# [162430](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf)
## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=1) 🆗
### Non-article text
1 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4
This document may be accessed online: www.unesco.org/courier
Journalists can help change the world. 
As proof, Mexican reporter Lydia Cacho 
Ribeiro (45) whose courage impressed the 
members of the jury of the 2008 UNESCO/
Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom 
Prize. In an exclusive interview granted 
to our colleague Lucia Iglesias on the day 
the Prize was announced, the laureate 
explains how she has contributed to the 
evolution of legislation with respect to 
child pornography in her country and the 
abolition of legal detention of journalists 
following accusations for slander and libel.
InformatIon:  
a game of hIde and seek
Decembre 2005. For 17 years this Director of the “An-
Nahar” newspaper published a supplement devoted to 
the young generation he saw as a “daily mirror of an 
entire generation no-one has paid an attentive ear 
to, either in the past or in the present.” His silence 
weighs down on their future. 
The American journalist Susan Moeller also 
addresses the young. She believes that the fight for 
the diversity of expressions starts with the  education 
of students. Teaching them how to account for events 
and problems of the present is not enough. Director 
of the International Center for Media & the Public 4
2008 - number 4 • ISSN 1993-8616
© UNESCO/Aleksandar Džoni-Šopov
Investigation often resembles navigating through a labyrinth.
But it is precisely because they detain real power 
that journalists have many enemies, some of whom 
don’t hesitate having them killed to silence them.
Although international laws obligate States to punish 
these crimes, justice is often powerless. Yet when a 
journalist is killed we are all victims, explains Toby 
Mendel, Director of “ARTICLE 19”, an International 
Human Rights Organization that protects freedom of 
expression throughout the world. 
To illustrate the tragedy of these murders, our 
Lebanese colleague Bassam Mansour portrays his 
famous compatriot Gébran Tuéni, assassinated in 
## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=2) 🆗
### Non-article text
2 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4
Agenda, she explains that the young also have to be 
made aware of the importance of a free and objec-
tive press.
But how can a free and objective press be guaran-
teed, if journalists themselves don’t have access to 
the information that interests them and often have 
to rely on rumours to write their articles? «With the 
exception of South Africa, Angola and Uganda, Africa 
has been lagging behind in the global movement 
towards the adoption of Freedom of Information 
Laws which should guarantee journalists the access 
to information held by public authorities,» explains 
Togolese journalist Gabriel Baglo, Director of the 
Africa Bureau of the International Federation of 
Journalists 
Paul Taylor adds: ““For a long time they refused 
to give us the lists [that] show that particularly in 
the United Kingdom, the royal family and the big 
 aristocrats are among the main beneficiaries of Euro-
pean agricultural subsidies.” Who is “they”? The 
European Commission claims it’s the Member States. 
It took journalists – otherwise flooded with informa-
tion - ten years of campaigning to access certain 
files considered sensitive by Brussels’ European Insti-
tutions, explains this journalist at Reuters. 
Access to information for all, but first of all for those 
whose job it is to make it public – this is what the 
journalists and experts, who have contributed to this 
issue devoted to World Press Freedom Day celebrated 
on 3 May in Maputo, are asking for. 
Contents
Shoot a journalist 
and society is 
wounded 7
Lydia Cacho Ribeiro: 
“International visi-
bility is a shield for 
threatened  
journalists.” 3
Information:  
a game of hide  
and seek 1
Gebran Tueni:  
the man who was  
like thunder 9
Freedom of  
expression:  
a right  
to be taught 12
Access to 
information… 
journalists  
come first 14
Landmarks: Marin 
Držić, ingenuous 
genius 21
Stop “fast food  
information” 16
Focus: Koyo,  
a place for dialogue 
between  
two cultures 19
Next month: 
Tribute to Claude 
Lévi-Strauss 23
4
© UNESCO/Yves Bergeret
4
Partners 23
## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=3) 🆗
### Non-article text
3 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Lydia Cacho Ribeiro: international visibility is a shield for threatened journalists
Besides the award of the World Press Freedom 
Prize to Lydia Cacho Ribeiro, UNESCO has organized 
on this occasion an international conference entitled 
“Freedom of Expression, Access to Information and 
the Empowerment of People” in the capital of 
Mozambique.
Towards the end of the month, UNESCO will also 
celebrate World Day for Cultural Diversity for Dia-
logue and Development. To mark this day, the Courier 
is publishing an article entitled “Koyo, a place for 
dialogue between two cultures.” For almost eight 
years, a French poet and six Malian painters have 
 created, in a small village, works that belong neither 
to Western nor to Dogon culture, neither to poetry 
nor to painting….They open a new space for dialogue 
and creation.    
Finally, the Courier tells the sad and funny adven-
ture of a rebel genius, the Croatian Marin Držić, con-
sidered one of the major playwrights of the 
Renaissance. He was born 500 years ago, in Dubrovnik, 
a jewel on the Dalmatian coast, now on the World 
Heritage List. He died in May 1567, in Venice, with-
out having succeeded in convincing Cosme de Medici 
to overturn the Senate of his birth place, “this 
20-headed monster tyrannizing the people.” 
Jasmina Šopova 
4
4
Lydia Cacho ribeiro: “International 
visibility is a shield for threatened 
journalists.”
“I believe the role of journalism is to be 
a lantern, allowing society to exercise its 
right to know and understand; I believe 
human rights are non-negotiable. As long 
as I live, I will continue to write and 
writing will keep me alive.” 
My work as a journalist and my activism as a citizen 
are intertwined. I have been sensitive to the cause 
of defending human rights since I was a small child. 
My mother, who was French and moved to Mexico 
© José Gallardo / Random House Mondadori
Lydia Cacho Ribeiro, 2008 UNESCO–Guillermo Cano World 
Press Freedom Prize.
This forceful declaration of faith is made by Lydia 
Cacho Ribeiro (45), Mexican freelance journalist and 
head of a centre that helps abused women in 
Cancun. 
Laureate of the UNESCO/Guillermo Cano World 
Press Freedom Prize, she answers questions put by 
Lucia Iglesias (UNESCO). 
Through your books and hundreds of articles, you 
have denounced pedophilia, trafficking of minors, 
corruption, organized crime, gender discrimination 
and violence against women. You’ve done it despite 
death threats and attempts to murder you. You’ve 
fought legal battles. Where do you find the strength 
to act? 
## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=4) 🆗
### Non-article text
4 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Lydia Cacho Ribeiro: international visibility is a shield for threatened journalists
4
when she was very young, had always practiced social 
activism. It was an integral part of her life and she 
brought up her children in that spirit. I grew up in a 
family where defending human rights was the natural 
responsibility of citizens, and neither an effort nor a 
sacrifice. 
For many years I hosted a show for a community 
radio station in Quinatana Roo state, where we were 
always bringing up the issue of violence against 
women. Sometimes women came unexpectedly to the 
studio. Some had been slashed with machetes; others 
told us their husbands threatened to kill them. They 
asked us for help but I didn’t know what to do for 
them. So then we decided to start a support group 
and finally we were able to open a maximum security 
shelter for women and children who were the victims 
of violence, as well as a counseling and aid centre. 
How does the centre operate?
The Cancun centre for aid to women and their chil-
dren (CIAM) is a non-profit organization that subsists 
on donations. I run it, but I make my living from 
journalism. The staff, though, is on salary. They are 
professionals in the defense of victims. The CIAM 
has been recognized as one of the best aid centres in 
Mexico. It’s a progressive organization. We’ve pro-
tected wives of drug dealers, politicians, masons, 
farmers….in other words, we take in any woman 
knocking on our door who is involved in a violent 
relationship.
Do you think things are in the process of changing? 
Is all this work worth the effort? 
Of course it’s worth it. Many things are evolving, 
people are in prison because of the book I wrote [Los 
demonios del Edén, Published by Grijalbo Mondadori, 
2005], many victims spoke out and received help in 
different parts of the country. Society reacted vigor-
ously, and for me it’s a great honour. More than prizes 
we might win, it proves our work as journalists is ful-
filling its purpose and being useful. 
In addition, after my detention and because of 
the media reaction and the intervention of important 
social and political actors, journalism was decrimi-
nalized. I was thrown in jail precisely because jour-
nalists could legally be held after being accused of 
defamation and libel. All that disappeared following 
my court case. Now, such matters are tried in civil 
The itinerary of a heroine
A few dates
1963 Lydia Cacho Ribeiro is born in Mexico. 
2002 She is awarded the Journalism Prize for Journalism of the State of Quintana Roo. 
2003 Publication of Las Provincias del Alma (Demac Publishers), where she describes the discrimination 
against women with HIV. 
2005 Publication of Los Demonios del Edén (The Demons of Eden - Grijalbo Mondadori Publishers), 
indicting the paedophile mafia in Mexico. 
2006 Publication of Esta Boca es mía y tuya tambien (This Mouth is Yours and Mine too - Planeta 
Publishers). The same year, she is awarded the Francisco Ojeda Award for journalistic courage 
for her investigation on the violent death of hundreds of young women in Ciudad Juárez, 
Northern Mexico, the Don Sergio Méndez Arceo Prize for the protection of human rights, 
the Yo Dona Prize rewarding humanitarian work (Spain) and the Coatlicue-Mujeres en el Arte 
Prize. 
2007 Publication of Memorias de una Infamia (Memoirs of an infamy - Giraldo Mondadori Publishers). 
She obtains the Amnesty International Ginetta Sagan Award for Women and Children’s Rights. 
She receives distinctions from non governmental organizations Human Rights Watch and 
Oxfam. The Cable News Network (CNN) gives her the title of CNN Hero 
2008 She receives the third Casa Amèrica Catalunya Prize for Freedom of Expression (Spain), the 
Unión de Periodistas de Valencia Prize (Spain) and UNESCO’s World Press Freedom Prize. 
4
## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=5) 🆗
### Non-article text
5 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Lydia Cacho Ribeiro: international visibility is a shield for threatened journalists
courts, as they are in all other more advanced 
countries. 
Furthermore legislation concerning child pornog-
raphy has developed considerably; above all, the sub-
ject has been covered in the media. Sexual abuse of 
children was a taboo subject in Mexico. Since my 
court case, forums on the issue have multiplied and 
specialized organizations have sprung up.
Do you fear for your life? Have you ever been afraid 
during your career?
Of course I was afraid when I was kidnapped in late 
2005. I was held somewhere between Cancun and 
central Mexico and tortured for 20 hours. But as time 
goes by, you learn to master your fear and it becomes 
a tool for making certain decisions and building cer-
tain strategies. 
I have to say too that after receiving about 20 
death threats over the telephone, you learn to keep 
living without really taking it into account, because 
it would be insane. I’d have to leave not only my 
country but maybe also my profession, and I’m not 
ready to do that. 
Do you have special security to protect you when 
you go out? 
For about three years I had four federal agents as an 
escort and I went everywhere in an armoured van. 
But in March 2007, this federal van was the target of 
a bombing attack, and the police still haven’t 
4
 investigated the matter. So it seems having federal 
agents in charge of your security isn’t really a guar-
antee. A few months ago I decided to give up this 
escort and to simply take the usual precautions that 
reporters have to take when exercising their profes-
sion, wherever they are. 
But can you work normally under these 
circumstances? 
That’s exactly where there’s a trap in the security 
measures offered to journalists. Since I investigate 
organized crime and human rights, it’s very difficult 
to get certain informants to speak to me, given that 
we are constantly guarded. 
Last year, when I’d begun writing my book on the 
traffic of women in the world, I felt that my range of 
action was limited because I wasn’t free to talk to 
my informants. To be guarded when you’re a journal-
ist is really like being in prison, as if you were a 
criminal under the supervision of police, not know-
ing whether they’re watching over you or watching 
you. 
How do you feel about receiving the UNESCO/ 
Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom Prize? 
First I’m very honoured to be awarded such recogni-
tion, when after all I’m simply doing a job I love and 
consider essential in a country like mine. Psychologi-
cally it’s very important for me to feel supported 
today, after being imprisoned and tortured because 
of my work; and after these events revealed the 
extent of institutional corruption that victimizes 
journalists in Mexico. We must remember that after 
Iraq, Mexico is one of the most dangerous countries 
in the world for journalists. 
And I also feel this kind of recognition gives us in 
a way a certain protection, because international 
visibility is a kind of shield.
What topic are you working on right now?
As I said, I’m finishing a book about the interna-
tional networks involved in the trafficking of women 
and girls. It’s a map of the world showing not only 
who is behind these organizations and how the net-
works buying and selling human beings operate, but 
also the relationships maintained by highly-placed 
political leaders locally and internationally to  protect 
© Cimac
Lydia Cacho at the Journalists’ Club in Mexico, her home town.
4
## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=6) 🆗
### Non-article text
6 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Lydia Cacho Ribeiro: international visibility is a shield for threatened journalists
On May 3, UNESCO cel-
ebrates World Press 
Freedom Day, underlin-
ing the issue of access 
to information. What 
can be done so that 
people can have access 
to plural and independ-
ent information? 
Electronic media play a 
crucial role. Media 
monopoly, much criti-
cized by the interna-
tional community, is one of the major problems today 
in Mexico. That’s why keeping community radio sta-
tions going is vital. Unfortunately we’re in a phase of 
repression regarding these radio stations. A few days 
ago in the state of Oaxaca, two young women who 
managed a community radio broadcasting news in 
one of Mexico’s traditional languages were murdered. 
Here in the state of Quintana Roo where I’ve been 
living and working for 22 years, we speak Maya, but 
news are very rarely broadcast in this language. I 
think we need more community radio and that we 
have to invest in electronic media, which are more 
easily accessible to the Mexican people, even if the 
most important issue is to improve content. 
* Lydia Cacho Ribeiro’s concern for the future of community 
radio speaks to an issue of critical importance, first and 
foremost for practitioners, but also for policy leaders and 
scholars. A 2008 World Bank report calls community radio 
vital to development; yet laws governing spectrum regula-
tion often disadvantage not-for-profit community broadcas-
ters. The issue has been the focus of a two-year study funded 
by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of 
Canada. The study — Sound as a Dollar?: The Propertization 
of Spectrum Resources and Implications for Non-Profit Com-
munity Radio in Guatemala — was undertaken by Victoria 
Henderson (Queen’s University) and is due for release in Fall 
2008.
the networks involved in the 
trade. 
What is the situation right 
now in Mexico regarding free-
dom of the press and 
information? 
It’s evident journalism has 
become in recent years a cru-
cial element for change in 
Mexico, as the democratic 
process inevitably goes hand 
in hand with more truthful 
information. The single party 
that ruled the country for 70 years controlled the 
media, both economically and editorially. With the 
change in government, when President Vicente Fox 
was elected for the preceding six-year term 
(2000-2006), we saw a degree of new openness in 
the media, which we Mexican journalists are in the 
process of learning how to handle. 
It is crucial to have journalists in Mexico in 2008 
to describe the real situation in this country of 104 
million inhabitants, 30 million of whom are in the 
grip of extreme poverty. It’s a country where the rich 
are richer than Europeans and the poor poorer than 
Africans. We journalists have to understand these 
disparities and the risk we run by uncovering the 
fundamental characteristics of national problems. 
“...as indigenous women, we have our 
space in the radio. And this space... I know 
that the mainstream radio would never 
give it to us because we are women and 
as indigenous people we are discriminated 
against. In this case, in our radio, we 
have space to express ourselves and to say 
what we feel, what we think... about our 
traditional clothing, about our language...”  
Angelica Cubur from Radio Ixchel 
(Guatemala). *
4
© V. Henderson, 2007
Angelica Cubur, of Radio Ixchel (Guatemala).
## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=7) 🆗
### Non-article text
7 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Shoot a journalist and society is wounded
eration of Journalists, 177 media professionals were 
killed in 2007. The Iraq war, in particular, has led to 
unprecedented numbers of journalists being killed or 
suffering physical attacks. 
Of course, a journalist could be murdered by their 
spouse, die in an unfortunate car accident or be the 
victim of a random shooting. In many cases, how-
ever, the fact that they are a journalist is not just a 
random circumstance but structurally linked to the 
case in one of two ways. First, journalists may, by 
virtue of their profession, find themselves in danger-
ous situations, for example because they are report-
ing on war, social unrest or disasters. Even more 
serious, however, are cases where journalists are tar-
geted because of what they write. 
The media has variously been described as the 
fourth estate, the watchdog of the social interest 
and a key underpinning of democracy. In these roles, 
journalists often create enemies, many of them 
people who wield significant power in society, some 
of whom lack scruples or have even been involved in 
criminal activity. In some cases, these people go to 
the extreme length of threatening the journalists 
who have exposed them, or even of perpetrating 
crimes of violence, including murder, against them. 
Such attacks are heinous crimes which affect not 
only their target but journalists as a group. A single 
© UNESCO/Cyril Bailleul
Nikita White reads her essay during the launch of IYPE on 
12 February 2008 at UNESCO.
4
shoot a journalist and  
society is wounded
Justice is done in less than 15% of the 
approximately 500 cases involving murders of 
journalists for their work in the last 15 years. 
States have the obligation to combat the 
impunity in relation to these crimes, for each 
time a journalist is attacked, democracy is a 
victim.
Let us recall the case of Orgür Gundem v. Turkey in 
March 2000 that was brought before the European 
Court of Human Rights. The case involved Orgür 
Gundem, an Istanbul-based daily, which had been 
harassed and attacked so persistently that it eventu-
ally had to close. 
Seven staff members, including journalists, were 
actually killed and the paper suffered numerous 
attacks – arson, bombs and even armed attacks – 
against newsagents, shops selling its paper and its 
offices. Several petitions by the newspapers to the 
authorities calling for assistance were met, for the 
most part, with no response. Finally some minor pro-
tective measures were put in place. At the same time, 
the authorities launched an official investigation of 
the newspaper, as well as several criminal 
prosecutions. 
The Court held that Turkey had breached the news-
paper’s right to freedom of expression by failing to 
protect it against these attacks. It reiterated the 
obligation on Turkey to put in place ‘positive meas-
ures of protection’. The Court also dismissed Turkey’s 
claim that it was relieved of this obligation because 
the newspaper supported terrorist groups. The State 
might prosecute the newspaper for any illegal mate-
rial it had disseminated, but it could not simply 
ignore the repeated attacks on it.
Censorship by killing
Stories of attacks on journalists are, unfortunately, 
all too common. According to the International Fed-
## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=8) 🆗
### Non-article text
8 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Shoot a journalist and society is wounded
instance of serious retaliation sends a signal to all 
journalists involved in exposing abuses that they are 
at risk. The aim of those perpetrating these atroci-
ties is to silence all those who would report on the 
matter, whether it be crime, official incompetence, 
corruption or some other social evil. This problem 
has been referred to as ‘censorship by killing’.
To ‘seek and receive’  
information is a right
Most crimes against journalists have a particularly 
chilling effect and are, therefore, crimes against 
society as a whole. We all rely on the media as a pri-
mary source of information, whether about events 
abroad, problems in our own society or anything out-
side of our direct sphere of experience. We need this 
information for a variety of fundamental democratic 
functions: to exercise our right to vote, to ensure 
the proper custody of public resources, and to bring 
those responsible for wrongdoing to justice. To the 
extent that attacks on journalists limit the ability of 
the media to provide us with this information, they 
threaten democracy. As such, they are crimes against 
us all, not just against journalists. 
International human rights law recognises this 
aspect of the right to freedom of expression. 
Although we normally think of this right as protect-
ing the right to speak, the right to impart informa-
tion and ideas, it has a dual nature. It also protects 
the right of the listener, and this is reflected in the 
fact that international guarantees refer not only to 
the right to impart but also to ‘seek and receive’ 
information and ideas. 
In addition, international law goes beyond pro-
hibiting States from interfering with free speech and 
places a positive obligation on States to ensure 
respect for the exercise of freedom of expression. 
International courts have held that States are under 
a positive obligation to make a special effort to pre-
vent attacks on journalists, to investigate such 
attacks and to bring those responsible to justice. 
Where the State is directly involved, for example in 
attacks perpetrated by State officials, there is also 
an obligation to compensate the victims. 
Unfortunately, the evidence suggests that many 
States are failing in their responsibility to combat 
impunity in cases involving attacks on journalists. 
According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, 
justice is done in less than 15% of the approximately 
500 journalists murdered in the last 15 years. 
Toby Mendel, Senior Director for Law, author of 
ARTICLE 19 
4
© New York Times
The Lebanese journalist May Chidiac, in her wheelchair, after the 
2005 September attack on her life.
© All rights reserved
Justice is done in less than 15% of cases involving murders of 
journalists for their work in the last 15 years.
## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=9) 🆗
### Non-article text
9 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Gebran Tueni: the man who was like thunder
Gebran Tueni, Lebanese journalist and director of the 
Beirut daily, An-Nahar, was assassinated on 12 
December 2005. Condemning this crime, UNESCO’s 
Director-General, Koïchiro Matsuura, said at the time, 
“The global press community has lost one of its great 
defenders. Mr Tueni’s death is a terrible loss not only 
for his family, friends and colleagues, but for the 
cause of freedom of expression and press freedom in 
the Middle East”. 
“I’m less afraid for myself than for those I love.” 
That is how Gebran Tueni responded to Marlene Kha-
life, when she asked him to react to the death threats 
he had received over his political stand and opinions, 
whether in his own newspaper or other public and 
political platforms. These were among his last words 
that morning, shortly before his car was blown up in 
the eastern suburb of Mekalis, as he drove from his 
home in Beit Meri (Mount Lebanon) to his newspa-
per’s offices in Beirut’s Martyrs’ Square. His paper 
published the interview the next day. 
The explosion that shook the Lebanese capital 
was so violent that only the remains of his body and 
those of Nicolas El Falouti and Andre Mourad were 
left, scattered in nearby gardens. This crime brought 
a sudden end to a life that had been filled with thun-
der, energy and hope for a better future. Gebran 
Tueni was 48. Throughout his life he had to face end-
less personal tragedies – notably the early deaths of 
his sister Nayla and brother Makram – as well as the 
national tragedy of a war that struck the entire coun-
try. The Lebanese war broke out on 13 April 1975, 
gebran tueni: 
the man who was like thunder
“As a journalist, I aim to write the truth. And as a Congressman, I aim to speak the 
truth”, said Lebanese-born Gebran Tueni in an interview with the Courier’s Bassam 
Mansour in July 2005. Here he paints a 
portrait of this fellow countryman, who 
shared a passion for electronic games and 
with his involvement in highly dangerous 
political affairs, which cost him his life in 
December 2005. 
© An-Nahar, Beirut
Gebran Tueni in the An-Nahar press room.
4
destroying everything as it went, especially the 
young generation that became caught up in it. 
These trials seemed to become a part of Gebran’s 
character, and never shook his dream of a country 
built on principles of freedom, diversity and equality, 
with freedom of expression as its cornerstone.
Listening to a multitude of voices
Gebran Tueni founded what was then the weekly 
newspaper Arabic and International An-Nahar, in 
Paris in 1977, with other journalists of his genera-
tion. It stood out for the diversity of the opinions it 
published, even if they were sometimes contradic-
tory. For Gebran Tueni, freedom of expression was 
not a matter of defending an idea, but of adopting a 
point of view, while allowing others to have different 
views on the same subject. 
In the political arena, Gebran Tueni joined with 
men and women who were known for their courage, 
and who would not hesitate to overstep the mark: 
## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=10) 🆗
### Non-article text
10 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Gebran Tueni: the man who was like thunder
whether it was President Bechir Gemayel, Gen-
eral Michel Aoun (a friendship that forced his 
exile to Paris from 1990 to 1993), or Prime Min-
ister Rafic Hariri. After Hariri was assassinated 
on 14 February 2005, Gebran Tueni was called 
upon to play an important part in the so-called 
“Cedar Revolution” or “Independence Revolu-
tion”, that led him to office as congressman for 
Beirut in the Lebanese parliament. But he never 
allowed his political career to interfere with his work 
as director of the daily, An-Nahar. He always felt his 
function as a politician to be complementary to his 
work as a journalist. 
When I went to visit the headquarters of his news-
paper in July 2005, along with colleagues from 
UNESCO, I raised the possibility of a conflict of inter- 4
est between these two activities. 
“Not in the least”, he replied. “There 
is no conflict at all … As a journal-
ist, I aim to write the truth. And as 
a congressman, I aim to speak the 
truth.” It was a genuine answer, 
filled with the innocence and can-
dour that were so characteristic of 
this man. Faced with a world torn 
between good and evil, love and 
hate, beauty and ugliness, he 
enjoyed imagining it free of political 
dealings and machinations. And, 
above all, he refused to bow down 
before those with power, or to give 
up in the face of Realpolitik. 
With the same youthful ardour 
that refuses to follow the 
crowd, despite the pas-
sage of time, when he 
returned from exile in 
1993 he created a weekly 
youth supplement to An-
Nahar. In its editorial he 
announced that it would 
be “an independent plat-
form for free-thinking 
young writers”, and that 
it was time that they 
“expressed themselves 
openly – even with the 
distractions of youth – 
on whatever preoccupies 
them!” He also declared 
that the supplement was 
intended to be the 
“mirror of daily life for a 
whole generation that 
no-one has listened to, either in the past or the 
present”. 
In 1990, Gebran Tueni became an active member 
of the World Association of Newspapers (WAN) and 
advisor on Middle-Eastern affairs to WAN’s president. 
He was also a member of WAN’s Fund for Press Free-
dom Development, created in 1994. After his assas-
sination, the Fund launched the annual International 
Gebran Tueni Award for press freedom, awarded for 
© An-Nahar, Beirut
Demonstration after  
Samir Kassir’s assassination.
4
Note intime
Born on 15 September 1957, Gebran Tueni was the son of Ghassan 
Tueni, doyen of the Lebanese press, and the great Lebanese poet 
Nadia Tueni. His paternal grandfather, Gebran Tueni, founded the 
newspaper An-Nahar in 1933. His maternal grandfather, Mohamed 
Ali Hamade, was a diplomat and writer. The grandson loved to say 
that he was half Muslim, half Christian, in a country where one’s 
religion was sometimes more important than one’s nationality.
He was just seven years old when he lost his elder sister, Nayla, 
to whom he felt very close. His parents hid the truth from him. 
They told him that Nayla had gone away on a journey... This 
tragedy always hung over the family, breaking Nadia’s heart, 
who dedicated a collection of poems to her daughter, entitled 
“Lebanon: 20 Poems for a Love”, published in 1979. When Gebran’s 
eldest daughter was born, he didn’t hesitate to give her the 
name of his lost sister. Even so, the suffering did not cease, and 
was added to by Nadia’s long illness. 
“We never felt weak or afraid in her 
presence,” said Gebran, adding, in an 
interview with Marlene Khalif, that “she 
faced her illness with great courage, dignity 
and openness. Until the end, her smile 
radiated through the house …”. In 1983, 
Nadia Tueni departed this world, leaving 
behind two sons, Gebran and his younger 
brother Makram, who also departed before 
his time in a car accident in Paris. It was 
1987; he was 21 years old. 
B.M.
## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=11) 🆗
### Non-article text
11 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Gebran Tueni: the man who was like thunder
the first time in 2006. On this occasion WAN’s presi-
dent, Timothy Balding, told Roula Beydoun in an 
interview published on 13 December 2006 in An-
Nahar, that “we felt the need to keep the spirit of 
Gebran Tueni alive, especially given the energetic 
part he played in all of our activities, by promoting 
press freedom for over 20 years”.
No-one dies before their time
Gebran played while he worked. This man, who was 
involved in the most dangerous affairs, knew how to 
keep his youthful spirit alive and looked at the world 
with dazzled and joyful eyes, triumphing over a 
mountain of sufferings. He loved electronic games 
and car racing. He also enjoyed reading horoscopes. 
He was a Virgo. “No-one dies before their time,” he 
said in 2005. In June that year, his fellow journalist 
and colleague at An-Nahar Samir Kassir died in a car 
bomb attack near his home as he set off for work.
Shortly after, in September, a similar explosion hit 
journalist May Chidiac, laureate of the 2006 UNESCO/
Guillermo Cano Prize for Press Freedom. By a miracle 
she survived, although she lost a leg and an arm. The 
entire country was plunged into fear, as bombs 
exploded everywhere. 
On the evening of 11 December 2005, Gebran Tueni 
returned to Beirut, brushing aside advice that he 
should remain abroad. The day after he came back, 
his car exploded. His father, Ghassan Tueni, who had 
now lost his third child, said that the final blow was 
that he could not even kiss his son’s cheek before he 
was buried. 
This was the journey of Gebran Tueni, who resem-
bled one of those men that his mother, the great 
Lebanese poet Nadia Tueni, described in these 
words: 
“In our mountains men can be found,  
who are just like thunder,  
And know the world is apple-round…” 
by Bassam Mansour, UNESCO 
4
© An-Nahar, Beirut
Gebran Tueni checking the newspaper’s printing.
© An-Nahar, Beirut 
Gebran Tueni welcoming students in the newspaper's offices.
## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=12) 🆗
### Non-article text
12 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4
will people from all over the planet understand the 
issues and evaluate the players?
What is a journalism  
professor’s job?
Last summer 50 students and a dozen faculty from 14 
universities on five continents came together in 
Salzburg, Austria, to address just those kinds of 
questions. One of the faculty members for this global 
initiative came from China. At the start of the three-
week session he expressed serious concern. No matter 
how good the training at his university, his journal-
ism students were not being hired, privately-owned 
media outlets didn’t want to pay for reporters and 
editors when they could get unpaid interns to do the 
work. And besides which, the faculty member said, 
most of those media were tabloid-type outlets in 
which solid news—not to mention accuracy and bal-
ance—were hardly valued. Gossip and celebrity cov-
erage dominated Chinese print and online outlets. 
What was he to do as a journalism professor? 
The three weeks of the Salzburg Academy on 
Media & Global Change, during which the partici-
pants created a curriculum to teach media literacy to 
students around the world, transformed that Chinese 
professor’s opinion about his job. His work was not 
just to teach journalism students how to report on 
The world is poised to watch the 2008 Olympics, 
beginning with the opening ceremony in Beijing on 
8 August. Eighty-thousand people will be in attend-
ance at the National Stadium and an estimated four 
billion more are expected to be viewing via live tel-
evision and internet feeds. 
Already for several months, controversies are 
swirling in the media about the games—from the 
route that the Olympic torch is taking around the 
world to the decision to move the swimming and 
gymnastic events so that they can be seen live during 
primetime in the United States. Protests over the 
outbreak of violence in Tibet and China’s human 
rights record threaten to disrupt the games. 
The Olympic sporting events as well as the Olym-
pic controversies will all be covered by the world’s 
media. How will the public make sense of it all? How 
© David Wise

### Freedom of expression: a right to be taught
“Press freedom is not just essential in times of political crisis.”
4
freedom of expression:  
a right to be taught
Paradox: Media have never been more 
vital for the nurturing of civil society but 
freedom of expression is now in retreat. No 
society can be free, open and fair without a 
diversity of voices. To remedy this situation, 
students of journalism must first be taught 
to develop a critical mind.
© Maurice Albrecht
“Teaching them to notice what isn’t being said and isn’t being 
shown”
## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=13) 🆗
### Non-article text
13 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Freedom of expression: a right to be taught
the events and issues around them, but to instruct 
all the students in the university about the impor-
tance of a free and fair media. Without an audience 
educated to understand how essential access to 
information is to the exercise of citizenship, there 
will be no pressure for quality journalism. 
Media have never been 
more vital for the nurturing 
of civil society but freedom 
of expression is now in 
retreat. So much attention 
has gone into managing the 
new technologies, consider-
ing the viability of existing 
business models, coping with 
the dramatic demographic 
shifts in audiences and con-
demning the seemingly insa-
t i a b l e  d emand  f o r 
scandal-mongering media that 
there has been little space for 
expressing other concerns. 
But press freedom organi-
zations have recorded the 
global losses—the violations 
of free speech, the targeting 
of journalists, the repression 
of both bricks-and-mortar as 
well as virtual media outlets, 
the marginalization of minor-
ity voices. Finally, recently, the depredations on free 
expression and a free press have become impossible 
to ignore.
A matter of life and death
Last year according to the Paris-based World Associa-
tion of Newspapers, 95 media employees were 
killed—44 in Iraq alone, 8 in Somalia, 6 in Sri Lanka 
and 5 in Pakistan. Other 110 media workers died in 
2006—among them such leading voices as Russian 
investigative reporter Anna Politkovskaya. In Paki-
stan this past November when President Pervez Mush-
arraf suspended Pakistan’s constitution, several TV 
stations were shut down, foreign cable newscasts 
stopped and controls over the content of news 
reports imposed. Punishments against journalists 
ranged from heavy fines and suspension of broadcast 
licenses to sentences of up to three years in prison. 
And even in the West, France has been struggling to 
deal with the children and grandchildren of North 
African immigrants who have been marginalized in 
many ways, including their 
access to media—unless 
they are rioting—and fur-
ther demonized through 
stereotypical depictions 
that reinforce a negative 
image that is out of step 
with reality. 
It shouldn’t take threats 
and riots to put freedom of 
expression centre stage. 
Press freedom is not just 
essential in times of politi-
cal crisis. Free media that 
allow a diversity of voices 
to be heard and all ideas to 
be discussed play a central 
role in both the sustaining 
and monitoring of good 
government, as well as in 
the fostering of economic 
development and the 
encouraging of corporate 
transparency and account-
ability. Freedom of expression is a life and death 
matter and a bread and butter issue. To live the good 
life, as well as to live a safe one, the public needs to 
understand how fundamental the right to freedom of 
expression is. 
How can that case be made? Through the schools, 
through courses and case studies and assignments 
that give students not just the tools to criticize 
media for their tabloid news habits or their pander-
ing to a youthful demographic, but that show stu-
dents that without a diversity of voices, without a 
media that can represent all opinions, there can be 
no free and open and fair society. Without the ability 
to hear all voices, without the protection for all 
voices, only the powerful voices will be heard. Teach-
ing all students to evaluate what they read and hear 4
4
© E. Boy
“Media have never been more vital for the nurturing of civil 
society.”
## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=14) 🆗
### Non-article text
14 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Access to information... journalists come first
### Freedom of expression: a right to be taught
and see and teaching them to notice what isn’t being 
said and isn’t being shown is critical to their  eventual 
exercise of their rights as citizens and their access to 
opportunity. 
Come 8 August, when the Olympic Games begin, 
most of those watching will take for granted their 
ability to see the athletes from around world com-
pete in the events. Wouldn’t it be great if the 
4
journalists come 
first
Over the last two decades the legal 
framework of the media in Africa has 
evolved; the independent and community 
media have expanded. Nevertheless, 
various factors have been employed by 
most African governments to hinder 
freedom of expression and of the press: 
Freedom of Information remains a great 
challenge at continental level.  
© Christopher Herwig
A street newspaper in the making, Monrovia (Liberia).
access to 
information… 
4
 diversity at the Games were reflected in the diversity 
of expressions in the media? Wouldn’t it be great if 
all those watching at least just understood that this 
should not only be a right but is a necessity? 
Susan Moeller, 
Director of the International Center for Media 
and the Public Agenda (United States) 
In 1995, the Senegalese press group Sud Communica-
tion media group was prosecuted by La Compagnie 
Sucrière du Sénégal (CSS) and condemned by the 
court to a fine of 500 000 000 FCFA (763 000 Euros) 
for publishing information on customs fraud by the 
company. The court did not consider if the informa-
tion was true or not; the issue was rather: how did 
the information leak, who leaked it, and how did the 
journalist get the document? 
Although it dates back several years, this case 
serves as an example. In most African countries if 
you publish documents or information contained in 
documents from the public administration, you run 
the risk to be sued by the government and the civil 
servant who released the document gets into deep 
trouble. In this case the judge does not even con-
sider the veracity of the document or the 
information 
Access to public information remains a challenge 
for working journalists and most journalists in Africa 
often rely on rumours to write their articles. 
The right to investigate and to report freely with-
out any form of hindrance lies at the core of quality 
journalism. Just as the right of Communities to access 
public information ensures better housing, health, 
education and development budgets; combats cor-
ruption and alleviates poverty; and enables demo-
cratic participation. Good governance is centred on 
the principles of accountability and transparency. 
This, however, cannot be achieved anywhere, if infor-
## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=15) 🆗
### Non-article text
15 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Access to information... journalists come first
mation that is so very vital to the public interest 
continues to be hoarded by governments.
Tactics to breach laws
Article 9 of the African Charter on Human and Peo-
ples’ Rights guarantees freedom of expression as a 
fundamental human right besides the “Right to Life” 
- that is the right to seek, receive and impart infor-
mation and ideas. In Africa all the countries have 
signed and ratified the African Charter, thus taken 
the commitment to uphold the principles of the Char-
ter. In addition, the majority of the governments 
have reflected this fundamental principle in their 
national constitutions. 
In response to the numerous calls and complaints 
by media organisations in the continent about the 
“inadequacies” of the Charter, the African Commis-
sion on Human and Peoples’ 
Rights adopted in 2002 the Declaration of Princi-
ples on Freedom of Expres-
sion in Afr ica, which 
recognises that “freedom of 
expression is an inalienable 
human right and an indis-
pensable component of 
democracy”. 
However, the Declaration 
like the Charter is not bind-
ing on the member states 
and has not brought in the 
desired results for the erad-
ication of all obnoxious 
media legislations in the 
continent. Media organiza-
tions in the continent are 
therefore, currently advo-
cating for the adoption of a 
Protocol to the African 
Charter on Freedom of 
Expression in Africa, which should be binding to all 
the states. 
Despite this development many African govern-
ments have legislated very draconian measures in 
order to intimidate the press. Such arbitrary meas-
ures include the charging of exorbitant license fees 
for media houses, registration of journalists, obnox-
ious libel and defamation laws, the levy of heavy 
importation taxes on media related materials and 
equipment, arbitrary arrests, attacks and jailing of 
journalists.
A new coalition
Last year, a few weeks before he relinquished power, 
President Olusegun Obasanjo refused to approve the 
FOI bill voted by parliament on 21 February, after 
eight years of administrative steps. The bill is cur-
rently before the new administration of President 
Umaru Yaradua. 
With the exception of 
South Africa, Angola and 
Uganda, Africa has been 
lagging behind in the 
global movement towards 
the adoption of Freedom 
of Information Laws which 
should guarantee journal-
ists the access to infor-
mation held by public 
authorities. Coalitions in 
Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya, 
Sierra Leone, Tanzania, 
and Zambia have been 
f ighting for about a 
decade for the Freedom of 
Information bill to be 
adopted but to no avail. 
This is why in Septem-
ber 2006, media and civil 
society organisations 
from Africa met in Lagos 
to discuss ways to pro-
mote the right of access 
to information held by 
public authorities and, in 
4
4
© UNESCO
Media diversity is a sine qua non 
condition of democracy.
## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=16) 🆗
### Non-article text
16 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4
particular, to share experiences in advocacy and 
strategies for advancing the adoption of laws that 
fully protect this right. The meeting set up a coali-
tion and established the Africa Freedom of Informa-
tion Centre based in Lagos (Nigeria). 
The centre should serve as a clearing house and 
enable civil society to participate in governance and 
transform itself into a true constituency. 
Gabriel Baglo, 
Togolese journalist, director of the Africa Bureau of 
the International Federation of Journalists 
© Pal Skeggs

### Access to information... journalists come first
Demonstration, in May 2006, in front of the 
Journalists’ Union in Cairo (Egypt)
4
decided in favour of the Commission, with a few 
exceptions. Now the judgment is being appealed. 
stop “fast food information”
It took European institutions in Brussels ten years of campaigning to start making 
certain dossiers available to the public. Journalists are demanding access to European 
Commission projects before they are adopted, to allow advance public debate.
What are the problems with access to information 
in Europe? 
On one hand, the journalists covering European insti-
tutions are swamped with information and they have 
to sort it, because some is of dubious value. On the 
other hand, they come up against obstacles trying to 
obtain the information they think is important. 
For example, there is ongoing litigation between 
the European Commission and the International Press 
Association, representing journalists working in Brus-
sels. The Association is demanding access to certain 
dossiers regarding competition, maintaining that 
documents the Commission submits to the European 
Court of Justice to back up its decisions about com-
pany mergers and acquisitions should be made public. 
The Commission claims these documents contain con-
fidential or commercially sensitive data and refuses 
to make them public. The Court at the first level 
4
© European Commission
Europe is not united with respect to norms on access to 
information.
## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=17) 🆗
### Non-article text
17 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4
But I understand it’s not 
the Commission’s role to 
release projects before 
they’re adopted. 
Does that mean access to 
information is not self evi-
dent in Europe? 
There are extraordinarily 
diverse traditions in Europe, 
the Europe of the 27 but 
also that of the 15. The 
Nordic countr ies, for 
instance, are much more 
open than those in the 
south, like France and Italy, 
where information is often withheld, or the United 
Kingdom, where a spokesman will give you the public 
side of his country’s position in a negotiation, but 
not the real content of the negotiation or the posi-
tion of other countries. 
In Brussels, if a journalist wants to know what’s 
going on at the Council of ministers, he’ll go see the 
representatives of the Nordic countries where thanks 
to a tradition of the right to information you can get 
an overall view. 
The lack of a consistent practice within the 15 or 
the 27 does not facilitate the work of the European 
Union when it wants to impose norms on candidate 
countries. What is it going to tell the Turks, for 
instance – you have to behave like Danes or you 
have to behave like Italians? 
In Europe, to my knowledge, the question of access 
to information does not come under European law, 
except as far as institutions are concerned.
What are the greatest threats to the press in the 
West?
The deterioration of press quality. The laziness of 
journalists, readers or television viewers who want 
everything reduced to sound bites. What the French 
economist and politician Jacques Delors calls “fast 
food information”. During my 30-year career, I’ve 
witnessed the people-ization of the written press – 
the space for international and even national news 
on important issues has been cut to accommodate 
Another example – for a long time 
they refused to give us the lists of 
beneficiaries for the common agricul-
tural policy subsidies. These show that 
particularly in the United Kingdom, 
the royal family and the big aristo-
crats are among the main beneficiar-
ies of European agricultural subsidies 
– something the press always finds 
amusing. 
Who is “they”? 
That’s exactly the issue. The Commis-
sion claims it’s the Member States. 
But in any case, we are moving 
towards generalized release of such 
information. It took ten years of campaigning to get 
results. 
Another controversy is centered on the role of the 
Commission’s industrial advisers. The difficulty lay in 
finding out which adviser was appointed in order to 
check whether there might be conflict of interest, if 
the adviser to a commissioner might not be the owner 
of a business that had a commercial interest in the 
legislation – which was inevitably sometimes the 
case. There too, the Commission put up obstacles at 
the beginning and finally agreed to publish the lists. 
It’s now underway. 
Personally, I don’t feel they’re hiding everything 
from us. There are journalists who have taken that 
stance.
To what extent should a legal text that is still a 
draft be made public?
As an agency representative, I don’t have an opinion. 
As a journalist, I would like to have maximum infor-
mation. I think it’s legitimate that there should be 
public debate beforehand. Industry, the NGOS and 
other actors in different fields – climate change, bio-
fuels, regulation of financial markets or transport – 
all have offices or employ lobbyists to try and 
influence the process in advance, before the Commis-
sion’s proposals are published. 
I don’t hide the fact that I sometimes get draft 
legislation not from my Commission sources but from 
an NGO or industrial lobby. 4
© UNESCO/Aleksandar Džoni-Šopov
Confidential.
4
## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=18) 🆗
### Non-article text
18 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4
the “lifestyle” section, sports, people, and the thing 
I hate, and not because I’m a snob, local news. 
The loss of independence is another real threat. A 
free press needs to have financial means that are 
independent of governments and independent of the 
big economic interests. Yet the number of readers 
buying quality press is shrinking. Yesterday (17 April 
2008), the New York Times announced a loss. In 
France, Le Monde recently announced a loss and job 
cuts. Advertising and ad revenues are shifting to the 
internet, away from the classic print media. 
As a result there are agencies surviving thanks to 
major public subsidies, for instance, with the conse-
quent threat to their independence. 
In any case, the media always run this risk, not 
just from governments, but also from company 
owners. That’s why there are constant attempts to 
create instruments, like conscience clauses, designed 
to protect the independence of editors and journal-
ists, with laws that vary in different countries. 
Yet we mustn’t forget there are many countries in 
the world where the press has so many other crush-
ing problems they would be only too happy to have 
problems like these. 
© Flickr

### Koyo, a place for dialogue between two cultures
«People-ization» of the written press: but famous Chinese 
actress Maggie Cheung has other plans.
4
Focus
koyo, a place for dialogue between  
two cultures
On a piece of cloth spread out on the floor, a poet is painting the letters of his poem in French. 
He translates it orally into Toro Tegu for the six Dogon villagers of Koyo, in northern Mali, who 
work with him. Immediately they trace their graphic characters on the same cloth. The poet and 
the painters are responding each in his own way to the spirit of the place. The work produced 
here belongs neither to the French nor the Dogon culture – it opens a new space of dialogue and 
creation. 
It will soon be eight years since Yves Bergeret from France and Hamidou Guindo, Alguima 
Guindo, Belco Guindo, Yacouba Tamboura, Dembo Guindo and Hama Alabouri Guindo from Mali 
started working together every year. 
A unique experiment in dialogue between two cultures and two art forms is turning space into 
speech, a place into a poem. But it led to the creation of a school and a museum of a new and 
different kind. 4
## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=19) 🆗
### Non-article text
19 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Koyo, a place for dialogue between two cultures
In the summer of 2000, I 
arrived alone in the village of 
Koyo, on the top of a moun-
tain in northern Mali, 1000 
kilometres from Bamako. You 
can only get there on foot, 
and some climbing is required. 
About 500 inhabitants. Houses 
of earth and stone among 
orange rocks – materially, very 
poor. Yet here the mountain - 
simple, epic and so beautiful 
– speaks. As a poet, I read 
space, which is the Other’s 
speech, and I answer. I there-
fore wrote about this village, 
perceiving that one lives there 
only by listening to the spirit 
of this mineral environment 
set on the edge of the desert. 
I came back often. I 
learned the village was Dogon, 
without writing; it is the most 
active of the easternmost Dogon ethnic groups’ and 
the only one remaining on top of a mountain. In the 
plain, Peul and Tuareg nomads are dominant. Up 
above, in Koyo, I gradually got to know six farmers 
who painted, on the inner walls of their houses: 
Hamidou Guindo, Alguima Guindo, Belco Guindo, 
Yacouba Tamboura, 
Dembo Guindo and Hama 
Alabouri Guindo. 
When I met them, 
they had on their walls 
large checkerboards in 
ocre, black and white, 
adorned with a few 
graphic characters – 
strange, deep gestures 
expressing their mineral 
setting. They cultivate 
this environment almost 
bare-handed, in meticu-
lous fashion, in little 
terraces next to basins 
of water between the 
rocks on the summit’s 
plateau. 
Accepted by the vil-
lage, I suggested to 
these painters during 
my third stay that together we should create poem-
paintings about the place, on cloth at least the size 
of sheets or floor coverings; I had already practiced 
this approach of creation as dialogue in Haiti with 
carpenter-painters and in Senegal with painters of 
pirogues.
Creation as dialogue
We took one step at a time. Gradually I learned the 
village language, Toro Tegu. Little by little the tradi-
tional chief, the elders and the painters showed me 
around their mountain, even the remote and secret 
places. They taught me certain rites to approach 
these places. 
They imparted some myths and the powers of cer-
tain ancestors. Yes, after my 20th working visit, I 
can say the place where they live is the place of 
intelligence, of initiatory knowledge and of a vigi-
lant kind of ethics. The space is words in action. The 
place is a poem. Certain women elders in the village, 
during an occasional night ceremony, sing and dance 
the reminders and the reactivation of the founding 
words for the entire community. 
4
4
© UNESCO/Yves Bergeret
Creating a blue triptych in the Painters House, July 2007.
© UNESCO/Yves Bergeret
The painters and the poet are mounting an exhibit in the open 
air, Koyo.
## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=20) 🆗
### Non-article text
20 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Koyo, a place for dialogue between two cultures
We now proceed as follows. The painters are 30 to 
50 years old, I am somewhat their elder. As tradi-
tional chief, Alabouri Guindo, who is the same age as 
I am, always comes with us. First we walk on the 
mountain for a long time, to encounter the visible 
and the invisible. Then the painters derive the theme 
we will work on together from our day of walking. On 
the cloth spread on the ground outside, I paint the 
letters of the poem I compose. With the participa-
tion of the village chief, I translate the poem. Imme-
diately the painters paint their graphic figures on 
the same cloth. Then, as they put it, they “read me 
what they have written” and ask me to note it. 
This is our dialogue of creation: a poet who reads 
space and animistic farmers inventing graphic designs 
to express the same thing, in tandem. 
In the work, each one’s thought has its place. 
Each writes according to his graphic method. The 
work is a third entity, never exclusively in their world 
or mine. Powerfully modern. Together we pay intense 
attention to the human and sacred beauty of the 
place. And, what amounts almost to the same thing 
on this mountain, we also pay intense attention to 
the ethics of speaking and listening. We create a 
work that makes visible and transmits oral heritage, 
which is thereby strongly reactivated, and produces 
active poetic speech. 
In the same process we also create our poem-paint-
ings on stones that we raise and leave where they are, 
to guard the village, the ancestors and the spirits.
A welcoming village keeping  
its distance
Renting the works on cloth (and a few on paper) to 
galleries (like the Museo nazionale Pigorini in Rome, 
for one) funds their production and the development 
project defined by the village. In 2000 the village 
was struggling to survive on top of the mountain; 
desertification and poverty drove people to descend 
and no doubt adapt to the plain. But our dialogue of 
creation simultaneously reactivated heritage and 
made it possible to install water reservoirs, a health 
worker, a school for 50 children in a single class, etc. 
In 2006, we built a “Painters’ House” at a short 
distance from the village, because visitors and tour-
ists are starting to show up. The uninhabited house 
fruitfully and vigilantly channels curiosities. 
The pride of the whole village, the house’s inte-
rior walls bear the vast and complex designs of the 
painters, my companions in creation, and express in 
a very dynamic modern medium the deep thought 
and beauty of the place. These are enlivened by the 
encounter between oral heritage and the poet who 
writes; all of these paintings talk about the fecun-
dity and permanence of speech. 
In 2007, very actively involved in creation and 
transmission, the painters and I founded five more 
“Painters’ Houses” on the plain at the foot of the 
mountain. The village welcomes visitors, but keeps 
its distance. 
Yves Bergeret, French poet
With this article, the UNESCO Courier joins in the 
celebration of World Day for Cultural Diversity for 
Dialogue and Development (21 May) 
4
© UNESCO/Yves Bergeret
The poet and the painters responding their own way to the spirit 
of the place.
## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=21) 🆗
### Non-article text
21 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Marin Drzic, ingenuous genius
 
Marin Držić wrote for only ten years and left behind 
ten plays, all in the Croatian language. Only a few 
letters and official documents have come down to us 
from the period before 1549, year his first play 
“Tirena” was published. He was past 40 when he 
began to write. 
Landmarks
marin držić, ingenuous genius
Considered one of the most important 
Renaissance playwrights, Marin Držić from 
Croatia (1508-1567) saw the Mediterranean 
as a theatre, where the laughing mask of 
comedy can quickly turn into a cynical and 
terrifying grimace. 
Scorned by his contemporaries, admired 
by his compatriots today, he proved to 
be one of the most remarkable authors 
of his region and his time, unjustly 
unknown on the international scene. 
In honour of the 500th anniversary 
of his birth, a date UNESCO 
commemorates, the Courier presents an 
abbreviated version of the rebellious 
dramatist’s sad and peculiar life.
4
© All rights reserved
Marin Držić medal.
Like many talented and penniless writers, Držić 
did his best to please the public. His writing style 
was light, never pompous, and respectful of the rules 
of the literary genres he chose. 
Everything he penned was new, original, modern 
– clearly to excess, because his countrymen failed to 
understand him and he was mocked. He must be the 
only writer ever to have maintained such an ambiva-
lent relationship with Dubrovnik, which was one of 
the era’s most flourishing Mediterranean coast city-
states, though it never became more than marginally 
influential. The “Slav Athens” surrounded by power-
ful neighbours like Turkey and Italy nonetheless man-
aged to keep its independence for centuries, thanks 
to the skilful if not always virtuous diplomacy of its 
government. 
As the years went by, his frivolous farces grew 
more complex, highlighting the tragic dimension of 
his characters. The naïve old man, for instance, 
victim in the early plays of all sorts of intrigue, 
© All rights reserved
Scene from «Dundo Maroje,» Marin Držić’s most famous play.
## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=22) 🆗
### Non-article text
22 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4

### Marin Drzic, ingenuous genius
becomes a victim of his own illusions, not to say the 
author’s alter ego.
Unpopular celebrity
By criticizing the society he lived in, he hoped to 
improve it, to rouse spirits, to shine a light on cer-
tain political dysfunctions. But the petty bourgeoisie 
is unforgiving when it feels threatened. Constantly 
criticized and even accused of plagiarism, Držić 
refused to be intimidated. His vitriolic rebuttals, 
however, only made him all the more unpopular. 
Since the mid-19th century, Marin Držić is a clas-
sic in Croatia. He is considered a writer brimming 
with talent but also with human weaknesses, a man 
oppressed by the daily tedium of the small society he 
sprang from, incapable of finding his place within it, 
constantly fleeing it and coming back, a victim of his 
own genius but also of others’ jealousy, and incapa-
ble of keeping his mouth shut. 
In Yugoslavia in Tito’s time, he was hoisted to the 
summit of the cultural and historical pantheon, 
© UNESCO/Ariane Bailey
« Pred dvorom », one of Dubrovnik’s squares where the yearly 
theatre festival takes place.
4
embodying the sort of figurehead that could help 
forge a Yugoslav cultural identity. Not a single year 
of the famous Dubrovnik theatre festival goes by 
without one of his plays being staged in front of an 
elite audience – the same audience he aimed for 
when he was alive, except larger.
The grand illusion
Born into a family of tradesmen who had lost their 
aristocratic titles due to the treachery of a distant 
ancestor, Držić trained to be a priest. But at age 30, 
he was still living with his parents at their expense, 
until they went completely bankrupt. This financial 
ruin is said to have drastically altered, for the rest of 
his life, his outlook on high society, which he both 
craved and condemned. 
The Dubrovnik senate then paid for him to study 
church law in Italy. He lived the good life in Sienna, 
keeping company with the nobility and briefly taking 
up the position of rector at the university. Returning 
to Dubrovnik, he entered the service of an Austrian 
adventurer count, traveling with him to Vienna and 
Istanbul before returning home to start writing plays 
– “Dundo Maroje” being the most famous. He also 
acted on stage, did menial work for the municipal 
government and squandered his small inheritance. 
In 1562, three years after his last play “Hecuba”, 
tired and disappointed, he left Dubrovnik and his 
debts behind and moved to Venice. Fortunately, he 
knew how to play the organ, which allowed him to 
survive, but his resentment ran deep. 
He traveled to Florence, writing four letters to 
Cosmo di Medici urging him to overthrow the 
Dubrovnik senate, “this 20-headed monster tyranniz-
ing the people” and to establish a just government. 
The letters are of great literary quality, but politi-
cally absurd. “We have nothing to fear,” he tells the 
Florentine duke, forgetting that Dubrovnik’s continu-
ing stability was what interested the period’s great 
powers, not whether its government was just. 
Did Cosmo ever read the letters? No one knows. 
Držić waited in vain for his answer and finally 
returned to Venice where he died. 
Ines Sabalić, journalist (Croatia) 
## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=23) 🆗
### Non-article text
23 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4
Partners
Press freedom and freedom of information, 
are the founding principles for good 
governance, development and peace. On 
World Press Freedom Day, UNESCO pays 
tribute to the courage and professionalism 
of the many journalists killed and wounded 
while carrying out their professional 
activities. 
©UNESCO/M.Ravassard
“The Spiritual Globe”, by Robert Rauschenberg.
Next month
tribute to  
Claude Lévi-strauss
Claude Lévi-Strauss is celebrating his hundredth anniversary 
this year. As a tribute to his life and work, the UNESCO Courier 
will devote its next issue to the famous anthropologist. 
A selection of articles he wrote for our magazine since the 
beginning of the 1950s, unpublished documents, as well as his photos and sketches since 
the 1930s will be made available. 
You will be able to listen to his lecture on “Race and Culture” at UNESCO in 1971, a 
recording made public for the first time. The Courier will also present the video of his 
speech on the occasion of the celebration of our Organization’s 60th anniversary in 2005. 
© UNESCO/Michel Ravassard
Claude Lévi-Strauss at UNESCO, in 2005.
Several of UNESCO’s Partners:
Established in 1987, Article 19 fights for all hos-
tages of censorship, defends dissenting voices that 
have been muzzled, and campaigns against laws and 
practices that silence. 
At present, ARTICLE 19 (http://www.article19.org/
index.html) works with more than 80 implementing 
partners across the globe that are active in areas 
such as human rights, freedom of information, 
democratisation, media, women, health and 
environment. 
Article 19 of the Universal Declaration on Human 
Rights: “Everyone has the right to freedom of opin-
ion and expression; this right includes freedom to 
hold opinions without interference and to seek, 
receive, and impart information and ideas through 
any media and regardless of frontiers.” 
IFEX (http://www.ifex.org/en) 
Meeting point of vital importance for the journalists 
and the media organizations, the International 4
## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=24) 🆗
### Non-article text
24 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4
distribution of information on all issues related to 
press freedom but also increased exchanges between 
developing countries. IFEX issues 2000 alerts per 
year, a weekly newsletter in five languages, and coor-
dinates joint campaigns. 
WAN (http://www.wan-press.org/
article.php3?id_article=390) 
Founded in 1948, the World Association of Newspa-
pers groups 77 national newspaper associations, 
individual newspaper executives in 102 nations, 12 
news agencies, and 11 regional press organisations. 
It is a non-profit, non-governmental organisation. 
In all, the Association represents more than 
18,000 publications on the five continents. It has 
formal consultative status to represent the newspa-
per industry at UNESCO, the United Nations and the 
Council of Europe.
 Freedom of Expression and Exchange Network groups 
81 member organisations in 55 countries and more 
than 17,000  subscribers. 
Since its creation, the IFEX network has not only 
enhanced the worldwide collection, production and 
© Article 19
4
## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/162430eng.pdf#page=25) 🆗
### Non-article text
25 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 4
The UNESCO Courier is published by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 
7, place de Fontenoy – 75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
general inquiries by e-mail: courier.unesco@unesco.org 
 director: Saturnino Muñoz Gómez editor in Chief: Jasmina Šopova
 french editor: Agnès Bardon english editor: Ariane Bailey
 spanish editor: Lucía Iglesias Kuntz arabic editor: Bassam Mansour
 russian editors: Katerina Markelova Chinese editor: Weiny Cauhape
 Layout: Marie Moncet Photo and features editor: Fiona Ryan
 Web Platform: Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be reproduced and/or translated providing the credit line reads “Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier”, 
and include date and hyperlink. Photos without UNESCO credit request specific authorization. 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations of the countries and territories concerned.
ISSN 1993-8616 