# [370032](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf)
## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=1) 🆗
### Non-article text
CourierT HE  UNE SCO
July-September 2019
United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization
The ethical challenges 
of climate change
## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=2) 🆗
### Non-article text
Published in 
10 languages
 Arabic, Chinese, English, 
Esperanto, French, Korean, 
Portuguese, Russian, 
Sicilian and Spanish. 
Become an active publishing partner 
by proposing new language editions 
of the UNESCO Courier.
2019 • n° 3 • Published since 1948
The UNESCO Courier is published quarterly by the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. It 
promotes the ideals of UNESCO by sharing ideas on issues 
of international concern relevant to its mandate. 
The UNESCO Courier is published thanks to the generous 
support of the People’s Republic of China. 
Director: Vincent Defourny
Editor-in-chief: Jasmina Šopova 
Associate Editor: Katerina Markelova 
Section Editor: Chen Xiaorong
Editions
Arabic: Anissa Barrak
Chinese: Sun Min and China Translation & Publishing 
House
English: Shiraz Sidhva
French: Gabriel Casajus, proofreader
Russian: Marina Yartseva 
Spanish: William Navarrete
Digital edition: Mila Ibrahimova
Photographs and illustrations: Danica Bijeljac 
Translation and layout coordination: 
Veronika Fedorchenko
Administrative and editorial assistance:  
Carolina Rollán Ortega
Production and promotion: 
Ian Denison, Chief, UNESCO Publishing and 
Branding 
Eric Frogé, Senior Production Assistant
Digital Production:  
Denis Pitzalis, Web Architect/Developer
Media Relations: 
Laëtitia Kaci, Press Officer
Translation: Peter Coles, Cathy Nolan
Design: Laurence Gouttefangeas
Cover illustration: © Roberto Cigna
Printing: UNESCO
Interns: 
Chen Xintong, Gao Sijia, Li Yihong (China) 
Julie Guyader, Nathan Hallegot (France) 
Natasha D’souza (India)
Co-editions: 
Portuguese: Ana Lúcia Guimarães 
Esperanto: Trezoro Huang Yinbao 
Sicilian: David Paleino 
Korean: Eun Young Choi
Information and reproduction rights: 
courier@unesco.org  
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
© UNESCO 2019 
ISSN 2220-2285 • e-ISSN 2220-2293
Periodical available in Open Access under the Attribution-
ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) licence (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using 
the content of this publication, the users accept to be 
bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access 
Repository (https://en.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-
ccbysa-en). The present licence applies exclusively to the 
texts. For the use of images, prior permission shall be 
requested.
The designations employed in this publication and the 
presentation of the data do not imply the expression 
of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO 
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city 
or area of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation 
of its frontiers or boundaries. Articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO and do not commit the 
Organization. 
## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=3) 🆗
### Éditorial
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   3 
CourierT H E  U N E S CO
The 2018 Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on 
Global Warming at 1.5 °C caused quite a stir 
and a lot of ink to flow. To avoid catastrophic 
consequences, global warming should be 
limited to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels, 
the report warned. But, as we know, we are 
far from achieving this. To overcome this 
challenge of the century, scientists advocate 
a radical change in behaviour – something 
that cannot be achieved without a profound 
change in our attitudes. 
“Changing minds, not the climate” is the 
slogan for the public awareness campaign 
of UNESCO’s Strategy for Action on Climate 
Change 2018-2021. It is in line with the 
2015 Paris Agreement (COP21) and the 
United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development (SDGs). 
It sets out a wide range of actions in 
various fields – from Education for 
Sustainable Development (ESD) and 
responsible ocean management (through 
the Intergovernmental Oceanographic 
Commission, IOC), to water security (through 
the International Hydrological Programme, 
IHP) and the cultural and natural sites under 
UNESCO protection, which serve as Climate 
Change Observatories.
Many other projects to raise public 
awareness on climate change through 
the media, or to inform children through 
the UNESCO Associated Schools Network 
(ASPnet), are ongoing. In addition to these 
efforts, there are UNESCO Chairs on Climate 
Change and Sustainable Development; 
Climate Frontlines, networks of indigenous 
people and other vulnerable communities 
and the grassroots UNESCO Green Citizens: 
Pathfinders for Change initiatives. 
Editorial
Changing minds means establishing a new 
order of priorities in politics, the economy, 
industry and the daily lives of us all. But 
above all, it is about becoming aware of 
the ethical implications of climate change 
– which threaten not only the planet’s 
ecosystems, but also our fundamental 
rights, by creating injustices and widening 
inequalities. 
As the ethical dimensions of climate change 
are still relatively unexplored, UNESCO 
adopted, in November 2017, the Declaration 
of Ethical Principles in relation to Climate 
Change – a tool that is accessible to all actors 
in society, especially political leaders, to allow 
for the most appropriate decision-making.  
With this special report, the Courier aims 
to open up new avenues for reflection on 
these lesser-known aspects of the greatest 
global challenge of our times. Because, in 
parallel to the scientific issues that hit the 
no plan, no planet
A Planet for Tomorrow poster from 
the Poster for Tomorrow project.  
© posterfortomorrow 2018 - homework
media headlines, the issues of justice and 
equity, respect for human rights, solidarity 
and scientific and political integrity, and 
individual and collective responsibility, must 
be the principal cornerstones of our actions 
on a global scale. 
But in practice, this is still not the case. Even 
“the human rights community, with a few 
notable exceptions, has been every bit as 
complacent as most governments in the 
face of the ultimate challenge to mankind 
represented by climate change,” asserts 
Australian expert Philip Alston, in his report 
to the UN on 25 June 2019. The Special 
Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human 
rights considers the measures taken by the 
majority of  UN human rights bodies have 
been patently inadequate. “Ticking boxes 
will not save humanity or the planet from 
impending disaster,” he warns.
Vincent Defourny and Jasmina Šopova
The Wide Angle section of this issue is published to mark the United Nations Climate 
Action Summit on 23 September 2019, and the 25th session of the Conference of 
the Parties on Climate Change  in Santiago, Chile (COP25), 2-13 December 2019.
## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=4) 🆗
### Non-article text
4   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
WIDE ANGLE
 7 The philosophical and ethical 
issues of climate change 
Bernard Feltz 
 10 Climate crimes must be brought 
to justice
Catriona McKinnon 
 13 Climate change: 
A new subject for the law 
Anne-Sophie Novel
 16 Climate and social  justice
Thiagarajan Jayaraman, 
interviewed by Shiraz Sidhva
 19 Pakistan: Green again
Zofeen T. Ebrahim
 22 Solar energy: 
Changing rural lives in Kenya
Victor Bwire
 24 Zero carbon, starting with cities!
Manuel Guzmán Hennessey
 26 African cities in action
Niels Boel and Finn Rasmussen, 
with Hadra Ahmed
 28 International solidarity 
and climate change 
Johan Hattingh
 31 Climate change and education 
Laura Ortiz-Hernández
 32 Colonel: We must act quickly!
Thierry Geoffroy, 
interviewed by Niels Boel
 34 Arshak Makichyan: 
The lone picketer 
Interview by Jasmina Šopova
6-35
36-43
ZOOM
Arab youth:  
Architects of their future 
Photos:  
Yan Bighetti de Flogny
Text:  
Katerina Markelova
Contents
## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=5) 🆗
### Non-article text
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   5 
44-49
50-53
OUR GUEST
Baku: Multicultural city
Fuad Akhundov,  
interviewed by Mila Ibrahimova
54-58
 55 Mandela’s South Africa: 
Reality or distant dream? 
Jody Kollapen, 
interviewed  by Edwin Naidu
 57 Dmitry Mendeleev: 
The teachings of a prophet 
Natalia Tarasova and Dmitry Mustafin
CURRENT 
AFFAIRS
IDEAS
 45A tale of two futures
Sandrine Cathelat and Mathilde Hervieu
 48AI innovations to counter  
social challenges 
Dhruv Ghulati and Gil Perry,  
interviewed by Shiraz Sidhva 
## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=6) 🆗
### Non-article text
W
id
e 
A
n
g
le
©
 S
el
çu
k 
D
em
ire
l
Climate change:
The ethical challenges
Poster to raise awareness 
about climate change, 
designed on the occasion 
of COP21 by Belgian 
architect Luc Schuiten.
 Luc Schuiten
## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=7) 🆗
### Enjeux philosophiques et éthiques du changement climatique
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   7 
We can see to what extent such assumptions 
have led to the shameless exploitation of 
nature in all its forms: agriculture, fishing, 
intensive livestock farming, mineral 
depletion, pollution of all kinds.
Ecological science is another approach, 
which conveys a completely different 
vision of the world. In 1937, the British 
botanist, Arthur George Tansley, proposed 
the concept of the ecosystem that would 
revolutionize the scientific relationship 
with nature. This concept refers to all the 
interactions of the various living species 
among themselves, and of all living 
organisms with the physical environment: 
soil, air, climate, etc. In this context, man 
rediscovers himself as belonging to nature, 
as an element of the ecosystem. Moreover, 
this ecosystem is a finite environment, 
with limited resources, both upstream and 
downstream of human activities.  
But many thinkers consider that the 
ecological science approach is insufficient. 
Deep ecologists, for example, believe that 
the core of the problem in the scientific 
approach, including the ecological one, 
is anthropocentrism. They advocate a 
philosophy of the totality that integrates 
humans with living organisms as a whole, 
without granting them any particular status. 
Respect for animals is the same as respect 
for humans. 
Bernard Feltz
Humanity is in a state of debit. Year after year, it consumes more 
resources than nature can provide. This over-consumption has a direct 
effect on the climate. To better understand the issues at stake, the Belgian 
philosopher and biologist Bernard Feltz sheds light on the complex 
relationships between humans and nature and then focuses on the 
ethical aspects of climate change management. 
The philosophical
and ethical 
issues of climate change 
A final understanding of human-nature 
relations attempts to keep a fair distance 
from the radicality of deep ecologists, while 
emphasizing the relevance of the criticism 
of ecological science. Nature and humans 
coexist and interpenetrate in a more 
respecting way of living. An animal can be 
respected for itself, without being given the 
same status as a human being.
A living species or a particular ecosystem are 
to be respected as remarkable achievements 
of nature, just as a work of art is a 
remarkable accomplishment of humanity. 
The aesthetic dimension of a work of art 
reflects a fundamental dimension of reality 
that only the artist is able to reveal. But 
such a relationship does not imply that the 
respected work has the status of a human. 
A hierarchy of values is possible. Animals, 
certain ecosystems and landscapes become 
respectable in two ways – it is the human 
being who decides to respect them, and it is 
a way of respect that does not equate with 
the respect due to humans. 
A major challenge for our time, climate 
change concerns both our daily lives and 
the world geopolitical order. It is one of 
the dimensions of a global ecological 
crisis, a direct consequence of the complex 
interactions between humans and nature. 
These relationships can be divided into four 
main approaches.
The first, that of Descartes, considers nature 
to be a set of objects made available to 
human beings. The seventeenth-century 
philosopher – a contemporary of Galileo and 
considered a great  initiator of modernity 
– advocated establishing life sciences that 
were similar to the emerging physical 
sciences. He defends the idea of an “animal 
machine”. Living things are nothing more 
than inert matter organized in a complex 
way. Only the human being has a substantial 
soul distinct from the body, making it the 
only respectable species. The rest of nature, 
living or inert, is part of the world of objects 
at humanity’s disposal. Descartes has no 
regard for the environment, which he views 
in a utilitarian way, and considers an infinite 
resource that humans can draw upon 
without any qualms.
## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=8) 🆗
### Enjeux philosophiques et éthiques du changement climatique
8   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
At the crossroads of 
science and politics 
A dimension of the ecological crisis, climate 
change paves the way for a more specific 
reflection on the relationship between 
science and politics. 
Science bears a heavy responsibility for 
the emergence of the climate problem. It 
is largely because of the impressive power 
developed by new technologies and their 
unlimited use by economic powers that we 
have entered the Anthropocene. For the 
first time in history, human activities are 
leading to changes in certain environmental 
characteristics that affect all of humanity.
But science also makes us aware of the 
problems related to the ecological crisis. 
It plays a decisive role in the development 
of scenarios that could lead to the rational 
management of the climate crisis. Science 
can destroy us, but it can also save us. 
Integrated into a broader understanding 
of reality, the scientific approach remains 
decisive in controlling climate change. 
However, democracy is not technocracy. In 
a democracy, it is the politician who makes 
the  decisions. The German sociologist Max 
Weber (1864-1920) distinguished between 
the factual realm and the realm of values. On 
the knowledge side, scientists are specialists 
in facts. They are responsible for analysing 
situations and proposing various scenarios 
that are compatible with ecological 
constraints. 
We know the “imperative of human 
responsibility” principle that the German 
philosopher Hans Jonas developed in the 
late 1970s, thinking precisely of ecological 
issues: “Act so that the effects of your actions 
are compatible with the permanence of 
genuine human life on Earth.” 
From now on, it is a question of conceiving 
contemporary social life by integrating into 
it the concern for the sustainability of the 
system in the very long term, by including 
future generations in the scope of our 
responsibilities.
These environmental concerns must be 
consistent with contemporary ethical 
requirements, namely respect for human 
rights and equal consideration for all human 
beings. Not all human populations are 
equal in the face of the climate challenge. 
Paradoxically, the poorest countries are 
often those most affected by uncontrolled 
global warming. Respect for human 
rights must therefore lead to a principle 
of international solidarity that alone can 
guarantee both the global management of 
climate change and that specific measures 
for particularly complex situations will 
be taken. 
A living species or a 
particular ecosystem 
are to be respected 
as remarkable 
achievements 
of nature, just 
as a work of art 
is a remarkable 
accomplishment 
of humanity 
Politicians, on the other hand, act according 
to the values they are committed to 
upholding. In a democratic system, they 
derive their legitimacy from their election. 
They are elected to choose precisely the 
scenario that fits their value system. Climate 
change involves highly complex technical 
analyses, which are not always in line with 
policy directions. 
Environmental ethics  
Nevertheless, it must be acknowledged 
that we have begun a transition towards 
a society shaped decisively by ecological 
constraints. The involvement of everyone 
in their daily lives, the work of the various 
economic actors in their respective activities 
– from small and medium-sized enterprises 
to the most powerful multinational trusts 
and the involvement of state structures 
and  intermediary structures, trade unions, 
business federations, non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs), etc. – are essential 
conditions for effective action. 
Because the fundamental issue is the future 
of humanity. What pushes us to act is this 
realization that uncontrolled climate change 
can cause human life on Earth to become 
much more difficult, if not impossible. 
## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=9) 🆗
### Enjeux philosophiques et éthiques du changement climatique
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   9 
Minimum Monument, an ephemeral 
public art project by Brazilian artist Néle 
Azevedo. Hundreds of tiny human ice 
figures thaw in high temperatures the 
moment they are installed.  São Paulo, 
Brazil, 2016.
©
 M
in
im
um
 M
on
um
en
t b
y 
N
él
e 
A
ze
ve
do
 /
 p
ho
to
 F
an
ca
 C
or
te
z,
 2
01
6
The ethical principles of climate change
Climate change not only threatens our ecosystems, it undermines the foundation of our 
fundamental rights, deepens inequalities and creates new forms of injustice. Adapting 
to climate change and trying to mitigate its impacts are not just a matter of scientific 
knowledge and political will; they also demand a broader view of a complex situation. 
In order to help Member States and other stakeholders to make appropriate decisions 
and implement effective policies for sustainable development, adaptation to climate 
change and the mitigation of its negative effects, UNESCO adopted a Declaration of Ethical 
Principles in relation to Climate Change in November 2017.
Ethics constitute the substantial core of any commitment. As a mobilizing force, ethics 
can steer action, facilitate arbitration, resolve conflicting interests, and establish priorities. 
Ethics have the capacity to connect theory with practice, general principles with political 
will, and global awareness with local actions. 
The Declaration adopted by UNESCO is based on six ethical principles:
Prevention of harm: To better anticipate the consequences of climate change and 
implement responsible and effective policies to mitigate and adapt to climate change, 
including through  low greenhouse gas emissions development and initiatives to foster 
climate resilience. 
Precautionary approach: Do not postpone the adoption of measures to prevent or 
mitigate the adverse effects of climate change on the grounds of a lack of definitive 
scientific evidence. 
Equity and justice: Respond to climate change in a way that benefits all, in a spirit of justice 
and equity. Allow those who are unjustly affected by climate change (due to insufficient 
measures or inadequate policies) to access judicial and administrative proceedings, 
including redress and remedy. 
Sustainable development: Adopt new paths for development that make it possible to 
sustainably preserve our ecosystems, while building a more just and responsible society 
that is more resilient to climate change. Special attention must be paid to areas where 
the humanitarian consequences of climate change can be dramatic, such as food, energy, 
water insecurity, the oceans, desertification, land degradation and natural disasters.
Solidarity: Support, individually and collectively, the people and groups most vulnerable 
to climate change and natural disasters, particularly in the Least Developed Countries 
(LDCs) and Small Island Developing States (SIDS). Strengthen timely co-operative action 
in various areas, including technology development and transfer, knowledge-sharing and 
capacity-building. 
Scientific knowledge and integrity in decision-making: Strengthen the interface between 
science and policy to optimally aid decision-making and the implementation of relevant 
long-term strategies, including risk prediction. Promote the independence of science and 
widely disseminate its findings to as many people as possible, for the benefit of all. 
UNESCO has long-standing experience in environmental ethics, supported by the World 
Commission on the Ethics of Scientific Knowledge and Technology (COMEST), created in  
1998. As an advisory body and a forum for reflection, COMEST has published a series of 
reports over the past decade, that have helped to inform public debate. Its 2015 report 
served as the basis for the Declaration of Ethical Principles in relation to Climate Change. 
The principle of responsibility for future 
generations and the principle of solidarity of 
all towards all, are essential for an equitable 
management of the ecological crisis.
A Belgian biologist and philosopher, 
Bernard Feltz is Professor Emeritus at 
the Catholic University of Louvain. His 
research focuses on the philosophy 
of ecology, bioethical issues and 
science-society relations. He is currently 
Belgium’s representative on UNESCO’s 
Intergovernmental Bioethics Committee 
(IGBC).
A dimension of the ecological crisis, 
climate change paves the way for 
a more specific reflection on the 
relationship between science and 
politics
## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=10) 🆗
### Crimes climatiques
10   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
Catriona McKinnon 
Climate denial has increased the risk of catastrophic global change. 
Should international criminal law be used against those who 
promote this dangerous trend? Economic and political leaders can no 
longer pretend it is business as usual. Whether they actively induce 
environmental harm or just ignore the existential threat against the 
survival of the human species, states and corporations must be held 
accountable for their actions or inaction regarding climate change.
Climate crimes 
must be brought to justice
We reserve the hard treatment of 
punishment for conduct that damages 
the things we hold most fundamentally 
valuable. Climate change is causing precisely 
such damage. 
Over the last 250 years or so, we have 
burned fossil fuels for cheap energy, 
destroyed carbon sinks, grown the global 
population, and failed to halt the malign 
A fire has started in the theatre, from which 
there are no exits. Unchecked, the fire will 
kill and injure many in the theatre, starting 
with those in the cheapest seats. Many 
people can smell the smoke, but some 
others have not noticed it yet. Some people 
are trying to warn everyone so that the fire 
can be contained before it spreads out of 
control. Another group – sitting mainly in 
the most expensive seats – is trying to shout 
loudly that there is no fire, or that it is not 
serious, or that there is plenty of time left to 
put it out. This group uses emotive language 
and insists that the other group is not to be 
trusted. 
Many people in the theatre are confused by 
these conflicting messages or convinced by 
the fire deniers. There are enough people in 
this combined set to significantly slow down 
the efforts of those listening to the accurate 
warnings, those who are trying to put out 
the fire. In this scenario, those shouting “No 
fire!” ought to be silenced, because there is 
a fire that requires urgent and immediate 
action to prevent it from spreading and 
becoming uncontrollable. But the fire is not 
being tackled properly because many of the 
people in the theatre do not know whom to 
believe.  
Can we compare those who deny the 
reality of climate change to the group that 
occupies the best seats in the theatre? The 
answer seems obvious: yes.
Accelerating the 
extinction of humanity 
Criminal sanctions are the most potent 
tools we have to mark out conduct that 
lies beyond all limits of toleration. Criminal 
conduct violates basic rights and destroys 
human security. 
©
 C
yn
th
ia
 C
ar
va
lh
o 
/ 
G
re
en
pe
ac
e
## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=11) 🆗
### Crimes climatiques
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   11 
influence of corporate interests on 
political action that could have made 
mitigation manageable. Now, we have a 
window of just ten years or less to avoid 
using up the carbon budget for 1.5 °C, 
according to the 2018 Special Report of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC). If we continue on our current 
trajectory of emissions without aggressive 
mitigation, we could see warming in the 
range of 4–6.1 °C above pre-industrial 
averages by 2100. Even if all countries meet 
their current mitigation targets under the 
Paris Agreement 2015 (COP21), we are likely 
to see warming of at least 2.6 °C by 2100.
A 4–6.1 °C rise in temperature by 2100 
would be catastrophic. Large areas of the 
earth would become uninhabitable as sea 
levels rise and temperatures soar. Severe 
weather events, crop failure, and conflict 
in the face of mass migration never before 
seen in human history, would place intense 
pressure on remaining habitable places. 
In these fragile and febrile conditions, 
positive feedback from warming could put 
humanity at risk of extinction, according 
to the journal, Futures, September 2018. 
This feedback occurs when tipping points 
are passed in the climate system, causing 
processes to be unleashed that exacerbate 
warming. For example, the transformation of 
the Amazon forest from the world’s largest 
carbon sink to a carbon source; or, the 
massive retreat of polar ice, which reduces 
the planet’s reflectivity, leading it to warm 
at a greater speed. These tipping points are 
described in the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment 
Report (AR5) as a critical threshold at which 
global or regional climate changes from a 
stable state to another stable state.
Temperature rises of 4–6.1 °C are not likely, 
but they are not science fiction either. 
Each year that passes without aggressive 
mitigation to reach net-zero emissions by 
2050 makes this existential threat more real. 
Even if the Paris Agreement aggressively 
ratchets up mitigation ambition to close 
the emissions gap by 2030, it remains the 
case that we have already reached 1 °C 
of warming. Given the time lag between 
emissions and the warming they induce – 
due to the long lifetime of carbon molecules 
in the atmosphere – further increases are to 
be expected.
Between irresponsible 
behaviour …
Should we use criminal law to tackle 
climate change? The current generation 
of people alive in the Anthropocene is 
capable of damaging and degrading the 
environment in ways that could make 
humanity go extinct. Postericide is a morally 
required response to humanity’s changed 
circumstances in the Anthropocene. The 
scope of international criminal law makes 
it the right site to address the existential 
threats created by climate change. 
International criminal law aims to protect 
the entire human community irrespective of 
national borders, now and into the future. 
International criminal law expresses the 
values that bind the human community 
together across time. It asserts the 
condemnation of “unimaginable atrocities 
that deeply shock the conscience of 
humanity” – as stipulated in the Rome 
Statute of the International Criminal Court 
(ICC) of 17 July 1998, which defines, inter 
alia, the international crimes over which the 
ICC has jurisdiction.
For there to be a crime, there must be a 
criminal. The death and suffering caused 
by climate impacts is deeply shocking, but 
this is not enough to prompt prosecution 
under international criminal law. Death and 
suffering are caused by volcanic eruptions, 
yet there are no culpable agents in these 
cases.
The current climate crisis has been caused 
by human activity over the last two and 
a half centuries or so, leading to the 
accumulation of greenhouse gases in the 
atmosphere. The crisis is in large part an 
unintended consequence of action across 
history that has led to the destruction of  
carbon sinks, increased carbon flows, and 
concentrated carbon stocks.
Most of this conduct is beyond the 
legitimate reach of international criminal 
law, not least because the relevant people 
are dead. Most, but not all.
… and postericide
I have proposed that international criminal 
law should be expanded to include a new 
criminal offence that I call postericide. It 
is committed by intentional or reckless 
conduct fit to bring about the extinction of 
humanity. Postericide is committed when 
humanity is put at risk of extinction by 
conduct performed either with the intention 
of making humanity go extinct, or with 
the knowledge that the conduct is fit to 
have this effect. When a person knows that 
their conduct will impose an impermissible 
risk on another and acts anyway, they are 
reckless. It is in the domain of reckless 
conduct, making climate change worse, that 
we should look for postericidal conduct. 
The scope of international 
criminal law makes it the 
right site to address the 
existential threats created 
by climate change
“Climate denial has benefited from the 
generosity of the fossil fuel industry.”
## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=12) 🆗
### Crimes climatiques
12   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
Climate denial has seriously impeded 
aggressive mitigation efforts that could have 
averted our present climate emergency. It 
has magnified the risk that humanity locks 
in to catastrophic global climate change. The 
people in positions of authority in states, 
or industrial groups whose lies have put 
us and our descendants in peril, should be 
held accountable. The damage that climate 
deniers do is heinous, and they have no 
excuses. The time has come to prosecute 
them for postericide.
Professor of Political Theory at the University 
of Exeter, United Kingdom, Catriona 
McKinnon has published numerous 
articles and books on climate justice, and 
on toleration and liberal political ideals. 
She is currently completing a monograph 
defending postericide (Endangering 
Humanity: An International Crime), writing an 
introductory book on climate justice, and 
researching the ethical questions raised by 
geoengineering. 
Hummingbird Rising, a mandala for 
climate justice in San Francisco, United 
States, by American artist John Quigley, 
2018. It is a message to world leaders that 
the climate has changed and so must we.  
No one person’s emissions are fit to bring 
about human extinction as a result of 
climate impacts – the many private jets 
and oil wells they own can do so, however. 
But individual people in their roles as 
political and corporate leaders can exert 
extensive control over how much worse 
climate change becomes as a result of their 
executive action. A country’s president 
can withdraw an entire state from a global 
agreement on mitigation; a Chief Executive 
Officer can authorize the withholding of 
information about the progress and impacts 
of climate change because it threatens the 
corporation’s bottom line.
Individuals often have control over 
conduct they do not perform themselves 
– for example, by giving direct orders to 
subordinates, or by virtue of the special 
relationship in which they stand to others 
whose conduct causes harm. This means 
that we can assign vicarious liability to 
individuals of power, authority and influence 
within groups that, as collectives, worsen 
climate change in ways fit to make humanity 
go extinct. Just as international criminal 
law holds military leaders to account for 
genocide committed by their troops, it 
should hold political and economic leaders 
to account for postericide committed under 
their authority. These leaders should go to 
trial at the ICC and be held to account at the 
bar of the human community’s fundamental 
shared values.
Who should be prosecuted for postericide? 
We could start by examining the established 
international network of well-funded 
organizations devoted to organized climate 
denial (For more on this subject, read “Text-
mining the signals of climate change doubt”, 
in the journal Global Environmental Change, 
Volume 36, January 2016).  The epicentre of 
this activity is in the United States. A set of 
Conservative think-tanks has deliberately 
deceived the public and policymakers 
about the realities of climate change. Their 
ideologically-driven climate denial has been 
heavily funded by the fossil fuel industry; 
which includes, for example, Koch Industries 
and ExxonMobil. This climate denial has had 
a significant impact on public opinion and 
has impeded legislation to tackle climate 
change. 
Vicarious criminal 
liability
Should Rex Tillerson [the former CEO of 
ExxonMobil, who also served as US Secretary 
of State from February 2017 to March 2018], 
Charles Koch and David Koch [the owners 
of Koch Industries] be tried for the crime 
of postericide at the ICC? Their vicarious 
criminal liability would be generated by 
their authorization of multiple acts of 
climate denial by others, without which 
early aggressive political action on climate 
change would have been more likely. 
©
 Jo
sh
 E
de
ls
on
 /
 G
re
en
pe
ac
e
## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=13) 🆗
### Le climat, nouveau sujet du droit
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   13 
The years go by and new records are set 
for rising temperatures. Greenhouse gases 
(GHG) continue to increase, and populations 
the world over are more and more 
concerned and discontented about the lack 
of responsiveness of states to the climate 
change crisis. As a result, the number of 
lawsuits against climate change inaction is 
rising sharply.
The first case of this kind in the world 
was filed in 2013, in the Netherlands. 
The Urgenda Foundation, a Dutch 
environmental group, sued the government  
for “the failure of the Dutch state to take 
sufficient actions to prevent dangerous 
climate change”. At the time, the 
Netherlands was one of the most polluting 
countries in the European Union, and the 
Foundation demanded it take action to 
reduce the country’s emissions by twenty-
five per cent to forty per cent by 2020 
(compared to 1990 levels). 
On 24 June 2015, the District Court of 
The Hague ruled in favour of Urgenda – a 
judgement confirmed on 9 October 2018 
by the Hague Court of Appeal, based 
on scientifically established facts and 
in line with the traditional principle of a 
government’s duty of care. The court ruled 
that Dutch GHG emissions must be reduced 
by at least twenty-five per cent. Recognized 
as the world’s first climate liability lawsuit, 
this ruling sets a precedent that has 
since inspired other legal actions around 
the world.
Anne-Sophie Novel 
More and more citizens and non-
governmental organizations 
around the world are going to 
court to seek climate change 
justice. The unprecedented extent 
of these disputes deserves to be 
highlighted. This relatively recent 
type of litigation is forging public 
opinion, and constitutes a form of 
pressure on states and industries 
that is forcing them out of their 
inertia.
Climate change: 
A new subject for the law
On 5 April 2018, the Supreme Court 
in Colombia ruled in favour of twenty-
five young people who had sued the 
government for failing to guarantee 
their fundamental rights to life and 
the environment. With the support of 
Dejusticia, a Bogota-based human rights 
non-governmental organization (NGO), 
they obtained a court ruling ordering the 
government, provincial governors and 
municipalities to draw up an action plan to 
preserve the forest – recalling their duty to 
protect nature and the climate on behalf of 
present and future generations.
Earlier in the same year in Norway, a verdict 
that was less favourable for the plaintiffs was 
delivered. In 2015, two NGOs, Greenpeace 
Nordic and Nature and Youth, had opposed 
the opening of new oil and gas drilling areas 
in the Barents Sea in the Arctic Ocean, one 
of the most fragile ecosystems in the world. 
But the Oslo Court ruled that these new 
drilling efforts were not in violation of the 
Norwegian Constitution. The NGOs were 
required to reimburse 580,000 Norwegian 
kroner ($66,100) in legal costs to the 
government.
©
 P
et
er
 P
a
Poster by Cambodian-American illustrator 
Peter Pa, commissioned by amplifier.org.
## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=14) 🆗
### Le climat, nouveau sujet du droit
14   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
Also in 2015, in the United States, twenty-
one youth represented by the non-profit 
Our Children’s Trust, filed an appeal in an 
Oregon court, demanding that the US 
federal government reduce carbon dioxide 
(CO2) emissions significantly. Their plaint 
asserted that the government, through 
affirmative actions that cause climate change, 
has violated the youngest generation’s 
constitutional rights to life, liberty and 
property and failed to protect essential 
public trust resources. Known as the Juliana v. 
United States Youth Climate Lawsuit, this trial 
has yet to be admitted to the US Supreme 
Court, in spite of the support of thousands 
of people – including members of the US 
Congress, legal scholars, businessmen, 
historians, medical doctors, international 
lawyers, environmentalists – and more than 
32,000 youth under the age of 25.
At a hearing in the case held by the Ninth 
Circuit Court of Appeals [a US federal court 
preceding the Supreme Court] on 4 June 
2019, a three-judge panel remained sceptical 
of whether the court had any role to play 
in dealing with the landmark case. Their 
decision could have important implications 
on whether or not the courts can be used to 
pursue climate action in the US. 
By contrast, in Pakistan in 2015, a farmer 
successfully petitioned judges to force 
the government of this country – which is 
particularly affected by global warming – to 
adopt climate legislation to protect his farm 
and guarantee his right to food and access 
to water.
In France, the first lawsuit related to 
climate change was initiated in December 
2018 by Notre Affaire à Tous, a climate 
justice association, with three other NGOs 
(Oxfam France, Greenpeace France and the 
Fondation Nicolas Hulot pour la nature et 
l’homme). 
Dubbed the “case of the century”, it 
presented six demands to the government: 
the inclusion of climate in the constitution; 
the recognition of climate change as 
a crime of ecocide; the possibility for 
citizens to defend climate well-being in 
court; the reduction of GHG emissions; 
the regulation of multinational companies’ 
activities, and an end to subsidies for 
fossil fuels. 
Aided by numerous influencers, the petition 
was an unprecedented success, with more 
than two million signatures obtained in a 
few weeks. In March 2019, when there was 
still no response from the government, the 
NGOs filed an appeal. 
Going to  
court is an 
effective means 
to compel 
action
Poster by American artist and activist Chip 
Thomas, commissioned by amplifier.org, 
a design lab that creates art to amplify the 
voices of grassroots movements. 
©
 C
hi
p 
Th
om
as
## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=15) 🆗
### Le climat, nouveau sujet du droit
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   15 
They are aware that the procedure will drag 
on, but hope to raise public awareness and 
promote the idea that going to court is an 
effective means to compel action.
At the European level, the first litigation 
was initiated by a group of ten families from 
eight countries – France, Portugal, Romania, 
Italy, Germany, Sweden, and also Kenya 
and Fiji – in May 2018. The plaintiffs of the 
People’s Climate Case took the European 
Parliament and the Council of the European 
Union to the European General Court (EGC) 
for having allowed too high a level of GHG 
emissions. According to a press release 
from the People’s Climate Case in April 
2019, the plaintiffs called on EU leaders 
to reduce GHG emissions by fifty-five per 
cent by 2030 (compared to 1990), instead 
of the target of forty per cent. According to 
them, the currently set target is “inadequate 
with respect to the real need to prevent 
dangerous climate change and far from 
what is needed to protect our fundamental 
rights of life, health, occupation and 
property.” 
While recognizing that climate change 
affects all Europeans in different ways, 
the EGC dismissed the case on procedural 
grounds in May 2019, saying the plaintiffs 
did not have a right to go to court to 
challenge the EU’s 2030 climate target. The 
families who initiated the lawsuit  plan to 
appeal to the European Court of Justice – it 
is a case to be followed. 
Suing corporations for 
climate change 
Legal action for climate crime is also being 
taken against the private sector. The nature 
of the claims differs according to the 
target. From states, plaintiffs demand more 
urgent, proactive and binding mobilization 
and action. From the private sector, they 
increasingly litigate for compensation for 
losses (crops, infrastructure) in the event 
of climate change hazards (heat waves, 
droughts, floods, etc.) or the management 
of upstream developments, in coastal areas 
in particular.
One of the most significant lawsuits in 
the private sector was filed in Germany 
in November 2017. After two years of 
proceedings, the court agreed to hear the 
case of Saúl Luciano Lliuya, a Peruvian 
peasant and mountain guide from the city 
of Huaraz (100,000 inhabitants). Lliuya is 
suing German energy giant RWE, Europe’s 
largest carbon emitter, to force it to pay for 
the damages caused by climate change in 
the Andes. Once his lawsuit was deemed 
admissible, the case entered the expert 
appraisal phase. It was a symbolic step 
forward to commit states and corporations 
to global climate justice. 
In the Philippines, in 2015, survivors of the 
Haiyan super-typhoon and a coalition of 
NGOs filed a petition with the country’s 
Human Rights Commission for action 
against forty-seven  multinationals, 
including Shell, ExxonMobil and Chevron. 
They demanded an investigation into 
human rights violations related to the 
effects of climate change and ocean 
acidification, and the possible failure of 
the most polluting companies to meet 
their responsibilities to the Filipino people. 
Another legal case to be followed. 
In the US, lawsuits against the oil industry 
are multiplying. Big Oil [as the clutch of the 
world’s largest publicly-traded oil and gas 
companies are known] has been accused of 
being responsible for climate change and 
its effects (rising water levels and coastal 
erosion) and of deliberately “discrediting” 
climate science.
The United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) recorded nearly 900 
climate cases worldwide, as of May 2017. 
The figure is increasing daily: in May 2018, 
the database of the Sabin Center for Climate 
Change Law at Columbia University in New 
York counted 1,440 court cases related to 
climate worldwide, including 1,151 in the 
US. 
“Sometimes plaintiffs know very well that 
the trial has no chance of success, but it’s 
the media coverage that counts, and the 
way the lawsuit is orchestrated,” explains 
Sandrine Maljean-Dubois, CNRS (National 
Centre for Scientific Research) Research 
Director at the University of Aix-Marseille, 
France. According to her, “the main issue is 
to establish that the state has failed, that it 
is responsible for this deficiency and that it 
must remedy this and choose the means to 
comply with its obligations.” It is therefore 
a question of obtaining action rather than 
compensation and of exerting political 
pressure through lawsuits, but also through 
marches or strikes for the climate, and 
ultimately of seeing civil society adopting 
this type of approach to other subjects – air 
pollution, biodiversity, the environment, etc. 
“Even losing a lawsuit can be positive, to 
show the inadequacy of the law,” concludes 
Maljean-Dubois.
A French journalist, author and film director 
who focuses on environmental, economic 
and social issues, Anne-Sophie Novel 
works for Le Monde, Le 1, Public Sénat 
and specialized French publications. She 
directed the documentary Les médias, le 
monde et moi (The Media, the World and Me), 
a preview of which was held at UNESCO on 
28 March 2019.
Even losing 
a lawsuit can 
be positive, 
to show the 
inadequacy 
of the law
UNESCO Green Citizens 
Learning about and sharing initiatives aimed at providing sustainable solutions to the 
challenges of everyday life is the objective of  UNESCO’s Green Citizens project. It was 
launched following the success of a travelling exhibition of the same name in 2015, 
which presented projects started by twenty-five citizens committed to transforming 
their lives and those of their generation – in Egypt, France, India, Japan, Morocco, 
Nicaragua, Senegal,  United States, Vanuatu, and other countries.
Discover the stories of Fatou Aidara, Elizabeth Salomon, Alberto Lopez, Ezzat Guindy, 
Syo Ogasawara, Janaki, Claudia Valle and other Pathfinders for Change on UNESCO’s 
Green Citizens website (https://en.unesco.org/greencitizens/green-citizens).
## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=16) 🆗
### Climat et justice sociale
16   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
Thiagarajan Jayaraman,  
interviewed by Shiraz Sidhva
There is a tendency in the public 
debate on climate change to 
present the use and development 
of green technologies as a miracle 
solution or panacea. We often 
forget one aspect: it is crucial to 
ensure that their development 
goes hand in hand with social 
justice. “The realization that it 
is not just global warming that 
we are dealing with, but global 
warming in an unequal and 
unjust world, has yet to sink 
in,” according to Thiagarajan 
Jayaraman. Without equality and 
equity – in other words, without 
peace and security – we cannot 
effectively fight climate change, 
the Indian climate policy expert 
insists.
Climate and 
social justice 
Does the current push towards green 
technologies overshadow the need to focus 
on equality and social justice in the fight 
against climate change?
This is definitely an issue that needs to 
be explored. I think there is a general 
recognition that you could hardly fight 
what is the most prominent environmental 
threat to humanity while you ignore issues 
of equality and social justice. The natural 
tendency is to argue that fighting climate 
change must go hand in hand with social 
justice. Unfortunately, the term social justice 
gets diluted in the usual international 
agency-speak in which this subject is 
sometimes being dealt with, and then you 
lose a specific understanding of what social 
justice means – it means very different 
things to  different people.
For me, at least one reading of social justice 
is having a regime or social economic 
order that leads to the enhancement, the 
extension and the development of human 
capabilities.
Obviously, one cannot speak of saving 
humanity while talking about tolerating 
injustices in the social and economic 
world. But in practice what happens is 
that there is a tendency in a section of the 
polity − especially among those who are 
environmentalists − to argue that the one 
is so important, that the other has to be put 
on the back burner. For instance, you shut 
down factories that are polluting before 
you worry about what is going to happen 
to those who are employed there. That kind 
of issue is where the question of equity and 
justice becomes really sharp.
Maskbook, an international participatory 
and artistic project by Art of Change 
21, an association which raises public 
awareness on the climate issue. 
So how do you avoid these pitfalls of social 
inequity while undertaking the development 
of green infrastructure?
This is not just an issue about the 
development of green infrastructure, but in 
all varieties of climate action, and there is no 
easy solution to it. To pretend otherwise is 
to fool ourselves. For instance, people talk 
of adaptation, of vulnerability or dealing 
with the needs of the vulnerable in a certain 
way as part of adaptation. This is the same 
jargon, slightly displaced, that comes from 
earlier talk about poverty eradication, like 
sustainable livelihoods. It’s not as if such 
talk does much to push poverty eradication 
along. There is no easy route to ensuring 
social equity as part of climate action.  Like 
all other developmental agendas, the fight 
for an equitable and just world is an ongoing 
fight, and it will continue. The important 
thing is to be very clear that climate is no 
exception.
There is a tendency, which has become 
prominent recently, since the publication 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) Special Report on Global 
Warming of 1.5 °C, wherein it is sought to 
be argued that a 1.5 °C world is naturally 
equitable. I think this is completely bogus 
− it’s not as if you can completely conflate 
social justice, equity and development with 
keeping the world average temperature 
increase at 1.5 °C. It amounts to saying that 
all problems of injustice are environmental 
in origin, which is obviously an absurd 
statement. 
## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=17) 🆗
### Climat et justice sociale
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   17 
Are the developed countries willing to 
help out to achieve this leapfrogging of 
developing countries to help fight climate 
change?
The effort is very patchy. Where developed 
countries sense opportunities, they are keen 
to bring their technologies to developing 
countries, as in electric vehicles. The other 
problem is that they want all-or-nothing 
solutions, which will not work. For instance, 
they want India not to invest in coal. My 
point is, when developed countries are 
unable to implement the coal-to-renewables 
transition, and in effect doing only coal-
to-gas, why are they asking developing 
countries to do this?
Why are developed countries so slow in 
reforming the transport sector? Why is there 
not a push for electric mobility in developed 
countries, comparable to the push that is 
happening in countries like India and China? 
China has entire cities, like Shenzhen, which 
are run on electric transport. There’s nothing 
of the kind in the West. Forget electric 
mobility – even the most stringent norms 
on emissions have been deferred for a few 
more years in the European Union. Transport 
is a sector where developed countries have 
been getting away with doing very little.
©
 M
as
kb
oo
k 
- A
rt
 o
f C
ha
ng
e 
21
Preserving biodiversity with solidarity
One million species are at risk of extinction if we don’t act to save them, is the stark 
warning of the 2019 Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. 
Human activity has caused a biodiversity crisis that threatens every ecosystem in the 
world, according to a sweeping 1,500-page report published by the Intergovernmental 
Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES), an 
independent intergovernmental environmental organization based in Bonn, Germany.  
“The health of ecosystems on which we and all other species depend is deteriorating 
more rapidly than ever. We are eroding the very foundations of our economies, 
livelihoods, food security, health and quality of life worldwide,” Robert Watson, 
environmental scientist and former IPBES chair, said. 
“Protecting biodiversity is as vital as fighting climate change,” Audrey Azoulay, Director-
General of UNESCO, an institutional partner of IPBES, said. A summary of the report for 
policymakers and the media, approved by 132 governments, was released in May 2019 
at UNESCO Headquarters. 
Compiled by 145 authors from fifty countries, the intergovernmental report, to be 
released in late 2019, is the first global biodiversity assessment since 2005. 
Human action has already severely altered about seventy-five per cent of the land 
environment and sixty-six per cent of the marine environment, the report finds. 
Protecting biodiversity and nature is the key to progressing towards the attainment of 
the global Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
The report stresses that nation states have a responsibility towards future generations 
to act in solidarity to ensure that the planet remains inhabitable. The scope of 
“transformative changes across economic, social, political and technological factors” 
to correct the alarming trends of degradation are explored. It dismisses the notion that 
degradation of biodiversity is only an environmental issue. It is, in reality, an economic, 
development, security, social, ethical and moral issue, and everyone is a stakeholder. 
https://en.unesco.org/links/biodiversity/ipbes
Politicians who are aware of the threat of 
climate change and its scope have been 
trying to get businesses to back green 
industries, saying they will create millions of 
new jobs and fresh opportunities for growth. 
Is social justice a part of this equation?
So far, there has been a tendency to 
mollycoddle businesses and hope that they 
will do right by climate change and social 
justice. But this is a strategy doomed to 
failure. 
Developed countries have reached a 
stalemate on this in climate talks. They go 
back and forth on carbon taxes, on carbon 
trading, but why can’t they mandate certain 
targets to be reached by certain industries? 
There have to be tighter regulations. 
Otherwise they should be made to pay the 
penalty, and that hardly seems to be on the 
agenda. To believe that somehow you can 
sweet-talk businesses into acting morally, 
or scare them into taking the right steps, 
seems to me a little absurd. I don’t think it’s a 
very useful point of view either – economics 
doesn’t work like that. Companies like Shell 
and ExxonMobil make polite noises about 
investing in green technologies, and then 
continue their business as usual.
I think that you need a two-pronged 
strategy on technology for the world: in 
developed countries, push very hard to 
convert rapidly to green technologies, which 
is not happening fast enough. For instance, 
many developed countries are still thinking 
of substituting gas for coal − both are fossil 
fuels − instead of going for renewables.
The other leg of the strategy is that 
developing countries must leapfrog in 
moderate amounts. This has to be done in 
a sensible way. They cannot be expected 
to leapfrog from centuries-old biomass 
burning to state-of-the-art solar power. To 
move an economy from one level of energy 
use and efficiency to a completely different 
level is not simply a matter of saying, ‘If you 
try hard enough, it can be done’. It’s more 
complicated than that.
## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=18) 🆗
### Climat et justice sociale
18   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
In a wide variety of other sectors, the 
urgency which emerges in the talks of 
climate scientists is not reflected in policy 
and real climate action. Even in the official 
documents of the developed countries 
themselves, they are clear they will be hard-
put to meet their Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDC) targets at the rate at 
which they are moving today. There is hardly 
any real furore over this in climate policy 
circles.
If climate change escalates, the 
consequences and indirect consequences 
− an increase in migration, for example − 
will also affect the wealthy countries. Do you 
think self-interest – like mitigating migration 
− can motivate wealthy countries to support 
social justice?
There are two kinds of self-interest: one is 
the self-interest in a stable global order, 
and the other is self-interest in one’s own 
country. But when it comes to the US, 
unfortunately there is not even self-interest 
with regard to the conditions of life in the 
US itself. A recent study has suggested that 
the higher rate of warming in the higher 
latitudes will create a lot of extra storm 
activity and this especially refers to Canada, 
the US, the EU and Russia. 
There is this new wave of thinking which 
attributes all migration and conflicts to 
climate or environmental conditions. Some 
of it seems to be an effort to awaken the 
self-interest of developed countries, but 
from the global security perspective. But 
war or armed conflicts – which have a 
lot to do with migration – are very much 
problems of social and political conditions 
and are not simply climate-driven. For 
instance, the North African migration to 
Europe has a great deal to do with the 
huge destabilization and overthrow of 
regimes that provided some basic welfare, 
so obviously people are fleeing in the 
tens of thousands. The conflation of this 
with the impact of climate change is quite 
unwarranted.
A peaceful and secure world is a 
precondition for dealing effectively with 
climate change. But that does not mean 
peace and security will arise because you 
take effective climate action.
An Indian academic who has focused on 
climate action and climate justice for more 
than a decade, Thiagarajan Jayaraman is 
a professor at the School of Habitat Studies 
at the Tata Institute of Social Sciences, 
Mumbai, India. He is also a member of the 
Planning Board of the government of Kerala 
state and has worked with the Government 
of India on climate policy issues.
There is no easy route 
to ensuring social equity  
as part of climate action
These are the countries − except perhaps 
for the EU, which is not in the same league 
− that hardly discuss their own countries as 
the sites of the most demanding adaptation 
requirements, when in fact they should be 
doing so. Australia is now a huge burden of 
adaptation − all those forest fires contribute 
a lot to climate change.
This idea that adaptation is a problem 
of the third world – and not of their own 
(developed) countries – which has gained 
ground in some of the policy discourse, is, 
I think, unfortunate. In fact, if you compare 
sea-level rise at 1.5 °C to that at 2 °C – in 
terms of the number of people affected by 
it, North America has the highest absolute 
numbers of people who will be affected, 
even more than the island states. The idea 
that self-interest should make them worry 
about the environmental conditions of 
human life in the developed world itself, is 
not quite there. It has come home, to some 
extent I believe, in Europe, though it doesn’t 
seem to affect all their behaviour. But I think 
in many other places, this realization has not 
really sunk in.
“A peaceful and secure world is a 
precondition for dealing effectively with 
climate change.”
 Luc Schuiten
## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=19) 🆗
### Le Pakistan retrouve sa parure verte
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   19 
In 2014, the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (the 
movement for the restoration of justice, 
PTI) the political party which governed KP 
between 2014-2018, jumped into the global 
fray and joined the Bonn Challenge – which 
aims to restore 150 million hectares of the 
world’s degraded and deforested lands by 
2020. Headed by former cricketer-turned-
politician Imran Khan, the PTI ambitiously 
pledged to restore 350,000 hectares of forest 
and degraded land from 2014 to 2018.
More than  
a billion trees
In the short time it had, the forest 
department could not have completed or 
done what the political party had pledged, 
all on its own. 
The model adopted for the BTTAP became 
a business involving local communities. “We 
were able to complete the project in August 
2017, ahead of time!” said Malik Amin Aslam, 
who is currently federal minister and Climate 
Change Advisor to Imran Khan, who became 
the country’s prime  minister in 2018.
Zofeen T. Ebrahim
A billion trees have been planted 
in recent years in the Pakistani 
province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, 
about fifty kilometres from 
Islamabad, the country’s 
capital. The landscape has been 
transformed, and so has society. 
The fight against global warming 
and the fight against poverty are 
one and the same. 
 Pakistan: 
Green again 
“The cost was estimated to be 22 billion 
Pakistani rupees ($155 million), and it was 
completed at Rs14 billion ($99 million), an 
anomaly for a government-funded project, 
which usually go over budget,” pointed 
out Aslam, who was the force behind the 
initiative. In less than three years, 1.18 billion 
trees were grown.
The four-pronged strategy employed 
included planting new trees and 
regenerating existing forests; ensuring a 
high level of transparency; making this a 
people-centred programme; and taking on 
the powerful timber “mafia” or the illegal 
loggers.
According to Aslam, who also serves as 
Global Vice President of the International 
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), 
sixty per cent of the billion-tree target 
was reached by “natural regeneration 
through community-managed protection 
of the forests”. These forests were divided 
into about 4,000 enclosures, with the 
communities given the incentive of 
collecting dead wood. 
Sitting comfortably on a footstool in her 
backyard under a tree providing her ample 
shade, Farzana Bibi puts a fistful of earth 
from the mound next to her into a black 
elongated rubber pocket. The clucking of 
hens and the lone rooster prancing around 
her tiny green backyard make for a perfect 
pastoral backdrop. Once filled to the top, she 
deftly makes a dip in the middle of the tube, 
lodges a seed in it and covers it with soil.
Idyllic and surrounded by mountains, Bibi’s 
village of Najafpur, in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
(KP) province, is some fifty kilometres from 
Islamabad, the capital of Pakistan. 
She is among the 400 women who have 
been trained in modern ways to prepare and 
propagate plant nurseries in their backyards 
and sell the saplings to the provincial 
government’s forest department. It is part of 
the government’s Green Growth Initiative’s 
(GGI) Billion Tree Tsunami Afforestation 
Project (BTTAP), to fight climate change and 
pollution by planting trees.
Pakistan’s total forest cover ranges between 
two per cent and five per cent of the land 
area – making it a country with one of the 
lowest forest cover in the region and well 
below the twelve per cent recommended by 
the United Nations. 
Farzana Bibi puts a fistful of earth into 
a rubber pocket. 
©
 Z
of
ee
n 
T.
 E
br
ah
im
## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=20) 🆗
### Le Pakistan retrouve sa parure verte
20   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
They also benefited from green jobs as 
forest nigehbans, or community-assigned 
guards, who protected the enclosures from 
grazing, fire and the illegal felling of trees.
The remaining forty per cent target was 
achieved by employing a public-private 
model of shared revenues and growth – like 
the nurseries being tended by Bibi and 
others. The government was also able to 
extricate nearly 3,000 hectares of its land 
from encroachers. 
The project was lauded both nationally and 
internationally. The World Wildlife Fund for 
Nature- Pakistan (WWF-Pakistan) was tasked 
with carrying out an independent annual 
performance audit of the BTTAP.  Hammad 
Naqi Khan, Director General of WWF-
Pakistan, said the project was “a good step in 
the right direction”.
Tackling unemployment
Meanwhile in Najafpur, Bibi’s husband, 
Shaukat Zaman, joins in to fill the pockets. 
His poultry business folded two years ago, 
after a deadly virus annihilated the entire lot 
of chickens. He has been unable to recover 
the loss and start anew. Between them, they 
are able to fill a thousand  tubes with soil 
and seeds in a day. The completed tubes are 
stacked neatly at the back of the courtyard. 
“We provide the seed and the pockets, they 
get the soil, mix it with organic fertilizer and 
put in the labour,” explained Mohammad 
Tehmasip, BTTAP’s project director.  
Over the next few weeks, Bibi and Zaman 
have to fill as many as 25,000 pockets. In 
about six to eight months, the saplings that 
survive will be bought by the government’s 
forest department for Rs6 per sapling. 
“There’s lots of unemployment in our village, 
so every little bit helps,” Bibi says. Her three 
sons, all graduates, are out of work and help 
tend her nursery.       
“In less than a year, they earn about 
Rs150,000 ($1,060) for running these one-
unit (with 25,000 saplings) nurseries and 
we pay them in three installments,” said 
Tehmasip. The first thing Bibi plans to do 
with the money she gets from selling the 
saplings is to make a proper grave with a 
tombstone for her 20-year-old daughter 
Anam, who died suddenly a few months 
ago. 
“Last year, Anam had made her dowry from 
the money she earned from preparing a 
nursery,” she says, her eyes welling up. 
“I’d never seen so much money in my life; 
my life has changed completely, and all 
that without leaving home!” says 30-year-
old Rubina Gul, bursting with enthusiasm. 
“My son goes to a private school now,” 
she smiles. She and her husband, Sajjid 
Zaman, have been preparing and tending 
to nurseries since 2015. “The first year we 
used our front yard to grow the saplings,” 
Gul recalls, adding that from the profits, they 
were able to set up a bigger nursery in an 
empty plot they owned, and also to convert 
part of it into a shop, which they rent for a 
monthly income. They were also able to buy 
a second-hand van. “We are now able to visit 
the adjoining valleys,” Gul beamed. 
...and now the 10 billion 
challenge 
When the PTI formed the federal 
government in August 2018, the party 
decided to expand the project nationwide 
by planting 10 billion trees. 
Terming it an “upscaled” version of the 
BTTAP, Aslam said it was, by nature, quite 
different, as it dealt with more diverse 
ecological zones, different terrains and 
different managerial models for tree 
plantations.
“The 10-billion-tree tsunami (BTT) is a much 
more complex endeavour, as it traverses 
diverse landscapes and forestry models 
across six regions – from mangroves to 
plantation blocks to natural reserves and 
urban forestation,” he explained. Having 
battled and won against illegal loggers in 
KP, the authorities are ready to confront the 
land “mafia” in Punjab “to make space for 
forests to thrive,” Aslam said.
©
 Z
of
ee
n 
T.
 E
br
ah
im
## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=21) 🆗
### Le Pakistan retrouve sa parure verte
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   21 
And they are already walking the talk. 
An hour’s drive from Lahore, at Balloki, 
in Punjab province, the government has 
succeeded in extricating state-owned land 
from those illegally occupying it. They have 
turned it into a nature reserve covering 
1,011 hectares. Using legal channels, 
the government aims to recover twenty 
years of rent arrears for illegal use of the 
land from eighty politicians and landlords. It 
also plans to drive out encroachers from the 
riverine forests and wetlands along the River 
Indus, soon.
Changing mindsets
For those who got this once-in-a-lifetime 
chance to ride the BTTAP wave, it was 
a huge learning experience. “The forest 
department, once considered the most 
corrupt department, went through a 
thorough cleansing. 
The working improved manifold too. Earlier 
there was no monitoring, no accountability 
and the forest officers hardly ever even 
went into plantation sites. All that has 
changed. We may not have had the most 
trained team, but it became, by far, the most 
dedicated and motivated,” KP’s environment 
secretary, Nazar Shah, claimed. 
Next, violators – often from the most 
influential segment of society, and who 
considered themselves invincible – were 
dealt with using an iron hand and penalized. 
All this was only possible because of political 
commitment at the top. 
Many in the forest department said it 
brought about a change in the way people 
in KP started looking at trees. The traditional 
wisdom of conserving and preserving 
forests was revived.  “Today we see a strong 
ownership in the communities,” said Ubaidur 
Rehman, community development officer 
with the KP forest department. “Without the 
community on board, this project would not 
have succeeded.” 
“What makes the BTT special is that it is 
not just about planting trees but about 
changing mindsets and making people 
think differently about the role of trees, 
nature and valuing their conservation. The 
billion trees project helped us change the 
behaviour of people, especially the children 
and youth of KP province, and made them 
value the trees as a natural asset. It did 
that not just within the province, but also 
catalyzed a green political movement across 
the country – which is now more sensitized 
to ecological conservation,” Aslam added.
And though it looked like an “impossible” 
task, especially for a province where the 
timber “mafia” rule was so well-entrenched, 
today, in retrospect, the two most 
important lessons for Aslam were: “Firstly, 
that if you give nature some space and 
a chance to rebound, it does so beyond 
your expectations and calculations; and 
secondly, that nothing is impossible if you 
wholeheartedly commit to it and are willing 
to work hard.”
A Pakistani journalist who covers 
development issues for national 
and international media outlets, 
Zofeen T. Ebrahim is Pakistan editor for 
The Third Pole, a multilingual platform 
dedicated to promoting discussion about 
the Himalayan watershed and the rivers 
that originate there.
If you give nature some 
space and a chance 
to rebound, it does so 
beyond your expectations 
and calculations
Women working in a government-owned 
nursery in Pakistan’s Khyber  
Pakhtunkhwa province
## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=22) 🆗
### L'énergie solaire change la vie des villageois au Kenya
22   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
The recent commissioning of five solar-
powered water pumps in the region has 
made these hardships a thing of the past. 
Currently serving 700 households in seven 
villages, the new water project, launched 
on 11 February 2019, gives residents access 
to clean water for drinking and cooking, 
while protecting the water catchment areas 
around the Rangwe and Riana rivers. Its 
water pump at Nyandiwa produces 3,000 
litres of water per hour – the 2.2 kilowatt 
pump has been reinforced by a five kilowatt 
solar structure, to ensure that it works even 
when sunshine levels are low.  
Previously, the people of Rangwe 
constituency were forced to boil their 
water to avoid contracting waterborne 
diseases such as cholera. This was especially 
important after water pipes burst and clean 
water was contaminated by raw water. 
Boiling water requires firewood and the 
burst pipes meant that people had to fetch 
water from the catchment areas – both 
these actions  contribute to climate change.  
It took the intervention of the Kenya Red 
Cross Society (KRCS) and the area’s Member 
of Parliament to rehabilitate an old water 
supply project that was conceptualized in 
1979 to run using diesel power, but was 
never completed. 
Eliminating pollution
The work involved the KRCS – which 
manages the new project – undertaking 
the fresh protection of the old water spring 
and fencing it, designing and constructing a 
new sump tank, and installing solar energy-
based pumps.  The use of solar energy, 
instead of diesel, to pump the water has 
not only saved the community from the 
high costs associated with using petroleum 
products, but has also ensured a steady 
supply of clean power – all without adding 
any air pollution. 
Victor Bwire
The availability of solar-powered 
water pumps and solar lamps 
have had a life-changing effect 
on rural communities in Kenya, 
providing clean drinking water 
and lighting while eliminating 
hardships, health hazards and 
habits that contribute to climate 
change. The government’s 
commitment to invest in clean 
energy has been bolstered by 
private companies to bring about 
real change, especially for those 
who need it most.  
Solar energy: 
Changing rural lives in Kenya 
The private sector has viewed solar 
energy as a business opportunity, while 
providing climate- friendly energy to poor 
communities. In addition to government 
investment in the development of solar 
energy in the country, the private sector 
– both businesses and non-profits – have 
been instrumental in the growth of the 
sector.  Through such initiatives as highly 
subsidized prices, social marketing and 
loan schemes, a number of entities have 
aggressively expanded the use of solar 
systems across the country.  
Targeting women’s 
networks
Solibrium, a local company, provides solar 
power at affordable prices. It sells solar 
panels, solar systems and solar lamps to 
communities through women’s groups, 
offering loans or a subsidized price system. 
Residents have access to the solar systems 
and can pay in installments. Incentives 
are extended to those who pay promptly 
and some existing users are made sales 
representatives to recruit more users. 
Solibrium has recruited nearly 200 members 
through women’s communities, who 
actively promote the sales of solar products 
in six counties in Kenya. More than 50,000 
households have been equipped by the 
company so far. 
The solar lamps have been life-changing 
for the communities. “The solar systems 
have reduced the health burden and air 
pollution related to using diesel engines 
within the communities. For example, for 
generators at water pumps and hospitals, 
the solar lanterns have eliminated the use 
of kerosene, which was not only expensive, 
but caused eyesight problems for users. It 
has  reduced the destruction of forests by 
eliminating the need for charcoal, and the 
availability of power also enables children to 
do their homework after nightfall, without 
hurdles,” Anton Espira, the company’s 
founder and chief of operations explains. 
“I have nothing more to say than thank God 
for remembering us, and the people who 
have made the completion of this water 
project here possible” Jane Akinyi, a resident 
of Nyandiwa in Homa Bay county, says. Even 
though the area is not far from Lake Victoria, 
one of the largest fresh-water lakes in the 
world, access to clean drinking water has 
remained unattainable here for decades. 
“Women used to walk several kilometres 
to the rivers to seek water, and often, the 
long queues at the only water points in the 
region would mean you could waste the 
whole day waiting. This meant chores at 
home would remain undone, resulting in 
other challenges,” Akinyi explains.
## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=23) 🆗
### L'énergie solaire change la vie des villageois au Kenya
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   23 
Benefiting small 
landowners
The solar systems, which include lamps 
and chargers, play a significant role in 
the economic empowerment of the 
farmer communities they are working in, 
affirms John Ohaga of One Acre Fund, an 
international non-profit working in East 
Africa. “These lanterns have helped some of 
the farmers do business late into the night, 
thus growing their businesses. They are able 
to charge their phones, thus fully utilizing 
the online payment platforms, and use the 
torches to continue some work on the farms 
after dark,” he says.
Farmers are also increasingly using 
solar irrigation systems to deal with the 
unpredictable seasons brought about 
by Kenya’s climate. Unlike before, when 
irrigation farming and predictable farm 
produce was mainly associated with the 
rich who could afford them, things have 
changed for the better for these formerly 
poor farmers, who were unable to invest in 
their crops and land. A better harvest also 
means food security for these farmers.
Optimizing solar energy
According to estimates by the International 
Energy Agency (IEA), solar photovoltaic 
energy will contribute the largest share 
(forty-seven per cent) of the technology 
mix for mini-grids and off-the-grid systems 
power generation in Sub-Saharan Africa by 
2040. M-KOPA Solar, a privately-held Kenyan 
solar energy company has installed 225,000 
solar energy products in the country so far, a 
2016 study by the World Resources Institute 
indicated. 
Kenya has committed to reducing its carbon 
dioxide emissions by 30 per cent by 2030.   
Decreasing the use of diesel and petrol 
machines and easing pressure on forests 
by using less charcoal, the solar power 
systems are a major intervention that not 
only alleviate the problems faced by women 
and children in communities, but also play a 
big role in mitigating the adverse effects of 
climate change in Kenya.
The climate change interventions in Kenya 
are guided by governmental decisions as 
reflected in the National Climate Change 
Response Strategy (NCCRS 2010) and 
the National Climate Change Action Plan 
(NCCAP 2013). Meanwhile, a National 
Climate Change Framework Policy 
and legislation are in their final stages 
of enactment to facilitate an effective 
response to climate  change. In addition, the 
Government of Kenya has developed Energy 
(Solar Photovoltaic Systems) Regulations, 
which require the registration and licensing 
of players in the sector.  
The Government Master Plan for the energy 
sector notes that due to its position on the 
equator, Kenya is endowed with very high 
solar resources, among the highest ten of 
Sub-Saharan African countries. Given the 
challenges posed by conventional energy 
sources and poverty levels in Kenya, solar 
energy has high potential – the government, 
through its energy regulatory framework, 
is working to ensure the maximizing of this 
resource.  Electricity consumption is forecast 
to grow in the medium term by an annual 
average of 7.2 per cent per year, a 140 per 
cent increase over the 2015 level, by 2020. 
This makes it imperative to find renewable 
energy solutions to benefit marginalized 
groups and small-scale users.
Head of Media Development and Strategy 
at the Media Council of Kenya, Victor Bwire 
is an environmental journalist. He also trains 
journalists on environment, health and 
related issues. 
Kenya’s Masai women walk  
house-to-house with their donkeys, which 
carry solar panels on their backs. 
©
 G
re
en
 E
ne
rg
y 
A
fri
ca
 /
 N
ic
ho
la
s
## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=24) 🆗
### Zéro carbone, à commencer par les villes!
24   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
Before the publication of the Special Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change in October 2018, the tipping point 
(the critical threshold at which the climate 
changes from one stable state to another) 
of the increase in the earth’s average 
temperature was thought to be 2 ºC. As we 
have learnt since, it is now at 1.5 ºC. If this 
threshold is crossed, IPCC scientists note, 
society will face devastating consequences. 
These include the loss of entire ecosystems 
and species, melting polar ice caps and 
rising sea levels, intense heat waves and 
droughts, and an increased intensity and 
frequency of extreme weather events.
The Paris Agreement of 2015 (COP21) is not 
enough to stop this catastrophe. Scientists 
have explained that in order to limit global 
warming to 1.5 °C instead of 2 °C, as set out 
in this Agreement, it would be necessary 
to reduce net global carbon dioxide (CO2) 
Manuel Guzmán Hennessey 
Non-state actors, with cities at 
the forefront, must be the first to 
sow the seeds of a carbon-free 
society. To avoid the nightmare of 
climate change, we must reduce 
our carbon emissions further than 
called for by the Paris Agreement 
of 2015. This requires coordinated 
actions at the international 
level and concrete initiatives 
such as electric transport, the 
decarbonization of housing and a 
large-scale transition of energy.  
Zero carbon, 
starting with cities!
emissions by about forty-five per cent of 
2010 levels by 2030, and to achieve net-zero 
carbon emissions by 2050. The emission 
reduction targets set by COP21 average 
around twenty-five per cent. 
What is to be done? The IPCC has called for 
“rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented 
changes in all aspects of society”, which 
essentially involves reducing our carbon 
emissions. Accumulated CO2 emissions 
and the average increase in the earth’s 
temperature are directly related to the 
production and consumption of fossil fuels. 
The consequence is unprecedented global 
warming – the last three years have been 
the hottest in history. 
Future city, a drawing by Wang Boya, 
7,  for The Future World in My Eyes, an art 
activity launched by the UNESCO Courier 
on its WeChat platform, in 2019.
©
 W
an
g 
Bo
ya
## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=25) 🆗
### Zéro carbone, à commencer par les villes!
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   25 
Why start with cities? Because they account 
for three-quarters of greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions and two-thirds of the world’s 
energy consumption. About seventy per 
cent of the world’s cities already face the 
consequences of climate change, and 
almost all are at risk. By 2060, more than a 
billion people  – projected at ten per cent of 
the world’s population at that time – will live 
in low-lying urban coastal areas, with the 
majority of them in developing countries. 
These figures – taken from Bahareh Seyedi, 
climate and energy advisor at the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
– provide an overview of the vulnerability 
of cities to climate change, and stimulate 
reflection.
It is clear that cities will have to develop 
climate action plans by the end of 2020 – 
that is, tomorrow! – to limit global warming 
to 1.5 °C and to adapt to the repercussions 
of climate change. These action plans can 
be structured around three pillars: reducing 
CO2 emissions, increasing  resilience, and 
education.
Reducing CO2 emissions includes the 
transition of transport systems; energy 
efficiency; integrated waste management 
and the promotion of recycling, and the 
renewal of urban infrastructure to achieve 
sustainable patterns. Increasing resilience 
must start from the recognition that cities 
are complex systems and must therefore 
respond in complex ways to the effects of 
climate change.
This approach includes the adaptation 
of territories to climate change; risk 
management and prevention; the 
strengthening of circular and local economy 
systems; and the implementation of 
decentralized energy systems (for the 
production, distribution and marketing of 
renewable energy surpluses). The education 
of citizens, especially the youngest, is 
essential, because it will enable them to 
Glimmers of hope
So what explains the certainty of scientists 
who say that it is possible to lay the 
foundations of a carbon-free society by 
2030? According to them, a net-zero 
emissions society is entirely possible. 
And it is not an “alternative” society or an 
experimental social model: decarbonization 
is the new condition for the viability of life 
on the planet.  
Among the most authoritative sources 
on the subject is the International Energy 
Agency (IEA), which has published its 
flagship publication, World Energy Outlook 
(WEO), every year since 1977. From its 
analysis, it can be concluded that the 
new actors in the fight against climate 
change – non-state groups made up of 
citizens, entrepreneurs, city governments 
and universities – have taken the lead in 
decarbonization efforts. Multiple platforms 
demonstrate the climate actions undertaken 
by these new actors. They are a daily 
illustration of a transition that is making 
advances, which are sometimes faster than 
the fulfillment of the goals set by their own 
countries. Here are some examples of these 
new certainties that encourage hope. 
First, in 2016, the growth rate of installed 
capacity of solar photovoltaic systems 
exceeded that of all other energy sources. 
Since 2010, the cost of new installations 
has fallen by seventy per cent for solar 
photovoltaic and twenty-five per cent 
for wind energy. The cost of photovoltaic 
batteries has fallen by forty per cent, in 
addition. Between 2020 and 2050, wind and 
solar energy will together account for forty-
eight per cent of total electricity. And the 
European Council has set new targets to be 
achieved by 2030, which include a forty per 
cent reduction in carbon emissions, twenty-
seven per cent renewable energy in the 
energy mix,  and a twenty-seven per cent 
improvement in energy efficiency. 
The climate action 
of cities
I start from the premise that a decarbonized 
society is possible on the condition that 
we concentrate transitional climate 
actions in the management of cities, 
and if we undertake these actions in an 
articulated and collaborative manner on an 
international scale between 2020 and 2030.  
The education of citizens, especially 
the youngest, is essential, because 
it will enable them to implement 
transitions in an orderly and 
accelerated manner
implement transitions in an orderly and 
accelerated manner. 
The cities that follow the net-zero carbon 
route will need to combine the best of 
urban design and cutting-edge digital 
technologies to meet these challenges. 
They will have to get rid of fossil fuels in their 
streets by purchasing only zero-emission 
buses starting in 2025, to ensure that large 
parts of their cities have no more carbon 
emissions by 2030. 
It will also be important to decarbonize 
buildings, by adopting regulations or 
designing policies to ensure that new 
buildings reduce their carbon emissions 
to net-zero by 2030 – with the measure 
applying to all buildings by 2050. 
Another key measure would be to reduce 
the amount of waste generated by at least 
fifteen per cent per capita by 2030, and to 
reduce the volume of municipal solid waste 
sent to landfills or incinerators by at least 
half. 
Finally, cities will have to implement climate 
actions with high social impact, that deliver 
significant environmental, social, economic 
and health benefits, especially to vulnerable 
and low-income communities.
Founder of the Klimaforum Latinoamérica 
Network (KLN), Manuel Guzmán 
Hennessey (Colombia) is a professor at 
the Universidad del Rosario in Bogota, 
Colombia. KLN is an independent 
organization dedicated to promoting 
climate actions that contribute to the 
decarbonization of society. It works in 
partnership with universities, companies 
and civic groups, and consists of an 
advisory board and a team of recognized 
environmental advocates. 
## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=26) 🆗
### Les villes africaines passent à l'action
26   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
The inhabitants of Addis Ababa have the 
impression that they live in the middle 
of a construction site. As they say, “Head 
out on one road in the morning and you 
might find it blocked off for a development 
project by the evening!”  The Ethiopian 
capital is a massive  continental hub with 
an exploding population of people fleeing 
from unrest and the lack of opportunities 
in the country’s poverty-stricken provinces. 
At the current growth rate, the number of 
inhabitants is expected to double in thirty 
years. 
Some economists have called Ethiopia an 
“African lion”, for mimicking the success 
stories of Asia’s economic tigers. But this 
economic success and the accompanying 
population growth – one of the highest in 
the world – come at a price.
Although its carbon (CO2) emissions are still 
modest, Ethiopia is one of the countries in 
the world that is most vulnerable to climate 
change. The variable rainfall and rising 
temperatures cause recurrent droughts 
and famine. The problems related to 
climate change are exacerbated by rapid 
urbanization, as multinational clothing-
retail companies like Calvin Klein and H&M 
establish garment factories here, taking 
advantage of some of the lowest wages in 
the world.
In May 2018, Addis Ababa – along with 
seven other African cities – made a 
commitment to reduce its CO2 emissions. 
This means it will have to rethink its 
transport, energy production and waste 
management strategies. 
Meanwhile, Ethiopians complain that 
concrete progress in the fight against 
pollution and traffic congestion remains 
elusive. “The pollution is increasing and 
people are getting sick,” says Biniam 
Getaneh, 30, one of the 3.5 million 
inhabitants of the capital. 
Niels Boel and Finn Rasmussen, with Hadra Ahmed
Ninety-four megacities around the world have come together to form the 
C40 network. Their aim is to share their experiences of combating climate 
change and its effects, and to set ambitious goals for the reduction of 
carbon emissions. 
African cities  
in action
Leading the way on 
climate action
Addis Ababa is a member of C40, a network 
of cities representing over 700 million people 
and a quarter of the global economy, which 
have been working together since 2005 to 
reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
For Hastings Chikoko, the Regional Director 
for Africa at C40’s Cities Climate Leadership 
Group, it is clear that cities have an important 
role to play in producing innovative solutions 
and technologies to address the climate crisis. 
“As cities have private sector and research 
institutions within their boundaries, we see 
them coming up with innovation, being able 
to demonstrate to national governments that 
climate change mitigation and adaptation 
work, and  can be upscaled to the national 
level.”
Chikoko, a Malawian economist with long 
experience in climate change, points to 
positive experiences in Accra (Ghana) 
and Tshwane (South Africa), where 
traffic congestion has been  eased by 
transportation initiatives, while significantly 
reducing CO2 emissions.
While acknowledging the difficulties faced 
by the capitals of many of the world’s 
poorest  countries in particular, Chikoko 
says he remains optimistic – pointing out 
that some cities have decided to exceed the 
goals of the Paris Agreement 2015 (COP21).
The C40 Cities network is working to 
promote local climate initiatives at 
the national level, such as facilitating 
municipal representatives to integrate 
with government teams participating 
in international platforms. “We have 
ensured that some C40 mayors take part in 
delegations whenever possible,” explains 
Chikoko. “That way, they can use their best 
practices from the local level and raise their 
voices in decision-making processes.”
Ethiopia is one 
of the countries 
in the world 
that is most 
vulnerable 
to climate 
change
©
 E
du
ar
do
 S
ot
er
as
 /
 A
FP
## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=27) 🆗
### Les villes africaines passent à l'action
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   27 
Also, in the context of the scarcity of local 
finances, municipalities are struggling to 
allocate budgets in the fight against climate 
change. C40 provides support for capacity-
building, to enable city officials to access 
alternative financing.
“During the Paris climate summit, we 
launched the C40 Cities Finance Facility. 
We identify big projects and help cities to 
identify the challenges and to transform 
these challenges to bankable projects that 
can be financed, for example, by the World 
Bank,” Chikoko adds. 
Technology transfer is another central 
aspect facilitated by the network. “Some 
solutions really depend on cities being 
innovative. This could be green buses, or  it 
could be technology for water efficiency. 
This is an area where African cities are 
lagging behind. There is also a value in 
identifying cities that are advanced in terms 
of cleaning technology, for example. We are 
then able to facilitate knowledge transfer as 
well as technology transfer from those cities 
to other  cities in Africa, for instance.”
Another obstacle to climate change at 
the city level is often the lack of adequate 
plans. A fundamental objective of the 
C40 network is to ensure that the cities 
involved have common data references and 
measurements, enabling them to assess and 
compare their progress.
Accra’s mayor, Mohammed Adjei Sowa, was 
supported by the C40 network to gather 
credible data on which to base decisions for 
the city’s waste management plan. Waste  
generation plays a significant and growing 
role in carbon emissions.
“The mayor is now collaborating with the 
private sector to establish an efficient waste 
collection service,” explains Chikoko. “Other 
African cities can learn from this: first, illegal 
dump-sites must be banned. Secondly, you 
must make sure you have an efficient system 
that gives residents an incentive to abide by 
the rules.”
Sharing lessons learned
Transportation is another major source of 
carbon emissions – it is in this sector that 
global GHG emissions are rising the fastest.
The city of Tshwane – created in 2000 by 
the merger of thirteen municipal entities, 
including Pretoria, the administrative capital 
of  South Africa –  is part of C40’s Mass 
Transit Network, which brings together 
member cities that have shown innovation 
in this field.
“This metropolis of more than three million 
people has worked to improve its public 
transport network, making it comfortable 
enough to encourage car owners to use it. It 
has improved its transport infrastructure to 
include dedicated bus lanes. This is also one 
of the cities that have completely changed 
the source of energy of their buses from oil 
to gas.” 
The lessons learned in areas of 
transportation or waste management in C40 
cities, including  Tshwane, Accra or Chicago, 
can inspire action in an overpopulated and 
congested city like Addis Ababa. When the 
Ethiopian capital launched its plan for a bus 
rapid transit system, it sent a delegation to 
Tshwane to learn from its experience.
Improving the public transport in Addis 
Ababa is part of the national Ethiopian 
Green Economy Strategy, launched in 2011. 
The Ethiopian government is currently 
revising its environmental policies, taking 
climate change into account, according to 
Chikoko. “It will contain measures for cities in 
different parts of the country to be climate-
change resilient and to minimize their 
carbon emissions while developing.”
“The role of C40,” concludes Chikoko, “is 
essentially to connect cities that are trying 
to implement solutions to reduce carbon 
emissions and to help cities to inspire each 
other.”  
Niels Boel, Danish political scientist, 
journalist and author, and Finn 
Rasmussen, Danish sociologist and 
culture specialist,  are consultants for 
the Wide Angle section in this issue of 
the UNESCO Courier. Ethiopian journalist 
Hadra Ahmed contributed to this article 
from Addis Ababa.
Street scene of the third edition  
of Car-Free Day, 3 February 2019,  
in Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital.
## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=28) 🆗
### La solidarité internationale en question
28   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
Johan Hattingh
If rich countries can adapt to rising 
temperatures “with the flick of a 
thermostat”– to use the metaphor 
of the South African Nobel 
Peace Prize winner Desmond 
Tutu – developing countries face 
far more dramatic challenges. 
A reflection on a shared 
solidarity informed by an ethical 
consciousness. 
Facing the challenges of climate change, the 
world today is more in need of a framework 
of  ethics and an ethically informed practice 
of international solidarity than ever before. 
This need arises, in the first place, from the 
stark reality that the global challenges and 
mega-trends of our time – climate change, 
the movement of people, geopolitical 
tensions, security, and international 
terrorism – become more and more 
integrated, but our responses to them are 
more and more fragmented. This was the 
core message of António Guterres, United 
Nations Secretary-General, in his speech 
to the World Economic Forum at Davos, 
Switzerland, in January 2019. 
In the second place, and perhaps more 
importantly, the need for international 
solidarity also springs from the causes and 
effects of climate change itself. Climate 
change is the product of a world that is 
already deeply divided, and in its effects and 
impacts, intensifies and multiplies divisions 
and vulnerabilities that already exist.
A question of international
 solidarity
This also applies on a subnational level 
to marginalized social groups and 
communities. These are undeniable political 
and social facts, experienced by many as 
injustices. Poorer nations and groups, for 
example, are much more vulnerable to the 
risks and burdens of climate change, while 
they have contributed much less, if anything 
at all, to its causes. 
Similarly, poorer nations and groups already 
need to adapt to climate change, while 
they have the least resources to do so. 
Developing nations and groups are thus 
dependent on assistance for adaptation, 
while the urgency for such assistance is not 
very high in more affluent parts of the world. 
The rich are not directly affected by climate 
change for now, or if they are, they can 
adapt to it fairly easily.  
This asymmetry has been captured neatly 
by Desmond Tutu, former Archbishop of 
Cape Town, South Africa, when he pointed 
out in the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) Human Development 
Report 2007/2008 (p. 166) that those in 
more affluent parts of the world can – at 
least for now – adapt to rising temperatures 
by merely adjusting their air conditioning 
“with the flick of a thermostat”. But for 
countless women in developing nations, 
adaptation would entail walking ever-longer 
distances to fetch clean drinking water for 
their households.
The range of possibilities
The need for standing together and 
co-operating with one another in response 
to climate change is clearly there, but the 
world is divided, and the prospects for 
overcoming these divisions are very dim.
So, what, if anything, can we do about 
this? There are three obvious things we 
could do for a start: expand our conceptual 
understanding of the notion of solidarity; 
remove two of the stumbling blocks – 
human development and jobs – that are 
often used as excuses for not addressing 
climate change; and move the conversation 
about solidarity from political and social 
facts to that of ethical principles. 
Let us tackle the major themes in broad 
outline, noting how ethical considerations 
already start to emerge in the conversation 
about the concept of solidarity.
Expanding and 
deepening the notion 
of solidarity 
Popularly, solidarity has been understood 
in recent times as a call for unity in trade 
union or political circles in the fight against 
labour exploitation or oppression. In both 
contexts, solidarity as a concept is linked 
to compassion with, and lending support – 
materially or otherwise – to victims of unfair 
labour practices or political injustice.
All these connotations are also present 
when solidarity is evoked as a basis for 
the fight against climate change: unity, 
identification, compassion, support and 
assistance.  But in this context, its meaning 
is shifted to wider target audiences and 
contexts than that of labour movements or 
liberation struggles.
In the fight against climate change, victims 
are usually associated with those suffering 
directly – and often very dramatically and 
visibly – from extreme weather events (for 
example, floods, hurricanes, droughts, fires). 
In such cases, humanitarian aid is usually 
mobilized fairly quickly, within states or 
internationally, to provide for the immediate 
needs of victims. 
Our motivation for such acts of solidarity 
is usually referred to as human solidarity, 
based on a recognition of those that suffer 
as fellow human beings, sharing the same 
fate as we do – their fate is our fate, and we 
cannot ignore it. This is often captured by 
metaphors of society as an organism, or the 
whole of humanity as one family. 
The need for international 
solidarity also springs from the 
causes and effects of climate 
change itself
## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=29) 🆗
### La solidarité internationale en question
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   29 
Climate change, however, confronts us 
with the interdependence of us humans 
on one another and on ecosystems for 
our survival and flourishing, embedded 
as these ecosystems are in the biosphere, 
earth and planetary systems – all unfolding 
in processes of natural evolution over time. 
Accordingly, notions of earth solidarity, 
planetary solidarity, and intergenerational 
solidarity can be envisaged to elaborate 
on the reality that all life on earth is part, 
as it were, of the same community – the 
community of life sharing the same fate 
together. 
Human development 
versus climate?
In the international community, the fight 
against climate change is often framed as 
a dilemma. States often say they cannot 
engage in this fight because they first 
have to make sure that their citizens have 
development opportunities to move out 
of poverty. The same excuse is often made 
about jobs: if the fight against climate 
change puts workers at a disadvantage, then 
they cannot join in.
The argument about jobs was precisely the 
excuse used by the United States to justify 
its withdrawal from the Paris Agreement 
(COP21). But are poverty alleviation and job 
retention really so diametrically opposed to 
taking action on climate change? This was 
exactly the conundrum addressed in the 
2007/2008 Human Development Report, 
with the telling title: Fighting climate change: 
Human solidarity in a divided world. 
In this comprehensive report, two core 
messages are communicated. First, that 
climate change will definitely have a 
negative effect on human development 
in the long run, making it more difficult 
to achieve the Sustainable Development 
Goals (called the Millennium Development 
Goals when the report was written), and 
eventually, even reversing many of the 
gains that have been made in human 
development thus far in history. This is an 
alarming message, putting a big question 
mark on the argument that responses to 
climate change can be put on the back 
burner while we first eradicate poverty in 
the world.
In response to the serious and highly urgent 
need for human development and poverty 
alleviation, the second core message 
of the 2007/2008 report is that human 
development and the fight against climate 
change are not two separate agendas. They 
are two dimensions of the same agenda 
that are inseparably linked and need to be 
pursued together. 
In policy and project terms, this means that 
measures adopted to respond to climate 
change should at the same time also 
contribute to human development, and 
have a beneficial impact in both areas. In 
ethical terms, solidarity in the fight against 
climate change conversely means that the 
poor and the vulnerable cannot be left 
behind. Their interests need to be addressed 
as well, and indeed as a matter of priority, 
in ways so smart and intelligent that the 
human development agenda and the 
climate change agenda fully merge.
Balancing Bamboo #3, Vanuatu, 
2015. With the island of Malekula in 
the background, a girl balances a long 
bamboo stick on her head. Will this become 
the new horizon one day? “Every year, 
the sea level is rising at an accelerating 
pace,” observes Dutch photographer 
Scarlett Hooft Graafland.
© Scarlett Hooft Graafland
## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=30) 🆗
### La solidarité internationale en question
30   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
The same argument applies to the retention 
of jobs. If workers are left behind in the 
fight against climate change, the ethical 
imperatives of solidarity are betrayed. 
Clearly, if jobs are lost in the fight against 
climate change, then we haven’t applied 
our minds as intelligently and smartly as we 
should have done.
An ethical debate
This is why we need to shift the debate on 
solidarity from the field of socio-political 
facts to that of ethical principles. In this 
regard, UNESCO’s Declaration of Ethical 
Principles in Relation to Climate Change 
(2017) is a good place to start. Solidarity 
features there as one of six ethical principles 
that should guide all decision-makers in 
their responses to climate change (see p. 9). 
In the context of social and political facts, 
the conversation is usually about a lack of 
solidarity, or the impossibility of achieving 
it – turning this into a convenient excuse to 
do nothing, rather than something, about 
climate change. In the ethical sphere, the 
conversation shifts to solidarity as a form 
of conscience and a source of inspiration 
for action – that is, as a commitment and 
point of departure, rather than a technical 
prerequisite for action.
Given the ethical demands of solidarity 
in the fight against climate change, huge 
uncertainties  remain in an increasingly 
divided world. A radically expanded notion 
of solidarity may not facilitate international 
cooperation. But it could be an invaluable 
source of inspiration and  motivation to 
undertake the mammoth task of tackling 
climate change together.
A professor of philosophy at South Africa’s 
Stellenbosch University, Johan Hattingh 
(South Africa) specializes in the areas of 
applied ethics, environmental ethics and 
climate change ethics. He served two 
terms as a member of UNESCO’s World 
Commission on the Ethics of Scientific 
Knowledge and Technology (COMEST). 
He was also President of the Ad Hoc Expert 
Group convened by UNESCO in 2016 to 
prepare the first draft of the Declaration 
of Ethical Principles in Relation to Climate 
Change.
Climate Frontlines
Many of those most vulnerable to the 
effects of climate change – like those 
living in the Arctic, on small islands 
or at high altitudes – are unsure what 
kind of future to expect. That is why 
UNESCO, in collaboration with various 
other organizations, launched Climate 
Frontlines.
The global forum allows these 
communities to connect with 
each other, and to share local and 
indigenous knowledge and findings 
from scientific research. It contributes 
to the strengthening of solidarity and 
helps communities to feel less isolated 
in the face of climate risk. 
www.climatefrontlines.org
Cut off from the world, these villagers 
watch helplessly as the dam breaks and 
waters rise in the upazila (sub-district) of 
Raomari, in Bangladesh. “It all happened 
in half an hour,” recalls Bangladeshi 
photographer Rasel Chowdhury.  
©
 R
as
el
 C
ho
w
dh
ur
y
## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=31) 🆗
### Changement climatique et éducation
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   31 
According to the RISU Project (2015), which 
defines indicators for the evaluation of 
sustainability policies in Latin American 
universities, seventy per cent of these 
institutions have a university authority to 
apply environmental measures; eighty-
six per cent engage in extra-curricular 
communication and awareness-raising 
activities on environmental and 
sustainability issues, and forty-six per cent 
conduct research in these two areas. 
The report also reveals that forty-six 
per cent of universities have an energy 
sustainability plan, and thirty-five per cent 
conduct awareness-raising activities on 
energy conservation. Lastly, thirty-three  
per cent of these universities monitor 
the quality of water intended for human 
consumption, and 61.5 per cent have a unit 
to handle hazardous waste management. 
Half of the universities have an information 
and monitoring system for solid waste, 
classifying it by type and quantity.
Laura Ortiz-Hernández
Educating on climate change and 
sustainable development issues is 
a necessity. In Latin America, there 
are some promising experiments 
being carried out that deserve to 
be replicated, both in the entire 
region and on other continents. 
There are some aspects, however, 
that are being neglected.
Climate change and  
education
These figures are rather encouraging. But 
it must be noted that in the education 
sector, the emphasis has been mainly on 
environmental aspects – the social aspects 
that complement the efforts being made to 
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) that the 193 United Nations Member 
States have a duty to achieve by 2030, have 
yet to be included. This is the next stage that 
will have to be undertaken. 
An environmental consultant and research 
director at the Misión Sustentabilidad 
México A.C., Laura Ortiz-Hernández is a 
member of the Coordination Committee 
of the Alliance of Ibero-American 
University Networks for Sustainability and 
the Environment (ARIUSA). She was the 
UNESCO Chair in Climate Change and 
Sustainable Development in Latin America, 
2016-2017. 
In recent years, the environmental crisis 
and climate change have highlighted the 
need to transform our ways of thinking 
and acting. Education for Sustainable 
Development (ESD) is therefore, a key factor 
in the search for alternative methods to 
build a different kind of society that is fair, 
participatory and open to diversity. 
In Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), 
ESD has advanced through the application 
of different strategies, adapted to the 
conditions of each country. In Mexico for 
example, ESD is being implemented at all 
levels of the school system: educational 
games in preschool education, biodiversity 
activities and programmes in primary or 
basic education, and the integration of 
environmental protection studies into the 
secondary school curricula.
In countries such as Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, 
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala and Peru, 
ad hoc ESD strategies are being developed 
– book publications, television and radio 
programmes, visits to protected natural 
areas, and teacher training on these issues – 
to comply with established regulations.
In addition to the formal system, civil society 
organizations are also working to impart 
knowledge on different environmental 
issues and to support the work of teachers 
in schools.
Children playing at the Mar Chiquita 
primary school, Argentina’s first 
sustainable public school.
©
 T
ag
m
a 
/ 
Lo
re
na
 P
re
sn
o
## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=32) 🆗
### Colonel: il faut faire vite!
32   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
One of your most recent works consists of 
red neon letters that say “I give up”. Have you 
lost hope that we will win the race against 
climate change?
The answer is yes. I don’t know if it’s 
because I’m getting older or because the 
situation is getting worse. We no longer live 
in fear, we live in “it’s too late”. But I don’t 
think that means we’re giving up. For it 
is perhaps precisely this despair that will 
finally rouse sleeping consciences! Almost 
everybody is aware of climate change and 
the responsibility of human activity. And yet 
nobody, almost nobody, does anything. 
The problem isn’t ignorance, it’s apathy. 
I have the impression we live in a world 
where planes fly across the sky day and 
night, spraying sleep-inducing substances 
that atrophy our consciousness. The media 
has a lot to do with this – they ignore 
the real causes of the extreme weather 
phenomena we are witnessing, so that we 
don’t question the system of production 
and consumption on which the power of 
the elites is based. Knowing that the same 
media is part of these same elites.
I think that artists have a role to play in 
raising awareness. They can detect the 
workings of media propaganda. They 
can show the public the real face of the 
problems.
That’s the purpose of your Emergency Room 
project, isn’t it?
Indeed, the essence of my work on climate 
change is to ask the question: “What’s 
the emergency?” Just as in hospital 
emergency wards, it isn’t possible to treat 
all emergencies at the same time – it’s 
necessary to identify those that need to be 
treated as soon as possible. It’s clear that 
climate change is the priority of all priorities. 
It is – and will be – the cause of many 
other emergencies: massive population 
movements, ecological problems, wars, etc.
Colonel: We must act quickly!
So I imagined a project – or rather, a format  
that allows contemporary artists to urgently 
express themselves on the news transmitted 
by the media. They’re on the lookout, 
observing what’s happening around them 
and reacting almost in real time – creating 
a work that they display in the Emergency 
Room the next day, to discuss it with the 
public.
To give you an example, for the first 
Emergency Room installed at MOMA PS1 in 
New York, the Danish artist Søren Dahlgaard 
had produced – in the aftermath of very 
heavy snowstorms – fake copies of the 
world’s most influential newspapers to draw 
public attention to climate change. The 
headlines announced disasters everywhere.
Critical run is 
a metaphor: 
either we run 
to save the 
world, as long 
as it’s not too 
late, or we 
run to save 
ourselves, 
because it’s 
too late
Critical Run, an art format first created 
by Colonel in Italy, during the Venice 
Biennale 2011.
Thierry Geoffroy, interviewed by Niels Boel, Danish journalist
Apathetic and soporific. These words describe the state of public opinion 
and the media’s attitude to climate change, according to French-Danish 
conceptual artist Thierry Geoffroy, alias Colonel. Little by little, his slogans 
– that wavered between “Before it’s too late” and “Tomorrow is too late” – 
were reduced to a simple “Too late”. Paradoxically, it is in despair that he 
finds some consolation. 
©
 E
m
er
ge
nc
y 
Ro
om
s
## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=33) 🆗
### Colonel: il faut faire vite!
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   33 
That was in 2007, and the public was really 
shaken by it. Today, no one would bat an 
eye seeing such topical headlines! But, as I 
was saying, that does not mean we should 
give up. I continue to set up Emergency 
Rooms all over the world. I’m counting on 
the fact that the debates taking place there 
will eventually win over and raise awareness 
among new audiences. 
You use recyclable materials for your works. 
Is this a deliberate choice? 
It’s the fact of working in the present that 
imposes this choice. I’ll go find a box in the 
street and write on it. I will spend more time 
trying to understand what’s going on and 
communicating with the audience than on 
polishing my work alone in my workshop 
or studio. There’s no time for perfecting. We 
must act quickly.
Critical Run is another art format you have 
created. What does it entail, and what’s the 
objective?
Critical Runs are in fact conferences on 
current topics, particularly climate change. 
But instead of participants sitting in a warm, 
comfortable conference room, drowsy from 
the heat and the whirring of projectors, 
they’re invited to debate while running!
Critical Run is a metaphor: either we run to 
save the world, as long as it’s not too late, or 
we run to save ourselves, because it’s too 
late. If it’s really too late, we’re not going to sit 
on chairs and leaf through the history of art.
In May 2019, you organized a Critical Run 
at the Venice Biennale to reflect upon 
the title of the 58th edition of this major 
international art exhibition: May You Live in 
Interesting Times. 
Yes. And some good questions were 
asked during this race-debate. One of the 
participants discussed the main work of 
this year’s Biennale, Barca Nostra (Our boat) 
by Christoph Büchel. This Icelandic-Swiss 
artist is exhibiting the wreck of a fishing 
vessel that sank in the Mediterranean in 
2015, killing about a thousand migrants. Our 
participant suggested it would have been 
better to exhibit one of those cruise ships 
– which, through a chain reaction, causes 
entire populations to be condemned to 
migrate for climatic reasons – instead. 
The Biennale should exhibit works 
that evoke the causes of problems and 
encourage us to try to solve them in time, 
not works that ironically embody our 
attitudes that it is “too late” and of us turning 
our backs.
The son of a soldier, French-Danish artist 
Thierry Geoffroy has adopted the nom 
de guerre,  Colonel, to indicate that 
he is fighting a battle: to raise public 
awareness of climate change. Originally 
a photographer, Geoffroy has been 
touring art fairs, galleries and museums 
in many countries for over a decade. He 
invites himself, even when not invited, 
to communicate his messages. Author 
of several books and manifestos, he 
has produced more than twenty films 
for Danish television and as many solo 
performances in museums.
Now before it is too late,  
an Emergency Rooms installation 
by Thierry Joffroy/Colonel in Morocco, 
during the Casablanca Biennale, 2018.
©
 E
m
er
ge
nc
y 
Ro
om
s
## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=34) 🆗
### Le piquet solitaire d'Arshak Makichyan
34   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
How did you end up demonstrating alone on 
the street?
I have been interested in environmental 
issues for a long time. But it was only 
towards the end of 2018 that I was really 
struck by the problem of global warming, 
when I discovered, through Greenpeace 
International, what Greta Thunberg is doing. 
At the time, the idea of demonstrating in the 
streets, like this young Swedish schoolgirl, 
had not yet crossed my mind, because we 
don’t really have a culture of protest here.
Then, in February 2019, I participated in a 
demonstration for the first time  – the march 
in memory of Boris Nemtsov, the former 
Russian minister and deputy, who was 
murdered in 2015. This experience made me 
realize that I was an adult who was capable 
of doing something similar myself. 
When I learned – quite by chance – that 
a demonstration was being organized in 
Moscow on 15 March as part of the Global 
Climate Strike, I went along. It was being 
held in “Hyde Park”, a space in Sokolniki Park 
specially designated by the authorities as 
a zone for free speech and protests. There 
were about seventy participants, but as the 
site is surrounded by a fence and not many 
people go through there, no one really 
noticed us. 
That’s when I decided to take action. Since 
solitary pickets or single-person protests 
are permitted in Russia, I thought I would 
demonstrate alone every Friday, to show my 
support for the Fridays for Future movement 
launched by Greta. I chose Pushkin Square 
because it is always teeming with people.  
Interview by Jasmina Šopova
Every Friday since March 2019, Arshak Makichyan has been 
demonstrating alone in Moscow’s Pushkin Square. His placard displays 
slogans like “Global warming equals hunger, war and death”. This young 
violinist in Russia’s capital is leading a solitary and tenacious fight on 
behalf of the entire planet.  
Arshak Makichyan: 
The lone picketer
According to some sources, the first Global 
Climate Strike on 15 March 2019 mobilized 
about 1.8 million people worldwide. Why did 
only seventy people turn up for the march in 
Moscow? 
This was not at all surprising. A large 
part of the population in Russia does not 
understand what global warming is. Many 
people think that the weather will become 
milder, that the winters will be less severe. 
People have nowhere to go for information.
We do not have a single well-known 
political figure who talks about ecological 
catastrophes and global warming, and the 
media do not report on these issues. Some 
believe that the public is not interested in 
climate change; others avoid the subject 
in order not to offend the oil and gas 
companies that hold the reins of economic 
power in this country – which is one of 
the world’s largest producers of these 
commodities. As a result, we keep quiet 
about Russia’s lack of action to implement 
the 2015 Paris Agreement (COP21), which 
it has signed but not yet ratified. In my 
opinion, the silence on climate is no 
different from the silence on the Chernobyl 
disaster.
Even on the internet, the March 15 strike 
went almost unnoticed, for example, 
because people are afraid to mention 
youth demonstrations. Here, people are 
not allowed to organize demonstrations 
or hold a solitary picket if they are under 
18 – involving minors in such actions is a 
punishable offence.
Yet, across the world, it is mainly young 
people who are mobilizing against climate 
change.
Yes, and it is precisely for this reason that I 
organized a flash mob on the web last May 
– with the idea of obtaining the right for 
schoolchildren and youth under 18 to fight 
for their future. 
Photographs of young people holding 
placards saying: “Let Russia Strike for 
Climate” (my flash mob’s slogan) in different 
countries were sent to me. Like one of a 
9-year-old girl demonstrating in New York. 
Greta is 16 and she can demonstrate on the 
streets without fear of any consequences. 
She also responded to my flash mob 
and follows me on Twitter, where I write 
in English. That made me so happy. It’s 
really rewarding when someone like Greta 
Thunberg, who has done so many positive 
things for the world, takes an interest in 
what you are doing. 
And this is even more important because, to 
my knowledge, there were only three of us 
staging solitary pickets before the second 
World Climate Strike on 24 May 2019 – one 
girl in Yaroslavl, in the central region of 
Russia, and another in Saratov, about 850 
kilometres from Moscow.
And what did you do for this second strike? 
It is reported to have mobilized more than 
a million people around the world and 
even influenced the European Parliament 
elections on 26 May,  putting green parties in 
the lead in several countries.
Along with the Uchenik student’s union, we 
applied for authorization to hold a gathering 
of 500 people in Museon Park, in the city 
centre. But we were refused permission on 
the grounds that the space was not large 
enough – even though, according to the 
union, the park could hold up to 850 people. 
After several unsuccessful negotiations, 
about ten one-person demonstrations took 
place in Moscow. During the day, I held a 
solitary picket in front of the Pushkin statue, 
and in the evening, the union members took 
over.
On that day, Greenpeace International let 
me use their Twitter account. For an hour, 
I reported on the various actions being 
staged in Russia. Then, for the rest of the day, 
I wrote the tweets for their Russian section. 
## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=35) 🆗
### Le piquet solitaire d'Arshak Makichyan
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   35 
There were demonstrations in about ten 
cities in total, but they were always quite 
small.
Where do you get the inspiration for the 
slogans on your placards?
For the first one, I referred to the Paris 
Agreement, but I quickly realized that 
people did not know what that was. So I 
started writing about simpler things – about 
sorting waste [for recycling], for example, 
which is still not done in Moscow, and 
against the oligarchic system of waste 
management. We pay for waste collection, 
but there is no infrastructure in place. Of 
course there are a few sorting bins, but the 
rubbish gets mixed together as soon as it is 
loaded into the garbage truck and arrives 
jumbled up at the landfill site – under the 
pretext that so few people sort their rubbish 
that it is not worth the effort! 
And how do passers-by react to your 
slogans?
I usually stand in front of the Pushkin 
statue and stay there for about two hours. 
In this time, I am usually photographed 
approvingly and supported by about ten 
people. Many others come up to me and ask 
strange questions, referring to lies invented 
by Russia’s enemies or international 
conspiracy theories. I don’t argue with them. 
I have also been approached by police 
officers who photographed my passport 
and told me they would report me to their 
superiors. As for other passers-by who don’t 
show any particular interest, I have no idea 
what the effect is on them. They read what 
is written on my placard and it probably 
makes them think. 
Have you thought about what to do next in 
your fight against climate change?
Before I started all these actions, I planned 
to continue my music studies in Germany. 
But last May, I decided to stay in Moscow. 
I realized that my solitary picket was more 
important than my violin bow. Because 
what’s the point of having an education and 
starting a career if you have no future?
As my actions seem to be finding some 
resonance in society, I have decided to 
continue going out on the street every Friday. 
I am in contact with people who share the 
same concerns as me and we plan to meet to 
discuss how we should develop our projects. 
I believe we will make a difference. If until 15 
March 2019, the problem of global warming 
had been ignored, everything is beginning to 
change now.  
A Russian environmental activist and 
violinist of Armenian origin, Arshak 
Makichyan, 25, recently  graduated from 
the Moscow Tchaikovsky Conservatory. 
I realized 
that my 
solitary picket 
was more 
important 
than my violin 
bow 
“Global warming equals hunger, war and 
death”. Arshak Makichyan has been picketing 
alone every Friday since 15 March 2019 in 
Moscow’s Pushkin Square.
©
 A
nn
a 
A
nt
an
ay
tit
e 
/ 
G
re
en
pe
ac
e
## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=36) 🆗
### La jeunesse arabe, architecte de son avenir
36   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
Zo
o
m
Zo
o
m
Arab youth, 
architects of their future
Photos: Yan Bighetti de Flogny (Al Safar Project) / MiSK Art Institute
Text: Katerina Markelova
## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=37) 🆗
### La jeunesse arabe, architecte de son avenir
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   37 
almost 120,000 kilometres and visit all 
the Muslim countries. In the course of this 
great journey, comparable only to that of 
Marco Polo, he visited Mecca four times, 
became a judge in Delhi and in the Maldive 
Islands, accompanied a Greek princess to 
Constantinople, sailed to Sumatra and Java, 
and journeyed to China as ambassador 
of the Sultan of India. Then, in 1349, he 
returned briefly to his own country (“the 
best land in the world”) before setting off 
immediately to the kingdom of Granada 
and after that on a journey through Africa to 
the Niger basin. The diary which Ibn Battuta 
dictated to a scribe during his travels is a 
source of the first importance for the history 
of the Muslim world of his time, especially 
for the history of India, Asia Minor and West 
Africa.”
The story inspired our photographer, whose 
reporting project on the fight against 
cultural prejudices had been maturing for 
years, but lacked a common thread. Which 
he had now found: Yan decided that he 
would embark on a long journey, in the 
footsteps of Ibn Battuta! The project was 
launched in March 2018. It will take three 
The old and the new,  
Beirut, Lebanon, 2018. 
French photographer Yan Bighetti de 
Flogny was in Pakistan when, in the course 
of a conversation with a hotel owner, he 
learned of the existence of Ibn Battuta, the 
fourteenth-century Moroccan explorer. 
Unfairly little-known, Ibn Battuta is “perhaps 
the greatest traveller who has ever lived”, 
as an article in the Courier of  August-
September 1981 tells us. 
“At the age of 21, he started his travels 
by undertaking a pilgrimage to Mecca. 
This was the start of thirty years of 
wandering, during which he would travel 
## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=38) 🆗
### La jeunesse arabe, architecte de son avenir
38   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
Football game in the heart of  the historic city of Jeddah,  
Saudi Arabia (2019), inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List. 
## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=39) 🆗
### La jeunesse arabe, architecte de son avenir
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   39 
years and cover more than twenty countries, 
from Morocco to China, following a similar 
itinerary to the one undertaken by the 
Moroccan explorer seven centuries earlier.
Yan and his team are currently halfway 
through, trying to “restore some accuracy 
and a little bit of colour to this Muslim world, 
wrongly disparaged in the West”. Every time 
he comes home, he is disturbed by the gap 
between the way the people around him 
look at this unknown world and the reality 
he witnesses during his travels: “the warmth, 
the hospitality, the deep generosity, and 
especially the people, who have the same 
dreams and the same sorrows that we have.”
The ardour of youth
Arab youth, with their unwavering 
determination to choose their own destiny, 
have emerged as one of the pillars of 
the project. It is to them that the Courier 
dedicates this photo reportage,  published 
on the occasion of International Youth Day, 
12 August.
The desire to live and to change their lives is 
what unites young people from the Middle 
East and North Africa (MENA). “Wherever 
you are, you really feel a common energy. I 
found a lot of similarities in their way of life, 
in their vision of the future,” explains Yan. 
“Sometimes I think it’s the elders who have 
remained stuck on certain disagreements 
that young people only want to forget.”
Faced with the highest youth 
unemployment rate in the world, forty-nine 
per cent for women and twenty-seven per 
cent  for men, the region’s youth are not 
giving up. “I didn’t sense any negativity or 
lack of hope,” says the photographer. “The 
problem of unemployment is worrying, 
but many of the other challenges facing 
the region until twenty years ago – such 
as access to education, clean water and 
sanitation – are less prevalent today.”   
According to the World Bank, two out of 
three people in the MENA region are under 
the age of 24. The demographic weight 
of Arab youth makes them a living force 
and gives them a central place in the Arab 
societies of tomorrow. “The spark has been 
ignited,” says Jan. “They won’t give up, they 
know what they want, and in my opinion, 
they have taken the right path to get there.”
Jana, 16, a champion climber, often scales the high rocks of Wadi Rum, Jordan, 2018. 
The protected area is on the UNESCO World Heritage List. 
Sunset over the Hassan II Mosque 
in Casablanca, Morocco, 2018.  
In the foreground are dancers of 
the Lhiba Kingzoo hip-hop group, 
founded in the city in 2005. 
Produced by the international cultural 
platform Al Safar (“voyage” in Arabic), the 
project In the footsteps of Ibn Battuta is 
in progress in partnership with UNESCO, 
the French digital edition of National 
Geographic and MiSK Art Institute.  
Discover it on the website  
www.alsafarproject.org
## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=40) 🆗
### La jeunesse arabe, architecte de son avenir
## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=41) 🆗
### La jeunesse arabe, architecte de son avenir
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   41 
An afternoon at the beach,  
Aqaba, Jordan, 2018.
A play of reflections at the El Mechouar palace, 
Tlemcen, Algeria, 2018, dating from the Middle Ages. 
## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=42) 🆗
### La jeunesse arabe, architecte de son avenir
42   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
The graffiti artist Ed One in action, Casablanca, 2018. The Moroccan city’s former slaughter-houses 
have now been converted into a cultural space dedicated to urban and contemporary arts.
Three young women captured in a suspended moment amidst the perpetual goings  
and comings of trams in Alexandria, Egypt, 2019. 
## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=43) 🆗
### La jeunesse arabe, architecte de son avenir
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   43 
A peaceful evening on the corniche, Tripoli, Lebanon, 2018. An admirer of the great Orientalist paintings, 
the photographer composes his shots on several levels. The first view from a distance allows the staging 
and colours to be observed. Then, as the viewer gets closer, more details can be examined.    
Rochdi Belgasmi under the  Republic Bridge in Tunis, Tunisia, 2018. 
This young dancer, whose notoriety continues to grow, 
has had to fight to have his innovative vision of dance recognized. 
## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=44) 🆗
### Non-article text
44   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
Id
ea
s
A Question of Ethics:  
AI and the Human Race,  
by Australian artist  
Pete Kreiner. 
© Pete Kreiner / Cartoon Movement
## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=45) 🆗
### Quel récit allons-nous écrire?
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   45 
For organizations and their managers, 
it is an opportunity to entrust more and 
more managerial responsibilities to AI: 
optimizing purchasing, logistics, the security 
of installations and databases, selection and 
recruitment, the distribution of tools and 
human resources – all this in real time, with 
maximum flexibility. 
But is everything in the capabilities of these 
algorithms worth accepting? Anything at 
all, at any price, in the name of efficiency 
and profitability? The dizzying pace of 
successive innovations and disruptions, and 
the increasing concentration of innovation 
hubs in the hands of a few, must keep us on 
the alert. Especially since this trend towards 
the delegation of responsibilities will only 
increase when AI develops to become 
more generalized. It is already setting the 
stage for this by extending its connectivity 
network to our entire real environment, in 
a technological trend where interfaces are 
becoming more invisible and intuitive. 
A tale 
 of two futures
Sandrine Cathelat and Mathilde Hervieu
Is artificial intelligence (AI) on the 
verge of becoming completely 
autonomous? The answer will 
depend on us alone. It is up 
to us to define the future of 
humanity, in harmony with 
this technological tool that 
we sometimes perceive as a 
terrifying monster.
As we have seen for several years now, 
the latest technological developments are 
creating a service-based ecosystem that is 
ever easier to use. Steering this convenient 
ecosystem, is AI! For the individual, citizen 
or consumer, it means an increasingly wide 
range of user-friendly services, available 
to simplify their lives and make optimized 
choices. For the worker, self-employed or 
salaried, it provides the advantage of a more 
objective assessment, more immediate 
access to know-how and experts, digital 
assistance at all times to be up for the task.
We are at the crossroads of civilizations, 
and a major challenge is emerging: what 
status, what place, what use for Homo 
sapiens in this digitalized ecosystem (hybrid 
at best) of the twenty-first century? Are 
we experiencing the opportunity here, to 
redefine human beings and their humanity 
in order to better envisage life with AI and 
its multiple incarnations? What scenarios 
of the future should we envisage and write 
(since it is still our responsibility to wield the 
pen)? It is certainly high time to reflect and 
to choose which strategy to adopt in the 
face of digital empowerment: prohibit or 
regulate, to reverse the course of innovation 
or at least to slow it down? Should we bet  
on a new kind of cyborg human species to 
animate the man-machine competition, 
on the machine’s own playing field? Or 
demonstrate creative plasticity by imagining 
a society of complementary collaborations 
between human and digital capacities?
Robotics conception,  
by Cuban artist Falco.
©
 A
le
x 
Fa
lc
o 
C
ha
ng
 /
 C
ar
to
on
 M
ov
em
en
t
## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=46) 🆗
### Quel récit allons-nous écrire?
46   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
The time of 
metamorphosis 
AI is a hot topic. It catalyses all our anxieties. 
Some still say it is “weak”. When will we see it 
as “strong”? Who will own it? Who will have 
the right to use it? To do what? And above 
all, what will it look like? Will it be human 
or human-like? Will it have all our qualities 
and defects? Will it have a morality and an 
intention? To evoke it in this way makes 
it a terrifying monster. However, if AI is 
monstrous, it is more a monster of efficiency 
than a monster like Frankenstein’s! Because 
AI is a tool, just like a hammer, driven by an 
external will.
This will is organizational and not human, 
however. AI is a tool that, since it emerged a 
few decades ago, has served the objectives 
of profitability and functionality of an 
organization. It is thus, first and foremost, 
the tool of a project, a vision, a narrative. 
And today, the dominant narrative is that of 
efficiency.
Given this logical and anticipated 
metamorphosis (which we cannot deny if 
we maintain this technological momentum), 
we are tempted to be frightened by AI, even 
though we still hold the reins. But we have 
to face major challenges: the transparency 
of algorithms and databases; the limits and 
constraints to be set for the machines and 
services they can provide; the writing of 
a narrative that AI can serve in the same 
way we can. The question is probably 
less technological than ethical, moral and 
political: what is our future with AI, what 
narrative will we write?
Nevertheless, AI is not a tool like any other. 
If at first it was tactical software entirely 
sponsored and programmed by humans, it 
is now entering a second phase where it is 
gradually gaining autonomy – becoming 
capable of choosing, by itself, the method 
that will allow it to achieve a goal. The goal 
is still set by a human. Tomorrow, yesterday’s 
software will become autonomous AI in 
every respect, capable of setting its own 
objectives and means, capable of operating 
in a network, capable of modifying people’s 
narratives. For better or for worse.
©
 R
af
ae
l L
oz
an
o-
H
em
m
er
 /
 p
ho
to
: A
nt
im
od
ul
ar
 R
es
ea
rc
h
Blow-Up, Shadow Box 4, 2007. Created 
by Mexican-Canadian multimedia 
artist Rafael Lozano-Hemmer, this high-
resolution interactive display is designed to 
fragment the view of a surveillance camera 
into 2400 virtual cameras that zoom into 
the exhibition space. 
AI is, first and 
foremost, 
the tool of a 
project, a vision, 
a narrative. 
And today, 
the dominant 
narrative is that 
of efficiency
## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=47) 🆗
### Quel récit allons-nous écrire?
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   47 
The cyborg solution 
A first scenario is the natural extension 
of the current narrative. In this tale of 
efficiency, growth and liberalism, humans 
have no choice but to develop themselves – 
not to compete, but to co-operate, with the 
machine. Because the advent of AI raises the 
question of human employment and skills 
versus digital skills. In a profitability model, 
it is highly likely that the vast majority 
of jobs will be assigned to machines. In 
order to hold their ground, humans will 
increase the number of their digital aids 
and acquire capacities greater than those 
conferred on them by nature. Thanks to 
the osmosis between the human and the 
digital, humans will become more efficient. 
They will understand faster, decide faster, act 
faster. These gifts of hyper-awakening and 
hyper-consciousness are consistent with the 
current narrative of efficiency. 
The cyborgs – very light, very agile, very 
chameleon-like – will be ready to co-operate 
actively and on an equal footing with the 
machine, provided they get closer to it. 
They will be augmented by the unlimited 
resources of the digital intelligence 
network, but at the same time, their quota 
of humanity will be diminished. Like AI, 
the cyborg will then become a monster of 
efficiency and both will be part of the same 
network that will connect humans and 
machines without distinction. 
This osmosis with AI has many benefits, 
mainly functional reassurance and 
operational efficiency. But it raises major 
issues. What will happen if the power is “cut 
off”? Who will have access to the cloud? Will 
we have to agree to be transparent to have 
access to it? Will we have to pay for it? Will 
there be a single cloud for everyone? Or a 
variety of clouds, but of variable quality? Will 
the cyborg be synonymous with equality or 
will it mean a socio-economic divide? One 
thing is certain: once cyborgs have become 
fully connected, they will no longer own 
anything, and especially not their skills. They 
will be users, merely temporary custodians 
of available services. What will happen then 
if their rights are cut off?
A new human narrative
These issues are all the more important 
because if AI is still in the midst of a 
metamorphosis, this is also the case for 
humanity. The cyborg solution is part of 
the narrative of capitalist liberalism. But 
is this narrative capable of meeting the 
challenges we face, even as the planet and 
its resources are being depleted? Aren’t we 
being ordered to invent a new narrative? 
Especially since with this powerful tool, AI, 
we would undoubtedly have the means to 
implement it. 
AI is a powerful tool capable of successfully 
developing an existing model, but 
disrupting the established order is not 
in its DNA. Moreover, our current digital 
transformation efforts do not invent 
anything, either, and do not change the 
narrative in any way. Our catchphrase could 
then be summed up like this: let’s stop 
innovating and start inventing!
Because it is humans that we can trust (once 
again) to invent. And their convictions and 
motivation are multiple sources that fuel 
efforts to resist the current model. To invent 
is to speak of a faith, a desire, an intention 
fixed to the body, a certainty. It means 
talking about meaning before talking about 
technological achievement or financial aim. 
Inventiveness often originates in a singular, 
unique spirit – in the mind of a woman or a 
man, in their history, wounds or strengths, 
desires or needs. Let us not forget that the 
great geniuses of humanity have drawn 
from their innermost weaknesses (which 
they sought to overcome, mostly), the 
obstinacy necessary for their success. 
Is everything in the capabilities 
of these algorithms worth 
accepting? Anything at all,  
at any price, in the name 
of efficiency and profitability?
Sandrine Cathelat (France) is Partner 
and Research Director of the Netexplo 
Observatory and Mathilde Hervieu 
(France) is Editorial Project Manager. 
Founded in 2007 by Martine Bidegain and 
Thierry Happe, under the patronage of the 
French Senate and France’s Ministry for the 
Digital Sector (Ministry of Economy and 
Finance), the Netexplo Observatory studies 
the global impact of new digital uses on 
society and businesses.
We are talking here about a scenario that no 
longer has anything to do with cyborgs, and 
where there is no mention either of rejecting 
technology as a tool. We are talking about 
another narrative, which will use AI, but for 
other purposes, with other constraints and 
rules of use. We are talking about a strategy 
that gives pride of place to what makes us 
human. And without pitting the human 
against the machine, we must recognize 
that in this strategy, what was for the cyborg 
a weakness, becomes a strength. 
We are not talking about standardization 
here. We are not talking about rational 
logic. We are not talking about causality, 
prediction, process. We are not talking about 
a stereotypical model of efficiency. We will 
not be able to leave this new scenario to the 
machines. Their overpowering algorithms 
have neither faith nor conviction; no 
anarchist or transgressive spirit, and no 
fierce desire to survive and see their children 
happier than themselves! Collaboration with 
the machine can be beneficial, undoubtedly, 
but it must be better supervised, better 
controlled and better understood. All 
this will be possible if we all agree on the 
narrative it should serve. Let’s pick up our 
pens today!
 
## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=48) 🆗
### Innover dans l'IA pour répondre aux défis sociaux
48   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
Dhruv Ghulati:  
Fighting fake news
What made you set up an AI startup to 
tackle fake news? Isn’t it a daunting task, like 
fighting corruption?
Yes, it is. If you want to change the world, 
rather than simply build a business, you 
need to think about building enabling 
technology, where, if it does work, the 
potential impact on everyone everywhere 
would be astronomical. By combining AI and 
the human community, Factmata develops 
explainable algorithms to solve the problem 
of online misinformation and build a better-
quality media ecosystem.   
Factmata’s scoring system has the ability to 
digest every piece of online content, read 
it intelligently and score it on nine signals 
− including hate speech, political bias and 
sexism − to give users a deep understanding 
of the quality, safety and credibility of any 
piece of content on the web. It builds these 
classifications in a fair and explainable 
manner, by deploying a proprietary network 
of experts who are most suited to assess any 
given content in question. 
Our goal is to build a new universal ranking 
system for the quality of online content, to 
be deployed across ad exchanges [a digital 
marketplace that facilitates the buying and 
selling of media advertising inventory from 
multiple ad networks, often through real-
time auctions], browsers, search engines, 
social networks, and more. This will ensure 
good quality journalism gets ranked higher 
and monetized more, and low-credibility, 
unsafe content gets demonetized. 
AI innovations to counter 
social challenges 
What is the difference between Factmata 
and other software out there − the kind that 
Facebook uses, for instance?
Our technology has the potential to be 
more accurate because of the proprietary 
way in which we use expert communities to 
help build our software and give us unique 
training data – which is very difficult and 
time-consuming to maintain – rather than 
using existing open datasets out there that 
everyone else has access to. We’ve figured 
out a way we can get that data more cheaply 
and efficiently than others by making users 
feel they are part of the process.
Who are your primary users? 
Our primary users are members of the 
public who like to challenge their critical 
thinking via our tools, and then brands 
and governments who are trying to ensure 
either they can monitor people spreading 
rumours that are really bad for societal 
health, or spread disinformation that can 
derail a product launch or campaign. 
When it comes to weeding out fake news, 
would you say an AI is more effective than a 
human?
No. Humans are way better. But humans 
don’t scale. Algorithms running on lots of 
hardware can scan millions of content items 
per second to flag them for fake news. But 
it would take huge numbers of humans to 
sift through such large volumes of content, 
who would need to be replaced before they 
got tired. Besides, only some humans are 
more effective than other humans. Hence 
the key is to combine the right humans with 
the right AI. 
Can hackers and fake news-mongers cheat 
the AI? 
Yes, they will try. But the good thing for us 
is that every time they cheat it, it becomes 
harder and harder. Soon, the number of 
cheaters good enough to beat the system 
is outweighed by the quality of the system. 
This is how we dealt with email spam, and in 
fact most spam/fraud/cybersecurity. 
The key thing for us is being able to survive 
long enough with enough funding to 
build our core technology, whilst having 
customers that can sustain us, to be able to 
look to the future. I believe that with enough 
hard work and time, we will tackle fake news 
whilst most might give up.
Interviews by Shiraz Sidhva
Artificial intelligence (AI) is being harnessed to tackle two of the most 
challenging problems today – the flagrant proliferation of fake news 
and the increasing invasion of individual privacy. Factmata, which uses 
AI to fight disinformation and D-ID, which protects identities from facial 
recognition systems using AI, were two of the ten winners of the 2019 
Netexplo awards, presented at UNESCO Headquarters in April. 
Dhruv Ghulati, CEO and co-founder of the London-based Factmata 
and Gil Perry, co-founder and CEO of D-ID, based in Tel Aviv (Israel) 
and Palo Alto (United States), spoke to the UNESCO Courier about their 
innovations.
## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=49) 🆗
### Innover dans l'IA pour répondre aux défis sociaux
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   49 
Work created in Copenhagen, Denmark, 
part of the Controlled Lives series  
by Italian artist Fabian Albertini.  
© Fabian Albertini
Gil Perry: Making faces 
unreadable  
You were a veteran of the Israel Defense 
Forces Intelligence Corps’ elite 8200 unit. 
What prompted you to create software that 
protects identities from facial recognition 
systems? 
A group of us came up with the idea 
during our military service. At that time, 
we were very much aware of the risks that 
face recognition technologies can pose to 
privacy and identity protection. We were 
not permitted to post our own photos on 
social media for that reason. After leaving 
the army, I decided to dive deeper into 
the issue. I studied computer vision and 
image processing and worked in the field 
for several years. Then, about two and a half 
years ago, I partnered with Sella Blondheim 
and Eliran Kota, D-ID’s co-founders. 
Together we started writing one of the 
most complicated and ground-breaking 
algorithms to protect photos from face 
recognition technologies. This algorithm is 
now the foundation of D-ID. 
Our faces are now our passwords, but 
unlike passwords, we cannot change them 
so they need to be protected. We have 
developed an AI technology that makes 
images unrecognizable to face recognition 
algorithms, while there are no differences 
perceptible to the human eye. This allows 
people to store, share and utilize images 
and videos without having to worry about 
their faces being picked up, identified and 
misused by automated face recognition 
tools.
How important is it to protect facial 
recognition, and what are the dangers 
associated with not using software to mask 
photos? 
Firstly, face recognition is everywhere, and 
the market is booming. Second, we are 
surrounded by cameras. There are CCTVs 
everywhere – on the street, in shops, on the 
train. And then, we all have smartphones 
and we use them to take pictures and 
videos. Lastly, our photos are everywhere, 
on social media, on our company’s 
servers, in government databases, etc. 
This combination – surveillance cameras 
everywhere and face recognition that 
is becoming more accurate and easy to 
obtain – creates a situation where anyone 
can identify you, track you, and steal your 
identity. 
Face recognition technology can be used 
to rank citizens’ behaviour or to tell you 
who around you has a debt with the bank. 
In some countries, you can take a picture 
of a random person on the street and use 
face recognition to find out every last detail 
about him. These apps have been known to 
be used to harass minorities and protesters. 
In the United States and other places, 
face recognition is used to learn about 
a customer’s age, gender, ethnicity, our 
satisfaction when we shop, and much more. 
In short, I think we should all be concerned 
about our privacy. Luckily D-ID is here to 
help.
D-ID’s proprietary algorithm combines 
the most advanced image processing and 
deep learning techniques [which enable 
a machine to independently recognize 
complex concepts such as faces, bodies, 
etc.] to resynthesize any given photo to a 
protected version. This is extremely difficult 
to do, and we believe that we’re the only 
ones today who are capable of providing 
such a technology. 
Do you envisage facing any problems with 
government agencies, who use a lot of facial 
recognition technology?
No, we don’t. In fact, governments and local 
legislators are pushing for more privacy 
regulation, which plays well with our vision.   
Who are your main customers? Is it 
individuals who want to protect their 
identities? 
Currently we sell mostly to businesses. 
Our customers use our technology to 
protect the images of their management 
and employees, and to protect the image 
databases of their customers.
We also target schools to help teachers and 
students to post and share images that 
are privacy-protected. As we advance with 
our technology, we are looking to be able 
to offer D-ID to everyone – with on-device 
solutions for smartphones and cameras, so 
that every picture we take would be de-
identified on creation.  
## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=50) 🆗
### Non-article text
O
u
r 
G
u
es
t
The spirit of competition and  
open-mindedness are at  
the core of the eclecticism  
of Baku’s architecture.
© Will Van Overbeek
## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=51) 🆗
### Bakou, cité multiculturelle
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   51 
When did Baku become a modern city?
Baku began to become a modern 
city in 1872, when the Russian tsarist 
power established what is now called 
a concession for oil field development. 
From that moment, known in history as 
the first oil boom, the city experienced 
rapid development that resulted in an 
extraordinary growth of its population – 
which  increased tenfold in the first twenty-
five years, then doubled every seven or 
eight years. 
While Baku had 14,500 inhabitants in 
1872, it had a population of 215,000 at the 
beginning of the First World War. Of course, 
no city can grow at such a speed in a natural 
way. This demographic growth is due, above 
all, to immigration, which was attracted 
by the country’s wealth. It should not be 
forgotten that at the very beginning of the 
twentieth century, Baku provided more than 
fifty per cent of the world’s crude oil. 
That was when a new city began to take 
shape around the old fortified city, which 
was several millennia old (a World Heritage 
Site since 2000). It was planned at the time 
of the Imperial Russian administration 
and built thanks to local millionaires, who 
invested in projects by European architects. 
Fuad Akhundov,  
interviewed by Mila Ibrahimova
Several millennia old, the 
fortified city of Baku, the capital 
of Azerbaijan, retains traces of 
the presence of the Zoroastrian, 
Sassanian, Arabic, Persian, 
Shirvani, Ottoman and Russian 
peoples. The modern city, born 
from the first oil boom in the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries, has an equally eclectic 
cultural heritage. Because of its 
bay and its proximity to caravan 
routes, the city has always been 
crossed by multiple currents. 
The result is an extraordinary 
harmonious diversity, reflected 
both in its architecture and its 
cosmopolitan spirit.
This transformed the city into a real 
patchwork of cultures.
The oil magnates of Baku were keen to 
get closer to Europe, and this desire was 
also reflected in the architecture. They 
invited renowned architects to the city, 
who were mainly of Polish descent, among 
whom were Kazimir Skurevich, Konstantin 
Borisoglebski, Eugene Skibinski, Jozef 
Goslawski and Jozef Ploszko. 
This new city became so sumptuous that 
it would be nicknamed the Paris of the 
Caucasus.
Did turning to the West mean turning away 
from the past? 
In no way were the local oil tycoons trying 
to erase their past! Quite simply, they were 
receptive to cultural influences from outside, 
such as the European spirit that came to 
them through Russia. But this did not mean 
that they lost their cultural particularities.
So, for example, the vast majority of the 
frescoes that I have had the opportunity 
to see in my life, I found in ancient Azeri 
houses – although traditionally, they were 
prohibited by the Islamic religion.  
Baku: 
Multicultural city 
This article is published to mark the 
occasion of the 43rd session of the 
World Heritage Committee, held in Baku, 
Azerbaijan, from 30 June to 10 July 2019.
Fuad Akhundov in Baku. 
©
 T
ho
m
as
 M
ar
sd
en
## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=52) 🆗
### Bakou, cité multiculturelle
52   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
The orders they placed were more or less 
like this: “I want the same entrance as 
Taguyev, the same balcony as Mukhtarov, 
the same dome as Dadachev and the same 
window, say, as Mitrofanov, and something 
more of my own inspiration!” From this 
competition between millionaires, who 
wanted to impress their competitors, 
emerged the unusual style of Baku 
architecture of the late-nineteenth and 
early-twentieth  centuries – which is 
impossible to classify in any of the known 
genres of Western architecture.
But who was actually doing the work?
The local craftsmen, of course. The architects 
were able to take full advantage of the 
ambitious orders of the Azeri millionaires, 
equipped with unlimited resources, to 
enhance the value of stone – the only 
construction material available in this desert 
region. 
The stonemasons of Baku enjoyed a great 
reputation at that time. They were said to be 
born with chisels in their hands! But they did 
not have knowledge of figurative art, which 
is forbidden by Islam, according to some 
interpretations. An Italian sculptor, Antonio 
Franzi, was brought in to teach them this 
skill.
Although the architects borrowed motifs 
from different cultures, their approach was 
never a ‘copy-paste’ one. It was perceived 
through deeply-rooted local traditions and 
executed in fine local sandstone in quite an 
impeccable manner. The different influences 
coexist side by side, so to speak. This gives a 
special cachet to Baku’s architecture, which 
reflects the multicultural dimension of its 
population, from the first oil boom to this 
very day. 
What was the ethnic composition of the city 
at that time?
At the beginning of the First World War, the 
majority ethnic groups each represented 
about a third of the population: thirty-six 
per cent Russians and thirty-four per cent 
Azeris, about one third of whom came from 
Iran. There was also a rich and prosperous 
Armenian community in Baku, representing 
nineteen per cent of the population. About 
four and a half per cent of them were Jewish, 
followed by Germans, Poles, Georgians, 
Greeks, Tartars, etc. 
The Jewish community enjoyed a tolerant 
environment in Baku and did not fear 
persecution. They provided the city with 
nearly forty per cent of  the doctors and 
more than thirty per cent of the lawyers. The 
Rothschild, Landau, Cohen and Itskovich 
families were among them. Together with 
the Poles and Germans, they constituted 
Baku’s upper middle class. 
The Azeris, for their part, were the core of 
the middle class. They owned eighty-one 
per cent of the real estate during Baku’s oil 
boom. The billionaire Moussa Naghiyev, 
for example, who had started as a field 
worker and ended up as the richest Azeri oil 
baron, was also one of the local real-estate 
moghuls. Many of them had grown rich 
very quickly, without having had the time to 
obtain any formal education. Often, these 
first-generation local industrial magnates 
could barely read or write. One of these 
An extraordinary interpenetration of 
cultures took place in Baku, at all levels, 
including architectural and artistic. For 
example, Murtuza Mukhtarov, who was a 
famous drilling wizard, had mosques built in 
his native suburb of Amirajanin near Baku, 
and in Vladikavkaz (Russia), the hometown 
of his wife. He later erected a fascinating 
French Gothic palace for her, which still 
adorns Baku’s downtown.
One detail deserves attention: the imposing 
shape of this palace takes after the stately 
image of its owner! Just like the neo-
Renaissance palace erected by Dmitri 
Mitrofanov reflects the sturdy appearance 
of this other nouveau riche (I use this term 
in its positive sense) man who came from 
the province of Perm to make his fortune 
in the oil industry. The same applies to Isa 
Bey Hadjinski’s palace, built on six levels and 
mixing a variety of styles: from neo-Baroque 
to neo-Gothic and Modern. 
These similarities are so striking, they 
inspired this verse by the Russian poet 
Alexander Gorodinsky: “I am there, not 
knowing where to go, / standing, in the 
morning wind of Baku, / among its houses 
so similar to their masters, / from the 
outside, as from the inside.”
To a certain extent, this challenging 
individuality resulted from the wish of  the 
newly rich Baku elite to outdo each other. 
Dmitri Mitrofanov’s palace in Baku  
evokes the imposing appearance  
of its owner.
©
 C
ou
rt
es
y 
of
 th
e 
N
at
io
na
l P
ho
to
 a
nd
 C
in
em
a 
D
oc
um
en
ts
 A
rc
hi
ve
, R
ep
ub
lic
 o
f A
ze
rb
ai
ja
n 
an
d 
pe
rs
on
al
 a
rc
hi
ve
 o
f F
ua
d 
A
kh
un
do
v
## [Page 53](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=53) 🆗
### Bakou, cité multiculturelle
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   |   53 
illiterate oil barons was Hadji Zeynalabdin 
Taghuyev, who nonetheless founded the 
first secular school for Muslim girls in 1901, 
and the first European theatre in Baku.
How did these communities relate to each 
other?
The Azeris in general did not take a negative 
view of the foreigners who came to settle 
in the city. This made it possible for the 
different communities to live together in 
peace, and even solidarity. Local Muslim 
millionaires frequently made donations for 
the shrines of other faiths. For example, for 
the consecration of the Alexander Nevsky 
Cathedral in Baku – the largest Orthodox 
church in the South Caucasus (demolished 
by the Communists in the 1930s) – Hadji 
Taguyev donated 10,000 roubles.
The process of Azerbaijan’s integration into 
the Soviet Union started in the early 1920s. 
What changes did this bring to Baku? 
In terms of architecture, the Soviet influence 
was first felt through a set of landmarks with 
strong Oriental influence in the 1920s. The 
Sabunchi train station in Baku is vivid proof 
of this National Romantic style, conveying 
the desire of the new Soviet administration 
to win the hearts of the local population 
by turning back to their architectural past. 
This trend gave way to constructivism 
in the 1930s, which introduced modern 
buildings with cubic shapes and flat roofs 
into the Baku landscape. Many felt that this 
architecture was a harmonious addition to 
traditional architecture, of which the flat 
roof was one of the main features. Thus Baku 
easily assimilated this novelty, as it had so 
many others in previous decades.
The Stalinist Empire style of the 1940s and 
1950s was heavily impacted by a plethora 
of architects trained at the Soviet school, 
such as Mikhail Useinov, Sadik Dadachev, 
Konstantin Sentshikhin, Elbay Gasimzade 
and others. They managed to adorn this very 
heavy and pompous style with elaborate 
details featuring the Oriental legacy, and 
thus made the Stalinist era architecture 
in Baku very site-specific, interpreting it 
through a local prism. 
If you had to summarize the main feature of 
Baku’s architectural heritage in one word, 
what would you say?
Eclecticism! And I would add immediately: 
a very site-specific eclecticism that is due 
to the deeply-rooted local traditions on 
the one hand, and the spirit of competition 
and openness on the other. And it is this 
openness of spirit which explains, for 
example, the strange similarity between 
the flamboyant Gothic Venetian Ca’ d’Oro 
and the sumptuous Ismailiyya palace which 
Moussa Naghiyev donated to the Muslim 
Charity Society of Baku, to honour the 
memory of his son, Ismail. 
The “city of winds” well deserves its 
nickname in the literal sense, but also in 
the figurative sense of the term – swept 
as it was by these winds that came from 
elsewhere, yet, never losing its unique and 
cosmopolitan identity.
A great lover of Baku, Fuad Akhundov 
is known for his unusual tours of the city, 
during which he presents each place by 
juxtaposing his photographs of yesterday 
and today, using the hundreds of archive 
photos he carries in his immense portfolio. 
Akhundov is the author of articles, films and 
television shows, including The Baku Secrets.
Isa Bey Hadjinsky and his palace in Baku.
©
 C
ou
rt
es
y 
of
 th
e 
N
at
io
na
l P
ho
to
 a
nd
 C
in
em
a 
D
oc
um
en
ts
 A
rc
hi
ve
, R
ep
ub
lic
 o
f A
ze
rb
ai
ja
n 
an
d 
pe
rs
on
al
 a
rc
hi
ve
 o
f F
ua
d 
A
kh
un
do
v
## [Page 54](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=54) 🆗
### Non-article text
54   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
C
u
rr
en
t 
A
ff
ai
rs
Johannesburg Inner City, 2013, 
part of a series by South African 
photographer Graeme Williams, 
which highlights the country’s 
social polarization. 
© Graeme Williams / Agence VU
## [Page 55](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=55) 🆗
### L'Afrique du Sud de Mandela: rêve ou réalité?
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   55 
Twenty-five years after South Africa’s 
hard-won freedom, has the country made 
progress in the fight against racism? 
I think that the answer to that must be 
yes, simply because the racial divides that 
characterized South Africa during apartheid 
were quite stark, suspicions because of 
race ran deep, and instances of gratuitous 
violence against black people had almost 
reached a level of social acceptability. 
Things have changed dramatically since 
then. But that does not mean that there 
aren’t any serious instances of racism. The 
difference is that when these happen, large 
numbers of South Africans, black and white, 
are outraged. In addition, there is a legal 
framework to deal with racism.
Are the legislative measures proposed in 
the new bill to criminalize acts of racism  
necessary to promote a united South Africa? 
Ideally, we would like to combat racism 
through voluntary initiatives, appealing 
to the better sense of people. Historically, 
most South Africans would agree that in the 
absence of criminal sanctions, the new laws 
could be important, giving license to act 
strongly against those who think they can 
get away with paying a fine, since no current 
processes provide for criminal action.
Based on a legal and constitutional 
framework where we are willing to send 
someone to jail for stealing a loaf of 
bread, why, considering the hierarchy of 
seriousness of the acts, do we not send 
someone to jail for racist behaviour? You 
can’t be racist and pay your way out of 
it.  The idea is to use the law to deal with 
extreme cases – one hopes it is used 
sparingly. 
Jody Kollapen, interviewed by Edwin Naidu, South African journalist
Twenty-five years after attaining democracy, South Africa has taken 
giant strides towards forging a united nation. But overcoming racism 
and realizing Nelson Mandela’s vision of a nation that belongs to all who 
live in it, remains a wonderful ideal – which still requires a lot of work, 
according to Justice Jody Kollapen. Both an arbitrator and a victim of 
racist cases (he was refused a haircut as recently as in October 2003!), this 
human rights defender maintains that there is enough goodwill to build 
on Mandela’s vision.
Analysts refer to racism as an unresolved 
problem, inherited from the past, which the 
nation has failed to adequately address.  
What is your view?
I agree that the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission (TRC) has never dealt with 
the issue of racism. It dealt with crimes of 
apartheid but not apartheid as a crime. The 
large majority of South Africans who were 
victims and perpetrators never appeared 
before the TRC to talk about racism under 
apartheid. Sadly, the TRC may have got 
caught up with the romantic notion of 
reconciliation without addressing apartheid, 
discrimination – and the fact that there 
can be no reconciliation without social and 
economic transformation. It was a missed 
opportunity. But I don’t think it can be 
addressed via legislative means.
What must be done to ensure that a sense of 
unity prevails in South Africa?
As long as South Africa remains the most 
unequal society in the world, and as long 
as we trace that back to having its roots 
in colonialism and apartheid, we are not 
going to reach that sense of unity. Even if we 
do not succeed in creating the egalitarian 
society which some of us wish for, we can 
certainly achieve a more equal society.
But for that to happen, we need to be 
mature in the debates on issues such as 
resources, affirmative action, access to 
land, and we can’t be defensive. If we don’t 
transform society in a meaningful way, that 
sense of unity may evade us.
Mandela’s South Africa: Reality
or distant dream? 
Nelson Mandela has left his stamp on 
the twentieth century. More than that, 
he has given it a meaning. Human but 
not all too human, and obsessive in 
his respect for law and justice, he has 
succeeded in being a unique individual 
at the same time as the symbol of a 
people who recognized themselves in 
him before they had even chosen him 
through the democratic channel of 
the ballot box. In Africa and beyond, 
in the memory of those who suffer, 
those whose voices still carry the echo 
of a wound that has never healed, 
the voices of those tossed into the 
mass grave of ordinary massacres or 
suffocated in a jute sack thrown from 
an express train, Mandela exemplifies 
a determination that nothing could 
crush, a passion that nothing could 
discourage.
Prison, humiliation, petty harassment 
and attempts to undermine his 
morale did not succeed in shaking his 
conviction that freedom could not 
be achieved without a struggle. And 
he had a particular kind of freedom 
in mind, not one that is deceptively 
packaged to look attractive, yet is 
actually full of illusions. In his eyes, 
freedom is a non-negotiable value, 
inseparable from dignity and pregnant 
with responsibility.
Tahar Ben Jelloun, 
the UNESCO Courier, 
November 1995
## [Page 56](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=56) 🆗
### L'Afrique du Sud de Mandela: rêve ou réalité?
56   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
In the 8 May 2019 elections, some politicians 
used race as an election tool. What is your 
opinion on their conduct?  
Unfortunately, race continues to define our 
social and economic order, so it defines the 
political order as well. It is easy to use the 
notion of race  to stir up anxiety. This is not 
unique to South Africa – we’ve seen it in 
Europe and the United States as well. But 
given our history, it is easy to evoke feelings 
of insecurity among people. When people 
have these feelings, I’m not sure that they 
are able to make the right electoral choices. 
I hope we reach a level of maturity to deal 
with this. The long-term damage caused by 
the use of race as a campaign tool may not 
be quantifiable, but it serves to divide, and 
runs counter to the argument of the united 
nation we seek. 
In his inaugural speech on 10 May 1994, 
Nelson Mandela called for reconciliation and 
an end to racism. Have we made progress 
towards achieving his vision for South 
Africa?
We’ve made considerable progress. Naked 
acts of racism still occur, but they’re not the 
norm, and attract universal condemnation, 
which is very good. However, I see a real 
problem in the fact that there are no anti-
racism campaigns in schools, public or 
private. We have programmes to deal with 
gender-based violence, xenophobia, etc. 
but I’m not aware of any campaigns against 
racism – surely we need these.
According to the Freedom Charter, South 
Africa belongs to all who live in it.  But this 
remains a wonderful ideal, and we remain 
far from achieving it. Yes, in some respects 
we have made progress. Certainly, we are 
a better society today, we must take solace 
from that, we’re not a society at war with 
each other, and there remains enough 
goodwill to build on the vision that Madiba 
has left us. 
An acting Justice of the Constitutional 
Court of South Africa since July 2017, 
Jody Kollapen has served as a Judge of 
the High Court of South Africa, in Pretoria, 
since 2011. He is also the Chairperson of 
the South African Law Reform Commission. 
Kollapen served as the head of the South 
African Human Rights Commission, from 
2001 to 2009, prior to his appointment as 
a judge.
Atteridgeville, a work  from The Stone, 
the Gun, and the Plate, the first of a series 
of collaborative projects by South African 
photographer Gideon Mendel – who took 
photos of riots in his country in 1985-1986 
– and Argentinian artist Marcelo Brodsky, 
who is updating them today with colours 
and words, to narrate history and convey 
its meaning to new generations. 
© Marcelo Brodsky & Gideon Mendel / ARTCO
## [Page 57](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=57) 🆗
### Dmitri Mendeleïev ou les enseignements d'un prophète
The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019   57 
disciplines did not exist at the time, the 
scientist perceived the need to prevent 
the excessive exploitation of natural 
resources – to inform people about the 
exhaustibility of minerals, and to call for the 
parsimonious consumption of oil, water 
and coal. Mendeleev stressed the need to 
focus on coal gasification and to change the 
methods of extracting and transporting oil. 
He advocated the respectful use of the soil 
in order to improve its fertility. He reflected 
on the modernization of Russia.
Natalia Tarasova and Dmitry Mustafin
1 March 1869 is the date of a 
discovery that changed the 
course of science in the world. 
On that day, Dmitry Mendeleev 
completed his work on the 
periodic table of elements, 
which would play a fundamental 
role in the future of chemistry 
– but also in physics, biology, 
astronomy and geochemistry. 
Even more interesting is that 
he revolutionized the ideas of 
what is now termed sustainable 
development.  
Mendeleev was fiercely critical of what 
we now call oligarchy and corruption. He 
believed that any possibility of a monopoly 
of natural resources should be eradicated. 
But these warnings were not heeded either 
at the time or in the twentieth century, 
when Russia privatized its oil and mining 
deposits. In the nineteenth century, the 
powerful oil and coal oligarchy fought an 
implacable and victorious battle against 
Mendeleev, to prove that he was not a great 
scientist. 
The United Nations proclaimed 2019 
as the International Year of the Periodic 
Table of  Chemical Elements. It marks the 
150th anniversary of the publication of 
the first model of the periodic table in 
the Review of the Russian Chemical Society 
by the illustrious Russian scientist Dmitry 
Mendeleev, considered one of the fathers 
of modern chemistry. At that time, when 
knowledge of the structure of the atom was 
largely imprecise, periodic law could only 
be formulated by a man endowed with an 
extraordinary predictive power, the intuition 
of a genius. 
Yet, in Mendeleev’s bibliography, less than 
one-tenth of his research is devoted to 
chemistry. The overwhelming majority of 
his work concerns other scientific fields, 
including aeronautics, meteorology, Arctic 
exploration, ice-breaker design, popular 
education, the denunciation of spiritualism, 
legal expertise and economics – to name a 
few of the issues in which this encyclopaedic 
mind was interested.
Much of his research was devoted to what 
we now term sustainable development, 
the rational management of natural 
resources and ecology. Although, obviously, 
these fields of knowledge and academic 
Dmitry Mendeleev: 
The teachings of a prophet
©
 Y
ur
i K
on
ev
 /
 T
he
 M
us
eu
m
 o
f N
at
ur
e 
an
d 
M
an
A portrait of Dmitry Mendeleev 
by Yuri Konev, a Russian painter from 
the second half of the twentieth century.
## [Page 58](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=58) 🆗
### Dmitri Mendeleïev ou les enseignements d'un prophète
58   |   The UNESCO Courier • July-September 2019
Excerpts from “That chart on the laboratory wall”, 
an article published in the UNESCO Courier, June 1971.
The formulation of the periodic law marked 
the passing of the study of chemistry from 
almost medieval trial-and-error methods 
to a modern science capable of predicting 
elements not yet seen, heard, touched or 
smelled by man. The coherent arrangement 
of the elements by Dmitry Mendeleev 
crowned the efforts of men of science in 
many countries, to discover a meaningful 
system in the properties of these basic 
substances.
Mendeleev’s idea was to be virtually a 
quantum jump from the simple table 
laid out in the eighteenth century by the 
French chemist Antoine Lavoisier, who had 
included, besides physical elements, what 
he called “imponderable fluids” – such as 
light, or the energy derived from heat. 
Although a far cry from Mendeleev’s 
rigorously logical approach, Lavoisier’s effort 
succeeded in conditioning other scientists 
to reject the theory of phlogiston. This was 
the ancient chemical concept, dating from 
early Greek civilization, that fire in its various 
forms was a physical or material component 
of nature. 
Lavoisier’s analysis was improved upon in 
1803 by the British chemist John Dalton 
and his atomic theory, which attributed 
a distinctive atomic “weight” to each of 
the twenty-three elements recognized 
by Lavoisier. Characteristics such as this 
and the “equivalent weight” concept of 
another British scientist, William Wollaston, 
paved the way for other chemists who 
have subsequently been able to perceive 
a cohesive order among all the elements 
found in nature. 
But until Mendeleev’s time, even notions of 
what constituted an element were vague 
and subject to individual interpretation.
By 1850, an additional thirty elements 
had been recognized, bringing the total 
known to somewhat more than sixty, and 
novel forms of classifying the elements 
were proposed,  which were all steps in the 
right direction. But some men of learning 
considered them as little better than mental 
games, and viewed the correlation of 
properties of the elements grouped in triads, 
octaves or along a telluric spiral as nothing 
more than happenstance – and therefore 
little better than superficial analogy. 
A little history
Even as the English chemist John Newlands 
was presenting a paper on his “law of 
octaves” before Britain’s prestigious 
Chemical Society, he was asked, ironically, if 
it would not be possible to obtain the same 
results by arranging the elements in their 
alphabetical order!
Mendeleev’s 
contribution 
What, then, was Mendeleev’s theory all 
about? Briefly, he proposed arranging the 
elements in lines and columns (also called 
“periods” and “groups”) inside a rectangle, 
with their atomic weights rising in number 
from left to right along the same line, one 
line following the other down the page.
The columns were determined by elements 
possessing analogous properties, in the 
same way  that an oxide was formed, for 
example. The fewest atoms of an element 
(R) combining with the fewest of oxygen 
(O) would appear in the first column, 
augmenting in combining proportions 
towards the seventh column.
Mendeleev knew from the outset that he 
had developed a scientific device to lay 
out the chemical elements in a convenient 
system. More than that, he realized he had 
discovered an objective, natural law. Yet, 
just as Newton had been popularly said 
to understand universal gravitation when 
struck on the head by a falling apple, or 
Watt realized that a boiling kettle could 
be transformed into the steam engine, 
there were still those who thought that 
Mendeleev had come upon the periodic law 
as the result of a dream.
Man tends to overlook that while scientific 
truth may suddenly strike one man’s mind 
as a flash of lightning, that same scientist 
may have spent years of arduous research 
on his subject. Indeed, it was Pasteur who 
later commented that “chance favours 
only the prepared mind”. If we take a look 
at Mendeleev’s activities before 1869, it 
becomes fairly clear that the emergence of 
the periodic table was no mere accident.
Guenrij Teterin (Ukraine) and Claire Terlon 
(France), specialists in physics and authors 
of many popular science articles
Even the members of the St. Petersburg 
Academy of Sciences eventually chose Fedor 
Beilstein (whom only a few specialists can 
remember today) over Mendeleev when 
they had to elect a new colleague to their 
institution. They cited the modest amount of 
research Mendeleev had carried out in the 
field of chemistry. 
No one is a prophet in his own land! 
Mendeleev is no exception. Even so, 
his prophecies about natural resources 
management – and sustainable 
development in general – are just as 
important as the periodic law and the 
periodic table of elements, which raised  
his name to the ranks of the most famous 
Russian scholars.  
The International Year 2019, and the 
worldwide recognition of  the periodic 
table of elements, underline once again 
the need to develop systems in our chaotic 
world. After all, it is systems that allow us to 
understand the very idea of regularity and 
give us the predictive capacity to meet the 
challenges of sustainable development.
Co-chair of the International Year of the 
Periodic Table of the Elements Inter-union 
Management Committee, Russian scientist 
Natalia Tarasova is director of the Institute 
of Chemistry and Problems of Sustainable 
Development at the D. Mendeleev 
University of Chemical Technology of 
Russia. She is one of the pioneers of 
sustainable development research in 
Russia.
A Russian chemist and professor at the 
D. Mendeleev University of Chemical 
Technology of Russia, Dmitry Mustafin 
is an author, presenter, scientific editor 
and guest expert on numerous television 
programmes and films for the general 
public.
## [Page 59](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=59) 🆗
### Non-article text
Many voices,
one world
The Courier welcomes  
the Korean language!
With its April-June 2019 issue, the UNESCO 
Courier has been enriched with a new 
language: Korean. Officially launched on 
4 March 2019 at the offices of the Korean 
National Commission for UNESCO in Seoul, 
this is a joint publication with Random 
House Korea. The Courier had previously 
been published in Korean from August 1978 
to December 1996, when the journal was a 
monthly. Relaunched in April 2017, the Courier 
is now a quarterly, published online and in PDF 
format, and with a limited number of copies in 
print. Korean has become the tenth language 
in which it is now published.
2019 : A
nnée internationale des langues autochtones
Courrier
DE L’UNESCO
LE janvier-m
ars 2019
Idées : un inédit 
de W. H. Auden
Quand tu bois 
de l'eau, pense
à la source
The UNESCO Courier • 2019. 4-6   |   1 
재창조되는 
도시들
유네스코 꾸리에
2019. 4-6
알랭 마방쿠
호르헤 마푸드
토마 B. 르베르디
값
 1
0,
00
0원
The UN World Water 
Development Report 2019
Leaving No One Behind
ISBN 978-92-3-100309-7 
186 pp, 210 x 297 mm, paperback, €45 
Published by UNESCO on behalf of UN-Water
Access to water and sanitation is an 
internationally recognized human right. Yet 
more than two billion people lack even the most 
basic of services. The latest United Nations World 
Water Development Report 2019: Leaving No One 
Behind, explores the symptoms of exclusion and 
investigates ways to overcome inequalities.
Coordinated and published by UNESCO’s World 
Water Assessment Programme, this Report is 
the result of a collaboration between the thirty-
two United Nations entities and the forty-one  
international partners who make up UN-Water. 
It is published every year on World Water Day, 
22 March.
Fighting the Illicit Trafficking 
of Cultural Property
A Toolkit for European Judiciary and 
Law Enforcement
ISBN 978-92-3-100289-2 
119 pp, 180 x 240 mm, paperback 
UNESCO Publishing 
Available on http://unesdoc.unesco.org
UNESCO and the European Union have 
cooperated to prepare this publication dedicated 
to the fight against the illicit trafficking of 
cultural property – an endemic phenomenon 
that involves organized criminal activity and 
contributes to the financing of terrorism.
Aimed at the judiciary and law enforcement, this 
handbook offers a set of practical tools to help 
combat illicit trafficking. Numerous case studies 
enable a concrete understanding of international 
principles, and allow practitioners to acquire 
and strengthen their knowledge of the legal 
framework in their fight to protect cultural 
property. 
World Heritage No.91
Walled Cities 
ISSN 1020-4202 
EAN 3059630101912 
80 pp., 220 x 280 mm, paperback, €7.50 
UNESCO Publishing/Publishing for 
Development Ltd.
Historic walls are a legacy of the multifaceted 
relations of towns and cities with the 
surrounding environment, sometimes keeping 
people in and sometimes shutting them out. 
Once an instrument of division and domination, 
these urban walls and fortifications with their 
layered histories are today an ideal laboratory for 
participatory approaches to cultural heritage 
management. 
They also represent an asset for social cohesion, 
inclusion and sustainable local development.
UNESCO Publishing
www.unesco.org/publishing 
publishing.promotion@unesco.org
United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization
Discover the Courier in Arabic, Chinese, English, Esperanto, French, Korean, Portuguese, Russian,  
Sicilian and Spanish on our website: https://en.unesco.org/courier
## [Page 60](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370032eng.pdf#page=60) 🆗
### Non-article text
Composition, by Victor Vasarely, the 
Hungarian-French artist who is widely known 
as the father of the Op Art movement. This 
serigraph has been part of UNESCO’s Works 
of Art Collection since 1985.
© Succession Vasarely / photo: UNESCO