# [070484](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf)
## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=1) 游
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
AVERRO칆S
MAIMONIDES
## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=2) 游
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
A time to live . . .
47 Spain
The water tribunal
The Huerta de Valencia, one of Europe's most
productive agricultural areas, has a long his춻
tory reaching back to the Arabs of al-Andalus
(Muslim Spain), who introduced into it a var춻
iety of crops including the orange. Water is
scarce, and its distribution, today as in the past
a key to the region's prosperity, is governed by
a set of ancient regulations with which all
farmers who practise irrigation are bound to
comply. A special court, the Tribunal de las
Aguas, exists to make sure that the regulations
are observed. It is the descendant of an institu춻
tion which, according to a text by the 11th-
century Andalusian historian Ibn Hayy칛n,
performed a similar task at the time of the
Cordob치n caliphate. The court, the members
of which represent all the towns and villages of
the Huerta, meets beside the Apostles' Door in
Valencia Cathedral every Thursday morning
between 11 o'clock and noon. Following a sim춻
ple oral procedure, it settles lawsuits and im춻
poses fines, which are paid with the ancient
currency of Valencia, the libra, worth 3.75
pesetas.
## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=3) 游
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
The Courier
A window open on the world
Editorial
TWELFTH-century C칩rdoba was the setting for a glorious
chapter in the history of human culture. It saw the flowering
of four centuries of the civilization of al-Andalus, Muslim
Spain, which covered an area essentially that of Andalusia today. It
also saw the apogee of the even older classical Arab Muslim
civilization of which al-Andalus was but a part, although a distinc춻
tive part, and which extended from India to north Africa and the
Iberian peninsula.
Until the beginning of the thirteenth century, C칩rdoba, capital of
al-Andalus, was the most populous, the wealthiest and the most
cultured city in Europe. Its Great Mosque, a legacy which has come
down to us largely intact, provides magnificent testimony to its
splendour. But the crowning glory of C칩rdoba and al-Andalus
undoubtedly lay in the sphere of intellectual creativity. In this
region of southern Europe flourished a galaxy of great minds which
would influence the development of modern thought and liter춻
ature: poets such as Ibn Hazm, al-Mu'tamid and Ben Quzman;
mystics such as Ibn 'Arab!; thinkers such as Ibn Tufayl; geog춻
raphers such as al-Idrls칦; physicians such as Avenzoar; philosophers
such as Ibn Gabirol (Avicebron), Ibn Masarra, Ibn B칛jja (Avem-
pace) and, above all, Maimonides and Averro칢s.
Moses ben Maym칲n (Maimonides in Latinized form) and Ibn
Rushd (the Averro칢s of the Europeans) were both born in C칩rdoba
within a few years of one another. The former Jewish, the latter
Muslim, both writers in Arabic, they took the great tradition of
Classical Antiquity and transmitted it, enriched and modified, to
medieval Christendom. These two great Cordob치n philosophers
symbolize the cultural universalism of al-Andalus, a tradition
which made for the fruitful co-existence of cultural traditions that
sprang from the three great monotheistic religions, Islam, Judaism
and Christianity, in a spirit of tolerance which, despite religious
persecution as the period drew to an end, still stands as an example
and was almost unique in its time.
This issue of the Unesco Courier, devoted to these two great
figures of universal learning, is an attempt to throw light on a great
age of intellectual achievement, the age of classical Arab Muslim
thought, which deserves to be more widely known and understood.
Already last December, Unesco organized an international round
table to mark the 850th anniversary of Maimonides' birth. Part of
the November 1986 issue of the magazine will be devoted to
another major figure in this tradition: al-Ghaz칛ll, the Algacel of the
Latins. In conclusion, it should be recalled that the authors, of all
shades of opinion, to whom we have given space in this issue,
express their own point of view which is not necessarily that of
Unesco or of the editorial staff.
Cover: above, Averro칢s, detail of The Triumph of St. Thomas Aquinas,
(see page 16); below, Maimonides, detail of his statue in C칩rdoba (see
page 4).
Photo 춸 Scala, Florence
Photo 춸 Diodoro Urquia, Salduero, Soria, Spain. Taken from Mois칠s ben Maim칩n "Maimonides"
1135-1204, an audiovisual montage by Diodoro Urquia, Ministry of External Affairs, Madrid
Editor-in-chief: Edouard Glissant
September 1986
39th year
"Y
"I^Ei I
TBE^-=r
c^rm
A \Jc
South-west fa칞ade of the Great Mosque, C칩rdoba.
4 Maimonides, a guide for the perplexed
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
6 Averro칢s and Maimonides, philosophers of al-Andalus
by Miguel Cruz Hern치ndez
14 Two mediators of medieval thought
by Mohammed Arkoun
18 A miniature anthology of Maimonides and Averro칢s
21 A voice that speaks across the centuries
by Shalom Rosenberg
24 Averro칢s, reason and tolerance
by Mohammed Allai Sinaceur
25 Ibn Rushd and the Islamic philosophical tradition
by Artur V. Sagadeev
29 Maimonides the humanist
by Angel S치enz-Badillos
32 The prophet, the scholar and the statesman
by Roland Goetschel
34 1986: International Year of Peace/ 9
2 A time to live...
SPAIN: The water tribunal
Published monthly in 32 languages
by Unesco
The United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization -
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris.
English Italian Macedonian Turkish Finnish A selection in Braille is published
French Hindi Serbo-Croat Urdu Swedish quarterly in English, French,
Spanish Tamil Slovene Catalan Basque Spanish and Korean
Russian Hebrew Chinese Malaysian Thai
German
Arabic
Japanese
Persian
Dutch
Portugu칠s
Bulgarian
Greek
e Sinhala
Korean
Swahili
Croato-Serb
ISSN 0041-5278
N춿 9 - 1986 - CPD - 86 - 1 - 437 A
## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=4) 游
### 70432: Maimonides, a guide for the perplexed
Maimonides,
a guide for the perplexed
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
In December 1985 Unesco organizedat its Paris Headquarters an international symposium to mark the 850th anniversary
ofthe birth in C칩rdoba ofthe great Jewish thinker Moses ben Mayrnun (Maimonides) . We publish below salientpassages
from an address given on this occasion by Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, Director-General of Unesco. At another
symposium held at Unesco Headquarters last December, the life and work ofthe Islamicphilosopher al-Ghaz칛li (Algacel)
were also commemorated. Extracts from the address given by Mr. M'Bow during the al-Ghaz칛li symposium will be
published in the November issue of the Unesco Courier.
MAIMONIDES was at one and the
same time one of the greatest
exponents of Jewish law, one of
the authorities of medieval philosophy of
Greek inspiration and one of the main con춻
tributors to the extraordinary blossoming of
philosophic and scientific thinking which
occurred in the Arab world in the eleventh
and twelfth centuries.
The Maimonides of The Guide of the Per춻
plexed is a thinker at the height of his
powers who brings together into a meaning춻
ful whole Arab science, Greek philosophy
and Jewish theology. In a letter to Samuel
ibn Tibbon, who in France was embarking
on the Hebrew translation of his work,
Maimonides wrote as follows:
"Take good care to study the works of
Aristotle only with the help of his com춻
mentators Alexander of Aphrodisias,
Themistus or Averro칢s. The writings of
Aristotle's master, Plato, are parables and
difficult to understand, and there is no need
for recourse to them, as Aristotle's work is
sufficient; nor, is it necessary to concern
oneself with works written by his pre춻
decessors, for his intellect represents the
acme of the human intellect, with the excep춻
tion of those who have received divine
inspiration. ... As for logic, it is necessary to
study only the works of Al-F칛r칛bl. All his
writings are excellent. ... as are those of Ibn
B칛jja."
It would be a mistake, however, to see in
the approach adopted by Maimonides an
exclusively philosophical orientation. He
considered philosophy, including, be it
said, the science of his time, as an essential
preliminary to defining the ideal society and
to pondering such fundamental questions
as: Where do I come from? Where am I
going? What meaning can be attributed to
the order of the world? What can be known
about its creation?
In Maimonides' view the elucidation of-
these questions should be the goal of all
intellectual striving. In his own words: "...
that perfection in which man can truly take
pride lies in his having acquired, in a degree
commensurate with his capacity, knowl춻
edge of God."
Maimonides was in fact addressing the
undecided, the "perplexed" throughout the
ages who are already virtuous in their
religion and conduct, who are already con춻
versant with the philosophical sciences-and
who are already inclined to exercise human
reason and to apply it as widely as possible
but who are nevertheless troubled in their
minds, for they are unable to reconcile the
JQK
<
춸
## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=5) 游
### 70432: Maimonides, a guide for the perplexed
findings of science and philosophy with the
literal meaning of the Scriptures. The per춻
plexed are, in sum, those who know that
discursive reason cannot fully account for
the mysteries of human existence and who,
at the same time, do not intend to forgo the
inexhaustible resources of reason.
Logic and mathematics are tools that help
the human mind to exercise its faculty of
demonstration. But can demonstrative dis춻
course exhaust all our questions? Clearly
not, in Maimonides' view. He did not claim,
any more than did his contemporary Ibn
Rushd, that faith in reason exhausts the
reasons for faith, even though some theo춻
logians criticized both men for having
unduly magnified the power of reason.
Concerning the limits of demonstrative
science and, concomitantly, the meaning to
be assigned to the interpretation of the
Scriptures, one example among others
throws light on the approach adopted by
Maimonides. Aristotle is known to have
distinguished the world of living, corrupt춻
ible beings the "sublunar world" from
the world of the heavenly spheres, actu춻
ated, so he felt, by a necessary being from
Statues commemorate Maimonides and
Averro칢s in their native city of C칩rdoba.
Far left, bronze statue of Maimonides by
Amadeo Ruiz Olmos stands on Plaza
Tiberiades in the old Jewish quarter of the
city. Left, white marble statue of Averro칢s
near the city walls and the Alc치zar gar춻
dens.
Below, map showing the extent of Islamic
domination in the Mediterranean basin
around the middle of the 11th century.
Also shown are cities connected with the
lives of Maimonides and Averro칢s.
time immemorial. Down the centuries,
many theologians of the three revealed
religions have set in opposition to this con춻
ception that of the creation of the entire
world by a free act of divine will. They
defied the philosophers to account for the
doubts concealed by Aristotle's system.
Al-Ghaz칛ll's famous critique of the "phil춻
osophers" is an example of this attitude.
What does Maimonides say? "All that
Aristotle has said regarding that which
exists beneath the sphere of the moon all
the way down to the centre of the earth is
undoubtedly true and no one can claim
otherwise, save him who has not under춻
stood. ... However, concerning that which
lies above the sphere of the moon, what
Aristotle has to say seems little more
than conjecture."
As regards the limits of Aristotelian sci춻
ence i.e., in his time, science tout court
Maimonides adds: "As for all that is in the
heavens, man knows nothing except this
small portion of mathematics. ... I would
say, borrowing from poetry: 'the heavens
belong to the Lord; but He has given the
earth to the sons of Adam. ..'. As for what is
beneath the heavens, he has given man the
ability to know it, for it is Man's world and
his abode, where he has been placed and of
which he forms a part...".
Maimonides does not, however, dismiss
out of hand a possible science or knowledge
of the heavens. He repeats that he is per춻
fectly willing to hear a demonstration on
this subject, if any such exists. In the mean춻
time, it is best to adopt an attitude which he
describes as follows: "... To weary men's
minds with what they cannot grasp, not
even possessing the wherewithal to do so,
would go against common sense and be a
kind of madness. Let us confine ourselves to
what is within our power; let us leave that
which cannot be grasped by reason to him
who has been visited by divine inspira춻
tion...".
He therefore introduces certain qualifica춻
tions into his interpretation of the Scrip춻
tures. When science has established a truth,
there is nothing to be gained by setting it in
opposition to the literal meaning of God's
word; preference should be given to the
allegorical meaning, the ta'wil of the Mus춻
lim theologians. However, the wisdom then
required is even greater than that of the
scientists although it should include it.
Of these men, who would need to be at
one and the same time scientists, lawgivers
and defenders of a religion both demanding
and enlightened, Maimonides draws a
poetic portrait at the end of his "Guide":
"Those who have understood the demon춻
stration of all that is demonstrable; who
have achieved certainty in metaphysical
matters, wherever this is possible; or who
have approached certainty, there where it
can only be approached; they are the ones
who 'have attained the innermost abode
where dwells the Lord'...".
Does not this description apply to Mai춻
monides himself, just as much as to the most
brilliant minds of the great epoch that was
his? And is it not because he attained such
heights that he was able to clarify the think춻
ing and guide the faith of so many who came
after him from the researchers of Islam, to
the commentators of the Mishna, from theo춻
logians of Christianity such as St. Thomas
Aquinas and Meister Eckhart to such mod춻
ern philosophers as Leibniz and Spinoza?
## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=6) 游
### 70436: Averro칢s and Maimonides, philosophers of al-Andalus
Averro칢s and Maimonides,
philosophers of al-Andalus
by Miguel Cruz Hern치ndez
CORDOB츼N society experienced an
authentic cultural renaissance in
the twelfth century. As excavations
have shown, the city had been an important
settlement since the days of the Phoeni춻
cians, as in antiquity the River Guadal춻
quivir was navigable as far as the Cordob치n
ford.
The extensive Roman city was remark춻
able for its beauty and the fame of some
of its families, such as that of Seneca.
But it was Islam that established C칩rdoba
as the capital of al-Andalus Muslim
Andalusia and as the court of the
Umayyad monarchy, making it the pearl of
춸
the western Arab world and the most
important, populous and wealthy city in
Europe until the twelfth century.
Its fertile valley and gardens, its rich soil
and the splendour of its palaces and
religious buildings, despite the vicissitudes
of war and other harsh strokes of fate, have
survived to the present day, as has the repu춻
tation of its people, famed for their knowl춻
edge and culture.
After the great fitna or civil war which
destroyed C칩rdoba at the downfall of the
Umayyad monarchy, the city was reduced
to the status of one more "petty kingdom"
of the Ban칲 'Abb칛d, the Lords of Seville.
But the Almoravids and the Almohads
made it once again the capital of al-Andalus
and filled it with new leading lights in art,
science and literature, until its conquest by
the Christians. The Crusaders, in turn, were
impressed by the city's grandeur, thanks to
which the Great Mosque has survived to
this day.
After the Islamic conquest the three great
monotheistic religions existed side by side
in C칩rdoba: the Jewish, Christian and Mus춻
lim faiths. Remarkable tolerance reigned
between 711 and 1085, apart from isolated
incidents and the persecution of Christians
in the time of 'Abd al-Rahm칛n II. During
the Almoravid period (1085-1146) there
was greater intolerance of Christians and
Jews, aggravated in the former case by the
support given by the Andalusian
Mozarabs1" to the aceifa (military expedi춻
tion) led by King Alfonso VII of Castile.
After the Almohad occupation, Jews and
Christians were obliced to leave the terri-
The splendour of the Umayyad caliphate
ofal-Andalus reached its artistic apogee in
the Great Mosque (today the cathedral) of
C칩rdoba. Begun In 786 AD by 'Abd al-
Rahm칛n I, "the Immigrant", an Umayyad
leader who escaped from 'Abb칛sid
Damascus and founded the emirate of
C칩rdoba, it was enlarged and enriched
over the centuries by his successors.
Opposite page, general view of C칩rdoba
with the old Jewish quarter and the Great
Mosque at centre and, In foreground, the
Roman bridge over the Guadalquivir. Left,
typical patio in the Jewish quarter, with
beyond the tower (formerly the minaret) of
the Great Mosque.
tory under their sway or to pretend, as did
the family of Maimonides, that they had
been converted to Islam.
Cultural co-existence was a very different
matter, although it worked to the advantage
of the dominant social group and was lim춻
ited to certain times and certain categories
of people. In the ruling classes, peaceful
co-existence was confined to kings, nobles
and scholars; where their subjects were con춻
cerned those who lived amicably side by
side were scholars, artists or craftworkers
working as architects, astronomers, ambas춻
sadors, landowners, mathematicians, doc춻
tors, philosophers, tax-collectors, transla춻
tors, etc. In fact throughout the Middle
Ages two major "established" cultures
existed in the Iberian peninsula: the Latin-
Christian and the Islamic. Judaism certainly
existed also, but Judaeo-Hebraic culture
was fundamentally centred on the syn춻
agogue. Far from diminishing its greatness,
this represents the greatest claim to glory of
the Jewish community. Having lost all real
political power since their exile to Babylon,
uprooted time and again from their lands,
the Jewish people not only preserved the
treasure of their faith and the testimony of
their customs, but made a home of their
countries of exile. No country seemed more
like a "second homeland" to them than
Sefarad, the name which they gave to the
Iberian peninsula. But this made it incum춻
bent on them to become integrated with the
prevailing social pattern, to use the lan춻
guage of their rulers and to assimilate the
knowledge and wisdom of other peo춻
ples in this case, to speak and write the
Arabic language and to master science and
philosophy as perfectly as Maimonides
did.
The importance of this great period of
cultural co-existence, which later (in the
second half of the twelfth century and in the
thirteenth century) bequeathed its benefits
to the medieval Christian world, is apparent
in the work of two outstanding men of
learning, both of whom were born in Cor춻
doba and wrote in Arabic: Averro칢s, a
Muslim, and Maimonides, a Jew.
1. Spanish Christians who lhed under Muslim rule,
while presen ing their religion and ecclesiastical organi춻
zation. Editor.
## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=7) 游
### 70436: Averro칢s and Maimonides, philosophers of al-Andalus
M*fc '0^<
## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=8) 游
### 70436: Averro칢s and Maimonides, philosophers of al-Andalus
Centre of political power and of cultural
and artistic development, the C칩rdoba of
the Umayyad caliphate was for centuries a
great focus of civilization. The caliphs
took pleasure in welcoming to their court
musicians, poets, architects and philo춻
sophers, who came sometimes from dis춻
tant countries, such as the great Persian
musician Ziry칛b. Above, a painting which
portrays this cultural splendour, by the
Spanish artist Dionisio Baixeras (1862-
1943), in the University of Barcelona.
Seville, the Roman Hispalis, was one of the
principal urban centres of the civilization
ofal-Andalus. Averro칢s, a jurist by profes-
Fundaci칩n Juan March. Taken from Andaluc칤a, Noguer publishers, Barcelona, 1980
sion, for a long time occupied the post of
q맋칦 or judge in the city. Below, detail of
the raisedaltarpiece ofSeville cathedral, a
representation in relief of the medieval
city; in background can be seen the cele춻
brated Giralda, the minaretof the vanished
mosque, today the tower of the Gothic
cathedral.
Averro칢s: a universal Andalusian. The
Ban칲 Rushd family can be traced back for
six or more generations. Averro칢s' grand춻
father (450-520 AH/1058-1126 AD) known
as Ab칲 l-Walld Muhammad b. Ahmad b.
Muhammad al-gidd, "the grandfather", to
distinguish him from his famous grandson,
was an outstanding jurist, chief q맋칦 (q칛di
al-gam칛') of C칩rdoba and adviser to the
Almoravid and Almohad rulers. Thanks to
his advice, the Mozarabs who lent their
assistance to the Christian aceifa of Alfonso
VII were only exiled, instead of being
executed according to custom. Several of
his works are still extant, including two
monumental legal encyclopaedias: The
Muqaddam칛t al mttmahhad칛t and the Kit칙b
al-Tahs칦l.
Averro칢s' father was called Abu 1-Q칛sim
Ahmad Ibn Rushd (487-564 AH/1094-1168
AD) and he too was a jurist and chief q칛di
of C칩rdoba. He took part in the educational
reform ordered by the Almohad rulers. His
son, Abu 1-Wal칦d Muhammad b. Ahmad b.
Muhammad al-haf칦d, "the grandson", to
distinguish him from his grandfather, was
born in C칩rdoba in 520 AH/1126 AD, and
in due course was to become the greatest of
the Islamic philosophers and the most uni춻
versal of those born in the Iberian penin춻
sula.
From a very early age Averro칢s studied
the Arab humanities, Islamic law, medicine
and philosophy. He was so industrious that,
according to his biographers, he rested only
twice in his lifetime: on the day of his
father's death and on his own wedding day.
8
## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=9) 游
### 70436: Averro칢s and Maimonides, philosophers of al-Andalus
The ig칛za or licentia docendi, the equivalent
of a lecturer's diploma today, was probably
awarded to him between 1141 and 1146, and
he must have married between 1146 and
1153.
Towards the end of 1168, Ibn Tufayl, the
author of the famous work Ris칙la Hayy ibn
Yaqz칛n ("The Improvement of Human
Reason"), introduced Averro칢s to the
Almohad sultan Ab칲 Ya'q칲b Y칲suf, to
whom he was vizier and personal physician.
The sultan reassured Averro칢s concerning
his dedication to philosophy and even urged
him to write a commentary on Aristotle.
The monarch's protection was very impor춻
tant, as acknowledged by Averro칢s in dedi춻
cating his "Commentary on Plato's
Republic" to his successor. In 565 AH/1169
AD he was appointed q칛dlof Seville, where
he performed his duties to the satisfaction
of the Sevillians, who showed their
approval by interceding on his behalf when
he fell from favour. In 578 AH/1182 AD
Averro칢s was appointed chief q칛di of Cor춻
doba and chief physician at the Almohad
court, positions in which he was confirmed
by the new sultan, Abu Y칲suf Ya'q칲b
al-Mans칲r, in 580 AH/1184 AD.
After the battle of Alarcos (18 June
1195), at which the Almohad army crushed
their Christian opponents, the intolerant
alfaquies and ulemas (doctors of law and
Islamic theologians) of C칩rdoba denounced
Averro칢s, with the result that his works
were banned and he was exiled to Lucena
for some twenty months. In 595 AH/1198
AD the sultan pardoned him, restored his
position at court and took him with his reti춻
nue to Marrakesh, perhaps in order to pro춻
tect him from his Andalusian enemies. On
Thursday 9 safar of the year 595 AH (10
December 1198), at the age of seventy-two,
Averro칢s died in that Moroccan city. His
body was transported three months later to
C칩rdoba and buried in the cemetery of the
Ban칲 'Abb칛d. The funeral must have been
a remarkable occasion, since the great mys춻
tic Ibn 'Arab! of Murcia tells us that he was
present; the mule which carried Averro칢s'
mortal remains was laden with the corpse
on one side and his books on the other as a
counterweight. Thanks to an extract from
the Kull칦y칙t, we are able to deduce that he
died of the complications of arthritis, from
which he had suffered since his youth fol춻
lowing an attack of rheumatic fever which
had not been properly treated when he was
a child.
Averro칢s is thought to have had more
than five children. We know the names of
only two of them: Ab칲 Muhammad 'Abd
Allah ibn Rushd, a doctor, philosopher and
q맋칦, like his father; and Abu al-Q칛sim
Muhammad ibn Rushd, who died in 612
AH/1215 AD and who also held the post of
q맋칦. The names of the other sons are lost,
Because ofhis unorthodox ideas, towards
the end of his life Averro칢s was exiled to
Lucena, to the south ofC칩rdoba. The fami춻
ly of Maimonides also was linked with this
town, with its strong Jewish roots. Right,
arcades of the old synagogue, now the
church of Saint James.
but we know that they also held the position
of q칛di in al-Andalus. Of his grandchildren
we have information about only one, Abu
l-'Abb칙s Yahy칛 b. Q칛sim ibn Rushd, who
was likewise a judge.
The writings of Averro칢s form an impres춻
sive corpus. As many as 127 works are
attributed to him, but he cannot have writ춻
ten more than 84; of these 55 are still fully
extant and parts of another eight have been
preserved. These works constitute a com춻
plete scientific, legal, medical, philosophi춻
cal and theoretical encyclopaedia. In accor춻
dance with a convention of medieval
scholarship, part of these works consists of
an exegesis of the body of doctrine inherited
from Antiquity (the Corpus aristotelicum in
philosophy, the Corpus galenicum in medi춻
cine, etc.). For this reason, the Christian
Schoolmen claimed that Averro칢s had writ춻
ten three types of commentaries on Aristo춻
tle (whereas in reality they are three exposi춻
tions of his philosophy), and called him
"The Commentator".
Besides such expositions of Aristotle,
Plato, Euclid and Galen, Averro칢s also
wrote many works from a more personal
approach, such as the Kit칙b al-Kull칦y칙t
("Book of the General Principles of Medi춻
cine"); the great legal encyclopaedia Kit칙b
al-Bid칛ya; the famous defence of philoso춻
phy against more traditional theologians,
Tah칛fut al-Tah칛fut ("The Incoherence of
the Incoherence"), which was an attack on
The Incoherence of the Philosophers by
al-Ghaz칛li; and the theological works Fasl
al-Maq칛l ("Decisive Treatise on the Har춻
mony of Religion and Philosophy"); and
Kashf 'an man칛hij (on the interpretation of
the revealed Scriptures).
Beneath the scholastic appearance typi춻
cal of the forms and method of medieval
scholarship lurks the distinction between
scientific and philosophical knowledge on
the one hand, and theology on the other,
together with the idea of human wisdom as
something which can exist independently,
and even the concept of an altogether secu춻
lar society. It is not surprising that when
Averro칢s' ideas were encountered by the
medieval Christians they caused real intel춻
lectual turmoil, and he was branded as an
atheist and a blasphemer.
At the same time, his writings on the
natural world and medicine contain numer춻
ous empirical observations concerning
astronomy, earthquakes, the growth of
plants, the meat and wool of sheep, and
even the food eaten in his time, for which he
gives some recipes for rehogo (a sim춻
mered meat dish), for humble fried eggs,
for a dish of aubergines and for barley
water, which are still typical of Spanish
cooking.
Averro칢s' great human qualities were
augmented by a strong affection for his
native C칩rdoba, which he regarded as the
most beautiful of places, and for his com춻
patriots, whom he held to be the most intel춻
ligent people of their time. By contrast, he
wrote with particular severity against
tyrants of all periods, especially his own.
"There is nothing worse than to be a
tyrant," he repeatedly wrote, and in his
social theory lie gave prominence to the
analysis of the well-known dialogue
## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=10) 游
### 70436: Averro칢s and Maimonides, philosophers of al-Andalus
between master and slave, of Platonic
origin, which Hegel was to make famous.
He was the first, and perhaps the only,
medieval thinker to criticize the status of
women in society, which "turned them into
cabbages" since it was impossible for them
to achieve complete personal and social
fulfilment. In his model society, the neces춻
sary order would come into being freely,
there would be no distinction between
"mine and thine", and no-one would be
treated as an outcast from the community of
all human beings.
Maimonides, "the Andalusian", the uni춻
versalJew. Averro칢s' twenty-month exile to
Lucena, a Cordob치n town famous in the
past for its distinguished Jewish com춻
munity, gave rise to the legend that he and
Maimonides knew one another. Unfor춻
tunately this was not the case. The family of
Moses ben Maym칲n, who was known as
Maimonides and also as "Rambam" (an
anagram of Rabbi Moses ben Maym칲n),
had long been living in C칩rdoba. But when
Averro칢s arrived in Lucena, Maimonides
had been living in Cairo for thirty years.
The Ban칲 Maym칲n held two unshake-
able convictions: that they were descended
from the line of King David and that they
had Andalusian roots. They were estab춻
lished in C칩rdoba, well known and
respected by the Cordob치n Jewish com춻
munity. Rabbi Isaac ben Maym칲n, father of
Maimonides, begat him in that city where,
according to tradition, he was born in the
siesta hour on Saturday 14 nis치n of the year
4896 of the Jewish calendar (30 March 1 135).
There he received instruction in the Arab and
Hebrew humanities and in the religion of
Abraham and Moses. But in 542 AH/1147
AD, as the Almohad army was marching
towards C칩rdoba, Rabbi Isaac and his fam춻
ily, including his two sons David and Moses,
left the city and took refuge in Granada,
where they lived until 1150. Their next
move was to Almer칤a, where Moses ben
Maym칲n continued his education. But
when this city in its turn was menaced by the
Almoravids, Rabbi Isaac and his family
were obliged to leave it, at the beginning of
1160. They settled in Fez, where they had
outwardly to dissemble {'am칱s칥m) the faith
of Abraham and Moses, although in private
they strictly adhered to it. In Almer칤a and
Fez, Maimonides finished his scientific,
In the year 1198 AD, Averro칢s, hisposition
restored at the Almohad court in C칩rdoba,
accompanied the sultan to Marrakesh,
where he died on the 10th of December
that same year. His body was taken back
and buried in C칩rdoba, his native city.
Above, the Place Djemaa El-Fna and its
famous market in Marrakesh.
The Moroccan city ofFez was an important
stage in the long, forced wanderings of
Maimonides and his family. During five
years there he completed his scientific
andphilosophical education and began to
write his books. Right, this old blocked-up
window in Maimonides' family house at
Fez was perhaps that of his study. Still
preserved in the fa칞ade are eight of the
twelve bronze bowls which embellished it
in the 12th century, which were apparently
used by the philosopher scientist for his
solar astronomical calculations. Above
right, library of the al-Qarawiyym mosque
(859 AD), the oldest and most important in
the city.
10
## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=11) 游
### 70436: Averro칢s and Maimonides, philosophers of al-Andalus
if
*~
UJ
O C '
il
CO o
춸 8춰
0. D
O o
o S
춲 j=
0. Ol
*
nvyt r
w .*
s : 'P
I
H i1
췉MU
-츿
Il 1
/x : ' 췉w
-> ^l^H BT
rt,3 4I HT-
' BW/
cr:
^~춲춲x춲A
11
## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=12) 游
### 70436: Averro칢s and Maimonides, philosophers of al-Andalus
philosophical and theological training, and
it was in Fez that he began to write the first
of his books.
Still fearing for their safety, Rabbi Isaac
and his family decided to emigrate to the
East, and on Saturday 4 iyar of the year
4927 (18 April 1165) they took ship for Pal춻
estine, reaching Akko (St. Jean d'Acre) on
3jiv치n (16 May) after a stormy voyage dur춻
ing which they almost lost their lives. They
spent six months in Akko, then visited
Jerusalem and Hebron in order to pray in
the ruins of the temple and at the tomb of
the patriarchs. According to tradition,
there were only four Jewish families living
in Jerusalem; the city was in ruins, to which
Maimonides seems to have been referring
when he said that such ruination was
brought about by men and their strife:
"May God give me strength in everything I
do and help me to keep my promises, and
may that for which I prayed, there in the
ruins, be granted to me, and may all Israel
soon see the Holy Land restored and res춻
cued from its decline."
The family of Rabbi Isaac left for Egypt,
where they lived for a time in Alexandria.
Maimonides was then thirty-one, and sor춻
row came to him again with the death of his
father, which raised the problem of his own
livelihood. Grief at his father's death was
eased by the countless testimonies of
respect which he received, even from lands
far distant from Egypt. The problem of
keeping body and soul together was solved
by his younger brother David, who used the
money inherited from his father to set him춻
self up as a merchant trading in precious
stones. It may have been the intransigence
of the Jewish "literalists" of Alexandria
which compelled Maimonides to leave that
city and travel to Fostat, or Old Cairo,
where he completed his great commentary
on the Mishna, in 1168.
But misfortune again befell Maimonides
with the death of his brother David, to
whom he had always been very close and
whom he would remember all his life, and
that of his wife which occurred shortly after춻
wards. Thus he was faced with the problem
of earning a living. Since he did not wish to
be a burden on the community, he decided
to support himself by working as a doctor.
He communicated this plan to al-F칛dil,
vizier and royal secretary to the famous Sal-
adin (Sal칙h al-DIn), who appointed him
Court Physician, a position which added
lustre to his reputation. It may have been
around this time that Maimonides married
again, this time a sister of another royal
secretary, al-M칙t칦, who himself married one
of Maimonides' sisters, with whom he had a
son called Ibrahim.
In 1177 Maimonides was appointed nag-
gib (ruler) of the Jewish community, which
meant personal recognition within that
community but was also an honour
bestowed by Saladin on the Jews, since the
post had been vacant for several years
owing to the irregular conduct of the last
incumbent. Maimonides never allowed the
Jews to call him by the title of naggib, but
the Arabs, undeterred by such modesty,
repeatedly mentioned his title when writing
of him. In carrying out his official duties,
Maimonides distinguished himself by his
integrity and his liberal attitudes. Despite
these heavy responsibilities and his unre춻
mitting work as a doctor, in 1180 he suc춻
ceeded in completing the Mishne Torah
("The Torah Reviewed"), begun twelve
years previously.
Maimonides' biographers describe his
long working day. He would rise at first
light and ride on horseback to the court,
which in those days was in Cairo, several
kilometres north of Fostat. He lectured on
philosophy and medicine and attended to
his patients at court. In the early afternoon
he returned home, dealt with official mat춻
ters and treated his many other patients,
most of whom were poor and needy. More
In 1165 Maimonides and his family took
ship at Ceuta for Palestine. After dis춻
embarking at St. Jean d'Acre, where they
stayed for a time, they visited Jerusalem
and other holy places of Judaism. Later
they left for Egypt, settling in Fostat (Old
Cairo). Here Maimonides wrote the major
part of his work and held Important posts,
notably that of physician to Saladin and
his court. Opposite below, the Ben Ezra
synagogue at Fostat, near the site of
Maimonides' house, where he and his
family may have worshipped. This page,
the AI Azhar mosque, construction of
which was begun in 970 AD.
12
## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=13) 游
### 70436: Averro칢s and Maimonides, philosophers of al-Andalus
than once there were so many of them, and
so great was his fatigue, that he was obliged
to lie down on his bed to conduct his medi춻
cal consultations.
Yet it was during this period of his life
(1185-1200) that he wrote the most univer춻
sal and grandiose of his works, The Guide of
the Perplexed (Dal칙lat al-hairin), written in
Arabic as were virtually all his books and all
his letters. During this period (in 1190) the
writings of Averro칢s reached Egypt, as
Maimonides himself testifies. He took the
view that the Cordob치n Muslim thinker
"interpreted Aristotle according to an
appropriate and reliable method". Never춻
theless, the Arab thinkers who really
influenced Maimonides were Mu'tazila,
al-F칙r칙b칥 and Avempace (Ibn B칙jja), and
possibly also the Andalusian Ibn Tufayl, in
view of the parallel approach adopted by
both philosophers in the introductions to
their most important works.
The fame of Maimonides, both for his
work and writings in the field of medicine
and for his Guide of the Perplexed, spread
throughout the Arab world and the Jewish
communities. In 1195, for example, a letter
arrived in Cairo from the Jewish community
of Lunel, in Provence, hailing his supreme
authority in rabbinics. It came at a time of
affliction, for Maimonides was ill and had
been the butt of accusations by the most
intransigent of his critics. But letters such as
this, and the high opinion of the sultan
al-Afdal, Saladin's elder son and successor,
brought him consolation for his mental and
physical sufferings. When the scholars of
Lunel received the copy of the Guide of the
Perplexed which they had requested, they
entrusted the Sephardic Jew Samuel ben
Tibbon with the task of translating it into
Hebrew. The task was an arduous one, but
on 30 November 1204 Samuel ben Tibbon
finished the translation, which in Hebrew
bore the title M칪r칟 Neb칱kh칥n. Samuel ben
Tibbon had hoped to deliver the translation
personally into Maimonides' hands, but
during the night of 20 tebet of the year 4965
(13 December 1204), Moses ben Maym칲n
departed this life. According to his wishes,
his body was taken to Tiberias (Israel),
where he was buried.
The written works of Maimonides are
very extensive, chief among them being the
many medical writings (some of which have
been published for the first time in recent
years), the scientific learning of which is
proof of considerable advances in the care
of the sick comparable to the practices of
those Averro칢s called the "new Andalusian
doctors", in other words those of the Ban칲
Zuhr (Latin Avenzoar) family. Also of
great importance are his Commentary on
the Mishna, the impressive Mishne Torah,
and, above all, The Guide of the Perplexed,
the greatest landmark in Jewish writing
since the Scriptures. Soon after Mai춻
monides' death it was being said in Jewish
communities that "between Moses and
Moses, there is no one to choose but
Moses"; in other words, Maimonides is the
second Moses of the Jewish people.
MIGUEL CRUZ HERNANDEZ, of Spain, is pro춻
fessor of Islamic thought at the Autonomous
University of Madrid and formerly taught at the
Universities of Granada and Salamanca. Among
his manypublished works are Historia del pensa춻
miento en el mundo isl치mico ("History of
Thought in the Islamic World". 1981), Historiadel
pensamiento en al-Andalus ("History of Thought
in al-Andalus", 1985). and the forthcoming Aver춻
ro칢s: Vida, obra, pensamiento e influencia
("Averro칠s: Ufe, Work. Thought and Influence").
In accordance with his wishes, the mortal
remains of Maimonides were transported
from Fostat to Tiberias (Israel) to be
buried. Below, epitaph in English and Heb춻
rew carved on his tomb, formerly unpro춻
tected, today covered by a small shelter. !
1 :
13
## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=14) 游
### 70437: Two mediators of medieval thought
Two mediators of medieval
thought
by Mohammed Arkoun
	 'ijlfl 췉췉lift * r ,^. .*!<** .:.-4
	,t췉iV.*.
- . ^JU.'j^i'l^-l-l- 	 ^ - -.
- .. 	
.<^ . j ~. . - . - mi - - wLi
-, _*췉-*-^췉'*-. . .,. 췉i_.
: - . . , ^- p	췉
-
M*<J| <fj춰qgW
	. <	ijji Wyu ..
	 .
Page from an Arabic manuscript of the
Great Commentary and Paraphrase on the
Posterior Analytics of Aristotle by Aver춻
ro칢s, copied In Maghrebi script by an
anonymous 13th century scribe. The
manuscript is now in the State Library,
West Berlin.
IBN Rushd (1126-1198) and M칲sa Ibn
Maym칲n( 1135-1204), more commonly
known in the West as Averro칢s and
Maimonides, dominated the twelfth cen춻
tury by the power of their thought, the vol춻
ume and the variety of their writings, their
intellectual commitment to the service of
their respective communities and, not least,
their wide influence in the Western
world.
Both were born in C칩rdoba, the brilliant
capital of what was then Muslim Andalusia,
into families of jurists (of q칙d칦s, for the
Muslim Averro칢s, of rabbis, for the Jewish
Maimonides). Both lived for a time in
Morocco Averro칢s at Marrakesh (where
he died in 1198), undcrthe patronage of the
Almohad ruler Ab칲 Ya'q칲b (1163-1184)
and of his successor Ya'q칲b al-Mans칲r
(1 184-1 199), and Maimonides at Fez, where
he took refuge in 1160. In 1165 Maimonides
was obliged to seek refuge again, this time
in Cairo, where he became head of the Jew춻
ish community and physician to al-F칙dil,
vizier of the Sultan Saladin, and where he
died in 1204, just six years after Averro칢s.
To be born into a family of magistrates
whose task it was to apply the standards of
religious law within a society totally subject
to the dogmas of revealed religions, to be
oneself a judge or doctor of religious law
and yet at the same time to devote one's
energies to the secular sciences grouped
together under the name of philosophy
this was the mark of a certain society and a
certain age. Confrontation between the
revealed religions and the Greek philosophi춻
cal tradition went back to Philo of Alex춻
andria and the Fathers of the Church. In the
Islamic context, it became more intense
from the third century of the Hegira (ninth
century AD). Maimonides claimed intellec춻
tual kinship with the Muslim philosopher
al-F칙r칙b칥 (878-950) and held the philos춻
opher-scientist Ibn SIn칙 (Avicenna, 980-
1037) in great respect, whilst expressing
some reservations on his teachings. He also
acknowledged his debt to Averro칢s who,
with his critical re-examination of four cen춻
turies of Arab Muslim research, endowed
the twelfth century with the most faithful
expression of Aristotelian philosophy.
It is in this historical context that the work
of these two mediators should be consid춻
ered. I call them "mediators" because they
did much to reconcile rational philosophy
with revealed religion and also because they
created a meta-theological language which
made possible enduring communication
between the three great religious commu춻
nities stemming from the same initial phe춻
nomenon of revelation yet irremediably
opposed and divided by mutually exclusive
theological systems.
Even today, Christians and Jews are
reluctant to admit an intellectual and
cultural debt to classical Arab Islamic
thought. Certain Jewish thinkers take this
reluctance so far as failing to mention that a
large number of Maimonides' works were
conceived and written in Arabic. Some
biographers maintain that Maimonides may
even have been converted to Islam; even if
such a conversion was forced, it throws
some light on the possibilities of cultural
communication and the differences of rites
and dogma between the religious commu춻
nities of the Middle Ages.
At all events, it is important to stress that
the works of these two sages are concerned
both with philosophy and religion. In exam춻
ining Aristotle's rationalism in depth in his
closely-argued commentaries, Averro칢s
created a new intellectual climate which
Maimonides, for the Jews, and St. Thomas
Aquinas, for the Catholics, took advantage
of to elaborate theological theories which
are not wholly outdated even today.
To the Neoplatonism of the "oriental"
philosophers, the dialectical weakness of
the Ash'arite school'" and the simplistic,
legalistic dogmatism of the jurists, Aver춻
ro칢s opposed the demonstrative (Analyti춻
cal) method, dialectical (Topical) reasoning
and persuasive (Rhetorical) argumenta춻
tion, the categories of logic (Organon)
which reflect Aristotle's philosophical prac춻
tice and approach. In this attempt at the
rationalization of knowledge Averro칢s does
not seem to have been aware of the contri춻
bution of the Mu'tazilites'2'. The teachings
of this important Islamic school, which, as
early as the second to the fourth century of
the Hegira (eighth to tenth century AD),
did so much to restore confidence in
rationalism, did not spread to the Muslim
West (Andalusia, the Maghreb) owing to
the opposition of the Malekite jurists'3'. It
was these same Malekites who succeeded in
obtaining the banishment of Averro칢s him춻
self towards the end of his life.
The political and social position of the
jurists (fiiqah칛s) was an abiding factor in the
history of the intellectual activity and
14
## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=15) 游
### 70437: Two mediators of medieval thought
Parchment manuscriptpage of the second
part of Maimonides' Guide of the Per춻
plexed, in the Hebrew translation com춻
pleted by Samuel ben Tibbon, a Jew from
Provence, in the lifetime of the author.
Maimonides, in a letter to his coreligionist,
advised him on the best way to translate.
This manuscript 춰s earlier than 1356 AD,
the date when it is known that the manu춻
script was used as security for a loan
(perhaps in the Spanish town of Huesca).
The title of the work here stands out
against a floral background, with an ani춻
mal motif on the lower part of the page.
religious thought of the Muslim West.
Strong ideological pressure had everywhere
established the teachings of the Malekite
school as the exclusive expression of Islam.
With the fall of the Caliphate of C칩rdoba
(1031), the break-up of Muslim Spain into
petty kingdoms and the growing pressure of
the Christian reconquest, the Reconquista,
Islam fostered an ideology of combat
(jih칛d) so as to mobilize its forces; this gave
added importance to the role of the jurists
and, even more, of the popular preachers.
Thus, rather than deplore the fanaticism
of the Almoravids and the Almohads, the
historian would do better to examine the
social and ideological context of intellectual
activity in the Muslim West.
The difficulties Averro칢s encountered
and the conversion of Maimonides,
whether feigned or sincere, are indicative of
the general climate of the time and also,
going beyond the specific situation in
Andalusia, of the tension between the
"rational" or "intrusive" sciences ('aqliyya-
dakh칦la) and the "religious" or "traditional"
sciences (d칱n칦yya-naql칦yya) throughout
Islam. The struggle between the Mu'taz춻
ilites and the Hanbalites14' in Baghdad in the
third century of the Hegira/ninth century
AD reflected both a socio-cultural split and
a philosophical difference regarding the
faculties, the paths and the seats of
knowledge.
Ghaz칙l칦'5췉 (1058-1111 AD) had added a
speculative dimension to the argument
which, nearly a century later, captured the
attention of Averro칢s. In his lhy칙 'Ulum
al-din ("The Revival of the Religious Sci춻
ences"), Ghaz칙l칦 inveighed against the stul춻
tifying literalism of the jurists, the gnostic
constructs of the esotericists (al-B칛tiniyya)
and the heretical deviations of the philos춻
ophers (fal칙sifa) all this in the name of a
spiritual religion open to rational knowl춻
edge but nevertheless with the strict limita춻
tion that the body of revealed knowledge
was not susceptible to critical investiga춻
tion.
Averro칢s chose to contest the views of
Ghaz칙l칦 as a means of furthering philosophi춻
cally (today we would say scientifically) the
crucial debate on the relationship between
philosophy and religion. In his Fasl
al-maq칙l f칦m칙 bayn al sharVa wal-hikma
min alittis칛l ("Decisive Treatise on the Har춻
mony of Religion and Philosophy") Aver춻
ro칢s replied to Ghaz칙l칥's Faysal al-tafriqa
o
CD
춸
>칲췉oSi츿^r 칯 if A3-*7i'D>wtu쯡**'3 t** r쯜^ysv췉 *
^srr&nvm-A'&ri'칯f. ?Mew췉 춺a
iiti:i -rOr 칯 frysi-iay^ ^^awap*' 췉pt**w3-*r
-칞rr\r<" BT" "칬J* '^*J
-쯥vV-^v3 irr**춺*'' w^v-m
rf *췉M ^-O
^ m
춸
Page from a paper manuscript of Mai춻
monides' Mishne Torah ("The Torah Re춻
viewed"), at the bottom of which can be
read this phrase In his own hand: "Fair
copy of my book made by myself, Moses,
son of Rabbi Maym칲n blessed be the
memory of this just man." This is the old춻
est known signature of Maimonides. The
Mishne Torah, Maimonides' major rabbi춻
nical work, is a vast and detailed codifica춻
tion, with an Aristotelian philosophical
base, of all the laws and rules characteriz춻
ing post-Biblical Judaism. It is the only
one of his master works that he wrote in
Hebrew.
15
## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=16) 游
### 70437: Two mediators of medieval thought
"In examining Aristotle's rationalism in
depth in his closely-argued commentar춻
ies, Averro칢s created a new intellectual
climate which Maimonides, for the Jews,
and St. Thomas Aquinas, for the Catholics,
took advantage of to elaborate their theo춻
logical theories" (M. Arkoun). Mediator in
the fullest sense of the word, Ibn Rushd
made possible the attempt to reconcile
rational philosophy and revealed faith
which would characterize all Western
scholasticism, in particular that of St. Tho춻
mas Aquinas. Thus he exerted a consider춻
able influence on European philosophy of
the Middle Ages and succeeding centur춻
ies, even though the novelty and audacity
of his ideas often shocked the defenders
of Christian, as well as Islamic, tradition.
Below, A vermes is depicted at right in this
detail of The Triumph of St. Thomas
Aquinas, fresco by the 15th century Italian
painter Andrea de Firenze, in the "Spanish
Chapel" of the Church of Santa Maria
Novella, Florence. Part of this portrait of
the philosopher is reproduced on the front
cover of this issue.
^ bayn al-isl칙m wal zandaqa ("Distinction
Between Islam and Impiety"); and in Taha춻
fut al-tah칛fut ("The Incoherence of the
Incoherence") he also refuted another work
of Ghaz칙l칦 entitled Tah칙fut 맓fal칙sifa ("The
Incoherence of the Philosophers"). In more
general terms he exposed the weaknesses of
the methodology of the theologians (the
Mutakalliiiu'tn) in his Kashf 'an man칙hij
al-adilla ("Examination of the Methods of
Proof Concerning the Doctrines of
Religion"), as well as writing an important
treatise on the basic sources of law (Bid칛yat
al-Mujtahid).
All these works go to show how deeply
Averro칢s wanted to remain a Muslim
thinker and, with all his philosophical cul춻
ture (the scientific knowledge of his age), to
face up intellectually to all the problems
arising from the confrontation between the
Qur'anic revelation and the strictest philo춻
sophical standpoint. Latin commentators,
and later the French writer Ernest Renan,
distorted Averro칢s' thought by thinking of
him only in terms of his commentaries on
Aristotle. For their part, Muslims so dis춻
trusted him as a philosopher that they for춻
got that he was also a Muslim thinker.
Maimonides, for the Jews, and St.
Thomas Aquinas, for the Christians (the
Catholic Church of pre-Reformation days),
adopted Averro칢s' intellectual scheme for
the purposes of their own communities,
using the same philosophical approach, the
same conceptual guidelines and methodol춻
ogy to systematize the received corpus of
revealed knowledge of their different tradi춻
tions. For all three revealed religions the
great problem remained the harmonization
of faith and reason, the reconciliation of
religious law and the essential tenets or uni춻
versal of religion with Aristotle's logical
processes and categories. The Torah,
Canon Law and the Shari'a, which express
God's commandments as interpreted by
learned experts in the Law trained in the
exegesis of the Word of God, retain their
supremacy. The difficulties that arise are
not concerned with the norms thus deduced
from the revealed word, but with the dogma
on which the Law itself is based. Three
essential points are at the heart of the con춻
frontation with philosophy: the creation of
the world, causality, and the destiny of the
soul (immortality and the body/soul
duality).
This is not the place to enter into the
subtle discussions of these questions, which
modern science has shifted towards new
fields of research; of greater interest, it
seems to me, is to examine to what extent
Averro칢s and Maimonides were, and
remain today, mediators between three
communities and three historic destinies.
## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=17) 游
### 70437: Two mediators of medieval thought
Thought and culture as expressed in Ara춻
bic reached full flower in the sixth century
of the Hegira/twelfth century AD thanks to
the great works written in the East and the
Muslim West from the second century of
the Hegira/eighth century AD onwards.
The intellectual and scientific supremacy of
the Arab world of that time is confirmed by
the many translations into Hebrew and
Latin of studies on philosophy, medicine
and the natural sciences written in Arabic
by authors not all of whom were Muslims.
Jews and Christians who lived in an Arab
cultural setting thought and wrote in Ara춻
bic, thus enriching a body of knowledge and
a range of intellectual activity that went
beyond the limits set by the creeds of each
of the three communities. Maimonides
ranks among the greatest Jewish thinkers
who conceived and wrote their works in
Arabic in that area of intellectual and
cultural convergence of which philosophy,
as understood and practised in the Middle
Ages, was largely representative.
His works were, however, very soon
translated into Hebrew. As early as 1204
AD, his Guide of the Perplexed had been
translated by Samuel ibn Tibbon, and this
led the Jews to forget the cultural values and
intellectual climate in which Maimonides
had lived, worked and written. Today, the
ideological tensions between Arabs and
Israelis is such that many Jews are unwilling
to take into account the great thinker's deep
links with the corpus of learned writing in
Arabic. Yet it was precisely the existence of
these links that made even more precious
Maimonides' historic role as a mediator.
The same could be said of St. Thomas
Aquinas, even though he wrote all his
works in Latin. His intellectual debt to
Averro칢s in particular marks him out also as
a leading light of a world of thought and
human existence based on an axiological
system common to that medieval intellec춻
tual milieu that I have elsewhere^6' referred
to as the "Societies of the Book". I call
"Societies of the Book" all those commu춻
nities whose existence, order and culture
are based on the phenomenon of Revela춻
tion (a unique living God, revealing himself
to men at a moment in history so as to
communicate to them his commandments
which then become the source of the Law)
and on a philosophical culture which
favours the search for a rational order of
things. These two great lines of approach
Revelation and scientific and philosophical
rationality imposed an educative tension
on all medieval thought, whatever its par춻
ticular religious attachment, in which at
times religion and the "orthodox" tradition,
at times reason, held sway. The whole of
medieval thought bore the mark of this
duality. The question remained: how could
revealed knowledge be reconciled and
brought into harmony with the necessary
constraints of reason?
Both Averro칢s and Maimonides suc춻
ceeded in achieving a real, personally satis춻
fying balance which they attempted to
express in elaborately thought out systems
in which they integrated rational knowledge
(philosophy) and religious Law, the Shari'a
with all its developments and the Torah and
the whole rabbinical tradition Mai-
V" A ^ inapt < k
wV ,-xq m |t칩
*치췉 Jfcv
hi r>: -v
nr -.y;;. ..... . ->. -.
&Y
1: 춺 :^
a
춸
monides' Mishne Torah ("The Torah
Reviewed"), was a systematization of the
oral Law, Mishna, and the Talmud.
Rationalist commentators on the two
thinkers have attempted to claim them both
as supporters of "pure" reason and a phil춻
osophy which, if not entirely secular, was at
least distinct from religious ideas.
However, the functions they fulfilled as
judges in their respective religious commu춻
nities have to be disregarded and their writ춻
ings concerning the "religious sciences" of
their time have to be ignored, if they are to
be considered as "philosophers in dis춻
guise".
Like all the sages of his time, Maimonides
had a lofty view of his responsibility as an
intellectual capable of explaining to the
faithful the teachings of religious Law whilst
taking into account the fact that men had
not all attained the same level of learning.
In Book III of The Guide of the Perplexed,
with the aid of a rich parable, he explains
clearly the various stages and levels in any
true search for God. I quote this entire pas-
Another page from a parchment manu춻
script of Samuel ben Tibbon's Hebrew
translation of the Guide of the Perplexed. It
was copied in Barcelona in 1348 AD by
Levi ben Ishaq Fijo Caro (son of Caro), of
Salamanca, for the physician R. Menahem
Besalel, and illuminated shortly after춻
wards in the Catalan Gothic style, prob춻
ably by a Christian artist. The miniature
shows an astronomer with an astrolabe in
his hands speaking to his pupils. Accord춻
ing to one specialist, it depicts Aristotle
explaining the creation of the world.
sage, since it has not been contradicted by
Muslim thinkers and because it affords an
example of that climate of intellectual, spiri춻
tual and cultural convergence in which the
brightest Jewish, Christian and Muslim
minds were active under the double im춻
pulsion of Revelation and a philosophical
culture.
"I will begin the subject of this chapter
with a simile. A king is in his palace, and all
his subjects are partly in the country, and
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17
## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=18) 游
### 70444: Maimonides, Averro칢s: a miniature anthology
MAIMONIDES
Maimonides tells how he spends his working
day at Cairo
I live at Fostat whereas the king resides in
Cairo; the two towns are two sabbatical
days apart [each equivalent to a league]. My
obligations towards the king are very time
consuming. I must pay him a visit each
morning; when he is not well, or if his chil춻
dren and his wives fall ill, I dare not nor춻
mally go far from Cairo, being constrained
to stay at the palace almost all day. It is also
usual for me to have to look after one or
another of his officials. Thus, I go to Cairo
every day at dawn and do not return to
Fostat, even if something unexpected does
not arise which forces me to stay in Cairo,
until the early hours of the afternoon at
best, racked by hunger.
I find the waiting rooms of my home full
of people: Jews and Gentiles, dignitaries
and ordinary people, judges and officials,
friends and enemies, a whole multitude who
are impatiently waiting for me. I get down
from my mount, wash my hands and go into
the antechamber, praying to God that they
will not be impatient while I quickly take a
light refreshment: the sole meal worthy of
the name which I have throughout the day.
Then I receive them, I write prescriptions
and advise them on the treatment corre춻
sponding to their ailments, and the people
do not cease coming in and going out of the
house until dusk, indeed until two hours
after nightfall, I swear on the Law, and it
may be that I have eaten or drunk nothing.
When it is pitch dark, I am so weary that I go
to bed without even having been able to say
goodnight.
Only on Saturdays can I speak in private
with a Jew, or meditate alone. Then, the
whole community or at least a substantial
number of its members, gathers in my house
after the morning religious service; so I
advise them on the best thing to do the
following week, and we meditate together
for a while until noon, the hour at which
they leave. Some of them come back [in the
afternoon] to study with me until the eve춻
ning prayer. Thus I pass my days.
Letter to Samuel ben Tibbon, September 1199
Photo 춸 Diodoro Urqu칤a, Salduero, Soria, Spain
Man is naturally a social being
It has already been fully explained that
man is naturally a social being, that by vir춻
tue of his nature he seeks to form commu춻
nities; man is therefore different from other
living beings that are not compelled to com춻
bine into communities. He is, as you know,
the highest form in the creation, and he
therefore includes the largest number of
constituent elements; this is the reason why
the human race contains such a great variety
of individuals, that we cannot discover two
persons exactly alike in any moral quality,
or in external appearance. The cause of this
is the variety in man's temperament . . . Such
a variety among the individuals of a class
does not exist in any other class of living
beings ; for the variety in any other species is.
limited; only man forms an exception; two
persons may be so different from each other
in every respect that they appear to belong
to two different classes. ... This great vari춻
ety and the necessity of social life are essen춻
tial elements in man's nature. But the well-
being of society demands that there should
be a leader able to regulate the actions of
man.
The Guide for the Perplexed, translated by
M. Friedl칛nder, Dover Publications, New York,
1956, Part II, Chapter XL, pp. 232-3
Ignorance is the cause of all evils
All the great evils which men cause to
each other because of certain intentions,
desires, opinions, or religious principles,
are likewise due to non-existence, because
they originate in ignorance, which is
absence of wisdom. ... In the same manner
various classes of men, each man in propor춻
tion to his ignorance, bring great evils upon
themselves and upon other individual mem춻
bers of the species. If men possessed
wisdom ... they would not cause any injury
to themselves or to others.
The Guidefor the Perplexed, idem, Part III,
Chapter XL, p. 267
Intellectual perfection is the highest level of
true human perfection
The ancient and the modern philosophers
have shown that man can acquire four kinds
of perfection. The first kind, the lowest, in
the acquisition of which people spend their
days, is perfection as regards property; the
possession of money, garments, furniture,
servants, land and the like; ... The second
kind is more closely related to man's body
than the first. It includes the perfection of
the shape, constitution and form of man's
body; ... The third kind of perfection is
more closely connected with man himself
than the second perfection. It includes
moral perfection, the highest degree of
excellency in man's character. ... The
fourth kind of perfection is the true perfec춻
tion of man; the possession of the highest
intellectual faculties ... With this perfection
man has obtained his final object; it gives
him true human perfection; it remains to
him alone; it gives him immortality, and on
its account he is called man.
The Guide for the Perplexed, idem, Part III,
Chapter LIV, pp; 394-5
The difficulties encountered in writing "The
Commentary on the Mishna"
I have finished this work in accordance
with what I promised [when I began it],
praying fervently to the Ail-Powerful that
he should preserve me from error. But if
anyone were to discover some error in this
commentary or to know of some better
explanation, I will readily accept them, and
my only excuse will be that I have done my
best to apply myself much more than some춻
one who writes expecting a reward or who is
moved by self-interest. I have worked in
very difficult conditions, as heaven desired
that I live in exile and wandering from place
to place; thus I have been obliged to do this
work while I was travelling on land or sea.
Suffice it to recall that during all this period
other tasks also occupied my time, but I
prefer the former explanation, in order to
stimulate those who wish to criticize or gloss
over this commentary, and supply at the
same time [the reason] for the long process
of compiling this work. I, Moses ben May춻
m칲n, began this work when I was twenty-
three years old, and I have finished it in
Egypt at the age of thirty-three, in the year
1479 of the Seleucid era (1168 AD).
The Commentary on the Mishna
18
## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=19) 游
### 70444: Maimonides, Averro칢s: a miniature anthology
A miniature
anthology
On the condition of women in medieval
Islamic society
And we say that women, in so far as they
are of one kind with men, necessarily share
in the end of man. They will differ only in
less or more ... If the nature of men and
women is of one kind, and the [nature] that
is of one kind [turns] to only one activity in
the city, then it is evident that the women in
this city will practice the [same] activities as
the men ... Similarly, too, since some
women are formed with eminence and a
praiseworthy disposition, it is not imposs춻
ible that there be philosophers and rulers
among them. . . . The competence of women
is unknown, however, in these cities since
they are only taken [in them] for procrea춻
tion and hence are placed at the service of
their husbands and confined to procreation,
upbringing, and suckling. Since women in
these cities are not prepared with respect to
any of the human virtues, they frequently
resemble plants in these cities. Their being a
burden upon the men [in these cities] is one
of the causes of the poverty of these cities.
This is because they are to be found there in
double the number of men, while not
understanding through [their] upbringing
any of the necessary actions except for the
few actions like the art of spinning and
weaving that they undertake mostly at a
time when they have need of them to make
up for their lack of spending [power].
Averro칢s on Plato's "Republic", translated
by Ralph Lerner 춸 Cornell University Press,
New York, 1974. The First Treatise, pp. 57-9
Necessity for social cohesion
Now there is no greater evil in the gov춻
ernance of the city than that governance
which converts a single city into many cities,
just as there is no greater good in cities than
that which joins them together and makes
them one. This being so, it is clear that
community in advantages and damages will
lead them to be bound to the city and
befriend it. ... That is why it is said that
people's being near other people is advan춻
tageous. In general, there is nothing more
productive of evil and confusion to the city
than its citizens saying of some particular
thing: "This is mine and this is not mine."
Averro칢s on Plato's "Republic", idem
The First Treatise, p. 64
Photo 춸 Scala, Florence
The psychology of sight
Sight has the property of capturing the col춻
ours of material reality, and so it must adapt
itself adequately to matter. Thanks to this
adequation, it can be abstracted by cogita춻
tion and understanding. ... The sense of
sight [also] receives the forms of objects in
the following manner: first, the air receives
the [sensible] forms by means of light, con춻
ducting them straight to the tissue; then, the
common sense receives the forms of the
objects. The tissue contains the vitreous
humour, which resembles a mirror the
nature of which is between air and water,
thanks to which it can capture the image
from the air, which functions [also] as a
mirror, and transmits it to the aqueous
humour which, through its very condition,
can communicate with the two natures. ...
From this the common sense receives the
forms which it transmits to the imaginative
faculty where their reception, totally
dematerialized, takes place. And so it is
said that the received form shows three
degrees: the first is the sensible [in the eye] ,
the second is dematerialized in the common
sense, and the third is immaterial in the
imaginative faculty. From these degrees,
one then passes to others, more elevated
and more noble [in the memory and in the
understanding].
Book of the General Principles of Medicine
The prime mover is devoid of movement and
eternal
If a prime mover exists, which precedes
all movements, whether temporally or
essentially, then that movement will take
place either in a generable and corruptible
moving body, or in an eternal moving body.
Thus [Aristotle] says that if it were a gener춻
able moving body, it would not be the prime
mover, either by nature or temporally,
because it cannot be asserted that the prime
mover is a form generated in a moving
body.
Treatise on Physics
The most elevated knowledge alone brings
happiness
Just as hunger and thirst are an emptying
of the body and an emptiness that befalls it,
so are ignorance and absence of knowledge
an emptying of the soul and an emptiness
for it. This being so, there are two people
who are filled i.e., he who takes food and
he who acquires knowledge. But the true
fullness is only through the thing that has
the noblest existence. ... Now if, in general,
fullness in what one apprehends is pleasant,
whatever [he apprehends of what] is essen춻
tially nobler and [participates] more in truth
and is more enduring, is necessarily a more
choiceworthy pleasure. Such is the case of
the pleasure of the intellect relative to the
other pleasures.
Averro칢s on Plato's "Republic", idem
The Third Treatise, pp. 146-7
The virtues of the use of olive oil
When it is derived from ripe and healthy
olives and if its properties have not been
adulterated in an artificial manner, the oil
can be assimilated [perfectly] by the human
organism. ... Foodstuffs seasoned with the
oil are nourishing, so long as the oil is fresh
and not very acidic. ... Generally, the entire
substance of the oil agrees with man, and so
at home [in al-Andalus] meat is seasoned
only with this oil, because it is the best way
to prepare it, while cooking it slowly. This is
how it is done: place the meat in a casserole
into which some oil has been poured, then
add water and heat it on a low flame, with춻
out allowing it to boil.
Book of the General Principles of Medicine
The base condition of the tyrant
This is necessarily the situation of the
tyrant: he is detained among a class such as
this, filled with hunger and fear. Moreover,
he has great hunger [within] himself and
cannot rule himself. Hence he cannot go
wherever he wishes nor look at whatever he
wishes. ... One of the worst dispositions of
such an individual is that he is unable to
restrain and overcome himself, yet he
attempts to lead other people at some level.
. . . The tyrant is the most enslaved of people
and has no device by which to put an end to
his desires, but rather is forever in continual
sorrow and mourning. The soul of one who
is of this description is an impoverished
soul; hence he is envious, violent and
friendless. ... Without any doubt, he is of
necessity troubled and unlucky.
Averro칢s on Plato's "Republic", idem
The Third Treatise, pp. 142-3
19
## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=20) 游
### 70437: Two mediators of medieval thought
춸
minn 췉no췉 n^D>7^
"JV3-D J3 r칥TD "J^
CON S TITVTION ES
D C
F V N n A M B N T I S
L E C .1 S
RAltl JtlOSIS X OUJtir칤ilOX.
Ijtm icddils per
C i) i L i r L w u h V o i i i i u >; CF.
Addimt]uii>u!.칈3in luHuli* , Se AbMvoncUs
' i칠s칤칠
li칬llli
All t T t O D A U I(
ApOtl C U 1 M 1 L, 칉C IcWAKHlM BlAlit췉
c칤a 1? c siJ칦Ttiu
T칦f/e page o칤* a /.af/n translation of the
Foundations of the Law (first section of the
fourth book of the Mishne Torah,}, pub춻
lished in Amsterdam in 1638.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17
p. partly abroad. Of the former, some have
their backs turned towards the king's pal춻
ace, and their faces in another direction;
and some are desirous and zealous to go to
the palace, seeking 'to inquire in his tem춻
ple', and to minister before him, but have
not yet seen even the face of the wall of the
house. Of those that desire to go to the
palace, some reach it , and go round about in
search of the entrance gate; others have
passed through the gate, and walk about in
the ante-chamber; and others have suc춻
ceeded in entering into the inner part of the
palace, and being in the same room with the
king in the royal palace. But even the latter
do not immediately on entering the palace
see the king, or speak to him; for, after
having entered the inner part of the palace,
another effort is required before they can
stand before the king at a distance or close
by hear his words or speak to him. I will
now explain the simile which I have made.
The people who are abroad are all those
that have no religion, neither one based on
speculation nor one received by tradition.
Such are the extreme Turks that wander
about in the north, the Kushites who live in
the south, and those in our country who are
like these. I consider these as irrational
beings and not as human beings; they are
below mankind, but above monkeys, since
they have the form and shape of man, and a
mental faculty above that of the monkey.
"Those who are in the country, but have
their backs turned towards the king's pal춻
ace, are those who possess religion, belief,
and thought, but happen to hold false doc춻
trines, which they either adopted in con춻
sequence of great mistakes made in their
own speculations, or received from others
who misled them. Because of these doc춻
trines they recede more and more from the
royal palace the more they seem to proceed.
These are worse than the first class, and
under certain circumstances it may become
necessary to slay them, and to extirpate
their doctrines, in order that others should
not be misled.
"Those who desire to arrive at the palace,
and to enter it, but have never yet seen it,
are the mass of religious people; the multi춻
tude that observe the divine command춻
ments, but are ignorant. Those who arrive
at the palace, but go round about it, are
those who devote themselves exclusively to
the study of the practical law; they believe
traditionally in true principles of faith, and
learn the practical worship of God, but are
not trained in philosophical treatment of
the principles of the Law," and do not
endeavour to establish the truth of their
faith by proof. Those who undertake to
investigate the principles of religion, have
come into the ante-chamber; and there is no
doubt that these can also be divided into
different grades. But those who have suc춻
ceeded in finding a proof for everything that
can be proved, who have a true knowledge
of God, so far as a true knowledge can be
attained, and are near the truth, wherever
an approach to the truth is possible, they
have reached the goal, and are in the palace
in which the king lives.
"My son, so long as you are engaged in
studying the Mathematical Sciences and
Logic, you belong to those who go round
about the palace in search of the gate. Thus
our Sages figuratively use the phrase: 'Ben-
zoma is still outside'. When you understand
Physics, you have entered the hall; and
when, after completing the study of Natural
Philosophy, you master Metaphysics, you
have entered the innermost court, and are
with the king in the same palace. You have
attained the degree of the wise men, who
include men of different grades of perfec춻
tion." (The Guide of the Perplexed, III,
51)
Averro칢s was even more insistent than
Maimonides on the importance of not
revealing "philosophical interpretations to
those who are not able to comprehend
them". This was not because he had an aris춻
tocratic or elitist attitude towards philos춻
ophy or because he wanted to protect his
reputation as a good Muslim; the fact is that
he shared with other experts of the Law
Ghaz칙l칦 held the same view with regard to
Kal칛m (Muslim scholastic theology) the
specifically religious conviction that great
caution should be exercised by teachers so
as not "to lead the faithful away from the
divine Law", following in this the example
of "the divine legislator [who] cares for the
well-being of the soul as a doctor cares for
the health of the body".
It is true that Maimonides was much bet춻
ter received and respected within his com춻
munity than Averro칢s ever was by the Mus춻
lims. This is no doubt due to the fact that
Maimonides compiled "guides" to the
orthodox faith to help the faithful avoid
perdition and the loss of eternal salvation.
Thus, in his "Commentary on the Mishna",
he summarized the thirteen articles of faith
which every Jew must accept and which
have been used, in verse form, since the
fourteenth century in the daily ritual of
Sephardic communities. Religious commu춻
nities, especially when they are minorities,
need the cohesion provided by beliefs and
rituals that are valid for all and act as a
"safety net" for believers. Maimonides was
well aware of this need, whereas it was not
so vital a matter of concern for Averro칢s
who was a member of a broader and more
dominant Umma (community), especially
during the time of the Almohads.
At all events, the century of Averro칢s
and Maimonides, succeeded shortly by that
of St. Thomas Aquinas, is worthy of study
with a view to a reassessment of medieval
thought which goes beyond the claims of
supremacy of militant theologies or a his춻
tory of philosophy deprived of its medieval
dimension, such as the secularized, positiv춻
ist, anti-clerical West has long imposed.
In university courses as conceived and
followed in the West, Arab philosophy is
generally left to departments of Oriental
studies which themselves are considered of
only marginal importance within the uni춻
versities. If this state of affairs is to be rec춻
tified, a scientific revision must be under춻
taken of the overall history of the cultural
climate of the Mediterranean during the
Middle Ages, involving philosophy, theol춻
ogy and the history of the sciences. This is
the lesson that emerges from the works of
the two great mediators whom I have all too
briefly presented here.
1. The Ash'arite school: Followers of the Muslim theo춻
logian al-Ash'ari (873-935 AD) who reconciled a dialec춻
tic method with orthodox beliefs to create a new form of
scholasticism in Islam. Editor.
2. The Mu'tazilites: A Muslim philosophical school
founded in the eighth century AD emphasizing reason in
religious interpretation, free will in opposition to pre춻
destination and the unity and justice of Allah. Editor.
3. The Malekites: One of the four Sunni schools of law
founded in the eighth century AD. The Malekites pre춻
ferred traditional opinions and analogical reasoning to a
strict reliance on Ilad칦th (traditions concerning the
Prophet's life and utterances) as a basis for legal judge춻
ment. Editor.
4. The Hanbalites: School of religious law relying solely
on a literal reading of the Our'an and Ilad칦th in for춻
mulating legal decisions. Editor.
5. Part of the November 1986 issue of the Unesco Cou춻
rier will be devoted to this great Islamic thinker.
6. Pour une critique de la raison islamique, Maison-
ncuvc-Larosc, 1984, and Lectures du Coran, 1982.
MOHAMMED ARKOUN, born in Algeria, is pro춻
fessor ol the history of Islamic thought at the New
Sorbonne, University of Paris III, and director of
the University's Institute of Arabic and Islamic
Studies. He has previously taught at the Univer춻
sity of Lyon, the University of California at Los
Angeles, the Catholic University of Louvain, at
Princeton, and at the Pontifical Institute ofArabic
Studies, Rome. He has taught and lectured in
many academic and cultural centres around the
world. Among his many publications are La pen춻
s칠e arabe, ("Arab Thought", 1979), l'Islam,
religion et soci칠t칠, ("Islam, Religion and
Society", 1981), Lectures du Coran, ("Readings
from the Qur'an", 1982) and Essais sur la pen춻
s칠e islamique ("Essays on Islamic Thought",
1984).
20
## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=21) 游
### 70445: A Voice that speaks across the centuries
A voice that speaks
across the centuries
by Shalom Rosenberg
EIGHT hundred and fifty years after
his birth, Maimonides is still in
some ways an enigmatic figure, and
research into his writings is a detective story
that passionately divides scholars and scien춻
tists.
There are various reasons for this, some
of them subjective. In the Jewish tradition,
for example, Maimonides has become a
"Rorschach ink blot" onto which people
project their ideals, and sometimes
though very seldom their enmity.
On the one hand, Maimonides' profound
and encyclopaedic knowledge, the depth
and scope of his writings, have made him a
central authority for experts in many dif춻
ferent fields. On the other hand, his per춻
sonal integrity and dedication, his commit춻
ment to the future of his people, have given
him a great significance to large numbers of
men and women, not only as a focus of
identification but as a caring teacher. He
has certainly become, as the name of his
main philosophical work implies, the
"Guide", but not only of the perplexed.
Indeed, everyone who has studied his works
has interpreted them in his own image and
according to his own level of understanding.
This subjective picture is, however, only
a partial representation of the whole truth.
Great controversy, between even the most
dispassionate modern scholars, is caused by
the fact that Maimonides wrote in a special
way. He saw himself continuing the Biblical
and Talmudic tradition of writing on two
levels. The Bible and the Talmud are,
according to him, books written for the
masses, yet they have an inner level that
speaks to the philosophers and those who
have advanced beyond the masses.
The principal idea characterizing Mai춻
monides' interpretation of the Scriptures is
that the texts are relevant to all people at all
times. His Biblical-philosophical exegesis
took four variables into consideration.
First, the linguistic component, whereby
Detail of a miniature from a manuscript
of Maimonides' Mishne Torah, copied in
Portugal in 1472, today preserved in the
Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Mai춻
monides is represented clutching a roll of
parchment, possibly the Mishne Torah
itself.
revelation is transmitted through a lan춻
guage, the semantic and syntactic charac춻
teristics of which cannot be ignored.
Second, the historical perspective, by
which Biblical issues and stories can only be
understood in the light of their particular
historical situations; taking into account,
for example, the nature of a society that
practises idolatry, or one that is not scien춻
tifically advanced.
Philosophy may therefore be taught using
one of two methods: the Greek way, in
technical language and by constructing sys춻
tems that can only be understood after a
lengthy initiation; or the Hebrew way, by
encoding philosophy in a symbolic text and
transmitting the key of interpretation from
teacher to disciple.
The third variable in Maimonides' inter춻
pretation of the Scriptures is the psychologi춻
cal dimension prophecy and revelation
take place through the mediation of human
beings. Anthropological and psychological
characteristics are reflected in the very con춻
tent of revelation.
A fourth variable, Sod (secret), is the use
of esotericism as a teaching aid. The sacred
texts must take into consideration the exis- ^
/
'
Q
춸
21
## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=22) 游
### 70445: A Voice that speaks across the centuries
O ' d춰 v k*4BMC >춺췉% ijV췉.
- -
Ci. 5-"- 춺1/7
o
춸
Pages from twoparchmentmanuscripts of
the Mishne Torah. Right, a master teaching
from his pulpitas depicted in a manuscript
illuminated in northern Italy In the second
half of the 15th century. Above, page from
a manuscript copied in German rabbinical
script by a scribe called Selomo.
^9h< .^tr*:^*^^-
": ;
^V"
tence of many people who are incapable of
attaining philosophical perfection and
whose exposure to metaphysical truths may
be dangerous for them and for society.
Maimonides applied this method to his
own writings. In the introduction to his
major work, The Guide of the Perplexed, he
deliberately warns the reader that esoteric
views are concealed in his book in such a
way that only those who study the whole
text will be able to find them. Hesees this as
the inner meaning of the Sage's saying:
"...apples of gold in settings of silver"
(Proverbs, chapter XXV, verse 11). The
"silver" structure of the Guide was imme춻
diately obvious and admired, but the nature
of the inner "golden" content is still being
debated.
As a result of its author's method, Mai춻
monides' book has an impressive architec춻
tonic structure which connects all its parts.
One constantly finds new secret doors lead춻
ing to an unmapped labyrinth of cross-refer춻
ences and varied hints, a guide to the hidden
philosophical treasure sometimes dif춻
ferent treasures for different readers.
Maimonides was a great philosopher. To
fully understand his system the reader
would be obliged to abandon his contempo춻
rary world-view and adopt the medieval
scientific and philosophic mentality. It is
important to note, however, that his teach춻
ings nevertheless still have relevance today.
They are undoubtedly controversial; Mai춻
monides never intended to be "popular". A
meaningful presentation of Maimonidean
thought would entail translating more of his
ideas into our modern vocabulary.
In an attempt to summarize his ideals of
human behaviour, I would present them as
a scale of four values which need to be
attained sequentially: Society, Self-realiz춻
ation, Transcendence and Politics. Such a
sequence will allow better understanding of
each stage.
Further clarification can also be achieved
by using a theatrical analogy. We can con춻
sider a play from three different angles. It
can be understood as the realization of the
instructions of the script; or, from the stand춻
point of the director, as the realization of a
certain situation on the stage; or as psycho-
drama, wherein the play's central function
lies in the influence it has on the actors. In
the same way, ethics can be understood
either as deontological, as the fulfilment of
the ethical categorical imperatives; or as
utilitarian, fulfilling a social function; or as a
means of self-transformation.
Society. The first condition of human
development is the existence of a healthy
society that assures the basic freedoms of
the individual. Maimonides thought that
human beings are, as Aristotle wrote,
"social by nature". But people are individ춻
uals, distinct and different from one
another. This is a divine blessing but also an
imminent danger. The political structure is
the instrument through which society gov춻
erns itself and provides a possibility for the
individual to develop.
Maimonides severely criticized the
authoritarian and fanatical regimes of his
time, and yearned for a return to the ancient
Biblical and Greek systems in which true
religion, science and philosophy could
flourish. His own experiences of wander춻
ings and persecution bear witness to his sin춻
cerity.
This is the first version of ethics: social
ethics, our duties in society.
Self-realization. Society is not an end in
itself. There is no such entity as a "people-
by-itself". A people, a nation, is above all a
construction in which the real elements are
the individuals. Society has to enable the
development and full self-realization of
each of its members. However, Mai춻
monides did not believe that this self-
realization involves an arbitrary choice. A
"human essence" exists, and people have to
find it. The central imperative is "Grow!",
and society has to make this possible.
22
## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=23) 游
### 70445: A Voice that speaks across the centuries
Here we find Maimonides' version of eth춻
ics as self-transformation, the idea of indi춻
vidual ethics moulded on the model of the
psychodrama. Ethics must enable people to
grow, to develop all their faculties,
especially their intellectual faculties. Only
then can the individual attain the central
human aim, the knowledge of truth. Rea춻
son is the divine image that resides in every
one of us.
The ideas presented up to this point can
be illustrated with Maimonides' exposition
of the Paradise story. The Biblical story
seems to present a fools' paradise in which
suffering came to the world when Adam ate
the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge. This,
however, is an incorrect interpretation. The
Paradise story is an archetypical representa춻
tion of the human condition. True knowl춻
edge and, as we shall see later, the pos춻
sibility of transcending the human condition
are represented by the Tree of Life. The
knowledge of the Tree of Knowledge is not
the knowledge of true and false , but of good
and evil.
Without going too deeply into the
ramifications of Maimonides' explanation,
it is clear that two types of knowledge are
presented here: objective, rational knowl춻
edge as opposed to subjectively distorted
systems constructed by rampant, uncon춻
trolled imagination. The Paradise story is
not set in the outside world, and in historical
time, but in our own souls. A continuous
struggle takes place between Adam and the
serpent the representation of irrational
forces in man. As Goya masterfully por춻
trayed it, dreams of reason engender
monsters.
Accordingly, the Messianic age does not
mean changes in the laws of nature, but
according to Maimonides represents the
age when people will be cured from their
spiritual blindness which makes them harm춻
ful to their fellow men as well as to them춻
selves.
Transcendence. Had Maimonides
remained at this stage in his thought, his
teachings would be very similar to those of
other rationalistic systems in the history of
philosophy. However, he used the philo춻
sophical background of his time which
treated the possibility of conjunction with a
supra-human reality, the "Active Intellect"
of medieval tradition. The implication of
this philosophy is that beyond natural dis춻
cursive rational activity there is an addi춻
tional epistemological category, the intui춻
tive way of prophecy, and the ultimate
possibility of conjunction with what tran춻
scends common human experience.
We cannot say whether or not Mai춻
monides accepted the reality of mystical ex춻
perience, and I would instead prefer to
speak of some form of meta-intellectual
experience, modelled on Biblical prophecy
and attaining its highest level with Moses.
According to the rabbis, Moses died the
"death by a kiss". This kiss, as in the alle춻
gory of the Song of Songs, is the true
immortality, the union of the soul with tran춻
scendence.
Politics. "In the Ways of the Lord." At this
stage, Maimonides' thought resembles that
of many mystical thinkers, and he might
have succumbed to the temptation of those
Page from a manuscript of the Mishne
Torah copied in Cologne (Germany) In
1294-1296 AD by Nathan ben Shimon ha-
Levi and completed in the same city in
1413. The miniatures appear to come from
the Cambrai region of France or the mid-
Rhine and date from the end of the 13th or
the beginning of the 14th century.
Below, portrait of Maimonides (left) with
the Jewish philosopher Isaac Abravanel
(1437-1508 AD) in an annotated edition of
The Guide of the Perplexed published in
1904 in Vilna (now Vilnius, Lithuanian
SSR).
jfi~
칱'Z'c; rm
H
i
*
m
|
츿
.TtllST ':k -*'" IS	.
.: :;
- in : ,1-m"
#: :
m T -r new -- .-: .in^:
iHiirr llrlmrliim.
--- ------ - vf.
who achieve perfection and bliss and forget
society. However he goes on to close the
circle, with the symbol of Jacob's ladder, by
which God's envoys go up and down. We
have seen him so far on his way up, but he
speaks also of a return to society. The
prophet is not only interested in his own
personal experience; he has a duty to return
and bring redemption to society. This is not
because he needs society but because, now
that he has reached the highest level of
morality, he must go in the ways of the
Lord. God had left His own perfect solitude
and, in an act of grace, created the world. In
his imitation we find the real meaning of
politics, and we are able to return to the first
stage, that of society. These are the roots of
the Bible, the message of prophecy, that a
new cycle begins at the point when the
prophet returns to the people and presents
them with a deontological system.
Every summary is necessarily a distortion
of the whole, and this is no exception.
However if something may be added to
soften the sharp edges of misunderstanding,
it would be the idea of the absolute respon춻
sibility of the elite.
There are pseudo-elites in the same way
as idolatry is a pseudo-religion. Continuing
Maimonides' exegesis of the Paradise story,
we could say that stationed in front of the
Tree of Life there are angels with whirling
swords; and that there are always people
who mistake the flash of the sword for the
shine of the Tree itself, as do those who
confuse drugs with mystical experience.
There will always be false prophets of whom
humanity should beware.
Intellectuals, scientists and scholars are
not prophets, but according to Maimonides
they are an elite and they influence the
future development of the world. The true
political, cultural and spiritual leader must
obviously act neither in his own interests,
nor as the representative of a single faction
or group. He is bound to the general inter춻
ests of the community. Maimonides' mes춻
sianic ideals were, however, not restricted
to one community. In the "end of days" the
whole world will be free from the curse of
war, and, as the prophet said, the earth will
be as full of understanding as the oceans are
fuil of water.
SHALOM ROSENBERG, Israeli researcher, isa
member of the teaching staff of the Hebrew Uni춻
versity of Jerusalem. He is the author of numer춻
ous publications on religious questions and on
Jewish thought.
23
## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=24) 游
### 70448: Averro칢s, reason and tolerance
A ^f^wr칤p'Q by MA' Sinaceur
reason and tolerance
This statue of Averro칢s, the work of the
brothers Agapito and Venancio Vallmit-
jana, Spanish sculptors of the second half
of the 19th century, stands in an alcove at
the University of Barcelona.
IN reflecting on Averro칢s, it is not my
wish to evoke the man whom Latin
Schoolmen held in boundless admira춻
tion or the researcher whose commentaries
on Aristotle rivalled in power of thought the
works he was analysing. Nor shall I dwell
here on his life as a sober, pious judge or on
the affinity of his approach with that
developed by the great Islamic jurists, an
approach characterized by a spirit of frank
self-questioning. Instead I shall concentrate
on two ideas, two notions which bring us
abruptly face to face with real problems,
real questions, eternally posed.
The first of these is the notion of the unity
of reason. To know, it is postulated, is to
acknowledge participation in universal
knowledge. I use the word reason instead of
the term intellect which Averro칢s used, true
to the terminology of the philosophers of
Alexandria and Baghdad. To transpose in
this way is not to yield to lack of rigour and
precision; it is simply a refusal to succumb
to pettifogging and indecision or to bend the
knee to a form of erudition for erudition's
sake.
The unity of reason, then, was what
Averro칢s propounded, an overriding con춻
cept which inspired audacious develop춻
ments. For the French philosopher/writer
Ernest Renan (1823-1892) it was human
thought taken as a whole, "a universal phe춻
nomenon stemming from superior powers".
Unity of reason encompasses the principles
on which we base the demonstration that
takes us a step further, the proof that suc춻
ceeds, the experiment which achieves its
end. It is the unity of the psychological
make-up of mankind the hardships and
vices that engender evil and suffering, and
the faculties that enable us to construct the
city of harmony and peace. It is humanity
one and indivisible, living and permanent,
as essential to itself as is personal dignity to
the most individualistic of individuals,
which the most intimate, innermost truth
affords to him who recognizes and acknowl춻
edges it. Thus he who knows and is, is no
more, as individual, than a splendid speci춻
men of the Universal.
The second idea is not unconnected with
the first. Reason cannot destroy faith. Both
express the same truth. Now this was a
notion that was as bound to displease the
Schoolmen of old as it does the ideologists
of today. Two truths, it should be remem춻
bered, cannot contradict each other. But, a
word of caution, this is a truth that no single
statement can exhaust, not inert truths that
one can take hold of and possess. The real
Averro칢s was a practitioner of rational tol춻
erance, a tolerance which was neither com춻
plaisant, sceptical nor moralistic:
1. Reason should seek neither purposeless
confrontation with nor the destruction of
the faith of those for whom it is a necessity.
Among men there are many kinds of
exchanges, undertakings and beliefs. Yet
men can live together quite happily in a
world in which opinions are varied and
diverse. This is because there are opinions
that merit respect; and to respect implies to
explain and to understand.
2. Reason demands that we examine other
cultures in a spirit of understanding and
objectivity: "We accept with joy whatever is
in conformity with truth truth, that is,
which is the outcome of research; ... that
which is not in conformity with truth we
shall point out and excuse..." No matter
whence it comes or where it originates,
validity is the only condition knowledge has
to fulfil. Knowledge is not the sole constitu춻
ent of the heritages of the different cultures;
each of them also encompasses conceptions
that comfort or disturb.
3. Finally although Averro칢s did not state
this explicitly it is implicit in the whole
thrust of his argument what applies to
religion and to philosophy applies also to
any body of beliefs: concealed behind two
apparently opposed truths lies an identity
waiting to be discovered. Such an opposi춻
tion is an invitation to research, to medita춻
tion, to the elaboration of a unity which
goes beyond the apparently contradictory
expressions of diversity.
By dint of excessive study, philological
examination and pointless and laborious
annotation it is possible to obscure the
clearest lines of thought such as those
most dear to Averro칢s, and the most mean춻
ingful of his life. And it is these latter that
have the power to move us. At a time when
people are wondering anxiously whether
there is today a place for such a thing as
"modern humanism", the least we can hope
is that in recalling his ideas we shall ensure
the continuance of the essential principles
he stated so strongly.
One day Averro칢s was informed of a holy
man's method of curing men and women by
making them pay out sums of money equiv춻
alent to the supposed value, as determined
by him, of their affected organs. Instead of
launching into a diatribe against supersti춻
tion, Averro칢s declared: "There goes a man
who believes that a human being can be
moved by the act of giving." It is to be
hoped that evocation of the path followed
by Averro칢s, the path of totally frank and
open thought, has power to move the hearts
of men today.
MOHAMMED ALLAL SINACEUR, director of
Unesco's Philosophy Division and professor of
Sociology of Development at Hassan II Univer춻
sity (Morocco), was formerly a research officer at
the French Centre National de la Recherche Sci춻
entifique. He has written widely on philosophical
problems and on the history of mathematics.
24
## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=25) 游
### 70467: Ibn Rushd and the Islamic philosophical tradition
Ibn Rushd and the Islamic
philosophical tradition by Artur V. Sagadeev
*
;-
*6 c(t(l<o -i fl칤yioo
OTV-MJ lUM" lllW *"" '"칤!"* *"~**1"
i i Win춺 춺*e*췉J**t칤 '*H< m -riiTtJinl*
iwtHh.irk췉*1 i-imu>칦 j-frirO**"'1 i*i. **m1*p}
.1 .~4M췉>W *춺"|^o* *춺it췉Jji i췉wl4**-l
i . i -.iw'k |r j MMM* rl-|<췉. 췉Ml*
tt*W if췉"췉"i * MflSr ti" it<t*"i칤fchii**"iiiiW r
<.i*fk.a~i.HkrT nii춺4*. if-*', i"if MfjMj M***
i.K췉 li ir, i'iI.h I*춺춺At춺 춺fr IM^MM-?
\ ihijih칈hiT JfY C>춺" * '* f *h W-jT
-\ nt> ittfih^.i' tiU> 4 Miftn^li'pih i(h UM kti >iv
I"- ^r-.vh- 'i.i"Wi..f췉ftt.f lii^ m1' V *.췉 IUT칈--
v itiw i>l .t'r 칤iiKm.i i* i-n( . .irv.i if hiTilim
MviflbAadftflnfRn-M칈 i췉i췉 A t칅t >'
췉Uin.i췉 춰춺..췉Vli.ai.iiJ춺 ff HH4hvA칄MHf췉H
ui.nTb ...춰( -- nM O***췉!
lin*fi*춺K췉/t:-Ki<nff .춺tcki* "nfri-f칖 iw.*rf췉}
HiMV -Mi'hiMiO Cli*.' .1 *	 0 	
im iniihf p^HiLt- . HMMM- Hl|MPHM
ih-iiw칤 f.췉i. n^**.*tj췉 i MpM f .i췉 n*.'n#tr i j rt.
' i t MiHf" twA^t *" 췉pi"P*췉iT .- fti> 춺* r-vcW 1 1 MUH
, HmiVtni.ll'tn칙altftIM 11췉 W* l.*칦ifc IWpV |Wtlnt*f
1췉w i-< r>n>v췉.' mirMi*<f i
i춺> Mi M'imlUv pM^MM fr iMW췉춺*칤 fh>l-1<칌
rs>ih>iir>>.췉'--l췉 4p\nirh*춺 f .t<춺il>l*f.1 - pii췉r**t-
inrvhktFiViii<i>w.i.-ir iiiii*"췉 ..i dnnlihil칤 n*il,i*
-r i'iHiiti'Jit.-i'i''^mmWmI iIhmI
Mi'칈 >vl쯟in칈<>nS <"l|.iJ칤 i*l춺
nMlk| m.췉쯀lnil 11 if d i.lliri i|i-MKh*Mkikl-
V춺 1H춺T V fttn- ** JMlf ll칲". -V" H^ii n.li -
춰hl^H. nvurtivmr'^Mlct.Tr -*~1_ >1췉HtiVvtf췉-VWi>
WMMrfwrfi it-lfin- hC iff jMimr칤mn
DJ .칤칤iwntLin, / mi.iIm' [춺춺f T.H.H+
iMiir -i 춺-.췉i칤.4*ilii.ni췉췉itij췉ii칤칤 uift> m.췉Wt*춺Jiiii
V- im./" - HtffVI MMffMMfi mu *"췉<W p |H칈*.
춺tMf^K*n'.,VMii.*W- . rl.'i lut i-fk.1 * .nr.~i*H췉< ]
*tW*칈v- 4 i (j
.iin.i M A '"t li' 췉.mi -i	. .i>vi -ih", pf*
췉' n 췉fii.iii.KLtl?. mrfli m. .^
niKiNvKw | Mt "*>* 1.1..I춺 .jh IM mm-WY-Hl칯
UM췉췉*췉*^췉 iiH췉MHrt# |^췉lli*t춺^ t,iiH
H칄MMIM -'t*n.M<i >췉췉vi"I>춺춺h*"*>-*췉 i
jhwr*tpi*췉i*W. 	 i 췉.h l'uiiM ij-r췉.L|r
INiK.Ih I l춺f >h1fM>' <1IW>| 췉l'IKfim if>> > ffV
, .4t.1*.춺 ntw ffff(Mk hmbM -t*췉t - 춺iifl- 칤췉
췉>4p y f 췉ll.llf.l-p, 'II. Il H 1 .ft춺! IK
."췉.il 칤 rnAli춺! .췉^ Ah i -X< iimi i,n ir춺 .f-irrV. (
t., pTfMMM Mfffff i>T",i.칈춺ci i*
칤Hiwkhn 춺mMi i!| 췉tttfMtrt tw4nw^ ?
iiii.iiiliwWiin^nhH ,iU^r ii.i.i tc*ii췉 i. Mi칤
, .fi'hitr tiM .- 췉Li^niM T-iAimliwcm 춺y
t <>n*췉KhM ammJiA .'hu칤 .춺V T m...,"-
. '*i*t', nvkili'ifitfL' iT 	\쯒칤.,r,.+
i 췉Im kWdM ,n , n^rirtH* .췉>^췉iul ftn+r* <* T)f
..i l-M칲 M fx....ln 4쮿krt m-ii-H ki
W춺n*f췉췉 .췉^췉췉.1 ^ ihsthiIiii' 1 1 .i i춺췉. ^- if irif it.
.-.itMilltt 췉c Itiji칤n칲 in A m 췉Li"췉*'춺" T^췉**. -
. _ 췉LJ ^..|l.lV.-t*.M:"if''l<-'l 4 . >l췉f"
JKw M*HffW춺 췉 '-췉 -I " "
i ti췉r4*.Mi M^jhfffr4-r>jBr*-% -..-r.t.1'췉"'!
. 	 *
^{iVnin	^-췉 f*A*츿* "췉T-":
pi Ji.iiiwM liHtrtli췉췉* 췉Wi'lt.c JmiImUI.'i i춺J-
>.i4ii'iK-t춺,i4iii*4i'Mr><4-i' mm "*"췉r * lu췉-* -i
,Uuf fr*incW춺칦 -*" ~f-y.t MffM'l MMMM1 *췉
ff침RM ri t JmhC춺 ir췉rtT-+췉칤춰o^i_,칤iJ췉 nK|M.* P춺췉
LJV-.I >| 춺 Ticffiittn >r rfc wifctrt<-췉i췉rti췉*f췉췉f *r
쯠m^M iWmlkk.' *췉 .- Ji:<*Mf>tJK i췉i*n-.*tr^
*W 췉 tt췉 ir췉췉췉fiW *IKi *1M춺n *'췉 칤> " t 칈mI췉*췉췉*췉"*췉 If*"
.t i.-.i-tii tul -i' iiiii hmvmmmmmJIhmi MMM
.iii*K ir춺"i'Tii 칄BMMf MM r*M 'TT*'췉.췉"* 춺췉h'췉
hm'w f W w,#i'i Juvi >vii"i.<*
hM칈MMJl 춺췉 *w 췉'* f- H pt침V *췉i춺l췉' rt - J''p췉"
y -U hm A췉n칤 *?춺* l칤iuMMwft칤'
^, .^fenii"TiCTl'ii췉T^r췉/rw춺'^췉it췉<i춺iw*
칦j\T^-,t췉 .춺r춺*w췉*-*fVc w*Jh췉Jh춺.i^칤\춺'.w칈 I ^
fi칤T칄' iiwitfM췉 <V췉wf m ww\ inffMtffMwT I
/ pi'rf췉Vi춺췉칤.*췉w췉l^<췉*춺*"췉V 췉췉췉췉r-.iHfj칤칤ii-roi-칤i i ^
n. i .ut. V" in(>ii-nmt"칦 " 1
tr *r"n*i 췉 ii f 췉i- r cti m "Ti t-*- m 췉춺H-**춺-* Atnf#.칥f < ] -
Mb췉 i rAnwM칌 춺-'췉Hi^ -i .ii'.Hii ..-ri- .tum. I
rnki* t-inf ^n칤fcj'tmiri,iK- <4rrV -
fnttfr>4췉*lifi췉i>i> -V.",lMf춺춺췉'".iri췉wir-췉n춺^l
f.-rt칤imnJ tiVi 칤 g .ji췉f irrfwrn'-KiitiMf TtV
춺W -liuifr iji-* iiff*t춺rfrliiv츿r*'^췉t*t춺i>- |f* 칦
*rr*r i4췉#.*ii췉l' 춺fVfi.ti. ^ ,iith'i-Mi irr lV**i* if춺tff>A
liiir-tf .ar'it췉-!, '*칦l , ttlf Jmrf칉V^" f<.-^-ii칄nr r -..춺1 |
.(....췉t,' 췉i.rV^rT iVV^IiHi Untinbiki .칤i-rf.-Jnw j
fajMt MfYrifiit tf*|fc% r*rfTiTf f*^-"
u췉ii*T**췉'1*> *췉f *w*i Umm) mAhhM 췉
4mtM춺 niin*.*춺m.ii-i < j.|i-*i 췉ttLi/ofw v
Aifintr^ r.-*J^*춺-fi'>fi춺r -Uiii춺tiiw i
^-^nrwr- 칕칊rrV > : 1 ..-.췉 n* Jii>*r 췉i l'iml Jf^
PMHNntfD*" 'i춺'^" , 춰"v w* i* im'.in t Ji l^fn춺/1췉
^ -11췉- - * t i^*i췉췉.MlStW
r LtitrH췉itH- Js>췉vlik iT*j wi칤ii'i; r w춰 f^ ^\'
J m췉- .ii..!>4'iV-침ft*Ki* .췉\wiYi-wi mI^칠MIV춺*!
lhi Im U rLi JifUili - 췉r "ti췉A
(S'i v ff* .*!*4imfc.**V* .]. "췉.n*. (tu . ;
..**춺췉 i H".' : f* *U췉T췉췉".
^4*춺*tMiVm)*i *"M,' fr 췉' - im.fiKi |
i - I1".i>iu췉rt칤 -칥iirH춺춺 liii'pm-tuf' ...j^.m
칥J!!,^-,, ...,'. ., L
1# t Un . f(**i ^ r... MirHl
.Ull|ifi#칥iini *fcU췉, .if"*.. |
IMMMHlMl * .1|Hi춺M|.Hit. - t'.lt ijm'i* n#
iinr I췉 .췉췉.W.-Lti.if췉췉!*췉!. i aItt' ,-n\f>f it.t.' ti춺췉t:
MPmhM .WrHifcJu.tf .칈mIt IPmI췉*
i'i"'i춺<ii>.: "^iiUi- iwfaw lwnuC췉r* f*'Ar춺 Jf>*S.T*i
irf i"t .it\ (.춺 .|i% 췉t 1*^췉'"' "lif tt< riiiinj췉1'
iim> rHttuxfin,- - **?췉.>fiV.f tt*nTM -! i4)h|
nr -f f*i in춺 I1.쯟. 췉t(V.**" W|'ti*v|Mi^췉ir**w쯜 f
*iimviV tt;;,., L*n r A. 춰ou r , 췉칯 췉-ri춺 f'nti**>M j f
t"W t t l'r* irii *W췉r Hk i\- in.VnVf. ni췉, f
,i+* k*itir.titl, r-i.t 칈*a ti*iM[
tt""!췉 f H 칉ifMtrtwJi jilniiilr f .. * fr^pn* \ 춺
'mi .-i' n; 1-fu." (Vi.'.nJm ,Hi ,
fiin.i(r.tkfiii(A 칯u> if^.i춺' 춰췉췉pi* iif.*^.
iv.^i* f* uitr**io< ' ':
. -칦&칦^:	
Page from a medieval manuscript in Latin
of the commentary byAverro칢s on Aristot춻
le's "Book On the Heavens and On the
World". Latin translations of works by the
great Cordob치n Arab philosopher multi춻
plied very quickly, above all thanks to the
famous School of Translators in Toledo,
where Muslim, Jewish and Christian
scholars worked closely together.
, , 	 fW^HE name of Ibn Rushd (Averro칢s)
I has become a symbol of freedom of
-M. thought and rationalism, of rejec춻
tion of mysticism in all its forms and of blind
faith in the Holy Scriptures. The influence
of the Cordob치n philosopher has spread
widely, both through his own writings and
through the works of his European disci춻
ples, the Averroists, as well as through
attacks from their opponents, who went so
far as to claim that Ibn Rushd was the
author of the doctrine of the "three impost-
ers" (Moses, Jesus and Muhammad) which
once unleashed a storm of controversy.
Scorn has been poured on Ibn Rushd's
concept that the individual soul is mortal,
but that human reason is immortal. This
idea has become familiar to us in the works
of Duns Scotus, Dante, Herder, Kant and
other writers associated with the idea of
unity in human intellectual and moral de춻
velopment.
Ibn Rushd's reputation is certainly not
undeserved, but to some extent it obscures
the merits of the eastern Muslim philo춻
sophers who preceded him, especially al-
F칙r칙b칦 (c. 870-950) and Ibn Sln칛 (Avicenna,
980-1037), whose teachings, in the opinion
of certain scholars, pointed towards a re춻
conciliation of reason and faith, and thus
lacked the internal coherence of Ibn
Rushd's thought. In fact, not only had these
earlier philosophers made possible the birth
of Hispano-Arabie philosophy, and its frui춻
tion in Ibn Rushd; they were also the true
authors of theories often credited to him.
The differences between Ibn Rushd and
his predecessors were not due to a lesser
degree of consistency in defining the scope
of rationalism or of fidelity to the philoso춻
phy of Aristotle. They were due to the
distinctive features of the social, cultural
춿: and political situation in the Muslim East
f and West during medieval times. These
| differences do not relate to the fundamental
췉 principle of the autonomy of human reason ,
f but simply to the methods of its application
| to doctrines of the "ideal city".
m The most complete expression of Ibn
춸 Rushd's rationalism is to be found in his
o
I "Decisive Treatise on the Harmony of Reli춻
gion and Philosophy", a work in which he
divides people into three categories: the
"rhetorical class", the "dialecticians" and
the "demonstrative class". For the first
category, convictions are the fruit of rhetor춻
ical argument to which they turn when they
wish to convince their listeners of a certain
point, without taking the validity of the
point into account. The second category
uses "dialectical arguments", in the Aris-
	 totelian sense of the term, that is to say their ^
25
## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=26) 游
### 70467: Ibn Rushd and the Islamic philosophical tradition
^J
Averro칢s was the greatest medieval inter춻
preter of Classical Greco-Latin thought. In
his turn hepassedon this heritage to other
important thinkers, such as his compatriot
Maimonides, and to Christian philo춻
sophers and theologians like St. Thomas
Aquinas, St. Albertus Magnus and Duns
Scotus, who regarded him as "The Com춻
mentator" on Aristotle. Below, a bust of
Plato from the Vatican Museum in Rome.
Right, Persian miniature showingAristotle
In the form of a corpulent seated mullah,
taken from a manuscript in Persian verse
entitled Aphorisms on Hygiene, attributed
to Aristotle.
^
I 'M
HB 칠r\ mH
M
/ M
in r ^
(5 칃P
CL I %_-췉
칐
"^PffMT
>
춰5
O)
o
rr
춸
1
0)
c
<
o
칎
CL BVJH
춸
opinions are based on "generally accep춻
ted", plausible premises, unsuitable for
procuring true knowledge. Members of the
third category reach their convictions
through demonstrations based on sound
premises.
Ibn Rushd identifies the rhetoricians with
the "overwhelming mass", with the
"crowd", that is, the body of faithful who do
not aspire to the subtleties of theology, and
even less to those of philosophy. The di춻
alecticians are the representatives of spe춻
culative (theoretical) theology, and those
who belong to the "demonstrative class" are
the philosophers who, in all societies, con춻
stitute a small intellectual elite which is
alone capable of acquiring true knowledge.
Ibn Rushd was not the originator of this
theory; it was expounded in detail by Ibn
S칥n칙, and before him by al-F칙r칙b칦. Eastern
Muslim philosophers were already classify춻
ing arguments into "apodictic" (demonstra춻
tive), "dialectical", "rhetorical", "sophisti춻
cal" and "poetical", in decreasing order of
cognitive value, ranging from "absolutely
true" apodictic arguments to "absolutely
false" poetical arguments.
Poetical arguments occupy the lowest
step on the ladder because they take into
consideration, not the objective existence
of objects, but their images, which are the
result of the purest subjectivity. These argu춻
ments act on people's imagination, not their
reason, inciting positive or negative emo춻
tions. "Poetical" and "rhetorical" argu춻
ments were identified with religion;
"sophistical" and "dialectical" arguments
with speculative theology.
In their conception of the relation be춻
tween faith and knowledge, Ibn Rushd, Ibn
26
## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=27) 游
### 70467: Ibn Rushd and the Islamic philosophical tradition
Sln칛 and al-F칙r칙b칦 all share the basic convic춻
tion that religion is a "political art" which is
only necessary to society insofar as society
consists of an overwhelming majority of
people incapable of assimilating abstract,
theoretical truths, and for whom religion is
the only means of providing their rela춻
tionships with a moral and legal framework.
They teach that philosophy and religion
are related to the extent that they are both
concerned with the foundations of ex춻
istence. But this link is no more than nomi춻
nal. Al-F칙r칙b칦 prefers to regard religion as
the daughter-in-law, not the daughter, of
philosophy; and Ibn Rushd sees them as
sisters by upbringing, but not by blood. For
as far as knowledge is concerned, science
and religion are strangers, insofar as reason
works through rigorous demonstration,
while faith is based on rhetoric and mythi춻
cal, poetical images.
As for the assertion that Ibn Rushd's
predecessors had made concessions to
theology and mysticism, it is simply the
result of a widespread but radically mis춻
taken view of the history of medieval Ara춻
bic Muslim philosophy, according to which
this philosophy owes its specific features to
a blind take-over, by the Muslim world, of
the legacy of Antiquity, integrating into
Aristotelian metaphysics ideas borrowed
from Neoplatonic works wrongly attributed
to Aristotle.
Ibn Rushd's great merit is thus consi춻
dered to be that of refining the Aristotelian
ideas from this Neoplatonic "dross". The
falsity of such an interpretation is shown
solely by the fact that neither al-Kind칥 (c.
800-870), who laid the foundations of East춻
ern Aristotelianism, nor al-F칛r칛bi who sys춻
tematized it, confused Aristotelian and
Neoplatonic works, as can be seen from
their own treatises which review the com춻
plete works of the great thinker of Anti춻
quity.
An analysis of the work of al-F칙r칙b칦, held
responsible for this "original sin" of Arabic
philosophy, clearly shows that the Neopla춻
tonic theory of emanationism (extra-tem춻
poral emission of existence from a single
point of origin) has been incorporated into
it quite deliberately, as a doctrine capable
of formally reconciling the Aristotelian
thesis of the eternal existence of the world
and the religious dogma of its creation.
This reconciliation was essential, con춻
sidering the social and political situation of
the Muslim East in the tenth century, while
philosophers were faced with the prospect
of the foundation of a type of "ideal State"
along the lines of the "ideal city" of Plato's
Republic. As in Plato, philosophers would
be at the head of such a State, the ideologic춻
al foundations of which would be a religion,
also ideal, modelled on philosophy. The
춸
In his works Averro칢s takes up the basic
contribution of the Classical Greek philo춻
sophers, which does not imply thathe was
merely a follower who continued their
work. On the contrary, the Cordob치nphilo춻
sopher marks the apogee of a great cur춻
rent of Islamic philosophy originating in
Eastern Muslim thinkers of the standing of
al-Kind칥, al-F칛r칛biandAvicenna (Ibn Sln칛)
and culminating in the thinkers andphilo춻
sophers of al-Andalus. Above, imaginary
portrait of Ibn Sln칛 from Authentic Por춻
traits and Lives of Illustrious Men, Greek,
Latin and Pagan (1581) by the French
monkand travellerAndr칠 Th칠vet. It is now
in the Museum of the History of Medicine,
Paris.
theory of emanationism would be at the
centre of such a religion.
The great success in the eastern Muslim
world of Ismailian Shi'ite movements,
heralding the imminent collapse of the 'Ab-
b칛sid caliphate, an "empire of evil" found춻
ed on a "false religion", made possible the
existence of doctrines of the "ideal city".
The situation in the western Muslim world
was very different. Neither in al-Andalus
nor in the Maghreb were there any objec춻
tive presuppositions allowing for the dream
of a State based on any ideology other than
that of the existing religious doctrine.
This explains why the ideal situation for
Ibn B칛jja (died 1139), the first great Aris춻
totelian philosopher of these regions, is that
of isolated individuals who, by way of intel춻
lectual and moral perfection, achieve
happiness while continuing to live in an
imperfect State. In exactly the same way,
Ibn Tufayl (died 1185), an older contem춻
porary and friend of Ibn Rushd, thought
that such a situation is the prerogative of
individuals, but not of society as a whole.
Finally Ibn Rushd himself explicitly stresses
the futility of attempts to elaborate "ra춻
tionalized" forms of religion.
Like his Eastern predecessors, Ibn Rushd
considered it essential to interpret allegcr-
ically those passages in the Qur'an which
contradict philosophical principles of
understanding the world, but he favoured
an even sharper dividing-line between the
realm of knowledge and that of faith, be춻
tween science and religion. Al-F칙r칙b칦 toler춻
ated the activity of speculative theologians
in the ideal State, while reducing the role of
mm
-V
Coins from al-Andalus and the Maghreb
(from top to bottom): Yahya al-Mam칲m
dirham, Toledo, 1069 AD; 'Abb칛did dinar
of al-Mu'tamid, Seville, 1082 AD; Almor-
avid dinar of All Ibn Yusuf, Fez, 1 132 AD.
27
## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=28) 游
### 70467: Ibn Rushd and the Islamic philosophical tradition
lllil
theology to that of a servant of philosophy,
content to underpin the positions taken by
the ruling philosophers. On the other hand
Ibn Rushd, in his Commentary on Plato's
Republic, excludes theologians from the
affairs of State. Moreover, he recommends
that Muslim leaders should ban the works of
theologians because they contain within
them the seeds of dissidence, and may en춻
courage the appearance of all kinds of sects,
which could plunge society into the abyss of
civil war.
The above remarks systematically con춻
tradict the idea, still too often put forward,
that Arab philosophers were mere com춻
mentators, just capable of repeating, with
greater or lesser degrees of success, the
doctrines of their Greek masters from the
Classical or Hellenistic periods. In fact,
their relationship with the philosophical
tradition of Antiquity was infinitely more
selective, critical and creative. Arabic phi춻
losophy, as exemplified by Ibn Rushd and
his Eastern predecessors, was a philosophy
which responded to the demands of prog춻
ressive forces in "theologized" societies,
which were qualitatively a far cry from the
society of Antiquity. The ground was there춻
by prepared for a philosophical thought
freed from the grip of the Church that of
medieval Western Europe, the Renaissance
and modern times. The legacy of the East춻
ern and Western traditions of the Muslim
world thus blended into the creative philo춻
sophical thought of all mankind.
H
IM .
; -V I I
*M췉i<-4^Wj>^
(^^WJU-^t, i- >Jl췉9췉) , taiiC^칬i춺_iX춺.fl	_	,",
ARTUR VLAD1MIROVICH SAGADEEV is a
Soviet specialist in Arabic Muslim philosophical
studies. He is the author of around a hundred
publications in this field, notably three mono춻
graphs on al-F칛r칛bi, Ibn Sln칛 and Ibn Rushd,
and has also translated into Russian many texts
by medieval and contemporary Arabic thinkers.
Director of the Islamic studies group at the
Institute of Scientific Information in Social Sci춻
ences of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR,
he is also a member of the scientific advisory
board on the history of philosophy of the USSR
Philosophical Society.
Top, page from an early 15th-century
manuscript copied In Maghrebi Arabic
script of the Kitab al-Kull칦y칙t ("Book of the
General Principles ofMedicine"), the basic
medical work of Averro칢s. Right, manu춻
script page in the same script ofAverro칢s'
book The Syntheses, with marginal notes
in Arabic, Hebrew and Latin. The book
contains six treatises, each of which is a
commentary on a work of Aristotle.
춸
*칥$ 춺^Ale i^cir ijs침? r.( tr>
- ...Mir-.,
. - - *. ..
' - -
췉 - -'.춺.- . 4 . . r. 'A/M
T > -* - -.- - ^ . . j, ._.!
- -
-
," * ...
- . .
	 	.- "... 	 	 l.iflfi 	 *춰
-
-
28
## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=29) 游
### 70471: Maimonides the humanist
Maimonides the humanist
by Angel S치enz-Badillos WHEN we cast our twentieth-cen춻
tury minds back to the work of a
medieval thinker, we must look
not so much for objective facts or accurate
theories which may have associations or
implications for our own period as for gen춻
eral attitudes.
A twelfth-century philosopher such as
Moses ben Maym칲n, or Maimonides, was
wholly a man of his time. He was influenced
by his personal circumstances he was an
emigrant and an exile for much of his life; by
the categories which shaped the evolution
of thought in the Jewish community; and by
the assumptions and problems which pre춻
occupied philosophy in his time. To this
extent, his thought reflects the peculiarities
of a minority religious community im춻
mersed in the main currents of predominant
Islamic thought in the Middle East, North
Africa and the greater part of Spain.
A superficial glance at the work of any
medieval philosopher may only reveal his
responses to problems arising from histor- ^
Two portraits of Maimonides: right, the
first known graphic representation of the
Hispano-Jewish philosopher appeared in
a book by Biagio Ugolini, Thesaurus anti-
quitatum sacrarum, published in Venice,
1744. Maimonides' name is written in Heb춻
rew in a banderole. Above, white marble
bas relief by Brenda Putnam dates from
1949. It is one of23 medallions which com춻
memorate the great legislators of human춻
ity and can be seen in the House of Repre춻
sentatives, Washington, D.C.
ccclxxxili 1' K 칠 / Jt.l I O cccIxjmv
I I
- w On
llur<in:m i- I ^ '
;
I
norttr .
in tu
.
:
ra. pal
Cur hue Own
al Mtr칞illiili l mm Onuiiffin
, H. fern. H
I
I
I
INDI X .1
A XIV.
liU-|rilr.n 췉
'
춸
CON
29
## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=30) 游
### 70471: Maimonides the humanist
f
v
GRERADHJa
!-
<
춸
Three o칤 many postage stamps com춻
memorating Maimonides from different
countries. From left to right, 1967 Spanish
stamp depicting his statue in C칩rdoba;
1953 stamp from Israel; stamp issued by
Grenada In 1970.
Fragment of a holograph manuscript on
paper of the "Commentary on the Mishna ",
written in Arabic with Hebrew characters,
as was Maimonides' custom. A commen춻
tary on the first "Order" of the Mishna, it
was written around 1 168 AD, shortly after
its author's arrival in Cairo.
k , t f oJ>
01 r-; 춲-* rU"o:
,.,.r- . , . .
>;J i;:3
j>Jp' i,'Ka "칯- -n}hyt K'Jihi -췉i-Uv** .'칲* A)> 3*f
."fu ^?i ^'f<ji,tvj ,
->/i" riiu i.i^s-'.i fcJ/^ V
,T1>V ou> .vu "f륹lfifj tve 춲 ""*"* Wj* 췉 r'-' '
v. n,v yy V췉 fr)*"1 JJ Vfh -ai *nf춺r<칤>
-: > v 'hi -oVM I- -oO/췉
' {wv>r**~ ripiy> pjrrjJi ivjt'v ,.jt^
irr ;J칤 i,w tJ'^jf-'^r
<ZXjy?> vjti칲fa 5J<*췉 췉ft*췉,f췉 W 'Miff 1칐P
&l칤
. Si fil
V
. >v>
.i i-
t칤o n# y
i .
-j^.
o
m
춸
30
## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=31) 游
### 70471: Maimonides the humanist
ical circumstances, and may thus overlook a
much deeper dimension. It seldom happens
that great thinkers radically overturn the
categories of their time; instead they usually
take such categories as their starting point
and go on to open up new possibilities and
directions for human thought and conduct
to explore, so that giant strides forward may
be made, untrammelled by the spider web
of current ideas. This attitude of transcend춻
ing time, of standing poised at a turning
point, distinguishes the great thinkers of the
past. We would venture to suggest that
Maimonides was undoubtedly one of the
great medieval thinkers and one of those
who most successfully broke new ground.
While most of his fellow Jews saw a radi춻
cal opposition between the universe of their
faith, the Torah or Law of Moses, and the
universe of human knowledge, science and
philosophy inherited from the Greeks,
Maimonides was one of the masters of
Judaic learning who clearly understood that
such a dichotomy was spurious. In his view,
the human sciences cannot be diametrically
opposed to faith; instead, they must com춻
plement it and help to make it more pro춻
found.
Ultimately, the contents of Aristotelian
philosophy and those of the Jewish faith
share the same essence. For Maimonides,
the religious ideal is attainable only by
someone who is capable of assimilating
knowledge of both the human and the
divine. Moses and Aristotle join hands to
help humanity to the summit of perfection,
namely the knowledge and love of God. We
should remember that the society in which
he lived, and especially his own Jewish com춻
munity, held a totally religious and God-
centred view of the universe. Maimonides
did not break with this position, but he insis춻
ted that room must be made for another,
more specifically human, component: rea춻
son or philosophy. Few medieval thinkers
did more than he to end the conflict
between faith and reason.
Maimonides' rationalism is a facet of his
humanism. To be a rationalist in the Middle
Ages meant casting out ontological horror
of the supernatural and the unknown, put춻
ting an end to irrational human fears, com춻
bating all kinds of alienation and refusing to
accept any of the moral imperatives
imposed on humanity by some arbitrary
Will: in other words, it meant humanizing
the faith of the believer. Medieval man was
fundamentally a believer, as was Mai춻
monides. His efforts, however, were
directed towards building a much more
human universe, albeit still with God at its
centre. Man, the being who aspires to a
loving union with God, will attain this ulti춻
mate aim only by fully realizing his human
potential, by leading a more worthy life and
by casting out ignorance in order to improve
his conduct.
Maimonides wished to help his contem춻
poraries to free themselves from their per춻
plexities, from all kinds of superstitions
which enslaved them and even from the
passions which dragged them down and pre춻
vented them from becoming fully human.
To emphasize the rational aspect was not,
as he saw it, to reject the theocentric pattern
of his universe, but to readjust the focus on
춸
Twelfth century miniature depicting Mai춻
monides examining a flask of urine. As
well as a philosopher and religious think춻
er, Moses ben Maym칲n was, like Ibn
Rushd, one of the greatest physicians of
his time, and in his numerous medical
works (Commentary on the Aphorisms of
Hippocrates, Compendium of the Books of
Galen, Treatise on Asthma, Guide to Good
Health ...) he summarized and developed
contemporary knowledge in this field.
reality so that everything was in its proper
place. Man does not accede to divine love
through false mysticism, on the paths of
irrationality where he can disguise his igno춻
rance, but on the highroad to knowledge,
wisdom and learning in the human sciences,
complemented by theology. As man
advances along this highroad, he must
never renounce the use of his own intel춻
ligence or be lured away by the irrational
and unknown. Likewise in the field of eth춻
ics, man is not the plaything of an arbitrary
Supreme Being; the commandments con춻
tained in the Law of Moses all have a reason
for their existence and are not obligations
capriciously imposed on the human will.
Maimonides thus constructed a style of
humanism which was still religious, but
which was primarily human.
This humanism led him to combat the
alienation of man and everything which
diverted him from his true purpose in the
universe. Maimonides opposed all kinds of
idolatry, because he considered it to be one
of the most dangerous forms of alienation:
to worship the spheres, the stars or graven
images, to become a slave to superstition, to
believe in astrology or to practise any kind
of primitive religious rites, prevents man
from realizing his full potential. Even fever춻
ish involvement in an economic activity that
is not necessary for the fulfilment of one's
own needs he regarded as another form of
alienation, comparable to becoming a slave
to the basest passions. For Maimonides,
reason and knowledge represent true liber춻
ation for humanity.
The evil that exists in the universe is not
the work of God, but the consequence of
what some human beings do to others, or
the harm that man does to himself. And
nearly always, it is a consequence of ig춻
norance. Only knowledge, which for the
human being is akin to the gift of sight, is
capable of driving out enmity and hatred.
Someone without knowledge is like a blind
man stumbling against walls and blundering
into other people. One of the evils that
people can inflict on one another is tyranny.
True knowledge is the necessary
condition for the historical redemption of
humanity.
Such is Maimonides' breadth of spirit that
it transcends the narrow bounds of the
majority of his fellow worshippers, and he
thinks not so much in Jewish categories as in
a new and universal dimension. The way to
God is not reserved for the chosen people,
but is open to all humankind. The great
Greek philosophers had travelled far along
the road to true knowledge, just as the
promises in the Bible were made not only to
Jewish people but to all humanity.
Thus Maimonides remains loyal to the
faith of his ancestors, but at the same time
he embraces all peoples with his genuinely
universal outlook. Despite having suffered
from it personally, he never gives way to the
temptation of fanaticism. He believes that
the other monotheistic religions have
played a positive role in preparing the world
for knowledge of the one true God and his
Law. And although he sees all problems
from the point of view of a devout Jew, his
interpretation of the Law of Moses points
the way towards better human understand춻
ing and a greater sense of the brotherhood
of man. In this respect he was ahead of his
time.
Maimonides has been criticized for fail춻
ing to condemn slavery, for speaking con춻
temptuously of half-savage peoples and for
taking a very negative view of women and
their role in society. It is true that he did not
radically break out of the categories of his
time on these issues, but he did succeed in
pointing out new directions through his con춻
ception of human dignity.
He saw the individual hidden behind the
outward fa칞ade of the slave, he pleaded for
the redemption of the oppressed through
education and fairer working conditions,
and he placed women on an equal spiritual
footing with men. He did not break with the
past, but endeavoured to change the system
of values and the attitudes of his day in
order to build a more truly humane society.
Herein, I believe, lies the source of his rele춻
vance to the present and his ability to influ춻
ence modern thought. a
ANGEL SAENZ-BADILLOS, of Spain, teaches
Hebrew language and literature at the University
of Granada and formerly taught at the Com-
plutensian University, Madrid. He has published
a number of studies on medieval Hebrew-Span춻
ish philology and poetry and on the history of
biblical exegesis in Spain.
31
## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=32) 游
### 70473: The Prophet, the scholar and the statesman
The prophet, the scholar
and the statesman
by Roland Goetschel
THE philosophy of Moses Mai춻
monides lies at the convergence of
Jewish and Arab-Islamic thought;
this explains the considerable importance
accorded to political activity in his thinking
and practice. This article is an attempt to
rediscover the coherence of this philosophy
through a discussion of his major work, The
Guide of the Perplexed.
The need for political order. The starting
point of Maimonides' thought is the nature
of man whom, like Aristotle, he considers
to be naturally a political animal. While
other living creatures can very well look
after themselves without help from other
members of their species, this is not the case
with the individual isolated human, who
outside society would in the normal course
of events be doomed to perish before very
long. Man's food requirements alone neces춻
sitate the existence of an elaborate technol춻
ogy and a multiple division of labour, which
would be inconceivable outside a political
system: "This is why men need someone to
guide and unite them, so that their society
can be organized and perpetuated and so
that they can give one another mutual assis춻
tance."
For Maimonides the need for govern춻
ment also emerges from the great diversity
which exists between different members of
the human species. There is need for a guide
who can remedy what is defective and mod춻
erate what is excessive, who can impose a
common and permanent law on the mem춻
bers of a society.
He distinguishes three kinds of political
regimes. First, conventional legal regimes
in which the aim of the legislator is simply to
ensure that the affairs of the community are
transacted in an orderly fashion, without
insisting on the improvement of man and his
rational faculty. The regime of Divine Law
is different in the sense that it is concerned
not only with material and social improve춻
ment but also with man's spiritual welfare,
leading him to eternal happiness. There are
also regimes which claim to be prophetic
For Maimonides, "the regime of Divine
Law ... is concerned not only with material
and social improvement but also with
man's spiritual welfare" (R. Goetschel).
Opposite page, the Tables of the Law (the
code which Moses, the great legislator,
gave to the Jewish people during the Ex춻
odus) from the Ben Ezra synagogue, Fos춻
tat (Old Cairo). Above, an illumination rep춻
resenting the Exodus of the Hebrews,
taken from a manuscript of the Hebrew
Haggada (book derived from the Talmud).
This manuscript, copied in Spain in the
14th century, is today preserved in the
Budapest Academy of Sciences (Kauf춻
mann Collection).
32
## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=33) 游
### 70473: The Prophet, the scholar and the statesman
쯊/칦
* r' % -BfcW,.
and which have in fact borrowed all or part
of their content from the true prophetic
regime.
The prophet, the scholar and the states춻
man. Although all men possess the faculty
of governing, this faculty will not be fully
developed unless a man has brought his
rational and his imaginative faculties to a
state of perfection. If such is the case, he
will be able to become a prophet when a
divine emanation flows first of all into his
intellect, then into his imagination. If this
divine influence flows only into the man's
intellect without being received by his imag춻
ination, he becomes a scholar who devotes
himself to speculation. Conversely, if the
divine emanation touches only his imagina춻
tion without influencing his intellect, he will
join the ranks of statesmen who make laws,
or those of soothsayers or interpreters of
omens.
It is clear from the above that con춻
ventional legal regimes are set up by politi춻
cians who draw substance from their imag춻
ination alone, while the regime of Divine
Law is based on a prophetic gift, necessitat춻
ing the two-fold perfection of the rational
and the imaginative faculties. The true
prophet combines the capacities of the pol춻
itician and the scholar, while surpassing
them both. The influence working on his
intellect brings him the speculative insights
which enable him to grasp the essential
nature of things and makes him a superior
philosopher.
The prophecy of Moses. The divine ema춻
nation sometimes comes to the prophet
with a force sufficient for him to attain per
fection for himself, and sometimes with a
superabundance that allows him to strive to
transform others. There are many degrees
of prophets as there are many degrees of
scholars. Maimonides also makes a major
distinction between Moses and the other
prophets. All prophets except Moses
received the prophecy through an angel,
whereas to Moses God spoke directly.
In his commentary on Chapter XXXIII of
the Book ofExodus, Maimonides returns to
the subject of Moses as legislator. If God
would not reveal his essence to Moses, he
nevertheless made known to him the thir춻
teen attributes of God which allowed Moses
to understand the nature of living beings
and the links between them, thus teaching
him how to govern over them. The ultimate
aim of this revelation is therefore to estab춻
lish political order: "And that was the final
aim of his demand, for he ended by saying:
that I may know thee, that I may find favour
in thy sight and consider that this nation is
thy people, which I must govern by means
similar to thine." The ruler of the ideal city
will therefore govern his State as far as pos춻
sible according to the model furnished by
God as ruler of the world.
The finality of the Divine Law. The object
of the Law is to bring man to a full realiza춻
tion of both his spiritual and his bodily exis춻
tence. This is achieved by the institution of
civil peace as well as through the individual
acquisition of virtues useful to society. The
Law of Moses therefore carries within it a
two-fold perfection: it establishes a perfect
community, and it produces in man right춻
eous ideas which will lead to happiness.
True human perfection is not found
where it is commonly supposed. Most peo춻
ple think that perfection lies in assets which
include the possession of power. As Mai춻
monides wrote, "the possession of the title
of a great king belongs to this class." But
such perfection is external to the human
essence. The two other perfections, that of
the body and even moral perfection, are
themselves only a means to intellectual per춻
fection, which reaches its highest degree in
the knowledge of God.
However, as Maimonides points out in a
reference to The Book ofJeremiah, on the
last page of the Guide, knowledge of God
must not remain speculative, it should lead
mankind to ensure that solidarity, law and
justice prevail on earth. To know God is
therefore to submit to ethical restraints, and
this ultimate requirement should be the pri춻
ority of the ideal ruler, for he more than all
other men created in the image of God must
accomplish "the imitation of God", the sov춻
ereign ruler of the universe.
ROLAND GOETSCHEL, of France, is director of
the Department of Hebrew and Jewish Studies,
and of the Centre for Hebrew Studies and
Research at the University of Strasbourg. For춻
merly a staff member of the department of
Hebrew at the University of Paris VIII, he is an
associate professor at the Martin Buber Institute,
Brussels, and teaches at the Ecole des hautes
칠tudes en sciences sociales, Paris. He is the
author of several published works in the field of
Hebrew studies.
33
## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=34) 游
### 70479: 1986: Year of Peace, 9
1986: Year of Peace/ 9
In this article, Professor Jean Dausset
(Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine,
1980) highlights the benefits of bio춻
logical diversity, and stresses the
unavoidable incompatibility between
science and racism as an important fac춻
tor in efforts to establish peace.
FEAR of difference, sometimes going so far
as rejection, is a widespread reflex. Chil춻
dren are afraid of being different from
their peers. Adolescents are the first to follow
fashions. But, much more seriously, adults are
almost instinctively wary of all those who do not
belong to their group or community; this leads to
neighbourhood rivalry, argument between
administrative bodies, conflict between nations,
religious or racial hatred.
This reflex is however both a biological ab춻
surdity and a basic error where cultural life is
concerned. Three concepts from biology may
help to clarify the issue:
First, each living being is different, even
unique, since there are so many possible varia춻
tions in its chemical composition. It is the product
of a combination of paternal and maternal
characters, which themselves came from a mix춻
ture of the characters of four grandparents.
Moreover, these characters, or genes, show
multiple variations within populations. In man,
the number of possible combinations exceeds, it
has been said, the number of atoms in the known
universe. In each generation new beings thus
appear, fruits of the genetic lottery, unique
because formed from an entirely new combina춻
tion of genetic characters. Nature has taken
good care to ensure that this mixing happens at
regular intervals: sexual reproduction and death
repeat it for each generation.
Second, according to Darwinian natural selec춻
tion, those individuals which fortuitously receive
the combinations which render them best
adapted to live in a certain environment, survive
and produce most descendants, whereas the
least well adapted produce fewer descendants.
Thus, thanks to the diversity of the individuals of
which it is composed, a species will be able to
adapt to changes that may occur in the environ춻
ment or climate, or to the appearance of new
parasites or pathogenic agents. Difference
between individuals is thus an absolute neces춻
sity for the perpetuation of a species. It is basic to
all animal and plant life.
Third, the environment shapes varieties within
species: the North African swallow is not Identi춻
cal to the Norwegian swallow; the Italian poplar
differs from that of northern Europe; the Mediter춻
ranean human type is not the same as the Nordic
type. The influence of the environment on mod춻
ern man is perhaps less than it was, but it
remains a determining factor on his psychology.
Two identical twins, who do not differ genetically,
are subjected to different external influences,
especially if they are separated, and thus
become two different beings. Only man moves
from individuality to personality, because only
man appropriates a cultural heritage from his
social environment. . v
It is thus clear that the uniqueness of each
person confers on him or her an individual dignity
which is an additional reason, if any were neces춻
sary, for respecting that person; that this unique춻
ness should not make us forget that each person
belongs to the great human family, which is also
unique; that the concept of "racial purity" is
totally meaningless, since all standardization
leads to death. Thus, without losing its identity, a
people must encourage the introduction of new
genes from elsewhere. Finally, experience plays
a paramount role in the mental and spiritual
development of mankind.
In the melting pot of Western Europe, a human
community with a number of common genetic
traits has developed. The relative isolation of the
provinces over a long period, inter-village mar춻
riages, diversity of climate and origins have
favoured differences which modern means of
communication are tending to obliterate.
These biological truths can easily be trans춻
posed by analogy to the cultural level.
The diversity of living, authentic cultures,
which were even more plentiful in the last cen춻
tury, is a treasure of inestimable value. The dis춻
appearance of a culture is an irreparable loss,
comparable to the extinction of an animal or plant
species.
Each culture is characterized by its customs,
its conception of the place of mankind in the
universe, its beliefs. Each has its rituals, its
modes of dress, each contributes to the incredi춻
ble range of plastic arts or architecture, music,
song, dance and all the other manifestations of
mankind's creative imagination. Each has given
humanity scientific discoveries or new technol춻
ogies to ease the workload or relieve suffering.
These ideas, these dances, these techniques
are, as in the field of biology, the fruit of multiple
interactions between man and his surroundings.
This deep-seated adaptation of cultures to their
environment was striking before the intrusion of
western technology; it takes a long time for such
a symbiosis to develop.
Differences between cultures alone allow
comparisons, the confrontation of ideas, ideol춻
ogies and aspirations. They allow concepts to be
enlarged and enriched. They allow discoveries
and technologies to spread through the whole
body of humanity, in a word they allow evolution
through the choice of the highest values. In this
way, by stages, the cultural evolution of human춻
ity has progressed for thousands of years. No
animal has profited like man from the experience
of other groups; this is a unique feature of the
history of the evolution of life.
Diversity of cultures is thus a priceless trea춻
sure which must be jealously preserved. If diver춻
sity is to persist, cultures must remain alive, that
is, be capable of evolving through contact with
others. Folklore is fossilized culture.
Most Important of all, there should be harmo춻
nious co-existence between these diverse cul춻
tures, cohabitation accepted without discrimina춻
tion, without reservations, without preconceived
ideas. The most pernicious of the latter Is the
establishment of a cultural hierarchy in which
one's own culture is of course high on the list.
Just as there is no hierarchy between men and
womenthey are simply differentso there is
no hierarchy between cultures: they are for춻
tunately different.
We are today faced with two major risks: stan춻
dardization and intolerance.
The standardization of cultures, as in biology,
leads to the cessation of evolution, therefore to
death. We already have a bitter foretaste of
this.
Intolerance, more than indifference, secretes
internecine conflicts and leads ultimately
through incomprehension and the closing of
minds and frontiers, to the same result as stan춻
dardization: the end of evolution.
Wisdom lies in open-mindedness, In listening
to others, in a spirit of total equality.
The French writer Antoine de Saint-Exup칠ry
(1900-1944) magnificently encapsulated this
mental attitude when he wrote, "If you are dif춻
ferent from me, brother, far from harming me,
you enrich me." a
Jean Dausset
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Office:
Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris.
Subscription rates
1 year: 78 French francs. Binder for a year's issues:
56 FF
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly.
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be
reprinted providing the credit line reads "Reprinted from the
UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three voucher
copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles reprinted must bear
author's name. Non-copyright photos will be supplied on request.
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompanied
by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed arti춻
cles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of the
UNESCO COURIER. Photo captions and headlines are written
by the Unesco Courier staff. The boundaries on maps published
in the magazine do not imply official endorsement or acceptance
by Unesco or the United Nations. The Unesco Courier is pro춻
duced in microform (microfilm and/or microfiche) by: (1 ) Unesco,
7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris; (2) University Microfilms
(Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A.; (3) N.CR. Micro-
card Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 1 1 1 West 40th Street, New York,
U.S.A.: (4) Sell and Howell Co., Old Mansfield Road, Wooster,
Ohio 44691, U.S.A.
Editorial staff (Paris)
Assistant Editor-in-chief: Olga Rodel
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb
Editors:
English: Roy Malkin
French: Alain L칠v칡que
Neda el Khazen
Spanish: Francisco Fernandez-Santos
Jorge Enrique Adoum
Russian: Nikolai Kuznetsov
Arabic: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoudi
Braille: Frederick Potter
Research: Violette Ringelstein
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey
Layout and Design: Georges Servat, George Ducret
Promotion: Fernando Ainsa
Sales and subscriptions: Henry Knobil
Special projects: Peggy Julien
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-
Chief in Paris
Non-Headquarters editions
German: Werner Merkli (Berne)
Japanese: Seiichiro Kojima (Tokyo)
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome)
Hindi: Ram Babu Sharma (Delhi)
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras)
Hebrew: Alexander Bro칥do (Tel Aviv)
Persian:
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp)
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro)
Turkish: Mefra llgazer (Istanbul)
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi)
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona)
Malaysian: Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur)
Korean: Paik Syeung-Gil (Seoul)
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwah (Dar-es-Salaam)
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene:
Bozidar Perkovic (Belgrade)
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing)
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia)
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens)
Sinhala: S.J. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo)
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki)
Swedish: Lina Svenz칠n (Stockholm)
Basque: Gurutz Larra침aga (San Sebastian)
Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok)
34 IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) - D칠p칪t l칠gal : C 1 - Septembre 1986 -
PHOTOCOMPOSITION : Ateliers de I'UNESCO - PHOTOGRAVURE-IMPRESSION : MAURY-IMPRIMEUR S.A., Z.I. route d칄tampes, 45330 MALESHERBES.
## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=35) 游
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Just published...
Much has happened to the notion of human rights
since the Universal Declaration was proclaimed
by the United Nations in 1948. Philosophical
Foundations of Human Rights, a collection of
essays prepared by Unesco and the International
Institute of Philosophy, with an introduction by
Paul Ricoeur, represents Unesco's contribution
to the conviction that in this field there exist in
different communities differing philosophical
traditions that call for clear assessment.
Eighteen authors from every geocultural region
of the world examine the origins of the Declar춻
ation, Western perspectives on individual and
collective rights, non-Western perspectives on
human rights and human duties, and post-colo춻
nial perspectives, notably from Africa and Latin
America, on rights in relation to unjust suffering.
The analyses presented by Western contributors
on enlarging the 17lh- and 18th-century Euro춻
pean and American philosophical base of both
individual and social rights dovetail with the
observations of non-Wcstcrn thinkers who find in
their own intellectual and spiritual traditions a
foundation for reformulating many of these
ri춺hts in other terms.
340 pages
ISBN 92-3-102201-6
85 French francs
Philosophical
foundations
of
I'rcivirrJ bf Vimcu 췉췉J the lnlcrmtimul Inv.ilutc 췉I r-hilowpliy
wuh jn iMtojiKiion b춺 Paul Ricoeur
1
Where to renew your subscription
and place your order for other Unesco publications
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National Distributor in your country.
(See list below; names of distributors in countries not listed, along with subscription rates
in local currency, will be supplied on request.)
AUSTRALIA. Hunter Publications, 58a Gipps St.. Collmgwood, Victoria 3066:
Publications: Educational Supplies Pty. Ltd.. P.O. Box 33. Brookvale 2100,
NSW; Periodicals: Dominie Pty. Subscriptions Dept.. P.O. Box 33. Brookvale
2100. NSW. Sub-agent: United Nations Association of Australia, P O. Box
175. 5th floor. Ana House, 28 Elizabeth St.. Melbourne. Victoria 3000.
AUSTRIA. Buchhandlung Gerold and Co.. Graben 31. A-1011, Vienna.
BAHAMAS. Nassau Stationers Ltd., P.O. Box N-3138, Nassau. BAHRAIN.
The Arabian Agencies and Distributing Co., AI Mutanabi St., P.O. Box 156,
Manama. BANGLADESH. Bangladesh Books International Lid., Irtefaq Build춻
ing, 1, R.K. Mission Rd., Hatkhola, Dacca 3. BARBADOS. University of the
West Indies Bookshop. Cave Hill Campus, P.O. Box 64, Bridgetown.
BELGIUM. "Unesco Courier" Dutch edition only: N.V. Handelmaatschappij
Keesing. Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurne-Antwerpen. French edition and
general Unesco publications agent: Jean de Lannoy. 202 Ave. du Roi, 1060
Brussels, CCP 000-0070823-13. BOTSWANA. Botswana Book Centre, P.O.
Box 91, Gaborone. BURMA. Trade Corporation No. 9, 550-552 Merchant
Street, Rangoon. CANADA. Renouf Publishing Co. Ltd., 2182 St. Catherine
St. West, Montreal, Qu칠. H3H 1M7. CHINA. China National Publications
Import and Export Corporation. P.O. Box 88. Beijing. CYPRUS. "MAM",
Archbishop Makanos 3rd Avenue. P.O. Box 1722. Nicosia.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L.. Spalena 51-1 13 02. Prague 1 : Ve Smeckach
30. P.O.B. 790-1 1 1-27 Prague 1 (Permanent display): Zahranicni literatura. 1 1
Soukenicka, Prague 1 . For Slovakia only: Alfa Verlag.-Publishers, Hurbanovo
nam. 6,893 31 Bratislava-CSSR. DENMARK. Munksgaard Export-OG. Tids-
sknrtservice, 35 Norre Sogade. DK-1970 Kobenhavn K. EGYPT (ARAB
REPUBLIC OF). National Centre for Unesco Publications. No. 1 Talaat Harb
St., Cairo, ETHIOPIA. National Agency for Unesco, P.O. Box 2996. Addis
Ababa. FINLAND. Akateemmen Kirjakauppa, Keskuskatu 1, SF-00100 Hel춻
sinki 1 0; Suomalainen Kirjakauppa Oy, Koivuvaarankuja 2, 01 640 Vantaa 64.
FRANCE. Librairie de l'Unesco. 7 Place de Fontenoy. 75700 Pans. CCP
12598-48. GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Buchhaus Leipzig, Post춻
fach 1 40, 71 0 Leipzig, or from Internationalen Buchhandlungen in the G D.R.
FED. REP. OF GERMANY. For the Unesco Courier (German, English, French
and Spanish editions): Mr. H. Baum. Deutscher Unesco-Kurier Vertrieb,
Basaltstrasse 57. D5300 Bonn 3. GHANA. Presbyterian Bookshop Depot Ltd.,
P.O. Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Ltd , P.O. Box 7869, Accra; The
University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; The University Bookshop of Cape
Coast; The University Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon GREAT
BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. HONG KONG. Federal Publications (HK)
Ltd., 5A Evergreen Industrial Mansion. 12 Yrp Fat St., Abderdeen. Swindon
Book Co., 13-15. Lock Rd., Kowloon. Hong Kong Govt. Information Services.
Publication Centre. Baskerville House, 22 Ice St. HUNGARY. Kultura-
Bushimporl-ABT, P.O.B. 149-H-13S9, Budapest 62. ICELAND. Snaebjorn
Jonsson and Co., H.F. Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. INDIA. UBS Publishers'
Distributors Ltd , 5 Ansan Road, P.O. Box N춿 701 5. New Delhi 1 1 0002. Orient
Longman Ltd., KamaniMarg, Ballard Estate, Bombay 400038; 17Chitaranjan
Ave., Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, Madras 2; 5-9-41/1 Bashir
Bagh. Hyderabad 500001 (AP); 80/1 Mahatma Gandhi Rd.. Bangalore
560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda, Hyderabad-500001. Sub-depots: Oxford Book
and Stationery Co., 17 Park St.. Calcutta 70016; Scindia House, New Delhi;
Publication Unit. Ministry of Education and Culture, Ex. AFO Hutments, Dr.
Rajendra Prasad Rd.. New Delhi, 1 1 0001 . INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers
and Booksellers, 29 Jl. Oto Iskandardinata 111, Jakarta; Indira P.T.. Jl Dr. Sam
Ratuiangie 37, Jakarta Pusat IRAN. Kharazmie Publishing and Distribution
Co., 28 Vcssal Shirazi St., Engh칠lab Ave., P.O. Box 314/1486. Teheran;
Iranian Nat Comm. for Unesco. 1 1 88 Englab Ave., Rostam Give Building, Zip
Code 13158, P.O. Box 1 1365-4498, Teheran. IRAQ. McKenzies Bookshop,
Al Rashid St., Baghdad. IRELAND. The Educational Company of Ireland Ltd.,
Ballymount Rd., Walkinstown. Dublin 12. ISRAEL. A.B.C. Bookstore Ltd.,
P.O. Box 1283, 71 Allenby Rd., Tel Aviv 61000. ITALY. Licosa (Librer칤a
Commissionaria Sansoni, S p A ), Via Lamarmora 45, Casella Postale 552.
50121 Florence. JAMAICA. Sangster's Bookstores Ltd , PO. Box 366, 101
Water Lane, Kingston; University of the West Indies Bookshop, Mona, Kings춻
ton. JAPAN. Eastern Book Service Inc., 37-3 Hongo 3-chome Bunkyo-ku.
Tokyo 1 1 3. KENYA. East African Publishing House, P.O. Box 30571 , Nairobi;
Africa Book Services Ltd.. Quran House, Mfangano St., P.O. Box 45245.
Nairobi. KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O Box Central
64, Seoul. KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., Ltd, POB 2942, Kuwait;lor the
Unesco Courier: Farafalla Press Agency, P.O. Box SAFA 4541, Kuwait.
LESOTHO. Mazenod Book Centre, P.O. Mazenod, Lesotho, Southern Africa.
LIBERIA. Code and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286. Monrovia.
LIECHTENSTEIN. Eurocan Trust Reg. P.O.B. 5-9494 Schaan. LIBYAN
ARAB JAMAHIRIYA. Agency for Development of Publication and Distribu춻
tion. P.O. Box 34-35, Tripoli. LUXEMBOURG. Librairie Paul Br칲ck, 22.
Grande-Rue, Luxembourg MALAWI. Malawi Book Service, Head Office. P.O.
Box 30044 Chichin, Blantyre 3 MALAYSIA. University of Malaya Co-Opera
tive Bookshop, Kuala Lumpur 22-11. MALTA. Sapienzas, *26 Republic St.
Valletta. MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd.. 30 Bourbon St.. Port-Louis.
MONACO. British Library, 30 Bd. des Moulins, Monte Carlo. NEPAL. Sajha
Prakashan Polchowk, Kathmandu. NETHERLANDS. Keesing Boeken B.V..
Joan Muyskenweg. 22, Postbus 1118. 1000 BC Amsterdam.
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. Van Dorp-Eddme N.V.. P.O. Box 200. Willem-
stad. Cura칞ao. NA. NEW ZEALAND. Government Publishing. P.O. Box
14277-Kilbirnie, Wellington; 130 Oxford Terrace, P.O. Box 1721, Christ-
church; Alma St., P.O. Box 857, Hamilton; Princes St.. P.O. Box 1104,
Dunedm. NIGERIA. The University Bookshop of Ife; The University Bookshop
of Ibadan, P.O. 286; The University Bookshop of Nsukka; The University
Bookshop of Lagos; The Ahmadu Bello University Bookshop of Zaria.
" NORWAY. Johan Grundt Tanum, P.O.B. 1 177 Sentrum Oslo 1. Narvesen
A/S; Subscription and Trade Book Service, P.O.B. 6125 Etterstad, Oslo 6;
Universitets Bokhandelen, Universitetssentret, Postboks 307 Blmdern, Oslo
3. PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-i-azam, P.O. Box No.
729, Lahore 3; Unesco Publications Centre, Regional Office for Book De춻
velopment in Asia and the Pacific, 39 Delhi Housing Society, P.O. Box 8950,
Karachi 29. PHILIPPINES. National Book Store, Inc.. 701 , Riza! Ave.. Manila
D-404. POLAND. Orpan-lmport, Palac Kultury I Nauki. Warsaw; Ars Polona-
Ruch, Krakowskie Przedmiescie No.7. 00-068 Warsaw. PORTUGAL. Dias &
Andrade Ltda. Livrana Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. SEYCHELLES.
National Bookshop, P O. Box 48, Mah칠. New Service Ltd., Kingsgate House.
P.O. Box 131, Mah칠. SIERRA LEONE. Fourah Bay. Njala University and
Sierra Leone Diocesan Bookshops, Freetown. SINGAPORE. Federal Pub춻
lications (S) Pte Ltd. Times Jurong, 2 Jurong Port Rd.. Singapore 2261.
SOMALI DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Modern Bookshop and General, P.O.
Box 951. Mogadiscio. SOUTH AFRICA. For the Unesco Courier (single
copies) only: Central News Agency, P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. SRI
LANKA. Lake House Bookshop. 100 Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata,
P.O.B. 244. Colombo 2. SUDAN. AI Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118,
Khartoum, SWEDEN. All publications A/B CE. Fritzes Kungel, Hovbokhan-
del, Regenngsgatan 12. Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the Unesco
Courier: Svenska FN Forbundet, Skolgrand 2. Box 150 50 S-104. 65 Stock춻
holm; Wennergren-Williams, Box 30004-S-104. 25 Stockholm; Esselte Tids-
kriflscentralen, Gamla Brogatan 26, Box 62 - 101 20 Stockholm.
SWITZERLAND. All publications: Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich;
Librairie Payot. Rue Grenus 6, 1211. Geneva 11, C.C P. 12-236; Librairies
Payot also in Lausanne, Basle. Berne, Vevey, Montreux, Neuch칙tel and
Zurich. TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030, Dar-es-Salaam.
THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Ltd., 40-42 Charoen Krung Road. Siyaeg Phaya
Sri. P.O. Box 402, Bangkok; Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9. Rajdamnern Ave.,
Bangkok; Suksil Siam Company, 1715 Rama IV Road, Bangkok. TRINIDAD
AND TOBAGO. National Commission lor Unesco, 18 Alexandra St , St. Clair.
Trinidad W 1 . TURKEY. Haset Kitapevi A.S., Istikl칙l Caddesi. No 469, Posta
Kutusu 219, Beyoglu. Istanbul. UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, P O Box 71 45,
Kampala. UNITED KINGDOM. H. M. Stationery Office, H.M.S.O., P.O. Box
276, London SWS 5DT, and Govt. Bookshops in London. Edinburgh, Belfast.
Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol; for scientific maps only. McCarta Ltd., 122
Kings Cross Rd.. London WC1X 9DS. UNITED STATES. Unipub, 205 East
42nd St., New York, N. Y. ,1 001 7 Orders for books and periodicals' P.O. Box
1 222, Ann Arbor, Ml 481 06. USSR. V/O Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga, Ul. Dimitro-
va39, Moskva 113095. YEMEN. 14th October Corporation. P.O. Box 4227,
Aden. YUGOSLAVIA. Mladost, Ilica 30/11, Zagreb; Cankaneva Zalozba,
Zopitarjeva 2. Lubljana; Nolit, Terazije 27/11, Belgrade. ZAMBIA. National
Educational Distribution Co. of Zambia Ltd.. P.O. Box 2664, Lusaka
ZIMBABWE. Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd., 67 Union Ave., Harare.
## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070484engo.pdf#page=36) 游
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
C칩rdoba the splendid
In 923 AD the I may \ ad caliph of Cordoba "Abd al-Rahm칛n began
to build a "royal seat" for his court outside the city . Work on the new
royal residence, named Madinat al-Zahra or city of the flower, was
completed 50 years later by his successor al-Hakam II ai-Mustansir.
Sadly, the palace-city fell into almost immediate decline, and by the
12th century it already lay in ruins. Only in the present century have
its edifices been partially excavated and restored. With the Great
Mosque of C칩rdoba, Madinat al-Zahra illustrates the full flowering
of the art of al-Andalus. in which a variety of Oriental and Greco-
Roman influences blended into a style ofgreat originality . Some idea
of the splendour of this Cordob치n Versailles can be gauged from this
detail of the Sal칩n Rico or Royal Palace (Dar al-Mulk). which was
used as lodgings for visitors of royal stock.
-
U0
m
u
췉..te
mm
mm
m
Vs'.:,-'' t
('- ',-!'