# [159919](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf)
## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=1) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
1 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3
This document may be accessed online: www.unesco.org/courier
“Scholars have not paid adequate attention 
to the equity implications of climate 
change”, says Indian scientist Rajendra 
Pachauri, Chair of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2007 
Nobel Peace Prize. And he explains: “Thus 
far research has largely focused on the 
physical science aspects of climate change, 
the vulnerability aspects as well as on the 
options for mitigation. Now, however, there 
is growing awareness about equity as an 
ethical issue related to climate change.” 
Planet Hot-SPot
resources by the year 2050», adds Mathis Wacker-
nagel (Switzerland), giving alarming examples: «The 
United States uses twice what they have, whereas 
Egypt, Italy and Switzerland use three times as 
much as they have.». 
Experts agree: we are at a point where we 
«manage the unavoidable and avoid the unmanage-
able,» to quote Filippo Giorgi. However, there still 
is hope, as the entire planet is becoming aware of 
global warming and its dangers. 4
2008 - number 3 • ISSN 1993-8616
© Mark Bakker
Poster by Mark Bakker (The Netherlands), one of the laureates of 
the student contest organized by the International Year of Planet 
Earth.
“It is unrealistic to think we can suddenly reduce 
emissions drastically to stabilize concentrations at 
the current level or even to attain lower levels,” adds 
Italian climatologist Filippo Giorgi. Member of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and head 
of the Earth System Physics Section in UNESCO’s 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics Abdus 
Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
(Trieste, Italy). 
«Even according to the most optimistic fore-
casts, we will have to use twice our planet’s 
## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=2) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
2 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3
As evidence, the student contest organized by 
the International Year of Planet Earth which shows 
how much mentalities have evolved with respect to 
environment. The Courier presents the essay of 
Irish student Nikita White as well as a series of 
drawings from different parts of the world. 
The issue also presents two international pro-
grammes aiming to preserve our environment: the 
Global Network of National Geoparks and the Bio-
sphere Reserves. 
Our features include the fascinating story of the 
book in Amsterdam, nominated 2008 World Book 
Capital by UNESCO, as well as an interview pub-
lished posthumously of our colleague Tchicaya U 
Tam’si (1931-1988), considered one of the greatest 
African writers of the French language. 
 Jasmina Šopova 
Contents
Refugees of the 
future will be  
“climate refugees” 7
“If I was  
a grown up  
I would do  
something about it” 5
Turn off the lights 
please! 3
Neanderthal man  
at the seaside 10
How much  
can we spend? 12
Boost for  
biosphere  
reserves 14
Next month 22
Focus: 
Amsterdam:  
a paradise  
for book-lovers 16
Landmarks: 
The little leaf  
singing  
its country 19
Partners 22
4
## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=3) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
3 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3

### 159921: Turn off the lights please!
turn off the lights please!
Each one of us can show more respect towards Mother Nature, by changing his or her 
lifestyle, believes the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize Rajendra Pachauri. A follower of the 
Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam philosophy, who considers the universe like a family, he chairs 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Interview by Jasmina Šopova 
At the end of last year, the Nobel Peace Prize was 
attributed to IPCC which you chair and to America’s 
former vice-president Al Gore. Could this be seen as 
a sign of change in the world’s attitude towards 
global warming? 
Indeed the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to the IPCC 
and Mr. Al Gore is an important statement on what 
the Norwegian Nobel Committee sees as a danger to 
peace arising out of unmitigated climate change. 
Since the Nobel Peace Prize and the significance 
attached to it get a great deal of attention and cover-
age worldwide, hopefully people’s attitude towards 
this issue will be affected as a result. 
What are the impacts of climate change on peace? 
The impacts of climate change on peace can be numer-
ous. First, the availability of water is decreasing, 
water resources are under high stress in several parts 
of the world. Second, extreme events such as heat 
waves, floods, droughts and extreme  precipitation, 
© J. Lingaraj
Rajendra Pachauri.
coastal flooding as a result of sea level rise, can lead 
to population movements on a sizeable scale. The 
migration of large numbers of people can have an 
impact on peace, since the locations where such 
people move to may find this to be an unacceptable 
imposition. Finally, the impacts of climate change on 
agriculture could also lead to large scale malnutri-
tion, hunger and deprivation, which could end in con-
flict within communities and further movement of 
large numbers away from areas where food is scarce.
In your Nobel lecture, you highlight that scholars 
do not pay enough attention to the inequities aris-
ing from these changes, although they are part of 
the most significant aspects of the impacts of cli-
mate change. Could you develop this idea? 
Scholars have not paid adequate attention to the 
equity implications of climate change because thus 
far research has largely focused on the physical 4
© Thamirez Nogueira Magalhães (Brazil)
Drawing by Thamirez Nogueira Magalhães (Brazil), one of the 
laureates of the contest organized by the International Year  
of Planet Earth.
## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=4) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
4 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3

### 159921: Turn off the lights please!
 science aspects of climate change, the vulnerability 
aspects as well as on the options for mitigation. 
Now, however, there is growing awareness about 
equity as an ethical issue related to climate change. 
You head The Energy and Resource Institute which 
developed a germ that breaks down petrol. Can you 
explain how it works and what the results are? 
We have a major biotechnology programme in The 
Energy and Resources Institute, and some of our work 
has resulted in the development of microbes that 
consume petroleum products. This technology is 
being used now quite extensively for cleaning up oil 
spills and oil sludge deposits. Once the oil has been 
completely eaten up, the microbes perish without 
any environmental effects. 
You subscribe to the philosophy of Vasudhaiva 
Kutumbakam, which means the whole universe is 
one family. What is the role of Indian traditional 
culture in your work? 
It is difficult for me to identify what role Indian tra-
dition and culture play in my work, but having been 
brought up in this country and holding Indian tradi-
tion in great respect, I suppose everything I do is 
influenced by my upbringing and beliefs.
You believe that each one of us can do something 
for a better and safer world. What advice would you 
give our readers?
Each one of us can do a great deal to make this world 
better and safer. First, we must develop a belief in 
the need for protecting the environment. We must 
also realize the danger of treating Mother Nature 
with disrespect and of damaging the earth’s ecosys-
tems and natural resources. We could then find ways 
to minimize our footprint on the earth’s natural 
resources and ecosystems. This would involve simple 
things like switching off lights when we leave the 
room, using efficient energy consuming devices, 
using energy efficient transport such as public trans-
port, promoting the use of renewable forms of 
energy… We can bring about a lifestyle change in 
which we reduce reusing and recycling products that 
we have become accustomed to. Technology will also 
bring about change towards lowering the intensity of 
natural resource use, which in turn should be sup-
ported by policies. But lifestyle changes are impor-
tant too. 
4
© UNESCO/Fiona Ryan
Sign to raise environmental awareness, Island of Gorée, 
Senegal.
## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=5) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
5 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3
the extent of the impending consequences and pre-
vent them from ever occurring. 
Creativity exists in a different part of the brain - 
a part that someone very close to me still taps into 
everyday. His creative streak is enviable, but so too 
are his skills with the Playstation! His passion for 
mythical creatures and plastic wrestlers is something 
© UNESCO/Cyril Bailleul

### 159922: If I was a grown up I would do something about it
Nikita White reads her essay during the launch of IYPE on 
12 February 2008 at UNESCO.
4
“If I was a grown up I would do 
something about it”
All is for the best in the best of worlds. So thought little Killian before his older sister, Nikita, 
decided to “have a little chat” with him. The laureate of the student contest organized by the 
International Year of Planet Earth (IYPE) tells us how she initiated her brother to the facts of 
the Planet.
The outline for this essay emphasized a ‘creative’ 
approach – I shuddered in the face of this task! This 
isn’t a concept I’m hugely familiar with. Creativity 
was never something I could claim credit for. One 
might call me a cynical empiricist but I prefer the 
notion of an analytical observer! It is imperative for 
us to judge the matters we take the time to note. 
Passive observation is a crime that we cannot allow 
ourselves to commit, especially in relation to planet 
earth. […] 
Here are a few thoughts. What about when a baby 
cries out for food, you feed it. When the dog bounds 
around the house practically running up the walls, 
you bring him for a walk. When you are feeling tired, 
under the weather, you might take a rest, put your 
feet up. But what about a planet that is in need of a 
rest? What about a planet that needs to exercise 
itself? What about a planet that is being starved? 
This is what the International Year of Planet Earth is 
about for me. It’s about listening to our planet. It’s 
about doing something about what our planet has to 
tell us. It is simply about giving our planet back what 
it has given us: life.[…] 
What we are in for if the current trends in plane-
tary exploitation continues is beyond anything that 
we will have seen before. If ever we do happen to 
catch a glimpse of it, we know we have reacted too 
late. We hear about cities disappearing underwater, 
polar bears drowning, animals liable to extinction, 
environmental refugees- the list is endless. There are 
endless suggestions about adaptation and mitigation 
measures. This is where we are asked to start using 
our imaginations because the reality of these poten-
tial outcomes can never be realized. It is pivotal that 
we use our imagination at this stage to understand 
## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=6) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
6 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3

### 159922: If I was a grown up I would do something about it
I have never seen equaled. Meet Killian, my eight 
year old brother.
Explaining climate change  
to children
We use both our imagination and our methodical 
thinking to understand the potential outcomes of a 
planet that is abused; floods, droughts, storms, dis-
ease, and inevitably death. It doesn’t always require 
imagination as these things are currently happening 
in some form but its grasping the threat they pose to 
both us and our planet in the future that requires us 
to think bigger. I decided what I would do was share 
some facts with Killian and encourage him to use his 
imagination to engage in some meaningful dialogue 
with his big sister. The following is the very insight-
ful conversation that followed. 
We sat down and I told him I wished to have a 
little chat. He was immediately suspicious but as a 
young boy whose teacher’s major complaint is that 
he never stops talking, he wasn’t too reluctant for a 
chance to babble on! […] 
Considering his penchant for the sun, like most 
other people, I ask him can people affect the weather 
and if they could, should they interfere? 
“No they can’t but if they could they should leave it 
cos it wouldn’t be fair to people who like winter”. I’m 
pleased he is showing such consideration for people 
like myself who have a mild aversion to anything 
over ten degrees Celsius! He tells me it doesn’t need 
to rain but it does as summer is for sunny weather 
and winter is for cold. He carries on to disclose the 
fact that he would love to go to France as it looks 
nice and he thinks its sunny. His favourite animal is 
a dog. He had never heard of extinction and couldn’t 
tell me what the environment actually was. He told 
me that cars had no effect on the environment. He 
didn’t know where the heating and electricity for our 
house came from. He believes that nothing is wrong 
with the planet. Interestingly though when I asked 
him what was the worst thing he could imagine hap-
pening to our planet he replied, “the largest thun-
derstorm in the world that would destroy all the 
cities and towns.”
“It’s not gonna happen in years”
Well I should definitely try and point out where I’m 
going with all this. I wanted Killian to think about 
the living things around him. I wanted him to con-
sider the interaction between these things. Climate 
change demonstrates these facts clearly. I then did 
possibly the most unimaginative of all things, typed 
“explaining climate change to children” into Google. 
Welcome Tiki the Penguin to the conversation! Along 
with this extremely informative creature I used some 
material devised by the British embassy in Brussels 
for the purpose of educating Belgian school 
children. 
Firstly we went through the embassy’s animations. 
They explained the effects that cars and electricity 
had on the environment. After going through them 
both I asked Killian was he worried about how much 
people used cars? “No, I don’t feel scared. It’s not 
gonna happen in years”. This, you should note is from 
a young boy who gets dropped to and picked up from 
school by his mother in our family car everyday. A 
slightly self-interested answer indeed! 
I enquired further asking him to specify when he 
thinks it will happen? 
“A long time away. I don’t really think it’s happening” 
he responds. It seems that even a child with the 
most active of imaginations finds it difficult to 
fathom our impact on the planet. 
4
4
© UNESCO
“The ultimate test of a moral society is the kind of world it leaves 
for its children”, Dietrich Bonhoeffer (German theologian).
## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=7) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
7 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3

### 159922: If I was a grown up I would do something about it
I elaborated further 
with Tiki. This presenta-
tion was a lot more com-
prehensive in that it was 
very explicit about our 
actions and their conse-
quences. He seemed to 
think about it more this 
time. He agreed that it 
was not right for busi-
nessmen to make money 
if they don’t care about 
the environment as “it 
won’t be fair for places 
where it is cold”. He con-
curred that we need to stop global warming as “it 
wouldn’t be fair to the penguins and the polar 
bears…oh and all the poor people too.” 
The most important ques-
tion I think was “What is 
the one thing you think we 
need to do to stop it?” His 
answer was one that we 
need to listen to: “Whatever 
you have to do”. Even if it 
meant not making lots of 
money? “Yes even if it meant 
not making lots of money. If 
I was a grown up I would do 
something about it.” 
This text is drawn from 
the essay of the Irish student 
Nikita White, one of the 6 
laureates of the student contest (18 to 22 years of 
age) organized by the International Year of Planet 
Earth. 
© Guy F. Raymond

### 159923: Refugees of the future will be climate refugees
«No, I don’t feel scared.» says little Killian.
4
All countries – rich and poor – will have to sit 
around the same table to find a solution to 
the problem of climate change, believes the 
Italian climatologist Filippo Giorgi. Member of 
IPCC, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (Nobel Peace Prize 2007),  
Mr Giorgi is also the head of the Earth System 
Physics Section in UNESCO’s Abdus Salam 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
“Abdus Salam” (Trieste, Italy).
Interview by Jasmina Šopova.
Refugees of the 
future will be 
“climate refugees”
© Francisco Ferreira de Campos (Brazil)
Drawing by Francisco Ferreira de Campos (Brazil), one of the 
laureates of the student contest organized by IYPE. 4
## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=8) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
8 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3

### 159923: Refugees of the future will be climate refugees
According to the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report 
(2 February 2007), “most of the global average 
warming over the past 50 years is very likely due to 
anthropogenic greenhouse gas increases”. You have 
said that one of the big challenges today is to 
“manage the unavoidable and avoid the unmanage-
able”. What does this mean? 
Some further human induced climate change is una-
voidable, because it is unrealistic to think we can 
suddenly reduce emissions drastically to stabilize 
concentrations at the current level or even to attain 
lower levels. This will require implementing adapta-
tion policies. However, it is even more important to 
stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations under the 
danger level at which the earth’s climate can be pro-
foundly affected and in turn can profoundly affect 
human societies and natural ecosystems, especially 
for the next generations which will inherit the envi-
ronment we leave them. 
In addition, because greenhouse gas can stay in 
the atmosphere a long time and because of the iner-
tia of the climate system, what we do now will be 
felt for many years, so action is needed now. This 
will require strong and urgent mitigation policies to 
reduce emissions in the next decades. Adaptation 4
and mitigation have to go hand in hand; the one 
cannot be the solution for the other. 
The IPCC Fourth Assessment Report also states that 
“warming of the climate system is unequivocal”. 
Did this statement lead to a revolution in our minds, 
concerning our responsibility? Did you notice 
changes in climate policies this last year? 
I feel that this is the statement that really made the 
difference. For the first time the scientific commu-
nity expressed a certainty that the global warming 
problem is real. 
The public perception of this problem has really 
changed, especially in the United States and Aus-
tralia and in countries, such as China and India. In 
Europe there has been a high consciousness of this 
problem for some years, although it has also increased 
in recent years. A number of factors contributed to 
this change in public perception. 
The 2003 European heat wave and hurricane Kat-
rina [United States, 2005] made people realize how 
vulnerable even industrialized countries are to cli-
mate, regardless of whether those events can be 
directly linked to climate change or not. The Stern 
report [Stern Review on the Economics of Climate 
Change, 2006] pointed to the incredibly high poten-
tial costs of climate change. Some high visibility 
media events brought attention to the problem: the 
movie “The Day After Tomorrow” [Roland Emmerich, 
2004], Michael Crichton’s book “State of Fear” [2005] 
and of course Al Gore’s movie “An Inconvenient Truth” 
[2006]. And then our report gave scientific solidity 
to all these messages.
Will climate change increase the divide between rich 
and poor?
Climate change will not be felt by all countries in the 
same way. Developing countries are more vulnerable 
because of their lower capacity to respond to climate 
change. This will likely enhance the large imbalances 
across countries we see today and increase friction. 
In some cases, expected changes such as sea level 
rise and widespread increase in drought conditions 
might lead to massive population migrations, the so 
called climate refugees, and this will of course 
increase tension. 
© UNESCO/NOPD Isidro Magana
Floods in New Orleans after Katrina in September 2005.
4
## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=9) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
9 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3

### 159923: Refugees of the future will be climate refugees
However, the solution to the climate change prob-
lem requires a probably unprecedented global coop-
eration effort across countries, so it offers a great 
opportunity for international collaboration and coor-
dinated action. All countries will have to sit at the 
same table to solve the problem. 
According to the “Climate Change Index” you pub-
lished in September 2006, the Mediterranean and 
North-Eastern European regions are the most promi-
nent “Hotspots”? Why? 
The index is based on changes in the averages and 
the variability of temperature and precipitation. The 
Mediterranean and North-Eastern Europe emerged as 
the most prominent hotspots, but not for the same 
reasons. 
For the Mediterranean the main problem, indi-
cated by model projections, is important warming 
and a marked reduction in precipitation in the spring 
and summer seasons. This is due to a northward shift 
of the storm track (storms increasingly travel north 
of the Mediterranean) and the intensification of local 
soil moisture-precipitation feedbacks (decreased pre-
cipitation leads to drier soil and warmer conditions, 
which in turn inhibit precipitation etc.). The models 
also project an increase in variability during the 
warm season, which implies a relatively large increase 
in the occurrence of extremely warm and dry seasons 
(even warmer and drier than the summer of 2003). 
This would lead to severe increased aridity and per-
haps even desertification, especially in the southern 
Mediterranean countries. 
In North-Eastern Europe, the main effect is a large 
increase in precipitation related to higher frequency 
and intensity of storms, conditions more prone to 
flood events, and important warming in the cold 
season. The latter is due to the melting of snow, 
which decreases surface reflectivity and induces a 
higher absorption of solar radiation, thereby intensi-
fying warming.
You seem to be particularly concerned by the effects 
of land-use changes. 
The problem is that current model projections of cli-
mate change do not include land-use change and for 
some regions this is an important source of uncer-
tainty that needs to be better addressed in 
the future. We have indications that land-use change 
can have large effects, even larger than greenhouse 
gas warming in particular in some specific regions, 
for example West Africa. But at the global scale the 
effect of land-use change is minor compared to that 
of greenhouse gases. I also think the effects of 
atmospheric aerosols and dust may be important at 
the regional scale and need to be better addressed in 
the future. 
A personal question at last: after the announce-
ment of the Noble Foundation, in October 2007, you 
declared to the Italian journalist Fabio Pagan: “Il 
mio sogno? Andare a Oslo per la cerimonia del 
Nobel”. Did you realize your dream, attending the 
Oslo ceremony? 
I did not get to go. It was a relatively small delega-
tion, 25 people, and only 4 slots remained for a 
draw including several hundred IPCC bureau mem-
bers and authors. I unfortunately did not win. 
Maybe another time! 
4
© Massimo Silvano, ICTP Photo Archives. 
Filippo Giorgi.
## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=10) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
10 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3
Torbay – alias the English Riviera - on south Devon-
shire coast is a gentle arc of pink sandy beaches and 
red cliffs, linking three towns that could hardly be 
more different. At the southern tip of the bay, Brix-
ham, home to Britain’s largest fishing fleet, still 
looks quaint, with its cottages and shops huddled 
under the steep cliffs of Berry Head. Opposite, 
Torquay’s Victorian elegance has acquired a rougher, 
urban edge, as though every square inch of land, 
© UNESCO/Peter Coles

### 159924: Neanderthal man at the seaside
View of Torbay with raised beaches in cliffs showing signs  
of past sea level change.
4
even impossibly steep hills, has been built on, with 
little attempt at coherence. And, in the middle, 
Paignton, with its wide lawns, palm trees and former 
gentleman’s club, resembles a once beautiful old 
lady, now relying on powder and rouge. 
For local historian, John Risdon, “Torbay’s three 
main towns, Torquay, Paignton and Brixham owe their 
very existence to their geology, which created shel-
tered beaches and harbours”. 
On a balmy summer’s day, as children paddle in 
the sea with their buckets and spades, it is hard to 
imagine that this was once arid, equatorial desert, or 
that corals had flourished here in tropical waters. 
It is equally hard to conjure up a picture of early 
humans, a few hundred million years later, chasing 
mammoth over the cliffs, then competing with hyae-
nas for the meat. But these are some of the time 
warps that, with the right guide, are clearly visible in 
what, in September 2007, became the latest addition 
to a new Global Network of National Geoparks, under 
the aegis of UNESCO. 
The concept of geopark is recent. “Culture and 
biodiversity have well-established programmes to 
make sure they are valued and protected,” says Mar-
garete Patzak, of UNESCO’s Division of Earth Sci-
ences, “but, until 2004, when the geoparks initiative 
was launched, our geological heritage had largely 
been overlooked.” Since the network has been 
neanderthal man  
at the seaside
Before Agatha Christie and Charles Darwin, 
the English Riviera was visited by the 
Neanderthal man! So many celebrities in 
the United Kingdom’s new geopark, the first 
in the world entirely located in an urban 
zone! The new Global Network of National 
Geoparks, launched in 2004, is one of the 
tools under the aegis of UNESCO that aims 
at preserving our environment.
<<<The Global Network of National Geoparks
The Global Network of National Geoparks, under 
the umbrella of UNESCO, was launched in 2004 as a 
platform for active cooperation between experts and 
practitioners in geological heritage. 
To qualify for membership of the network, a proposed 
Geopark has to be an area with a significant geological 
heritage, and have a coherent and strong management 
structure, with a sustainable economic development 
strategy. A Geopark creates enhanced employment 
opportunities for the people who live there, bringing 
sustainable and real economic benefit, usually through 
the development of sustainable tourism. 
The Global Network currently features 54 selected, high 
quality National Geoparks from 17 countries (Austria, 
Brazil, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, France, Germany, 
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Iran, Malaysia, Norway, Portugal, 
Rumania, Spain, United Kingdom).>>>
## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=11) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
11 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3

### 159924: Neanderthal man at the seaside
 running, the 53 national geoparks so far designated 
have brought private sector, public and research com-
munities together in a number of innovative local 
and national projects.
A stage set worthy  
of Agatha Christie
There is probably no better place to get to grips with 
the extraordinary history in the English Riviera 
Geopark than underground, in Kents Cavern, now 
buried among the houses, shops and hotels coating 
the steep hills of Torquay, on the northern cusp of 
Torbay. 
About 375 million years ago, this part of England 
was under the sea, south of the equator, before the 
tectonic movements of the Earth’s crust thrust it 
north, forming today’s continents. Over millions of 
years, shells and bones from marine organisms formed 
the cave’s sedimentary limestone rock. A series of ice 
ages and warmer, interglacial periods, starting about 
2.5 million years ago, hollowed out the caves provid-
ing shelter for animals and early man. 
“The cave has an uninterrupted sequence of human 
occupation going back half a million years,” says Nick 
Powe, Managing Director of Kents Cavern and great 
grandson of Francis Powe, who bought the cave in 
1903. Francis’s father in law, George Smerdon, had 
been foreman on pioneering excavations there, led 
by William Pengelly in the late 1800’s. By candle-
light, Pengelly, a teacher from a small town in Corn-
wall, systematically dug away the floor of the cave, 
formed by debris after each ice age, turning up evi-
dence of human occupation 500,000 years ago, along-
side bones from cave bears, cave lions, mammoths, 
woolly rhinos and hyaenas. 
Charles Darwin, who wrote the finishing chapters 
of his Origin of Species at Meadfoot Beach in Torquay, 
was in regular correspondence with Pengelly whose 
discoveries shook the orthodox scientific community 
in London, which adhered to the Biblical theory that 
God created Man about 6000 years ago. 
A fragment of human jawbone found in the cave, 
recently estimated to be 35-40,000 years old, is the 
oldest record of modern man (Homo sapiens) Europe. 
Now, DNA from the fragment is being studied by the 
UK’s Natural History Museum. It may, after all, be 
from a Neanderthal skull, and therefore a crucial link 
in the history of human occupation of the United 
Kingdom, proving that Neanderthals and modern man 
coexisted there. 
Kents Cavern also inspired one of Britain’s most 
famous crime writers, Agatha Christie, who was born 
and grew up in Torquay. In her murder mystery, The 
Man in the Brown Suit , Agatha Christie’s heroine, 
Anne Beddingfeld, describes her palaeontologist 
father spending his days in Hampsly Cavern, “bring-
ing to light portions of cave bear and woolly 
rhinoceros”.
© UNESCO/Peter Coles
Nick Powe, Managing Director of Kents Cavern, holding 
reconstruction of Neanderthal skull.
4
4
© UNESCO/Peter Coles
Fossilised coral at Hopes Nose, Torquay, Devon.
## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=12) 🆗
### 159924: Neanderthal man at the seaside
12 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3
Sustainable development is more 
than concrete and cranes
Although the geoparks initiative is aimed at preserv-
ing our global geological heritage, explains Marga-
rete Patzak, “it is also very much about people”. The 
initiative has even led to a new concept of “geotour-
ism” as tool for sustainable economic development. 
“Geologically interesting places like the Antarctic or 
deserts would not be considered for geopark status,” 
she says, “as they are too inaccessible”. 
For Mel Border, Geopark Officer and Education 
Ranger for Torbay Coast and Countryside Trust, being 
located in an urban area, the English geopark has 
direct benefits for the local community, not least 
through its potential for job creation. “There is 
extreme deprivation in the Torbay area,” she says, 
“since the decline in tourism in the 1970s. Some local 
children have never even been to the beach.” 
4
Mathis Wackernagel (Switzerland), 
Executive Director of the Ecological 
Footprint Network. 
The Network, a non-profit organization 
that promotes ecological, social and 
economic sustainability, compiles 
national footprint accounts, measuring 
the ecological resource use and 
resource capacity of nations over time. 
Wackernagel told Roni Amelan of 
UNESCO’s Bureau of Public Information 
about the purpose of the network. 
The Global Footprint Network was established in Cali-
fornia in 2003 and its main goal is to end our shoot-
ing ourselves in the foot. Our metabolism has become 
© UNESCO/Michel Ravassard

### 159925: How much can we spend?
Mathis Wackernagel (to the right) and Roni Amelan, at UNESCO.
How much can we spend?
Ecological Footprint consists in measuring how much land it takes to meet a person’s 
needs according to lifestyle, consumption versus regeneration. It was developed by 
4
The geopark now has a network of local teachers 
developing curriculum-based coursework to be made 
available online to teachers across Europe. “Economic 
development comes from the roots up,” adds Nick 
Powe. “It’s about educating children. It’s amazing 
how some schools have taken to the geoparks idea.” 
The English Riviera Geopark Organisation (ERGO) is 
now actively developing its partnerships not just with 
schools and universities in the region, but also with 
other geoparks through the 32-member European 
Geopark Network. Local experts regularly give guided 
walks and lectures for the public. About 3.7 million 
tourists visit the region each year. Meanwhile, ERGO 
is building private sector involvement through brand-
ing and a code of practice. “Sustainable development 
is more than concrete and cranes”, says Nick Powe. 
Peter Coles, British journalist. 
## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=13) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
13 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3

### 159925: How much can we spend?
overburdened, we consume more than we can gener-
ate. The most visible sign of that is climate change. 
It is possible to sustain this for some time because 
of existing stocks but we are heading towards eco-
logical bankruptcy.
When do you expect the stocks we rely on to run 
out?
In some parts of the world we have already reached 
bankruptcy. Haiti and Darfur for example are areas 
where everything comes together: civil wars are the 
result of many factors including, not least, shortage 
of resources. In Darfur, we see that there is no wood 
in a radius of ten kilometres around the refugee 
camps. Dramatic situations, including conflict and 
even war, are becoming increasingly frequent in some 
poor parts of the world where the inhabitants cannot 
pay for the resources they lack. 
Even according to the most optimistic forecasts, 
we will have to use twice our planet’s resources by 
the year 2050. Fisheries are already collapsing, there 
is a growing water problem in Australia with rising 
salinity in the water table. Meanwhile water levels 
are going down alarmingly in Yemen, for example, 
from ten metres 50 years ago to 800 metres now. 
Libya is investing in huge projects to try and over-
come its water shortage. 
Twenty years ago Gro Harlem Brundland [former 
Prime Minister of Norway, now serving as the UN 
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy on Climate Change] 
spoke about sustainability for future generations, 
but now we are talking about sustainability for our 
own generation. 
Do you feel that we are preparing ourselves effec-
tively for the imminent shortage of resources? 
To a certain extent, some rich countries are taking 
necessary measures, but too slowly. In some cities 
for example car traffic has to be reduced on some 
days because of poor air quality. But such necessary 
steps can only be taken in cities that have a reasona-
ble public transportation network. Fifty percent of 
the world’s population live in cities but cities account 
for 70 percent of the CO2 emissions. Cities are very 
intense consumers of energy, but they could be more 
efficient. There could be great economy of scale, 
because of their compactness. People who live and 
work in cities travel over shorter distances and heat-
ing is more effective in large buildings than in 
detached houses. 
In Houston (Texas, U.S.A.) three times more 
resources are used per inhabitant than in Sienna 
(Italy), for example. Yet the quality of life in Sienna 
is no less good than in Houston. Sienna is more effi-
cient because of the way it was built. Being resource 
efficient does not necessarily mean reducing the 
quality of life.
Can we reasonably expect to achieve a balance 
between resource consumption and supply?
Finding ways of cooperating for the well-being of all 
is not unprecedented. This is already being done 
among small groups and in some countries with 
respect to environmental consideration. Clearly much 
remains to be done to adapt such activities to the 
global scale. But I am convinced that this dream is 
possible. 
The dichotomy between developed and developing 
countries is becoming outdated because the current 
model of development is reaching breaking point. 
The future will offset countries that use less resources 
against those that use more than they have, which 
will become weaker. 
The United States uses twice what they have, 
whereas Egypt, Italy and Switzerland use three times 
as much as they have. Switzerland can afford to pay 
4
4
© Martin Baran
Slums, Port-au-Prince, Haïti.
## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=14) 🆗
### 159925: How much can we spend?
14 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3
for this but that’s a liability. Either the prices of 
 everything go up or supplies are disrupted. 
Have you observed any improvements in resource 
expenditure? 
Being able to talk about it is already a great thing 
considering that we have denied this problem for so 
long. For years, there has been great resistance to 
talking about climate change. Every city faces the 
risk of a break down, like an overburdened bridge 
that resists for some time but finally collapses. As 
resources become more expensive and their supply 
gets disrupted, cities will not be able to operate. To 
avoid this we will have to, among other measures, 
reduce our dependence on private cars, improve 
energy efficiency. Countries with stable or declining 
populations will be able to survive better, not least 
because they will be spared the need to expand their 
infrastructure. 
© Qin Tongchun

### 159926: Boost for biosphere reserves
Drawing by Qin Tongchun, China, one of the laureates of 
the IYPE student contest.
4
reserves in 2005 for its “natural and landscape 
values”, the Sierra del Rincón incorporates five 
municipalities with a population count of 818 inhab-
itants, only half of whom live there year-round. 
The month of February is just beginning, but the 
sun is shining brightly. On the main square in La 
Hiruela, one of the reserve’s villages, four or five 
locals are sitting in the sun chatting. When asked, 
they all say they’re proud to live in an area with the 
prestigious label of “UNESCO Biosphere Reserve”. 
Boost for biosphere reserves
They’ve been called “the lungs of the planet” or “sustainable development laboratories” 
and both depictions are accurate. But biosphere reserves are above all pioneer areas 
where the needs of humanity and nature are reconciled. The International Year of Planet 
Earth provides an opportunity to give one of UNESCO’s emblematic scientific programmes 
a boost.
Eighty-five kilometers along the Madrid-Brugos high-
way, a sign on the right points to the small road that 
leads to the Sierra del Rincón biosphere reserve. 
There, an expanse of 15,230 hectares is home to 193 
species of vertebrates, 694 species of vascular plants 
(holm oak, downy oak, beech, birch and pine) and 
139 species of non-vascular plants (lichens, mosses 
and mushrooms). Fifty-five of these species are 
endemic and four of them are in danger of extinc-
tion. Accepted into the global network of biosphere 4
## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=15) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
15 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3
© Luiz de Mog
Mata Atlantica, Brazil.
4
The place is so quiet it’s hard to believe there’s a 
bustling city of three million people only 90 km away, 
with its problems of air pollution, urban waste and 
lack of greenery.… “Being close to a big city is both 
an advantage and an inconvenience,” says biologist 
Elena de Mingo, head of the reserve’s technical 
centre. “On the positive side, residents have access 
to a wide range of infrastructures and social services 
– hospitals, schools, etc – near by, which is not the 
case in more remote reserves, even in Spain. The 
proximity also makes it easy for people to come and 
visit on weekends. And of course when it come to 
attracting conservation and research projects, we are 
lucky to be considered a jewel in the crown of the 
Community of Madrid.” The latter does indeed finance 
environmental protection projects and initiatives. 
“In short, we represent a priority area for a govern-
ment with means at its disposal, and that’s very pos-
itive,” she adds.
Humanity and nature
“But we also come up against certain problems,” de 
Mingo admits, “such as having to organize tourism 
down to the tiniest detail, so that it won’t have a 
negative impact on what we’re trying to safeguard. 
That’s why we have hikes on ecological trails that 
always follow the same route. The other side of the 
coin is that the younger generations have trouble 
staying, because building new houses is prohibited. 
All that stands in the way of renewing the demo-
graphics and creating employment”. 
© UNESCO/Lucía Iglesias

### 159926: Boost for biosphere reserves
Sierra del Rincón Reserve, Madrid.
The balance between human activity and environ-
mental protection is precisely the major challenge of 
UNESCO’s Man and the Biosphere programme. From 
Yellowstone Park (USA), on the list since 1976, to the 
recently-inscribed Rostovsky reserve (Russian Federa-
tion) the global network of biosphere reserves today 
counts 531 sites located in 105 countries. It includes 
arid and semi-arid lands, mangroves, tundra, snowy 
peaks and seascapes. What do all these sites have in 
common? What threatens them?
laboratories for climate change
The third World Congress of Biosphere Reserves, held 
in Madrid last February and attended by over 800 
delegates, was organized around these questions. 
“The goal was to revise the entire management strat-
egy in order to deal with new challenges, such as 
loss of traditional know-how and cultural diversity, 
population growth, decrease of arable land or climate 
change,” explains Miguel Clüsener-Godt, Programme 
Specialist in the Division of Ecological and Earth Sci-
ences at UNESCO. “It’s a fact, climate change is upon 
us, and we are feelings its effects. Biosphere reserves 
are the ideal places to study consequences and look 
for ways to mitigate them.” This is precisely the aim 
of the Madrid Strategy, which consists of 31 goals 
organized into 65 actions. Among the measures 
planned are promoting the incorporation of urban 
landscapes into the biospheres; organizing training 
on different kinds of ecosystems; establishing 
## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=16) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
16 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3

### 159926: Boost for biosphere reserves
 biosphere reserve pilot sites to 
measure their economic contri-
bution to local economies; 
increasing the involvement of the 
private sector; and promoting 
incentives for creating products 
with the “biosphere reserve” 
brand. 
The MAB Programme 2008-
2013 will be run according to the 
Madrid Strategy and such repre-
sentative sites as the Brazilian 
Atlantic forest, which covers 
4.5% of Brazil, Mount Kenya or the 
French Camargue will benefit. 
Elena de Mingo at Sierra del Rincón 
sums up what’s at stake: “The bal-
ance between humans and nature 
still exists for now, but safeguard-
ing it is a delicate task.” The 
Madrid Strategy, adopted this 
International Year of Planet Earth, 
will certainly be a valuable tool to 
make that task possible. 
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz
© Yiting Liang

### 159927: Amsterdam: a paradise for book-lovers
Fontainebleau Forest, near Paris.
4
Focus
amsterdam: a paradise for book-lovers
A collection of poems sold rapidly at 50000 copies. This doesn’t happen every day. And not just 
anywhere. Especially in the middle of the 17th century! And yet it did happen in Amsterdam, 
appointed World Book Capital by UNESCO this year. After Madrid, Alexandria, New Delhi, 
Antwerp, Montreal, Turin and Bogotá, UNESCO 
appointed Amsterdam World Book Capital, 
thus acknowledging the role it played since its 
golden era, in the 17th century, to this date. 
Events started on 23 April this year, World Book 
and Copyright Day, and will last until 22 April 
2009.
Serge van Duijnhoven, Dutch writer and historian living in 
Belgium, tells us the story of the book in Amsterdam.
© Serge van Duijnhoven
Amsterdam’s municipal library welcomes a million visitors a year.Since twelve years I live, as a Dutch writer-in-resi-
dence, in the centre of Brussels. And there is much 
to be said for living in this multi-faceted, slightly 
surrealist capital of Europe. Whoever agrees with 
Lautréamont’s definition of beauty as “the coming 
together of an umbrella and a sowing machine on an 
operating table”, will definitely feel himself at home 
in this bilingual city on the vault-line of North and 
South, East and West. 4
However, I always feel a great excitement and, to 
a certain extent, relief, when I take the train and 
travel north to Amsterdam. Compared to the arid 
atmosphere of Brussels, as interesting as it may be, 
with three ugly Dutch bookstores (and one beautiful 
one that had to close down because of lack of sales), 
## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=17) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
17 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3

### 159927: Amsterdam: a paradise for book-lovers
Amsterdam is like a paradise for book-lovers. The city 
on the Amstel houses all important publishers, count-
less bookstores, and weekly or even daily second-
hand book-markets, like the ones in Oudemanhuispoort 
and Spui-square where in the afternoon many writers 
gather in the surrounding café’s. 
Only recently, the jewel was put on the crown of 
this city with the opening of a magnificent library 
building boarding on the docks of the IJ and over-
looking the age old city centre. The building, a sub-
lime construction of architect Jo Coenen, offers 
seven floors, 25.000 meter shelve space, 28.000 
square meters, comfortable foyers and study corners, 
exhibition spaces with books on display, a café, 
 theatre and restaurant on the top floor. A temple of 
books as I have never seen before, where one imme-
diately feels at ease and wants to stay as long as 
possible.
Sanctum of free speech
Amsterdam has a strong reputation of intellectual 
freedom that it tries to honour with the upcoming 
festivities of being World Book Capital. Ever since 
the end of the sixteenth century, the city was a place 
of refuge for free speech and the written word. In 
4
amsterdam, an open book!
Dancing with your favourite poet in a library, surrounded by 5 million books! this is just one of the 
attractions at this year’s Book Capital, amsterdam. 
David Grossman (Israel), Samir el-Youssef (Palestine), Vikram Seth (India) and Ingo Schultze 
(Germany) are only a few of the numerous well-known writers expected in amsterdam to celebrate 
books between 23 april 2008 and 22 april 2009.
this year amsterdam is paying special tribute to Spinoza, who spent most of his life in the city; 
to ann Frank who wrote her famous Diary here, hiding in an attic with its entrance concealed by a 
bookcase; and to annie M. G. Schmidt, whose Miss Minnie made her famous among children all over 
the world. 
this year’s slogans are open book , an idea encompassing exchange of knowledge in areas as varied 
as copyright, neo-censorship and digital media, and open doors , to indicate that the programme is 
not reserved for an audience of specialists. 
With information technology having opened a new debate on the relationship between copyright 
and access to information, exclusivity and free competition, digitization and privacy, a symposium 
will be held on the theme the Book in the Internet era (21-23 april, Public library). 
those who believe censorship is a thing of the past in our democratic societies may think differently 
after attending the International Symposium on neo-Censorship (18-20 September, De Balie 
Centre). It will examine the consequences of new forms of censorship for writers and publishers. 
the International Publishers association’s Freedom to Publish Prize will be presented during the 
symposium’s opening ceremony. the Prize, awarded to persons or organizations for exemplary 
contributions in upholding freedom of expression, was presented for the first time in 2006 to 
Shahia lahji, first woman to open a publishing house in Iran in 1983. 
amsterdam intends to be a book capital that is open to all. Public events will be held both within 
the city and in the suburbs, and activities of all kinds will be organized in libraries and schools. 
Picture, for instance, a “traveling tent” going from one library to another in amsterdam’s suburbs, 
inviting pupils from primary and professional schools to develop their reading appreciation. It will 
be called Kinderboekenstad , the centre for young people’s books. 
the books will be accompanied everywhere by music, particularly during the International literature 
Festival (24 to 27 april), which will allow the public to meet famous writers from all over the 
world, and why not, to dance with their favourite authors. the new Public library has made all the 
necessary arrangements! 
4
## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=18) 🆗
### 159927: Amsterdam: a paradise for book-lovers
18 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3
Holland, people opened themselves to the sea and to 
everything that came from afar, while those on the 
sandy soil of other provinces turned their backs on 
it. Tolerance was in Amsterdam not a mere principle 
but a practical necessity: the open merchant city, 
being the meeting place of all sorts of different cul-
tures, could not allow itself to indulge in the large-
scale prosecution of those adhering to different 
beliefs. Whilst throughout the continent books were 
being burnt, in Amsterdam books were being fabri-
cated and traded. 
With the fall of Antwerp in 1585 (when the King 
of Spain, Philip II, took possession of the city) tens 
of thousands of immigrants came to Amsterdam from 
the southern Netherlands, bringing with them their 
trading expertise, their capital, and their goods, as 
well as their appreciation of art, culture, their verve, 
their language and literature. It was largely by their 
efforts that Amsterdam’s publishing trade acquired 
its international reputation. 
Another wave of immigrants arrived from Portu-
gal: Sephardic Jews who had lost their livelihoods 
there because of the Inquisition. These laid the foun-
dations of the tobacco trade and the diamond indus-
try, and also made Amsterdam famous as a centre for 
Hebrew typography. Religious observance was not 
controlled by the state; there was no oppression by 
the Inquisition; there was freedom to marry within 
the community; no one was compelled to live in a 
ghetto; and Jews could acquire property freely. Such 
freedom was unheard-of elsewhere. Money, freedom 
and culture pushed aside the old medieval combina-
tion of “honour”, “nobility” and “heroism”. The city 
paradoxically grew into a realization of a medieval 
utopia: the safe, enclosed space in which new and 
old citizens alike could cast off the yoke of serfdom. 
“This church consecrated to God knows not enforced 
beliefs, nor torture, nor death,” the Jewish immi-
grants, full of trust, wrote above the door of their 
Portuguese Synagogue. They called Amsterdam the 
Jerusalem of the West.
Books sold like hotcakes
The English philosopher, John Locke, wrote his “Epis-
tulae de Tolerantia” in Amsterdam, among other 
works. The Frenchman Rene Descartes found the lei-
sure and freedom to conduct his research, just as did 
his home-grown colleagues Baruch Spinoza, Hugo de 
Groot (Grotius) and Christiaen Huygens. The great 
French philosopher of the Enlightenment, Voltaire, 
who visited Amsterdam seven times and had his work 
published here, remarked that it made no difference 
to the Dutch whether they traded in books or in tex-
tiles, and that what was written in these books did 
not concern them one bit as long as they made money 
out of them. That aside, however, he saw the city as 
an inspiration, as an anticipation of the utopian 
4
©  Serge van Duijnhoven
A library to stay in.
© all rights reserved
Engraving of a book market in Oudemanhuispoort 
(Amsterdam) by van H. Horst (1967).
4
## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=19) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
19 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3

### 159927: Amsterdam: a paradise for book-lovers
### 159928: The Little leaf singing its country
spirit of the Enlightenment – or “Felix Meritis” (Hap-
piness through Achievement) as one of the best-
known art society’s in the city is still called. 
Apart from the notion of freedom, books made in 
Holland had an excellent reputation because of the 
craftsmanship of the engravers, the quality of the 
paper (papie de Hollande!) and the fair price per 
copy. Moreover, the Dutch printing press was 
extremely inventive by creating pocketbooks for the 
masses (the bible by Menasseh ben Israel, the world 
atlas by the Dutch cartographer Willem Jansz Blaeu 
who became famous with his richly illustrated world 
atlas in eleven editions). 
During the seventeenth century, more books were 
been published in Amsterdam than in all other coun-
tries of Europe as a whole. Almost 30.000 people 
made a living in this field. In 1600 the city had 96 
book shops; in 1699 the number had risen to 273. An 
illustrated book of poems by the Dutch poet Jacob 
Cats, written in 1655, immediately sold more than 
50.000 copies, an amount poets nowadays can only 
dream of. Jews that were being prosecuted and 
chased around Europe, in Amsterdam were allowed to 
publish books in Hebrew, Latin, Spanish, Portuguese 
and even Yiddish, to such an extent that the city 
became the world book capital of Jewish 
publications. 
From atop the new library building, with its splen-
did view on the city, the contrast between the bus-
tling inner city and the spaciousness of the IJ River 
can be best appreciated. 
With a little bit of imagination, it is here between 
the atlases of Bleau, Mercator and Hondius exposed 
in glass boxes on the third floor, that one can see 
the endless row of shimmering masts, spires and sail-
boats lining up with cords along the wooden pali-
sades that for centuries have marked the city of 
freedom and trade. 
Jasmina Šopova 
Landmarks
the little leaf 
singing its country
Considered one of the greatest writers of 
the French language, Congolese Gérald 
Félix-Tchicaya, alias Tchicaya U Tam’si 
(1931-1988) was an international civil 
servant at UNESCO from 1961 to 1985. 
Having come to France at the age of 16 
with his father, an elected deputy of 
Middle Congo, he was an activist for the 
independence of the Congo Republic. 
His pen-name means “little 
leaf singing its country”. © Éditions Seghers
Cover of Tchicaya U Tam’si ‘s last novel (1987).
4
4
## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=20) 🆗
### 159928: The Little leaf singing its country
20 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3
As a tribute to our colleague, who died prematurely 
on 22 April 1988, we are publishing excerpts from an 
interview he gave French journalist Bernard Magnier 
on 21 December 1979 when he was a programme spe-
cialist in UNESCO’s education sector. 
Twenty-five years have gone by since the publica-
tion of your first collection [Le Mauvais Sang (Bad 
Blood) Paris, P. J. Oswald, 1955]. How do you view 
this last quarter-century in African literary 
creation? 
From the perspective of Africa, I would have a lot of 
difficulty, but I can try as far as my own country is 
concerned. 
This quarter-century has seen the blossoming of a 
large number of writers who published books either 
right before independence, or after. At the begin-
ning, the favorite genre was poetry. Only one author 
wrote prose, traditionally-inspired prose, and that 
was Jean Malonga. Between 1950 and 1960, the 
movement was launched with Jean Malonga, Sinda 
Maetial and then me. Then in 1960 there was Guy 
Menga, Sylvain Bemba, Henrio Lopes, Théophile 
Obenga, etc. A blossoming of names. The magnitude 
of this phenomenon is rather surprising. Looking at 
the population, the number of writers is 
considerable. 
Sony Labou Tansi has just now published a high 
quality novel La Vie et demie (Life and a half), Paris, 
Seuil, 1979]. Finally, another generation with a heap 
of manuscripts that aren’t second-rate are waiting to 
be published. In all the results are quite positive. 
These writers belong to a movement that runs paral-
lel to “negritude”. It has to do with taking responsi-
bility for oneself and even an acerbic gaze on the 
country, the inner country. 
What was your own itinerary during this period? 
My own itinerary is marked out by the books I pub-
lished whose titles are significant. In 1955, bad 
blood, that’s anxiety. In 1957, Feu de Brousse (Bush 
fire), that’s the fire of exorcism. In 1960, À Triche-
cœur, (Cheating heart), it’s compromise not as a cow-
ardly act but as the acceptance of the different parts 
of oneself without rejecting any. In 1962, Épitomé 
(Epitome), it’s a historical précis, almost a summary, 
which comes out at a turning point. 
Regarding the plays, whether it’s Le Zulu (The 
Zulu) or Le Destin glorieux du Maréchal Nnikon Nniku 
(The Glorious Destiny of Marshal Nnikon Nniku) 
[1979], it’s a reflection on power and construction 
that is being done or remains to be done.
There are two major themes in your work: women 
and the Congo. Through these themes, the reader 
perceives two kinds of suffering, two revolts. Don’t 
you envisage the Congo and women as two elements 
of yourself?
If I can get that across, I’ll have every reason to be 
satisfied. For the Congo, it’s been recognized. In con-
trast, I’ve been portrayed as a dreadful misogynist. I 
don’t know why. 
An anecdote: the first talk I ever gave, a very 
long time ago, was on the topic of woman, the mother 
and the “matrie”, that is to say the motherland rather 
than the “patrie”, fatherland. The fatherland is the 
sword. The motherland is love. That’s why Le Ventre 
[The Belly, poetry, 1964] is a return to maternal 
love. 
The Congo is also a quest for identity, it’s the 
circle in which I’m trying to find myself. 
Isn’t the quest for identity a political quest? 
But the human quest is a political quest, to the 
degree that human beings are fundamentally gregari-
ous. The fundamental gregariousness is sociability; 
it’s rejecting the other’s refusal. 
© UNESCO/Fiona Rya
African sand painting.
4
4
## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=21) 🆗
### 159928: The Little leaf singing its country
21 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3
The Congo is therefore very close 
to you through your work, yet you 
live in Paris. How do you accept 
this distance? 
You know, I see better from far 
away. Needless to say if I hadn’t 
had this distance, I would have 
had this perception. Of course I 
perceive and I would like to 
embrace. That’s where suffering 
begins. Every day I would like to 
go back, but disenchantment 
begins every time I return because 
the dream always goes beyond the 
reality. 
Christ is an important character 
in your works. Is he a symbol? 
Yes. He’s a multiple symbol. He’s 
the symbol of brotherhood fore-
told and not accepted by others. 
Christ is also a prototype of the 
colonized.
Hasn’t he been used as a prototype of the 
colonizers?
One uses him to be a colonizer. Brotherhood is also a 
form of colonization. If you force someone to be your 
friend, you make him your slave. If you respect the 
other’s freedom and choice, there is no longer any 
constraint or slavery, there is only the expression of 
this brotherhood. 
In your poems you evoke suffering, revolt, but also 
forgiveness…. 
I say, “I will no longer see my blood on their hands. 
I forget I’m black to forgive the world of this.” This is 
the origin of those lines: I was a journalist in the 
1950s and I had a French woman friend, a political 
journalist. Every time there was a political event in 
Africa, she questioned me. I was impassive, almost 
blasé, indifferent. One day, she said to me, “Gérald, 
one would think you’re forgetting you’re black!” I 
replied, “If I had to think about being black all the 
time, I couldn’t look you in the face.” That’s why I 
wrote those lines. 
4 If I have to keep thinking 
endlessly about the millions and 
millions of black people who 
ended up in the Atlantic, those 
who suffered in the New World 
and all those who were bled to 
death on the continent, I’d never 
be able to sleep again. 
Is forgiving necessar ily 
forgetting? 
The idea of forgiving is under-
pinned by that of forgetting. If 
you don’t forget, you can’t for-
give properly, you’ll always be 
obsessed by revenge. 
You’re very ready to use humor. 
Comic relief but also disturbing 
humor… 
Yes, I say “I have the laugh that 
kills”. In Le Destin glorieux du 
Maréchal Nnikon Nniku, it ’s 
laughter that expels, that 
relieves tension and liberates. Humor preserves you. 
It makes you peaceful. It makes things relative, quite 
rightly so, to temper excessive rage, to recharge your 
energy. 
Humor is our weapon, we who are weak. The weak 
laugh at themselves to disarm their foes. That’s what 
(French writer) André Schwarz-Bart said when I inter-
viewed him after he’d won the Goncourt literary prize 
[1959]. Humor is a weapon. 
Like poetry… 
Possibly… 
You don’t think of yourself as a militant? 
I consider myself committed. I don’t think there’s 
any literature that isn’t. What is the meaning of my 
commitment? Effectively everything said that goes 
to another carries a message, and that message con-
tains a minimum of effectiveness. Humor is militant. 
Poetry is militant. Every action that projects the 
consciousness of being is militant. 
Tchicaya U Tam’si is 
the author of numerous 
collections of poems 
including Le Mauvais 
Sang (Bad Blood, 1955) 
and Épitomé (Epitome, 
1962), of novels including 
Les Cancrelats (The 
Cockroaches, 1980), and 
of plays : Le Zulu (The 
Zulu) followed by Le Destin 
glorieux du maréchal 
Nnikon Nniku, prince qu’on 
sort (Glorious Destiny of 
Marshal Nnikon Nniku, 
1979).
## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=22) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
22 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3
Partners
A joint initiative of UNESCO and the 
International Union of Geological 
Sciences(IUGS), the International Year 
of Planet Earth contributes to the United 
Nations sustainable development targets 
by promoting wise use of the Earth 
materials and encouraging better planning 
and management to reduce risks for the 
world’s inhabitants.
© Moonkyoum Kim
Drawing by Moonkyoum Kim, Republic of Korea, one of 
the laureates of the IYPE student contest.
To mark the Day’s celebration in Mozambique, the 
2008 UNESCO/Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom 
Prize will be awarded to a journalist for his dedica-
tion to the defence of freedom of expression and 
Next month
How does access to information help the 
most vulnerable groups transform their 
lives? The question will be raised by the 
UNESCO Courier’s next issue published in 
May, on the occasion of the World Press 
Freedom Day (3 May). 
© Cyrus Farivar
Cybercafe in Mauritania.
Numerous Organizations are working together in the 
context of this international project. 
A few examples:
International Union of Geological Sciences  
 http://www.iugs.org/ 
International Year of Planet Earth  
 http://www.yearofplanetearth.org/ 
The Geological Society  
 http://www.geolsoc.org.uk/index.html 
American geological institute  
 http://www.agiweb.org/ 
International Union of Soil Sciences  
 http://www.iuss.org/ 
African Association for Remote Sensing of the Environment 
  http://www.aarse2008.org/index.html  
International Association on the Genesis of Ore Deposits  
 http://www.geology.cz/iagod  
European Geosciences Union  
 http://www.copernicus.org/EGU/
information. Last year it was awarded posthumously 
to Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya.
## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/159919eng.pdf#page=23) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
23 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 3
The UNESCO Courier is published by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 
7, place de Fontenoy – 75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
General inquiries by e-mail: courier.unesco@unesco.org 
 Director: Saturnino Muñoz Gómez editor in Chief: Jasmina Šopova
 French editor: Agnès Bardon english editors: Ariane Bailey
 Spanish editor: Lucía Iglesias Kuntz arabic editor: Bassam Mansour
 Russian editors: Katerina Markelova Chinese editor: Weiny Cauhape
 layout: Marie Moncet Photo and Features editor: Fiona Ryan
 Web Platform: Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be reproduced and/or translated providing the credit line reads “Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier”, 
and include date and hyperlink. Photos without UNESCO credit request specific authorization. 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations of the countries and territories concerned.
ISSN 1993-8616 