# [138446](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf)
## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=1) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
0 ^ /- ^^
.^^
\7
J
Talking to
le Jean
Océans:
a new threat, acidity
ging ethics
r space travellers
## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=2) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Cover photo:
© Betty Press/Panos Pictures, London
thé new Courier is published
by thé United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
Tel: 33 l 45 68 46 85
Fax: 33 l 45 68 56 52
Email: unesco. courier@unesco. org
Internet: http://www. unesco. org/courier
Editors in Chief: Vincent Defourny, Sue Williams
Editorial Assistant: Agnès Bardon
Editorial staff: Roni Amelan, Pierre Gaillard,
Lucia Iglesias-Kuntz, Cathy Nolan, Bassam Mansour,
Vladimir Sergueev, Jasmîna Sopova
Research and documentation: José Banaag
Photo éditer: Ariane Bailey
Photographers: Niamh Burke, Michel Ravassard
Editions produced away from headquarters:
Mîchiko Tanaka
Artistic direction: Jean-Francis Cheriez
Production. : Gérard Prosper, Eric Frogé
Photoengraving: Annick Coueffé
Distribution: Pilar Morel Vasquez
Printed by: Imprimerie Corlet,
Condé-sur-Noireau, France
Electronic version: Richard Cadiou,
Fiona Ryan-Jacqueron
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted
may be reprinted provîding thé crédit line reads
"Reprinted from thé new Courier", including thé
date and issue. Non-copyrîght photos will be
supplied upon request. Unsolicited manuscripts and
articles will not be retumed unless accompanied
by an international reply coupon covering postage.
Signed articles express thé opinions of thé authors
and do not necessarily represent thé opinions
of UNESCO or those of thé new Courier.
Photo captions and headlines are written by thé
magazine's editorial staff.
Thé boundaries on maps do not imply officiai
endorsement or acceptance by UNESCO or
thé United Nations of thé countrîes and territories
concerned.
BSN 0041-5278
verybody was on their feet swaying to thé music, happy to
be sharing an exceptional moment. To bring thé International
Year for thé Commémoration of thé Struggle against Slavery
and its Abolition to a dose, Gilberto Cil, musician and
Brazilian Minister of Culture, performed an exceptional concert at
UNESCO's Paris Headquarters. "Thé most fantastic contribution of
thé Black diaspora to thé world is thé cultural, racial and spiritual
blending it has spawned, " Gil commented in between an evocative
ballad about thé island of Corée, a song of revoit and hope by
Bob Mariey and John Lennon's "Imagine".
Thé concert hall was packed on that evening of December 3.
As with events over thé whole of 2004, it served as a poignant
reminder of thé abominations of slavery, thé célébration of
its abolition, and thé need to continue thé struggle against ail
contemporary forms of slavery. At thé same time, it also highlighted
thé extraordinary exchanges that thé slave trade engendered, and
how they hâve iiifluenced thé world in which we live today.
Thé concert was thé final event on thé evening's emotionally
chargea programme. Earlier, poet Aimé Césaire took part, live
via videolink from his home in Fort de France in Martinique. He
was awarded thé Toussaint Louverture Prize, specially created by
UNESCO for thé International Year. With finesse and précision, he
spoke of thé universal dimension of thé combat against injustice
and for human dignity. Quoting from his writings on thé freed slave
who went on to lead Haiti, he emphasized how seriously Toussaint
Louverture had taken thé Déclaration of thé Rights of Man and of
thé Citizen, which was adopted by thé National Assembly of France
in 1789.
Thé founder of thé Teatro Expérimental do Negro, Abdias
Nasacimento of Brazil, was there in persan. He also received thé
Toussaint Louverture Prize for his efforts aver almost 70 years to
rehabilitate Afro-Brazilian héritage, and his commitment to thé
struggle against domination, racism and intolérance. He called for
vigilance and launched a vibrant plea in favour of Haiti and Africa,
denouncing ail mechanisms that today maintain injustice and
oppression.
Earlier in thé day, in la salle des pas perdus, a travelling
exhibition was inaugurated. « Lest we forget : thé triumph aver
slavery", was conceived by thé Schomberg Centre in New York
in collaboration with UNESCO's Slave Route project. Thé facts
and figures, thé methods used and thé terrible logic of thé slave
trade presented in this exhibition serve as a sober reminder of thé
suffering endured by so many men and women.
Thé dossier published in this issue of thé new UNESCO Courier
focuses on thé « blending » that resulted from thé population
movements that resulted from thé slave trade. It takes us on a
strange cultural odyssey, shedding a completely différent light on
some of thé most dreadful pages of human history
Vincent Defoumy
UNESCO l thé neiu Courier l December 2004
## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=3) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
MiCHÈLE JEAN
Human dignity, key value
of bioethics
7
HIT
Already thé victims of global warming, marine ecosystems
are threatened by a rising level of ad ity
Ï<>
FOR
As space exploration advances, law
and ethics hâve to keep up.
MALI: MOBILE RADIO
IN THE BATTLE
0F
l?
DRC: SPECIES
EXTINCTION ALERT
Bonobo and Northern White
Rhinocéros are endangered
d«Stfetl
CF JA
T$
QUÂLITY 0F EDUCÂTSON:
COULD DO BETTER
Conclusions of thé latest Education
for AU Global Monitoring Report
<2T
Thé organization's latest news
^
TiES
<^hl\
n
uun LO. yss
v-N
?<î
Projects organized, sponsored or supported
by UNESCO with civil society: personalities, universities,
NGOs, corporations....
?î
ICTTIIVIESNAFRICÂ
Close-up on community multimédia
centres in Mozambique
?^
5^
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=4) 🆗
### 138436: Talking to Michèle Jean: human dignity, key value of bioethics
ICH'LEJE
Science is becoming more and
more universal. In order to
respond to thé questions raised
by modem science, ethics
must go global, with common
points of référence established.
Thé International Bioethics
Committee (IBC) has been
working at this task for several
months, creating thé basis of
a déclaration on thé universal
norms of bioethics. Thé IBC
will soon hand thé bâton to
govemment experts, who are
expected to meet and generate
thé final document that will
be submitted to UNESCO's
Général Conférence in 2005.
IBC Président Michèle Jean of
Canada answers our questions.
What wiM this future déclaration inctude?
Takiiig into account our consultations with UNESCO niember
states, we've chosen to focus thé déclaration on human beings
as moral actors with responsibiiities vis-à-vis animais, thé
environment and thé biosphère. Thèse areas could be thé focus
of other work done either by thé World Commission on thé
Ethics of Scientific Knowledge and Technology (COMEST), thé
IBC or other bodies.
Who witl thé déclaration be targeting?
Thé déclaration aspires to create a framework that could inspire
states in thé implementation of their policies, législation,
rules of good coaduct and codes of ethics. It's an instrument
that should help countries draft their own policies and their
own guidelines, while taking into account their cultures and
traditions, une of thé challenges is not to fall into thé trap of
cultural relativism.
UNESCO | thé nciu Courier | December 2004
## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=5) 🆗
### 138436: Talking to Michèle Jean: human dignity, key value of bioethics
Thé IBC's text is based on a séries of fundamentat prînciples,
with human dignity at thé forefront. Can this principle realty
be defined?
This notion is very complex and l don't thiak that we'll end up
with a précise définition. Human dignity can take diverse forms
in différent cultures. Others before us hâve tried to do it and we
always end up with solutions that don't allow for thé principle
to maintain its universality.
So, what's thé point then?
Human dignity is a notion that crops up in several international
texts, notably in thé Universal Déclaration of Human Rights,
and in thé works of philosophers Uke Kant. This principle bas
fhe advantage of putting forward a vision oî thé human being.
If we don't take human dignity into considération, what is
thé use of talking about principles like autonomy or informed
consent? l think that this notion constitutes a vision or an
objective to which we should strive, an objective which allows
us to establish a certain aumber of other principles that we can
define more cleariy.
Does such a plurafetic approach risk weakening thé
instrument?
We must not fall into any kind of cultural relativism, where
everything is mixed up and we can do aaything in thé name
of cultural diversity. This is why we specify in thé déclaration
that one cannot undermine thé values of justice, human dignity
and human rights in thé name of cultural diversity. Nothing
that bas been implemented should run contrary to thé général
and fundamental principles that we define. But one can - in
one's way of working, in one's relationship with spirituality and
religion - corne up with différent ways of implementiag thèse
same principles.
One of thé goats of thé future déclaration is to prevent
thé stigmatization of and discrimination against individuals
or a group of individuate. Coukl you give some récent
examptes of cases In which seiwrtlfic progress came up
against such a risk?
New risks hâve appeared, notably with thé development of
genetic science. For example, if you study thé "susceptibility"
of a given. population to certain aînesses, there is a risk that
certain sectors of thé population could be stigmatized. Those
who are more susceptible than others to developing a certain
iïlness due to their genetic make-up are maybe going to see
themseives denied jobs or health insurance. How can we make
sure that, on one hand, epidemiological reaearch - which can
benefit from thé study of genetic data from certain populations
- moves forward, but on thé other hand, that this does aot lead
to thé stigmatization of individuals?
There is also a question about thé collective diinensioas of
consent. If you décide to submit to a DNA test, it can reveal
certain susceptibilities withia your family and thus hâve
repercussions within thé family. On thé other hand, everything
should not be "geneticized" as thé mdividual is made up of
genetic data, but also of phenotypes, thé éducation he or she
bas received aad his/her environment.
Thé draft highHghts that scientific progress should always
attempt to promote thé wetl-being of individuals and
of thé human species as a whole. Are there sftuations in
which thé interests of thé individual and thé interests
of thé community clash?
Thé gréât challenge in bioethics is, as a matter of fact, to try to
reach equilibrium between those mterests. For example: if you
hâve a médication that costs 20,000 dollars a year per person in
a public health System funded by thé state, you might be forced
to décide not to subsidize that médication because it is too
costly aad those costs could adversely affect thé entire System.
There are collective iatercsts that must be counterbalanced with
thé intercsts of an individual. Bioethics allows us to inform
such a choice.
On such an issue tike thé one you just mentioned, how
could thé déclaration hâve helped hiform thé décision?
When we're talking about acting for thé good of thé individual
or individuals, thé déclaration is not necessariïy going to
/ÎR6 iH.-t^Y'KA'fcioKAl
^BiortKi^ ôommx^t
UNESCO created thé
International Bioethics
Committee (IBC) in 1983,
at a time when human
genome research and
genetic testing were
beginning to take shape.
With culture, éducation and
thé sciences as its mandate,
UNESCO wanted to use this
Committee -which did not
yet hâve a formai structure
- to contribute by drawing
up a déclaration on thé
human genome and human
rights. Thé Universal
Déclaration on thé Human
Genome and Human Rights
was drafted by thé IBC
and adopted by UNESCO's
Général Conférence in 1997,
and later approved by thé
United Nations Général
Assembly in 1998.
In 1998, thé IBC was given
a formai structure with
ststutes, rules and formai
working procédures. Thé
Committee was quickly
given a mandate to prépare
anothar déclaration,
this time devoted to
human genetic data. This
déclaration was adopted
in 2003 and, at thé same
time, thé Committee was
given thé mandate to work
on a draft déclaration
on universal norms in
bioethics. That text witl
soon be reviewsd by thé
Intergove rn mental Bioethics
Committee (IGBC) and
government experts.
UNESCO | (te new Courier | Deeember 2004
## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=6) 🆗
### 138436: Talking to Michèle Jean: human dignity, key value of bioethics
Cottective intsrests
can sometimss
coaflictwithshoseof
ths mdivtsluai
help because thé level of social acceptability is not thé same
everywliere. But we hope to provide a framework that will
allow us, whea we're looking at thèse types of questions, to
make thé best possible décisions in thé given drcumstances
by applying thé fundamental aad secondary principles of thé
déclaration.
Thé text introduoes certain new or emerging principles
like thé principls of responsibUHy, of aceountabHity. What's
thé point of this prindple?
This principle is particulariy important iii thé current coiitext. Il
touches on thé whole question of thé integrity of scientists and
their responsibility, but also on thé responsibility of iadividuals.
We don't talk about it that often, but as individuals in a society
we also hâve a certain degree of responsibility with respect to
our health, thé way we behave, feed ourselves and live, with a
view to not undermining thé health System for our countrymen.
We often say, "My freedom stops where yours begins" that is
a question of balance.
AU of thèse principles remain rather général. Are you worried
that thé déclaration could become merely a statement of
good Intentions? What is its tnie usefulness?
Thé déclaration also recommends rather concrète measures,
like thé establishment of ethics committees, public debate, etc.
On ail of thèse issues, we hâve tu eiigage in public debates and
foster dialogue with scientists and civil society, to see how far
we want to go and how it would work. Ail this is very concrète
- we need ethics committees, we need ethics éducation
programs for scientists and health professionals, we need to
develop genetic couaseling programs... As for UNESCO, it must
develop procédures to implement thé déclaration, as well as
évaluation and monitoring procédures. AU thèse things will
breathe life into thé déclaration.
2004 - Re-elected président of thé IBC
2002 - Elected président of thé IBC
2002 - Named vice-president of thé board
of Quebec's health research fund
2001 - Nominated to Quebec's
Commission on thé Ethics of Science
and Technology
1998 - Nominated ta thé International
Bioethîcs Committee (IBC)
1995 - Received honorary doctorate in law
from Concordia University, Montréal
1993-1998 - Served as Canada's deputy
health minister
1982 - Published "Thé History of Women
in Québec, from New France to today"
fre-released in 1992)
1975 - Earned Masters in History from
thé University of Montréal
1974- Earned Masters in Education from
thé University of Montréal
This déclaration is aimed at estabUshing ethical prindples
that will provide a framework for récent scientiHc progress.
te it truly possJble to croate norms that wttl keep up with thé
speed of scientific évolution?
Certainly, science is developing at breakneck speed, but that
is predsely why we need this déclaration. In addition, thé
déclaration is due to be reviewed later on to take scientific
progress into account so that certain areas that might not be
initially covered can be included in subséquent work. l don't
think we should give up on moving forward just because
science is moving too quickly. On thé contrary, we must
continue to develop useful frameworks. Once we hâve a
good framework, we can gradually - notably through reports
and opinions - follow thé évolution and make thé necessary
adjustments. We cannot forget that bioethics must bc based
on an adéquate sdentific background and must not make
pronouncements based on unfounded principles.
Interview conducted by Jeanette Blom, SHS
UNESCO | thé neiu Courier | December 2004
## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=7) 🆗
### 138437: Oceans hit the bottom
ac scpe ce
Much of our carbon gas émission is absorbed by thé océans. This is a boon for thé
atmosphère, already saturated with gases contributing to thé greenhouse effect.
But it is a growing danger for marine ecosystems, in which acidity is increasing.
UNESCO and thé sdentific community are sounding thé alarm.
Austraiia. /-f l , , , now, we considered it a blessing
Underwater robot l/1 I^L'l/ 11 for thé environment. Thé océans
nearthe Gréât covering two-thirds of thé planet's surface absorb
Barrier Resf much of our carbon gas émissions, particularly
carbon dioxide, which would otherwise contribute
to thé greenhouse effect. Thé problem is that
océans are being harmed in thé process. Thé
océan environment has significantly increased
in acidity since thé start of thé industrial era. In
May 2004, UNESCO and thé scientific community
sounded thé alarm at a symposium organised by
thé Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission
(IOC) and thé Scientific Committee for Oceanic
Research (SCOR).
In récent years, heat waves, unusual droughts,
a succession of cyclones and storms hâve
focused attention on thé climate and supposed
signs of global warming. Up until now, interest
in what is happening in thé océans was limited
to discovering their influence on climate
models and their response to a warming of thé
planet's atmosphère (raised water levels and
températures). But thé absorption of around a
third of thé carbon gas output of human activity
aver two centuries - some 118 billion tonnes
between 1800 and 1994 - has threatened thé
chemical balance of thé sea's upper levels.
Concern over climate change has now been
overtaken by worries of a potentially disastrous
dégradation of marine ecosystems.
PLANKTON IN DANGER
In soluble form, carbon gas is acidic. Thé
increased acidity of seawater, that is to say its
lowered pH* level, translates to a deficiency in
carbonates (l). But carbonates are used by coral
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=8) 🆗
### 138437: Oceans hit the bottom
e * se e ce
and some plankton species to form protective
outer shells made of calcium carbonate. "A
decreased availability of carbonates will lead ta
a lessened calcification of thé exoskeletons of
thèse species" of between 10 and 40 per cent, says
James Orr, a biogeochemist at France's Laboratory
for Climate and Environmental Science [LSCE)
and member of thé planning committee for thé
SCOR-IOC symposium. Based on measurements
taken at nearly 10, 000 sites between 1990 and
1998, Richard A. Feely, Christopher L. Sabine
and their colleagues hâve clearly highlighted thé
importance of thé level of carbonates in seawater
[l). Their research shows that, at thé current rate
of carbon gas émissions, thé décline in this level
is going to worsen.
Coral reefs are among thé first victims of this
change. They are no longer threatened only by
thé increase in thé ocean's température but also
by thé shift in its chemical balance. Various
uncontrollable chain réactions are being triggered.
One of thé most important is thé réduction in thé
size of some plankton species which serve as food
for fish and other marine organisms. Thé entire
food chain is being perturbed in unpredictable
ways that could imperil thé ocean's biodiversity
and production.
Proiiîeration of
phytopSanktonoffthe
iVorwegian coast
CARBON GAS IN THE OCEAN'S
DEPTHS?
Thé reasons to view thé océans as CO; "sinks"
hâve become well-established. Thé discovery was
ail thé more eye-opening because very few experts
had anticipated it. Thé océan in effect acts as an
enormous réservoir of carbon (holding around
37,000 gigatonnes, or 37,000 billion tonnes),
much more than in thé atmosphère (around
800 gigatonnes). Thé addition of human-produced
carbon gas (nearly two gigatonnes a year of
thé total six gigatonnes generated by industrial
activity(2)) would seem relatively harmless.
Some hâve even theorized, and still theorize,
that carbon gas could be captured at its source,
compressed into a liquid form, and injected into
thé ocean's depths. Based on oceanic circulation
models, carbon gas stored in this way would not
cycle to thé surface and into thé atmosphère for
several hundred years.
Cesare Marchetti was thé first to suggest this
solution in 1977, while he was working for thé
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
(IASA) in Austria. His idea for disposing of thé COz
produced in Europe was to send it to thé bottom
of thé Atlantic Océan, off thé Strait of Gibraltar.
Marchetti's proposai was picked up two years
later by American scientists, and in thé 1980s thé
US Department of Energy started researching thé
possibility. Thé underiying question was: Given
that thé carbon gas dissolved on thé surface is only
very slowly circulated into deep water, is there a
way to speed up thé process? Especially as deep
water, being colder, absorbs carbon gas at a much
faster rate than surface water.
CAUTION IS THE WATCHWORD
Thé European Commission currently faveurs
carbon gas storage underground or in saline land
aquifers and gives little support to researching
océan storage. This path is mostly being explored
by Norway, Japan and thé United States, though
as it stands US authorities seem unconvinced by
thé technique. Scientists in those three countries
are working together on thé Océan Abyssal
Carbon Experiment (OACE) project (2002-
2005). Ceertain results were presented at thé 7th
International Conférence on Greenhouse Cas
Control in Vancouver in September 2004(3). In thé
industrial sector, caution reigns, as expressed in
a report prepared by scientists from thé oil group
Total and thé Institut Français du Pétrole (IFP)
for thé 19th World Energy Congress in Sydney
* Thé pH of a
liquid or a solution
measures its acidity
or alkalinity. A level
of 7 is neutral, lower
numbers indicate
increasing acidity,
and higher numbers
indicate increasing
alkalinity. Thé pH
of seawater is on
average between 8
and 8. 3. This level
has dedined by
around 0. 1 since
thé beginning of thé
industrial era.
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=9) 🆗
### 138437: Oceans hit the bottom
Les écoies de la
région de Semei sont
isolées et (Sifficiles
d'accès,
in September 2004, which read: "Even with a
certain scientific guarantee as to thé system's
equilibrium, it would not be easy for thé public to
allow our océans - part of our universal héritage
and a source of life - to be used as storage sites.
Thé océans hâve long been unwisely considered
bottomless trash cans [... ]" (4).
This sort of storage also has to be evaluated
in thé light of international measures protecting
thé océan environment, such as thé London
Convention on waste disposai at sea, even
though, strictly speaking, COi cannât be
considered waste. But whether we like it or not,
part of thé carbon gas output resulting from
human activity has already gone into thé océan.
Therefore, if we short-circuit C02's présent route
(through thé atmosphère and surface océan)
by putting it directly at thé bottom of thé sea,
thé question is whether this créâtes additional
risks to thé deep océan environment, as Takashi
Oshumi, Japanese scientist and member of thé
SCOR-10C planning committee, wrote in 2002. (5)
One achievement of thé conférence was bringing
together thé various points of view and scientific
knowledge from différent disciplines (chemistry,
physics, biology, ecology, paleoceanography... ),
as another member of thé committee, French
biogeochemist Liliane Merlivat, pointed out.
LOOKING BEFORE LEAPING
A multidisciplinary confrontation is crucial
for evaluating each alternative on scientific,
environmental and économie grounds, as thé
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) bas recommended. That also holds for
proposais to fertilize thé océan environment
with injections of iron, an élément essential for
activating photosynthesis. Thé idea now is to
encourage thé growth of océan végétation in order
to sequester some of thé carbon dioxide generated
by humans. Despite inconclusive results so far,
some companies hâve already started to develop
techniques implementing this process, notes
Patricia Bernai, thé lOC's Executive Secretary. For
symposium participants, thé scientific évaluation
has to continue before any décision is made on thé
method's large-scale application.
Given thé volume of émissions predicted
for thé décades ahead, nothing should be left
to chance. Scientists predict that by 2100 thé
décline in surface seawater pH will accelerate
further, multiplying by as much as a factor
of three compared to thé level recorded since
thé beginning of thé industrial era. This is a
phenomeaoa unprecedented in thé last 20 million
years, says Maria Hood, a specialist researcher for
thé IOC. UNESCO's initiative aims to address thé
situation. "Our main message, " Patricia Bernai
stresses, "is to leave no path unexplored, but to
evaluate each one according to strict scientific
principles. This is thé key to making fully
informed political décisions about a problem that
goes far beyond mère national interests."
Dominique Chouchan
[l) R. A. Feely et al.. Impact of anthropogenic 00; on
thé CaC03 System in thé océans. Science, vol. 305,
pp. 362-366, 2004
(2) IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme, Carbon
Dioxide Chemistry and Properties, March 2002 (http://
www.ieagreen.org.uk/index.htm)
(3) Péter M. Haugan et al., Océan abyssal carbon
experiments at 0, 7 and 4 km depth, in E.S.Rubin,
D. W. Keith and C. F Gilboy (Eds. ), Proceedings of 7th
International Conférence on Greenhouse Cas Control
Technologies (IEA Greenhouse Cas Programme), in press
(4) G. Plouchard (IFP), P. Le Thiez (IFP), L. de Marliave
(Total), S. Crépin (Total), Capture et stockage du CO;,
contraintes et progrès, World Energy Council, Sydney 2004.
(5) Takashi Oshumi, Océan storage, including costs and
risks, IPCC Workshop for Carbon Capture and Storage,
2002
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=10) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
i a a se e ces
Mikhaïl Grachyev/Gamma, Paris

### 138438: Space for ethics
Thé World Commission on thé Ethics
ofScientific Knowledge and Technology''
(COMEST) brought scientists, légal
experts and space programme directors
together for a symposium on "thé légal
and ethical framework for astronauts"
at UNESCO's Paris headquarters on
October 29
To whom do l complain to if thé sky falls on
my head? What law applies and which court
is compétent?» Those are thé questions
Gabriel Lafferranderie** half-seriously asked
himself in 1997. Since then, thé development of
thé 16-nation International Space Station (ISS)
has not made matters any clearer. Let's say débris
does drop out of thé sky. Will it be necessary
to ask which part of thé station it cornes from?
Which of thé 16 countries built that section of thé
«erector set» spacecraft?
Like space itself, space law might seem quite
murky to mère Earthlings like us. There are texts,
such as thé 1967 Space Treaty, thé Agreement
on thé Rescue of Astronauts, thé Return of
Astronauts and thé Return of Objects Launched
into Outer Space and even thé 1998 Agreement on
thé International Space Station, which attempts
to untangle in advance thé légal intricacies that
UNESCO | thé neiu Courier | December 2004
## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=11) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
might anse if a crime took place aboard thé
ISS. Ail thèse texts might seem largely sufficient
because they pertain to situations that, for thé
most part, hâve not occurred yet. What's more,
thé burden of determining what constitutes a
crime will fall primarily on a small group of
individuals living and working in close proximity
to each other, and will probably require ethical
judgement before légal judgement.
But chances are that thèse texts and thé
ethical reflection swirling around them will fall
short in thé near future. New directions in space
exploration are opening up horizons very différent
from those of thé period of thé moon launches
and thé Cold War. Commercial and national
interests are increasingly looming up behind

### 138438: Space for ethics
astronauts, described as "envoys of mankind" by
thé Outer Space Treaty. Thé two flights thé private
rocket-powered plane SpaceShipOne made in
September and October 2004 show that thé âge
of space tourism opened up by billionaire Dennis
Tito's May 2001 trip is hère to stay. Thé ticket
is still quite pricey - 160,000 euros - but Virgin
Galactic says aver 7,000 potential passengers
are already queuing up for its flights, which are
scheduled to begin in 2007 or 2008, and other
'carriers" will probably follow suit. That means
there will be many more astronauts in a few years
than during thé entire first half-century of space
exploration.
MORAL RESPONSIBILITY AND
FINANCIALUABILITY
But it also means new problems, from something
as banal as lost luggage to determining what
constitutes an acceptable risk to space tourists.
(Astronaut Jean-Pierre Haigneré says that in 1969
Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin had just one
chance in two of coming back from thé moon safe
and sound, and today thé risk is 3 %, which is
quite high for mère tourists!) Thé growth of space
tourism will also raise thé likelihood of seeing
crimes and misdemeanours committed in space,
but thé existing text applies only to thé ISS. "Thé
fîrst recognized space criminal, " North Carolina
University anthropologist Péter Redfield said at
thé October meeting, "could in fact prove to be
an unethical corporation that violâtes commercial
law in search of greater profit, or a particularly
rude and belligerent space tourist who goes one
step too far. "
A single example is enough to show thé limits
of présent law in dealing with today's situation.
Dennis Tito and his fellow trailblazers were
still "envoys of mankind" and they incurred thé
moral responsibility and fiaancial liability of thé
State responsible for launching thé vessel aboard
which they travelled. Imagine a passenger on thé
Virgin Galactic or another future carrier causing a
disaster during a space flight. Neither thé party at
fault nor thé company that sent thé craft into orbit
could afford to cope with such a possibility.
Tourist-astronauts will be joined by future
astronaut-colonists. At thé October 29 meeting,
Jacques Arnould, of thé CNES (Centre National
d'Etudes Spatiales, thé French space agency),
pointed out that for thé moment astronauts are
still campers "working and living in space", but
thé day is coming when they will be "settled
in space". Longer and longer space sojourns,
increasingly far from Earth, will raise new
technical problems as well as ethical and légal Sillionaire Dennis
Tito launched thé
era of space tourism
(left).
Virgin Galactic
hopes to develop
space flighîs by 2007.
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=12) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
UNESCO in action social sciences
Earth viewsd îrom a
space sîation
issues. How will existing principles be applied to
thé situation? Should new régulations or ethical
considérations govern astronauts' activities? In
thé long run, one may wonder whether a spécial
status will hâve to be created for space settlers'
descendants whose ties with Earth are so loose
that they could only be described as a différent
species.
PONDERING ASTRONAUTS'
STATUSANDOTHERETHICAL
QUESTIONS
Without peering quite so far ahead into thé
future, it might be worth pondering whether thé
foundations of thé astronaut's status should be
revised. Until now, astronauts hâve been considered
pioneers pushing back new frontiers, focusing
mainly on scientific research and geostrategic
compétition. Is thé driving force behind space
exploration shifting, with économie motives
taking precedence aver research? It might also
be worth asking other kinds of ethical questions
involving space exploration: wouldn't thé resources
swallowed up by flights to Mars be put to better
use on Earth, to combat illiteracy for example?
Thé October 29, 2004 meeting, organised
by UNESCO, thé European Centre for Space
Law (ECSL), thé European Space Agency
and thé Institut du droit de l'espace et des
télécommunications at Université Paris XI-Sceaux,
tried to map out thèse uncharted territories.
"We're hère to move thé debate forward, or rather
to get it started, " says Julien Tort of UNESCO's
Division of Ethics of Science and Technology,

### 138438: Space for ethics
adding that to his knowledge, UNESCO is thé
only international organisation which "provides a
framework for thinking about space ethics issues.'
Adigun Ade Abiodun, chairman of thé Committee
on thé Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS)
and thé meeting's rapporteur, concluded by calling
on States to develop space policies and laws.
Pierre Gaillard
* UNESCO has been exploring thé ethics
of outer space for five years.
**Today président of thé ECSL
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=13) 🆗
### 138439: Mali: mobile radio in the battle against hordes of locust
act
Thé people of Timbuktu in Mali used a suitcase radio donated by
UNESCO to battle thé hordes of locusts that destroyed a significant
percentage o f Mali's crops in 2004. Thé equipment helped
Community Multimédia Centres to reach and involve commnnities
in thé vital stmggle against this blight.
Crops are left
devastated when
locusts invade
Thé suitcase radio bas enabled us to save
crops in thé plain around Timbuktu,"
says Birama Diallo, of UNESCO's Community
Multimédia Centre pronject in Bamako, thé
capital of Mali. He explains that "it enabled us
to disseminate information about traditional
methods of fighting thé locusts that had been
forgotten because there had been no locust
attacks in so long. Thanks to thé suitcase radio
we hâve been able to reach everybody, including
nomads. " Thé last major invasion of locusts
occurred some 20 years ago, according to Diallo.
"Thé equipment was used to broadcast daily
crisis programmes, retransmitted on ail four radio
stations in Timbuktu, to tell people where to go
and to organize thé fight against thé invading
swarms, " explained radio technician Mahi Touré.
With few government resources available
for actions such as airborne surveillance and
spraying, Timbuktu had to rely on traditional
methods like smoking thé locusts out, beating
thé swarms with sticks and with traditional
boubou cloth. This requires thé participation of
many people. Thus thé mobile radio, which was
taken to thé anti-locust operational headquarters
run by thé authorities and even into thé fields
to broadcast live from thé local communities,
was essential in mobilizing thé necessary large
numbers.
Thé languages spoken in this cultural
crossroads include Tamacheq, Songhay, Peulh,
Arabie, French and Bambara, and radio provides
thé only effective means of ensuring urgent
information reaches ail communities in ail
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=14) 🆗
### 138439: Mali: mobile radio in the battle against hordes of locust
UNESCO in action
Thé suitcase s-adio
makes it possible to
reach even ths most
remote coinmunitiss
For more information on
thé suitcase radio:
www. wantokent. com
For UNESCO's Community
Multimédia Centres:
http : //www. Unesco. org/
webworld/cmc
languages and is therefore understood by ail. It
also allows local peuple to participate, hâve their
say and share traditional knowledge - which has
proved vital in times of crisis.
"Old people explain thé traditional methods of
fighting thé locust hordes. We also broadcast calls
to mobilize thé villagers. Today, thé army and
thé youth of Timbuktu will be going out together
to fight thé swarms, " explained Mr Touré. Thé
spécial broadcasts linked up ail four radio stations
each day from 9 a. m. to 11 a. m. and from 10 p. m.
until midnight. "There has never been such an
effective way to reach ail thé people of our arca
before, " noted Mr Touré.
Thé radio presenters also used thé local
telecentre to obtain further information from thé
^oy-fc^ble. ̂ (d ue\/-<sA-fcl[&
Thé suitcase radio, a complète
broadcast station in a single case and
complète with a high gain antenna,
is a product of Wantok Enterprises in
Canada. It is designed ta be extremely
simple to use and to withstand harsh
conditions such as those of thé Sahara
désert. Thé unit is fully portable but
can also be used as a permanent FM
community radio station. Because of
its low-cost, easy-to-use advantage,
suitcase radio has been piloted in
several CMCs including in Mali,
Mozambique, Uganda, Niger, Burkina
Faso and Tanzania. Thé suitcase radio
cornes in 30 watt and 100 watt versions.
Internet. Thé suitcase radio was originally donated
by UNESCO under its Community Multimédia
Centre programme, to help radio stations make
optimal use of telecentre resources. Staff from
each station hâve been trained in web searching
and in producing "radio browsing" programmes
in which thé présenter browses pre-selected
web sites on air, explaining and discussing thé
contents with a local expert in thé national
languages.
In less critical times, thé stations also use thé
suitcase unit to cover local sporting events such
as football matches and officiai célébrations. Thé
unit has even been much in demand to give a
spécial touch to Touareg weddings at nomadic
camps in thé désert surrounding Timbuktu.
But with thé locust crisis, it had become clear
that thé suitcase radio has a vital rôle ta play in
reaching thé people scattered across thé area.
UNESCO bas decided to provide thé radio stations
with a 100 watt suitcase, which increases thé
broadcast radius from thé 15 to 20 kilomètres
possible with thé 30 watt transmitter to upto
60 km, covering thé entire populated area of
Timbuktu and thé 40 villages situated in thé Niger
Delta.
Although thé radio stations of Timbuktu are
small and under-funded, they hâve successfully
managed to share thé cost of maintaining thé
unit and hâve carried out live outside broadcasts
weekly for three years.
Stella Hugues
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=15) 🆗
### 138440: DRC: species extinction alert
act u yr
Endangered by civil war, deforestation and poaching, certain
animal species living in thé Démocratie Republic of Congo
are now down to a few individuals. If nothing is done,
thé bonobo, thé mountain gorilla and thé Northem White
Rhinocéros will vanish. UNESCO sounds thé alarm.
Gorilla and elephant
skuilsfound in
Kahuzi-Biega Park
inDRC
onsidered thé "world's second green lung"
after thé Amazon, thé Démocratie Republic
of Congo (DRC) is home to a number of
animal species that are now under threat. For
that reason, UNESCO rallied ail of its Member
States and partners in September to join a major
international campaign to support thé DRC's rich
natural héritage. This western African country
has five sites inscribed on thé World Héritage List
and thé World Héritage in Danger List that are
thé habitat of emblematic species and sub-species
such as thé bonobo, thé okapi, thé mountain
gorilla and thé Northern White Rhinocéros.
No other African country can boast such a
variety of animal and plant species. One reason
is thé diversity of climates and ecosystems:
tropical forest, deciduous forest, savannah,
mangrove, swamps, and a whole range of rivers,
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=16) 🆗
### 138440: DRC: species extinction alert
UNESCO in action itum
J^lo^Ur^ ̂ Oki'te^RkiK06^vo<s;
^A^t o{ Âter-fc i«
In thé of thé UNESCO'sWorld Héritage
UNESCO hosted thé
"Nature and culture
in DRC" exhibition,
created by thé Royal
Muséum for Central
Africa in Tervuren,
Belgium
In response to thé
risk of extinction
of a number of
species. UNESCO
and thé United
Nations Foundation
launched a project to
safeguard ths DRC's
*ive World Héritage
sites
survive.
Another problem: thé white
rhinocéros seems unable to
reproduce successfully in
captivity. In 2000, a femate
rhinocéros was born in a zoo
in Dvur Kralove, in thé Czech
Republic, but that was thé first
birth for ten years. What can be
done? In July, a meeting was
held in Nairobi to deveiop an
emergency strategy to save thé
species. Thé managers of thé
ticking for thé white rhinocéros:
"If nothing is done in thé very
near future, thé Démocratie
Republic of Congo could hâve
thé sad privilège of being thé
first country in thé 21st century
to expérience thé extinction of a
large mammal species."
mountains, volcanoes and lakes. Thé civil war
and instability in thé Gréât Lakes région are
endangering thé conservation of thèse species,
which are threatened by de-forestation, poaching,
thé movement of refugees or thé illégal extraction
of ore.
In an attempt to reduce this damage, UNESCO
and thé United Nations Foundation launched a
Project in 2000 called "Biodiversity Conservation
in Régions of Armed Conûict: Conserving World
Héritage Sites in thé DRC", aiming to préserve
thé sites in their entirety in a country embroiled
in war. This programme used 62 percent of
its budget of three million dollars to pay thé
salaries of thé park wardens, who sometimes risk
their lives to protect thé parks. This intensive
surveillance of thé sites has, for example, allowed
thé mountain gorilla population to rise from
325 individuals at thé start of thé programme
to 355 aow. Thé staff of thé parks hâve also
benefited from training programmes to help them
deal with thé crisis. Another important part of this
alliance, which thé DRC governmeat and several
conservation organisations active in thé DRC hâve
joined, has been thé launch of a "diplomacy of
conservation". Its main achievement has been
to develop links and contact with ail belligerent
parties.
Thé event in Paris, which took place from
September 14 to 26, included an international
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=17) 🆗
### 138440: DRC: species extinction alert
donors conférence. Thé countries and institutions
taking part made commitments to donate 50
million dollars, which will prolong several
programmes. More specifically, 3. 5 million dollars
pledged by thé governments of Belgium and Italy
as well as thé United Nations Foundation and thé
Wildlife Conservation Society will fund thé second
phase of thé programme launched in 2000. Arthur
Z'Ahidi N'Goma, one of thé four Vice-Presidents
of thé DRC's government of national unity,
pledged to do everything possible to stop thé
dévastation of thé forest and to keep troops and
displaced people away from thé protected areas.
Other events were aimed at thé wider public:
UNESCO hosted an exhibition organised by thé
Royal Muséum for Central Africa in Tervuren,
Belgium, and a charity concert featuring rumba
music and other traditional Congolese rhythms.
Thé programme established in DRC by
UNESCO and thé UNF can serve in future as a
model for thé protection of héritage in times of
conflict. Meanwhile, thé survival of a number
of threatened species dépends on thé initiative's
success.
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz
^OovU -{-^Y'i-bA^e- <st^^ 10- ÎÔ^RC
Virunga National
Park
Founded: 1925
Surface area: 8, 100 km2
Inscribed ontheWorld
Héritage List: 1979
InscribedontheWorld
Héritage in Danger List:
1994
Principal protected
species: mountain
gorillas
Mainthreats: military
intrusion, poaching
Garamba National
Park
Founded: 1938
Surface area: 4,900 km2
Inscribed ontheWorld
Héritage List: 1980
Inscribed ontheWorld
Héritage in Danger List:
1996
Principal protected
species: white
rhinocéros and
Congolese giraffe
Mainthreats: influx of
Sudanese refugees,
military présence,
poaching
Kahuzi-Biega
National Park
Founded:1970
Surface area: 6, 000 km2
Inscribed ontheWorld
Héritage List: 1980
Inscribed ontheWorld
Héritage in Danger List:
1997
Principal protected
species: 'high-altitude'
forests, Eastern
lowland gorillas
Mainthreats: influx of
Rwandan refugees,
milita ry présence,
poaching
Salonga National
Park
Founded: 1970
Surface area:
36,000 km2
InscribedontheWorld
Héritage List: 1984
Inscribed on thé
World Héritage in
Danger List: 1999
Principal protected
species: dwarf
chimpanzés or
bonobo
Mainthreats: illégal
hunting andtrade
in bush méat, illégal
exploitation of forests
Okapi Wildlife
Réserve
Founded: 1992
Surface area:
13, 700 km2
Inscribed ontheWorld
Héritage List: 1996
Inscribed ontheWorld
Héritage in Danger List:
Principal protected
species: okapi
Mainthreats: poaching
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=18) 🆗
### 138441: Quality of education: could do better
More children are going to
sckool, thé gender ratio is
improving and resouros
for éducation are tending
to increase. Quality of
éducation, however, is
still significantly lacking
in many régions of thé
world. Thèse are some of
thé conclusions of thé 2005
édition of thé Education
for AU Global Monitoring
Report.
n
'ducafcâo for Ai!
AL8TY
news: More children are going
to school than ever before. But
unfortunately, many drop out before grade 5 of
primary school or graduate without mastering
even a minimum set of cognitive skills, concludes
thé 2005 Education for Ail Global Monitoring
Report, launched November 8 in Brasilia (Brazil).
Thé Report, which monitors progress towards
thé six Education for Ail goals* set by aver 160
countries at thé World Education Forum in Dakar
(2000), finds that significant efforts are being
made to increase resources, broaden access to
school and improve gender parity. However,
exhaustive analysis of research data shows that
UNESCO l thé new Courier l December 2004
## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=19) 🆗
### 138441: Quality of education: could do better
thé quality of éducation Systems is failing children
in many parts of thé world, and could prevent
many countries from achieving Education for AU
bythetargetdateof2015.
In one third of countries with data, for example,
less than 75 percent of students reach grade
5. National and international assessments also
show that performance levels and very weak in
low and middle-income countries and among
disadvantaged groups in some industrialized
nations.
"Overcrowded classes, poorly qualified teachers
and ill-equipped schools with scant learning
materials remain ail too familiar pictures in
many countries, " said UNESCO Director-General
Koïchiro Matsuura. "Yet, achieving éducation
for ail fundamentally relies on assuring décent
quality: what children learn and how they learn
can make or break their school expérience and
their subséquent opportunities for life."
DEVELOPMENT INDEX
Thé importance of quality is reflected in thé
report's EFA Development Index, which measures
thé overall progress of 127 countries towards
EFA. Thé Index is based on indicators for thé four
most measurable Dakar goals: universal primary
éducation, adult literacy, éducation quality as
proxied by survival rate of pupils to grade 5 and
^ender parity.
Norway, Denmark and thé Netherlands head a
list of 4l countries at thé top of thé Index, which
hâve achieved or nearly achieved thé four goals.
Almost ail are in North America and Western,
Central and Eastern Europe, except for a few
in Latin America and thé Caribbean, such as
Argentina, Cuba and Chile, and five small island
states.
They are followed by another 51 countries,
headed by Remania, Bulgaria and Costa Rica
and including many of thé Arab States and thé
countries of Latin America, which are well on thé
way to achieving some of thé goals, but are being
held back by slow progress on others, notably
quality.
Finally, a third group of 35 countries, 22 of
them in sub-Saharan Africa, but also including
thé high population countries of Bangladesh,
India and Pakistan, are "very far from achieving
thé goals", with "multiple challenges to tackle
simultaneously if EFA is to be assured."
Thé report provides a detailed analysis of thé
key factors influencing thé quality of éducation,
including financial and material resources for
schools, teacher numbers and their training, core
subjects, pedagogy, language, thé amount of
actual learning time, facilities and leadership.
There is a clear upward trend on many of
thèse fronts. Education spending, for example,
has increased aver thé past décade in many
developing countries, and access to éducation
continues to improve. But there are still 103.5
million out-of-school children, a figure that is
declining too slowly to achieve universal primary
éducation by 2015. Thé report also emphasizes
that improved access has not beea matched by an
expansion of educational facilities and resources.
INSUFFICIENTTRAINING
FORTEACHERS
This is most notable, for example, with teachers,
who, thé report emphasizes, "are thé stroagest
influence on learning. " In many low-income
countries, teachers do not meet even thé
minimum standards for thé profession. In Togo,
for example, only two percent of teachers met thé
minimum national standard of lower secondary
éducation. In Botswana, where thé standard was
an upper secondary éducation for teaching in
primary, only 10 percent of teachers made thé
grade. Similariy, a récent study of seven Southern
African countries, cited by thé Report, "found
that some primary school mathematics teachers
LikeNorway. 41
countries are on thé
verge of reaching
four EFA goals (left)
India is among
siatesstillfarfrom
reaching EFA goals
.a e
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=20) 🆗
### 138441: Quality of education: could do better
UNESCO in action
A l^ 6V {ov poti-fcicAt A^'tioM
Thé Education for Ail
Global Monitoring Report is
prepared byan independent
international team based at
UNESCO Headquarters in
Paris (France). It is part of
thé follow-up to thé World
Education Forum held in
Dakar (Sénégal, 2000), and
benefits from thé advice of
international editorial board.
Itisfundedby UNESCO
and a number of bilatéral
agencies.
Its findings will be serve
as thé basis for discussions
at thé Fourth High-Level
Group Meeting on Education
for Ail (Brasilia, November
4-10). Thissmall, flexibie
group comprising high-level
leaders from governments
and civil society in
developing and developed
countries, serves as a lever
for political commitment
and technical and financial
resource mobilisation
for EFA. Informed by
thé Global Monitoring
Report, it also provides
an opportunity to hold thé
global communityto account
for commitments made at
thé Dakar Forum.
Thé Report présents
cassstudiesjorll
countries, including
Brazii
possessed only basic numeracy and actually
scored lower than students on thé same tests."
Too often, thèse poorly trained, teachers must
also face over-crowded classrooms. Thé report
finds that in countries with thé highest pupil/
teacher ratios, "barely one third of students who
start primary reach grade S. " In many countries
of sub-Saharan Africa and South and West Asia,
where éducation has expanded rapidly aver thé
past décade, pupil/teacher ratios hâve actually
risen. In most countries of thèse régions, thé
number of pupils per teacher exceeds 40 in
primary éducation and climbs above 60 in several
cases, including Malawi, Mozambique, Central
African Republic and Chad. Furthermore, in many
low-income countries, teachers' real wages hâve
declined relative ti average incomes and their
earnings are too low to provide an acceptable
standard of living.
HIV/AIDS PANDEMIC:
UNDERMINING EDUCATION
Thé HIV/AIDS pandemic is another factor
"severely undermining" thé quality of éducation,
states thé report. In Zambia, for example, an
estimated 815 primary school teachers died of
AIDS in 2001, "corresponding to 45 percent of
teachers trained that year. " Across sub-Saharan
Africa, "more than 11 million children under
thé âge of 15 hâve lost at least one parent to
HIV/AIDS". "Their opportunities to learn" points
out thé report, "are often curtailed by thé need
to care for sick family members or contribute to
household income."
Thé Report présents case studies from 11
countries (Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Cuba, Egypt, Finland, Republic of Korea, Sénégal,
South Africa and Sri Lanka) showing how both
rich and developing nations are tackling thé
quality issue. It also proposes a séries of policy
measures to improve thé quality of éducation,
emphasizing that although "there are no universal
recipes, a robust long-term vision for éducation,
strong government leadership and a motivated,
well-supported teaching corps are conditions for
successful qualitative reforms."
Thé international community has a crucial rôle
to play in supporting this process. Récent pledges
may double thé amount of aid to basic éducation
to about US$3-3.5 billion by 2006, but even this
figure falls short of thé estimated US$7 billion
per year required for achieving universal primary
éducation by 2015.
Sue Williams
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=21) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Fwfl^^li-i^l^fi
çûyr^uc^
For thé first time ever,
Israeli and Palestinian
public broadcasters -
Channel 2 (Keshet TV)
and thé Palestinian
Broadcasting
Corporation - aired
thé same télévision
programme
simultaneously.
Thé documentary,
"On thé Road to
Dialogue", broadcast
on November 24, is
also thé first co-
production by Israeli
and Palestinian public
télévision broadcasters.
It was supported
by German public
broadcaster ARD and
by UNESCO.
In thé film, Israël!
director Yoram Binour
interviews Palestinians
in thé West Bank, and
Palestinian director,
Salwa Abu Libdeh
speaks to Israelis
in Israël. Made as a
road movie, showing
how thé Israël; and
Palestinian crews
worked together on
their parallel stories,
thé film travels from
one village to another.
It highlights people's
ideas and problems,
thé prévalent
stéréotypés that mark
their views of one
another, and thé socio-
économie and political
realities of both sides.
Fwf ^i ôf (î^mm^^f^l
tx^Tis^ ^tlf^r^l Viv^stty
C^v^'w^
Représentatives of UNESCO's
Member States met at
headquarters to examine thé first
outline of a preliminary draft of
an international Convention on
thé Protection of thé Diversity
of Cultural Contents and Artistic
Expressions (September 20 to 25) .
Thé draft, prepared by 14
independent experts from
various régions and professional
backgrounds, recognizes both thé
cultural and économie natures of
cultural goods and services, and
identifies measures to be adopted
by States Parties ta ensure thé
promotion and protection of thé
diversity of cultural contents and
arûstic expressions.
Further experts meetings are
scheduled for 2005.
^r m^i w^w t
for Ir^^f ̂ r'vrl
^TVWtS
Thé UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water
Education at Delft in thé Netherlands
is providing postgraduate training in
hydrological engineering, water resources
management and river management,
to 16 Iraqi professionals. Thé initiative is
a response to thé urgent need for water
supply, water treatment and sewage
services on thé ground in Iraq today.
© UNESCO/Michel Ravassard
U E$C(>.
1 ^iwd Chw
m E^^fiô
dWtl HIV/AIPS
UNESCO's Director-General
Koïchiro Matsuura and Professor
Rex Nettleford, Vice Chancellor
Emeritus of thé University of thé
West Indies, signed an agreement
in October for thé establishment
of a UNESCO Commonwealth
Région Chair in Education and
HIV/AIDS, thé first UNESCO
Chair in this field. It will give a
rôle of régional leadership to thé
University of thé West Indies in
thé educational aspects of thé
fight against thé pandemic. Thé
inauguration was held in Cave
Hill [Barbados).
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=22) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
UNESCO
Ww^y
^^ti(î»iW dtôôk
UNESCO and thé French
National Commission for
UNESCO, in partnership
with several French bodies
such as thé ministries of
éducation and defence,
hâve published a manual,
"Defence in thé Service of
Peace". Thé book, which
consists of 40 fold-out
fact sheets, is to provide
secondary school teachers
with a complète package
of information about
French defence
policy, how it
works, what
it stands for
and its spécifie
components,
as well as thé
corollaries
related to
citizenship, human rights,
democracy, and thé
universal values of law
and civic éducation. Thé
book is divided into three
chapters: Foundations of
Peace and International
Security; Risks and Threats
to Peace and International
Security: Thé Défense of
Peace; A Gioba; Action.
^04 U E$C6- ^
i Prizc
Director-General Koïchiro
Matsuura awarded thé
2004 UNESCO-Madanjeet
Singh Prize for thé
Promotion of Tolérance
and Non-Violence to
Bangladeshi writer and
journalist Taslima Nasrin
on November 16.
A qualified physician,
Ms Nasrin bas won public
récognition for her writings
against thé oppression
of women. Facing death
threats from Moslem
fundamentalists, she
continues fighting for a
new civil code, based on
gender equality, and for
secular éducation.
Thé $100, 000 UNESCO-
Madanjeet Singh Prize was
created in 1995 thanks
to thé generosity of thé
Indian writer and diplomat
Madanjeet Singh, who is
also a UNESCO Goodwill
Ambassador.
© UNESCO/Han Qunli
Biosphère Réserve in Cat
Ba (Vietnam)
U EWs tlflic
?i^p^^( A?)N^tW(îrk
Nineteen new sites in 13
countries were added to
UNESCO's World Network
of Biosphère Réserves during
thé 18th session of thé
International Co-ordinating
Council of UNESCO's Man
and thé Biosphère (MAB)
Programme in late October.
Thé new réserves are: Taza
Biosphère Réserve (Algeria);
Gouraya Biosphère Réserve
(Algeria) ; Pribuzhskoye-
Polesie Biosphère Réserve
(Belarus); Georgian Bay
Littoral Biosphère Réserve
(Canada); Foping Biosphère
Réserve (China); Qomolangma
Biosphère Réserve (China);
Wadden Sea of Schleswig
Holstein Biosphère Réserve
-- extension (Germany);
Nanda Devi Biosphère
Réserve (India); Selva Pisana
Biosphère Réserve (Italy) ;
Mount Kuwol Biosphère
Réserve (People's Démocratie
Republic of Korea); Ria
Celestûn Biosphère Réserve
and Rîa Lagartos Biosphère
Réserve (Mexico); Kedrovaya
Pad Biosphère Réserve
(Russian Fédération);
Kenozerskiy Biosphère
Réserve (Russian Fédération);
Valdaisky Biosphère Réserve
(Russian Fédération); Thé
Karst Biosphère Réserve,
(Slovenia); Babia Biosphère
Réserve Unit, Gran Réserva de
Biosfera Cantabrica, (Spain);
Kanneliya-Dediyagala-
Nakiyadeniya Biosphère
Réserve [Sri Lanka); Cat Ba
Biosphère Réserve (Vietnam);
Red River Delta Biosphère
Réserve (Vietnam); Thé
Council also decided to
expand thé area included in
Menorca Biosphère Réserve
(Spain). Thé network,
which has been pioneering a
scientific basis for sustainable
development for aver 30
years, now includes 459
réserves in 97 countries.
UNESCO | thé neiu Courier | December 2004
## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=23) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
U E$(t6 <IK(I R<idî<i
Tk^il^^d Ck^K$ M^î
Three thousand five
hundred tickets were
sold in just a few days
for a five-hour concert by
20 of thé most popular
singers from thé Akha,
Hmong; Karen, Lahu,
Lisu, Mien and Shan
communities in Chiang
Mai (Northern Thailand)
organized by UNESCO's
Bangkok office and Radio
Thailand Chiang Mai on
November 20. Thé concert
- which was broadcast live
across thé Mékong région
reaching a 15-million
hill tribe population in
southern China, parts of
India, northern Vietnam,
Myanmar, Laos and
Thailand - featured
messages on HIV/AIDS,
human trafficking and
drugs. Thé event was part
of UNESCO's work with
Radio Thailand Chiang
Mai to fight HIV/AIDS,
trafficking and drug abuse
by providing people with
prévention information in
their own language based
on their own spécifie
cultural context.
A^d y^rfôr fr^dom
ôf ̂ pr^^iàh
At thé time of writing,
in December 2004, thé
Committee to Protect
Journalists reported that 54
journalists and 17 média
workers had been killed in thé
course of 2004, compared to
37 journalists last year. Thirty-
one of thé dead were killed in
Iraq. 2004 proved thé deadliest
year since 1994 when 66
journalists were killed in thé
exercise of their profession.
Thé Director-General of
UNESCO issued numerous
statements over thé year
calling for strong measures
to punish and deter acts of
violence against professionals
whose work is indispensable
for democracy and rule of law.
He also drew attention to thé
fact that inadéquate security
of journalists undermines
freedom of expression.
UNESCO contributes to
efforts to improve thé safety
of journalists, especially
through training provided
by thé International News
Safety Institute. In late 2004,
Reporters Without Borders
reported 187 cases of men
and women - 115 journalists
and 69 cyberdissidents
- held in prison around thé
world for exercising their
right to disseminate or seek
information.
-^k-î
© UNESCO/Owen Wrigley
U EW m?.
for km^^ n$kf^
'^Ç^^
Professer Vitit
Muntarbhorn of Thailand
is thé winner of thé 2004
UNESCO Prize for Human
Rights Education. Mr
Muntarbhorn, born in
1952, and a Professer of
Law at Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok,
has devoted his life to
human rights éducation
activities, notably through
his teaching and his
participation in traimng
sessions, seminars and
conférences. An expert
and consultant for
several United Nations
organizations, he is also
thé author of numerous
publications and learning
tools (including board
games with a human
rights thème). In July
2004, he was appointed
UN Spécial Rapporteur on
thé Situation of Human
Rights in thé Démocratie
People's Republic of
Korea.
iwï^s'm^ ÏT^S î$k^
Ed^i^froh
Four containers of laboratory
equipment, along with
supplies of référence books
and students' textbooks,
were delivered to universities
in Iraq at thé end of
December as part of a major
international project to
revitalize thé country's higher
éducation.
Thé consignment was
organized by UNESCO and
thé International Fund for
Higher Education in Iraq, in
close coopération with Iraqi
éducation authorities.
Thé first phase of thé
Project also includes
500 fellowships for Iraqi
researchers and university
teachers that will allow
them to spend three months
in universities abroad to
reintroduce them to thé
académie community and
update their knowledge and
teaching methods.
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=24) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Musical memories p. 26
Jongo's rebirth p. 30
Okra gumbo and rice p. 32
lllustrious unknowns p. 35
Mary Ann Shadd Cary: pushing
thé boundaries p. 37
Thé African 'maisons de trente'
in Louisiana p. 39
Créole miracle p. 42
Africa-America: return trip p. 44
2004 : International Year for thé
Commémoration of thé Struggle against
Slavery and its Abolition p. 47
Studying slavery in schools p. 49
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=25) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Report planned and prepared by Jasinina Sopova
" t(
© Paolo Koch/Rapho, Paris
. r^ï . )... -1
;r; " i . ::
rai îi) bec», i
8'
agaiast humaaity*, thé
slave trade constitutes one
i. of thé most tragic pages of
our history. Four centuries of terrer and humiliation.
Human beings captured, chained, deported, sold like
merchandise, exploited, tortured. Ten million? Twenty
million? Thé exact number is unknown, and could
hardly convey thé extent of thé catastrophe of thèse
dehumanized people: families separated, populations
decimated, a continent dispossessed of its greatest
wealth.
Thé year 2004, which marks thé bicentennial of
thé création of Haiti, thé first independeat black
state, has been proclaimed International Year for thé
Commémoration of thé Struggle against Slavery and
its Abolition by thé Général Assembly of thé United
Nations (p. 47). It is a time to accomplish our duty of
remembrance, but also to "to bring renewed attention
to this abiding and widespread influence of African
cultures and civllizations, " to quote thé Director-General
of UNESCO, Koïchiro Matsuura.
Despite thé horror that pervaded it, this commerce
in human beings carried with it cultural values and
ideas. It laid thé ethical and cultural foundations of
Caribbean and Indian Océan societies and profoundly
affected sodeties on thé American continent. It was thé
origin of a blendîng of cultures that coastitutes one of
thé modem's world's greatest riches. A peculiar cultural
odyssey.
Africaa influence is most obvions in music and
religion (p. 26 aad 30). But we hâve more than just jazz,
jongo and voodoo. We also hâve agriculture. Africa is
présent in thé daily life of Americans, down to thé food
on their plates, whether they rcalize it or not [p. 32).
Thé legacy of slaves is often little known, if not Uterally
obscured, particulariy in thé sciences. Few are aware,
for instance, that thé "father of thé smallpox vaccine"
Edward Jenner was not even born when Onesimus, a
slave, revealed to his master thé method used by African
healers to combat thé disease (p. 35). And not many
people suspect that thé "typically Palladian" houses in
Louisiana are just as typically African (p. 39).
UNESCO thé neiu Courier December 2004
## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=26) 🆗
### 138448: Musical memories
Créole culture, formed around an African core,
is undoubtedly one of thé most positive outcomes
of thé slave trade - a barbarie act that led ta thé
création of new societies. By putting down thé
foundations of new societies that incorporated
their cultural, linguistic, spiritual and esthetic
characteristics - in short, their identity - slaves
brought about a genuine miracle (p. 42).
If this dossier in UNESCO's New Courier focuses
primarily on little-known aspects of African
influence in thé world, born of thé slave trade, it
also opens an even lesser-known chapter: how
cultural values, customs and social practices that
were exported with thé slaves then returned to
Africa (p. 44).
Ten years ago, UNESCO launched thé programme
"Slave Routes" with thé purpose of retracing
thé slave trade's path, analyzing particulariy
thé interpénétration of différent cultures of thé
continents concerned. A number of publications
hâve emerged on thé subject, and new projects
are multiplying, especially targeting young people.
Commemorative sites such as Stone Town of
Zanzibar (United Republic of Tanzania) or James
Island (Gambia) hâve been inscribed on thé World
Héritage List, while thé Carnival of Barranquilla
(Colombia) and La Tumba Francesa (Cuba), as
well as a number of other cultural expressions and
practices, hâve been proclaimed masterpieces of oral
and intangible héritage of humanity (p. 48).
In presenting a dossier devoted to thé diverse
legacies that African slaves and their descendants
left behind, UNESCO's New Courier is attempting
to discover thé positive effects of thé slave trade.
Examining thé past is a way of calling thé présent
into question.
Jasmina Sopova
UNESCO
* Thé slave trade and slavery were recognized
as a crime against humanity at thé World
Conférence against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related
Intolérance (Durban, South Africa, 2001).
On® sphère in wbich Africa bas unquestionabty
inflwncsd miversal culture Es music. Black slaves
were atso th® ©riginators of voodoo and tbe différent
syncretic reiigions in thé Caribbeaa aad Soirth
Ameriea. CertBin culîs and mtssical styles are now
retumlng to their roots in Africa, l»8ar!Rg wttness to
thé excepîional wealîh ofthis cuîtural blendtRg, which
finds probably its most colourfuS expression in
Notfing earnival in LoBdoii.
and other styles of Afro-
Americaii inusic such as
Bliies . ippeared in thé
slavery.
Thé African héritage is also a primary basis of
Brazilian samba, Cuban rumba and Trinidadian
calypso, which ail became internationally popular
Combining thé skills of African story telling, singing
and instrument making, calypso usually involves
some social commentary, typically in thé form of
satire, with an infectious béat. It bas since been
influenced by European, North American and other
Caribbean cultures to produce reggae and thé most
controversial of ail forms of black music today, rap.
Cubaa music too has its roots in thé ritual music
of African slaves mixed with Catholic liturgies and
thé brass bands and guitars of Spanish colonialists.
It developed in a rural setting in which African
slaves and small farmers from Andalusia worked
and played music together. With thé end of thé Cold
War and thé popularity of "Thé Buena Vista Social
Club", film by German director Wim Wenders,
Cuban music is enjoying a résurgence around thé
world.
Another slavery-related art form enjoying global
popularity is Capoeira, leaping and wheeling in
stylized combat lo thé rhythm of drums. Rooted in
Bantu tradition of Angola, Capoeira was iised by
Africans enslaved in Brazil to practice their fighting
UNESCO | thé neu» Courier | December2004
## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=27) 🆗
### 138448: Musical memories
î
.f
^v»
^\
-^ïx"
"?.. ''
.
/."
"^-
f-
-s
<<Z
tv
^-^-
7
-s
s
skills, unbeknown to their masters. When colonial
authorities, who at ftrst thought it a harmless dance,
eventually learned its rcal purpose they banned it on
penalty of death. But it continued to be practiced by
fugitive slaves who set up independent settlements,
known as Quilombos (see page 31). Capoeira
remained illégal in Brazil until thé 1930s, when il
received national récognition as a martial art. In
récent years it exploded out of Brazil and continues
to grow in popularity. According to thé International
Capoeira Angola Foundation, it is aow practiced
in 74 countries, and there are over 1,000 Capoeira
schools listed on thé intemet.
Besides culture, enslaved Africaas also carried
spiritual traditions with them to thé New Worid,
where they were modified to meet thé conditions
of slaver^ and arc aow being re-exponed back
to Africa. One of thèse was Voodoo, which gave
Africans enslaved in Haiti thé strength to survive,
resist and eventually overturn slavery. Many think
Voodoo hails from Haiti. But it originated in Africa,
where thé Fon tribes of Bénin first called it 'voodoo'
meaning 'spirit.' Although taking new fomis in Haiti,
including of Roman Catholicism, Voodoo
African-American
musician B. B. King
in concert in New
York on June 20, 2008
spinte.
Africans enslaved in America blended African
musical forms with European Christian hymns
to create spirituals, which developed into gospel
music. At first a predominanûy white style, it
became prominent in charismatic evangelistic
movements. Black gospel music became distinctive
by 1930, and is especially associated with
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=28) 🆗
### 138448: Musical memories
Briiish hobby
sprayed with
chscolate during
ths Notiiag Hiil
Carnival in Lcndon
Pentecostal churches. Today black church choirs
ï\l ^
htvtl^ A^AÂ. 'ïTA-tiUitl1!
v ! \. l
. lis ysar, thé Smithsonian
Institute's Folklife Festival, thé
biggest annual cultural event
in Washington D.C. (USA),
commemorated thé bicentennial
of Haitian independence. It
highlighted thé roie of Haitian
culture in its people's fight
forfreedom. Founded by thé
descendants of slaves, Haiti was
thé first country to free itself
from colonialism and slavery
simultaneously.
o Fsstiwal hosted more
than tOOtraditional Haitian
artists, crafts people, musicians,
dancers, storytellers and cooks
during 10 days date June and
early July) of démonstrations,
workshops and concerts
outdoors on Washington's
National Mail.
Over one million visitors were
abie to expérience a variety
of celebratory events that
represented Haitian rites ot
résistance. Thèse included
Rara, a processional tradition
village bands paying handmade
instruments, and Voudou, an
African-based religious tradition
that persists as a spiritual
influence in Haitian life.
Thé idea for thé Festival
program, "Haiti: Freedom and
Creativity, " originated two
years ago with members of
thé O. S. Haitian community
A broad coalition of Haitians,
U.S. government agencies and
international organizations,
such as UNESCO, joined forces
to mske Haitian participat'on in
thé Festival possible.
J. L.
by drums.
Gospel and blues merged in America to produce
yet another popular genre known as soiil, which
also gives its name to a cuisine commonly
associated with African Americans in thé southern
United States. Soûl food reflects gastronomie
responses to racial and économie oppression, and
makes créative use of inexpensive products such as
yams, peanuts, okra, black-eyed peas and rice (see
p. 10). Simply prepared Kentucky fried chicken now
spearheads a fast food chain that reaches around thé
worid.
Thé most colorful manifestation of thé fusion of
diverse cultures in thé New World is undoubtedly
carnival. A spring fertility festival of thé Ancient
Egyptiaas adopted by thé Greeks, Romans and then
Christianity, thé carnival tradition was carried across
thé Atlantic by European settlers, and transformed
by descendants of African slaves who hâve now
taken it back to Europe in fhe form of London's
huge Notting Hill Carnival.
It started when slaves began to burlesque thé
extravagant pre-Lenten festivities that their masters
had brought from European courts. Later they added
éléments of West Africa's Egungun festival hononng
family ancestors, such as throwing talcum powder
on fellow masqueraders, ail wearing thé same
UNESCO | thé neu> Courier | December2004
## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=29) 🆗
### 138448: Musical memories
Axé- popu^af music which sprang
in Salvador de Bahia, Brazil in thé
mid-1980s. Qufck tampo and b&at
wfth pefcussion and guitar, it mixes
aamba, reggae, pop and othfir
influences. Orlginally instrumantal,
vocal» were a Irter addition.
Cwmteia - born on thé Atlantic coast
of Cotombia, traditionally con&isting
onty of vocals and parcussion,
from African, Indian and European
influsnces. Laft thé countrysjdo in thé
1940s to b«ome a favourito of thé
urban ctasaes.
\ -^ \/ .6 AM^I^^S
BBamba - began in Cuba in thé 1940s,
from Central African ritual music.
Gave rise to thé cha cha cha in thé
early in thé early 1950s, also in Cuba.
Bîumb'a - from thé Havana &
Matanzas provinces in Cuba,
developed at thé end of thé 19th
centuryfrom rhythms of thé Bantu in
West Africa.
Samba - originated in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil in thé early 1900s, from thé
rhythms of Angola and thé Congo.
Son - developed in thé early 1900s in
thé Oriente province of Cuba, a fusion
of West African and Iberian éléments.
Gave rise to thé salsa in Cuba and
Puerto Rico in thé mid-1960s.
Tumba francesa* - from thé Oriente
province in Cuba, appeared in thé
18th century, inspired by music from
Dahomey, West Africa.
J. B.
^ Oral
Sources: Thé Oxford Companion to
Music; New Grave Dictionary of Music
and Musicrns; Dictionnaire tttémBtique
daa musiques du monda.
color of dress. Finally they turned this annual
explosion of dazzling color and fantasy into
frenzy by infusiag it with African-influenced
music and dance.
Like its counterparts in ancient Egypt and in
thé New Worid, London's Nottiag Hill carnival
is a célébration of life. Started 40 years ago
by a group of homesick Tïimdadians, it is
now an annual favorite loved by people from
ail cultures. Although thé historical legacy of
slavery, includiag racism, discrimination and
poverty, is far from played out, hope springs
from thé fact that people from around thé world
can enjoy together thé slave trade's cultural
legacy.
John Lawton,
Film Director
VoodoB ritual in
Bénin
UNESCO | thé neiu Courier | December 2004
## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=30) 🆗
### 138450: Jongo's rebirth
Jongo, a blend of song, dance and magie, bad faiJeii iRto oMivioti.
Thanks to certain communities such as Sâo José da Serra, this pièce of intangible
héritage brought by slaves who came from Angola ar Congo is again
in thé spotlight in Brazii.
JO
CSiapel, Sâo José
da Serra community
(Brazi!)
Militana and their son
Manoel were bought
in Bahia, in mid-19UI
century, to work on thé Sào José da Serra property.
Thé former coffee fazenda, converted now to
subsistence farming and small-scale stock breeding,
is aear Valença, in thé state of Rio de Janeiro.
According to his descendants, Pedro belonged
to thé Cabinda nation. Back then, thé slaves in
thé région were mostly of Bantu origin, sent to
Brazil from thé slave trade ports on thé coasts of
Angola and thé Congo, or via Mozambique. Thé
grandchildren, great-grandchildren and great-great-
grandchildren of Pedro and Militana now form
thé Sâo José da Serra community, a group that
perpétuâtes thé intangible héritage of its aacestors.
Nearly 80 people live in some 15 clay and straw
houses, with roofs made from plant materials and
mud floors. There is also a small chapel in thé
fazenda, and since 1970 a public school. Because
researchers, journatists and jongo fans from thé
big cities hâve "discovered" Sâo José da Serra, it
recently got electricity.
"Thé captive black man/ Worked so hard/ He
won his freedom/ Today May 13. " Thé inhabitants
of Sâo José da Serra dance to thèse words during
thé commémoration, which lasts several days, of
thé 1888 abolition of slavery in Brazil, on May 13.
Thé high point is thé caxambu, dance around a big
fire that bas been blessed by thé mae-de-santo(see
box) at thé beginning of thé festivities. A large cirde
is formed and one couple dances in thé middle
while thé rest sing jongos, songs which are often
improvised, to thé rhythm of timbus, drums made
from hollow tree-trunks sealed with animal hide.
According to thé elders, magie is an ingrédient
of traditional jongo. Thé singers "sent" each other
words that contained spells and thé "dialogues"
between singers could end up in actual battles.
Children were excluded from thé circle for this
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=31) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
3 0
' l y p»
l
0 l &
.
&
i y
1-
1 l j 3 ^ en 3 s '^
i W S2
.
2
.
<
;
f& j a (U l p
l
» en
re à l &> 0 g J 0 ?
& .§ » 'l s 5. ! n v
j'
il
il
î!
î 
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
 3
s X
S
- 
£
0
 
o
îë
- 
o
lï
^
g
ll
J
5
-5
-^
î=
o
 
3
 
E"
=
f>
 
N
 
^
-
©
 I
sa
b
e
l C
a
sl
ro
\
> ft"
l
l $ § l s
m
'
Eu es l p p- fl
-< 0 §: ff w 2 s (3
l g s 0 0
- i'
l w 
### 138450: Jongo's rebirth
s. m & 3 n I l
l en c
r l 3 a > l 2
.
EU
l-
 J
l 
s tl 0
 
»"
1
l r
l g a
. l s' §' z EU
'
î u»
'
5
' l
g: 0 l .B l. &
l w l ff 3 3
£3
.
©
 I
s
a
b
e
l C
a
st
ro
s
 ^
u
 ®
t»
 
(Q
§>
i
If
l
3
' 
g:
 m
^
^
t 
^
?
 
<û
.
o
 
o
'
$\a ïï Il
?9
3
^ 
(0
 3
-
tO
 0
,1 s
Q
 
C
D
 
C
 0
3-
 2
.
'°
 
<:
ro
 
y
' 
" 
5
'
ï's
.
^
s
ï 
a
 
^
- 
o
Cf
l
ÎU
?
 
s.
e
 o
1
^
1
C
d 
a
 
a
i
U 
S
. 
3
^
 
5
 ^
S
fâ
 .
 "
ïë
^ !11 a
;
3-
 S
o
 3 Il l? ^ s e 
~<
:
S
 
3
'
1
1
C
D
 ®
s:
t Il îl S
 
ce
Il a 3
11
1!
11
il
il
i!
a>
'
|£
's
 !
; 1
1
Il
 l
 ?
 l
eu
 
a
. 
=.
,
o
 
in
S
 
S
 
3
 
o
 c
l
s 0 ï e 3 I i 3 eu <p C
L
3 e 3 l̂ m cB l co Q
.
(B ro Q
.
.§ -a E
.
m 0 3 ? g-
tB 1
0 §' u 0 l Q 3
~ (D
2, l? 0 O
B s m 3
3
-
CD l l Q
. l j m
3 u s i i (D t Q
)
(D a
.
s t M l j w e
:
tO
s l l g 3
.
3 tQ
^
## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=32) 🆗
### 138452: Okra gumbo and rice
Mosî Americans are unaware
of African caltural héritage
as a component of thé Amgrifâin
way of life. We are far fromn Nly
ocognizing thé rôle that AWea
played in îhe création of tha UnEted
States and continues ta piay in te
peopie's daily lives.
oiira (AbelnwssSius eseutentes)
may hâve Cuff, Cuffy, Coffey,
or Coffee as a family name,
or Guida (h) or Weda as a
female first name. Their children love Bambi. They
say "Wow!" when impressed or surprised. Many
eat okra gumbo with rice. They listen ta jazz. They
are American, and would deny African influence
on their culture. Africa is just not seen as a possible
component of thé American Way of Life.
Thé name Koffi that thé world knows thanks to
United Nations Secretary Général Koffi Annan cornes
from thé Akan-speaking peuple of West Africa.
Ouidah is a coastal town in Bénin from which many
Africans were deported to thé Americas during thé
transatlantic trade in enslaved Africans. Wow means
"yes" in thé Wolof language of Sénégal and thé
Gambia. And Bambi is a Central African Bantu word
for antelope.
Thé word okra cornes from Akan and gombo is
Bantu for thé vegetable that is thé key ingrédient in
thé Louisiana stew called redundantly okra gumbo.
And thé rice that so enriched planters that it was
called "Carolina Gold" came to thé United States
from thé banks of thé Niger River and thé Atlantic
shores of Senegambia.
Some scholars hâve claimed, and most people still
believe, that although culture of African origin may
hâve persisted in farther south régions they consider
"exotic, " like thé Caribbean and Latin America, little
or no African culture came to thé United States, and
certainly none has remained. In 1919 sociologist
Robert Park stated that, "It is very difficult to find in
atermelon (Citrullus lanatus)
col (Brassici ( raci lar. oceph a)
breadiruit (Artocarpus
0
i
3.
&
s
l
UNESCO | thé neiu Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=33) 2
### 138617: Itinerant plants
### 138452: Okra gumbo and rice
(-fciKerAK't; ^[AK-te
breadfruît (Arîoearpus aUUis)
Atree native to thé Malay archipelago, its fruit can be cooked
like a potato. Thé Poiynesians carned it to thé South Pacifie
istands. From Tahiti, Captain William Btigh took it to thé West
Indies in 1793 on thé Bounty, intended as food for slaves wbo
refused to eat it as it was totaiiy unknown to them in West
Afiica. It was oniy after thé end of slavery that breadfruit
appeared on Caribbean tables.
cassava (manioc) (BSanihol; escutenta)
This Braziiian vsgetabte with tubers boiled and baked . ".'
potatoes travelted on Portuguese ships to Africa. Msgrating
Sndians also transported them in their canoës îo thé Caribbean.
coBtofds (B*wssî®a atoracwe var. ooephaia)
One of thé earliest varwtws of thé cabbage family, said to hme
originated in thé Mediterranesti wgion, spread îo Asie and
Africa, fînally reaching thé Americas via ths slave trade. Today,
it is an ingrédient of "soûl food/' its dark green leaves usualiy
boiled with pork.
®ewpea (Vigna uroguîcutata)
A bean going back as far as thé prehistoric era either in India
or China, with Africa suggested as a possible source. Reached
thé Americas via thé slave trade and cultivat»d today in most
tropical and subtropical régions. Its best-known varisty is thé
biack-eyed bean, a common feature of southern cuisine in thé
United Statea.
W«st Indian gharkin (Cucumis anguria)
A native of tropical Africa, crossed into thé Amerteas in thé early
18th cantury throuflh thé slave trads. From there, it crossad tb«
Attantic orwe again towards Europe. Mostly used for ptektos.
matze (corn) (Zea mays)
Native to thé Americas, Columbus carried it to Spain. In thé 1Wi
century, Portuguese traders carried it ta East Africa and Asia,
Arab traders to North Africa. It reached Wsst Africa from thé
Caribbean, used on both sides of thé Attant're a» an inexpensive
means of provisioreng slav ships across thé Atlantic.
okra (Abelmaschus ®scutontu«)
Atso calted "gumbo, " although th» latter is at»o thé name of
a soup using okra as a main ingr»diant. Natrvs to Africa, wa«
grown by thé Egyptians, ttwn brought by Spanish Moors to
Europe in thé 12th century and introduced by riaves to thé
Americas in thé 17th.
resvMs il-ti ibi-sctts s'abdarWta!
Indian Océan to India and China. Used as grain and as a source
of syrup, several varieties of sorghums reached thé Americas
through thé slave trade.
taro (Colocasia esculenta)
Originated in South Asia, travelled to Egypt some 2, 000 years
ago, later introduced into Europe, from wherethe Spaniards
took it to thé New World. It marie its way ta West Africa from
there. Its starchytuber is cooked like potatoes.
watermeSen (CiîruSt'js . anaîus)
A vine cultivated for its fruit, this native of Africa reached thé
Middle East, EgYQt; India and Persit ) semé 6,000 yyars ago. Later
grown &y thé ancient Greeks and Romans, also by thé Chinese
in thé 'iûîh century AD. Ar'ived in iSurope via thé Spanish
Moore. then thé Americas via thé slave irade.
winged bean (Psophocarpus tetragonolobus)
A relative of thé cowpea, this vegetable's leaves, pods, seeds,
shoots and tubers are ail edible. Its origins are thought to be in
tndia or China, even Africa where it grows wild. Reached thé
Caribbean and South America via thé slave trade.
yeliow malanga (Xanthosoma atrovirens)
Grown for its corm which is cooked like a yam. Most probably
originated in South America, taken to thé Caribbean by thé
Taino. later reached West Africa from where it was used to feed
America-bound slaves. Also grown today in Asia and thé Pacifie.
Source: Thé Cambridge World History of Food
José Banaag
sorghum (Sorghum vulgare)
slave trade.
sésame (Sesamum indfeuiw)
Thc piant may hâve originated in East Africa or India, grown
for its oit some 5,000 years ago in thé valleys of thé Tigris and
Euphrates. Slave shtps carried th< seeds to thé New World.
sarghtwn (Sorgttum vuigare)
Cuttivated in East Africa same 6,000 years ago, crosaed th<
i
g
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=34) 🆗
### 138452: Okra gumbo and rice
?4 Keystone/Gamma, Paris
i-ew Aa»eri». 8*iS
teew that Watt
Disney's Bainlx
owBS ite nama ta
thé Bauiu word
thé South today anything that can be traced directly
backto Africa."
Such perspectives were challenged in Melville
Herskovits' 1941 Thé Myth o f thé Negro Post,
which demonstrated "that African survivais can be
discovered in almost ail phases of Negro life in thé
United States. " Yet in 1963 sociologist E. Franklin
Frazier maintained that, ". . . because of thé manner
in which thé Negroes were captured in Africa and
enslaved, they were practically stripped of their
social héritage."
Twenty years later, in an article about engineer
Lewis Latimer, in thé book Blacks in Science Andent
and Modem, thé African American scholar John
Henrik Clarke maintained that "Thé collective
contributions of African Americans to science and
inventions is so extensive that it is not possible to
live a full day in any part of
thé United States, or thé world in général, without
sharing thé benefits of
their contributions."
Why is there such ignorance and déniai of this
African présence in U. S. culture? Because in spite
of ail of thé accurate information that bas been
available for décades, schools and thé média
portray Africa as a continent characterized by
sévère problems rather than tremendous wealth
and resources, that has folklore rather than culture,
and that certainly could not hâve contributed to thé
civilization of thé United States.
This déniai of Africa as part of thé foundation of
U.S. society is especially true concerning intellectual
and technological matters.. Thé "Carolina"
served with thé okra gumbo, which niight be more
apprupriately tenned Seiiegambian rice, is an
excelleiit example.
Thé rice grown in South Carolina and other parts
ot thé Americas is Oryzaglaberrinia, différent froin
thé Asijn Ory'zii sativa. This West African rice
and thé complex System of knowledge involved
in growing it and making it edible were broiight
by Africans, but they hâve not been given crédit.
As shown in Judith Carnev's récent book, Black
Rice: Thé Afrimn Origins of Rice Ciiitivation in thc
Ameriras Portuguese mariners were credited with
introducing lire culture tu Afiica-iiol explaining
how sailors taught planters to plant, iind ignoring
Portiiguese writings abolit their jmazemeiit at
discovering cuin{»]ex rice prodiiction teclinology in
thé Senegiinibia.
Thus, Europeans assuined uiidue crédit for
African intellectual and techiiological achievements,
despite évidence ta thé contr. iry. Eiiropeans
from temperate zones dici iiot liave thé skills and
knowledge required for sucli cndcrivors as rico
cultivation, particularly in thé siib'tropical cliinate
of thé southern United States. Afric.in origins can
also be found for other éléments of fouiidational
technologies, such as thé animal husbandry
popularized in U. S. cowboy films.
Thé traasatlantic trade in enslaved Africans
needs to be reconceptualized as not just a soiirce
of unskilled labor, but more importantly, also as
a massive brain drain and transfer of knowledge,
technology, and culture from Africa to thé Americas.
Sheila S. Walker,
Director of thé African Diaspora
and thé World Program, Spelman Collège,
Atlanta, Georgia
UNESCO | thé neiu Courier | December 2004
## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=35) 🆗
### 138453: Illustrious unknowns
IWen aad wOTieti o< geiims, î li
an impact on thejrera. ThsIr ie tific
discoveries were brilllant, but w
dw't know th®tr names. Owty rarBty bave
slaves or cNltifen of slaves recetved
recognjtion. Soi» of them servsd moderR
science with traditKma! toow-tiow.
thé skin, put in one
thé thirteen
ttie United iitates. lie sfiowed tils own scar as
évidence.
Cotton Mather, thé Puritan pastor in Boston,
found it hard to believe, but he finally published
thé "discovery" in a text - Some Account of What
Is Said of Inocuîating or Transplanting thé Small
Pox - and found himself thé laughing stock of
thé era's médical profession, with thé exception
of Zabdiel Boylston. He tested thé vaccine on
his own son and two of his slaves. It was a
success. He continued thé experiment on 241
people. Only six were infected. Late, Thomas
Jefferson had complète success with 200 slaves,
80 of them his own. After that, thé vaccine was
accepted by thé white population and saved a
good number of American soldiers from illness
during thé war of independence.
Edward Jenner, internationally recognized as
thé father of thé smallpox vaccine, wasn't bom
when Onesimus taught his master thé method
used by African healers to fight thé illness. Thé
young African had been deported to America in
1706. His name remains inscribed in thé history
of medicine, but in a footnote.
Other slaves kaew similar fates. A certain
César, for instance, devised an antidote for
rattlesnake bites, mixing several ingrédients
induding wood ash and tobacco. It is very
probable that thé remedy was based on
traditioaal African kaow-how. A description was
published in 1792, in Massachussets Magazine.
Thé remedy did not earn ils inventor worid
famé, but it did inspire thé South Carolina
Général Assembly to restore his freedom.
Btitjawia Bavwskwvs
PrsNsyi. VANid, DÏI-AWARE, MARY-
I. AND, AKD VlROtNlA
AL M A NAQ
fOB TBÏ
YEAR. of OUF LORD 1795, ' .
Sring Ae ThW after lAsp-Year.
S^<m»<^S»«^«^*»«<l^«W»»(^<>W*(^«^<8^«^<aN»< ai»B^ -»
-»niNTîB rog~
.. "^»S SM t/ ]OH!<( ,ytSIISR,
BAl-TIMO^S.
^ete.^_^..... r::-_;:l-.
UNESCO/Route de l'esclave/CoBection Alibert
Thé almanac
published by
Benjamin Banneker
impressed US
Président Thomas
Jefferson
'"ÎRfc -K&A JAcCo^
People in thé United
States who want thé real
thing, not an imitation,
often say they want "thé
real McCoy. " But most
probably hâve no idea
that they are referring
to a gadget invented by
an African American,
Elijah McCoy. In 1872, he
received a patent for thé
drip cup, a tubricating
device for steam engines
that fed oil to moving
machinery, avoiding thé
waste and cost of having
to stop engines in order
to lubricate them. People
were so confident in thé
reliability of McCoy's
invention, which had a
séminal impact on thé
evolving railroad industry,
that to be sure they were
getting his device rather
than someone else's
imitation of it, they asked
for "thé real McCoy."
McCoy, who arrived in
thé United States after
thé Civil War, was thé
son of African-Americans
who had escaped from
enslavement and fled to
Canada.
s.w.
UNESCO l thé neiu Courier l December 2004
## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=36) 🆗
### 138453: Illustrious unknowns
^
Benjamin Banneker, son of a slave father
and free mother born in Maryland in 1731, was
granted more récognition. A brilliant astronomer
and mathematician, he published an Almanac
in 1791 containing such an impressive wealth of
information that Thomas Jefferson was prompted
to Write him a letter. In his letter, Thomas Jefferson
speaks of thé almanac as proof "that nature bas
given to our black brethren, talents equal to those
of thé other colors of men" and informs thé author
that he is sending it to Monsieur de Condorcet,
Secretary of thé Academy of Sciences in Paris. It
was a revolutionary gesture for thé time.
Thé Fédéral Gazette and thé Baltimore Daily
Advertiser also paid tribute to Banneker's genius,
publishing articles about thé "direct descendant of
an African" a few days after his death on October
25, 1806.
Other scientists such as thé engineer Lewis
Howard Latimer (1848-1928), who became one
of thé "Edison Pioneers", or Norbert Rillieux
(1806-1894) from New Orléans, whose process
for refining sugar cane juice into sugar is used
to this day, also received récognition. But for thé
most part thé scientific contributions of slaves and
their immédiate descendants remained cloaked
in silence. Too often, as in thé case of Onesimus,
it was thé masters who published or patented
thé slaves' inventions, with thé latter considering
themselves lucky to hâve their names even
mentioned.
Only recently has research exhumed thèse
personalities, who should be familiar to us,
Sarah Breedtowe was not
predestined ta become a
millionaire. Born in 1867 on
a Louisiana Delta plantation,
a child of former slaves,
she went to school only
intermittently. Married at âge
14, widowed when she was
30, she was working as a
laundress in Saint Louis when
she began to lose her hair.
-Poor }^tttt
^K^'^
for biack women anc! then
marketed them
She moved to Denver in 1905
and married C.J. Waiker,
who helped promote hw h<iir
products and a whole range
of cosmetics for black wornen,
which bec. ame fsmous
underthe label "Madam C.J.
Walker". White manufacturers
had ignored this niche market.
Thanks to her inventions, she
became a milt'ionaire.
from silence and oblivion. This represents part
of our duty to remember, but also a contribution
to intercultural dialogue founded on inclusive
kaowledge of thé scientific finds and techniques
of différent segments of humanity. Thé goal is for
everyone to identify with thé words of thé Latin
comic playwright Terence, a freed slave himself:
Homo sum; nihil homini a me puto alienum.
("I am human; nothing human is alien to me. ")
Oiimar Dioume,
Director of Research and Development,
AirTel Corn (Montréal, Canada)
of USS
Madam
UNESCO | thé nciu Courier | December 2004
## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=37) 🆗
### 138454: Mary Ann Shadd Cary: pushing the boundaries
... ^.«,^,. ,^y*^
^'w^-yw^ <ÎK'î-. rf't
DEVOTED TO MTI-SUVESY, ANB GENESAI HTERATUSE.
TOMXE l j IOROSIO, CU'ADA' 'ffjKSI, SiïCBSAT I;BCBÏBB& î. l8S4
. JFSf^BBWÇS
wn»
WOIWCÎAI EaSBBîîASi, < S^y^tt^^j^%%A^|^;^^; ̂ -^?&ë^i~@fe^~';..ï!i?î»i55
t^r^i itôtt».^t»*
An»
^ *î ». ^'* a°^
m~s.
. ^^wê^. ^. t. itst.i
'«tfW^iïfiaSSiiifSiWi:
W. A-UWWi'ftittoiriaï
^l^(tç^*Ath^An 6»m
'%%"""
|Wto»wBB*i
.
ÏSS*»"
aate-:^38
AA ̂ ^S^^îtw^^
gîS»&s-E:°:';îis
&
à
CHAfiU^ MAJRCg.
-!%ii^^^
A- 3B.-ÎO»K^"""~"
t;^ifÉSi^^sa^<E®oes%yw. ^a,
_";%%. ?%.
^S^SSwël
i;. yABUAitt, A  ." ;
m n ssifêjyT^^' ^
Wtïi. MSSt. ^.w. 1<
AWK^WGt. SK^r A   T^ëS ^ ^
ï. -t-. rig. fc^ç. ;^-]:
\
B*Mt5Z^S*ffi'^ïï- ; .?«?^'?ïîî. 5?%S JASSS'
-?|î3ï'{*34'î5%'»'&£;'î"^. u'â&'ÀS-âS."2l£35~'-i^wSws^a-. wiwiiiM tt. tt^^ifct^wteïiïS^»,^
T|i- , i;«.. < » »«, ",.. iS«i '. irTS.'îa'iSSS'Sda,l^-'<^<aS.~-N~"i''*SS;"i*>"»"«'S*«;'n'«"S:
; ̂ ii^.̂ s.^^s e^w^^,^ i^S fcïi * ^%""r'^ &^i"tï; ;
ETL^^W^^" awteî~wwï^4îl^^^^^'&"t^*'^S^.:
îa ?&. '^'y^i éï?"à^'fc^fî^WMWni6.*'^"^^1t'!ttol
'SÊAïïK^îSSSSSEëi
^»hw« 'te(*fc *y»tt, *2rfî^
'WM&s^w^i
:*^ ïM y* "*~: \ too&tr | sw,f^S» tWnm^r^^teid'aw.ï. î'rfÏHi'WsiB'^S'te^a^ «r
!W '^ ». d» AwA sr'iwtt» i&"^&T»£!rtA^;j^MapK ^ ̂ | ̂ w?¥ . ^^ï^»^
l3;£%^i%^te. ïte''!csi?iS??ttls»~-"to'. i»'"'><-S?ïî
f^'iâKiW
^*&  t »rf vfw. Lsri S^st, *1! ! fc« imïwS. Swïit irfwt'.J
!?.«....< n«<-, i-*l~i''.''-*"«l*"">.«"-K..A.,;',tuH'1
ts*;^'wï*af E^lEh V^y^-î ttf-MW..f-^ "rf,. @^*&^t>^f*l'.. ^, '1
'^.. MS^^^^^S 'fî^&tîi^t,, ^twiSttffS,.̂ li fhi'~u,&~^'^~^-
^ <^»t*tB" <A» *T« "'rtw»î& fe? ' îpwd, *iS && wwA BKa^i^^ l
, »<i««vi-ai>u, l, v.. ft»,,^h:'V»y'S\
';*'":'!"*ÇS~<to«^ . Sî'Aî'. iïïBiS'&^SI5iîL***-ï-'-T-"?ïï":*Kï"&«i"3^'-lS^
%a SSMW .«^çrf &«a- AR itê^ ; tmt w^^rfï^fe" ̂ a»Zfwî,
.ë?vS5J££nl:iSS^ï'S'**W^\
p... 'Sï, »j=a.-s3a
SS S;SSSSS&a. '5^^3ÊS£S»^'&S-'!
ltei*t. iw^^ta^* ''^. ^^^. ^^"^^^^. StW^'WwvS'viSifrw 'H»wi*»ÏBOii'ï'
;S"to^.. '^Ï<s*'î,. ï'>--'lll"i"î*"**J«"în»**;">îlS~a', 3u~B!5
,
^» *'î,. '' l"i-î*" '>"iffi«ï*;" îl . 55~
:.11-1 'lm<?T. *ft*'twatt*"--rw<;*. ':Tw-ww t»*>«"'imu'^ï'Aï*V%i'âE^'
^L<^l. tï:l't ièa f-'/^_-i*li  *"nw;--^^<WK&'toi"rirt*t'T;rt?. t»srisB<,ïï»I?^"ï's's!"!~"«=. sî??<. S"»ï. 3!,
liti-i^Um.ijly'rtd'ib-u.:
lwhtteK Ba*>*irihî<
|?^ai^»^tefctV*f*i"»*
îte^., wï*^ t <W. »ifaî.. ?w.»»/;<
»t6*lkB^*i»f»in i&rf, îltâ|e(^*Snliï»t*te»{à^rJf, ttii» StlfV/to'd*
..^lïiSï'È^i^l^^^^^lss^^j^;^S^î:£vS';sîS^?. S£y'xa£^SSy£S^
iï'S^ï
', 'Sï. s^ysSs
:ua«A--.«i-S3ît?
J7
Launched in Î853
in Toronto (Canada),
thé provincial
freemanisthefirst
newspaperfounded
byaBlackwoman
inNorthAmerica
'\.
Pioneer newspaperwoman, airtisia 'ery
activist, lawyer, leader of thé emigration
movement to Canada, recruiter oî Bteck
ssldiers during thé Civil War, Mary Aniî
Sfeadd Cary contributed significantly to tl
saceess of aboiitioiiist causes. A escendant
of thé Shadd îsmiîy telis tfie story
great-aunt.
1850, thé American Congress passed
a bill known as thé Fugitive Slave Act.
It stipulated that any white persan
could arrest and detain anyone of African descent
suspected of being a runaway slave. Even those
who had been bom free, unless they had irréfutable
proof, were at risk of being captured and dragged
into bondage. As a result, thousands of African
Americans picked up and fled thé northern states.
For many, this destination was Canada. It was a
phénoménal movement of refugees on what was
known as thé Underground Railroad: 20,000 people
are estimated to hâve settled in Canada between
1820 and 1860.
At thé time of thé fugitive slave law, Mary Ami
UNESCO thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=38) 🆗
### 138454: Mary Ann Shadd Cary: pushing the boundaries
-V
Shadd, a young freeborn woman, was a teacher in
thé northeastern United States. Mary Ann was born
in Delaware in 1823 into a prominent abolitionist
family. When her services were requested by
Henry and Mary Bibb, founders of thé first Black
newspaper in Canada, Voice of thé Fiigitive, she
moved to Windsor (Ontario) and started a school
in 1851 for thé children of fugitive slaves. She also
quickly became a leading emigrationist, hiding
numerous fugitives in her home.
In 1852, she published A Plea for Emigration;
or Notes of Canada West which touted thé country
as a major refuge not only for escaping slaves but
also free African Americans experiencing increasing
restrictions on their lives in northern states. Her
skills as an orator convinced many, but her public
outspokenness got her into trouble. A dispute with
thé Bibbs aver thé question of separate schools for
Blacks spilled onto thé pages of their newspaper, thé
Voice of thé Fugitive, and led to her firing from her
teaching position.
Shadd than decided to start her own weekly,
where she could control how her ideas were
disseminated. One of Canada's first women
journalists thus became thé first Black woman in
North America to found a newspaper. Thé Provincial
Freeman began publishing out of Toronto on March
24, 1853. Because she was aware that her name
on thé masthead could alienate a leadership that
preferred thé strict gender codes of thé 19th century,
she had asked Samuel Ringgold Ward, Black
abolitionist and agent of thé Anti-Slavery Society of
Canada, to become editor. Shadd then spent a year
on thé lecture circuit drumming up subscriptions
and interest in her paper, which became a daily thé
following year.
First and foremost, thé Provincial Freeman was
an anti-slavery paper. It focused on thé importance
of Black self-reliance and intégration into Canadian
society and denounced thé practice of "begging,"
or fundraising on behalf of thé "downtrodden
fugitives" by presenting them in an unfavorable
light. It also championed women's rights, providing
a forum for activists Lucy Stone Blackwell and
Lucretia Mott.
Yet in spite of its success, thé paper could not
stay afloat, dépendent for its readership upon
a small educated élite. In 1860, it succumbed.
Seven years of publishing a newspaper under
such circumstances was nonetheless quite an
BAHAWAV froni llx- sub»rriliff. <u»
!hc nisltt urthc st«l ÎB-laitl, s» uysn, mau,
whc ealb )tHti»i-tif M«»cy ..?&y, iibuitl 3s»
/i'ar» »Ed, S fept « or H inrh;» bij;b, iir-
dinar» colw» «.B»I|CT «.hruhy tiuHt; hv'.hf
bnxl, IÎB. I UH» it ilh-tdfd inui..tt) 'ou BBP
îwet"'i<t 'tt''"!*? l». *'..?..* ulwly'couilx-d;
bB» l»<wn rs>(M. <( (" (tai h»B»«-, Rnd l» a Ïrit
rrfç <tttiîug"r»»m >wr<ati<, 'at, <i »g» ma
ft'crn IM fx;tisïlllr toy (,>; innn<Ïs7~ Ï
::ex(M",''i 1 '?. '".nsn . «»ui»îi)l- ti-îhiïl»
.Vtfinilti- l»rf, tSijt,
l^îë'^S
«Itefï'. i.ïi, '?!;^"'- """""a bf m.im
A bonnty wes offered for
rimsway slawe cauglit
achievement and places it among a very smjll gruup
of Black publications, including Frederick Douglass's
newspapers. It is today a valuable resource for
researchers.
After thé death of her husband Thomas F. Cary,
a Toronto businessman she married in 1856, Shadd
Cary left Canada with her two children. Hired by
Martin Delany as perhaps thé only woman to recruit
Black soldiers during thé Civil War, she later went
on to study and practice law in Washington D. C.,
being one of thé first women of her race to do so.
She also became increasingly vocal and active on
thé issue of women's rights and suffrage during her
later years.
Shadd Cary died on June S, 1893. A woman who
pushed thé boundaries and limitations normally
ascribed ta her race and sex, she was designated a
persan of national historié significance in Canada,
one of a number of posthumous honors she
received.
Shadd's descendants, and those of her brothers
and sisters, live ail over Canada and thé United
States today. l am one of those descendants
who hâve become active in thé résurrection and
préservation of thé memory not only of Mary Ann
Shadd but of thé thousands of others who made
Canada home during Aat period.
Mrienne Shadd,
writer, researcher and curator
living in Toronto
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=39) 🆗
### 138455: The African Maison de Trente in Louisiana
Joseph Dunn/Laura Plantation, Louisiana
Sta es from West A ica l archit
inLoOTsiana. TheyliroiglîttraditS na know-ho tfaat
onditions in îbe south ef he
d construction techniques
appropriate for thé climatic
Lam-a Plantattoo's
main house was butlt
by thé descendante
uf thé (irst slaves
wbo amved {rom
Ce^ry
years ago, l visited
some of thé plantation
homes along thé
Mississippi River, outside New Orléans. It was not
my first visit to thé area, but l had never before
wanted to visit them. This time, however, l vetttured
out to see thèse beautiful places that once witnessed
so much humaa suffering. l was silenced when l
saw one-room slave cabins built on raised wooden
posts, weathered by time, but still standing.
Thé first site l visited was Laura Plantation. La
maison principfde or manor house was built in 1805,
on land granted to thé French owner by Président
Thomas Jefferson.
Thé main house was built by thé descendants of
thé first slaves brought to Louisiana from Sénégal
in thé eariy 1720s. Builders from thé Bambara
and Wollof tribes were highly valued for their
construction skills. Every spring, thé Mississippi
River would flood, just as rivers in Africa flooded,
and thé slaves used thé same architectural solution
as they did for houses in Africa. As Joseph Dunn,
spokesman for Laura Plantation, explains, "Thé
main house of Laura Plantation rests on 72 pyramids
that are identical to those found in West Africa. in
thé Sénégal and Gambia région, according to thé
architects that we coasulted."
Because thé house was built on alluvial laad,
thé builders dug a 750 m2 hole, 2. 5 m deep. At thé
bottom of thé hole, they put down a sort of raft of
cypress and willow logs, on top of which they built
72 brick pyramids to support thé foundation aad
make thé ground level stable. Once thé hole was
filled with earth, brick columns were erected on
some of thé pyramids. Thé columns support thé
horizontal beams that hold up thé building, forming
an above-ground basement.
Today, when visitors stand on thé floor of
thé above-ground basement and look up at thé
horizontal beams supporting thé first floor, they
can see thé Roman numerals numbering one to 30
on thé beams. Thé slave builders eut thé beams
^
UNESCO l thé new Courier l December 2004
## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=40) 🆗
### 138455: The African Maison de Trente in Louisiana
^
from 1000-year-old cypress trees harvested from thé
nearby swamp. It took them approximalely one year
to sélect and eut down thé trees.
Because thèse houses were constructed on 30
horizontal beams and 30 vertical posts. tliey were
called "maisons de trente". Predating thé Civil
War, they share a striking number of arcliitectural
features with West African houses: gatleries,
porches, pillars one tu four feet liigh, (lie use of
plastered clay for walls, thé decoratioii of façades
with patterns in bas relief OT in paint, relativeiy
small interior rooms, and detached kitcliens built
away from thé main house. Thèse characteristics are
found in plantations along thé Mississippi, in thé
Garden District residential quarter of New Orléans,
and in Charleston, South Carolina.
"Thé method used by thé Senegalese builders was
similar to what we now call prefabricated. They
prepared everything in advance and thé house had
to be finished in 11 days, " says Duna, adding, "Thé
Créole architectural style that is typical of oui région
is a blend of Palladian and African ingrédients.
That's why it's very close to thé style found in West
Africa, and even in thé Indian Océan."
African understanding of doiiieslic space, which
was ideally suited for thé subtropical climate in thé
south of thé United States, as well as construction
techniques an-ived in Louisiana by way of thé
slave trade route, stopping off iii Brazil and in thé
CdribbCtin and making modifications to suit each
locale along thé way.
In 1733, a factory building constructed in thé
Gambia by local Mandingo designer-builders far tlie
English Royal African Compaiiy was described by ils
British factor:
"Their next work was to mdke a porch, callcd
an Alpainter by thé natives, who preteiid a right
to hâve oiie at every factory, that they inay liave
access dnd she!ter....Here a house is built with a
hall [piazza] of40 foot l)y 13, two-lodging rooms 20
font by 13, .ind ihree strong storehouses, without
aiiy iroii work, truwels, squares or carpenter's rules,
and with thé sin<illest expense to (lie Coinpany, for it
was done by thcir servants only .."
NumberedttoXXX,
thé beams were eut
from thousand-year-
old tress
^Fv^^ui^ baiUtK^ Ar-t<s
In 2002, thé New Orléans
Muséum of Art presented
an exhibition, "Raised to
thé Trade" showcasing
thé artistry of thé building
trades and thé talent of thé
builders who helped make
New Orléans an architectural
gem. Thé muséum also
recorded, aver four years,
thé oral historiés of builders
who are living today, but
growing older. Because
young people today hâve not
been interested in learning
thé building trades, thé skills
of thèse master craftsmen
coutd be lost. Thé exhibition
curators hope that "Raised to
thé Trade" will inspire young
people to learn thèse unique
building skills, ensuring
that thé architecture of New
Orléans witl be preserved by
qualified restorers.
D. D.
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=41) 🆗
### 138455: The African Maison de Trente in Louisiana
. ^
f^hs
^
This passage also attests to thé expérience of thé
Mandingo designer-builders and of thé economy and
skill with which they worked. It forever répudiâtes
thé idea that Africans came to thé Americas as
unskilled, uncivilized people. Dunn adds, "It has
been our expérience that many of our visitors
think only of African slaves within thé context of
fieldwork. Hardly ever are they afforded crédit
for designing, constructing and maintaining such
buildings as Laura Plantation, and yes, most of thé
French Quarter in New Orléans."
Descendants of slaves handed down from
génération to génération thé building techniques
inherited from their ancestors. Résides thé brick
pyramids, thé main house at Laura plantation also
incorporâtes what is known as "Senegalese plaster",
made of ground oyster shells, sand and water, aad
"evaporation planks" at thé point where horizontal
beams meet vertical pillars, intended to protect thé
wood from humidity.
and European technique bas been perpetuated until
now.
Thé names of slave architects aad builders are
lost to us, but thé architectural treasures they built
continue to enchant ail who visit them. In spite of
beauty in architecture, iron work, thé décorative arts
and furniture. That beauty is with us today.
Denise Dennis,
American novelist
Nearthe main house,
thé rudîmentary
cabinsthatservedas
slave quarters
^av-tRe/v
VôA^i^:
Jay D. Edwards, Vemacular
Vision; Thé Gallery and Our
Africanized Architectiiral
Landscape, éd. Jonn Ethan
Hankins; and Steven
Maklansky, Raised to thé
Trade: Créole Bmlding Ans
ofLouislana, (New Orléans
Muséum of Art, New
Orléans, Louisiana, 2002)
UNESCO l thé new Courier l December 2004
## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=42) 🆗
### 138457: Creole miracle
^
Thé slave was treated like a beast
of burden, a tool, an abject that
belonged to his master. He was
reputed ta be lazy, thieving, lacking
moral judgment and constantly
jeopardizing his owner's property.
Today, however, in thé islands
of thé Indian Océan, slaves are
increasingly recognized as thé
architects of a new culture and
society.
s %&-
Msea^em^^
Orill'ABlatlon
.BKnwcs" lêCc
KOÎCHIRO MAT^ÎURA :
It -.
Steven Obeegadoo compte présenter un dBeument de politique générale
sur l'utiilsaUon du kreQidans ies aatilteaaents prbnatet.
S,tmiSt  t f» ^(... isi
S.Î'£'iîS£ï
i^w«
.te;!twff»
^swti-^S. f.'
r^Se»^&!
SiKB^^é te^^
»te*fiS. Sï1
.-«-h. k.U. *.
...:;"*"s!u.*'î*">;
^.^w.
WiiisitK^aSelwr
S3»a. 'teiatn i'<toiifw ^
5%5saa
. ïtA»i»tKt^wt.
. "was»ï&umïa, <oB&
Wûtis^Si îtspavm^is, iuih
..«u. tn. air,
>jîtoaiftrf(iit(Mitou*ai»fif)
ïite^3^ ^ïm^^jwm^iiimw»u-wfeïÀ*-
wABiStwi.ltutïïAt&ltiaufei fcÏ'AwaWi. riwîhTA*i
^<fttît:^fc*îte»te«>bF>»f*«(itte. Ww<t^Ai.
^6-», i^ah^^«ws»-sâ*^a^i
tf^iaÉm.i
tw- »»i».i!. t!"cwartffiAfw«a iw ^!ur. »*S iwy>d   *m{rMi^A,^w><&
a,w!e(BGiE^»mmfemffln ^w.̂ woriyuiCîE^» ^pw»i«:.B»tf.ïfil.. i ^
SMK&^ivliiWiif'WMv tealusiteluaAïlu&'t'fitldlr rsKiaAwA'tlwi^'ttatea*' ditos.iituw^BfaBWt. Sta- daairt Hn.»!U!^lï^B-a
<t»W AudafcmytotniBT"!* wOSffi^ . . fe;.»Bl«. RiBtWTOa^a»n- i^wk
ara"sâs'5 ^'s^sït^
SS£'u^« £
îa&pw^i
tSBd>n^. K h».j i*^»iffita
H-iWitiiteaâifasaBuétanhSt "^Jsn!!
F i'OyW aptffl «*HS^BW . jP»W" Tl
Article in L'Express,
Mauritian
nevrfspaper, Fsbruary
20, 2004
ecked by captivity and thé long
voyage, slaves deported to thé
islands in thé Indian Océan between
thé 171h and 19"' centuries were victims of racism,
de-socialized, de-cultured, almost dehumanized.
They were a sprinkling of individuals in exile,
torn from their familles and peer groups, eut off
from their myths, symbols and everything else
that anchored their reason for being. No lineage,
no name, no genealogy. Slaves were barred from
forming groups, and often could not understand
each other: Makuas, Yaos, "Inhambanes," Makondé,
Betsimisaraka, Sakalava, Merina, Betsileo and
other ethnie groups from Africa and Madagascar,
Indians, Malaysians and Indonesians, spoke différent
languages and belonged to différent traditions.
Hunters, stock breeders, farmers, from matrilineal,
patrilineal, polygamous, monogamous, gérontocratie
or monocratic societies, they had little in common.
Nonetheless, for thé saké of survival, they managed
to adapt to inhuman living conditions in a hostile
universe and to leave traces of their existence for
postenty.
Out of 63,447 slaves counted in 1826 on Bourbon
Island (now Réunion Island], 79.2% were farmers
(between 1680 and 1810, agriculture in thé islands
of thé Indian Océan was 90% dépendent on slave
labour); 16% servants; 2. 9 manual workers, 0.9%
sailors, 0. 6% day labourers and 0.4% fishermen.
In thé French colony, as in thé British colony of
Mauritius, thé slave "s thé équivalent of a tool,
"portage".
Nothing permitted thé immense majority of
thèse oppressed peuple to develop creativity or
spécifie professional skills. Yet "slaves with talent"
- what they called carpenters, cabinetmakers,
and stone masons at thé time - produced genuine
masterpieces, including roads, sugar factories,
churches, and East India Company buildings. Gol
Castle in Saint-Louis and thé Desbassays house
[Réunion), what is now thé history muséum in
Mahébourg and thé port of Saint-Louis (Mauritius)
are only a few examples of héritage they left
behind. And they made discoveries, such as thé
one by Edmond Albius (see box p. 21), which
revolutionized agriculture and inade thé island thé
top producer of vaailla in thé worid.
It has often been said that slaves did nothiiig
more than obey thé orders of thé boss or overseer.
Is that any reason to deny their contribution to thé
development of thé colonies and thé construction
of thé island societies in thé Indian Océan? Their
traces can be seen in areas as diverse as territorial
planning, social stnictures, economy and culture.
In a life story collected by Eve Prosper, historian
from Réunion, an elder more than 70 years old says:
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December2004
## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=43) 🆗
### 138457: Creole miracle
"Thé most wonder&il tesson oiir slave ancestors
left us is thé knowledge of how to work with
persévérance, even m a hostile climate, and to get
good results. " Research donc on thé héritage left by
former slaves, notably oral tradition, show that thèse
men's share was crucial to thé évolution of Indian
Océan societies. It must be pointed out that they
numbered 140,000 in 1830, which amounted to 70%
of thé total population of Mauritius, Bourbon Island
and thé Seychelles.
While it is true that slaves were more likely to
carry out than to conceive thé création of material
héritage, it is just as true that they left us an
authentic intangible héritage. They succeeded in
something that no one, neither masters nor colonial
authorities, had foreseen. In laying thé foundation
of a new society which today bas its own cultural
specificities, ils language, spirituality and esthetics,
they accomplished a true miracle: thé "Créole
miracle".
Thé miracle is visible everywhere and primarily
in thé Créole laaguage. It was made up by slaves
and masters spoke it too. Today it is part of thé
cultural héritage of ail Indian Océan islands. Despite
attempts in thé 1960s to eradicate it from Réunion, it
resisted and finally was given thé status of régional
language, which thé political authorities long denied
it. In Mauritius, Créole is spoken by everyone, and
is currently being introduced experimentally as thé
language for primary éducation. In thé Seychelles,
Créole became thé officiai language after thé
country's independeno.
^Amoi/[À Atbia<s.
^t <sku^ c\\:\^ ^À ̂ t
UÂKttk pOÂ
For a long t'me, botanist
Ferreoi Beaumont Bellier
had been searnhing "n vsin
for e way to polii.iaté vaiiilla
artificiaity. Fhen a 12-ysar-
ùld kirt showed hirr, what
he had d;scoverâd !;owto
do: t<j;'r a var. Nla flcwg" ir. to
a pac.
Thé Kid wps his sleve. Mis
name was Edmond. Mis
niother h(«d riied when he
was born. »fe had grcwn up
h lis master's fruit gar'-fen
and lea'-ned from him to
lovri plants.
'îhiswas in 184'!, on
Bourbon Isla.ic! ;4euR;on
:sl?ir:d). BefurR thé botaniits
iii thû nuseuni 01' na'ïurat
histury ;n Paris and thé !ocal
sci6nt:sîs, t'-~f child p'odigy
;~.3j 'dentit'ec; thé mâle
a. iû femaie oigens 'n i'hs
sai r, a flowe', snd dev:ssd
a method of artificial
pol;instion thst sosn made
thé island thé leadi. 'j
prodiije.- o'Fva"[f;& i-: thé
t^cept in iViexico, where it
. s fsrt":;izeG bv a local bfc&
Slhe rne!;pc"iuL '/anr!a ha3
tj oe ool'i'-iated h,/ humsn
:iand.
Albius: lithograph
partrait, 1863.
cd'non'J's method snosc
quicki y throughout thé
color.y. Thé ianacwner from
thé sma:l town of Sainte'
Suzanne was happy to lend
his you"g sl&>'e te. ûther
Dlaniers .r' ;he colûny so he
could teach them hov" te
cultiv&te var. illa.
r)6spi te his ingenuity,
i-~d nond, w",o wa? g;ven tt;e
name /i;bius in 1848 when
sî3»'er" was abciished,
received nu seward ftom
his maswi or tl)p coionv'F
adtl'-orit;»s. !Js û'ir.d in
po"cr;y G. : August 9, ": 380,
at thé Sainle-Suzanne
ccinmun't',' iiospiîa'..
S. F.
^Mori^
Créole/ CApodrA
Fort Saint-Louis in
Part-louts
l
3
'3
l
8
Morir.s, a martial art
st:li practiced today in
Madagascar (Moraingy),
thé Comores (Mrengué),
Mayotte, Réunion island
and Afrsca, was brought
to thé islands by slaves
or recrurts from Africa
and Madgascar. Ciose
to Brazilian Capoeira
(see p. 4), Morini :)
helped slaves redefine
their lives and resist
thé cuttural oppression
of cotonization. Thé
surviving forms ofthis
ancestral rite rem'nd us of
thé extraordinary calturai
resources developed
by siaves in thé Créole
jslands of thé indian
Océan,
S. F.
^
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=44) 2
### 138458: Africa-Americas: return trip
### 138457: Creole miracle
^
Food, handicrafts, medicine, taies and legends
are ail components of thé rich legacy of thé slaves,
and ail part of thé Créole miracle. Particularly
music: sega and maloya, very popular with young
people, typical of thé islands in thé Indian Océan,
perpetuate thé memory of thé ancestors on public
and private radio (see box p. 7)
Of course, not ail Indian Océan island inhabitants
lay daim to thé history of slavery as their own.
As a conséquence of racism, undoubtedly, certain
descendants of slaves from Africa or Madagascar
do not recognize themselves as such, or try to
conceal thé fact, forgetting that "A people that
bas no memory has no future, " in thé words of
Aimé Césaire, poet from Martinique. Yet in récent
décades, a genuine cultural révolution is taking
place in thé région, and more and more thé
people are embracing their history. February 2 and
December 20 are holidays in Mauritius and Réunion,
commemoratiag their abolition of slavery in 1835
and 1848 respectively.
Finally, let us say that thé miracle has taken place
mainly at thé level of Créole identity, making thé
concept of "residential identity" thé keystone of
Créole societies in thé Indian Océan. While Africa
and Madagascar remain thé cultural références for
much of thé population, thé country we live in is
our real homeland.
Sudel Fuma,
University of Réunion
l. Thé différent ethnie groups from
thé Inhambanne (Mozambique) région were
ail given that géographie label on Bourbon
Island [Réunion).
phenomena of physical or spiritual
return to thé ancestral homelaad
began even before thé end of
slavery. Often thé same ship that transported
human cargo to thé New World returaed to thé
African coast with other people aboard, who
carried with them new knowledge, ideas and
practices. Thé latter aonetheless seemed familiar to
local populations.
For nearly four hundred years, thé Atlantic
shipping route in both directions allowed for
exchanges that gave birth on both sides of thé
océan to hybrid cross-breed cultures, which remain
fundamentally African. There is no better illustration
of thé movement of Africans and their descendants
UNESCO | thé neiu Courier | December 2004
## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=45) 🆗
### 138458: Africa-Americas: return trip
Asttbject ftendiscu. a b'e E ! srican culture owes to African slaves. Much
(ess tatked afeoirt is wh Africa awes to diasporc artain cultural values, customs and social
pfactices thé slaves took w m to thé ABIC contiRent returned to Africa, generally in modified
but recogiiizaWe
(-
in thé Atlantic world (thé European, American and
African coasts) than thé expérience of black sailors.
They acquired valuable knowledge of navigation
and a number of them went into trade, accumulating
enough capital to buy their freedom.
Such exchanges were undoubtedly thé most
fruitful between Bahia, in BrazU, and thé Benm Gulf.
According to certain estimâtes, nearly two million
people crossed thé océan aboard slave ships in 250
years. During this period, Braziliaas of ail origins
and conditions - white slavers, mulattos, free men
and slaves - settled in places ranging from thé cape
of Sao Paulo to thé mouth of thé Niger River. Port
cities such as Agoue, Aneho, Ouidah, Cotonou,
Porto-Novo, Badagri and Laos were marked by thé
Westt' is<
AfricEia-A
return of freed slaves of Brazilian origin, called
Aguda or Amaro.
Thé expérience acquired during their years of
captivity and thé kaowledge of European languages
and customs were extremely useful to those who
decided to try their luck on thé African coast as
traders, craftsmen, farmers or hired help. Many
started shops; others made their fortune in thé slave
trade. Masons, foremen, carpenters, cabinetmakers,
goldsmiths and barber-surgeons brought new know-
how to thé région. A aovel architectural style was
created, using previously unknown methods and
unusual materials. Converted to Catholicism, thèse
retomados brought with them religious practices
that continue today, such as thé extravagant feast-
days in honor of thé Lord of Bonflm, identical to
those in Bahia.
Following thé abolitions of slavery, freed
slaves from Brazil, Cuba, thé West Indies and
thé United States settle on thé Slave Coast and
inland, reinforcing and diversifying thé American
influences. Ghana, Libéria and Sierra Leone thus
became important réception centres for retomados
and people freed by British forces fighting thé illicit
slave trade. Maay of them contributed to developing
thé cultivation of oil-yielding plants, which became
thé region's principal économie activity to replace
thé slave trade.
Starting in thé 19th century, Afro-American
churches in thé United States began to send aid and
missionaries to thé African coast and sometimes
even inside thé African continent. Black missionaries
converted and brought Western-style schooling to
some of thé population, at thé same time promoting
American university éducation for Africans and thé
founding of vocational schools in several African
régions. Mostly they intensifted thé exchange of
ideas between Africans and Americans.
Pan-African conférences in thé first half of thé
20th century, numbering an overwhelming majority
of représentatives from thé US and thé Caribbean,
played a major rôle, in spite of limited African
participation, in thé birth of a supranational and
UNESCO l thé neiu Courier l December 2004
## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=46) 🆗
### 138458: Africa-Americas: return trip
CetekratisBs 00
Maw 25, 2093, in
Jotonaesburg
(SoBthMrisaioîtSte
48ft ansîversary
Organizatieia of
Wrican Un<^ a»d 8bB
birthdtheAfricaa
^
intercontinental identity, as well as an alliance
against racial and colonialist dominance. Following
World War II, many national libération movements
picked up thé ideas that came eut of thé conférences
to justify their struggle. In thé long term, pan-
Africanism provided a solid ideological base for thé
leaders pushing for modem policies in Africa, some
of whom became thé principal actors in thé new
international relations that emerged as countries
became independent. Pan-Africanism also served as
thé basis for founding thé Organization of African
Unity (OAU), now thé African Union (AU).
During thé 20th century, économie exchanges
between thé two continents deteriorated, but
cultural exchanges, particularly in music and thé
performing arts, did not diminish. North-American
music noticeably affected thé birth of urban identity
in South Africa. On thé western coast, thé musical
dialogue is even aider. Retornados from Cuba
and thé West Indies. as well as British soldiers
recruited in thé Caribbean, introduced syncretic
musical styles in thé region's urban areas. Those
returning from Brazil put an indelible mark on
urban music in Nigeria and Bénin. Thé introduction
of record-players and records facilitated extensive
dissémination of music from thé other side of thé
Atlantic. Recordings by thé famous groups Septeto
Habanero and Trio Matamores béat ail thé audience
records in thé first half of thé 20th century.
Instruments of mixed origin like thé maracas,
congas and bongos, which arrived in Africa in thé
1950s, led to thé development of an impressive
style of rumba, characteristic of today's Démocratie
Republic of Congo. Thé rumba, calypso, Bahia's
"axe", jazz, soûl, reggae and hip-hop, ail musical
genres of African origin, came/returned to Africa
and are now enjoying undeniable success ail aver
thé continent. Dance and théâtre hâve also absorbed
North-American, Cuban and Brazilian éléments. A
derivative of thé "bumba-meu-boi", for example, a
sort of popular Brazilian opéra, of European, Indian
and African origin, has been "adopted" by Nigeria
under thé name of "boi" (ox in Portuguese) and as
"burrinha" [female donkey) in Bénin.
Cartos Liberato de Sousa,
of thé Fédéral University of Sergipe,
Brazil
^Vlu<si6Â[ [y[&trîÂmt^
bangos - a pair of smalt single-
headed drums made from
hollowed tree-trunks, created
in Cuba around 1900. Always
p!ayed with bare hands using
pressure to produce varying
sounds and pïtches, thé two
drums are of varying sizes,
with thé heads made of nailed
membrane or plastic material.
oongaa - used either singly or
as a pair, thèse long, narrow,
barrei-shaped drums are made
out of wood or fibreglass, thé
head being ofthick vetlum.
An intégral élément of Latin
American dance bands in thé
1930s, they are played with
thé fingers, thé hand pressure
providing a variety of sounds
and pitches.
mairecas - Of pre-Columbian
tndian origin, thé word mbaracé
dénotes a gourd containing dry
seeds. Widely used in dance
bands in Cotombia, Vanezuaia
and Brazil, this pair of rattles
with wooden handtes providss
rhythm and has been adopted
everywhere else by pop bands
and percussion ensembles.
Sources: Thé Oxford Companion
to Music; New Grave Dictionary of
Music and Musicians.
UNESCO | thé nciu Courier | December 2004
## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=47) 🆗
### 138463: 2004: International Year for the Commemoration of the Struggle against Slavery and its Abolition
L^!'.
Laiiiichmgoffhe
Internadonal Year w
Cape Coast (Ghana)
I. Thé message of
UNESCO's Director-
Général is available
in its entirety at:
www.unesco.org/dg
roclaimed International Year for thé
Commémoration of thé Struggle against
SIavery and its Abolition by thé Général
Assembly of thé United Nations, 2004 marks thé
bicentenary of thé first independent black state,
Haïti, symbol of uprising and résistance by slaves..
"By institutionalizing memory,
resisting thé onset of oblivion,
recalling thé memory of a tragedy that for long
years remained hidden or unrecognized, and
by assigniag it its proper place in thé human
conscience, we respond to our duty to remember,"
said thé Director-General of UNESCO, Koïchiro
Matsuura, in his message for thé occasion.
Thé year, devoted to a tragedy recognized
as a "crime against humanity" in 2001 at thé
Durban Worid Conférence against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolérance,
has helped humanity accomplish its duty of
remembrance as well as promote thé fight against ail
forms of slavery and radsm in thé world today.
In thé framework of thé Year, UNESCO prcpared
a séries of activities m coopération with Member
States, National Commissions, govemmental and
non-governmental organizations, UNESCO Clubs,
thé international sdentific cofflmunity, Nobel Prize
winners, and UNESCO's Artists for Peace and
Goodwill Ambassadors.
Several events will mark thé closing of thé
International Year and thé célébration of
thé International Day for thé Abolition of
Slavery on December 2.
A traveling exhibition entitled "Lest
We Forget: thé Triumph over Slavery,"
created by thé Schomburg Center
in New York in collaboration with
UNESCO's project "Thé Slave Route,"
will be inaugurated at UNESCO. Thé
show, which bas already traveled to
several countries, traces thé économie impact of
thé slave trade and thé labour of African slaves
on American and European developmeat, and thé
trade's disastrous effects on économie, political and
social life in Africa. It highlights its contributions
to language, religion, music and institutions on ail
three continents.
> Thé présentation of thé Toussaint Louverture prize,
named after thé freed slave who fought for thé
independence of Haiti; it is awarded in récognition
of contributions ta thé struggle against domination,
racism and intolérance. Lauréates are thé well-
known poet from Martinique Aimé Césaire, bard of
"Négritude," and Abdias do Nascimento, founder of
thé Teatro Expérimental do Negro, thé fîrst Afro-
Brazilian association to combine thé fight against
discriinination with thé issue of réhabilitation of
African culture as a fundamental asset of Brazilian
society._
A spécial concert by Gilberto Gîl, UNESCO
Goodwill Ambassador and Brazilian Minister of
Culture.
. An international colloquium on "Issues of
Memory: Coming to Terms with thé Slave Trade
and Slavery" explores interactions between
différent approaches to memory, such as revisionist
historiography, thé ethics of responsibility, and
identity-based mobilisation for thé reconfiguration of
collective memory.
^ttS
47
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=48) 🆗
### 138461: Studying slavery in schools
^
^lÂUê-ri) ÂK^I l^.. ^tbk-{~te^^-
Thé first proclamation of
masterpieces of oral and
intangible héritage of humanity
was made in 2001. Every
two years, UNESCO sélects
outstanding examples of
practices, représentations,
expressions, knowledge and skills
that communities recognize as
part oftheir cultural héritage.
A certain number of thèse
masterpieces are linked to îhe
slave trade.
Thé Garifuna Language,
Dance and IVIusic (Belize)
- "Thé Garifuna, a population
of mixed origin, incorporating
éléments of thé culture of
indigenous Caribbean groups
and populations of African
origin...The mélodies bring
together African and Amerindian
éléments."
Thé Carnwal of Earranquitta
(Colombia) - "a véritable melting-
pot of indigenous, African and
European cultural héritages....
aspects that, in many cases, died
out in thé very areas where they
onginated or evolved."
La Tumba Ftancesa, MUMC
of thé Oriente BrothBrhood
(Cuba) - "an eighteentn-ceniury
fusion of music from Dahomey in
West Africa and traditional French
dances....brought to Cuba by
Haitian slaves."
Thé Cultural Space of thé
Brotherhood of thé Holy Spirit
of thé Congés of Villa Mella
(Dominican Republic) - "Thé
Brotherhood was founded in thé
16th century by African slaves
and people of mixed origin."
T?",® MarB®n Héritage of
Rîoora TOWH (Jamaica) - «Moore
Town is home to thé descendants
of independent coiTtmunities of
former n.inaway slaves known
as Maroons...hsi!ina from WesT
and Central African régions with
diverse languages and culturel
practices."
ï
s
^iÂU^^i Â^l
^onÂ fovttA^i
A dozen sites associated with thé
slave trade and slaves' struggle
for freedom hâve been inscribed
on thé World Héritage List.
In Africa, thé Island of Gorée
(Sénégal), thé Ruins of Kilwa
Kisiwani and Songo Mnara as
well as Stone Town of Zanzibar
(United Republic of Tanzania), thé
Forts and Castles of Volta (Ghana)
and James Island (Gambia) are
sites that commemorate thé
embarkation of slaves towards
thé NewWorld.
Others, like thé Royal Palaces
of Abomey in Bénin, testify to
thé rôle African feudal Systems
played in supplying thé slave
trade.
A variety of significant places
in thé history of slavery in thé
Americas and thé French West
Indies are also listed as World
Héritage: thé Historié Centres
of Salvador de Bahia (thé New
World's first slave market),
lyri Preto, Olinda, Sào Luis,
Carawal af Rarraiiquiïia
héritage at humaBtty
Diamantina and thé Sanctuary
of Bom Jésus do Congonhas
(Brazil); Brimstone Hill Fortress
National Park on thé little istand
of Saint Kitts and Nevis in thé
Caribbean; thé Fortifications on
thé Caribbean Side of Panama:
Portobello-San Lorenzo and
thé Historié District of Panama;
Old Havana, San Pedro de la
Roca Castle and thé first coffee
plantations in south-east Cuba;
and thé Historié Inner City of
Paramaribo (Suriname).
In Haïti, thé Palace of Sans Souci,
thé buildings of Ramiers, and thé
Citade! are thé first monuments
built by slaves after they had
fought for and won theirfreedom.
For more information on
sites: http://whc.unesco.
org/nwhc.fr/pages/doc/
mainfS.htm
Ako, ja^-b pabti^^l
{« -{"ve-^:
LES ROUTES DE UESCLAVAGE :
HISTOKE D1UN TRÈS GRAND
«DÉRANGEMEKIT»,
by Claude Fauque and
Marie-Josée Thiel,
Hermé éditions ÎParis), 2004, 192 pp
From thé start of thé slave trade to
abolition, thé book retraces thé history
and conséquences of thé "peculiar
institution" of slavery. Considering
slavery as a precursor of globalization,
thé authors examine thé économie
reasons for thé slave trade, biit also
thé social life and living conditions of
slaves. Thé abundant illustrations, many
previously unpublished, are drawn from
UNESCO archives.
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=49) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
l l
Ç' fâ^
1^
.^.^\
/.
NESCO's entire ASPnet, or
Associated Schools Project
Network (7,600 institutions
in 175 countries), was mobilized in 2004
in order to introduce thé issue of slavery
in school curricula. Network members
produced innovative educational
resource material and held workshops,
ail in thé cause of improving éducation
about thé causes and conséquences of
slavery. Thèse activities are part of thé
"Breaking thé Silence" Project, launched
by UNESCO in 1998.
For more
information on
Breaking thé
Silence: www.
unesco.org/
education/asp
Among publications, a resource
booklet Levons le Voile pour un futar
meilleur (Banishing Shadows for a
Better Future) was produced and
illustrated by Haitian ASPnet students.
In thé trilogy "Slave Voices, " "Slave
Voyages," and "Slave Visions," thé final
volume is in préparation, focusing on
thé aspirations of thé enslaved for a
new sodety following thé abolition of
slavery. An initiative to produce multi-
média educational material on places
of memory related to thé slave trade
is also underway. Finally, thé schools
network in thé United States bas begun
production of a "Memory Tïunk" of slave
trade artifacts.
Following a séries of international
meetings on teaching about thé causes
and conséquences of thé slave trade,
an International Youth Forum was
held November 12-16 in Trinidad and
Tobago. Attended by students, teachers
and experts from aver 20 countries in
Pupils from thé Abomey-
Calvi school in Bénin,
which is a member of
thé Associated Schools
Project Network ASPnet
three régions, it finalized "Thé Race
agauist Racism, " an international schools
campaign against racism and modem
forms of slavery to be launched in early
2005.
On 21 March 2005, International
Day for thé Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, ASPnet schools will be
invited to join this campaign by carryiag
out a séries of concrète anti-rarism
activities within thé school and thé
commumty.
Jean 0'Su.llivan
UNESCO
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=50) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
icrosoft
Gâtes,
head of thé
transnational computer
software firm Microsoft,
and UNESCO Director-
Général Koïchiro
Matsuura signed an
open-ended coopération
agreement on November
17 to encourage thé
use of information
and communication
technology [ICT] as
part of thé UN policy of
international coopération
to narrow thé world's
"digital divide."
Microsoft and UNESCO
will devise projects and
exchange expériences in
areas such as éducation
and learning, expanding
linguistic diversity, thé
exchange of information
and software applications
and community access to
technology.
© Niamh Burke/UNESCO
"We are very honoured
to work with UNESCO in
this important initiative,"
Gâtes said. "Our shared
aim is ta help remove
obstacles to joining thé
digital world and enable
people everywhere to
grasp thé full potential
of technology through
educational programmes
and new skills,
increasing access to it
for communities and
preserving cultural and
linguistic diversity."
Matsuura welcomed thé
link-up with Microsoft.
"Efficient use of ICT can
play a big rôle in giving
people thé means to build
sustainable development,
which involves support
for éducation and
learning, " he said.
Thé agreement includes
plans to set up knowledge
and Internet-based skills
communities leading
to pooling of intellectual
resources across
geographical borders and
stresses thé need to train
teachers ta incorporate
ICT into thé classroom.
Corporation,
iKtê- theworld's
leading manufacturer
of electronic
microprocessors and
a major producer of
computer, network and
communication déviées,
signed with UNESCO
on November 9, 2004, a
coopération agreement
aimed at developing a
model curriculum or
syllabus to improve
thé use of information
and communications
technology (ICT) in
classrooms woridwide.
UNESCO chose to
work with Intel on
this project because of
thé firm's enormous
expérience in traimng
teachers in thé use of
technology, in addition
to its renowned support
for teachers striving
to include technology
in their courses.
Through its programme
"Intel@Teach to thé
Future, " thé company
has already trained two
million teachers from
across thé world. "Thé
challenge is to find thé
best use of technology
for improving thé
quality of teaching
and learning, while
introducing a high
degree of flexibility to
respoad to régional
needs, " declared Wendy
Hawkins, Intel director
of éducation.
On thé basis of thé
agreement, UNESO and
Intel will work together
jointly on a multi-partite
initiative aimed at
establishing norms for
improving thé quality
of teacher training
programmes through
ITC. Thèse norms
will be drawn from
theoretical knowledge
and practical skills in
thé field.
UNESCO | thé new Courier \ December 2004
## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=51) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Ambassadors and artists
more prominent figures hâve
agreed to help UNESCO
campaign for its ideals and aims - Brazilian
activist Maria Lourdes Egydio Villela (Milù
Villela) and Croatian actor Relja Basic.
Villela was appointed in Brasilia on
10 November as a UNESCO goodwill
ambassador for inclusive éducation "in
récognition of her outstanding commitment
to éducation and her attachment to thé
ideals and aims of UNESCO."
She is well known in Brazil for her work
with voluntary and youth movements. In
1994 she founded Despertar (Wake Up), a
community association providing technical
and vocational courses for teenagers as
well as médical and psychological help. It
also teaches adults skills so they can earn
a living, directly benefiting about 7, 000
people every year.
She currently heads Faca Parte (Be Part
of It), an NGO that encourages voluntary
work, especially among young people,
to help schools throughout thé country.
As a goodwill ambassador, she will défend
thé right to éducation for people with
disabilities.
Croatian actor Relja Basic was
named a UNESCO artist for peace
on 6 November in récognition
of his "outstanding career
achievements in thé performing
arts and his lifelong contribution
to film and théâtre."
He has appeared in more than
3,000 plays and about 120 films
and TV séries in Croatia and
elsewhere. He was a member
of thé Croatian National Théâtre
from 1956 to 1968, and in 1974
founded Zagreb's "Visiting Théâtre" (Teatar
il gostima), which he ran until he retired
last February at thé âge of 74. Thé théâtre
has performed throughout thé former
Yugoslavia and about 50 times in other
countries.
As an artist for peace, Basic said he
would promote intercultural dialogue,
especially among young people in south-
eastern Europe.
Internationa!
n NESCO
Director-
Général Koichiro
Matsuura and thé
président of Rotary
International,
Jonathan
Majiyagbe, signed
a mémorandum on October
11 to encourage thé governors
of various Rotary districts
to work with UNESCO
national commissions to
promote worldwide peace and
understanding.
Rotary, which was founded
in Chicago in 1905, is an
international organisation of
business and professional leaders
that do es humanitarian work and
strives for peace in thé worid.
It is active in 166 countries and
comprises 31, 000 clubs and
nearly 1. 5 million members. It
will celebrate its centenary next
year in Chicago.
"UNESCO and Rotary
International share thé goal
of setting up projects and
programmes with other
government, non-government
and civic organisations to
help build peace worldwide,"
said Matsuura and Majiyagbe
in their joint letter. "Working
with UNESCO, Rotary clubs
can increase their impact
by launching projects that
promote peace in communities
everywhere."
Rotary has spearheaded a
major campaign against infantile
paralysis (polio) and is currently
involved in a big way in thé fight
against AIDS.
UNESCO | thé neiu Courier | December 2004
## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=52) 🆗
### 138462: ICT time in Africa
ïeh^erêioSaiitjma
## [Page 53](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=53) 🆗
### 138462: ICT time in Africa
CoîpjTiunitv Multiined
Centres (CMC)
of Manhica ,snd
Namajcl^ (Mozambique) are part ot
j network deveioped with UNESCO
anc! a consorîiuni of partners ).n
Mozainbique, Mali md Serîeg. i! ir
jn iniliaîive announced aï thé Worici
Summit on thé intormation Society in
Cenevd in Decenîber 2003. Tlie Swiss
Developmeni Agencv is providing riie
biilk of thé ftindiug for thé network
which wii; nuiiiwr 20 centres in eacli
country bv 2006.
Thé CMCs are designed to meet thé
needs of local popiiiaiior? getting
and exchangmg infonTiation il! their
l.irtguage aiici to provide iheii-! \vitl-i
iearning and training opportunities
Ai theii most basic. centres lise a
portable FM broadcastiiig unst. a
so-càlled "suitcaw radio" which
costs iess îhan US$5. 000. and a few
computers for inteTnet bFowsing, einai
and basic office, iibran and lecirning
jpplicjtions. Thev ofter comniercial
services inciiuiing téléphone, fax
## [Page 54](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=54) 🆗
### 138462: ICT time in Africa
TBiC Tfc-L_... ' il
.'%»<<" *. '%"£..* dutni'to;.
ï'*taMi»»tl».
'^S. ^iato».
.&xï*&*.^
. ktït. E-fd < F»«».
.teahA* _!%"".
## [Page 55](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=55) 🆗
### 138462: ICT time in Africa
,1
## [Page 56](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=56) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
l * *
nspired by thé DVD of thé same
name, Silk, Scents and Spice tells thé
fascinating story of thé silk, scent and
spice trade routes. At once a fasdnating
history and travelogue, this book is filled
with astonishing colour photographs,
illustrating thé author's journeys along
routes once traced by gréât trade caravans
and vessels. Besides exotic merchandise
thèse routes also carried new ideas,
technologies and religions across vast
distances, shaping thé history of hunianity.
Thé oldest route was thé Incense Trail,
which linked thé frankincense-produdng
régions of Arabia with thé empires of
antiquity. Thé Silk Road was thé longest
of thé routes, stretching across mountains,
désert and thé steppes of Central Asia,
joining thé markets of China with those
of Europe and thé Middle East. Thé Spice
Route connected thé gréât civilizations
of Europe, India and thé Orient for aver
2,000 years. Arab dhows, Chinese junks
and Spanish galleons would sail this route
laden with precious spices from South-East
Asia and thé treasures of thé Orient. Their
trade of thèse routes bred international
rivalries and conquests, and thé search for
thèse riches impelled Columbus to cross thé
Atlantic and Magellan to circumnavigate
thé globe.
Written by John Lawton
Photographed by Nik Wheeler,
Tor Eigeland and Bill Lyons
128 pp., 29x24,7 cm
2004, 92-3-103927-X
 
19.80
UNESCO Publishing/ECONOMICA
Memoryof Peuples séries
UNESCO | (he new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 57](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=57) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
www.unesco.org/publishing
MEDITERRANEAN BASIN
WATER ATLAS
Thé synthetic maps presented in this
book offer a séries of panoramic views
aecompanied by short commentaries
on thé geography of thé Mediterranean
Basin. They show thé extrême
diversity of natural water resources,
thé spécifie needs of Mediterranean
countries, and thé impacts of water
usage on thé environment. This
publication will satisfy thé demands
of thé général public and teachers for
well-documented and synthetic maps,
presented in a user-friendly format
suitable for educational purposes.
By Jean Margat
46 pp., 27x21 cm
2004, ISBN 92-3-103963-6
 
15. 00
UNESCO Publishing/Blue Plan/Commission
fer thé Geological Map of thé World (Paris)
Earth Sciences séries
(.. uf4\irCk! c^'/crï. ^y
iHd'icienouS peoc-. e:a/ia
... -_.. _.... _SSCHOOLS:
IMPROVING ACCESS IN RURAL
AFRICA ?
This volume présents an overview of
thé rôle of multigrade and one-teacher
classes in thé history of primary
schooling, noting thé factors that
détermine their success or failure. It
offers educational planners a cohérent,
flexible and realistic set of measures
for increasing provision in rural areas,
particularly in thé French-speaking
countries of sub-Saharan Africa.
By Étienne Brunswic and Jean Valérien
124 pp., 21 x 13,5 cm
2004, ISBN 92-803-1242-1
 
12. 20
UNESCO-IIEP
Fundamentals of Educational Planning séries
THE CHALLENGE 0F
]MDIQENOUS EDUCATION:
PRACTICEAND
PERSPECTIVES
Published in thé framework of
thé United Nations International
Décade of thé Worid's
Indigenous People (1994-
2004), this book offers insights
for éducation policy makers,
researchers and ail those
concerned with educational
provision for indigenous
peoples.
Part l reflects upon thé
challenges and obstacles facing
indigenous éducation, thé
situation of indigenous peuples
with regard to éducation,
aspects of thé political and
légal context, and prospects
for indigenous éducation. It
also summarizes thé général
objectives of indigenous
éducation. Part II develops a set
of criteria for thé identification
of successful examples of
quality éducation for indigenous
peuples, illustrated by some
relevant expériences.
Part III présents some successful
case studies in éducation for
indigenous peuples.
By Linda King and Sabine Schielmann
284 pp., 24x15,5 cm
2004, ISBN 92-3-103934-2
19. 80
UNESCO Publishing
Education on thé Move séries
CULTURAL DIVERSITY
AND INDIGENOUS PEUPLES
Oral, written expressions and
new technologies
This unique CD-ROM, aimed at promoting
thé Convention on Cultural Diversity,
contains thé full text of thé Convention and
documentation related to thé subject. It
offers a rare opportunity to appreciate thé
languages of indigenous peuples, many of
which are under threat. Included are more
than 130 texts, photographs, paintings, film
extracts, vidéo séquences and files presented
in languages spoken by différent indigenous
peuples. Thèse are combined with links to
websites and portais developed by différent
institutions and indigenous organizations
throughout thé world.
Users will discover over 20 hours of
navigation (thé équivalent of a fascinating
1, 000-page, multi-language publication)
including a rich variety of essays, literature,
poetry, photography, cinéma, paintings and
songs. Ail texts are translated into Englîsh,
with additional texts in French and Spanish,
as well as oral examples of 30 indigenous
languages. Also included are feature film
extracts portraying aspects of contemporary
life in indigenous communities. In
addition, thé CD-ROM présents différent
joint-activities and partnerships carried
out by indigenous peuples, muséums and
researchers, making use of ail available
média to transmit thé knowledge of
indigenous communities.
Editorial Team:
Division ofCultural Policies and Intercultural Dialogue
(UNESCO), Barbara Glowczewski (Laboratoire
d'Anthropologie Sociale, CNRS, France), Laurence
Fourchez (MNHN, CNRS, France), Joëlle Rostkowski
(EHESS and UNESCO Consultant, France) and John
Stanton (Berndt Muséum of Anthropology, University
of Western Australia).
Conception, design, graphies and development:
Hervé Pourchez (for Vidéosolutions)
PC: Windows 98 SE or later
2004, ISBN 92-3-103939-3
 
49. 00
UNESCO Publishing
UNESCO | thé neiu Courier | December 2004
## [Page 58](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=58) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
UNESCO Offices
United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP
France
Tel. +33 1 45 68 10 00
Internet:
www. unesco. org
Documentation Centres
Archives (BSS/AM)
a (33-1) 45 68 19 50/55
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 17
E-mail: archives^unesco. org
Coastal Areas and Sinatl tslBnds
îî (33-1) 45 68 39 34
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 58 08
E-mail: c. noliet@unesco. org
CammiiBicallon
W (33-1) 45 68 42 67
Fax: (33-1) 45 6S 55 82
E-mail: n. nguyen-van@unesco. org
Culture
.S (33-1) 4S 68 43 43
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 55 74
E-mail: culture. doc^unesco. org
Education
n (33-1) 45 68 10 29
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 S6 24
E-maiÏ; sdi^ Unesco, org
lirformation et tnformatics
W (33-1) 45 68 43 99
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 55 82
E-mail: g. mensah®uneaco. org
Infsmatien about UNESCO
.ff (33-1) 01 45 68 16 81
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 57
B-mail: p. morel-¥asquez^unesco. org
library
a (33-1) 45 68 03 56
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 98
E-mail: libraryiBunesco. org
MAB - Maa and thé Biosphère
.S (33-1) 45 68 40. 59
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 58 04
E-mail: mab@unesco.o]
Natural Sciences
S- (33-1) 45 68 40 17
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 58 23
F. -mail- p. mumgaiyan@uncsco. org
OeeanBgraphy
.S (33-1) 45 68 39 82
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 S8 12
E-mai!: p.boned®unesco.org
Phota Ubfary
tf (33-1) 45 68 16 91
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 55
E-mail: photobânk^ Unesco, org
Studio Radia-TV, Arebives, Audiovisual
a (33-1) 45 68 00 68
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 56
E-mail studio®une»co. org
Sscial and HumBn SeiBnBes
.B (33-1) 45 68 38 07
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 S6 77
E-mail: dare@unesco. org
Statistros
.S (1-S14) 343- 68 80
Fax: (1-514) 343-68 82
E-mail: uis.resource-centre®unesco.org
MydfBlogy
.S (33-1) 45 68 40 04
Fax. (33-1) 45 68 58 11
Ë-mail' ihp^unesco. org
Wortd Héritage
.S (33-1) 45 68 18 76
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 SS 70
E-mail: wh-info®unesco org
Youth CosNinaSBB
.B [33-1) 45 68 16 34
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 57 90
E-mail: uci(g>unesco. on
Afghanistan
UNESCO Kabul
P. O. Box 5, Kabul
S +93-70-283. 008
Fax: +873-763468836,
E-mail: martin. hadlow®undp .org
Bangladesh
Idb Bhaban (16th fioor)
E/8-A Rokeya Sharan
Sher-e-Banglanagar, Dhaka 1207
.S (880-2) 912 34 69/6522
Fax: (880-2) 912 34 68
E-mail: dhaka@unesco. org
Brazil
SAS Quadra S Bloco H Lote 6
Edifido CNPQ/1BICT/UNESCO
9° andar. 70070-914 Brasilia D. F.
W (55-61)21 06 35 00
Fax: (55-61) 322 42 61
E-mail: brasiU3@unesco. org
Burundi
Avenue du Luxembourg,
Bujumbura
.S (257) 21 53 82/84
Fax: (257) 21 53 Si
E-mail: bujumbura@unesco. org
Cambodia
P. O. BOX 29
House 38, Samdech Sothearos
blvd. Phnom Penh
S (855-23) 217 244, 426 726
Fax: (855-23) 426 163, 217 022
E-mail: phnompenh^unesco. org
Cameroon
Immeuble Stamatiades,
(2nd Hooi), Avenue de
[. Indépendance, BP 12909,
Yaoundé
'B (237) 22 57 63
Fax: (237) 22 63 89
E-mail: yaounde^ Unesco, org
Chile
Calle Enrique Delpiano, 2058
Providencia, 3187 Saniiago
a (56-2) 472 4600/655 10 SO
Fax: (56 2) 655 10 46, 655 10 47
E-mail: santictgo@unesco. org
China
Waijiaogongyu S-1S-3,
Jianguomenwai Compound,
Beijing 100600
.S (86-10) 65 32 28 28
Fax: (86-10) 65 32 48 54
E-mail: beijingaunesco. org
Congo
134 bd du Maréchal Lyautey,
Brazzaville
ff (242) 81 18 29
Fax: (242) 81 17 80
E-mail: brazzaville@unesco. org
Costa Rica
Paseo Colon, ave l bis, calle 28,
casa esquinera, 2810 San José
n (506) 258 76 2S
Fax: (506) 258 74 S8, 2S8 76 4l
E-mall: s an-Jose^ unesco. org
Cuba
UNESCO Régional bureau
for Culture
Calzada 551 - Esq. a U
Vedado, Havana
a (53-7) 832 76 38,
(57-3) 3î 34 38
?ax: (S3-7) 33 31 44
E-mail: habana^ Unesco, org
DeRiocratic RepubKc of thé Congo
Immeuble Losoma,
Boulevard du 30 Juin, Kinshasa
S (243) 88 48 253
Fax: (243) 88 48 252
E-mail: kinsh3sa@unesco. org
Ecuallar
Juan Léon Mera 130 y
Ave. Patria, Edificio CFN 6to Piso,
Quito
S 2 5932 2529 085/2 5932 2562 327
Sax: 2 5932 2S04 435
E-mail: quito@unesco. org
Egypt
UNESCO Régional Office
for Science
8 AbdeI-Rahman
Fahmy Street, Garden City.
Cairo 11541
a (202) 79 504 24
Fax: (202) 79 45 296
E-mail: cairo@unesco. org
EUopia
P.O. Box 1177, EGA Building,
Menelik Avenue,
Addis Ababa
S (251-1) 51 39 53
Fax: (251-1) 51 14 14
E-mail: mlconde@hotmail com
Gabon
A la Cité de la Démocratie,
Bâtiment   6, B. P 2, Libreville
ff (241) 76 28 79
Fax: (241) 76 28 14
E-mail: unescïby^inet. gâ
Ghana
32 Nortei Ababio Street, Airport,
Residential Area, Accra
.B (233-21) 765 497, 765 499
Fax: (233-21) 765 498
E-maiî: accra@unesco org
Guatemala
Edifiao Etisa, Ofic. 7 "A°
Plaza Espana, Zona 9,
Guatemala City
S (502) 360 87 17,
360 87 27
Fax: (502) 360 87 19
E-mail: gu3temala@unesco. org
19, Delmas 60, Musteau par
Bourdon, Petion ViBe
S (509) 511 04 60/61/62
Fax; (509) 257 SIS»
E-oail: unescohaiti@hamet.net
B 5/29 Safdarjung Enclave, New
,3elhi 110 029
® (91-11) 671 3000
Fax: (91-11) 671 3001/2
3-mail: newdelhi@unesco. org
UNESCO | thé new Courier | December 2004
## [Page 59](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=59) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Indonesia
UNESCO House, Jalan Galuh
(II)
Nu 5, Xebayo Baru,
Jakarta Selatan, Jakarta 12110
S- (62-21) 739 9618
Fax: (62-21) 7279 64S9
E-mail: jâkarta^unesco org
Iran (tetainic BBfiiililic at)
Bahman Building, Sa'ad
Abâd Palace Compiex
Tefaran
V |:9?-21i 27 40
I41/I42/I43
Fax; (98.21)2740 144
E-mail: tetiran@unesco urg
Maty
Palazzo Zorzi, Castello 4»30
Venice
a (39-041) 260 15 11
.<\vitchboard
fax (39-041) 52S99 ÏS
E-niâil. roste@unesco. ojg
Jamaica
Thé Towers, 25 Dominica
Drive, 3rd FIoor, Kingston 5
W (1-876) 929 70 87,
929 70 89
Fax. (1-876)9298468
E-maii kingston@unesco. org
Jardaa
Wadi Saqra Street
Amman 11181
® (962-6J 551 42 34/65 59
Fax (962-6) 553 21 83
E-maii regtstry@unesco. org
Kazakhstan
4th Floor, UN Building
67, Tôle Bi Street, Almaty
S 17-3272) 58 26 37/38
Rax [7-îi7î'l 79 4S 53
E-nuit: almâty@unesco org
Kenya
Uniied Nations Ol'tices,
Ctgin, Biock C, Uniîed
N'aTîon? Avenue, Gigin
Nûîrob'
® (254-;) 62 12 34
F.IX (234-2) 62 27 50
E-iuail naît cbi@ Unesco org
letianon
Ci:é Sportne Ai'.. Be;ful
.B i:961. 1) 85 (Xl !?
F.1X (961-1; 82 48 54
K-mail: beirui®unesco org
Ma»
BadaîabougoLi Est
B. P E 176.5, Banuko
S- (223.1 223 34 92. 223 34 93
Fax: (223) îî} 34 94
E-niaiî. bd ako@ytiesco org
Mexico
Pte Masar^'k n. c 526, 3er piso
Colonia Polanco, 11S60
Mexico, D.F
.B (52-55) 5230 76 00
Fax: (52-55) 5230 76 02
E-maii mexico@unesco org
IKtoreeea
35 av du 16 novembre,
Agdal, Rabat 1777
S (212-37) 67 03 72,
67 03 74. 77 81 82
Fax: (212-37) 6703 75
E-mail rabat@unesco. org
Mozambique
515, av. Frederick Engels,
Maputo
n (258-1) 49 44 50, 49 34 34
F.1X. (.'5S-D 49 ?4 31. 4*) 45 03
E-niail; mapulo@-iïiiesco org
Namibia
Oppeiiheimer Hoiisc,
5 Brahms Si.. W'indhoek
V (264-61.! 29: 7000.
FdX '^64-6i) 291 7220
E-nitiil
wndh0tjk@une?co ors
Népal
Ring Rûâd-Bansbari
Krithiuandu
S P77-1; 437 40 t>9.
fax: (977-11 437 3004
E-mail'
kathmându@une§co org
Nigeria
Street Plot 777,
Bouake Street, off Herben
Maccautay Way
Wu&e Zone ô, Abuja
W (234-9) 52 37 088
Fax: (234-9J 52 38 094
E-mail; abuja®unesco. org
Saudi-Pak Ibwer, First Floor,
BIue Area, Jinnâh Avenue,
Islamabad 44000
S (92-51) 28 000 83
Fax: (92-3!J 28 000 56
E-mail:
islamabad@unesco.org
Palestinien Authority
17, Ahliyyah Collège St. West
Bank via Israël Ramallah
ff ,972-2) 29S 9740
Fax: |97;-2i 295 97 4l
E-mail une?Lto@paiiïeî. [:c'm
Fera
Avenidci Jûvier Priicio i'^sîe
. :465 - 8 piso MU.WO de la
N'acion. S^ii Bon<î, Linîa
.S l5'-l) 476 9S 7].
^24 25 26
Fax: (51-1; 47h 98 72
E-n-ia't i. ineïiC(iyc@apjauîa.
rch neî. pe
Qatar
57. AI-J<izira Al-ArobiA
S t Dohd
W (974) 486 77 07, 7- US,'
7349
Fax. (974) 4S6 76 44
K-n^i. ti- ;^>!i?. @!.;.*ie;:co org
Romania
> UNESCO European Centre
for Higfaer Education, 39,
Stirbei Vodà Str., Bucharest
S (40-21) 313 08 39 / 06 98
Fax: (40-21) 312 35 67
E-mail; bucarest@une§o. org
Russian Fetteratioii
B&^hoi Levshinsky per 15/28,
blg. 2, 119034 Moscou
a (7-09S) 202 80 97,
202 87 S9/202 81 66
Fax: (7-095) 202 OS 6S,
956 36 66
E-mail: moscow ̂unesco. org
Rwaitda
Mlneduc Compound
.B (2SO) SI 58 45, 44, 46
Fax: (250) 51 38 44
E-mait kigalfunesco.org
P. O Box 615
Matautu-uta Post Office, Apia
a (685) 242 76
Fax; (685) 222 53
E-mail: apu®unesco.org
UNESCO Régional Office
Dakar and Regiona] Bureau
foi Education
}î av-L. S Senghor,
Dakar
.S [22l) 849 232S
Fax. 1221) 823 83 93
E-mail dakar® Unesco .org
Swteeriand
Villa « Les Feuillantines
CH-1211 Genève 10
a (41-22) 917 33 81
Fax: (41-22) 917 00 64
E-maîl: geneva^unesco org
Tanzama fUwited Repubîtc of)
Oyster Bay, Ufada Av,
Ftot N* 197A, Dar-es-Salaam
S (255-22) 2666 623/26
671 656
Fax; (253-22) 26 66 927
E-maii:
dâr-e8-sala*m@unesco.org
Thailand
920 Suhumvit Rd.,
Bangkok 10110
0 (662) 391 05 77/391 0879
Fax: (662) 391 08 66
E-mail bangkok@iinesco. org
Uniteil Slates ef Amerfsa
!, U-. ited Nation? Pl.lz.1,
Suiie 900
New York, N \ 10017
V [1-2U; 963 59 95,
1-d.x: (1-21;;<)63SO 14
E-mjii.
e minchenherg@unesco. org
Uruguay
UNESCO Office Montevideo
Kpg;ynaî Bureju îbr Science
iiî Latin Aiici thc C<u'ibbean
f,ciiîic;o ciel Meicusur (ex
Paraue Motei), Ciiîie Dr. Luis
Fiera. 1992
MoiHei. 'ideo
.S- i'.Wâ-2'i 41.i 2U75-413
2U94
Fax; ;59S-;j 4i3 2094,
L-mail. orcv't^uiîCftco. org. ury
Itebekistan
95, Amir Temur Str.,
Ta»hkent. 70 000
.B (998-71) 12 07 116
Fax; (998-71) 13 21 3*2
E-maU. tashkent@unesco.org
VietNan
23 Cao Ba Quat, Hanoi'
.B (84-4) 747 0275/6
Fax: (84-4) 747 0274
E-mail- registry@unesco. org
Zîmbabvtfe
8 Kenilworth Rd. Newlands,
Harare
S (263-4) 77 61 16
Fax: (263-4) 77 60 55
E-mail h*rare»unesco.org
UNESCO | thé new Courier l December 2004
## [Page 60](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=60) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Thé sculpture, which faces Ibe
N UNESCO headquarters, was
spared. U is a westfge of thé Ura
de^roycd by ths atomic bsmB
August 8, 194S. It was givwi ta U ESCO b
city o( Nagasaki m thé Nïation's
annivBrsary in 1976.