# [185815](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf)
## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=1) 🆗
### Non-article text
S
MEETING 
PEOPLE 
AND SHARING 
HERITAGE
## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=2) 🆗
### Non-article text
Special edition October 2009 
Contents
MEETING PEOPLE  
AND SHARING HERITAGE
When well-managed, tourism need not pose a threat  
to the cultural or natural environment. On the contrary, 
it can be a source of sustainable development, helping 
to combat poverty, safeguard our heritage and preserve 
cultural diversity. 
This special issue, which is published to coincide  
with the 35th UNESCO General Conference,  
brings together a number of  articles that have already  
appeared in our magazine, illustrating various issues  
surrounding this question.
Tourists in Borobodur, UNESCO World Heritage Site 
(Indonesia).
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/S
ilv
ia
 S
ch
ie
m
an
n
ROHA THE WONDERfuL  
Perched at an altitude of 2500 metres in the 
Amhara region (Ethiopia), the small village 
of Lalibela has been home to an astonishing 
gem of religious architecture for the last eight centuries.  
Constructed of single blocks of stone, the village’s churches were 
added to the World Heritage List in 1978.  3
A PERMANENT cHALLENGE
Twenty-seven new sites have been  
inscribed, in 2008, on UNESCO’s World 
Heritage List. While no changes were made 
to the List of Heritage in Danger, ‘reinforced monitoring’ was 
requested for four sites: Bordeaux, (France), Timbuktu (Mali), 
Historic Sanctuary of Machu Picchu (Peru) and Samarkand 
(Uzbekistan).  7
THE GRAND OLD LADy  
AND THE PLASTIc cHAIRS
On the border between East and West, 
the island of Corfu is shaped like a handle, 
thrusting from the Ionian Sea towards the Adriatic, not far from 
Italy. The little streets of Corfu exude its Roman, Byzantine and 
Venetian past. The Greek artist, Katerina Zacharopoulou,  
takes us on a tour.  11
WHEN WORLD HERITAGE SITES 
AND BIOSPHERE RESERvES 
MERGE 
Last May, Fraser Island, Australian World 
Heritage site since 1992, became the core part of the new Great 
Sandy Biosphere Reserve. Natural world heritage sites conserve 
ecosystems for which they have been inscribed, while biosphere 
reserves also do restoration of degraded environments. How will 
environment and tourist management practices change  
for the world’s largest sand island?  17
vISITING  
SuBMERGED TREASuRES 
Underwater museums and parks, replicas 
and digital reconstructions of wrecks  
are all ways to encourage the public to discover our under- 
water cultural heritage without damaging it. Some cost more 
than others, but they may also be more magical.  
Take the museum in the Bay of Alexandria, for example.  14
THE PERSONAL EyE  
Of A fAMILIAR STRANGER  
“This is not a photo of a merry-go-round,  
but of its reflection,” explains Shigeru Asano, 
a Japanese photographer fascinated by the light and shadows 
of Paris. He has been walking the streets of the city for 30 years. 
Nearly 10,000 kilometres from his native Osaka, he feels at home 
in the French capital, where he finds an atmosphere  
of melancholy more to his taste than “Tokyo’s dazzle”.  20
LEGENDARy cAMAGüEy 
With its red tiles, neoclassical façades  
with their louver-boards and pilasters,  
windows and carved screens,  
the city of Camagüey, the birthplace of Cuba’s national  
poet Nicolás Guillén, offers its visitors a haughty  
and legendary beauty. 9
## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=3) 🆗
### Roha the wonderful
T
3
practically the size of Notre Dame 
of Paris! 
As for the double church, Gol-
gotha-Michael, also called Debre 
Sinai and Golgotha: it offers one 
of the most spectacular views. 
The king, after whom the village 
is now named, is buried there, 
adjacent to the tomb of Adam – 
ancestor of all humanity, in the 
Biblical tradition. Take one step in 
Lalibela, and you tumble from his-
tory into myth. 
A short distance from this hillside 
nest of churches lies St George, 
the only one with a drainage sys-
tem and probably the most recent 
of the churches hewn on the or-
ders of King Lalibela. One can see 
it from a distance jutting out of the 
earth inside a huge pit with its 
roof sculpted with interconnected 
he village was called Roha, ‘the 
Wonderful’, back when the very pi-
ous king Gebre Mesqel Lalibela 
had 11 monolithic churches hewn 
from the rock, linked to each other 
by a vertiginous maze of tunnels, 
their walls pierced with cavities, 
some of them with a foot sticking 
out of some saint laid to rest there 
several centuries ago. 
The living and the dead are ac-
customed to rubbing elbows in 
this place where nothing seems 
impossible – not even carving an 
entire church, with portico, naves, 
vaults, upper stories, windows, 
out of a single block of stone. 
Beta Medhane Alem, the largest 
of the 11 churches inscribed on 
the UNESCO World Heritage 
List, rests on 34 pillars forming a 
rectangle 34 metres by 24. It is 
Roha the Wonderful 
  Perched at an altitude of 2500 metres in the Amhara region (Ethiopia),  
       the small village  of Lalibela has been home to an astonishing gem of religious architecture 
                  for the last eight centuries. constructed of single blocks of stone, 
                         the village’s churches were added to the World Heritage List in 1978.
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/J
as
m
in
a 
Š
op
ov
a
In Lalibela, look out for concealed churches.
A cavity in the rocks around the famous  
church of St. George where the feet of saints,  
at rest there for centuries, are exposed. 
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/J
as
m
in
a 
Š
op
ov
a
## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=4) 🆗
### Roha the wonderful
4
have no windows because that’s 
Noah’s level,” says Muchaw, one 
of the site’s official guides. “It’s to 
prevent flood water coming in,” he 
adds with a smile. 
To reach another group of 
churches, which, from afar, seem 
to be straddling each other, one 
must walk by a stream called Jor-
dan, which flows past another hill 
crowned by a small bell hanging on 
a dead tree – Mount Thabor – and 
you cross the cave of Bethlehem: 
the Holy Land in miniature ! 
According to one of the many con-
tradictory legends surrounding King 
Lalibela, he founded Roha when he 
returned from exile in Jerusalem 
and intended it to become a new 
holy city in Africa.
Lalibela at risk
It welcomes some 140,000 pilgrims 
a year, between Christmas and Tik-
met (Epiphany), says Belete, the 
most popular person around. He 
heads a staff of 20 at the Tourism 
and Culture Office in the village of 
12,000 inhabitants, which is lo-
cated some 600 km north of Ad-
dis Ababa. For Belete, tourism is 
the wave of the future: “Between 
July 2007 and March 2008, more 
Beta Medhane Alem, the largest church in Lalibela, under a modern shelter.
Traditional shelter for the little church in the village of Kirkos, which is 
not on the World Heritage list. It is 30 km from Lalibela.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/J
as
m
in
a 
Š
op
ov
a
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/J
as
m
in
a 
Š
op
ov
a
Mt Tabor at Lalibela, named after the site  
of the transfiguration of Christ in Galilee.
than 8000 tourists stayed in our 
12 hotels,” he reports. 
His office, funded by the Amhara 
Regional Council, receives contri-
butions from the central govern-
ment and from the Authority for 
Research and Conservation of 
Cultural Heritage (ARCCH). Safe-
guarding projects on the Lalibela 
site is also supported by the Eu-
ropean Union, UNESCO and sev-
eral NGOs, notably Plan Interna-
tional. 
While one of UNESCO’s main 
concerns is preventing the 
churches’ deterioration due to in-
filtration of rainwater, Belete’s first 
preoccupation is the disadvan-
taged population that lives on the 
site and is causing damage. It is 
imperative to relocate these 270 
families as quickly as possible, he 
thinks. 
Right now he lacks a specific plan 
and an accurate idea of cost, but 
he is optimistic. For this dynamic 
young leader, the image of a clean 
and well-maintained Lalibela is 
paramount. “I spread the word in 
the village’s five schools and it’s 
working,” he says proudly. 
He is equally worried about the 
condition of 24 churches in the 
crosses. Standing next to it, you 
feel dwarfed by the cross-shaped 
structure, with its 12 façades ris-
ing 12 metres. Its three stories are 
marked on the outside by ledges 
and windows. “Those at the bottom 
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/J
as
m
in
a 
Š
op
ov
a
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=5) 🆗
### Roha the wonderful
5
vicinity of Lalibela, 14 of which are 
not part of any safeguarding plan. 
“They should all be inscribed on 
the World Heritage List,” he main-
tains. To convince me, he takes 
me on a tour. 
One stands out because of its 
amazing natural setting. It was 
built by Lalibela’s predecessor, 
King Imrahana Kirstos.
The mysteries  
of Imrahana Kirstos
More than 40 minutes’ drive to 
cover the 12 kilometres separating 
Lalibela from a very poor hamlet at 
the foot of a mountain. Then half an 
hour of climbing, on a slope with no 
visible sign of human life… except 
a group of women returning from 
the market on the other side of the 
mountain. 
Halfway up, we leave the trail and 
suddenly an immense cliff looms 
above us like a thick cloud petri-
fied centuries ago. A small church 
is nestled there, barely visible. It is 
protected by a newly-constructed 
high wall. 
The inside of the sanctuary is like 
a theatre: daylight only reaches 
one side of the church and a small 
royal palace of brick and earth 
explains the priest, lifting the small 
lid inserted in the ground to con-
vince unbelievers. 
Behind the church, the body of 
its architect is laid out on the bare 
ground, wrapped in multicoloured 
sheets, close to the sarcopha-
gus of the holy king and the tomb 
of his holy spouse. She bore him 
no children. “Their union was only 
spiritual,” says the priest, launching 
into an astonishing biography of the 
king, who every day received the 
visit of the archangels Gabriel and 
Raphael, bringing food for the 5740 
pilgrims come from the four corners 
of the world to admire his work and 
his wisdom. The precision of the 
numbers is also surprising. 
Having shown me the cross God 
himself forged and gave to Imra-
hana Kirstos, as well as a triptych 
painted by the king’s own hand, 
the priest lets me go off alone to 
explore the depths of the cave. As 
my eyes get used to the dark, I spot 
a grinning skeleton, stretched out 
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/J
as
m
in
a 
Š
op
ov
a
A few tourists venture as far as the church of Imrahana Kristos.
nearby. Splendid liturgical drums 
are heaped on the straw-covered 
floor. The straw is spread over ani-
mal skins, under which are bones. 
“The church was built on water,” 
The church dedicated to Neakutdeab, youngest brother of Lalibela, is built beneath  
this enormous rock.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/J
as
m
in
a 
Š
op
ov
a
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=6) 🆗
### Roha the wonderful
6
in a long wooden box. Recovering 
from the shock, I see a vast ossuary 
spread out in front of me. It could 
easily contain the remains of 5740 
people. 
What happened in this grotto? 
From what period do these bones 
really date? Answers remain vague. 
But it seems, in Lalibela, just one 
step is enough to take you from 
imagination to reality. 
Jasmina Šopova 
(The UNESCO Courier, 2008, n° 8)
 
 
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/J
as
m
in
a 
Š
op
ov
a
An immense bone yard is hidden deep inside this rock cave.
When culture and tourism  
work hand in hand
T o mark the reinstallation of the Aksum Obelisk in its original location in northern Ethiopia, The UNESCO Courier (2008, n° 8) 
revisitsed some of the country’s cultural sites. Our travels off the beaten path lead us to another treasure, less obvious, 
less monumental than the castles of Gondar, less visible than the rock-hewn churches of Lalibela, but just as impressive: 
Ethiopia’s intangible heritage.
True, tangible and intangible heritage are inseparable, particularly in Ethiopia. This is one reason why Françoise Rivière, 
UNESCO’s Assistant Director-General for Culture, decided to launch another ‘worksite’, specifically in Lalibela, the Ethiopian 
World Heritage site renowned for its monolithic churches carved into the rock. 
“The idea is to carry out projects 
integrated in world heritage sites,” 
she explains. “These ‘projects’ are 
intended to contribute to economic 
and human development by focusing, 
according to need, on cultural tourism, 
safeguarding intangible heritage, pro-
moting cultural diversity, dialogue, lan-
guages or cultural industries. We will 
identify one site per region to launch 
these projects. In Africa, it will be 
Lalibela, where UNESCO has been 
present for a long time.” 
The foundations for the new initia-
tive are already there: the Organiza-
tion has several conventions at its 
disposal, including those concerning 
natural and cultural heritage (1972), 
intangible cultural heritage (2003) and 
the diversity of cultural expressions 
(2005). “By operating in symbiosis, 
these instruments can transform 
cultur into a powerful agent for deve- 
lopment,” says Françoise Rivière. 
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/J
as
m
in
a 
Š
op
ov
a
 Neakutdeab church’s bell near Lalibela.
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=7) 🆗
### A Permanent challenge
7
T
                  Twenty-seven new sites have been inscribed, in 2008, 
                          on uNEScO’s World Heritage List. 
                While no changes were made to the List of Heritage in Danger, 
                   ‘reinforced monitoring’ was requested for four sites: Bordeaux, (france), 
         Timbuktu (Mali), Historic Sanctuary of Machu Picchu (Peru) and Samarkand (uzbekistan). 
A permanent challenge
tional Council on Monuments and 
Sites (ICOMOS) to evaluate the 
tower’s impact, and to postpone 
action until results of the analysis 
are available. 
Infrastructure projects like dams, 
canals, roads and bridges are often 
highlighted in the state of conserva-
tion reports on specific World Heri-
tage Sites. In the case of the Group 
of Monuments at Hampi, India, a 
proposed bridge that threatened 
the site’s values was re-routed away 
from the property, leading to the re-
moval of the site from the In Danger 
List in 2006. Another situation, yet 
to be resolved, involves a proposed 
bridge at the Dresden Elbe Val-
ley. In 2006, the Committee took 
the position that the bridge would 
“irreversibly damage the values and 
integrity of the property.” This year 
[2008], it regretted the construc-
tion of the bridge underway and 
urged the authorities to opt for a 
tunnel. If the bridge construction is 
not stopped and damage reversed, 
the Committee decided, the prop-
erty will be deleted from the World 
Heritage List in 2009*. 
The threat of uncontrolled tour-
ism is one that occurs frequently 
at World Heritage Sites. There are 
travel companies that create tour 
packages around UNESCO sites, 
using the label ‘UNESCO World 
Heritage Site’ as a tourism market-
ing brand. At Angkor in Cambodia, 
there are reportedly 5000 visitors a 
day. In the Galapagos Islands, tour-
ism has increased from 40,000 visi-
tors in 1991 to 120,000 in 2006. 
The problems related to tourism 
include threats to public security 
and the heritage resources as well 
he 1972 Convention concerning 
the Protection of the World Cultural 
and Natural Heritage is perhaps the 
most widely recognized and effec-
tive conservation instrument in the 
world. One of its main purposes is 
to ensure “the identification, protec-
tion, conservation, presentation and 
transmission to future generations 
of the cultural and natural heritage.” 
Inscription is thus not an end in it-
self, but only the beginning. 
The World Heritage Committee 
provides leadership in promoting 
systems to support the sustainabil-
ity of heritage sites. There are pro-
cesses to identify threats to World 
Heritage properties, including peri-
odic reporting, reactive monitoring 
and, in cases of severe threat, In 
Danger listing. 
Over the past biennium, the World 
Heritage Committee examined al-
most 300 State of Conservation 
reports, the highest number ever 
examined by the Committee. Nine 
properties were removed from the 
List of World Heritage in Danger, 
in recognition of the improvement 
in their state of conservation, while 
five additional sites were added. By 
flagging them on this special list, 
the Committee hopes to draw par-
ticular attention to their plight.
Tip of the iceberg
But the In Danger List is only the tip 
of the iceberg. Most of the World 
Heritage Sites face conservation 
problems such as construction of 
skyscrapers, bridges or oil pipe-
lines, uncontrolled tourism, poach-
ing and climate change. 
The first major case discussed by 
the Committee was the proposed 
Wien Mitte project in the Historic 
Centre of Vienna, which, in 2003, 
sparked an ongoing debate. The 
most recent example is the pro-
posed Gazprom Tower develop-
ment in St. Petersburg, by the ma-
jor Russian natural gas company. 
During its meeting in Quebec, the 
Committee asked Russia to invite 
an expert mission from the World 
Heritage Centre and the Interna-
Band-e Miza dam, in Khuzistan province (Iran). The ancient hydraulic system in Shustar is 
inscribed on the World Heritage list.
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/Y
al
da
 M
oa
ie
ry
* In June 2009, the Dresden Elbe Valley was with-
drawn from the List of World Heritage Sites.  
The construction of the Waldschlösschen Bridge 
altered the cultural landscape and integrity  
of the site as defined by the List.
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=8) 🆗
### A Permanent challenge
8
as to the quality of the visitor experi-
ence. The World Heritage Commit-
tee works on developing principles 
for responsible tourism that apply 
to the stewards and custodians, to 
tour companies, to the people who 
write guidebooks as well as to tour-
ists. 
Over time, the Committee has 
dealt with cases of mining, logging, 
gas and oil extraction as well as the 
poaching of animals for commercial 
purposes. And the Committee can 
claim some spectacular successes, 
such as the re-routing of the mining 
road around Huascaran National 
Park (Peru) and the re-alignment of 
a proposed oil pipeline outside the 
watershed of Lake Baikal (Russia). A 
singular achievement for UNESCO 
is the 2003 undertaking by the In-
ternational Council on Mining and 
Metals not to explore or mine in 
World Heritage Sites, recognizing 
them as ‘no-go’ areas.
An important advance: 
reinforced monitoring 
mechanism
Among the less manageable threats 
are natural disasters, including ex-
treme weather events, fires and 
floods often related to the broader 
issue of climate change. In collabo-
ration with international institutions 
and committees, the World Heri-
tage Committee has developed 
its own policy framework and op-
erational plan for monitoring and 
addressing the impacts of climate 
change on World Heritage proper-
ties. (See Case Studies on Climate 
Change and World Heritage, a 
2007 UNESCO report) 
Another issue that is beyond the 
control of the Committee is the 
threat to sites from civil unrest and 
armed conflict. As an example, par-
ticular concern for the deteriorat-
ing condition of the properties in 
the Democratic Republic of Congo 
(DRC) led the Committee last year 
to decide on a comprehensive ap-
proach for all five In Danger sites. 
The Committee has also recently 
adopted a ‘reinforced monitoring 
mechanism’ for properties inscribed 
on the World Heritage List in Dan-
ger, applying it to the five sites in 
DRC, as well as Dresden and Jeru-
salem. This mechanism can be acti-
vated either by the World Heritage 
Committee or by the Director-Gen-
eral of UNESCO in specific and ex-
ceptional cases. At its 32nd session 
in Quebec, decisions were taken to 
apply it to Timbuktu (Mali), Machu 
Picchu (Peru), Samarkand (Uzbeki-
stan) and Bordeaux (France), which 
are not on the In Danger list. The 
case of the five DRC sites was 
again closely examined. 
For the first time in the history of 
the Convention, the World Heri-
tage Committee in 2007 decided, 
with deep regret, to remove a prop-
erty, the Arabian Oryx Sanctuary 
in Oman, from the World Heritage 
List. The Committee judged that the 
property had deteriorated to the ex-
tent that it had lost its Outstanding 
Universal Value. This dramatic mo-
ment of the Convention reminds us 
all that protection of World Heritage 
is a shared responsibility. It is the 
obligation of States Parties to pro-
tect the world cultural and natural 
heritage situated on their territory; 
it is the duty of the international 
community as a whole to assist and 
to cooperate with States Parties in 
this endeavour. 
At the 32nd session in Quebec, 
Canada made a special effort to 
engage young people in the work 
of the World Heritage Committee. 
The long-term conservation of our 
World Heritage Sites depends on 
the will of future generations to take 
over stewardship responsibilities. 
Engaging today’s youth will shape 
the decision-makers of tomorrow. 
Christina Cameron, 
University of Montreal, Chairperson 
of the 32nd World Heritage Committee 
(The UNESCO Courier, 2008, n°6)
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/I
. R
ed
m
on
d
Skulls of plains gorillas, killed by war and the bushmeat trade (DRC).
Hampi (India). General view.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/N
.B
ur
ke
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=9) 🆗
### Legendary Camagüey
9
As my friend, the Cuban poet 
Roberto Méndez, a native of 
Camagüey, tells it, the indigenous 
chief Camagüebax welcomed the 
Spaniards with open arms when 
they arrived in 1514 in what they 
would call Villa Santa María del 
Puerto Príncipe. The chief gave 
them a ribbon of land stretched be-
tween the Tinima and Hatibonico 
rivers so they could settle. They, in 
exchange, murdered him and threw 
him off a mountaintop. Legend has 
it the land all around immediately 
turned red
That said, the capital of Cuba’s 
most extensive province, also 
called Camagüey, had to be re-
founded several times in diverse cir-
cumstances down through history. 
First the indigenous people rose up 
against the conquistadores, then 
pirates attacked and finally in 1616 
a dreadful fire reduced all the eccle-
siastical archives to ashes. Difficult, 
then, to piece together the history 
of the city, which, in the past, was 
characterized by narrow and sinu-
ous streets like a medieval town, in 
flagrant contrast to the rectangular 
shape of its main square today. 
Following the 1616 fire, the city’s 
first parish church, La Parroquial, 
was rebuilt. It was moved from its 
original site facing the city council 
to a side of Arms Square. From then 
on, urban geography adopted the 
church as its core and the square 
as its centre. It was around the lat-
ter, renamed Agramante Park, that 
the most important government 
buildings were erected.
The city with  
the earthenware jars
Residential buildings definitely take 
up the most space within the central 
historical heritage, which is proba-
bly the largest in Cuba. We must re-
member that in 1800, at the start of 
the 19th century, the Royal Justice 
Palace of Santo Domingo Island 
was transferred to Camagüey, when 
the former Spanish colony became 
French under the Treaty of Basel. 
As a result prominent families came 
to live in the city, giving impetus to 
majestic architecture with its own 
particularities, consisting mainly 
of what we call today neoclassical 
houses, which still bear the names 
of their owners in olden times. 
These large palaces, built in the 
second half of the 19th century, 
conform to the fashion of the era 
that favoured neoclassical style 
and had as antecedents the vast 
two-storey houses of the previous 
century. We can therefore affirm 
that, starting in 1850, architecture 
took on a new aesthetic. The most 
eloquent example is the Socarrás 
building, designed in 1862 by the 
Spanish architect Dionisio de la 
Iglesia, whose influence is evident 
on all subsequent buildings. Every-
where we find the rhetorical alterna-
tion of pilasters and bay windows 
as well as balconies defined by 
wrought-iron balustrades. 
Legendary Camagüey 
One of the emblematic sites of Camagüey (Cuba).
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/P
re
ns
a 
la
tin
a
             With its red tiles, neoclassical façades with their louver-boards and pilasters,
                      windows and carved screens, the city of camagüey,  
                           the birthplace of cuba’s national poet Nicolás Guillén, offers its visitors 
                                  a haughty and legendary beauty.
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=10) 🆗
### Non-article text
10
Daily life in Camagüey.
©
 A
hr
on
 d
e 
Le
eu
wIn 1841, Camagüey comprised 

### Legendary Camagüey
125 streets composed of 1033 
blocks of houses, and already 
standing since the 18th century 
were buildings like the convent 
and hospital of San Juan de Dios, 
the churches of La Merced and La 
Soledad, the Jesuit college and the 
women’s hospital, all imposing con-
structions typical of the century’s 
architecture. 
But if there is one thing that gives 
personality to this city the Cubans 
call ‘Legendary’, it is the enormous 
earthenware jars, like those in An-
dalusia, placed on the patios of 
houses and in gardens and parks 
which fill with rainwater and are 
intended to keep epidemics from 
spreading. They started making 
them in 1620, at the same time as 
the bricks and tiles used in the con-
struction of all the city’s buildings. 
Camagüey is also scattered with 
an impressive number of churches, 
which earned it the nickname ‘city 
of temples’. All of them share the 
same feature, a single tower. The 
architectonic complex that includes 
the Iglesia de Nuestra Señora del 
Carmen, the Ursuline convent and 
the women’s hospital is the most 
typical example.
If the cart had not got 
stuck in the mud…
But the church that goes farthest 
back in time is the old Ermita de 
Nuestra Señora de la Soledad, 
haunted by a legend. The story 
goes that at the beginning of the 
17th century, a cart drawn by oxen 
came to a halt at the future site of the 
church, stuck in the mud. The load 
was removed to lighten the cart and a 
mysterious bundle fell to the ground, 
containing the image of Our Lady of 
La Soledad. Brother José de la Cruz 
Espí, known as Father Valencia, rec-
ognized this as a sign and had the 
church built, along with a number of 
other Christian houses of worship. 
It was in Camagüey, furthermore, 
that what is considered Cuba’s first 
literary work, El Espejo de Paciencia, 
the Mirror of Patience, materialized, 
written by the public writer from the 
Canary Islands Nicolás Guillén, the 
island’s national poet. 
In the general cemetery is pre-
served the epitaph that poet and 
barber Agustín de Moya is believed 
to have written in memory of his 
beloved and inaccessible Dolores 
Rondón. According to Méndez, 
Dolores, the illegitimate daughter 
of a Catalan merchant, chose out 
of self-interest to accept the ad-
vances of a Spanish officer instead 
of those of the love-struck Moya. In 
1863, the barber found her in the 
women’s hospital, disfigured and 
dying of the pox. Above the com-
mon grave where she was buried, 
an epitaph appeared on a piece of 
wood. Anonymous hands renewed 
the inscription as the years passed, 
until finally in the 19th century the 
mayor, Pedro García Argenot, de-
cided to build a tomb in the central 
part of the cemetery. 
The epitaph on it reads: 
Here Dolores Rondón came  
to the end of her path. 
Come, mortal, and consider, 
How great are pride and  
self-importance 
Opulence and power 
Everything withers in the end 
Because nothing is immortal 
Except the harm we keep  
ourselves from doing 
And the good we are able to do. 
Marilyn Bobes, 
Cuban poet 
(The UNESCO Courier, 2008, n°6)Pilasters and wrought-iron balustrades are part of Camagüey’s charm.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/P
re
ns
a 
la
tin
a
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=11) 🆗
### The Grand old lady and the plastic chairs
11
for a long time Corfu has been a 
favourite destination for all sorts of 
visitors. Cosmopolitan society of 
the 1960s, tourists in groups, poets 
and academics, Greeks from the 
farthest reaches of the country – all 
who wanted to come to visit this is-
land had good reason. It is true that 
a place such as this – inhabited, 
ruled or described by such person-
alities as Dionysos Solomos, Jean 
Capo of Istria or Lawrence Durrell 
– has an aura that goes beyond its 
natural beauty, although that cer-
tainly plays a role in its renown
Here, like everywhere, everyone 
forms, not to say draws, his or her 
own picture of the place. For me, 
I’ve kept the first, practically defini-
tive impression of Corfu I was filled 
with when I arrived, still a child, with 
my parents, on this island that my 
mother was from, and with which 
my father had fallen so in love he’d 
partially abandoned his ties to his 
own birthplace, Constantinople. 
The contrast between East and 
West gave me the feeling that I was 
coming from an indefinable place 
and arriving in a European city. A 
      On the border between East and West, the island of corfu is shaped like a handle, 
              thrusting from the Ionian Sea towards the Adriatic, not far from Italy. 
                    The little streets of corfu exude its Roman, Byzantine and venetian past. 
                             The Greek artist, Katerina Zacharopoulou, takes us on a tour.
sensation that the island I could 
perceive from the boat, as it slowly 
approached the port, was the des-
tination chosen by a fairy who sent 
me there so that I could discover 
secrets. I would later understand 
that this childish fantasy was in-
spired by two things: the roofs on 
the houses and the incredible, ro-
mantic landscape all around. With 
its city dwellers and the Italian style 
of their ways, its villagers who all 
had the appearance, at the time, of 
administrators for important land-
owners, with the atmosphere of the 
The grand old lady  
and the plastic chairs 
Nightfall in the town of Corfu (Greece).
 ©
 M
un
ic
ip
al
ité
 d
e 
C
or
fo
u
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=12) 🆗
### The Grand old lady and the plastic chairs
12
cafes, bars and night clubs con-
centrated on the sea shore. The 
real paradise is the city in October 
when you wander the little streets 
and you discover the bookshop 
‘O Plous’ (The Crossing), before 
a sudden shower pushes you into 
the Liston café. The real paradise 
is to be found in those fragrances 
whose origins you’re unsure of: a 
blend of air from sea and cypress, 
moistened earth and jasmine, from 
an old closed home and wet grass.
A cosmopolitan  
aristocrat
There are in the world many deeply 
moving towns teeming with archi-
tectural treasures, surrounded by 
breathtaking vistas, exotic beaches, 
etc. Corfu is not the only one. But 
at the same time Corfu is unique. 
It’s enough to go once at Easter 
time to understand that. Corfu is 
nightlife of the 1960s dominated by 
the personality of Aristotle Onassis, 
“the richest man in the world”, Cor-
fu was indeed opening to me like a 
book of fairy tales. 
Mainly there were the little streets 
that exuded history. History with 
European roots, with its lords and 
aristocrats, men of letters, painters 
and musicians, with its struggles 
for independence, its avant-gardes 
and precursors, its fortresses and 
palaces, local and foreign customs, 
its peasant houses and lordly resi-
dences portraying the diversity of 
humankind.
Self-discovery
Corfu is not a holiday island, at least 
for me. As Lawrence Durrell, who 
lived there, said: “Other countries 
may offer you discoveries in man-
ners or lore or landscape; Greece 
offers you something harder – the 
discovery of yourself?” Corfu is cer-
tainly Greece, but also a Mediterra-
nean bridge of the Orient towards 
the Occident. Besides self-discov-
ery, it awakens in people some-
thing profoundly human, a sort of 
melancholy, indefinable nostalgia, 
something heavy, like a definitive 
and hopeless love, like a romantic 
interior landscape. 
We each have our own paradise. 
And the island of mass tourism and 
a carefree life, turquoise sea and 
fancy hotels, the island in the travel 
agency brochures, is not one. Real 
paradise is the smile of the Corfiot 
woman wearing a white scarf on her 
head, sitting in the afternoon on the 
step of her house in Aghios Markos, 
and behaving as if she didn’t know 
that two steps from her peaceful vil-
lage in Ypsos, thousands of motor-
cycles are roaring, on the road to 
innumerable taverns, restaurants, 
Corfu seen from the old fort.
 ©
 M
un
ic
ip
al
ité
 d
e 
C
or
fo
u
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=13) 🆗
### The Grand old lady and the plastic chairs
13
simply spectacular on those days 
of mourning transformed into days 
of celebration. Musical groups mul-
tiply in the town, handsome young 
people, usually blond, play music, 
fireworks tossed from the Citadel 
complete the décor. 
The Corfiots are very proud of their 
island, and let’s be honest, they feel 
superior to Greeks from other re-
gions. So do Cretans, you say, and 
people from the Cyclades too, but 
for other reasons. That is a question 
that concerns History, far from what 
I’m talking about. What I mean here 
is that, for me, Corfiots, as heirs to 
a great civilization, are both ancient 
and modern. They are Greek, but 
also a little Italian. They care about 
their heritage, and at the same time 
they destroy it. Like everywhere in 
Greece, you say, but in Corfu the 
contrast sometimes takes on ex-
cessive proportions. Is it possible 
to make past, nature and globaliza-
tion coexist without damage? 
Corfu is a cosmopolitan aristocrat 
who suffers from plastic chairs. 
Fast-food doesn’t suit her any more 
than motorcycles and vulgar behav-
iour. She needs to be treated like a 
Grande Dame in the old days, with 
respect… But today, as we know, 
great ladies are having a hard time 
just about everywhere in the world,.
Katerina Zacharopoulou, 
Greek artist 
(The UNESCO Courier, 2007, n°6)
Is tourism a threat to the ‘old aristocrat’, the town of Corfu?
©
 E
ile
en
 M
cI
nt
yr
e
Corfu: Mediterranean stepping-stone 
between East and West 
I
n the Ionian Islands, Corfu lies farthest to the north, close to the Albanian coast but also the closest point in Greece to Italy. Because 
of its strategic position on the border of East and West, the small and scenic island has been caught up in the Mediterranean’s 
battles and conquests throughout history. A Corinthian colony from about 734 BC, it fell successively into the hands of the Romans, 
Byzantines, Venetians, French and British. For four centuries, however, its fortifications were used to defend the maritime trading 
interests of the Republic of Venice against the Ottoman Empire. 
Corfu has been a part of modern Greece since 1864, yet it still treasures remnants of foreign influence in its chequered past, all 
the way down from antiquity. The splendid Venetian citadel, today the setting for concerts and other cultural events, testifies to the 
tumultuous sieges Corfu endured. Both the Old Citadel and 
New Fort, outstanding medieval military monuments built by 
Venice’s best architects and engineers and restructured by 
the British, have been selected for the World Heritage List. 
Between the two fortresses midway along the island’s 
eastern coastline, lies Corfu’s Old Town. With its labyrinth 
of quaint little streets crammed within the fortifications, it too 
is now part of the World Heritage site. Marked by its Italian-
style architecture, it also boasts Eastern Orthodox churches 
(one containing the mummified remains of patron Saint 
Spiridion), while its vast main esplanade incorporates a very 
British cricket field. In structure and form, as well as in its life-
style, arts and letters, Corfu represents a unique entity, having 
absorbed by osmosis both Eastern and Western character-
istics. This ensemble has been preserved alive and substan-
tially intact until today, and World Heritage recognition will 
help keep up that momentum.
©
 M
un
ic
ip
al
ité
 d
e 
C
or
fo
u
The Old Fort by the Harbour.
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=14) 🆗
### Visiting submerged treasures
14
      underwater museums and parks, replicas and digital reconstructions 
          of wrecks are all ways to encourage the public to discover our underwater 
              cultural heritage without damaging it. Some cost more than others, 
                but they may also be more magical. Take the museum in the Bay of Alexandria, for example.
Stonehenge, Chartres cathedral, 
the pyramids of Egypt, are all evi-
dence of the power of human cre-
ativity. They need to be protected 
and preserved, but not locked away, 
so that everyone can marvel at their 
heritage. 
This is not a great problem on land. 
But how can the public discover the 
ruins of the Alexandria lighthouse, 
or Cleopatra’s palace, the wrecks 
of Greek and Roman ships, or the 
sphinxes and other statues found 
beneath the waters of the Bay of 
Alexandria? 
This is one of the purposes of un-
derwater archaeology, a discipline 
that requires good diving skills and 
expensive equipment. But it takes a 
great number of dives and sophis-
ticated technology - and therefore 
a lot of money - to bring treasures 
to the surface, or to decide to leave 
them where they are and preserve 
them. 
After all, if these wooden wrecks 
have survived for centuries, it is pre-
cisely because the darkness and 
lack of oxygen in deep water have 
allowed their preservation. Once 
exposed to the air, the saturated 
remains have to be treated to stop 
them deteriorating. “Conservation 
takes a lot of work, over many years, 
and is very expensive,” says Florian 
Huber, underwater archaeologist at 
the University of Kiel (Germany). 
Irena Radić-Rossi, one of his Croa-
tian colleagues, is a specialist in 
Roman shipwrecks carrying large 
cargoes of amphorae. “When you 
raise that number of objects,” she 
explains, “you run into all sorts of 
problems, like storage, conser-
vation, treatment and exhibition 
space.” And, on some sites, the 
amphorae have melded with the 
seabed. “Any attempt to free them 
could easily end up by destroying 
some of the finds.” 
The easiest solution, concludes 
Huber, is to leave the sunken ob-
ject where it is. This is what the 
Convention on the Protection of 
Visiting 
submerged treasures
Greek bronze representing a young athlete, Vele Island (Croatia).
©
 D
.F
rk
a/
C
ou
rt
es
y 
of
 th
e 
M
in
is
tr
y 
of
 C
ul
tu
re
, C
ro
at
ia
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=15) 🆗
### Non-article text
15
Plans for an underwater museum in the Bay of Alexandria, by French architect Jacques Rougerie.
©
 J
ac
qu
es
 R
ou
ge
rie
 C
re
at
io
n

### Visiting submerged treasures
the Underwater Cultural Heritage, 
adopted in 2001 by the UNESCO 
General Conference, recommends. 
But how can these submerged 
treasures then be made accessible 
to the public?
Underwater museums
The ideal solution would be to build 
an underwater museum that could 
be visited without even getting 
one’s feet wet. No need, then, to be 
able to dive to admire the exhibits 
in situ. But building such a museum 
is itself a highly complex and costly 
technological feat. The question is, 
how complex and, above all, how 
expensive? 
“Finding answers to these ques-
tions was one of the aims of a feasi-
bility study for an underwater muse-
um in the Bay of Alexandria,” explains 
Ulrike Koschtial, of UNESCO’s 
Division of Cultural Objects and In-
tangible Heritage. Launched by the 
Egyptian authorities with support 
from UNESCO, the pilot project is 
under the direction of French archi-
tect, Jacques Rougerie. Not lacking 
imagination, he envisages a mu-
seum complex in two major parts. 
Not far from the new library of Al-
exandria visitors will enter the first 
part, above ground, with its glass 
walls. They will then go deep under-
ground via a tunnel until they reach 
a 40-metre diameter underwater 
terrace, in the centre of the Bay. 
There, seven metres down, behind 
glass windows, they will be able to 
admire the many finds dating back 
to ancient Alexandria. The museum 
would boast a total surface area of 
22,000 square metres and receive 
some three million visitors a year. 
Apart from its probably prohibitive 
cost, this captivating project would 
have to overcome other obstacles, 
like the Bay’s pollution. Before visi-
tors can appreciate the treasures in 
their underwater setting, a way has 
to be found to purify the seawater 
and keep it clear, while not hamper-
ing the operation of the port. An-
other challenge is that Egypt is in 
a seismically active area, with the 
Red Sea lying on a fault line be-
tween the Arabian and African tec-
tonic plates. 
Another underwater museum is 
already being built. At Baiheliang 
(China), there is a 1600 metre-long 
ridge, on which changes in the level 
of the Yangtze River have been re-
corded for 1200 years. Until now, 
the ‘White Heron Ridge’, as it is 
called, has only partially been sub-
merged by the river. But, when the 
Three Gorges dam is completed, it 
will be completely under water. So, 
in the 1990s, the Chinese authori-
ties decided to preserve the Baihe-
liang inscriptions by making them 
part of an underwater museum. This 
should have been finished in 2007, 
but is taking longer than planned.
Other solutions
While waiting for these under- 
water museums to open, the public 
can enjoy ‘underwater parks’. But 
for this, the visitor needs to be able 
to dive. Sarah Arenson, a historian 
from the University of Haifa, is be-
hind one such project in Caesarea, 
the ancient port city on the Mediter-
ranean coast of Israel, constructed 
by King Herod to honour the Em-
peror, Augustus Caesar, in 10 B.C. 
Some of the problems that still have 
to be solved in Alexandria are fami- 
liar to her. “In the case of Caesarea, 
there was no option of recovery,” 
she explains, “as the site is mainly 
composed of architectural remains.” 
But, she adds, “the prospects of 
damage to the site are slight. The 
biggest danger comes from use of 
the area by fishermen and pleasure 
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=16) 🆗
### Visiting submerged treasures
16
An underwater museum  
in the Bay of Alexandria  
“It will be a revolutionary museum because for the first time we’ll be able 
to visit an underwater museum without getting our feet wet! 
A feasibility study on the subject is in preparation and a technical 
management committee led jointly by UNESCO and Egypt will proceed 
with its evaluation and recommend procedure. Egypt has assigned 
the study to Jacques Rougerie from France.” 
 Françoise Rivière, 
UNESCO Assistant Director-General for Culture
craft.” The only way to prevent this, 
she says, is through legislation, by 
prohibiting fishing and boating in 
the area. But, as for visibility, “the 
only answer is prayer,” she smiles. 
Meanwhile, pollution is minimized 
by periodical cleaning by volun-
teers, attracted by special events 
and competitions. 
For Daniel Zwick, of Deguwa, the 
German society for nautical archae-
ology, underwater parks are a good 
way to make underwater heritage 
accessible, while preserving it. 
“The routes followed by divers are 
usually designed to avoid exposed 
relics, which could be damaged by 
the movement of scuba fins, for ex-
ample.” 
Humans are still a threat, though. 
There are always a few black sheep 
masquerading as divers who come 
to pillage the sites. And, to enable 
the public to gain a better appre-
ciation of these sites, Florian Hu-
ber has set up a study group for 
maritime and limnic (freshwater) 
archaeology (AMLA), which offers 
regular courses for divers. “It is very 
difficult to protect shipwrecks,” he 
says. “The only way is to raise pub-
lic awareness.” Even so, fragile rel-
ics can also be damaged by deep 
sea fishing nets, storms and even 
the naval shipworm (Teredo nava-
lis), a tiny mollusc that bores into 
submerged wood. 
This is why other approaches 
are being used. One of the most 
impressive underwater trails, any-
where, takes visitors to the oldest 
known shipwreck, the Uluburun, 
which sank over 3000 years ago, 
off the south-west coast of Turkey. 
But, since 2006, divers have been 
unable to explore the original. The 
archaeological park they come to is, 
in fact, next to the original site, and 
exhibits an exact replica, named 
Uluburun III. 
“Uluburun III was built on dry 
land,” says underwater archaeolo-
gist Guzden Varinliogu, “with a fake 
cargo of gold and amphorae. It was 
then laid on the seabed following 
the archaeological layout of the 
original Uluburun wreck.” The origi-
nal is now in the museum for under-
water archaeology in Bodrum. 
Even less harmful to underwater 
treasures are virtual visits, where 
dives are simulated on a screen. 
This is the aim of the European Ve-
nus project, which digitally recon-
structs wrecks in three dimensions. 
Data from sonar scans of the site 
are combined with underwater pho-
tography to provide a realistic simu-
lation of the sunken object, with the 
same resolution used in the latest 
computer games. This is one way 
to allow everyone to see these un-
derwater relics. “It is perfectly clear 
that not everybody can reach such 
sites,” says Irena Radić-Rossi. “But 
you can always create virtual real-
ity spaces on nearby land and offer 
some of the emotion, pleasure and 
adventure of diving to people who 
can’t dive.” 
Jens Lubbadeh, 
journalist for 
Der Spiegel Online, Germany, 
correspondent for 
the UNESCO Courier 
(The UNESCO Courier, 2009, n°1)
©
 J
ac
qu
es
 R
ou
ge
rie
 C
re
at
io
n
Design for the interior of the future underwater museum in Egypt.
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=17) 🆗
### When world heritage sites and biosphere reserves merge
17
                                       Last May, fraser Island, Australian World Heritage site since 1992, 
                               became the core part of the new Great Sandy Biosphere Reserve. 
                Natural world heritage sites conserve ecosystems for which they have been inscribed, 
       while biosphere reserves also do restoration of degraded environments. 
How will environment and tourist management practices change for the world’s largest sand island?
Off the eastern coast of Australia, 
Fraser is the largest sand island 
in the world. It supports a com-
plex rainforest ecosystem, unique 
perched freshwater lakes and rare 
Australian flora and fauna. 
The island, which recently became 
the core part of the Great Sandy 
Biosphere Reserve, was inscribed 
on the UNESCO World Heritage 
List in 1992 and much of its land is 
protected by national park laws. “In 
some rare cases, core zones can 
be inhabited. In the case of Fraser 
Island, the villages are very small 
and only at the coast line,” explains 
UNESCO’s Ecological Sciences 
and Biodiversity Section chief, Dr 
Thomas Schaaf. 
How will Great Sandy’s joining 
UNESCO’s World Network of Bio-
sphere Reserves alter the manage-
ment practices already in place on 
Fraser Island for the environment 
and tourism? 
According to Schaaf, “Natural 
world heritage sites conserve natu-
ral ecosystems for which they have 
been inscribed, while biosphere 
reserves also do environmental res-
toration and rehabilitation activities 
of degraded environments. In fact, 
biosphere reserves are mainly con-
When World Heritage sites  
and Biosphere Reserves merge   
©
 F
ra
se
r C
oa
st
 S
ou
th
 B
ur
ne
tt 
To
ur
is
m
Fraser Island, Australia, is the largest sand island in the world.
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=18) 🆗
### When world heritage sites and biosphere reserves merge
18
cerned with managing change in 
ecosystems linked to human activ-
ity in order to promote sustainable 
development.” 
Management of natural World 
Heritage sites also takes sustain-
able development into account, 
particularly for tourism. According 
to Kishore Rao, Word Heritage 
Centre Deputy Director, “The most 
important factor and management 
challenge is to ensure that such 
use is compatible with and has no 
negative impact on the ‘outstand-
ing universal values’ for which the 
sites were inscribed on the World 
Heritage List.” 
This is not the first time a World 
Heritage site has also become or 
been incorporated into a Biosphere 
Reserve. “As is the case with 
Serengeti National Park in Tanza-
nia – named a World Heritage site 
and a Biosphere Reserve in 1981 – 
the two can go together. The mag-
nificent wildlife array is outstanding, 
but the Serengeti is also a typical 
savanna ecosystem in Eastern 
Africa,” he said.
Changing lifestyles
Russel Burnett, chairman of the Bur-
nett Mary Regional Group (BMRG) 
that presented Great Sandy’s ap-
plication to UNESCO, said that 
one of his organization’s main goals 
in having the area designated a bio-
sphere reserve was to establish its 
importance to the integrity of a world 
heritage site, thus contributing to its 
conservation. “It is not well known 
that many of Fraser Island’s attrac-
tions can actually be seen without 
the need to drive bumpy four-wheel 
drive tracks or catch a boat,” said 
Stewart. “There is a great poten-
tial to develop eco-tourism on the 
mainland.” 
©
 F
ra
se
r C
oa
st
 S
ou
th
 B
ur
ne
tt 
To
ur
is
m
To get to Fraser Island you have to take a boat and then hire a 4x4.
Fraser supports rare Australian flora and fauna.
©
 F
ra
se
r C
oa
st
 S
ou
th
 B
ur
ne
tt 
To
ur
is
m
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=19) 🆗
### When world heritage sites and biosphere reserves merge
19
World Heritage Sites and Biosphere Reserves  
— 85 sites in common
Fraser Island, a World Heritage Site, is the core part of the Great Sandy Biosphere Reserve.
©
 F
ra
se
r C
oa
st
 S
ou
th
 B
ur
ne
tt 
To
ur
is
m

### World heritage sites and biosphere reserves: 85 sites in common
World Heritage sites and bio-
sphere reserves share a num-
ber of common challenges – 
such as climate change and the 
worldwide loss and degradation of ser-
vices provided by ecosystems, notably 
those related to preserving biodiversity. 
To respond to these common challeng-
es, strategic coordination of activities 
of the Man and the Biosphere (MAB) 
Programme and the World Heritage 
Convention is needed for better man-
agement of some 85 sites that are both 
biosphere reserves and World Heritage 
sites. This process must combine the 
different mechanisms and approaches 
 offered by the two instruments, and use 
them as complementary tools for the 
benefit of both the environment and lo-
cal populations.
The main differences between biosphere 
reserves and World Heritage sites (in-
cluding natural, cultural or mixed sites 
and cultural landscapes) are their objec-
tives, legal status and management prin-
ciples. During the first years of biosphere 
reserve designations, the traditional con-
ception of national parks weighed heav-
ily. In a majority of cases, therefore, these 
old designations (from the 1970s and 
early 1980s) involve sites that do not re-
ally fulfil the three functions of biosphere 
reserves (the conservation, development 
and logistic functions including research, 
and monitoring and education) nor have 
the proper zonation scheme (i.e. core, 
buffer and transition areas) or coopera-
tive management structures. In these 
cases, biosphere reserves coincide with 
the respective natural World Heritage 
sites (such as Dja in Cameroon, Yellow-
stone in the United States and Macqua-
rie Island in Australia). 
However, in the majority of sites with 
twin designations, and particularly since 
1995, the World Heritage site repre-
sents the core area or a part of the core 
area of the respective biosphere reserve. 
An example is the Pantanal Biosphere 
Reserve in Brazil. Indeed, the Pantanal 
Conservation Complex, a natural World 
Heritage site, represents one of the 15 
core areas of the biosphere reserve. But 
biosphere reserves can include not only 
natural heritage sites, but also cultural 
heritage sites. Like the Pays de Fon-
tainebleau Biosphere Reserve in France 
and Tonle Sap in Cambodia. As for El 
Vizcaino Biosphere Reserve in Mexico, 
two sites – one natural and one cul-
tural – are part of the same biosphere 
reserve. 
Ana Persić 
Division of Ecological 
and Earth Sciences (UNESCO)
Excerpts from the article “World Heritage Sites and 
Biosphere Reserves - Building on complementarities”, 
World Heritage Review, n° 49 – April 2008
Although the Great Sandy region 
already plays host to 950,000 sea-
sonal visitors per year – compared 
with less than 200,000 permanent 
residents – the BMRG chairman 
was less concerned with the im-
pacts of increased tourist numbers 
to the area than the vast number of 
people moving to the region to live. 
“The ‘seachange’ phenomenon, 
whereby people are moving to 
coastal areas of Australia, is caus-
ing very rapid growth in population 
in the Great Sandy Region, with 
significant urban development,” he 
said. “The loss of natural areas of 
conservation, development of good 
agricultural land and increased hu-
man impacts on popular recreation-
al areas are all potential threats to 
the region’s environment.” Manag-
ing Great Sandy as a biosphere will 
help to plan this development in a 
more sustainable way, he believes. 
“In fact, we call Biosphere Re-
serves learning sites for sustain-
able development”, said Dr Schaaf. 
“In addition, Biosphere Reserves 
are also scientific research sites 
to study the structure, functioning 
and dynamics of ecosystems, and 
the interactions between people 
and the environment — of interest to 
both natural and social scientists.” 
Letea Cavander, 
Australian journalist 
(The UNESCO Courier, 2009, n°6)
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=20) 🆗
### The Personal eye of a familiar stranger
20
S
        “This is not a photo of a merry-go-round, but of its reflection,” 
            explains Shigeru Asano, a Japanese photographer fascinated by the light and shadows 
                 of Paris. He has been walking the streets of the city for 30 years. 
                     Nearly 10,000 kilometres from his native Osaka, he feels at home in the french capital, 
                  where he finds an atmosphere of melancholy more to his taste than “Tokyo’s dazzle”.
“People sometimes come up to 
me and ask if I am feeling all right,” 
he says. “They are concerned when 
they see someone crouching in the 
rain under an umbrella, trying to stay 
dry. They don’t see that this man is 
trying to set up his camera on a 
tripod, aiming his lens a couple of 
centimetres from the ground. They 
can’t imagine that he has spent 
months, even years, visualizing the 
photo he is about to take; or that he 
might use up thirty films before he 
gets the photo he has seen in his 
mind’s eye.” 
The personal eye  
of a familiar stranger  
higeru Asano’s photographs, like 
shimmering skylights, only give a 
partial glimpse of reality - no more 
than a tiny puddle of water on a 
pavement can hold. Shigeru Asano 
is not the only photographer to be 
fascinated by reflection, but he is 
surely one of the very few to have 
used it as an aesthetic principle. 
These reflections stay surprisingly 
sharp, even when the wind whips 
up a strip of blur, or water forms a 
frame of shadow. In any case, the 
reflection is the only perceptible re-
ality in his images. 
This gives an idea of how impor-
tant time is in Shigeru Asano’s 
approach as an artist. He avoids 
digital technology because he is 
not interested in the instantaneous. 
“With film, you have to wait … and 
then the moment of truth comes 
– success or failure? Sometimes, 
when the film is developing, no im-
age appears. Everything is black. 
So, I have to start again. It is like a 
perpetual struggle with the image. 
It is very motivating.” In eight years, 
since he started his “puddles” proj-
ect, Shigeru Asano has made only 
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=21) 🆗
### The Personal eye of a familiar stranger
21
60 photos he is satisfied with.
At the opposite end of the spec-
trum to his compatriot Nobuyoshi 
Araki, Shigeru Asano creates a par-
allel universe, woven with illusions 
and dreams. He counters violence 
with lyricism; uproar with silence; 
the crowd with solitude. His Paris 
is almost empty of people. “No it 
isn’t,” he protests. “Look, there’s a 
man.” And, it’s true, a few rare sil-
houettes do cross the black and 
white scenes that Shigeru Asano 
composes on the Pentax 6x7 that 
accompanies him everywhere. But 
they are always alone. “For me, 
these photos are like a mirror”, he 
finally admits. 
And the photographer tells of his 
solitude. He lost his mother at the 
age of fourteen. He never knew his 
father. He has no brothers or sis-
ters, and no children of his own. “At 
least, not for the moment,” he adds. 
In 1971 he moved to Tokyo to study 
design. Five years later he came to 
Paris on a short trip and returned 
in 1979 to live. In his first ten years, 
he turned his hand to everything – 
painter, mechanic, waiter – before 
discovering a Minolta and throwing 
himself into photography. He spent 
the next ten years searching, taking 
hundreds of photos in flamboyant 
colour, some for fashion magazines. 
“Then, one evening, when I was feel-
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=22) 🆗
### The Personal eye of a familiar stranger
22
ing low, because the woman I loved 
had left me – which happens to ev-
eryone doesn’t it? – I went out for 
a walk in the rain. My tears, mixed 
with the rain, misted my eyes, and I 
started to see images that were to 
become the photos you see today. I 
found my path.”
Curious coincidences with the 
Stranger we encounter in Paris 
Spleen by the French poet, Charles 
Baudelaire: 
“Tell me, enigmatical man, 
whom do you love best, 
your father, your mother, 
your sister, or your brother? 
I have neither father, nor mother, 
nor sister, nor brother [...] 
Then what do you love, 
extraordinary stranger? 
I love the clouds... 
the clouds that pass... 
up there... up there... 
the wonderful clouds!” 
Jasmina Šopova 
(The UNESCO Courier, 2009, n°5)
As part of the UNESCO World Cultural Diversity Festival, in May this year, Shigeru Asano exhibited his work at the Town Hall  
in the first arrondissement of Paris. He has allowed us to reproduce a selection here (© Shigeru Asano).
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009
## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=23) 🆗
### Non-article text
CONTACT
 
 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights  
Director  
Editor in Chief  
Editorial assistance  
EDITORS 
Arabic  
 
Chinese  
 
English  
Portuguese 
 
Russian  
Photo  
PDF Layout  
Web Platform  
 
 
 
 
 
 
## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185815eng.pdf#page=24) 🆗
### Non-article text