# [124785](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

Dialogue^mong civilizations
g « »  in the Courier
Last m onthly 
issue > p. 3
Canada: $4-65 Can, United Kingdom: £2.5, USA: S4.25

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

I N T H I S  I S S U E  
3 1948-2001
“To serve as a window opening 
on the world through which 
the readers can look out to wide 
global horizons.”
This has been the goal of 
The U n e s c o  Courier since its 
creation in 1948. To open to 
the Other, to all others in order 
to discover and understand both 
the universal and unique 
dimensions of their identities.
This is essential if we are to build 
peace based upon the “intellectual 
and moral solidarity” highlighted in 
U n e s c o ’s Constitution. Our greatest 
chance of achieving this lies not just 
with governments but mainly in 
the hands of the world’s peoples, 
the billions of individuals living 
around the globe.
This has been the goal of all 
those who have worked to write, 
translate and distribute 
the 32 editions of the Courier as 
well as that of its readers 
everywhere. To mark the end of 
the Courier as it has appeared 
for decades, it is logical to present 
an anthology of the great names 
and events in the inter-cultural 
dialogue that has always been 
the cornerstone of the magazine. 
This final issue also represents 
a fitting end to 2001, proclaimed 
the United Nations year of 
“Dialogue among Civilizations.”
The intellectuals and artists 
presented in this issue came from 
all the world’s regions and a wide 
range of disciplines. They were 
pioneers, who foresaw the major 
issues arising at the end of the 20th 
century in their respective fields.
Yet despite the diversity of their 
expertise, they shared the same 
conviction: only a global dialogue, 
democratically undertaken by 
actors with equal rights and 
responsibilities, could respond 
to the universal desire for peace, 
dignity and happiness.
The U n e s c o  Courier hopes 
that all of its readers, co-editors 
and partners will continue to strive 
towards this goal.
Signed articles express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the 
editors of the Unesco Courier. Photo captions and headlines are 
written by the Unesco Courier staff. The boundaries on maps do 
not imply official endorsement or acceptance by Unesco or the 
United Nations of the countries and territories concerned.
C O N T E N T S  
DECEMBER 2 0 0 1
I  ETHICS
4 The greatest enemies to liberty (October 1958) 
6 Race, history and culture (March 1996)
10 Interview with Vaclav Havel (june 1990)
16 “I was born 1,000 years ago” (January i975)
17 A ‘silent genocide’ (May 1988)
CULTURE
19 Beethoven tames the jungle (June 1973)
Aldous Huxley 
Claude Lévi-Strauss
Dan George 
Abdus Salam
Dmitri Shostakovich
22 “The action of a man who snatches something from death 
(May i960)
26 Where gods and men have mingled (September 1977)
28 The universal and the particular (December 1993)
31 World’s largest Buddhist statue (June 1956)
32 “Culture must be one of the foundations for world 
understanding” (December 1951)
André Malraux 
Jorge Amado 
Joseph Ki-Zerbo
_ Albert Einstein 
I  SCIENCE
33 The divorce of science and ‘culture’ (February 1958) Bertrand Russell
34 The Pugwash movement (August 1986) Joseph Rotblat 
36 Interview with Vandana Shiva (March 1992)
40 Towards a world conservation ethics (May 2000) m . s. Swaminathan
I  WORLD OF LEARNING
41 Can we educate for world peace? (October 1985) ArchibaldMacLeish
42 The birth of a dialogue between Africa and Europe (September i960)
I  MEDIA
45 Towards a ‘new world order of information’ (April 1977) Ridha Najar
48 The electronic gap (February 2000) Paul Kennedy
I  PHOTO
49 Peace in everyday life (February and April 1998)
Copyrights: Cover: Rotner/U n ic e f ,  New York; page u :  Gilles Bassignac ©  Gamma, Paris; pages 12-13: Claude 
Gaspari ©  FDAC, Conseil Général du Val-de-Marne, 1988; page 14: ©  Gabina Farova/Vu, Paris; page 15.- ©  
Amnesty International, Paris; page 28: ©  Kinkas, Paris; pages 28-29: ©  Philippe Maillard/institut du Monde 
Arabe, Paris; page 30: ©  Claude Postel/Jean Pigozzi Collection; pages 36, 37 : DR; page 39 : ©  Lam Kim, 
Paris.
Correction: The photo o f the installation by Georges Adeagbo published on page 43 o f  the October 2001 
issue o/The Unesco Courier should have been accredited to: ©  Jean-Michel Rousset, Kano, Nigeria.

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### 124813: To be heard and listened to

___________E D I T O R I A L I
To be heard 
and listened to
m  ^  £ 1 I l Ht t  
54th year
Published monthly in 28 languages and in Braille 
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
íu'lt'ural Organization.
31, rue François Bonvin, 75732 Paris Cedex 15 France
e-mail: unesçp.çourier@unesco.org ■ 
lntemet:jhtt’p ://www.unesco.org/courier
DirectorrRfenéLefort 
Secretary, Director’s Office/Braille editions:
Annie Brachet (Tel: (33) (0) 1.45:6847.15)
Editorial staff (Paris)
Editor in Chief: Janfes Burnet 
English edition: CynthiaíGuttmán 
Spanish edition: Louise Cbrradini t  
French edition: Sophie Boukhari •;
Michel Bessiêfés,
IváñÍBriSGo'er ,
1 ‘ Philippe Demenet 
Lucía iglesias Kuntz 
AsbélLópez 
Amy Otchet 
Shiraz Sidhva
Translation 
Miguel Labarca
Art and production unit: Gérard Prosper, 
Photoengraving: Annick Coueffé 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey (tel: (33) (0) 1.45.68.46.90) 
Documentation: José Banaag (Tel: (33). (0) 1.45.68.46.85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press:
Solange Belin (Tel: 33 (o)'i. 45.68.46.87)
Editorial Committee 
Réné Lefort (moderator), jéróme Bindé, Milagros del Corral,
Aleino Da Costa, Babacar Fall, Sue Williams
Non-headquarters editions 
German: Urs Aregger (Berne)
Arabic: Fawzi Abdel Zaher(Cairp)
Itajfen: Giovanni Puglisi, Gianluca Formi.chf (Florence)
'. ;Flind¡: Pushplata Taneja (Delhi) '
If Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras)
Pèrsiarn: j alil S'hàHii (Teheran): ■;
Portuguese: Alzira Alves.de Abreu (Rio de Janeiro)
Urdu: Mirza Muhammad Mushir (Islamabad)
Catalan: Jordi'Folch (Barcelona)
Malay: Sidiñ Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur)
Swahili :LèonardJ. Shuma-(Dar-es-Salaam)
Slovene: Aleksandra Kornhauser (Ljubljana)
Chinese: Fe n gM i ngxi a(Beijing)
Bulgarian: Luba Raojèvâ (Sofia)
Grèek: Ñiçolas Papageorgiou (Athens)
Sinhala: Lai Perera (Colombo)
Basque: juxto Egaña (Donostià);
Thai: Suchitra Chitrafiukra4H!(Bangkok)
Vietnamese: Ho Tien Nghi (Hanoi)
Bengali: Kafil uddin Ahmad (Dhaka)
Ukrainian: VolodymyrVasiliuk;(Kiey)..
Galician: XabierSenín Fernández 
(Santiago de Compostela)
Serbian: (Belgrade)
Sardinian: Diego Córrame (Nu§ro)\
Russian^aleri Kharkin (Moscow)
Circulation and promotion 
Fax: ^p!(tì)'4f'45:68.57.45
Subscriptions and customer service 
Michel Ravassard (Tel: (33) (9) 1.45.68.45.91)
Sales and subscription agents 
Mohamed Salah El Din (Tel: (33) (0) 14 5 68 4919)
Stock management and shipping 
Pham Van Dung (Tel: (33)' (0) 1.45.68.45.94)
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted pro­
viding the credit line reads “Reprinted from the Unesco Courier”, plus date 
of issue, and three voucher copies are sent to  the editor. Signed articles 
reprinted must bear author’s name. Non-copyright photos will be supplied 
on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accom­
panied by an international reply cpupon covermg postage. The Unesco 
Courier is produced in microform (microfilm and/or microfiche) by:
(1) Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris; (2) University Microfilms 
(Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100 U.S.A.; (3) N.C.R. Microcard Edition, 
Indian Head Inc.,111 West 40th Street, New York, U.S.A.; (4) Bell and 
Howell Co., Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A.
IMPRIMÉ EN FRANCE 
DÉPÔT LÉGAL: Cl - DECEMBER 2001 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - 
Diffusé.par les N.M.P.P.
The Unesco Courier (USPS 016686) is published monthly 
in Paris by Unesco. Printed in-France:
Periodicals postage paid at Champlain NY and.additional mailing offices. 
•PhotOGompositionjanfl photoengraving:'
The Unèsco Courier.
Maulde & Renou 
ISSILO,044:5278 No.ftò-2poi-OPIfo'0|5§Ì2'A-
W orld events over the 
past few months 
have shown us that 
the efforts of those 
international organizations 
working for peace and dialogue 
between cultures are more 
important than ever.
From this perspective, the 
pertinence of U n esc o ’s pro-* 
grammes and the Organization’s 
defence of such values as edu­
cation for all, cultural diversity, 
press freedom or the eradica­
tion of poverty, is striking.
However, in the public eye, 
U nesco  is largely invisible and 
has been for a long time. This is 
not a question of vanity. On the 
contrary, a poor public image is 
a real handicap: U nesco has lit­
tle weight in the media and, by 
extension, in public debate. 
This is particularly worrying at a 
time when the world is crying 
out for some ethical signposts.
U nesco has chosen to face 
up to the problem by radically 
changing its information poli­
cies. In short, we have to reach 
out to all citizens, not just those 
committed to U nesco ’s cause. 
After all, the Organization’s con­
cerns and activities touch 
everybody’s lives in some way 
or another: the debate over 
human cloning, for example, or 
access to clean water, the digi­
tal divide, education, protection 
of our cultural and natural her­
itage, are of concern to us all, 
wherever we may live. It is 
U nesco ’s duty to fuel debate on 
these and other issues that fall 
under its mandate by providing
key data and analyses and by 
promoting the univeral values 
that the Organization stands 
for.
No organization today can 
fulfil such a goal without the 
support of the media: the news­
papers, magazines, radio and 
television programmes as well 
as the internet, which people 
read, listen to, watch and con­
sult daily.
To do this, U n e sco  must 
redeploy its staff members 
and redistribute its financial 
resources. It has therefore been 
decided to suspend publication 
of The U nesco  Courier—which 
had a larger budget than that of 
the World Heritage Center or 
the International Bureau of 
Education —in its current form 
at the end of the year. It will be 
replaced initially by a new 
Courier, which will come out 
twice a year (May and October) 
in the six official languages of 
the United Nations and distrib­
uted free of charge.
This marks a painful and 
inevitably controversial deci­
sion. Yet it should not be inter­
preted as the end of a long and 
often outstanding adventure. 
U nesco , with its new leadership 
firmly in place, is determined to 
be heard and listened to in a 
bid to become an indispens­
able reference in democratic 
debate.
MICHEL BARTON 
Director of
the Bureau of Public Information
December2ooi-TheUNEScoCoiirier 3

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

I E T  H I C S
O  C  T  O  B  IË Ü R  a  S> 5  S
©  Festsp.îelleitung, Bayreuth
by Aldous Huxley
ln 1947 w h ile  the U . N . Com m ission on H um an Rights w as w orking out an in ternational bill o f rights, 
U n es c o  carried out a broad enquiry into th e  philosophic bases of th e  rights w hich could be inclu­
ded in such a declaration . It consulted leading philosophers and w riters of m any countries and 
obtained th e ir personal v iew s on the question . Th is  sym posium  served as the basis for th e  final 
conclusions which Un e s c o  drew  and w hich were forwarded to  the U . N . H um an R ights C om ­
mission to  help to  c la rify  its discussions and to  help explore th e  ground fo r constructive agree­
m ent. Later th e  m ost significant te x ts  o f th is  sym posium  w ere edited by U n e s c o  and published  
under th e  t it le  Human Rights : Comments and Interpretations (P ub lisher, A llan  W in g a te , London, 
1949). On the occasion of th e  10th anniversary o f the adoption o f the Universal D eclaration of 
H um an R ights, T he  U n es c o  C o u r ie r  reproduces below  A ldous H ux ley 's  contribution. Though  
it  was w ritten ten  years ago it is just as tim e ly  and provocative to day  as it was th en .
T he increasing pressure of population upon resources 
and the waging, threat of, and unremitting preparation 
for total war—these are, at the present time, the most 
formidable enemies to liberty.
About three-quarters of the 2.2 billion inhabitants of our 
planet do not have enough to eat. By the end of the present 
century world population will have increased (if we manage 
to avoid catastrophe in the interval) to about 3.3 thousand 
millions (1). Meanwhile, over vast areas of the earth’s 
surface, soil erosion is rapidly diminishing the fertility of 
mankind’s four billion acres of productive land. Moreover, 
in those countries where industrialism is most highly developed, 
mineral resources are running low, or have been completely 
exhausted—and this at a time when a rising population 
demands an ever increasing quantity of consumer goods and 
when improved technology is in a  position to supply that 
demand.
Heavy pressure of population upon resources threatens 
liberty in several ways. Individuals have to work harder and 
longer to earn a poorer living. At the same time the economic 
situation, of the community as a whole is so precarious that 
small mishaps, such as untoward weather conditions, may 
result in serious breakdowns. There can be little or no
(1) A c c o r d i n g  t o  t h e  l a t e s t  p o p u l a t i o n  s t a t i s t i c s  p u b l i s h e d  
b y  t h e  U n i t e d  N a t i o n s  t h e  w o r l d ' s  p o p u l a t i o n  i s  n o w  i n c r e a s i n g  
a t  t h e  r a t e  o f  5,400 i n d i v i d u a l s  p e r  h o u r  (47,000,000 e a c h  y e a r ) .  
A t  t h i s  r a t e  t h e  p r e s e n t  t o t a l  o f  2,737,000,000 w i l l  'b e  d o u b l e d  b y  
t h e  e n d  o f  t h e  c e n t u r y .— E d i t o r
personal liberty in the midst of social chaos; and where 
social chaos is reduced to order by the intervention of a 
powerful contralized executive, there is a  grave risk of 
totalitarianism. Because of the mounting pressure of popula­
tion upon resources, the twentieth century has become the 
golden age of centralized government and dictatorship, and 
has witnessed the wholesale revival of slavery, which has 
been imposed upon political heretics, conquered populations 
and prisoners of war.
Throughout the nineteenth century the New World provided 
cheap food for the teeming masses of the Old World and 
free land for the victims of oppression. Today the New 
World holds a large and growing population, there is no free 
land and over the vast areas, the much abused soil is losing 
its fertility. The New World still produces a large exportable 
surplus. Whether, fifty years from now, it will still have 
a surplus, with which to feed the three billions inhabiting the 
Old World, seems doubtful.
By destroying accumulated wealth and the sources of future 
production, total war has sharply increased the pressure of 
existing populations upon their resources and has thereby 
sharply curtailed the liberties of vast numbers of men and 
women, belonging not only to the Vanquished nations, but 
also to those which were supposed to be victorious. At the 
same time the fear of, and busy preparation for, another 
total war in the near future is everywhere resulting in an 
ever greater concentration of political and economic power.
Bitter experience has proved that no individual or »group
Aldous Huxley (1894-1963) was the author of the famous novel Brave Mew World (1932). His brother,
t t  The U n e s c o  Courier - December 2001


### 124765: The Greatest enemies to liberty

THE GREATEST ENEMIES 
TÒ LIBERTY I

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### 124765: The Greatest enemies to liberty

E T  H I C S )
O C T O B E R  a s >58
of individuals is fit to be entrusted with great powers for 
long periods of time. The socialist rulers of welfare states 
may imagine that they and their successors will be immune 
to the corrupting influence of the enormous powers which 
total war and mounting population pressure', have forced 
upon them; but there is, unfortunately, no reason to suppose 
that they will prove: to be exceptions to the general rule, 
th e  abuse of power can be avoided only by limiting the 
amount and duration of the authority entrusted to any person, 
group or class.
But so long as we are menaced by total war and mounting 
population pressures, it seems very unlikely that we shall get 
anything but a steadily increasing concentration of power in 
the hands of the ruling political bosses and their bureaucratic 
managers. Meanwhile conscription, or military servitude, is 
almost everywhere imposed upon the masses. This means 
in practice that, at any moment, a man may be deprived of his 
constitutional liberties and subjected to martial law. Recent 
history has shown that even socialist rulers are ready to resort 
to this device for coercing persons engaged in inconvenient 
strikes.
It is virtually certain that, at the present time, no govern­
ment actually desires war. But it is also probable that many 
governments would be reluctant' to give up all preparations 
for war; for such preparations justify them in maintaining 
conscription as an instrument of control and coercion. And 
we may add that universal disarmament, if it should ever 
be achieved, would not necessarily mean the end of con­
scription. Compulsory service to the States will probably 
persist in some other than military form—as a scheme for 
the “training of youth,” for example, or as a “labour draft.”
A constitutional bill of rights, whose principles are applied 
in specific legislation, can certainly do'som ething to protect 
the masses of ordinary, unprivileged mien and women against 
the few who, through wealth or hierarchical position, effec­
tively wield power over the majority. But prevention is 
always better than cure. Mere paper restrictions, designed 
to curb the abuse of a power already concentrated in a few 
hands, are but the mitigations of an existing evil. Personal 
liberty can be made secure only by abolishing the evil 
altogether.
U n e s c o  is engaged at present in facilitating the task of 
mitigation; but it is in the fortunate position of being able 
to proceed, if it so desires, to the incomparably more important 
task of prevention, of the radical removal of the present 
impediments to liberty. This is primarily an affair for the 
scientific section of the Organization. For the problem 
of relieving the pressure of population upon resources is 
primarily a  problem in pure and applied science, while the 
problem of total war is (among other things, of course) a 
problem in ethics for scientific workers as individuals and as 
members of professional organisations.
Mill ions for destruction
T o provide all of the 2.2 thousand million persons at present 
inhabiting the planet with a nutritionally adequate diet, 
it would be necessary to double the existing food supply. 
It will take years, b y  conventional methods, to achieve this 
goal and by that time the population will be, not two billions, 
but more than three— and malnutrition will be very nearly 
as serious and as widespread as it is today.
Every industrial nation spends huge sums on research into 
the techniques of mass destruction. Thus, two thousand 
million dollars went into the production of the atomic bomb 
and many hundreds of millions more are at present being 
spent upon research into rockets, jet planes, the dissemination 
of pneumonic plague and the wholesale destruction of food 
plants. If comparable amounts of money and scientific 
ability could be devoted to the problem of producing food­
stuffs artificially, it seems likely enough that methods would 
quickly be found for providing the half-starved millions of 
Europe and Asia with an adequate diet. The synthesis of 
chlorophyll, for example, might be, for the later twentieth 
century, the equivalent of what the exploitation of the empty 
lands of the New World was for the nineteenth.. It would 
reduce the pressure of population upon resources and thereby
- The Unesco Courier. —  October 1958
remove one of the principal reasons for highly centralized, 
totalitarian control of individual lives.
The prosperity of an industrialized society is proportionate 
to the rapidity with which it squanders its irreplaceable 
natural capital. Over large areas of the earth’s surface, 
easily available deposits of useful minerals have already 
been exhausted, or are running low; with the increase in 
population and the progressive improvement in industrial 
techniques, the drain upon the planet’s remaining resources 
is bound to be accelerated.
Useful minerals are very unevenly distributed. Some 
countries are exceedingly rich in these natural resources, 
others lack them completely. When a powerful nation 
possesses a natural monopoly in some indispensable mineral, 
it ■ is > thereby enabled to increase its already formidable 
influence over its less fortunate neighbours. Where a weak 
nation finds itself blessed, or cursed, with a natural monopoly, 
its stronger neighbours are tempted to acts of aggression 
or “peaceful penetration.”
Science at the crossroads
S c i e n t i f i c  workers have it in their power to postpone the 
day of planetary bankruptcy and to mitigate the political 
dangers inherent in the existence of natural monopolies. 
What is needed is a new Manhattan Project, under interna­
tional auspices, for the development of universally available 
surrogates for the unevenly distributed and soon-to-be- 
exhausted minerals, on which our industrial civilization 
depends for its very existence—e.g. wind power to take the 
place of power produced by coal, petroleum and that most 
dangerous of all fuels, uranium; glass and plastics as 
substitutes, wherever possible, for such metals as copper, tin, 
nickel and zinc.
A project of this kind would be valuable in several ways. 
It would shift our industrial civilization on to a foundation 
more permanent than that accelerating exploitation of 
wasting assets, on which it rests at present; it would break 
those natural monopolies which are a standing temptation to 
war; and finally .it would make possible an extension of per­
sonal liberty and a reduction of the powers wielded by the 
ruling minority.
We now come to ■ the ethical problems confronting 
scientific workers as individuals and as members of pro­
fessional organizations. Whatever may have been the wishes 
of the inventors and technicians involved, applied science has 
in fact resulted in the creation of monopolistic industries, 
controlled by private capitalists or centralized national 
governments. It has led to the concentration of economic 
power, strengthened the hands of the few against the many 
and increased the destructiveness of war. Applied science 
in the service, first, of big business and then of government 
has made possible the modem totalitarian state.
The time has surely come when scientific workers must 
consider, individually and collectively, the ethical problem of 
“right livelihood” . How far is a man justified in following 
a course of professional action which, though involving no 
immediate wrong-doing, results in social consequences which 
are manifestly undesirable or downright evil? Specifically, 
how far is it right for the scientist or technologist to 
participate in work, the outcome of which will be to increase 
the concentration of power in the hands of the ruling 
minority and to provide soldiers with the means for the 
wholesale extermination of civilians?
Up to the present applied science has been, to a great 
extent, at the service of monopoly, oligarchy and nationalism. 
But there is, nothing in the nature of science or technology 
which makes it inevitable that this should be so. Pro­
fessionally speaking, it would be just as easy for the scientific 
worker to serve the cause of peace as of war, of personal 
liberty, voluntary co-operation and self-government, as of 
monopolistic statism or capitalism, universal regimentation 
and dictatorship. The difficulties are not technical; they lie 
in the realms of philosophy and morals, of value judgments 
and the will that acts upon those judgments.
First published in 1949 by Allan Wingate (Publishers) Ltd., 
London. A ll rights reserved.
Julian Huxley (1887-1975), was a biologist and the first director-general of Unesco (1946-1948).
December 2001 - The Unesco Courier 5

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### 124766: Race, history and culture

I E T  H I C S
Race, history and culture
by Claude Lévi-Strauss
One of the world’s 
leading
anthropologists, Claude 
Lévi-Strauss twice set 
forth his ideas on 
racism for Unesco, first 
in Race and History 
(1952) and later in 
Race and Culture 
(1971). On the 
following pages we 
publish long extracts 
from these two 
Important studies.
The development of human life is not everywhere 
the same but rather takes form in an extraordinary 
diversity of societies and civilizations. This intel­
lectual^-aesthetic and sociologie|l diversity is in no 
way the outcome of the biological differences, in 
certain observable features, between different 
groups of men; it is simply a parallel phenomenon 
in a different sphere. But, at the same time, we 
must note two important respects in which there 
is a sharp distinction. First, the order of magnitude 
is different. There are many more human cultures 
than human races, since the first are to be counted 
in thousands and the second in single units. . . . 
Second, in contrast to the diversity of races, where 
interest is confined to their historical origin or their 
distribution over the face of the world, the diver­
sity of cultures gives rise to many problems; it may 
be wondered whether it is an advantage or a disad­
vantage for human kind.. . .
Last and most important, the nature of the 
diversity must be investigated even at the risk of 
allowing the racial prejudices whose biological 
foundation has so lately been destroyed to 
develop again on new grounds. . . .  We cannot 
therefore claim to have formulated a convincing 
denial of the inequality of the human races, so 
long as we fail to consider the problem of the 
inequality—or diversiigrHtof human cultures, 
which is in fact—however unjustifiably-Jffdosely 
associated with it in the public mind.. . .
Collaboration between cultures
. . .  A culture’s chance of uniting the complex 
body of inventions of all sorts which we describe 
as a civilization depends on the number and 
diversity of the other cultures with which it is 
working out, generally involuntarily, a common
4 culture’s chance of uniting the complex body of inventions of all 
sorts which we describe as a civilization depends on the number 
and diversity of the other cultures with which it is working out a 
common strategy.
strategy. Number and diversity: a comparison off 
the Old World with the New on the eve. of the 
latter’s discoveryjin 1492] provides a good illus.-:J 
tration of the need for these two factors. :
Europe at the beginning of the Renaissance! 
was the meeting-place and melting-pot of th f | 
most diverse influences: the Greek, Romaiijl 
Germanic and Anglo-Saxon traditions combined! 
with the influences of Arabia and China. Pr<5$ | 
Columbian America enjoyed no fewer cu ltu ral 
contacts, quantitatively speaking, as the various! 
American cultures maintained relations with one ( 
another and the two Americas together represent.;; 
a whole hemisphere. But, while the cultures! 
which were cross-fertilizing each other in Europe'! 
had resulted from differentiation dating back sev-| 
eral tens of thousands of years, those on the mor;e| 
recently occupied American continent had had| 
less time to develop divergencies; the pictur®! 
they offered was relatively homogeneous. Thus, 5 
although it would not be true to say that the cul- .; 
tural standard of Mexico or Peru was [in 14?;2|| 
inferior to that of Europe at the time of the: disS 
coyery (we have in fact seen that, in sometj 
respects, it was superior), the various aspects of 
culture were possibly less well organized in reHfa 
tion to each other. . . . Their organization, lesisj 
flexible and diversified, probably explains their'* 
collapse before a handful of conquerors. And the 
underlying reason for this may be sought in the 
fact that the partners to the American cultural ’ 
“coalition” were less dissimilar from one another j 
than their counterparts in the Old World. | |
No society is therefore essentially and intrin­
sically cumulative. Cumulative history is not the 
prerogative of certain races or certain cultures, 
marking them off from the rest. It is the result of 
their conduct rather than their nature, f t  repre^i 
sents a certain “way of life” of cultures which.j 
depends on their capacity to “go along together”, i 
In this sense, it may be said that cumulative'.hisil 
tory is the type of history characteristic of. ‘ 
grouped societies—social super-organisms—-; 
while stationary history (supposing it to exist)• 
would be the distinguishing feature of an inferior 
form of social life, the isolated society.
The one real calamity, the one fatal flaw which j 
can afflict a human group and prevent it fro m l 
achieving fulfilment is to' be alone.
We can thus see how clumsy and intellectual 
ally unsatisfactory the generally accepted efforts! 
to defend the contributions of various human J
Claude Lévi-Strauss was born in 1908.
The Unesco Courier - December 2001

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### 124766: Race, history and culture

E T  H I C  S  I
M A R C H  aS>S><S
►
The one flaw which can afflict a human 
group and prevent it from achieving 
fulfilment is to be alone.
races and cultures to civilization often are. We list 
features, we sift questions of origin; we allot first 
places. However well-intentioned they may be, 
these efforts serve no purpose for, in three 
respects, they miss their aim.
In the first place, there can never.be any cer­
tainty about a particular culture’s credit for an 
invention or discovery.. . .  In the second place, all 
cultural contributions can be divided into two 
groups. O n the one hand we have isolated acqui­
sitions or features, whose importance is evident 
but which are also somewhat lim ited .. . .  A t the 
other end of the scale (with a whole series of 
intermediates, of course), there are systematized 
contributions, representing the peculiar form in 
which each society has chosen to express and sat­
isfy the generality of human aspirations. There is 
no denying the originality and particularity of 
these patterns, but, as they all represent the exclu­
sive choice of a single group, it is difficult to see 
how one civilization can hope to benefit from the 
way of life of another, unless it is prepared to 
renounce its own individuality. A ttem pted com­
promises are, in fact, likely to produce only two
C laud e Lévi-Strauss in 1971, 
lecturing on “Race and 
Culture" at U nesco’s  Paris 
headquarters.
CLAUDE LÉVI-STRAUSS 
;is a French social anthropologist 
and university teacher whose work 
has exerted considerable influence 
on the development of the 
. contemporary social sciences. His 
works published in English ' 
include: The Savage Mind (1968), 
Elementary Structures of Kinship 
(1969), Structural Anthropology. I 
and //(1974 and 1981), and Myth 
and Meaning.{19ST)i '
results: either the disorganization and collapse of 
the pattern of one of the groups; or a new combi­
nation, which then, however, represents the 
emergence of a third pattern, and cannot be 
assimilated to either of the others. The question 
w ith which we are concerned, indeed, is not to 
discover whether or not a society can derive ben­
efit from the way of life of its neighbours, but 
whether, and if so to what extent, it can succeed in 
understanding or even in knowing them___
World civilization
Finally, wherever a contribution is made, there 
must be a recipient. But, while there are in fact 
real cultures which can be localized in time and 
space, and which may be said to have “con­
tributed” and to  be continuing their contribu­
tions, what can this “world civilization” be, which 
is supposed to be the recipient of all these contri­
butions? It is not a civilization distinct from all the 
others, and yet real in the same sense that they 
are .. . .  [It is] an abstract conception, to which we 
attribute a moral or logical significance—moral, if 
we are thinking of an aim to be pursued by 
existing societies; logical, if we are using the one 
term to cover the common features which 
analysis may reveal in the different cultures. In 
both cases, we must not shut our eyes to the fact 
that the concept of world civilization is very 
sketchy and imperfect, and that its intellectual and 
emotional content is tenuous. To attempt to 
assess cultural contributions with all the weight 
of countless centuries behind them . . .  by refer­
ence to the sole yardstick of a world civilization 
which is still a hollow shell, would be greatly to 
impoverish them, draining away their life-blood 
and leaving nothing but the bare bones behind.
. . .  The true contribution of a culture consists, 
not in the list of inventions which it has personally 
produced, but in its difference from others. The 
sense of gratitude and respect which each single 
member of a given culture can and should feel 
towards all others can only be based on the con­
viction that the other cultures differ from his own 
in countless ways___
We have taken the notion of world civilization 
as a sort of limiting concept or as an epitome of a 
highly complex process. If our arguments are 
valid, there is not, and never can be, a world civi­
lization in the absolute sense in which that term is 
often used, since civilization implies, and indeed 
consists in, the coexistence of cultures exhibiting 
the maximum possible diversities. A world civi­
lization could, in fact, represent no more than a 
worldwide coalition of cultures, each of which 
would preserve its own originality.
December 2001 - The Unesco Courier

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### 124766: Race, history and culture

I E T  H I C S
/VI A R C H  0 .  S> S> 6
[In 1952,] in a booklet written for UNESCO, I  sug­
gested the concept of ‘fcoalition” to explain why 
isolated cultures could not hope to create single- 
handed the conditions necessary fo r a truly 
cumulative history. To. achieve this, I said, dif­
ferent cultures must, voluntarily or involuntarily, 
com bine their respective stakes in the great game 
of history, to increase their chances o f making 
that-long run o f winning plays by which history 
progresses. G eneticists are at present [1971] 
putting forward very similar views on  bi&lpgical 
evolution, in pointing out that a genome is in 
reality a system within which certain g e n itfu n c- 
tion as regulators and others act in concert on a 
single characteristic (or the contrary, if  ¡several 
characteristics depend on a single gene). W hat is 
true o f the individual genome is also true of a 
population, in w hich the com bination of a 
num ber of genetic inheritances-^in w hich until 
recently a “racial type” would have.ibfen identi- 
f iM g m u st always be such as to allow the estab­
lish m ent of an optim um  equilibrium  and 
improve the group’s chances of survival. In  this 
sense, it might be said that in the history of popu­
lations, genetic recom bination plays a part com-1 
parable to that played by cultural .recombination 
in the evolution of the ways o f life, techniques, 
knowledge and beliefs by  w hich different soci- 
eties are distinguished.. . .
The nature-culture debate
[But] one fact cannot be too strongly emphasized: 
whiielselection makes it possible for living species 
to adapt to their natural environment or to resist 
its changes more effectively, in the case of man 
this environment ceases to be natural in  any resit 
sense. Its characteristics arise from  technical, eco­
nom ic, social and psychological conditions 
which, through the operation o f culture, create a 
particular environm ent for eacfihu m an group. 
W e can go a step further, and consider whether 
the relation between organic evolution and cul­
tural evolution is not merely analogical, but also 
com plem entary.. . .
In  the dawn of humanity, biological evolution 
perhaps selected such pre-cultural traits as 
upright posture, manual dexterity, sociability, the 
capacity to think in sym bols, speech and the 
ability^W S'eommunicate. B u t once a culture
A world civilization could represent no more than a 
worldwide coalition of cultures, each of which would preserve its 
own originality.
existed, these traits were consolidated and prop­
agated by cultural factors. W hen cultures became 
specialized, it was again cultural factors which 
consolidated and encouraged other traits, such as 
resistance to heat o f« fg ld  fo r thosie s a fe t ie s  
which had w illy-n illy  to adapt themselves to 
extreme clim atic conditions;, aggressive or con­
templative dispositions;, technical ingenuity etc. 
N one o f these traits, as perceived at a cultura§| 
level, can clearly be attributed to a genetic basis, 
Although we cannot exclude the possibility that 
Such a- connexion— even if partial, rem ote and 
indirect'— may sometimes exist. In  that case, it 
would be true to. say that every culture selects 
genetic aptitudes w hich then, by  re flex, action, 
influence those cultures by  w hich they w ere.at' 
first stimulated.
An ideological cover
B y  pushing back the earliest beginnings of 
hum anity to an ever m ore rem ote p’a l j^ S  
according to recent estimates, some millioiiSriof 
years ago— physical anthropology has under­
mined one o f the principal bases for racialist; 
theory, since the num ber of unknowable factors 
concerned  thus increases m uch m ore rapidly 
than the number of landmarks available to stake 
out the paths followed by our earliest ancestors 
in the course of their evolution.
Geneticists delivered even more decisive^fews 
to these theories when they replaced the concept., 
of type by that of population and the concept of 
race by that of the genetic stock, and again when 
they demonstrated that there is a gulf between 
hereditary differences attributable to a single gene-iii 
which are of little significance from  the point of 
view of race,, since they probably always have an 
adaptive value— and those attributable to the com­
bined action of several, which makes it virtually 
impossible to determine t hem. . , .
O nly in the last ten years have we begun tor. 
understand that we were discussing the problem  
of the relation between organic and cultural evolu­
tion in terms w hich Auguste. Com te would have 
d escrib ed  as metaphysical. Human evolution, is.' 
not a by-product of biological evolution, but nei-. 
ther is it completely distinct from  it. A synthesis 
of these two traditional points of view is now pos- ■ 
sible, provided that biologists are not content with 
answers not based on fact, or with dogmatic expla­
nations, and realize both the help they can give 
each other and their respective limitations.
The unsatisfactory nature of the traditional 
solutions to the problem  perhaps explains why 
the ideological struggle ¡against racialism has 
proved so ineffective on a practical level. There 
is nothing to indicate that racial prejudice is 
:declining and plenty of evidence to suggest that, 
after brief periods of localized quiescence, it is 
reappearing everywhere with increased intensity 
It is for this reason that UNESCO feels called upon
8  The Unesco Courier - December 2001

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### 124766: Race, history and culture

E T  H I C  S  I
ISA A R C H 1 9  9 6
All true creation implies a certain 
deafness to outside values, even to the 
extent of rejecting them.
to renew from time to  tim ea battle whose out­
come appears uncertain, to s'ay the least.
But can we be so sure that the racial form 
taken by intolerance results primarily from false 
beliefs held by this or that people about the 
dependence of culture on organic evolution? Are 
these ideas not simply an ideological cover for ̂ i 
more real form of antagonism, based on the will 
to subjugate and on relations of power? This was 
certainly the case in the past, but, even supposing 
that these relations of pow er become less 
marked, will not racial differentiation continue to 
serve as a pretext for the growing difficulty of 
living together, unconsciously felt by mankind, 
which is undergoing a demographic explosion 
and which . . .  is beginning to hate itself, warned 
by a mysterious prescience that its numbers are 
becoming too great for all its members to enjoy 
freely open space and pure, non-polluted air?
Racial prejudice is at its most inten'se^hen it 
concerns human groups confined to a territory so 
cramped and share of natural resources so 
meagre that these peoples lack dignity in their own 
eyes as well as in those of their more powerful 
neighbours. But does not humanity today,-on the 
whole, tend to expropriate itself and, on a planet 
that has grown too small, reconstitute, to its own 
cost, a situation comparable to that inflicted by 
some of its representatives on the Unfortunate. 
American or Oceanic tribes? Finally, what would 
happen to  the ideological struggle against racial 
prejudice, if it were shown to be universally true— 
as some experiments conducted by psychologists 
suggest—that if subjects of any origin whatever are 
divided into groups, which are placed in a com­
petitive situation, each group will develop feelings 
of bias and injustice towards its rivals?
M inority groups appearing in various parts of 
the world today, such as the hippies, are not dis­
tinguished from the bulk of the population by 
race, but only by their way of life, morality, hair 
style and dress; are the feelings of repugnance and 
sometimes hostility they inspire in most of their 
fellows substantially different from racial hatred ? 
Would we therefore be making genuine progress 
if we confined ourselves to dissipating the partic­
ular prejudices on which racial hatred—in the 
^ t r ic t  sense of the term—can be said to be based?
The mirage of universal entente
In any case, the contribution ethnologists can 
make to the solution of the race problem would 
be derisory; nor is it certain that psychologists 
and educators could do any better, so strong is 
the evidence—as we see from the evidence of the
December 200 1-The Unesco Courier ^
so-called primitive peoples'—that mutual toler­
ance presupposes two conditions which in con­
tem porary society are further than ever from  
being realized: one is relative equality; the other is 
adequate physical separation.
. . .  N o doubt we cherish the hope that one day 
equality and fraternity will reign among men 
without impairing their diversity. But if humanity 
is not to resign itself to becoming a sterile con­
sumer of the values it created in the past and of 
those alone. . . ,  it will have to relearn the fact that 
all true creation implies a certain deafness to out­
side values, even to the extent of rejecting or 
denying them. For one individual cannot at the 
same time merge into the spirit of another, iden­
tify with another and still maintain his own iden­
tity. Integral communication with another, if fully 
realized, sooner or later dooms the creative origi­
nality of both. The great creative epochs in history 
were those in which communication had become 
adequate for distant individuals to stimulate each 
other, but not frequent or rapid enough for those 
obstacles, indispensable between individuals as 
they are between groups, to be reduced to the 
point at which diversity becomes levelled out and 
nullified by excessively facile interchange.
. . .  Convinced that cultural and organic evolu­
tion are inextricably linked, [biologists and ethnol­
ogists] know, of course, that a return to the past is 
impossible, but they know, too, that the course 
humanity is at present following is building up ten­
sions to such a degree that racial hatred is a mere 
foretaste of the greater intolerance that may hold 
sway tomorrow, w ithout even the pretext of 
ethnic differences. To forestall the dangers threat­
ening us today and those, still more -formidable, 
that we shall have to face tomorrow, we must 
accept the fact that their causes are much deeper 
than mere ignorance or prejudice: we can only 
hope for a change in the course of history, which is 
even more difficult to bring about than progress 
in the march of ideas./ ■
C la u d e  Lévi-Strauss 
in 1988.
1. Extract from Race and His­
tory, first published in The 
Race Question in Modem Sci­
ence, Paris, UNESCO, 1952.
2. Extractfrom “Race and 
Culture”, published in 
UNESCO’s International 
S.ocial Science Journal, Vol. 
XXIII, No. 4,1971.

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### 124767: Vaclav Havel: document

President of the Republic of Czechoslovakia, is 
a playwright and a fighter for freedom. It was as a 
dissident writer that he won the reputation that led to 
his election as President on 29 December 1989, becoming 
thereby the symbol of the peaceful revolution that had taken 
place in his country. B  In 1968, after the brutal termination of 
the “Prague Spring” in which Vaclav Havel had played a leading 
role, production of his plays was banned  in  Czechoslovakia, although 
his trilogy  Interview , A  P rivate V iew  and Protest (1975-1976), was 
staged in m any other countries. Because of his human-rights advocacy and 
resistance to oppression he was arrested several times and spent a total of five 
years in prison. |  The following interview, here published for the first time in 
its entirety, was conducted on 30 June 1989 in semi-clandestine conditions at Vaclav 
Havel’s home near Prague. We publish it as an exceptional document of its 
time—the weeks before the banned playwright moved into the centre of the stage.
This conversation is taking place in rather a strange 
atmosphere. You’re under observation, arid yet you still 
speak without taking any special precautions.... Are you, 
or are you not, free to come and go as you please?
' — I’ve, been very isolated until .the last few years, but not 
any longer. The isolation was effective during the 1970s, at 
a time of widespread social inertia. People seemed to have 
lost heart, seemed not to believe that social change was 
possible any more.' They had stopped taking an interest in 
public life, which anyway was systematically stifled. People 
had withdrawn into themselves, with very little 
'^communication between individuals. '
It was a period when society became fragmented, when 
everyone was isolatedfrom everyone else. I was particularly 
isolated because I belonged to the category of people who,
. in the wake of the Soviet invasion of 1968, were to some
Born in 1936, Vaclav Havel was elected president of the Republic of Czechoslavakia in July 1990 but
D O  C U M  E N T
VACLAV HAVEL

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### 124767: Vaclav Havel: document

E T  H I C  S  I
» U N E  a S» s> O
extent singled out as enemies of the state. It was dangerous 
to have anything to do with us. I was a banned writer. I 
couldn’t get work anywhere...
Then, little by little, things started to change. Today, 
the situation is radically different. Not that the party or 
government leadership has changed its policy. They’re still 
the same. But society, society’s changed. People are perhaps 
just tired of being tired. They’re emerging from their shells 
again, from their isolation. Something akin to public life 
is taking shape .once more.
New generations! are growing up, who have not been 
stigmatized by the trauma of the Soviet invasion. It’s been 
a gradual, i  progressive development—though a significant
one all the same. But in my case, I’ve been able to follow 
this development quite closely, owing to the fact that I’ve 
been arrested and imprisoned a number of times. When you 
go to prison, you somehow take along with you your aware­
ness of the situation as it is when you’re arrested. Afterwards, 
for a while, you remain outside the development of events 
and this frozen memory remains in your mind. Then, all 
of a sudden, you come out of prison. At such times, you’re 
particularly alive to all the changes which may have taken 
place .in the intervening period. At the end of each of my 
prison terms, I’ve been surprised by new developments. Each 
time, society was more alive, the apathy had retreated still 
further, more and more people had woken up... ^
resigned in July 1992 after the state’s partition. He became president of the Czech Republic in 1993.
December 2001 - The U n e sc o  Courier 11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### 124767: Vaclav Havel: document

J U N E  1 9 9 0
I E T  H i C  S
Have you at any time bad to stop writing?
— My plays have been banned in Czechoslovakia for twenty 
years, but I haven’t stopped writing. You can’t really prevent 
a writer from writing. His mission is to continue writing, 
speaking, even under the most difficult circumstances. So 
I went on publishing things. Where? Abroad, but above all 
in samizdat, clandestine form.
In the early 1970s, two mutually Hefstile cultures 
appeared in this country. One of them official, authorized, 
the other clandestine, independent. After a modest start, 
samizdat publishing mushroomed. Today, dozens of 
samizdat magazines and newspapers are published, as well 
as hundreds of Bloks and even a current affairs video. In 
recent years, cracks have started to appear in the barriers 
between these two cultures. A no-man’s-land has developed 
between them, which has sometimes been called the “grey 
zone”. There has been cross^fertilization—the official and 
the independent cultures have moved closer together, each 
of them having realized that it has no monopoly over 
culture. It is this inner pressure, this growing awareness, 
which has caused the rapprochement, and not some sort of 
liberalization of the cultural policy of the authorities.
What in your view is the political and social role of 
intellectualsf
;f§- Intellectuals are right to think about the future. They 
mustn’t be afraid to deal with the future, to imagine how 
it might be. But their primary task, their chief priority is, 
in my view, to understand the present, to understand its 
crises and put a name to them. That is how true awareness 
of perspectives is born.
The politicians’ role is to build the best of all possible 
worlds. The intellectuals must watch, warn, put people on 
their guard. They must to some extent monitor the politi­
cians, remind them how they become divorced from reality 
when they follow the shams of ideology. When I say this, 
I’m speaking as someone disillusioned with ideology. A 
disillusionment which has been experienced by all this part 
of Europe. We live in conditions which force people to 
reflect upon the bankruptcy of ideologies.
What we want, here and now, are simple, elementary 
things. Without reference to any ideological framework,
beyond all ideology. We aspire to a share in the basic values 
of life, those which simple common sense and elementary 
human dignity demand we should be entitled to. Yet what 
have we actually experienced? An attempt to subjugate the 
world to ideology. And what a failure! Perhaps it will make 
the intellectuals realize that it is not enough to construct 
a theory and then twist reality to fit in with it. Alive and
Letter to Freedom. The torches of your 
pupils accompany me throughout the journey 
(1989), collage by the Czech artist Jin Kolar.
Works by Vaclav Havel translated 
into English include:
Plays: The Memorandum, Eyre Methuen, London 
1981; The Vanek Plays trilogy, University of Britisl 
Columbia Press, 1987; Largo Desolato, Faber & Faber 
London/Grove Press, New York, 1987; Tcmptatior, 
Faber & Faber/Grove Press, 1988.
Essays and other writings: Letters to Olga (1979 
1982), a collection of correspondence from prison t  
his wife, Faber 8c Faber, 1983, reissued 1989; Vacla• 
Havel: Or Living in Truth, Faber & Faber, 1987.
12 The Unesco Courier - December 2001

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### 124767: Vaclav Havel: document

E T  H I C S )
J U N E  a s> 9  o
mysterious, reality transcends all imaginable theories, plans, 
concepts. To order and organize it calls for humility and 
respect for the richness, the diversity, all the colourful variety 
of life. It is impossible to stretch it out on the Procrustean 
bed of a utopia created by the cold mind of an ideologist. 
But in our part of the world,(this is what has been done. 
It’s a total failure. Hence the mistrust of plans and theories 
on the part of the intellectual in Eastern Europe. Hence 
our desire to stick to analysing the present, which is the best 
way of planning the future.
Do you see any difference between the respective roles of 
intellectuals in the East and in the West?
— The first difference is that, in most of the communist bloc 
countries, even recently, politics, the political debate, seemed 
to have vanished. Totalitarianism banishes politics. Deprived 
of all political culture, society cannot build its natural 
defences, public opinion cannot be born. Politics does not 
even have any professional ground where it can be practised. 
But a strange thing happened. Politics, chased out of the 
door, came back in through the window. It suddenly
December 2001 - The Unescó Courier 13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### 124767: Vaclav Havel: document

I E T  H I C S
J U N E  a s> s> o
invaded the whole spectrum of social life. Secretly, every­
thing took on political significance: a concert, a mass, a 
fair.... In such circumstances, the writer’s word acquires 
an extraordinary aura. Especially if he strives to tell the 
truth, without fear of the problems he is bringing down 
on his own head, if he ceases to be the docile interpreter . 
of authority. Why is the writer so important? Because 
the tool with which he works is language, which calls a 
spade a spade, which asks questions. It is the quintessential 
tool of culture. In our country, the writer’s cultural audience 
is on a par with the level of political expectation—immense. 
Many people from the West are struck by this. People 
are desperately eager to hear what is going to be said, ex­
pressed. It is their own hopes, their freedom, which thus 
seem to take shape. It is as though society, through the 
medium of this cultural ferment, becomes varied, structured. 
Writers, upon whose shoulders there weighs a growing 
political responsibility, have to be correspondingly more 
demanding.
Does this desire for change in Eastern Europe and in other 
parts of the world mark the advent of a new era?
^  I’m not a futurologist, nor am I a seer. I do not know 
where the world community is heading. Everywhere, I 
observe the economic, political, ecological signs of a deep- 
seated crisis. In my view, this crisis is an existential crisis* 
a crisis of identity: man has lost the sense of responsibility 
he had previously felt towards something higher than him, 
something which transcended him. There are many men and 
women in the world who have felt it, understood it and who 
are seeking a way out.
Perhaps the end of the millennium will see new perspec­
tives opening up. There are already some encouraging signs: 
a slowing down of the arms race, attempts at peaceful 
co-existence, the Helsinki agreements. Signs which are still 
modest. The most brutal and obvious aspects have already
been tackled. But the most dangerous aspects are precisely 
those which aren’t visible.
Will the gulf between West and East disappear?
E -1  honestly don’t know. The differences between the two 
worlds are so enormous.... For decades, these two systems 
have had a different history. Today, the communist-type 
totalitarian system, which, following the example of the 
communists themselves, I would call “stalinist socialism”, 
has reached stalemate. People are starting to realize this in 
the East. Whence the related efforts to introduce an element 
of democratization, of perestroika. This fact is vitally 
important. The East is taking a step towards the West. Is 
the western world for its part capable of taking a step 
towards its neighbour? I don’t know. The West is defending 
values which are good for humanity as a whole. It has no' 
desire to abandon them and in this it is absolutely right.
I suffer whenever it relinquishes some of them: we subscribe 
to these values too. As for the upheavals which the West 
is experiencing, m§f£-@f these strike me as variants of this 
pj®f$tmd crisis of civilization which I have already referred 
to. The West can only soke these problems by itself.
But there is one serious problem which is commons to 
both systems, and that is excessive centralization. Here, 
political power, the economic levers, energy resources, every­
thing'lies in the same hands. So in fact the state is the sole 
employer, the sole organizer of social life. This is monstrous. 
In the West, though in different forms—increasingly vast 
undertakings, gigantic conglomerates—you find the same 
trend towards total centralization. The result, on both sides, 
is the same “anonymization” of life in general, though of 
course in our case it looks more directly shocking. Human 
links, relations between one person and S th e r ,  are disap­
pearing from the workplace, but also from social life, from 
towns, from homes. The individual is becoming just a cog 
in an immense machine. He is losing all sense of his work 
and of his existence. Both systems ought to be capable of 
overcoming this dehumanizing phenomenon, each in its 
own way. When they nave done so, perhaps they will find 
a way of movfflg closer together...
At this decisive turning point for the future, can intellectuals 
do anything to change the course of events?
— By their very nature, intellectuals are powerless in certain 
fields. They cannot change the world as politicians do. Their 
presence in the world is marked by what they say, they act 
through words. I have written an essay entitled “The power 
of the impotent”, in which I have tried to explain how a 
true word, even when spoken by a siiigJe person, is more 
powerful in certain circumstances than entire divisions of 
soldiers. The word illuminates, awakens, liberates. The word 
also has its power. The intellectuals must hang on to or 
acquire this power of theirs, in order to turn it to advantage. 
They must not desire any other power than this. Let them 
leave the power of immediate transformation or social 
organization to the politicians.
14 The UNESCQCourier - December 2001

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### 124767: Vaclav Havel: document

E T  H I C  S  »
J U N E
Above, illustration by the French artist Michel Granger for 
the cover of Amnesty International’s annual report, 1987. 
Opposite page, cover design by Gabina Farova for Revolver 
Revue, a Czechoslovakian samizdat publication (1989).
What cause do you think intellectuals should use their 
power to serves’
— On the eve of a new millennium, the most precious 
possession we ought to defend, and which should find unani­
mous support among people everywhere, regardless of their 
country or the system under which they live, is a certain 
number of human qualities, of fundamental values. And 
first of all, humility. Many cruel events which we have 
experienced at the end of this millennium, such as Hitlerism, 
Stalinism or the excesses of Pol Pot, show the vanity, the
arrogance of groups or individuals, of fanatics or non­
fanatics, of ideologues, doctrinaires, Utopians. The arrogance 
of those who think they know how everything ought to 
be, who think they can decide the order of things. When 
reality doesn’t fit in with their theories,, they impose their 
theories and these lead straight to the camps, to massacres, 
to horrendous wars. This lack of humility can also be 
observed elsewhere than in the strict political domain. Pride 
is also at the root of the global ecological crisis: man imposes 
his will upon nature, without respecting her laws, her secrets. 
There is plenty I could say on this subject.... Let us not forget 
the meaning of freedom, of dignity, of justice. And let us 
be more humble. ■
A video film of this interview, by Michel Bongiovanni, was 
made by the Centre International de Création Vidéo, 
Montbéliard-Belfort, France (director Pierre Bongiovanni).
December;
CnRS.NiJeR
a s> s> o
-The Unesco Courier 15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### 124768: I was born 1,000 years ago: open letter from Chief Dan George of the Capilano Indians

I E T  H I C S
Open letter from Chief Dan George of the Capilano Indians
‘ I w as bom  1 ,0 0 0  y e a rs  a g o ../
M y very good dear friends :
W AS it only yesterday that man 
sailed around the moon? You 
and I marvel that men should travel so 
fa r and so fast, ye t if they have trav­
elled fa r then I have travelled farther, 
and if they have travelled fast then I 
faster, fo r I was born a thousand years 
ago, born in a culture of bows and 
arrows. But w ithin the span of half a 
lifetime I was flung across the ages to 
the culture of the atom bomb and from 
bows and arrows to atom bombs is a 
distance fa r beyond the fligh t to  the 
moon.
I was born in an age that loved the 
things o f nature and gave them beauti­
ful names like “Tessoualouit” instead 
o f dried up names like “ Stanley Park” .
I was born when people loved nature 
and spoke to it as though it has a 
soul: I can remember going up Indian 
rive r w ith  my father when I was vèry 
young. I can .remember him watching 
thé sunlight fires on M ount Pé-Né-Né.
I can remember him singing his thanks 
to  it as he often did, singing the Indian 
word “ thanks" very very softly.
And the new people came, more and 
more people came, like a crushing 
rushing wave they came, hurling the 
years aside, and suddenly I found 
m yself a young man in the m idst of 
the twentieth century.
I found myself and my people adrift 
in th is new age but not a part o f it, 
engulfed by its rushing tide but only 
as a captive eddy going round and 
round. On little  reserves and plots of 
land, we floated in a kind o f grey 
unreality, ashamed of our culture which 
you ridiculed, unsure o f who we were 
and where we were going, uncertain 
o f our grip on the present, weak in 
our hope of the future.
I had a glimpse o f something better 
than this fo r a few  brie f years: I knew 
my people when they lived the old life;
I knew them when there was still a 
d ignity in the ir lives and a feeling of 
worth in the ir outlook; I knew them 
when there was unspoken confidence 
in the home and a certain knowledge 
o f the path they walked upon. But 
they were living on the dying energy 
o f a dying culture, a culture that was 
s low ly losing its forward thrust.
W e did not have time to adjust to 
the startling upheaval around us; we 
seem to  have tost what we had w ithout 
a replacement; we did not have time 
to take our twentieth-century progress 
and eat it  little  by little  and d igest it.
Do you know w hat it is like to  be 
w ithout moorings? Do you know what 
i t  is like to  live in surroundings that
are ugly? It depresses man, fo r man 
must be surrounded by the beautiful 
i f  his soul is to  grow.
Do you know what it is like to  feel 
you are of no value to society and 
those around you, to  know that people 
came to help you but not to w ork with 
you, fo r you knew that they knew you 
had nothing to offer. Do you know 
what it is like to  have your race 
belittled, and have you been made 
aware of the fact that you are only 
a burden to the country? Maybe we 
did not have the skills to  make a 
meaningful contribution, but no one 
would w ait fo r us to  catch up. We 
were shrugged aside because we were 
dumb and could never learn.
W hat is it like to be w ithout pride 
in your race? Pride in your family? 
Pride and confidence in yourself? 
W hat is it  like? You don 't know fo r 
you never tasted its bitterness. I shall 
te ll you what it is like. It is like not 
caring about tomorrow fo r what does 
tomorrow matter! It is like having a 
reserve that looks like a junkyard 
because the beauty in the soul is dead 
and why should the soul express an 
external beauty that does not match it?
And now, you hold out your hand 
and you beckon to me to come over: 
“ Come and in tegrate” , you say, but 
how can I come? I am naked and 
ashamed; how can I come in dignity?
I have no presents, I have no gifts. 
W hat is there in my culture you value? 
My poor treasure you can only scorn. 
Am I then to  come as a beggar and 
receive all from your omnipotent hand?
Somehow, I must wait, I must delay.
I must find myself, I must find my 
treasure. I must w ait until you want 
something o f me, until you need 
something that is me. I can raise my 
head and say to  my w ife and family: 
“ Listen, they are calling, they need me,
I must go !" Then, I can walk across 
the street and I w ill hold my head high 
fo r I w ill meet you as an equal. I w ill 
not scorn you fo r your gifts and you 
w ill not receive me in pity. Pity 
I can do w ithout. M y manhood, 
I cannot do without. I shall not come 
as a cringing object of your pity! I 
shall come in dignity o r I shall not 
come at all!
You ta lk  big words o f integration in 
the schools: does it really exist? Can 
we ta lk  o f integration until there is 
social integration? Until there is 
integration o f hearts and minds you 
have only a physical presence and the 
walls are high as the mountain range.
Come w ith me to the playground of 
an integrated high school. See how
level and fla t and ugly the black top is. 
But look, now it is recess time, the 
students pour through the doors. 
Soon, over there, is a group o f white 
students and see, over there, near the 
fence, a group o f native students, and 
look again, the black is no longer level: 
mountain ranges rising, valleys falling 
and a great chasm seems to be 
opening up between the two groups, 
yours and mine, and no one seems 
capable o f crossing over. But wait, 
soon the bell w ill ring and the students 
w ill leave the playground.
Integration has moved indoors. 
There is not much room in the class- \\ 
room to dig chasms so there are only 
little  ones there, only little  ones fo r 
we won’t  a llow  big ones, at least not 
right under our noses.
W hat do we want? W e want firs t 
o f all to  be respected and to feel we 
are people of worth; we want an equal 
opportunity to succeed in life. But we 
cannot succeed on your terms, we 
cannot raise ourselves on your norms, 
we need specialized help in education, 
specialized help in the form ative years, 
special courses in English; we need 
guidance, counselling; we need equal 
job opportunities fo r our graduates. 
Otherw ise our students w ill lose 
courage and ask: “W ell, what is the 
use p f it a ll? ”
Let no one forget it: we are a people 
w ith special rights guaranteed to us 
by promises and treaties. W e do not 
beg fo r these rights, nor do we thank 
you fo r them because, God help us, 
the price we paid was exorbitant. W e 
paid fo r them w ith our culture, our 
d ignity and our se lf respect. W e paid 
and paid and paid until we became a 
beaten race, poverty-stricken and 
conquered.
I know that in your heart, you wish 
you could help. I wonder if  there is 
much you can do, and yet there is a 
lo t you can do. W hen you meet my 
children, respect each one fo r what he 
is: a child and your brother. Maybe 
it all boils down to jus t that.
Dan George
This letter from Dan George. chief o f the 
Capilano Indian tribe in British Columbia. 
Canada, was read to a recent symposium on 
the economic development o f the Arctic and 
the future o f Eskimo societies (see pages 4-11) 
by a missionary. Father Andr6-Pierre Steinmann. 
He told the symposium that in h is ' view this 
eloquent letter could equally well express the 
feelings o f Eskimos in Greenland and Canada. 
Father Steinmann. of Puvimituq. New Quebec, 
has spent over 30 years with the Eskimos and 
is a pioneer o f their cooperative movement.
Dan George (1899-1981) was a docker and lumberjack until the age of 60, when he began an award-winning career as an actor.
The Unesco Courier - December 2001

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=17) 0

### 124769: A 'Silent genocide'

E T  H I C S I
M A Y  1 9 S S
A  ‘s i l e n t g e n o c i d e ’
Abdus Salarti
O UR planet is inhabited by two 
distinct types of human beings. 
According to the United Na­
tions Development Programme (UNDP) 
count of 1983, one quarter ¡of mankind, 
some 1,100 million people, are “developed”. 
They inhabit two-fifths of the land area of 
the Earth, while 3,600 million “developing” 
humans—Les Miserables—live in the re­
maining three-fifths. I shall call them the 
rich and the poor respectively, although 
some of those in the developing world are 
not exactly poor in pure economic terms. It 
is not just the level of poverty which dis­
tinguishes one type from the other, it is also 
a question of ambition and dynamism, and 
the differing contribution made by each 
type to “present day culture” and to science 
and technology.
During 1983, the rich countries enjoyed a 
total Gross National Product (GNP) of 
$10.5 trillion, $9,500 per year and per cap­
ita, or around $800 per month. For the sam£ 
year, the poor countries had a total GN P of 
$2.6 trillion, an average of $60 per capita per 
month. The part of the world I come 
from—South Asia—which consists of Af­
ghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakis­
tan and Sri Lanka and has a population of 
1,000 million, had a GNP of $250 per cap­
ita. This means on an average $20 a month 
or 70 cents a day. These 70 cents are sup­
posed to provide us with two daily meals, 
clothing, shelter, health care and education, 
if  any.
The rich quarter of humanity “lead” the 
“North-Centric” world of today through 
their economic superiority and their mil­
itary prowess. They include the two super­
powers', the USA and the USSR, with pop­
ulations of 235 and 272 million (and GNPs 
of $3.3 trillion and $1.85 trillion, respec­
tively). The “leaders” as a whole suffer from 
two problems: a nuclear psychosis and un­
employment. They seem to have conscious­
ly chosen to keep 10 per cent of their active 
population unemployed—feeding and 
clothing them at subsistence level.
The remaining three-quarters of human­
ity includes some of the peoples who built 
up the oldest civilizations of the planet—the 
Chinese, the Hindu, the Buddhist and the 
Islamic. Their basic problems are lack of 
food (some countries are wracked by recur-
“Unfortunately, there are few  points o f contact 
between the two types of human beingsy the 
rich and the poor. ”
ring famines); of shelter; of clothing; of 
health care; of education. Their situation is 
aggravated by the problems of unemploy­
ment; adverse terms of trade; chronic indeb­
tedness (to the tune of $1 trillion); over­
crowding; and lack of security.
I am not referring to the obviously shel­
terless, the obviously needy. I have in mind, 
rather, the uncomplaining hungry millions, 
w ho—and I speak from experience—sel­
dom get two regular meals a day; the mil­
lions who must often choose between buy­
ing badly needed food or a schoolbook for 
their child. They live in a crushing poverty 
of the kind that has not been known in 
Europe and the United States since the time 
of Dickens. I never cease to be amazed that, 
despite this “silent genocide”, the human 
spirit does not break and that most of the 
needy are still able to keep up a dignified 
appearance.
Lack of security is today one of the most 
unsettling aspects of life in the developing 
world. The causes include: military dicta­
torships (perhaps, as one dictator succeeds 
another, the struggle for sheer survival ex­
tinguishes the democratic spirit); the un­
settled borders of nation States, which are 
mainly a legacy of imperialism; religious
Abdus Salam died in 1996.
December 2001 - The Unesco Courier *7
Ph
ot
o 
© 
C
la
ud
e 
V
én
éz
ia
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=18) 0

### 124769: A 'Silent genocide'

I E T  H I C S
The forests o f Amazonia ► 
are one o f our planet’s 
“lungs”, of vital 
importance for all 
humanity.
ABDUS SALAM, of Pakistan, was awarded the 
Nobel Prize for Physics in 1979 (with S. Glashow 
and S. Weinberg) for establishing an analogy be­
tween electromagnetism and the interactions of 
elementary particles. Founder and director of the 
Unesco-supported International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics, Trieste, and professor of 
theoretical physics at the Imperial College of Sci­
ence and Technology, London, he is the author of 
a number of publications, including Ideals and 
Realities: Selected Essays of Abdus Salam (1984), 
and Supergravity in Diverse Dimensions (1987).
together account for no more than 20 per 
cent of world trade. A recent study points 
out that “the thirty-six countries—the ‘Real 
South® w ith a per capita income of less 
than $400 and half of the world’s population 
(including China, India and Pakistan) sur­
prisingly account for no more than 3 per 
cent Gif world trade”.1
For all practical purposes, the “Real 
Poor”, like Frantz Fanon’s2 oppressed 
Blacks, make no mark on the present world. 
Like all poor anywhere, they could dis­
appear from the face of the Earth without 
leaving any trace. What can be done about 
their predicament?
T*here are two contrasting answers to this 
question. Either to eliminate all the poor on 
the lines of what the Irish satirist Jonathan 
Swift suggested -in his famous “modest pro­
posal” to solve the problem of famine in 
Ireland two centuries ago.3 O r if the con­
science of. the world will not accept a “final 
solution” (and fortunately there are people 
in the rich countries who would oppose 
this), then the only other alternative is to try. 
to restore some measure of human dignity 
to this assortment of peoples.
My thesis is that the situation of the 
developing world can be improved in the 
long term only through an assisted and 
massive importation of modern science and 
technology, the possession of which is the 
basic difference between the N orth and the 
South. Such a step may incidentally also 
solve the unemployment problem of the 
rich countries through the demand for 
goods and services it would generate. ■
1. Gerald Segal, Guide to the W orld Today, (1987)
2. W est Indian psychoanalyst and social philosopher 
know n for his writings on behalf of the national liber- 
atioiï of colonial peoples in such w orks as Black Skin, 
W hite Masks (1967), and The W retched o f  the Earth 
(i965)rv:;
3. In his M odest Proposal fo r  preventing the children o f  
the poor people fro m  being a burthen to their Parents or 
Country, and  fo r  m aking them beneficial to the Publick 
(1729), Swift suggested that economic Conditions might 
be alleviated by  using the children of poor parents as 
food for the rich.
fanaticism, fanned by past events; greed for 
territory; superpower rivalries and the in-- 
sistent arms sales by the rich to the poor; 
apartheid.
Unfortunately, there are few points of 
contact between the two types of human 
beings. Some of these are historical in nature, 
a consequence of the Imperial past. Others 
include a shared environment 5  most of the 
tropical forests which are the “lungs” of our 
planet happen to be located within the
developing countries. The rich countries are 
just beginning to appreciate the biological 
importance of tropical forests for all human­
ity and the need to share responsibility for 
their upkeep. Another point of contact is 
the need for raw materials, substitutes for 
which cannpt be easily found, such as oil 
and gas, as well as food items such as ba­
nanas.
Trade could have been an area for contact, 
but it is not. All the developing countries
Engraving by the French 
artist Georges Rouault 
(1871-1958) is one o f a 
series entitled Miserere, 
executed between 1917 
and1927.
18 The Unesco Courier - December 2001

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=19) 0

### 124771: Beethoven tames the jungle: a great Soviet composer presents his views on music without frontiers

C U L T U R E
J U N E  a  S> 7  3
BEETHOVEN 
TAMES THE JUNGLE
by
D m itri
Shostakovich
A great Soviet composer 
presents his views 
on music without frontiers
I  HE interaction and the play 
of mutual influences between the mu­
sical cultures of W est and East, of 
peoples brought up in the traditions of 
European musical thought and the peo­
ples of the rest o f the world, con­
stitutes a key factor fo r the under­
standing of the evolution of national 
musical traditions.
In this connexion, I fu lly  agree with 
those who rightly point out how wrong 
it is to use the term "developing 
countries” with regard to the ancient 
and great cultures of the Asian, A fri­
can and Latin American states. W here­
as these countries may lag behind 
Europe and North America industrially, 
it is highly ¡inappropriate to speak of 
them patronizingly as “ developing” in 
the sphere o f the arts.
To what extent can the means of 
expression accumulated over the cen­
turies by one people be used o r sub­
ordinated to the artistic norms of 
another national cu lture? To me the 
question of the so-called “ incompati­
b ility ” o f modal and harmonic sys­
tems, of the “ harm or benefit” which 
the polyphonic or harmonic devices 
characteristic o f European music bring 
to the cultural heritage of the coun­
tries o f the East, is not entirely clear.
But of one thing I am firm ly con­
vinced, namely the basic equality in 
human culture of all the various natio­
nal musical traditions, the whole rich 
fund o f melodies, rhythms, timbres and 
subtle poetic discoveries created by 
fo lk singers, instrumentalists and pro­
fessional composers.
To my mind, the point is not the
“ compatibility" or “ incompatibility” 
o f the various musical systems, but 
how  and by which methods the prob­
lem of the interaction and mutual in­
fluence of the cultures of peoples dif­
fering from one another ethnically and 
geographically is solved.
Here everything depends on the 
artistic tact and talent of the people 
concerned— the composer, performer,; 
teacher or theoretician— their sense of 
responsibility to  the art and their pro­
fessional honesty.
They may, of course, encounter 
many a stumbling-blqck. There is 
always the great danger of standardi­
zation, o f reducing the musical cul­
tures of various peoples to the 
“ average European level".
And one can well understand the 
concern o f people who are closely in­
volved in guiding these processes, 
who are connected with training pro­
fessional musicians for their country, 
and who are familiar with a ir the forms 
of propagating music.
One cannot allow of a thoughtless 
or, worse still, commercial approach, 
a disregard for the great humanist tra­
ditions of all the peoples of our planet. 
Such a course could lead to the des­
truction of century-old artistic values 
and to the burying of one’s own natio­
nal heritage in oblivion.
But nor should one attempt to iso­
late the art o f this or that people from 
the natural exchange of creative 
achievements between'/nations, from 
the mutual borrowing of elements in 
the various systems o f musical 
thought and musical speech.
CO N TINUED  NEXT PAGE
Dmitri Shostakovich, left of photo, holding fire-hose to extinguish incendiary 
bombs in Leningrad during World War II. Shostakovich wrote the first three 
movements of his 7th Symphony (“Leningrad”) in 1941 during the siege of the city.
DMITRI SHOSTAKOVICH is the world 
famous Soviet composer. He has written 
more than a dozen symphonies as well as 
ballets, operas, chamber music, choral works 
and film scores. The article presented here 
is an address given by Shostakovich at an 
international music congress held in Moscow 
in 1971 on traditional and contemporary 
music, organized by the International Music 
Council and the Soviet National Music Com­
mittee.
Dimitri Shostakovich died in 197$.
December 2001 - The Unesco Courier 19

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=20) 0

### 124771: Beethoven tames the jungle: a great Soviet composer presents his views on music without frontiers

C U L T U R E
J U N E  a S> 7  3
!■
I
1
Caruso and 
Chaliapin: 
the centenary 
of two
‘Mastersingers’
This year the whole world is celebrating the 
centenary of the birth of tw o great singers 
T^the bass Fedor Ivanovich Chaliapin and 
the tenor Enrico Caruso. Born at Kazan 
(USSR), Chaliapin quickly won inter­
national fame not only for his stupendous 
voice, but also for his skill as an actor which 
enabled him to  interpret such great roles as 
Strauss’ Don Quixote (left) and Mussorgsky's 
Boris Godunov, on the principal stages of 
the world. Caruso was born in Naples 
(Italy). The exceptional purity and power of 
his voice earned him world-w ide acclaim 
and a reputation as one of the greatest 
tenors of all time. His prestige is still so; 
great that a London street-musician (right) 
can attract an audience merely by advertising 
"songs of Caruso".
BEETHOVEN TA M ES  THE JUNGLE (Continued)
One of the natural and logical forms 
of development of the national tradi­
tion is not only its direct link with the 
life around it, w ith new social condi­
tions and the growth of people's 
awareness but also its ability to 
absorb and enrich itself from every­
thing that is genuinely progressive in 
the ideo log ica l^ and technological 
sense, «which is created by other tradi­
tio n s , sometimes even very remote 
ones.
Naturally, this process must take 
the form of mutual exchange and not 
be imposed from outside. To illustrate 
these remarks 1 should like to men­
tion a few well-known facts from the 
history of Russian music.
Did not Borodin, Balakirev, Mus­
sorgsky and Rimsky-Korsakov enrich 
their work by turning to individual spe­
cimens or elements of the fo lklore of 
the peoples of the East? How much 
poorer Russian music would be 
without Borodin’s Polovtsian Dances, 
Balakirev’s Islarriey, Mussorgsky's Per­
sian Dance and Rimsky-Korsakov’s 
Scheherazade and many other pages 
of Russian music about the East.
And then there is the dedicated 
work of a number of Moscow and 
Leningrad composers In the Central 
Asian republics, where an incredibly 
short period of time saw the emer­
gence of national schools of compo­
sition using the experience of Russian 
and W est European music to build their 
own national cultures.
The experience o f my country— I 
have in mind the period after the vic­
tory of the Great October Revolution—  
testifies to the fact that the efforts of 
several generations of Soviet musi­
cians to build a musical culture fo r all 
the peoples of the U.S.S.R. were 
directed along the right lines.
In order to appreciate the greatness 
of this task presented by history It­
self one must be able to envisage the 
vast size o f our country and the great 
variety of geographical and ethnic con­
ditions which mould the life and cha­
racter of its peoples, who speak and 
sing in a hundred and five languages.
In the complex process of founding 
a musical culture fo r the Soviet peo­
ples an important part is played by 
Russian classical music and the fine
traditions of the Russian school of 
composers. These traditions are 
deeply rooted in the everyday life drtfljjj 
culture of the Russian people. They 
have been further developed io-. tbe . 
new conditions of socialist life in- our 
multinational state.
The last thing I should want is that 
the development of our musical, cu l­
ture— composition, performing, teach­
ing and musicology— should appear 
to be smooth and entirely free from 
contradictions and difficulties. We 
have also had our difficulties and mis­
takes and irritating failures.
Nevertheless I am convinced that 
the direction of our searching was and 
remains a correct and fruitfu l one. 
This may be seen from the truly his­
toric accomplishments in the building 
of a progressive culture and art in the 
Soviet Asian republics which can be 
measured by quantitative and, more 
importantly, qualitative data of an In­
disputable kind.
The intensive advance of Soviet 
musical culture in breadth, embracing 
millions of people in all parts of o u r| 
country, has developed and Is still
20 The Unesco Courier - December 2001

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=21) 0

### 124771: Beethoven tames the jungle: a great Soviet composer presents his views on music without frontiers

C U L T U R E
J U N E  a S> 7  3
developing in depth, enriching our 
lives with bold, truly innovatory finds 
and: d iscoverie^d^
It should suffice to mention here the 
name of the great composer Sergei 
Prokofiev, who has given a mighty im­
pulse to the creative searchings o f  
many composers and performers all 
over the world. Another of. Prokofiev’s 
great contributions is his profoundly 
original discovery of the riches of Rus­
sian, and not only Russian, folkfmusic. 
f f ls h o w  ju s S ik e  to mention h ig 'flne  
second string quartet on Kabardinian- 
Balkar themes.
The world-famous composer Aram 
Khachaturian, who has d^lyed deep 
into the music of the Transcaucasian 
peoples, has succeeded in using this, 
basis to create symphonic works 
which have greatly influenced the 
developmental’: firs t and foremost, 
but not exclusively of his native A r |  
menian music.
The same can be said of the. crea­
tive role of the talented composer 
Kara Karayev who stands at the head 
o f an interesting and most promising 
schoolfipf composers in Soviet Azer­
baijan.
To my mind, those who support 
"protective tendencies” with respect 
to the musical cultures of non-Euro­
pean peoples, are somehow ignoring 
the realities, the generally! recognized
artistic values which have been and, 
■ am  convinced, w ill be created as a 
result of the bold, creative interven­
tion of the domposer in a sphere 
which is at firs t alien to him.
While rejecting the crude repression 
of one culture by another and the 
views current in  the West about cul­
tural genocide and the implanting of an 
alien musical culture, we cannot never­
theless agree with the appeals fo r 
complete isolation of one musical sys­
tem from another for the sake of pre­
serving these cultures in their orig inal 
purity.
I■■tET the Asian and African 
peoples who i;have created a high 
culture and a rich original folklore, 
develop their art and perfect th'e'ir 
musical speech, but at the same time 
let them not close their ears to the 
great achievements in the music of 
other peoples.
I remember the unforgettable im­
pression which a certain documentary 
left on me. It was a film- 'about the 
life of what appeared to be a very 
primitive Indi&n tribe living in an 
almost inaccessible area somewhere 
in the upper reaches of the Amazon.
Thesfi was a really moving scene in
it, where the chief and several o f the 
tribesmen listened to a tape-record- 
ing of the Beethoven violin concerto. 
On the faces of these people, who 
had just been shown at work, hunt­
ing, in ¿primitive everyday life, 
one saw extremely strong emotions 
verging on shock. Beethoven was 
addressing himself to a person from 
another world and that person was lis­
tening -to his speech and understand- 
ing U I
This seems to me to suggest the 
following conclusion. Music does not 
allow of nati'onaHimitations and does 
not need protective measures aimed 
at isolating one culture from another.
On the contrary, what is required 
is that countries possessing more 
developedfifneans of spreading musi­
cal culture, highly qualified specialists 
and teachers should come to the aid of 
peoples who suffered centuries o j  
colonial rule without the opportunity to 
develop their national culture freely.
O f course, this help should not turn 
into cultural “ aggression” . And musi­
cians who are sincerely concerned 
about the fate of music the whole 
world over, must try to find a common' 
language for affirming and preserving 
the great cultural values,. those which 
the peoples of the world have already 
created and those which they are sure 
to create in the future. ■
December 2001 - The Unesco Courier 21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=22) 0

### 124772: André Malraux: 'There is only one action over which indifferent stars and unchanging rivers have no sway: it is the action of a man who snatches something from death'

6There is on ly  
one action over 
which indiffer­
ent stars and un­
changing rivers 
have no sway: it 
is th e  a c t io n  
o f  a m an who  
snatches som e­
thing from deathi
Writer André Malraux (1901-1976) served as the French minister of cultural affairs between 1958 and 1969. He delivered this speech at the
U nesco-Berretty .
André 
M alraux :
The Unesco Courier - December 2001

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=23) 0

### 124772: André Malraux: 'There is only one action over which indifferent stars and unchanging rivers have no sway: it is the action of a man who snatches something from death'

C U L T U R E
the  following is the full text of an address delivered in 
Vnesco’s Headquarters on March 8 by André Malraux, 
French Minister of State for Cultural Affairs. M. Malraux 
was presiding at the ceremony which marked the launching 
of the International Campaign for the Preservation of the 
Monuments of Nubia.
★
n  March 8 1960, for the first time, the nations, 
though many of them even now are engaged in 
overt or open conflict, have been summoned to 
save by a united effort the fruits of a civilization on which 
none has a pre-emptive claim.
Such an appeal, in the last century, would have seemed 
fanciful. Not that Egypt was unknown then. Her 
spiritual greatness was surmised, her majestic monuments 
were admired. But if the !West knew Egypt better than 
it knew India or China, this was because it saw in her a 
province of the Bible. Through the Bible, Egypt, like 
Chaldaea, belonged to the dawn of our own history. Of 
the forty centuries Napoleon evoked as he stood before 
the Pyramids, the supreme moment was that in which 
they were beheld by Moses.
Temples have power to speak 
and statues acquire a soul
i t '  h e n ,  gradually, Egypt came into her own, though still 
J- within narrower -limits than one would imagine. The 
-pre-eminence of Graeco-Roman architecture and sculp­
ture was -never called in question; Baudelaire could speak 
of Egyptian “ naïveté.” These tremendous temples, these 
rapt masterpieces which for three thousand years 
had seemed to commune with each other in the 
same unchanging dream, were above all prized as 
records, the only ones bequeathed to us by the ancient 
East. Th;y fell within the domain of history rather than 
of art. In 1890 as in 1820, though the West was moved 
to study Egypt, it was not moved to safeguard her works.
With our own century, however, has come one of the 
greatest developments in man’s spiritual history. These
launching of the International Campaign for the Preservation of the
/ W A Y  a  S> <S O
The Unesco Courier. — May 1960
temples which had been looked on only as records 
have again become living witnesses; these statues have 
acquired a soul. Not, to be sure, the spirit which first 
informed them; but one which is their own, which we 
find nowhere else but in them, and which nobody before 
us has found there.
We talk of this art as a witness to a civilization, just 
as we say that Romanesque art bears witness to the 
Christianity of its time. Yet in fact we can only really 
comprehend a culture that .still survives. Egyptologists 
have done noble work: but the faith of a priest of Amon, 
the basic attitude of an Egyptian to the world around him, 
are beyond our grasp. The humour of the ostraca, the 
homely figurines, the text where a soldier calls Rameses II 
by his nickname as familiarly as his veterans used 
Napoleon, the worldly wisdom of the legal texts-—how 
are we to relate these to the Book of the Dead, to the 
funereal majesty of the great statues, to a civilization which 
for three thousand years seemed dedicated only to the 
celebration of the after-life?
Nefertiti haunts our painters 
Cleopatra Inspires our poets
T h e  only ancient Egypt which can come alive for us is 
the one conveyed toy its art—and this is an Egypt 
that never existed at all, any more than the kind of 
Christianity which would be inferred from Romanesque 
art if that were our only witness to it. Yet Egypt has 
survived in her art, not through famous names or lists of 
victories... Despite Kadesh, one of history’s decisive 
battles, despite the cartouches carved and recarved at the 
behest of the bold pharaoh seeking to force his lineage 
upon the gods, Sesostris has less meaning for us than the 
unfortunate Akhnaton. The face of Queen Nefertiti 
haunts our painters as Cleopatra has inspired our poets; 
but whereas Cleopatra is a queen without a face, Nefertiti, 
for us, is a face without a kingdom.
Egypt, then, survives by virtue of certain forms. And 
today we know that these forms, like those of all religious 
cultures, are not to be interpreted in terms of the living 
people they profess to portray but in terms of the 
conventions which raise these people to the other world.
At their highest expression, Egyptian conventions were 
designed to mediate between ephemeral men and the 
controlling stars. It is an art that consecrates night.
That is what we all must feel before the Sphinx at 
Gizefa, as I  remember doing last time I saw it at twilight.
I thought then, “ How the second, furthermost pyramid 
enfolds the view, and how it makes this colossal death- 
mask seem like the guardian of some trap set to lure the 
heaving desert and the darkness. This is the hour when 
the oldest fashioned forms recapture the soft murmur with 
which the desert echoes the timeless devotions of the East; 
the hour when they restore to life these places where the 
gods were heard; when they banish the immensity of 
chaos and order the stars which seemingly emerge from 
night simply to gravitate round them.”
CO NT'D  ON N EXT PAGE
Nubià, which introduced the concept of world heritage.
December 2001 - The Unesco Courier 23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=24) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

ISA  A V a S> <5 o


### 124772: André Malraux: 'There is only one action over which indifferent stars and unchanging rivers have no sway: it is the action of a man who snatches something from death'

In such a way, during three thousand years, Egyptian 
art translated the temporal into the eternal.
Let there be no misapprehension about this today: it 
is not as a  witness to the past that it moves us, nor as 
wihat used to be called beauty. "Beauty” has become one 
of our age’s most potent mysteries, the inexplicable quality 
which brings the Egyptian, masterpieces into communion 
with1 the statues of our own cathedrals, or the Aztec 
temples, or the Indian and Chinese grottoes; with the 
paintings of Cézanne and Van Gogih, with the greatest 
dead and the greatest living artists; with, in short, the 
whole treasury of the first world civilization.
This is an immense regeneration, of which our own 
Renaissance will soon seem a diffident prefiguring. For 
the first time, men have discovered a universal language 
of art. We feel its influence acutely, even if we only 
partly understand its nature. This tremendous store­
house of art, of which we are ¡now becoming 'conscious, 
draws its force no doubt from its being the most signal 
victory of human effort over death. To the impregnable 
“nevermore” that governs the history of civilizations, this 
art opposes its own mysterious grandeur.
Of the force that brought Egypt into being out of 
prehistoric night, nothing now remains; but the impulse
which engendered these giants which are threatened today 
still speaks to us as clearly as the genius of the master- 
craftsmen of Chartres, or the genius of Rembrandt. The 
emotion we share with file creators of these granite statues 
is not even one of love, nor a  common feeling for death— 
nor even, perhaps, a  similar way of looking at their work; 
yet before their work, the accents of anonymous sculptors 
forgotten during two thousand years seem to us as much 
untouched by the succession of empires as the accents of 
mother love.
This is what brings throngs of Europeans to exhibitions 
of Mexican art; of Japanese to exhibitions of French art; 
and millions of Americans to see Van Gogh. This is 
why the commemorative ceremonies of Rembrandt’s death 
were inaugurated by the last kings of Europe, and the 
exhibition of our own stained glass by the brother of the 
last Asian emperor. This is why, Mr. Director-General, 
so many sovereign names are associated with the appeal 
you are launching today.
One could not too highly praise your having conceived 
a plan so magnificent and so precise in its boldness—one 
might say, a  kind of Tennessee Valley Authority of 
archaeology. It is the antithesis of the kind of gigantic 
exhibitionism by which great modem states try to outbid 
each other. Nor should the well-defined object of your
ANDRÉ M ALRAUX (Continued)
T.V.A. OF 
ARCHAELOGY
ANCIENT POTTERS’ KILNS 
and pottery remains (photos 
centre and far right) were 
among the important discoveries 
made during recent excavations 
at Faras carried out by the 
Sudan Antiquities Service. 
Dr. Wiliiam Adams (in fore­
ground), an American archaeolo­
gist who was sent to  the Sudan 
by Unesco, collaborated in this 
work. Right, the Nile as seen 
from one of two fortresses on 
granite cliffs at Semna in the 
threatened area of the Sudan.
Photos ©  Almasy, Paris
The Unesco Courier - December 2001

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=25) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

/VA A v 1 9 6 O
The Unesco Courier. May I960
scheme conceal its profound significane. If U n e s c o  is 


### 124772: André Malraux: 'There is only one action over which indifferent stars and unchanging rivers have no sway: it is the action of a man who snatches something from death'

trying to rescue the monuments of Nubia, it is because 
these are in imminent danger; it goes without saying that 
it would try to save other great ruins—Angkor or Nara, 
for instance—if they were similarly threatened.
On behalf of man’s artistic heritage, you are appealing 
to the world’s conscience as others have been doing, this 
week, for the victims of the Agadir earthquake. “ May we 
never have to choose,” you said just now, “between 
porphyry statues and living men!” Yours is the first 
attempt to deploy, in a rescue operation, on behalf of 
statues, the immense resources usually harnessed for the 
service of men. And this is perhaps because for us the 
survival of statues has become an expression of life.
At the moment when our civilization divines a mysterious 
transcendence in art and one of the still obscure sources 
of its unity, at the moment when we are bringing into a 
single, family relationship the masterpieces of so many 
civilizations which knew nothing of or even hated each 
other, you are proposing an action which brings all men 
together to defy the forces of dissolution. Your appeal is 
historic, not because it proposes to save the temples of 
Nubia, but because through it the first world civilization 
publicly proclaims the world’s art as its indivisible heritage. 
In days when the West believed its cultural heritage had
its source in Athens, it could nonetheless look on with 
equanimity while the Acropolis crumbled away.
The slow flood of the Nile has reflected the melancholy 
caravans of the Bible, the armies of Cambyses and 
Alexander, the knights of Byzantium and Islam, the soldiers 
of Napoleon. No doubt when the sand-storm blows 
across it, its ancient memory no longer distinguishes the 
brilliant notes of Rameses’s triumph from the pathetic 
dust that settles again in the wake of defeated armies. 
And when the sand is scattered again, the Nile is once 
more alone with its sculpted mountains, its colossal effigies 
whose motionless reflection has for so long been part of 
its echo of eternity.
But see, old river, whose floods allowed astrologers to 
fix the most ancient date in history, men are coming now, 
from all parts of the world, who will carry these giants 
far away from your life-giving, destructive waters. Let 
the night fell, and you will reflect again the stars under 
which Isis accomplished her funeral rites, the star of 
Rameses. But the humblest worker come to rescue the 
statues of Isis and Rameses will tell you something you 
have always known but never heard from men before: 
that there is only one action over which indifferent stars 
and unchanging, murmurous rivers have no sway: it is 
the action of a man who snatches something from death.
December 2001 - The Unesco Courier 25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=26) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

C U L T U R E
E R T E  ISA B E R  0. S> 7 7
THE THREE RACES, a canvas by the Brazilian painter Emiliano di 
Cavalcanti, symbolizes the harmony reigning between the ethnic 
groups that went to form the population of Brazil.


### 124773: Where gods and men have mingled

WHERE 
GODS 
AND MEN 
HAVE 
MINGLED
by Jorge Amado
JORGE AM ADO , Member o f the Brazilian Academy, 
is one o f  Latin America's most widely read novelists. 
Since the appearance o f  his nove! Mar Muerto ("Dead 
Sea", 1961), which won him a reputation throughout 
Latin America, he has published over 15 books that 
have been translated into some 30 languages. Among 
his more recent works published in English are Gabriela 
(Chatto and Windus, London, 1963) and Doña Flor 
and Her Two Husbands (Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 
London, 1970).
BRAZIL Is a country of racial mixture. 
This is an obvious and ¡ncontrq-tf 
vertible fact. The Brazilian expert 
ment is of immense importance in the 
search for a solution to the terrible racial 
problem that afflicts the world. For in 
Brazil the most diverse races have con­
stantly been mingled.
What Brazilian could honestly claim to 
be of "pure" descent in a country where 
Iberians, Slavs, Anglo-Saxons, Magyars 
and others have become inextricably mix­
ed with black and Amerindian peoples 
and with Arabs, Jews and Japanese?
This continuing process is the funda­
mental reality of life in Brazil, and repre­
sents our own special contribution to 
world culture and the humanist tradition.
We are a racially mixed people, and 
the mixture has depended as much on 
the contribution of the black as on that of 
the white. We owe to the black peoples 
some of our most outstanding character­
istics: our ability, for example, to endure 
misery and oppression, to survive, in the 
toughest conditions, and to love life and 
laughter.
Born in 1912, Jorge Amado published many famous works, such as Home Is the Sailor, after this article. He died in August 2001.
26The Unesco Courier - December 2001

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=27) 0

### 124773: Where gods and men have mingled

_________ C U L T U R E
I ;
w?r*
Photo ©  Dominique Desjardins, Paris
It is to them that we owe the unfailing 
joyfulness that inspires our efforts to fight 
against and defeat backwardness, poverty 
and the many obstacles on our path to 
development. We owe this toughness 
and fighting spirit to the black blood 
which flows not only in our veins but also 
in our music, dance and other forms of 
artistic expression.
The culture of Brazil was formed in the 
struggle against racism and was born of 
the mingling of whites, blacks and Amer­
indians. The black element in Brazilian, 
society is inextricably mingled with the 
white, and Africa is a maternal presence 
in our midst.
But it would be ridiculous to claim that 
there are no racists in Brazil, for there are 
many. On the other hand, we do not 
have a racist philosophy of life: our out­
look is fundamentally anti-racist, based 
as it is on intermingling.
The vigorous "negro" art of the sculptor 
Agnaldo da Silva, without equal in Brazil 
today, is not exclusively black. It bears 
traces of white and- Iberian influences in 
both form and subject: Agnaldo's Oxossi 
is also St. George.
It is all the more unfortunate, then, that 
a distorted image of our way of life is 
sometimes presented abroad. The African 
contribution, which is of fundamental im­
portance to Brazilian culture, is glossed 
over or pushed into the background.
This is a totally false approach. Through 
a curious reversal of the colonial mentality, 
there is a tendency to put the spotlight on 
painters, writers and singers with the 
blackest possible skins. This attempt to 
prove the absence of racial prejudice in 
Brazil actually indicates a preoccupation 
which is totally alien to the Brazilian philo­
sophy of life.
The blackest girls are chosen to sing, 
but no attention is paid to the fact that 
they sing songs more strongly marked 
by Iberian than black influence, although 
Brazilian music derives primarily from the 
atabiques of Africa.
The paintings shown tend to be typical 
examples of the Paris School—the 
important thing is that the artists' skins 
are black. Brazilian painters like Tarsila 
and Di Cavalcanti are neglected, although 
their work displays the black African in­
fluences which, along with white, Amerin­
dian and Japanese elements, have pro­
duced an art which is uniquely Brazilian.
We must proclaim to the world at large 
the tremendous importance of the African 
presence in Brazil, in our life, culture and 
in the faces of our people.
The black African has contributed to all 
the great achievements of Brazil. The 
presence of Africa with its sunlight and 
shadow can be felt in the prophets, saints 
and angels which the mestizo sculptor 
Aleijadinho (1730-1814) carved in the 
mining region of Minas Gerais.
Africa is present in the music of Villa 
Lobos and Dorival Caymini, in the Orixas 
and Madonnas of Agnaldo, in the poetry 
of Gregorio de Matos, Castro Alves and 
Vinicius de Moraes. It is present in the 
dancing, and the singing, the gentleness, 
the friendliness and the expansive imagi­
nation of everything great in Brazil.
For here in Brazil gods and men have, 
happily, become inextricably mingled.
I Jorga Amado
December 2001 - The Unesco Courier 27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=28) 0

### 124774: The Universal and the particular

C U L T U R E
D  E  C  E  iyi B  E  R  a  S> S> 3
^ North-South: beyond 
the great divide
In a world divideihetw em  haves am have-nots domination 
the hidden face o f progress? O r should we see progress within the context 
o f a single world facing the same problem, albeit to different degrees? 
How far is it possible to imagine a definition o f progress that would be 
universally applicable?
The universal and 
the particular
IS by Joseph Ki-Zerbo I
F
O R  some time, I have been arguing that the 
idea of universality is p u t forw ard by 
people in centres of power and places that 1 
dominate the rest of the world. The spectacle of 
the chaos reigning in the modern world impels 
us to  f^l| back on this idea as though  on a 
fortress. W hen danger threatens we use it like a 
lifebuoy, clinging to it because we feel that it can 
save the world.-
N ow  terms such as the universal, progress 
and development need to be approached with 
great vigilance and in a critical spirit. I agree 
that we should talk about the universal, but 
w ithout overlooking its counterpart, the par­
ticular; and we should relate them to each other 
dialectically rather than as a pair of opposites. 
The universal feeds on particular cases, and par­
ticular cases must make use of the universiM jl 
This dialectical approach seems to  me tci;: 
revalidate the idea of the universal, providing it 
is agreed from the outset that there is a piece of 
the universal in every individual. As regards 
democracy, for instance, either we say that the 
dem ocracy the w orld  needs is b f the type 
designed in the West—which is liable to be met 
with counter-arguments or even fierce objections 
to any such intrusion—or we seek to  find in 
every culture some starting point or predispo­
sition towards democracy.
To take the case of Africa, that continent’s
Joseph Ki-Zerbo, who is now 80, was president of the Association of African Historians from 1975 to August 2001.
28The U n e s c o  Courier - December 2001

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=29) 0

### 124774: The Universal and the particular

C U  L T  U R E
Above, Jour de fête 
(1984), acrylic on canvas 
( 100 x 300 cm), by the 
Moroccan-born artist 
Fatima Hassan.
Below left, Germination 
(1992), by the Brazilian 
painter Kinkas.
JOSEPH KI-ZERBO, 
of Burkina Faso, is a noted 
historian who was general 
editor of the first volume o f 
UNESCO's eight-voiume General 
History of Africa. He :is the 
author of a history of black 
Africa (Histoire de I’Afrique 
noire, 1978).
llis to ry  obviously contains advance pointers to 
the state as an institution based on the rule of law. 
Africans have a sayin|j;“The king does not have 
royalty, royalty has the king”, meaning that even 
a king is subjeci to a higher authority. This idea 
suggests that of the rule of law. I have confirmed 
this mysdfpin the case of the emperor of the 
Mossi, who remained seated while people around 
him continually made suggestions as to what he 
should do. H e was literally the first slave of law 
and custom.
This gives the lie to our modern African dic­
tators, w ho claim that democracy has never 
existed in Africa and is an idea alien to our culture. 
Africans who think this ignore the reality of their 
culture and history. This type of particularism is 
to be avoided.
O r again, consider man’s relationship with 
nature, with health, with life and death. In this area 
every culture has good and bad, positive and neg­
a tiv e  aspects. The universal must operate on the 
basis of positive particulars. N one of us, I think, 
defends a “tribalization” of principles. The uni­
versality of human rights is a just idea for the 
simple reason that we all have a human identity. It 
is as human beings that we all claim the applica­
tion of these rights.
O n the subject of progress, I recently wrote, 
“It’s all very well to  move fast as long as you 
know where you’re going”. We cannot speak of
progress solely in relation to means: the direction 
and purpose must be defined from the outset. In 
short, we cannot speak of progress without raising 
the question of erids: and this raises an ethical 
problem, since we have to choose a modelibr a 
plan for society. This aspect of the matter is often 
left out of the discussion. What kind of society do 
we want to  build? In this context development 
has tended to mask—-and even to prom ote— 
dom ination. Some W estern leaders—I am 
thinking of Ronald Reagan in particularSlfave 
said, “They sfiould do as we do! ” O n that basis, 
development becomes ,a way of imposing a pre­
determined model.
It is important to realize that the human and 
social sciences are lagging behind the other sci­
ences. In my opinion no development is pos­
sible w ithout the development of the former. In 
the last ten years the world has witnessed a mul­
titude of events that no-one foresaw because far 
too much priority has been given to the sciences 
that contribute to material development. People 
have devoted themselves to the accessories of 
intelligence, to the detriment of the brainwork 
that is the prime mover of human progress.
We have reached the point where people’s 
individuality has been dismembered, split into 
fragments. They have lost touch w ith certain 
transcendent values and they have lost their 
sense of community. By way of illustration of
December 2001 - The Unesco Courier 29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=30) 0

### 124774: The Universal and the particular

C U L T U R E
D E C E M B E R  a S> S> 3
O n/O ff ( 1991), 
a mixed-media work 
measuring 48 x 39 x 25 cm 
by Romuald Hazoumé, an 
artist from Benin.
this process ano ther p icture  comes to  m y 
mind—that of the god-king Osiris, whose body 
was chopped up in to  pieces by his b ro ther 
before being pu t back together again. I believe 
that this Egyptian m yth is relevant today to 
human society as a whole: it is time to recon­
s t r u c t  man and pu t him together again.
Intellectuals can plky a crucial part in this 
respect, no t only by weaving the dreams and 
myths that hum an beings need to give them a 
reason for living, bu t also by blazing the trail 
towards solidarity and mutual recognition on 
the basis o f universal values. A  Senegalese, stu­
dent recently said to me, “Professor, what we are 
interested in today is not development, bu t hap­
piness.” I was impressed by his remark. A t a time 
w hen everyone is talking about progress and 
development, this young man brings us back to 
the essentials. N o  doubt people wilF’Say that 
happiness is as hard to define as progress. All the 
same, it is w hat we should be aiming for.
U niversality as the West understands it is a 
truncated  concept. I t  is based only  on  one 
sequence of history. I have often rebuked my 
Western colleagues for their lack of receptiveness 
to  other histories, their hermetic approach, and 
their tendency to think that things have only 
been happening in  the last four centuries. If 
they do go further back, it is to  make ancient 
Greece the absolute starting point, forgetting 
that Greece was itself influenced by other his­
tories, especially that of Egypt, which in tu rn j 
owes much to Africg.'r
But let us go back to  Ronald Reagan’s posi­
tion. It does not hold water. Take the question 
of energy consumption. If the world’s per capita 
energy consum ption  was as high as tha t o f l  
N o rth  America, the consequences w ould be 
devastating. I t is no t enough to say that this;3 
model is undesirable; it is impossible. Wanting 'i 
everyone to adopt it is a tragic mistake. Western 
thought, by persisting on this ecumenical path, 
actually tends towards exclusiveness.
C ould we no t get intellectuals to tu rn  their 
attention seriously to  this dialectic between the 
universal and the particular? This w ould lead to 
agreement on some intangible principles which a 
hold good for all hum an beings, such as respect j 
for life and m an’s relationship w ith nature and 
knowledge. W hat’s the point of advocating uni­
versality w hen in my country 70 to 75 per cent ., 
of the population can neither read nor write? In 
Africa we are moving directly, from  an oral tra­
dition to  the post-industrial era of the audiovi­
sual, skipping the crucial stage of writing.
It is utopian to  propose the application of ! 
universal values to  peoples in situations where . 
the conditions for this do not exist. The principle 
of intercom m unication, w hereby individuals 
get to  know  themselves and communities get to  Í 
know  each other, is essential. I have already : 
suggested that the right to  know  oneself and to 
be know n should be added to  the list o f basic 
hum an rights. M any people, especially in the 
developed countries, think nowadays that there 
is nothing interesting to  be learned in the coun­
tries of the South. People w ho go there as j 
tourists do no t really enter into their histories, 
their cultures o r their civilizations. This makes 
it impossible to  achieve the “co-responsibility” ! 
we sometimes hear about.
The foundations of universality need to  be 
strengthened and another organization of peo­
ples established. People say that the U nited 
N ations O rganization represents the peoples 
of the w orld, bu t today this is no longer true. 
States have gained the upper hand. They have 
been described as cold monsters, bu t I wonder 
w hether they are no t deep-frozen monsters.
Transcending the paradigm of the national 
state, a legacy of nineteenth-century Europe, seems 
to me one possible route to the universal. Modern 
man’s technological achievements are creating 
new patterns, a new image of the world which 
makes this framework obsolete. We must tran­
scend the nation-state and move towards the estab­
lishment of livelier and more receptive communi- i 
ties. Movement in that direction will bring us 
closer to the universal, and to  progress. ■
30 The Unesco Courier - December 2001

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=31) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

C U L T U R E
J U N E  1  S> 5  <S
fcfghanistan
jp.sian ‘M an 
B of G a u l’
In 1922, French archaeologists brought 
light some remarkable sculpture in 
j '̂the ruins o f Hadda, near Jelalabad, 
felMghanistan. The figures, made o f lime 
g^laster or stucco and originally b ril­
liantly coloured, had decorated the 
ff waljs of innumerable stupas and monas- 
f<  teries. But the real significance of 
||ffiis sculpture is its obvious Greco- 
Roman inspiration. In this region,
“No man’s land”  o f ancient conque- 
ffjfors, there had flourished a Greco- 
MRoman Buddhist art of singular beauty, 
llih e  fragment of the figure holding a 
J||apful of flowers (left), fo r example,
|  is believed to  be a model of the Roman 
|g||àirtrait o f Antinous, favourite o f the 
¡Iffnperor Hadrian. And the tit le  
|||W arrior o f ancient Gaul”  could easily 
be applied to  the head, lower left.
¡¿'•Most of the sculpture at Hadda dates 
'" ’from the 3 rd to  the 5th centuries A.D. 
flpr-ther artistic development was pre­
sented by the invasion of the Huns 
pin the 6th century. (See page 2 for 
jHfcher Greco-Roman Buddhist art)
M usée G u im et, Paris
The Unesco Courier
C o p y rig h t Francis B runei
W orld’s largest Buddhist statue
To the north west of Kabul, capital of Afghanistan, in a green and fertile valley surrounded by 
pink and rose red mountains, lies Bamiyan. In ancient times i t  was a stopping place on the 
caravan route which linked Central Asia to  India, and through i t  passed Buddhist pilgrims and 
missionaries. Between the 1st and the 3rd centuries A.D. Buddhist monks at Bamiyan carved 
innumerable shrines and monastic cells out o f the sandstone rocks. The invasion by the 
Mongol hordes of Ghengis Khan in the I 3th century brought ruin to the countryside around 
Bamiyan and devastation to  the Buddhist shrines and sculptures. The two most imposing 
relics which still exist are colossal statues of Buddha, one 173 feet high, the other 120, 
carved out of the cliffside. Photo, left, shows the largest of these statues (the largest statue 
o f Buddha in the world). A man can easily walk upright in the opening between the toes. 
Above, the second statue in its diffside niche, surrounded by the openings of former shrines
The Bamiyan Buddhas were destroyed by the Taliban in March 2001.
December 2001 - The U n e s c o  Courier 31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=32) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

C U L T U R E
J U N E  a  S> S> 6


### 124775: Culture must be one of the foundations for world understanding

A s it w as.
( p Ù R I E R  D e c e m b e r  1 9 5 1
Culture must be one of the foundations for world 
understanding’
by Albert Einstein (1879-1955)
In order to grasp the full significance of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, it is well to be fully aware 
of the world situation  th a t gave b ir th  to the U nited 
Nations and to UNESCO. The devastation wrought by the 
wars of the last half century had brought home the fact 
to everybody th a t, with the present-day level of t e c t  
nical achievement, the security of nations could be based 
only on supra-national institutions and rules of conduct. 
It was understood that, in the long run , an all-destroying 
conflict can be avoided only by the setting up of a world 
federation of nations.
So—as a modest beginning of international order— 
the United Nations was founded. This organization, how­
ever, is but a meeting ground for delegates of national 
governments and not for the peoples’ representatives 
acting independently on the basis of their own personal 
convictions. Furtherm ore, U.N. decisions do not have 
binding force on any national government; nor do any con­
crete means exist by which the decisions can be enforced.
The effectiveness of the United Nations is still fur­
ther reduced by the fact that membership has been refused 
to certain nations, whose exclusion seriously affects the 
supra-national character of the organization. Yet, in itself, 
the fact tha t international problems are brought up and 
discussed in the broad light of day favours the peaceful 
solution of conflicts. The existence of a supra-national 
platform of discussion is apt to accustom the peoples grad­
ually to the idea th a t national interests must be safe­
guarded by negotiation and not by brute force.
This psychological or educational effect I regard as 
the United Nations’ most valuable feature. A world fed­
eration presupposes a new kind of loyalty on the part of 
man, a sense of responsibility that does not stop short at 
national boundaries. To be tru ly  effective, such loyalty 
must embrace more than purely political issues. Under­
standing among different cultural groups, mutual eco­
nomic and cultural aid are the necessary additions.
Only by such endeavour will the feeling of confidence 
be established tha t was lost owing to the psychological 
effect of the wars and sapped by the narrow philosophy 
of militarism and power politics. No effective institution
for the collective security of nations is possible without 
understanding and a measure of reciprocal confidence.
To the U .N . was added UNESCO, the agency whose 
function it is to pursue these cultural tasks. It has in a 
greater measure than the U .N . been able to avoid the 
paralyzing influence of power politics.
Realizing that healthy international relations can be 
created only among populations made up of individuals 
who themselves are healthy and enjoy a measure of inde­
pendence, the United Nations elaborated a Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, which was adopted by 
the U.N. General Assembly on 10 December 1948.
The Declaration establishes a number of universally 
comprehensible standards tha t are designed to protect 
the individual, to prevent his being exploited economically, 
and to safeguard his development and the free pursu it 
of his activities within the social framework,
To spread these standards among all U .N . Member 
States is rightly regarded and aimed at as an im portant 
objective. UNESCO has accordingly instituted this th ird  
celebration for the purpose of drawing attention far and 
wide to these fundamental aspirations as a basis on which 
to restore the political health of the peoples.
I t was scarcely to be avoided tha t the Declaration 
should take the form of a legalistic document, which in 
its rigidity may lead to endless discussion. It is impossible 
for such a text to take the great diversity of conditions 
of life in  the different countries fully into account; in 
addition, it is unavoidable that such a text admits various 
interpretations of detail. The general tendency of the 
Declaration, however, is unmistakable and provides a 
suitable, generally acceptable basis for judgment and 
action.
To give formal recognition to standards and to adopt 
them as the guiding lines of action in the teeth of all the 
adversities of a changing situation are two very different 
things—as the impartial observer may see particularly in 
the history of religious institutions. The Declaration will 
only exert effective influence, when the United Nations 
itself shows by its decisions and actions that it does embody, 
de facto, the spirit of this, its own Declaration. ■
Albert Einstein (1879-1955) invented the theory of relativity and received the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1921.
32 The U n e sc o  Courier - December 2001

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=33) 0

### 124776: The Divorce of science and 'culture', a phenomenon of our time

S C I  E N C  E »
A  phenomenon of our time
THE DIVORCE  
OF S C IE N C E  
& ‘C U L T U R E ’
by Bertrand Russell
T h e r e  was a time when scientists looked askance at 
attempts to make their work widely intelligible. 
But, in the world of the present day, such an 
attitude is no longer possible. The discoveries of modem 
science have put into the hands of governments 
unprecedented powers both for good and for evil. Unless 
the statesmen who wield these powers have at least an 
elementary understanding of their nature, it is scarcely 
likely tha t they will use them wisely. And, in democratic 
countries, it is not only statesmen, but the general public, 
to whom some degree of scientific understanding is 
necessary.
To insure wide diffusion of such understanding is by no 
means easy. Those Who can act effectively as liaison 
officers between technical scientists and the public 
perform a work which is necessary, not only for human 
welfare, but even for bare survival of the human race. 
I think that a great deal more ought to be done in this 
direction in the education of those who do not intend 
to become scientific specialists. The Kalinga Prize is 
doing a  great public service in encouraging those who 
attempt this difficult task.
In my own country, and to a lesser degree in other 
countries of the West, “culture” is viewed mainly, by an 
unfortunate impoverishment of the Renaissance tradition, 
as something concerned primarily with literature, history 
and art. A man is not considered uneducated if he 
knows nothing of the contributions of Galileo, Descartes 
and their successors. I am convinced that all higher 
education should involve a course in the history of science 
from the seventeenth century to the present day and a  
survey of modern scientific knowledge in so far as this 
can be conveyed without technicalities. While such 
knowledge remains confined to specialists, it is scarcely 
possible nowadays for nations to conduct their affairs 
with wisdom.
There are two very different ways of estimating any 
human achievement: you may estimate it by what you 
consider its .intrinsic excellence; or you may estimate it 
by its causal efficiency in transforming human life and 
human institutions. I am not suggesting that one of 
these ways of estimating is preferable to the other. I am 
only concerned to point out th a t they give very different 
scales of importance. If Homer and Aeschylus had not 
existed, if Dante and Shakespeare had not written a line, 
if Bach and Beethoven had been silent, the daily life of 
most people in the present day would have been much 
what it is. But if Pythagoras and Galileo and James Watt 
had not existed, the daily life, not only of Western 
Europeans and Americans but of Indian, Russian and 
Chinese peasants, would be profoundly different from 
what it is. And these profound changes are still only 
beginning. They must affect the future even more than 
they have already affected the present.
At present, scientific technique advances like an army 
of tanks that have lost their drivers, blindly, ruthlessly,
F E B R U A R Y  a S> 5 8
without goal or purpose. This is largely because the men 
who are concerned with human values and with making 
life worthy to be lived, are still living in imagination in 
the old pre-industrial world, the world tha t has been made 
familiar and comfortable by the literature of Greece and 
the pre-industrial achievements of the poets and artists 
and composers whose (work we rightly admire.
The separation of science from "culture” is a modem 
phenomenon. Plato and Aristotle had a profound respect 
for what was known of science in their day. The Re­
naissance was as much concerned with the revival of 
science as with art and literature. Leonardo da Vinci 
devoted more of his energies to science than to painting. 
The Renaissance architects developed the geometrical 
theory of perspective. Throughout the eighteenth century 
a very great deal was done to diffuse understanding of the 
work of Newton and his contemporaries. But, from the 
early nineteenth century onwards, scientific concepts and 
scientific methods became increasingly abstruse and the 
attempt to make them generally intelligible came more 
and more to be regarded as hopeless. The modern theory 
and practice of nuclear physicists has made evident with 
dramatic suddenness tha t complete ignorance of the 
world of science is no longer compatible with survival.
The above is the text of the address (with minor deletions■) 
delivered by Bertrand Russell, on receiving the Kalinga Prize, at 
Unesco House, on January 28, 1958.
©  W adington Studios Ltd., London
Bertrand Russell (1872-1970) was a British mathematician and philosopher who was also renowned for his commitment to pacifism 
and nuclear disarmament. He received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1950.
December 2001 - The U n e s c o  Courier 33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=34) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

S C I E N C E
A U G U S T  1. S> 8 <S


### 124777: The Pugwash movement

The Pugwash movement
by Joseph Rotblat
THE direct initiative for the Pugwash 
Movement came not from a scientist 
but from the British philosopher Ber­
trand Russell. In 1955, the world situation 
appeared highly dangerous and the outlook 
for mankind very gloomy. The development of 
the hydrogen bomb in the United States and 
the Soviet Union marked the start of the nu­
clear arms race, with both sides manufactur­
ing and testing bombs of ever-increasing des­
tructive power. Even at that time, before the 
advent of ballistic missiles, these bombs delB 
vered by manned aircraft could annihilate the 
largest centres of population. In the climate of 
intense mistrust, fear, and hostile propaganda 
which then prevailed, it seemed highly prob­
able that the cold war would change into a hot 
war in which civilization would be destroyed.
It was in these circumstances that the Rus- 
sell-Einstein Manifesto was born. Russell 
conceived the idea that the scientific com­
munity should be actively concerned about 
the dangers to humanity which arose largely 
through the work of scientists. At that time the 
greatest living scientist was Albert Einstein, 
and Russell wrote to him with the idea of 
convening a conference of eminent scientists
for this purpose. Einstein immediately agreed 
and asked Russell to prepare a draft of a 
suitable statement. This Russell did and in 
April 1955 sent it to Einstein for his signature.
Later that month, Russell was flying from 
Rome to Paris, when the pilot announced to 
the passengers that Einstein had died. Rus­
sell was shattered, because he feared that 
without Einstein’s sponsorship the whole pro­
ject would collapse. But when Russell arrived 
at his hotel in Paris, a letter with Einstein’s 
signature to the statement was waiting for 
him. Signing it had been one of the last acts of 
the great scientist’s life. In this dramatic way 
the Pugwash Movement began. The signa­
tures of nine other scientists from six coun­
tries were obtained, and on 9 July 1955 the 
Manifesto was issued at a press conference 
held at Caxton Hall in London.
The press conference was attended by a 
very large number of media representatives 
from all over the world; it was a great success 
and received huge publicity. This in turn 
brought a flood of letters and cables from 
individuals and groups endorsing the Manif 
festo and offering help. One of the letters was 
from Mr. Cyrus Eaton, a Canadian-American
industrialist, offering to finance' the : confer­
ence of scientists which was called for in the 
Manifesto, and suggesting that it be held at his 
birthplace, Pugwash, a small fishing village jn 
Nova Scotia.
In his offer of help Eaton made it clear that 
while the participants would be his guests 
they would be completely independent; that 
the preparatory work and organization would 
be handled by Russell and his colleagues, 
and that the conduct and proceedings of the 
Conference would be left entirely to the parti­
cipants.
The first of the series of conferences of 
scientists held under the aegis of the Russell- 
Einstein Manifesto took place in Pugwash In 
July 1957. The twenty-two participants came 
from ten countries, including the United 
States, the United Kingdom, France, the 
Soviet Union, China and Poland. The work 
was divided among three committees, with 
the following topics: hazards arising from the 
use of atomic energy in peace and war; con­
trol of nuclear weapons; and the social 
responsibility of scientists.
The possible hazard from the radioactive 
fall-out from nuclear weapons tests was a ►
Peace on the singing constellation of the waters
Jostling like the shoulders of the crowd
Peace in the sea’s waves of goodwill
Peace on the resting place of the foundering
Peace on the drums of arrogance and the darkened pupils
And if I am the interpreter of the waves
Peace also on me.
Vicente Huidobro (Chile) 
Uonumento al mar
Born in 1909 in Warsaw (Poland), Joseph Rotblat received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1995.
34 The UfiiEScpiourier - December 2001

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=35) 0

### 124777: The Pugwash movement

S C I  E N C  E I
A U G U S T  1 S> 8 <S
^  major issue at that time, and it was of con­
siderable importance that such an internation­
al group of scientists, covering a wide range of 
political opinion, managed to reach unani­
mous agreement on the quantitative assess­
ment of the consequences of large-scale test­
ing of nuclear weapons. The most controver­
sial issue was the discussion in the committee 
on the control of nuclear weapons, because 
this included the whole area of arms limita­
tions and reductions, and the steps needed to 
achieve general and complete disarmament, 
topics which were to occupy most of the time 
of future Pugwash Conferences. But there 
was unanimous agreement that scientists can 
and ought to contribute to the debate on these 
problems.
The committee on the social responsibility 
of scientists was also unanimous in its find­
ings, which took the form of a statement of 
common beliefs. The fact that a long 
statement, dealing in some detail with the 
most controversial issues of the day, and 
setting out the role and responsibility of scien­
tists, was accepted by such a diverse group of 
scientists, was in itself of great significance. 
This was probably the first time that a truly 
international conference, organized by scien­
tists, with participants from East and West, 
had been convened to discuss not purely 
technical matters but the social implications of 
scientific discovery.
The first Pugwash Conference proved that 
scientists have a common purpose which can 
transcend national frontiers without violating 
basic loyalties. It had shown that, by virtue of 
their training and their knowledge, scientists 
are capable of discussing objectively the com­
plex problems which have arisen from the 
progress of science, with the aim of finding a 
solution to these problems.
The realization of this unanimity of intent 
decided the participants to make further 
efforts in the same direction. For this purpose, 
a Continuing Committee of five persons was
set up at the end of the Conference, with 
instructions to organize further conferences of 
a similar nature. This was the go-ahead for the 
setting up of a Movement of Scientists, which 
takes its name “The Pugwash Conferences 
on Science and World Affairs” from the venue 
of'the first meeting.
Since then, the following characteristics of 
Pugwash have gradually evolved: partici­
pants in conferences and meetings are invited 
in their personal capacity and represent no­
body but themselves ;-tHey are scientists (this 
term being used in Its broadest sense) and 
cover a wide spectrum of ideologicai and 
geographical groupings within the scientific 
community; the debates in Pugwash meet­
ings are conducted in the scientific spirit; as a 
private and independent entity, Pugwash 
does not usually undertake joint action with 
other organizations, except the United Na­
tions and its specialized agencies, such as 
Unesco.
The role and responsibility of scientists has 
always been a matter of special concern for 
Unesco: the Preamble to its Constitution con­
tains the famous declaration “ ...since wars 
begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of 
men that the defences of peace must be 
constructed.” In 1982, Unesco organized 
jointly with Pugwash a symposium on the 
theme of “Scientists, the Arms Race and Dis­
armament” , the conclusions and recom­
mendations of which set forth specific tasks 
for scientists to undertake in the fulfilment of 
their social obligations. These recommenda­
tions are based on the development of ideas 
put forward in Pugwash Conferences since 
1957.
One unique characteristic of Pugwash is 
absence of rigidity in its make-up and a mini­
mum of formalized structure. There Is no writ­
ten constitution and no formal membership; 
any scientist who has attended a Pugwash 
conference automatically becomes a "Pug- 
washite” . However, being without a constitu­
tion is not the same as acting entirely arbitrar­
ily. In the course of time certain guiding princk 
pies have evolved. These are usually re­
viewed every five years at the Quinquennial 
Conference, which serves as a kind of Gener­
al Assembly, which all who have participated 
in at least two Pugwash conferences in the 
past are entitled to attend.
Although the largest attendance so far, at 
the 1977 Quinquennial, was 223, it has never 
been the intention to confine the Movement’s 
activities to a small group of scientists. One 
way of involving more participants has been to 
set up national Pugwash groups, and by 1982 
such groups existed in thirty-six countries. An 
example of a regular activity by a national 
group is the International Summer School of 
Disarmament and Arms Control organized 
biennially by the Italian Pugwash Group.
There are also Pugwashites in thirty-nine 
other countries, but they are not numerous 
enough to form national groups. In such 
cases, regional groups are set up such as 
those which exist today for Africa and Latin 
America.
Today the Pugwash Movement is estab­
lished as an Important and effective channel 
of communication between scientists for the 
study and discussion of many of the complex 
issues which confront mankind at the present 
time. Participation in these conferences by 
eminent scientists from East and West, North 
and South, and the constructive proposals 
which have emerged from the discussions, 
particularly in relation to disarmament, have 
secured for the Pugwash Conferences the 
respect of the scientific community, of gov­
ernments, and of many sectors of society. The 
name “Pugwash” has become a symbol of 
successful international debate on controver­
sial issues, and the conferences are cited as a 
model for similar efforts in other fields.
The success of the Pugwash Conferences 
is the result of resolute efforts of a group of 
scientists determined to retain an indepen­
dent and unbiased outlook, and anxious to 
build and consolidate international under­
standing and co-operation. The Conferences 
have shown that it is possible to apply the 
scientific approach, which has proved so suc­
cessful in science and technology, to prob­
lems which are only Indirectly related to sci­
ence. They have shown that even when deal­
ing with highly controversial matters, it is 
possible to tell the truth without being abusive, 
to be candid without trying to embarrass, pro­
vided that there is a common approach based 
on scientific objectivity and mutual respect. ■
JOSEPH ROTBLAT, of the United Kingdom, isa  
founder member of the Pugwash Movement, and 
was its first Secretary-General (1957-1973). To­
day Professor Emeritus o f Physics at the Uni­
versity o f London, he has campaigned for many 
years in favour of arms control and disarmament. 
He is the author o f numerous publications on 
world affairs, nuclear energy and the quest for 
peace, including the official history o f Pugwash. 
He was general editor o f Scientists, the Arms 
Race and Disarmament, a Unesco-Pugwash 
Symposium published by Unesco in 1982. The 
present text has been extracted from the author’s 
contribution to a series o f studies which Unesco 
is publishing on the origins of peace movements 
in different parts o f the world.
December 20 0 1-The U n e s c o  Courier 35

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=36) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

I S  C  I E
/VIARCH 1 . 992


### 124778: Vandana Shiva talks to Judithe Bizot, interview

I N T E R V I E W
VANDANA SHIVA
talks to Judithe Bizot
Vandana Shiva is an Indian physicist and feminist militant 
who works with many community action groups fighting against 
environmental destruction. In this interview she examines the links 
between the ecological crisis, the marginalization of women 
and the dominant model of economic development.
■ You are a physicist who abandoned your 
country’s nuclear energy programme to 
devote yourself to nature and to halting its 
destruction. How did you reach your present 
position?
E- Ever since I was a chilfflove and knowledge’̂  
of nature 'have given me my deepest satisfac- . 
tion. I was very .lucky to have the.
daughter of a forester in India and to have 
■grown up in the Himalayan forest. Then I 
studied physics. The real basics of nature as 
defined in the reductionist scheme of things 
are understood through physics, the foundar 
tion of all the sciences. I had the opportunity ; 
to study biology and chemistry too, but real, 
profound understanding of nature was sup­
posed to be reached through physics. Then I 
went into nuclear physics, where I experienced 
massive disappointments. It was only when I 
was doing my master’s degree that I realized 
how unthinking nuclear scientists were about 
the question of radiation hazards. We were 
taught how to create chain reactions in nuclfear';* 
material and we knew all about energy translg 
formations, and so on, but nothing about the 
interaction of radiation with living systems!» 
I learned about radiation impacts from my s 
sister, who is a dosfer. When I was working 
in a nuclear reactor in India she kept saying: 
“Promise me you’re never going to go back 
there!” “But why?” I’d say and,she; would 
reply, “but you could have babies with muta­
tions. You don’t know what’s going to happen 
to you.”
When I was. groping my way and 
exploring these issues, senior physicists would 
say, “You don’t need to know these things.” 
Again this was an exclusion and a violation 
of my search for knowledge. If science means 
to know, then Ijhad no scientific training. So 
I went to Canada and enrolled on a Founda- 
tiljis of Physics programme, where some of 
the basic questions about science that were 
troubling me were being asked.
I knew that if I continued studying the 
foundations of quantum theory I should be 
marginal to my situation and I decided that
Vandana Shiva, a leading figure in the “anti-globalization” movement, created the
’ The Unesco Courier - December 2001

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=37) 0

### 124778: Vandana Shiva talks to Judithe Bizot, interview

S  C  I E N C E I
M A R C H  1S>S>2
I  must do something to relate myself to tie 
Indian context. I shifted to science and tech- 
nology policy issues, in the meantime, the 
Chipko movement had been created and 
. because this had happened where I was from, 
I feept going back and doing, volunteer work 
and writing for them. Before I knew where 
I was, ecology had become my primary
■ What is the Chipko movement? In your 
book Staying Alive you talk of the forest, for 
instance, not as a product for the market but 
as prakiti—a life-giving force. You talk of the 
importance of women in the struggle against 
the massive consumption of natural resources.
— I responded to the destruction of the forest 
first because I was a child, of the Himalayan 
forests. They were my identity and my sense 
of being. The erosion of the forests' hit me very ' 
hard. Just before I left for Canada, I wanted 
to go back and visit a favourite spot of mine, 
a place where the British had built lovely rest 
houses from which the foresters managed the 
forests. There was one I particularly loved, 
near a stream in the beautiful oak forest. I 
went back there, and the oak forest had 
become a mere sprinkling of trees, and the 
stream was no longer gushing with water. 
When I talked to the people in the area I found 
that the stream had disappeared because they 
had cut the oak forest down to plant applei; 
Orchards, an enterprise which had never really 
been successful. (Apple trees need very fertile 
soil and virgin forest is usually cut down for 
this purpose.)
As for my involvement with Chipko;ia 
movement of Himalayan women dedicatedto 
the protection of the environment, I nrstgot 
to know a leading figure in the movement 
named Sundarlal Batingujia, who was a great 
inspiration to people like myself. But at a 
second and more lasting level my involvement 
was with the ordinary women who form the 
bedrock of Chipko. It was their perceptions 
and their beliefs that were the really rich foun­
dations of'my knowledge of ecology. They
offered me a new sensibility about relation­
ships. Ordinary jpople don’t theorize. They 
'Stave visions and beliefs. The germ of an idea 
| r  insight that I have developed has always 
been a phrase or an action from a person com­
mitted to act in a concrete situation. All my . 
theory-building has come out of this nature  ̂
centred and woman-olltred action. The spe­
cial relationships women have with the 
environment are due to this. In my hfifi 
Staying Alive I attempted to explain why my 
insights came from women who were consi­
dered ignorant and marginal, who were not ■ 
given a platform of any kind by society.
Why .is it that women sense destruction-: 
faster and are more persevering in the struggles 
against'.destruction? Why do they carry on 
when ev.eryone else is cynical and hopeless? 
The reason is that women have :a distinctive 
perception of what life is, a sense of what is 
really vital, which colours their view of what 
is at stake in the world,
■  Can women lead the way in the new con­
cern for the environment?
— I think women are taking the lead today. 
The important thing is that their leadership 
should be taken seriously. For ns in India 
.¡Chipko marked the reawakening, of an eco­
logical ndhsciousness, ■ in a movement 
stretching from the villages of central India to 
the western Ghats. This new ecological cons­
ciousness is as old as our civilization, but what 
is new is its re-emergence as a political force 
in response to destruction, a force like Chipko 
in which ordinary women define the issues.
It doesn’t take much effort to say, let’s 
bring women in. The crucial issue is let’s not 
. push women out. Because of its very specific 
nature, the relationship between women and 
the environment differs from one place to 
another.Hhe movements that have led me 
towards my own commitments and decisions 
originate in the most marginal sectors of our 
"society, in the so-called backward communi­
ties and specifically among the women of 
those communities.
[ hese oak trees 
save. and. worship them, 
because their roots store water, 
their leaves have milk and fodder, 
the breeze blows cool 
over the beautiful rhododendron flower.
A song of the Chipko movement
If societies have succeeded in reproducing 
themselves for centuries, they are examples of 
sustainability. Today, unfortunately, these are 
the societies that are labelled backward, 
whereas the societies that give up too quickly 
traditional ways of doing things are called 
progressive. That definition, of course, is 
biased. It is in countries like India that you 
find groups of women who are embedded 
-poth in nature and in sustainable cultures. 
Perennial civilizations, not ones that burst into 
growth and collapse, have something very spe­
cial to offer. They enshrine the capacity to 
regenerate, the capacity to heal, the capacity 
to give and take, to build and create.
But I believe that women in the North are 
also: intimately linked to the environment. 
Even in the most advanced societies women 
have been left to care for children, homes and 
health. A wonderful study was carried out in 
Helsinki which showed that, whatever yard­
stick you take—time, energy, work—women 
are running Finnish society and the Finnish 
economy. It’s wrong to say that women are
—
Navdanya association to preserve biodiversity and defend the rights of small farmers.
December 2001 - The U n e sc o  Courier 37

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=38) 0

### 124778: Vandana Shiva talks to Judithe Bizot, interview

I S  C  I E  N C  E
M A R C H  aS»S>2
i  WËÊÈÊÈÊÊ '
Water-bearers in Rajasthan (India).
unproductive, that they don’t work. It is often 
said that women who stay at home do not 
work, but in fact they work harder than 
anyone else.
Nature for me comprises the life-giving 
forces, the life:support systems, the ecological 
systems that make life possible. These things 
are violated in the cities and in the Country 
through nuclear hazards, toxic wastes, con­
taminated water and polluted air. We need 
those life-giving sources of pure air, pure 
water, pure food, no matter where we are.
■ Are we not in the process of amputating 
something from ourselves by rapidly 
diminishing our powers of regeneration?
— The term “feminine principle” is basically 
just an English translation of p rakiti, a force 
in nature.and life which exists all round us, 
in women and in men. To me, the r||| of 
modern patriarchy tended to kill the feminine 
principle in all its fullness, and in particular 
to annihilate it totally in man. In a sense, the 
rise of the masculine mode of knowledge, 
production and governance was. i s  way of 
crushing something essential tc||s!§§iety as a 
whole—to males and to females. Fortunately, 
however, whereas the patriarchs considered 
that they were ruling over-passive creatures 
(women and nature), they could never fully 
take that life away. They could distort and 
stifle it but they couldn’t destroy it entirely.
I can’t imagine any recovery or flowering 
of these creative forces of nature, of women 
coming into their own, that would leave men 
untouched. Men will do one of two things. 
Either they will react violently because this 
flowering creates a new kind of insecurity and 
inadequacy. Or, hopefully, more men will 
sense that they have impoverished themselves, 
and the feminine principle will emerge as a
creative fo^ce which values nurture above, 
domination, sustaining above destruction, 
rooted and experiencedfencrete knowledge 
above abstract, irrelevant knowledge. Surely 
these values are important: enough for men to 
recognize and support them.
■ Are you saying that male-dominated 
knowledge should be thrown out?
— Every sSeiety except contemporary indus­
trial society has had criteria, as to what it 
should say “no” to. Industrial society is the 
only one which believes that if you have the 
power to do something you must do it. Indian 
philosophy febuilt on the concept that “yes, 
you might have the power, but;it is impor­
tant that you use your discrimination in the 
exercise-of that power”. A society should be 
able to make choices and judgements about 
means, to have values as ends.
I feel that plurality of choice creates an 
opportunity to decide what is needed and 
desirable, and what is nqt-, and what is good 
and what is not. If that kind of opportunity 
is honestly and scientifically made available to 
society, with the idea of maintaining quality 
of life, with participation by people, then it 
will undoubtedly be taken. It should also be 
recognized that scientists are as fallible as 
anyone else and that science and its institutions 
are more often than not prostituted to eco­
nomic interests, since the structure of power 
is so closely married . g  the. structure of 
knowledge. Many technologies are used to 
serve the economic interests of the powerful! 
not choices based on ecology and ethics. 
Women have already made their choices on 
these issues.,
■ Does the exploration of other planets have 
a place in a world-view which is concerned
with improving the quality of life, joy, 
sharing, and meeting basic needs?
— It’s all right to explore. What is wrong is 
to justify the exploration of outer space, in 
terms of solving thé problems of this planet. 
I believe it is immoral to use people and their' 
needs as the reasons for outer-spacfi 
programmes, which should be seen as what 
they are: the indulgence of a group of very 
privileged people and countries. Everyone has- 
a right to explore, but to use that right as an 
imperative into which everyone must fit is 
another matter. It’s hiding the other agendas 
which go along with space programmes,,: 
which are not simply pursued for their own 
sake but for military and other ends.
■ What is your attitude to global, planetary 
management and the question of local versus 
global ecologies?
— So-callM“primitive” peoples have always, 
had a planetary cosinology, and for them the 
planet has existed in every action they have 
taken. The most isolated communities have 
had a view not just of this planet but of how 
it relates to others and of how balance must 
be maintained. The planetary has always 
existed in the local. Any attempt to disenfran­
chise local communities of their planetary 
consciousness is unethical.
■ In what specific ways do local communi­
ties understand or use planetary knowledge?
— Traditional systems of agriculture in every 
society have been based on the relationships 
between planets, which have provided the 
basis for deciding which is the right time to 
sow,.and which crops should be grown 
together. For example, many peasants possess 
a kind of scientific knowledge which enablés 
them to recognize certain types of insect
18 The Unesco Courier - December 2001

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=39) 0

### 124778: Vandana Shiva talks to Judithe Bizot, interview

S C I  E N C  E I
ISA A R C H  aS>S>2
behaviour which indicate impending floods, 
so that they move out in time. But all this is 
a thing of the past because pesticides have 
killed these living indicators. We create 
systems which seem more reliable than tradi­
tional systems but are actually more, vul­
nerable.
.1 see two ways in which industrial .society 
has been impoverished. Ethically, it is the only 
society which cannot distinguish between 
good and bad, which does not provide a 
chance to say no, which has no restraining 
criteria, values or limits to action. Secondly, 
it seems to lack any realization that its systems 
are increasingly based on highly vulnerable 
forms of organization. There is no compre­
hension of how these systems, break down 
when most needed. If my relationship to 
nature provides me with knowledge and a 
feeling for what’s happening to the world and 
what changes are coming, it helps me guide
and protect; my animals, myself and others. 
I have certain indicators available to me 
without risk of breakdown by which I can act 
in informed ways. Satellites, computer net­
works and so oil are made to replace what is 
considered unreliable, but they are actually 
more vulnerable.
■  What influence can women have? How 
can they make a difference? How can they 
improve their lives and their environment?
— The first thing is that they should not lose 
faith in the knowledge they have and that they 
should trust in themselves. I also believe that 
when those Himalayan streams were disap­
pearing women knew that deforestation is 
linked to desertificalgn - and stood their 
ground, even though -the foresters said that 
forests have no link with watershed manage­
ment. Women’s instruments of resistance are 
standing their ground, believing in their
knowledge, having faith in their values, not 
losing confidence, not feeling inferior. The 
dominating system imposes its choice on 
people by transforming every multiple choice 
into a tragic last possible one. Things are not 
black or white. I think that in our time it is 
very important to be able to turn around and 
say, no matter how powerless one is, well 
things could be different, could they not? I 
don't think that merely increasing the number 
of choices necessarily enriches people’s lives. 
The criteria of choice are what really count. 
Merely to increase the number of choices is 
to adopt a supermarket mentality of consumer 
\®|oice. It is essential to know when a choice 
is not a real choice, and that is impossible 
unless people have a sense of discrimination 
within them. Relating to nature, being 
embedded in it, provides the ethical frame­
work for choice between different scientific 
and technological options. ■
December 2001 - The U n e sc o  Courier 39

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=40) 0

### 124779: Towards a world conservation ethics

* S  C  I E N C  E
M A Y  2 0 0 0
Biodiversity: a friend for life
Towards a world 
conservation ethics
t M. S. Swaminathan
The Rio convention marked the first major international step towards 
the sharing of biodiversity based on the principle of social fairness
It has become commonplace to say that the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) adopted 
during the Rio Summit in June 1992 is an important 
landmark in integrating the principles of ethics and equi­
ty in the use of biodiversity. To stem the increasingly 
rapid decline of biodiversity, it was necessary to take 
action, and quickly, without waiting for the scientific 
community to gather further knowledge. First and fore­
most, the CBD was an acknowledgment of this urgent 
need.
It entered into force in December 1993 and so far has 
been ratified by 177 States—but not by the United States. 
This agreement, the only one of its kind, sets up a frame­
work for worldwide action aimed at ensuring the conserva­
tion, the sustainable use and—a noteworthy develop­
ment—the fair sharing of biodiversity’s benefits. More 
specifically, the CBD focuses on the definition and the 
financing of conservation policies, access to genetic 
resources, North-South technology transfers stemming 
from the use of those resources, and trade in genetically 
modified organisms (GMOs). In particular, it acknowl­
edges that poor countries cannot meet their commitments 
to preserve biodiversity unless the developed nations pro­
vide them with access to biotechnologies and the related 
financing. Biodiversity will unavoidably be depleted 
through overuse if the current co-existence of unsustainable 
lifestyles and unacceptable poverty continues, and if the 
means of subsistence of families putting strains on 
resources are not strengthened.
The CBD has first and foremost been an effective 
awareness-raising tool. Political leaders, the media and 
the general public now know that taking from nature 
without restraint jeopardizes humanity’s security. Many 
states have changed their national laws to create or 
strengthen mechanisms to manage biodiversity. The con­
vention has also lent support to the idea that preserving 
species with their natural habitats and enlisting the local 
people’s support in managing them are vital priorities.
The convention has also prompted oyer 130 States to 
adopt a protocol last January 29, 2000 in-Montreal 
(Canada) on biosafety in order to regulate international 
trade in GMOs. The negotiations led to a stand-off between
P Holder of the UNEseo-Cousteau chair in Ecotechnology, 
chairman of the M. S. Swaminathan Research Foundation 
(Chennai, India), author o f I Predict: A Century o f 
Hope-Harmony with Nature and Freedom from Hunger, 
la s t  West Books Pv.t. Ltd, Chennai, 1999.
the European Union and the “Miami Group”, consisting of 
the leading GMO producing countries led by the United 
States, Argentina and Canada. According to the text even­
tually adopted, countries may oppose GMO imports 
deemed hazardous for the environment or health by invok­
ing the principle of precaution—in other words, without 
necessarily having irrefutable scientific proof that they are 
dangerous. However, the issue of whether the protocol 
overrides the rules of the World Trade Organization (the 
WTO, which so far has not recognized the principle of pre­
caution) remains to be settled. Only a specific dispute 
brought before the WTO will show whether the protocol 
has any teeth.
The CBD has certainly enabled progress, but the 
funding of conservation projects is far from guaranteed. 
Development aid has been steadily declining since 1992. 
The Global Environment Facility in charge of, among 
other things, managing international financing for biodi­
versity, has received and distributed about $2 billion in 
10 years.
Protecting traditional knowledge
Lastly and, most importantly, scant political effort 
has been focused on guaranteeing a fair share of biodi­
versity’s benefits. Many developing countries continue to 
denounce what they call “biopiracy” by the governments 
and companies of the North, which collect their biologi­
cal resources for commercial purposes. There is an 
urgent need to take steps that would acknowledge and 
compensate the inestimable contribution of indigenous 
rural families to the conservation and improvement of 
•the planet’s genetic resources.
That task requires changing intellectual property 
rules. They are currently being revised in the framework of 
the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property 
(TRIPS) agreement, which regulates biotechnology 
patents and new varieties of crops. The system in force, 
based on individually-owned private property, is unsuit­
able for protecting indigenous people’s collective tradi­
tional knowledge. The World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WTPO), which has launched a study on the 
need to recognize their rights, is likely to help identify 
alternative solutions. Next, the international community 
must carry out a crucial task: drafting and adopting a pro­
tocol on agrobiodiversity that would protect traditional 
knowledge and farmers’ rights over plant genomes. ■
40 The U n e s c o  Courier - December 2001
1
¡¡s
f l
2 s  lu
|s

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=41) 0

### 124780: Can we educate for world peace?

O C T O B E R  a  9_8
Can we educate for world 
peace?
____________W O R L D  O F  L E A R N I N G »
Extracts from the opening remarks by Archibald MacLeish 
during a radio discussion with Dr. F.L. Schlagle, President of 
the U.S. National Education Association, Mr. Herbert Emmer­
ich, Director o f the Public Administration Clearing House, and 
Dr. Francis Bacon, member o f the Educational Policies Com­
mission o f the National Education Association, broadcast on 12 
December 1945, one month after the establishment o f Unesco.
“Of course we can educate for world peace. 
I’d be willing to go a great deal farther than 
that, I’d be willing, for my own part, to say 
that there is no possible way of getting 
world peace except through education. 
Which means education of the peoples of 
the world. All you can do by arrangements 
between governments is to remove the 
causes of disagreement which may become, 
in time, causes of war. But peace, as we are 
all beginning to realize, is something a great 
deal more than the absence of war. Peace is 
positive and not negative. Peace is a way of 
living together which excludes war, rather 
than a period without war in which peoples 
try to live together.
“But the difficulty with this kind of dis­
cussion is not the answers. The difficulty is 
the questions. And the trouble with the 
questions is that they are put—have to be 
put—in words which have lost their fresh­
ness and their reality of meaning (...)
“The real problem (...) is one that goes a 
lot deeper. It has to do with the effect on the 
human mind of words like ‘international 
understanding’ and ‘education’ and ‘cul­
ture’ (...)
“Before we can talk intelligently and 
meaningfully, therefore, about questions 
like education for peace, or the creation of 
international understanding, we have got to 
find the abrasives which will scrape these 
words down to their living meanings again. 
For some reason which I have never been 
able to understand, people are quite willing 
to believe that anything you call ‘econo­
mics’ is real and that you call ‘politics’ is
exciting, but that anything you refer to 
under the general words which describe the 
life of the human mind is necessarily dull 
and stale and unrealistic and fuzzy (...) •
“Actually, in the world we live in, which 
is very different from the world we think we 
live in, the relations of peoples to each 
other in terms of the things they think and 
the things they believe and the things they 
hope, in terms, that is to say, of their mental 
processes, of the things that distinguish 
them as men, are far more vivid—make, to 
be brief, far more sense than the economic 
and political arrangements between gov­
ernments which capture the front pages of 
our minds as well as of our newspapers(...)
“I am not belittling the tremendous im­
portance of economic solutions for econo­
mic difficulties and political cures for poli­
tical mistakes. I am saying that these things, 
important as they are, are far less important 
than the creation of a world of words and 
images and mutual knowledge within which 
people may talk to each other.
“What we tried to do in London was to 
invent an international instrument which 
could help us all to create that world by the 
use of all the channels of communication— 
education and radio, press and scholarship, 
motion pictures and music, journalism in all 
its forms and living, enduring arts. If the 
question you are discussing is the question 
whether our international instrument will 
work, I am going to ask my colleagues 
Emmerich and Schlagle to put me down as 
voting Yes.” ■
m m’••• ' • S SSI
\
• • V
îS ÿ ^
US poet and Librarian of Congress Archi­
bald MacLeish (1892-1982) was Chairman 
of the Committee which drafted the Pre­
amble to Unesco’s Constitution.
Archibald MacLeish wrote the famous phrase in Unesco’s Constitution, “since wars begin in the minds of men, 
it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed”.
December 2001 - The U n e s c o  Courier 4 1

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=42) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

I W O R L D  O F  L E A R N I N G
S E P T E M B E R  1 S> <S O


### 124781: Bouba and Jacques: the birth of a dialogue between Africa and Europe

BOUBA AND JACQUES
THE BIRTH OF A D I A L O G U E  
BETWEEN A F R I C A  & EUROPE
Over the signature of Bouba, the schoolchildren of Pitoa (Cameroons) 
began an exchange of letters a few years ago. with Jacques and the 
schoolchildren of Costes-Gozon, a tiny village in southern France. They 
wrote of their work, their games, and their everyday life. The letters 
became part of the reading and writing programmes of both schools 
(See page 5). Each week they were read, explained, discussed and reco­
pied. In this way the Boubas of Africa and the Jacques of Europe 
contributed to a better understanding of each other. Their efforts have 
resulted in a delightful and informative little book Notre Ami Jacques 
(Our Friend Jacques) published by the Club African du Livre, at Pitoa, 
from which the passages on the following pages have been selected.
Pitoa (Cameroons), October 1.
My dear friend Jacques,
I  am very happy to be writ­
ing to you. My name is Bouba 
and my father’s name is Cadji. 
He grows millet. I  chase away 
the birds and the monkeys 
from his crops and I tend his 
herd of goats. I  have a sister called Djenabou and a  little 
brother whose name is Oumar. My mother grinds the 
millet, crushes the ground nu ts and sweeps out the hut. 
I ¡hope you and your parents are well. Goodbye for now 
and I  hope to  hear from you soon.
Your friend: BOUBA.
Costes-Gozon (France)
October 1.
My dear friend Bouba,
My name is Jacques Lacroix. 
My fa th e r is a  farm er. He has 
a ftdek of 30 sheep and four 
pigs. My m other looks after  
the house, cleans it, prepares 
the meals does the washing and helps my fath er in the  
fields.
I  have a  brother called Maurice an d  two sisters, 
Jeanette and  Leonie.
I’m glad I  can w rite to you an d  I  hope you are  well.
Your friend: JACQUES.
42 The U n e sc o  Courier - December 2001

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=43) 0

### 124781: Bouba and Jacques: the birth of a dialogue between Africa and Europe

W O R L D  O F  L E A R N I N G !
SEPTlgg/VVBER aS><SO
The Unesco Courier. —  Septem ber 1960
T H I S  I S  MY  H O M E
BOURA: In  June, w;hen the school closes I shall 
walk down the hill towards my village, very happy to 
see my home again.
All around it  are young cotton plants, com and 
millet. I t  has a straw roof which keeps it  fresh and 
cool. The side which looks out on the road has a veran­
dah. The second side has a window but as it  is unpro­
tected, it is always drenched during the rainy season. 
The third side also has a verandah held up by two open 
brick walls. This is where my father quietly sits sewing 
his clothes. We also eat our meals there and sleep out 
a t night during the hot season.
I shall be glad to sleep in  the house where I  was born.
JACQUES: My home seems to hang on a red and  
green hillside: brick-red soil and green alfalfa and  
young corn. The house is built of stone covered by 
rough-cast plaster. The walls are pink and the tiled 
roof is covered with moss. Some grey and white pigeons 
circle overhead and with a fluttering of wings land on 
the stone-edged pigeon-house.
In  another building on the fa r side of th e  stone 
courtyard are the bam , the sheep-pen, the stable and 
the pigsty.
In  an open shed leaning against a wall my father  
keeps his cart and his binder. In  the same shed is the 
sling in  which we pu t the ox when it is being shod.
tftiV  jQ ’a iJ lM ., J faA ynjsgH  _____ 
Jy n t  -&» fjfflrvne& iicpie- Cfu&nd,
\ ont Jit font dm
BAL L  AND WH I S T L E
BOUBA: We’ve decided to make a ball. Armed with 
knives we go off to the river bank. The sap from the 
trees here is like the latex of rubber trees. We make 
a gash in  a tree and the sap starts  to flow. I  cover 
one of my thumbs with the sap which starts to harden. 
To get a thicker layer we add some manioc flour. Then 
we let some of the sap run on to Abbo’s stomach. The 
sap spreads out and solidifies. I  go and fetch a hollow 
reed stem. I take off the latex from my thumb and 
have a small cylinder. With the hollow stem I blow 
into it  and the latex swells up until It makes a sphere 
about eight inches across. To give i t  a  thicker sur­
face, I  spread on it  the sap which covers Abbo’s sto­
mach. Finally the skin of the bladder we have made 
is nearly half an inch thick. We go back to  the village 
very pleased with ourselves and in  the evening we play 
with the ball.
JACQUES; I  am  guarding the pigs in  the chestnut 
grove. I  pick out a new, straight, smooth branch and 
1 cut a  piece from it about six inches long and about 
as thick as my thumb. Halfway down I  cut into the  
bark just down to the wood. With the handle of , my 
knife I  tap very lightly on the bark and  with, a  twisting 
movement I  slide it  carefully from the wood. About 
half an inch, from the end of the bare wood and in the 
centre, I  cut a  triangular notch, and from here to the  
end of the wood I  cut out a narrow shaving. I  wet the 
wood with saliva and slide back the tube of bark over 
it. Now I cut out of the bark a  piece half an inch long 
and a quarter of an inch wide above the first hole I  
made in  the wood. My whistle is ready. I  blow it and 
keep blowing, blowing, blowing.
►
December 2001 - The Unesco Courier 43

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=44) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

I W O R L D  O F L_ E A  R N I N CE
S E P T E M B E R  a S> <S O


### 124781: Bouba and Jacques: the birth of a dialogue between Africa and Europe

N I G H T  F I S H I N G  
WI T H  S T I C K  
A ND T O R C H
BOUBA: Wheta. it has. got dark 
Nohou, the man with the powerful 
voice, cries: “Let all those who have 
eaten their fill, who are full of 
strength and courage, come fishing 
with me; let all those who are still 
hungry stay here to wash the 
cooking pots of their mothers and 
their brides-to-be.”
Picking up sticks, matches and 
torches of dried grass, we run to 
join him.
At the river’s edge we light our 
torches and wade out until the 
water is up to our thighs.
Mamadou and I fish together. A 
fish, lured by the light, comes close. 
It seems dazzled and stays quite 
still. With a quick blow from his 
stick, Mamadou stuns the fish. I 
grab it easily and put it into a 
gourd.
Suddenly I see a big catfish. This 
time I hit out and stun the fish. 
But my stick breaks in two.
Then I see another big fish and 
am just about to grab it when 
Mamadou hits my hand. I start 
crying and to comfort me, Mama­
dou gives me half his catch.
■ * 3  m H A R V E S T  T I ME
BOUBA: In the field the ears of 
millet are drooping towards the 
ground and the stems are bent. I t  is 
harvest time.
My father gives 15 bowls of millet 
to my mother. She grinds It into flour 
and  makes a  meal for the labourers. 
My father kills a  goat. When these 
preparations are finished, my fa ther,’ 
goes to borrow some machetes. He 
warns thé neighbours th a t there is 
work to be done and. then he goes to 
see the witch-doctor. The next day 
work begins. With their machetes, 
the men cut the stalks a few inches 
above the soil. They’ lay them out 
on the ground in  parallel rows. I t  is 
hard  work, but the rhythm  of a tom­
tom helps to keep them a t it.
We children follow the harvesters, 
chewing millet stems as though they 
were sugar cane.
Three days later, the women cut off 
the ears from the stalks and carry 
away the ears in large baskets to the 
place where they will be threshed.
JACQUES: The oxen are pulling 
the harvest.er-binder. I grease it well,, 
put in a good supply of string and  
prepare a  reserve supply and a  spare 
blade.
My fa th er leads the oxen. Robert 
is in  the driving seat; with a  lever he  
can raise or lower the blade according 
to th e  cut he wishes to make.
The oxen pull hard. The cutting  
blade rattles in  its frame, the drum  
squeaks as it turns, th e  belts carry  
th e  wheat up to the binder which 
gives a  bang a s  each sheaf is tied; 
the sheaf carrier tilts as Robert pres­
ses a  pedal, and the sheaves fall.
Mother and I  stack the sheaves in 
lines. The thistles prick our fingers.
ANGLERS WITH A TRIDENT
JACQUES : When my fath er and my uncle were 
schoolchildren, they would leave home early in the morn­
ing so as to be able to go fishing before classes began.
Usually about a  dozen boys went down to the stream  
to fish with a  trident.
A few of the boys kept watch in case th e  gamekeeper 
should pass th a t way. Two others had an iron trident 
attached to a  long stick. They went carefully towards 
the water and when they saw a  trout motionless just 
above the bed of the stream, their trident flashed into 
the water. Impaled by the prongs, the fish fought madly. 
But they quickly had it  out on the bank and in a  twink­
ling it  v m s  hidden in a  satchel between the schoolbooks 
and the sandwiches.
Then these young rascals went to a  place well hidden 
by thick bushes and made a  fire on which to cook their 
catch. How good it  tasted.
Sometimes they were late  for school and when the  
teacher scolded them, they replied, timidly: “We had to 
help with the chores a t home."
44  The U n e s c o  Courier - December 2001

## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=45) 0

### 124782: Towards a 'new world order of information'; a voice from the Third World

M E D I A I
A VOICE FROM 
THE THIRD WORLD 
Towards 
a 'new world order 
of information'
by Ridha Najar '
RIDHA NAJAR, Tunisian journalist and sociologist specializing in 
the field o f information, is attached to the Institut de Presse et des 
Sciences de Tinformation (Press and Information Sciences institute) 
in Tunis. He has been technical adviser to the Director-General of 
the Tunisian Radio and Television Service and editor-in-chief of 
Tunisia's television news.
■  NCONTESTABLY, 1976 w as the 
I  year in w hich the problem s of
■  in form ation and com m unication 
became w orld -w ide  issues. A  w hole  
series o f conferences, symposia and 
m eetings on these subjects launched 
a m ajor debate and the issues were 
fu lly  aired a t the 19 th  session o f 
Unesco's General Conference last 
November In Nairobi, Kenya.
Today the countries o f the Third 
W orld  are demanding a "new  world 
order o f In form ation". W ha t does 
th is  expression mean? W ha t are 
the immense stakes in th is  debate, 
w h ich poses questions th a t are at 
one and the same tim e  cultural, eco­
nom ic and po litica l?
How  can the countries o f the Third 
W orld  take the firs t urgent steps to  
im prove com m unication between 
themselves? H ow  can they help to  
lim it the quantity o f "one-w ay in for­
m ation" w h ich  fo r years has relegated 
them  to  the role o f consumers w ith o u t 
calling in question the very principle 
o f a free, balanced (and thereby fru it­
fu l) exchange o f in form ation between 
nations?
H ow  w ill it  be possible progressi­
vely" to  achieve the "balanced flo w  
o f in fo rm ation" o f w h ich  so much is »
The debate over “NWOi” sparked the most serious crisis ever to confront Unesco. As a result, the United States left the Organization 
in December 1984, followed by Great Britain and Singapore in December 1985. Great Britain rejoined in July 1997.
D e c e m b e r  2 0 0 1  -  T h e  U n e s c o  C o u r ie r  45
a
CL
13O
Cl)
•§
”3553O
- Ï
co
TJ(0O
05
C
5
Sû

## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=46) 0

### 124782: Towards a 'new world order of information'; a voice from the Third World

M E D I A
ONE W AY ONLY...
t  heard today, as a means of achieving 
better communication between peoples, 
and hence promoting greater inter­
national understanding and world 
peace, which is so often jeopardized 
by major historical and cultural mis­
understandings?
The preamble to the resolution sub­
mitted by Tunisia on behalf of the 
non-aligned countries at the General 
Conference in Nairobi points out that 
Unesco has a contribution to make in 
"liberating the developing countries 
from the state of dependence result­
ing from specific historical circum­
stances which still characterizes 
their communication and information 
systemsilpS
Just as people once referred to 
"political and economic decoloniza- 
tion", they now speak of the "deco­
lonization of information" which is 
inseparable from the achievement of 
a new universal humanism founded 
on dialogue and mutual respect.
The developing countries continue 
to "consume" world information as 
it is conceived in the main by the 
industrialized nations.
t
This information tends to maintain 
the people of the Third World in a 
state of alienation. It also keeps 
the peoples of the Western countries 
in a dangerous state of ignorance 
regarding the realities of the Third 
World countries, lulling them w ith the 
complacent assumption that Western 
industry, technology and culture, in 
short, Western civilization as a whole, 
are superior.
A serious matter, and one which 
lends itself to all kinds of misunder­
standings, is that in the name of a 
certain concept of the "freedom" and 
"free flow " of information, most of the 
large Western news agencies cons­
ciously or unconsciously disseminate
Detail from a poster by the Japanese artist Shigeo Fukuda
information which is fragmentary, 
schematic and frequently distorted 
concerning the complex realities of 
the developing countries.
Conversely, the information which 
they distribute in the Third World 
countries is sometimes dangerously 
loaded w ith the overtones of alien 
cultures.
The Report of the Symposium of 
Non-Aligned Countries on Communi­
cation, held in Tunis in March 1976, 
goes as far as considering that, for 
these international agencies, infor­
mation is "a commodity... in whose 
processing and transmission inter­
vene considerations which tend to 
perpetuate a system of domination 
in which the authentic interests of 
the developing countries are consis­
tently ignored or misinterpreted".
Is it surprising therefore that the 
citizen of the Third World ends up 
by accepting the vision of himself 
presented by the mass media ?
The technological superiority of 
the industrially developed countries 
is constantly growing as a result of 
modern progress, and their media 
networks deluge the Third World 
countries, which are far less well- 
endowed w ith technical equipment 
and trained personnel, w ith their 
own brand of information.
There is no point in even men­
tioning communication satellites. 
Their "use by developing countries 
is subject to the w ill o f those who 
possess the advanced technology, 
and by it can decisively influence 
the economic, political and social 
reality of the developing countries" ( 1 ).
(1) Report o f the Symposium o f Non- 
Aligned Countries on Communication, Tunis, 
March 1976.
This, then, is the state of the world 
as far as information is concerned. 
In the 1970s it has forced the Third 
World countries to make a harsh 
appraisal of their position.
The newly-independent countries, 
believing that they had defeated 
direct colonialization, realized that 
their development remained in jeo­
pardy, that their demands for a new 
economic order could not make them­
selves heard, and that their cultural 
identity could never be achieved 
w ithout a substantial change in the 
world system of disseminating infor­
mation.
What is the solution to this prob­
lem ? How can better communi­
cation between the countries of the 
Third World be established? What 
measures w ill help to achieve a more 
balanced flow  of information between 
North and South, and vice versa?
In an attempt to find an answer 
to these interrelated questions, let 
us consider the action taken by the 
non-aligned countries (see also article 
page 18).
Meeting in Algiers, in September 
1973, thé Fourth Summit Conference 
of Non-Aligned Countries recommen­
ded that a jo in t plan of action should 
be worked out in the field of commu­
nications.
An international symposium concer­
ned w ith ways and means of deve­
loping the flow  of information be­
tween the non-aligned countries was 
held in Tunis in March 1976. The 
recommendations adopted at the 
symposium lay in tw o main direc­
tions:
•  the consolidation (or creation) of 
telecommunication networks, ini­
tially at the national and later at 
the regional and continental levels;
4 6The Unesco Courier - December 2001
□ ra w in g  fro m  G ra p h is , Z u rich  ©  Shigeo Fukuda, T okyo

## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=47) 0

### 124782: Towards a 'new world order of information'; a voice from the Third World

M E D I A
Bertolt Brecht and Unesco . 
on communication
Bertolt Brecht (1 898 -195 6 ), the world-famous German playwright and 
poet, wrote in his. Theory o f  R ad io  (1 927-193 2) :
"Here is a proposal designed to transform the way radio is used, 
and thus to reveal itsj constructive aspects: it must be transformed 
from an instrument of distribution into an instrument of communication 
Radio could be the most remarkable instrument of communication 
imaginable in public life* a vast network of communication-chanpels. 
Or rather, it could be such an instrument if it w ere capable not only of. 
sending out but also of receiving; not only of getting its audience to listen 
but also of getting them  to speak; not of isolating them  but of bringing 
them  into contact w ith their fellows. If this is to come about, radio 
must cease to be simply a provider and organize a supply furnished 
by listeners themselves".
B e rto lt B rech t, Schriften 2  (Zur Literatur und Kunst, Politik und 
Geselbchaft) (W ritin g s  2, On L ite ra tu re  and  A r t , . P o litic s  and  S ocie ty)..
It  is interesting to compare Brecht's ideas w ith  those set out in Unesco's 
M e d ium -T erm  P lan (1 9 7 7 -1 9 8 2 ):
"Although the notion o f  'the free flow  of information' goes back 
some 50 years, it has been invoked as a concept... only since the end 
o i  the Second W orld W ar... Although the, word 'communication' was 
already current at that tim e in English-language texts, w hat was meant, 
in fact, was a rather one-sided dissemination of information. It was 
only much later that there emerged the concept of communication in 
its true sense (from the Latin co m m un ica re : to make common, to share) 
no longer implying merely an active transm itter and a passive receiver, 
but allowing for feedback from the latter of a kind to modify the behaviour 
of the form er or, better still, requiring the active participation of all 
concerned in the communication process, which thus becomes a pluri- 
dimensional flow  of information w ith multiple feedback.".
•  the developm ent o f co-operation 
and exchanges between the non- 
aligned countries in all branches 
o f com m unication: news agencies, 
the press, radio and television, 
news film s, the cinema, exhibitions, 
festivals, tourism , research, the 
tra in ing o f personnel and so on.
Im plem entation o f the  firs t set of 
recom m endations w ou ld  help to  bridge 
the technological gap between the 
industrialized countries and those o f 
the Third W orld.
The second group o f directives 
invites the non-aligned countries to  
produce the ir ow n in form ation and 
circulate it  am ongst themselves in 
order to  counter-balance the essen­
tia lly  one-way flo w  o f in form ation 
orig inating in the developed countries.
Far from  w ish ing  to  supplant or 
short-c ircu it the  transnational news 
agencies—even if th is  were possible— 
intercom m unication between the 
Third W orld  countries should seek 
to  f ill the gaps w h ich  those agencies 
leave (whether in tentiona lly  or other­
wise), to  compensate fo r the ir om ­
issions and above all to  provide more 
regular inform ation gathered in the 
countries w h ich  it  concerns.
Nothing w ould  appear more ju s ti­
fiab le than the demand o f peoples fo r
the fundam ental right to  voice the ir 
ow n preoccupations, and to  te ll the 
w orld  about the ir life, the ir culture 
and the ir e fforts to  achieve deve­
lopment.
The m ost im portant po in t o f all is 
not merely th a t th is  in tercom m unica­
tion  should be established, but tha t 
in form ation should reach as w ide a 
public as possible.
This w ill be a long-term  task, fo r it 
w ill be necessary to  stim ulate fresh 
pockets o f interest in a public long 
accustomed to  "consum ing" infor­
mation originating in one part o f the 
w orld  alone. National news agen­
cies, cinema, press, and particularly 
radio and te levision w ill have an 
im portant role to  play in th is  respect.
This m ulti-d irectiona l co-operation 
calls fo r both adequate equipm ent 
and trained personnel, and, together 
w ith  a general awareness o f the 
situation, a realization o f the under­
lying moral obligations.
Such an awareness now  exists. 
The problem s o f equipm ent and 
personnel were indeed examined 
at Nairobi by Unesco’s General 
Conference. W ha t remains to  be 
achieved is agreement concerning an 
international code o f ethics in the fie ld 
o f in form ation. Here there w ill be
many d ifficu lties, because points of 
v iew  still d iffe r greatly, but there are, 
nevertheless, certain grounds fo r 
hope.
A t Nairobi, the non-aligned coun­
tries tabled a proposal w h ich had 
the m erit o f setting the debate 
w ith in  a practical fram ework. This 
proposal recommended th a t efforts 
be made to  create an improved ba­
lance in the w orld  flo w  o f inform ation, 
w ith  the establishm ent o f a vast 
programme o f aid designed to  assist 
the  developing countries in extending 
the ir in form ation systems.
The proposal w as adopted unani­
mously. It advocated in particular 
measures to  counteract disparities 
in news transm ission rates, and to 
support regional groupings, news 
agency pools and national and inter­
national unions o f journalists.
This programme o f technical and 
financial aid to  the developing coun­
tries, together w ith  the international 
research programme fo r com m uni­
cation w hich has been recommended 
by Unesco since 1970, should lead 
to  a reduction o f the technological 
gap be tw e en . the Third W orld and 
the industrialized countries.
If  in form ation is no longer to  be 
treated as a "com m od ity", and 
become instead a "service" at the 
disposal o f all mankind, and if a new 
w orld  order in the fie ld  of in form ation 
is to  be established, the Third W orld 
countries m ust consolidate the ir 
in form ation media.
Here again, the problem s should be 
posed in the context o f m utually 
beneficial international co-operation, 
rather than in a context o f sterile 
confrontation and pointless verbal 
arguments.
■  Ridha Najar
December 2001 - The Unesco Courier 47

## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=48) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

I /V\ E D  I A
F E B R U A R Y  2 0 0 0
O P I N I O N


### 124783: The Electronic gap

THE ELECTRONIC CAP
Paul Kennedy
British historian Paul Kennedy 
is the J. Richardson Dilworth 
Professor of History at Yale 
University (U.S.A.). He is the 
author of a widely acclaimed 
work, The Rise and Fall o f the 
Great Powers: Economic 
Change and M ilita ry Conflict 
from 1500-2000 (Random 
House, 1987), in which he 
analysed the factors 
underlying the rise and fall of 
empires over the past five 
centuries. In the final chapter 
he evoked the coming collapse 
of the USSR, and also 
speculated about the decline 
of the United States as a great 
power and the rise of Japan 
and China. Notable among his 
other works are Preparing fo r 
the Twenty-first Century (1993) 
and Strategy and Diplomacy, 
1870-1945 (1983).
The present text has been 
extracted from Prof. Kennedy's 
contribution to a series of 
"21st Century Talks" held at 
Unesco  Headquarters in Paris 
on November 6,1999.
■ In the United States, business journals, market gurus, economics professors and highly
I  paid consultants talk incessantly about the coming global boom, the transformation 
|  of the workplace, the technology revolution and the knowledge explosion. It is 
implied that the world is slowly becoming a reproduction of Silicon Valley. It is asserted 
that this is the future. But instead of swallowing this hype, perhaps we should pull 'back 
and look at the globe as a. Whole.
The pessimistic view would be to point out what is currently occurring in Kosovo, West 
Africa, Rwanda, Chechnya, Kashmir and elsewhere. We might also follow Robert Kaplan 
in the trips he describes in  To the Ends o f the Earth1, only to discover that m uch of 
humanity is headed for disaster and self-destruction. I  do not wish to be as negative as that. 
However, I would like to offer a caution to those who portray globalization in an uncrit­
ical and overly enthusiastic manner.
Each day I send and receive up to 40 messages on the Internet. From  my home I can 
search the web sites of the World Bank and the U nited Nations to find new data, read the 
NmYork Times and check the 9 million book titles in the Yale University Library. The Internet 
gives me, my students and my children immediate access to knowledge, and the knowl­
edge explosion is at the heart of the modernization and globalization of world society.
One in three Americans are regular, daily In ternet users. Even within American 
society, the computer and e-mail have widened the gap between educated people (chiefly 
whites and Asians) and the less educated (chiefly black Americans). This gap will be felt 
in every aspect o f  life; whether it is in opportunities, potential, education or job-hunting. 
The United States will be divided into two groups, one which is computer-literate and the 
other which is not.
This phenom enon has been replicated at the international level. T he m ost im portant* 
fact is that we are in the midst of a technology revolution that seems less likely to close the 
gap between rich and poor Countries than to widen the gap even further.
The technology revolution and the communications revolution still bypass billions of 
hum an beings. From  UNESCO’S standpoint, the Internet may have more influence than any 
single medium upon global educational and cultural developments in the coming century. 
Yet only 2.4 per cent of the world’s population is .on the Internet, or one person out of 40. 
In Southeast Asia, only one person in 200 is linked to the Internet. In the Arab states, only 
one person in 500 has Internet access, while in Africa only one person in a 1,000 K |an 
Internet user. This situation will not change as long as those lands lack electricity, telephone 
wires and infrastructure. They cannot afford either computers or the expensive software 
they require. I f  knowledge indeed equals power, the developing world may have less real 
power nowadays than it did 30 years ago, before the Internet was developed.
If  we want to work toward a knowledge-based society in the coming century, over at 
least the next 10 years we need to make.fl jconcerted effort to bring poorer societies into 
the system of electronic communications. This effort will need to be coordinated by the 
World Bank, the U N  Development Programme, UNESCO, the N G O  community and the 
global business community.
The alternative is to perpetuate a world which is fundamentally undemocratic and struc­
turally unsound. If we do nothing, if we let the knowledge explosion intensify in technology- 
rich societies while poorer societies fall further and further behind, the growing gap 
between haves and have-nots will lead ^w idesp read  discontent and threaten any prospect 
of global harmony and international understanding. This is the most significant challenge 
we face. We have no time to waste in responding. ■
1. Robert Kaplan’s book suggests that in most of the Third World conditions will get worse, largely 
because of the effects of overpopulation, environmental deterioration and social breakdown.
48The U n e s c o  Courier - December 2001

## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=49) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

Ro
ge
r 
Jo
b.
 B
ru
ss
el
ls
A P R I L  1 S> S> 8 P H O  T  O »
THE UNESCO (oU R IER  N
INTERNATIONAL PHOTO 
COMPETITION
PEACE IN EVERYDAY LIFE
Playground, 
Magadan (Russia). 
Photo by Jim Hodson 
(United Kingdom).
A Dinka herdsman 
(Sudan) with a newborn 
calf. Photo by Roger Job 
(Belgium).
December 2001 ̂ ¡ìI^IÌÌnesco Courier 49
Jim
 
Ho
ds
on
, 
Lo
nd
on

## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=50) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

I P  H O  T  O F E B R U A R Y  1 S? £? 8
THE UNESCO (Ò U R IE R  N ì k O i ì  INTERNATIONAL PHOTO COMPETITION
PEACE IN EVERYDAY LIFE
Special Jury Prize:
JORDIS ANTONIA SCHLÖSSER
50 The Unesco Courier- December 2001

## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=51) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

F E B R U A R Y  a S> S> 8 P H O T  O I
December 2001 - The Unesco Courier 5 1

## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/124785eng.pdf#page=52) 0

### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT

J
ublished since 1948, the 609 issues of 
The Unesco Courier have offered readers
a “window opening on the world” each month.
This is the last issue in that format. As our work 
for the Courier ends, we would like to express
o n r o t i f  1 i r l û  f a  a  1 1  y  K û i r l û i ' c  / » a  o r l i f a k c  ! ngrauiuuc 10 our rcaucib) co-eanors in
25 language editions and four Braille versions, 
as well as to the Courier’s contributors
a n d  n a r f n p r ça i i u  y j u I  u i c i
The Unesco Courier