# [189770](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf)
## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=1) 🆗
### Non-article text
2009 • number 9 • ISSN 1993-8616
MeMory  
and History 
## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=2) 🆗
### Non-article text
2The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9 
MeMory and History
From the cruel dictatorships of Latin america and Cambodia, the destruction 
of the Burgundian kingdom, and the Korean enlightenment, to the splendour 
and intrigues of the Malagasy empire, the saga of the Kalahari and the  
constructive failure of the League of nations – memory and history wend 
their way through this issue, revealing the extraordinary wealth  
of the documented heritage of humanity.
From the animated film “Begone Dull Care”  
by Norman McLaren (Canada) whose film  
« Neighbours » was inscribed on UNESCO’s 
Memory of the World Register this year.
©
 1
9
4
9 
N
at
io
na
l F
ilm
 B
oa
rd
 o
f C
an
ad
a.
 A
ll 
rig
ht
s 
re
se
rv
ed
.
tHe Man wHo disCovered 
tHe arCHives oF terror
On 22 December 1992, a Paraguayan,  
Martín Almada, discovered three tons of 
documents in a police station. They turned out to be the archives  
of Operation Condor, which confirmed the crimes carried out in the 
1970s and 1980s by the six dictatorships of the Southern Cone  
of Latin America. A former UNESCO colleague looks back. 3
MeMories oF BroKen 
dreaMs and intaCt Hopes
To grasp the complexity of history,  
it is necessary to confront all types of  
documents – from personal archives to international collections. 
The inscription on the Memory of the World Register  
of the League of Nations Archives (1919-1946) has opened up 
new perspectives on historiographic research. 8
reHaBiLitation For tHe 
“song oF tHe niBeLungs”
Sung since the 5th century, transcribed  
in about 1200, the medieval epic poem 
“Song of the Nibelungs” has had a troubled 
history. It inspired Wagner, Fritz Lang and perhaps Tolkien, but it was 
also appropriated by Hitler. Its inscription in UNESCO’s Memory of 
the World Register 2009 should help to restore its honour. 11
tHe JoHn MarsHaLL 
Ju/’Hoan BusHMan FiLM 
and video CoLLeCtion, 
1950 – 2000
When John Marshall accompanied his father on an expedition 
to Namibia in 1950, he was just a teenager, and had no idea 
that he was embarking on the first of many fascinating journeys 
that would make up his life’s work. His six-hour series  
“A Kalahari Family”, the product of five decades of filming,  
takes us across thousands of years of history. 15
donguiBogaM : preCious 
BooK oF MediCine
For four centuries, the Korean medical 
encyclopaedia known as Donguibogam 
has been a source of inspiration for thinkers and artists alike. Its 
25 volumes contain a colossal amount of medical knowledge 
and philosophy along with some unusual prescriptions. 18
in tHe BLue inK  
oF MaLagasy aristoCrats
The Royal Archives of Madagascar, 
written in Malagasy, are a unique, living 
testimony of daily life in the 19th century and the meeting  
of two cultures, as seen by Malagasy people themselves.  
In July 2009, the Archives were inscribed on the UNESCO 
Memory of the World register. 20
Foresight
the earth in close-up   
In 2000 UNESCO sponsored Yann Arthus-Bertrand’s project Earth from Above featuring his photographs of the 
world’s most beautiful landscapes. 24
Focus
a wall comes down, a world is born 
Andrei Kurkov, a Ukrainian author who writes in Russian and is well-known for his lucid perspective on post-Soviet 
society comments on the late 1980s and the Orange Revolution as well as on more current events.  22
tHis issue was produCed in partnersHip  
witH unesCo’s MeMory oF tHe worLd prograMMe.
doMiniCans reCover 
tHeir MeMory
Last century, two successive dictatorships 
marked the history of the Dominican  
Republic and were responsible for nearly 60,000 victims.  
Deathly silence shrouded this period until very recently.  
Now, the archives recording this tragic past have been inscribed 
on the Memory of the World Registe. 6
2009 - n°9 
Contents
## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=3) 🆗
### The Man who discovered the archives of terror
3
D
                                     on 22 december 1992, a paraguayan, Martín almada, discovered three tons 
of documents in a police station. they turned out to be the archives of operation Condor, 
      which confirmed the crimes carried out in the 1970s and 1980s by the six dictatorships 
                       of the southern Cone of Latin america. a former unesCo colleague looks back.
The man  
who discovered 
The archives  
of Terror
her and made her listen to my shout-
ing and crying. On the tenth day, at 
midnight, they told her, coldly, that 
the “subversive educator” had died, 
asking her to come and collect the 
body. This news proved fatal and 
Celestina died in December 1974. 
After three years in a detention 
centre, I was transferred, for “mis-
conduct” – I had taught my cell-
mates to read – to the Emboscada 
concentration camp, 45 km from 
Asunción. I went on hunger strike 
for 30 days. Thanks to the energet-
ic intervention of the Committee of 
Paraguayan Churches (CIPAE) and 
Amnesty International, I was condi-
tionally released in September 1977. 
But the freedom was only relative – 
I was re-arrested in November and 
interrogated at the infamous Tech-
nical Section of the Ministry of the 
Interior. This “elementary school” 
for assassins operated without in-
terruption from 1956 to 1992.
An exile at UNESCO
The United Nations High Commis-
sion for Refugees (UNHCR) then 
negotiated political refugee status 
for me in Panama, where the gov-
ernment backed my application for 
a post in Paris as education consul-
tant for Latin America, in November 
During the 1960s I was director of 
a primary and secondary school in 
the suburbs of San Lorenzo (Para-
guay). My wife, Celestina Pérez, and 
I lived in accommodations provided 
by the Juan Bautista Alberdi Institute, 
named after the Argentinean lawyer 
who had defended Paraguayan in-
terests following the devastating 
conflict of 1870. Our once well-
educated and prosperous country 
had never recovered. So much so 
that, in 1954, the military dictator-
ship of General Alfredo Stroessner, 
undoubtedly the most savage in the 
entire Southern Cone of Latin Amer-
ica, descended on us. 
We carried on our work as educa-
tors against a backdrop of perma-
nent siege and the suspension of 
civil and political freedoms, looking 
to the Brazilian Paulo Freire for in-
spiration on the pedagogy of the 
oppressed. For us, school was the 
antechamber of democracy. 
When I was elected president of 
the Association of School Teach-
ers, my colleagues and I launched a 
campaign entitled “A roof for every 
Paraguayan teacher”, because pri-
mary teachers were in dire need of 
housing. In 1965, we built a coop-
erative teachers’ residence in San 
Lorenzo called Villa del maestro. In 
the 1970s, I was able to take up my 
studies again in Argentina, at La 
Plata University, with a scholarship 
from the Argentinean government. I 
submitted a thesis on educational 
science, specializing in educational 
policy, on the theme of “Paraguay, 
Education and Dependency”, which 
argued that, in my country, educa-
tion only helped the ruling classes, 
and that it perpetuated underdevel-
opment and subjugation. I was the 
first Paraguayan to receive a PhD in 
educational science. 
When I went back to Paraguay in 
November 1974, I was immediate-
ly arrested and brought before an 
Operation Condor military tribunal, 
where Paraguayan officials sat next 
to Argentinean, Brazilian, Bolivian, 
Chilean and Uruguayan military 
attachés. For 30 days I was sub-
jected to barbaric torture, based on 
“scientific” techniques taught at the 
School of the Americas in the Pan-
ama Canal Zone [a zone controlled 
by the USA from 1903 to 1979]. 
I was accused of “intellectual ter-
rorism” for my education work and 
for having demanded a decent 
salary and housing for teachers. 
Meanwhile, Celestina was put un-
der house arrest at the school. For 
ten days the political police called 
©
 A
ll 
rig
ht
s 
re
se
rv
ed
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
Police record for Martín Almada, a prisoner 
of Alfredo Stroessner’s dictatorship  
(1974 – 1977), found in the Paraguay  
police and military forces archives  
on 22 December 1992.
## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=4) 🆗
### Non-article text
4The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
Shortly after the Khmer Rouge 
gained power in 1975 they 
converted an abandoned high 
school into a prison and inter-
rogation centre. Under the control of Ka-
ing Guek Eav, also known as “Duch”, it 
became known to local workers as kon-
laenh choul min dael chenhmeaning liter-
ally “the place where people go in but 
never come out.” From factory workers, 
students, academics and monks to high 
ranking party officials and Westerners, 
anyone suspected of opposition to the 
party was detained. Over the four years 
of its existence only a handful of those 
who entered came out alive. 
Suspects were often brought in with 
their families, each systematically pho-
tographed and documented. Kept un-
der strict regulations, prisoners were 
shackled to walls or long iron bars and 
forbidden to speak, kept alive on mere 
spoonfuls of rice porridge and soup. Un-
der torture they were forced to confess 
their “crimes” and name their “collabora-
tors”. Eventually, they died under torture, 
succumbed to illness, or were marched 
to nearby fields to be executed. 
While the inmates are long gone, the ma-
jority of original documents remain, repre-
senting a unique witness to the regime’s. 
atrocities. Over 5000 photographs and 
4000 confessions are stored in the Tuol 
Sleng Genocide Museum and its ar-
chive, along with biographical records 
of prisoners, guards and officials and 
many of the original torture instruments. 
These are crucial evidence in the current 
Khmer Rouge trials and are unremitting 
illustration of one of the worst tragedies 
of the 20th century. 
David Jackman, 
UNESCO Courier 
Women prisoners at S-21.
©
 Is
ab
el
 G
on
zá
le
z 
R
oj
o 
(U
N
E
S
C
O
)

### The Place where people go in but never come out
The place where people go in  
buT never come ouT
under the Khmer rouge over 15,000 people were  
murdered at the infamous “security prison 21 (s-21)”  
at tuol sleng. the site has since become a museum  
and its archives were added this year  
to the Memory of the world register.
HuMan rigHts arCHives in CaMBodia 
The man who discovered The archives of Terror
## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=5) 🆗
### The Man who discovered the archives of terror
5
1978. I went on to join the staff 
of UNESCO’s Education Sector, 
where I stayed until the end of 1992. 
I was one of many Latin Ameri-
cans to come under the protec-
tive wing of UNESCO – including 
Argentineans Julio Cortázar and 
Juan Gelman, the Bolivian Fernan-
do Laredo, Chileans Mario Leyton 
and Miguel Núñez, and the Ecua-
dorian Jorge Adoum. 
Reading UNESCO documents 
made me realize that my cam-
paign was justified and I continue 
to think that we were right to fight, 
so that the following recommenda-
tion by the then Director-General, 
Amadou-Mahtar M’Bow, could be 
applied: “To teach everyone to re-
spect and ensure that others re-
spect, one’s own human rights and 
those of other people, and to be 
prepared, when necessary, to find 
the courage to defend them in all 
circumstances, even the most dif-
ficult – such is the most imperative 
moral duty of our generation.” 
During the week, I was a Latin 
American educator working for 
UNESCO. But at the weekend, for 
almost fifteen years, I spent my time 
researching the mystery of Opera-
tion Condor in Paraguayan police 
journals. Father Charles Antoine, 
then head of the weekly magazine 
Dial (which published news about 
Latin America), offered help with 
methodology and let me use his li-
brary outside working hours. 
The Paraguayan military dictator-
ship came to an end in February 
1989, and, in December 1992, I 
went back to live in my own coun-
try. Through my research, I was 
convinced that the archives of Op-
eration Condor could be hidden in 
three places.
Outcome  
of the investigation
Martín Almada is laureate of the 
French Republic Human Rights 
Award (1997), the Right Livelihood 
Award (2002) and the Tomas Moro 
Prize from the Paraguayan Catholic 
University of Asunción (2007). He 
is Commander of the Order of May 
of the Argentine Government.
The new democratic constitution 
of June 1992 gave us the right to 
access the files kept on us. I asked 
Judge José Agustín Fernández for 
mine. According to the police, there 
were no such files, and I had never 
been detained. So I then requested 
that the police central archives be 
searched. This was covered exten-
sively in the newspapers. 
Then a woman telephoned me: 
“Professor, the documents you are 
looking for are not in the central ar-
chives, but in a police station in the 
suburb of Asunción.” I invited this 
woman to come to my office, and 
she brought a map of the place, 
saying she wanted to help bring 
about the return of democracy. I im-
mediately passed the information 
onto the judge and, a few days later, 
on 22 December, accompanied by 
national and foreign jour-
nalists, we exhumed three 
tons of documents – the 
infamous Operation Con-
dor “Archives of Terror”. 
They were immediately 
transferred to the court-
house. We then worked 
tirelessly to make sure 
these archives were pre-
served, while making them 
available to historians. 
They played an impor-
tant role in establishing 
the Commission of Truth 
and Justice, which, after 
four years of hard work 
(2004-2008), confirmed 
the crimes carried out by the dicta-
torship and gave rise to a series of 
conclusions and recommendations 
that the democratic government is 
about to implement. 
Human rights organizations, 
backed by the Paraguayan govern-
ment, have requested that UNES-
CO inscribe this entire archive, 
which I had the honour to redis-
cover, on the Memory of the World 
Register. This inscription is crucial 
because it protects the right of peo-
ple to their identity and their mem-
ory. And protecting memory means 
making it possible to understand 
the present and to build the future.
The man who discovered The archives of Terror
Almada discovering the “Archives  
of Terror” on 22 December 1992  
in Lambaré, a suburb of Asunción 
(Paraguay).
©
 A
ll 
rig
ht
s 
re
se
rv
ed
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
Martín Almada is laureate  
of the French Republic  
Human Rights Award 
(1997), the Right Liveli-
hood Award (2002) and the 
Tomas Moro Prize from the 
Paraguayan Catholic Uni-
versity of Asunción (2007). 
He is Commander of the 
Order of May of the  
Argentine Government..
Martín Almada and Federico Mayor, Director-General of UNESCO, 
just before Almada’s return to Paraguay in November 1992.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
Martín almada 
is head of the Celestina Pérez 
de Almada Foundation, whose 
distinguishing characteristic 
is to associate protection of 
human rights and protection of 
the environment. The Founda-
tion was awarded the European 
Solar Prize in Berlin in 2005. 
## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=6) 🆗
### Dominicans recover their memory
6
The executioner always kills twice 
– the second time through silence, 
said Elie Wiesel, Nobel Peace Prize 
laureate (1986). This applies per-
fectly to the Dominican Republic. 
Sharing a Caribbean island with 
Haiti, this country was ruled by a 
savage dictatorship from 1930 to 
1961, and then by another, imme-
diately after, until 1996. 
Under the first regime, led by Gen-
eral Rafael Leónidas Trujillo Molina, 
some 50,000 people were killed, 
tortured or disappeared, according 
to Dominican historians. No-one 
disputes this today, but, until a mas-
sive effort to gather documents and 
eye-witness statements over the 
past five years, these years were 
shrouded in silence. Even ten years 
ago, Dominicans were not allowed 
to utter the word “dictatorship”. 
“The Dominican people are only 
just recovering their memory,” says 
Luisa De Peña Díaz, Director of the 
Memorial Museum of Dominican 
Resistance in Santo Domingo. To 
come to terms with the past, she 
believes, it is necessary to continue 
to investigate the crimes committed 
under the Trujillo regime, to list 
the dead, identify all those who 
disappeared, and record all the 
forms of torture that were used. 
The museum is continuing this 
work of remembering, since many 
cases have still not been solved. 
Survivors are keen to help, pro-
vided that someone will listen. 
Until the late 1990s,the country 
had turned a deaf ear to their 
stories – their families were their 
only audience. Victims’ relatives 
used to celebrate the dates of at-
tacks against the regime, like 14 
June 1960, originating in Cuba, 
in which every last perpetrator 
was killed. They would lay a flow-
er on the tomb of the three Mira-
bal sisters, to commemorate their 
assassination on 25 November, 
1960. These three human rights 
militants were murdered together, 
as they visited their husbands in 
prison. It was only much later that 
this crime came to the attention 
of the world. On 17 December 
1999, the United Nations Gen-
eral Assembly, in its Resolution 
54/134, voted to designate 25 
November as International Day 
for the Elimination of Violence 
Against Women. 
For years, survivors and those 
close to them had secretly kept 
alive the memory of resistance to 
the regime. In an effort to spread 
their action beyond their families, 
while trying to avoid being per-
secuted themselves, they would 
set up foundations, often bearing 
the name of the victims. The first 
was the “Foundation of widows, 
sisters, mothers, aunts and cous-
ins”. 
When a family was persecuted, 
it would go from house to house 
carrying whatever documents re-
mained of their missing loved ones, 
like holy relics. These documents 
were not just proof of the ignominy 
dominicans recover 
 Their memory
       Last century, two successive dictatorships marked the history 
  of the dominican republic and were responsible for nearly 60,000 victims. 
           deathly silence shrouded this period until very recently. now, the archives 
 recording this tragic past have been inscribed on the Memory of the world register.
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
Women mourning their dead in the Dominican Republic.
©
 M
em
or
ia
l M
us
eu
m
 o
f D
om
in
ic
an
 R
es
is
ta
nc
e
## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=7) 🆗
### Dominicans recover their memory
7
of the regime; they also proved that 
a son, husband, or brother had, in-
deed, once existed.
Balaguer takes over 
the Trujillo regime
Trujillo’s assassination in 1961 did 
not bring his regime to an end, how-
ever. His successor was none oth-
er than Joaquín Balaguer, a former 
minister and ambassador who had 
spent 35 years close to the dictator. 
He promised to initiate transition to-
wards democracy but his regime 
merely put on a more “presentable” 
front. Although the first free elec-
tions removed him from power in 
1962, he returned following a coup 
d’état and new elections in 1965; 
he stayed on for twelve years. “A 
second dictatorship,” says Luisa 
de Peña, “but this time it was legal.” 
Balaguer used the same methods 
against his opponents – assassina-
tions and torture – as his mentor. 
Only, this time, the number of vic-
tims was smaller. The Memorial Mu-
seum estimates 7000 deaths under 
the Balaguer regime, compared 
to 50,000 under Trujillo, including 
the 17,000 Haitians massacred in 
1937. 
Balaguer did not stand down un-
til 1978, then took over again from 
1986 until 1996, when he resigned 
to put an end to controversy sur-
rounding the conditions of his re-
election in 1994. He stood again 
for the 2000 elections, at the age of 
94. In the first round he came third, 
with 24% of the votes. He 
died of a heart attack in 
2002. An emblematic fig-
ure of the last 40 years of 
the 20th century, he left a 
heavy imprint on Domini-
can society. 
Up until 1978, Balaguer 
was able to keep the 
archives of the Trujillo 
regime top secret. It 
was only when he was 
deposed the first time 
that this documentary 
heritage became acces-
sible, testifying to the systematic 
and massive persecutions, illegal 
arrests, disappearances, ethnic 
cleansing, creation of torture cen-
tres and murders, ordered by the 
Trujillo dictatorship. The archives of 
the Attorney General of the Repub-
lic confirm the terrifying repression 
perpetrated by the State. 
Crimes committed abroad are 
also documented, such as the at-
tempted assassination of the Ve- 
nezuelan president, Rómulo Betan-
court, in 1960; the kidnapping and 
disappearance in New York of the 
Basque, Jesús de Galíndez; and 
the murder of the Spanish writer, 
José Almoina.
The situation today
Hampered by the two successive 
dictatorships, this work of remem-
bering only started under the pre- 
sent government. The political will 
of this government can be explained 
by its origins – the majority party, 
the Party for Dominican Liberation 
(PLD), was set up by Juan Emilio 
Bosch y Gaviño (1909-2001), the 
man who won the first free elec-
tions held in 1962, before he was 
deposed a few months later by the 
army, who put Balaguer in his place. 
Juan Bosch was opposed to Trujillo 
from the start. Accused of leading 
a number of attempts to overthrow 
the regime, he fled to exile to Cuba 
in 1937. 
It was not until 2007 that his politi-
cal successor, the incumbent Presi-
dent of the Republic, Leonel Anto-
nio Fernández Reyna, of the PLD, 
started the process of “memory re-
trieval”, an act that helped him win 
a second term as president. Having 
led the country from 1996 to 2000, 
he won the 2004 elections and was 
re-elected in 2008. 
Luisa de Peña Díaz is delighted 
with this show of political will. For 
her, “people have always kept the 
memories alive, but until there was 
an official policy to encourage them, 
there could be no real action.” 
These actions, above all, involve 
education and communication, the 
two main missions of the Memo-
rial Museum, which was created by 
decree in 2007, as an instrument to 
“help the Dominican people to re-
trieve and openly express its mem-
ory.” 
In all, some 150,000 objects and 
documents have been collected, 
dominicans recover Their memory
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
Funeral wake.
©
 M
em
or
ia
l M
us
eu
m
 o
f D
om
in
ic
an
 R
es
is
ta
nc
e
Archives at the Museum of Resistance  
in Santo Domingo.
© Memorial Museum of Dominican Resistance
revealing the way the dictatorships 
operated, but also the struggle 
waged by Dominicans for freedom 
and democracy in their country. The 
task now is to make them available 
tothe public, as part of the founda-
tions of a society in which no future 
dictator will be able to find accom-
plices. Inscription on the Memory of 
the World Register of the “Docu-
mentary Heritage on the Resistance 
and Struggle for Human Rights in 
the Dominican Republic, 1930-
1961” is part of this process.
Gabrielle Lorne, 
journalist, RFO-A.I.TV. (France) 
## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=8) 🆗
### Memories of broken dreams and intact hopes
8
T story of laborious efforts in a wide 
range of practical and concrete 
areas of international cooperation. 
Conferences, intergovernmental 
committees and groups of experts 
met in Geneva to discuss topics as 
diverse as health and social affairs, 
transport and communications, 
economic and financial affairs and 
intellectual cooperation. The Mem-
ber States ratified more than one 
hundred conventions. Although the 
League failed in its primary mis-
sion, which was to avoid world war 
and ensure collective security, it 
achieved results in developing in-
ternational technical cooperation. 
One of the miracles of archives is 
that beyond stereotypes and estab-
lished ideas, they provide evidence, 
solid ground and inspiration for 
true historical research, which may 
memories of broken dreams  
and inTacT hopes
he League of Nations emerges 
in the collective remembrance as 
a “Boulevard of Broken Dreams”, 
better known for its failures than its 
successes. The powerlessness of 
the League in front of the Japanese 
aggression in Manchuria, Italy’s in-
vasion of Abyssinia (Ethiopia), the 
Spanish Civil War and Germany’s 
annexation of Austria are some ex-
amples. Add to this a slight touch of 
bureaucratic nightmare, as depict-
ed wonderfully and without mercy in 
Swiss author Albert Cohen’s “Belle 
du Seigneur”, and the shining glass 
palace above Lac Léman seems to 
float away towards the white moun-
tains in the distant horizon, beyond 
reality. 
All this may be true, but there is 
more to the story. The history of 
the League of Nations is also the 
eventually change our perceptions 
of the past. 
The archives of the League of Na-
tions, added to the Memory of the 
World Register in July 2009, repre-
sent 2.175 linear meters, approxi-
mately 15 million documents. They 
reflect the political mandate and the 
activities of the League, such as its 
work on peaceful solutions to ter-
ritorial and other disputes through 
conciliation and arbitration. One 
successful example is the Swedish-
Finnish agreement on the state of 
the Åland Islands in the Baltic Sea. 
This was the first European interna-
tional agreement (1921) concluded 
directly through the League. The 
archives of the League of Nations 
tell the story of the difficult process 
leading to a solution to this prob-
lem. 
Successes and failures of the 
League to reach peaceful settle-
ments to international disputes and 
its work on other matters relating to 
peace and security are also reflec- 
ted in archives on the Mosul dispute 
between Turkey and Iraq (1926), the 
Chaco War between Paraguay and 
Bolivia (1932), armed clashes be-
tween Greece and Bulgaria (1925) 
and investigations on the existence 
of slavery in Liberia (1930).
The Power  
of the Record
The most fascinating thing about the 
League of Nations archives is the in-
credible variety of issues dealt with 
in them. International trade in opium 
and sexual slavery were among the 
issues, as was the important matter 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
                                to grasp the complexity of history, it is necessary to confront all types 
              of documents – from personal archives to international collections. 
                the inscription on the Memory of the world register of the League of nations archives
                           (1919-1946) has opened up new perspectives on historiographic research.
Speech by Haile Selassie, emperor of Ethiopia, at the 20th Assembly  
of the League of Nations (30.06.1935).
©
 L
ea
gu
e 
of
 N
at
io
ns
 a
rc
hi
ve
s,
 U
N
O
G
 li
br
ar
y
## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=9) 🆗
### Non-article text
9The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
memories of broken dreams and inTacT hopes
 
The fruit of 10 years of research, the United Nations Intellectual History Project  
was achieved in September 2009 with the publication of the 17th volume of the collection, 
entitled “The ideas of the UN that have changed the world”. 
In 2004, UNESCO launched the project “The History of UNESCO”,  
to initiate a multidisciplinary critique on the history of the organisation,  
its goals, activities and past achievements. 
The archives services of international organizations are also working together  
to simplify access to knowledge about their holdings. Together,  
they have created an electronic “Guide to the archives of international organizations”
J.B.
League of Nations archive photo.
©
 L
ea
gu
e 
of
 N
at
io
ns
 a
rc
hi
ve
s,
 U
N
O
G
 li
br
ar
y
inTernaTional organisaTions’  
archives
Conscious of the value of their archival holdings some 
international organizations, such as the united nations, 
unesCo and the iLo, have launched history projects  
to encourage independent research and critical reflection 
on their past orientations and actions.
## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=10) 🆗
### Memories of broken dreams and intact hopes
10
of refugees and their resettlement. 
In the spring of 1920, Fridtjof Nans-
en - a Norwegian scientist, Arctic 
explorer and politician - was ap-
pointed as League of Nations High 
Commissioner for Prisoners of War 
and appointed by the League of Na-
tions to facilitate the repatriation of 
many prisoners of war. Within two 
years, Nansen arranged for approxi-
mately 450,000 ex-prisoners of war 
from 26 countries to be returned 
to their homes. The “Nansen pass-
port” (introduced in 1922) was the 
first internationally recognized iden-
tity card for stateless persons. This 
very effective work, which changed 
the life of hundreds of thousands of 
people, resulted in the settlement of 
Russian refugees, then Armenian, 
Assyrian and Greek refugees from 
Turkey and still later, in the 1930s, 
refugees from Germany, Austria, 
Czechoslovakia. In this work one 
finds the roots of what the UNHCR 
is doing today. 
Among other major achievements 
documented in the archives are the 
League of Nations Economic and Fi-
nancial Organisation, which worked 
for international economic coopera-
tion, the financial reconstruction of 
Austria and Hungary after World 
War I and the tremendous work of 
the League’s Health Section, the 
forerunner to the WHO, with the 
standardization of vaccines, such 
as diphtheria, tetanus and tubercu-
losis. 
The archives of international docu-
ments also invite the curious re-
searcher to track the roots of ideas 
and concepts that have become 
popular and influential. The notion 
of cultural diversity, for example, is 
closely related to what in a file of 
the International Institute for Intel-
lectual Cooperation (agency of the 
League of Nations whose archives 
are in the custody of the UNESCO 
Archives) was called “particularités 
culturelles” (cultural characteris-
tics). Other United Nations’ ideas 
and notions, which have had a ma-
jor impact, such as cultural heritage 
or sustainable development, can 
also be traced back in archives of 
international organizations in differ-
ent parts of the world.
Perspectives
The inclusion of the League of Na-
tions archives in their totality in the 
Memory of the World Register is 
a significant event because of the 
implied recognition of the value of 
archives of international organiza-
tions. It also highlights the impor-
tance of preserving archives kept in 
their integral, original context as part 
of Humanity’s common heritage. 
Among the perspectives of the 
inclusion in the Register are the 
questions that it raises for historical 
research: How can the archives of 
organizations that often aspire to 
contribute to lofty ideals, including 
the creation of a Parliament of Man, 
be brought together with sources 
at the micro level? History of migra-
tion is an example of a topic where 
consultation of archives and docu-
ments at all levels, from the indi-
vidual to the international, can lead 
to extremely interesting insights for 
researchers. Historians are already 
addressing the challenges of re-
flecting on the interplay of univer-
sality and diversity in transnational 
relations; how do the local, national, 
regional and international levels in-
teract? Many different types of ar-
chival collections and sources need 
to be combined to give a better 
basis for grasping the complexity 
of history. It is one of the merits of 
the inclusion of the League of Na-
tions archives in the Memory of the 
World Register that they and other 
archives of intergovernmental and 
international organizations become 
more visible. 
The inclusion of the League of Na-
tions archives will hopefully lead to 
more attention being given to the 
archives of other international or-
ganizations. Already, the photo and 
film archives of the United Nations 
Relief and Works Agency for Pales-
tine Refugees (UNRWA) were in-
scribed in the Register at the same 
time as the League of Nations ar-
chives. These audiovisual archives 
testify strongly and effectively to the 
human disaster following the Pales-
tinian exodus and the relief work 
carried out by the UN. Other ar-
memories of broken dreams and inTacT hopes
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
Cover of the Nansen Passport for refugees.
©
 R
ef
ug
ee
s 
M
ix
ed
 A
rc
hi
va
l G
ro
up
 (N
an
se
n 
Fo
nd
s)
Palestinian refugee camp set up  
by the United Nations Relief and Works 
Agency (UNRWA) on the east bank  
of the River Jordan.
©
 U
N
R
W
A
chives of international organisations 
provide evidence on human rights 
issues, international efforts to com-
bat diseases, labour regulations, 
children’s conditions, intellectual 
cooperation, press, information and 
communication history and more or 
less every other aspect of human 
life. Just take UNESCO’s archives, 
where more than 10,000 linear me-
ters of archives bear witness to the 
multifaceted international coopera-
tion on culture, sciences, communi-
cation and education.
Jens Boel, 
UNESCO’s Chief Archivist 
## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=11) 🆗
### Non-article text
11
The word “Nibelungentreue”, de-
noting the unquestioning loyalty 
unto death displayed by the Nibel-
ungs, tends to have rather negative 
connotations in German. It is often 
used to refer to politicians who re-
main unbendingly loyal to their par-
ty– even when the consequences 
of this are ultimately detrimental. 
The term was coined by a chancel-
lor, Bernhard von Bülow, who used 
it in 1909 in connection with the 
allegiance of the German empire 
to Austria-Hungary. And it was pre-
cisely this “Nibelungentreue” that 
culminated, five years later, in the 
catastrophe of World War I – and 
ended in Germany’s total defeat. 
Von Bülow himself probably did not 
realise the portent of his remarks: in 
the Song of the Nibelungs, too, the 
heroes all end up dying. 
                                    sung since the 5th century, transcribed in about 1200, the medieval epic poem
                  “song of the nibelungs” has had a troubled history. it inspired wagner, Fritz Lang 
                             and perhaps tolkien, but it was also appropriated by Hitler. its inscription 
             in unesCo’s Memory of the world register 2009 should help to restore its honour.
UNESCO has now inscribed the 
three oldest preserved manuscripts 
of the medieval epic poem, dat-
ing back to the 13th century, in its 
Memory of the World Register. 
The historic roots of the Song of 
the Nibelungs reach back to the 
times of the Migration Period, in 
the 5th century. The Song of the 
Nibelungs was written some time 
around 1200 and combined cycles 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9

### Rehabilitation for the Song of the Nibelungs
rehabiliTaTion  
for The  
“song of The nibelungs”
Ute Obhof of the Land Baden-Württemberg Library in Karlsruhe,  
presenting “Manuscript C” of the Song of the Nibelungs.
©
 B
ad
is
ch
e 
La
nd
es
bi
bl
io
th
ek
## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=12) 🆗
### Rehabilitation for the Song of the Nibelungs
12
of sagas which had been passed 
on orally for centuries. The author 
of the Song of the Nibelungs is un-
known, says Claudia Fabian of the 
Bavarian State Library. Nor has the 
very first version been preserved, 
“but from the manuscripts that have 
come down to us we can deduce 
that it must have existed”. 
One subject covered by the epic 
poem is the crushing of the Bur-
gundian kingdom by the Romans 
and the Huns. Scientists believe 
that the King of the Huns, named 
Etzel in the manuscript, is in fact 
the historic emperor Attila, and 
that the dragon-slayer Siegfried 
was modelled on the Cheruscan 
chieftain Arminius. The latter led 
the Germanic tribes against the 
Romans and inflicted a devastating 
defeat upon the occupying forces 
in the year AD 9 in the legendary 
Varus Battle. Never again did the 
Romans manage to bring the Ger-
manic tribes completely under their 
control. The dragon Fafnir, slain by 
Siegfried, who afterwards bathed in 
its blood in order to become invul-
nerable, is thought to symbolise the 
Roman occupiers. 
Nevertheless, the Song of the Ni-
belungs is not a historic document. 
Ute Obhof, who looks after the 
manuscript in the Regional Library 
of the State of Baden in Karlsruhe, 
notes: “It brings together various 
different events and persons from 
different periods.” The other two 
manuscripts are located in the Ba-
varian State Library in Munich and 
in the Abbey Library in the Swiss 
town of St. Gallen. The abbey itself 
was declared a UNESCO World 
Heritage Site in 1983. 
Thrilling stuff, and yet it sunk into 
oblivion in the 16th century. We can 
only speculate about the reasons: 
Claudia Fabian speculates that 
“perhaps it simply didn’t agree with 
the popular taste at the time.” 
It was not until 1755 that it was 
resurrected, when one of the manu-
scripts was rediscovered by acci-
dent. This time, it struck a strong 
chord with the awakening national 
sentiments of the German people, 
rehabiliTaTion for The “song of The nibelungs”
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9

### Arnamagnaean Manuscript Collection
arnamagnæan manuscripT  
collecTion
a life’s collection of early scandinavian manuscripts,  
including icelandic sagas of viking explorations to north america 
and mythological poems have been added to the Memory  
of the world register this year.
Testimonial letter written on vellum by Bishop Jon Eiriksson (1358-1390)  
with his seal (left).
©
 T
he
 A
rn
i M
ag
nu
ss
on
 In
st
itu
te
 fo
r I
ce
la
nd
ic
 S
tu
di
es
The Icelandic scholar Arnas Magnæus 
(1663-1730) devoted himself to build-
ing up what is now regarded as the 
world’s most important collection of 
early Scandinavian manuscripts. Mov-
ing to Denmark at the age of twenty to 
study at the University of Copenhagen, 
Magnæus began to collect principally 
Icelandic, but also Danish, Norwegian 
and Swedish historical texts. The col-
lection grew throughout his career as 
secretary of the Royal Archives and 
professor of Danish Antiquities at the 
University until the Great fire of Copen-
hagen in 1728 which destroyed many 
of his printed books. Upon his death, 
a short time after, he bequeathed his 
life’s work to the University, along with 
an endowment from his private estate. 
The collection consists of almost 
3 000 items, the most important of 
which portray the birth and growth 
of the Icelandic people. Dating as far 
back as the 12th century the collection 
contains many of the unique Icelandic 
narrative – the legendary sagas. Tales 
of Viking conquest and adventure to 
the shores of Greenland and North 
America are widely considered some 
of the world’s most significant litera-
ture and express the emergence of a 
distinct identity. They also illuminate 
the transition from pagan Nordic be-
liefs to Christianity and the tensions 
that heathendom brought to Rome. 
Other works such as Landnámabók, 
(The Book of Settlement) and Íslend-
ingabók, (The Book of Icelanders) rep-
resent a country solidifying its sense 
of origins and place in explaining the 
development of law and governing in-
stitutions. 
The collection is also unique for an-
other reason. Even before constitu-
tional separation from Denmark in 
1944 Iceland had began petitioning 
for the return of many of the manu-
scripts which represent an invaluable 
part of their cultural heritage. In 1965 
the Danish Parliament agreed to divide 
the collection in two, with just over half 
(1666 items) moving to the University 
of Iceland. By 1997 the transfer had 
taken place exemplifying a successful 
dispute resolution over cultural trea-
sures.. 
David Jackman,
The UNESCO Courier
## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=13) 🆗
### Rehabilitation for the Song of the Nibelungs
13The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
who built it up into a national epic. 
Romantic painters a little later re-
garded it as the rediscovery of the 
Middle Ages and the germ cell of 
the Germanic identity. Goethe, too, 
was extremely taken by the drama 
about the dragon slayer; and the 
poet Friedrich Hebbel based his 
play “The Nibelungs” on it in 1861. 
It serves as the foundation for sev-
eral dramatic productions, as well 
as the Nibelungen Festival, held an-
nually in Worms since 2002.
Art as propaganda
The story, however, has repeatedly 
been instrumentalised for political 
ends too. Fundamental German vir-
tues could allegedly be identified in 
the invulnerable dragon slayer Sieg-
fried, the Burgundy king Gunther, 
the sly Hagen, the beautiful and 
vindictive Kriemhild and the strong 
Brunhilde. More than anything, the 
story served as a screen on which 
the increasingly pronounced nation-
al aspirations of the Germans could 
be projected – initially in response 
to their oppression by Napoleon; 
later in support of the Wilhelminian 
Empire’s ambition to become a ma-
jor power (1871-1888). And then 
it was hijacked by the Nazis. Thus 
in 1943 Hermann Göring drew 
parallels to the Nibelungs with the 
intention of motivating the German 
soldiers surrounded at Stalingrad: 
“And of all these gigantic battles, 
Stalingrad now stands out like a 
huge, monumental structure: the 
Battle of Stalingrad. One day this 
will be seen as the greatest heroic 
battle ever fought in our history. [...] 
– We know a tremendous, heroic 
song about an unparalleled battle, 
called ‘The Battle of the Nibelungs’. 
They too stood in a hall full of fire 
and flames, and quenched their 
thirst with their own blood – yet 
they fought, and fought to the last.” 
“It was the mutilation of a medieval 
text”, says Ute Obhof. It would seem 
that Göring did not read the Song 
of the Nibelungs very carefully, be-
cause its tragic end does not make 
it particularly suitable for generating 
confidence in an ultimate victory. As 
we know, the battle of Stalingrad 
ended in the disastrous defeat of 
the German army. 
The Song of the Nibelungs is not 
suitable for rousing German patrio-
tism either. It deals with amorous af-
fairs and petty jealousy at the court 
of the Burgundians, with deceit and 
murder, and ultimately ends with 
Kriemhild taking bloody revenge on 
the murderers of her beloved Sieg-
fried. Apart from this, the story is 
set in places scattered across all of 
Europe. The people of the Nibelung 
are identified in the song as com-
ing from Norway, Brunhilde is the 
queen of Iceland and Etzel is the 
leader of the Huns, who resided in 
what is today Hungary. 
So how German is the Song of the 
Nibelungs anyway? 
“It is not really German at all,” says 
Ute Obhof, “it’s European”. As it is, 
Germany did not actually exist in 
its present form in the fifth century. 
“What does make it German, how-
ever, is the fact that it was handed 
down in the German language.” 
It was presumably not so much the 
Song of the Nibelungs itself that led 
to its becoming so charged with 
nationalism, Ms Fabian believes. 
This was promoted in particular by 
the musical interpretation of the 
material by the composer Richard 
Wagner – although that was not in 
fact the effect he intended. Wag-
ner was in fact more interested in 
depicting human nature – torn be-
tween the competing interests of 
love and power. Over a period of 
almost thirty years, Wagner created 
rehabiliTaTion for The “song of The nibelungs”
Initial on the manuscript.
©
 B
ad
is
ch
e 
La
nd
es
bi
bl
io
th
ek
## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=14) 🆗
### Rehabilitation for the Song of the Nibelungs
14The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
a four-part, sixteen-hour magnum 
opus which he called the “Ring of 
the Nibelung”. It was first staged 
in 1876, and since 1896 has been 
performed regularly in Bayreuth. 
It is hardly surprising that Hitler, 
seeing the work as a nationalistic 
celebration of Germanic ideology, 
became a permanent visitor of the 
Bayreuth festival from 1933 on-
wards. Winifred Wagner, Richard 
Wagner’s daughter-in-law, directed 
the festival at the time and was also 
a close friend of the dictator. Even 
thirty years after the war she would 
continue to profess a glowing admi-
ration of Hitler. 
All this did severe harm to the image 
of Wagner and the Song of the Nibe-
lungs. And it stuck in people’s minds. 
In one of his films, Woody Allen puts 
it this way: “I can’t listen to that much 
Wagner. I start getting the urge to 
conquer Poland.”
The Eddas :  
a universal inspiration
Unfortunately, the medieval epic poem 
has never been able to free itself en-
tirely from this long period of abuse. 
The inclusion of the manuscripts in 
the UNESCO list of cultural heritage 
could mark an important step in its 
rehabilitation. Their inscription puts 
them alongside numerous other Ger-
man works, including Beethoven’s 
Ninth Symphony, documents from 
the estate of Goethe and Schiller, 
a Gutenberg Bible and Fritz Lang’s 
classic silent film “Metropolis”. 
Fritz Lang would certainly have been 
pleased by the decision, because he 
too was fascinated by the medieval 
heroic epic. Indeed, he was the first 
to make a film of the story, in 1924. 
Along with “Metropolis”, Lang’s five-
hour production is considered one of 
the milestones of silent films. 
Richard Wagner’s descendants 
have also done a great deal to shake 
off the nationalistic connotations of 
the music. Aside from Bayreuth, a 
regular Nibelungen Festival has also 
been held in Worms since 2002 – 
the town in which most of the story in 
the Song of the Nibelungs is set. 
The festival was revived by Dieter 
Wedel, and this triggered a come-
back on the silver screen too: in 
2004, Uli Edel filmed a star-studded 
new version of the Nibelungs. That 
too made every effort to avoid any 
form of German pathos. Perhaps too 
much so: Edel turned the story into 
a globalised fantasy fairy tale, which 
could have taken place anywhere – 
in Germany, Denmark or the Shire. 
This is not entirely surprising either, 
because the Song of the Nibelungs 
gives the impression of having had a 
formative influence on Tolkien’s “Lord 
of the Rings”. Although Tolkien de-
nied having copied from it, he did, like 
Wagner, draw inspiration from Ger-
manic and Norse sagas when writing 
his epic novel – from the “Edda”, for 
example, a collection of Germanic 
and Norse epic poems about gods 
and heroes, which contains parts of 
the Nibelung legend. So Tolkien’s 
Ring and the Song of the Nibel-
ungs ultimately spring from the same 
source.
Jens Lubbadeh, 
journalist at Spiegel Online (Germany), 
correspondent for the UNESCO Courier 
rehabiliTaTion for The “song of The nibelungs”
Manuscript of the Song of the Nibelungs, an illumination.
©
 B
ad
is
ch
e 
La
nd
es
bi
bl
io
th
ek
## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=15) 🆗
### The John Marshall Ju/'Hoan Bushman Film and Video Collection, 1950-2000
15
Born on November 12, 1932, John 
Marshall grew up in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts and on his family’s 
farm in Peterborough, New Hamp-
shire. Almost as remarkable as the 
footage he shot is the story of how 
his entire family, prosperous Bos-
tonians, forged such a close bond 
with the Ju/’hoansi (prononced “ju-
wansi”) Bushmen of the Kalahari, a 
tribe of hunter-gatherers in the Nyae 
Nyae region of North-East Namibia, 
that they returned to Africa again 
and again. 
Marshall first picked up a camera 
in 1950, at age 18, when he ac-
companied his father, Laurence 
Marshall, a top American industri-
alist, on the first of many expedi-
tions to the Kalahari Desert. The 
entire family accompanied them on 
a second trip in 1951, staying for 
a month and a half. It was a trans-
formative experience for them all – 
they returned in 1953, staying for a 
year and a half this time. 
Lorna Marshall, an English litera-
ture teacher, became an anthro-
pologist only to be able to unravel 
the intricacies of the Ju’/hoan clan’s 
familial ties. Gaining acclaim in the 
academic world, Lorna worked on 
many films, including “First Film,” 
which allows viewers to see some 
of John Marshall’s earliest footage. 
John’s sister, Elizabeth Marshall 
Thomas, is the author of several 
books, including “The Harmless 
People” and “Warrior Herdsmen,” 
about the Dodoth people of Ugan-
da, whose pastoral life was very dif-
ferent from that of the Ju/’hoansi. 
                  when John Marshall accompanied his father on an expedition to namibia in 1950, 
      he was just a teenager, and had no idea that he was embarking on the first of many fascinating 
journeys that would make up his life’s work. His six-hour series “a Kalahari Family”, the product 
               of five decades of filming, takes us across thousands of years of history.  
The John marshall Ju/’hoan  
bushman film and video collecTion, 
1950 – 2000
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
©
 S
m
ith
so
ni
an
 In
st
itu
te
, H
um
an
 S
tu
di
es
 F
ilm
 A
rc
hi
ve
s 
C
ol
le
ct
io
n
N!ai, a nine-year-old Ju/’hoansi, holding her little cousin.  
She is one of the characters in John Marshall’s films.
## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=16) 🆗
### The John Marshall Ju/'Hoan Bushman Film and Video Collection, 1950-2000
16
“It’s so wonderful that UNESCO 
has given John the recognition he 
so richly deserved,” Elizabeth Mar-
shall Thomas said on the occasion 
of the inscription of John Marshall’s 
collection of films into the Memory 
of the World Register in July of 
2009. “But recognition didn’t mean 
as much to him as getting done 
what he did – he would have pro-
duced what he did whether or not 
he got any recognition at all.”
Shattering the myth
Much of Marshall’s work focuses 
on one particular extended family, 
that of Toma Tsamko. Marshall met 
Film archivist Karma Foley, who 
has worked closely with Marshall 
and now works on the Collection, 
describes what it was like to work 
with the filmmaker. “Working with 
John was a wonderful experience. 
It was a very formative time in my 
life, having just graduated from col-
lege, and it was incredible to have 
the opportunity to work with such 
rich and beautiful material, and to 
learn from someone who was so 
talented and so passionate. John 
was very demanding of himself and 
of those who worked with him. He 
cared about the craft of filmmaking, 
of course, but he was also keenly 
The John marshall Ju/’hoan bushman film and video collecTion, 1950 – 2000
working with John, I quickly learned 
that it was much more than that. 
He used film as an advocacy tool, 
he used it to educate. There was a 
great deal of purpose and commit-
ment behind his work.” 
Those who worked with Marshall 
stress that despite his significant 
aesthetic and theoretical contribu-
tions to documentary, he believed 
that the people in front of the cam-
era were more important than the 
filmmaker himself. Throughout his 
career, he battled “the Myth”, the 
popular notion among Westerners 
that the Bushmen didn’t know what 
was best for them and needed help 
from “developed” society.
A cinematic activist
Marshall saw himself as a reporter, 
not a spokesman for the Ju/’hoansi, 
often allowing them to describe 
their lives in their own words. 
“John was extremely committed 
to helping the Ju/’hoansi. He basi-
cally gave up his filmmaking career 
in 1980 to do grassroots develop-
ment and advocacy work in Namib-
ia. He dedicated so much of his life 
to trying to help,” says Foley, who 
has accompanied Marshall on trips 
to Africa and returned since. “That 
kind of commitment is very rare. Per-
sonally I think it comes from love, a 
very deep love and respect that he 
had for the people he considered 
his second family. And that’s what 
I see in so much of the footage he 
shot over all those years - tremen-
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
©
 S
m
ith
so
ni
an
 In
st
itu
te
, H
um
an
 S
tu
di
es
 F
ilm
 A
rc
hi
ve
s 
C
ol
le
ct
io
n
Toma Tsamko greeting John Marshall, after a long absence, in 1978.
Toma Tsamko (in suit and tie) taking part in a political rally  
for the SWAPO party before Namibia’s first democratic elections.  
Tsamko was the first president of the Nyae Nyae Farmers’ Coop  
and entered politics in 1980.
©
 C
la
ire
 R
itc
hi
e
Toma under a baobab tree on his first 
visit to /Gautcha, an area with a large 
salt pan and a permanent waterhole. 
It was the start of a mutually enrich-
ing relationship, one that would span 
nearly half a century. 
“John fell in love with these people, 
and once they got to know each oth-
er – learning the language so quickly 
helped – it was like a wonderful 
dream for him, the hunting trips, and 
the different way of life. They literally 
became his family,” his wife, Alexan-
dra Eliot Marshall reminisces. “He 
was never condescending – the way 
John perceived it, and documented it 
and lived with it, he never glamorized 
these people. He told their story with 
an intimacy that came from years of 
knowing them, both in good times 
and bad times, and across four gen-
erations of the Ju’/hoansi.” 
aware of the power of the moving 
image and he felt a great respon-
sibility to represent the Ju/’hoansi 
accurately. For me, working in video 
production was very exciting, but 
## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=17) 🆗
### The Founding of the ethnographic film
17
dous love and respect.” 
It was probably due to this close 
relationship with the Ju/’hoansi that 
Marshall was forced to leave South 
West Africa in 1958 after his visa 
expired, and was not allowed to re-
turn for twenty years. 
Meanwhile, Marshall became well-
established as a cinema vérité film-
maker in the 1960s and 1970s. 
In 1968, Marshall and American 
filmmaker Timothy Asch, who had 
filmed the Yanomamo Indians in 
Venezuela, founded Documentary 
Educational Resources, a nonprofit 
that produces and distributes an-
thropological films for classroom 
use. 
In 1978 Marshall was allowed to 
return to Nyae Nyae, only to find his 
Ju’/hoan friends had lost much of 
their land to the South African gov-
ernment and could no longer sur-
vive as hunters. Virtually abandon-
ing his filmmaking, Marshall started 
a foundation to bring the Ju/’hoansi 
closer to self-sufficiency. The fund 
allowed them to establish water 
access, learn subsistence farming, 
and establish a local government. 
Marshall’s epic five-part series, 
“A Kalahari Family,” is culled from 
more than a million feet of footage 
shot between1950-2000. “In the 
course of six hours, you actually tra-
verse thousands of years of history,” 
says documentary filmmaker Jayas-
inhji Jhala, associate professor of 
anthropology at Temple University, 
Pennsylvania, and a close friend 
of Marshall’s. According to Jhala, 
there is nothing that remotely com-
pares to this remarkable body of 
work. Besides being a comprehen-
sive record of the Ju/’hoansi, the se-
ries charts Marshall’s evolution from 
filmmaker to activist. 
Marshall’s final visit to Nyae Nyae 
was in 2004. He died due to com-
plications from lung cancer in April 
2005.
Shiraz Sidhva, 
Indian journalist, correspondent for 
the UNESCO Courier
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9

### The John Marshall Ju/'Hoan Bushman Film and Video Collection, 1950-2000
The John marshall Ju/’hoan bushman film and video collecTion, 1950 – 2000
Housed in the Human studies Film archives at the smithsonian’s 
national Museum of natural History in washington dC,  
the John Marshall Ju/’hoan Bushman Film and video Collection, 
1950 – 2000 was recently added  
to unesCo’s Memory of the world register.
John Marshall in the Nyae Nyae region, 1989.
S
m
ith
so
ni
an
 In
st
itu
te
, H
um
an
 S
tu
di
es
 F
ilm
 A
rc
hi
ve
s 
C
ol
le
ct
io
ns
he recognition has been welcomed by 
the Smithsonian’s archivists, and col-
leagues, friends and family of the Ameri-
can anthropologist and acclaimed film-
maker who documented 50 years of the 
lives of the Ju/’hoansi of the Nyae Nyae 
(Namibia). 
Pamela Wintle, senior film archivist at 
the Smithsonian’s Human Studies Film 
Archives and a long-time advocate of 
film preservation, hopes UNESCO’s 
recognition “will raise the profile of this 
specific archival collection, making it 
well-known throughout the world, as 
well as the profile of the Human Studies 
Film Archives, within both the National 
Museum of Natural History, and the 
Smithsonian.” 
Considered one of the seminal visual 
anthropological projects of the 20th 
century, Marshall’s work documents 
the traditional lives of these once-inde-
pendent hunter-gatherers and their ties 
to the land. He goes on to record the 
Ju/’hoansi’s fight against dispossession, 
disease, and war, and their struggle to 
establish farming communities and re-
claim their lands as hope for Namibian 
independence and the end of apartheid 
grew. 
“The career of John Kennedy Marshall 
spanned a remarkable 50-plus years 
during which he became an innovator in 
the technical production of films as well 
as a leading voice in the ethics of ethno-
graphic filmmaking,” said Jake Homiak, 
director of the museum’s Anthropol-
ogy Collections and Archives Program. 
“During his lifelong association with the 
Ju/’hoansi (Bushmen) he became an ad-
vocate for those he documented, using 
his films as tools for education and em-
powerment.” 
The Marshall Collection contains 767 
hours of unedited film and video footage, 
as well as edited films and videos, audio 
tapes, still photographs, maps, study 
guides for edited films, published and 
unpublished writing by Marshall and oth-
ers. It also houses production files that 
include letters, shot logs, translations, 
transcriptions, editing logs, treatments 
and proposals spanning from 1950 to 
2000. The collection also includes sev-
eral books and numerous journal articles 
that have been written about Marshall’s 
films and methods.
S. Sidva
The founding  
of eThnographic film
## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=18) 🆗
### Donguibogam: precious book of medicine
18The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
All the traditional medical practic-
es of our country are cited in the 
Donguibogam and it is also their 
source. This is how Hwang Kyeo-
ng-sik, professor of philosophy at 
the University of Seoul, began his 
presentation at an international sci-
entific conference devoted to this 
exceptional book, held on 3 Sep-
tember 2009. The conference, at 
Korea’s National Library, marked 
the 400th anniversary of the Don-
guibogam, which had just been in-
scribed on the UNESCO Memory 
of the World Register. It is the first 
medical text to appear on this pres-
tigious list. 
It was compiled by a court phy-
sician, Heo Jun (1546-1615), on 
orders from the king, Seonjo de 
Joseon. It took 16 years of continu-
ous effort, not even disrupted by 
a change of reign or the Japanese 
invasion. Thus was born a genuine 
medical encyclopaedia in 25 vol-
umes, which has continued to in-
spire thinkers and artists alike over 
the centuries. 
The Donguibogam is one of the 
classics of Korean culture. Apart 
from its value for the medical world, 
it also offers a philosophical vision of 
Eastern Asia at the beginning of the 
17th century. The underlying mes-
sage of the encyclopaedia is that it 
is possible to keep a body in good 
health by maintaining its energies – 
which are like those found in nature 
– in balance. Indeed, it starts with 
a chapter on cosmology, where the 
workings of the body are compared 
to those of the universe. 
This principle is still accepted to-
day and continues to spread, thanks 
to the success of “deep ecology”, 
which considers humanity to be 
an integral part of the planetary 
ecosystem. It can trace its origins 
to Taoism and the concepts of not-
acting and not-being. Hoe Jun was 
convinced that all illnesses arose 
from an imbalance. For him, the 
most effective remedy was medita-
tion, not medication.
The pulse,  
a celestial energy
If the Donguibogam were not useful 
in healing the sick, its value would 
have remained limited despite its 
philosophical interest. Using the 
teachings of oriental philosophy, 
the encyclopaedia identifies, clas-
sifies and lists all the medicines 
and medical practices known at the 
time. In the chapters on pharma-
copeia, acupuncture and moxibus-
tion, Hoe Jun describes appropriate 
treatments in detail. He specifies 
exactly when during the year to col-
lect a given plant, what to do with it 
and how long it remains effective. 
In the volumes on internal medi-
cine, Heo Jun describes the inter-
actions of the five viscera. “The liv-
er, the lungs, the kidneys, the heart 
and the spleen all interact with one 
another,” explains Kim Nam-il a re-
                  For four centuries, the Korean medical encyclopaedia known as donguibogam has been 
      a source of inspiration for thinkers and artists alike. its 25 volumes contain a colossal amount 
                    of medical knowledge and philosophy along with some unusual prescriptions.
donguibogam : 
precious book of medicine
©
Th
e 
N
at
io
na
l L
ib
ra
ry
 o
f K
or
ea
Volumes of Donguibogam, considered a classic of Korean culture.
“Dry and reduce to a powder  
the gall bladder of a white dog,  
a kudzu vine stalk and pinch  
of cinnamon. Mix all of these together 
with some honey. Roll the paste  
into balls. This preparation makes you 
invisible. The gall bladder  
of a blue dog is even more effective.”
. 
## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=19) 🆗
### Donguibogam: precious book of medicine
19The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
donguibogam : precious book of medicine
searcher in oriental medicine at the 
University of Kyeonghui. “A given 
organ acts differently according to 
its links with the other viscera. The 
Donguibogam explains this prin-
ciple clearly.” 
The section on external medicine 
deals with the five body elements 
that enable it to maintain its form 
and capacity for movement: the skin, 
the muscles, the blood vessels, the 
tendons and the bones. Here it is 
explained that the pulse represents 
celestial energy. In oriental medi-
symptoms of illnesses, as well as 
the remedies. Among these is a 
strange illness entitled yukjing : 
“The patient is tormented by an in-
satiable hunger for meat. If he is not 
made to vomit, he will die.” 
Even more peculiar is a formula in 
the chapter on Diverse Remedies , 
which tells us how to make our-
selves invisible: “Dry and reduce 
to a powder the gall bladder of a 
white dog, a kudzu vine stalk and a 
pinch of cinnamon. Mix all of these 
together with some honey. Roll the 
paste into balls. This preparation 
makes you invisible. The gall blad-
der of a blue dog is even more ef-
fective.” 
“The Donguibogam is an excellent 
treatise, and most of its principles 
are still valid four centuries after it 
was written,” writes Yi Sang-bong, 
communications officer for the As-
sociation of Practitioners of Orien-
tal medicine (Joseon Ilbo, 29 Au-
gust, 2009). He adds, “Master Hoe 
Jun was determined to compile all 
the popular Korean remedies, with-
out exception,” as if to justify the ap-
pearance of some that may appear 
outlandish to us. Yi Sang-bong also 
suggests interpreting the magic 
formula for invisibility as a means of 
practising the way of the heart. 
In his encyclopaedia Hoe Jun did 
indeed present a compilation of 
the traditional remedies passed 
down from generation to genera-
tion throughout Asia, and especially 
China. But he was not shy of ex-
pressing his own convictions and 
experiences as a doctor. The title 
of the work is, itself, an expression 
of his libertarian spirit: literally, the 
word Donguibogam designates a 
precious book on oriental medicine, 
objective and independent.
An accessible treasure
Heo Jun’s wisdom and art, as well 
as his colourful life, have inspired 
generations of artists in South Ko-
rea. The novel by Yi Eunseong, en-
titled Donguibogam, was a great 
success, as was its adaptation 
into a television soap opera. “This 
is not most people’s idea of what 
it means to be a doctor. Most doc-
tors are proud of their art and how 
it relieves the sufferings of their pa-
tients, but hardly any of them write 
down the treatments they use for 
the guidance of future generations. 
Unfortunately,” writes Yi Eunseong 
in his novel. 
The Korean National Library, 
which holds the original edition of 
Donguibogam, is producing an an-
notated translation into modern Ko-
rean. And, from 1 to 25 September 
2009, it put on an exhibition entitled 
The Donguibogam in Words and 
Images . “We showed 176 works 
of literature and art centred on the 
original edition of this work, which 
appeared in 1613 and is now in-
scribed on the UNESCO Memory 
of the World Register,” explains Mo 
Taek-min, head of the Library. 
But what makes the Donguibogam 
so precious is not just to be found 
in the display cabinets of the Na-
tional Library. It has also given us, 
in the 21st century, access to the 
oriental worldview at the beginning 
of the 17th century, people’s daily 
lives at the time, and Asian popular 
medicine. The work builds a bridge 
from the present to the past. Often 
we are oblivious to readily available 
marvels. Fortunately, this one has 
not escaped our notice. 
Yeon Kyung, 
The original volumes of Donguibogam are kept in the Korean National Library
©
Th
e 
N
at
io
na
l L
ib
ra
ry
 o
f K
or
ea
An encyclopaedia of traditional remedies 
passed down from generation to generation 
throughout Asia.
©
Th
e 
N
at
io
na
l L
ib
ra
ry
 o
f K
or
ea
cine, the pulse is essential. “Tak-
ing the pulse” is a time-honoured 
expression that means “to make a 
diagnosis”. The Donguibogam lists 
precisely the different methods of 
taking the pulse and the various in-
terpretations. 
Heo Jun devoted 11 volumes to 
the description of the causes and 
## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=20) 🆗
### In the blue ink of Malagasy aristocrats
20The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
Time has started to yellow the pag-
es and the blue ink is already fad-
ing. A few letters have gone, leav-
ing some words missing a vowel or 
a consonant. But overall the text is 
still legible, and the erratic grammar 
of the Malagasy language, only be-
ginning to adapt to the Roman al-
phabet, in no way dulls the pleasure 
of discovering a whole culture and 
civilization. 
The registers of the village chiefs 
(sakaizambohitra), as well as the 
notebooks, records and bound 
correspondence that comprise 
the Royal Archives open the door 
on a whole panorama of daily life. 
The kingdom of Madagascar be-
gan in 1810 and ended in 1897, 
with French colonization, when the 
island’s new General Governor, Jo-
seph Gallieni, abolished the mon-
archy. These precious documents, 
now kept in the main island’s Na-
tional Archives, cover the period 
from 1824 to 1897. They give an 
important account of the nascent 
history of a hitherto oral culture, 
revealing the secrets and intrigues 
of the court, as well as the difficul-
ties central government envoys 
sometimes encountered in the con-
quered lands. 
Until the accession of King Ra-
dama I (1810-1828), Madagascar 
was divided into a multitude of king-
doms. Radama I, from the Merina 
clan, was recognized by the British 
as King of Madagascar in 1817. He 
continued the policy of island uni-
fication that his father had initiated 
in 1795, but with greater openness 
towards the developed world. He 
welcomed the Protestant mission-
aries, who went on to build schools, 
adapt the Roman alphabet to the 
Malagasy language and teach the 
aristocracy to read and write. This is 
how, from 1824, the first Malagasy 
archives gradually took form.
History behind  
the scenes
Did the Prime Minister buy arms 
without consulting his Cabinet, and 
even though the State coffers were 
empty? The Rainilaiarivony Journal 
–written minutes of the twice-week-
ly cabinet meetings as transcribed 
by secretaries – gives a detailed 
account of how, after failing to se-
cure a loan from the queen and 
now faced with a ‘fait accompli’, the 
government decided to involve the 
people in the purchase. Since the 
arms had already been delivered, 
they had to be paid for somehow! 
The royal ‘kabary’ (speeches), which 
informed subjects of the decision to 
raise new taxes for the “good of all”, 
are more or less faithfully recorded 
in the records. 
Did the queen appoint a disrepu-
table character as head of criminal 
justice? Once again, the Rainilaia-
rivony Journal relates, in full detail, 
how the cabinet tried to dissuade 
her from choosing this “womanizer”. 
But management of public affairs is 
not all that is recorded. There are 
also references to the private lives 
of the courtiers in the queen’s and 
the prime minister’s palaces. Here 
we learn, interspersed among more 
serious debates, how so-and-so 
got divorced and such-and-such 
has been cheating on his wife. 
And this aspect of court life is 
not only the preserve of the cabi-
net records. Essays by erudite 
Malagasies on the history of the 
nation, correspondence between 
provincial governors, and even the 
                  the royal archives of Madagascar, written in Malagasy, are a unique, 
   living testimony of daily life in the 19th century and the meeting of two cultures, 
    as seen by Malagasy people themselves. in July 2009, the archives were inscribed 
                       on the unesCo Memory of the world register.
in The blue ink  
of malagasy arisTocraTs
©
 H
er
y 
R
ak
ot
on
dr
az
ak
a/
L’
E
xp
re
ss
 d
e 
M
ad
ag
as
ca
r
These royal archives are not available to the public.
## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=21) 🆗
### In the blue ink of Malagasy aristocrats
21The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
English language exercise books of 
the Prime Minister, all offer titillating 
details of the daily life of a Malagasy 
courtier. 
But, besides the gossip, the Royal 
Archives provide historians, the only 
ones to have access, with material 
to better understand life in Mada-
gascar in the 19th century, and not 
just from the perspective of political 
history. Thanks to these records, re-
search has been carried out on the 
costumes, cuisine, lifestyle and fes-
tivals of the island. And this insight 
into the habits of the people also 
sheds light on the entire social and 
economic history of the period.
From ‘lovan-tsofina’  
to written archives
These documents are all the more 
interesting because they reflect the 
Malagasy point of view on a period 
which turned out to be crucial for 
the country, because of its encoun-
ter with Western, Christian cultures. 
With the adopttion of the Roman 
alphabet, tales of daily life were no 
longer confined to the lovan-tsofina 
(oral transmission of traditions and 
customs) but were also written 
down. And these written records 
were not produced only by the for-
eign missionaries, soldiers and ex-
plorers, but also by the Malagasy 
people themselves. 
“The Madagascar Royal Archives 
provide a very explicit account of the 
opening of the island to the western 
world and the contact between the 
two cultures,” explains Sylvie Andri-
amihamina, Director of the National 
Archives. And between the two re-
ligions. From the 1820s onwards, 
Protestant missionaries gradually 
established Christianity. Up until 
then, Malagasies worshipped their 
ancestors, seen as mediators be-
tween the living and the one god, 
Zanahary. He was then integrated 
with the new religious practises and 
assimilated to the Christian God of 
the Bible. 
The archives are currently held 
in the Archives of the Republic 
of Madagascar, in Antananarivo. 
“They are still very well preserved 
despite several moves,” says Sylvie 
Andriamihamina. “But we do need 
to find a way for them to be con-
sulted without damage to the origi-
nal documents. We have been able 
to digitize the correspondence be-
tween missionaries and the central 
government, thanks to a partner-
ship with the Centre for Technical 
and Economic Information (CITE). 
Other records are available on the 
Internum Aristhot website.” In the 
interests of conservation, access to 
the documents is strictly controlled. 
“Conventions and agreements have 
been signed with the research de-
partments that want to use them,” 
she adds. 
Inscription of the Royal Archives 
on the UNESCO Memory of the 
World Register in July 2009 came 
just at the right time. “Thanks to 
this inscription, we can learn more 
about our own heritage and share 
this with the rest of the world,” says 
Ms Andriamihamina. 
Lovasoa Rabary-Rakotondravony 
and Isabelle Motchane-Brun, 
L’Express de Madagascar
in The blue ink of malagasy arisTocraTs
©
 H
er
y 
R
ak
ot
on
dr
az
ak
a/
L’
E
xp
re
ss
 d
e 
M
ad
ag
as
ca
r
Sylvie Andriamihamina, Director of the National Archives of Madagascar.
.
Example of Malagasy diplomatic correspondence 
before French colonisation.
©
 H
er
y 
R
ak
ot
on
dr
az
ak
a/
L’
E
xp
re
ss
 d
e 
M
ad
ag
as
ca
r
## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=22) 🆗
### Non-article text
22
of orientation. The group, meanwhile, 
possesses a certain collective con-
science. Each new generation takes 
the same path as the one before. 
Everything is programmed in these 
animals and they function according 
to the programme only when they 
are together. If you put a penguin on 
a deserted island, the programme 
stops. 
In 1991, with the breakdown of the 
Soviet Union and the dissolution of 
the communist party’s hegemony, 
the programme directing the Soviet 
people’s collective life disappeared 
too. Individuals found themselves 
alone and disoriented. They had to 
get used to their new life, to autono-
my, as well as they could. 
What did you think about pere-
stroika? Had you imagined such 
an outcome? 
I welcomed Gorbachev with joy. 
There was a premonition of great 
change. Andropov was dead along 
with Chernenko and in their place a 
young Gorbachev had emerged full 
of promise for the future. At about 
that time I was able to publish my 
first short stories, which had been 
You were quite young when  
the President Mikhail Gorbachev 
started his perestroika. 
Were you aware of the limits  
imposed by the Soviet regime? 
At that age and time, I did not think 
about limits. There simply existed 
certain rules which it was better not 
to transgress. As a student, I wrote 
black-humoured short stories that 
I distributed at the university (the 
Kiev State Pedagogical Institute of 
Foreign Languages). Which got me 
a summons from the KGB (Com-
mittee for State Security in the for-
mer USSR). Someone once told 
me which one of my acquaintances 
had written letters denouncing me. 
Informing in this way was very com-
mon at the time and more or less the 
norm. However, I would not define 
everything that happened during that 
time in terms of “limits imposed by 
the regime”.
The universe of your novels of-
ten seems unreal and a number 
of your characters are animals 
– in Death And The Penguin, 
for example. Is this a means of 
expressing your ideas on society 
without calling things by their 
real names? 
Yes, I think unconsciously, in the 
Soviet era, I wrote in such a way that 
no one could accuse me of anything 
at all. Since the 1990s, however, the 
settings of my novels have become 
more real; they are sometimes Kiev, 
or Ukraine and Russia, or Kazakh-
stan. 
The penguins came to mind be-
cause they remind me so much of 
the Soviets. They are animals that 
live in groups. One individual, isolat-
ed, cannot survive; it loses its sense 
Focus
Andrei Kurkov in the apartment where he writes, in Kiev.

### A Wall comes down, a world is born
A wall comes down, a world is born
“a country under construction presents 
the same dangers to its population as 
a building site does to unsupervised 
children,” declares andrei Kurkov,  
a ukrainian author who writes  
in russian and is well-known for his 
lucid perspective on post-soviet society. 
Here he comments on the late 1980s 
and the orange revolution as well as 
on more current events.
©
 A
. K
ou
rk
ov
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
An interview to mark the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin wall (9 November 1989),  
by Katerina Markelova, The UNESCO Courier. 
## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=23) 🆗
### Non-article text
23
Focus
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9

### A Wall comes down, a world is born
rejected previously. I remember that 
science-fiction, for example, which 
until then had been scarce, began 
to proliferate. This meant in a way 
we had more of a right to dream. So 
everyone started believing that life 
would improve. I did too. 
The weakening of the State’s con-
trol was obvious, but I could never 
have imagined it leading to the disin-
tegration of the Soviet Union. Then, 
when the collapse began, there 
was first the economic crisis – the 
empty shops, the depreciation of the 
ruble – then simply decomposition 
and the separation of Ukraine and 
the USSR. That was when I began 
to feel mixed emotions. At the same 
time, I was thinking it was easier to 
bring order to a small country than to 
a big country. I don’t know why, but 
I imagined that Ukraine would move 
quickly into a normal orbit. But… that 
did not happen. 
How did you react to the fall  
of the Berlin wall? 
At first, I was confused! I was afraid 
that it would end badly. I remember, 
just before the fall of the wall, Hun-
gary had opened its border with 
the German Democratic Republic 
(GDR) and about 10,000 East Ger-
mans streamed in, to be part of the 
Federal Republic of Germany. The 
future seemed precarious at those 
moments. Maybe, unconsciously, I 
was afraid they would trigger a Third 
World War. But my apprehension 
quickly dissipated. We could follow 
the events on television regularly 
and it became clear that the political 
system of the GDR was collapsing. 
And as it was much more solid than 
the Soviet or the Polish system, it 
was evident that a new era was ap-
proaching. 
How have the societies of post-
Soviet countries, and particularly 
Ukrainian society, evolved since 
the Iron Curtain fell? 
In many of my novels I describe 
how, in 1991, life gained the upper 
hand over humanity. What I mean 
is that the rules of life – which until 
then had been universally accepted 
by societies – had disappeared and 
people found themselves tossed by 
the waves of destiny. 
On one hand, the majority of retired 
people – nostalgic for the Soviet 
Union – were not willing or able to 
adapt to the new era. On the other, 
the people of my generation sudden-
ly threw themselves into activities for 
which they were not prepared. Life 
pushed some towards small com-
mercial ventures and others towards 
crime. For example, I had a classmate 
who was a good student and who 
wanted to be a chemist. Suddenly, 
he became a broker. He worked with 
money of dubious origin, which got 
him five years in prison. It is different 
for the new generation, those born 
after 1985. Young people have a dif-
ferent mentality because they have 
not known the suffering of political 
and social rupture. 
All this to say that a country under 
construction presents the same dan-
gers to its population as a building 
site does to unsupervised children. 
The people fall, they bump into things, 
they’re constantly hurting themselves 
and destroying their destiny. 
In addition, immorality in politics was 
legitimized. In other words, if you are 
comfortable being dishonest, cor-
rupt, etc. – become a congressman. 
Politics has been reduced to a dirty 
business in many countries. We can 
say that people are going into poli-
tics to enrich themselves and not to 
build the State. That is why the State 
still seems unfinished. This failure to 
establish the State is still felt today in 
Ukraine, although less violently. The 
time of dividing up power among 
gangsters is over: intelligent wrong-
doers turn to financial crime.
What were you doing during the 
Orange Revolution, which began 
in Ukraine in November 2004? 
I got involved actively: I spent three 
weeks in Maidan (Kiev’s central 
square), giving interviews that were 
broadcast live in Spain, Canada, Ger-
many and England. My writer friends 
and I organised open debates in the 
bookshop Nautchnaia mysl (scien-
tific thought) in the centre of the city 
where followers of both Yanukovych 
and Yushchenko came to get warm. 
I do not regret having done that. In 
any case, what we have today is 
better than what we had before the 
Orange Revolution, from a political 
and moral point of view. Even if now 
almost all the actors from the revolu-
tion are disillusioned because they 
expected more. 
What are the strengths  
of democracy in the post-Soviet 
countries and what are  
the weaknesses? 
The existence of political plura- 
lism indicates a democracy. But our 
democracy is more symbolic than 
real, because behind the political 
parties, one sees no ideological pro-
grammes. These parties are simply 
groups of representatives of the eco-
nomic sector united around common 
interests who call themselves liberal 
or something else. Occasionally, I 
have the impression that in Ukraine, 
despite everything, there is more de-
mocracy than in Russia. But on the 
other hand, when laws are not ap-
plied in a country, when a number 
of rules are missing and no one is 
striving to establish them, one has 
reasons to doubt the validity of one’s 
democratic regime. That said, we do 
have a certain freedom of the press 
and people can, if they want to, par-
ticipate in all political actions. That is 
already great progress.
Andrei Kurkov, 
born in 1961 in Russia, 
is the author of 15 novels, 
nearly half of which have been 
translated, as well as seven books 
for children. His novel 
Death And The Penguin, 
published in Ukraine in 1996, 
has been translated in 33 languages. 
## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=24) 🆗
### Non-article text
24
Grand Prismatic Spring, Yellowstone National Park, United States.

### The Earth in close-up
The eArTh in close-up
in 2000 unesCo sponsored  
yann arthus-Bertrand’s project 
earth from above featuring his 
photographs of the world’s most 
beautiful landscapes.  
it was tremendously successful:  
130 million people saw  
the travelling exhibition and over 
three million copies of the book 
were sold in 21 languages.  
But the experience had no follow 
up. will the organization  
and the photographer team up 
again to help the planet?
Foresight
has been in the news lately. “Listen-
ing to the carbon tax discussions,” 
Arthus-Bertrand says, “you get the 
impression something is being im-
posed on people. But on the con-
trary, people should be proud of 
paying the carbon tax. They should 
be thinking, ‘I’m helping, too’. When 
I drive my car I produce CO2 but at 
least I pay a tax that will help fight 
climate change. I admit that I con-
sume carbon, but I try to offset it by 
raising people’s awareness. All the 
participants in December’s World 
Climate Change Conference in Co-
penhagen will take a jet to get there. 
That’s a bit ridiculous, isn’t it? Let’s 
hope this big meeting will produce 
results that will offset the amount of 
carbon they consume.” 
Is offsetting CO2 emissions enough 
to solve the problems? “Offsetting 
isn’t what matters, it’s being aware 
what you consume. When you rea-
lise that flying from Paris to New 
York and back consumes as much 
carbon as two French people con-
“It is the duty of all of us today to 
safeguard the planet,” says French 
artist and ecologist Yann Arthus-
Bertrand, whose photos of the earth 
have dazzled viewers around the 
world. “The human population is 
steadily rising and biodiversity de-
creasing. We’re ruining the planet’s 
equilibrium. We’ve tamed the Earth. 
The Earth is at our service. Animals 
are at our service. It’s as if we still 
don’t realize that we need animals to 
live, that animals are part of our life, 
because they’re our cousins and we 
owe them respect.” 
How does Arthus-Bertrand recon-
cile art and action? Can a picture be 
political? “Can art change things?” 
he asks, smiling. “Of course it can! 
Otherwise I wouldn’t be doing what 
I do. First, what is art? Am I an art-
ist or a journalist? I use pictures to 
show what scientists say. I didn’t 
become an ecologist by accident. 
It happened gradually, over time, by 
working. And today I’m an activist 
doing my best to be convincing. I do 
what I know how to do, which is to 
make beautiful images, and I enjoy 
it. But I’m not interested in a beauti-
ful image for its own sake. It has to 
make people think. I try to give my 
work meaning.” 
Since the current financial and 
economic crisis began, some coun-
tries have shifted their orientation 
to a green economy. What lessons 
can be drawn from the downturn? 
“Right now,” Arthus-Bertrand says, 
“it’s clear that people in the rich 
countries must learn to live with less, 
waste less, eat less meat, throw less 
away, use less oil. We can live better 
with less, despite those who think 
that’s a step backwards.”
Offset? Tell us more…
To coincide with the United Na-
tions Climate Change Conference 
in Copenhagen, the Courier is de-
voting its December 2009/January 
2010 edition to the topic of global 
climate change.
The debate about carbon taxes 
©
 Y
an
n 
A
rt
hu
s-
B
er
tr
an
d/
La
 T
er
re
 v
ue
 d
u 
ci
el
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
Interview by Linda Tinio (UNESCO Bureau of Strategic Planning). 
This column, launched by the Foresight Section of UNESCO’s Bureau of Strategic Planning,  
tackles topics of interest to the general public and the Member States of the Organization.  
It features intellectual opinions likely to foster UNESCO’s reflection, programming  
and action in its various fields of competence. 
## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=25) 🆗
### The Earth in close-up
 
25
sume in a year, you understand 
something’s wrong! I have a lot of 
faith in individual consciousness. 
Politicians aren’t the ones who have 
the power to convince people. Even 
in the democracies, if strong public 
opinion isn’t built up it won’t work. 
Nothing can be imposed by force. 
You have to convince people – the 
richest as well as the poorest – that 
they must change their lifestyles. 
The UN should launch a campaign 
to raise the awareness not of politi-
cians but of the world’s citizens.”
Come work with me!
In September 2008  Arthus-Bertrand 
said, “It’s too late to be pessimistic”. 
What did he mean by that? “When 
you care about the planet and read 
increasingly gloomy reports every 
day about the state it’s in, you can’t 
help noticing there are two kinds of 
people in the world: those who fret 
and those who try to change things. 
Personally, I want to be on the side 
of the people who are fighting for 
change and who believe in it. So it’s 
too late to be pessimistic. The indi-
cators do look rather grim, but we 
have to move forward.” 
In 2000 UNESCO sponsored 
Arthus-Bertrand’s project Earth from 
Above, in which he photographed 
the world’s most beautiful land-
scapes. It was tremendously suc-
cessful: 130 million people saw the 
travelling exhibition and over three 
million copies of the book were sold 
in 21 languages. But the experience 
had no follow up. Would it be worth 
reviving such a positive collabora-
tion? Arthus-Bertrand is ready for 
new adventures with UNESCO. 
The photographer would like the 
UN to help with his latest project, 
Six Billion Others. “It’s a subject 
that really should interest interna-
tional organizations,” he says. Six 
Billion Others is an exhibition of over 
6,000 video testimonials by people 
around the world talking in their na-
tive languages about the issues af-
fecting humanity. The project started 
in 2003 and was presented at the 
Grand Palais in Paris in January and 
February 2009. 
His parting words: “Come work 
with me. Let’s set up a big project. 
We can do terrific things together!” 
An opportunity not to be missed.
Foresight
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
Well, Fatehpur Sikri, Uttar Pradesh, India.
©
 Y
an
n 
A
rt
hu
s-
B
er
tr
an
d/
La
 T
er
re
 v
ue
 d
u 
ci
el
Pink trumpet tree on Kaw Mountain, French Guiana.
©
 Y
an
n 
A
rt
hu
s-
B
er
tr
an
d/
La
 T
er
re
 v
ue
 d
u 
ci
el
Yann arthus-Bertrand : some projects
yann arthus-Bertrand, born in 1946, 
founded the aerial photography agency 
altitude in 1991. in 2005 he set up 
goodplanet, a foundation with the aim 
of raising public awareness concer- 
ning environmental issues. it includes 
six programmes: six Billion others, 
Carbon action, goodplanet post-
ers, goodplanet Junior, goodplanet 
info and goodplanet Conso. in april 
2009 the united nations environment 
programme (unep) appointed him 
goodwill ambassador. His show vu du 
Ciel (earth From above), a documentary 
series about the planet, airs in 34 coun-
tries. His film Home, screened in 126 
countries on world environment day 
(5 June 2009), illustrates our planet’s 
condition and the challenges that must 
be met to protect it.Yann Arthus-Bertrand.
©
 E
rw
an
 S
ou
rg
et
To coincide with the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen,  
the Courier is devoting its December 2009/January 2010 edition  
to the topic of global climate change.
## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189770eng.pdf#page=26) 🆗
### Non-article text
contact
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
The UNESCO Courier is published by  
the United Nations Educational, Scientific  
and Cultural Organization. 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France
http://www.unesco.org/courier 
general inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
f.ryan@unesco.org 
director 
Saturnino Muñoz Gómez 
editor in Chief 
Jasmina Šopova - j.sopova@unesco.org
editorial assistance 
Katerina Markelova - k.markelova@unesco.org 
EDITORS 
arabic 
Bassam Mansour - b.mansour@unesco.org  
assisted by Zaina Dufour - z.dufour@unesco.org 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape - w.cauhape@unesco.org
 
english 
Cathy Nolan - c.nolan@unesco.org
portuguese
Ana Lúcia Guimarães et Nelson Souza Aguiar 
a.guimaraes@unesco.org 
russian 
Victoria Kalinin - v.kalinin@unesco.org 
photo 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org
and Ariane Bailey
pdF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi  
web platform 
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro 
s.roberts@unesco.org
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be  
reproduced and/or translated providing the credit line 
reads “Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier”  
and includes date and hyperlink. Photos without  
UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement  
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations  
of the countries and territories concerned.  