# [370977](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

Teachers: 
Changing 
lives
CourierT HE  UNE SCO
October-December 2019
Canada 
A second-chance school
Chile 
Teaching behind bars
China 
A teacher brings hope 
to a remote village
Congo 
Teaching a class of 76
India 
The school under 
a bridge
Sierra Leone 
Mohamed Sidibay: 
The story of 
a former 
child soldier

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

2019 • n° 4 • Published since 1948
The UNESCO Courier is published quarterly by the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 
It promotes the ideals of UNESCO by sharing ideas on 
issues of international concern relevant to its mandate. 
The UNESCO Courier is published thanks to the generous 
support of the People’s Republic of China. 
Director: Vincent Defourny
Acting Editor-in-chief: Agnès Bardon 
Associate Editor: Katerina Markelova
Section Editor: Chen Xiaorong 
Editions 
Arabic: Anissa Barrak
Chinese: Sun Min and China Translation & Publishing House
English: Shiraz Sidhva
French: Gabriel Casajus, proofreader
Russian: Marina Yartseva 
Spanish: William Navarrete
Digital edition: Mila Ibrahimova
Photographs and illustrations: Danica Bijeljac
Translation and layout coordination: 
Veronika Fedorchenko
Administrative and editorial assistance:  
Carolina Rollán Ortega
Production and promotion: 
Ian Denison, Chief, UNESCO Publishing 
and Branding 
Eric Frogé, Senior Production Assistant
Digital Production: 
Denis Pitzalis, Web Architect/Developer
Media Relations: 
Laetitia Kaci, Press Officer
Translation: 
 Peter Coles, Cathy Nolan
Design: Corinne Hayworth 
Cover illustration: © Osama Hajjaj
Printing: UNESCO 
Interns: 
Gao Sijia, Ren Danni, Xu Dan (China) 
Alice Christophe, Coralie Moreau (France) 
Natasha D’souza (India)
Co-editions 
Portuguese: Ana Lúcia Guimarães 
 Esperanto: Trezoro Huang Yinbao 
Sicilian: David Paleino
Korean: Eun Young Choi
Information and reproduction rights: 
courier@unesco.org 
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
© UNESCO 2019  
ISSN 2220-2285 • e-ISSN 2220-2293
Periodical available in Open Access under the 
Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) licence 
(http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using 
the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound 
by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository 
(https://en.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en). 
The present licence applies exclusively to the texts. For the 
use of images, prior permission shall be requested.
The designations employed in this publication and 
the presentation of the data do not imply the expression of 
any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning 
the legal status of any country, territory, city or area of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers 
or boundaries. 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO and do not 
commit the Organization. 
Published in 
10 languages
Arabic, Chinese, English, 
Esperanto, French, Korean, 
Portuguese, Russian, Sicilian 
and Spanish.
Become an active publishing partner 
by proposing new language editions of 
the UNESCO Courier. 
Subscribe to the print version
• 1 year (4 issues): €27 • 2 years (8 issues): €54
Subscription fees cover printing and 
distribution costs. There is no profit motive.
Discounted rates for group subscriptions: 
10% discount for five or more subscriptions.
Read and 
share
Share the 
UNESCO Courier 
with your network by 
promoting it, in line 
with the Organization’s 
Open Access publishing policy.
Subscribe to  
the digital version
https://en.unesco.org/courier/subscribe 
It’s 100%  
FREE! 
Read the 
UNESCO 
Courier 
and spread 
the word!
For more details, contact
DL Services, C/O Michot Warehouses, 
Chaussée de Mons 77, 
B 1600 Sint Pieters Leeuw, Belgium 
Tel: (+ 32) 477 455 329 
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@dl-servi.com

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   3 


### 371007: Editorial

Editorial
Sandrine teaches at a school in Burkina 
Faso, which has no water or electricity. A 
still from the shooting of the documentary, 
Teach Me If You Can, produced by 
French film production company, Winds, 
in partnership with UNESCO.

### IGNORE

©
 W
in
ds
/É
m
ili
e 
Th
ér
on
d
CourierT H E  U N E S CO

### 371007: Editorial

An “impossible profession”. For Sigmund 
Freud, education, like government 
and psychoanalysis, represented 
an undertaking “in which one can 
be sure beforehand of achieving 
unsatisfying results1”. It is no easy task 
to simultaneously transmit knowledge, 
maintain classroom discipline, stimulate 
curiosity, impart the rules of living 
together and train future citizens. 
The challenge is all the more difficult 
to take on in contexts that are marked 
– too often – by a lack of resources, 
overcrowded classrooms, or even the risk 
that the teacher’s original purpose loses 
its meaning. 
Certainly, everyone recognizes the key 
role teachers play. On a personal level, 
we can all name at least one teacher 
who made a difference – sometimes 
to such an extent that it redirected our 
whole lives. At the international level, the 
United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs), Goal 4 in particular, 
recognize the importance of teachers in 
the implementation of the Sustainable 
Development Agenda by 2030. 
Yet, the profession is being undermined. 
The development of cognitive 
neuroscience and the many applications 
of new technologies in the field of 
education are forcing the profession to 
adapt and reinvent itself. 
Once respected and valued, the role 
of the teacher is now contested, with 
teachers being held accountable for the 
failures of the education system.
1. Freud, S., 1937. Analysis Terminable and 
Interminable. 
2. Ingersoll, R., Merrill, E., Stuckey, D. and Collins 
G., 2014, updated October 2018. Seven Trends: The 
Transformation of the Teaching Force. Consortium for 
Policy Research in Education (CPRE) Research Reports. 
This negative perception of them can 
– in some cases – result in intimidation, 
or even violence, by students or 
their families. 
In fact, the profession is struggling to 
attract new recruits. After a few years of 
practice, many teachers are throwing 
in the towel. A 2014 study conducted 
in the United States on a sample of 
50,000 teachers2 shows that more than 
forty-one per cent of them (primary and 
secondary education levels combined) 
leave the profession within five years of 
entering it. 
Low wages, limited career advancement, 
strong societal pressures and a lack of 
resources are all factors that discourage 
young people from pursuing this career. 
Yet, over 69 million teachers will have to 
be recruited by 2030 to achieve the SDGs. 
Of these, 48.6 million new recruits will 
be needed to replace teachers leaving 
the profession. There is already an acute 
shortage of teachers in South and West 
Asia and in sub-Saharan Africa. 
In this context, how can we attract a 
new generation of motivated teachers? 
This question inspired the theme of the 
2019 edition of World Teachers’ Day, 
5 October: Young Teachers: The Future of 
the Profession. 
But beyond the alarming numbers, 
statistics and headlines, there are still 
teachers who are not discouraged by the 
difficult situation. Teachers who continue 
teaching in the most impoverished 
settings, in overcrowded classrooms. 
Teachers who choose to focus on learners 
with troubled backgrounds, those who 
are out of the school system or in remote 
areas. Teachers for whom teaching 
is a commitment, a daily struggle. 
It is these teachers that the Courier is 
honouring today.
Vincent Defourny and Agnès Bardon
This Wide Angle section is 
published to mark the occasion of 
World Teachers’ Day, celebrated on 
5 October every year. 

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

4   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019
Contents
6-19
WIDE ANGLE
 7 A second-chance school 
in Montreal
Lyne Fréchet 
 10 The school under a bridge 
in New Delhi
Sébastien Farcis 
 12 Mohamed Sidibay: 
The role of teachers is to restore 
our confidence 
Interview by Agnès Bardon
 14 Congo: A class of seventy-six 
Laudes Martial Mbon
 15 Teach Me If You Can: 
From classrooms to the big screen 
16 Teaching behind bars in Valparaiso
Carolina Jerez Henríquez
 18 A teacher brings hope 
to a remote Chinese village
Wang Shuo
20-27
ZOOM
Archive treasure: The unpublished 
album of David Seymour 
The story of the discovery of 
a forgotten album by the co-founder 
of the Magnum agency 
in the UNESCO archives
Photos: David Seymour/Magnum Photos
Text: Giovanna Hendel, UNESCO

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   5 
CURRENT 
AFFAIRS
28-33
OUR GUEST
Nelly Minyersky: The green queen
Interview by Lucía Iglesias Kuntz
38-45
 39 An Inca suspension bridge 
is restored in Peru 
Jordi Busqué 
 42 From the holds of the Clotilda 
to Africatown 
Sylviane A. Diouf
IDEAS
 29
Architectural lessons 
for the future, via the past
Amin Al-Habaibeh
34-37

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

6   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019
W
id
e 
an
g
le
W
id
e 
A
n
g
le
Teachers: 
Changing lives
Kénia Alvarado-Lara, a teacher at 
the Centre d’intégration scolaire in 
Montreal, comforts a student during 
an exam. Many of the children 
here suffer from psychological and 
behavioural problems, and are unable 
to study at regular schools.
 © Robert Etcheverry

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   7 

### 380108: A second-chance school in Montreal

Dull noises are then heard in the next 
classroom. A few staff members – all 
connected by walkie-talkie – head to the 
classroom, ready to intervene. Inside, the 
teachers have already managed to calm 
the young boy who was hitting a wall. 
He lies on a small mattress in a space 
away from the others and two of the 
interveners stay with him to soothe him.
Tossed from 
one school to another
These outbursts are not uncommon, 
especially at the end of the year. 
“Many of these youth suffer from 
attachment disorders,” says the principal, 
Ysabelle Chouinard, who has taught 
Lyne Fréchet, Canadian journalist
To succeed where traditional schools have failed. This is the challenge 
that teachers at the Centre d’intégration scolaire (Centre for academic 
integration, CIS) in Montreal, Canada, face every day. The French-
language school takes in students whose educational paths have 
been rocky – gaining their trust is a prerequisite for any learning.
A second-chance
school in Montreal
at the school for seventeen years. 
“When the holidays arrive, the students 
are anxious. They don’t know what to 
expect and are afraid of parting from 
their teacher.” 
There is an immense need for affection 
in some of these young people, who 
have been tossed from one school to 
another and from one family to another.
With its brick walls, drawings hanging on 
the walls and worn-out lockers, CIS looks 
like any other school. Classrooms open 
onto rows of desks, aligned and facing a 
blackboard. From eight in the morning, 
students noisily invade the wide staircase 
that leads to the top floors. But the 
comparison ends there. 
This is because the school, located in 
the city’s Rosemont district, has been 
welcoming vulnerable students – 
students with learning disabilities or 
psychological problems – for nearly 
fifty years. Many of them have chaotic 
backgrounds and complicated family 
histories, and some have even been in 
conflict with the law. Aged from 6 to 18, 
many students have also had a difficult 
past in schools they have attended. 
They have experienced academic failure, 
successive expulsions or been relegated 
to the back of the classroom in special 
programmes for difficult students. CIS 
is a new beginning for them – on a 
completely different basis. 
At the end of June, a week before the 
summer holidays, the atmosphere is 
charged. The grade six students are 
preparing to take their “social universe” 
exam, a subject taught at the elementary 
and secondary levels, which covers the 
social and political history of Quebec. 
The children fidget in their seats. 
Their young teacher, Kénia Alvarado-Lara, 
announces that the questions will focus 
on the Roaring Twenties [the decade 
of the 1920s in Western culture] and 
the baby boom [a period marked by 
a significant increase in the birth rate, 
coined after the one that occurred in the 
United States and other parts of the world 
following the Second World War]. 
An educator at the Centre d’intégration 
scolaire for twenty-eight years, 
Luc Fugère gives instructions to Flora. 
Listening and empathy are key to 
building trust with the students.

### IGNORE

©
 R
ob
er
t E
tc
he
ve
rr
y

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

8   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019

### 380108: A second-chance school in Montreal

The teachers have to deal with sudden 
changes in behaviour, emotional distress 
and violence, which sometimes requires 
police intervention. If the school is a little 
too big for the eighty-four students it 
takes in, it is because the unpredictable 
behaviour, yelling and fighting do not 
allow the school to share the premises 
with other students. 
Working at CIS requires a solid 
constitution. In addition to the principal, 
social workers, a dozen teachers and 
specialized educators are responsible 
for this unique school in Quebec. Many 
teachers or trainees who come with the 
idea of helping young people resolve 
their problems leave after a few months, 
bewildered. 
Alvarado-Lara admits that she has 
painful memories of her first year in the 
school. “My class consisted of sixteen 
students from Secondary I [grade seven 
in Quebec], who were very difficult 
cases. In a traditional school, it’s already 
a difficult age. But with them, I also had 
to face insults, physical violence and 
fights. I cried a lot and felt personally 
targeted by the insults. I couldn’t sleep.”
Honesty. Trust. Respect. Empathy. 
These words are often repeated by the 
teachers and educators at CIS. Without 
these patiently constructed relationships 
with students, nothing is possible. 
“You cannot approach a student with 
Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) in 
the same way as you would a student 
with an attachment disorder. But in 
any case, you have to be reassuring. 
If a student insults me, I have to get 
beyond that. There are days when a 
child is incapable of verbalizing what 
he feels. I need to spend some time 
with him. A young person who spits 
or bites is a child who is trying to tell 
me something,” explains Luc Fugère, a 
specialized educator. He has worked at 
the school for twenty-eight years and 
his role is to help young people manage 
their emotions. 
The teachers at CIS have all completed 
four years of university training in 
special education – a speciality that 
equips them to teach children with 
special needs. 
Taking a break with educator 
Mélanie Bélanger. In each classroom, 
a specialist is present to help the teacher 
manage the students’ emotions.
Over time, Alvarado-Lara has found 
ways to respond to these demanding 
students. “The relationships I’ve 
managed to develop with these young 
people, have allowed me to overcome 
all the challenges,” she continues. “We 
have developed a mutual respect over 
time. The other crucial factor was that 
my director trusted me. When I couldn’t 
take it anymore, she’d encourage me to 
take a day off. It’s important to take care 
of yourself.” 
Roxanne Gagnon-Houle, who has been 
teaching at CIS for ten years, has also 
learned to deal with strong emotions. 
She loves her work and the students 
love her. She only doubted this once 
– the day her ribs were broken in a 
fight. “At the secondary school level, 
I had students who had experienced 
homelessness, drug addiction and 
psychiatric disorders. The only way to 
intervene is to build a relationship of 
trust. You have to be honest and make a 
sincere commitment to them,” she says.

### IGNORE

©
 R
ob
er
t E
tc
he
ve
rr
y

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   9 

### 380108: A second-chance school in Montreal

Social worker Pascale Montcalm (left) 
and teacher Emma Chouinard-Cintrao 
work to calm a student down, 
using great sensitivity.
Rekindling 
the desire to learn
Teachers have been trained to identify 
certain disorders, to respect the learning 
rhythm of a dyslexic child and to 
manage a classroom. But not everything 
can be learned at university. To restore 
the desire to learn in these youth who 
have a troubled relationship with school, 
it is also necessary to demonstrate 
initiative and creativity. 
“When I arrived,” says Alvarado-Lara, “I had 
only a blackboard, chalk and books. What 
could I do with these? I was convinced 
I couldn’t work here as I would in an 
ordinary school.” She then borrowed a 
projector from her brother and asked 
the principal for a laptop. She prepared 
interactive lessons, adding videos and 
photos, and succeeded in capturing the 
attention of her students. “I no longer had 
to do any class management. I integrated 
this method for each subject and gave 
the students pencils to take notes. It 
worked!” she enthuses.
Emma Chouinard-Cintrao, a third-year 
teacher, is completing her university 
degree in special education. She has been 
teaching at CIS for only a few months. 
To encourage learning, she takes every 
opportunity to think outside the box – by 
using educational games. To stimulate a 
taste for mathematics, she organizes cake 
and lemonade sales outside the school to 
familiarize students with fractions. 
Pet therapy, developed with the help 
of specialists, is also part of the school’s 
therapeutic arsenal. Several animals 
have been included in classrooms – 
guinea pigs for the youngest children, 
a trio of rats in the first year of primary 
school, and ferrets and rabbits in the first 
year of secondary school. Pet therapy 
days are also held with specialists, to 
help some students to communicate. 
Some shy children learn to become 
more assertive when a dog obeys their 
commands, for instance. 
These efforts are paying off. Andrew, 
15, who was dismissed at the end of 
elementary school, attended several 
anger management sessions until he 
felt better. “I’m impulsive and when I get 
angry, I hit out. Here, I was helped to find 
ways to change,” he says. 
His testimony is echoed by Joé, 12. 
“I have a behavioural problem. In my old 
school, I used to fight all the time. Here, 
there are people to supervise us when 
there are fights.”
This painstaking work with students 
to allow them to express themselves 
and to channel their aggressiveness, 
makes learning possible. “At first, I felt 
I was teaching for nothing,” explains 
Alvarado-Lara. “I thought they had 
too many behavioural problems to 
progress academically. But in fact, 
they’ve advanced very far in developing 
their skills. There are so many ways to 
teach differently.” 
“The younger the students are when they 
arrive, the more successful they will be 
in returning to mainstream school,” says 
Chouinard. The principal cites cases of 
students who have flourished after leaving 
CIS – such as Stéphanie, who earned a 
master’s degree in communication, or 
another student who went on to join 
a professional basketball team in the 
United States. “We don’t necessarily aim 
for university studies for all,” she stresses. 
“The important thing is for students to find 
fulfilment. Leading them towards their 
adult lives already means a lot.”
The only way 
to intervene is to build 
a relationship of trust. 
You have to be honest 
and make a sincere 
commitment to them 

### IGNORE

©
 R
ob
er
t E
tc
he
ve
rr
y

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

10   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019

### 370985: L’école sous un pont de New Delhi

The school under
a bridge in New Delhi
Most of them also attend the local school, 
but come to him for academic support. 
“We have sixty-three students in my class,” 
says Mamta, 13, who attends the third 
year of high school. “Sometimes we can’t 
understand everything, so we come and 
ask Mr Rajesh.”
Sébastien Farcis, French journalist 
based in New Delhi 
For the past nine years, 
Rajesh Kumar Sharma has been 
operating a makeshift school 
between two pillars of the aerial 
metro that runs across India’s 
capital. More than 200 children 
from the surrounding slums 
attend this open-air classroom 
every day. 
Personal vindication 
His battle is also a personal vindication. 
Sharma, who comes from a poor family 
of nine children in a rural area of Uttar 
Pradesh state in the country’s north, had 
always wanted to study but could not 
finish university because he lacked the 
means. “The school was seven kilometres 
from my home,” he says. “It took me over 
an hour to cycle there. When I was in high 
school, I always missed chemistry, which 
was the first class. As a result, I didn’t get 
good marks in this subject, and couldn’t 
go on to study engineering, which was 
my dream.”
Sharma still managed to obtain a high 
school degree, a feat that none of his 
eight older brothers and sisters had 
achieved. He enrolled in university, selling 
his textbooks to pay the registration fees. 
To get there, he had to travel more than 
forty kilometres by bicycle and bus. But 
after a year, the elders in his family cut 
off the funds for his education. His dream 
was cut short. 
The next phase in Sharma’s life was 
challenging. When he was about 
20, he moved to New Delhi with his 
brother. “I sold watermelons, worked 
on construction sites, did anything I 
could to earn a few rupees,” he recalls. 
One day, on the metro construction 
site, he was shocked to see the workers’ 
children, most of them out of school, 
wandering amidst the rubble. At first 
he offered them candy and clothes, and 
then he considered providing them more 
sustainable help. And thus, in 2006, he 
began helping two children with their 
homework, under a tree. One of them, 
now 18, has just entered university, and 
wants to become an engineer. 
Four years later, in 2010, he set up his 
makeshift school under the newly-built 
aerial bridge, where he now welcomes 
more than 200 children a day – at levels 
ranging from the first year of primary 
to the third year of secondary school. 
The students are divided into two groups 
– boys in the morning, and girls in the 
afternoon, for almost two hours each. 
A primary school student attends a Hindi 
class at the makeshift school under a 
bridge in New Delhi. Rajesh Kumar Sharma, 
who started the school, can be seen in the 
background, teaching other students.
This school does not appear on any 
map. It does not have whole walls or a 
complete roof, let alone tables or chairs. 
Like the small street shops that keep 
the Indian capital alive, the “Free school 
under the bridge” has simply merged into 
New Delhi’s sprawling urban space. It 
nestles between the massive number five 
and number six pillars of the aerial metro 
of this megalopolis of over 20 million 
inhabitants. And for the past nine years, 
the school has provided free education 
to hundreds of poor children from the 
surrounding slums on the banks of the 
Yamuna River – a no-man’s land located 
in the heart of a city that is prosperous in 
pockets, but badly overcrowded. 
The district is a concrete grey, the sky low 
and heavy in the monsoon season. But 
the street school is full of life and colour. 
The three walls that make up its space 
are painted sky blue, with a forest of tall 
trees and giant roses surrounding the five 
blackboards that hang on the back wall. 
As soon as they spot him, the students 
run up to the teacher from everywhere, 
shouting “Namasté, teacher!” The man 
held in such esteem by the children is 
Rajesh Kumar Sharma, 49, founder of 
the “Free school under the bridge”. He 
considers it his mission to help break 
the cycle of poverty by improving the 
education of the poorest. 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   11 

### 370985: L’école sous un pont de New Delhi

Outdoor classes
There are many other children who do 
not attend school because their parents 
– migrants or informal workers – are 
undocumented. Sharma helps them 
to get papers, so they can enroll their 
children in school. He does this for free, 
relying on the meagre income from 
his family grocery store and occasional 
donations. So far, he has refused to create 
a non-governmental organization (NGO). 
“It’s a way to avoid paperwork, but also 
because I’m afraid that with a formal 
structure, the metro authorities will be 
afraid that we’ve settled in, and will kick us 
off their property,” he explains. But in the 
absence of a legal organization, donations 
are received in his personal name, which 
has recently exposed him to criticism. “I 
do the best I can, but I can’t provide an 
invoice when I use the donated money to 
feed the children,” he says. To dispel such 
doubts, he has stopped accepting money 
and only receives donations of clothing, 
food and books. 
On this hot July afternoon, the outdoor 
classroom is a little disorganized. The 
105 students are divided into groups 
of different levels. Three teachers, all 
volunteers, assist Sharma and have to 
shout as they point to the letters on the 
board, to be heard above the noise of the 
metro overhead. One teacher does his 
best to hold the attention of the youngest 
pupils. Sharma, meanwhile, is busy 
interpreting a Hindi text to a group of 
very attentive girls. “We use the national 
textbooks and do everything we can with 
the few resources we have, to help them 
progress,” explains this improvisational 
teacher. “In the old days, classes were held 
outdoors, so I don’t think it’s essential to 
have closed classrooms to teach properly. 
In India, it is said that the most beautiful 
lotuses are born in the marshes.” 
Sharma considers 
it his mission to help 
break the cycle of poverty 
by improving the education 
of the poorest

### IGNORE

©
 S
éb
as
tie
n 
Fa
rc
is

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019

### 370986: Mohamed Sidibay: le rôle des enseignants est de nous redonner confiance

Interview by 
Agnès Bardon, UNESCO
Orphaned at the age of five, 
Mohamed Sidibay became 
a child soldier during the 
civil war in Sierra Leone, and 
owes his survival to school. 
A tireless advocate of education, 
particularly through the Global 
Partnership for Education, he 
tells the story of his debt to a 
teacher who knew how to reach 
out to him. 
Mohamed Sidibay: The role
of teachers is to restore 
our confidence
You were recruited as a child soldier at 
an early age. How were you able to go 
to school? 
It was in 2002, a year before the end of 
the war in Sierra Leone. I was part of a 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) 
programme for the Disarmament, 
Demobilization and Reintegration 
(DDR) of child soldiers. I was nearly 
10 at the time, and had never been to 
school. All I knew was how to load an 
AK-47. But UNICEF made sure that I 
received an education by providing my 
primary school with books, pencils and 
equipment. Without this help, the story 
of my life would undoubtedly have been 
very different from what it is today. Going 
to school has aroused my curiosity to 
learn, and it is this curiosity that continues 
to be my driving force today.
After what you had been through, what 
were your first days at school like? 
The first time I sat in a classroom, 
I felt lost. I was upset. I didn’t feel like 
I belonged. But above all, I felt alone. 
At the age of 10, most of the children 
who were there knew how to spell their 
names, read, write and count. I didn’t 
know how to do any of that. I was 
ashamed and didn’t feel welcome among 
them. But I stayed, not because I was 
aware of the importance of education, 
but because school, in spite of everything, 
was the safest place for me.
A ceremony to release child soldiers in 
Yambio, Southern Sudan, in February 2018. 
It is estimated that more than 
250,000 children worldwide are still directly 
or indirectly involved in armed conflict.

### IGNORE

©
 S
te
fa
ni
e 
G
lin
sk
i/A
FP

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   13 

### 370986: Mohamed Sidibay: le rôle des enseignants est de nous redonner confiance

A still from the short film Mohamed 
Sidibay: Teaching Peace, directed by The 
MY HERO Project, a non-profit educational 
organization based in the United States. 
What was your relationship with 
the teachers? 
Having grown up during the war, I did 
not trust adults. When I came into contact 
with them, my only goal was to make 
myself very small, so as not to attract their 
attention. Being invisible is the only way 
to survive a civil war. At first, my relations 
with most of my teachers were not good. 
Their anger at losing everything during 
the war, my frustration with what I had 
lost myself, and my fear of adults, made 
relationships difficult. I was very tempted 
to give up everything. 
Do you remember any teacher 
in particular? 
When you are only one of eighty students 
in a public school in a slum, you are just 
one face among others. But one teacher 
left a lasting impression on me. She was 
special for many reasons. As a homeless 
child, I had nothing to eat at lunch-time. 
So, from time to time, she would share 
her meal with me. In class, she didn’t 
make me come to the blackboard 
because she knew that, as I couldn’t read, 
the other students would laugh at me. 
And then she had the good idea of 
making me sit next to the brightest girl 
in my class, who became my tutor. And 
even though the teacher knew what my 
life was like outside her classroom, she 
always asked me about my day. When 
she realized that I didn’t like school, she 
had the intelligence not to force me. 
In fact, she did her best to make me feel 
safe. She knew that if I felt good, I would 
keep coming to school. And she was 
right. It is by this kind of attitude that you 
recognize a good teacher.
 In your opinion, how should teachers 
approach children suffering from trauma? 
There is always a time when wars come 
to an end. But the scars they leave on 
the lives of men and women last a 
lifetime. Teachers are the architects of 
the reconstruction of society. Their job is 
not only to pass on knowledge, but also 
to make sure that children feel safe. They 
must understand that children like me 
come from a world where adults have 
not only failed to protect them, but also 
robbed them of their childhood and 
innocence. The first thing we see when 
we enter a classroom is not teachers but 
adults, ready to exploit us once again. 
The role of teachers is therefore to restore 
our confidence. At first, we do not go to 
school with a desire to learn, with the 
idea of growing up and becoming better 
citizens. Sometimes all I needed was 
someone to sit next to me.
How can we help teachers to meet 
this challenge? 
It requires resources. Teachers working 
in war zones or in post-conflict regions 
often lack adequate training. In fact, their 
work is less about passing on knowledge 
than about retaining students until the 
end of the year. If they do not manage 
to inspire their pupils, it is not because 
they lack imagination, but because 
maintaining discipline becomes more 
important. This is why teachers must be 
given the means, particularly through 
appropriate training, to play their full role 
with children who have suffered. 

### IGNORE

Better training for teachers who care for traumatized children
Many migrant children and school-age refugees have suffered traumatic experiences. These may have occurred before they left 
home, during their journey, or after arriving in the community or country in which they find refuge. Teaching these vulnerable 
children requires appropriate training, which teachers often lack.
This is the conclusion of a policy paper, Education as healing: Addressing the trauma of displacement through social and 
emotional learning, released by UNESCO’s Global Education Monitoring Report (GEM) in June 2019. This publication 
emphasizes the need for better training for teachers to provide psychosocial support to children in need. 
In Germany, twenty per cent of refugee children suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Unaccompanied minors 
are particularly vulnerable. Almost a third of the 160 unaccompanied children from Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of 
Iran and Somalia seeking asylum in Norway suffered from PTSD. In another study of 166 unaccompanied refugee children 
and adolescents in Belgium, thirty-seven per cent to forty-seven per cent had “severe or very severe” symptoms of anxiety, 
depression and post-traumatic stress. 
The rates of psychological disorders following trauma in refugees in low-income and middle-income countries are also high. 
For example, seventy-five per cent of the 331 displaced children in camps in South Darfur, Sudan, had PTSD and thirty-eight 
per cent showed signs of depression.
In the absence of health centres, schools often play a key role in establishing a sense of stability – provided that teachers 
understand the symptoms of trauma to better support students. However, in Germany, the majority of teachers and educators 
say that they do not feel sufficiently prepared to meet the needs of refugee children. In the Netherlands, twenty per cent of 
teachers with more than eighteen years’ experience report having great difficulty interacting with traumatized students. 
A review of early childhood education and care facilities for refugee children in Europe and North America revealed that, 
although many programmes have recognized the importance of providing care, the necessary training and resources are 
“almost universally lacking”.
©
 p
er
m
is
si
on
 p
ro
vi
de
d 
by
 
Th
e 
M
Y 
H
ER
O
 P
ro
je
ct
 (m
yh
er
o.
co
m
)

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

14   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019

### 370991: Au Congo: faire classe à 76 élèves

Congo:
A class of seventy-six
Laudes Martial Mbon, 
Congolese journalist 
Saturnin Serge Ngoma, a teacher 
at La Poudrière primary school 
in Brazzaville, Congo, gives 
geometry and grammar lessons 
to a seriously overcrowded 
class every day. Teaching in a 
school that lacks everything is 
a constant struggle. 
In the dusty courtyard of La Poudrière 
primary school, the cries of the children 
have been temporarily silenced since 
the beginning of June, with the start of 
the holidays. Only the roar of airplane 
engines at Brazzaville’s Maya-Maya 
Airport – whose runway is separated from 
the school by a simple paved road and 
a few houses – occasionally disrupts the 
tranquility of this hot summer afternoon. 
Just a few weeks ago, seventy-six 
students, twenty-seven boys and 
forty-nine girls, crowded every morning 
at 7 a.m. into the first-year elementary 
school class (CM1) – the penultimate level 
of the primary cycle – taught by Saturnin 
Serge Ngoma. “If I add the six children 
I have at home, I took care of eighty-two 
children this year. Exhausting!” smiles this 
almost six-foot-tall giant, sitting at the 
foot of a mango tree. 
The primary school – named after 
this neighbourhood where a powder 
magazine [gunpowder store] was located 
before independence – was Ngoma’s very 
first post after he was recruited by the 
state in 2017. “You could say that I was 
spoiled,” he says, pointing to the school 
premises – two makeshift shacks that 
house six classrooms, surrounded by tall 
grass and vegetable gardens. 
On rainy days, the clay courtyard turns 
into sticky mud. The school is not 
enclosed. During the year, teachers give 
their classes with the doors open, under 
the gaze of passers-by who cross the 
courtyard to walk from one part of the 
neighbourhood to another. 
The reign of making do
Everything is lacking in this school, which 
has no fences and no latrines. Before 
more tables were found at the start of 
the school year, Ngoma’s students were 
packed in, four to a desk. The others sat 
on the floor. Faced with such deprivation, 
making do was the order of the day. 
Teacher Saturnin Serge Ngoma in the 
makeshift barracks of La Poudrière 
school in Brazzaville.

### IGNORE

©
 L
au
de
s 
M
ar
tia
l M
Bo
n

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   15 

“To give back to teachers their status 
as life’s great heroes, because they 
change the destinies of children, and 
they change the future of the world”. 
This is the ambitious goal of Teach Me If 
You Can (working title), a feature-length 
documentary currently being produced by 
Winds, a French film production company. 
The idea, inspired by UNESCO – which 
is a partner in the film – is to present 
several portraits of teachers across the 
world who go above and beyond their job 
requirements, and to show the universal 
nature of their commitment.
Sandrine in Burkina Faso, Taslima in 
Bangladesh and Svetlana in Siberia (Russia) 
are each heroines in their own way. The 
three teachers featured in the film, whose 
vocation is part of who they are, overcome 
many obstacles to accomplish their 
tasks. These include poor infrastructure, 
geographical isolation, extreme climate 
conditions, interruptions in teaching, 
cultural problems and nomadism. Resilient 
and prepared to make sacrifices, these 
women, like millions of other teachers 
around the world, live each day as an 
adventure – mainly educational, but also 
human and physical. 
Svetlana, for example, made the difficult 
choice of moving away from her children 
in order to teach in the camps of Evenk 
reindeer herders, an indigenous people 
in eastern Siberia. Her nomadic school 
is set up on a sled, and is the only one 
of its kind in the world. Accompanied 
by her husband, also a reindeer herder, 
she follows the nomads of the Siberian 
taiga – providing their children with an 
education wherever they go. 
Barthélémy Fougea, the film’s producer, is 
still surprised at how isolated the region is. 
“In my thirty-year career, I have never had 
such long production trips,”  he says. It took 
the film crew seven days just to get to the 
location, first by plane, then by train and 
truck and finally by snowmobile. Another 
challenge underlies Svetlana’s commitment 
– she hopes the nomadic children are able 
to be both Russian and Evenk at the same 
time. This is also a personal challenge – the 
teacher, born in the Soviet era, is herself 
Evenk and was sent away to boarding 
school, which distanced her from the 
traditions of her people. 
Directed by French director and 
cinematographer Émilie Thérond, this 
feature-length film is currently in post-
production, and will be released in 2020. It is 
part of an international transmedia project 
that include a television series, books, 
children’s books and an exhibition, among 
other initiatives. Simultaneously, education 
projects are being funded through On the 
Way to School, an association named after 
the award-winning film produced by Winds 
in 2013, also in partnership with UNESCO. 
Teach Me
If You Can:
From classrooms to the big screen

### 370991: Au Congo: faire classe à 76 élèves

“The students collected small planks 
here and there, on which they 
settled. It was really not an easy 
situation,” the teacher sighed. 
The children also have to share the few 
textbooks available at the school, getting 
together in groups of three or four to do 
exercises, or during reading time. The 
situation is all the more critical because 
many students are experiencing learning 
difficulties. Learning French is particularly 
hard for them. “I have to pay close 
attention during the reading exercises 
because some students don’t have a 
good grasp of the language and so they 
recite something other than the text – 
they make it up.”
Nor is it easy to enforce discipline among 
such a large number of pupils. Ngoma has 
his own special methods to avoid being 
overwhelmed. The first is to send his 
most restless students to the blackboard. 
“They’re afraid they won’t know how to 
do an exercise in front of the others, so 
they make sure they don’t get themselves 
into that situation. If they don’t behave, 
I also give them punishments – verbs to 
conjugate, and in the most extreme cases, 
I send them outside to clean the yard.”
In spite of these precarious conditions, 
sixty-two students from Ngoma’s class 
successfully moved up to the next 
grade at the end of the school year. He 
takes pride in the fact that one of his 
students topped the whole school, with a 
12.5 overall average. 
A graduate with a master’s degree in 
sustainable development economics, this 
40-year-old teacher came to teaching late 
– after working as a security guard and 
giving courses in private institutions. Yet, 
in spite of his demanding daily routine 
and a paltry salary, he has no intention of 
changing professions. 
In September, he will take the same road 
he walks every day for half an hour to 
get from his district of La Frontière to 
La Poudrière. “Mr Ngoma always tells 
us that he doesn’t know many people 
who have succeeded without going 
to school,” Guelor, one of his former 
students, sums up. 
A still from the shooting of the documentary, 
Teach Me If You Can. Taslima, a Bangladeshi 
teacher, works on board a floating school, 
the only way to continue to teach students 
in a country hit hard by rising waters.

### IGNORE

©
 S
um
on
 D
el
w
ar

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

16   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019

### 370987: À Valparaiso, l’école derrière les barreaux

Carolina Jerez Henríquez, 
UNESCO Office in Santiago, Chile
Situated on a hill in the seaport 
city of Valparaiso, on the Chilean 
coast, the Juan Luis Vives school 
was founded in 1999. Today it 
has 550 students. What makes it 
unique is that it is located inside 
the city’s prison. Every day, 
the teachers who work there 
are forced to cope with the 
challenges of the prison world 
– which include disparities in 
learning abilities, and emotions 
on edge. The school was 
awarded the UNESCO Confucius 
Prize for Literacy in 2015.
Teaching
behind bars
in Valparaiso 
Sonia Álvarez is a history and civic 
education teacher. She has been 
campaigning for the right to education 
of people in detention for the last forty 
years. “Earlier, I felt that something was 
missing in my life. Now, I know that what 
I do is essential,” she says, as she climbs 
the stairs leading to the second floor 
of the school. It is a completely new 
space that she designed herself and had 
built inside the prison, using public and 
private funds. 
Working under the constraints that 
are typical of prison life, the school 
provides basic and secondary education 
and vocational training in cookery and 
catering to enable prisoners to learn 
a trade and increase their chances of 
finding work once they return to the 
outside world. 
Giving lives a meaning
According to figures from the Chilean 
government’s National Coordination 
for Youth and Adult Education, there 
were seventy-two educational centres 
in Chile’s prisons in 2018. The Juan Luis 
Vives school is part of this network. 
Álvarez and her colleagues believe 
that education is a liberating process 
that renews the social condition of the 
individual – as the Brazilian educator 
Paolo Freire would say – both in prison 
and outside. That helps them reflect on 
and give meaning to the process. 
Teaching in this context is a daily 
challenge. “It has a lot to do with teacher 
motivation and having a concept of 
quality education that is relevant to the 
student body,” explains Jassmin Dapik, 
another teacher. “Here, it is vital that 
the teacher has the creativity necessary 
for what she or he teaches to be useful. 
As teachers, we need to teach them so 
they are able to continue their studies 
outside. And above all, so they can 
function as citizens and make the right 
decisions,” she adds. 
But the role of the teachers here is 
not limited to the transmission of 
knowledge. They also help prisoners to 
regain some of their self-esteem. “One 
of the most important things is that the 
teachers don’t treat us like prisoners,” 
says José, who is serving a sentence 
at Valparaiso prison and attends 
classes regularly.
“For them, we are people who have 
dignity and rights – they want us to be 
better people than when we enter here, 
and for that, they must have empathy,” 
points out Carlos, another inmate. “And 
it is because of this characteristic that 
when we are with the teachers in class, 
we do not feel like we are in jail, but like 
free people,” he adds.
The classes, held outside of prison time, 
are privileged moments where stories 
that are difficult to articulate, can be 
shared. “Behind each person here, 
there are terrible catastrophes – I call 
them survivors,” says Leopoldo Bravo, 
another teacher. “As a teacher, one must 
assimilate that information and build 
the dynamics to face this reality. The 
students here are diminished in every 
way. More than providing an academic 
education, we are dedicated to the 
rescue of the human being.” 
To this end, teachers are supported 
by Jessica León, a psychologist who 
encourages the students to be more 
receptive to the learning process. Her 
work to actively support teachers 
is aided by the School Integration 
Programme (PIE). “This is very necessary, 
because in this context, it takes a lot of 
effort from the teachers to somehow fill 
in the gaps that the inmates have – at 
the academic and emotional levels,“ 
she explains. “For us as a team, it is 
very important to maintain harmony 
in a context in which there are 
conflicting emotions.” 
Far from the historic quarter of 
Valparaiso, which features on UNESCO’s 
World Heritage List, the Valparaiso 
Prison is located off the tourist track – in 
a windswept neighbourhood in one of 
the city’s most disadvantaged areas. 
This is where the Juan Luis Vives school 
welcomes prisoners, who attend to 
resume their often-disrupted schooling 
or to pursue vocational training courses. 
In all cases, the aim is to better prepare 
them for the life that awaits them 
outside, once their sentences have 
been served. 
At the school, each day brings its own 
surprises. “It is not possible to plan 
anything,” explains one teacher. “It 
all depends on what happens inside 
the prison, whether there are raids or 
searches being carried out, for example. 
There are days when a normal schedule 
is possible. And others when you can’t 
even teach.”

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   17 

### 370987: À Valparaiso, l’école derrière les barreaux

The students themselves recognize that 
teachers working within the prison walls 
face a daunting task. They say that they 
have serious problems concentrating, 
and regret not having the necessary time 
to advance in their studies as they would 
in a regular school. “We depend a lot on 
what the prison guards decide, we don’t 
have a regular schedule,” José explains. 
Surmounting 
difficulties
Another major challenge is the absence 
of educational programmes specifically 
designed for prisoners or adapted to 
their situation. In fact, it is the teachers 
themselves, without any specific 
training, who design strategies, plan 
activities and evaluate content – to 
ensure that their classes are relevant, 
and the learning useful. 
Also, classes in prison are usually a mix 
of students with different backgrounds 
and abilities – which makes planning 
a class an essential task, but also a 
daily challenge. “We have to take all 
this into account when planning our 
day. We must consider what we are 
going to teach, and what values we 
want to give them – because our class 
is based mostly on concepts, we want 
them to retain something,” Dapik says. 
To do this, teachers at the school use 
the curriculum of Chile’s Ministry of 
Education as a starting point – and then 
adapt it to the different levels and needs 
of their learners. 
Yet another challenge for teachers is 
getting students to attain a similar 
level, as many of them have had their 
schooling interrupted one or more 
times. There are also many instances of 
students not attending classes regularly, 
which makes it harder for them to keep 
up with their studies. But these repeated 
challenges are not likely to discourage 
the teachers. “We know that education 
transforms people,” concludes Bravo. 
“We see these changes taking place 
over time; it is this satisfaction that 
motivates us.” 
A poster designed by Mexican graphic artist 
Elmer Sosa, on the theme of the right to education.
The teachers help prisoners 
to regain some of 
their self-esteem

### IGNORE

©
 p
os
te
rfo
rt
om
or
ro
w
 2
01
1/
El
m
er
 S
os
a

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

18   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019

### 370981: Enseignant à tout faire dans un village chinois isolé

Setting off from Zhenping county and 
heading along the mountain road to the 
peak that rises 1,600 metres above sea 
level, you can see the Heihumiao primary 
school, nestled in the valley below. This is 
where Zhang Yugun has been teaching 
for the past eighteen years.
The village of Heihumiao is far away from 
everything. In earlier times, inhabitants 
who wanted to leave the mountain 
had to follow the trails carved by cattle 
and sheep on the ridge, climb over 
the hilltop, and then pass through the 
precipitous hillside of Bali. The mountain 
road is so rugged, it is impossible to ride 
a bicycle through it – it would take at 
least five hours to climb the hill, with 
no transportation available. The harsh 
conditions meant that few teachers were 
keen to take up positions here.
Wang Shuo, Chinese journalist 
The people who live in 
Heihumiao, in central China’s 
Henan province, often dream 
about leaving the mountains 
to find a better life in the city. 
Zhang Yugun also left. But 
once he graduated, he chose to 
return to the village where he 
grew up – to give the children a 
fighting chance. 
A teacher
brings hope 
to a remote Chinese village
“If teachers from outside won’t come 
here, and the students we train won’t 
stay, who would be responsible for the 
education of the children here?” asks 
Zhang. This question haunted him after 
he visited his old school, accompanied 
by the former principal, Wu Longqi. 
Even though he hesitated, due to the 
low wages and the tough environment, 
he finally decided to stay. He promised 
Wu that he would transform the lives of 
the children, and he has kept his word. 
In the absence of parents, most of whom 
work far from home, it is the teacher 
who accompanies the students each 
morning, up the steep path to school.

### IGNORE

©
 S
ha
sh
a 
G
U
O
/C
hi
na
 P
ic
to
ria
l 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   19 

### 370981: Enseignant à tout faire dans un village chinois isolé

Due to the lack of teachers at the school 
in his isolated village, Zhang Yugun 
has learned to take on many roles. 
In addition to mathematics and morals, 
he also teaches music.Carrying hope 
on a shoulder pole
Books, textbooks, pencils and erasers – 
the school needed teaching materials, 
but also basic food supplies, such as oil, 
salt, vinegar, vegetables, rice. All these 
things had to be carried in from the city. 
From 2001 to 2006, Zhang carried these 
supplies all the way up the mountain, 
using baskets tied to a shoulder pole 
he inherited from Wu. This was the only 
way to make it possible for the children 
to attend school, and to give them the 
opportunity to leave the mountain 
one day – if they chose to.
One winter day, the mountain road was 
too slippery to walk on. It was almost 
the first day of school, and the children’s 
textbooks were still in Gaoqiu, a town 
more than thirty kilometres away. 
Faced with this challenge, Zhang and 
another teacher rushed to the town in 
the early morning, carrying the shoulder 
pole through muddy roads. When they 
returned to the school, weighed down 
with their load of textbooks, they were 
almost completely covered in mud. But 
the books remained clean.
Conditions have improved in recent 
years. Since 2006, a concrete road 
provides access to the village, breaking 
its isolation. Buses have started plying 
the route occasionally, since the 
winter of 2017. Zhang now drives a 
motorcycle to ferry textbooks and daily 
necessities to the village – he is often 
weighed down by over a hundred kilos. 
But conditions still remain difficult. 
Since the teacher’s return, four of his 
motorcycles have broken down, and he 
has had to replace countless tires.
Zhang refuses to complain, however. 
“I think all my efforts have been 
worthwhile, because the students 
I taught were able to go out of the 
mountains,” he says. Before he became 
a teacher in the village, he was the 
only student from Heihumiao to have 
attended college – the number has since 
increased to twenty-two. 
A versatile teacher
Due to the lack of teachers, Zhang has 
trained himself to take on many roles. 
He is both the principal and a teacher 
of mathematics and ethical education. 
Over the last eighteen years, he has also 
acquired skills that go well beyond the 
scope of his initial training. In addition 
to teaching, he doubles up as a cook, a 
tailor after school, and even a nurse, in 
emergencies. 
But his role of helping students goes 
even further. Most of the parents of the 
children work away from home, and 
Zhang understands the ordeals faced 
by each of the families. 

### IGNORE

©
 S
ha
sh
a 
G
U
O
/C
hi
na
 P
ic
to
ria
l 

### 370981: Enseignant à tout faire dans un village chinois isolé

“During all these years, none of the 
students in our village have dropped out 
of school because of poverty, especially 
the girls,” the head of the village said. 
Zhang persuaded the parents of 
students whose families live far away 
from the school, to let their children live 
and eat on the school premises. Assisted 
by his wife, he has helped the students 
wash and mend their clothes, and has 
taken care of all their daily needs. With 
his meagre income, he has financed 
more than 300 students so they could 
continue their studies.” 
Fortunately, with the help of the 
education department, conditions at the 
school have continued to improve. With 
fifty-one students currently enrolled, 
the school now has new dormitory 
buildings, canteens, playgrounds, and 
computer classrooms.
Influenced and inspired by Zhang, four 
retired teachers have decided to return 
to the mountains to resume teaching. 
Encouraged by social recruitment, there 
are eleven teachers at the school today. 
“As long as children are there, so will we 
be,” some of them said. 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

20   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019 
Zo
o
m
One of thirty-eight contact sheets of 
photos taken by David Seymour for 
UNESCO in 1950. Most of them remain 
unpublished. They illustrate the campaign 
against illiteracy in southern Italy. 
Zoom
We see an adult classroom at the Rogiano 
Gravina People’s Cultural Centre in Calabria. 
On several occasions, the photographer’s 
lens focuses on the hands of older farmers 
who, not very skilled at handling a pen, try 
to trace the outline of the letters – some, 
for the first time. 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   21 


### 370994: Trésor d’archives: l’album inédit de David Seymour

Archive treasure:
The unpublished album 
of David Seymour
Photos:  David Seymour/
Magnum Photos
Text: Giovanna Hendel, UNESCO
One of the pictures on the contact sheet shown 
opposite was used as the cover for the March 
1952 issue of the UNESCO Courier. An elderly 
peasant learns to write. To his right, the map of 
Calabria, Italy, allows the reader to place the 
location of the reportage. 
It all began in the autumn of 2017, with 
the exploration of UNESCO’s audiovisual 
collection, after their transfer to the 
Organization’s archives. Most of the 
collections had barely been indexed in 
their almost seventy years of existence. 
Walking through these archives was a bit 
like visiting Jorges Luis Borges’ The Library 
of Babel. With thousands of documents in 
the archives, the only way to get an idea 
of how the collection was organized, was 
simply to open the drawers of the many 
old filing cabinets and take a look inside.
It was by opening one of these drawers 
that we made an amazing discovery: 
an unpublished album of thirty-eight 
contact sheets and accompanying 
texts by David “Chim” Seymour, one 
of the greatest photographers of the 
twentieth century. In 1947, Seymour, 
along with Henri-Cartier Bresson, Robert 
Capa, George Rodger and other leading 
photographers, co-founded the Magnum 
photography cooperative – now known 
as Magnum Photos. 
In 1950, UNESCO commissioned Seymour 
to report on a major campaign to fight 
illiteracy in southern Italy. The UNESCO 
Courier published an article on the 
subject in March 1952, with Seymour’s 
photos and the text by Carlo Levi, author 
of the famous 1945 memoir, Christ 
stopped at Eboli. The book is based on 
what the Italian intellectual experienced 
when he was exiled in the 1930s by the 
fascist authorities to a remote region, 
known as Basilicata today. It tells the 
story of the lives of its inhabitants, their 
customs, their beliefs and the misery they 
struggled through.

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

22   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019 

### 370994: Trésor d’archives: l’album inédit de David Seymour

Sixty-seven years later, on the occasion 
of the publication of the book They 
Did Not Stop at Eboli: The UNESCO 
Campaign against Illiteracy in Reportages 
by David “Chim” Seymour and Carlo Levi 
(1950), which reproduces the entirety 
of the Seymour album, accompanied 
by analytical essays, the Courier 
reveals another perspective of the 
photographer’s work.
The historical context of Seymour’s 
reportage was the fight against illiteracy 
led by the post-war Italian government 
and non-governmental associations 
such as the Unione Nazionale per la 
Lotta contro l’Analfabetismo (UNLA, the 
National League for the struggle against 
illiteracy). Illiteracy was rampant in the 
country’s south. In some regions, like 
Calabria, where Seymour travelled for 
his reportage, nearly fifty per cent of the 
population was illiterate at the time. 
To combat this scourge, UNLA has 
contributed to the creation of many 
schools offering basic literacy classes for 
children and adults, since it was founded 
in 1947. The organization’s most original 
initiative has been the creation of nearly 
sixty Centri di Cultura per l’Educazione 
Permanente (CCEP, cultural centres for 
continuing education) across the country. 
Under the direction of an UNLA teacher, 
adults who have already benefited from 
literacy classes are able to continue 
their education by asking questions 
about their practical lives, but also more 
theoretical questions. The UNLA teacher 
tries to answer them with the support of 
professionals in the community – such 
as doctors, pharmacists, veterinarians, 
parish priests, etc.
UNESCO first took great interest in, and 
then supported the Italian campaign 
– clearly considering it very important, 
since the report was commissioned 
from one of the great photographers of 
the time.
For his reportage, Seymour not only 
took hundreds of photos, but also wrote 
very detailed notes to accompany 
them. He provided distinct storylines 
or themes for groups of photographs, 
and even made suggestions of possible 
editorial selections. Some, but not all, 
of these choices were followed in the 
1952 Courier article, and only a small 
part of the text was used. Sixty-seven 
years later, it is time to do justice to what 
Seymour noted. 
For instance, very little attention 
was given to Seymour’s detailed 
observations on the condition of 
women in the context being analysed. 
In particular, in the text accompanying 
another series of photos of women 
learning to read (including the photo 
of the woman learning to read with 
her daughter reproduced in the 1952 
article), Seymour highlights the linking 
of the literacy campaign with the 
application of equal opportunities 
measures to promote social progress. 
The 1952 Courier article also reproduced 
one of Seymour’s photos of women 
carrying loads on their heads (In this 
article, we have reproduced another 
photo from this series [p. 26], digitized 
for They Did Not Stop at Eboli). However, 
the caption accompanying this photo 
restricted its role. It was used to illustrate 
the fact that the workers had to be 
taught at evening classes, after a hard 
day in the fields. 
Similarly, the 1952 article reproduced 
one of Seymour’s photographs of 
men working in the fields. However, 
once again, the role of the photo 
was reduced by the caption, which 
illustrated the day’s hard work, followed 
by evening classes. Reading Seymour’s 
comments on one of his series of 
photographs of men working in the 
fields, however, one can appreciate 
the depth of his observations – as he 
stressed that educational campaigns 
had to go hand in hand with social and 
economic reforms.
This mise en abyme of the Courier 
illustrates how UNESCO’s archives 
continue to shed light on past 
campaigns that remain of great 
relevance today – while highlighting 
how these campaigns were brought to 
the attention of readers. 
After a hard day’s labour 
in the fields, peasants of 
Rogiano Gravina attend 
evening classes, often 
accompanied by their 
children. Illiteracy is more 
widespread among women 
than men. Besides reading 
and writing, women are 
taught embroidery and other 
handicrafts. For the teaching 
of reading, the mobile letter 
system proves very effective. Ca

### IGNORE

pt
io
n 
fr
om
 th
e 
Co
ur
ie
r, 
M
ar
ch
 1
95
2
They Did Not Stop at Eboli: 
The UNESCO Campaign Against 
Illiteracy in Reportages by David 
“Chim” Seymour and Carlo Levi 
(1950). Edited by Giovanna Hendel, 
Carole Naggar and Karin Priem. 
UNESCO/De Gruyter, 2020.
A composition of photographs, as they 
appeared in the Courier, March 1952.

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   23 

### 370994: Trésor d’archives: l’album inédit de David Seymour

Women’s evening classes in reading. 
The problem of the students’ small 
children is handled in various ways. 
Sometimes they are brought to school 
and sit in class with their mother and 
father. In the case of infants, mothers 
and fathers take turns – one stays at 
home while the other goes to school on 
alternating evenings. The old established 
traditions in Southern Italy in which the 
woman has been kept in a very inferior 
position are changing here.

### IGORE

D
av
id
 S
ey
m
ou
r’s
 n
ot
e

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

24   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019 

### 370994: Trésor d’archives: l’album inédit de David Seymour

Photo taken from 
the contact sheet 
reproduced opposite.

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   25 

### 370994: Trésor d’archives: l’album inédit de David Seymour

The need for agrarian reform in Southern Italy is recognized by everybody. The Italian Parliament 
is discussing at present a project of law concerned with agrarian reform. However, poor peasants of 
Calabria went ahead and started occupying uncultivated land. This occupation is not taking over 
the land. It means only that the peasants will work the land, harvest the crop, and give the owner 
the usual share of the harvest which varies from 30 to 40 per cent. The average holdings of Rogiano 
Gravina peasants and agricultural workers are from two to four acres (the minimum land holding for 
a peasant family to assure an acceptable standard of living being from 15 to 20 acres). The extent of 
the occupation goes to one or two acres per family and still doesn’t solve the basic problems of living. 
The occupation was peaceful, with no police or carabinieri present. The man in center, Oreste Rossini, has 
a family of five, land holding of three acres and is a very active pupil in the evening school of the Centro.

### IGNORE

D
av
id
 S
ey
m
ou
r’s
 n
ot
e
©
 D
av
id
 S
ey
m
ou
r/
M
ag
nu
m
 P
ho
to
s. 
Ph
ot
o:
 U
N
ES
C
O
/C
hr
is
te
lle
 A
lix

### 370994: Trésor d’archives: l’album inédit de David Seymour

A contact sheet from David Seymour’s 
unpublished album. The photos show farmers peacefully 
occupying and working on uncultivated land. 
It is accompanied by detailed facts and observations from 
the photographer (see below). 

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

26   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019 

### 370994: Trésor d’archives: l’album inédit de David Seymour

One of the many pictures of women 
carrying different loads on their 
heads. I have a general idea that 
these pictures can be used as a sort 
of symbolic introduction to the story. 
I couldn’t find yet the verbal slogan 
for it, but the general idea is that 
people in Calabria were using their 
heads to carry loads, and sometimes 
very heavy loads, and at present 
they are discovering that they can use 
their heads for education. 

### IGNORE

D
av
id
 S
ey
m
ou
r’s
 n
ot
e

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   27 

### 370994: Trésor d’archives: l’album inédit de David Seymour

First class in reading for peasant 
women in Rogiano Gravina. Illiteracy 
is much more widespread among 
women than men and the League for 
Struggle Against Illiteracy is making 
special efforts to attract women to 
evening classes. Besides reading 
and writing, the women are taught 
embroidery and other handicrafts 
and their evening classes are divided 
between reading, writing and 
sewing. The very successful device of 
embroidering the letters combines all 
in one. For reading, the mobile system 
shown here is very effective. 

### IGNORE

D
av
id
 S
ey
m
ou
r’s
 n
ot
e

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019
Id
ea
s
Id
ea
s
A Marsh Arab, who lives in a 
traditional reed house, drinks fresh 
buffalo milk on a cold morning. 
This photo, taken in March 2017 in 
the marshy regions of southern Iraq, 
is from the series Iraq’s last Eden: 
Mesopotamian marshes by French 
photographer Emilienne Malfatto.
© Emilienne Malfatto

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   29 

### 370995: L’architecture traditionnelle, source d’inspiration pour l’habitat de demain

Asphalt also absorbs a large part of the 
sun’s rays, which it converts into a heat 
flux – thus contributing to warming the 
local environment. Concrete, on the 
other hand, consumes a lot of energy 
during its production, contributing 
to global warming through carbon 
emissions. In addition, modern urban 
planning does not favour public 
transportation. This makes private cars 
a necessity, creating more pollution and 
localized heat islands, especially when 
combined with the air-conditioning 
systems of buildings. 
Architectural
lessons 
for the future, via the past 
Amin Al-Habaibeh
Modern cities, with their paved 
roads and glass towers, are 
hardly adapted to cope with the 
expected rise in temperatures. 
Designed to provide shade 
and air circulation, traditional 
buildings in the Middle East, 
Gulf and African countries 
could inspire more sustainable 
and environmentally-friendly 
habitats in other parts of 
the world. 
As a result of global warming and the 
rise in greenhouse gas levels, cities 
across the world are increasingly likely 
to be exposed to extreme temperatures. 
This is particularly true in the Gulf 
countries, where temperatures are 
expected to rise to over 50 °C during 
the twenty-first century. But these heat 
surges have not spared other regions of 
the world – particularly Europe, where 
during the summer of 2019, record 
temperatures were reached in France, 
the United Kingdom and Switzerland, 
among other countries. 
Today, lifestyles and architecture are 
dependent on air conditioning, and 
modern materials such as concrete, 
asphalt or glass. These materials, 
however, are not adapted to high 
temperatures. Glass reflects solar 
radiation to the surrounding area, 
creating heat islands and the risk of 
a greenhouse effect inside buildings. 
Historically, before the adoption of the 
modern way of life, most people on 
the planet lived in a more harmonious 
way with their environment. They were 
either farmers within oases, agricultural 
or fishing village communities, Bedouins 
or nomads living in tents in the desert, 
or urban dwellers living in cities. 
The materials they selected to build 
their dwellings came from the 
environment. They were sustainable, 
adapted to their way of life, and based 
on what is now termed a circular 
economy. Due to their travelling 
lifestyles and animal herding, the 
Bedouins lived in tents that were 
optimized for protection against the 
weather, and for flexibility.  
A typical Andalusian patio in Cordoba, 
Spain.

### IGNORE

©
 k
el
vi
nj
ay
/iS
to
ck
/G
et
ty
 Im
ag
es
 P
lu
s

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

30   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019

### 370995: L’architecture traditionnelle, source d’inspiration pour l’habitat de demain

The tents were designed and built to 
function effectively with the environment 
– they were woven using available 
resources like goat hair and sheep’s wool. 
This is why they are called “houses of hair” 
in Arabic. 
Environmentally-
friendly materials
The tent’s material allows the air to 
circulate. The fibres become swollen 
and waterproof when wet, which is ideal 
during the rainy weather. In the hot and 
dry weather, the Bedouins would wet the 
tent and its surrounding area, and also 
humidify additional pieces of cloth and 
rugs to reduce temperatures by water 
evaporation. The tent’s high insulation 
capabilities allow for cool conditions 
in the summer, and warmth in the 
winter, created with a small fire. Nothing 
prevents us from using similar materials 
to create modern architecture, to make 
temperatures more bearable.
The buildings of the past, on the other 
hand, were designed with very thick 
walls, using natural and environmentally-
friendly materials such as limestone and 
natural mud, mixed with local desert 
plants in some cases. This provided a 
construction material with a high thermal 
capacity to regulate the temperature 
of the buildings. The material had the 
advantage of being able to absorb 
humidity during the night-time, which 
would evaporate during the hot and 
sunny days, to provide the required 
cooling effect. This effect is evident at 
the Red Palace in Al-Jahra, Kuwait – an 
excellent example of the architecture and 
building technology that once existed in 
the Gulf region. 
Glass was not a common building 
material in the past. Some rooms had 
only two windows. The first was a small 
skylight, placed very high, and kept open 
for air circulation and natural light, while 
maintaining privacy. A second larger 
window was usually kept closed, with 
wooden shutters allowing a flow of air 
into the room, while protecting privacy. 
The mashrabiyya, a projecting window 
with carved wooden latticework, usually 
located on the top storeys of buildings, 
ensures better air circulation and protects 
against direct exposure to the sun. 
In warm climates, cities and buildings 
were designed to optimize shade, reduce 
the direct or indirect thermal gain of sun 
radiation, regulate building temperatures 
and enhance air circulation for cooling. 
The streets were paved with natural 
stones, or simply left covered with sand. 
That meant they reacted much better to 
high temperatures without storing heat, 
as is the case with the asphalt used today. 
With the narrow roads and alleyways, 
and buildings built adjacent to each 
other, the ratio of the area exposed to 
the sun relative to the total volume of the 
buildings was reduced to a minimum – as 
was the heat gain during the day.
Opting for shade 
and air 
Buildings were designed with internal 
courtyards surrounded by rooms or 
walls – in most cases, from all sides. This 
created a large area for social activities in 
the late afternoons and at night, due to 
the maximization of shade provided by 
the surrounding rooms. In most cases, 
the central courtyard contained trees 
and a fountain or a well, which could also 
be used to collect rainwater. At midday, 
the courtyard functioned as a chimney 
for the hot air to rise and be replaced 
by cooler air from the surrounding 
rooms, improving air circulation and 
the cooling effect. 
This type of architecture was very 
common in Damascus, Syria, and in 
Andalusia, Spain. The narrow streets 
could be covered with lightweight 
materials from date palms. This 
improved air circulation between 
the streets and courtyards of the 
buildings, via the rooms. The texture 
and the sandy colour of the walls 
limited the absorption and emission 
of the radiating heat. 
In Jordan, the Nabatean 
people took this symbiosis 
with nature even further, 
by using the thermal inertia 
of the ground
Built in 2011, the Sewing School 
Steel-Earth in Niamey, Niger, combines 
know-how and local materials with 
contemporary technological advances. 
The durability of the structure, which uses 
materials including banco, a mixture of 
soil and straw with good thermal inertia, 
is ensured by a double metal roof.

### IGNORE

©
 p
ho
to
: G
us
ta
ve
 D
eg
hi
la
ge
/a
rc
hi
te
ct
: O
di
le
 V
an
de
rm
ee
re
n

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   31 

### 370995: L’architecture traditionnelle, source d’inspiration pour l’habitat de demain

This was a common feature of buildings 
in many regions of the Middle East, 
including Egypt, the Hejaz region in Saudi 
Arabia, and Iraq – where the windows are 
known as roshan or shanasheel.  
Some buildings in the Gulf had a wind 
tower to create natural ventilation, where 
it was possible to open and close doors 
in the ceiling, depending on the wind 
direction – performing a similar function 
to that of modern air-cooling systems. 
Other building design characteristics 
were high structures and cloisters, 
to maximize shade and enhance air 
circulation. They were often used with 
domes, to increase the air volume 
internally, and decrease external 
thermal gain. The idea was to create 
a thermal differential that caused 
a cooling breeze, regardless of the 
actual wind speed. Symbiosis with nature
In Africa, mud huts are still being built 
today. With a sustainable and simple 
design made from clay and thatch, the 
huts not only provide passive cooling, 
but are also quick to build, affordable, 
and recyclable. The same is true of the 
traditional reed houses made by the 
Madan people, or Marsh Arabs, in the 
swamps of southern Iraq – their unique 
design and structure provide protection 
with enhanced air circulation. 
In Petra, Jordan, the Nabatean people 
took this symbiosis with nature even 
further, by using the thermal inertia of 
the ground. They created an ingeniously 
planned city, with innovative dwellings 
and an efficient rainwater harvesting 
system. The original inhabitants took 
advantage of the natural mountains 
in the area, carving out their dwellings 
in the mountainside. This ensured 
well-regulated temperatures in both 
the summer and the winter – unlike in 
modern buildings, where temperatures 
fluctuate with the season. 
Similar structures and concepts using 
the ground’s thermal inertia can also 
be found in Cappadocia, Turkey; the 
cliff dwellings of the Sinagua Indians 
at Montezuma Castle in Arizona, and 
the cavates, or man-made caves, and 
pathways carved from soft tuff rock at 
Tsankawi, New Mexico – both in the US.
A troglodyte house in Matmata, 
southern Tunisia.

### IGNORE

C
C
 B
Y-
SA
 2
.0
 p
ho
to
: D
en
ni
s 
Ja
rv
is
 

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

32   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019

### 370995: L’architecture traditionnelle, source d’inspiration pour l’habitat de demain

One of the most fascinating historic 
architectural designs, the underground 
troglodyte dwellings, can be found in the 
Berber village of Matmata, in southern 
Tunisia. Built by digging a large pit in 
the ground, usually on a hilly site, caves, 
which serve as rooms, are carved out 
from the central pit, which becomes a 
central courtyard. This design ensures 
excellent thermal insulation. One of the 
Matmata dwellings, now converted into a 
hotel, featured in the 1977 film, Star Wars: 
Episode IV - A New Hope, as the home of 
Luke Skywalker on the fictional desert 
planet, Tatooine. 
Adapting their lifestyles was yet another 
way that people dealt with extreme 
weather conditions in the past. The 
working day began just before dawn, and 
people sought refuge from the midday 
sun until the late afternoon – when they 
resumed their business and socializing in 
cooler temperatures. This culture is still 
practised in the Middle East and Spain, 
where a siesta is observed. Drinking water 
is stored in clay jars or water bags made 
of animal skin, and kept in the shade. 
The evaporation process creates a cooling 
effect for both the stored water and 
the surroundings. 
People dressed in clothes made from 
natural materials – the loose-fitting styles 
were designed to enhance cooling and 
air circulation, while covering most of the 
body to prevent sunburn. The heads and 
faces of both men and women were most 
often protected by scarves – designed 
to reduce water loss through breathing, 
filter dust, protect from sunstroke and 
prevent aging of the skin. This versatile 
fabric is known by different names, 
depending on gender, region and design 
– in all cases, it serves as an important 
device for health protection. 
Modern solutions from 
traditional concepts
In Europe, people have used wine 
cellars to preserve wine at a specific 
range of temperatures, using the 
thermal inertia of the ground. This 
concept could be enhanced to provide 
regulated temperature in both hot and 
cold weather. Incorporating traditional 
designs into modern architecture may 
be yet another solution for tackling 
climate change. The use of traditional 
architecture has worked well for some 
modern buildings in Seville, Spain, for 
example. A water fountain in the middle 
of a courtyard surrounded by trees and 
the building structure, works well to 
reduce the temperature. 
Masdar City, a planned urban project in 
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, has 
sought to combine lessons from the past 
with modern technologies – with the use 
of mashrabiyya windows, narrow streets 
and traditional colours. 
Other Gulf countries are also working to 
design sustainable eco-buildings. With 
ongoing research and the improvement 
of building and pavement materials, 
building design and urban planning, 
insulation and the use of renewable 
energy, cities in the Gulf and other 
countries with high temperatures are able 
to maintain their comfortable lifestyles – 
with considerably lower levels of carbon 
emissions and fossil fuel use.
In Europe, where temperatures are 
expected to fluctuate between extreme 
heat and cold in the future, a good start 
would be to increase the thickness of 
building walls by adding insulation and 
natural materials. This would reduce 
the need for heating in winter, and air 
conditioning in the summer. 
Fortunately, the rise in temperatures 
also allows for an increase in renewable 
solar energy. In most homes, the use of 
photovoltaic solar energy combined with 
better insulation could provide the power 
needed to run air-conditioning systems. 
But this would create heat islands on 
the roads – particularly those made of 
asphalt, as is currently the case. Planting 
more trees would help to regulate 
temperatures in these conditions, and 
provide a cooler environment.

### IGNORE

©
 L
au
re
nt
 W
ey
l/A
rg
os
/S
ai
f i
m
ag
es
/c
ou
rt
es
y 
of
 F
os
te
r +
 P
ar
tn
er
s

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   33 

### 370995: L’architecture traditionnelle, source d’inspiration pour l’habitat de demain

The use of insulation would also reduce 
air-conditioning loads and electricity 
consumption. Natural or innovative 
new materials that absorb moisture and 
increase thermal capacity could regulate 
heat gain and aid the natural cooling 
process. Intelligent urban planning that 
simulates old cities could make the use 
of clean public transportation a more 
feasible option. Since the temperature 
of sea-water is more stable than that of 
air, replacing existing air-conditioning 
systems with large-scale cooling and 
heating systems at the district level 
could provide a sustainable alternative. 
The same technology could also be 
applied to river water and water from 
flooded coal mines. 
There are many lessons to be learned 
from traditional buildings around the 
world. These lessons will help us to 
appreciate our global heritage – while 
aiding us to transfer some of this 
knowledge to the design of future 
buildings and urban developments. 
Over centuries, people have designed 
buildings to be sustainable in terms 
of heating and cooling requirements, 
using ingenious techniques and 
sustainable materials sourced from the 
local environment. If we want to reduce 
global warming for future generations, 
we must integrate these lessons with 
our modern technologies to create 
sustainable and zero-carbon cities.
 
Professor of Intelligent Engineering 
Systems at the School of Architecture, 
Design and the Built Environment, 
Nottingham Trent University in the 
United Kingdom, Amin Al-Habaibeh 
(United Kingdom) also heads the 
university’s Innovative and Sustainable 
Built Environment Technologies (iSBET) 
research group.
Over centuries, people have designed 
buildings to be sustainable in terms 
of heating and cooling requirements, 
using ingenious techniques and 
sustainable materials sourced from 
the local environment
Construction of a modernized wind tower, by global architectural firm Foster + Partners, 
at the Masdar Institute of Science and Technology, in Masdar City, Abu Dhabi, in the 
United Arab Emirates. This forty-five-metre-high structure made of recycled steel, 
is equipped with atomisers, which reduce air draughts to promote freshness. 

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019
O
u
r 
g
u
es
t
O
u
r 
G
u
es
t

### 370999: Nelly Minyersky, la reine verte

At 90, Nelly Minyersky 
is a major figure in the 
fight of Argentinian 
women to denounce 
gender violence and 
decriminalize abortion.
 © Sebastián Hacher

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   35 

### 370999: Nelly Minyersky, la reine verte

What about feminism?  
Did you have role models? 
I would be lying if I said that I was inspired 
by the great figures of the movement. 
My role models have been independent 
women. The women in my husband’s 
family were all professionals – chemists, 
French teachers... I have always been 
surrounded by progressive people. I came 
through the law, and became interested 
in feminism as part of human rights in 
general, as I have lived under various 
dictatorships. 
I specialized in family law and began to 
realize that a woman’s legal incapacity 
mainly concerned a married woman. 
The single woman had very few 
limitations or constraints, and enjoyed 
practically all the rights. However, due to 
the economic model and the desire to 
preserve the family income, the married 
woman was far more limited. When 
I became interested in changing things, 
I became interested in feminism. 
Interview by 
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz, UNESCO
Through their campaigns 
to protest gender 
violence and femicide, 
such as #NiUnaMenos 
(Not one less), and their 
fight for the legalization 
and decriminalization of 
abortion, Argentinian women 
are breaking new ground 
and transcending borders. 
The 90-year-old lawyer Nelly 
Minyersky is one of their 
most active representatives. 
So much so that some call her 
“the green queen”, because 
of the colour of the scarves 
worn by supporters of free and 
safe abortions – who demand, 
in short, a law “to not die”.
How did the current campaign for the 
right to abortion in Argentina, in which 
you are involved, come about? 
The campaign for the right to abortion 
started in 2005, but it had its origins 
in the Encuentro Nacional de Mujeres 
(national women’s encounters), 
which was created in 1986, shortly 
after democracy was restored1. The 
encounters are spaces for meeting and 
discussing values, principles and forms 
of organization, by and for women, 
and are held every year in a city in 
Argentina. When they first started, about 
a thousand of us attended – now, we are 
more than 60,000 women who attend. 
The meetings are held over two and a 
half days, where all the activity revolves 
around gender issues – with workshops, 
plays, craft fairs, and panels on health, 
on breast-feeding, and literary debates 
with a gender perspective. It’s a unique 
experience that unites different social 
classes, different ages.  
 
 
1. Democracy was restored in Argentina in October 1983, 
following a bloody dictatorship that began in 1976.
Nelly Minyersky:
The green queen
Nelly Minyersky with activists from 
the National Campaign for the Legal, 
Safe and Free Right of Abortion, outside 
the National Congress of Argentina 
on 13 June 2018, during a debate on 
the law to legalize abortion.

### IGNORE

©
 G
al
a 
A
br
am
ov
ic
h

### 370999: Nelly Minyersky, la reine verte

Where does your commitment to 
human rights come from? 
My father emigrated to Argentina from 
Bessarabia, now Moldova, at the age of 
23. His entire family was in Europe, so we 
lived very intensely through the Second 
World War. I remember hearing Hitler’s 
voice on the radio – that pungent voice 
was a very hard thing that marked me, 
and undoubtedly predisposed me to do 
what I do. 

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

36   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019

### 370999: Nelly Minyersky, la reine verte

Why does Argentina, which has legalized 
same-sex marriage and allows the free 
choice of sexual identity, remain opposed 
to an abortion law? 
It is true that in recent years, Argentina 
has adopted those and many other 
laws that have granted many rights to 
women – a comprehensive protection 
law, the Optional Protocol to the 
Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination against Women2, 
retirement pensions for housewives, etc. 
My theory is that egalitarian marriage 
ultimately means allowing a group of 
people to enter into an institution that is a 
model, so they are under social control. But 
abortion, on the other hand, falls out of the 
desired model; it is completely disruptive. 
And it is also undoubtedly one of the most 
resistant strongholds of patriarchy.
2. The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women, ratified by Argentina in 2007, allows individuals 
and associations to file complaints of violations of 
the Convention to the Committee on the Elimination 
of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) when 
they do not obtain prompt and effective judicial or 
administrative protection in their country, and to the 
Committee to open an ex-officio investigation procedure 
for serious or systematic violations of the Convention.
You were one of the drafters of the bill 
on the decriminalization of abortion 
approved by the Argentinian Congress in 
June 2018, but you failed to obtain Senate 
approval two months later. What does 
this bill contain? 
Our campaign slogan is: “Sexual 
education to decide, contraceptives to 
not abort, legal abortion to not die”. These 
three principles demonstrate that there 
are solutions. And our proposal advocates 
the decriminalization of abortion, but 
also its legalization. The law criminalizing 
abortion is discriminatory because the 
women who die – pregnant girls who are 
forced to be mothers – are the girls and 
women who belong to the most excluded 
and vulnerable sections. If abortion is not 
legalized but simply decriminalized, these 
sections won’t have the right to decent 
and safe health services. Between 2007 
and 2018, there were seven attempts in 
Argentina to introduce a bill for the right 
to abortion, and soon we will make an 
eighth proposal. In the meantime, the 
campaign, which brings together more 
than 500 organizations, persists and 
continues to work on the issue, which 
we consider essential, and the right to 
abortion is experienced and transmitted 
as a fundamental human right. 
What has been the reaction to this bill? 
When, in 2018, the debate was finally 
opened in parliament, a unique 
phenomenon occurred, an incredible 
mobilization. We got 1.5 million to 2 
million young girls and women marching 
in the streets to support us, we were 
invited to speak in secondary schools, 
where the boys politely asked me if I’d 
had an abortion. There were debates 
without screaming. We woke up and we 
communicated – and this is the most 
exciting thing – a message that went far 
beyond abortion. It was a message of 
freedom, of autonomy. It was thrilling 
to see these girls, young people, men, 
wearing the green scarf, which is the 
symbol of the law’s supporters. And 
that’s how we achieved something we 
had never dreamed of – an agreement 
between women representatives from 
opposing political parties who, together, 
managed to obtain approval for the law – 
what we call a “half sanction” in Argentina 
– from the Chamber of Deputies. It was 
something wonderful, unexpected. 
In my opinion, women have this 
particularity – it’s easier for us to get 
together than for men, even though each 
one of us has our own political ideas. You 
get together with municipal workers, 
with young people from schools… and 
you breathe joy. These meetings are 
also pluralistic, so much so that now 
they want to change their name to 
“plurinational encounters”, to include 
our indigenous peoples. 
The United Nations Office on Drugs and 
Crime (UNODC) estimates that more than 
50,000 women worldwide are victims of 
femicide each year. How can we confront 
this problem?
I have a theory – which I’ll probably 
never be able to explore in depth – that 
femicide will decrease as comprehensive 
sex education advances. The proof is that 
in all the countries where they receive this 
education seriously from a very young 
age, murder rates due to gender violence 
are lower. But in many countries, we are 
years away from getting there. 
“A legal, safe and free abortion”. 
Drawing by Argentinian artist Andi 
Landoni, part of the Linea Peluda 
campaign for the legalization of abortion.
© Andi Landoni

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   37 

### 370999: Nelly Minyersky, la reine verte

“You are not alone”. Drawing by 
Argentinian artist Lucia Seisas, 
 part of the Linea Peluda campaign for 
the legalization of abortion.
© Lucia Seisas
But the law still hasn’t been passed...
The law was rejected by the Senate, 
but we were short of only seven votes 
(thirty-eight against, thirty-one in 
favour) and that was a huge triumph. 
We didn’t lose. We didn’t get the law 
passed, but times are changing. Abortion 
has been taken out of the dark zone, 
out of the criminal zone in society’s 
imagination, it has been un-demonized. 
And now we talk about sexual and 
reproductive rights – young people 
talk about these. That’s how greatly we 
have advanced. And we have opened 
a breach, because we are achieving a 
change in social consciousness. We have 
won over teenagers and young people, 
who consider abortion a human right. 
And other important sectors, because 
networks of professionals, doctors, 
nurses, lawyers have also emerged 
– a real green tidal wave. 
After so many decades of work and 
activism, how do you view feminism at 
the global level? 
There is no doubt that popular 
movements have succeeded in advancing 
the feminist movement. But this progress 
has also provoked a reaction, which 
is rather hidden, but which works in 
a permanent way within the United 
Nations and other international forums. 
A recent report by the Observatory 
on the Universality of Rights, Rights at 
Risk, very clearly demonstrates how the 
most extreme supporters of various 
religions are joining forces with the most 
conservative sectors to try to return, 
on gender issues, to before the Beijing 
Conference (1995). 
The term “gender ideology” was coined 
there, for example. It is a movement that 
is advancing every day, and which, by the 
way, accuses UNICEF, or you at UNESCO, 
of promoting this supposed ideology. 
We must remain alert. 
I became 
interested 
in feminism 
as part of 
human rights 
in general, 
as I have lived 
under various 
dictatorships
Born in 1929 in San Miguel de Tucumán, 
north-west Argentina, Nelly Minyersky is 
one of the most prominent women’s rights 
activists in her country. She was named 
an illustrious citizen of the city of Buenos 
Aires in 2010 and has presided over the 
Women’s Parliament since 2017. She was 
the first woman president of the Asociación 
de Abogados de Buenos Aires (Buenos 
Aires Bar Association) and of the Tribunal de 
Disciplina del Colegio Público de Abogados 
de la Capital Federal (Disciplinary Tribunal of 
the Buenos Aires public Bar Association). 

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

38   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019
C
u
rr
en
t 
af
fa
irs
C
u
rr
en
t 
A
ff
ai

### 371000: Au Pérou, la restauration du pont suspendu de Q’eswachaka

rs For three days every 
year in June, the 
inhabitants of Quehue 
district take part in 
a centuries-old ritual: 
the restoration of the 
Q’eswachaka rope 
bridge which spans 
the Apurímac River.
 © Jordi Busqué 

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   39 

### 371000: Au Pérou, la restauration du pont suspendu de Q’eswachaka

It takes about four hours of cautious 
driving on winding roads to reach 
Quehue from Cusco. In the first week of 
June 2019, as the rainy season ends, this 
village, located in the southern Andes in 
Peru, is about to experience a very special 
moment. As is customary at this time 
each year, the inhabitants take part in a 
centuries-old ritual that lasts three days: 
the restoration of the Q’eswachaka rope 
suspension bridge. 
This bridge is built over the Quehue gorge 
of the Apurímac (which means “oracle 
of the mountain god” in Quechua) river. 
It connects the Huinchiri, Chaupibanda 
and Chocayhua communities, which live 
on the left bank, to the Qollana Quehue 
community on the right bank. It is the 
last remaining bridge made of vegetable 
fibres in Peru. A symbol of the link 
between the inhabitants and nature, their 
traditions and their history, Q’eswachaka 
is considered sacred. 
A few days before the ritual begins, the 
inhabitants cut q’oya, a hardy grass that 
grows in the humid highlands of the 
Andes. It is then twisted and extended, 
to form q’eswa, a long cord. The villagers 
learn how to weave the fibres from 
an early age. Sitting on a sidewalk in 
the village, a woman weaves one of 
these ropes with amazing dexterity. 
Jordi Busqué, photojournalist based in South America
Every year in the first week of June, the inhabitants of Peru’s Quehue 
district gather to restore the rope suspension bridge that connects 
the two banks of the Apurímac river. This centuries-old secular 
Andean tradition has been inscribed on the Representative List of 
the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity since 2013. 
As the country has relatively high seismic 
activity, the flexibility provided by rope 
suspension bridges was an advantage. 
The downside was that these bridges 
were less resistant to bad weather than 
stone bridges. In a climate where it rains 
almost every day during the course of 
several months, the ropes eventually 
deteriorate, and the bridges have to be 
reconstructed periodically. Although the 
bridge is no longer the only road that 
links the two banks of the Apurímac, the 
tradition continues year after year. 
During the first day of the reconstruction, 
men gather around the old bridge and 
weave the smaller ropes – woven by the 
women – into bigger ones. The head of 
each household brings a q’eswa, about 
seventy metres long. The roads leading to 
the bridge are packed with motorcycles 
loaded with ropes. 
An Inca suspension
bridge is restored in Peru 
This article is published on the 
occasion of the 14th session of the 
Intergovernmental Committee for 
the Safeguarding of the Intangible 
Cultural Heritage, held from 
9 to 14 December 2019 in Bogota, 
Colombia. 
Another beats the grass with a round 
stone and then soaks it in water from the 
river, to make it more pliable. Everything 
must be ready for the next day, when the 
reconstruction of the bridge begins. 
A remarkable network 
of roads
The construction, which uses a technique 
that is over 600 years old, is testimony to 
one of the most remarkable achievements 
of the Inca civilization. They built a network 
of roads – the Qhapaq Ñan – to connect 
their vast territories. This could only be 
achieved by challenging the rugged 
geography of Peru, crossed by the deep 
gorges and canyons created by the rivers. 
A few days before the work begins, 
the inhabitants cut q’oya, a special grass 
that grows in the high Andean areas, and 
twist it to form long cords. They learn how 
to weave these ropes from an early age.

### IGNORE

©
 Jo
rd
i B
us
qu
é

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

40   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019

### 371000: Au Pérou, la restauration du pont suspendu de Q’eswachaka

A traditional master of ceremonies, called 
paqo, presents offerings to the apus, 
the mountain spirits that are believed 
to protect the locals. A small altar, on 
which llama fetuses, corn-cobs and other 
ritual objects are placed, is put up near 
the bridge. The elder men, acting as 
traditional priests, offer alcohol to the 
men participating in the reconstruction. 
A sheep has been sacrificed to the apus, 
and its heart is burnt in a small fire 
maintained at the foot of the bridge. 
The priests want to make sure that 
the workers are protected by the gods 
and that no accidents occur during 
the reconstruction. 
The ropes are installed on the second day, 
once the old bridge has been detached, 
and falls into the river, where it is carried 
by the current and floats downstream. 
It will simply decompose, as it is made 
only of grass. Tradition dictates that 
only men are allowed to work on the 
actual reconstruction. 
The women remain in the upper part of 
the gorge, weaving the smaller ropes. The 
main support of the bridge comes from 
six large three-ply ropes, each about a 
foot thick, made up of about 120 thinner 
ropes. Four of the large ropes will form the 
floor of the bridge, while the other two 
serve as handrails. All six ropes are securely 
attached to large anchors made of carved 
stone, on either side of the canyon. 
Pre-Columbian 
tradition of community 
work
Giving these heavy ropes the necessary 
tension, by human traction alone, 
takes up most of the second day. The 
pulling is done in rhythm, according to 
the instructions of the lead architects. 
The various stages of construction 
are supervised by the elders and two 
chakaruwaq, specialized craftsmen 
whose weaving techniques are passed 
down from generation to generation. 
This reconstruction draws on mink’a, a 
pre-Columbian tradition of community 
service, which consists of Andean 
farmers carrying out important work, the 
benefits of which are shared by the entire 
community. 
On the third day, a handful of men 
who have no fear of heights, walk the 
length of the structure, attaching small 
ropes from the handrail to the floor of 
the bridge. This makes it possible for 
everyone to safely cross the bridge. Two 
groups start on either side of the bridge, 
and eventually meet at its centre. When 
the last rope is in place and the bridge is 
finally ready, the workers raise their arms, 
causing the crowd to cheer loudly. 
The workers are the first to use the new 
bridge, but everybody is eager to emulate 
them. For safety reasons, no more than 
four people are allowed to cross the 
structure at any one time. 
On the third day of the ritual, men on 
either side of the bridge attach the last 
cords that make up the bridge’s guard-rail.

### IGNORE

©
 Jo
rd
i B
us
qu
é

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=41) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   41 

### 371000: Au Pérou, la restauration du pont suspendu de Q’eswachaka

The crowd is large, and it takes a long 
time before everyone has crossed the 
gorge. No modern materials, tools 
or machines have been used during 
the entire reconstruction process of 
the bridge – only ropes of grass and 
human power. 
The annual rebuilding ritual ends with 
festivities in which all the inhabitants 
participate. A stage has been set up 
and a music group plays traditional 
songs from the region. Schoolchildren 
from neighbouring villages take part 
in a dance competition. In a few years, 
it will be these boys and girls who will 
take over, to rebuild the Q’eswachaka 
suspension bridge. 
No more than four people 
are allowed to be on the structure 
simultaneously.
A symbol of the link 
between the inhabitants and 
nature, their traditions and 
their history, Q’eswachaka 
is considered sacred

### IGNORE

©
 Jo
rd
i B
us
qu
é

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=42) 0

### IGNORE

42   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019

### 371006: Le destin des descendants du Clotilda, dernier navire négrier américain

It all began in 1859 in Mobile, Alabama, 
when planter and ship captain Timothy 
Meaher bet that he could bring in “a 
shipful of niggers” right under the noses 
of the authorities. By then, the slave 
trade to the United States – which had 
been legally prohibited since 1 January 
1808 – could only be conducted illicitly, 
with offenders risking the death penalty. 
Nevertheless, the trafficking continued 
unabated and demands to reopen the 
slave trade had grown since the 1840s. 
Short of labour for their expanding cotton 
and sugar plantations, slave-holders in 
the Deep South had to buy enslaved 
labour from the Upper South, at prices 
they considered exorbitant. A man sold 
in Virginia could fetch $50,000, whereas 
a smuggled African could be bought for 
$14,000. Meaher recruited and financed 
William Foster, the builder and owner of 
the Clotilda. As an improvised slave-ship 
captain, Foster arrived in Ouidah, in the 
kingdom of Dahomey, on 15 May 1860.
The terrible ordeal of the 110 children 
and young adults – half male, half female 
– who became the Clotilda’s prisoners, 
had begun a few weeks earlier. After a 
deadly raid by the Dahomey army on a 
small town, a group of survivors were 
brought to Ouidah. Among them was 
19-year-old Oluale Kossola, who was later 
renamed Cudjoe Kazoola Lewis. Others, 
including a group of traders, had also 
been kidnapped. 
Sylviane A. Diouf 
In May 2019, the news that archaeologists had discovered the 
wreck of the Clotilda – the last recorded slave ship to arrive in the 
United States, fifty-two years after the international slave trade 
had been outlawed – made headlines around the world. 
But all the attention focused on the ship’s owner, its captain, and 
the ship itself, rather than on the victims of this appalling journey. 
From the holds of the 
Clotilda to Africatown
The prisoners came from various areas 
of Benin and Nigeria, including Atakora, 
Banté, Bornu, and Dahomey. They 
belonged to the Yoruba, Isha, Nupé, 
Dendi, Fon, Hausa and Shamba ethnic 
groups. Among them were Muslims, 
and initiates of the Oro society, or 
Orisha convents. All of them had been 
brutally snatched from their families and 
communities, and held in a barracoon, 
after Foster had selected them from 
among hundreds of captives. 
As Ar-Zuma, Oroh, Adissa, Kupollee, 
Oluale, Abache, Omolabi, Sakaru, Jabar, 
and their companions set foot on the 
Clotilda, they were stripped of their 
clothes, as was customary on slave ships. 
The humiliation and the suffering they 
endured was such that even fifty years 
later, they could not bring themselves to 
speak about it – except to say that they 
were very thirsty, and that two people 
had died. 
Hidden in a swamp
On 8 July 1860, after forty-five days at 
sea, the captives arrived in Mobile, under 
cover of night. To remove any trace of the 
landing, the Clotilda was set on fire. Even 
so, news of the “secret” arrival spread from 
coast to coast. The federal government 
was forced to intervene, and a crew was 
sent to search for the young Africans. 
Detail of a sculpture by Ghanaian 
artist Kwame Akoto-Bamfo. Dedicated 
to the memory of the victims of the 
transatlantic slave trade, it is on display 
at the National Memorial for Peace and 
Justice in Montgomery, Alabama.

### IGNORE

©
 E
qu
al
 Ju
st
ic
e 
In
iti
at
iv
e 
∕ 
H
um
an
 P
ic
tu
re
s 

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   43 

### 371006: Le destin des descendants du Clotilda, dernier navire négrier américain

They had been hidden in a swamp, 
completely naked for several days, until 
some rags and skins were handed out to 
them when they were discovered. A sale 
was organized discreetly, and the group 
went through another heartbreaking 
separation. As some of them were leaving 
for places that were far away, they all sang 
a parting song, wishing each other a safe 
journey. About seventy-six people were 
divided between Meaher and his two 
brothers, and Foster. 
The cases against the slave-owners were 
ultimately dropped, and the “ship-mates” 
– as Africans who travelled on the same 
slave ship generally called each other – 
were put to work, openly, on steamships, 
in the fields, and as domestics. They were 
a tightly-knit community, and were said 
never to accept brutality – they stood 
up to authority and were unafraid of 
the consequences. An African American 
enslaved on the same plantation as 
some of the newcomers recounted that 
once, when a supervisor tried to whip 
one of the women, they all jumped 
on him and beat him up.  
When a cook slapped a young girl, she 
screamed. Her companions ran to her 
rescue, tools in hand, and banged on the 
door of Mrs Meaher’s bedroom, where 
the cook had taken refuge. Often mocked 
by their enslaved companions born in 
the US, the Clotilda passengers kept to 
themselves and continued to adhere to 
their original cultures – including their 
funeral rites. 
In April 1865, at the end of the Civil War, 
the ship-mates were finally free. But it was 
not the kind of freedom they had longed 
for. They wanted to go back home. As 
one of them, Ossa Keeby, said, “I go back 
to Africa every night in my dreams.” The 
men found work in the lumber-mills and 
powder-mills. The women, who were self-
employed, made their living gardening 
and selling their produce, and the baskets 
that the men wove at night. They saved 
their money to pay for their return. When 
they realized they would never make 
enough, they sent Cudjoe Lewis to ask 
Meaher for some land. They argued that 
they had families, homes, and land before 
he had forcibly brought them to Mobile 
and made them work hard for nothing, 
for five years. Meaher refused. 
Africatown 
Redoubling their efforts, the ship-mates 
accumulated enough money to buy plots 
from the Meaher family and other local 
owners. By 1870, they had established 
a small village in Alabama that they 
proudly called African Town – it was later 
renamed Africatown. 
It was a clear way of demonstrating who 
they were, who they wanted to remain, 
and where they wanted to be. To manage 
their settlement, they elected a chief, 
Gumpa, who was a nobleman from 
Dahomey, and two judges. They built the 
first church and the first school in the area 
and some of them learned to read and 
write. They also stayed in touch with the 
ship-mates, some of whom lived several 
counties away. 
As they married within – and sometimes 
outside – the group, a second generation 
was born. They were given one American 
name and one African name. These 
children learned about their origins – some 
were fluent in their parents’ languages and 
even acted as translators. The ship-mates 
talked fondly about their hometowns – 
which became a paradise, a refuge, for 
the children, where they could go to in 
their dreams when white racism and black 
derision became too hard to bear. 
The ship-mates never lost 
their deep-rooted sense 
of belonging to a land 
and a people far away

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

44   |   The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019

### 371006: Le destin des descendants du Clotilda, dernier navire négrier américain

Having stood up while they were 
enslaved, the people of Africatown 
continued to fight for their rights. When 
the men decided to vote in elections 
in 1874, an incensed Meaher blocked 
their way. Undaunted, the men walked 
from polling station to polling station, 
finally succeeding in casting their ballot. 
Kohenco, who ran a dairy farm with her 
American husband, became a member 
of the first reparations movement that 
sought pensions for freed people. In 
1902, Lewis was hurt by a train and sued 
one of the largest corporations in the 
South. Against all odds, an all-white jury 
awarded him $13,000, but the judgement 
was overturned by the Alabama Supreme 
Court. Gumpa also sued, after being 
injured by a train. He died before the case 
went to court, but the claim was later 
settled, with a small amount of money 
awarded to his grandchildren.
When the ship-mates were interviewed, 
starting in the 1890s, they systematically 
refused to belittle their former religions, 
or to criticize polygamy. They also 
refused to condemn those who had 
taken them prisoners, attributing 
their fate to “bad luck”.  
They patiently, and sometimes 
exasperatedly, explained and defended 
their cultures. Asked whether they 
preferred Mobile or their erstwhile 
homes, they forcefully picked the latter. 
Clotilda’s last survivors 
When Emma Langdon Roche, a teacher, 
told the last survivors, now in their 
seventies, that she wanted to write 
about their lives, they asked to be called 
by their original names – so that if the 
story reached home, their relatives 
would know they were still alive. The 
book, with their photos taken fifty-four 
years after their brutal uprooting, was 
published in 1914. The author, Zora 
Neale Hurston, also interviewed Lewis at 
length and filmed him in 1928. Cudjoe 
Lewis, who lost his wife, Abile, and 
their six children in short succession, 
was the last survivor of Africatown. He 
passed away in 1935, aged 94, and was 
the second-to-last known survivor of 
the Atlantic slave trade. Two years later, 
Redoshi, a woman captured in the same 
raid, died in Dallas. She too had been 
photographed, interviewed, and filmed.
Cudjoe Lewis (1841-1935) was one of the 
founders of Africatown, a village created 
in 1870 by the people who were brought 
to Alabama on the Clotilda.

### IGNORE

©
 E
rik
 O
ve
rb
ey
 C
ol
le
ct
io
n,
 T
he
 D
oy
 L
ea
le
 M
cC
al
l R
ar
e 
Bo
ok
 a
nd
 M
an
us
cr
ip
t L
ib
ra
ry
, U
ni
ve
rs
ity
 o
f S
ou
th
 A
la
ba
m
a

### 371006: Le destin des descendants du Clotilda, dernier navire négrier américain

They did all 
they could 
to ensure 
that their 
stories were 
recorded, 
shared and 
remembered

## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=45) 0

### IGNORE

The UNESCO Courier • October-December 2019   |   45 

### 371006: Le destin des descendants du Clotilda, dernier navire négrier américain

The ship-mates of the Clotilda lived in 
Alabama as much as they could on their 
own terms. But in spite of their deliberate 
insularity, they were involved in a series 
of events that marked their times. Yet, 
they never lost their deep-rooted sense 
of belonging to a land and a people far 
away. Today, the Africatown they created 
as an alternative, is still home to some of 
their descendants. But this once-vibrant 
community has fallen on hard times. 
Polluting paper mills, streets blocked 
by factory walls, roads cutting through 
the neighbourhood – environmental 
racism has devastated the place. Only 
the Union Missionary Baptist Church 
and the graveyard where the ancestors 
are buried are tangible reminders of 
the first generation. The residents hope 
that the discovery of the Clotilda will 
encourage tourism and result in a much-
needed revival of Africatown and its 
fascinating history.
The shipwreck of the Clotilda, and 
whatever it reveals, is only a disgraceful 
symbol of the basis of the economic 
development of the US. More important 
is the history of the experience of the 
young people who lost everything, but 
transcended their awful circumstances. 
Through the ordeals of the trans-Atlantic 
crossing of slave ships from Africa to 
America, slavery, the Civil War, Jim Crow 
[the state and local laws that enforced 
racial segregation in the southern states 
of the US], and for part of the Great 
Depression of 1929, they retained their 
dignity, their confidence in themselves 
and their abilities, their unity, their sense 
of family and their pride in their cultures. 
What is more, they did all they could to 
ensure that their stories were recorded, 
shared and remembered. Theirs is a 
dreadful tale of loss and calamity, but 
also of triumph over adversity – a story of 
unsung heroes.
A historian of the African diaspora, 
Sylviane A. Diouf is the author of 
Dreams of Africa in Alabama: The Slave 
Ship Clotilda and the Story of the Last 
Africans Brought to America and several 
other books. She is a Visiting Professor at 
the Center for the Study of Slavery and 
Justice, Brown University, in Providence, 
United States.
The graveyard of the original enslaved 
people who arrived on the Clotilda, 
and their descendants, in Africatown. 
The neglect is apparent, with some 
graves disappearing into the ground.
A dreadful 
tale of 
loss and 
calamity, 
but also 
of triumph 
over 
adversity

### IGNORE

©
 M
aa
rt
en
 V
an
de
n 
Ey
nd
e

## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=46) 0

### IGNORE

Manual for Developing 
Intercultural Competencies
Story Circles
ISBN 978-0-367-19997-5 
116 pp., 142 x 224 mm, hardback, €50 
UNESCO Publishing/Routledge
Behind the Numbers: 
Ending school violence 
and bullying
ISBN 978-92-3-100306-6 
70 pp., 210 x 297 mm, paperback 
UNESCO Publishing 
Available on http://unesdoc.unesco.org
They Did Not Stop at Eboli
The UNESCO Campaign Against 
Illiteracy in Reportages 
by David “Chim” Seymour 
and Carlo Levi (1950) 
Edited by Giovanna Hendel, 
Carole Naggar and Karin Priem
ISBN 978-3-11-065163-8 
180 pp., 170 x 240 mm, hardback, €86.95 
UNESCO Publishing/De Gruyter
UNESCO Publishing
www.unesco.org/publishing 
publishing.promotion@unesco.org
United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization
The analysis of UNESCO’s audio-visual 
archives for their digitization has brought 
to light a forgotten album of thirty-eight 
contact sheets and accompanying texts 
by Magnum photographer David “Chim” 
Seymour – a reportage commissioned 
by UNESCO in 1950 on the fight 
against illiteracy in southern Italy’s 
Calabria region. 
A number of Seymour’s photographs 
appeared in the March 1952 issue of the 
UNESCO Courier, accompanied by an 
article written by Carlo Levi, who gained 
worldwide fame with his 1945 memoir, 
Christ Stopped at Eboli.
Intercultural competencies refers to the 
skills, attitudes and behaviours needed to 
improve interactions across differences, 
whether within a society or across 
borders. This book presents a structured, 
yet flexible, methodology for developing 
intercultural competencies in a variety of 
contexts, both formal and informal. 
Piloted around the world by UNESCO, 
this methodology has proven to be 
effective in a range of different contexts. 
It is an important resource for anyone 
concerned with effectively managing 
the growing cultural diversity within 
our societies, to ensure inclusive and 
sustainable development.
School-related violence in all its forms, 
including bullying, is an infringement of 
children’s and adolescents’ rights to 
education and health and well-being. 
This report provides an overview of the 
most up-to-date evidence on school 
violence and bullying in 144 countries.
The publication also includes an analysis 
of factors that contribute to effective 
national responses, based on a series of 
case studies commissioned by UNESCO, 
of countries that have succeeded in 
reducing the prevalence of school 
violence and bullying.

## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=47) 0

### IGNORE

Many voices, one world
The UNESCO Courier is published in the six official languages of the 
Organization, and also in Portuguese, Esperanto, Sicilian and Korean. 
Read it and share it widely across the globe.
https://en.unesco.org/courier • https://fr.unesco.org/courier  
 https://es.unesco.org/courier • https://ru.unesco.org/courier • https://ar.unesco.org/courier • https://zh.unesco.org/courier
CorreioO
2019: O Ano Internacional das Línguas Indígenas
Quando beber 
água, lembre-se 
da fonte
janeiro-março 2019
Ideias:
um ensaio inédito 
de W. H. Auden
DA  UNE SCO
ЮНЕСКОКурьериюль-сентябрь 2018 года
Οрганизация
Οбъединенньιх Ηаций по
вопросам образования,
науки и культуры
Искусственный 
интеллект:
перспективы  
и угрозы
Courrier
DE  L’ UNE SCO
LE
juillet-septembre 2019
Défis climatiques, 
défis éthiques

## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/370977eng.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

Physichromie, work by Venezuelan painter and kinetic artist Carlos Cruz-Díez (1923-2019). 
This diptych, made from acrylic painting and metal, has been part of UNESCO’s art collection since 1978. 
The left part of the work is at the top, the right part is shown below.
© Carlos Cruz-Díez/photo: atelier Cruz-Díez