# [078253](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf)
## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=1) 🆗
### Non-article text
March 1970 (23rd year) - U. K. : 2/-stg - Canada : 40 cents - France: 1.20 F
SPIN-OFF
the fruit
of space research
bb
Bl B
## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=2) 🆗
### Non-article text
TREASURES
OF
WORLD ART
Neolithic goggles
This strange-looking figure, suggestive of a visitor from outer space, dates back to a period of
ancient Japan about which little is known. A hollow clay figurine (34.8 cm. high) it
was unearthed in northern Japan and was fashioned towards the end of the Jomon civilization
which lasted from about 5000 B.C. to the start of the Christian Era. Excavations have brought
to light several "goggled" figurines like this one. Certain archeologists believe that goggles
with horizontal slits like those employed by Eskimos to protect their eyes against snow glare
were also used in Neolithic Japan.
## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=3) 🆗
### Non-article text
Courier
MARCH 1970
23RD YEAR
PUBLISHED IN
THIRTEEN EDITIONS
English Japanese
French Italian
Spanish Hindi
Russian Tamil
German Hebrew
Arabic Persian
U.S.A.
Published monthly by UNESCO
The United Nations
Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization
*
Sales and Distribution Offices
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7*
Annual subscription rates: 20/-stg.; $4.00
(Canada); 12 French francs or equivalent;
2 years : 36/-stg. ; 22 F. Single copies : 2/-stg. ;
40 cents ; 1 .20 F.
Tha UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except
in August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic,
Japanese, Italian, Hindi, Tamil, Hebrew and Persian. In the
United Kingdom it is distributed by H.M. Stationery Office,
P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.I.
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may
be reprinted providing the credit line reads "Reprinted from
the UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re¬
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos
will be supplied on request Unsolicited manuscripts cannot
be returned unless accompanied by an international
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the opinions of UNESCO or those ;of the editors of the
UNESCO COURIER.
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Read¬
ers' Guide to Periodical Literature, published by
H. W. Wilson Co., New York, and In Current Con¬
tents Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A.
Editorial Office
Unesco, Place de Fontenoyj Paris-7», France
Editor-in-Chief
Sandy Koffler
Assistant Editor-in-Chief
René Caloz
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief
Lucio Attinelli
Managing Editors
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris)
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris)
Spanish Edition: Francisco Fernández-Santos (Paris)
Russian Edition : Georgi Stetsenko (Paris)
German Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne)
Arabic Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo)
Japanese Edition : Takao Uchida (Tokyo)
Italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome)
Hindi Edition: Annapuzha Chandrahasan (Delhi)
Tamil Edition: T.P. Meenakshi Sundaran (Madras)
Hebrew Edition: Alexander Peli (Jerusalem)
Persian Edition: Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran)
Photo Editor: Olga Rodel
Layout and Design: Robert Jacquemin
All correspondence should be addressed to the EdItor-ln-Chlef
Page
4
8
13
16
24
27
29
31
32
19
20
22
SPIN-OFF: THEFRUIT OF SPACE RESEARCH
By Gene Gregory
(1) IS THE SPACE EFFORT
A WASTE OF MONEY?
(2) SPIN-OFF FROM SPACE SATELLITES
(3) THE NEW SPACE-AGE TECHNOLOGY
(4) BENEFITS TO MEDICINE
(5) NEW SPACE-AGE MATERIALS
(6) NEW SPACE-AGE POWER SOURCES
(7) SPACE-AGE ELECTRONICS
AND POCKET COMPUTERS
(8) THE 'SYSTEMS APPROACH'
Applying the space team method
to major problems on earth
BEYOND BABEL
Laying the foundation of the first global society
By Arthur C Clarke
TREASURES OF WORLD ART
Neolithic goggles (Japan)
FOUR PAGES IN COLOUR
The earth also rises
The conquest of space a panoramic view
Prospecting earth resources from space
£over
This month's cover illustration,
showing an apple in space, with
an astronaut attached to it by an
umbilical cord, is meant to convey
a double symbolism. On the one
hand, the fruits accruing to all
mankind from the "apple" that is,
communication and other satellites;
on the other, that space research,
and its living emblem, the astronaut,
are directly tied to the "apple" that
is, our Planet Earth which has
begun to reap the vast benefits from
space spin-off. What progress that
apple has made since it fell before
Newton's eyes I
Drawing McDonnell Douglas Astronautics
3
## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=4) 🆗
### Non-article text
SPIN-OFF
the fruit of space research
Much has been written on man's conquest of space in the past twelve years,
crowned by the two successful landings on the moon by U.S. astronauts
in 1969. Less appreciated, but perhaps far more significant than the spectacular
aspects of space exploration itself, are the spin-off benefits that is,
the vast accumulation of practical results for men on Earth of space research.
Last year, the "Unesco Courier" asked Mr. Gene Gregory, U.S. engineer
and writer specializing in economic and technological questions, to undertake
a special inquiry into the fruits of space research. Mr. Gregory's findings
occupy a major portion of this issue, and reveal a vast array of new products
and processes, innovations in materials, revolutionary progress in electronics
and computer technology, and a host of benefits for developed and developing
countries in communications, weather forecasting, food and agriculture,
education, health and medicine, industry and manufacturing, transportation
and commerce, new sources of energy, geology, hydrology, oceanography
and other applied sciences of direct use to all mankind today and in the years
to come. On page 32, Arthur C. Clarke, the world famous science writer,
discusses the implications and promise of what he calls "The century of
the communications satellite."
"
« r^o^ wiji
A
## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=5) 🆗
### Is the space effort a waste of money?
by Gene Gregory
A
Is the
space
effort
a waste
money
The strange form floating above the
> lunar landscape in this photo-montage
is one of the many new products
' developed through space research. A
revolutionary three-dimensional fabric,
J it was built into the boots used by
_ the first astronauts on the moon,
>. since it is extremely light and an
.b extraordinary insulator. It can be put
o to many terrestial uses.
LS the Apollo 11 and 12
spacecraft raced toward their ren¬
dezvous with the moon last July and
last November, these most ambitious
of man's ventures were the focus of
a sharp and lively debate back on
earth about the real meaning and value
of space exploration.
Twelve years had passed since the
Soviet Union launched the space age
by firing Sputnik I into earth orbit on
October 4, 1957. The United States had
spent some $44 thousand million on
space programmes, $24 thousand mil¬
lion on the Apollo project alone. Hun¬
dreds of thousands of top scientists
and technicians had been striving
together in by far the largest team of
specialists ever mobilized in a single
undertaking.
Yet the basic question was still
being asked: "Is this trip really
necessary?"
Was the moon landing a pointless
"stunt", however adroitly executed, or
a breathtaking demonstration of man's
unlimited capabilities? Would the bil¬
lions allocated for space be better
spent on solving pressing problems
here on earth? What, in short, is
there in all this running around in
space for those of us who remain
earthbound mortals?
Arnold J. Toynbee, the esteemed
British historian, expressed the con¬
cern of many serious-minded scep¬
tics for whom the moon landing sym¬
bolized a yawning gap between tech¬
nology and morals.
"In a sense," Toynbee remonstrated,
"going to the moon is like building the
pyramids or Louis XIV's palace at
Versailles. It's rather scandalous,
when human beings are going short
of necessities, to do this. If we're
clever enough to reach the moon, don't
we feel rather foolish in our misman¬
agement of human affairs?"
But others contend that there is
money enough for the moon and tasks
on earth, too. And some go further
to point out that the conquest of space
has done much, through the develop¬
ment of new ideas, new attitudes, new
techniques and new structures for the
management of large-scale undertak¬
ings, to prepare man for a major offen¬
sive against the unsolved social and
material problems at home.
"If you look at the thousands of
years of civilization," Sir Bernard
Lovell, director of Britain's Jodrell
Bank Observatory reminds us, "you
will find that only those communities
that have been prepared to struggle
with the nearly insoluble problems at
the limits of their technical capaci¬
ties those are the only communi¬
ties, the only times, that civiliza¬
tion has advanced. The Roman Em¬
pire decayed when ¡t ceased to be
progressive in this sense, and there
are other examples. To a certain
extent, you see the beginnings of it
in the United Kingdom today, but for¬
tunately not in the United States and
certainly not in the Soviet Union."
Queen Isabella of Spain was con¬
fronted with something of the same
sort of question nearly five centuries
ago when she sold her jewels to
assemble the resources necessary to
finance the trip to the Indies of
Christopher Columbus and his crew.
Her prime motives may well have
been the glory and riches she expec¬
ted to accrue to Spain. But the great
results of this historical venture were
not the spice and gold it brought to
Spanish coffers, nor the vast territo¬
rial acquisitions which gave Spain
dominion over the first global empire
in history.
Far more important, the Columbian
explorations marked the beginning of
a major new cycle in the development
of the world, enhancing man's mastery
of the seas and bringing together in
one great community, however un¬
happily, the entire human race.
It is not too much to contemplate
that similar experiences may be await¬
ing us as we embark on the contem¬
porary venture into unknown space.
This is not simply because outer space
provides a new dimension to poten¬
tially new resources, nor because the
possibility of finding life on other pla¬
nets has suddenly become much more
real. Of even greater importance is
the vast accumulation of new techno¬
logy and new techniques resulting
from the first decade of space explo¬
ration.
Not unnaturally, the sheer specta¬
cular quality of the moon landing ten¬
ded to focus the world's attention on
the heroic aspects of the achievement.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5
## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=6) 🆗
### Is the space effort a waste of money?
6
WASTE OF MONEY? (Continued)
Somehow, the casting of the Apollo
11 and 12 voyages on millions of tele¬
vision sets around the world gave it
the character of a sports event. Focus
was on the astronauts, champions of
a new interplanetary Olympiad, and
on the faultless performance of the
spacecraft In the process, the real
significance of space exploration be¬
came obscure.
If the experience of the past three
or four thousand years has any value,
it tells us that in freeing himself from
the millenial confinement of the earth's
gravitation and its atmosphere, man
has added a vast new dimension to
his environment and to his character.
In broadening his horizons, he has in
a qualitative* sense altered his very
being and completely changed his
relationship to the rest of nature, and
this in turn presages sweeping chan¬
ges in every field of human activity.
Colossal strides in civilization in the
past have followed each major
advance in man's observation of the
skies. Astronomical discoveries, time
after time, have influenced and, in
some cases, shifted the very course of
history.
Now, the impact of space explora¬
tion the most momentous of all
human adventures promises to usher
in a new stage of civilization the broad
outlines of which remain undefinable,
if for no other reason than that the
exploration has only begun. The
potential of the universe for mankind
is as completely unknown today as
was that of the New World after the
return of Columbus to Spain.
As Margaret Mead, the American
anthropologist, has put it: "Once you
raise the question that other land than
this earth is possible to live on, that
other places are possible places to
found colonies, or that there may be
other living creatures somewhere, you
have changed the whole place of man
in the universe. You've altered every¬
thing. This involves a considerable
reduction of human arrogance and a
tremendous magnification of human
possibilities."
Just as the age of earth exploration
completely transformed the political
matrix around the globe, the space age
will radically. alter the present global
political constellation and institutions.
The nation state, already ill-suited to
human needs in the last half of the
twentieth century, can hardly be
expected to effectively serve man's
goals in space.
The on-again off-again trip to Mars,
originally scheduled for the 1970s,
will very likely be too expensive for
either the United States or the Soviet
Union to undertake alone. By com¬
bining in this and other projects in the
conquest of space, it is possible to
co-operate where prejudices and con¬
flicting interests are least involved. In
this age of global problems, the neces¬
sity of co-operation in space as human
beings with predominantly common
interests cannot but have a feedback
on earth. If and when space explora¬
tion becomes more than a marginal
activity, its higher priority is bound to
give new stimulus to international joint
ventures in space.
Already COMSAT (Communications
Satellite Corporation) and INTELSAT
(the international space communica-
## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=7) 🆗
### Is the space effort a waste of money?
THE BULLET
IN THE BRAIN
AND THE SPACE
CENTRIFUGE
In 1968, a man named Joseph
Barrios was shot in the head, the
bullet lodging in the brain. Before
attempting an operation to remove
it, doctors hit on the idea to try
to reposition it to a less critical
area with the help of a centrifuge
capsule used to train astronauts.
Barrios was accelerated to six times
the force of gravity for five
seconds (photo left). The
experiment worked, eliminating
the need for surgery. Right, a
NASA space helmet is fitted on a
child with a heart defect to study
oxygen consumption. A suction
pump circulates fresh air through the
helmet, picking up the exhaled
breath and drawing the combined
fresh air and exhaled breath
into an oxygen analyser. The
conventional rubber mouthpiece used
to collect exhaled air has been
found awkward for children.
tions organization of 70 member
countries) have established a pattern
for international public utilities in
space communications. American and
Soviet rockets are launching Euro¬
pean, Australian and Japanese satel¬
lites into space. And some 40 track¬
ing stations around the globe, involv¬
ing varying degrees of international
co-operation, participated in the Apollo
project.
But if no one knows where this new
adventure in space will eventually take
us, what new worlds will be discovered
what new horizons will open as man
colonizes the moon or other planets,
or what advantages may be found in
manufacturing instruments and equip¬
ment in the vacuum of ogter space,
the first decade of the Space Age has
given us a foretaste of what is in store
for the future.
Since 1967 hardly a person on earth
has not been directly or indirectly
effected in one way or another by the
results of the space exploration.
Liberated from the forces that have
kept us earthbound throughout record
ed history, we now have capabilities
(intellectual and material ) that are
immeasurably greater than ever
before. These new capabilities open
unlimited opportunities for the de¬
velopment of human faculties and
the satisfaction of human needs.
A whole galaxy of earth satellites is
now providing global services which
have already brought vast improve¬
ments to communications, weather
prediction, geology and geodetics,
navigation and oceanography. These
and other vital tools for the enhance¬
ment of man's control over his envi¬
ronment are available not only to the
advanced industrial countries that have
developed them, but have had imme¬
diate benefits for all countries around
the globe providing developing coun¬
tries with tremendous new capabilities
for more rapid economic and social
advance.
New technologies products, mater¬
ials, processes, manufacturing tech¬
niques, operating procedures, and new
standards born of space requirements
are being transferred from their
original space application to industry,
commerce, education and public
health, replacing products or practices
currently in use to provide those which
will better fill the vast variety of human
needs'.
But, most important, effective tech¬
niques and structures have been deve¬
loped for the "forcing" of technology
transfer, and private industry, univer¬
sities and governments now have at
their disposal vast computerized data
banks of knowledge and data on vir¬
tually every field of the physical and
social sciences, technology and the
humanities.
But an even more important aspect
of the Space Revolution is the last
one: techniques for directing massive
projects undertaken by thousands of
minds in a close-knit, synergistic com¬
bination of government, universities
and industry. Taken together these
techniques are potentially the most
powerful management tool in man's
history, changing the way civil serv¬
ants, scientists and managers approach
virtually every task they undertake.
7
## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=8) 🆗
### Non-article text
2. Spin
from
c
^PACE exploration and de¬
velopment, hardly more than a decade
since the launching of Sputnik I into
earth orbit, have brought immediate
benefits to mankind as a whole to
developing as well as advanced indus¬
trial countries with far-reaching impli¬
cations for economic progress and the
global political constellation.
Space satellites have endowed us
with a new dimension of capabilities
for coping with the overriding and dif¬
ficult tasks of management of the
earth's complex ecological system, of
which man is but one segment.
They make possible, for the first
time in human history, global solutions
to global problems. And this has in
turn increased the urgency for the
development of new global institutions
and a new global political matrix to
assure maximum benefits of these new
capabilities.
Direct telecasts from the moon,
viewed simultaneously by hundreds of
millions of people around the world,
marked a revolution in communications
hardly less spectacular than the first
moon landing itself. Satellites in earth
orbit are now capable of broad-band
transmission of all types of communi¬
cations, including voice, telegraphy,
high speed data transmission, facsimile
and television.
Voice and telegraphic communica¬
tion traffic alone has been expanding
so rapidly that international traffic

### Spin-off from space satellites
-Off
space satellites
could not possibly be handled ade¬
quately by wireless high frequency
radio facilities or underwater cable
systems. Yet traffic with the many less
developed countries of the world had
not yet become heavy enough to make
more costly cable systems economi¬
cally feasible.
Since communications satellites have
been placed in orbit, however, it has
become possible not only to meet all
these requirements, but also to reduce
tariff rates for communications gener¬
ally.
INTELSAT has operated the world¬
wide satellite communications system
since 1965, the first "Early Bird" satel¬
lite, with 240 two-way telephone chan¬
nels, doubling the capacity of the exist¬
ing four trans-Atlantic underwater
cables overnight and giving countries
in other areas of the world immediate
new international facilities.
A second satellite, "Atlantic 2", with
1,200 channels is now operating over
the mid-Atlantic off the west coast of
Africa, and "Pacific 1 and 2" over the
mid-Pacific.
The first Soviet communications
satellite of the "Molniya" class was
launched April 23, 1965 with a very
high elliptical orbit of high apogee to
provide the longest duration of com¬
munication within the territory of the
Soviet Union. Six Molniya satellites,
each of them more powerful, have
been launched since April 1965 to pro
vide the world's first domestic satellite
communications system.
Joined with a network of 20 earth
stations in the Orbita communications
system, the Molniya I satellites are
designated mainly for transmission of
TV programmes, newspaper matrices,
radio broadcasts and meteorological
maps. It is, however, also used for
telegraph and telephone communica¬
tion.
At a recent private meeting of
experts in Talloires, France, the Soviet
participant, Professor Gennady Zhukov
of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences
made it clear that his country was
prepared to co-operate with INTELSAT
to form a global telecommunications
system. Not only is technical compa¬
tibility between INTELSAT and Orbita
not difficult to obtain, the random orbit¬
ing of the Soviet Molniya satellites,
which adequately cover the northern¬
most areas of the northern hemisphere,
is complementary to the geostationary
satellites of INTELSAT.
A founding member of INTELSAT,
Canada will most likely be the next
country to establish its own domestic
multipurpose satellite communications
system, capable of handling television,
telephone, data and other signals. For
the Canadian environment the effect
of satellite communications is expected
to be as dramatic as the introduction
of telegraphy and microwave trans¬
mission combined, making it possible
8
SIX USES FOR
COMMUNICATIONS
SATELLITES
Today's use of communications satellites for
intercontinental link-ups is merely the first
step in a vast revolution in communications
technology. Drawings, right, show some
striking capabilities of a developed global
satellite communications network.
(1) Intercontinental point to point transmissions.
(2) Multiple access to communications
satellites enables many nations to "hook-up"
to transmissions, using relatively small and
inexpensive earth terminals. (3) Air and sea
navigation and traffic control satellite system
brings greater safety to crowded sea and
air lanes. (4) Relay satellites round the earth
reduce the need for a global network of
space tracking and data stations. Lunar and<
planetary orbiting relays provide continuous <
communications service. (5) Community TV 2
via satellite to schools and isolated villages, f
(6) Direct broadcasts voice and TV to |
sets in the home. A
## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=9) 🆗
### Spin-off from space satellites
MAPPING
OUR GLOBE
FROM
OUTER SPACE
Satellites have brought hitherto
unknown precision to the mapping
and measuring of the earth. By
1967, observations from 41 earth
stations, using the 'Pageos" satellite
in polar orbit at an altitude of 2,600
miles, enabled far distant points on earth
to be located with a margin of error of
30 feet Introduction of navigation satellite
systems for planes and ships may bring
cheaper travel. NASA estimates that a one per
cent saving in fuel and manpower through improved
navigation would save the shipping industry $150
million yearly. Here, Gemini 4 crew, Ed White and James
McDivitt use a celestial navigation aid to study locations of
constellations before their 1965 flight Photo USIS
to provide television, telephone and
data services to remote northern areas
more efficiently than by any other
means.
To obtain the many early and poten¬
tial advantages offered by satellite
communications, the Canadian govern¬
ment decided to create a special cor-
poration which would develop, own
and operate the satellites and the cor¬
responding ground stations. While the
government intends to hold an ade¬
quate degree of management control
in the Corporation, ownership is
encouraged by any private interests
desirous of participating in the new
venture.
But other large countries such as
the U.S., Brazil, India, Indonesia, Aus¬
tralia and Japan are now preparing to
establish their own domestic satellite
communications systems for commer¬
cial and educational purposes, operat¬
ing in conjunction with the INTELSAT
world-wide telecommunications system.
And regional groupings of countries in
Africa and Latin America, where great¬
er economic integration provides one
of the great hopes for more rapid
development, are currently studying
the creation of regional communica¬
tions satellite systems.
With ground stations in each coun¬
try, they will be able to receive and
send programmes over regular world¬
wide radio and TV channels, as well
as have greater and more economical
voice, telegraphic and data transmis¬
sion services with the rest of the
world.
It is now technically feasible to
expand space communications systems
to provide direct television broadcast¬
ing to receivers in homes and public
buildings all over the world. The use
of such satellites as an educational
tool by an appropriate international
organization, could lead to one of the
greatest breakthroughs in mass educa¬
tion in history, bringing vast new know¬
ledge and information to literally thou¬
sands of millions of people at much
reduced cost.
But technology of satellite educa¬
tional systems has far outrun plans
for its use. Educational satellites are
likely to be mostly television satellites,
and the use of television itself as an
effective instrument of education is
still very much in the development
stage.
Despite the fact that TV has become
a household necessity in all advanced
industrial countries during the past
twenty years, it has encountered
serious obstacles as a medium of ins¬
truction. Television education entails
costly installations, implies a great
deal of centralized control over the
educational system, required singu¬
larity of purpose and close co-ordina¬
tion among various branches of
government concerned, and, equally
important, poses serious programming
problems if the real educational needs
of a heterogeneous audience are to be
met. .
Yet, despite these sobering prob¬
lems, more than 50 countries make
some use of television for teaching.
It is widely used as an audio-visual
aid in the U.S., Western Europe and
the Soviet Union and, after their suc¬
cess in Italy with Telescuola, TV edu¬
cational programmes have evidenced
a remarkable development.
Japan is using TV not only in
schools, but also with correspondence
study the Japan Broadcasting Corpor¬
ation's "Citizen's College" to teach
young people who have been unable
to attend secondary school or univer¬
sity.
The Republic of Niger is using it in
the first years of school to make up
for an acute teacher shortage. Col¬
ombia is using it to teach nearly half a
million primary school children, and is
expanding into secondary school.
And in Brazil, where as many as
5 million children cannot find school¬
ing, television education satellite bas-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
9
## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=10) 🆗
### Spin-off from space satellites
SATELLITES (Continued)
Price of a weather station less than $5,000
ed may be the only answer to that
country's gigantic needs for improving
and increasing education facilities at
all levels.
Undaunted by the problems of edu¬
cational telecasts for international
audiences, the Japan Broadcasting
Corporation (NHK) is proceeding with
plans to provide educational program¬
mes for developing countries of South¬
east Asia via satellite. As a member
of the Asian Broadcasting Union, NHK
is presently developing a multi-pur¬
pose, multiple access satellite that can
be utilized by several countries.
Meanwhile, NHK has established a
library of educational films for use by
developing countries of Southeast
Asia. Japanese science programmes
are now edited and processed in the
various languages for shipping as
films or video tapes, but in the future
programmes will be transmitted to
other countries via satellites using
automatic translators or foreign lan¬
guage sound tracks.
I
10
N India, an initial study of
a Unesco expert mission shows that
a satellite system is not only the most
economical means of meeting that
country's tremendous needs for nation¬
wide telecommunications and educa¬
tional facilities; indeed such a satellite
system offers the only way national
goals in in-school and out-of-school
education, food production, community
development, health, and family plan¬
ning can be met within a decade.
Using conventional telecommunica¬
tions systems, All India Radio does not
hope to have more than six main tele¬
vision transmitters and 50 smaller relay
stations operating by 1981. These
would cover not more than 19 per cent
of the area of the country and 25 per
cent of the population.
A satellite system, with total initial
capital costs of no more than $50 mil¬
lion, would provide people all over the
country, including those in the most
remote areas, with immediate access
to television. Not only would this have
an immediate impact on the major agri¬
cultural and social problems of the
country, but it would also pierce the
isolation of individuals and communi¬
ties in rural areas and instil a sense
of participation in a wider national and
global environment.
Equally important, an Indian satel¬
lite-based TV system would stimulate
and expand industrial, technological
and managerial capabilities. Potential
benefits resulting from the electronics
industry needed to produce the broad¬
casting, relay and receiving equipment
would in themselves be significant.
Similar benefits will be forthcoming
for African and Central American
countries after the 1971-72 launching
of the Franco-German "Symphony"
telecommunications satellite. The sat¬
ellite, two flight models of which will
be launched in geostationary orbit at
approximately 15° longitude, will en¬
able the establishment of satellite com¬
munications links between countries
where the smaller ground stations
developed for the project will be locat¬
ed, particularly the Middle East, Africa
and Central America, as well as with
those countries already equipped with
INTELSAT-type stations.
The Symphony satellite programme
is expected eventually to provide a
comprehensive and permanent means
not only of interconnecting the mem¬
bers of Eurovision more economically
than the microwave links used at pre¬
sent, but also of extending it to other
regions. High on the list of priorities
for this system is the development of
regional satellite services, which, co¬
ordinated within a global system, will
include experimental work on the prob¬
lems of educational TV.
Balanced regional telecommunica¬
tions development, including the shar¬
ing of earth stations between countries,
will contribute substantially to the
development of TV distribution and
broadcasting which can become a cri¬
tically important factor in meeting a
wide variety of educational needs in
developed and developing countries
alike.
"Very often, the expenditures born
by the most advanced countries for
space activity are criticized as a luxury,
in the face of the pressing needs of
large sectors of mankind," M. Rodino,
Chairman of Italy's Telespazio, told
the United Nations Conference on the
Exploration and Peaceful Use of Outer
Space in Vienna. "But satellite educa¬
tional transmissions would almost ma¬
gically close a circuit through which
money spent for the most sophisticat¬
ed technology returns manifold bene¬
fits to a large number of less privileg¬
ed peoples. There can be no more
dramatic confirmation of the sometimes
obscured truth that technological pro¬
gress assures the progress of all
humankind."
This is even more dramatically evi¬
dent in the rapid development of
weather satellites. Until recently it
seemed unlikely that meteorologists
would ever have the tools they needed
to make relatively long-range weather
forecasts based on worldwide obser¬
vations. The practical difficulties and
enormous cost of obtaining such
observations which of necessity must
be three-dimensional over the vast
areas of oceans and inaccessible
regions of the globe, seemed insur¬
mountable. With the launching of
Sputnik I meteorologists for the first
time saw some hope of achieving their
long-sought goals.
Satellites are ideally suited to serve
as weather observation platforms.
Situated high above the atmosphere,
with the earth rotating beneath them,
satellites can view every area on the
globe, including those that are inac¬
cessible to man and those where
weather stations cannot be installed
on a practical basis. While surveying
the atmosphere with their own cameras
and sensors, they can collect data by
interrogation of horizontal sounding
balloons, ocean buoys and remote
land-stations, and then communicate
these data to processing centres.
Two operational weather satellite
systems, the Tiros (TOS) system of
the United States and the Meteor sys¬
tem of the U.S.S.R., have been joined
together in a worldwide meteorological
network called "World Weather
Watch" under the auspices of the
World Meteorological Organization
(WMO). Information gathered by met¬
eorological satellites and ground sta¬
tions is transmitted by high speed
facilities to the three World Meteoro¬
logical Centres (Moscow, Melbourne
and Washington), where Command
Data Acquisition Stations process and
analyze the data by computer and dis¬
seminate weather forecasts to regional
meteorological centres.
w
ITH the advent in 1967 of
automatic picture transmission (APT)
from meteorological satellites, coun¬
tries throughout the world obtained
direct access to daily observations
from space. With global coverage
performed twice a day from several
views, the system provides local wea¬
thermen with a continuous flow of
pictures of the earth and its atmo¬
sphere in both the visible and infra¬
red wave lengths (for day and night
coverage) within less than four minutes
after each individual picture has been
taken by the various satellites.
Daily surveillance of ocean areas
permits early detection of developing
storms, typhoons and hurricanes,
determination of their tracks and
estimations of storm development and
intensity. This information is passed
along automatically, on a daily basis,
to all countries likely to be affected by
a particular storm. The likelihood of
a sudden storm hitting an unwarned
and unprepared community is thus
diminishing rapidly and will soon be a
thing of the past.
Of particular import for developing
countries, direct instantaneous parti¬
cipation in meteorological satellite pro¬
grammes is relatively easy and takes
an investment of only $5,000 or so
or even less, if a ground station is
built on a "do-it-yourself" basis. And
the immediate benefits from such
participation are enormous. Advanced
CONTINUED PAGE 12
## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=11) 🆗
### Spin-off from space satellites
SPACEBORNE
SURVEYORS
OF EARTH'S
RESOURCES
Earth orbiting satellites have given man a highly sophisticated tool for the survey and management
of his planetary resources to help solve such major problems as water and food supply, mineral
and fuel resources, water and air pollution. Data gathered by satellites already helps hydrologists
to identify new water supplies, to locate pollution in lakes and rivers, and generally to improve
water management. Infra-red photography (as in photo above of Quinault River flowing into the
Pacific at Taholah, State of Washington) reveals the flow patterns of rivers, estuaries and tidal
regions, of value In study of silting and shoals. For the oceanographer, the location of fish shoals
in the warm waters of the Gulf Stream is simplified by plotting the daily meanderings of this
huge current, which a satellite can do within minutes. Surveys from space are also being used
for a host of other purposes, such as prospecting remote areas on earth potentially rich in
minerals (limestone deposits, photo below).
## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=12) 🆗
### Spin-off from space satellites
r 4 t * r f
12
SATELLITES (Continued)
warnings ot storms and accurate fore¬
casts of the beginning and end of
monsoons can help farmers to deter¬
mine more intelligently the best time
to plant, fertilize, spray and harvest
crops, and when to provide protection
for them. Accurate forecasts can
result in substantial improvements in
water management systems, and allow
transportation to be managed more
safely, more economically and more
efficiently with limited delays and
diversions. They also provide increas¬
ing assurance that fishing fleets will
not be caught off guard at sea by
sudden storms.
What this means in human and eco¬
nomic terms to a country like India
defies calculation by the most advanc¬
ed data processing system. Estimates
of the potential benefits from timely
action based on reliable long-range
weather predictions of two weeks and
a satisfactory briefing of the farmer
through a nation-wide, satellite TV
broadcast system range as high as
$1,600 million annually through preven¬
tion of losses in agricultural production
alone not to mention additional bene¬
fits such as improved flood protection,
forestry control, transportation and
communications.
For India, as for other developing
countries, weather satellites coupled
with satellite telecommunications offer
the prospects within the next decade
of controlling hunger and greatly
improving nutrition through improved
management of farm production and
food distribution.
In addition, space sensoring tech¬
niques and multispectral photography
are expected to radically improve agri¬
cultural efficiency throughout the
world.. NASA's (U.S. National Aero¬
nautics and Space Administration)
Office of Space Science and Applica¬
tions has gone on record urging that
the benefits derived from these deve¬
lopment in the U.S. alone warrant the
creation of a new management agency
with representation from NASA and the
Agricultural and Commerce Depart¬
ments.
In developing countries, the effective
use of new satellite technology to take
regular Inventory of food supplies and
indicate causes of deficiencies or crop
diseases would mean the difference
between subsistence and starvation,
between stable and unstable govern¬
ments.
Satellites can also help increase
food supplies by measuring ice move¬
ments, water temperature, and salinity
in the oceans. Recording the move¬
ment of plankton, which feed the
fishes of the sea, could do a lot for
the fishing industry. For where the
plankton go the fish go.
Estimates of economic benefits
resulting from operational satellite-
surveillance systems to air transport,
shipping and coastal engineering ran¬
ges into hundreds of millions of dol¬
lars annually. By the mid-1970s, the
world's marine and air transport com
panies will be carrying more than three
times the amount of cargo they were
carrying in 1968, and they will be doing
so faster and more efficiently to more
dispersed locations around the globe.
In order to accomplish this feat, it
will be necessary to enlarge and
improve ships, aircraft, and, in parti¬
cular, support services. Among the
required expanded support services,
navigational aids are probably the
most important, and here space will
play an important role.
Satellites will constitute a major
element in a world-wide system mak¬
ing it possible for surface ships and
aircraft to proceed to their destinations
safely and efficiently, in any part of
the world. With only four satellites
in polar orbit at any given time, it is
possible to provide exact automatic
navigational position-fixes whenever
the satellite is interrogated from nearly
any part of the globe or in the air.
Such an exact position determina¬
tion for sea-going vessels especially
when predetermined lanes in congest¬
ed areas are to be used, for transocea¬
nic air traffic where It is heavy and
increasing in density, and later for the
operation of manned spacecraft
represents an important major break¬
through for greater transport safety.
Satellites, with their remote-sensing
equipment, are also capable of making
important contributions to geological
surveying and detection of mineral and
underground water resources. These
techniques, combining aerial photo¬
graphy with electromagnetic, magnetic
and gravity measuring equipment, have
already led to spectacular discoveries
of large nickel deposits in Manitoba
and the base metal find in the Tim-
mins, Ontario, region. The extension
of airborne remote-sensing surveys to
earth-orbital space platforms is a step
currently projected in NASA program¬
mes for an earth-resources satellite.
» 4 1 .
* 4 .
0 / t t f t
**??''>
, t r f t f f
. . . i * t *
t * f
> f f f f f f f
' f / f f f f '
. * t r /
III tffffff
iMffffff f
i t » f ft f f f f
lltftftf f
tttttfff
Ittttttf f
illltttTTf
1111111 tt
« a AAAA^iUt'
I V K kè*<
« 4*<
»ft V * v
"ft * * v * s
>** ft ft » *
****** I
SPUN LIKE CLOTH from metal
thread filaments, this
honeycomb-structured
material has found a wide
range of uses outside the space
field because of its remarkable
insulating and heat-resisting
properties. Originally produced
for the re-entry heat shields
of spacecraft, it withstands
temperatures of 5,000 degrees
centigrade. Treated to seal in
its myriad pockets of air and
cut into slabs it becomes a
strong, lightweight structural
material for all types of
buildings. A perfect Insulator,
it increases efficiency of air
conditioning. Some of its
other uses: refrigerator
Insulating panels, nose cones
for aircraft and protective
screens In factories using high
temperature processes (above).
## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=13) 🆗
### Non-article text
r r r
I
|N addition to the direct
programmatic benefits deriving from
the application of space programmes
to earth needs, there is an almost infi¬
nite variety of second order "spin-off"
returns from man's venture into space.
In a recent appraisal of the impact
of the U.S. and Soviet space program¬
mes, European space companies con¬
cluded that the new technologies deve¬
loped through space exploration have
been of the greatest significance, pro¬
foundly affecting the whole of indus¬
try particularly in new materials,
techniques of metal forming, automa¬
tion and ways of obtaining a new
order of miniaturization and reliability
in complex equipment.
As a result, a noted European finan¬
ce minister has somewhat wistfully
estimated that every dollar the U.S.
has invested in its space programme
in the past ten years is returning four
dollars worth of value today.
If this is true, it is largely because
NASA recognized from the outset that
the maximum transfer of space tech¬
nology to non-space use should
be purposefully and systematically
sought. At least in part with a view
to achieving this goal, NASA sought
with outstanding success a working
partnership between universities, in¬
dustry and government.
A measure of the application of this
policy is the fact that 90 per cent of
every dollar spent by NASA in the
first decade of operations went to uni¬
versities and private industry. At the
peak of the space programme in 1966,

### The New space-age technology
3.
The new
space-age
technology
some 200 universities, 20,000 con¬
tracting firms and laboratories and
420,000 workers were involved in the
programme. (NASA's operations were
manned by approximately 32,000 civil
employees).
Contractors have been not just the
major aerospace companies, but also
electronics firms, auto manufacturers,
rubber companies and, in fact, a
cross-section of modern industry.
While Europe has made a very slow
start in space technology, a large num¬
ber of European firms are either NASA
prime- or subcontractors and others
are producing components of INTEL¬
SAT satellites. Still others are involv¬
ed in ELDO (European Launcher De¬
velopment Organization) and ESRO
(European Space Research Organiza-
13
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=14) 🆗
### The New space-age technology
INTEGRATED CIRCUITRY
AT ONE'S FINGER TIPS
The stringent demands of space technology for ever
smaller yet even more reliable equipment have
sparked some revolutionary developments in the
science of electronics. Strikingly miniaturized
circuits have been created for all kinds of electronic
equipment, to the point where thousands of circuits
can be compressed into a case smaller than a coin.
Right, an "integrated circuit" placed on a finger
tip and magnified several hundred times. In the
newest molecular electronics, circuits are built
up virtually molecule by molecule. Finely focussed
electron beams are used as high precision tools
for fabricating these microscopic circuits. Such
breakthroughs in electronics technology have
spawned a whole generation of new products from
clocks to calculators the size of a cigar box as
well as faster and large-capacity computers to
meet the information and control needs of science,
education, industry, business and government
SPACE-AGE TECHNOLOGY (Continued)
Equipment designed to be
99.999 per cent reliable
14
tion) projects. As a result, new
co-operative relationships have devel¬
oped between engineers and scien¬
tists, between industry and university
or research institutes, and between
industry and government.
In France, since its creation in 1962
to develop space activities, the Cen¬
tre National d'Etudes Spatiales
(CNES) has relied almost entirely on
the symbiosis between the Centre
National de la Recherche Scien¬
tifique, university laboratories and
private industry. Similar patterns have
emerged in the United Kingdom, Fed.
Rep. of Germany and Italy.
But experience has shown that even
such a working partnership between
government, universities and industry
does not automatically produce "spin¬
offs" of new technology into the
mainstream of society. While to some
extent this process is inevitable, its
workings are slow and uncertain.
Minimum lead time for the transfer of
new knowledge to new applied tech¬
nology is usually 10-16 years. But in
some cases the conversion is likely to
take 30 to 40 years. In addition, the
time it takes to develop new techno¬
logy into marketable products and
processes seems to have lengthened,
too, when things are left to their natu
ral course. So much of new techno¬
logy depends on perception and
entrepreneurship. It is putting things
together that no one had thought of
putting together before, things that,
left alone, may lie around a long time.
In his latest book, "The Age of Dis¬
continuity", Peter Drucker has summed
it up this way. "Perceptions have
greater impact, as a rule, economically,
socially and culturally, than have many
"new" things or even "new" ideas. . .
In an age of rapid change, a techno¬
logical strategy is essential for the
success and indeed for the survival of
a business and perhaps even an indus¬
trial nation. It is necessary to have
thought through in advance where to
put one's own technological effort."
He goes on to point out that Henry
Ford never really invented anything.
Everything he used was known. Even
the automobile was not new; there
were many on the market before he
brought out his famous Model T. And
yet Henry Ford was a true innovator.
What he contributed were mass pro¬
duction, the mass market, and the pro¬
fitability of the very cheap.
But the very fact that hardly more
than a decade after the beginning of
space exploration NASA has cata¬
logued more than 2,500 technological
innovations directly attributable to its
programmes and that there have been
innumerable instances of significant
transfers of new technology to the
economy is testimony to both the vast-
ness of new knowledge gathered by
space programmes and the effective¬
ness of new techniques to hasten the
transfer process.
In the early 1960s, the beginning of
the "knowledge explosion era", it
was apparent that the research and
development effort of the space pro¬
gramme had the potential to contri¬
bute more than any other single fac¬
tor to economic growth during the
coming decades. But it was also
apparent that traditional mechanisms
were no longer adequate to do this
with sufficient dispatch.
James E. Webb, then the Adminis¬
trator of NASA, conceived of a Tech¬
nological Utilization Programme as an
experimental effort designed to achie¬
ve the widest possible use of the tech¬
nology and knowledge arising out of
the NASA programmes.
To provide industry and universities
with a one-stop source of scientific
and technical data, the findings of
research and development work spon¬
sored or undertaken by the U.S.
Department of Defense and the Ato-
## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=15) 🆗
### The New space-age technology
i
mic Energy Commission, as well as
data compiled by the Chemical
Abstracts Service, were added to the
NASA Scientific and Technical Infor¬
mation Data Collection.
This Data Collection, in addition to
research and development of NASA's
own installations, includes all inven¬
tions, discoveries, innovations and im¬
proved techniques developed by pri¬
vate or public contractors in their
work for NASA.
Some $5 million a year is now being
spent solely for the identification, eva¬
luation, classification, storage and dis¬
semination of this information to indus¬
try. But the value of this program¬
me is not confined to the accomplish¬
ment of this task alone. In addition
to channeling a volume of highly
advanced technology into the main¬
stream of the economy, NASA has
provided valuable new knowledge
concerning the involved and difficult
process of technology transfer itself.
Regional Dissemination Centres
(RDCs), operated by six universities
strategically located across the United
States, now provide industry with a
computerized knowledge bank contain¬
ing about 700,000 reports and which
continue to grow at the rate of great¬
er than 6,000 per month. Each cen
tre develops and operates a variety
of information and other technical ser¬
vices available to firms in the private
sector which pay fees to partially sup¬
port the centre's operation.
The centres, operating within the
university institutional framework, are
encouraged to contribute toward
teaching, research, and service goals
of the university as well as to de¬
velop industry relationships. Intensive
efforts are made to identify new pro¬
ducts, new processes, new scientific
and technological knowledge, and all
useful Innovations in materials,
processes, manufacturing techniques,
operating procedures, and new stan¬
dards born of space requirements.
As a result, industry has come to
understand much better the dynamics
of technology and to appreciate the im¬
portance of anticipating the direction
and speed of technological change.
Large, medium, and small-sized firms
have begun to adapt their organization
structure to perform the innovative,
entrepreneurial function of developing
and harnessing knowledge "energy"
to assure technological advance in
their field.
V
ERY little advanced re¬
search in aerospace is directly appli¬
cable in the market place. Products
and processes conceived for extremes
in temperatures, pressures and stress,
or exceptional qualities in weight, mi¬
crominiaturization, reliability and per¬
formance frequently are available only
at a cost prohibitive to the normal
commercial or industrial use. Once a
market is found for a product or pro¬
cess, adjustments are necessary to
bridge the gap between the needs of
the market, the state of the art, and the
elements of cost.
Clearly, while the Apollo and other
space programmes have succeeded
in forcing "invention by the clock",
the full impact of these programmed
innovations will not be felt on industry
until the mid-1970s and even the
1980s.
It still takes time and money for
large aerospace' companies to find
new applications even for in-house
technologies. And then thousands of
companies must ask the computers
which store the vast reservoir of
NASA and other data the right
questions.
Still, if the individual technology
transfers which have bridged the gap
between space programmes and earth-
bound applications are not enough to
bring a man out of his chair, col¬
lectively they become monumental.
Least apparent, but considered most
important by industrial engineers, is
the impetus space programmes have
given to the technology of perfection.
Manrating of thousands of systems
and millions of parts has forced new
standards of excellence into the in
dustrial system. Modern industry had
already achieved a high order ef¬
ficiency, cost consciousness and high
sensitivity to the needs of the market.
Now it has developed a capability for
precision and flawlessness.
The Apollo Saturn space vehicle,
with more than 5.6 million parts, push¬
ed the necessity for reliability far
beyond anything previously achieved
even with the high standards of qua¬
lity imposed by jet-age commercial
aviation.
If a level of 99.9 per cent perfection
were assured, it would mean that one
part in a thousand might fail. This
would mean that on each flight some¬
thing like 5,600 parts would be defec¬
tive resulting in almost certain catas¬
trophe.
To assure accident-free manned
space flight, manufacturers were
required to design equipment to be
99.999 per cent reliable or just as
close to zero-defects as is humanly
possible.
It was this kind of perfection that
prompted Astronaut John Glenn to
quip, when asked how he felt before
his first flight: "How would you feel if
you were strapped in a machine which
has thousands of components and each
one was built by the lowest bidder?"
While cost considerations prevent
many techniques used to obtain the
perfection John Glenn knew had been
achieved in his spacecraft from being
directly applied to the manufacture of
consumer products, they do have wide
and immediate applications in medi¬
cine, precision instruments and other
laboratory and industrial equipment
which in turn improve prevention and
care of disease and improvements In
production.
Almost without exception, every
industryin the U.S., the U.S.S.R.,
Europe and Japan that has been
exposed to the almost maddening
demands for the light weight, micro¬
miniaturization, and the unrelenting
reliability of the space programme has
profited from the sweat that was
involved.
As one top American engineering
official recently put it: "Every partici¬
pating company in the space effort has
been forced through a new and very
fine sieve of quality control and relia¬
bility. It is inevitable that product bet¬
terment would be the result . . . Maybe
a new material, some new trick in
fabrication. Maybe some new ap¬
proach in production that consciously
or unconsciously the company applies
to other products."
Space contractors have developed
many entirely new products and man¬
agement techniques that have crept
over from the space side of their
operations to the commercial side.
Spin-offs In biomedicine, new mater- ^ »-
ials, power generation and computer 1 ¿J
technology, have brought major chan-
ges to industry, commerce and most
important to the quality of human life.
## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=16) 🆗
### Benefits to medicine
4.
Benefits
to
medicine
IB
I
N 1959 a new term, "bio-
astronautics," came into popular usage
to describe all studies related to living
organisms in space. It has to encom¬
pass every discipline and technology
that contributes to the study of living
phenomena.
To sustain a man in space, a small
artificial world had to be created an
environment containing at least a mini¬
mum supply of everything required to
maintain health, mental alertness, and
physical fitnessincluding breathable
atmosphere, a near optimum diet, exer¬
cise in an extremely restricted environ¬
ment, and a synergistic programme of
activities that will also allow a sleep
cycle permitting alertness and health
to be maintained.
This opened an entire virtually unex¬
plored field of medicine. Everything
that influences the adult had to be
studied from both the traditional
aspects and the new view of operating
in space with weightlessness as the
principal unknown.
The focus of bioastronautics on the
healthy adult initially, test pilots who
are assumed to be among the finest
physical specimens to be found in a
large population was a historic depar¬
ture from the past studies of medicine
that have concentrated on pathological
processes found in adults who were
either ill or showing early signs of
illness.
Bioastronautics has also been con¬
cerned primarily with relatively young
men as opposed to medical studies in
the past which tended to concentrate
on older people.
At the outset of the space pro¬
gramme it was found that little was
known about the physical parameters
of the normal healthy adult. During
the past ten years, a vast amount of
data has been obtained, enabling us
to know what the mental and physical
performance of a healthy human should
be under a given set of circumstances
in any one of several different envi¬
ronments.
These base-line data are already
having, and will continue to have, a
great impact on the emerging field of
preventive or predictive medicine.
To determine the physical parame¬
ters of astronauts or cosmonauts, and
to monitor these parameters during
space flights, a variety of physiological
instrumentation has been developed
that has great potential in clinical medi¬
cine, both for the individual physician
and throughout the complex of clinics
and hospitals.
Many of these devices have gone
through clinical trials and are begin¬
ning to find their way into general
medical practice, providing the most
dramatic benefits of space life scien¬
ces for humans in their mundane
struggle for existence and also for
development.
Many biomedical innovations that
are now finding clinical applications
have been serendipitous, and in some
instances developed from space needs
outside the broad area of bioastronau¬
tics. Serendipity items range from
tiny motors now being used in kidney
dialysis machines and heart pumps to
prosthetic organ implants that promise
to outlive the patients receiving their
life-extending surgery.
Perhaps the most significant of these
serendipitous life-science contributions
to clinical medicine is in the difficult-
to-define area of advanced computer
development and related programming
techniques, especially mathematical
models to simulate the life processes.
Biologists and medical scientists can
now handle a vast amount of physiolo-
CONTINUED PAGE 18
The handicapped man, above,
is dialing a phone number,
but he is doing so in an
extraordinary way by the
voluntary movements of his eyes!
Like the woman below, he is
wearing a pair of special
"glasses" which are in effect
an infra-red switch that enables
a person who cannot use
his hands or feet to use his
eyes to switch and control a
variety of functions. The device
can operate and steer a motorized
wheel chair, turn the pages
of a book, switch stations on
a TV or radio set, alter a
thermostat setting, or turn a
lamp on or off. The eye switch
was developed in the U.S.
as an aid to astronauts when
high acceleration forces prevent
them from using their
arms or legs.
## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=17) 🆗
### Benefits to medicine
J2§
U .. >£ / U
5^1
R. *J- I r Î ^J
Ban & '^t
There is already a long list of practical
benefits to medicine from space research
and particularly the new field of
bioastronautics. Many hospitals are
new using automated systems first used
for astronauts in flight to monitor heart
beats, blood pressure and other body
functions. Many devices have been
adapted as aids for handicapped persons
(some are shown on these pages).
A NASA device has been designed to
familiarize astronauts with the problems
of walking on the moon where weight
is only one-sixth of that on earth A
system of slings enables a man to
waik, run or jump under conditions
simulating gravity on the lunar surface.
Left, the same device is now in use
in the rehabilitation of persons who have
difficulty in learning to walk with
crutches or even to sit up in a wheel
chair. It also aids those learning to
walk with artificial legs. The slings
rori.jro the ^hyf=ical work Inad on a
patient during rehabiliation and can
oe adjusted for any degree of
support required.
Astronautics helps the handicapped
"Laser cane" (right) emits light beams to detect
obstacles, allowing blind user to scan the area
ahead of him. It is one of several such devices
produced by bionics", a new science combining
biology and electronics to develop apparatuses that
can supplement the functions of the human organism.
This eight-legged "walking chair", or "moon walker" (below), gives
new freedom of movement to disabled children, including those
who have lost a leg or are paraplegic. It can easily traverse
a field or sandy beach, step over obstacles and onto a curb. It is
controlled by a lever which can be adjusted for operation by hand,
Hot. or even by the chin. The idea came from the design of the
Lunar Tic", an unmanned, radio-directed instrument carrier for
exploring the moon's surface. Here, a handicapped boy confidently
crosses the road in his walking chair.
' ** I
* si
! I
Photo Aerojet Space Corporation
17
## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=18) 🆗
### Benefits to medicine
BENEFITS TO MEDICINE (Continued)
Dialing a phone number with the eyes
18
gical data from experiments and have
some understanding of how they inter¬
relate in living systems. Bioastronau¬
tics programming techniques will even¬
tually allow biomedical research to
become far more of an exact science
than it has been in the past.
But much of the transfer of medical
technology from the space programme
has been spinned by the new approach
to systematic technology applications
to non-space uses. An outstanding
example of this process involves the
adaptation of design principles in the
space helmet worn by the Gemini
astronauts.
The University of Wisconsin Medical
Center is in the final stages of adapt¬
ing the helmet to use in delivering
breathable medication for child care.
Current practice is to place the child
with a respiratory ailment in a hospital
tent and fill the tent with medicated
vapours. Use of the helmet respiro-
meter in place of the tent enables the
ailing child to have considerable mobi¬
lity and yet breathe the healing
vapours without exposing his whole
body to them.
Similarly, a switch actuated only by
voluntary movement of the eyes has
found immediate applications for use
by the handicapped. Developed for
NASA by an Alabama company as a
potential aid to astronauts in situa¬
tions where high G-forces might make
them unable to move their arms or
legs, by mounting light sources at each
side of a pair of eye-glasses, this most
ingenious device bounces a light into
the wearer's eyes detecting the differ¬
ence between the reflection from the
whites and from the darker pupils.
When the pupil of an eye moves
across the path of the light beam, the
reduced reflection activates an electric
switch. Properly relayed, the "sight
switch" can be put to a variety of uses
to assist a patient who cannot move
his hands or legs.
Among these uses: remote opera¬
tion of a machine to turn the pages of
a book; to switch on or off a hospital
call board, room lights, a thermostat,
a television set, a radio, etc. The sight
switch has already been experimen¬
tally adapted to a motorized wheel¬
chair enabling a paraplegic to control
it with only his eyes.
Space programmes have been par¬
ticularly prolific producers of new auto¬
mated patient monitoring systems.
One NASA contractor produced for
biomedical experiments at the Ames
Research Center a telemetry unit
designed to monitor the electrocardio¬
grams of astronauts while they per¬
formed various duties.
The unit consisted of a small, bat¬
tery-operated transmitter with electro¬
des to be pasted to the chest and a
portable FM receiver. Heart signals
transmitted to the receiver were ampli
fied to be read visually on a polygraph
or oscilloscope.
Now a slightly modified wireless
telemetering system is being used in
a New York hospital in the intensive-
care cardiac monitoring unit. The sys¬
tem is excellent for monitoring a heart
patient, and permits the patient to
move freely within 100 feet of the
receiver while his EKG is being con¬
stantly read.
ONITORING of the effects
of weightlessness and other unique
environmental aspects of manned
space flights has caused substantial
improvements to be made in electrodes
used to measure heart and brain func¬
tion. Almost every one of these elec¬
trode advances has been swiftly trans¬
ferred to general clinical practice.
Spray-on electrodes using electri¬
cally conducive cement developed
through the co-operative efforts of
NASA and Spacelabs, Inc., in Van
Nuys, California, for applying electro¬
cardiogram electrodes quickly to pilots
just before their training flights can
be sprayed on the skin by a spray gun
or aerosol process in less than half
a minute.
In turn, the NASA Biomedical Appli¬
cations Team at the Midwest Research
Institute in Kansas City has transferred
the technique at the University of
Kansas Medical Center, where spray-
on electrodes have been tested for a
wide variety of applications. The suc¬
cess of this transfer can be credited
largely to the amount of attention that
NASA has given to this innovation.
But, most important, innovations of
this kind have become an international
process, as was demonstrated recently
by the work of Dr. W. Ross Adey,
Director of the Space Biology Labor¬
atory at the Brain Research Institute
of the University of California, in the
refinement of a novel electroencepha¬
logram (EEC) system.
Soviet scientists originally conceived
the idea of placing sponge-type EEC
electrodes in the cosmonauts' helmets
so that the electrode contact could be
made simply by putting the helmet on
without any special scalp attachment
or removal of any hair.
Dr. Aday was aware of the Soviet
concept and developed a similar spon¬
ge-type electrode system mounted in
a covering similar to a bathing cap or
light helmet that requires only the
removal of oil from the skin and hair
surface. Transfer of his sponge elec¬
trode cap, or helmet, was made directly
by Dr. Adey himself at the University
of California Brain Research Institute,
where the system has been used with
schizophrenic children and in obtaining
new data on the state of the brain
during sleepwalking.
The sponge EEG helmet system, is
doubly unique, involving an indirect
technology transfer benefit from the
Soviet space programme and the direct
transfer of the system to non-space
use by the scientist who developed it
in the first place.
Electrodes are relatively inexpensive
and are in a different category from
CONTINUED PAGE 23
COLOUR PAGES	
OPPOSITE: . The moon is potentially a
great laboratory for a host of experiments
and observations essentially impossible
to perform on earth. To realize this
potential it has been proposed that an
international laboratory be established on
its surface, where scientists from
different countries would work together.
These photos show two phases of an
"earthrise" viewed across the lunar
horizon. On left, the glowing half orb
of earth photographed on May 22,
1969 by U.S. astronauts Thomas P.
Stafford, John W. Young and Eugene A.
Cernan, as they orbited the moon in Apollo 10. Right, photo taken by Soviet spacecraft
Zond 7, orbiting the moon at an altitude of 2,000 kms., on August 11, 1969.
Photos NASA-Hasselblad and APN
CENTRE PAGES: On this map, a panoramic presentation of the conquest of space,
vehicles and trajectories of the principal space missions accomplished since 1957
intermingle around the earth. They range from Sputnik 1, the first space satellite
launched on October 4, 1957, to Apollo 11 which returned to earth on July 24, 1969,
after landing the first men on the moon. Trajectories are identified as follows:
Manned spacecraft: U.S., orange, U.S.S.R. green; Unmanned satellites and probes:
U.S., yellow, U.S.S.R., blue; Unmanned satellites and probes launched by U.K.,
Canada, France and Italy, red. The original map, prepared and published by
Editions Hallwag, Berne (Switzerland), measures 112 by 84 cms. It presents overleaf
details of over 200 space missions and numerous explanatory drawings and photos
of space vehicles. It can be ordered through booksellers (Price Sw. Fr. 6.80).
Photo © Hallwag, Berne
## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=19) 🆗
### Benefits to medicine
* <- "V
## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=20) 🆗
### Benefits to medicine
.Asa's
wn
ft*j^£ /.
## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=21) 🆗
### Benefits to medicine
N
tx /î
&£-
fë
t ^y^ Surveyor * ^k^'
Y yh
i
0 ^%c^_ Mars "
s ^ asçygj
/ -- \
N
^ -4 ... ,**
ocot F
1
y
^^^ Mondbahn
^^^ Mo'.n Ofbil
mm~
## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=22) 🆗
### Benefits to medicine
## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=23) 🆗
### Benefits to medicine
BENEFITS TO MEDICINE (Continued from page 18)
COLOUR PHOTOS
OPPOSITE
Here we see a few of the vast
possibilities of observation from
space for surveying and managing
our earth's resources. Pictures were
taken by spacecraft (including
Gemini and Apollo missions) and
NASA aeronautical survey missions,
for the NASA Earth Resources Survey
Programme. The flights tested the
potentialities of spaceborne cameras
and remote-sensing devices for
global studies of earth's resources.
NASA hopes to launch a special
earth resources technology
satellite by the end of 1971. It
could survey crops and water
resources, track icebergs and watch
for forest fires.
TOP LEFT: Infra-red photo of citrus
orchard in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley, Texas, shows insect
damaged trees as dark colour and
healthy trees bright red. Damaged
forest trees in Oregon appear blue-
coloured in photo BOTTOM LEFT,
healthy ones as red or pink. Infra¬
red photography picks out dead and
diseased trees more clearly than
standard colour shots. Such
detection permits prompt use of
spraying and measures to limit spread
of infestation. From space photos
it is possible to identify crops and
estimate their state of maturity. An
eventual operational survey satellite
system could report regularly on
crop growth and at harvest time
predict the yields in various parts of
the world, thus simplifying
management of global food supplies.
TOP RIGHT: Like a blot of India ink
on a blue and white mosaic is
how this large lake and valley
appear in a satellite photo taken
125 miles above the earth. Pattern
of red dots, bottom end of lake,
marks field and orchard vegetation.
Specialists see the key to more
efficient exploitation of resources in
small-scale photo image mapping of
earth's features from space. By
conventional aerial means this would
require more than a million photos
just for the U.S.A. By satellite, only
400 pictures would do the job better.
BOTTOM RIGHT: From space, cameras
see more than man can on the
ground and sensors can detect more
facts. Earth objects reveal to
sensitive instruments spectral
"signatures" as distinctive as
fingerprints. Different colours in
this infra-red shot of a glacier area
indicate geological, hydrological and
glaciological patterns. Geological maps
are already being corrected and
made more useful both scientifically
and commercially from colour photos
of the earth taken from spacecraft.
Photos NASA
a system that might cost hundreds of
thousands of dollars. Overall budget
tradeoff considerations are not entailed
in their purchase, as they are with
systems such as, for example, the
automated blood pressure cuff.
Developed by the Air Research
Manufacturing Company to measure
the blood pressure of the astronauts
during all phases of the Mercury and
Gemini orbital missions, the automated
cuff can be said to have passed its
initial clinical tests in 1961. But it
was first installed in an intensive care
centre in Bethesda at the National
Institutes of Health only in 1968.
The reasons for this seven year
delay in an improved process that
would have been a contributing factor
in saving many lives are typical of the
pattern that has prevailed in trans¬
ferring relatively expensive bioastro¬
nautics systems tö the needs of clinical
medicine.
Even hospitals and clinics have their
priorities, and have to put their scarce
resources into systems with the
greatest lifesaving value instead of
those that would simply refine a
measurement that could be obtained
manually. And, if the medical pro¬
fession manifested no great rush to
try the new technique, the research
company was so busy in other life
science activities that there was no
internal need to find new markets
quickly for this system.
In other cases, however, systems
rejected by the space programme after
the Research and Development stage,
have found immediate terrestrial appli¬
cations. Such was the fate of a
walking machine developed by the
Space General Division of Aerojet
General to serve as an unmanned,
radio-directed instrument carrier for
exploring the Moon's surface.
When the decision to go ahead with
the manned Apollo mission was made
the prototype of this machine, called
the Lunar-Tic, was relegated to limbo
until Dr. Richard Brennaman, a NASA
technology utilization officer, was
informed of its existence.
With a grant from the Department of
Health, Education and Welfare, the
University of California contracted with
Space General to build an eight-legged
version of their Lunar-Tic to be used
by crippled children. The new system
performed according to expectation,
was able to navigate terrain that would
stop an ordinary wheelchair, and could
even climb a flight of stairs. A
crippled child can control it by
manipulating an upright stick that can
be modified with a chin cup to serve
quadriplegic children who cannot
move either their arms or legs.
Among the numerous other bio¬
medical developments by the aero¬
space industry as a result of research
and development for the Apollo
programme, here are some of the most
significant:
A "Telamedic" device which
relays electrocardiogram data by
telephone, and designed for immediate
electrocardiogram checks on post-
coronary patients in the home, nursing
home, hospital or physician's office,
has been developed by United Aircraft
Corporation's Hamilton Standard Divi¬
sion. The battery-powered system
includes a transmitter and receiver,
each about the size of a bedside alarm
clock. No special equipment , Is
needed for the telephone.
Using technology developed in
research on small radioisotopic systems
to convert nuclear energy to electric
power, Aerojet is making a conceptual
design study of a system to power
artificial heart devices of the future.
The Aerojet system would be of a size
that would permit implanting in the
abdominal cavity and, connected to the
heart, would supply power without
interruption over years of operation.
Laser technology developed ori¬
ginally for space use is being adapted
for delicate and precise use In medi¬
cine. Martin Marietta Corp. has been
working since 1962 with medical
research teams throughout the U.S. to
find new ways to use lasers in "knife-
less surgery" and as diagnostic tools.
Lasers are already being used in
several countries with outstanding suc¬
cess in eye surgery, and are being
evaluated in dermatology, organ repair,
amputation, and microbiological stud¬
ies. Laser surgery has two great
advantages which argue for its imme¬
diate use: it is painless, and in many
cases it is practically bloodless.
A cross-spectral analysis compu¬
ter programme created by Rocketdyne,
a division of North American Rockwell
Corp., for use in solving a variety of
rocket engine vibration, ignition and
combustion problems has been found
applicable to medical research and
brain studies. In-depth studies of the
heart are presently being performed in
Australia using this cross-spectral ana¬
lysis concept. The technique may also
be used by medical science in the
diagnosis of a wide variety of human
abnormalities and diseases.
A space industry spin-off with
obvious potential is the automated
patient monitor developed by the
Boeing Company. The device is about
the size of a package of cigarettes and
can be strapped to the patient's arm
or leg. It will report on six physiolo¬
gical conditions three for the heart,
two for temperature and one for blood
pressure. The battery-powered moni¬
tor is divided into two subsystems, one
for the patient and one for a central
control station. Radio links the two.
Tiny wires extend to skin-surface sen¬
sors. No needles or implanted probes
are used.
Upon command from the central
control station information on the
patient is printed out on the same strip-
charts that physicians use, or dis¬
played on an oscilloscope. The control
station operator will have selection
switches one for each patient, enabl¬
ing her to dial specific patients on the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
23
## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=24) 2
### Benefits to medicine
### The New space-age materials
BENEFITS TO MEDICINE (Continued)
circuit. Key to development of the
system has been the advancement in
micro-circuitry and data transmission
and handling techniques needed for
the Apollo/Saturn V programme.
At the peak of the Saturn V pro¬
gramme the Boeing Company hired a
blind computer programmer. While he
could generate his own programmes,
there was no way he could monitor
and evaluate the data produced by
them. Braille printers were not avail¬
able on the commercial market.
Boeing realized it had to develop a
technique that would convert the
COBOL computer language characters
into Braille on a computer.
The firm's engineers came up with
a system that converts print image
tapefiles, consisting of 120 characters
a second, into six-dot Braille cells that
can easily be read by the blind pro¬
grammer. The technique was turned
over to the Baylor School of Medicine
for further exploitation.
24
Through these and many other trans¬
fers the public is already benefiting
from a myriad of clinical uses of space
medicine, among which are major
breakthroughs in the alleviation of
human suffering and the extension of
human life. Bioastronautic and other
space innovations offer important solu¬
tions to the mounting clinical problems
of crowded hospitals and other places
where people seek needed and pre¬
ventive medical treatment.
But the great potential of bioastro¬
nautics technology transfer lies in the
years ahead. A dynamic space pro¬
gramme during the 1970s and 1980s
combined with a well funded tech¬
nology transfer programme can be
expected to provide transfer options
of benefit to almost every branch of
medicine and biological research. But
Imagination and understanding combin¬
ed with good planning are likely to be
equally as important as the level of
technology transfer funding.
Photo usis
Techniques developed for building biologically sterile spacecraft
to explore the planets are being applied in the design of hospital
operating and recovery rooms. In industry, too, men and women
who build components for communications systems (photo above)
now work under conditions that often rival hospital operating rooms
in cleanliness. A single speck of dust, visible only through a microscope,
could affect the operation of many of the delicate instruments of modem
electronics technology. A constant war is therefore waged on dust,
and technicians work in sealed-off work areas and wear special
lint-free clothing, thus helping to increase the reliability and life
of sensitive equipment. An air curtain recently developed to keep
spacecraft free from dust during assembly in the factory is now
being used in testing antibiotics. The air curtain insulates the
test bench and substantially reduces the number of test failures
that can be attributed to dust-borne organisms.
^
5. The
I
F the immediate spin-offs
from bio-astronautics have been more
numerous and more dramatic than
others, the development of new ma¬
terials for space promises to have the
most far-reaching economic conse¬
quences for the future. One leading
space scientist has called the new
space materials "the greatest single
advance that has been made in the last
three thousand years" and, judging
from the facts already In, his enthu¬
siasm seems only slightly exaggerated.
A new "composite material" made
from tiny boron crystal fibres imbed¬
ded in a plastic resin is twice as strong
and two and a half times as stiff as
aluminum, yet weighs 25 per cent less
and should eventually be considerably
less expensive.
Transparent materials, strong as
steel, now provide an entirely new
concept of their use as a structural
part of buildings or vehicles, replac¬
ing normal glass insertions into the
building or product. Alternatively,
transparent materials flexible enough
to be folded, yet strong enough to
withstand the rigours of prolonged
space expedition housing, made of a
composite of silicone, ethylene-propy¬
lene, polyisoprene and polyurethane,
can be adapted wherever necessary
to maintain a difference in pressure
between the interior and exterior of
structures.
## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=25) 🆗
### Non-article text
One highly versatile by-product
of space technology is a new
material known as reinforced plastic
mortar, discovered and developed
in the U.S.A. during glass fibre
rocket case research and
production. It is now widely used
to make pipes for water, sewer,
irrigation and drainage systems.
It is light (left, pipe being
transported by helicopter), highly
resistant, non-corrosive, virtually
unbreakable, and is suitable for
making thin-walled pipes which
thus have a maximum flow capacity.
With its simple, low-cost
manufacturing process and the
universal availability of its basic
raw materials, it can be produced
almost anywhere in the world.
Its light weight and high strength
permit its use in servicing remote
areas where delivery was hitherto
impossible, and it will thus be of
great use to developing countries.

### The New space-age materials
new space-age
materials
In Switzerland, the Société Con-
traves has adapted a technique
developed for space application to
produce a new sandwich-material
made of aluminium and plastic foam
now being used in Europe to manufac¬
ture walls for pre-fabricated houses
as well as extremely resistant and
extra light skis.
But, more important than any one
material or the whole galaxy of new
materials spawned by the rigorous
requirements of space, is the new
materials concept itself. The design
engineer is now free to concern him¬
self primarily with the function or
shape of his product or structure
simply assuming that the manufacturer
can provide the right materials with
the correct properties.
Composite materials can be design¬
ed starting not from a particular
substance but from a specific micro-
structure of atoms and molecules to
produce an entirely new material with
specific and totally new properties.
Others such as fibre-reinforced ma¬
terials, alloys and laminates are being
produced from new combinations of
substances.
This shift of concern from materials
ready-made by nature to man-made
materials designed for specific pur¬
poses and with specific qualities has
been accompanied by a more imagin¬
ative use of the wide spectrum of
elements found in nature. Of the 90
elements known to man, until recently
all except about 20 were chemical
curiosities, and only a very few were
considered to be metals.
All basic materials in use in the first
half of our century steel, nonferrous
metals, glass, concrete, timber, cera¬
mics had existed for four or five
thousand years. Only rubber and alu¬
minium could be claimed as innovations
of the industrial revolution, before the
advent of plastics, one of the first
"spin-offs" from the discovery of radia¬
tion. Now almost all elements, except
gaseous ones, are being used in some
form for their metallic qualities.
Titanium is an outstanding example
of the development through the impe¬
tus of aerospace programmes of ma¬
terials already existing in nature for
applications at higher temperatures,
under higher stress and under expos¬
ure of radiation. The creation of a
whole titanium technology, including
sheet rollings, forging and joining, res¬
ponded to the urgent need for a light,
strong, stiff, high temperature struc¬
tural material for air and spacecraft.
Similarly, germanium and silicium
have become main constituents of
space electronic componentry; and
zirconium is important for construction
of the nuclear rocket engines that
will power manned flights to Mars and
other planets. All four are now increas¬
ingly used in consumer and industrial
applications in the civilian sector.
Aerospace Industries have also
spurred the development of a multi¬
tude of highly sensitive, ultra-thin
metal alloys such as new magnetic
steels and the titanium foils 60-mil-
lionths of an inch thick for particle
detection in satellites.
Demands for new materials have
impelled the development of new tech¬
nologies for materials-working, with
the same zero-defects standards appli¬
ed to producing the faultless materials
needed for space applications.
Since precision machine shops were
not equipped to handle this work, a
whole new industry had to be develop¬
ed. It was the watch industry which
came closest to having the right tech¬
nology and seized the opportunity that
emerged with the advent of new
materials and the requirements for
them in space.
The Precision Metals Division of
Hamilton Watch Co., with its fully
integrated thin metals production, was
the logical place for the development
of photochemical processing on a mass
production scale. In a $500,000 dust-
free, vapour-and humidity-controlled
plant, Hamilton processes more than
60 pure metals and alloys, including
its own proprietary alloys.
This new facility, expected to be a
prototype of others to follow, is attract¬
ing the attention of everyone from
computer manufacturers to auto¬
makers.
Similar breakthroughs have resulted
from space research and development,
in processing techniques such as elec-
troforming for the production of stress-
free parts, the improvement of electro¬
des for nickel-cadmium batteries, tools
and dies, and artificial limbs.
B
UT space exploration also
required bigness, especially in rocket
construction. "Build us a new kind of
rocket motor case. Make it big. Make
it strong. Make it light." That's the
kind of counterpoint NASA gives to its
requirements for the smallest, thinnest
precision componentry. Using a uni¬
que, computer-controlled filament-wind¬
ing machine and 34 million miles of
fibreglass filaments, B.F. Goodrich,
whose name was once a synonym for
rubber tyres, produced a 50-foot
assembly as strong as a steel case of
comparable size, but 30-50% lighter.
With the shift from concern with
substance to concern with structure,
woven fabrics developed for space
usage are being applied in a wide
variety of products and structures.
Heat-shedding fabric-based buildings
provide new comfort in torrid, tropical
heat. Defying the Arctic cold, woven
fabric buildings hug the Alaskan land¬
scape. Outside, it is a bitter 65 de¬
grees below zero; inside, it is a balmy,
constant 72 degrees above. Ijr
The fabric is just one of many new 2.0
products of the three-dimensional (3-D)
weaving business that has been devel¬
oped using new yarns, looms and
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=26) 🆗
### The New space-age materials
26
Mountaineer's
dream blanket
Mountaineer (above) is snug and warm
inside his full sized blanket made of
aluminized plastic so compact it can be
held in the hand (right) or slipped into
the pocket. Initially produced in the
U.S. for superinsulation in space, the
plastic material is now being sold
commercially. It has unique heat
reflecting properties and is flexible,
waterproof and windproof. Though only
1 /2000th of an inch thick it is
surprisingly strong, and blankets made
of it are now used for emergency rescue
or similar purposes since they are robust
enough even to serve as stretchers,
windbreaks or water containers.
SPACE-AGE MATERIALS (Continued)
weaving techniques to produce honey-
combed-structured re-entry heat
shields for Apollo spacecraft and
radome housings for space-age radar
tracking stations.
A full range of strong, lightweight,
Insulating structural fabrics is now in
the process of being developed for
use in refrigerated boxcars, air-cargo
containers, buildings, boat decks,
sports cars, and greaseless bearings.
Made of graphite- or carbon-yarn-
reinforced artificial resins, these new
composite materials offer higher stiff¬
ness-to-density ratios than those rein¬
forced by boron fibres, and hold out
to users the lure of significantly lower
costs. Special epoxy resins, develop¬
ed by Switzerland's CIBA for the U.S.
space programme, are used as adhes-
ives and fillers in conjunction with
honeycombs and tapes in building
construction, refrigeration, ships and
automobiles. Non-inflammable solid
epoxy structural or decorative elements
are increasingly used where fireproof
materials are required.
Nothing demonstrates more drama¬
tically the international dimensions of
space age Innovation than these new
materials. Swiss epoxy resins rein¬
forced by carbon filaments developed
by British industry for aerospace appli¬
cations (particularly as metal-based
composites used in Rolls-Royce jet
engines) were combined to produce the
critical Apollo heat shields. Now, as
a result of space applications, these
materials are replacing metal and con¬
crete in a wide range of construction
applications and manufactured pro¬
ducts that will soon be commonplace
throughout the world.
Meanwhile, a Westinghouse Electric
Corp. research programme on high-
temperature plastics has produced a
new family of copolymers that have
outstanding strength at temperatures
up to 650 degrees Fahrenheit. Rein¬
forced with glass cloth and pressed
into laminates, the materials at these
temperatures are stronger than air¬
craft aluminum and compare favourably
with stainless steel and titanium alloys.
Used as adhesives, the new mater¬
ials bond together sheets of titanium
and stainless steel with hot strengths
in excess of 1,000 pounds per square
Inch. Besides use as structural mem¬
bers of aircraft and heat shields, these
new plastics have found applications
as electric motor windings, printed
electronic circuits and other electrical
and electronic elements.
B
UT these, and the many
other new materials that have been
developed for space and other uses,
are only the beginning. We now live
on the boundary between the Iron Age
and a New Materials Age in which we
will become more and more dependent
on a growing variety of materials.
These materials are increasingly inter¬
changeable, with each potentially com¬
peting for use with all others.
Not only does this "materials revo¬
lution" free the designer, the engineer
and the architect from his ancient ser¬
vitude to a relatively few materials,
but it will make countries less and less
dependent on natural resources, since
the same material requirements can be
satisfied from almost any natural re¬
source, organic or inorganic.
This will not only result In sweeping,
rapid and disturbing changes in the
industrial sector, but may radically
alter the pattern of economic relations
between the industrial and develop¬
ing nations of the world.
Knowledge, rather than specific na¬
tural resources, is becoming the de¬
terminant component in technological
advance. Without it all else is useless.
And, while both materials and energy
continue to be important, each indiv¬
idual source of both materials and
energy will be confronted with a gra¬
dual shift from a sellers' to a buyers'
market.
## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=27) 🆗
### Non-article text
6.
W
HILE space programmes
have yet to produce an advance in
power generation technology as revo¬
lutionary as the atomic power develop¬
ment during World War II, they have
brought about major Improvements In
existing systems which promise to
have far-reaching effects for remote
area power generation, the automotive
industry, deep ocean technology,
communications, home and commercial
power sources and air pollution.
Fuel cells, developed under NASA
sponsorship to assure life support in
the sealed environment of spacecraft,
have a wide variety of applications for
improving man's living conditions on
earth as well as for supporting life in
the ocean depths. Of most immediate
interest to the general public are
experiments now under way for their
use in powering electric automobiles.
One American company (Allis Chal¬
mers) has already demonstrated a
farm tractor and an electric passen¬
ger car powered by fuel cells using
hydrocarbons and air. The advent of
the fuel-cell powered automobile only
a matter of time is expected to make
a major contribution to an economic
elimination of air pollution.
United Aircraft Corp., which devel¬
oped the fuel cell power plants for
Project Apollo, is putting this techno¬
logy to work to produce a marketable
gas-powered fuel cell, which promises
to have far-reaching import for home
and commercial building power supply.
The goal of the project, known as
TARGET (Team to Advance Research
for Gas Energy Transformation) is a
"comfort package" for homes, apart¬
ments and businesses which will be
better than any of the methods pres¬
ently used for environmental control.
The package will provide control of
indoor temperatures and humidity
while generating electrical power for
other needs. Experimental prototypes
are being tested for seven model
installations: light industry, a multi-
unit shopping arcade, a high-rise
apartment building, a hotel, a suburban
garden apartment complex, a large
real estate development and a single
residence.

### New space-age power sources
New space-age
power sources
These fuel cell powerplants, highly
efficient devices for producing elec¬
trical power directly from fuel by che¬
mical reaction, will provide control of
indoor temperatures and humidity
while generating power for other
needs. Since they are smokeless, the
fuel cells have the added advantage of
sharply reducing air pollution.
While other major U.S. corporations,
including General Electric, Monsanto
and Union Carbide dropped work on
fuel cells when their government
development grants were cut off,
Britain's Energy Conversion Ltd. (ECL)
believes it has built fuel cells that
will be suitable for a wide variety of
ground applications as well as in
space and océanographie exploration.
Just eight years ago three British
companies and the National Research
Organization formed ECL to develop
a commercial power plant for space,
industrial and eventually domestic
markets for packaged power.
In 1966, ECL's work got a major
boost from the 800-strong fuel cell
research team of Pratt and Whitney in
the U.S., which licensed patents
to develop fuel cells for the
U.S. space programmes. Some $132
million of NASA funds went to Pratt
and Whitney to finance this develop¬
ment, and in the meantime a free inter¬
change of information has continued
with ECL.
In the meantime, Sweden's large
manufacturer of power generation
equipment, has patented its own
fuel cell which it believes now to be
ready for space and civilian applica¬
tions after nearly a decade of devel¬
opment work.-
Concurrently, small, compact and
rugged nuclear-powered electric gen¬
erators are also being developed for
terrestrial and undersea commercial
applications as an outgrowth of the
work on SNAP (Systems for Nuclear
Auxiliary Power) generators for NASA
and the U.S. Atomic Energy Commis¬
sion.
The most immediate uses of this
radio-isotopic generator, which comes
in a variety of power outputs from 3
to 50 watts, are in communications
relay stations, pipelines and Instal¬
lations in remote areas where uninter¬
rupted long life is required and main¬
tenance or resupply are difficult, costly
or downright impossible.
One such 50-watt generator, having
no moving parts, is currently operating
a wellhead control system on an un¬
dersea well in the Gulf of Mexico.
Another powers navigation devices.
The French firm Alcatel has devel¬
oped isotopic batteries supplying a
power of 0.1 to 20 watts which are
now being used for underwater re¬
search, oceanography and oil-drilling
operations.
D
EVELOPING countries of
the world may soon have available
mobile, compact, high-output power
facilities which can be installed quickly
as the result of the development of a
self-contained power source conceived
for possible space applications. This
power package can Increase the nor¬
mal output of a gas turbine as much as
66 per cent by capturing the waste
heat of a gas turbine.
Solar cells, the main source of elec¬
tric power on about half of the space¬
craft launched during the first decade
of the Space Age, have now been
refined for use in certain Industrial and
communications applications. In devel¬
oping countries located in desert or
tropical areas, this innovation in power
generation has the widest applications.
Rigid, déployable solar array pro¬
duced for spacecraft is a primary
power source presently being adapt¬
ed for areas of the world endowed
with virtually unlimited supplies of
solar energy.
Specific uses to which these im¬
proved array systems might be put
include hospital and laboratory power
supply, petroleum and water pumping
systems, telephone systems. Japanese
transistor radio manufacturers have
succeeded in devising a small solar
power pack which can be attached to 0"T
the outside of the radio, to replace ¿,1
conventional battery sources.
The development of flexible thin
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=28) 🆗
### New space-age power sources
POWER SOURCES (Continued)
film solar arrays for use in high power
systems in a convenient roll-up type
of construction promises to provide a
cheap, highly mobile source of power
with wide applications in both tropical
and desert areas.
. The space programme, demanding
miniature power sources with high
energy density and reliability, has
also produced major improvements in
nickel-cadmium batteries which have
led to better products for the consu¬
mer market. Compact hearing-aid bat¬
teries are now available that operate
at a cost of about one per cent of
those previously in use.
Nickel-cadmium batteries are also
used to operate a 24-ounce television
camera not much bigger than a large
packet of cigarettes, used initially to
photograph the separation of Saturn V
rocket stages in flight for engineering
information. These cameras are now
on sale worldwide in a commercial
version for monitoring industrial pro¬
cesses. In France solar cells for spa¬
cecraft developed by Radiotechnique
Company have now been incorporated
into a commercial portable cinema
camera to recharge its battery while
in use.
Specifically designed nickel-cad¬
mium batteries are now being design¬
ed for electrical automobiles used in
city and commuter driving; nickel-
cadmium battery operated cars will
have a range of about 200 miles before
recharging is necessary.
Nickel-cadmium batteries have a
high charge capacity, are capable of
operating for tens of thousands of
recharge cycles and have a good over¬
charge capacity all qualities required
for automotive use. But they have the
disadvantage of limited power output.
Work now underway to perfect
silver-cadmium and silver-zinc cells for
space and deep submergence marine
vehicles is expected to provide a
breakthrough which will give the elec¬
tric automobile power for higher
speeds and longer single-charge
operation.
A new, versatile atomic battery that
converts heat from a radioactive iso¬
tope directly into electrical power has
opened broad, new horizons for bat¬
tery applications. The tiny ISOMITE
(Isotope Miniature Thermionic Elec¬
tric) battery, developed by the McDon¬
nell Douglas Corp., is a compact
source of lowlevel electrical power in
the microwatt to milliwatt range supply¬
ing up to 100 times as much energy as
chemical batteries of the same weight.
Developed for spacecraft systems,
other long-life applications of this
type of battery include cardiac pacers
implanted in heart patients, undersea
equipment and remote s'ite power
supply.
Also under development in the
U.S.A. is the Betacel atomic battery
which produces electric current direct¬
ly from low-level nuclear radiation
without the use of heat. Betacel bat¬
teries, made of thin semi-conducting
wafers sandwiching layers of Prome¬
thium 147 or other radioactive isotopes,
can be produced in a wide range of
current-voltage ratings by "stacking"
of wafers.
Inherently smaller than Isomite bat¬
teries, Betacel offers greater efficiency
at lower power-output levels, making
it ideal for small instrument packages,
biomedical telemetry and prosthetic
devices, wrist watches, remote-site
instrumentation, computer -circuit
standby power, as well as self-power¬
ed devices on spacecraft.
A small team at Harwell, Britain's
Atomic Energy Research Establish¬
ment, has spent some £400,000 mostly
in the past four or five years, develop¬
ing a family of isotope batteries de¬
signed specifically for situations where
the cost of maintaining any alternative
powerpack is unavoidably high. The
Soviet Union has already supplied a
chain of meteorological stations with
nuclear batteries, and the British have
powered an offshore navigational light
at Dungeness in this way for over two
years.
A promising further development in
power generation for microelectronic
equipment is taking place at General
Electric's Valley Force Space Techno¬
logy Center, where bio-scientists work¬
ing under a NASA contract have suc¬
cessfully demonstrated that usable
electric power can be drawn from
living animals. This means that in the
future such life-saving devices as the
Heart Pacer may be powered without
any batteries at all. And the day may
not be far off when transmitters im-
panted in the human body and power¬
ed by the body's own electricity will
telemeter back to a doctor's office a
continuous report on a patient's health.
PREVIOUS SPIN-OFF
This issue is devoted to the "spin-off" achievements of space research on
earth itself. It does not dwell on the purely scientific benefits of the space
endeavour to astronomy, physics, astrophysics, etc., which have been dealt
with in previous issues. Some of these articles are listed below.
Nov. '57: Challenge of the spaceship (A. Clarke).
Nov. '57: A Soviet scientist looks at Sputnik (K. Staniukovich).
April '60: What shall we gain by the conquest of space? (V. Fesenkov).
Nov. '61 : Rays from outer space (A. Gusev).
May '66: Special issue on space and international co-operation. Space: a
gigantic laboratory (A. Blagonravov). Efforts of space research
(A. Frutkin). European space science (P. Auger). Science in space
(K. Feoktistov). Lunar International Laboratory (B. Friedman).
Oct. '66: Unmanned vehicles for the new study of planetology (W. Pickering).
March '69: Communications on the moon (G. Phélizon).
## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=29) 🆗
### Non-article text
NASA's broad range of aerospace research activities has led to
many practical applications in unexpected fields. NASA's Langley
Research Centre in Virginia recently found that on water-covered
surfaces tyres do not touch the ground but skim along on a cushion
of water. Discovery of this "hydroplaning" effect has had
immediate applications for automobile safety. U.S. government
agencies and the automobile industry are now experimenting with
grooved highways, road textures, new tyre treads and Improved
breaking systems to avoid skidding and loss of control on wet roads.
The fuel cell that provided electrical power for Gemini and Apollo
spacecraft has already been used experimentally to run farm
tractors and electric passenger cars, and may be the forerunner
of power for pollution-free automobiles of tomorrow.

### Space-age electronics and pocket computers
7. Space-age electronics
and pocket computers
T
HE key to man's conquest
or space is the computer. The assi¬
milation of scientific data for every
stage of a space flight, the design and
production of virtually every component
of a spacecraft, the precision control
of the spacecraft in flight, and the
storage, classification and retrieval of
data received from each space mis¬
sion have produced tremendous ad¬
vances in computer technology. The
stringent weight and volume require¬
ments of spacecraft have led to
development of striking miniaturized
computer circuits which in a short time
will find their way into commercially
available equipment.
Computers have been scaled down
to the point where thousands of cir¬
cuits can be compressed into a case
smaller than a thumbnail. Similar low-
cost computers soon will be incor¬
porated into control systems for air¬
planes, motor vehicles, industrial ma¬
chinery, and construction and mining
equipment.
Space age computer software dev¬
eloped for the wide gamut of opera¬
tions involved in the Apollo program¬
me have been adapted for use with
computers in air traffic control, indus¬
trial process control, engineering
design, automation of hospital services
and sophisticated medical diagnosis.
Computer data processing techniques
and programmes developed by space
projects have permitted airlines to
provide instant flight information and
reservations systems, insurance com¬
panies to improve their accounting and
investment services and other firms to
handle transactions involving more
than 20 million items per day.
The applications of computerized
numerical control and digital logic to
the machine tool, a direct result of
aerospace research, received its great
impetus from the metal machining re¬
quirements of the space programme.
Parts are complex. Zero-defects stand¬
ards are absolute. Production lots
are small. Design changes are fre¬
quent. A system which assured the
automatic control of machinery by
means of programmed instructions
stored on punched cards or tape
replacing the operator, jigs and manual
controls was essential to meeting
these rigid standards and rigorous
conditions.
"The marriage of numerical control,
the digital computer and machine tools
is one of the stunning technological
innovations of our time, ranking with
nuclear power and space flight itself
as a third great development of our
generation," the American industrialist
Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., contends. Not
only will 80 per cent of all machined
parts be produced by numerical con¬
trol, with tremendous improvements in
productivity which means lower costs
as well as greater reliability, but the
computer is enabling management to
make sounder decisions on the basis
of faster, more accurate and more
complete information.
While the aerospace Industry is still
by far the largest user of numerically
controlled tools, numerical control
applications are being broadened to
a multitude of other uses beyond the
cutting of metal. These uses include
material handling, assembly, welding,
fabrication, inspection, quality control,
computer graphics and drafting ma¬
chines and plotters. Systems concepts
of numerical control cut right across a
company's activities with an irresis¬
tible logic all of their own.
They jolt and stimulate and chal¬
lenge every member of the corporate
team from the worker to top manage¬
ment. They free the worker from the
drudgery of assembly-line routine,
and the engineer can turn to more
creative pursuits. They blur the dis¬
tinction between design and manufac¬
turing, interlocking both Into a single
computerized process. They become
an integral part of computerized
management information systems.
And all this adds up to a new indus-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
29
## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=30) 🆗
### Space-age electronics and pocket computers
SPACE-AGE ELECTRONICS (Continued)
Cartridge programmes for every TV set
trial revolution, with productivity boost¬
ed by a ratio of four or five to one
wherever numerical controls and data
logic are properly used.
To make certain that innovations in
computer software technology devel¬
oped in space projects become avail¬
able to all who can use it, the Com¬
puter Software Management and In¬
formation Center (COSMIC) was set
up by NASA and is run under contract
by the University of Georgia.
COSMIC operates as the central
clearinghouse and dissemination outlet
for computer programmes and related
information developed by NASA itself
as well as by its 20,000 contractors.
The centre receives, evaluates and
checks out the software adding to its
inventory those programmes which are
operational and of potential value in a
wide range of applications.
Over 14,000 requests for software
from industry, commerce and univer¬
sities have been filled by COSMIC
with substantial savings to the user.
Since the development costs are all
born by NASA, it is estimated that the
average purchaser of a programme
from COSMIC saves from 50 to 90 per
cent of the cost of developing a sim¬
ilar programme. More than 400 com¬
plete programmes and documentation
packages are available for sale "off
the shelf" and new items are regu¬
larly being added to the inventory.
I
30
F computer technology is
the key to man's conquest of space,
the computer itself owes its rapid de¬
velopment to space requirements. To
begin at the beginning, if aerospace
technology had remained shackled to
the vacuum tube, there would have
been not the slightest hope of landing
on the moon or probing the planets in
this century. Even efforts to explore
the near reaches of space just outside
the atmosphere would have been ser¬
iously handicapped because of the
size, weight and power consumption
of avionic equipment.
The development of the transistor
and its solid-state offspring the inte¬
grated circuit made it possible to
build digital computers no bigger than
a shoebox and reliable enough to
make possible exacting interplanetary
space flights. But it was first the
transistor, and now microminiature
integrated circuits, that made possible
the development of successive gene¬
rations of computers faster and with
greater capacity to meet the informa¬
tion and control needs of science,
education, industry, business and
government. Thus, in France the Labo¬
ratoire Central de Télécommunications
has developed a tiny computer with
integrated circuits no bigger than a
portable typewriter using space elec¬
tronic technology.
Yet the transistorized computer was
but the beginning of a total revolution
of the electronics industry throughout
the world, providing the underpinnings
for economic miracles such as that
of Japan. Now, following on the heels
of the ubiquitous Japanese-made
transistor radio, a whole new genera¬
tion of electronic products from clocks
to computers using advanced micro¬
electronic devices called "metal oxide
semiconductor/large-scale integrated
arrays" (or more simply MOS/LSI
devices) are pouring off Japanese
production lines.
Developed by North American Rock¬
well's Autonetics Division, MOS/LSI
devices are about the size of this
capital "O", twice the thickness of a
sheet of writing paper, and contain
more than a thousand circuit elements.
None of the vital space systems could
function without the electronic sensing,
calculating and controlling "brain
centres" using these devices.
But neither could the revolutionary
desk-top calculators now being pro¬
duced by Japan's Hazakawa Electric
Company, using Autonetic MOS/LSI
devices. Approximately the size of a
cigar box, the new calculator weighs
just three pounds, operates instan¬
taneously, without noise, and features
a lighted display of eight digits. And
this promises to be just the beginning
of a Lilliputian invasion that will
eventually affect the lives of men
everywhere.
Another technological breakthrough
in space age electronics promises to
revolutionize education and home
entertainment. In addition to books,
libraries of the future will contain
Electronic Video Recordings (EVR)
cartridges that can be played over any
ordinary television receiver. Devel¬
oped originally for high resolution'
photo reconnaissance of the moon EVR
will soon be produced and marketed
worldwide by "The EVR Partnership"
in London a consortium of Columbia
Broadcasting System (US), Imperial
Chemical Industries (UK) and CIBA
(Switzerland) as a low-cost means of
playing sound motion pictures of high
quality as and when the user chooses.
It's like recording tapes with the
very important difference that sight
has been added to sound, the sound
track being carried on magnetic strips
built into the edges of black and white
or colour film. For the public, it means
movies at home. For students, audio¬
visual learning at home.
For doctors, too busy to keep up
with the ever-Increasing flow of med¬
ical literature, it means convenient
audio-visual briefings on new develop¬
ments in the medical field prepared
and distributed by pharmaceutical
companies for easy viewing at home
after office hours. For television, it
means competition. And for socio-
philosophers like Marshall McLuhan, it
is the end of the Gutenberg era and
an affirmation of the "picture civiliza¬
tion". Slowly, under the impulse of
space technology, civilization seems to
be bypassing the written word.
A
iS this happens, a new
industry is developing on a global
scale. In the U.S., Kodak has devel¬
oped a new process for the duplication
of films which produces four times as
many copies in any given time than
previous methods, and at half of the
price. CBS has set up a plant for
high-speed duplication and will develop
the EVR market for films. In licence
agreements with CBS, Motorola will
manufacture EVR players and the
New York Times will develop educat¬
ional EVR cartridges.
Outside the United States, llford
will manufacture fine grain 8.75 mm
film for copy prints and high
speed printing equipment of its own
design to provide copies for fast
delivery at low cost. The Rank Organi¬
zation will manufacture and distribute
teleplayers, and plans to package the
Rank Film Library in .EVR cartridges.
Quantity production Is scheduled to
begin by the summer of 1970, just
three years after Its first use in lunar
reconnaissance.
Add to all these spectacular develop¬
ments affecting whole industries the
crop of new science-based companies
shooting up in North America, Europe
and Japan dedicated specifically, if not
exclusively, to the conversion of aero¬
space technology to "down-to-earth"
civilian applications.
Spar Aerospace Products Ltd. of
Toronto, Canada, is typical of the
breed. In addition to its space eng¬
ineering work in support of the Cana¬
dian Alouette/ISIS programme and
planning for the Canadian domestic
communications satellite system, Spar
manufactures STEM (Storable Tubular
Extendible Member) for Canadian, U.S.
and European space programmes.
But STEM devices are also excellent
examples of the many "unglamorous"
products developed specifically to
meet satellite requirements that are
now finding a wide variety of uses in
earthbound applications. Essentially,
the STEM principle is a means of
coiling-up and storing long, rigid rods
or booms. In the ground environ¬
ment, uses range from vehicular ship
antennas, mobile elevating masts for
television cameras, lights or antenna
arrays to surveyor's tripod legs and
tent poles. The ability to coil-up
lengths of relatively rigid tube into a
small volume, and re-deploy it again
has a range of uses limited only by
one's imagination.
## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=31) 🆗
### The 'Systems approach'; applying the space team method to major problems on earth
8.
The 'Systems
Approach'
Applying the space
team method to major
problems on earth
A
whole new generation of
industries has grown up with special
expertise in blending science and
technology with advanced management
concepts.
An entirely new school of managers,
one that practices the "systems
approach", is emerging. The "sys¬
tems approach" applied to the manag¬
erial task has helped to transform prac¬
tice from a fractionalized mode of
operation to a highly integrated one.
Relying heavily on computerized
information systems, the main concern
of this school is the increasing
complexity of industrial and govern¬
ment operations. The emphasis is
on techniques for organizing and
managing the large-scale undertaking,
whether it be industry, govern¬
ment or ad hoc projects of gargantuan
proportions. It is a total rejection of
the thesis which holds that all that
is big is evil.
Implicitly it challenges Lord Acton's
dictum that all power corrupts, and
comes down solidly on the side of
Lord Radcliffe (and Lenin) who held
that "power Is good or evil according
to the vision that it serves."
It accepts the realities of modern
economic life, which clearly indicate
the necessity for global solutions to
global problems. Piecemeal actions
provide no solutions for the pressing
problems of our age, nor little hope
for harnessing technology to the
service of mankind.
On the contrary, a new Welt¬
anschauung in industry and govern¬
ment is necessary to perceive problems
and opportunities in their real dimen¬
sions. The pragmatic approach
crossing the bridges when one gets to
them, solving problems as they
arise has no place in the space age
where the dimensions of undertakings
and the stakes are simply too great
for mankind to be able to afford the
luxury of a heroic reliance on ingenuity
to carry us through come what may.
In the Apollo programme, for
example, every aspect, from the launch
pad design to the water recovery
system including men, environment
and equipment is part of a system.
All the elements must tie together and
contribute in a' specific way to the
ultimate objective. Systems analysis
is the means of making sure that they
do that nothing is overlooked or out
of place. That everything is performed
to at least 99.999 per cent perfection.
If this combination of overview and
attention to detail has been made
possible by the computer, it also stems
from a new perception of man and his
environment as a result of space age
discoveries. We now are acutely
aware of almost limitless opportunities
for man to mould and use his environ¬
ment that extends in a continuum from
the ocean floors, through the oceans
and the atmosphere on into space.
The oceans, air and space long
thought of separately are today
viewed as inseparable media for
human activity. The new technology
being developed for this activity
embraces and feeds on the entire array
of human knowledge, the physical and
social sciences as well as the
humanities.
Using systems engineering applied
with large-scale organized effort, the
experience of the Apollo programme
dramatically demonstrated that it Is
possible to meet new needs or effect
desired results on an almost fixed
time schedule, despite a myriad of
unknown factors and imponderables in
a totally unexplored sphere of action.
And all this despite a decentralization
of effort never before attained In a
single, crash programme.
The spectacular results obtained in
the Apollo project led former NASA
Administrator James E. Webb to
confidently proclaim that "We . . . have
the ability, in this concept of large-
scale, organized effort and our
experience with it, to organize our¬
selves, our knowledge and our
resources to accomplish almost any
task we may set for ourselves. But,"
he went on to qualify, "this form of
effort has its own requirements a
clear relationship to fundamentals and
a sustained support over extended
periods are two of the most important."
Operating on this general thesis, a
U.S. firm (N. Amer. Rockwell) recently
assigned its aerospace team to apply
the systems analysis technique in a
thorough study of the textile industry.
They analyzed textile processing,
textile machinery and trends in fibres,
new and old, with a view finally to
determine where technology and
capital can best advance in the textile
industry.
All this was a huge undertaking.
The first phase alone, the systems
study, took months. But before it was
over the task force had already drawn
up a proposal for the design of
computer control of eleven different
textile machines, to enable them to
monitor their own performance and
make corrective adjustments to
maintain optimum performance. The
preliminary designs were made, and
management authorized the manu¬
facture of prototypes of two of these
machines. If they are successful, the
company will extend the application to
other textile machinery.
There is a new and rising trend
throughout the world to use the
technological resources of the large
electric-electronic-aerospace corpora¬
tions to find solutions to such public
problems as poor housing, congested
mass transportation in industrialized
countries as well as infant transporta¬
tion systems of developing nations, air
pollution, stream pollution, crime
control and inadequate health, educa¬
tion and welfare.
Sweden's Professor Carl-Gören i\a
Heden carries this principle to its j I
ultimate when he advocates consider¬
ing the earth as a space ship as a
closed ecological system. "We would
CONTINUED PAGE 38
## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=32) 🆗
### Beyond Babel
BEYOND
BABEL
Today, whether we like it or not, we are
laying the foundation of the first global society
T
by Arthur C. Clarke
HERE is no longer any
need to argue that the communications
satellite Is ultimately going to have a
profound effect upon society; the
events of the last ten years have
established this beyond question.
Nevertheless, it is possible that even
now we have only the faintest under¬
standing of its ultimate impact upon
our world.
There are those who have argued
that communications satellites (here¬
after referred to as "comsats")
represent only an extension of existing
communications devices, and that
society can therefore absorb them
without too great an upheaval.
I am reminded rather strongly of the
frequent assertions, by elderly generals
immediately after August 1945, that
nothing had really changed in warfare
because the device which destroyed
Hiroshima was "just another bomb".
Some inventions represent a kind
of technological quantum jump which
causes a major restructuring of society.
In our century, the automobile is
perhaps the most notable example of
this. It is characteristic of such
inventions that even when they are
already in existence, it is a considerable
time before anyone appreciates the
changes they will bring. To demon¬
strate this, I would like to quote two
examples one genuine, one slightly
fictitious.
For the first I am indebted to the
Honorable Anthony Wedgewood Benn,
now U.K. Minister of Technology, who
passed it on to me when he was
Postmaster General.
Soon after Mr. Edison had invented
the electric light, there was an alarming
decline In the Stock Exchange quota-
32
ARTHUR C. CLARKE, British science
writer and former chairman of the British
Interplanetary Society, was awarded the
Unesco Kalinga Prize for the Populariz¬
ation of Science in 1962. He has been
a regular contributor in the past to the
"Unesco Courier". This article is taken
from an address he delivered to an
international space communications confe¬
rence at Unesco, Paris, last December.
tions for the gas companies. A
Parliamentary Commission was there¬
fore called in England, which heard
expert witnesses on the subject; I feel
confident that many of these assured
the gas manufacturers that nothing
further would be heard of this impracti¬
cal device.
One of the witnesses called was the
chief engineer of the Post Office,
Sir William Preece an able man who
in later years was to back Marconi
in his early wireless experiments.
Somebody asked Sir William if he had
any comments to make on the latest
American invention the telephone.
To this, the chief engineer of the Post
Office made the remarkable reply:
"No Sir. The Americans have need
of the telephone but we do not. We
have plenty of messenger boys."
The second exemple is due to my
friend, Jean d'Arcy, Director of Radio
and Visual Information Services Divi¬
sion of the United Nations. He
has reported to me the delibera¬
tions of a slightly earlier scientific
committee, set up in the Middle Ages
to discuss whether it was worth
developing Mr. Gutenberg's printing
press. After lengthy deliberations,
this committee decided not to allocate
further funds. The printing press,
it was agreed, was a clever idea, but
it could have no large-scale applica¬
tion. There would never be any big
demand for books for the simple
reason that only a microscopic fraction
of the population could read.
If any one thinks that I am labouring
the obvious, I would like him to ask
himself, in all honesty, whether he
would have dared to predict the
ultimate impact of the printing press
and the telephone when they were
invented. I believe that in the long
run the impact of the communication
satellite will be even more spectacular.
Moreover, the run may not be as long
as we think.
The human mind tends to extrapo¬
late in a linear manner, whereas pro¬
gress is exponential. The exponential
curve rises slowly at first and then
climbs rapidly, until eventually it cuts
across the straight-line slope and goes
soaring beyond it. Unfortunately, it
Is never possible to predict whether
the crossover point will be five, ten
or twenty years ahead.
" However, I believe that everything
I am about to discuss will be tech¬
nically possible well before the end
of this century. The rate of progress
will be limited by economic and
political factors, not technological
ones. When a new invention has a
sufficiently great public appeal, the
world insists on having it. Look at the
speed with which the ' transistor
revolution occurred. Yet what we
now see on the technological horizon
are devices with far greater potential,
and human appeal, even than the
ubiquitous transistor radio.
It must also be remembered that our
ideas concerning the future of space
technology are still limited by the
present primitive state of the art.
All of today's launch vehicles are
expendable, single-shot devices which
can perform only one mission and
are then discarded. It has been
"recognized for many years that space
exploration, and space exploitation,
will be practical only when the same
launch vehicle can be flown over and
over again, like conventional aircraft.
The development of the reusable
launch vehicle the so-called "space
shuttle" will be the most urgent
problem of the space engineers in
the 1970s.
It is confidently believed that such
vehicles will be operating by the end
of the decade, the end of the 1970s.
When they do, their impact upon
astronautics will be comparable to that
of the famous DC-3 upon aeronautics.
The cost of putting payloads and
men into space will decrease from
thousands, to hundreds, and then to
tens of dollars per pound. This will
make possible the development of
multipurpose manned space-stations,
as well as the deployment of
very large and complex unmanned
satellites which it would be quite
impractical to launch (from Earth) in
a single vehicle.
It must also be remembered that
comsats are only one of a very large
CONTINUED PAGE 34
## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=33) 🆗
### Beyond Babel
o
DIME-SIZED ATOMIC BATTERY. Two sizes of a miniature atomic battery are compared above to a pair
of tweezers. Batteries may be smaller than an old English farthing or U.S. dime to produce microwatts
of power or the size of several stacked coins to produce milliwatts of power (a microwatt is one-millionth
of a watt). An electric watch can be powered by 10 microwatts, a hearing aid by 1,000 microwatts.
Batteries produce electric current directly from low-level nuclear radiation and have a lifetime of up to
five years. Other batteries of similar size exist which convert heat from radioactive isotopes directly
into electricity, providing 100 times as much energy as chemical batteries of equal weight Developed
for use in space, all these batteries are finding application as power sources for biomedical telemetry,
cardiac pacemakers and undersea uses. Below, a tiny sensor and radio transmitter developed for space
missions but now used to monitor electrocardiograms and the condition of patients with respiratory
ailments. Radio starts buzzing loudly if complications occur. A TV camera, used to film the separation
of Saturn V rocket stages, and no bigger than a packet of cigarettes, is now on sale in a commercial
version for monitoring industrial processes.
33
## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=34) 🆗
### Beyond Babel
BEYOND BABEL (Continued)
The wise King Canute and the rising tide
range of applications satellites; they
may not even be the most important.
The Earth Resources satellites will
enormously advance our knowledge of
this planet's capabilities, and the ways
in which we may exploit them. The
time Is going to come when farmers,
fishermen, public utility companies,
departments of agriculture and for¬
estry, etc. will find it impossible to
Imagine how they ever operated in
the days before they had space-borne
sensors continually scanning the
planet.
The economic value of meteorolo¬
gical satellites and their potential for
the saving of life has already been
demonstrated. Another most impor¬
tant use of satellites, which has not
yet begun, but which will have an
economic value of thousands of mil¬
lions of dollars a year, Is their use for
air-traffic control. It appears possible,
that the only real solution to the
problem of air congestion, and the
mounting risk of collisions, may be
through navigational satellites which
can track every aircraft In the sky.
I
34
N dealing with telecommu¬
nications problems it is convenient
and often indeed essential to divide
the subject according to the type of
transmission and equipment used.
Thus we talk about radios, telephones,
television sets, data networks, fac¬
simile systems, etc., as though they
were all quite separate things.
But this of course is a completely
artificial distinction; to the communica¬
tions satellite which simply handles
trains of electric impulses they are
all the same. For the purposes of
this discussion I am therefore looking
at the subject from a different point
of view, which may give a better
overall picture. I am lumping all tele¬
communications devices together and
am considering their total impact upon
four basic units in turn. Those units
are the Home, the City, the State, and
the World.
Note that I start with the home, not
the family, as the basic human unit.
Many people do not live in family
groups, but everybody lives in a home.
Indeed, in certain societies today the
family itself is becoming somewhat
nebulous around the edges, and among
some younger groups Is being replaced
by the tribe of which more anon.
But the home will always be with us.
There was once a time when homes
did not have windows. It is difficult
for those of us who do not live in
caves or tents to Imagine such a state
of affairs. Yet within a single genera¬
tion the home in the more developed
countries has acquired a new window
of incredible magical power the TV
set. What once seemed one of the
most expensive luxuries became, in
what Is historically a twinkling of an
eye, one of the basic necessities of
life.
The television antenna swaying
precariously above the slum-dweller's
shack ¡s a true sign of our times.
What the book was to a tiny minority
in earlier ages, the television set has
now come to be for all the world.
It is true that, all too often, it Is no
more than a drug like its poorer
relative, the transistor radio seen
pressed to the ears of the blank-
faced noise-addicts one sees walking
entranced through the city streets.
But, of course, it is infinitely more than
this, as was so well-expressed by
Professor Buckminster Fuller when he
remarked that ours Is the first genera¬
tion to be reared by three parents.
All future generations will be reared
by three parents. As René Maheu, Di¬
rector-General of Unesco, remarked
recently, this may be one of the real
reasons for the generation gap. We
now have a discontinuity in human
history. For the first time there is a
generation that knows more than its
parents, and television is at least partly
responsible for this state of affairs.
Anything we can imagine In the way
of educational TV and radio can be
done. As I have already remarked,
the limitations are not technical, but
economic and political. As for
economic limitations, the cost of a
truly global satellite educational
system, broadcasting into all countries,
would be quite trivial compared with
the long-term benefits It could bring.
Let me indulge In a little fantasy.
Some of the studies of educational
comsat broadcasts let us call them
EDSATS to developing countries
indicate that the cost of the hardware
may be of the order of $1 per pupil
per year.
I suppose there are about a thousand
million children of school age on this
planet, but the number of people, who
require education must be much higher
than this, perhaps two thousand mil¬
lion. As I am only concerned with
establishing orders of magnitude, the
precise figures don't matter. But the
point is that, for the cost of a few
thousand million dollars a year a
few per cent of the monies spent on
armaments one could provide a
global EDSAT system which could drag
this whole planet out of ignorance.
Such a project would seem ideally
suited for Unesco supervision, because
there are great areas of basic educa¬
tion In which there are po serious
disagreements.
The beauty of television, of course,
is that to a considerable extent it
transcends the language problem. I
would like to see the development, by
the Walt Disney studios or some
similar organization, of visual edu¬
cational programmes which do not
depend on language, but only upon
sight, plus sound effects. I feel
certain that a great deal can be done
in this direction, and it is essential
that such research be initiated as soon
as possible, because it may take much
longer to develop appropriate pro¬
grammes than the equipment to trans¬
mit and receive them.
Even the addition of language, of
course, does not pose too great a
problem, since this requires only a
fraction of the band-width of the vision
signal. And sooner or later we must
achieve a world in which every human
being can communicate directly with
every other, because all men will
speak, or at least understand, a hand¬
ful of basic languages. The children
of the future are going to learn several
languages from that third parent in the
corner of the living-room.
Perhaps looking further ahead, a
time is going to come when any
student or scholar anywhere on earth
will be able to tune in to a
course in any subject that interests
him, at any level of difficulty he
desires. Thousands of educational
programmes will be broadcast simul¬
taneously on different frequencies, so
that any individual will be able to
proceed at his own rate, and at his
own convenience, through the subject
of his choice.
T,
HIS could result in an
enormous increase in the efficiency of
the educational process. Today, every
student is geared to a relatively
inflexible curriculum. He has to attend
classes at fixed times, which very often
may not be convenient. The opening
up of the electromagnetic spectrum
made possible by comsats will
represent as great a boon to scholars
and students as did the advent of the
printing press itself.
The great challenge of the decade
to come is freedom from hunger. Yet
starvation of the mind will one day be
regarded as an evil no less great
than starvation of the body. All men
deserve to be educated to the limit
of their capabilities. If this opportunity
is denied them, basic human rights
are violated.
This is why the forthcoming experi¬
mental use of direct broadcast EDSATS
in India in 1972 is of such interest and
importance. We should wish it every
success, for even if it is only a
primitive prototype, it may herald the
global educational system of the future.
It is obvious that one of the results
of the developments we have been
discussing will be a breakdown of the
## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=35) 🆗
### Beyond Babel
barrier between home and school, or
home and university for in a sense
the whole world may become one
academy of learning. But this is only
one aspect of an even wider revolution
because results of the new communica¬
tions devices will also break down
the barrier between home and place
of work.
During the next decade we will
see coming into the home a gener¬
al purpose communications console
comprising TV screen, camera, micro¬
phone, computer keyboard and hard-
copy readout device. Through this,
anyone will be able to be in touch
with any other person similarly
equipped. As a result, for an ever-
increasing number of people in fact,
virtually everyone of the executive
level and above almost all travel for
business will become unnecessary.
Recently, a limited number of the
executives of the Westinghouse
Corporation In the United States who
were provided with primitive forerun¬
ners of this device, promptly found that
their traveling decreased by 20 per
cent.
This,' I am convinced, Is how we are
going to solve the traffic problem
and thus, indirectly, the problem of air
pollution. More and more, the slogan
of the future will be, "Don't Commute
Communicate." Moreover, this de¬
velopment will make possible and
even accelerate another fundamental
trend of the future.
It usually takes a genius to see the
obvious, and once again I am indebted
to Professor Buckminster Fuller for
the following ideas. One of the most
important consequences of today's
space research will be the develop¬
ment of life-support, and above all,
food1 regeneration systems for long-
duration voyages and for the establish¬
ment of bases on the Moon and
planets. It is going to cost thousands
of millions of dollars to develop these
techniques, but when they are per¬
fected they will be available to
everyone.
This means that we will be able to
establish self-contained communities
quite independent of agriculture, any¬
where on this planet that we wish;
perhaps one day even individual homes
may become autonomous closed
ecological systems producing all their
food and other basic requirements
indefinitely.
This development, coupled with the
communications explosion, means a
total change in the structure of society.
But because of the inertia of human
institutions, and the gigantic capital
investments involved, it may take a
century or more for the trend to come
to its inevitable conclusion. That
conclusion is the death of the city.
We all know that our cities are
obsolete, and much effort is now
going into patching them up so that
they work after some fashion, like
thirty-year-old automobiles held toge¬
ther with string and wire. But we
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
WORLD
TV CLASSES
FROM
SPACE
The cost of the equipment for a truly global satellite
educational system broadcasting radio and TV
programmes to all countries has been estimated at
about $1 per pupil per year. Such a system could
eventually be developed to allow thousands of
programmes to be broadcast simultaneously on different
frequencies so that any individual could select the
subject and level of his choice. T.V. educational
broadcasts via communications satellite are to begin
in India in 1972, and the results may show whether
this method offers a real solution to the educational
problems of the developing countries. A global
communications satellite system may also open up
vast possibilities for the new idea of "lifelong
education". Photo shows two Malagasy technicians
at work on the antenna of a satellite tracking station
in Tananarive (Madagascar). Built by a Madagascar
firm for NASA, the station is manned by 120 Malagasy
technicians with U.S. help. In addition to tracking
satellites in orbit, it picks up data recorded by
weather and astronomical observation satellites.
35
## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=36) 🆗
### Beyond Babel
World weather watch
around the clock
The development of a morning's weather hour
by hour (left) recorded by a satellite passing over
the Pacific on January 24, 1967. Right, photo
sequence of day-to-day weather changes over
the Pacific. Satellite meteorological observations
have sparked a revolution in the art of weather
forecasting. More accurate predictions have
brought incalculable benefits, from the saving
of lives and property to the protection of
food crops. Even more fantastic prospects
will be opened up once reliable long-range global
forecasts of two weeks or more become a
reality. The potential saving of such forecasts
to India's agriculture, for example, would be
at least $1,600 million a year and to U.S.
agriculture $2,500 million. In 1961, timely warning
of the approach of Hurricane "Carla" in the
U.S. by the weather satellite Tiros 3 enabled
over 350,000 persons to flee from the path
of the storm. Warnings have had similar
beneficial effects in many countries. Space
observations now bring greater navigational safety
to ships and aircraft. Pilots on transoceanic
flights leaving New York now receive weather
photos of their route transmitted automatically
from weather satellites. Today, U.S.S.R. and
U.S.A. weather satellite systems are combined
in a worldwide meteorological network under the
auspices of the World Meteorological Organization.
Photos NASA
1057 AM 11 43 AM
Pacific weather, hour by hour
36
BEYOND BABEL (Continued)
must recognize that in the age that is
coming the city except for certain
limited applications is no longer
necessary.
The nightmare of overcrowding and
traffic jams which we now endure is
going to get worse, perhaps for our
lifetimes. But beyond that ¡s a vision
of a world in which man is once again
what he should be a fairly rare ani¬
mal, though in instant communication
with all other members of his species.
Marshall McLuhan has coined the
evocative phrase "the global village"
to describe the coming society. I hope
"the global village" does not really
mean a global suburb, covering the
planet from pole to pole.
Luckily, there will be far more space
in the world of the future, because the
land liberated at the end of the
agricultural age now coming to a
close after ten thousand years will
become available for living purposes.
I trust that much of it will be allowed
to revert to wilderness, and that
through this new wilderness will
wander the electronic nomads of the
centuries ahead.
It Is perfectly obvious that the
communications revolution will have
the most profound influence upon that
fairly recent invention, the nation-state.
I am fond of reminding American
audiences that their country was
created only a century ago by two
inventions. Before those inventions
existed it was impossible to have a
United States of America. Afterwards,
it was impossible not to have it.
Those inventions, of course, were
the railroad and the electric telegraph.
U.S.S.R., China in fact all modern
states could not possibly exist
without them. Whether we like it or
not and certainly many people won't
like it we are seeing the next step
in this process. History is repeating
itself one turn higher on the spiral.
What the railroad and the telegraph
did to continental areas a hundred
years ago, the jet plane and the
communications satellite will soon be
doing to the whole world.
Despite the rise of nationalism and
the surprising resurgence of minority
political and linguistic groups, this
process may already have gone further
than Is generally imagined. We see,
particularly among the young, cults
and movements which transcend all
geographical borders. The so-called
"jet set" is perhaps the most obvious
example of this transnational culture,
but that involves only a small minority.
In Europe at least, the Volkswagen
and Vespa sets are far more numerous
and perhaps far more significant.
The young Germans, Frenchmen, and
Italians are already linked together by
a common communications network,
and are impatient with the naive and
simple-minded nationalism of their
parents which has brought so much
misery to the world.
What we are now doing whether
we like it or not indeed whether we
wish to or not is laying the foundation
of the first global society. Whether
the final planetary authority will be an
analogue of the federal systems now
existing in the U.S. or the U.S.S.R.
I do not know. I suspect that, without
any deliberate planning, such organiza¬
tions as the world meteorological and
earth resources satellite system, and
the world communications satellite
system (of which INTELSAT is the
precursor) will eventually transcend
## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=37) 🆗
### Beyond Babel
13 January 1967 14 January 1967 15 January 1967
Pacific weather, day by day
their individual components. At some
time during the next century they will
discover, to their great surprise, that
they are really running the world.
There are many who will regard
these possibilities with alarm or
distaste, and may even attempt to
prevent their fulfilment. I would
remind them of the story of the wise
English king, Canute, who had his
throne set upon the sea-shore so he
could demonstrate to his foolish
courtiers that even the king could not
command the incoming tide.
The wave of the future Is now rising
before us. Let us not attempt to hold
it back. Wisdom lies in recognizing
the inevitable and co-operating with
it. In the world that Is coming, the
great powers are not great enough.
Let us look at our whole world as
we have already done through the
eyes of our moon-bound cameras.
I have made it obvious that it will be
essentially one world though I am not
foolish or optimistic enough to imagine
that it will be free from violence and
even war. But more and more it will
be recognized that all terrestrial vio
lence is the concern of the police and
of no one else.
And there is another factor which
will accelerate the unification of the
world. Within another lifetime, this
will not be the only world, and that
fact will have profound psychological
impact upon all humanity. We have
seen in the annus mirabilis of 1969
the imprint of man's first footstep on
the Moon. Before the end of this
century, we will experience the only
other event of comparable significance
in the foreseeable future.
Before I tell you what it is, ask
yourselves what you would have
thought of the Moon landing, thirty
years ago. Well, before another
thirty have passed, we will see its
inevitable successor the birth of the
first human child on another world, and
the beginning of the real colonization
of space. When there are men who
do not look on Earth as home, then
the men of Earth will find themselves
drawing closer together.
In countless ways this process has
already begun. The vast outpouring
of pride, transcending all frontiers,
during the flight of Apollo 11 was an
outstanding indication of this process.
Whether or not one takes it literally,
the myth of the Tower of Babel has an
extraordinary relevance for our age.
Before that time, according to the book
of Genesis (and indeed according to
some anthropologists) the human race
spoke with a single tongue.
That time may never come again, but
the time will come, and through the
impact of comsats, when there will be
two or three world languages which all
men will share. Far higher than the
misguided architects of the Tower of
Babel ever could have imagined
36,000 kilometres above the equator
the rocket and communications
engineers are about to undo the curse
that was then inflicted upon our
ancestors.
So let me end by quoting the
relevant passage from the 11th chapter
of Genesis, which I think could be a
motto for our hopes of the future:
And the Lord said: Behold they are
one people and they have all one
language, and this is only the beginn¬
ing of what they will do, and nothing
that they propose to do now will be
impossible for them.
37
## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=38) 🆗
### The 'Systems approach'; applying the space team method to major problems on earth
THE 'SYSTEMS APPROACH' (Continued from page 31)
then not only arrange for organic
household sewage and industrial waste
to be processed separately, but we
would also regard photosynthesis as
more precious for balancing our
gaseous environment than for provid¬
ing food," he contends.
"If we then start to consider dome-
structures for agriculture in order to
provide the elevated carbon-dioxide
concentrations probably needed for
maximal biological productivity, and for
simplifying the control of insect pests,
we enter an overlap area with a whole
range of planetary base problems.
Many of the solutions which must be
considered by the engineers charged
with providing a constant environment
for extended manned flights or in
moon or planetary bases are in fact
highly relevant to the scientists and
engineers concerned with (these) less
glamorous projects . . ."
A
38
lDVOCATES of the sys¬
tems approach are tackling these
pressing social problems with a firm
conviction that we have the technical
tools to free society of many of its
burdens and to carry It to new levels
of achievement. Recent projects in
which aerospace companies contracted
to apply to public problems what they
had learned in space is long and
impressive:
A recent AVCO Corp. programme
which had its origin In a Basic Planetary
Transportation Model developed for
lunar space problems, involves systems
analysis for national water resources
in the U.S. The programme calls for
a thorough evaluation of water
technology, benefits and costs of water
programmes, and assessment of state
and regional policies, plants and
programmes.
An American company, employing
aerospace systems engineering tech¬
niques, conducted a waste manage¬
ment study for California with projects
25 years ahead. Control and manage¬
ment of solid, liquid and gaseous
wastes generated by the State's rapidly
expanding population was assessed.
Subsequently, an intensive systematic
study was carried out of solid waste
in Fresno County, an area typical of
many other rapidly growing urban-
agricultural complexes throughout the
United States. Some nine months
before scheduled completion of the
study, environmental conditions in the
country were measurably improved by
adoption of recommendations in a
preliminary report.
California has applied aerospace
systems analysis techniques to the
solution of important social problems.
In 1965, the American space firm
Aerojet performed a systems analysis
study of the problems of crime and
delinquency In the State. Results of
the six-months effort demonstrated the
practicality of using aerospace tech¬
niques to gain new insight into crime
prevention and control procedures.
Of particular significance was the
simulation of the criminal justice
system on a computer.
This mathematical model enabled
systems engineers to determine how
well the system functioned and how
changes would affect its functioning.
Information was obtained on the
operation of a criminal justice system
that would require years to achieve in
actual practice.
Work is proceeding with the govern¬
ment of Venezuela on plans to provide
a management support programme
for the Ministry of Public Works.
A contract study has also recently
been completed for the government of
Chile on national air transportation,
with proposals for short, medium and
long-term development of both present
domestic and future international
routes.
An important aspect of the study is
evaluation of the systems approach as
a means of analyzing the socio¬
economic needs of less developed
countries. Even some of the most
fervent advocates of extended use of
the systems management approach
have serious apprehensions.
Prior to the Space Age few industries
were organized for innovation. Most
firms were created and managed to
use some existing technology to manu¬
facture and market products for which
there existed a recognizable demand.
And by the very nature of their
objectives and organization, they were
not equipped or properly motivated
to come up with anything truly new.
This static organizational provision
for innovation was found inadequate
for the rapid and radical pace of
technological change required by
space programmes and for the efficient
transfer of new space technology to
commercial uses.
Multi-functional teams involving
scientists, production engineers, sys¬
tems analysts and marketing spe¬
cialists, cutting across existinq organi¬
zational structures, working on an ad
hoc project team basis, were found to
enlist and deploy creative energies
much more effectively than compart¬
mentalized endeavour.
This relationship is not only more
flexible but it has no institutional
motives other than the task itself,
which means both that the selection
of personnel for team membership is
likely to be more commensurate with
the job to be done and that the results
of team action are much less likely
to be determined by considerations
foreign to the task at hand.
One of the really significant achieve¬
ments of the strains, traumas and
endless experimentation of the first
decade of space exploration has been
this use of ad hoc team structures to
direct the massive endeavours of
hundreds of thousands of minds in a
close-knit, synergistic combination of
government, university and industry
to tackle complex, large-scale pro¬
jects.
In the United 'States, the Apollo
Project has spawned an intimate, new
symbiosis of private and public
institutions, leaving each to perform
the tasks it knows and can do best
in co-operative effort that enhances the
abilities of both participating govern¬
mental and private organizations.
Quite deliberately NASA confined
its role to an integrating and directing
one, acting as a central fund of
experience and a point of transfer
through which painfully acquired
knowledge in managing and develop¬
ing complicated systems gets from
one contracting company to another.
This new interdependence of govern¬
ment, industry and the universities is
not primarily physical. On the
contrary, its strength and success
depends greatly on the preservation
of the intrinsic, independent character
of each party.
L
1ARGE universities such as
the Massachusetts Institute of Techno¬
logy, the California Institute of Techno¬
logy, Harvard and Columbia have
become the most prolific breeders of
private, science-based businesses in
which professors emerge as leaders of
industry. And, at the same time,
governments are increasingly inclined
to use industrial forms of organization
to run everything from post offices to
pension plans.
The late Adlai Stevenson saw the
true import of this new pluralism when
he stressed that if we are to realize
the great promise held out by our new
scientific and technological capabilities,
so greatly magnified by the venture
into space, two things are necessary:
"The first Is to recognize that in our
modern highly productive market
economy, stability and growth depend
upon a partnership between manage¬
ment, labour and government. The
second is an end to the quarrel bet¬
ween public and private purposes."
If what NASA and industry have
learned about management in space
programmes has contributed to these
objectives leading to better ways of
organizing ourselves to do the big
things we have to do to putting a
greater degree of rationality Into man's
relationships with his global environ¬
ment then in the conquest of space
we will have made our most signifi¬
cant investment in human progress
however infinite are the broad horizons
of the still known universe.
## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=39) 🆗
### Non-article text
Just published by Unesco
Study abroad XVIII
Etudes à l'étranger
Estudios en el extranjero
1970-1971
1971-1972
International scholarships and courses
Bourses et cours internationaux
Becas y cursos internacionales
Unesco
Composite : English-French-Spanish
660 pages
$6.00 36/-stg.(£1.80) 24 F.
Study Abroad
Vol. XVIII, 1970/1971, 1971/1972
Unesco's international students' guide to
opportunities for study abroad during the
academic years 1970-1971 and 1971-1972.
Lists scholarships, fellowships and
international courses offered by
129 countries and territories, covering
almost every field of study.
Gives easy-to-use information on: who can
study, what subject and where, how large
is the award, how and where to apply.
Where to renew your subscription
and order other Unesco publications
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to
the National Distributor in your country. (See list
below ; names of distributors in countries not
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is
made in the national currency ; the rates quoted
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO
COURIER in any one language.
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. AUSTRALIA.
Publications : Educational Supplies Pty. Ltd., P.O.
Box 33, Brookvale, 2 100 NSW ; Periodicals:
Dominie Pty. Limited, Box 33, Post Office, Brook¬
vale 2100 NSW. Sub-agent. United Nations As¬
sociation ot Australia, Victorian Division, 4th
Floor, Askew Housi, 364 Lonsdale St., Melbourne
(Victoria), 3000. ($ 2.75). - AUSTRIA. Verlag Georg
Fromme & C*., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V (AS 82)
BELGIUM. All publications: Editions "Labor", 342, rue
Royale, Brussels, 3. Presses Universitaires de Bruxelles,
42, av. Paul Héger, Brussels S. NV Standaard-We-
tenschappelijke Uitgeverij Belgièlei 1 47, Antwerp, I. For
the Unesco Courier (1 70 FB) and art slides (488 FB) only:
Jean de Lannoy, 112, rue du Trône, Brussels 5. CCP
3380.00. BURMA. Trade Corporation N« (9), 550-
552 Merchant Street, Rangoon. CANADA. Queen's
Printer, Ottawa. Ont. ($ 4.00). CEYLON. Lake House
Bookshop, SirChittampalam Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244,
Colombo, 2. (Rs 12.50) World Book Co.
Ltd., 99 Chungking South Rd., Section 1, Taipeh,
Taiwan (Formosa). CYPRUS. "MAM", Archbishop
Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 1722, Nicosia.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L.. Spalena 51, Prague 1
(permanent display); Zahranicni literatura 11 Soukenicka
Prague 1. DENMARK. Ejnar Munksgaard. Ltd.,
6, Norregade, 1165. Copenhagen K. (Dan. Kr. 19.00).
ETHIOPIA. National Commission for Unesco, P.O.
Box 2996, Addis Ababa. FINLAND. Akateemmen
Kinakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (Fmk. 11.90).
FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, Place de Fontenoy,
Pans-7«. CCP. 12598-48. (12F). GERMANY. All
publications: R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse
1 45,8 M un ich, 80. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed o.nly)
Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 1 60, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld. CCP.
276650 (DM 12). GHANA. Methodist Book Depot
Ltd., Atlantic House, Commercial Street, POB 100, Cape
Coast. GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom.
GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade,
Athens; Librairie Eleftheroudakis, Nikkis 4, Athens.
HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co.. 13-15 Lock Road,
Kowloon. HUNGARY. Akadémiai Konyvesbolt,
Váci u. 22, Budapest V; A.K.V. Konyvtárosok Boltia,
Népkoztársaság utja 16, Budapest VI. ICELAND.
Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co., H.F.. Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik.
INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd., Nicol Road, Ballard.
Estate, Bombay 1 ; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 1 3;
36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 3/5 Asaf Ali Road, New
Delhi 1 ; Sub-Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery Co.
1 7 Park Street, Calcutta 1 6 and Scindia House, New Del¬
hi ; Indian National Commission for Unesco, att. The Libra¬
rian, Ministry of Education, "C" Wing, Room N' 214,
Shastn Bhawan, New Delhi 1.(Rs. 13.50).
SIA. Indira P. T., D|l. Dr. Sam Ratulangie 37, Diakarta.
IRAN. Iranian National Commission for Unesco, 1 /1 54
Avenue Roosevelt, B P. 1533, Teheran. IRAQ. McKen-
zie's Bookshop, AI- Rashid Street, Baghdad ; University
Bookstore, University of Baghdad, P.O. Box 75, Baghdad.
IRELAND. The National Press, 2,Wellington Road, Balls-
bridge, Dublin, 4. ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly
Blumstein'5 Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48 Nahlat
Beniamin Street, Tel-AviviJL. 1 2.50 )JAMAICA. Sang-
ster's Book Stores Ltd., P.O.Box 366, 101 Water Lane,
Kingston. JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., P.O. Box 5050,
Tokyo International 1 00-31. JORDAN. Joseph I. Bahous
& Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Amman.
KENYA. E.S.A. Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi.
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco,
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. KUWAIT. The Kuwait
Bookshop Co., Ltd., P.O. Box 2942, Kuwait. LIBERIA.
Cole and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286.
Monrovia. LIBYA. Agency for Development of
Publication & Distribution, P.O. Box 261, Tripoli.
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Brück. 22, Grand-Rue,
Luxemburg (F L. 1 70). Federal Publica¬
tions Sdn Bhd., Balai Berita, 31 Jalan Riong, Kuala Lum¬
pur. MALTA. Sapienza's Library, 26 Kingsway, Valletta.
MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd.. 30, Bourbon
Street, Port Louis. MONACO. Britisn Library, 30,
Bid. des Moulins, Monte Carlo. NETHERLANDS.
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague,
(fl. 10). - NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G. C.
T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Cura¬
çao. N.A. (NA fl 5 25). NEW ZEALAND. Govern¬
ment Printing Office, Government Bookshops at: Rutland
Street, P.O. Box 5344, Auckland ; 130 Oxford Terrace,
P.O. Box 1721,Chnstchurch; Alma Street, P.O. Box 857
Hamilton ; Princes Street, P. O. Box 1 1 04, Dunedin ; Mul-
grave Street, Private Bag. Wellington. ($ 2.15) NOR
WAY. All publications; A.S. Bokhjornet, Akersgt 41 -Oslo
1. For Unesco Courier only: A.S. Narvesens Lltteratur-
jeneste. Box 61 25, Oslo 6 (K.2.75). PAKISTAN. The
West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., Unesco Publication House,
P.O. Box 374 G. P.O., Lahore; Showrooms: Urdu Bazar, La¬
hore, and 57-58MurreeHighway,G/6- 1, Islamabad. Pakis¬
tan Publications Bookshop, Sarwar Road, Rawalpindi ; Pan-
bagh, Dacca. PHILIPPINES.The Modern Book Co., 928.
Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box632, Manila. - POLAND. All publi¬
cations: ORWN PAN Palac Kultury i Nauki, Warsaw
For the Unesco Courier only : RUCH, ul. Wronia, 23,
Warsaw 1 0. PORTUGAL. Dias& Andrade Lda.Livraria
Portugal, rua de Carmo 70. Lisbon . PUERTO RICO.
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor Roosevelt 115.
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. SINGAPORE. Federal Pu¬
blications Sdn Bhd , Times House, River Valley Road, Sin¬
gapore 9. RHODESIA. Textbook Sales
(PVT) Ltd., 67 Union Avenue, Salisbury. SUDAN.
AI Bashir Bookshop, P. O. Box 1118. Khartoum.
SWEDEN. All publications : A/B CE. Fritzes Kungl.
Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2. Box 16356, 103 27 Stock¬
holm 16. For the Unesco Courier : Svenska FN.
Forbundet, Vasagatan 1 5-IV 101 23 Stockholm 1
Postgiro 18 46 92 (Kr. 18) SWITZERLAND.
All publications: Europa Verlag. 5 Rimistrasse,
Zurich. Librairie Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211,
Geneva 11, CCP. 1-23 6. "Courier" only : Georges
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. CCP.
12-4811. (Fr. S. 12). TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam
Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam. THAILAND.
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok.
(37.50 baht). TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. UGANDA. Uganda Book¬
shop, P.O. Box 1 45, Kampala. AFRICA.
All publications: Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty). Ltd.,
Libri Building, Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria.
For the Unesco Courier (single copies) only: Central
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg.
- UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie
Kasr El Nil. 38. rue Kasr El Nil, Cairo. Sub-agent:
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, Cairo.
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O.
Box 569, London, S.E.I., and Government Bookshops
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester,
Birmingham and Bristol. (20/-). UNITED STATES.
Unesco Publications Center, P.O. Box 433, New York,
N.Y. 1001 6 ($ 5). U.S.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaia Kniga.
Moscow. G-200. YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska
Knj'iga .Teraziie, 27, Belgrade ; Drzavna Zaluzba Slovenije,
Mestni Trg. 26, Ljubljana.
## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078253engo.pdf#page=40) 🆗
### Non-article text
7
EARS FOR SATELLITES
These two 40-foot-diameter parabolic antenna are used to
receive, amplify and transmit messages through a satellite
communications network. Easily transportable,
they can be reassembled in 48 hours.
Photo Henry W. McAllister, New York - Hughes Aircraft Company
Ik."! -
v .*