# [189559](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf)
## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=1) 🆗
### Non-article text
2007 • number 8 • ISSN 1993-8616
UNESCO  
a Will aNd a Way
## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=2) 🆗
### Non-article text
2007 - N° 8
Contents
UNESCO: a Will aNd a Way
Six hundred and thirty-one million dollars – this is the minimum amount UNESCO 
needs to operate for the next two years. The budget will be set at the 34th session 
of UNESCO’s General Conference, which brings together - in Paris, from 16 Octo-
ber to 3 November - the representatives of the Organization’s 193 Member States 
who will also determine the 2008-2009 programme. a preview of the Organization’s 
future priorities is presented in this issue of the UNESCO Courier. 
EdiTORial 3
Irrigated land in Mexico.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/F
ra
nc
e 
B
eq
ue
tte
RESPONdiNG  
TO NEW ExiGENCiES
What are UNESCO’s priorities  
for the next two years?  
On the eve of the Organization’s General Conference  
(16 October - 3 November) which will determine  
its new programme and budget, Koïchiro Matsuura,  
the Director-General, gives us a preview of the coming biennium. 4
CUlTURES TRavEl  
WiTh hUMaNiTy
Cultural diversity and dialogue between  
cultures are on the list of UNESCO’s  
top priorities. The Organization now has three conventions  
that protect humanity’s cultural heritage.  
The challenge lies in applying them. 5
WaTER, aN ObviOUS PRiORiTy
Nearly one person out of five in the world  
has no access to drinking water. Hardly  
surprising that water is UNESCO’s  
main priority. To face this challenge, the Organization emphasizes  
education and increased knowledge about this key resource.  
Another UNESCO priority issue related to water is preventing  
and reducing the impact of tsunamis. 6
FROM EdUCaTiON  
FOR all TO all OF EdUCaTiON
Newly appointed Assistant Director-General  
for UNESCO’s Education Sector and former  
Director of the Education for All (EFA) Global Monitoring Report  
published by UNESCO, Nicholas Burnett explains his vision  
for education and UNESCO’s role in promoting it. 8
MakiNG ROOM FOR  
dialOGUE
“We’re no longer merely conducting  
and publishing research. Or preparing 
conventions and declarations.” Pierre Sané, UNESCO’s  
Assistant Director-General for Social and Human Sciences, 
wants to go further and get involved on the ground. Promoting 
dialogue and building capacity are his main goals.   12
TOWaRdS iNClUSivE  
kNOWlEdGE SOCiETiES
Over the coming two years, UNESCO  
is committed to continue working  
for freedom of expression and press freedom and to promoting 
the use of the information and communication technologies  
to foster inclusive knowledge societies that empower  
individuals and communities. 10
 Budgets 14
 the general ConferenCe in 20 dates  15
 What they say aBout unesCo 16
## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=3) 🆗
### Editorial: UNESCO: a will and a way
3The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
UNESCO 
 a Will aNd a Way
631 million dollars – this is the minimum 
amount UNESCO needs to operate 
for the next two years. 
The budget will be set 
at the 34th session of UNESCO’s 
General Conference, which brings 
together - in Paris, from 16 October 
to 3 November - 
the representatives 
of the Organization’s 
193 Member States who will also 
determine the 2008-2009 programme. 
a preview of the Organization’s future 
priorities is presented in this issue 
of the UNESCO Courier. 
In an interview, the Director-General 
of UNESCO, Koïchiro Matsuura, 
shares his thoughts about the Or-
ganization’s role in the reform of the 
United Nations, and underlines Af-
rica and gender equality as priorities 
 that concern all sectors of UNESCO. 
The culture sector, illustrated by the 
article “Cultures travel with human-
ity”, emphasizes particularly the im-
portance of cultural diversity and dia-
logue between cultures; the natural 
sciences sector, focus of the article 
“Water, an obvious priority”, stresses 
education and furthering knowledge 
about this crucial resource. 
The new Assistant Director-General 
for Education, Nicholas Burnett, puts 
forward in an interview his vision 
 of the Organization’s mission to pro-
mote education. In spite of extremely 
strict budgetary restrictions, he does 
not believe that financial resources 
represent a real problem. 
EdiTORial 
UNESCO headquarters
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/N
in
a 
Le
vi
nt
ha
l
The article “Towards inclusive knowl-
edge societies”, describing the 
communication and information 
sector, highlights freedom of ex-
pression and the ways in which 
the new technologies contribute to 
safeguarding knowledge and shar-
ing information. “Making room for 
dialogue”, about the social and 
human sciences sector, defines ca-
pacity building as the sector’s num-
ber-one goal. 
The features in this latest UNESCO 
Courier include a chronological pre-
sentation of past sessions of the 
General Conference since 1946; 
excerpts from the international sym-
posium “60 Years of UNESCO” 
(2005); clips of early Courier ar-
ticles about the General Confer-
ence; and a closer look at the 
Organization’s budget. 
Jasmina Šopova 
## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=4) 🆗
### Responding to new exigencies
4The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
ing tangible contributions to the at-
tainment of internationally agreed 
development goals. 
Moreover the Organization has set 
two overarching priorities- Africa and 
gender equality. In general, UNES-
CO will strive to act in a unified man-
ner and favour an “intersectoral” ap-
proach, rather than organizing work 
sector by sector. UN coherence and 
effectiveness begins at home. As 
we are striving to “deliver as one” at 
the country level, we must also dem-
onstrate within our own organization 
that we can act together as one. 
Lip service alone will not suffice. We 
must also solidify our presence and 
impact at both the global and coun-
try levels, capitalizing on our range of 
competences and functions.
Will UNESCO have 
the necessary resources 
to implement its activities?
It is in the nature of our mission that 
we are always asked to do more and 
hence need more resources. 
But in a world with limited resour- 
ces, where governments are also 
tightening their budgets, we must 
learn to economize and to implement 
our activities in the most cost-effective 
manner. New modalities may need to 
be applied which will allow us to ren-
der assistance with less financial in-
put without compromising results and 
quality of delivery. In this context, think 
only of the potential of South-South 
cooperation. 
At this General Conference, I am 
asking UNESCO’s Member States to 
provide us with a budget level of US$ 
631 million for the next two years. This 
is above the zero-nominal growth level 
that has constrained us in past years. 
It is not as high as many of us would 
have wished. But I am confident that 
it is a level that can command con-
sensus among the different interests 
and aspirations of our Member Go- 
vernments. Consensus on the bud-
get level would thus strengthen the 
Organization as a whole and lay a so- 
lid foundation for support in the years 
to come.                               
You have said that UNESCO 
plays a key role in the reform 
of the United Nation’s system. 
Could you explain? 
UNESCO is playing a key role in 
the reform of the UN system for a 
number of reasons. For one, no sus-
tainable development effort is con-
ceivable at the country level without 
education, without culture and with-
out science and technology which 
are our Organization’s fields of com-
petence. They all are key drivers for 
the attainment of the internationally 
agreed development goals, including 
the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs). UNESCO is indispensable 
in providing the requisite expertise 
and assistance to its Member States. 
Our efforts globally to design a 
structure that better responds to the 
expectations of developing countries 
and the exigencies of donors are al-
ready beginning to bear fruit, in par-
ticular where it counts: for the people 
of developing countries. 
UNESCO is also in a privileged po-
sition to take advantage of the link-
age between global normative work 
and its translation into operational 
reality - applying best practices and 
proven knowledge in all regions of 
the world. 
I am convinced that UNESCO must 
proactively contribute to the UN re-
form pilots currently under way in a 
few countries. This will help us gain 
experience with new, more effective 
modalities of cooperation, and to in-
sert ourselves into a range of com-
mon UN programmes in different 
countries. Dedicated training efforts 
for field and headquarters staff will 
help ensure that UNESCO provides 
high-quality assistance.
What are UNESCO’s priorities 
for the coming two years?
UNESCO’s priorities for the com-
ing two years are set out in the new 
medium-term strategy and the pro-
gramme and budget, both of which 
will be adopted by the General Con-
ference in October. 
Each Programme Sector will have 
to pursue two or three specific pri-
orities and seek to attain explicitly 
defined results. This results-based 
approach will be a consistent fea-
ture of all our activities in the future. 
Our efforts will be measured by the 
extent to which we succeed in mak-
                             What are UNESCO’s priorities for the next two years? On the eve 
                                   of the Organization’s General Conference (16 October - 3 November) 
                                    which will determine its new programme and budget, koïchiro Matsuura, 
                                             the director-General, gives us a preview of the coming biennium.
Responding  
to new exigencies  
Koïchiro Matsuura,  
Director-General of UNESCO.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/M
ic
he
l R
av
as
sa
rd
Koïchiro Matsuura answers Jasmina Šopova’s questions. 
## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=5) 🆗
### Cultures travel with humanity
5The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
         Cultural diversity and dialogue between cultures are on the list of UNESCO’s 
          top priorities. The Organization now has three conventions that protect humanity’s
               cultural heritage. The challenge lies in applying them.
cultuRes tRavel 
 with humanity
Safeguarding and promoting cul-
tural diversity and its corollary, dia-
logue between cultures, make up a 
UNESCO priority. The Organization 
spent years identifying and making 
an inventory of cultural property 
around the world before putting for-
ward in 1972 the Convention con-
cerning the Protection of the World 
Cultural and Natural Heritage. It 
was an important phase, necessary 
but not sufficient. Because the con-
cept reflected rather heavily the Eu-
ropean perspective, a large portion 
of the world whose cultural wealth 
did not rest on tangible heritage felt 
excluded. 
In the years since 2000, the con-
cept of culture was expanded in the 
Organization’s texts. The UNESCO 
Universal Declaration on Cultural 
Diversity (2001) defined it as “the 
set of distinctive spiritual, material, 
intellectual and emotional features 
of society or a social group that en-
compasses, in addition to art and 
literature, lifestyles, ways of living 
together, value systems, traditions 
and beliefs.” 
Two new texts emerged: the Con-
vention for the Safeguarding of the 
Intangible Cultural Heritage (2003), 
followed by the Convention on the 
Protection and Promotion of the 
Diversity of Cultural Expressions 
(2005). “With these instruments, 
we practically completed the cons= 
truction of the legal structure to 
protect cultural property,” explains 
Françoise Rivière, Assistant Direc-
tor-General for Culture. “UNESCO 
today protects cultures in all their 
forms: tangible, intangible and ob-
jects (museum pieces, for instance, 
or shipwrecks protected by the 
Convention for the Protection of 
the Underwater Cultural Heritage). 
From now on, the challenge lies 
in the application of the conven-
tions. Most people think a conven-
tion’s entry into force is the end of 
the process when on the contrary 
that’s where it all starts, once the 
normative base exists.”
The essence of greater 
harmony
Cultural diversity was recognized 
as “common heritage of humanity” 
in the 2001 Universal Declaration. 
The World Heritage sites testify to 
this, both through places (from Ven-
ice, Italy to Timbuktu, Mali and Eas-
ter Island, Chile) and down through 
time (from the archaeological sites 
of the Côa Valley, Portugal, to 
Brasilia). Further testimony comes 
from the masterpieces of the oral 
and intangible heritage of humanity, 
as diverse as Bolivian Kallawaya rit-
uals, Japanese Ningyo Johruri Bun-
raku puppet theatre, Vanuatu sand 
drawings, Georgian polyphonic 
singing, and the Gule Wamkulu 
dance with masks practiced in Ma-
lawi, Zambia and Mozambique. 
Diversity is both an established 
fact and a value. Its recognition as a 
factor in social cohesion and human 
development, essential for greater 
harmony in intellectual, emotional, 
moral and spiritual life, is at the 
heart of UNESCO’s concerns.
Today’s tradition,  
yesterday’s novelty
Nonetheless, the decision to safe-
guard diversity in the face of homog-
enization and the threat of extinction 
is not synonymous with a vision of 
culture as unchangeable, isolated 
and defensive. All cultures are dy-
namic; they evolve with time, through 
contact with other cultures – some-
times in the form of exchange, other 
times conflict. Diversity always in-
volves a degree of tension. Cultures 
are not sedentary; they’re nomadic, 
they travel with humanity. Not stat-
ic but fluctuating, they grow and 
change. Today’s tradition is yester-
The felt bowler hat, typical of 19th century Europe, 
is now typical of Aymara Indians in the Andes.
©
 F
lic
kr
/T
## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=6) 🆗
### Cultures travel with humanity
6The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
day’s novelty. The felt bowler hat, typical 
of 19th century Europe, is now typical 
of Aymara Indians in the Andes. This is 
why diversity and dialogue have a rela-
tionship of reciprocity. Cultural heritage 
is not a static legacy that need only be 
safeguarded, like a museum piece, but 
instead the ground for permanent and 
sometimes tense dialogue, among all 
its forms of expression. 
The concept of culture has indeed 
changed over time, but the safe-
guarding of cultural diversity has 
been a priority for UNESCO since 
its foundation, as shown in its Con-
stitution, in which the Organization 
pledges to help preserve “the inde-
pendence, integrity and fruitful diver-
sity of the cultures and educational 
systems of the States members”.  n
Carlos Tello Díaz 
(UNESCO)Minaret and interior courtyard of the Mosque 
of Sankare, Timbuctu, Mali.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/T
. J
of
fro
y/
C
R
AT
er
re
-E
A
G

### Water, an obvious priority
wateR, an obvious pRioRity
                  Nearly one person out of five in the world has no access to drinking water. 
            hardly surprising that water is UNESCO’s main priority. To face this challenge,
              the Organization emphasizes education and increased knowledge 
                      about this key resource. another UNESCO priority issue related to water 
                              is preventing and reducing the impact of tsunamis.
A qanat in Iran. Qanats spread as far as Mexico in the West  
and China in the East.
©
 F
lic
kr
/H
ad
i F
oo
la
di
Contrary to popular belief, there 
is enough water on the planet for 
everybody - but on the condition 
the supply is managed wisely. As it 
stands, 1.1 billion people still have 
insufficient access to drinking wa-
ter, according to the 2006 United 
Nations World Water Development 
Report (WWDR). And halving 
the percentage of the population 
without access to water by 2015, 
as specified in the United Nations 
Millennium Goals, will be a major 
challenge. Estimates say this goal 
will not be reached in Sub-Saharan 
Africa before 2075. 
“Water has been the main priority 
of UNESCO’s Natural Sciences 
sector for the last six years,” says 
Walter Erdelen, Assistant Director-
General for Natural Sciences. A di-
rect consequence: the budget allo-
cated to water-related programmes 
has increased by 40% since 
2001. “The activities conducted by 
UNESCO in the domain of fresh-
water are by far the most extensive 
within the United Nations system. 
We employ about 200 people,” 
says Andràs Szollosi-Nagy, Direc-
tor of the Division of Water Scienc-
es at UNESCO. 
Essential for assuring effective 
distribution of resources, wise wa-
ter management is all the more cru-
cial in regions affected by drought 
or desertification. “There will always 
be enough water for everyone, but 
humans must realize the impor-
tance of good governance for this 
precious resource,” stresses Szol-
losi-Nagy.
Investing  
in the future
To manage water more wisely, we 
need sound knowledge of existing 
resources. This is why UNESCO 
contributes to the United Nations 
World Water Development Report 
(WWDR), published every three 
years (next edition in 2009). In ad-
dition, 12 water centres have been 
established in different countries 
around the world to increase knowl-
edge about this resource. Centres 
specialized in key areas such as 
managing water in urban settings, 
water and climate change, and wa-
ter laws and policies are adding to 
research and reframing the water 
issue within a wider cultural context. 
## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=7) 🆗
### Water, an obvious priority
7The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
The International Centre on Qa-
nats and Historic Hydraulic Struc-
tures (ICQHHS) in Yazd (Iran), for 
instance, conducts research on 
these traditional underground irri-
gation systems. 
The goal is to revive the ancestral 
technique in regions where modern 
solutions, which use up a lot of wa-
ter, have failed. Another goal is to 
promote systems that further not 
only irrigation but also communica-
tion among people and cultures. 
“Qanats, which appeared in Iran al-
most 3000 years ago, spread as far 
as Mexico in the West and China 
in the East,” explains Szollosi-Nagy.
Prevent  
the worst
Another key issue for the Sciences 
sector: disaster mitigation, particu-
larly tsunamis. Founded in the mid-
1960s in the Pacific Ocean, the 
tsunami early warning system has 
since made considerable progress. 
With the help of extra budgetary 
funding that poured in after the 
December 2004 tsunami, the pro-
visional alert system was deployed 
in the Indian Ocean. Sweden - 10% 
of its population annually chooses 
Thailand as a holiday destination - 
donated a substantial amount. In 
coming years, the Intergovernmen-
tal Oceanographic Commission 
(IOC) plans to expand the alert sys-
tem to the North Atlantic, the Medi-
terranean and the Caribbean. 
Baan Khem, Phang Nga province, one of the hardest hit villages 
during the tsunami of 26 December 2004.
The existing tsunami warning sys-
tem, implemented in the Pacific 
Ocean in the 1960s and in the In-
dian Ocean in 2006, uses 35 deep-
ocean pressure sensors. These de-
vices, installed at a depth of 1000 
to 4000 meters, detect seismic ac-
tivity leading to a tsunami and send 
an alert. Only 88 are needed to 
make the system global. But funds 
are lacking for such a system to 
be deployed. Just 1.2% of UNES-
CO’s budget is currently allocated 
to IOC activities. 
To avert future disasters, better 
coordination between the various 
coastal countries is another cru-
cial requirement. “Technically, the 
warning system in the North Atlan-
tic, Mediterranean and Caribbean 
will certainly be in place by 2009. 
But will the alert signal reach the 
populations concerned? Highly 
unlikely! Even if you have a tele-
phone, you still need to know the 
number to call the fire depart-
ment!” explains Patricio Bernal, 
IOC Executive Secretary. 
More funds, better understand-
ing between coastal countries 
– additional conditions for suc-
cessfully implementing a global 
tsunami warning system include 
revising maritime legislation, 
teaching populations about res-
cue techniques and creating 
evacuation infrastructure.
Katerina Markelova 
and Agnès Bardon 
(UNESCO)
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/Z
ha
na
t K
ul
en
ov
The Aral sea is drying up. Studies, tests, measurements of the level,  
the salinity of water are done by the Institute of Geography.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/C
S
I/
LI
N
K
S
, B
an
gk
ok
/D
er
ek
 E
lia
s
## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=8) 🆗
### From Education for All to all of education
8The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
                       Newly appointed assistant director-General for UNESCO’s Education Sector 
                         and former director of the Education for all (EFa) Global Monitoring Report
                                      published by UNESCO, Nicholas burnett explains his vision for education
                                                and UNESCO’s role in promoting it.
FRom education FoR all 
 to all oF education
Hagara Elementary in Port Moresby (Hanuabada). Papua New Guinea 
has over 800 different languages and children can begin their learning 
experience in their mother-tongue.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/R
oc
ky
 R
oeAs Director of the Global  
Monitoring Report, your focus 
has been on progress towards 
the Education for All (EFA) 
goals. What are you going  
o draw from that experience? 
I have a good knowledge of what 
has to be done both around the 
world, with our partner agencies and 
within the sector. But I don’t intend to 
only be the Assistant Director-Gener-
al (ADG) for Education for All. I intend 
to be the ADG for all of education. 
Within that, nothing is more impor-
tant, however, than EFA. 
What needs to be done  
with EFA? 
EFA goals… emerge as being in 
two categories: goals which people 
are paying attention to, such as pri-
mary school, gender parity and qual-
ity in education and goals which peo-
ple are not paying sufficient attention 
to such as, with some notable excep-
tions, literacy, early childhood and 
the needs of youth who don’t go to 
school or don’t learn while at school. I 
am particularly worried about the lack 
of movement on literacy. 
We need to make sure that we are 
well geared up to promote the areas 
where we’re not moving through ad-
vocacy and through making the tech-
nical competencies available where 
they are needed.
What other areas need  
particular attention?
Secondary education for example, 
for which, because of the relative 
success at the primary level, there is 
Interview by Ariane Bailey and Sue Williams (UNESCO)
an enormous demand coming from 
all over the world. We have to see 
what we need to do to help support 
that. It can be partially within the EFA 
framework through gender parity but 
it is much more. 
One of the issues globalisation is 
raising in almost every country is: 
what sort of specific skills do people 
need, what is the balance between 
specific and general skills? We 
need to help countries come to their 
own answers. Vocational skills and 
training is, of course, an area of the 
International Labour Organization 
(ILO) activity as well as UNESCO 
and I intend to explore our relation-
ship with ILO. 
International finance is a third area 
that needs attention. There are 
two big problems: first, there is not 
enough and second, it is not nec-
## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=9) 🆗
### From Education for All to all of education
9The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
essarily going to the right countries 
and the right sub-sectors of educa-
tion. Although UNESCO is not an 
aid agency, it is a major voice and 
has a major advocacy role to play, to 
constructively engage with some of 
the donors. Too much of some coun-
tries’ bilateral aid goes to foreign 
students attending their universities 
and clearly insufficient resources 
are going to Africa. Moreover, we’re 
facing a worrying situation: aid for 
basic education has increased pro-
gressively until 2004 and dropped 
in 2005. Preliminary data for 2006 
also indicate that promises aren’t 
being met but that doesn’t mean 
they aren’t being met by some of the 
donors.
How can we change  
this tendency?
There is a lot of interest and good-
will among donors in how they 
could support UNESCO more di-
rectly. The donors don’t want us to 
fail; they want us to succeed: what 
we have to figure out is ways to 
work with them as partners so we 
succeed and they succeed as well. 
I’m looking to reinforce several 
partnerships for direct collabora-
tion with OECD and with EFA part-
ners - World Bank, United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP), 
UNICEF, United Nations Popula-
tion Fund - but also with the Fast 
Track Initiative (FTI). UNESCO has 
just become a more formal mem-
ber of FTI, and there is enormous 
scope for collaboration. But its na-
ture depends on what we are trying 
to do: part of it is about influencing 
where the aid goes and for this the 
links with the World Bank and the 
FTI are very important. 
Our credibility also has to do with 
knowledge and knowledge man-
agement. UNESCO should be the 
premier source of knowledge about 
education in the world... Knowledge 
is one of the key areas at UNESCO 
that we need partly to rebuild and 
partly make more visible. I’ve been 
surprised at how much knowledge 
there is at UNESCO. The problem 
is getting access to it. 
We have to separate knowledge 
production and generation, and 
knowledge management where we 
would like to take advantage of 
knowledge generation by others as 
well as by us. 
What about  
private partnerships? 
I want to look for ways to work ef-
fectively with the private sector. For 
example, we need to do more work 
on private schools. In countries like 
Haiti education is delivered through 
the private sector as in much of Latin 
America. We should take a pragmatic 
approach towards private education 
and play an important role in helping 
governments regulate it. Regulation 
doesn’t have to be seen as control to 
dampen down but positive regulation 
to align services delivered by the pri-
vate sector with public goals. 
Resources for UNESCO  
are perhaps the first obstacle 
that leaps up? 
There are two types of resources, 
financial and human; despite the very 
tight budgetary constraints, I don’t 
believe that resources will ultimately 
be a problem. There is an enormous 
amount of money around to support 
education development in develop-
ing countries and I believe that we 
can access it if we deploy our own 
human resources properly. 
We have many capable people and 
we have good relationships with our 
Member States. We have to improve 
the way we work together.
Nicholas Burnett.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/D
an
iç
a 
B
ije
lja
c
A child working in a village above Chang Mai (Karen Village), Thailand.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/D
an
iç
a 
B
ije
lja
c
## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=10) 🆗
### Towards inclusive knowledge societies
10The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
«C
                  Over the coming two years, UNESCO is committed to continue working for freedom 
                           of expression and press freedom and to promoting the use of the information 
                                 and communication technologies to foster inclusive knowledge societies 
                                       that empower individuals and communities.  
towaRds  
inclusive knowledge societies
 ontributing to the construction 
of inclusive knowledge societies 
through information and com-
munication,” is how UNESCO’s 
Assistant Director-General for 
Communication and Information 
(ADG/CI), Abdul Waheed Khan 
encapsulates the objectives of 
his sector for the coming bien-
nium. 
This echoes objectives estab-
lished by World Summit on the 
Information Society (WSIS), 
which UNESCO helped organize 
in Geneva in 2003 and in Tunis in 
2005. UNESCO remains active 
in the WSIS process, destined to 
build people-centered informa-
tion societies that are mindful 
of the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, and, of the ba-
sic human right of freedom of 
expression. 
That strategy focuses on foster-
ing free, independent and plura- 
listic communication and univer-
sal access to information. This is 
essential for the strengthening 
of participatory democracy and 
for the struggle against poverty, 
as communication and informa-
tion play a central role in devel-
opment. However, in many parts 
of the world, the media need to 
be reinforced so as to contribute 
to the international development 
drive, says Mr Khan. 
Media development has long 
been at the centre of CI’s work, 
notably through programmes 
such as the International Pro-
gramme for the Development of 
Communication (IPDC) which, 
over the last 27 years, has raised 
some US$ 93 million for over 
1,100 projects in 139 develop-
ing countries and countries in 
transition. IPDC is the only forum 
in the United Nations to discuss 
and promote free and indepen-
dent media in developing coun-
Cyber café, Jemaa el-Fna square in Morocco.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/F
io
na
 R
ya
n
## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=11) 🆗
### Towards inclusive knowledge societies
11The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
tries and countries in transition. 
The CI sector is also committed 
to continue serving as a watch-
dog for freedom of expression 
around the world, an area in 
which UNESCO plays a leading 
role, reminding Member States 
of their obligation to respect this 
fundamental human right en-
shrined in the Universal Declara-
tion on Human Rights and recog-
nized by the WSIS.
Creating  
resources
“Creating the resources in 
Member States for them to de-
velop free and independent me-
dia is our bread and butter,” says 
Mr Khan, recalling that universal 
access to knowledge depends 
on adequate communication and 
information infrastructures. 
“At stake is the empowerment 
of individuals and communities”, 
says Mr Khan, who recalls that 
the link between empowerment 
and knowledge is becoming ever 
stronger. It is therefore not sur-
prising that another major objec-
tive for CI, is to support UNESCO 
in working towards fulfilling the 
ambitious goals of the Education 
For All (EFA) drive adopted by the 
international community in Dakar 
in 2000. EFA concerns overall 
improvements in the provision of 
quality basic education and life 
skills to all and achieving gender 
parity in education by 2015.
The multiplier  
effect
Mr Khan explains that the in-
formation and communication 
technologies (ICTs) can have a 
“multiplier effect,” contributing 
to the education of learners and 
the training of teachers. “Like-
wise, CI works to ensure that the 
multiplier effect of ICTs benefits 
UNESCO’s promotion of cul-
tural diversity and dissemination 
of scientific knowledge.” Thus, 
argues Mr Khan, CI is the leader 
when it comes to cooperation be-
tween UNESCO’s sectors. 
In addition, the ADG recalls that 
ICTs not only help generate and 
disseminate knowledge but are 
also important for the preserva-
tion of knowledge. Programmes 
such as Memory of the World 
serve to preserve and dissemi-
nate the heritage of documen-
tary material and archives. Thus, 
through ICTs, UNESCO’s Com-
munication and Information sec-
tor has become involved in the 
preservation of knowledge, in-
cluding indigenous knowledge, 
and in cultural heritage. 
The new technologies have ope- 
ated a deep change in the flow 
of information and its sharing. 
Mr Khan strongly believes that 
UNESCO must play its role in 
bridging the knowledge gap to 
ensure that this multidirectional 
flow of information and know- 
ledge does not pass by those 
who are less privileged. With pro-
grammes such as the Community 
Multimedia Centres, and a wide 
range of partners including some 
of the world’s leading private 
sector companies and NGOs, 
as well as networks such as the 
new Power of Peace Network, Mr 
Khan is convinced that UNESCO 
can contribute to world peace 
and development.
Roni Amelan 
(UNESCO)
New technologies in a village in Namibia.
The Hudson’s Bay Company Archival Records (Canada) are inscribed 
on UNESCO’s «Memory of the World» Register. This programme 
encourages the preservation of documentary heritage.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/C
le
m
en
ce
 P
et
it 
P
er
ro
t
©
 M
an
ito
ba
 g
ou
ve
rn
m
en
t
## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=12) 🆗
### Making room for dialogue
12The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
States facing the challenges of re-
gional integration – this was the 
focus of the seminar recently held 
in Cap Verde (24-26 September 
2007), as part of an extensive re-
search project launched under the 
auspices of the programme MOST 
(Management of Social Transfor-
mations). The project, exploring 
the reasons for the slow progress 
of a process essential for lifting 
West African countries out of their 
“maldevelopment”, has already or-
ganized national seminars in 10 of 
the 15 Member States of the Eco-
nomic Community of West African 
States (ECOWAS). Five more of 
these seminars will take place in 
upcoming months, leading up to an 
international conference in autumn 
2008 that will formulate proposi-
tions to be submitted to ECOWAS 
heads of state. 
Each of these 10 meetings pro-
vided the opportunity to gather 
around the same table scientists, 
political decision-makers and those 
involved in economic and social de-
velopment. “Often it was the first 
time they’d been brought together,” 
underlines Pierre Sané, UNES-
CO’s Assistant Director-General 
for Social and Human Sciences. 
The project clearly illustrates the 
objective the Social and Human 
Sciences sector (SHS) has set for 
the future: engage researchers and 
policy-makers in dialogue so that 
social transformations can be more 
closely linked to the values inherent 
in UNESCO’s Constitution.
Promoting dialogue
For Mr Sané, “The main thrust is that 
we’re no longer merely conducting 
and publishing research. Or prepar-
ing conventions and declarations. 
We want to go further and facilitate 
policy-making that takes into ac-
count the results of this research 
and the standards defined by these 
instruments. Such implementation 
demands dialogue, so SHS is cre-
ating places for dialogue.” This is 
the case for the programme? Net-
work? Supporting regional integra-
tion, but also for managing social 
                  “We’re no longer merely conducting and publishing research. 
 Or preparing conventions and declarations.” Pierre Sané, UNESCO’s assistant director-General 
                   for Social and human Sciences, wants to go further and get involved on the ground. 
                            Promoting dialogue and building capacity are his main goals.
making Room  
for dialogue
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/I
va
ld
o 
A
lv
es
Federal Supreme Court of Justice, Brazil.
## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=13) 🆗
### Making room for dialogue
13The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
development, through regional or 
sub-regional forums of Social De-
velopment Ministers. The model, 
launched in Latin America back in 
2001, is now taking root in the dif-
ferent regions around the world. 
It encourages not only exchange 
between researchers and decision-
makers but also among the minis-
ters themselves. To date nearly 80 
ministers and ministry delegates 
have taken an active part in these 
regional or sub-regional meetings. 
The coalitions of cities against rac-
ism, is another programme pro-
moting dialogue. Here the cities 
facilitate connections between 
decision-makers, researchers and 
various representatives of civil soci-
ety at the local level to implement 
concrete actions – through educa-
tion, housing, employment or cul-
tural activities – against racism and 
exclusion. 
In the same area of human rights 
can be noted the existing networks 
or those being formed to tackle 
the obstacles encountered by 
specific rights directly concerning 
UNESCO: right to education with 
the Latin American Research Net-
work of Ombudspersons (LARNO) 
and cultural rights with the African 
Research Network on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights (AR-
NESCR). And the effort to create 
places for dialogue applies also to 
other SHS fields of action. 
Even philosophy fits in, as it cre-
ates dialogue between Asia and 
the Arab world, or Africa and Latin 
America. Post-conflict justice will 
thus be the issue debated at the 
philosophical dialogue between Af-
rica and Latin America, to be held 
in Angola.
Capacity 
building
Other examples, concerning wom-
en or ethics? Mr Sané started to 
cite some – the Palestinian Wom-
en’s Research and Documentation 
Centre, for one – and changed his 
mind. Obviously the strategic focus 
of dialogue still applies to those ac-
tivities, but they seem more closely 
related to the second main thrust: 
building capacities. This is not really 
a new priority for SHS: UNESCO 
has long been providing assistance 
to member states who request it. 
To develop scientific ethics, for in-
stance, to set up national ethical 
committees or regional centres, 
and so on. But there too momen-
tum is building. After Vilnius and 
Egerton, Doha and Cordoba will 
acquire Regional Documentation 
and Information Centres for bioeth-
ics education. The Asia Pacific re-
gion will soon be dealing with the 
ethics of energy technologies. An 
equivalent of the Palestinian wom-
en’s research centre is planned in 
the Great Lakes region of Africa. 
There is no shortage of projects.
Pierre Gaillard, 
(UNESCO)
Preparing for a workshop on democracy, human rights  
and the management of conflict (Cubal, Angola).
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/G
er
t V
an
 D
er
m
ee
rs
ch
A father and his daughter in front of their house, in a shantytown in Italy.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/J
ea
n 
M
oh
r
## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=14) 🆗
### Non-article text
With 17.2% of the regular budget,  
the Education sector gets the largest share.  
This is shown in the distribution of the regular budget put forward for 2008-2009,  
to be approved by the General Conference  
(16 October – 3 November).
14
The graph on the left illustrates  
the planned breakdown of the regular budget, 
which is made up of the Member States’  
mandatory contributions. 
Source: Bureau of the budget.
The graph on the left shows  
how the regular budget has changed since 1981, 
in budget periods (usually two years).  
While in 1981-83 it amounted to US$414 million, 
for 2006-07 it came to US$610.  
In real terms, however, the 610 million  
calculated according to a constant dollar value 
(that of 1981-83), would be the equivalent today 
of US$ 273 million. 
Source: Bureau of the budget.
The graph on the left shows the evolution  
of extrabudgetary resources,  
meaning the contributions the main partners  
of the United Nations system  
and the Member States choose to make.  
From US$176.7 million in 1988-89,  
they increased to US$676.4million in 2002-3. 
Since 2004, data are annual, not biennial. 
Source: Bureau of the budget.
budget
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=15) 🆗
### Non-article text
The General Conference  
in 20 dates
To date there have been 
34 ordinary and  
4 extraordinary sessions 
of the General Conference. 
Some of the well-known  
and not so well-known  
highlights of the past 61 years
1946 – A solemn ceremony at the 
Sorbonne University in Paris opens the 
first session of the General Conference. 
Meetings take place at the former Hotel 
Majestic, UNESCO’s headquarters on 
the Avenue Kléber. Julian Huxley (United 
Kingdom) is elected Director-General. 
1947 – he second conference meets 
in Mexico City and adopts a programme 
focused on the reconstruction and reha-
bilitation of educational, scientific and 
cultural life in war-devastated countries. 
Also of interest to delegates: ecological 
problems of tropical forests, notably in 
the Amazon. 
1953 – An extraordinary session 
approves the nomination of Luther H. 
Evans (United States) as the new Direc-
tor-General. The decision to construct 
a new Headquarters building in Paris is 
taken. The International Social Science 
Council is established.
1954 – At the eighth conference 
in Montevideo (Uruguay), UNESCO 
adopts the Parthenon as its official em-
blem. Designed in 1947, it has already 
featured in some of the Organization’s 
publications. 
1956 – India is host to the conference 
in New Delhi where delegates approve 
UNESCO’s first three major projects: on 
primary education and teacher training in 
Latin America, scientific research on arid 
lands and mutual appreciation of Eastern 
and Western cultural values. 
1958 – The conference meets at the 
newly-inaugurated UNESCO House on 
the Place de Fontenoy in Paris. Works 
by Pablo Picasso and Joan Miró are un-
veiled. Vittorino Veronese (Italy) is named 
Director-General. 
1960 – he eleventh General Confer-
ence decides to create the Intergovern-
mental Oceanographic Commission. 
1962 – The conference approves 
the establishment of the International 
Institute of Educational Planning. René 
Maheu (France) is appointed Director-
General . 
1964 – UNESCO decides to launch 
a five-year experimental world literacy 
programme, paving the way for an even-
tual worldwide campaign. Science pro-
grammes are accorded the same impor-
tance as those in education. 
1966 – To celebrate UNESCO’s 
twentieth anniversary, Nobel Peace Prize 
winners take part in a round table. French 
president Charles de Gaulle addresses 
the General Conference. September 8 
is proclaimed International Literacy Day.
 
1970 – The conference decides to 
launch a programme on Man and the 
Biosphere. 
1972 – At its seventeenth session, the 
conference decides to implement a plan 
for the study of oral traditions and the 
promotion of African languages. It also 
adopts the World Heritage Convention. 
1974 – Amadou Mahtar M’Bow (Sen-
egal) is chosen as the new Director-Gen-
eral. The General Conference grants ob-
server status to the Palestine Liberation 
Organization and 14 African liberation 
movements recognized by the Organiza-
tion for African Unity. 
1985 – The fax machine is used for 
the first time as an essential working tool 
between the General Conference in So-
fia (Bulgaria) and the Secretariat in Paris. 
1987 – Federico Mayor (Spain) is ap-
pointed Director-General. The confer-
ence approves a plan of action in educa-
tion for the prevention of AIDS. 
1997 – The United Kingdom returns 
to UNESCO having previously left in 
1985. 
1999 – The newly-elected Director-
General, Koïchiro Matsuura (Japan), under- 
takes major reforms to restructure and 
decentralize the Organization’s staff and 
activities. The UNESCO Institute for 
Statistics is set up. 
2001 – The conference adopts the 
Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity. 
2003 – First Lady Laura Bush address-
es the plenary session, marking the return 
of the United States to UNESCO after 
19 years of absence. Mrs Bush is also 
named UNESCO Honorary Ambassador 
for the United Nations Literacy Decade. 
2007 – On 8 October, Singapore 
is UNESCO’s 193rd Member State. 
The same day, a Google search for 
“UNESCO General Conference” yields 
2.2 million results. A similar query for 
“UNESCO” alone gives 36 million.
15
UNESCO Headquarters were located 
at the former Hotel Majestic  
on the Avenue Kléber in Paris.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
Sources : 
The Courier Archives; 
A Chronology of UNESCO, 1945-1987; 
Roger Pol-Droit, 
Humanity in the Making, 2005; 
Michel Conil Lacoste, 
The Story of a Grand Design, 1994; 
Fernando Valderrama, 
A History of UNESCO, 199
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8
## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=16) 🆗
### Non-article text
What they say about UNESCO
The international symposium “Sixty years of UNESCO history” 
(16-18 November 2005) brought together some 80 speakers  
on the occasion of the 60th anniversary of the Organization.  
here are a few excerpts.
Claude  
lévi-Strauss 
(France)
By wise customs that 
we would be wrong to 
regard as superstitions, 
these [indigenous] peoples limit the hu-
man consumption of other living species 
and impose moral respect associated with 
rules to ensure their conservation. Such are 
the lessons that ethnologists have learned 
from them, while hoping that, when it helps 
them join the concert of nations, UNESCO 
will also assist them in their quest to keep 
these principles intact and will encourage 
others to be guided thereby. 
Paul kennedy 
(USa)
Today’s discords and 
struggles are a constant 
reminder of how far we 
are from the stated aims of the leaders of 
1945. But this gap should not ignore the 
many achievements of this valuable organi-
zation, most of which are being given their 
proper accord in this conference. And it 
should absolutely not deter us from con-
tinuing to believe in UNESCO’s larger pur-
poses. 
dhruv Raina  
(india)
n 1947, on the declara-
tion of independence of 
colonial rule, a semblance 
of a scientific and technological system was in 
place in India […] UNESCO’s intervention in 
setting the frame for disciplines and disciplin-
ary research communities during this formative 
decade is important. 
Glenda Sluga 
(australia)
From its very beginnings 
UNESCO […] was 
an agent of ideas, not 
merely a product of them. The creation of 
UNESCO made a difference to the ways 
in which the relationship between univer-
salism and diversity and the political signifi-
cance of cultural and biological difference 
were understood. 
ily a Gaiduk  
(Russia)
In the 1950s UNESCO 
gradually abandoned its 
adherence to non-gov-
ernmentalism, when it should have served 
as a forum of “people speaking to people”, 
and became more and more the “play-
thing” of governments […] Along with this 
systemic modification came the increase of 
UNESCO’s involvement in the solution of 
practical problems, such as the provision 
of technical assistance to underdeveloped 
countries.
Emma Rothschild  
(United kingdom)
UNESCO has had an 
intimate relationship, 
throughout its existence, 
to the multiple connections which are the 
subject of transnational history.
heloisa Maria 
bertol domingues 
(brazil)
The scientific internation-
alism that oriented the 
actions […] of UNESCO […] can be sum-
marized in the vision of man and nature as 
a unity […] This unity was also the guiding 
principle of the Scientific and Cultural His-
tory of Humanity project, resulting from the 
plans of Needham and Huxley […] The His-
tory of Humanity would be a history of the 
sum of the cultures and not of its divisions. 
ibrahima Thioub 
(Senegal)
UNESCO has, undoubt-
edly, made a major con-
tribution, and accompa-
nied and participated, in various ways, in the 
construction and consolidation of the African 
Nation-States. It has established numerous 
programmes and projects at the multilateral 
and bilateral levels, and supported State ini-
tiatives. In its ever-widening fields of compe-
tence, it has, more often than the other multi-
lateral institutions, assumed positions that are 
out of step with political neutrality, providing 
the liberation movements with as much help-
ful assistance as it could, given the balance 
of power between the conflicting interests 
within it. 
akira iriye  
(Japan)
A history of UNESCO, in 
other words, has a chro-
nology that is not deter-
mined by the chronology of the Cold War 
but that has its own logic, a logic deter-
mined by human emotions and aspirations. 
Some day a history of the contemporary 
world will be written that takes UNESCO 
as one of the key actors in inter-cultural 
communication, not as a marginal presence 
in the grand drama of international rivalries. 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°8 16
## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189559eng.pdf#page=17) 🆗
### Non-article text
ContaCt
The UNESCO Courier is published by  
the United Nations Educational, Scientific  
and Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
+ 33 (0)1 45 68 15 88
http://www.unesco.org/fr/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights  
f.ryan@unesco.org 
+ 33 (0)1 45 68 15 88 
Director  
Saturnino Muñoz Gómez 
Editor in Chief  
Jasmina Šopova - j.sopova@unesco.org
Editors
arabic 
Bassam Mansour  
assisted by  Zaina Dufour 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape 
English
Ariane Bailey
French
Agnès Bardon
Russian 
Katerina Markelova 
Spanish
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz
Photo
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org
PdF layout
Gilbert Franchi
Web platform
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio,  
Chakir Piro
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be reproduced  
and/or translated providing the credit line reads  
“Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” and includes  
date and hyperlink : http://www.unesco.org/courier 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Photographs belonging to UNESCO may be reproduced freely. 
They must carry the following caption:  
© UNESCO and photographer’s name. For high resolution,  
please contact the Photobank: photobank@unesco.org 
Photographs without UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement  
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations of the countries 
and territories concerned