# [078266](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf)
## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=1) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
í
U.K.: 10p stg. - Canada: 40 cants - France: 1.20 F
the new
tom-tom
## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=2) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
/
TREASURES
OF
WORLD ART
Korea
The serenity of meditation
This gilt-bronze figure, the epitome of meditative serenity, depicts Avalokiteshvara, a
Buddhist bodhisattva (a future Buddha, or one whose essence is enlightenment). It dates
from the Silla Period in Korea (early 7th century A.D.). It is 90 cm high and is now in the
Duksoo Palace Museum at Seoul (Republic of Korea). Bodhisattvas are revered as the
ideal of compassion and salvation. Avalokiteshvara, whose cult dates back to the 2nd
century, is one of the most popular in Asia. Bearer of the lotus, symbol of enlighten¬
ment, Avalokiteshvara is both a male and a female deity. In China, Korea and Japan, this
bodhisattva is especially worshipped in the female form.
## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=3) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Couri e r
FEBRUARY 1971
24TH YEAR
PUBLISHED IIM 13 EDITIONS
English
French
Spanish
Russian
German
Arabic
U.S.A.
Japanese
Italian
Hindi
Tamil
Hebrew
Persian
Published monthly by UNESCO
The United Nations
Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization
Sales and Distribution Offices
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7e
Annual subscription rates : £1 stg. ; $4.00
(Canada); 12 French francs or equivalent;
2 years: £1.80 stg.; 22 F. Single copies: 10p
stg.; 40 cents; 1.20 F.
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except
in August and September when it is bj-monthly (1 1 issues a
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic,
Japanese, Italian, Hindi, Tamil, Hebrew and Persian. In the
United Kingdom it is distributed by H.M. Stationery Office,
P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.I.
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may
be reprinted providing the credit line reads "Reprinted from
[he UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re¬
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos
will be supplied on request Unsolicited manuscripts cannot
be returned unless accompanied by an international
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the
UNESCO COURIER.
The Unesco Courier Is indexed monthly In The Read¬
ers' Guide to Periodical Literature, published by
H. W. Wilson Co., New York, and In Current Con¬
tents - Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A.
Page
8
12
14
17
22
25
28
33
34
TV's CHALLENGE OF THE 70s:
QUANTITY PLUS QUALITY
By Martin Essiin
AMERICAN TV's 'OPEN SESAME'
TO EDUCATION
A children's TV series now seen in 50 countries
UNESCO IN THE SECOND
DEVELOPMENT DECADE
By Howard Brabyn
WORLD BOOM IN TV AND PUBLISHING
Unesco Statistical Yearbook reports
LIFELINES FOR THE DEVELOPING WORLD
New highway systems across the continents
By W.H. Owens
THE WILL TO PEACE
Message of His Holiness Pope Paul VI
ON CYCLONES AND OTHER DISASTERS
-REFLECTIONS OF A GEOPHYSICIST
By E.M. Fournier d'Albe
LATENT TALENT: THE ANAGRAM
A PARENT CAN SOLVE
By Boris Nikitin
UNESCO NEWSROOM
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
TREASURES OF WORLD ART
The serenity of meditation (Korea)
Editorial Office
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Parls-7". France
Editor-in-Chief
Sandy Koffler
Assistant Editor-in-Chief
René Caloz
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief
Lucio Attinelll
Managing Editors
English
French
Spanish
Russian
German
Arabic
Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris)
Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris)
Edition: Francisco Fernández-Santos (Paris)
Edition : Georgi Stetsenko (Paris)
Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne)
Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo)
Japanese Edition: Hitoshi Taniguchi (Tokyo)
Italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome)
Edition: Kartar Singh Duggal (Delhi)
Edition : T.P. Meenakshi Sundaran (Madras)
Edition : Alexander Peli (Jerusalem)
Edition: Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran)
Assistant Editors
English Edition: Howard Brabyn
French Edition : Nino Frank
Spanish Edition : Jorge Enrique Adoum
Photo Editor: Olga Rodel
Layout and Design : Robert Jacquemin
All correspondence should be addressed to the EdItor-ln-Chlef
Hindi
Tamil
Hebrew
Persian
Cover
Television, the new "tom-tom",
has been called "a world where
the real and make-believe tend
to blur together and where the
ultimate judgement was this or that
good or bad television? is made
on the basis of entertainment values".
Can television reconcile its role
as a medium of relaxation and
entertainment with that of a source
of information and education?
Is it, in fact, meeting the challenge
to provide quantity plus quality?
These crucial questions are discussed
in the article on page 4.
Photo Babout Rapho, Paris
## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=4) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
TV receivers galore
set a perplexing
problem of choice for
shoppers in a section
of Tokyo that
specializes In the sale
of television sets
and other electrical
equipment and home
appliances. Japan has
over 21 million
television receivers
(one for every five
persons) and over
2,600 transmitters.

### 52794: TV; the challenge of the 70s: quantity + quality
TV
The challenge of
the 70s
+
QUANTITY
QUALITY
by Martin Esslin
| ELEVISION is the mass
medium par excellence. Never In
the whole of human history have the
products which television diffuses
news, views, entertainments, drama,
human personality been ingested In
such enormous quantities by such
large masses of human beings.
In Great Britain the first country
MARTIN ESSLIN is head of Drama (Radio)
for the British Broadcasting Corporation.
A member of the Arts Council of Great
Britain and script adviser to the Royal
Shakespeare Company, he has written
extensively on modern theatre and contem¬
porary playwrights. He is the author of
"Brecht, a Choice of Evils" (1959), "The
Theatre of the Absurd" (1962), "Harold Pin¬
ter" (1967), and "The Genius of the German
Theatre" (1968), and is the editor of
"Beckett" a volume of critical essays
(1965). The present text is based on a
study by Mr. Esslin published in Unesco's
science quarterly, "Impact of Science on
Society' (Vol. XX. No. 3). July-Sept., 1970.
## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=5) 🆗
### 52794: TV; the challenge of the 70s: quantity + quality
v :
m JT'1
m ' "
1 IH:!
il 1 " I
I
in the world to introduce (in 1936)
a regular television service and thus
one of the most highly developed
television areas In the world the
average viewing audience lies bet¬
ween one-quarter and one-third of the
total population. In the peak viewing
hours In the evening, it can reach bet¬
ween 40 and 50 per cent of Britain's
population.
It can well happen that one of the
most popular programmes will be
watched by more than one-third of the
total population an audience of 16
to 17 million people for a single play,
light entertainment show, or serial.
These figures must be viewed in
relation to the sizes of audiences for
a single event or artistic presentation
in pre-mass media epochs: one hun¬
dred thousand spectators for a foot¬
ball match, or, assuming a theatre of
a capacity of a thousand spectators
giving eight performances a week,
about one million spectators for a play
that runs for more than two years to
packed houses.
A single popular television play in
Britain thus reaches an audience which
corresponds to a run of more than
thirty years in a theatrel And this
happens not just exceptionally, but
almost every day, and sometimes even
several times in the same evening!
In times past, another person's
thoughts were one of the greatest of
mysteries. Today, during television
peak hours in one of the more highly
developed countries, the contents of
a very high proportion of other peo¬
ple's minds have become highly pre¬
dictable.
Indeed, if we regard the continuous
stream of thought and emotion which
constitutes a human being's conscious
mental processes as the most private
sphere of his individuality, we might
express the effect of this mass com¬
munications medium by saying that
for a given number of hours a day,
twentieth-century man switches his
mind from private to collective con¬
sciousness. It Is a staggering and, in
the literal sense of the word, awful
thought.
The above considerations are based
on figures for television viewing in
Britain, where more than 95 per cent
of all households possess a television
set. While other countries may not
yet have reached this state of satura¬
tion, the likelihood that they eventu¬
ally will is extremely high, almost to
the point of certainty.
Three different channels are avail¬
able in Britain; in many countries
there are fewer; In some, like the
United States, where up to ten or
more different channels may be avail¬
able to viewers in the bigger metro¬
politan areas, there are more. Tele¬
vision in the United States is operat¬
ed by private enterprise and supported
by advertising, In contrast to most
countries, where it is a public mono¬
poly operated by an agency of the
government.
Taking the United States as an
example, it would then appear that
commercial television, offering more
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5
## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=6) 🆗
### 52794: TV; the challenge of the 70s: quantity + quality
TV's CHALLENGE (Continued)
Putting the vision in 'telly7
channels, provides the viewer with
much more variety. Paradoxically,
this is not the case.
The availability of more channels in
a commercially operated system, like
the American one, seems rather to
restrict than to increase the choice for
the viewer. This is true because mar¬
ket research is extensively used to
determine what kind of programme
tends to appeal to the maximum num¬
ber of viewers at a given time.
As a result, there tend to be the
same kinds of programmes on all
the channels situation-comedy series
next to other situation-comedy series,
Western against Western, football
(American variety) against football.
This tends to result In even greater
uniformity in the type and level of
material offered than in the British
or German systems where at least
two of the three channels are planned
to provide genuine alternatives: seri¬
ous against light material, arts against
sports, intellectually demanding against
popular fare.
Seen In such terms millions of
viewers hooked into the same stream
of consciousness at a given moment
the quantitative aspect of the cultur¬
al revolution which the advent of tele¬
vision constitutes seems staggering
enough. Yet, it might be argued, there
is another, and even more stagger¬
ing, even more revolutionary aspect
to the matter. This, it seems to me,
lies In the fact that the material of
television music-hall show or play or
football game Is available continu¬
ously In an uninterrupted flow, on tap
like piped water or electricity.
A
6
ADMITTEDLY, with the ex¬
ception of the United States, the con¬
tinuous stream of programmes does
not yet, in most parts of the world,
cover all the hours of the day and night.
However, even in those countries
where television hours are still res¬
tricted to afternoons and evenings,
they cover the periods when most
people are at leisure to switch on.
The main consequence of the con¬
tinuous stream of material which tele¬
vision provides is that it juxtaposes,
and tends to reduce to the same level
in the consumer's mind, very different
kinds and categories of viewing
matter, different not only in the super¬
ficial qualitative sense that some of
it is better, some worse, but in a far
more basic regard. The viewer has
come to see as one kind of thing
television programmes what is in
fact an amalgam of very heteroge¬
neous material, in a far deeper quali¬
tative sense.
One can arrange the material trans
missible by television In a spectrum
ranging from total reality at the one
end to total Irreality (fictitiousness) at
the other. Thus, we can begin with
events totally unrelated to any planning
done by the television industry, e.g.
news films of a war or a natural
disaster.
Next are events that are still real,
but foreseeable, so that they can be
planned and in some degree pre-pro¬
cessed by the television producers,
e.g. a coronation, a military parade,
a sports event like the Olympic
Games.
Then there is a range of events that
are still real in the sense that they
involve people in their real personali¬
ties, but are already structured and
pre-planned as entertainment, e.g.
parlour games in which members of
the public answer questions to win
prizes, or studio discussions between
well-known personalities. And finally,
at the other extreme end of the spec¬
trum are the totally fictitious events:
a play, a serial, a feature film.
The effect of the continuousness
with which this material is presented
for entertainment is that it tends to
blur the qualitative distinctions bet¬
ween the different kinds of material.
A scene from the fighting in Viet-Nam
which shows real soldiers really dying
may precede or follow a scene from
a war play with actors simulating war;
a politician trying to raise real Issues
on which the population is to make up
its mind may precede or follow a
comedian who Is merely using his
personality to amuse an audience.
What Is significant Is that to the
audience as a whole, television is
basically a medium of relaxation and
entertainment. It is inevitable, there¬
fore, that the distinctions between the
real and the artificial tend to become
blurred, at least subconsciously.
But the critical consequence of this
is that, even by those who are quite
clear In their minds as to what is
reality and what is fiction, the ultimate
qualitative judgement was this good
or bad television? is made on the
basis of entertainment values.
Thus it may well happen indeed
will happen almost inevitably that the
real soldiers really dying in Viet-Nam
will be judged as either more or less
moving, absorbing, entertaining than
the actors in the war play, and the
politician by whether his performance
was as entertaining as that of the
comedian.
No wonder that comedians and other
television personalities become figures
of national importance and influence
on a par with politicians, that poli¬
ticians are judged by the electorate
on the basis of their abilities as
comedians or television pundits.
The child who, on seeing the live
television pictures of the first moon
landing, remarked that he had seen
more exciting television treatment of
the same event in a science fiction
serial a long time ago, highlighted a
very real problem with, in the very
long run, very alarming consequences.
For the events which happen un¬
expectedly and spontaneously, the
most real events of all, are the ones
which are most outside the control
and planning of the television pro¬
ducer, and therefore tend to produce
less good in the sense of less en¬
tertaining, less skilful television. The
closer an event lies to the other end
of the spectrum, the irrealistic end,
the more manageable it becomes from
the television producer's point of view.
\^RGANIZERS of a demon¬
stration who inform television news
organizations beforehand that there will
be violence which will provide good
filmed news material are making use
of the same basic problem of tele¬
vision. Because it is possible to film
the event with a greater degree of
planning and preparation it assumes
far greater importance in the minds
of the viewers as a piece of news
than it may well deserve.
The French dramatist, Claude Oilier,
highlighted this disturbing aspect
of the mass media in a radio play
In which the assassination of a head
of State ultimately turned out to have
been prearranged by a broadcasting
organization in need of really gripping
first-hand news reporting. Reports
which from time to time appear about
executions held up or even arranged
for the benefit of television camera¬
men in an African civil war show that
the satirist, in this case, was by no
means exaggerating.
The increasing theatricalization of
public life and politics, the selection
of candidates by their faces' aptitude
to take make-up, the conduct of
election campaigns according to the
televisual potential of issues rather
than their real relevance all these
are ultimately a consequence of the
medium's insatiable demand for en¬
tertainment material.
On the other hand, the positive,
beneficial effects of the vast quantity
of material on real, semi-real and
pseudo-real events which television
pours out must not be overlooked.
By the very fact that politics and
public affairs have become a branch
of the entertainment industry they have
been brought nearer to millions and
millions of people who never pre¬
viously gave them a thought.
The candidate for office may be
## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=7) 🆗
### 52794: TV; the challenge of the 70s: quantity + quality
selected according to the same criteria
by which a film star is promoted, but
he will also have become as familiar
a personality as a film star to vast
masses of electors whose interest
would have remained dormant in the
pre-television age. And the sheer
quantity of news films about an event
like the war in Viet-Nam has, it can
be very convincingly though never
wholly conclusively argued, transform¬
ed American public opinion about It.
All this occurs at the most real end
of the spectrum of television material.
What of the middle ground of events
involving real people but staged and
stage-managed by television?
Whereas real events are hard to
capture and plan for, the wholly fiction¬
al programme requires a very scarce
commodity, writers and performers of
outstanding ability, quite apart from
being the most costly type of pro¬
duction because it needs long re¬
hearsal, expensive sets, costumes,
etc. On the other hand, the pseudo-
event, such as the parlour game, the
confrontation between interviewer and
public personality, and a multitude of
variations of the same pattern, Is both
plannable and relatively inexpensive
to stage in terms of rehearsal time,
sets, etc.
The greater the quantity of material
a television system has to provide the
larger will this element have to loom
in its output.
From a cultural point of view this
material is the least positive aspect
of television. It is entertaining but little
else. Neither information nor edifica¬
tion are conveyed by It. In addition, by
exposing members of the public to the
lure of large prizes it contains an ele¬
ment of manipulation, of the exploita¬
tion of greed and of the longing for
notoriety, which make it less than just
harmless amusement.
T
HE same applies to Inter¬
view shows where one guest after the
other is paraded before the audience,
exposed to more or less searching
questioning and then involved in gene¬
ral and fairly trivial conversation. Emp¬
ty air time is here, literally, filled with
vacuousness: the viewer switching off
his consciousness and switching it on
to material of this kind is replacing his
own thoughts by a spiritual and intel¬
lectual vacuum.
None the less, in the search for ma¬
terial to fill empty spaces by foresee¬
able and plannable events, television
has occasionally performed socially
useful acts. Thus, in Britain, for exam¬
ple, a programme of the parlour-game
type, In which archaeologists were
CONTINUED PAGE 10
Today's children have been called "the first generation to be
raised by three parents", the "third parent" being the television
set in the corner of the living room. Estimates from different
countries indicate that the average child of elementary school
and high school age (six to sixteen) devotes from 12 to 24 hours
a week to television. In the U.S., it Is estimated that a child
of three is already averaging about 45 minutes a day on
television "the electronic baby sitter" in many homes.
7
## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=8) 🆗
### 52794: TV; the challenge of the 70s: quantity + quality
I
Above, camera team from "Sesame Street" films the letter D
executed by a skywriting planeone of the varied techniques
used to prepare materials for lessons, so unobtrusive that
children learn without realizing it. Puppets in the sweet
shop (below) are teaching numbers as prices.
Photos USIS, Paris
8
AMERICAN
TV's 'OPEN
SESAME'
TO
EDUCATION
>
ï
« i
z
## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=9) 🆗
### 52794: TV; the challenge of the 70s: quantity + quality
To millions of children around the globe, the
name "Sesame Street" has come to mean a
fascinating world of fun, adventure and learning
with a chuckle. Hailed in the U.S.A. as the best
children's show in TV history, it will this yea/
be seen in some 50 countries by children and
grown-ups. This witty, fun-and-games pro¬
gramme began as an experiment on U.S. tele¬
vision in October 1969, with the help of grants
totalling $8 million from the Carnegie Founda¬
tion, the Ford Foundation, the U.S. Office of
Education and related government agencies.
Within six months, 190 stations were carrying
it to 6 million pre-school age children in the
U.S.A. "Sesame Street" is different from the
run-of-the-mill fare offered to junior TV viewers
for two reasons. As opposed to the programmes
filled with violence found in so many countries,
it brings to children's TV a series of wit and
humour, devoid of any violence, containing the
positive message that no problem can be solved
without co-operation. Secondly, it seeks to
teach youngsters letters, numbers and simple
counting skills, to stimulate their vocabulary
and powers of reasoning and to open their
eyes to the world at large. Despite its ad lib
atmosphere, it is meticulously planned and uses
well-proven and highly skilled TV techniques to
bring home its lessons simply and usually with
a joke. Researchers testing children who have
watched it have found that counting, reasoning
and other skills have improved by two and a
half times as compared with those of non-
viewers. "Sesame Street" has been called "true
international television" and has been a success
in every country where it has been introduced.
This year it is opening a "side street" a
programme aimed at children aged from seven
to eleven.
"Sesame Street" is set
in an imaginary city
neighbourhood (right) that
gives the programme its
name. On the street with
its brownstone houses,
stores and an alley, live the
four chief participants In
the programme. They are
(photo above right) a married
couple (in foreground), a
teacher (seen on left) and
a sweet shop proprietor (in
apron, seated on steps).
Photos USIS, Paris
Paid advertisements, called
"commercials" are a common
feature of American
television. "Sesame Street"
programmes include
15-second spoof
"commercials" to "sell"
the letters of the alphabet
and numbers. Left, a
cartoon character teaches
the letter "L" (for lunchbox)
and a surprise ending wraps
the lesson In a joke.
The "commercials" may tell
young viewers "this
programme has been brought
to you by the Letter Y and
the Number 3".
## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=10) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
TV's CHALLENGE (Continued Irom page 7)

### 52794: TV; the challenge of the 70s: quantity + quality
TV: the new folk art of the 20th century?
10
asked to guess the origin, nature and
age of objects supplied by museums,
led to a vast expansion of interest in
archaeology, a quickening of amateur
exploration of the local past, and a
rise in the sale of books dealing with
the subject.
Any television programme can be
seen as good or bad from the point of
view of the consumer, whose primary
test, a short-term one, is whether it is
entertaining or boring.
To the detached observer consider¬
ing the effects of television in the long-
term context of its impact on a society
or culture, a programme will be good
if socially beneficial, bad if it tends, in
the long run, to debase the cultural
level of the society or to have harmful
effects on its political health.
P
ASSING to the area of the
wholly premeditated, planned type of
television programme, which is also the
area where the mass medium conveys
artistic values and may itself become
something like an art, the concept of
quality appears in a third form. Good
or bad here means artistically success¬
ful or unsuccessful.
It Is by no means certain that the
quality of a programme of this nature
will be apparent to the viewer, who is
above all preoccupied by entertain¬
ment value. The very profusion of
quantity in television creates innumer¬
able dilemmas of evaluation: the sil¬
liest parlour game may be infinitely
more entertaining than an artistic mas¬
terpiece which and here is the rub,
and the measure of the dilemma may
in fifty years' time be appreciated as
an immortal work.
Television's appetite for skills of
artistic or pseudo-artistic nature is
literally insatiable. Whereas, before the
advent of television, a country's thea¬
tre demanded no more than, say, one
hundred or two hundred new plays
from its dramatists each year, today
a country with three television chan¬
nels may well present six or more dra¬
matic programmes (plays, serials, com¬
edies) each evening and thus demand
something like two thousand new dra¬
matic scripts a year, and this is a
highly conservative estimate.
The same remaining in the relat¬
ively restricted and therefore compara¬
tively easily surveyable field of drama
applies to the performers.
Before the advent of this mass
medium an actor who learned a new
part could, if the play proved success¬
ful, count on appearing in it a hundred
times or more in one theatre, and then
afterwards touring in it to other parts
of the country.
On television a single performance
practically saturates the entire popu¬
lation of the country. The public can¬
not accept the same actor in a mul¬
titude of parts within a short span of
time, so the demand for actors also
has vastly increased.
How many playwrights, how many
actors of outstanding talent can a
country produce? How many does it
need to provide enough material for a
full television service? The supply of
talent cannot be unlimited. So here
quantity directly creates a problem of
quality.
This point has major cultural conse¬
quences In the case of the smaller
countries or language areas. A coun¬
try of three or four million inhabitants
may simply not possess enough actors
or playwrights to provide even a frac¬
tion of the material that is demanded
by television.
So the answer is found In the mass
import of foreign material, dubbed or
with subtitles, and this in the long run
poses a serious threat to the cultural
identity of the country concerned. One
can say that the mass medium tends
to create the large cultural unit.
In the case of large language areas,
like those of the English and Spanish-
speaking countries, this cultural effect
is at least part of a process of organic
change, even though some of its
effects may be viewed with distaste
by some of those affected.
In the case of smaller national cul¬
tures, however, the long-term effects
may well be much more far-reach¬
ing. This is particularly the case in
countries which are not only small in
area but are bordered by powerful
neighbours like Switzerland, where
German, French and Italian television
can be received in considerable areas
speaking the same language as the
neighbouring larger unit.
I F the importing of tele¬
vision material is having such an im¬
pact on highly developed European
countries, in the developing world,
where television is often a prestige
symbol of newly independent States,
having neither a tradition of the skills
required nor a reservoir of trained per¬
formers, these effects may be disa¬
strously magnified and surely will be
in the near future.
It will require great insight and skill
on the part of those in charge of tele¬
vision programming in these countries
to avoid, or at, least minimize, a really
catastrophic development: the loss of
their own cultural identities. Perhaps
this can be done by judiciously mixing
imports from very different areas and
by concentrating on manifestations of
the local culture which may be unspec¬
tacular the local story-teller or folk-
singer but which are firmly based in
the national tradition.
It would be wrong, however, to re¬
gard the effects of the mass demand
for drama, situation comedy and spec¬
tacular musical and dance shows at
least in the larger culture areas as
wholly detrimental. A large demand
stimulates talent. Indeed, throughout
the history of art the highest achieve¬
ments have always sprung from situa¬
tions where many craftsmen or artists
were engaged in satisfying a large
demand: Rembrandt's artistic produc¬
tion was based on the widespread
demand for portraits among the rich
burghers of Holland which evoked a
numerically strong guild of painters;
Shakespeare and Marlowe, Calderón
and Lope de Vega, Racine and Molière
were the peaks of a broadly based cul¬
ture which created a considerable
demand for dramatists.
The same is true in the field of tele¬
vision of the artistic skills which spring
directly from the production process.
There can never have been as many
highly skilled film directors and
cameramen as we find today in coun¬
tries like the United States, the United
Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many or France.
The effects of this on related arts,
such as the cinema, are obvious. Many
of the best film-makers started their
careers in television. And the cinema
it must perhaps be stressed will
in all likelihood emerge as the highest
and most characteristic artistic ach¬
ievement of our century when viewed -
from the vantage point of history.
The same is true of dramatists, at
least in certain countries like the
United Kingdom or the Federal Repub¬
lic of Germany. The large demand
for television drama ¡s without doubt
one of the reasons for the current
flowering of dramatic talent in Britain.
In the United States, by contrast, the
commercial nature of television has
been detrimental to the development
of drama: plays are too costly to pro¬
duce relative to the size of the au¬
dience they can command, which in
turn determines the advertising reve¬
nue. In many European countries the
public-service concept behind the or¬
ganization -of the mass media has been
able to counteract this tendency to
make size of audience all-determining.
Precisely in the field of television
drama, the quantitative demand has
created certain characteristic forms
which have their strong negative as¬
pects side by side with some positive
ones:
The dramatic series, in which the
same set of characters reappears in
self-contained episode after self-con¬
tained episode, is perhaps the most
## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=11) 🆗
### 52794: TV; the challenge of the 70s: quantity + quality
characteristic feature of television. It
is also one of the most formidable cul¬
tural phenomena of our time.
These series are undoubtedly among
the most popular features of television
in the major countries and the cha¬
racters they create become mytholo¬
gical figures with their own lives and
personalities which far transcend the
relatively modest confines of their
original raison d'être. They are the
archetypes of twentieth-century man's
collective consciousness and, per¬
force, also of his collective uncons¬
cious.
The series is the logical and inevi¬
table outcome of television's vast hun¬
ger for material. It allows the same
character, the same leading actor, and
essentially the same story to be re¬
peated week after week for months
and years.
Such series are the sagas of the
twentieth century. They correspond
almost exactly to the stories which
in primitive communities bards and bal¬
lad singers used to provide, always
about nearly identical exploits of the
tribal heroes. The western series In
particular here provide an uncannily
apt parallel.
T
HE mass demand which for
the first time since man emerged
from the primitive tribe enables every
member of the community to have a
say in the creation of its cultural mate-
rial-^-whereas in every culture since
antiquity, cultural creation always res¬
ponded to the requirements of a small
élite minority and the annihilation of
all physical distance through the elec¬
tronic mass media (which Marshall
McLuhan has rightly called the creation
of the electronic village), have thus
literally re-created something like the
cultural situation of primitive man.
The chief can once again speak
directly to his people and can be ins¬
tantly recognized by every member of
the community, and the whole com¬
munity again shares in the exploits of
the heroes: real the soldiers at the
war front one sees in the newsreel, or
the wise television pundits who are
the medicine men of our societies; or
legendary the neo-mythologlcal figu¬
res of the fiction serials.
The analogy is complete, but does
it reveal a situation which is frighten¬
ing or which is reassuring? Neither,
I think. For it has great positive as well
as negative aspects: after all from pri¬
mitive man's myths about heroes
sprang such immortal works as the
Iliad and the Odyssey.
Television is, or can at least be¬
come, the great folk art of modern
CONTINUED PAGE 32
-v» ¿- '»' a»\ ---
-**
Scanning the empty desert skies, this
Telstar ground station brings programmes
relayed by satellite to the television screens
of Kuwait. The oil-rich island boasts 185
television sets per 1,000 of its 540,000
population (1968 figures). This compares
with 294 per 1,000 for Canada, 280 for
the United Kingdom, 185 for France,
158 for Italy, 106 for Argentina, 71 for Cuba,
13 for the United Arab Republic and I for Sudan.
11
## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=12) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
ATILIO DELL'ORO MAINI, former Minister of National
Education of Argentina, is President of the Unesco General
Conference. He was elected at the last session of the
Conference in November, 1970. The General Conference, which
consists of representatives of Unesco's 125 Member States, is
the sovereign body of this United Nations Agency and meets
every two years to discuss and vote the organization's programme
and budget The General Conference elects the members
of The Executive Board as well as the Director-General
of the Unesco Secretariat.
PREM N. KIRPAL, former Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of
Education of India, is President of the Unesco Executive Board.
The Board consist of 34 members who supervise the
execution of Unesco's programme and the administration of its
budget between sessions of the General Conference. It
usually meets several times each year.

### 52796: UNESCO in the Second Development Decade
Unesco
in the Second
Development
Decade
L
¡IKE the last, reluctant
leaves of autumn, the flags of 125 na¬
tions, which for five weeks had flutter¬
ed in the chill air of Paris, were
hauled down on November 14, 1970,
marking the end of Unesco's 16th
General Conference.
But while the autumn winds were
stripping the trees In preparation for
the long winter months, a strong wind
of change was whistling through the
corridors and conference rooms of
Unesco headquarters. For though
Unesco has reached the ripe age of.
25, the pace of its activities is quicken¬
ing as the world enters the Second
Development Decade.
Change was the keynote of the
speech made by the Director-General
of Unesco, Mr. René Maheu, introduc¬
ing Unesco's Long-Term Outline Plan,
itself an Innovation of major signifi¬
cance, covering a span of five years.
Recognition of the need for long-term
planning underlines the growing scope
and value of the tasks now being
assumed by Unesco which can no
longer be dealt with piecemeal on a
two-yearly basis. Great alms require
continuity as well as flexibility, and
this is what the Outline Plan is intend¬
ed to provide.
"I am profoundly convinced," said
Mr. Maheu, "that Unesco's mission is
essentially a cultural one and that Its
centre of gravity is destined, in a rela¬
tively distant future, to shift from educ¬
ation, where it Is located at present,
to science and then from science to
culture, and that the social sciences
will play a most important role in this
process."
## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=13) 🆗
### 52796: UNESCO in the Second Development Decade
by
Howard Brabyn
RENE MAHEU of France has been
Director-General of Unesco since 1962
and is now in the middi'e of his second
term of office. The Director-General is
the chief executive of the Secretariat
and is appointed for a six years term.
He is responsible for the preparation
and administration of the budget, the
execution of the programme, and the
recruitment and running of the
Secretariat.
MALCOLM S. ADISESHIAH
of India retired as Deputy
Director-General of Unesco at
the end of 1970 after completing
22 years service with the
Secretariat. He is now Director
of the Madras Institute
of Development Studies.
JOHN E. FOBES of the United States
assumed the duties of Deputy
Director-General on January I, 1971.
Before joining Unesco in 1964 as
Assistant Director-General in charge of
Administration, Mr. Fobes had for many
years been involved in the formulation
and implementation of United States
aid programmes and American policies
in international organization affairs.
The desire for change was reflect¬
ed in the budget and programme
which are voted every two years by
the 125 Member States at the general
conference. At a total of $89,898,560.
the allocation for 1971-72 was 16.1 per
cent higher than the previous two-
year budget. An additional contribu¬
tion towards Unesco's operational pro¬
jects of $69,422,000 over the two-year
period will come from the United
Nations Development Programme.
The shift in emphasis towards
science was seen In the planned par¬
ticipation of Unesco in the setting up
of UNISISTthe United Nations Infor¬
mation System, Scientific and Techni¬
cal a prodigious undertaking destin¬
ed to have far-reaching repercussions
throughout the world. With a central
fund of scientific and technical infor¬
mation available, the duplication of
time-consuming and often tedious
research will be avoided.
At present, scientific knowledge
often remains locked up within coun¬
tries by differences of language and
method. Initially UNISIST aims to
establish a common language of sym¬
bols that can be handled by compu¬
ters. A start has been made with a
basic set of 45 characters made up
of Roman capitals, 10 digits and nine
other characters. An inter-governmen¬
tal conference is to be convened by
Unesco this year to push this work
ahead and to arrange for the training
of scientists from the developing coun¬
tries to enable them to work the
system.
In the more distant future, UNISIST
hopes, by encouraging standardization
of norms used, to make an effective
link-up between the various national
scientific information systems as sim¬
ple as making an intercontinental tele¬
phone call.
Information, or rather the lack of it,
Is one of the key factors preventing
effective control of pollution of all
kinds with all its concomitant dangers
for the biosphere, the thin layer of air,
water and land in which life on this
planet exists.
Unesco has been one of the leaders
in pointing out the dangers that exist
for us If we go on Increasing atmo¬
spheric pollution, If we release more
and more oil into the oceans, if our
consumption of energy continues to
double every ten years. These dangers
are now increasingly recognized, but
there Is still too wide a gap between
awareness of the problem and positive
action to deal with it.
With this in mind the Unesco gen¬
eral conference launched a long-term,
inter-governmental programme Man
and the Biosphere. An International
co-ordinating council, with representa¬
tives from 25 States, Is to start work
this year and the programme should
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
13
## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=14) 🆗
### 52796: UNESCO in the Second Development Decade
UNESCO (Continued)
be well under way by the time a Uni¬
ted Nations conference on the human
environment Is held at Stockholm
early in 1972.
The programme aims to develop
ways of measuring changes in the
environment, to establish comparable
data, to arrange for exchange of in¬
formation between existing monitoring
systems and to attempt to achieve
more accurate forecasting of future
trends. In all these activities Unesco
will be co-operating closely with other
specialized United Nations Agencies
such as the World Health Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization
and, of coursé, the United Nations
itself.
Work carried out by Unesco in col¬
laboration with the Inter-governmental
Oceanic Commission is to be extend¬
ed in a long-term plan for oceanic
research and exploration and assis¬
tance given towards the establishment
of the world monitoring system» of
automatic buoys known as IGOSS
(Integrated Global Ocean Station Sys¬
tem).
Changing attitudes towards culture,
already widely evident in recent years,
received concrete acknowledgement In
Unesco's budget and programme. The
English essayist John Cowper Powys
once wrote that "culture is the bed¬
rock, the final wall against which one
leans one's back in a [_ god-forsaken
chaos." While the Unesco general
conference might not have been pre¬
pared to go all the way with this
assessment, it clearly recognized that
culture and cultural development was
a sine qua non for the whole fabric
of Unesco policy.
The general conference enthusiastic¬
ally endorsed the findings of the Inter¬
governmental Conference on Cultural
Policies attended by representatives
of 85 countries In Venice last summer.
The Venice conference recognized
that if there was a human right to
culture, the State had a corresponding
obligation to provide access to It,
and this obligation Is underlined in
Unesco's programme.
A regional inter-governmental con¬
ference on cultural policies is being
prepared for Europe next year and
conferences are scheduled for Asia
in 1973 and Africa in 1975. What Ven¬
ice did was to put culture back into
the mainstream of development
along with economic and social aims.
Studies to be undertaken will -deal
not only with planning, legislation
and cultural statistics, but with the
democratization of culture and parti¬
cularly with enlisting the mass media"
for cultural development. (See the
"Unesco Courier" special issue of
January 1971.)
The Unesco general conference
took a very important step towards
safeguarding our cultural heritage by
approving the convention to halt Ille¬
gal trafficking in cultural property
through the institution of a "passport",
without which items cannot legally be
exported.
WORLD BOOM IN TELEVISION AND
14
EAD any good books lately? Latest figures
tow plenty available 487,000 titles produced in 1968, a
70 per cent increase in 13 years.
The publishing boom coincided with a television boom.
In 1968, 22 million more TV sets brought the world total to
236 million, nearly eight times as many as in 1953.
Depending on where you live, you might have cut back
on your cinema-going to make time for all that reading
and viewing. The average Briton went to the cinema only
four times in 1968, once less than in 1967. His American
cousin, with 9,800 movie houses and 3,600 drive-in cinemas
to choose from, only managed to get to the cinema seven
times in 1967. In 1968 the Bulgarian went twice as often,
the citizen of the U.S.S.R. (where more than half the world's
cinemas are located) went 20 times.
The champion cinema-goer is still, however, the citizen
of Taiwan, who went 66 times in 1967. Regrettably there
are no Taiwan figures for 1968: it would have been interest¬
ing to see if he continued to go once a week, and more
often when there was something he did not want to miss.
These figures are taken at random from a yearbook the
Unesco Statistical Yearbook 1969 (1), which has just been
published. Taken together they describe an exciting and
unfair world.
Exciting, because this world is culturally expanding, with
more books, more radio sets, more university students and
a record consumption of paper for cultural purposes which
has nearly tripled since the 1950s.
Unfair, because these cultural advances are concentrated
on a minority of the 3,483,000,000 of us.
(1) UNESCO STATISTICAL YEARBOOK 1969, Unesco, 7, Place
Fontenoy, Paris (7*). $26, £7.80 stg., 104 F.
In the case of book production, Europe, which has only
13 per cent of the world's people, publishes more than
44 per cent of the titles. Africa, which has 10 per cent
of the population, publishes only 1.6 per cent, while even
Asia, with 55.9 per cent of the world's people, publishes
only 20.5 per cent. North America produced 14.4 per cent
in 1968, two points down on 1967, while the U.S.S.R.
produced 15.6 per cent, one point up, although still not at
its peak of 20.9 per cent in 1960.
Africans have few chances of cinema-going. People in
Mauritius and dependencies get to the cinema nine times
a year, those in the Spanish Sahara eight times, but most
Africans are lucky if they see a film a year. Algeria had
far and away the greatest number of cinemas at 322 but
this only equals 13 seats per thousand, while Upper Volta
has one seat per thousand, Mali and Burundi even less.
Daily newspaper reading is similarly concentrated. The
Swedes read most, for although the number of papers is
falling, circulation is rising to 518 per thousand. The
Japanese have 492 copies per thousand, the British, who
were world champions at 573 per thousand in 1954,
have 463, Eastern Germany has 445, more than the Fede¬
ral Republic of Germany which has 328. Norway, the
Netherlands, New Zealand and the U.S.S.R. are in the 300s,
a good number of European countries in the 200s.
Circulations become dramatically thinner elsewhere.
Pakistan has 6 newspapers per thousand. Ceylon 44,
Malaysia 75. In Africa, Mauritius and dependencies have
96 per thousand, Dahomey has less than one paper for
every two thousand, Mali is little better at 0.6 per thousand.
One bright spot: at the previous count 44 countries had
no daily paper; now Botswana has started one.
There is a trend for developing countries to produce more
## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=15) 🆗
### 52796: UNESCO in the Second Development Decade
Furthermore, international assistance
is to be mobilized to safeguard the
sites and monuments of Mohenjo
Daro, in Pakistan, Philae, In the United
Arab Republic, and Borobudur, in In¬
donesia. While the conference was
in progress the Federal Republic of
Germany announced a contribution of
more than half a million dollars towards
the rescue of Borobudur, the Nether¬
lands one of $150,000, and Japan
promised to launch a fund-raising
campaign. The Indonesian government
announced the allocation of one million
dollars to the project.
Buildings and monuments are not
the only aspects of culture that Unesco
is helping to preserve. Work is to
go ahead on the preparation for publi¬
cation of a "General History of Africa",
the collection and publication of Afri¬
can oral tradition and the promotion
of African languages as a medium of
culture and lifelong education.
In its discussion of the social scien¬
ces the general conference re-affirm
ed that all Unesco's activities. have
social consequences. Trying to act
without reference to the social scien¬
ces is like trying to dock a liner with¬
out a pilot. The servicing of projects
by social scientists is, in the words
of Assistant Director-General Richard
Hoggart, "more than mere intellectual
plumbing," for it can affect the defi¬
nition and operation of entire pro¬
grammes.
The social science programme will
concentrate on the development and
promotion of human rights and peace.
Population and environment problems
will be studied and the results of an
enquiry Into trends in human science
research will be published.
Despite the increasing emphasis on
science and culture, education con¬
tinues to receive the major portion
of the Unesco budget. This is
understandable In view of the fact
that the world's population is grow¬
ing bigger and growing younger. In
western Samoa, for example, 51 per
cent of the population is of school
age, and Barbados Is spending as
much as 20 per cent of its national
budget on education.
Experience in the developing
countries has shown that the need is
not merely for more and more educa¬
tion. In Dahomey, only 0.7 per cent
of the children who entered first grade
two years ago are likely to complete
their full 13 years of schooling, while
50 per cent of the 37,000 enrolled will
not even finish primary school. In
Zambia there is a problem faced by
many developing countries; 50,000
primary school leavers could not find
secondary school places In 1969, and
very few of them could find jobs either.
The days are over, in Zambia and other
African countries, when a certificate of
education was a passport to good
employment.
Over recent years, and particularly
during International Education Year
1970, Unesco has been conducting a
re-examination of the aims and methods
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
films and the developed countries less. But even where
patterns change, unfairness remains. After Japan, India
produced more full-length films than any other country
in 1968 at 350, close to the American rate in the early
1950s but the average Indian only got to the cinema four
times in the last year recorded.
The Yearbook does not contain the latest U.S.A. film
production figures which were running at 215 in 1967, behind
Italy's 254 in 1968, and not much ahead of Greece's 192, the
U.S.S.R. 's 163, Hong Kong's 156 or Pakistan's 133. Only
two African countries are recorded as producing any long
films: the U.A.R. (54) and Algeria (3).
School enrolment figures aro much more encouraging.
In the year 1967 some 15 million more students were
enrolled at the three levels of education, total enrolment
being nearly 450 million. Of these over 320 million were
at the first level, over 100 million at the second level and
between 21 and 22 million were at the third level.
For the first time the Yearbook presents a series of
enrolment figures adjusted to allow for the different national
systems and the differing ages of the pupils in various
countries, so as to permit real comparisons between
countries. One striking comparison concerns the enrolment
of girls, who, at under 200 million, still make up well under
half the world total, and are still most disadvantaged in the
developing countries. Whereas in North and South America
52 million of the 108 million enrolled are girls, in Asia only
62 million out of the 164 million students are girls. The
percentage of girls enrolled in Africa, although steadily
increasing, is the same as in Asia about 38 per cent.
Progress shows in the distribution of radio sets. Although
half the world's 674 million sets were in North America,
the number per thousand went up fairly steadily. Morocco,
which had 15 per thousand in 1950, had 57 in 1968, Kenya
had 49, Gabon 104, the Seychelles 204. Even the lowest
distribution rate in an independent African country nine
per thousand for Mali and Rwanda was many times better
than most countries' 20 years back. The lowest distribution
rate recorded in South America was French Guyana's 82,
the highest Argentina and Uruguay at 381. Asia's rates
vary from Bahrein's 1,075 per 1,000 (four times Japan's
score) to Bhutan's 4.
The sections on science and technology contain for the
second time data on the use countries make of human
resources the deployment of scientists and engineers on
research and experimental development (R & D), for
example. Current expenditure for R & D compared with
Gross National Product (G.N. P.) figures give a rough
measure of the effort a country is making and certainly
point the way forward. While the U.S.A. spent approxi¬
mately 3.0 per cent of its G.N. P. in 1967 and other
advanced countries between 1 and 2 per cent, most of the
developing countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America
spent less than 0.5 per cent.
There are some hopeful straws in the wind, however;
a number of young countries have doubled and sometimes
tripled their current expenditures for R & D over the past
five years. Yet this effort remains relatively modest in
comparison with the development tasks ahead for these
countries.
An entirely new section deals with public expenditure on .
culture, giving an idea of differing cultural priorities.
Botswana, having started a daily paper, spent most of its
money on its press Radio and TV took the largest sums
in Austria, Denmark, Hungary, Niger, Norway, Poland and
the U.S.S.R. Nowhere do the fine arts rank top, and the
theatre gets priority only in Czechoslovakia and the Federal
Republic of Germany.
15
## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=16) 🆗
### 52796: UNESCO in the Second Development Decade
UNESCO (Continued)
The recognition of Man's rights
and human dignity
of education. This process is to
continue with special emphasis on
education for all and lifelong education.
Problems of women's access to educa¬
tion and the special needs of the
handicapped will receive particular
attention.
Ministers of education are to attend
regional conferences to be organized
by Unesco In Asia in 1971, in Latin
America in 1972, and in Europe in 1973.
A commission of international experts
has been set up to study plans for
developing educational systems region
by region and a report which will help
developing countries in their planning
will be ready this summer. Another
commission starts work this year and
will advise developing countries how
to make the best use of training
schemes available abroad to provide
the skills needed at home.
In a new departure, Unesco is to
send out "flying squads" of experts
to help Member States with the
planning of curricula. One of the big
problems of today is how to adapt
the school curriculum to keep pace
with rapid technological change. In
some cases curricula have become
irrelevant; in others, particularly in
former colonies, the "imported"
curricula never were relevant.
Not so long ago Jane Austen's
studies of upper middle-class life In
19th century England were still required
reading for African boys who wanted
to get ahead, whilst their own countries'
social problems were totally ignored;
in predominantly agricultural countries
agricultural problems were omitted
from school programmes in which long
hours were devoted to the study of the
European Industrial Revolution.
D
16
	 ESPITE determined efforts
over the years, literacy remains one of
the world's major problems. Although
the percentage of illiterates is drop¬
ping, the total number of illiterates
keeps on rising.
Unesco's Experimental World Liter¬
acy Programme is to be continued
in 12 large scale projects in countries
ranging from Ecuador to Tanzania.
The Indian government, for example,
alms to halve Its illiterate population
of 115 million within the next ten years.
Included in the world literacy pro
gramme will be a number of projects
to encourage young people to parti¬
cipate in economic and social develop¬
ment.
The very latest technological
weapons are to be used in this
continuing battle. This year Unesco
specialists are to examine the possible
uses of computers in education; long-
term studies on the use of tele¬
communication satellites in education
will include experiments to see how
far culturally linked areas, such as
French-speaking Africa, can make use
of regional programmes thus reducing
the per capita costs; a major
project based on Santiago is under
way in which twenty experts are
studying the feasibility of a regional
satellite education system for Latin
America; $200.000 is being spent on
assistance to the Latin American Ins¬
titute for Educational Communications
which carries out research into the use
of mass media for education, trains
personnel and sends out mobile teams
of experts to help national activities.
The growing part played by the
mass media in plans for education
is typical of the trend towards inter¬
disciplinary action in Unesco's pro¬
gramme. Unesco's Communications
Sector no longer restricts itself to the
training of journalists and television
men or the promotion of book produc¬
tion and distribution, important as
these things are. American children
now spend more time in front of their
television screens than they do behind
their desks, so television is already
playing a vital part in their education.
Unesco's communications programme
recognizes this interaction and tries to
harness it.
The general conference also recog¬
nized the inherent dangers of these
powerful new media. A draft declara¬
tion of guiding principles on the uses
of telecommunication satellites is being
drawn up to counter the evident risks
involved when a few countries will
soon be in a position to impose their
cultural, educational and political
standards on large sections of the
world.
While attention Is focussed on the
new possibilities of sophisticated
modern media in education, one of the
most exciting items in the programme
has to do with the oldest form of mass
communication the book. By accla¬
mation the general conference desig¬
nated 1972 as International Book Year,
and Unesco is to launch a programme
to make what is still the cheapest,
handiest (you cannot turn back the
pages of a television broadcast) and
the most effective means of mass
communication available to more
people.
Although there are now twice as
many readers as twenty years ago,
the book is still a rarity in too many
parts of the world. International Book
Year will encourage writing and trans¬
lation, production and distribution as
well as the reading habit, which needs
a boost both in those countries where
books are rare and in those in which
television consumes an increasing
share of leisure time.
Unesco has already set up book
development centres in Karachi and
Bogota and is to establish a copyright
information centre to help developing
countries to get greater access to
those protected works which they need
to fill the gaps in their own production.
T
HE dominating theme of
Unesco's 16th General Conference can
be summed up in the one word "Dev¬
elopment". The urgent need to help the
developing countries to throw off the
indignities of the past and develop
their enormous potentialities was "at
the core of almost every discussion
and every decision.
Addressing the delegates at the Ple¬
nary Session, the President of the
general conference, Mr. Atilio dell'Oro
Maini, former Minister of National Edu¬
cation in Argentina, declared:
"The Second Development Decade
will give Unesco the opportunity of
increasing its aid to Member States.
Unesco is largely responsible for the
recognition of the fact that man is at
once the source, the agent and the
beneficiary of a development which
should be of benefit to the whole
community. Development is not merely
economic growth, nor the purely mate¬
rial expansion of a consumer society.
It is also, above all, the raising up of
man and the recognition of his rights
and dignity."
Standing on the threshhold of the
Second Development Decade, Unesco
has set itself a new pattern of con¬
tinuity with change; building on the
achievements of twenty-five years it
is preparing to meet the new challenge
with new ideas. M
## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=17) 🆗
### 52797: Lifelines for the developing world
Lifelines
for the
developing world
by W. H. Owens
i «i
I1/ /
V
Photo © Attlllo Gaudlo, Pari
Metalled highways snake across the barren emptiness of the Algerian Sahara along
the route of the old camel trails. Above, the junction of the fine new roads connecting
Ouargla, Ghardala and El-Golea, some 500 kilometres south of Algiers.
OST of the world's people
live in villages with only primitive
means of transport. The lack of mod¬
em communications deprives them
of trade and social contacts with neigh¬
bouring communities. Across vast
areas of continents the only roads fit
to carry today's motor traffic link the
main towns and cities; even these are
not always hard surfaced throughout,
and stretches may become Impassable
in the rainy seasons.
W. H. OWENS is a British journalist who
has specialized in questions of economic
development and the exploitation of natural
resources.
But great efforts are now being
made In the developing nations of Asia,
Africa and Latin America to provide
and maintain the roads needed to ad¬
vance their economies and improve the
living standards of millions of people.
Too poor as yet to finance their own
highway programmes, these countries
are assisted on a growing scale by
international agencies like the World
Bank and its affiliated International
Development Association, the Inter-
American Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme.
In past years, financial aid for high¬
ways In the developing countries has
been put mainly to large scale projects.
Now, increasing funds are being allo
cated each year to village access
roads and the farm-to-market roads
which directly benefit the greatest
numbers of people.
Due to the lack of transportation
facilities, areas with an excess of food
often exist in close proximity to famine
stricken areas. In west Africa, as
elsewhere, foodstuffs have had to lie
and rot on farms because there were
no means available of distributing them
to needy communities not so very far
away.
The trend towards rural road Impro¬
vement is reflected in recent lending
by the international banks. For exam¬
ple, the Inter-American Development
Bank Is currently assisting Mexico to
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17
## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=18) 🆗
### 52797: Lifelines for the developing world
HITTING
THE TARMAC TRAIL
Three great continental highway projects the
Pan-American Highway and the Trans-Africa
Highway have been going ahead for some years
past. They mean closer social contact and new
opportunities for trade for millions in the
developing countries. Apart from one section, the
Pan-American Highway, forming a continuous
link across two continents from Fairbanks,
Alaska, to Tierra de Fuego on the southern tip
of Argentina, is now complete. Opposite, a new
bridge carrying a section of the highway across a
river in Chile. Below, building a feeder road
in Kabul, Afghanistan, through which a section of
the Asian Highway passes. Feeder roads to
connect these great transport arteries to the
millions of villages of the world are an essential
part of the development plan. Right, the Bus
Station in Lagos, Nigeria, a nerve centre of trade .
between town and village.
## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=19) 🆗
### 52797: Lifelines for the developing world
illiiiiniijii nmitlinwinrt.
* a. W ?aâ. v * i W ja. -' *^- *
5'. --v*B' - jàm.
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=20) 🆗
### 52797: Lifelines for the developing world
ROADS (Continued)
The 3,500 ft. Bosporus Bridgetomorrow's
direct road link between Europe and Asia
provide some 1,500 miles of rural
access roads that will connect sev¬
eral hundred small village communities
to the national highway network, and
so to markets throughout the country.
A Mexican Government survey con¬
cluded that every new mile of road laid
in fertile areas could create employ¬
ment for up to 500 farm workers. And,
of course, there are many other econo¬
mic and social benefits.
I
20
|N India, the provision of
village access roads has been recog¬
nized as an important part of overall
highway planning ever since that
country's first national road develop¬
ment programme (the Nagpur Plan)
was prepared more than a quarter of
a century ago.
Very considerable improvements
have been made to the road system
of India, and in fact the Nagpur Plan
road mileage targets were well exceed¬
ed with the completion of the First and
Second Five-Year Plans. Even so, the
task of creating a modern network
over so vast a land area is an immense
one, and there are still several hun¬
dreds of miles of missing links on the
important routes.
Under India's present 20-year road
development programme, 1961-81, it
is planned to increase the total net¬
work by about one third, to 657,000
miles. The objective is to connect the
more important villages with the near¬
est marketing centres, or district head¬
quarters, in order to speed up the
delivery and distribution of agricultu¬
ral produce.
More precisely, the programme aims
to bring every village:
in a developed and agricultural area
to within four miles of a metalled road
and one-and-a-half miles of any road;
in a semi-developed area to within
eight miles of a metalled road and
three miles of any road;
In an undeveloped and uncultivated
area to within twelve miles of a metal¬
led road and five miles of any road.
Apart from the limited resources
available for rural roads under the
state plans, much good work has been
done in this field through the Commu¬
nity Development Programmé in India.
Many thousands of miles of village
roads have been constructed at very
low cost by the village communities
themselves.
In Turkey, where about 20 million
people, or two-thirds of the total popu¬
lation, live in villages with partly iso
lated economic and social conditions,
an estimated 93,000 miles of rural
access roads are required to improve
their living standards.
In order to complete the greatest
road mileage in the shortest time with
limited resources, a method has been
developed for constructing the roads
not for individual, but for group villa¬
ges. When this long-term roads pro¬
gramme Is completed, nearly 35,000
villages in Turkey will be linked to
one another, either directly or indirect¬
ly, and to the district market centres.
Turkey's most spectacular highway
project now under construction is the
Bosporus Bridge, whose 1,074 metre
(3,523 ft) long clear span will be the
fourth longest in the world. When
completed early in 1973, this wonder¬
ful bridge will provide the first direct
link-up between the European road
network and the developing Asian
Highway System.
The Asian Highway is a vast inter¬
national network of through routes for
motor traffic spanning all the coun¬
tries of southern Asia, except Mainland,
China, between Iran in the west and
Viet-Nam and Singapore in the Far
East. Under the direction of the Uni¬
ted Nations Economic Commission for
Asia and the Far East (ECAFE), which
launched the undertaking in 1958,
great progress is being made in up¬
grading the designated routes to the
agreed Highway standards.
In fact, the target set for the first
U.N. Development Decade, 1960-70,
of establishing at least one through
route connecting all the countries, has
been almost achieved, except notably
in Burma. But it is hoped that the
route through Burma, and the other
few remaining gaps in south-east Asia,
will become motorable in the near
future.
The Asian Highway, from the mos¬
ques of Iran to the temples of Burma
and Thailand, from the high plateau of
Afghanistan to the great forests and
mountains of Malaysia, offers thrilling
prospects as one of the world's great
tourist routes. But its primary purpose
is to change the economic climate and
raise the low living standards through¬
out one of the great undeveloped
quarters of the world.
Certainly its economic benefits
could be vast. For the Highway will
help to open up barren and arid lands
for Irrigation and settlement. It will
provide the means for low-cost trans¬
portation of the region's natural com¬
modities like tea, rubber, rice, cotton,
timber and minerals; and will facilitate
the distribution of food, raw materials
and manufactured goods throughout a
region where hitherto the only modern
long-distance transport has been in the
air. Feeder roads from the Asian High
way will assist the movement of agri¬
cultural produce into areas which at
present suffer serious shortages.
An International road system of a
comparable scale in the Western
Hemisphere is the Pan-American High¬
way, serving all the countries and prin¬
cipal cities across the length and
breadth of two continents. The only
break that remains in the continuous
highway system between Fairbanks,
Alaska, and Tierra del Fuego, in the
extreme south of Patagonia, is the dif¬
ficult Darien section in Panama and
Colombia. Until recent years the Da¬
rien isthmus of Panama was virtually
untouched and impassable, inhabited
solely by Indian tribes. Now these last
few hundred miles which once seemed
unconquerable, will be paved and
opened to traffic during the 1970s.
Speaking recently of the major eco¬
nomic and social benefits which will
result from the completion of this final
Highway section, the chief engineer
of the Pan-American Highway Surveys
in the region, Camilo R. Carles, said:
"The Darien region represents a
very complex, wealthy potential, on
which improvement has been impos¬
sible due to the lack of highway com¬
munication. Each kilometre opened by
the road will mean territory available
for immediate use. The Indian com¬
munities could be incorporated into the
national life; agriculture and livestock
could be improved; forest reservations
would, become available; schools,
markets, health and electrification
programmes would be expanded, and
Panama's development would be en¬
hanced. As a consequence of the
Darien Highway, other access and
feeder roads would be opened, thus
contributing to the development of the
farthest away places of the region."
T
HE special need in Africa
is for roads to promote the inter-ter¬
ritorial trade and economic co-opera¬
tion between states which is of vital
importance for the future advancement
and prosperity of its developing
nations.
In the past, the few motor highways
were built to serve the main centres
within the former colonial territories,
or to link raw material areas with rail¬
heads and seaports. So today the
road situation throughout most of the
African continent is of a very large
number of unintegrated national road
systems. Many African countries do
not have road links with their neigh¬
bouring states.
This major aspect of road devel-
## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=21) 🆗
### 52797: Lifelines for the developing world
opment was among the main subjects
discussed at the first Africa Highway
Conference, held at Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia, in October 1969. More than
500 delegates from 49 nations attend¬
ed the conference, the theme of which
was African unity and progress, and
how good roads could provide the key
to both.
But as delegates at Addis Ababa
emphasized, the establishment of inter-
territorial road links Is only one half of
the main problem of present land com¬
munications in Africa. The other half
as Is the case in the rest of the dev¬
eloping world is to connect market
centres through an integrated system
of trunk and local feeder roads so
that the village communities, which
comprise over 80 per cent of Africa's
total population, may trade their pro¬
duce and goods freely with one
another In all seasons, wet or dry.
Apart from construction of new
roads, there is the importance of main¬
taining them in good order after they
have been built. Parts of the interna¬
tional loan funds to the developing
countries are therefore usually ear¬
marked for the improvement of na¬
tional maintenance organizations with
the assistance of experts from the
advanced nations. Such funds are
put to the local training of mechanics,
drivers and operators of modern road-
making plant, the purchase of maint¬
enance equipment, the setting up of
depots and workshops, and so on.
The United Nations Development
Programme plays a key role in provid¬
ing technical assistance for highway
works in all the developing countries.
In this and in other fields of modern
development, the UNDP has provided
opportunities for advanced training
abroad to thousands of qualified peo¬
ple whose responsibilities call for skills
they could not at present obtain in their
own lands.
Another agency which promotes the
training of young road engineers in all
countries around the world is the Inter¬
national Road Federation, adviser to
the United Nations on all road trans¬
port matters and sponsor of the Afri¬
can Road Conference and other impor¬
tant regional and world meetings of
highway experts over the past twenty
years.
Under the IRF Fellowship Programme
young engineers from more than eighty
nations including many of the dev¬
eloping countries have been able to
undertake intensive one-year study
courses In highway engineering at
leading universities and advanced
technicial institutes in the United
States. Many of these highly trained
men will take charge of the growing
road building programmes in their own
countries in the vital years that lie
ahead.
Photo © Photo Researchers. New York
Besides the normal risks of the road, the motorist in Zambia, above, has to
contend with the world's weightiest jay-walkers. The Great Asian Highway
goes through the famous Khyber Pass from Afghanistan into Pakistan. Below,
in south Pakistan the pedestrian, whether biped or quadruped, can walk in perfect
security along his own track, safely separated from the pounding traffic of the
Asian Highway, a bit of which can be seen on the extreme left of the photo.
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
*
## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=22) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
INTERNATIONAL YEAR FOR ACTION TO COMBAT RACISM AND RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
The year 1971 has been designated International Year for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination by the
General Assembly of the United Nations. Throughout its
25 years of existence, Unesco has waged a permanent war
against these twin evils. During 1971, a special effort is
being made to mobilize public opinion and governmental
and inter-governmental bodies to take more positive action
on behalf of racial equality. At Unesco's Paris headquarters
a public Round Table is to be held, from March 22 to 26,
on "Race and Society" at which a number of internationally
famous personalities have been invited to speak. Audience
participation will also be invited. One of Unesco's best
sellers, "The Race Question in Modern Science", first
published in 1956, is being revised and a new version in
English and French, including a number of entirely new
chapters, is to be published in May this year. A revised
edition of the Apartheid Report, first published in 1967, ¡s
also being prepared.
In his message to the world on the occasion of the
"Day of Peace", January I, 1971, major portions of which
we publish below, His Holiness Pope Paul VI speaks of the
growth of racial and religious discrimination and the menace
it represents to world peace.

### 52800: The Will to peace: message of His Holiness Pope Paul VI
THE WILL TO PEACE
Message of His Holiness Pope Paul VI
11
BRISTEN to Us. It is worth¬
while. Yes, as usual, Our word is:
peace. But it is the word of which
the world is in need, urgently in need,
and that makes it new.
Let us open, our eyes at the dawn
of this new year, let us observe two
orders of general facts and events,
which affect the world, its peoples,
families and individuals. These facts,
¡t seems to Us, influence our destinies
deeply and directly. Each one of us
can be their horoscope.
Observe the first order. In truth it
is not an order, but a disorder. For
the facts which We assemble in this
category all indicate a return to
thoughts and deeds which it seemed
the tragic experience of war had, or
should have, wiped away. At the end
of the war everyone said: Enough!
Enough of what? Of everything that
gave rise to the human butchery and
the appalling devastation. Immediately
after the war, at the beginning of this
generation, humanity became suddenly
conscious that it was not enough to
bury the dead, heal the wounds, rebuild
what was destroyed and renew and-
Improve the face of the earth; the
causes of the conflagration we had
undergone must be removed.
The causes: this was the wise plan:
to look for the causes and to eliminate
them. The world breathed again.
Indeed It seemed that a new era was
about to open, the era of universal
peace. Everyone seemed ready to
accept radical changes, in order to
avoid new conflicts.
For the political, social and economic
structures a perspective of wonderful
moral and social Innovations was
presented. There was talk of justice,
of human rights, of betterment of the
weak, of orderly co-existence, of
organized collaboration, of world union.
Great gestures were made: the
victors, for example, came to the aid
of the vanquished. Great institutions
were founded. The world began to
organize itself on principles of effective
union and common prosperity.
The way to peace, as a normal and
fundamental condition of life in the
world, seemed to have been finally
planned.
And yet, what do we see after
twenty-five years of this material and
idyllic progress? We see, first of all,
that, here and there, wars still rage,
and seem to be incurable plagues,
which threaten to spread and grow
worse. We see a continuation of,
and in places an increase in, social,
racial and religious discrimination.
We see a return of the old mentality;
man seems to entrench himself in
situations of the past, first psycho- '
logical and then political.
The demons of yesterday rise up
again. The supremacy of economic
interests, with the all too easy exploi¬
tation of the weak, once more returns;
so does class hatred and class war¬
fare, and thus Is born again interna¬
tional and civil strife. The struggle
for national prestige and political
power is back; the inflexible conflict
of opposing ambitions, and of the root¬
ed and uncompromising prejudices of
races and ideologies has returned;
recourse is had to torture and terro¬
rism; recourse is had to crime and
violence, as a burning ideal, heedless
of the conflagration that may ensue.
Peace is again thought of as no more
than a balance of mighty forces and of
terrifying armaments. Once again
people feel a tremor of fear lest some
catastrophic imprudence might lead to
Incredible and uncontrollable holo¬
causts.
What Is happening? Where are we
going? What has gone wrong? Or
what has been lacking? Must we
resign ourselves to doubting that man
is capable of achieving a just and last¬
ing peace, and to renouncing the task
of implanting into the education of the
new generations the hope for, and the
mentality of, peace?
F
ORTUNATELY another set
of ideas and facts appears before our
gaze; and it is that of progressive
peace. For, notwithstanding every¬
thing, peace marches on. There are
breaks in continuity, there are incon¬
sistencies and difficulties. But all the
same peace marches on and is esta¬
blishing itself in the world with a
certain invincibility.
Every man is conscious of it: peace
Is necessary. It has In its favour the
moral progress of humanity, which is
indisputably directed towards unity.
Unity and peace, when freedom uni¬
tes them, are sisters.
Peace benefits from the growing
favour of public opinion, which is con¬
vinced of the absurdity of war pur¬
sued for its own sake and believed
to be the only and unavoidable means
of settling controversies among men.
Peace avails itself of the ever closer
network of human relations in the
fields of culture, economics, com-
## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=23) 🆗
### 52800: The Will to peace: message of His Holiness Pope Paul VI
merce, sport and tourism. We must
live together, and it is good to know
each other, and to respect and help
one another.
A fundamental cohesion is taking
shape in the world. This favours
peace. International relations are in¬
creasingly developing, and they form
the premise and also the guarantee
of a certain concord. The great inter¬
national and supranational Institutions
are seen to be providential, at the
source as well as at the perfection
of humanity's peaceful coexistence.
Before this double picture, on which
are superimposed phenomena contrary
to the purpose closest to Our heart
that Is, peace it seems to Us that
a single, ambivalent observation can
be drawn. Let us ask a two-fold ques¬
tion, concerning two aspects of the
ambiguous scene the world presents
today:
why, today, does peace recede?
and why, today, does peace pro¬
gress?
What is the element which emerges,
in a negative sense, or indeed in a
positive sense, from this simple ana¬
lysis? The element Is always man.
Man abased in the first case, man
upraised in the second.
Let us venture to use a word, which
may itself appear ambiguous, but
which, given the thought Its deep signi¬
ficance demands, Is ever splendid and
supreme. The world is "love": love
for man, as the highest principle of
the terrestrial order. Love and peace
are correlative entities.
Peace is a product of love: true love,
human love. Peace supposes a certain
"identity of choice": this Is friendship.
If we want peace, we must recog¬
nize the necessity of building it upon
foundations more substantial than the
non-existence of relations (relations
among men are inevitable; they grow
and become necessary), or the exis¬
tence of relations of self-interest (these
are precarious and often deceptive),
or the web of purely cultural or fortui¬
tous relations (these can be double-
edged, for peace or for combat).
True peace must be founded upon
justice, upon a sense of the intangible
dignity of man, upon the recognition of
an abiding and happy equality between
men, upon the basic principle of human
brotherhood, that is, of the respect
and love due to each man, because
he Is man. The victorious word
springs forth: because he is a brother.
My brother, our brother.
This consciousness of a universal
human brotherhood is also happily
developing in our world, at least in
principle.
Whoever works to educate the rising
generations in the conviction that
every man is our brother, is building
from the foundation the edifice of
peace.
Whoever implants in public opinion
the sentiment of human brotherhood
without reserve is preparing better
days for the world.
Whoever conceives of the protec¬
tion of political interests without the
Incitement of hate and of combat
amongst men as a logical and indis¬
pensable necessity of social life, is
opening to human society the ever
effective advancement of the common
good.
Whoever helps In discovering in
every man, beyond his physical,
ethnic and racial characteristics, the
existence of a being equal to his own,
is transforming the earth from an epi¬
centre of division, antagonism, trea¬
chery and revenge Into a field of vital
work for civil collaboration. Where
brotherhood amongst men Is at root
disregarded, peace is at root des¬
troyed..
And yet peace is the mirror of the
real, authentic, modern humanity, vic
torious over every anachronistic self-
injury. Peace is the great concept
extolling love amongst men who dis¬
cover that they are brothers and decide
to live as such.
This then is Our message for the
year 1971. It echoes, as a voice aris¬
ing anew from the conscience of civil
society, the Declaration of Human
Rights: "All human beings are born
free and equal in dignity and rights.
They are endowed with reason and
conscience and should act towards
one another in a spirit of brotherhood."
This is the summit reached by the
teaching of civilization.
Let us not turn back. Let us not lose
the treasures of this axiomatic con¬
quest. Rather let us all give rational
and resolute attention to this formula,
this goal of human progress: "Every
man. is my brother". This is peace,
In being and in the making. And it
avails for all!
23
## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=24) 🆗
### 52802: On cyclones and other natural disasters; reflections of a geophysicist
Photo Ihrt © Stern - Black Star, New York
24
The cyclone that struck East Pakistan on the night of 12-13 November, last year, was one of the worst
natural catastrophes of this century. Photo above, showing large ship left stranded far inland in the
middle of a paddy field, and shattered village (right) give only a paltry picture of the devastation that
killed an estimated half million persons. Lack of adequate communications posed a serious problem for
rescue workers as food, medical aid and other equipment were rushed to the scene from around the
world. "Are we going to continue, as we have done in the past to stagger from one catastrophe to
another, helping to bury the dead, tend the injured, feed,clothe and house the survivors, while
doing virtually nothing to prevent the recurrence of such disasters?", asks Dr. Fournier d'Albe in the
article on facing page. "Or shall we mobilize our scientific, technical and economic resources in order
to deal with the situation in a rational manner?"
## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=25) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
by
E. M. Fournier d'Albe

### 52802: On cyclones and other natural disasters; reflections of a geophysicist
On cyclones and
other natural disasters
of a geophysicist
I
|N 1970, Nature gave Man
two severe lessons in survival.
On November 12-13, a tropical
cyclone moved slowly up the Bay of
Bengal to the Ganges-Brahmaputra
delta. The low atmospheric pressure,
the hurricane-force winds and the huge
volume of water coming down the
E.M. FOURNIER D'ALBE Is a specialist in
Unesco's Department of Environmental Scien¬
ces and is in charge of the programme in
geophysics related to the prevention of na¬
tural disasters. Before joining Unesco Head¬
quarters staff, he carried out long-term mis¬
sions for Unesco In Pakistan, where he help¬
ed to set up a geophysical observatory in the
earthquake-prone region of Quetta, and at the
National University of Mexico.
rivers at the end of the monsoon
season, combined with the high tides
(it was nearly full moon) to produce
a surge of water which swept over
many of the islands in the delta and
flooded the whole coastal area to
depths of as much as six metres.
In an area of 2,800 square miles,
between 250,000 and 500,000 people
were drowned. Some 235,000 houses
were destroyed and the number of
persons stricken was estimated at
three million. Innumerable cattle were
lost, some 600,000 tons of crops were
destroyed, and over one million acres
ravaged.
At 3.24 p.m. on May 31, 1970, seismic
waves generated by an earthquake
55 kilometres below the sea bed off
the coast of Peru began to reach the
"Callejón de Huaylas", a high valley in
the Peruvian Andes noted for the
beauty of its scenery, and a favourite
rendezvous of climbers. Within ninety
seconds, more than half the buildings
in Huaraz, the largest town in the
valley, had collapsed into rubble, filling
the narrow streets with debris and
burying, under their ruins more than
fifteen thousand people.
But earthquakes can also shake
whole mountains. While Huaraz was
crumbling into dust, a great slab of
rock (seven or eight million cubic
metres) broke away from the west face
of the giant peak of Huascarán,
carrying with it about a million tons of
ice from the summit glacier. It fell six
hundred metres on to the glacier below
and, within a minute, a huge mass of
rock, water and ice was moving with
gathering speed down the slopes of
the mountain towards the Huaylas
valley.
By the time it had reached the foot
of the mountain it was travelling with
such speed that it leapt over a
150 metre high ridge and buried the
town of Yungay under five metres' of
mud. Of the 20,000 inhabitants of the
town, only a few hundred escaped.
As soon as the extent of these
disasters became known, there was on
each occasion a spontaneous move¬
ment of solidarity throughout the world.
Rescue teams, medical supplies, food,
clothing and emergency housing poured
into the stricken areas from dozens of
countries, not only as individual gifts
but also through the Red Cross and
other international relief organizations.
Such was the volume and variety
of this help that the governments
of the countries concerned, whose
resources had already been strained to
the limit by the disasters themselves,
had the greatest difficulty in co-
continued NEXT PAGE
25
## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=26) 🆗
### 52802: On cyclones and other natural disasters; reflections of a geophysicist
MAY DAYI MAY DAYI MAY DAYI This air photo (right) records the death of two Peruvian towns Yungay
and Ranrahirca buried under the debris of an avalanche that rolled off the west slope of Huascaran, Peru's
highest mountain, on Sunday, May 31, last year. A mass of glacial ice and rock on the mountain, shaken
loose by an earthquake which rocked Peru, swept down the Huaylas Valley and with the noise and speed of an
express train struck the two towns. Some 80 million cubic metres of water, mud and rocks buried the towns,
killing over 20,000 persons. "Aqui Estuvo Yungay" (This is where Yungay stood) says the inscription (top
of photo) and a cross marks the site of the Central Square (Plaza de Armas). Burial place of Ranrahirca is
similarly marked (bottom of photo). Dotted line at centre shows where a highway formerly linked the two towns.
Below, some survivors of the Peruvian earthquake, to whom emergency supplies and equipment were airlifted.
ï
0)
Z
Z
3
CYCLONES AND OTHER DISASTERS (Continued)
26
ordinating and channelling this aid
into the areas where it was most
urgently needed. As had so often
happened in similar circumstances in
the past, a great deal of effort and
generosity was, in fact, partly wasted
through confusion.
The question before us is very clear:
are we going to continue, as we have
done In the past, to stagger from one
catastrophe to another, helping to bury
the dead, tend the injured, feed, clothe
and house the survivors, while doing
virtually nothing to prevent the re¬
currence of such disasters? Or shall
we mobilize our scientific, technical
and economic resources in order to
deal with the situation in a rational
manner?
If the latter is our choice, our first
task must be to comprehend the
natural phenomena which are responsi¬
ble for these disasters, so that we
may forecast with accuracy when and
where they will strike and what will
be their magnitude.
This is already being done with
some success in the case of wind
storms and floods; it may well be
possible to do so, In the future, for
volcanic eruptions, provided that the
necessary resources are devoted to
establishing proper instrumental sur¬
veillance of active and dormant vol¬
canoes.
It Is perfectly feasible, when suffi¬
cient data are available, to predict
where destructive avalanches, earth¬
quakes or landslides are likely to
occur, and it may be that further in¬
tensive research will provide us with
the means of forecasting when they
will happen.
The most striking progress in all
these branches of scientific research
has been made, as one might expect,
In the advanced countries. But there
are still vast areas of the world where
the means necessary for the sur¬
veillance and study of the natural
phenomena are sadly lacking, and here
there is an urgent need for more
effective international co-operation and
assistance.
Our second task' must be to devise
and develop means of protection
against the violence of nature. We
already know, in theory, how to
build wind and earthquake-resistant
houses, how to control floods in rivers
and how to reduce the risks of avalan¬
ches and landslides; but only in very
few parts of the -world Is such know¬
ledge systematically applied.
This is partly a problem of economic
resources: flood control, for instance,
often entails large and expensive
public works. But it is often a problem
of education: rules and regulations can
be drafted for the design and con¬
struction of wind and earthquake-
resistant buildings, but these rules will
remain ineffective unless the engineers,
architects and builders fully understand
them and recognize the need to apply
them diligently in practice.
Here again, there is a tremendous
need for more effective international
co-operation, especially so that the
resources of the great research centres
can be brought to bear on the problems
faced by the developing countries,
problems which are imposed on them
by their limited economic resources.
Our third task must be to Integrate
these scientific and technical elements
Into the overall plans for dealing
with disaster situations. Considerable
efforts are being made, both by the
United Nations and by the League of
Red Cross Societies, to assist govern-
## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=27) 🆗
### 52802: On cyclones and other natural disasters; reflections of a geophysicist
ments in preparing national plans.
However, there are still great variations
from country to country in the degree
of preparedness for coping with
natural disasters.
Even in countries where detailed
plans have been made, one often finds
that these are concerned solely with
post facto rescue and relief; relatively
little attention is given to the improve¬
ment of forecasting and warning
systems or to the development of more
effective means of protection, based
on a better knowledge of the natural
phenomena concerned.
One particular aspect of such
planning needs to be emphasized.
When a disaster has occurred, medical
and rescue teams are normally on the
spot within a few hours, and they are
swiftly followed by emergency supplies
of food and clothing. However, it
often happens that in the few hours
or days immediately following a
catastrophe, the local authorities have
to make urgent decisions on re-housing
and the re-establishment of public
services.
These decisions may have far-
reaching consequences for the subse
quent reconstruction and rehabilitation
of the affected area, but they never¬
theless have often to be made under
conditions of extreme stress. It has
therefore been suggested that emerg¬
ency aid should include not only
rescue and relief teams but also small
technical units to help in the organiza¬
tion both of immediate relief and long-
term rehabilitation.
The three tasks defined above were
presented in a certain logical order,
but of course work may proceed on
all three simultaneously. There is no
doubt that their fulfilment would be
rendered easier If there were a greater
degree of co-operation and a greater
exchange of ideas and information
between different countries, between
international organizations both within
and outside the United Nations system,
and between the various professions
concerned.
At the beginning of this article, we
remarked on how natural disasters
never fail to stir the spirit of human
solidarity, and on the generous aid
which is always forthcoming on these
occasions. Yet we must surely ask
ourselves, In this latter half of the
twentieth century, whether more
effective means cannot be found to
help those countries and communities
which have to bear the heavy economic
burden of reconstruction after such
events.
Is It not possible to imagine some
global system of insurance against
natural disasters? This question has
often been debated and was studied
in some depth by the International
Relief Union during the years of its
active existence. The principal diffi¬
culty resides, of course, in the magni¬
tude and the uncertainty of the risks
involved.
However, with our steadily increas¬
ing knowledge of the natural pheno¬
mena and the recent rapid progress
in mathematical techniques for handl¬
ing statistical problems of this kind,
we may perhaps soon be able to
define the bases on which viable
insurance schemes may be established.
This is certainly a problem which would
repay intensive study by scientists,
mathematicians and insurance spe¬
cialists, working in close co-operation
with each other.
And so the lesson to be learnt from
the events of 1970 is quite clear.
Science and technology offer us the
means of foreseeing the violent
paroxysms of nature and of protecting
ourselves against them. Disasters of
the kind that happened last year can
be prevented in the future if, by a
concerted effort, we bring the scientific
technical and economic resources of
the world to bear on this problem.
27
## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=28) 🆗
### 52803: Latent talent; the anagram a parent can solve
Latent talent
anagram
a parent
can solve
The famous French writer, Georges Duhamel, who was also a medical doctor, once wrote
that "up to the age of five, every child Is a genius". It is now .Increasingly recognized
that pre-school and even pre-kindergarten youngsters have an untapped capacity for
learning and this capacity could be exploited far more than it is under many current
teaching practices. Hence the growing importance attached by educators and psychologists
to the Idea that everything should be done to stimulate the child's natural curiosity
(photo below) and to encourage the rapid broadening of his knowledge (photo opposite).
Photo © G. Bern, Paris
¿2*9 >
#1
$&&£
C- t..
## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=29) 🆗
### 52803: Latent talent; the anagram a parent can solve
by Boris Nikitin
W
HY do some persons have
aptitudes that others lack. Why are
some talented and others not gifted
In any way? Why doesn't every child
prodigy become a genius? And why,
in general, are geniuses so rare in all
spheres of human activity? Human
ability is a subject that has always
aroused the keenest interest.
The unprecedented acceleration of
scientific and technological progress,
the growing avalanche of knowledge
about the world we live in and the
need to acquire this knowledge con¬
front educators and psychologists
with a multitude of problems.
Giving students more knowledge
means either increasing the number of
years they must study or adding new
material to school programmes. Yet
high school students already have a
longer working day than adult workers
a load that endangers their health.
BORIS NIKITIN of the U.S.S.R. was train¬
ed as a mechanical engineer, but has
studied and written widely on the problems
of development in early childhood. He
and his wife Yelena, who is a teacher,
have now six children, and are co-authors
of a book entitled "Are We Right?" based
on their own experiences and theories on
raising and educating children. Boris Niki-
tin's most recent book on these questions
published In the U.S.S.R. Is "Hypothesis
on the Emergence of Creative Abilities".
Moreover, the "life span'of know¬
ledge Is growing shorter all the time.
Knowledge Is aging faster and faster
and must be constantly "renewed."
One after another, trades and profes¬
sions are becoming extinct and are
being replaced by new ones. In
almost all occupations mental and
creative activity has a tendency to
grow, and to grow at an accelerated
pace. Consequently, development of
creative faculties and intellect is a
paramount task in education. Society
wants to know where genius comes
from.
All sorts of assumptions have been
put forward over the centuries. Since
many geniuses and talented men and
women were known to have had larger
brains than the average person, it
was believed that ability depended on
the amount of grey matter. But there
have also been geniuses who had
small heads or who lost the use of part
of their brain.
After the great French chemist Louis
Pasteur suffered a cerebral haemor¬
rhage In 1868, only one hemisphere of
his brain functioned and he was
partially paralyzed. But he continued
his experiments and made some of his
greatest discoveries during the next
twenty years.
Special studies have been made of
the structure of the brain cells, espe¬
cially the cells of the cortex. These
have shown that the cells of geniuses
sometimes differ from the usual cell
structure, but which differences are
decisive has remained a mystery.
It was once assumed that the first
born child in a family was talented.
The hypothesis found supporters
until statistics disproved It. Out of
73 world-famous geniuses and talented
persons, only four were first-born
children. Milton, Leonardo da Vinci,
Heine, Anton Rubinstein, Benjamin
Franklin and Mendeleyev were each
the 17th child In the family, while llya
Mechnikov, the Russian biologist was
a 16th child.
The belief that ability is inherited has
proved to be extremely tenacious.
Yet geneticists who have made major
discoveries In the sphere of heredity
In recent years are far from unanimous
in their opinions on this question.
How can we explain the following
facts? Small children often amaze
adults with early displays of creative
ability. But as they grow older they
do not develop into geniuses or even
talented men and women. Where did
their precocious abilities and faculties
vanish to? Why do the overwhelming
majority of the children reared in
orphanages and children's homes
develop speech habits so slowly and
do so poorly at school?
In searching for answers to these
questions let us consider the nature
of what we call "faculties."
Science knows of several dozen
instances where small children have
lived or grown up in the wilds among
wolves, bears or apes and have been
returned to human society between the
ages of eight and twelve. Naturally,
attempts have been made to teach
CONTINUED PAGE 31
29
## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=30) 🆗
### 52803: Latent talent; the anagram a parent can solve
Ac Ku
Np'Pu "Am Cm'Bk C.í. Es. Fm
- V,
:
oT ,.
K C^j
i
i "*&
:f- *
7 ,
Photos O APN
## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=31) 🆗
### 52803: Latent talent; the anagram a parent can solve
LATENT TALENT (Continued)
them to speak, but not a single one
of these children has ever learned to
speak normally. A girl named Kamala,
found in a wolves' den near Calcutta
at the age of eight, learned to pro¬
nounce only 30 words ¡n the six years
she lived with the family of a minister.
From this we can conclude that
learning to speak is not something that
can be doae at any age. Under
certain conditions the potential de¬
velops into faculty and children begin
to speak quite easily. Under other
conditions, the process ¡s impeded
and progress is slow, while in other
cases it stops almost completely.
Every physically and mentally
healthy child possesses tremendous
potentialities for the development of
his or her creative faculties from the
moment of birth. In my view, the
earlier we start to develop these
faculties the better. Yet we neglect
and discount the period in a child's
life that is most important for the
development of creative faculties.
Let me give you an example from my
own experience in raising five children.
Our family experiment, if one may call
it that, began before the hypothesis of
creative faculties assumed the form
I am describing now. Our project and
the ways we planned to carry it out
were extremely simple. The only
surprising aspect was the result we
obtained.
Like many other parents, my wife
and I wanted our children to be well
developed both physically and mental¬
ly. Yet we had our doubts about
many educational and medical pre¬
cepts, particularly those concerning
the period when mental development
begins. We even doubted whether
these principles had a valid scientific
basis.
We decided to enlarge the child's
world to the extent that the resources
of a family of schoolteachers allowed,
and to fill It with all the things that
make up our "adult" world real
objects, tools, materials, instruments,
books and so on and provide ample
opportunities for human contacts.
The tools were small, but they were
real tools to be used on a work-bench.
The penknives were sharp and so were
the hatchets. Things could really be
weighed on the scales, and gymnastic
exercises performed on the rings,
horizontal bars and climbing ropes.
Even the toys were not just toys.
Big wooden blocks and boards could
be used to build a house large enough
to crawl into. The house could be
wired for electricity, through a low-
voltage transformer. Toy machines
and models were to be built by follow¬
ing real blueprints. The walls of the
children's rooms were hung with maps,
charts, diagrams and the letters of the
alphabet. On the shelves we put
building sets, reference books and
textbooks.
In this small but real world we gave
the children complete freedom to act
as they chose. We did away with a
great number of pedagogical rules and
restrictions, and watched to see what
would happen.
We did not then know how soon a
child is capable of learning to read.
At the age of one, the eldest boy was
already playing with letters printed on
cardboard and on blocks. We prov¬
ided him with a blackboard and chalk,
with paper and pencils, with letters
made out' of plastic and wire, with ABC
books and first-grade readers.
The result took us completely by
surprise. We discovered that children
can learn to read very early. Alyosha,
the eldest, read his first word at the
age of two years and eight months,
Anton at the age of three years and
three months, Anna and Olga at the
age of three years and four months.
By the time they were three and a
half years old, they knew as much
arithmetic as a child in his first year at
school (Soviet primary education
begins at the age of seven.) The
ability to read led to an interest in
maps, books and even textbooks. The
children easily picked up information
about grammar and arithmetic from
textbooks and from conversations at
the dinner table, and even set Father
and Mother problems in division. By
the age of six they could draw a plan
of a route, read maps, and find their
bearings In the fields and forests and
In the town.
When Alyosha was five he walked
dally to the infant-feeding centre, one
and a half kilometres away, to fetch
food for his baby sisters. He was
seven and a half when he made his
first trip on the suburban train from
Bolshevo to Moscow (about 60 km.)
and we were not afraid to let him go
alone. Two years before the boys
went to school they could read figures
up to one million and do simple
fractions, and easily handled measure¬
ments in length, weight and time.
Alyosha completed three years of
schooling in One year. At a mathema¬
tics' contest held in the third year of
school he won first place. Anton
entered school one year later but
quickly caught up with his brother.
He is now nine years old but feels at
ease among thirteen year-olds and has
overtaken his elder brother by coming
first in the last maths contest. Q1
The girls are evidently going to "
move ahead equally fast in elementary
school. Learning to read early, we
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=32) 2
### 52803: Latent talent; the anagram a parent can solve
LATENT TALENT (Continued)
have discovered, makes it easier to
write correctly. Both boys wrote
without grammatical mistakes in their
very first year at school.
I have given the boys psychological
tests in combining, elucidating natural
connexions, and classifying. They did
as well as children of fifteen.
Children of pre-school age have
great opportunities to solve vital new
problems. They have plenty of free
time to do this. That is why there is
often an early flowering of their
creative abilities. But as they grow
older, curiously enough the number of
complicated problems they face
decreases. At school whatever Is
new and incomprehensible is explained
to them. Besides, as the children
move from grade to grade at school
they have less and less time to devote
to what interests them. All this is
bound not only to check but also to
extinguish creative abilities that have
flowered so vividly.
At kindergarten where children stay
throughout the week, going home only
at the weekend, careful supervision
and a strict daily regime are of the
utmost Importance. The child there
is not forced to solve anything for him¬
self. He is Isolated from older
children. Conditions for speech de¬
velopment are unsatisfactory since he
has contacts with only a few adults,
and learns nothing from other children
of the same age.
If mathematical ability depended on
"nature," all schools would produce
equally capable mathematicians. But
they do not, and so we have "special"
schools with "special" teachers and
"special" methods of teaching maths.
This creates conditions favourable to
the development of aptitudes in mathe¬
matics which other schools do not
have.
No matter what faculties we con¬
sider, we find everywhere that the
older the group of children the fewer
the number of capable children. And
on the contrary, the younger the group,
the larger the number of capable child¬
ren.
The Swedish neurobiologist, Holger
Hiden, confirms this in biological
terms. He states that experiments
conducted at a "molecular level" show
that for full development the brain
needs not only physical nourishment
but also stimulation, especially in early
childhood.
Neurons deprived of either of these
factors and especially a stimulating
"study" environment cannot produce
albumin or form a sufficiently develop¬
ed network of fibrous links. Figura¬
tively speaking, they become empty
sacks, and finally atrophy. Mew
research may lead to big changes in
education. There Is already a .move¬
ment in support of starting formal
education in the first year of life.
At the General Assembly of the
World Organization for Early Childhood
Education, Prof. René Zazzo of France
summed up a great deal of recent
research when he said: "Observations
show more and more that the first
years of life are extremely significant.
These first years are filled with un¬
suspected riches." And he added:
"The point of equilibrium between
birth and adulthood is the age of three
years." From their calculations, the
American educator, Robert L. Thorn-
dike and his associates have come to
the same conclusion. By the age of
three, they say, a human being has
covered half of his mental develop¬
ment.

### 52794: TV; the challenge of the 70s: quantity + quality
TV's CHALLENGE
(Continued from page 1 1)
OF THE 70s
32
man. The huge quantity of material it
produces, the vast number of human
beings on which It has to draw do give
it the character of genuine folk art
based on the demands of the mass
rather than on the tastes of a few
elitist figures.
The negative aspect of the above si¬
tuation follows from the fact that while
there Is a true analogy with the primi¬
tive man in his tribe and his village,
modern man Is not a primitive and his
world Is a village only in the electronic,
not in the literal sense. Clearly the
possibilities of mass manipulation
through television commercial mani¬
pulation in some free-enterprise socie¬
ties, political manipulation In collecti-
vist countries are truly frightening.
It seems to me, however, that the
very quantity of television carries its
own built-in safety valve. Television
commercials may be effective sales
devices, yet in the long run surely they
must Immunize their audience. The
time will come when the law of dimi¬
nishing returns sets in.
The very quantity of the material
poured out to the electronic village
must, over the generations, the deca¬
des, the centuries, produce a highly
critical and sophisticated tribe, a com¬
munity hardened and immunized
against both the overt and the hidden
manipulators. And such resistance to
manipulation and criticism is also, I
believe, the immediate task of those
aware and informed enough to be able
to think in the long term.
Criticism and judicious evaluation of
material offered on the mass media
must surely become one of the prin¬
cipal subjects treated in the education
of future citizens in any truly demo¬
cratic community. Since anyone who
is familiar with the technical problems
and procedures behind the scenes of
the medium develops a trained eye to
detect the concealed manipulation,
surely generations of children who
have grown up with television and
become familiar with its techniques
will no longer be as credulous and as
naive as their elders who first en¬
countered it as a new toy when they
were already adults.
They will certainly develop their own
almost automatic evaluation of the
different kinds of material offered to
them, will become able to distinguish
between the real and the manufactured
event, between the genuine and the
synthetic personality, between the true
work of art and the spurious hack
product.
Television may have reduced our
culture to the status of the primitive
tribe, but that tribe will soon comprise
the whole of humanity, without dis¬
tinction of race, creed or social class.
That tribe will then, if external cir¬
cumstances remain favourable, have
vast opportunities for development
development towards mass sophistic¬
ation, mass wisdom, and a genuine
mass culture. These opportunities are
made available, for the first time In
history, by an electronic communic¬
ations medium which Is able to bring
the whole of human wisdom to every
human being.
In the long term, perhaps quantity
will have become the foundation of a
great leap forward in the overall quality
of human culture and through it of
human life itself.
## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=33) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
BOOKSHELF
RECENT UNESCO BOOKS
Unesco Statistical Yearbook 1969
Population, Education, Television,
Film and cinema, Science and tech¬
nology. Radio broadcasting, News¬
papers. Libraries and museums,
Cultural expenditure etc.
Bilingual : English-French
1970 ($26.00, £7.80)
See article page 14
Better Teachers
An experiment with in-service teacher
training conducted by the UNRWA/
Unesco Institute of Education
1970 ($3.50, £1.05).
The Education and Advancement
of Women
by Jacqueline Chabaud
1970 ($2.00, 60 p).
Annual Summary of Information
on Natural Disasters, No 3 : 1968
1970 ($2.50, 75 p).
New Trends in Mathematics
Teaching Vol. II (1970)
Prepared by the International
Commission of Mathematical
Instruction
Composite : English-French
1970 ($7.00, £2.10).
Functional Literacy
Why and How
(Unesco and its Programme)
1970.
Main Trends of Research in the
Social and Human Sciences
Part I : Social Sciences
Foreword by René Maheu
Co-edition Unesco-Mouton, The
Hague, 1970 (Cloth: $30.00, £9).
What is Educational Planning?
by P.H. Coombs
Unesco-International Institute of
Educational Planning
1970 ($2.00, 60 p).
Students as Links Between
Cultures
Co-edition Unesco-Universitetsfor-
laget, Oslo
1970 ($10.00, £3).
National Science Policy and
Organization of Research in the
Philippines
(No. 22 of Science Policy Studies
and Documents)
1970 ($2.50, £0.75).
D
uu \S\
The 5,000-year-old
history of Korea
The first complete history of Korea
written in English has now been published.
A 300-page volume written by leading
Korean scholars and produced with Unes¬
co's help, it is designed to promote a
better understanding and appreciation in
other countries of Korea's 5,000-year-old
historical and cultural heritage.
Birth of an art museum
Work is going ahead on a hilltop site
in the centre of Karachi (Pakistan) on an
art library planned as the nucleus of a
museum of modern art. The project has
been launched by Pakistani artists and
supporters of artistic and cultural activities
as a co-operative and self-paying venture,
run by a non-profit foundation.
Tracking down the guilty six
The six most common air pollutants
sulphur dioxide, dust and other particles,
carbon monoxide, oxidants, nitrogen oxides
and lead are to be studied by the World
Health Organization with the aim of setting
criteria and guide lines for air quality.
Data gathered by WHO's international net¬
work of centres and laboratories for moni¬
toring air pollution will be used to pinpoint
the most polluted areas and to find out
at what level health is endangered.
Science for the blind
"Science for the Blind", a non-profit
organization In the U.S.A. provides recorded
scientific information and develops techni¬
cal work aids for visually handicapped
scientists, technicians, hobbyists and lay¬
men. Taped periodicals which keep blind
scientists up to date with the latest trends,
total 24,000 a year and serve close to
1,000 persons in the U.S.A. and Canada.
"Science for the Blind" operates from
221 Rock Hill Road, Bala-Cunwyd Pennsyl¬
vania 19004, U.S.A.
Bubble barrier
against pollution
A "bubble barrier" is used in Antwerp
harbour to prevent the spread of oil spillage
from Belgium's largest refinery. The sys¬
tem, designed by a Swedish firm, consists
of a perforated hose laid on the harbour
bed. When compressed air Is pumped
into the pipe, bubbles rising to the surface
form a barrier of turbulence effective
against even very thick layers of oil.
Bubble barriers have the twin advantage
of being in place before pollution occurs
and of allowing sea-going traffic to pass
unhindered through a polluted area.
An ecology reserve
barred to man
In a 120 square mile expanse of desert
and low uplands, near Richland, Oregon,
U.S. ecologists are studying wildlife in a
"pure balance of nature" unaffected by
disruptions caused by man. The "Arid
Lands Ecology Reserve" is semi-arid and
populated mainly by coyotes, deer, rabbits,
snakes, mice, darkling beetles, hawks and
owls. It forms part of a security zone
round plutonium factories and has been
virtually barred to humans for nearly twenty
years.
'Literacy Discussion'
A new quarterly bulletin dealing with
problems of literacy, the "Literacy Dis¬
cussion", has been launched by the Inter¬
national Institute for Adult Literacy
Methods in Teheran (Iran). The Institute
was established jointly by Unesco and the
Government of Iran to provide documenta¬
tion, research and training services on
methods, media, materials and techniques
for adult literacy. "Literacy discussion" is
published in English and French. Its
"Summer 1970" issue was specially de¬
voted to literacy . research. Copies can
be obtained free of charge by writing to
the Institute, c/o Box 1555, Teheran, Iran.
Training
in analytical chemistry
A nine month international postgraduate
training course in Analytical Chemistry,
sponsored by Unesco and organized by
the Charles University, Prague, begins on
October 1, 1971. The programme covers
a wide field, Including the application of
modern analytical methods to problems of
special importance to developing countries.
Application forms are obtainable from the
Training Course Office, Charles University,
Albertov 2030, Prague 2, Czechoslovakia;
closing date for applications April 1, 1971.
Fewer women
die in childbirth
A striking drop in maternal death rates
is shown by a WHO study of statistics
covering 36 countries during 15 years.
Sweden is the safest place In the world
to have a baby. Its maternal death rate
dropped from 69 per 100,000 births in
1951 to 11.3 per 100,000 in 1966. Some
countries have halved their maternal deaths
during the same period.
Flashes...
Reconstruction of the cyclone-devas¬
tated areas of East Pakistan will cost
$785 million, according to World Bank offi¬
cials who have drawn up a comprehensive
plan for this operation.
M International youth centres are to be
built by the Nigerian Youth Council in each
of the 12 States of the Nigerian Federation,
the first near Lake Chad.
M Canada has become the first country in
the world to have an entirely automated
meteorological network with stations linked
to a central computer in Toronto.
M A special travel service to aid foreign
students visiting Indonesia has been set
up by the Student Council of the University
of Indonesia in Djakarta.
33
## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=34) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Letters to the Editor
PRINCESS OF KERKOUAN
Sir,
I have much pleasure in sending you
a photograph of the statue of a woman,
carved in wood, which was recently
discovered at the site of the Punic
city of Kerkouan at Cap Bon, Tunisia.
The statue has provisionally been named
"The Princess of Kerkouan".
This is a discovery of outstanding
Importance and I am sure the photo¬
graph of this "goddess" deserves a
place in your much admired magazine.
I enclose a short text by Prof. Mham-
ed Fantar of the University of Tunis,
describing the discovery of the statue
during the archaeological Seminar held
at Kerkouan, and indicating the archae¬
ological importance of the find.
Rafik Said
Minister Plenipotentiary, Permanent
Delegation of Tunisia to Unesco.
Mhamed Fantar, a Tunisian specialist
in Punic archaeology and epigraphy, is
the author of "Carthage Through the
Eyes of Greece and Rome", published
in our special number on Unesco's
programme for the safeguard and deve¬
lopment of monuments and sites in the
Carthage-Tunis Region (December 1970).
Secretary-General of the Archaeological
and Historical Research Commission of
the National Institute of Archaeology
and the Arts, in Tunis, he has written
many studies on archaeological disco¬
veries in Tunisia. On the important
discovery of the "Princess of Ker¬
kouan" (photo above), Prof. Fantar
writes:
"At the end of the 1970 university
year, the Archaeological and Historical
Research Centre of Tunisia held its
annual Seminar for archaeologists at
the site of the Punic city of Kerkouan
at Cap Bon, between Kelibia and el-
Haouaria, in Tunisia. The Seminar,
which was attended by archaeologists
from Africa, Asia and Europe, lasted
for two rewarding weeks.
"Among other activities, three tombs
were examined with the aim of acquir¬
ing a better knowledge of the Punic
burial ground at Kerkouan.
"In one of the three tombs investigated
the archaeologists were astonished to
find the statue of a woman sculpted In
wood and forming the lid of a sarco¬
phagus.
"This find will undoubtedly arouse
world-wide interest among archaeolo¬
gists. It brings to light certain aspects
of Punic religion about which little is
known. Perhaps we have uncovered
the statue of a goddess. Furthermore,
the Kerkouan statue opens up for us
a new field of Carthaginian art sculp¬
ture in wood. In addition to the artistic
aspects of sculpture, the "Princess of
Kerkouan" will reveal to us the tech¬
nical aspect of wood sculpture.
"The tomb in which the statue was
found was sealed again Immediately
after examination In order to avoid a
sudden change in the ambient atmos¬
phere. The wood of the statue has
suffered greatly from humidity and it
was essential to maintain the micro¬
climate that had existed in the tomb
for some 2,300 years. International
collaboration will be necessary to
ensure the preservation of this master¬
piece of the world's cultural heritage."
FOR THE SICK AND LONELY
Sir,
For the past five years, my wife and
I and a few friends have been helping
over 1,000 sick and lonely people by
giving them books, magazines and
newspapers that we have collected.
Appeals have been made on our behalf
over the radio with excellent results.
But the winter is here and we are
once again short of reading material
to distribute.
Would you say something about our
work, not necessarily only in the French
edition. Above all I should like people
to know about our work which might
perhaps serve as a small example of
what can be done to help the sick
and elderly.
Jacques Maréchal
B. P. 129, Saint-Dizier
Haute-Marne, France
MAN VS NATURE
Sir,
I was most impressed by the article,
"Man Killer of Nature", in your August-
September, 1970 issue.
Pollution is a problem of the utmost
importance, but, unfortunately, such
means as exist for fighting it are slow-
moving and often ineffective.
Public opinion remains unmoved by
this problem, but I trust that this article,
which was of great moral weight and
value, will have a positive effect on
those who read it.
We can never have too much Infor¬
mation about problems of this kind.
Simone Aviron-Violet
Lyon, France
THE PERILS OF INHALING
Sir,
The correspondence about cancer
and the Inhaling of tobacco smoke
(Letters to the Editor, Aug-Sept, 1970,
issue), leads me to ask is it definitely
proved that a form of lung cancer
results only from inhaling? I have been
smoking for 60 years but have never
inhaled and at the age of 86 my heart
and lungs are sound, as is proved by
my continued employment in govern¬
ment service.
If only inhaling can result in cancer,
why is not this fact definitely stated in
medical treatises on this subject? It
seems to me that no smoke in lungs
implies no impairment of lungs.
This seems to be such an important
facet of the subject and for research
that one can only be amazed at its
apparent neglect. What about a slogan
"No inhalation, no lung cancer"?
Colonel E. A. Loftus
Lusaka, Zambia
BRITTANY OR NORMANDY?
Sir,
In your Issue devoted to Cancer
(May 1970), Nedd Willard, writing of
"hidden factors in the geography of
cancer", mentions the hypothesis which
sees a link between the high rate of
cancer of the oesophagus (the human
gullet) in Brittany and the large quan¬
tities of calvados (spirit distilled from
cider) drunk in that region of France.
As far as I know, the Bretons drink
less cider spirit than their neighbours
in Normandy. It is above all the people
of Auge district in Calvados (Normandy)
who "chase" their coffee with a calva¬
dos or drink it after a meal.
Charles Collard
Antwerp, Belgium
'IMPOTENT IDEALISTS'
Sir,
In a letter published in your October
1970 number, I wrote: "One aspect of
youth which is often sneered at is their
idealism" and "youth often seems to
be faced with a choice: either you cat*
remain an impotent idealist or you can
carry out the measures which we
(governments) desire."
Since I wrote that letter, I have joined
the Cambridge University United Na¬
tions Association, and thus I am not
quite so convinced of the "impotent
idealist" position. I wonder whether my
address could be supplied to anyone
who feels strongly about what I said.
I would thus not only become acquaint¬
ed with a much wider range of opinion
(which I am anxious to do) but might
also be able to clarify my position. '
M. L. Meakin
1 St. Peter's Terrace
Cambridge, U.K.
THE PROBLEMS OF AGING
Sir,
May I suggest that the "Unesco Cou¬
rier" devote a forthcoming Issue to
the problems of age and the aged in
the world? Articles could deal with
the physiological and psychological
aspects of old age as' well as its demo¬
graphic and sociological implications.
M. Durry
Paris, France
In "Science vs Old Age", the "Unesco
Courier" devoted the major part of its
October, 1958 issue to the problems
of aging Editor.
## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=35) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
JUST PUBLISHED BY UNESCO
introduction
to lifelong
education
75 p $2,50 10 F 99 pages
In the modern world, where every frontier of
knowledge is constantly expanding, education in
its fullest sense needs to be a continuing process
throughout life, embracing general, technical and
professional knowledge, helping men and women
to adapt to changing ways of life and enabling
them to enrich their leisure time. Written for
the layman as well as the educator, "An Intro¬
duction to Lifelong Education" explores this
challenging new concept of education.
In this thoughtful Unesco study, Paul Lengrand,
chief of the Continuing Education Section at
Unesco:
Discusses the significance of
lifelong education
Analyses its contents,
dimensions and objectives
Offers suggestions for a
strategy of lifelong education
Where to renew your subscription
and order other Unesco publications
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to
the National Distributor in your country. (See list
below ; names of distributors in countries not
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is
made in the national currency; the rates quoted
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO
COURIER in any one language.
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. AUSTRALIA.
Publications : Educational Supplies Pty. Ltd., P.O.
Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NSW; Periodicals :
Dominie Pty. Limited, Box 33, Post Office, Brook¬
vale 2100, NSW. Sub-agent. United Nations Asso¬
ciation of Australia, Victorian Division, 4th Floor,
Askew House, 364 Lonsdale St., Melbourne (Vic¬
toria). 3000 ($ 2.75). AUSTRIA. Verlag Georg
Fromme & C-., Arbeitgasse 1-7, 1051, Vienna, (AS 82).
BELGIUM. Editions "Labor", 342, rue Royale,
Brussels, 3. Presses Universitaires de Bruxelles, 42,
avenue Paul-Héger, Brussels 5. NV Standaard-We-
tenschappelijke Uitgeverij Belgielei 147, Antwerp, I.
Jean de Lannoy, 1 1 2, rue du Trône, Brussels 5. CCP
3380.00. BURMA. Trade Corporation N* (9), 550-
5 52 Merchant Street, Rangoon. CANADA. Information
Canada, Ottawa, Ont. ($ 4,00). CEYLON. Lake House
Bookshop, Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244
Colombo, 2. (Rs 12.50). CHINA. World Book Co.
Ltd., 99 Chungking South Rd., Section 1, Taipeh,
Taiwan (Formosa). CYPRUS. " MAM ", Archbishop
Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 1722, Nicosia.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L., Spalena 51, Prague 1
(permanent display); Zahranicni literatura 11 Soukenicka
Prague 1. For Slovakiaonly : Nakladatelstvo Alfa, Hurba-
novo nam. 6 Bratislava. - DENMARK. Ejnar Munksgaard
Ltd., 6, Norregade. 1 1 65,Copenhagen K. (Dan. Kr. 1 9.00).
ETHIOPIA. National Commission for Unesco, P.O.
Box 2996, Addis Ababa. FINLAND, Akateeminen
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki (Fmk. 11.90).
FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, place de Fontenoy,
Paris-7«. CCP. 12598-48 (12 F). GERMANY. All
publications; Verlag Dokumentation, Postfach 148,
Jaiserstrasse 13, 8023 Munchen-Pullach. For the
Unesco Kurier (German ed only) Bahrenfelder-
Chaussee 160, Hambourg-Bahrenfeld, CCP. 276650
(DM 12). GHANA. Methodist Book Depot
Ltd., Atlantic House, Commercial Street, POB 100,
cape Coast GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom.
GREECE, Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade,
Athens; Librairie Eleftheroudakis, Nikkis 4, Athens.
HONG-KONG, Swindon Book Co., 13-15, Lock Road,
Kowloon. HUNGARY. Akadémiai, Konyvesbolt,
Váci u. 22, Budapest V; A.K.V. Konyvtarosok Boltja,
Népkoztársaság utia 16, Budapest VI. ICELAND.
Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik.
INDIA. Orient Longman Ltd., Nicol Road, Ballard.
Estate, Bombay 1 ; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13;
36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 3/5 Asaf Ah Road, New
Delhi 1 ; Sub-Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery Co.
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16 and Scindta House, New
Delhi; Publications Section, Ministry of Education and
Youth Services, 72 Theatre Communication Building,
Connaught Place New Delhi 1.(Rs. 1 3.50). INDONE¬
SIA. Indira P.T., D|l. Dr. Sam Ratulangie 37, Djakarta.
IRAN. Iranian National Commission for Unesco, 1/1 54
avenue Roosevelt, B.P. 1533, Teheran. IRAQ. McKen-
zie's Bookshop, Al-Rashtd Street, Baghdad; University
Bookstore, University of Baghdad, P.O. Box 75, Baghdad.
IRELAND. The National Press, 2. Wellington Road,
Ballsbridge, Dublin, 4. ISRAEL. Emmanuel Brown, for¬
merly Blumstein's Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48,
Nahlat Benjamin Street,Tel-Aviv (IL. 1 5). JAMAICA.
Sangster's Book Stores Ltd., P.O. Box 366, 101 Water
Lane, Kingston. JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., P.O. Box
5050, Tokyo International 1 00-31. JORDAN. Joseph I.
Bahous & Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Am¬
man. KENYA. The E.S.A. Ltd., P.O. Box 301 67, Nai¬
robi. KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco
P.O. Box Central 64. Seoul. KUWAIT. The Kuwait
Bookshop Co., Ltd., P.O. Box 2942, Kuwait. LIBERIA.
Cole and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286.
Monrovia. LIBYA. Agency for Development of
Publication & Distribution, P.O. Box 34-35, Tripoli.
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Brück, 22, Grand-Rue,
Luxembourg (F.L. 170). MALAYSIA. Federal Publica¬
tions Sdn Bhd., Balai Benta, 31, Jalan Riong, Kuala Lum¬
pur. MALTA. Sapienza's Library, 26 Kingsway, Vallet¬
ta. MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon
Street, Port-Louis. MONACO. British Library, 30,
Bid des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. NETHERLANDS.
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, the Hague,
(fl. 10). NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G. C. T.
Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.). N. V., Willemstad, Cura¬
çao. N.A. (NA fl. S.25). NEW ZEALAND. Govern¬
ment Printing Office, Government Bookshops at: Rutland
Street, P.O. Box 5344, Auckland; 130, Oxford Terrace,
P.O. Box 1 721, Chnstchurch ; Alma Street, P.O. Box 857,
Hamilton; Princes Street, P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin;
Mulgrave Street, Private Bag, Wellington ($ 2.15).
NORWAY. All publications: A/S Bokhjornet, Josefi-
nesgate 37, Oslo 3. For Unesco Courier only: A.S.
Narvesens Litteracurjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6 (K.
2.75). PAKISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Co.
Ltd., Unesco Publication House, P.O. Box 374 G.P.O. ;
Lahore ; Showrooms : Urdu Bazar, Lahore, and 57-58
Murree, Highway, G/6-1, Islamabad. Pakistan Publi¬
cations Bookshop, Sarwar Road, Rawalpindi ; Panbagh,
Dacca. PHILIPPINES. The Modern Book Co., 928.
Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 632. Manila. POLAND. All
publications: ORWN PAN Palac Kultury i Nauki, War¬
saw. For the Unesco Courier only: RUCH, ul. Wronia, 23,
Warsaw 1 0. PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lda, Livra-
ria Portugal, ruade Carmo 70, Lisbon. PUERTO RICO.
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor Roosevelt 115.
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. SINGAPORE. Federal Pu¬
blications Sdn Bhd., Times House, River Valley Road. Sin¬
gapore 9. SOUTHERN RHODESIA. Textbook Sales
(PVT) Ltd., 67 Union Avenue, Salisbury. SUDAN.
AI Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum.
SWEDEN. All publications: A/B CE. Fritzes Kungl.
Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan, 2, Box 16356, 103 27, Stock¬
holm 16. For the Unesco Courier : Svenska FN. For-
bundet, Vasagatan 15, IV 1 01 23, Stockholm 1 Post-
giro 18 46 92 (Kr. 18). SWITZERLAND. All
publications: Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich.
Librairie Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11,
CCP. 1 2-23 6 (Fr. S. 1 2.) - TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam
Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam. THAILAND.
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok.
(37.50 bäht). TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. UGANDA. Uganda Book¬
shop. P.O. Box 145, Kampala. SOUTH AFRICA.
All publications: Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty). Ltd.,
Libri Building, Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria.
For the Unesco Courier (single copies) only: Central
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. UNI¬
TED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie Kasr
El Nil, 38, rue Ksar El Nil, Cairo. Sub-agent: La Re¬
naissance d'Égypte, 9Sh. Adly-Pasha, Cairo. UNITED
KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569,
London, S.E.I., and Government Bookshops in London,
Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, Birmingham
(20/-). UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications
Center, P.O. Box 433. New York, N.Y. 10016
($ 5). U.S.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, Moscow,
G-200. YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska Knjiga, Te-
raziie, 27, Belgrade; Drzavna Zaluzba Slovemje Mestni
Trg. 26, Ljubljana.
## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078266engo.pdf#page=36) 🆗
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
1971
International Year
for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial
Discrimination
(see page 22)
Photo A. Perlstein - © L'Express, Paris
"*>
* t£
IV
flf>