# [192180](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf)
## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=1) 🆗
### Non-article text
2007 • number 10 • ISSN 1993-8616
Education for all  
halfway thErE
## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=2) 🆗
### Non-article text
 Yemen : an example in education for girls 21 
 Where the World stands on the six goals 22
Education for all: halfway thErE
the sixth edition of the Efa Global Monitoring report has just been released. it testifies 
to considerable progress in education since 2000: the number of out-of-school children 
dropped sharply, primary education forged ahead by 36% in Sub-Saharan africa, 14 countries 
abolished primary school fees. But 72 million children are still deprived of school around 
the world, and 18 million more teachers are needed by 2015. and 774 million 
adults lack literacy skills. the challenges are substantial.
Editorial 3
UNESCO campaign «Send my friend to school» (2005). Work by Tara Badcock (Australia).
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/M
ic
he
l R
av
as
sa
rd
Education for all By 2015:  
will wE MakE it?
In 2000, the international community committed to six goals 
aimed at assuring education for all by 2015. We are halfway 
there and we have good reason to be optimistic.  
But much remains to be done in early childhood education, 
gender parity and literacy. 4
Education, a fundaMEntal riGht
Too often, education is perceived as an opportunity rather 
than a right, although access for all children to free and 
compulsory education is guaranteed by most Constitutions. 
When the right to education is flouted, the courts can  
and must intervene. 7
School iS likE a BicyclE: 
if you don’t pEdal, it topplES
An education expert, Michaela Zatreanu doesn’t fiercely advocate 
teaching school in Romani, despite being the author of the first 
textbooks published in this language in Romania. She thinks instruc-
tion exclusively in Romani would represent a form of segregation and 
promotes schooling with a multicultural dimension. 8
for MultilinGual Education in africa
Education should enable people to take root in their culture as 
well as open them up to other cultures. Africa needs schooling 
that integrates its languages, history and social values, accord-
ing to Adama Samassekou, president of the African Academy 
of Languages (ACALAN). 10
VincEnt Bikono: contract workEr  
and not proud of it
In Cameroon, contract workers make up 53% of teaching 
staff at primary level. Systematically paid less than those with 
civil servant status and sometimes better qualified, contrac-
tors are in the process of founding a union. 12
raúl VallEjo corral : rEMoVE oBStaclES 
liMitinG accESS to Education
Ecuador has considerably increased its investment in education. 
The country occupies an intermediate position regarding fulfillment 
of the Education for All objectives set in Dakar (Senegal) in 2000. 
Its Minister of Education Raúl Vallejo Corral describes  
the situation. 13
firSt yEar of School:  
crucial for thE rESt of a child’S lifE
Support for teachers, evaluation of pupils’ progress, follow-up 
for children outside the classroom, and parents’ participation 
in their children’s education – these elements are key  
to the success of the campaign “Save the first year”  
in Guatemala. Simple but effective strategies. 15
llitEracy coStS MorE than litEracy
We cannot abandon adult literacy under the pretext that children 
are being educated, when we know the crucial importance 
of the home environment. Literacy has often been associated 
with one-off campaigns when sustained investment 
over time is needed. 16
GEndEr Equality in Math tExtBookS:  
an iMpoSSiBlE Equation?
Are girls and boys equal in mathematics textbooks? 
This is not evident, judging by the study conducted by Sylvie 
Cromer, lecturer at Lille 2 University. With a group of African 
academics, she analyzed primary school textbooks in several 
countries in the region. Result: girls become fewer 
as the scholastic level rises. 17
thE inViSiBlE childrEn of BanGladESh
More than half the inhabitants of Bangladesh’s city slums are 
children: nearly 15 million boys and girls, of which 8 million 
must work to help their families survive. For a cost of 35 dollars 
a child, the government has launched an education project for 
child workers, giving them a chance to change their lives. 19
2007 - N° 10
Contents
## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=3) 🆗
### Editorial
3The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
1990 – The Education for All (EFA) 
campaign is launched in Jomtien 
(Thailand). The international commu-
nity pledges to provide quality basic 
education to all children, youths and 
adults. 
2000 – In Dakar, Senegal, more than 
160 governments set six goals to be 
reached no later than 2015. The goals 
concern early childhood education, 
primary school, life skills, adult literacy, 
gender parity and quality education. 
2007 – “We are halfway there and we 
have good reason to be optimistic,” 
says, in this issue of the UNESCO 
Courier, Nicholas Burnett, UNESCO 
Assistant Director-General for Educa-
tion and director of the just-launched 
2008 EFA Global Monitoring Report. 
Troublesome areas remain nonethe-
less, notably early childhood educa-
tion, gender parity and adult literacy. 
One reason for delays is the per-
ception of education as an opportu-
nity rather than a right, says Jan de 
Groof, professor of education law 
at the College of Europe in Brug-
es. “When the right to education is 
flouted, the courts can and must in-
tervene,” he asserts, citing the exam-
Editorial 
year of school can be stigmatized for 
life. For that reason the country, 30% 
of whose 13 million inhabitants lack 
literacy skills, launched the campaign 
“Save the first year”. 
And to return to the most delicate as-
pects of Education for All, David Archer, 
from the NGO Action-Aid, explains 
why illiteracy costs more than literacy. 
Sylvie Cromer, from Lille 2 University, 
demonstrates that gender inequali-
ties are visible even in mathematics 
textbooks. Indian Journalist Shiraz 
Sidhva tells the story of working 
children in Bangladesh to whom the 
state is giving the opportunity to suc-
ceed. Ann Therese Ndong-Jatta, Direc-
tor of Basic Education at UNESCO, 
talks about the Organization’s activities 
on behalf of early childhood, notably in 
developing countries where preschool 
education remains the privilege of the 
wealthier families. 
The features of this issue of the 
UNESCO Courier offer a photo report 
on education for girls in Yemen, a coun-
try making considerable effort to close 
the gender gap in schools; and a brief 
summary of the six Dakar goals. 
Jasmina Šopova
ple of Roma children who just won 
their appeal at the European Court of 
Human Rights. 
Schools with instruction entirely 
in Romani would represent a form 
of segregation, says Roma Michaela 
Zatreanu, education expert (Roma-
nia) who advocates multicultural edu-
cation. 
Meanwhile Adama Samassekou 
from Mali, president of the African 
Academy of Languages, is fighting 
much more fiercely for the integration 
of mother languages at school. “We 
need a school that is attached to soci-
ety, not torn from it,” he declares. 
But Africa has other problems in 
education. In Cameroon, for instance, 
contract teachers comprise 53% of 
the labor force at primary level. They 
have as many responsibilities and far 
fewer rights than their civil service 
counterparts. How then can they pro-
vide quality education? Lawyer-teach-
er Vincent Bikono tells his story. 
On the other side of the Atlantic, 
Ecuador wants to set the example 
by greatly increasing its investment in 
education. Minister of Education Raúl 
Vallejo Corral presents an overview of 
the reforms. 
Also in Latin America, Guatemala 
thinks that children who fail their first 
UNESCO campaign «Send my friend to school» (2005). Work by Pepe Agost (Spain).
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/M
ic
he
l R
av
as
sa
rd
## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=4) 🆗
### Education for all by 2015: will we make it?
4The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
T
sharply, especially since 2002. 
Many countries in Africa and Asia 
have taken special measures to lift 
barriers to girls’ education through 
campaigns, better sanitation in 
schools, free learning materials 
and recruitment of more female 
teachers. Latin American countries 
have implemented effective subsidy 
programmes to offset the costs of 
schooling for the poorest house-
holds. 
Public expenditure on education 
increased by over 5% annually in 
sub-Saharan Africa and South and 
West Asia, the two regions farthest 
from achieving the EFA goals. Fi-
nally, aid commitments to basic 
education increased substantially 
between 2000 and 2004, from 
US$2.7 billion to US$5.1 billion, 
with low-income countries benefit-
ing most. 
Success creates  
its own problems 
As schools attract a larger and 
more diverse student population, 
they face pressure to offer more 
classrooms, trained teachers and 
textbooks. Across the world more 
than 18 million new teachers will 
be needed by 2015, with the 
greatest challenge in sub-Saharan 
Africa. Governments are taking 
stop-gapping measures to avoid a 
crisis by hiring teachers on short-
term contracts, but this is not a sus- 
tainable solution for improving quality. 
Adequate teacher training and pro-
fessional development are keys to 
better quality schools. 
he international community is set-
ting itself more and more targets 
in all domains: education, health, 
climate change etc. Global targets 
signal the collective recognition of a 
problem and the collective will to do 
something about it. This is why over 
160 governments committed to six 
goals in 2000, in Dakar (Senegal), 
aimed at assuring quality education 
for all by 2015. Two of the Education 
for All goals (EFA) - universal pri-
mary education and gender parity 
- are also Millennium Development 
Goals, a broad set of poverty reduc-
tion objectives endorsed by over 
200 countries. Targets are also poli- 
tical instruments that citizens can 
use to hold governments to account 
for their pledges. They are, howev-
er, of little significance if not regu-
larly monitored, with results used 
to inform and to influence policy. 
The EFA Global Monitoring Report, 
now in its sixth edition, serves this 
purpose for basic education.
Reasons  
for optimism
The latest Report asks a seem-
ingly straightforward question at 
the midway point to 2015: “Will 
we make it?” The scorecard leaves 
ample space for optimism because 
there is clearly a “Dakar effect” 
since 2000. Progress has been 
faster than in the 1990s on several 
fronts. In sub–Saharan Africa enrol-
ment in primary school increased 
by 36%, in South and West Asia 
by 22%. Governments in fourteen 
countries abolished primary school 
tuition fees, a measure that has fa-
voured access for the most disad-
vantaged children. The number of 
out of school children has dropped 
                                   in 2000, the international community committed to six goals aimed 
                     at assuring education for all by 2015. we are halfway there and we have good reason
                            to be optimistic. But much remains to be done in early childhood education, 
                                       gender parity and literacy.
Education for all by 2015: 
Will We make it?  
Warao woman at Robinson Mission, National Literacy campaign in Venezuela (2005).
.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/M
or
te
n 
K
ro
gv
ol
d
## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=5) 🆗
### Education for all by 2015: will we make it?
5The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
Relatively low learning achieve-
ment in language and mathemat-
ics characterize many countries 
worldwide. Pupils need to spend 
more time learning in school, with 
enough trained teachers, textbooks 
and learning materials. They are 
most likely to acquire literacy skills 
if they start learning in their mother 
tongue. 
Inclusion stands among the great-
est challenges for education today. 
Special measures are now required 
to reach the 72 million children who 
are not in school. They may belong 
to indigenous groups, live in rural 
areas, urban slums or countries in 
conflict, suffer from a disability, or 
have lost one or both parents to 
HIV/AIDS. In all cases poverty is 
a major constraint. Only through 
policies that recognize that children 
from different backgrounds have 
different needs can education be-
come fairer for all. Small interven-
tions such as health and school 
feeding programmes can make a 
big difference to learning.
All the goals  
matter
Extending the reach of education 
now calls for a much bolder focus 
on all the EFA goals, with more fi-
nancial support from donors. Sev-
eral facts are cause for concern: 
early childhood education, gender 
parity and adult literacy. 
Children under age 6 in most de-
veloping regions lack access to care 
and education programmes. These 
have the proven potential to offset 
disadvantage, prepare children for 
primary school and increase their 
chances of doing well there once 
enrolled. The whole education sys-
tem benefits when children enjoy 
the right start. 
Girls: data available for the school 
year ending in 2005 confirms that 
the gender parity goal in primary 
and secondary education set for 
that year has been missed. Only 
three additional countries reached 
parity since 1999. Only about one-
third of countries reported parity in 
both primary and secondary edu-
cation in 2005. Disparities remain 
widespread in sub-Saharan Africa, 
What can unESco do for Early 
childhood Education?
Many governments in developing countries have relegated 
the aspect of preparing young children for school 
to the private sector, especially in urban areas 
where families who can afford it benefit most. 
we need a pro-poor strategy that focuses on rural areas.
Our approach is to reach young 
children by including two years of 
pre-primary within primary school 
programmes. Early childhood care 
and development (ECD) is very 
inter-sectoral: it is not only about 
pre-school, but about health, nutri-
tion and support to parents. These 
pre-primary programmes are more 
flexible, involving play, nutrition, 
and use of the language spoken at 
home. They aim to build confidence 
and bridges between the home and 
the school. The idea is to bring ECD 
closer to the school system, and to 
work with parent-teacher associa-
tions and NGOs. 
UNESCO needs to drive home the 
message to ministries of education 
that investment in education starts 
early, otherwise you run into repeti-
tion, drop out and poor performance. 
Donors also need to be sensitized. 
They are beginning to see that 
preparation before primary school is 
important but funding does not yet 
reflect this. 
We are here to help governments 
negotiate the right types of assis-
tance to make sure that schools are 
prepared for each child and each 
child prepared for school. This ap-
proach can change policies in coun-
tries as well as patterns of invest-
ment. It is also grounded in human 
rights: good quality learning pro-
grammes for all young children are 
the best response to the Conven-
tion and Recommendation Against 
Discrimination in Education.
« Send my friend to school », UNESCO 
campaign (2005), involved 25 artists. 
Work of Jean Joseph Sanfourche, France.
©
 U
N
ES
C
O
/M
ic
he
l R
av
as
sa
rd
Ann Therese Ndong-Jatta, Director of the division for the promotion of basic education, 
speaks to Cynthia Guttman (UNESCO). 
## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=6) 🆗
### Non-article text
6The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
the Arab States and South and 
West Asia, where they mainly fa-
vour boys. In several other regions, 
including Latin American and the 
Caribbean, girls are at an advan-
tage. 
Literacy: 774 million adults lack ba-
sic literacy skills. Although the adult 
literacy rate has increased in devel-
oping countries, the absolute num-
ber of illiterates has barely changed 
over the past two decades. Lack 
of literacy is synonymous with de-
privation, making individuals, and 
especially women, more vulnerable 
to ill-health, exclusion and exploita-
tion. It also heightens the chance 
that parents will not send their own-
children to school. Literacy must be 
promoted in school and in society 
Outside school activities. New Windsor, New Zealand.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/A
S
P
ne
t/
La
ur
ie
 D
ow
er

### Education for all by 2015: will we make it?
at large through adult education 
programmes and access to the 
written word through appropriate 
media and publishing policies. 
To these difficulties is added the 
issue of international aid. In Dakar in 
2000, the international community 
pledged to support countries’ com-
mitment to education by providing 
higher levels of aid. Between 2000 
and 2004, aid for basic education 
increased by 90% but fell in 2005, 
sending out a negative message. 
Aid needs to increase sharply to 
meet the annual external financing 
need of US$11 billion. 
Education is everyone’s concern. 
Projections suggest that the EFA 
goals will not be reached on cur-
rent trends. The pace of change 
can be accelerated with much 
greater political will, resources and 
partnerships, both within countries 
and between them. As societies 
become more knowledge intensive, 
the education goals are more rele-
vant than ever. But policies must be 
grounded in a concern for inclusion 
and quality for all age groups. The 
targets set in 2000 act as a bea-
con, drawing countries forward to 
provide a way out of poverty and fulfil 
the right to education.  
Nicholas Burnett, 
Director of the 2008 EFA Global 
Monitoring Report, Assistant Director-
General for Education (UNESCO).
“The targets set in 2000 act as a beacon”. This drawing was part  
of an exhibit of children’s drawings from Cuba. UNESCO, 1970.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/R
. D
om
in
iq
ue
## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=7) 🆗
### Education, a fundamental right
7The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
L
                        too often, education is perceived as an opportunity rather  
                              than a right, although access for all children to free 
         and compulsory education is guaranteed by most constitutions. 
     when the right to education is flouted, the courts can and must intervene.
Education, 
a fundamental right
et us look at India: an estimated 
58 out of 185 million children aged 
5 to 14 years are not in school. 
(Editor’s note: According to other 
sources, India had 13.5 million 
children not in school in 2005.) 
Yet the original text of the 1950 
Constitution of India stated that 
‘The State shall endeavour to pro-
vide, within a period of ten years 
from the commencement of this 
Constitution, for free and compul-
sory education for all children until 
they complete the age of fourteen 
years.’ The 10 year deadline for the 
provision of free, universal elemen-
tary education is long passed and 
has not been met. 
In 1992 and 1993, the Supreme 
Court of India examined two cases 
in which the plaintiffs claimed a 
judicially enforceable right to edu-
cation. The Court expressed its 
concern at the obvious failure of 
the Government of India to fulfil 
its duty: ‘Does not the passage of 
44 years more than four times the 
period stipulated in article 45 con-
vert the obligation created by the 
article into an enforceable right?’. It 
held that the right to education up 
to age 14 contained in the Consti-
tution amounted to a ‘fundamental 
right’ enforceable by law. The im-
mediate effect of the decision: any 
child below the age of 14 denied 
access to primary education could 
approach a court and obtain an or-
der directing the authorities to initi-
ate appropriate measures. 
The Indian Court re-characterized 
the right to education as a funda-
mental right. This activist approach 
has not been followed in other 
continents. The European Court of 
Human Rights (ECtHR) rather re-
luctantly adhered to such a judicial 
interpretation.
A European  
break-through
A case in point is that of the 18 
Roma children living in the Czech 
Republic who were placed in a 
school for children with learn-
ing disabilities. The Roma unsuc-
cessfully complained in the Czech 
courts in 1999 that this placement 
was discriminatory on the basis 
of race and ethnic origin and con-
stituted a breach of their right to 
education. They maintained that 
the State’s “differential treatment” 
in sending them to special schools 
only served to aggravate the dif-
ferences between them and the 
pupils attending regular schools. 
They therefore requested that the 
State take positive measures to 
compensate for their socio-cultural 
handicap and afford them instead 
a means of resuming the normal 
curriculum. 
In 2000, the applicants turned to 
the ECtHR. Despite the disturbing 
statistics resulting from the place-
ment of Roma children in special 
schools, the ECtHR held that on 
the basis of the relevant facts, the 
reason for the applicants’ place-
ment in special schools was not 
based on their ethnic or racial 
origin. Thus the Roma children 
were not treated differently from 
children of non Roma origin. The 
court voted six to one that there 
had been no violation of Article 14 
November 2007 : Roma children’s victory  
at the European Court of Human Rights.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/A
S
P
ne
t/
E
te
ri 
N
eb
ie
rid
ze
This article is based on the talk Professor de Groof  
gave at the 13 September 2007 session of “21st Century Dialogues” 
on the theme “How to make education fairer”.
## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=8) 🆗
### Education, a fundamental right
8The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
of the European Convention on 
Human Rights (prohibition of dis-
crimination), and no violation of 
Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 
(the right to education). 
On 14 November 2007, how-
ever, the Grand Chamber of the 
ECtHR, by a vote of 13 to 4, ruled 
in a ground-breaking judgment 
that segregating Roma students 
into special schools is indeed a 
form of unlawful discrimination, 
in breach of Article 14 of the 
European Convention (prohibit-
ing discrimination), and of Article 
2 of Protocol No. 1 (securing the 
right to education). As such, the 
judgment pointed out that the 
Convention addresses not only 
specific acts of discrimination, 
but also systemic practices that 
deny the rights to racial or ethnic 
groups. It also underscored that 
racial segregation which disad-
vantages members of a particular 
racial or ethnic group amounts to 
discrimination in breach of Article 
14 - thereby bringing the ECtHR‘s 
Article 14 jurisprudence in line 
with antidiscrimination law of the 
European Union. 
Infringements on the right to edu-
cation and unequal educational 
opportunities are perhaps the 
most complex problem facing so-
cieties today as they struggle for 
social cohesion and economic de-
velopment. There may be no silver 
bullet to eradicate them. However, 
fair legal processes within schools 
themselves would already be a 
good start. They would not only 
make it a safer environment but 
also give the proper signals about 
a fairer society. Most important, 
they would affect the way young 
people react to, and interact with, 
authorities and legal processes 
throughout their adult live.
Jan de Groof, 
Professor of Education Law 
at the College of Europe in Bruges.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/A
S
P
ne
t/
M
ar
tin
 B
ob
ic
Education is a fundamental right
(A school in Slovenia).

### School is like a bicycle: if you don't pedal, it topples
School iS likE a bicyclE   
if you don’t pedal, it topples
        an education expert, Michaela Zatreanu doesn’t fiercely advocate teaching school 
            in romani, despite being the author of the first textbooks published in this language 
in romania. She thinks instruction exclusively in romani would represent 
           a form of segregation and promotes schooling with a multicultural dimension.
Born into a Roma family in Maglavit, a 
village of 2500 inhabitants in south-
east Romania, Michaela Zatreanu 
learned Romanian by watching tele-
vision before starting school. Her 
mother language, Romani, spoken 
by the 70-odd Roma families in the 
village, was banned at school, even 
in the playground. “Under Nicolae 
Ceauscescu, the recognized minori-
ties were Hungarian, German, Serb 
and miscellaneous. We were miscel-
laneous,” she explains with a laugh. 
Today Zatreanu, 32, is a consultant at 
the Romanian Ministry of Education, 
after having worked for the European 
Roma and Travellers Forum (ERTF), 
an organization partnered by the Fishermen’s children in Kazakhstan.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/Z
ha
na
t K
ul
en
ov
## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=9) 🆗
### School is like a bicycle: if you don't pedal, it topples
9The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
Council of Europe and the European 
Union. “Working for a year within the 
Council of Europe! What an amazing 
experience!” she exclaims. 
She never imagined getting that 
far. Her dream when she was a little 
girl was to attend high school in 
Bucharest. She made it, thanks to her 
determination and her father’s moral 
support. “He was afraid he wouldn’t 
have enough money to pay for my 
schooling, but he said, ‘Go, we’ll 
see what happens’.” He was right. 
Michaela passed the exam for 
teachers’ training school. 
“That’s where I really saw the dif-
ference between the attitude of the 
teachers in my village and the teachers 
in the capital,” she explains. Unlike her 
brother, who finally dropped out at el-
ementary level because his teacher 
was beating him, Michaela has fond 
memories of school. But, she does 
recall, “When a pupil lost his pen or 
anything else, some teachers would 
make all the Roma children come up 
from the back rows (we were always 
in the back) and stand in line in front 
of the board and take off our boots. 
Imagine the shame – I wore socks 
that weren’t very presentable. I was 
very very embarrassed.” And she 
won’t soon forget the time her history 
teacher said in front of all the pupils 
in the playground that if this young 
Roma girl could be an excellent 
student, anybody could do good 
schoolwork. 
“It certainly wasn’t a compliment, but 
his intentions weren’t evil,” she says. 
“You have to keep in mind we Romas 
were inferior, in our own eyes as well 
as other people’s. Up to a point, I ac-
cepted this treatment. I didn’t find it 
terrible.” 
But Ms Zatreanu won’t generalize. 
“Not all teachers are racist and not all 
Roma suffer from discrimination. But 
some do. It can be explained through 
their own experience, their own moti-
vation.” She wants to remain optimis-
tic: “I won’t say all teachers now are 
extraordinary, but they are generally 
better prepared than before. Things 
today have changed a lot.” 
Undoubtedly. Proof enough to see 
her take the floor at international 
meetings held at UNESCO and 
to think of her grandmother who 
couldn’t even imagine leaving her vil-
lage, or her father, whose idea of a 
very good job was doing the cleaning 
in a hospital. “When you live in pov-
erty, perspectives are very limited,” 
says the woman who defied deeply-
rooted prejudice. 
One incident in the late 1990s did 
upset her. She was teaching in a 
state school in a district of Bucha-
rest with a large Roma population. 
“Another teacher came and banged 
on the door of my classroom. ‘Come 
out and make your little gypsies quiet 
down!’ she shouted. I told her it was 
out of the question for me to interrupt 
my class to stop a fight. The most 
shocked was the American journalist 
who was in the classroom just then, 
reporting a story about my Romani 
classes.”
What a lady!
What were these classes? After 
the fall of Ceausescu’s regime, the 
Ministry of Education embarked on 
extensive reforms, and Romani could 
be taught as a mother language in 
schools. The young teacher jumped 
at the chance. “It was outside the 
regular school curriculum. After an 
entire day of classes in Romanian, 
when the children were tired, I would 
take my guitar and sing them songs 
in Romani. They had fun and they 
learned at the same time, the little 
Roma and the little Romanians.” 
No real program, no real method…
so she decided to create them. That 
was how she became the author of 
the first Romani textbooks: “It wasn’t 
difficult for me, since it was my moth-
er language. And I had an excellent 
director of research. And linguists 
had already come up with a writing 
system based on the Latin alphabet.” 
Ms Zatreanu the pioneer decided to 
continue her studies: “I had a great 
teacher in high school. What a lady! 
She was my role model, and when 
you have a role model like that, you 
make progress,” she says. Michaela 
was accepted into the philology de-
partment at the university and chose 
English and Romani. Had Romani 
been taught at university during 
Ceausescu’s time? “No way!” she 
shoots back. 
How many Roma live in Romania? 
“Officially it’s 5,500, but accord-
ing to some of the Roma NGOs, 
it’s more than two million! I wonder 
if there aren’t even more than that. 
Half the Roma who make it don’t ad-
mit to being Roma, you know.”
Romania’s luck
There is genuine political will in Ro-
mania to improve education for the 
Roma. About five years ago, the gov-
ernment adopted a number of mea-
sures pertaining to different social 
issues: education, housing, health, 
employment. “It’s to be expected,” 
says Ms Zatreanu. “Romania has the 
luck to have more Roms than other 
countries” – she maintains her radi-
ant smile – “and therefore more edu-
cated Roma who could participate in 
instituting such a strategy. The largest 
number of Roma activists at the Euro-
pean level comes from Romania!” 
Michaela Zatreanu.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/M
ic
he
l R
av
as
ar
d
## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=10) 🆗
### For multilingual education in Africa
### School is like a bicycle: if you don't pedal, it topples
10The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
Does this strategy have real impact 
on daily life? “Of course, but it’s 
not always visible. We have a law 
against segregation and discrimina-
tion. Children’s learning conditions 
are regulated. It’s a good start. But 
policies aren’t enough to change the 
world overnight! If you want to solve 
the problem of discrimination, you 
have to work on people’s minds.” 
Ms Zatreanu proceeds to explain 
that teachers’ outlooks are changing, 
parents are more involved in the 
school program, curricula are no lon-
ger “monocultural”, and schools are 
becoming autonomous as power is 
decentralized, a novel process that is 
inspiring people - for decades used 
to working under state authority - to 
take responsibility for themselves. 
“School is like a bicycle. If you 
don’t pedal, it topples. The system 
has to move all the time. I always 
see change as positive,” she says. 
“For example, the fact that more and 
more Roma children in Europe no 
longer speak Romani is considered 
a real problem. But I say if a child 
is happy without speaking Romani, 
that’s positive!” 
In Ms Zatreanu’s view, it is the 
state’s duty to offer mother lan-
guage teaching to Roma children, or 
at least to have teachers who speak 
it. But, she maintains, “Setting up a 
school exclusively in Romani would 
be another form of discrimination.” 
As the mother of a four-year-old 
son, does she want her child taught 
in Romani? “For me, it’s important he 
have multicultural schooling, in what-
ever language. My son has already 
learned Romanian in kindergarten. 
With no effort, just by playing.”.
Jasmina Šopova 
and Ariane Bailey, 
UNESCO Courier
                       Education should enable people to take root in their culture as well as open 
           them up to other cultures. africa needs schooling that integrates its languages, 
                    history and social values, according to adama Samassekou, 
                                president of the african academy of languages (acalan).
for multilingual Education  
in africa
Multilingual education based on the mother 
language must be developped.
This article is taken from Adama Samassekou’s talk at the session of “21st Century Dialogues” 
held at UNESCO on 13 September 2007 on the topic “How to make education fairer?”
If education were a consumer 
product, we would make it fairer by 
distributing it equitably among all 
the peoples of the world, so that no 
one would be lacking. But if educa-
tion is a process of conditioning, 
with the aim of shaping children’s 
personalities so that as adults they 
can find their place in the society 
in which they live, then the educa-
tional project is linked to a societal 
project. 
In that case, would it be fairer for 
everybody to practice the same 
education, at the risk of falling into 
global cultural leveling? Isn’t the di-
versity of educational methods the 
best guarantee of the cultural diver-
sity we are so fiercely safeguarding 
these days? From this standpoint, 
to increase fairness in education, 
don’t we have to make sure that 
all the world’s peoples have the 
means to create their own educa-
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/A
nt
on
io
 F
io
re
nt
e
tional systems? And shouldn’t we 
think about taking concerted action 
to make education fairer, by making 
access to educational means more 
equitable?
Universal knowledge 
and endogenous 
knowledge
The need to preserve each peo-
ple’s identity and singularity 
doesn’t exclude the need for com-
munication and exchange with the 
rest of the world. If, in every corner 
of the globe, we succeed in blend-
ing harmoniously a certain quan-
tity of universal knowledge and a 
certain quantity of endogenous 
knowledge, this education enables 
humans to take root in their local 
cultures and also to become part of 
an international culture. 
Maybe it’s a dream, but it would 
be good to remember the greatest 
## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=11) 🆗
### For multilingual education in Africa
11The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
projects of humanity were, for a 
long time, dreams. Let us recall the 
wise words of Brazilian Don Helder 
Camara: When you dream alone, 
it’s just a dream; but when several 
people have the same dream, it’s al-
ready the beginning of reality. 
In my part of the world, Africa, 
the situation is sadly only too well-
known. Who has described it bet-
ter than the author of “Educate or 
Perish”, the late Professor Ki-Zerbo 
(Burkina Faso), with his highlighting 
of what prevails on our continent: 
a culturally integrating education, 
which for decades has not respected 
the right of millions of pupils to 
have an identity; education that im-
poverishes, too, because it is dis-
connected from production; and 
finally a socially violent education, 
because it fosters the social ex-
clusion of the less-privileged, who 
are handicapped by the preceding 
anomalies. 
We need a school that is attached 
to society, not torn from it. A school 
that would give real actors back 
to society, and not victims of the 
cognitive violence represented 
by the repression of the mother 
language. 
I am convinced that if we want to 
achieve education that is fairer in 
Africa, we must develop a multilin-
gual education based on the mother 
language, an education in the African 
languages of the learner, in partner-
ship with the European and inter-
national languages serving today 
as official languages in the greater 
majority of African states; an 
education that builds bridges 
between early schooling in the 
formal sector and literacy training 
for those who are past the age of 
starting school.
Education and culture 
are indivisible
Most African countries continue to 
endure an unacceptable situation: 
as soon as they start school, chil-
dren start learning in a language they 
don’t speak at home. Introducing 
African languages in the African 
school systems – as a vector of learn-
ing and as a subject of study – is one 
of the goals of the African Academy 
of Languages, which I head. We 
decided to undertake a genuine re-
habilitation process for education at 
continent level, by reestablishing the 
link between education and culture 
and by including our languages and 
our history in school curricula. It’s 
what I call the reestablishment of the 
African educational system, charac-
terized by three essential principles, 
like the three stones of the African 
hearth: rebuilding cultural identity 
of the learner by taking as a base 
the simultaneous use of the mother 
language and the official language; 
linking school to life, by restructur-
ing curricula and promoting profes-
sional training, entrepreneurship and 
active educational methods; and 
promoting a dynamic of partnership 
around and for the benefit of the 
school, allowing the entire educa-
tional community to contribute to a 
school project in which participants 
can recognize themselves. 
Taking African languages into ac-
count as working languages in all 
domains of public life must start at 
school, the best place for building 
know-how and developing knowl-
edge, before it takes its place in 
other social spheres. Africa is the 
only continent in the world where, in 
most countries, the person on trial 
doesn’t have access to justice in his 
or her mother language, and still has 
to rely on an interpretation system in-
herited from the colonial period. Let 
us remember the indignation of Ma-
hatma Gandhi, who as a lawyer in 
court was obliged to express himself 
in English while an interpreter trans-
lated his words into his own mother 
language. “Isn’t this ridiculous,” he 
would say. “Isn’t it a sign of slavery? 
Must I blame the English or myself?” 
Africa has decided to change the 
situation by creating the African 
Academy of Languages. It’s a con-
tinental structure concerned with 
all language issues, which makes it 
unique in the world. It aims to set up 
a real partnership in Africa between 
what I would call “Africanophony” – 
the condition of speaking one or sev-
eral African languages – and other 
linguistic spheres: English-speaking, 
French-speaking, Spanish-speaking, 
Portuguese-speaking etc, with a 
view to intercultural civic education. 
In this way, the African Academy 
of Languages represents one of 
the major catalysts for the ongoing 
African cultural Renaissance.
Adama Samassekou, 
President of the African Academy 
of Languages, former Minister 
of Education of Mali (1993-2000).
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/A
nt
on
io
 F
io
re
nt
e
We need a school that is attached to society,  
not torn from it.
Children must learn in the language they speak at home.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/A
le
ks
an
da
r D
žo
ni
-Š
op
ov
## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=12) 🆗
### Vincent Bikono: contract worker and not proud of it
12The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
A
                  in cameroon, contract workers make up 53% of teaching staff at primary level. 
                             Systematically paid less than those with civil servant status 
                         and sometimes better qualified, contractors are in the process of founding a union.  
VincEnt bikono    
contract Worker and not proud of it
t his makeshift desk in a CM2 class 
(10-11 year olds) at the Melen public 
school in Yaoundé, Vincent Bikono, 
a teacher on contract, is deep in his 
thoughts while his pupils – 20 boys 
and 20 girls – complete their first 
history and geography tests of the 
school year. “I’m lucky,” he says. “Aid 
from Japan to Cameroon built three 
schools in our district. It allowed us to 
make classrooms less crowded, while 
in districts like Mballa II, Nlongkak 
or Tsinga, teachers find themselves 
in front of 100 pupils. Actually, in our 
school too, some of the lower grades 
still have classes numbering 95 
children.” 
But that’s as far as this teacher’s 
“luck” takes him. With his profession-
al diploma - CAPIEM – qualifying him 
to teach at preschool and elementary 
levels he found himself in the educa-
tional system more out of necessity 
than by vocation. “I had obtained a 
degree in law and I was unemployed. 
A friend one day advised me to take 
the qualifying exam for the state 
school for teachers. I passed and in 
1998 I started working as a substi-
tute teacher. It was survival instinct,” 
he recalls. It takes nine months to ob-
tain the diploma that qualifies teach-
ers in Cameroon.
Working as a teacher 
in Cameroon
He had to wait eight years to move up 
from substitute teacher to contrac-
tor. In 2006, some 10,300 substi-
tute teachers were promoted, giving 
them a slightly larger paycheck. But 
working conditions remain un-
satisfactory. “Being a teacher in 
Cameroon is not particularly pleas-
ant,” confides a disillusioned Mr 
Bikono. “If you’re a contract worker 
on top of it, you tend to feel marginal 
and frustrated.” His monthly salary 
comes to 99,000 CFA francs (about 
US$158), a long way from the 
starting salary of 140,000 CFA francs 
for a teacher with a civil service job. 
“It’s true that as a substitute teach-
er, I was only making 55,000 CFA 
francs, 10 months out of 13 in theory, 
but often more like seven out of 12 
in practice….As a contract worker, 
I get paid every month.” And indeed 
his salary is much superior to that of 
teachers in the private sector who 
earn between 20,000 and 50,000 
CFA francs (between 40 and 100 
dollars for eight or nine months of the 
year, as the employer pleases. But 
Mr Bikono feels he should be paid as 
much as his civil servant colleagues. 
“It’s discrimination. We’re doing the 
same job and we have the same 
amount of work. In fact, contractors 
are sometimes better qualified than 
civil servants, because some of the 
latter take the CAPIEM exam when 
they have only a BEPC (lowest level 
secondary school diploma).” The 
teacher becomes indignant about his 
paltry salary, which does not allow 
him to live decently and forces him to 
live in his father’s home. His wife has 
left him, tired of waiting for a “sup-
posed improvement of the situation”. 
Seven contract  
workers for three  
civil servants 
Contract teachers play a very impor-
tant role in Cameroon’s educational 
Pupils at the Melen school in Yaounde (Cameroon).
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/D
or
in
e 
E
kw
è
Teachers have a major responsibility  
in Africa. (Class in Ethiopia).
©
 D
or
in
e 
E
kw
é
## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=13) 🆗
### Vincent Bikono: contract worker and not proud of it
13The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
system, Vincent Bikono explains. “At 
the Melen public school, there are 
seven of us contractors and three 
civil servants, including the headmis-
tress, the secretary and one teacher.” 
The Ministry of Basic Education rec-
ognizes the importance of contract 
teachers by listing 36,000 of them 
in its mid-term expense budget for 
2007, not counting the 5,500 new 
hires last September. According to 
the government report on the national 
education system, contractors make 
up 53% of the teaching workforce at 
primary level. 
His teaching job involves giving 
pupils about a dozen classes, from 
|Monday to Friday, from 7.30 a.m. 
to 2.30 p.m. “It’s a huge work-
load. I give classes in grammar, 
spelling, mathematics, history, 
geography, English….not to mention 
sports! Luckily there aren’t too many 
pupils so when it comes to marking 
homework, things mostly go well,” 
recounts Bikono, who says a contract 
teachers’ union is being set up to 
better coordinate collective action.
Dorine Ekwè, 
journalist at Mutations, 
Cameroon.
What initiatives has Ecuador 
taken in order to achieve  
the Dakar goals? 
Our wager for achievement is con-
tained in the ten-year education plan 
adopted on 26 November 2006 by a 
national referendum, with more than 
66% of the vote. In other words, the 
people voted in favour of this plan and 
turned it into state policy. This means 
that independently of the govern- 
ment or of the minister in charge of 
this portfolio, the plan will be pursued 
until 2015. It rests on eight pillars (link 
towards Dakar goals), with the first 
four aimed towards universal educa-
tion and the rest concerned with re-
storing school infrastructure. 
Among other aspects of the plan, I 
would underline the development of 
a fairer wage policy for teachers and 
the establishment of funding policies. 
The latter consists of increasing by 
half a point annually the proportion 
©
 M
in
is
tè
re
 d
e 
l’é
du
ca
tio
n
Minister Raúl Vallejo Corral working with a child.

### Raúl Vallejo Corral: remove obstacles limiting access to education
                                                Ecuador has considerably increased its investment in education.
            the country occupies an intermediate position regarding fulfillment of the Education 
                     for all objectives set in dakar (Senegal) in 2000. its Minister of Education 
                             raúl Vallejo corral describes the situation.
raúl VallEjo corral 
remove obstacles limiting access 
to education
Interview by Lucía Iglesias Kuntz (UNESCO Courier).
## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=14) 🆗
### Raúl Vallejo Corral: remove obstacles limiting access to education
14The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
of the GDP allocated to the educa-
tion sector until 2012, or at least until 
the education sector’s part reach-
es 6% of the GDP, as UNESCO 
recommends. In 2005, the percent-
age was 2.4% and in 2006 it had 
already risen to 2.9%. This year we 
hope to reach 3.4%, then 3.9% 
in 2008. 
How are these measures 
applied concretely? 
We began by removing obstacles 
limiting access to education. In 
1992, we launched a programme 
to provide free textbooks to pupils 
in rural schools. In the period 
I would call the “long night of 
neoliberalism”, the programme 
was suspended, but we have 
revived it. We provide textbooks 
(mathematics, Spanish, natural 
sciences and social sciences) 
to all children within the public 
school system, from the first to the 
tenth year. 
We have also eliminated parents’ fi-
nancial contribution until the seventh 
year. From now on the State takes 
on all these costs, so that the right 
to free education guaranteed by 
our Constitution becomes a reality. 
We have also increased the number 
of days of school catering from 80 
to 120. In all we have 200 days of 
classes, so we are 80 short. Our 
goal remains to serve the children 
food on every school day. 
Furthermore, we are at the point of 
achieving universal education for the 
first year. Before, children started 
school at age six and now it’s five. We 
have hired 1,400 preschool teachers 
and this year we will hire 1,400 more.
Another very troublesome 
issue is indeed the shortage 
of teachers. In Ecuador, 
there is a shortage 
of 112,000 schoolmasters….
Yes, that’s true. The reason is that 
since 1998, not a single teaching 
job has been created. According 
to neoliberal reasoning, this meant 
spending more public money. Right 
now, we have two options to solve 
the problem: a programme encour-
aging teachers who want to retire 
to do so with a financial incentive of 
US$12,000 per teacher. This year, 
we will thus open 2,000 positions, 
and with the money saved, we will 
be able to make up the deficit by 
hiring younger teachers. And above 
all, a few weeks ago, President 
Rafael Correa decided that his 
Minister of Economy and myself 
would work together to create 
these 12,000 jobs, by conceding 
an investment of US$60 million. 
What reactions are being 
sparked by the debt swap  
initiatives for education? 
In 2005 and 2006, Ecuador de-
veloped a debt swap programme 
with Spain, in the amount of 
US$20 million. The debt swap was 
a success but it was fragmented 
into a multitude of small projects. 
We are currently negotiating a 
new more balanced swap that will 
cover overall projects. 
In general, debt swap opens up an 
interesting possibility for developing 
countries. But it should not be viewed 
as charity, consisting of sending us 
consultants or experts who would 
pocket 70% of the non-refundable 
loans to advise us to do what we 
already know. From another perspec-
tive, a useful strategy would be to 
insert debt swap into national educa-
tion plans. This would make it possible 
to fund concrete actions with easily 
verifiable results: repair schools, 
for instance, or equip them with 
computers. Obviously, UNESCO 
could be the ideal forum to promote 
Raúl Vallejo Corral, Minister of Education  
of Ecuador at UNESCO’s  
General Conference in 2007.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/M
ic
he
l R
av
as
sa
rd
Eight pillars  
of the ten-year plan  
 1.Universal preschool 
    education from age 0 to 5. 
2.Universal general primary
   education from 1st 
   to 10th year. 
3.Increase of number of  
     secondary school pupils  
   to 75% of the age group 
   concerned. 
4.Eradicating illiteracy  
     and reinforcing adult 
   education. 
5.Improving school  
     infrastructure 
   and equipment. 
6.Improving educational 
   quality and equity, 
   and implementing  
     a national system 
   of evaluation and social 
   responsibility for education. 
7.Enhancing the status  
    of the teaching profession  
    and improving teacher 
  training, continuing education,
  work conditions and quality 
  of life. 
8.Increasing by 0.5% annually
   the educational sector’s part  
    of the GDP until 2012, or
  until it reaches at least 6% 
  of the GDP.
## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=15) 🆗
### First year of school: crucial for the rest of a child's life
15The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
G The coordinator of the national 
agency for the management and 
quality of education, Jose Francisco 
Puac, is visibly delighted by the 
success of “Save the first year”, 
pointing out that out of the 9000 
children who took advantage of 
the program this year, 63% were 
“caught up” and admitted to the 
following class. In 2007, the pro-
gram cost US$62,000. 
Parents and children have be-
come aware of the importance of 
education,” says Francisco Puac, 
explaining that dropping out and 
repeating in school before the 
implementation of the program 
were due to teachers’ insufficient 
training and the lack of family sup-
port. From now on, he adds, “the 
essential remedy is that teachers 
are ready to surmount these diffi-
culties,” thanks to financial incen-
uatemala, a country facing high 
rates of illiteracy, has found a genui- 
nely effective solution through the 
program “Save the first year”, which 
can play a determining role in the 
success or failure of thousands of 
children living in poverty. Taking the 
country “out of the darkness of illi- 
teracy” is the goal of the organizers 
of the project, which was devised 
by the United States Agency 
for International Development 
and implemented throughout the 
country since 2004 by the Ministry 
of Education. 
The strategy consisting of “catch-
ing up” children who fail their first 
year has had positive repercus-
sions, as much for pupils and their 
parents as for the teachers them-
selves, who see it as source of in-
spiration for improving the quality 
of education in the country. 
tives allocated by the Ministry of 
Education, such as for instance the 
scholarships available for teachers 
and students.
The poorest 
have priority
At the beginning the program 
covered the 331 municipalities 
comprising Guatemala. This year, it 
concentrated on 41 communities, 
considered the poorest “with 
high rates of malnutrition, as well 
as health, education and human 
development problems.” 
According to Francisco Puac, 
these communities were selected 
because they had the highest 
drop-out and repeating levels, up 
to 50% of the children inscribed in 
school. 
He says that children who fail 
their first year “remain stigmatized” 
and are doomed to an uncertain 
future. This slows social and eco-
nomic development in the country, 
30% of whose nearly 13 million in-
habitants are illiterate. 
“The success of the program 
is due to the interest shown by 
firSt yEar of School  
crucial for the rest  
of a child’s life
        Support for teachers, evaluation of pupils’ progress, follow-up for children outside 
               the classroom, and parents’ participation in their children’s education – 
                          these elements are key to the success of the campaign 
             “Save the first year” in Guatemala. Simple but effective strategies.
Maya K’iche children in the El Quiche region  
(North West of Guatemala).
©
 U
S
A
ID
/W
or
ld
 L
ea
rn
in
g
Class at Santa Teresita primary school 
(Guatemala).
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/E
du
ar
do
 B
ar
rio
s
## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=16) 🆗
### First year of school: crucial for the rest of a child's life
### Illiteracy costs more than literacy
16The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
T
parents of pupils and to the support 
of the authorities,” echoes Olga 
Monterroso, a headmistress in 
San Marcos department. “These 
children no longer repeat their 
first year and are no longer among 
Guatemala’s illiterates.” Her region 
scored highest this year by 
“catching up” 82% of the 1700 
children who benefited from the 
program, in which six municipalities 
and 375 teachers took part. 
One asset of the innovative project 
is that it motivates children to con-
tinue their schooling, instead of their 
parents sending them out to work 
in the fields for the boys, or mak-
ing them do housework for the girls, 
given the conditions of extreme pov-
erty in which they live. 
Oscar Ovando, a headmaster in 
Petén department, which borders 
Belize and Mexico, is also satisfied 
with the impact of the program, 
because it really does help pre-
vent children from dropping out or 
repeating the first year. He has even 
asked for the program to become in-
stitutional, given that Alvaro Colom, 
a Social-Democrat elected for four 
years, officially begins his term on 
14 January 2008. 
Ovando explains that out of the 
2815 children inscribed in schools 
in the municipality of Sayaxche, 
775 participated in the program 
and 175 succeeded in going up 
to the next grade. “That proves the 
method is effective,” he concludes. 
“It’s very important because for a 
child to make it past the first year 
can determine whether his life is a 
success or a failure.”
Edgar Calderón, 
Guatemalan journalist.
illitEracy  
costs more than literacy
               we cannot abandon adult literacy under the pretext that children 
                 are being educated, when we know the crucial importance 
                        of the home environment. literacy has often been associated 
               with one-off campaigns when sustained investment over time is needed.
he donor community has played 
quite a negative role by reducing 
the EFA agenda to primary school-
ing. The World Bank in particular 
has quite actively argued against 
investment in adult literacy. We 
are a very far cry from the post- 
independence era when adult 
literacy was a national priority in 
many countries. 
Sometimes past practices are at 
fault: adult literacy has often been 
associated with quick, one-off cam-
paigns whereas you clearly need 
sustained investment over time. 
National policy makers respond 
to national evidence, but there is 
a lack of good quality evaluations. 
A first priority is for governments 
to understand the scale of the chal-
lenge. Kenya’s recent national liter-
acy survey is an excellent example. 
It used direct testing of adults and 
graded results along a spectrum. It 
found that literacy challenges were 
School for adults in Bhutan.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/Y
an
ni
ck
 J
oo
ris
much higher than anyone had pre-
viously thought and this discovery 
is leading to new engagement on 
adult literacy. 
Second, there is an urgent need 
to build up good quality trained 
professionals to work in the sec-
tor. Third, there is a case for put-
ting together national documents 
that look at the history of literacy 
in the country, and pooling what 
has worked from the effective pro-
grammes.
Renewed 
momentum
Governments’ role is to put together 
policy frameworks and galvanize 
## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=17) 🆗
### Illiteracy costs more than literacy
17The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
resources. It is now widely accepted 
that the most effective literacy pro-
grammes are those run collabora-
tively, across multiple government 
agencies, with civil society, and 
decentralized to a district level so 
that learning is relevant to the liveli-
hoods of the learners. 
There has been renewed momen-
tum over the past year around the 
UN Literacy Decade. Many big 
African countries, including Kenya, 
Nigeria and South Africa, are begin-
ning to take literacy seriously again. 
Brazil is doing extremely interesting 
work. Donors need to send out the 
message that they are willing to 
support adult literacy. We need to 
put pressure on them to support 
education plans that include adult 
literacy (as happened, for example, 
with the Fast Track Initiative’s en-
dorsement of Benin’s education 
plan which included adult literacy), 
otherwise governments will con- 
tinue to neglect it. 
The cost of not achieving literacy 
is immense. You can’t abandon 
generations of adults under the 
pretext that it is enough to educate 
the next generation of children. 
All literature shows the incredible 
importance of the home environ-
ment. A child from a non literate 
household will struggle at school. 
Women’s literacy in particular 
empowers the whole house-
hold. Adult literacy is the invisible 
glue for achieving the Millennium 
Development Goals.
David Archer, 
Head of International Education, 
Action-Aid (development 
through education NGO), 
with Cynthia Guttman (UNESCO).
« Literacy project» of the Public Library at Watertown, 
Massachusetts, United States.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/C
ha
rle
s 
A
. M
ey
er

### Gender equality in math textbooks: an impossible equation?
                                            are girls and boys equal in mathematics textbooks? 
     this is not evident, judging by the study conducted by Sylvie cromer, lecturer at lille 2 university. 
with a group of african academics, she analyzed primary school textbooks in several countries 
       in the region. result: girls become fewer as the scholastic level rises.
gEndEr Equality in math tExtbookS 
an impossible equation?
©
 F
lic
kr
/S
op
hi
e 
M
et
zl
er
School books are not neutral with respect to gender parity
Interview by Agnès Bardon, UNESCO Courier. 
What did this study  
examine? 
The study is the result of scientific 
research carried out within the frame-
work of the Réseau international de 
recherche sur les représentations 
sexuées dans les manuels scolaires 
(RIRRS – international research net-
work on gender representations in 
textbooks), and of regional seminars 
organized by UNESCO in several 
African countries. Universities in Côte 
d’Ivoire, Cameroon, Togo and Senegal 
volunteered to examine the math 
books used throughout the primary 
level in their country, adding up to a 
## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=18) 🆗
### Gender equality in math textbooks: an impossible equation?
18The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
total of six years. This is a novel initia-
tive because up until now, the study 
of gender representations in school-
books has mainly looked at history 
or French books. We chose to look 
at math books because normally we 
consider science to be neuter and 
abstract – therefore it was interesting 
to see whether it was as sexless as 
we generally think. It’s also interesting 
insofar as scientific fields of study 
attract, as we know, many more boys 
than girls. In addition, we took a quan-
titative approach while other studies 
are generally qualitative – which is to 
say we looked not only at situations 
and illustrations but also counted 
each gender instance in the books. 
This thorough survey yields an exten-
sive body of knowledge.
What are the main findings  
of this study? 
It reveals first that textbooks aren’t 
neutral when it comes to gender 
equality. They are based in fact on 
examples from daily life that call upon 
representations of gender. To learn 
counting, for instance, you find a 
mother who goes to market with a 
certain number of eggs in her bas-
ket, or a child who travels a number 
of kilometers. What is noteworthy is 
that the characters who play a role 
in books designed for the youngest 
pupils are often children. At that level, 
Old school textbook: male and female figures  
are treated the same. Is this an exception?
©
 D
R we see that there is practically parity; 
we count as many girls as boys. But 
as the level rises, the adults are more 
and more present. And when adults 
are represented, there is a majority 
of men. The over-representation of 
men reaches 67.6% in Cameroon 
and 76.4% in Togo. It means that 
the more we advance, the more the 
masculine figure takes over and the 
more the deficit in female characters 
becomes flagrant.
Is the difference 
only quantitative?
No, masculine and feminine 
characters aren’t treated the same 
way. In one out of two instances, when 
the subject is a man, he’s identified by 
his profession. When it’s a woman, 
she’s often identified by a family rela-
tionship – she’s the mother, sister or 
daughter “of”. And when she’s identi-
fied by her profession, she’s usually 
from the informal sector: for example, 
she’s selling produce from the fam-
ily garden, but she doesn’t have the 
status of a shopkeeper. Girls are also 
more often shown in passive situa-
tions. I remember the cover of one 
textbook that showed a boy and a 
girl at school. The boy was writing on 
the blackboard while the girl was sim-
ply handing him a geometry triangle. 
There’s nothing shocking about this. 
We’re far from the sexist stereotypes 
you could find in schoolbooks 30 
years ago. Yet the stereotypes haven’t 
disappeared; they’ve reconstituted 
themselves in more subtle forms. 
Do these representations  
have real impact 
on schoolchildren? 
In all societies, text books are a fun-
damental educational tool, even with 
competition from multimedia. They 
are a powerful vehicle for transmitting 
knowledge, and also values. It’s even 
truer in developing countries where 
books are expensive. In classes, 
therefore, they make full use of them. 
Which is why it’s so important for the 
books to transmit images of equal-
ity, because they have the power to 
legitimize them. And a girl can’t feel 
her ambition to learn mathematics is 
legitimate if that knowledge is shown 
as a masculine privilege.
The male figure dominates in most school books  
and manuals.
©
 F
lic
kr
## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=19) 🆗
### The Invisible children of Bangladesh
19The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
T
                                More than half the inhabitants of Bangladesh’s city slums are children: 
             nearly 15 million boys and girls, of which 8 million must work to help their families survive. 
                         for a cost of 35 dollars a child, the government has launched an education project 
                               for child workers, giving them a chance to change their lives.
thE inViSiblE childrEn  
of bangladESh
Some eight million children work in Bangladesh.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/L
. I
gl
es
ia
s
welve-year-old Hosneara has been 
wielding a heavy hammer to chip 
bricks since she was nine. But her 
life changed two years ago, when 
she started spending two hours a 
day at a learning centre close to 
her home in one of the poorest 
slums in Dhaka, Bangladesh. “The 
employer used to cheat me, but he 
can’t anymore, because I’ve learnt 
how to count,” she says proudly. 
Farzana, an 11-year-old domestic 
worker, is equally proud that she is 
able to count the change returned 
to her at the grocery store. And 
Al-Amin, who’s 11, is happy to 
have escaped toiling in a factory 
since he helped his father start 
and run a phone and fax facility – 
he too received his basic educa-
tion at a learning centre close to 
the slum where he lives. 
These are just three examples of 
thousands of children who have 
benefited from the Basic Education 
for Hard to Reach Urban Working 
Children (BEHTRUWC) project. 
Supported by UNICEF and man-
aged by the Bureau of non formal 
education of the government of 
Bangladesh this project was initia- 
ted in 1997. Its first phase ended 
in June 2004. Currently it is in its 
second phase which runs through 
2009. The project seeks to pro-
vide vulnerable child labourers in 
Bangladesh with a basic primary 
school education while they con-
tinue to work. Though the eradica-
tion of child labour is the ultimate 
goal, the project recognizes that it 
is not yet feasible to do away with 
the malaise in a country where 
an estimated 7.9 million children 
work to help their families survive. 
The children are “hard to reach” 
because many of them work invis-
ibly, behind closed doors. Often, 
they are domestic workers in pri-
vate homes, or toil in small sweat-
shops where there is no regula-
tion, and most often, exploitation. 
“We are looking to prepare the 
children for the better life options 
that will be available to them once 
they have a basic education,” says 
Shamima Siddiky, UNICEF’s edu-
cation specialist in Dhaka, who 
monitors the program.
The Roadside Schools, as they are 
sometimes called, targeted 8-14 
year olds in the first phase, with 
11,550 centres in six cities, reach-
ing 339,150 working children. 
Classes were held in two shifts to 
accommodate the children’s work 
## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=20) 🆗
### The Invisible children of Bangladesh
20The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
schedules, with a maximum of 30 
students per class. Learning mate-
rials were provided, and there was 
no homework involved. 
Trained for a job
Based on the studies and evalua-
tions of the initial phase, a number 
of strategic changes have been in-
corporated in the second phase, ex-
plains Siddiky. An older age group of 
10-14 years, who are even less likely 
to return to mainstream education 
has been targeted, with 200,000 
children to be enrolled in 8,000 
new learning centres by June 2008 
— 3,310 of these are already opera-
tional. The basic education course, 
which allows students to reach an 
equivalent of grade 3, has been ex-
tended to 40 months, from the ear-
lier two-year program. 
Priority has been given to vocation-
al training in a trade or livelihood skill. 
– The first phase having produced 
1,000 graduates in Dhaka, Sylhet 
and Barisal, the second phase will 
enroll twenty thousand working chil-
dren above the age of 13 in training. 
A future 
for 35 dollars
The project will then assist the trained 
children with job placements, or self-
employment, and follow up on their 
needs for six months. Students not 
chosen for vocational training will 
also be linked to services through 
other relevant organizations.
Many of the learning centres are 
located in close proximity to city 
slums, where there is a concentra-
tion of working children who lack the 
most basic amenities, and have no 
access to schools. Over one-fifth of 
Bangladesh’s population of 140 mil-
lion lives in urban areas (about 28.8 
million people). Children account for 
about 56% of slum inhabitants – 
nearly 15 million boys and girls. 
“Our main task is to identify the 
children, and then motivate them to 
attend classes,” says Siddiky. “It is 
very important to involve the commu-
nity in this endeavour, with teachers, 
parents and employers working 
together to ensure a brighter future 
for the children.” The project includes 
a month-long training program for 
teachers who are recruited locally, 
and have the basis for contacts with 
parents and employers in the vicinity. 
“Most of the teachers are women, 
who have a better chance of ap-
proaching parents and getting girls 
to attend,” says Reazul Quader, Joint 
Secretary and Project Director for 
BEHTRUC, BNFE. Since girls are 
particularly vulnerable to violence and 
exploitation, especially as domestic 
workers, and as part of an improved 
gender strategy, learning centres at-
tempt to enroll 60% girls. 
“The project has been running 
smoothly so far,” says Quader. “One 
of the main problems we face is high 
drop-out rates, which have recently 
increased from 20% to 30%,” he 
adds. Quader explains that this is 
mainly because slum inhabitants are 
evicted by government agencies, and 
have to seek a new home every two 
or three months. “The government 
has decided to halt evictions, in or-
der to improve attendance,” he adds. 
“The children really enjoy coming to 
the learning centres, because they 
know it (education) will eventually 
change their lives.” 
This project has cost 39.5 million 
dollars up to date, i.e. 35 dollars per 
child a year. 
The main donors are the Swedish 
and Canadian governments.
Shiraz Sidhva, 
Indian journalist
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/L
. I
gl
es
ia
s
For 35 dollars a year, this child can have  
a better future.
Child workers (Dhaka, Banglades), in an aluminum 
tableware manufacturing workshop who learn to read 
and write after hours.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/L
uc
ia
 Ig
le
si
as
## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=21) 🆗
### Non-article text
21The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
yemen  
an example in education for girls
yemen is making considerable efforts to fill the gap between the number of girls  
and boys attending school. photo reportage on the attabari primary school in Sana’a
by the american photographer linda Shen born in Shaghai (china) in 1969.
• At the end of the 1990’s, some 2000 teachers 
were trained in the rural areas. They are a model  
for young girls and encourage them to finish  
secondary school before marrying.
• Yemen is a poor country, with a traditional society 
and one of the lowest rates of school attendance 
for girls in the world.
• Since 2006, in partnership with the private sector 
and UNICEF, the government launched a campaign  
encouraging girls to attend school which aims  
at reachingthe gender parity goal at school:  
Business Partnership for Girls Education. 
(Source: UNICEF)
Many girls growing up in rural areas may never get a chanceto go to school.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/L
in
da
 S
he
n
The pupils read “Tariq brushes his teeth”.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/L
in
da
 S
he
n
Attabari Elementary School.
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/L
in
da
 S
he
n
## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=22) 🆗
### Non-article text
22
3. Ensuring the learning needs 
of young people and adults 
This goal has been particularly neglected, 
in part because of the difficulty of defining, 
documenting and monitoring it. Many young 
people and adults acquire skills through in-
formal means, or through a great variety of 
non-formal literacy, equivalency, life-skills and 
livelihood programmes. 
Household surveys show that non-formal 
education is the main route to learning for 
many disadvantaged youth and adults in 
some of the world’s poorest countries. Yet 
non-formal education programmes remain 
neglected in terms of public funding, although 
some governments have recently developed 
national frameworks for sustained provision. 
4. achieving a 50 per cent 
improvement in adult literacy 
Adult literacy remains a serious global issue. 
Worldwide, 774 million adults still lack basic 
literacy skills. Some 64% of them are women, 
a share virtually unchanged since the early 
1990s. Three regions (East Asia, South and 
West Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa) concen-
trate the vast majority of the one in five adults 
around the world still denied the right to lit-
eracy. Except in China, there has been little 
progress during the past decade in reducing 
the large number of illiterate adults. 
The adult literacy rate in developing coun-
tries increased from 68% to 77% between 
the periods 1985–1994 and 1995–2004. 
Of the 101 countries still far from achieving 
‘universal literacy’, 72 will not succeed in halv-
ing their adult illiteracy rates by 2015.
5. Eliminating gender
disparities 
Only 59 countries with data had achieved 
gender parity in primary and secondary edu-
cation by 2005; 75% of countries with data 
are at parity or close to it at primary level, while 
1. Expanding and improving 
early childhood care 
and education 
Although child mortality rates have dropped, 
a majority of countries are not taking the 
necessary policy measures to provide care 
and education to children below age 3. 
The provision of pre-primary education for 
children aged 3 and above has improved but 
remains scarce across sub-Saharan Africa 
and the Arab States.  
2. Ensuring access to free 
and compulsory primary 
education 
Access to and participation in primary educa-
tion have sharply increased since Dakar, and 
the number of out-of-school children dropped 
from 96 million to 72 million between 1999 
and 2005. 
Twenty-three countries that lacked legal 
provisions for compulsory education in 2000 
have since established them. Compulsory 
education laws now exist in 95% of 203 
countries and territories. 
The global net enrolment ratio rose from 
83% to 87% between 1999 and 2005. 
Participation levels increased most rap-
idly in sub-Saharan Africa (23%), and 
South and West Asia (11%). The number 
of out-of-school children dropped by 24 million 
to 72 million between 1999 and 2005. 
Thirty-five fragile states account for 37% 
of all out-of-school children. 
Despite overall enrolment increases, sub-
national disparities in school participation 
persist between regions, provinces or states 
and between urban and rural areas. Children 
from poor, indigenous and disabled popula-
tions are also at a systematic disadvantage, 
as are those living in slums. On current 
trends, 58 out of 86 countries that have not 
yet reached universal primary enrolment will 
not achieve it by 2015.
Education made us what we are (Ethiopia).
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/A
nt
on
io
 F
io
re
nt
e
47% are close to reaching the goal in sec-
ondary education. Boys’ underparticipation 
and underachievement are of growing con-
cern in secondary education. 
Only 18 out of 113 countries that missed 
the gender parity goal at primary and second-
ary level in 2005 stand a chance of achieving 
it by 2015. Gender equality remains elusive: 
sexual violence, insecure school environ-
ments and inadequate sanitation dispropor-
tionately affect girls’ self-esteem, participation 
and retention. 
6. improving 
the quality of education 
Survival rates to the last grade of primary 
school improved between 1999 and 
2004 in most countries with data but re-
mained low in sub-Saharan Africa (median 
rate of 63%) and in South and West Asia 
(79%). Relatively low and unequal learning 
achievement in language and mathematics 
characterize many countries worldwide. 
Crowded and dilapidated classrooms, too 
few textbooks and insufficient instructional 
time are widespread in many developing 
countries and fragile states. Pupil/teacher 
ratios have increased in sub-Saharan Af-
rica and in South and West Asia since 
1999. Eighteen million new primary school 
teachers are needed worldwide to reach 
universal primary education by 2015. 
Many governments are hiring contract 
teachers to save costs and rapidly increase 
the teaching force, but where such teachers 
lack adequate training and service condi-
tions, this practice could have a negative 
impact on quality in the future.
Extracts from the “EFA Global Monitoring 
Report 2008”.
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°10
where the world stands on the six goals
at the 2000 world Education forum in dakar (Senegal), 
governments, organizations, agencies, groups and associations 
pledged themselves to achieve six goals on education 
for all by 2015. what are the principal developments 
since then in each one of these?
## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/192180eng.pdf#page=23) 🆗
### Non-article text
contact
The UNESCO Courier is published by  
the United Nations Educational, Scientific  
and Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
+ 33 (0)1 45 68 15 88
http://www.unesco.org/fr/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights  
f.ryan@unesco.org 
+ 33 (0)1 45 68 15 88 
Director  
Saturnino Muñoz Gómez 
Editor in Chief  
Jasmina Šopova - j.sopova@unesco.org
Editors
arabic 
Bassam Mansour  
assisted by  Zaina Dufour 
chinese 
Weiny Cauhape 
English
Ariane Bailey
french
Agnès Bardon
russian 
Katerina Markelova 
Spanish
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz
photo
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org
pdf layout
Gilbert Franchi
web platform
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio,  
Chakir Piro
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be reproduced  
and/or translated providing the credit line reads  
“Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” and includes  
date and hyperlink : http://www.unesco.org/courier 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Photographs belonging to UNESCO may be reproduced freely. 
They must carry the following caption:  
© UNESCO and photographer’s name. For high resolution,  
please contact the Photobank: photobank@unesco.org 
Photographs without UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement  
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations of the countries 
and territories concerned