# [372603](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf)
## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=1) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Radio Ambulante: A wealth of Latin American stories
Mark Tully: A radio legend in India
Burkina Faso: Addicted to radio
China’s Himalaya FM: Radio à la carte
CourierT HE  UNE SCO
January-March 2020
Str
onger a
nd
than ever
Rad
io:
more vibrant
## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=2) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
2020 • n° 1 • Published since 1948
The UNESCO Courier is published quarterly by the United 
Nations Educational, Scientic and Cultural Organization. 
It promotes the ideals of UNESCO by sharing ideas on 
issues of international concern relevant to its mandate. 
The UNESCO Courier is published thanks to the support of 
the People’s Republic of China. 
Acting Director: Matthieu Guével
Acting Editor-in-chief: Agnès Bardon 
Associate Editor: Katerina Markelova
Section Editor: Chen Xiaorong 
Editions 
Arabic: Anissa Barrak
Chinese: Sun Min and China Translation & Publishing House
English: Shiraz Sidhva
French: Christine Herme, proofreader
Russian: Marina Yartseva 
Spanish: William Navarrete
Digital edition: Mila Ibrahimova
Photographs and illustrations: Danica Bijeljac
Translation and layout coordination: 
Veronika Fedorchenko
Administrative and editorial assistance:  
Carolina Rollán Ortega
Production and promotion: 
Ian Denison, Chief, UNESCO Publishing 
and Branding 
Eric Frogé, Senior Production Assistant
Digital Production: 
Denis Pitzalis, Web Architect/Developer
Media Relations: 
Laetitia Kaci, Press Ocer
Translation: 
 Peter Coles, Cathy Nolan
Design: Corinne Hayworth 
Cover illustration: © Lex Drewinski
Printing: UNESCO 
Interns: 
Zhu Wendi, Li Yihong (China) 
Lena Whipple (France) 
Linda Klaassen (Sweden)
Co-editions 
Portuguese: Ivan Sousa Rocha 
 Esperanto: Chen Ji 
Korean: Soon Mi Kim
Information and reproduction rights: 
courier@unesco.org 
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
© UNESCO 2020  
ISSN 2220-2285 • e-ISSN 2220-2293
Periodical available in Open Access under the 
Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) licence 
(http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using 
the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound 
by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository 
(https://en.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en). 
The present licence applies exclusively to the texts. For the 
use of images, prior permission shall be requested.
The designations employed in this publication and 
the presentation of the data do not imply the expression of 
any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning 
the legal status of any country, territory, city or area of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers 
or boundaries. 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO and do not 
commit the Organization. 
Published in 
9 languages
Arabic, Chinese, English, 
Esperanto, French, Korean, 
Portuguese, Russian 
and Spanish.
Become an active publishing partner 
by proposing new language editions of 
the UNESCO Courier. 
Subscribe to the print version
• 1 year (4 issues): €27 • 2 years (8 issues): €54
Subscription fees cover printing and 
distribution costs. There is no profit motive.
Discounted rates for group subscriptions: 
10% discount for five or more subscriptions.
Read and 
share
Share the 
UNESCO Courier 
with your network by 
promoting it, in line 
with the Organization’s 
Open Access publishing policy.
Subscribe to  
the digital version
https://en.unesco.org/courier/subscribe 
It’s 100%  
FREE! 
Read the 
UNESCO 
Courier 
and spread 
the word!
For more details, contact
DL Services, C/O Michot Warehouses, 
Chaussée de Mons 77, 
B 1600 Sint Pieters Leeuw, Belgium 
Tel: (+ 32) 477 455 329 
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@dl-servi.com
## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=3) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   3 
Editorial
The Wide Angle section of this issue is published 
to mark the occasion of World Radio Day, 
celebrated each year on 13 February
The lack of statistics in many countries 
makes it impossible to draw a global 
map of diversity in radio. But the data 
that does exist, speaks for itself. In 
France in 2018, women accounted for 
thirty-seven per cent (Conseil supérieur 
de l’audiovisuel (CSA), 2019) of radio 
broadcasters. They constituted twenty-
three per cent of political guests, and 
thirty-seven per cent of experts on radio. 
In the United Kingdom, while fty-one 
per cent of radio sta were women, 
only thirty-six per cent held positions of 
responsibility (Ofcom, 2019). Another 
example: in the United States, in 2017, 
only eleven per cent of radio newsroom 
sta were from minority backgrounds 
(The Radio and Television Digital News 
Association (RTDNA) and Hofstra 
University Newsroom Survey, 2018). 
It is important that radio reects the 
audiences it serves more accurately, 
because diversity in radio is the key to 
fair and independent information.  
It is also a means of giving a voice to the 
variety of cultures and opinions that form 
the basis for critical thinking. 
In spite of the evolution of radio in 
recent years, it remains that irreplaceable 
voice which populates our solitude 
and seems to speak to us alone – even 
though it addresses the multitude. In a 
world invaded by screens, “paradoxically, 
one advantage of radio is that it is not 
accompanied by the image”, noted the 
UNESCO Courier in the editorial of its 
February 1997 issue devoted to radio. 
This message is just as relevant today. 
“The chief quality of the TV image – that 
it seems so realistic – is actually its main 
aw because it inhibits our imagination 
and our capacity to stand back and think,” 
the editorial continues. “We shall always 
need sound without image as part of our 
right to interpret for ourselves, as we tune 
in to the morning news, the meaning of 
world events.”
Agnès Bardon
Is radio out of date? Is it time to bury this 
medium that entered our homes nearly 
a century ago? Far from it. Certainly, the 
transistor of yesteryear has lived its life. 
Linear listening, ear glued to the radio 
receiver, has had its day. Radio has begun 
its digital transformation. Today, listeners 
are just as likely, if not more so, to tune 
in on their mobile phones or computers. 
A major factor in reinventing the medium 
has been the production of podcasts 
– programmes available on demand. 
Radio can sometimes even be watched, 
when programmes are lmed and posted 
online. The listener has evolved too. Once 
passive behind their devices, they can 
now take part in broadcasts, and even 
help shape programmes, by voicing their 
opinions on social media. 
So it is a very dierent but thriving 
medium that we now celebrate on 
13 February each year, on World Radio 
Day. Proclaimed in 2011, the Day reminds 
us of the crucial role of this medium, 
which reaches a wide audience, even in 
the most isolated areas or in emergency 
situations. Since UNESCO’s creation, 
the Organization has relied on this key 
medium to help full its mandate to 
foster freedom of expression and the free 
ow of ideas throughout the world. 
The Organization provided programmes 
to radio stations around the world, 
supporting radio information campaigns 
– such as the 2016 information campaign 
on the Zika virus in Latin America and 
the Caribbean – something it continues 
to do today. UNESCO oers training in 
radio broadcasting and reporting, as it 
has done for young Syrian refugees in 
Lebanon since 2014. It also supports the 
creation of community radio stations, or 
those broadcasting in the aftermath of 
natural disasters. 
The theme of World Radio Day 2020 is 
diversity. This remains a burning issue 
because the representation of women, 
minorities and people with disabilities 
on the airwaves is still unsatisfactory. 
We have come a long way since female 
reporters had to make way for men to 
read their reports on air, because male 
voices were considered more credible. 
But the challenge is real. ©
 O
cé
an
e 
Ju
vi
n
CourierT H E  U N E S CO
## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=4) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
4   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
WIDE 
ANGLE
 7 Podcasts: Radio reinvented
Siobhan McHugh 
 10 Radio Ambulante: A wealth of Latin American stories 
Carolina Guerrero, interviewed by Lucía Iglesias Kuntz
 12 China’s Himalaya FM: Radio à la carte 
Shi Zhan 
 14 Radio audiences: More vocal than ever before
Tiziano Bonini
 16 Late-night radio: A window on intimacy
Marine Beccarelli
 18 A voice you can't see
Emma Rodero
 20 Women and radio: On the same wavelength
Kristin Skoog
 23 Mark Tully: A radio legend in India
Sébastien Farcis
 26 Burkina Faso: Addicted to radio
Yaya Boudani
6-27
28-37
ZOOM
Powerful women 
Photos: Nadia Ferroukhi
Text: Katerina Markelova
Contents
## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=5) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   5 
Contents
38-41
42-45
OUR GUESTS
Samal Yeslyamova and Sergey 
Dvortsevoy: Reality on the big screen
Interview by Katerina Markelova
46-53 47 The League of Nations: 
A universal dream that has 
stood the test of time 
Jens Boel 
 50 Helen Pankhurst: 
“Feminism is in my blood” 
Helen Pankhurst
CURRENT AFFAIRS
IDEAS
The origins of violence
Marylène Patou-Mathis
## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=6) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
6   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
W
id
e 
A
n
g
le
Radio: Stronger and 
more vibrant than ever
## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=7) 0
### 372610: Le podcast: la radio réinventée
Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            7 
Podcasts:
Radio reinvented 
A new way to use 
the power of the voice 
Two developments – one technological, 
the other, cultural – helped transform the 
podcast market into a global industry. In 
2012, Apple embedded a podcast app in 
its smartphones, which provided a library 
system that proved popular with listeners. 
A seismic cultural shift that introduced 
millions to the podcast format occurred 
in 2014, when an independent New 
York-based radio team packaged Serial, a 
podcast of online investigative journalism 
as gripping episodic narrative. 
Serial’s rst season oered a true story 
that grabbed its audience and hooked 
them onto the weekly podcast format. 
It told the story of Adnan Syed, who 
was convicted for the murder of his ex-
girlfriend and high-school classmate, 
Hae Min Lee, in Baltimore, US in 1999. 
Syed was found guilty by a Baltimore 
County jury in 2000, when he was 18, and 
continues to serve a life sentence. 
But the podcast host, Sarah Koenig, 
who interviewed him extensively over 
a prison payphone for the show, raised 
doubts about his conviction. Over twelve 
episodes, Koenig painstakingly combed 
through the evidence, interviewing 
many of those who were associated with 
the case. 
Koenig – who received numerous awards, 
including the rst-ever Peabody Award 
for a podcast – had stumbled onto a 
new way of leveraging the power of 
voice. Although grounded in regular 
audio journalism, Serial’s style was unlike 
anything heard on radio before. Firstly, 
she spoke to listeners as if they were 
companions in her quest for the truth, 
spawning lively debates on social media 
networks. Serial became an instant hit, 
clocking up ve million downloads in 
the rst month.
By developing new forms of sound narratives, podcasting has 
done more than breathe new life into radio. In just a few years, 
it has evolved into a global industry – reinventing the audio 
medium and allowing closer links to be forged with listeners. 
Siobhan McHugh
More than any other means of 
communication, radio has the ability 
to create an atmosphere of intimacy 
with the listener. As early as in the 
1930s, United States President Franklin 
D. Roosevelt harnessed this capability, 
delivering “reside chats”, a series of 
evening radio addresses to the nation 
over the wireless (from 1933 to 1944). But 
in recent years, the growth of podcasting 
has dialled up radio’s incredible qualities 
to maximum volume. 
There are two reasons for this. People 
usually listen privately, often through 
headphones, which allows hosts to 
speak to them directly into their ears. 
That sets up the perfect conditions 
for a host-listener bond. Unlike radio, 
where presenters are ghting the 
listener’s random switch-on and ability 
to change stations with the ick of a 
dial, the podcast host can trust that the 
listener wants to listen in. This allows 
hosts to relax and be authentic, which 
increases their relatability. Some listeners 
say nding a new favourite podcast is 
like making a new friend – with over 
700,000 podcasts on US media giant 
Apple’s iTunes, the largest podcast 
platform, that’s a lot of friends.
Podcasting began simply enough in 
2004 as a technological innovation, 
mostly used by radio stations to time-
shift shows. They could be posted on 
the internet, to be downloaded at the 
listener's convenience. The name podcast 
reected that. Inadvertently coined 
by British technology journalist and 
broadcaster Ben Hammersley, it was an 
amalgam of the words iPod (the portable 
device created by Apple that allows users 
to download audio les) and broadcast.
© Océane Juvin
## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=8) 0
### 372610: Le podcast: la radio réinventée
8   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
Serial’s popularity triggered a podcasting 
boom as media organizations scrambled 
to emulate its success. Countless true 
crime podcasts followed. The best, such 
as In The Dark, delivered engaging crafted 
storytelling, and sometimes exposed 
miscarriages of justice.
Pop culture, frivolity, 
and the news 
Since then, the podcast genre has grown, 
taking on multiple formats. The chatcast 
genre, in which hosts make short, incisive 
comments on a theme, gained popularity. 
Inexpensive to make, the genre just needs 
a host with a good audience rapport 
and a distinctive theme that will attract 
listeners. Topics can be frivolous too. There 
are chatcasts for women, such as Call Your 
Girlfriend, a frank and often funny show 
“for long-distance besties everywhere”. 
The Podfathers, a humorous take on 
fatherhood, is aimed primarily at men. 
One common format has journalists 
breaking down the news of the week, but 
in a deliberately casual way. Listeners are 
made to feel like insiders on shows such 
as the online magazine Slate’s Political 
Gabfest in the US. In France, Le Nouvel 
Esprit Public has a similar approach, but its 
guests are public intellectuals moderated 
by veteran journalist Philippe Meyer – 
who started the podcast after his radio 
show was terminated.
Pop culture podcasts have proliferated, 
such as Eyes on Gilead, an Australian 
podcast about the hit television show, 
A Handmaid’s Tale. 
Interview shows also translate well to 
podcasting: a hugely popular example 
is The Joe Rogan Show, in which the 
American comedian interviews a raft 
of celebrities.
The press was quick to notice the 
potential of podcasting to extend its 
reach. In 2017, The New York Times 
launched The Daily, a narrative news 
digest billed as “How the news 
should sound”. Hosted by the 
Times political journalist Michael 
Barbaro, its formula is simple. 
Choosing one or two big stories 
of the day, it mines the expertise 
of the daily’s 1,300 journalists to 
deliver an informed take on the 
news. The style of the podcast 
is casual and personalized, 
coupled with creative 
audio production. 
The results were immediate: young 
people subscribed to the free podcast 
in droves. In two years, The Daily was 
getting two million downloads per show. 
In September 2019, it reached a new 
milestone: an astonishing one billion 
downloads overall.
Although the US and the English-
speaking world have dominated 
the podcasting market in the last 
ve years, that looks set to change. 
In March 2019, Voxnest, an audio 
technology company, reported that 
the highest growth in podcast listeners 
was in Latin America, particularly in 
Chile, Argentina, Peru and Mexico. 
This is mirrored by the success of 
Radio Ambulante (see p.10), the 
biggest Spanish-language narrative 
journalism podcast in the world. It 
also produces an English-language 
version, hosted on NPR (National 
Public Radio) in the US. 
In India, podcasting is expanding rapidly, 
via networks such as IVM Podcasts. 
The India Explained Podcast promises 
“a refreshingly real take on all things 
Indian”, and is hugely popular. The Middle 
East has around 400 podcasts. The edgy 
Eib (shame in Arabic), a podcast from 
Amman, Jordan, examines the lives of 
ordinary people and social, cultural and 
religious taboos. 
China tends to follow a dierent 
audio-listening model, where people 
pay a modest amount for educational 
“knowledge” programmes, or follow 
interactive audio platforms such as 
Himalaya, whose 600 million users get to 
sing songs and talk about family, or listen 
to audio books. Inspired by American 
programmes such as This American Life, 
Gushi FM features stories told by ordinary 
Chinese people of various backgrounds.
Unlike radio, where presenters 
are fighting the listener’s 
ability to change stations 
with the flick of a dial, 
the podcast host can trust that 
the listener wants to listen in
©
 O
cé
an
e 
Ju
vi
n
## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=9) 0
### 372610: Le podcast: la radio réinventée
Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            9 
Podcasting has a powerful potential 
role as a tool of inclusion. To make an 
engaging podcast, you do need to know 
the nuts and bolts of audio production 
and to understand how audio works as a 
medium. Once this knowledge has been 
acquired, almost anyone can create a 
podcast. This allows marginalized voices 
– people from political or religious 
minorities, the LGBQTI community, the 
disabled, the elderly and others – to 
be heard. 
Community groups, non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs), activists, and 
institutions of all kinds are now devising 
podcasts. For example, the Cancer 
Council of Australia podcast provides 
information and support, and universities 
showcase their research via podcast. In 
an initiative described as “innovative and 
disruptive”, the Supreme Court of Victoria 
in Australia sought to make the justice 
system more transparent with Gertie’s 
Law, a popular podcast [for which the 
author was consulting producer] where 
judges discuss their work. 
In a world plagued with disinformation 
and mistrust of the media, the 
authenticity of podcasting oers 
unique opportunities – from long-form 
investigative storytelling and the pursuit 
of social justice to building transparency, 
trust and social inclusion. 
A writer, oral historian and podcaster, 
Siobhan McHugh is an Associate 
Professor of Journalism at the University 
of Wollongong, Australia. She has 
co-produced award-winning narrative 
podcasts including Phoebe’s Fall, Wrong 
Skin and The Last Voyage of the Pong Su.
Why we mark World Radio Day 
United Nations Radio was established on 13 February 1946. The date was, 
therefore, a natural choice to celebrate this mass medium. World Radio Day 
was proclaimed at UNESCO’s General Conference in 2011, following an initial 
proposal by Spain. It was unanimously approved the following year by the 
United Nations General Assembly, which declared it a UN International Day. 
Why create a Day for radio? Because radio is a low-cost and popular medium, 
which can reach the remotest areas and the most marginalized people. It 
continues to broadcast when other media are out of action – for emergency 
communications or following a natural disaster. Finally, it is a medium that has 
been able to fully embrace technical developments, such as broadband and 
digital audio broadcasting (DAB), and to adapt to mobile devices. 
The objective of World Radio Day is to raise public awareness of the importance 
of radio and to encourage decision makers to use it to provide access to 
information, and to improve international co-operation among broadcasters. 
And it works. It is one of the most popular UN International Days. Every year, 
hundreds of radio stations around the world join in the event. The ocial 
website for the Day receives an average of over 100,000 hits a year. After 
gender equality (2014), youth (2015) and sport (2018), the theme chosen for 
World Radio Day 2020 is diversity.
©
 O
cé
an
e 
Ju
vi
n
© O
cé
an
e J
uv
in
## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=10) 0
### 372611: Ambulante: radioscopie de l’Amérique latine
10   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
Carolina Guerrero, interviewed by 
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz, UNESCO 
How did you come up with the idea of 
Radio Ambulante?
Eight years ago, Daniel Alarcón and 
I were living in San Francisco. He is 
a writer, and I am a journalist; he is 
Peruvian, and I am Colombian. We 
emigrated for dierent reasons, but 
we shared the same attachment to 
Latin America, to the culture we grew 
up in – the culture of our parents and 
the Spanish language. We often found 
ourselves commenting on the type of 
format that dominates public radio 
in English, here in the United States – 
which is long-lasting, and narrated by 
the characters themselves. We really 
liked this format and regretted that 
nothing similar existed in our language. 
The Spanish content available to us in 
the US was not of great quality, so we 
ended up consuming content and media 
in English. Given that Latin America has 
a wealth of stories and narrators, we 
thought that there was a need for telling 
stories in that format… and decided to 
create it ourselves.
A Colombian guru who abused dozens of women while 
pretending to heal them; a Cuban writer remembering her 
childhood in Havana; an amateur astronomer who managed to 
photograph the birth of a supernova from the terrace of his house 
in Rosario, Argentina. These are some of the diverse stories told 
on Radio Ambulante, a podcast service in Spanish that for eight 
years has not spared the imagination or eort to reach more and 
more people. Carolina Guerrero, one of its founders, explains 
the mission of this new kind of broadcasting.
Radio Ambulante:
A wealth of 
Latin American stories
Why did you choose the podcast format 
and not broadcast radio?
When we rst started, we were radio 
listeners but had no idea how that 
industry worked. We started looking for 
funding for our project here in the US, 
and realized that there was no room 
for another live radio station and that 
nobody was going to give us the means 
to create one. We immediately saw that 
the future was digital and realized that 
if Radio Ambulante was going to nd an 
audience, it would be in digital media. 
How do you interact with 
your listeners?
Nowadays, it is impossible to ignore 
your audience. The digital world oers 
a means of constant interaction, that 
may not be so easy to nd on the air. In 
fact, for us, more than an audience, it is 
a community of listeners – who listen to 
us, tell their friends about us, and give 
us their positive or negative comments. 
The listeners feel empowered, and they 
can also be quite demanding. They ask 
us for things, and sometimes point out 
our mistakes – we have a very direct line 
to them.
Were you thinking then of a Latino 
audience, that is, Spanish-speaking 
migrants living in the US?
When I migrated to the US over twenty 
years ago, I somehow stopped being 
Colombian and became more Latin 
American. I no longer had many 
Colombian friends, they came from 
everywhere – Chile, Argentina, Venezuela, 
Puerto Rico – and also Latinos born 
here. A new horizon opened up for me, 
because this explosion of cultures in 
the US makes you realize that you didn’t 
know as much about Latin America as 
you thought you did. The idea was to 
create content not just for migrants, but 
the fact of living here pushed that idea. 
Because deep down, we consider the US 
to be a Latin American country – it is full 
of people who speak Spanish. 
From the beginning, we wanted our 
stories to have a universal appeal, so 
that everyone could somehow relate 
to them. They are not too newsworthy 
or too local – yet they are entertaining 
enough for a listener from the Bronx in 
New York to be interested in a story from 
Chile; or for someone from Colombia to 
be following a story from Guatemala.
Ý  The Radio Ambulante logo. Podcasts 
are distributed exclusively by National 
Public Radio (NPR), the United States 
non-prot media organization.
Þ  “Let's do that radio thing”, a series of illustrations 
by Argentinian artist María Luque to mark the creation 
of Radio Ambulante on its 7th birthday in 2019.
## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=11) 0
### 372611: Ambulante: radioscopie de l’Amérique latine
Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            11 
About three years ago, we hired 
Colombian journalist Jorge Caraballo 
as a growth editor, to strengthen the 
show’s relationship with its community 
of listeners. In this way, we opened other 
channels of communication, like a group 
on WhatsApp, for the most enthusiastic 
listeners. This allowed us to strengthen 
our bulletin and to build even more 
direct communication with listeners. 
We also recently launched Listening 
Clubs, which are like book clubs, but for 
podcasts – where people get together 
to listen to one of our stories and then 
comment on it. 
What is your business model and 
how do you sustain it?
Radio Ambulante is an expensive 
project. Today, there are twenty of 
us, who do not produce news or do 
a certain number of articles per day. 
We produce thirty episodes a year – 
which is not a lot, but they take time to 
produce because they require a lot of 
editorial work and rigour. We received 
support from a few foundations. And 
three years ago, we signed an exclusive 
distribution contract with NPR (National 
Public Radio, the US non-prot news and 
media organization), which distributes 
our content as podcasts and pays us 
for exclusive rights. Every year, we 
also organize live events that are held 
in theatres, and oer a membership 
programme for those who want to 
support us on a regular basis. 
We have recently been trying to derive 
new products from our existing content, 
to give them added value. These 
derivatives are not expensive to produce, 
and allow us to monetize our catalogue. 
For example, we are currently looking at 
two additional sources of income, based 
on the 150 episodes that we already 
have in our catalogue. 
We have just launched Lupa, the rst 
initiative. It is an application that 
enables people with an intermediate 
or advanced level of Spanish to 
perfect their language through our 
programmes. A signicant segment 
of our audience is made up of people 
studying Spanish who match this prole, 
especially in the US and Canada. We are 
very enthusiastic about this project.
©
 A
nd
ré
s 
A
st
ur
ia
We immediately 
saw that the 
future was digital 
and realized 
that if Radio 
Ambulante was 
going to find 
an audience, 
it would be in 
digital media
Ý  Radio Ambulante’s listening clubs 
(Clubes de Escucha+) are like book clubs, 
but for podcast episodes. 
## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=12) 0
### 372611: Ambulante: radioscopie de l’Amérique latine
12   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
Shi Zhan, Chinese broadcaster 
and talk-show host
It was by pure chance that I enrolled 
in a training course that Himalaya, the 
online audio platform, was oering to 
media professionals, amateur voice 
lovers and people from all walks of life. It 
was from this course that I learnt how to 
use cutting-edge ideas and techniques 
in new media broadcasting. By using 
creative narration and sharing knowledge 
based on a respect for historical facts and 
audience preferences, I am now one of 
the most popular hosts on the platform. 
With my new media thinking and 
humorous interpretation of Chinese 
history, I have attracted over 800,000 
fans – ten times the number of fans I had 
in traditional media. Audio content has 
gained popularity in China over recent 
years. Unlike in most Western countries, 
where public or private advertising 
funds radio platforms, Chinese networks 
are gradually convincing audiences – 
especially the younger generation – to 
pay for audio content and knowledge. 
This monetizing of audio programmes 
– where listeners think it is worthwhile 
to chip in, often in very small amounts, 
to listen to their favourite shows – has 
allowed radio hosts to increase their 
incomes, depending on their popularity. 
I recently spent $150,000 of my income 
from Himalaya to build my own studio.
A pioneer in live-streaming broadcasts, 
audiobooks and podcasts, Himalaya FM – 
with oces in China, Japan and the United 
States, and plans to expand further – has 
over 600 million users (as of October 2019, 
according to a company release). The 
network’s unique expertise has enabled 
amateur and professional producers to 
create content for a potentially broad and 
burgeoning audience. 

### 372612: En Chine, des contenus à la carte sur Himalaya FM
Having worked as a professional host for the radio and television 
station of Jilin province, one traditional Chinese broadcaster 
experienced an interesting transformation into a new media host. 
Since 2014, Shi Zhan has been practising a new form of audio 
storytelling – vividly recreating the history of China’s ancient 
dynasties on Shanghai-based Himalaya FM, the country’s most 
successful audio network. 
China's
Himalaya FM:
Radio à la carte 
“Sharing human 
wisdom through audio”
Professional lawyers, doctors and other 
experts can share their knowledge with 
the general public through audio. Their 
eorts are supported by Himalaya, whose 
stated mission is to “share human wisdom 
through audio”. The online audio platform 
provides a large market for paid copyright 
content, and a wide distribution channel. 
Anyone can benet from the company’s 
business model. One striking example 
of this is of broadcast host Deshu from 
Shenyang, who led a group of disabled 
people to read and record audiobooks, 
earning them a good wage.
In a fast-growing and intensely 
competitive Chinese online audio 
market, the new radio practices followed 
by the Asian audio giant have enabled 
traditional radio producers to achieve 
a successful transformation into new 
media hosts. My training and years 
of experience with Himalaya have 
taught me to create original content 
while adhering to three fundamental 
new media practices – which have 
transformed my way of thinking and 
have proved game-changing. 
The rst new media practice involves 
paying more attention to the completion 
rate than merely looking at the click-
through rate of listeners. The completion 
rate signies the probability that the 
audience will listen to the programme till 
the end. Himalaya’s users spent an average 
of 170 minutes listening to its shows (as 
of October 2019), but the back-end data 
reected that after just a few minutes of 
listening, half of my listeners left. This really 
surprised and frustrated me.
Our second idea is much more long-
term – it involves looking for intellectual 
property opportunities in movies or 
television series. We think that some 
of the stories in our catalogue might 
one day be the basis for a ctionalized 
story or screenplay that could generate 
royalties for us.
How do you choose your stories?
We look for stories with characters 
rather than choosing topics. It is key 
that they have a narrative arc, with 
a beginning and an end. As we are 
present in various parts of the world, 
particularly in American and Latin 
American cities, and even in London, 
we receive stories all year round. 
We know, for example, that stories 
about drug dealers attract many clicks, 
but those are already being made by 
others, and we are not interested in 
giving a human face to these villains. 
We think that there are other stories 
that deserve to come to light. Listeners 
like stories that are well-told, with many 
scenes and several voices – stories 
that make them dream, that connect 
them with their childhoods, that value 
ambition or eort. There are stories that 
we all see every day in the media, but 
here we can recount them unhurriedly 
and give ourselves the pleasure of 
going deeper into topics – which the 
audience appreciates. The average 
production time for each story is 
six months. 
One last question, that could well 
have been the rst: why are you called 
Radio Ambulante?
We really had a tough time deciding on 
the name – it was hard to nd! It refers 
to the street vendors – simply called 
ambulantes – who are everywhere in 
our Latin American cities. These are 
super-brave, resilient people, who 
walk, travelling around the city, moving 
all over the public space; they are 
persevering. We felt that this image 
reected us particularly well. And we 
loved the idea of our logo, of someone 
carrying a radio.
© María Luque
## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=13) 0
### 372612: En Chine, des contenus à la carte sur Himalaya FM
Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            13 
Ý  Shi Zhan, who hosts a Chinese history 
programme on Himalaya FM.
©
 Z
u 
H
on
gj
ia
o
To solve this problem, I spent half a year 
cultivating the internet’s “user thinking” 
model, forcing myself to develop “a sharp 
mind while covering the latest events 
and discovering the latest news”. Doing 
your homework and being up-to-date is 
very important in this business. Before 
recording each programme, I study the 
news and current aairs for two hours 
and spend eight hours writing an original 
script – before nally distilling it to a 
programme of only eight minutes. This 
“grinding” of my own work has doubled 
my audience, and allowed me to rapidly 
increase the completion rate.
The second new media practice involves 
improving the user experience, which 
is of paramount importance. To achieve 
this, I developed my own method. This 
involved moving away from the “loud” 
background music of traditional radio, 
and using music as a tool to enhance the 
atmosphere – so the audience would pay 
more attention to the content itself.
“Selection” and “creation” are the 
keywords of the third new media 
practice. As a new media host, I dare to 
choose material that is not accessible 
to the audience anywhere else. This 
original content is created with my own 
interpretation – making it both interesting 
and informative for my listeners.
My current projects for Himalaya include 
working on an audio guide on the 
terracotta warriors of the Mausoleum 
of the First Qin Emperor. Tourists only 
need to scan the QR code to listen to 
my narration.
UNESCO Radio: A brief history 
“I am at peace with what I wanted to do.” The voice is gravelly, partly mued by 
the surrounding brouhaha. It is the voice of an elderly man, who speaks French 
with a Spanish accent – the voice of Pablo Picasso. Interviewed from Vallauris, 
in the south of France, the Spanish painter talks about the The Fall of Icarus, the 
monumental fresco he has just completed – and which will soon adorn UNESCO’s 
Paris Headquarters. 
The recording dates back to 1958. It was produced by UNESCO Radio. This unique 
service existed almost since the Organization's inception. In 1947, a recording 
studio was set up at its international Headquarters, which at the time, were 
located at the Majestic Hotel in Paris. 
In the post-war context, radio emerged as a mass medium – capable of 
transcending borders between countries, but also of removing certain barriers 
that stood between individuals, whether social, economic or cultural. The role of 
radio was also to promote a better understanding of the Organization's objectives 
and to help countries develop their own infrastructure.
Originally part of the Mass Communications Projects Division, UNESCO Radio 
did not broadcast its own programming, but produced shows – round-tables, 
interviews, documentaries, reports, and music – for broadcast by radio stations 
around the world. 
The Masters Meet was one of these radio series. Personalities of dierent 
nationalities presented the work of writers, artists or scholars from other 
countries. The Hopes for Tomorrow series explored the possibilities oered by 
science, technology and certain cultural or educational programmes to provide 
solutions for humanity – from the exploitation of new sources of energy to the 
treatment of mental illness or the development of synthetic foods. 
These programmes were recorded in a number of languages that would vary 
over the years. In September 1949, UNESCO Radio made recordings in seventeen 
dierent languages and distributed 3,000 programmes in fty-two countries 
and territories. “UNESCO's voice is heard by listeners on all ve continents,” the 
UNESCO Courier proudly proclaimed in its September 1949 issue.
At the time of its closure in 1997, UNESCO Radio was still producing some twenty 
programmes in English, French, Spanish and Russian. The thousands of sound 
documents that were produced over the years are being digitized, giving a second 
life to these recordings. Some 1,639 audio documents are now available online on 
the Digitizing Our Shared UNESCO History website.
## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=14) 0
### 372614: Des auditeurs devenus acteurs de leur radio
14   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
A wide social network is of great 
importance for the future of radio 
stations. Even if the fans’ network does 
not generate a tangible economic value 
like radio audiences do, it generates a 
signicant amount of reputational capital. 
The crisis in traditional mass advertising 
will lead to a future increase and rening 
of tools for the capitalization of the 
wealth of these networked audiences. 
Citizen reporters
While social media has helped to extend 
the reach of radio, it has also made it 
possible to give listeners a voice outside 
broadcast times. At major political and 
social events, listeners can now transform 
into citizen reporters – using their 
smartphones to make audio and video 
recordings, and sending them to radio 
stations, or sharing them via Twitter or 
YouTube. 
In fact, listeners have become full-
edged contributors to their radio 
stations. In Italy, the public service 
station Rai Radio 3 has built a large 
audience of followers on Twitter, who 
comment actively and passionately on 
its programmes. During the station’s 
classic press review each morning, a 
listener volunteers to live-tweet all the 
news he or she hears, so that those who 
are not listening in have continuous 
access to all the news of the day.
In France, Emilie Mazoyer, who used to be 
a host on the youth-oriented public radio 
station, Mouv' (she now works for Europe 
1), co-created a music playlist, Tweet-Liste, 
together with her listeners and followers 
on Twitter, in 2011.
Listeners can now send audio 
messages recorded on WhatsApp, the 
free messaging service, to stations. 
Social media networks now make it possible for radio audiences 
to comment on, and even inuence, radio programming. But this 
citizen participation and seemingly innocuous interaction comes 
at a price – it allows large technology companies to collect lucrative 
data on our behaviours. 
Radio hosts then lter, select, curate and 
edit these contents before including 
them into the ow of their programmes. 
One Italian public service radio show 
even gathered life stories from their 
listeners through social media and turned 
them into a docu-ction series. From 
2015 to 2019, Rai Radio 2 aired Pascal, 
a programme which asked listeners to 
contribute true stories, based on their 
own lives. The stories were peer-reviewed, 
curated, and turned into brief docu-
ction episodes. 
Listeners are more articulate today and 
“noisier” than in the past, producing more 
content than ever in the form of audio, 
video and text messages. But increased 
audience and citizen participation in 
radio production comes at a price. 
Intensied datacation
This combination of radio and social 
media has also led to greater audience 
datacation. This is essentially an 
intensication of the process of collecting 
information on radio listeners who 
connect via social networks. All the 
content that is collected is measured and 
analysed, and then turned into a valuable 
dataset for the predictive analysis of 
user behaviour. 
While in the past, it was the attention of 
listeners that was commodied and sold 
to advertisers, today it is the user data and 
content that have become commodities. 
This data represents a valuable asset for 
social network owners, especially since it 
is acquired at no cost – listeners are not 
compensated for the value they produce 
for the tech companies that own these 
platforms. And radio stations have no 
access to this data either. 
Tiziano Bonini
“The crucial failure of radio has been to 
perpetuate the fundamental separation 
between radio producers and their 
audiences, a separation that is at odds 
with its technological basis [...] audiences 
must be transformed into witnesses in 
interviews and conversations and must 
have the opportunity to be heard”.
Walter Benjamin, the German philosopher 
and literary critic wrote these words in 
1930, conceiving radio as a tool to bridge 
the distance between the radio host and 
the listener. More than seventy years later, 
his words could perfectly describe what 
has happened to radio with the advent of 
social media. 
Today, a radio station's audience must 
be understood as the sum of its listeners 
and those who follow it on social 
networks. While the rst kind of audience 
still receives radio in a traditional way, 
members of the second set are connected 
to each other and to the host within a 
network. The intersection of radio and 
social media heavily modies both the 
vertical relationship between the host 
and the audience, and the horizontal 
relationship between individual listeners.
The network of friends/fans of a radio 
programme on Facebook, for example, 
constitutes its specic social capital. 
While the FM or digital radio audience, 
measured through traditional audience 
rating systems, constitutes the economic 
capital of the station, the social media 
audience represents its true social capital 
– one that is very ‘tangible’ and visible. 
Radio audiences:
More vocal 
than ever before 
## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=15) 0
### 372614: Des auditeurs devenus acteurs de leur radio
Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            15 
Today more and more of us listen to 
the radio on smartphones, streaming 
devices and computers – and all our 
interactions take place through a 
keyboard or touch screen. Listening 
to radio content is no longer just an 
aural or visual activity. It is increasingly 
haptic – we touch the screen multiple 
times to open an app, access schedules, 
and to tune in to a station to listen 
to our favourite radio shows, live or 
on demand. 
Each of these tactile activities generates 
a new mass of data that is extremely 
lucrative for social media platforms. The 
boundaries between the benets of 
the emotional involvement that radio 
continues to oer and the exploitation 
of this connection by social media, are 
getting increasingly blurred. While we 
create new bonds with other listeners 
of the same radio programme on social 
networks, we are also commodied, and 
our passion for radio is converted into a 
goldmine for others. 
The aective data – comments, 
emotional states, emoticons, likes – 
that we produce on social media are 
all indicators of our future behaviours. 
It is also for this reason that today, more 
than ever in the past, public service 
radio and community stations are once 
again important, allowing a public 
involvement that is still authentic and 
outside the circuits of commodication.
A lecturer in Media Studies at the 
Department of Social, Political and 
Cognitive Sciences at the University of 
Siena, Italy, Tiziano Bonini’s current 
research interests are the intersection 
between radio, the internet and 
social media. 
While in the past, 
it was the attention 
of listeners that 
was commodified, 
today it is the user 
data and content 
that have become 
commodities 
©
 L
au
re
n 
Si
m
ki
n 
Be
rk
e
## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=16) 0
### 372617: La radio de nuit: fenêtre sur l’intime
16   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
With a freer and more intimate tone than daytime broadcasts, 
night-time radio has long been the privileged place for condences 
delivered in the anonymity of the night. At a time conducive to 
imagination and solitude, these broadcasts provide listeners with 
a reassuring voice that seems to speak only to them. 
But they are now giving way to less expensive programming. 
Late-night
radio: A window on intimacy 
A voice for night 
workers
In Europe, regular night-radio broadcasts 
were introduced in the 1950s. The rst of 
its kind, Notturno dall'Italia, was created 
in Italy in 1952. It was essentially a music 
programme designed for people of the 
night – truck drivers and night watchmen, 
bakers and typographers, nurses 
and insomniacs. 
In 1955, the French radio station, Paris 
Inter, launched the show Route de nuit. 
The very recent introduction of the car 
radio, coupled with the increase in motor 
trac, made it possible to keep listeners 
company on the road, so that they did 
not fall asleep at the wheel. But very 
quickly, letters from the listeners testied 
to the success of these programmes. And 
their popularity soon spread beyond 
drivers and night workers. Insomniacs, 
night owls, students, artists and the 
elderly listened to these late-night shows. 
The transistor, which made it possible 
to individualize listening by taking one's 
own personal radio into the bedroom, 
also encouraged the development of 
more diversied programming.
The late programmes soon began to 
relay the noisy and festive sounds of 
the night – broadcasting from a bar, 
for instance. But they also created an 
intimate atmosphere of quiet discussion. 
Programmes based on true confessions 
from listeners began in the US in the 
1960s, initiated by the inuential radio 
talk show host Herb Jepko’s nationwide 
all-night show. 
In France, while Ménie Grégoire's 
afternoon programme on the private 
radio station RTL gave women the chance 
to discuss intimate subjects starting in 
1967, confessional radio shows took 
on a new dimension on the late-night 
airwaves. It began in 1975 with Ligne 
Ouverte (Open line), hosted by Gonzague 
Saint-Bris on the private radio Europe 1. 
Then, public radio France Inter started Allô 
Macha (Hello Macha) hosted by Macha 
Béranger, which ran from 1977 to 2006. 
Marine Beccarelli
“Radio is in a way humanity that speaks to 
itself, that addresses itself day and night,” 
wrote Jean Tardieu in Grandeur et faiblesse 
de la radio (The grandeur and weakness 
of radio, UNESCO, Paris, p.22), in 1969. 
In fact, this humanity the French poet 
evoked only began to speak to itself at 
night quite recently. 
In the early 1920s, when the rst radio 
stations appeared, they were only on the 
air for a few hours daily. Programming 
schedules expanded gradually to ll 
most of the day, but broadcasts stopped 
when evening came. Until the late 1930s, 
only a few nights were exceptionally 
lively on the radio – Christmas and New 
Year's Eve, in particular, when festive 
and musical programmes extended past 
the usual hours.
And yet, there may be no better moment 
to listen to the radio than during the 
hours of the night – when the listener 
is more available, more alone, and less 
distracted by external demands. In the 
dark, the sound unfolds: “it is our hearing 
that we prefer to rely on”, wrote the 
French philosopher Michaël Foessel, in 
Quand la nuit s'éteint (When the night 
is over), in the French magazine Esprit, 
No. 393 (March-April 2013, p.12).
Radio became an everyday consumer 
item in the 1950s, by when it was a 
permanent xture in most homes and 
started to take over the evenings. In the 
United States, radio stations have been 
oering night-time programmes since 
the late 1940s – designed to make those 
who are still awake, dream. In Lonesome 
Gal, an anonymous actress whispered 
sweet nothings in her predominantly 
male listeners' ears. 
Û  Radio is best listened to at night, when 
the listener is more available, more alone.
© Arnaud Brihay
## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=17) 0
### 372617: La radio de nuit: fenêtre sur l’intime
Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            17 
On these shows, listeners could call the 
radio station switchboard at the hour 
when loneliness became most pressing, 
and anxiety needed to be eased. This 
type of night programming gradually 
spread throughout the world, to the 
point of representing the very essence of 
night radio – a place where people could 
communicate and be listened to. Where 
they still exist, it is these talk shows that 
have lasted the longest on the air.
End of late-night radio 
monopolies
Night-time also proved to be a 
playground for exploring the night in all 
its dimensions, and for radio creativity. 
Inventive and pioneering programmes 
were launched on the after-dark airwaves, 
with an almost complete freedom of 
tone and form, in contrast to the daytime 
broadcasts. An example of this is Nuits 
magnétiques (Magnetic nights), launched 
in 1978 on the public Radio France’s 
France Culture, which mixed the personal 
revelations of celebrities with those of 
ordinary people, in an experimental 
and musical, often psychedelic, sound 
atmosphere. 
At the same time, French pirate radio 
stations also extensively used the night 
to go on the air, bypassing the state radio 
monopoly that had been established in 
1945 – in the same way as the British or 
Italian pirate stations, such as Radio Alice 
in Bologna, had.
But the glorious hours of night-time radio 
seem to be long gone. The emergence 
of twenty-four hour television in the late 
1980s contributed to the reduction of 
the importance and excitement of night-
radio programmes – which, until then, 
had a monopoly on nocturnal talk shows. 
Moreover, with the advent of the internet 
and the development of podcasts in the 
mid-2000s, it became possible to listen to 
radio on demand, disconnected from live 
real time. 
Because of budget cuts, radio 
stations have chosen to replace their 
live broadcasts after midnight with 
automated music or repeats from the 
previous day. Yet, at night, radio voices 
oered listeners a presence, keeping 
them company in a way that has not 
been replaced by the communication 
possibilities oered by the internet and 
social networks. 
The overabundance of images on 
television or online also contrasts with 
radio’s lack of images – which appeals to 
the imagination of listeners, triggering 
particularly strong sensations at night, 
and giving people the impression that the 
radio voices are speaking only to them. 
Some radio stations still provide live 
late-night broadcasts. Spain’s public 
radio network RNE’s Radio 3 invites 
listeners to explore night-related themes 
in Todos somos sospechosos. BBC Radio 
5 Live oers Up all night, in which Rhod 
Sharp and other hosts present news, 
interviews and stories from around the 
world between one a.m. and ve in the 
morning. A few web radios – and even 
an app, Call in the Night, an experimental 
radio show and telephone network which 
has listeners talking about their dreams 
– still occupy the night-time slot. After all, 
who says the night is just for sleeping?
An expert on the history of radio, 
Marine Beccarelli is the author of a 
thesis on night radio in France and a 
contributor to the public radio station, 
France Culture. 
Ý  Night radio show host 
Macha Béranger in a studio at the 
Maison de la Radio, Paris, 1999.
© Mat Jacob/Tendance Floue
## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=18) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
18   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
Deprived of a physical image, 
listeners rely on the evocative 
power of the voice on the radio, 
to immerse themselves in the 
story – creating mental images 
that facilitate concentration 
on what is being said. 
A voice you can't see
Forging a mental image
When we listen to a voice, we draw a 
specic physical portrait of its owner in 
our minds, based on its vocal features. 
In a study conducted in 2013 by Olatz 
Larrea and myself, a group of participants 
listened to several radio voices reading a 
piece of news. Another group listened to 
the same voices after seeing photographs 
of the presenters. Seventy-three per cent 
of the participants reported that they 
had been inuenced by the images they 
had seen. They said they were less able to 
use their imagination, because they were 
conditioned by these images.
In both groups, the listeners imagined the 
presenter, but dierently. Of the group 
that heard only the voice, thirty-nine per 
cent imagined what the speaker looked 
like, while 18.5 per cent in the second 
group conjured up the presenter. The 
group that had no image of the presenter 
to go by, paid more attention and were 
more focused when they listened only to 
the voice. More importantly, they were 
able to recall more information about 
what they had heard. 
Listeners rely on characteristics of the 
voice to conjure up a mental image. 
This process is strongly inuenced by 
the stereotypical associations conveyed 
by the media – lm, in particular. For 
example, the villain of the lm always 
has a rough, low-pitched voice. Through 
these conventions, listeners form a 
mental image derived from the sound of 
a speaker's voice. They do so, coinciding 
with other listeners’ judgements, beyond 
what we might consider chance. 
This means that when we hear the voice 
of a presenter on radio, we all imagine 
the same physical traits. If the voice is 
weak and high-pitched, we imagine a 
person who is small; if we hear a sensual, 
low-pitched voice, we tend to imagine it 
belongs to an attractive person – even if 
this association does not always coincide 
with reality. This explains why many 
listeners are surprised when they see a 
radio presenter – because the person is 
often quite dierent from the image they 
had conjured up in their minds. 
The characteristics that we infer from 
the sound of a voice depend mainly on a 
particular vocal feature – the tone or pitch 
of voice are the most important in terms 
of perception. A high pitch is usually 
associated with positive moods such as 
euphoria, excitement, or joy; but also with 
alertness, conveying fear or nervousness. 
Deep voices 
are more credible 
Our study concluded that listeners tend 
to perceive that high-pitched voices on 
the radio were tense, distant, cold and 
weak. A deep voice is often associated 
with a strong, tall physical presence, and 
dark hair. But the essential factor in the 
listeners’ preference was that low-pitched 
voices conveyed sensations of credibility, 
maturity and dominance. In a study we 
applied to radio news, low-pitched voices 
were rated as more pleasant, but also as 
“more convincing, calm and credible”. 
When listeners hear a presenter’s voice, 
they can infer his or her personality and 
their aective or emotional state with a 
sixty-ve per cent accuracy, according 
to a study by psychologist Klaus R. 
Scherer, published in the Journal of Voice 
(September 1995). Our voices provide 
information about our personalities. 
For example, people who speak very 
quickly are usually perceived as nervous 
or extroverted, while those who express 
themselves with a low intensity are 
perceived as shy. 
Emma Rodero
Listening to the voice of a radio presenter 
is an experience that triggers a cascade 
of emotions, feelings and mental images 
– which makes listeners unconsciously 
sketch a physical person and a story 
in their minds. The more numerous 
and vivid these mental images – or 
representations – created in the listener’s 
mind are, the richer their cognitive 
processing will be. The radio voice 
generates a dened hearing imprint on 
the mind – composed of both a physical 
and psychological representation of the 
speaker, and the content of the message.
When listening to the radio, people 
have the feeling that they are not 
alone. The listener has the perception 
of being connected with the speaker, 
and immersed in the content. This 
connection and immersion occurs on 
the psychological level. The listener feels 
a pleasant sensation of well-being by 
establishing a strong connection with the 
radio presenter and getting involved with 
the story.
In doing so, listeners tend to infer various 
traits to the presenter. Studies have 
shown that listeners have the unique 
ability to recognize certain characteristics 
– such as age, gender, height and weight; 
although the latter two are tougher 
to detect. 
Ü  Deprived of a physical image, 
listeners rely on the evocative power 
of the voice on the radio.
© Serge Picard/Agence VU
## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=19) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            19 
The way radio presenters use their 
voices also conveys their emotions and 
intentions. This is called prosody, or the 
melody of speech – formed by intonation, 
accent, speech rate, and pauses. The rst 
rule for a radio presenter, in this respect, 
is to avoid extremes: monotony (very 
few low inections) and uptalk (many 
high inections). 
A monotonous tone directly causes the 
listener to lose attention. At the opposite 
end of the spectrum is uptalk, a manner 
of speaking with rising intonation at the 
end, repeated at regular intervals. This 
over-emphatic style is widespread in 
radio news broadcasts and advertising. 
Often this style, which sounds like a 
repetitive sing-song, does not work 
either. It produces a negative perception, 
especially if it does not relate to the 
content, or hinders comprehension. 
Instead of these two extremes, the best 
strategy for a radio presenter would be 
to use variations – starting a sentence 
with a high pitch to attract the listener’s 
attention, and ending with a low pitch, to 
reinforce the essential information. 
With proper vocal training, radio 
presenters can evoke detailed images, 
impressions, intentions and emotions 
that they want to elicit in the minds of 
their listeners. All we have to do is relax, 
allow ourselves to be accompanied 
by the warm voice of a host, compose 
suggestive mental images in our brains, 
feel intense emotions – and immerse 
ourselves entirely in their stories. 
A communications professor at the 
Pompeu Fabra University (UPF) in 
Barcelona, Spain, Emma Rodero heads 
the Media Psychology Lab there. She 
also teaches communication skills at 
UPF’s Barcelona School of Management. 
Listeners rely on 
characteristics of the voice 
to conjure up 
a mental image
## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=20) 0
### 372618: Femmes et radio: sur la même longueur d’ondes
20   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
Forgotten history
Today, there is a growing body of 
historical research exploring this subject. 
Studies examining specic national 
contexts – from Argentina, Australia, 
Germany, Sweden, Turkey, the United 
Kingdom and the United States, for 
instance – have written women and 
gender back into broadcasting history. 
They have uncovered marginalized 
and often “hidden” histories of women 
in broadcasting, whose lives and work 
have been forgotten or ignored. They 
have recorded key developments in 
women’s programming, including 
changing denitions of the contested 
term, “women’s interest”, and highlighted 
debates on women’s voices – both on and 
o the air. Together, these histories point 
to the role of radio in the lives of women 
and how this relationship has contributed 
to processes of democratization and 
modernization.
In a sound environment that has long been dominated 
by men, women have been slow to carve out a place 
for themselves. Yet, having been assiduous listeners 
from the start, they have played a central role in shaping 
the history and content of radio. 
Women and radio:
On the same wavelength
Women have played a key role – both 
as broadcasters and listeners – in 
shaping radio’s general development 
and broadcasting practices. Programme 
formats and genres we now take for 
granted, such as serials and talk shows, 
were conceived for a female audience. In 
the US, in the 1930s, for example, where 
commercial radio dominated, women 
played an important role as consumers 
and became a target group for advertisers 
and sponsors. 
Daytime broadcasts came to be 
characterized as “feminine” and soon, 
radio soaps dominated the airwaves 
because they were so lucrative. 
Michele Hilmes, Professor of Media and 
Cultural Studies at the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison and an expert on 
US broadcasting, has suggested that the 
gendered nature of daytime radio serials 
soon meant they oered a space for 
women. In her 1997 book, Radio Voices: 
American Broadcasting, 1922-1952, Hilmes 
writes that “under cover of daytime”, radio 
serials addressed and confronted issues 
and concerns facing American women in 
the 1930s and 1940s. 
A similar trend can be observed in the 
magazine-style format. Woman’s Hour, 
introduced on BBC Radio in 1946, was 
the rst dedicated radio programme for 
women in the UK. Topics such as “keeping 
house” and “childcare” were soon replaced 
by dicult issues facing women, such 
as politics and women’s citizenship. 
And quite early on, sensitive topics and 
taboos such as menopause and intimate 
relationships in marriage, were addressed. 
Kristin Skoog 
In September 2019, the British 
Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) reported 
the story of Sediqa Sherzai on its website. 
Based in the city of Kunduz in northern 
Afghanistan, Sherzai set up Radio Roshani 
in 2008. Run by women and promoting 
women’s rights, the station continues 
broadcasting today, in spite of death 
threats and other war-related challenges. 
Its phone-in programmes provide an 
important space and public platform 
for women’s voices and concerns. Radio 
Roshani is a powerful example of the 
strong relationship between women and 
radio today.
Since the 1920s, when radio was 
introduced into people’s homes, the 
medium has provided a space for women 
to be heard – literally and guratively 
– in a largely male-dominated public 
soundscape. Radio bridged, connected, 
and blurred the boundaries between 
the private and public spheres and by 
doing so, spoke to women as housewives, 
workers, consumers and citizens. In many 
countries, the emergence of radio in 
the home also coincided with women 
gaining the vote. 
FRANCE
Presence of women on radio (2018):
Source: Conseil supérieur
de l’audiovisuel, 2019.
37%
experts37%
political guests23%
journalists39%
## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=21) 0
### 372618: Femmes et radio: sur la même longueur d’ondes
Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            21 
Reporters and pioneers
Women have also contributed to the 
development of new formats, such as 
the social documentary. The British 
radio producer and broadcaster Olive 
Shapley (1910-1999), is an example of 
this. Her career began at the BBC in 1934, 
where she produced the Children’s Hour 
programme for the BBC’s North region, 
based in Manchester. 
The depression in the 1930s had plunged 
many areas of Britain into poverty – this 
was particularly visible in and around 
Manchester. Shapley made good use of 
mobile recording vans that enabled her 
to travel across the region to interview 
people in their homes, on the street, 
or at work. Her documentaries were 
pioneering, both in technique and 
subject matter. Her aim, she said later, 
was to get “real people talking”. 
Not long before the outbreak of the 
Second World War, Shapley produced 
a programme called Miners’ Wives, that 
explored the way of life in two mining 
villages – one in County Durham in the 
north-east of England, and another near 
Béthune, France. The programme was 
later translated and rebroadcast on the 
BBC’s French service during the war.
It was also during the Second 
World War that the rst women war 
correspondents emerged. American 
radio journalist Betty Wason (1912-2001) 
rst travelled to Europe for the 
Transradio Press Service, a wire service 
that provided the news to radio stations. 
She was in Prague in 1938 when the 
Nazis took over the government, and 
reported on events there. 
The idea that radio could bring women 
together across national boundaries 
gained currency after the war. Women 
were the driving force behind the 
creation of the International Association 
of Women in Radio in 1951 (a T for 
Television was added in 1957). The IAWRT, 
which still exists, was founded to promote 
peace by bringing women broadcasters 
together to share ideas and information. 
It was initiated by the Dutch feminist, 
economic historian and radio broadcaster 
Willemijn (Lilian) Hendrika Posthumus-
van der Goot (1897-1989). Today the 
organization is a global network with 
members from fty-four countries – 
focusing on gender equality, and working 
to enhance the role of women in media 
and communications.
Feminism and radio
The evolution of women’s radio 
programming has often been closely 
associated with the feminist movement. 
In the late 1940s and 1950s, for example, 
Woman’s Hour was connected with 
several women’s groups in Britain. In its 
early days, the IAWRT was also strongly 
linked to the international women’s 
movement through the International 
Council of Women (ICW). 
These early examples may not have 
identied themselves as “feminist”, 
although in many ways they clearly 
were. World Radio Day in 2014 
celebrated women in radio and women’s 
empowerment, but also noted that 
gender equality remained a challenge in 
the media industry. 
Wason was then hired by the Columbia 
Broadcasting System (now CBS) and was 
soon reporting on the Nazi invasion in 
Norway. She was later based in Greece. 
However, the pioneering reporter was 
told to get a man to read her reports 
on air. At the time, it was thought that 
women’s voices were not suitable for 
serious reporting. “They said women 
weren’t authoritative enough or 
suciently knowledgeable to handle 
serious subjects,” she later recalled. 
Another radio pioneer was Audrey 
Russell (1906-1989). The BBC’s rst 
woman war correspondent, she 
contributed war reports and interviews 
between 1941 and 1945. Russell focused 
on the experiences of civilians during 
the war, such as the impact of German 
long-range shelling over Dover and 
Folkestone, and the destruction of a 
V-2 rocket. However, being a woman 
prevented her from reporting from 
the battlefront – that was reserved 
for her male counterparts. In spite of 
the obstacles they faced, Wason and 
Russell were both signicant voices that 
challenged a space dominated by males. 
During the Second World War, women’s 
radio programming played an important 
role in mobilizing morale on the home 
front, but was also used as a vehicle 
for propaganda abroad. For instance, 
US radio propaganda programmes 
were devised to target listeners in Latin 
America – whose resources, such as 
rubber and petroleum, were crucial to 
the US war eort – to maintain good 
relations with the people and combat 
Nazi propaganda there. Research shows 
that Latin American women listeners 
were particularly targeted because 
they were perceived as being central to 
family values. 
Since the 
1920s, radio 
has provided 
a space for 
women to be 
heard – literally 
and figuratively UNITED KINGDOM
Number of women working in radio: 
Source: Ofcom 2019.
51% Women in senior positions: 
36%
## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=22) 0
### 372618: Femmes et radio: sur la même longueur d’ondes
22   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
There are several examples, though, of 
women’s activism on radio, with a clear 
feminist agenda. Norway’s radiOrakel, 
which claims it is the rst feminist 
radio station in the world, was set up 
in October 1982 in Oslo – it is available 
today via FM and internet streaming. 
Its mission is to train women in areas 
including radio journalism and sound 
engineering. The station actively supports 
women as both interviewers and 
interviewees. It also stipulates that at least 
half the music aired must be composed 
or performed by women. 
Community radio stations also provide an 
important space for the empowerment 
of women. Often described as a 
“third” model of radio, since it oers an 
alternative to public and commercial 
broadcasting, community radio is 
generally not for prot. It is operated 
by volunteers and serves specic local 
communities that are often neglected 
by the mainstream media. As Caroline 
Mitchell, Associate Professor, Radio 
and Participation, at the University of 
Sunderland in the UK and co-founder 
of Fem FM, the UK’s rst radio station 
for women, established in 1992, has 
observed, community radio oers 
“a space for women’s representation, 
participation and resistance.”
This reinterpretation of the role played 
by women broadcasters and listeners 
sheds new light on the history of radio. 
Leaving aside the obvious dierences 
between Radio Roshani in Afghanistan 
in 2019, series broadcasts in the US in 
the 1930s, or radiOrakel in Norway today, 
these examples are a clear indication that 
the medium has, from early on, been a 
powerful platform for women’s voices.
Senior Lecturer in Media History at 
Bournemouth University in the United 
Kingdom, Kristin Skoog is a co-founder 
of the Women’s Radio in Europe Network 
(WREN). Her research is centred on radio 
and media history, and the history of 
women’s radio and women broadcasters.
Women have played a key role 
– both as broadcasters and listeners – 
in shaping radio’s general development 
and broadcasting practices 
Radio and UNESCO: A long history
The role of radio was already being discussed at UNESCO as early as in 1946, at 
its rst General Conference. Julian Huxley, the rst Director-General, described 
radio as “an agency which may jump across national barriers in a way impossible 
to any material medium.” This makes it an ideal vehicle for promoting peace and 
mutual understanding among people. 
Lightweight, mobile and able to operate without electricity, radio also plays 
a key role in the aftermath of armed conicts and natural disasters. Indeed, 
for over seventy years, UNESCO has been promoting this local medium par 
excellence – with its capacity to create links, speak to the greatest number, reach 
vulnerable populations and cover remote areas, while promoting freedom of 
expression and information.
The Organization has a long history of supporting community radio stations, 
and endeavours to strengthen local radio through the use of information 
and communication technologies (ICTs). With funding from Sweden, UNESCO 
supported fty-nine local radio stations in ten African countries (Burundi, 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Lesotho, Namibia, Rwanda, South 
Africa, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia) between 2012 and 2018. The objectives 
of this long-term project included improving the quality of programming, 
strengthening the skills of journalists and technicians, providing training in the 
use of ITCs, and helping to improve geographical coverage through a network 
of local correspondents. 
In Afghanistan, UNESCO helped to renovate the equipment of the Educational 
Radio and Television (ERTV) network, and to produce programmes, starting in 
2007. More recently, UNESCO’s Beirut Oce provided training in editing and 
broadcasting to young Syrian refugees in Lebanon, as part of its “Promoting an 
Enabling Environment for Freedom of Expression: Global Action with Special 
Focus on the Arab Region” programme, funded by Finland and Sweden. 
UNITED STATES
Number of women in 
radio newsrooms:  
Source: RTDNA/Hofstra 
University Newsroom 
Survey 2018.
34.3%
## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=23) 0
### 372620: Mark Tully: légende des ondes en Inde
Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            23 
For over a quarter of a century, 
one of the most recognized 
and trusted radio voices in 
India was that of Mark Tully. 
This British correspondent for 
the BBC has covered all the 
momentous events that marked 
the country's recent history, 
until the mid-1990s. He is a 
living witness of the time when 
radio was the main medium to 
reach the masses, telephone 
communications were 
unreliable, and radio recordings 
were made on magnetic tapes 
that had to be physically sent to 
the editorial oces. 
Mark Tully
A radio legend  in India
Sébastien Farcis, French journalist 
based in New Delhi
December 1992: The sixteenth-century 
Babri Masjid (mosque) in Ayodhya, 
had just been demolished by Hindu 
extremists, who claimed it was built on 
the site of an ancient Hindu temple. 
Thousands of militants charged through 
the streets of this village in the Indian 
state of Uttar Pradesh, attacking 
journalists who were there to cover this 
dramatic moment in the country's history. 
As they destroyed the media’s photo 
and television cameras, one foreign 
journalist was particularly targeted. The 
mob shouted out his name: Mark Tully! 
The British Broadcasting Corporation 
(BBC) bureau chief for India and South 
Asia narrowly escaped being attacked. 
He stayed locked up in a small temple, 
till he was nally released by three Indian 
colleagues and brought to safety after 
the intervention of a local ocial. 
Ý  Mark Tully at a political rally 
in New Delhi, 1991.
©
 P
ar
th
iv
 S
ha
h
## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=24) 0
### 372620: Mark Tully: légende des ondes en Inde
24   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
For more than thirty years, the radio – and 
occasionally, television – correspondent 
bore the weighty responsibility of having 
one of the most listened-to voices in 
a country of over a billion inhabitants. 
He was threatened, beaten, and even 
expelled from India – but he always 
returned. He eventually never left, making 
New Delhi his home. 
The country, it must be said, was, in 
some ways, his own. Tully was born in 
Calcutta in 1935 into a wealthy family 
of British settlers. His father was the 
director of a railroad and a partner in a 
holding company that owned a bank, 
an insurance rm, and tea plantations. 
After the Second World War, his parents 
sent him to boarding school in the 
United Kingdom. He later took theology 
courses at Cambridge University and then 
entered a seminary. 
“I thought I might have a calling to be 
a priest. But I lasted there for only two 
terms,” reminisces Tully, now 84, in an 
interview to the UNESCO Courier in 
his apartment in New Delhi’s historic 
Nizamuddin district. “I was always rather 
rebellious and I didn’t like the discipline 
of the seminary. Also, I was a good beer 
drinker,” he admits with a pinched smile. 
Return to India
Tully’s career as a journalist brought him 
back to the land of his birth. In 1965, 
he was hired as an administrator by the 
BBC's New Delhi oce. But he quickly 
ended up behind the microphone. “My 
rst broadcast was a report on a vintage 
car rally. I remember they stopped and 
had a picnic. And I recorded a maharaja 
saying, ‘why don’t you stop and have a 
glass of champagne?’” 
Tully returned to London in 1969, to 
head the Hindi service and then the West 
Asia service – for which he covered the 
Bangladesh War of Independence in 1971. 
"I was among the rst journalists to be 
let into Bangladesh. This was the most 
important thing that happened to me in 
my career and that made my name and 
my reputation,” he said.
Although he travelled with the army, 
which intimidated some of the people he 
met, the ace reporter could still observe 
the extent of the humanitarian crisis 
brought about by the war. Most of his 
dispatches were reported to the bureau 
by telephone. “There was no way to send 
the tapes to the oce quickly enough, 
I had to carry them back to London,” 
Tully explains. ”I was recording mainly 
straightforward voice reports on tape, 
using a Uher tape recorder. At the time, 
we could aord to work with studio 
managers and sound engineers, who 
were real wizards.” 
Hanging above a chest of drawers in his 
apartment, a large black-and-white photo 
taken a few months after the war, shows a 
young Tully with Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, 
the rst president of the newly-formed 
Bangladesh. 
From that moment on, his career took 
o. In 1971, Tully was appointed BBC 
correspondent in New Delhi, and 
named bureau chief a few years later, 
responsible for covering the South Asia 
region – which included India, Pakistan, 
Bangladesh and Sri Lanka. It was a 
post he held for twenty years, until his 
retirement in 1994. His distinctive voice, 
the voice of the BBC, was recognized and 
revered by generations of Indians. 
During this time, the intrepid journalist 
covered insurgencies, elections, and 
reported on a diverse range of subjects 
including political corruption, bonded 
labour, and Su mysticism. In the early 
1990s, Tully reported extensively on 
India’s modernization and the social 
changes this inevitably brought about. 
This reporting is also reected in India in 
Slow Motion, a book published in 2002, 
co-authored with his partner, British 
author Gillian Wright. 
Even today, Indians across the 
country still remember that they 
first heard about Indira Gandhi's 
assassination on the BBC
In the 1970s and 1980s, there were many 
technical challenges that international 
radio correspondents faced in India. For 
the recording of each sound report, the 
Delhi oce had to book an international 
telephone call, or use the public radio 
station, All India Radio (AIR), which had 
better dedicated lines. Outside the capital, 
the task became even more challenging. 
At the Simla summit of 1972, held in this 
mountain town in north India where 
a peace accord was signed by India 
and Pakistan to end the 1971 war, “the 
telephone was so hopeless that we had to 
send telegrams to London and they were 
read on the air,” recalls Tully. The tapes of 
the reports were always physically sent 
via aeroplane.
The “voice of truth”
At a time when AIR, the country’s main 
radio service, was controlled by the 
government, the BBC represented the 
“voice of truth”, according to Madhu 
Jain, editor-in-chief of the literary and 
cultural magazine, The Indian Quarterly. 
The British radio channel had more 
broadcasting relays that reached the 
smallest Indian villages. Tully soon 
became a celebrity whose voice was 
recognized and trusted throughout the 
subcontinent. “He was very respected by 
his listeners because he was objective 
and measured,” says Jain, who knows 
him well. She remembers his unique 
delivery. “He has this kind of voice of the 
upper-class elite with a good education. 
A bit dated now, because today, young 
people speak faster,” she adds. 
## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=25) 0
### 372620: Mark Tully: légende des ondes en Inde
Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            25 
Working alongside Tully, Satish Jacob, 
who was the BBC’s deputy bureau chief 
between 1978 and 2003, also made 
a major contribution to the foreign 
broadcaster’s credibility. Though the 
London oce sometimes commented 
on his Indian accent, Jacob gave the 
BBC one of its most impressive scoops: 
the announcement of Prime Minister 
Indira Gandhi’s assassination on 
31 October 1984. 
That morning, informed that someone 
had left the prime minister’s residence 
in an ambulance, Jacob went to the 
hospital and was able to get a doctor 
to tell him what had happened. “When 
I asked him whether her condition was 
serious, he told me that Indira Gandhi's 
whole body was riddled with bullets,” 
recalls Jacob, who is now 80. “I ran out 
of the hospital like a world-class sprinter 
and drove straight to the oce and 
asked them to book a call to London. 
I didn't have the time to write anything. 
‘There has been an attempt on 
Mrs Gandhi’s life, and she has been 
admitted to an elite hospital in Delhi,’ 
was all I could say.”
The Indian prime minister died at 
10.50 a.m., but the country’s public 
radio did not announce her death until 
several hours later, at 6 p.m., when Rajiv 
Gandhi, her son, ocially conrmed the 
information. Even today, Indians across 
the country still remember that they rst 
heard about Indira Gandhi's assassination 
on the BBC. 
Tully nally resigned from his job as 
a radio correspondent in 1994, but 
remained in India. He continued to host 
Something Understood, a programme 
about spirituality, on BBC’s Radio 4, 
till it was discontinued in April 2019, 
after twenty-four years. “I have a lot 
of aection for India, that is a country 
worth ghting for as a journalist,” he said. 
“And it would have been a poor reection 
of what I have done (all these years) if I 
had to leave just because I have lost the 
support of the mighty organization!” 
His adopted country returned this 
aection by awarding him two of India's 
highest civilian honours – the Padma 
Shri (for distinguished service) and the 
Padma Bhushan (for distinguished service 
of higher order). At home, the British 
queen knighted him for his contribution 
to journalism in 2002. Tully, who retains 
his strong English accent, insists these 
distinctions are “embarrassing, but it 
would be more arrogant to refuse them.” 
They do not seem to have changed 
this humble man, who remains deeply 
attached to radio, the “extraordinary 
medium that allows us to speak directly 
to people.” 
Þ  Villagers gather around a community radio 
set to listen to a rural broadcast in India, 1967.
©
 U
N
ES
C
O
/M
. S
er
ra
ill
ie
r
## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=26) 0
### 372623: Le Burkina Faso, un pays accro à la radio
26   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
Burkina Faso:
Addicted to radio
Yaya Boudani, 
journalist in Burkina Faso
Radio Pulsar, in Sanyiri, a populous 
district east of Ouagadougou, broadcasts 
its programmes – news, sports, music, 
entertainment – over an area with a 
radius of forty-ve kilometres. This 
independent radio station has modest 
premises on the rst oor of a three-
storey building – just two rooms for 
production and broadcasting. 
From Monday to Friday, at 7.15 a.m., 
journalist Hermann Naze goes on air. He is 
the host of Faut qu’on en parle! (We have to 
talk about this), a live programme which 
invites guests to the studio to discuss a 
wide range of subjects. Elections, terrorism, 
current aairs, the alcohol consumption of 
youth – no topic is out of bounds. “Every 
morning, we give the public a chance to 
have their say,” he explains. Listeners are 
encouraged to phone in and react on air to 
what they hear. 
Oering listeners a live forum is also the 
mission of Aairage, an early-morning 
programme broadcast by Ouaga FM, 
another private radio station in the 
capital. “It’s a form of reality radio,” 
explains Paul Miki-Rouamaba, 
Ouaga FM’s editor. “We’re 
interested in all the topics that 
are currently being debated.” 
When it comes to listening to the radio, Burkina 
Faso is one of the champions of sub-Saharan Africa. 
The proliferation of stations and the popularity 
of programmes that give listeners a voice, 
reect the enthusiasm of 
the Burkinabe people 
for this medium. 
Ü  The people of Burkina Faso 
are the most committed radio 
listeners among sub-Saharan 
African countries, according to 
an Africascope study, 2019. 
© UNESCO/Dominique Roger, 1971
## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=27) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            27 
Listeners can call in on the air to discuss 
real-life experiences, or to report 
problems. But they can also question 
their leaders, and get immediate answers. 
“Depending on the issues raised on air, 
we contact people who can answer 
listeners’ questions,” the editor adds. 
154 active radio stations
Sayouba Sanfo, a shopkeeper and 
launderer in Ouagadougou, listens to six 
or seven radio stations every day. Like 
many other residents in the capital, he 
sometimes participates in interactive 
programmes “to change things.” 
“One day,” he explains, “I criticized the way 
in which a health centre was being run. I 
had noticed that the nurses were taking 
supplies home, and that the place was 
very dirty. When I mentioned that on the 
radio, something was done about it.”
The widespread use of mobile phones 
over the past decade has brought radio 
and listeners even closer. Twenty years 
ago, only those with a land-line could 
take part in interactive live broadcasts. 
Now everyone can react on air, by calling 
or texting. 
The success of these participatory 
programmes shows the vitality of the 
radio scene in Burkina Faso. The country 
has at least 154 active radio stations – 
forty-seven of which are community 
stations, thirty-nine religious, thirty-eight 
commercial, and seven, state-owned. 
According to an AfricaScope survey 
published by Kantar, an international 
market research company, in September 
2019, Burkinabe listeners are the most 
committed out of the eight sub-Saharan 
African countries included in the survey 
(Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Congo, Côte 
d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, Gabon, Mali and Senegal). 
About sixty-two per cent of residents 
of these countries, aged 15 and over, 
listened to the radio every day in 
2019 – for an average of one hour and 
twenty minutes daily. With an average 
listening time of three hours and eight 
minutes, Burkina Faso is well ahead of its 
neighbours. 
The Burkinabe people’s enthusiasm for 
this medium is not new. It has its roots 
in experiments with rural radio in the 
1970s. In a country where only forty-one 
per cent of 15-year-olds can read and 
write (UNESCO Institute for Statistics, 
2018), radio has made it possible to reach 
populations – often with low levels of 
literacy – living in remote areas, far from 
towns and cities. 
The rural radio boom
“Rural radio was introduced in 1969. 
We needed a medium that we could 
use to teach farmers about new 
agricultural methods,” explains Seydou 
Drame, a specialist in information and 
communication law who teaches at 
the Aube Nouvelle University and the 
Institut des Sciences et Techniques de 
l’Information et de la Communication 
(ISTIC), both in Ouagadougou. 
This is how the country’s “radio clubs” 
– groups of radio listeners – were born. 
People living in rural areas would 
gather around a radio set to listen to 
the broadcasts. When the programmes 
ended, there was always a discussion. 
“Rural people immediately recognized 
themselves in this new means of 
communication – which spoke about 
their problems, in languages that they 
could understand,” explains Mathieu 
Bonkoungou, who has worked at 
Burkina Faso’s national radio station for 
several years.
While French remains the ocial 
language, in reality it is only understood 
by about twenty per cent of the 
population. Radio is therefore a way 
to build bridges between the dierent 
languages spoken in the country, and 
also between dierent media. News 
and current events reported in the print 
media are broadcast on radio – reaching 
those with little interest or access to 
the written word, in languages that 
they understand. 
The agship programme of Savane FM, 
one of the country’s most listened-to 
radio stations, is the Sonré press round-
up. It is presented by Aboubacar Zida 
(known as Sidnaba) in Mooré, one of the 
national languages. Journalists divide up 
the newspapers and decide which articles 
to summarize and read on air. “Even 
those with a good level of education 
listen to the press round-up on the radio,” 
says Soumaïlla Rabo, the editor-in-chief. 
“It also helps them to improve their 
knowledge of the Mooré language.”
The success of radio in Burkina Faso 
might explain why the Burkinabe are less 
interested in television. While people 
in countries in the AfricaScope survey 
spend nearly four hours a day on average 
in front of the TV, Burkinabe people only 
spend three hours a day watching it. 
47
39
38
19
7
3
community radio stations
religious radio stations*
commercial radio stations
communal radio stations
state radio stations
institutional radio stations
*Catholic, Protestant, Islamic.

### 372623: Le Burkina Faso, un pays accro à la radio
Number of radio stations in Burkina Faso:
Burkina Faso
Mali
Senegal
Côte d’Ivoire
Dem. Rep. of the Congo
Congo
Gabon
Cameroon
3h08
2h21
1h53
1h17
1h17
1h11
1h03
0h56
Daily listening time
in sub-Saharan Africa:
Source: Africascope 2019.
## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=28) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
28   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020 
Zo
o
m
## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=29) 0
### 372624: Des femmes puissantes
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   29 
Powerful women 
Photos:  Nadia Ferroukhi      Text: Katerina Markelova
Naliapou, the doyenne 
of Tumai, a Kenyan 
village forbidden to 
men, prepares for a 
chanting ceremony to 
the spirits, by coating 
her face with red earth 
mixed with animal fat.
In 2009, photographer Nadia Ferroukhi was on an 
assignment in Kenya. As she stepped out of the 
bus, which had stopped in the middle of the bush, 
she recognized Mohammed, who had served as a 
guide in a television documentary about Umoja, a 
village forbidden to men. 
Established in 1991 by women of the Samburu 
ethnic group, this village – near Mount Kenya, 
some 300 kilometres from Nairobi – provides a 
home to women who are divorced, rejected or 
beaten by their husbands. This subject aroused 
her curiosity to such an extent that she decided to 
track down these women, who lived in exile from 
their own environments. 
Born in Paris and raised alongside a feminist 
sister, the Czech-Algerian photographer has long 
been interested in strong women who occupy 
prominent places in their communities. “As a 
woman, it’s natural to be interested in the plight of 
women,” she explains. “As a photographer, you can 
express some of what they are going through.”
After this chance meeting, Mohammed became 
Ferroukhi’s guide. He accompanied her in her work 
with the women of Umoja. But not for long. The 
village had become a tourist attraction because of 
the media exposure. So Rebecca, the village chief, 
allowed Ferroukhi only three days to complete 
her assignment, at specied times and for a fee. 
“As a photographer, it’s important to be present 
as much as possible, so that you are forgotten and 
can capture the moment, the light. You can’t follow 
oce hours,” she noted, adding that she refused to 
comply with the conditions imposed.
Her guide then took her to Tumai, another women-
only village. It was founded by Chili, who had 
originally lived in Umoja. “There, I was welcomed 
like a princess, with dances. I was the rst person to 
report on this village,” Ferroukhi said. 
The inhabitants of Tumai are completely self-
sucient. These “lionesses of the bush”, as they 
are known locally – with a touch of irony and a 
lot of respect – rear their own goats and perform 
sacred rituals and other tasks usually undertaken 
by men, such as building huts and hunting. 
The practice of excision is prohibited here. All 
important decisions are taken by a majority vote.  
Only women who are divorced are allowed to live 
here. Boys are permitted, but only until they are 16, 
after which they must leave. 
Other women-only villages have been created 
along the lines of Umoja and Tumai. “Living 
conditions are dicult, but for these women, 
it is the price of freedom,” says Ferroukhi. The 
photographer has visited nine other countries 
where women play a central role in societies – 
economically, socially, and sometimes, politically. 
Through her reading, travels, and above all, 
her meeting with the French ethnologist, 
anthropologist and feminist Françoise Héritier 
(1933-2017), Ferroukhi became interested in the 
much-discussed notion of matriarchy. Her series In 
the Name of Mother came from this research. 
What indigenous matriarchal societies have in 
common is that they are true gender-egalitarian 
societies – as described by the German matriarchy 
scholar Heide Goettner-Abendroth in her book, 
Matriarchal Societies: Studies on Indigenous Cultures 
Across the Globe. Some of these societies are 
secular, horizontal, non-hierarchical, and essentially 
agrarian. The children are related primarily to their 
mother. They bear her name and live mainly in her 
clan house, even when they have become adults. 
The inheritance of property and goods is from 
mother to daughter. 
Ferroukhi has lived among the Tuareg of Algeria, 
the Mosuo in China, the Navajo in the United 
States, and the Minangkabau of Indonesia. 
She has also lived with the inhabitants of the 
island of Grande Comore in Comoros, the 
island of Canhabaque in Guinea-Bissau, and 
the town of Juchitán in Mexico. The photos 
here are accompanied by texts written by 
the photographer, in which she details the 
particularities of each community. 
Portraying matriarchy is a challenge. “People 
often expect a spectacular result. But in fact, I 
photograph everyday life,” Ferroukhi insists. The 
daily life of societies which, far from clichés, base 
their social organization, as Goettner-Abendroth 
puts it, “on the equal value of each member.” 
This photo reportage marks the celebration of 
International Women’s Day on 8 March. 
## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=30) 0
### 372624: Des femmes puissantes
30   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020 
The island of Ushant (Ouessant in 
French) is located at the extreme tip 
of Brittany, in France. It harbours 
a social curiosity – since the 
seventeenth century, the island’s 
male population has left massively 
to join the navy, particularly the 
merchant navy. Until recently, 
the men left Ushant for months, 
even years, at a time, leaving the 
material and social organization of 
the island to the women. 
France, 2012
These Native American Navajo 
women work in a coal mine, 
ensuring their complete 
nancial independence.
Married to a 
long-distance sailor, 
Jeanne ran the family 
farm on the French 
island of Ushant – 
known as the island at 
the end of the world – 
all by herself.
## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=31) 0
### 372624: Des femmes puissantes
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   31 
The social life of the Navajo nation is organized 
around women, according to a matrilineal 
system in which titles, names and property are 
transmitted through female lineage. When a 
Navajo girl reaches puberty, she must go through 
the Kinaaldá, a four-day ceremony which marks 
her passage from childhood to womanhood. 
This ceremony is linked to the Navajo myth of 
Changing Woman, the rst woman on earth who 
was able to bear children. On the reservation, 
women are generally more active than men. 
It is not uncommon for them to resume their 
education late in life, even after having children.
United States of America, 2011
In the foothills of the Himalayas, between the 
provinces of Yunnan and Sichuan in southwest 
China, the Mosuo community is organized on 
matrilineal lines. It is the woman who bears the 
family name and holds the reins of the household. 
Heritage is passed down from mother to daughter. 
Love relationships are lived without a marriage 
contract or moral constraints – at the sole rhythm 
of the feelings and the will of the women. The rules 
require the man leave his lover’s room before dawn 
– this is the custom of the zouhun, or “walking 
marriages”. The man does not assume the status 
of father. But he can play the role of uncle and help 
his sister raise her children. 
China, 2009
The Dabu, the matriarch who 
heads the Mosuo family. This key 
role is held by the oldest woman 
in her lineage. A proud guardian 
of tradition, she passes on the 
name and property, manages 
the money and organizes 
religious ceremonies.
## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=32) 0
### 372624: Des femmes puissantes
32   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020 
Comorian society is steeped in Bantu 
African matriarchal traditions and 
the Islamic religion. Every individual 
is born and lives at their mother’s, 
aunt’s or grandmother’s home, 
following the maternal line. It is the 
woman who inherits and owns the 
mania houli heritage – particularly 
the house, built by her father or 
maternal uncle on the family land. 
The traditional anda or Grand 
Marriage, which is more widespread 
on Grande Comore than on the other 
three islands – Anjouan, Mohéli 
and Mayotte – is a prerequisite for 
anyone who wishes to rise in the 
Comorian social hierarchy.
Comoros, 2017
A young bride on the 
island of Grande Comore. 
After the wedding, the 
husband moves into her 
house built by her family, 
where he is considered 
a guest of the matriclan. 
The women in Juchitán, 
a city in southern Mexico, 
play a major social and 
economic role, enjoying 
a rare independence in 
this patriarchal society. 
## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=33) 0
### 372624: Des femmes puissantes
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   33 
Juchitán, a town of 78,000 inhabitants in the Mexican state of Oaxaca 
is the birthplace of painter Frida Kahlo’s mother. Over the centuries, 
men and women here have developed clearly identied forms of 
autonomy. Women manage commerce, the organization of festivals, 
the house, and the street. Agriculture, shing and politics are the 
responsibility of men. This is one of the few places in Mexico where 
the Zapotec language is still spoken. Used in exchanges between 
female neighbours and passers-by, this language has enabled the 
development of a remarkable solidarity between women. The name, 
the house and the heritage are passed down through the women. 
The birth of a daughter is therefore a great source of joy. 
Mexico, 2011
## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=34) 0
### 372624: Des femmes puissantes
34   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020 
The way of life in the archipelago, particularly on the island of Canhabaque 
(population 3,500), has barely been inuenced by modern civilization, if 
at all. Here, houses are owned by the women, and it is the men who move 
in with their wives. Although the father passes on his family name to his 
children, it is the mother who chooses the rst name – and it is to her clan 
that they are related. The island is ruled by a queen. There is also a king (who 
is not the queen’s husband), but his role is limited – he is simply a spokesman. 
Each village is governed by a council of women, elected for a lifelong term. 
Guinea-Bissau, 2011
Two young girls defunto. This is the name 
given to young girls who must go through 
all the stages of female initiation, on the 
island of Canhabaque, Guinea-Bissau.
## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=35) 0
### 372624: Des femmes puissantes
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   35 
Today, Kihnu, a tiny Estonian 
island in the Baltic sea, has some 
500 inhabitants, compared to 7,000 
during the Soviet era. Traditionally, 
when the men went to sea, the women 
took on their tasks, such as working 
in the elds. Since the mid-nineteenth 
century, the women of Kihnu have 
taken over, managing the aairs of the 
community. Although men make up 
roughly half the population of the island 
today, it is still their mothers, wives 
and daughters who are responsible for 
education, culture, community life and 
craft traditions. Kihnu is often referred 
to as the Isle of Women in tourist guides. 
This simplistic image is not to the liking 
of those concerned, though. The women 
acknowledge that they play a leading 
role in decision-making, but in a society 
where men’s incomes remain the basis 
of household nances. 
Estonia, 2019
Celebrated folk singer Virve Köster (born 
1928) is the guardian of the centuries-old 
cultural traditions of Kihnu, which are 
expressed in song, dance and craftsmanship. 
These traditions were inscribed on UNESCO's 
Representative List of Intangible Cultural 
Heritage in 2008.
The women of Kihnu choose their 
skirts according to tradition and 
their moods – the darkest skirts are 
worn on sad days, the brightest on 
happy days.
## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=36) 0
### 372624: Des femmes puissantes
36   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020 
The Tuareg woman does not wear a veil – the man does. 
She has complete freedom to choose her husband. 
She knows the tinagh alphabet, the tales and legends, 
and teaches them to her children. The tent and its contents 
belong to her. She manages and supervises the camp when 
the man is away, and participates in all decision-making, 
even when he is present. She is involved in all social, 
cultural and economic matters. It is through the maternal 
lineage that all aristocratic powers are transmitted. But 
the policies of sedentarization in the 1970s and 1980s, 
repeated droughts, and the attractions of modernity for 
young people have undermined this way of life. 
Algeria, 2019
## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=37) 0
### 372624: Des femmes puissantes
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   37 
The world’s largest matrilineal 
society, the Minangkabau, inhabit 
the highlands of the west coast of 
Sumatra in Indonesia. According to 
their social system, all hereditary 
property is passed on from mother 
to daughter. The biological father 
is not the child’s guardian; it is 
the mamak, the uncle, who plays 
that role. During the marriage 
ceremony, the wife goes to pick 
up her husband at his home, 
accompanied by the women of 
her family. The adat, or customary 
law, determines a set of unwritten, 
traditional rules on matrimonial 
and property matters. Under these 
rules, in the event of a divorce, the 
husband must leave the home, and 
the woman retains custody of the 
children and the house. 
Indonesia, 2011
In the event of a break-up or death, 
the Targuia – a Tuareg woman – 
leaves the nomadic camp with her 
children, her dowry, the tent, and even 
the camels left to her by her father. 
Among the Minangkabau of Indonesia, it 
is the mamak – the eldest of the maternal 
uncles – not the father, who is the head of 
the matrilineal lineage. 
## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=38) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
38   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
Id
ea
s
Þ  Cueva de las Manos, Cave of the Hands, in Río Pinturas 
– with the stencilled outlines of human hands – is 
considered to be one of the most important habitat sites 
for early hunter-gatherer groups in South America. 
In Santa Cruz province, Argentina.
CC-BY-SA-3.0 photo: Marianocecowski
## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=39) 0
### 372625: Origine(s) de la violence
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   39 
Indeed, dietary cannibalism can be 
practised on individuals who are already 
dead – as in funerary endocannibalism, 
which consists of eating a member of 
one’s own family after their death. 
Only the presence of traces on human 
bones of beheading, or injuries due 
to the impact of projectiles or blunt 
instruments causing death, can support 
the hypothesis that the consumed victims 
were violently killed. In the Palaeolithic 
era, these marks were observed in fewer 
than thirty cases. The question remains: 
did the “eaters” and the “eaten” belong to 
the same community? Although today 
the practice of cannibalism – both dietary 
and ritual – is documented at several 
Palaeolithic sites, it is often dicult to 
know whether it was an endocannibalism 
or an exocannibalism.
Absence of collective 
violence
Excluding this particular context, 
just under a dozen cases of violence 
– projectile impacts, blows to the 
head – have been identied on several 
hundred human bones dating back 
more than 12,000 years. But are these 
injuries the result of an accident, or of an 
act of violence during an interpersonal, 
intragroup or intergroup conict? 
Prehistorian Marylène Patou-Mathis 
is a research director at the French 
National Centre for Scientic 
Research (CNRS), and currently 
joint director of the UMR 7194 
Histoire Naturelle de l’Homme 
Préhistorique (HNHP, Natural 
history of prehistoric man) project, 
at the National Museum of Natural 
History in Paris.
For these early periods, the distinction is 
dicult to make. However, in many cases, 
injuries, such as those caused by a shock 
or a blow to the head, had healed. These 
persons were therefore not killed, which 
would tend to prove that their wounds 
were the result of an accident, or a quarrel 
between two people. 
In other cases, the question of the 
identity of the aggressor arises again 
– was the individual a member of the 
victim’s community or an outsider? This 
remains unanswered. In addition, the use 
of human bones in the manufacture of 
domestic objects or ornaments also raises 
the question of the conditions of death 
of the individuals whose bones they 
are. In most of these cases, it is dicult 
to conclude that the death was violent, 
because they can just as easily attest to a 
particular funeral procedure.
Archaeological data shows that a 
form of violence already existed in the 
Palaeolithic era, notably ceremonies 
involving cannibalism. But no evidence 
has been found so far of collective 
violence. In the majority of the cases 
retained and studied (outside the context 
of cannibalism), only one individual was a 
victim of violence – which may reect the 
existence of interpersonal conicts (which 
were rarely fatal) or sacricial rites. 
Our image of the wild and warlike 
prehistoric human, which persists even 
today, is actually a myth, devised in the 
second half of the nineteenth 
century. Archaeological research shows 
that, in fact, collective violence emerged 
with the sedentarization of communities 
and the transition from a predation 
economy to a production economy. 
Ý  A cave painting depicting a battle in 
the Mesolithic age, discovered in Castellón 
province, Spain. 
(Public domain)
The origins of violence
Even if today, prehistoric humans are still 
perceived in the popular imagination 
as violent beings in perpetual conict, 
were these societies really as violent as 
ours? Only archaeological remains can 
provide answers to these questions. To 
characterize a violent act, archaeologists 
study the impacts of projectiles and 
injuries on human bones, assess the state 
of preservation of the skeletons, and 
analyse the environment in which they 
were discovered. 
Currently, the most ancient traces of 
violence that have been found are 
those resulting from the practice of 
cannibalism. Marks of disarticulation, 
emaciation (the stripping of esh), 
fracturing and calcination have been 
observed on Palaeolithic human bones. 
This relatively rare practice – which 
appeared 780,000 years ago and has been 
documented in the Sierra de Atapuerca 
mountains in Spain – persisted in other 
nomadic hunter-gatherer societies of the 
Palaeolithic age, and among Neolithic 
agro-pastoralists. But this evidence of 
one human’s action on another human’s 
body raises questions: were the victims 
killed before they were eaten?  
## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=40) 0
### 372625: Origine(s) de la violence
40   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
It is therefore reasonable to assume 
that there was no war in the Palaeolithic 
period, strictly speaking. There are several 
reasons that could explain this absence – 
a small population, a suciently rich and 
diversied subsistence territory, a lack of 
resources, and a social structure that was 
egalitarian and less hierarchical. 
Among these small groups of nomadic 
hunter-gatherers, collaboration and 
mutual support among all members of 
the clan were necessary for their survival. 
In addition, a good understanding 
between them was essential to ensure 
reproduction, and therefore progeny. The 
so-called “savagery” of prehistoric humans 
is thus only a myth – devised in the second 
half of the nineteenth century and the 
early twentieth century, to reinforce the 
discourse on the progress accomplished 
since the birth of humanity and the 
concept of “civilization”. This image of 
“violent and warlike” prehistoric humans 
is the result of a scholarly construction 
popularized by artists and writers. 
The development of 
conicts
Collective violence seems to have 
appeared with the sedentarization of 
communities at the end of the Palaeolithic 
era, around 13,000 BC in the Near East; 
but, again, only one or a few individuals 
were killed. This may reect the existence 
of conicts within the group, but also the 
appearance of human sacrices. 
Two sites are exceptions to this: Site 117 
of Jebel Sahaba, on the right bank of the 
Nile on the northern border of Sudan in 
Egypt; and Nataruk, west of Lake Turkana 
in Kenya. 
In the Jebel Sahaba necropolis, dated 
between 14,340 and 13,140 years 
before the present, half of the fty-
nine skeletons (discovered in 1964) of 
men, women and children of all ages – 
In several necropolises, dated between 
about 8,000 and 6,500 years ago, the type 
of weapons used (few arrow impacts) 
and the fragments of pottery associated 
with the bodies, attest to internal or inter-
village conicts. The remains of these 
victims testify to tragic events linked to 
a crisis (demographic, of governance, 
epidemiological) or to the practice of 
rites – funerary, propitiatory, expiatory 
or foundational – with human sacrices 
sometimes followed by cannibal meals. 
However, the existence of conict 
between two groups or communities 
cannot be ruled out, as shown by certain 
paintings on the walls of rock shelters 
in Spain. Dated between 10,000 and 
6,500 before the current era (BCE), they 
represent scenes of armed encounters 
between groups of archers – scenes that 
are absent in Palaeolithic parietal art. 
The change in the economy (from 
predation to production), which led to a 
radical change in social structures very 
early on, seems to have played a major 
role in the development of conicts. 
excavated from several pits covered with 
stone slabs – had died violent deaths. 
The deaths were either a result of blows 
to the head in particular, or after their 
bodies were pierced by spearheads or 
stone projectile tips, some of which were 
found still embedded in their remains. 
Three of the men were probably lying on 
the ground when they were put to death. 
Even if the question whether all fty-nine 
bodies were buried at the same time 
remains unanswered, this site represents 
the rst proven case of collective 
violence. Was it intragroup or intergroup 
aggression? The debate remains open. 
About 10,000 years ago in Nataruk, 
twenty-seven individuals, including men, 
women and children, were probably 
thrown into a swamp. Ten of the twelve 
bodies that were perfectly preserved, 
bear lesions caused by acts of violence 
and two of these, including a pregnant 
woman, had their hands tied. First 
discovered in 2012, far from a habitat, 
this small group of hunter-gatherers 
may have been exterminated by another 
group during a sojourn away from 
their homes. 
From predation to 
production
Traces of acts of violence are more frequent 
in the Neolithic period. This period was 
marked by many changes of a dierent 
nature. They were environmental (global 
warming); economic (domestication 
of plants and animals, search for new 
territories, surplus and storage of food); 
social and societal (sedentarization, local 
population explosion, the emergence of 
an elite and castes) and, at the end of this 
period, religious (goddesses gave way to 
male divinities). 
When faced with crises, 
a community is more resilient 
if it is based on co-operation 
and mutual support, 
rather than on individualism 
and competition
Þ  From the nineteeth century, representations 
of prehistoric man have evolved over time. 
According to Marylène Patou-Mathis, 
the Neanderthal was neither superior nor 
inferior to modern man – he was just dierent.
©
 M
us
eo
 d
i A
nt
ro
po
lo
gi
a 
cr
im
in
al
e 
C
es
ar
e 
Lo
m
br
os
o,
 U
ni
ve
rs
ité
 d
e 
Tu
rin
 (I
ta
lie
)/
Ro
be
rt
o 
G
offi
## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=41) 0
### 372625: Origine(s) de la violence
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   41 
Unlike the exploitation of resources 
in the wild, food production allowed 
the option of a food surplus, that gave 
rise to the concept of ownership – 
and, consequently, the emergence of 
inequalities. 
Very quickly, the stored commodities 
aroused envy and provoked internal 
struggles, but were also potential spoils 
in conicts between communities. As 
evidenced by the emergence in Europe 
during the Neolithic period, of gures of 
the chief and warrior (visible in rock art 
and burials), this change in economy also 
led to a hierarchical structure within agro-
pastoral societies. The emergence of an 
elite and castes included the warriors and 
as a consequence, the slaves needed to 
do the agricultural work, in particular. 
In addition, the emergence of an elite 
with its own interests and rivalries 
provoked internal power struggles and 
intercommunity conicts. It was only from 
5,500 BC, marked by the arrival of new 
migrants, that traces of conicts between 
villages became much more frequent.
Violence is not inscribed in our genes. 
Its appearance has historical and social 
causes – the concept of “primordial 
(original) violence” is a myth. War is 
therefore not inseparable from the human 
condition, but is the product of societies, 
and the cultures it generates. As the 
studies of early human societies show, 
when faced with crises, a community 
is more resilient if it is based on co-
operation and mutual support, rather 
than on individualism and competition. 
As for the reality of our ancestors’ lives, 
it probably lies somewhere between the 
two visions – both of them mythical – 
of the Hobbesian Aubes cruelles (Cruel 
dawns, a book of poems on prehistoric 
times, by the scientist and writer, 
Henri-Jacques Proumen, 1879-1962), 
and the golden age of human 
ourishing imagined by the philosopher 
Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
These would proliferate in the Bronze 
Age, which began before 3,000 BC. It was 
during this period, when genuine war 
weapons made out of metal appeared, 
that war became institutionalized.
The historical and social 
causes of violence
While it is dicult today to assess the true 
extent of acts of violence in prehistoric 
times – as the evaluation of the importance 
of this phenomenon is probably qualied 
by the state of ndings and studies – it 
is possible to put forward some ideas. It 
appears, on the one hand, that the number 
of prehistoric sites in which acts of violence 
have been observed is low, in relation to 
the geographical extent and duration of 
the period under consideration (several 
100,000 years). 
On the other hand, we could conclude 
that while violent behaviour towards 
others is old, war has not always existed. 
Its origins appear to be correlated with 
the development of the production 
economy, which led very early on to a 
radical change in social structures.
Þ  The reconstruction of the muscles of the head and neck of 
the Homo Neanderthalensis of La Chapelle-aux-Saints, 
in the Corrèze, France. Sculpture by Joanny Durand, 1921. 
Þ  El Neandertal Emplumado, the scientic reconstruction 
of the face of a Neanderthal who lived some 50,000 years ago. 
Sculpture by Italian scientist Fabio Fogliazza.
©
 M
N
H
N
/D
an
ie
l P
on
sa
rd
©
 F
ab
io
 F
og
lia
zz
a/
ph
ot
o 
G
io
rg
io
 B
ar
de
lli
/M
us
eo
 d
e 
la
 E
vo
lu
ci
ón
 H
um
an
a,
 B
ur
go
s 
(E
sp
ag
ne
)
## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=42) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
42   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
Ý  A poster of the lm, 
Ayka, released in 2018.
© Kinodvor/Pallas Film/Otter Films
## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=43) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   43 
But no one around me had ever faced 
a situation like this before. Thus, it was 
dicult to nd the right expression. When 
the shooting started, I had just nished 
my studies at the Russian Institute of 
Theatre Arts. I had a spring in my step. 
Now, I was going to be playing a woman 
paralysed by pain. 
Before I started shooting, I had to run and 
dance until I was literally exhausted. This 
state of exhaustion was enough for a few 
takes, but I quickly regained my energy 
and had to start running and dancing 
again. Even more so because, as the story 
progressed, my character’s level of fatigue 
increased. 
Interview by 
Katerina Markelova, UNESCO
Familiar yet invisible people, 
around 2.5 million migrants 
have left their homes in Central 
Asia to try their luck in Moscow. 
Most of them eke out a living 
doing precarious jobs. In Ayka 
– a feature lm which won the 
Best Actress award at the Cannes 
Film Festival in 2018 – Russian-
Kazakh writer-director Sergey 
Dvortsevoy and Kazakh actress 
Samal Yeslyamova explore the 
fate of those who are willing to 
sacrice everything in the hope 
of a better life.
Sergey Dvortsevoy, how did you 
come up with the idea for this lm?
Dvortsevoy: I was appalled to learn 
that a large number of women from 
Kyrgyzstan were abandoning their 
children in Moscow’s maternity hospitals. 
Although I have lived in Moscow for 
over twenty years, I am originally from 
Shymkent, Kazakhstan. I am therefore 
familiar with the culture and mentality of 
Central Asia. I wanted to understand what 
could be pushing these women to do 
something so drastic.
I started to do some research, to meet 
women who have been through such an 
ordeal. Some of them, like the character 
played by Samal, commit this desperate act 
after being raped. Others do it because the 
child was conceived outside marriage, and 
it is impossible for them to return to their 
country because they would be rejected. 
I was very touched by this situation and 
decided to make a lm about it.

### 372626: Samal Yeslyamova et Sergueï Dvortsevoï, le réel sur grand écran
Samal Yeslyamova and
Sergey Dvortsevoy:
Samal Yeslyamova, in the lm you 
play a Kyrgyz migrant who is forced to 
abandon her newborn child to return to 
work. How did you prepare for this role?
Yeslyamova: My character lives in 
extremely dicult conditions. I knew 
Sergey as a director, and realized how 
complicated it would be to play this role 
under his direction. When he becomes 
interested in a subject, his approach is 
more that of a documentary lmmaker 
than of a director of ction.
I prepared myself for the role for 
a long time. I rst interviewed my 
family, my acquaintances, my friends. 
©
 R
om
ua
ld
 R
iff
au
d/
A
ss
oc
ia
tio
n 
fra
nç
ai
se
 d
u 
ci
né
m
a 
ka
za
kh
st
an
ai
s
Reality on the big screen 
Ý  Sergey Dvortsevoy and Samal 
Yeslyamova after the screening of Ayka, 
the opening lm of the rst Kazakhstan 
Film Festival in France.
Our Guests
Our Guests were interviewed during 
the rst Festival of Kazakhstan 
Film in France, held in Paris from 
26-29 September 2019. Samal 
Yeslyamova was the guest of honour. 
## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=44) 0
### 372626: Samal Yeslyamova et Sergueï Dvortsevoï, le réel sur grand écran
44   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
Samal, you express your character’s 
feelings with so little dialogue. 
How did you manage that? 
Yeslyamova: There were a lot of takes. 
Sergey edited them right away, and 
the next day we would watch the 
results. If we felt that something didn’t 
work, we would shoot it again. It was a 
permanent work in progress. The lm was 
constructed as we went along.
And then we talked a lot with migrants 
from Central Asia. Some of them told 
us that eight of them lived in a single 
room. Sometimes one person would stay 
in a room during the day, and another 
would use the same room at night. They 
also told us how much they missed their 
children. To avoid the painful moment 
of separation, some of them preferred 
to leave early in the morning, when the 
children were still asleep. When they 
returned home, their children would not 
leave their side, afraid that they would 
be left alone again. These painful stories, 
and the shooting itself, were so hard 
and psychologically charged that I can 
say that this lm was like a third school 
for me. 
How do you explain that this lm, which 
shows a few days in the life of a Kyrgyz 
migrant in Moscow, was able to nd 
such resonance with audiences abroad?
Dvortsevoy: At each screening, the lm 
generates strong reactions from the 
audience. I wasn’t expecting that at all. 
When I started working on the lm in 
2012, the issue of migrants was not so 
acute a phenomenon in Moscow. At that 
time, the Western European countries 
were not facing such an inux of 
migrants either. Today, these population 
movements are aecting almost all 
countries.
The other thing is that, in all my lms, 
I try to avoid anything that seems fake 
in the acting. When this authenticity is 
achieved, the audience can identify with 
the character. I knew that by watching 
this lm, the audience would stop seeing 
these migrants in terms of what they do, 
but would begin to see them as people. 
Cinema cannot change the way things 
are, but it can reach people’s hearts. If a 
work succeeds in touching the soul, it is 
an immense satisfaction for the creator. 
Some migrant workers participated in 
the lm alongside professional actors. 
Why did you make this choice?
Dvortsevoy: For the same reason – that 
is, for the sake of truth. Non-professional 
actors have a big advantage over 
professional actors. Their sincerity 
shows on their faces and in their words. 
Ayka is your second feature lm, before 
which you made documentaries. Why 
did you feel the need to switch to ction?
Dvortsevoy: In fact, I had already started 
to feel restricted by the documentary 
format. I couldn’t have made a 
documentary about a story like Ayka’s 
because I would never have been able 
to get close enough to this woman’s 
most intimate life. Besides, there is a 
contradiction in documentary lmmaking 
– the more dicult the character’s 
situation, the more dramatic the lm is, 
and the better the result for the director. 
This ethical problem has been very 
painful for me. Although it is not easy to 
make a feature lm, it is still ction.
The main character literally takes 
up the entire space in the lm, 
from beginning to end. Why is that?
Dvortsevoy: On the screen, we see Ayka’s 
life in the present. We have to understand 
who she is through her eyes, her body 
and her behaviour. It is through these, 
more than through her few lines, that we 
must also glimpse her past and predict 
her future. Samal has very expressive 
eyes, which the camera hardly leaves 
for a moment.
Ý  Ayka, seen in the foreground, with 
migrant women workers at a clandestine 
sweat-shop in Moscow. A still from the lm. 
©
 K
in
od
vo
r/
Pa
lla
s 
Fi
lm
/O
tt
er
 F
ilm
s
## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=45) 0
### 372626: Samal Yeslyamova et Sergueï Dvortsevoï, le réel sur grand écran
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   45 
Our Guests
They bring to the lm the roughness of 
life, the authenticity and the scent of real 
life. That’s why I wanted non-professional 
actors to join the cast. But that requires 
a lot of training. Many people who have 
seen the lm said that they could not 
distinguish between the professional and 
non-professional actors – I take that as 
a great compliment.
Some of these migrants were on Russian 
territory illegally, which couldn’t have 
made shooting any easier.
Dvortsevoy: That did indeed happen 
many times. We would choose someone, 
check their papers, start working, train 
them in acting, and they would disappear 
overnight. They would then phone us 
from Kyrgyzstan to say they had been 
deported. In Moscow, it is extremely 
dicult to obtain a residence permit 
legally, so the majority of migrants use 
false documents – sometimes even 
without knowing it. People arrested in 
possession of forged documents are tried 
and deported after a few days. We would 
then have to search for another person 
and start all over again.
Were these unusual shooting conditions 
the reason the lm took six years to make?
Dvortsevoy: That is one of the reasons, 
but not the only one. To highlight the 
heroine’s dicult conditions, we shot 
the lm in winter, in the middle of a 
snowstorm. But as it turned out, it hardly 
snowed in Moscow for two years in 
a row. We tried to continue shooting 
using articial snow, but this lm did not 
support such artice. So we had to wait 
until the weather was favourable, and 
there were snowstorms. Waiting is a very 
complicated state.
Samal, how did you feel when you heard 
your name announced for the Best 
Actress award at the Cannes Festival?
Yeslyamova: When the lm was chosen 
to be in competition in the ocial 
selection, it was still being edited. The 
month before the festival, we worked 
hard to ensure that it was completed 
on time – the director slept for only 
two hours a night, and the rest of the 
crew, four hours. Each of us performed 
about three dierent functions. At the 
beginning of the festival, I was so tired 
that even though I was aware of the 
importance of the moment, I only felt 
the emotional impact a little later. 
When I heard my name, I felt both joy and 
disappointment. In fact, I was hoping that 
the lm would win the Palme d’Or. What 
would my role have been without such 
a talented director and dedicated team? 
So this prize is not only mine, it goes to 
the whole lm.
What does Samal’s award mean for you, 
Sergey?
Dvortsevoy: It is totally justied. I am 
happy that an actress who has thrown 
all her strength into the lm has been 
rewarded. It is proof that thorough work 
and a sincere rapport with what is being 
done can elevate you to the top. But 
this level of commitment is not given 
to all actors.
In addition, this recognition is important 
for Kazakhstan. It is the rst time that the 
Best Actress award at Cannes has been 
given to a country in the post-Soviet 
area. This award has also made it possible 
to understand that Ayka is a lm that 
touches people beyond our borders. Its 
reach will continue to grow long after its 
release. For a creator, this is essential.
Winner of the Best Actress award at 
the 71st edition of the Cannes Film 
Festival in 2018, Kazakh actress Samal 
Yeslyamova, born in 1984, started her 
career in film by chance. After considering 
becoming a journalist, she studied drama 
at the Petropavlovsk College of Arts in 
Kazakhstan. Before she graduated, she got 
a role in Sergey Dvortsevoy’s film, Tulpan, 
which won the Un Certain Regard award 
at the Cannes Film Festival in 2008. She 
graduated from the Russian Institute of 
Theatre Arts (GITIS), Moscow, in 2011.
Cinema cannot 
change the 
way things 
are, but it can 
reach people’s 
hearts. If a work 
succeeds in 
touching the soul, 
it is an immense 
satisfaction for 
the creator 
Russian-Kazakh director Sergey 
Dvortsevoy was born in 1962 in 
Shymkent, Kazakhstan. He worked as an 
aeronautical engineer before enrolling in 
the documentary section of an advanced 
course for screenwriters and film directors 
at a Moscow film school, at the age of 
29. After making four highly regarded 
documentaries, he turned to feature films. 
His second full-length feature, Ayka (2018), 
has won awards in several international 
competitions. In 2019, he became a 
member of the Academy of Motion Picture 
Arts and Sciences, which awards the Oscars.
Ü  Sergey Dvortsevoy at the rst 
Kazakhstan Film Festival in France: 
“It is important that there are festivals 
to show complex lms like Ayka.” ©
 R
om
ua
ld
 R
iff
au
d/
A
ss
oc
ia
tio
n 
fra
nç
ai
se
 d
u 
ci
né
m
a 
ka
za
kh
st
an
ai
s
## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=46) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
46   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
C
u
rr
en
t 
A
ff
ai
rs
Ý  A poster from the poster 
for tomorrow project 
launched by 4tomorrow, 
a non-prot based in Paris.
© Eston Kamelang Mauleti – 
posterfortomorrow 2016
## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=47) 0
### 372627: La Société des Nations, le rêve universel à l’épreuve des faits
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   47 
Jens Boel
National interests and multilateralism are 
not necessarily antagonistic. They can 
even be complementary. It was from this 
idea that the League of Nations was born. 
Far from being idealistic dreamers, its 
founders were convinced that the “spirit 
of internationality” and state realism were 
inextricably linked.
The League of Nations was established 
as part of the Treaty of Versailles, which 
marked the end of the First World War. 
The creation of this new intergovernmental 
organization was inspired by United States 
President Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen 
Points declaration – outlining his proposals 
for a post-war peace settlement – which 
he presented to the US Congress in 
January 1918. The idea of a “society 
of nations”, however, is much older. It 
dates back to international conferences 
in the second half of the nineteenth 
century. It was during the Hague Peace 
Conferences in 1899 and 1907 that the 
decisive move from the idea of the Concert 
of Nations – orchestrated by the major 
European powers – to true, inclusive 
multilateralism, was made. 
At the 1907 conference, European 
states had become a minority at an 
intergovernmental meeting for the rst 
time – due in particular to the presence 
of eighteen Latin American states, out of 
the total of forty-four states. The creation 
of the League represented a historical 
breakthrough and precedent. This was 
in spite of important limitations, which 
reected the historical context of the time 
– in particular, colonialism, and the refusal 
of governments to accept the principle of 
gender equality.
A hundred years ago, on 10 January 1920, the League of Nations 
was born out of the rubble of the First World War. The International 
Institute of Intellectual Cooperation (IIIC), UNESCO's predecessor, 
was created in its wake. The aim was to overcome the national 
egoisms that had led to the disaster, by focusing on multilateralism. 
This dream would not survive the inter-war period. But in an era 
facing challenges such as war, terrorism, economic crises and climate 
change, the credo of the founding fathers of the League for a more 
united world has not lost any of its relevance. 
preventing or sanctioning the territorial 
aggressions of Japan, Italy and Germany 
in the 1930s. The outbreak of a second 
devastating world war saw the dream 
completely shattered – until the birth of 
the UN on 24 October 1945 brought it 
back to life, against all odds. 
The League
of Nations:
A universal dream that has stood 
the test of time
Never again
Like the United Nations twenty-ve 
years later, the League emerged from a 
world war – with the rm determination 
that never again should such a tragedy 
be allowed to happen. But the lack of 
will on the part of the major powers 
incapacitated the League from eectively 
Ý  A plenary session of the International Commission on 
Intellectual Cooperation, attended by well-known gures in culture 
and science, among them Albert Einstein. Geneva, in the 1920s.
©
 U
ni
te
d 
N
at
io
ns
 A
rc
hi
ve
s 
in
 G
en
ev
a,
 L
ea
gu
e 
of
 N
at
io
ns
 P
ic
tu
re
s
## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=48) 0
### 372627: La Société des Nations, le rêve universel à l’épreuve des faits
48   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
Soon after its creation, the League’s 
members accepted the idea – of the 
French statesman and scholar Léon 
Bourgeois (1851-1925) and winner 
of the 1920 Nobel Peace prize – that 
international intellectual co-operation 
was an essential precondition for 
peace. Thus, in 1922, the International 
Commission on Intellectual Cooperation 
was created. The International Institute 
of Intellectual Cooperation (IIIC), the 
executive branch of the commission, was 
established in 1925. These organizations 
were the predecessors of UNESCO, or, “the 
Forgotten UNESCO”, as French historian 
Jean-Jacques Renoliet called it. 
In concrete terms, the IIIC established 
international norms and standards, 
organized conferences and published 
books on themes such as The Future of 
Culture; The Future of the European Spirit; 
Towards a New Humanism and Europe – 
Latin America (about cultural relations). 
Probably its most famous publication 
was Why War?, an exchange of letters 
between Albert Einstein and Sigmund 
Freud, published by the institute in 1933, 
which discussed the causes of war, and 
how to prevent it. 
Among the many intellectuals who 
worked with the IIIC were French 
philosopher Henri Bergson (1859-1941); 
the physicist and chemist Marie Curie 
(1867-1934); philosopher and statesman 
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (1888-1975), 
who later went on to become India’s 
President from 1962-1967; the Chilean 
poet and diplomat Gabriela Mistral (1889-
1957) who, in 1945, became the rst Latin 
American writer to be awarded the Nobel 
Prize in Literature; and German author 
Thomas Mann (1875-1955), winner of the 
Nobel Prize in Literature, 1929. 
Lessons learnt
The IIIC quickly faced the challenges 
related to the inter-war context, and was 
forced to reect on the diculties of its 
time. For example, in 1933, there was a 
proposal that the organization reprint 
the books that were burned by the Nazis 
in Germany. Its leadership refrained 
from doing so out of fear of oending 
Germany, and provoking the country’s 
departure from the institute. Eventually, 
Germany left the League, but for dierent 
reasons. 
When UNESCO was created, its founders 
learned from the experience of IIIC, 
both from its successes and failures. 
Part of the institute’s weakness was the 
over-emphasis on co-operation among 
intellectuals (“a society of minds”), and 
the relatively secondary role of politics. 
The League 
emerged from a 
world war, with the 
firm determination 
that never again 
should such a 
tragedy be allowed 
to happen
## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=49) 0
### 372627: La Société des Nations, le rêve universel à l’épreuve des faits
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   49 
This is why a greater role was reserved 
for States within UNESCO’s structure. In 
addition, education, that had not played 
a particularly prominent role in the IIIC, 
became UNESCO’s main programme 
sector – emphasizing its fundamental 
signicance for the Organization’s 
peacebuilding mission.
In several areas, the IIIC achieved a 
number of successes, which laid the 
foundations that UNESCO could build 
on. These include work on languages 
and translations; the organization of 
international conferences that encourage 
debates on key philosophical subjects; 
and standard-setting work – in the elds 
of libraries and museums, for example. 
The preservation of cultural heritage 
was already one of the concerns of the 
IIIC, as was cultural diversity – called 
“the particularity of cultures” at the time. 
Work on textbooks – particularly on history 
and geography – with a view to ghting 
prejudices and stereotypes, was started 
by the IIIC and continued by UNESCO. The 
role of the mass media – radio in particular 
– for the promotion of peace was another 
priority area for the IIIC, which was taken 
up by UNESCO. 
A realistic dream
The IIIC was what the American historian, 
Jay Winter, called “a small utopia”. Its 
archives – now a part of UNESCO’s 
archives – bear witness to dreams 
and hopes that were momentarily 
defeated, but which were reborn after 
the Second World War. The founding of 
the institute represents the rst time in 
the history of humanity that there was 
an attempt to create a truly universal 
organization for intellectual co-operation. 
There were many shortcomings, but it 
was a beginning, a rst attempt.
The work of the IIIC, its successes and 
failures, its political strengths and 
weaknesses – all this is reected in the 
archives. In 2017, their universal value 
was acknowledged and highlighted by 
their inclusion in UNESCO’s Memory of 
the World Register. In the same year, a 
project was launched to digitize these 
records (and completed in 2019), making 
them universally accessible online. 
The creation of the League of Nations and 
its associated bodies for the promotion 
of intellectual co-operation, represented 
the concrete emergence of a dream 
of universality and global solidarity of 
humanity. This seems more relevant than 
ever today, when it is under erce attack 
in many parts of the world. The dream is 
still with us. 
A Danish historian, Jens Boel was 
Chief Archivist of the UNESCO archives 
from 1995 to 2017. He initiated the 
UNESCO History Project in 2004 and 
organized international conferences 
on UNESCO's history to encourage the 
use of its archives. Boel's next book is 
on the history of the Intergovernmental 
Oceanographic Commission (IOC), 
created in 1960.
©
 U
N
/J
ea
n-
M
ar
c 
Fe
rr
é
Û  The Human Rights and Alliance of 
Civilizations Room, one of the largest 
conference rooms at the United Nations 
Oce in Geneva.
## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=50) 0
### 372628: Helen Pankhurst, le féminisme dans les veines
50   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
Helen Pankhurst
Far from seeming like something in 
history, the resistance of the suragettes 
a hundred years ago, with their demand 
for equal political representation, seems 
as relevant today as it was then. There 
seems to be something in the air, globally, 
that is a reminder of those early struggles, 
which my great-grandmother spear-
headed. This includes millions of feminists 
marching in the streets again, challenging 
heads of states and governments who are 
openly adopting policies that are socially 
regressive.
In spite of the fact that huge progress 
has been made, women the world over 
are still ghting for equality. Why, at the 
present rate, will we have to wait till 2069 
in the United Kingdom for the gender 
pay gap to disappear? Why, in 2015, did 
eleven per cent of women lose their jobs 
due to pregnancy? Why, globally, has one 
in three women experienced physical or 
sexual violence?
The journey of every country in the ght 
for women’s rights is specic to that 
country. And yet, so much is common 
in the experiences of women across 
space and time. Gender inequality 
and discrimination remain integral to 
our political and economic systems, 
to people’s identities, to cultures and 
religions – to power.
Two years after the #MeToo movement erupted in the United States 
and twenty-ve years after the Fourth World Conference on Women in 
Beijing, Helen Pankhurst assesses the dierent waves of feminism over 
the last 100 years. The activist and author also writes about the roles of 
her great-grandmother Emmeline Pankhurst and grandmother Sylvia, 
leaders of the suragette movement, who helped win British women 
the right to vote in the early twentieth century. 
Helen Pankhurst:
Feminism
is in my blood
Ü  The See Red Women’s Workshop was 
founded in 1974 by three British former art 
students. It focused on creating feminist 
posters to combat sexist images of women. ©
 S
ee
 R
ed
 W
om
en
’s 
W
or
ks
ho
p
## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=51) 0
### 372628: Helen Pankhurst, le féminisme dans les veines
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   51 
A new wave
Today, as was the case a century ago, it is 
the unity around one particular issue that 
has captured the moment. The issue at 
this time, which has become denitional 
of the fourth wave of feminism, is 
workplace violence. This wave is mainly 
dened by the #MeToo Movement, which 
started in the US in October 2017, and has 
reverberated around the world – known 
dierently, for example, as #WatashiMo in 
Japan and #BalanceTonPorc in France. 
Importantly, the voices of individuals 
speaking out and challenging 
discriminatory social norms are now 
being taken up in the form of structural 
change, nationally and globally. After 
years of campaigning, the landmark 
International Labour Organization (ILO) 
Convention on Violence and Harassment 
at Work was adopted in June 2019. Eort 
is now focused on ensuring its ratication. 
Overall, the waves are rst and foremost 
a description of the momentum 
created by individuals coming together 
to challenge the status quo – with 
increasing numbers becoming part 
of the force for change, and together 
changing the structures and policies 
of society. The result not only changes 
what people think and how they behave, 
but also spear-heads policy change. 
The metaphor of waves to describe 
feminism was introduced retrospectively, 
and it has stuck, as a simple way of 
explaining how energy and priorities 
have shifted over time. 
Social media, a tool of both oppression 
and liberation, has been a dening 
characteristic of the fourth wave. This 
current wave is acutely aware of – in fact, 
is dened by – an understanding not so 
much of the dierent political positions 
women might hold, but of the dierent 
layers of privilege and vulnerability that 
women experience. 
The term intersectionality, coined by 
Kimberlé Cranshaw, puts this centre 
stage and demands an understanding 
of dierences beyond gender – such as 
those of age, reproductive status, class, 
colour, sexuality and ability. 
Women leaders have also brought their 
feminism to other causes − for example, 
in the current wave, Black Lives Matter, 
the global activist movement started 
by African Americans in the US, and the 
environmental movement by Sweden’s 
young Greta Thunberg.
There are also two calendar moments 
that are umbilically linked to the global 
women’s movement. The International 
Day of the Girl Child on 11 October 
is an annual reminder of the specic 
constraints facing girls, and the reality 
that their voices are the least likely to 
be heard in any policies or decisions – 
including those that most aect their 
own lives.
Ý  Emmeline Pankhurst being arrested on 
21 May 1914, while trying to present a petition 
to the king at Buckingham Palace, London.
© Museum of London
## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=52) 0
### 372628: Helen Pankhurst, le féminisme dans les veines
52   |   The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020
The other key dates on the global feminism 
calendar fall between 25 November and 
10 December, known as the 16 days of 
Activism against Gender-based Violence. 
This period highlights both the problems 
remaining, and the ongoing activism 
against gender-based violence in the form 
of sexual abuse of all kinds. One way or 
another, feminist activism always circles 
back to gender-based violence – the ip 
side of women’s lack of political, social and 
economic power.
The vote, key to all 
change
Starting in the late nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries, the rst wave 
of feminism built on the demands of 
women centuries earlier − for a greater 
voice. It also built on campaigns in 
which women were pivotal, such as the 
anti-slavery movement. Many concerns 
were addressed, including rights to 
education and employment; double 
standards around sexuality; tracking 
and violence against women; temperance 
(anti-alcohol campaigning); and women-
led anti-colonial and anti-war protests. 
This foundational wave is, however, best 
known for campaigns around citizenship, 
the right to vote and to be voted into 
parliament. The vote was seen at the time 
as the key to all other changes.
That rst ght was particularly bitter in 
the UK. Emmeline Pankhurst (1858-1928), 
the leader of the suragette movement 
and my great-grandmother, was at the 
forefront of that ght – which started in 
Manchester in 1903. She was, and has 
remained, an iconic global representation 
of women’s resistance, as a consequence. 
The movement resulted in hundreds of 
thousands of people, mainly women, 
marching, but also to the destruction of 
property, to thousands being imprisoned, 
to being force-fed, to dying for the 
cause. As the leader of the movement, 
Emmeline’s courage, her determination, 
her vision of gender equality has 
continued to inspire. She was, and 
remains, a controversial character, even 
among supporters of her objectives. 
Emmeline’s three daughters were all 
involved in the movement − her second 
daughter, Sylvia (1882-1960), was 
my grandmother. Sylvia increasingly 
disagreed with her mother’s leadership 
of the movement – opposing her 
authoritarian decision-making, with the 
focus on wealthier women, and with 
the militancy.  
Ü  The Italian feminist movement 
Non Una Di Meno (Not one less), 
born in 2016 in the wake of the 
Argentinian movement of the same 
name, Ni Una Menos, to denounce 
gender violence and feminicide.
Ý  The Prisoners' Pageant – made up 
of more than 600 suragettes who had 
served prison sentences – participating 
in a procession in support of a bill that 
would allow women to vote, in 1910. 
In the centre, Sylvia Pankhurst, 
holding a model of the prison gates. 
©
 C
hr
is
tin
a 
Br
oo
m
/M
us
eu
m
 o
f L
on
do
n
©
 K
ar
l M
an
ci
ni
## [Page 53](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=53) 0
### 372628: Helen Pankhurst, le féminisme dans les veines
The UNESCO Courier • January-March 2020   |   53 
She also believed that campaigning for 
the vote needed to be done together with 
strategies through which working women 
could address their daily struggles.
Furthermore, Sylvia argued for the 
importance of universal surage – at 
a time when many working-class men 
didn’t have the vote either − and was an 
outspoken pacist when it came 
to the Second World War. Following the 
invasion of Ethiopia by Mussolini, this 
became another cause that she took on. 
She moved to Ethiopia, where she was 
buried with a state funeral.
The splits in our family are a reection 
of how very personal the political can 
be, and of the schisms throughout the 
history of women’s rights. 
Feminism’s second wave, from 
the 1960s, spotlighted economic 
rights such as equal pay and the 
challenge to gendered hierarchies 
of work, which had resulted in 
women being driven into 
poorly-paid jobs.  
Sexual freedom and individual choice 
characterized the third wave, from the 
1990s – thirty years later. The period 
also saw greater government and intra-
governmental commitments to address 
gender issues. The United Nations World 
Conferences on Women took place in this 
time frame. 
Personal inuences
The Pankhursts were extraordinary 
women in their day, but how have they 
inuenced me, a woman in the twenty-
rst century? Without a doubt, I am 
moulded by having had to think about the 
dierences of opinion within my family, 
and also by the fact that I was brought 
up in Ethiopia. In 1992, I wrote a book on 
women in Ethiopia, based on my thesis, 
called Gender, Development and Identity.
Last year, I turned to women’s experiences 
in the UK with the book Deeds Not Words: 
The Story of Women’s Rights, Then and 
Now. It considers how far we have come 
over the last hundred years, and has 
facilitated innumerable discussions with 
audiences here and abroad. 
If feminism is in my blood, so too is an 
understanding of the power of solidarity 
and purpose created by marches. The 
celebration of global feminism around 
International Women’s Day and the 
March4Women events – in London, in 
particular – have long been highlights of 
my year. 
On 8 March this year (2020), I will be 
marching as so many have done, and will 
continue to do so right around the world 
– banners held up high. We still have a 
long way to go.
A human rights activist and author, 
Helen Pankhurst is an advisor for 
CARE International, a professor at 
the University of Manchester, and a 
chancellor at Suffolk University. She 
divides her time between Ethiopia and 
the United Kingdom. 
Û  Image for the Greater 
Manchester for Women 
2028 coalition. Convened by 
Helen Pankhurst, the coalition 
aims to achieve gender equality 
in Greater Manchester, United 
Kingdom – where the suragette 
movement was born – by 2028.
©
 Ja
ck
y F
le
m
in
g 
/ w
w
w
.g
m
4w
om
en
20
28
.o
rg
## [Page 54](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=54) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Supporting Safety of 
Journalists in Afghanistan
An assessment based on UNESCO's 
Journalists' Safety Indicators 
ISBN 978-92-3-100361-5 
130 pp., 150 x 210 mm, paperback 
UNESCO Publishing 
Available on http://unesdoc.unesco.org
Reporting on Violence 
against Women and Girls
A Handbook for Journalists
ISBN 978-92-3-100349-3 
160 pp., 148 x 210 mm, paperback 
UNESCO Publishing 
Available on http://unesdoc.unesco.org
World Heritage No.93
The Silk Roads 
ISSN 1020-4202 - EAN 3059630101936 
76 pp., 220 x 280 mm, paperback, €7.50 
UNESCO Publishing/Publishing for 
Development Ltd.
publishing.promotion@unesco.org
Ethical journalism is always fact-based, 
and aims to promote gender equality in 
and through the media. This handbook is 
designed to support media professionals 
in their coverage of various types of 
violence against women and girls.
The handbook provides guidance, 
benchmarks and resources to help 
journalists and reporters ensure quality 
media coverage that is accurate, regular, 
engaged and respectful of the 
fundamental principles of the profession.
To be meaningful, press freedom 
requires that journalists do not fear 
attacks for doing their work. Threats 
to the safety of journalists amount to 
censorship by intimidation and force. 
UNESCO’s Journalists’ Safety Indicators 
provide a baseline against which 
changes in safety can be measured 
over time.
This report maps threats against 
journalists in Afghanistan through the 
year 2017. It provides an overview of 
the safety of journalists, followed by a 
discussion of the roles and responses of 
dierent actors in the country. 
The Silk Roads encompass some of the 
most complex and fascinating systems 
in the history of world civilizations. 
This shifting network of roads and trade 
routes that evolved over centuries 
enabled the exchange of cargo such 
as silk, spices, gems and furs. It also 
allowed for the sharing and dissemination 
of art, religion and technology.
Today, these heritage corridors have 
enormous potential to oer economic 
benets to local communities, and 
cross-cultural exchanges 
through tourism. 
New publications
U
N
ES
C
O
 P
u
b
lis
h
in
g
## [Page 55](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=55) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Many voices, one world
The UNESCO Courier is published in the six official languages of the 
Organization, and also in Portuguese, Esperanto and Korean. 
Read it and share it widely across the globe.
https://en.unesco.org/courier • https://fr.unesco.org/courier  
 https://es.unesco.org/courier • https://ru.unesco.org/courier • https://ar.unesco.org/courier • https://zh.unesco.org/courier
CorreioO
2019: O Ano Internacional das Línguas Indígenas
Quando beber 
água, lembre-se 
da fonte
janeiro-março 2019
Ideias:
um ensaio inédito 
de W. H. Auden
DA  UNE SCO
ЮНЕСКОКурьериюль-сентябрь 2018 года
 
 
 
  
Искусственный 
интеллект:
перспективы  
и угрозы
حتديات  مناخية،
يوليو - سبتمرب 2019 حتديات أخالقية
 المتحدة
ظمة األمم
من
ثقافة
م وال
والعل
ربية 
للت
 Ces profs 
 qui changent 
le monde
Canada 
L’école de la deuxième chance
Chili 
Apprendre derrière 
les barreaux
Chine 
Professeur à tout faire 
dans un village isolé
Congo 
Faire classe à 76 élèves
Inde 
L’école sous un pont
Sierra Leone 
Mohamed Sidibay : 
témoignage 
d’un ancien 
enfant soldat
Courrier
DE  L’ UNE SCO
LE
octobre-décembre 2019
## [Page 56](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/372603eng.pdf#page=56) 0
### NON-ARTICLE-TEXT
Follow us on social networks!
@unescocourier
© 
Da
vi
d 
de
 la
 M
an
o/
Pr
oj
et
 B
ld
 
Pa
ris
13
/G
al
er
ie
 it
in
er
ra
nc
e
© 
Ge
tty
im
ag
es
©
 U
NE
SC
O
©
 C
yn
th
ia
 C
ar
va
lh
o/
Gr
ee
np
ea
ce