# [073741](073741engo.pdf) 21

## [Page 1](073741engo.pdf#page=1) 3

### IGNORE

  
  
——— 
UNESCO. 
COURIER 
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
 
Volume I—No, 4. Price: 10 Cents (U.S.), 6 Pence (U.K.), or 20 Francs. MAY 1948 
THE FUNDAMENTAL EDUCATION BATTLE 
  
\ 
  
The four emergency Regions of Fundamental] Education, 


### 73744: Fundamental education battle: panel of experts maps strategy

anel of Experts 
Maps Strategy 
A Panel of nine experts on Fun- 
damental Education, *** with 
experience covering many. parts 
of the world, hag concluded a 
week’s meeting at Unesco House 
in the course of which it discuss- 
ed Unesco’s Fundamental Educa- 
tion programme and the work 
being done by other organizations 
in this field. 
This Panel, set up by Unesco, 
constitutes a world-wide body of 
experts who are kept in touch 
with the ‘latest developments of 
education through the Organiza- 
tion’s clearing house for informa- 
tion. It responds to requests for 
expert advice by correspondence, 
by analyzing and commenting on 
documents and other educational 
material, by encouraging an in- 
formed and active interest in Fun- 
damental Education, visiting pro- 
jects in their own and other coun- 
tries and by attending occasional 
meetings in Paris. 
The first 1948 meeting of the 
Panel of experts has just come 
to an end, lasting from April 26 to 
May 1. . 
At the outset, the experts 
agreed that while Fundamental 
Education, in the broadest sense 
#%%* Members of Panel: M, Albert 
Charton (France); M. M. Colombain 
(LL.O.); M. Hubert Deschamps (France); 
Dr. Zakir Husain (India); Dr. Ahmed 
Hussein (Egypt); M. Léon Jeunehomme 
(Belgium); Dr. P. Kose (Netherlands); 
Dr. Frederick Rex (USA); Dr. J 
Welch (U.K.). Chairman: Mr. John 
Bowers, head of Unesco’s Fundamental 
Education programme. Unesco partici- 
pants: Dr. C.J. Beeby, Assistant Direc- 
tor General in charge of education, Dr. 
Kuo Yu-Shouw, Special Adviser on Far 
Eastern Affairs, Mr. E. Gabriel, pro- 
gramme specialist, 
X The Pestalozzi Child- 
" ren’s Village. Page 2. 
X J.B. Priestley: The In- 
ternational Theater 
Institute. Page 3. 
XM Unesco’s Summer Se- 
minars., Middle Page. 
® Newspapers Printed by 
Radio. Page 8.     
of the term, was needed through- 
out the world, special priority be 
given to less developed rural areas 
and village communities and un- 
derprivileged groups in more high. 
ly industrialized regions. 
To determine the needs of in- 
dustrial areas, Dr. Welch, of the 
U.K, suggested that enquiries be 
carried out in the slum areas sur- 
rounding many of the African in- 
dustrial towns, where migratory 
workers have settled] in the most 
(Continusd on Page 7) 


### 73743: Dr. Beeby arrives to take up post

  
Dr. BEEBY ARRIVES 
TO TAKE UP POST 
Dr. Clarence E. Beeby, a lead- 
ing world {figure in progressive 
education, arrived in Paris on 
April 21, following his recent ap- 
pointment as Assistant Director- 
General of Unesco with special 
responsibilities in the field of 
education. To take up his post at 
Unesco headquarters, Dr. Beeby 
has been granted an 18-month 
leave of absence by the New Zea- 
land Government with which he 
is Director of Education. 
Dr. Becby, born in 1902, was 
educated in England and New 
Zealand, and later became Pro- 
fessor of Philosophy and Psycho- 
logy at the University of New 
Zealand. In 1934 he became the 
first Director of the New Zea- 
land Council for Educational Re- 
search. 
For the past eight years he has 
been Director of New Zealand’s 
school system during which time 
he was also in charge of educa- 
tion in Western Samoa and the 
Cook Islands, Dr. Beeby helped 
organize the attack launched in 
recent years by the New Zealand 
Government on illiteracy in West- 
ern Samoa and thus gained first- 
hand knowledge of the problems 
and difficulties which face fun- 
damental educators in their work 
with primitive peoples. Dr. Beeby 
is the author of several books, of 
which “The Intermediate School 
in New Zealand” and “Entrance 
{Continued on Page 6) 


### 73746: Iquitos Meeting prepares Hylean Amazon Institute

Iquitos Meeting 
Prepares Hylean 
Amazon Institute 
Delegates representing eleven 
nations and seven. international 
organizations have, during the 
first days of their Conference in 
Iquitos, Peru, made significant 
progress towards the establish- 
ment of an International Institute 
of the Hylean Amazon. 
The Conference, called jointly 
by Unesco and the Governments 
of Brazil and Peru, convened on 
April 30 and is scheduled to con- 
tinue for ten days. Its purpose 
is to organize the Hylean Insti- 
tute as an important first step 
towards opening up the vast equa- 
torial region of the Amdzon Valley. 
Delegates are considering a 
draft convention for the Insti- 
tute, which has been prepared 
by Unesco, and will draw up fi- 
nancing plans and a working pro- 
gramme to co-ordinate and fur- 
ther research work in the mys- 
terious region which has surender- 
ed few of its stvrets during more 
than 400 years &f exploration. 
Opening addresses at the Con- 
ference ware made by Dr. Luis 
Alayza y Paz Soldan, head of the 
Peruvian Delegation and Dr. Pe- 
rez Arbelaez, head of tite Colombi- 
an Delegation. 
Dr. Luis Alayza was elected 
President of the Conference and 
Dr. Linneu Albuquerque Mello, of. 
Brazil and Dr. Rafael Alvarado 
of Ecuador named Vice-Presidents. 
A Scientific and Programme Com- 
mittee was formed under the 
Chairmanship of Professor Paul 
Rivet. Director of the Musée de 
Homme in Paris, with Dona 
Heloisa Torres of Brazil as Rap- 
porteur. . 
Following the first sessions, the 
President of the Conference cabl- 
ed the following message to Unes- 
co: “The Conference... expresses 
its gratitude for the most valuable 
assistance of Unesco which will 
ensure the success of the Insti- 
tute. We look forward to your 
continuing magnificent co-opera- 
tion.” 
Iquitos, site of the Conference, 
is the capital of Loreto Depart- 
ment and an important cepter for 
the tropical areas of Peru in the 
Amazon basin. 
  
Four Italian Libraries 
Aided by Unesco Grant 
Four historical Italian libraries, 
closed and emptied during World 
War II, are to-day being restored 
by assistance from Unesco. 
Thousands of volumes of rare 
archacological and historical 
works are being brought out of 
storage, catalogued and prepared 
for use once again by students 
and research workers. These were 
the archives of the Biblioteca 
Hertziana, the former German 
Archaeological Institute Library 
and the Prussian Historical Insti- 
tute in Rome, and the former 
German Art-Historical Institute 
Library in Florence. 
The International Union of Ins- 
titutes of Archaeology, History 
and History of Art (Rome) is the 
responsible authority and the Ita- 
lian government has provided pre- 
mises and facilities for the work. 
Unesco has allocated grants to- 
talling eight thousand dollars te 
assist this work from its 1947-48 
budgets. Arrangements to go 
ahead were made with the Allied 
Control Authorities, as all four 
libraries had been German pro- 
perty before and during the war. 
3,000 1.5. Delegates 
To Meet This Month 
AT UNESCO REGIONAL CONFERENCE 
Further evidence of the active 
interest of the people of the 
United States in the work of 
Unesco is seen in the announce- 
ment of the forthcoming Pacific 
Regional Conference on Unesco to 
be held in San Francisco from 
May 13 to 15. 
Approximately 3,000 representa- 
tives from the states of California, 
Arizona, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, 
Oregon, Washington and the ter- 
ritories of Alaska and Hawaii will 
gather this month to attend the 
regional conference, the first 
meeting on the West Coast of the 
United States of an official 
United Nations Agency since the 
UN Charter was signed at San 
Francisco in 1945. 
This was announced by Mrs. 
Henry P. Russel of San Francisco, 
chairman of the conference con- 
vening committee who succeeds 
the late Dr. Donald P. Tresidder, 
President of Stanford University 
(California). 
“The idea of the regional con- 
ference,” Mrs. Russel stated, ‘is 
that people in communities 
should dévelop a consciousness of 
the countries which are not -ad- 
jacent to them 
“Unesco believes,” she added, 
“that if you understand the 
varying cultures of the world, you 
won't want to fight them. Our 
regional conference hopes to 
show people what they can do in 
their own communities toward 
the aims which Unesco hopes to 
achieve on an international level.” 
Both national and international 
figures are expected to speak 
during the conference. Among 
these will be George V. Allen, 
Assistant Secretary of State, 
George D. Stoddard, President of 
the University of Illinois and 
Margaret Mead, world-famous an- 
thropologist from the American 
Museum of Natural History m 
New York. 
  
W.H.C. LAVES CALLS 
For Greater Effort 
By U.N. and Unesco 
A concerted effort by the United 
Nations and its Specialized Agen- 
cies “to meet the requirements 
of the troubled world situation” 
was called for by Mr. Walter H.C, 
Laves, Acting Director-General of 
Unesco during a meeting of the 
Programme Committee of Unesco’s 
Executive Board on April 26. 
Mr. Laves referred to the critical 
scrutiny to which the United Na- 
tions will be submitted during the 
coming months due to an in- 
creasing personal insecurity 
among the peoples of the world. 
“It is therefore of the greatest 
urgency”, he said, “that... every 
element in Unesco’s programme 
be completely justifiable as con- 
tributing to what will be recognized 
as the real needs of the world...” 
- 
    
  
  DIRECTOR-GENERAL 
LEBANESE PRESIDENT 
RECEIVES 
Dr. Julian Huxley, who recently left Paris for a goodwill tour of 
the Middle Eastern countries, in conversation with HE. the Pre- 
sidént of the Lebanon, Sheik Becharra El-Khoury, and {wo former 
Prime Ministers, Abdallah Bey Yaffi and Sami Bey Sohl   International Student Conference 
Opens Session in Paris on May 6 
As this issue goes to press, 
delegates from s.x international 
student organizations are meeting 
at Unesco House in Paris on May 
6 and 7 to study ways by which 
students throughout the world can 
assist Unesco in carrying out its 
aims. 
Under the chairmanship of Dr. 
Clarence E. Beeby, Assistant Di- 
rector-General, the delegates are 
studying the Unesco programme 
dealing particularly with univer- 
sity development, exchange of 
persons and the preparation of an 
International Educational Charw 
ter for Youth. 
The six organizations taking 
part in the meet.ng are the In- 
ternational Union of Students, 
Pax Romana, the International 
Student Service, the World Union 
of Jewish Students, the World 
Student Christian Federation and 
Young Christian Students. Also 
participating are representatives 
of the International Federation 
of University Women.

## [Page 2](073741engo.pdf#page=2) 4

### IGNORE

2 UNESCO COURIER Volume 1.—No. 4 
  


### 73749: At Pestalozzi Village war orphans are learning to smile again

AT PESTALOZZI VILLAGE 
War Orphans 
Are Learning 
To Smile Again 
HEN a group of Polish children, orphans of war, were broughi to 
the Children’s Village oy Peslalozzi in Trogen, Swiizerland 1hey 
were housed ‘in a chalet the main windows of which jaced towards 
Germany. Their distress was so great when they realised this that 
they closed the windows and refused to look cut of them. 
After a few weeks, however, in the friendly and peaceful amo 
sphere of the setllement they were 
able to look towards the land of 
their former enemy without fear 
or hatred, 
This story, brought back to 
Paris by members of the Unesco 
Secreiariat who recently visited 
Pestalozzi village, is an example 
of one of the many small ways by 
which the authorities of the 
settlement are endeavouring 'o 
eradicate the nationalistic preju- 
dices intensified by the war. 
The actual construction of the 
Village of Pestalozzi began in the 
spring of 1946. 
Prior to that date, Walter Ro- 
bert Corti, a Swiss national, had 
publicized his idea for the wn'er- 
national settlement and with the 
aid of Mr, Otto Binder, Secretary 
General of Pro Juventute, money 
had been raised, an action com 
miltee set up, and technicians 
engaged to plan a mode! village. 
In August, 1946, the New Edu- 
cation Fellowship supporting the 
idea of the settlement proposed 
that a group of 350 children 
should be sent to Switzerland (0 
test the feasibility of the project. 
By March, 1946, thirteen lempo- 
rary houses for 400 children were 
established. 
Prof. J. Lauwerys of the Insti 
te of Education, London Uni- 
versity, wrote a detailed rept on 
the Children’s Village of Pesta 
lozzi which was studied by a Com- 
mission of the Conference of 1h= 
Allied Ministers of Education. He 
strongly supported the experiment 
saying that it was his decp con 
vietion that such an opportuni'y 
for laying securely the founda 
tions of international sojidari’'y 
would never recur. 
The village is divided according 
to nationality, the children living 
in small groups, each group under 
‘the supervision of an adult from 
its own country. Close contact is 
maintained with their country of 
origin so that they have full op- 
portunity lo learnt their own 
language, religion and national 
culture. As the scheme develops it 
is proposed lo teach the children 
a common language so that they 
may converse freely with each 
other. At present communily acti- 
vities are limited to music, 
dancing and play. 
The experimen’ provides a uni 
que opportunity for international 
understanding. Without desiroying 
national identities, it ye! gives the 
children a chance to learn the 
modes of life and characteristics 
o] other nationals and so helps to 
elinunate the misrepresentations 
of different conflicting ideologies. 
By studying the reactions of 
these war orphans to their sur 
roundings and condition it is 
expected that knowledge of grea 
benefit to all psychologists and 
educationalists will be gained 
which eventually may lead to the 
establishment of similar setile- 
ments in other countries, 
The children who have been 
brought from many countries in- 
cluding Germany, have suffered 
intense miseries and it is expected 
that it will take a long time and 
great patience before they regain 
a normal outlook. Their experien- 
ces are revealed in their games, 
where death and war play a 
major role. Their drawings and 
paintings depict the scenes of de- 
solation and horror which they 
have observed. 
Support for the village, has been 
obtained mainly from voluntary 
contributions and help. People 
from all over the world have come 
as voluntary helpers for varying 
periods of time and during the 
15 months of its existence, the 
Kinderdorf has received abou: 
70,000 visitors. 
Pestalozzi village has the sym- 
pathy and support of the Unesco 
Secretariat, Through the Recons- 
fruction and Rehabilitation Ser- 
tion of the Organization, volun 
tary donations hate been for: 
warded to the village. 
In addition, Unesco will proba 
bly convene (his July, a con- 
ference of directors of Children’s 
Villages at the Pestalozzi Village 
in Trpgen, Switzerland. The con- 
ference will study the best methods 
of readapl/ing children to normal 
life, 
  
  
Youth Camp 
Organisers Meet 
N 
Organizations responsible for 
cover 150 international voluntary 
work camps in Europe this year 
met in Paris, April 22-23, to map 
out a programme to co-ordinate 
and expand their camp activities 
and to further co-operation with 
Unesco. 
Delegates from more than 
twenty world voluntary groups 
discussed the technical problems 
of work camps, as well as the best 
ways of using the camps as a 
medium for building interna- 
tional co-operation, and a means 
whereby Unesco can assist not on- 
ly as co-ordination agency, but 
also in supply.ng educational gui- 
dance and materials. 
Libraries will be supplied by 
Unesco for thirty of the voluntary 
work camps this year. The orga- 
nization algo provides a clearing 
house for information concerning 
such camps, assists in publicizing 
their function and usefulness and 
will publish a pamphlet contain- 
ing complete information on the 
technical and cultural problems 
ol the camps. 
 
The children of Pestalozzi Village still hear the psychelogical 
marks of the last war. War orphans all, they are slowly learn- 
ing to smile and laugh again. Their drawings and paintings still 
depict the scenes of horror and desolation they have observed. 


### 73751: Technical needs surveys proceeding on three continents

  
Technical Needs Surveys 
Proceeding on Three Continents 
The Field Surveys into the 
technical needs of press, radio 
and films have continued during 
the month of April. All but one 
of the field workers recruited by 
Unesco to visit the countries 
where the enquiries are taking 
place this year have already left 
Paris. To date these Unesco field 
workers have travelled a total of 
over 50,000 miles in order to obtain 
the information required. 
In spite of the preoccupation 
with the elections in Italy, M. 
Artigue has almost completed his 
survey of the Italian press and 
radio, and will shortly be leaving 
for Budapest. Mr. Paul Anderson 
has finished his survey in Austria 
and the material is now available 
for the Secretariat of Unesco. Dr. 
Peter Bachlin, of Switzerland, is 
now in Hungary for the survey 
on films in that country, and will 
leave in the near future for 
Vienna. 
In the Far East M. Robert Guil- 
lain, who had previous been work- 
ing for a French news agency in 
that part of the world, has been 
in Pakistan and India and is now 
en route for Rangoon. Mr. Alexan- 
der Shaw, British documentary 
film producer, is at work in Bom- 
bay and has visited most of the 
principal film studies in that 
area. The survey of the newly 
created Federation of Malaya will 
be carried out this month. 
The enquiries into press, radio 
and films in Venezuela have been 
completed and most of the docu- 
mentation has already reached 
Paris. Political events in Colom- 
bia prevented the Unesco field 
workers froin entering that coun- 
try, and in view of the destruc- 
tion of archives and records it is 
probable that the survey will be 
postponed until 1949. Twa Unesco 
field workers are at present in 
Ecuador, and will shortly be leav- 
ing for Peru. M. Philippe Sou- 
pault, who has been carrying out 
the Unesco survey in Central 
America has already terminated 
his work in Mexico and Honduras 
and is now in Ciudad Trujillo in 
the Dominican Republic. / 
The study of press, films and 
rad’o in Haiti and Cuba will be 
made during the following months. 
A Netherlands film specialist will 
shortly make an enquiry for Unes- 
co into films in Mexico, It is 
hoped to include research work 
into the media of mass commu- 
nications in Uruguay during 1948. 
  
  
HE success of United Nations 
Associations,” said Henri Lau- 
gier Assistant Secretary-General of 
United Nations, “is necessary and 
indispensable for the success of 
the United Nations, for the simple 
By 
Wm. VAN VLIET 
Secreiary, WFUNA Education 
| Commission. 
14 
reason that their task is the es- 
sential one of mobilising support 
everywhere on behalf of the great 
cause of international peace and 
security.” 
That was in 1946, when 26 As- 
sociations signed the Constitution 
of the World Federation of United 
Nations Associations. 
Today such Associations exist 
in more than 40 countries. There 
are thousands of lawyers, teachers, 
students, journalists and others 
all over the world devoting some 
of their spare time to holding con- 
ferences, writing articles, making 
radio speeches, with a view to 
winning public opinion for the 
cause of the United Nations. 


### 73739: W.F.U.N.A.

W.F.UN.A. 
only in the field of reconstruction, 
but also in education and culture. 
Another example of this lively 
interest in Unesco 1s furnished 
by the Austrian Association 
which has just published the first 
number of a 48-page illustrated 
review entitled Unesco. 
Thus it may be said tnat the 
World Federation of United Na- 
tions Associations 1s a voluntary 
organisation which is supperting 
in word and in deed, the ideas 
laid down in its Charter and 
which are primarily to be carried 
out by the U.N. and its specialis- 
ed agencies—but which are to 
find their roots in the minds of 
the peoples of the United Na- 
tions. 
As Mr. Trygve Lie recently de- 
clared: “Governments must be in- 
fluenced by the peoples. The 
peoples must tell their Govern- 
ments that they want peace. 1 
am very glad that we have the 
United Nations Associations and 
W.F.UN.A. They can count on 
the support of the Secretariat of 
the U.N.” 
It took three years to plan D- 
day. It will take a little longer to 
build up an effective United Na- 
tions, maybe a whole generation. 
~It is for your generation, wrote 
the late Jan Masaryk, who was 
Prezident of W.JF.U.N.A, in af 
letter to the Student Section of 
the American United Nations As- 
sociation, “to see that the people 
of the United Nations, through 
the machinery we have establish- 
ed, really achieve the peace, to- 
lerance and social progress which 
the Charter proclaims.” 
Obviously, such achievement 
cannot be made by talking alone 
What we need 1s action and the 
activities of U.N. Associations, 
their Student Sections and Edu- 
cation Commissions are manifold 
Highlighting these activities just 
now is their active participation 
m organizing the United Nalions 
Appeal for Children. Among As- 
sociations playing an important 
part in the Appeal are the Aus- 
trian, <Cuban, United States, 
French, Hungarian, Italian, Nor- 
wegian, British, Swiss, Czecho- 
slovak and Turkish Associations. 
In addition, many Associations 
are co-operating in the reconstruc- 
tion work which Unesco is under- 
taking. The Canadian Association. 
for example, took the initiative 
in setting up the Canadian Coun- 
cil for Reconstruction through 
Unesco; and during the recent 
meeting of the Temporary Inter- 
national Council for Educational 
Reconstruction W.F.U.N.A. was in- 
vited to ask some of her other 
national associations to under- 
take similar steps in their 
countries, 
The work of Unesco in general 
is followed by our Associations 
with the greatest attention, not 
  
National Committees 
to Speed 
Reconstrution Work 
Creation of National Committees 
in all countries to speed the res- 
toration of cultural institutions in 
war-hit regions w.> agreed by ex- 
perts of the Tumporary Inter- 
national Council for Educational 
Reconstruction (TICER) meeting 
at Unesco House in Paris. 
Such Committees would make 
more effective and extensive the 
collection, despatch and distribu- 
tion of materials to help restore 
the centres of learning in the 
recent battle areas of Eurepe and 
Asia. 
Members siressed the importan- 
ce of close cooperaiion between 
Unesco and voluntary organiza- 
tions in the work of reconstrue- 
tion. It was recommended that 
a conference be called of French 
voluntary organizations to pre- 
pare a National Book Centre 
which would serve as a medium 
for the international exchange of 
publications. 
In connection with the United 
Nations . Appeal for Children, 
Unesco announced the dispatch 
of a letter to twenty-five inter- 
national non-governmental orga- 
nizations calling for their support 
for the Appeal. Favorable replies 
had already been received from 
fifteen of the organizations. 
It was announced during the 
sessions that Norway has decided 
to set aside five percent (approxi- 
mately $80,000) of funds collected 
under the United Nations Appeal 
for Children for cultural recon 
struction. 


### 73752: The U.N. Appeal for Children

  
The U.N. Appeal for Children 
ISTORIANS and statesmen 
may disagree about the date 
when the second world war start- 
ed, but it is all too clear that the 
world in which we find ourselves 
is still living in the horrors of 
war conditions, 
Today throughout the world 
two hundred to three hundred 
million children lack food, cloth- 
ing and care. 
Today in Europe alone, and 
despite the efforts of the govern- 
ments concerned, there are still 
sixty million children under- 
nourished and without clothing, 
shoes or schools. 
In certain famine areas, one out 
of every two children dies in its 
first year of life, without count- 
ing the stillborn. 
In Europe and Asja alike, on 
our doorsteps and far away, there 
are orphaned children wandering 
in city streets or in the country- 
side, hungry, cold and ill 
It was fitting that the United 
Nations should turn iis eyes to 
this grievous problem. On 11 De- 
cember 1946 the General As 
sembly passed a resolution set- 
ting up the U.N. appeal for 
children (UNAC). 
UNAC'’s task is to collect money. 
It is making a single, global ap- 
peal, for which governments will 
be responsible, but which is di- 
By Dr Bernard Drzewieskl 
Head of the Reconstruction Section of Uneseo. 
rected to individuals as well as 
organizations. 
The bulk of the donations, n 
cash or kind, will be distributed 
through the International Child- 
rens Emergency Fund. 
In each country a national com- 
mittee will be responsible for 
launching the appeal, and in its 
campaign will rely on the big pr- 
vate institutions and on all men 
of goodwill. 
The utilization of the funds. 
questions of foreign exchange, 
etc, will be governed by indivi- 
dual agreements between the na- 
tional committees and the Secre- 
tary-General. 
To-day fifty nations have ans- 
wered the call 
It is Unesco’s task to direct as 
great measure of the world’s 
attention to the importance of 
the educational needs of child- 
hood. In most parts of the world 
the war played havoc with the 
schools. Today in cellars, amid 
ruins, sometimes on the bare 
ground, always in conditions 
which are unhealthy, children in 
hundreds cluster round a single 
teacher and share a textbook, an 
old exercise book, or a stub of 
pencil. 
Unesco has made contact with 
all the countries which answered 
the appeal and has already indue- 
ed several of them to set aside & 
portion of the sum subscribed for 
the most basic educational needs. 
Thus Belgium, Canada, Norway 
and the United Kingdom, while 
giving the highest priority, as 
does Unesco, to physical needs, 
have allocated to the Organiza- 
tion a proportion of the sum sub- 
scribed, 
For the first time in history a 
chance is given to every indivi- 
dual to share in solving a prob- 
lem which concerns all aumaty 
now and in the future. 
The United Nations Appeal 
will be heard. The slogan “(iive 
a day's work” will touch men’s 
consciences. A large-scale mobi- 
lization for peace is under wey; 
authoritative voices are making 
themselves heard. With this help, 
the generations of tomorrow mill 
be a little stronger and, being 
better educated, will be able to 
share in the building of a world 
where the links of brotherhood 
will have been drawn closer by 
this act of international soli- 
darity. :

## [Page 3](073741engo.pdf#page=3) 4

### IGNORE

Volume 1.—No. 4 UNESCO COURIER 
   
A PREVIEW 
by J. B. PRIESTLEY 
Chairman, 
Provisional Executive Committee. 
International Theatre Institue. 
® 
HE value of the International Theatre Institute to theatre people 
will be enormous. Let me tabulate briefly some of the things it 
will do. It will collect and then distribute a great deal of valuable 
information: about new plays and productions in all the countries 
concerned; about the stage dimensions, technical resources, sealing 
capacities of the chief playhouses in all these countries; about copyright 
laws, censorship regulations, methods of payment and employment in 
its member countries. Again, it will try to remove the various obstacles 
that prevent the successful exchange of theatrical companies’to improve 
transport arrangements for companies touring abroad, to break through 
the-walls of currency regulations and customs dues. 
Then, when the Institute Is 
firmly established and has linked 
together the theatre folk of all 
nations, it can proceed to organize 
festivals and exhibitions, produce 
a journal in several languages, 
create theatrical scholarships and 
fellowships, advise the newer 
countries on the organization of 
good thea:ires, and do everything 
possible (without acting as a fi- 
nancial manager) to assist distin- 
guished theatrical companies to 
cross frontiers and, if neces- 
sary, tour the wide world itself, 
Finally, the annual Congress of 
the Institute will enable theatrical 
workers in all countries to meet 
and exchange ideas and if neces- 
sary to plan joint action. 
Many people imagine that thea- 
tre folk are incapable of mee’'ing 
together and sensibly discussing 
their affairs, finding common 
ground, planning joint action. 
Such people think of us in terms 
of “temperamental” stars, like so 
many petulant spoilt children. 
This is quite wrong. Within the 
past year I have been Chairman 
of two important theatrical con- 
ferences, namely, the Interna- 
tional Theatre Conference orga- 
nized by Unesco in Paris in the 
summer of 1947 (it was this Con- 
ference that planned the Insti- 
tute). and the British Theatre 
Conference held in London, Fe- 
* bruary 1948. th these confer- 
ences were very successful indeed. 
and on .each occasion I was told 
by various outsiders how astonish- 
ed they were to find delegates 
representing the Theatre so bu- 
siness-like, sensible, co-operative. 
But there is really nothing sur- 
prising in this. The drama itself 
is essentially an intimately co- 
operative art. The good produc- 
tion of a play demands that a 
considerable number of people 
must work together to achieve a 
common purpose. Dramatists, di- 
rectors, players, designers, theatre 
technicians. are all thoroughly 
familiar with these conditions of 
intimate and often very delicate 
co-operation. They are also used 
to a fairly high degree of ela- 
borate organization, for no good 
theatre can be run in a sketchy 
and haphazard manner. It 1s 
therefore not surprising that thea- 
tre folk should be able to run 
successful conferences, and indeed 
set an example that other types 
of people, always attending con- 
ferences, might do well to fellow. 
So it believe that the Interna- 
tional Theatre Institute will be 
mare than capable of carrying out 
the elaborate programme of good 
work already designed for it. 
The value then to people of the 
theatre will be enormous, But 
what about people outside the 
theatre, those who do not creai€ 
the productions but enjoy them 
(we hope) as audiences? Will the 
Insitute be of anv value to them. 
or Is it simply another profes 
sional organizatipn? The answer, 
in my mind, 1s that audiences— 
ordinary folk everywhere in all the 
countries concerned—will greatly 
benefit too. Clearly, they will 
benefit simply as members of au- 
diences, just because what helps 
the Theatre will help them too. 
The range of plays and theatrical 
techniques will be enlarged for 
them. They will have the oppor- 
tunity of enjoying the theatrical 
art of other nations. But even 
more than that is involved. We 
live now in a world in which 
international understanding is 
absolutely vital, for without it we 
may easily begin destroying soon 
the very roots of our civilization. 
And, in my view, much of the 
sharp disagreemen:s, between na- 
tions now do not spring. as we 
are so often and mischievously 
told, from fundamental philoso- 
phies that cannot be reconciled, 
but come largely from ignorance, 
vague prejudice, and the fog of 
cross-purposes in which so many 
negotiations are aitempted. Any- 
thing that dispels this fog, that 
clears away some of this ignor- 
ance and prejudice, will be daing 
us a magnificent service. 
Now I maintain that the Thea- 
tre is parficularly important here 
in this field of international un- 
derstanding. It is’ the dramalist 
and his actors who give us a 
really intimate, truthful picture 
of their people. And we receive 
that picture in the peculiarly re- 
ceptive and emotional atmosphere 
of the playhouse, where we are 
more open to new ideas and ge- 
nerous feelings than we are when 
we are reading a newspaper. A 
well-written and finely-acted play 
may do more than fif'y speeches 
by well-meaning politicians. It 
shows us people—their hopes and 
fears, doubts and dreams—and 
does not keep us fixed among poli- 
tical and economic abstractions, 
many of them already out of 
date. Therefore I say empha’ic- 
ally that a world in which an 
International Theatre Institute is 
securely established, and ‘is doing 
all the work it was mean: to do, 
is a far safer and more civilized 
world than one in which the art 
of the drama is imorisoned be- 
 
Cover of pamphlet just published on work of L.T.I. was prepared 
by French designer Jean Picart Le Doux. 
tween high mnatio- 
nal barriers. 
Nobody is going 
to pretend that the 
existence of an In- 
ternational Thea- 
tre Institute will 
settle our global 
problems, but ne- 
vertheless it will at 
least provide one 
stout thread for 
the fabric of a 
world society, 
which cannot come 
into bzing except 
by the creation of 
such internaticnal 
organizations, 
erossing frontiers 
and linking toge- 
ther the people of 
this earth. If you 
work in the Thea- 
tre, then this Ins!i- 
tute is of very 
great direct value 
to you. But if you 
never go near a 
playhouse, you are 
still justified in | 
taking an interest 
in this interna'io- 
nal organization, 
because it is a 
sound contribution 
to the new world 
civilization 
now struggling in- 
to existence. 
 
that is |[Self-partrait of J.B. Priestlay, 
play-wright and, critic, made in 


### 73754: The International Theatre Institute: a preview

The International Theatre Institute.     
  
noted British 
August of last 
year, in Paris. 
[This article is reproduced from the International Theatre Insti 
tute booklet, the cover of which is pictured below.) 


### 73755: I.T.I. Conference to open in Prague on June 28

  
I. T. 1. Conference to Open 
in Prague on June 28 
The first Congress of the 
International Theatre Institute, 
originally scheduled to open on 
May 31 has been potspongd for 
one month and will be inaugurat- 
ed in Prague on June 28. The 
Conference will take place at the 
Palace of the National Council at 
Mala Strana, Prague, and will 
last until July 3, . 
The Institute, which would be 
to facilitate the movement of 
theatrical companies from one 
"long needed 
country to another, sponsor 
translations and performances of 
plays, and collect and distribute 
news relating to the theatre. Its 
programme also includes a detail- 
ed study of the present conditions 
of the theatre in all parts of the 
world, 
J. B. Priestley, Tamous dra- 
matist and novelist and chairman 
of the Provisional Executive Com- 
mittee of the International 
Theatre Institute, wrote last 
month: 
“I attach great importance to 
the formation this year of the 
LTI as the international clearing- 
house which theatre people have 
in order to keep 
theatrically informed and pro- 
fessionnally aware of current 
events and developments in stage 
and audience circles throughout 
the world, I need hardly add the 
importance of such a clearing- 
house to international under- 
standing.” 
  
“I should like to urge,” he con- 
tinued, “that my colleagues in all 
countries be represented at this 
particular constituent Congress. It 
must be truly international to give 
us a world wide theatre service, 
and this must be a service remov- 
ed fromm all considerations save 
those which concern us technically 
and artistically as theatre folk.” 
It is expected that theatre 
specialists from about 25 coun- 
tries will meet under the co 
sponsorship of Unesco and the 
Czechoslovakian Government. 
More than fifteen countries.are 
now forming National Theatre 
Centres and choosing delegations 
to attend the Theatre Congress in 
Prague. 
The British Centre of the I.T.I. 
has appointed a distinguished 
delegation to participate at the 
Prague Congress, which will inclu- 
de Mr J. B, Priestley, famous dra- 
matist and novelist; Tyrone Gu- 
thrie, internationally known stage” 
director; Stephen Thomas, drama 
director of the British Council; 
Llewellyn Rees, drama director of 
the Arts Council of Great Britain; 
Mrs. Jacquetta Hawkes, secretary 
of the Arts and Letters Committee 
of the Unesco National Co-operat- 
ing Body; Kenneth Rae, Secretary 


### 73756: Eight countries form national theatre centres

Eight Countries 
Form National 
Theatre Centres 
Bight countries have thus far 
created National Centres of the 
International! Theatre Institute 
which will func.ion in co-opera- 
tion with Unesco. These are: 
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, China, 
France, Italy. United Kingdom, 
United .States. 
The French National Centre was 
set up on April 27 and will include 
14 members elected by profes- 
sioftal theatre organizations and 
12 persons chosen by the French 
National Commission. M. Armand 
Salacrou, one of the leading con- 
temporary playwrights of France, 
has been elected President of the 
Centre. 
The Brazihan Centre, formed 
on March 39 in Rio de Janeiro, 
elected the head of the Brazilian 
National Commission. Dr. Levi 
Carneiro, Honorary President, and 
Senhor Daniel da Silva Rocha 
President. Heitor Villa Lobos was 
named Vice-President and Joracy 
Camargo Genera! Representative 
of the Brazilian National Centre. 
Unesco Play has 
New York Premiere 
A short play, “In the Minds of 
Men”, the title of which is drawn 
directly from the Constitution of 
Unesco * and which is a dramatic 
presentation of the work of Unes- 
co, had its premiere performance 
in New York City recently. 
Written by Esther M. Hawley 
for the American Theatre Wing 
Community Plays in response tw 
many reguesis from community 
groups in the United States for 
a dramatic presentation of the 
work of Unesco and the United 
Nations, the playlet was present- 
ed at an International Theatre 
ceremony to welcome M. Armand 
Salacrou, the distinguished French 
dramatist, during his recent visit 
to the United States. 
Sgripts for the playlet are avail- 
able at 25 cents a copy for produc- 
tion by non-professional groups 
outside the playing area of the 
professional casts of Community 
plays (i.e. outside of New York 
City and a radius of 50 miles from 
Manhattan). The scripts may be 
obtained by writing to the Ame- 
rican Wing Community Plays. 730 
Fifth Avenue. New York 19, N.Y 
  
* “Since wars begin in the minds of 
men, it is in the minds of men that 
the defenses of peace must be con- 
structed...” 


### 73759: UNESCO begins photo survey of war-hit nations

  of the 1.T.I, British Centre. 
UNESCO 
BEGINS PHOTD 
SURVEY OF WAR-HIT 
NATIONS 
A photo survey of the needs 
and problems of children “in Po- 
land, Greece, Italy, Hungary and 
Austria has beén undertaken by 
Mr. D.R. Seymour, European 
photo-correspondent for the New 
York magazine “This Week” and 
the London “Illustrated”, who has 
left on a three months’ mission 
for Unesco’s Production Unit. 
The photo survey will cover the 
needs for education, housing, 
clothing, food and diet, medical 
care (with special reference to the 
anti-T.B campaign undtrtaken 
jointly by UNICEF and the 
Danish Red Cress). recreation, 
and the needs of hardicapped de- 
liqguent and working children. 
Special attention will be given 
in this survey to the activities of 
Unesco and the other Specialized 
Agencies in helping to solve these 
problems. . 
These photos are to be published 
in the form of five photographic 
stories in the U.S.A, the UK, 
France, Canada and Latin Ame- 
rica. The plan is to make a com- 
parative study of all needs in the 
five countries to be surveyed, a 
comparative study of one parti- 
cular problem in the five coun- 
tries and an individual study of 
the most pressing need in each 
country.

## [Page 4](073741engo.pdf#page=4) 4

### 73765: Caracas: educational problems in South America

  
    
JEYIRES 
  


### 73761: Sèvres: birth of the UNESCO Seminar

Birth of the Unesco Seminar 
N the summer of 1947, a small 
chateau built about 200° years 
ago by Giovanni Battista Lull, 
the court musician of Louis XIV, 
in the town of Sévres on the-out- 
skirts of Paris, became the home 
of the first Unesco Summer Semi- 
nar in Education for International 
Understanding. 
When it ended six weeks later, 
it had brought together almost a 
hundred educational leaders from 
countries on all the continents, 
and had provided them with a 
unique and profitable experience 
in international learning and 
Jiving. 
The Seminar was a 
experience, challenging in concept 
but with few precedents to guide 
jt. As an experiment it was and 
is of striking importance to Unes- 
co and to those throughout the 
world who seek to make educa- 
tion a constructive force for inter- 
national cooperation and under- 
standing. 
The first Unesco Seminar fo- 
cussed attention on two main 
areas of interest; 1) Ways and 
means of improving the curricu- 
lum, within the educational sys- 
tems of the member states, as a 
means of developing world-min- 
dedness; and 2) the influence of 
differences in culfural environ- 
ment on the growth and adjuste- 
ment of adolescents of various 
countries. 
To these principal purposes were 
added many others arising from 
the particular interests of partici- 
pants. One small group, for 
example, explored problems of 
adult education; one participant, 
seeking to make an international 
collection of songs for school use, 
arranged for other participants 
to send her copies of appropriate 
songs from their own countries. 
The Unesco Seminar was 
neither an international conferen- 
¢e nor a vacation course. Al- 
though many lectures were given 
by distinguished personalities and 
were followed by discussion, they 
did not constitute the principle 
technique of the Seminar. The 
chief method of work was based 
on the informal procedure of 
“study cirgles” or of the American 
“workshop,” the essence of which 
is to bring together specialists, 
with all their knowledge and 
experience, to study clearly defin- 
ed subjects of varying scope. Each 
group was made up of three to fif- 
.teen people, working on a single 
topic under the guidance of a 
Unesco staff member. 
The members of the Seminar 
were leading professional men and 
women 1n education. Twenty held 
responsible positions in the educa- 
tional ministries of their coun- 
tries; many were college and uni- 
versity - teachers, and outstanding 
secondar-school teachers. Among 
the world-famous leaders who par- 
ticipated in the Sevres Seminar 
were Leon Blum, Dr, James Yen, 
Professor Sdlvador Madariaga, 
Jean Piaget and Margaret Mead. 
“A necessary condition for 
effective international organiza- 
tion,” Leon Blum told the partici- 
pants, is the undertaking in which 
you are at the very moment co- 
operating. Education both for the 
child and the adult; culture both 
for the individual and for the 
multitude; the increase of re- 
pioneer 
    
 
Ed 
that is the essential aim of 
Unesco.” 
Indeed, the Sevres Seminar set 
in motion a chain of activities 
extending into many parts of the 
globe, on to many levels of educa- 
tion. Its members have become 
field agents of Unesco, carrying 
ideas acquired at Sevres to educa- 
tional colleagues, through speeches 
and writings, consulting with 
many educational committees, 
working with students, helping 
train teachers, preparing educa~ 
tional plans and formulating 
policies, 
A representative in the Seminar 
from Brazil, for example, who is 
responsible for radio work in his 
Ministry of Education, organized 
a series of radio broadcasts deal- 
ing with the work of the Seminar, . 
soon after his return to his 
country, and at the same time 
wapte a series of educational ar- 
ticks for leading Brazilian news- 
papers. 
Two of the representatives from 
Australia, were released from their 
academic duties for about six 
weeks after their return home to 
travel throughout the cbuntry, 
telling every major educational 
group in Australia of the work 
of the Seminar, 
As a direct result of the Semi- 
nar’s studies on curriculum im- 
provement, the Wales participant 
has been appointed chairman of 
a committee on Social studies 
engaged in revising the curricu- 
lum of Welsh schools. A partici- 
pant from Sweden has brought 
her Seminar experience to bear 
on the work of a general com- 
mittee on curriculum reform in 
elementary schools in her coun- 
try. The ‘Radiodiffusion Fran- 
caise,” co-operating through 
French members of the Seminar, 
included in its 1947-48 schedule 
a weekly hour on “Children of 
Other Lands” using scripts pre- 
pared and sometimes recorded by 
school children in other lands. 
Other schemes were organized for 
the exchange of broadcasts among 
various nations. The publication 
of material from or about the 
Seminar was made for virtually 
every national area represented at 
Sevres, while the number of 
speaking engagements before edu- 
cational and civic associations 
was also very large. These resulted 
not only in improved ‘curricula 
and methods of teaching, but in 
new insights into the people of 
other nations gained at the Semi- 
nar which have been passed on 
to many thousands of school 
pupils in different countries, 
The 1948 Seminars 
In the course of their meefings 
at last year’s Seminar, members 
constantly- found themselves con- 
fronted with related problems 
which could not be studied in 
detail at the time. 
This summer Unesco will take 
up the study of four of these 
problems at Seminars to be held 
in London, Lake Success, Prague 
Caracas. They will deal speci- 
fically with “The Education and 
Training of Teachers,” “Teaching 
about the United Nations and its 
Specialized Agencies,” “Childhood 
Education” and “Educational 
Problems in South America.” (See 
details in articles on this page.) 
In all these Seminars there will 
be a “common denominator” 
which is education for interna- 
tional understanding, or to use 
its new title, “Education for a 
World Society.» Unesco hoves that 
with the valuable experience gain- 
ed last year, all the group discus- 
sions and all the lectures will be 
directed towards the study of this 
common theme, and will serve as 
a stimulant in a widening circle 
to educational effort in behalf of 
Unesco’s great objective—peace 
and security for all men, 
EN 


### 73763: A World citizen

  
A World Citizen 
By Leonard S. KENWORTHY 
This is a personal statement by Leonard S. Kenworthy, formerly 
head of the social-studies department of Friends Central School, 
  
A WORLD citizen believes In 
the necessity and possibi- 
lity of attaining a peaceful 
world society in which the 
worth of all persons is re- 
cognized and an attempt is 
made to develop every indivi- 
dual to the highest degree of 
which he is capable in order 
that each may contribute his 
best to humanity, share to the 
fullest extent possible in the 
common achievements of 
mankind, and enjoy the satis- 
factions of such a society. He 
is striving to bring about such 
a peaceful society, based on the 
ideal of a worldwide broth- 
erhood of man, in which there 
is an adequate standard of liv- 
.ing for everyone, quality of 
educational opportunity, the 
provision and guarantee of 
suitable work for each indivi- 
dual, and the , provision and 
protection of civil liberties for 
all. 
A world citizen is loyal to his 
community and to his country, 
but his primary loyalty is to 
humanity. 
A world citizen is constantly 
attempting to acquire the ne- 
cessary knowledge and to de- 
velop the essential skills for 
effective participation in his 
community, in his country, and 
in the world. 
A world citizen is himself an 
integrated individual, free 
enough from conflict, insecur- 
ity, and frustration thatJhe can   
Philadelphia, Pa., and now on the staff of Unesco. 
live at peace with himself and 
others, rather than projecting 
his own conflicts on the indi- 
viduals and groups with which 
he lives. He knows that a world 
society is built not only on 
world organization politically, 
socially, and economically, but 
that it is built on right rela- 
tionships in the home and lo- 
cal community, and he endeav- 
ors to develop such relation- 
ships wherever he may happen 
to live. 
A world citizen realizeg the 
importance of common ideals, 
common purposes, common 
goals, and is constantly seeking 
to increase the areas of 
agreement among individuals, 
groups, and nations. At the 
same time he recognizes the 
importance of diversity and 
consequently strives for unity 
rather than uniformity. 
A world citizen is as object- 
ive as possible in his thinking. 
He attempts to develop his 
opinions with a global perspec- 
tive and to act accordingly. 
A world citizen has a philo- 
sophy of life or a religion 
which enables him to pursue 
this objective of a world so- 
ciety no matter what obstacles 
there are to its realization. 
His faith enables him {0 per= 
severe whether this objective is - 
achieved in his lifetime or not. | 
( Reproduced 
from “Education Digest’)   
I 
  
Film Catalogue 
On International 
Understanding 
Last month Unesco published 
the second in a series of draft 
catalogues of flims and filmstrips 
as part of its Production Unit. 
The latest catalogue is devoted 
to films and filmstrips on Inter- 
national Understanding. ‘Titles, 
language, producer, running time 
and size of each film are listed 
along with a short description of 
contents. Among the subjects 
covered by the catalogue are the 
United Nations and the Specializ- |, 
International Un- 
derstanding; International Aid; 
International Economics; 
national Transport and Commu- 
nications; International Migra- 
tion; and Inter-Group TUnder- 
standing, 
The first draft catalogue issued 
deals with films and filmstrips en 
the crafts and arts. Other film 
lists in preparation will deal with 
the Popularization of Science and 
Fundamental Education. 
ed Agencies; 
CARAC- 
 
Inter- | 
  
° | 
Educationa 
in South: 
N co-operation with the Pan Pp) 
American Union, Unesco iso! 
sponsoring a Seminar to study the 3€ 
“Educational Problems in South El 
America”, which it is hoped will go 
attract representatives from all ij 
the Latin American countries. ; 
The Seminar, which will be held jo 
in Caracas, Venezuela, will last PP 
for five weeks from August 2 0 
September 8. 
Mrs. Concha Romero James, 
Chief of the Division of Intellecs jy 
tual Co-operation of the Pan Ame- jk 
rican Union is organizing the Se-.m 
minar in collaboration with* 
Unesco. 
Among the members who will 
— 
   
  search and scientific knowledge... 
prominent child psychologist, 
A\ from Norway, who with 
her two sets of twins fled 
her country during the last war 
to Sweden, .made her way across 
Siberia and finally reached the 
United States, has been named 
Director of the Unesco Seminar 
on Childhood Education which 
will take place this summer in 
Prague from July 21 to August 25. 
Mrs. Aase G. Skard, now Pro- 
fessor of Psychology at the Uni- 
versity of Oslo, will lead a group 
of 61 distinguished educators com- 
ing from over 40 countries to study 
aspects of childhood education 
which are of vital importance to 
all participants insofar as they 
contribute to education for a 
World Society. 
These leaders in the education 
of children will meet not to at- 
tend lectures or to lecture others, 
nor will they meet for a university 
summer course, The Seminar will 
be rather a place where experts 
can get together informally to 
share their experiences and try to 
find solutions to similar problems 
arsising in different countries 
throughout the world. 
The spade work of the Seminar 
will be done in small study groups, 
each concentrating on a single 
topic and then reporting its find- 
ings to the entire Seminar. 
A tentative list of topics has 
  
PRAGUE 
 


### 73762: Prague: childhood education

Childhood Education 
been suggested for discussion at 
the forthcoming Prague Seminar. 
These are not fixed since the Se- 
minar members themselves will 
be able to share in the selection 
of subjects for discussion, which 
will by treated in relation to the 
entire span of childhood educa- 
tion, that is, from the ages of 
three to thirteen. 
Among the’ topics which will 
probably be considered are the 
following: 
What are the educational pro- 
blems facing the growing child 
today in relation to the various 
cultural patterns of a given com- 
munity, or of the world? What 1s 
being done by teachers to meet 
the specifi problems that dif- 
ferent cultural patterns pose ? 
What are the factors involved in 
the psychological development of 
the child? What in particular is 
being done in different countries 
in the field of child guidance? 
for develppirg world-mindedness? 
What have been the psychological 
effects of the last war on children? 
It is possible to glean some idea 
of the scope and range of the 
probable discussions from the re- 
commendations given to parti- 
cipants as preparatory work for 
the various study groups of the 
Seminar. 
Thus we find that the physical, 
mental, social and spiritual deve- 
lopment of children will probably 
be discussed along with the ge- 
neral psychological development of 
the child. Here, too, the applic- 
ation of psychiatry includ- 
ing psychoanalysis will play 
an important role. All of these 
technical questions will be examin- 
ed insofar as they affect teach- 
ing procedures and curricula con- 
tent in schools. 
In view of the importance at- 
tached to the development of 
world-mindedness in children, the 
Seminar will probably treat this 
suhject either in a special study 
group or in general discussions 
with the participation of all 
members. The Seminar will study 
how attitudes can be formed, what 
experiences can he provided and 
what skills developed to educate 
children for a world society. 
The education of deficient child- 
ren (physical, mental and social 
deficiencies), the problems of ju-- 
venile delinquency, the psycholog- | 
jcal effects of war on children 
and the special difficulties facing 
teachers In the education of these 
children, these and other topics 
will be proposed for study group 
and general discussion when the 
Seminar meets in Prague this 
summer. 
3 . J 
For a period of six weeks Semi- } 
nar members will have an oppor- |, 
tunity to’ participate in an expe 
riment in international living and 
learning, exchange and discuss in- 
formally their views and experi- 
ences on the varied aspects of |: 
childhood education. 
Unesco, in organizing its Inter- 
national Seminar, does not seek 
to fix one single method for all|: 
schools or to establish a uniform 
curriculum. It hopes, rather, to 
stimulate educational leaders by 
providing an unusual opportunity {1 
for comparative study, permitting 
a more realistic perspective of the 
problems and possibilities of child- 
hood education and the contribu- 
tion they can make to peace and 
security in a world society. 
    > 
C
R
A
B
E
R
A
E
 
WU
E 
   

## [Page 5](073741engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  
    
  
HIS summer, Unesco and the 
\ | United Nations will assist 61 
educators in preparing a 
iseries of radio scripts or re- 
icordings, filmstrips, slides, exhibi- 
‘tions and reading material, varying 
according to each participant's 
speciality and his country’s parti- 
foular requirements—so as to make 
.Javailable a graphic presentation 
fof the Unijed Nations and its 
4Specialized Agencies to school 
schildren in every part of the 
~ world. 
A 
For a period of six weeks, 
!peginning July 7 and ending 
August 18, these experts, repre- 
.4genting the outstanding educators 
{jin their field, will take part in 
Unesco’s Seminar on “Teaching 
.:about the United Nations and its 
Specialized Agencies.” They will 
Vive and work together in quarters 
Lsset aside for them at Adelphi 
JCollege, Garden City, New York 
$2near Lake Success. Dr. Yuen Jen 
#Chao, noted Chinese educator and 
 »Chinese delegate to the First and 
L1Becond Sessions of Unesco’s Gen-   


### 73766: Lake Success: teaching about the U.N. and its agencies

LAKE SUCCESS 
EAGHING ABOUT THE U.N. 
IND ITS AGENCIES 
  
Y) 
I ——— 
| 
a: Problems 
LAmerica 
n play a leading part in the conduct 
is<ef the Seminar are Nieto Cabal- 
e dero, Rector of the Gimnasio Mo- 
Lh Aderno in Bogota, and Colombian 
elegate to Unesco’s Mexico Con- 
I erence last November, and Dr. 
uan Roura-Parella of Wesleyan 
5. Mniversity, Middletown, Connecti- 
d gut, who has been loaned to the 
t Pan American Union to act as Di- 
ofrector of a general study group 
on Education for Understanding. 
i The progress made in education 
» Bn South America during recent 
= years is such that the results of 
= Khe discussion groups and general 
«-yneetings of the Seminar are ex- 
1-Pected to prove of unusual inte- 
- west. Since the war, many pro- 
-fects for educational reform have 
1 been initiated in Latin American 
untries and long-held educatio- 
J al values are being seriously 
qnuestioned and examined by edu- 
gators all over South America. 
- 
[¥ Latin American educationists 
have given particular attention to 
E child deliquency, especially in 
Brazil, Chile and Ecuador where 
ts relation to school attendance 
{has brought out sych oulstanding 
$tudies as those of Piragibe and 
Hauck Magofke, while Argentina, 
JColombia, and Cuba have paid 
particular attention to research in 
ge history of education, to cite 
| y a few cases. 
: Harold Benjamin, of the Uni- 
pyersity of Maryland, writing in 
de “Handbook of Latin Amer- 
an Studies” (Number 10) states: 
“The growing body of educa- 
tional writings, especially in the 
lields of theory, curriculum, and 
©rganization, show tha: the 
schools of the American countries 
pt coming more and more to de- 
: their own problems, examine 
2€Iir own objectives, and critize 
1€Ir own practices in terms of 
ghe needs of their own people. 
Chey have long believed in the 
Pld maxim, “Nemo dat quod non 
habet”, and now they are work- 
ng to give their educational ins- 
tutions resources of personnel 
Ald equipment proportional to 
ghe tremendous task of the school 
Mm and for democracy.” 
 
       
    
    
     
   
   
 
    
eral Conference will act as Di- 
rector of the Seminar. 
The Seminar will be conducted 
chiefly as a production centre or 
workshop of materials for instruc- 
ting boys and girls up to the age 
of 18, about the United Nations 
and its Specialized Agencies. 
Each participant has been asked 
to plan, before leaving for New 
York, a particular project to be 
developed. Thus, one member 
might come prepared to do a 
booklet on some phase of the UN 
or its Agencies; another member 
might do a series of radio scripts 
or a series of lessons for children. 
or some other type of material. In 
some cases, a group may wish to 
work on a common subject. For, the 
method of the International Se- 
minar is one not only of individual 
but’ of collective work as well. 
There will be general discussions 
and small study groups to exa- 
mine the best methods of presen- 
ting the United Nations system to 
school children at different ages 
and through different media. A 
survey will be made of existing 
methods and materials. These 
discussions will be led by members 
of the Seminar staff, by Seminar 
participants, by officials of the 
United Nations and its Agencies, 
and by educational authorities. 
Ample materials for the parti- 
cipants will be provided by the 
UN and Unesco. The library at 
the United Nations will be at their 
disposal in addition to the Semi- 
nar reference library. Several trips 
will be arranged to visit educa- 
tional institutions in and around 
New York City. 
The reports of Member States 
stem directly from Unesco’s pro- 
gramme in 1947 and in 1948 and 
from ga resolution adopted last 
November by the General Assem- 
bly of the United Nations which 
recommended “to all Member 
Governments that they take 
measures... to encourage the 
teaching of the United Nations 
Charter and the purposes and 
principles, the structure, back- 
ground and activities: of the. 
United Nations in the schools... 
of their countries, with particular 
emphasis on.. elementary and 
secondary schools.” The UN also 
requested Unesco “to assist Mem- 
bers of the United Nations, at 
their request, in the implemen- 
tation of this programme, with 
the co-operation as required of the 
Secretary-General of the United 
Nations, and to report there on to 
the Economic and Social Coun- 
cil.” 
In oursuance of a resolution 
adopted by the Second Session of 
the Unesco General Conierence 
at Mexico City, the New York 
Seminar will therefore be held in 
collaborat:on with the United Na- 
tions. ) ) 
+ 
Loa lu 
 
  
  
   
 
Seminar 
Reading List 
The following documents will 
be found useful for partici- 
pants and those interested in 
Unesco’s summer Seminars. 
They may be had free of 
charge by writing to Unesco in 
Paris. . 
Director’s Report on Sevres 
Seminar. (Sem./25) 
The Basic Principles of Educa- 
tion for International Under- 
standing. (Sem. Rep./1) 
A Realistic Approach to Edu- 
cation for a World Society in 
Secondary Schools. (Sem. 
Rep./2) 
Modern Languages and Litera- 
ture. (Sem. Rep./3) 
International Interchange and 
Correspondence. (Sem.Rep/4) 
The Film as a Means of Pro- 
moting International Under- 
standing. (Sem. Rep./6) 
Introduction to the Problem 
of Education for interma- 
tional Understanding. (Sem. 
Rep./8) 
Education for International 
Understanding In The Light 
of Cultural Differences. 
(Sem. Rep./9) , 
Some Persistent Problems in 
the Development of Inter- 
Group Understanding. (Sem. 
Rep./10) 
Education of the Emotions in 
Relation to International Un- 
derstanding, (Sem. Rep./11) 
A Draft Catalogue of Films 
and Filmstrips on Interna- 
tional Understanding. 
Unesco in Action. L’Unesco au 
Travail—illustrated booklet 
on Sévres Seminar. Limited 
supply.     
I. B. E. Meeting 
At Geneva in June .- 
HE Eleventh International 
Conference on Public Educa- 
tion, jointly sponsored by Unesco 
and the International Bureau of 
Education (IBE) will open at 
Geneva on June 28 at the head- 
quarters of the IBE, 
PETES ¢ 4 
NBO SA A 
Léon Blum, famous French siateman, converses with educators 
who participated at the Sévres Seminar, last year. 
  
LONDON 
  


### 73767: London: the education and training of teachers

The Education and Training 
Of Teachers 
XT) DUCATION is the corn- 
IE erstone of the structure 
of nations and it is the 
teachers who must be the arch- 
itects”. - This was the feeling re- 
cently expressed by Dr. Tchoung 
Tao-Tsan, Inspector-General of 
the Chinese Ministry of Educa- 
tion. . ’ 
Unesco concurs closely with 
this theme and is devoting much 
energy to helping train teachers 
who have so important a role in 
the building of the peace. This 
summer Unesco will cail together 
a group of educators from more 
than forty countries to a six week 
Seminar to compare and discuss 
the preparation of teachers for 
elementary and secondary schools. 
Scheduled to last from July 15 
through August- 25, the Seminar 
will be held in Engiand, probably 
at Ashbridge Park within 30 miles 
of London. It is significant that 
- Unesco has chosen the United 
Kingdom as the site for the study 
center. Since the adoption of the 
Education Act of 1944, important 
efforts have been made in Eng- 
land to improve and expand the 
education and training of ins- 
tructors .known as the Emergency 
Training Programme. 
Special courses, begun since the 
end of the war, have already 
shown excellent results; and the 
status of primary and secondary 
school teachers has been measur- 
ably raised. 
For the Unesco Seminar in Eng- 
land this summer a broad course 
of study has been prepared. More 
than sixty educators “broadly” 
specialized in the education and 
training of teachers and represent- 
ing educational systems and cul- 
tural traditions from many parts 
of the world, will be able to work 
together in study groups from 12 
to 15 members, and to make com- 
parative analyses of methods and 
materials. It is expected that 
these study groups will work in- 
tensively, ordinarily meeting for 
several hours each day throughout 
the six-weeks Seminar period. 
General meetings will be held at 
intervals. These will be devoted 
to matters of interest to all parti- 
cipants, relating both to the sub- 
ject and the conduct of the Se- 
minar. They will also provide 
opportunities for hearing of spe- 
cial lectures. A series of film pro- 
jections will also be included. 
Emphagis in study and discus- 
sion will placed especially on 
the following suggested themes: 
1) Educating teachers to under- 
stand child growth and develop- 
ment and the influence of combin- 
ed biological, psychological and 
social forces on children, 
2) Educating teacherg for social 
understanding, that is, under- 
standing the social situation pre- 
sented by the classroom, the, 
school, the community, the nation 
and the world. ‘ 
Education for social understand- 
ing may be regarded as a special 
case of education for the develop- 
ment of co-operative and sympa- 
thetic intergroup relations. For 
the \social attitudes developed in 
the formative years derive from 
the social experience of the infant, 
the child and the adolescent. If 
the teacher and the school are to 
play an adequate role in the 
fostering of tolerance and under- 
standing between individuals, 
groups, communities and cultural 
groups, the role of both the 
teacher and the school in relation 
to the life of the community will 
provide an object lesson of” pri- 
mary importance. ‘ 
3) Preparing teachers for their 
role as potential contributors to 
better understanding. A study 
group on this topic might evaluate 
the effect which curricula, instruc~ 
tional methods, textbooks and 
other teaching materials have on 
this aspect of education and train- 
ing of teachers. 
In preparation for the Seminar, 
participants have been requested 
to prepare in advance a succinct 
statement on the education and 
training of teachers in their res- 
pective countries. These are de- 
signed to help those from other 
lands to obtain a reliable general 
uderstanding of the most impor- 
tant aspects of the situation in 
the various nations represented at 
the Seminar. 
Unesco hag outlined the major 
points which are to be included in 
each resume, although partici- 
pants in the Seminar will be free 
to adapt them to the particular 
needs of their country. The out- 
line will cover information on the 
general character of the school 
system, on the jnstitutiong and re- 
quirements for admission of 
teachers in different types of 
schools, on problems specifically 
related to education for better 
international understanding and 
the factors <€avourably or un- 
favourably affecting prospects of 
improving teacher training and 
" education. 
The Director of the London Se- 
minar will be Dr. Karl W. Bigelow, 
Professor of Education at Teach- 
ers’ College, Columbia University. 
Dr. Bigelow is the author of sev- 
eral volumes on the education of 
teachers, and in 1947 completed a 
tour of teacher training institu- 
tions in Europe. The experience 
he gained at last year’s Seminar 
at Sevres will undoubtedly serve 
as an important guide in conduct- 
ing the London Seminar this sum- 
mer. .

## [Page 6](073741engo.pdf#page=6) 3

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER Volume 1.—No. 4 
 


### 73768: The Story of science cooperation offices

The Story of the Field 
Science Co-operation Offices 
QOIENCES and technology are 
now playing and will increas- 
ingly play so intimate a part in 
all human activities that new 
means whereby science can effec- 
tivily transcend national and lo-. 
cal limitations are urgently ne- 
cessary. 
Science the 17th century, when 
the first academies appointed for- 
eign secretaries to take charge of 
correspondence with observers in 
other countries there has grown 
up spontaneously. organized by 
scientists, multi-national bug spe- 
cialized international seientific 
un'ons. These are now federated 
in the International Council of 
Scientific Unions (1.C.8.U.) with 
shich Unesco has a formal agree- 
ment and represent the most 
authoritative international group- 
ings of the scientists in the ma- 
jority of the fields of pure 
science. 
During the last war, when these 
spontaneous international agen- 
cies were forced to suspend their 
activities, some of the United Na- 
tions set up in one another's capi- 
tals “Science Co-operation Offi- 
ces”. The crucial importance of 
scientific knowledge to the con- 
duct of the war made it necessary 
to ensure that the democratic 
countries pooled 
ment; ‘assists with problems of 
scientific documentation (ab- 
stracts, microfilms, reprints, etc.); 
arranges the exchange of scien- 
tific manuscripts, articles and re- 
views for publication; and studies 
the possibilities of creating new 
international scientific laborato- 
ries and observatories. Among 
these might be institutes of astro- 
nomy, nutritional science, meteo- 
rology, applied mathematics, tro- 
pical life and resources (Amazon 
Basin), health (specific diseases 
such as TB and cancer), tropi- 
cal diseases field research sta- 
tions, oceanography and fisheries, 
ete., etc. 
The aim of Unesco is to locate 
the field offices in the most im- 
portant intellectual and techno- 
logical centre of the largest of the 
countries in the chosen region. 
The scientists and. technologists 
coming from headquarters are 
men of wide sympathies, able to 
take a considerable measure of 
initiative under what may be dif- 
ficult or isolated conditions and 
capable of understanding and 
assisting in the engineering, agri- 
cultural and medical problems of 
non-industrialized areas. They 
constitute the nucleus of the 
demic, unpublished data from the 
U.S.A. on copreant bodies in en- 
geric infections (infections from 
fecal matter) for Egyptian bacte- 
riologists. This aided the great 
effory made by the World Health 
Organization during the crisis. 
The Middle East office has also 
provided information on current 
work on genetics, on the organiza- 
tion of scientific research in dif- 
ferent countries, special informa- 
tion on certain lesser-known 
scientific publications, arrange- 
ments for Egyptian optical tech- 
nicians to gain experience in 
Swiss firms and the exchange of 
information on bilharziasis and 
schistosomiasis (diseases caused 
by the most dangerous parasites 
in the human blood, especially 
common in Egypt and other parts 
of Africa) with the Latin Amer- 
ican Field Science office and with 
WHO. } 
It is interesting to note how the 
Middle East office has been able 
to make available information on 
other aspects of Unesco’s work. 
One such example is Unesco’s 
Book Exchange Center. Scientific 
men in the middle eastern coun- 
tries are showing live interest in 
the Book Coupon Scheme and are 
anxious to participate in it. 
their informa. 
tion. 
In contrast to 
the scientific 
R10....CAIRO.. NANKING... DELHI... 
  
congresses and 
unions, the wartime science co- 
operation offices .were not con- 
fined to any one particular 
science. Much attention was given 
to the applied sciences. But they 
were bilateral and restricted as to 
mational scope. * 
It has often been said that 
-what was needed was a system 
which would combine the desir- 
able parts of these two principle 
methods of international scienti- 
fic co-operation. Unesco, in its 
scientific function, was the germ 
of such a system By its formal 
agreement with the I.CS.U, it :s 
substantially aiding the con- 
gresses and unions; by its chain 
of Field Scienze Co-operation Ot- 
fices it is attenpt'ng to fulfil the 
other function. 
In 1946, the Preparatory Com- 
mission creat:ng Unesco proposed 
the setting up of a system of field 
science co-operation offices to 
maintain more effective contact 
between the scientists and techno- 
Jog sts in thosz parts of the world 
remote from the main centres of 
research and development and 
their colleagues at tncse centres. 
This proposal was later endorsed 
and authorized by both the First- 
and Second Sess.ons of Unesco’s 
General Conference, 
Field Science Co-operat'on Of- 
tices were opened in Latin Amer- 
ica (Rio de Janeiro), the Middle 
East (Cairo) and East Asia 
(Nanking) during 1947. A fourth 
off ce in South Asia (India) was 
officially established on April 15 
at Delhi University. 
Why it may be asked, is the 
Unesco Field Science Co-opera- 
tion Office necessary? 
A number of science co-opera- 
tion offices existed during the 
lasy war in Washington, London, 
Moscow. Most of these were con- 
cerned with exchanges of inform- 
ation concerning the military 
app’ication of science. 
There was, however, one such 
office which dealt with both war 
science and scientific matters con- 
cerning agriculiure, industry, ap- 
plied science and pure sciences for 
reconstruction. This was the Bri- 
tish Scientific Office in China 
Pield Team and they are associat- 
.ing with themselves whole or 
part-time groups drawn from lo- 
cal scientific circles who are fami- 
liar with the cultural traditions 
of the region, Local scientists are 
thus playing an important part 
in the mach nery of scientific 
liaison. 
The Latin American Office 
From the bzz.nning of "its act- 
wvities, the Latin American Office 
in Rio was entrusted with the 
onerous ‘task of exploring the 
ground for the establishment of 
an International Institute of the 
Hylean Amazon. 
Mr. E.J.H. Corner, tropical bo- 
tanist from the United Kingdom, 
was named Principal Field Scien- 
tific Officer and Dr. B. Malamos, 
Greek paras 'tolog st, Field Scien-. 
tific Officer. 
Travelling thousands of miles 
in Brazil and elsewhere in South 
America, the members of the La- 
tin American office> were able to 
lay the extensive groundwork for 
the Hylean Amazon Commission 
which met at Belém do Para, 
Brazil, in August 1947. 
During 1948 the work of the 
P.S.C.0O. will continue to be close- 
ly geared to the Hylean Amazon 
project. The Conference which 
opened at Iquitos on April 30 to 
found the Hylean Amazon Insti- 
tute” will have benefited enorm- 
ously from the experience and the 
inspiration of the Unesco F.S.C.O. 
in South America. - 
Middle East Office 
The Middle East Office has de- 
veloped vigorously. It began ope- 
rations in July 1947 with the 
arrival of Dr. L. Thuriaux, agri- 
cultural chemist of Belgium, as 
head of the office and Mr, K. 
Borch, mathematician of Norway, 
Perhaps, one the most specta- 
cularly successful actions of the 
office (though only typical ot 
what scientific liaison should do) 
was the speed in obtaining, at the 
time of the recent cholera epi- 
8 
In addition, collections of cata- 
logues of scientific books and 
instruments are being built up in 
the office and have been avail- 
able for consultation by the} 
scientists of the region. 
~ East Asia Office 
It had been expected that the 
existing currency inflation and 
housing in China wou'd make the 
opening of the Far East Office 
extremely difficult, and the ex- 
pectation proved true. Neverthe- 
less, Mr. Smid (a Civil Engineer 
from Czechoslovakia) was able to 
begin operation immediately after 
his arrival last November, owing 
to the ass’stance given him by 
Chinese scientists and Govern- 
ment officials. 
Since U.N.R.R.A. came to an 
end in China, the East Asia F.S. 
C.0. has taken over the respon- 
sibility of ensuring that engineer- 
ing equipment to the value of 
about ‘two million dollars reaches 
the various colleges and universi- 
ties for which it had been bought 
by UN.R.R.A 
Requests for literature and 
aparatus are beginning to come 
in and are being studied in con- 
junction with Unesco’s Recons- 
truction specialists. The task of 
the Asia F.S.C.O. was greatly aid- 
ed by the work which had been 
done during the war by the Sino- 
British Science Co-operation Of- 
fice. 
Conclusion 
In general, therefore, it may be 
said that the Field Science Co- 
operation Offices are developing 
vigorously but along somewhat 
diverse lines, as would be expect- 
ed from the very different condi- 
tions of the parts of the world in 
which they are located. The F.S. 
C.O. serve as an important link 
in providing the information re- 
quired by the laboratories and re- 
search workers all over the world 
and in keeping them appraised of 
the latest discoveries of thelr 
colleagues in other countries, 
(Chungking). From the work of 
this office and other similar acti 
vities arose the realization of the 
intense value of a chain of such 
offices in peace-time. 
In establishing its Field Science 
Co-operation Offices, Unesco 
seeks to establish personal con- 
tacts with Government science 
departements as well as scientific 
societies, university faculties, re- 
search institutions and individual 
scientists and technologists. The 
F.SC.O. also acts as a clearing 
house and information centre for 
the supply and distribution of 
scientific literature and where   possible essential scientific equip- 
CALENDAR OF CONFERENCES CONVENED 
BY UNESCO 
DATE CONFERENCE PLACE 
6- 7 May Meeting of International Student Organizations. Paris 
11-15 — Meeting of Experts: Art in General Education Project. ” 
13 — Expert Committee on International Voluntary Work Camps. ad 
18-22 — Meeting of Experts: Translation of Great Books, ” 
T-9% June Meeting of Experts for Examination of a Manuscript of 
Essays on Human Rights. t 
9-11 — Meeting of Experts: Constitution of an International Council 
of Professional Archivists. = 
14-19 — Meeting of Experts: School Broadcasting, » 
268 — 4th meeting of the joint Unesco-IBE Commission. Geneva 
28- 2 July First Congress of the International Theatre Institute. Prague 
28-3 — 11th International Conference on Public Education Unesco-IBE. Geneva 
28-3 — Meeting of Experts on Agressive Nationalism. Paris 
® Dates tentative.   


### 73769: Specialists urge coordination of scientific abstracting services

Specialists Urge Co-ordination 
of Scientific Abstracting Services 
QOIENTISTS depend to a very 
large extent on short summa- 
ries of scientific articles, called 
abstracts, to decide what to read 
of the ever-increasing flood of 
scientific publications. These ab- 
stracts are generally printed in 
monthly or quarterly publications. 
Some abstracts, called indicative 
abstracts, give merely enough in- 
formation about the original arti- 
cle to enable the scientists to 
decide whether he should read or 
not. Other abstracts, known as 
intormative abstracts, summarize 
the principal arguments and give 
the principal data of the original 
article. 
Unesco called together a com- 
mittee of nine experts to advise 
it on lines of action to improve 
and develop abstracting services 
for the natural sciences, bot pure 
and applied. The Committee met 
in Unesco House, Paris, on 7, 8 
and 9 April 1948, 
The Unesco Secretariat put be- 
fore the Expert Committee a work- 
ing paper which referred to a 
survey made at the Science Mu- 
seum Library, Loudor, in the 
1930’s. This survey indicated that 
abou: one third of the scientitic 
articles were abstracted on the 
average of three times, and the 
rest not at all 
While not denying these Inigu-. 
res, seyeral experts strengly dis- 
puted the implied conclusion that 
two thirds of scientifically useful 
information is not abstracted. 
They claimed that very little of 
value 1s missed by the abstracting 
services. The discrepancy between 
this claim and the figures they 
explained as due to the fact that 
many scientists publish their find- 
ings in several papers to ensure 
that they are not overlooked by 
any scientist to whom they might 
be of value. 
Many papers contain no nw 
information, being merely written 
to review recent work or to present 
already published results to spe- 
cial audiences. Such papers, al- 
though they may be useful, should 
not be abstracted, the experts con- 
tended. 
The working paper also noted 
that many absiracting services 
cover the same ground and are 
merely repeating each other's 
work. This was admitted by the 
experts, but they contended that 
each broad subject field should 
reference to a paper that interests 
him, probably through an ab- 
stracting periodical, he is still fac- 
ed with the need of getting a copy 
of the paper. In this connection, 
the Committee recommended that 
national information centers 
should be established in each 
cauntry, which would inform the 
scientist where he may borrow the 
periodical in question, or get a 
photocopy or microfilm copy of it. 
The Committee decided thar it 
is very important, for the progress 
of science, that an International 
Conference on Scientific Abstract 
ing should be held. The principal 
subject on which the Committee 
hoped the Conference would take 
action was the development and 
consolidation of cooperation be- 
tween abstracting services, to en- 
sure that the services cover each 
subject field more completely, that 
subject fields now inadequatel 
covered should receive proper at- 
tention, and that abstracts written 
in each of the major languages 
should be available for all pure 
and applied scientists. The de- 
velopment of closer cooperation 
may also be expected to lead to 
more economical abstracting ser- 
vices and more prompt publica- 
tion. 
Another matter on which the 
proposed Conference may take 
action is the standardization of 
the terminology and abbrevations 
used in abstracts, and the layout 
of abstracts. The conference will 
provide a valuable opportunity for 
abstracting services to exchange 
information about the tricks of 
their trade, including their me- 
thods of preparing abstracts and 
the economic aspects of abstract- 
ing. Methods of classifying and 
indexing abstracts, and the pro- 
blems that arise from the variety 
of languages in which scientific 
papers are written will also be 
discussed. 
The Expert Committee left the 
question of the time and place of 
the International Conference on 
Scientific Abstracting to the Unes- 
co Secretariat to decide. The Com- 
mittee recommended that Unesco 
National Commissions should be 
asked to ensure a good represent- 
ation from the abstracting services 
in their countries and from work- 
ing scientists who are interested 
in the question as consumers. 
J.B. REID. 
pe covered by an indicative ab- 
stracting service and also by se- 
veral informative abstracting ser- 
vices, each covering a small por- 
tion of the field from different 
points of view. 
The Committee made it clear 
that there is no adequate survey 
of the abstracting sliuation as it 
is today, and it was glad to learn 
"that the International Federation 
for Documentation has commenc- 
ed to carry out a ‘survey for 
Unesco. 
A valuable interchange of ideas 
took place on methods of prepar- 
ing abstracts. Most informative 
abstracting services prefer to get 
working scientists to prepare their 
abstracts for them as a part-time 
occupation. By this method, the 
abstracting services get the bene- 
fit of the expert knowledge of a 
scienlist in lhe field dealt with 
in the article, and the scientist 
benefits by reading the latest 
scientific papers. 
Some services—usually indieat- 
ive services—prefer, on grounds of 
speed of production and uni- 
formity of style, to employ full- 
time abstractors. On the other 
hand, some services use abstracts 
written by the author of the ori- 
ginal paper on the ground that 
he knows best what he meant to 


### 73743: Dr. Beeby arrives to take up post

Dr. BEEBY ARRIVES 
T0 TAKE UP POST 
(Continued from Page 1) 
to the University” are the most 
outstanding. He has also con- 
tributed many articles to psycho- 
logical and educational reviews. 
In announcing the appoint. 
men} of Dr. Beeby last February, 
Dr, E, Ronald Walker, Chairman 
of Unesco’s Executive Board, 
observed that it “marks Unesco’s 
ability to attract outstanding 
people to the Secretariat”. 
  say, and his abstract can be in 
the hands of the editor of the 
abstracting service as soon as his 
paper, if not sooner. 
It is essential that each ab- 
stract should be classified in some 
way if the scientist or librarian 
Is to find the information he fis 
looking for without undue search- 
ing. There are several widely used 
svstems of library classification. 
~The Committee recommended that 
Unesco should initiate a research 
project on science classification, 
using the methods of operational 
research ’ 
After the scientist has found a 
  
  
Speaking at a farewell ceremo- 
ny in honour of Dr. Beeby's de- 
parture, the Prime Minister of 
New Zealand, Mr. Peter Fraser, 
stressed the importance of the 
Director of Education’s new post 
with Unesco. “Nobody has claim. 
ed that education will stop war”, 
the Prime Minister declared, “but 
without education millions of 
people may fall victims to dicta- 
tors or those who mislead people 
with prejudices of all kinds”.  

## [Page 7](073741engo.pdf#page=7) 3

### IGNORE

Volume 1.—No. 4 UNESCO COURIER 
1 


### 73771: Use of mass media poses serious problem in fundamental education areas

“Use of Mass Media Poses Serious Problem 
In Fundamental Education Areas - 
ONE of the typical problems 
met in the attempt to adapt 
the media of mass communica- 
tion for purposes of Fundamental 
Education occurred during the 
American campaign in Burma. 
The Stillwell Road had been com- 
pleted in the face of almost in- 
credible obstacles, and the only 
serious danger that remained was 
the prevalence of malarial mos- 
quitoes. Tp instruct the Burmese 
in the elementary precautions to 
be taken against the disease, the 
Americans made up some film 
slides greatly magnifying the size 
of the mosquito so as to illustrate 
clearly the means by which the 
deadly germ was carried. To their 
dismay, at the first showing of 
the film, the audience burst into 
laughter. One of the Americans 
asked the Burmese lad seated 
next to him the cause of the 
merriment, 
“Tn America”, he said, “mavhe 
you have great big mosquitoes 
like elephants and they must be 
dangerous, But here we have 
teeny bitsy ones which only give 
you a little itch.” 
Experiences of this sort are only 
too well known to all educators 
who have ever worked with any 
of the mass media among popula- 
tions less familiar with the con- 
ventions of these media than the 
adult urban audiences for whom 
they were developed. 
It has been suggested, theve- 
fore, that viewing panels be estab-- 
lished to sort out the most suit- 
able films and filmstrips and that 
these should be put to the test 
by experts in P.lot and Associated 
Projects. 
An alternative plan would be to 
send one or more visual educa- 
tion experts with a number of 
selected audio-visual aids on a 
tour of the world’s most critical 
deficiency arcas and to use the 
results of their study as a basis 
‘for the production of Unesco's 
own sample materials 
The expense of some of these 
proposed experiments and studies 
would, quite probably, be bevond 
Unesco’s scope. It has been 
suggested that means of finanec- 
mg, through national sources, a 
series of research projects on the 
practical use of visual aids for 
Fundamental Education be .con- 
sidered, 
The need of finding an econo- 
mic and technological solution of 
this problem before any discus- 
sion of pedagogy can be attempt- 
ed has become most dramatically 
ohvioys during Unesco’s first acti- 
vities in fundamental education 
areas, 
Films and Audio-visual Aids 
It may be useful at this point 
to examine some of the typical 
problems which have faced a 
Unesco Consultant. in a Funda- 
mental Education Pilot Project. 
Here is what Mr. Hubbard, Con- 
sultant to the Pilot Project in 
China, recently wrote in a letter 
to Unesco: 
“...This brings me to what we in 
~ China feel to be a most important 
need. In the absence of electric 
current in all rural areas (except 
in one or two restricted areas in 
the Mass Education Movement 
field in Szechwan), there is a cry- 
ing need for some means of gene- 
rating light. 
“I have tried acetylene (appa- 
ratus bulky and difficult to adjust 
to projectors; pressure gas lamps 
(the whole projector has to be re- 
built and extra condensers insert- 
ed in front of light); and hand 
generators (expensive, heavy, re- 
quire special bulb arrangement in 
projector). 
“I feel that Unesco could render 
a very great service for all back- 
ward areas throughout the world 
by persuading some commercial 
firm to solve this problem in an 
efficien; and yet economical way. 
“My own solution would be the 
use of a first class bicycle head- 
light, generated by friction on the 
revolving wheel (or by hand), 
taking the bulb out of the head- 
light when showing filmstrips and 
putting it into the projector, the 
socket of which is titted with an 
adapter to bring the bulb up to 
the right position for the light 
centre. The bicycle is then se’ on 
its stand and some one asked to 
peddle it at the right speed, thus 
lighting the projector. The main   
- proved Seeds, 
  
—
 
  
    
          
  
Sketch of “Box Lantern” devised 
by Unesco’s consultant to Piiot 
Project in China, showing wooden 
collapsible frame (above) and 
black cloth cover and paper pijc- 
Animal Stocks, Children’s Games | 
in Other Lands, How Other Na- 
tions Dress, Forms of Greeting 
Around the World. etc.. etc. 
2) We also need to have fiim- 
strips showing Fundamental Edy- 
cation projects in action for the 
benefit of other paris of China. 
for other nations and Unesco. n 
“I am alse work.ng on a sim- 
pier, but quite effective form of 
visual aid. which I have used suc- 
cessfully in the past. It might be 
called a “Box Lantern”. It is a 
collapsible frame of bamboo or 
wood, about 2 x 1 x 2 1/2 feet, 
with a black cloth on all sides but 
the front, with a lamp or candle 
in the centre, lighting up the pic 
tures shown at the front, These 
pictures of texts are on paper 
sheets pasted together and mount- 
ed on scrolls in the lantern. The 
l.ght is in the interior of the box 
and shows through the paper. 
The whole equipment may be 
collapsed and carried in a roll on 
a bicycle, as it does not weigh 
more than 3 lbs. 
“The advantages are 1) solu- 
tion of the rural light problem 
and 2) low cost. As used by me 
formerly, there would not pe more 
than five or six pictures to a 
scroll, but these would be a unit, 
all calculated to drive home a 
single point. ...In rural districts, 
even the filmstrip is often too ex- 
pensive or impractical for com- 
mon use among large numbers of 
teachers... So far as I know, this 
is nowhere in use at present. The 
main cost wil be in making the 
pictures.” 
ture at front (below). 
question here will be a technical 
one of how much wattage can be] 
thus generated, and the proper 
bulb for if... 
“To sum up: we want to make 
filmstrips on the spot, we could 
use a projector for demonstration 
purposes where there is electri- 
city, but we need most tc solve 
the problems of rural areas. I in- 
tend io make inquiries in Shang- 
hai and will keep vou informed 
whether there is a possibility of 
solving it there. Meanwhile can 
you enlist technical help?”. . . 
“I hope to get started before 
long on two kinds of filmstrips: 
1) the most urgent is on single 
projects for use in Fundametital 
Education, such as—Vaccination, 
Trachoma, Health Habits, How   Disease is Spread, Various Im- 
Improved Farm 


### 73757: Philosopher calls for new humanism

  
pe 
| Philosopher Calls 
For New Humanism 
ODERN civilization suffers 
from an obvious disequili- 
brium. The enormous scientific 
and technical progress which 
began in the 17th century and 
continued theough the Industrial 
Revolution of the 19th century to 
  
Supplies to War- 
Hit Countries 
Film projectors, chemical 
products and epidiascopes are 
among the latest allocations 
al technical equipment being 
shipped by Unesco to -institu- 
tions in eight war damaged 
rounlries, i 
These supplies, the “bulk of 
. which was bought with Unes- 
co funds in the United Stales, 
are intended 10 help revive 
educational and scientific cen- 
tres in regions which suffered 
most heavily during the last 
war. Their distribulion is part 
of the Unesco Reconstruction 
.programme (0 rej '¥ batile— 
and bomb-damages and to in 
crease communication be 
tween the peoples of the world. 
The equipment will go to 
the following countries: China 
(21 SJ), Poland (18 <¢), Greece 
(10 %), Czechoslovakia (9 %), 
Philippines (9 9), Italy (8 SJ, 
Hungary (8 9 J}, Austria (7 So). 
The total value of the goods 
is nearly $100,000 which was 
drawn jrom a fund of $130,000 
in the 1947 Unesco budget for 
scientific and educational re- 
construction work. Orders are 
now beiry placed for the re- 
mainder oj the allocation, 
dA 
Some of the scientific and technical equipment Jurchased by Unesco 
for donation fo war damaged nations in Europe and Asia. 


### 73744: Fundamental education battle: panel of experts maps strategy

  
Panel of Experts Maps Strategy 
(Continued from page 1.) 
squalid conditions. These condi- 
tions, Dr. Welch explained, con- 
trasted with those in other re- 
gions of Africa, such as the Congo 
and the Copper Belt of Northern 
Rhodesia, where labour was im- 
ported under government super- 
vision, and where the authorities 
provided for the education and 
health of the workers. 
After a discussion of Unesco’s 
Pilot Projects in Haiti, Nyasaland 
and China, it was announced that 
the Peruvian Government had 
confirmed its proposal to establish 
a Pilot Project in the Cuzco area 
with the technical collaboration 
of Unesco. The Project will take 
advantage of the successful ex- 
perimental work carried out dur- 
ing the war by Mr. Truman Bai- 
ley, an American artist, with the 
Cuzco population. 
Dr. Rex, the U.S. member of 
the Panel, revealed how Mr. Bai- 
ley had set up a small workshop 
ag part of an educational develop- 
ment scheme. By encouraging the 
local inhabitants to come to his 
workshop and try their hand at 
using clay, wood, fibers and other 
inexpensive Peruvian raw mate- 
rials, Mr. Bailey was able to de- 
velop the local skills and talents 
of the people for the production of 
useful, artistic objects of sales 
value. This combination of artistic, 
practical and commercial skill is 
evidence that profitable enter- 
prises can be developed without 
destroying native talent. 
Gandhi 
and the “Work Schools” 
Dr. Zakir Husain, describing the 
work done in India, gave details 
of the experiment now being 
carried out in the Champaran 
area of Behar. ‘Work schools” 
have been set up which, by selling 
the produce of their looms and 
workshops, are able to {finance 
themselves in part. For many 
years, he said, Mahatma Gandhi 
had urged the opening of “work 
schools” despite opposition from 
university circles and business 
groups. The latter felt the schools 
to be in competition with them, 
while the universities opposed 
their departure from the academic 
studies. 
The system of the “work school” 
provides however, ag Gandhi saw, 
a way of bringing education into 
direct touch with everyday life 
and at the same time of helping 
it to support itself financially. 
The problem of making Funda- 
mental Education self-supporting 
was further discussed by members 
of the Panel who recognized the 
serious difficulties that existed. 
M. Colombain, of Belgium, describ- 
ed the contribution of .the Co- 
operative movement to Funda- 
mental Education, stressing the 
development of cocoa and coffee 
growing on a co-operative basis 
in West Africa. Be pointed out, 
however, that this method was 
not, of it8elf, a guarantee of self- 
support since success was achiev- 
ed only after a highly technical 
and gradual development, 
How popular prejudices retard 
the work of Fundamental Edu- 
cators was explained by several 
Panel members. M. Deschamps, of 
France, cited an example in 
French Somaliland where the in- 
habitants will not permit girls to 
go to school. Dr. Rex stressed the 
necessity of careful sociological 
surveys prior to Fundamental 
Educalion work in any area. He 
showed how in Costa Rica, for 
example, a health campaign had 
to be undertaken in one region to 
teach children that oranges were 
good to eat and provided by na- 
ture not merely for ball games. 
Elsewhere, field workers had been 
required to teach the inhabitants 
that eggs were good food. 
The Panel of experts also dis- 
cussed various other problems of 
Fundamental Education, including 
the use of films and filmstrips 
and other masg media (See article 
on this subject in adjoining co- 
lumns) and the need for text 
books and teaching materials. 
The meeting at Uhesco House, 
which ended on May 1, is only 
the first of a series which the 
Organization plans tc hold this 
year and in the future. 
As Unesco's programme de- 
velops the Clearing House for In- 
formation on Fundamental Edu- 
cation will assume increasing im- 
portance not only for the Panel 
of experts but for field workers 
everywhere. Some of the informa- 
tion will come from Unesco’s Pilot 
Projects; the rest will come from 
organizations working on *“Asso- 
ciated Projects” that is, from the 
many enterprises throughout the 
world contributing to the Funda- 
mental Education movement. 
1t is one of Unesco’s important 
jobs to keep workers in. one part 
of the globe in touch with the 
latest developments in other 
areas and to furnish them with 
the most advanced technical ad- 
vice and information. The Clear- 
ing House thus serves as a collat- 
ing centre and a “conveyer belt” 
providing a two-way flow of infor-   mation all around the world. 
the latest new advances, seems 10 
have caused an eclipse of the 
spirit. The Renaissance broke 
with the old ideals of balance of 
mediaeval society and with the 
religious axis on which that, so- 
ciety had turned. The world ex- 
panded, human personality dis- 
covered a new awareness of itself 
and new and unsuspected fields 
of activity. Scientific progress 
gave 1t a new optimism. Techno- 
logy gave it instruments for bind- 
ing nature to its service and for 
By 
Dr.Pedro Bosch-Gimpera, 
 
recently appointed head of the 
Philosophy and Humaniiies - 
Section.   
 
satisfying its new-found needs. 
Rationalist philosophy led 1t to 
believe that by its intelligence it 
could penetrate all the mysteries 
of the world. 
The New Sociely 
From the political revolutions 
a new form of government emerg- 
ed, under which man felt himself 
free and in which the State was 
the instrument of his happiness; 
the old oppressions were shatter- 
ed. ‘The old ideals of humanistic 
education were no longer ade- 
quate, and it fell to science 10 
set the new standards. 
But progress produced new con- 
trasts and new conflicts; there 
arose the problems of the poverty- 
stricken masses, neglected by 
those who profited from progress; 
and so new aristocracies came 
into being which, if more open 
than their predecessors, Were no 
less privileged. The State could no 
longer limit itself to the mere 
function of guardian of the law, 
and it became an octopus-like 
monster, invading every sphere.’ 
Conflicts between modern nations 
became a struggle for power, more 
violent than ever, and warring 
imperialisms led up to the recent 
catastrophies, extending over the 
whole world and aggravated by 
racial doctrines. The sense of 
human dignity was foundering; 
man became an insignificant cog, 
the tool of monstrous conceptions. 
Scientific progress, even when it 
was serving to give victory to the 
peoples who were fighting for 
humaner and more "democratic 
ideals, discovered dangerous wea- 
pons which, had they been avail 
able to the enemy, would have 
brought about the final ann‘hi- 
lation. 
Civilization in Danger 
With the immediate danger re- 
moved, we find ourselves faced by 
new and terrifying enigmas. New 
wars must indeed be avoided; but 
peace must also be organized and 
a truly universal solidarity and 
co-operation created: This meats 
that the new generations must be 
brought up .in a true humanism,’ 
wider than the former conception 
which was often no more than 
an aesthetic and classic ideal 
Technology and science, States 
and international organizations, 
must be placed truly at the ser- 
vice of mankind. New paths are 
therefore opened up for philo- 
sophers and huménists, who must 
prepare to formulate new ideals 
for the spirit and to institute a 
universal education to enable all 
to share in the benefits of civi- 
lization, bring the cultures of the 
east and the west into contact, 
and raise to their own level back- 
ward peoples who still occupy 
large areas of the world’s surface. 
No single type of civilization must 
dominate, nor must there be pri- 
vileged master races. 
The Task of the 
Philosopher 
To promote this prodigious task, 
which may be long and difficult 
but which cannot fail to have 
lasting effects and. which js in- 
spired by a generous spirit, Unesco 
was created. Through it we strive 
for a reconstruction of the spiri- 
tual bases of humanity and a new 
balance of its forces; we seek new 
ideals capable of commanding the 
support of all men; we seek to 
bring all peoples together in one 
great community without destroy- 
ing their individuality or stifling 
their initiative by way of free and 
sincere co-operation.

## [Page 8](073741engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
   
        


### 73772: UNESCO outlines research needs in communication techniques

Unesco Outlines 
Research Needs | 
Cand Oo pofusal uf Lhe Panamn 
Government tu IED the Dhiteds 
: . COBLRT ER Cont fnur uRifg defense. 
. J SIE outgids the Canal Pane 
3 2 Thr cpsmmi ties rwcompendnd 
HoAriper pentient In President 
CO Truman's request far Canal Zone © 
Fiscal posr ssart oo 
THE announcement that the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 
with the aid of a grant from the Carnegie Foundation, is about to undertake 
a large scale programme of research into techniques of assembling, organizing 
and communicating knowledge has been received with interest by Unesco. i 
In a memorandum recently forwarded to M.LT. Unesco has suggested that. 
in organizing their research 
priorities M. I. T. should re- 
late their work to Unesco’s pro- 
gramme in the hope that the two 
programmes may be mutually 
supporting. . 
Unesco recognizes two priority 
areas for its work—the war-de- 
vastated countries, with their vast 
reconstruction problems, and the 
countries and areas, in which 
educational, scientific and cultu- 
ral activity is underdeveloped and 
which need active aid and advice 
to bring their services and institu- 
tions on the level with those in 
more fully developed regions. 
The Unesco memorandum to 
MIT. outlines in detail the 
research needs in the special 
fields of facsimile reproduction, 
newspaper printing, colour re- 
‘production on film, educational 
film equipment, microfilm repro- 
duction and mechanical selection. 
It points out that “the proposed 
M.IT. vesearch programme, while 
serving to raise the American 
standards still more, can be large 
ly- directed so as to serve. the 
special needs of the Unesco prior- 
ity areas”. 
Facs imile Reproduction 
One of the most [fascinating 
developments in recent years has 
been the work carried out in fac- 
simile reproduction. Although 
considerable research is still 
necessary it has already resulted 
in the delivery of-daily newspapers 
directly into the home through 
the radio receiver. On February 
17 of this year, the New York 
Times began the regular publica- 
tion of a facsimile edition of its 
newspaper. The facsimile paper, 
reproduced by frequency modula- 
tion is transmitted by radio every 
day and consists of four pages. 
jncluding photographs. Radio wa- 
ves, passing through special elec- 
tro-sensitive paper, produce an 
exact copy of the original page. 
The facsimile edition can be de- 
tached from the home radio re- 
ceiver. 
Experiments are now being 
carried out by newspapers in the 
United States, notably the New 
York: Times, the Miami He- 
rald, the Chicago Tribune, the 
Chicago Sun and the Clatchy 
chain in California. The Phila- 
delphia Enquirer has published 
most optimistic results in a pam- 
phlet “A Facsimile Newspaper”. 
The system is certainly a success 
in the transmission of news 
photos and has become standard- 
jzed in the US. = 
Facsimile reproduction is par- 
ficularly advantageous because of 
a 
ANE 
UVEIED Br hao 
AB ls - oo pe 
ANE 
x SEA 
geen 
its speed. To reproduce a page 
by means of facsimile normally 
takes four minutes and there is. 
no time "lag in distribution. The 
disadvantage, which might be 
overcome by research, is chiefly 
the short distance which frequen- 
cy modulation (now used in fac- 
simile radio reproduction) can 
now attain. With an increased 
scope it would be possible for an 
owner of a radio receiving set in 
Topeka, Kansas, for example, to 
receive his copy of Pravda by 
tuning to Moscow and vice versa, 
with considerable advantages to 
the free flow of information. 
There is an added disadvantage 
in that few persons now own fre- 
quency modulation receivers, but 
it may be possible tas convert fac- 
simile to standard broadcasting 
by means of a special attach- 
ment, which, it is claimed, will 
cost only $100 by 1950. 
Although primarily a radio 
problem, it should be noted that 
30 % of the facsimile machines 
in the U.S. are being bought by 
newspaper publishers. It is evi- 
dent that facsimile has a future, 
and not for the press alone. A 
recent announcement in the Unit- 
ed States by R.C.A. makes known 
a new device, representing a 
great improvement over present 
facsimile machines, capable of 
reproducing one million words a 
minute. 
Newspaper Printing 
“Of all current research and 
experimentation in newspaper 
printing,” the Unesco memoran- 
dum continues, “..two processes 
x 
UNESCO COURIER Volume 1.—No. 4 
   
  
    
         
  
od 
. Facsimile Edition 
  
    
    
CARTRBEAN 
See Troms) 
Just fue Bre, 
cit of Eu Gone 
tip: 
The sire ry wen amt 
AEERGE LL FO 
Inteeasrd aint 5 x 
hh dt 
      Rime] Cefvan & 
DR T0258 & 5 PR 2g 
trae the gag 
Shy ER 
LES even rnin 
IEFR 
Trestle sreneies DI UNE Sh ee 
The Bee IN Pup 
WEEASE xvt he 
7 {ERE 
TRUMAN ORDERS 
STEEL INQUIRY 
ITE PRESIINNY THOMAS IN TRE Feb 24 IAMS Presse 
Lidey Atrvited (he 
fraent, thy Colm A RPE Rdvisera and Lb re eksrteent ten mike « Cull Ynguiry tnto thw {fcrvaze In Nieuw) (ricer, oo ¢ 
Crum the Preeldentisl yacht 
Kall Koen Ryeps, 
Ter tdent asl Ss istant Prose ; 
ERSTCAMTY. BIRO Prive were 
Sh oF 103 Prestawnt haw alt 
EIA rena Shee Ener eane ta 
TROLL telepiaae 
LER EEE £4 Str gears 
*2y Bay, ERLE 3% PL Ca i © 7 SE He Lan Cirrcing: bhi 
ST
EW YOK | TUBSDAY, VRNRUARY 34, 1wd 
COMER FRE, Pen, Bt LAF) — Bajor 
commodity amd sesurity markets: 
kept wiihin nervow Buunew £9 
; mgs ant ny after the Bash 
Birikaley vias rvence, 
  
       
  
by Padi 
 
Lis Taw  
     
tid en 
SAE ma 
 
1 or ye’ : 
Stree itnee 
thy CRY Sea TRL 
CERARS QUE. Coin 
    
  
  
   
    
     
 
BOA 
Penal Zone 38 Gn pus 
UY ER 3 wh   
1283 3! 
trargmin ly gafended.” 
The pGmmitine nail 
SE
 
Panda Tor vie 
gE Joely 3 
i Vg, ®r. 3 ramen maker hay     
#: 
3   
dns f 
| TRS LE hr 
House Group Reduces 
Funds for Canal Zena x 
CRAXBINLTON FAL a8 (AVIA ed 
slrimmI ts de Ka td Ade 
CREAMSUADCLE bag bh he Panase 
Dds country Should go easy, 
he kipenprlations grovs satd, 
BAL AN LER renal As coleE 
INS CRitavinng cans ibe 
  
WI LAB RK 
comm ities approved, Y 
SIS. STRANI Re 
Co the roamstites outlined & 
watt iomkllion dolisy cemmiery 
progees tu hunor World %ar 131 
  
the Lyded 
Fhe rg 
CEfEAbYY 
i slEcky, 
ty oar ¥ Ks hot tir : 
end cad 2 
CE 
   
    
     
N. GUARD 
y RUSALEM       
  
   
   
     
  
  
    
  
   
might most usefully be investigat- x Photos show Facsimile edition of the “New York Times” emerging jx 
from radio receiver (inset and upper left). Part of a page, photo- 
graphed after transmission is also shown above. The radio set is a 
Frequency Modulation receiver which transforms radio waves onto 
a piece of electro-sensitive paper, producing an exact copy of the 
original page. Four pages, including photos, can be reproduced - 
in 15 minutes, . 
ed by MIT. and Unesco in con- 
junction, because of their obvious 
application to the problems of 
communication in reconstruction 
and deficiency areas. 
1. The new direct photo-electric 
engraver. 
2. Photo-engraving coupled with 
electromatic typewriters. 
This latter system, which is 
already producing a newspaper in 
Leesburg, Florida, is of consider- 
able interest. Both stereotyping 
equipment and type founding ma- 
chines are eliminated, with a ~on- 
sequent saving of time, space, and. 
it is claimed, 50 % in production 
costs. Lower costs might result 
in less dependence on advertizing 
revenues, with a consequent dis- 
‘posal of a barrier to the frs2 flow 
of information. This system also 
does away with plate making 
from malftrices, the latter being 
the chief problem for newspaper 
publishers in the war-devastated 
countries. 
Microfilm 
Few libraries can {ill war gaps 
or rebuild war losses without the 
aid of film. And yet, the Unesco 
memorandum states, use of micro- 
film is far less extensive than if 
might be, largely because most 
present day equipment for read- 
ing microfilm is inconvenient to 
use and possibly because micro- 
film is still tied to the cinema 
technique of using film in reels. 
Also no entirely satisfactory tech- 
niques have yet been developed 
for the rapid production of micro- 
film or photocopy editions. The 
of Unesco. 
Kleber; Paris-16e, France. 
Tower Lane. — Belfast: 
Low Countries:   
SUBSCRIPTION RATES 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly in English, 
French and Spanish by the Public Information Section 
6-month subscription: 2s.6d. or $0.50 or Fr. frs. 100. 
Please write to the Unesco agent indicated below for 
your country, or directly to Unesco House, 19 Avenue 
Argentina: Editorial Sudamericana S.A. Alsina 500, Buenos-Aires. 
Australia: H, A. Goddard Ltd, 255a, George St., Sydney. 
Canada : The Ryerson Press, 293 Queen St. West, Toronto. 
Cuba: La Casa Belga, R. de Smedt O'Reilly, Habana. 
Czechoslovakia : Librairie F. Topic. 11 Narodni, Prague, 
Denmark : Einar Murksgaard, 6 Norregade, Copenhagen, 
Great Britain: H.M. Stationery Office: London: York House, Kings- 
way (Retail Counter Service) 
orders). — Manchester 2: 39/41 King Street. — Edinburgh 2: 13a 
Castle Street, — Cardiff: 1 St. Andrew’s Crescent. — Bristol 1; 
80 Chichester Street. 
France: Editions A. Pedone, 13 Rue Soufflot, Paris, Se. 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie internationale, Athens. 
India: Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Iraq: Mackenzie and Mackenzie, Booksellers, The Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Lebanon and Syria: Librairie universelle, Av. Fouad Ier, Beirut. 
N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, 
9 Lange Voorhout, The Hague. 
Sweden: Ab. O. E, Fritzes, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. - 
Switzerland: Librairie Payot, Lausanne, 
; P.O, Box 569, London, S.E.1, (Post 
Afd., Fondsaministratie   
use of microfilm is almost entirely 
research workers and with them, 
confined to specialists and 
for the most part, is unpopular. 
Colour Reproduction 
The Arts and Letters and 
Museums programmes of Unesco 
stress the need for research into 
methods of improving existing 
techniques for the colour repro- 
duction of paintings and draw- 
ings, “so that faithful colour re- 
- productions may be made avail- 
able to the art student and gen- 
eral public at prices within their 
means.” At present in spite of 
the existence of number of first- 
class techniques, comparatively 
little high quality work is pro- 
duced except in de-luxe editions 
at high prices. Attention is also 
urged towards “improving the 
colour fidelity in films of works 
of art. 
Educational Film Equipment 
The key problem of the edyca- 
tional film today is not a peda- 
gogical but an econom'c one. 
Before any of the discussions on 
visual education techniques can 
be brought down to the level of 
Unesco’s workaday tasks in 
deficiency areas, the cost of all 
educational film services and 
supplies must first be brought 
down to a level where the less 
well endowed schools, universities, 
missions and other educational 
institutions can afford them. 
The Unesco memorandum to 
MIT. therefore suggests the pos- 
sibility of investigating the tech- 
nology of the educational film 
with a view to reducing costs of 
raw stocks, laboratory services, 
cameras, projectors, screens, 
sound recording and reproducing 
equipment. 
A closely allied problem is the 
study of film equipment to be 
used in non-electrified or insuf- 
ficiently areas. Projectors that 
may operate on coal oil or other 
easily available fuels, laboratory 
machinery to be driven by petrol 
or diesel engines, raw stock 
manufacturing equipment that 
may draw on local machinery to 
run with the cheapest and mest 
easily available power supply. 
Mechanical Selection 
At present the manually select- 
ed punched card (e.g. Key Sort) 
is the oddly selection device that 
is economically possible for small 
organizations. Automatically se- 
lected punched card equipment 
(e.g. IBM, ~~ Remington-Rand, 
Powers) hag considerable advanta- 
ges, but is prohibitively expensive 
for most organizations. A cheaper 
selector even with a considerably 
reduced rate of selection would 
have many applications., Similarly 
a cheap, and reliable form of the 
Bush Selector would be very 
useful. 
One problem of particular im- 
portance to Unesco is the stan- 
dardization of mimeographing 
apparatus so that stencils produc- 
ed in any country can readily be 
reproduced elsewhere in the 
world. At present for speed and 
economy of operations, Unesco 
constantly wishes to prepare do- 
cuments in Paris which can be 
sent in stencil to other countries. 
This cannot usually be done be- 
cause there is no standardization 
of apparatus. The nearest ap- 
proach to an answer to this pro- 
blem is the offset machine, which 
is expensive, bulky and requires 
trained technicians for mainte. 
nance and operation. Unesco nas 
suggested that research along the 
lines of developing a simple 
economical standard’ of reproduc- 
tion which would be universally 
used and unaffected by climatic 
changes, would be most valuable. 
Field Work 
In concluding its memorandum 
to the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Unesco declares its 
willingness to help in planning 
field experiments in the use and 
development of equipment: 
“Unesco representatives are- 
constantly travelling in recons- 
truction and fundamental educae 
tion areas and will gladly keep in 
touch with MIT. in connection 
with the development of the pro- 
gramme.” 
Director : H. KAPLAN. 
Reproduction of all articles authorized. 
IMPRIMERIE 
DU NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE 
21, Rue de Berri - Paris 8e