# [186704](186704eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](186704eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
United Nations : 
Educational, Scentificend + 
Cutural Organization © 
  
2009 * number 6 * ISSN 1993-8616 

## [Page 2](186704eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

rier 
  
 
Contents 
2009 -N°6 
 
~ 
© 
La
ur
en
t 
Te
st
ot
 
MAN AND NATURE: LIVING IN HARMONY 
Of the 32 billion tons of CO2 we produce globally, our natural ecosystems can 
absorb approximately 18 million tons. Without this natural sponge, 
the global ecological situation would be far more desperate. 
In the past 30 years the planet’s natural resources have diminished by 30% 
-due to over-consumption, according to the World Wildlife Fund (WWF). 
      
EDITORIAL P3 
Animal species are currently becoming 
extinct one thousand times faster than 
the natural rate. 
ne ON LAJAT: WHERE NATURE 
A | MAN AND THE BIOSPHERE: Port ' MEETS HISTORY 
. APPLYING THE CONCEPT hs 35 a “4 Lajat, in the far south of Syria, offers 
- LITERALLY ET ¥ some of the region's most impressive 
 
The concept of urban ecology is key for 
the Bliesgau, a protected area in Germany added to the global 
network of UNESCO Biosphere Reserves on 26 May. The 
Bliesgau is not the first site to include its urban elements, but 
it is the only one where population density is as high as 310 
inhabitants per square kilometre. Pd 
TIGERS AND MEN 
Black tigers, four-horned antelope, giant 
squirrels, mugger crocodiles, deer, rhesus 
macaques — this is just a sample of the 
fauna living in Nokrek, Pachmarhi and Similipal. Managers of 
these three Indian biospheres are counting on international 
support to protect the traditional rights of forest dwellers and 
at the same time preserve wildlife. P6 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
BOGEYMAN IN YOUR 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
Giam Siak Kecil — Bukit Batu, Indone- 
sian site that has just joined the World 
Network of Biosphere Reserves, will become a “living labora- 
tory” for sustainable development. Solutions for climate change 
will be devised and tested. P 8 
1] FOCUS 
) FORUM 
A Bridge to Nowhere 
scenery. With its farming traditions and archaeological ruins, 
this new biosphere reserve is an example of the interdepen- 
dence between cultural and biological diversity. P11 
WHEN WORLD HERITAGE 
SITES AND BIOSPHERE 
RESERVES MERGE 
Last May, Fraser Island, Australian World 
Heritage site since 1992, became the core part of the new 
Great Sandy Biosphere Reserve. Natural world heritage sites 
conserve ecosystems for which they have been inscribed, 
while biosphere reserves also do restoration of degraded 
environments. How will environment and tourist management 
practices change for the world's largest sand island? P13 
 
@ FUERTEVENTURA, 
) THE COMPLETE RESERVE 
Fuerteventura, one of the Canary Islands 
of ~ off south-west Spain, was recently added 
: to the list of world Biosphere Reserves. 
The decision was made in order to preserve the island's fish 
stocks and rich marine life, as well as protect their natural 
environments. P 16 
Higher Education Shaken by Change 
Exploding enrollments over the last decade are putting severe financial strains on tertiary systems. P17 
X gp In June, the Dresden Elbe Valley, Germany, was withdrawn from the List of World Heritage Sites. 
«es. The construction of the Waldschlésschen Bridge altered the cultural landscape and integrity of the site as defined 
o by thelist. P19 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
 

## [Page 3](186704eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### 186749: Editorial

© 
Jo
el
 
Bo
lz
en
iu
s 
  ” v 
a 00 «i . 
Woongarra Coast coral, Great Sandy 
Marine Park, Australia. 
he concept of biosphere reserves was 
created in 1974 within the framework 
of UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere 
(MAB) Programme. The network was 
born two years later. While the concept 
originated in the protected areas realm 
during the 1980s it increasingly encom- 
passed the idea of sustainable devel 
opment. Understanding people as inte- 
grated in the biosphere, it promoted a 
beneficial interaction between societies 
and their environment. 
Following the 1995 Second Interna- 
tional Congress on Biosphere Reserves 
in Seville, Spain, three overarching goals 
of the biosphere reserves were clearly 
defined in the Seville Strategy and the 
Statutory Framework of the World Net- 
work of Biosphere Reserves. These in- 
clude conserving both biological and 
cultural diversity, fostering innovative 
approaches to sustainable economic 
and human development and providing 
logistic support by facilitating research 
and monitoring, as well as education and 
training. 
In order to meet their goals, the bio- 
sphere reserves are divided into three 
zones: one or more core areas dedicated 
to conservation of genetic diversity of spe- 
cies and of the ecosystem; a clearly iden- 
tified buffer zone used for co-operative 
activities compatible with sound ecologi- 
cal practices; and an adaptable transition 
area that promotes the creation of part- 
nerships for sustainable development. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
  
Last year, the 3rd World Congress of 
Biosphere Reserves (Madrid, Spain) 
adopted the Madrid Action Plan for Bio- 
sphere Reserves (2008-2013) recog- 
nizing the need for developing models 
for global, national and local sustain- 
ability. This provides the framework for 
biosphere reserves to become training 
grounds where global principles of sus- 
  
The geographic, economic and sociocultural 
context of biosphere reserves demand particular 
attention, as do the innovative approaches to research 
subjects, conservation and sustainable development. 
The 22 new reserves in 17 countries which have joined 
the global network of biosphere reserves constitute 
an emblematic example of UNESCO’s work 
towards sustainable development through 
the conservation of biodiversity and cultural diversity. 
This issue of the UNESCO Courier focuses on these 
new reserves which have been called to play a role 
in the battle against the erosion of biodiversity 
and the loss of natural ecosystems, 
the impact of climate change and rapid urbanisation. 
tainable development are translated into 
locally relevant praxis, particularly when 
it comes to addressing the major global 
challenges such as loss of diversity and 
ecosystem services, climate change and 
rapid urbanisation. 
Natarajan ISHWARAN, 
Director of the Division of Ecological 
and Earth Sciences (UNESCO) 
JEJUI 
i a - 
    © 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
J
e
s
s
i
c
a
 
Wa
ke
fi
el
d 
- hI, - ud 
Waterfalls in the Jeju Biosphere Reserve, 
Republic of Korea 
  
Reaching from sea level to an altitude 
of 1950 m, this biosphere reserve cov- 
ers a large variety of different marine, 
coastal and terrestrial ecosystems. It is 
home to about 7,500 people who make 
their living from tourism, cattle-ranches 
and agriculture. 
The high biological diversity, unique 
volcanic topography and the culture of 
Jeju Island attract many tourists, thus 
sustainable tourism development is one 
of the main challenges for the site.   
SLAND 
The 21st session 
of the Intergovernmental 
Coordinating Council of the Man 
and the Biosphere Programme 
was held between the 
i 25 and 29 of May on Jeju Island, 
Republic of Korea 
The Jeju Island Biosphere Reserve is 
also at the heart of a programme called 
the “Jeju Initiative”. Financially supported 
by the Jeju Special Self-governing Pro- 
vincial Government, the initiative aims to 
enhance the capacity of governmental 
institutions, the scientific community 
and local communities in the conserva- 
tion and wise management of the bio- 
logical and cultural diversity of the island 
and coastal Biosphere Reserves in the 
Asia-Pacific Region.  

## [Page 4](186704eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### 186750: Man and the Biosphere: applying the concept literally

MAN AND 
APPLYING fe > 
THE CONCEPT 
v
e
 
- 
w 
‘ 
T
y
 
© 
De
tl
ef
 
Re
in
ha
rd
 
A
A
T
 
  
  
  LI LL nt 
Part of the central area of the Bliesgau Biosphere Reserve (Germany). 
LITERALLY 
BO 11 oN ole] [oft o) Ae MTT oT: 1 W=Yolo) (To \TAER CATA (0 4 CW 2 T-TT0 FETT o] (0) Coos To JET (CT: 
in Germany added to the global network of UNESCO Biosphere Reserves on 26 May. 
The Bliesgau is not the first site to include its urban elements, but it is the only one 
LCC TTT EL 6 CH EW ACEC TE LE ERA (RT LETT ET Cf oY Eo [TET CN (lo) [=i (= 
  
mall, but significant. That's Saar- 
land. If you discount the “city states” 
“of Hamburg, Berlin und Bremen, it's 
Germany's smallest Federal State. 
Slightly withdrawn in the south-west 
of the republic, it gives the impres- 
“sion of being a small appendage of 
the great German state. France is 
its majestic neighbour to the south, 
and a small snout noses Luxem- 
bourg in the west, but apart from 
that it's completely surrounded by 
the large state of Rhineland-Palat- 
inate. 
© 
De
tl
ef
 
Re
in
ha
rd
 
At the same time, it's one of the 
warmest corners of Germany, so 
it's not surprising, then, that people 
have settled here for thousands of 
years, leaving their traces behind 
them. The Gollenstein, a 4000-year- 
old menhir, bears witness to the 
fact that the region was occupied 
as early as the Middle Paleolithic 
age. 
Later on, the Romans led a good 
life in Saarland. Julius Caesar origi- 
nally conquered the land from the 
Celts, and it was the Romans, too, 
  
The town of Blieskastel, part of Bliesgau Biosphere Reserve. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
who introduced wine to Saarland 
- the start of a long tradition. Wine 
was cultivated in the valley of the 
River Blies right up to the first half 
of the 20th century. 
“Bliesgau” is the name of the 370 
square kilometre region bordering 
on the River Saar in the west, the 
Rhineland Palatinate in the East, 
and France to the south. Travel bro- 
chures talk enthusiastically of “Med- 
iterranean climate” “rolling hills” 
and “wide orchard meadows”. The 
shell limestone soil makes Bliesgau 
unique, and numerous species of 
orchids thrive on it. 
It is not an untouched natural idyll, 
however. Humans have shaped the 
region. The Bliesgau Biosphere Re- 
serve thus contains 111,000 peo- 
ple, divided between two towns, St. 
Ingbert and Bieskastel. The popu- 
lation density of 310 residents per 
square metre is above the Federal 
German average and also higher 
than in any other biosphere. 
With regard to nature conserva- 
tion, Bliesgau is nothing special 
compared with other biospheres. 
Measures to protect fauna and flora 
(v0)

## [Page 5](186704eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

EE 


### 186750: Man and the Biosphere: applying the concept literally

% MAN ANDTHE BIOSPHERE: APPLYING THE CONCEPT LITERALLY 
  
(vee) 
were taken long ago. Parts of the 
region are nature reserves: 43% of 
the territory corresponded to pro- 
tected land even before the site 
was added to UNESCO's World 
Network of Biosphere Reserves. 
“But urban natural conservation is 
also a project we are working on; 
add Detlev Reinhard and Holger 
Zeck, employees at the Ministry 
of the Environment. A number of 
the species recorded at Bliesgau 
actually live in the towns, such as 
the crested lark, wall lizard, greater 
mouse-eared bat, barn owl and 
common swift. These animals are 
part of the reserve. “We want to 
systematically assess how nature is 
developing in urban centres’, Rein- 
hard and Zeck say. “What is impor- 
tant to observe is how species that 
have moved to the towns change 
their habits and become dependent 
on urban infrastructure, for instance 
for food” 
How is Bliesgau 
unique? 
The urban ecology concept is key 
for this biosphere reserve. For Re- 
inhard and Zeck, “lt's the vibrant 
diversity that makes the Bliesgau 
so unique. Meadows, valleys and 
forests shaped the landscape, but, 
above all, it was the coexistence of 
man and nature, and the close in- 
tegration with urban regions that 
made this stretch of countryside so 
special’ 
“The situation here can't be com- 
pared with other biosphere re- 
serves” explains Pia Schramm of the 
Biosphere Association in Blieskas- 
tel. “Many biosphere reserves are 
very much geared to classical na- 
ture conservation and regional de- 
velopment; and rely strongly, for ex- 
ample, on the marketing of regional 
products” Schramm says. "We 
wanted, in addition, to show what 
it means to attain sustainability in 
urban systems, too”. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
© 
Bi
os
ph
éd
re
nz
we
ck
ve
rb
an
d 
Bl
ie
sg
au
 
Urban ecology 
St. Ingbert, the town in the north 
of Bliesgau with a population of 
40,000, is the model for the close 
link between town and countryside. 
“In St. Ingbertwe started to think about 
biospheres very early on; explained 
Monika Conrad, responsible for the 
environment and biosphere section of 
the Town Development Office. Their 
citizens were extremely active on the 
climate protection front, Conrad said. 
“There is a solar initiative which offers 
assistance to citizens installing solar 
equipment on their roofs.” And a solar 
cooperative, whereby citizens who do 
not have an available roof of their own 
can buy shares in the company that 
equips public buildings. This provides 
yearly income and added motivation 
to get involved in such projects. 
Another example: an area of indus- 
trial waste land in the town has been 
listed as a model trading estate in line 
with sustainable urban development. 
A block heat and power plant supplies 
the estate with heat; the biomass for it 
comes from the town’s compost plant, 
as well as ligneous lopping from Blies- 
gau. This supplies heat to resident 
firms, as well as the adjacent commu- 
nity building and the town hall. 
In addition, the public transportation 
bus system has been greatly expand- 
ed, to make it possible for schoolchil- 
dren in the region to get to school in 
St Ingbert, and for farmers to reach 
sales outlets for their produce in sur- 
rounding towns. 
For those in charge of Bliesgau's con- 
servation project, sustainability means 
not just ecological, but economic and 
social sustainability as well, 
Jens Lubbadeh, 
journalist for Der Spiegel Online 
(Germany), correspondant 
for the UNESCO Courier 
  
In Bliesgau, various educational activities and awareness campaigns encourage 
sustainable development. 
5

## [Page 6](186704eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

SIE To Que [TEM (1 ly LT gy (0 BET V2 CoY o TW TET E10 [VHT (= E90 1 Ve fo [<1 fd ood Xo [| [T3000 [=Y-T 
OCHRE [TEER IER CR TS EEE [J CX RG CRE UL ERT [RTH fe] (108 
SETI ETGTIE [BIT TT ETM EL ET ET Eo) RG CECA OI CER LG ETN J [Xo I CEE 1X «Jy Li [3 [e 
n international support to protect the traditional rights of forest dwellers 
ENERO CEE ER CR CEERI {8 


### 186751: Tigers and men

  
TIGERS AND MEN 
    © 
Aa
rt
i 
Ka
ni
se
tt
 
green canopy of lush tall forests 
covers the Nokrek Biosphere Re- 
serve in the North eastern Indian 
state of Meghalaya. The highest 
peak in the Garo Hills, at an altitude 
of 1,418 metres above sea level, 
Nokrek features undisturbed natural 
ecosystems and stunning mountain 
landscapes. The area is home to 
wildlife, including elephants, tigers, 
leopards and hollock gibbons, and 
rare orchids, many of which have 
yet to be documented. Nokrek also 
houses a gene sanctuary to pre- 
serve rare varieties of citrus plants 
including the Indian wild orange 
(citrus indica), which could serve 
as a genepool for commercially pro- 
duced citrus. 
Off the beaten path, Nokrek 
gained international recognition in 
May. Along with two other Indian 
biosphere reserves -- Pachmarhi 
in the central Indian state of Mad- 
hya Pradesh, and Similipal, in the 
eastern state of Orissa -- Nokrek 
is among the 22 new sites recently 
added by UNESCO to its World 
Network of Biosphere Reserves. 
Their inclusion raises the number 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
ge AR 
“Project Tiger” has resurrected the dwindling population of tigers in Similipal. 
vv? 
of Indian sites on the World list to 
seven, from a total of 15 Biosphere 
Reserves across the subcontinent. 
The new status is expected to have 
a huge impact on the conservation 
and monitoring of these reserves to 
find the right balance between eco- 
nomic and human development. 
The challenge for all three Indian 
Biosphere Reserves is to achieve 
a balance between human activity 
and environmental protection. This 
is precisely the main challenge of 
UNESCO's Man and Biosphere 
(MAB) Programme. “Apart from be- 
ing a huge accolade for the area, 
the inclusion of Nokrek on the 
World Network list will help local 
officials discover how people living 
in the area can improve their qual- 
ity of life and enhance the superb 
natural environment,” said Vinod K. 
Nautiyal, principal chief conservator 
of forests, Meghalaya. 
The state forest chief points out 
that guidance from international ex- 
perts would greatly benefit Nokrek. 
He hopes the new designation 
will contribute to the research and 
documentation of landscapes, 
6 
ecosystems, species and genetic 
variations, besides complement- 
ing conservation and sustainable 
development strategies already in 
place. 
The Botanical Survey of India 
has revealed that 10% of plants 
in Nokrek are rare or endangered. 
Scientists fear that increasing hu- 
man intervention around the area 
designated as the gene sanctuary 
is affecting the habitat's natural 
balance. Large-scale deforestation 
and shifting cultivation have led to 
soil erosion, and the selective cul- 
tivation of commercially-profitable 
citrus varieties in areas close to the 
reserve also threatens genetic di- 
versity. 
Spanning an area of 47.48 square 
kilometers, Nokrek's core zone is 
an important source of many peren- 
nial rivers and streams, including 
the Simsang, Ganol, Bugi, Dareng 
and Rongdik rivers. One of the big- 
gest tourist attractions in the area 
is the Siju Cave, located on a cliff 
overhanging the right bank of the 
Simsang River. Locally known as 
Dobakhol or the cave of bats, the 
(v0)

## [Page 7](186704eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### 186751: Tigers and men

TIGERS AND MEN 
  
(o00) 
cave is the third- longest cave in 
India, and consists of innumerable 
internal chambers and labyrinths 
which have yet to be fully explored. 
Pachmarhi, botanical 
and religious sanctuary 
Located in the heart of India, the 
Pachmarhi Biosphere Reserve en- 
compasses three wildlife parks 
- Bori, Satpura, and Pachmarhi. 
It also includes the Satpura Tiger 
Reserve at its core, and the pic- 
turesque hill-station of Pachmarhi, 
established by the British as a re- 
gional army headquarters. 
With cascading waterfalls, ravines 
and gorges sculpted into the red 
sandstone earth, and dense ev- 
ergreen sal and teak forests inter- 
spersed with wild bamboo groves, 
Pachmarhi is a veritable paradise 
for botanists and geologists. Pach- 
marhi is also an archaeological 
treasure-house, with rock paintings 
in cave shelters, some of which are 
estimated to be 10,000 years old. 
Pachmarhi also has cultural and 
religious significance for Hindu 
pilgrims who throng here in large 
numbers every year to celebrate 
two important Hindu festivals, Maha 
Shivratri (in March) and Nagpanchmi 
(in July-August). 
Pachmarhi boasts seven distinct 
forest types, including tropical, moist 
and dry as well as sub-tropical hill 
forests. A monsoon climate, with 
three distinct seasons, ensures a 
rich and luxurious vegetation. Peren- 
© 
Vi
pi
n 
Vy
as
 
Pachmarhi is home to over 50 species 
of mammals, 254 species of birds, 30 species 
of reptiles, and 50 species of butterflies. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
nial streams and dark shady gorges 
encourage the growth of moisture- 
loving species such as ferns, orchids 
and rare herbs. As many as 71 spe- 
cies of ferns and fern allies, and 1190 
species of angiosperms (flowering 
plants) have been documented. 
Pachmarhi's dense forest vegeta- 
tion provides an ideal habitat for wild 
animals, including panthers, wild 
boar, barking deer, rhesus macaques 
and crocodiles, besides tigers. The 
area is home to over 50 species of 
mammal, 254 species of birds, 30 
species of reptiles, and 50 species 
of butterflies. 
The reserve, with a total area of 
4926 square kilometres, comprises 
511 villages, with agriculture as the 
main source of income. Poaching, 
deforestation and man-animal con- 
flicts remain the reserve's greatest 
problems. 
“The international recognition that 
we have gained by being added to 
the World Network will provide tre- 
mendous financial support, needed 
for the improvement of infrastructure, 
Nayan Singh Dungriyal, Field Director 
of the Pachmarhi Biosphere Reserve 
said. “This will allow us to discover 
new approaches to conservation 
and sustainable development’ 
The tigers of Similipal 
The Similipal Biosphere Reserve, 
once a royal hunting ground of 
the Maharaja of Mayurbhanj, com- 
prises the Similipal Sanctuary, and 
the adjoining Nato and Satkoshia 
Reserve Forests, covering a total 
area of 5500 square kilometres. 
Sustained protection measures 
and management initiatives under 
the Indian government's “Project 
Tiger" programme have resurrected 
the dwindling population of tigers in 
the Similipal Tiger Reserve, which 
accounts for nearly half the tiger 
population in Orissa state, on In- 
dia’s east coast. 
Named after the silk cotton trees 
that bloom here, Similipal is a living 
laboratory for environmental scien- 
7 
tists. Its ecosystems include lush 
forests, grasslands and wetlands, 
which are inhabited by elephants, 
panthers, four-horned antelopes, 
giant squirrels and mugger croco- 
diles, besides being the abode of 
tigers, including the rare black and 
melanistic tigers.lt houses 94 spe- 
cies of orchids and over 3000 spe- 
cies of other plants. 
The tribal inhabitants, who account 
for 73 per cent of the total popula- 
tion of about 450,000, depend on 
agriculture, hunting and collection of 
forest products for their livelihoods, 
but need additional sources of in- 
come. With 75 tribal villages located 
inside the tiger reserve, and the human 
population and livestock living in close 
proximity with wildlife, it is little wonder 
that forest officials are constantly chal- 
lenged by man-animal conflicts. 
“Our biggest challenge is to pro- 
tect the traditional rights of the forest 
dwellers, while conserving wildlife; 
said R. Nagaraja Reddy, Orissa's 
Chief Conservator of Forests and Di- 
rector of the Similipal Biosphere Re- 
serve!’ The inclusion of Similipal on the 
World Network will lead to meaningful 
exchanges of information, experience 
and personnel. It will also considerably 
help the research of ecosystems, as 
well as monitoring and training work” 
Besides providing advice, Reddy 
hopes the new designation will “bring 
funding from UNESCO through seed 
funds which could initiate local efforts, 
help broker local projects, and estab- 
lishing durable financial mechanisms? 
For Belinda Wright, Executive Direc- 
tor of the Wildlife Protection Society 
of India, “The benefits for the sites of 
joining the World Network are largely 
political. With world recognition, the 
state governments of Orissa and 
Madhya Pradesh will focus more at- 
tention on the protection and manage- 
ment of these two tiger reserves, and 
this in turn should help improve their 
conditions 
Shiraz Sidhva, 
Indian journalist, correspondant 
for the UNESCO Courier

## [Page 8](186704eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

  
    = a 
The Sundarbans (Bangladesh, India), a Wo 
CEI BIEL CIE ER TTL GR ELTA [so CET 
site that has just joined the World Network of Biosphere 
      
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
 
Ma
rc
 
Pa
tr
y 
rid Heritage Site, 
was ravaged by cyclone Sidr in November 2007. 
loods, droughts, entire islands and 
coasts drowning in seawater, cities 
trapped in hothouses, wildfires, entire 
continents turned into deserts, ecosys- 
tems destroyed in a snap of a geologi- 
cal finger — simply, the natural world 
“unleashing its wrath. Climate change 
is now nature's bogeyman, stalking us 
and dredging up our greatest fears. 
Yet, climate change is not really a bo- 
geyman that has just decided to ran- 
domly unleash his fury and is now walk- 
ing up our doorstep. Climate change 
is more like your next-door neighbour 
that kept on sending you polite notes 
that your oak tree was overtaking his 
yard, which you promptly threw in 
the waste bin. Now, the oak tree has 
crashed through your neighbour's liv- 
ing room and he is coming after you 
and your tree with a chainsaw. 
Current climate change findings are 
not revolutionary. Scientists have been 
sounding the alarm for decades. Over 
the past century the average global 
temperature has increased by 0.75° C 
and is expected to increase between 
1 and 5.8° C by the year 2100. 
Some have argued that technology 
got us into this ecological mess and 
it will save us from climate change. 
Some have suggested: deflecting 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
heat away from earth's surface with 
reflectors; pouring iron into the ocean 
to boost phytoplankions that would 
gobble up the carbon; and so on. The 
problem with this is that, in typically 
seeking technological solutions to the 
problem, one arrives at relief but rarely 
a cure. If one is overweight, diet pills or 
surgery are hardly a lasting solution. By 
the same token, if we are producing 
too much carbon, finding new ways 
to store excess carbon is not a last- 
ing solution. The problem is not merely 
capturing the billions of tons of carbon 
that we produce but to cut down on 
activities that will produce carbon and 
other gasses that contribute to global 
warming. In other words, co-existing 
with the natural environment rather 
than dominating it and having natural 
spaces that can absorb the effects 
of the range of human activities and 
by-products, including carbon. 
Living laboratories 
for sustainable 
development 
These ideas were central to the 
creation of biosphere reserves. 
Biosphere reserves in their child- 
hood have faced earthquakes, fires, 
floods, mass migrations, warfare, 
8 
CELE |W oT=Tele TYE RR NUT [ MET eTe = 1(eTo Vial {I EATES ET Eo] 
will be devised and tested. 


### 186752: Climate change bogeyman in your neighbourhood

CLIMATE CHANGE 
BOGEYMAN 
IN YOUR 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
and other calamities. Now, nearly 
forty years old, biosphere reserves 
are tackling the biggest challenge 
of their lives — climate change. 
Biosphere reserves are fitting tools 
for reducing and trying to cope with 
global warming. Just the network of 
biosphere reserves in Asia and the 
Pacific represents over 47 million 
hectares, an area corresponding to 
about one hundredth of the entire 
continent. This is a natural sponge 
that absorbs a lot of carbon. We 
now know that of the 32 billion tons 
of CO2 that are produced, natural 
ecosystems absorb about 18 billion 
tons. Without these natural spong- 
es, the world would be in an even 
direr ecological situation. 
In addition, biosphere reserves are 
natural spaces that buffer against 
the constant whirl and noise of 
development and provide key lo- 
cal environmental services such as 
keeping water clean, maintaining 
healthy soll, protecting wildlife and 
plants, maintaining pollination and 
seed propagation systems, among 
others. They are reminders that de- 
velopment needs a partner in con- 
servation. 
(oe)

## [Page 9](186704eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### 186752: Climate change bogeyman in your neighbourhood

a DE 
LIMATE CHANGE BOGEYMAN IN YOUR NEIGHBOURHOOD 
BE 
  
© 
Si
na
r 
Ma
s 
Fo
re
st
ry
 
an
d 
In
do
ne
si
an
 
M
A
B
 
Co
mm
it
te
e 
Pr
og
ra
mm
e.
 
  
View of the centre of Siam Giak Kecil Biosphere Reserve, Bukit Batu. 
(o0°) 
Finally, they serve as “living labo- 
ratories” for sustainable develop- 
ment. Climate change mitigation 
and adaptation efforts can be tried 
and tinkered with in biosphere re- 
serves. Successful efforts then can 
be applied to other reserves and 
non-reserves. 
Riau saved? 
This is the case for Indonesia's new 
biosphere reserve, Giam Siak Kecil 
— Bukit Batu (GSK-BB), which has 
just joined the World Network. The 
site, in Riau province east of Suma- 
tra island, represents 705,271 hect- 
ares and contains significant areas 
of peat swamp and lowland forests. 
These are not only key carbon sinks 
but also contain key endangered 
wildlife species as the Sumatran 
tiger and elephant, sun bear, tapir, 
and several globally important leaf 
monkeys. 
Like other biosphere reserves, the 
new site contains a protected core 
area, a buffer zone that can support 
sustainable human activities, and a 
transition area, with resources avail- 
able to all. The core area of the re- 
serve supports an important water 
reservoir supplying the communi- 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
ties and economies that occupy the 
transition areas and buffer zone. 
The latter is suitable for ecotourism, 
plant collection, and other small en- 
 
© 
Si
na
r 
Ma
s 
Fo
re
st
ry
 
an
d 
In
do
ne
si
an
 
M
A
B
 
Co
mm
it
te
e 
Pr
og
ra
mm
e.
 
terprise ventures that will contribute 
to sustainable local economies and 
environment. 
The management plan of this re- 
serve will put in place a programme 
that aims to strengthen environ- 
mental and economic security of lo- 
cal communities by supporting and 
promoting innovative solutions that 
attempt to mitigate and adapt to cli- 
mate change effects. 
Does this mean that the wildlife 
and swamp forests of Riau are now 
safe, and people of Riau ready to 
embrace sustainable develop- 
ment? Hardly. More than half of the 
Sumatran peat swamp forest eco- 
region has been cleared in the past 
two decades, and swamps drained 
for transmigration settlements and 
development projects. Local com- 
munities know little about sustain- 
able development or biosphere re- 
serves. They just want to feed their 
families. But at the same time, the 
very activities that feed their families 
(eee) 
  
An example of illegal 
logging at Sumatra 
(Indonesia).

## [Page 10](186704eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

 (LIMAECHANGEBOCETIANN OUR NEIGHBOURHOOD 
  
(see) 


### 186752: Climate change bogeyman in your neighbourhood

today will likely lead to suffering to- is investing in research into sustain- ~~ Biosphere reserves like the one in 
MOrrow. ably harvesting plant material found ~~ Sumatra need to innovate and push 
Now is the time to work with these in the reserve for medicinal purposes. for sustainable living to address not 
communities, government and the =~ Communities and the private sector only climate change, but the way in 
private sector to develop ideas and will be directly involved in propagat- ~~ which we perceive the natural world. 
activities that support people in their ing, harvesting and marketing prod- 
ecosystems. At present, stakehold- ucts through a planned “Biosphere 
ers are exploring ways to provide Product’ labeling programme. Robert Lee, 
economic and social benefits to the There is no one solution to climate conservation biologist, 
people living in and around the bio- change. lt is a challenge that requires deputy director of the UNESCO 
sphere reserve. For example, the In- political, economic, technological and Jakarta office (Indonesia) 
donesian Academy of Sciences (LIP) social solutions that come together. 
      
  
5 "T a x ry a 
yu pelos » ol neat - ov -_ 
p¥: NES 7 7.” Xs ! X Fc. Sd ne ~ r- hr. 
AG po Xs AI Te EARS op RA 
Ll LAM EE Tes ak Fe 2 Shy po ov 
o£. Lhd wo - Soi rd 4] ’ ry Ls i ,o Js yer 
X PR NS 5 Wall Aa Ps YA zs 
gs a oy ie N iv fa 
: Ser UST To RA 
. Ww Cy ya ¥ 
Ad hed AYE) ¥ 
. ' BJ 
© 
Si
na
r 
Ma
s 
Fo
re
st
ry
 
an
d 
In
do
ne
si
an
 
M
A
B
 
Co
mm
it
te
e 
Pr
og
ra
mm
e.
 
  
D dg § ly r , 3 Y, 
ANE lel CRA 4 
vl ko a APO R : 
° - A et UJ wl 34 53 A 
st y IW 3 | RAL Ain x 32 ory i} Ton Tg Ae LT / 
Chg Bodie Cie ¢ SANT 2 
¥ x 15 ®.." EN: F SW nf 
INDONESIA IN THE LEAD 
ndonesia has been the focus of many climate change discussions in recent years, for bad 
and good. Indonesia is the third largest emitters of greenhouse gases in the world. A good bit 
(839%) of these gasses come from deforestation and forest fires resulting in the loss of about 
20 million hectares per year and a haze that blankets the rest of Southeast Asia. 
As a result, Indonesia has been making a strong effort to make changes by leading on major 
climate change initiatives - such as hosting in 2007 the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change conference and this May the World Ocean Conference and the Coral 
Triangle Initiative Summit, attended by about 3,900 participants from 121 countries - and put- 
ting into place major climate change measures.     
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 1 0

## [Page 11](186704eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

CC Lajat, in the far south of Syria, offers some of the region’s most impressiv 
WEY CLARRIE ET RET TL ERE Ti [oJ T (oe Fo T=Yol [oTe T{or: 1 IA TTT E00 4 TER C1 A oT CoB o] [<1 CR (ELT 
is an example of the interdependence between cultural and biological diversity. 


### 186753: Lajat: where nature meets history

LAJAT: WHERE NATURE 
MEETS HISTORY 
© Permanent Delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic to UNESCO 
  
  
1 =. 
amen JP 
Lajat is scattered with village ruins, the most ancient of which 
date from the 3rd century. 
t looks like a lake that has been 
~~ “whipped into waves and then sud- 
denly petrified,’ says Syrian re- 
searcher, Jamal Abou Jahjah, de- 
scribing the precipitous landscape 
of Lajat - 120 km2 of rolling basalt 
hills, with peaks 600 - 900 metres 
high. 
Lajat lies some thirty kilometres 
south of the Syrian capital, Damas- 
cus, in the province of Sweida, on 
the border with Jordan, at the inter- 
section of two very different regions 
- one with a mild climate, the other 
semi-desert. Recently added to the 
World Network of Biosphere Re- 
serves, it is marked on the map as a 
‘biogeographical crossroads. 
The plateau of Lajat has been in- 
habited for thousands of years, and 
today has a population of 16,500, 
spread across 13 villages. Like their 
ancestors, they continue to live es- 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
sentially from farming. This is clearly 
visible from the crop terraces and 
hundreds of pastures enclosed by 
kilometres of stone walls, that also 
provide a haven for lizards and 
birds. The ancient practice of crop 
rotation, which is the reason behind 
these enclosures, has proven to be 
essential for the sustainability of the 
land. 
Blessed with reserves of water 
and renowned for the quality of its 
soil, Lajat is one of the most fertile 
regions in Syria. One third of the 
country’s plant varieties are found 
here. There are olive trees, date 
palms, figs — the so-called ‘Koranic'’ 
plants, because they are mentioned 
in the sacred book — alongside or- 
chards of pistachio, almond and 
other fruit trees — a rare mix of Medi- 
terranean and Irano-Turkish species 
due to the unusual geography. 
11 
Growing these fruits has long 
provided work for the local people. 
Olive and pistachio presses dating 
from the Roman era are evidence 
of the long tradition of oil and soap 
production. Now, research is being 
carried out to find ways to exploit 
the wild bitter almonds, pears and 
various endemic plants known for 
their medicinal virtues. 
Roman ruins 
Lajat's rich natural resources are 
not the sole attraction, though. The 
region is also scattered with the 
ruins of ancient villages, the oldest 
dating back to the third century. 
Despite the devastation caused by 
an earthquake in 749, it is still pos- 
sible to see the remains of great 
fortified farms and houses, with 
separate living spaces and spaces 
set aside for farming activities, all 
(o0°)

## [Page 12](186704eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

EE a 


### 186753: Lajat: where nature meets history

AJAT: WHERE NATURE MEETS HISTOR 
  
(eee) 
made out of the same material - ba- 
salt. 
Between 2003 and 2007 a team 
of French experts recorded no 
fewer than 700 ancient and ar- 
chaeological sites in the region. 
Some thirty of the sites have been 
excavated, revealing the existence 
of Greco-Roman settlements, near 
to the village of Shahba, as well as 
monasteries and houses from the 
Byzantine era. 
There is, then, a promising future 
for tourism in Lajat. Its vast panora- 
mas, wild plants and animals and its 
pastoral traditions are ideally suited 
to ecotourism, while history lovers 
can find plenty to satisfy their curi- 
osity. 
Restoring a balance 
The development of ecotourism 
is one of the main objectives of a 
management plan for Lajat, drafted 
in 2006 by the Syrian Ministry for Lo- 
cal Administration and the Environ- 
ment, when the site was designated 
as a national nature reserve. 
Projects have been developed to 
renovate the ancient houses and 
ruins, which have repeatedly been 
abandoned and then rebuilt over 
the years, only to be used by semi- 
nomadic peoples, since the 1970s, 
for grazing animals, or as watering 
places and crafts workshops. 
The national authorities take a dim 
view of the current situation and are 
seeking solutions to preserve the his- 
torical ruins by turning them into tour- 
ist hostels. As part of this plan, local 
people from various villages on the 
plateau are to be trained as guides 
and interpreters. 
In the meantime, observation towers 
have been built for bird-watchers, in 
collaboration with the Sweida Re- 
search Centre, the General Com- 
mission for Agricultural Science and 
neighbouring universities, which 
have also developed other projects 
aimed at improving the lives of local 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
people, while respecting the envi- 
ronment. 
Today, the main threats to the en- 
vironment of Lajat are uncontrolled 
logging and grazing. Local opinion 
is divided, with those who support 
protection of the forests, but are 
against designated grazing areas, 
while others want grazing controls 
but unlimited logging rights. 
-~ “Tr 
PR 
RS 
 
© Permanent Delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic to UNESCO 
-— 4 TT — TL 
By awarding Lajat the status of 
UNESCO biosphere reserve, it 
should be possible to develop a 
management plan that regulates 
both logging and grazing, thus re- 
storing ancient traditions that were 
more respectful of the environ- 
ment. 
Hala Kodmani, 
Franco-Syrian journalist. 
Some 700 historic and archaeological sites have been identified in Lajat. 
   
Sirius ExT 
Lajat is promoting its cultural tourism. 
12 
© Permanent Delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic to UNESCO 
L  iat Ae 
  
 

## [Page 13](186704eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

Last May, Fraser Island, Australian World Heritage site since 1992, became the core part 
of the new Great Sandy Biosphere Reserve. Natural world heritage sites conserve ecosystems 
{oT A Tol JH U3 EE TL 0 TT=Ys WT Ef ooo RTE 11 (=o {o2 oy Lo (0 (CIT a TET | Eo Wo [eM (I Co 1 To] 
of degraded environments. How will environment and tourist management 
[0]: Lot {oS o ETy [e [-R (0) 1 (RUe Td [e EA ET {TX CET 0 WE ET Ue rg 
© 
Fr
as
er
 
C
o
a
s
t
 
So
ut
h 
Bu
rn
et
t 
To
ur
is
m 


### 186754: When world heritage sites and biosphere reserves merge

  
WHEN WORLD HERITAGE SITES 
AND BIOSPHERE RESERVES 
MERGE 
  
ff the eastern coast of Australia, 
Fraser is the largest sand island 
in the world. It supports a com- 
plex rainforest ecosystem, unique 
perched freshwater lakes and rare 
“Australian flora and fauna. 
The island, which recently be- 
came the core part of the Great 
Sandy Biosphere Reserve, was 
inscribed on the UNESCO World 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
Heritage List in 1992 and much 
of its land is protected by national 
park laws. “In some rare cases, 
core zones can be inhabited. In 
the case of Fraser Island, the vil- 
lages are very small and only at the 
coast line," explains UNESCO's 
Ecological Sciences and Biodi- 
versity Section chief, Dr Thomas 
Schaaf. 
13 
Fraser Island, Australia, is the largest sand island in the world. 
ih
r   
How will Great Sandy's join- 
ing UNESCO's World Network 
of Biosphere Reserves alter the 
management practices already in 
place on Fraser Island for the en- 
vironment and tourism? 
According to Schaaf, “Natural 
world heritage sites conserve 
natural ecosystems for which 
(o00)

## [Page 14](186704eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### 186754: When world heritage sites and biosphere reserves merge

WHEN WORLD HERITAGE SITES AND BIOSPHERE RESERVES MERGE 
  
  
© 
Fr
as
er
 
Co
as
t 
So
ut
h 
Bu
rn
et
t 
To
ur
is
m 
  
To visit Fraser Island it isn't necessary to take a boat and rent a 4X4. 
(o00) 
they have been inscribed; while 
biosphere reserves also do envi- 
ronmental restoration and reha- 
bilitation activities of degraded 
environments. In fact, biosphere 
reserves are mainly concerned 
with managing change in eco- 
systems linked to human activity in 
order to promote sustainable devel- 
opment.” 
Management of natural World 
Heritage sites also takes sustain- 
able development into account, 
particularly for tourism. According 
to Kishore Rao, Word Heritage 
Centre Deputy Director, “The most 
important factor and management 
challenge is to ensure that such 
use is compatible with and has no 
negative impact on the ‘outstand- 
ing universal values’ for which the 
sites were inscribed on the World 
Heritage List. 
This is not the first time a World 
Heritage site has also become or 
been incorporated into a Biosphere 
Reserve. “As is the case with 
Serengeti National Park in Tanzania 
— named a World Heritage site and 
a Biosphere Reserve in 1981 — the 
two can go together. The magnifi- 
cent wildlife array is outstanding, 
but the Serengeti is also a typical 
savanna ecosystem in Eastern Af- 
rica, he said. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
© 
Fr
as
er
 
Co
as
t 
So
ut
h 
Bu
rn
et
t 
To
ur
is
m 
Changing lifestyles 
Russel Stewart, chairman of the 
Burnett Mary Regional Group 
(BMRG) that presented Great San- 
dy’'s application to UNESCO, said 
that one of his organization's main 
goals in having the area designated 
 
  
uy 
ho n el 
Fraser supports rare australian flora and fauna. 
14 
a biosphere reserve was to estab- 
lish its importance to the integrity 
of a world heritage site, thus con- 
tributing to its conservation. “It is 
not well known that many of Fraser 
Island's attractions can actually 
be seen without the need to drive 
bumpy four-wheel drive tracks or 
catch a boat said Stewart. “There 
Is a great potential to develop eco- 
tourism on the mainland’ 
Although the Great Sandy region 
already plays host to 950,000 sea- 
sonal visitors per year — compared 
with less than 200,000 permanent 
residents — the BMRG chairman 
was less concerned with the im- 
pacts of increased tourist numbers 
to the area than the vast number of 
people moving to the region to live. 
“The ‘seachange’ phenomenon, 
whereby people are moving to 
coastal areas of Australia, is caus- 
ing very rapid growth in population 
in the Great Sandy Region, with 
(eee) 
TE? BREE NY EE 
 

## [Page 15](186704eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### 186754: When world heritage sites and biosphere reserves merge

Tm WORLD HERITAGE SITES AND BIOSPHERE RESERVES MERGE 
  
(o0°) 
significant urban development,’ he 
said. “The loss of natural areas of 
conservation, development of good 
agricultural land and increased hu- 
man impacts on popular recreation- 
al areas are all potential threats to 
the region's environment.” Manag- 
ing Great Sandy as a biosphere will 
help to plan this development in a 
more sustainable way, he believes. 
‘In fact, we call Biosphere Re- 
serves ‘learning sites for sustain- 
able development! said Dr Schaaf. 
“In addition, Biosphere Reserves 
are also scientific research sites 
to study the structure, functioning 
and dynamics of ecosystems, and 
the interactions between people 
and the environment — of interest to 
both natural and social scientists’ 
Letea Cavander, 
Australian journalist 


### 186755: World heritage sites and biosphere reserves: 85 sites in common

  
WORLD HERITAGE SITES AND BIOSPHERE 
RESERVES - 85 SITES IN COMMON 
© 
Fr
as
er
 
Co
as
t 
So
ut
h 
Bu
rn
et
t 
To
ur
is
m 
Fraser Island, a World Heritage Site, is at the centre 
of the new Great Sandy Biosphere Reserve (Australia). 
orld Heritage sites and 
biosphere reserves share 
a number of common chal- 
lenges — such as climate 
change and the worldwide loss and 
degradation of services provided by 
ecosystems, notably those related to 
preserving biodiversity. To respond 
to these common challenges, stra- 
tegic coordination of activities of 
the Man and the Biosphere (MAB) 
Programme and the World Heri- 
tage Convention is needed for bet- 
ter management of some 85 sites 
that are both biosphere reserves 
and World Heritage sites. This pro- 
cess must combine the different 
mechanisms and approaches of- 
fered by the two instruments, and 
use them as complementary tools 
for the benefit of both the environ- 
ment and local populations. 
The main differences between 
biosphere reserves and World 
Heritage sites (including natural, 
  
cultural or mixed sites and cultural 
landscapes) are their objectives, 
legal status and management prin- 
ciples. During the first years of bio- 
sphere reserve designations, the 
traditional conception of national 
parks weighed heavily. In a major- 
ity of cases, therefore, these old 
designations (from the 1970s and 
early 1980s) involve sites that do 
not really fulfil the three functions 
of biosphere reserves (the conser- 
vation, development and logistic 
functions including research, and 
monitoring and education) nor have 
the proper zonation scheme (i.e. core, 
buffer and transition areas) or coopera- 
tive management structures. In these 
cases, biosphere reserves coincide 
with the respective natural World 
Heritage sites (such as Dja in Camer- 
oon, Yellowstone in the United States 
and Macquarie Island in Australia). 
However, in the majority of sites 
with twin designations, and particu- 
  
larly since 1995, the World Heritage 
site represents the core area or a part 
of the core area of the respective bio- 
sphere reserve. An example is the 
Pantanal Biosphere Reserve in Brazil. 
Indeed, the Pantanal Conservation 
Complex, a natural World Heritage 
site, represents one of the 15 core 
areas of the biosphere reserve. But 
biosphere reserves can include not 
only natural heritage sites, but also 
cultural heritage sites. Like the Pays 
de Fontainebleau Biosphere Reserve 
in France and Tonle Sap in Cambodia. 
As for El Vizcaino Biosphere Reserve 
in Mexico, two sites — one natural and 
one cultural — are part of the same bio- 
sphere reserve 
Ana Percié, Division of Ecological and 
Earth Sciences (UNESCO). Excerpts 
from the article “World Heritage Sites 
and Biosphere Reserves - Building on 
complementarities”, World Heritage Re- 
view, n° 49 — April 2008. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 15 
 

## [Page 16](186704eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

Fuerteventura, one of the Canary Islands off south-west Spain 
was recently added to the list of world Biosphere Reserves. 
LL CX CYS (oy RTE Rg Po Te (SN WoT {oT (Fo) CCR ACR CHES ET [BRE BS 
EL RoW EL CRT CHEER ET of fo) Clo CHE ELUTE NET (o] | CL ES 
  
Photos : © UNESCOQO/Cabildo de Fuerteventura 


### 186756: Fuerteventura, the complete reserve

FUERTEVENTURA, 
THE COMPLETE 
RESERVE 
he Fuerteventura reserve consists 
of not only the island's beaches, the 
longest in the Archipelago, but also 
a strip of sea extending three to five 
nautical miles. 
The site encompasses an array 
~ of ecosystems including desert and 
semi-desert as well as coastal and 
marine areas. Famed for the diver- 
sity of marine life (dolphins, sperm 
whales, sea turtles that reproduce on 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
the beaches, etc), the island is also 
one of the foremost sites of geo-pale- 
ontological interest in the world. 
The island benefits from its natu- 
ral wealth. Tourism is currently the 
principal source of income and an 
expanding industry, as seen in the 
growth of ornithological tourism. The 
island's community is developing 
sustainably managed ecotourism. 
Fuerteventura is the most ancient 
of the Canary Islands, the most 
arid and the closest to the African 
coast. It has a surface area of 1659 
square kilometres and offers visitors 
impressive views of deep ravines, 
relics of its volcanic origins. The 
more than 300 kilometres of coast 
and innumerable vast beaches are 
among its defining characteristics. 
Ana Minondo, 
Spanish journalist 
16 
 

## [Page 17](186704eng.pdf#page=17) 0

### 186757: Higher education shaken by change

  
Higher Education 
Shaken by Change 
Around the world higher education is being shaken by profound changes. 
Exploding enrollments over the last decade are putting severe financial 
strains on tertiary systems. At the same time, computers and the internet 
have allowed previously unimaginable forms of global knowledge trans- 
fer. Institutions are becoming increasingly competitive, vying for scarce 
resources at home and for the rapidly growing numbers 
of students studying outside their own countries. Universities, including 
a rapidly growing number of private universities, are making international 
partnerships, and opening academic programs and even branches 
in other countries as never before. 
hese trends were discussed 
at the 1998 UNESCO World 
Conference on Higher Edu- 
cation. But they have all inten- 
sified over the last decade, 
bringing both new opportunities and 
challenges for participants attend- 
ing the 2009 World Conference on 
Higher Education, which took place 
at UNESCO's Paris Headquarters 
from July 5-8. 
The issues are often complex and 
the solutions fraught with controver- 
sy. When public systems are over- 
whelmed by galloping enrollments, 
how should the money be found to 
reverse overcrowding, to maintain or 
improve standards? Should higher 
education be considered a public 
good, essential for economic devel- 
opment and financed by public bud- 
gets? Or is it more a private good, 
allowing personal advancement, 
and able to thrive only if students are 
required to pay for it? Will access to 
higher studies depend on wealth rath- 
er than merit? 
The shift to post-industrial economies 
has led to mass demand for higher ed- 
ucation. Enrollments are increasing at 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
breakneck speed. There were 152.5 
million tertiary students worldwide in 
2007, a roughly 50% increase com- 
pared to 2000. 
Only a half-century ago, post-second- 
ary studies were reserved for a small, 
mostly male elite in most countries. But 
today, participation rates of 40 or 50% 
of young people are often considered 
vital for economic growth. Globally, the 
percentage of university-aged young 
people enrolled in tertiary education in- 
creased from 19% in 2000 to 26% in 
2007. Women now account for a slight 
majority of students and their predomi- 
nance is expected to increase. 
Yet the average rate masks stark re- 
gional differences. Participation was 
71% in North America and Western 
Europe, 26% in the East Asia/Pacific 
region, 23% in the Arab States, 11% 
in South and West Asia and, despite 
rapid growth, only 6% in Africa. A child 
in sub-Saharan Africa today still has 
less chance of reaching the end of 
primary school than a European has 
of entering university. 
Within countries some groups do 
not have equal access to higher stud- 
ies either. Those with lower incomes 
17 
©
 
Ca
ro
li
ne
 
El
fl
ed
a 
 
Cambridge, United Kingdom: 
students lined up to receive their degrees. 
or from remote regions, ethnic mi- 
norities, immigrants, and disabled 
persons may have lower participa- 
tion rates. Some education authori- 
ties have sought to improve equity 
and inclusion with such measures as 
student loans, grants for low-income 
students, culturally targeted pro- 
grams, and quotas for members of 
minority groups or lower castes. 
Troubling trends 
Higher education is increasingly 
seen as an engine of economic de- 
velopment. But as student numbers 
expand, government tax revenues 
typically cannot keep pace with the 
rising costs of public systems. The 
result is often increasing austerity: 
overcrowded classes and lecture 
halls, outdated library collections, 
declining funds for research and a 
deterioration of facilities. The prob- 
lem has been most crippling in sub- 
Saharan Africa, but is felt across the 
developing world and in countries in 
transition as well. 
Public institutions, once largely de- 
pendent on state funding, have been 
forced to generate an increasing por- 
(o0°)

## [Page 18](186704eng.pdf#page=18) 0

### 186757: Higher education shaken by change

(eee) 
tion of their costs. The most common 
way has been with tuition fees, which 
have been introduced in a number of 
countries with formerly free or nearly 
free higher education (e.g., China in 
1997, the United Kingdom in 1998, 
and Austria in 2001). Fees are being 
introduced across Europe, long the 
bastion of free higher education. In 
addition, a number of African coun- 
tries have substantially raised stu- 
dent charges for dormitories, food, 
and other services. 
Institutions have become more en- 
trepreneurial. They do paid research 
for companies or administrations, 
and develop paying courses to meet 
the needs of local businesses. This 
is sometimes raising concerns. Too 
much emphasis on income genera- 
tion can undermine traditional univer- 
sity activities. Courses and research 
in the humanities typically have no 
commercial applications. Campus 
theatre groups, journals, and non- 
commercial radio and television sta- 
tions generally produce no income. 
But such activities make universities 
centers of intellectual life. 
Public authorities are also increas- 
ingly replacing budgeted funding for 
research with competitive grants. All 
these developments are fostering 
competition, and growing differen- 
tiation among institutions. Many uni- 
versities now pay close attention to 
their place in international rankings. 
The impact is especially evident in 
predominantly public systems where 
until recently universities were sup- 
posed to be all more or less equiva- 
lent. 
Some institutions and some national 
systems are introducing more techni- 
cal and professional programs. This 
is a crucial issue in developing econ- 
omies, which need both more gradu- 
ates trained in technical disciplines, 
and also professionals and leaders 
with general knowledge, creativity, 
and critical thinking. There is also a 
pressing need for research focused 
on local development needs. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
Focus 
  
Globalisation 
and privatisation 
Institutions, especially in the indus- 
trialized nations, are competing for 
the growing numbers of international 
students. More than 2.8 million stu- 
dents elected to study outside their 
own country in 2007. The largest 
number came from China (421,100), 
India (153,300), and the Republic of 
Korea (105,300). Their main des- 
tinations were the United States 
(695,900), the United Kingdom 
(351,500), and France (246,600). 
Globalization is impacting tertiary 
education in other ways. The last de- 
cade has seen a veritable explosion 
of programs and institutions oper- 
ating internationally. Several coun- 
tries are developing themselves as 
international higher education hubs. 
(Qatar, Singapore and the United 
Arab Emirates are prime examples). 
Regional agreements are emerging 
to promote higher education coop- 
eration and exchange. The Bologna 
Process, adopted in that Italian city 
in 1999, is harmonizing what were a 
myriad of distinct degree systems in 
over 40 European countries. Similar 
efforts are underway in Latin Amer- 
 A 
Students at Lycée Lamine Guéye in Dakar 
(Senegal). Lack of funding for higher education 
is most flagrant in Africa, but the problem 
affects all developing countries. 
18 
ica, Africa, Southeast Asia and the 
Asia-Pacific region. 
A major challenge is how to com- 
pare institutions and degrees from 
different countries. New national 
quality assurance mechanisms rely 
on peers, not government agencies. 
And the focus is now on outcomes 
— the skills and knowledge graduates 
have acquired — rather than inputs, like 
faculty qualifications and library collec- 
tions. Education leaders have begun 
work on ways to compare evaluation 
results across borders. 
A striking development has been the 
rapid expansion of private higher edu- 
cation. While private institutions have 
traditionally played an important role in 
East Asia and the United States, today 
they account for 30% of global enroll- 
ment. Private institutions have been 
central to the rapid expansion of enroll- 
ments in such countries as Brazil, Chile, 
and a number of African countries, 
where demand far outstrips the number 
of study places at state institutions. 
Many for-profit private providers are 
raising concems about quality assur- 
ance and the emergence of fraudu- 
lent diploma mills. The growth of dis- 
tance education adds to the need for 
increased international cooperation, 
since the Intemet allows such programs 
to cross borders effortlessly. 
Tertiary enrollments are expected to 
continue expanding rapidly. Student 
populations will continue to diversify, 
counting more people already in the 
workforce, part time students, and 
those from other countries. 
But while this expansion is widely 
welcomed, it is bringing serious chal- 
lenges, especially in low-income de- 
veloping countries. The need for an 
ever-expanding number of teachers will 
mean that their qualifications will tend 
to remain low. And authorities will be 
hard pressed to ensure that access 
is not just for the more affluent, but 
for all those who could benefit from 
further studies. 
Burton Bollag, 
American journalist

## [Page 19](186704eng.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

©S
ta
dt
ve
rw
al
tu
ng
 
Dr
es
de
n 
  
PE: at ™ 
i “ ot -. " Fou ae. 20S 
» - -t™y 
- 
 
In June, the World Heritage Committee made the decision to withdraw the Dresden Elbe Valley from the list of World Heritage sites. 


### 186758: A Bridge to nowhere

A BRIDGE TO NOWHERE 
  
In June, the Dresden Elbe Valley, Germany, was withdrawn from the List of World Heritage Sites. 
The construction of the Waldschlosschen Bridge altered the cultural landscape and integrity of the site 
as defined by the list. This move, unprecedented in Europe, has shaken German public opinion. 
y decision of the World Heri- 
B:: Committee, the Dresden 
Elbe Valley has ceased to be 
a world heritage site. Fourteen mem- 
bers of the Committee voted in fa- 
vour of delisting it, 5 against, with 2 
abstentions. 
This is only the second time ever 
that a World Heritage Site has had 
its status revoked, the first being the 
Arabian Oryx Sanctuary, Oman, in 
2007. 
“Every time we fail to preserve a site, 
we share the pain of the State Party, 
declared Maria Jesus San Segundo, 
the Ambassador and Permanent Del- 
egate of Spain to UNESCO, chair of 
the 33rd session of the Committee, 
which met in Seville, Spain, from 22 
to 30 June of this year. Francesco 
Bandarin, Director of the World Heri- 
tage Centre, noted with regret that 
“The work of UNESCO is to add 
properties to the World Heritage List 
so as to promote their preservation, 
not to drop them off the List 
When the news became public 
townspeople congregated outside 
Dresden’s world-famous Church of 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
Our Lady holding up signs that read 
“What an embarrassment, Dres- 
den!” Germany's transport minister 
Wolfgang Tiefensee said: “This is 
very black day for Dresden and for 
Germany as a country that values 
culture highly. | deeply regret that 
it has come to this. Saxony and 
the city of Dresden had more than 
enough time to reach a compromise 
with UNESCO? 
Foreign minister ~~ Frank-Walter 
Steinmeier was concerned that the 
decision by UNESCO was “not 
good news”. An understatement. 
Olaf Zimmermann, chief executive 
of the German Cultural Council, 
was scathing in his reproaches: 
“Through its stubbornness, Dres- 
den has done Germany, as a coun- 
try that holds culture in high es- 
teem, a real disservice. Germany 
has been disgraced in the face of 
the world" And Eva-Maria Stange, 
who is the chairwoman of the Ger- 
man National Committee for the 
Preservation of Historic Monu- 
ments and the Minister of Art of the 
state of Saxony accused Dresden 
19 
of having “walked into disaster with 
its eyes wide open. This is a black 
day for the state of Saxony and for 
Germany, as a country that places 
great emphasis on culture. 
In fact it had been clear for years 
that this day was bound to come. 
An old controversial 
project 
The bone of contention is the 
Waldschlésschen Bridge over the 
river Elbe, the plans for which have 
existed since the 1990s, and been 
a subject of controversy from the 
start. A four-lane motorway is to lead 
across it. The bridge is supposed to 
link the eastern and south-eastern 
parts of Dresden with the north, 
taking some of the load off the four 
bridges in the inner city. 
For the World Heritage Committee 
this bridge was the reason for with- 
drawing the status of world heritage 
site from the Dresden Elbe Valley. 
The explanation is that by building 
the bridge, Dresden has failed to 
preserve the “outstanding universal 
(o0°)

## [Page 20](186704eng.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

© Staatliche Schlésser, Burgen und Garten Sachsen 
   
havi 
. 
ee = ANE 
CRT tear — : 
nae | | | i 
[BAA TR 's ) TEL eS }" 
; or a - . i 
re aE 
The cultural landscape of Dresden Elbe 
Valley is crowned by the Pillnitz Palace. 
(o00) 
value” of the cultural landscape in 
the Elbe Valley in the way it was in- 
scribed on the World Heritage List. 
Dresden was pronounced a world 
heritage site in 2004, having been 
nominated two years previously. 
Although the planned bridge was 
actually mentioned in the nomina- 
tion file, its described location was 


### 186758: A Bridge to nowhere

incorrect; the bridge was said to be 
about “5 kilometres down the river 
from the centre”. In actual fact, the 
bridge is 2.5 kilometres upriver. 
In the spring of 2004, planning ap- 
proval was granted for the bridge. 
With this, all the legal hurdles had 
been taken. But the start of con- 
struction was repeatedly delayed on 
account of planning errors and nu- 
merous lawsuits, as well as changes 
on the German political scene. Fi- 
nally, it was decided to hold a public 
referendum that was to determine 
whether or not to go ahead. 
And so it was that in February 2005 
the citizens of Dresden voted on the 
construction of the Waldschloss- 
chen Bridge. The result: two thirds 
of the votes cast were in favour of 
building the bridge, though turnout 
was a meagre 50.8 percent. The 
information leaflet published in con- 
nection with the referendum includ- 
ed references to the building code 
and the fact that planning approval 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
    
Yo es 
   
 
   © 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
i
a
m
h
 
Bu
rk
e 
  J
 
.
 
    
j
s
 
fy
 
f
u
 
- » u 
Semper Opera House, Dresden. 
had already been given — which 
means that in actual fact the refer- 
endum was not a direct vote on the 
issue but a request to confirm the 
existing parliamentary decision. 
2006 : Dresden in peril 
However, what the citizens of Dres- 
den could not be aware of at that 
time was that building the bridge 
might threaten the city's status as a 
world heritage site. The incorrect de- 
tails about the location of the bridge 
were not discovered and corrected 
until October 2005. UNESCO 
then declared, for the first time, in 
2006 that the bridge was irreconcil- 
able with world heritage status and 
threatened to de-list the property 
if it was indeed built. The Dresden 
Elbe Valley was put on the List of 
World Heritage in Danger, while at 
the same time the city was urged to 
submit an alternative concept that 
would be compatible with the re- 
quirements of a world heritage site. 
Over the ensuing months, the city 
council and the regional council 
continued to argue over the con- 
struction of the bridge, several court 
rulings were handed down, and the 
search for an alternative solution also 
failed. UNESCO decided to leave 
Dresden on the World Heritage List 
for one more year, but called upon 
20 
the city once again to come up with 
alternatives. 
In November 2007, various actions 
brought by conservation groups hav- 
ing been dismissed, the construc- 
tion of the bridge began. UNESCO 
reacted immediately. “We asked for 
the construction of the bridge to be 
stopped and the area to be re-nat- 
uralised”, says Francesco Bandarin. 
Further lawsuits followed; a new ref- 
erendum, this time on a tunnel as an 
alternative to the bridge, was reject- 
ed by the then mayor. The argument 
between the city council, the state 
directorate, the regional council and 
the mayor raged on. 
In March 2009, having dismissed 
several actions filed by conservation 
groups, the Dresden Administrative 
Court declared: “The tunnel solution 
does not represent a preferable al- 
ternative” A tunnel would “consider- 
ably impair” the protected lowland 
meadows. However the court ruling 
did not take into account the UNES- 
CO issue. 
Bandarin considers the entire pro- 
cedure a bad idea: “I don't think 
these decisions should be taken by 
the courts. This is a purely techni- 
cal matter. Solutions to engineering 
problems should be left to engineer- 
Ing projects. 
(eee)

## [Page 21](186704eng.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

(o00) 
Now the UNESCO decision has 
been taken and Dresden’s current 
mayor Helma Orosz — who has 
been in office since October 2008 
— is having to carry the can for all the 
harm done by years of ignorance, 
small-mindedness and intransigence. 
“Years of communication problems 
between all the parties involved have 
not been helpful’ Orosz criticises. 
“Instead of admitting their mistakes, 
people kept putting the blame on 
each other. That led to rifts between 
the citizens, which | deeply regret” 
Brief description 
of the site 
The cultural landscape 
of Dresden Elbe Valley extends 
some 18 km along the river. 
It features low meadows, and is 


### 186758: A Bridge to nowhere

crowned by the Pillnitz Palace 
and the centre of Dresden with its 
numerous monuments and parks 
dating from the 16th century. 
Some old villages have retained 
their historic structure and 
elements from the industrial 
revolution, notably the 147-m 
Blue Wonder steel bridge. The 
passenger steamships and the 
shipyard, dating from the early 
20th century, are still in use.     
The decision by UNESCO is, she 
says, a serious defeat for a town like 
Dresden — though she would not go 
so far as to call it a disgrace. “The 
majority of people in Dresden want 
the bridge. To me the referendum 
in 2005 was a legitimate decision. | 
am bound by the legal circumstanc- 
es — that is a local politician's job’ 
“She was in fact bound to the ref- 
erendum,’ says Francesco Bandarin 
— “but only until 2008, as the valid- 
ity is three years! After that, he be- 
lieves, Orosz could have revoked 
the decision or, as he suggested, 
“organize[d] a new referendum with 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6   
the ‘right question’: Do you want to 
have the bridge and lose the World 
Heritage Site title?” 
To back up her conviction, Orosz 
cites further surveys carried out by 
various media during her term in of- 
fice. In each case, a majority of re- 
spondents spoke out in favour of 
the bridge — though always in con- 
nection with preserving the status 
of world heritage site. “But,” Orosz 
notes, “the surveys also showed 
that if that were not possible then 
people would support the bridge 
without the title. 
After taking office, Orosz imme- 
diately contacted UNESCO, hop- 
ing that the organization could be 
persuaded to move on the issue. In 
vain. According to the Mayor, it be- 
came clear in Seville that the crite- 
ria for awarding the status of world 
heritage site were not realistic and 
needed to be revised. “| spoke with 
representatives from other coun- 
tries that were on the Heritage 
Sites in Peril list. In all cases it be- 
came clear that the assessment 
was becoming increasingly rigid, 
she says. “We cannot allow a mod- 
ern infrastructure to be seen as a 
problem when it comes to recogn- 
ising a world heritage site 
Bandarin disagrees: “As | ex- 
plained many times, the bridge was 
incompatible because Dresden 
was inscribed as a cultural land- 
scape, not as an historic city. As an 
historic city it would not have the 
values for inscription, as it was al- 
most completely destroyed. Being 
a cultural landscape, the integrity is 
what matters, and the bridge breaks 
that. Also, the proposed project has 
a very heavy, old-fashioned design. 
The quality of the design matters 
too. 
Orosz views the fact that many 
members of the World Heritage 
Committee voted against the deci- 
sion to de-list the site as confirma- 
tion that at UNESCO, too, people 
are starting to reconsider the crite- 
ria. She says, “I am grateful that the 
21 
members of the committee reached 
their decision with some degree of 
concern. The vote shows that there 
is a conviction deep inside that the 
city is capable and worthy of being 
a world heritage site’ 
The door 
isn’t irrevocably closed 
It is indeed true that the World 
Heritage Committee has left it open 
for Dresden to present a new nomi- 
nation. “The door is not shut”, said 
Francoise Riviere, UNESCO As- 
sistant Director-General for Cul- 
ture, in Seville. However the pro- 
ceedings would have to be started 
from the beginning and the new 
nomination must be limited to one 
part of the cultural landscape of 
the Elbe Valley. Francesco Ban- 
darin states that this would re- 
quire “completely new nomination 
of the site, obviously with differ- 
ent perimeters and values. This 
will take time and will be carefully 
scrutinized.” 
Helma Orosz is confident: 
“UNESCO has built a bridge for 
Dresden to cross — and this time 
the expression is fitting. The city 
is to be given another chance. | 
think a new nomination is pos- 
sible — provided the majority of 
Dresden’s citizens want it” 
It seems they do: a survey carried 
out by the newspaper “Sachsis- 
che Zeitung” on 29 June among 
501 citizens found that almost 
two thirds of them wanted Dres- 
den to submit a new nomination. 
Just before UNESCO proclaimed 
its decision, it was a different mat- 
ter: on 20 June, the same news- 
paper had already done an opin- 
ion poll. At that time, 57 percent 
of Dresdeners felt they could do 
without the title of World Heritage 
Site. Public opinion is changing in 
Dresden. 
Jens Lubbadeh, 
journalist for Der Spiegel Online 
(Germany), correspondant 
for the UNESCO Courier

## [Page 22](186704eng.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

NN 
        
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Organisation 
des Nations Unies 
pour l'éducation, 
la science et la culture 
Organizacion 
de las Naciones Unidas 
para la Educacion, 
la Ciencia y la Cultura 
Opranu3auus 
O6beanHeHHbIX Hauui no 
BONpPOCaM 00pa30BaHus, 
HaYKU WU KYJIbTYpb! 
LiLaily alally Loy 
a EAE. 
Be BOUL ALR 
  
=   
      
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°6 
   
The UNESCO Courier is published by 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization. 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
f.ryan@unesco.org 
Director 
Saturnino Munoz Gomez 
Editor in Chief 
Jasmina Sopova - j.sopova@unesco.org 
Editorial assistance 
Katerina Markelova - k.markelova@unesco.org 
Editors 
Arabic 
Bassam Mansour - b.mansour@unesco.org 
assisted by Zaina Dufour - z.dufour@unesco.org 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape - w.cauhape@unesco.org 
English 
Cathy Nolan - c.nolan@unesco.org 
Russian 
Victoria Kalinin - v.kalinin@unesco.org 
Spanish 
Francisco Vicente-Sandoval - liglesias@unesco.org 
Photo and web layout 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org 
PDF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi 
Web Platform 
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro 
s.roberts@unesco.org 
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be 
reproduced and/or translated providing the credit line 
reads “Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” 
and includes date and hyperlink. Photos without 
UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations 
of the countries and territories concerned. 
22