# [096815](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

ANTONI TAPIES 
Vv 
ENVIRONMENT 
DEFEATING DECIBELS 
Vv 
HERITAGE 
Hf rm en     C
l
l
 
e
S
 
E
e
.
 
5 
5 
a
N
  

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### 97078: From Sarajevo: on the occasion of International Press Freedom Day the Director-General of UNESCO launches an appeal for peace

  
al § 111 IN | INTL | 1) 0 
 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

INTERVIEW WITH Contents 
JUNE 1994 
Antoni Tapies 
   
TEC HNOLOGY 
THE RESOURCEFUL GENE 
: 3 Cover: 
8 Biotechnology for beginners genetic manipulation of mouse eggs. 
by Monkombu Sambasivan Swaminathan 
I | Achievements, expectations and challenges 
by Albert Sasson and Edgar |. DaSilva 
  
UNESCO IN ACTION 
30 I 4 The state of the art 
NEWSBRIEFS by Toshiomi Yoshida 
+ ' Greenwatch 
HERITAGE 1 © The magic of mushrooms Defeating decibels 
Butrinti rediscovered by France Bequette by Zia Xholi by P. Atthasampunna and S. T. Chang y q 
15 . 
tor J 1 © greative ferment 
MARTIN LutHER KING: by Peter L. Rogers 
Death, where is thy sting? 
by Edouard J. Maunick 211 UNESCO's international network 
46 of microbial resources centres 
ARCHIVES 
€0 MM ENTARY The downfall of idealism 4g A rising tide 
by Thomas Mann 
re by Rita Colwell by 
Recent recordings 39 Federico Mayor 
by Isabelle Leymarie From the Green Revolution 
49 to the Gene Revolution 
Books of the world by Indra K. Vasil and Luis Herrera-Estrella 
by Edgar Reichmann Special consultants for this issue: 
50 21 Art and the science of life Albert Sasson 
Letters to the Editor by John Hodgson and Edgar J, DaSilva 
“The Governments of the States parties to this Constitution on behalf of their peoples declare, 
The NESCO “that since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed... . 
“that 2 peace based exclusively upon the political and economic arrangements of governments would not be a peace which could secure the 
Ti COURIER unanimous, lasting and sincere support of the peoples of the world, and that the peace must therefore be founded, if it is not to fail, upon the 
RELA LI intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind. 
“For these reasons, the States parties ... are agreed and determined to develop and to increase the means of communication between their peoples 
47th year — Published monthly and to employ these means for the purposes of mutual understanding and 2 truer and more perfect knowledge of each other’s lives...” 
in 32 languages and in Braille EXTRACT FROM THE PREAMBLE TO THE CONSTITUTION OF UNESCO, LONDON, [6 NOVEMBER [945 
 
 

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 96814: Interview with Antoni Tàpies

INTERVEN 
ANTONI 
‘TAPIES 
talks to 
Serafin Garcia Ibanez 
Born in Barcelona in 1923, Antoni Tapies is 
one of the greatest Spanish artists of our 
time. Largely self-taught, he was influenced 
early in his career by the Dadaists and the 
Surrealists and then in the 1350s he engaged 
in the experimentation with informalism for 
which he became famous. Major museums 
began to hold exhibitions of his work and 
in 1958 an entire room was devoted to it at 
the Venice Biennale. Awards from Unesco 
and the Carnegie Foundation testified to his 
growing international reputation, He has a 
highly personal way of using materials, con- 
structing his compositions from common- 
place and discarded objects — packaging, 
sand, marble dust, latex, cast iron, rags — 
mixed with thick impasto and incised with 
expressive graffiti-like markings. His later 
assemblages incorporate objects such as 
buckets, mirrors and even larger items. He 
has written widely about his art, and a 
volume of Conversations with Antoni Tapies 
was published in 1991 (Preste! Verlag, Ger- 
many). 
ay 
SERAFIN GARCIA IBANEZ 
is a journalist with UNESCO's 
Office of Public Information. 
  
  
WM You started out as a law student and 
then abandoned your law studies to devote 
yourself to painting. Did you take that 
decision on an impulse? 
— I'had an artistic vocation. When I was 
a child I loved drawing. I lacked the basic 
skills, but as time went by I became con- 
sumed by a desire to do better than all 
my classmates. My father, who was a 
lawyer, hoped that I would follow in his 
footsteps and join his practice. He was so 
insistent that I actually studied law for 
five years before dropping it. Then I had 
the good fortune to win a scholarship 
awarded by the French Institute in 
Barcelona which enabled me to go to Paris. 
Those scholarships were wonderful. They 
  
  
  
   
i 
carried no obligations, and although they 
were not worth very much financially, 
they provided enough to live on. For me 
it was an extraordinary stroke of luck. 
  
BW What sort of person are you? 
— I would say off the cuff that I am an 
anxious person. I worry about everything. 
I need to know everything. I tend to live in 
a state of anxiety with the feeling that life 
is some kind of great catastrophe. I feel the 
desire, or rather the intense need, to do 
something useful for society, and that is 
what stimulates me. In every situation I 
always look for what is positive and ben- 
eficial for my fellow citizens. I am inter- 
ested in study, reflection, philosophy— 

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 96814: Interview with Antoni Tàpies

i Me 
  
 
Hl One should come to art with an open mind, without searching 
for references. One should simply listen to one’s feelings. 
but always as a dilettante. I also consider 
myself a dilettante as a painter. 
W It is hard to reduce art to a formula and 
one might almost say that everyone bas 
‘their own definition. What is yours? 
—For me, art 1s a mechanism, a system 
that makes it possible to change the spec- 
tator’s way of looking and to bring him or 
her closer to a state of contemplation of 
reality at its deepest level. The artist is like 
the mystic: each one acts in his own way 
but their common purpose is to achieve 
the inner illumination that enables them to 
perceive the depths of reality. For me this 
1s what art is about. 
BW What do yor mean by “reality”, a word 
you often use? 
—When I talk of reality, I am always 
thinking of essentials. Profundity is not 
located in some remote, inaccessible 
region. It is rooted in everyday life. That 
1s what great thinkers have taught me, 
above all the philosophers of the Far East, 
for whom true wisdom—which I am far 
© from achieving—is the conjunction of 
samsara (the ordinary world) and nirvana 
(profound reality). To achieve contact with 
reality is not to transport oneself else- 
where, it is not transcendence but thor- 
ough immersion in one’s surroundings. A 
reality which is neither purely physical 
nor metaphysical, but both at once. 
BW Your work is known all over the world 
but many find it perplexing. Do you think 
this is because the public is used to figu- 
rative art? 
—It is true that the education we receive 
inculcates certain mental habits. As far as 
art is concerned, for example, it is gener- 
ally thought that painting is copying 
nature, in other words reality in its most 
superficial form. Today this 1s the role of 
photography, the cinema and television. 
What 1s called photorealism in painting 
no longer has any point. Not because it is 
questionable in itself but because there 
are other ways of expressing and 
explaining what it shows us. 
MW You yourself started out as a figurative 
painter... .. 
—Yes of course, just like everyone else. 
Like the artists of my generation, at any 
rate. We were attracted by what we have 
just been talking about: the imitation of 
nature. I did not attend an academy, I 
made one for myself, painting the por- 
traits of my friends and forcing myself to 
control what I wanted to express. 
WM Does a work of art have a message? 
—Is the medium the message? This is an 
endless source of debate. The way in which 
things are presented is one part of the mes- 
sage. Like the most conventional of figu- 
rative painters, I could paint a still-life 
with apples, for example, but I would do 
it in terms of something else that I wanted 
to express. I would paint those apples in 
my own way. Perhaps I would sketch a 
whirlpool, or a world in movement, an 
impression of living, organic matter. 
Painting expresses the painter’s way of 
thinking, his perception of reality. The 
kind of realism we are talking about is not 
so far from the work of certain contem- 
porary painters. Today we have other tech- 
nical possibilities, but some of them are 
very simple. People think that computers, 
new machines, the power of technology 
make it possible to reproduce reality with 
a high degree of precision. My equipment 
is extremely modest—it amounts to a 
brush whose bristles are rather worn. 
Thats all I need. The simplest tools can 
express the deepest feelings. 
BW You use very ordinary materials such as 
cardboard or hessian for vour paintings. 
—That too is a message. Materials are 
expressive. Gold leaf will make a totally 
different impression on you from that 
made by a piece of torn cardboard. And 
the piece of cardboard will have different 
connotations, and will arouse different 
feelings from those produced by a piece of 
polished marble. These commonplace 
materials, which had been ignored, were 
exactly what I was looking for. They pro- 
voked the spectator and made him think. 
Perhaps on the spur of the moment he 
thinks they are rubbish, but when he gives 
the matter a little thought he sees that 
there 1s profound wisdom in the humblest 
objects. The Japanese say that the whole 
universe is contained in a grain of sand. 
These objects, which seem to be nothing 
but rubbish, can deliver an authentic 
human message. 
W Is it necessary for the artist and his work 
to be politically, socially or morally com- 
mitted? Or is beauty sufficient justifica- 
tion for a work of art? 
—T have always thought that the ideolog- 
ical component—the political component 
even—was necessary. But it has to arise 
from the artist’s general vision and not, 
as has happened in totalitarian—fascist or 
communist—countries, from an overtly 
political discourse. My political commit- 
ment results from my way of working. 
The details naturally take their place on 
this backcloth. The message, whatever itis, 
is essential. The person who only paints to 
amuse the gallery or play the fool must be 
very unhappy. But, I repeat, the message 
emerges from the work itself; it is the 
work that reveals its social, political or 
philosophical content. 
WM A message only has meaning if it is 
understood, and the language of contem- 
porary art is perhaps not within everyone’s 
reach. Is an initiation necessary? 
—I think so. An initiation in the educa- 
tional sense of the term. Unfortunately, it 
is a training one must follow when young, 
for sensibility is formed in childhood. I do 
not think that educational systems in the 
West, especially in Spain, are up to it. Art 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 96814: Interview with Antoni Tàpies

  
must be taught at school in order to edu- 
cate the taste of children and young 
people, to prevent them from falling into 
banality. Most people approach art with 
preconceived ideas: they want to see in it 
what, as a result of conformism or because 
they are ill informed, they expect to find in 
it. One should come to art with an open 
mind, without searching for references. 
One should simply listen to one’s feel- 
Ings. 
W Which painter or painters do you most 
admire? 
—There are so many of them that it would 
be boring to give you alist of all of them. 
I'am a collector in a small way and I like 
to be surrounded by my favourite authors, 
painters and sculptors. And I am 
extremely eclectic. I am deeply moved by 
the great art of Egypt, Chinese painting of 
the Song and Yuan periods (which has 
inspired some of our contemporaries) and 
the works of the great Chinese and 
Japancse calligraphers. African art and 
pre-Cortesian and pre-Columbian art as 
well. 
W And among Spanish painters? 
—Spanish painting and art cover an 
immense range. I love the Romanesque 
style—Catalan Romanesque above all— 
but also certain features of Gothic art, the 
mysterious works of Ribera, Zurbardn, 
and of course Picasso and Miré. 
  
  
W You have left out another Catalan 
painter, Dali. 
—Dali produced some very interesting 
work in the 1930s. Then he began to do the 
kind of thing I was attacking a few minutes 
ago—photo painting. And from an ideo- 
logical point of view, Dali ceased to 
interest me from the time of the Civil War. 
I was disappointed by his behaviour as a 
citizen and as a human being. 
BW Do you have any pastimes or hobbies 
outside painting? 
—1I collect books, all kinds of books, old 
and new. Books that talk of the mysteries 
of life in every period. I also love listening 
to music. I am particularly fond of 
Romantic music: I find Wagner 
enchanting. But I also appreciate later 
composers such as Bruckner and Mahler, 
and even more modern composers such as 
the Italian Scelsi, whose admirable work is 
still not widely known. At present his is 
my favourite music. I also like the modern 
French composers and some of the Ger- 
mans, such as Stockhausen. 
MW Do you like flamenco? 
—I don’t know it well. I ought not to say 
that, because one cannot know flamenco, 
one can only feel it. It hasn’t often hap- 
pened to me, but whenever I have had an 
opportunity to see and hear great cantes 
being interpreted, I have been extremely 
moved. 
  
MW Literature uses words, music uses sounds. 
Architecture, sculpture and painting deal 
in matter. Does this mean that there are 
uncrossable frontiers between these dif- 
ferent forms of expression? 
—Speaking from experience I will say no. 
These arc academic classifications that are 
used by force of habit. Sometimes I feel 
that I am very close to the poets: it has cven 
been said that some of my paintings are 
poetic metaphors. At other times I feel 
affinities with music: I use fragile materials 
which when they crack produce a musical 
sound. I have also been told that my relief 
effects in painting are close to sculpture, 
and in fact I deliberately work in three 
dimensions. Today the very precise fron- 
tiers that separated painting, sculpture and 
other forms of art arc tending to fade away. 
W You designed the medal struck by 
UNESCO to commemorate the centenary 
of the birth of Pablo Picasso. And you 
recently designed another to mark the cen- 
tenary of the birth of Join Mir. 
—When UNESCO entrusted me with 
these commissions, I felt a tremendous 
sense of satisfaction since it created a kind 
of continuity, a link with the preceding 
generation through Picasso and above all 
Miré whom I knew very well and to 
whose work I have devoted much study. I 
even worked with him since I was a 
member of the governing body of the 
Miré Foundation in Barcelona. I feel very 
close to him and I have always had great 
admiration for him both as a man and as an 
artist. He was extremely human and hada 
vision of the world that was full of fantasy. 
We both tend to escape into dreams, 
dreams that are rooted in the depths of 
our being and awaken in the unconscious 
mechanisms that are far closer to tangible 
reality and everyday life than one might 
think. I see in Mird’s painting the convul- 
sions of the break with academicism and . 
the return to innocent things charged with 
meaning. As for Picasso, with the gen- 
erous positions he took, his fidelity to 
humanism, and his espousal of certain crit- 
ical approaches to social and political 
issues, he was for me a great master. MW 
  

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

Su 
Lal THE RESOURCEFUL BE 
UE GENE 5 
BE Lo J 
Vv 
By unlocking the treasury of the living 
world, modern biotechnology can help 
to solve some of the world’s most 
urgent problems — hunger 
P recunoLocy INE 
and malnutrition, disease, energy 
supplies and pollution.... 
 

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 96801: Biotechnology for beginners

BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR BEGINNERS 
by Monkombu Sambasivan Swaminathan 
Previous page, lettuce 
grown in liquid nutrients, 
using the technique known 
as hydroponics, in a 
Japanese vegetable factory. 
Kept at constant 
temperature with 24-hour- 
a-day lighting in a carbon- 
dioxide-rich atmosphere, 
the lettuce reach maturity 
4 to 5 times faster than 
normal. 
MONG the more than five billion 
women, men and children living 
on our planet, no two individuals 
are alike and the same is true of cross-polli- 
nated plants as well as animals and micro- 
organisms. This kaleidoscopic diversity, which 
exists in all living beings, provides the basis for 
biotechnology, which may be described as the 
technological modification and improvement 
of living organisms. 
The rediscovery of Gregor Johann 
Mendel’s laws of heredity in the early part of 
this century helped promote an understanding 
of the origins and workings of genetic diver- 
sity. The principal phenomena involved are 
segregation, mutation and recombination of 
genes. Together, these three actions generate 
opportunities for the immense genetic diver- 
sity in living organisms. 
In the past, the existence of genetic vari- 
ability enabled humans to select plants and 
animals for domestication. Over 10,000 years 
ago, plants such as wheat, barley and rice were 
selected for cultivation from the wild flora. 
After their initial domestication, these crops 
were continuously improved through selection 
of naturally occurring variability. In plants 
like fruit trees and the potato, occasional muta- 
tions gave rise to new varieties. Thus, today, we 
not only have over 1.5 million species of plants 
and animals, but also a large number of genetic 
strains within species. For example, more than 
100,000 varieties of rice are grown in different 
parts of the world. 
From the beginning of this century, tech- 
niques such as planned hybridization and later, 
the induction of mutations, were used by agri- 
cultural and biological research institutions 
to create new genetic combinations. 
Hybridization also became a method of 
increasing the growth of crops and animals, a 
phenomenon known as hybrid vigour. Hybrid 
maize developed in the United States in the 
1930s helped to double maize yields. The iden- 
tification of genes for a semi-dwarf plant type 
in wheat in Japan and in rice in China in the 
1940s provided the raw material for the green 
revolution witnessed in these crops in Asia in 
the late 1960s. Identification and utilization of 
genetic mechanisms for male sterility in plants 
made the commercial exploitation of hybrid 
vigour possible even in a self-pollinated crop 
like rice. Today, hybrid rice occupies nearly 18 
million hectares in China. 
Biological diversity thus became the basis 
of continuous improvements in productivity. 
Selection, mutation and hybridization were 
used to improve plants, animals and micro- 
organisms of interest to agriculture, industry 
and medicine. Thus, new antibiotics and vac- 
cines could be developed. Fermentation tech- 
nology made rapid strides. Classical biotech- 
nology involving non-molecular techniques 
is responsible for many of the improvements 
witnessed in scientific endeavours involving 
living organisms. 
 
 

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 96801: Biotechnology for beginners

  
Genetic engineering=the hard core 
of modern biotechnology 
Against this background, we may examine the 
new vistas opened up by molecular biology. 
This area of science was inaugurated by James 
Dewey Watson and Francis Crick forty years 
ago when they described the double helix 
structure of the deoxyribonucleic acid mole- 
cule, commonly known as DNA. Since then, 
emphasis has shifted to the study of the mol- 
ecular basis of genetic diversity and to the 
standardization of methods that can help 
achieve novel genetic combinations through 
what are known as recombinant DNA tech- 
niques, whereby scientists use tiny circular 
pieces of DNA known as plasmid vectors to 
achieve gene splicing. These techniques have 
opened up a new world of genetic engineering, 
leading to the creation of transgenic organ- 
Isms—organisms containing genetic material 
into which DNA from an unrelated organism 
has been artificially placed. They are alrcady 
being used in the production of insulin, inter- 
feron, and human growth hormone. Although 
the term “biotechnology” is used to denote a 
wide range of procedures such as cell and 
tissue culture, micro-propagation and fer- 
mentation, the hard core of modern biotech- 
nology is genetic engineering. 
The birth of an industry 
Present-day biotechnology, which combines 
conventional and molecular techniques, has 
every prospect of becoming a great industry. In 
addition to already existing applications in 
health and medicine, large-scale uses in agri- 
culture, industry, energy supplies, environ- 
  
 
¥ 
I. the United States 
tomatoes with a shelf-life 
of several weeks 
are grown by deactivating 
the enzymes that cause 
them to rot. In container 
at left are ordinary 
tomatoes 25 days 
after being picked; 
at right, genetically 
altered tomatoes. 
Biogas production 
on a farm in the village 
of Rangasamudra, 
Karnataka province (India). 
Cow dung is mixed 
with water in a trough 
from which it is piped 
into a tank where it is 
transformed by heat into 
natural gas (photos | 
and 2). As a result of this 
easy-to-use system, 
gas can replace wood 
as domestic fuel (photo 3), 
thus helping to halt 
deforestation in this part 
of southern India. 
mental protection and the exploration of space 
are becoming exciting possibilities. Biotech- 
nology will probably provide the key to pro- 
ducing more food and other agricultural com- 
modities from less land and water in the 
twenty-first century without the adverse eco- 
logical implications associated with the high 
doses of mineral fertilizers and chemical pes- 
ticides being used now to make high-yielding 
varieties of rice, wheat, maize and other crops 
express their full potential. 
Many transgenic plants are currently under 
field testing in several parts of the world. Early 
applications of recombinant DNA method- 
ology gave rise to micro-organisms that can 
clean up oil spills. This led to the birth of 
bioremediation technology, which has been 
widely used to treat the problems of “oil lakes” 
created by the 1991 Gulf War. In fact, biotech- 
nologies have opened up unlimited opportu- 
nities for the purposeful use of biological 
diversity. For example, at our Research Centre 
in Madras, we are assembling a gene pool for

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 96801: Biotechnology for beginners

     
      
  
Drought-resistant crop 
varieties and a new system 
of drip irrigation enable 
farmers to grow asparagus 
in the desert of lca (Peru). 
SC 
MONKOMBU SAMBASIVAN 
SWAMINATHAN is an Indian 
scientist who played a leading 
role in the “Green Revolution” 
in Asia, He is Director-General 
of the International Rice 
Research Institute, Los Bafios, 
The Philippines, and has 
worked extensively in the 
fields of plant genetics and 
agronomic research and 
development. 
WC — 
: 
. 
iL 
    
  
  
 
  
 
SF» 
. wl » . : oN Lo XN EAE Sat 
a - Fa po SRS or LE SRST ony ND Rare es BW I Lat Ta Waris Cat 5, IT SR rad « ALITY Ty LP Mr Pe PA v - . 
- LB LG FT. -— 44 Lo - OE wat, A : 
x SRF UR oR aE RT SA Pious das a A x 
breeding crops for tolerance to salt-water 
intrusion. Mangrove trees that inhabit inter- 
tidal regions along the shore have such genetic 
traits. When we have enough scientific knowl- 
edge, it may be possible to transfer genes for 
salt-water tolerance from mangrove trees to 
other plants. Such research is important due to 
the possible rise of the world’s sea level in the 
not-so-distant future. 
Microbiological enrichment of cellulosic 
wastes can be an important source of animal 
feed, particularly where farm animals are 
reared under stall-fed conditions. Biomass 
refineries are now being established in several 
countrics. 
Questions of safety and ethics 
New rescarch tools always generate hope and 
fear, and questions about safety and cthics 
have kindled public concern about biotech- 
nology. Critics fear that “playing God” with 
living systems may create an environmental or 
medical disaster, or lead us to interfere with 
human nature itself. This is why countries 
with a significant biotechnology programme 
also have strict biosafety regulations. Com- 
\ 
. 
A ——— cs TL SGU——— GO — —
—— - an. ——————————— a mr  —— ~ ————— el a 
a EE = A a 14 * ia — i = pu = 
—— - \: : 
as = : . i : LAR El a Ld 
-— SE I J ETT CRE we SOR SL o Vee La%ia — a = 
- 
.) 
= 
— — 
. —————— 
_ ro —— . 
- 5 » - - __. o- 
~— er —,  —— ~~ P— - 
mittees dealing with ethical issues also exist in 
many scientific organizations. 
Another issue of public concern, particu- 
larly in developing countries, is the usc of 
basic genetic material from plants from these 
countries by private seed companies in indus- 
trialized nations solely for private profit. Since 
most biotechnological research in industrial- 
ized nations is in the private sector, and the 
private sector depends on developing countries 
for genetic resources, questions relating to 
systems for patenting and monetary compen- 
sation arc the centre of widespread interna- 
tional attention. This was reflected in the 
Global Biodiversity convention signed by 
over 150 nations at Rio de Janeiro in June 
1992. | 
Besides providing the foundation for global 
food security and for sustainable livelihoods, 
the wise use of biotechnology and a broader 
understanding of both conventional and mol- 
ecular genetics could contribute to the elimi- 
nation of irrational beliefs and prejudices 
about the dangers of diversity. These societal 
benefits may ultimately be the most significant 
contributions of modern biotechnology. MH

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 96804: Achievements, expectations and challenges

ACHIEVEMENTS, EXPECTATIONS 
AND CHALLENGES 
by Albert Sasson and Edgar |. DaSilva 
HE world of biotechnology is vast and 
varied. Some idea of just how varied can 
be gauged from a report published by 
the Organization for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD), which defined 
biotechnology as “the application of scientific 
and engineering principles to the processing of 
materials by biological agents to provide goods 
and services”. The “biological agents” referred to 
are mainly micro-organisms, animal and plant 
cells, and enzymes. The “goods and services” 
include the products of the agriculture, fishery, 
food processing and pharmaceutical industries. 
The scientific basis of biotechnology is mul- 
tidisciplinary, and the core disciplines include 
molecular and cell biology, biochemistry, genetics, 
microbiology, immunology, chemical and process 
engineering, computing and data processing. So 
many fields of activity are involved that it is per- 
haps more appropriate to talk of “biotechnolo- 
a 
-~ - - = 
v3 “ a go! i . " . . 
us r 
| 
MS. ut 
&T r i «| gr 5 - 
4 a 
i . K 
* 2 d A = af 9 ~~ 
af Nd + - . 
» oo 
o 
i 
\ ay g" _ " - ah 
i ahs » 
=" - i \ ba ' 
. ud ' i» 
ar 9 i 
> 4 y 2 Fd st 
tad mE 
ATL 
WY) IN 
24 Lar 
gies” in the plural rather than the singular. These 
technologies may be simple or sophisticated, 
cheap or expensive. They range from time-hon- 
oured processes such as fermentation, to genetic 
enginecring, the ability to take hereditary char- 
acters from one organism and transplant them 
into another, thus creating “transgenic” plants and 
animals with desired characteristics. 
Genetic engineering is a powerful tool that 
holds vast promise for medicine and agriculture, 
where basic research has advanced so far since the 
mid-1970s that there has been much talk of a 
“biotechnological revolution”. However, it raises 
many sensitive ethical and legal questions, as well 
as questions relating to safety and public atti- 
tudes. 
During the 1980s, biotechnologies in the 
industrialized countries progressed on many 
fronts. In North America, research led to the 
discovery and manufacture of the first commer- 
  
 
Advances in 
biotechnology 
are 
transforming 
social J 
and economic 
a 
 
M onoculture — 
the cultivation of large 
tracts of land to produce 
a single variety of crop 
which is harvested all 
at once — is a typical 
feature of modern large- 
scale agriculture. It has 
a number of disadvantages 
including low resistance 
to pests, the use of large 
amounts of chemical 
fertilizers and pesticides, 
and consequent risks 
of groundwater pollution. 
Below, a wheat field 
in Canada. 
rh RC (LULL SAL 

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 96804: Achievements, expectations and challenges

These scientists at the 
Botanical Conservatory at 
Porquerolles (France) have 
propagated in vitro date 
palm plantlets resistant to 
“Bayoud”, an incurable 
disease which threatens 
the palm groves of North 
Africa and, eventually, 
elsewhere. 
ee Nh hiliS 
ALBERT SASSON is 
Director of UNESCO's Bureau 
of Studies, Programming and 
Evaluation. He has written 
numerous works on biology, 
microbiology and 
biotechnology, including 
Biotechnologies: Challenges and 
Promises (UNESCO, 1984), 
Biotechnologies and Development 
(UNESCOI/CTA, 1988) and 
Biotechnologies in Developing 
Countries: Present and Future. 
Volume 1: Regional and National 
Survey (UNESCO, 1993). 
 
cial biotechnology-derived products such as 
insulin, human growth hormone and tissue plas- 
minogen activator. The most recent such product 
was the antihaemophiliac factor VIII, produced 
by an American firm for the treatment of 
haemophilia A. Also in pharmaceutics, new devel- 
opments in molecular biology made it possible to 
produce vaccines using yeasts and animal cells. 
Attempts were made to increase the rate of 
growth of farm animals by injecting growth hor- 
mones produced via genetic engineering. So far 
there are no transgenic animals on the market, but 
transgenic animals such as mice are being used in 
the laboratory as human disease models. Some of 
these recent and possible future developments are 
shown in the box on page 14 and others are 
described elsewhere in this issue. 
However, a “knowledge revolution” does 
not necessarily lead immediately to a revolution 
in practice. It has, for example, been estimated that 
it may take twenty or thirty years before the 
impact of recent biotechnological discoveries in 
plant and animal breeding and in food production 
is truly felt. 
Consumer interests and biosafety 
In the public mind biotechnologies are often 
identified exclusively with genetic engineering 
or with human reproduction technologies rather 
than with industrial microbiology, biochemical 
engineering or fermentation, or associated with 
food safety or public health concerns. 
Governments and industry are increasingly 
aware that there is a need to inform the public 
better about the new biotechnologies, that the 
participation of both experts and non-special- 
ists is required to assess the objectivity of infor- 
mation, and that public confidence in regulation 
effectiveness must be significantly improved. 
France is one European country that has 
established a mechanism, in the form of a Com- 
mittee on Biomolecular Engineering, to control 
the risks associated with the production and 
release of genetically-engineered crop species or 
domestic animals. According to the Committee, 
1993-1994 would be a crucial period when 
numerous projects concerning transgenic plants 
implemented over several years were close to the 
homologation phase prior to marketing. Most of 
the requests for trials examined by the Com- 
mittee concerned plants that had been engineered 
for resistance to herbicides, insect pests or specific 
diseases, or were designed to provide improved 
nutritious quality. A similar situation existed in 
other industrialized countries. 
In the United States, the government was 
asked by the Environmental Defence Fund and 
several other groups to create new, or modify 
existing, regulatory structures for biotechnologies 
through legislation. However, the U.S. govern- 
ment’s “Report on National Biotechnology 
Policy” found that the risks posed by bio-engi- 
neered organisms should not be exaggerated and 
stated that “products developed through biotech- 
nology do not per se pose risks to human health 
and the environment.” On 26 May 1992, the U.S. 
administration announced that genetically mod- 
ified foodstuffs would not need special autho- 
rization or labels before being marketed, because 
they do not pose specific biosafety problems. 
This decision, which was criticized by several 
consumer and environmentalist groups, ended a 
ten-year period of uncertainty for the industri- 
alists concerning the regulations on the use of 
biotechnologies in the agro-food sector. 
Economic effects 
Biotechnologies are expected to make a significant 
impact on agricultural production. Market bal- 
ances published for the United States and Europe 
suggest that they could increase productivity by 
decreasing costs per unit of output (e.g. fewer 
chemical inputs) or by increasing yields per unit 
of output. Forecasts made in the early 1990s 
mentioned possible milk production increases 
of from 10 per cent to 16 per cent within a five- 
to-ten-year period, if bovine growth hormone 
were to be used. (Its utilization was approved by 
the Food and Drug Administration in November 
1993.) 
Biotechologies are expected to contribute to 
long-term trends towards the reduction of the 
share of agriculture in total employment, but job 
loss may be partly offset by job creation in related 
sectors, particularly the food-related services. 
Sull, the dissemination of agricultural and food 
technologies in the OECD countries is expected 
to be a gradual process in the next decade, without 
major, destabilizing impacts on the social struc- 
ture of employment. 
During the 1980s biotechnologies were estab- 
lished in developing countries with varying 
degrees of priority and sophistication, a process 
illustrating not only the contrasting economic

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 96804: Achievements, expectations and challenges

and scientific development conditions of these 
countries, but also the various possibilities for 
applying biotechnologies at levels of investment 
and complexity suitable for each specific situation. 
Biotechnologies 
and developing countries 
Everyone agrees that developing countries need 
to move up the gradient of biotechnologies, from 
the low-cost ones to the more sophisticated and 
expensive ones. The more richly endowed 
national systems are already well on the way, 
and even the smallest and poorest need to think 
about developing and using modern biotech- 
nologies. For instance, a country where crop 
species provide the staple food could profitably 
invest in a tissue culture laboratory, at a capital 
cost of about $20,000. This would enable it to 
import, as tissue cultures, virus- or disease-free 
clones developed in research stations abroad, 
and to multiply them rapidly, if they proved 
adaptable to local conditions and acceptable to 
producers and consumers. 
The significance of biotechnologies for the 
Third World is illustrated by the example of 
Asian agriculture. In the early 1990s, Asia has 
more than 50 per cent of the global population, 
over 70 per cent of the world’s farming families, 
but only 25 per cent of the world’s arable land. At 
the beginning of the twenty-first century, the 
per capita land availability may be 0.1 hectare in 
China and 0.14 hectare in India. Meanwhile, the 
average Asian population growth rate is 1.86 per 
cent. The only way for countries like China and 
India to feed their growing populations is through 
continuous improvement in yields. China has 
gone into large-scale exploitation of rice hybrids 
for this purpose. 
There has been an almost three-fold expansion 
in the world’s irrigated land since 1950, much of 
1t in the developing countries. Scope for further 
A biochemical engineer in 
the United States carries 
out a computer-controlled 
process for the 
development of a malaria 
vaccine using genetic 
engineering. 
In this water purification 
facility at Narragansett, 
Rhode Island (U.S.A.), 
waste water is purified 
naturally though 
processing in tanks by 
minerals, bacteria, fungi 
and algae (foreground), 
and then by certain species 
of molluscs, fish and large 
aquatic plants 
(background). 
expansion is being gradually reduced and conse- 
quently improved water management and the 
incorporation of genes for drought tolerance 
into major crop species are now urgent necessi- 
ties. 
As we have seen, however, more than excel- 
lent research is needed before biotechnologies 
can achieve commercial success. The latter 
depends on factors related to “social capability”, 
which includes facilities for the diffusion of 
knowledge and conditions facilitating structural 
change. Today scientists and political leaders in 
developing countries are concerned about a 
number of aspects of current global trends in 
biotechnological research and development. Some 
of the questions they are asking themselves are: 
5 Will the “biotechnology revolution” help 
resource-poor farmers increase productivity? 
ww Will genetic engineering research directed 
at finding substitutes for national products not 
have adverse impacts on the farming sector and 
the export products of their countries? Such fears 
are based, for example, on the possible use of 
natural or synthetic sweeteners as substitutes for 
cane or beet sugar, as well as the development of 
substitutes for vanilla flavouring, cocoa butter and 
diosgenin. 
ww Will products produced by genetic engi- 
neering be safe? Will developing countries be 
used as testing grounds for genetically modified 
organisms, as a way of avoiding the stringent 
regulations prevailing in the industrialized coun- 
tries? 
ex What will be the impact of the extension of 
intellectual property rights to individual genes and 
genotypes on the availability of such improved 
material to developing countries and resource- 
poor farmers? Will intellectual property rights be 
exclusively reserved for rewarding formal inno- 
vation, even though the informal innovation 
system has played, and is playing, a key role in the 
identification and conservation of plant and 
animal and genetic resources? 

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

14 
  
  
The 1980s and early 1990s have seen rapid 
advances in biotechnologies on many fronts. 
Here is a sample of achievements and pros- 
pects: 
PHARMACEUTICALS 
Today . . . production by microbial or animal 
cells of hormones, substances for breaking 
down blood clots, blood coagulants, lympho- 
kins, interferons (anti-cancer), vaccines 
against viral, bacterial and parasitic 
diseases (e.g. hepatitis B and C, schistoso- 
miasis, malaria) 
and tomorrow. . . Breakthroughs may occur 
in the fields of anti-Aids vaccines or drugs 
and anti-cancer medicines. 
DISEASE-RESISTANT PLANTS 
Today. . . Progress has been rapid since 
1982, when the first transgenic plant was 
created. Several dozen plants have since 
been modified to increase growth perfor- 
mance and resistance to viruses and other 
pathogens. In 1994, several hundred trials 
were being carried out on transgenic plants 
in Europe, North America, Japan and Aus- 
tralia. 
and tomorrow. . . Some of the transgenic 
plants already tested (potato, cotton, rape- 
seed, tomato, tobacco, soybean) are 
expected to be marketed by the mid- or late 
1990s. A transgenic tomato variety with a 
prolonged shelf-life (U.S.A.) is already being 
marketed; this will also be the case for a 
virus-resistant tomato variety (Japan). 
However, delays due to safety requirements, 
public concern and the need for more 
research may slow down large-scale market- 
ing of genetically modified crop species bet- 
ween now and the year 2000. 
NEW FOODS 
Today. . . Bioconversion of starch into sweet 
products, food flavours and enhancers, fruit- 
juice processing; derivation of amino-acids 
and other nutrients, pigments and vitamins 
from micro-algae; new foods from fermenta- 
tion; cheese-making enzymes, lactose-free 
dairy products, yeast hybrids. 
and tomorrow. . . Products that may be mar- 
keted by 1995 include genetically modified 
baker's yeast, new food colourings and 
ingredients, high added-value compounds 
from plant cell and micro-algal cultures. By 


### 96805: The State of the art

Fle 
““ THE STATE OF THE ART | 
the end of the century we may see geneti- 
cally modified food bacteria for flavour and 
quality, modified food enzymes, novel bio- 
catalysts for food processing, and increasing 
numbers of rapid biotests and biosensors for 
food contaminants or pathogens. 
FASTER-GROWING ANIMALS 
Today. . . Already in commercial exploitation 
are: diagnostics, new vaccines and drugs, in- 
vitro fertilization and embryo transfer in 
domestic animals, growth hormone adminis- 
tration to increase growth and milk yield, 
feeds and feed additives. So far no trans- 
genic domestic animals are on the market. 
Transgenic animals such as a transgenic 
mouse carrying a human cancer gene have 
been used in the laboratory as human 
disease models. 
and tomorrow. . . Between now and the end 
of the century, the development of fish, pigs 
and cattle with rapid growth potential 
through the insertion of growth hormone 
genes, improved carcass quality and, for 
cattle, increased milk yield, is expected to 
be rapid. Gene transfer may also lead to the 
multiplication of genetically superior animals 
through the development of disease-resis- 
tant breeds. 
MORE PRODUCTIVE 
FISH AND ALGAE 
Today. . . Growth hormone genes from 
rainbow trout have been inserted into a 
number of other commercial fish species. No 
transgenic fish have yet been patented. A 
wide range of products derived from micro- 
algae are used in the manufacture of food- 
stuffs, cosmetics, dyes, paints, paper, tex- 
tiles, etc. 
and tomorrow. . . Vaccines for disease and 
stress control in aquaculture is a probable 
growth area. In Scandinavia nearly all trout 
and salmon produced by aquaculture are 
vaccinated, compared to 5% ten years ago. 
Promising new antibiotics, anti-cancer 
agents and food additives will be developed. 
T. Yoshida 
  
  TOSHIOMI YOSHIDA, of 
Japan, is a Professor at the 
International Centre of Co- 
operative Research in 
Biotechnology, Faculty of 
Engineering, Osaka University.

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 96804: Achievements, expectations and challenges

> Will it be possible to balance the market- 
driven features of biotechnology research by 
concern for the long-term well-being of 
humankind, poor as well as rich? Research on 
staple food crop species in the developing coun- 
tries needs to be supported internationally, for 
the sake of global, human sustainable devel- 
opment conducted in a spirit of solidarity. The 
same international effort is required to find 
cures for diseases prevailing in the Third World. 
No panacea 
The perfecting of conventional biotechnologies 
and the expansion of more advanced biotech- 
nologies as a result of further discoveries in 
cell and molecular biology are leading to far- 
reaching economic and social change because of 
their applications in agriculture and food pro- 
duction, the cure and prevention of disease, 
the meeting of energy needs, and environ- 
mental protection. The spectacular progress 
of biotechnologies is full of promise for 
humankind. 
However, these advances should not be 
seen as a panacea. They are not intended to 
substitute, but to complement, the wide range 
of technologies used in the various areas of 
social and economic development. For instance, 
plant biotechnologies, including genetic trans- 
formation of crop species and varieties, are 
complementary to conventional crop breeding 
and selection of cultivars. 
The value of biotechnologies is that they can 
be applied at different levels of complexity, 
investment and effort in the production of 
food crops, livestock husbandry, chemical and 
pharmaceutical industries, the conversion of 
biomass into fuel, the transformation of agri- 
cultural and industrial by-products and pollu- 
tion abatement. Developing countries are now 
taking advantage of these characteristics. This 
trend will continue. | 
A cell culture laboratory 
in Egypt. 
i i ES 
EDGAR ). DASILVA, a 
microbiologist and former 
vice-president of the World 
Federation of Culture 
Collections (WFCCQC), is 
responsible for the life sciences 
in UNESCO's Basic Sciences 
Division. He has been largely 
responsible for the preparation 
and implementation of the 
MIRCENSs (Microbiological 
Resources Centres) 
programme. 15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 96806: The Magic of mushrooms

  
THE MAGIC OF MUSHROOMS 
by P Atthasampunna and S. T. Chang ngs ith 
a future 
    
HE mushroom has always been a 
- Tr thing of mystery. In ancient times the 
seemingly miraculous manner of its 
fT growth without seed, its sudden appearance 
4y after rain, its equally rapid disappearance and 
rr = its curious umbrella-like shape gave rise to a 
ealth of allusions and mythologies. Today, it 
is continuing to perform feats of magic and 
versatility, not only as a source of food, but by 
helping to convert agricultural and industrial 
wastes into useful matter. 
  
I
Y
 
4
a
 
m
i
 
N
N
 
=
 
The mushroom as symbol 
of longevity. Detail of a 
Korean painting (late- 18th, 
i oH early-19th century).

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

Edible mushrooms provide high quality 
protein that can be produced with greater 
biological efficiency than animal protein. They 
are rich in fibre, minerals and vitamins, and 


### 96806: The Magic of mushrooms

have a low crude fat content. These properties 
are major contributing factors to the tradi- 
tional recognition of mushrooms as “healthy” 
food. 
However, although a large number of 
mushroom species are not only edible but 
also possess tonic and medicinal qualities, 
some are lethally poisonous. There is no 
simple way of distinguishing between edible 
and poisonous mushrooms, and one should 
eat mushrooms only if one knows their names 
and their properties with considerable preci- 
s10n. 
+ Mushroom cultivation, moreover, requires 
relatively little in terms of large-scale equip- 
ment, capital, land and processing. In the rural 
areas of less-developed countries, where large- 
scale capital-intensive operations are inap- 
propriate, well-managed mushroom farms 
can make important contributions to the 
nutrition and economic welfare of the local 
people. This is especially true in regions where 
the indigenous population suffers from pro- 
tein deficiency. 
Nature’s garbage man 
However, the mushroom would not be 
worthy of its versatile reputation if it were 
only a source of food. It can also help to solve 
  
one of humankind’s most urgent and growing 
problems—its propensity to create waste. 
The agricultural, forestry and food pro- 
cessing industries generate huge quantities of 
wastes, much of which is either burnt, dis- 
charged into watercourses or used for landfill. 
And yet it constitutes a potentially valuable 
resource. Most agricultural, industrial and 
household solid wastes are rich in organic 
matter, mainly cellulose, hemicellulose and 
lignin, substances that are highly resistant to 
biological degradation and have little or no 
food value in their original form. Further- 
more, their disposal can be a major source of 
environmental pollution. However, when 
properly treated with bioconversion tech- 
nology—the process whereby micro-organ- 
isms are used to transform organic residues 
into utility products—they can be modified 
and upgraded into high-quality protein for 
human and animal consumption, and used 
for the production of microbial metabolites 
and the generation of new feedstocks for the 
polymer industry, which creates materials 
such as plastics, resins and synthetic rubbers. 
Edible mushroom production is a partic- 
ularly effective form of bioconversion tech- 
nology. Mushrooms differ from green plants 
in that they cannot use sunlight to manufac- 
ture their food. What they do is produce 
enzymes that degrade the complex substrates 
on which they grow and then feed themselves 
on the soluble substances thus produced. They 
can be cultivated on a wide variety of woody 
and cellulose wastes, and the spent residue 
left after harvesting can be used as an animal 
feedstock and/or a soil conditioner. 
There is also rapidly growing interest in 
Above, Shiii take (Lentinus 
edodes), a fragrant 
mushroom grown in Japan 
from which a natural 
product, active against 
certain types of tumour, is 
extracted. 
Below left, the poisonous 
mushroom fly agaric 
(Amanita muscaria). 
EERE ES 
P. ATTHASAMPUNNA of 
Thailand, is Director of the 
Microbial Resources Centre 
(MIRCEN) at the Thailand 
Institute of Scientific and 
Technological Research, 
Bangkok. She is a specialist in 
biofuel research and also heads 
the Microbial Culture Service 
Unit at her country’s National 
Centre for Genetic Engineering 
and Biotechnology. 
S.T. CHANG, of Australia, is a 
specialist in fungal genetics. A 
former Executive Secretary of 
the Headquarters of 
UNESCO's Southeast Asian 
Network on Microbiology, he 
is now Chairman of the 
Biology Department at the 
Chinese University of Hong 
Kong and Director of the 
Hong Kong MIRCEN on 
Bioconversion Technology. He 
is a member at large of the 
Executive Board of the 
international Union of 
Microbiological Societies. 17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

Mushroom spore used to 
inoculate wood with fungus 
for growing Shii take on a 
mushroom “farm” in 
Texas (U.S.A). 
Cultivated mushrooms 
are grown in former 
quarries near Paris on 
sacks of manure covered 
with crushed chalky soil. 
The harvest lasts from 
3 to 6 months, 
  
mushrooms as a source of high-value metabo- 
lites, substances which can be used to treat 
tumours, strengthen the immune system and 
reduce blood pressure and cholesterol levels. 
One such substance, PSK, also known as 
Krestin, is made from the mushroom Coriolus 
versicolor and has become the best-selling 
anti-cancer drug in Japan, where it has 25 per 
cent of market share and in 1987 had an annual 
sale of $357 million. One Japanese company 
has annual sales of lentinan, a polysaccharide 
derived from another mushroom, Lentinus 
edodes, amounting to $90 million. These nat- 
ural products are active against certain types 
of tumours and have the advantage of not 
being toxic to non-target cells. 


### 96806: The Magic of mushrooms

Mushrooms also represent a relatively 
untapped source of novel products for use in 
the food and drink industries as illustrated 
by the growing number of products reaching 
the retail market. Important examples include 
natural food additives such as colorants and 
flavour compounds that can be used to replace 
chemical additives that are often considered 
less acceptable. Furthermore, the food 
industry is already subject to consumer pres- 
sure to produce “healthy” foods and, as the 
emphasis on prevention rather than cure of 
diet-related diseases grows, this trend will 
become even stronger. 
It should be noted that world production 
of cultivated edible mushrooms is, well, mush- 
rooming. Nearly 4,000 tons of mushrooms 
were cultivated worldwide in 1989-1990, a 
dramatic increase from just over 2,000 tons 
cultivated in 1986. There has been a particu- 
larly sharp increase in growth over the last five 
years. This trend is expected to continue in the 
future. 
While it is likely that more low-tech 
processes such as mushroom bioconversion 
technology will be of interest to developing 
countries, it is certain that the application of 
microbial biotechnology to solid organic 
wastes will be an important tool for their food 
industries and environmental management in 
the years to come. | 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

  
Known since Antiquity, 
fermentation processes offer 
great opportunities to today’s 
food industry | 
Ee lh pr 


### 96807: Creative ferment

1 ERMENTED foods and beverages, in their 
many and varied forms, have been a great 
source of pleasure to humans over the cen- 
turies. The ancient art of cheese-making involves the 
fermentation of milk or cream. Bread involves a 
yeast fermentation, and loaves of bread have been 
found in Egyptian pyramids built 6,000 years ago. 
The discovery of fruit fermentation was made so 
long ago that the ancient Greeks believed that wine 
had been invented by one of their gods, Dionysus. 
And from about 2500 B.C, Egyptian documents 
describe the malting of barley and the fermentation 
  
CREATIVE FERMENT 
by Peter L. Rogers 
of beer. Kuz, a Chinese rice beer, has been traced 
back to 2300 B.C. More than 3,000 years ago, the 
Chinese used mouldy soybean curd to clear up 
skin infections and Indians living in central America 
used fungi to treat infected wounds. The Penicillinm 
mould in cheese-making was often used for similar 
purposes. 
It is only since the time of Louis Pasteur, who in 
1857 established that alcoholic fermentations were 
caused by living cells, that we have begun to under- 
stand the fundamental role of micro-organisms in 
these fermentation processes. In fact, the successful 
development of the food industry in Western coun- 
tries has involved the use of micro-organisms not 
only to enhance the flavour, texture and nutritional 
qualities of many foods and beverages, but also to 
control spoilage through sterilization and proper 
packaging. In other societies as well, control of 
spoilage has been achieved by fermentation. 
In recent times, there has been a growing interest 
Above, rows of ewe’s milk 
cheeses in a cave at 
Roquefort-sur-Soulzon in 
the Aveyron department 
of France. Bread-mould 
(inset) is added to the 
cheeses as they ripen.

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 96807: Creative ferment

in studying traditional food fermentations with a 
view to understanding the characteristics of the 
micro-organisms and to designing better processes 
for foods with enhanced flavours and better nutri- 
tional and preservative qualities. 
A recipe for flavoursome fish sauce 
Fermented foods can be classified broadly into 
three types, depending on the way the fermentation 
is carried out. Some fermentations occur under 
liquid culture conditions, some take place almost 
entirely on solid material, while others are a com- 
bination of both. Some of these processes are now 
being practised on a very large industrial scale, but 
it is important to remember that most, if not all, had 
their origins in traditional small-scale activities. 
In liquid culture fermentations, the raw mate- 
rials for the fermentation are allowed to solubilize 
or are mixed together with large quantities of water. 
Then either a specific inoculuin is added to start a 
new culture, or a natural culture develops. A good 
example is the production of fish sauce, which has 
been practised widely in Korea, Japan and other 
Asian countries for centuries. Because fish are 
highly proteinaceous, they spoil very rapidly in 
tropical temperatures. To make fish sauce, the fish 
is normally mixed with salt (20-35 per cent) and 
allowed to solubilize in vats or tanks at tropical 
ambient temperatures. 
The maturation process, which involves the 
transformation of the fish tissue into simpler com- 
pounds (by the action of enzymes) and the subse- 
quent growth of beneficial microbial flora (which 
suppresses harmful micro-organisms) usually takes 
three to twelve months or longer. During this period 
special bacteria and yeasts, which are capable of 
surviving the higher salt concentrations, develop and 
give the final fish sauce its distinctive flavour and 
aroma. Other examples of liquid culture fermenta- 
tions are fermented milk products such as yoghurt 
and soy sauce. (Soy sauce production was described 
in seventh-century Chinese and Japanese litera- 
ture and more than one million kilolitres of it arc 
produced annually in Japan today.) 
Semi-solid fermentations are usually carried 
out with solids such as grains or chopped vegetables 
that are mixed with water and allowed to ferment. 
The production of og?, a traditional African fer- 
mented starch cake made from maize, sorghum or 
millet grains, is a good example of a semi-solid 
process. Fermentation is anaerobic and sponta- 
neous, and requires only one or two days. During 
this time, the ogz develops a yoghurt-type flavour 
which is a critical factor in its acceptability. Various 
moulds and bacteria have been identified during the 
fermentation process and it is evident that Lacto- 
bacillus bacteria are responsible for the produc- 
tion of lactic acid, which is the major component of 
In Abomey (Benin), a girl 
sells yovo-doko, a fritter 
made of marwsé, a 
fermented paste of sugar, 
yeast, wheat and maize 
flour. 
bt eS SE 
PETER L. ROGERS, of 
Australia, is a Professor of 
Biotechnology at the 
University of New South 
Wales, A member of 
UNESCO’ Southeast Asian 
Network on Microbiology 
since 1975, he has 
published extensively on 
fermentation processes and 
the application of recombinant 
micro-organisms.

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 96807: Creative ferment

* ogi flavour. The industrial production of ogi is 
based on an upgraded village method and the final 
product is a dry form of the starch cake that has a 
longer shelf-life. 
A soybean-enriched variant called soy-ogi has 
about 15 per cent protein content and has been 
used to treat children suffering from kwashiorkor, 
a protein deficiency disease. Other well-known 
semi-solid fermentations are the fermented veg- 
ctable products of sauerkraut and the Korean 
kimchi. 
The third type of fermentation, solid substrate 
fermentation, can be seen in the creation of soybean 
tempeh, a fermented product consumed as a staple 
food in Indonesia and other countries in Southeast 
Asia. 
Tempeh manufacture involves a two-step fer- 
mentation process. In the first stage, soybeans are 
soaked in tap water for twelve to twenty-four hours 
during which an acid fermentation develops. After 
soaking, the soybeans are boiled in water, drained, 
cooled and then arranged in trays for the second fer- 
mentation, which is conducted with the fungus 
Rhizopus oligosporus. A mixed culture of bacteria 
and fungi occur, with the bacteria being very impor- 
tant in improving the nutritional content, in par- 
ticular enhancing vitamin B12. 
In Indonesia, tempeh is eaten by all sectors of the 
population and is often used as a substitute for 
meat among many low income groups as it is an 
excellent high protein food that can be preserved 
without the need for expensive refrigeration. It is 
also becoming increasingly popular among vege- 
tarians in Western countries in the form of tempeh 
burgers. : 
Besides tempeh, other examples of such 
solid substrate fermentations include fermented 
meat products, cheese making and the produc- 
tion of gari, a staple in parts of Africa such as 
Nigeria. 
  
 
- UNESCO'S INTERNATIONAL NETWORK 
  
OF MICROBIAL RESOURCES CENTRES 
The microbe is helping to free Third World farmers from dependence | 
on costly chemical fertilizers 
Progress in biotechnology depends to a large extent on the availability of 
microbes. To meet this need UNESCO, in active collaboration with the United 
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), began in the 1970s to establish a 
network of Microbiological Resources Centres (MIRCENSs) directed to the 
needs of developing countries. The first MIRCENs were six regional centres 
in Nairobi (Kenya), Porto Alegro (Brazil), Bangkok (Thailand), Dakar (Senegal), 
Cairo (Egypt) and Guatemala City. Although the MIRCEN concept applies mainly 
to the developing countries, “technical” MIRCENs began to be established in 
the 1980s in the technologically advanced countries, and today the UNESCO 
network comprises twenty-seven centres in twenty countries. 
The MIRCENs provide facilities for the management, distribution and 
use of microbial gene pools world-wide, assist in the conservation of micro- 
organisms and encourage the development of new inexpensive technologies 
for specific regions. They promote the applications of microbiology to 
strengthen rural economies, and provide local centres for training, particularly 
in the developing countries. Each one has a special research interest. Sev- 
eral MIRCENSs in developing countries are particularly concerned with research 
into biofertilizer technology so as to lessen their regions’ dependence on expen- 
sive chemically derived fertilizer that may have adverse effects on the envi- 
ronment. The Nairobi MIRCEN has built up a venture whereby over 20,000 
packets of quality-controlled biofertilizer or “black ash” are provided to 
farmers in Kenya and surrounding areas of East Africa. 
Training is a particularly important activity, and many researchers, exten- 
sion workers and industrial technical staff have benefitted from short courses 
and intensive on-the-job training programmes organized at the different cen- 
tres. In 1991 UNESCO launched a scheme for short-term fellowships in 
biotechnology whereby scientists, particularly from the least developed and 
developing countries, can carry out research at a MIRCEN and learn to use 
techniques that are not normally accessible to them. So far 112 Fellow- 
ships have been awarded. For further information please write to: 
UNESCO MIRCEN Short-term Fellowships in Biotechnology, 
Division of Basic Sciences (Attn. Dr. E. J. DaSilva), 
UNESCO, 1 rue Miollis, 
75015 Paris, France. 
Tel. (33-1) 45 68 38 83 - 45 68 41 82 
Fax: (33-1) 43 06 11 22-4567 16 90 
  
  
Nuoc, a fermented fish 
sauce widely consumed 
in Asia, is stored in these 
containers at a small 
Vietnamese factory.

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 96807: Creative ferment

Brewing pitto, a kind of 
beer, in northern Ghana. 
Gari 1s a gritty, pre-cooked, dry starch food pro- 
duced by fermentation of cassava roots. Although 
itis a good source of calories, it is deficient in pro- 
teins, vitamins and minerals. 
Remarkable advances 
Although the major commercial emphasis of 
biotechnology in recent years has been the pro- 
duction of recombinant proteins for pharmaceutical 
purposes, there are also many opportunities in food 
biotechnology that will make an impact on both 
developing and developed countries. 
‘The new opportunities in food biotechnology 
can be grouped into four main areas: the improve- 
ment of microbial cultures, larger and improved fer- 
mentation processes, improved food properties 
and better detection of contaminations. 
Many indigenous fermented foods are pro- 
duced on a very small scale either in homes or in 
small-scale cottage industries in villages. In these sit- 
uations, the microbial cultures are often traditional 
and highly variable. For example, some types of 
tempeh in Indonesia are produced by wrapping 
the soaked soybeans in a hibiscus leaf, which pro- 
vides the natural flora for inoculation. 
As our understanding of the microbial ecology 
of such fermented foods has increased, there have 
been efforts to produce a more standardized 
inoculum which would create tempeh of higher 
quality for the villagers. These programmes have 
been initiated by government research laborato- 
ries in countries such as Indonesia and Malaysia. 
A similar pattern has emerged in developed 
countries involved in cheese-making: specific cul- 
tures of lactic acid producing bacteria are now 
being supplied to manufacturers for better quality 
cheeses. Techniques of genetic engineering are also 
being used to isolate new strains that are resistant to 
attack by various bacteriophages, small virus-like 
particles that can infect the usual lactic acid bacteria 
and cause the disintegration and dissolution of 
cells. 
Food biotechnology can also lead to improved 
food properties. The main advantages provided by 
fermentation include higher vitamin levels and 
increased digestibility, better flavour and texture, 
and longer storage properties. Inoculation with 
selected micro-organisms can protect the foodstuff 
against breakdown by contaminating micro-organ- 
isms. In many cases, metabolic products of the fer- 
mentation process such as acetic acid (vinegar), 
lactic acid and alcohol provide natural inhibitory 
compounds. In other cascs, the fermenting micro- 
organisms can produce natural antibiotics, which 
provide further protection against invaders. The 
usc of these antibiotics in food preservation is likely 
to be an area of considerable importance in the 
future. | 
 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 187199: Defeating decibels

  
  GREENWATCH 
THE UNESCO COURIER — JUNE 1994 
BY FRANCE BEQUETTE 
Traffic and 
low-flying 
aircraft are 
major causes 
A 7 hat is a drop of water? It's 
the best way of demon- 
strating how noise is 
transmitted. When a water 
i wd drop hits the surface of a 
pond, it causes waves that spread 
outward in concentric circles, just 
as sound waves move through the 
air. Moreover when the drop strikes 
a resonant surface, it produces a 
noise that may seem like torture 
even if theimpact is very mild. It is 
not so much the intensity of noise 
that makes it unbearable as its 
repetitive nature, the attention we 
give it and the impossibility of con- 
trolling it. Noise is becoming a 
threat to human health, and as 
such, ranks among the foremost 
environmental problems in the 
    
- 
T
y
 
a 
E
E
 
o 
| 
-— 2 
     
    
     
we
 
—
—
 
 
of noise industrially developed countries 
pollution in that are member States of the Orga- pn 
cities. Right, nization of Economic Co-opera- ha A 
a Hong Kong tion and Development (OECD). Ri a -— 
street. “People consider noise to be the od LS 
main local environmental 
problem, sometimes even more 
important than air pollution or the 
quality of drinking water,” says an 
OECD study, The State of the Envi- 
ronment, published in 1991. 
Although they suffer just as much 
from noise, the inhabitants of 
developing countries don’t talk 
much about it, largely because it 
is overshadowed by the demands of 
the struggle for survival. 
Noise is a blend of sounds. Its 
frequency, i.e. the number of vibra- 
tions per second, is calibrated in 
hertz. The human being perceives 
sounds between 20 and 20,000 Hz, 
L
a
 
: 
h
a
 
eB
) 
   
     
  
while elephants are sensitive to 
infra-sounds (less than 20 Hz) and 
bats and dolphins, though virtu- 
ally blind, move about thanks to 
ultra-sounds that they emit at 
greater than 20,000 Hz. We experi- 
ence the sound level, expressed in 
decibels (dB), as pressure on our 
  
  
 

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 187199: Defeating decibels

DEFEATING DECIBELS 
- 
= 
“3 
M 
a 
te 
EX] 
Rh 
R
E
Y
 
77 
i
 
ears. With the audible threshold 
being zero dB, 85 is the risk level, 90 
dB the danger level and 120 dB the 
pain threshold. Beyond that the 
ear-drum may rupture, 
|
NOISES THAT HURT 
It is therefore easy to understand 
that too much noise can damage 
our ears. What is more surprising is 
that our health is affected in other 
ways too. There are immediate 
effects, i.e. cardio-vascular prob- 
lems with an accelerated heartbeat 
and high blood pressure, gastric- 
intestinal problems, a decrease in 
alertness and ability to memorize, 
nervousness, pupil dilation and a 
decrease in the visual field. These 
effects may be temporary; others 
are longer lasting, e.g., insomnia, 
nervousness, bulimia, chronically 
high blood pressure, anxiety, 
depression and even sexual mal- 
functions! 
Discomfort may arise from even 
very low noise levels. A couple, for 
example, lives in a small town, Next 
 
  
door there is a cock that crows at 
dawn. The wife doesn’t mind, but 
her husband can’t stand it. He 
wakes up early and waits for the 
cock to crow; when it does, he flies 
into a rage. This happens every 
morning until, rather than wring 
the bird’s neck, the couple moves 
away. Another example. A sixty- 
year-old widow lives alone. A 
young couple moves into a semi- 
detached house next door that 
they've just built. The noise of their 
love-making enrages the widow, 
and she lodges a complaint. An 
expert measures the disturbance 
caused and notes that there is no 
possible effective sound insulation. 
The judge orders the young lovers’ 
house to be pulled down; it is not in 
conformity with the legal norms 
of the building code. 
Noise is a psychological fact. It 
contains an emotional element. In 
a manual entitled Noise and Its 
Effects on Health the French Min- 
istry of Social Affairs emphasizes 
that “active, ambitious people with 
a sense of responsibility seem less 
The noise of 
public-works 
machinery is 
highly 
unpleasant for 
operatives and 
anyone else who 
happens to be 
near. Left 
roadworks in 
Panama City. 
bothered by noise than introverted 
people”. It adds, “Certain groups 
are more sensitive to noise or are 
apt to be made more sensitive to it 
by specific factors: those prone to 
depression, hypochondria and 
anxiety or who are going through a 
difficult experience such as a 
divorce, unemployment or rela- 
tional problems.” . 
On the other hand deafness is 
the most indisputable effect of 
noise on people. An explosion of 
140 dB can cause permanent deaf- 
ness, for it destroys certain cells in 
the inner ear that do not regen- 
erate. Permanent deafness can also 
occur gradually as a result of expo- 
sure to 85 dB sound-levels over sev- 
eral years. This level is not con- 
fined to factories where 
occupational medicine, at least in 
the rich countries, is trying to 
reduce noise levels. A rock concert 
emits as many decibels as a work- 
shop for testing jet-engines. The 
noise-prevention brigade of Lau- 
sanne’s city police department in 
Switzerland received permission 
to order the lowering of noise levels 
at a concert given by the singer 
Michael Jackson, after posting the 
following notice to spectators, 
“Bring ear-plugs or cotton”. 
Moreover, the craze for the 
Walkman has been held respon- 
sible for serious hearing problems 
among the young. Germany has 
calculated that noise-related health 
costs and payments made for 
hearing loss amount to nearly 4 
billion dollars annually! 
L.____________________________ | 
INCREASING SOUND POLLUTION 
More than a third of the 400 million 
inhabitants of the OECD countries 
are exposed to a daily dose of 65 
dB, an unacceptably high level; 200 
million live in an uncomfortable 
sound environment. The foremost 
culprit is road traffic. Between 1970 
and 1988 in Japan, for example, the 
motorway network was extended 
by 510 per cent, while the number 
of motor vehicles increased by 200 
per cent and total traffic grew by 
126 per cent. Aircraft are guilty too. 
They constitute a nuisance for 2 
per cent of the population in the 
United States, i.e. 5 million people, 
four times more than in Europe or 
Japan. 
Trains disturb a smaller per- 
centage of people, usually depen-

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 187199: Defeating decibels

A
 
cb
 
. 
B 
>
 
. 
- 
I
E
 
= 
ding on their frequency, the density 
of the rail network and local topog- 
raphy. Factories, workshops and 
building sites, though increasingly 
well monitored, are no less a dis- 
turbance for a fair amount of the 
population, not to mention for the 
workers themselves. Among the 
sources of neighbourhood noise 
problems—the cause of countless 
complaints and court cases—are 
stereo systems and household 
appliances, joint-housing equip- 
ment and barking dogs. 
What can be done about rapidly 
growing sound pollution? Australia 
is the champion for noise reduc- 
tion. Some of its states require a 
“noise” label for chainsaws, lawn- 
mowers and pavement breakers. 
When the police in the southern 
city of Adelaide spot an unsafe or 
noisy car on their roads, they pre- 
sent the owner with a “defect 
notice”. The car's registration is sus- 
pended until it has been repaired in 
an authorized garage. In New 
South Wales noisy vehicles can be 
stopped and tested by the side of 
the road. The excellent results thus 
obtained are derived from close 
co-operation between the police 
and environmental officials. 
However, Switzerland is the only 
country with legislation designed 
to ensure that the best possible 
technology for reducing noise is 
always used. It requires construc- 
tors, for example, to encapsulate 
already low-noise-producing truck 
engines. The costs are covered by 
the users. Moreover, the Swiss 
Society of Engineers and Architects 
has defined the required norms for 
sound-proofing building interiors: 
stairwells, lifts and heating and 
ventilation systems. 
L________________________________________| 
A NEW CHAPTER 
IN ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
In Switzerland, as in France, Aus- 
tralia and Japan, the authorities are 
trying to promote the notion of 
“quiet” communities with reduced 
levels of industrial, traffic and 
domestic noise. In Australia big 
campaigns against noise, featuring 
posters proclaiming, “Be neigh- 
bourly, it feels nice” or “A quiet day”, 
have a real impact on the popula- 
tion. In Switzerland the picture of a 
black cat on wheels encourages 
people to drive quietly. Unfortu- 
nately new problems are arising 
more and more urgently in the 
OECD countries, i.e. rapid increases 
in motor traffic, especially planes 
and trucks, increases in evening, 
night-time and weekend noise 
levels in rural areas, and a prolif- 
eration of motorized pleasure craft, 
Walkmen and ghetto blasters. 
The history of sound is linked 
to the history of humanity. “The 
acquisition of language,” writes 
sound engineer Denis Fortier, “then 
of chanting and music, has taken 
thousands of years of patient 
learning, the time required for the 
brain to learn oral and auditory 
communication.” The Greek 
philosopher Pythagoras believed 
that music enabled man to harmo- 
nize with the cosmos, which, long 
before the theory of the Big Bang 
was formulated, ancient India 
believed was born from sound. 
Sound is vital for communicating, 
but when it becomes noise and a 
nuisance, it can also kill communi- 
cation. From now on the fight 
against noise must be a part of any 
environmental policy. [| 
FRANCE BEQUETTE 
is a Franco-American journalist 
specializing in environmental 
questions. Since 1985 she has been 
associated with the WANAD- UNESCO 
training programme for African 
news-agency journalists. 
“A rock concert 
emits as many 
decibels as a 
workshop for 
testing jet 
engines”, 
Above, Joe 
Cocker at the 
1976 Le 
Castellet pop 
festival in 
France. 
Wh
 
EE
NW
AT
CI
H 
Im

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

  
THE SUN, FRIEND OR FOE? 
The World Health Organization 
(WHO) believes that the public is 
not sufficiently aware of the dangers 
posed by overexposure to ultra-violet 
rays. As a result, an international 
research programme on health, 
ultra-violet sunlight and modi- 
fications to the environment 
(INTERSUN) has been launched by 
WHO, the International Cancer 
Research Centre and the United 
Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP). It entails setting up a net- 
work of centres for monitoring solar 
ultra-violet radiation at ground-level, 
the exposure of populations to it and 
resulting health problems. Although 
small doses are beneficial —they help 
stimulate our production of vitamin 
D—prolonged or intensive exposure 
could damage our immune system 
and provoke skin and eye ailments. 
  
- . 
SEA 
ri pd pn ae 
- - - T. sir 
 
THE FUTURE 
OF MIGRATING WASTE 
The United States administration is 
seeking to ban exports of hazardous 
wastes except to Canada, Mexico, 
Japan and western Europe, and has 
asked Congress to approve a pro- 
posal to this effect. U.S. Greenpeace 
has welcomed the move, which 
would effectively ban the export of 
toxic wastes to most developing 
countries. In 1992 the U.S. Senate 
approved the Basel Convention, 
signed in 1989 by 116 countries, on 
the control of transboundary move- 
ments of hazardous wastes and their 
disposal. However, the U.S. cannot 
ratify the Convention until domestic 
law is changed to conform to its pro- 
visions. Under the Convention, 
importing countries must give their 
consent and must possess adequate 
disposal facilities. In practice, the 
bulk of the 130,000 metric tons of 
hazardous waste shipped by the 
United States in 1992 went to Mexico 
and Canada. | 
HOW TO WIN THE WAR 
ON HUNGER 
According to Mr. Jacques Diouf, 
Director-General of the United 
Nations Food and Agriculture Orga- 
nization (FAO), by the year 2000 there 
will be a billion more mouths to feed, 
yet there will be 15 per cent less crop- 
land per head. Livestock is another 
major area of concern. Ambylomma 
variegatum, a parasite that attacks 
cattle, sheep, goats, horses and dogs, 
causes heavy financial losses. A pro- 
gramme exists for ridding the 14 
already-infested Caribbean islands of 
the parasite within five years and 
preventing it from spreading to the 
American continent. And there is 
one success story to give us hope: 
the fight against the new world 
screwworm in north Africa was 
crowned with success. mn 
RUSSIA CREATES A HUGE 
ARCTIC RESERVE 
Avyear ago Russia decided to create a 
strictly protected zone of more than 
40,000 square kilometres on the 
Taimyr peninsula on the northern 
Siberian coast, i.e. an area the size of 
Switzerland. This zapovednik or 
nature reserve, proposed by the 
Russian Academy of Sciences and 
the World Wide Fund for Nature 
(WWE), is the most arctic landfall 
for migratory birds. More than 150 
species have been counted. There is 
also a wide variety of marine life: 
fish, seals and walruses, as well as 
polar bears and the world’s largest 
herd of wild reindeer. The decision to 
“freeze” these lands, which are 
already affected by pollution from’ 
nearby industry, is all the more 
impressive since beneath them are 
deposits of precious metals, coal, oil 
and natural gas. |

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

[   
  
  
PACHAMAMA, 
MOTHER EARTH 
Manuel Vegas-Velez, an expert in 
marine biology, has written to tell 
us of his activities in Peru, a country 
rich in natural resources. Along its 
coastline, which bathes in the tem- 
perate waters of the Humboldt cur- 
rent, live 700 species of fish, 800 
species of molluscs and more than 
300 species of shellfish. Tropical rain 
forest still covers 61 per cent of the 
country's area, and minerals such as 
gold, iron and zinc are found there, 
as well as oil and natural gas. A 
non-governmental organization, 
Pachamama, has launched a range 
of projects to promote the wise 
exploitation of these abundant 
reserves. One project aims to restore 
fertility to hills eroded by coca 
growing. Another is concerned with 
managing the two new marine 
reserves of Mancora and the Illescas 
and Lobos islands to the northwest 
of Peru. This team of Peruvians, now 
a member of The World Conserva- 
tion Union (IUCN), was self- 
financed when it began operations 
but is currently looking for assis- 
tance in order to carry out its pro- 
grammes. 
Address: Camino Real 479, Lima 27 
Peru. Tel: (51) 1442-8948, Fax (51) 
411-990. | 
  
THE DANGERS OF CHEMICAL 
ACCIDENTS 
The Organization for Economic Co- 
operation and Development (OECD) 
has published three guidance docu- 
ments about chemical accidents. 
The first is designed to assist man- 
agers and other decision-makers in 
developing appropriate policies and 
plans of action. The second docu- 
ment is a more detailed and tech- 
nical practical guide to action in the 
event of a chemical accident. The 
third, Checklist for Action, is aimed at 
persons with overall managerial 
responsibility for chemical accident 
contingency planning (in French and 
English). OECD, 2, rue André- Pascal, 
75775 Paris Cedex 16, Fax (33-1) 
4524-1675. | 
  
  
  
  
 
CANADA’S CONTEST 
BETWEEN FIR 
AND BIRCH TREES 
After a forest-fire it seems to make 
sense that the new trees growing in 
should be the same as those burned 
down. Not so, say Ross Wein and 
Simon Landhausser, researchers at 
Canada’s University of Alberta. 
Conifers, they have found, tend to 
give way to birches and poplars, a 
phenomenon they attribute to the 
climate, which is warmer and drier 
nowadays than at the beginning of 
the century and better suited to 
broad-leaved trees than to the cold- 
preferring cone-bearers. The light 
seeds of broad-leaved trees are car- 
ried by the wind and are gradually 
colonizing the northern regions at 
the expense of coniferous trees. 
Could this really be a proof of global 
warming? | 
    
b
R
E
E
N
W
A
T
C
 
 
  
  
 

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

E
N
W
A
T
U
H
 
i 
hE
 
Birth rates 
and child death 
rates both 
decline when 
countries 
expand access 
to health and 
family planning 
services 
and education 
for girls. 
Above, a school 
in Viet Nam. 
  
INITIATIVES   a — 
 
THE LESSON OF EASTER ISLAND 
opulation Action Interna- 
P:- (PAI) is an American 
non-governmental organiza- 
tion whose work is inspired by a his- 
torical event. When a group of Poly- 
nesian voyagers arrived on Easter 
Island in the fifth or sixth century 
A.D, they found a plentiful supply of 
natural resources and created a 
unique civilization, now famous for 
its enormous and mysterious stone 
statues. But studies of fossilized pol- 
lens have shown that as the popu- 
lation grew, the Iush green forest 
diminished, leading to a fatal ero- 
sion of the fertile soil and disap- 
pearance of the island’s wildlife. 
When a Dutch traveller set foot on 
the island in 1722, he observed that 
itwas completely barren. Deprived 
of natural resources, the 3,000 
people living on the island spent 
their time fighting fratricidal wars. In 
other words, environment and pop- 
ulation are inextricably linked. 
Human overpopulation exhausts 
the earth, which, in turn, can no 
longer feed that population. 
In the past, as Population Action 
International (PAI) points out, 
“People altered local landscapes; 
today we are changing the earth 
itself. And the parables of the past 
send a warning: Nature has the 
upper hand. If human activities 
cause climate to warm dramatically 
or soil to wear out or water sources 
to fail, the risk to humanity will be 
incalculable”. Yet as long as the 
world’s wealth is not shared more 
equitably and children’s health not 
better guaranteed, couples in the 
most disadvantaged nations will 
continue to resort to large families as 
away to insure against old age. 
Family planning is not PAI's only 
concern. It also conducts pro- 
grammes for promoting studies for 
girls, especially in south Asia, the 
Middle East and Africa where the 
largest disparities in school enroll- 
ment exist between boys and girls. In 
1992 it launched a population and 
environment programme, one of 
the results of which was an inter- 
esting pamphlet on water manage- 
ment for the planet. It is the first in 
aseries of case studies analysing the 
effects of demographic pressure on 
natural resources. 
PAI was founded in 1965 as a 
non-profit organization. It has an 
annual budget of about 3 million 
$US and receives no support from 
the American government or from 
multi-lateral agencies such as the 
World Bank or the United States 
Agency for International Develop- 
ment (U.S. AID), the policies of 
which it does not hesitate to criticize 
when it thinks fit. | 
Contact Robert Engelman, Director, 
Population and Environment 
Program, PAI, 1120 19th Street, 
suite 550, Washington D.C. 20036, 
Tel: (1-202) 659-1833, Fax: (1-202) 
293-1795. 

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
The Kombu alga is grown 
on Rishiri, an island 
adjacent to Hokkaido 
(Japan). 
‘A———— Eee 
RITA COLWELL, of the 
United States, is President of 
the University of Maryland 
Biotechnology Institute. 
Adviser to several public 
bodies, national and 
international, she is a member 
of the Executive Board of the 
International Council of 
Scientific Unions and of the 
Scientific Advisory Committee 
of the United Nations 
University’s Biotechnology in 
Latin America and the 
Caribbean programme. She is 
the author or editor of 16 
books, author or co-author of 
several hundred papers and 
articles and produced an 
award-winning documentary, 
Invisible Seas, on marine 
microbiology. 


### 96808: A Rising tide

T is only a decade since marine biotech- 
nology was first recognized as an area 
of great potential. In that short span of 
time astonishing progress has been made. 
Some of the most striking advances have 
been in the aquaculture industry, where direct 
genetic manipulation using recombinant DNA 
techniques has made it possible to develop an 
entirely new approach to fish farming. This is 
important because of the significant expansion 
  
A RISING TIDE 
by Rita Colwell 
of aquaculture in recent years. According to 
some estimates aquaculture may be supplying 
25 per cent of world seafood consumption by 
the end of the century. 
Fish are highly amenable to genetic manip- 
ulation because their eggs are large and can 
therefore be injected with DNA constructs. 
Major research efforts in genetic manipulation 
have been directed towards enhancing the 
growth and production of fish with superior 
  
  
  
  

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 96808: A Rising tide

Below, a mullet is given 
an injection of hormones 
at the Hawaii Oceanic 
Institute. 
Bottom photo, carp eggs 
seen through a microscope 
at Ahrensburg Scientific 
Institute (Germany). 
When they hatch, the 
alevin are kept immobile in 
heated water and fed with 
granules of egg white. 
They grow three times 
more quickly than in 
natural conditions. 
resistance to cold temperatures. With the spread 
of intensive fish farming and the concomitant 
increased risk of disease, the development of 
disease-resistant fish has also become an 
increasingly important objective. 
Goldfish with a human gene 
The first successful growth hormone experi- 
ment using fish was the transfer into a goldfish 
of the human growth hormone gene, yielding 
offspring significantly larger than untreated 
fish. Since then, several vertebrate genes have 
been introduced into fish species, including 
Atlantic salmon. 
Of more practical significance has been the 
achievement of growth enhancement using fish 
growth hormone. In several experiments, fish 
injected with growth hormone reached double 
the weight increment of untreated fish over a 
sixty-day period. However, as growth hor- 
mone is not easy to administer to fish, rescarch 
is now focusing on gencrating transgenic fish. 
Up to 1990, thirteen transgenic fish species 
  
had been reported, including transgenic variants 
of commercial varieties such as the Atlantic 
salmon, channel catfish, carp and tilapia. 
Research 1s now underway to determine the 
physiological, nutritional and environmental 
factors that maximize the performance of trans- 
genic fish. Major problems of safety and envi- 
ronmental impact must also be solved before 
large-scale, commercial production of trans- 
genic fish will be permitted. 
Antifreeze for salmon 
Genetic manipulation of Atlantic salmon has 
been carried out to try and increase the resis- 
tance of this species to cold. Many marine fish 
that live in cold water produce proteins which 
act as an “antifreeze” and protect them by 
inhibiting the formation of ice crystals in their 
serum. Atlantic salmon lack genes for the pro- 
duction of these proteins and therefore cannot 
survive in icy waters. However, genes coding 
for antifreeze proteins have now been trans- 
ferred to Atlantic salmon, and the expression of 
adequate concentrations of these proteins in 
their blood could extend the range of envi- 
ronments where this fish can be grown. 
Shellfish are also amenable to genetic 
manipulation, especially for enhancing their 
rate of growth and their size. It has been shown 
that bovine growth hormone can enhance the 
growth rates of California red abalone, and 
similar results have been reported for the appli- 
cation of biosynthetic rainbow trout growth 
hormone to young oysters. 
Unlike fish and shellfish, anthropoids such 
as lobsters shed their exoskeletons during 
growth by means of a moulting process that is 
under hormonal control. Thus, regulation of 
moulting by the hormone-secreting endocrine 
gland may improve growth cfficiency in the 
lobster. However, knowledge of the molecular 
genetics of marine crustaceans such as shrimp, 
lobster and prawns must be expanded before 
commercial production of these species will 
be efficient and reliable. Growth, development, 
and disease resistance have yet to be controlled. 
One factor on which the successful 
exploitation of a fish or shellfish specics in 
aquaculture depends is the ability to obtain 
consistent, controlled reproduction as eco- 
nomically as possible. It has been shown that 
water temperature and the period of daily illu- 
mination the fish receive can be manipulated 
sufficiently to improve spawning. Fortunately, 
some important advances have been made 
recently in the use of hormone treatment to 
control reproduction of fish species that arc 
important in aquaculture. 
The farming of marine macroalgae—sea- 
weed—has been practised for several cen- 
turies in Astan countries, particularly Japan,

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 96808: A Rising tide

  
  
Above, dried dihé, a blue 
alga rich in protein, 
mineral salts and vitamins. 
It is harvested by women, 
top, in pools in parts of 
Chad, where it constitutes 
an essential part of the 
diet. 
and products derived from them have been 
widely used as sources of medicine and food. 
Macro- and microalgae yield a wide range 
of products, including food additives and 
supplements, culturé media, pesticides, plant 
growth regulators and antibacterial, anti- 
cancer and antiviral agents. 
Seaweed for medicine and food 
Microalgac have proved useful for large-scale 
production of fatty acids which may help to 
reduce the risk of coronary vascular discase. 
The green microalga Dunaliella salina is 
grown in large-scale, intensive culture in 
California to produce beta-carotene, a sub- 
stance associated with the prevention of 
cancer. It has also been suggested that oceanic 
farming of marine algae could reduce global 
carbon dioxide levels. 
The application of biotechnology to the 
cultivation of marine algae presents an 
opportunity for countrics near rivers and 
the ocean, cspecially developing countries 
with extensive coastal regions. This potential 
is most likely to be realized by the formation 
of partnerships with industrialized coun- 
tries. However, to achieve success, an under- 
standing of molecular genetics and an appli- 
cation of the techniques of modern molecular | 
biology will be required. Although molecular 
techniques have not yet been widely applied 
to achieve strain enhancement or the pro- 
duction of transgenic plants and algae of 
commercial importance, this approach is now 
being adopted in several laboratories in the 
United States, Asia and Europe. 
Marine organisms are sources of a very 
wide range of natural products that have bio- 
medical, biotechnological, agricultural and 
industrial applications. Chitin is one such 
product that has made it to market in a 
variety of forms—as poultices to heal 
wounds, cxtenders, and emulsifiers for pho- 
tography—yet still remains a focus of exten- 
sive study. If and when the genes for chitin 
synthesis are cloned, the production of this 
compound will increase immeasurably since 
a stable source can then be obtained. 
In the past decade, more than 1,000 new 
compounds, natural products, and other dis- 
coverics relating to the molecular genetics 
of fish and shellfish growth, metabolism and 
reproduction have been recorded. Promising 
new antibiotics, anti-cancer therapeutic 
agents, improved aquaculture stocks and 
food additives have either been discovered or 
are in the development stage. Where once 
only a few pioncers toiled in their laborato- 
ries, there arc now major new centres of 
biotechnology rescarch and development in 
Norway, Japan, the United States and else- 
where. ||

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

  
world’s swelling 
TET pt  
 


### 96809: From the Green Revolution to the gene revolution

FROM THE GREEN REVOLUTION 
T0 THE GENE REVOLUTION 
by Indra K. Vasil and Luis Herrera-Estrella 
HE rapidly-growing world popula- 
tion and increasing demand for more 
and better food are certain to pose 
serious threats to social, political, economic 
and environmental stability early in the twenty- 
first century. Without a decline in the current 
rates of growth, today’s population of nearly 
5.5 billion 1s projected to nearly double to 10.7 
billion by the year 2030. Almost all of this 
growth will occur in the already overpopu- 
lated and impoverished countries of Africa, 
Asia and Latin America, which will be home to 
nine out of every ten human beings. 
In this near future, additional land for 
  
a f 4 uf 
thie hd f 
Wl 
  
growing food as well as for meeting all the 
other needs of the expanding population will 
have to be derived from the destruction of the 
already dwindling and endangered but pre- 
cious protected natural areas. Undoubtedly, 
these changes will place unprecedented strain 
not only on the global, social, political and 
economic infrastructure, but will also cause 
further deterioration of the fragile environ- 
ment of our already fully occupied planet. It is 
doubtful that world food production, which is 
barely adequate to meet today’s needs, can 
keep pace with current rates of population 
growth. Indeed, in the past few years crop

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

  
lhaus. Department of 
Agriculture plant genetics 
laboratory at Beltsville 
(Maryland) fluorescent 
bands of DNA are 
photographed under 
ultraviolet light. 
Left, growing improved 
wheat varieties in India. 
yields have generally levelled off or have actu- 
ally declined in many of the developing coun- 
tries. 
What can be done to reverse or at least fore- 
stall these dangerous and suicidal trends? First 
and foremost it is necessary to bring down the 
rate of population growth to a sustainable level. 
In the interim, food production must be dra- 
matically increased. Scientists expect that plant 
improvement through the use of biotechnology 
will be an important part of this process. 
Plants in the human diet 
Ninety-eight per cent of global food produc- 
tion 1s land-based. Of the total human diet, 92 


### 96809: From the Green Revolution to the gene revolution

per cent is derived from plants, with no more 
than thirty plant species accounting for most of 
the calories and protein intake. Cereal grains 
like wheat, rice and maize alone provide more 
than 53 per cent of the world food supply. 
Historically, major technological advances 
in agriculture have been a driving force for 
economic growth, political stability and social 
and cultural development. In recent history, 
the most dramatic results of agricultural 
improvement were those of the Green Revo- 
lution, which was based on the introduction 
and adoption of high yielding and otherwise 
improved varieties of wheat and rice devel- 
oped at the international agricultural centres in 
Mexico and the Philippines, in close co-oper- 
ation with national agricultural programmes. 
The introduction of these varieties, partic- 
ularly in Mexico, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh 
and China, in the mid-to-late 1960s helped not 
only to save millions from starvation and death 
but also to prevent widespread social and polit- 
ical unrest. 
It was in recognition of this that the Nobel 
Peace Prize was awarded to Norman Borlaug, 
the American agronomist who developed vari- 
eties of “miracle” wheat in Mexico and played 
a seminal role in the introduction of such vari- 
eties in the developing countries of Asia and 
Latin America. 
The benefits of the Green Revolution con- 
tinue to be felt in the developing world. During 
the 1980s, agricultural production in China 
rose at an annual rate of 8 per cent, making it 
the largest producer of food in the world. In the 
developing countries as a whole, wheat and 
rice production increased by about 75 per cent 
in the fifteen years between 1965 and 1980. 
From 1950 to 1980, wheat production increased 
four-fold in Mexico, while rice production 
doubled in Indonesia. Similarly, wheat pro- 
duction in India increased three-fold in less 
than twenty years, from 1965 to 1983. The 
introduction of similar improved agricultural 
practices combined with high quality seed on 
a limited scale in parts of Africa, under the 
leadership of Norman Borlaug, has increased

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 96809: From the Green Revolution to the gene revolution

EE I prt 
INDRA K. VASIL, of the 
United States, is a Professor of 
Piant Cell and Molecular 
Biology at the University of 
Florida, United States, where 
his laboratory is noted for 
research on the biotechnology 
and molecular improvement of 
cereal crops. Chairman of 
UNESCO's Biotechnology 
Action Council, he is author or 
co-author of more than 325 
research publications and 
editor or co-editor of 18 
books. 
LUIS HERRERA-ESTRELLA, 
of Mexico, is Head of the 
Department of Plant Genetic 
Engineering at the Centre for 
Research and Advanced 
«Studies, National Polytechnic, 
Irapuato, Mexico. He received 
UNESCO's Javed Husain 
Award for Young Scientists for 
his work on the genetic 
transformation of Latin 
American crops, particularly 
for resistance to plant 
pathogens, 
Below, cassava plants 
produced by cloning at the 
Institute of Tropical 
Agriculture, Ibadan 
(Nigeria). 
Below right, a tiny peach 
plant produced in the 
laboratory by cloning. 
the yields of maize, sorghum and millet by 300 
to 400 per cent. 
Plant improvement: a slow process 
The process of plant improvement is painfully 
slow, however, and is generally limited to the 
discovery of useful genes in wild germ plasm 
and their introduction into commercial varicties 
during many years of breeding and selection. 
The process is also restricted to recombina- 
tion of genes within the same or similar species 
because of biological limits to hybridization 
between unrelated species. 
It is highly doubtful that conventional plant 
breeding alone can help produce the vast quan- 
tities of food that will be needed to feed the bil- 
lions more people that are expected to inhabit 
the earth during the next few decades. It is in 
this context that biotechnology has attracted 
great attention, for it provides an excellent 
opportunity to supplement and complement 
plant breeding by providing mechanisms for 
the introduction of agronomically useful genes 
into crop species by overcoming all barriers to 
gene transfer between species. 
In addition, it has already been demon- 
strated that crop species can be engineered to 
make them resistant to certain insects and 
viruses, as well as to compete successfully 
against weeds. Introduction of such technolo- 
gies on a wide scale could immediately increase 
the amount of available food by more than 
one-third, by saving from destruction food 
that is lost to pests, pathogens and weeds. This 
would give us the needed time to integrate 
biotechnology into the traditional methods of 
plant breeding to improve the quantity and 
quality of food produced by plants. 
If carefully planned, co-ordinated and 
implemented, plant biotechnologies could have 
such a profound impact on world food pro- 
duction as to bring about a Gene Revolution in 
  
the twenty-first century. It is vitally impor- 
tant, however, that the practice and benefits 
of plant biotechnology should not be limited to 
North America, Western Europe and Japan, 
where much of the current activity is concen- 
trated, but be systematically introduced into the 
poor and developing countries where the needs 
are urgent and compelling. 
Simple, inexpensive procedures 
Plant biotechnology has two important com- 
ponents, onc based on the use of tissue culture 
methods, and the other involving a combina- 
tion of cellular and molecular biology. Each 
offers powerful methods for plant production 
and improvement. Many of the procedures 
involved are simple and can be practised 
without substantial investment in facilities and 
infrastructure for the rapid mass production 
and multiplication of plants. 
One of these technologies is clonal propa- 
gation or meristem culture, the process that 
occurs when shoot buds of plants are isolated 
and placed in culture in the presence of plant 
hormones so that many new shoot buds form. 
Such buds can be separated from each other and 
induced to form roots and complete plants. 
Rapid, large scale and economical clonal mul- 
tiplication is of particular value for many forest 
and fruit trees, plantation crops, endangered 
species and medicinal plants. 
As a rule, one shoot bud placed in a culture 
can be made to produce more than a million 
plants in one year. The rate of multiplication 
can be further improved—and the costs sub- 
stantially reduced—by automation of much 
of the process. It is significant that all the plants 
produced from the initial shoot bud are iden- 
tical to cach other as well as the source material. 
This is of paramount importance where a 
selected and valuable variety is being multi- 
plied and no genetic variation is desired. 
 

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 96809: From the Green Revolution to the gene revolution

The southern delta of 
Viet Nam is home to many 
varieties of valuable wild 
rice. However, the wild 
plants (at left in photo) are 
often considered as weeds 
by farmers and are being 
replaced by new varieties. 
The well-established and reliable methods 
of clonal propagation are simple and do not 
require elaborate and expensive laboratory 
facilities. They can be easily and profitably 
practised as a small-scale industry at the village 
level, not only to provide quality material for 
plantings but also as a source of employment 
and earnings. This technology is potentially 
most useful for reforestation of vast areas in 
Asia, Africa, Latin America and Eastern 
Europe. 
Global reforestation using this method can 
greatly reduce the damaging effects of pollution 
and acid rain, the dangers of the greenhouse 
effect, soil erosion and flooding, while pre- 
serving precious natural sources of energy and 
providing a natural habitat for endangered 
flora and fauna. 
Another important use of meristem cul- 
ture 1s the elimination of viruses, which cause 
more than 50 per cent yield loss in many crops, 
especially those which are propagated vegeta- 
tively, such as potato, sugarcane, cassava and 
banana. Cells at the extreme tip of a shoot are 
generally devoid of virus particles. Plants 
obtained from the culture of very small shoot 
buds are, therefore, free of viruses, and provide 
maximum yields of quality material. This tech- 
nology is well established and can be practised 
on a large or small scale as necessary. 
The most powerful and uscful methods of 
biotechnology are those that involve genetic 
transformation, the transfer of genes, at the 
level of DNA, from one species to another. 
"Two main strategies have been used for this 
purpose. The first and most commonly used 
method is based on a natural system offered by 
CF aie 
\ ’ 
’ 
wy it 
Ales (0% 
Jey 
vite 
at AE 
the soil-borne micro-organism, Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens (crown gall bacterium); the second 
uses the direct physical delivery of DNA from 
one organism to another. 
The crown gall bacterium contains a circular 
picce of DNA, called the Ti (tumour inducing) 
plasmid. During normal infection of a plant 
by the bacterium, a part of the plasmid called 
T-DNA (transfer DNA) is transferred to the 
host plant cell and becomes permanently inte- 
grated 1nto its nuclear DNA. The T-DNA con- 
tains left and night border sequences which are 
necessary for its transfer to the plant cell. In 
between are genes that control the synthesis of 
certain plant growth regulators that cause the 
crown gall disease. 
adam 
Jig ore be 
Rice seeds are sterilized 
before being sent to the 
International Rice 
Research Institute at Los 
Bafios (Philippines). 

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 96809: From the Green Revolution to the gene revolution

For directed plant transformation, the Ti- 
plasmid is disarmed by removing the genes 
responsible for tumour induction and replacing 
them with genes of interest. The useful genes 
are then transferred by the bacterium to the 
host plant cell during an infection process that 
does not result in the crown gall disease. 
Because of its simplicity and ease of use, this 
method has been used extensively since the 
production of the first transgenic plants (plants 
in which foreign genes have been transferred by 
genetic transformation) in 1983. 
Unfortunately, for a variety of reasons that 
are still not clearly understood, the cereal grains 
such as wheat, rice and maize are not amenable 
to transformation by Agrobacterium. Fortu- 
nately, several methods of direct DNA delivery 
, have been developed to produce transgenic 
cereals. 
Currently, the molecular genetic improve- 
ment of plants is not limited so much by tech- 
niques for DNA transfer as by the relatively 
low number of agronomically useful genes that 
have been identified, characterized and cloned 
at the molecular level. The best characterized 
and therefore most widely used are the genes 
that confer resistance to insect pests, to viruses 
and to broad spectrum herbicides. Such genes 
have been successfully transferred to crops like 
wheat, rice, maize, soybean, cotton, oil seed 
rape and tomato. The transgenic crops are 
therefore protected from the enormous yield 
losses they would otherwise suffer as a result of 
pest and pathogen infestation, and competi- 
tion with weeds for life-giving nutrients and 
water. 
Major efforts initiated during the past few 
years to map the genomes of some important 
crop plants are expected to provide valuable 
information about the location and identity 
of other important genes—those that confer 
resistance to environmental stresses such as 
temperature, drought and salinity and those 
that control yield. 
Saving plants from extinction 
Thousands of wild plant varieties, which are 
valuable sources of useful genes, have either 
been lost forever or face imminent extinction as 
a result of the increasing destruction of natural 
forests for agricultural and urban use. Con- 
servation of these irreplaceable resources for 
future generations and for the maintenance of 
biodiversity has thus become a global concern. 
In recognition of this, the Consultative Group 
on International Agricultural Research, which 
is responsible for the network of international 
agricultural centres around the world, has taken 
a step in the right direction by establishing the 
International Plant Genetic Resources Institute, 
with the mandate to conserve plant genetic 
resources. | 


### 96810: Art and the science of life

 
  
ART AND THE 
SCIENCE OF LIFE 
Dy John Hodgson 
  
RT and science both endeavour to 
explore the mysteries of existence. 
Artdoes it by creating physical forms 
that reveal intangible subject matter or illu- 
minate previously unconsidered aspects of the 
physical world. Science progresses by dis- 
secting the physical world, assessing how each 
of the parts works first in isolation and then as 
a part of the whole. One significant difference 
between art and science, however, is the extent 
to which they concern themselves with telling 
people about their discoveries. 
The archetypal scientist—caricatured as a 
person devoid of normal human drives, human 
emotions and human values—is concerned 
with the acquisition of knowledge. Moving 
from one piece of knowledge to the next like 
a hunter, he or she is generally unconcerned 
about communicating that knowledge to a 
wider public. Indeed, science often appears to 
build its walls high with the bricks of experi- 
ment and cement them together with quick- 
drying jargon and runic mathematics. In its 
keep are the precious jewels of knowledge, 
jewels that belong to everybody but are jeal- 
ously guarded. In media reporting of science 
you will often find phrases such as “researchers 
have revealed” or “scientists have unlocked 
the secrets of”, reflecting both the mystery 
that has become attached to science and the 
possessiveness about knowledge that has 
become attributed to scientists. 
In art criticism, on the other hand, the 
stock phrases are “X shows us that” or “What 
Y is trying to say to us is”, phrases that demon- 
strate the intrinsic role of communication in 
art. It 1s not enough for the artist merely to 
have had insight; if he or she cannot convey 
that insight to other people, then the art has 
failed. 
We all have an interest in biology, even if it 
extends only to our personal health, longevity 
and ultimate mortality. Because biological sci- 
ence now has its public to please, biologists, 
perhaps more than any other scientific group, 
need to communicate widely. But even within 
the narrow confines of their profession, the 
 

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 96810: Art and the science of life

imprecise nature of living organisms—even 
the simplest bacterium or virus—decrees that 
biologists cannot call upon precise formulae to 
describe their discoveries. They need to invoke 
artistic forms. 
For instance, proteins, which are respon- 
sible for most metabolic processes, are often 
depicted as winding ribbons, reminiscent of 
Maurits Escher’s graphic art. This style of rep- 
resentation was developed by Jane Richardson, 
a highly-regarded researcher at Duke Univer- 
sity in North Carolina. Richardson’s work is 
the design of completely new protein mole- 
cules based on information she has gleaned 
from existing natural proteins. Part of her con- 
tribution to her field, however, has been her 
ability to capture certain qualities of proteins 
by depicting them in certain ways. 
No protein actually looks like Richardson’s 
ribbons. In fact, no protein could ever be scen 
at all because the wavelength of visible light is 
too long to resolve the detailed structures. 
Proteins are “visualized” through a combina- 
tion of X-ray light and computer analysis, a 
combination that produces the Escher-like 
images. However, the ribbon provides a useful 
Let, false-colour scanning 
tunneling micrograph of 
DNA. 
Above, Pathway, a Carrara 
marble and sheet plywood 
sculpture (122 cm high, 30 
cm diameter) by the 
British artist John Maine. 
37

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 96810: Art and the science of life

  
way for scientists to think about proteins 
because it illustrates the way that the com- 
plex chemical chain that makes up the pro- 
tein winds round on itself. 
By adjusting the computer analysis, pro- 
teins can equally well appear as pointillist 
paintings, as similar to the works of Salvador 
Dali or as architectural drawings. There is no 
“correct” way of depicting a protein. What 
needs to be recognized, however, is that the 
way scientists visualize the molecules does 
influence how they think about them. 
Conveying emotions 
Just as an Impressionist painting is not a pho- 
tograph but an image that can convey a sense 
of emotion or atmosphere, images of proteins 
and other important biological molecules can, 
if portrayed in a suitable fashion, indicate a 
whole range of properties of the molecule. 
For instance, some regions of proteins are 
known to be very mobile; but how can you 
show that in a two-dimensional image? One of 
the solutions that protein chemists have come 
up with is to use “glowing coal” images; 
mobile parts of the molecule are represented by 
yellow and orange colourations while static 
regions are much darker. There is probably a 
good case to be made for showing the regions 
where the structure is uncertain as soft-focus 
images. 
An appreciation of aesthetics can be impor- 
tant for scientists who wish to understand the 
mechanisms of biology. Perhaps the best 
example of this is the work of James Watson 
and Francis Crick in elucidating the structure 
of the fundamental heredity material, deoxyri- 
bonucleic acid (DNA) in 1953. Watson and 
Crick performed very little experimental work 
Above, hand-tinted 
electron-transmission 
micrograph showing the 
DNAs of two bacterial 
viruses partially spliced 
together. Where the two 
DNAs are spliced together 
they are coloured yellow. 
Above right, Untitled 
(1988), oil on canvas by 
Noel Forster (United 
Kingdom). 
Coexistence Human-VYein 
Air-leaf Parasite-Tree Sun- 
Breath Fragility. Sycamore 
leaves on wood panel 
(118 x 191.8 cm), 
by the British artist 
Garry Fabian Miller. 
on DNA; instead they attempted to build 
models of DNA based on the research findings 
of other scientists. One expectation they had, 
however, and adopted as a guiding principle, 
was that the structure of DNA would have 
an inherent beauty. This enabled them to elim- 
inate some of the possible structures as inele- 
gant or downright ugly. The symmetrical mol- 
ecular structure that they developed in 1953 
has stood the test of time and has become an 
icon of the revolution in biological under- 
standing. 
  
] be off ne

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 96810: Art and the science of life

If biotechnology is undoubtedly being 
enriched by the application of artistic consid- 
crations, the reverse is also true. The forms of 
molecules and organisms that are first scen by 
scientists, even if they have not inspired art, can 
certainly find parallels in recent art. The helical 
structure of DNA, for instance, is reflected in 
John Maine’s plywood and marble sculpture, 
Pathway. Noel Forster’s untitled oil painting 
shows a weaving, bullet-shapcd pattern which 
is highly reminiscent of the false-colour pictures 
of viruses produced by electron microscopists. 
And the images that neuroscientists produce of 
nerve cells in the brain arc extraordinarily stm- 
ilar to paintings such as a red gouache work 
produced by Anish Kapoor in 1989. 
Similar parallels can be seen carlier in the 
century. The American artist Alexander 
Calder’s Calderberry Bush of 1932 is onc of the 
artist’s free-standing mobiles. In the way the 
size of the red disks increases, the work 
reminds one of the molecular machinery that 
is present in all living cells for the synthesis of 
proteins. The same theme is expanded in 
Calder’s 1939 Four leaves and three petals, in 
which protein synthesis appears to be taking 
place on an undulating framework. That frame- 
work has its equivalent in what is called the 
“endoplasmic reticulum”, a sort of membra- 
nous network that spreads throughout the cell 
and forms a kind of work-bench on which 
protein synthesis takes place. 
Whereas Calder used three dimensions, the 
Catalan artist Joan Miré expressed similar 
images in two dimensions. Much of Miré’s 
work appears to depict simple cell-like struc- 
tures that have various functional forms dotted 
inside them. These forms closely resemble 
mitochondria chloroplasts or other sub-units 
of cells. 
For me, one of the most provoking and 
biotechnologically relevant pieces of modern 
art is Garry Fabian Miller’s arrangement of 
sycamore leaves, which goes by the rather 
extended name of Coexistence Human- Vein 
Air-Leaf Parasite-Tree Sun-Breath Fragility. 
Miller has taken square sections of sycamore 
leaves in various states of health and decay 
and arranged them on a panel. As one views the 
work from left to right and top to bottom the 
leaves become progressively more decayed 
until the final squares show nothing more than 
a leaf skeleton. 
For me, the work illustrates both the peren- 
nial and natural process of autumnal rotting 
and the role of interacting organisms in this 
process. Its clear that many of the leaves are 
being degraded by cellulose-cating fungi and 
these fungi arc an integral part of the recy- 
cling process. Looked at from a biotechno- 
logical point of view, the work reminds us of 
the importance not only of trees but also of 
fungi. Biotechnologists use fungi for antibiotic 
production, for traditional and modern food- 
making processes and for solving problems in 
waste disposal or recycling. On a more global 
scale, the Miller piece also brings home the 
self-sustaining nature of biology and the 
dependence of human life on the cycle of 
growth and death in nature. [| 
  
Ee Be LS 
JOHN HODGSON, a British 
microbiologist, is senior editor 
of the London magazine 
Bio/Technology. He has written 
widely for the press and has 
been responsible for drafting 
several governmental reports 
and brochures. He is the 
author of Biotechnology-changing 
the way nature works, and is the 
publisher and editor of The 
Genetic Messenger.

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

40 
NEWSBRIEFS... 
  
PALOMA O'SHEA AWARDED 
THE PICASSO MEDAL 
On 2 February 1994, Paloma O’Shea 
(Spain) was presented with UNESCO's 
Picasso Medal by Federico Mayor in 
recognition of her activities for the 
promotion of Spanish culture. 
President of the Isaac Albéniz 
Foundation, she has for over twenty 
years devoted herself to promoting 
music and young musicians and, among 
her other achievements, was 
responsible for creating the 
prestigious Santander international 
piano competition. UNESCO's Picasso 
Medal has rewarded artists and 
personalities in the world of the arts 
since 1981 for their contributions to 
international cultural dialogue. Past 
winners include Yehudi Menuhin, 
Ingmar Bergman, Nadine Gordimer 
and Pina Bausch. 
LL aI, SE 
PROTECTING MOENIODARO 
FROM THE ELEMENTS 
The protohistoric site of Moenjodaro, 
which is included in the World 
Heritage List, is exceptional for its 
size, its town planning and the 
artefacts collected on the site. The 
vestiges of this brick-built city are, 
however, at present under serious 
threat from the floodwaters of the 
nearby river Indus and the capillary 
rise of groundwater; humidity and salt 
are eroding the walls of the buildings. 
International archaeologists and 
scientists are working together to save 
Moenjodaro from destruction. Experts 
from UNESCO are currently at work 
installing a monitoring station that will 
determine the exact relationship 
between the degree of humidity, which 
may also be coming from the 
atmosphere, and salt absorption. 
Among the several protective 
measures already implemented are the 
laying of new salt-free mudbricks, the 
coating of the outside faces of the 
walls with mud mortar, and the 
covering of some buildings with 
geotextile material, 
am lh it ts hl A 
1995, THE YEAR 
OF LOUIS PASTEUR 
UNESCO will participate, in 1995, in 
the commemorative activities marking 
the centenary of Louis Pasteur’s death. 
Pasteur’s brilliant research in the fields 
of microbiology, immunology and 
fermentation technology, his inspired 
insights that led to the development of 
vaccines, his scientific rigour and his 
moral qualities make him one of the 
great benefactors of humanity. An 
inaugural ceremony at UNESCO 
Headquarters in Paris on 17 January 
1995 will be followed by high-level 
symposia, on subjects dealt with by 
NEWSBRIEFS... 
Pasteur, to be held in different regions 
of the world: From Spontaneous 
Generation to Molecular Evolution 
(February, Rio de Janeiro), 
Epidemiology and Public Health 
(March, Hanoi), Etiology and 
Pathogenesis of Infectious Diseases 
(April, Dakar), Microbes, Environment, 
Biotechnology (May, Tahiti), 
Stereospecificity and Molecular 
Recognition (September, New York) 
and Vaccines (September, Paris). 
Other centenary activities include a 
travelling exhibition and the striking of 
a commemorative medal. 
TS L TRE 
MARISA BERENSON, 
UNESCO GOODWILL AMBASSADOR 
“It is not always easy, when one 
belongs, as | do, to the exclusive world 
of cinema, to convince others of one’s 
good faith in wanting to serve an 
ideal”, said Marisa Berenson upon 
being named UNESCO Goodwill 
Ambassador on 23 March. A member 
since 1993 of the Administrative 
Council of the International Fund for 
the Promotion of Culture, the 
celebrated American actress initiated 
the Artists with a Difference project, 
which is committed to combatting the 
exclusion of disabled artists. As one of 
her first tasks, Ms Berenson will set up 
an international committee to help 
and support UNESCO's important 
projects. Marisa Berenson joins a 
circle of men and women who have 
distinguished themselves by their 
talent and their commitment to 
UNESCO. Placido Domingo, Ivry 
Gitlis, Ikuo Hirayama, Miguel Angel 
Estrella, Yehudi Menuhin, Marcel 
Marceau and Jean-Michel Jarre are 
among the artists already named 
UNESCO Goodwill Ambassadors. 
Ee iL 
EDUCATING CHILDREN 
WITH DISABILITIES 
About 80 per cent of the estimated 
200 million disabled children in the 
world are living in developing 
countries, and very few receive good 
health care and education. Fewer than 
2 per cent receive special services of 
any kind. UNESCO has devoted a new 
64-page booklet to them, setting out 
the key principles governing the 
education of young people with 
disabilities and reviewing the 
provisions (legislation, administrative, 
educational, etc.) being made for 
them. The booklet, entitled Educating 
Children and Young People with 
Disabilities, is available free of charge 
from UNESCO, ED/BAS/PE, 7, Place 
de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 (France), 
Fax (33-1) 4065-9405. & 
  
THIS ARTICLE IS ONE 
OF A SERIES INWHICH 
THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF 
UNESCO SETS OUT HIS 
THINKING ON MATTERS OF 
CURRENT CONCERN 
 
  
UNESCOINACTION

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 97079: Sharing the future

COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR 
Sharing the future 
OOKING towards the future, I think UNESCO's 
#%| role could be summed up as fighting for human 
L273 dignity and solidarity, both of which are inseparable 
from respect for freedom. 
North and South alike are doomed not only to suffer 
the same endemic ills that go together with underdevel- 
opment but also to consume the same products, whether 
they be dreams or material goods, exported by the indus- 
trially developed nations. In both, we are witnessing the 
growth of sprawling monster cities, with their mixture of 
splendour and squalor, vast agglomerations where alien- 
ation and the worst kind of solitude, that experienced in the 
midst of crowds, are rife; where extreme poverty radical- 
1zes the emotions and the longing for justice degenerates 
into hatred and violence; where the well-to-do, blinkered 
by their own affluence, see no promise for the future other 
than that held out to them by “market forces” alone. 
Well-being, democracy, freedom and education are 
not rewards to be conferred by one set of people and 
gratefully accepted by another. They develop, find expres- 
sion, take shape and attain fulfilment in cach one of us. Sci- 
entific and technological advances are indeed necessary in 
order to facilitate this process, but they need to be applied 
judiciously and in moderation, since if they go too far 
they could have the opposite of the desired effect, lulling 
and inhibiting us and making us the slaves of our handi- 
work instead of its masters. 
  
A single road 
This is why I would assert that the culture of peace calls, 
atall levels of decision-making but especially at the highest 
level, for a clearsighted and at the same time open-hearted 
perception of the historic change now under way. 
We must not cling to the past, merely taking stock 
and laying stress on past achievements. Time has become 
the most valuable of commodities, and we do not have 
enough of it. Since we cannot draw up an inventory before 
we set out, we shall have to do so as we go along. We have 
to set off on the road to the future, without undue haste but 
resolutely—the same road for all, not just for a chosen few, 
involving a process of change whereby civil society pro- 
gressively comes to occupy those areas of activity that the 
state will have to hand over tot. The creation of ever-wider 
interfaces, especially at the local level, is absolutely essen- 
tial if, in spite of wounds that arc still fresh and painful, there 
is to be a reconciliation. Regardless of our different out- 
looks, we must all unite so that our paths converge and 
combine into a single road, pluralist and integrated, where 
each 1s mindful of our commen future. 
We must advance united, or rather reunited, in pursuit 
of a grand project to usher in, at the end of the present mil- 
lennium, peaceful coexistence, justice and freedom, world- 
wide interaction and a form of competition that preserves 
identities and diversity. History is something to be written 
and made, not described and viewed from outside. The sole 
protagonists of progress and its only bencficiaries must be 
human beings—individual men and women—and itisup 
to each and every one of them, exercising their rights to the 
full, to shape their own destinies. 
It is unimaginable that such a process, whereby each 
individual is given a chance to be listened to and to play a 
part, could take place in an atmosphere of isolation and dis- 
trust. It calls for a thorough educational approach. As the 
great Cuban patriot José Marti said with prophetic insight, 
“Education means pulling individuals up to the level of their 
time”. 
Ready for dialogue 
Inthe first instance, the lifting of barriers and the removal 
of obstacles will allow contacts to be revived and dialogue 
to be established as we look to the future. The ideal dialogue 
is sometimes said to be that between grandparents, who 
have lost their memory, and grandchildren, who do not yet 
have memories. We would do better to ensure that our chil- 
dren’s memory is not like ours nor like that which our 
grandparents have already lost. 
Let us open doors instead of shutting them; let us 
build bridges instead of destroying them. If we are to be 
stubborn, let us be stubborn only in our resolve to engage 
in dialogue and in our endeavours to discover new ways and 
means. Itis impossible to forget, but provided we acknowl 
edge that those who come after us are the only people 
who really matter, that mindfulness of the future should 
guide our steps, then we can put the past behind us and 
advance together, in step, towards that new age to which 
all aspire. 
Sharing, talking together, respecting other people and 
our environment, all the avenues leading to a future com- 
mensurate with the human condition meet at the same 
crossroads, that represented by democracy. Civil society 
has to take charge of its own destiny, with the state, hith- 
erto all-powerful and omnipresent, contenting itself from 
now on with the role of watchful guardian, ensuring com- 
pliance with the rules that society itself has chosen. HW 
41

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 96811: Butrinti rediscovered

BUTRINTI 
rediscovered 
pi ak by Zija Xholi 
  
In Albania, archaeologists 
have rescued a great city 
of the Ancient World from 
the mud and vegetation 
that concealed it for 
centuries 
LBANIA has witnessed the passing 
A: a wide variety of civilizations. 
From Antiquity to the beginning of 
the twentieth century, successive domina- 
tion by the Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman 
empires has left its traces. The city of Both- 
rota—Butrinti in Albanian—is one of the 
fragments which form the fabric of Albania’s 
ancient cultural landscape, in the south- 
west of the Balkan peninsula. 
Nestling in the highlands in the far south 
of the country and surrounded by dense 
vegetation, Butrinti was doubly protected by 
nature and by the fortifications which its 
inhabitants built in ancient times. How- 
ever, this was not sufficient to isolate the city 
from the rest of the world. Less than ten 
kilometres from the island of Corfu, Butrinti 
was linked to the Mediterranean by the 
Vivari canal, which ran from the Butrinti 
Lake to the Ionian Sea. 
The proximity of the sea and the lake, the 
gentle climate and the beauty of the sur- 
rounding countryside provided a splendid 
environment for the foundation of a city. In 
taking advantage of this site, the architects 
of the past constructed what was to become 
one of the major maritime and commercial  

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 96811: Butrinti rediscovered

Above, the ruins of the 
amphitheatre (4th-3rd century 
B.C.). In background, remains of 
houses with colonnaded 
courtyards. 
Opposite page, the baptistry (4th- 
6th century) with its double row of 
granite columns and mosaic floor. 
Right, a statue belonging to the 
school of Praxiteles unearthed at 
Butrinti. 
v 
ZIJA XHOLLI, of Albania, lectures in 
history and philosophy at Tirana 
University and is 2 member of the 
Academy of Sciences of the Republic of 
Albania. His publications include 
Thinkers of the Albanian Renaissance 
(1987). 
 
centres of the Ancient World. Butrinti 
reached the height ofits glory in the fourth 
century B.C,, at which time the city num- 
bered 10,000 inhabitants. 
The sight of the fortifications alone, 
which date from the sixth century B.C, 
evokes the military and economic potential 
ofthe city at that time. The hill on which the 
acropolis stands is encircled by a wall built 
of huge stone blocks. In places this wall is 
two metres high and 3.5 metres wide. 
The amphitheatre, dating from tbe third 
century B.C., bears witness to the cultural 
riches of the city. The stone banks of seating, 
of which twenty-three rows have been pre- 
served, would have held an audience of 
1,500. The theatre is situated at the foot of 
the acropolis, close by two temples, one of 
wbich is dedicated to Asclepios, the Greek 
god of medicine, who was worshipped by 
the city’s inhabitants. Approximately thirty 
inscriptions, almost all in ancient Greek, 
carved in the western facade of this temple, 
and another hundred or so found on a tower 
which was rebuiltin the 1st century B.C,, are 
the only examples of writing discovered in 
Butrinti. These inscriptions are mainly con- 
cerned with the liberation of slaves. 

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 96811: Butrinti rediscovered

44 
Excavations have brought to light many 
objects—plates, vases, ceramic candle- 
sticks—as well as sculptures, including a 
remarkable “Goddess of Butrinti”, which 
seems to completely embody, in the per- 
fection of its features, the Greek ideal of 
physical beauty. 
The ramparts served to remind the 
inhabitants of their peaceful life and the 
uncertainty of their future. For centuries, 
the walls faithfully defended Butrinti. But 
no wall is invincible, and these huge blocks 
of stone finally ceded to the assault of the 
Roman legions which landed on the Adri- 
atic and Ionian shores in the second cen- 
tury B.C. Under the rule of the occupiers, 
Butrinti was to fall slowly into decadence. 
Unlike Dyrrachium and Apollonia, cities 
comfortably situated on the roads joining 
Head of Apollo (4th century B.C.) 
known as the “Goddess 
of Butrinti”. 
Rome to the East, which experienced a 
wave of prosperity, Butrinti—far from the 
major road links—was at the mercy of the 
whims of patricians and senators whose 
sole concern was achieving rapid personal 
gain. 
In spite of this, three monumental foun- 
tains, three public baths, a gymnasium 
decorated with mosaics, and especially the 
aqueduct constructed during the reign of 
Augustus, prove that the site was not com- 
pletely abandoned. Augustus also oversaw 
the reconstruction of all the ancient city 
walls and the erection of new fortifications. 
He accorded Butrinti the status of a colony, 
and it was at this time that the city minted 
its first coins. 
Christianity brought new life to Butrinti. 
The palaeo-Christian period adorned the 
city with two basilicas and a baptistry, 
which is among the most beautiful in the 
Mediterranean region. Sixteen granite 
columns, forming two concentric circles, 
support the roof of the main hall. The floor 
is paved with a magnificent mosaic repre- 
senting the Tree of Life and decorated with 
medallions embellished with animal 
motifs. 
But this was to be a mere respite. Bar- 
barian incursions and Norman raids in the 
eleventh century, a catastrophic earth- 
quake in 1153, conquest by the Venetians 
in 1386, the subterranean infiltration of 
water and the subsequent epidemics com- 
pleted the ruin of the city and forced the 
inhabitants to flee. Butrinti was buried in 
silence and oblivion. Throughout the 
occupation by the Ottoman Empire, from 
the fifteenth to the twentieth centuries, 
the city remained in deep slumber. The 
waters covered Butrinti in mud, and an 
abundant vegetation completely hid the 
remains from view. 
It was not until the beginning of the 
twentieth century that systematic excava- 
tions were carried out at Butrinti by the 
Italian archaeologist I. Ugolini, followed by 
his compatriots P Marconi and D. Mustili. 
Between 1928 and 1941, the ground was 
cleared and the ancient city gradually began 
to reveal its hidden treasures. 
Following the liberation of Albania in 
1944, Albanian archaeologists undertook 
more ambitious excavations. In turn, the 
ramparts, the acropolis, the agora, the 
amphitheatre, the temples, public baths 
and private residences re-emerged into 
the light of day. The entire city arose, almost 
intact, under the fascinated gaze of the 
archaeologists. The mud and vegetation 
that covered Butrinti had protected it from 
the natural and human ravages of time. 
Today, this rediscovered city represents 
a unique cultural treasure whose value far 
surpasses national frontiers. The impor- 
tance of Butrinti can be gauged from its 
inclusion in 1992 on UNESCO's World Her- 
itage List. |

## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 96812: Martin Luther King: death, where is thy sting?

here is thy sting ? 
by Edouard J. Maunick 
ARTIN Luther King, Jr., who was born 
on 15 January 1929, would have been 
seventy-five years old this year. He died, aged 
less than forty, assassinated in Memphis, Ten- 
nessee, on 4 April 1968. 
Anniversaries have a definite role to play in 
the mental calendar. With each passing year, 
events which have stamped a particular mark 
on the history of humanity resurface from the 
shadowy pool of memory. However, there is no 
doubt that some of the events and public fig- 
ures recalled by a particular date speak to us 
independently of such anniversaries, moving 
through our daily lives and conditioning, in 
some way, our present circumstances. They 
are not waiting to pop out from the next page 
of our diaries. They are ever present, chal- 
lenging us. Thus it is with the life and death of 
Martin Luther King, 
As is the case with a number of other 
exceptional public figures, circumstances in 
the closing years of this century are such that 
the fate of this son of black America is again 
becoming topical as a landmark and an inspi- 
ration. It is tempting to echo the words of 
Albert Diirer who, four centuries earlier— 
believing Martin Luther to have been killed fol- 
lowing the Diet of Worms—wrote in his 
journal on 17 May 1521: “O Lord, would that 
you might give us such another man as this!” 
“Such another man” as Martin Luther King 
would be a warrior of non-violence, one who 
sought his weapons in Gandhi's armoury, to 
wage war without sword, bullet or bomb. 
During a voyage to India in February and 
March 1959, on the invitation of Pandit Nehru, 
Martin Luther King and his wife Coretta visited 
New Delhi to add a wreath to the carpet of 
flowers permanently adorning the sanctuary 
where Mahatma Gandhi was cremated. “I may 
travel to other countries as a tourist,” he told 
journalists, “but travel to India as a pilgrim.” 
These were flowers of gratitude to aman who 
stood up against the staunch defenders of the 
caste system in a sub-continent steeped in 
almost unbearable poverty, aman who dared 
to raise the Untouchables to the rank of Har- 
ijans (Children of God). Was this not precisely 
the same cause as that to which Martin Luther 
King strove to devote himself: ensuring that 
the blacks of the United States should not be 
considered as inferiors or even pariahs? 
In New York, shortly before this journey, 
while he was signing copies of his book Stride 
Toward Freedom in a department store, a men- 
tally-deranged forty-five-year-old black 
woman had struck Martin Luther King in the 
chest with an ornamental paper-knife, grazing 
his aorta. Had the victim so much as sneezed, 
the aorta would have punctured, leading to 
certain death. This was only one of numerous 
attacks which dogged the career of this 
remarkable pastor, who—in December 1955, 
at the age of twenty-six, on hearing that 
another black woman, Rosa Parks, had been 
arrested in Montgomery, Alabama, for refusing 
to give up her seat on a bus to a white—had 
decided to devote himself to freeing his com- 
munity from the scorn, derision and shame 
which had been heaped upon it. Freedom 
became his watchword and rallying call. 
Surrounded by friends, all of whom 
believed as he did that “the time for silence is 
past, the time has come to speak out”, he leapt 
into the fray, armed by the memory of the 
Martin Luther who, seeking to lead his com- 
panions out of the Babylonian Captivity (the 
title of one of Luther's treatises), wrote these 
words which must have been familiar to 
Martin Luther King: “Would it not be against 
Nature if, a fire being declared, each citizen 
were to remain still and let the fire wreak its 
havoc, solely because he is not Mayor of the 
city?” 
The violence endured by Martin Luther 
King in thirteen years of campaigning 
included both physical and moral attacks: he 
was to be arrested several times, beaten, 
imprisoned, prosecuted for “incitation to riot” 
and fraud, accused of treason against America 
by those who opposed his stance on the Bay 
of Pigs operation in Cuba and the Viet Nam 
war, and “to spice things up” Martin Luther 
King's opponents circulated tapes made with 
the use of hidden microphones, even sending 
to his wife tape-recordings of high-spirited 
Martin Luther King in 1966, two years before 
he was assassinated in Memphis (Tennessee). 
evenings spent while on tour in the southern 
States. 
He was to be spared no form of attack. But 
nothing was able to break his resolve to build 
a new America, the land of the famous 
“dream” which he described on 28 August 
1963 to a crowd of 200,000 people—black and 
white—assembled in Washington D.C., and to 
millions of Americans at home, sitting in front 
of their radio and television sets. Martin Luther 
King’s words on that day will remain forever 
etched in the memory of people in all cor- 
ners of the world: North, South, East and West. 
Indeed, nothing could halt the war 
declared by Martin Luther King in the name of 
his fellow black Americans. He fought the 
good fight to the end, stubbornly rejecting 
violence, trusting in the civil disobedience he 
had learned from Henri David Thoreau, who 
had himself been influenced by the same 
Hindu mystics who had nourished the sub- 
lime non-violence of Mahatma Gandhi, the 
inspiration for Martin Luther King’s approach 
to his task. Nothing could stop him, until a 
bullet fired from a rifle struck him down on the 
evening of 4 April 1968, sounding the death- 
knell of the man: “with the golden voice, melo- 
dious as the flutes of angels/ A voice of blazing 
brass which rings out over Sodom and 
Admah."* [| 
* L.S. Senghor: Elegy for Martin Luther 
King. 
A 
EDOUARD J. MAUNICK, Mauritian poet and 
writer, former Director of the UNESCO 
Collection of Representative Works, is at present 
associate editor of the magazine Jeune Afrique. He 
is the author of some fifteen works, including 
Ensoleillé vif, which won the Prix Apollinaire in 
1977, Anthologies personnelles (Actes Sud, Paris, 
1984) and Paroles pour solder la mer {Gallimard, 
Paris, 1989). 45

## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 96813: The Downfall of idealism

46 
Thomas Mann 
The downfall of idealism 
In this second excerpt from the 
address he gave in 1935 at a meeting 
organized in Nice by the 
International Institute of 
Intellectual Co-operation on the 
theme of the education of modern 
nan (see previous issue), the German 
writer Thomas Mann has harsh 
words for the moral waywardness of 
the masses and their betrayal of the 
intellect. This text, written almost 
sixty years ago at the time of the rise 
of Nazism, is in some ways still 
strikingly topical. The third and 
final instalment will appear in next 
month's issue. 
 
Text selected and presented 
by Edgardo Canton 
HE First World War was not the 
i prime cause of the impoverish- 
ment of European civilization. it 
only accelerated and accentuated it. It 
was not the war that threw up the gigantic 
wave of eccentric barbarity and dema- 
gogical, primitive brutality that is over- 
whelming the world; it only enlarged and 
intensified its blind rage. Modern man is 
both the victim and the product of the 
disorganized and confusing as well as 
exciting and exhilarating impressions that 
assail him. The fantastic development of 
technological expertise with its triumphs 
and disasters, the blare and thrills of 
sporting records, the exaggerated impor- 
tance and remuneration given to crowd- 
drawing “stars”, the boxing matches fought 
for fabulous prizes and held in vast arenas 
before huge crowds—these are some of 
the characteristic features of our time, 
along with the decadence and decline of 
concepts that are edifying and salutary in 
their severity, such as culture, the mind, art 
and ideas. These are the conceptions of 
the bourgeois age, the glad rags of nine- 
teenth-century idealism. 
In fact the nineteenth century was 
above all a period of idealism. With a cer- 
tain emotion we see today just how ideal- 
istic it was. It not only believed in the ben- 
efits of liberal democracy but in socialism, 
a socialism that would elevate the masses, 
instruct them and have them participate 
in the advantages of science, culture and 
art, in short, in civilization. Today we are 
convinced that it is more important and 
also easier to dominate thc masses by 
increasingly perfecting the crude art of 
using their psychology, i.e. by replacing 
their education with propaganda, not, it 
would seem, without the intimate con- 
sent of the masses, who can easily be 
swayed by dynamic propaganda that 
seems more modern and more attractive 
to them than any educational idea. The 
masses are organizable, and it can be seen 
that they always accept organization grate- 
fully, whatever the spirit behind it may 
be, even if it is the spirit of violence. Vio- 
lence is a principle that greatly simplifies 
things; it is no surprise that it should be 
understood by the masses. 
If these modern masses were merely 
primitive, if they only consisted of happy, 
naive barbarians, it would be possible to 
get along with them and hope for some- 
thing, but they have two qualities that 
make them quite simply appalling: they 
are sentimental, and they are disastrously 
philosophical. The mind of the masses, 
imbued with noisy modernism as it is, 
speaks in romantic jargon. It talks of race, 
the earth and blood, a stack of old ideas 
both traditional and pious... . The result 
is a hypocritical blend of sentimentality 
and popular stupidity bathed in mawk- 
ishness, a triumphant combination that 
characterizes and defines our times. 
L____________________________________________| 
THE IDEALISTIC REBELLION 
Things are even worse concerning the 
masses’ philosophical system. Of course, 
they didn't invent it; it has trickled down to 
them little by little from the intellectual 
spheres above. The role played by the 
mind for several decades now has been 
extremely remarkable. It has turned 
against itself, has begun to indulge in irony 
at its own expense and has pathetically 
abdicated in favour of life and the gener- 
ative forces of the unconscious, of the 
dynamic, and of the subterranean deities, 
those august and dark creative forces 
whose maternal breast is the sacred source 
of all life. We all know of this attack by the 
mind against itself, against reason that it 
has pilloried by accusing it of destroying 
life: it is a bold and fascinating spectacle,

## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 96813: The Downfall of idealism

V 
Thomas Mann in 1936. 
but apt to engender confusion so that per- 
haps it would have been better not to let 
the general public in. 
[tis clear that the struggle against ide- 
alism was started by idealism. The nine- 
teenth century was so bitterly in love with 
truth that through Ibsen's voice it even 
wanted to recognize the “lie of life” as 
indispensable. But it is easy to see that 
there is a big difference between the 
person who accepts the lie because of 
painful pessimism and bitter irony and 
the person who accepts it because of a 
lack of love for the truth. Today this dif- 
ference is no longer apparent to everyone: 
Nietzsche's polemical virulence against 
Platonism, Socraticism and Christianity 
was the polemic of a man more like Pascal 
than Cesare Borgia or Machiavelli. It was 
the ascetic victory of a Christian-born 
man over himself. Marx’s fight against 
German idealism’s conception of truth 
and morality was not without analogies to 
Nietzsche's. Marx undertook the struggle 
because of idealism, because of love for a 
new truth and justice and not out of con- 
tempt for the mind. 
This contempt was to be expressed in 
the decades that romanticized the ideal- 
istic rebellion against idealism, thereby 
opening up dangerous possibilities of pop- 
ularity. Those who professed these theo- 
ries neither saw nor cared about the dan- 
gers to which humanity and civilization 
are exposed by any intellectual attack on 
the mind, about the seeds of latent reac- 
tion in a revolution of this sort, about the 
dark possibilities of abuse they can lead to 
when, transposed into reality, they 
become in the bat of an eyelid the charter 
for all kinds of “spiritualism”, for all kinds 
of human indignity, for impudent con- 
tempt for truth, freedom, justice and 
honour. We are forced to observe that the 
mind has been lacking in a sense of 
responsibility and has not understood 
that morality and mind go together, that 
their rise and fall happen simultaneously 
and that contempt for reason leads to 
moral licence. Thousands of proponents 
of irrationalism have not bothered to find 
out whether or not they are leading the 
E 
| 
people into moral impoverishment and 
training them to be apathetic towards all 
kinds of atrocities. 
|
THE HULLABALLOO OF THE FAIR 
The new masses heard rumours about the 
sensational downfall of the mind and 
reason that had taken place in the higher 
spheres; they learned that this was the 
latest thing, and they did not seem very 
surprised about it, for movements of this 
kind had already long been rampant 
among them. Many things that would 
never have been accepted by the more 
demanding humanity of the nineteenth 
century had again become possible, had 
once more insinuated themselves into our 
habits, owing to our age’s fairground hul- 
laballoo: all kinds of occult sciences, half- 
sciences and quackery, obscure sects and 
  
stupid back-street religions, bare-faced 
bluffing, blind and simple faith and the 
airs and graces of an old charlatan, all 
these aberrations had their day, drew in 
the masses and set the tone of the times. 
Many cultivated men saw these things 
neither as a vulgar, modernistic hotch- 
potch nor as the degeneration of civiliza- 
tion. Instead they mystically proclaimed 
that we were witnessing the resurrection 
of deep-rooted vital forces and venerable 
popular feelings. The ground was even 
prepared for the most absurd and the most 
shameful of mass superstitions. And this 
was not the vague and thoughtless super- 
stition of the past, but a modern democ- 
ratic superstition based on the right 
of every person to think, in short a super- 
stition that went with “philosophical 
ideas”. [| 
{TO BE CONTINUED) 47

## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

  
JAZZ 
Carmen McRae Sings Great 
American Songwriters 
CD MCA GRP 16312 
This disc contains a selection 
of songs by Gershwin, Cole 
Porter, Jerome Kern, Rodgers & 
Hart and other composers, 
recorded in the 1950s. McRae is 
sometimes accompanied by a 
piano and guitar, sometimes by 
big bands with string sections. 
Some of her accompanists are 
outstanding instrumentalists, 
like Kenny Clarke and Tadd 
Dameron, but for the most part 
the backing is provided by 
session artists, She interprets 
some of the great jazz 
standards, “My Romance”, “My 
Funny Valentine” and 
“Summertime”, with her 
wonderful clarity. In the same 
way that Billie Holiday is 
famous for conveying emotion, 
Sarah Vaughan for her vibrato 
and Ella Fitzgerald for her 
brilliant improvisations, McRae 
is famous for her diction. Every 
syllable is crystal-clear and 
different from the last. A jazz 
classic. 
LEE KONITZ. Rhapsody 
Konitz (alto sax), Helen 
Merrill, Jay Clayton (vocals), 
Peggy Stern, Paul Bley 
(piano), Gary Peacock, Ben 
Allison (bass), and others. 
CD KIC) 174 
In terms of style, this is “white 
jazz”, with the emphasis not on 
swing but on intimacy, with 
each piece being performed as 
if it was chamber music. 
Inventiveness is omnipresent, 
especially in Jay Clayton's 
  
   
RECENT RECORDINGS 
by Isabelle Leymarie 
  
  
vocals and the harmonies of 
Stern and Bley. Clark Terry, the 
only black musician on these 
tracks, contributes a stronger 
beat in his duet with Konitz on 
“Flyin’-~~Mumbles and 
Jumbles”. His individual sound 
spices up Konitz’s more 
flowing, “classic” (in the 
academic sense of the word) 
style. 
| 
MUSIC FROM 
AROUND THE 
WORLD 
CUARTETO PATRIA. 
A una Coqueta 
CD Corason COCDI106 
Hailing from Santiago de Cuba, 
in Oriente province, cradle of 
the bolero and the son, the 
Cuarteto Patria, led by Eliades 
Ochoa, is made up of two 
guitars, bongos and a double 
bass. A traditional group that 
has kept its country flavour, it 
performs pieces by Cuba’s 
leading composers of popular 
music: Luis Marquetti, 
Francisco Repilado, Miguel 
Matamoros, Manuel Corona 
and Lorenzo Hierrezuelo. Easy 
listening though the music 
may be, it is not as simple as it 
appears at first hearing, as may 
be judged from the guitar and 
bongo solos, frequently off- 
beat in relation to the basic 
rhythm. 
VIET NAM. Tradition 
of the South 
Anthology of Traditional 
Music Collection 
CD Coraséon COCDI06 
Although Viet Nam is now 
open to tourism and has 
figured in several recent films, 
its ineffably beautiful music 
remains a great mystery to 
most listeners. This disc offers 
a series of recordings of 
  
“entertainment” music 
belonging to the tradition of 
the southern part of the 
country, but affected by various 
influences from elsewhere. The 
music, improvised and here 
played on a dan tranh, a 
sixteen-string zither, a ty ba, 
rather like an old Chinese pipa, 
and a song lang, a hardwood 
black, is governed by modes 
and “modal nuances” that 
express, as in India, various 
emotions: joy, serenity, 
solemnity, calm and sadness. 
This is one of the most 
flourishing of the musical 
traditions in southeast Asia. 
TURKEY. L’art vivant 
de Talip Ozkan 
CD Ocora C 580047 
Less harsh than some classical 
Arab music, tempered by 
influences from the heartland 
of Asia, Turkish melodies 
inevitably recall the opulence 
of The Thousand and One 
Nights, and Turks are in general 
fervent lovers of dancing and 
music. An expert in his 
country’s oral heritage, Talip 
Ozkan is a virtuoso of the long- 
necked lutes, the divan saz and 
the tambura. Here he offers us 
music from various regions— 
Anatolia, Edirne, Aydin, the 
northeast and the border 
region between Turkey and 
Iran—seldom heard outside 
Turkey, enabling us to enjoy all 
the nuances of this fascinating 
world of sound. 
GERARD 
ZUCHETTO/MICHEL 
ROUSSET. L’Hérétique. 
Poems by René Nelli 
CD Gallo 765 
France is at present witnessing 
a renaissance of regional 
languages and dialects, one of 
which is Occitan, famous in 
    
wi Bp 
- HA 4 = 
La 
Y 
# 
fr 
vishal 
5 
y Rg a 1 
days gone by for its courtly 
literature. Occitan remained a 
living language for a long time: 
my grandmother, born in 
Carcassonne, often spoke it to 
me and knew countless old 
poems and songs in the 
language. The Centre for 
Popular Music in Céret has 
undertaken to collect the 
vanishing folklore of the 
French southwest. Keenly 
interested in the troubadours 
and the Cathars, René Nelli is, 
with his strong, dense 
language, one of the great 
Occitan poets. The singer 
Zuchetto and the pianist 
Michel Rousset, with a 
contribution from Dominique 
Regef on the cello, rebeck and 
israj, do an admirable job of 
setting these poems in Occitan 
and French to music. The 
booklet that comes with the 
disc contains translations of 
them into several languages. 
I
CLASSICAL MUSIC 
CAMILLE SAINT-SAENS. 
La Muse et le Poéte. 
Ensemble Orchestral de Paris 
directed 
by Jean-Jacques Kantorow 
CD EMI Classics 0777 754913 2 6. 
The Ensemble Orchestral de 
Paris and several soloists—the 
violinist Patrice Fontanarosa, 
the cellist Gary Hoffman, the 
flautist Clara Novakova and 
the clarinettist Richard 
Vieille—play several of Saint- 
Saéns’ vibrant, refined and 
romantic works: the Odelette 
for flute and orchestra, the 
Tarentelle for flute, clarinet 
and orchestra and the Suite for 
orchestra with its Prelude, 
Sarabande, Gavotte, Romance 
and Finale, as well as the 
Romance for flute and 
orchestra. The texture is 
variable: the music is 
sometimes compact and 
intense as if moved by surging 
passion, sometimes sparkling 
with subtle chromatic effects, 
as in the barcarolle, Une nuit a 
Lisbonne, dedicated to Don 
Luiz, King of Portugal. B

## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### IGNORE

BOOKS OF THE WORLD by Edgar Reichmann 
  
On the trail 
of Ferndio 
Mendes Pinto 
When Renaissance Europe 
discovered the distant East 
¢ eregrinations of Ferndo Mendes Pinto, 
P in which he relates the very numerous 
and very strange things which he saw 
and heard in the Kingdoms of China and also of 
Tartaria, of Sornau, which is commonly known 
as Siam, in those of Calaminh4, of Pegu, of 
Martaban and in many other Kingdoms and 
Realms of the Orient, of which little or nothing is 
known in Occident. And also relates the many 
and exceptional adventures which befell him 
and many other persons. . . ." Thus reads the 
title page of a monumental work, first published 
in Lisbon in 1614, which was subsequently trans- 
lated from Portuguese into many other lan- 
guages and published in various editions 
throughout the world. Today, there are signs of 
aresurgence of interest in this remarkable best- 
seller of the seventeenth and eighteenth cen- 
turies, as evidenced by recent translations into 
American English, French and Japanese. 
Who exactly was Femao Mendes Pinto? Most 
reference books have little to say about him. A 
contemporary of another poet of the warm seas, 
Luis de Camoens, he explored the East Indies and 
published an account of his travels, Peregrinagio 
(1614): this is all we are told. The index of place 
names in the most recent French edition of this 
work—translated by Robert Viale and containing 
an illuminating commentary by the transtator— 
yields further information regarding the myste- 
riously named places visited by this writer- 
adventurer. Thus Calaminhd, initially thought to 
be Tibet, has been identified as Laos; Pegu was 
the capital of Burma, and Martaban was a very 
ancient city in the same country. 
Ferndo Mendes Pinto’s life was that of a char- 
acter in a baroque novel. It has similarities with 
that of the French explorer Henri de Monfreid in 
this century. Probably from a modest back- 
ground, talented and cultured, at the age of 
twenty-seven Pinto left his position in an aris- 
tocratic Portuguese household and set out into 
the unknown to make his fortune. He did not 
return to his homeland for more than two 
decades, during which time he explored the 
horn of Africa, the coast of Arabia, the fabled 
land of India, and Southeast Asia, China and 
Japan. After returning to Portugal, he obtained a 
royal pension late in life and devoted his twi- 
 
light years to the writing of his book. This man 
who wasat various times a trafficker and a slave, 
condemned to death and reprieved, an ambas- 
sador, a missionary and a friend of the Jesuit St. 
Francis Xavier, is, because of his epic story-telling 
genius, an exemplary witness of the way in which 
Renaissance Europe perceived other civiliza- 
tions. 
Ri i a LPL 
ATHIRST FOR CONQUEST 
Pinto does not depict the Portuguese as supe- 
rior to the peoples he discovers. On the con- 
trary, with the exception of their religious prac- 
tices and military weakness, he admires the 
munificence of these distant civilizations— 
particularly China—to the extent of indicating, 
by contrast, the weaknesses of the West, espe- 
cially in the areas of social organization, justice 
and economics. As Robert Viale points out in 
his introduction, this is the account of a lucid, 
meticulous observer, who went so far as to 
count each and every wick in the 1,439 lamps 
in one temple he visited, but one who is also at 
pains to provide the reader with a full picture 
of whatever he is describing. 
This thirst for detail and astonishing pre- 
cision are by no means innocent, however, 
For Ferndo Mendes Pinto, everything has a 
price, and the defensive weakness of the pros- 
perous countries which he visits awaken in 
him the desire for mastery. As early as the Aviz 
dynasty (1385-1580), Portugal—this small 
country at the furthest western extremity of 
Europe—had established its first trading mis- 
sions on the African coast. Portuguese navi- 
gators rounded the Cape of Good Hope in 
1487, and founded a colonial empire in the 
Indies, of which Vasco da Gama became 
Viceroy. More than the metaphysical quest for 
an improbable grail, probably more than the 
thirst for knowledge, it was the attraction of 
great wealth—the fabrics, spices, precious 
wood, gold and gemstones which abounded 
on the Far Eastern shores—which made Euro- 
pean caravels hasten to these hitherto 
unknown lands. 
Da i i. 9 
ENTHRALLING ADVENTURES 
However, these travels also form a series of 
amazing adventures. The narrator recalls his 
youth prior to his departure, his discovery of 
India, and the harrowing demise of the King of 
Aaru (a now-extinct kingdom on the north- 
east coast of Sumatra). Among a host of other 
portraits, Ferndo Mendes Pinto paints a picture 
of Beijing in the sixteenth century, “wherein the 
king of China holds his residence”. The author 
also evokes “the cares which are dispensed to 
all infirm and needful persons”, stating that 
“throughout the kingdom are to be found habi- 
tations destined for the poor”, but also relates 
the way in which “the town of Martaban was 
sacked and destroyed and the manner whereby 
the Queen and many other women were sub- 
jected to manifold tortures”. 
The author condemns the religious 
hypocrisy of his compatriots, who cause harm 
by invoking the name of the Lord; he is horri- 
fied by the cruelties of the Inquisition. His 
“peregrinations” illustrate those of a humanity 
which wishes to progress, reaching beyond its 
limits and breaking away from the conditions 
imposed by the environment, to finally 
encounter the “Other”. But at what cost? the 
reader is tempted to enquire, after turning the 
last of the 777 pages of this odyssey of the 
1600s. The disappearance of the civilizations 
of the Andes and Central America, the depop- 
ulation of Africa by slave traders, the geno- 
cides which ran like a sore through the fol- 
lowing centuries suggest that he who sets out 
in search of the “Other” without first taming his 
appetite for conquest and his lust for wealth 
runs the risk of losing himself on the way. ll 
i LL Ee 
Fernio Mendes Pinto, Pérégrination, travel 
writings translated into French from the Por- 
tuguese and presented by Robert Viale, Col- 
lection Outre-mers, La Différence publishers, 
Paris, 1991. ISBN: 2-7291-0597-2. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Cover, page 3: M. Baret © Rapho, Paris. Pages 4, 
6: Emmanuel Scorcelletti © Gamma, Paris. Page 7: 
Satoru Ohmori © Gamma, Paris, Pages 8-9: Markel 
© Gamma, Paris. Pages 9, 32: © Claude Sauvageot, 
Paris. Pages 10, 11, 35 (above): Lynn Johnson © 
Black Star/Rapho, Paris. Page 12: Patrick Land- 
mann © Gamma, Paris. Pages 13 (above), 33, 34 
(right): Fred Ward © Rapho, Paris. Page 13 
(below): Filipacchi/Liaison © Gamma, Paris. Pages 
14-15: Jorgen Schytte © Still Pictures, London. 
Page 16: Roland Michaud © Rapho, Paris. Pages 17 
(above), 18 (above): Howell/Liaison © Gamma, 
Paris. Pages 17 (below), 24: Gérard Boutin © 
Explorer, Paris. Page 18 (below): Alain Le Toquin 
© Explorer, Paris. Page 19 (above): Y. Cavaille © 
Explorer, Paris. Page 19 (inset): Francis Jalain © 
Explorer, Paris. Page 20: © Vincent Poulain, Paris. 
Page 21: M. Fournie © Explorer, Paris. Pages 22, 
34 (left): Bruce Patton © Panos Pictures, London. 
Page 23: ). P. Porcher © Explorer, Paris. Page 25: 
Jacques Joffre © Explorer, Paris. Page 26: Missir © 
Explorer, Paris. Page 27 (above): © Société 
Pachamama, Lima. Page 27 (below): Durand © 
Jacana, Paris. Page 28: Boiffin Vivier © Explorer, 
Paris. Page 29: Nacivet © Explorer, Paris. Page 30: 
Michael Friedel © Rapho, Paris. Page 31: © M. Y. 
Brandily, Paris. Page 35 (below): Paris. Aventurier 
© Gamma, Paris. Page 37 (left): Laurence Berkeley 
Laboratory/ SPL © Cosmos, Paris. Page 37 (right): 
© John Maine, The South Bank Centre, London. 
Page 38 (left): Pamela and David Parker/SPL © 
Cosmos, Paris. Page 38 (right): © Noel Forster, 
The South Bank Centre, London. Page 38-39: © 
Fabian Miller, The South Bank Centre, London. 
Page 40: © Fabian. Pages 42, 43 (above), 44: 
Michel Setboun © Rapho, Paris. Page 43 (below): 
All Rights Reserved, Page 45: © Archiv fir Kunst 
und Geschichte, Berlin. Page 47: Lotte Jacobi ©     Archiv fiir Kunst und Geschichte, Berlin. 49

## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

50 
    >» 
  
WHEN THE SAHARA 
WAS A TROPICAL FOREST 
In the article entitled “The dry lands” which 
appeared on page 11 of your January 1994 
issue, I read that “arid and semi-arid 
regions are concentrated in two zones 
straddling the Tropics of Cancer and Capri- 
corn, on cach side of the Equator. The main 
cause of aridity is to be found in the circu- 
lation of the atmosphere above our 
revolving globe. The almost permanent 
ridges of high pressure that predominate 
around the 30°-latitude mark stop rain 
from forming.” 
I do not think that this has always been 
the case. Several million years ago, what is 
now the Sahara was apparently a tropical 
forest, which means that the explanation 
given for the present situation is invalid 
for such very ancient times. Is there any 
way of finding out about the climatic 
changes that have taken place since then? 
JOSEPH EMPAIN 
BRUSSELS (BELGIUM) 
The general circulation of the atmosphere is 
an extremely complex phenomenon. It is 
true that the Sahara has experienced far 
less dry periods than today, as we know 
from the remarkable neolithic frescoes of 
Tassili N'Ajjer. These periods occurred not 
millions of years ago, but in the course of a 
rainy period following the most recent 
glaciations, less than 10,000 years ago. At 
that time the general circulation necessarily 
shifted. However, the explanation given, 
which takes account of the situation since 
the historic era, remains globally valid. 
Michel Batisse 
| 
OUCH! 
I was happy to sce in your excellent 
November 1993 issue {“The Story of Num- 
bers”) a reference to my language, Breton. 
On page 10 there is a table showing ways of 
forming the number 18 in different lan- 
guages. In Breton 18 is actually written 
triwec’l: (and not “tri-ouch” as you have it). 
Our Welsh brothers say deunaw {2 x9), but 
also un deg wyth (1 x 10 + 8), The Celts of 
the Gaelic branch say a h-ocht-déag (8 + 
10). 
Thank you again for this allusion to 
Breton, a language which, while no longer 
openly attacked as it was for years, still has 
no official status... 
ALAN ER IIOULVENN 
KERILIEU LANDAD (FRANCE) 
“> LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
 
A FAITHFUL READER 
I have read the Courier since it began publi- 
cation and have every issue except for the first 
one or two. I wonder whether you have many 
such faithful readers. 
MARIE-HELENE ERNST 
RUE DU CIIATELARD 
87370 SAINT-SULPICE-LAURIERE (FRANCE) 
| 
EMOTION IN ART 
I agree with what Henry Christiaen said in his 
letter which appeared in the February issue 
of the UNESCO Courier. As an academically 
trained artist, I think, like him, that with the 
development of techniques for the mass pro- 
duction of images some emotions have 
become subdued, latent, 
Turning to abstract geometric forms 
appears to be a result of fcar—a retreat from 
reality—leading to a sharp deviation from 
life forms to a kind of cubistic art. And yet the 
photographer searches for design and bal- 
ance in interpreting his emotions, as does 
the careful painter and brush artist. 
J think a deliberate return to reality might 
result in a form of creation that encourages 
an understanding of the artistic message. 
MILDRED BOIIN 
IIOUSTON, TEXAS (U.S.A) 
°° | 
FOR A CULTURE OF PEACE 
I greatly appreciated the editorial of your 
October 1993 issue (“Time to Disarm”) which 
mentions Lord Noel-Baker whom I had the 
good fortune to meet at a UNESCO sympo- 
sium with Sean MacBride, and with whom J 
had warm relations until his death. 
ButI appreciated above all the “Appeal for 
non-violence” launched in that issue by the 
Director-General of UNESCO, Mr. J'ederico 
Mayor. I welcome the fact that he puts the 
accent on generosity, a neccessary and suffi- 
cient condition for the creation of the culture 
of peace that he calls for in his interesting 
Commentary. It is admirable that he should 
find generosity “natural” for human beings, 
thereby showing himself to be a profound 
humanist. 
I read with far less enthusiasm about the 
meeting between Goethe and Napoleon so 
brilliantly described by Paul Valéry (in the 
“Archives” feature). Jt scemed to me out of 
place in the Courier, since Napoleon belongs 
precisely to that culture of war whose end Mr. 
Mayor wishes to see. 
MME M.C. CIIARPY 
ST.-TROPEZ (FRANCE) 
The NESCO 
COURIER 
Published monthly in 32 languages and in Braille by Unesco, 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization. 
31, rue Frangois Bonin, 75015 Paris, France 
Director: Bahgat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin 
French edition: Alain Lévéque, Neda El Khazen 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey (Tel 45.68.46.90) 
Documentation: 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel. 45.68.46 87) 
Secretariat: Annie Bracher (Tel. 45.68.47.15), 
Administrative Assistant: 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and 
Korean: Mouna Chatta (45.68.47.14) 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Irina Utkina (Moscow) 
German: Dominique Anderes (Berne) 
Arabic: El-Said Mahmoud El-Sheniti (Cairo) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi) 
Tamil: M, Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: H. Sadough Vanini (Teheran) 
Dutch: Claude Montrieux (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Serpil Gogen (Ankara) 
Urdu: Wali Mohammad Zaki (Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay: Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Yi Tong-ok (Seoul) 
Swahili: Leonard |. Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene: Aleksandra Kornhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala: Neville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Basque: Juxto Egaia (Donostia) 
Thai: Duangtip Surintatip (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Do Phuong (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Nazer Mohammad Angar (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
Bangla: Abdullah A.M. Sharafuddin (Dhaka) 
Ukrainian: Volodimir Vasiliuk (Kiev) 
Galician: Xabier Senin Fernandez (Santiago de 
Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION 
Subscriptions: Marie-Therése Hardy (Tel. 45.68.4565), 
Jocelyne Despouy, Jacqueline Louise-Julie, Manichan 
Ngonekeo, Michel Ravassard, Mohamed Salah El Din 
Customer service: Ginette Motreff (Tel. 45.68.45.64) 
Accounts: (Tel. 45.68.45.65) 
Shipping: (Tel. 45.68.47.50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. Tel.: 4568.45.65 
| year: 21 | French francs. 2 years: 396 FF. 
Binder for one year's issues: 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
| year: 132 French francs. 2 years: 21| FF. 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to the 
order of UNEsco 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted pro- 
viding the credit line reads “Reprinted from the Unesco Courier”, plus date 
of issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles 
reprinted must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos will be sup- 
pled on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless 
accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily rep- 
resent the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the Unesco 
Couner, Photo captions and headlines are written by the Unesco Courier 
staff. The boundaries on maps published in the magazine do not imply offi- 
cal endorsement or acceptance by Unesco or the United Nations. The 
Unesco Couner is produced in microform (microfilm and/or microfiche) 
by: (1) Unesco, 7 Place de Fonter oy, 75700 Paris; (2) University Micro- 
films (Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100 USA: (3) N.C R. Microcard 
Edition, Indan Head Inc, | 11 West 40th Street, New York, USA. (4) 
Bell and Howell Co., Old Mansficld Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, USA 
IMPRIME AU LUXEMBOURG (Printed in Luxemburg) 
DEPOT LEGAL: C1 - MAI 1994 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N' 71844 . DIFFUSE PAR LES NMPP 
Photocomposition, photogravure: Le Courrier de I'UNesco 
Impression; IMPRIMERIE SAINT-PAUL. 2, rue Christophe-Plantin 
L-2988 Luxembourg 
ISSN 0041-5278 N' 6-1994-OPI-94-526A 
This issue comprises 52 pages and a 4-page insert between 
pages 10-11 and 42-43.

## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

Biotechnologies in 
developing goliiiest 
present and futu 
Volume 1: 
Regional and national survey 
by Albert Sasson 
1993, 764 pp. 
ISBN 92-3-102875-8 by : ding postage Price 2680 FF (incluiig £0 vail) 
   
Just published 
   
   
Seven outstanding new CDs 
of traditional music: 
  
      AKA Pygmy Music 
Japan: Ainy Songs 
Tajik Music of Badakhshan 
Islamic Ritual from the Province of Kosovo 
Turkmen Epic Singing: K. aroglu 
Viet Nam: Tradition of the South 
Cote d'Ivoire: Baoyls Vocal Music 
    
      
      
  
    These recordings form part of the UNESCO Collection of Traditional Music of the world published by AUVIDIS in collaboration with 
the International Music Council (IMC). 
   
    
      
     
They may be obtained via your local record 
dealer or from the UNESCO Bookshop, 
7 place de F ontenoy, 
75352 Paris O7 SP, France. 
   
       
 
 
tus of ion of the sta 
| A a & D in the developing 
ogy d national surveys 
d Latin 
piotechnol 
| 
world through regional an CHEN 
in Africa, the Arab States, 
: ; ( an 
America and the En Soran 
critical analys! 
. 
. ort measures to organiz ich 
Be hnology R & D and bio-indu 
biotec 
jopment 
oF 
Eo authoritative B
s oii 
{ lications In S 
jotechnology app : } Sou 
Dare. forestry, Yo ar ar Xe 
Bok husbandry, Suet 
arg a 
i imal and hun 
fisheries, amm 
food and industrial fermentation   
0 through UNESC any bookshop or In case of May he orgered ol agents in each eoyniry ncs only, by postal Publishing's sa epaid orders in French heques) payable difficulty, send pr k cheque (except EUroche! money order, a ban VISA credit card to: 
through a French bank or 
ey 
S y 
ESCO Publishing, Promotion and Sale 
UN 
7 Place de Fontenoy: i 
75352 Paris 07 SP, = 
Fax: (33-1) 42 7330 
   
L Utece 
Propose depuis 1978 
des stages d'anglais Langua ge pour scolaires, 
universitaires et College adultes, a Jersey, 
Guernesey et Londres U Stages renforeés pour la 
préparation aux gxamens 
Q Cours pendant toute I'année 
préparant aux examens de 
Cambridge et de Ia Chambre de 
commerce de Londres 
Ul Stages intensifs Suivis d’un 
placement professionnel 
3 Stages “sur mesures” individuels Ou séminaires pour professionnel (cadres, juristes, gestionnaires, etc.) 
0 Séjours linguistiques pour jeunes et adultes de 23 6 semaines 
pendant les vacances Scolaires (tous niveau, classes de 8 éleves, professeurs hautement qualifiés, hébergement en famille, programme Sportif et excursions). 
. Pour obtenir de Plus amples renseignements ; Lutéce Language College 
P.O. BOX 623 9 New street St. Hélier, JERSEY Channel Islands 
Tél : (19.44) 53459502 
Fax: (19.44) 53469010 

## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/096815engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

three good 
AT 
offering your _ 
friends a gr: 
bseription: 4 = 
Nl By 
The Unesco Coureris the anylnteroncl magazine. i 
PUST3554 1 52 coslopes neat by Mnched of epson of 
3 Jesplein 10 copris og ad 
| , | k, Cif 
Edn pasar dnt volt land pt 
* tassocates ts readers with UNEscos mision of furthering “universal 
| espectfousics, fr the le of aw and for umn gts an dome 
freedoms.. Whe distinction of mcs; 5, \anguege o veligion...” We 
nats. WHAT IS MODERN?... RHYTHM, ANG AND THE SACRED... TIME TO DISARM... THE 
NUMBERS... A NORTH-SOUTH DEBATE: THE MEANING OF PROGRESS... DESERYS... WORLDS WITHIN pe " 
HY RIGHTS, THE UNFINISHED TASK... MODERN MANAGEMENT AND LOCAL TRADITIONS... A NEW 
THE HISTORY OF COMMUNISM... BIOTECHNOLOGY: THE RESOURCEFUL GENE... 
~ FRANCOIS MITTERRAND... JORGE AMADO... RICHARD ATTENBOROUGH... JEAN-CLA - 
LACOUTURE... FEDERICO MAYOR... NAGUIB MAHFOUZ... SEMBENE OUSMANE... REI VO 
FREDERIC ROSSIF... HINNERK BRUHNS... CAMILO JOSE CELA... V V HAVEL... El S. NTSEV. 
ERNESTO SABATO... GRO al CLAUDE USS... LEOPOLDO « PA 
      
                FREIRE... 
DANIEL J. BOORSTIN... FRANCOIS JACOB... MANV DIBANGO... FAROUK rn SADRUDDIN AGA KHAN... 
JORGE LAVELLL... LEON SCHW +. TAHAR BEN JELLOUN. . GABRIEL GARCIA . INVES: 
YVES COUSTEAU... MELINA MERCOVRI... CARLOS FUENTES... JOSEPH KI-ZERBO... VANDANA SH ™ WILLIAM 
STYRON... OSCAR NIEMEYER... MIKIS THEODORAKIS... ATAHUALPA YUPANQUI... HERVE BOURGES... ABDEL 
MALAMOUD... UMBERTO ECO... OLIVER STONE... ANDRE BRINK... JAMES D. 
EL SERRES... THEODORE MONOD... YVES COPPENS... EDOVARD J. MAUNICK. .. 
VAN THUAN... ANTONI TAPIES... 
    
  
  - 
; x- Te x 3 LS 
™, 
ENCOUNTERS WITH OTHER CVLYURES ANB WAYS OF LIFE 
ALSO FEATURING M INTERVIEW WITH THE CHILEAN WRITER 
y p 0    