# [191576](191576eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](191576eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

Li]   
 
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
  
March * 2006 * ISSN 1993-8616 
 
  

## [Page 2](191576eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
   
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
a
r
i
o
 
Sa
nt
an
a 
  
Contents 
MARCH - 2006 IE 0764151 SN   
. FE _ TO THE LAST DROP 
p REE ALES The UNESCO Courier is reborn. Now a full-fledged online magazine, each new issue 
mA 8 + will focus on timely themes of special concern to the Organization. To celebrate 
World Water Day on 22 March, the Courier has published a collection 
of articles on this precious resource, that is increasingly threatened 
by population growth, pollution and poor management. 
Band-i-Amir lake in Afghanistan (2003).   
WATER: 
A GRINDSTONE OF GOVERNANCE 
~ Therei is no water shortage, at least not on paper. 
* The Second United Nations World Water 
Development Report shows that resources are unequally 
distributed, and, above all, badly managed. Presented in Mexico 
City in March 20086, ‘Water, a Shared Responsibility’ takes 
an inventory of the planet's water resources. 3 
 
“1 “ARAB STATES SUFFER 
~ FROM WATER SCARCITY”: 
| INTERVIEW WITH PRINCE TALAL 
“ Prince Talal bin Abdul Aziz, President 
of the Arab Gulf Foundation for United Nations Development 
Organizations (AGFUND) has repeatedly warned 
of the water shortage threatening a number of Arab States, 
particularly in the six Gulf States. 5 
 
   
ney WHEN WATER BECOMES 
57 A POLITICAL CHALLENGE 
U2 nan overwhelming majority vote, water was 
enshrined in Uruguay's constitution as public property - a world first. 
As a result, the state must now decide what will happen to private 
concessions that managed the supply network before the vote, 
and also undertake the task of monitoring water quality. 7 
  
VALENCIA: 
WATER WISDOM 
In Valencia's vast “huerta’, the heartland 
' of Spain's orchards, water is an historically 
strategic element. For centuries a special court has met on every 
Thursday to settle disputes relating to this key resource. 9 
<2 THE PROMISE 
i: : OF THE RIVER CONGO 
- The Congo River, whose flow is the greatest 
Lg in the world after the Amazon, possesses 
an exceptional hydroelectric potential for the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo (DRC). While estimates boast that it could satisfy 
the electrical needs of the entire African continent, the access rate 
for inhabitants in the DRC is paradoxically one of the lowest 
in the world. 11 
a LIVING IN A COUNTRY 
/= =.= - WITHOUT WATER 
di rd . Desalinization, recycling, importation: 
i confronted with a virtual absence 
of water resources, Kuwait has been forced to find solutions 
to face its water shortage problems. 13 
 
THE COURIER LOOKS BACK 15 
The UNESCO Courier has devoted many i es to water-related problems. Here is a b ip down memory lane. 
Pacts AND FIGURES 1/ 

## [Page 3](191576eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

There is no water shortage, at least not on paper. The Second United Nations Worl 
Water Development Report shows that resources are unequally distributed, and 
above all, badly managed. Presented in Mexico City in March 2006, 
‘Water, a Shared Responsibility’ takes an inventory of the planet’s water resour 


### 144875: Water: a grindstone of governance

  
WATER 
A GRINDSTONE OF GOVERNANCE     
   
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
I
n
e
z
 
Fo
rb
es
 
7 . - 
Fy 3 
2p 
  
aR 
oday, one in five people doesn't 
ave access to safe drinking water. 
he report shows that bad quality 
ater kills. Diarrhoeic diseases and 
alaria caused more than three mil- 
ion deaths in 2002, mostly among 
children under five. 
Already, it is estimated that certain 
regions like sub-Saharan Africa will 
not reach the Millennium target that 
aims to cut in half the proportion 
of people without access to safe 
drinking water by 2015. 
The short-term prospects are 
quite worrying. As a rule, demo- 
graphic growth leads to a drop in 
the how much water is available per 
inhabitant. It is forecast that 55 % 
more food will be needed to feed 
the planet in 2030. However, cur- 
rent irrigation demands already rep- 
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 
    
y 
- 
Rd 
  
» ’ - oh 
Zu 3 ’ 
Woman removes water from a well in Mali. 
resent nearly 70 % of freshwater 
consumed. 
Freshwater is not just a technical 
issue. ‘lt is not only about digging 
wells or improving the water mains. 
Water must be tackled within in a 
much wider framework. It concerns 
not only science and technology but 
also cultural and social aspects’, ex- 
plains Andras Sz6ll6si-Nagy, Director 
of UNESCO's Division of Water 
Sciences. 
“Water stress 
tends to occur 
where individual rights 
and liberties are limited...” 
Second UN World Water Report 
3 
    
The political dimension mustn't be 
forgotten either. ‘It is much less a 
problem of resources than one of 
governance’, he adds. Corruption, 
which costs millions of dollars every 
year, also takes its toll on the supply 
of water. The report quotes a sur- 
vey carried out in India which stated 
that 41 % of the people questioned 
had paid bribes to falsify their water 
meter readings. 
But governance does not just 
concern developing countries. 
‘Hurricane Katrina showed just how 
unprepared the United States was 
to face such a catastrophe. The 
different levels of government did 
not work together enough’, analy- 
ses Gordon Young, World Water 
Assessment Programme Coordina- 
tor at UNESCO.

## [Page 4](191576eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### 144875: Water: a grindstone of governance

PN c 
o 
1% 
>) 
< 
Oo 
c 
o 
2 
< 
[] 
[6] 
[723 
w 
Zz 
=> 
© 
  
Traditional irrigation in Luang Prabang (Democratic republic of Laos). 
This is a crucial issue since natural 
catastrophes are becoming more 
and more frequent, with 90% of 
them being linked to water. 
Reasons for hope 
Nevertheless, there are signs of 
hope. There appears to be a ris- 
ing level of public awareness of 
the issue. If alarmist warnings from 
experts went unheeded for a long 
time, this is no longer the case. 
Since the end of the 1990s, water 
has figured prominently on the inter- 
national political agenda. The adop- 
tion by the United Nations General 
Assembly in 1997 of a resolution 
dealing with water became a turn- 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
Z
e
v
a
c
o
 
ing point. At the same time, more 
and more private citizens are facing 
up to the issue. 
In some Latin American countries, 
like Argentina or Bolivia, abuses 
linked to the privatisation of water 
services have given rise to signifi- 
cant protest movements. Uruguay- 
ans even voted a referendum to 
have water enshrined in their Con- 
stitution as public property. 
‘In the Nile basin, we have also 
seen the creation of groups of citi- 
zens who are very active in issues 
linked to water’, adds Richard Me- 
ganck, Director of the UNESCO- 
IHE Institute for Water Education in 
Delft (Netherlands). ‘The participa- 
y : 
Woman taking water in Bolivia. 
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 
tion of people is absolutely vital if 
we want to implement sustainable 
and efficient management meth- 
ods! 
Furthermore, certain good prac- 
tices are being developed, like the 
practice in certain regions of India 
of collecting rainwater and storing 
it in underground reservoirs. 
Mechanisms for mediating con- 
flicts linked to water, like the Water 
Court in Valencia, already exist and 
could be spread. 
In addition, approaches are being 
explored to improve supply tech- 
niques. One of these consists in 
continuing the 20th century prac- 
tice of building dams. Enormous 
projects are underway, like Grand 
Inga, which is planned for the Dem- 
ocratic Republic of the Congo in 
ten years’ time. 
These projects, which have a se- 
rious impact on ecosystems, also 
give rise to many doubts. 
A possible alternative for arid 
coastal countries may be to de- 
salinate seawater. This technique, 
which is very costly, is already In 
use in Persian Gulf countries like 
Kuwait. 
However, these technical solutions 
will not be enough. In the future, it 
will also be necessary to consider 
water as an exhaustible resource. 
Agnes Bardon. 

## [Page 5](191576eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

SN CCHETETR IT Wo Le [TW VAF- 20 2 (IT [1h 1 fe the Arab Gulf Foundatior 
{IRV TI Cel ELT ER 0 EYE [oT o ETT ROT ETaP-£ Vi {e) EXO: Xe 2 1») 
WER CIENT NATETG EL Ro RG CRUE CIE (eg EL ERG CETCHIT | 
ITT LT WAVE BS ET CEM ET TTI ET VAT RY TX eT] | RS C1 


### 144881: Arab States suffer from water scarcity: interview with Prince Talal

  
ARAB STATES SUFFER 
FROM WATER SCARCITY 
Interview with Prince Talal 
© U
NE
SC
O 
    
P
e
 
Prince Talal. 
     
 
Interviewed by Bassam Mansour 
You were one of the first 
to draw attention to the threats 
to freshwater resources in Arab 
States, especially 
in the Gulf region. 
What is the current situation? 
| often insist that the issue of wa- 
ter in the region is a matter of sur- 
vival. The greatest challenge facing 
people in the Arab world, especially 
in the Gulf (rulers and ruled alike), 
is how to deal with the issue in a 
sensible way. The serious implica- 
tions of the current situation call 
for something to be done rapidly. 
Looking at the situation of water in 
the Arab world in light of the Water 
Poverty Index, it becomes clear that 
the Arab world is on a dangerous 
downward slope towards an abyss. 
According to this index, a country 
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 
suffering from water shortage is one 
whose average per capita share of 
water is below 1000-2000 m3 per 
year. Using this measurement, 13 
Arab countries fall within the cat- 
egory of countries with water short- 
ages or water scarcity; among them 
are a number of Gulf States. 
Do you think the solutions 
currently proposed 
to limit water consumption 
are sustainable? 
In our view, the practical solution 
is for governments to adopt well- 
designed water management poli- 
cies which deal rationally with the 
problem while preventing waste 
and bridging the gap between 
available water resources and fu- 
ture needs. This should be done 
5 
by revising the regulatory and legal 
framework: a large part of the wa- 
ter problem in our region is a result 
of regulations and laws. 
In the Gulf, we are now witnessing 
a growth in awareness of the need 
to overcome the water crisis. We feel 
that this movement can be more ef- 
fective if education is harnessed pos- 
itively, and the private sector and civil 
society are mobilized to perform their 
duty to help Arab governments. 
Scientific research should be con- 
centrated in a Gulf State scientific 
institution which involves universi- 
ties and draws on the experience 
of States and the expertise of inter- 
national organizations. The creation 
of such an institution would make 
data available and help to resolve 
the discrepancies and conflicting 
approaches regarding the vari 
ous readings of the “water situa- 
tion”, such as the raging debate on 
groundwater reserves. 
Developing countries that face se- 
vere water shortages should pursue 
creative, non-conventional policies 
in order to deal with the crisis. One 
idea could be to undertake studies 
on the relocation of inhabitants of 
areas suffering from water shortag- 
es to regions within the same coun- 
try where water is plentiful. Indeed, 
consideration could be given to the 
idea of moving the inhabitants of 
that State to a neighbouring State 
which is not facing a water crisis. 
This idea remains on the table, and 
those responsible should examine 
the feasibility of implementing it at 
the national or regional.

## [Page 6](191576eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

© 
w
w
w
.
w
e
l
t
r
e
k
o
r
d
r
e
i
s
e
.
c
h
 
  
    
Stripped water towers in the Gulf region 
providing precious water supply. 
How can we best convince 
people of the seriousness of 
dwindling freshwater reserves 
and the need to rationalize 
consumption? 
It is extremely important that plans 
and projects adopted by govern- 
ments be based on solid popular 
support, which should strengthen 
them and provide a backdrop for 
their implementation. This means 
making people in the Arab world and 
the Gulf fully aware of the realities of 
the situation. This is the responsibility 
of the media, by which | mean the 
free and independent media. The 
starting point should be the promo- 
tion of a “culture of water” among 
the various social sectors, stressing 
the importance of rationalizing con- 
sumption. The other essential factor 
in rationalizing water consumption 
Is education. Its inclusion in curricu- 
lum development will help prepare 
younger generations and make them 
aware of the future that awaits them 
if they ignore the water issue. 
Researchers agree that there 
is a causal link between good 
governance and good water 
management. Do you agree? 


### 144881: Arab States suffer from water scarcity: interview with Prince Talal

Reform is an integrated system. 
There can be no talk of economic 
reform in isolation from concomitant 
political and social reform, because 
the economy is a reflection of politics 
and the social environment. Politics 
and the economy naturally cast their 
shadow on the social sphere. Reform 
thus has three dimensions and is in- 
divisible, although it may be put into 
practice gradually, in stages. Dealing 
decisively with the water issue is thus 
part of the overall reform process. For 
instance, in order to address institu- 
tional shortcomings and inadequate 
water management, there needs to 
be political determination at the high- 
est levels, and sufficient resources 
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 
must be allocated to the reform 
national institutions, an endeavour 
which should be guided by the rel- 
evant modern concepts. 
In this sense, the reform processes 
underway in the countries of the re- 
gion can make a positive contribu- 
tion to the solution of the water issue 
through the civil society organiza- 
tions. These organizations, with their 
creative potential, can spearhead true 
changes in ways of thinking which 
may help to boost the water reserves 
available for future generations. 
AGFUND has worked on a num- 
ber of water-related 
programmes, what 
are the challenges you are 
trying to overcome, 
in particular through your 
cooperation with UNESCO? 
The development and funding strat- 
egy we are pursuing at AGFUND 
addresses health, education, institu- 
tion-building and private develop- 
ment. Water plays a crucial part 
in developing these four sectors. 
For instance, it would not be pos- 
sible to imagine a comprehensive 
approach to tackle poverty without 
taking into account the complica- 
tions arising from freshwater scar- 
city in poor communities. By the 
same token, projects to develop 
the education sector cannot be 
separated from efforts to address 
the water problem. If this were not 
so, UNESCO would not be at the 
forefront of this problem. 
AGFUND has made great prog- 
ress in its efforts to focus attention 
on the water problem, particularly 
in promulgating the concept of a 
“scientific and institutional culture”, 
which we encourage in order to 
tackle social, economic and po- 
litical problems. An example is our 
cooperation with the World Bank 
which has led to the publication of 
the most recent scientific report on 
water in the region, “A water sector 
assessment report on the countries 
of the Cooperation Council of the 
Arab States of the Gulf". The aver- 
age annual per capita share of water 
in the Arab Gulf States lies between 
60 and 370 m3. What is even more 
worrying, according to the report, 
6 
is that this figure is expected to 
be halved by 2030, in view of high 
growth rate of the region's popula- 
tion, which is expected to increase 
to 56 million. 
Cooperation with UNESCO in the 
water sector is ongoing. This is an 
extension of our development rela- 
tions with the Organization. Perhaps 
the clearest sign of this cooperation 
is the fact that UNESCO desig- 
nated the President of AGFUND as 
Special Envoy for Water for 2003, 
in order to draw attention to water 
issues worldwide. 
We at AGFUND support all of 
UNESCO's work on water issues. 
This is why we announced at the 
World Water Conference in Delft 
(Netherlands) the establishment of 
an AGFUND-UNESCO Fund to 
support UNESCO projects on wa- 
ter issues. AGFUND donated $1 
million to the Fund. We have also 
called upon governments, organiza- 
tions and individuals concerned with 
development issues to provide the 
necessary material support to sup- 
port UNESCO's work and activities. 
“We look forward to seeing 
— as we have repeatedly 
called for — 
the establishment 
of supreme water councils 
in the countries of the region”. 
We look forward to seeing — as we 
have repeatedly called for — the es- 
tablishment of supreme water coun- 
cils in the countries of the region, 
who are entrusted with periodic as- 
sessment of the volume of reserves 
and of new resources, and monitor- 
ing of existing resources. Such an 
authority would constitute a kind of 
national database bringing together 
all estimates of water resources in 
the country, and would be involved 
in the design of policies and various 
strategies for their implementation. 
We believe that UNESCO, with its 
expertise and know-how, may help 
in this regard. For its part, AGFUND 
will spare no effort to support the 
idea, whether through funding or

## [Page 7](191576eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

ENE CLE NLERU EI TWAT CRE was CHE LE RT RY TT [TENE ee Ea {o) 
as public property - a world first. As a result, the state must now decide 
ETRE] RCN VE) CR (ET I ERG ETN ED ET Tl RG TERT o of, T2814 
DE 
ICRU CAI CIEL EL RIG EY EL CRG ER EE full Ids AVE LEE TET 
DE DE 


### 144879: When water becomes a political challenge

  
WHEN WATER 
BECOMES A POLITICAL CHALLENGE 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
F
e
r
n
a
n
d
o
 
Ba
rr
os
 
n terms of water resources, Uru- 
uay is somewhat blessed. Ac- 
ording to the Second United Na- 
ions World Water Development 
eport, published in March 2006, 
the country is ranked 26th for the 
quantity of water available per in- 
habitant. 
224 billion cubic metres of rain 
water falls each year in the coun- 
try. However, a third of this volume 
evaporates or is lost, almost 183 
The UNESCO Courier - March 20086 
 
billion litres of water per day. 
In this South American country 
of three million inhabitants, this re- 
source is used unsparingly. 6,000 
litres of water costs a family only 
six dollars per month. However, 
only 43% of drinking water pro- 
duced by the company is billed, as 
shown in a report commissioned by 
the state-owned water utility OSE 
(Obras Sanitarias del Estado). Also, 
it is not rare for a damaged pipe to 
7 
leak for days before the authorities 
deal with it. 
Yet it is now constitutionally en- 
shrined that water belongs to the 
community. The result is that only 
state-owned companies can supply 
drinking water and sewage services. 
The Uruguayan voters decided 
this by an overwhelming majority 
(64.58% of the votes) in a referen- 
dum in October 2004. Since then, 
a delicate process of negotiation

## [Page 8](191576eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### 144879: When water becomes a political challenge

has been underway to transfer the 
private concessions to the public 
domain. 
Furthermore, the constitutional 
reform established that drinking 
water and the sewage system ‘are 
fundamental human rights’. Work- 
ing on the assumption that water 
is property ‘in the public domain’, 
according to the amendment that 
was passed, Uruguay must now 
implement a national policy based 
on ‘sustainable supportive man- 
agement’ of this resource. 
User involvement 
Another important new concept: 
this policy now requires the partici- 
pation of users at ‘all levels of plan- 
ning, management and monitoring’. 
‘Water cannot to be considered 
as private property, it belongs to 
“Complete privatization 
of water services 
in developing countries, 
however, has not been able 
to meet expectations for 
improved and extended water 
supply and sanitation 
services. There is, thus, 
a need for improving dialogue 
on water between govern- 
ments, civil society 
and the private sector...” 
Second UN World Water Report 
| | 
all, to the community ‘, maintained 
lawyer Guillermo Garcia Duchini, 
who took part in the drafting of the 
constitutional amendment, pro- 
moted by the National Commis- 
sion in Defence of Water and Life, 
a coalition including close to forty 
associations. 
‘It is inconceivable that this vi- 
tal resource should be subject to 
speculation and profit. ‘In this re- 
spect’, he continued, ‘we have had 
rather negative experiences in this 
country, both in terms of cost to 
users and of protection of the en- 
vironment’. 
The lawyer recalled that the initia- 
tive for the reform was born out of 
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
F
e
r
n
a
n
d
o
 
Ba
rr
os
 
a meeting of inhabitants in the De- 
partment of Canelones, in South- 
ern Uruguay. At that time it was 
a response to worries among the 
local population that drinking wa- 
ter and sewage services would be 
privatized in the future. 
The 2004 referendum, a world 
first, permanently ruled out this 
possibility. ‘In Uruguay, the consti- 
tution can only be modified by refer- 
endum’, explained Garcia Duchini, 
hence the decision to resolve this 
issue by a vote. 
Quality monitoring 
The choice of the Uruguayans is 
surprising, to say the least, in a 
country that is liberally supplied 
with water, not only by rainfall but 
also by rivers and lakes. 
Waterways such as the Uruguay 
River and the Rio de the Plata flow 
towards most of the costal regions, 
and almost half the territory of this 
country of 187,000 km? is situated 
above usable aquifer sources (the 
largest, the Guarani aquifer, is one 
of the biggest subterranean fresh- 
water reservoirs in the world, oc- 
cupying 58,000 km2 of Uruguayan 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
F
e
r
n
a
n
d
o
 
Ba
rr
os
 
  
territory and extending into Argen- 
tina, Brazil and Paraguay). 
Mario Garcia, Professor of the De- 
partment of Soil and Water at the 
University of Uruguay considers 
that water demand is currently low 
due to the enormous resources in 
the country. 
Nevertheless, ‘when a resource 
is abundant, little importance is at- 
tached to it, and instead of opting 
for integrated management of the 
hydrographic basin, an individual 
strategy is applied; he affirms. 
Those in favour of the new legal 
framework wish to avoid this pitfall 
by creating specially designated 
organizations to administer the ba- 
sins, comprised of the authorities, 
technicians and users. 
However, according to Professor 
Garcia, the main ‘risk of vulnerabil- 
ity’ that Uruguay faces today is the 
deterioration of water quality due 
to the use of agricultural chemical 
products. Preserving the quality 
and not only the quantity of water 
is now a public concern in Uruguay. 
Mauricio Rabuffetti, 
in Montevideo. 
The Rio de La Plata is an enormous reserve of freshwater. 
8

## [Page 9](191576eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

(REICH WE CRTET fa [TY gr: CY CET ET [We RT ETH ER (o) ET 
water is an historically strategic element. For centuries a special court has m 
on every Thursday to settle disputes relating to this key resour 
  
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
J
o
s
é
 
Jo
rd
an
 
     
   
  
n Thursday at midday in the cathe- 
Square in Valencia the faithful 
to mass while tourists feed pi- 
alguacil”, or constable, comes out of 
an adjoining building and picks up a 
long cane with a golden harpoon on 
one end. 
He is followed by eight men dressed 
in the long black shirts traditionally 
worn by farmers in the region. These 
are the members of the “Tribuna 
del Agua’, an ancient institution that 
meets each Thursday. 
In public hearings, the court settles 
disputes on the distribution of water 
among the eight channels that irri 
gate the 17,000 hectares of land that 
form the huerta, where citrus fruits, 
rice, grapes and peaches are grown 
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 


### 144874: Valencia: water wisdom

VALENCIA 
WATER WISDOM 
  
Water Court meeting in the cathedral plaza in Valencia (Spain). 
for all of Spain and for export. 
At the sound of the cane striking 
the granite pavement, eight men with 
greying hair take their seats in front of 
the Porch of the Apostles on chairs 
made of wood and tooled leather. 
They are not judges, but “Sindicos”, 
or magistrates, elected democrati- 
cally for a period of two years, who 
represent the owners of all the eight 
channels. 
They have no legal training and farm 
their land for their livelihood. All have 
the reputation for being ‘honest men’. 
The Sindicos master the rotations 
and watering periods, and it is their 
duty to distribute water proportionally 
and see to it that the channels that 
cross their land are maintained so 
that water may flow to the other farm- 
ers’ fields. 
9 
‘I come every Thursday because it 
is my duty’ Vicente Baixauli Pastor, 
Sindico of the Favara canal, one 
of the largest in the area. He is 
astounded by anyone who would 
doubt the usefulness of the Court. 
‘The Court is for people who don't 
“a society that claims 
to attack water problems 
must make serious efforts 
to develop effective 
institutions and processes 
that can mediate disputes...” 
Second UN World Water Report

## [Page 10](191576eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### 144874: Valencia: water wisdom

do things right, and they clearly have 
to respect our decisions, as our in- 
stitution was founded by the Caliph 
of Cordoba, who was a lord of great 
distinction and high rank 
A court 
of Arab origin 
lt was the Arabs, during the time of 
Abderraman Il and Al-Hakem Il who 
perfected the irrigation system of the 
huerta. He designed the water dis- 
tribution methods, and defined the 
principle according to which water 
distribution and the land are insepa- 
rable. 
Arabic origins can be found in words 
such as azud (sluice gate), acequia 
(canal) and fila (a measurement unit 
equivalent to a variable quantity of li- 
tres per second). 
The court in its current form was 
founded around 960 under the reign 
of Abderraman lll, and it is thought 
that its sessions were held in front 
of the Porch of the Great Mosque, 
which is now the cathedral. 
The hearings of the Court take place 
in the open air, and only in the Valen- 
cian language. Everyone acts on their 
own behalf, without a lawyer, pros- 
ecutor or any written documents. It is 
possible to call witnesses or order an 
inspection of the land if this is consid- 
ered necessary. 
Justice, laws 
and common sense 
Court verdicts cannot be appealed. 
‘We are a Supreme Court, because 
we use good sense), states Baixauli. 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
J
o
s
é
 
Jo
rd
an
 
©
 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
J
o
s
é
 
Jo
rd
an
 
  
Sessions are in public and in Valencian language. 
Even though he asserts that his de- 
cisions have always been fair, he re- 
grets that he once convicted a saint. 
‘What happened was that there 
was too much water in the main 
canal, which destroyed the crops 
of a farmer who in turn accused his 
neighbour of letting in more water 
flow than was needed. He was the 
one | should have punished for false 
accusation, but as he had already 
lost his harvest, it seemed too harsh. 
So, | punished Saint Peter for too 
much rain and. As | am a Catholic, | 
  
The system of “acequias” was created in muslim times. 
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 10 
later wrote him a letter asking him to 
forgive me. 
According to Maria Jose Mascarell 
Navarro, professor of administrative 
law and civil procedure at the Uni- 
versity of Valencia, several factors 
explain the fact that the Court has 
endured and that its decisions are 
systematically respected: ‘First, be- 
cause it exercises its authority not 
over only one canal, but over all the 
channels. Then, because it is not a 
higher authority, but a court in which 
the Sindicos are elected democrati- 
cally by the people. Above all, the tra- 
ditional farmers see the fact of being 
judged in public as an affront. This is 
why they generally reach agreement 
beforehand’. 
Meanwhile, Baixauli explains to 
anyone who wants to listen what 
he sees as the real dangers to the 
huerta: tourism, the main activity of 
the region. ‘You see, our children do 
not want to hear about rice or or- 
ange trees, because farmers do not 
make much from their harvests - the 
person who makes money today is 
the one who plants pillars. 
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz.

## [Page 11](191576eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

The Congo River, whose flow is the greatest in the world after the Amazon, 
ELLIE T EV oo ETI To [fo TA Tati fof o To] CTU E:T (oT TER 0 121) ToToi c= Yi Toll a TY Wo] [Too] i { [=X C6], Te TeX (01 2 {9 
yo While estimates boast that it could satisfy the electrical needs of the entire African continent, 
e access rate for inhabitants in the DRC is paradoxically one of the lowest in the world. 
  
©
N
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
El
ec
tr
ic
it
y 
C
o
m
p
a
n
y
 
of
 
D
R
C
 
(
S
N
E
L
)
 
    the river that irrigates the Demo- 
ratic Republic of the Congo. In 
testimony to the strengh of Congo 
River, the speeding current of mud- 
dy water sweeps along tree-trunks 
and forms whirlpools of foam, her- 
alding the first rapids downstream 
of the capital. 
This force is also apparent in 
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 


### 144876: The Promise of the River Congo

THE PROMISE 
OF THE RIVER CONGO 
  
figures: with an average flow of over 
40,000 m3/s, it is an exceptional 
source of energy. It is estimated 
that this river represents around 
13 % of the world’s hydroelectric 
potential, and its force alone could 
satisfy the electricity requirements 
of the entire African continent. 
In theory, this is its potential. The 
paradox Is that electricity con- 
sumption in the RDC is one of 
the lowest in the world. The rate 
of households with access to 
11 
  
“.. rapids, riparian vegetation 
and wetlands 
can all disappear 
when river flow 
Is altered by damming.” 
Second UN World Water Report

## [Page 12](191576eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

» 
LA 
©
N
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
El
ec
tr
ic
it
y 
C
o
m
p
a
n
y
 
of
 
D
R
C
 
(
S
N
E
L
)
 
  
= ry 
NS  — 
ns 
Lame 
  
Inga 1 power plant. 
electricity is less than 6%, one of 
the lowest levels in sub-Saharan 
Africa. 
Yet infrastructure does exist. Ex- 
isting power sites (named Inga | 
and Il) are situated on the lower 
reaches of the river, around 400 
kilometres from the capital. These 
sites were brought into operation 
in 1972 and 1982, and have the 
potential to supply electricity to a 
large part of the region. 
However, in many rural areas of 
the country today, petrol genera- 
tors are still the only source of elec- 
tricity. At nightfall, it is not rare for 
some popular districts of Kinshasa 
to be plunged into darkness, forc- 
ing the residents to use candles or 
hurricane lamps. 
Ageing 
installations 
It must be said that at first, priority 
was given to the mining industry to 
the detriment of households. Ray- 
mond Chikuru, who is an expert at 
the Ministry of Energy, states that 
‘electrical energy was above all de- 
veloped to facilitate mining and the 
transformation of mineral ores’ 
There is another problem: these 
installations operate at a very slow 
pace. They are dilapidated and suf- 
fer from a serious lack of mainte- 
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 
nance. There is also a flagrant lack 
of spare parts, and breakdowns are 
commonplace. Professor Laurent 
Kitoko (University of Kinshasa), 
Director of Planning and Devel- 
opment at the Societe nationale 
d’électricité (SNEL), blames these 
shortcomings on the ‘budget-de- 
vouring nature’ of the hydroelectric 
industry. 
The installations should have 
been rehabilitated in the 1990s, 
but the country was unable to 
meet the cost of the work, which 
was estimated at 15 million dollars 
for each of the two turbines in Inga 
| and Il. The war that ravaged the 
DRC in the late 1990s, and led to 
the suspension of international co- 
operation, only worsened the situ- 
ation. 
The return to peace in the country 
and the resumption of international 
cooperation, has brought new de- 
velopment projects. There is now 
a plan to renovate Inga | and Il and 
build a third dam. 
A huge project 
The final stage in the development 
plan is “Grand Inga”, an enormous 
dam that will harness the entire 
flow of the river, and in turn sup- 
ply a large part of Southern Africa 
(and even some countries in 
12 
= BE an 
Bt i SiS - 


### 144876: The Promise of the River Congo

Southern Europe) with electrical 
energy in ten years’ time. The esti- 
mated 50 billion dollars cost would 
have to be covered by international 
funding (the World Bank, the Afri- 
can Development Bank, etc.), and 
by private partners, like Eksom, 
the South African electricity utility 
company. 
Grand Inga could become the 
cornerstone of electrical produc- 
tion on the continent, and give ex- 
ceptional leverage to the country’s 
economy, as long it also benefits 
its inhabitants. 
Voices are already being raised 
to question this project, especially 
among environmental watchdogs. 
‘One big unknown is the effect 
on fisheries and the river ecol- 
ogy’, says the Uruguayan associa- 
tion World Rainforest Movement 
(WRM), in a December 2003 
document (1). WRM especially 
fears that fish migration will be in- 
terrupted, and that such a dam will, 
in the long run, damage silt flows, 
a phenomenon crucial to the river's 
ecosystem. 
Moise Musangana, 
in Kinshasa.

## [Page 13](191576eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

Desalinization, recycling, importation: 
confronted with a virtual absence of water resources, 
(OVE EER ol Re] (o=To RoR {111s EL [THT] ER RT HICRAVE LCI ES 1 (eg Te [Rol (ol o] [514415 


### 144877: Living in a country without water

  
LIVING IN A COUNTRY 
WITHOUT WATER 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
F
e
l
i
p
e
 
A
l
c
o
c
e
b
a
 
P
R
N
Y
A
T
E
 
» 
- 
-
 
o
r
 
> 
\
 5 
Kuwait 
10t avoid the challenge of wa- 
lis natural resources are some 
> most limited in the world. 
While some annual precipitation 
does exist, the UN's Food and 
Agriculture Organization estimates 
that rainwater averages have fallen 
to 104 - 134 mm in comparison 
to the 176 mm for previous years. 
Furthermore, only a small part 
of this water percolates into the 
ground. The desert climate and the 
nature of the soil bring a high rate 
of evaporation. 
Groundwater inflow in Kuwait has 
been estimated at about 20 million 
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 
m3/year. Due to lateral underflow 
from Saudi Arabia, both ground- 
water quality and quantity are de- 
teriorating as more saline water is 
being pumped for irrigation pur- 
poses. 
To face these challenges, Kuwait 
has for a longtime imported fresh- 
water from Shat El-Arab in Iraq. 
This policy was officially endorsed 
by the state in 1939 with the foun- 
dation of the Kuwait Water Import 
Company. After the first oil boom 
in the early 1940s, Kuwait began 
its search to diversify its reserves. 
In 1953 it built the country’s first 
water desalination plant boasting 
a total output capacity of 4,545 
13 
  
   
     m3/day. The country now has six 
plants with an annual capacity of 
231 million m3. 
Another avenue they have explored 
is that of recycling used water. To- 
“... resources, such as water 
re-use and desalination, 
are being increasingly used 
and new technologies 
such asartificial re-charge are 
also becoming more common!’ 
Second UN World Water Report

## [Page 14](191576eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

© 
w
w
w
.
w
e
l
t
r
e
k
o
r
d
r
e
i
s
e
.
c
h
 
    
    
  
  
Water towers in Koweit. 
day, the quantity of treated and re- 
used wastewater stands at around 
52 million m3, which is mainly used 
for irrigation. 
Recycling is a priority 
A recent study conducted by the 
Kuwait University and the Petro- 
chemical Industries Company (PIC) 
indicates that up to 70 percent 
of water used by manufacturing 
industries can be recycled. The 
practice of recycling has become 
a priority as a result of population 
increase resulting from economic 
prosperity. 
To face growing demand, a new 
treatment plan was inaugurat- 
ed in Sabiyyah in March 2005. 
Since then, water production has 
reached 182,000 litres per inhab- 
itant according to recent studies. 
However, this ambitious project 
did not stop Kuwaiti officials from 
making their repeated calls for wa- 
ter conservation. Recent studies 
show that the share of water per 
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 
inhabitant in the region should 
plunge from the 1960's average 
of 3,500 m3 of water to only 650 
m3 in 2025. Around 80 percent 


### 144877: Living in a country without water

of the Arab world already suffers 
from drought. 
Despite numerous awareness 
campaigns in Kuwait, water con- 
tinues to be perceived as a free 
resource. With each household 
paying a relatively meager 20 to 
30 dollars per month for water, 
who would think the country was 
suffering of a water problem? 
Benefits from subsidies only ac- 
centuate the problem. 
Considering water 
a free resource 
A recent effort to overcome water 
shortage came with the holding 
of the Seventh Gulf Cooperation 
Council (GCC) Conference on 
Water Management on November 
22, 2005. 
The head of the Council of the 
Kuwaiti Institute for Scientific Re- 
14 
sources, M. Al-Hamad, empha- 
sized that increasing consumption 
of water in Gulf member states 
increased the depletion of water 
and financial resources. These 
states currently spend millions of 
dollars to establish water plants 
to meet the increase in water de- 
mand. 
Another issue raised at the con- 
ference was the call for the estab- 
lishment of a water grid joining the 
six GCC member states (Saudi 
Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar, Oman, 
Bahrain and the United Arab Emir- 
ates). 
In the meantime, Kuwait must 
continue to rely on water desali- 
nation and treatment, alongside 
plans for water import from Iran. 
Although this small state has one 
of the highest per-capita incomes 
in the world, it will not be easy to 
resolve this crucial problem. 
Bichr El-Dallal.

## [Page 15](191576eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### 210788: The Courier looks back

  
The Courier looks back 
Since it began publication, The UNESCO Courier has devoted many issues 
o water-related problems. Here is a brief trip down memory lane. 
ourier I mo 
   
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 
The rush for water 
November 2005 
Reducing by half the number of people 
in the world deprived of clean water, 
between now and 2015. 
Water for people, water for life 
October 2003 
On the occasion of the International 
Year of Freshwater, a flood of promises, 
a trickle of progress. 
Striking peace 
on troubled waters 
October 2001 - 
The mirage of the “water wars? 
What price water? 
February 1999 
Limited supplies, growing demand for this 
rare resource. 
Water of life 
May 1993 
This issue marks thirty years since 
UNESCO launched the Intemational 
Hydrological Decade in 1964, the first truly 
international scientific and educational 
effort in hydrology. Among the most 
significant fruits of such efforts are the 
drawing up of hydrological maps 
particularly useful for the world’s 
water-short developing countries. 
Ten years later, UNESCO created the 
International Hydrological Programme, 
with the aim of finding solutions to the 
problems of countries with different 
geographical and climatic conditions 
and at different levels of technological 
and economic development. 
The wonder of water 
January 1985 
Every living thing consists mostly of water. 
A human being is about 65 per cent water, 
an elephant 70, a potato 80 and a tomato 
95. Yet the benefits of water are not evenly 
distributed. Over half the people in the 
Third World lack clean drinking water, 
three-quarters have no sanitation, while 
three-quarters of human illness is related 
to lack of clean water and sanitation. Five 
years after the launch of the International 
Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation 
Decade, this issue examines the current 
situation. 
15 
A world water famine 
can it be averted? 
February 1978 
“If nothing is done, water resources in 
the world's populated areas will be nearly 
exhausted by the year 2015” Such is the 
bleak opening line of this issue, one year 
after the United Nations Water 
Conference. Held in Mar del Plata 
(Argentina), the 1,500 delegates from 
116 countries faced a daunting task: 
some $100 billion must be invested 
by 1990 to provide the world’s urban and 
rural areas with adequate water supplies, 
while a further $100 billion of investment 
will be need by 1990 for irrigation. 
Man in quest for water 
June 1970 - 
At mid-point in the International 
Hydrological Decade, the vast programme 
has mobilized hydrologists the world 
over for man’s first concerted attempt to 
take stock of his diminishing fresh water 
resources and to coordinated worldwide 
research on better ways of making use of 
them. The issue examines the historical 
and scientific background of the problem 
and describes some major areas 
where this international cooperation 
has been in action. 
Water and life 
July/August 1964 
In preparation for the 1965 launch 
of the International Hydrological Decade, 
this double issue on water highlighted 
our constantly increasing need for water. 
The lead article warned that in 20 years’ 
time, the demand for water will roughly 
double. It is the domain of hydrology 
to research different forms in which 
the world's waters exist, their circulation 
and distribution, their interactions 
with the environment, including 
their responses to human activity. 
José Banaag

## [Page 16](191576eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

© 
P
.
N
e
n
d
a
z
 
      
     
2.6 million people don't 
N= - 
= A "yy 
Cn Re ON Tanase LY iL 
have access to basic water sanitation. 
 
  
Facts and Figures 
Water & sanitation 
Some 1.1 billion people still do not have 
access to an adequate supply of drinking 
water and some 2.6 billion do not have 
access to basic sanitation. 
Health 
Globally, diarrhoeral diseases and malaria 
killed about 3.1 million people in 2002, 
90 % of them children under the age of 
five. An estimated 1.6 million lives could 
be saved annually by providing access 
to safe drinking water, sanitation and 
hygiene. 
Food production 
On average, it takes about 3,000 litres 
of water per person to produce our daily 
intake of food. 
Food consumption 
The world will need 55% more food 
by 2030. This translates into 
an increasing demand for irrigation, 
which already claims nearly 
70% of all freshwater consumed for 
human use. Food production has greatly 
increased over the past 50 years, 
yet 13% of the global population 
(850 million, mostly in rural areas) 
still do not have enough to eat. 
Urbanization 
Half of humanity will be living in towns 
and cities by 2007. By 2030, 
this will have risen to nearly two thirds, 
The UNESCO Courier - March 2006 
resulting in drastic increases in water 
demand 
in urban areas. An estimated 2 billion 
of these people will be living in squatter 
settlements and slums. 
Usage 
Water usage has increased six times 
in the last century — twice the rate 
of population growth. 
Wastage 
A staggering 30-40% of water being 
transported goes unaccounted 
for worldwide due to water leakages 
in pipes and canals and illegal tapping. 
Environmental species 
Freshwater species are more threatened 
by human activities than species in other 
realms. On average, populations fell by 
about 47 % between 1970 and 2000. 
Energy investment 
Total worldwide investment 
in renewable energy rose from $6 billion 
in 1995 to approximately $22 billion 
in 2003, and is increasing rapidly. 
Hydropower 
Europe makes use of 75 % 
of its hydropower potential. Africa, 
where 60% of the population 
hasno access to electricity, 
has developed only 
7 % of its potential. 
16 
Disasters 
In the last decade, 90 % of natural disas- 
ters are water-related events, and they 
are on the increase. Two out of every five 
people now live in areas vulnerable 
to floods and rising sea-levels. 
Lakes 
Lake Baikal (Russia) is the world's 
largest, deepest and oldest lake, 
it alone contains 27% of the freshwater 
contained in all the world's lakes. 
The world’s 145 largest lakes contain 
over 95% of all lake freshwater. 
Rivers 
The Amazon carries 15% of all water 
returning to the world’s oceans. 
An estimated 263 international river 
basins have drainage areas that cover 
about 45% of the Earth's land surface, 
excluding polar regions. 
Source: 
The United Nations World Water Development 
Report 2 (2006)

## [Page 17](191576eng.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

ro 
        
  
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Organisation 
des Nations Unies 
pour I'éducation, 
la science et la culture 
Organizacion 
de las Naciones Unidas 
para la Educacion, 
la Ciencia y la Cultura 
OpraHu3auus 
O6beanHeHHbIX Haumin no 
BOMpPOCaM 00pa3oBaHus, 
HayKn UN KYJbTYpbl 
Sata any aliie 
Lally alally Loy 
eA EAR A 
Brg ROUEAAR 
  
  
  
         
  
  
The UNESCO Courier is published by 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
+ 33 (0)1 4568 15 88 
http://www.unesco.org/fr/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
f.ryan@unesco.org 
+ 33 (0)1 4568 15 88 
Director 
Saturnino Muiioz Gomez 
Editors 
Arabic 
Bassam Mansour 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape 
English 
Edna Yahil 
French 
Agnes Bardon 
Russian 
Vladimir Sergueev 
Spanish 
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz 
Editorial Assistant 
José Banaag 
Photo 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org 
PDF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi 
Web platform 
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro 
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be reproduced 
and/or translated providing the credit line reads 
“Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” and includes 
date and hyperlink : http://www.unesco.org/courier 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Photographs belonging to UNESCO may be reproduced freely. 
They must carry the following caption: 
© UNESCO and photographer's name. For high resolution, 
please contact the Photobank: photobank@unesco.org 
Photographs without UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations of the countries 
and territories concerned 
 