# [093670](093670engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](093670engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

rc 1003 2 
it 
i Jl  

## [Page 2](093670engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
          
 
   
     
THE UNESCO COURIER OLE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR ® THE Los ANGELES TIMES SYNDICATE 
REN nO ESTADO DE SAO PAULO @ EL PAIS ® LA REPUBBLICA @ THE INDEPENDENT 
ORGANIZED ON 12 AND 13 FEBRUARY AT UNESCO HEADQUARTERS IN PARIS 
* 
ha Ih 
N - . 
3 ' 1 p BN a » g ! : 
yA y wh 
wp we 
a ” h 
ne LS A 3 - I's 
. 
go - 
  
      
 
  
   
   
   
   
  
    
        
  
    
   
   
    
   
   
   
   
    
   
   
       
  
   
 
   
: Ft 
DEA aoF PROGRESS? : oy 
- NS 
AMONG J | oH 
THE PARTICIPANTS Mia 
~ ALEXANDRE ADLER % 
TARIQ BANURI ; 5 
TAHAR BEN JELLOUN bd i 
| 4 ~ JACQUES BERQUE HEL 
pi ANDRE BRINK | Ey 
& | LESTER BROWN EE 
a : 3 : ~ FAWZIA CHARFI | go. 
A A |  MUSTAFA CHERIF PEA SRE EERESE FL 
, A ! JEAN DANIEL | IR TER De 
hy, | \ y REGIS DEBRAY wl Re Sade 
Ww | AMOS ELON fa 
4 LUC FERRY i fh 
i! ~ CELSO FURTADO 3 : Cl 
478 : NATHAN GARDELS e 
be : SUSAN GEORGE : % 
0% BERNARD GUETTA i 
”» Feaipnivitin HUSSEIN | A 
3 ~ JOSEPH KI-ZERBO : h 
   
 
   
} A wr Cie SHUICHI KATO ie, 2H) Bh ERA 
) ' X ¥ Cag A . aL h eS Al - ah : 
~ RAVINDRA KUMAR     
    
    
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
      
   
 
    
 
   
   
N - ar ~ JEAN LACOUTURE “id 
Pha 
i © GILLES LAPOUGE re E 
i 
Yl . ny Rs 4 fo : To _ Be gE 
H ANTONIN MERMY Ee Fal iy. 
ES 
\ y a . ) A } y 4 A v & 1 
d. PAVEL LOUNGUINE HL Ye 
| ADAM MICHNIK "i 
] 
“ { v Ww, ” 
ad 
hs | ~ EDGAR MORIN i 
4 SAMI NAR f EL 
: | | : EHSAN NARAGHI 3 
4 
: 3 © OLUSEGUN OBASANJO 
a 
AF 3 11:4] 4 ORSENNA AE a a Ja . ol : hs Io WIC Da 
41 " i] . J hi 
’ DILEEP PADGAONKAR fire REE ; NAS 
| Seo 8 (OLIVER STONE 
: re © ALAIN TOURAINE i 
5 ; rr WALLERSTEIN yd 
AN J a , Y 1 NN. ) At . 
yo! pa { 3 J 4 
*; \ A] 
A ] 
u 2 
o> 
a ne bt A Fa aA s = : 
aks iH — RE hsiad tai 
LE y ’ 
| ) 1 
! : i SAL 2 nd | 1 Wy 
' ¥ = 
. 4 
i ok 

## [Page 3](093670engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

4 DOCUMENT 
A letter from Freud to Einstein 
eBMR a Fe er 
PSYCHOANALYSIS 
THE HIDDEN |    
44 unesco iv action presented by Sylvie Nerson Rousseau re art's omar (Eon 
NEWSBRIEFS... by the Catalan painter Juan Gris. 
Freud and Freudianism 
by Jacques Hassoun 10 
49 recent RECORDS - 
: The inner adventure 
  
by Isabelle Leymarie 
by Olivier Marc 14 
50 worwo oF Books How to say ‘I’ 
by Edgar Reichmann by Eliane Amado Lévy-Valensi 17 
pi... ,_—.,~,.,.,._. 
The Ajasé complex 
by Etienne Barral 20 2 3 
Africa: the healer’s art Greenwatch 
by Anne-Marie Kaufmant 30 
The talking cure 
by Chawki Azouri 34 
Russia: 
Sects the revenge of subjectivity 
SE a oe au by Aleksandr Mikhalevich 36 4 A 
Psychoanalysis in Quebec Commentary 
by Monique Panaccio 40 hy Federico Mayor 
“The Governments of the States parties to this Constitution on behalf of their peoples declare, 
“that since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed . . . 
The NESCO “that a peace based exclusively upon the political and economic arrangements of governments would not be a peace which could secure 
at the unanimous, lasting and sincere support of the peoples of the world, and that the peace must therefore be founded, if it is not to fail, 
IE COURIER upon the intellectual and morat solidarity of mankind. 
  — “For these reasons, the States parties . . . are agreed and determined to develop and to increase the means of communication between 
their peoples and to employ these means for the purposes of mutual understanding and a truer and more perfect knowledge of each 
46th year — Published monthly other's lives. . . .» 3 
in 33 languages and in Braille EXTRACT FROM THE PREAMBLE T0 THE CONSTITUTION OF UNesco, Lonoow, 16 NOVEMBER 1945 

## [Page 4](093670engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 93658: A Letter from Freud to Einstein: why war?

i DOCUMENT 
A LETTER] 
FROM © 
FREUD TO 5 
EINSTEIN 
™ 
He] 
Is there a way of freeing humankind from the threat of war? Can 
human aggression be channeled to help protect people against 
the impulses of hatred and destruction? 
These questions were put to Sigmund Freud in an anxious 
letter from Albert Einstein dated 30 July 1932, when Fascist and 
Nazi violence was spreading in Europe. The father of 
psychoanalysis, whom Einstein described as an “expert in the 
lore of human instincts”, replied two months later, spelling out 
his thoughts on the psychical foundations of behaviour and 
defining possible ways in which the conflicts rending humanity 
could be brought to a halt. 
Their correspondence was published in 1933, under the title 
Why War?, by Unesco’s precursor, the International Institute of 
Intellectual Co-operation. With a number of other exchanges 
between leading thinkers of the day, it constitutes one of the 
most remarkable initiatives taken by the League of Nations 
(whose mission was taken over hy the United Nations 
Organization in 1946) to preserve the spirit of peace at a time 
when it was increasingly under threat. Sixty years on, this little- 
known document has lost none of its interest or validity. 
Salient extracts from Einstein's letter appeared in the May 
1985 issue of the Unesco Courier entitled Forty Years After, 
commemorating the end of World War II. Now for the first time 
    
  
Sh Sigmund Freud 
we publish Sigmund Freud's reply, in slightly abridged form. (1856-1939), photographed on 20 July 1932. 
al

## [Page 5](093670engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 93658: A Letter from Freud to Einstein: why war?

Why war? 
BY SIGMUND FREUD 
You begin with the relations between Might 
and Right, and this is assuredly the proper 
starting-point for our enquiry. But, for the 
term “might”, I would substitute a tougher 
and more telling word: “violence”. In right 
and violence we have today an obvious 
antinomy. It is easy to prove that one has 
evolved from the other. . .. 
Conflicts of interest between man and 
man are resolved, in principle, by recourse to 
violence. It is the same in the animal kingdom, 
from which man cannot claim exclusion; nev- 
ertheless men are also prone to conflicts of 
opinion, touching, on occasion, the loftiest 
peaks of abstract thought, which seem to call 
for settlement by quite another method. This 
refinement is, however, a late development. 
To start with, brute force was the factor 
which, in small communities, decided points 
of ownership and the question of which man’s 
will was to prevail. Very soon physical force 
was implemented, then replaced, by the use 
of various adjuncts; he proved the victor 
whose weapon was the better, or handled the 
more skilfully. 
Now, for the first time, with the coming 
 
Translated into English by Stuart Gilbert 
a a 
Albert Einstein (1879-1955). 
of weapons, superior brains began to oust 
brute force, but the object of the conflict 
remained the same: one party was to be con- 
strained, by the injury done him or impair- 
ment of his strength, to retract a claim or a 
refusal. This end is most effectively gained 
when the opponent is definitively put out of 
action—in other words, 1s killed. 
This procedure has two advantages; the 
enemy cannot renew hostilities, and, sec- 
ondly, his fate deters others from following 
his example. Moreover, the staughter of a foe 
gratifies an instinctive craving—a point to 
which we shall revert hereafter. However, 
another consideration may be set off against 
this will to kill: the possibility of using an 
enemy for servile tasks if his spirit be broken 
and his life spared. Here violence finds an 
outlet not in slaughter but in subjugation. 
Hence springs the practice of giving quarter; 
but the victor, having from now on to reckon 
with the craving for revenge that rankles in his 
victim, forfeits to some extent his personal 
security. 
BW From violence to law 
... We know that in the course of evolution 
this state of things was modified, a path was 
traced that led away from violence to law. 
But what was this path? Surely it issued from 
a single verity; that the superiority of one 
strong man can be overborne by an alliance of 
many weaklings, that union fait la force. 
Brute force is overcome by union, the allied 
might of scattered units makes good its right 
against the isolated giant. 
  
  
 
Thus we may define “right” (i.e. law) as 
the might of a community. Yet it, too, is 
nothing else than violence, quick to attack 
whatever individual stands in its path, and it 
employs the selfsame methods, follows like 
ends, with but one difference; it is the com- 
munal, not individual, violence that has its 
way. 
But, for the transition from crude vio- 
lence to the reign of law, a certain psycho- 
logical condition must first obtain. The union 
of the majority must be stable and enduring. 
If its sole raison d’étre be the discomfiture of 
some overweening individual and, after his 
downfall, it be dissolved, it leads to nothing. 
Some other man, trusting to his superior 
power, will seek to reinstate the rule of vio- 
lence and the cycle will repeat itself unend- 
ingly. 
Thus the union of the people must be 
permanent and well-organized; it must enact 
rules to meet the risk of possible revolts; 
must set up machinery ensuring that its 
rules—the laws—are observed and that such 
acts of violence as the laws demand are duly 
carried out. This recognition of a community 
  A

## [Page 6](093670engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

6 
  
of interests engenders among the members of 
the group a sentiment of unity and fraternal 
solidarity which constitutes its real strength. 
... Now the position is simple enough so 
long as the community consists of a number of 
equipollent individuals. The laws of such a 
group can determine to what extent the indi- 
vidual must forfeit his personal freedom, the 
right of using personal force as an instrument 
of violence, to ensure the safety of the group. 
But such a combination is only theoret- 
ically possible; in practice the situation is 
always complicated by the fact that, from the 
outset, the group includes elements of unequal 
power, men and women, elders and children, 
and, very soon, as a result of war and conquest, 
victors and the vanquished-—i.e. masters and 
slaves—as well. From this time on the 
common law takes notice of these inequalities 
of power, laws are made by and for the rulers, 
giving the servile classes fewer rights. 
Thenceforward there exist within the 
state two factors making for legal instability, 
but legislative evolution, too: first, the 
a, 
  
 
Here and on pages 46-47: postcards sent by Freud to 
attempts by members of the ruling class to set 
themselves above the law’s restrictions and, 
secondly, the constant struggle of the ruled to 
extend their rights and see each gain 
embodied in the code, replacing legal dis- 
abilities by equal laws for all. 
The second of these tendencies will be 
particularly marked when there takes place a 
positive mutation of the balance of power 
within the community, the frequent outcome 
of certain historical conditions. In such cases 
the laws may gradually be adjusted to the 
changed conditions or (as more usually 
ensues) the ruling class is loath to reckon 
with the new developments, the result being 
insurrections and civil wars, a period when 
law is in abeyance and force once more the 
arbiter, followed by a new regime of law. 
There ts another factor of constitutional 
change, which operates in a wholly pacific 
manner, viz: the cultural evolution of the 
mass of the community; this factor, however, 
is of a different order and can only be dealt 
with later. 
the International Institute of Intellectual 
Co-operation in 1933 to acknowledge receipt 
of Why War? 
BW A supreme authority 
Thus we sce that, even within the group itself, . 
the exercise of violence cannot be avoided 
when conflicting interests are at stake. But the 
common needs and habits of men who live in 
fellowship under the same sky favour a 
speedy issue of such conflicts and, this being 
50, the possibilities of peaceful solutions make 
steady progress. Yet the most casual glance at 
world history will show an unending series of 
conflicts between one community and 
another or a group of others, between large 
and smaller units, between cities, countries, 
races, tribes and kingdoms, almost all of 
which were settled by the ordeal of war. Such 
wars end either in pillage or in conquest and 
its fruits, the downfall of the loser. 


### 93658: A Letter from Freud to Einstein: why war?

No single all-embracing judgement can be 
passed on these wars of aggrandisement. 
Some, like the war between the Mongols and 
the Turks, have led to unmitigated misery; 
others, however, have furthered the transition 
from violence to law, since they brought 
larger units into being, within whose limits a 
recourse to violence was banned and a new 
regime determined all disputes. Thus the 
Roman conquests brought that boon, the 
pax Romana, to the Mediterranean lands. 
The French kings’ lust for aggrandisement 
created a new France, flourishing in peace 
and unity. Paradoxical as it sounds, we must 
admit that warfare well might serve to pave 
the way to that unbroken peace we so desire, 
for it is war that brings vast units into being, 
within whose frontiers all warfare is pro- 
scribed by a strong central power. In practice,

## [Page 7](093670engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 93658: A Letter from Freud to Einstein: why war?

however, this end is not attained, for as a rule 
the fruits of victory are but short-lived, the 
newly-created unit falls asunder once again, 
generally because there can be no true cohe- 
sion between the parts that violence has 
welded. Hitherto, moreover, such conquests 
have only led to aggregations which, for all 
their magnitude, had limits, and disputes 
between these units could be resolved only by 
recourse to arms. For humanity at large the 
sole result of all these military enterprises 
was that, instead of frequent not to say inces- 
sant little wars, they had now to face great 
wars which, for all they came less often, were 
so much the more destructive. 
Regarding the world of today, the same 
conclusion holds good, and you, too, have 
reached it, though by a shorter path. There is 
but one sure way of ending war and that is the 
establishment, by common consent, of a cen- 
tral contro! which shall have the fast word in 
every conflict of interests. For this, two things 
arc needed: first, the creation of such a 
“supreme court of judicature; secondly, its 
investment with adequate executive force. 
Unless this second requirement be fulfilled, 
the first is unavailing. Obviously the League 
of Nations, acting as a Supreme Court, fulfils 
the first condition; it does not fulfil the 
second. It has no force at its disposal and can 
only get it if the members of the new body, its 
constituent nations, furnish it. And, as things 
are, this is a forlorn hope. 
Still, we should be taking a very short- 
sighted view of the League of Nations were 
we to ignore the fact that here is an experi- 
 
ment the like of which has rarely been 
attempted in the course of history, and never 
before on such a scale. It is an attempt to 
acquire the authority (in other words, coer- 
cive influence), which hitherto reposed exclu- 
sively on the possession of power, by calling 
into play certain idealistic attitudes of mind. 
We have seen that there are two factors of 
cohesion in a community: violent compul- 
sions and ties of sentiment “identifications”, 
in technical parlance) between the members 
of the group. If one of these factors becomes 
inoperative, the other may still suffice to hold 
the group together. Obviously such notions 
as these can only be significant when they are 
the expression of a deeply rooted sense of 
unity, shared by all. It is necessary, there- 
fore, to gauge the efficacy of such sentiments. 
History tells us that, on occasion, they have 
been effective. For example, the Panhellenic 
conception, the Greeks” awareness of supe- 
rority over their barbarian neighbours, which 
found expression in the Amphictyonies, the 
Oracles and Games, was strong enough to 
humanize the methods of warfare as between 
Greeks, though inevitably it failed to pre- 
vent conflicts between different elements of 
the Hellenic race or even to deter a city or 
group of cities from joining forces with their 
racial foe, the Persians, for the discomfiture 
of a rival. The solidarity of Christendom in 
the Renaissance age was no more effective, 
despite its vast authority, in hindering 
Christian nations, large and small alike, from 
calling in the Sultan to their aid. And, in our 
times, we look in vain for some such uni- 
fying notion whose authority would be 
unquestioned. It is all too clear that the 
nationalistic ideas, paramount today in every 
country, operate in quite a contrary direction. 
Some there are who hold that the Bolshevist 
conceptions may make an end of war, but, as 
things are, that goal lies very far away and, 
perhaps, could only be attained after a spell of 
brutal internecine warfare. Thus it would 
seem that any effort to replace brute force by 
the might of an ideal 1s, under present con- 
ditions, doomed to fail. Our logic is at fault 
CONTINUED PAGE 46 
Ki

## [Page 8](093670engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 93659: The Hidden I

THE HIDDEN I 
  
hy Sylvie Nerson Rousseau 
| 
SYLVIE NERSON ROUSSEAU 
is a French psychoanalyst. 
She is a consultant to a 
number of public health 
organizations and is 
engaged in the education of 
doctors and social workers 
concerned with seropositive 
and Aids-infected 
persons. She is the author 
of a number of articles on 
psychoanalysis and 
modern life. 
0 become individuals in the fullest sense, 
we must accept an inescapable obligation: 
to respect that which is human in our- 
selves. 
We each of us accept this “price that must 
be paid” in our own way, according to priori- 
ties fixed by our own imagination. For one 
person the priorities will be of a legal order—it 
will be important for that person to feel that he 
or she is a possessor of rights. For someone 
else the main thing will be to feel that he or she 
belongs to a group or has a task to accom- 
plish—this person will see himself or herself 
above all as a “social actor”. Another person 
may feel that the concepts of integrity and 
potentiality are essential—he or she will regard 
himself or herself primarily as an individual. 
For the psychoanalyst, one of the aims of 
treatment is to induce the patient to escape 
from the grip of what might be called “narcis- 
sistic manicheanism”—a self-image that is 
either totally good or totally bad. From the 
time when we learn to speak we are obliged to 
master our impulses in order to serve the ideals 
of our community. Hence the ambivalence of 
our condition as creatures who are not good or 
bad, but good and bad, since our impulses 
(unless they are sublimated) are a priori 
opposed to these ideals. 
At another level, that of the ethnic, religious, 
social or national community, this division 
between good and bad still persists, in spite of 
the so-called “collapse” of ideologies, in spite of 
geopolitical changes that might be expected to 
modify the images peoples have of each other. 
For Europe—the cultural cradle of psycho- 
analysis—the spectre of evil that came from the 
east has changed, but—there as elsewhere—evil 
is still perceived as something that originates in 
others. Nothing seems capable of shaking 
people’s conviction that what is bad comes from 
outside them. However, it 1s through encoun- 
tering within ourselves the other side of our 
idealized—or dethroned—image that we 
become capable of empathy with others. 
Psychoanalysis sheds an impartial light on 
the human psyche. It does not seek to judge, 
only to define the unconscious mechanisms 
that govern our acts and our thoughts. This 
form of understanding of the human mind 
gives rise to the conception of an innate 
equality, since a priori it situates each indi- 
vidual in an identical position in relation to the 
real, the imaginary and the symbolic—a posi- 
tion that is only modified by the unique fea- 
tures of each case history. This idea of inherent 
equality is a fundamental link between psy- 
choanalysis on the one hand and democratic 
ethics and thought on the other. At a sec- 
ondary level, historic, social and cultural 
events transform this generic equality into 
equality of opportunities or rights. 
No society—from Japan to Africa, from 
Canada to Israel, from Lebanon to the 
stripling Commonwealth of Independent 
States—is today unaware of the unconscious 
mind, which in one way or another, albeit in 
some cases still only indirectly, forms an inte- 
gral part of any vision of humankind. Perhaps 
it could even be said that the notion of the 
unconscious as a central component of the 
human mind has played a role in the criticisms 
that have been levelled at certain ways of 
thinking about society. In Canada, for 
example, Christianity long took the fact that 
psychoanalysis stressed the predominance of 
sexual tendencies as a pretext for strengthening 
its own prohibitions. The example of the 
former USSR, another place where psycho- 
analysis did not flourish, also shows the extent 
to which psychoanalysis is regarded as a hos- 
tile force by regimes whose ideology is based 
on a denial of individuality and its subjective 
components. 
In addition to its therapeutic effects, psy- 
choanalysis encourages the emergence of funda- 
mental values such as tolerance and respect for 
historical truth, since experience of it enables 
those who take part to discover what makes 
them unique as persons, and to realize the 
uniqueness of others without feeling threatened. 
If the preoccupation with good or bad 
becomes obsolete, is there not a possibility—or 
a danger depending on one’s viewpoint—that 
differences will no longer be sufficient to jus- 
tify inequalities within a community, that the 
forces of opposition within the community will 
cease to be radical and become more gradual- 
istic, thereby liberating antagonisms which 
need to find expression. 
Certainly recognition of the unconscious as 
an essential factor in determining human 
behaviour cannot serve entrenched positions. 
Psychoanalysis is not about truth; it is one 
pathway to human subjectivity. Perhaps too in 
the post-modern era, it can maintain a tension 
between emotion and reason, between the sub- 
jective point of view and aspirations to absolute 
objectivity. |

## [Page 9](093670engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

La réponse 
"© imprévue 
{“The 
Unexpected 
Response”; 
oil on 
canvas, 
1933), by 
the Belgian 
painter 
René 
Magritte. 
     
  
  
£0
 
[ 
a
 
  
    
  
—
 
  
   
  
    
       
    
  
           

## [Page 10](093670engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 93660: Freud and Freudianism

10 
Freud and Freudianism 
(BA 
TH IILIBA 
snansn Bi 
+A 
ARAN 
———— 
—— Al 
. 
LR "5 
hy Jacques Hassoun 
Above, a postcard dating 
from 1908 shows Vienna's 
Opera House and the 
Ringstrasse, symbols of the 
ambitious urban planning 
and the liberal culture that 
distinguished the city in the 
19th century. 
Opposite page, Portrait of 
Emilie Floge, a 1902 work 
by the Austrian master of 
Art Nouveau, Gustav Klimt. 
F, at the end of the last century, the Czarist 
empire seemed like a prison camp for ethnic 
groups, the Austro-Hungarian empire, like 
the Ottoman empire, was more of a patchwork 
quilt. In it Ruthenians, Bukovinians, Magyars, 
Slovenes, northern Italians, Jews, Germans, 
Galicians, Czechs, Slovaks and Poles together 
lived out the last decades of an institution that 
remained splendid, if only in appearance. The 
arca that history was to christen Mitteleuropa 
was to be the birthplace of the works of Musil 
and Mach, of the Austrian Marxists, of Mahler 
and Klimt, Schnitzler and Zweig, Arnold 
Schonberg, Hugo van Hofmannsthal and Sig- 
mund Frcud—all of them destined in varying 
degrees to influence the history of ideas in the 
twentieth century. 
Overshadowed by Stalinism in the east, 
their works destroved by the Nazi regime in 
the north, and accused of superficiality, of chal- 
lenging obvious facts and institutionalized con- 
ventions, sometimes even of sensualist obscu- 
rantism, these authors would be (at least for a 
time) rejected much as the idea of the individual 
was rejected—the latter being central to a cul- 
’ 
wi
n 
n 
"
a
 
h
e
 
We 
<&
 
A 
t
o
y
 
RE 
Y 
* 
ture in which subversion and ridicule played a 
bigger part than rebellion or destruction. 
What now seems remarkable is that this 
society, imbued as it was with religious and 
social prejudices—which many people (such as 
Mahler), adopted, sometimes (like Otto 
Weininger) to the point of lunacy—should have 
managed to produce work of this kind. The 
work was surely the product of contacts that 
were not so much haphazard as the result of 
tensions inherent in that society. Each ethnic 
group seems to have contained tensions of its 
own that condemned it to follow where they 
led but also to encounter the other groups at a 
crossroads that was the birthplace of an extra- 
ordinary culture. 
In such circumstances the idea of the indi- 
vidual was bound to come to the fore: indeed, 
individualism was to modulate the notion of 
an egalitarian cohabitation of ethnic groups (in 
which some were evidently more equal than 
others). But if we may regard individualism as 
the keystone of the Mitteleuropa culture, it 
was a stone which, far from affording a fixed 
and stable base, seems to have been balanced

## [Page 11](093670engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

on one corner, allowing it to move about and 
rotate, and in so doing to give exceptional 
coherence and quality to the whole structure. 
So this culture (whose death-knell was 
sounded by the Anschluss of 1938) could not 
claim to emanate exclusively from any one of 
its components, and no one of them could 
claim exclusive paternity of it. It was in the 


### 93660: Freud and Freudianism

context of this conjunction that Freud gradu- 
ally built up his theory of psychoanalysis. 
FREUD'S FIRST CASE 
The question that faced Freud at the outset was 
one that runs throughout Viennese literature 
and at the same time presented medicine with 
an insoluble problem, namely that of the hys- 
terical person and his or her isolation. All 
things considered, it should come as no sur- 
prise that “Anna O.” (Freud’s first case) was 
actually the celebrated Bertha Pappenheim, one 
of the earliest German welfare workers, a 
woman who devoted her life to rescuing Jewish 
prostitutes abducted from their east European 
families to stock the brothels of the Ottoman 
Empire. Anna O. was an example of a socially 
uprooted woman experiencing the shock of 
new-found freedom—a shock aggravated by 
symptoms in whose presence medicine had to 
confess its impotence. The state of mind of 
hysterical patients is akin to the situation of 
individualism under the stress of modernity, in 
which individuals oscillate between the depths 
of isolation and involvement in society. 
Perhaps it was significant that Ernst Mach, 
one of Freud’s contemporaries, should have 
said that the subject is “the ephemeral resultant 
of the interrelationship between complexes of 
sensations”, “made permanent by memory and 
habit”, but continually changed by experience. 
This is not the transcendental subject of Kant 
or the concept of the self once so dear to psy- 
chologists, teachers and ideologists of good 
manners. It is also significant that. another con- 
temporary, Arthur Schnitzler, a keen admirer of 
Freud, should have raised the question of hys- 
terical personalities throughout his writings. 
For evidence we need go no further than 
Schnitzler’s Fraulein Else in which, during a 
long inner monologue played out on the 
shadowy borders of subjectivity, Else wastes 
away and dies through her inability to under- 
stand and come to terms with reality. 
To go further than the medical and psycho- 
logical thinking of his time, Freud had to take 
seriously the individuality of the patients who 
came to him for psychoanalysis. He refused to 
see the self as a stable, predictable force capable 
of being moulded by teaching, and wrote that 
there are some professions that always fail in 
their aims, such as teaching, tutoring, parenting 
and of course psychoanalysis, thereby indi- 
cating that the person at the receiving end will 
always elude the good intentions which these 
figures of authority seek to develop with 
respect to the Self. 

## [Page 12](093670engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 
   
0 
T+
 
W
H
 
AL
IV
S 
YV
OO
X 
u 
Scenes from a 1992 Paris 
production of Fraulein Else, 
a play by the Viennese 
author Arthur Schnitzler 
(1862-1931). 
‘| 
JACQUES HASSOUN, 
an Egyptian-born French 
psychoanalyst, is a founder 
member of the Paris Cercle 
Freudien and a member of 
the Société des Gens de 
Lettres de France. Among 
his recent publications are 
Les passions intraitables 
(Aubier, Paris, 19892), Non- 
lieu de la mémoire—la 
cassure d'Auschwitz (with M. 
Nathan-Murat and A. 
Radzynski; Bibliophane, 
Paris, 1290) and L histoire a 
la lettre (Mentha, Paris, 
1991). 
ad 
| 
i
l
l
 
He
 
W
O
 
he
 
E
e
 3 o
e
 
i 
    
   e
s
 
u
o
s
 
v
e
r
 
Picking his way through the pitfalls of 
transference, Freud was to turn his attention to 
the unconscious desires of subjects under the 


### 93660: Freud and Freudianism

stress of their fantasies and wishes and the ups 
and downs of childhoods subjected to the 
mechanisms of repression. 
BEYOND THE FATHER 
Three main stages can be discerned in Freud's 
universalization of the concepts revealed by his 
experience as an analyst. 
The first is represented by the studies of 
hysteria and the science of dreams. Freud 
started from what his patients told him about 
their questioning, their slips of the tongue, 
their abortive acts and the difficulties they 
experienced in living their lives. Starting from 
the study of these puzzles, which he regarded 
as coded hieroglyphs for desires, Freud sought 
to fit all these odd case-histories into the gen- 
eral theory he wished to develop. 
The second stage is the one in which Freud, 
in On Narcissism: an Introduction, Mourning 
and Melancholia and Beyond the Pleasure Prin- 
ciple (as also in Group Psychology and the 
Analysis of the Ego and The Psychopathology of 
Everyday Life), raised the question of the sub- 
ject and his or her “destiny”. For him this des- 
tiny was nothing more than a transformation of 
the child’s parental figures. At the time when a 
child’s image 1s created, when it arouses fascina- 
tion and later when subjectivization occurs, 
when the child escapes the meshes of maternal 
desire, the most basic element of its personality 
is laid down, and that is an unconscious aware- 
ness of death. This idea had been put forward 
by philosophers of classical Greece, and had 
been used and abused by the Romantics—it 
illustrates how Greek mythology and German 
Romanticism both form part of the genealogy 
of psychoanalysis. But Freud sought to go fur- 
ther. The idea he proposed was that erotic 
instincts are intermingled with the death 
instinct via what he called “repetition-compul- 
sion”—a term he used to describe what he 
believed to be an innate tendency to revert to 
earlier conditions. 
The death instinct 1s supposedly a human 
attribute: and hence it operates in the subject 
not as the opposite of life, nor as a destructive 
impulse, but precisely as a repetition-compul- 
sion. In this perspective, neurotic illness may 
be a manifestation of what tends to counter the 
workings of this instinct. The subject, trapped 
in repetitive mechanisms, always tends to 
return to the beaten track, being unable to 
innovate, as Freud put it*, for fear of coming 
up against the proposition that “It seems as 
though the essence of success was to have got 
further than one’s father, and as though to excel 
one’s father was still something forbidden”. 
One particular form of neurotic activity is a 
tendency to repeat in order to transmit, which 
overlooks the fact that transmission always pre- 
supposes an element of loss. After all, transmit- 
ting means that people put to work what they

## [Page 13](093670engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

Sigmund Freud 
(1978), a silkscreen print 
by the French artist 
Jean de Gaspary. 
have inherited and what they have to pass on to 
succeeding generations in the certainty that it 
will be modified—a fact that proves that there 
is something alive at work that goes beyond a 
mere pious tendency towards tautological 
reproduction. Wanting to receive a cultural 
legacy intact so as to transmit it completely 
unchanged is surely the problem that afflicts 
people under the tyrannical sway of idealiza- 
tion. Is this not what religion requires of us, 
and what political authority demands? 
At all events, this 1s what Freud maintains, 
and it can be stated as follows: the focal point of 
psychoanalytical enquiry is the singularity of the 
individual mind. His theoretical propositions 
  
  


### 93660: Freud and Freudianism

consequently represent in their entirety a break 
with a totalistic conception of the collective. 
The third and last stage in Freud’s develop- 
ment is the one spelled out in Moses and 
Monotheism. By this time the father had 
become for Freud the product of conjectures 
and hypotheses. It is impossible to divorce his 
tendency to think in terms of symbols from 
the situation of actual and emotional exile in 
which Freud found himself during the years of 
the Nazi pestilence, and which one could also 
compare to what the subject experiences in 
psychoanalysis: inner exile, separation, divi- 
sion—in short, all the things we ascribe to the 
process known as individuation. | 
 
* In “A Disturbance of 
Memory on the Acropolis” 
(letter to Romain Rolland, 
1936). 13

## [Page 14](093670engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 93661: The Inner adventure

14 
The inner adventure 
by Olivier Marc 
Near right, 
Charles Darwin as 
represented in a detail from 
a fresco entitled Man, 
Master of the Universe 
(1934) by the Mexican 
muralist Diego Rivera. 
Far right, Der Wahnsinn 
(“Mental lliness™), a pen- 
and-ink sketch that in 1913 
was reproduced in the 
review Imago, founded by 
Freud. 
OLIVIER MARC 
is a French psychoanalyst. 
He is the author of 
Psychology of the House 
{Thames and Hudson, 
London, 1977), L'enfant qui 
se fait naitre (with Varenka 
Marc; Buchet-Chastel, Paris, 
1981) and Premiers dessins 
d'enfants—ies tracés de la 
mémoire (Nathan, Paris, 
1992). 
OW far is science a product of the collec- 
tive expectation of its time? To what 
extent does it foreshadow and express 
the quintessence of a given moment of his- 
tory? Freud certainly was a man of his time. 
He invented the human science that his epoch, 
which had been convulsed by the Industrial 
Revolution, was waiting for. He even antici- 
pated a need that had yet to make itself fele— 
the need to return human beings to the centre 
of history and to the centre of their own selves 
at a time when they were being made to feel 
increasingly bewildered and irrelévant by the 
technology they had created. 
THE BIRTH OF PSYCHOANALYSIS 
The concept of the unconscious was already in 
the air at the time when Freud created psycho- 
analysis. But he was the man who brilliantly 
exploited the idea, which unal then had made 
little headway beyond a closed circle of avant- 
garde intellectuals and enthusiasts. Generally 
speaking, the human sciences were then held in 
low esteem. They aroused suspicions and 
awakened old fears, justifiably, since they dealt 
two massive blows to the self-image of the 
generation that matured around the turn of the 
— \ 
 
century. The first blow fell in 1871 when 
Charles Darwin published The Descent of 
Man. Man was the species that had conquered 
the world, that had produced Copernicus and 
Galileo and the great minds of the Enlighten- 
ment, not to mention the many eminent scien- 
tists who appeared on the scene in the nine- 
teenth century. How could he be descended 
from monkeys? It came as little consolation to 
learn soon afterwards that the great apes were 
not so much our fathers as our cousins. 
Freud himself delivered the second blow 
when he drew attention to the fact that homo 
sapiens sapiens (man doubly-wise) had an 
unconscious, and so could not even be consid- 
ered to possess self-mastery. Despite the resis- 
tance the idea aroused, Freud soon attracted 
disciples. Carl Gustav Jung, Karl Abraham, 
Ernest Jones, Sandor Ferenczi, Melanie Klein 
and Otto Rank all joined his circle. 
. Freud launched humanity on a journey of 
inner exploration that matched the contempo- 
rary discovery of the external world. At the 
start of the new century, explorers were probing 
virgin forests and frozen wastes, climbing the 
highest summits and plumbing the depths of 
the ocean. Edouard Branly was pioneering 
aN z= 
 

## [Page 15](093670engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 93661: The Inner adventure

a
h
 
S
%
 
Be
 
« 
techniques of long-distance communication; 
Louis Blériot was embarking on the conquest 
of the skies; Henry Ford was industrializing the 
manufacture of automobiles. 
Although psychoanalysis was at first 
restricted to a small intellectual elite, it soon 
started to affect a widening circle of people. 
The first psychoanalytical society was founded 
in Vienna, and the second in St. Petersburg, in 
1906. Like other forms of associative activity, 
the new discipline soon developed internal 
conflicts, the first being that between Freud 
and Jung, who in 1913 introduced new con- 
cepts derived from his studies of different cul- 
tures and from his clinical experience of psy- 
chosis. Jung’s most important innovations 
Das Wort 
(“The Word”, oil on 
cardboard, 1933), by the 
Russian painter Alexey von 
Jawlensky. 
were the idea of the collective unconscious as 
the common ground of humanity reflected in 
every individual, and the notion of archetypes 
giving rise to shared symbolic images. 
The rise of Nazism and the Second World - 
War shifted the focus of psychoanalysis to 
London and the English school. D.W. Winni- 
cott, a paediatrician as well as an analyst, was 
reputedly consulted by no less than 60,000 
mothers and children in the course of a medical 
carcer that ended only with his death. His 
lengthy clinical experience with children 
enabled him to bring fresh insights to a branch 
of psychoanalysis that had already been firmly 
established by Anna Freud and Melanie Klein. 
More recently, Wilfred R. Bion, H. F. Searles, 15

## [Page 16](093670engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 93661: The Inner adventure

16 
  
1. Carl Gustav Jung 
(1875-1961), Swiss 
psychologist, was initially a 
disciple of Freud's, although 
their paths later diverged. 
2. Anna Freud (1895-1982), 
Freud’s daughter, was a 
specialist in the 
psychoanalysis of children. 
3. Jacques Lacan 
(1901-1981) brought a 
fresh approach to Freudian 
theory in France. 
4, Frangoise Dolto 
(1909-1988), French child 
psychiatrist. 
  
H. A. Rosenfeld and others have extended the 
scope of psychoanalysis, which had been 
employed by Freud only for the treatment of 
neurosis, to that of psychosis also. 
In France the psychoanalytical world has 
been divided by repeated schisms, the most 
important of which was brought about by 
Jacques Lacan. But a particularly influential 
figure there in recent years has undoubtedly 
been Francoise Dolto, a psychoanalyst of chil- 
dren. It is by no means fortuitous that she 
should have become a public figure, since it 
had become high time to realize that the future 
of society rests on the health of its young. 
In less than a century, psychoanalysis has 
had to contend with the racist and totalitarian 
ideology of Nazism, as well as with Marxism- 
Leninism, the most influential collectivist phi- 
losophy of all time. It was rejected by both, for 
neither was prepared to permit the individual 
to escape the net of its communal aims. Liberal 
society, on the other hand, has proved rela- 
tively fertile ground, turning psychoanalysis 
into an almost commonplace consumer 
product. At one time in the United States, 
almost everyone consulted a “shrink” at some 
point in their lives. But that raised a problem: 
how was a science devoted to the individual's 
search for him- or herself, for what Jung called 
individuation, to accommodate the demands 
of the growing number of men, women and 
children ready for its services? 
PSYCHOANALYSIS 
AND SOCIETY 
Today, psychoanalysis plays three principal 
social roles. It performs a clinical role that is 
indispensable if it is both to meet the growing 
needs of individuals and to maintain the exper- 
imental tradition needed to improve our 
understanding of the human mind. It has a cul- 
tural function. Itself influenced from its early 
days by ethnology and mythology, it has in 
turn enriched all the human sciences, from 
philosophy, psychology and the study of 
teaching methods to ethnology, anthropology 
and sociology. 
Finally, it has an exploratory side. It too 
must continually refer to the other sciences so 
as not to become imprisoned in a theoretical 
framework that would soon become arid and 
ossified if it were not constantly put to the 
test. The most innovatory currents in psycho- 
analysis today draw on animal ethology, 
embryology and physics, whose laws can be 
verified at every level of the organization of 
matter, however complex this may be in the 
case of the human mind. 
Psychoanalysis is concerned with the indi- 
vidual and nothing else. It thereby respects the 
principle of liberty and distances itself both 
from certain psychiatric methods that have 
been used in totalitarian countries to neutralize 
freedom of thought and from such neurolog- 
ical procedures as electric shock treatment and 
other therapeutic systems and the manipula- 
tory situations to which they have given rise. 
From a psychoanalytical perspective, the 
great threat to society today lies at the very 
moment of birth. Reinforced by the power that 
intensive care techniques now give them, doc- 
tors in general and obstetricians in particular 
are in danger of forgetting that a new-born 
baby has no real existence without its mother, 
since it cannot achieve the status of an indepen- 
dent human being on its own, and that frequent 
separation at too early an age can cause it more 
harm even than physical infirmity. 
Psychoanalysis has now acquired a body of 
experimental knowledge that makes it possible 
to define the periods and rhythms necessary for 
the healthy development of the individual in the 
first years of life. Animals know how to respect 
the gestation periods that are indispensable to 
the survival of their young. Guided by instinct, 
mother animals know how to maintain the 
rhythms proper to their species and to protect 
their babies from the dangers around them. 
Human mothers, however, face the threat of 
losing their instincts and their protective 
maternal role unless they are given support. 
The modern world expects babies to per- 
form substantially beyond their capacities, 
both physically and mentally. From the 
moment of birth onwards, they are too often 
treated like objects rather than beings with 
special needs, and are forced to undergo 
repeated trials by separation that they cannot 
survive without damage to their health. The 
number of cases of infant psychosis is 
increasing, and so is the incidence of autism. 
Men and women are social beings and, 
paradoxical though it may seem, the process of 
socialization has its roots in successfully coping 
with separation. The most important task 
facing psychoanalysis today is to show, by 
warning and instruction, how the process of 
separation, set in motion at birth and continued 
first through weaning and then adolescence, 
can best be weathered through respecting chil- 
dren’s essential needs. Only by respecting the 
needs of its children can modern society attain 
the degree of civilization to which it aspires. WH

## [Page 17](093670engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 93662: How to say "I"

  
by Eliane Amado Lévy-Valensi How to say I’ 
  
We must learn 
to say ‘I’ 
in the first 
person in a 
profound 
sense. 
KIERKEGAARD      
The Quest (acrylic, 1990) 
by the French artist Sylvie 
Sémavoine. 
  
*1n From the History of an 
Infantile Neurosis (1918). 
relationships has been neatly summed up 
by Jacques Lacan and Frangoise Dolto in 
these two phrases: “Who is speaking to 
whom?” and “At the start of an analysis, it is 
not the neurotic who 1s speaking, and he is not 
speaking to the analyst.” The situation could be 
described as one of multiple neurosis. Neu- 
rotics are a channel—and a blocked channel at 
that—for fantasies which are initially not so 
much of their own making as socio-cultural 
determined. Their self is made up of various ill- 
coordinated vectors built in to the conflicts that 
eventually led them to enter analysis. Ncuroses 
never occur in the singular. There is, rather, a 
nexus of intertwining patterns in which various 
individualities can be discerned. These individ- 
valities may be artificially linked or separated. 
The significance of each intersects with that of 
all the others without really shedding light on 
them; indeed, through an infinite process of 
interpenetration they may sometimes even 
conceal one another. In such cases the neurotic 
material may be likened to a riddle. Freud him- 
self compared dreams to riddles; and before 
him the Talmud had stated that a dream not 
interpreted is a letter left unread. 
THE EMERGENCE OF THE SELF 
The neurotic message is a coalition of diffcrent 
elements. Patients, unaware of this multi- 
plicity, cannot separate the parts. Eugene 
Minkowski cites a schizophrenic who was in 
the habit of referring to himself in the third 
person, but he was an extreme case. Ordinary 
neurotics conjugate verbs correctly. They 
learned language in the usual way, with “me”, 
then “I”, being used tq replace the first name 
very carly on. On the face of it at least, neu- 
rotics are grammatically normal. 
However, their individuality is disguised by 
the masks of their desire to be someone clse. 
T HE neurotic’s confusion with respect to During a model course of treatment, the self 
will travel back to earlier states of mind and 
rediscover the moment when its future devel- 
opment was set, perhaps even precisely enough 
to put a date to it. Sometimes, as in the case of 
the Wolf Man described by Freud,* the 
symptom relates to an incident that occurred in 
the individual’s prehistory, before the develop- 
ment of memory. The patient’s individuality 
will only emerge after his or her history has 
been pieced together and he or she has accepted 
that history. The patient will then no longer use 
the word “I” in a stereotyped sense, as though 
it referred to someone else. Instead, uttering it 
will Incorporate an acceptance of his or her 
stages of development, even including their 
ambivalence. 
But there is no straightforward fairy-tale 
happy end, with people getting married and 
having lots of children. The degree of success 
or faiture achieved by psychoanalytical treat- 
ment can vary widely. The term “post-analyt- 
ical Parkinson’s disease” has been coined to 
describe the renewed tension that some 
patients experience once they have emerged 
(or think they have emerged) from their mul- 
tiple neuroses. They look singularly strange in 
their new clothes. Perhaps they were night to 
fear this fresh apparel, like Diderot lamenting 
the loss of his old dressing gown, or like 
Kierkegaard trying to establish what Repeti- 
tion may be, somewhere between memory and 
hope: “Hope is a brand-new piece of clothing, 
stiff and uncomfortable; but as one has never 
worn it before one does not know if it will fit, 
or suit one.” Kierkegaard felt that people only 
really feel at ease with repetition, “a garment 
that never wears out”, and. is “neither too tight 
nor too loose.” 
The pitfall awaiting those emerging from a 
more or less successful course of sychoanalyt- 
ical treatment—and the results Ahays fall into 17

## [Page 18](093670engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 93662: How to say "I"

18 
The Mask (coloured pencil 
on paper, 1991) by the 
French artist Denise 
Fernandez Grundman. 
ELIANE AMADO 
LEVY-VALENSI, 
of Israel, is the author of 
many works on philosophy 
and psychoanalysis—over 
300 articles and 16 books, 
including La névrose plurielle 
(Aubier, Paris, 1992). 
the category of “more or less”—is to believe 
that their individuality has been made to 
emerge, cleansed of its previous phantasms like 
a well-scoured saucepan. The emergence of 
individuality is not an illusion, but it may 
become one if it is treated as a kind of object, 
encysted within its defining parameters and 
alienated on the threshold of liberation. 
Anyone who uses the word “emergence” 
should not concentrate on what has “emerged” 
but try to restore to the resultant mental states 
the momentum that brought them to the sur- 
face. Kar] Jaspers said that everything hinged 
on the “sum of time” understood in the fullness 
of its three terms: past, present and future. 
THE CULTURAL CONTEXT 
But while the emergence of individuality can 
be grasped within the prism of psychoanalysis, 
it also owes a great deal to ethics, religion, the 
economy and social and political integration. 
Psychoanalysis must not be reductive, not 
become the exclusive dogma it has so often 
been accused of being. No one theme should 
be stressed above the others when all are 
involved in the emergence. The individuality 
that emerges entails—even demands—a multi- 
disciplinary approach, which is constantly 
shifting and can at best only be (no pun 
intended) approached rather than arrived at 
with any degree of finality. The psychoanalyt- 
ica] process differs qualitatively and quantita- 
tively in each individual case-history. 
That 1s very obvious in Israel, where an 
immigrant from Ethiopia cannot be analysed 
in the same way as an elderly patient of 
Russian origin. In France too, a psychoanalyst 
cannot use the same language to young 
workers that he or she would use with stu- 
dents (as I discovered in one of my most mem- 
orable professional encounters). In each case 
individuality takes a very different path towards 
its own reality. I remember being very struck, at 
a psychoanalytical symposium on reality, by the 
evanescent, elusive quality of reality. My feelin 
is that reality is not a state that can be describ od 
or a series of states that can be recorded, so 
much as something that, to borrow a Hebrew 
saying as old as Genesis itself, is always in the 
making. In this sense, the emergence of individ- 
uality is an action plan, a project, the taking in 
hand of a story whose aim is the winning of its 
own freedom, which alone can redeem it. It is a 
time that has to be set in motion once more. 
“The wind is rising, we must try to live,” 
wrote Valéry in Le Cimetiére Marin. But such 
an attempt implies the mobilization of all the 
agencies that make us up. Viktor Frankl, who 
accepted Freud’s discoveries in their entirety, 
rightly added other dimensions to them in his 
book The Unconscious God: psychotherapy 
and theology in which he superimposed on the 
repressed instinctual impulses of Freudian 
theory the repressed impulses of the spiritual, 
which are equally necessary to the emergence 
and fulfilment of the individual. The relative 
importance of one or other form of repression 
will vary in different cases at different stages of 
treatment to create an infinite number of com- 
binations, with every possible form of stop 
and start along the way. 
Perhaps the world of politics provides an 
example of these stops and starts. The message 
lies in receptiveness to other people, always 
granted that receptiveness is not unconditional. 
Ultimately, relating is the important thing. 
RELATIONS 
WITH OTHERS 
It would be impossible to reach a conclusive 
approach (we must be wary of talking about 
conclusions) without looking again at the “I™

## [Page 19](093670engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 93662: How to say "I"

which is constructed in childhood, and which 
needs to be conjugated in the first person “in a 
profound sense”. If one did no more than say 
“I”, the result would be the emergence of a nar- 
cissistic, even autistic, individuality. The dia- 
logues of the deaf that ensue are striking evi- 
dence of this on the cultural level. In fact the 
emergence has no meaning except in terms of 
relationships with others. To say “I” to oneself 
in a profound sense entails bringing together all 
the persons involved: the “He”, even when 
absent, the “We” of latent solidarity and, most 
fundamentally, the “Thou” which reveals me to 
myself, 
Perhaps Martin Buber’s book I and Thou is 
relevant here. The world, Buber writes, is not a 
divine game, but a divine destiny. Pure rcla- 
tionships generate absolute dependency and 
the fulfilment of a freedom which, by bringing 
together creator and created, provides a foun- 
dation for humankind’s creativity by associ- 
ating it indissolubly with love. Buber locates 
human relationships—the I and the Thou—in 
the transcendence of all that pertains to them. 
He 1s even prepared to state that we have 
always known we needed God, but that “God 
necds you to give your life its meaning specifi- 
cally through your agency.” : 
Conditioned as we are by all the factors that 
make up a culture, or alienated by some of 
them and by all the wrong choices and repres- 
sions they entail, we can see that psycho- 
analysis is an astonishing key with which to 
open scaled doors. But there arc a hundred 
other doors to the magic palace that shelters the 
newly-emerged, or new-born, individual iden- 
tity. Those who think they have arrived after 
going through the first door are mistaken. HW 
  
Multiplicity (charcoal on 
paper, 1932) by the French 
artist and writer Francis 
Picabia (1879-1953). 
19

## [Page 20](093670engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 93663: The Ajasé complex

The Ajuse complex 
by Etienne Barral 
Morning gymnastics in a 
Hokkaido bottling plant 
(Japan). 
knock in any nail that sticks out,” is a 
common Japanese saying. The metaphor 
is symptomatic of the national approach to edu- 
cation. Japanese children are brought up not to 
rock the boat, not to be different from their 
neighbours and to conform with other mem- 
bers of the group. It is difficult to talk of the 
emergence of the individual when principles of 
this kind are firmly rooted in the national 
mentality. 
When asked about this, Dr. Tooru Taka- 
hashi, a psychiatrist at Japan’s National Mental 
Health Research Institute, first puts the indi- 
vidual in context: “Even from a purely gram- 
matical point of view, the Japanese language 
allows people a choice between several types 
of ‘I’. The ‘I’ they decide to use depends on the 
person or persons they are talking to. The 
individual constantly has to redefine his or her 
identity depending on who is being 
addressed—a superior, a work colleague, or a 
1 D ERU kngiwa utarern,” or “One should 
R CL itll. Bie 
PLLA EE ht - ¥ Sada w - -- 
  
member of the family.” The mental gymnastics 
the Japanese practise in their relationships with 
other people provide one clue as to why they 
tend to sce themselves less as well-defined: 
individals than as persons capable of adjusting 
to their environment. Their ability to adjust 
arises, according to psychiatrist Takeo Doi, 
from their wish to avoid conflict with people 
around them, and thus to be treated indul- 
gently, as a child is by its mother. 
THE AJASE COMPLEX 
In his book Anatomy of Dependence’, Takeo 
Doi describes the bond of emotional depen- 
dence—amae—which in his view greatly influ- 
ences the way in which the Japanese personality 
1s formed. In a matriarchal society in which the 
father occupies a very limited place, the rela- 
tionship with the mother determines a person’s 
psychological development and his or her rela- 
tions with society. Whereas Western psychoan- 
alytical thinking emphasizes the “castrating”

## [Page 21](093670engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

  
role of the father in breaking into what would 
otherwise remain a hermetic fusional relation- 
ship between mother and child, Japanese psy- 
chiatry starts off with an acceptance of this 
mother-child dyad, which was described by 
the first Japanese psychiatrist, Dr. Kosawa, as 


### 93663: The Ajasé complex

the “Ajasé complex”. (Ajasé was a king in 
Buddhist mythology who wanted to kill his 
mother.) 
When he used the psychoanalytical tech- 
nique of free association on his patients, Dr. 
Kosawa discovered that their fantasies did not 
reveal an (Edipus complex (or wish to kill the 
The mother-child 
relationship lies at the 
heart of Japanese society. 
  
father) of the kind he had learned about from 
Freud in Vienna in 1932. What emerged, 
rather, was an Ajasé complex. “It is a guilt 
feeling towards the mother in a relationship of 
dependence, a feeling you experience after 
obtaining her forgiveness despite the fact that 
you have tried to kill her in order to satisfy 
your hostile wishes,” says Dr. Takahashi, 
echoing Takeo Dot's work on amae. 
“The archetypal relationship involving 
amae 1s that between mother and child, but 
this archetype also structures the relationship 
between husband and wife, teacher and pupil, 21

## [Page 22](093670engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 93663: The Ajasé complex

22 
A 19th-century Japanese 
print entitled The Last Look 
shows a man gazing out of 
his window before 
committing seppuku, or 
ritual suicide. 
| 
ETIENNE BARRAL 
is a French freelance 
journalist who lives in Japan. 
A contributor to a number of 
French and Japanese 
periodicals, he is the author 
of a book on Japanese 
society entitled 123 456 
789 Japonais {llyfunet, 
1991). 
     
  
  
N 
I 
S
0
L
 l
b 
N
h
  
and doctor and patient,” writes Yves Pelicier, a 
French specialist, in a preface to a French 
translation of Doi’s book. “There is never any 
question of equality. The relationship is asym- 
metrical, which means that it presupposes 
respect and offers in return the definition of a 
certain reassuring position or status in the rela- 
tionship system.” What the child, and later the 
adult, seeks in amae is not the independence of 
the “individual” as it is envisioned in the West, 
but a relationship of ideal dependence that will 
earn him or her the indulgence of the mother, 
then of the group. 
“Amae is normally what a child feels in 
relation to its mother when it becomes capable 
of realizing that she can separate from it,” Doi 
says. But while that feeling indicates both a 
request for the presence of the mother and a 
negation of separation from her, it is some- 
thing that is found throughout adult life in a 
culture which regards the individual, or “I”, as 
important only in his or her relationship with 
other people. Amae is the wish to restore a lost 
unity by going out to meet other people. 
“The purpose of analysis,” Dr. Takahashi 
adds, “is to grasp the subject’s individuality. 
But the Japanese accept, and even tend to 
emphasize, the ambiguity of their ‘I, which is 
determined by other people. The analysand 
does not seek individual independence, which 
would run counter to the very principles of the 
way human relationships work™. 
As for his own patients, Dr. Takahashi 
finds they chiefly suffer from behaviour prob- 
lems within groups: “There are two main 
problems facing my patients: either they tend 
to deny their individuality completely so as to 
merge more successfully into the group, or 
they react against the group to an excessive 
degree by overasserting their individuality.” 
The bond between the individual and the 
mother is of the same type as that between the 
individual and the group: it is a bond based 
more on the emotions than on reason. As long 
as this relationship is an emotional one, the 
individual can seek the indulgence of the 
group in order to achieve his or her aims. This 
1s why it 1s important not to create open con- 
flicts, which would break up the harmony of 
the group to the detriment of each individual’s 
interests. 
THE THREE CIRCLES OF SOCIAL LIFE 
The group is of prime importance because it 
affects and conditions behaviour. But what 
group, or groups, are we talking about? First 
there is the circle of people to whom the indi- 
vidual 1s very close and needs to display no 
restraint because he or she will always be 
treated indulgently: this is the world of amae. 
Then there 1s the circle of friends and col- 
leagues, which is dominated by the need for 
compromise and the desire for harmonious 
relations. A certain degree of restraint is 
required in this circle, one in which individuals 
become aware of their position within other 
groups. This is the world of debt, obligation 
and duty, of mutual favours and devotion, of 
reciprocity, where emotional interaction must 
achieve some kind of equilibrium and where 
there may even be a feeling of understanding 
similar to the amae of the first circle. But 
anyone failing to observe the rules of this 
second circle or betraying the trust of the 
group, which is well-meaning but chiefly con- 
cerned with its own evolution, will incur dis- 
grace. The third and most distant circle is the 
world of “other people”, towards whom the 
individual has no obligations or feelings, and 
from whom he or she consequently expects 
nothing. Neither their presence, nor what they 
think, nor how they view the individual are of 
any importance. That is why the Japanese 
seem reserved in the presence of people they 
do not know, or “strangers”. These concentric 
circles rarely overlap. 
Dr. Takahashi also points out that people 
who come for analysis are not interested in the 
deeper causes of their neurosis, but simply want 
the analyst to get rid of its symptoms. That is a 
further indication of the way in which people

## [Page 23](093670engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 93669: Greenwatch: the right to clean air

  MEET 
   
    
  
   
   
    
THE UNESCO COURIER - MARCH 1993 
mi Dossier 
» THE RIGHT 
TO CLEAN AIR 
by France Bequette 
World 
Voices from the past 
8» THE STORY 
OF THE SANDS 
  
  
Dossier 
[HE RIT { 
[0 CLEAN AIR 
by France Bequette 
 
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
The road from Irkutsk to Lake Baikal crosses the 
taiga, magnificent, open forestland where in June 
pine and birch trees rise from a thick multicoloured 
carpet of flowers. Here and there, however, even in 
this Siberian wilderness, clusters of yellowed leaves 
blemish the soft green foliage. Meanwhile, several 
thousand kilometres away in Athens, Phidias’ sculp- 
tures in the Parthenon, which had survived 2,000 
years of history intact, have been replaced by fibre- 
glass copies after being disfigured by a century of 
pollution. 
Like the Parthenon, the Taj Mahal in India, the 
Coliseum in Rome and Rheims cathedral in France, 
the taiga is a victim of what has come to be known 
as acid rain, caused by emissions of sulphur dioxide 
LE Lil 
  
 
  
        

## [Page 24](093670engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

Dossier 
 


### 93669: Greenwatch: the right to clean air

[HE RIGHT 10 CLEAN AIR 
A researcher at 
Cornell 
University (USA) 
holds up sick 
vine-leaves to 
demonstrate the 
toxicity of the 
ozone that can 
accumulate in 
the atmosphere 
as a result of 
pollution. In his 
other hand he 
holds healthy 
leaves from 
stock cultivated 
in an ozone-free 
chamber. 
and nitrogen oxides from coal-fired 
power plants and metal foundries, 
as well as from vehicles and heating 
systems. 
The wind carries these particles 
over long distances. While the 
Parthenon sculptures were bound 
to be victims because they are 
located in the heart of a city where 
air pollution is rampant, today even 
a seeming natural paradise like the 
Baikal region is affected, graphically 
demonstrating that our planet is 
indeed a village. The effects of 
burning coal with a high sulphur 
content are not limited to the 
immediate vicinity in which the coal 
is burned. Once the smoke-borne 
pollutants are in the air, they are 
beyond human control and travel 
wherever the wind takes them. 
Floyd Elder, a Canadian expert 
on acid rain, notes that the British 
chemist Robert Angus Smith coined 
the term more than a century ago. 
Although the technology at Smith's 
disposal was rudimentary by today’s 
standards, he demonstrated as early 
  
as 1872 that smoke and steam con- 
tain substances that cause impor- 
tant changes in the chemical com- 
position of rain. He noted that these 
changes could be detected not only 
in the immediate area around the 
point of emission but also “in the 
fields, at a great distance from the 
source.” He also discovered some 
of the harmful effects of acid rain, 
such as the discolouring of fabrics, 
the corrosion of metal surfaces, the 
deterioration of building materials 
and the withering of plants. 
Although the term “acid rain” is 
evocative, it is often inappropriate: 
“acid deposits” is more accurate. 
Drifting air pollutants are deposited 
not only by rainfall but also by snow, 
clouds and fog (so-called “wet” 
deposits}, as well as by gases and 
dust (“dry deposits”) during the dry 
season. Even normal rain is mildly 
acidic, with a pH that varies 
between 5.6 and 5.0. (Distilled water 
has a pH of 7, which is considered 
neutral. Substances with a pH over 
7, such as limewater and ammonia, 
 
are alkaline. Those such as wine and 
lemon juice with a pH under 7 are 
acidic.) 
Development fallout 
Despite the early warning given by 
Robert Smith, industrial countries 
only began to take acid deposits 
seriously in the 1950s. In 1953, 
the Canadian Government launched 
a programme to study and monitor 
the water in the lakes of Nova Scotia, 
where acidity was increasing at 
an alarming rate. In the 1960s, 
Scandinavian countries reported 
that fish populations were declining 
and that some lakes had even 
become completely sterile. Trout 
don't like swimming in vinegar. 
In Japan pollution was at its worst 
after World War II. Between 1946 and 
1954, the need to rebuild the country, 
feed the population and keep facto- 
ries working called for the use of fer- 
tilizers and pesticides, the extrac- 
tion of raw materials, the burning of 
fossil fuels, and a dam construction 
programme. Japan's number one pri- 
ority was to achieve a high level of 
development. Pollution would be 
attended to later. 
Four tragic accidents, however, 
caused the Japanese authorities to 
take public-health and safety mea- 
sures. Two of the accidents—at 
Minamata and Niigata respectively— 
involved mercury poisoning; the 
third was linked to cadmium and 
the fourth to sulphur dioxide. The 
last case occurred at a time when 
coal and hydroelectric power were - 
beginning to be superseded by 
petroleum and petrochemicals. A 
huge industrial complex was built 
at Yokkaichi, south of Tokyo. When it 
went into production, local people 
began to complain of unpleasant 
odours, irritating fumes, and soot- 
marks on their laundry. There was a 
significant rise in the incidence of

## [Page 25](093670engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 93669: Greenwatch: the right to clean air

asthma, and the phrase “Yokkaichi 
asthma” was coined. In 1967, studies 
identified sulphur dioxide released 
from the smokestacks as the prin- 
cipal culprit. The victims took the 
six companies involved to court and 
won their case, gaining compensa- 
tion and focusing public attention 
on the dangers of air pollution. In 
the same year, the Idemitsu Kosan 
refinery invested some ten billion 
yen in a desulphurizing facility, the 
first of its kind in the world, designed 
to remove sulphur from heavy oil 
before it was burned, and the Tokyo 
city authorities established a sulphur 
dioxide monitoring station in front of 
the former town hall. The public was 
alerted whenever the readings 
reached levels considered dangerous 
to health—this happened sixteen 
times in 1968 alone. 
The Japanese government 
responded energetically. It set up 
an Environment Agency and drew 
up a strict regulatory system mod- 
eled on the Clean Air Act adopted 
in the United States in 1970. How- 
ever, a recent assessment by the 
agency points to the inadequacy of 
all such controls. The higher the 
level of a nation’s development, the 
more industries, vehicles, and 
heating appliances it possesses and 
the more pollution it produces. 
Is this inevitable? In the United 
States, the Clean Air Act was amended 
and strengthened in 1990. The atmos- 
phere today contains 23 billionkg of 
suspended particulates of lead, sul- 
A gargoyle 
disfigured by 
sulphur 
emissions on the 
Canadian 
Patliament 
Building in 
Ottawa. 
  
phur dioxide, carbon monoxide, 
nitrogen oxide and other substances, 
which means that every man, 
woman and child inhales 112 kg of 
particles a year. Economic incen- 
tives should make it possible to 
reduce the figure by two thirds by 
the year 2005. The U.S. Environ- 
mental Protection Agency counts 
among its undisputed successes a 
substantial reduction in the level of 
toxic lead emissions since lead was 
banned from automobile fuel. 
Canada is concerned about the 
winds blowing in from regions of 
heavy industry across the border in 
the United States. But foundries in 
the mining district of central Ontario 
are also implicated. In the mid- 
1980s, eastern Canada alone was 
responsible for the emission of 4.6 
million tonnes of sulphur dioxide. 
Meteorological cenditions only 
make things worse. Heavy winter 
snowfall traps acids for months. The 
spring thaw frees a stream of acid 
into rivers and lakes at the time when 
aquatic fauna are reproducing, | 
causing sterility and embryo mal- 
formation. The forest is also affected; 
maples and birch trees in eastern 
Canada are dying. 
In 1990, the United States pledged 
to reduce sulphur dioxide emissions 
by half. Canada is doing the same. 
But modern society has a growing 
demand for energy and industrial 
goods. Individuals, companies and 
communities must take stock of the 
situation and work together to find 
new and different consumption 
patterns. | 
  
FRANCE BEQUETTE 
is a Franco-American journalist 
specializing in environmental 
questions. Since 1985 she has been 
associated with the WANAD-UNESCO 
training programme for African 
news-agency journalists. 
 
  
| 
| 
| 
: 
  
P
r
 
T
T
T
 
  
  
e
T
 
TL
 
Be a
 
i
 
e
e
e
 
  Fre ae

## [Page 26](093670engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 93669: Greenwatch: the right to clean air

World 
 
  
  
INFORMATION PLEASE! 
The Unesco Courier will be happy to publish informa- 
tion from readers about projects to protect the envi- 
ronment, however modest or localized. If you know of 
an initiative of this kind, please write and tell us all 
about it—its aims, methods and results. | 
 
TRACKING INSECTS BY SATELLITE 
In the countries of Africa's Sahel 
region, it is vitally important to 
keep watch for invasions of crickets 
that can devastate the area’s 
meagre crops. The Paris-based 
Centre for International Coopera- 
tion in Agricultural Research for 
Development claims that remote 
detection via Landsat, Météosat, 
NOAA and SPOT satellites can 
provide a monitoring system that 
may be highly effective, although 
the data must be subsequently 
corroborated on the ground. In 
1991 a 300-square-kilometre area 
in the north of Niger was moni- 
tored. It took 80 hours of helicopter 
flights, 30 hours of plane flights, 
and 6,000 km of track covered to 
provide 800 aerial photographs 
and 300 field surveys. These data 
were then compared with the 
images provided by the satellites. 
Once the invaders have been 
located, of course, they still have to 
be eliminated. | 
  
 
AIR POLLUTION 
IN CHINA 
According to the World Bank, heavy industry, tradi- 
tionally a major source of pollution, still accounts for 
nearly half of China's industrial output. This situation 
is seriously jeopardizing the progress that has been 
made in environmental protection. The Environmental 
and Economic Policy Research Centre set up under the 
aegis of the National Environmental Protection Agency 
faces an uphill job in trying to reduce air pollution. 
Average particulate-suspension levels measured in 
China's big cities can be as many as five times the 60-to- 
90-microgram-per-cubic-metre levels considered 
acceptable by the World Health Organization. The 
figure for the city of Xian averages 520, for Beijing 358, 
and for Shanghai 251. | 
 
CROCODILES 
IN THE BATHTUB 
There is never a dull moment at the 
Blohms'. For the past 40 years, they 
have been doing their best to pro- 
tect one of the five most endangered 
large reptile species in Venezuela, 
the Orinoco crocodile (Crocodylus 
intermedius), and their efforts have 
included letting sick specimens use 
the family bathroom to recuperate. 
Hunting of this species coveted for 
its skin and even for its teeth, which 
according to local folklore have 
medicinal properties, reduced a 
population that numbered several 
million at the beginning of the cen- 
tury to some 2,000 animals. Cecilia 
and Tomas Blohm now breed 
Orinoco crocodiles in concrete 
tanks on their 2,500-hectare ranch 
located in the state of Guarico. In 
1992 they released 200 crocodiles 
into the wild. If their enterprise suc- 
ceeds, it might be possible to raise 
the crocodiles on a sustainable 
basis, so providing a source of pro- 
tein for the local people as well as 
helping to save one of the world’s 
twelve most threatened animal 
species from extinction. | 
 
CARDBOARD COFFINS 
It can be argued that it is wasteful to fell trees in order 
to manufacture coffins that may only be used for a 
matter of hours. In view of the increasingly widespread 
practice of cremation, Alexander Haas of Switzerland 
has invented the “Peace Box", a cardboard coffin made 
from materials that are 60-per-cent recycled. Even if this 
ecologically-minded initiative has yet to catch onin a 
big way, it certainly counts as an honourable attempt to 
use materials “from the cradle to the grave”. |

## [Page 27](093670engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 93669: Greenwatch: the right to clean air

  
 
CANADA RATIFIES THE WORLD CONVENTION 
ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY 
Canada, which on 4 December ratified the Convention on Biological 
Diversity signed at the Rio Earth Summit in June 1993, is one of the world's 
biggest countries. The home of some 70,000 known animal species, it 
comprises a host of distinct habitats. But a great many of these ecosystems 
are imperilled. Little tallgrass land is left, while 103 animal species or sub- 
species are listed as threatened or in danger of extinction, and 20 are 
extinct. Canada’s Green Plan has established a national wildlife strategy 
designed to protect endangered species and their habitats. A federal policy 
on the conservation of wetlands adopted in March 1992 defined new 
wildlife reserves and bird sanctuaries. By the year 2000, the government 
should have established as many national parks as there are natural regions 
(39in all), covering 12 per cent of the country’s surface area. | 
GREEN 
GASOLINE 
With the development of biomass fuels derived from 
   
I 
\ }   
  
POLLUTION AND THE STOCK 
EXCHANGE 
As of this year, “clean” firms will be 
selling “pollution permits” on the . 
Chicago stock exchange. This novel 
system authorizes buying and 
selling of the right to emit specific 
amounts of sulphur dioxide, one of 
the main sources of acid rain. A 
company that has not used up its 
maximum emission quota will be 
allowed to sell the remainder to 
others, for the highest bid or for a 
fixed price. The United States 
Environmental Protection Agency 
(USEPA) has declared its approval of 
an initiative that will enable bene- 
ficiaries to avoid having to pay fines 
or suspend operations. | 
    
      sugar cane or rape seed, green is in fashion, even for 
automotive fuels. Yet Pierre Delacroix, energy specialist 
with the nongovernmental organization France Nature 
Environnement, warns that neither the ethanol-gaso- 
line mix used in Brazil nor diester, a fuel for diesel 
engines currently being studied in Europe, are risk- 
free. Ethanol by-products may be toxic, while diester 
contains nitrogen oxide and carcinogenic aldehydes, 
both hazards to health. Furthermore, as these fuels are 
based on agricultural crops, production would be likely 
to call for massive doses of fertilizers and pesticides, 
without the restrictions on their use applied to food 
crops. In trying to limit carbon dioxide emissions from 
conventional fuels, might we not create new sources of 
pollution? || 
Ferran 
2 Ul 
od fo. 
  
GR
EE
NW
AT
 
  I 
i 
a J 
i 
p
i
 
L
B
 
il
e 
-
 
a
 
-
 

## [Page 28](093670engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 93669: Greenwatch: the right to clean air

W
I
E
 
AT
 
R
T
T
 
a
 
AM
 
a
.
 
$
a
 
T
R
L
 
4 
J
e
n
 
e
f
 
B
a
n
i
 
S
F
 
9
%
 
  
i
l
l
 
  
Voices from the past 
 
 
W The story on this 
page appears in an 
anthology entitled 
Compagnons du 
Soleil (“Companions 
of the Sun} co- 
published (in French) 
by Unesco, Editions 
La Découverte (Paris) 
and the Fondation 
pour le progrés de 
I'Homme. The 
anthology has been 
prepared under the 
general editorship of 
the African historian 
Joseph Ki-Zerbo, in 
collaboration with 
Marie-Joséphe Beaud. 
THE STORY OF TH 
Dervish stories are medieval allegorical tales used by the dervishes 
in Middle-Eastern Muslim orders to illustrate their mystical teachings. 
This one still forms part of the region’s oral tradition and is told 
in several languages. 
river which rose in the distant moun- 
tains flowed through many lands before 
it finally reached the desert sands. It 
tried to overcome this new obstacle just 
as it had surmounted all others in its 
path, but it noticed that as it flowed 
through the sand, its waters disappeared. 
It was sure that its destiny was to cross the 
desert, but how? Then a hidden voice, a voice 
from the desert, murmured: “The wind 
crosses the desert. The river can do the same.” 
The river replied that when it rushed at the 
sand it was soaked up, whereas the wind 
could fly across the desert. 
“If you leap forward in your usual way, you 
will not get across. You will only disappear, or 
become a swamp. You must let the wind carry 
you to your destination.” 
The river asked how that could be, and the 
voice answered, “Let the wind absorb you.” 
The river found the idea unacceptable. It 
had never before been absorbed. It did not 
want to lose its individuality: once it had 
given it up, how could it be sure to get it back? 
“The wind takes care of that,” said the sand. 
“It absorbs the water, carries it over the desert, 
then lets it fall. The water falls in the form of 
rain and becomes a river anew.” 
“How do I know this is true?” 
“That is how it is. And if you don't believe it, 
you will never become anything but a marsh- 
land, and even that could take many years. 
And that is certainly not the same thing as a 
river!” 
“But couldn't I remain the river am today?” 
“No matter what happens, you cannot 
remain the same,” murmured the voice. “The 
essential part of you is carried off to form a 
river anew. Even today, you have that name 
because you do not know what part of you is 
the essential part.” 
These words stirred distant recollections for 
the river. It could vaguely remember a time 
when the wind had carried it, or part of it at 
least. It also remembered—but was this really 
a memory?—that this was what it was meant 
to do, even if there was no real need. 
So the river evaporated into the welcoming 
arms of the wind. And gently, effortlessly, the 
wind raised it up and carried it off, letting it fall 
gently in droplets when they reached a moun- 
taintop many leagues away. And because it 
had doubted, the river remembered and 
absorbed all the more acutely the details of 
the experience. “Yes, I now know my true 
identity,” said the river to itself. 
The river was beginning to learn. But 
the sands murmured: “We know because 
we see this happen day after day and because 
we sands stretch out from the river to the 
mountain.” 
This is why they say that the ways that allow 
the River of Life to pursue its journey are 
written in the sand. n

## [Page 29](093670engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 93663: The Ajasé complex

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 22 
  
see themselves, which is not in relation to them- 
selves, but to the members of their immediate 
circle, for whom an absence of symptoms 
means an absence of disorders. A person with 
no apparent symptoms runs no risk of being 
rejected by the group, which 1s always very 
concerned not to show any failings. 
THE EYES OF OTHERS 
In The Chrysanthemum and the Sword, which 
appeared in 1946, the American sociologist 
Ruth Benedict put her finger on the difference 
between Judaeo-Christian culture, which is 
based on guilt, and Japanese culture, which is 
based on shame. Guilt feelings are generated by 
reference to a given system of moral values, that 
1s to say the struggle between good and evil, 
notions which are defined and identified as 
such. Feelings of shame, on the other hand, are 
produced by the way other people see us. Here 
again it is the group which dictates a person’s 
behaviour. Takeo Doi comments on Benedict's 
definition as follows: “Whereas guilt feelings, 
after arising in the ego, travel outwards in the 
form of an excuse, feelings of shame originate in 
awareness of how other people see us and travel 
inwards, towards the ego.” Further on he adds: 
“[The Japanese] love living as a group. It is 
extremely difficult for them to dissociate them- 
selves from the group and act on their own ini- 
tiative. They somehow feel that to act indepen- 
dently 1s to betray. They are even ashamed to 
do anything on their own.” 
Here again there is a parallel to be drawn 
between the group, which a person feels 
ashamed to disappoint or be excluded from, 
and the mother. The sociologist Chie Nakane 
wrote that a Japanese mother might punish her 
child by letting it know symbolically that it no 
longer belonged to the family, that it would 
have to remain alone as it had not observed the 
family rules, and that she was “putting the child 
outside”, whereas Western parents are more 
likely to keep a child at home—*in deten- 
tion”"—as punishment for being too indepen- 
dent-minded. 
Given that the ultimate aim of analysis 1s the 
process of individuation, it is easy to see why 
the Western model of psychoanalysis has not 
really caught on in Japan. As Dr. Takahashi 
points out: “In Japanese society, the analyst as 
well as the patient lacks the determination to 
achieve personal independence. Psychoanalyt- 
ical treatment gives the patient the means to 
break free from his or her primary dependence 
and is therefore in contradiction with the gen- 
eral fabric of human relations in society. That is 
why it has not yet really become an everyday 
feature of Japanese life or been fully assimilated 
by Japanese culture.” | 
1 Anatomy of Dependence, by Takeo Doi, translated 
from the Japanese by J. Bester, Kodansha International, 
1982. 
2 Histoire de la psychanalyse au Japon, by Tooru Taka- 
hashi, Livre de Poche, Hachette, Paris, 1982. 
    
   
The ideogram for 
Self-control as drawn 
by the 19th-century 
calligrapher Hitsu Juko. 29

## [Page 30](093670engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 93664: Africa: the healer's art

30 
Africa: 
the healers 
ar 
by Anne-Marie Kaufman 
SYCHOANALYSIS is not a matter merely of 
explaining or elucidating what is wrong 
in people’s relationships with their con- 
temporaries and those around them. It is also a 
therapeutic procedure in which, for the psy- 
choanalyst, it is inconceivable to act against a 
patient’s wishes, and above all to know more 
than the patient about his or her own case. The 
psychoanalyst’s ethics, in other words, are 
based on a kind of renunciation of knowledge. 
When a patient comes to seek help to enable 
him or her to live a better life, the analyst 
knows no more than the patient, but waits to 
be enlightened by what he or she has to say. 
The psychoanalyst’s desire to know engenders 
a similar desire in the patient: and this enables 
the patient, rather than waiting for a recipe for 
improvement, to dismantle the pathological 
mechanisms at work in him or her in order to 
alleviate the problems caused by his or her 
relationship to reality. In short, psychoanalysis 
is a theory which uses the patient’s own words 
to provide for this or that neurotic symptom 
an explanation which is by definition indi- 
vidual and personal. 
What first strikes a psychoanalyst in Africa 
is the predominant place occupied by talking. 
Traditional therapies there are all based on 
something which—contrary to the claims of 
some European ethnopsychiatrists—is not 
mere verbal conditioning designed to make a 
deviant subject conform to a codified social 
norm, but a form of verbalization that takes 
individual account of the patient’s problem and 
1ts cause. 
Nevertheless there is an essential difference 
between Africa and Europe. Illness in Africa is 
due to an external force, the supernatural 
intervention of a jinn, a zaar or a rab following 
an offence committed against it or some other 
deity. So before any treatment you have to 
know which deity is concerned, what the 
offence was, and how to make it good. 
An anthropomorphic vase 
produced by potters 
of the Bena Kanioka people 
(Zaire). 
 
Many European psychiatrists think that 
once a subject’s symptoms have been identi- 
fied, all that has to be done is to recondition 
him or her. Each symptom calls for an appro- 
priate medicinal treatment or a stay in an insti- 
tution which will put everything back to 
rights. European psychiatrists with experience 
of psychoanalysis are, like traditional African 
healers, sceptical about this approach because 
it bypasses the truth, the root cause concealed 
within each patient, and merely papers over 
the cracks—which reopen at the first opportu- 
nity. Whenever we have talked to traditional 
African practitioners and to Western psychia- 
trists, we have been struck by this emphasis on 
uncovering the cause, on talking, which allows 
a person’s symbolic landmarks to be put back

## [Page 31](093670engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 93664: Africa: the healer's art

in place and completely reorganized so as to 
make him or her a place in society again. 
CONSCIENTIOUS HEALERS 
I shall give two examples of traditional African 
therapy. The first concerns a Pygmy healer 
who was approached by a woman who since 
her husband’s death had been subject to fits of 
delirium and hallucination in which he had 
appeared to her and enjoined her to look after 
the house, to make the land he had farmed 
more productive, and make sure that the chil- 
dren did not squander his legacy. These 
episodes were accompanied by intense distress 
and agitation, which cut the woman off from 
the world—so much so that she neglected her 
children, onc of whom diced as a result. Letting 
this child die, and allowing her legacy to waste 
away, was obviously the disaster of her life. 
The Pygmy healer who saw this woman 
was thus faced with a case of pathological 
bereavement. A European psychiatrist would 
have looked no further, and would have rec- 
ommended treatment with neuroleptic anti- 
depressant drugs which would have “got rid of 
the symptom”. But the Pygmy healer was not 
satisfied with this sort of rough and ready 
approach. It took him several wecks to find 
out what the problem was. During his long ill- 
ness, the patients husband had asked her to go 
into the forest and gather herbs that might 
cure him, but pleading shortage of time or 
money as an excuse the woman had shirked 
doing so, and after her husband’s death this 
made her feel (with some justification) respon- 
sible for his demise. This unconfessed guilt 
could resurface only in the form of demoniac 
possession, in which her husband came and 
reminded her of himself. Once her fault was 
brought out into the open, she was able through 
a ritual ceremony to reduce it to its due propor- 
tions and make amends for it, and she was soon 
rid of the hallucinatory bercavement symptoms. 
The second example has to do with the 
treatment of a case of male sterility. A man 
came to a healer complaining of persistent 
sterility. From unions with several women he 
had begotten no offspring, although when they 
had left him the women had soon managed to 
procreate. The healer was not content merely to 
prescribe his patient the simples that would 
solve the sterility problem. He suspected a psy- 
chogenic cause and investigated the matter with 
him. Some weeks later he uncovered the nub of 
the matter. The patient admitted that he had 
met women without the approval of his father, 
who had several times laid a curse upon him. 
The healer then sent for the father, got the story 
out of him and arranged a reconciliation which 
was made possible by putting the son’s fault 
into perspective. Soon afterwards the son mar- 
ried with his father’s agreement, and nine 
months later a child—the first of many—was 
born of this union. 
‘Here the patient’s relationship to the cause 
In Burkina Faso, cowrie 
shells help a healer to 
diagnose the causes of an 
illness. 
    
       
  
of his problem is easy to spot behind the trivial 
and treatable symptom. It was only by talking 
it out that the healer managed to reconstitute 
the symbolic course of events that led to the 
disaster—a procedure very close to psycho- 
analysis. A psychoanalyst i is not someone who 
knows what is subconsciously brewing bchind 
a symptom; he is someone who through his 
ignorance allows a patient to elucidate what is 
wrong. 
THE SYMBOLISM 
OF PAYMENT 
Now let us consider the nature of analytical 
treatment. In Europe it is generally considered 
that analysis 1s for those who can afford to pay 
for it. Freud himself always emphasized that 
treatment through talking could not begin to 
work until some form of payment had been 
made. Payment serves a twofold purpose. It 
reflects the individual nature of the service 
asked of the analyst, not so much because he 1s 
treating the patient—which is after all his 
job—as because the treatment requires him to 
put aside his subjective self and subordinate it 
to a desire for knowledge which will enable 
the patient to cure himself. Thus in a pyscho- 
   
  
       
  
TT — i 
’ £ 4 
i ' te 
- 
5    
      
a art 
r -— 
a 
   
£ 
i 
analytical relationship the payment is the price 
paid to the analyst for sacrificing—though not 
forgetting—his subjectivity. Secondly the pay- 
ment has a loss function. Money paid out 1s 
money lost, and in an analytical treatment this 
means forfeiting the pathological comfort that 
may be associated with certain symptoms. 
In Africa economic problems are always 
invoked in order to argue that people with 
nothing obviously cannot be expected to pay. 
This is to overlook the symbolic dimension of 
payment, which Freud again emphasized when 
he urged his pupils to open psychoanalysis to 
all classes of society. After all, there are plenty 
of other ways of paying apart from money, 
such as paying with one’s time, through ser- 
vices rendered. Freud used to ask his patients 31

## [Page 32](093670engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

32 
A healer and his patients in 
Dakar (Senegal). 
—_— 
      
EEE 
add Wi 
to do a variety of things, such as bibliograph- 
ical research, for him. This was taken into 


### 93664: Africa: the healer's art

account when it came to paying for treatment. 
Traditional practitioners in Africa also 
believe that patients should pay, and that some 
part of their goods (and of the morbid comfort 
linked to their symptoms) should be lost. In 
some African countries psychoanalysis seems 
to have become acclimatized quite naturally, as 
regards both recognition of the patient’s indi- 
viduality and also the need to get payment 
from him or her. 
On the other hand a psychoanalyst has no 
chance of operating in Africa, of following a 
patient step by step in his or her search for the 
truth, unless he is thoroughly conversant with 
the local culture—not from reading textbooks 
of ethnology but directly, as a result of being 
steeped in the cultural environment. Hence it 
seems essential to train therapists who can be at 
home on the interface between two forms of 
knowledge: knowledge of the unconscious 
mind, which evolves a new theory about each 
patient’s relationship with the world, and 
knowledge of the individual’s relationships with 
his or her parents and family, society, the neigh- 
bourhood and the deity—relationships which - 
vary according to ethnic group, culture and 
period. 
Though the mechanisms people use in 
order to come to terms with reality are the 
same everywhere, they may be expressed in 
    
w
o
 
F
i
 
A
 
§ 
dad 
h
a
l
 
apd
 
, 
" 
. 
¥ 
- 
J
d
 
Th
e 
SEEL 
ii ficii (R91 
totally different ways. Superficially there is 
nothing in common between the way in which 
a European family organizes its mourning 
after the death of a child and the way in which 
African parents who have lost several children 
contrive to protect an unborn infant from the 
awful sequence of continual journeys back and 
forth across the river of life. Ignorance of all 
these mechanisms lays a European psychoana- 
lyst open to mistaken interpretations; and this 
is a pitfall into which many technical assistance 
psychiatrists have fallen. After reading a few 
books and meeting a few people, they have 
thought they understood how their patients’ 
minds worked. They might, for example, have 
regarded a liver complaint in 2 Hausa man as a 
trivial hypochondriac symptom, whereas in 
fact it represented a fundamental assault on the 
seat of his courage and virility. 
AFRICAN WISDOM 
The important thing in Africa is to relate psy- 
choanalysis to all aspects of the culture, to all 
the accumulated wisdom of an area not yet 
overtaken by acculturation, where people still 
understand what the basis of their life is and 
which family and cultural landmarks they can 
hold on to. This interface between two types of 
knowledge should produce an approach to psy- 
chology consistent with the African idea of 
taking responsibility, and also with an analytical 
ethos which presupposes that the patient is a 
T— 8 
- ’ 
: 
a 
wis
 
l
—
—
 
—
—
 —-
 
    

## [Page 33](093670engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 93664: Africa: the healer's art

| 
ANNE-MARIE KAUFMANT 
is a French psychiatrist and 
psychoanalyst. She is a co- 
founder of a research group 
concerned with the 
application of 
psychoanalysis to psychiatry 
in French-speaking Africa, 
where she has contributed 
to films about traditional 
mental health care. In Dakar, 
Cotonou and Paris she 
directs seminars on 
concepts of psychoanalysis 
and the function of speech 
in African cultures. 
responsible being. This would enable Africans, 
like our European patients (and those of us 
psychoanalysts who have ourselves trodden 
that road) to have access to an understanding 
which is enhanced by taking account both of 
Africans’ culture and of their individuality. 
European psychiatry seems to me to have 
failed by attempting to make generalizations 
about mental disorders and to use them as 
guidelines for explaining the African mind. 
After listening to it with ironical patience, 
Africans have retained their profound beliefs 
" 
"
N
a
 
“
*
:
 
r 
_
-
w
 
“f
e 
5)
 n
d
 
i 
3 
J 
nd 
intact, convinced that the way in which people 
experience the power of speech is chosen by 
them and enables them to react to their envi- 
ronment in the way that is most tolerable for 
them. Psychoanalysis in Europe has been and 
always will be subversive because it puts the 
patient before the sacrosanct interests of 
society. But in Africa we have a continent in 
which this subversion is skilfully moulded to fit 
in with a wise and ancient culture, which still 
believes that technological civilization has no 
chance of crushing the individual. | 
  
A sacred baobab tree in 
Senegal. 
33

## [Page 34](093670engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 93665: The Talking cure

34 
The talking cure 
by Chawki Azouri 
|] 
CHAWKI AZOURI 
is a Lebanese 
psychoanalyst. He is a 
member of the Centre de 
Formation et de Recherche 
Psychanalytiques in Paris 
where, since the Centre's 
foundation in 1982, he has 
directed a research seminar 
on paranoia, institutions and 
the transmission of 
psychoanalysis. He teaches 
at the faculty of medicine at 
Créteil (France) and is the 
author of J'ai réussi ia ot le 
paranoiaque a échoué 
(Denoél, Paris, 1991) and La 
Psychanalyse (Flash 
Marabout, Paris, 1992). 
  
  
I sent my soul through the Invisible, 
Some letter of that After-life to spell: 
And by and by my Soul return’d to me, 
And answered ‘I myself am Heav’n and Hell" 
The Rubdiyit of Omar Khayyam, LXVI 
(translation: Edward Fitzgerald)   
specialist under whom I was working as a 
psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, asked me 
to help him by interpreting for a Libyan patient 
of his whose left arm and leg were paralysed. 
The patient had left Libya more than a year 
earlier and had been shunted from one hospital 
to another all over Europe. He had undergone 
the most searching examinations, all of which 
had ruled out any possible organic causes for 
his illness. He was eventually diagnosed as suf- 
fering from hysteria and was sent to Paris for 
hypnosis treatment. 
The patient, who was twenty-eight years of 
age and spoke virtually nothing but Arabic, was 
delighted at being able to talk in his mother 
tongue to a therapist who understood it. With 
his few words of English, he had managed to 
start conversing with Dr. C., who had already 
given him one hypnosis session before we met. 
I had three long conversations with him, during 
which he told me his story. On the day after his 
second hypnosis session, the patient was 
extremely agitated and told us that he had 
woken up during the night in great pain: he had 
felt acute cramp his left big toe and had been 
able to move his foot for the first time in a year. 
The young man gradually recovered the 
use of his left foot, which had lost 50 per cent 
of its muscle volume. At the end of two weeks, 
he was walking with the aid of a stick. In the 
meantime, Dr. C. continued his hypnosis ses- 
sions and I continued to have conversations 
with the patient. Two months after he had 
arrived in Paris, the patient was cured and 
returned to his own country, where he was ini- 
tially welcomed like somebody who had been 
saved by a miracle. 
S OME years ago, Dr. C,, a Parisian hypnosis 
A FATHER'S CURSE 
It 1s worth going deeper into the story of this 
young man and his social and cultural back- 
ground. Before he fell ill, he had had two 
major conflicts with his father, one over his 
own marriage and the other over the marriage 
of his sister. 
In a bid to oblige him to marry 2 cousin 
against his will, the patient’s father had secretly 
given him a love potion that would also make 
him obey his father’s wishes. Under the effects 
of this magic draught, the young man went 
through the marriage ceremony in a trance- 
like state. “I was happy,” he said, “but it was as 
if someone else was getting married.” As soon 
as the effects of the potion wore off, he sepa- 
rated from his wife, but the same stratagem 
was again used to force him to go back to her. 
The father kept on interfering in order to make 
sure that he stayed with his wife. In the end, 
the father uttered a threat whose unconscious 
impact on the son he failed to realize. What he 
said was: “If you leave your wife again, I shall 
leave your mother.” | 
The father had wanted the patient's sister to 
marry his nephew, the brother of the patient’s 
wife. The conflict had then taken a dramatic 
turn. The sister had been mercilessly thrashed 
in front of the whole village and had thrown 
herself out of a window. The patient had tried 
to come between her and their father who, on 
seeing his authority challenged, had cried: “She 
is not your daughter. Get out! You are no 
longer my son.” 
In revenge, the rejected suitor, who was 
both the patient’s cousin and his brother-in- 
law, took away the patient’s wife and four chil- 
dren. The patient’s in-laws took him to court 
and accused him of having driven his wife and 
children from the family home. The case 
dragged on for some eighteen months, during 
which time scarcely any heed was paid to the 
patient’s word and good faith. He was sen- 
tenced to pay over two-thirds of his earnings 
to his former wife, just when he was about to 
undergo surgery on an artificial plate that had 
been placed 1n his collar-bone two years earlier 
following a car accident. 
When he came round from the anaesthetic, 
the poor man was paralysed down one side. 
The doctors’ opinion was that this was due to 
a lesion in the nervous system of the brachial 
plexus. Since there were no suitable facilities 
available in Libya, he was sent to Europe for 
treatment at the state’s expense. 
THE POWER OF MEDICINE 
This story is particularly interesting on 
account of the extraordinary combination of 
personal and cultural factors at work. Together 
they conferred on the patient’s symptoms 2 
fascination that even the celebrated Professor 
Charcot would have acknowledged, in a con- 
text where psychoanalysis does not exist and 
where hysteria is branded as malingering. 
The failure of leading specialists to cure the 
patient strengthened his conviction that the doc- - 
tors did not understand him. He was therefore 
on the lookout for a magic solution or the inter- 
vention of an all-powerful figure. His meeting 
with Dr. C. was accordingly preordained: the 
hypnosis treatment reminded him of the spell- 
like practices to which he had been subjected by 
his father. The patient saw a parallel between the 
hypnotic trance and the effects of the potion, 
and even the effects of the anaesthetic after 
which he had become partly paralysed.

## [Page 35](093670engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

      
    
     
    
   
    
     
  
| 
i { #1 / 
a 
As a result of being listened to, he was able 
to shed light on the relationship which he had 
established with his symptom. He remembered 
that the day after his sister had been beaten and 
gagged by their father and he had released her 
against the patriarch’s wishes, he woke up with 
bruises on his wrist and ankles, at the same 
places where the bonds had left marks on his 


### 93665: The Talking cure

sister’s body. Simply talking about this to some- 
body who realized its symbolic importance 
made it possible for him to recognize that the 
marks represented his participation in, and 
identification with, his sister’s suffering. 
Similarly, emphasizing the importance of 
the words spoken by his father—"She is not 
your daughter. . . . You are no longer my son. . 
.. If you leave your wife again, I shall leave 
your mother” —prompted him, without any 
interpretation from me, to establish a relation- 
ship between them and the disappearance of 
sexual desire after he had become paralysed. 
Those words awoke in him the horror of 
incest which he had repressed until then. He 
took his father’s words “She is not your 
daughter” to mean that it was not he, the son, 
who had conceived her with the mother, while 
“You are no longer my son” meant “I release 
you from the taboo of incest of which I, your 
father, was the guarantor and by threatening to 
leave your mother I make possible.” 
 
    
  
    
i 
[ in 
fl A Ml 0 
| 
ki IH ( 
IG) hit all 
J 
J 
| 
I | | ’ i | ; 
fi Hl 
As soon as the court declared that he was 
divorced, his father’s threats took on an 
(Edipal significance and the patient woke up 
from the anaesthetic suffering from a hyster- 
ical hemiplegia and a loss of all sexual desire. 
Hence listening to the patient was instru- 
mental in bringing out a subject which had 
hitherto only been expressed through massive 
and serious symptoms. During our last con- 
versations, he said to me: “Nobody has ever 
listened to me as you have done. When I get 
back home, I should like to change jobs and 
learn to do yours.” 
However, when he did go home, he was 
again faced with the incomprehension of the 
medical profession which, recalling the diag- 
nosis of hysteria made by the European spe- 
cialists before he was sent to Paris, looked 
upon him as a malingerer, a good-for-nothing 
and a coward who did not want to work. He 
was even ordered to repay the costs incurred 
as a result of his “so-called” illness. 
He was compelled to start working again 
when he had barely recovered. He developed 
other symptoms, and had to be operated on 
again. In a manner of speaking, he had to 
undergo further physical ordeals against his 
own will in order to prove his good faith and 
the legitimacy of his suffering. 
   fl} / / ! Fi 
i 1") ) I ff / f f / / | \ 
me (Af i ART 
) / h \& \ 
Al 
| f | 
il 
| 
A hysterical fit as depicted 
in a late-19th-century 
medical engraving. 
A 
li I 
00 35

## [Page 36](093670engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 93666: Russia: the revenge of subjectivity

Russia: the revenge of subjectivity 
by Aleksandr Mikhalevich 
SYCHOANALYTICAL literature was circulated 
in Czarist Russia from 1907 onwards by 
Russian doctors who had been trained in 
Switzerland, Germany or Austria and had then 
gone on to practise analysis in their own country. 
These followers of modified forms of Freudianism 
strongly opposed the view that the causes of 
. mental illness are constitutional, and were hostile 
to the pessimistic and lazy attitude which led to 
confining its victims in asylums. From their expe- 
rience as practitioners in local communities, they 
came to believe that there was little point in 
working on dreams, associations of ideas and 
sexual and infantile phantasms in an autocratic 
society that did not allow its subjects any 
autonomy. Nevertheless, the Czarist censors did 
nothing to prevent the publication of the review 
Psikhoterapiya, the formation of a medical circle 
whose meetings were known as the “little 
Fridays”, or the translation of the works of Freud 
and his disciples. 
The Russtan Freudians, who were comfortably 
established in their country’s scientific and pro- 
fessional institutions, were reluctant to relate indi- 
viduals to their psycho-sexual background, to the 
effects of childhood traumas, or to the conflict trig- 
gered off by the remoteness and coincidence of 
past and present in their experience. They turned 
instead to psychotherapeutic techniques con- 
sisting of a mixture of psychoanalysis (to shed 
light on the meaning of the symptoms), and of sug- 
gestion (to reeducate patients and help them to 
readapt). 
The influence of the “nervism” school formed 
by I. M. Scchenov and later developed by IL. I 
Pavlov and V. M. Bekhterev prompted the Russian 
Freudians to look for a physiological basis for the 
psychological mechanisms and processes described 
by psychoanalysis. This reductionist approach 
tended to make them somewhat distrustful of 
introspection, to raise the brain reflex to the status 
of a key concept in scientific psychology and to 
play down the insights of mentally disturbed 
people into their own condition. 
However, this voluntarist view of the indi- 
vidual as a programmed entity was qualified by 
clinical practitioners such as Drs. Drosneés, 
Ossipov, Vyrubov and Pevnitzky, who acknowl- 
edged the validity of Freud’s discoveries con- 
cerning the sexual causes of neuroses. This was 
tantamount to discovering that the individual 
had a “psychic reality” which was shaped by the 
pleasure principle and was impervious to the 
36 illusions of voluntarist teaching. At the same 

## [Page 37](093670engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 93666: Russia: the revenge of subjectivity

A factory workshop 
(1930). Detail from a work 
by the Russian painter 
V. Rozhdestvensky. 
  
time, Freud’s disciples applied psychoanalysis 
to literature and political events, and rediscovered, 
in the wake of Dostoyevsky and Tolstoy, the 
pathological motivations underlying certain forms 
of terrorist and revolutionary action. 
THE BOLSHEVIK-STALINIST PHASE 
The new regime that emerged from the October 
revolution tolerated the existence of a Soviet 
Association of Psychoanalysis (1922-1931) and 
a Governmental Institute of Psychoanalysis 
(1922-1925). Intellectuals living in the big cities 
and Communist youth organizations realized 
that Freud could become a useful adjunct to 
Marx and could justify the sexual freedom 
favoured by Lenin ina bid to break down the tra- 
ditional hidebound bourgeois family. Trotsky 
regarded the works of Freud and Adler as tools 
that could be used to create a new kind of human 
being and to provide decisive arguments against 
the theses of idealism. Medical doctors who were 
advocates of psychoanalysis, such as A. Zalkind, 
set out to construct anew form of teaching prac- 
tice based on the concept of sublimation: since 
human beings possess a single form of bio-psy- 
chic energy, it should be managed in such a way 
as to derive the maximum benefit from eroti- 
cism for collective purposes, and also perhaps 
to bring about the end of “sexual imprisonment”. 
Although it did not share these extraordinary 
views, the Soviet Association of Psychoanalysis, 
a club of university teachers and middle-ranking 
Communist Party officials favourable to 
Freudianism, worked on possible ways and means 
of taking prophylactic sociological action. The 
educationalist Vera Schmidt founded the 
“International Solidarity” hostel in Moscow in 
1922 to experiment with an original approach to 
the education of the two- to five-year-old children 
in her charge. The systematic and collective 
analysis of the counter-transference of educa- 
tionalists on children went hand-in-hand with 
the use of teaching methods designed to encourage 
the development of a sense of reality, cleanliness 
and personal autonomy, and endeavoured to min- 
imize the repression of the children’s sexual drive 
and the guilt feelings it aroused. However, this 
non-authoritarian exercise in education was dis- 
continued in 1925. Moreover, after the political 
eclipse of Trotsky and the end of the New 
Economic Policy (N.E.R), blind faith was placed 
in state planning as a means of consolidating and 
“curing” the human personality. 
Even before the Soviet psychoanalytical move- 
ment was banned by Stalin, it was already falling 
apart. Psychoanalysis was condemned as being too 
long and expensive a process and as imprisoning 
patients within themselves. In the early 1930s the 
rejection of all forms of psychotherapy heralded 
this development, which stifled individual aspi- 
rations in the name of industrial efficiency. 
Naturally, references to infantile sexuality and to 
phantasms were especially forbidden, since the 
psychology of the self had been put to death. 
In spite of the reign of terror, researchers made 
a case for recognizing the specific character of 
Ivan Pavlov, 
the great Russian 
physiologist, in 
1926. 
Vladimir Bekhterev 
(1857-1927), 
Russian 
psychiatrist and 
psychologist. 
The neurologist 
F. Bassin, who 
encouraged a 
revival of 
psychology in the 
Soviet Union in the 
1960s. 
certain individual psychological processes and 
the existence of an unconscious mind. Novelists 
such as Yevgeny Zamyatin in We and Yury 
Karlovich Olesha in Envy were outspoken enough 
to claim that the Revolution had given birth to a 
gulag-like soup kitchen, into which the irruption 
of sexuality would perhaps thwart the then current 
process of robotization. 
Freudianism was forced underground. It was 
later to serve as a model for the revenge taken by 
the individual after the Stalinist era. 
THE POST-STALIN THAW 
In 1958, during the Khrushchev thaw, the neu- 
rologist F. Bassin tried to encourage a revival of 
Soviet psychology and to bring discussions on the 
 
317

## [Page 38](093670engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

38 
Ra ——— 
El 
— 
=a 
WEEN ea 
i u TR pr 
I 
fri 
   
  
   
ERE IE EE —— wr — TT rrr Ep — TR —— TE—— 
3 —— 
pl 
“Identification with the 
Supreme Guide crushed the 
family father figure.” A giant 
portrait of Lenin on the 
facade of a Moscow 
apartment block (1988). 
[pu——— 
 
a 
Se ses 
—— 
wd da 
- —_—_—_——— 
 
  
  
A Fal 3 
unconscious into line with current thinking. A 
conference held in Moscow 1n 1962 gave official 
status to this attempt to rediscover the subjective 
by means of a less ideologically-oriented critique 
of psychoanalysis. 
During the cyclical phases of freeze and thaw 
which marked the evolution of Soviet society 
stgnificant advances were being made in urban 
growth, the development of higher education, 
the relative accessibility of information, and 
exchanges with the West. In 1968, a paper by 
Bassin on the Problem of the Unconscious 
attempted, with a measure of official support, 
to impose a theory of personality which took 
account of unconscious processes and defence 
mechanisms such as projection, rationalization, 
sublimation and repression. However, the new 
individual forged by Soviet psychology was a 
subject that was fully developed, balanced and 
capable of modifying his or her behaviour in 
order to adapt to the demands of reality. Persistent 
psychological conflicts, neuroses, and the ravages 
caused by desire were only marginal occurrences 
typifying a (pathological) minority of the popu- 
lation. This conception of the individual, which 
minimized the roles of sexuality and conflict, 
was upheld unul 1969, when a Congress on the 
problem of the unconscious was held in Tbilisi. 
From the 1970s onwards, the Soviet social sci- 


### 93666: Russia: the revenge of subjectivity

ences stressed the fact that the qualitative devel- 
opment of the economy and adaptation to the 
third industrial revolution that was then begin- 
ning to take shape called for a relatively heteroge- 
neous pattern of society and a degree of individual 
autonomy. This represented the revenge of the 
personality against the mechanical reductionism 
which had regarded individuals as strictly social and 
= ~~ _—— - 
- hm———— A LnSEC LA | 
    
   
 
biological entities. Under cover of social psy- 
chology and of the scientific study of collective 
_ interactions, the dominant value became one of 
restricted pluralism. 
PSYCHOANALYSIS UNDER PERESTROIKA 
From 1985 onwards, a number of Soviet scholars 
called for the rehabilitation of psychoanalysis, the 
creation of a scientific séxology, and the publi- 
cation of the works of Freud. The unofficial prac- 
tice of psychoanalysis, which until then had only 
been tolerated, crept back in again through the co- 
operative system. In 1989, the psychiatrist and 
endocrinologist Aron Belkin re-established the 
Russian Association of Psychoanalysis in 
Moscow. Some ten years before, Belkin had pub- 
lished a work entitled “The Individual and 
Socialization”, in which he denounced the harm 
done by the totalitarian system under Stalin. In 
particular, he stressed that idenufication with the 
Supreme Guide had crushed the family father 
figure, forced the individual to regard as diabol- 
ical any alternative that was rejected by an 
authority vested with quasi-sacred power, and 
eventually caused the death of thought and the 
blunting of all moral sense. Brief outbursts of 
aggression had provided the only outlet for the- 
desire for freedom. In “The Soviet (Edipus” 
(1983), the literary critic E. Kogan attacked what 
he called “the obsessive identification with the 
father who had disappeared, the feeling of shame 
towards the father who had been deported or 
elimmated as an enemy of the people, and the soli- 
tude and wanderings of the son”. 
Novelists such as Voinovich and Zinoviev 
have described people of this kind as products of 
the kickback generation, a world which saw the

## [Page 39](093670engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

triumph of servility and selfishness, envy and 
resentment. Trainee analysts constantly encounter 
patients who demand a quick cure, stubbornly 
refuse to accept their personal autonomy and 
cannot grasp the liberating value of making pay- 
ment in exchange for the sessions they received. 
This painful emergence of the individual, in 
parallel with the restoration of psychology and 
syncretic forms of psychoanalysis, is taking place 
against a background of social pathology 
involving alcoholism, an alarming rate of child 
LL ______ ] 
ALEKSANDR MIKHALEVICH, 
a doctor in psychoanalysis, 
has published many articles 
oh the history of 
Freudianism in Russo-Soviet 
culture, notably in the 
journal of the International 
Psychoanalytical 
Association. He contributed 
to La Psychanalyse en Union 
Soviétique, a study on 
psychoanalysis in the Soviet 
Union (L'Harmattan, Pans, 
1992). 
mortality and flagrant criminal activity. Brutal 
attempts to introduce economic reform are 
making life difficult for the artistic and scientific 


### 93666: Russia: the revenge of subjectivity

intelligentsia which paved the way for the revenge 
of subjectivity on the totalitarian model. 
One thing is certain. This ambiguous process 
of social and cultural differentiation has certainly 
been encouraged by the distant memory of 
Russian Freudianism and the curiosity that psy- 
choanalysis inspires today in a highly educated 
society. [| 
“This painful emergence of 
the individual. . .”, long 
stifled by totalitarianism. 

## [Page 40](093670engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 93667: Psychoanalysis in Quebec

40 
HE problem of identity runs through the 
history of Quebec from the earliest colonial 
times up to the present day, when one of the 
main issues involved in the integration of Quebec 
into the Canadian constitution is the recogni- 
tion of its status as a distinctive society. How 
was Quebec’s identity forged, and how can psy- 
choanalysis contribute to an understanding of 
its unique history and play its role in the emer- 
gence of the individual? 
CATHOLIC AND FRENCH 
In the seventeenth century the first colonists of 
this French outpost whose mission was to spread 
civilization and the Gospel were themselves for 
  PRE Ta RY 20 INA 
Psychoanalysis in Quebec 
by Monique Panaccio 
the most part poor and ignorant. They had to sur- 
vive as best they could in an apparently bound- 
less land plunged in interminable winter. France’s 
hopes of its colony on the banks of the St. 
Lawrence were soon disappointed. There was 
no gold and there were no diamonds. All that was. 
left was morality. The Catholic congregations 
that then proliferated in Europe founded com- 
munities in New France, where they could pursue 
their mission in complete freedom. 
Over the ensuing centuries, Quebec was, for 
better or for worse, to remain Catholic and 
French. Conquest by the English in 1760; the 
failure of the republican uprising of 1837, which 
saw the increasingly influential French-Canadian

## [Page 41](093670engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
The deportation of the 
Acadians by the English in 
1755 as depicted in an 
unsigned painting from 
Louisiana (USA) 
| 
MONIQUE PANACCIO, 
Canadian psychologist and 
psychoanalyst, is a lecturer 
in the department of 
psychology at the University 
of Quebec (Montreal). She is 
co-founder of Cirque 
psychanalytique, a 
psychoanalytical study and 
training workshop. The 
author of several articles on 
madness, clinics and 
institutions, she contributed 
to The Montreal Massacre 
(Gynergy Books, 1991) and 
La folie comme de raison 
(VLB, 1984). She is also the 
author of a fictional work, 
Sous le signe du monstre 
(VLB, 1991). 
clergy make common cause with the English to 
protect their divinely-sanctioned powers; even the 
union of Upper and Lower Canada in a single 
province whose official language was English— 
all of these failed to put an end to French culture 
in America. 
Until the Quiet Revolution of the 1960s, 
political and economic power was in the hands of 
English-speakers, while French-speakers domi- 
nated social and religious life. The Church estab- 
lished a monopoly over moral suffering. The 
religious communities took care of the mentally 
ill, and as private corporations received in return 
a daily per-capita sum from the state. It was thus 
in the Church’s interest to maximize the number 
of inmates and economize on their care. Vast 
asylums were constructed, self-contained com- 
munities that had the legal status of municipali- 
ties and Catholic parishes. It was in this field 
that a conflict of values took place between 
French-speaking Catholics and English-speaking 
Protestants. The former had a privileged status in 
charitable work through their hold over health- 
care institutions; the latter pressed their claims in 
the name of progress. In education, two parallel 
systems were also set up. 
In the mid-nineteenth century, when Freud’s 


### 93667: Psychoanalysis in Quebec

birth in the Moravian town of Freiberg fore- 
shadowed a fundamental break in the continuum 
of human thought, Quebec’s French-spcakers 
were developing a national mystique under the eye 
of the Catholic Church, which saw itself as the 
guarantor of its people’s survival. 
Inthe 1930s and 1940s, the clerical elite based 
its temporal power on anti-semitism, anti- 
Bolshevism and xenophobia. The religious com- 
munities joined forces with the state to promote 
traditional rural values in face of industrialization, 
urbanization and social change. Yet it was from 
within their ranks that the “plague”, as Freud 
himself once described psychoanalysis, began to 
spread. The first journal to address the subject was 
La Revue Dominicaine (“The Dominican 
Review”), when it published extracts from a doc- 
toral thesis on The Bases of Frendianism. It was 
the Dominicans too who in 1942 founded the 
Institute of Psychology at the University of 
Montreal, which included in its syllabus “the 
psychological system of Freud”. 
The religious establishment of the time saw in 
psychoanalysis a new argument in favour of its 
cause. If Freudianism teaches that human beings 
are ruled by impulses that are beyond them, then 
this is all the more reason why they should turn to 
A pen-and-ink sketch   
 
 First Convent of 
the Ursuline ANuny, 
butft in 1641-42 
on the vite which 
they still occupy In the City of 
~y Vv 
From an ofd vaintin 
dating from 1859 
shows the first 
convent of Ursuline 
nuns in Quebec, built 
in 1641-42. 
s : RY Quebec, In the 
foreground ir the houve of Mme. de la Peltrie. 
which Jhow's the Forest then 
Jurrounding the building, 
v v/ 41

## [Page 42](093670engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 93667: Psychoanalysis in Quebec

God. But a new generation was coming to the 
fore in Quebec, one whose members were no 
longer prepared to put up with economic stagna- 
tion, with the introversion and the sense of shame 
they had inherited from their forebears, with 
their situation as a submissive colonized people. 
TROUBLED TIMES 
AND TROUBLED MINDS 
The Quiet Revolution of the 1960s transformed 
Quebec almost overnight. In less than a decade 
the state’s role was enlarged, a clergy-dominated 
society began to turn away from agriculture, 
new institutions appeared, and education and 
social welfare became priority issues. The reli- 
glous communities could no longer meet the 
new requirements of an industrializing society. 
The welfare state was born, bringing with it free 
social services, education and medicine. This was 
also the golden age of psychiatry in Quebec. The 
health service was rebuilt on fresh ideological 
foundations. The suffering were no longer 
entrusted to charitable institutions; they became 
patients in need of care and rehabilitation. 
The effects of the challenge to the old values 
were spectacular. Traditional morality was shat- 
tered, people deserted the churches, marriage went 
out of fashion and demands for a national identity 
went hand in hand with calls for sexual freedom. 
Low self-esteem was replaced by unrealistically 
high self-regard. French Canadians no longer saw 
themselves either as Canadians—a name which 
tended to be associated instead with their English- 
speaking conquerors—nor as French, a word 
recalling colonial links to the motherland. Instead 
they became Québécois, people of Quebec, and 
promoted joual, the Quebec dialect, as their own 
language. Quebec welcomed immigrants and 
opened itself to the world. The time was ripe for 
artistic and literary creativity and for new ideas of 
every kind. Relations with France, which had 
- 
“ay 
| I 
Posters from the 1992 
constitutional referendum 
campaign. 
  
  
  
  
r
n
 
R
E
E
T
 
h
r
s
 
     
grown somewhat chilly because of the French lay 
tradition, now became warmer. Young Québécois 
went to France to study and returned home to start 
work. The group known as Interprétation, and the 
humanities journal of the same name, had their 
origin in this collaboration between France and 
Quebec. 
Many people were disturbed by the rapid 
pace of social change. In the 1970s and 1980s 
they were normally offered free, medicine-based 
psychiatric treatment. Psychoanalysis was not 
unknown in the hospitals, but less and less use 
was made of it, until it was finally confined to the 
private sector and marginalized. It would not be 
   
accurate to say that psychoanalysis was pushed . 
out of the great debates of the day, for that would 
imply a degree of recognition it had never in fact 
enjoyed. Little was heard of it except for occa- 
sional articles in journals like Interprétation 
(which folded after twenty-four issues had been 
published). Frangoise Dolto sometimes made 
the cover of popular magazines, but that was 
imported news. Even the universities, which had 
shown a new openness in the 1970s, came increas-

## [Page 43](093670engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 93667: Psychoanalysis in Quebec

  
    
  
    
ingly to follow the American model and empha- 
size experimental research. 
THE PSYCHOANALYTICAL APPROACH 
Psychoanalysis remains marginal to the great ques- 
tions of the day because its concerns transcend cur- 
rent nationalist viewpoints: the approach of those 
who seck “an immense bilingual nation stretching 
from occan to ocean” and are concerned about the 
fragmentation of Canada; the views of those sup- 
porters of the sovereignty of Quebec who dream 
of a “people of giants” enjoying cultural and eco- 
nomic autonomy in a free, pluralistic society; and 
the attitude of the Amerindians who seek self- 
government. 
The psychoanalytical approach, whose func- 
tion 1s to unveil the unconscious forces at work 
in the mind of the individual undergoing analysis, 
is disconcerting for the nationalistic mindset. Yet 
it 1s only by seeing themselves as a people or a 
nation and then by identifying with this image 
they have made of themselves that Quebec’s 
French-speakers have hitherto been able to ensure 
their cultural survival in a largely English- 
  
 
  
Missionaries and their 
charges in Canada around 
the year 1910. 
  
speaking America. Until that survival is more 
“certain, it is unlikely that psychoanalysis and its 
concerns will emerge from the restricted circles 
to which they are presently confined. 
Quebec’s history has been built on disconti- 
nuity and forgetting, First came the break with the 
continent of Europe, then with France, then with 
England and then with the Catholic tradition—not 
to mention the separation inevitably involved in 
emigration which, now as in the past, is part of the 
experience of much of Quebec’s population. And 
an clement of forgetting inevitably accompanies 
these discontinuities. Car numberplates in Quebec 
bear the motto Je me souviens (“1 remember”), but 
if you ask people exactly what it 1s they are sup- 
posed to be remembering, very few of them know. 
Psychoanalysis could no doubt find a role 
for itsclf in social, legal, educational and health 
institutions by helping people to reclaim their his- 
tory and origins—and, what is more, by offering 
society as a whole a way of thought that would 
allow it to approach politics in a different way, 
without recourse to illusions, and to put discon- 
tinuity behind it. m 43

## [Page 44](093670engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

44 
  
UNESCO IN ACTION 
ee —-- 
ENERGY IN FOUR LANGUAGES 
» The World Energy Council (WEC) has 
published an energy dictionary in four 
languages, with support from Unesco. It 
contains some 2,000 terms related to 
energy, with definitions in English, 
French, German and Spanish. Indexed 
and illustrated with diagrams, the book 
is intended as a reference guide for 
people working in the energy sector as 
well as for translators and interpreters. 
A Portuguese edition is being prepared, 
and versions in other languages are 
also planned. The 656-page dictionary 
is available from the French committee 
of the WEC, 89 Boulevard Haussmann, 
75008 Paris, France 
(Tel: 33-1-40 42 65 26; 
Fax: 33-1-47 42 56 73). 
The price is FF 690, postage included. 
FILMS IN LEIPZIG 
» The Leipzig International 
Documentary and Animation Film 
Festival was held from 27 November to 
2 December 1292, for the first time 
under the patronage of Unesco. On the 
programme were a total of 956 
documentary and animation films and 
videos from 52 countries. The festival 
spotlighted the Year of Columbus, with 
around 40 productions from South and 
North America grouped under the title 
“The Anniversary Refused”. The 
changes in Eastern Europe and in 
Germany since reunification were also 
popular subjects. High-definition TV 
was debated in a round-table 
discussion between supporters and 
detractors of the new technology. 
| 
A REVERBERATING ECHO 
» Unesco has put three of its 
databases on ECHO, the host 
computer of the Commission of the 
European Communities. Located in 
Luxembourg, ECHO was established in 
1980 to provide multilingual 
information on European information 
services. The databases concerned, 
which can be consulted free of charge, 
are UNESBIB, which contains 46,000 
biblicgraphical references to 
documents and publications issued by 
Unesco; DARE, listing 4,650 research 
institutes and information services as 
well as 4,500 periodicals in social 
sciences worldwide; and Index 
Translationum, which contains 
500,000 bibliographical! references to 
translated books in about 60 countries 
in the fields of literature, science, 
social science, art and education. For 
more information contact: ECHO Help 
Desk, BP 2373L, 1023 Luxembourg 
(Tel: 35-2-34981-200; Fax: 35-2- 
34981-234); or Unesco, DIT/CH, 7 
Place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP 
(Tel: 33-1-45 68 23 00; 
Fax: 33-1-45 67 39 98). 
TECHNOLOGY AND COPYRIGHT 
» Technology is developing so quickly 
that creators are having a harder and 
harder time protecting their rights, 
according to speakers at a three-day 
forum organized by Unesco late last 
year to coincide with the 40th 
anniversary of UNesco's Universal 
Copyright Convention. Digital copying 
and musical sampling aroused 
particularly heated discussion. 
Sampling is a process whereby 
extracts of music, sometimes broken 
down to single notes, are electronically 
memorized and reassembled to create 
new works. Until now musical copyright 
has covered melodies, or sequences of 
notes, but not single notes. In another 
field, electronic publishing, it will soon 
be possible to consult not just printed 
text but also extracts from films or 
musical works on compact disc. The 
forum adopted a declaration inviting 
Unesco to follow closely developments 
in electronic publishing, multimedia 
publishing and sampling, and “to 
reinforce its action to enccurage the 
international protection of copyright”. 
MEMBRANES: A NEW SCIENCE 
» A Unesco Centre for Membrane 
Science and Technology is to be set up 
in Australia under the auspices of the 
Special Research Centre for Membrane 
Science and Technology of the 
University of New South Wales. As 
barriers controlling the flow of 
substances to and from cells, 
membranes are essential to the 
biological processes of all living 
organisms. Synthetic membranes play 
an important role in many industrial 
and biomedical processes, from water 
desalinization to dialysis in artificial 
kidneys. The market for membranes is 
growing rapidly, and it is vital to 
facilitate access by developing 
countries to this expanding field. 
ECOLOGY ON THE CURRICULUM 
» The Baltic Sea Project {BSP) was 
created in 1288 on the initiative of the 
Finnish delegation to Unesco to 
establish a network of schools in the 
Baltic region which would provide a 
common envircnmental curriculum, 
Mere than 150 schools are now 
participating in the project, and in view 
of its success, a similar project 
involving the North Sea countries is 
being prepared. Meanwhile, the BSP is 
preparing for publication, with Unesco 
support, a new teachers’ guide to 
environmental education and student 
exchange programmes. It is hoped that 
the guide, prepared by more than 20 
educators in the region, will encourage 
the introduction of ecology into school 
curricula, 
  
COMMENTARY 
Federico 
Mayor 
—— 
This article is one of a 
series in which the 
Director-General of 
UNESCO sets out his 
thinking on matters of 
current concern

## [Page 45](093670engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 93668: War and peace in the minds of men, commentary

  
War and peace 
in the minds of men 
ECENT years have seen the confirmation of a vast 
movement of liberation from totalitarianism, the 
emergence of a broad consensus among the interna- 
tional community regarding the most basic values of our 
societies, and the virtually universal recognition of the prin- 
ciples of democracy and respect for human rights. 
Extraordinary achievements seemed at last within our reach 
and every hope seemed justified. 
Yet even in spite of the undeniable progress made in the 
direction of democracy, it is painfully obvious that world 
poverty has not lessened, that an entire continent is still at 
grips with grinding hardship and political instability and that 
the impressive liberation movement in the former commu- 
nist-bloc countries, although rich in promise, has brought in 
its wake conflicts as numerous as they were unexpected. 
We cannot hide from ourselves the grave threats to the 
world caused by famine and civil war in Africa, the bloody 
fighting in central Asia, the enormous development problems 
confronting Latin America and the Caribbean, the myriad 
obstacles to peace in Cambodia, the murderous war in Bosnia- 
Herzegovina, the damage—possibly irreversible—inflicted on 
the environment and, in the last analysis, the failure of the pur- 
suit of happiness in the most prosperous nations. 
Yet this should not cause us to underestimate the remark- 
able mobilization of effort on the part of the international 
community to resolve all these problems which, it seems to 
me, are without precedent in history. Admittedly, world 
and regional institutions have in some cases proved unable 
through ill-preparedness to deal with the new challenges 
arising at an accelerating rate. However, the debates at recent 
international conferences, such as the United Nations 
Conference on Environment and Development, and the 
increased collaboration of international non-governmental 
Organizations are opening up encouraging prospects. 
Embarked as we are on the path towards a new world 
understanding, we are currently living in a period of transi- 
tion which is inevitably unstable and such as to cast doubts 
both on our readiness and our capacity for action. However, 
the entire international community now feels concerned 
by the tragic situations facing so many countries. Its com- 
mitment is necessarily strong and unambiguous inasmuch as 
a worldwide moral contract seems the essential first step 
towards ensuring that a culture of war—which appeared 
to be on the decline—is gradually transformed into a culture 
of peace, which is already beginning to take shape. We can 
no longer shelter behind the responsibility of the nuclear 
superpowers. We are all responsible and no one can now say 
“I didn’t know” or “It’s not my business”. 
No one can fail to be aware that the international com- 
munity has mobilized its efforts under the flag of the United 
Nations in the case—for example—of Somalia, Cambodia 
and the former Yugoslavia. Yet, significant as they are, those 
efforts can not always prevent massive migrations of 
people—as we are witnessing today—or, looking towards the 
future, provide populations with aid on a scale that would 
favour endogenous development. 
It is my deep conviction that our incapacity to respond ade- 
quately to these dramatic situations constitutes a serious 
threat to the democratic and ethical foundations of our civi- 
lization. For that reason, we must act—and act quickly— 
in order to equip ourselves against having to accept the 
unacceptable. 
For my part, I do not doubt that the determination of 
men and women of goodwill must ultimately prevail and that 
we shall ensure that the basic values we hold dear will finally 
triumph. However difficult our task, we shall never yield to 
discouragement. Our commitments, which are those of our 
Organization, seem more relevant than ever, and we shall 
keep constantly in mind the famous words of UNESCO’s 
Constitution: “Since wars begin in the minds of men, it 
is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be 
constructed”. [ 45

## [Page 46](093670engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### IGNORE

if we ignore the fact that right is founded on 
brute force and even today needs violence 
to maintain it. 
W Life force and death instinct 
I now can comment on another of your state- 
ments. You are amazed that it is so easy to 
infect men with the war-fever, and you sur- 
mise that man has in him an active instinct for 
hatred and destruction, amenable to such 
stimulations. [ entirely agree with you. I 
believe in the existence of this instinct and 
have been recently at pains to study its man- 
ifestations. 
In this connexion may I set out a fragment 
of that knowledge of the instincts, which we 
psychoanalysts, after so many tentative essays 
and gropings in the dark, have compassed? 
We assume that human instincts are of two 
kinds: those that conserve and unify, which 
we call “erotic” (in the meaning Plato gives to 
Eros in his Symposium), or else “sexual” 
(explicitly extending the popular connota- 
tions of “sex”); and, secondly, the instincts to 
4% 
Se OE Di 
destroy and kill, which we assimilate as the 
aggressive or destructive instincts. 
These are, as you perceive, the well-known 
opposites, Love and Hate, transformed into 
theoretical entities; they are, perhaps, another 
aspect of those eternal polarities, attraction 
and repulsion, which fall within your province. 
But we must be chary of passing overhastily to 
the notions of good and evil. Each of these 
instincts is every whit as indispensable as its 
opposite and all the phenomena of life derive 
from their activity, whether they work in con- 
cert or in opposition. 
It seems that an instinct of either category 
can operate but rarely in isolation; it is always 
blended (“alloyed”, as we say) with a cer- 
tain dosage of its opposite, which modifies its 
alm or even, 1n certain circumstances, 1s a 
prime condition of its attainment. Thus the 
instinct of self-preservation is certainly of an 
erotic nature, but to gain its ends this very 
Instinct necessitates aggressive action. In the 
same way the love-instinct, when directed 
to a specific object, calls for an admixture of 
a TT ee Te 


### 93658: A Letter from Freud to Einstein: why war?

"DOCUMENT: A LETTER FROM FREUD TO EINSTEIN (continued rom page 7 
  a a - 
a ————— sr eee ss LL ll Mell ll 
the acquisitive instinct if it is to enter into 
effective possession of that object. It is the dif- 
ficulty of isolating the two kinds of instinct in 
their manifestations that has so long pre- 
vented us from recognizing them. 
If you will travel with me a little further 
on this road, you will find that human affairs 
are complicated in yet another way. Only 
exceptionally does an action follow on the 
stimulus of a single instinct. . .. As a rule 
several motives of similar composition concur 
to bring about the act... .. 
When a nation is summoned to engage in 
war, a whole gamut of human motives may 
respond to this appeal; high and low motives, 
some openly avowed, others slurred over. The 
lust for aggression and destruction is certainly 
included; the innumerable cruelties of history 
and man’s daily life confirm its prevalence and 
strength. The stimulation of these destructive 
impulses by appeals to idealism and the erotic 
instinct naturally facilitates their release. 
Musing on the atrocities recorded on history’s 
page, we feel that the ideal motive has often 
served as a camouflage for the lust of destruc- 
tion; sometimes, as with the cruelties of the 
Inquisition, it seems that, while the ideal 
motives occupied the foreground of con- 
sciousness, they drew their strength from the 
destructive instincts submerged in the uncon- 
scious. Both interpretations are feasible. 
...Twould like to dwell a little longer on 
this destructive instinct which is seldom given 
the attention that its importance warrants. 
With the least of speculative efforts we are led 
to conclude that this instinct functions in 
f
—

## [Page 47](093670engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 93658: A Letter from Freud to Einstein: why war?

every living being, striving to work its ruin 
and reduce life to its primal state of inert 
matter. Indeed it might well be called the 
“death-1nstinct”; whereas the erotic instincts 
vouch for the struggle to live on. The death 
instinct becomes an impulse to destruction 
when, with the aid of certain organs, it directs 
its action outwards, against external objects. 
The living being, that is to say, defends its own 
existence by destroying foreign bodies. 
But, in one of its activities, the death 
instinct is operative within the living being 
and we have sought to trace back a number of 
normal and pathological phenomena to this 
introversion of the destructive instinct. We 
have even committed the heresy of explaining 
the origin of human conscience by some such 
“turning inward” of the aggressive impulse. 
Obviously when this internal tendency oper- 
ates on too large a scale, it is no trivial matter, 
rather a positively morbid state of things; 
whereas the diversion of the destructive 
impulse towards the external world must 
have beneficial effects. Here is then the bio- 
logical justification for all those vile, perni- 
cious propensities which we now are com- 
bating. We can but own that they are really 
more akin to nature than this our stand 
against them, which, in fact, remains to be 
accounted for. . .. 
The upshot of these observations, as 
bearing on the subject in hand, is that there is 
no likelihood of our being able to suppress 
humanity's aggressive tendencies. In some 
happy corners of the earth, they say, where 
nature brings forth abundantly whatever man 
 
desires, there flourish races whose lives go 
gently by, unknowing of aggression or con- 
‘straint. This I can hardly credit; I would like 
further details about these happy folk. ... 
From our “mythology” of the instincts 
we may easily deduce 2 formula for an indirect 
method of eliminating war. If the propensity 
for war be due to the destructive instinct, we 
have always its counter-agent, Eros, to our 
hand. All that produces ties of sentiment 
between man and man must serve us as war’s 
antidote. 
These ties are of two kinds. First, such 
relations as those towards a beloved object, 
void though they be of sexual intent. The 
psychoanalyst need feel no compunction in 
mentioning “love” in this connexion; reli- 
gion uses the same language: Love thy neigh- 
bour as thyself. A pious injunction easy to 
enounce, but hard to carry out! The other 
bond of sentiment is by way of identification. 
All that brings out the significant resem- 
blances between men calls into play this 
feeling of community, identification, whereon 
is founded, in large measure, the whole edi- 
fice of human society. 
In your strictures on the abuse of 
authority I find another suggestion for an 
indirect attack on the war-impulse. That men 
are divided into leaders and the led is but 
another manifestation of their inborn and 
irremediable inequality. The second class 
constitutes the vast majority; they need a 
high command to make decisions for them, to 
which decisions they usually bow without 
demur. In this context we would point out 
.that men should be at greater pains than 
heretofore to form a superior class of inde- 
pendent thinkers, unamenable to intimidation 
and fervent in the quest for truth, whose 
function it would be to guide the masses 
dependent on their lead. There is no need to 
point out how little the rule of politicians 
and the Church’s ban on liberty of thought 
encourage such a new creation. 
The ideal conditions would obviously be 
found in a community where every man sub- 
ordinated his instinctive life to the dictates of 
47

## [Page 48](093670engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

  
reason. Nothing less than this could bring 
about so thorough and so durable a union 
between men, even if this involved the sev- 
erance of mutual ties of sentiment. But surely 
such a hope is utterly utopian, as things are. 
The other indirect methods of preventing 
war are certainly more feasible, but entail no 
quick results. They conjure up an ugly picture 
of mills that grind so slowly that, before the 
flour is ready, men are dead of hunger. 
... But why do we, you and I and many 
another, protest so vehemently against war, 
instead of just accepting it as another of life’s 
odious importunities? For it seems a natural 
thing enough, biologically sound and practi- 
cally unavoidable. I trust you will not be 
shocked by my raising such a question. For 
the better conduct of an inquiry it may be 
well to don a mask of feigned aloofness. 
The answer to my query may run as fol- 
lows: Because every man has a right over his 
own life and war destroys lives that were full 
of promise; it forces the individual into situ- 
ations that shame his manhood, obliging him 
to murder fellow men, against his will; it rav- 
ages material amenities, the fruits of human 
toil, and much besides. Moreover wars, as 
now conducted, afford no scope for acts of 
48 
Freud with his grandson. 
heroism according to the old ideals and, given 
the high perfection of modern arms, war 
today would mean the sheer extermination of 
one of the combatants, if not of both. 
This is so true, so obvious, that we can but 


### 93658: A Letter from Freud to Einstein: why war?

wonder why the conduct of war is not banned 
by general consent. Doubtless either of the 
points I have just made is open to debate. It 
may be asked if the community, in its turn, 
cannot claim a right over the individual lives 
of its members. Moreover, all forms of war 
cannot be indiscriminately condemned; so 
long as there are nations and empires, each 
prepared callously to exterminate its rival, 
all alike must be equipped for war. But we 
will not dwell on any of these problems; they 
lie outside the debate to which you have 
invited me. 
I pass on to another point, the basis, as it 
strikes me, of our common hatred of war. It 
is this: we cannot do otherwise than hate it. 
Pacifists we are, since our organic nature 
wills us thus to be. Hence it comes easy to us 
to find arguments that justify our standpoint. 
This point, however, calls for elucida- 
tion. Here is the way in which I see it. The 
cultural development of mankind (some, I 
know, prefer to call it civilization) has been in 
progress since immemorial antiquity. To this 
phenomenon we owe all that is best in our 
composition, but also much that makes for 
human suffering. Its origins and causes are 
obscure, its issue is uncertain, but some of its 
characteristics are easy to perceive. ... 
The psychic changes which accompany 
this process of cultural change are striking, 
wa
n 
and not to be gatnsaid. They consist in the 
progressive rejection of instinctive ends and 
a scaling down of instinctive reactions. 
Sensations which delighted our forefathers 
have become neutral or unbearable to us; 
and, if our ethical and aesthetic ideals have 
undergone a change, the causes of this are 
ultimately organic. | 
On the psychological side two of the 
most important phenomena of culture are, 
Sistly, a strengthening of the intellect, which 
tends to master our instinctive life, and, sec- 
ondly, an introversion of the aggressive 
impulse, with all its consequent benefits and 
perils. Now war runs most emphatically 
counter to the psychic disposition imposed on 
us by the growth of culture; we are therefore 
bound to resent war, to find it utterly intol- 
erable. With pacifists like us it is not merely 
an intellectual and affective repulsion, but a 
constitutional intolerance, an idiosyncrasy 
in its most drastic form. And it would seem 
that the aesthetic ignominies of warfare play 
almost as large a part in this repugnance as 
war’s atrocities. 
How long have we to wait before the rest 
of men turn pacifist? Impossible to say, and 
yet perhaps our hope that these two factors— 
man’s cultural disposition and a well-founded 
dread of the form that future wars will take— 
may serve to put an end to war in the near 
future, is not chimerical. But by what ways or 
by-ways this will come about, we cannot 
guess. Meanwhile we may rest on the assur- 
ance that whatever makes for cultural devel- 
opment is working also against war.... Hl 
= 
ho

## [Page 49](093670engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### IGNORE

  
RECENT 
RECORDS 
  
TRADITIONAL MUSIC 
IRAQ. Traditional Rhythmic Structures 
Unesco’s Traditional Musics of Today 
series 
Unesco CD D 8044 
Iraq, the cradle of splendid 
ancient civilizations, is 
considered in the Arab world to 
possess a musical tradition of 
great purity. Various maqam, or 
modes, are associated with 
different parts of the country, 
and the singers may be 
accompanied by any of several 
instruments including the 
santour (struck zither), the djoze 
(spike fiddle), tablal: (goblet 
drums) or the rigq (a framed 
hand drum with jingles). The 
rhythmic complexity of some of 
the pieces indicates ancient 
Indo-Asiatic influences, and in 
tracks like the Mukhalif or the 
Fann Khammari, both of which 
feature a male-voice choir 
accompanied by the great drums 
known as far and by rhythmic 
clapping, the strangulated voice 
of the soloist seems to issue from 
the very dawn of time. This is a 
high-quality recording. But what 
a pity that women are excluded 
from this music. 
JAZZ 
THE NAT ADDERLEY SEXTET. 
Work Song. 
Nat Adderley (cornet), Sonny Fortune 
{alto sax), Vincent Herring {alto sax), 
Rob Bargad (piono), Walter Booker 
(bass), Jimmy Cabb (drums) 
(D Sweet Basil ALCR-44 
Nat Adderley, Cannonball 
Adderley’s brother, is one of the 
finest surviving representatives 
of the “hard bop” style 
popularized in the 1950s by 
groups like Art Blakey's Jazz 
Messengers. This compact disc, 
recorded at New York's Sweet 
Basil jazz club, consists of four 
standards, “High Fly", “Ina 
Sentimental Mood”, and Nat 
Adderley’s own “Work Song” and 
“Jive Samba”, all played with 
considerable energy. Alongside 
more established talents like 
Walter Booker and Jimmy Cobb, 
the sextet features Vincent 
Herring, only recently discovered 
while playing in New York's 
streets and subway. His classical 
style contrasts with the freer, 
more powerful playing of Sonny 
Fortune, long a sideman with 
McCoy Tyner. This is solid, 
robust music—one of the many 
currents of mainstream jazz. 
JAY HOGGARD. The Fountain 
Jay Hoggard (vibraphone), Kenny 
Burrell (guitar), James Weidman 
(piano), Marcus Mclaurine (bass), 
Yoron Israel (drums). 
CD Muse MCD 5450 
Jay Hoggard is currently the most 
inventive jazz vibraphonist of his 
generation. Destined fora 
brilliant career, he needs to be 
more widely known. Backed here 
by the great guitarist Kenny 
Burrell and by a group of younger 
instrunientalists including 
pianist James Weidman, who has 
accompanied Abbey Lincoln and 
other singers, Hoggard plays two 
original numbers and several 
standards including 
“Epistrophy”, “My One and Only 
Love”, “Stoinpin’ at the Savoy” 
and a splendid "Prelude to a 
Kiss”. Hoggard is absolute master 
of his instrument; he has 
No! A il 
  
complete control of tone, 
accentuation and phrasing, a 
rich feeling for harmony and a 
highly developed melodic and 
rhythmic sense. He stretches the 
vibraphone’s range to make it 
sound a much less limited 
instrument than it actually is. 
POPULAR MUSIC 
L'ORCHESTRE DE CONTREBASSES. 
les Corgos 
CD Label Bleu LBLC 6536 HM 83 
The Orchestre de Contrebasses, 
made up of seven young French 
bass players (Olivier Moret, 
Christian Gentet, Frédéric 
Alcaraz, Renaud Garcia-Fons, 
Yves Torchinski, Jean-Philippe 
Viret and Thibault Delor), is 
beginning to win an 
international reputation, Several 
American jazz bassists, including 
Anthony Cox, have talked to me 
about it in the past few months. 
There is nothing new about the 
idea of a bass ensemble. In New 
York in the 1970s David Lee, 
father of the film director Spike 
Lee, created the remarkable Bass 
Choir which played jazz only. 
The Orchestre de Contrebasses 
plays original compositions by its 
members—"“Béret, beurre, 
cornichons”, “Week end a 
Deauville”, “A pas de chat”"—that 
are completely sui generis, 
neither jazz, pop nor 
contemporary music. As Lionel 
Rotcage rightly claims in his brief 
cover note, “The music of this 
strange group . . . draws its 
energy from evocation, poetry 
and sheer zaniness". The 
Orchestre de Contrebasses is 
worth discovering, 
ABED AZRIE. Aromates 
CD Elektra Nonesuch 7559-79241-2 
Azrié, a Syrian from Aleppo, finds 
his inspiration in oriental poems 
such as the Epic of Gilgamesh 
which he sings to the 
accompaniment of a synthesizer 
and various traditional Arab 
instruinents, including the 
qanun, nay and drums. The   
lyrics (by the Palestinians Samih 
Al-Qassem and Tawfiq Zayyad, 
the Iraqis Badr Chaker As- 
Sayyab, Al-Hallaj and Rabiah Al- 
Adawiyyah, the Syrian poet 
Adonis, and the Lebanese Khalil 
Hawi and Qunsi Al-Haj) are of 
great beauty, and Azrié's grave 
and mysterious voice puts them 
to intelligent use. My only 
complaint is that the synthesizer 
creates an inappropriate New 
Age atmosphere that slightly 
spoils this otherwise splendid 
world of sound. 
CLASSICAL MUSIC 
RODRIGO AND KHACHATURIAN. 
Flute Concertos 
Patrick Gallois (flute) and the 
Philharmonia Orchestra, conducted by 
lon Marin 
CD Deutsche Grammophon 435 767-2 
The remarkable young flautist 
Patrick Gallois gets a panpipe- 
like sound from his instrument, 
demonstrated here in two 
concertos by 20th-century 
composers, Joaquin Rodrigo 
(born 1901) and Aram 
Khachaturian (1903-78). The 
first, which was composed for 
the Irish flautist James Galway, is 
pastoral in mood and difficult to 
play. The second, more sombre 
and Slavic, was originally written 
in 1940 for the violin of David 
Oistrakh and was subsequently 
adapted by the composer himself 
for the outstanding French 
flautist Jean-Pierre Rainpal. 
Spanish themes remain in the 
background in the Rodrigo 
concerto, which calls for 
considerable virtuosity on the 
part of the soloist. By contrast, 
the Khachaturian piece is 
unrnistakably Russian, 
particularly the Andante, 
inspired by a Caucasian men's 
dance. However different the 
style of the two works may be, 
they share a common Moorish 
influence, since the folklore of 
both Spain and the Caucasus 
bears the trace of Arab music. 
ISABELLE LEYMARIE 49

## [Page 50](093670engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

50 
W ORLD OF B O 0 K § 
  
An atlas of 
world literature 
twould be hard to imagine a more appro- 
| work with which to launch this 
column than Le Grand Atlas des Littéra- 
tures (The Great Atlas of World Literature) 
published in Paris by Encyclopaedia 
Universalis in 1990. The Atlas is a reference 
book which also stimulates the reader to ask 
fundamental questions about the nature of 
literature, 
What is literature? Is it simply a collection 
of signs, as Roland Barthes maintains in Degré 
zéro de lécriture (Writing Degree Zero), signs 
which bear no relation to ideas, language or 
style but exist to define the isolation of a ritual 
language? Or is it a mirror held up to history, 
offering a wide range of ways of making sense 
of an ever-changing, multifarious and 
inescapable reality? Whether regarded as form 
or essence, the fruit of mental activity for its 
own sake, of political commitment or even of 
political servitude, fiction—in the form of epic 
or drama, poetry or prose—has long been the 
subject of debate between the partisans of a 
disembodied, incantatory “pure beauty”, and 
those who opt for a “uscful” literature devoted 
to political and moral education. 
Of course, so-called “committed” litera- 
ture often ends up as little more than militant 
pamphleteering, thus renouncing the essen- 
tial function of all art, which is to present 
the world through the artist’s unique, trans- 
forming vision. It is nevertheless true that 
literature, perhaps more than all the other 
arts, has always had a special relationship 
with history, from the great Asian and 
Mediterranean epics, the northern sagas and 
the folktales of Africa, to Shakespeare and the 
contemporary novel. 
A THEMATIC APPROACH 
The distinguishing feature of the 436-page 
Atlas is its thematic approach, which intro- 
duces the reader to major works of the imag- 
ination from many countries, whilst at the 
same time bringing him or her into the vital, 
never-ending debate that revolves around the 
same, oft-repeated questions: How was lit- 
erature born? How can it be defined? What 
purpose does it serve? 
This monumental tome offers stimulating 
reflections on literary forms, structures and 
genres and their links with the real world 
and with philosophical and religious thought. 
With the Atlas we journey through Africa, 
India, southeast Asia, Japan and China, dis- 
covering en route the links that have been 
forged in many parts of the world from the 
earliest times down to the present between the 
theatrical traditions of Europe and the East, 
between poems, tales and myths, between 
abstract thought and signs. 
Literature, the creation of a mind engaged 
in a process of self-discovery which draws on 
the imaginary and the real, cannot exist 
without a material support—the stone and 
clay tablets of Mesopotamia, the volumen 
or roll of papyrus (which began to be used 
around the time of the appearance of writing 
in ancient Egypt), and the codex, the form 
taken by the book from the times of ancient 
Rome and China until the glorious days of 
the European Renaissance saw the birth of 
modern printing. 
The codex, which appeared in the Roman 
empire during the first century of the 
Christian era, consisted of sheets of manu- 
Litteratures 
LES 
GRANDS 
ATLAS 
UNIVERSALIS  
script folded in two and grouped into a sec- 
tion called a gathering. The gatherings could 
then be sewn together into a book. Codices 
were used for sacred and profane subjects, for 
story-telling and for purposes of adminis- 
tration. Most texts recorded on them were 
later erased. Although the invention of 
printing, which took over from the written 
manuscript in Europe around the middle of 
the fifteenth century, is still commonly attrib- 
uted to Johannes Gensfleisch, better known 
as Gutenberg, the Atlas reminds us that 
xylography (printing using engraved wooden 
blocks) was known in China more than six 
centuries before. By the ninth century the 
new technique had reached Japan and Korea, 
countries which were then subject to Chinese 
cultural influence. 
A MUSEUM 
OF THE WRITTEN WORD 
The Atlas also gives a full account of the 
written word, from Sanskrit script and Asian 
pictograms to medieval calligraphy and 
modern printing, and of that verbal sorcerer, 
the writer, whether Egyptian scribe or Hindu 
pandit, avant-garde poet or exile in search of 
anew homeland or new forms of expression, 
Other themes treated in the Atlas include 
the relationship between reading matter and 
the reading public, the commerce in literature 
and the literature of commerce, the devel- 
opment of libraries—those temples of the 
book—and the eventful history of publishing 
from the earliest days of printing to the mega- 
publishers of today. Meanwhile, Gutenberg, 
bright central star of his galaxy, looks mis- 
chievously down at McLuhan and the flood 
of images that threatened to displace his 
invention, the modern book. 
An inexhaustible treasure-house of facts 
and stimulating ideas, the Grand Atlas des 
Littératures draws on the work of major 
authorities in linguistics, sociology, palaeo- 
graphy and anthropology. It is also, through 
the outstanding quality of its illustrations— 
maps and photographs, drawings, reproduc- 
tions of paintings and early printed manu- 
scripts—a muscum of literature and the world 
of the imagination. 
EDGAR REICHMANN 
Writer and «critic

## [Page 51](093670engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

The NESCO 
7 COURIER 
eg —— 
46th YEAR 
Published monthly in 32 languages and in Braille by Usesco, The 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 
31. rue Francois Borvin, 75015 Pans, France 
Director: Bahgat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Ade! Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Wr icomb 
English edition: Roy Makin 
French edition: Alzin Leveque, Neda E) Khazen 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, Aracell Ortiz te Urbina 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Serval 
Illustrations: Ariane B T 
  
        
 
Tel. 45.68.46 90) 
Documentation: Violette Ringelsten (Tel, 45 68.46.85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel. 4568.46.87) 
Secretariat: Anne Brachet (Tel, 45.68.47.15., 
Administrative Assistant: Prithi Perera 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and Korean: 
Mouna Chalta (£45.68.47.14) 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: A exander Melnikov (Moscow 
German: Werner Merk (Berne) 
Arabic: £1 Said Mahmoua El-Sheniti (Cairn) 
Halian: Mar o Guigotl (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal |Delh 
Tamil: M. kchammec Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: H. Sadough Yann: [Teheran] 
Dutch: Clauge Montreux (Antwerp; 
Portuguese: Benedicto Siva {Rio de Janeiro 
Turkish: Mefra |igazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Wali Monammad Zaki (Islamabad 
Catalan: Joan Carreras | Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Yi Tong-ok (Seoul) 
Swahili; Leonard ). Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene: A eksandra Kornhauser (Ljudljanal 
Chinese: Shen Guofer (Being 
Bulgarian: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala: S_.. Sumanasekera Banca (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Basque: Juxto Egana [Donastia) 
Vietnamese: Do Phuong (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Ghot| Khawen (Kabul 
Hausa: Habib Alvassan (Sokoto) 
Bangla: Audullan A.M. Sharafuddin (Dhaka 
Ukrainian: Victor Stelmakh | Kicv) 
Galician: xzbier Senin Fernandez (Santiago ce Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION 
Subscriptions: Vlarie- "hérese Hardy (Tel. 45.68.45 65) 
Jocelyne Despouy, lacqueline Louise-Julie, Manicman 
Ngonekeo, Miche! Ravassard. Mohamed Salah Ei Bin 
Customer service: Ginelle Motrelf (Tel. 45.68.45 54) 
Accounts: (Tel, 45.68 45.65) 
Shipping: Tel. 45.68 47.50, 
   
  
   
      
SUBSCRIPTIONS. Tel : 45 68.45.65 
1 year: 211 French francs. 2 years: 396 fF, 
Binder for one year's ssues: 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
1 year: 132 French francs. 2 years! 211 FF, 
Payment can be made with any convertiole currency 1o the 
order of Unesco 
  
   
 
Individual amcles ang photog 
provding the credit line re 
RUS gale of ssua, and 
nghted may be reprinted 
from the Ub Couner 
  
ree vaucher cones ae se 
Sgned ant cles reprinted must bear author's name. 
photos will be supolled on request. Lnsalicitsd 3 
be returned unless accompanied Dy an intemnation 
a the eoitor 
YON Copyngl 
scnpts cannot 
reply coupor 
Xess the op nions of the authors 
Ent the opinions of Un:sco or those of 
oto caphons and Neaalines are 
r staff, The boundaries on maps 
ofhcial endorsement or 
   
    
 
 
      
   
    
   
pubiishec ir the magazine ¢ 
 
   
    
    
     
  
     
  
acceptance hw LUsssoo ar the | : we LU Counter 1s 
ocuced in micraform (miciefim and/or microficne) by (11 Ugsco 7 
Place -OnLenay 700 Pans: 12) Unversity Microfilms (Xetra), 
Ann: Arhor, Michigan 48100 U.S.A; (3) N.C.R. Microcard Editon, 
nda Head Inc. 111 West 40th Street, New York, L.S. A. [4] Bell 
and Howel Co... Old Manstiekd Road, Wooster, Ohig 44691, U.S.A 
INPRIME EN FRANCE {Printed 
DEPOT LEGAL: C1 - MARS 1 
GO SSION PARITAIRE N 71 DIFFUSE PAR LES NMP} 
Phatncompositon: Le Courrier de I'Unesca 
ho vurd: ETC GRAPHIC, Impression’ IMAYE GRAPHIC, 
S. Bd Henri Be 21 Laval Cedex [France 
IS5N 3 N 51347 
 
Fis Issue comprises 52 pages and a 4 page inser between pages 
lend 4243 
 
  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Cover, page 3: Faillet © Artephot, Paris. Page 4: © Folie-Tapabor, Paris. Page 5: All Rights 
Reserved. Pages 6, 7, 46, 47: UNEsco. Page 9: © Phototheque René Magritte-Giraudon, Musées 
Royaux des Beaux-Arts, Brussels. Pages 10, 14 (right), 16 (1): © Jean Loup Charmet, Paris. Page 
11: © Bridgeman-Giraudon, Historisches Museum des Stadt, Vienna. Page 12: © Phototheque 
Bernand, Paris. Page 13: © Jean Loup Charmet/Jean de Gaspary, Paris. Pages 14 (left), 40, 42-43: 
© Roger Viollet, Paris. Page 15: © Alexej von Jawlensky Archiv S.A. Locarno. A.D.A.G.P. Page 
16 (2), 36: © Edimédia, Paris. Page 16 (3): © J. P. Fouchet-Agence Top, Paris. Page 16(4): B. 
Barbereau © Sygma, Paris. Page 17: © Sylvie Sémavoine, Bois-Colombes, France. Page 18: © 
Denise Fernandez Grundman, Aix-en-Provence. Page 19: All Rights Reserved. Jean-Jacques 
Lebel Collection, Paris, A.D.G.A.P./SPADEM. Page 20: © Diego Goldberg Ditla-Cosmos, 
Paris. Page 21: D.A. Harvey © Cosmos, Paris. Pages 22, 29: © Giraudon, Paris, Galerie Janette 
Ostier. Page 23: © Sygma, Paris. Pages 24, 25: Ted Spiegel © Rapho, Paris. Page 26 (above): 
Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris. Page 26 (below): C. Rojon © Rapho, Paris. Page 27 (above): 
Tom Walker © Jacana, Paris. Page 27 (below): Cheryl Pick © Rapho, Paris. Page 30: Michel 
Huet © Hoa qui, Paris. Pages 31, 32, 33: Francois Perri © Cosmos, Paris. Page 35: © Viollet 
Collection, Paris. Page 37 (right): © Novosti, Paris. Page 38: Sergei G. Federov © Cosmos, 
Paris. Page 39: Ricki Rosen Picture Group © Cosmos, Paris. Page 41: © Leonard de Selva- 
Tapabor, Public Archives of Canada. Page 42: R. Emblin © Black Star/ Rapho, Paris. Page 44: 
UnEesco-Dominique Roger. Page 48: © Leonard de Selva-Tapabor, Paris. 
 YR— Fu —— 
 

## [Page 52](093670engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

"EACH MONTH, 
ESSENTIAL 
READING FOR AN 
UNDERSTANDING 
OF THE 
"PROBLEMS OF 
“TODAY AND 
TOMORROW 
i 
J 
: 
: 
: 
| 
i 
   