# [074812](074812engo.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](074812engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

JUNE 1977 (30th year) 
2.80 French francs 
 

## [Page 2](074812engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
TREASURES 
OF 
WORLD ART 
@ 
Belgium 
- 4 - - “ ATLL hy Ta 
Childhood radiance 
An incomparable child-portraitist, Rubens excelled at capturing the fleeting moods and 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
To
p-
Ré
al
it
és
, 
Pa
ri
s.
 
expressions of childhood in drawings and paintings which glow with life and freshness. This 
"Child's Head" is thought to be a portrait of his daughter Clara Serena. The eldest child of 
Rubens and his first wife, Isabella Brant, Clara was only 12 years old when she died in 1623. 
The portrait is today preserved in the art gallery of the Prince of Liechtenstein at Vaduz, 
Liechtenstein.

## [Page 3](074812engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

The ° . 
@mCourier 
JUNE 1977 30TH YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 16 LANGUAGES 
English Japanese Dutch 
French Italian Portuguese 
Spanish Hindi Turkish 
Russian Tamil Urdu 
German Hebrew 
Arabic Persian 
  
  1
2
 
 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris 
" Subscription rates 
- 1vyear : 28 French Francs 
2 years: 52 FF 
Binder for a year's issues: 24 FF 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except in 
August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year. For list of distributors see inside back cover. 
ndividual articles and photographs not Rented may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads "Reprinted from 
the UNES COURIER”, plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts 
cannot be returned unless accompanied by an interna- 
tional reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles 
express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily - 
Signed articles re- 
represent the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors 
of the UNESCO COURIER. Photo ca tions and head- 
lines are written by the Unesco Courier sta 
page 
 
A 400th ANNIVERSARY TRIBUTE TO RUBENS 
by Makaminan Makagiansar - 
RUBENS 
~ A PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST AS A UNIVERSAL MAN 
by Roger Avermaete 
MANSION FOR A MASTER 
Photos 
12 RUBENS THE BOOK-ILLUSTRATOR 
Photos 
14 VIVE LA FEMME! 
Photos 
17 HELL'S TORMENTS AND EARTHY DELIGHTS 
Photos 
STAMPS TO HONOUR RUBENS 
19 FOUR PAGES IN FULL COLOUR 
RUBENS 
Emissary of peace in strife-torn Europe 
by Frans Baudouin 
26 THE THRILL OF THE CHASE 
Photos 
SPINOZA oo 
PHILOSOPHER OF INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 
by Ben Rekers 
* The Unesco Courier is produced in microform {micro- 
film and/or microfiche} by: {1} University Microfilms 
(Xerox}, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A. ; (2) N.C.R. . 
Microcard Edition, Indian Head, Inc. « 111 Waest 40th 
Street, New York, U.S.A. ; (3) ‘Bell and Howell Co., 
Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in the Readers’ 
Guide to Periodical Literature, published by H. W. 
Wilson Co., New York, and in Current Contents - 
Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A. 
Editorial Office 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris - France - 
Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
8 ANTONIE VAN LEEUWENHOEK 
FATHER OF MICROBIOLOGY 
by Jan Willem Maurits La Riviére 
UNESCO MEDAL FOR RUBENS YEAR 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
UNESCO NEWSROOM 
| 
8
1
8
1
8
 
. TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
BELGIUM: Childhood radiance 
Olga Rédel 
Managing Editors 
English Edition : 
. French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition : Francisco Fernandez-Santos {Paris) 
Russian Edition : Victor Goliachkov {Paris) 
German Edition : Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abde! Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Kazuo Akao (Tokyo) - : 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition : H. L. Sharma (Delhi) 
Tamil Edition : M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew ~ Edition : Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian Edition : Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Dutch Edition :. Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese Edition : Benedicto Silva {Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish Edition : Mefra Arkin (Istanbul) 
Urdu Edition : Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Assistant Editors 
English Edition : Roy Malkin 
French Edition : Philippe Ouannés 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Research : Christiane Boucher 
Cover 
This year marks the 400th anniversary of the 
birth of Peter Paul Rubens, the great Flemish 
painter. To salute the occasion, this issue of 
the Unesco Courier is largely devoted to a 
study of Rubens’ monumental achievement, 
not only as a prolific and versatile artist of 
genius but as a diplomat who worked 
tirelessly for peace. Cover shows a detail 
from St. George and the Dragon (today in the 
Prado Museum, Madrid) which Rubens 
painted sometime between 1606 and 1610. 
Layout and Design : Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed 
to the Editor-in-Chief in Paris 
Fa 
IS
SN
 
00
41
-5
27
8     N°
 
6 
- 
19
77
 
MC
 
77
-3
-3
33
 
Photo © Editions Arcade, Brussels

## [Page 4](074812engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 46642: Rubens: a 400th anniversary tribute

RUBENS 
A 400th ANNIVERSARY TRIBUTE 
W. celebrate this year the 400th anniversary of the birth of Peter Paul Rubens, 
one of the world’s most outstanding painters. 
The sensuous exuberance, the overwhelming vitality of Rubens, the greatest 
exponent of Baroque painting, is a joy for ever for all those who have eyes to see. 
Seldom in the history of art have all the good things that enhance the value and 
beauty of life been represented with such strength and eloquence. 
Through the genius of Rubens, the great traditions of the north and south of 
Europe —of Dutch and Flemish painting on the one hand, and of Italian painting on 
the other—were to combine in unrivalled masterpieces. 
Rubens’ inspiration had robust roots in the life of the Flemish people that he 
knew from his earliest childhood. And through his artistic skill this people has 
become dear to art lovers all over the world. Though he never severed his roots, he 
spent long years studying Italian art at the court of the Gonzagas in Mantua and 
then in Rome, where he acquired new techniques and became aware of the new 
visions of the Carracci brothers and Caravaggio. 
It is thus that he was able to reconcile in his person and in his art the Ars Nova 
of the north and the Buona Pratica of Florence. All that was most traditional and 
most modern in the painting of his time found equally vigorous expression in his 
~work. This towering personality, poised astride two centuries, was the most 
accomplished figure of the Renaissance and a herald of modern times. 
From Mantua, Genoa and Rome, Rubens brought back not only new art forms, 
trends and perspectives, but he was also able to complement his vast knowledge in 
different fields, and to acquire, in the six languages he mastered, all the Western 
culture of his time. 
No wonder, therefore, that his house in his beloved city of Antwerp was to 
become one of the great schools of painting of all time. Many masterpieces now 
hanging in galleries all over the world come from that school. 
Man of genius, man of culture, man of education, Rubens was also a man of 
peace. It is not surprising, therefore, that he spent a great part of his extraordinarily 
active life in the service of international understanding. His intelligence, his charm, 
his exceptional knowledge of political affairs and his perfect command of the 
major European languages made him a first-rate diplomat. 
But though he served different courts, he always acted as a universal messenger 
of peace. He fought to protect his country’s interests among the tensions of the 
great powers of the time. In Madrid, in Paris and in London he was always to 
oppose war and to advocate a policy of negotiation and understanding. 
The horrors of war are expressed with agonizing reality in his wonderful 
masterpiece in the Pitti Palace in Florence, and the blessings of peace are immortalized 
with equal eloquence in his great canvas in the National Gallery in London. 
Genius of the arts, scholar, fighter for peace: all these qualities make Rubens 
dear to all men of goodwill dedicated to serve international understanding. 
Makaminan Makagiansar 
Unesco's Assistant Director-General for 
Culture and Communication 
Self- -portrait of Rubens, executed some time after 
his marriage to the beautiful young Héléne 
Fourment in 1630.

## [Page 5](074812engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 46642: Rubens: a 400th anniversary tribute

 
 
a
 
Shear 
— 
Stig 
'XNEUDIEN SPST 
Sa UOIUNGY 
© OI0Yg

## [Page 6](074812engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

RUBENS 
  


### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

A portrait of the artist 
as a universal man 
by Roger Avermaete 
HE great Flemish painter Peter Paul Rubens was born 
400 years ago, on 28 June 1577. Although known to 
contemporaries as ‘‘the painter of Antwerp’’, he was not 
born in Antwerp, as was long thought, but in Siegen, a small 
town in Westphalia. 
A trivial detail, one might suppose. And yet it throws an 
interesting light on life in western Europe in the late 16th century. 
Jan Rubens, the painter's father, was a rich and cultivated 
burgher of Antwerp. An alderman of the city and a Protestant, 
he was an opponent of the Duke of Alva, then governor of 
Flanders and a notorious slaughterer of Protestants. In 1568 
the alderman and his family were forced to flee the dreaded 
Duke's wrath, 
They settled in Cologne, where Jan Rubens became involv- 
ed in an intrigue which led to his being imprisoned for five years. 
On his release he was allowed to live with his family in Siegen. 
So it came about that ‘the Painter of Antwerp’s” birthplace was 
determined by Europe's religious conflicts. 
Jan Rubens renounced his Protestantism and died a Catho- 
lic, and in 1589 his widow, Maria Pypelinckx, obtained permission 
to return to Antwerp with her children. 
Peter Paul was about 12 years old at the time. In 1590 he 
became apprenticed to a well-known landscape painter, Tobias 
Verhaecht, with whom he spent two years before going on to 
spend two years in the studio of Adam van Noort. After a 
further spell of apprenticeship under Otto van Veen, in 1598 he 
was accepted as a Master by the Guild of St. Luke, the Antwerp 
association of artists and artisans. 
It is hard to tell what exactly Rubens learned from his mas- 
ters, solid painters untouched by genius. Tobias Verhaecht was 
an unremarkable landscape painter who also depicted Towers of 
Babel and scenes from the Apocalypse. It was his misfortune to 
work several generations after Bruegel the Elder. 
Adam van Noort, whose reputation had a moment of glory 
in the 19th century when a number of works were wrongly 
attributed to him, was a mediocre artist who belonged to Ant- 
werp’s group of “Romanists’’, painters who had studied in Italy 
and whose work was imbued with the humanist learning of the 
Renaissance. 
ROGER AVERMAETE, internationally known Belgian writer, is the author of an 
important study of Rubens’ life and work, Rubens et Son Temps {Rubens and his 
time), published in French and Dutch versions by Arcade publishers, Brussels, 1976. 
A member of the Royal Flemish Academy of Sciences, Letters and Fine Arts of 
Belgium, he has published novels and plays as well as art criticism and historical 
studies. Two of his works, Guillaume le Taciturne (William the Silent] and Rem- 
brandt et Son Temps (Rembrandt and his time) have been awarded prizes by the 
Académie Frangaise, ) 
6 
One of Rubens’ most remarkable works is an 
altarpiece he painted for Antwerp cathedral 
between 1611 and 1614. It was commissioned by 
the Arquebusiers, an Antwerp brotherhood, for 
their side-chapel in the cathedral. Rubens 
produced a magnificent triptych whose central 
panel was the Deposition from the Cross; on the 
left was the Visitation, and on the right the 
Presentation in the Temple. The Deposition 
established Rubens as the foremost religious 
painter of his time and has for over 300 years 
been admired for its breathtaking virtuosity. 
Painted with a dramatic intensity which is all the 
more poignant for its restraint, the Deposition 
scene is composed with powerful sweeping 
curves that lead the eye directly to the dead 
Christ, at the moment after his body has been 
released from the Cross and is about to slump 
into the arms of St. John. Rubens was 
unsurpassed at creating a sense of dynamism 
and movement through the use of curves and 
counter-curves, but this was the first time that 
he had achieved such a powerful effect with such 
economy of means.

## [Page 7](074812engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

  
Photo © Bulloz, Paris 
1

## [Page 8](074812engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

) The most interesting of the trio, Otto van Veen, produced 
pale imitations of the works of the Italian masters. A cultivated 
man with a passion for the art "from beyond the mountains”, he 
whetted the curiosity of his young apprentice ard filled him with 
impatience to travel to Italy. 
We know little of Rubens’ work during this period, except 
that he painted an Adam and Eve in Earthly Paradise (today in 
Rubens’ House, Antwerp}, a conventionally classical work in the \Y/ AN S | O N FO R 
manner of Otto van Veen, and a portrait of a man stated —with 
unusual precision —to be "26 years old”. This work, now in a A M ASTER 
private collection in New York, seems to herald later develop- 
ments in the art of portrait painting. When Rubens bought a large house in Antwerp 
about 1610, he was a rich man, the most famous 
painter in Europe. Commissions were flowing in, 
- and he was surrounded by pupils and assistants. 
The im pact of Italy He carried out extensive alterations to his new 
house before moving in five years later. As an 
annex he built a two-storey studio (centre of lower 
In 1600, Rubens set out for Italy, as many Flemish painters photo, opposite page) for which he designed an 
‘had done before him. To tomplete their education, they regard- Italianate fagade decorated with statues and 
ed a journey “across the mountains” as indispensable, although Baroque stonework. Here, in a room over 
for some of them the experience proved fatal. More than one 10 metres long and 8 metres wide, he could work 
Flemish painter lost the roots of his originality in Italy. Only re tt he hon by hriumohal 
Bruegel the Elder managed to resist the siren-call and emerge arch (left of same photo), giving onto a garden 
triumphant. As for Rubens, his great achievement was to create with a classical pavilion {detail below). Almost 
a style that was all his own, reconciling the opposing forces of entirely rebuilt in the 18th century, Rubens’ house 
North and South. was bought in 1937 by the city of Antwerp, 
. Hardly had Rubens arrived in Italy (doubtless furnished with Fo tor ie Hai 
impressive testimonials) than he was taken into the service of in. 1609 during the Twelve-Year Truce (see article 
Vincenzo de Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua. Like all Italian princes page 23), in an engraving by Visscher, a 
of his age, Vincenzo lived in sumptuous style. He was a great contemporary of Rubens. 
collector and a man of boundless curiosity. 
However, it seems that Rubens did not find Mantua an ideal 
setting for his work, since he managed to get himself sent to 
Rome, ostensibly to complete his studies. The Eternal City was 
then the capital of the arts. The great masters of the Renais- 
sance were dead, but a number of brilliant painters still worked 
there, including Caravaggio, the Carracci brothers and Guido 
Reni. Artistic life in Rome was passionate and turbulent. 
In 1603, Rubens was entrusted by the Duke of Mantua with 
the task of taking a number of presents to King Philip lll of Spain 
and to other influential people. Some have claimed that this 
was a diplomatic mission. But Rubens thought otherwise and 
complained that he didn’t even get an opportunity of presenting 
the gifts to the King himself. In compensation, though, he was 
commissioned to paint an equestrian portrait of the King’s chief 
minister, the all-powerful Duke of Lerma. 
On his return to Italy, Rubens did his utmost to remain in 
Rome, although his master, the Duke, demanded his return to 
Mantua. 
In 1608, on receiving news 5 from Antwerp that his mother 
was seriously ill, he packed his bags and left for the North “in all 
haste” (he wrote) without waiting for permission from the Duke, 
who was away travelling at the time. He said he would soon 
be back, but in fact he never returned. 
Too little attention has been paid to the fact that a year 
earlier Archduke Albert of Austria, Governor-General of the 
Spanish Netherlands, had already asked Vincenzo | to grant 
Rubens leave of absence to settle some matters in Antwerp and 
that the Duke had refused. This may well have been a first, 
unsuccessful attempt on Rubens’ part to break free from Mantua. 
A number of paintings have survived from Rubens’ eight- 
year stay in Italy. Of the great triptych The Holy Family being 
adored by Vincenzo de Gonzaga and his family there still 
remains The Baptism of Christ, The Transfiguration and two 
fragments of the central painting, which was mutilated in the 
18th century. One is in the Academy of Mantua and the other in 
the Academy of Vienna. 
Other works which have survived from this period are a 
triptych painted on slate for the Church of Santa Maria in Valli- 
cella, The Adoration of the Virgin by the Saints, a St. George 
and the Dragon, a portrait of The Marchesa Brigida Spinola Doria 
and other portraits of noblewomen. Some portraits of men have 
also survived, such as the curious Moulay Ahmed, today in the Photo © Almasy, Paris 
Boston Museum of Fine Arts. 
These works all display sound craftsmanship, but none 
escapes the influences of the great Renaissance masters. Their ) 
8 
  
 
: —— - X a _— 
_ SE I ————

## [Page 9](074812engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ru
be
ns
’ 
Ho
us
s,
 A
nt
we
rp
. 
£
1
 
E
L
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 

## [Page 10](074812engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

   ) composition is calm and ordered; the colours lack any personal 
touch. 
Rubens received a warm welcome from the rulers of the 
‘Spanish Netherlands, who immediately commissioned portraits 
of themselves from him. The painter decided to settle in Antwerp 
and made his home there for the rest of his life. Commissions 
soon began to pour in. He painted an Adoration of the Kings for 
Antwerp's Town Hall which made a great impression. Traces of 
Caravaggio’s influence can be detected in this work. 
The Elevation of the Cross which he executed for St. Wal- 
burga’s Church in Antwerp marks a further stage in Rubens’ 
development and is still one of his most popular works. Cons- 
tructed along a diagonal, the painting creates an impression of 
dynamism and movement, with its astonishingly muscular figures 
and its athletic Christ on the Cross. In fact it looks more like a 
hymn to life than a death-scene. 
In Rubens’ next major painting, the Deposition from the 
Cross, the effect is less tempestuous and the colours are in gene- 
ral more sombre, although the figures are just as muscular as in 
the Elevation and the gloominess of the scene is mitigated by a 
fine sweep of red. 
Thus Rubens embarked upon his extraordinary career in 
Antwerp. He was soon inundated with commissions. There 
was a great demand for paintings of religious subjects, reflecting 
the spirit of the Counter-Reformation sparked off by the Council 
of Trent. The Catholics countered the severity of the Lutherans 
and the Calvinists with images that were more numerous and 
above all more attractive. At the same time, the influence of 
humanism made it permissible to depict mythological themes. 
This was an ideal climate for an artist like Rubens who loved life 
in all its multifarious forms, especially men, women, children, 
and animals. 
i
n
 
—
—
—
 
 
E
T
 
  
Ph
ot
o 
® 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pi
tt
i 
Pa
la
ce
, 
Fl
or
en
ce
 
The nude triumphant 
This love of life found expression in his work through his 
exaltation of the nude. The masters of the Renaissance, from PHILOSOPHERS AND CLASSICISTS 
Michelangelo to Titian, had given the nude figure a prominent 


### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

place in their work, but none of them ever showed such a mark- This painting, executed around 1612, is entitled “The Four 
ed predilection for it as Rubens. The Old and the New Testa- P hilosophers., although pi all (hose Portrayed rors strictly 
; . speaking, philosophers. Grouped beneath a bust of Seneca are 
ments certainly offered a wealth of subjects, but afforded few thom tight to left) the Latin scholar Jan Woverius, the Stoic 
opportunities for painting the female nude. In mythology, on the philosopher Justus Lipsius, Rubens’ brother Philip—a disciple of 
other hand, ‘nymphs and goddesses abound, and since in Lipsius—and Rubens himself. The work, with its background of 
Rubens’ imagination they were never clothed, they provided him Classical ruins, documents the vogue for Greek and Latin learning 
with an inexhaustible supply of models. in early 17th century Europe. 
. 
; 
5
 
r 
; 
- 
’ 
Pe
 
4
 
Lo 
v
 
pr
 
33 
¢ 
=
 
N
g
 
F
W
.
 
oy
 
i! 
Fi 
» 
v \ i 
E pp
l 
g
r
a
d
 
L
N
 
Nl - xr vi » 
pe
 
I»
 
AS
 y 
TL
 
i 
3
 
0, 
y
r
 
hi
nd
 
g
e
 
'
f
 
Ni
 S
A
 
, 
J 
X 
  
=
=
 
P
a
l
i
 
: 
* 
n
e
 
a 
fi 
Ey
 
y 
hey
 
S
e
e
d
 
»
 
B
A
 
| 
- 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Na
ti
on
al
 
Ga
ll
er
y,
 
Lo
nd
on
 
10

## [Page 11](074812engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

Gradually there emerged a type of woman, buxom and pale- 
skinned, which was to recur so often in Rubens’ painting that 
people came to believe that it was a representative likeness of 
Antwerp women in general. (However, it is known that the 
models for the naiads in The Reception of Marie de Medici at 
Marseilles were Italian.) 
Some of Rubens’ vast canvases are crowded with nude 
figures. Among them are two Last Judgements depicting clusters 
of mingling men and women, and a delightful panel entitled The 
Infant Jesus, St. John and two Angels, showing four children, 
one of them a cherub with a lamb and a basket of fruit. 
Rubens derived constant inspiration from men, women and 
children. The nude is everywhere triumphant in his mytholo- 
gical paintings such as Nymphs and Satyrs; Ceres, Bacchus, 
Venus and Love; Neptune and Amphytrite; and even the Four 
Parts of the World. Obviously it was more difficult to introduce 
nude figures into paintings of religious subjects. Christ, and the 
Infant Jesus in the Holy Family were the only appropriate occa- 
sions —with the possible exception of the Adoration of the Kings. 
In the latter, however, one of Rubens’ favourite subjects, the 
crowds thronging the scene and the splendour of the costumes 
tend to distract attention from the newborn babe. 
Rubens was a competent portraitist, but during these early 
years, not a brilliant one, although an exception should perhaps 
be made for the portrait he painted of himself and his young 
wife, Isabella Brant, whom he married in 1609. 
Another much admired work from this period is the painting 
known as The Four Philosophers, a portrayal of the scholar 
Justus Lipsius with his pupils Jan Woverius and Rubens’ brother 
Philip on either side of him, and, in the background, Rubens 
himself. 
Later Rubens was to develop a more expansive manner, but 
he had already moved far from the style of his predecessors. To 
  
appreciate this one has only to look back to the portraits of the 
16th-century Dutch painter Antonio Moro, with their deep concern 
for visual analysis, where truth comes before beauty. 
Rubens saw things otherwise. He did not forget the manner 
of the Renaissance masters and idealized his models with a subt- 
lety that delighted them. Van Dyck was to learn this lesson and 
make his fortune thereby. 
For a long time, landscape merely served as a background 
for the groups of people which occupy the centre of the stage. 
Later, however, it came to occupy a far from negligible place in 
Rubens’ paintings, bearing as always the unmistakable stamp of 
his genius. 
It was probably to give free rein to his taste for movemen 
that Rubens painted a series of hunting scenes: depicting a wolf; 
a lion and a leopard; a crocodile and a hippopotamus; a wild 
boar; and a lion. These are tumultuous paintings in which men 
and beasts are locked in furious combat. 
Rubens’ horses are always magnificent animals of unrivalled 
beauty. In his first equestrian portrait, depicting the Duke of 
Lerma astride his mount, the steed is drawn with unequalled 
grace. Mane and tail streaming in the wind, Rubens’ horses are 
involved in countless adventures. They are the main protagonists 
in The Battle of the Amazons, a masterly example of perfectly- 
balanced composition despite the turmoil of the scene. 
In the midst of all this activity, Rubens still found time to 
indulge in architecture. He bought a house on the Wapper (a 
canal which had once formed part of the moat of Antwerp’s 
fortifications) and spent three years carrying out alterations to it. 
His designs were clearly inspired by the Italian palazzi he had so 
admired. He even published a book on Genoese architecture, 
Palazzi di Genova, with the declared aim of combatting the 
Gothic style which, like Vasari, he thought barbaric. 
People said that his house, together with that of his friend. 
Wealthy and successful, a happy 
husband and father, Rubens felt an 
increasing need as he grew older to 
withdraw from his crowded 
professional and social life in - 
Antwerp. In 1635 he bought a 
country retreat, the Chateau of Steen 
(left), a manor in the Flemish 
Renaissance style with a moat, a 
drawbridge, an orchard and gardens. . 
In addition he purchased woods and 
fields nearby. Here he began to 
paint peaceful! landscapes, depicting 
the lush farmland in all its variety of 
" light, mood and season. In one of 
his most beautiful portrayals of the 
countryside around the chateau 
{opposite page), the mellow evening 
light strikes through trees onto the 
facade and glinting window-panes of 
the mansion (far left of painting). 
These “sunset years” in the Flemish 
countryside also inspired him to paint 
the famous scene of peasant revelry 
known as La Kermesse. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
ri
s 
1

## [Page 12](074812engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

) 
  
1 Photo © Almasy, Paris 
Balthasar Moretus (the grandson of the great printer Christophe 
Plantin} was one of the finest in Antwerp. Rubens wanted to 
furnish it with antique marble statues and to this end he began 
negotiations with the English Ambassador, Sir Dudley Carleton. 
The resultant haggling between these two equally wily dealers, 
each out to get the better of the other, is a highly entertaining 
episode. 
In 1619, Rubens painted The Last Communion of St. Francis 
of Assisi. Despite the angels thronging the scene, this is one of 
his few paintings expressing pain. Not long afterwards, he 
received an important commission for 36 ceilings and three altar- 
pieces for the new Jesuit church in Antwerp (today the church 
of St. Charles Borromeo). The church was gutted by fire in 1718 
and all Rubens’ work perished in the flames, except for the three 
altarpieces. 
A helping hand from 
van Dyck and Brueghel 
A mounting flood of commissions meant that Rubens had 
to take on experienced assistants to help him. These were not 
mere pupils as has often been suggested; even renowned artists 
such as Jan Brueghel and Frans Snyders were happy to under- 
take this sort of work. 
Antony van Dyck also worked for a time with Rubens, after 
being received into the Guild of St. Luke. This collaboration 
between the master and his young rival produced at least one 
masterpiece, the Rape of the Daughters of Leucippus. Rubens 
and van Dyck also worked together on the cartoons for a tapes- 
try recounting the story of the Roman Consul Decius Mus. 
Van Dyck did not stay long in the service of Rubens. Other 
assistants took his place. There was never any lack of applicants. 
Jan Wildens and Lucas van Uden painted landscapes; Theo van 
12 
  
    
  
» 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
ri
s 
  
Photo © Bulloz, Paris —Plantin Museum, Antwerp 


### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

RUBENS THE 
As well as producing a gigantic output of paintings, for 
25 years Rubens supplied the Plantin printing-house in 
Antwerp with many designs for title pages and book 
illustrations. The Plantin press was founded by 
Christophe Plantin (1530-1589), a Frenchman who settled 
in Antwerp and became the most celebrated printer of his 
time. By 1576 he had 16 presses and was working 
virtually on an industrial scale. In 34 years he published 
over 1,500 works, ranging from anatomical treatises and 
atlases to Bibles, including the renowned “Polyglot 
Bible”, an ambitious attempt to fix the original text of the 
Old and New Testaments on a scientific basis. Rubens 
.was a lifelong friend of Balthasar Moretus, Plantin‘s 
grandson, who became head of the press and had 
unlimited confidence in Rubens’ capacities as an 
illustrator. In his work for Moretus, Rubens developed a 
new style of book illustration through designs displaying 
a wealth of allegorical motifs, symbols, emblems and 
 
           
 
. 
i | 
! 
: Ll 
— = 
Td 1 
ABE 
ag r 
   
   
    

## [Page 13](074812engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

  
Photo © Bulloz, Paris —FPlantin Museum, Antwerp 
"BOOK-ILLUSTRATOR 
figures from Greek mythology. 
Although not himself an engraver, Rubens 
was instrumental in creating a whole new school of 
engraving, working closely with a carefully-chosen group 
of print-makers and often correcting the first pulls of a 
print with pen or brush. As an illustrator he turned his 
hand to a variety of subjects, from treatises on optics to 
historical compilations, travel books and philosophical 
works. Photos on this double page show (1) the 
courtyard of the Plantin printing house in Antwerp, today 
the Plantin Museum; (2) a portrait of Christophe Plantin 
by Rubens ; (3) Martine Plantin, Christophe’s daughter; 
(4) printing presses (left) in the Plantin workshop; and (5) 
. a title page designed by Rubens for a historical work, 
La Reddition de Breda (The Surrender of Breda). It is seen 
at various stages of production. Above left, Rubens’ 
original design; above right, the engraved copper plate; 
and below right, as it appeared in the book. 
  
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Thulden, Justus van Egmont, Abraham van Diepenbeek and 
Erasmus Quellin specialized in figures; Paul de Vos painted ani- 
mals. This list of Rubens’ collaborators is far from complete. 
Curiously, once these painters set up on their own account they 
seemed to run out of inspiration. 
Rubens was a hard task-master, but he was perfectly capable 
of adapting to the manner of a talented assistant. Adam and 
Eve in Paradise, painted in collaboration with Jan Brueghel, has 
been called “a masterpiece of understanding between the great- 
est genius and the subtlest talent in 17th-century Flemish 
painting”. 
While never ceasing to paint, Rubens gradually became 
involved in other activities. Events were to provide him with an 
opportunity of playing a part in politics, in which he was passion- 
ately interested. The Twelve-Year Truce between Spain and the 
United Dutch Provinces expired in 1621 and a resumption of 
hostilities seemed inevitable. 
Rubens was a staunch pacifist, and he set out to promote 
peace —no easy task at that time. Spain was proud and Holland 
was unyielding.. The painter sought to use his brilliant circle of 
friends and acquaintances to ease his entry into public life. After 
the death of the Archduke Albert, in 1621, the Archduchess 
employed his services on more than one occasion. He was sent 
to Holland to sound out the prospects for peace, but in vain. 
Scenes from the life of 
a scheming queen 
Rubens the artist, on the other hand, was as successful as 
ever. In 1622, he was summoned to Paris, where Marie de Medi- 
ci, the Queen Mother, asked him to decorate a gallery in her 
newly-built Luxembourg Palace. 
The subject was a tricky one. The artist was asked to paint 
20-odd episodes from the scheming Queen Mother's none- 
too-glorious life. But imagination can help to surmount most 
obstacles. A combination of allegory and symbols, with a sprink- 
ling of mythology, provided a brilliant camouflage for history, 
and Rubens managed to skirt round a number of embarrassing 
episodes (although not quite enough for Richelieu, who ordered 
certain alterations). 
Thus was created the famous Medici Gallery, today one of 
the glories of the Louvre. It is not Rubens’ greatest work, and 
certain contemporaries criticized him for his excessive and often 
obscure use of allegory. Even so, it was a gigantic undertaking, 
one that few painters could have brought to completion. It 
required two years’ work, although it did not prevent him from 
completing other works in the meantime, notably his finest ver- 
sion of The Adoration of the Kings (Antwerp). 
After completing the Medici Gallery, Rubens returned once 
more to Paris to discuss the pictures needed for a second gallery, 
whose decoration was to be devoted to the life of King Henry IV. 
This project never came to fruition, and only a few brilliant 
sketches have survived to testify that the lusty king inspired the 
artist better than his scheming wife. 
Fortunately, there were compensations: Louis Xl had com- 
missioned the designs for 12 tapestries telling the story of the 
Roman Emperor Constantine. At this time, Rubens also made 
the acquaintance of the Duke of Buckingham, the all-powerful 
favourite of two English kings, James |, and his son Charles |, 
He painted a portrait of the flamboyant Duke and cultivated 
his company. Their relations were not without political overtones 
on either side, and Buckingham, probably eager to win over a 
man of such high standing at the Brussels court, paid Rubens a 
fabulous price for the collection of statues that the painter had 
earlier purchased from Sir Dudley Carleton. 
In quest of peace 
in Madrid and London 
- For several years, Europe had been involved in the bloody 
conflict known to history as the Thirty Years’ War. Buckingham 
was seeking peace with Spain and Rubens embarked on skilful 
mangceuvrings that led to his being summoned to Madrid to pre- 
pare the ground for discussions. CONTINUED PAGE 16 
13

## [Page 14](074812engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

Vive la femme ! 
  Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Portrait of Isabella Brant (Dijon Museum, France) 
Rubens was one of the greatest painters of women—and 
especially the nude female form —who ever lived. He excelled in 
depicting milk-white flesh, glossy curls, graceful gestures, 
the hollows and curves of the body. When a widower of 53, he 
married the 16-year-old Héléne Fourment. Breaking the news to 
one of his friends, he wrote, “It would have been hard for me to 
exchange the priceless treasure of liberty for the embraces of an 
old woman.” He painted many portraits of Héléne, sometimes 
playing with her children, sometimes richly adorned, and once 
clad only in a fur cloak. She also served as a model for many of 
his mythological and religious scenes (such as The Education of 
the Virgin, opposite page below, and The Judgement of Paris, 
below, where she appears as the naked Venus in centre of ~ 
painting). Of his first wife, Isabella Brant, who died prematurely 
in 1626, Rubens also painted unforgettable portraits reflecting the 
gentleness and serenity which enchanted him both as husband 
and painter. ' ’  Ph
ot
o 
& 
Ha
es
ae
rt
s 
an
d 
St
or
k,
 
Br
us
se
ls
 
Self-portrait of Rubens painted around 1624 (Windsor 
Castle, England) 
  Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s 
The Judgement of Paris (Prado Museum, Madrid)

## [Page 15](074812engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s   
- Portrait of Héléne Fourment (Museum of 
The Hague, Netherlands) 
Héléne Fourment and her children 
{Louvre Museum, Paris) 
  Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s 
  Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s 
The Education of the Virgin 
(Musée Royal des Beaux- 
Arts, Antwerp) 
15

## [Page 16](074812engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

) The Spanish prime minister, Count Duke Olivares, was 
unenthusiastic about opening peace negotiations with England, 
but Rubens won over Philip IV, who preferred painting to poli- 
tics. At all events, the painter was eventually entrusted with- an 
official peace mission to London. Before he left he was given 
the honorific title of “Secretary to the Privy Council”, since it 
was considered unfitting that proud Spain should be represented 
by a man who “worked with his hands’’ 
While in Madrid, Rubens spent much of his time painting, 
and is said to have produced 30-odd works during his stay. He 
also managed to persuade the King to buy the paintings he had 
had the foresight to bring with him. In his spare time, he met 
and frequently conversed with the young Sevillian, Velasquez, 
the indefatigable painter of the Spanish king and his court. 
Rubens’ visit to England was a personal triumph. The king 
commissioned a series of paintings, representing the blessings of 
his father’s reign, to decorate the ceiling of the great Banqueting 
House in Whitehall, and knighted the artist on the eve of his 
departure. Diplomatically, the trip was less successful. After a 
year and a half's absence, Rubens returned home disappointed. 
The records tell us nothing about the work of his studio during 
this period. 
In the year of his return to Antwerp, he married Héléne 
Fourment, then aged 16. His first wife, Isabella Brant, who had 
died in 1626, had borne him a daughter, Clara Serena {who died 
young) and two sons, the elder of whom was the same age as 
his new wife. 
This plump, blend young woman was henceforth to appear 
in many of his works, as Venus, Andromeda, St. Cecilia, Diana, 
one of the “Three Graces” and as a goddess in the Judgement 
of Paris, She also posed as plain Héléne Fourment, richly 
RAVISHED 
BEAUTIES 
According to a Greek myth, Phoebe and Hilaria, 
daughters of King Leucippus of Messene, were 
snatched away from their husbands-to-be by 
Castor and Pollux, the twin sons of Zeus. 
delighted in such stories, which provided him with 
adorned, with her husband or with her children, or even virtually 
naked, as in the painting known as The Little Fur. 
[t seems that Rubens wished to abandon politics at this 
time, for he turned down an offer to return to England on ano- 
ther mission. The next year, however, he was once more in the 
thick of things. Marie de Medici had been forced to flee from 
France and arrived in Mons, where Rubens was delegated to 
welcome her. The Queen Mother's misfortunes led him to urge 
Olivares to support armed intervention on behalf of her intrigue- 
ridden entourage. The peace-loving Rubens had become over- 
night an advocate of war! However, his petition came to naught, 
for Madrid would have none of it. The artist returned to his 
brushes and easel, the best thing he could have done. 
The last ten years of his life were as prolific as those that had 
gone before but his style became increasingly subtle. As in the 
past he continued to paint both religious and secular subjects. 
The latter became more and more sensual, while his treatment 
of religious themes reflects a greater tenderness and tranquility 
than his earlier work. 
Paintings such as the Offering to Venus, with its angels 
dancing about the goddess or perched in the trees above her, 
and with its amorously entwined couples, exude joie de vivre 
through their fresh colours, their spirited sense of movement and 
the gaiety of the children. 
Rubens loved children and they abound in his paintings, 
even in such dignified works as the Triptych of St. lldefons, 
which had been commissioned by Archduke Albert and his wife, 
who were portrayed on the side panels. Children appear in The 
Education of the Virgin, looking down on Héléne Fourment as 
the Virgin Mary, and in the Holy Family and the Saints. 
These are the paintings of a happy man. His varied expe- 
Rubens 
  
Dr
aw
in
g 
Ed
it
io
ns
 
d’
Ar
t 
Al
be
rt
 
Sk
ir
a,
 
Ge
ne
va
 
almost inexhaustible opportunities to portray his - 
favourite subject: the female nude. The Rape of the 
Daughters of Leucippus (2.25 m by 2.10 m), painted 
around 1619, is not a tragic picture: the maidens, 
like the impish cupid clinging to the horse's bridle 
at left, do not seem unduly perturbed by what is 
-going on. Rubens has enclosed the action within 
a circular compositional frame (see schematic 
presentation above). Within the circle tensions are 
expressed through sweeping intersecting arcs and 
the scene is organized in a series of rectangles. 
(The size of each rectangle is determined by the 
"golden section”, a canon of proportions which 
Rubens had studied intensively in Italy.) To create an 
atmosphere of motion and excitement, Rubens has 
systematically used contrasting surfaces and ) 
colours. It is remarkable that the same techniques 
could create such different effects as the high 
tragedy of The Deposition from the Cross (see page 
7} and the “comic opera’ atmosphere of the 
painting shown here.   Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s 
—P
in
ak
ot
he
k,
 
Mu
ni
ch
 
16

## [Page 17](074812engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

riences in public life had not affected his art. When the Arch- 
duchess Isabella asked him to attend negotiations between the 
Estates General of the Spanish Netherlands and the United 
Provinces, he was confronted by a storm of protest from his 
countrymen, outraged by this interference in their affairs. This 
time, Rubens had had enough, and he bade farewell to politics. 
Staging a mammoth pageant 
with an army of 
artists and craftsmen 
The Archduchess died in 1633 and was succeeded as 
Governor General by the Cardinal-Infant Ferdinand. To celebrate 
his ceremonial entry into Antwerp, Rubens designed elaborate 
street decorations that are probably unique in the history of art. 
HELL'S TORMENTS : 
AND EARTHY DELIGHTS 
The works shown on this page are characteristic of two 
distinct stages in the development of Rubens’ art. In The 
Last Judgement (right), a great turmoil of figures hurtles 
down towards the middle of the picture, whence devils 
drag their tortured bodies to the fires of Hell. This 
painting, commissioned for a Bavarian church, displays 
Rubens’ delight in depicting whirling movement, nudes 
in abundance and strong contrasts of light and shadow. 
Below, La Kermesse, a village carnival painted in the 
1630s when Rubens was concentrating more and more on 
landscapes and pastoral subjects. In this scene of 
uninhibited revelry, harking back to the world of Bruegel 
the Elder, Rubens has rediscovered his roots as a 
Flemish painter. 
) 
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
P
a
r
i
s
 
— 
Al
te
 
Pi
na
ko
th
ek
, 
Mu
ni
ch
 
 
17 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s—
 
Lo
uv
re
 
M
u
s
e
u
m

## [Page 18](074812engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

  
) 
 
As architect, chief designer and impresario’ of this grandiose 
pageant, he marshalled an army of assistants. Among them 
were 20-odd painters, including Jacob Jordaens, Cornelis de 
Vos, Erasmus Quellin, Theodore Rombouts, Cornelis Schut, 
Theodore van Thulden, the two van Balen sons, and six sculp- 
tors, including Quellin, van Mildert and Van den Eynde. 
The inscriptions were done by his friend Gevaerts, the poet 
and scholar. A multitude of carpenters, painters, gilders, black- 
smiths, drapers, firework-makers, weavers, tinsmiths and glaziers 
were also engaged on the colossal undertaking, aimed at turning 
the whole city into an immense theatre. Floats were set up in 
the streets and no fewer than 11 triumphal arches were erected. 
The most resplendent of them was decorated on one side with 
12 white stone statues of the emperors of the House of Austria, 
and with paintings illustrating their achievements. Decorations 
were everywhere and no expense was spared. 
The city council wanted to raise new taxes to cover the 
enormous costs of this gala occasion, but higher authorities 
refused. However, these were mere details; the important thing 
was the magnificence of Rubens’ achievement. Several sketches 
for the reception still survive, in a number of museums, notably 
the design for the monumental “Pompa introitus”, showing 
sculptures and paintings by van Thulden and a text by Gevaerts. 
During the same year, 1635, Rubens purchased the chéteau 
of Steen at Elewyt, in Brabant, where from now until his death 
he would spend part of each year. Steen influenced the deve- 
lopment of his work: he began to use its trees, and sometimes the 
‘STAMPS TO HONOUR 
RUBENS 
1577 MONACO 1977 
a
 
o~ 
i
.
 
S
V
G
 
T
T
 
  
COLOUR PAGES 
Opposite page: Detail from a painting by 
Rubens showing the artist, his young wife 
Héléene Fourment and one of his sons strolling 
in their Antwerp garden, 
Photo Blauel-Pinakothek, Munich 
Centre double page: 
The Marchesa Brigida Spinola Doria, a Genoese 
noblewoman. Rubens painted this portrait 
around 1606. 
Photo © National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C., U.S.A, 
surrounding countryside and its people, in the background of his 
paintings. The painter's imagination reached new heights in 
romantic scenes such as the Landscape with Ulysses and Nausi- 
caa and the Shipwreck of Aenaeas. In these last years he conti- 
nued to develop, applying his art to what he saw around him. 
In some paintings, reality mingles with the imaginary: the chateau 
serving, for example, as the backdrop to a tournament scene. 
Gradually, human figures began to dwindle in importance 
until they became no more than tiny actors; their presence re- 
mained necessary —artistic tradition demanded it—but the land- 
scape now dominated the entire painting. A light breeze rustles 
the leaves; the sky, strewn with light clouds, becomes more 
vast; horizons stretch out in the distance. 
Gardens of love and peasant frolics 
This development also influenced his choice of figures, In 
the lavish canvas known as The Garden of Love, well-dressed 
figures stroll, sit and fiirt outdoors but still maintain an atmosphere 
of polite restraint. In the marvellous Kermesse (Carnival}, painted 
with light, deft brush-strokes, restraint has been cast to the 
winds: peasants and their women dance, drink and embrace in 
a veritable explosion of joy. This is the work of a painter expres- 
sing himself with total freedom, in full possession of his creative 
powers. The time had come to discard the mask. The Peasants’ 
Dance is a joyful reel, a prelude to the Shepherd Embracing a 
Woman in which Héléne Fourment’s legs entwined around the 
legs of a man leave little to the imagination. 
One last major commission arrived from Spain. Philip IV 
wanted a series of paintings to decorate the Torre de la Parada, 
his hunting lodge near Madrid. The subjects chosen, "Ovid's 
Metamorphoses and the Labours of Hercules”, were just the 
kind of thing to delight the painter, providing him with endless 
opportunities to depict the nude. 
At the same time, he continued to paint religious subjects, 
and his customers went on plying him with commissions. Some 
of his works from this late period are outstanding, especially The 
Virgin with the Saints, which he planned for his tomb, The Road 
to Calvary and The Martyrdom of St. Livinus, painted with 
breathtaking energy. His brushstrokes were growing lighter and 
lighter, barely skimming the canvas. 
As for the dazzling nudes of his last years, many of them 
depicting Héléne Fourment, surely they are the best and most 
convincing answer to those who, glancing at his last self-portrait, 
have assumed that he was an unhappy husband. Nothing could 
have been further from the truth. His last known letter, written 
CONTINUED PAGE 36

## [Page 19](074812engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

 

## [Page 20](074812engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

 

## [Page 21](074812engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

 

## [Page 22](074812engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

 
 
E
e
 
S
S

## [Page 23](074812engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

"RUBENS 
  


### 46650: Rubens: emissary of peace in strife-torn Europe

‘Emissary of peace 
in strife-torn Europe 
Opposite page above: 
Rubens executed this chalk 
portrait of his son Nicolas 
around 1625-1626. He made 
many delightful sketches of 
his children and sometimes 
used them as models for his 
paintings. 
Photo © Erich Lessing-Magnum 
Albertina, Vienna, Austria 
Opposite page below: 
Le Chapeau de Paille (The 
Straw Hat) is one of Rubens’ 
most famous and attractive 
portraits. It shows Susanna 
Fourment, sister of Rubens’ 
second wife, wearing a 
wide-brimmed hat which is 
actually made of felt. 
Photo © Erich Lessing-Magnum, 
National Gallery, London 
Right, Peace and War (or 
Allegory on the Blessings 
of Peace), painted in 
London in 1630, when 
Rubens was trying to 
induce Charles | to make 
peace with Spain. In the 
background, Minerva, 
goddess of wisdom, drives 
away Mars, while beneath 
her protection the joys of 
peace are displayed. A faun 
blissfully offers the 
gorgeous fruits of the earth 
to children and cupids, 
while his companions (left) 
are laden with gold and 
treasures, symbols of 
renewed prosperity. 
by Frans Baudouin 
- § a painter whose fame stretched 
throughout Europe, Rubens ful- 
filed a mass of commissions 
which would have exhausted a lesser 
man. And yet, astonishingly enough, he 
still found time to take part in the affairs 
of State. His correspondence, as well as 
other documents, provides ample evidence 
of this. 
The earliest surviving letter mentioning 
public affairs is dated 30 September 1623, 
but its contents support the view that he 
had been concerned in secret State busi- 
ness long before then. However, it was 
through a series of fortuitous events and 
circumstances that he came to play an 
active part in diplomacy. 
At that time, the Netherlands were divi- 
ded into two parts. The largely Catholic 
south (corresponding roughly to present- 
day Belgium) belonged to the Spanish 
crown; in the north was the Republic of 
 
FRANS BAUDOUIN /s curator of Antwerp’s mu- 
seums of history and art, and secretary of the co- 
ordinating committee for Rubens Year (1977). He is 
the author of P.P. Rubens: L'CEuvre de Toute une Vie 
{P.P. Rubens: the work of a lifetimel, published by 
fonds Mercator S.A. (Antwerp) and Albin Michel 
(Paris). 
 
the United Provinces (the nucleus of 
today’s Netherlands) which had won its 
independence from Spain and whose 
representatives met at The Hague. 
For many years Spain spared no efforts 
to reconquer the United Provinces. How- 
ever, by 1609 the Republic was so well 
defended under the determined leadership 
of Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange, 
that Spain agreed to sign a 12-year truce. 
The governors of the Spanish Nether- 
lands at this time were the Archduke 
Albert of Austria and his wife the Arch- 
duchess Isabella (her Spanish title was the 
"Serene Infanta’), whose court was at 
Brussels, the capital. When the truce 
came to an end in 1621, Jan Brant, a 
resident of The Hague and a nephew of 
Rubens’ first wife, tried to make contact 
with the Archducal court. 
A close friend of the Prince of Orange, 
Jan Brant was among those who had 
supported the truce and who were press- 
ing for an agreement with the Spanish 
Netherlands. When the Prince seemed in 
favour of making peace, Jan Brant was 
eager to convey the news to the Arch- 
ducal court. ) 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Na
ti
on
al
 
Ga
ll
er
y,
 
L
o
n
d
o
n

## [Page 24](074812engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 46650: Rubens: emissary of peace in strife-torn Europe

) 
PORTRAYING 
THE MIGHTY 
In 1625 Rubens painted this portrait 
{top left) of the Infanta Isabella 
Clara Eugenia, governor of the 
Spanish Netherlands. She is 
wearing the habit of a nun, which 
she adopted after the death of her 
husband, the Archduke Albert, in 
1621. Judging from a portrait of her 
in court dress which Rubens painted 
about 1609, the Infanta had never 
been beautiful: here her expression  . 
is one of authority softened by 
benevolence. For 25 years she was 
a friend, patron and protector to 
Rubens, who was deeply moved by 
her death in 1633. Top right, the 
first Duke of Buckingham, English 
politician, flamboyant adventurer 
and favourite of King Charles I. 
During his diplomatic missions, 
Rubens had close contacts with 
Buckingham, who was assassinated 
in 1628. Below, detail from The 
Presentation of the Portrait of Marie 
de Medici to Henry IV, one of 
21 great paintings depicting the 
life of Marie de Medici, the dowager 
queen of France. The queen 
commissioned this series from 
Rubens in 1621 for her sumptuous 
Paris residence, the Luxembourg 
Palace. Considerable imagination 
was needed to present the 
quarrelsome queen as the 
embodiment of all the virtues. 
Rubens solved the problem by 
clothing truth with allegory, 
showing the queen in glorious 
scenes peopled with bevies of 
goddesses, sirens, angels and 
cupids. In three years he completed 
the series, a masterpiece of 
Baroque art. Here a portrait of 
Marie is shown to her future 
husband Henry IV, who is attended 
by the god Mars. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
P
a
r
i
s
 
— 
Lo
uv
re
 
Mu
se
um
, 
Pa
ri
s 
At this point Rubens expressed his 
willingness to act as an intermediary. As 
a painter, much-favoured by the Archduke 
and the Infanta, he had access to the 
Brussels court and could communicate 
secret information to influential people 
there without arousing suspicions. Rubens 
gave an account of his talks with Jan 
Brant to another of his relatives, Pierre 
Peck (or Peckius), Chancellor of Brabant 
and a trusted counsellor of the Infanta. 
Rubens’ first diplomatic letter was 
addressed to Peckius.. It deals with the 
24 
peace terms the artist had discussed at 
Antwerp with Jan Brant, who is referred 
to pseudonymously as “el Catolico” (the 
Catholic). Thus it was through two family 
connexions that Rubens became involved 
in State business as a negotiator. 
From the surviving evidence, it is impos- 
sible.to piece together a detailed account 
of the talks between Rubens and Jan 
Brant. Because of the highly confidential 
nature of the negotiations, many letters 
relating to them were undoubtedly destroy- 
ed by the participants. At all events, 
Peckius reported on them to the Infanta, 
who subsequently passed on the infor- 
mation to her nephew, Philip IV of Spain. 
On 11 October 1624, the Spanish king 
expressed his agreement with Jan Brant's 
proposal that the belligerents should meet . 
Rubens’ name is not .- in a conference. 
mentioned in the letter, but we can assume . . 
that he was responsible for transmitting 
thé “"Catolico’s” proposal to the Brussels 
court. In 1625, Rubens again refers to 
these negotiations, which had probably 
been interrupted in the meantime.

## [Page 25](074812engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 46650: Rubens: emissary of peace in strife-torn Europe

MEN, GODS 
AND 
SNARLING 
TIGERS 
These works illustrate two of the 
many aspects of Rubens’ art, 
Above, expressive and realistic 
studies of African heads. Below, 
graceful group of nymphs and 
gods in The Four Parts of the 
World. As in so many of Rubens’ 
works the nudes are resplendent. 
In foreground, a snarling tiger 
suckles its young and children 
play with a crocodile whose 
gaping jaws and scaly hide make 
a startling contrast with the 
creamy skin ot its human 
companions. 
In "1623, Rubens reported on his talks 
with Jan Brant to Peckius. 
ever, he had an opportunity to brief the 
Infanta herself about them. 
On 30 August 1624, the French ambass- 
ador in Brussels noted that the Infanta 
had granted several audiences to Rubens, 
who was exploring the possibilities of a 
truce. He also recorded that Rubens, as 
well as making frequent journeys between 
the Brussels court and the army camp of 
General - Ambrogio Spinola, a Genoese 
marquis in the Infanta’s service, was putt- 
1 
Soon, how- 
 
ing it about that the Prince of Orange was 
favourable towards a truce. 
A letter Rubens wrote to the Infanta on 
15 March 1625 provides further proof 
that his standing was now sufficiently 
high for him to approach her directly on 
official business. 
The scope of Rubens’ diplomatic activity, 
which had hitherto aimed at establishing 
peace between the two parts of the Nether- 
lands, now became European-wide. At the 
beginning of 1627 he began to devote all 
his energies to promoting a peace treaty 
between Spain and England, then at war. 
A chance encounter, two years before, 
was of decisive importance in extending 
Rubens’ diplomatic activities to a wider 
European stage. While in Paris in the 
spring of 1625 to complete his series of 
paintings on the life of Marie de Medici, 
Rubens had made the acquaintance of 
George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham, 
and his agent, Balthazar Gerbier. Bucking- 
ham was an adventurer, a connoisseur, a 
collector and a favourite of Charles I. 
Gerbier, like Rubens, was a painter and 
diplomat. 
25 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s—
Mu
sé
es
 
Ro
va
ux
 
de
s 
Be
au
x-
Ar
ts
, 
Br
us
se
ls
 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s 
— 
Ku
ns
th
is
to
ri
sc
he
s 
Mu
se
um
, 
Vi
en
na
 
)

## [Page 26](074812engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 46650: Rubens: emissary of peace in strife-torn Europe

Like many Flemish artists, Rubens loved painting animals, and 
gave free rein to his taste for excitement, drama and physical 
power in tumultuous hunting scenes depicting men and beasts 
locked in life-and-death combat. As well as European animals, 
he also portrayed lions, tigers, crocodiles and hippoes, some of 
which he may have seen and sketched in menageries belonging 
to rich noblemen. In The Boar Hunt (below) a boar attacked by 
a swarm of hounds and huntsmen is the centre of a whirlpool 
of action dominated by a horse's head poised dreamily above the 
melée. Rubens had a particular fondness for horses, often 
giving them expressions that are almost human. The great 
French painter Eugéne Delacroix (1798-1863) dubbed Rubens 
"the Homer of painting’’ and made a careful study of his 
  
Photo © Bulloz, Paris— Marseilles Museum, France 
techniques, especially his use of horses to define a painting's 
"lines of force’. Delacroix shows something of his debt to 
Rubens in The Death of Sardanapolus (detail right). 
) In Paris Rubens painted the Duke's 
portrait and thus had ample opportunity 
to get to know this powerful figure. This 
meeting in Paris undoubtedly explains 
why Buckingham, when he subsequently 
, wished to conclude a peace treaty between 
England and Spain, called on Rubens to 
act as an intermediary. He dispatched 
Gerbier to the Netherlands to sound 
Rubens out. 
. Rubens played a key role in the ensuing 
negotiations. He was summoned to 
Madrid by Philip IV to give an account of 
his contacts with Buckingham. He left 
Antwerp in haste at the end of August 
1628 and made the journey to Madrid in 
the remarkably short time of two weeks. 
Until then Philip IV, his powerful minister 
Olivares, and his other Counsellors, had 
been sceptical about the negotiations in 
which Rubens was engaged. Now they 
were impressed by the positive results of 
the talks and by the soundness of Rubens’ 
reasoning. 
26 
P
h
o
t
o
 
©
 
Bu
ll
ez
, 
P
a
r
i
s
 
— 
Lo
uv
re
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
Rubens’ stay in Madrid lasted about 
eight months, ending on 29 April 1629, 
when he set out for London on a mission 
entrusted to him by Philip IV. He called 
at Brussels on the way to meet the Infanta, 
and paid a brief visit to Antwerp to see his 
two sons. 
In London, Rubens encountered many 
obstacles but finally succeeded in prepar- 
ing the ground for a peace treaty between 
England and Spain. His acuteness in 
assessing men and situations, his powers 
of persuasion, his skill and tact certainly 
made a major contribution to the outcome, 
as well as his reputation as a great painter, 
for both Charles | and Philip IV of Spain 
loved the arts and were delighted by the 
presence of Rubens at their courts. 
For Charles | he painted an Allegory on 
the Blessings of Peace (National Gallery, 
London) in which Minerva, goddess of 
peace, drives away Mars, god of war.’ 
This was clearly an allusion to the nego- 
tiations which Rubens had carried on with 
THE THRILL 
OF THE CHASE 
 
Charles | and which led to the peace treaty 
between Spain and England. 
Rubens’ mission to London was undoub- 
tedly the high point of his diplomatic 
career. Madrid was highly satisfied with 
his work in London. There was question 
of entrusting him with other missions. 
But the artist, who had spent so many 
years travelling, now wished to live a 
peaceful family life in Antwerp with his 
young wife, Héléne Fourment, whom he 
married on 6 December 1630. He wished 
once more to devote himself entirely to 
his art. : 
“For my part, | should like the whole 
world to be at peace and that we should 
-live in a century of gold and not of iron,” 
Rubens wrote. It is not only in his paint- 
ings that we can see the glimmering dawn . 
of a "century of gold.” 
: Hl Frans Baudouin

## [Page 27](074812engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

he
 
L 
» 
Rubens’ skill in creating a luminous quality 
when depicting human flesh has been 
admired (and envied) by many artists. A 
great modern painter of the female nude, 
Auguste Renoir (1841-1919), once ruefully 
confessed that he needed to use heavily 
applied paint to produce effects which 
" Rubens achieved with the lightest of 
brushstrokes. Nevertheless, Renoir’s 
Mother and Child (right) strikes the same 
warm, intimate note as Rubens’ Portrait of 
Héléne Fourment and her Children (detail 
below). See also colour reproduction, 
page 19. 
¥ 
| 
i 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
P
a
r
i
s
 
— 
Du
ra
nd
 
Ru
el
 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
 
P
h
o
t
o
 
©
 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s—
 
Lo
uv
re
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
VENUS GOES POP 
Rubens borrowed the subject of The Toilet of Venus (below left), executed between 1612 and 1615, from the great Venetian 
Master, Titian (1477-1547). In the 1960s the painting was given a "pop art” treatment when the American artist Robert 
Rauschenberg used it in a work entitled Persimmone. : 
   Ph
ot
o 
© 
Li
ec
ht
en
st
ei
n 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
Va
du
z 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Us
is
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 28](074812engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 46654: Spinoza: philosopher of intellectual freedom

PINOZA 
PHILOSOPHER OF 
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 
HREE hundred years ago, on 21° 
| February 1677, Benedict de Spino- 
za, the great seventeenth-century 
forerunner of modern agnostic thought, 
died at The Hague. 
The contents of his desk, containing 
his last writings, were in accordance with 
his wishes taken that very evening to 
Amsterdam, where the bookseller Jan 
Rieuwertsz made an immediate start on 
the printing of the Opera Posthuma (Post- 
humous Works). 
Within a few months a translator, Jan 
Glazemaker, had produced a Dutch ver- 
sion of these works so as to render their 
contents accessible to those who did not 
know Latin. 
In 1632, when Spinoza was born in 
Amsterdam, the country was enjoying a 
period of tolerance and great prosperity. 
The latter, resulting from successful trad- 
ing with the Dutch overseas colonies, had 
its focus in the Beurs or stock exchange 
of Amsterdam. 
Power in this city was in the hands of 
the burgomasters, an oligarchy drawn 
from a small circle of patrician families. 
. The religious tolerance of Amsterdam’s 
cosmopolitan citizens sprang from their 
tradesman’s mentality—one does not, 
after all, question the religion of people to 
whom one is trying to sell something.’ 
During the first 15 years of his life Spi- 
noza had little or no contact with the 
Dutch. Even though its members enjoyed 
the rights of citizenship, the Jewish com- 
munity, to which Spinoza’s family belong- 
ed, lived in isolation in its own quarter of 
the city. 
Spinoza spoke Portuguese at home and 
at school (1). His father ran a highly 
‘successful business trading in products 
from the Levant. From the age of five, 
  
BER REKERS, ODuich university teacher, is an 
assistant professor at the University of Utrecht. His 
study on Arias Montano, the 16th-century- Spanish 
Qrientalist who directed the translation of the Antwerp 
polyglot Bible (see page 12) has been published in 
English as Benito Arias Montano 1527-1598 (The 
Warburg Institute, London, 1972). 
28 
by Ben Rekers 
Spinoza attended a Jewish school where 
he learned excellent Hebrew and scripture. 
When aged about 14, he left the school 
in order to help in his father’s business, 
and after the latter's early death Spinoza 
ran the business for some years on his 
own. He probably had little talent for 
commerce, but it is known that he was 
delighted to leave school. 
At the Amsterdam stock exchange he 
made the acquaintance of other young 
merchants like himself, such as Jarig 
Jelles, Pieter Balling and Simon de Vries, 
all of whom were Collegiants (2). Their 
piety reflected the simplicity and austerity 
of the early Christians and they professed 
a religion with pronounced spiritualist 
leanings. 
The young Spinoza, who was himself 
sober and serious-minded by nature, was 
attracted to them, and they were to remain 
his closest friends throughout his life. 
Their ways of thinking were more sympa- 
thetic to him than those of the capitalist- 
minded Jewish milieu. 
Around this time Spinoza also met 
Francis van den Enden, an ex-Jesuit from 
Flanders who was now married and living 
in Amsterdam. He had opened an excel- 
lent Latin school there, where the sons of 
rich merchants could be prepared for their 
studies at the University of Leiden. 
Spinoza went there to learn Latin, with 
the particular purpose of acquainting him- 
self with contemporary European science. 
He then began to read Giordano Bruno, 
Bacon, Hobbes, Machiavelli and, most 
important of all, Descartes, who had be- 
come famous in the Netherlands when his 
  
(1) Like many of its neighbours, Spinoza's family 
was descended from immigrants of iberian origin who 
had fled the Inquisition. 
{2) The collegiants constituted an important movement 
of religious dissidence in Dutch Protestantism. From 
1620 onwards they set up “colleges” which met in the 
village of Rijnsburg near Leiden, where they underwent 
rebaptism by immersion. They respected all religious 
beliefs since they felt that no denomination could 
claim a monopoly of the truth. They did not recognize 
any religious services or dogmas, and attached more 
importance to love of their fellow beings than to love 
of God. 
first works were published in 1637, and 
for whom there was a veritable passion at 
Leiden University. 
Van den Enden introduced Spinoza to 
the philosophy of scepticism, of which he 
was himself an advocate, and in return 
Spinoza gave lessons in Hebrew grammar 
to the school’s pupils, who included the 
young intellectuals Lodewijk Meijer and 
Adriaan Koerbagh, with whom he became 
great friends. 
Their nates occur in his correspondence 
right up to the end of his life, and it was 
they who eventually persuaded him to put 
his ideas down on paper. They were acti- 
vely involved in publishing his work and 
drew on Spinoza’s philosophy in their own 
writings. 
As a result of this contact with liberal 
Dutch intellectuals, Spinoza became in- 
creasingly estranged from the milieu of his 
birth. However, the leaders of the Jewish 
community, who would have been glad to 
have had such a brilliant young man to 
their credit, tried to win him over, even 
going so far as to offer him a thousand 
florins in return for his silence. 
But in his discussions with the rabbis, 
Spinoza refused to change his ideas, per- 
sisting in them with, if anything, greater 
vehemence. 
By 1656, when Spinoza was 24, the 
synagogue had had enough and proceed- 
ed to excommunicate him. He was cursed 
to future generations, and no Jew was 
allowed to have anything to do with him 
or even approach him closer than ten 
paces.. 
History is, however, guilty of a certain 
misinterpretation, or at any rate misunder- 
standing, with respect to the much-quoted 
text of Spinoza’s excommunication. Less 
well-known than the actual text is the fact 
that such bans were a frequent occurrence 
in Jewish communities, often being rescind- 
ed after as little as a week. 
In any case Spinoza seems to have been 
totally unconcerned by the event, and did 
not even bother to defend himself or take 
any steps to have the excommunication 
withdrawn. His choice had been made )

## [Page 29](074812engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 46654: Spinoza: philosopher of intellectual freedom

  
  
    
    
   
Portrait of Spinoza by an anonymous 17th-century Dutch painter 
29 
    
    Ph
ot
o 
© 
Gi
ra
ud
on
, 
Pa
ri
s 
—W
ol
fe
nb
ut
te
l 
Li
br
ar
y,
 
Th
e 
Ne
th
er
la
nd
s

## [Page 30](074812engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 46654: Spinoza: philosopher of intellectual freedom

voluntarily. His new circle of friends was 
like a family, with the advantage that they 
thought as he did. 
~ Spinoza's separation from the Jewish 
community meant that he could no longer 
carry on his business, so he learned to 
grind lenses in order to make a living. 
There was a great interest in experi- 
mental natural science at this time, espe- 
cially microscopy and astronomy. Through 
the work of Descartes, Spinoza had already 
come into contact with the investigations 
being made in the Netherlands by the 
young Christiaan Huyghens, van Leeuw- 
enhoek (see article page 34) and Swam- 
merdam, and he knew of the experiments 
being carried out by Newton and Boyle in 
England. He felt that his occupation had 
a promising future. 
For another four years Spinoza continu- 
ed to live in Amsterdam, until the fanatical 
rabbis managed to persuade the city coun- 
cil to declare him persona non grata. After 
this he spent some months at the summer 
residence of a rich friend in Ouderkerk, 
15 kilometres away from his Amsterdam 
friends, who were thus able to pay him 
regular visits. 
In the mid-17th century Amsterdam was 
referred to by foreigners as lrenopolis 
(city of peace) or Eleutheropolis (city of 
freedom). The city opened its doors freely 
to all those who were undergoing religious 
persecution elsewhere in Europe: Span- 
ish Jews, French Huguenots and Soci- 
nians from Poland could speak, write and 
publish there unmolested. 
The city council, by reason of its busi- 
‘nessman’s mentality, was tolerant, for 
prosperous trade was irreconcilable with 
fanatical idealism. Anyone who had ex- 
pertise or good trade contacts to offer 
was welcome and of potential use to the 
economy. 
During his Amsterdam period, Spinoza 
learned to value highly the climate of free- 
dom which reigned in the city, and later 
sang its praises in the following splendid 
passage:... "the city of Amsterdam, whose 
enjoyment of this freedom had made it 
great and admired by the whole world. In 
this flourishing state, this city without a 
  
(3) From chapter 20 of the Tractatus Theologico- 
Politicus, 1670, translated by A.G. Wernham in Spi- 
noza's Political Works, (Oxford 1958). 
peer, men of every race and sect live in 
the greatest harmony, and before they 
entrust their goods to anyone, there are 
only two things they want to know : 
whether he is rich or poor, and whether 
he is honest or dishonest. His religion or 
sect does not matter, -for it has no influence 
on the decision of lawsuits. And no sect 
whatsoever is so detested that its mem- 
bers (provided that they harm no one, 
give every man his own, and live decent 
lives} are refused the protection of the 
civil authorities.” (3) 
In 1660 Spinoza moved to Rijnsburg, 
where he knew he would find an atmos- 
phere of peace and seclusion in the com- 
pany of the Collegiants. He lived in the 
village in a small house for three years, 
making optical instruments, reading and 
above all writing. 
He corresponded frequently with Hein- 
rich Oldenburg of the Royal Society in 
London on the subjects of refraction and 
Boyle's experimental physics, and received 
regular letters containing questions from 
his Amsterdam friends Meijer, Balling and 
de Vries. 
Two scenes of life in Amsterdam in Spinoza’s time. Below right, the Stock Exchange, where the tolerant and enlightened Dutch 
merchants met not only to talk business but to discuss the latest ideas. In the 1650s, when Spinoza worked for his father, a prosperous 
merchant, his duties often took him to the Stock Exchange. It was there that he met and befriended a group of young Protestants 
belonging to the "“Collegiant’” movement (so named because its members were organized in small congregations or “‘colleges”). Below, an 
assembly of Collegiants, who, like the young Spinoza, were critical of existing social and religious institutions. 
    
  
  
  
        
30 
Ph
ot
o 
® 
Me
nn
on
it
e 
Co
mm
un
it
y,
 
A
m
s
t
e
r
d
a
m

## [Page 31](074812engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 46654: Spinoza: philosopher of intellectual freedom

They had formed a discussion group 
which met weekly in Jan Rieuwertsz’ 
bookshop, the centre for freethinkers. 
Spinoza also received visits from states- 
men and scholars such as Burgomaster 
Hudde, who ordered lenses from him, and 
probably from the well-known diplomat 
van Beuningen, a Collegiant who came to 
Rijnsburg every year for a retreat. 
Another visitor was the powerful Grand 
Pensionary Jan de Witt, who was a mathe- 
matician by training and the author of a 
well-known mathematical treatise, De 
Linearum Curvarum. 
A student from Leiden by the name of 
Casearius paid regular visits to Spinoza in 
order to have the work of Descartes 
explained to him. As a result, a collection 
of notes came into being which were also 
read by the members of the discussion 
group in Amsterdam, who urged Spinoza 
to have them published. 
He agreed, and the notes became his 
first work to appear in print, entitled “"Prin- 
ciples of the Cartesian Philosophy toge- 
ther with Metaphysical Thoughts”. 
His friend Lodewijk Meijer, the doctor 
and philologist, wrote a preface to the 
book. The corn-chandler. Jarich Jelles, 
who in the meantime had sold his business 
in order to devote himself to philosophy, 
financed the printing. 
Jelles did not know Latin, and consider- 
ed that at his age it would be a waste of 
time to learn it, and so he paid for a trans- 
lation of the book into Dutch, which was 
undertaken by Jan Glazemaker. This and 
subsequent translations were of consider- 
able importance in making Spinoza’s phi- 
losophy known to a wider public at an 
early stage. 
During this period Spinoza began to 
formulate his own philosophical system, 
in the first version of his Ethics, in which 
he moved right away from Descartes. 
Passages of this began to circulate in 
manuscript form and were read and com- 
mented on with eager enthusiasm by his 
friends. 
Their admiration was so great that the 
merchant Simon de Vries, a bachelor, 
named Spinoza as his sole heir, although 
the philosopher, whose way of life was 
still modest and frugal, only accepted an 
annuity of 300 florins. Without a doubt 
the generous offers of help to Spinoza and 
the interest taken in his ideas from an 
early stage were invaluable to his work. 
At this point a gradual change began to 
form in Spinoza’s attitude to life. He felt 
that he could no longer allow himself to 
share in the Spiritualists’ lack of political 
commitment. His thoughts had been 
turned in this direction by reading Pierre 
de la Court's Maximes Politiques pour les 
Etats de Hollande, which defended a form 
of liberal republicanism. According to de 
la Court the system of government was 
determined by economic freedom, and 
political and religious freedom were close- - 
ly linked. The church should not be. al- 
lowed to dominate the State. 
Spinoza now abandoned isolation and 
abstract thought. in order to give active 
support, through his writing, to the liberal 
politics of Jan de Witt. He moved to 
Voorburg on the outskirts of The Hague 
so as to keep in closer touch with his 
friends in the government. 
During this period he wrote his Tracta- 
tus Theologico-Politicus, which contained 
  
31 
) 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s—
 
Am
st
er
da
m 
Ci
ty
 
Ar
ch
iv
es

## [Page 32](074812engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 46654: Spinoza: philosopher of intellectual freedom

a fierce attack on the so-called "theocra- 
tic” Calvinist mode of government, and 
on the greed for power of the clergy, who 
Jpandered to popular feeling. 
Spinoza categorized military patriotism 
as one of the basest human passions. He 
thought that the most suitable form of 
government for the country would be the 
rule of an oligarchy composed of a small 
intellectual élite drawn from the upper 
merchant classes. 
in the theological part of the Tractatus 
he pointed out that the Bible was only the 
work of man, and had been used time and 
time again to enslave the people. Spinoza 
also indicated various chronological inac- 
curacies in the Bible. 
The work was published in 1670, the 
author's name only being indicated by the 
initials B.D.S. 
During this period, Jan de Witt's politi- 
cal power began to wane. A rationalist 
politician, he had never curried. favour 
with the mass of the people, and now he 
was making mistakes, particularly in his 
foreign policy towards England. 
In 1672 he was suddenly faced with a 
joint attack by the French army of Louis 
XIV and the English fleet.. This year of 
invasion became known in Dutch history 
as the Rampjaar or year of disaster. De 
Witt's fall is partly attributed to his refusal, 
during his period in power, to allocate 
sufficient funds for Dutch military forces. 
This decided his fate: he was lynched by 
the mob at The Hague. 
When Spinoza, normally so disciplined 
in his emotions, heard of his friend and 
kindred spirit’s brutal murder he was over- 
come with rage. He wanted to go out in 
the street to challenge the hateful mob, 
and was only dissuaded from doing so 
with the greatest difficulty. That night he 
wrote a short pamphlet, Ultimi Barbaro- 
rum (the very lowest of the barbarians), 
which he posted near the place of the 
assassination. 
In the same year, the young Prince 
William [ll of Orange was appointed Stad- 
thoider and Captain-General of the Army. 
He was already much liked by the people, 
as a ''child of the state”. Admiral de 
Ruyter was able to make his mark on the 
English fleet; and so the disaster-ridden 
“nation was saved. 
On the home front, however, a period 
of repression was under way. University 
professors who had been won over to 
scepticism were dismissed and censorship 
was reintroduced. The city councils, which 
for years had ignored the condemnations 
of the Calvinist synods, were purged. Mili- 
32 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Un
iv
er
si
ty
 
Li
br
ar
y,
 
Am
st
er
da
m 
  
         
tary patriotism had prevailed. 
Spinoza now belonged to the ranks of 
the persecuted, whose spokesman he had 
been in his writings. His Tractatus Theo- 
logico-Politicus was banned: it is thought, 
though not known for certain, that it had 
been commissioned by Jan de Witt. In 
any case it was denounced by the censor- 
ship as a work "forged in hell by a rene- 
gade Jew and the devil, and issued with 
the knowledge of Mr Jan de Witt" 
Spinoza's subsequent fear, especially in 
a man of such natural caution, is under- 
standable, particularly in view of the fate 
of his disciple Adriaan Koerbagh. After 
writing a Spinozist work, A Light Shining 
in Darkness, Koerbagh had in 1668 been 
imprisoned and tortured, and had died in 
gaol. 
In addition, Spinoza had learned that 
his former teacher van den Enden, who 
had gone to France, had been beheaded 
in 1674 for his involvement in the republic- 
an plot of the Chevalier de Rghan against 
Louis XIV. 
During the remaining five years of his 
life Spinoza lived in a rented room in The 
Hague, secluded and disillusioned, work- 
ing on a new Political Treatise and com- 
pleting his Ethics. He received a number 
of important visitors, particularly from 
abroad where his reputation was already 
high, such as a representative of the Prince 
de Condé, the French general, and also 
the young Leibniz, St-Evremont, and the 
Elector Palatine, who offered him a chair 
at the University of Heidelberg. 
He refused the offer because of his 
desire to complete his life's work in peace 
and isolation, and almost achieved his 
wish. Unfortunately he left his Political 
Treatise unfinished, in the chapter where 
after discoursing on the subject of rmonar- 
chy and oligarchy, he had intended to 
deal with the advantages and disadvanta- 
ges of democracy. 
Spinoza died of tuberculosis at the 
early age of 45. Right to the end of his life, 
he applied himself to his writings and 
correspondence, often working at night. 
Towards the end a doctor friend from 
Amsterdam stayed with him, and after- 
wards took the manuscript of the Ethics 
back with him to van Rieuwertsz, the 
publisher. 
The philosopher was buried in the 
Nieuwe Kerk (new church) at The Hague, 
and his hearse was accompanied by six 
carriages occupied by important admirers 
whose names have not come down to us. 
The house on the Prinsessegracht where 
he spent his last years has recently been 
restored and opened as a museum. 
As we have seen, even during Spinoza's 
lifetime he had followers who saw in his 
thought the ultimate truth and who, often 
grossly simplifying his philosophy, made 
extreme and radical deductions from it in 
their own writings. 
These followers included Lodewijk Meijer

## [Page 33](074812engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 46654: Spinoza: philosopher of intellectual freedom

Opposite page: 17th-century engraving of 
a district of Amsterdam. The Dutch 
voyages of discovery and the founding of 
the Dutch East India Company in the 
early 17th century made Amsterdam the 
world’s major commercial city, and its 
policy of religious toleration attracted 
waves of Jewish refugees from Spain and 
the Spanish Netherlands as well as 
Protestants from many countries. Left, 
The Geographer (1658) a work by one of 
the great Masters of Dutch painting, Jan 
Vermeer of Delft, who, like Spinoza, was 
born in 1632. He died in 1675. 
  
in his Philosophia S. Scripturae Interpres 
("Philosophical Interpretation of the Holy 
Scriptures’) —an eloquent title—and also 
spiritualist believers such as Pieter Balling 
("The Light on the Candlestick”) who 
modified his philosophy into a vague mys- 
. ticism, and Jarich Jelles, who in his "“Pro- 
fession of the Christian Faith” presented 
Spinoza as a kind of evangelist. 
These spiritual free-thinkers were of | 
great value to Spinoza when it was a 
question of giving him practical help, but 
they were somewhat naive and only had a 
partial grasp of his metaphysics, which 
are far more complex than those of 
Descartes. : 
~ Shortly after Spinoza’s death, a minister 
from the town of Zwolle, F. van Leenhof, 
wrote "Heaven on Earth’, an epicurean 
work in which he drew on Spinoza’s work 
to advocate free sexual morals. He was 
given a savage sentence in 1712 after a 
long trial. 
The orthodox Calvinists had been right 
in realizing early on that Spinoza’s philo- 
sophical system contained dynamite. It is 
difficult to be sure whether Spinoza was 
essentially an atheist in his Ethics, as: 
modern interpretations of his work are 
greatly at variance. 
What is certain is that his pantheism 
{Deus sive Natura), his lay rationalism and 
his philosophical free-thinking prepared 
the way for the crisis of the European 
conscience and the Age of the Enlighten- 
1 
ment. Later on Schelling, Goethe, Schlei- 
ermacher and Hegel were to build on his 
foundations, and in 19th-century France 
his influence on Victor Cousin, Paul Janet 
and Ernest Renan was considerable. Ein- 
stein in the 20th century was an admirer 
of his work. 
painted a highly sentimentalized picture of 
him as a poor spectacle-maker who lived 
his life in poverty and obscurity. The truth 
is that, along with Huyghens, he was one 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ku
ns
ti
ns
ti
tu
ts
, 
Fr
an
kf
ur
t 
.__.Many of Spinoza's biographers have _ 
of the most famous experts in optics of 
his day. 
He is often depicted as a dreamy abstract 
thinker living in seclusion, whereas he 
numbered many influential politicians 
among his friends and acquaintances. 
Finally, his often-cited excommunication 
by the Jewish authorities was a frequent 
and relatively insignificant occurrence at 
the time. 
Recent historical research, in some cases 
undertaken on the occasion of the tricen- 
tenary of Spinoza’s death, has set out to 
expose a number of legends concerning 
his life and to distinguish fact from fiction. 
Nevertheless, there are still some gaps 
in Spinoza’s biography. Evidence dating 
back to the 17th century, apart from the: 
biased and unreliable entry in Pierre Bayle's 
Dictionary, is confined to descriptions of 
him by his contemporaries Lucas and. 
Colerus. They did not know him perso- 
nally, and were obliged to rely on informa- 
tion given them by the painter from whom 
Spinoza rented a room. There are many 
discrepancies in the works of these early 
biographers. : 
The surviving correspondence to and 
from Spinoza is -scant, consisting of a 
mere 84 letters whose texts are often in- 
complete. . Personal news was regarded 
by early scholars as unimportant and was 
cut out, so that most of the letters read 
more like treatises on philosophy or natur- 
al science. - 
Even so, they provide much useful clari- 
fication of the Ethics and also illustrate 
Spinoza’s kindliness, revealing the patien- 
ce with which he explained his ideas to 
the often simple people who wanted to 
understand his work. 
Spinoza was a highly original thinker 
who evolved his philosophical system quite 
independently. Yet it should not be for- 
gotten that he was able to work so 
successfully partly because he lived in one 
of the freest nations in Europe, where the 
intellectual climate was salutary and sti- 
mulating and where he was able to find a 
circle of friends who could support him 
morally and financially. 
One might even wonder whether this 
modest and cautious man would ever have 
committed his thoughts to paper, let alone 
published them, had it not been for the 
pressure exerted by these friends. 
HM Ben Rekers 
33

## [Page 34](074812engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 46657: Van Leeuwenhoek: father of microbiology

VAN LEEUWENHOEK 
FATHER OF MICROBIOLOGY 
by J.W.M. La Riviére 
 
Portrait of Antonie 
     
van Leeuwenhoek 
(1632-1723) 
by J. Verkolje 
    
: ome 300 years ago—in the 1670s—: 
a vast new world was uncovered 
by the ingenuity and perseverance 
of a self-made scholar living in the city of 
Delft, the Netherlands. 
name was Antonie van Leeuwenhoek. 
He did not sail uncharted oceans, nor 
did he cross inhospitable mountains and 
deserts. 
at home looking at a candle, armed with a 
tiny hand-microscope. 
The candle served as a light source for 
the illumination of a great variety of objects 
ranging from a drop of blood to the wing 
of a butterfly. These he studied with his 
home-made instrument about the size of a 
matchbox, which nevertheless gave a 
 
JAN WILLEM MAURITS LA RIVIERE is professor 
of environmental microbiology at the International 
Institute for Hydraulic and Environmental Engineering, 
Delft, the Netherlands. He is chairman of the Inter- 
national Cell -Research Organization (ICRO), of the 
International Commission on Microbial Ecology and of 
the natural sciences subcommission of the Netherlands 
National Cornmission for Unesco. 
34 
The scholar’s 
He made his discoveries quietly 
magnification of some 270 times with a 
single lens. 
Having started his career as a draper, 
van Leeuwenhoek had been counting the 
threads of his wares with a magnifying 
glass. Gradually he became so fascinated 
by microscopy that he devoted more and 
more time to perfecting his lenses and 
bringing them to bear on everything he 
could put his hands on, 
Thus he turned from a small business- 
man into one of the world’s great natura- 
lists, earning what money he needed 
through several jobs in the service of the 
town of Delft. : 
He recorded his observations in great 
detail and with passionate objectivity in 
his famous letters to the Royal Society in 
London; the Society eventually elected 
him a Fellow in 1680. 
His collected letters are now being 
published by the Royal Academy of Scien- 
ces of the Netherlands in both Dutch and’ 
English, illustrated with his drawings, and 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ga
bb
 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
annotated in the light of present know- 
ledge. More than 20 thick volumes are 
foreseen. 
Even today his reports are a delight to 
read. On the one hand he leaned over 
backwards to remain factual and to refrain 
from unwarranted interpretations and 
speculations, providing ingenious quanti- 
tative measurements wherever he could. 
On the other hand he could not always 
restrain himself, a human being possessed 
as he was by the elation engendered by 
marvels freshly discovered. 
On such occasions he let himself go, 
giving vent to his excitement, an ex- 
citement easily shared by biologists peer- 
ing through their microscopes today. 
Describing, for instance, his observations 
on what we now call bacteria in infusions 
of pepper in water, he wrote (1676) . 
“In the afternoon of the same day, about 
3 o'clock, | saw still more animalcules, both’ 
round ones and those that wera twice as 
long as broad, and besides these, a sort

## [Page 35](074812engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 46657: Van Leeuwenhoek: father of microbiology

which were still smaller, and incredibly 
many of the very little animalcules whose 
shape | could not make out this morning. 
| now saw very distinctly that these were 
little eels or worms..., lying huddled toge- 
ther and wriggling, just as if you saw with 
your naked eye a whole tubful of very little 
eels and water, the eels moving about in 
swarms; and the whole water seemed to 
_ be alive with the multitudinous animalcules. 
"For me this was among all the marvels 
that | have discovered in nature the most 
marvellous of all, and | must say that, for 
my part, no more pleasant sight has yet 
‘met my eye than this of so many thousands 
of living creatures in one small drop of 
water, all huddling and moving, but each 
creature having its own motion. And even 
if I said that there were a hundred thousand 
animalcules in one drop of water which’ | 
took from the surface of the water, | 
should not err.” 
And in his letter (1693) on the anatomy 
of the flea he recorded the following excla- 
mation of his draughtsman: “Dear God, 
what marvels there are in so small a 
© creature.” ~~ oC Cot Ce 
Because he also observed and described 
many other kinds of microbes such as: 
algae, protozoa and yeasts, van Leeuwen- 
hoek became perhaps best known as the 
Father of Microbiology. Nevertheless we 
should not forget that he made many more 
pioneering discoveries in other branches 
of biology as well, including: 
- — the spermatozoids of man (1677); the 
circulation of the blood in arteries; the 
structure of hair, teeth and bone; the 
components of blood, milk and sputum; 
— the structure of wood and many other 
plant tissues; 
— the anatomy of insects, worms and 
many other animals. 
Through his work in botany, anatomy, 
histology, entomology, physiology, as 
well as that in microbiology, van Leeuwen- 
hoek became a universal forerunner in the 
life sciences, a field of intensive activity 
for Unesco too, in which the Organization 
closely collaborates with the International 
Cell Research Organization {ICRO)}, found- 
ed exactly 15 years ago. 
A major segment of this programme is 
carried out jointly with the United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) and is 
directed towards the application of micro- 
biology to the basic human needs in the 
developing countries, especially rural areas. 
Most microbes —less than one-tenth of 
a percent of them can cause disease—are V 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ga
bb
 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
 
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Go
ve
rn
me
nt
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
fo
r 
th
e 
Hi
st
or
y 
of
 
Na
tu
ra
l 
Sc
ie
nc
e,
 
Le
id
en
, 
th
e 
N
e
t
h
e
r
l
a
n
d
s
 
 
iv 
"Ts 
CL eae 
PSSYS SA 2 
  
 
PIONEER EXPLORATION 
OF THE MICROBE WORLD 
Above, a brass microscope, one of 500 | 
made and used by Antonie van 
Leeuwenhoek between 1673 and 1723 in 
his pioneering studies of microbes. The 
tiny lens was mounted between two metal 
plates (approx. 40 mm by 18 mm) riveted 
together. Objects to be viewed were 
mounted on a needle and brought into 
focus by adjusting the screw which moved 
     
In a famous letter to the Royal Society in 
London, written in 1683, van Leeuwenhoek 
vividly described the above bacteria and their 
movements: A, he wrote "had a strong and 
nimble motion and shot through the water like 
a pike”; B “often spin about like a top and 
sometimes took a course as shown between C 
and D*; E “went ahead so nimbly... that I can 
compare them to nothing better than a swarm 
of gnats or flies’; F were “streaks or threads... 
which lay disorderly ravelled together’; and 
G "bent themselves in curves as they moved.”  Ph
ot
o 
© 
La
bo
ra
to
ry
 
of
 
Mi
cr
ob
io
lo
gy
, 
De
lf
t 
Un
iv
er
si
ty
 
[7 
] 
2 = 
@ 
L = 
2 
= 
Q 
££ 
- 
> 
o 
2 
[=] 
c 
££ 
ES] 
[a 
»— 
o 
the specimen in front of the lens. On 
15 April 1977 a replica of a van 
' Leeuwenhoek microscope was presented 
to Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M’'Bow, Director- 
General of Unesco by the Netherlands - 
National Commission for Unesco in 
recognition of Unesco’s activities in the 
life sciences. Below left, van 
Leeuwenhoek’s drawings of bacteria 
from the human mouth. Fig. Ais a 
drawing of a motile Bacillus. Below right, 
" cell of a motile Bacillus seen through a 
powerful modern electron microscope. .

## [Page 36](074812engo.pdf#page=36) 2

### 46644: Rubens: a portrait of the artist as a universal man

### 46657: Van Leeuwenhoek: father of microbiology

) beneficial and eminently suited to serve as 
tools in the production of food, fodder; 
fuel and fertilizer, in the recycling of waste 
materials and in the production of chemi- 
cals like antibiotics {see Unesco Courier, 
July 1975}. These are the areas on which 
the UNEP-Unesco-ICRO programme of 
applied microbiology concentrates its 
activities. 
But there is one more good reason why 
Unesco should join in the celebrations of 
the tercentenary of van Leeuwenhoek’s 
discoveries. At a time when Europe was 
seething with conflict, van Leeuwenhoek 
quietly conducted his correspondence 
with the Royal Society in London across 
the barriers of the war between England 
and the Netherlands (1672-1674). 
This is spelled out in the letter through 
which Reinier de Graaf, an anatomist from 
Delft, introduced van Leeuwenhoek to the 
Royal Society in 1673: “That it may be the 
more evident to you that the humanities 
and science are not yet banished from 
among us by the clash of arms, | am writ- 
ing to tell you that a certain most ingenious 
person here, named Leeuwenhoeck, has 
devised microscopes which far surpass 
those which we have hitherto seen... The 
enclosed letter from him, wherein he des- 
cribes certain things which he has observed 
more accurately than previous authors, 
will afford you a sample of his work...."” 
The letters in which van Leeuwenhoek 
communicated his discoveries to the Royal 
Society 300 years ago manifest the univer- 
sality and pervasiveness of scientific en- 
deavour among the nations of the world, 
spiritual foundations upon which Unesco 
also depends. 
BH J.W.M. La Rividre 
R U B E N S (CONTINUED FROM PAGE 18) 
less than two months before his death, provides ample proof to 
the contrary. And his work, it must be repeated, is that of a 
‘contented man. 
Rubens died in Antwerp on 3 May 1640. He had been the 
: crowning glory of the Antwerp school, which virtually died out 
with him, Van Dyck followed him to the grave in 1641, although 
. Jordaens, the Antwerp school’s last representative of note, sur- 
vived until 1678. After that, the school went into a more or less 
final decline. However, Rubens’ work continued to exercise 
great influence, especially on French artists, from Watteau, 
. Boucher and Fragonard, to Delacroix, and even Renoir. 
Rubens, a fascinating and many-sided personality, loved 
corresponding with the great men of his time, especially with 
humanists such as Fabri de Peiresc, the famous Provencal scholar 
who, right up to his death in 1637, lost no opportunity to show 
his admiration for the painter. 
As a result of his formative years in Italy, Rubens was most 
at ease when writing in Italian, which he used whether commu- 
nicating with Spanish grandees such as the Archduke and his 
wife, or Count-Duke Olivares, or with his French scholar friends. 
Sometimes he wrote in French—to Buckingham among others — 
or in Flemish, to some of his colleagues. His letters contain a 
liberal sprinkling of Latin phrases. 
His prodigious capacity for work enabled him to amass an 
impressive fortune, despite the hard times in which he lived. He 
was tireless in defending his own interests, For example, he was 
greatly interested in engraving, realizing that the circulation of 
prints was an excellent means of getting his work widely known. 
In addition to obtaining privileges for the distribution of his works 
in several countries, he made a close study of engraving tech- 
niques, even giving impetus to a new school of engraving, differ- 
ing from earlier schools in its concern to render subtle gradations 
of light and shade. 
In his search for the most faithful possible rendering of his 
coloristic richness into linear black and white, he helped to 
train a galaxy of engravers, including Cornelis Galle, the Bolswert 
brothers, Lucas Vorstermans and Paulus Pontius. These engrav- 
ers took the rapid sketches he prepared for his friend Balthasar 
Moretus, who had inherited the Plantin press, and completed 
them in accordance with his instructions. These sketches became 
the sumptuous title pages which lent the books coming off 
Plantin’s presses their entirely new, pure baroque style. 
Rubens was a draughtsman of astonishing skill. When pre- 
paring his portraits, he would make a study of the mode! from 
life, thereby enabling us to gauge just how much liberty he took 
when he came to apply the paint. Here too, his powerfully deco- 
rative style helped save his models from banality. What is most 
striking in these sketches, which usually served as a guide for the 
final composition, is his sureness of touch. . Everything fell into 
place at once; there was no need for second thoughts. The 
sketches, done on little wood panels, with brush and sepia, with 
the occasional underscoring of colour here and there, furnish 
striking evidence of Rubens’ genius. Even at this stage, every- 
thing was already in its intended place, and the final painting 
could be executed to scale from these invaluable documents. 
36 
P
h
o
t
o
s
 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
On more than one occasion, as we have seen, the paintings 
were done by teams of assistants, with the master adding the 
finishing touches. Not that there was ever any attempt to de- 
ceive the client. Rubens graded the prices of his work according 
to whether it was entirely “by his hand”, as he put it, or simply 
supervised or revised by him, , 
In any case, the skill of his assistants was such that specia- 
lists still argue over who exactly did what.’ 
One expert tried to sidetrack the problem by asserting that, 
with two exceptions—which were undeniable on account of 
evidence that has survived in Rubens’ correspondence—all the 
paintings were by the master himself. But this view is untenable. 
The fact is, Rubens relied heavily on his assistants, and painted 
very few works entirely by himself. This in no way detracts from 
his creative genius, one of the greatest in the history of art. 
Hl Roger Avermaete 
 
    

## [Page 37](074812engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

  
Letters 
to 
the editor 
THE ACROPOLIS IN DANGER 
Sir, : . 
A short while ago, a terrible photograph 
appeared in the newspapers. It showed the ° 
‘Acropolis, in Athens, trapped in an enorm- 
ous semi-transparent plastic bubble, through 
which the famous monuments appeared 
dimly, as if seen in a mist. 
This “artist's impression” purported to 
show the most effective and—according to 
its inventors —the easiest way of protecting 
"the Acropolis from the effects of pollution. 
.But no one who knows what the Acro- 
polis means to the world, and no one who 
has seen for himself the sunlight of Greece 
playing on the marble of its monuments, 
could countenance such an imprisonment, 
even as a last, desperate measure of pro- 
, tection. - 
That is why | was pleased to read, in the 
February 1977 issue of the Unesco Courier. 
 - the appeal by Mr. Amadou-Mzahtar M'Bow 
- Acropolis. 
--M'Bow's appeal. 
-'—Unesco’s Director-General—for an inter- 
national campaign to save the monuments 
of the Acropolis." . 
There is hope, then, that the Parthenon, 
the Erechtheum,’ the Propylaea and the 
temple of Athena Nike will be saved, with- 
out recourse to plastic. 
I look forward to reading the Unesco 
Courier’s forthcoming issue devoted to the 
_There can be no doubt that by 
calling attention again to the site's historic 
importance and to the problems of its pre- 
servation, you will alert world opinion, and 
make the public even more receptive to Mr. 
Jean Sam Curtet 
Nyon, Switzerland 
Editor's note: The Greek authorities have rejected 
as unfeasible a plan to cover the Acropolis monu- 
ments with a giant glass dome to save them from 
pollution decay. 
LEVIATHAN LIVES ON 
Sir, 
Your January 1977 issue ("Who Owns 
the Oceans?’’} contains a caption on whales 
which is misleading. 
It is not true to state that “all species of 
. great whales are threatened with extinction 
because of intensive whaling.” Indeed, the 
only species so threatened is Bryde's Whale 
a tropical species ° {Balaenoptera edenil, 
which is taken mainly by nations not party 
to the International Whaling Convention. 
- Nor is it true to state that ‘no measurable 
increase has occurred in the numbers of the 
[totally] protected species [of great whales.” 
Humpback whales in the North Atlantic 
have been protected since 1955, blue wha- 
les since 1960. -Humpback whales in the’ 
Northwest Atlantic are numerous, probably 
numbering 1500 or more. The number of 
blue whales in the same area is not known 
accurately, but strandings induced by ice 
are now an annual phenomenon in south- 
west Newfoundland. 
Rate of increase, clearly, will be a func- 
tion of the residua! population at time of 
protection and time elapsed since protec- 
tion, and will follow the kind of curve ex- 
pected of an animal population. 
Dr. D.E. Sergeant 
Member, Whale Research Group, 
International Union for Conservation of 
Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) 
- Ste. Anne de Bellevue 
Montreal, Canada’ 
AND WORLD COMMUNICATION 
Sir, 
I am rather surprised that your April 1977 
issue about world communication contains 
no reference to the international language, 
Esperanto, invented by. Dr. Zamenhof to- 
wards the end of the last century. 
Being completely regular in grammatical 
construction, and for other reasons, it is 
much easier to learn than any national lan- 
guage. It has the added advantage of being 
"neutral’’, so that its use does not excite 
national sensitivities. 
R.D.Y. Perrett 
Sheffield, U.K,   L   
UNESCO MEDAL FOR RUBENS YEAR 
To mark the 400th anniversary of Rubens’ birth, Unesco 
has issued a commemorative meda! in gold, silver and 
bronze. The medal (see opposite page) shows on one 
side a bust of Rubens, after his self-portrait in the Rubens’ 
House, Antwerp. On the other is a mother and infant 
from a Rubens drawing, “Maternity”, in the Louvre, 
bearing the inscription "Pietro Pauolo Rubens’ in the 
style of his signature. During a ceremony at Brussels on 
21 April, the first gold medal to be struck was presented 
toKing Baudouin of Belgium bya delegation led jointly by 
Mr. Makaminan Makagiansar, Unesco’s Assistant Direc- 
tor-General for Culture and Communication and by Mr. 
Felipe Herrera, Chairman of the Administrative Council of 
the International Fund for the Promotion of Culture. 
Prices are as follows: 
Gold 900/1,000, 23 mm, 75g 
{with chain ring) 
Silver 925/1,000, 3 41mm, 30g 
{with chain ring) 
Bronze @ 59 mm, 100 g 
{with chain ring) 
" Complete series in a box 
{with chain ring) 
Proceeds from the sale of the medal, designed by Serge 
Santucci (France) and struck by the French mint, will be 
used to assist the training of young artists from develop- 
ing countries. 
The medal can be obtained from: 
The Philatelic Service of Unesco, 
7. Place de Fontenoy, 
75700 Paris; 
Monnaies et Mé&dailles du Monde, 
24, Rue Royale, 
75008 Paris: 
or from Belgian banks. 
455 French francs 
500 FF 
135 FF 
145 FF 
60 FF 
70 FF 
670 FF 
735 FF 
{3370 Belgian francs) 
(3705 FB) 
(1000 FB) 
(1075 FB) _ 
( 445 FB) 
( 520 FB) 
(4965 FB) 
(5445 FB)   
 
37

## [Page 38](074812engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
BOOKSHELF 
RECENT UNESCO BOOKS 
8B New Trends in Integrated Scien- 
ce Teaching, Volume IV: Evaluation 
of Integrated Science Education, 
edited by David Cohen. (Based on the 
proceedings of an international sympo- 
sium held in Oxford, U. K., in 1975). 
1977, 199 pp. (38 F). 
B Communication Policies in Costa 
Rica, by Jaime M. Fonseca. 1977, 
89 pp. {16 F). 
| Science and Technology in the 
Development of the Arab States. 
(No. 41 in Unesco’s "Science Policy . 
Studies and Documents” series). 1977, 
327 pp. (30 F).. 
B The Economics of New Educatio- 
nal Media. A reference book on the 
cost effectiveness of different media 
approaches to education. ("Educational 
Methods and Techniques’ series, No. 1). 
1977, 200 pp. {36 Fl. : 
HB In-service Training of Teachers in 
Sri Lanka, by K.D. Ariyadasa. 1976, 
- 56 pp. {7 F); Examination Reforms in 
Sri Lanka, by B. Premaratne. 
49 pp (6 F); Management of Educa- 
tional Reforms in Sri Lanka, by K.D. 
Ariyadasa. 1976, 41 pp. (6 F); Integrat- 
ed Approach to Curriculum Deve- 
lopment in Primary Education in Sri 
Lanka, by K. Peiris. 1976, 25 pp. {6 F); 
Integrated Science in the Junior 
Secondary School in Sri Lanka, by 
A.M. Ranaweera. 1976, 31 pp. (6 F). 
A series of studies on Sri Lanka's major 
educational reforms of 1972. Unesco: 
International Bureau of Education (IBE) 
"Experiments and Innovations in Edu- 
cation’’ series, Nos. 23, 24, 25, 26 and 
27. 
B A Comprehensive Plan for the 
Global Investigation of Pollution in 
the Marine Environment and Base- 
line Study Guidelines. 
mental Oceanographic 
© Technical Series, No. 14). 
(6 F). 
1976, 42 pp. 
NH An Alternative Pattern of Basic 
Education. Radio Santa Maria, by 
Robert White. A study on Radio Santa 
Maria, which provides an education 
service for the rural adult population of 
the Dominican Republic. (Unesco: IBE 
"Experiments and Innovations in Educa- 
tion” series, No. 30). 1976, 122 pp. 
(15 F). 
8B Mediterranean Forests and Ma- 
quis: Ecology, Conservation and 
Management. 1977, 79 pp. (14 F); 
Human Population Problems in the 
Biosphere: Some Research Strate- 
gies and Designs, edited by Paul 
Baker. 1977, 82 pp. (16 F); Dynamic 
Changes in Terrestrial Ecosystems: 
Patterns of Change, Techniques for 
Study and Application to Manage- 
ment, edited by R.O. Slatyer. 1977, 
30 pp. (6 F) Nos. 2, 3 and 4 in Unesco’s 
"MAB Technical Notes” series. (MAB 
= Man and the Biosphere, Unesco’s 
international programme of global re- 
search on the interactions between man . 
and the environment.) 
1976, - 
“ {Intergovern-" 
Commission 
  
38 
ESED [I 
  
Lo 
Dictionary of 
African Biography 
The first volume (Ethiopia-Ghana) of the Dic- 
tionary of African Biography was presented to 
Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M’Bow, Director-General 
of Unesco, on 19 April 1977 by Professor Ofosu- 
Appiah, Director of the Encyclopaedia Africana 
secretariat. The first of 20 volumes being 
written under the direction of the Encyclopaedia 
Africana secretariat in Accra (Ghana) it cont- 
ains 290 biographies of noted African figures 
from Ethiopia and Ghana {living persons not 
included). Vol. | can be obtained from Refe- 
rence Publications Inc., 218 St. Clair River 
Drive, Algonac, Michigan 48001, U.S.A., price 
$59.95 per copy. (For orders outside U.S.A. 
add $3 per copy for shipping.) The 20-volume 
set can also be ordered at a specially reduced 
pre-publication price of $49.95 per volume {plus 
$3 per volume for shipping costs outside U.S.A.). 
Prices subject to change for later volumes if 
printing costs increase. ~~ 
30 years | 
of international co-operation 
in flying 
The International Civil Aviation Organization 
(ICAO) celebrates its 30th anniversary this year. 
A specialized agency of the United Nations 
with 136 Member States, its objectives are to 
develop the principles and techniques of inter- 
national air navigation and to foster the plan- 
ning and development of international air trans- 
port. It is currently playing an active role in 
providing technical assistance for aviation pro- 
jects within the framework of the U.N. family’s 
programme of aid to developing countries. 
Centenary of : - 
sound recording 
The centenary of the invention of recorded sound 
was celebrated recently at Unesco’s Paris head- 
quarters at a ceremony organized jointly by 
the International Federation of Producers of 
- Phonograms and Videograms (IFPI) and the 
International Music Council {{MC). The French 
  
U.N. stamp honours 
Security Council 
  LA AA AA AA ALAA LAS ALAA AL 
UNITED NATIONS. NATIONS UNE S 
O
C
D
E
 
A
M
E
 
r
e
i
 
H
A
L
I
M
 
  
“
A
 
s
i
d
o
a
t
a
d
 
25 
d
h
i
v
i
i
n
i
n
g
e
 
¥ 
r
u
 
v
o
n
 
S
I
N
O
O
W
Y
N
 
L
A
A
 
A
R
A
R
R
A
R
R
A
A
R
A
L
 
{0,80 conse oe stcumne 
BALA LAALRRARARALAAAADLAAAL     
This stamp honouring the United Nations Secu- 
rity Council is one of a set issued by the U.N. 
Postal Administration on 27 May 1977. Itis a 
tribute to the work of the body on which the 
U.N.’s Member States have conferred the pri- 
mary responsibility for maintaining peace and 
security. Designed by G. Hamori (Australia), 
the stamp renders the idea of security through 
two stylized hands protecting the U.N. emblem, .. 
symbol of the universe.   
HWSROON 
poet Charles Cros invented a phonograph in 
1877, the same year in which Thomas Edison 
of the U.S.A. made his first recording. During 
the ceremony, Mr. John E. Fobes, Unesco's 
Deputy Director-General, drew attention to 
Unesce-sponsored conventions and agreements 
protecting recordings and facilitating their 
circulation, and stressed the importance of re- 
cording in conserving and making known "‘un- 
written music, so rich in many countries of 
Africa, Asia and Latin America’. 
New catalogue of 
U.N. stamps 
A new list of U.N. stamps issued during the 
first 25 years (1951-1976) of existence of the 
United Nations Postal Administration has just 
. been published. It is available {in English only} 
from the U.N. Postal Administration, Palais des 
Nations, CH-1211 Geneva 10, Switzerland {price 
$0.75). 
i 
India’s gift to save 
Moenjodaro in Pakistan 
The Indian government has contributed $50,000 
to Unesco’s International Campaign to safe- 
guard the 5,000-year-old site of Moenjodaro in 
Pakistan, one of the largest known examples of 
early Bronze Age town planning. The Interna- 
tional Campaign was launched to raise a mini- 
mum $5 million of the estimated $11 million 
needed to preserve Moenjodaro from destruc- 
tion. Total contributions pledged or received 
now stand at $650,000. 
Dinosaurs and drifting 
continents 
A piece of fossilized bone, recently discovered _ 
on the Isle of Wight {U.K.), is believed to be 
part of the tail of a giant Diplodocus dinosaur. 
A complete skeleton of a Dijplodocus was un- 
earthed in Wyoming (U.S.A.) at the turn of the 
century. The new find suggests that this pre- 
historic creature also existed in what is now 
Europe, and supports the theory that Europe 
and America were once joined in a single land- 
mass that later split and drifted apart. ; 
Flashes... 
  
B The Paris mint has issued a medal to 
mark the 300th anniversary of Spinoza’s 
death. 
‘BB Schistosomiasis, or snail fever, is ende- 
mic in 71 countries, infecting about 200 mil- 
‘lion people, reports WHO. The disease is 
spreading and its severity increasing. 4 
- The water used by 90 per cent of the 
population of the developing world is either 
unsafe or inadequate, or both, 
UNICEF. 
B As part of its "philatelic year’ Sweden 
is issuing a special stamp to commemorate 
the 500th anniversary of Uppsala University. 
B The U.S. alligator has been saved from 
extinction after 20 years of efforts by con- 
servationists and officials, reports U.N. 
Development Forum. 
B UNICEF is helping to sink some 310,000 
shallow wells in Bangladesh (from 1972 to 
7880) for supplying safe drinking water to 
rural communities. 
reports 
B
R
O
D
A
R
D
 
et
 
T
A
U
P
I
N
.
 
C
O
U
L
O
M
M
I
E
R
S
.
 
— 
Dé
pd
t 
lé
ga
l 
C1
 
— 
Ju
in
 
19
77
 
— 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
 
(P
ri
nt
ed
 
in
 
Fr
an
ce
)

## [Page 39](074812engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

  
TWO UNESCO BOOKS ON PAINTING 
Catalogue of reproductions of paintings 1860 to 
1973 with fifteen projects for exhibitions 
  
Cotnlogue de + Catalogue of 
reproductions de n 
PAINTINGS 
1840 to 1¥73 
paintures 
1960 41972 
eproductions of BW Lists high-quality colour 
An illustrated inventory of famous 
dismembered works of art—European painting 
  
Cathloge de 
reproducciones de / An illustrated inventory 
18001973 reproductions of more than of famous dismembered 
1,500 important paintings Works of art 
produced between 1860 European painting 
! 
Distinguished European 
specialists trace the history 
of famous dismembered or 
mutilated works of art and 
  
  
  
  
1974 
343 pp. 
40 French francs 
and 1973, chosen by an 
international panel of 
experts. 
B Each reproduction 
shown in black and white, 
along with full details of 
original work (date, 
collection, museum, etc.) 
and reproduction (size, 
price, publisher's 
address, etc. ). 
B Fifteen projects for 
exhibitions based on the 
reproductions in the 
catalogue. 
Unesco 
m
f
 
  
  
cl a 
show what has been or 
could be done to restore 
these works to their 
original unity, 
Chapters on dismembered 
works of Flemish, French, 
German, [talian, Russian 
and Spanish painting; : 
European illuminated 
manuscripts; and 
dismembered tombs and 
sculpture in France.   
1974 
70 FF (hardbound)   221 pp., 340 illustrations 
  
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the 
National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed, along with subscription rates in local 
currency, will be supplied on request.) 
AUSTRALIA. Publications: Educational Supplies Pty. 
Ltd., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NSW; Periodicals; 
Dominie Pty., Limited, Box 33, Post Office, Brookvale 
2100, NSW. Sub-agent: United Nations Association of 
Australia, Victorian Division 5th floor, 134-136 Flinders St., 
Melbourne (Victoria), 3000. — AUSTRIA. Dr. Franz Hain, 
Verlags-und Kommissionsbuchhandlung, Industriehof Stadlan, 
Dr. Otto Neurath-Gasse 5, 1220 Wien, — BELGIUM. “Unesco 
Courier’ Dutch edition only; N.V. Handelmaatschappij Keesing. 
Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurne-Antwerpen. French edition 
and general Unesco publications agent: Jean de Lannoy, 112, 
rue du Tréne, Brussels 5. CCP 000-0070823-13. — BURMA. 
Trade Corporation N° 9, 550-552 Merchant Street. Rangoon. 
— CANADA. Renouf Publishing Co. Ltd., 2182 St. Catherine 
Street West, Montreal, Qué H3H 1M7. — CYPRUS, "MAM", 
Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 1722, Nicosia. — 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. — S.N.T.L., Spalena 51, Prague 1 
{Permanent display); Zahranicni literatura, 11 Soukenicka, 
Prague 1. For Slovakia only; Alfa Verlag — Publishers, 
Hurbanovo nam. 6,893 31 Bratislava — CSSR. — DEN- 
MARK. Munksgaards Boghandel, 86, Norregade, DK-— 
1165, Copenhagen K. — EGYPT {ARAB REPUBLIC OF). 
National’ Centre for Unesco Publications, N° 1 Talaat Harb 
Street, Tahrir Square, Cairo. — ETHIOPIA. National Agency 
for Unesco, P.O. Box 2996, Addis Ababa, — FINLAND. 
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, SF 00100 Helsinki. — 
FRANCE, Librairie de I'Unesco.”7, place de Fontenoy, 75700 
Paris, C.C.P. 12598-48. — GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REP. 
Buchhaus Leipzig, Postfach 140, 710 Leipzig or from Interna- 
tionalen Buchhandlungen in the G.D.R. — FED. REP. DF 
GERMANY. For the Unesco Kurier {German ed. only): 53 
Bonn 1, Colmantstrasse 22, C.C.P. Hamburg 276650. For 
scientific maps only: GEO CENTER D7 Stuttgart 80, Postfach 
800830. Other publications; Verlag Dokumentation, Pdssen- 
bacher Strasse 2, 8000 Miinchen 71 (Prinz Ludwigshthe). — 
GHANA. Presbyterian Bookshop Depot Ltd., P.O. Box 195, 
Accra: Ghana Book Suppliers Ltd., P.O. Box 7869, Accra; The 
University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; The University Bookshop 
of Cape Coast; The University Bookshop of Legon, P.Q. Box 1, 
Legon, — GREAT BRITAIN. Ses United Kingdom, — GREECE, 
International bookshops. — HONG KONG. Federal Publications 
Division, Far East Publications Ltd., 5 A Evergreen Industrial 
Mansion, Wong Chuk Hang Road, Aberdeen. Swindon Book 
Co.. 13-15, Lock Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Akadémial 
Kdnyvesbolt, Vaci u. 22, Budapest V; A.K.V. Konyvtirosok 
Boltja, Népkdztarsasag utja 16, Budapest VI. — ICELAND. 
Snaebjrn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. — 
- INDIA. Orient Longman Ltd., Kamani Marg, Bailard Estate, 
Bombay 400038; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; 36a, 
Anna Salai, Mount Road, Madras 2; B-3/7 Asaf Ali Road. New 
Dethi 1; 80/1 Mahatma Gandhi Road, Bangalore-560001; 3-5-820 
_ Hyderguda, Hyderabad-500001. Sub-Depots; Oxford Book & 
Stationery Co. 17 Park Street, Calcutta 70016; Scindia House. 
New Delhi; Publications Section, Ministry of Education and 
Social Welfare, 511 C-Wing, Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi 110001. — 
INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers and Booksellers, 29 JI. Oto 
Iskandardinata Ill, Jakarta; Gramedia Bookshop. JI. Gadjah 
Mada 109, Jakarta; Indira P.T., JI. Dr. Sam Ratulangie 47, 
Jakarta Pusat, — IRAN. Kharazmie Publishing and Distribution 
Co., 229 Daneshgahe Street. Shah Avenue, P.O, Box 14/1486, 
Teheran. Iranian Nationa! Commission for Unesco, Avenue 
Iranchahr Chomali No 300, B.P. 1533, Teheran. — IRAQ. 
McKenzie’s Bookshop, Al-Rashid Street, Baghdad. .— IRELAND. 
The Educational Company of Ireland Ltd., Ballymount Road, 
Walkinstown, Dublin 12. — ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly 
Blumstein’s Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48, Nachlat 
Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv; 9, Shlomzion Hamalka Street Je- 
rusalem. — JAMAICA. Sangster's Book Stores Ltd., P.O. 
Box 366, 101 Water Lane, Kingston. — JAPAN. Eastern Book 
Service Inc., C.P.O. Box 1728, Tokyo 100-92. — KENYA. East 
African Publishing House, P.O, Box 30571, Nairobi. — KOREA. 
Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, 
Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., | td, P.O. Box 
2942, Kuwait, — LESOTHO. Mazenod Book Centre, P.O, 
Mazenod, Lesotho, Southern Africa. — LIBERIA. Cole and 
Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. — LIBYA. 
Agency for Development of Publication & Distribution, P.O. 
Box 34-35, Tripoli. — LUXEMBOURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 
22, Grande-Rue, Luxembourg. — MALAYSIA. Federal Publi- 
cations Sdn. Bhd., Balai Berita, 31, Jalan Riong, Kuala Lumpur. - 
MALTA. Sapienzas, 26 Republic Street, Valletta. — MAU- 
RITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon Street, Port- 
Louis. — MONACO. British Library, 30,- bd des Moulins, 
Monte-Carlo, — NETHERLANDS. For the "Unesco Koerier” 
Dutch edition only: Systemen Keesing, Ruysdaelstraat 71-75, 
Amsterdam-1007, Agent for ali Unesco publications; N. V. 
Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. — NETHER- 
LANDS ANTILLES. G.C,T, Van Dorp & Co, {Ned Ant.}. N.V., 
Willemstad, Curagao, N. A. — NEW ZEALAND. Government 
Printing Office, Government Bookshops at: Rutland Street, 
P.O. Box 5344, Auckland; 130, Oxford Terrace, P.O. Box 1721, 
Christchurch; Alma Street, P.O. Box 857 Hamilton; Princes 
Street, P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin; Mulgrave Street, Private Bag, 
Wellington. — NIGERIA. The University Bookshop of Ife. The 
University Bookshop of Ibadan, P.O. Box 286; The University 
Bookshop of Nsukka; The University Bookshop of Lagos; The 
Ahmadu Bello University Bookshop of Zaria. — NORWAY. 
All publications: Johan Grundt Tanum {Booksellers) Karl Johans- 
gate 41/43, Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only; A.S. Narvesens 
Literaturtjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6. — PAKISTAN. Mirza Book 
Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-e-azam, P.O. Box No. 729, Lahore 
3. — PHILIPPINES. The Modern Book Co., 926 Rizal Avenue, 
P.O. Box 632, Manila D-404. — POLAND. ORPAN-IMPORT, 
Palac Kultury i Nauki, Warsaw; Ars Polona-Ruch, Krakowskie 
Przedmiescie No. 7.00-901 WARSAW. — PORTUGAL. Dias & 
Andrade Ltda, Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — 
SINGAPORE. Federal Publications {S} Pte Ltd., No. 1 New 
Industrial Road, off Upper Paya Lebar Road, Singapore 19, — 
SOMALI DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Modern Book Shop 
and General, P.O. Box 951, Mogadiscio. — SOUTH AFRICA, 
All publications: Van Schaik’'s Bookstore (Pty.} Ltd., Libri Buil- 
ding, Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. For the Unesco 
Courier (single copies} only; Central News Agency P.O. Box 
1033, Johannesburg, — SOUTHERN RHODESIA. Textbook 
Sales (PVT) Ltd., 67 Union Avenue, Salisbury. — SRI LANKA, 
Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata 
P.0.B. 244 Columbo 2. — SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P.O. 
Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publications: A/B C.E. 
Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokbandel, Fredsgatan 2, Box 16356, 10327 
Stockholm 16. For the Unesco Courier; Svenska FN-Férbundet, 
Skolgrind 2, Box 150 50 S- 104 65, Stockholm. — SWIT- 
ZERLAND. All publications; Europa Verlag, 5 Rémistrasse, 
Zurich, Librairie Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 
12-236. — TANZANIA, Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop. P.Q.B. 9030 
Dar-es-Salaam, — THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Ltd., 40-42 
Charoen Krung Road, Siyaeg Phaya Sr, P,Q, Box 402, Bangkok; 
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok; 
Suksit Siam Company, 1715 Rama IV Road, Bangkok, — 
TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Caddesi, Beyoglu, 
Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, P.O. Box 145, 
Kampala. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, 
P.O. Box 5689, London, S.E.l., and Government Bookshops in 
London. Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, Birmingham, 
Bristol. — UNITED STATES. Unipub, Box 433 Murray Hill 
Station, New York, N.Y. 10016. For "Unesco Courier’ in 
Spanish: Santillana Publishing Company, Inc,, 575 Lexington 
Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022, — U.S.8.R., Mezhdunarodnaya 
Kniga, Moscow, G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska 
Knjiga, Terazije, 27, Belgrade; Drzavna Zalozba Slovenije, 
Titova C 25, P.0.B. 50-1, Ljubliana.  

## [Page 40](074812engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

  
SELF-PORTRAIT OF RUBENS, PAINTED WHEN HE WAS AGED ABOUT 60, A FEW YEARS BEFORE HIS DEATH. 
Ph
ot
o 
Er
ic
h 
Le
ss
in
g 
© 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s.
 
Ku
ns
th
is
to
ri
sc
he
s 
Mu
se
um
, 
Vi
en
na
, 
Au
st
ri
a.