# [081475](081475engo.pdf) 10

## [Page 1](081475engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

p | | | | Publication No. F440 
VOLUME Ill — N° 6—7 PRICE : 10 Cents (U. S.), 6 Pence (U. K.), or 20 Francs (FRANCE). JULY-AUGUST 1950 
J 
~ : = 
       
EALLACIES OF RACISM EXPOSED 
UNESCO PUBLISHES $% “ox ; 
DECLARATION BY wighg 
WORLD'S SCIENTISTS 3 
  
  
~ 
ORE than fifteen years ago, men and women 
of goodwill proposed to publish an inter- 
national declaration which would expose 
“racial” discrimination and “racial” hatred as 
unscientific and false, as well as ugly and inhuman. 
The world at that time was running downhill 
toward World War II, and so-called “ practical” 
considerations prevented publication of the state- 
ment — even if they could not prevent the war. 
False myths and superstitions about race 
contributed directly to the war, and to the murder 
of peoples which became known as genocide — but 
victims of the war were of all colours and oi all 
“ races ”. Despite the universality of this agony and 
destruction, the myths and superstitions still 
survive — and still threaten the whole of mankind. 
The need for a sound unchallengeable statement of 
the facts, to counter this continuing threat, is a 
matter of urgency. 
Accordingly, Unesco has called together a group 
of the world’s most noted scientists, in the fields of 
biology, genetics, psychology, sociology and anthro- 
pology. These scientists have prepared a historic 
declaration of the known facts about human race, 
which is reprinted in this issue of the Courier. 
Unesco offers this declaration as a weapon — and 
a practical weapon — to all men and women of 
goodwill who are engaged in the good fight for 
human brotherhood. Here is an official summary 
of the conclusions reached in the declaration : 
® In matters of race, the only characteristics which 
anthropologists can effectively use as a basis for 
classifications are physical and physiological. 
® According to present knowledge, there is no 
proof that the groups of mankind differ in their innate 
mental characteristics, whether in respect of inteili- 
gence or temperament. The scientific evidence 
indicates that the range of mental capacities in all 
ethnic groups is much the same. 
® Historical and sociological studies support 
the view that the genetic differences are not of impor- 
tance in determining the social and cultural diffe- 
rences between different groups of Homo sapiens 
and that the social and cultural changes in different 
groups have, in the main, been independent of 
changes in inborn constitution. Vast social changes 
have occurred which were not in any way connected 
with changes in racial type. 
® There is no evidence that race mixture as such 
produces bad results from the biological point of 
view. The social results of race mixture, whether 
for good or ill, are to be traced to social factors. 
® All normal human beings are capable of learning 
to share in a common life, to understand the nature 
of mutual service and reciprocity, and to respect 
social obligations and contracts. Such biological 
differences as exist between members of different 
ethnic groups have no relevance to problems of 
social and political organization, moral life and 
communication between human beings. 
Lastly, biological studies lend support to the ethic 
of universal brotherhood ; for man is born with drives 
toward co-operation, -and unless these drives are 
satisfied, men and nations alike fall itl. Man is born 
a social being, who can reach his fullest development 
only through interaction with his fellows. The denial 
at any point of this social bond between man and es 8 and 9 of this issue for the full text of the. importont sta a 
man brings with it disintegration. In this sense, (See pog of f fi of mpo tement on race, 
every man is his brother's keeper. For every man is published by Unesco on July 8th, together with an article, “Race ond Civilization”, written 
a piece of the continent, a part of the main, because by Dr. Alfred METRAUX, the well-known American anthropologist.) y 
he is involved in mankind. Aaa— a ——— . _ -_ EEEEE———E

## [Page 2](081475engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 
A HUNDRED GROUPS 
 


### 81477: A Hundred groups with a common aim

COMMON 
WITH A 
AIM 
 
This is the third in a series of special 
articles describing the work of some of 
the 100 international non-governmental 
organizations whose co-operation with 
Unesco helps the accomplishment of 
its programme. 
\ 7 the masthead of the Courier, and on an ever-inercasing number of 
publications in the world of arts and letters, you sce Uncsco’s 
insignia — the familiar Greek temple, with the initials of the 
organization forming the columns across the front. 
is not mere 
This classic facade 
y symbolic of Unesco’s purposes in promoting the [rec 
exchange of knowledge and educated thought, but actually represents some 
of the work which Unesco encourages. 
In the publication Fasti Archaeolo- 
gici, for example, one comes across a 
picture of the restored temple of 
Augustus, at Pola, Italy, an original 
building in this architectural form 
which we have inherited from ancient 
Greece. This book, published with 
Unesco aid, by the International Asso- 
ciation for Classical Archaeology, sur- 
veys the classical acquisitions of differ- 
ent countries, with photographs of 
restored monuments, statues, and bas- 
relief, coins and pottery. Its purpose 
is to familiarize specialists in the civi- 
lizations of archaic and classic Greece, 
pre-historic Italy and early Rome, and 
ancient Syrian and Christian cultures 
with the work that is going on in their 
fields of study. 
As anthropologists trace the origins 
of myth and tradition, and linguists 
the origins of language, archaelogists 
uncover the physical aspects of the 
past. The world they restore is one 
in which distinctions of form and co- 
lour, custom and language are not 
barriers, but elements in the growth 
and development of the modern world. 
CORPUS VASORUM ANTIQUORUM 
ost of the work done by the inter- 
national organizations which are 
working under consultative ar- 
rangements with Unesco is concentrat- 
ed in specific fields of activity. 
Sometimes their achievements mean 
little or nothing to the average man, 
but the results of their study and 
research are reflected in many aspects 
of life which he takes for granted. A 
school of English decorators, for ins- 
tance, is now studying artistic forms 
dating back to the drawings of the 
cave-men, to adapt them to modern 
mural painting, 
In the field of research in ancient 
artistic form and design, an impor- 
tant contribution is being made by the 
International Academic Union, with 
the help of a grant from Unesco. 
This work is the preparation of a 
series of books, the Corpus Vasorum 
  
cation, science and custure. 
French Francs. 
SUBSCRIBE NOW! 
get them to subscribe too. 
Australia : 
Chile : 
India : 
Mexico : 
Philippines : 
Quiapo, Manila. 
United States of America : 
York 27, N.Y. 
Artigas, 1320-24, Montevideo. 
* For France : Retail sales : 
  
The UNESCO COURIER is an international periodical devoted to the work 
of UNESCO and to activities and developments throughout. the world in edu- 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) costs only $1.00 US., or 5/- or 200 
Tell your friends about the UNESCO COURIER and 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, or directly to UNESCO 
House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris, 16¢, France, 
Argentina : Editorial Sudamericana S. A. Alsina 500 Buenos-Aires. 
H. A. Goddard Ltd., 255a, George St., Sydney. 
Belgium : Librairie encyclopédique, 7, rue du Luxembourg, Bruxelles IV. 
Brazil : Livraria Agir Editora, Rua Mexico $8-B, Caixa postal 3291, Rio-de-Janeiro. 
Canada : The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen Street West, Toronto. 
Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 924, Santiago de Chile. 
Colombia : Mr Emilic Royo Martin, Carrera 9a, 1791, Bogotd. 
Cuba : La Casa Belga, Sr. D. René de Smedt, O'Reilly, Havana. 
Czechoslovakia : Orbis, Stalinova, 46, Praha XII. 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard, 6, Norregade, Copenhagen. 
Egypt : Librairie James Cattan, 118, rue Emad el Dine, Cairo. 
France : Maison du Livre Frangais, 4, rue Félibien, Paris (6¢). (Wholesale only) *. 
Great Britain : [1.M. Stationery Office : London : York House, Kingsway (Retail Counter 
Service) : P.O. Box 569, London S.E.I. (Post orders). - Manchester 2 : 39-41 King 
Street. - Edinburgh 2 : 13a Castle Street. - Cardiff : 1 St Andrew's Crescent. - 
Bristol I : Tower Lane. - Belfast : 80 Chichester Street. 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie Internationale, Athens. 
Hungary : “lIbusz” Akademia-u. 10, Budapest V. 
Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Israel : Leo Biumstein, Book and Art Shop, 35, Allenby Road, Tel Aviv. 
Italy : Messaggerie Italiane, Via Lomazzo, 52, Milano. 
Lebanon and Syria : Librairie Universelle, Avenue des Frangcis, Beirut. 
Libreria Universitaria, Justo Sierra 16, Mexico DF. 
Netherlands : N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout 9, The Hague. 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 7, 
Peru : Libreria Internacional del! Perl, S.A. Girén de la Unién, Lima. 
Philippine Education Co., Inc., Corner Tanduay and Vergara Streets, 
Portugal : Unico Portuguesa de Imprensa, 198 Rue de S. Bento, 3° Esq. Lisbon. 
Sweden : C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhande!, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
Switzerland : Europa Verlag, 5 Ramisirasse, Zurich. 
Union of South Africa : Van Schaik’s Bookstore, Pty. Ltd., P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
Columbia University Press, 
Uruguay : Centro de Cooperacién Cientifica para la América Latina, Unesco, Bulevar 
Unesco Sales Service, 19, Avenue Kléber, Paris (16¢). 
Antiquorum, on ceramic collections in 
France, Italy, Spain, Greece and the 
United States. 
An instalment is being prepared in 
England on early Australian and New 
Zealand pottery. Another volume is 
devoted to the Swedish collection of 
ceramics of Mediterranean countries, 
the Near East, Cyprus and Greece, and 
a further one deals with the collection 
of the National Museum of Copen- 
hagen. These comparative studies in- 
clude the origins of shapes and subject 
matter of design, and the names of the 
pottery-makers and designers. 
FROM ALCHEMY TO AN ATLAS 
n even better example of some of 
the highly specialized work of the 
International Academic Union is 
the catalogue of Latin manuscripts on 
Alchemy which it is compiling. 
Unesco’s interest in such a project is 
its vital contribution to the history of 
science, since alchemy has been called 
the “prelude to chemistry”. 
This group is also at work on a dic- 
tionary of mediaeval Latin, which was 
the lingua franca, the international 
language of scholars and artists for 
over eight-hundred years of western 
civilization’s development. Ten coun- 
tries are co-operating in this work, 
which will be assembled at the French 
Institute. France has already two- 
hundred - and - sixty - thousand card- 
- index notes as its part of the work. 
In this field of languages, the Per- 
manent International Committee of 
Linguists is working, with Unesco’s aid 
on the production of a highly-technic- 
al linguistics atlas, which will indicate 
the spread of cultural bounderies 
beyond national frontiers, and the 
inter-mixture of peoples beyond politic- 
al barriers. This Committee is also 
at work on a dictionary and grammar 
of the almost extinct Tasmanian lan- 
guage, 
Other studies of extinct languages 
have gone far to prove the vast extent 
of migrations of pre-historic peoples, 
- - UTS jo 
  
Oslo. 
296 Broadway, New     
  
 
The Upessco Information Centres in Amsterdam (Unesco Centrum Nederland) which 
was opensd last November, recently found gn ellective way of showing how the 
Nethetiands is linked with other countries end of demonstrating the importance of 
internationsl co-operation. Croups of boy scouts went to the consulates of I2 countries 
in Amsterdam and brought back national flogs and pical products exported fo 
Holland by these countries. The products were then ibited in the square lacing 
the royal palace while the flags were hoisted during @ general salute by the scouts, 
Later, the United Nations flag was hoisted as a symbol of international co-operation. 
the need for which was stressed by a number of speakers including Mr. Arnold 
|. d'Allly, Mayer of Amsterdam, and Mr. Aldese ey Director of the Infor 
mation Coeatre, 
movements of such tremendous scope 
that they were not equalled again 
until the fifteenth century. What is 
believed to be the proto-Indian script, 
for instance, has been found as far 
east as the Oceanic islands — a remark- 
able achievement of colonization for 
people with the most primitive sea- 
faring equipment. 
MUSIC — A UNIVERSAL MEDIUM 
ut if artistic and linguistic studies 
tell of a universal inheritance 
from the past, how much more 
universal a medium is music. In 
January of this year, the International 
Music Council was formed under 
Unesco’s auspices to co-ordinate the 
work of independent musical groups. 
At present, with the aid of such mem- 
ber organizations as the International 
Society for Contemporary Music and 
the International Society for Musical 
Research, the Council is working on 
two Unesco projects, a world catalogue 
of recorded music, and the establish- 
ment of a universal musical pitch. 
Even though we may never have 
studied music and can hardly tell one 
pitch from another, we would realize 
that something was wrong if we heard 
instruments at a concert playing at 
different pitches. 
Before a concert, we hear one ins- 
trument, usually the oboe, sound a 
note, and the other instruments tune 
to the same pitch. But the “A” of 
Paris is not quite the same as that of 
London, and it is still slightly differ- 
ent in Vienna. An internationally- 
established pitch would not only ease 
the work of musicians playing with 
fereign orchestras, but would also 
help instrument builders. 
A CHANCE FOR YOUNG COMPOSERS 
ach of the international musical 
organizations working with 
Unesco was originally founded to 
bring together men in specialized 
fields of musical work. The Interna- 
tional Society of Musical Research is 
a group of musicologists, who special- 
ize in such studies as the history and 
theory of composition, counterpoint 
and harmony. Their bulletin, regu- 
larly published in the various langua- 
ges of the members, contains articles 
and reviews of new books on music, 
and lists new musical publications. 
Another group, the International 
Society for Contemporary Music was 
formed in 1922. 
Successful concerts have been given 
in Salzburg, the birthplace of Mozart, 
and Vienna, Venice, Geneva and Ox- 
ford, where young composers conduct 
their own music. This Society is 
mnking a choice of the works of 
worth-while contemporary composers 
for Unesco’s projected record-library, 
which will give young composers, 
whose music is not yet played extensi- 
vely by large orchestras, the chance to 
be heard. 
The history of music and art is a 
record of talent enriched and deve- 
loped through exchange of work and 
ideas. These are the foundations on 
which the independent international 
crganizations contributing work from 
thew specialized fields to Unesco are 
uilt. 
 
  
RECENT UNESCO 
PUBLICATIONS 
INDEX TRANSLATIONUM 
(International Bibliography of Trans- 
lations 421 pages) 
Originally a quarterly publication 
of the International Institute of In- 
tellectual Co-operation (1932-40) 
Index Translationum has now been 
revived by Unesco as an annual vo- 
lume. 
The former Index began its exis- 
tence with bibliographies of transla- 
tions from 6 countries and ended 
with 14. The Index just published, 
covering the year 1948, has been 
greatly expanded, and contains the 
titles of 8,750 works published in 26 
countries. 
Translations listed in the Index in- 
clude literary, scientific, educational 
and cultural works which are arrang- 
ed, under each national heading, by 
categories corresponding to the large 
divisions of the Universal Decimal 
Classification system. It is complet- 
ed by cross-indexes of authors, trans- 
lators and publishers and by a statis- 
tical table presenting the total num- 
bers of works translated within each 
category and country. 
The Index will provide current in- 
formation about works which have 
been translated, indicate works 
whose translation might usefully be 
undertaken and generally constitute 
a record of one of the most valuable 
means of cultural exchanges between 
countries. 
Preface, notes etc. in English and 
French. 
Price : $ 3.00 - 18/6d. - 900 francs. 
A HANDBOOK FOR THE IMPRO- 
VEMENT OF TEXTBOOKS AND 
TEACHING MATERIALS AS AIDS 
TO INTERNATIONAL UNDER- 
STANDING (172 pages) 
The improvement or revision of 
textbooks, especially of history and 
geography, has been an important 
problem since the first world war. 
This volume describes the historical 
background to the problem and in 
particular the efforts of the League 
of Nations and of the International 
Institute of Intellectual Co-operation, 
in this field. 
Part Two of the publication out- 
lines the development of Unesco’s 
programme and presents a model 
plan for the analysis and improve- 
ment of textbooks and the third part 
includes recommendations for action 
by teachers, authors, publishers, edu- 
cational organizations and public 
authorities. An extensive bibliogra- 
phy is also included. (172 pages.) 
Price : $ 0.45 - 2/6d. - 125 francs. 
SOME SUGGESTIONS FOR THE 
TEACHING OF GEOGRAPHY 
(Towards World Understanding. 
Vol. VII.) (98 pages.) 
This handbook is an adaptation in 
English of a document prepared at 
Unesco's request by a small group of 
French geographers to assist geogra- 
phy teachers in primary and secon- 
dary schools. Its aim is to impress 
on teachers the part that geography 
can play in general education, and 
to suggest specific ways in which it 
can be used as an aid to better 
understanding between peoples. 
Price : $§ 0.40 - 2s. - 100 francs.:  

## [Page 3](081475engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

es TH EH HE I Er a = Tua 0 er ee 
HA AH 
’ 
. UNESCO FACE 
HE PROBLE SL 
Conference has come to an end. If the debates of this Assembly 
A rTER four weeks of frequently heated discussions, the Fifth General 
have presented a new aspect, it is this: Unesco finds that it must 
face up to one of those contradictions of which our age gives so many 
examples. 
peace, but they will only reach fruition during peace. 
The tasks undertaken are in the interests of a more stable 
[t is a question 
of long-term projects: will there be sufficient time? Will those threats 
which weigh so heavily on the world today allow the forces of peace 
enough time to become established and to triumph ? 
However difficult the solulion, the problem confronting the General 
Conference of Unesco, was neverthe- 
less very clear: Was its duty to conti- 
nue as if nothing was wrong, to confine 
itself to technical projects, unquestion- 
ably useful but producing results only 
in the distant future? Or, on the con- 
trary, was its duty to accept the world 
as it is, admit its division, its problems, 
and to take immediate steps to fight 
those dangers imposed by the constant 
threat of war? The final decisions of 
the General Conference were inspired 
by the need to reply to such questions; 
questions indeed which constantly ab- 
sorbed the representatives of all the 
59 member states of the Organisation. 
acan 
special projects which will attempt 
“more directly and in the framework 
ag the United Nations and its particular 
epartments, to support and consolidate 
peace”. 
Positive Action 
For World Stability 
T was foreseen that the importance 
and scope of these projects would 
be so great that the ordinary budget 
of Unesco would not be sufficient to 
finance them. 
fore decided that they could be financed 
“by voluntary contributions of ntoney 
from private and public sources or in 
services from as many countries as pos- 
sible”. By such projects Unesco will 
take positive steps toward immediate 
relief for the world's present intellec- 
tual and moral instability, in propor- 
tion to the means put al its disposal 
and in the framework of its competence. 
Two proposals (presented by the U.S. 
delegation) relating to matters such as 
these, have been approved by the Con- 
ference. The first charges Unesco to or- 
ganise and put mo 2ffect a major pro- 
gramme “with a view to aaevs!CNg - 
ternational understanding in Germany . 
The other requests Unesco to set up re- 
The Conference there- 
gional cenires of scientific research the 
first of which will be in Western Eu- 
rope. These centres, established by 
means of funds collected by Unesco 
outside its normal budget, will help to 
remove that monopoly of scientific re- 
search which the present high cost of 
modern apparatus gives to countries 
rich enough to afford its construction. 
The moral and intellectual instability 
which Unesco is trying to remedy, par- 
tially originates in the differences that 
become more and more apparent bet- 
ween industrial countries and less fa- 
voured regions of the globe. The latter 
are becoming more impoverished every 
day and their resources continually di- 
minish; the power of the former grows 
all the time and modern techniques en- 
sure a way of life that becomes in- 
creasingly easier. 
The United Nations’ plan of tech- 
nical assislance to countries that 
are insufficiently developed has been 
conceived to answer this problem. 
In 1951, Unesco will play an important 
role in putting this plan into effect. In 
addition, it ‘will undertake specific 
works of its own. in this field. Thus, an 
international conference on “The con- 
quest of the desert” is going to meet in 
Israel, in collaboration with the Inter- 
national Institute of the Arid Zone, 
which Unesco is at present setting up. 
However, despite the great importance 
of these matters, they do not represent 
a full solution. Many conflicts arise 
from the inequality of man. Others re- 
sult rom different causes. There are, 


### 81480: UNESCO faces the problem of peace

Addressing the final session 
of UNESCO's Fifth General 
Conference, M. Jaime Torres 
Bodet, Unesco’s Director- 
General, summed up his im- 
pressions of results achiev- 
ed. Below, we reproduce 
the full text of his speech. 
x 


### 74378: What is not good for humanity as a whole cannot be good for any nation, race or individual

‘““ What is not good for Humanity as a whole cannot be 
good for any nation, race or individual” 
a 4 : 
M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Unesco’s Director-General, speaking at a plenary session of the 
Fifth General Conference, in the Palazzo Vecchio, Florence. 
Jaime Torres Beodet 
  
| 
  
resolution you have just passed unanimously. In 
all sincerity, I believe that this is the perfect 
complement to that approved by the Programme 
and Budget Commission yesterday evening on the 
motion of a number of Delegations and confirmed by 
yourselves this morning. Taken together, the two 
resolutions* reveal a will to peace which does honour to 
this Conference and testifies to the fidelity of all of us 
to Unesco’s supreme ideal. 
At this stage, when you are bringing your work to a 
close, 1 feel it to be necessary to give you my absolutely 
frank opinion on the results achieved. I had hoped that 
this session of the Conference might mark a decisive 
stage in the development of our Organization. It would 
be going too far to suggest that that hope has been fully 
satisfied. The characteristic note of this Conference has 
been less one of decision than of heart-searching and, 
M AY I say how pleased I am at the adoption of the 
in certain matters, of clarification. That, of course, is 
not all that we could have wished, but it is a great deal. 
As trees are judged 
OU have deflned ga basic programme which had 
never previously been explicitly stated. You have 
defined a list of methods, which had not previously 
been made. You have defined a policy of reccmmend- 
ations and conventions which will, I am convinced, be 
fruitful in the years to come. An excellent instance of 
what we can secure by these means is the agreement 
on the free importation of educational, scientific and 
cultural material, whose ratification you are recom- 
mending to your governments. You have recorded your 
intention of increasing Unesco's resources and have 
promised to do it by trying to overcome the financial 
difficulties arising from arrangements necessarily tem- 
porary, but which could not be better in view of the 
Elsi adopted regarding the establishment of a budget 
ceiling. 
It would be premature to express any viéws as to the 
worth of these results. As trees are judged by their 
fruit, so the resolutions of an international conference 
are judged by the action in which they issue. What 
happens in the year which lies before us will, in my 
view, be of vital importance to this Organization. We 
must be vigilant to ensure that the work of the Secre- 
tariat and the activities of Member States in matters 
within Unesco’s sphere are more effectively integrated 
than they have so far been. We must plan bold and 
simple tasks, for the better service of peace through 
education, science and culture. We must secure action 
within each Member State to spur rulers and private 
bodies to augment the slender financial resources at our 
disposal. 
All definition is difficult 
OR all this two things are essential : mutual trust 
and mutual understanding. But can we really doubt 
that we shall find that spirit of trust and under- 
standing ? We are met in ga country which, in its 
greatest epoch, was governed by a sage, the philosopher- 
emperor Marcus Aurelius, the author of the profound 
epigram : “What is not good for the hive, cannot be 
good for the bee”. Its application to our own age is 
obvious . What is not good for humanity as ga whole 
cannot be good for any nation, race or individual. That, 
surely, is an exact definition of the intellectual and 
moral solidarity of the peoples to which Unesco is dedi- 
cated. 
This has been ga difficult Conference, because all 
definition is difficult. Let us, then, pray that the diffi- 
culties may lead to a more conscious effort to see clearly 
in the future so that we may all more effectively serve 
the noble aims of Unesco. 
It is with that prayer in my heart that I thank you 
for your work and offer to Italy, in the person of Sena- 
tor Jacini, our warmest gratitude for the generous hospi- 
tality she has afforded us. 
* The terts of the two resclutions referred to by the 
Director-General will be found on page 7 of this issue.   
Page 3 — UNESCO COURIER 
ARE GE — 0, _- - oe 
\ 
M OF PEACE 
foi example, conflicts, whose origin 
remain obscui€¢, Which occur even 
within a nation, between ditscrent eti- 
nic groups. Unesco, in pursuing en- 
quiries into various states of social ten- 
sion, is making a study of these obscure 
causal factors. It is important to know 
not only the obstacles which oppose 
lharmonious relations between different 
groups, but also the factors which have 
brought about good relations in certain 
regions. 
Unesco has decided to underfasce iis 
year an enquiry into economic, politi- 
cal, cultural and psychological factors 
which “aid or hinder harmonious relu- 
tions between races and ethnic groups”. 
This enquiry will be launched in Bra- 
zil, which country, to quote the DBra- 
zilian delegate at the General Confer-- 
ence, “progresses in fraternity between 
its ever-increasing black, white and 
Indian population”. 
A Step Towards Universality 
NTERNATIONAL understanding, which 
I is one of the fixed aims of Unesco 
as stated in its Constitution, can only 
be facilitated by works such as these 
which, moreover, are directly allied to 
all the tasks undertaken by Unesco— 
studies related to states of social ten- 
sion, dissemination of scientific data 
with respect to racial problems, diffu- 
sion and promotion of the rights of man. 
Even within the organisation a new 
step has been taken towards that uni- 
versality which should be the main 
characteristic of Unesco : the Confer- 
ence has in effect, charged the Direc- 
to-General to study the possibilities 
of aq, nitting as associate members a 
certain number Gi non-autonomous ter- 
ritories. } 
It is impossible to review all aspecis 
of the programme decided upon for 
1951 by the General Conference. It is 
equally impossible to draw up a balance 
sheet of endeavours which have already 
borne fruit. Nevertheless, it must be 
noted that the General Conference of 
1950 .marks an importani date in the 
struggle for the {ree circulation of 
ideas “by words and images”. The 
Conference has, in fact, unanimously 
approved an International Convention 
for the free circulation of educational 
material. In ie ers of this agree- 
ment, the signatory governments would 
undertake to abolish customs duty on 
books, publications and documents and 
provide currency for the importation of 
books to public libraries. Moreover, all 
customs duties which have prevented 
tlhe importation of pictures, designs, 
sculpture, music and material for mu- 
seums, would also be lifted. Immediat- 
ely after the approval of this project 
agreed upon by the Conference, the 
British delegation announced that its 
government intended to sign and pre- 
sent this document without delay for 
the ratification of Parliament. 
An Examination Of Conscience 
HETHER it was a question of exa- 
mining its routine programme or 
specially selected projects, the 
General Conference was continually ab- 
sorbed with the problem of peace. The 
crises undergone and surmounted arose 
from this “examination of conscience” 
that the Conference had attempted, in 
the words of M. Torres Bodet. Further- 
more, one of the most significant fea- 
tures of the Conference has been its 
desire to place particular emphasis on 
the role of the member states in the 
execution of Unesco's programme. 
Unesco had at times been accused of 
being a bureaucracy. This year even 
the language of its programme indicates 
an effort to nullify this objection. The 
resolutions which have been voted are 
not all drawn up according to the tra- 
ditional formula: “The General Confer- 
ence instructs the Director-General...” 
An increasing number begin with these 
words: “The General Conference inviles 
member States...” One can perhaps find, 
in this new trend, signs of a happy- 
transformation. There is no cause for 
astonishment that attention to such 
matters is of such recent date. Unesco 
is a young organism; its means are 
limited and its tasks immense. For tive 
years it has had to work as quickly 
as possible; to repair, with the means 
at its disposal, the havoc of war; to 
draw up a programme and a field of 
action. 
Unesco, foday, in taking stock of it- 
self, is passing through a kind of crisis. 
Its weakness, and at the same time its 
strength is being noted. “Unesco”, as 
M. Torres Bodet has said, “consists of 
59 member states.” Measured in terms 
of this idea of an assembly of states, 
the power of Unesco is immense. And 
in order that this power can be fully 
used, its programme and its efforts 
inust not be merely those of a team of 
specialists; they must become the com- 
mon task of nations determined to safe- 
guard peace.

## [Page 4](081475engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 4 
   
A LONG- 
NL ' 
IFTH GENERAL CONFERENCE 
PLAN 
al tend IS es BF 
TERM 
eS A Ee Op JU rr ae Co LA Tl rial Sl Tn 
cover: 
Unesco. These are : 
higher education: 
tance. 
heads    
EDUCATION 
ie SSE 
ETTER methods of education and 
wider diffusion of liter: acy are 
not ends ii, themselves. The 
fin1 object must be to equip man 
w play his part harmoniously in the 
modern world. It is not enough for 
him to know his own land and his 
own people; he lives in a network of 
relationships that go beyond frontiers. 
Today, all nations are interdependent, 
and they must learn to recognize it. 
1. IMPROVEMENT OF EDUCATION 
THROUGH THE EXCHANGE OF 
INFORMATION 
More progress can be achieved, and 
many mistakes avoiaed, i the experi- 
ments being made throughout the 
world in education and psychology are 
better known. Unesco collects inform- 
ation about such experiments, ana- 
lyses it, and promotes its distribution, 
to help improve methods of teaching 
and to further the international pur- 
poses of Unesco. 
2. EXTENSION OF EDUCATION 
Unesco has the duty of helping 
Member States to ensure for everybody 
whose education has been neglected, 
interrupted or impeded, the chance to 
overcome his handicaps. Unesco must 
pay special attention to fundamental 
and adult education, and to the train- 
ing. of handicapped children. 
3. EDUCATION FOR INTERNATION- 
AL UNDERSTANDING 
Consciousness of the unity of man- 
kind is still rudimentary. Teachers are 
only beginning to discover suitable 
methods ; textbooks need to be im- 
proved. Schoolchildren know little 
about the international organizations 
of today and the services they can 
render to world peace and prosperity. 
Unesco must therefore help to promote 
education in world citizenship. 
BE _ 
ps5. NATURAL SCIENCES 
HE natural and exact sciences, 
being objective and impartial, 
offer a particularly suitable field 
for action by Unesco. 
Laboratories and research institutes 
influence the development of human 
communities. All men should benefit 
from discoveries that can raise stan- 
dards of living. Once men are in a 
position to improve their living condi- 
tions, they are able as never before 
to grow in mutual understanding. 
i. DEVELOPMENT OF SCIENTIFIC 
COOPERATION 
Scientific research benefits from a 
widespread exchange of information. 
Unesco must help international orga- 
nizations of scientists by encouraging 
the meeting and movement of experts, 
to help in the co-ordination of inter- 
national scientific congresses, to pro- 
mote the classification and analysis of 
specialized publications and to over- 
come difficulties of language by stan- 
dardizing scientific terminology and by 
encouraging multilingual dictionaries. 
To ensure speedier exchanges between 
scientists, Unesco maintains scientific 
cooperation offices in areas where thev 
are most needed. 
NE ot the most important decisions taken by Unesco’s Fifth General 
Conference was to establish a long-range basic programme for the 
rext several years as distinguished from the work plan for 1851. 
Thus, Unesco’s obieciives for next year are part of « long-term plan, 
i.g the policies and main lines of work of the Organization. 
Included in the basic programme is a 10 point list of tasks fo: 
1. To eliminate illiteracy and encourage fundamental education: 
2. To obtain for each person an education conforming to his aptitudes 
and to the needs of society, including technological training and 
3. To promote respect for human rights throughout all nations: 
4. To remove the obstacles to the free flow of persons, ideas and 
knowledge between the countries of the world: 
5. To promote the progress and utilization of science for mankind; 
6. To remove the causes of tensions that may lead to war; 
7. To demonstrate world cultural interdependence: 
8. To advance through the press, radio and motion pictures the cause 
of truth, freedom and peace: 
9. To bring about better understanding among the peoples of the 
world and to convince them of the necessity of co-operating 
loyally with one another in the framework of the United Nations; 
10 To render clearing-house and exchange services in all its fields 
of action, together with services in reconstruction and relief assis- 
The basic programme: resolutions are grouped under seven different 
: Education, Natural Sciences. Social Sciences, Cultural Activities. 
Exchange of Persons, Mass Communications and Relief Services. As lack 
of space prevents publication of these resolutions in full, the Courier pre- 
sents on this page « summarized version of the basic programme.    
2. ASSISTANCE TO TUSEFARCH FOR 
THE IM>COVEMENT OF THE LIV- 
YG CONDITIONS OF MANKIND. 
Unesco can render genuine service 
by detecting gaps in the development 
of research and helping to fill them. 
Thus, for example, it encourages insti- 
tutes for the study of biological factors 
in different climates or the develop- 
ment of certain wide areas, and it par- 
ticipates in the plans for creating 
United Nations laboratories. 
3. TEACHING AND POPULARIZ- 
ATION OF SCIENCE 
All men need access to basic scien- 
tific knowledge in order that they may 
better understand their world. They 
should also know that such knowledge 
depends in large measure on the result 
of international cooperation. The ob- 
ject should be to develop an attitude 
of mind and an understanding of the 
effects of applying science to modern 
conditions and to the development of 
human society. 
SOCIAL SCIENCES 
O attempts to better the lot of 
man can meet with success un- 
less they take account of his en- 
vironment. Unesco must there- 
fore place social science in the fore- 
ground of its field of study. Inter- 
national cooperation is itself a pheno- 
menon deserving scientific study. 
The major international organiz- 
ation established in the first half of 
the twentieth century are especially 
worth studying. In a world becoming 
more complex, and more highly organ- 
ized, the study of international coo- 
peration may make it possible both to 
improve that cooperation and to ex- 
tend if to new fields. 
1. AID TO INTERNATIONAL SCIEN- 
TIFIC COOPERATION 
There are three ways in which 
Unesco can help in the teaching and 
development of the social sciences. 
These are by meetings which may re- 
sult in new contacts and exchanges of 
views, through translation and docu- 
mentation services, and through the 
standardization of technical termi- 
nology. 
2. STUDIES OF SOCIAL TENSIONS 
International Cooperation must be 
brought to bear on particular studies 
related to the purposes of Unesco— 
such as that of social tensions. Re- 
search results must be disseminated 
as widely as possible to prevent or 
arrest the growth of mass mental atti- 
tudes that endanger peace. 
3. STUDIES OF INTERNATIONAL 
COOPERATION 
The organs of international cooper- 
ation have sufficiently developed to 
make a study of them by the methods 
- of Social Science worth while. 
- 1 
CULTURAL ACTIVITIES 
U Totem first task is to foster 
L$ 
international relations by ar- 
ranging for thinkers, writers, 
artists and their ideas to move 
freely across national frontiers. Unes- 
"helps Unesco to 
  
FOR 
co forms a meeting ground for the 
cultures of the world. It stimulates 
nations to develop their literature, art 
and science and see them as parts of 
a world heritage. It helps Member 
States to protect works of art from 
neglect or violence and from the ra- 
vages of time, and it assists in bring- 
ing artists and writers before the world. 
It uses every means to ensure that all 
people shall have access to the best 
works of every land and every age. 
1. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
Gatherings of experts or of interna- 
tional associations of scholars, can do 
a great deal for cultural cooperation. 
Unesco accordingly aids and encou- 
rages such meetings, at the same time 
associating these experts and associ- 
ations with its own programme. The 
exchange of specialized information de- 
pends largely on documentary an 
bibliographical services: here again 
Unesco can do much useful work. 
2. PROTECTION OF 
WORK AND ITS AUTHORS 
For the preservation of works of art 
and historical monuments every State 
is responsible both to its own people 
and to mankind. But international co- 
operation is also necessary to spread 
wide the knowledge of method. Unesco 
encourages and helps this activity, 
offering technical assistance and, in 
exceptional cases, where resources are 
inadequate, aid in the raising of funds. 
The creation of new bphilisophical, 
artistic or literary work, should be 
fostered Lu the assertion and defence 
of the independence of the thinker, 
writer and artist. Unesco seeks to 
promote international cooperation in 
order to ensure respect for this inde- 
pendence throughout the world. Unes- 
co is endeavouring to bring about the 
conclusion of a universal convention 
that will give equal consideration to 
the interests of the authors, the in- 
dustry, the workers and the general 
public. 
3." DISSEMINATION -OF CULTURE 
The Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights affirms that “everyone has the 
right freely to participate in the cultur- 
al life of the community”. Unesco will 
assist Member States by providing in- 
formation, carrying out studies, mak- 
ing recommendations and, where ne- 
cessary, itself taking practical action to 
direct the education of both youth and 
adults towards a better understanding 
of the culture of mankind. Finally, 
means should be found for improving 
the quality of the reproduction and 
translation of artistic and literary 
works and for their wide dissemin- 
ation. 
EXCHANGE OF PERSONS 
S TUDY abroad not only gives in- 
sight into new discoveries and 
techniques but also helps the in- 
habitants of one country to adapt 
themselves to the ways of life and 
thought of another. Accordingly, 
Unesco encourages people with differ- 
ent national, social and cultural back- 
grounds to visit other countries either 
for general education or for profess- 
icnal training. 
The world today suffers from a 
shortage of experts and technicians in 
almost every field of activity. Unesco 
is accordingly doing its best to multi- 
ply fellowships as well as facilities for 
short periods of study. It is itself able 
to award annually a limited number 
of fellowships. 
1. CLEARING-HOUSE 
The Clearing-House makes inform- 
ation available to Member States, go- 
vernmental and other organizations, 
institutions 
with education in order to advise those 
wishing to study abroad, to ensure a 
closer co-ordination of already existing 
activities, and to stimulate new pro- 
grammes. In the publication of the 
volume “Study Abroad” a methodical 
attempt is made to list all facilities for 
study abroad available to students: 
2. PROMOTION 
To encourage interrational exchange 
of persons, Unesco seeks to increase 
facilities for those requiring financial 
assistance and to promote broader and 
more varied programmes. It also sug- 
gests how programmes of study abroad 
can serve the cause of international 
understanding. 
3. FELLOWSHIP ADMINISTRATION 
The award of fellowships enabling 
qualified candidates to study abroad 
implement its own 
programme, inasmuch as holders of 
travel fellowship financed by Unesco . 
can be associated with its projects and 
activities. Unesco can also give help 
and advice to institutions planning 
international fellowship programmes 


### 81484: Fifth General Conference approves a long-term plan for UNESCO

"APPROVES 
FOR UNESCO 
CREATIVE 
and persons concerned 
    
and it furthermore organizes interne- 
ships for students 
"MASS COMMUNICATIONS 
RESS, radio and film can do much 
P to help international understand- 
ing. Understanding depends on 
information, and in a free world 
the right to this is part of the right to 
education. 
Unesco’s first task is to make a sur- 
vey of the present resources for mass 
communications, as the basis for im- 
proving them. ‘Unequal technical de- 
velopment in various countries has 
cften led to such disparities that what 
should be normal for all is often 
in fact the privilege of the few. 
Unesco is therefore building up a 
clearing-house for the exchange of 
data on public information systems so 
that all may benefit from one an- 
other’s experience. Unesco must also 
encourage the scientific study of the 
problems of mass communication and 
promote professional training to meet 
modern needs. Nor do knowledge or 
training solve all the problems, so long 
as ideas and technical materials can- 
not freely cross national frontiers. 
Unesco in its survey of present resour- 
ces also collects data about such obsta- 
cles to a free flow, and seeks ‘g sur- 
mount them by international agree- 
ments or ii, other ways. 
4Ccording to its Constitution, Unesco 
collaborates “in the work of advancing 
mutual knowledge and understanding 
of peoples through all means of mass 
communication ”. Throughout the 
world, consequently, it stimulates the 
uses of press, film, radio and related 
media to promote social progress and 
international understanding and uses 
them to enlighten the public about its 
activities and objectives. 
1. IMPROVEMENT OF MEANS AND 
TECHNIQUES OF INFORMATION 
Unesco has set up an information 
clearing-house to deal with all pro- 
blems concerning mass communic- 
aticns, including professional ant 
technical training and the techniques 
and influence of the press, radio and 
film. Exact information is collected 
by field surveys. 
2. REDUCTION OF OBSTACLES TO 
THE FREE FLOW OF INFORM- 
ATION 
Progress in the field of mass com- 
munication requires the reduction and, 
if possible, the removal of certain ob- 
stacles. Means of overcoming them 
must be investigated and adequate 
measures recommended to Member 
States, to whom appropriate inter- 
national conventions must be submitted 
for ratification. The free flow, which 
Unesco thus seeks to promote, should 
cover not only ideas and news of an 
informative nature but all audio-visual 
material serving educational, scientific 
and cultural purposes. 
3. ACTION THROUGH PRESS, FILM 
AND RADIO 
While encouraging, within the scope 
of its capacities and the limits of its 
programme, the practical activities of 
the press, cinema and radio, Unesco 
intends also to employ the facilities 
they offer for the purposes laid down 
in its Constitution. It encourages di- 
rectors and producers through dis- 
cussion and the supply of material, to 
take due account of the services to be 
rendered to international understand- 
ing in the fields of education, science 
and culture. It also keeps them in- 
formed of its own activities and sup- 
plies them with appropriate material 
ready for immediate use. 
RELIEF ASSISTANCE SERVICES 
in education, science and culture 
are from time to time threatened 
by disaster—whether natural or 
at the hands of man. Help for the 
victims of such misfortunes, if it is to 
be really effective, must be co-ordinat- 
ed and directed where it is most 
needed. Unesco has undertaken, with- 
in the sphere of its competence, to 
collect, analyse and distribute inform- 
ation about the nature and extent of 
the help required. 
This documentary service provides 
a basis for three types of action: first- 
ly, Unesco gives direct aid to devastat- 
ed countries by gifts of material or by 
the provision of services, drawing for 
this purpose on a Relief Fund to which 
it contributes from its own budget. 
This direct aid is supplemented by 
campaigns for voluntary aid in which 
Unesco unites its efforts with those of 
other organizations pursuing similar 
aims. These campaigns are capable 
of producing substantial results. 
Lastly, Unesco encourages voluntary 
work camps conducted in accordance 
with the aims of Unesco and engaged 
in reconstruction tasks té become 
centres of international understanding. 
A LL those things we hold valuable

## [Page 5](081475engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

Page 5 — UNESCO COURIER 


### 81485: UNESCO's programme for 1951

UNESCO'S PROGRAMME FOR 1951 
  
EDUCATION 
NESCO during 1951 will stimulate 
the mecvement for mass educa- 
tion in many parts of the world. 
chiefly by helping member states 
to develop and improve their work in 
such fields as fundamental and adult 
education. Unesco will therefore pre- 
pare teaching materials, organize se- 
minars and educational ccnferences, 
help to train teachers at regional cen- 
tres and develop educational co-opera- 
ticn through missions and the exchan- 
ge of information. 
Three educational missicns will be 
sent to member states and inquiries 
into language and science teaching 
will be continued with the Internatio- 
nal Bureau of Education. The probiem 
cf expanding and lengthening free 
education and the effect of this on 
labcur and industry will be discussed 
with the Internaticnal Bureau of Edu. 
cation and the International Labour 
Office. 
Unesco will give advice and provide 
technical facilities for the United Na- 
tions Technical Assistance Program- 
me. The pilot preject, started in Hai- 
ti between 1948 and 1950, wiil be 
further developed. The Government 
of India plans a pilot project in as- 
scciation with Unesco. A seminar on 
fundamental and adult education is 
planned for the Near East. 
Unesco will continue a comparative 
study of curricula in use in the va- 
rious ccuntries of the world in the 
teaching of history, geography and so- 
cial studies. It will issue a publica- 
ticn on the teaching of history and 
a Teacher's Guide to the Declaration 
of Human Rights. Studies on history 
and geography textbcoks used in va- 
rious countries will be continued, and 
an international seminar on the 
teaching of history in primary and 
secondary schools will be held. 
To meet a request from the United 
Naticns and its specialized agencies, 
Unesco will investigate measures to 
reduce illiteracy, to use native langua- 
ges in teaching, and to stimulate in- 
ternational action to break down bar- 
riers to the access of women to edu- 
. cation. 
Special efforts will be made to de- 
termine and encourage the application 
of the most effective ways of teaching 
children about the Universal Decla- 
ration of Human Rights and about the 
United Nations and ifs Specialized 
Agencies. 
NATURAL SCIENCES 
HE 1951 activities of Unesco in 
the field of Natural Sciences will 
particularly concern the develop- 
ment of international scientific co- 
operation, assistance to research for 
the improvement of the living con- 
ditions cf mankind, and the teaching 
and popularization of science. 
Approval has been given to study a 
plan to set up regional research cen- 
tres, with funds to be obtained out- 
side Unesco’s budget. One example 
suggested was for a centre of research 
in physics ana other sciences in 
 
trated manner. 
from member countries. 
Board.   
N this and the following page, the Courier presents a sum- 
mary of the main Unesco projects for 1951 approved by 
the Fifth Session of the General Conference. 
programme, M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Unesco’s Director-General 
has been authorized to select immediate priority projects so as 
to carry out Unesco’s work in the most effective and concen- 
The Unesco work plans for 1951 have been allocated a budget 
of $8,200,000, but in addition to the regular annual budget, finan- 
cial resources may be increased through voluntary contributions 
These extra funds would be used to 
finance special projects outside the ordinary programme, which 
are to be worked out by the Director-General and the Executive 
From this 
  
Western Europe as an attempt to over- 
come difficulties arising out of the 
high cost of research into higher phy- 
sics. 
Grants-in-aid and services will be 
given to internaticnal organizations in 
the fields of engineering, science, me- 
dicine, agriculture, biology and the 
protection of nature. Discussions will 
be promoted on scientific preblems of 
regicnal importance; and action taken 
to organize the exchange of scientific 
information, personnel and material. 
Recognizing the value of Unesco’s 
Field Science Co-operation Offices, the 
Conference vected to increase the bud- 
get allotted to them. These offices 
will help the execution of the Plan of 
Technical Assistance to under-deve- 
loped areas. 
Unesco will also make a special ef- 
fert to encourage scientific and tech- 
nical research and development of arid 
and semi-arid areas, in co-operation 
with the International Arid Zone 
Research Council and with the United 
Nations. 
Unesco also aims to bring science 
into the lives of ordinary men and 
women by fostering science clubs, 
scientific exhibitions, discussions 
amecng workers’ groups about the ef- 
fect on their work of scientific pro- 
gress, and world-wide discussions on 
themes related to the inter-action bet- 
ween Science and Scciety. The Orga- 
nization will help publishers to pro- 
duce cheap attractive books on science, 
and will distribute popular scientific 
articles to newspapers and magazines, 
and filmstrips for use by lecturers to 
non-scientific groups. It will help as- 
sociations for the advancement of 
science in war-devastated and other 
needy areas. 
Finally, Unesco will promote closer 
international collaboration between 
science teachers, particularly in science 
teaching methods and the develop- 
ment of a scientific attitude in pri- 
mary and secondary schools. 
SOCIAL SCIENCES 
NESCO’s Social Sciences program- 
me has three main sections : aid 
to international scientific colla- 
boration, studies of social tensions, 
and studies of international co-oper- 
ation. 
The studies of social tensions will 
ii 
“ we 
Br 
include an investigation of race con- 
tacts in Brazil, to determine factors 
contributing to harmonious race rela- 
tions. 
Unesco plans a study of population 
prcblems in countries in process of in- 
dustrializaticn, will organize a study 
of tensicns resulting from over-popu- 
lation, and will continue the enquiry 
into tensicns resulting from shifts of 
population. Unesco will also arrange 
a “tensions” investigation among Ja- 
panese youth. 
Unesco will encourage the develop- 
ment of international associations in 
the branches of sociology, political 
science, economics, cemparative law, 
and international studies, and will 
entrust them with work correlated to 
its programme. It will publish a perio- 
dical for social scientists and will en- 
ccurage the develecpment of social 
sciences’ documentation services. 
Studies will be made in the field of 
international co-operation. In one of 
these Unesco will seek to deTermine 
how greater public support can be cb- 
tained for the United Nations. 
Finally, Unesco will study the tech- 
nique of international conferences 
based upon exploratory surveys car- 
ried out during 1949-50, and will pu- 
hlish the results. oo 
CULTURAL ACTIVITIES 
ITH the aid of the Internatio- 
\X/ nal Council of Philosophy and 
Humanistic Studies, UNESCO 
will assist studies already in progress 
on the native cultures of America, 
Africa and other regions. Another 
plan to be carried out is the pre- 
paration by an international group 
of experts of a history of the scien- 
tific and cultural development of hu- 
manity, shcwing the exchanges which 
have taken place throughout the ages 
between different peoples and cultures 
in science, technology, philosophy, the 
arts and other branches of cultural 
life. 
In addition to assisting the develop- 
ment of modern cultural relations, 
UNESCO helps to preserve the cultu- 
ral heritage of the past through the 
maintenance of libraries and museums 
centaining Books and works of art 
which constitute this heritage. The 
rights and the material and moral in- 
terests of the authors of literary and 
artistic creation must be defended. 
UNESCO will also endeavour to bring 
the most important works and expres- 
sions cof world culture to ail peoples. 
UNESCO will continue its efforts to 
cc-crdinate Bibliographical services on 
an international basis. Furthermore, 
it will study the prcblem of the mi- 
crophotographic reproduction of rare 
periodicals and the practical aid to be 
given to cerfain States for the repro- 
ducticn of impertant documents. 
In the field cof the visual arts, 
UNESCO will cenduct an enquiry on 
the place held by the aris in the edu- 
cational system of various countries. 
In order to familiarise the masses 
with art, impulse will be given to the 
photographic reproduction of the 
works cf art of all countries. 
Under the auspices of the Interna- 
ticnal Ccuncil of Music, international 
music festivals will be held, scholar- 
ships and grants awarded, and music- 
al scores of special importance co- 
pied, reprcduced, and lent from one 
country to another. The work of ca- 
talcguing recorded music will be con- 
tinued, and UNESCO will increase it 
by a collecticn of important musical 
works which have nct yet been record- 
ed on a commercial scale. It will 
also encourage the recording of folk 
music. : 
UNESCO will continue to collabo- 
rate with the International P.E.N. 
Club. It will also publish information 
on the translations of foreign books 
published in each country and in the 
Index translationum, an international 
analytic catalogue of translations. 
The translation of the chief literary 
and cultural works of every country 
into the greatest possible number of 
languages will be chiefly concerned, in 
1951, with Italian, Arabic and Latin- 
American literature. 
UNESCO will alse work for the esta- 
blishment of a Universal Copyright 
Convention, and will prepare the con- 
vening of an inter-governmental con- 
ference to decide on the text of this 
~ convention, 
EXCHANGE 
OF PERSONS 
NESCO will continue an enquiry 
U into means of removing obsta- 
cles to the free movement of 
persons. A new edition of a spe- 
cial supplement to “Study Abroad” on 
study opportunities during vacations 
will be published. The basic work, 
“Study Abroad”, of which successive 
editions were published in 1948, 1949 
and 1850 constitutes a general guide to 
existing openings of study abroad. In- 
tended originally to provide a full list 
of international fellowships, the con- 
tents have been progressively augment- 
ed to include other categories of ex- 
changes as, for example, industrial 
and agricultural workers, and young 
people. 
‘While assembling information from 
Member States and from non-govern- 
( Continued on page 6) 
rs 
« © AE. 
Some of the delegates to Unesco’s Fifth General Conference. Above (left) are members of the United States delegation. From left to right : Dr Howland H. Sargeant 
(Chairman of the Delegation): Mrs. Charles Reed (wife of the U.S. Consul General); Mr. Charles Reed, Miss Bernice Baxter. Dr. George D. Stoddard, Dr. I. I. Rabi 
and Dr George F. Zook. In the photo (above, right) .are : H. E. Dr. Jose Pezet (Panama) Dr Riazuddin Siddiqui (Pakistan): Dr. I. C. Beaglehole (New Zealand) and 
Mr. Hans Mohr (Norway).

## [Page 6](081475engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 6 


### 81485: UNESCO's programme for 1951

UNESCO'S PROGRAMME FOR 1991 
(CONTINUED) 
  
(Continued from page 5.) 
mental crganizations on the granting 
‘and administering of international 
study grants, and making this infor-. 
mation available to individuals, groups 
and governments, UNESCO will also 
help to bring about adoption cf com- 
mon metheds and techniques in the 
‘administration of schclarships and 
the planning of new programmes. 
As budgetary limitations prevent 
UNESCO from allocating large sums 
for the creation and administration of 
scholarships, the programme for 1951 
aims to encourage exchanges of per- 
sons by co-ordinating activities of or- 
ganizations which award fellowships 
and study grants. 
Help to intellectual refugees is cov- 
ered by an International Student Ser- 
vice proposal sponsored by the Ne- 
therlands Conference delegation, pro- 
viding for the creation—with UNESCO 
help—of a fund for the use of refugee 
students. 
UNESCO will itself during 1951 
grant 55 fellowships for citizens of its 
Member States. These will allow spe- 
cialists to study activities related to 
the UNESCO Programme. After the 
beneficiaries have finished their work 
and returned to their heme countries, 
UNESCO remains in close contact with 
them so that the knowledge they have 
acquired may be used in the applica- 
tion of UNESCO's programme, 
MASS 
COMMUNICATIONS 
O bring about the widest possible 
T public participation in its pro- 
gramme and an understanding 
of its aims by action through the 
world’s press, radio, fllms and other 
media of communications will be one 
of the main Unesco tasks for 1951. 


### 74381: Six new UNESCO Executive Board members elected by the General Conference

SIX NEW UNESCO 
EXECUTIVE BOARD 
MEMBERS ELECTED 
BY THE GENERAL 
CONFERENCE 
IX of the eighteen crembers 
S of Unesco's Executive Bord 
which acts on behall of the 
General Conletence hetwoen 
otier's sessions, wore repia. 
General 
compomiion of 
ard, whose members sil aa 
private individuals and not co 
peoresenialives Of thelr counties, 
HE. Count Stefano Jacini (Maly). 
VICE.CHAIRMEN 
Dr. Luther H. Evans (United Sta- 
tes). 
H.E. Shatik Ghorbal Bey (Egypt). 
MEMBERS 
General Sir Ronald Adam (Uni- 
ted Kingdom)”. 
Dt. Rafael Bernal Jimenez (Co 
lombia)”*. 
Professor Paulo Cameire (Brazil). 
H. E. Dr. Antonio Castro Leal 
(Mexico) . 
H.E. M. Victor Doré (Canada). 
Monseigneur Jean Maroun (Le- 
baneon)*. 
HE. Dr. C. Parra Perez (Vene- 
suela). 
Senator Geronima Pecson (Phi- 
lippines) *. 
Professor Alex Photiades (Grec- 
ce). 
Professor Jean Piaget (Switzer. 
land) *. 
HE. Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrish- 
nan (India). 
M. Roger Seydoux (France). 
Professor Alf Sommerfelt (Nor 
way). : 
M. Ahmet Kutsi Tecer (Turkey). 
Prolossor Louis Verniers (Bel. 
gium). 
  
* Now members elected a: the 
ith Session of the General Cone 
ference Florence 1950     
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE FAR EAST THE MIDDLE EAST, LATIN AME. 
RICA AND EUROPE AT UNESCO'S FIFTH GENERAL CONFERENCE 
 
The aim will be to present these 
activities so as to focus them upon the 
Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights and within this framework, to 
highlight the right to education, the 
benefits of scientific progress and in- 
formation. Emphasis will be put on 
material illustrating: Fundamental 
education for all people and education 
for international understanding; the 
right of all peoples to enjoy the bene- 
fits of scientific progress and the rela- 
ticnship of the work of scientists to 
peace and human welfare; the strug- 
gle to resolve racial and other pro- 
blems, and the methods and achieve- 
ments of international co-operation ; 
the part played by creative artists in 
such co-operation; freedom of infor- 
mation and the free exchange of ideas. 
The organization will examine the 
possibility of creating an Internatio- 
nal Institute of the Press and Infor- 
mation through consultations with 
national and international organiza- 
"tions. 
The replies from these groups will 
be discussed by an experts’ committee 
set up by Unesco. On the basis of the 
replies, Unesco will be able to decide 
whether a conference to create the 
Institute sheuld be called. 
The General Conference also ap- 
preved a number of projects to help 
* Unesco’s efforts to reduce obstacles to 
the free flow of information. One of 
them is to secure from the contracting 
parties of the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade further reductions 
of customs barriers to the internatio- 
nai circuiaticn of educational, scienti- 
fic and cultural materials. 
Unesco will also co-operate with the 
Regional Economic Commissions of 
the United Nations in the encourage- 
ment of the domestic production, the 
promotion of the exchange, and the 
facilitation of trade agreements in- 
volving educaticnal, scientific and cul- 
tural materials. It will seek, in con- 
junction with these commissions, spe- 
cial dispensations for categories of 
persons engaged in educational activi- 
ties with regard to visa and irontier 
formalities, labour permits and simi- 
lar facilities. Unesco will work for 
wider application of schemes initiated 
by the Universal Postal Union to per- 
mit payment in national currencies 
for subscriptions to foreign newspa- 
pers, and for a 50 per cent reduction 
on postal charges for printed matter. 
The preparation and dissemination 
of a study such as “World Press Co- 
verage of Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Information” will also be un- 
dertaken, 
An international agreement reduc- 
ing cr abolishing economic controls on 
the movement of books, newspapers, 
works of art, documentary films and a 
wide range of other educational mate- 
rials, was adopted by the Conference * 
During 1951, Unesco will also carry 
out intensive work as a clearing 
house for the collection, analysis, diss= 
emination and exchange of informa- 
tion and experiences in the techniques, 
uses and effects of the press, film, ra- 
dio and allied media in the fields of 
education, science and culture. 
Expert aid missions will be underta- 
ken to advise and assist in the im- 
prevement of mass communications in 
under-developed or war devastated 
countries. 
The world survey of technical faci- 
lities, already carried out in 52 coun- 
tries or territories, will be completed 
and extended to 33 other countries 
and territories. The Member States 
will be invited to set up within the 
framework cf their National Commis- 
siecns standing consultative commit- 
tees on technical and professionnal ° 
problems. 
Finally, Unesco will continue its ef- 
fort to bring about world unification 
in Braille. A world Braille Council 
will be created and conferences will be 
held for experts in Arabic and Spa- 
nish-Portuguese Braille. 
* See page T of this issue for a 
report on this agreement. 
RELIEF SERVICES 
HE Relief Assistance Service of 
UNESCO, set up five years ago 
as the Reconstruction Depart- 
ment to help war-hit countries, has 
now extended its programme to meet 
the needs of any country requiring 
relief. 
‘War damage is being repaired, but 
new emergency situations requiring 
the assistance of an international or- 
ganization such as UNESCO stil] arise. 
The wars in Palestine and Greece left 
many refugees to be cared for as did 
the earthquakes in Ecuador last year 
and in Peru fhis year, when numerous 
schoels and buildings of great histo- 
ric and artistic value were destroyed 
The General Conference considered 
two such problems in particular: the 
situation of refugee children in Greece 
and the Near East, which continues to 
be extremely serious. As no really ef- 
fective help could be given from 
Unesco’s limited budget, the Confe- 
rence decided to appeal to the govern- 
ments of the 59 Member States to 
contribute funds sufficient for effec- 
tive action. 
Unesco’s Relief Service will continue 
tc assemble information on the needs 
of countries and use it to prepare for 
the provision of direct assistance or 
the organization of voluntary aid cam- 
paigns. It will also allocate credits 
from the Relief Fund to needy coun- 
tries and will assist them to purchase 
and transport equipment and help to 
secure import and export licences and 
customs exemptions. 
As UNESCO's funds are insufficient 
for this work, the Service will work 
with Member States to focus public 
cpiniocn and sympathy cn the needs of 
devastated areas and organise cam- 
paigns for voluntary assistance. Fi- 
nally, it will aid co-ordination inter- 
nationally—and, through National 
Commissions, nationally—of the ef- 
forts of the voluntary associations 
participating in UNESCO's relief work.

## [Page 7](081475engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

  
S
N
 
kw 
ADDED POWER TO 
LSS 
delegates to the Fifth Session of the Unesco General Conference 
0 May 23rd, 1950, Director-General Jaime Torres Bodet asked 
to act in the interest of world peace — in the future and in our 
times as well. On June 17, he described certain ultimate conclusions 
of the delegates as expressive of “a will for peace” and testimony to 
“the fidelity of all of us to Unesco’s supreme ideal”. In his sum- 
mation, the Director-General referred particularly to two resolutions 
passed by the conference — one of them proposed jointly by the 
  
YEAS 


### 81487: Conference resolutions give UNESCO added power to work for peace

CONFERENCE RESOLUTIONS GIVE UNESCO 
WORK FOR PEACE 
a a. p = 
~ Page 7 — UNESCO COURIER 
  
- 
L
U
 
J
S
 
delegations of Brazil. Canada, Ecuador, Egypt. France, India, Italy. 
the United Kingdom and the United States of America: the other by 
the delegation of Belgium. These resolutions are reproduced on this 
page. The Conference also approved proposals by Norway and by 
France, aimed to define the duties of member states in carrying out 
their obligations under the Unesco Constitution and to provide funds 
for the execution of priority projects. 
  
  
RESOLUTION 
PRESENTED BY THE DELEGATIONS OF 
BRAZIL, CANADA, ECUADOR, EGYPT, 
FRANCE, INDIA, ITALY, UNITED KINGDOM, 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
THE GENERAL CONFERENCE, 
HAVING HEARD the statements of various delegations and of 
the Director-General, 
NOTING that the programme of the Organization, as decided 
upon by the present Conference, constitutes a more direct and 
important contribution to the cause of peace than the programmes 
of previous years, 
CONSIDERING that all the activities of Unesco must, in 
accordance with its Constitution, be directed towards the peace 
and prosperity of mankind, within the framework of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, 
CONSIDERING that these activities, to be fully effective, must 
postulate a truly and sincerely universal outlook that shall eschew 
all thought of aggression and shall be based on recognition of the 
principles of justice and freedom on which the Constitution of the 
Organization is based, 
INSTRUCTS the Executive Board and the Director-General to 
carry out the programme for 1951 in the most effective and 
concentrated manner possible, bearing prominently in mind the 
guiding principles laid down in the preamble to the basic pro- 
gramme, 
INSTRUCTS the Executive Board and the Director-General to 
prepare, for the Sixth Session of the General Conference, a draft 
programme in which the various activities involving international 
co-operation in the fields of education, science and culture shall 
tend more directly, within the framework of the United Nations 
and its other Specialized Agencies, towards the maintenance and 
consolidation of peace, 
REQUESTS the Executive Board and the Director-General to 
study, for that purpose, projects that can be financed apart from 
the regular programme, by voluntary contributions of money or 
services from the greatest possible number of countries, 
INVITES Member States, with a view to the successful exe- 
cution of a concentrated programme of this nature, to consider the 
possibility of increasing in this way the resources of the Organiz- 
ation in the future. 
  
RESOLUTION 
SUBMITTED BY 
THE BELGIAN DELEGATION 
THE GENERAL CONFERENCE 
REAFFIRMS ITS DECISION that Unesco, within the limits of 
its competence, co-operate closely and actively in the programme 
of peace of the United Nations; 
NOTING that, as one of the Specialized Agencies of the United 
Nations, Unesco suffers from the effects of the difficulties which 
are compromising the harmonious workings of the system of the 
United Nations and its Specialized Agencies, 
EXPRESSES the hope that these difficulties will be rapidly 
solved, 
AND CALLS ON Member States to make every effort to this 
effect in the framework of their action within the United Nations 
and its Specialized Agencies, 
RENEWS an urgent appeal to its Member States in order that 
each, on the national level, continues and intensifies its action in 
the fields of education, science and culture with a view to 
facilitating and developing understanding between the peoples, 
AFFIRMS that Unesco’s contribution to the cause of peace 
consists in giving an example of tolerance and mutual under- 
standing as well as freedom of exchange and freedom of expression 
of ideas within the widest diversities of viewpoints, 
INVITES all those in the world who are devoted to education, 
science and culture as well as those who dispose of means of mass 
communication to assist in the development of this action, 
INSTRUCTS the Director-General to bring this resolution to 
attention of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
  T its closing meeting on June 17th, the General Conference approved 
a resolution proposed by France to authorize Unesco’s Executive 
Board to finance, by a transfer of funds from the 1950 budget, pre- 
liminary studies in 1950 of special projects aimed at the maintenance and 
consolidation of peace proposed for the 1951 programme.     Norwegian proposal on Educational 
Scientific and Cultural duties of the State 
T HE following resolution, submitted by the delegation of Norway, was 
unanimously adopted at the closing session of the General Confer- 
ence: 
«The Director General is authorized to consider the constitution of a 
committee charged with the preparation of a charter of the duties of the 
State in regard to education, science and culture for the purpose of ensur- 
ing a better understanding between peoples, and to prepare a report on 
this subject for the next session of the General Conference.” 


### 81488: General Conference adopts world agreement for duty-free import of educational materials

  
  
GENERAL CONFERENCE ADOPTS WORLD AGREEMENT 
FOR DUTY-FREE IMPORT OF EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS 
N some ‘countries books coming 
from abroad are taxed as. much 
as 300 per cent. Scientific equip- 
ment needed in research laboratories, 
!is taxed with equal severity. Education 
exhibitions, destined for schools and 
museums, remain in customs ‘ware- 
houses while their sponsors try to raise 
the heavy bond often required by the 
authorities. 
These tariff and trade regulations 
make it costly, difficult and sometimes 
impossible for people in many coun- 
tries to obtain the works of art, and 
the scientific and educational materials 
they need. 
To remedy that situation, Unesco’s 
Fifth General Conference adopted 
unanimously a new international 
Agreement allowing a wide range of 
educational, scientific and cultural ma- 
terials to move across frontiers free of 
duty. Governments adhering to this 
Agreement will abolish duties on books, 
newspapers, magazines, musical scores, 
maps and charts. They will grant 
import licences and foreign currency 
for publications needed by public 
libraries. 
The Agreement will also permit the 
free importation of paintings, drawings 
and sculpture. Approved institutions, 
such as museums, laboratories and 
schools, will enjoy sweeping privileges 
"for the free importation of everything 
from documentary films to scientific 
apparatus. One provision, for exam- 
ple, eliminates barriers to the move- 
ment of everything required for the 
educational advancement of the blind. 
“ Free Trade” 
in Culture 
No that the Agreement has been 
unanimously adopted, it will be 
opened shortly for signature at 
Lake Success. The British Govern- 
ment has announced that it will sign 
the Agreement and submit it to Par- 
liament for ratification. Many other 
countries have also indicated that they 
will seek quick legislative approval of 
the pact. There is little doubt that it 
will obtain, within a short delay, the 
ten ratifications needed to bring it 
into force. 
This is the second international 
Agreement to be sponsored by Unesco. 
The first is designed to abolish duties, 
quotas and other trade barriers to the 
movement of films, recordings and 
similar audio-visual aids to education. 
It has been signed by 17 countries 
and ratified by one, Norway. 
When these Unesco Agreements 
enter into force, bringing a “free 
trade” in culture, people in each coun- 
try will find it much easier to obtain 
books, paintings, documentary films 
and all types of educational materials 
from other countries — a significant, 
practical step towards international 
understanding.

## [Page 8](081475engo.pdf#page=8) 2

### 81491: Race and civilization

UNESCO COURIER — Page 8 


### 81490: The Scientific basis for human unity: UNESCO publishes Declaration by world's scientists

THE SCIENTIFIC BASIS FOR HUMAN UNITY 
Unesco Publishes Declaration By World's Scientists 
The following statement was published by Unesco on July 18 th. It was prepared by the Unesco Committee 
of Experts on Race Problems, at Unesco House in Paris, and was drafted by the following scientists: Ernest Beagle- 
hole, New Zealand ; Juan Comas, Mexico ; L. A. Costa Pinto, Brazil ; Franklin Frazier, United States ; Morris 
Ginsberg, United Kingdom ; Humayun Kabir, India; Claude Levi-Strauss, France; Ashley Montagu, United 
States. The text was revised by Professor Montagu after criticisms submitted by Professors Hadley Cantril, E. G. Conklin, 
Gunnar Dahlberg, Theodosius Dobzhansky, L. C. Dunn, Donald Hager, Julian S. Huxley, Otto Klineberg, Wilbert Moore, 
“H. J. Muller, Gunnar Myrdal, and Joseph Needham. 
CIENTISTS have reached general 
S agreement in recognising that 
mankind is one: that all men belong 
to the same species, Homo sapiens. 
It is further generally agreed among 
scientists that all men are probably 
derived from the same common stock; 
‘and that such differences as exist between 
different groups of mankind are due to 
the operation of evolutionary factors of 
differentiation such as isolation, the drift 
and random fixation of the material 
particles which control heredity (the 
genes), changes in the structure of thece 
particles, hybridization, and natural 
selection. In these ways groups have 
arisen of varying stability and degree of 
differentiation which have been classified 
in different ways for different purposes. 
From the biological standpoint, the 
species Homo sapiens is made up of a 
number of populations, each one of which 
differs from the others in the frequency 
of one or more genes. Such genes, 
responsible for the hereditary differences 
between men, are always few when com- 
pared to the whole genetic constitution 
of man and to the vast number of genes 
- common to all human beings regardless 
choose to describe as a race. Thus, many 
national, religious, geographic, linguistic 
or cultural groups have, in such loose 
usage, been called “races”, when obviously 
Americans are not a race, nor are En- 
glishmen, nor Frenchmen, nor any other 
national group. Catholics, Protestants, 
Moslems, and Jews are not races, nor are 
groups who speak English or any other 
language thereby definable as a race; 
people who live in Iceland or England or 
India are not races; nor are people who 
are culturally Turkish or Chinese or the 
like thereby describable as races. 
National, religious, geographic, lin- 
guistic, and cultural groups do not ne- 
cessarily ceincide with racial groups; and 
the cultural traits of such groups have 
no demonstrated genetic cennection with 
racial traits. Because serious errors of 
this kind are habitually committed when 
the term “race” is used in popular par- 
lance, it would be better when speaking 
cf human races to drop the term “race” 
altogether and speak of ethnic groups. 
Now what has the scientist to say 
about the groups of mankind which may 
be recognized at the present time? Hu- 
man races can be and have been dif- 
A 2 IE SRA 
a." A > 
» v7 : 
> 
RAGIAL HARMONY   NEW ZEALAND 
today Maoris number about one twentieth of the total population. Not more than half of 
the Maoris are of pure Maori descent and the number of those of mixed blood appears to 
be increasing rather more rapidly than those of unmixed race. 
contribution to New Zealand's war effort and to-day are participating more and more in 
the economic and political life of the country. one important development being the increas- 
ing number entering the teaching profession. 
In New Zealand the Maori population more 
than doubled between 1896 and 1936 and 
Maoris made an important   
of the population to which they belong. 
This means that the likenesses among 
men are far greater than their diffe- 
cences. 
A race, from the biological standpoint, 
may therefore be defined as one of the 
group of populations constituting the 
species “Homo sapiens.” These popul- 
ations are capable of interbreeding with 
one another but, by virtue of the isolat- 
ing barriers which in the past kept them 
more or less separated, exhibit certain 
physical differences as a result of their 
somewhat different biological histories. 
They represent variations, as it were, on 
a common theme. 
In short, the term “race” designates a 
grcup or population characterised by 
some concentrations, relative as to Ire- 
quency and distribution, of hereditary 
particles (genes) or physical characters, 
which appear, fluctuate, and often disap- 
pear in the ccurse of time by reason of 
geographic and/or cultural isolation. The 
varying manifestations of these traits in 
different populations are perceived in 
different ways by each group. What is 
perceived is largely preconceived, so that 
ea~h group arbitrarily tends to misinter- 
pret the variability which occurs as a 
fundamental difference which separates 
that group from all others. 
These are the scientific facts. Unfor- 
tunately, however, when most people use 
the term “race” they do nct do, so in the 
sense above defined. To most people, a 
race is any group of people whom they 
ferently classified by different anthropo- 
logists, but at the present time most 
anthropologists agree in classifying the 
greater part of present-day mankind into 
three major divisions, as follows: 
Mongecloid, Negroid, Caucaseoid 
The biological processes which the cias- 
sifier has here embalmed, as it were, are 
dynamic, not static. These 
were not the same in the past as they 
are at present, and there is every reason 
to believe that they will change in the 
Tuture. 
Many sub-groups or ethnic groups 
within these divisions have been descrip- 
ed. There is no general agreement upon 
their number, and in any event most 
ethnic groups have not yet been either 
studied or described by the physical 
anthropologist. 
Whatever classification the anthro. 
pologist makes of man, he never includes 
mental characteristics as part of those 
classifications. It is now generally reco- 
gnized that intelligence tests do nof in 
themselves enable us to differentiate 
tafely between what is due to innate 
capacity and what is the result of envi- 
ronmental influences, training and educ- 
ation. Wherever it has been possible 
to make allowances for differences in 
environmental opportunities, the tests 
have shown essential similarity in men- 
tal characters among all human groups. 
In short, given similar degrees of cul- 
tural opportunity to realise their poten- 
tialities, the average achievement of 
divisions . 
the members of each ethnic group is 
about the same. The scientific investig- 
ations of recent years fully support the 
dictum of Confucius (551-478 B.C.) "Men's 
natures are alike ; it is their habits that 
carry them far apart’. 
The scientific material available to us 
at present dces not justify the conclusion 
that inherited genetic differences are a 
major factor in producing the differences 
between the cultures and cultural 
achievements of different peoples or 
groups. It dces indicate, however, that 
the history cf the cultural experience 
which each group has undergone is the 
major facter in explaining such differ- 
ences. The one trait which above all 
others has been at a premium in the 
evolution of men’s mental characters has 
been educability, plasticity. This is a 
trait which all human beings possess. 1t 
is, indzed, a species character of “Homo 
sapiens.” 
Sc far as temperament is concerned, 
there is no definite evidence that there 
exist inborn differences between human 
grcups. There is evidence that whatever 
greup differences of the kind there might 
be are greatly over-ridden by the indi- 
vidual differences, and by the differences 
springing from environmental factors. 
As fer personality and character, these 
may be considered raceless. In every 
human group a rich variety of personality 
and character types will be found, and 
there is no reason fcr believing that any 
human greup is richer than any other in 
these respects. 
Biological Facts and Racial Myths 
ITH respect to race-mixture, the 
WW evidence points unequivocally to 
the fact that this has been going 
on from the earliest times. Indeed, one 
of the chief processes of race-formation 
and race-extinction or absorption is by 
means of hybridization between races or 
ethnic groups. Furthermore, no con- 
vincing evidence has been adduced that 
race-mixture cf itself prcduces biolo- 
gically bad effects. Statements that hu- 
man hybrids frequently show undesirable 
traits, both physically and mentally, phy- 
sical disharmonies and mental dege- 
neracies, are not supported by the facts. 
There is, therefore, no “biological” justi- 
fication for prohibiting intermarriage 
between persons of different ethnic 
groups. 
The biological facet of race and the 
myth of “race” should be distinguished. 
For all practical social purposes “race” 
is not so much a biclogical phenomenon 
as a social myth. The myth of “race” 
has created an enormous amount of 
human and social damage. In recent 
vears it has taken a heavy toll in human 
lives and caused untold suffering. It 
still prevents the normal development of 
millions of human beings and deprives 
civilization of the effective co-operation of 
productive minds. 
The biological differences between 
ethnic groups should be disregarded from 
the standpoint of social acceptance and 
sccial action. The unity of mankind 
from both the biological and social 
viewpoints is the main thing. 
To recognize this and to act accordingly 
is the first requirement of modern man. 
It is but to recognize what a great 
biclogist wrote in 1875: “As man advances 
in civilization, and small tribes are united 
into larger communities, the simplest 
reason would tell each individual that he 
cught to extend his social instincts and 
sympathies to all the members of the 
same naticn, though personally unknown 
to him. This point being once reached, 
there is only an artificial barrier to 
“prevent his sympathies extending to the 
men of all nations and races.” 
These are the words of Charles Darwin 
in “The Descent of Man” (2nd ed., 1875, 
pp. 187-188). And, indeed, the whole of 
human history shows that a co-operative 
spirit is not only natural to men, but 
more deeply rooted than any self-seeking 
tendencies. If this were not so we should 
not see the growth of integration and 
organization cf his communities which 
the centuries and the millennia plainly 
exhibit. 
We now have to consider the bearing 
cf these statements on the problem of 
human equality. It must be asserted 
with the utmost emphasis that equality 
as an ethical principle in no way depends 
upcn the assertion that human beings 
are in fact equal in endowment. Obvious- 
ly individuals in all ethnic groups vary 
greatly among themselves in endowment. 
Nevertheless the characteristics in which 
human groups differ from one another 
are often exaggerated and used as a basis 
for questioning the validity of equality in 
the ethical sense. For this purpose we 
have thought it werth while to set cut in 
a formal manner what is at present 
scientifically established concerning indiv- 
idual and group differences. 
(The final conclusicns of the scientists 
are published on page 1.) 
Pt
 
m
r
e
 
=
=
 
I 
J " 
R
 
-
r
 
gr
ey
 
| bad . , ge 
i . on 
"e 
a 
—
—
  
~ ALL THESE MEN AND WOHEN 
i who speak one of the many Ind 
in many ways—sometimes for blo 
r J JU EE 
OWARDS the end of the last century, 
| a French anthropologist, Lapouge, 
declared that the day was drawing 
near when men would slaughter 
one another for a few millimetres’ differ- 
ence in cranium size. What may then 
have seemed only a whimsical theery has 
since become harsh reality with the per- 
petration cf appalling massacres during 
the last decade in the name of racial 
superiority. Thus our age has been given 
the sorry privilege of verifying prephe- 
cies, which net long ago would have bzen 
regarded as ludicrous. : 
Unfortunately the evils of racial 
discrimination have not disappeared with 
the suppression cof Nazi political power. 
Although not applied in such ruthless 
fashion it still causes immeasurable 
suffering every day and continues to 
affect the lives and futures of millions of 
people. 
Racism is one of the most disturbing 
phenomena cf the great revolution of the 
mecdern world. At the very time when 
industrial civilization is penetrating to all 
points of the globe and is uprcoting men 
cf every colour from their age-old tradi- 
tions, a doctrine, treacherously scientific: 
in appearance, is invoked in order to rob 
these men of their full share in the 
advantages of the civilization forced upon 
them. 
There exists in the structure of Western 
civilization a fatal contradiction. On the 
cne hand it wishes and insists that cer- 
tain cultural values, to which it attributes 
the highest virtues, be assimilated by 
other people. But, conversely, it will not 
admit that two-thirds of humanity is 
capable of attaining this standard which 
it has set up. Ironically, the worst 
sufferers from racial dogma are usually 
the people whose intellect most forcibly 
demcnstrates its falseness. 
i US LDA ra 
No “Pure” Races 
F nearly a century, all genuine 
anthropolcgists have insisted on the 
purely conventional character of the 
features chosen tc classify the human 
Fg 
UNESCO TO BEGIN PILOT 
STUDY IN BRAZIL 
ON RACIAL PROBLEMS 
NESCO will mnie Hake a I'ilet 
Project” in Bevicll wert gear fo 
otwely the prrobile nis of ifferent 
rere iet! clhnic sgpronps fring Mm § 
Coli nan social environment The 
sifu y will serk fo hiree 
cronemic, peldifioal, cwliveal apd pry 
chologieal factors help or hurl [he 
harmunlons relalions auiong races and 
cthnmic Irons. 
ihe wipenal proposal [ou the Pool 
Ion ject, as submitted by ! NESCO'S 
FEreenline Hoard ten The oogri 
and Bndged Commission of '\NEs 
Fist CONS Crente, yore bili U 
thet H bie eqrried ond “in a country of 
3 Latin America™ Professoy franio te 
Berredo Carnciro, of Brasil, | 
that his conunlry be chosen heoanase, 
he said, Brazil o as a nalion wh A 
owed ts erelution to a fowternily of 
Mark. while and Indian cifizens, “and 
oir racial mixiure Is Increasing all 
the Hime.” 
FX ESHER 
and 
oe cIrmine 
i 
ff» 
tieneral 
oposer     

## [Page 9](081475engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 81491: Race and civilization

  
ARYANS. — 
Page 9 — UNESCO COURIER 
a 
< 
] 
4 
: 
v 
’ 
i 
The men and women shown above, coming respectively from Norway, India, Italy and France, as well as those of many other countriesare 
“Aryans ”, for this linguistic term can apply to hundreds of millions of people living in Europe, Asia, North and South America and Oceania, 
ropean languages. As expressed by Ruth Benedict and Gene Weltfish in “The Races of Mankind *', * Aryans”, Jews, Italians are not races. Hitler used the term 
uropeans... sometimes for Germans... sometimes for all who agreed with him politically, including the Japanese. As Hitler used it, * Aryan" had no meaning. 
ND CIVILIZATION 
by Dr. Alfred METRAUX 
species. They have reiterated that there 
is no such thing as a pure race, that 
racial differences are biological and pro- 
bably do not affect character and mental 
faculties, and that from the anthropolo- 
gical point of view the human species is 
cne. But little attention has been paid 
by the majerity to their words. 
Hew many cultivated, intelligent and 
kindly people believe in all good faith 
that Negroes inherit at birth an exu- 
berant and primitive nature and that 
rhythm and dance are theirs from the 
cradle? How many others, who believe 
themselves to be free from any taint of 
racial prejudice, credit the Jews with 
inteilectual qualities superior to those of 
Chistians ? Every day, all too many 
attest to the belief that racial groups 
have hereditary virtues and defects, a 
belief which is a commonly accepted 
error, and which, if not discredited, comes 
to be accepted as the truth. 
Race prejudice thrives on the inability 
of most people to make a clear distinction 
between facts pertaining te civilization 
and culture on the cne hand and biolo- 
gical facts on the other. Men are dis- 
tinguished by their respective cultures, 
which is that “complex whole which 
includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, 
law, custom, and any cther capabilities 
and habits acquired by man as a member 
of society.” As cultural differences are 
frequently associated with | physical 
differences, the latter have been regarded 
too cften as the cause of the former. 
Culture Confused With Instinct 
OCIAL prejudice will not diminish 
until it is generally recognized that 
the real differences between human 
societies are not due to biological here- 
dity but tc cultural environment. The 
influence of culture on the individual is 
at cnce so subtle ‘and strong, and it is 
exerted from such an early age, that it is 
apt to be confused with instinct. 
The cultural factor plays a highly 
important part in the workings of the 
intellect. A peor, isclated group which 
does not receive much stimulus from the 
outside world may easily be taken to be 
congenitally inferior; but another one in 
the favourable atmosphere of a different 
moral and econcmic environment, may be 
regarded as a privileged specimen of 
mankind. 
Psychology and criminology have 
taught us that delinquency is related to 
social conditions. If we are convinced of 
the importance cof family and social 
environment, why should we refuse to 
recognize the part played by culture? It 
is too easily forgotten that there are 
many cultural specializations and many 
cheices open to every culture. 
Take for example the Australian abori- 
gines. Their tools and eccnomy are 
those of cur prehisteric ancestors. Like 
several species of fauna in the country 
they seem to represent an early stage of 
evelution. Nevertheless, these primitive 
people have developed a social organiz- 
ation and a system of relationship of 
such complexity and refinement that it 
requires an able brain and a degree of 
mathematical ability to unravel all its 
intricacies. In comparison, some of our: 
systems are simple, even crude. Examples 
from cther sccieties could be multiplied. 
Doubts About The Nordics 
NE of the essential features of cultures 
is their malleability. They change 
rather rapidly and only remain static 
in certain exceptional cases. 
The racial composition of Europe has 
probably varied very little in the course 
of the last two or three thousand years, 
but wculd anyone venture to affirm that 
European mentality has always been the 
same? Would Englishmen of today 
feel at home among the subjects of 
Edward IIL? In Japan the 19th century 
saw the tremendous cultural revolution of 
a people whese racial type was in no way 
changed, for it is obvious that, biologic- 
ally speaking, the Japanese of 1950 is 
the same as his great-grandfather in the 
days cf Commodore Perry. 
The Uniled States cf America provide 
a very gced example of the fact that 
culture is more important than race. 
Who has not been impressed by the 
“typically American” mentality, gestures 
and behavicur of persons springing from 
the most varied races? 
It is a gross errcr to believe history 
can be explained by race. Western 
industrial culture does not owe its great 
development and power to any innate 
superiority of the white race. The Gauls, 
as Julius Caesar describes them, were 
scarcely superior to Western African 
tribes, whom some pecple glibly declare 
incapable of progress. Writers of the 
ancient Mediterranean peoples frequently 
expressed doubts about the capacities of 
the Nordics, some of whom are inclined 
today tc disdain other races. 
There is nothing hereditary or even 
spontaneous in the antipathy felt by 
members cf one racial group for those of 
another. Chbservations on the behaviour 
of children show very clearly that they 
express aversion for people of another 
colour only under the influence of the 
family milieu. The millions of half- 
castes in the wcrld are witness that 
different races have in fact .a particular 
attraction for cne another. Relations 
between races are generally determined 
by cultural tradition. History is there to 
teach us that this tradition- has varied 
greatly in the course of the centuries. 
No Escape From Heredity 
ACISM is a relatively new myth, 
dating back to only two or three 
centuries ago. Before the colonial 
expansion of the Eurcpean powers, men 
despised or hated one ancther for cultural 
cr religicus differences, but did not claim 
te be superior to cne another because of 
the cecleur of their skin or the shape of 
their skull or their nose. 
Morally, slavery was just as damaging 
to the whites as to the blacks. The 
whites made skin colour and other phy- 
sical characteristics indelible distinguish- 
ing marks. The Inquisition burnt the 
Jews because they had crucified Christ 
and because they were supposed to be the 
enemies of the faith; the Nazis did the 
same because the Jews were said to belong 
tc a species which was inherently harm- 
ful. The difference is of little importance 
to the victim, but it means much from 
a&Qs aaa PS 
  
    
~ Oa O_o, *) 
Sy Sn Ll * | 
ee LT RT 
S, SmamE 
~~ — 
US 0 Le AS; & | Fo 
    
    
Very soon after their 
sccupation of Poland the 
Nazis decided to herd all Jews together in special walled-oft parts of Warsaw and other large 
cities. In Warsaw an eight foot wall (shown in ihis photo) topped with broken glass was 
built to define the limits of a revived mediaeval ghetto. By 1941, over 450.000 people were 
crowded into the area. many being forced to share a room with a dozen other people.     
the point of view of history. It is pos- 
sible fo change one’s religious convictions; 
but nobody can escape heredity. 
There is in this concept of race some- 
thing implacable. The barbarity of our 
time is more ruthless and more absurd 
than that of the so-called Dark Ages; for 
racial prejudice is an un-intelligent and 
unattractive myth. Its fiourishing deve- 
lopment in the twentieth century will no 
doubt in future ages be regarded as one 
of the most shameful episodes in history. 
Science versus Prejudice 
ACIAL hatred and conflict feed on 
mistaken scientific noticns and anti- 
rational dogma. To show up these 
errors and lessen their harmful effect, we 
must use the means supplied by science, 
culture and education. Unesco, better 
than any other institution in the world, 
is thus qualified to combat racial preju- 
dice. 
Any campaign for an ideological object- 
ive must be based cn a declaration of 
principles. As regards ‘race, what is 
needed is not dogma or moral conviction, 
but scientific data, in view of the fact 
that the system of race discrimination 
claims to derive from actual experience 
and alleged biological laws. Before 
making an appeal to common sense, to 
charity, and even to the self-interest cf 
the groups affected by this plague, it was 
necessary to ascertain the results of 
scientific observation. 
That is why a commissicn ef anthro- 
pologists and sociclogists met towards 
the end of last year at Unesco House for 
the purpose of preparing a document in 
which the attitude of science to the 
racial problem would be clearly set forth. 
This declaration, reproduced elsewhere, 
leaves not a shadow cf doubt, that the 
specialists lock upon racial dogma as a 
myth. 
The fight against race discrimination, 
which figures in the Unesco Constitu- 
tion, will be long. To combat an emo- 
tional attitude as deep-seated and dan- 
gerous as racial prejudice is not easy, but 
by depriving it of. all scientific and 
rational justification a great step forward 
will have been made.

## [Page 10](081475engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 10 
  
HONORE DE BALZAC 
A portrait by the French painter Court. 
thirteen years ago, the title of 
“The Human Comedy”, it is 
necessary that I should state its 
purpose, relate its origin, and give 
some explanation of its plan; 
endeavouring to do so as if I had no 
personal interest in the matter. This 
is not as difficult as the public might 
imagine. The writing of a few books 
makes a man self-sufficient; 
much labour and hard toil bring 
humility. This reflection explains 
the survey which Corneille, Moliére, 
and other great authors made of 
their writings. If it is impossible to 
equal them in the grandeur of their 
conceptions, at least we may share 
the spirit with which they examined 
them. 
The leading idea of this human 
comedy came to me at first like a 
dream ; like one of those impossible 
visions which we try to clasp as they 
elude us; a smiling fancy showing 
for a moment a woman’s face, as it 
spreads its wings and rises to the 
ideal heavens. But soon this vision, 
this chimera, changed, after the 
fashion of chimeras, into a living 
shape with compelling will and 
tyrannical power, to which I yielded 
myself up. The idea came from the 
study of human life in comparison 
with the life of animals. 
It is a mistake to suppose that the 
controversy which in these latter 
days has arisen between Cuvier and 
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire rests upon a 
scientific innovation. Synthetic unity 
filled, under various definitions, the 
greatest minds of the two preceding 
centuries. In reading the strange 
books of those mystical writers who 
drew science into their conceptions 
of the infinite — such as Sweden- 
borg, Saint-Martin, and others; also 
the writings of the great naturalists, 
Leibnitz, Buffon, Charles Bonnet, 
I N giving to a work, begun nearly 
etc. — we find in the monads of 
Leibnitz, in the organic molecules of 
Buffon, in the vegetative force of 
Needham, in the encasement of 
germs of Charles Bonnet, who was 
bold enough to write in 1760, 
“animal life wvegetates like plant 
life” — we find, I say, the rudiments 
of that strong law of self- 
preservation upon which rests the 
theory of synthetic unity. 
Society Makes The Man 
HERE is but one animal. The 
Creator used one and the same 
principle for all organized 
being. An animal is an essence 
which takes external form, or, to 
speak more correctly, takes the 
ditferences of its form from the 
centres or conditions in which it 
comes to its development. All 
zoological species grow out of these 
differences. 
The announcement and pursuit of 
this theory, keeping it as he did in 
harmony with preconceived ideas of 
the Divine power, will be the lasting 
glory of Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, the 
conqueror of Cuvier in this particular 
branch of science — a fact recognized 
by the great Goethe in the last words 
which came from his pen. 
Filled with these ideas, I had 
but . 
perceived, long before this discussion 
arose, that Society in these respects: 
is like Nature. Society makes the 
man ; he develops according to the 
social centres in which he is placed: 
there are as many different men as 
there are species in zoology. The 
differences between a soldier, a 
workman, a governor, a lawyer, a 
man of leisure, a scholar, a 
statesman, a merchant, a sailor, a 
poet, a beggar, a priest, though more 
difficult to decipher, are at least as 
marked as those which separate the 
wolf, the lion, the ass, the crow, the 
shark, the seal, the lamb, etc. There 
have always been, and always will 
be, social species just as there are 
zoological species. If Buffon 
achieved a great work when he put 
together in one book the whole 
scheme of zoology, is there not a 
work of the same kind to be done 
for Society ? 
Mankind’s Complicated 
Struggle 
ATURE imposes upon the animal 
Kingdom limitations which do 
not bind the social realm. When 
Buffon had described a lion, he 
could dismiss the lioness with a 
word; but in the world of men, 
woman is far from being the female 
of the male. Two species of 
mankind may exist in one household: 
the wife of a shopkeeper is some- 
times fit to be the wife of a prince; 
often the wife of a prince is 
unworthy to be the companion of the 
meanest labourer. The Social king- 
dom has uncertainties and accidents 
which are not to be found in the 
natural world, for it is itself Nature 
plus Society. Any description of the 
social species, consequently, doubles 
all description of the animal species 
in the matter of the sexes alone. 
... Buffon found the life of animals 
extremely simple. They have no 
belongings, neither arts nor sciences; 
while man, by a law still un- 
explained, feels the need to set the 
stamp of his habits, his thoughts, his 
being, upon all that he collects to 
meet his wants. Though Leuwen- 
hoec, Swammerdam, Spallanzani, 
Réaumur, Charles Bonnet, Muller, 
Haller, and other patient zoologists 
proclaim the interest which attaches 
to the habits of animals, yet to our 
eyes at least they remain perpetually 
the same; whereas the habits, 
clothing, methods of speech, the 
abodes of princes, bankers, artists, 
citizens, priests, and paupers, are all 
widely dissimilar, and change with 
the whims of civilization. 
For these reasons my ideal work 
took on a triple form, — men, 
women, and things; that is to say, 
persons and the material represent- 
ation which they gave to their being: 
in short, man and his life. 
Portrait Of An Epoch 
T has been no light task to 
I point the three or four 
¢ ¢ ¢ ® thousand salient figures of an 
epoch, — for that is about the 
number of types presented by the 
generation of which this human 
r
E
 
H
A
 
— . 
Some years after Balzac’s death, the “Socié- 
té des Gens de Lettres” (The French 
Authors’ Association) commissioned Rodin, 
the famous sculptor, to execute a statue of 
the novelist. Rodin carried out a great deal of 
research, studied lithographs and engravings 
and read Balzac’s works for he aimed to 
portray the character of the novelist rather 
than his physical likeness. The final result 
(shown - in the photograph above) was a 
- synthesis of the two. but the French writers 
refused to accept it. It was not until 1939 
that a bronze was cast and this now stands 
at the junction of two Paris streets while the 
original work is preserved in the Musee 
Rodin, in Paris. 
comedy is the contemporary and the 
exponent. This number of figures, 
of characters, this multitude of por- 
traits needed frames, permit me even 
to say galleries. Out of this neces- 
sity grew the classification of my 
work into Scenes — scenes from 
private, provincial, Parisian, politi- 
cal, military, and country life. Under 
these heads I have classed all those 
studies of manners and morals which 
form the general history of Society 
and of its *“ conduct of life and noble 
deeds ” (faits et gestes), to use the 
language of our ancestors. These 
six divisions follow a general idea; 
each has its meaning and signific- 
ation, and represents a distinct phase 
in human life. The “Scenes trom 
private life” are those of childhood 
and of youth, just as the “Scenes 
from provincial life” represent the 
age of passions, calculations, self- 
interest, and ambition. The * Scenes 
from Parisian life ” draw the picture 
of tastes, fashions, sentiments, vices, 
and all those unbridled extravagan- 
ces excited by the life of great cities, 
where meet together the extremes of 
good and the extremes of evil. Each 
of these three divisions has its local 
colour. Paris and the provinces — 


### 81492: Balzac and the human comedy

BALZAC 
AND THE HUMAN COMEDY 
EW writers have had such a great influence on the literature of all countries as Honoré 
de Balzac, who died in Paris, on August 18th, 1850. 
Balzac’s true literary career started in 1829 after ten years of trying and discourag- 
ing apprenticeship. It had exactly twenty-one years to run, yet during this time Balzac, 
working with a furious energy, produced an immense and varied total of novels and phil- 
osophical and analytical studies in which, using his gifts of observation and imagination 
and on a scale never achieved by any other novelist, he portrayed the life of his time. 
Balzac openly, publicly and proudly pursued fame and money. He affected at times 
to hold mankind in contempt. Some critics have asserted that these attitudes were the 
whole basis for bis work. That work itself, however, in its profundity and integrity, gives 
a sufficient answer to the lesser critics — and even to Balzac himself — for contending 
that it could have bad so mean an origin. 
In 1842, Balzac carried out the idea of building his work into one structure to which 
he gave the name “La Comédie Humaine”, and in a preface written for the first volume 
of this “Human Comedy”, he gave his own interpretation of his books. 
As a tribute to Balzac on the centenary of his death, the Courier publishes on this 
page extracts from the preface in which the novelist, explaining bis title for the work, 
sets out to “state its purpose, relate its origin and give some explanation of its plan.” 
that social antithesis — furnished the 
data. 
Society In Convulsion 
sections of Society, I wished 
to show certain other 
phases of 1life which unite the 
interests of some or of all, and yet 
are partly aloof from the common 
order. Out of this desire came the 
“ Scenes from political life”, also 
the “ Scenes from military life” ; in 
the latter I have sought to show 
Society in convulsion, carried out of 
itself either for conquest or for 
defence. Finally, the “ Scenes from 
country life” are, as it were, the 
evening of my long day’s-work, if I 
may so call this social drama. In 
this division will be found my purest 
characters ; also the application of 
the great principles of order, of 
patriotism, and of morality. 
Such is the structure, teeming with 
life, full of comedy and of tragedy, 
on which I base the “ Philosophical 
Studies ” which form the second nart 
of my work. In these I have shown 
the keynote of that vast assemblage 
of all that strikes the eye, that 
captivates the mind or touches the 
heart ; I have shown the havoc that 
has followed thought, step by step, 
from emotion to emotion. 
A FTER drawing these three 
LX NX J 
The Public Will Decide 
BOVE these again will be 
A: ound the “Analytical 
e060 Studies”, of which I shall 
say nothing, as only one of them has 
been published. Later, I hope to 
give other works of the same class, 
— the “ Pathology of Social life ” the 
“ Anatomy of Educating bodies ”, the 
“ Monograph of Virtue”, etc. 
Looking at the work still to be 
done, perhaps my readers will join 
my publishers in saying, “ May your 
life be prolonged!” My own prayer 
is that I may not be so tortured by 
men and events as I have been in 
the past, since the beginning of my 
great and terrible labour. Yet I have 
had one support, for which I return 
thanks to God. The highest talent 
of our day, the noblest characters, the 
truest friends, have clasped my hand 
and said to me, “ Take courage!” 
Why should I not own that such 
proofs of affection, such testimonials 
given now and then by strangers, 
have upheld me in my career in spite 
of myself, in spite of unjust attacks, 
in spite of calumnies that have 
pursued me, — upheld me against 
disheartenment, and also against that 
too-vivid hope, the expression of 
which has been mistaken for exces- 
sive conceit. 
The extent of a plan which em- 
braces both the history and the 
criticism of Society, which analyzes 
its evils and lays bare its hidden 
springs, justifies me, I think, in 
giving to my work the title under 
which it now appears, — “The 
Human Comedy ”. Is it ambitious ? 
Is it not just ard legitimate? The 
public, when my work is done, will 
decide.

## [Page 11](081475engo.pdf#page=11) 3

### IGNORE

POWER LR, V-SEen 
Page |! — UNESCO COURIER 


### 81494: Many nations seek new uses for free fuel

WITH HE WIND 
  
MANY NATIONS | 
SEEK NEW USES | 
FOR “FREE FUEL” 
But not the classical friendly-looking Dutch type with 
which we are all familiar. The new mills are designed 
WW INDMILLS are going up again in various parts of the world. 
to capture the power from the wind and to translate it, 
on a large scale, into electrical energy for use in homes and 
industry. They are an expression of the fact that many countries 
face increasing shortages of coal and oil and that wind power 
may, in many cases. prove an admirable substitute for, or addition 
other forms of power. 
Countries such as the U.S.A., Denmark, France, the Netherlands 
and Britain already have teams of experts investigating how the 
winds which blow over their countries can be captured to produce 
more electrical power. 
The British have set up a Wind 
Power Research Station in the 
Orkney Islands, where it is propos- 
ed to erect a 100 kwt. generator 
which will be tied in with the 
electricity supply servicing the 
islands. It is estimated that the 
western coastal districts of Britain 
are among the windiest in the 
world, and experts say that only a 
few hundred feet above the ground, 
millions of horse power in the form 
of wind cross the coasts on a 
windy day. 
Free And Inexhaustible 
KEPORT issued two years ago 
by the British Electrical and 
Allied Industries Research 
Association gave a tentative esti- 
mate that between 7.75 and 7.5 mil- 
lion kwt. hours of electricity might 
be generated yearly in Great Bri- 
tain by wind power. This would 
be equivalent to a saving of from 
2 to 4 million tons of coal. 
In these terms, wind power is of 
distinct economic importance. Its 
supply is free and inexhaustible. 
The British expert, Mr. E.W. 
Golding, points out that there are, 
however, two main disadvantages 
which must be met if it is to be 
‘used economically for electricity 
supply : the low energy content 
per unit of volume of air, and its 
uncertain availability at any par- 
ticular time. 
The first disadvantage is likely 
to result in relatively high costs 
for storage facilities which will 
preserve the energy for use during 
non-windy periods. It is Mr. Gold- 
ing’s opinion that storage should 
be ruled out in large-scale opera- 
‘tions, and that wind power should 
be used as and when it is available. 
The windmill must therefore be 
erected on very windy sites in 
close proximity to local metworks 
of electricity supply. 
Mr. Golding calculates that, for 
Britain, wind power can be 
produced at a cost of .24d. to .38d. 
per kilowatt-hour, which compares 


### 81495: World Power Conference to consider latest UNESCO discussion theme

WORLD POWER CONFERENCE 
To consider latest 
Unesco discussion 
theme 
wo _ 
¢¢C NERGY IN THE SERVICE OF 
«R MAN”, the theme which 
UNESCO has chosen as a dis- 
cussion topic for 1950-1951, was the 
subject considered in its technical as- 
pects at the Fourth World Power Con- 
ference in London during July. 
The Chairman of the Conference, 
Sir Harold Hartley, was also chairman 
of the committee of experts who met 
at Unesco House in Paris last October 
and who advised on the aspects of 
“Energy in the Service of Man” to be 
written on in « special series of six 
booklets. These are due to appear 
this month and will provide basic 
material which can be used for popu- 
larization and discussion. Authors 
include Sir Alfred Egerton, Prof. F. E. 
Simon, U. K., Dr. M. S. Thacker, Indiq, 
Prof. Gustav Eichelberg, Switzerland, 
and M. Pierre Ailleret, France. 
Sir Harold Hartley is also President 
of the British Association for the Ad- 
vancement of Science, whose annual 
meeting will be held at Birmingham 
England on September 11. Refer- 
ring to this meeting, “Nature”, the 
leading science journal recently wrote: 
“He has chosen the title ‘Man's Use 
of Energy’. and it would be difficult 
to find a topic more appropriate to the 
times, or to the place of the Associa- 
{ion’s meeting. 
“The Unesco discussion theme for the 
year is ‘Energy in the Service of Man’ 
 
SIR HAROLD HARTLEY 
which differs from Sir Harold's title 
mainly by being easier to translate 
into French. This same theme will be 
made prominent during the meeting by 
discussions in several of the thirteen 
sections. Civil applications of nuclear 
energy. the harnessing of chemical 
energy, the use of power by primitive 
man, and gas turbines will come under 
review by the physics, chemistry, 
anthropology and engineering sections 
respectively. 
“An exhibition illustrating this central 
topic of the meeting is being organised, 
and a series of five public lectures on 
its various aspects will be given in 
Birmingham by distinguished spea- 
kers.” 
 
The largest wind generator to be constructed so far (above) was an experimental 
unit, built on a Vermont hill, in the United States. 
175 feet in diameter. 
favourably with the cost of fuel 
in a steam-driven power station, 
at an average figure of 4d. 
Denmark’s Power Problem 
BE Danish government has 
been experimenting in wind 
power plants since the end 
of the last century. Between 
1900 and 1910, several hundred 
wind power plants of 3 to 30 kW 
capacity were set up. These were 
used partly to supply current to 
big estates, and partly to supply 
villages. These wind power plants 
were based on batteries, small size 
petroleum motors often being used 
during calm weather. They were 
in operation for 25 to 30 years 
until the high tension plants 
superseded them. 
Now, as electricity has become 
almost the main source of power 
supply in Denmark, it has become 
necessary to secure a steady 
supply. This, in connection with 
high coal prices and the difficulty 
of importing fuel, is the reason 
why the question of the rational 
utilisation of wind power has again 
been taken up. Wind power is, in 
fact, the only natural large-scale 
source of power in Denmark. 
For the past three years, the 
South East Zealand Electricity Co 
has been doing researches in this 
field. A trial mill has been built 
and a wind power plant will prob- 
ably be erected. These plants 
will most profitably be set up on 
western coasts and, in adequate 
numbers, will be able to yield 60 % 
to 70 % of the power supply needed 
at any time in Denmark. 
In Italy, researches inthis field 
began in 1940. The French have 
installed more than 100 special 
instruments in France, North 
Africa and in certain colonial ter- 
ritories. Preliminary results indic- 
ate that the best areas in France 
for wind power machines are on 
the Mediterranean coast, along 
the northern half of the Spanish 
frontier, near the mouth of the 
Rhone, in Brittany, and along the 
coast near the Belgian frontier. 
There is also an apparatus at the 
top of the Eiffel Tower in Paris 
to collect data on wind velocity. 
Main interest at the moment is 
in two types of windmills. In one, 
Its propellor swept a circle 
Photo : “Discovery”. 
instead of pumping water or opera- 
ting a millstone, the drive shaft 
turns an electric generator. The 
other is made up of ‘a hollow pro- 
pellor with three blades, which are 
open at the tips. When the propel- 
lor rotates the air is expelled from 
the tips by centrifugal force, which 
creates a vacuum so that air is 
sucked through the air turbine, 
which drives the generator. The 
advantage of this latter type of 
windmill is that the generators, 
weighing as much as 250 tons, are 
kept on the ground and not, as in 
other windmills, perched on top of 
the windmill tower. 


### 74391: Food and people booklets aid educational drive in U.S.

FOOD AND 
PE OFPLE 
BOOKLETS AID 
EDUCATIONAL 
DRIVE IN U.S. 
IMED with the publication 
T of the American edition 
of the Food and People 
pamphlets, the United States 
National Commission has 
launched a campaign to 
promote this Unesco discussion 
theme. 
The six titles of the Food 
and People series in the U.S. 
edition are : “Food and the 
Family” by Dr. Margaret 
Mead ; “UN Sets the Table” 
by Peter Kihss; “Food and 
Social Progress” by Andre 
Mayer ; “ Distribution of the 
World's Food” by Stefan 
Krolikowski ; “ Are there Too 
Many People ?” by Alva Myr- 
dal, and “ Food, Soil and Peo- 
ple” by Charles E. Kellog. 
NOTE: All the above pamphlets 
are published by the Manhattan 
Publishing Company, 225 La- 
fayette St., New York. They may 
be obtained from the publisher or 
from the Unesco sales agencies 
listed on Page 2. The first four 
pamphlets listed are priced at 
25 cents each, the last two atl 
b0 cents each.     

## [Page 12](081475engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 12 
     
HA i i Veo lle 
SWORDS INTO PLOUGHSHARES. At Ameland, 30 volunteers from 11 
countries worked hard to turn a German radar station into a summer 
holiday hostel. Toiling side by side with pick, shovel and paintbrush, 
they did «a constructive job in the cause of peaceful international relations. 
They also left behind something EYnRoliec of their work “A Song for 
eland” 
- 
a . 
A THEME SONG FOR THE WORK CAMP. One night, Daniel, a French 
volunteer lay on his bunk and played a few notes of a folk melody 
recalled from his native Basque region. The other campers picked up 
the song and by next day the camp had a theme song to speed its 
work along. Later, the villagers learned the song. Today. it still 
reminds them of the young people who came to help irom such far away 
places as Indonesia and America. 


### 81499: A Song for Ameland

* 
*  
A SONG FOR AMELAND 
MELAND, a little island off the Dutch 
A coast was marked on German staff 
maps during the war as a strong 
point on the “Atlantic Wall”, with a 
radar station to give warning of the ap- 
proach of enemy planes and ships. 
Although the steel and concrete defences 
were demolished after the war, the metal 
frame and buildings of the radar station 
were still there in 1949 on the site where 
the Dutch Youth Hostel movement planned 
to build a summer holiday camp. 
Answering an appeal for help, issued 
through the International Youth Hostel As- 
sociation, volunteers from many countries 
came to the tiny island during the summer 
of 1949. 
The way in which these young people, 
strangers to one another, formed a living, 
working community—doing a constructive 
job and providing an example of interna- 
ticnal harmony—Iis the theme of a dramatic 
French film, “A Song for Ameland”, which 
is to be released shortly. 
The film was made after Jean Leduc and 
CREDITS 
Title : “A Song for Ameland”. 
Origin : French. 
Production : Bernard Maurice, 
Film, 
Script : Jean Leduc and Pierre Mignot. 
Direction : Jean Leduc, assisted by Daniel 
Wronecki. 
Camera : André Dumaitre. 
Music : Dino Castro. 
Commentator : Daniel Gelin. 
  
Spartacus« 
    
Pierre Mignot, two young French film 
makers had been advised by Unesco to go 
and see what was being done in Ameland. 
They quickly wrote a script and assembled 
a production team which included as assis- 
tant director Daniel Wronecki, a young ci- 
nematographer, who had just completed a 
Unesco Fellowship. 
A Youthful Army 
HE actors are mostly anonymous. In 
addition to Daniel and Nicole, two 
French volunteers, Jose, a Spaniard, 
Bill, an American and Pino, a Greek, they 
include an Indonesian and Belgian, English, 
Danish, Norwegian and Swedish youths and 
girls—volunteers in a youthful army serving 
the cause of international cec-operation. 
The 20-minute film shows that first con- 
tacts between them were not always easy 
because of differences in customs, language 
barriers, a feeling of loneliness and home- 
sickness and, to some extent, the reserve of 
the local people. 
Finally, it was a song, played on a mouth 
organ one evening by Daniel, a young 
Frenchman, sung in chorus the next day and 
eventually adopted by the villagers of Ame- 
land, that brecke down all barriers of iso- 
lation and created a real community spirit. 
Using this simple story, the producers have 
made an inspiring film distinguished by 
some outstanding camera shots. “A Song 
for Ameland” has now been submitted in 
scenario to Lake Success for United Nations 
sponsership. 
Unesco, through its Film Division and Re- 
construction Department, gave both encou- 
ragement and practical help to the film 
makers. 
TY — 


### 81497: The World's stages: a platform for peace

  
The World S Stages - A Platform For Peace 
T HE International Theatre Institute (ITD) is one of the specialized 
“non-governmental” organizations, set up within the framework 
of the United Nations. It was founded in 1948 under the auspices of 
UNESCO after a series of consultations between UNESCO’s Theatre Ser- 
vices and individuals prominent in the international theatre. The ITI 
is made up of National Centres representative of the theatrical life of 
each member country. Official delegates from these Centres constitute 
the annual Congress, which is the governing body of the Institute. 
The goal of the organization is to 
encourage and facilitate “inter- 
national exchange of knowledge 
and practice in theatre arts” 
through exchange of information, 
by facilitating international circu- 
lation of theatre people and by 
helping to arrange tours for young 
managers, directors, authors, desi- 
gners, etc., desirous of completing 
their studies by a period of work 
abroad. 
sal expression of mankind 
and possesses the influence 
and power to link large groups of the 
world’s peoples... we have decided to 
form an autonomous international 
organization... whose purpose is to 
promote international exchange of 
knowledge and practices in theatre 
arts... 
When the International Theatre 
Institute (ITI) from whose charter 
the above extracts are taken, was 
founded at Prague in 1948, eight 
nations signified their belief in its 
purpose and worth, by signing the 
Charter, 
Today, the ITI has 25 member 
countries and to its Third Annual 
Congress which ended in Paris on 
June 29th, ten other nations sent 
observers. But, equally important, 
is the progress made by the National 
Centres towards “promoting inter- 
national exchange of knowledge and 
practices of theatre arts” thereby 
helping international understanding. 
Already this year many centres 
organized an International Theatre 
Week—in the United States the 
“Week” became a Theatre Month in 
48 states—and it is planned to 
extend these celebrations to many 
more countries during the first 
quarter of 1951. 
Under one of the plans adopted by 
the Paris Congress, to give a more 
universal tone to next year’s Theatre 
Week, the ITI will choose an author, 
probably from Norway, where the 
1951 Congress is to be held, and will 
distribute a list of his plays to all 
cog ox theatrical art is a univer- 
AN we in 1950 be satisfied 
with a theatre reserved 
for a tiny fraction of the 
world's population? Can we 
limit our efforts to defending 
and giving lustre to the theatre 
on the stages, official or 
otherwise, of the great cities of 
Europe, America and Asia? The 
theatre has been described as 
the most effective instrument ct 
culture, the living element of 
education and one of the surest 
ways to international under- 
standing” 
“.. What then is the situation 
of the enormous rural masses, 
the industrial populations the 
suburbs and the innumerabie 
villages which have been so 
long neglected by even the mosi 
enterprising theatrical touring 
companies? What is to become 
of the vast regions where the 
theatre dies before it has even 
evolved from its most primitive 
form? These are tremendous 
problems, but ones which your 
Institute cannot ignore.” 
Jaime Torres Bodel, 
Director - General of 
Unesco, in a message to the 
Third Congress of the Interna- 
tional Theatre Institute.     
member countries. One of these 
plans, having a universal idea pro- 
moting international understanding, 
will be suggested for production 
during the Theatre Week. 
A proposal by Yugoslavia for 
presentation in 1951 of a series of 
plays stressing the ideals of peace 
was also adopted. 
The Congress asked national 
centres to form “ITI Clubs” whose 
members would help publicize the 
movement, assist visiting foreign 
players, and arrange international 
Theatre Weeks and Festivals. 
The Congress also proposed that 
the term “work of art” be defined by 
legal authorities working on Interna- 
tional Cultural Agreements to inclu- 
de all items of theatrical equipment, 
decors, drapes, curtains, properties, 
costumes, musical instruments and 
all electrical equipment, It was sug- 
gested that exemption from taxes be 
discussed by countries which have 
signed cultural agreements, with a 
view to including such exemptions 
on a reciprocal basis. Non-profit per- 
formances for school-children would 
be exempt from national and local 
taxes. 
Among other projects approved by 
the Third Congress were : full 
support for TUnesco’s efforts in 
drawing up a new Universal Copy- 
right Convention; assistance in the 
publication of a glossary of technical 
theatrical terms in five languages ; 
RE ET ET Tey TT Ea BIC FISTS 
ANY SEO RS IEE SL SRL 4 RIT 
EGYPT 
Yy A company has been founded for 
showing 16 mm. films in Egyptian 
villages, particularly in those where 
the inhabitants have never seen 
moving pictures before. The pro- 
grammes include educational and 
documentary as well as feature 
films, 
% Armand Roux, the co-inventor, 
with his brother, of a new colour 
film process, will make a documen- 
tary film about the Cairo Museum, 
using this technique. 
FRANCE 
% Nicole Védrés has completed a 
feature-length film : “Life beings to- 
morrow”. Some of those who 
appear in the sequences are :@: An- 
dré Labarthe, a well-known French 
journalist and Jean-Pierre Aumont, 
the French actor as “The man in the 
street”, in the sequence where Jean- 
Paul Sartre emphasises the personal 
responsibility of everyone in world 
a study of children’s theatres 
throughout the work by the next 
Congress ; an enquiry into the possi- 
bility of creating an International 
Theatre in Paris and the provision 
of grants in aid for the exchange of 
theatre professionals between ITI 
Centres. 
Before the opening of the Congress 
by Dr. Emile Oprecht (Switzerland), 
a former ITI chairman; a Conference 
of Experts on Modern Theatre 
Architecture, was held from June 
19th to 21st, 
For the first time, a group of Ger- 
man experts took part in this confer- 
ence on modern theatre architecture 
along with the member states. The 
debates of the technicians and artists 
were illustrated by an Exhibition 
which proved a great success with 
members of the public. This exhi- 
bition will be taken over by certain 
centres and the German technicians 
are presenting it iin Berlin when 
they hold their annual meeting this 
year. 
EPs 5 pn ELA REE VEL EE Eo 
events everywhere; Jean Rostand 
looks into the future developments of 
biology, and Le Corbusier presents a 
preview of the house of the future. 
As the film concludes, André La- 
barthe poses the question facing 
mankind to-day; will atomic energy 
create a better world or bring about 
its destruction? 
INDIA 
Y% An open-air cinema for education- 
al films has been opened in Bombay 
by “Educational Films of India”. 
Entry to the cinema, which holds 
1500 people, is free. 
MEXICO 
Y In 1949, Mexico produced 107 
films for general release. A fund 
for financing the cinema industry up 
to a total of $ 4,500,000 has been 
placed under the direction of 
General Abelardo Rodriguez, former 
President of the Republic.

## [Page 13](081475engo.pdf#page=13) 3

### 74398: It happened in July

  
"DUTCH PAINTERS 
-y 
E
E
 
E
R
 
TR
 
TI
S 
R
S
E
 
-
r
 
ee
 
b
e
 
= 
r
i
 
soon only from the ground itself 
r
m
 
T
T
R
 
a
 
T
R
 
Sixty of the paintings (two of which are shown above), representing all tendencies in modern 
art, were sxhibited In the Amsterdam Monicipal Museum, SO much interest was aroused Dy the 
paintings from the alr in artistic circles both In Holland and abroad that the experiment has 
had two important results. in the first place, the paintings are 10 be flown to a number of other 


### 81498: Refugee musical ambassadors tour Western Europe

Refugee Musical 
“ Ambassadors” 
Tour 
Western Europe 
o draw attention to the plight of over 650 
qualified musicians and singers still living 
in International Refugee Organization 
(IRO) camps in Germany, Austria and Italy, five 
refugee musicians made a concert tour under IRO 
sponsorship to several Western European capitals 
during July. 
These five musicians—violinists Elise Cser- 
falvi, 22, and Arpad Gerecz, 25, both of Budapest; 
pianists Charles Reiner, 26, of Budapest, and 
Boris Maximowicz, 44, of Kiev; and 26 years old 
basso Ladislas Pudis, of Czechoslovakia—were 
selected at a competition by a jury of Geneva 
Conservatory professors. 
Together with accompanist Siegfried Oehl- 
giesser, also a stateless refugee, these artists 
gave performances in Geneva, Zurich, Amster- 
dam, Paris and London. 
The concert tour was organized by the IRO to 
awaken world attention to the problem of refugee 
intellectuals and artists who, five years after the 
war’s end, are still waiting for a chance to leave 
the displaced persons camps of Central Europe. 
In January 1950, there were still 38,000 
refugees registered with IRO who were pro- 
fessional and managerial workers, or members of 
their families. 
The Director General of IRO, Mr. Donald 
Kingsley, has appealed to the governments of 
the world to find new homes for this “forgotten 
elite” before this U.N. specialised agency closes 
down on March 31st next year. 
|moressions of the earth, what grows on it, and what has been bull! an it, have been recorded 
by artists in many different ways, but the sphere in all (is varying aspects has usually been 
rs new and wondes ful viewpoint came into being — along with 
the airplane—and the delicate, breath-taking beauty of “skyscapes' —always new, never repe- 
titive—is being caught and held by an increasing number of artists. Unusual encouragement for 


### 74396: Dutch painters put sky views on canvas

Page 13 — UNESCO COURIER 
PUT SKY VIEWS ON 
this venture has been given 
experiment. 
ration of Associations of Artists. 
of air photos for a few minutes and then 10 shetch their impressions 
by a Netherlands airline, in co-operation with the Netherlands Fede- 
First of all, interested painters were asked to study a number 
From 175 applicants, 
8 jury chose 30 Dutch painters to fly over their country and make sketches (above fort 
shetchos wore then completed In their studios (above, right). 
). The 
countries for exhibition, In addition, the airline will take twenty Dutch painters 10 the Middle 
and Far East, South America, South Africa and possibly to other points, to continue the 
The artists are committed to pair! five pictures each, and they will be exhibited 
in Holland during October of this year, 
  
REEDOM had waited through the centuries for 
events which took place in Philadelphia, in the 
American colony of Pennsylvania, on the 4th of 
July 1776, and in Paris, France, on the 14th of July 1789. 
These events did not concern only the .Americans and 
the French, but all men, everywhere. They did not 
concern only the men of the late 18th century, but all 
who have lived since that time, and those who will live, 
during the foreseeable future. 
The American Declaration of Independence, drawing 
its words and thoughts from the whole history of the 
struggle for human rights, declared : 
“We hold these truths to be self evident, that cll men 
are created equal, that they are endowed by their 
Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among 
these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.” 
Thirteen years and ten days later, in the name of 
Liberty, Equality and Fraternity, the people of France 
smashed the gates of the Bastille, and dealt a blow 
to the concept of absolute monarchy which echoed 
across the world. 
PAUL BROCA 
Twenty years before his sudden death on July 9th 1880, 
this famous surgeon, carrying out research into the 
nerve centres of the brain, identified the centre that 
governs speech — the third frontal convolution, 
generally referred to since then as “Broca’s convo- 
lution”. At the time he was a professor at the University 
of Paris, and his discovery established him as a master 
of comparative anatomy and a pioneer in the domain 
of anthropology. Broca died before completing his 
study on cerebral morphology. 
FABRE D’EGLANTINE 
During a period of twelve years, from 1793 to 1805, 
Frenchmen dated their letters “ler Floréal” or “16 Fri- 
maire”, held celebrations in honour of Virtue, Labour or 
Public Opinion, and dedicated the different days of the 
year to the Grape, the Chestnut, the Vat and so forth, 
instead of to the saints. The man responsible for this 
was a middle-class citizen of Carcassone born on the 
28th of July 1750 with the very ordinary name of Fabre. 
He added the rest after winning the prize of a golden 
eglantine for an ode he submitted to the Jeux Floraux 
of Toulouse. Fabre d’Eglantine began his career as a 
mediocre playwright, then became a revolutionary, 
followed Danton faithfully through every phase of his 
career — and went to the guillotine in the same tumbril 
as his leader... But he will be remembered for his 
calendar, with its charming headings, and by a few 
|]   
songs. Although a hundred and sixty years have gone 
by. children still love to sing “Il pleut, il pleut. ber- 
g re’. 
JOHANN SEBASTIAN BACH 
Johann Sebastian Bach died two hundred years ago 
on the 28th of July 1750. “It is interesting”, writes 
Albert Schweizer, “to compare his life and that of Kant. 
Both of them lived a simple, middle-class life. but kept 
in close touch with outside events. Neither had any 
great doubt as to the path he should follow, nor any 
great difficulty in winning appreciation from his contem- 
poraries. Both wrote a great deal, but not too much. 
Both were greater and happier than certain other men 
of genius, because the ideal towards which they strove 
was in complete harmony with their daily occupations...” 
VINCENT VAN GOGH 
n 1 Van Gogh, the painter, who died 
La on the 29th of July, 1890, was a 
great artist even before he left his 
y native Holland and settled in Pro- 
ow vence. But it was there that, to 
use his own words, he “found 
SW salvation”, there that he found the 
» enchantment he had sought for so 
long. As his Dutch biographer, 
Julius Meier-Graefe, says, “he had 
to penetrate more deeply than 
anyone else had done before him. 
His eyes bit into every object, into 
trees and soil like an axe... He kneaded the ephemeral 
air into a solid mass... As everything was yellow he 
had painted yellow but so that you could taste, hear, 
smell and touch it. He painted till he made stone 
talk...” 
THE MOST PRECOCIOUS POET OF INDIA... 
... and very probably of the world, was Pillamarri 
Pinavirabhadrich, born near Madras some time in July 
1450. He died at the age of thirty, having, it is said, 
undermined his constitution by every kind of excess. 
But he had time to bestow upon his nation those 
wonderful poems, the *Jaimini Bahratha” and the 
“Sringara Sakunthala”. At the age of ten he was 
already famous. And one story relates how an old 
writer, who had just published a bock, came one day 
to ask his opinion of it. He had to hunt tor the young 
critic among his little playmates, and after listening to 
a judgment that was both severe and brief, went sadly 
away while Pillamarri returned to his game. 
ha R 
   
  
 

## [Page 14](081475engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 14 


### 81504: 1950 UNESCO seminars chart a way to world understanding through improved educational techniques

1950 UNESCO SEMINARS CHART A WAY 
TO WORLD UNDERSTANDING THROUGH 
IMPROVED EDUCATIONAL TECHNIQUES 
*  
‘“ Seminar 
for national and international use. 
of everybody’s thinking.   
NESCO has developed a special form of international study meeting or 
, where educators from many countries are brought together 
to make extensive studies of specific educational problems, to draw up 
plans and suggestions for action in their respective countries, to prepare materials 
The most important feature of each Seminar is the small, informal study group 
in which information is exchanged, ideas and methods are discussed and solutions 
to problems are suggested. The usual techniques of conferences, with commigtees 
and formal voting, are not employed. The Seminar is a working party of practical 
people who pool their resources for the solution of common problems, and the 
participants come as individuals, not as delegates representing an institution or 
a particular point of view. They are workers in a common field, where 
everybody’s contribution is valuable and the results will be the product   
! 
Ti Te 
i A rel ma 
- 8 ’ lr 
Fauane ati 2 1, —- ret r 
ry 5s UE oun A - 
rarer : : 
Crrrrrrr a. vs TEE EB BA 
NNUNAF AAA RRRN AA vv 
       
          
  
  
Unesco’s seminar on the improvement of textbooks is being held in the Cité Universitaire 
Paul Héger (above). which forms part of the Université Libre. in Brussels. The Cité Uni- 
versitaire provides board and lodging. at exceptionally low rates, for foreign students and 
for Belgian students whose homes are far from Brussels. The Université Libre de Bruxelles 
is one of Belgium's four Universities, the three others being the University of Louvain (a 
Catholic foundation), and two State Universities (Liege and Ghent). 
   
Over fifty librarians and experts in adult education met in the Malmé City Library, (above) 
at the end of July, for the Unesco seminar on the role of libraries in adult education. Malms, 
Sweden's third city, was chosen as the seminar site because of the excellence of its library 
facilities and their rural extensions. 
educators from 24 countries 
gathered at the Cité Universitaire 
of the Université Libre in 
Brussels. Six hours later and some 
3,000 miles away in Canada, a similar 
group of about 50 educators began to 
assemble at Macdonald College — part 
cof McGill University — near Montreal. 
The men and women in both groups 
— participants in two international 
educaticnal seminars organized by 
Unesco — had travelled to Canada and 
to Belgium to spend six {weeks 
together, to study two closely related 
aspects of the same problem -— how 
to make the most effective use of 
education in developing international 
understanding. 
While members of the Brussels 
Seminar discuss practical means for 
improving textbooks, particularly 
history books, their colleagues in 
Canada are examining ways in which 
geography teaching can help to 
develop international understanding. 
Both seminars will end on August 
3rd. : 
O° the afternoon of July 12th 
‘ International’ National History 
Books 
INCE 1946 Unesco has worked for 
greater mutual tolerance, har- 
mony and understanding between 
the peoples of different nations by seek- 
ing to improve textbooks and teach- 
ing materials. In the Brussels Seminar, 
educators are going beyond purely 
theoretical study to examine practical 
classroom problems, concerning the 
evaluation and use of textbooks, which 
face their colleagues in all countries. 
In its study of methods for analys- 
ing and improving textbooks, the 
Seminar is applying Unesco’s 
“Model Plan” to sample material. 
This plan, prepared by Dr. I. James 
Quillen, of Stanford University, 
provides many practical proposals for 
“testing” books and encouraging 
higher standards of writing and 
selection. 
By dividing themselves into four 
working groups, members of the 
Seminar are able to pool their 
specialized knowledge, skill and 
experience to solve technical and 
professional problems of textbook 
writers as well as teachers, and to 
 of 
Dr. Elsayed Mahmoud Zaki. Egyptian delegate to the Unesco International Seminar on Methods 
and 
   
Macdonald College, where the Unesco Seminur on Geography teaching as a Means of 
Developing International Understanding opened on July 12th. houses the Faculty of Agri- 
culture of McGill University, with which is included the School of Household Science. 
Accommodation is alse provided for the School for Teachers where young men and women 
are prepared for the teaching profession in the elementary and intermediate schools of the 
Province of Quebec. This aerial photo, showing part of the College, includes (1) The Men's 
Residence (2) Day School (3) Chemistry-Physics building (4) Main building, where Unesco’s 
Seminar is being held (5) Biology building (6) Women’s residence (7) Men's campus. 
deal with the varied educational and 
psychological problems involved in 
attempts to improve international 
understanding. : 
One group is dealing with the ques- 
tion of generally raising the level of 
all textbooks, while the second group 
discusses the best ways of using books 
in classrooms. 
The third group is seeking answers 
to such questions as “Can national 
history textbooks be written from an 
international viewpoint?” 
World history textbooks will he 
dealt with by the fourth group whose 
work includes a comparative study of 
the terms of national, general and 
universal history and the history of 
civilization in relation to international 
understanding. 
An important objective for the 
Seminar, whose director is M. A." Wei- 
ler, headmaster of the Experimental 
Secondary School at Montgeron, 
France, is to produce studies, biblio- 
graphies and other materials for use 
in future textbook improvement 
campaigns. 
Geography Creates Community 
Spirit 
EOGRAPHY, when well taught, 
can make a child realize that he 
is a member of a great human 
cemmunity, in which he has both 
privileges and obligations. Geography 
teaching can and should help to 
increase respect for others, and above 
all, the sense of community on 
regional, national and international 
levels. For the experts meeting at 
Unesco’s seminar in Canada, the 
problem is therefore to define 
metheds which can be used in 
geography teaching to encourage 
world-mindedness and international 
understanding. 
To do this they will make compar- 
ative studies of geography teaching 
in the schools of the various countries 
represented at the Seminar, par- 
ticularly in primary and secondary 
schools, explore the possibilities for 
improving the prefessional and 
technical training of teachers and also 
suggest specific ways in which 
geography can lead towards intern- 
ational understanding. 
Four of the five study groups are 
dealing with these factors in relation 
to the needs of children and students 
in different age groups. For the 
youngest children, particular attention 
will be paid to the use of films, radio, 
books, folk tales and other methods, 
to broaden the children’s interest 
beyond their immediate environment 
| 
- 
Techniques of Adult Education, (fifth from left on this photo) explains the methods used 
by organizations in his country, to a group working at Kreuzstein. At the daily group 
meetings, participants benefited from the experiences of their colleagues in other lands. 
— and to show more of thie relation 
of their home towns to towns and 
cities in other parts of the world. 
Another group, dealing with the 
needs of students from 12 to 15, is 
examining special teaching methods 
and psychological approaches most 
suitable for them. 
During the course of the Seminar, 
plenary sessions are held, at which 
group leaders report on the work 
carried out, so that other group 
members get an overall picture of 
progress made and also join in 
discussions of the problems which are 
outlined. ’ 
The reports and studies produced by 
the Seminar are to be published by 
Unesco as guides to educational 
authorities and teachers in all parts 
of the world. 
Libraries Serving Adult Education 
T WELVE days after the opening of 
the two Unesco seminars on 
education for international un- 
derstanding, about fifty professional 
librarians and experts in adult 
education met in Malmo, Sweden’s 
third largest city, to study the role 
of libraries in adult education. 
Although a library seminar — 
Unesco’'s second — the Malmo 
“workshop” is a direct outcome of 
recommendations made at the Elsinore 
. conference on adult education last 
summer, and is closely linked with the 
seminar on adult education techni- 
ques, just concluded near Salzburg, 
Austria. 
The experts brough* to Malmo 
reports on library adult education 
techniques, methods, policies and 
programmes in their own countries. 
These reports, together with the 
booklet, “Adult Education Activities 
for Public Libraries”, just published 
by Unesco, give a broad picture of 
what libraries are doing in the service 
of adult education. 
‘ Mankind Is On The March’ 
NESCO’S fourth 1950 Seminar, un 
methods and techniques of adult 
education, took place at Kreutz- 
stein, about 25 miles from Salzburg, 
Austria, from June 18th to July 29th. 
Over 70 men and women from 20 
countries constituted a temporary 
international community, living and 
working in a lakeside hotel, exchang- 
ing their experiences — both successes 
and failures — in adult education, to 
provide a full picture of its present 
state in various parts of the world, 
and a basis for future action. 
Dr. Lionel Elvin, recently appointed 
head of Unesco’s Education Depart- 
ment, was present at the opening of 
the Seminar, when delegates were 
welcomed by Dr, Hurdes, Austrian 
Minister of Education. Dr. Elvin 
read a message from M. Jaime Torres 
Bodet, Unesco’s Director-General, in 
which the latter stressed “the un- 
challengeable evidence that in adult 
education mankind is on the march” 
Director of the Kreutzstein Seminar 
was Dr. Sven Bjorklund, Dean and 
tounder of the Stockholm Peoples 
University and one of the outstanding 
figures in the Scandinavian adult 
education movement. 
Under the direction of M. Jacques 
Brunet, of Unesco’s Film Division, one 
seminar group prepared a film on the 
methods and techniques of adult 
education as applied at the Seminar, 
Other successful seminar projects 
were a radio programme, a bi-weekly 
newspaper, a mural journal, and a full 
report of the Seminar’s work to serve 
as a guide to adult education groups. 
These and other aspects of the 
Seminar’s work are already being put 
to practical use in hundreds of 
neighborhecod clubs, union halls, rural 
centres, schocels, colleges, etc. in all 
parts of the world.

## [Page 15](081475engo.pdf#page=15) 2

### 81505: Bach, the genius who served truth

### 74402: It happened in August

BACH-THE GENIUS 
WHO SERVED TRUTH 
by Georges F RADIER 
ACH continues to grow in siature. On the 28th July, 1750, only a handfu; 
B of discerning musicians and lovers of music, including the King oi 
Prussia, to whom the old masler had recently dedicated his “ Musika- 
lisches Opfer ”, mourned the end of a rare virtuoso. Outside his family and a 
few pupils, the compositions which had 
of fifty years, were scarcely known. 
A century later, Bach’s 
genius received somewhat 
wider recognition but that 
recognition was still limit- 
ed. A group of intellec- 
tuals in Germany, under- 
took an up-to-date edition 
of his works, or of ‘what 
remained of them. Bach 
had become the mysterious 
master of ‘world-famed 
musicians : Mendelssohn 
had revived “The Passion 
according to St. Matthew; 
to the younger musicians, 
Schumann offered the 
“Well-Tempered Clavier”, 
‘with the advice : “Make il 
your daily bread”. Wag- 
3 . 
to celebrate the bi-centen- 
ary of Bach, in order to 
take on the air of a capi- 
tal city, for a few hours or 
weeks, The massive figure 
of Johann Sebastian Bach, 
father of Music, continues 
and will continue to domi- 
nate the ‘world. 
He Lived So Simply 
T would be impossible 
to find in the history 
of art, a nobler or pur- 
er mind. lle lived so sim- 
ply that even legend has 
not coloured such simple 
images as the “cantor” at 
piled up in his cupboards over a period 
made famous and which 
he modestly called “the 
old style” was now aban- 
doned. “Art has becom: 
much higher”, he said. 
“the old musical style no 
longer pleases our modern 
ear.” 
But in the twentieth cen- 
tury, the art of Johann Se- 
bastian is ageless; it is no 
more “old” than a Cretan 
fresco or a mediaeval ca- 
thedral. For Bach believed 
himself to be neither a 
prophet nor an innovator: 
“he simply placed his ge- 
nius so much in the service 
of truth, that this truth to- 
Page 15 — UNESCO COURIER 
 
JOHANN SEBASTIAN BACH. Portrait by an unknown painter. 
day seems immortal and 
more than one person who 
seeks a refuge in the con- 
fusion of the middle of the 
20th century, can still find 
it in this temple of order 
and peace — the music 
of Johann Sebastian Bach. 
  
The original manuscript of Bach's Sonata in G minor 
for solo violin. 
ner, then Brahms, avowed 
their allegiance to the “pa- 
triarch who had preceded 
them”. 
In 1950, two hundred 
years after his death, Bach 
truly came into his own. 
There have been innumer- 
able Bach festivals, special 
days devoted to Bach, Bach 
concerts, gramophone re- 
cords and programmes on 
the radio, consecrated sol- 
ely to Bach. 
Father Of Music 
o honour the greatest 
of her musicians, Ger- 
many organized a se- 
ries of festivals in both the 
East and the Western zo- 
nes, arranged by a central 
committee. The New Bach 
Society held a festival at 
Gottingen, west of the 
Elbe, from 23-30 July, and 
at Leipzig on the east from 
26-30 July. From 16-20 
July, the German Society 
of Musicology organized a 
General Congress on Musi- 
cology in Lineburg, where 
Bach studied, and from 23- 
26 July the Society held a 
Bach Seminar in Leipzig. 
Today a town only has 
the organ of St. 
Thomas, the wor- 
thy family man 
of middle-class 
parentage, sur- 
rounded by his 
twenty children... 
It would indeed be 
even unjust to 
isolate Johann. 
Sebastian from 
his enormous 
family. All the 
members of the 
Bach family were 
devoted to music, 
so much so, that 
al Erfurt when a 
musician was 
implied, one said 
simply “Bach”. 
Towards the 
middle of the 18th 
century, at their 
annual family 
reunions, they 
used to form an 
orchestra of 120 
parts. 
Toward the end 
of his life Bach 
watched ‘with the 
calm serenity of 
a great master, 
the beginning of 
the reign of the 
symphony. The 
style that he had 
OF BACH’S 
UNESCO PUBLISHING 
FIRST FULL LIST 
his death, Unesco is publishing the 
T commemorate the Bi-centenary of 
first complete list of the works of 
WORKS 
  
Bach, indicating all those that have 
been recorded since the development of 
the gramophone record industry. This 
volume, entitled “The Works of J.S. 
Bach”, will be the second in the Unesco 
series “Archives of Recorded Music”, the 
first volume of which was devoled to the 
works of Frederic Chopin. 
. Magnificent.”     
“It was just a year ago to-day... It was len 
years ago... This is our Golden Jubilee... This is 
the centenary... Just about a thousand years 
ago...” 
The birthdays of a child, events in the lives 
of individual men and women, commemoration 
of the births and deaths of men and women 
who have lit torches along the road of history, 
red-letter days marking the advance of mankind 
—these are dates traditionally noted in the arbi- 
trary system of reckoning which we call the 
calendar, 
Not forgetting the unknown and unsung per- 
sons and events, perhaps of equal greatness, 
making nc claim at completeness, here are some 
note-worthy dates in August, eighth month of 
the Gregorian calendar, 
WACLAW SIEROSZEWSKI 
Sieroszewski was born cn August 1st, 1860. 
At the age of 15 he was an crphan, a lock- 
smith’s apprentice and had become a socialist. 
He began his writing career while exiled in Sibe- 
ria in the 1880’s—a time when many Polish wri- 
ters were developing their talents as exiles in 
this part: of Russia. oo 
- For trying to escape from Siberia, Sieroszew- 
ski was sent to Yakutsk where he began to work 
both as a novelist and a sociologist. When he 
published his “Twelve Years in the Country of 
the Yakutsk”, the Geographical Academy ot 
St. Petersburg awarded him a prize and 
obtained for him the right to return to Poland. 
From then on his life was divided between 
writing, scientific expeditions and political 
activities. 
GUY DE MAUPASSANT 
Born cn August 5th, 
1850, de Maupassant grew 
up in solitude, became a 
soldier then a govern- 
ment official and finally, 
a famous novelist whose 
style short stery writers 
all over the world conti- 
nue to imitate. Europe 
and America eagerly 
awaited the publication 
of each of his books. He 
was lionised by scciety, 
yet his life was marked 
by loneliness. De Maupas- 
sant had admirable po- 
wers cof observation and 
imperscnal interest in the madness 
  
tock an 
which gradually clouded his brain. 
He died in an asylum in his forty-fourth year. 
BARTOLOMEO RASTRELLI 
Of all the architects—German, Dutch, French 
and Italian—who contributed to the beauty of 
St. Petersburg, the most original was undoub- 
tedly Rastrelli, born en August 7th, 1700, and 
called by his contemporaries, “Rastrelli the 
His memory is perpetuated in 
such buildings as the 'Winter Palace and the 
Smolny Institute and also in the Church of 
St. Andrew of Kiev. Rastrelli became the real 
superintendent of imperial architecture, his 
work being inspired by the French classical, the 
Austrian “baroque” and the cld Muscovite styles. 
  
JOSE DE SAN MARTIN 
Born on the banks of 
the Uruguay and educ- 
ated in Madrid, San Mar- 
tin became a soldier in 
the Spanish Army fight- 
ing against Napoleon. 
His life’s work, however, 
was devoted to the young 
republics cf the Plata and 
the Andes. For ten years 
he carried on in South 
America an unrelenting 
struggle against oppres- 
sion and colonialism. His 
goal was reached when 
independence was won 
for Chile and Peru. In 
the latter country he abolished slavery with a 
stroke of the pen. In 1822 he left America for 
France where he died, almost forgotten by his 
generation, at Boulogne-sur-Mer, on August 
17th, 1850. 
BALZAC 
Honoré de Balzac died in Paris cn August 
18th, 1850. - 
(See page 10 of this issue for an article com- 
memorating the centenary of Balzac) 
NICOLAS LENAU 
‘When this Austrian poet wrote an epic on 
Savonarola it ‘was much less with the aim of 
evoking a specific historical period than to 
defend the idea of liberty. Again, in his famous 
poem on the Albigensians,” he stressed two 
themes—tolerance and democracy. Lenau 
yearned for a free life in the vast spaces of the 
New World, but after spending an Autumn in 
Baltimore and a winter in Ohio, he returned to 
Eurcpe. Lenau, whose work remains as an act 
of faith in liberty, died near Vienna con August 
22nd 1850, aged 48. 
NIETZSCHE 
On August 25th 1900 the death occurred of 
Wilhelm Friedrich Nietzsche, the German philos- 
opher. For a long time he had been 
despondent and felt that his work had been 
useless. But, in his last writings were these 
prophetic words: “People will understand me 
after the next European war.” He had pre- 
dicted the terrible war-clouded days that were 
to come and ascribed a cause: “the corruption 
of nationalism, the slow poisoning that causes 
nations to draw away from other nations.” 
He had hoped, mith almost dangerous 
obstinacy, for a renaissance. Sometimes enthu- 
siastically, sometimes fearfully, he asked him- 
self: “Is the enncblement of mankind possible?” 
THE FIRST MEXICAN NEWSPAPER 
Mexico's first newspaper—El Mercurio Volante 
(the Flying Mercury) — appeared in 1680. 
The founder was Carlos de Siguenza y Gon- 
gora, bern at Puebla, in 1645. 
Geographer, historian and philosopher and 
friend of the famous woman poet, Sister Juana 
Inez de la Cruz, the founder of “E] Mercurio 
Volante” was also the author cf the first map 
of the Gulf of Mexico. 
 
 

## [Page 16](081475engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER ~ Page 16 


### 81506: How Salerno lighted a path through the dark ages

HOW SALERNO LIGHTED 
A PATH THROUGH THE 
“DARK AGES” 
by Dr. Riccardo LUZZATO 
Ww 
HEN the Provinces of the Western Empire were 
overflooded by primitive warrior tribes in the fifth 
century, the great wealth of scientific knowledge 
created and accumulated by the Romans, Greeks and the 
older eastern civilizations seemed irretrievably lost to 
Europe. Yet, during the troubled centuries of the early 
Middle Ages there was established an international 
scientific organization which was to flourish for more 
than 500 years, in the face of all the violent prejudice 
  
  
  
At the start of the ninth century, Salerno was simply a little coastal 
town to whose hospital came many sick people from Rome. Gradually, 
more doctors arrived in Salerno and they were followed by students 
of both sexes (as is shown in the cbove engraving) from many Medi- 
terranean and Western European countries. The medical school of 
Salerno — “the most celebrated of all those formed in the West after 
the fall of the Roman Empire” came into being. It officially ceased 
to exist in 1811, but already for some time past had only existed in 
name. Today, not a stone remains of the famous “Hippocratic City” 
where generations of doctors from many countries worked for the 
advancement of medical science. 
then prevailing in the Christian 
world, 
Sometime during the ninth 
century, in the lovely seaside 
town of Salerno in Southern 
Italy, a school was founded 
which was to renew and 
preserve medical knowledge for 
the world and provide an 
everlasting example of the 
practicality and importance of 
intercultural co-operation. 
  
  
  
- —— nt 
, 
The masters of Salerno stimulated enthusiasm 
for scientific experimeni throughout Europe 
Such experiments included 
that made by a sixteenth century Venetian 
who invented a 
balance to helr him determine the amount 
and weight of perspiration given off by the 
human body in relation to the effects of 
food and drink. The above engraving shows 
Sanctorius sitting in the balance he invented. 
The Venetian doctor calculated that for every 
8 lbs. of food and drink consumed in a day. 
5 lbs. were lost through the pores of the 
skin. The importance of this knowledge. he 
held, was that “most illnesses are caused 
through an excess or a lack of perspiration”. 
for many years. 
doctor named Sanctorius, 
  
History at that time did not 
yet reach the remarkable 
standards of medical science, 
and records are incomplete 
about the early days of the 
Civitas Hippocratica, as the 
school was called in honour of 
the greatest physician of An- 
cient Greece. Modern histo~ 
rians generally agree however, 
in ascribing its foundations to 
four scholars : Master Adela, 
an Arab, Master He- 
linus, a Jew, Master 
Pcntus, a Greek. and 
Master Salernus, an 
Italian. Each taught 
in his language, which 
meant Latin for Saler- 
nus and Hebrew for 
Helinus. 
The next news we 
have states that in 904 
cian was in residence 
at the court of the 
King of France. In 
984, Alberon, Bishop of 
Verdun, came to seek 
the advice of the 
Salernitan physicians. 
At a later period many 
other princes of the 
Church and secular 
their aid. 
The international 
character of the insti- 
tution is illustrated 
by the fact that the 
nationality of many of 
its famous teachers 
was hardly known. At 
the Civitas Hippo- 
cratica, they were 
just teachers, and the 
thousands of students 
who came from Arabia, 
Africa, Spain, Britain, 
Palestine, Northern 
a Salernitan physi-- 
rulers had recourse to 
France and other countries 
knew and cared little about 
the origins of their professors. 
This applies, for instance, to 
Gabriopontus who died about 
1350. Some historians think he 
was a Greek, others that he 
was a Lombard, others again 
that he was a Salernitan. 
Works Of «Dame Trot” 
JE of his best known 
successors, Constantinus 
Africanus, was born in Car- 
thage and made long journeys 
to Syria, Egypt, Ethiopia and 
India, to bring the Iatest 
achievements of Eastern 
science to Salerno. 
The passion for science at 
Salerno was strong enough to 
overcome more than one form 
of prejudice. A prominent fi- 
gure of the early period was 
the woman physician Trotula, 
about whose personality little 
is known, although she left a 
number of medical treatises 
which were used as textbooks 
up to the sixteenth century 
and were first printed by 
‘Aldus in Venice in 1547. Other 
women too were admitted to 
the lectures and to study. 
Woman doctor Trotula 
acquired such a wide fame, 
that she gained a certain 
popularity in old English liter- 
ature under the mame of 
“Dame Trot” and became 
Madame Trotte in the thirt- 
eenth century medical trou- 
vere Rutebceuf (Le Dex de 
I'Erberie). 
© More potent evidence of 
  
CHOLERA, MELANCHOLIA QUOQUE, 
“Those of sanguine temperament, servants of Venus Salerno School : 
  
  oo B ) 
THE FOUR HUMAN TEMPERAMENTS 
QUATUOR HUMORES HUMANO CORPORE CONSTANT : SANGUIS CUM 
PHLEGMA. According to the 
and favourites of Bacchus, have a jovial humour... the choleric man 
has a bold heart but a lean body, slender and sickly. .«e« The melan- 
cholic person, of a sombre and sometimes crabbed humour, is diligeni 
in his studies. but sleeps badly and broods over his plans with 
stubborn concentration. «. Bs for the phlegmatic person, he is short 
of stature, broad and thick-set and frigidly resists all forms of agitation...” 
Written records of the Sa- 
lerno school show the influence 
upon it of the great Arabian 
schools of the Orient and 
Mohammedan Spain. The Per- 
sian physicians Rhazes (865- 
925) and Avicenna (980-1037); 
and the Spanish Arabians 
Avenzoar (1113 - 1162) and 
Averroes (1126-1198), as well 
as the great Maimonides, a 
Spanish Jew (1135-1204), were 
intensively studied at Salerno. 
Two of the most celebrated 
Jewish physicians, the urolo- 
gist Isaac Judaeus (9th or 10th 
century) and the oculist Ben- 
venutus Grassus (born in 
Jerusalem in the 1ith or 12th 
   § 
Ninth century manuscript Irom ihe Salerno Medical School 
(British Museum) 
universality of science, even 
in the so-called Dark Ages, 
was the long-continued colla- 
boration of Christians, Mos- 
lems and Jews, during the 
whole of European history's 
“crusading season”. To the 
average European of the Middle 
Ages, whoever did not belong 
to the orthodox Christian 
Church, whether he was a Jew, 
a Moslem, a Hindu, a pagan — 
or worst of all a heretic— was 
hardly considered as a human 
being." 
ANTONIT MYA 
BRA _ Lt OD) 
: be [elo 10 
il -“ 
: V Vice Slervierrom So 
wow pe Litas, 
hi . On pate IL 
LT Aa) ’ wl to md 
ons ws re IPCI 0D. 
ferua 
Poor pels moter v8 Fe oN ben. Fo ie 
“ 
wos nar 0 pars wae Re . 
AN 
i rp 
# 
eatury) had studied and 
taught at the Salerno school. 
From Salerno and Mont- 
pellier came also the famous 
French physician Pierre Gilles 
de Corbeil, who later taught 
in Paris and became court 
physician to Xing Philippe 
Auguste. The Emperor Fred- 
erick II, son of a Norman 
Italian mother and a German 
father, followed the recom- 
mendations of the school of 
Salerno. At his brilliant court 
at Palermo the dignitaries 
I] * Re 
. 
DE CONSIRYANDA : 
buns . bola : 
Tar o> wees pd 
a oe 
AN unt Regt Kribie Keds ! 
oes Naor 3 
A efi yard 
} - 
Co 3 : lords 
r 
3 PRMD DarEm 
AY 
¥ x JERE 4 
Tw wo 
Nt Dh " " 
14s CEL 
  
The Latin text above is reproduced from the first pages of an edition 
of “Regimen Sanitatis Salernitatum” published in Venice in 1567. 
were chosen from among great 
thinkers, regardless of their 
ancestry or creed, and Arabic 
was almost as largely used as 
Italian and Latin. As late as 
1413 King Ladislaus of Hun- 
gary gave special privileges to 
Salerno teachers. 
The school made one. par- 
ticularly memorable literary 
contribution, in the poem 
“Regimen Sanitatis Salernita- 
num”, probably dedicated to 
Robert, eldest son of William 
the Conqueror and pretender 
to the throne of England. It 
was re-edited over 300 times 
and translated into many lan- 
guages. From Arnold of Vil- 
lanova’s edition in 1553 may be 
quoted the following verses : 
“The Salerne School doth by 
these lines impart All health 
to England's King and doth 
aduise, From care his head to 
keepe, from wrath his heart... 
Use three Physicians still: 
first Doctor Quiet, Next Doctor 
Merry-Man and Doctor Dyet” 
and so on for 362 stanzas. 
A Scientific Renaissance 
ALERNO re-awakened a 
scientific spirit, indepen- 
dent of dogmatic doctrines; 
revived ancient texts, and 
inspired its students to a calm 
and critical appraisal of facts 
as they found them. Thus, 
Salerno paved the way for the 
greal achievements of the uni- 
versities of the Renaissance. 
Its outstanding accomplish- 
ments and its lasting influence 
were possible because, right 
from the beginning, it over- 
came the towering barriers of 
religious and national preju- 
dice and aimed to make know- 
ledge available to the greatest 
possible number of people ot 
all countries of the. then 
known world. 
Courier 
Nese — - 
EDITORIAL OFFICES : 
UNESCO HOUSE 
19, Ave. Kidber, PARIS. 16 
* 
Ediror : PETER DU BERG 
English Language Editor : 
R. 5. FENTON 
* 
All reproductions authorized 
* 
Imprimerie GEORGES LANG y 
11, rue Curial, Pars 
  
UNESCO Publication 740     