# [069680](069680engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](069680engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
~ ~ Abe y 
; yo RES RAP 3 
read 
Yr 
 

## [Page 2](069680engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
    
   
A time to live... 
46 The People’s Republic of China A stone lion guards the Bridge of Golden Water 
leading from T’ien-an-men Square to the old 
Imperial Palace in Beijing. Beside it stands a 
pillar adorned with carvings of clouds and 
dragons. The pillar recalls an ancient tradition 
stretching back to the time of the first emperors 
of China, who erected in front of the Imperial 
Palace tree trunks on which the people could 
carve their grievances. 
Pillar of tradition 
Ph
ot
o 
Qi
 
Gu
o 
Hu
a 
©
 
Ch
in
es
e 
ed
it
io
n 
of
 
th
e 
Un
es
co
 
Co
ur
ie
r

## [Page 3](069680engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

U
N
E
S
C
O
 
The Courier 
A window open on the world 
 
Editorial August 1986 
39th year 
1986, proclaimed International Year of Peace by the 
General Assembly of the United Nations, Spinoza’s 
definition remains as relevant as ever. If there has been no 
world war for forty years, neither has there been world peace: 
internecine conflicts continue to devastate certain regions, and 
all mankind is haunted by the spectre of a nuclear catastrophe, 
threatening the annihilation of present and future generations. 
The defence of peace today is increasingly assuming the form 
of a constructive effort which is not confined to the need to 
prevent wars, but grapples with a whole series of imbalances 
that pervade the economic and social organization of the entire 
planet. All the contributors to this issue of the Unesco Courier, 
whatever their field—whether they be specialists in war and 
peace studies, economists, historians, medical doctors, philo- 
sophers or jurists—and wherever they are from, agree on this 
point. 
Despite the different perspectives from which they analyse 
the situation, they also share more common ground in that they 
stress the interdependence of peace, disarmament and develop- 
ment, and regard the Third World for historical as well as 
economic reasons as today’s theatre of violence. They examine 
and condemn the exploitation of peoples and the lack of rap- 
prochement between them; the opposition of blocs; the ram- 
pant folly of the arms race with its crippling cost to humanity; 
anachronistic rivalry between national interests; the submission 
of science to political and military power. From these various 
approaches emerges the pressing need for a philosophy and 
practice of peace; here, as the present number shows, Unesco 
clearly has an essential role to play. 
To contribute to the maintenance of peace and security is the 
pre-eminent task assigned to Unesco by its Constitution and, 
during the forty years of the Organization’s existence, it has 
worked unremittingly, within its fields of competence, towards 
a world in which the whole human community may live in peace. 
Faithful to its mandate of constructing the defences of peace in 
the minds of men, Unesco is particularly concerned to promote 
education for understanding, co-operation and international 
peace. 
In Japan, children have understood since Hiroshima that the 
destruction of an enemy is also the destruction of a friend. They 
make paper birds—cranes, a Japanese symbol of longevity— 
and give them away because they wish, in their own words, “to 
build peace in this world.” 
¢ Pox is a virtue originating in spiritual strength.” In 
Cover design Yurek Janiszewski 
Editor-in-chief: Edouard Glissant 
 
  
Dr
aw
in
g 
K.
 
Sl
iw
ka
 
© 
Wo
rl
d 
Pe
ac
e 
Co
un
ci
l 
       
Z/B 
\/ 
4 Reflections on peace 
1. Peace as an absolute value 
by Claude Lefort 
6 2. Peace, disarmament and technology 
by Luis Echeverria 
8 3. The cost of peace 
by Michael S. O. Olisa 
9 4. Peace in the regional context 
by Ahmad Sidqi Ad-Dajani 
11 ‘There is no peace because there is no justice’ 
by Desmond Mpilo Tutu 
13 The Pugwash movement 
by Joseph Rotblat 
15 Perceptions of threat and security 
by Yoshikazu Sakamoto 
18 Higher education and peace 
19 Physicians and the nuclear threat 
by Bernard Lown 
20 Unesco and the International Year of Peace 
24 World military spending 
25 The United Nations World Disarmament Campaign 
by Jan Martenson 
27 Towards a new way of thinking 
by Gennadi I. Gerasimov 
29 A thousand paper cranes 
30 Violence in the Third World 
by Soedjatmoko 
34 1986: Year of Peace/8 
2 A time to live ... 
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA: Pillar of tradition 
Published monthly in 32 languages English Italian Turkish 
by Unesco French Hindi Urdu 
The United Nations Educational, Spanish Tamil Catalan 
Scientific and Cultural Organization Russian Hebrew Malaysian 
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. German Persian Korean 
Arabic Dutch Swahili 
Japanese 
Macedonian Finnish A selection in Braille is published 
Serbo-Croat Swedish quarterly in English, French, 
Slovene Basque Spanish and Korean 
Chinese Thai 
ISSN 0041-5278 
Bulgarian N°8-1986-CPD-86-1-436A 
Portuguese Croato-Serb Sinhala 

## [Page 4](069680engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 69623: Peace as an absolute value

Reflections on peace 
A Unesco-sponsored international symposium on the theme 
“Philosophical Reflections on the Foundations of Peace in the Present World Situation” 
was held at Unesco’s Paris headquarters from 3 to 6 December 1985. 
We publish below extracts from papers presented by four of the participants. 
1. Peace as 
an absolute 
value 
by Claude Lefort   
  
“It is certainly true that the closer men 
come together the more they seem to 
touch each other’s sensitive spots. But 
this Is only a half truth. Is it not rather 
because contacts and relationships are 
not frequent enough that they arouse such 
apprehension?” Right, The Ship of Fools, 
by the Dutch painter Hiéronymus Bosch 
(c. 1450-1516), now in the Louvre Museum, 
Faris. P
h
o
t
 
(©
 
Ré
un
io
n 
de
s 
Mu
sé
es
 
Na
ti
on
au
x,
 
Pa
ri
s.
 

## [Page 5](069680engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 69623: Peace as an absolute value

“Peace as an absolute value can only be 
based on the notion that relations between 
men are relations between equals.” Right, 
Totonac earthenware statuette in the Jala- 
pa Museum, State of Veracruz, Mexico. 
The civilization of the Totonacs, a pre- 
Columbian Mexican people, flourished 
from the 7th to the 14th centuries on the 
west coast of the Gulf of Mexico. 
manuel Kant (1724-1804) outlined 
the idea of a code of law for mankind 
emerging from the bitter experience of war 
and necessitated by the increasing proxim- 
ity of men due to the growth of populations 
on the limited surface of the globe. 
Kant’s foresight was astonishing when we 
consider how heterogeneous and scattered 
was the world he knew in comparison with 
our own, He was not alone in his prediction; 
most of the great thinkers of the early 
nineteenth century, whatever their beliefs, 
from Saint-Simon or Chateaubriand, in 
France, to Karl Marx, were aware of the 
new and incredibly rapidly accelerating 
rhythm of population growth and of the 
inescapable evidence, on every hand, that 
space was finite. 
Such predictions, which have constantly 
been repeated up to our own times, con- 
tinue to amaze us, so far are they out- 
stripped by the actual speed of change. The 
words of the French poet and essayist Paul 
Valéry, written in 1931 in his book Regards 
sur le monde actuel (Reflections on the 
World Today), which sounded so excitingly 
original to his contemporaries, seem to us 
today as no more than a statement of the 
obvious. 
. “All the habitable regions of the Earth,” 
he wrote, “have today been discovered, 
mapped and divided amongst the nations. 
The era of no man’s lands, of free territor- 
ies, of unexplored regions, of areas to which 
no one lays claim, is over, and with it has 
gone the era of unlimited expansion. There 
is now not a rock on which a flag has not 
been planted, not an empty space on a map, 
not a region without its laws and its customs 
officers, not a tribe whose affairs have not 
been filed and classified and which, through 
the evil magic of writing, is not under the 
tutelage of a varied host of ‘humanists’ in 
far-distant offices. The era of the finite world 
has begun.” 
He went on: “A new, excessive and in- 
stant interdependence between regions and 
events is the perceptible consequence of 
this important phenomenon. Now every 
political happening must be considered in 
the light of this new condition of universa- 
lity.” And he spoke of “a closer and closer 
interdependence in human actions.” 
It must be said that Paul Valéry, imbued 
with the heritage of the Greek spirit with its 
love of clear-cut boundaries, did not consid- 
er this new situation in which the world 
found itself to be a happy one. In the same 
passage his anxiety shows through: “This 
complexity will be the undoing of all 
prudence, wisdom, genius, since in this uni- 
verse of multiple relationships and contacts 
there is neither permanence nor continuity 
nor discernible causality.” 
TT great German philosopher Im- 
This is a judgement which cannot be 
ignored. It is certainly true that the closer 
men come together the more they seem to 
touch each other’s sensitive spots. But this 
is only a half truth. Is it not rather because 
contacts and relationships are not frequent 
enough that they arouse such 
apprehension? Is it not because the growing 
interdependence of human actions has not 
been matched by a genuine propagation of 
human rights or by the establishment of a 
public domain, on a world-wide scale, in 
which divisions could find a form of express- 
ion other than war? Is it not also because 
the movement towards the erosion of 
ancient particularisms, which all are now 
agreed is irreversible, comes up against con- 
siderable resistance and provokes estab- 
lished hierarchies to invent new methods of 
excluding all those who, despite their differ- 
ing condition, might otherwise appear to be 
“equals”? 
Peace as an absolute value can, in fact, 
only be based on the notion that relations 
between men are relations between equals. 
"In other words, this value is indissociable 
from that of liberty. It also means that it 
would be hypocritical to sanction, in the 
name of peace, any form of exploitation of 
peoples who find themselves, under the 
pretext of the play of market forces, dep- 
rived of the resources of their territory and 
subjected to overt or covert dictatorship; it 
would be equally hypocritical to sanction 
any form of totalitarianism which denies 
individuals and minorities their elementary 
rights. 
Since, in this discussion, we have been 
cautioned not to fail into a facile utopianism 
but to take due account of the constraints of 
the contemporary world, we must not con- 
fuse the cause of peace with unreasoned 
pacifism. Nor should we, in respecting the 
realities, surrender to the delirium that the 
spectacle of current conflicts gives rise to. 
Rather we should admit that sovereigns do 
not, as Rousseau supposed, alone decide 
the fate of humanity. The laborious task of 
bringing men closer together can only be 
achieved through a better mutual know- 
ledge of customs and mental attitudes, 
through progress in education, the diffusion 
of information and the propagation of hu- 
man rights; far from being a vain task, this 
can spark off decisive political moves to- 
wards peace. 
Are these hopes doomed to remain unful- 
filled? The question clearly has yet to be 
answered. Yet rather than concur with 
Rousseau that it would be madness to want 
to be sane in the midst of madmen, we 
would do better to recognize calmly, with 
Freud, that in the unceasing struggle be- 
tween Eros and the instinct of death, the 
latter has shown itself to be decidedly the 
stronger. | 
CLAUDE LEFORT, French philosopher, is 
Director of Studies at the School of Advanced 
Studies in the Social Sciences, Paris, where he 
divides his time between teaching and research. 
His published works include Eléments d'une criti- 
que de la bureaucratie (Galfimard, revised edi- 
tion 1979) and L’invention démocratique 
(Fayard, 1981). 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
An
ne
tt
e 
Di
az
 
Le
wi
s,
 
Me
xi
ca
 
Ci
ty
, 
M
e
x
i
c
o

## [Page 6](069680engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 69628: Peace, disarmament and technology

2. Peace, disarmament and technology 
   E consider peace to be an active 
W form of wisdom and negotiation, 
and it is precisely for this reason 
that it is essential for us to recognize that, in 
our day and age, peace cannot be merely an 
“institutionalized truce”. Since 1945, each 
truce, each agreement, each convention has 
simply heralded a new impetus to the arms 
race and accelerated development of the 
military technology of the atomic era. 
Although it is not the only cause, this has 
been due in large part to a fundamental 
reality—the division of the world into 
opposing blocs. In military and economic 
terms, these blocs have been at the root of 
the division of the world; furthermore, the 
political conception of blocs, with their 
ideological stratification, has hampered the 
evolution of philosophical theory as well as 
any progress in the parallel yet independent 
process of philosophical reflection. 
One practical consequence of this has 
been the “colonization” of science, due 
largely to the ideology of power and to the 
ethically anomalous divorce of science itself 
from its own historical effects. In practice 
this has led to a methodological sectarian- 
ism according to which science must be- 
come the servant of military rather than 
human priorities. This moral aberration, 
the evidence of which we encounter daily, 
characterizes the science of our time. It 
presupposes that alignment into blocs is a 
natural state of affairs; it also explains the 
moral reaction of those scientists who have 
broken with the established order and with 
the military/industrial complex and whose 
stance allows us to hope that there is a 
future for mankind. 
It is clear, therefore, that for this century 
peace is going to be bound up with a new 
formulation of the objectives of develop- 
ment. There will be no peace worthy of the 
name so long as we fail to take advantage of 
each period of ideological truce that occurs 
“Disarmament implies, above all, a change 
in the priorities of those countries princi- 
pally engaged inthe arms race; and such a 
change must involve a material and dialec- 
tical transformation, both internal and ex- 
ternal, in the aims and objectives that must 
be set for contemporary development in 
the name of solidarity and Inter- 
dependence.” 
to alter the existing status quo of today’s 
world—in other words, so long as we do not 
adopt the principle of a genuine liquidation 
of the dominant structurally-enshrined 
violence. 
To speak of peace and development as 
one and the same phenomenon does not 
mean merely to speak in abstract terms of a 
purely moral proposition or to enter an 
ideological labyrinth from which there is no 
exit. On the contrary, it is to pose the crucial 
question of the closing years of the twen- 
" tieth century. Peace today is not simply the 
opposite of war; it is the political and philo- 
sophical context for the practical achieve- 
ment of a new form of development giving 
Po
st
er
 
©
 
Fr
ie
nd
s’
 
Pe
ac
e 
an
d 
In
te
ma
ti
on
al
 
Re
la
ti
on
s 
Co
mm
it
te
e,
 
Lo
nd
on
 
by Luis Echeverria 
effect to the suspension of conflicts and 
which will give rise to a new form of society 
based on negotiation, self-examination and 
liberty. 
So long as this aspect of peace remains 
less than perfectly clear, local conflicts and 
wars of tactical and strategic attrition will 
continue to be the determining factor in 
international relations. In other words, the 
nightmare threat of local conflicts develop- 
ing into a total, catastrophic war will con- 
tinue to hover over our heads. 
Worse than this, if present conditions 
persist, any purely national interest, any 
selfish supranational goal will be seen, 
ideologically, as a factor in military policy. 
Structural violence will thus menace us 
daily in forms ranging from fanatical terror- 
ism to local or regional conflicts, irrational 
chain explosions which are no more than 
the expression of a violent departure from 
the principles of solidarity, justice and law. 
It is incomprehensible that, each year, 
expenditure on armaments should be 
almost equal to the external debt (approx- 
imately 800,000 million dollars) of the de- 
veloping countries, whose populations at 
present amount to 75 per cent of total world 
population, a figure that will rise to 79 per 
cent by the end of the century. 
Rationally speaking, we cannot dissoci- 
ate the philosophical and political aspects of 
the struggle for peace from the economic 
choices proposed under the project for a 
new international economic order. 
In every respect, the interlinkage of 
peace, disarmament and development 
seems fundamental. It cannot, as is some- 
times maintained, be conceived in terms of 
a purely mechanical transfer to the peoples 
of the developing world of the resources at 
present devoted to armaments. 
Disarmament implies, above all, a 
change in the priorities of those countries 
principally engaged in the arms race; and

## [Page 7](069680engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 69628: Peace, disarmament and technology

  
Ph
ot
o 
Em
il
 
Sc
hu
lt
he
ss
 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
such a change must involve a material and 
dialectical transformation, both internal 
and external, in the aims and objectives that 
must be set for contemporary development 
in the name of solidarity and inter- 
dependence. 
There is another essential underlying 
question: that of the transfer of scientific 
and military resources to a science whose 
goal is peace. This would imply the greatest 
revolution of the century—the divorce of 
science from power politics and the moral 
regeneration of research by making it possi- 
ble for science and scientists to escape from 
the clutches of the powerful military/indus- 
trial complex which dominates ourage. HW 
» 
X L 
I's » 
/ 
4 oN J o 
EW > 
OR es (RR 
AXE 
4 > gv 
¥ , Ps " 
{ Foy aot. 
a. Fr fF 
A, or 
ey. oh a. 
’ 7 M wt A 
Ji ity a 
‘ ra! - 
o » We : + 
‘ “ . 
q » 
- . 
‘ oe 1 » 
o = .-     
    
 
ei LJ) 
BHAA 5 [v- * 
—— 
a
 
   
      
    
Ryan rE | i Le
ill l/l i 
AY hs. / 3 J Lil 
Cymer 
Disarmament would free massive re- 
sources for development. One possible 
joint international venture could be the 
exploration of the Arctic and Antarctic for 
the benefit of humanity. 
 
LUIS ECHEVERRIA was President of Mexico 
from 1970 to 1976. Jurist, journalist and a former 
professor of political science at the National 
Autonomous University of Mexico, he is Director- 
General of the Centre for Third World Economic 
and Social Studies, Mexico City. 
—
—
 
A
 
RY
 
RA
N    i 
B
y
 
A 
[3 i 2 [11] 
=k : oo 
    
    
 
=i iP nw 
   
    
        
r lL ad Pr ivi 
| Wr WANE CHULA 
LER EL AL 4 LTE maa in I 
i Ne. : L 
| cil V A. 
“In 1980, out of the 3 million scientists and 
engineers employed world-wide in scien- 
tific laboratories, approximately half a mil- 
lion were specifically engaged in the de- 
velopment of new weapons systems. By 
1981, those in the forefront of space tech- 
nology were believed to have acquired the 
ability to survey virtually every square 
metre of each other's territory, but the 
world-wide pool of scientific and engineer- 
ing resources had barely begun to survey 
the complex ecos ystems of fast-dis- 
appearing tropical rain forests or the 
menacing spread of the world’s deserts.” 
(United Nations document, April 1986.) Be- 
low, this 600-year-old pine is a symbol of 
nature conservation for the people of the 
Republic of Korea. The tree, growing some 
100 kilometres south-east of Seoul, is pro- 
fected by a large cage. Legend has it that 
the tree was given the official title of 
cabinet minister by a 15th-century Korean 
king, because it raised its branches in re- 
spect when he passed by. 
  
rn 554 
4 \ : 
LT 
- "J 
A] ,- 
5 
“" | 
& * i r 
r L 
» ai Rl 3 2 4 a . =a fl 
9 a1 ] J --— 
! . ne a . — 3 “" 
| : (A aim J Ih - 
} 1 i { 
] { : I 
Hes LL UMD ! 
BIS wt \ am 
| A 
  
) 
al £8 \ 
| IR 
ul 
tl 
| 
= RY in. 
  
    
wi = 
all in VAR | 
Wa EF Voll sy 
= oo Su 
Ph
ot
o 
Yo
nh
ap
 
€ 
Ko
re
an
 
Cu
lt
ur
al
 
Ce
nt
re
, 
Pa
ri
s 
 

## [Page 8](069680engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 69629: The Cost of peace

3. The cost of peace 
HERE are two conflicting ap- 
T proaches to the question of peace. 
One postulates the existence of an 
ideal world. The other is more realistic. In 
an ideal world an immediate end to the arms 
race and to ideological confrontation would 
be possible. Total acceptance of the neces- 
sary conditions for disarmament would lead 
to a world without war in which the re- 
sources of all nations would be channelled 
to non-military production and distribu- 
tion. All nuclear weapons would be des- 
troyed and further production banned; use 
of non-nuclear arms would be restricted or 
prohibited; the North-South conflict would 
be virtually eliminated, with the industrially 
advanced countries giving a large measure 
of genuine economic assistance to the de- 
veloping world. 
  
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ce
nt
ra
al
 
Mu
se
um
, 
Ut
re
ch
t 
by Michael S.0. Olisa 
The realistic approach is different and 
less optimistic. Itis based on the assumption 
that struggle and ideological polarization, 
backed by advances in weapons science and 
technology will be stepped up. In these 
circumstances efforts towards disarmament 
will meet an increasing number of obstacles 
and frustrations. 
These arguments point clearly to the 
futility and unattainability of the ideal 
world concept. At the same time they 
underline the necessity for collective re- 
search by the world community into the 
most practicable options for the rest of this 
century and for the next. 
In this connexion it is instructive to look 
at some options which have been put for- 
ward within the United Nations system. In a 
1984 report to the General Assembly, the 
Secretary-General outlined three scenarios 
relevant to the prospects of peace by the 
year 2000. Although these scenarios are 
based on the economic aspects of the arms 
race and disarmament, they are directly 
linked to the central issue of world peace 
today and tomorrow. 
The baseline scenario assumes that the 
share of military outlay in gross national 
product (GNP) and the geographical dis- 
tribution of military industry will be roughly 
the same throughout the period 1970-2000. 
The second scenario envisages an accel- 
eration in the arms race, with a hypothetical 
doubling of the share of GNP for military 
outlays by the year 2000 in comparison with 
the baseline of 1970. 
The third, a disarmament scenario, 
assumes that United States and Soviet milit- 
ary spending as projected under the base- 
line scenario will fall by one third between 
1970 and 1990 and by a further third by 
2000. It also assumes that the relatively 
wealthy regions of the world will transfer a 
fraction of their hypothetical savings from 
disarmament to the poorest regions. 
An important issue raised by these sce- 
narios is that of the cost of peace, as opposed 
“The cost of war is the continued alloca- 
tion of massive resources to armaments 
production, the possible outbreak of wars 
and the consequent need to continue pro- 
duction for replacement purposes.” Left, 
Slapende Mars, (Mars Asleep) by the 
Dutch painter Hendrik Terbrugghen (1588- 
1629). Mars is the god of war in classical 
Roman mythology.

## [Page 9](069680engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

“The cost of peace ... will face a variety of 
challenges arising from the conversion of 
resources to non-military uses, the rede- 
ployment of a massive labour force from 
armaments and support industries ... and 
the reallocation to the world’s poorer 
countries of some of the resources re- 
leased from arms production.” Right, a 
patchwork picture created by a Kenyan 
woman from scraps of material in different 
colours and textures. 
to the cost of war. The cost of war is the 
continued allocation of massive resources 
to armaments production; the possible out- 
break of wars and the consequent need to 
continue production for replacement pur- 
poses. 
The cost of peace implies a reversal of 
these trends, a process which will face a 
variety of challenges arising from the con- 
version of resources to non-military uses, 
the redeployment of a massive labour force 
from armaments and support industries; 
plant conversion; the hostility of powerful 
interest groups deprived of huge profits; 
and the reallocation to the world’s poorer 
countries of some of the resources released 
from arms production. 
It is both significant and highly encourag- 
ing that positive and optimistic attitudes 
exist towards these problems, especially in 
non-governmental circles, suggesting 
strongly that the cost of peace will not be 
too great a burden. These positive indica- 
tors also suggest that it is not the objective, 
material factors in the peace package—dis- 
location, conversion and reallocation of the 
resources hitherto invested in war—which 
constitute the main barriers to peace, but 
rather the subjective, psychological factors 
arising from contemporary economic and 
political problems. In other words, the hu- 
man factor is the most serious threat to 
world peace. 
However, there is no dearth of public 
expressions of concern and desire for peace 
from world leaders and governments. Un- 
fortunately, disarmament negotiations con- 
tinue to flounder because nations dread 
unilateral disarmament. They are not sure 
that their opponents wmuld follow their 
lead; they fear that their rivals may strike 
first; they feverishly continue arms produc- 
tion because they suspect that the other side 
has outstripped them. This “balance of sus- 
picion” results in the continuation of activi- 
ties which encourage war and threaten 
peace. n 
  
MICHAEL S.0. OLISA, Nigerian political scien- 
tist and lecturer at the University of Nigeria, 
Nsukka, is Director of the Nigerian Institute for 
Peace Research. His published works include 
Political Culture and Stability among Traditional 
Ibo (1971) and Problems of National ldentifica- 
tion and Unity in Nigeria (1971). 


### 69629: The Cost of peace

### 69632: Peace in the regional context

 
4. Peace in the regional 
context 
by Ahmad Sidqi Ad-Dajani 
understand more clearly that the sta- 
bility of relations between States is 
influenced by circumstances in each indi- 
vidual State. The stability of relations be- 
tween the world’s rich States is affected by 
the stability of basic structures in the 
world’s poor States. Countries that are rich 
and secure must realize that they cannot 
remain so if they continue to close their eyes 
to the scourge of poverty that prevails in the 
entire southern half of the globe. 
The term “independence” has begun to 
imply responsibility as well as freedom, 
both at the level of the individual State and 
that of the community of States. The world 
situation may be likened to that of a ship full 
of people. Those at the bottom have de- 
P woes today are beginning to cided to drill their way out. If the others 
leave them to their own devices everyone 
will perish, whereas if they offer assistance, 
all will be saved. We owe this parable illus- 
trating the meaning of responsibility to the 
Prophet of Islam. 
The stability of world peace at the 
national, regional and international levels is 
affected by the dominant philosophies of 
our age. We are currently witnessing a 
reawakening of philosophical thought and a 
renewal of interest in fundamental philo- 
sophical issues. The place of religion in 
Western industrial societies had declined, 
and the role of philosophy had shrunk. In- 
deed, some Western thinkers had asserted 
that the age of philosophy was over. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Al
l 
ri
gh
ts
 
re
se
rv
ed
 
Today, however, there is a revival of p 
9

## [Page 10](069680engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 69632: Peace in the regional context

10 
p> interest in philosophical thought and en- 
quiry, a trend which extends to the man in 
the street, whose life is dominated by the 
phenomenon of mass communication. We 
are also witnessing a revival of religion, the 
impact of which—a blend of social, cultural 
and political factors—is today apparent in 
various societies and social milieux. The 
trends emerging in these religious revival 
movements and those that are likely to 
emerge in contemporary philosophies will 
have a decisive influence on the issue of 
peace or war. 
The question of peace requires a system 
of values that is recognized throughout the’ 
world, and at the same time there must be a 
growing acceptance of others, despite their 
diversity. This would tend to a situation of 
equilibrium. If a relativistic value system 
prevails, in which some people are regarded 
with contempt and differences are not 
accepted, then equilibrium is disrupted and 
the spectre of war must inevitably reign. 
The establishment of non-homogeneous 
States within a single region is a major cause 
of tension and a source of local and regional 
conflicts. Thus, after the withdrawal of the 
Western colonial powers and the triumph of 
nationalism, States with arbitrary and artifi- 
cial boundaries came into being. Within 
these artificial geopolitical units were va- 
rious tribes and racial communities, one of 
which eventually became dominant. Such 
States have to contend with tribal or civil 
war within their borders, and this phe- 
nomenon may be a lasting one inasmuch as 
its main cause is deeply rooted in their 
human composition. It should be noted that 
civil war is frequently characterized by 
savagery, sometimes spreading to a point at 
which it threatens the peace of an entire 
region. 
Another form of heterogeneity is appa- 
rent in the multinational State. In aworld in 
which the nationalist impulse has grown 
increasingly powerful, especially in the last 
two centuries, and in which the nation-State 
has come to be regarded as the ideal form of 
State, the presence of a number of national 
population groups within a single State 
brings the danger of communal strife, un- 
less adequate steps are taken to recognize 
the nationalist impulse and national lan- 
guages and to promote economic and social 
progress under a strong central federal 
authority. 
National and religious pluralism are 
closely interrelated, and conflict between 
national groups is sometimes expressed as 
religious conflict and vice versa. Civil wars 
break out under the banner of religion: 
Europe, for example, was convulsed by 
wars of religion at the beginning of the 
modern era. Furthermore the presence of a 
number of different national groups within 
a single State may lead to tension between 
that State and its neighbours because of 
what are termed “national minorities”. 
Another form of the heterogeneous State 
also appears in the “bi-national States” that 
arose in the modern world during the period 
of the Western colonial offensive. In these 
La planeéte affolée, oil on canvas by the 
German-born (later US, then French) artist 
Max Ernst (1891-1976). The picture was 
painted in 1943 in the United States. Paint- 
er, sculptor, poet, essayist, Max Ernst has 
been called the “Leonardo of surrealism”, 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Sp
ad
em
, 
19
86
, 
Pa
ri
s.
 
Ma
rs
ei
ll
e 
M
u
s
e
u
m

## [Page 11](069680engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 69632: Peace in the regional context

States, minorities of European stock 
dominate an indigenous majority, and the 
phenomenon of “biculturalism™ is clearly 
apparent. In many cases this situation of 
dominance has resulted in outbreaks of 
deadly strife between different population 
groups. 
Perhaps the most dangerous form of the 
heterogeneous State in a single region is the 
“settler colonialist” State which is im- 
planted in a homogeneous region on a basis 
of racist aggression. Both Africa and Asia 
have suffered as a result of having been 
selected as targets for a number of assaults 
by European settler colonialism during the 
colonial era. 
Colonialism has been and still is a leading 
cause of wars, and colonized peoples have 
suffered severely as a result. It has been a 
destructive force in regions which have lost 
a unity formerly characterized by the in- 
tegration of natural and human elements. 
The effort to halt the destructive impact of 
colonialism and to repair the damage done 
by it was initially expressed in the form of 
resistance to colonialist assaults and subse- 
quently in the form of revolutionary wars of 
liberation, such measures being regarded as 
necessary to the building of peace and the 
return to a normal situation. 
While colonialism is a particularly blatant 
form of exploitation, exploitation in gener- 
al, even within a single State or community, 
is a source of tensions that may lead to wars 
and revolutions. In any society, social re- 
volution is neither more nor less than a 
decisive answer to the exploitation of the 
downtrodden classes by the dominant class. 
One distinguishing feature of the modern 
world has been the appearance of ideo- 
logies, and fierce ideological struggles have 
been a source of tribulation in our time. 
Clearly this type of struggle was one of the 
sources of tension leading to what is com- 
monly known as the “cold war”. The strug- 
gle 1s intensified by the attacks of ideo- 
logical opponents which permeate the 
communications media. 
Another cause of tension at the regional 
level is terrorism, which has emerged as a 
phenomenon of the contemporary world. A 
variety of factors—nationalist, social, 
ideological, political and intellectual—have 
interacted to give rise to this phenomenon. 
While terrorism is still largely shrouded in 
obscurity, it is at any rate clear that a dis- 
tinction must be made between it and resist- 
ance to colonialism. Terrorism may occur at 
the level of individuals, and it may also 
assume official form when practised by 
States. 
What can be done to remove these causes 
of tension? Any successful action must be 
based on an understanding of human 
aspirations and instincts. 
The impulse to universal brotherhood is a 
natural human instinct, while the racist feel- 
ings that have come to dominate the minds 
of some people are a deformation of that 
instinct. Nationalist sentiment is also natu- 
ral to man, a “social animal”, but chauvinis- 
tic nationalism is a clear deformation of that 
sentiment. Again, man instinctively strives 
after justice, but once he achieves power he 
begins to exploit others. The spiritual 
dimension is a basic feature of human 
nature, and the motive force behind reli- 
gious faith. But religious fanaticism is a 
deformation of that motive force. Lastly, 
while it is natural for man to seek ideologies 
that provide comprehensive explanations of 
the universe, ideological confrontation is a 
deformation of that natural desire. 
The problems that have arisen in human 
relations spring to a great extent from a 
failure to reconcile the obligations arising 
from a plurality of reference-groups and 
from artificial contradictions*between the 
demands of these multiple affiliations. Our 
world has suffered greatly from an exagger- 
ated emphasis on the “national” group to 
the detriment of the demands of our affilia- 
tions to the global group. This has had 
disastrous consequences for all nations. In 
his introduction to Bertrand Russell's book, 
Has Man a Future?, Arnold Toynbee 
speaks of the striking contrast between the 
enormity of the dangers that we have 
brought upon ourselves and the petty 
nature of the national interests for which we 
are fighting and which would be doomed to 
extinction if the whole world were 
annihilated. | 
 
AHMAD SIDQI AD-DAJANI, professor of history 
at the Scientific Centre on the History of Arab 
Countries in Cairo, has written widely on the 
history of the Arab world. 


### 69633: There is no peace because there is no justice'

‘There is no peace because there is no justice’ 
Desmond Mpilo Tutu, Anglican Bishop 
of Johannesburg since 1985, was 
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984 
for his role in the opposition to apar- 
theid. As General Secretary of the 
South African Council of Churches, 
Bishop Tutu is a leading spokesman for 
the rights of black South Africans. He 
has always emphasized non-violent 
means of protest. Below is an extract 
from his Nobel Lecture on the occasion 
of the Prize-giving ceremony held in 
Oslo on 11 December 1934. 
  Ph
ot
o 
© 
No
be
ls
ti
ft
el
se
n,
 
St
ok
ho
lm
 
... We see before us a land bereft of much 
justice, and therefore without peace and 
security. Unrest is endemic, and will remain 
an unchanging feature of the Scuth African 
scene until apartheid, the root cause of it 
all, is finally dismantled. ... There is no 
peace in Southern Africa. There is no peace 
because there is no justice. There can be no 
real peace and security until there be first 
justice enjoyed by all the inhabitants of that 
beautiful land. 
I have spoken extensively about South 
Africa, first because it is the land I know 
best, but because it is also a microcosm of 
the world and an example of what is to be 
found in other lands in differing degree— 
when there is injustice, invariably peace 
becomes a casualty. 
Because there is global insecurity, na- 
tions are engaged in a mad arms race, 
spending billions of dollars wastefully on 
mstruments of destruction, when millions 
are starving. ... We have the capacity to 
feed ourselves several times over, but we 
are daily haunted by the spectacle of the 
gaunt dregs of humanity shuffling along in 
endless queues, with bowls to collect what 
the charity of the world has provided, too 
little too late. When will we learn, when will 
the people of the world get up and say, 
Enough is enough? ... When will we learn 
that an escalated arms race merely escalates 
global insecurity? We are now much closer 
to a nuclear holocaust than when our tech- 
nology and our spending were less. 
Let us work to be peacemakers. If we 
want peace, let us work for justice. Let us 
beat our swords into ploughshares. | 
Text © The Nobel Foundation, 1985 
1

## [Page 12](069680engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

Nuclear war 
5,000 megatons 
A third of the nuclear arsenal (1) 
  
  
  ~~ og 
  
  
  
Immediate 
radiation - 
gamma rays 
and neutrons 
  
  
Thermal 
blast wave     
\ [4 
~~ o - 
¥ 4 A 
  
     
 
  
Fires 
Forests 
Towns 
Supplies 
Fuel stocks 
  
   
  
    
  
    
  
Local 
radioactive 
fallout 
     
  
Contamination 
of water 
by iodine-131     
Increase 
in dead 
organic 
matter   
Smoke | Soot | 
Darkness 
and nuclear 
winter 
  
     
  
Photosynthesis 
halted 
         
  
Increase in 
carbon dioxide 
450 to 900 
parts per million 
    
         
  
  
        
 
  
Biospheric 
distress 
Proliteration 
of organic 
decomposing 
agents 
  
Woridwide 
radioactive 
fallout - 
strontium-90 
and caesium-137 
   
     
  
  
Food chains 
contaminated 
     
12 
  
General 
: famine 
     
  
Neolithic 
CX subsistence 
= economy 
    
    
(1) The world nuclear arsenal in 1982 was the equiva- 
lent of 12,000 to 14,000 megatons of explosive power. 
Source: Association of French Physicians for the Pre- 
vention of Nuclear War 
Graphics: Yurek Janiszewski - The Unesco Courier 
Oxides of nitrogen 
Depletion of 
ozone layer 
Increase in 
ultraviolet radiation 
Shock 
wave 
Destruction 
of soils 
(erosion) 
Destruction 
of the plant 
community 
10 fo 20.10% km? 
Breakdown 
of dead 
organic 
matter 
General 
temperature rise 
Desertification 
of tropical regions 
Warming of 
nordic regions 
Melting of 
poiar icecaps 
and glaclers 
Floods 
Reduced 
population - 
500 million?

## [Page 13](069680engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 69636: The Pugwash movement

The Pugwash movement 
Movement came not from a scientist 
but from the British philosopher Ber- 
frand Russell. In 1955, the world situation 
appeared highly dangerous and the outlock 
for mankind very gloomy. The development of 
the hydrogen bomb in the United States and 
the Soviet Union marked the start of the nu- 
clear arms race, with both sides manufactur- 
ing and testing bombs of ever-increasing des- 
tructive power. Even at that time, before the 
advent of ballistic missiles, these bombs deli- 
vered by manned aircraft could annihilate the 
largest centres of population. In the climate of 
intense mistrust, fear, and hostile propaganda 
which then prevailed, it seemed highly prob- 
able that the cold war would change into a hot 
war in which civilization would be destroyed. 
It was in these circumstances that the Rus- 
sell-Einstein Manifesto was born. Russell 
conceived the idea that the scientific com- 
munity should be actively concerned about 
the dangers to humanity which arose largely 
through the work of scientists. At that time the 
greatest living scientist was Albert Einstein, 
and Russell wrote to him with the idea of 
convening a conference of eminent scientists 
TT direct initiative for the Pugwash 
Peace on the singing constellation of the waters 
Jostling like the shoulders of the crowd 
Peace in the sea’s waves of goodwill 
Peace on the resting place of the foundering 
Peace on the drums of arrogance and the darkened pupils 
And if | am the interpreter of the waves 
Peace also on me. 
Vicente Huidobro (Chile) 
for this purpose. Einstein immediately agreed 
and asked Russell to prepare a draft of a 
suitable statement. This Russell did and in 
April 1955 sent it to Einstein for his signature. 
Later that month, Russell was flying from 
Rome to Paris, when the pilot announced to 
the passengers that Einstein had died. Rus- 
sell was shattered, because he feared that 
without Einstein's sponsorship the whole pro- 
ject would collapse. But when Russell arrived 
at his hotel in Paris, a letter with Einstein's 
signature to the statement was waiting for 
him. Signing it had been one of the last acts of 
the great scientist's life. In this dramatic way 
the Pugwash Movement began. The signa- 
tures of nine other scientists from six coun- 
tries were obtained, and on 9 July 1955 the 
Manifesto was issued at a press conference 
held at Caxton Half in London. 
The press conference was attended by a 
very large number of media representatives 
from all over the world; it was a great success 
and received huge publicity. This in turn 
brought a flood of letters and cables from 
individuals and groups endorsing the Mani- 
festo and offering help. One of the letters was 
from Mr. Cyrus Eaton, a Canadian-American 
Monumento al mar 
AM PAHALEMANA 4. _~ 
= _,TERAO] 
nin Ar SAlY 7 | 
Ph
ot
o 
UN
 
by Joseph Rotblat 
industrialist, offering to finance the confer- 
ence of scientists which was called for in the 
Manifesto, and suggesting that it be held at his 
birthplace, Pugwash, a small fishing village in 
Nova Scotia. 
In his offer of help Eaton made it clear that 
while the participants would be his guests 
they would be completely independent; that 
the preparatory work and organization would 
be handled by Russell and his colleagues, 
and that the conduct and proceedings of the 
Conference would be left entirely to the parti- 
cipants. 
The first of the series of conferences of 
scientists held under the aegis of the Russell- 
Einstein Manifesto took place in Pugwash in 
July 1957. The twenty-two participants came 
from ten countries, including the United 
States, the United Kingdom, France, the 
Soviet Union, China and Poland. The work 
was divided among three committees, with 
the following topics: hazards arising from the 
use of atomic energy in peace and war; con- 
trol of nuclear weapons; and the social 
responsibility of scientists. 
The possible hazard from the radioactive 
fall-out from nuclear weapons tests was a p 
0 
Exe. | v4 
MTHUNLAM 7 

## [Page 14](069680engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 69636: The Pugwash movement

Wi 
J ry 
= 
p major issue at that time, and it was of con- 
siderable importance that such an internation- 
al group of scientists, covering a wide range of 
political opinion, managed to reach unani- 
mous agreement on the quantitative assess- 
ment of the consequences of large-scale test- 
ing of nuclear weapons. The most controver- 
sial issue was the discussion in the committee 
on the control of nuclear weapons, because 
this included the whole area of arms limita- 
tions and reductions, and the steps needed to 
achieve general and complete disarmament, 
topics which were to occupy most of the time 
of future Pugwash Conferences. But there 
was unanimous agreement that scientists can 
and ought to contribute to the debate on these 
problems. 
The committee on the social responsibility 
of scientists was also unanimous in its find- 
ings, which took the form of a statement of 
common beliefs. The fact that a long 
statement, dealing in some detail with the 
most controversial issues of the day, and 
setting out the role and responsibility of scien- 
tists, was accepted by such adiverse group of 
scientists, was in itself of great significance. 
This was probably the first time that a truly 
international conference, organized by scien- 
tists, with participants from East and West, 
had been convened to discuss not purely 
technical matters but the social implications of 
scientific discovery. 
The first Pugwash Conference proved that 
scientists have a common purpose which can 
transcend national frontiers without violating 
basic loyalties. It had shown that, by virtue of 
their training and their knowledge, scientists 
are capable of discussing objectively the com- 
‘plex problems which have arisen from the 
progress of science, with the aim of finding a 
solution to these problems. 
The realization of this unanimity of intent 
decided the participants to make further 
efforts in the same direction. For this purpose, 
a Continuing Committee of five persons was 
YARD a n 
         
  
Theis 
set up at the end of the Conference, with 
instructions to organize further conferences of 
asimilar nature. This was the go-ahead for the 
setting up of a Movement of Scientists, which 
takes its name “The Pugwash Conferences 
on Science and World Affairs” from the venue 
of the first meeting. 
Since then, the following characteristics of 
Pugwash have gradually evolved: partici- 
pants in conferences and meetings are invited 
in their personal capacity and represent no- 
body but themselves; they are scientists (this 
term being used in its broadest sense) and 
cover a wide spectrum of ideological and 
geographical groupings within the scientific 
community; the debates in Pugwash meet- 
ings are conducted in the scientific spirit; as a 
private and independent entity, Pugwash 
does not usually undertake joint action with 
other organizations, except the United Na- 
tions and its specialized agencies, such as 
Unesco. 
The role and responsibility of scientists has 
always been a matter of special concern for 
Unesco: the Preamble to its Constitution con- 
tains the famous declaration “...since wars 
begin in the minds of men, itis in the minds of 
men that the defences of peace must be 
constructed.” In 1982, Unesco organized 
jointly with Pugwash a symposium on the 
theme of “Scientists, the Arms Race and Dis- 
armament”, the conclusions and recom- 
mendations of which set forth specific tasks 
for scientists to undertake in the fulfilment of 
their social obligations. These recommenda- 
tions are based on the development of ideas 
put forward in Pugwash Conferences since 
1957. 
One unique characteristic of Pugwash is 
absence of rigidity in its make-up and a mini- 
mum of formalized structure. There is no writ- 
ten constitution and no formal membership; 
any scientist who has attended a Pugwash 
conference automatically becomes a “Pug- 
washite”. However, being without a constitu- 
tion is not the same as acting entirely arbitrar- 
ily. In the course of time certain guiding princi- 
ples have evolved. These are usually re- 
viewed every five years at the Quinguennial 
Conference, which serves as a kind of Gener- 
al Assembly, which all who have participated 
in at least two Pugwash conferences in the 
past are entitled to attend. 
Although the largest attendance so far, at 
the 1977 Quinquennial, was 223, it has never 
been the intention to confine the Movement's 
activities to a small group of scientists. One 
way of involving more participants has been to 
set up national Pugwash groups, and by 1982 
such groups existed in thirty-six countries. An 
example of a regular activity by a national 
group is the International Summer School of 
Disarmament and Arms Control organized 
biennially by the Italian Pugwash Group. 
There are also Pugwashites in thirty-nine 
other countries, but they are not numerous 
enough to form national groups. In such 
cases, regional groups are set up such as 
those which exist today for Africa and Latin 
America. 
Today the Pugwash Movement is estab- 
lished as an important and effective channel 
of communication between scientists for the 
study and discussion of many of the complex 
issues which confront mankind at the present 
time. Participation in these conferences by 
eminent scientists from East and West, North 
and South, and the constructive proposals 
which have emerged from the discussions, 
particularly in relation to disarmament, have 
secured for the Pugwash Conferences the 
respect of the scientific community, of gov- 
ernments, and of many sectors of society. The 
name “Pugwash” has become a symbol of 
successful international debate on controver- 
sial issues, and the conferences are cited as a 
model for similar efforts in other fields. 
The success of the Pugwash Conferences 
is the result of resolute efforts of a group of 
scientists determined to retain an indepen- 
dent and unbiased outlook, and anxious to 
build and consolidate international under- 
standing and co-operation. The Conferences 
have shown that it is possible to apply the 
scientific approach, which has proved so suc- 
cessful in science and technology, to prob- 
lems which are only indirectly related to sci- 
ence. They have shown that even when deal- 
ing with highly controversial matters, it is 
possible to tell the truth without being abusive, 
to be candid without trying to embarrass, pro- 
vided that there is a common approach based 
on scientific objectivity and mutual respect. B 
 
JOSEPH ROTBLAT, of the United Kingdom, is a 
founder member of the Pugwash Movement, and 
was its first Secretary-General (1957-1973). To- 
day Professor Emeritus of Physics at the Uni- 
versity of London, he has campaigned for many 
years in favour of arms control and disarmament. 
He is the author of numerous publications on 
world affairs, nuclear energy and the quest for 
peace, including the official history of Pugwash. 
He was general editor of Scientists, the Arms 
Race and Disarmament, a Unesco-Pugwash 
Symposium published by Unesco in 1982. The 
present text has been extracted from the author's 
contribution to a series of studies which Unesco 
is publishing on the origins of peace movements 
in different parts of the world.

## [Page 15](069680engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 69637: Perceptions of threat and security

Perceptions of threat | 
and security 
by Yoshikazu Sakamoto 
context of international relations, 
concerns the security of nations— 
“national security”.- The State-system is 
characterized by this emphasis on the secur- 
ity of the State as the primary and para- 
mount actor in international politics. 
At the same time, it is evident that, when 
“national security” became a key political 
symbol after the Second World War, in 
é § ome oti as discussed in the 
Two visions, nine centuries apart, of the 
end of the world. Miniature, left, from the 
Saint Sever Apocalypse (1028), with com- 
mentary by the 8th-century monk Beatus, 
originally belonged to Saint Sever Abbey, 
south-west France, and is now in the Bib- 
liothéque Nationale, Paris. Right, detail 
from Pablo Picasso’s Guernica, “the most 
celebrated painting of our century” and its 
most symbolic, both in the masterly bold- 
ness of its conception and execution and 
in the grim topicality of its content. 
  
  
many countries the issue of “internal secur- 
ity” became as important as, if not more 
important than, “external security” —which 
the idea of “national security” originally 
referred to. 
This illustrates the basic fact that the 
State is not always a tightly homogenized 
entity, but is composed of groups with di- 
verse and often conflicting interests. Thus, 
an examination of the concepts of “secur- 
ity” and “threat” should begin by raising 
two basic questions: Whose security, and 
security of what? Or, threat to whom and to 
what? Hence the need for an examination 
of actors and values. 
The emergence and consolidation of the 
modern nation-State in the West involved, 
firstly, the establishment of the State 
machinery and, secondly, its extension and 
penetration into society—mobilizing -the 
people who would be integrated into the 
State and who would constitute the 
“nation”, 
This mobilization process has two com- 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bi
bl
io
th
eq
ue
 
Na
ti
on
al
e,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
S
P
A
D
E
M
 
19
86
, 
Pa
ri
s 
  
TN 
71 N 
oN \/ 
ponents: domination and participation. As 
a result of domination, two functionally 
distinct strata emerge: the ruling elite and 
the ruled masses, the former normally small 
in number. But there is another form of 
coercive integration in which a majority 
prevails over a minority. What is crucial is 
obviously not number but the locus of 
power. 
The political system of a State integrated 
in this fashion is bound to be characterized 
by an unequal and inequitable distribution 
of values. Even in a democratic society, one 
can observe an inequitable distribution of 
the effects of external insecurity in favour of 
the privileged elite. It is said that a proposal 
for world peace once contained the 
observation that “if the King, the President, 
the Prime Minister and the Commander-in- 
Chief are to be the first to go to the front 
line in the battlefield when war has been 
declared, there will be no war”. 
This being the case, measures have been 
taken by the elite in the nation-State to p 
NIE LL AU AREA 
gant i ap id 
18 
UY 

## [Page 16](069680engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 69637: Perceptions of threat and security

16 
Pp ensure that people’s perceptions of their 
interests are identical with those of the elite. 
These measures are intended to strengthen 
the people’s sense of identification with the 
elite and with the State; they point to the 
second aspect of the mobilization process— 
participation, whether real or manipulated. 
One way of strengthening the people’s 
sense of identification with the nation-State 
is through manipulation of the popular 
perception of the threat-security issue. 
There are three levels on which manipula- 
tion is systematically applied. 
The first has to do with the conception of 
the values to be defended and secured 
against threat. In the nation-State, there is 
always a latent cleavage which may develop 
into a situation in which values for the elite 
and values for the people are no longer 
compatible, and the elite and the people 
constitute a threat to each other, making 
“internal security” a fundamental issue to 
both parties. 
To counteract this withdrawal of national 
allegiance and identification on the part of 
the people, the elite frequently resorts to 
symbols such as order, royalty, property, 
cultural tradition, and national mythology, 
which are conceived of as transcending sec- 
toral interests. 
The second level concerns the perception 
of the presence and degree of the external 
threat to security. Even if the internal cleav- 
age is limited, enabling a degree of national 
consensus to emerge, there is still room for 
different perceptions as to the presence and 
degree of external threat. Accordingly, the 
elite group has to manipulate public percep- 
tion in order to mobilize the people fully in 
support of a policy. 
The third level has to do with the cost 
involved in counteracting the perceived 
threat. To facilitate public acceptance of 
the cost, the manipulation of public percep- 
tion is systematically carried out by resort- 
ing to symbols of patriotism to convince the 
people that the “threat” is serious and the 
cost to be paid is acceptable. What fre- 
quently happens is that those citizens who 
are educated and earn higher incomes con- 
stitute the “attentive public” who do not 
readily conform to the policy and rhetoric of 
the elite group. It is the poorer and less 
educated who are more likely to fall victim 
to the manipulation of patriotic symbols 
and show willingness, even fanatical confor- 
mism, to make sacrifices in support of 
chauvinistic policy. It is indeed a tragedy 
that those who get least from the existing 
system often pay most. 
Another way of strengthening a sense of 
identification with the nation-State is by 
promoting popular participation in the pro- 
cess of value allocation. 
This can take two forms—participation in 
the political decision-making process and 
sharing of the well-being distributed by the 
State. The former concerns input, the latter 
output. Theoretically, the West put an 
emphasis on the former, the East on the 
latter. In practice, the States in the West 
and in the East have a similar characteristic 
in common—the welfare state. 
The development of the welfare state has 
given rise to somewhat contradictory re- 
sults. On the one hand, it has made people 
more dependent on the State as far as their 
welfare is concerned. On the other it has 
reinforced the popular attitude toward the 
State, which has come to be regarded as a 
mere instrument for satisfying the welfare 
needs of the people—an attitude which has 
led to the erosion of the authority of the 
State. The welfare state offers more service 

## [Page 17](069680engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 69637: Perceptions of threat and security

Add LAN 
5 \ 
AN wt TA A 
[JPET WA [J te ye y A Ls RN 
AN \ “J A pl \ 9, Te) Ca OA LON Lota ba 
o 
ta
ke
n 
fr
om
 
Ca
ll
ig
ra
ph
ie
 
ar
ab
e 
vi
va
nt
e 
by
 
Ha
ss
an
 
M
a
s
s
o
u
d
y
 
© 
19
81
, 
Fl
am
ma
ri
on
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
Ro
be
rt
 
Da
vi
d 
© 
Le
 
Po
in
t 
Ca
rd
in
al
, 
Pa
ri
s 
“..Bleeding on the wall, living, red or half- 
infected, the wound of a man ... Strange 
wounds that we encounter with embar- 
rassment and nausea, suffering on empty 
walls.” These lines are by the French poet 
Henrl Michaux, who also painted the 
watercolour at left. Above, In this calli- 
graphlc composition by Hassan Mas- 
soudy, the word “peace” in Arabic sug- 
gests the shape of a bird floating on peace- 
ful waters which are themselves depicted 
by the same word repeated many times. 
  
    
  
  
and distributes values more equitably than 
the classic nation-State; but it evokes less 
political enthusiasm and dedication. A new 
form of incongruity is emerging between 
people and the State. : 
One of the main reasons for this incon- 
gruity is the loss of “impermeability”, espe- 
cially military impermeability, of the na- 
tion-State. Whereas the welfare state pro- 
vides the people with abundant welfare faci- 
“lities, it fails to guarantee their survival. No 
single State, including the major powers, 
can protect its people from the danger of 
extinction. The survival of the people of one 
great power is at the mercy of another. 
In sum, the implementation of popular 
participation has not led to a strengthening 
of the process whereby people identify with 
the nation; on the contrary, the greater 
extent of participation has raised public 
awareness that the nation-State is not an 
adequate institutional framework for ensur- 
ing the people’s security. 
It is clear today that the incongruity be- 
mA ; A pO i Lee es A 
AA - ~ Te , - 
. J WTA, FCI Ad 
Xoo FTP Las - REG GA ry. A 
- » » - hr XA Sdindadolaaiti 
A Call A orat Tu \ AZ - 
tween “national security” and people’s 
security can be observed not only within the 
nation-State but also in the field of interna- 
tional security. : 
At the international level, there is an 
unmistakable tendency to define what con- 
stitutes security and the threat to it in 
accordance with the perceptions of a very 
small number of elites in the major powers. 
The fact that the entire globe can be annihi- 
lated as a result of the perception or mis- 
perception of a top decision-maker testifies 
to the extraordinary concentration of power 
whereby the security-threat nexus is de- 
fined on behalf of the people of the world 
without their mandate. 
While the elite of each major power per-. 
ceives the threat to security as originating in 
the arms buildup of the other, the people of 
the world perceive the threat to security as 
originating in the arms race between the 
major powers and fear that this may even 
escape control of the elite of these powers. 
In this sense, the threat is systemic. > 
17

## [Page 18](069680engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 69637: Perceptions of threat and security

18 
Pp The systemic character of the threat im- 
plies that attainment of global security— 
assuring the security of the people of the 
world—calls for significant modifications in 
the State-system. Efforts have been made 
to strengthen the institutional framework 
for global security, such as the peace-keep- 
ing and peace-making machinery of the Un- 
ited Nations and the arrangements for arms 
control and disarmament in a search for 
“common security”, but no substantive 
progress has been made. 
In the absence of an institutionalized 
framework despite the impending systemic 
crisis, transnational people’s movements 
for disarmament have emerged. Such 
movements are an uninstitutionalized de- 
vice for coping with a crisis and are an 
indispensable initiator of a new institutional 
framework that has yet to be created. | 
 
YOSHIKAZU SAKAMOTO, of Japan, is a former 
Secretary-General of the International Peace 
Research Association, and is currently a profes- 
sor of law at the University of Tokyo. He is a 
member of the International Commission for 
Peace in the Minds of Men, the jury responsible 
for awarding the Unesco Prize for Peace Educa- 
tion. A longer version of this article has appeared 
in the Unesco Yearbook on Peace and Conflict 
Studies 1983, published by Unesco in 1985. 


### 69641: Higher education and peace

Higher education and peace 
riding problem facing humanity today 
and efforts to prevent nuclear annihila- 
tion should be the first priority of peace and 
disarmament education. 
These were two of the major points that 
emerged from a recent International Con- 
sultation on ways of improving higher educa- 
tion in the field of peace and respect for hu- 
man rights and the rights of peoples. Orga- 
nized by Unesco and the Greek National 
Commission for Unesco, the meeting was 
held in Athens from 20 to 24 January 1986, 
and was attended by leading scientists, spe- 
cialists in the social and human sciences and 
in higher education from 17 countries of 
Unesco’s European region, Latin America, 
Africa, the Arab Region and Asia. 
The participants, among whom was Profes- 
sor Bernard Lown (Nobel Peace Prize 1985; 
see article opposite page), described experi- 
ences in their countries and exchanged views 
on ways of informing students about problems 
relating to peace. They discussed how to 
teach about the dangers of a nuclear war, the 
arms race, and military uses of science and 
technology, as well as how to increase the 
role that students, future researchers and de- 
cision-makers should play in finding solutions 
to problems in these areas. . 
It was pointed out that the risks of nuclear 
T: risk of a nuclear conflict is the over- 
Teachers often lack documentary material 
and other teaching aids to help them intro- 
duce their students to international affairs. 
To fill this gap, the United Nations and 
Unesco’s Associated Schools Project 
have prepared a practical handbook, 
World Concerns and the United Nations, 
for primary- and secondary-school 
teachers. The handbook, published in 
English, French and Spanish, contains 
model teaching units on subjects such as 
peace and disarmament, human rights, 
racism, development, the environment, 
and cultural diversity, as well as advice to 
help teachers plan stimulating lessons 
which can be integrated into traditional 
history, geography, science, languages 
and even mathematics courses. Painting 
right by a 12-year-old Romanian girl, 
Adriana Moisin, illustrates a model 
teaching unit on the theme of different 
perceptions of the world. 
war and the consequences of the arms race 
extend to the developing world: some Third 
World countries already have nuclear 
weapons, while others are afraid of countries 
which possess them. At the same time there 
have been many wars since 1945 using con- 
ventional weapons, and the prevention of 
such wars and the constant violations of hu- 
man rights should also remain priority areas. 
The reduction of military arsenals is a pre- 
requisite for economic and social develop- 
ment for mankind as a whole and especially 
for Third World countries. 
Stressing the urgent need for radical im- 
provements in higher education on these 
issues, participants made a number of sug- 
gestions about the general approach, aims, 
content and forms of international education. 
Among their recommendations were: 
e promoting the introduction of a global 
approach based on the ideas of international 
understanding, tolerance and . solidarity 
among peoples and countries, and on respect 
for cultural diversity; 
® developing an educational strategy which 
would integrate education for peace, respect 
for human rights and the rights of peoples into 
development education; 
¢ basing international education on a scien: 
tific approach; 
a N 9 a) \ » 
ECCLES i 
SN ’ 
! >) y | A Ld 
/ v J 
) TIN “’ - KA 
{4 - 4 ow a | : . 
3 Pat, \ OR . | 
  
® including among the aims of international 
education the prevention of a nuclear catas- 
trophe, the prevention of conventional wars 
and the violation of human rights; 
® promoting the idea of a united front of 
people to face the unprecedented threat of a 
nuclear catastrophe in order to ensure the 
survival of human civilization; 
® resisting the development of ideological 
and psychological stereotypes dehumanizing 
other peoples; 
¢ improving communications between scien- 
tists and politicians; 
® introducing problems related to the New 
International Economic Order, underdevelop- 
ment, poverty, imperialism and neo-col- 
onialism; 
® extending programmes of peace and hu- 
man rights education to military academies; 
¢ promoting the establishment of “linked 
schools and universities” from different coun- 
tries in order to strengthen international 
understanding; 
e establishing in universities and higher 
education institutions an oath on graduation 
for young scientists and engineers in which to 
draw their attention to the ethical and human 
consequences of scientific research and tech- 
nological achievements. | 
S
S
N
 
R
e
 
3
0
 
3 
MY 
ACTA 
a ) > ZA 
or “W! 
ih) P
h
o
t
o
 
U
n
e
s
c
o

## [Page 19](069680engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 69644: Physicians and the nuclear threat

Physicians and the nuclear 
threat 
from the Soviet Union and three from 
the United States, met in Geneva to 
establish the International Physicians for 
the Prevention of Nuclear War (IPPNW), 
and in December 1985 we travelled to Oslo 
to receive the Nobel Peace Prize. 
I believe that this extraordinary achieve- 
ment and recognition relates to the cogency 
and the urgency of the issue being ad- 
dressed by these physicians. It is also due to 
the fact, as the Nobel Committee pointed 
out, that the IPPNW has been “spreading 
authoritative information by creating an 
awareness of the catastrophic consequences 
of atomic warfare”. 
We have resisted being sidetracked onto 
other issues, no matter how morally com- 
pelling. Combating the nuclear threat has 
been our exclusive preoccupation, since we 
are dedicated to the proposition that to 
ensure the conditions of life we must pre- 
vent the conditions of death. Ultimately, we 
believe people must come to terms with the 
fact that the struggle is not between diffe- 
rent national destinies or between opposing 
ideologies, but rather between catastrophe 
and survival. All nations share a linked 
destiny—nuclear weapons are their com- 
mon enemy. 
IPPNW has emphasized a number of cri- 
tical conclusions. 
Firstly, that no public health hazard ever 
faced by humankind equals the threat of 
nuclear war. Never before has man posses- 
sed the destructive resources to make this 
planet uninhabitable. 
Secondly, that modern medicine has no- 
thing to offer, not even a token benefit, in 
the event of nuclear war. - 
Thirdly, while no national interest would 
justify nuclear war, sober appraisals suggest 
that we have created a technology which is 
increasingly out of human control, Ulti- 
mately the bomb, the robot and the compu- 
ter pre-empt man’s decision-making role 
and take command. 
Fourthly, even if war is prevented, the 
arms race is exacting an €normous econo- 
mic, psychological and moral toll. 
The current global economic crisis results 
I: December 1980, six physicians, three 
 
  
  
The official poster of the International Year 
of Peace, showing the face of a youth with, 
superimposed, the faces of men, women 
and children from all over the world. De- 
signed by the American artist Neil Wald- 
man, it won first prize in the International 
Year of Peace poster competition orga- 
nized by the United Nations. 
largely from the mortgaging of scarce worid 
resources to the military. One might use the 
metaphor of a metronome. Listen to a met- 
ronome set at a rate of sixty beats per 
minute, imagine the sound of a pulse every 
second. Every two seconds the pulse con- 
veys the message that a child has died of a 
disease that could have been prevented by 
immunization, by providing adequate food 
and a safe water supply. With each in- 
tervening beat of the metronome, also 
every two seconds, a child is permanently 
crippled physically or mentally by a pre- 
ventable illness and is destined to live the 
rest of its life with severe disability. Thus, 
with each beat of the metronome, a child is 
either killed or maimed by, a preventable 
affliction: 120,000 children, the same num- 
ber of victims claimed by the first atomic 
bomb, are dying every three days. 
With each second’s pulse, the metro- 
nome proclaims another message, a mes- 
sage of waste. Each beat conveys the spend- 
Ph
ot
o 
Un
it
ed
 
Na
ti
on
s 
by Bernard Lown 
~— EN ~~ N= — —> 
IS \ 
ez 
C 
ing every second of $25,000 on arms; $1.5 
million every minute. 
Compounding the tragedy is the fact that 
even a small transfer of the funds being 
spent on arms to health and social needs 
would result in extraordinary permanent, 
long-lasting benefit, serving all of human- 
kind. Three hours of world arms spending is 
equivalent to the total cost of the twenty- 
year campaign to eradicate smallpox, one of 
the great achievements of twentieth-cen- 
tury medicine. Half a day of world arms 
spending would pay for the full immuniza- 
tion of children against common infectious 
disease that now claims 3.5 million lives 
annually. Four days of world arms spending 
would pay for five years of a malaria control 
programme, ‘addressing what is probably 
the world’s greatest cause of morbidity. Six 
months of world arms spending would pay 
for a twenty-year programme providing 
essential food and health needs in all the 
developing countries. 
As you listen to the metaphorical metro- 
nome pulsing at one beat every second, it 
conveys a third message, that of the extra- 
ordinary danger in which the world finds 
itself. Nuclear weapon stockpiles are now 
equivalent to 16,000 million tons of TNT. If 
each metronome beat represents the explo- 
sion of a ton of dynamite, the din of explo- 
sions would be continuously heard for 500 
years. 
For a cardiologist, the metronome con- 
veys a fourth message. It evokes the beating 
of the human heart. We must ask ourselves 
whether we will let the heartbeat of human- 
ity stop, or struggle to make certain that it 
pulses for an eternity to come. [| 
BERNARD LOWN, of the USA, is professor of 
cardiology at the Harvard School of Public 
Health. With Academician Evgeny Chazov of the 
USSR, he is co-president of International Physi- 
cians for the Prevention of Nuclear War 
(IPPNW), which was awarded the 1984 Unesco 
Prize for Peace Education and the 1985 Nobel 
Peace Prize. The article published here consists 
of extracts from Prof. Lown’s address to a 
Unesco International Consultation on higher 
education and problems relating to peace, held 
in Athens in January 1986 (see opposite page).

## [Page 20](069680engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

Ge
or
g:
 
Ec
ke
rt
 
In
st
it
ut
e 
fo
r 
In
te
rn
at
io
na
l 
Te
xt
bo
ok
 
Re
se
ar
ch
 
© 
Dr
aw
in
g 


### 69661: UNESCO and the International Year of Peace

20 
Unesco 
and the International 
Year of Peace 
 
  
tional Year of Peace form part of a - 
U NESCO'S activities during the Interna- 
continuing effort which began forty 
years ago. The Preamble to Unesco’s Consti- 
tution, adopted on 16 November 1945, 
pledges the Organization to advance, 
“through the educational and scientific and 
cultural relations of the peoples of the world, 
the objectives of international peace and of 
 
 
First awarded in 1981, the annual Unesco 
Prize for Peace Education was created to 
reward outstanding examples of “activity 
; designed to alert public opinion and 
> mobilize the conscience of mankind in the 
cause of peace”. In 1985 the Prize went 
jointly to General Indar Jit Rikhye, of India, 
President of the International Peace 
Academy, and to the Georg-Eckert Insti- 
tute for Internationa! Textbook Research 
(Fed. Rep. of Germany). The Institute 
works for peace by seeking to identify and 
eliminate from textbooks factual errors, 
prejudices and stereotyped ideas about 
peoples, in order to encourage pupils’ 
readiness to understand and appreciate 
different cultural systems. Its headquar- 
ters are in the Villa von Biilow, above, a 
masterpiece of classical architecture 
made available by the municipality of 
Braunschweig. 
the common welfare of mankind for which the 
United Nations Organization was estab- 
lished”, and states that “peace must therefore 
be founded, if itis not to fail, upon the intellec- 
tual and moral solidarity of mankind”. 
Unesco’'s commitment to “international 
peace” and “the common welfare of mankind” 
is in a sense the keystone of all its work and 
permeates every one of its activities without 
exception, whether in education, science, cul- 
ture or communication. Its approach to these 
issues is based on the conviction that they 
cannot be dissociated from the wider canvas 
of interrelated contemporary problems which 
must be tackled globally by the international 
community. More specifically, Unesco’s 
efforts to achieve and preserve peace are 
today embodied in a wide range of: pro- 
grammes relating to international understand- 
ing, human rights and the rights of peoples, 
and to the elimination of prejudice, intoler- 
ance, racism and apartheid. 
First of all, Unesco has sought to define the 
very meaning of the word peace. A resolution 
adopted at the 18th Session of Unesco's 
General Conference in 1974 stressed that 
peace “cannot consist solely in the absence of 
armed conflict but implies principally a pro- 
cess of development, justice and mutual re- 
spect among peoples designed to secure the 
building of an international society in which 
everyone can find his true place and enjoy his 
share of the world's intellectual and material 
resources”. 
Two years later, at its 19th Session, the 
General Conference went further, adopting a 
resolution on “The Role of Unesco in Gener- 
ating a Climate of Public Opinion Conducive 
to the Halting of the Arms Race and the Tran- 
sition to Disarmament”, This resolution re- 
flected the conviction that disarmament would 
make it possible to redistribute vast material 
and intellectual resources for social and eco- 
nomic development and help to prepare the 
ground for equitable political and economic 
relations between the countries of the world. 
In April 1978 Unesco organized an expert 
meeting on “The Obstacles to Disarmament 
and the Ways of Overcoming Them”, as part 
of its preparations for the United Nations First 
Special Session on Disarmament held in the 
  Ph
ot
o 
© 
AP
 
At the end of the Second World War, 
Unesco launched a major project aimed at 
the elimination of racism, discrimination, 
prejudice and tensions and the promotion 
of international understanding. The need 
for such a plan is no less urgent today. 
Unesco’s efforts are directed to analysing 
and exposing the mechanisms of pre- 
judice, intolerance and racism as a first 
step to mobilizing its own forces and those 
of people everywhere against these phe- 
nomena and their most brutal manifesta- 
tion, apartheid. Above: “Their right—to 
share a future without war” is the message 
of this anil-aparifeid poster from South 
Africa. 
same year. Participants stressed that the pur- 
pose of disarmament education was to pro- 
mote the goal of general and complete dis- 
armament, and recommended the holding of 
a world congress to propose measures aimed 
at the establishment of specialized education 
in favour of disarmament. 
This World Congress on Disarmament 
Education was duly organized by Unesco and 
held in June 1980, in Paris. Some 250 partici- 
pants and observers from alt over the world 
attended. The Congress set forth a number of 
guidelines for an action plan to cover the 
Second Disarmament Decade of the United 
Nations, ending in 1989, and defined a series 
of principles relating to disarmament educa- 
tion as an essential component of peace edu- 
cation. Unesco was asked to produce a 
Teacher's Handbook on Disarmament 
Education designed for secondary schools. 
This book, now in preparation, gives a de- 
tailed presentation of the links between dis- 
armament and development education. 
Unesco followed up the World Congress on 
Disarmament Education by convening a 
series of expert meetings and training semi- 
nars for teachers devoted to practical ques- 
tions of teaching about disarmament issues in 
their relationship with peace; strengthening 
international understanding and security; de- 
—~—

## [Page 21](069680engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 69661: UNESCO and the International Year of Peace

Ph
ot
o 
Mi
rc
ea
 
H
u
d
e
k
-
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
a 
A Lol TEN  
The aim set forth in Unesco’s Constitution 
of “advancing ... the objectives of interna- 
tional peace and the common welfare of 
mankind....” can never be achieved with- 
out a mobilization of world public opinion 
in a united struggle against the continua- 
tion of the arms race, especially in the field 
of nuclear ‘veapons. Above, peace march 
in Romania. 
velopment; a new international economic 
order; respect for human rights and the rights 
of peoples. 
The Organization has also sponsored 
meetings on the role of the media in increas- 
ing public awareness of the links between 
disarmament and development. One such 
meeting, held in Paris in November 1982, 
examined different perceptions of threat and 
conceptions of security. A study on “Media 
Contribution to Worldwide Security and 
Peace”, carried out in 1984-85 in co-opera- 
tion with the International Social Science 
Council, analysed among other topics cover- 
age of war and peace issues, effects of style, 
vocabulary, and negative stereotypes. 
Acknowledging the crucial role played by 
science and technology in the debate on 
peace, disarmament and development, Un- 
esco organized a joint symposium with the 
Pugwash Conferences on Science and World 
Affairs on the theme of “Scientists, the Arms 
Race and Disarmament” in Ajaccio, France, 
in February 1982. The Organization con- 
tinues to sponsor scientific research projects 
and meetings such as the International Con- 
sultation on higher education, peace and re- 
spect for human rights and the rights of peo- 
ples held in Athens in January 1986 (see page 
18). 
Ph
ot
o 
Fr
an
ti
se
k 
Do
st
al
-U
ne
sc
o 
 
Unesco encourages physical education 
and sport as a means of bringing peoples 
closer together on the basis of respect, 
mutual understanding and disinterested 
competition. It also honours the spirit of 
sportsmanship through its long associa- 
tion with the International Pierre de 
Coubertin Fair Play Trophy, first awarded 
in 1965. Unesco is currently examining the 
origins and forms of violence in sports 
activities in a study which will focus on the 
social and educational aspects of this 
complex problem, as well as remedial 
action. Photo of the jubilant judoka, above, 
featured in an international exhibition on 
the theme of “Youth in the 1980s”, orga- 
nized by Unesco on the occasion of Inter- 
national Youth Year (1985). 
In 1980 a Unesco Prize for Peace Educa- 
tion was established to promote all forms of 
action designed to “construct the defences of 
peace in the minds of men”. The annual prize, 
worth $60,000, is financed by the interest from 
a $1 million donation from the Japan Ship- 
building Industry Foundation. Among the 
prizewinners are Evgeny Chazov of the 
Soviet Union and Bernard Lown of the United 
States, who jointly accepted the 1984 award 
on behalf of International Physicians for the 
Prevention of Nuclear War (see page 19). 
In the domain of culture, Unesco’s pro- 
gramme is based on the conviction that de- 
velopment and peace are preconditions of the 
cultural fulfilment of societies and individuals. 
In this context Unesco has concentrated on 
safeguarding the cultural heritage, streng- 
thening cultural identities and intercultural re- 
lations, promoting creativity and artistic 
creation, and work in the field of cultural de- 
velopment and cultural policies. An interna- 
tional symposium currently being prepared on 
the role of cultural workers and artists in work 
for peace will “analyse ways in which co- 
ordinated action could be taken to place their 
works, their creations and their talents in'the 
service of peace”. 
Of the fourteen Major Programmes featur- 
ing in Unesco’s Second Medium-term Plan p 
Ph
ot
o 
L. 
Cl
iv
ia
-U
ne
sc
o   
Article 10 of the Declaration of the Rights 
of the Child adopted by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations on 20 
November 1959 stipulates that the child 
“... shall be brought up in a spirit of under- 
standing, tolerance, friendship among 
peoples, peace and universal 
brotherhood. ...” Today there is a growing 
awareness that in order to encourage this 
spirit among young people all over the 
world, action is called for at the earliest 
possible age, during the years when a 
child’s fundamental outlook and personal- 
ity are formed. Unesco has encouraged 
this interest in education for peace at pre- 
school age and in 1985 published Seeds 
for Peace, a booklet presenting recent ex- 
periences in this field in the family context 
and elsewhere. Photo showing 3 genera- 
tions of one family is an illustration from 
the booklet.

## [Page 22](069680engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 69661: UNESCO and the International Year of Peace

Ph
ot
o 
Mi
ch
el
 
Cl
au
de
-U
ne
sc
o 
 
Unesco’s cultural programme is based on 
its constitutional obligation “to contribute 
to peace and security” by promoting inter- 
national collaboration through culture. 
This basic tenet is defined in more specific 
terms in the Declaration of the principles 
of International cultural co-operation 
(1966} which declares that “Cultural co- 
operation shall contribute to the establish- 
ment of stable, long-term relations be- 
tween peoples, which should be subjected 
as little as possible to the strains which 
may arise in international life”. In this field 
Unesco Is today engaged in a broad prog- 
ramme of activities to protect the cultural 
heritage, strengthen cultural identity and 
relations between cultures, encourage 
creativity, and support Member Slates in 
promoting cultural development. (1) A gor- 
gon’s head in the forum of Septimius 
Sevetus at the ancient city of Leptis Magna 
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), which features 
on the World Heritage List of cultural and 
natural properties of outstanding univer- 
sal value. The List, which Unesco has 
drawn up through the World Heritage 
Committee, today includes 216 sites (27 in 
Africa, 34 in the Arab States, 30in Asia and 
the Pacific, 25 in Latin America and the 
Caribbean, and 100 in Europe and North 
America) which enjoy special protective 
measures both from the States in which 
they are located and from the international 
community. (2) The inner courtyard of a 
traditional house at Oualala, Mauritania. 
(3) A staff member of the National Museum 
of Mali explains to a French boy how to 
play the balaphon, a West African 
xylophone, during a study tour in France 
as part of the Museum's staff training 
programme. 
i fk 
- ™ Sas rt 
avd, SFX IMS 
CEng Si 
 Ph
ot
o 
B.
 
Ga
ly
-U
ne
sc
o 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Sa
li
a 
M
a
l
é
-
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
 

## [Page 23](069680engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 69661: UNESCO and the International Year of Peace

On a number of occasions, Unesco’s 
General Conference has drawn attention 
to the links between peace, disarmament 
and development education on the one 
hand, and human rights education on the 
other, considering notably that education 
concerning human rights “is capable of 
making an essential contribution to the 
maintenance and promotion of peace as 
well as to economic development and so- 
cial progress in the world”, Cartoons and 
games were devised as part of one recent 
Unesco-sponsored project to create hu- 
man rights teaching materials adapted to 
the needs and interests of young people in 
Thailand. The project, carried out by the 
Faculty of Law, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, focused largely on child pros- 
titution and human rights and child labour 
and human rights. Left, cover of a set of 
cartoons produced as part of the project. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Fa
cu
lt
y 
of
 L
aw
, 
Ch
ul
al
on
gk
or
n 
Un
iv
er
si
ty
, 
Ba
ng
ko
k 
  
p (1984-1989), No. Xlll, “Peace, International 
Understanding, Human Rights and the Rights 
of Peoples”, includes the commitment to 
maintain peace and international understand- 
ing, through studying the causes and the con- 
sequences of the arms race and the condi- 
tions favourable to disarmament. 
The Plan highlights the responsibility of 
education in creating awareness of the inter- © ue 
dependence of global problems, particularly - 
between peace, the halting of the arms race, 
disarmament, respect for human rights and 
the rights of peoples, the elimination of col- 
onialism, racism and apartheid, and develop- 
ment. The international educational strategy 
established as part of the Medium-term Plan 
seeks to develop a climate of opinion condu- 
cive to the transition to disarmament, “by 
providing support for youth activities, and by 
encouraging young people to think and act in 
support of peace, disarmament, respect for 
human rights and the rights of peoples”. 
Today, Unesco’s normative, educational 
and informational activities relating to dis- 
armament and development can be 
   
  
       Dr
aw
in
g 
©
 
Sc
uo
la
 
Me
di
a 
G.
 
Bo
no
ri
s,
 
M
o
m
p
i
a
n
o
 
approached from four different angles. 
e The arms race creates a huge burden on 
national economies and on societies’ re- 
sources. Defence budgets can be seen to be 
inflationary in industrialized countries, and a 
source of external debts in the Third World. 
¢ The present international order, the nature 
of societies and of political regimes, especial- 
ly their form of economic growth, are basic 
factors in the continuation of the arms race. 
¢ The third approach explores future possi- 
ble alternatives to the present relationship 
between disarmament and development, in- 
cluding the creation of an international fund to 
administer the resources which could be 
transferred to development, and the conver- 
sion of the arms industry to civilian activities. 
e The fourth approach advocates a new form 
of international co-operation, emerging from 
research into present forms of national and 
international relations which generate least 
tension, with the aim of creating a favourable 
context for eventual disarmament. Such a 
new international order implies the rejection of 
conventional models of growth and moderni- p 
Dr
aw
in
g 
Ro
ma
n 
Ni
ko
-U
ne
sc
o 
  
As part of its major programme “Commu- 
nication in the service of man”, Unesco 
has prepared, in collaboration with the 
French Ministry of Education, a booklet 
entitled Des médias pour la paix et les 
hommes (The media for peace and man- 
kind). The booklet is a presentation, writ- 
ten for young people aged between 9 and 
17, of the 1978 Unesco Declaration on fun- 
damental principles concerning the con- 
tribution of the mass media to strengthen- 
Ing peace and international understand- 
ing, to the promotion of human rights and 
to countering racialism, apartheid and in- 
citement to war. It will be distributed in 
co-operation with the World Federation of 
Unesco Clubs and other non-governmen- 
tal organizations. Before publication, a 
draft of the booklet was sent to 1,500 
young people, some of whom created 
posters inspired by its contents. Above, 
poster by a group of pupils at a school In 
Mompiano, Italy. Left, an illustration from 
the booklet, which will also be published 
eventually in English and Spanish.

## [Page 24](069680engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 69661: UNESCO and the International Year of Peace

Pp zation, especially those imposed on develop- 
24 
ing countries. 
Finally, Unesco’s publishing programme 
also plays an important part in disarmament- 
related activities. Relevant works include the 
Unesco Yearbook on Peace and Conflict Stu- 
dies (published since 1980); Wurld Directory 
of Peace Research Institutions (5th edition, 
1984); Obstacles to Disarmament and Ways 
of Overcoming Them (1981); and Arm- 
aments, Arms Control and Disarmament; a 
Unesco Reader for Disarmament Education 
(1982). Other studies and publications which 
seek to further knowledge and appreciation of 
cultural values and mutual understanding 
among peoples, include the History of Man- 
kind: Cultural and Scientific Development, a 
new edition of which is currently being pre- 
pared, and the eight-volume General History 
of Africanow in course of publication. [| 
Two Moons, a poster designed by the Ja- 
panese master Kaii Higashiyama to mark 
International Year of Peace (1986). The re- 
sult of collaboration between Unesco, the 
Japanese Federation of Unesco Associa- 
tions and the International Association of 
Art, the poster shows the moon, symbol of 
truth in Asian tradition, reflected in peace- 
ful waters. 
  
Ke “o (4 A 
annee internationale de la paix 
unesco 1986 
A
 


### 69664: World military spending: over $1.5 million a minute

World military spending: over $1.5 million a minute 
In the developing world, 800 million people 
live in absolute poverty and deprivation. 500 
million are malnourished. Many millions have 
no access to safe drinking-water and do not 
have the income necessary to purchase food. 
thas been estimated that there are more than 
50,000 nuclear warheads in the world. The 
total explosive power of the world stock of 
nuclear weapons is about equal to one mil- 
lion times that of the Hiroshima bomb, which 
had a yield of 13 kilotons. (A kiloton is equal 
to 1,000 tons of conventional high explosive 
or TNT; a megaton is equal to 1,000,000 tons 
of TNT.) 
According to a recent United Nations study 
on conventional disarmament, the world 
arsenal of conventional weapons includes 
well over 140,000 main battle tanks, over 
35,000 combat aircraft, over 21,000 helicop- 
ters, over 1,100 major surtace warships, plus 
more than 700 attack submarines. Approx- 
imately four fifths of the total world military 
expenditure is estimated to be devoted to 
conventional weapons and armed forces. 
It has been estimated that some 150 conflicts 
fought with conventional weapons have 
occurred since the Second World War, It is 
Impossible to determine with any accuracy 
the death toll arising from these conflicts. A 
recent United Nations study on conventional 
disarmament, however, gives an estimate of 
20 million deaths. 
Military expenditures represent a significant 
share of the public finances of developed and 
developing countries. In both cases, they 
come to represent an average of some 20 per 
cent of governmental expenditures. Accord- 
ing to some estimates, in the developed 
countries military spending is about equal to 
public expenditure on education or health; in 
the developing countries it equals three 
times the public expenditure on health and is 
a third more than the public expenditure on 
education. 
Worldwide military expenditures in 1983 
amounted to some $800,000 million, accord- 
ing to the most reliable estimates available, 
which is the equivalent of more than $1.5 
million per minute. In constant prices, this is 
more than double the expenditures for 1960 
and almost four times those for 1949. At this 
rate it takes just 15 days and 15 hours for 
world military expenditure to reach the 
$34,300 million spent in the whole of 1983 for 
all official development assistance for all de- 
veloping countries. A recent United Nations 
study emphasized that, if recent trends 
should persist, the world military expendi- 
ture could reach or exceed $1,000,000 million 
a year, in current dollars, well before 1990. 
Developed countries spent 20 times as much 
on military expenditures as they provide for 
economic aid. 
70 per cent of world military spending is by 
the six major military powers, 15 per cent by 
other industrialized countries, and the re- 
maining 15 per cent by developing countries. 
$1,000 million dollars =28,000 jobs in military 
goods and services, or 57,000 jobs in person- 
al consumption industries, or 71,000 jobs in 
education. 
For every soldier the average world military 
expenditure is $20,000. For every school-age 
child the average public education expendi- 
ture is $380. 
For every 100,000 people in the world there 
are 556 soldiers, but only 85 doctors. 
Just one fifth of annual arms expenditures 
could abolish world hunger by the year 2000. 
Source: United Nations 
Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o

## [Page 25](069680engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

ANNEE INTERNATIONALE DE LA PAIX 
. <r &® /~ 
NATIONS UNIES isl40 
  
|
 
NI
NO
LI
VN
 
3I
NI
IH
IA
 
“w 


### 69666: The United Nations World Disarmament Campaign

The United Nations 
World 
Disarmament 
Campaign 
by Jan Martenson 
to inform, to educate and to gener- 
ate public understanding and sup- 
port for the objectives of the United Na- 
tions in the field of arms limitation and 
disarmament represents a unique aspect of 
the role of the United Nations. As an inter- 
national organization consisting of 
sovereign States, the United Nations essen- 
tially deals with member governments. In 
deciding to launch a world disarmament 
campaign, these member governments 
T- World Disarmament Campaign 
have provided the United Nations with an 
instrument of communication with the pub- 
lic at large. 
The Campaign was launched, by consen- 
“sus, in June 1982 at the Twelfth Special 
Session of the General Assembly devoted 
to disarmament. By the time it was in- 
itiated, the process of negotiating disarma- 
ment had acquired a great complexity with 
regard to the issues under consideration, 
the results attained, and the status of agree- 
ments actually arrived at. At the same time, 
The United Nations Postal Administration 
issued a series of six stamps on 20 June 
1986 to commemorate the International 
Year of Peace. Designed by artists from 
various couniries, the stamps depict sym- 
bolic motifs (from top to bottom): doves 
flying and nesting in a tree (Akira Iriguchi, 
Japan); the word “peace” in several lan- 
guages encircling the United Nations 
emblem (Henryk Chylinski, Poland); mullti- 
coloured stylized dove (Renato Ferrini, 
Italy); the word “peace” and an olive 
branch (Salahattin Kanidinc, USA); olive 
branch describing a rainbow above the 
curve of the earth (Milo Schor, Israel); 
doves within the United Nations emblem   
there was a growing public debate over the 
causes and consequences of a continuing 
arms race and the problems and prospects 
of disarmament, particularly of nuclear dis- 
armament. While the themes highlighted in 
this debate continued to bear the imprint of 
regional and local concerns, there was also 
anincreasing trend towards greater interna- 
tional interaction, a process facilitated by 
the availability of modern means of com- 
munication which permit wide public parti- 
cipation. 
United Nations objectives in the field of 
arms limitation and disarmament underline 
commonly shared goals which transcend 
national, geographical and political dif- 
ferences. As evolved in response to the 
changing international situation, these 
objectives could be attained through a 
lowering of the present levels of military 
build-ups in a balanced and verifiable man- 
ner and in accordance with the need for 
undiminished security for all States, large 
and small. Also, in a world of increasing 
interdependence, not only States but issues 
are becoming interlinked. As such, the 
themes supported by the World Disarma- 
ment Campaign are those which emphasize 
our common human destiny. 
The most comprehensive statement of 
United Nations objectives in this field is 
given in the unanimously adopted Final 
Document of the Tenth Special Session of 
the General Assembly devoted to dis- 
armament: “while the efforts of all States 
should continue to be general and complete 
disarmament under effective international 
control, the immediate goal is that of the 
elimination of the danger of nuclear war 
and the implementation of measures to halt 
and reverse the arms race and clear the path 
towards lasting peace.” 
These issues have been the subject of      Ph
ot
o 
UN
 
considerable public interest in all regions of p 
I 
25 
(Mohammad Sardar, Pakistan).

## [Page 26](069680engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 69666: The United Nations World Disarmament Campaign

Pp the world. In providing objective, factual 
26 
and balanced information pertaining to 
these questions, the Campaign primarily 
relies upon the priorities and measures set 
out in the Final Document; the decisions 
taken at the Twelfth Special Session of the 
General Assembly devoted to dis- 
armament; the views expressed by Member 
States; the recommendations in the declara- 
tion of the 1980s as the Second Disarma- 
ment Decade; and the unanimous conclu- 
sions of the various expert groups nomin- 
ated by the Secretary-General to study spe- 
cific aspects of arms limitation and dis- 
armament. ‘Within this broad framework, 
the Campaign places emphasis on the in- 
teraction between the issues of disarma- 
ment and international security as well as 
disarmament and development. 
In order to reach the largest number of 
people in all parts of the world, a consti- 
tuency-related approach is required. Such 
constituencies lead to.a multiplier effect in 
educating, informing and generating public 
understanding and support for the objec- 
tives of the United Nations in the field of 
arms limitation and disarmament, where 
the issues involved are often complex and 
need to be explained in an easily compre- 
hensible manner. 
Elected representatives, media, non-gov- 
ernmental organizations, educational com- 
munities and research institutes from diffe- 
rent political and geographical backgrounds 
are thus the primary constituencies of the 
World Disarmament Campaign, which en- 
courages bilateral and multilateral ex- 
changes, interpersonal communications, 
and gives the widest possible dissemination 
to contacts, for example, between 
government officials, experts, academics, 
non-governmental organizations and 
journalists. 
Having been entrusted with the responsi- 
bility of carrying out this Campaign on a 
universal basis in a factual, objective and 
balanced manner, the Department for Dis- 
armament Affairs realizes that the Cam- 
paign is a vehicle not only for informing but 
also for learning.» Qur experience in the 
last four years of preparing and distributing 
information materials and organizing con- 
ferences, symposia and other activities in 
different parts of the world has led us to the 
unmistakable conclusion that, cutting 
across ideological and political boundaries, 
there is a universal constituency for dis- 
armament bound by concern for human 
survival and well-being in the nuclear age. 
Within this growing and increasingly know- 
ledgeable community, each of the primary 
constituencies of the World Disarmament 
Campaign has a role to play. 
At this point, two observations should be 
made. 
First, it is unrealistic to expect disarma- 
ment to be achieved overnight. After all, 
(1) A detailed description of the Department's activities 
can be found in the yearly report of the Secretary- 
General on the activities of the World Disarmament 
Campaign, which can be obtained by writing to The 
Department for Disarmament Affairs, United Nations, 
New York 10017, USA. The Department also publishes 
a newsletter with updated information on the activities 
of the Campaign throughout the world. 
concern about security and our resort to 
some form of weaponry to achieve that end 
is as old as the human race, whereas the 
process of bringing about mutually accept- 
able disarmament agreements among 
sovereign States is a rather recent concept. 
Yet at the same time human rationality 
inspires us not to accept defeat in the face of 
a formidable challenge. I, for one, believe 
that it is well within the reach of the human 
intellect to turn a challenge to the survival 
of mankind into an opportunity for human 
betterment. The same ingenuity which has 
produced deadly arsenals of destruction 
might indeed become capable of using sci- 
_ ence and technology for peaceful purposes. 
We need to accept the notion of common 
survival in the nuclear age and thus the 
indivisibility of mankind’s destiny. 
Second, the World Disarmament Cam- 
paign is an instrument which the interna- 
tional community has unanimously and 
voluntarily devised to further its common 
objectives in the field of arms limitation and 
disarmament. The full potential of this 
unique endeavour can be realized only 
through ensuring the principles of univer- 
sality and objectivity. Unimpeded access to 
a wide range of information for all sectors of 
the public is a necessary condition for the 
creation of the confidence and trust badly 
needed to generate widespread support for 
halting and eventually reversing the arms 
race. 
The programmes and activities under- 
taken for the World Disarmament Cam- 
paign have reached hundreds of thousands 
of people in all parts of the globe through 
the dissemination of information materials 
and publications, the holding of regional 
conferences and seminars, as well as 
through the media and personal contacts. In 
the last few years, such regional events have 
been organized in Mexico, Kenya, 
Thailand, Romania, India, Venezuela, 
USSR, Egypt, Sweden, Togo, Italy and, in 
May 1986, Tbilisi (Georgian SSR). 
Leading representatives of non-gov- 
ernmental organizations, media, research 
institutes and educational communities are 
invited from various countries within a re- 
gion to participate in the discussions on 
disarmament issues of specific and general 
concerri. The objective of these confer- 
ences is not to apportion blame or to issue 
communiqués, but to facilitate a construc- 
tive exchange of views and opinion, to im- 
prove dialogue and thus further under- 
standing and communication among people 
throughout the world on issues of arms 
limitation and disarmament. Indeed, a well- 
informed public opinion stands a much bet- 
ter chance of playing a positive, construc- 
tive and realistic role in the search for solu- 
tions to these issues. 
All these contacts, in turn, have made it 
possible for the United Nations to ascertain 
the impact of the Campaign. Growing num- 
bers of people have manifested their in- 
terest in disarmament matters, while better 
understanding the complex realities of the 
arms race, on the one hand, and the difficul- 
ties surrounding the issues, on the other. 
The impact made so far can perhaps be 
assessed at several levels, one of them being 
the generation of new ideas. As the Secre- 
tary-General of the United Nations has 
said: “All the speeches made there (in the 
United Nations), all the information emerg- 
ing therefrom, all the studies undertaken 
there, perhaps have no immediate effect on 
national policies, although very often they 
provide inspiration. But they definitely do 
influence world public opinion and contri- 
bute to the way in which thinking and mor- 
als evolve. And it is ideas which transform 
the world.” | 
 
JAN MARTENSON, of Sweden, has been 
Under-Secretary-General, Department for Dis- 
armament Affairs, at the United Nations since 
1983. He was previously UN Assistant Secret- 
ary-General, Centre for Disarmament, Depart- 
ment of Political and Security Council Affairs 
(1979-1982). A former head of the Information 
Department of the Swedish Ministry for Foreign 
Affairs, he has also served as Deputy Director of 
the Stockholm International Peace Research 
Institute. 
The University for Peace 
The University for Peace, the creation of 
which was approved by the UN General 
Assembly on 5 December 1980, is an interna- 
tional institution located In Costa Rica. For- 
maily outside the organizational framework 
of the United Natlons, it is established on the 
basis of an international agreement and a 
charter which came into force on 7 Aprii 1981, 
Its activities, devoted to the promotion of 
peace through education and research, are 
rooted in the principies of the Charter of the 
United Nations and the Universai Declaration 
of Human Rights. 
The University is a muiltidisclpiinary 
academic Institution which focuses on 
education for peace and human rights per se 
but aiso studies problems related to the en- 
vironment, natural resources, technology, 
communications and other issues in terms of 
their impact on the attainment of peace. 
Tapio Varls (Finland) 
Rector of the University for Peace 
oe 
  
      
   

## [Page 27](069680engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 69667: Towards a new way of thinking

Towards anew way 
of thinking 
by Gennadi Ivanovitch Gerasimov 
  
Ph
ot
o 
An
de
rs
on
 
(©
) 
Ro
ge
r 
Vi
ol
et
, 
Pa
ri
s 
VER thirty years ago, Bertrand Russell 
and Albert Einstein invited us to 
“learn to think in a new way” and 
pointed out that “if the issues between East 
and West are to be decided ... then these 
issues must not be decided by war”. In what 
became known as the Russell-Einstein Man- 
ifesto (see article page 13), the two philo- 
sophers suggested that people should regard 
themselves primarily as members of the hu- 
man race, whether they be workers, shop- 
keepers, farmers, or property-owners on a 
large or small scale: “Consider yourselves 
only as members of a biological species.” 
Looking more deeply into the question, | 
discovered that Russell and Einstein were by 
no means the first to put forward such views, 
although they had extremely cogent reasons 
for doing so at that time. As long ago as 1928, 
the French novelist Romain Rolland called for 
the creation of a Peace International, which 
would discount all the “political, social, re- 
ligious, philosophical and intellectual pre- 
occupations” which divide mankind, and 
would be exclusively guided by a “clear and 
direct awareness of the community of all living 
beings”. 
Rolland was sickened by the lunacy of 
trench warfare, which had systematized 
butchery. Russell and Einstein were anxious 
about the new danger represented by the 
atomic bomb which indiscriminately mas- 
sacred the population at large as well as the 
armed forces. Today, three decades later, the 
dangers far exceed those which they de- 
nounced, and their message has acquired a 
new dimension, especially with the establish- 
ment of the now well-documented hypothesis 
of “nuclear winter” as the inevitable outcome 
of a nuclear conflict. 
Before the "nuclear winter” theory, 
armchair strategists speculated at great 
length about the stages of nuclear escalation, 
about second strike capabilities and the pos- 
sibility, under certain conditions, of prevailing 
over the enemy in a nuclear exchange. To 
encourage plans for a “lightning” war to 
amputate the political and military leadership 
of an enemy power, a war unleashed from 
behind an antimissile shield capable of ward- 
ing off a counter-attack from a weakened 
adversary, is to foster a dangerous illusion. it 
is now clear that the dust, soot and ash from 
many nuclear explosions will obliterate the 
“victor's” sun. Whoever lifts his sword will also 
die by it. Does this not encourage us to “think 
in a new way”? 
This 2nd-century statue of Clio, the first of 
the nine Muses of Greek mythology, was 
discovered in 1774 in the ruins of a villa 
south-east of Tivoli, a favourite summer 
resort of the Romans 2,000 years ago. Clio, 
whose name means “to celebrate” in 
Greek, is the Muse of epic poetry and of 
history. She is often depicted seated, hold- 
ing a roll of parchment in her hand. 
27

## [Page 28](069680engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 69667: Towards a new way of thinking

\.: WR 
p The nuclear threat has taken on the dimen- 
sion of “cliocide”—a word coined from Clio, 
the Greek Muse whose task was to watch 
over the course of human history. Today his- 
tory faces the risk of sudden termination, as 
war, which formerly menaced only indi- 
viduals, now threatens the whole human 
species. 
Nuclear weapons sweep away the moral 
problem of ends and means, because any 
attempt to achieve a given end by using such 
weapons nullifies that end, by liquidating the 
two parties to the conflict. It would be like 
burning down a house while trying to carry out 
repairs on it, or killing a man in order to alter a 
mean streak in his character. Nor can nuclear 
war stand up to cost-benefit analysis. 
The nuclear weapon, a creation of the hu- 
man intellect, threatens to arrest the march of 
history through some act of political folly. Just 
as the great wars of the ancient world razed 
cities, sometimes wiped out entire peoples, 
after nuclear war the chronicle of human his- 
tory would be ended. In any case, there would 
be nobody left to read it. 
Just as we inherited this planet from our 
forebears, we have a responsibility towards 
In a Moscow square, young Muscovites 
and a visiting group of Indian children take 
part in a drawing contest organized on 
Universal Children’s Day, celebrated 
annually on the first Monday in October. 
“Peace for children” and “May the sun 
always shine” were two of the themes 
treated by the budding pavement artists. 
RE: | Li 
“future generations, each of which must hand 
on the heritage to their successors. In other 
words, we are all bound to Clio by a solemn 
oath which commands us to carry on the 
history of mankind. 
If we want to preserve peace, it should be 
given absolute priority; the general interest 
must be seen to override the interests of 
specific groups or classes. According to 
Lenin, from the point of view of basic Marxist 
ideas, the interests of general development 
come before the interests of the proletariat, 
because when the workers gain power it is 
taken not for its own sake, but rather to deliver 
society from exploitation, establish social 
equality, and create the conditions necessary 
for balanced development of individual char- 
acteristics. 
Karl Marx saw a major transformation in the 
relation between capital and labour as a 
necessary condition of world peace. In his 
inaugural address to the International Work- 
ing Men's Association in 1864, he stressed 
the necessity of creating conditions in which 
the elementary laws of morality and justice 
which ought to govern individual relations 
should also be supreme in international 
relations. 
Disarmament is the only possible route to 
the establishment of a new and just interna- 
tional order of world security. Only disarma- 
ment will allow us to use the vast material and 
intellectual resources thus freed to promote 
economic development and prosperity. 
Humanity has reached a crucial point and 
must choose which direction to take. It can 
overcome the inertia of the past and abandon 
the notion of security as based on the balance 
of power and on recourse to military or tech- 
nological solutions; or it can continue to be 
hostage to the arms race—to nuclear and 
chemical weapons, and to others no less 
fearsome. 
This choice between the dictates of reason 
and the road to catastrophe can only be made 
by mutual agreement between all States, 
whatever their social system or level! of econo- 
mic development. It will have to be bold and 
responsible. Today we can no longer be con- 
tent with piecemeal solutions which slow 
down the arms race in certain spheres only to 
accelerate it in others. - 
It is time to remove for ever the sword of 
Damocles which has been hanging over our 
heads since the tragedy of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki. It would be appropriate for the 
Soviet Union and the United States, holders of 
the largest nuclear stockpiles, to make a first 
decisive step and for other nuclear powers to 
follow them. 
To encourage world opinion “to think in a 
new way”, is one of the main tasks of the 
International Year of Peace. If United Nations 
Member States, together with massed public 
opinion, energetically support this effort, it 
may help to prevent “cliocide”. n 
GENNAD! IVANOVITCH GERASIMOV, a well- 
known Soviet journalist specializing in interna- 
tional relations, is currently chief editor of the 
weekly Moscow News, which is published in 
Russian, French, English, Spanish and Arabic. 
He was awarded the Vorovski Prize (The Union 
of Journalists of the USSR) and “The Golden 
Pen” (Bulgaria) for his journalistic work. 
  
© 
Ph
ot
o 
A.
 
Tr
ip
ho
no
v

## [Page 29](069680engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

"
P
h
o
t
o
 
© 
Hi
ro
sh
im
a 
In
te
ma
ti
on
al
 
Sc
ho
ol
 
   
Sadako Sasaki was living in a 
Japanese city called Hiroshima 
along with about half a million other peo- 
ple. When she was two years old the first 
atomic bomb ever to be used against human 
beings was dropped on Hiroshima. Most of 
the city was completely smashed and 
burned to the ground. Sadako was about a 
mile and a half away from where the bomb 
exploded, but she wasn’t burned or injured 
at all, at least not in any way people could 
see. 
A few weeks after the bomb, people in 
Hiroshima began dying from a sickness 
even the doctors couldn’t understand. Peo- 
ple who seemed perfectly healthy would 
suddenly get weak and sick and then just 
die. It was so strange and new that no one 
knew what to do. In fact, even today no one 
really knows exactly what radiation does or 
what it might do to a particular person. 
By the time Sadako was in seventh grade, 
she was a normal, happy, twelve-year-old 
girl going to a regular school and studying 
and playing like everyone else. Ten years 
had passed since the bomb and she was 
thinking about other things. One of the 
things she thought about most was running. 
One day after an important relay race 
that she helped her team win she felt ex- 
tremely tired and dizzy. After a while she 
felt better, so she thought it was just that she 
was so tired because vf the race. Over the 
next few weeks she tried to forget about it, 
but the dizziness kept coming back, espe- 
cially when she was running. She didn’t tell 
anyone about it, not even Chizuko, her best 
friend. Finally, one morning, it got so bad 
that she fell down and just lay on the ground 
for a while. This time everyone noticed. 
They took her to the Red Cross hospital to 
see what was the matter. No one could 
believe what they found out. Sadako had 
leukaemia, a kind of cancer of the blood. At 
that time quite a few children about Sada- 
ko’s age were getting leukaemia, which the 
people then called “the A-bomb disease”. 
Almost everyone who got the disease died 
and Sadako was very scared. She didn’t 
want to die. 
Soon after Sadako went to the hospital 
her best friend, Chizuko, came to visit her. 
She brought some special paper and folded 
a paper crane. Chizuko told Sadako about a 
legend. She said that the crane, a sacred 
bird in Japan, lives for a thousand years and 
T HIS story startsin 1945. A girl named 


### 69669: A Thousand paper cranes

A thousand paper cranes 
The article below is an extract from a booklet written and 
published by pupils of Hiroshima International School, 
Japan. It concerns the short life of a Japanese girl, who 
contracted leukaemia through the after-effects of the atomic 
bomb, and the children’s club which was set up after her 
death to work for peace. For further information about the 
Club and its activities, please write to the Hiroshima Center 
for Global Education, 2-6, 2-Chome, Ushita-naka, Higashi- 
ku, Hiroshima-shi, 730 Japan. 
if a sick person folds a thousand cranes, that 
person will get well. Sadako decided to fold 
a thousand cranes. Because of the 
leukaemia she often felt too weak and tired 
so she couldn’t work all the time, but from 
that day on, whenever she could, she folded 
cranes. 
Sadako actually folded her thousand 
cranes, but she wasn’t getting any better. 
But instead of getting angry or giving up, 
she decided she would fold more cranes. 
She started on her second thousand. Every- 
one was amazed by how brave and patient 
she was. On 25 October 1955, surrounded 
by her loving family, she went to sleep 
peacefully for the last time. 
But this story doesn’t end with Sadako’s 
death. She had a lot of friends who loved 
her and who missed her very much. And 
they didn’t only feel sad about Sadako. Lots 
of other children in Hiroshima had died or 
were dying of the A-bomb disease. Her 
friends wanted very much to do something 
for Sadako. So thirty-nine of her classmates 
formed a club and began asking for money 
for a monument for her. The word spread 
quickly. Students from 3,100 schools in 
Japan and from nine other countries gave 
money, and finally, on 5 May 1958, almost 
three years after Sadako died, they got 
enough money to build the monument. It’s 
called the Children’s Peace Monument and 
itis in the Peace Park which is in the middle 
of Hiroshima right where the atomic bomb 
was dropped. 
The movement to build this monument 
became so famous and popular that a movie 
called “A Thousand Paper Cranes” was 
made about it. About sixty children from 
 
Hiroshima and about twenty children from 
Tokyo helped to make the movie, and when 
it was finished they wanted to stay together 
as friends so they started a new club called 
“The Paper Crane Club”. The purpose of 
this club was to help children get together to 
think and work for peace. This club has 
continued to exist for almost thirty years. 
The members take care of Sadako’s 
monument, visit atomic bomb survivors, 
people who were in Hiroshima when the 
bomb was dropped, and who are getting 
sick and old or who just need help for some 
reason. 
One other thing they always do is fold 
cranes. They use the cranes in many ways. 
Sometimes they hang them on Sadako’s 
monument and other monuments in 
Hiroshima’s Peace Park. Sometimes they 
send them to world leaders as a way of 
reminding those leaders that the children of 
the world want to get rid of nuclear bombs. 
And whenever world leaders or atomic 
bomb survivors or people working for peace 
come to Hiroshima, members of the Paper 
Crane Club greet them and put a wreath of 
cranes around their necks to welcome them 
and to help them think about the meaning 
of Hiroshima. 
But the meaning of folding cranes, and 
the meaning of Hiroshima and the Paper 
Crane Club are perhaps best summed up in 
the words carved on the granite base of the 
Children’s Peace Monument: 
THIS IS OUR CRY 
THIS IS OUR PRAYER 
TO BUILD PEACE IN THIS WORLD 
|| 
Ph
ot
o 
Un
es
co
 
29

## [Page 30](069680engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 69671: Violence in the Third World

Violence 
in the Third World 
by Soedjatmoko 
  
“Societies are beginning to come apart at 
the seams as the despair, frustration and 
rage of the ‘have nots’ clash with the 
fear, reluctance or intransigence of the 
‘haves’.” Below, rural South Africans. 
The present text is an abridged version of its author's con- 
tribution to a major forthcoming study on war as a human 
institution. Entitled The Quest for Peace: Transcending Col- 
lective Violence and War among Societies, Cultures and 
States, the study will be published later this year under the 
auspices of the Unesco-supported International Social Sci- 
ence Council. This book, prepared as a contribution from the 
social sciences to the United Nations International Year of 
Peace, aims at a systematic and comprehensive presentation 
of the latest knowledge from different social science disci- 
plines concerning the problems of war and peace. 
¢ IOLENCE is a sign of institution- 
V al failure and system overload,” 
Professor Nazli Choucri has writ- 
ten. (I These conditions are by no means 
unique to the Third World, but it remains a 
fact that the vast majority of wars and war- 
like incidents that have taken place since 
the Second World War have been fought in 
the Third World. Furthermore, the daily 
turmoil and frictions of life under circum- 
stances of economic struggle and rapid so- 
cial change give rise to violence among 
groups and individuals within Third World 
societies. 
 Ph
ot
o 
To
ny
 
Mc
Gr
at
h 
©
 
In
te
rn
at
io
na
l 
De
te
nc
e 
an
d 
Al
d 
Fu
nd
 
fo
r 
So
ut
h 
Af
ri
ca
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
Despite their great diversity, the coun- 
tries of the Third World have some charac- 
teristics in common, apart from their loca- 
tion in Africa, Asia or Latin America, that 
make possible some generalizations about 
violence as they experience it. In the first 
place, most developing countries share the 
experience of colonial domination, though 
the nature and duration of it vary 
tremendously among them. Most of them 
are poor. Perhaps most importantly, most 
are engulfed in a process of very profound 
social and economic transformation that, 
though a necessary condition for develop- 
ment, is in itself a source of instability. 
For many developing countries, one can 
begin the search for the roots of violence 
with the circumstances of decolonization. 
For those countries that gained their inde- 
pendence by armed struggle, the fight for 
independence gave a legitimacy to the use 
of violence that still clings to it in many 
settings. A further legacy of colonial rule is 
the forced cohabitation within a single State 
of antagonistic groups that are artificially 
bound together within the borders estab- 
lished by the colonizers. In many instances 
quarrels that were submerged but not re- 
solved during the colonial period have re- 
emerged and, often, burst into violent con- 
flict after independence. 
Poverty is not necessarily a cause of vio- 
lent conflict~—though many argue that it is 
in itself a form of violence. It can be seen as 
such when it is the product of maldistribu- 
tion of resources and denial of opportunity, 
and exists in the midst of plenty or even 
excess. Under these conditions, poverty is 
usually the result of social and economic 
relations that can only be maintained by the 
threat or the use of violence. One major 
feature of recent decades has been the 
growing self-assertiveness of poor and tra- 
ditionally powerless groups. In some cases, 
groups of people have managed to move up 
the economic ladder, though many have 
met with violent resistance on the way. 
However, it is not poverty but the attempt 
(1) Nazli Choucri, “Demographics and Conflict”, Bulle- 
tin of the Atomic Scientists, Vol. 42, No. 4 (April, 1986}. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
G
a
n
s
h
y
a
m
 
C.
 
Pa
te
l,
 
B
o
m
b
a
y

## [Page 31](069680engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 69671: Violence in the Third World

™ is 73 
He a a ARR Fir SN ES 
to break out of poverty that generates vio- 
lence both as a tactic and as a response. 
Heightened aspirations and a refusal to 
accept a miserable lot have also contributed 
to massive population movements, within 
and across national boundaries. Violent 
clashes with established residents are a 
common result of migration. For example, 
in the Indian State of Assam, many lives 
have been lost in attacks by the Assamese 
on illegal immigrants from Bangladesh. In 
Honduras, the migration of Salvadorans in 
the early 1960s not only produced local 
clashes but led to a build-up of tensions that 
culminated in war between the two States. 
Even in cases where migration is received 
peacefully or the initial violence simmers 
down, the long-term basis may be laid for 
communal tensions that erupt into violence 
at later stages—as has been the case 
throughout South and South-east Asia as 
well as in many parts of Africa. 
The process of development itself is al- 
ways a source of turbulence and often a 
source of violence. Developmental success 
inevitably brings about structural change, 
upsetting traditional hierarchies and often 
generating violent reaction. The failures of 
development lead to even greater strain on 
the soctal fabric. The global recession of the 
early 1980s, the debt burdens of many of the 
developing countries, the prospect of slow 
and uneven growth for many years to come, 
the drawing down of the financial and eco- 
logical capital of whole nations, have cre- 
ated intolerable strains. In many parts of 
the Third World, communities are on the 
verge of breakdown. Societies are begin- 
ning to come apart at the seams as the 
despair, frustration and rage of the “have 
nots” clash with the fear, reluctance or in- 
transigence of the “haves” and erupt into 
religious, ethnic, tribal, racial and class 
violence. 
The dislocations caused by rapid and ex- 
tensive change make countries vulnerable 
to conflict arising from both internal and 
external sources. Adjustment to the de- 
velopments of the late twentieth century is 
threatening enough to the equanimity of 
any society without the further challenge of 
trying to compress centuries of technologic- 
al change and nation-building into the span 
of a few decades. 
It is important to keep in mind, however, 
that the process of social transformation is 
by no means confined to the Third World. 
All countries are in some measure caught 
up in sweeping value changes that respond 
to new technologies and modes of organiza- 
tion, and to a pace and scale of change that 
are unprecedented in human experience. It 
is not only in the Third World that the 
re-examination of old and newer values has 
led to challenges to the State. 
The fragility of young States in the face of 
internal turbulence and external pressure 
leads many governments to attempt to cen- 
tralize power and to rely upon the armed 
forces to maintain stability. The ease with 
which this tendency slides into a cycle of 
militarization, repression and internal con- 
“Adjustment to the developments of the 
late 20th century is threatening enough to 
the equanimity of any society without the 
further challenge of trying to compress 
centuries of technological change and na- 
tion-building into the span of a few deca- 
des.” Above, village girls from Ahwa, in 
Gujarat State, India, go to the communal 
well early in the morning to draw water for 
domestic use. 
flict is all too familiar to students of Third 
World political development. 
Many of today’s violent conflicts are pro- 
ducts of the inability to manage change. 
Others have their roots in contradictory 
perceptions of and beliefs about change. 
The complexity of the interlinkages be- 
tween problems creates in many minds a 
longing for simple, reductionist explana- 
tions, whose foundations in reality are so 
insecure that they have no capacity for 
tolerance of other approaches. 
No region has quite mastered the disloca- 
tions of the twentieth century, with its 
dizzying growth of populations and massive 
movements of people, its instant communi- 
cations, alienating technologies, shrunken 
spaces, and horrifying destructive power— 
and so all remain vulnerable to conflict. 
Developing countries are not unique in this. 
It would be difficult, for example, todraw a 
clear distinction between the violence in 
Northern Ireland and many of the ongoing 
conflicts in the Third World. Nonetheless, Pp» 
 

## [Page 32](069680engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

“\ & 
Nr 
% 
- hh 
: ¥ , 
 ] 
h
y
 
#2
 
VT
 
R
e
 
L
s
 
0
 
rT 
os
 


### 69671: Violence in the Third World

  “In the developing world, 800 million peo- 
ple live in absolute poverty and depriva- 
tion. 500 million are malnourished. 
Many millions have no access to safe 
drinking-water and do not have the income 
necessary to purchase food. They lack 
protection against thé consequences of 
environmental degradation and natural 
calamities, such as floods and drought, 
which, in Africa in particular, have pro- 
duced famine and suffering of unpre- 
cedented proportions.” 
Source: United Nations

## [Page 33](069680engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 69671: Violence in the Third World

  
F
A
R
M
 
e
b
.
 J
AR
 
| 
Pp three of the widely shared qualities that 
£5 
>» I 
5 
o 
£ 
3 
c 
8 
. = 
= io 
2 ~ B® 
oD 
I) 
8 
“H 
& 
; © 
° 
££ 
QQ 
have been mentioned—colonialism, pover- 
‘ty, and accelerated change—do give the 
Third World some distinctive preconditions 
for violence. 
There is also a psychological sense of 
belonging to the Third World, which arises 
from the recognition that the international 
system is dominated by and directed for the 
primary benefit of countries that exclude 
the Third World from decision-making and 
a fair share of the benefits of interaction. 
The resulting sense of vulnerability and ex- 
clusion—and the often angry sense of injus- 
tice that accompanies it—gives the coun- 
tries of the Third World some sense of 
solidarity despite their differences and leads 
them into conflict with the North. 
This kind of conflict has not often been 
pursued by armed warfare between States, 
but it undoubtedly feeds the atmosphere of 
confrontation that leads to isolated acts of 
violence. And isolated acts can all too 
quickly fall into a pattern of mutual escala- 
tion of violence, with States entering into 
conflict as patrons, sponsors or perpetrators 
of terrorist incidents, punitive responses, 
campaigns of destabilization and overt or 
covert interventions. Uncontrolled, indis- 
criminate and self-perpetuating cycles of 
violence are thus set in motion. 
One further source of violence in the 
Third World should be mentioned: with the 
achievement of functional nuclear parity 
between the superpowers, and the virtually 
uncontested recognition of spheres of influ- 
ence dominated by one or the other in the 
North, the Third World has become the 
only “safe” battleground for the contest 
between East and West. Neither superpow- 
eris yet willing to run a serious risk of direct 
nuclear confrontation, which is implied by 
any armed conflict between them in the 
industrialized world. Thus the Third World 
has become a theatre, in both the military 
and the dramatic sense, of East-West com- 
petition. Of course this competition is not a 
factor in all violent conflicts in or between 
developing countries, but it has prolonged 
and intensified many of those in which it is 
not a prominent cause. Inevitably, it adds to 
the complexity of South-South or North- 
South confrontations. 
The sources of violence in the Third 
World are thus an admixture of internal 
pressures resulting from rapid change and 
external pressures resulting from the clash 
of outside interests. Efforts to minimize and 
control violence must recognize that these 
two aspects require rather different 
approaches. The effort to minimize internal 
violence must focus on ways of increasing 
the resilience of societies; the effort to mini- 
mize external violence must focus on res- 
traint in the definition of and response to 
threat. [| 
  
SOEDJATMOKO, an Indonesian scholar in the: 
field of international development and politics, 
has been Rector of the United Nations University 
in Tokyo since 1980. The author of numerous 
publications on economic, social and cultural 
problems, he has also served as a member of the 
Indonesian Mission to the United Nations and as 
his country's ambassador to the United States. 
33

## [Page 34](069680engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 69675: 1986: Year of peace, 8: Love and peace

  
1986:Year of peace/8 
  
Ph
ot
o 
G.
 
Ni
co
la
s 
- 
Un
es
co
 
INCE 10 December 1985, a re- 
markable mural by the French 
painter Benn has hung in Unesco 
Headquarters in Paris. Entitled “Love and 
Peace”, the mural measures 7 metres by 
2.5 metres, and has been presented to 
Unesco by the painter, who has devoted his 
life and art to the cause of peace and 
understanding between people and na- 
tions. Born in 1905 at Bielstok in Russia, 
Benn settled in Paris in 1930 and estab- 
lished a reputation before the Second 
World War. Shortly before the outbreak of 
war he executed a series of seventy-two 
premonitory drawings in white crayon on 
black paper, which as he wrote later “pre- 
figured the unprecedented monstrosities 
that were to assail helpless humanity”. 
These drawings were exhibited at Unesco 
Headquarters in 1983. Benn's wartime ex- 
periences, including internment and over 
two years spent in hiding from the Gestapo, 
gave rise to a series of paintings inspired by 
verses from the Psalms. The Unesco mu- 
ral, a celebration of universal harmony 
achieved after a struggle against war and 
violence, also reaches back to the wartime 
years, originating in a drawing executed 
early in 1944. Love and peace are evoked 
on its three panels by symbolism drawn 
respectively from the plant, animal and hu- 
man worlds. The world of plants is repre- 
sented by peace in the form of stylized olive 
branches; the animal world by two birds 
kissing, sheltered by the graceful antlers of 
two young stags. The world of humankind is 
symbolized by hands uplifted in a gesture of 
prayer to a white dove, the messenger of 
peace. 
 
Editorial," Sales and Distribution Office: 
Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. 
Subscription rates 
1 year: 78 French francs. Binder for a year's issues; 
56 FF 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be 
reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from the 
UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three voucher. 
copies are sent to the editor, Signed articles reprinted must bear 
author's name. Non-copyright photos will be supplied on request. 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompanied 
by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed arti- 
cles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily - 
represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. Photo captions and headlines are written 
by the Unesco Courier staff. The boundaries on maps published 
in the magazine do not imply official endorsement or acceptance 
by Unesco or the United Nations. The Unesco Courier is pro- 
duced in microform (microfim and/or microfiche) by: {1) Unesco, 
7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris; (2) University Microfilms 
(Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A.; (3) N.C.R. Micro- 
card Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 West 40th Street, New York, 
U.S.A.; (4) Bell and Howell Co., Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, 
Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
Editorial staff (Parls) 
Assistant Editor-in-chief: Olga Radel 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
Editors: 
English: Roy Malkin 
French: Alain Lévéque 
Neda el Khazen 
Spanish: Francisco Fernandez-Santos 
Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Russian: Nikolai Kuznetsov 
Arabic: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoudi 
Braille: Frederick Potter 
Research: Violette Ringelstein 
lMustrations: Ariane Bailey 
Layout and Design: Georges Serval, George Ducret 
Promotlon: Fernando Ainsa 
Sales and subscriptions: Henry Knobil 
Speclal projects: Peggy Julien 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in- 
Chief in Paris 
Non-Headquarters editions 
German: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Japanese: Seiichiro Kojima (Tokyo) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Ram Babu Sharma (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew: Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian: 
Dutch: Paut Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra ligazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Paik Syeung-Gil (Seoui} 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwah (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene: 
Bozidar Perkovic (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: S.J. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Lina Svenzén (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larrafiaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai: Saviti Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
34 IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France} - Dép6t 1égal : C 1 - Aoit 1986 - . 
PHOTOCOMPOSITION : Ateliers de I'UNESCO - PHOTOGRAVURE-IMPRESSION : MAURY-IMPRIMEUR S.A, ZI. route d'Etampes, 45330 MALESHERBES.

## [Page 35](069680engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

For people who care about 
the rest of the world ... 
® [It serves as a valuable source of ideas and 
information for teachers and students who wish 
to obtain an accurate synthesis on subjects for 
classroom discussions and research projects. 
® It is a useful aid in language instruction and 
practice, with monthly publication in 32 language 
versions. In addition, a quarterly selection in 
Braille (English, French and Spanish) is available 
free of charge. 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
Some reasons for subscribing 
® It focuses on a variety of subjects to which 
Unesco has special access: education, the natural 
and social sciences, culture, arts, archaeology, 
history, civilization, marine and earth science ... 
e It presents interesting and well-illustrated 
articles written by authors from different coun- 
tries representing many schools of thought. 
® It offers objective reporting and a truly inter- 
national outlook on educational and scientific 
aspects of current world problems: unem- 
Join or ask your friends to join our 
international family of more than 3 
million readers around the world 
ployment, the arms race, human rights, women’s ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION 
place in society, hunger ... 
The Ourjey 
12 issues 78 French francs   
  
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National Distributor in your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors in countries not listed, along with subscription rates 
AUSTRALIA. Hunter Publications, 58a Gipps St., Collingwood, Victoria 3066; 
Publications. Educational Supplies Pty. Ltd., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale 2100, 
NSW; Periodicals: Dominie Pty. Subscriptions Dept., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale 
2100, NSW. Sub-agent: United Nations Association of Australia, P.O. Box 
175, Sth floor, Ana House, 28 Elizabeth Si, Melbourne, Victoria 3000. 
AUSTRIA. Buchhandlung Gerold and Co., Graben 31, A-1011, Vienna. 
BAHAMAS, Nassau Stationers Ltd., P.O. Box N-3138, Nassau. BAHRAIN. 
The Arabian Agencies and Distnbuting Co., Al Mutanabi St, P.O. Box 156, 
Manama. BANGLADESH. Bangladesh Books International Lid., Ittefaq Build- 
ing, 1, R.K. Mission Rd., Hatkhola, Dacca 3. BARBADOS. University of the 
West Indies Bookshop, Cave Hill Campus, P.O. Box 64, Bridoetown. 
BELGIUM. “Unesco Courier” Dufch edition only: N.V. Handelmaatschappij 
Keesing. Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurne-Antwerpen. French edilion and 
general Unesco publications agent: Jean de Lannoy, 202 Ave. du Roi, 1060 
Brussels, CCP 000-0070823-13. BOTSWANA. Botswana Book Centre, P.O. 
Box 91, Gaborone. BURMA. Trade Corporation No. 9, 550-5652 Merchant 
Streef, Rangoon. CANADA. Renouf Publishing Co. Ltd., 2182 St. Catherine 
Sf. West, Montreal, Qué. H3H 1M7. CHINA, China Nationa! Publications 
Import and Export Corporation, P.O. Box 88, Beijing. CYPRUS. “MAM”, 
Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 1722, Nicosia, 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N T.L,, Spalena 51-113 02, Prague 1; Ve Smeckach 
30, P O.B.790-111-27 Prague 1 (Permanent display); Zahranicni literatura, 11 
Soukenicka, Prague 1. For Slovakia only: Alfa Verlag.-Publishers, Hurbanovo 
nam. 6,893 31 Bratislava-CSSR. DENMARK. Munksgaard Export-OG, Tids- 
skrittservice, 35 Norra Sogade, DK-1970 Kobenhavn K. EGYPT (ARAB 
REPUBLIC OF). National Centre for Unesco Publications, No. 1 Talaat Harb 
Si., Cairo. ETHIOPIA, National Agency for Unesco, P.O. Box 2996, Addis 
Ababa. FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, Keskuskatu 1, SF-00100 iHel- 
sinki 10; Suomalainen Kirjakauppa Oy, Koivuvaarankuja 2, 01640 Vantaa 64. 
FRANCE, Librairie de I'Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Pars. CCP 
12598-48. GEAMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, Buchhaus Leipzig, Post- 
fach 140, 710 Leipzig, or from Internationalen Buchhandlungen in the G.D.R. 
FED. REP. OF GERMANY. For the Unesco Courier (German, English, French 
and Spanish editions): Mr. H. Baum, Deutscher Unesco-Kurier Vertrieb, 
Basaltstrasse 57, D5300 Bonn 3. GHANA, Presbyterian Bookshop Depot Ltd., 
P.O. Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Ltd., P.O. Box 7869, Accra; The 
University Bookshop ot Ghana, Accra; The University Bookshop of Cape 
Coast; The University Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. GREAT 
BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. HONG KONG. Federal Publications (HK) 
Lid., 5A Evergreen Industrial Mansion, 12 Yip Fat St., Abderdeen. Swindon 
Book Co., 13-15, Lock Rd., Kowloon. Hong Kong Govt. Information Services, 
Publication Centre, Baskerville House, 22 Ice St. HUNGARY. Kultura- 
Bushimport-ABT, P.O.B. 149-H-1389, Budapest 62. ICELAND. Snaebjorn 
Jonsson and Co., H.F. Hafnarstraeli 9, Reykjavik. INDIA. UBS Publishers’ 
Distnbutors Lid., 5 Ansar Road, P.O. Box NC 7015, New Delhi 110002. Orient 
in local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
Longman Lid., Kamani Marg, Ballard Estate, Bombay 400038; 17 Chitaranjan 
Ave., Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, Madras 2; 5-9-41/1 Bashir 
Bagh, Hyderabad 500001 (AP); 80/1 Mahalma Gandhi Rd., Bangalore 
560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda, Hyderabad-500001. Sub-depots: Oxford Book 
and Stationery Co., 17 Park Si., Calcutta 70016; Scindia House, New Delhi; 
Publication Unit, Ministry of Education and Culture, Ex. AFO Hutments, Dr. 
Rajendra Prasad Rd., New Delhi, 110001. INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers 
and Booksellers, 29 JI. Oto Iskandardinata 111, Jakarta; Indira P.T., JIDr. Sam 
Ratulangie 37, Jakarta Pusat IRAN. Kharazmie Publishing and Distribution 
Co., 28 Vessal Shirazi Si., Enghélab Ave., P.O. Box 314/1486, Teheran; 
Iranian Nat. Comm. for Unesco, 1188 Englab Ave., Rostam Give Building, Zip 
Code 13158, P.O. Box 11365-4498, Teheran. IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, 
Al Rashid St., Baghdad. IRELAND. The Educational Company of Ireland Ltd., 
Ballymount Rd., Walkinstown, Dublin 12. ISRAEL. A.B.C. Bookstore Lid., 
P.O. Box 1283, 71 Allenby Rd., Tel Aviv 61000. ITALY. Licosa (Libreria 
Commissionaria Sanson, S.p.A.}, Via Lamarmora 45, Casella Postale 552, 
50121 Florence. JAMAICA. Sangster's Bookstores Ltd., P.O. Box 366, 101 
Water Lane, Kingston; University of the West Indies Bookshop, Mona, Kings- 
ton. JAPAN, Eastern Book Service Inc., 37-3 Hongo 3-chome Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo 113. KENYA, East Afncan Publishing House, P.O. Box 30571, Nairobi; 
Alrica Book Services Ltd., Quran House, Miangano St, P.O. Box 45245, 
Nairobi. KOREA, Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 
64, Seoul. KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., Lid, POB 2942, Kuwait; for the 
Unesco Courier: Farafalla Press Agency, P.O. Box SAFA 4541, Kuwal. 
LESOTHO. Mazenod Book Centre, P.O. Mazenod, Lesotho, Southern Africa. 
LIBERIA. Code and Yancy Bookshops Lid., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. 
LIECHTENSTEIN. Eurccan Trust Reg. P.0O.B. 5-9494 Schaan. LIBYAN 
ARAB JAMAHIRIYA. Agency for Development of Publication and Distribu- 
tion, P.O. Box 34-35, Tripol. LUXEMBOURG. Libraine Paul Bruck, 22, 
Grande-Rue, Luxembourg. MALAWI. Malawi Book Service, Head Office, P.O. 
Box 30044 Chichiri, Blantyre 3. MALAYSIA. University of Malaya Co-opera- 
tive Bookshop, Kuala Lumpur 22-11. MALTA. Sapienzas, 26 Republic St., 
Valletta. MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Lid., 30 Bourbon St, Port-Lows. 
MONACO, Bish Library, 30 Bd. des Moulins, Monte Carlo. NEPAL. Sajha 
Prakashan Polchowk, Kathmandu. NETHERLANDS. Keesing Boeken B V., 
Joan Muyskenweg, 22, Postbus 1118, 1000 BC Amsterdam. 
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. Van Dorp-Eddine N V., P.O. Box 200, Willem- 
stad, Curagao, N.A. NEW ZEALAND. Government Publishing, P.O. Box 
14277-Kilbirnie, Wellington; 130 Oxford Terrace, P.O. Box 1721, Christ- 
church; Alma St, P.O. Box 857, Hamilton; Princes Si., P.O. Box 1104, 
Dunedin NIGERIA. The University Bookshop of Ife; The University Bookshop 
of Ibadan, P O. 286; The University Bookshop of Nsukka; The Unwersity 
Bookshop of Lages; The Ahmadu Bello University Bookshop of Zara. 
” NORWAY. Johan Grundt Tanum, P.O B. 1177 Sentrum - Oslo 1, Narvesen 
A/S; Subscription and Trade Book Service, P.O.B. 6125 Etterstad, Oslo 6; 
Universitets Bokhandelen, Universitetssentret, Posiboks 307 Blindern, Oslo 
3. PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-i-azam, P.O. Box No. 
729, Lahore 3; Unesco Publications Centre, Regional Office for Bock De- 
velopment in Asia and the Pacific, 39 Delhi Housing Society, P.O. Box 8950, 
Karachi 29. PHILIPPINES. National Book Store, Inc., 70t, Rizal Ave., Manila 
D-404. POLAND. Orpan-Imponrt, Palac Kultury | Nauki, Warsaw; Ars Polona- 
Ruch, Krakowskie Przedmiescie No.7. 00-068 Warsaw. PORTUGAL. Dias & 
Andrade Lida. Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. SEYCHELLES. 
National Bookshop, P.O. Box 48, Mahé; New Service Ltd., Kingsgate House, 
P.O. Box 131, Mahé. SIERRA LEONE. Fourah Bay, Njala University and 
Sierra Leone Diocesan Bookshops, Freetown, SINGAPORE. Federal Pub- 
lications (8) Pte Ltd. Times Jurong, 2 Jurong Port Rd., Singapore 2261. 
SOMALI DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Modern Bookshop and General, P.O. 
Box 951, Mogadiscio. SOUTH AFRICA. For the Unesco Couner (single 
copies) only: Central News Agency, P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. SRI 
LANKA. Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawala, 
P.O.B. 244, Colombo 2. SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118, 
Khartoum. SWEDEN. All publications A/B.C.E. Fritzes Kungel, Hovbekhan- 
del, Regeringsgatan 12, Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the Unesco 
Courier: Svenska FN Forbundet, Skolgrand 2, Box 150 50 5-104, 65 Stock- 
holm; Wennergren-Willlams, Box 30004-5-104, 25 Stockholm; Esselte Tids- 
kritscentralen, Gamla Brogatan 26, Box 62 - 101 20 Stockholm. 
SWITZERLAND. All publications: Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich: 
Librairie Payot, Rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 12-236; Libramnes 
Payot also in Lausanne, Basle, Berne, Vevey, Montreux, Neuchatel and 
Zunch. TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030, Dar-es-Salaam. 
THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Lid., 40-42 Charoen Krung Road, Siyaeg Phaya 
Sri, P.O. Box 402, Bangkok; Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Ave, 
Bangkok; Suksit Siam Company, 1715 Rama IV Road, Bangkok. TRINIDAD 
AND TOBAGO. National Commission for Unesco, 18 Alexandra St, St. Clair, 
Trinidad W 1. TURKEY. Haset Kitapevi A S., Istiklal Caddesi, No 469, Posta 
Kutusu 219, Beyoglu, Istanbul. UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, P.O. Box 7145, 
Kampala. UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, H M.S.0., P.O. Box 
276, London SW8 5DT, and Govt. Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Belfast, 
Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol; for scientific maps only: McCarta Ltd., 122 
King's Cross Rd., London WC1X 9DS. UNITED STATES. Unipub, 205 East 
42nd St., New York, N.Y. 10017. Orders for books and periodicals: P.O. Box 
1222, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. USSR. V/O Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga, U1, Dimitro- 
va 39, Meskva 113095. YEMEN. 14th October Corporation, P.O Box 4227, 
Aden. YUGOSLAVIA, Miadost, llica 30/11, Zagreb, Cankareva Zalozba, 
Zopitaneva 2, Lubfjana; Nolt, Terazije 27/11, Belgrade. ZAMBIA. National 
Educational Distribution Co. of Zambia Lid, PQ. Box 2664, Lusaka. 
ZIMBABWE. Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd., 67 Union Ave., Harare.

## [Page 36](069680engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
 