# [073829](073829engo.pdf) 7

## [Page 1](073829engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Emm, 
COURIER 
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
 
Volume I.—No 8. Price: 10 Cents (U.S.), 8 Pence (U.K), or 20 Francs. SEPTEMBER 1948. 
 
  
peace through education, 
standing.   
Director-General Greets 
U. N. General Assembly 
N behalf of Unesco, I should like to join in wel- 
O coming the United Nations General Assembly to 
. Paris, the city in which Unesco has now lived and 
worked for nearly two years, the capital of a country 
which has played a leading role in the work of the 
Urited Nations and ils Specialized Agencies. 
We in Unesco are working to build a foundation for 
science and culture, 
through the great media of press, radio and film. This 
is a long-term process which takes time and palience. 
The United Nations’ work at the General Assembly is 
more immediate and pressing, 
relations of the nations in the coming months and years. 
Because of this, it is upon the results of these delibera- 
tions that our own hopes for tomorrow must depend. 
We are confident that the presence of so many leaders 
and statesmen here in Paris during the next three months 
will act as a lively stimulus to us in Unesco. 
all looking to the same common goal: a world society 
in which men can live together in peace and under- 
and 
for it will govern the 
We are 
Julian HUXLEY.   


### 73830: University problems viewed at Utrecht Congress

University Problems Viewe 
At Utrecht Congress 
and trustee of the great intellectual and cultural heritage 
ll first proud duty of a university is to be the guardian 
of mankind . . . To the inheritance we have received we 
also must add our humble portion, And this we can no longer do in 
cloistered isolation . . 
in a world of rapid change.’ 
Last month, Mr. Ifor L. Evans, 
Vice Chancellor of the University 
of Wales, spoke these words and 
voiced the feeling of nearly two 
hundred university leaders from 
32 countries who gathered to- 
gether at Utrecht, Netherlands, 
from August 2-13 to discuss the 
‘common problems of universities 
"all over the world. 
The conference, called by Unes- 
co in collaboration with the 
Netherlands Government, studied 
a wide range of pressing prob- 
lems in the field of higher edu- 
cation ranging from new demands 
of increased enrolment and me- 
thods of selecting students to 
questions of finance and the role 
~ of the university in international 
understanding, 
Among the problems which 
7 aroused perhaps the greatest con- 
_ troversy, was the question: Who 
is entitled to higher education? 
- Delegates from the United States 
and some of the British Domin- 
jons favoured the “open door” 
policy of education for the many 
while English and other European 
representatives tended toward a 
policy of restricted enrolment and 
a rigid selection of students. 
{Continued on Page 6.) 
 
® Book Coupon Scheme. | 
Page 2. 
® Lin Yutang. Page 3. 
® Jacques Maritain. P. 3. 
® Unesco, U.N. Team- 
work. Center Page. 
€ Art Treasures for All 
Page 6.     
. It falls to us to strive for cultural continuity 
conference will 
A view of Unesco House, in 
Paris, where the extraordin- 
ary session of General Con. ! 
ference will convene on 
September 15.       


### 73832: Scientists create World Mental Health Federation

  
Scientists Create World 
Mental Health Federation 
EN and women everywhere, profoundly disturbed by world- 
MM wide confusion and conflict, are asking: “Can the catastrophe 
of a third world war be averted?” 
world learn to co-operate for the 
there hope for enduring peace?” 
To consider these problems and 
to study means towards their so- 
lutions, some 2,000 psychologists, 
psychiatrists and sociologists 
from 54 nations met during 
August at the International Con- 
gress on Mental Hygiene. The 
delegates formed a World Federa- 
tion for Mental Health which will 
co-operate closely with Unesco 
and the WHO. : 
Held in the London Central 
Hall, August 11-21, the congress 
had for its theme: “Mental Health 
and World Citizenship”. There 
was wide agreement among the 
delegates that a sense of inter- 
national citizenship need not 
conflict wi‘a but rather embraces 
traditional loyalties to the family, 
the community and the nations 
“which alone are no longer suf- 
ficient for the protection of the 
inter-dependent peoples of the 
world”. : 
The congress was preceded 
by an International Preparatory 
Commission which met from July 
24 to August 8 to study the re- 
ports prepared during the past 
year by nearly 5,000 men and 
women of varying professions. 
The Preparatory Commission has 
issued a 40-page statement, based 
in part on these reports, which 
was submitted for consideration 
and discussion to the congress. 
* * 
“Can the peoples of the 
good of all?” “On what basis is 
Delegates to the congress in- 
dicated almost unanimous sup- 
port for the statement prepared 
by the LP.C. and the document 
will probably be made available 
to the public in the near future. 
Unesco was represented on the 
Preparatory Commission by Dr. 
Otto Klineberg, Director of the 
“Tensions Project” and former 
professor of Psychology at Colum- 
bia University, New York. 
Unesco also assisted the work 
of the Preparatory Commission by 
a grant of $10,000, and the Con- 
‘gress by another grant of $5.000 
to enable delegates from war- 
devastated Member States. to 
attend the meetings. Dr. Julian 
Huxley, Director-General, Dr. 
Arvid Brodersen, Acting Head of 
the Social Sciences Department 
and Dr. Klineberg addressed the 
congress for the Organization. 
Dr. Brodersen stressed the in- 
terest of Unesco in the work of 
the congress, declaring: “Mental 
health, when conceived in its 
broad terms, becomes a problem 
of human relations, of interna- 
tional relations, of community 
living, of world citizenship. 
“This very concept is basic to 
the whole philosophy of Unesco 
—and is, indeed, implied in the 
first sentence of its constitution.” 
(Continued on Page 7.)   
discuss a report by 
  
Unesco Essay, Poster 
Contest Begins 
This Month 
A Unesco-sponsored essay 
and poster contest aimed at 
encouraging knowledge about 
the United Nations and its 
Specialized Agencies will begin 
this month in Unesco Mem- 
ber States. 
rd 
Two competitions for stu- 
dents have been arranged. 
The first will be open to 
young people between the ages 
of 15 and 18 and the second 
Entries may be submitted in 
either of two forms: an essay 
of between 1,000 and 2,000 
words, or a poster not exceed- 
ing 48x66 cms. 
A preliminary selection of 
the essays and posters receiv- 
ed by Unesco from Member 
States will be made by the 
Secretariat. The most out- 
standing entries will then be 
submitted to an independent 
panel of judges who will make 
the awards for Unesco. 
Mrs. Chen Yuan (China), 
Mme. Vige Langevin (France), 
Miss Cecilia Meireles (Brazil), 
Professor Jean Piaget {Switz- 
erland) and Mr. Herbert Read 
(U.K.) have agreed to serve ts 
judges. It is hoped that Sir 
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (In- 
dia) will also join the panel.     
International Council 
For Philosophy 
And Humanities 
Meeting at Unesco House in 
Paris for a 4-day conference, 
September 8-11, world scholars will 
study the setting up of an Inter- 
national Council for Philosophy 
and Humanistic Studies, similar 
to the International Council of 
Sclentific Unions. ~~ 
to those from 12 up to 15.) 
  
- oat 
ession 
AX extraordinary session of the Unesco General Conference is meeting in Paris on September 15th 
to consider where and when its regular Third Session, which was originally planned to meet in 
Beirut, Lebanon, in October, should be convened. 
This special session was made necessary by the disturbed situation in the Middle East which may 
require the postponement of the Third Session or its meeting in another part of the world. 
The the Executive Board on the Third Session and 
will examine the possibility of 
calling the next session in Geneva 
or Paris, should it prove impos- 
sible to meet in Beirut. 
At its ninth session early this 
month, the Executive Board re- 
commended that the General 
Conference's Third Session be 
held in Beirut in November, uns 
less political or military develop- 
ments in the Middle East make 
this impossible. 
The extraordinary session will 
be under the chairmanship of the 
Head of the Mexican Delegation 
and will meet in the main confer- 
ence hall at Unesco House. The 
discussions are scheduled to last 
several days, but the work is 
expected to be completed before 
the opening of the United Na- 
tions General Assembly in Paris 
on September 21st. 
The Conference will discuss the 
date and venue of the Fourth 
Session and a temporary modifi- 
cation of the rules of procedure 
to make it possible to give effect 
to the decisions of the extra 
ordinary session, 
During the meeting of the 
Executive Board, a telegram was 
received from Dr. Charles Malik, 
Lebanese delegate to the Econo- 
mic and Social Council of the 
UN, reiterating his Government's 
request that the Third Session of 
the Conference be held as plann- 
ed in Beirut, 
Beirut Recommended 
After a three-day discussion of 
the problems connected with the 
Third Session, the Executive 
Board unanimously passed the 
following resolution: 
“Considering, on the one hand, 
the decision of the Second Session 
of the General Conference fixing 
the place of the Third Session... 
at Beirut and, on the other hand, 
the political situation in the Near 
East, - 
“Decides: 
“L—To submit to the extra- 
ordinary session of the General 
Conference in Paris on September 
15, a complete report on the 
question, to which report the 
Director-General shall attach any 
necessary information relating to 
the organization of the Confer 
ence, 
“IT.—To recommend to the ex- 
traordinary session of the Gen- 
eral Conference the following two 
solutions listed in order of prefer- 
ence: 
“(1) The maintenance of the 
decision of the Mexico Confer- 
ence to hold the third extra- 
ordinary session of the Confer 
ence at Beirut in November, uns 
less prevented by grave obstacles, 
“(2) If the Extraordinary Session 
of the General Conference con- 
siders that the political or mili- 
tary developments in the Middle 
East render it impossible to give 
effect to the decision taken at 
Mexico, 
“either (a) the convening of the 
Third Session of the General 
Conference in November in 
Geneva, 
“or (b) the convening of the 
Third Session of the General 
Conference in Paris in Decem- 
ber and the submission of a pros 
posal that the Conference ad- 
| journ to Beirut at a later date.

## [Page 2](073829engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER Vol. 1.—Neo 8, 
 


### 73833: Stix Pix Biz Nix

“STIX PIX BIZ NIX” 
¢QTIX PIX BIZ NIX.” 
These are “English” words. 
They are an authentic quo- 
tation from a United States 
. periodical called Variety, a trade 
journal of the stage, screen and 
radio profession. Far from being 
a joke or a misprint, these four 
words constitute an important 
piece of factual information. 
Upon reading them, an American 
actor, film producer, theatrical 
agent or critic, a film distributor 
or cinema usher, takes notice of 
the fact that receipts from sales 
of tickets of admission to motion 
picture showings in provincial 
theatres are extremely poor. The 
uninitiated reader, however, is 
only mystified by such pro- 
fessional jargon. 
Now, let us compare these four 
words with the following state- 
ment: “Stimulation, through 
mass communications media of 
the free flow of information con- 
¢erning themes of the Unesco 
fields of interests.” This is also 
a piece of factual information, 
which is more or less unintelligi- 
ble to a layman. It is a Unesco 
phrase which describes a task 
and invites specialists to convert 
this curtain of words into deeds. 
It is then the job of the Mass 
Communications Projects Divi- 
sion to translate Unesco pro- 
fessional jargon into plain lan- 
guage. 
~ As soon as we “translators” of 
the Projects Division settled 
down to work last June, we 
realized that our aim must be 
to arouse interest, gain confi- 
dence and secure co-operation 
and understanding from mass 
communication creative agents, 
which translated reads: Befriend 
people who write and edit news- 
papers, who broadcast radio pro- 
grammes and who make films. 
We found it extremely dangerous 
to throw at them our own ver- 
sion of “Stix Pix Biz Nix.” 
Writers and editors, broadcasters 
and film-makers are busy people. 
They are busy locking for good 
such as congresses, conventions, 
conferences, seminars, exhibits 
and festivals aimed at further- 
ing understanding among nations 
and advancement of human wel- 
fare. Periodical appendices to this 
section. may be published in the 
course of the year. 
The second section will be a 
comprehensive calendar of the 
past. Internationally selected 
entries will trace day by day an- 
hiversaries of great and small 
By 
George VOSKOVEC 
Member of the Ideas Group, 
Projects  Divtsion, Depart- 
ment of Mass Communications   
deeds, of famous and less famous 
heroes, of recognized and for- 
gotten milestones of Man's road 
to freedom, wisdom and brother- 
hood. Turning points in the lives 
of great nations will be recalled, 
side by side with humble gestures 
of small communities and hi- 
therto anonymous prophets. 
Thus in 1950, the calendar will 
remember that 2.200 years ago, 
Asoka, the bloody conqueror of 
India became an ardent apostle 
of peace. It will recall that 19 
centuries ago, Aerataos of Cap- 
padocia, discovered the impor- 
tance of a milk diet for the 
treatment of certain diseases. 
Jean de Rotrou will share the 
role of the year’s heroes with 
Thomas Masaryk, with Goethe, 
and France's Lous IX. The 350th 
anniversary of Giordano Bruno's 
death at the stake will be 
pointed out as one of the black 
days of the year, for the calen- 
dar proposes to also record some 
of the grim crossroads at which 
the world took a step backwards. 
The first meteorological bulletin 
will be given due credit, and the 
first day of spring will be dedi- 
cated to the anonymous inventor 
of the plough. 
The calendar should by no 
means be visualized as an ency- 
clopaedia of science, education 
and culture. Our conception is 
rather one of a colourful alma- 
nac, a prayer-book for a three 
hundred and sixty-five day 
memorial service to the great and 
the humble whose universe we 
have inherited. 
It is to be hoped that the 
Calendar of World Affairs, as a 
handbook for men and women of 
goodwill, will be a manifesto 
in plain language of Mass Com- 
munications’ Faith in the uni- 
versal appeal of Unesco’s news 
material—news material of high 
topical value springing from 
sources of tomorrow as well as 
from an ageless yesterday.   
Micro film Readers 
 
Bixteen microfilm readers 
have been distributed to the 
seven war-damaged countries,   
Above, view of microfilm reader in operation. 
» 
respective Paris Embassies of ° 
x A ATH gr ~ dis I 
» 
<   
it was announced by Unesco 
on August 14. 
The microfilm readers, the 
first of a total of 48 allocated 
to institutions impoverished 


### 73834: Book Coupon Scheme experiment under way

Book Coupon Scheme 
Experiment Under Way 
$10 
TNE 
 
LA J HAS 
i SCO BOOKCOUPON 
ORGAN ISATION OEE N re UNIES 
Four L'ERUCATION 
CULTURE 
— —————  ——.— — 
$10; 
  
Q NM ' TrYO NG 
or damaged by war, are now 
being transhipped to libraries 
in Belgium, Czechoslovakia, 
France, Greece, the Nether- 
lands, Norway and Poland. 
The microfilm readers are 
used by students and re- 
searchers in order to read on 
film strips books which are 
not available in ordinary 
form, 
The remaining 32 apparatus 
will be distributed within the 
next four weeks. Unesco is 
now studying possibilities of 
supplying the recipients of 
microfilm strips in the form 
of credits put at their dis      
  
   
   
 
  
  
“wn sarah ™ . "aati ak 8 } § X RR 
stories. They are in search of ir a 1471 ng A, REOULE AAS . posal in France, UK. and 
sharp, striking colourful h facts. - " wr AE ELE ALL - he A [TAREE » "NN san AEE the U.S. : 
They want drama and “human . i » “ VERA 
interest.” Qu:te naturally they ~ NH Arash pe - OR Fad bei 32 
get very irritated when con- TIL i. 0 TIE YY fo . 
fronted with obscure abstrac- ' , yy AEE EEE NLT ties W. WL» Wis) A" Ths eo Cl . H 
tions. oT No . whe cay thany +84 Py ry ere Arig AEA Li hd) MAR "ees AER (EEE WN] hyo Fas LI) . ’ oP ‘i caring ouse 
ENA TE AE A MLA IS AEA : ’ ETRE DN TIA RTE SIE HASLER I ter, 
Yet we believe, that Interaa- Aah bees FART RANA MY haan REAR ER I AT EE EEL RIA TS I 
tional co-operation in the fields AAA ALE MEE SEL Bast ian aan hand Bred For Mass 
of education, science and culture AA a Cv E_—_— } 
js one of the best stories in the | ‘ KY Ne Neen . 
world. We believe that the ex- 
E d t Co. 
change of cultural influences and RATT oh Tr ; p u C a 1 0 n 
the sharing of human progress —— . 
is full of sharp, striking, colour-| — Isesss wv ives ew ooree ee oe NE of the important parts of 
ful facts. We believe that the — r— : me — hy pr— — Unesco’s Fundamental Edu- 
incessant struggle for peace is ail LLL DE TTL CMA IIINEY REscise sr ren RE, to cation progra e is the Clearing 
the greatest drama ever played. . _— — === | House which is designed as a link 
As for “human interest”, who between governments, organiza- 
dares to doubt that peace has THE airplane and the radio the idea of creating a “Book ing in the experiment will have| tions and individuals facing the 
Number One priority? 
How then should we convince 
the hard-working and hardboiled 
press, radio and film people in 
the four corners of the world, of 
the validity of these Unesco 
beliefs? Simply by supplying 
them with down-to-earth facts, 
and perhaps, at the same time, 
by giving them a helping hand. 
Why not attempt, while calling 
their attention to world co-opera- 
tion, to offer them a tool of 
their trade—a practical little gift, 
a token of our appreciation for 
their difficult and responsibility- 
laden craft. 
Of course, we are in no posi- 
tion to build a colossal printing 
press for them, or a powerful 
wireless transmitter, nor can we 
dedicate the world’s largest and 
best equipped film studio. 
Couldn't we supply them, at 
least, with a memento, a souve- 
nir, an object of daily usefulness, 
like an address book or a desk 
calendar? 
This is how the project of 
Calendar of World Affairs was 
conceived. By Christmas, 1949, 
Unesco intends to present press, 
radio and film specialists of the 
world with a year-book of down- 
to-earth facts concerning the 
“human interest” storv Number 
I, the story of mankind's effort 
to achieve peace and happiness. 
The book is to be divided into 
two main sections. The first 
will list all events of interna- 
tional co-operation in the fields 
of education, science and culture, 
scheduled for the comming year;    
have reduced physical fron- 
tiers to little more than lines on 
a map And yet, many barriers 
still exist which prevent people 
in one country from exchanging 
ideas, information or materials 
with their fellow citizens in other 
nations. Unesco has been attempt- 
ing to remove or lower some 
of these barriers by encouraging 
the exchange of fellowships, the 
creation of an international ins- 
titute of the press and informa- 
tion, promoting the improvement 
of international copyright sys- 
tems and facilitating the move- 
ment of books and periodicals 
~ between nations. 
Even before the war many 
countries found it difficult to 
acquire books or magazines from 
abroad. Today this problem pre- 
sents even vaster difficulties. In 
an even greater number of count- 
ries, currency restrictions limit 
severely or prevent completely 
payments across national fron- 
tiers. They constitute a formi- 
dable barrier to the internation- 
al exchange of publications 
which is essential if mutual 
understanding is to be maim- 
tained. 
~ 
An individual! who wishes to 
order a book from g foreign 
publisher often finds that he 
must pay in “hard” currency 
—which he does not possess and 
cannot obtain—bhecause he lives 
in a “soft” currency country, The 
problem is the same all over the 
world not only for the individual 
but for institutions as well. 
In an effort to overcome this 
difficulty, Unesco has conceived 
Coupon” which would make for- 
eign purchases easier. The Book 
Coupon Scheme has been devel- 
oped into a practical plan and 
Unesco is now almost ready to 
put this plan into operation on 
an experimental basis. 
What is Unesco’s Book Coupon 
Scheme and how will it work? 
Simply defined, the Coupon 
Scheme is a means of facilitating 
Dr. J. ZUCKERMAN 
Head, Unesco Clearing House 
for Publications.     
the purchase of educational, 
scientific and cultural publica- 
tions in foreign countries by the 
use of a special coupon backed 
by “hard” currency. It is 
designed principally, to help 
“soft” currency countries to 
obtain publications from “hard” 
currency areas. 
The scheme requires a “hard” 
currency backing or reserve to 
enable the agency issuing the 
book coupons (in the experimen- 
tal period this will be Unesco) to 
sell them against “soft” curren- 
cies. These currencies will tnen 
be redeemable by the issuing 
agency in “hard” currency, 
During the experimental per- 
jod (which will not exceed one 
year), Unesco will make avails 
able for the introduction of the 
Book Coupon Scheme a “hard” 
currency reserve of $100,000. In 
view of this limited amount, the 
number of countries participat- 
to be limited to no more than 
five or six. 
Book coupons will be sold in 
denominations of 25 cents, $1.00, 
$3.00 and $10.00 and national 
distributing agencies will be set 
up in each participating count- 
ry. All the buyer of books 
in a participating country will 
have to do is purchase book 
coupons from his national dis- 
tributing agency by paying for 
them in his national currency. 
The purchaser will use the 
book coupons in the same way 
he would a cheque, le. either 
send it directly to a bookseller 
abroad, if he knows the price of 
the publication he desires, or 
make preliminary enquiries re- 
garding the cost and then send 
the coupons, It is also foreseen 
that books may be ordered 
through local booksellers. The 
coupons will be used to pay for 
foreign books, periodical sub- 
scriptions, or even single issues 
of magazines, reprints ete. 
Booksellers authorized to par- 
ticipate in the Book Coupon 
Scheme will accept coupons 
received from abroad. During the 
experimental period, however, 
the number of authorized book- 
sellers In each participating 
country will be limited to three 
or four. Coupons will be pre- 
sented {0 Unesco at regular 
intervals for reimbursement. A 
small discount, agreed upon by 
participating booksellers, will be 
deducted from the face value of 
the coupons by Unesco to cover 
the overhead expenses of the 
scheme. 
(Continued on Page &) 
  
common problems of fundamen- 
tal education in the different 
parts of the world. 
The Clearing House has now 
begun to operate. Mr. L. Fernig, 
a South African with long ex- 
perience in the field of funda- 
mental education publications 
has been named to direct this 
activity. 
The idea of pooling experience 
runs through most Unesco activ- 
ities. In this case, focus is given 
to one broad aspect of education, 
but many other Unesco depart~ 
ments — notably Exchange of 
Information—actively share in 
the work of the Clearing House. 
For the next few months the 
main concern of the fundamental 
education Clearing House is to 
collect data: lists of fundamental 
educators in all the Member 
States; accounts of work done; 
samples of materials used. The 
interest of the Clearing House is 
technical, not superficial or po- 
pular, which means that original 
sources have to be tapped wher 
ever possible. 
The task of gathering data is 
slow and not very spectacular, but 
it is extremely important. By the 
end of the year the Clearing 
House will be able to pass to its 
more active programme—making 
available what has been collected. 
The first issue of a quarterly 
Bulletin of Fundamental Educa~ 
tion will be published in January. 
As the programme develops 
during the next twelve months, 
various other activities will be 
called for. The form these take 
will be determined largely by the 
Fundamental Education field 
workers In Member States,

## [Page 3](073829engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

"Vol. 1.—No 8. UNESCO COURIER 


### 73835: Orient - Occident cultural co-operation stressed

  
TWO APPROACHES TO UNITY 
  
Orient - Occident Cultural 
Co-operation Stressed 
HEOPHILE GAUTIER said in 
hig preface to Mlle de Mau- 
pin, “I know that there are some 
who prefer mills to churches, and 
bread for the body to that for the 
soul. To such I have nothing to 
say. They deserve to be eco- 
nomists in this world and also in 
the next.” Since Gautier wrote 
this, the professors of the hu- 
manities, particularly the behav- 
iourists, have chosen apparently 
to march in the direction of the 
economists, and a publicist now- 
adays feels a little apologetic 
and ashamed of himself if he 
cannot give the percentage of 
export of Abyssinian cotton in 
1948, as compared with 
of vital concern to the peace and 
prosperity of the world. Prob- 
lems of ideas are created which 
demand the concentration of 
the highest thinking intelligence 
of Asia to solve them. 
On the positive side, a cultural 
interchange between the East 
and the West can be productive 
of results of the most far-reach- 
ing consequence. When one talks 
about cultural interchange, the 
most important and the most 
fruitful will obviously be that 
greater importance being laid on 
the cultural values and less em- 
phasis being laid on the economic 
values. 
All Asiatic philosophies are 
monistic and idealistic, and to- 
day our traditional concepts of 
matter and the nineteenth- 
century mechanistic physics have 
undergone a vast revolution that 
the layman hardly realizes. 
The duty of philosophy today 
is no less than the rediscovery 
of the concept of man. Thinkers 
and scholars like Professor Hock- 
between, the Otient and the ing of Harvard and Professor 
’ Northrop of Yale have occupied 
Rudyard Kipling said that the themselves with such diggings 
into the fundamental 
By problems.   that in 1938. Since good 
things need always to be 
sald again and again, 
today we can improve 
upon Théophile Gau- 
~ tler’s statement and say, 
“They deserve to be 
professors in this life   
Dr. LIN YUTANG, 
Noted chinese philosopher and author of “Impor- 
tance of Living”, “Wisdom of China and India” 
etc.., who recently joined Unesco as Head of the 
Arts and Letters Division. 
After all, a contact of 
ideas through race mix- 
tures and the meeting 
of different cultures is 
one of the most power- 
ful forces in history. 
The modern interna-   
and the life hereafter.” 
As Gautier says in the same 
context, “Society is suffering; it 
is a prey to a great internal 
anguish.” This is as true today 
88 a hundred years ago; only the 
symptoms of the malaise have 
a hundred years to develop and 
become apparent even to the 
most unthinking men, The ang- 
uish behind Europe and Asia 
today is a spiritual anguish as 
much as it is an economic 
anguish. 
‘The Ants Will’ 
The inadequacy of current 
world political coacepts to deal 
with the world political realities 
has become wore apparent; 
hence the hard pessimism of the 
poets and the frantic efforts of 
the politicians to provide for us 
a sound basis for peace. In the 
World War I, we hoped to make 
the world safe for democracy; in 
the postwar world today, we have 
to lower our target—we’ll be 
quite happy if we can have a 
world safe for homo sapiens. 
- In a debate over the air last 
year with Dr. Shapley on the 
twentieth-century civilization, I 
urged the immediate importance 
of adequate planning for peace 
and asked him what was the 
value of developing cancer 
research to save the patients if 
in the next war, both the doc- 
tors, nurses and the cancer 
patients were killed outright by 
an atom bomb, and who would 
survive? Dr. Shapley -curtly 
replied that the ants would. 
What comforting thought for 
man, who in Victorian times was 
stil the “crown of the crea- 
tion”, 
Security 
The most horrible word that 
has silently crept into current use 
today is the world “security”. 
Every day we are talking about 
security. We are talking about 
security because we haven't got 
it, the victorious no more than 
the vanquished. We are talking 
about security as a man suffering 
from stomach ulcer likes to talk 
about his stomach. Buf if there 
is no security, it is because the 
accepted ideas of our age, the 
current coins of our thinking, are 
inadequate or outdated by the 
march of economic - political 
events, because “society is prey 
to an internal anguish”. In other 
words, there must be a recon- 
struction on the level of ideas, 
and we must think fast. 
That there is an upheaval of 
ideas in present-day Europe is 
axiomatic. That there is an 
equal upheaval of ideas in Asia 
is perhaps less appreciated. 
Nascent nationalism and the des- 
fruction of the spiritual founda- 
tions of eastern cultures create 
@ ohaos in the realm of ideas and 
of political movements thai are 
East and West shall meet and 
respect each other only as man 
to man But a qualification is 
necessary. they can meet and 
understand and respect each 
other, not as one soldier to 
another, as Kipling childishly 
implies, but as a man of ideas to 
another—not as fighters, but, 
reluctantly I must use the word, 
as philosophers. 
It is quite apparent that the 
East needs the West and the 
West needs the East, each in its 
groping toward a more satisfac- 
tory design for living, and in 
humility and mutual respect we 
shall meet. This is quite apparent 
to everybody except the sub- 
scribers to Kipling's cocky “civiliz- 
ing mission” theory (of which 
Mussolini was one) and the 
theory of “Give everybody a 
quart of milk a day and that is 
that”. oo 
A synthesis for a culture of a 
richer and better-balanced type 
is lying somewhere, ready to be 
worked out by the mind of man, 
a synthesis of the materialistic 
and the idealistic concept of 
life, of science and mysticism, of 
tional contact of cul- 
tures can either destroy us and 
leave behind a Kurfurstendamm 
of wrecked ideals and rubble 
heaps of monstrous confusion, 
or bring mutual enrichment and 
a revival of sound thinking. 
It is » to us to determine 
whether we shall gain or lose 
by the meeting of different cul- 
tures, and whether the -oppor- 
tunity of contacts lying before 
us shall make for chaos or for 
restitution of a richer and better 
culture. The world is a rich 
world before us, intellectually, 
and more labourers must be called 
to the field, for the planting and 
the harvest. 
It is recognized that Chinese 
and Hindu philosophies are 
among the important original 
philosophies of the world and 
may make important contribu- 
tions, if systematic deep studies 
are undertaken. Hindu mys- 
ticism and avowal of the essen- 
tial spirituality of the universe 
and Chinese positivism and em- 
phasis on the adequacy and 
value of direct, unanalyzed aesthe- 
tic experience should merge into 
the currents of modern thought. 
(Continued on Page 6.) 
  
Unesco Exhibit Opens 
in Paris September 15 
N an effort to convey a 
graphic over-all picture of 
how Unesco opcrates, what 
its aims are, what it has already 
been able to do and the things 
it hopes to do in the near future, 
the Bureau of Public Information 
is preparing a special exhibit in 
the Main Hall of Unesco House, 
scheduled to open on September 
15. 
The exhibit, prepared to coin- 
cide with the opening of the Ex- 
traordinary Session of Unesco’s 
General Conference and the UN 
General Assembly, will show resi- 
dents and visitors in Paris how 
Unesco, as a Specialized Agency, 
fits into the family of the United 
Nations system working for the 
cause of peace. 
The exhibit will be divided into 
eight huge, colourful panels sur- 
rounded by many smaller ones 
grouped in a semi-circle around 
the main lobby of the former 
Hotel Majestic (now Unesco 
House). A central, introductory 
panel will outline Unesco’s rela- 
tionship with the parent body at 
Lake Success and the relation 
between Unesco and the othex 
Specialized Agencies of UN. 
The Second Session of the 
Unesco General Conference in 
Mexico City approved a pro. 
gramme for 1948 grouped under 
six main headings: Reconstruc- 
tion, Communication, Education, 
Cultural Interchange, Human 
and Social Relations and Natural 
Sciences. The Unesco exhibit, by 
the use of maps, charts, photo- 
graphs and drawings will depict 
“Unesco in Action” in these 
fields throughout the world. 
Unesco believe for example that 
its most urgent single task is to 
help overcome the crucial situa- 
tion in the fields of science, edu- 
cation and the arts throughout 
the war-devastated regions of 
Europe and Asia. One of the exhi- 
bit panels by the use of image 
and word, will emphasize this 
problem. 
Adjoining panels will {race 
Unesco’s work with Children’s 
Villages, and Youth Camps, the 
Organization’s co-operation with 
the Temporary Educational Coun- 
cil for Educational Reconstrue. 
tion (T.I.C.E.R.), tending to de- 
monstrate how Unesco is stimu- 
lating and co-ordinating volun- 
tary efforts for reconstruction. 
The remaining panels will 
present similar pictorial treat. 
ment of the other aspects of 
Unesco’s work, explaining educa- 
tional seminars in Great Britain, 
the U.S. and Czechoslovakia, the 
International Theatre Institute, 
the Book Coupon Scheme, the 
Hylean Amazon Institute, the 
Field Science (‘o-operation Offices 
in Latin America, Egypt, India, 
China, etc. 
Conceived as a permanent part 
of Unesco House, the exhibit will 
be open to the publie after 
September 15, 


### 73836: Pragmatic viewpoints on human rights

  
Pragmatic Viewpoint 
On Human Rights 
PROFESSOR MARITAIN SAYS 
CONFLICTING IDEOLOGIES NO OBSTACLE 
THE drawing up of 
an International 
Declaration of Hu- 
man Rights is 
present one of th: 
most difficult task 
in the hands of the 
United Nations, and 
one must not expect 
too much of it, states 
M. Jacques Maritain, 
distinguished philo- 
sopher and French 
Ambassador to the 
Holy See. 
. M. Maritain, how- 
ever, adds, with 
guarded optimism, 
that “if we adopt a 
practical viewpoint 
and concern ourselves 
no longer with seek- 
ing the basis and 
philosophic  signifi- 
cance of Human 
Rights, but only with 
their statement and 
enumeration, agree- 
ment on the funda- 
mental rights of the 
individual is pos- 
sible”, 
M. Maritain ex- 
presses these views 
in an introduction to 
a collection of the 
most significant texts received 
from world thinkers in the 
course of a survey by Unesco on 
the philosophic bases of Human 
Rights. The book will soon be 
published in English and French 
editions. 
In this introduction, M. Mari- 
tain analyses the various aspects 
of the problem and reviews the 
chances of reaching tangible 
results. . 
The chief obstacle to agreement 
on an international declaration 
of Human Rights, he says, is the 
existence of many schools of 
thought, “each of which brings 
its particular view and justifica- 
tion of individual rights, leaning 
in various degrees towards the 
classical or the revolutionary in- 
terpretation”. 
How, M. Maritain asks, can we 
imagine an agreement of minds 
between men who are gathered 
together precisely in order to ac- 
complish a common intellectual 
task... and who hot only belong 
to different cultures and civiliza- 
tions, but are of antagonistic spi- 
ritual associations and schools of 
thought?” 
The writer provides the answer 
by explaining that agreement is 
possible if it is “given a pragmatic 
rather than theoretical approach... 
to make practical conclusions ac- 
ceptable to both parties as points 
of convergence in practice, how- 
ever opposed the theoretic view- 
points. 
“Where it is a questioh of ra- 
tional interpretation and justifi- 
cation, of speculation or theory, 
the problem of Human Rights 
involves the whole structure -of 
moral and metaphysical (or anti- 
metaphysical) convictions held 
by each of us. So long as minds 
are united in faith or philosophy, 
there will be mutual conflicts 
between interpretations and jus- 
tifications. 
“Is it, therefore, surprising, M. 
Maritain further asks, that, while 
all... systems quarrel over the 
whys and wherefores, yet in their 
practical conclusions they pres- 
cribe rules of behaviour identical 
for a given age and culture?” 
Two Antagonistic Groups 
M. Maritain then deals with 
Human Rights from the point of 
view of philosophic doctrine. 
“Men, he says, are today divided... 
into Iwo antagonistic groups: 
those who, to a greater or lesser 
extent, explicitly accept, and 
those who, to a greater or lesser 
extent, explicitly reject Natural 
Law as the basis of those rights. 
“In the eyes of the first, the 
requirements of his being endow 
 
Jacques MARITAIN. 
man with certain fundamental 
and inalienable rights antecedent 
in nature and superior to society, 
and are the source whence social 
life itself, originates and develops, 
with the duties and rights which 
that implies. 
“For the second school, man’s 
rights are relative to the histo- 
rical developments of society and 
are themselves constantly varia- 
ble and in a state of flux; they 
are a product of society itself as 
it advances with the forward 
march of history.” 
Such an ideological contrast 
is irreducible and no theoretical 
reconciliation is possible, but if 
we follow a practical viewpoint, 
Professor Maritain goes on, “we 
have before us an entirely differ« 
ent picture, where no theoretical 
simplification is any more in 
question; then rot only is agree- 
ment possible between the mems- 
bers of opposing philosophic 
schools, but it must be said 
plainly that the operative factors 
are... less the schools of philo- 
sophy than currents of 
thoughts...” 
Collective Intelligence 
The writer then emphasizes 
that “admission of a particular 
category of rights is not the ex- 
clusive possessior. of any school 
of thought and the gain of col- 
lective intelligence under the ine 
fluence of its several crosse 
currents go far beyond the dispu- 
tations of the schools”. And, in 
practice, everyone sees that these 
rights, being human, are subject, 
like every other human thing, to 
modification and limitation. 
Professor Maritain illustrates 
his view by giving the following 
example: “If a criminal, he says, 
can justly be condemned to lose 
his life, it is because he has, by 
his crime, deprived himself, not 
of his right to existence, but 
rather of the possibility of 
demanding that right with jus- 
tice: morally, he has cut himself 
off from membership of the human 
community, as far as concerns 
the use of the fundamental and 
‘inalienable’ right which the 
penalty imposed prevents his 
exercising.” 
It is entirely normal, the 
French philosopher thinks, that 
the various acknowledged rights 
of the individual should be mut- 
ually limitative and in particular 
that economic and social rights, 
“the rights of man as a social 
animal, canhot take their place 
in human history without some 
restriction upon the freedom and 
rights of man as an individual”, 
(Continued om Page 8.)

## [Page 4](073829engo.pdf#page=4) 4

### 73839: UNESCO-UN: teamwork embraces five continents

   
Trygve Lie (center), Secretary-General of U.N. confers with leaders of the Specialized Agencies during 
recent co-ordination meeting in Geneva. 


### 73837: Educators study UN for classroom teaching

Educators Study U.N. 
For Classroom Teaching 
HE late Frarklin I. Roo- 
1) sevelt used to sav that 
there could never be peace 
on earth until all nations 
of the world became “Good 
Neighbours.” The United Na- 
tions was created in the hope of 
achieving the world good neigh- 
bourliness which Roosevelt 
sought, by bringing peoples and 
countries closer together and re- 
ducing the differences which 
keep them apart. But the success 
of the United Nations depends, 
essentially, on the“ measure of 
support and understanding that 
the citizens of the world give it. 
For nearly two years, in 1947 
and 1948, Unesco made world- 
wide surveys of teaching about 
-the U.N. and its Specialized 
Agencies in elementary and se- 
condary schools. From the in- 
formation obtained, it was dis- 
covered that teaching on this 
subject was scattered both in 
intensity and geographicaliy, and 
that entire areas of the world 
had not yet begun to give ins- 
truction on the U.N. 
To help remedy this situation, 
Unesco and the United Nations 
joined forces this summer in 
sponsoring a six-week’s Seminar 
at Adelphi College, near the U.N. 
headquarters at Lake Success, 
under the direction of the dis- 
tinguished Chinese scholar, Dr. 
Y.R. Chao, professor at the Uni- 
versity of California. Fifty-two 
educators from 28 countries there 
gained a deeper insight and 
understanding of the work of the 
United Nations and its Special 
ized Agencies. Participants ex- 
plored the best methods of 
presenting the U.N. system to 
children and young people up to 
the age of 18. They examined 
and criticized existing materials 
for such teaching purposes, and 
prepared new materials for the 
schools of their own countries. 
At the close of that period. 
this heterogeneous group rep- 
resenting many cultures had 
rapidly developed into an inter- 
national community imbued with 
understanding, mutual respect 
and co-operation. 
Practical classroom 
materials 
One of the most tangible 
results of the 1948 Seminar is a 
series of practical classroom 
materials on the U.N. and its 
Specialized agencies, prepared by 
the participants. These mate- 
rials, which were produced in 
several languages, cover a wide 
variety of topics and include 
filmstrips, recordings, pamphlets 
and study guides. 
Recordings, for example?” were 
made in English on the Security 
Council and the Palestine ques- 
tion and on the World Health 
Organization in Egypt and in the 
Philippines. A radio script was 
written for young children in 
Norwegian and in English on the 
Food and Agricultural Organiza- 
tion. The programme also in- 
cluded a visit to Lake Success 
and the International Control of 
Atomic Energy. 
A novel on U.N. for young 
children was begun in Norwegian 
and a study guide for teachers 
on Unesco was also started in 
German. Several papers were 
prepared as general outlines for 
Ministries of Education or - for 
United Nations officials. Among 
these were memoranda prepared 
for Pakistan, Chile, Uruguay and 
Canada on Teaching about the 
United Nations and a paper on 
presenting the U.N. in the Arab 
World. 
More Effective Teaching 
Participants also drafted a 
plan. for making teaching about 
the U.N. ang its Agencies more 
effective. This stressed the pre- 
paration of materials on U.N. 
activities in language other than 
English and French, the encou- 
ragement of regional and na- 
tional seminars and the joint 
U.N.-Unesco sponsorship of 10- 
day conferences in international 
centers. 
Members of the Seminar made 
a special trip to Hyde Park, 
where Mrs. Roosevelt spoke to 
them informally on the work of 
the Commission on Human 
Rights. 
After their return to their 
home countries, the Seminar par- 
ticipants will undoubtedly be- 
come leaders in the interpreta- 
tion of the United Nations and 
its Specialized agencies to chil- 
dren, young people and adults in 
schools around the world. 


### 73838: World body strives to lower news barriers

  
To Lower News Barriers 
HAT happens to a foreign 
WwW correspoadent’s news dis- 
patch when he steps into 
a cable office to send a story to 
his newspaper or news agency ab 
home? Does a censors blue pen- 
cil blot out the passages that are 
considered unfavourable? Does 
the dispatch lie around the cable 
office for hours unsent, while his- 
tory rushes past? 
And what went into the making 
of the story? Was the corres- 
pondent at liberty to 
where he wished to gather infor- 
mation? Did government officials 
talk to him freely or was he 
limited to a government approved 
press release? Finally, when he 
sat down at a typewriter to com- 
pose his story, to tell to the peo- 
ple of his country what happened 
that day in this foreign land, did 
he have to choose his words care- 
fully, lest tomorrow he be sum- 
moned before an official and 
given a curt notification of expul- 
sion? 
These are questions which are 
a common concern of Unesco and 
the United Nations. Free flow of 
information, not alone that con- 
tained in newspapers, but in ra- 
dio broadcasts. newsreels and 
magazines as well, is a primary 
objective on which the two inter- 
national organizations have 
worked out close and effective 
liaison. 
The Initial Move 
The initial move was taken by 
the United Nations General As- 
sembly when, at its First Session, 
it instructed the Economic avd 
Social Council to convene a 
World Conference to study “the 
rights, obligations and practices 
included in the concept of 
freedom of information”. Imme- 
diately afterwards, the First 
General Conference of Unesco, in 
December 1946, delegated to the 
Departmen of Mass Communi- 
wander 
cations of Unesco the task of 
joint action with the United Na- 
tions in this field. 
Geneva Conference 
To lay the ground for the 
United Nations Conference on 
Freedom of Information, the Eco- 
nomic and Social Council set up 
under the Commission on Human 
Rights a Sub-Commission on 
Freedom of Information and the 
Press. Unesco sent a member 
of its Secretariat to the Human 
Rights Division, and for five 
months at Lake Success the two 
secretariats worked together in 
preparation for the forthcoming 
world conference. 
The Conference was held in 
Geneva from 23rd March to 21st 
April 1948 and was attended by 
delegates from 54 nations, in- 
cluding 30 Member States of 
Unesco. Seven members of the 
Unesco Secretariat, including the 
Director-General, were present 
during the Conference. 
The Unesco representatives 
went to Geneva under broad in- 
structions from the 1947 General 
Conference of the Organization 
“to promote the principles stated 
in Unesco’s Constitution and the 
policies adopted by the General 
Conference”. Dr. Huxley, in a 
speech at the opening session of 
the First Commission, went to the 
heart of what proved to be the 
major issue confronting the Con- 
ference. He called for real and 
concrete freedom of information, 
but stressed that such freedom 
imposed commensurate responsi- 
bilities of truth and the main- 
tenance of peace. s 
In line with Dr. Huxley's em- 
phasis on the practical aspects 
of keeping the people informed, 
Unesco’s contribution to the con 
ference was in proposing ways in 
which to enlarge the facilities for 
disseminating information. Unesco 
submitted eight working docu- 
ments, on the basis of which the 
   
the need for 
problems. 
ration. 
Secretariat. 
Nations Agencies. 
social problems. 
Nations Assembly.   
Nations circles these days about 
co-ordination. 
Indeed, it would seem sometimes that 
co-ordination is expected to provide the 
answer to all our difficult international 
I. UNESCO = UN 
BRACES FIL 0 hears a great deal in United By Walter | 
Unesco 
Director 
Why is there this preoccupation with co-ordination? 
The reason is that there are so many separate units in 
the structure of international co-operation. First of all, 
there are the fifty-eight sovereign member states of the 
United Nations. These are the primary units of co-ope- 
Then there are the Assembly of the United 
Nations, the Economic and Social Council, the Security 
Council, the Trusteeship Council, and the United Nations 
Finally there are the eleven Specialized 
Agencies, each with its different set of member states, 
its supreme legistalive body, and its own secretariat. 
The work of all these public institutions requires co- 
ordination, to achieve peace and to promote the com- 
mon welfare. It is a. pluralistic structure; there is no 
single body with full and final authority. 
Since the United Nations Agencies are agents of their 
various member states, the first step toward co-ordina- 
tion would seem to be the co-ordination at a national 
level of national policies, vis-a-vis the varous United 
Nations Agencies to which each Member State belongs.’ 
If this were fully accomplished, even despite the dif- 
ferences in national memberships of 
Agencies, the principal remaining task would be the 
resolution of differing national policies in the United 
the Specialized 
The Charter of the United Nations recognized, 8f 
course, that complete co-ordination in this way would 
be difficult of achievement. In any case, these would 
still be required as a means of ensuring a United Nations 
approach to the host of international economic and 
The Economic and Social Council was created with 
special functions in this respect. But in addition, since 
it had been decided to set up Specialized Agencies for 
operations in the various economic and social fields, the 
Economic and Social Council was given also the task 
of co-ordinating the work of these Agencies. The pro- 
gress of the Council in carrying out these responsibilities 
was discussed during its last session at Geneva in July 
and August, and will be reported to the current United 
Conference adopted a number of 
resolutions. 
One resolution commended 
Unesco for its investigation of the 
technical needs in press, radio 
and films in war-devastated count- 
ries, It urged the Economic and 
Social Council to instruct the Spe- 
cialized Agencies “to assist Unesco 
in its task of reducing the inequa- 
lities in information {facilities 
caused by the devastations due to 
war, or other handicaps.” 
A parallel resolution adopted by 
the Conference highlighted the 
acute need for newsprint in cer- 
tain war-devastated countries, as 
established by the Unesco inquiry. 
This resolution endorsed a Unesco 
plan for providing emergency aid 
in newsprint for France, the Ne- 
therlands and China, and asked 
that similar aid be extended to 
other countries where a shortage 
of newsprint was depriving the 
people of adequate information 
through their press. 
A similarly realistic approach 
motivated Unesco’s introduction 
of a motion designed to bring 
more information into homes and 
schools everywhere by reducing to 
a minimum the cost of owning a 
radio receiving set. 
Unesco’s project for establishing 
an International Institute of Press 
and Information was also ap- 
proved by the conference and a 
resolution requested the Economic 
and Social Council to place its 
influence behind the implementa- 
tion of the plan. 
To the General Assembly 
In addition to these and other 
resolutions, the United Nations 
Conference on Freedom of Infor- 
mation. adopted three draft con- 
ventions. Two of them were de- 
signed to promote a free flow of 
information. The third proposed 
a procedure for publicizing a gov- 
ernment’s answer to information 
it deemed false. 
The Economic and Social Coun- 
cil, meeting in Geneva in August 
1948, passed on these proposals 
with slight amendments to the 
Third Session of the United Na- 
tions General Assembly, opening 
in Paris on 21st September 1948.   


### 73842: Agencies stress role of travel fellowships

Agencies 
Of Travel 
NE of the areas in .which 
( agencies of the United Na- 
tions are developing co-or- 
dination is in the field of inter- 
national fellowships and technical 
training. 
Unesco, from its inception, has 
stimulated international educa- 
tional exchange through its clear- 
irg-house activities on interna- 
tional fellowship schemes and its 
programme of Unesco and Unesco 
sponsored fellowships in educa- 
tional, scientific and cultural sub- 
jects (1). The International Chil 
dren’s Emergency Fund has insti- 
tuted programmes in Child Wel- 
fare and pediatrics. The Food 
and Agriculture Organization has 
recently instituted a small pro- 
gramme of fellowships for agri-- 
cultural experts. The Economic 
Commission for Asia and the Far 
East, while not operating a direct 
programme, has been instructed 
to develop international industrial 
training within its region. The 
International Labour Office is 
interested in the promotion of 
vocational training on the inter- 
national level. 
These programmes and inter- 
ests, representing as they do 
various fields of study and inves 
tigation, involve many common 
problems of administration and 
co-ordination. To develop more 
uniform procedures, to avoid over- 
lapping in planning, to develop 
ways of mutual assistance in ad- 
ministration of fellowship and 
training programmes, the Techni- 
cal Committee on Fellowships, 
made up of representative techni- 
cal officers of Unesco, F.A.Q., 
W.H.O. and I.L.O, a representa-, 
tive of I.C.EF. and representa- 
tives of the Division of Social 
Activities of the United Nations, 
was instituted. 
  
(n For more details on Unesco’s 
Fellowship programme, see Unesco Cou- 
rier of August, 1948 (Vol. I, No. 7). 
 

## [Page 5](073829engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

TEAMWORK 
E 
CON
 
C. LAVES 
Deputy 
General” 
FAO) 
international civil service 
tices; 
statistical programmes;   
| The progress made in thus pulling together for opera- 
tional purposes the otherwise essentially 
units has been due to painstaking and almost daily 
' consultation among the staffs concerned. Important, of 
“course, have been the formal agreements negotiated 
among the United Nations and Specialized Agencies, the 
periodic reviews by the Economic and Social Councii 
and by the Assembly's Advisory Commitlee on Adminis- 
trative ond Budgetary questions. 
But the first requisite of co-ordination has been the 
development of work habils in the several secretariats, 
to ensure that Uniled Nations problems are, 
with the full resources of all the United 
Nations Agencies and not only those of any single one. 
~~ The progress“ made to date relates largely to co-ordi- 
nating work plans under programmes and policies 
adopted by the separate Agencies. A real gap in the 
United Nations process still 
‘absence, so far, of adequately co-ordinated programme 
and policy planning before each of the legislative bodies 
of the Agencies concerned determine the programme for. 
"approached, 
their respective secretariats. 
.. Here lies an important field of activity for the Econo- 
mic and Social Council, aided by the principal adminis- 
trative officers of the Agencies. Not until more substan- 
tial progress is made at this point can we hope to 
harness the full resources of the Specialized Agencies 
and the United Nations for the attainment of the ends 
set forth in their various Charters. 
  
Meanwhile, very substantial progress 
has been made by the Secretariats to- 
ward co-ordinating the execution of the 
programmes adopted by their various 
Agencies. Some illustrations in fields in 
which Unesco is involved are presented 
on this page. There are others, such as 
the promotion of fundamental education (UN, WHO, 
and the rationalisation of scientific abstracting 
(WHO) in which Unesco has also worked closely with 
other United Nations Agencies. 
- Collaboration among all the Specialized Agencies under 
the leadership of the United Nations has resulted in 
real progress toward developing a strong and efficient 
in all 
estabiishing comparable budgetary and financial prac- 
in co-ordinating publications, 
in planning for regional offices 
and in the co-ordination of conference calendars. 
exists, therefore, in the 
the Agencies; in 
information and 
independent 
in fact, 
  
  
cies of the United Nations, 
none is more essentially 
concerned than Unesco with the 
maintenance and development of 
human rights. The very terms of 
Unesco's Constitution impose on 
the Organization the duty of 
fighting against the agents of dis- 
cord and war through education, 
science and culture and modern 
means of communication. The 
Organization’s final aim is to 
help maintain peace and human 
happiness. 
OO" all the Specialized Agen- 
Now what can threaten human 
rights more directly than war and 
warlike tendencies? Or, on the 
other hand, what can be a 
stronger force for peace than the 
unhampered development of 
every nation and every man? 
The maintenance of peace and 
the advancement of human 
happiness are therefore two tasks 
indissolubly linked, always to be 
considered together; they are in 
fact two aspects of the same 
ideal—the attainment of human 
rights. 
Economic and Social 
Council Recommendation 
It was this idea which, on the 
proposal of the Commission on 
Human Rights, brought forth the 
Economic and Social Council's 
recommendation that Unesco 
should co-operate in its work for 
the promotion of justice and 
peace. . The chief ways in which 
Unesco can further the work of 
the Economic and Social Council 
are: the working out by expert 
committees of educational pro- 
1 
‘tress Role 
Fellowships 
© This has held two meetings, one 
at Lake Success in March, 
1948, and one at Geneva in 
“August, 1048. 
At the March meeting, it was 
Tecommended that a small book- 
let should be prepared by the 
United Nations secretariat sum- 
marizing the main features of the 
respective - programmes of the 
United Nations agencies. At the 
same time, the members of the 
Technical Committee endorsed 
the Unesco fellowship survey as 
an important instrument for the 
promotion, planning and co-ordi- 
nation of international fellowship 
and training programmes.   
Pos me » 
The Palais de Chaillot (above) in Paris, will be the seat of the U.N. 
General Assembly during the coming three months.   
grammes, pilot projects and se- 
minars, and the dissemination of 
the results of scientific enquiries 
proving the falsity and monstros- 
ity of racial theories and the. 
dogma of inequality. 
Unesco’s work is an excellent 
complement to that of the United 
Nations, The latter is more con- 
cerned with immediate efficacy 
whilst the former is working for 
the progressive building up of a 
better world in tune with the 
actual march of history. . 
Philosophic 
Enquiries 
With this in mind, Unesco has 
included in its programme, since 
the first months of its existence, 
a Dphilosophic enquiry regarding 
the bases of human rights. Since 
the classic declaration of the 18th 
century was issued the material 
and political conditions of human 
life -have been fundamentally 
transformed; philosophical con- 
cepts and political ideologies have 
also completely changed. But no 
attempt has so for been made to 
reach agreement on the basic 
human rights by seeking the 
opinion of the most enlightened 
citizens of all countries. What 
are the prospects for man in so- 
ciety? What dangers jeopardize 
the attainment of his most 
elementary rights? What part 
should be played by society and 
the State? What relationship 
exists between the old acknow- 
ledged rights, which were chiefly 
civil and political, and the newly 
claimed rights, which are econo- 
mic and social? How do the right 
to education, cultural rights, the 
right to free expression of thought 
and the right to adequate infor- 
mation fit in with the other 
rights? And, to go deeper, what is 
individual man, what is his place 
in his own particular community 
and in the world community. 
Such are the essential questions 
which arise and they can well be 
described as philosophi e ques- 
tions. 
Unesco wished to consult the 
most enlightened minds in all 
countries on these vital problems, 
More than 250 outstanding per- 
sons, including not only philo- 
sophers and moralists but also 
artists, scientists,, sociologists and 
men of action, were invited to 
send replies to these questions to 
the Secretariat. The National 
Commissions for Unesco have 
been associated in this extensive 
undertaking. On the basis of some 
seventy replies received from 
widely differing areas of the 


### 73840: Human rights

HUMAN 
RIGHTS 
world, a Committee of Experts, 
including represéntatives of the 
chief philosophic tendencies, and 
more especially of political philo- 
sophy, has drawn up P positive con- 
clusions. 
At the same time, Unesco offer- 
ed the results of this enquiry to 
the United Nations in connexion 
with the drafting of the world 
Charter of Rights. Following an 
exchange of correspondence be- 
tween the Director-General and 
the Chairman of the Commission 
on Human Rights, Unesco, which, 
as a Specialized Agency, had been 
consulted on the draft charter on 
human rights, was able to trans- 
mit to the United Nations the 
conclusions of this enquiry. At 
the request of the Informaticun 
Department of the United Na- 
tions, it also provided the UN 
Bulletin with some of the essays 
which had been sent by corres- 
pondents. The United Nations 
were thus able to publish the 
texts specially written for Unesco 
by Mahatma Gandhi, Jacques Ma- 
ritain, E. H. Carr, Quincy Wright, 
Benedetto Croce, Salvador de Mo- 
dariaga, Peter Skov, Arthur Comp- 
ton, Aldous Huxley, Harold Laski, 
Lewis Mumford, etc. 
The Most Representative 
~~ Minds 
Thus, by %calling upon some of 
the most enlightened and repre- 
sentative minds in the world, by 
striving to overcome the doctrinal 
conflicts of the day in order to 
reach the common core of 
humanism, the more or less 
obscure realization of which 
animated the Allies in the com- 
mon war against fascism in all 
its forms, and by trying to per- 
ceive that deep harmony of ideals 
which the various political philo- 
sophies sugzast that mankind 
should reach by seemingly con- 
tradictory ways and means, Unes- 
co has found in the domain of 
human rights in collaboration 
with UN another opportunity of 
carrying out its action for the 
promotion of international un- 
derstanding and human happi- 
ness. 
By publishing a volume con- 
taining substantial extracts from 
the replies received on the philo- 
sophic problent of human rights, 
Unesco will help to sharpen and 
inform the already considerable 
interest taken by the public in the 
difficult and vital questions which 
the United Nations are required 
to solve today, as well as to pre- 
pare the way for the new world 
of tomorrow. 
OW children crippled by 
IH paralysis are patiently 
and methodically taughtc 
to walk again, how 
‘group of architects from many 
lands got together and wirked 
out the blueprints for the per- 
manent headquarters of the U.N. 
in New York and began the tre- 
mendous job of clearing the 
selected site—these and other 
stories are vividly fold in films 
prepared by the Uhited Nations 
Film Board. 
The U.N. Film Board is com- 
posed of members of the Secre- 
tariats of the United Nations 
and the Specialized Agencies 
concerned with the use of films 
and all visual media including 
filmstrips, still photographs and 
posters, It is composed of four 
Charter Members: the UN De- 
partment of Public Information 
(DPI), Unesco, FAO and ILO. 
In addition other Specialized 
Agencies collaborate in the work 
of the Board. They include 
WHO, IRO, International Civil 
Aviation Organization, Interna- 
tional Monetary Fund, Interna- 
tional Trade Organization and 
the International Bank . for Re- 


### 73841: Cameramen tell story of world social problems

~ Cameramen Tell Story 
Of World Social Problems 
construction and Development. 
The Board coordinates the 
film activities of the Members 
and dfrects and stimulates the 
production, distribution, and use 
of films serving the purposes 
and policies of the United Na- 
tions and the Specialized Agen- 
cies. 
In this way the specialized 
knowledge and services of each 
of the Members is made avail- 
able to all, and subjects coming 
within the field of interest of 
several Members are dealt with 
efficiently. The detailed work of 
the Board is handled by an 
Executive Office consisting of 
the film staff of the U.N. Dept. 
of Public Information in New 
York, headed by M. Jean Be- 
noit-Levy and the staff of the 
Mass Communications Dept. of 
Unesco in Paris, headed “by 
Mr. William Farr. Coa: Poland, 
The success of the Board's 
international production program- 
me was recently demonstrated 
by the award of an “Oscar” of 
the U.S. Motion Picture Aca- 
demy to one of its documentary 
films. Entitled “First Steps” the 
10-minute documentary tells of 
the rehabilitation of crippled 
children. 
Among other films already 
produced under the direction of 
the U.N. Dept. of Public Infor- 
mation are—“The People’s 
Charter”, “Searchlight on the 
Nations”, “Maps We Live By”. 
“Clearing the Way”, and three 
films produced in India fir the 
Social Affairs Department of 
the U.N. entitled, “Mother”, 
“Child”, and “Community”. 
Other films are being ~ pro- 
duced by film companies in 
France, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, 
Netherlands, Sweden, 
UX. and the U.S.A. The subjects 
include the fight against illite- 
racy, juvenile delinquency, ligh- 
thouses, and timber. In addition 
to these films for which the 
United Nations itself provides 
the production money, the Board 
is sponsoring the production of 
a number of films independently 
financed by film companies. 
The Board is also organizing 
an information service on films 
and filmstrips serving the pur- 
poses of its Members. In this 
field Unesco has compiled draft 
international lists of films and 
filmstrips on the following sub- 
jects: International Understand- 
ing and Co-operation, Fundamen- 
tal Education (including elemen- 
tary hygiene, public health, and 
agriculture), the Arts, and the 
‘Popularization of Science. 
These lists have been sent 
through the Member States to 
film specialists throughout the 
world for amplification and 
amendment. The lists when re- 
vised and edited will be made 
available to producers, distribu-~ 
tors, and users of educational 
films in all countries. 
Typical of the Board's activi- 
ties is a task recently undertaken 
jointly by U.N. Dept. of Infor- 
malion and the Mass Communi- 
cations Dept. of Unesco for the 
Committee which is preparing 
for the 1949 United Nations 
Scientific Conference on the 
Conservation and Utilisation of 
Resources (UNSCCUR). A list 
has been made of existing films 
on the subjects to be dealt with 
by the Conference and a report 
prepared on films which are 
urgently needed to present to 
the peoples of the world the 
world resources problems which 
the Conference will discuss. 
The final stage of the work 
will be to persuade national film 
production agencies in various 
countries to produce the films 
which are needed, as a coniribu- 
tion to understanding beiween 
peoples and the common welfare 
of all peoples. NE De

## [Page 6](073829engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

» " 
UNESCO COURIER - a Yol. L—No 8 
pram 
 [a 


### 73843: Art treasures to be put within reach of all

Art Treasures to Be Put 
Within Reach of All 
ANY millions of people in all paris of the world 
will never be able to visit the great art galleries 
  
  
3 #7 
 
and private collections which contain the finest 
paintings of all ages. 
As part of its cultural programme, Unesco has initiated” 
@ scheme which will eventually make available to all— 
particularly educational institutions, art organizations 
and students—fine colour reproductions of the world’s 
greatest works of art. 
The first step is the prepara- 
tion of comprehensive catalogues 
for world-wide distribution, of 
thigh quality colour reproductions 
devoted to particular phases and 
iods of art. By this it is hoped 
to encourage reproductions of the 
highest quality and to increase 
thelr availability to educational 
authorities, art institutions and 
private individuals throughout 
the world. 
As the number of great works 
of art is limited and because of 
the impossibility of transporting 
the world's art treasures from 
country to country, city to city 
and town to town to enable them 
to be seen by people everywhere, 
it is believed that the circulation 
of first-class reproductions is the 
only means of familiarizing the 
great majority of people with the 
world’s art heritage. 
Three Phases of Art 
~ The vast scope of the scheme 
eoncerning the preparation and 
publication of catalogues makes 
it necessary to assemble the 
material by sections. After con- 
sultation with experts of the 
International Council of Museums 
it was decided to concentrate 
during 1948 mainly on three par- 
ticular phases of art: Modern 
painting frem 1860 to the pres.| 
ent; Italian Renaissance painting; 
Persian art. 
Approximately 200 publishers 
and makers of colour reproduc- 
tions throughout the world hhve 
already been approached with a 
request to furnish Unesco with 
the information necessary to 
draw up complete and detailed 
lists in these three categories. 
To date more than 500 samples 
of colour reproductions have been 
received for inclusion in the 
Unesco archives, and more than 
1,000 detailed entries selected and 
made in the draft catalogue. 
This work has been carried 
on with the co-operation of 
JCOM experts, and further va- 
Juable assistance was obtained 
from them when a representative 
group met in Unesco House on 
July 7 and 8. 
It is anticipated that the cata- 
Jogues covering the first two 
groups will be published before 
the close of the year and another. 
povering Persian Art will be 
available early in 1949. 
In 1949 the ‘publication will 
be undertaken of catalogues 
dealing with three additional 
phases similar in size to those 
ghosen for 1948. 
Special Folios 
"Fhe published Unesco catalo- 
gues should be of great value to 
the general public, art institutes 
and educational authorities at 
all levels of education. Teachers 
will be able to refer to them and 
know exactly what is available, 
where it can be obtained. 
In the same way people desir- 
Ing to hold exhibitions to illus- 
trate the varied phases and mov- 
ements of art will be able in a 
few minutes by reference to the 
catalogue to find the best prints 
for their purposes, 
At the same time arrangements 
are being made for the produc- 
tion of special folios of colour 
reproductions covering the three 
gategories. 
Continuous collaboration will 
be maintained between Unesco 
and publishers producing special 
folios designed to illustrate ade- 
quately the various phases and 
periods. Governmental authorities 
and individual publishers have 
requested the closest cooperation 
with the Organization on matters 
of original selection and ques- 
ions of format and typography. 
Final discussions are taking 
place, through the International 
. Catholic Committee of Co-ordina- 
~ 3on, between Unesco, the Secre- 
gary of State of the Holy See 
* and the Directors of the Vatican 
. Museum for the publication of 
a series of about 
25 folios each contain- 
ing approximately 25 
colour reproductions of 
frescos in the Vatican. 
Arrangements are al- 
so being made with the 
Italian National Com- 
mission, to produce 
special folios of master- 
pieces of Italian Re- 
naissance paintings in 
Italian state and priv- "=. 
ate collections, in co- 
operation with Italian 
publishers. The first of 
these folios is schedul- 
ed for completion by 
next month. 
To show the best 
technical colour print- 
ing processes of today 
Unesco will stage an exhibition 
during the third Session of its 
General Conference of a selec- 
‘tion of outstanding prints from 
its archives. 
These archives will be perma- 
nently based at Unesco house, 
A member of the Secretariat examines a colour 
reproduction from Unesco’s art archives. 
but will be available at all times 
to educational authorities, stud- 
ents and publishers for refer. 
ence. Ultimately it may beco- 
me the most important and 
~ Libraries, 
  comprehensive collection of its 
type in the world. : 


### 73844: School for librarians opens in England

School for Librarians 
Opens in England 
ROMINENT librarians from 
twenty -one countries are 
meeting in Manchester at a 
Unesco-sponsored summer school 
September 2-28, to study the edu- 
cational réle of public libraries 
and to develop means of fur- 
thering international understand- 
ing through such institutions. 
The summer school, first of 
its kind on an international scale 
is being co-sponsored by the 
International Federation of Li- 
brary Associations and by pro- 
fessional library groups in the 
United Kingdom. 
Director of the four-week sum- 
mer school will be Arne Kildal, 
Director-General of Norwegian 
who will be assisted 
by Charles Nowell, Director of 
Public Libraries in Manchester. 
Some {fifty working librarians, 
more than half of them from 
war-devastated countries, are 
expected to attend to study 
techniques and equipment for 
making the public library a more 
effective educational medium and 
for developing its role in better- 
ing mutual understanding. 
Student-librarians will hear 
lectures and will participate in 
discussion groups. Also included 
in the programme will be visits 
to libraries, exhibitions of equip- 
ment and the showing of docu- 
mentary films. Each student will 
be expected to bring a written 
  
University Problems Viewed 
At Utrecht Conference 
_ (Continued from Page 1.) 
Pointing out that the U.S. pol- 
‘icy is to provide higher educa- 
tion to as many people as pos- 
sible rather than {to a select few, 
Dr. Thomas R. McConnell, of the 
University of Michigan (U.S.A), 
declared: 
“In England, less than 2 % of 
university-age young people at- 
tended the universities there in 
1947, whereas about 15 % of the 
18-21 year age group attended 
institutions of higher learning in 
the United States.” Dr. McConnell 
cited President Truman’s Commis- 
sion on Higher Education Reporf 
which recommends a university 
enrolment of double the present 
2,300,000 students by 1960, 
Professor Georges Scelle of the 
Faculty of Law, University of 
Paris, on the other hand, express- 
ed the view that higher educa- 
tion “is the culture of an élite 
. . . the aim of the university is 
to be the genesis of thought for 
the élite.” 
“We see a danger”, he added, 
“in an inflation of diplomas 
which might deprive them of all 
their value, or even [in] an in- 
flation of the number of students. 
The result would be not the 
selection of an élite, but a system 
of “mass education”, which is in- 
consistent with the very notion 
of higher education.” 
Professor Jan B. Kozak, of 
Charles (Caroline) University, 
Prague, regretted the overcrowd- 
ing in schools and universities in 
his address to the delegates, and 
cited cases of lecturers speaking, 
in some instances, to as many as 
1,000 students at once. He stress- 
ed the problem of training of 
younger people for academic 
careers. 
“Any help from international 
organizations”, he said, “will be 
keenly appreciated; it will consti- 
tute one of the best investments 
ever made.” He asked Unesco to 
make this need widely known, and 
recalled the disruption in educa- 
tion caused by German occupa- 
tion forces in Czechoslovakia. 
The same story of overcrowded 
universities, lack of teachers, 
destroyed or outmoded education- 
al equipment was told by repre- 
sentatives of many countries in 
their reports on the conditions of 
higher education in their native 
lands. For the most part, institu- 
tions were eagerly seeking to over- 
come these deficiencies and meey 
the needs of expanding enrol- 
ment. 
As Dr. Matta Akrawi, Chief of 
the Division of Higher Educa- 
tion, Iraq, pointed out: “The 
great influx of students into 
institutions of higher learning 
and their insistent demands for 
admission in even larger num- 
bers . . . is a phenomenon here 
to stay in most countries, as deep 
social forces are at work, and the 
sooner the universities face this 
situation squarely the better.” 
The conference recognized that 
the role of the university was, to 
a large degree, determined by the 
attitude of each nation. But it 
urged that “universities should 
consider afresh the part they must 
play in economic and social edu- 
cation . . . that many students 
capable of higher education still 
lack the opportunity of achieving 
it . . _ then no university can af- 
ford to neglect the moral and 
aesthetic development of its stu- 
dents and special emphasis must 
be laid on the importance of com- 
munity life . . . that much greater 
effort should be expended than 
at present on research in the 
social sciences and creative work 
in the humanities . . . and that 
the university has a wide social 
responsibility to the nation and 
beyond the nation to humanity at 
large.” 
The conference frankly recog- 
nized that an increasing propor- 
tion of support for higher educa- 
tion would come from public 
sources, but stated, “There is in 
general little apprehension of the 
development of sinister aspects of 
state aid. The danger is always 
there but it is latent rather than 
actual.” 
A specific programme of activ- 
ities leading to the acceptance 
by the university of greater res- 
ponsibility for the development of 
international understanding was 
recommended. Perhaps the most 
immediately significant is the 
recommandation that 
universities accept a 
responsibility for train- 
ing persons for employ- 
ment in positions in- 
volving contacts mith 
peoples of other gov- 
ernments or nations. 
The conference was 
unanimous in its re- 
commendations that 
international co-opera-' _ 
tion among universities | 
is desirable and ne- | 1 
cessary. In fact, it © 
initiated the first steps | SL \ 
essential to provide the, 
necessary machinery ey 
for such co-opera-§ 
tion. f 
It set up an Interim | 
Committee of ten mem- 
bers (nominating nine) 
to draw up a proposed 
of universities, The Committee 
will also administer an Inter- 
national Universities Bureau to 
be created immediately and plan 
for another world conference 
of universities sometime after 
August, 1950. 
The Bureau will serve as a 
world university information off- 
ice supplying educational leaders 
and students with vital data on 
school statistics, encourage the 
exchange of students and faculty 
through distributing information 
about summer courses and travel 
tours, availability of scholar- 
ships and staff vacancies. By pro- 
viding up-to-date information on 
university equipment, the Bureau 
will also act as an important cen- 
tre for improving the distribution 
and exchange of laboratory ma- 
terials, books and other technical 
equipment for university study 
and research, 
Dr. Francis J. Brown, Unesco 
programme specialist in higher 
education, who played a leading 
role in the preparatory work of 
the conference and acted as its 
Secretary-General, recently re- 
marked: 
“The universities of the world 
stand in a unique position. There 
is a universality of intellectual life 
which over-rides barriers of poli- 
tical or other differences . .. It 
is earnestly hoped that the Uni- 
versities Conference at Utrecht 
made a significant contribution to 
the mutual understanding of the 
universities of the world and, 
hence, to world peace.” 
For further details on the Utrecht 
conference, see Unesco Courier Vol, I 
_No. 7 (pp. 1 and 2); No, § (Dp. 8); No, 
3 ip. 8).7 
account of public library devel. 
opment in his or her own coun- 
try. 
Study groups will be under the 
chairmanship of Leon Carnovsky, 
Professor of Bibliography at Chi- 
cago University, S.A. Rangana- 
than, Professor of Bibliography 
at the University of Madras, and 
Charles Depasse, Principal Ins- 
pector at the Ministry of Public 
Education of Belgium. 
On September 20, the school 
will be transferred to London so 
that the students may participate 
during the final week in the 
second post-war meeting of the 
International Committee of the 
International Federation of Li- 
brary Associations. 
Countries which will be repre. 
sented at the summer school are: 
Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Can- 
ada, China, Czechoslovakia, Den- 
mark, France, Greece, Haiti, 
Holland, Hungary, Italy, Norway, 
Poland, Switzerland, Turkey; 
Union of South Africa, Uruguay, 
" United Kingdom, United States. 
  
   
   
constitution for an in- Netherlands and Chinese delegates at Utrecht 
ternational] asscciation. discuss their countries’ university problems. 
TWO APPROACHES 
TO UNITY Coa 
Maritain - 
(Continued from Page 3.) EE 
Consequently, MM. Maritain 
strongly urges the establishment 
of a scale of values, for “all 
depends on the ultimate value 
whereon those rights depend and 
in terms in which they are ine 
tegrated by mutual limitations. It 
is in terms of the scale of values 
which is thus acknowledged that 
the means are established where- 
by... Human Rights, economic and 
social, as well as individual, shall 
impinge on life”. 
M. Maritain thinks that by 
following this line of thought, the 
extent and limits of the practical 
agreement of Human Rights... 
would become clear. The agree- 
ment on that subject must, there- 
fore, also cover the scale of 
values. 
The Function of Language 
‘While expressing doubts as to 
the success of such an enterprise, 
M. Maritain lays considerable 
stress on the function of Ianguage 
which, he says, has been so much 
perverted and the truest words 
so pressed into the service of lies, 
that even the noblest and most 
solemn declaration could not suf- 
fice to restore to the peoples faith 
in Human Rights. That is where 
the scale of values plays its big 
part. 
For, if peoples were to agree on 
the means of securing effective 
respect for Human Rights, they 
would have to have in common, 
however, at least some ‘philo- 
sophy of life”. 
In conclusion, pending some- 
thing better, M. Maritain says 
that “a declaration of Human. 
Rights agreed by the nations 
would be a great thing in itself, 
a word of promise for the down- 
cast and oppressed throughout all 
lands, the beginning of the chang- 
es which the world requires, the 
first condition precedent for the 
later drafting of a universal 
charter of civilized life”. 
Dr. LIN YUTANG 
+ (Continued from Page 3.) 
On the other hand, the West 
must teach the East the dignity of 
the individual and other demo- 
cratic concepts. Or if the West 
is losing confidence in its own 
doctrine of individualistic so- 
ciety (as Dr. Benes said, “The 
theory of liberal society has been 
theoretically and pratically over- 
thrown”), the East, from its own 
perspective, may say to the West, 
“You fools, vou are throwing 
away the best thing you have 
got. You may have to throw 
some forms of it away practically 
and develop modifications. But if 
you throw away theoretically the 
basic theory that the state exists 
for the individual and not the 
individual for the state, then 
you are done for.”

## [Page 7](073829engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

Vol. 1.—No 8. UNESCO COURIER 


### 73845: Education in colonies poses UNESCO problem

Education in Colonies 
~ 
IN ON-SELF-GOVERNING ‘Terri- 
tories (NSGTs) is the offi- 
cial designation which, in the 
Charter of the United Nations, is 
given to the dependent territories 
usually known as colonies. Al- 
though all colonies are NCGTs, 
those former German and Jap- 
anese colonies, called mandated 
territories after the first World 
War, and now administered by 
different powers under the 
Trusteeship System, are called 
Trust Territories. 
According to Chapiers XI and 
XII of the Charter of the United 
Nations, the Administering Pow- 
ers of NSGTs and Trust Terri- 
tories “recognize the principle 
that the interests of the inhabi- 
tants of these territories are 
paramount”, and undertake, 
among other things, “to promote 
to the utmost... the well-being of 
the inhabitants of these terri- 
tories, to develop self-govern- 
ment”, and “to encourage re- 
search”. 
Although most of the NSGTs 
problems are common to other 
under-developed territories or 
even fo the whole world, there 
is no doubt that political disabi- 
lity resultant from economic sub- 
ordination and cultural infer- 
jority gives a special character to 
the former. This is so much so 
that one of the major sections of 
the United Nations Secretariat is 
the Department of Trusteeship 
and Information NSGTs. But, 
because most NSGTs are among 
the less developed areas of the 
world, they are of special interest 
to Unesco, for education, science 
and cultural development is in- 
dispensable fo their well-being 
and progress towards self-govern- 
ment. 
History shows that it was not 
by peaceful means that most of 
the colonial territories which in 
the mast became independent 
countries reached self-government. 
But there are instances in which 
the metropolitain country, recog- 
nizing. the cultural advancement. 
social progress and economic de- 
velopment of a Colony, has given 
it self-government. Such is the 
case of the British Dominions 
and some other overseas terri- 
tories. This should be the rule, 
and if it has not always been so, 
there is no reason why in the 
future the evolution towards seif- 
government should not always be 
peaceful and in mutual agree- 
ment. 
Now, the peoples of NSGTs will 
never be capable of the self- 
government which the adminis- 
tering powers themselves under- 
took to promote, if their edu- 
cation and culture does not reach 
a proper level. As “Unesco’s role 
is to help implement the princi- 
ples of the United Nations in the 
fields of education, science and 
culture”, it is obvious that it can 
powerfully contribute to the solu- 
tion of the major problem of 
NSGTs. This is a case in which 
Unesco can help to solve a deli- 
cate and difficult political prob- 
lem which on no small scale af- 
fects international understanding. 
The Trusteeship Council 
(Chapter XII of the Charter), 
the Special Committee on Infor- 
mation under Article 73 e (Chap- 
ter XI) of the Charter, and the 
Department of Trusteeship and 
Information from NSGTs, are the 
United Nations’ organs which are 
concerned with NSGTs. The im- 
portance of collaboration with 
these organs has been recognized 
in the Agreement between Unesco 
and the United Nations, Articles 
IX and X of which establish that 
the former will assist and co- 
operate with the latter to the 
greatest extent possible “with 
regard to matters affecting the 
well-being and development of 
the peoples of NSGTs”. 
Therefore, Unesco has been 
represented at the meetings of the 
Trusteeship Council and the 
Special Committee on NSGTSs, 
and close liaison has been. es 
tablished with the Department of 
Trusteeship and NSGTs. At the 
same time, a Resolution adopted 
by the Second General Confer- 
ence recommended that “due at- 
tention should be paid to promot- 
ing, through the appropriate 
channels, the objectives and pro- 
gramme of Unesco in Trust and 
Non-Self-Governing Territories”. 
Unesco’s action in NSGTs has, so 
for, been more noticeable. The 
Pilot Project in Nyasaland and 
the participation in the Tangan- 
yika Agricultural Development 
Scheme are the first steps in 
Unesco’s Fundamental Education 
work in NSGTs. 
The experience thus gained and 
the development of the Clearing 
House on Problems of Funda- 
mental Education will be of im- 
By o 
Armando CORTESAO, 
Head Non-Self-Governing 
Territories Division, Bureau 
of External Relations, 
 
    
portance to NSGTs in general 
In addition to such questions as 
technical education and voca- 
tional training, which may be 
included in Fundamental Educa- 
tion, the problem of higher educa- 
tion is of primary importance for 
dependent territories the develop- 
ment of which aims at self-gov- 
ernment, 
The colonial problem being 
essentially one of cultural change, 
the question of anthropology 
ethnology, sociology and cul- 
tures has beea kept well in mind. 
Thus, the International African 
Institute was invited to present, 
and has already presented, a 
report concerning plaas. for 
research to be undertaken on the 
native cultures of Africa in order 
to further the purpose of Unesco. 
Poses Unesco Problem 
At the same time, fostered by 
Unesco, the International Con- 
gress of Anthropological and 
Ethnological Sciences created last 
August an International Union 
of Anthropology and Ethnology 
which, in collaboration with 
Unesco, may undertake important 
work in NSGTSs. 
Many other Unesco activities, 
such as those of the Field Science 
Cooperation Offices, Mass Com- 
munication (Press, Film and Ra- 
dio), Museums, Libraries, Interna- 
tional Clearing House for Publica- 
tions and for Aris and Letters, 
and Relations between Cultures, 
have a great interest for NSGTs. 
Both the Trusteeship Council 
and the Special Committee on 
NSGTs have already asked for 
assistance from and close collab- 
oration with Unesco. It is likely 
that Unesco's next General Con- 
ference will take these requests 
into consideration, and that, 
within its possibilities of budget 
and personel, increasing atten- 
tion will be paid to NSGTs. 
The discussion of NSGTs prob- 
lems during the meetings of 
several organs of the United Na- 
tions has shown only too well 
that much international misun- 
derstanding and distrust exists 
in this field, with serious political 
_ implications. Though the role of 
Unesco is not to solve political 
problems immediately, it can, in 
this case as in many others, help 
considerably towards their settle- 
ment. 
  It is in the all-important field 
of Pundamental Education that 
U.K. Co-Operating Bodies 
THE British agency established to carry out the aims of Unesco 
in the United Kingdom is divided into 8 National Co-operating 
Bodies. These deal with the Arts, education, libraries, mass com- 
munication, museums, natural sciences, 
losophy and humanistic stuaes. 
The National Co-cperating 
Body for Philosophy and Huma- 
nistic Studies is the most recent 
to be established. It held its first 
meeting on July 28, presided over 
by Professor Arnold Toynbee, 
noted philosopher and author of 
“A Study of History”. 
The Cooperating Body voiced 
its full support of Unesco’s pro- 
ject to form an International 
Council for Philosophy and Hu- 
manistic studies along the sume 
lines of the existing Council of 
Scientific Unions. 
The members agreed that the 
social sciences and phi- 
books on J. Dobrovsky and the 
history of Czechoslovak literature, 
and a volume of essays on the 
Paris of 1945. He has also trans- 
Jated many French and Italian 
works into Czech, including the 
poems of Ronsard, Regnard’s 
play “Le Légataire Universel”. 
Duhamel’s novel “Le Club des 
Lyonnais” and poetry of the 
French Resistance Movement. 
Born at Novy Bydzov in Bohe-|" 
mia on 4 November 1897, he com- 
pleted his studies at the Charles 
University in Prague and at the   Sorbonne, 
  
[The problem of the war- 
handicapped child is by no 
means confined to Europe. It 
is a global problem, to be 
‘measured in varying degrees 
of tragedy throughout most of 
the countries of the world. 
. Surely nowhere is the prob 
lem more acute and on sO 
enormous a scale as in China. 
Dr. C. H. Chuang, Dean of 
Lingnan University, reported 
to the Meeting of Directors of 
Children’s Villages, which met 
last month in Switzerland, 
about the war-handicapped 
child in his country. The 
following are a few excerpts 
from that report.] 
“Among  war-devastated 
countries there is no doubt 
that China suffered longest in 
“time and most in extent. 
No reliable statistics have 
been compiled on the number 
of children handicapped by   
 
This Chinese girl smiles after being cared for by an Aid-To- 
China organization. But millions of others urgently need help. 


### 73846: All China's children do not smile

All China's Children 
Do Not Smile 
greatest need was to obtain fi- 
nancial aid for appropriate indi- 
vidual members and organiza- 
tions in each country. 
The Body also discussed the 
project for the Philosophical 
Analysis of Current Ideologicat 
Conflicts and suggested that a 
number of philosophers be en- 
couraged to prepare monographs 
which should later be publisuee 
Members were also in accord 
to advise Unesco to encourage 
small specialized conferences on 
philosophical subjects to permit 
philosophers to discuss common 
problems and facilitate the publ- 
cation of their work 
  
Honduras 
Sets up Commission 
The Republic of Hunduras is 
the latest Member State of 
Unesco to set up its National 
Commission. The Commission 
was established by decree dated 
August 9, 1948, signed by the 
Minister of Public Education. 
Professor Angel P. Hernandez. 
It provides for a twelve-member 
Commission presided over by 
the Minister of Education. 
New Czech Delegate 
The new Czechoslovakian Dele- 
gate to Unesco, Dr. Benjamin 
Jedlicka, arrived recently in Pa- 
ris to take up his duties at the 
Organization's headquarters. 
In 1948 he was appointed to 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
Before the war, Dr. Jedlicka, 
worked in the Ministry of Edu- 
cation and Culture in the Section 
concerned with cultural relations 
with foreign countries. He subse- 
quently became head of the Lite- 
rary Seclion of the same Minis- 
try. 
A member of the Union of 
Czech Authors and the P.E.N. 
Club Dr. Jedlicka has published   
Scientists Create World 
Mental Health Federation 
(Continued from Page 1.) 
The Congress, under the chair- 
manship of Dr. John R. Rees, war- 
time psychiatrist-in-chief of. the 
British Army, heard a broad 
range of recommendations of 
ways whereby specialists in men- 
tal health could contribute 
towards building a One World 
outlook among all peoples. 
Dr. Carl Binger, Associate Pro- 
fessor of Clinical Psychiatry at 
Cernell University, keynoted the 
gravity of the discussions when 
he urged “unless war is prevent- 
ed, there will not be any world 
fo be citizens in... 
“We must . . . persuade states- 
men and politicians to give us a 
hearing and to act on our find- 
ings. They would not think of 
trying to wage wars without the 
help of scientists—physical, me- 
dical and even, now, social and 
psychological—but they manage 
to get into wars which these 
same scientists might enable them 
to prevent. 
“We must abandon the role of 
isolated esoterics. We must speak 
a language that others can under- 
stand. If we do, they will hear 
us. We must join them in all 
humility and dedicate ourselves 
to the needs of mankind, with 
respect and reverence for the 
rights of common men and 
women, for to-day only a citizen 
of the world can be a true 
scientist.” 
The statement prepared by the 
International Preparatory Com- 
mission and adopted by the con- 
gress may be summarized as 
follows: 
Perhaps the most important 
contribution of the social sciences 
in their joint approach to the 
urgent problems facing mankind 
is the recognition of the plasticity 
of human behaviour and social 
institutions and of the resistance 
of each to change. Principles of 
mental health cannot be success- 
fully furthered in any society un- 
less there is progressive accep- 
tance of the concept of world citi- 
zenship. World citizenship can pe 
widely exlended among all peo- 
ples through the applications of 
the principles of mental health. 
The concept of world citizenship 
implies loyalty to the whole of 
mankind, 
Programmes for social change 
to be effective require the joint 
efforts of psychiatrists and social 
scientists working in co-operation 
with statesmen, administrators 
and others in positions of respon- 
sibility. 
The statement also includes an 
outline of acceptable principles, 
practices and professional ethics 
for those working in the field of 
mental health and human rela- 
tions, and closes with recom- 
mendations addressed te the 
United Nations, Unesco, WHO, to 
the newly formed World Federa- 
tion for Mental Health, to other 
non-governmental international 
organizations and te national and 
Jocal organizations concerned 
with the betterment of mental 
health and human relations. 
Steps are to be taken, it is ex- 
pected, to co-ordinate the acti- 
vities of Unesco and WHO with 
the World Federation. It is anti- 
cipated that this body will serve 
as a consultative group for Unesco 
  
the war, but the writer believ- 
es it must run into the tens 
of millions. 
“It is worth noting that 
while the number of such 
unfortunate children is enor- 
mous, the number of those 
privileged to receive such as- 
sistance and education has 
been comparatively small. The 
latter could be counted by 
hundreds of thousands at 
most. The great majority of 
war-handicapped children 
who lived through those long 
years of struggle received no 
attention from any kind of 
educational institution at all. 
“Most of the orphanages 
were very poorly equipped, 
both materially and spiritu- 
ally.. the housing situation 
was desperate... clothing and 
food were scarce... there were 
no reference books or text- 
books; even paper washard to 
find... but the most serious 
lack was in the proper kind 
of teachers. 
“A few far-sighted non-go- 
vernmental organizations be- 
gan to do something to help 
these children as soon as the 
war started. Among them may 
be mentioned the National 
Child Welfare Association of 
China... the National Associa- 
tion for Refugee Children... 
the China Wartime Child Re- 
lief Association... 
“It has been a privilege to 
hear the lectures and discus- 
sions (at the Children’s Vil- 
lage Conference) by specialists 
on different phases of prob- 
lems in connection with the 
educating of such children. 1t 
seems to me that although 
they are different in race and 
colour, they are handicapped 
by the same war and their 
problems are more or less the 
same all over the world. 
“The problems it seems to 
me most urgently in need of 
solution are these: education- 
al and vocational guidance 
for older children, nutrition 
for younger as well as for 
older children, and last, but 
not least, the restoring of 
love and sympathy in the 
hearts of all these children 
so they may lead a normal 
and useful life, and contri- 
bute their part towards the 
future peace of the world.”   
  on all problems affecting mental 
- 
health. 
BOOKS 
TO PHILIPPINES 
After consulting Unesco on the 
best ways of furthering Unesco's 
educational reconstruction worl 
the San Francisco Youth Associa® 
tion (U.S.A.) has collected 30,000 
textbooks for distribution im the 
Philippines,

## [Page 8](073829engo.pdf#page=8) 3

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER Vol. .—No 8. 
 
the world. 
With a view to developing further study and research in folklore within the country 
and to strengthen links between Brazilian folklorists and those in other lands, the Brazilian 
National Commission for Unesco (IBECC) has recently set up a National Folklore Com- 


### 73847: Brazil sets up Folklore Institute

Brazil Sets Up 
Folklore Institute 
BRAZIL is a vast nation rich in folklore traditions, popular legends, folkiales, folk 
poetry and folk music. In recent generations. much research work has been carried 
out on Brazilian folklore by foreign and native specialists. Until now, however, these 
sttdies have remained to a large extent scattered throughout Brazil and different parts of 
mission, with headquarters in Rio de Janeiro. : 
One of the most important aspects in the Commission's programme will ke the 
development of a system of exchange of information and works on folklore between the 
various parts of Brazil as well as between this South American nation and other countries. 
A special committee has been appointed to see to the speedy execution of this scheme. 
The Commission will also prepare a Bibliographical Bulletin and special documents 
on Brazilian folklore, draw up a complete list of national folklore experts, encourage the 
reprinting of classical works in 
the subject with added notes and 
commentaries, and make efforts 
to bring about a standardized 
terminology in Brazilian folklore. 
By organizing folklore courses, 
lectures and festival, the Com- 
mission hopes to stimulate  in- 
terest both abroad and in Brazil 
Prominent figures in the fields 
of folklore, anthropology and so- 
ciology and many Brazilian au- 
thors and artists are members of 
the organization. Its members 
represent official institutions such 
as the University of Brazil, Na- 
tional and Historical Museums, 
the Conservatoire, the National 
Educational Film Bureau, the 
Service for the Protection of the 
Indians. Many private associa- 
tions have also joined the Com- 
mission and include the Brazilian 
Society of Anthropology and 
Ethnography and the Folklore 
Research Centre of the National 
School of Music. 
Dr. Levi Carneiro, President of 
IBECC, is head of the Commis- 
sion and Renato Almeida, noted 
folklorist, is secretary-general. 
Correspondents have already 
been appointed in Portugal, Great 
Britain, Italy, France and. Mexico. 
The - establishment of the 
Brazilian Folklore Commission 
marks an important stage in the 
carrying out of a vast programme 
of international culwural co- 
operation which will undoubtedly 
increase in importance as its work 
develops and becomes more wide- 
ly known throughout the world. 
Brazil to Prepare 
Films 
On World 
Co-operation 
The Brazilian National Com- 
mission for Unesco (IBECC) is 
planning a series of films 
which will show how nations and 
peoples are working together 
throughout the world and illus 
trate the role and aims of Unesco. 
Specialists are going to work 
gathering material for the pro- 
duction of these films. When 
uitimately completed, the films 
will be given the widest possible 
distribution in Brazil 
This was announced following 
a special meeting of the Brazilian 
Commission which met during 
July in Rio de Janeiro. 
The Commission also approved 
proposals made by M_ Lourenco 
Filho and Dr. Levi Carneiro. 
President, for the production of 
recordings on international co- 
operation which will be broadcast 
over Brazilian radio networks. 
Other items in TUnesco’s pro- 
gramme discussed by the Com- 
mission were the teaching of 
international understanding in 
Brazilian schools, adult and pop- 
ular education, translation of 
the classics and progress reports 
on the Hylean Amazon Institute. 
Alvaro Lins, Secretary of the 
National Commission arrived in 
Paris on September 3 for a ten 
day visit to Unesco House during 
which he will discuss plans for 
closer TUnesco-IBECC co-opera- 
tion. Dr. Levi Carneiro is also 
expected to visit Unesco shortly. 
“Museum”’ 
The Museums Department of 
Unesco is now engaged in pre- 
paring the second issue of 
Museum, the new quarterly, 
museographical review. 
Like the first issue, the next 
edition will be a double one, this 
time devoted to the educational 
activities of museums. It will 
contain - contributions from the 
United States, France, Holland, 
£3 


### 73848: Is Amazon legend just a myth?

  England and Canada. 
Is Amazon Legend 
Just a “Myth”? 
Whenever the Amazon is mentioned, there is a 
question which is often asked. In all that enormous 
tropical river basin, were there really such women 
warriors who not only waged 
wars, but {filled the offices of 
the State? 
The name alone shows how 
Greek mythology was carried to 
the New World. It was borne to 
the banks of the Maranon by 
Orellana’s men, the first to 
follow the river downstream 
from the Colombian Cordillera. 
The legend runs that there 
was a battle on the banks of the 
Nhamunda between the Span- 
jards and a band of women 
warriors. After long enquiries to 
trace the Amazons glimpsed in 
that nightmare skirmish, the 
_eaptain’s men came on the cycle 
of Amazon legends born of the 
myth of Jurupary, the son of the 
sun. It was said he expelled 
from his kingdom in the High 
Sierra certain rebel women who 
had revolted, not only against 
the men, but against the king- 
dom’s laws. 
These women were supposed to 
have lived a nomadic life and 
finally to have settled near the 
Nhamunda on the shores of the 
lake known as the Mirror of the 
Moon. There they used to dive 
for muirakitans, talismans form- 
ed on the greenish clay at the 
bottom of the lake. 
But when all is said and done, 
it may well be that the Greek 
myth of the Amazons is the ori- 
gin of the story of the Ikamia- 
bas. When the pioneers set out 
in search of the fierce women 
who met Orellana’s men in 
hattle, they had to learm a 
smattering of the local tongue to 
make contact with the people. 
Hence, in all probability, the 
coining of the name “Ikamia- 
bas,” the manless, or alterna- 
tively the lawless, women, the 
latter meaning being connected 
with the legend of Jurupary. 
In any case, even if the In- 
dian tribes in the Amazon Basin 
were originally matriarchal, it is 
not there that we must look for 
the origin of the Ikamiabas 
myth. More probably the legend 
of the Amazons was brought to 
the Indians by the people who 
came from the “Brave New 
World,” thirsting for wealth and 
adventure. 
A.D. TAVARES BASTOS. 
    
a
 
~
 
a
 
  
Ae
n 
- 
  
  
{ 
E
L
 
  
Brazil as seen by a Portuguese cartographer 19 years after its discovery in 1500. 


### 73849: UNESCO plans assistance for Latin American scientists

  
= Unesco Plans Assistance 
For Latin American Scientists 
GP HERE exists in Latin Ame- 
rica today an eager and 
able group of scientists who 
urgently seek the indispensable 
technical means to carry out 
scientific development which will 
henefit their own countries and 
all humanity.” With these words 
Professor Paulo Carneiro of 
Brazil recently addressed a meet- 
ing of Unesco’s Executive Board 
in Paris. 
This month, leading scientists 
representing at least 14 nations 
of Latin America are meeting in 
Montevideo, Uruguay, to study 
the most effective means where- 
by Unesco can contribute to 
  
Book Coupon Scheme 
(Continued from Page 2.) 
From the point of view of gov- 
ernments of participating count- 
ries, it should be emphasized 
that the Book Coupon Scheme 
will not take the book trade out 
of the general line of foreign 
exchange control since the 
governments concerned will be 
left with the requisite powers 
of control insofar as selection of 
distributing agency, booksellers 
authorized to accept book cou- 
pons and total amounts of book 
coupons are concerned, 
The scheme will nevertheless 
considerably reduce the number 
of bureaucratic impediments 
which very often make it dif- 
ficult, if not impossible, to make 
payments abroad — particularly 
where small sums are involved 
Although in principle the book 
coupons are intended to serve 
the needs of both institutions and 
individuals, the distributing 
agency may. during the experi- 
mental period when only a very 
limited amount of book coupons 
can be put at the disposal of 
each participating country, have 
to make the allocation of book 
coupons on a priority basis. Thus 
the needs of educational, scien- 
tific and cultural institutions 
serving a multitude of people 
can receive first consideration. 
of Unesco. 
Kleber, Paris-16e, France. 
Australia: H. A. Goddard Ltd. 
Czechoslovakia : 
Denmark : Einar Mupksgaard, 
Castle Street — Cardiff: 1 
Tower Lane — Belfast: 80 
Greece : 
Lebanon and Syria: 
Low Countries: 
SUBSCRIPTION RATES 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly in English, 
French and Spanish by the Public Informalion Bureau 
6-month subscription: 2s.6d. or 30.50 or Fr. frs. 100. 
Please write to the Unesco agent indicated below for 
your country, or directly to Unesco House, 19 Avenue 
Argentina: PFditorial Sudamericana S.A., Alsina 500. Buenos-Aires. 
Caaada : The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. West, Toronto. 
Cuba: La Casa Belga, R. de Smedt O'Reilly, Habana. 
Librairie FP Topic, 11 
Great Britain: H.M Stationery Office: Londen: York House, Kings- 
way (Retail Counter Service) ; P.O Box 569, London, S.E.1. (Post 
orders). — Manchester 2: 39/41 King Street — Edinburgh 2: 13a 
France: Sditions A. Pedone, 13 Rue Soufflot. Paris, 5e. 
Eleftheroudakls, Librairie internationale. Athens. 
India: Oxford Book and Stationery Co. Scindia House, New Delhl, 
Iraq: Mackenzie and Mackenzie. Booksellers. The Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Librairie universelle, Av. Fouad Ier, Beirut. 
N.V. Martinus 
9 Lange Voorhout. The Hague 
255a, George St., Sydney. 
Narodni, Prague. 
6 Norregade. Copenhagen, 
St Andrew's Crescent, — Bristol 1 
Chichester Street 
Nijhoff, Afd., Fondsaministratie 
It is expected that during the 
experimental period the following 
countries will participate either 
as purchasers of book coupous 
or as suppliers of books: China, 
Czechoslovakia, France, India, 
UK. and U.S.A. In addition, a 
certain number of book coupons 
will be distributed free in the 
following countries: Austria, Chi- 
na, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Hun- 
gary, Italy, the Philippines and 
Poland. The money for this free 
distribution will be provided by 
Unesco’s 1948 funds for educa- 
tional reconstruction. Thus a 
considerable number of Member 
States will, in one form or 
another, participate in the plan 
and be able to decide on 
the merits or disadvantages of 
the project and determine whe- 
ther it should be continued on a 
permanent basis. 
It should be pointed out, finally, 
that during the experimental 
period, Unesco will accept pay- 
ment from the distribution agen- 
cies for the book coupons in one 
of the three Unesco currencies, 
ie. French francs or pounds 
sterling or U.S. dollars. 
The way the Book Coupon 
scheme will work may be sum- 
marized, therefore, ig five prin- 
cipal steps: 
& Unesco issues Book Coupon to 
national distributing agency. 
No payment made. 
& National distributing agency 
sells coupons to individual 
or institution for local cur- 
rency, 
& National distributing agency 
transfers equivalent of local 
currency to Unesco in either 
francs, sterling or dollars. 
# Individual purchaser of cou- 
pons uses them as a cheque 
to pay for books bought 
abroad. 
& Bookseller receiving coupons 
presents them to Unesco and 
is paid in his national cur- 
rency, minus discount to 
Unesco for upkeep of scheme. 
  
the scientific advancement of 
the continent either directly or 
through other Specialized Agen- 
cies of the United Nations. 
The Latin American Scientific 
Conference stems from a resolu- 
tion adopted last year at the Se- 
cond Session of the Unesco Gena- 
ral Conference in Mexico City 
which recognized the need for 
developing scientific institutions 
in Latin America and stimulating 
the interchange of information 
hetween this area and the rest 
of the world. 
Obstacles to Progress 
“The difficulties faced by Latin 
American men of science at the 
present time because of the lack 
of equipment and information”, 
Dr Carneiro has pointed out. 
“are a serious obstacle to sclen 
tific advancement in our count- 
ries. The Unesco Scientific Con- 
ference in Uruguay may well be 
the turning point for Latin Ame- 
rican scientists”, 
Scheduled to be held from 
September 6 to 10, the conference 
will study positive means to 
broaden scientific studies through 
university scholarships and post- 
graduate research work, the organ- 
ization of scientific “symposia” 
and closer co-operation with 
international scientific bodies. 
Delegates will also examine spe- 
cific problems facing Latin Ame- 
rican scientists in the different 
branches of their work, co-ope- 
ration between specialized labor- 
atories such as marine biology, 
astronomy, etc, and ways by 
which Unesco can aid in these 
fields. 
The work of Unesco’s Field 
Science “Co-operation Office estab- 
lished in Latin America will be 
discussed with emphasis on 
liaison methods, the radius of 
the FSCO'S influence, relations 
with the Hylean Amazon Insti. 
tute and suggestions regarding 
the office’s future activities. 
Delegations are submitting a 
report on the scientific develop- 
ment of their respective countries 
which are to serve as ga basis 
for the discussions during the 
conference. Spanish and Portu- 
guese will be the working lang- 
uages. 
Unesco has extended invita- 
tions to FAO, WHO, ILO, the 
International Meteorological Of- 
fice, the International Civil Avia- 
tion Organization, Rockefeller 
Institute, Carnegie Institute, Pan- 
American Union, Inter-American 
Institute of Agricultural Science 
and the Smithsonian Institute to 
send observers to the conference. 
Editorial Offices : Unesco, 19, 
Editor : S.M, KOFFLER, 
Avenue Kiléber, Paris (16e). 
Director : H, KAPLAN; 
Sweden: Ab. C. E Fritres. Fredsgatan 3, Stockholm. 
Switzerland: Libralrie Payot, Lausanne,     All Reproductions Authorized 
IMPRIMERIE DU “NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE”, 21, Rue de Berri, Paris (80).