# [073912](073912engo.pdf) 14

## [Page 1](073912engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

    
PUBLICATION No. bi Tew 
     
PUBLICATION OF THR UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
 
Volume II.—No 1. Price: 10 Cents (U.S.), 6 Pence (U.K), or 25 Francs FEBRUARY 1948, 
  
erness ‘and the smoke 
which has since long lifted 
jrom the last war still discloses 
a shattered continent. Where it 
is not shattered physically, it is 
UROPE is still a stone wild- 
hurt within its mind and its cour- |! 
age for life. The child grooving] 
his way out of the ruins must 
make his way to life now in this! 
Europe, 
The growth of the children of 
Europe has been disfigured by a 
greater or lesser degree of shock 
—physical, emotional, mental. 
There are millions of children 
under 17, and what they need is 
security, self-expression, educa-|: 
tion and the sense of belonging |: 
to the social world. 
The figures of Europe’s basic 
scholastic needs run from the. 
simple to the complex: millions] 
of pieces of chalk, thousands of |: 
blackboards and thousands ofl: 
pieces of vocational equipment. 
. How many cannot read? How 
mony millions have been re- 
tarded? : 
War smashed the high school] 
and the grade school as well as: 
the enemy’s fortress. These child-! 
ren were burrowing into the 
ground with fingers when they 
should have been learning the 
three “R’s”. 
Their teachers fled, were sent | 
~ to concentration camps, or are 
dead, combatants of batille. Even 
those children lucky enough to 
have survived with their parents 
are far and dangerously behind. 
And those just beginning to go to 
school lack teachers and equip-|, 
‘ment... 
The future teacher himself|. 
must be made fit to handle child- |: 
ren whose memory is the mem |: 
ory of war, poverty, destruction, |: 
black market, This is one of the|. 
great steps in the task, in addi-| 
tion to equipment. 
Al centres in Switzerland and |! 
other countries teachers are being | 
made. They come from the con- 
centration camps, from ruined 
lands. 
They are given special {raining 
‘for the size of the problem they; 
face with backward, emotionally 
and physically torn and crippled 
‘children. And they return to build 
education in Europe. From the 
ground up... 
Gradually, against the ruins, || 
there is a reaching out, For the 
physically handicapped must be 
given both the skill and the will} 
to life. The deaf must communi- 
cate with the hearing. The! 
crippled must learn first to walk. 
And the blind too must be given 
the faith to reach out in the 
darkness. 
But there is another reaching 
and another darkness: the delin- 
‘quent, the lost, the orphaned— 
‘they too reach out. Left alone, 
‘they reach out in the ways they 
know best. 
And where there is no encour- 
agement, energy and New 
strength, they go an old way— 
the road through the juvenile 
court into the reformatory. 
The child in the classroom, un- 
certain, remembering what it 
must forget, draws its conceptions 
‘of a house on a board. Picasso? 
No, but the memory of ruination. 
It has to be changed. The wild- 
erness within and without the 
human being must begin to grow 
life and the reflection of life. 
Millions of tools, millions of pen- 
cils, thousands of teachers, but 
mostly the will to belong and a 
world in which it is good to live. 
These are their needs, 
THE CHILDREN OF EUROPE 
A Unesco Photo Story 
   
Tereska, a small girl at a special school for war-handicapped 
children recently constructed in Warsaw, Poland, was asked 
to draw her house and family. She produced this representa~ 
tion of her confused mind — wavering chicken-track lines 
crisscrossing each other. What is it that she sees when the 
teachers says ‘‘draw a house”? Is it the memory of terror 
and the fact of ruin ? Are not the chicken-track lines of this 
little child’s drawing but the reflection of an uprooted life, 
the mirror of disorder and chaos which the war has 
’ strewn over Europe? 
 
      
   
       
i N this issue, the Unesco Courier presents a small selection from over 
five-thousand photographs, taken for Unesco last year by Mr. David 
Seymour, a U.S. photographer, during a visit to Austria, Greece, 
Hungary, Italy and Poland. : 
They show some of the problems of Furope’s war-handicapped 
emotionally handicapped, and the mentally handicapped—and the efforts 
being made to educate them. For. the main task is to educate them, to 
replace the powerful memory of violence which still haunts their lives, 
and to feed the living root of self-expression in them which is eager 
for nourishment, 
   
Ty   ) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
children—the physically handicapped, the morally handicapped, the 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
)       

## [Page 2](073912engo.pdf#page=2) 3

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER February 1949 
 
       
     
      
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
          
        
    
            
    
    
    
    
                
      
    
        
    
    
   
  
and culture. 
drive for subscribers. 
France. 
Australia: RA, 
Belgique — Librairie 
Bruxelles IV. 
Czechoslovakia : 
Denmark : 
Tower Lane — Belfast: 
Low Countries: NV. 
Are You A ‘Courier’ 
SUBSCRIBER ? 
The Unesco Courier is an 
devoted to the work of Unesco and to activities and 
developments throughout the world in education, science 
A full year's subscription (12 issues) costs only $1.00 
U.S., or 5/- or 250 French Francs (300 French Francs for 
subscriptions outside of France). This rate is far below 
the actual production cost of the Courier. 
Untill now some of our readers have been receiving 
free copies of our periodical. In order to permit us to 
supply- the many thousands of mew readers in almost 
every country in the world, we are undertaking a special 
SUBSCRIBE NOW! Tell your friends about the Unesco 
Courier and get them to subscribe too. 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, or 
directly to Unesco House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris, 16%, 
Argentina: Editorial Sudamericana S.A. Alsina 500. Buenos-Alres 
A. Guoddara Ltd. 255a, George St. Sydney, 
encyclopédique, 17, 
Canada : [he nryerson Press, 209 Queen St. West. Toronto. 
Cuba: La Casa Belga, R de Smedt O'Reilly. Habana. 
Librairie F Topie. 11 Narodni, Prague, 
Einar Munksgaard, 6 Norregade. Copenhagen. 
Great Britain: H.M Stationery Office: London: York House, Kings- 
way (Retail Counter Service) ; P.O Box 569, Londin, SE. 1Post 
orders). — Mancbester 2: 39-41 King Street — Edinburgh 2: 13a 
Castle Street — Cardiff: | St Andrew's Crescent. 
80 Chichester Street 
France: Editions A. Pedone. 13 Rue Soufflot. Paris. Se, 
Greece : Eleftheroudaakis, Librairie internationsie Athens. 
India: Oxford Book and Stationery Co.. Scind:a House. New Delhi. 
Iraq: Mackenzie and Mackensie, Booksellers. The Bookshop, Baghdad 
Lebanon and Syria: Librairie unjverselle, Av. des Francais, Beirut, 
Maruinus Nijhoff, 
J) Lange Voorhout. The Hague 
Sweden: Ab O. B Fritzes. Predsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
Switzerland: Librairie Pavot. Lausanne 
Uruguay. — Libreria Internacional SRL. Calle Uruguay 133], 
Montevideo. 
U.S.A. — International Documents Service, Columbia University 
Press. 2960 Broadway, New York 27 N.Y. 
international Periodical 
rue du Luxembourg, 
— Bristol 1: 
Afd., Fondsaminisiratie 
  
LITERARY SUPPLEMENT 
LONDON PRINTING HOUSE SQUARE 
CENTRAL 2000 
Saturday February 5 1949 


### 73915: Problems of UNESCO

PROBLEMS 
OF UNESCO 
ee QES the world need 
Unesco ?” In one 
form or another the 
question has been posed since 1919, 
although the League of Nations 
cannot be said to have succeeded 
very well in fortifying faith on 
this point, for the Committee of 
Intellectual Cooperation never 
succeeded in making a sufficiently 
vigorous impact even on the 
scholar’s limited world te com- 
mand great confidence in the 
value of its contribution to peace. 
That committee, with the Insti- 
tute of Intellectual Cooperation 
created and largely endowed for 
it by the Government of France, 
was, however, by no means the 
sole nor even the most vigorous of 
the many international organiza- 
tions striving to develop an 
interest and enthusiasm for the 
life of the mind on a world-wide 
scale. 
‘ The International Bureau of 
Education survives as one expres- 
sion of forces which in almost 


### 73913: The Need for professional training of journalists

The Need For Professional 
Training of Journalists 
OSEPH PULITZER, Hungar- 
J jan-born editor of The New 
York World, once said that 
“the only career for which a man 
needs no special training is that 
of an idiot.” 
When Pulitzer died nearly iorty 
years ago he left a million dollars 
to endow a training school for 
journalists, which now has oeen 
in existence since 1912 as a part 
of Columbia University, in New 
York. 
It was not the first such school 
jin the United States, or even 
in the world, but it now is one 
of many—and the number is 
steadily increasing. The last war 
emphasized the need for such 
schools and we find that training 
programmes have been introduced 
or revived or are being planned in 
many countries since 1945. ] 
Today, some form of journa- 
listic training, from a simple 
programme to an elaborate one, 
is being offered in many univer- 
sities and colleges of the Umted 
States, Canada, Mexico, China, 
India, Great Britain,” France, 
Poland, Italy and other couniries. 
MANY journalists of experience 
have regarded actual work for 
a newspaper as the only training 
necessary. This is the time- 
honoured, empirical method, and 
it has produced some great jour- 
nalists. 
Experience in the United States, 
over a period of more than 40 
years has demonstrated, however, 
that preliminary university train- 
ing in journalism has both direct 
and indirect benefits. And the 
leading organizations of editors 
and publishers are now suppost- 
ing and endorsing the professional 
training progammes. 
The same tendency is manifest- 
ing itself in certain other coun- 
tries. 
The problems the journalist 
must cope with today are so much 
more complex than ever before, 
and his responsabilities so much 
greater, that logic seems to many 
persons to demand an improved 
preparation for the journalist 
himself. 
Two Unesco Commissions on 
Technical Needs have made strong 
recommendations for professional 
training to help prepare the 
prospective journalist. Such train- 
ing the commission members felt, 
By Robert W. DESMOND 
should be given as part of the 
work of a university or college 
so that students might combine 
specialized journalism courses 
with general educational subjects. 
A journalist needs a thorough 
background—especially in the 
world of today—in history, cco- 
  
Dr. Robert W. Desmond is head 
of the Journalism Department ef 
the University of California, Ber- 
keley, Califgrnia. He has served 
on the editorial staffs of the New 
York Merald Tribune’s Paris Fdi- 
tion, The New York Times, The 
Christian Science Monitor and the 
Milwaukee Journal. He was a 
member of the first Unesco Cem- 
mission on Technical Needs, which 
met in Paris in 194%, and has 
recently been in Paris to do prepa- 
ratory work en a forthcoming 
Unesco brochure on “The Prefes- 
slenal Training of Journalists’.     
nomics, government, sociology, 
international relations, and in the 
liberal arts and humanities. In 
journalism courses he receives 
training in the techniques of news 
reporting and writing and editing, 
in the historical background of 
the profession that is to become 
his own, in the social importance 
of the press and its responsibili- 
ties, and perhaps in certain more 
specialized aspects af the work. 
He Unesco Commission on 
Technical Needs asserted hat 
“every effort should be made by 
Unesco to extend public awareness 
of the need for accurate and 
comprehensive dissemination of 
public information”. It urged that 
“training programmes for pros- 
pective journalists should be 
encouraged by any means within 
the power of Unesco”, including 
“practical assistance to schools 
by the provision of expert advice 
and guidance, by the arrangement 
of facilities for the... organizers 
of courses in journalism to meet 
and pool their knowledge aad 
by the encouragement of exchan- 
ges of lecturers.” 
As an aid to this purpose, the 
Commission proposed the forma- 
tion of and International Institute 
of Press and Information, one of 
whose functions would be to help 
national schools of journalism in 
problems of organization and 
exchange of information. 
This proposal has had support 
from the 1947 and 1948 General 
Conference of Unesco, from ‘he 
U.N. Conference on Freedom of 
Information at Geneva, in the 
spring of 1948, and from various 
individual journalists and groups 
of journalists in several countr.es. 
As a more immediate aid to 
the newer schools and to those 
countries. where plans are being 
made to introduce professional 
training, Unesco is preparing a 
brochure in which the entire 
subject will be explored and 
suggestions for training program- 
mes advanced. 
The importance of accurate and 
well-presented fact and opinion is 
se tremendous that any action in 
support of better performance in 
all the media of mass communi- 
cation has the support of thought- 
ful persons in every land. The 
young, prospective journalist there- 
fore may anticipate better op- 
portunities for training, and better 
opportunities to contribute to the 
improvement of his community 
and of his world in the years 
ahead.   
every discipline drove men of 
many countries to come together, 
cooperating to advance their spe- 
cial studies and interests not 
merely in their own country but 
throughout the world. In natural 
sciences and technelogy, in hist- 
ory, in philosophy, in archaeology, 
in the world of museums and of 
libraries this same expansive 
unifying interest was manifest. 
What more natural, therefore, 
‘than to demand an International 
of Internationals in the realm of 
education, science and culture 
which should harness this energy 
and direct it im the service of 
peace and international under- 
standing? For otherwise how 
would the seething mass of inter- 
national organizations struggling 
for survival have achieved any 
coherent pattern? Imevitably their 
needs and aspirations would meet 
with a poor response, because 
they would neither be heard nor 
understood by the lay and secular 
powers of Governments and their 
treasuries, without whose 2id in 
the past they plainly have achieved 
very little. In the Director-General 
of Unesco they mow have a tri- 
bune vho must listen, who will 
understand, who will be able to 
report their cause aright to the 
magistrates and chief officers of 
States. 
In this way money may, 
indirectly, be obtained from 
national budgets which national 
parliaments could not be asked to 
vote directly. In 1949, for example, 
the United Kingdom will have to 
find just over a quarter of a 
million pounds for Unesco. It 
seems a large sum; but more was 
spent on publicity for the Road 
Safety Campaign in 1948 and as 
much is needed by one of our local 
authorities to build and equip a 
single modern English school. 
Further questions, however, 
arise. It has been asked, “What 
has Unesco done?” and, more 
rarely, “What sort of activity 
should Unesco undertake?” The 
achievements of Unesco, as some 
of its critics appear to anticipate 
with eager relish, are not yet very 
impressive. This does not mean 
that they are non-existent, for 
Dr. Julian Huxley in his last 
annual report as Director-General 
recites a long list of activities; but 
their value cannot seem substan- 
tial in the current context of 
international antagonisms. And 
what is worse in many eyes is 
Unesco’'s failure te arrest the 
attention of the man in the street. 
To discredit Unesco on either of 
these two grounds would surely be 
premature. We are only at the 
threshold of knowledge about the 
treatment of tensions affecting 
international understanding. No- 
thing, moreover, would be more 
disastrous than for Unesco to 
neglect to build its ewn founda- 
tions while it tried instead to 
make am easy and impressive 
OCTOR WALTER H. C. 
LAVES, Deputy Director- 
General of Unesco, in a spe- 
cial statement to the press this 
month, described as “irres- 
ponsible” and “shocking”, 
recent newspaper articles 
which have appeared in cer- 
tain countries, based on an 
auditor's report of Unesco 
accounts in 1946. 
The articles, published in 
British, United States, Austra- 
lian, South African, Dutch, 
Norwegian and Swedish news- 
papers, were headlined 
“Unesco Accounts Scandal”. 
They were based on the 
audit carried out by Price, 
Waterhouse and Company, 
covering the accounts of the 
Unesco Preparatory Commis- 
sion to the end of 1946. 
Pointing out that Unesco 
itself had requested that the 
auditing report be made two   


### 73916: UNESCO official decries press 'scandal' reports

Unesco Official Decries 
Press ‘Scandal’ Reports 
years ago, Dr. Laves said : 
“I am shocked by the com- 
plete irresponsibility of those 
who presented a story like this 
at the present time as if had 
happened today, and the equal 
irresponsibility of those who 
published it in this form”. 
“The press stories”, Dr. La- 
ves added, “imply that the 
situation still prevails. The 
fact is three auditors reports 
by Price, Waterhouse and 
Company, since then, have 
given Unesco a completely 
clean bill of health”. 
“I make a direct appeal to 
the press of the world”, Dr. 
Laves concluded, “to under- 
stand the seriousness of the 
problems before us in build- 
ing the peace through the 
United Nations, and to make 
the utmost effort to check 
sources, be sure of the facts 
and to report them accurately”.   
display. In this, Unesco is mo 
different from the other spe- 
cialized agencies of the United 
Nations, all of which have to map 
out their future activities while 
they deal at the same time with 
new problems of organization and 
of planning, SEE 
Does the public expect more of 
Unesco? It is to be hoped so, if 
only bcause an attitude of critical 
expectancy must prove an encour- 
aging stimulant. For it will be 
upon the promise of performance 
in the many years ahead rather 
than upon activities during the 
three which lie behind that a just 
appreciation of Unesco is te be 
formed. 
Those who look askance at any 
form of movelty are always sure 
of a public and never more so 
than when the novelty may be 
made to appear expensive as well 
as exotic. The popular Press has 
on the whole shown restraint in 
exploiting Unesco in this way. 
Some attacks there of course have 
been, often on the ground of 
treating omne ignotum pro risible. 
Small wonder if the promotion of 
a concentrated attack on the 
whole range of scientific problems 
impeding the development of the 
vast resources latent in wet trop- 
ical forests wins scant sympathy 
when it is presented to the world 
as a proposal to establish “A 
Hylean Amazon Institute”. And it 
remains to be seen whether 
derision from those enjoying an 
ample rainfall will greet Unesco’s 
new inquiry, approved in Beirut, 
into the desirability of assisting 
the foundation of a new inter- 
national institute to be dedicated 
to the human and scientifie 
problems of the world’s arid zones. 
Serious criticism of Unesco’s 
programme, of which there is far 
too little, is rarely accompanied, 
however, by positive suggestions 
of alternative plans which would 
better serve its purposes. The 
essential questions are rarely 
asked; yet the existence of the 
programme is an open challenge 
to artists, teachers, philosophers, 
scientists, writers and thinkers 
everywhere. : 
If the present programme is 
poor and inadequate, how should 
it be revised? For it is clear that 
the achievement of a deeper sense 
of intellectual and moral solidarity 
between the nations of the earth 
is a new and exacting task; that 
the difficulties Iatent in it are by 
no means sufficiently realized and 
that the need for constructive 
inventions in methods and machi- 
nery has hardly yet been sensed 
by the leaders, not to mention the 
rank and file, of any continent. 
It is unfortunately all loo rare to 
encounter evidence of serious 
devotion to these questions, Yet 
they are far too important and 
too difficult to be left either te 
the few score men and women, 
their clerks and typists of the 
secretariat in Paris or to the 
delegations sent to the orgamiza- 
tion's general conferences, parti- 
cularly after the recent decision 
in Beirut that the general confer- 
ence will consider the programme 
at intervals of two years instead of 
annually. 
Unesco must be regarded as an 
experimental laboratory in the 
great task of achieving human 
understanding. Its labours may 
serve as the prolegomena to all 
other schemes of international 
understanding. Its programme 
enables it to invite philosophers 
and social scientists and intellect 
ual workers everywhere to coope- 
rate and to examine together the 
presuppositions and the methods 
of action directed towards the 
union of men and minds. For 
those who assume that this task 
ean be achieved merely by the 
more assiduous empleyment of 
traditional methods are but sleepy 
sentinels at Minerva’s gate. There 
are fundamental problems such 
as that restated last year by the 
Lambeth Encyclical, whether in- 
creased knowledge of the human 
environment and a greater con- 
trol of its resources will gradually 
but certainly ensure the perfection 
of the characters of men and ef 
society. Clearly it must be among 
the first tasks of Unesco to avoid 
uncritical acceptance of a facile 
Rousseauism and to rethink its 
philosophical foundations.

## [Page 3](073912engo.pdf#page=3) 4

### IGNORE

February 1949 UNESCO COURIER 
  
   
. Members of Unesco’s Executive Board during a session this month 
voted approval of programme to publicize U.N. Declaration of Human 
Rights and special order of priorities for Unesco’s 1949 activities, 


### 73919: UNESCO sets up priority system for 1949 work

“UNESCO SETS UP PRIORITY 
SYSTEM FOR 1949 WORK 
A 
N order of priorities for Unesco's 1949 programme . has been 
established by Dr. Torres Bodet, Director-General, and approved 
by the Organization’s Executive Board which met in Paris this month. 
The priority system has been applied to each of Unesco’s projects 
in accordance with criteria proposed by Dr. Torres Bodet. The crucial 
test applied to any project 
is three-fold: 
1) will it improve the standard of 
living of the ordinary people? 
2)does it help the intellectual 
and professional leaders to serve 
the people? 
3)will it show tangible results 
fairly quickly? 
“These”, Dr. Torres Bodet 
explained to the Executive Board 
" meeting, “are the considerations 
which have led me to mark out, 
in the permanent programme 
adopted at Beirut, certain acti- 
vities on which I suggest that 
we should concentrate our main 
energies in the coming months.” 
“I have a deep-rooted convic- 
tion”, he added, “that Unesco 
must be a driving force, courage- 
ously dedicated to the service 
of peace and progress, or else 
no one would care whether it 
exists or not.” 
.+ “However much sympathy and 
._ loyalty may be felt for the ideals 
"it embodies”, he went on, “we 
cannot ignore the fact that 
© Unesco as an organization has 
“. not yet compelled sufficient re- 
- cognition to be certain of its 
future. Many, not only among the 
~~ gencral public, but also in 
intellectual and professional 
+ circles, feel that it has to prove 
itself —to prove... not the nobility 
of its aims but the efficacy of 
its methods.”  - ~~ yo 
Spiritual needs 
of moment 
The concentration of Unesco’s 
energies on certain priority acti- 
vities would naturally entail a 
- reduction in the resources devot- 
" ed to the execution of other 
projects. “However”, he continu- 
ed, “I should like to make it 
clear that these resources will 
be maintained at a level adequate 
to ensure both the continuance 
of those basic activities that are 
essential for the efficient work- 
ing of the Departments and the 
steady preparation of projects 
which are likely in due course 
to become of paramount impor- 
tance.” } 
“The list of priority activities”, 
he went on, “must not therefore 
be regarded as exclusive or as an 
attempt to make an arbitrary 
reduction in the progremme voted 
by the General Conference. The| 
priorities I propose to you leave 
this programme untouched, With 
its full scope and diversity. Their 
sole object is to bring out the 
relative importance or urgency 
of the different projccts—so that 
~~ our energies may be directed to 
the fulfilment of the tasks most 
suited to the spiritual needs of 
the moment.” 
LY 4 Le 
AACHEN oF Be 
-% = & oe 


### 73918: UNESCO maps vast programme on human rights

  
  
‘VAST PRO 
3 ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
Radio, Press, Cinema To Be Used 
To Tell Story To World's Peoples 
NE of the jobs that Unesco is undertaking this year is the 
{ story of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This 
month, Unesco’s Executive Board enthusiastically approved a 
programme, outlined by Dr. Torres Bodet, the Director-General, 
which it is hoped will bring home sharply and vividly fo every 
youngster and grown-up the 
importance and especially the 
significance of the Declaration. 
The story of the adoption of 
the Universal Declaration by the 
U.N. General Assembly in Paris 
last December 10 has already 
captured the imagination of many 
peoples all over the world. But 
what about the story behind the 
story, the story behind each of 
the 30 Rights which make up 
what has been called “the most 
Switzerland Joins 
Unesco 
Switzerland is now officially 
a member of Unesco. 
Following the signing by the 
Swiss Minister in London of 
the Constitution of Unesco 
and the simultaneous deposit 
of the instrument of accept- 
ance of the Constitution by the 
Swiss Federal Council, this 
country became the 46th Mem- 
ber State of the Organization 
February 11.     


### 73917: Schuman, Bidault welcome Torres Bodet at French National Commission

  
AT FRENCH NATIONAL COMMISSION 
Schuman, Bidault 
Welcome Torres Bodet 
ROBERT SCHUMAN, French Foreign Minister, M. Georges 
M » Bidault, head of the French delegation to Unesco’s Beirut 
Conference, and M. Yvon Delbos, Minister of Education, 
were among the distinguished personalities present at the first 1949 
meeting of the French National Commission for Unesco, which 
officially welcomed Dr. Torres 
Bodet on January 22. 
Meeting in the historic Salon 
de [I'Horloge,- at the Foreign 
Ministry in Paris, Commission 
members heard the French 
delegates outline the results 
achieved at the Unesco General 
Conference in Beirut last De- 
cember. 
Re-affirming that the French 
Government and the French 
people were prepared to give 
Unesco full support during the 
present year, M. Schuman said: 
“France will never belittle the 
importance of the task assigned 
to Unesco. It is an organization 
responsible for the future peace 
of the world for which it is now 
laying the spiritual foundations.” 
In his address before the 
French National Commission, Dr. 
Torres Bodet drew an analogy 
between present day civilization 
and the famous painting of Gé- 
ricault, “The Raft of the Me- 
dusa.” In this painting, two 
figures stand out: one a youth 
signalling frantically into empti- 
ness, towards a point on the 
horizon from which help may 
come. The other, a man seated 
ith his back to the possible 
rescue ship, is lost in meditation 
as he supports the dead body of 
a young man. 
“I call this scene to your 
minds,” Unesco’s Director-Gen- 
feral said, “because it seems to 
i me that our civilization resembles 
ithe Raft of the Medusa. Raging 
seas surround it and storm 
‘clouds loom above. In each of 
us there is a man who thinks 
Huxley Becomes Unesco 
Adviser 
Dr. Julian Huxley, whose 
term of office as director-gen- 
eral of Unesco ended last De- 
cember, has accepted the in- 
vitation of the British Minister 
of Education to become a 
member of the United King- 
dom Committee which advises 
him on general policy concern- 
ing British partlicipation in 
Unesco.     
and another who hopes, a man 
who signals to the future and 
another who seeks in the wake 
the reasons for what has oc 
curred.’ 
Since the last two wars and 
especially since the more recent 
one, Dr. Torres Bodet declared, 
the world had witnessed a com- 
plete distortion of values, a 
dangerous spiritual confusion. 
Torn Up Treaties 
“Force usurped the place of 
law, and cruelty the place of 
courage,” he said. *‘Servility 
became tragically confused with 
discipline, and anarchy with 
freedom. The scientist was re- 
warded not for the lives which 
his discoveries saved, but for the 
cities which they destroyed. 
Statesmen were praised not for 
the agreements they honoured 
but for the treaties they tore 
up. Writers were honoured not 
for the virtues they inspired but 
for their efforts to still our 
latent curiosity.” 
(Continued on page 11.) 
 
  
M. Robert Schuman, French Foreign Minister addressing the French 
  
important document of modern 
times”? 
Working hand in hand with the 
U.N., Unesco will tackle this job 
of making the Declaration better 
known all around the globe. 
Special programmes designed to 
arouse the interest of all groups 
—highbrow and lowbrow, young 
and old—are to be organized 
through the use of radio, films, 
booklets and other methods. 
For example, Unesco’s Projects 
Division is already at work on 
a series of 12 broadcasts—being 
prepared by world celebrities— 
which will present dramatic 
events in the progressive estab- 
lishment of Human Rights. 
Zola and “Aaeropagitica’ 
One series will tell of famous 
court trials, of Socrates, Galileo, 
Zola. Another will centre around 
fhe world’s great Human Rights 
oks, such as Milton's Aereopa- 
gitica and Harriet Beecher Stowe’s 
Uncle Tom’s Cabin, The new 
weekly radio programme, “Unesco 
World Review”, will feature 
special talks om those Rights 
interesting to the public at the 
time. 
There may be scoffers and 
sceptics, but there always are. 
Unesco will try to show that the 
enforcement of ‘Human Rights 
has always been won by pressure 
of public opinion—the abolition 
of slavery is one example—and 
that it is therefore up to the 
public, by actively supporting the 
Universal Declaration, to obtain 
the full application of the prin- 
ciples proclaimed both in its 
Preambule and in its 30 Rights, 
where such application is still 
imperfect. 
Ways by which teachers can 
interest school children in the 
Universal Declaration will be told 
in a Teachers’ Handbook which 
Unesco is undertaking. The 
Handbook will also give a graphic, 
historical account of the rocky 
road that ultimately led to the 
successful application of each 
Right by different countries. 
H.R. Teachers’ Handbook 
For the general public, Unesco 
will evamine the Right of 
on the most essential of the 
Rights describing the sacrifices 
nations have made before reach- 
ing the present-day notion of 
Human Rights. 
For the cultured, although not 
specialized public, Unesco’s Phi- 
losophy and Humanistic Studies 
Division will begin preparation 
of a series of 6 booklets. One 
will examine the Rigth of 
freedom of scientific research, 
another the Right to informa- 
tion; and a third the Right to 
participate in the cultural life of 
the community and to share in 
scientific progress. 
Unesco will of course make special 
efforts to ensure full publicity 
by press, radio and cinema, of 
the anniversary of the Universal 
Declaration next December 10. 
  
  
  
National Commission for Unesco on January 22. Georges Bidault turns 
an attentive ear   


### 73920: France, Ecuador become first nations to adopt "Human Rights Day"

France, Ecuador 
Become 
First Nations 
To Adopt 
‘Human Rights Day’ 
CUADOR and France have 
become the first two coun- 
tries to announce plans for 
mobilizing their educational 
resources in order to make 
the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights a reality in the 
conscience of every schoolchild. 
The announcements were 
made in response to an ap- 
peal issued on December 31, 
1948, by Dr. Torres Bodet, 
Director-General of Unesco to 
its Member States, calling on 
all nations to adopt December 
10th as “Human Rights Day” 
and to aid Unesco and the 
United Nations in their com- 
bined efforts to publicize the 
Declaration of Human Rights, 
unanimously adopted by the 
U.N. General Assembly last 
year. 
The first reply to Dr. Torres 
Bodet’s appeal came from the 
Republic of Ecuador on Janu- 
ary 25 in a note delivered on 
behalf of his government by 
| Seftor Jorge Carrera Andrade, 
Ecuadorian Minister in London, 
The Ecuadorian reply, sign- 
ed by Foreign Minister Nestali 
Ponce, enthusiastically sup- 
ports Dr. Torres Bodet’s sug- 
gestion to dedicate December 
10th as “Human Rights Day”. 
“Ecuador”, the Ecuador For- 
eign Minister writes, “not only 
fervidly welcomes” this idea, 
but “is taking immediate steps 
to prepare the commemoration 
of Human Rights Day in all 
educational institutions of the 
Republic. 
In addition, Dr. Torres Bodet 
was officially informed by the 
South American Republic that 
the Ecuadorian Ministry of 
Education is formulating plans 
for a broad series of publica- 
tions, lectures and essay con- 
tests on the theme of the Uni- 
versal Declaration of Human 
Rights. 
The purpose of these plans, 
as set forth in M. Ponce’s 
reply, is to ensure widespread 
knowledge of the text of the 
Declaration, along with “a 
study of its antecedents, and of 
its relation to principles estab- 
lished in the constitutions of 
democratic countries”. Ecua- 
dorian schoolchildren, said M. 
Ponce, will also be taught 
“what the Declaration foresha- 
dows for the future of peoples” 
and the “intimate connection 
between the Rights of Man and 
the principles of Unesco”. 
French Rally to Appeal 
OY February 3, Dr. Jaime 
Torres Bodet announced 
that the French Government 
had also rallied to his appeal. 
The French reply came in 
the form of an official notifi- 
cation from this country’s Na- 
tional Commission for Unesco 
which announced that the 
‘Declaration had already been 
distributed in all French lycées, 
colleges, and teacher training 
schools. Primary schools will 
also receive the text shortly. 
All civics teachers in France 
will devote special lessons to an 
explanation of the Declaration 
of Human Rights, as one of 
the great steps made by man 
on the road to freedom. 
In addition, the French Na- 
tional Commisison announced 
that a series of twelve radio 
programmes of the Interna- 
tional University of the Air 
will be devoted to the Decla- 
ration on the National Net- 
work of the French radio 
system,  

## [Page 4](073912engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

4 
. ia > 
UNESCO COURIER February 1949 
A MANIFESTO 
  
  
E publish below the partial text of the 
WW Manifesto recently issued by the Inter- 
national Music Fund, set up by the 
American Section of the International Sociely 
of Contemporary Music (ISCM) to aid com- 
posers and composers’ societies in Europe. 
ra     
HE International Music Fund has come into existence as an 
Act of Faith on the part of America's composers, artists and 
educators—faith in the regenerative powers of creative thought. 
“and the exchange of creative thought, and faith in their own ability 
to form, in an epoch teeming with materialist implications, an 
organization that could rise above all ideological and spatial frontiers, 
and demonstrate in terms of action the enduring validity and urgent 
priority claims of the things of the spirit. 
As in Europe, here too in America, the creative artist feels himself 
to be working in a spiritual wilderness, for the darkness is a world- 
wide darkness—a flood-tide of materialism, prejudice and suspicion 
that threatens to engulf all other values. 
Much has been written and said of the urgeat necessity for a 
physical and material rehabilitation in war-shattered areas of Europe; 
little is heard of the spiritual exhaustion, the psychic devastation. 
the despair that is attendant upon these conditions—a spiritual 
chaos that has undermined the dignity and serenity of artists and 


### 73921: A Manifesto of the International Music Fund

Of The International 
Music Fund 
| S—_ 
of the mind, heart and spirit pefore the transient ones Co 
of the body, and to whom assistance that is designed to ~~ / 
enable them to formulate and bring forth a renaissance 
of their own creativity, will be hailed as the greatest 
service that in this country can render them. 
How Fund Will Work 
UCH people as the Fund will seek to discover and assist, will not 
J miscoastrue its intention, will not mistake fellowship and good- 
will for a gesture of charitable philanthropy, but will read in every 
ideal and rule set forth for the Fund’s guidance a deep desire on the 
   
  
Dr, Carleton Sprague Smith, Chair- 
thinkers everywhere. - 
A “Still Small Voice’ 
It is in answer to this “still small voice’ that the International 
Music Fund speaks forth, an answer to that precious minority of 
creative people who always did, always will place the eternal values 
man of the American Committee of 
  
Dr. Torres Bodet greets Paul Marie Masson, noted French musicologist 
at opening of Paris conference which set up World Music Council 


### 73922: Musicologists create World Council

Musicologists Create 
World Council 
A group of eminent American and European composers, conductors 
and musicologists, meeting in Paris last month under the auspices 
of Unesco, has brought inte being an international organization which 
is expected to be of immense bencfit to the world of music. 
After approving the steps to be taken for establishing an Interna- 
tional Council of Music, the conference elected a seven-member Pre- 
paratory Commission with Professor Roland Manuel of the French 
National Conservatory as presi- 
dent. The Commission's task will 
be to convoke, later this year or 
early in 1950, the first General 
‘Assembly of the new International 
Council. 
The Music Council, which re- 
presents the final step in pre- 
parations under way since 1947 
for the creation of the organiza- 
tion, will serve as-a liaison agency 
for national and international 
music organizations throughout 
the world. It will help to organize 
international or regional music 
festivals and congresses, to en- 
courage international contacts 
among musicians and composers, 
and to facilitate the distribution 
and performance of musical 
compositions. It will also study 
and report on proposals for the 
improvement of musical tech- 
niques. 
Unesco will also ask the Council 
to aid in instituting a “Unesco 
Prize”, to be awarded for the 
best musical works published each 
year, and in bringing about the 
adoption of a universeal standard 
of pitch. 
In addition to paving the way 
for the future work of the 
Council, the Preparatory Com- 
mission will consider the possibility 
of acting as an advisory body to 
Unesco in the distribution of 
grants-in-aid offered to European 
composers and composers socie- 
ties by the International Music 
+ Fund. 
The Fund was established last 
July by the American section of 
the International Society for 
Contemporary Music, in order to 
encourage musical creation in 
Europe. Shortly after the Pund’s 
foundation, Unesco was asked to 
give advice as to how it shoul 
be allocated. ‘ 
The Preparatory Commission is 
at present studying the distribu- 
tion of the sums placed at the 
disposal of Unesco by the Inter- 
national Fund. 
The first project to be realized 
will be the recording of music of 
contemporary composers. Unesco 
will get in touch with the phono- 
graphic industry, and the Inter- 
national Music Fund will subsidize 
these recordings. The first com- 
positions selected for recordings 
are woorks by Luigi Dallapiccola 
(Italy), Anton von Webern (Aus- 
tria) and Maurice Delage (Fran- 
ce). 
Marcel Cuvelier, director of the 
Brussels Philharmonic Society 
and general secretary of the 
International Federation of Mu- 
sical Youth, was elected vice- 
chairman of the Preparatory 
Commission. 
Others members of the Com- 
mission are the Swiss composer 
Arthur Honegger; Edward Clark, 
British orchestra leader and pre- 
sident of the International 
Society for Contemporary Music; 
Miss Maud Karpeles, secretary of 
the International Folk Music 
Council; Paul Marie Masson, pro- 
fessor at the Sorbonne and vice- 
president of the International 
Society for Musical Research; and 
Charles Beeger, chief of the 
Division of Music and Visual Arts 
of the Organization of American 
States. 
  
part of some individuals to re-distribute more evenly such wealth 
of the world as is the prerequisite for the liberating of creative minds 
for their destined work in that world’s service. 
The organizers of the Fund have accordingly gone to work to 
inaugurate a nation-wide series of Benefit Concerts and other musical 
activities to raise a budget that will be collected through the U.S. 
Section of the ISCM, (International Society of Contemporary Music), 
and distributed to European composers and composers’ organizations 
through the Paris office of Unesco. 
A committee has been sel up in New York, and a group of European 
Regional Advisers are being appointed, to recommend, and make appli- 
cations through the Paris Unesco headquarters, which, after due 
consultation with the N.Y. Commillee, will allot the funds raised. 
  
The sponsors of the Fund will not seek to interfere with, or 
dictate the allocation of the money, but rather—will endeavour to 
assist such activities or projects as are already in existence, or under 
way. 
Many types of application will be considered. Xt will be the desire of 
the Fund to facilitate wherever possible the movement and circula- 
tion of composers, and of their work from one country to another; 
to supplement the budgets of organizations wishing to perform or 
comission works by living composers; to undertake the copying of 
parts or the duplication of scores; ultimately it is hoped that exchange 
of scholarships may be arranged, so that it will be possible for the 
Regional Advisers to make application for such scholarships enabling 
European composers and student composers to visit the United States. 
Koussevitsky Pledges 
Support 
~\R. KOUSSEVITZKY, as 
Honorary President of the 
U.S. Section of the ISCM, 
has pledged his full support and 
has promised his assistance in 
cvery way, and he himself con- 
ducted the Imaugural Benefit 
Concert with the Boston Sym- 
phony Orchestra at Tanglewood 
on 3 August 1948, when a group 
of speakers representing the arts 
and letters spoke for the cause, 
and where Mr. Archibald Mac- 
Leish was present in both the 
capacities of Master of Ceremo- 
nies and as U.S. representative 
for Unesco. 
On that occasion, Mr. George V. Allen of the State Department 
wrote “that private groups take the lead in such efforts is highly 
desirable. The most effective means for establishing lasting inter- 
national ties among peoples is found in privately initiated activities. 
It is of paramount importance that international co-operation be 
developed and expanded in every way possible, The American Section 
of the International Society for Contemporary Music with Dr. Serge 
Koussevitzky at its head is working in a field of great significance.” 
Speaking at the opening of the Berkshire Summer School at 
Tanglewood last year, Dr. Koussevitzky expressed similar concepts 
in his own inimitable way: “The physicist calls it the atomic age,” 
he said. “The mystic sees in it the approach of apocalyptic times: 
it is surprising to note how little faith is shown by present-day 
leaders of humanity in the creative and regenerative capacity of 
cultural and spiritual values. oo 
 
“We read of millions of dollars being assigned for the vast European 
Recovery Programme, but all is for physical needs—none for the 
relief of the spiritual vacuum and cultural hunger of a sick mankind. 
Man has indeed lost himself in the conflict with life; he is demoralized, 
and stands on the verge of spiritual failure.” 
The American musicians who join forces to create this Fund, work 
not with any sense of patronage for their superior strength on a 
material plane, nor from a sense of inadequacy and inferiority in 
the creative field. For “In the field of Art,” wrote Romain Rolland 
to Carleton Sprague Smith in 1939. “there should not be any rivalry 
between the Nations. The only combat worthy of us is that savaged 
in every country, at every hour, between culture and ignorance, 
between light and chaos. Let us save all the light that can be saved; 
there is none more refulgent than music, It is the sum of the inner 
universe.” - a 
the International Music Fund 
UNESCO PREPARING 
CHOPIN REGORD 
CATALOGUE 
To commemorate the cente- 
nary of Chopin's death this 
year, Unesco is preparing a 
special catalogue listing all 
recordings of the composer's 
works which have been made 
throughout the world. A 
similar catalogue devoted to 
Beethoven is also being made 
and both should be ready 
about the middle of the year. 
This work is part of Unesco’s 
project to prepare a world 
catalogue of recorded music, 
which is to cover classical 
Western musie, classical Orien- 
tal music, and folk music. 
A Central Index of Western 
Classical Music Recordings is 
already being built up at 
Unesco House in Paris and, 
when complete, will list about 
200,000 titles of recorded music, 
starting with the first cylindri- 
cal records. As new recordings 
are made, the Index will be 
kept up to date. :     
Lin Yutang and Cerrea de Azevedo, of Unesco, discuss work of Music 
Council with Harrison Kerr of U.S. Composers’ Alliance, Mr. C. Seegher 
and Mr. C, Sprague Smith. 
  
Theatre Bulletin 
Lists World Plays 
HE International Theatre In- 
stitute (ITI), formed last year 
with the assistance and under 
the sponsorship of Unesco, has 
recently published the first num- 
ber of a monthly Bulletin, which 
provides a forum for countries to 
make known their current the- 
atrical productions and activities. 
Printed in English and French, 
the first Bulletin contains detail- 
ed information on cwrrent plays, 
operas and ballet performances 
which have been supplied by Na- 
tional Centres of ithe ITI in Bel- 
gium, France, Poland, the U.S.A. 
and the UK. as well as repre- 
sentative theatre sources in 
Egypt, Hungary, Netherlands, 
Roumania and the Union of 
South Africa, where National 
Centres are not yet established. 
In addition to the title and the 
name and address of the author 
or composer, the Bulletin provides 
a brief resume of each play, lists 
of actors, directors, scene design- 
ers, costumiers and critical ap 
praisals fram newspapers

## [Page 5](073912engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

February 1949 UNESCO COURIER 
= DISMAL 
" SERENADE 
| 
    
  


### 73923: These are children of Europe: dismal serenade

  
   
Minions of children of post-war 
Europe, all accidental veterans of the 
last war, today roam the alleys, streets 
and cities. Abandoned, unloved, un- 
taught and often crippled, they are 
starved in many ways... But they 
reach for life, and if they cannot do it 
the right way they do it the wrong way. 
Like a house whose walls stand 
straight and upright with the sun 
above it, the living channel has to be 
forged out of the past which still gapes 
and thrusts its sad reminders at them 
as they go by... Can the world, like 
the café habitués, coldly ignore these 
children’s plight? 
     

## [Page 6](073912engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 73925: Somewhere in Europe: a photographer highlights the drama of post-war youngsters

  
  
THROUGH THE EYE 
OF THE CAMERA   
———————————— co — 
» 
   
  
   
   
  
The guns did not curve around school buildings 
to reach enemy targets. Amidst the ruins of 
Favoriten, a workers’ district in Vienna, shoeless 
boys (Right) play on what was once a 
battlefield. 
*x %X xX 
But the schools are coming back. They are the 
first new buildings one sees in war-devastated 
Europe. Above, construction of a new school in 
a Hungarian village. Eagerly young boy and girl 
lend helping hand. 
x Xk xX 
Below, Polish girl in science classroom uses 
Bunsen burner, ingeniously made from ink 
bottle, to heat chemistry retort built out of old 
electric bulb. 
  
'SOMEWHE 
A Photographer    igh
N the summer of 1948 Mr. David 
Seymour, a distinguished United States 
photographer, undertook for Unesco an 
extensive photographic documentation of the 
needs and problems of Europe’s children, 
with special reference to the activities of 
the various U.N. agencies engaged in helping 
to solve these problems. 
  
Mr. Seymour has recently returned to 
Paris after completing six months in five of 
Europe’s war devastated countries. 
The result of this mission is an impressive 
collection of over 5,000 pictures, some of 
which have already been or are soon to be 
published by LIFE, ILLUSTRATED, SIE UND 
ER, FRANCE-ILLUSTRATION, and other 
leading magazines in various countries. 
Asked to give his first—hand impressions 
of this trip, Mr. Seymour {fold the following 
story: Car 
LA 
Eyes And Camera Open 
To The Faces Of Children 
@® § a photographer, I don’t know much 
about words. I speak the language of 
pictures. I look around and I try to 
record what I see. In the last six months I saw 
plenty. I went to Poland, Hungary, Greece, Italy 
and Austria with my eyes and my camera open 
to the faces of children. 
“Here is my key picture to the whole series; 
A bunch of kids who in the midst of the ruins 
of their bombed-out cities are playing with 
bricks. They are building a miniature house for 
their games: they marked out two doors, and on 
the doors they put up two signs: one says “Kin- 
dergaten, Age 3 to 6’—the other “Doctor's 
Office”. : 
“Here is your answer—direct from the chil- 
dren themselves. They want a school to replace 
the missing warmth of their tost homes—a 
place to play as well as a place te learn. They 
want a doctor to protect and build up their 
frail health. All over the five countries I saw 
this one story: the terrible need and the great 
challenge. Youngsters sitting on steps of bombed- 
out naked stairways of their houses. Through 
the smashed staircases you could see the sky— 
the sky that is the limit for the help they need. 
“IT also saw the beginnings, the wonderful 
beginnings of this help. In Peland, amidst the 
desert of the Warsaw ghetto, I saw the oasis 
of the garden school for handicapped and 
backward children—orphans, kids born in con- 
centration camps, war-scarred victims of all 
sorts. Specially trained teachers are returning 
these youngsters to normal life by making them 
do productive work of the simplest, vet most 
convincing kind: by making them experience 
that things can live again, by making them 
watch their own garden growing and blossoming 
and bearing fruits. 
lights 
Of Post-Wa 
  
  
. The road through the juvenile court into the refor 
© 9-year old Napolitan stands before a tribunal ¢ 
- charge. Right, a 13-year old Viennese boy gazes thr 
oo his juvenile prison cell,  

## [Page 7](073912engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 73925: Somewhere in Europe: a photographer highlights the drama of post-war youngsters

RE 
Youngsters 
@ @ |g N the rubble of Monte Cassino, I saw 
ii Italian boys playing with empty shells. 
: I saw little girls selling black market 
cigarettes and soap in the streets of Naples. But 
I also saw, and this is the contrast I want to 
stress, I saw the Villagio del Fanciullo—a child- 
ren’s community with adequate medical, educa- 
tional and recreational facilities. 
   
- Old Electric Bulbs 
And Corned Beef Cans 
“In Greece, I saw soldiers camping in a forest 
amidst scattered benches of an evacuated school. 
I also saw, against the background of the Acro- 
polis in Athens, Danish nurses and doctors vac- 
‘cinating Greek children against tuberculosis. 
‘This is being carried out as a joint project of 
two United Nations Agencies, the Children's 
Emergency Fund and the World Health Organ- 
ization. Together with the Danish Red Cross 
and the local governments, these agencies aim 
at treating, in the next five years, fifty million 
children the world over. I saw fifty dector-nurse 
teams operating in Poland and Hungary with 
a record of close to three million children 
already tested and treated in these two countries 
alone.  “Wherever I went, in any of the five countries, 
the first new buildings I saw, white and cheerful 
amidst the desolation of war-blinded cities, were 
schools. Everywhere I saw overworked teachers 
fighting with enthusiasm and resource against 
shortages of school supplies—making old elec- 
tric bulbs into chemistry retorts, corned Reef, . 
cans into calorimeters, or building optical instru- 
ments with raw macaroni. 
gy
 
r
e
a
r
 
oa
 
“Wherever I went, I saw children playing out 
their dreams of a full and peaceful life amidst 
the ruins of their parents’ world. Wherever 
I went, I saw the efforts of UNICEF to give . : 
them milk—so they could sleep better 
In fact, the work of the international and 
national relief organizations has shown real 
positive results. Todaw the most immediate prob- 
lems, the physical needs of food and shelter, are 
steadily improving becasie of the rapid strides 
being made in Enrope’s material reconstruction, 
But the other problem—the great problem 
educational help, the psychological rehabilitation 
and re-education of Europe’s children—presents 
a greater challenge than ever before. 
g a LARA 
  
And here, I think, Unesco has an important 
and decisive role to play in co-ordinating the   
efforts of differ- } } Italian boy (above), blind and armless after a hand grenade explosion in last days of battle for Rome, 
ent countries reads Braille with his lips 
the world over, Eo : » ’ : . . : : p 
organizing the Nor 1% Fle Bi wills : ] 
interchange of : . . Ca x % % 
different expe- 
riences, weorking 
out psychelogi- 
cal treatments 
and other ap- 
propriate meth- 
ods of healing 
the wounds of 
the abandoned, 
delinquent and 
backward child- 
ren of Europe. 
Classroom (below) of this tiny school in village of Dioanata, Greece, is so overcrowded that 3 childres 
must share one desk, Because of schoolbook shortage, children must also share textbooks : 
    
  
  i 
~~ A   = SE ‘f » Sap J .— v » 
rl : TP or Sad . 
rpatory. Above, a bs EDN SPE 
o8 2 delinquency a oe - Nn 
rough the bars of . v TR Ne TA 3 ¥ 
. 
» ~ od 
» ha 
. ~ . - . ’ . 
          
. 
8 
——————

## [Page 8](073912engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 73925: Somewhere in Europe: a photographer highlights the drama of post-war youngsters

3 | a UNESCO COURIER February 1949 
THE CHILD is entitled to special care and assistance 
(Art. 25) and ‘has the right to education (Art. 26), to 
social security and the full devel- = _o a 
opment of its personality through 
national effort and international 
co-operation (Art. 22). oo 
UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS. 
  
Above, a little Polish lad at the vaccination centre near Garwolin cries 
as Danish Red Cross vaccinates him against tuberculosis; the anticipa~ 
tion, though, is much worse than the ordeal. 
- > - 
Below, energetic young trumpeter puffs away contentedly during 
Sunday concert in Children’s Town of Bartoszyce, Poland. 
  
The crowded small classroom set up in an apartment house in Warsaw (shown above), 
is typical of thousands of others in war-devastated Europe. Chalked legend on the black- 
board reads: “Wednesday, September 29. Schooi work—Tatio writes.” Lo. 
For the task of educating this generation of children, Europe must recruit its teachers 
out of the ranks of those who have endured the common experience of war and the fight 
for freedom. The task demands of them new horizons of patience and resourcefulness. 
- - 
  
The relation of adult and child, of teacher and pupil is difficult everywhere. But in the war devastated countries of 
Europe it is more difficult. For the children of Europe have, as it were, hidden themselves behind what they remember... 
They must now be coaxed out from behind the facade of agression, of timidity, In the new schools being made over in 
Europe (See cut of model kindergarten in Vienna, on right) the old rigidity is being abandoned to guide the child, to 
nourish his personal pattern of growth w»— »—r - > 
ob 
3 
br 
F 
. i d 
  
{4 hiv ih £it1 3 ds : a AS ESE Mii ad Aging’ i 
  
Dressed in her finest Sunday sailor-suit, this little girl, (above, left) is seriously engaged in picking out an enchanting 
children’s book in a recently rebuilt and re-stocked Warsaw library. The memory of terror and the fact of ruin must be 
altered within the child so that they do not dominate her view of life. 
Should not the sad faced young boy shown above, right, also be holding a book in his hands instead of being thrust, se 
quickly, into the confusion of a “Modern Times” factory ?  FE

## [Page 9](073912engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

February 1949 UNESCO COURIER 
o
r
 


### 73926: Teen-age 'républicains' plug for world federation

Teen-Age ‘Républicains’ a
Plug For World Federation & 
EXT August a group of about fifty war orphans — lucky cousins of the Sciuscia boys — will be 
the guests of the Republic of Torchok. “BE 
That means that the population of the “Republic” will suddenly be doubled! Co 
For the citizens of Torchok themselves number around fifty — fifty youngsters aged fifteen 
N 
and under — who served a glorious apprenticeship with the Maquis of the Vercors and whose “Republic” 
is located within a small private estate of Moulin-Vieux, near Lavaldens, in the department of Isére, 
France, 
Thought out by the children themselves, this project of an “inter- 
: national get-together” was put before the Executive Committee of the 
: Jnternational Federation of Children’s Communities (LF.C.C.) by a 
©" House in Paris, 
will 
“Republic” on the Committee, 
At a recent meeting.at Unesco 
the Committee 
decided to help {the Torchok 
children to put their plan inte 
effect. 
For one month this summer a 
Holiday Camp at Moulin-Vieux 
bring together fifty war 
orphans, between the ages of 
10 and 16, They will come as 
“delegates” of their comrades. 
from children’s communities in 
Belgium, France, Hungary, Italy 
and Switzerland. 
These communities, which have 
sprung up with the war all over 
Europe, have a very strong feeling 
of solidarity. 
The children correspond with 
each other and exchange their 
publications, for they even put 
. out their own little editions. Last 
autumn, for example, Tato, Dédée, 
Denisio, Six-Sous and André (or 
was it Janine, Trompette, Mitsou, 
Framboise and Vitamine?) publish- 
‘ed 3 special issue of the Torchok 
© newspaper, written specially for 
~ hadhaza in Hungary. 
the Children’s Republic of Hajdu- 
(See cut 
below.) 
To strengthen the ties between 
the communities and at the same 
" time to interest public opinion in 
the social rehabilitation of the 
war’s most pitiful victims, Unesco, 
~ with the help of numerous educa- 
also hopes 
© a scientific 
paper for children, 
:a way be the Alma Mater of the 
children’s 
. lishing two pe- : 
~ publish reports on 
. will be a truly in- 
tors, sponsored the establishment 
of the International Federation of 
Children’s Communities last July. 
Between now and August Unesco 
will make every effort to obtain 
the necessary visas for the ‘“dele- 
gates”. And, just as it did fer the 
Work Camp volunteers, Unesco 
will also try to secure railway re- 
ductions for the Torchok guests 
1). 
Xx Xk xk 
LONG with the Moulin- 
Vieux project, the Executive 
Committee of the LF.C.C. 
approved a second plan, for the 
establishment of a “Unesco Cen- 
tre” at Trogen. In this delightful 
‘Horner of Switzerland, home of the 
* well-known French educator, M. Henri Julien, who represents the 
All these problems will come up 
for discussion at the Plenary 
Session of the LF.C.C. next July, 
when the Conference organized by 
Unesco will bring together forty 
directors of children’s communi- 
ties. It will be held in Belgium at 
the “Children’s City” directed by 
M. R. de Cooman. - - - 
x kx Xk 
ACK at Torchok, the meet- 
ing of the LF.C.C. has 
already been discussed by 
the Citizens’ Assembly, as the 
following extract from a report of 
its proceedings published in the 
Republic’s newspaper shows: 
MARGOT. — You know, this 
summer Unesco is going to 
invite about forty GROWN- 
UPS who know all about our 
Children’s Republics and our 
New Education, 
DENIS. — Hey ! Papa Torchok 
[Monsieur Julien] was invit- 
ed to go there, because he’s 
a specialist. Suppose we got 
him to tell the Congress all 
about our ideas, so we can 
have a meeting too, with de- 
legates from all the Chil- 
dren’s Republics, and swap 
ideas. 
TATO, No, that’s not 
enough. Let’s go much fur- 
ther than that, Why not set 
up a World Federation of 
Children’s Republics ? 
For that is the Torchok spirit ! 
And perhaps too, the proof that 
(1) Gifts of money for the “Unesco 
Reconstruction Fund’, addressed to 
19, avenue Kléber, Paris and mark- 
ed : “For the Moulin-Vieux Camp”, 
will be forwarded to the XIF.C.C. to 
help pay the expenses of the Torchok 
project. 
Gifts in kind may be sent to the 
LF.C.C,, VPestalozzidorf, Switzerland. 
there is no better tonic for chil- 
dren than work and responsibili- 
ties. 
In 1937, before becoming the 
Capitol of the Republic, the home 
of Henri and Henriette Julien was 
a haven for Spanish children 
driven from their homes by the 
Civil War, Later, French and 
other refugee children came under 
the care of “Papa” and “Mama” 
Torchok, as the children call 
them. 
That was in 1940. If the Commu- 
nity had had to choose a name at 
that time, no doubt it would have 
called itself the Ahasuerus Repu- 
blic. It was hunted from place to 
place by the Germans, right into 
the French Maquis. Once, the Re- 
public was forced by flood to flee 
from a spot by the river where it 
has pitched its tents. It had to 
shift its locale several times be- 
fore finally settling at Moulin- 
Vieux. 
(Continued on Page 11)   
~ wt 
I~ ‘ \ 
ot 
It Is never too early to learn 
the lesson of self-government. 
Above, a “citizen” of the teenage 
Hajduhadhaza Republic, in Hun- 
gary, votes with determination on 
a friend's back. Below, the newly 
elected President addresses his 
council, in a clearing of the Re- 
public’s forested territory. 
 
 
   
famous Pestalozzi Children’s Vil- 
lage, the “Unesco Centre” will in 
communities of the 
different countries. 
~- In particular, it will meet two 
needs which are becoming more 
and more acute: 
The orphans who found refuge 
in the communities during and 
after the war are growing up and 
this is creating new problems. 
They need leaders who must be 
trained, and trades which have 
to be learned. The future “Unesco 
Centre” in Trogen will institute 
special courses for these young 
war victims — of six months to a 
year's duration — to {rain cample- 
aders and international working 
teams specialized in reconstruction 
work. 
Thanks to the 
generosity of Ca- 
nadian and Amer- 
ican societies, the 
Committee of the . 
IF.C.C. hopes to 
be able to start : 
building the Cen- ° 
tre this year. 5 
The LF.C.C. 
this 
year to begin pub- 
  
  
riodical. The first, ° 
re- 
view for commun- 
ity directors, will : 
the latest educa- { 
tional exper- ° 
iments being car- 
ried on in each 
community. The 
second periodical 
ternational news- . 
; -ISERE . 
edited by and for « = 
the children them- 
selves, 
   
‘République 
Mou linN-VIEUX por Lavaldens 


### 73927: What is being done to heal the wounds?

What Is Being Done 
To Heal The Wounds? 
HE article printed below is the partial text of a broadcast made 
from Unesco House last month by Mr. W.D. Pile, Secretary of the 
United Kingdom Nalional Unesco Commission, after atiending a 
meeting of National Reconstruction Experts on January 3 and 4: 
@e [| am talking from a room in Unesco House, in Paris; a tall, 
ungainly building in the Avenue Kléber, where the peace 
talks in 1919 took place, and where German H.Q. was 
situated in the second world war. 
For two days, a committee has 
been sitting in one of the mirror- 
panelled rooms at the end of one 
—
 
A 
—
—
—
—
 
dé’ Enfants | 
FRANCE . 
——i —— 
Cover of review published by Torchok children. 
of the interminable corridors. I 
am sitting here quite alone, pack- 
ing my dispatch case. The Com- 
mittee is over. The Committee of 
Experts on Educational, Scientif- 
ic and Cultural Reconstruction 
is over. The other delegates have 
gone. 
Probably by now some huge 
four-motored Constellation, sleek 
and fat as a plump Scotch sal- 
mon, is carrying my American 
colleagues back to the United 
States. In an hour’s time the 
Canadians will be on their way 
home across the Atlantic. I too 
will be leaving at dawn tomorrow 
for London. 
As I put the files and papers 
away into my bag, I keep asking 
myself “What have I been doing? 
what has all this been about? 
Reconstruction ? Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Recon- 
struction ? What does it mean?” 
In going through one of the 
Committee’s documents, I read 
that in China a school teacher, if 
he wants to send an airmail 
letter to Europe, must spend his 
whole month’s salary to buy the 
necessary stamp. Behind this 
stark ridiculous fact lies a whole 
history of Chinese education to- 
day; war and education; infla- 
tion and education; disaster and 
education. 
| B® 
HAT this Committee tried 
WW to do for two days was to 
discover ways and meth- 
ods of rehabilitating educa- 
tion, science and culture in the 
distressed and war-devastated 
areas of the world. 
It is not worth trying to cal- 
culate the damage to educa- 
tional, scientific and cultural 
institutions and services which 
resulted from the war. The 
figures and facts are meaningless 
4 BURMA: and I saw this my- 
self during the war—all that was 
left of the anatomy schools in 
Rangoon Medical College were 
the dissecting tables—and they 
only because they were made of 
stone and could not be carried 
away by the Japanese. 
4 POLAND: 43 ¢% of her cul- 
tural resources, 60 9% of her edu- 
cational services wiped out. The 
cost—if you care to put a price 
to human civilisation — seven 
hundred and fifty thousand mil- 
lion pounds. Xt is not worth going 
on. The figures numb one’s 
awareness. 
Be @ 
ND yet this Committee has 
been trying to face up to 
this problem. 
The Reconstruction Depart- 
ment has only about £125,000 out 
of this to spend in 1949; it hires 
from this sum a staff of about 20 
people, and it is allowed tc use 
only about £45,000 on direct pur- 
chase of supplies and aid. It has 
bought, packed and distributed 50 
scientific workshops, 74 micro- 
scopes, 80 balances, 100 test me- 
ters; 394 radio 268 gra-mophones. 
It has bought other things. It 
has distributed over 2,000 sets of 
scientific periodicals, over 55,000 
miscellaneous publications, 300 
sets of the Encyclopaedia Britan- 
nica, 48 microfilm readers. 
il round for my coat. Yes, 
~ 225 fellowships, 55,000 mis- 
cellaneous publications, 74 micro- 
scopes on the credit side and 
there, on the debit side, figures 
taken at random, 50,000 books 
lost at Louvain in Belgium, 580 
microscopes smashed in Belgrade, 
750,000 million pounds’ worth of 
& BE BB 
closed my bag and looked 
‘damage in Poland. 
But I remembered that the aid 
which I have mentioned was only 
what the Headquarters of Unesco 
could give, from its limited bud- 
get. Unesco is not and was never 
meant to be a relief agency. No, 
its real task has always been re- 
cognized to be that of stimulating 
and coordinating the national 
efforts of its Member States to 
meet the reconstruction needs of 
the war-devastated countries. 
There, national efforts have been 
remarkable, : 
Six countries, for instance, in 
1948, together produced over haif 
a million pounds. The Canadian 
Council for Reconstruction 
through Unesco collected about 
half of this, some two dred 
and fifty thousand poun Aus- 
tralia has produced £90,000 of 
which a third wil be used to pro~ 
vide educational equipment and 
the remainder to endow 22 fellow- 
ships. New Zealand has found 
£1,500 for fellowships. Norway 
and Belgium together over £100,« 
000. And the United Kingdom, as 
the result of the 10 9% given to 
Unesco from the proceeds of the 
Lord Mayor of London's United 
Nation’s Appeal for Children, hag 
contributed about £70,000. 
0B HE 
ll there is quite apart 
from the aid given as the 
result of joint operations by 
Unesco and its Member States, 
the almost incalculable volume of 
asistance which voluntary so- 
cieties in nearly every country in 
the world are sending to the de- 
vastated countries. The Council 
for International Educational Re. 
construction in the U.S. has dur- 
ing 1947 and 1948 collected and 
spent nearly two hundred million 
dollars. . 
The Committee looked at three 
major quarters of an emergency 
character. The first, how to raise 
funds in 1949. In 1948 many coun- 
tries launched campaigns for 
funds under the United Nations 
Appeal for Children. This Appeal 
was directed to the physical and 
mental needs of children—food 
and education. In 1949, however, 
the United Nations are planning 
a campaign which will be directed 
exclusively towards the physical 
needs of children. This Appeal 
will be launched by the U.N. In 
ternational Children’s Emergency 
Fund. The problem therefore is 
~how an appeal for funds, for help, 
for educational reconstruction, 
can be launched. In fact it is a 
problem of co-ordinating twe 
world-wide appeals to voluntary 
agencies. 
(Continued on Page 11) 

## [Page 10](073912engo.pdf#page=10) 3

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER February 1949 
 
  


### 73929: Indian demographer looks at world population problems

INDIAN DEMOGRAPHER 
Looks At‘World 
Population Problems 
BOUT twenty million people are being added every year to the 
world population. In 1940 the total world populaiion was 
estimated at 2170 millions—probably an underestimate as it 
includes some ‘guestimates’ for certain regions for which we have 
no reliable census data. Even during the second world war the 
population had continued te increase. Today this increase is being 
maintained despite minor wars, regional epidemics and widespread 
under-nutrition, if not starvation. 
By 1950 the total world popula- 
tion will exceed 2,400 million if 
the present trends of fertility and 
mortality continue. 
. The fact that there are two 
and a quarter billion people to- 
Dr. Sripati Chandrasekhar 
Professor 
of Economics and Demography 
Annamalai University, 
Madras, India. 
Author of “India’s Population— 
Fact and Policy”, “Asian Migra- 
tions”, “Census and Statistics in 
India” and other works on eco- 
- nomics and demography. 
  
    
day or that there will be three 
billion at some near future date 
need not be a problem if all 
these people can be assured of 
irreductible minimum require- 
ments and decent human exist- 
ence in terms of food, clothing, 
shelter. education and leisure. But 
a great majority of the world’s 
population are today denied these 
necessities, And there seems to be 
no prospect that they will have 
these necessities if the present 
population continues to grow out- 
stripping our means of produc- 
tion. 
F course this is a con- 
troversial problem and a 
discussion of 
problems often produces more 
heat than light because of the 
clash of various economic, religi- 
ous and political ideologies. 
All cent discussion of this 
problem can be summarized as 
belonging to three schools of 
thought. The first school main- 
tains that our natural resources 
are not only not increasing with 
the growth of human population 
but what is worse they are actual- 
ly dwindling on a global scale, 
resulting as it were, in a double 
crisis. As the world population 
continues to increase there will 
be less and less for everybody of 
goods and services and the only 
road to survival is through a 
drastic reduction in the birth 
rate. 
HE second school maintains 
that the world demographic 
problem is not one of in- 
ereasing population and dwindi- 
ing resources but one of global 
under production and mal-distri- 
bution. They maintain that the 
world’s total production of food, 
fibre and feed can be doubled and 
—— ——— ~ 
pe 
   Dr. Sripati Chandrasekhar, 
population 
even trebled once a world-wide 
marriage between modern science 
and agriculture and food produc- 
tion is effected. 
So then the core of the problem 
is not lack of food but one of 
want of a heart and one of prop- 
er distribution, The world to 
them is the familiar old picture 
of poverty in the midst of plenty. 
You may call this school social- 
istic, communistic or catholic or 
what you will but they vigour- 
ously maintain that a consider- 
able segment of the world is un- 
derfed, underclothed and under- 
housed because of our defective 
economic and political patterns. 
The third school brushes all 
this discussion away as naive on 
the ground that we don’t have 
enough knowledge one way or the 
other to reach a definite con- 
clusion. They contend that we 
know yet little of the potenti- 
  
  
“Tomorrow morning there 
will be 55,000 more persons 
for breakfast than there 
were in the world this 
morning, and the day after 
tomorrow 55,000 more and 
so on daily... 20 to 25 mil- 
lion more people annually. 
But we are not producing 
55,000 more cups of milk a 
day for the new children, 
nor 55,000 more loaves of 
bread, nor 55,000 more 
bowls of rice.” 
Norris E. DODDS, 
Director-General of the Food 
and Agriculture Organization 
addressing the UN General 
Assembly in Paris.      
  
alities of man or the future possi- 
bilities of science to warrant an 
optimistic or a pessimistic con- 
clusion. They say that tomorrow 
the Sahara desert may be made 
into a smiling wheatfield and the 
Arctic may be thawed into a tro- 
pical paradise. Or on the other 
hand there may be a huge cata- 
clysm and man may commit 
collective suicide. 
OW what is the truth one 
may ask? The answer is 
. one of the things that the 
social scientists of the world and 
Unesco are trying to discover as 
a contribution to the understand- 
ing and lessening of international 
tensions. There is no space here 
to discuss the answer. But to be 
realistic one must realize the 
tremendous importance of this 
question and the relation the 
question and the possible answer 
bear to international tensions. 
No matter where the real truth 
lies, to us the world population 
problems are realistic enough in 
the sense that in one way or 
another population growth— 
deliberate or unconscious — has 
been the reason behind the de- 
mand for lebensraum and decla- 
ration of wars, accession to raw 
materials and unrestricted free- 
dom to migrate from one coun- 
try to another. 
Certain countries like Sweden 
or the United States of America 
may maintain a high level of 
living by a deliberate control of 
its numbers. Some other coun- 
tries like India and China may 
leave it to God and Nature, and 
reduce their level of living. 
If this differential growth of 
peoples leading to great differ- 
    
 
ences in standards of living be- 
comes a permanent feature, the 
one world of our dreams where 
wars become an ugly memory of 
the past can never be realized. 
HE differential growth of 
] national populations is not 
the only major problem. 
Within nations the differential 
growth of various ethnic, religi- 
ous, linguistic and cultural 
groups is an ever present sore 
spot leading to intergroup ten- 
sions. One group is always afraid 
that another group is eutbreed- 
ing it. 
‘We have plenty of examples: 
White and Negro; White and 
Nisei, Latin American and Mexi- 
can in the United States of 
America; Jew. and Arab in the 
Middle East; Hindu and Moslem 
in India and Pakistan; Chinese, 
Malayans and Indians in Malaya; 
Boer, Briton and Bantu in South 
Africa; the Fijians and Indians in 
Fiji and SO on. 
What is the answer to these 
conflicts engendered by all plural 
communities and heterogeneous 
population groups? In fact all the 
popularly called minority prob- 
lems belong to this group. Can 
we find a way out? 
There are a hundred other 
problems of a similar demogra- 
phic nature including inter-group 
and international tensions. And 
it is the business of social scien- 
tists to throw light oa those prob-   lems in the hope of an eventual 
and acceptable solution. 


### 73930: Humanists set up international body with UNESCO support

HUMANISTS SET UP © 
INTERKATIONAL BODY 
    
WITH UNESCO SUPPORT 
JVIERNATIONAL organizations representing philosophy, folk arts 
and folklore, languages, historical sciences and classical and 
academic subjects are for the first time centralizing their work 
through the International Council for Philosophy and Humanistic 
Studies, 
‘This ‘Council, which was creat- 
ed on January 18th, under the 
auspices of Unesco, held its first 
General Assembly in Brussels, 
Belgium, last month and drew up 
a programme of work for the next 
three years. 
The Council's first aim will be 
to establish contacts between 
scientists #aworking in different 
fields but whose subject matter 
for research is the study of Man. 
An observation of an anthropolo- 
gist is often valuable to a linguist; 
a discovery of a linguist may show 
a historian that his enquiries are 
on the right lines and a parti- 
cular feature in folklore often 
throws light on the literary heri- 
tage of mankind. 
Until now there has been little 
or none of the cross fertilization 
which human sciences need in 
order to progress. The Council’s 
work as a clearing house of in- 
formation on the activities going 
on in this broad field of intellec- 
tual activity is expected to be of 
great value to human scientists 
throughout the world. 
Linguists, Folklorists 
Participate 
The Council's programme to 
facilitate this cross diffusion of 
information will include the ex- 
change of bibliographies, resumés 
of articles, general information 
bulletins and the organization of 
conferences, symposia and scien- 
tific missions. 
Already six international organ- 
izations are represented on the 
Council and further accessions 
are expected during 1949 : Inter- 
national Academic Union, Inter- 
national Commission on Folk 
Arts and Folklore, Permanent 
International Committee of 
Linguists, International Com- 
mittee of Historical Sciences, In- 
ternational Federation of Classic- 
al Associations and the Interna- 
tiona] Federation of Philosophical 
Societies. 
The first step towards setting 
up the Council was taken in No- 
vember 1947, when Unesco’s Gen- 
eral Conference adopted a resolu- 
tion to encourage the establish- 
" Hoeg, 
ment of such an organization, 
which would be analogous to the 
International Council of Scien- 
tific Unions. 
Early last year, old and new 
organizations declared themselves 
in favour of the creation of such 
a council and in September 1948 
representatives of five interna- 
tional bodies met at Unesco 
House and set up a preparatory 
commission which was instructed 
to arrange the General Assembly 
of the Council. =) 
Committee Officers: Elected 
At its meeting in the Palais des 
Académies in Brussels last month, 
the Council elected as its chair- 
man M. J. Rueff, representative 
of the Institut de France on the 
Internationa] Academic Union. 
Two vice-chairmen were elected: 
Mr. A. Sommerfelt, President of 
the Permanent International 
Committee of Linguists and Pro- 
fessor at Oslo University and Sir 
Harold Bell, representative of the 
British Academy on the Interna- 
tional Academic Union. M. R. 
Fawtier, Vice-President of the In- 
ternational Committee of Histori- 
cal Sciences and professor at the 
Sorbonne, was elected General 
Secretary. 
The next meeting of the Perma- 
nent Committee of seven mem- 
bers (1), which will be responsible 
for carrying oul the Assembly's 
decisions, will be held at Unesco 
House in Paris next June. 
  
(1) The seven members of the Perma- 
nent Committee are: M. de Visscher, 
President of the International Academie 
Union and a Judge of the International 
Court of Justice; Mr. Berrien, member 
of the American Council of Learned 
Societies and professor, Harvard Univ- 
ersity; M. Rivet, Director, Musée de 
Homme, Paris; Mlle Mohrmann, Secre- 
tary-General, Permanent International 
Committee of Linguists and professor 
at Utrecht University; M. Nabhole, 
President of the International Com- 
mittee of Historical Sciences and pro- 
fessor at the University of Zurich; M. 
President of the International 
Federation of Classical Associations 
and professor at fhe University - of 
Copenhagen; M. Pos, President of the 
Internafional Federation of Philosophie 
Societies and professor at the Uiiyers 
sity of Amsterdam. 


### 73931: U.S. Conference to stress group, individual action for UNESCO

  
U. S. Conference To Stress Group, 
Individual Action For Unesco 
cipate in the work of Unesco will be discussed and demonstrated 
vate in ways in which individuals and communities can parti- 
by practical examples at the second nation-wide conference of 
the U.S. National Commission, meeting im Cleveland, Ohio, from 
March 31 to April 2, 
Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet will fly to the United States from Paris 
to deliver the principal address on “Unesco—A Personal Faith”, in which 
he will explain why he has 
dedicated himself to serve the 
cause of international collabora- 
tion in science, education and 
culture. 
At its Cleveland meetings, the 
U.S. National Commission will 
develop the theme “Nations will 
come together, not to destroy but 
construct”, inspired by the words 
of Louis Pasteur. (1) 
“Unesco’s programme has come 
into sharper focus since members 
met in Philadelphia two years 
ago”, Milton E. Eisenhower, 
chairman of the U.S. National 
Commission, recently declared. 
“Our purpose this time is to keep 
abreast of new developments and 
to find better ways of getting 
the Unesco story to more people.” 
Community Cooperation 
HE conference, which will have 
its headquarters at the Clevel- 
and Auditorium with a seating 
capacity for 10,000 people, will 
discuss six important areas within 
which communities can co-operate 
on Unesco objectives. Presented 
  
(1) “I hold the unconquerable belief 
that science and peace will triumph 
over ignorance and war, that nations 
will coms together, not to destroy but 
to construct, and that the future 
belongs to those whe accomplish most 
for humanity.” 
ag “Unesco’s Challenge to the 
American People”, they will be 
devoted to the global implications 
of Human Rights, the interchange 
of persons, educational reconstruc- 
tion through Unesco, the position 
of the U.N, advancement of world 
civilization through arts "ans 
sciences, and education for the 
world community. 
Special panels of experts will 
explain Unesco’s responsibility and 
programme as well as the oppor- 
tunities for community action 
in respect to each of these topics. 
Individual Participation 
HE best ways in which indi- 
n viduals can constructively 
take part in Unesco activities 
will alse receive ‘considerable dis- 
- cussion by the educators, scientists 
and publicists representing differ- 
ent U.S. national organizations 
who are expected to attend the 
conference in Cleveland. 
Fourteen groups, each examin- 
ing such different facets of 
community life as the press and 
radio, schools, civic, labour 
and farm organizations, libraries, 
church organizations, adulf edu- 
cation services, or the theatre will 
show how individuals can help 
put community resources to work 
on Unesco objectives and -how 
these efforts may be extended. 
Thus, for example, the con-- 
ference will show how the mass 
media are being used to advance 
international understanding, how 
music and other arts contribute 
to the sense of world community, 
and how the schools in the United 
States are developing citizens 
conscious of the world and without 
prejudice toward differences 
among races and religions. 
Delegates will have an oppor- 
tunity to -see how the Cleveland 
community has organized to carry 
out Unesco’s aims as well as 
special exhibitions and films on 
projects carried out in other 
communities. 
Featured Speakers 
N announcing last December 
that Dr. Torres Bodet had 
accepted to travel to Cleveland, 
Milton Eisenhower told newspa- 
permen: “I speak on behalf of the 
U.S. National Commission when I 
say that Dr. Torres Bodet's visit 
to our country will give added 
impetus to a programme for inter- 
national understanding which has 
already stirred the imagination of 
millions of Americans.” 
Among the other featured speak- 
ers announced for the Clevelanil 
Conference are Mrs. Franklin D. 
Roosevelt, who will discuss the 
Declaration of Human Rights; 
George V. Allen, Assistant Secre- 
tary of State; and Milten S. Eisen- 
hower.

## [Page 11](073912engo.pdf#page=11) 4

### 73926: Teen-age 'républicains' plug for world federation

February 1949 UNESCO COURIER 11 
  
NC 1 Loans, 
Se 
wl > 
eh 
A a : VW "5 2 
fe oat   
Dr. Torres Bodet addressing French 
National Commission at Quai 
d'Orsay in Paris: “It seems to 
me that our civilization resembles 
the Raft of the Medusa. Raging 
seas surround it and storm 
clouds loom above. In each of 
us there is a man whe thinks 
and another who hopes, a man 
who signals to the future and 
another who seeks in the wake 
the reasons for what has occurred.” 
nad —~- ~~ 
  
  
NEW ADVENTURES 
For Struggling Educators   
   
CURING the past few years I have seen something of education 
in many countries. Three things have particularly struck me. 
The first is that practically all countries are facing the same 
educational problems. They are, of course, at different stages in their 
development, and each country has some problems that are peculiarly 
its own; but there is a solid core of common difficulties with which 
educators throughout the world are struggling. Those of us who have 
faced these problems in distinct 
corners of the earth find some 
slight comfort in knowing that 
we are not alone in our perplexity. 
My second discovery brings 
more solid comfort. It is that at 
least partial solutions to some nf 
these problems have already been 
found, in scattered spots through- 
out the world, and that able, and 
sometimes brilliant, work is being 
done on them in many countries. 
But the third thing I have dis- 
covered in my travels is the 
extreme slowness with which 
educational ideas and practices 
spread. Within the past twelve 
months I have seen schools that, 
in more advanced countries, would 
have been outdated a century 
ago ; and there are few of us who,” 
in our own countries, cannot point 
to schools that, as far as their 
practices are concerned, are fifty 
years apart in time though only a 
few miles apart in space. In the 
past quarter of a century, great 
advances in educational methods 
have taken place in many schools, 
but they spread across natural 
borders, and even with nations, 
at a maddeningly snail-like pace. 
If, for example, the knowledge 
of penicillin had travelled through 
the world as slowly as has the 
knowledge of new teaching tech- 
niques in the infant school, there 
would have been a public outcry. 


### 73917: Schuman, Bidault welcome Torres Bodet at French National Commission

Schuman, Bidault 
Welcome Torres Bodet 
{Continued from page 3.) 
Dr. Torres Bodet continued: 
“Unesco was born in order that 
a lack of understanding between 
the peoples should not lead to 
fresh wars... Unesco’s task is not 
to make the peace which cannot 
be improvised and which de- 
«mands long years of effort and 
education.” 
© “Of all our main reasons for 
anxiety,” the Director-General 
went on, “the most urgent might 
be summed up in this question: 
Can the peoples organize their 
freedom in peace-time with the 
same energy they put forth dur- 
ing the war to save it? Is each 
citizen capable of choosing, 
without violence but also with- 
out weakness, between resigna- 
tion to a regime of automatic 
‘obedience and the sense of per- 
sonal responsibility? That, in my 
view, is the burning question 
of our time. It cannot be settled 
without the help of all the 
peoples standing together and a 
pressing appeal, within each 
separate nation, to the con- 
science of every individual.” 
Pointing out that the whole 
structure of Unesco was based on 
 
TEEN-AGERS 
(Continued from Page 2) 
Today it numbers 30 French 
children, 6 Spanish, 6 Italian, 
1 Croat, 1 Pole and 4 Turco-Greek 
children. They have their own 
government consisting of 5 or 
6 members elected by a two-thirds 
majority of the General Assembly 
after a first vote has been taken 
» in order to weed out the “unfit”. 
Elections are by secret ballot, with 
ne list of candidates. 
In the past two years, while 
eontinuing their studies, these 
children have built and fitted up 
- their Centre: dormitories, a class- 
. room, a garage, a work-shop, a 
laundry, an infirmary, showers, 
ete. In 1948, they carried off 14 
~ athletic prizes and won 5 school 
certificates, including the highest 
award for the district, 
_ This, then, is Torchok, a model 
Republic. “We feel”, say its citi- 
"zens, “that the world will only be 
. happy when it learns to run 
. itself the way we do.”   
the idea that the continuing 
functions of the Organization 
were in the hands of the Sec- 
retartat in Paris, guided by the 
Executive Board, and secondly of 
the governments themselves as- 
sisted by the National Com- 
missions, Dr. Torres Bodet de- 
clared: 
*Qae of my essential tasks 
will be to make it possible for 
the National Commissions to 
give ‘us the full cooperation we 
hope for...” 
“It is little enough,” he went 
on, “if the various nations are 
content to let Unesco work alone 
and merely use it as a forum in 
which they are supposed, once a 
year, to give voice to lofty senti- 
ments... 
The National Commissions, 
Unesco’s Director-General added. 
could help Unesco directly bv 
“mobilizing” the scholars, writers. 
research workers, philosophers 
and artists in every country to 
be “volunteers in the service of 
peace through culture, of science 
for peaceful aims and of peace 
through education ’ 
“Unesco as such,” Dr. Torres 
Bodet said, “will never be other 
than peoples and governments 
wish it and make it. For myself, 
I do not limit these efforts to 
the fields of science and culture. 
I scan more distant horizons of 
social justice. Happily, amid so 
many reasons for misgiving, the 
reception France bas always 
accorded to Unesco is of great 
comfort to ms.” 
After Dr. Torres Bodet had 
spoken, M. Georges Bidault sur- 
veyed the work of the Beirut 
Conference. He warned that the 
tendency to extol the indepen- 
dence of each separate culture 
involved certain risks for world 
culture as a whole: “Never, on 
the plea of ensuring that Unesco 
will be favourably looked upon 
in all the great cultural regions 
of the world, should universal 
culture be split up.” 
Other speakers at the French 
National Commission meeting 
were M. Montel, of the Académie 
des Sciences and President of the 
Commission, Lucien Febvre, Pro- 
fessor at the Collége de France, 
and M. Yvon Delbos, Frenc 
Minister of Education, : 
The latest educational methods 
are not necessarily the best, but 
at least they should be known 
and understood by the practi- 
tioners of the old. 
Educational Progress Is 
No Monopoly 
NE of the main functions of 
{ the Education Department 
of Unesco is to help meet 
just this situation, to make it 
easier for educators in one country 
to know what is going on in 
others, and to apply the know- 
ledge to the solution of their own 
problems. A wide variety of meth- 
ods are being used to bring 
P—TTTITN —- . - 
 
 
  
By 
Clarence E. BEEBY, 
Assistant Directer-General of Unesco in Charge 
of Education 


### 73932: A New Zealander views UNESCO educational missions

A New Zealander 
Views Unesco Educational Missions 
 
  
An educational mission is simply 
an international team of edu- 
cators sent by Unesco te advise a 
Member State on some of its edu- 
cational problems. In theory at 
least, the process is a simple one. 
The Member State asks Unesco 
for a mission, and states the fiekls 
of education in which advice is 
required. Unesco sets out to find, 
from anywhere in the world, an 
intermational group of experts 
whose experience peculiarly fits 
them to advice the Member Stat-= 
on those particular problems. The 
government concerned must, na- 
turally, agree to the experts 
chosen. 
The expenses of the mission 
are shared between Unesco and 
  
—— - —————— rt - Tq 
oy > £0 
Lan 
a Lag, 9° - 
Emergency tent school, Philippines, houses two classes. 
about this freer flow of educa- 
tional principles and praotices. 
The first task, obviously, is to 
discover what is going on in edu- 
cation throughout the world, what 
special contribution each country 
has to make to the solution of the 
world’s educational problems. 
The first thing one finds out, 
incidentally, is that no one coun- 
try has a monopoly of educational 
progress, and that almost every 
country has some lesson that :t 
can teach the rest of the world. 
The mere collection of inform- 
ation is the smallest part of the 
task. Unesco is primarily interest- 
ed in the use of it. We issue books, 
pamphlets and periodic bulletins; 
we organize world conferences on 
special educational topics; we ar- 
range seminars for representative 
teachers from all our Member 
States; and we send expert advis- 
ers to special experiments in 
education that can be regarded 
as “pilot projects” for the rest of 
the world. : 
International Teamwork 
HE consultative educational 
mission represents Unesco's 
latest attempt to encourage 
the spread of educational ideas. 
the Member State, Unesco, in the 
main, paying the fees of the 
experts and the cost of their 
travel from their own countries, 
and the State meeting most of 
the expenses incusred within its 
own borders. The mission stays 
in the country long enough to 
make a thorough survey of the 
problems at issue, working 4n 
closest cooperation with the local 
authorities. 
It reports ils findings and. re- 
commendations to the Head of 
the State and to Unesco, and 
they are published in a form 
agreed upon. Finally, Unesco 
collects from all over the world 
information and materials that 
will be of help to the country 
in putting into effect such parts 
of the mission’s report as it finally 
adopts. It may even help to find 
consultants who will stay on for 
a period to advise on the actual 
carrying out of the new plans. 
UCH is the mission in theory. 
In practice, of course, it soon 
proves more difficult—and, 
at the same time, more interest- 
ing. The complications of finding 
a team of half a dozen high- 
ranking experts—who have the 
necessary language qualifications, 


### 73927: What is being done to heal the wounds?

  
What Is Being Done 
To Heal The Wounds 
(Continued from page 9.) 
HE second question was what 
help could be given to 
bring educational assistance 
to the 400,000 Arab refugees now 
sheltering in the Middle East 
from the ravages of a prescut 
war. It will take one hundred mil- 
lion dollars to meet their needs 
adequately but 50,000 dollars will 
meet emergency needs. Plans were 
agreed as to how this small sum 
can be rapidly raised, and placed 
at the disposal of Unesco, and 
spent in the Middle East. 
‘The third problem was what 
steps could be taken to resettle 
in educational scientific and cul- 
tural employment, the 40,000 in- 
tellectual refugees at present in 
the keeping of the I.LR.O. Plans 
were made to try to place 
as many of these specialists as 
possible. Perhaps before July 1, 
1950, when I.R.O. closes down, 
these persons, caught between 2a 
distinguished past and an un- 
certain future will all be placed 
in universities, laboratories, and 
schools of Unesco Member States. 
Well, as 1 prepared to leave 
this committee room on my way 
back home, I wondered how far 
we have got towards finding solu- 
tions. It will need more hard work 
tomorrow and the next day, this 
year and next year from all of us   everywhere. 
who cover between them the fields 
of study, who are acceptable te 
the Government concerned, who 
represent different national cul- 
tures, who can all te spared at 
the same time from positions of 
importance in their own countries, 
and who can be relied upon to 
work as an amicable team—such 
complications must be experi- 
enced to be understood. 
‘There is not much previous ex- 
perience to guide us. I know of 
only one earlier example of an 
international educational mission, 
one sent to China in 1930 by the 
League of Nations. Indeed, with- 
out some such international or- 
ganization as Unesco, it would be 
practically impossible tc arrange 
for a genuinely international 
mission of this type, and any 
country wanting advice on its 
educational problems would have 
to seek help from some ether 
individual country. 
Philippines 
URING the past few weeks 
Unesco has signed contracts 
to send educational missions 
to two of its Member States, and 
two other missions are being ne- 
gotiated. The first mission to 
enter the field will be that to the 
Republic of the Philippines, which 
is due to arrive there at the 
beginning of February. 
Its leader will be Professor 
Floyd W. Reeves, of Chicago Uni- 
versity, who is an autherity om 
the administration and financing 
of education. Dr. Paul Hanna, of 
Leland Standford University, Cali- 
fornia, will be primarily respeon- 
sible for the survey of elementary 
education; Dean C.A. Lewis of the 
Ontario College of Education will 
concentrate on the teacher train- 
ing aspects, and Dr. S.Y. Chu, se- 
cond-in-command of the Chinese 
Mass Education Movement, will 
be the authority on adult educa~ 
tion. A Frenchman, M. Jean Gui- 
ton, who has had the main res- 
ponsibility on the Unesco Secre- 
tariat of arranging the Mission, 
will go to the Philippines to see it 
established. 
The Mission is expected to stay 
in the Philippines from three to 
four months, and its report 
should be ready by about the 
middle for the year. It will be 
awaited with keen interest in the 
Philippines, which are facing the 
double problems of war-devasta- 
tion and of a newly-found inde- 
pendence. For the past few 
months there has been intense 
governmental and public interest 
in education, and Unesco can at 
least he sure that its first mission 
will be to a country ready and 
anxious to listen to it. 
mission to Afghanistan 1s in 
AN course of preparation. The 
problems there are peculiarly 
interesting because of the varied 
national and cultural influence 
that have gone to mould its 
education system into its present 
form. The topics on which the 
Government wants advice are 
primary, secondary, and voca- 
tional education. An effort is 
being made to secure a three-man 
team from three different 
countries. 
It is, of course, too early as yet 
to say what the results of these, 
and Unesco's other missions, will 
be. The final criterion will be 
the practical effects they have 
on education in the countries to 
which they are sent. But, however 
sceptical one may be, one cannot 
but find encouragement in the 
fact that the countries of the 
world are willing, without any 
selfish or ulterior motive, to give 
practical help to individual States 
that want to improve the educa- 
tion of their people. It is a form 
of mutual assistance that is, I 
fear, still uncomrhon enough to be 
exciting. 
(The above article originally 
appeared in The Times Educational 
Supplement of London.) .

## [Page 12](073912engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 UNESCO COURIER 
  
The Case Agai 
  
  


### 73934: The Case against and for 'comic books'

| ‘Comic Books’ 
  
N February 19, Unesco’s first weekly radio programme 
0 “Unesco World Review”, went on the air. One of the 
feature stories included in the 15-minute programme 
was inspired by recent French discussions on the effects of 
the comic strips on children and adolescents. The article 
printed below was taken from the radio script. It gives 
some of the points which have been discussed recently on 
both sides of the Atlantic.       
 
UST about fifty years-ago, an unsung artist told a funny 
N story in a strip of cartoons—and thereby started a giant 
mew industry, sent educators to bed with nightmares and 
changed the reading habits of millions of children—and their 
parents, 
The latest blast in the storm of protest stirred by comics 
comes from France where superhuman exploits and glorified 
gungirls were debated on the floor of the French Chamber of 
Deputies. The result was a law to protect children and 
adolescents by forbidding any publication building up banditry, 
stealing, hatred, cowardice and cheating. A committee repre- 
senting the government, youth associations and the press will 
enforce the law, supported by the Ministry of Justice. 
The French measures to protect juveniles from undesirable 
reading matfer are symptomatic of the rising general concern 
about the flood of new publications, the so-called comics, aimed 
at young readers. This mounting uneasiness has been noticeable 
in the homeland of the comics-—the United States—as in most 
other countries; Unesco’s Director-General, Dr. Jaime Torres 
Bodet, expressed his concern about comics of the Superman 
type at a press luncheon recently in Paris. 
SO HIGHLY ORGANISED ARE THE ANTS THAT 
SOME SCIENTISTS BELIEVE THEY Will ONE 
DAY SUPPLANT MAN ON THE EARTH 
  
  
  
MASON ANTS BUILD SKY SCRAPER 
DWELLINGS CONTAINING WONDERFULLY J 
DOOMED CHAMBERS, THE CEILINGS | 
SUPPORTED ON PILLARS       
nst And For 
THE French Minister of Justice stressed that this new law 
is in no way an infringement of the liberties of the press. 
It has been passed mainly as a result of a campaign by the 
French Teachers’ League which has taken a special interest 
in the fight against the comics. According to the League’s 
figures, eighty-eight per cent of the juvenile delinquents in 
France are ardent readers of comics. The efforts to combat 
such publications have undoubtedly been stimulated by the 
alarming rise of juvenile delinquency in many countries. 
In the United States, an advisory committee has been 
established by the Association of Comic Magazine Publishers, 
whose members are responsible for forty per cent of the 
enormous comics output in the United States, to improve 
  
.comic books and use this technique for constructive educational 
purposes. 
Another example comes from Mamaroneck, New York, where 
a group of parents has gone ahead and organized an 
independent publishing company—The Once Upon a Time 
Press. Its first publication was a fairly tale by Hans Christian 
Andersen, with illustrations, 
Complaints against Comics 1 
Trrealism, Violence and Nightmares 
AT is, then, the case against the comics? 
That most of them are badly written and badly drawn— 
trash in short—is a thing apart. The main charge is the comics’ 
preoccupation with violence in all its forms, Murder in its most 
cruel aspects, sadism, fights, explosions, war on an inter- 
planetary scale, these are the main themes of too many of the 
so-called comics. 
Another complaint is that the comics, instead of popularizing 
science, make science everyman’s fool and remove it from the 
realm of reality and the possible to the land of nightmare and 
fantasy, 
third accusation is that the heroes and heroines, with 
whom the readers identify themselves, are, in most cases, 
gangsters or pin-up girls. The girls can be explained by the 
fact the press for adults usually carries comic strips and {ries 
to catch their interest as well as that of juvenile readers. It 
is certain that comics now are far from exclusively read by 
children and adolescents. Adults often start their daily paper 
with Flash Gordon or Jane, should the front page not carry 
-a story also revelling in violence. 
Another serious charge is that the comics really are meant 
for illiterates. The text on the whole confines itself to exclama- 
tions like Ohhh! Ugh! bang, whiz, bump, etc, and the context. 
dwindles to nothing. 
All this would not be worth serious concern, were it not for 
the tremendous popularity and diffusion of these comics. This 
popularity shows, among other things, that the technique is a 
good technique, 
The problem is how to use this new mass medium in a 
constructive manner. One way would be to paint a sympathetic 
picture of the foreigner and the under-privileged. Thus, the 
strips could make their contribution to international under- 
standing and tolerance. 
  
  
 
THE COLONY CONTAINS A QUEEN, (THE 
MOTHER OF THE ENTIRE FAMILY), A LARGE 
NUMBER OF WORKERS, OR STERILE FEMALES, 
AND, IN SEASON, A NUMBER OF MALES 
 
THE YOUNG QUEENS AND MALES HAVE 
WINGS, AND ARE HONOURED INHABITANTS 
OF THE NEST UNTIL THE CLIMAX OF THEIR 
LIVES = THEIR WEDDING DAY » ARRIVES     
 
  
  
ANTS PRACTICE MANY OF THE ARTS «= AND 
HAVE MOST OF THE VICES — OF MAN, THEIR 
FAVOURITE FOOD 1S HONEYDEW, A SUGARY 
SUBSTANCE SECRETED BY THE APHIDS OR 
*GREENFLYS® Lame OF 
THESE APHIDS ARE MILKED LIKE CATTLE, 
} GENTLE CARESSES OF THE ANTS ANTENNAE 
NCOURAGE THE FLIES TO EXUDE THE SW 
is LIQUID ex € Sweev     
 
  
  
 
  
 
“today’s world, says: 
February 1949 


### 73935: Did your local radio carry this news?

Did Your Local Radio 
Carry This News ? 
Did your local radio 
carry these news items 
prepared by Unesco’s 
new radio programme 
“Unesco World Review”? 
| 
SWITZERLAND: One of the 
world’s most important radio 
programmes went on the air 
recently, but you will never hear 
it in your home. It comsisted of 
twice-daily warnings, telling na- 
tional health authorities all over 
the world of outbreaks of serious 
epidemics. 
The programme, which comes 
jrom the World Health Organiza- 
tion in Geneva, is broadcast in 
    
  
* Morse code by ten powerful trans- 
mitters, and it gives last-minute 
statistics on plague, typhus fever, 
cholera, and yellow fever. 
The bulletins are beamed to 
Europe, America and West Africa, 
and will also be picked up by the 
captains of ships and aircraft who 
must know what quarantine res- 
trictions to expect in their next 
port of call. 
Xx Xx Xk 
POLAND: It may soon be pos- 
sible to send a “talking letter” 
through the post. A Polish chem- 
ical engineer, M. Stankiewicz, 
has discovered a liquid which 
makes even poor quality paper 
sensitive to sound. The machine, 
which can record your own voice, 
can be marketed for about one 
hundred and fifty United States 
dollars. The invention is expected 
to be of tremendous use to schools 
and libraries, and may bring 
about great changes in all fields 
of communication, 
x kX 
FRANCE: Leaders in the radio 
field from both sides of the At- 
lantic are meeting this month, 
from February nineteenth to 
February twentysizth, at Nice, for 
a seven-day conference to study 
the creation of an international 
university of the air. 
The idea was first discussed at 
the Unesco General Conference 
of 1946 and elaborated at later 
~ meetings of the Organization. 
The Nice conference was called 
by the Radiodiffusion Francaise, 
the French national network, 
whose own radio university is 
finishing its first month on the 
air, 
*x kx Xk 
CHILE: The University of 
Chile’s medical school, wiped out 
by fire, received an international 
helping hand almost before the 
embers stopped smouldering. 
Library associations in America 
and Greal Britain have already 
pledged donations to help replace 
the school’s losses. The libraries 
division of Unesco also will assist 
in the rehabilitation, 
* Xx Xx 
INDIA: People in many parts 
of the world are receiving letters 
this month postmarked with a 
unique tribute, 
The Indian Government .com- 
memorated the first anniversary 
of Mahatma Gandhi's death on 
30 January by stamping every 
letter mailed that day with a 
quotation from the great leader’s 
Javourite prayer. 
The postmark, much more than 
a mere stamp collector's item in 
“May God 
grant good sense to everyone.” 
Xx Xx xX 
UNITED KINGDOM: These 
days it’s not too easy for an 
English coal miner to visit the 
Comédie Frangaise in Paris—so 
the Aris Council of Great Britain 
is bringing Moliére to the mines 
on a seven-week tour. 
“The Miser”, one of the French 
writer's comic classics, is touring 
Northumberland, Durham and 
Yorkshire, playing to packed 
houses in tiny village theatres. 
 
SOME SLAVE-OWNING ANTS HAVE BECOME 
§O LAZY THAT THEY CANNOT LIFT A FINGER 
TO HELP THEMSELVES, SHOULD THE COLONY 
MOVE HOUSE, THEY ARE EVEN CARRIED TQ 
THEIR NEW HOME BY THEIR SERVANTS a - 
ROAD BUILDERS ARE THEREFORE 
CONSTANTLY AT WORK, CONSTRUCTING 
OPEN AND COVERED HIGHWAYS 
 DOWN THESE ROADS THE COLONY 
MIGRATES WHEN A CHANGE OF HOME (S 
DESIRED. ACCOMPANIED BY THEIR CATTLE 
AND OTHER INSECTS WHICH H APPEAR TQ BE 
KEPT AS PETS 
I Ral     & 
  
NO STREAM WILL STOP THEIR MARCH. A 
LIVING BRIDGE OF ANTS WiLL BE SWUNG 
ACROSS, OVER WHICH THE WHOLE COLUMN 
will PASS   B.N.12 
On this page we reproduce part of an “A.B, See” cartoon story which illustrates how comics can be effectively used for educational purposes. 
They are published by Frank C. Betts Lid, copyright by Visual Features Ltd.,, London,  - a LE re   Editorial Offices: Unesco, 
19, Avenue Kléber, Paris (16e), 
Editor : S.M. KOFFLER, 
Director : H. KAPLAN. 
ALL REPRODUCTIONS 
AUTHORIZED      
Imprimerie du “New York Herald 
Tribune”, 31, rue de Berri, Paris (8e).