# [185864](185864eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](185864eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

— 
HE 
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
. 
' yo 
“ 
} 
PEN 
“RECASTING 
rN 
: vi 
SHE PAST 4 
- 
 

## [Page 2](185864eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
© 
UN
ES
CO
 
     
t
d
 
#
7
)
 
F
v
 g
y 
Wr
 
F
o
 
i
 ¥ia
 
A
,
 
Rock he in La Cueva de Jas Manos A 
HISTORY 
OF PEOPLES: 
RECASTING 
THE PAST 
Special feature produced in collaboration 
with UNESCO's Division of Cultural 
Policies and Intercultural Dialogue 
Conception and coordination: 
Monique Couratier 
former Chief of the communication, 
information and publications section of 
UNESCO's Culture sector 
  
Contents 
2009 - number 8   
 
EDITORIAL 3 
WRITING HISTORY IN THE PLURAL 
The spirit behind the foundation of UNESCO was to foster 
a consciousness of the unity of the human species, in all its 
diversity. No sooner had the Organization been founded, than it 
embarked upon compiling a new History of Humanity. 5 
PECOLONIZING HISTORY 
Once African countries had won their independence 
in the 1960s, the challenge taken up by a group of intellec- 
tuals from Africa, or of African descent, was to rid people's 
minds of prejudice by remedying a widespread ignorance 
of African history. 8 
AN EAR FOR THE PAST 
Guinean historian Djibril Tamsir Niane argues that written re- 
cords are not the only stewards of history. As Burkinabe writer, 
Joseph Ki-Zerbo, put it, oral traditions are living museums, 
giving flesh and blood to the skeleton of the past. 11 
SIEPPES AND THE SILK ROUTE 
Central Asia, crossroads and meeting-place of cultures, has 
also known periods when it was closed off from the outside 
world. The History of Civilizations of Central Asia shows 
that despite ideological barriers, historical and cultural links 
between inhabitants weave a regional identity. 14 
  
HISTORY SEEN THROUGH SOCIETIES 
A world first: the General History of Latin America 
focuses on the societies and civilizations that have 
inhabited the central and southern American continent, 
more than on the nations. Even so, the lack of 
historical sources on indigenous and African-Latin 
American peoples has posed some problems. 17 
  
   AEN 
SHARED DESTINY 
© For the first time, thanks to the General History 
of the Caribbean, populations united by their common culture 
but scattered around this region are given prominence 
in history, not as mere objects but as subjects and actors 
~ of their own destiny. 20 
MESSAGES FROM ISLAM 
Wi The faith of Islam in God and mankind has enabled it to play 
7% a significant part in the edification of human civilization. But 
its strength emanates not so much from the ‘fixism’ of an im- 
4! posed order, but from the durability of a model that is always 
+ ready to be reinvented, starting from divine inspiration and the 
demands of the moment. 23 
   
FOCUS 
The Rosetta Stone of Bisotun 25 
FORESIGHT 
Teaching science: child’s play 27

## [Page 3](185864eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### 185974: Editorial

As UNESCO began weaving the thousand 
and one Ariadne’s threads of past and 
present, just after the Second World War, 
it embarked on an adventure of 
universal dimensions - writing a new 
History of Humanity. But also of Africa, 
Latin America, Central Asia, the Caribbean 
and Islamic Culture. 
   
  
~ fter the noise and furore of the Second World War and 
the nuclear hell of Hiroshima, mankind was confronted 
with a Shakespearian dilemma — to unite or to anni- 
“hilate® Convinced that “...ignorance of each other's 
ways and lives has been a common cause, throughout 
the history of mankind, of that suspicion and mistrust 
between the peoples of the world through which their 
differences have all too often broken into war" as laid 
down in the preamble to UNESCO's constitution, the 
founding fathers of the Organization embarked on a 
project for a new History of Humanity. This was to be a 
work of collective memory that would demonstrate the 
interdependence between peoples and cultures, while 
building bridges between history, culture and science. 
One of the missions of this audacious project was to 
forge an awareness of the unity of mankind in all its di- 
versity, thus responding to the intuition of the Dutch his- 
torian, Jean Huizinga, who, writing in the 1930's, said: 
“Our civilization is the first whose past is that of the 
world; our history is the first to be universal’ 
Refocusing the historian’s eye 
This ambition of becoming familiar with time in order to 
overcome a tendency to leave things out, was, indeed, 
excessive, since it meant no more and no less than set- 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
  
Sir Julian Huxley, one of UNESCO's founding 
fathers and first Director General. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
 
The “Nagasaki Angel” from the Urakami church destroyed 
by the atomic bomb explosion on 9 August 1945. 
ting out, in several collections of regional and cultural 
histories, the essential creations of the human mind, 
regardless of their latitude and period. 
By developing a more acute awareness of the partic- 
ular cultural identities of each society, and seeing the 
emergence of new forms of independence, it became 
necessary, when writing their history, to reflect the point 
of view of the civilizations concerned. The History of 
Humanity, as well as the General History of Africa, the 
History of Civilizations of Central Asia, the General His- 
tory of Latin America, the General History of the Carib- 
bean and that of the Different Aspects of Islamic Culture, 
are the fruit of this endeavour. A total of 51 published 
volumes, some in dozens of languages. 
Is it overly idealistic to wish to fix on paper something 
that is endlessly being reborn? More of a challenge. 
Although all societies have a history, the conception of 
time varies from one culture to another, and, with it, the 
status accorded to memory. Also, while our geography 
no longer has virgin continents, the contributions of dif- 
ferent peoples to the construction of mankind remains 
largely underestimated, even unknown — when they are 
not actively denied or reinterpreted to conform to the 
viewpoint of a dominating force. 
In order to refocus the historian’s eye and to give a 
voice to those who have not been heard, UNESCO 
(o0°) 
3

## [Page 4](185864eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### 185974: Editorial

> EDITORIAL 
  
0 6 We cannot proudly publish such works and let them gather 
dust on bookshelves. We must turn them to full account. We must find suitable ways for these 
outstanding works to leave the narrow circle of scholars and reach the general public. 
(vee) 
gave historians from all cultures and geographical ho- 
rizons an opportunity to express themselves, abandon- 
ing strictly national approaches and temporary fixes to 
preserve identities. 
“The public now has access to collections of history 
that rehabilitate the past of civilizations that had hith- 
erto been ignored and that also take a fresh look at cul- 
tures that have been obscured by prejudice and stereo- 
types, declared Koichiro Matsuura, Director-General of 
UNESCO, as he promised to complete this immense 
endeavour, started in the 1950s. 
Disarming history 
By weaving the thousand and one Ariadne’s threads of 
memories of the past and of current events, UNESCO 
has embarked on an adventure of universal proportions. 
Here, the notion of time takes on its full meaning, since 
it enables us to apprehend the global evolution of soci- 
I —— 
retele Vand 
  
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
i
a
m
e
 
Bu
rk
e 
Acropolis, symbol of democracy (Athens, Greece). 
gr ATLL 0 pogo ri ga SELLY) REY vr GRE; 41 
. -_— 
Koichiro Matsuura, October 2001 
eties, as cultures blossomed through exchanges, albeit 
marked by bloody violence, but also through the gene- 
rous acceptance of difference, leaving indelible traces. 
As new forms of ignorance and intolerance emerge 
today, foisting hypotheses about the end of history and 
an isolationist quest to preserve identity, the principles 
of mutual respect, solidarity and dialogue between civili- 
zations and cultures — which inspired the creation of the 
United Nations system — are as important as ever. 
The collections of history published by UNESCO bear 
witness to the common legacies and dreams of mankind 
and, given the wide dissemination of their message, may 
help to build a shared future that will capitalise on the 
possibilities for mutual understanding between cultures 
in this age of globalization. 
Katérina Stenou, 
Director of the Division of Cultural Policies 
and Intercultural Dialogue (UNESCO) 
    A gargantuan project 
in the regions and cultural zones concerned.   
NESCOQO's historiographic collections on humanity, Africa, Latin America, the Caribbean, 
the civilisations of Central Asia and Islamic culture are the result of forty years of international 
cooperation, involving some 1600 specialists from all corners of the world. To date, 51 volumes 
have appeared, some translated into dozens of languages. 
These pioneering reference works, with their interdisciplinary approach and international exchange 
of knowledge, combine the history of events with the history of ideas, societies, civilizations and institutions   
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8

## [Page 5](185864eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

The spirit behind the foundation of UNESCO was to foster a 
consciousness of the unity of the human species, in all its diversity. No sooner had the Organi 
zation been founded, than it embarked upon compiling a new History of Humanity. No mear 
eat. Thirty years on, a major revision was needed, with a change in methodology and renewed 
Yio] gS (XN [= (000) 1 A Le [Tod [oTe Lor TR) o 1 = Tod (SE N CCN EN CE AVA [1 Wor 1 TTT A 1 TER EET 


### 185977: Writing histories in the plural

  
WRITING HISTORIES IN THE PLURAL 
he idea of a History of the Sci- 
entific and Cultural Development 
of Mankind was put forward by 
UNESCO as early as 1946 and 
can be attributed to the Organiza- 
tion's first Director-General, the 
British scientist, Julian Huxley. 
Naturally, he did not envisage add- 
ing yet another history to the large 
number already published which, 
although they claimed to be uni- 
versal, nevertheless remained Eu- 
rocentric. Quite the opposite. His 
intention was to produce a work of 
collective memory, highlighting the 
contribution made by all peoples to 
universal civilization. This was a dar- 
ing endeavour, to say the least, but 
one that fitted well with the ideals of 
the one year-old Organization. 
In 1947 the UNESCO General 
Conference, held in Mexico, decid- 
ed to set up an International Scien- 
tific Commission to oversee publi- 
cation of the History of Humanity. 
Teams of historians got down to 
- 
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
H
o
n
g
 
bi
n 
Yu
e 
2 Ema 
' 4 x - = 
i# / uN J 
$0 J 
. a 
# . 
© 
UN
 
. 
Ler, 
\ n> & J 
SP ee 
Qty ey 
  
  
 
  
       
Faia £3 
Second UNESCO General Conferenc 
work three years later, under the 
direction of a Brazilian, Paulo E. de 
Berrédo Carneiro. The first volume 
appeared in 1961 and the five oth- 
ers at regular intervals until 1968. 
a 
; el Sons i 
» ANC . { Fam, NG if 
  
  
Shang dynasty (1767 to 1122 B.C.) chariot and bones found in Yin Xu (China). 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 5 
ad 
£ - 
iS. 
\! 
e, Mexico City, November 1947. 
However, despite the success of 
its wide distribution, the publication 
was not very well received outside 
the West. And rightly so. Through 
no fault of their own, the majority 
of the authors bore the imprint of 
colonialism, which had taken very 
little interest in the history of the 
subjugated civilizations. As a result, 
barely 1.5% of the publication was 
devoted to Africa. 
Also, the links and interactions 
between the history of science and 
cultural history were not sufficiently 
developed in these first volumes, 
even though its mission had been 
to trace the scientific and cultural 
development of mankind. 
Then there was the problem of 
methodology. Over the preceding 
three decades, historiography had 
been turning towards anthropologi- 
cal research rather than chronologi- 
cal history. These new approaches 
had largely been ignored. 
(eee)

## [Page 6](185864eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

(vee) 
Back to square one 
“The day will come when what we 
have written [...] will, in turn, have to 
be replaced”, said Paulo Carneiro in 
1969, in his introduction to the first 
edition of the History of Humanity. 
“| would like to think that our suc- 
cessors will take this task in hand 
and that a revised edition of the 
volumes that we have written will ap- 
pear as a new millennium dawns! 
That day came in 1978, when the 
General Conference decided that 
a complete revision was needed. 
Work began two years later, start- 
ing from scratch. 
An historian's work, effectively, 


### 185977: Writing histories in the plural

never ends, and history itself is a 
continuous flow where nothing — 
neither the facts nor their interpre- 
WRITING HISTORIES IN THE PLURAL 
  
century. These committees were 
responsible for checking the con- 
tents of contributions, discussing 
certain aspects and ensuring ho- 
mogeneity of style and approach. 
In parallel, working groups met to 
discuss given issues, whether to do 
with history (such as the impact of 
marronage on Native American so- 
ciety) or methodology (e.g. which 
criteria would be used to choose 
one cultural contribution over an- 
other). In any event, it was agreed 
that the importance accorded to a 
given historical period should be 
both within the International Com- 
mission itself, and between certain 
collaborators. Western historians 
were still following the humanist 
line of the Annales School, a move- 
ment founded in 1929 by French 
historians, Marc Bloch and Lucien 
Febvre, while the Eastern European 
historians had been trained in the 
Marxist tradition. Unable to find a 
solution, Charles Morazé handed 
in his resignation to the Director 
General of UNESCO. This could 
be catastrophic for the future of the 
project. 
© Cultural Centre of the Islamic Republic of Iran, France 
 
  
- & 
AR pray, 
EE Ret 
 
   
tation — is definitive. 
UNESCO's objective had not 
changed — namely, to provide an 
account of universal history through 
the multi-faceted cultural and sci- 
     
 
% FN aril CCW 3 ZILIA 
papa 
ae pd - ala : Say 
FIR MEET ST Ty et a a 
» 
ye 
Chant BT Int win 
entific achievements of humanity | | = 
— but this new project was going 
to be both more detailed and more 
diverse. First of all, a new Interna- 
tional Scientific Commission was 
designated, comprising 26 mem- 
bers from all over the world, chaired 
by the French historian, Charles 
Morazé. 
An editorial committee of emi- 
nent specialists was drawn up for 
each of the seven volumes, which 
spanned pre-history to the 20th 
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
 
Bo
us
qu
et
 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
     
o 3 RN . - d a" Cotly 
Ra NX - Fat DY (IPG fe att J o£ = hy d 2A TS 1 
Neolithic cave art in Tassili n'Ajjer (Algeria) from 3000 B.C. . 
Cylinder of Cyrus, King 
of human rights (539 B.C.). 
proportional to its contribution, not 
to its duration. 
This arrangement seemed to be 
working well, until, a few months lat- 
er, Charles Morazé ran into an unex- 
pected obstacle: the difficulty, and 
then the impossibility, of reconciling 
the different conceptions of history, 
© 
Bi
bl
io
th
eq
ue
 
na
ti
on
al
e 
de
 
Fr
an
ce
 
  
- 
of Persia, considered the first written bill 
A historic opportunity 
Probably because | was both a his- 
torian and a member of UNESCO's 
Executive Council, the Director 
General, Federico Mayor, asked me 
to take over from Charles Morazé, 
in 1989. Never one to refuse a chal- 
lenge, | accepted, and immediately 
Gutenberg invents the printing press in Europe (15th century). 
6

## [Page 7](185864eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

(00°) 
set about trying to find a compro- 
mise. It was not easy, but luck was 
handed to me on a plate: the Berlin 
Wall fell that same year and, with 
it, the ideological tensions. The ef- 
fect was so dramatic that my Bul- 
garian colleague and friend, Nicolai 
Todorov, suggested to his editorial 
committee that the space devoted 
to religions be increased. He even 
organized a meeting in Rome be- 
tween Christians and Muslims, 
hosted by the Vatican! 
In an effort to make sure matters 
did not get out of control, as well 
as to ensure that dialogue, interdi- 
siciplinarity and knowledge sharing 
remained priorities, | decided, sys- 
tematically, to chair all the specialist 
steering group meetings, whether 
they were in France, India, or Jor- 
dan. The thematic parts of each 
volume covered vast areas, from 
anthropology to demography and 
legal science, including the effects 
of science and technology on cul- 
ture and the arts. In order to treat 
these subjects, the authors had to 
resist ideological pressures in fa- 
vour of a multidisciplinary approach. 
They also had to demonstrate the 
interdependence of civilizations, 
whose inventiveness formed part of 
the cultural and scientific heritage 
of humanity. 
Today, as | look at the seven vol- 
umes of the History of Humanity 
on my bookshelf, | cannot help feel- 
ing a certain pride. And | tell my- 
self that this monumental work is a 
defence against an obsession with 
the clash of civilizations that still 
haunts too many minds, undermin- 
ing the ideal of the founding fathers 
of UNESCO. 
Georges-Henri Dumont, 
Belgian historian, Chairman of the 
International Scientific Commission 
for the History of Humanity, 
since 1989 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
 
Ge
or
ge
s 
Ma
le
mp
ré
 
© 
Jo
hn
 
Mi
ch
ae
l 
M
a
l
l
o
n
/
w
w
w
.
t
h
e
h
e
a
l
i
n
g
u
n
i
v
e
r
s
.
c
o
m
 


### 185977: Writing histories in the plural

    
7 
WRITING HISTORIES IN THE PLURA 
 
sp EEE N 
IR TT 
’ . - 

## [Page 8](185864eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

(01 Tol WiNiq[or: Wolo lT ly ig [-T-4 ET RUT) 
their independence in the 1960 
WER ENEN REL CHR oR OER: [{e]1] 6) 
f intellectuals from Africa, or of African 
descent, was to rid people’s minds 
I FI CIT [TR ACI ELL ERI CE CET 
ignorance of African history. 


### 185993: Decolonizing history

  
DECOLONIZING |} 
HISTORY | 
ost racial prejudices about Afri- 
cans can trace their origin back 
to arguments justifying the slave 
trade and colonization, which have 
perpetuated a belief that Africa is 
a continent without history or civi- 
lization. An example of the persis- 
tence of this belief can be seen in 
a statement, made as late as 1963, 
by Hugh Trevor-Roper, an eminent 
professor of modern history at Ox- 
ford University. “Nowadays,” he 
wrote, “students want us to teach 
them about the history of black Af- 
rica. Perhaps in the future there will 
be some African history to teach. 
But at present there is none, or 
very little: there is only the history of 
Europe in Africa. The rest is largely 
darkness [...] and darkness is not 
the subject of history! 
One can understand why intel- 
lectuals from Africa or of African 
descent involved in the liberation 
of black people have been fight- 
ing since the early 20th century to 
‘decontaminate peoples’ minds’, as 
some put it, and why African states, 
a soon as they acquired indepen- 
dence in the 1960s, called on 
UNESCO to help them rise to the 
challenge. 
When, in 1964, UNESCO decid- 
ed to produce a General History of 
Africa, it was, above all, to remedy 
the widespread ignorance about 
the continent's history and to break 
free of discriminatory prejudices. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
Vig Ton | EE 
w / 
Hh 
Va 
4 
MN 
9 Is 
J Pl, 
le . f 
_ 
! 
Po 
Head of statue from Taharga ( 
The best way to do this was to give 
Africans the opportunity to rewrite 
their own history, with the neces- 
sary scientific support. 
An international scientific commit- 
tee of 39 specialists was therefore 
set up, representing different dis- 
ciplines within the social and hu- 
man sciences. Two-thirds of the 
members were African, in order to 
encourage an African standpoint, 
while nevertheless remaining open 
to challenges from outside special- 
ists, with other perspectives. 
Within the framework of this proj- 
ect, Cheik Anta Diop (Senegal), 
Hampaté Ba (Mali), Joseph Ki-Zerbo 
(Burkina Faso), Ali Mazrui (Kenya) 
and Théophile Obenga (Republic of 
Congo), to cite just this era's more 
illustrious members, held seminal 
discussions with their peers from 
other regions of the world, which 
were to transform ideas about 
Africa and black people. 
8 
   
  
£1 
> 
|) » - 
CRG AEA SN 
oe u 27 ri ¥ \ 
wot XP es 
(6) 
! 
» "TA ANT 
Ne hi i I Bk 4 
Near rh : Nig gh os Bie » 
“J L.- nk Ts vo 
: . ey . A “’ Lad 
yan - 2 3 . 
8 8 ATEN 
Fa fo HENEATY AF Me ST 
Yabibon wn Crom ALR 
©
C
a
i
r
o
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
ay wa 
ok 
ay 
Ee — - . :. 2 
Karnak), 25th dynasty (circa 670 B.C). | 
These discussions were lively, 
even stormy at times, especially 
when, for historiographic purposes, 
use was made of African oral tradi- 
tions and the Ajami — the African 
language archives, transcribed us- 
ing the Arabic alphabet, which are 
still relatively unknown (see box). 
The more passionate discussions 
were to be taken up in volume Il. 
A global approach 
The scientific committee aban- 
doned any ambitions of producing 
an exhaustive history, opting instead 
for more condensed overviews 
showing the current state of knowl 
edge and the main contemporary 
research trends. It also decided to 
emphasise the history of ideas, civi- 
izations, societies and institutions, 
as well as favouring an interdisci- 
plinary approach that drew on all 
available sources. These included 
oral traditions and the Ajami, as well 
(o0°)

## [Page 9](185864eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

(00°) 
as disciplines such as linguistics, 
musicology and even the physical 
and natural sciences. The commit- 
tee also chose a continent-based 
approach, which considers Africa 
as a whole and abandons the usual 
dichotomy between North Africa 
and sub-Saharan Africa. 
The eight volumes in the collec- 
tion, which were published between 
1980 and 1999, traverse the entire 
continent, which is recognized as 
the cradle of civilization, from the 
appearance of hominids over three 
million years ago, to the eve of 
the new millennium. The collection 
passes through ancient Egypt, the 
Fatimid dynasty, the Swahili civili- 
zation, the kingdoms of the Horn of 
Africa, the slave trade, independence, 
etc. Some 6500 pages in all. 
The collection also departs from 
some preconceived ideas, like the 
continent's isolation. It demon- 
strates that the Sahara, far from 
being a barrier, has always been a 
place of exchanges and that Africa 
has maintained enduring contacts 
with Asia, the Middle East, Europe 
and the Americas. 
Long before UNESCO's “Slave 
Route” project, launched in 1994, 


### 185993: Decolonizing history

the General History of Africa helped 
to break the silence over the slave 
trade and its impact on the diffi- 
culties encountered in Africa ever 
since. It devoted an entire volume 
to the subject in its ‘Studies and 
Documents’ supplement series. 
Over 20 supplementary publica- 
tions, often on controversial sub- 
jects, such as sources for writing 
history, the populating of ancient 
Egypt and the decolonization of 
Africa, add to this monumental un- 
dertaking, which involved over 230 
specialists. 
As soon as its first volumes were 
published, the General History of 
Africa had a phenomenal impact 
in scientific and academic milieus, 
both on the African continent and 
elsewhere. The entire collection 
was published in Arabic, English 
and French — and parts of it in 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
J
a
s
m
i
n
a
 
So
po
va
 
a]
 
DECOLONIZING HISTORY 
IS) 
3 
ol 
0 
@ 8 
®° 
® 
£ 
@ 
m = 
[0] 
O 
[2} 
pri 
Zz 
j= 
© 
| 
Mandarin, Korean, Spanish, Italian, 
Japanese and Portuguese. lt is con- 
sidered to have made a major con- 
tribution to our understanding of 
African history and historiography. 
An educational tool 
However, the collection has re- 
mained largely inaccessible to 
the general public and has not 
sufficiently been used in African 
schools, even though an abridged 
version was published in English, 
French and three African languages 
(Hausa, Kiswahili and Pulaar). 
=   ‘a 
~ 
‘a 
 Ee 
9 
Very few history textbooks pub- 
lished in African countries have 
turned to the collection for source 
material and the teaching of African 
history still reflects a Eurocentric 
viewpoint. Worse still, there is a 
clear tendency for these textbooks 
to offer a nationalistic vision of his- 
tory, which exaggerates the impor- 
tance of the colonial partition of 
Africa. 
This is why UNESCO has once 
again been approached to make 
greater use of the collection as 
the basis for educational material. 
(oe) 
Yered and the king. Detail from a mural in the Azuwa Maryam church (Lake Tana, Ethiopia).

## [Page 10](185864eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

©A
fr
ic
an
 
Un
io
n 
— 
Founding fathers of the Or 
~N - 3 
—— 
sation of African Unity: Mural, 1963, 


### 185993: Decolonizing history

DECOLONIZING HISTORY 
  
      
ani 
Africa House in Addis Ababa (Ethiopia). 
(00°) 
A $2 million project was launched in 
2008, financed by Libya. “Study the 
past if you would know the future” is 
the principle behind a set of educa- 
tional materials due to be published 
at the end of next year. 
The aim is to remind us that, despite 
its diversity, Africa shares a com- 
mon history and values, upon which 
the African Union should be able 
to construct the United States of 
Africa. 


### 185995: What are the Ajami?

WHAT ARE THE AJAMI? 
ontrary to what is usually thought, African sources Sie i) 5 
The series is targeted at the very 
young — primary and second- 
ary school children — who will be 
offered teaching materials that are 
standardized across all of Africa, 
aiming to reconcile, on the one 
hand, themes that promote unity, 
such as cultural identity and pan- 
African citizenship, and, on the 
other hand, national differences. 
The main collection, along with the 
abridged version, will also be made 
thousands of written documents, called Ajami, that re- 
of history are not exclusively oral. There are hundreds of i i) f A od 
cord the medieval history of the continent. The origin of 
more readily available in higher 
education establishments. The 
series will also be tailored for use by 
teachers, providing them with man- 
uals, educational CD-ROMs and a 
Historical Atlas, bringing them up 
to date with advances in historical 
research and improving the way it is 
taught. There is also, of course, the 
general public, which will have ac- 
cess to a wealth of information on 
the UNESCO web site. 
The anticipated outcome of this 
endeavour is a better-informed 
African public regarding the history 
of their continent and the contribu- 
tion their cultures have made to the 
progress of mankind, thus aiding 
them to respond more appropri- 
ately to the novel challenges of the 
modern world. A new task, no less 
difficult than publishing the General 
History of Africa. 
Ali Moussa lye, 
Chief of the Intercultural 
Dialogue Section, in charge of 
the Histories Projects (UNESCO) 
oe cE £5 
the word comes from “a’jamiyy” which means “non-Arab” ell) Jolla. 13, Lor Sn wehS J, a 
This odd etymology can be explained by the fact that these [emis Sled d; 2% iAsdiazd cin Ere 
documents are, for the greater part, written in African lan- 7 2 2) Bs af os ars of er TR LI 4 
guages and transcribed using the Arabic script. When Arabic 2 SIRES rT Ip Fr daaligench, 
is used, the margins invariably contain notes and comments Bed) slalom tie az) bs < 
Pla ra on > ea r3 " 
LI et el KF 
a Rms al iy i Pers 1 | aha 2 3 2) 
©F
al
lo
u 
Ng
om
 
(A
ja
mi
 
in 
Se
ne
ga
mb
ia
) 
in African languages. 
As Islam spread across the continent, Arabic script was 
adopted by ten or so African languages, including Bambara, 
Fulfude, Hausa, Malinké, Mandinka, Somali, Songhay, Swa- ie ; . ~ RAR 
fruds Say $13 pals Cw “3 dary 
hili, and Wolof. 3 a 
The oldest known Ajami were discovered in Timbuktu (Mali), J (Sat 9 1d% sim! Bio set esi b.5F 
and date from the 14th century. The Ahmed Baba Centre in “2 $end, Sod bpp “ sep 
Timbuktu, founded with support from UNESCO, now houses Ajami manuscript: Jazaa'a Shakur : Bo Yoonu Gegj gi (Reward to the 
: : grateful: on the way to the Ocean). 
over 18,000 manuscripts, most of which have been restored 
and digitized. Tens of thousands of others are preserved in other centres,such as the library of Sankore University (Timbuktu) and 
various private collections in the region. The Ajami found in Niger are more recent, dating from the 16th century. But others have 
been found in Chinguetti, Ouadane and Koumbi Saleh (Mauritania), as well as Kano and Sokoto (Nigeria). The subjects treated 
in these documents cover a variety of areas, including Koranic exegesis, law and jurisprudence, astronomy, botany, medicine, 
chronicles, genealogies and literary forms. 
Mohamed Ziadah 
(UNESCO) 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 1 0

## [Page 11](185864eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

(01 I 1 To] oTol [CTI ITT/6] (0 Wo T-WTET=To IE ERT 165] Co) Lor: | ET I (oY NNT ET I TES C14 ET 
IRE ETA TEL EET TEER GER flac BET] (ERE TR [e CR VAS CIE T(E 
of history. As Burkinabe writer, Joseph Ki-Zerbo, put it, oral traditions 
ETCH Tale My VEC] TA TAT To I EE JE Ta Lo Med (eT To I {eo To GI LET Co] We J lo [Wo EY 


### 185996: An Ear for the past: interview with Djibril Tamsir Niane

  
AN EAR FOR THE PAST 
INTERVIEW WITH DJIBRIL TAMSIR NIANE 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
  
  
Djibril Tamsir Niane. 
“Words fly, writing remains,” as 
we say in the West. Can you ex- 
plain how the oral tradition has 
become a legitimate source for 
the history of African cultures? 
This saying comes down to us 
from the Romans and has helped 
perpetuate the opinion that oral 
sources are not to be taken seri- 
ously. But the culture of civiliza- 
eo 
© 
£ 
ko) 
= 
3 
@ 
@ 
@ 
E 
c 
2 
9 
[+] 
le] @ 4] 
< 
© 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
Gathering of Bambara griots (Mali). 
Djibril Tamsir Niane is an expert on the history of the Malian Empire. 
His major literary work, Soundiata, ou I'épopée mandingue [71960; 
Sundiata: An Epic of Old Mali] was compiled from the tales told to him 
by Mamadou Kouyaté and other griots (traditional story-tellers). He is 
editor of the fourth volume of the General History of Africa : Africa from 
the 12th to the 16th Century. This was the period of the great empires 
and dynasties of Mali, Songhay, Alimohades, etc, 
which played a crucial part in the continent's history. 
Interview by Monique Couratier (UNESCO), 
editor for this special issue. 
tions built on oral traditions is just 
as rich as that found in societies 
which use writing. The oral tradi- 
tion does not say any old thing in 
any old way — it is a form of the 
spoken word that is organized, 
developed and structured. It is an 
immense repository for knowledge 
acquired by the community, follow- 
ing well-defined conventions. This 
is knowledge reproduced with a 
rigorous methodology. 
And there are specialists of the 
spoken word, whose role is to 
preserve and transmit things from 
the past — the griots (see box). In 
West Africa there are entire villag- 
wo Tas 
11 
es of griots, like Keyla, in Mali, with 
its 500 inhabitants. These are like 
schools of the spoken word, where 
children as young as seven are 
taught the history of their lineage, 
learning it by heart. This memory is 
then reactivated by the rhythm of 
songs and musical instruments like 
the tamani, the koni or the khalam. 
The griot’s words are “spoken hi- 
eroglyphs”, as my friend and com- 
patriot, Joseph Ki-Zerbo has put it. 
What is the role of the griot in 
today’s society? 
In Africa today, the Western edu- 
cational model is encouraging a 
(oe) 

## [Page 12](185864eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

(o00) 
move away from oral culture to- 
wards the written word. And, in- 
deed, traditional schools are losing 
their strength in terms of transmis- 
sion. Even so, the griot continues 
to play his role within the commu- 
nity, in keeping with his socio-pro- 
fessional caste, and he continues 
to preside at all ceremonies. 
Can he be seen as a historian? 
Thanks to the knowledge passed 
down from his elders, the griot pos- 
sesses a corpus, which makes up 
the basic narrative. But, according 
to circumstances, he might decide 
to relate just one part, or a con- 
densed version. He can also add 
knowledge that he has acquired by 
speaking to others on his travels. 
These deletions and additions do 
not alter the validity of the narrative 
that is passed on from one genera- 
tion to the next, as they are clearly 
indicated in his tale. As he tells the 
story, the griot puts things into per- 
spective - in other words, yes, he 
acts as a historian, if you accept 
that history is always an arrange- 
ment of the facts by a historian! 
Isn’t there a danger of oral 
traditions becoming corrupted 
through transcription and 
translation? 
Naturally, stories are gathered in 
the griot's own language, using a 
tape recorder, before they are tran- 
scribed into this same indigenous 
language. The story is then trans- 
lated into a Western language - 
which suffers from the same limita- 
tions as any other translation! The 
historian can always go back to 
the original recordings and hear 
the “dot-dot-dots” and “brackets” 
inserted by the griot. 
Did you use oral sources when 
preparing the General History 
of Africa? 
Absolutely. The oral tradition is 
more than a matter of spoken his- 
tory; it also deals with cosmogony, 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
 
De
 
D
e
c
k
e
r
 


### 185996: An Ear for the past: interview with Djibril Tamsir Niane

N EAR FOR THE PAST 
legends, and so on. To make sense 
of all of this, the historian has to 
compare and cross check sourc- 
es. But this is also true for written 
sources. 
   
  
a
 
“Ph | > 
Recording of stories from oral tradition, 
Senegal, 1969. 
Take the epic of Sundiata. This 
is the oldest African epic, tracing 
the formation of the great Malian 
empire through the journey of its 
founder, Sundiata Keita. He lived 
in the 13th century and unified the 
Sahel region from Niger to Sen- 
egal. His story has been passed 
down to us via the oral tradition, 
but the historical facts are also 
confirmed by written records. 
BD >= 
Old map of Guinea. 
12  
In order to fill in some of the miss- 
ing details in the oral versions, we 
made comparisons with docu- 
ments from the 14th century left by 
lbn Battuta (born in Tangiers) and 
lbn Khaldun (born in Tunis). This 
made it possible for us to give an 
exact date for the battle of Kirina, 
where Sundiata defeated his en- 
emy, the sorcerer king, Soumaoro. 
We also cross-checked with oth- 
er oral variants of the epic, particu- 
larly from Keyla in Mali, Fudama in 
Guinea and Bangul in Gambia. It 
is interesting to note that the epic 
has been passed on in various 
languages, which makes the histo- 
rian’s task even more fascinating. 
Africa is known for its extraordi- 
nary linguistic diversity. At least 
six of the 16 linguistic families 
documented in the world are 
African. Does this make 
it possible to talk of a conti- 
nent-wide cultural identity? 
Africa has always been a model 
of cultural diversity. Let's come 
back to Sundiata’s Empire. It was 
made up of a number of ethnic 
groups, each with its own culture, 
language and traditions. This was 
not a Jacobin from of rule. It was a 
model of decentralised rule, which 
allowed diversity to flourish. And 
its linguistic diversity was not at 
(o0°) 
> 
A
s
 
NY
 
t
t
 
h
e
 
i
e
 
OR
 
F
r
 FI
G 
EE 
r
a
 
T
S
 
R
e
 
—

## [Page 13](185864eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

(eee) 
all a hindrance, if the freedom of 
movement enjoyed by the great 
traditional healers is anything to 
judge by, travelling from village to 
village, from Dakar, in Senegal, to 
Conakry, in Guinea. 
It is worth remembering that there 
was freedom of movement through- 
SPEAKING 
LIVE: THE 
WORDS OF 
THE GRIOTS 
efore he starts to tell a 
story, the griot situates 
himself in time, in order 


### 185996: An Ear for the past: interview with Djibril Tamsir Niane

to give his words a firm 
foundation. He is there- 
fore both orator and genealogist, 
not just telling of events, but also 
of the relationships between 
people. A guest at every ceremo- 
ny, he acts as moderator and can 
even be required to “tidy up” his 
story to avoid certain statements 
from causing ill feelings. He also 
always apologizes in advance for 
anything he may leave out - even 
if this is deliberate. This “Master 
of the Spoken Word", as well as 
promoting social harmony, also 
therefore plays an ethical role. In 
Africa, the spoken word “counts” 
because, once it has been “fired 
like a bullet”, it cannot be re- 
trieved. There is no question of 
saying whatever comes into one's 
speak only when it's time, 
and know how when to hold your 
head - “ 
tongue”, says one proverb. And 
this is the real meaning of the 
traditional “palaver”. 
    
out West Africa as a whole. In 
1236, Sundiata declared what has 
become known as “The Charter of 
)) 6 ( Tete la asom ene Kakyere. 
(Things from the = 
echo in the ear). 
Akan proverb 
© 
C
l
a
u
d
e
 
S
a
u
v
a
g
e
o
t
 
N EAR FOR THE PAST 
Kurukan Fuga”, a kind of state con- 
stitution, and established a docu- 
ment that acted rather like a pass- 
port, with regional, not national, 
validity. 
This variety of languages, then, 
does not necessarily imply a paral- 
lel variety of values. 
 
M.C The griot’s blind gaze expresses the power of African words. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 13

## [Page 14](185864eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

-
 
Central Asia, crossroads and meeting-place of cultures, has also known periods 
when it was closed off from the outside world. The History of Civilizations of Central Asia 
dE (4 [Io] CRT CT) (oT [Tor We ET{ {TV EMO TE oT Lo RET eet TL TT ETRE) 
ECE RL EL ET CRAVE VERE (CTe [To] ETM Te [131414 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
A
.
 
Ab
dy
gu
lo
v 
  
~ TN 
fad 2% AA ob 
Falconry in the Kyrgyz steppes. 
STEPPES 
Frio a gE =o dn ~ 


### 185997: Steppes and the silk route

   
AND THE SILK ROUTE 
amarkand, Bukhara, Herat... cit- 
ies of dreams. Genghis Khan, Ta- 
merlane, Akbar... characters who 
marked history. Avicenna, Khayyam, 
Ulugh Beg... thinkers who trans- 
formed worldviews. These names 
“were inscribed down through the 
ages on a territory that corresponds 
not to a specific region of the an- 
cient world but to a permanent 
crossroads of exchanges between 
peoples: Central Asia. Since antig- 
uity, Scythians, Hsiung-nu and Khi- 
oN = 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
 
E. 
Ei
ch
en
be
rg
er
 
wy 
o : 
2) 
J 1 Ti :
oy =: 
tai roamed this area, from the Cas- 
pian Sea to the Chinese border, 
setting the foundations for the great 
civilizations of Asia and Europe. 
The History of Civilizations of 
Central Asia covers this immense 
expanse, which, until the 16th cen- 
tury was essentially given over to 
steppe pastoralism, with agricul- 
ture only possible in a few favoured 
places, like oases. Accordingly, it 
has given birth to little that has been 
original to human life and culture. 
  
~ 
Ns , 
V } ok Zo, # 
hn & : \ - a y 
03 . Sy 
. 
 
ry SEE 
Dome of a mosque in Samarkand (Uzbekistan). 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
A hu I] iy The aoe 
145 
A 
AR 
14 
However, its position as the heart- 
land of the Asian continent has 
given it a unique position as a cor- 
ridor for the movement of peoples, 
religions and ideas, and for cultural 
and artistic currents. The more fa- 
voured, settled regions to the south 
and east of the core region have, 
over the past four or five millennia, 
given birth to several religions and 
civilizations of the Near East, Iran, 
India and China. Influences from all 
these have been significant for the 
evolution of Central Asia. 
A land bridge 
The region of the steppes acted as 
a land bridge between the great civi- 
lizations of south-western, southern 
and eastern Asia, which intervening 
mountain ranges and deserts have, 
throughout recorded history, largely 
separated from each other. Obvious 
examples here include the so-called 
‘Silk Route’ running across Central 
Asia from East Asia to Iran, the 
Near East and the Greco-Byzantine 
worlds of the later pre-Christian 
and early Christian times, which not 
(eee)

## [Page 15](185864eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

Q
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
(00°) 
only conveyed luxury textiles from 
China to the Levant and ultimately 
to Europe but also, in the reverse 
direction, brought Sasanian silver- 
ware from Iran into Central Asia and 
as far as Siberia and what is now 
Russia, and Roman gold to Central 
Asia and north-western India.. 
Greco-Roman influences were 
likewise a major factor in the devel- 
opment of an art like that of Gand- 
hara in eastern Afghanistan and 
north-western India. In Islamic times, 
other Chinese luxury goods like ce- 
ramics made the long and hazard- 
ous land journey across Central 
Asia to centres of consumption like 
Nishapur, Ray, Isfahan, Baghdad 
and other great cities of the caliph- 
ate and its successor states, thus 
supplementing sea traffic through 
the Indian Ocean. 
In the realm of ideas, various of 
the great religions of the Old World 
spread across Central Asia to oth- 
er parts of the continents, such as 
Zoroastrianism from Iran into Tran- 
soxania (corresponding roughly to 
modern Uzbekistan) and Khwarazm 
(between today's Uzbekistan and 
Turkmenistan). Buddhism went 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 


### 185997: Steppes and the silk route

DE 
Cs AND THE SILK ROUTE 
forth from India to conquer China 
and Mongolia. Meanwhile traders 
from Western Asia, the Iranian Sog- 
© 
UN
ES
CO
 
\ , v 
So
 
Fo
s 
wa
t 
|] 
H
A
 
W
a
 
A : 
- 
      
  
_©
 
As
ah
i 
Sh
im
bu
n 
 
syncretism with existing beliefs and 
practices there, such as those of 
shamanism. 
Closing and opening 
The History of Civilizations of Cen- 
tral Asia has thus been designed 
to show that Central Asia deserves 
consideration, in its own right, as a 
distinct entity of human history, and 
also because it has functioned as 
a crossroads and meeting-place for 
the civilizations of East and West 
during past millennia. 
Passing to our own time, it also 
provides the historical background 
for the vastly increased openness 
of the region during the last two de- 
cades or so after the tightly closed 
period of Soviet domination and 
Cold War rivalries. The open terrain 
of much of the region had, in earlier 
times, always made it accessible to 
outside influences and movements 
of peoples. But, at the turn of the 
20th century, despite lengthy lines 
of communication and the conse- 
quent slowness of travelling, en- 
 
Great Buddha of Bamyan (Afghanistan), before and after its 
dian merchants, brought Nesto- 
rian Christianity and Manichaeism 
across Central Asia to eastern 
Turkistan and northern China. In 
Islamic times, the new faith of Mu- 
hammad was carried from the Ira- 
nian lands into the steppes and be- 
yond, often involving a process of 
15 
thusiastic explorers, archaeologists 
and art experts from a variety of na- 
tions revealed to the world in gen- 
eral the remarkable cultural, literary 
and artistic treasures of the peoples 
of Central Asia. 
But then ideological fanaticisms 
and political turmoil made Central 
(00°)

## [Page 16](185864eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

(o0°) 
Asia a region largely closed to the 
outside world for many decades. 
One consequence of this was 
that no academic body or institu- 
tion, let alone a single scholar or 
small group of scholars, felt able 
to undertake the compilation of a 
general history of the region, from 
its prehistoric beginnings to its 
present place in world history, until 
UNESCO brought together a wide 
range of authorities in the 1980s 
8 
[2] 
[3] 
E 
Ke} 
© 
3 
w 
~~ 
Q 
Q 
[72] 
wl 
Zz 
jn 
© 
and the present history was thus 
launched, mobilizing some 180 au- 
thors. Recently we have witnessed 
the emergence of the four Central 
Asian republics which are Turkic in 
ethnos and speech (Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and Uz- 
bekistan) and the one which is their 
Iranian equivalent (Tajikistan). In- 
dependent since the early 1990s, 
these states are now able to exploit 
their own mineral and other re- 
  
Spring celebrations (Nowruz) in Tadjikistan. 
WHEN A HISTORICAL ENTITY 
DOES NOT CORRESPOND TO A GEOGRAPHICAL AREA 
he seven volumes of the 
History of Civilizations of 
Central Asia cover a vast 
territory from the Caspian Sea 
to the Chinese border. 
The International Scientific Commit- 
tee for the project had, at the outset, 
the task of delimiting what could not, 
from the very facts of topography and 
habitat, be a well-defined region of the 
Old World. From the point of view of 
geography and vegetation, the great 
Eurasian plain or steppeland stretches 
from Hungary to the Tian Shan and Altai 
mountains, but one may delimit this 
further hydrographically, since the 
lands between the Urals and western 
Manchuria comprise land-locked, 
exiguously-flowing river systems and 
lakes which have no outlets to the 
surrounding Arctic, Pacific and Indian 
oceans. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
This delimited region was taken by the 
Committee as the core, but cultural, 
commercial and economic factors 
necessitate taking into account 
adjoining lands of ancient civilization 
to its west, south and east which have 
been, throughout history, in a symbiosis 
with this core region. Hence the 
Committee finally decided to define 
‘Central Asia, for purposes of the 
History, as not only including the 
Central Asian republics that are now 
heirs of the old Soviet republics, but 
also fringe areas such as Khurasan in 
what is now north-eastern Iran, 
Afghanistan, the north-western and 
northern parts of the Indo-Pakistan 
sub-continent, Mongolia and those 
parts of the modern China known 
as Xinjiang (province in western China). 
C.E. B. 
16 
©
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
of
 
C
o
n
t
e
m
p
o
r
a
r
y
 
Ar
t,
 
Te
he
ra
n 


### 185997: Steppes and the silk route

  
nl 
TEPPES AND THE SILK ROUTE 
  
sources and to play decisive roles 
in world commerce and industry; 
on the other hand they are now dis- 
covering continuities of culture with 
lands on their periphery, such as 
the Turkish and Azerbaijan repub- 
lics, the Islamic Republic of Iran and 
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, 
links which were previously strongly 
discouraged or even rendered im- 
possible. 
It is hoped that this UNESCO His- 
tory will demonstrate that what was 
once considered as an amorphous, 
little-known region of the European- 
Asian landmass has in fact acquired 
an identity over recent centuries 
and is now fully able to play a part 
in world affairs. 
C. Edmund Bosworth 
British historian, Emeritus 
Professor of Arabic Studies, 
University of Manchester, 
co-director with M.C. Asimov 
of Volume IV of the 
History of Civilizations of Central Asia 
 
    
  
  
Miniature of Jamshid, mythical king of ancient 
Iran (16th century). 
(Source: A. Ferdowsi, Shahnameh, Tahmasbi editions)

## [Page 17](185864eng.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

~ A world first: the General History of Latin America focuses on the societies and civilizations 
WET EVCRTLET oJ Clo RG EXCEL ET Lo BET TG TY BV (ere Ty oo (0 (CRUEL eT RL CR Eo Ao] 
(SVT TOM i HF Tot QoL ill TE Col [ore | ToT TT (oqo Ty WT) [o [Te ToT Co LN RE Ty Lo WAN go Ly BE RET Ig CY Tore Ty I e2TeT o [1 
has posed some problem 


### 186000: History seen through societies

  
HISTORY SEEN 
THROUGH SOCIETIES 
t the beginning of this year, 
UNESCO published the final vol- 
ume in its General History of Latin 
America, bringing to a close a mas- 
“sive undertaking that offers a global 
vision of the history of an immense 
region, covering some 22 million 
square kilometres. The scale of this 
General History — which fills some 
5600 pages — is exceptional, both 
in terms of its size and the number 
of contributing authors. For the 
Venezuelan historian and Chairman 
of the editorial committee, German 
Carrera Damas, this reference col- 
lection is the first attempt to write 
the history of the societies — and 
not nations — of the Latin-American 
continent. 
“This book consolidates the efforts 
of Latin American societies to un- 
derstand themselves, on their own 
terms, says Carrera Damas. And 
that is what makes it so original. 
“There have already been General 
Histories of Latin America. But they 
focus much more on the States 
and nationalities than on the soci- 
eties. And it is precisely the latter 
that interest us’ While a chrono- 
logical national history follows the 
time-line of a given country, the col- 
lection just published by UNESCO 
adopts a thematic approach, which 
is not confined by national borders. 
For example, the chapter on Latin 
American dictatorships after 1930 
looks at them as a whole, without 
being limited to a single country or 
part of the continent. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
© 
Bi
bl
io
te
ca
 
M
e
d
i
c
e
a
 
L
a
u
r
e
n
z
i
a
n
a
/
D
o
n
a
t
o
 
Pi
ne
id
er
 
Caprtule JHE. 7 fxs Ng 
PEE 
     
im 
q Capit Ketan, A Sider. 
; pe CLE Wy 
Papnal. Vicario de Wihjlobuchnl. 
 
  
Take HMamaarsgws: ios delay 
- Lugar. cid : fs   
Aztec gods, from the Florence Codex (16th century). 
(Source : LAmérique de la conquéte, Editions UNESCO/Flammarion, 1991) 
One of the innovations of this col- 
lection, explains Carrera Damas, 
is the integration of the history of 
Brazil in a global vision of the con- 
tinent's history, while also devoting 
specific chapters to it. 
But he also emphasizes another 
peculiarity of the collection — its uni- 
versal approach. “Not so long ago 
17 
the history of the world was written 
in France, in Britain, and so on. But 
today we are trying to move towards 
a genuinely universal history” In- 
deed, the nine volumes comprising 
this history are the result of a col- 
laboration between 240 historians 
from Latin America, Europe and the 
USA. Carrera Damas recalls a judi- 
(eee)

## [Page 18](185864eng.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

(00°) 
cious remark by a Chinese historian 
during the writing of UNESCO's 
History of the Scientific and Cul- 
tural Development of Humanity. 
“Well, you talk about ‘The Renais- 
sance', he said, “but by the time 
that Renaissance was happening in 
Italy, we Chinese had already had 
four Decadence periods and three 
Renaissances!” 
For the Venezuelan historian, 
UNESCO has played a key role 
in the success of this marathon 
scientific endeavour. “No other 
organization could have taken on 
such a task, while guaranteeing 
the scientific freedom, the time and 
the human, scientific and material 
resources it required. The task of 
writing and editing this work would 
have been beyond the capabilities 
of a private enterprise and would 
have been extremely demanding, 
even for a university!” 
But, paradoxically, the more posi- 
tive aspects of this project — such 
as the multicultural composition of 
the editorial team and its funding by 
an international organization - were 
not without their own challenges. 
Several authors, including some 
of the most illustrious, died before 
completing their contributions. And 
the project suffered from inevitable 
financial ups and downs, the physi- 
cal distances between authors, too 
few meetings between contributors 
and technological constraints (at 
the beginning, communication was 
uniquely by post and fax!). 
History: questioning 
the past 
There have been suggestions that 
the work is ‘Eurocentric’, because 
of the small amount of space de- 
voted to indigenous peoples - and 
even its title. After explaining that 
the term ‘Latin America’ is simply 
the most common one, the Chair- 
man of the editorial committee 
added, “You shouldn't forget that 
this general history has been writ- 
ten with the aim of being commu- 
nicated. Any use of language that 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
G
u
i
l
l
e
r
m
o
 
Te
al
di
 
HISTO 
cannot translate reality, cloisters 
knowledge, rather than disseminat- 
ing it” Also, the introduction to the 
collection emphasises that writing a 
history of Latin American societies 
has, historically, meant endorsing 
the hegemony of the Latin Ameri- 
can Creole peoples. 
  
  
San Ignacio de Loyola 
baroque church, Quito 
(Ecuador). 
Ry ga 
Ra en i —
Priestess of Candomblé, - 
blend of Catholicism and African animism. 
And as far as the presumed Cre- 
ole-centrism of the General His- 
tory of Latin America, is concerned, 
Enrique Ayala Mora, a member of 
the editorial committee, points out 
that historiography only translates 
the real situation. For him, the lack 


### 186000: History seen through societies

of research by indigenous special- 
18 
RY SEEN THROUGH SOCIETIES 
ists on the history of indigenous 
peoples — and the even greater lack 
of research on Afro-Latin American 
societies by Afro-Latin Americans 
— is a reflection of the way things 
really are, and which this collec- 
tion cannot ignore. “We knew from 
the outset that a disproportionate 
amount of space would be devot- 
ed to mixed-race history, given the 
paucity of sources of information 
about indigenous societies. So, 
as much as this may be criticized, 
this work does present a history of 
the continuity of Creole peoples in 
       
  
x ——n 
xX 
© 
Ca
ry
bé
/R
os
a 
Gu
er
re
ir
o 
(c
ou
rt
es
y)
 
- 
Latin America, through the simple 
fact that there are no other writ- 
ten historiographic approaches to 
the Latin American reality. Neverthe- 
less, the General History does offer 
some insight into the more recent 
reality of indigenous and Afro-Latin 
American peoples’ 
(o0°)

## [Page 19](185864eng.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

(eee) 
According to the Ecuadorian his- 
torian, the choice of devoting a sin- 
gle volume to the Pre-Columbian 
period and the eight others to the 
period since the arrival of Europ- 
eans, should not be interpreted as 
ascribing too much importance to 
the Creole world. “The questions 
multiply as we approach the pres- 
ent! he says. “For example, we 
have devoted two volumes to the 
Colonial period and four to the Re- 
publican period. Each volume on 
the Colonial period covers more 
than 100 years, while the average 
period covered by each volume 
on the Republican period is about 
sixty years. The volume on the Pre- 
Columbian peoples covers a period 
lasting two thousand years. History 
is a questioning of the past’ 
For Enrique Ayala Mora, it is less 
important to know how many vol- 
umes are devoted to the history 
of indigenous peoples than to ask 
which are the volumes of the Gen- 
eral History that deal with the post- 
Conquest period, which also men- 
tion indigenous peoples still living 
on the American continent. “In sev- 
eral volumes,’ he says, “indigenous 
peoples occupy an important place, 
whereas in others, the space given 
to them is more limited. Once again, 
this is because of the absence of 
previous research on the subject. 
Nevertheless, the rule was to make 
sure that authors dealt with themes 
that had hitherto hardly been stud- 
ied, or even not at all 
A pan-American spirit 
Writing this history, then, has helped 
to train “general” Latin American 
historians, as Ayala Mora explains. 
‘Before, we only had national 
monographs, or at best compara- 
tive research on two or three coun- 
tries. Historians have a tendency 
to avoid general subjects. They 
prefer to study specific questions, 
like, for example, mining in Potosi 
in the 17th century. It was not easy 
to find a historian who could write 
on industrialisation across the con- 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 


### 186000: History seen through societies

HISTO RY SEEN THROUGH SOCIETIES 
 
tinent between 1880 and 1930!" 
The General History will therefore 
be able to claim to have served 
as a ‘school’ by raising the aware- 
ness of historians to Latin American 
subjects, inciting them to carry out 
research on common processes in 
the countries of the continent. 
Finally, Ayala Mora underscores 
another important aspect of the 
collection. “This General History, 
© 
DR
 
 
Simon Bolivar (1783-1830), 
liberator of Latin America. 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
he says, “is in some ways the echo 
of pan-American aspirations, which 
are currently in fashion in certain 
countries of Latin America But, 
he adds, these aspirations are not 
recent. The birth of an indigenous 
identity as such can be traced to 
the 1781 Tupac Katari indigenous 
uprising in what is now Bolivia, an 
identity that was to become a real- 
ity during the independence era. In- 
terest in a common Latin American 
history also received a boost by the 
integrationist ambitions that were 
popular in the 1960's among econ- 
omists of the Economic Commis- 
sion for Latin America (ECLAC) and 
dependency theorists, including the 
future Brazilian President, Fernando 
Henrique Cardoso [1995-2002] 
Niels Boel, 
Danish correspondent for the UNESCO 
Courier, travelled to Venezuela and 
Ecuador to meet German Carrera 
Damas and Enrique Ayala Mora, 
respectively Chairman and Member of 
the editorial committee of the 
General History of Latin America 
  
Rigoberta Menchu, winner of the Nobel peace prize in 1992, 
for her efforts to promote the rights of indigenous people. 
19

## [Page 20](185864eng.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

For the first time, thanks to the General History of the Caribbean, 
[oo] e111 ETA Tels FRITS TE (=Yo Mo) A { YT fale] 11 [oy Wo HIATT (N11) orn (= (Ye JT (1013 Lo I TE (=e [ 0) 
are given prominence in history, not as mere objects but as subjects 
C1 [oJ Tor (oT £-3oy 43 LV] 1 le [21411 


### 186002: Shared destiny

  
SHARED DESTINY 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
a
y
s
 
a 
Benen i 
   
  
  
Old map of the Antilles. 
history of the Caribbean observed 
from inside the region, not from the 
ports and capitals of Europe - this 
was the unprecedented approach 
~ taken by the Drafting Committee on 
the General History of the Caribbe- 
an in 1983 in Kingston (Jamaica). 
The team of 18 scholars, most of 
them from the Caribbean but also 
from Africa, the United States, Eu- 
rope and India, set out to examine 
the past of Caribbean populations, 
scattered yet nonetheless linked 
by custom and culture, in order to 
present it in a unified historical nar- 
rative. 
Groups and cultures hitherto ex- 
cluded from the historical narra- 
tives, or included as objects rather 
than as actors in making our history, 
would appear centre stage — much 
was at stake. 
To write the history of the Caribbe- 
an region from inside, we had first 
to define that region. We began 
with the sea from which the region 
got its name, and then considered 
the lands lapped by that sea and 
finally added all the people who 
had inhabited those lands from pre- 
history to the present day, who by 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
their actions had connected the 
lands to the north, south, east and 
west of the sea. The General His- 
tory therefore concerns the islands, 
but also the coasts on the Caribbe- 
an Ocean in South America, from 
Colombia to Guyana, and in Central 
America - territories which thereby 
had similar cultural heritages and 
experience of polity, economy and 
society, though at different times. 
; 
 
B
e
 
  
  
Print, a family of Caribbean Indians. 
20 
Bridge to a common 
history 
In choosing to organise the General 
History through the use of themes, 
the Drafting Committee avoided 
the history being written merely 
as a series of chapters containing 
summary accounts of the histories 
of individual islands. Such histories 
had been written from the 17th cen- 
tury to the early 20th by the Creole 
elite. The histories written by the 
European and American academic 
historians had for their subjects war 
and trade in the islands and the 
mainland. 
The first changes came through the 
broadening of historiography in Eu- 
ropean and American universities in 
the first half of the century. Change 
also came through the movement 
for political autonomy. Both factors 
led initially to changes of emphasis 
in the histories of individual islands, 
and later to the histories of topics 
which linked the islands, notably, 
the sugar industry, slavery, slave 
laws, and immigration, European 
and Asian. 
In the established universities of 
Cuba and Puerto Rico, and in the 
(oe)

## [Page 21](185864eng.pdf#page=21) 0

### 186002: Shared destiny

  
© 
UN
ES
CO
 
4 
  N ¢ - ’ LS
oe 7 
 
African slaves working on a sugar plantation. 
(eee) 
new ones such as the University 
of the West Indies, departments of 
Caribbean Studies were opened. 
Undergraduate courses were of- 
fered in Caribbean literature, 
history, culture and society sup- 
ported by research the better to 
understand the activities which had 
shaped the region, and to identify 
the main elements which constitute 
Caribbean culture. The scholars en- 
gaged in these studies have come 
together either in the Association 
of Caribbean Historians or in the 
Caribbean Studies Association. By 
the 1980s therefore the founda- 
tions for a thematic General History 
of the Caribbean had been laid. 
What does our History 
contain? 
The main results of scholarship are 
reflected in the six volumes of our 
History. First come the autochtho- 
nous people, migrants from the Ori- 
noco who inhabited the islands for 
hundreds of years before the Euro- 
pean migration. 
Situated at what had become the 
gateway to the New World, they 
were decimated in the north by 
enslavement, inhumane treatment 
and disease. In the east their tacti- 
cal skills, employed both in war and 
in politics with the Europeans, en- 
abled them to survive longer; nev- 
ertheless their numbers dwindled, 
and in the eighteenth century those 
that continued to resist were trans- 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
J
e
n
s
 
Bo
el
 
E
b
 
NERC 
 
  
  
  
ported to Belize. The communities 
they established exist to this day 
and now teach their native language, 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
  
Toussaint Louverture, leader of the Haitian 
revolution (18th century). 
  
A
l
 
=
m
 
nN
 
    
Castries market (Saint Lucia). 
21 
Garifuna, to the Kalinago who live in 
Dominica and St.Vincent. 
To the North and the East of the 
Caribbean sea, these migrants 
from the middle and south of the 
mainland had, over several hundred 
years, made themselves into Carib- 
bean people with a Caribbean cul- 
ture. They survived long enough to 
interact with the European migrants 
to create the New Society, the title 
of our second volume. There, we 
look at this society between 1492 
and 1650, at the Caribbean envi- 
ronment, at the effects on autoc- 
thonous societies of European oc- 
cupation, at the basis for the forced 
migration, settlement and enslave- 
ment of African peoples, at the na- 
ture of the wars for lands and trade 
among the Europeans. 
The third volume looks at The 
Slave Societies, at the human cost 
of enslavement, the various forms 
of resistance to slavery throughout 
the region with attention to the one 
which led to Haiti's independence 
at the beginning of the 19th centu- 
ry. It discusses the abolition of the 
British trade in enslaved Africans 
and the eventual Emancipation, the 
result of a combination of slave re- 
bellions in the islands and the de- 
termined campaign of the humani- 
tarians and free traders in Europe. 
(eee) 
 

## [Page 22](185864eng.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

(00°) 
Volume four, The Long 19th Cen- 
tury emphasizes themes rather than 
chronology. The disputes between 
the estate owners and the eman- 
cipated field labourers created the 
opportunity for government spon- 
sored and funded migration from 
Asia, predominantly Indian. The 
constraints of indenture and the 
indignities attendant on being es- 
tate labourers affected the ways in 
which Creole societies developed 
in the twentieth century. The social 
and economic relations in societies 
once dependent on slavery and in- 
denture have been characterized by 
ethnic and class conflict. However, 


### 186002: Shared destiny

by persistent resistance to these 
SHARED DESTINY 
  
oppressive regimes, these societ- 
les have also endowed themselves 
with the dignity and self-confidence 
of free men. The latter part of the 
19th century and the first half of the 
20th have been marked by the im- 
pulse towards autonomy, as well as 
by the expansion of American capi- 
tal and influence and the diminution 
of that of Europe in the region. 
Volume five, The Caribbean in the 
20th Century, looks at decoloni- 
zation and neo-colonization in the 
face of the prevalence and persis- 
tence of the plantation, the ubiquity 
of underemployment, and the vul- 
nerability of Caribbean economies. 
It explores the effects of moderni- 
sation and mass communication on 
local cultures. 
The final volume is Methodology 
and Historiography, in which we 
make available to readers the his- 
torical evidence and techniques 
used for writing this history. We 
conclude with the historiography of 
the particular territories, of history 
writing in all its branches, and close 
by tracing the changes in the inter- 
pretation of the past. 
Roy Augier, 
historian of Saint Lucia, 
is the scientific director of the 
General History of the Caribbean 
HOW DID THIS ADVENTURE BEGIN: 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
D
o
m
i
n
i
q
u
e
 
R
o
g
e
r
 
oN 
Haitian painting. 
n December 1981, the Director- 
General convened in Paris a Work- 
ing Group for the Preparation of a 
General History of the Caribbean to 
which he invited twenty scholars, Carib- 
bean and European, in their personal 
capacities. To write a history of the 
region, of its people and their habitat, 
as if observed from the inside, seemed 
to the Working Group to require an 
inclusive vision. In their report they 
embraced geography, archaeology, 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
bf V2 NT 
oa AN Ul 
i 
anthropology, ethnography, demog- 
raphy, sociology, ethnicity, religion, 
politics, socio-linguistics, rituals, music, 
dance, festivals, customs, oral-sources, 
historiography, cartography. The Group 
yet managed to reflect their own times; 
they managed to overlook gender and 
the environment! 
The Director-General then invited 
eighteen scholars, again in their own 
right, predominantly from the Caribbean 
to be the Drafting Committee. It had its 
22 
first meeting in Kingston in April 1983, 
considered the Report of the Work- 
ing Group (1981) and used it to elicit 
themes significant for a history of the 
Caribbean. It abandoned the form of 
organization proposed by the Group for 
five themes, which with some elabora- 
tion would be the basis for a coherent 
history of the Caribbean. 
R. A.

## [Page 23](185864eng.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

LEENA SEIT R CTT EL GEGEN LT DI EEEY ELIE RR GX EVER 1 {T1114 oF 1a als 
the edification of human civilization. But its strength emanates not so much from the “fixism’ 
of an imposed order, but from the durability of a model that is always ready to be reinvented, 
starting from divine inspiration and the demands of the moment. 


### 186003: Messages from Islam

  
MESSAGES FROM ISLAM 
he Muslim world displays an ex- 
‘traordinary cultural and doctrinal 
diversity — it is a veritable linguistic 
Tower of Babel, an ethnic patch- 
‘work, geographical mosaic, and a 
‘political kaleidoscope. This is re- 
lected in UNESCO's collection 
entitled The Different Aspects of 
Islamic Culture. While Allah may be 
unique, Islam is multi-faceted, vary- 
ing from one country to another and 
changing over the course of time. 
It would be wrong to think that 
Islam has fulfilled its mission once 
and for all, and can now only be 
proud of its past achievements. Is- 
lam has made major contributions 
to the edification of human civiliza- 
tion in such diverse fields as phi- 
losophy, geography, mathematics, 
astronomy, medicine and the arts, 
but its mission is still active, and is 
continuously being renewed. It is 
also important to ensure that the 
meaning of Quranic faith is up- 
dated, as verse 148 of the second 
Surah reminds us: “Every one has a 
direction to which he turns. So has- 
ten towards all that is good 
Faith in Islam - like all other faiths 
— has no meaning unless it is rooted 
in the present. Faith is as much an 
interior practice as an openness to- 
wards others. It is true that, in Islam, 
man is an “object” within nature, but 
a special object, in that he is also a 
subject — of God, of course — but 
© 
Gé
ra
rd
 
De
ge
or
ge
 
(c
ou
rt
es
y 
of
) 
      
rT. ARSC BY il 
* Ve has M 
Cupola of Sheykh Lotfollah mosque in Ispahan (Iran 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
). 
i) 
© 
Gé
ra
rd
 
De
ge
or
ge
 
(c
ou
rt
es
y 
of)
 
also an autonomous subject, able 
to make choices and therefore to 
be responsible for his actions. 
Integration of religious 
and social life 
Some of our best writers were in- 
vited to contribute to a book, which 
| edited, entitled “The Different 
Aspects of Islamic Culture: The 
Individual and Society in Islam”. In 
sixteen chapters, they attempted 
to show how the — sometimes fal- 
tering — quest to achieve a fragile 
equilibrium between rights, respon- 
sibilities and freedoms has liberated 
the individual in Islamic societies. A 
priority has been to calm our fears 
and anxieties, despite the rigour of 
certain key texts and 
the imperious inter- 
ests of an often closed 
society. 
Drawing on a mass 
of historical and re- 
cent information, we 
tackled some funda- 
mental issues, taking 
account of the subtle, 
but determinant po- 
lemics concerning the 
principles expounded 
within the Qur'an and 
the Sunnah [the set of 
23    
 
The Alhambra, Granada (Spain), 
symbol of the glory of Al Andalus, 
from the 8th to the 15th century. 
declarations made — or tacitly ap- 
proved — by the Prophet] and the 
burdens of everyday life. 
Rather than presenting an exposi- 
tion of Islamic doctrine, we decided 
to trace its penetration of the his- 
tory of civilization, in an attempt to 
understand its influence — how it 
constituted a powerful and unifying 
force across a vast geographical, 
social and cultural area, and how 
Qur'anic teaching has been inter- 
preted and translated into actions. 
(o0°)

## [Page 24](185864eng.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

  
© 
Gé
ra
rd
 
De
ge
or
ge
 
(c
ou
rt
es
y 
of
) 
  
Bridge built in the 16th century by Akbar, Mughal emperor 
who ruled India from 1556 to 1605. 
(o00) 
A living religion 
and culture 
From the Middle Ages to today, the 
Qur'an has been used as the refer- 
ence not only when defining laws, 
but also the collective attitudes 
and individual behaviour of peoples 
that have embraced Islam, from the 
China Sea to the Atlantic coast 
of Africa. The two specificities of 
Islam are, then, its creative continu- 
ity and its mission to bring peoples 
together. 
We know that the creation of val- 
ues and their integration with reality 
has had a vast sphere of application, 
ranging from law to psychology, 
society, politics, economics and the 
arts. We should also remember that 
this organizing force of Islam does 
not emanate from the “fixism" of 
an imposed order, but from the 
durability of a model that is always 
ready to be reinvented, starting from 
divine inspiration and the demands 
of the moment. The image of an Is- 
lam fossilized in its medieval form is in 
stark contrast with a living Islam, able 
to find new solutions, like Life itself. 
The notion of Islamic fraternity 
leads to a more universal fraternity, 
which is necessary for the defence 
and education of man, of all men: 
preparing the child for its tasks as 
an adult, serving human rights, or- 
ganizing relations between commu- 
nities, confronting deviancy, injus- 
tice, inequality and oppression. In 
other words, the mission of Islamic 
faith is to bring all mankind togeth- 
er, regardless of beliefs, language 
or ethnicity. 
In contrast to the caricature of 
Islamic culture, our book shows just 
how the law has been — and contin- 
0 ues to be —the object of dialectic ik & bh i di bh & ihibbdi i mn a debate, providing the means to 
= . 
Ho diss bb th  
© 
A
r
a
m
c
o
 
Wo
rl
 
The Kaaba (Mecca, Saudi Arabia), which pilgrims 
circumambulate seven times (tawaf). 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
rd 
live by one’s religion and also to 
live in today’s world, while facing 
and overcoming ever renewed 
challenges. And it reminds us 
that the spiritual vacuum we suf- 
fer from today cannot be filled by 
fanaticism, by abdicating or by 
denigrating others. 
Abdelwahab Bouhdiba, 
sociologist, is president of the 
Tunisian Academy of Sciences, 
Literature and Arts 
(Beit el Hikma) 


### 186003: Messages from Islam

24 
MESSAGES FROM ISLAM 
AN AGE-OLD 
CULTURE 
© Biblioteca del Monasterio 
de San Lorenzo de El Escorial, Madrid 
    Muslim and mm mm the lute: 
musical dialogue. 
(Source : Libro de musica de las cantigas de Alfonso X) 
he geo-cultural coverage of 
Islam during the Middle Ages 
made it a universal pole of 
attraction, exercising an un- 
deniable influence on its neighbours. 
Muslim thinkers and intellectuals fer- 
tilized the medieval soil in which the 
seeds of the European Renaissance 
were to sprout, bringing its own pre- 
cious contributions to the adventures 
of science and the arts. 
Age-old, but still very much alive 
today, Islamic culture has simulta- 
neously developed a vision of the 
individual and of the universe, a 
philosophy and an art of living, as 
borne out by the illustrious remains 
of its heritage - an integral part of the 
heritage of all mankind. 
This culture, momentarily halted by 
opposing developments, was able to 
delve into its own resources to find 
the strength to spring back. Remain- 
ing loyal to the roots of Islam need in 
no way be a barrier to the desire to 
be part of the present, to join in cur- 
rent debates and to be open to the 
dialogue between cultures. 
The six volumes of the collection 
on various aspects of Islamic culture 
deal, respectively, with: the theologi- 
cal foundations of Islamic culture; 
the status of the individual in Islamic 
society; the expansion of Islam since 
the Revelation of the Qur'an; the 
contribution of Islamic thinkers to 
global knowledge; literature, the arts, 
architecture, and education in Islam; 
and Islam’s quest for modernity.

## [Page 25](185864eng.pdf#page=25) 0

### 186005: The Rosetta stone of Bisotun

THE ROSETTA | 
STONEOF = + = 
BISOTUN 
EB A 
pe 
i / A 
Cn 
I~. 4 
3 LW =m 
E _—— : AX 
  
mf 
This inscription was the key evidence for deciphering cuneiform script. 
of NBNEN ew 118 
An emergency protection plan has just been launched to safeguard Bisotun, Iranian World Heritage site, 
threatened by erosion. Bisotun contains an exceptional document of human history: 
an inscription repeated in three languages - Elamite, Babylonian and Old Persian - that provided 
the key to deciphering cuneiform script. 
he inscribed property is locat- 
ed some 30 kilometres north- 
east of Kermanshah (Iran) on 
the main trade route leading 
from Kurdistan and the Mesopota- 
mian region to the Iranian Central 
Plateau. The archaeological site 
includes remains dating from pre- 
historic times through the history of 
ancient Persia, associated with the 
sacred mountain of Bisotun and the 
Bisotun Monument, i.e. the inscrip- 
tion and bas-relief by Darius | the 
Great, dating from the time when 
he rose to the throne of the Persian 
Empire (521 B.C.). 
The monument is carved in an in- 
accessible recess in the cliff, ap- 
proximately 100 metres above the 
plain. The bas-relief portrays Darius 
standing and facing right. He wears 
a Persian garment, the ‘royal’ shoes, 
a bracelet and a crown. In his left 
hand he holds a bow as a sign of 
sovereignty. His right hand is raised 
at face level. With his left foot Darius 
is treading on the chest of a figure 
who lies on his back before him and, 
according to the legends, repre- 
sents Gaumata, the Median Magus 
and pretender to the throne whose 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
assassination led to Darius’s reign. 
Gaumata, also dressed in Per- 
sian attire, Is raising his arms as a 
sign of submission. On the right, 
rebel leaders are walking towards 
the king. Their hands are tied be- 
hind their backs and a long rope is 
bound around their necks. Below 
and around the bas-reliefs, there are 
some 1200 lines of inscriptions tell- 
ing the story of the battles Darius 
had to wage in 521-520 BC against 
the governors who attempted to take 
apart the Empire founded by Cyrus. 
Apparently, the decisive battle took 
place on this site. 
The key to cuneiform 
script 
The Bisotun inscription is one of 
the most remarkable documents 
of human history. The inscription is 
repeated in three languages: Elam- 
ite, Babylonian and Old Persian. 
This is the only known Achaemenid 
monumental text to document the re- 
establishment of the Empire by 
Darius I. The last phase of the in- 
scription is particularly important, as 
it is here that Darius introduced for 
the first time the Old Persian version 
25 
of his res gestae or achievements. 
Darius states that he had the Old 
Persian cuneiform script specifically 
made for the purpose of composing 
this inscription. In addition to Bisotun, 
this Achaemenid writing was used for 
other royal monumental inscriptions, 
such as those in Persepolis and Susa. 
This cuneiform writing is referred to 
the ancient Mesopotamian system. 
However, in Bisotun, it is partly al- 
phabetic, partly syllabic. Each word is 
separated by a special symbol. 
Another “Rosetta Stone”, the in- 
scription was the key evidence for 
deciphering cuneiform script. Al- 
though the German scientist, Georg 
Friedrich Grotefend, had partially de- 
ciphered the Old Persian cuneiform 
writings in 1802, it was Sir Henry 
Creswicke Rawlinson who in 1835 
copied the inscription and began the 
tedious and rigorous work of its deci- 
pherment. 
Bisotun is an outstanding testimony 
to the important interchange of human 
values on the development of monu- 
mental art and writing. The symbolic 
representation of the Achaemenid 
king in relation to his enemy reflects 
traditions in monumental bas-reliefs 
(oe) 
© 
Ba
ba
k 
Se
di
gh
i

## [Page 26](185864eng.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

(o00) 
that date from ancient Egypt and the 
Middle East, and which were subse- 
quently further developed during the 
Achaemenid and later empires. 
Conservation: first 
steps and challenges 
Taking note of the outstanding uni- 
versal value of this document, one 
of the most remarkable of human 
history, the World Heritage Commit- 
tee, at its 30th session, decided to 


### 186005: The Rosetta stone of Bisotun

inscribe Bisotun on the World Heri- 
tage List in 2006. But the property 
is subject to various types of threat. 
The first of these is urban develop- 
ment. The plain of Bisotun is agricul- 
tural land with sporadic villages and 
small industries. The biggest indus- 
trial agglomeration is a petrochemical 
plant. The current studies have not so 
far ascertained any chemical impact 
on the inscription. The visual impact 
of the portal frame industrial build- 
ings in the plant demand serious at- 
tention, however. Second, Bisotun is 
located in a seismic region. As a re- 
sult of previous earthquakes, there is 
a transversal fissure across the whole 
inscription. Precipitation water seeps 
through these cracks and causes fur- 
ther erosion. The inscription is carved 
directly on the rock and is thus subject 
to physical, chemical and biological 
erosion. 
To urgently address further erosion 
of the inscription, UNESCO mobi- 
lized necessary funding for an interna- 
tional expert mission. The mission was 
undertaken by Professor Costantino 
Meucci, a specialist in stone conser- 
vation, at the end of 2008. As a result 
an emergency protection plan is now 
being implemented. The plan calls for 
establishing emergency scaffolding, 
reducing seepage by leading the wa- 
ter away from the inscription surface 
through pipes and conducting further 
studies for long term conservation of 
the property. 
Iranian authorities are now imple- 
menting these urgent conservation 
measures. Iran's Cultural Heritage, 
Handicrafts and Tourism Organiza- 
tion (ICHHTO) also plans to draft 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8   
a proposal for significant expan- 
sion of the protective boundaries. 
Nevertheless, the implementation 
demands rigorous monitoring. The 
development of a long term con- 
servation plan is the prerequisite for 
further interventions. Owing to the 
sensitivity of the property, the plan 
should be drawn up with adequate 
technical input at international and 
national levels. This demands further 
international assistance. 
Junko Taniguchi, UNESCO Office in 
Tehran, and Farzin Fardanesh, 
consultant at UNESCO 
MONUMENTAL CHALLENGES AT BISOTUN 
Inscribed in 2006 on the World Heritage List, 
the Bisotun site in Iran is located along the ancient trade route 
linking the Iranian high plateau with Mesopotamia and features 
remains from prehistoric times to the Median, Achaemenid, 
Sassanid and llkhanid periods and after. 
he prehistoric remains within 
Bisotun include Palaeolithic 
cave finds, the earliest evidence 
of human presence at the spring- 
fed pool on the plain under the rock. 
These finds provide testimony to a 
highly developed industry datable to 
the Middle Palaeolithic era. In addition 
there are remains from the Median pe- 
riod (8th or 7th centuries B.C.) as well 
as from the Achaemenid (6th to 4th cen- 
turies B.C.) and post-Achaemenid peri- 
ods. The Median fortress is a structure 
on the mountain slope, just under 
the Darius monument. Of the post- 
Achaemenid remains, the Seleu- 
cid figure of a resting Heracles dates 
from 148 B.C. Though not of high 
standard technically, it is important 
because of its datable Greek inscription. 
The Parthian remains comprise 
reliefs of Mithradates (123-87 B.C.), 
Gotarzes II (around 50 B.C.) and 
the Parthian stone which bears a crude carving of a sacrificial victim on an altar. 
The Sassanid remains consist of several smaller monuments and objects. 
They include three large sculptured capitals, which are important documents 
for the history of Sassanid art. 
Last but not least, remains of Sassanid and llkhanid palaces were excavated 
in the western section of the core zone. On the ancient caravan route, there 
is a Safavid caravanserai, which has recently been restored as a guest house. Close 
to this caravanserai, there is another building which was used as a prison until re- 
cently, but is now given to ICHHTO, which is responsible for the management of the 
property. 
Bisotun includes other significant properties. Tag-e-Bostan is another site locat- 
ed northeast of Kermanshah City. The property is situated by a mountain of the 
same name and a spring. It includes Sassanid reliefs of Artaxerexes Il, two carved 
vaults and the King Khosrow Parviz Hunting Grounds. More to the east are the 
Eshaqvand carved tombs. These properties are located within an area of some 
540 hectares. 
\y, » 
© 
Ba
ba
k 
Se
di
gh
i 
  
Bisotun, Iranian World Heritage site. 
J. T.etEF F 
26

## [Page 27](185864eng.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
O
Q
.
B
r
e
n
d
a
n
 
— — 
- 
  
  
   
: 
ery . Lan a . , & 
< LY 
  
Children at Katha public school (Govinpuri slums, south Delhi, India), during an astronomy class. 


### 186006: Teaching science: child's play

Teaching science: child’s play 
People cannot be educated by forcing them to memorise formulas, says French physicist 
Christophe Galfard, who has vowed to make the general public, and young people in particular, 
love science. In his view, science is a cornerstone of modernity and science education 
a strategic goal for the future. 
Interview by Linda Tinio (UNESCO Bureau of Strategic Planning) 
How can science education play 
a strategic role for the 
international community? 
Scientific knowledge today is the 
result of an accumulation of thou- 
sands of years of knowledge that 
has shaped our era. Possessing that 
knowledge increases the ability to 
create techniques and technologies 
and imagine worlds in step with mo- 
dernity. From a strategic standpoint, 
| think it's absolutely fundamental for 
as many people as possible to have 
access to that knowledge, precisely 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 
to be able to look ahead, understand 
what is happening around us, tap 
into our world's potential forces and 
dream of possible futures. 
How can science education be 
promoted among policymakers? 
By convincing them of two obvious 
things. The first is that technology 
and scientific knowledge have ap- 
plications in industry and the work- 
place in general, and that they have 
an impact on the economy. The sec- 
ond, which is subtler, is that those 
27 
applications shouldn't be expected 
to produce immediate practical re- 
sults. Even Einstein's theory didn't 
have immediate effects. Today it is 
the basis of almost all space technol- 
ogy, an application nobody imagined 
at the time it was conceived. 
What are the main challenges 
facing science education today? 
One of science education's greatest 
challenges is to reach the broadest 
possible public, in particular young 
people, who usually have a more in- 
(o00)

## [Page 28](185864eng.pdf#page=28) 0

### 186006: Teaching science: child's play

(o00) 
nocent and more wonderstruck view 
of the world than grown-ups. 
But people cannot be educated 
by forcing them to memorise formu- 
las. The American physicist Richard 
Feynman said that science formulas 
are the guardians of the memory of 
what we know today. To draw young 
people's attention to the sciences, 
they must be presented in an excit- 
ing way. We must tell them a story, 
raise their awareness of the beauty 
of our world, of the beauty of sci- 
ence, and capture their imagina- 
tions... Science education must 
have a fun, playful aspect. In any 
case, that's my approach. 
We're incredibly lucky to be the 
first people since the dawn of hu- 
manity to see pictures of distant gal- 
axies and hear sounds coming to us 
from the other end of the universe. 
Those scientific discoveries open 
our minds up in the same way art 
does, don't they? 
How can science education 
spread ethical values? 
Science in itself conveys ethical val- 
ues. The British physicist Stephen 
Hawking told me that, despite the 
political roadblocks, British, Ameri- 
can and Russian scientists never 
stopped communicating during the 
Cold War. Science remained united 
in the bipolar world of that period, 
illustrating, in my view, its universal 
and humanistic aspect. 
Science education instils values 
inherent to the search for truth in 
our world, values that bring people 
together whatever their political or 
religious views. 
  
 
© 
Fr
an
co
is
 
Le
be
l 
  
| Christophe Galfard has a Ph.D. 
in theoretical physics from Cam- 
| origins of the universe. His latest 
 
Born in Paris, France in 1976, 
bridge University (United King- 
dom) where, under the direction 
of Stephen Hawking, his work 
focused on black holes and the 
novel, Le Prince des Nuages 
(Prince of Clouds), which reads 
like an adventure story, looks 
into the fundamental problems 
of our planet and its climate.   
Do you think the present eco- 
nomic crisis will have a harmful 
impact on science education? 
| really hope governments will not cut 
funds for fundamental research on 
account of the economic downturn. 
That would be a huge mistake be- 
cause industries and economies rely 
mainly on scientific breakthroughs to 
rebuild themselves. A thoughtless 
reaction like that would have a nega- 
tive long-term effect. 
In what direction should science 
education develop in the future? 
| think there are three directions for 
the future that meet the needs of 
students, researchers and the pub- 
lic at large. 
First, it's important to make stu- 
dents aware that science lets us 
look at the world through modern 
eyes and to show them why it's im- 
portant to know about science even 
if they have no intention of following 
a science career. 
As for research, I'm delighted to 
note that more and more universi- 
ties integrate new scientific knowl- 
edge into their curricula every year. 
If that could be expanded to all the 
universities in the world, it would re- 
ally be a good thing for humanity. 
As for the general public, it's im- 
portant to popularise science so 
that everybody can have access to 
it. Let's imagine you want to share 
the joy of reading a poem in Russian 
with somebody who doesn’t speak 
that language. Well, you're not go- 
ing to force him or her to learn the 
Cyrillic alphabet, are you? You're 
going to translate the poem into a 
language he or she can understand. 
The same goes for mathematical 
equations. 
This column, launched by the UNESCO Bureau of Strategic Planning, tackles forward-looking topics 
of interest to the general public and the Member States of the Organization. It features intellectual 
opinions likely to foster UNESCO's reflection, programming and action in its various areas of competence. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 8 28

## [Page 29](185864eng.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

  
NN 
  
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Organisation 
des Nations Unies 
pour l'éducation, 
la science et la culture 
Organizacion 
de las Naciones Unidas 
para la Educacion, 
la Ciencia y la Cultura 
Opranunsauyus 
O6beauHeHHbIX Haun no 
BOnpocaM o6pa3oBaHus, 
Hayku 1 KyNnbTypbl 
Saaiall asl dali 
dslailly 0, du ill 
KEEHT. 
For Je SCA AHR 
  
     
  
Revised edition 
  
The UNESCO Courier is published by 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization. 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
http://www.unesco.org/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
f.ryan@unesco.org 
Director 
Saturnino Mufioz Gomez 
Editor in Chief 
Jasmina Sopova - j.sopova@unesco.org 
Editorial assistance 
Katerina Markelova - k.markelova@unesco.org 
EDITORS: 
Arabic 
Bassam Mansour - b.mansour@unesco.org 
assisted by Zaina Dufour - z.dufour@unesco.org 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape - w.cauhape@unesco.org 
English 
Cathy Nolan - c.nolan@unesco.org 
Portuguese 
Ana Lucia Guimaraes et Nelson Souza Aguiar 
a.guimaraes@unesco.org 
Russian 
Victoria Kalinin - v.kalinin@unesco.org 
Spanish 
Francisco Vicente-Sandoval - l.iglesias@unesco.org 
Photo and web layout 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org 
PDF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi 
Web Platform 
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro 
s.roberts@unesco.org 
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be 
reproduced and/or translated providing the credit line 
reads “Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” 
and includes date and hyperlink. Photos without 
UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations 
of the countries and territories concerned. 
 

## [Page 30](185864eng.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO, Sector de la cultura E-mail : histories@unesco.org http:// www.unesco.org/ culture/fr/histories/ 
+ 
+ 
© 
Ta
ur
us
 
De
si
gn
 
~~ KAMMALALLEN 
~~ TARIHIN AFIRKA 
JUZU'l NA | 
(TAEAITACTEN MAYAN 
Dabarun Rubuta Tarihi 
Da Kuma Labarin Afirka 
Gabanin Tarihi 
Pas ~ F KIZERO 
  
  
fisTol 
JUMANITE  