# [186521](186521eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](186521eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
     
  
     

## [Page 2](186521eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
e 
2009 - N° 2    
 
  
ENDANGERED LANGUAGES, 
ENDANGERED THOUGHT 
The Courier’s feature, published in honour of International Mother Lan- 
guage Day (21 February), focuses on this worrying trend: when languag- 
es become extinct, not only words disappear, but ways of seeing and 
describing reality; we lose valuable knowledge and worlds of thought. 
EDITORIALP 3   
Detail of poster 
for International 
Mother Language 
Day.   © 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
 
EACH LANGUAGE IS A UNIQUE 
* WORLD OF THOUGHT 
Australian linguist Christopher Moseley 
explains the crucial importance of preserving 
pa 
) ~~ 
languages and presents the main innovations of 
the just-released third edition of the UNESCO 
“Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger”. 
| Ad Ps 
2 THE MONKEYS, THE SCORPION 
AND THE SNAKE 
Stone is petrified speech, water is language 
laughing, the sown seed, a promised word: 
every element of reality is an integral 
part of Toro Tegu, currently spoken 
by some 5000 Dogons in the north of Mall... 
P6 
  
FORUM 
CLEA KOFF: BONES NEVER LIE 
FOCUS 
 
For Women in Science 2009. P 18 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
SERIOUSLY SPEAKING : 
WHAT IS CH'TI? 
The French film “Welcome to the Land of 
Ch'tis” has been making Europeans laugh 
recently. But the reality is not so funny: Ch'ti, 
which is a variation of the Picard language spoken in northern 
France, has become a social stigma, or at best a quaint museum 
piece. P8 
ITER + == WUTHING WE GWEN TULL? 
AIRN | AN 
; The same language is spoken on the islands 
| of Norfolk and Pitcairn (Pacific), yet it has 
k | developed differently in the two places, sepa- 
rated by 3,907 miles. A native Norfolk islander 
tells the curious story of this language, which came into being in the 
late 18th century and split into two 70 years later. P10 
  
   
AN EPIDEMIC 
IS THREATENING 
INDIGENOUS LANGUAGES 
Some languages are spoken by very few 
people but are still very much alive, while 
others have been preserved by the isolation of their speakers. 
Marleen Haboud from Ecuador explains these apparently para- 
doxical phenomena. P12 
Forensic anthropologist Clea Koff wrote “The Bone Woman” in 2004, to chronicle her experiences 
during seven UN missions to unearth the mass graves of Rwanda, Bosnia, Croatia and Kosovo. 
Her grueling investigations helped bring some of the perpetrators to justice. P14 
- AUGUSTO BOAL: “WE ARE ALL ACTORS” 
International message for World Theatre Day (27 March) by the world-famous Brazilian theatre director. P 17 
LCOREAL-UNESCO AWARDS FOR WOMEN IN SCIENCE 
Beatriz Barbuy (Brasil), Athene M.Donald (United Kingdom), Akiko Kobayashi (Japan), Eugenia Kumacheva 
(Russia/Canada) et Tebello Nyokong (South Africa) are the Laureates of the TOREAL-UNESCO Awards

## [Page 3](186521eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
    
Jo
hn
-T
ho
r 
Da
hl
bu
rg
 
NT 0 ae ! © =
 
’ | TR 
      
Tevfik Esenc in 1982. Last speaker of the Oubykh language 
(Turkey), he died in 1992. 
    
   
   
interactive digital version of the At- 
of the World's Languages in Danger 
ides updated data about approxi- 
ely 2,500 endangered languages 
nd the world and can be continually 
supplemented, corrected and updated, 
thanks to contributions from its users. 
lt enables searches according to sev- 
eral criteria, and ranks the endangered 
languages that are listed according to 
five different levels of vitality: unsafe, 
definitely endangered, severely endan- 
gered, critically endangered and extinct. 
Some of the data are especially worry- 
ing: out of the approximately 6,000 ex- 
isting languages in the world, more than 
200 have become extinct during the last 
three generations, 538 are critically en- 
dangered, 502 severely endangered, 632 
definitely endangered and 607 unsafe. 
For example, the Atlas states that 199 
languages have fewer than ten speakers 
and 178 others have 10 to 50. Among 
the languages that have recently be- 
come extinct, it mentions Manx (Isle 
of Man), which died out in 1974 when 
Ned Maddrell fell forever silent, Aasax 
(Tanzania), which disappeared in 1976, 
Ubykh (Turkey) in 1992 with the de- 
mise of Tevfik Eseng, and Eyak (Alaska, 
United States of America), in 2008 
with the death of Marie Smith Jones. 
As UNESCO Director-General Koichi- 
ro Matsuura stressed, “The death of a 
language leads to the disappearance 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
of many forms of intangible cultural 
heritage, especially the invaluable heri- 
tage of traditions and oral expressions 
of the community that spoke it — from 
poems and legends to proverbs and 
jokes. The loss of languages is also 
detrimental to humanity's grasp of bio- 
diversity, as they transmit much knowl- 
edge about the nature and the universe’ 
The work carried out by the more than 
30 linguists who worked together on the 
Atlas, financed by Norway, shows that the 
phenomenon of disappearing languages 
appears in every region and in very vari- 
able economic conditions. In Sub-Saha- 
ran Africa, where approximately 2,000 
languages are spoken (nearly one third 
of the world total), it is very probable that 
at least 10 % of them will disappear in 
the next hundred years. The Atlas further- 
more establishes that India, the United 
States, Brazil, Indonesia and Mexico, 
countries that have great linguistic diver- 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
R
o
c
k
y
 
Ro
e 
Papua New | 
Guinea boasts | 
more than 800 | = 
languages and | 
allows children 
to start their | 
schooling in 
their mother 
language. 
  
 
  


### 186536: A Subtle interplay of forces

   
  
J A SUBTLE INTERPLAY 
OF FORCES 
With the death of Marie Smith Jones, the Eyak language of 
Alaska (United States) died out last year and Ubykh (Turkey) 
vanished in 1992 with the demise of Tevfik Esenc. Some 200 
languages have become extinct in the last three genera- 
tions, according to the new edition of the “UNESCO Atlas of 
. | the World’s Languages in Danger”. 
sity, are also those which have the great- 
est number of endangered languages. 
However, the situation is not univer- 
sally alarming. Thus, Papua New Guin- 
ea, the country which has the greatest 
linguistic diversity on the planet (more 
than 800 languages are believed to be 
spoken there), also has relatively few 
endangered languages (88). Certain 
languages that are shown as extinct 
in the Atlas are being actively revital- 
ized, like Cornish (Cornwall) and Sishéé 
(New Caledonia), and it is possible that 
they will become living languages again. 
Furthermore, thanks to favourable lin- 
guistic policies, there has been an in- 
crease in the number of speakers of 
several indigenous languages. It is the 
case for Central Aymara and Quechua 
in Peru, Maori in New Zealand, Guarani 
in Paraguay and several languages in 
Canada, the United States and Mexico. 
The Atlas also shows that due to eco- 
nomic factors, different linguistic poli- 
cies and sociological phenomena, a 
given language may have varying de- 
grees of vitality in different countries. 
For Christopher Moseley, an Australian 
linguist and editor-in-chief of the Atlas, “It 
would be naive and oversimplifying to say 
that the big ex-colonial languages, Eng- 
lish, or French or Spanish, are the killers, 
and all smaller languages are the victims. 
It is not like that; there is a subtle interplay 
of forces, and this Atlas will help ordinary 
people to understand those forces better! 
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz, UNESCO

## [Page 4](186521eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### 186537: Each language is a unique world of thought

EACH LANGUAGE 
IS A UNIQUE WORLD 
OF THOUGHT ...... 
   
© 
Al
ex
an
de
r 
Tu
rn
bu
ll
 
Li
br
ar
y 
A “language nest” in which the Maori 
language Is transmitted to children 
(New Zealand). 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
ey, editor in chief of 
the UNESCO “Atlas 
of the World's Lan- | 
  
  
  guages in Danger”, 
at the launch on 
19 February at Paris [£ '} 
headquarters. 
    
    
Australian linguist Christopher Moseley explains the crucial importance 
CWE RENE TED FE LC LEE ER OCG ET RD TOE To ER 1 CRITE of CCE TST RTT a 
Interview by Lucia Iglesias Kuntz (UNESCO). 
Why should we care 
about language preservation? 
We as human beings should care 
about this inthe same way we should 
care about the loss of the world's 
variety of plants and animals, its 
biodiversity. What is unique about 
present-day language revival move- 
ments, which didn't exist before, is 
that linguists are for the first time 
aware of just how many languages 
there are in the world, and are com- 
ing to a better understanding of the 
forces that are attacking them and 
exterminating them, and of ways to 
4 
ROC {oo By i Vi FX RT ER [0 { [EF ET Le [TET SEAL MD ET Le [=] 6 
  
control those forces. It's very diffi- 
cult and complex, and it would be 
naive and oversimplifying to say that 
the big ex-colonial languages, Eng- 
lish or French or Spanish, are the 
killers, and all smaller languages are 
the victims. It is not like that; there 
is a subtle interplay of forces, and 
this Atlas will help ordinary people 
to understand those forces better. 
But to answer in one sentence: 
why do we have to care? Because 
each language is a uniquely struc- 
tured world of thought, with its own 
associations, metaphors, ways of 
thinking, vocabulary, sound sys- 
tem and grammar - all working 
together in a marvellous architec- 
tural structure, which is so fragile 
that it could easily be lost forever. 
Can you tell us a few projects 
or initiatives you know that 
have helped to safeguard 
a language? 
Projects and initiatives exist at 
all levels — from local gras roots 
campaigns from the bottom up 
to get people to read in their 
own language and thus pass it 
on to younger generations, up 
to big state-supported plans. 
(see) 
 

## [Page 5](186521eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### 186537: Each language is a unique world of thought

© HAH LANGUAGE IS A UNIQUE WORLD OF THOUGHT 
  
(vee) 
In Australia, for instance, there are 
active and successful campaigns 
to revive the use of languages 
that were regarded as dead for 
generations, but turned out to be 
only ‘sleeping. In New Zealand, 
the Maori language has been res- 
cued from near oblivion through 
the scheme of ‘language nests’ 
— nurseries where the language 
is passed on to young children. 
But the biggest success stories 
are the ones that are operated with 
state support and infrastructure, 
such as the reclaiming of Welsh 
in Wales or Catalan in Catalonia 
— two regions of Europe that have 
seen success in our own lifetimes — 
or, of course, the revival of Hebrew 
as a national language in Israel. 
What is new in this edition 
of the Atlas? 
This third edition of the Atlas is 
new in at least three important ways. 
Firstly and most obviously, it is being 
published in two different formats: 
an on-line version as well as a print- 
ed version. The on-line version is an 
important new development, and is 
based on Google Earth maps, with 
the location of each endangered 
language, no matter how small, pin- 
pointed as exactly as possible on 
the maps, which can be filtered to 
any desired scale and level of detail. 
Secondly, for the first time we are 
giving a comprehensive coverage 
of the whole world. The previous 
two editions gave only a sample 
from some continents of the state 
of threatened languages, but this 
time we have been careful to cover 
every language, and, as before, to 
show the level of endangerment, 
from “Unsafe” down to “Moribund” 
with a system of colour coding. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
© 
Je
nn
il
ou
 
& 
Je
ff
 
G
r
a
c
e
 
And thirdly, we are making the Atlas 
available in three languages: Eng- 
lish, French and Spanish, with pos- 
sibly more translations to come later. 
You are the general editor of the 
Atlas. Can you explain how the 
work for this Atlas was done? 
It was a worldwide collaborative ef- 
fort by a team of linguists, all of them 
experts in the field of endangered 
languages and linguistics. As in the 
previous editions (publishedin 1996 
and 2001), we had Regional Edi- 
tors in charge of collecting data for 
each continent, writing the regional 
essays for the Atlas, and entering 
the language points in the maps. 
 
For some areas, local knowledge 
of the situation came from special- 
ists in several countries. Of course 
the contributors needed help and 
guidance from technical experts at 
the Section for Intangible Heritage 
of UNESCO as well. The Web 
Editor from UNESCO provided 
help and guidance for the editors 
at every step of the way while the 
on-line version was being created, 
because this was a pioneering ex- 
periment for all of us; and mean- 
while the commissioning editors 
and myself as general editor were 
overseeing the preparation of the 
texts. The whole project has been 
done to a tight schedule, in just 
under a year from start to finish. 
- a oe 
Amazonia (Brazil): indigenous languages are today threatened with extinction, although Tupi, 
for one, was spoken as much as the official Portuguese until the mid-18th century.

## [Page 6](186521eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

Stone is petrified speech, water 
BELGE CRETT [Tl Md Ro) TT ME aterls 
7] {os BE TAC CT CL RO SCENT ACE R LCe [Tl o ET 
Lo] il [oY (oJ [=Ys [Ro TT=T 1 1d \TA] ood [C=T1 W o) TAY] 1g ERT 0 1011) 
  
Dogons in the north of Mali 
a 


### 186538: The Monkeys, the scorpion and the snake

THE MONKEYS, 
THE SCORPION 
AND THE SNAKE 
hisis the twentieth time | have come 
to work with the Dogon painters of 
Koyo, high up on their table moun- 
tain in the north of Mali. In the black 
of night, we all stretch out on mats 
‘outside the mud house set aside for 
me, in the centre of the village. The 
farmer-painters and | are exhausted, 
but happy with the poem-paintings 
that we have just made on cloth, un- 
der the burning sun. The youngest 
of the painters is making tea. Our 
conversation turns to the ancestors. 
Suddenly there is a sharp pain 
in my left hand. | grab my torch. A 
white scorpion has just stung me. | 
kill it. | panic at first and imagine that 
it will all be over for me in an hour. 
Then | think that | have thirty min- 
utes of — relative — peace before the 
convulsions start. So | ask the head 
of the village if he has any traditional 
antidote to the venom. “No, he re- 
plies, “just wait. You will see! The 
conversation starts again. My hand 
then my arm feel as though they are 
on fire. But, two hours later, the pain 
has stopped. | fall into a deep sleep, 
with the head of the village stay- 
ing to sleep beside me. A mystery. 
Three days later, all eight of us — 
the six painters, the chief and my- 
self — reach the foot of the cliff at 
the top of the mountain, ten kilome- 
tres from the village, where each 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
  
 
  
  
  
monsoon storm turns into a mas- 
sive waterfall. This place, where the 
water thunders, chants and sings 
almost all summer, is the source of 
many a legend. Caves protected 
by initiations bear ancient picto- 
rial signs. But | know that they are 
also home to awesome cobras. 
| ask the painters if they have any 
medicine against their venom. 
“No. Sit down and we'll explain’ 
All of reality is speech 
| will try to put together here 
what was passed on to me that 
According to tradition, the cobra is the guardian 
of the Toro Tegu language spoken in Dogon country, in Mali. 
morning, and so many times be- 
fore, using the signs and sym- 
bols that the painters draw when, 
in our poem-paintings, we tell of 
the profound life of this place. 
All of reality is speech; it is made 
and mellowed on the plateau at the 
top of the mountains. The beautiful 
round or flat stones are petrified, 
dense speech. Water is language 
laughing; the sky is its distant fore- 
shadowing, the clouds its gestation 
and rain its joyful roar. The sown 
seed is a promised word: and, if 
the farmer sings, it increases its 
(o0°) 
© 
S 
[9] 
m 
3 
$ 
lo) i" 
O 
92] 
w 
5 - 
© - 
REY 
— wo ~~ 
— kd od dnt nN - ol i - 
— Tar - - re 4 
- Sn — - — s Bes 
- -— - .  -— oe - -— - - | 
) _— - -— — 
A - - ——— — - n - 5 —l et
-— : an . 
— - 
— — — 
- — — i - 
- - » 
—di— - . 
— . » > — vv - 
For Koyo villagers, the top of the mountain embodies the power of the word. 
Coming down the mountain, the word becomes weaker. 
6

## [Page 7](186521eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### 186538: The Monkeys, the scorpion and the snake

CTH MONKEYS, THE SCORPION AND THE SNAKE 
  
(oe) 
fertile strength. Here, the crops are 
farmed with the hoe and a song. 
The language of my compan- 
ions, after all, is called Toro Tegu, 
“word of the mountain” and is one 
of the fifteen Dogon languages, 
with about 5000 native speak- 
ers. The Dogon from this eth- 
nic group call themselves Toro 
Nomu, “people of the mountain” 
The speciality of the Koyo village 
community, about 500 individuals, 
is to energize the fertility of the word 
through farming practices and rites. 
The community is broken down into 
small groups of six to eight indi- 
viduals, who are linked forever and 
share at least one meal a day to- 
gether. There is the group respon- 
sible for the collective grain stores, 
which are “reservoirs of the word", 
the group responsible for rainmak- 
ing rites, the group responsible for 
maintaining cliff paths, etc. Each 
group, of course, has its reference 
ancestor and only acts for the ben- 
efit of the community as a whole. 
The dynamic harmony of reality is 
regularly recast through nocturnal 
singing and dancing by a special- 
ized group of “women elders”. The 
choreography includes a regular, 
wide, horizontal sweep with the 
right arm, which signifies sow- 
ing the word as if it were a seed. 
The word at work 
Since 2002, the painters, the head 
of the village and | - the poet of the 
written word — have formed a sup- 
port group. We spread cloth or pa- 
per onto the flat rocks, like the fine 
loam of the market gardens, then | 
lay the “seeds” of the poem, while 
they lay the “seeds” of pictorial 
signs. These textiles and sheets of 
paper are then exhibited all over the 
world, bringing income, a “harvest” 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
Y
v
e
s
 
Be
rg
er
et
 
that feeds the village. We have been 
able to build a school, five reser- 
voirs, which have doubled the area 
under cultivation, three “Painters’ 
Houses" which can be visited, etc., 
as part of a development project 
for the village [see ‘Koyo, a place 
for dialogue between two cultures’, 
UNESCO Courier , n° 4, 2008]. 
Our group has two reference an- 
cestors, because it soon spawned 
other groups, responsible for main- 
taining the school, the “Painters’ 
Houses” and other fruits of our 
development project. “We have de- 
cided that you have become Dog- 
on, the painters tell me, “and you 
must add the names of these two 
ancestors to yours. The last time 
a foreigner was allowed to join us 
was five centuries ago. He is the 
one who painted the symbols in 
one of the caves near to the great 
waterfall. He is one of our two ref- 
erence ancestors. But now he is 
the last but one foreigner to be ac- 
cepted, because you are the last” 
According to Toro Nomu, every- 
thing on the mountaintop is the 
word at work and in harmony with 
  
The “Painters’ House" in the Dogon village of Boni. At right, the snake motif. 
7 
itself. Animals are also elements 
of this. But, in contrast, everything 
that is beneath these high plateaux 
— like a ravine, a gorge or even a 42 
kilometre-wide plain, separating the 
two plateaux — bears the generic 
name of pondo: here the word is 
weak, shapeless, undulating, shift- 
ing. Above all, it is the word of the 
nomadic herders, who have held feu- 
dal rule over the plain for centuries 
“Our hordes of monkeys shake 
the word into confusion”, the paint- 
ers continue, “but the scorpions 
and cobras are creatures that the 
word uses to protect itself. If they 
come across a stranger, they kill 
him. But they never attack us" 
‘Ah, that is why the scorpion 
stung me the other evening!” 
“No, no, you still haven't un- 
derstood. Make an effort! You 
speak Toro Tegu. You have be- 
come Dogon. The scorpion 
made a mistake when he stung 
you. Who is dead, him or you?” 
Yves Bergeret, French poet 
  
  
  
    
  

## [Page 8](186521eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

  
© 
Pa
th
é 
Di
st
ri
bu
ti
on
 
  
to the Land of Ch'tis"}. 


### 186539: Seriously speaking: what is ch'ti?

h'timi is the cousin of the Picard 
language,’ explains the French ac- 
“tor and director Dany Boon, in his 
film “Bienvenue chez les ch'tis” 
(Welcome to the Land of Ch'tis), 
which has sold over 20 million 
tickets in France in the last year, 
enabling the general public to re- 
discover a language defined by 
UNESCO as seriously endangered. 
Ch'timi — or Ch'ti — is one of many 
local variations of the Picard lan- 
guage. “The Picard language cov- 
ers the widest linguistic area of any 
regional language in France — five 
departments in Northern France 
and part of Belgium — so there are 
considerable variations from one 
zone to another, explains Fernand 
Carton, a linguist specialising in 
Picard and author of the “Picard 
Linguistic and Ethnographic Atlas” 
Depending on the region, people 
will speak to you in Ch'ti or Picard 
but, as Carton adds, “it is still the 
same language, with the same pho- 
netic features, the same grammar, 
and some common vocabulary” 
In any case Ch'ti is a much more 
interesting language than the film 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
Poster for the film “Bienvenue chez les ch'tis* (“Welcome 
The French film “Welcome to the Lan 
Lo] Jo) Jo 5 EER MO ELC Ls TER ELT GLC 
But the reality is not so funny: Ch’ti, 
WIGNER RENE Li Ro RO CR MI GR ERG ITED EE Jo] 1) 
in northern France, has become a social stigma 
or at best a quaint museum piece. 
  
suggests. The film reduces it to a 
kind of pronounced lisp and the 
odd phrase punctuated with “huh?” 
In reality, while close to French, 
since it has its roots in Latin, it is 
incomprehensible to the uniniti- 
ated. “Speaking Ch'ti is not simply 
a matter of sprinkling French with 
a few dialect words, like putting 
salt on your chips,’ says Carton. 
Even so, the film does give a pic- 
ture of the state of Ch'ti today. 
“Young people use expressions 
that they've heard their parents 
or grandparents use, but don't try 
to speak the language, explains 
Alain Dawson, a language special 
ist who helped translate the As- 
terix comic book into Picard. The 
first book sold over 101,000 cop- 
les, outselling all other translations 
into regional languages, accord- 
ing to its publisher, Albert René. 
“It was surprisingly successful, but 
paradoxically so,’ says Alain Daw- 
son, “because it reveals to what 
degree the language is dying out. 
When we talked to readers, we rea- 
lised that they were pleased to have 
a copy of the book, and had leafed 
8 
© 
U
d
e
r
z
o
 
a
y
 
- 
   
SERIOUSLY 
SPEAKING : 
WHAT IS CH'TI: 
through it to find words they knew, 
but only a few had read it from cov- 
er to cover’ The same is true for his 
guidebooks, “Pocket Ch'timi" and 
“The Pocket Picard’, published by 
Assimil — very good sales, but no 
increase in the prevalence of the 
language. “We're involved in saving 
part of our heritage, not in promot- 
ing the use of a living language’ 
(vee) 
CH LANCHRON 
&h fri fe 
HAN EB LAPS 
CaN BLL 
$3 PAZZT i5TT 
~~ Raman ! DIE ROEMER ! 
FOLL-MX BO m—y Brie Ee 
AR ROMANED-SE 13 Pi 
" of BRAQUES Cus 
- = INS-LO I! (oe 
4 
   
     
         
C
L
A
N
 
H
E
E
 
B
n
 
|
 
   
  
C
h
.
 
- 
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
 
   
“Asterix” comic book cover in Picard: 
Obelix and Asterix converse in six regional 
languages.

## [Page 9](186521eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

DE 


### 186539: Seriously speaking: what is ch'ti?

PP" SERIOUSLY SPEAKING : WHAT IS CH'TE; 
  
(00°) 
A language at the bot- 
fom of the social lad- 
er 
It is difficult to determine exactly 
how many people speak Picard to- 
day. The only available figures come 
from a 1999 census. According to 
Jean-Michel Eloy, professor of lin- 
guistics at the Jules Verne Universi- 
ty of Picardy, across the five French 
departments, 12% of the popula- 
tion, or about 500,000 people, 
say they continue to speak it. By 
extrapolation, across the entire lin- 
guistic area, there may be as many 
as two million Picard speakers. 
“The problem is that, in France, 
even languages that were recent- 
ly spoken by a large number of 
people, like Breton, have almost 
disappeared from daily use by 
the younger generation, explains 
Tapani Salminen, regional coor- 
dinator of the UNESCO Atlas of 
the World's Languages in Danger 
and an ethno-linguist at the Acad- 
emy of Finland. “Even though the 
Picard language seems still to have 
pockets of vitality along the Franco- 
Belgian border, where it is a lan- 
guage of the community, it is not 
really any better off than Breton’ 
In Belgium, the language remains a 
strong cultural element, setting itself 
apart from Flemish, but in France 
it is losing influence at the same 
rate that the cultures of the work- 
ers, miners and farmers, to which 
it is linked, are also disappearing. 
“lt was a class language that 
was spoken at the mill or down 
the mine," explains Dawson. Many 
Polish, Italian and Flemish immi- 
grants learned Ch'timi at the fac- 
tory before French. “Today it has 
become a language that stigma- 
tises the speaker, and is an obsta- 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
© 
T
h
o
m
a
s
 
Ro
la
nd
 
cle to climbing the social ladder’ 
Which partly explains why it has 
not been passed on within families. 
“The language suffers from a 
lack of legitimacy,” laments Olivier 
Engelaere, Director of the Agency 
for the Picard Language in Amiens 
(the regional capital of Picardy, 
in northern France). And this is 
because of the social stigma, as 
well as its similarity to French. “For 
many people, speaking Picard is 
like speaking bad French. When 
you speak it, people look ap- 
palled, or don't take you seriously! 
Keeping a language 
alive does not mean 
turning it into folklore 
Defenders of the Picard language 
feel that it has poorer prospects 
for survival than Breton or Basque, 
because it is not in the public eye. 
It does not appear in newspapers 
or on television news and there are 
no bilingual signs in towns. And, 
although the Ministry of Culture 
has recognised it as a “language 
of France’, the Ministry of Educa- 
tion has not included it on its list 
of regional languages taught in 
schools. “People are suspicious of 
the Picard language, says Fernand 
Carton. “They believe that learning 
it is detrimental to one’s French. 
But studies show the opposite, that 
it stimulates interest in languages 
In Picardy, it is nonetheless seen 
as part of the regional identity. 
“We bring it into schools using 
theatre, puppet shows and sto- 
rytelling, explains Olivier Enge- 
laere. “There is considerable in- 
terest in rediscovering this part of 
our cultural heritage. Even in ar- 
eas where it was hardly spoken’ 
Performances and readings in 
Picard always play to a full house. 
A novel-writing competition can at- 
tract hundreds of entries. And, in 
the wake of the film by Dany Boon, 
T-shirts with slogans in dialect are 
in fashion and there is a poem in 
Picard by Lucien Suel on YouTube. 
But “if it is not taught in schools and 
has no public presence,” warns the 
director of the Agency for the Picard 
Language, “it will become part of 
folklore, and not a living language” 
Isabelle Duriez, French journalist 
Jean-Marie 
Francois 
champions 
the Picard 
language. 
He passes 
on legends of 
the Picardie 
his poems, 
novels and 
region through

## [Page 10](186521eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

LL CEEIN CAEL CITED CREE oo LCH I RU CRE EL ERI fl [oly {LT [el 1 (or: Tf (2 Te { [98 
yet it has developed differently in the two places, separated by 3,907 miles.  ANG ELCN [ola {eS ET Lo (Ta CCH ER iy XT ToT TES (oT sR) MO TER ET Te [TE Te [IR To Wer: 11 CRT Lo Ro TT y 


### 186542: Wuthing we gwen tull?

RG CET CRE ORC TTT AE] ES Jd TA CRT (ATER EA : 
WUTHING WE 
GWEN TULL 
     
  
/ | hat shall we say?» must have been 
"| one of the first thoughts of Captain 
William Bligh and the crew of His 
Majesty's Armed Vessel Bounty 
when they sailed into Matavaii 
\ | Bay (Tahiti) on 26 October 1788. 
- 
When the British lost the Ameri- 
can colonies, feeding the slaves 
on the sugar plantations in the 
West Indies became a problem, 
until early explorers in the Pacific 
came back from their voyages tell- 
ing of “bread growing on trees”! 
Collecting these breadfruit trees 
and then transporting them to the 
West Indies was the sole reason for 
the Bounty's voyage. The complica- 
tion was that the ship was obliged 
to remain in Tahiti for 5 months. 
During this time, it was inevitable 
that the sailors of the Bounty, most 
from the West Counties of England, 
soon learned ‘wuthing f'tull’ (what 
to say) as they worked collecting 
the breadfruit plants, mingling with 
the people of Tahiti and, in some in- 
stances, forming romantic liaisons. 
Irrespective of that, the learning 
of “wuthing f'tull gwen wun nether” 
(what to say to one another) would 
have been the foundation of the 
Pitcairn/Norfolk languages that are 
still spoken on these two islands. 
A mutiny changed history. The 
story of the Bounty's eventual de- 
struction and the establishment of 
the settlement on Pitcairn Island by 
Fletcher Christian, leader of the mu- 
tiny, and his 8 shipmates together 
with 12 Tahitian women and three 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
© 
Ar
d 
He
ss
el
in
k 
a 
   
     
PI 
Few of the locals in 
one of the world's 
least inhabited places, 
Pitcairn Island 
Polynesian men, is well recorded. 
They also discovered three male 
stowaways and it is quite possible 
that the later tragedies on Pitcairn — 
which were caused partly by the lack 
of women — could have been avoid- 
ed if Christian had put them ashore. 
In 1831, due to the scarcity of 
water and other resources, the 
British government moved the en- 
 
The only goal of the Bounty's expedition was 
to gather breadfruit and transport it to the 
West Indies. 
10 
   
03d ~~ WCE . 
TCAIRN ISLAND 
    
tire community back to Tahiti. The 
move was unsuccessful: illness 
and deaths ensued and within 
months the bereaved families 
had returned to their homeland. 
In the late 1840s, the British 
Government decided to close the 
penal settlement on Norfolk Island 
and on 8 May 1856, the whole 
community of Pitcairn Island - 193 
persons - complete with their own 
laws and language, embarked on 
the Morayshire for Norfolk Island 
where they landed on 8 June 1856. 
Split language 
Thus commenced another phase 
in the history of settlement (and 
language), determining the pat- 
terns of Pitcairn and Norfolk's ex- 
istence for the next 153 years. 
(see) 
      
   
© 
A
n
d
r
e
s
 
E
s
c
o
v
a
r

## [Page 11](186521eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### 186542: Wuthing we gwen tull?

(00°) 
In spite of all that their new home 
offered them, 16 returned to Pitcairn 
in 1858 and a further party of 27 
sailed for Pitcairn in February 1864. 
And there you have it — two isolated 
communities sharing the same cul- 
tural roots and speaking amongst 
themselves acommon language that 
had evolved over some 76 years. 
While the Pitcairn branch of the 
language was relatively “safe” from 
change, the Norfolk Island branch 
was coming more and more under 
the influence of outside pressures. 
First came the arrival of the Mela- 
nesian Mission in October 1866 
with its own church, homes for the 
missionaries and pupils, workshops, 
printing house and store. The mis- 
sion remained separate from the 
community but nevertheless, some 
islanders did join the mission, 
while others were employed there. 
Change to the education system 
was the next threat. Ever since 
14 July 1856, when 70 children 
attended the first school, educa- 
tion was seen as a must for island 
children. Locally born teachers, 
assisted by others, taught them 
and there was still a wide-spread 
use of the Norfolk language. 
School can kill 
a language or revive it 
The Norfolk Island Public School 
came under the jurisdiction of 
the New South Wales Depart- 
ment of Education in 1897 and it 
was recommended that a trained 
and experienced teacher should 
be sent from Sydney to take 
up the position of Headmaster. 
One of the things that most con- 
cerned headmasters in those early 
years was the prevalence of the 
Norfolk language. It was always 
the first choice for conversation in 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2  
Co
ur
te
sy
 
G
a
e
 
Ev
an
s.
 
A Norfolk language class around a plaque commemorating 
the founding of the colony in 1788. 
every home, the playground and 
all social occasions. While Eng- 
lish was not a “foreign” language, 
it was second to “Norfolk” in terms 
of popularity and general use. Con- 
sequently, successive headmas- 
ters made it their business to try to 
eradicate the Norfolk language and 
replace it with the “King's English”. 
The headmaster of 1915 was 
bold enough to predict “I feel con- 
fident that it is only a matter of a 
few generations when the island 
jargon will disappear altogether”. 
Fortunately, this did not occur, de- 
spite the school rule banning the 
use of the language during school 
hours. Its use has certainly declined 
over the years, yet since 1987 
“Norfolk” is actually taught within 
the school, using phonetics, so it 
is preserved for future generations. 
This work is being done by a group 
of passionate “Norfolk” lovers, who 
conduct language camps, and en- 
courage their own children and 
grandchildren, as well as others to 
use “Norfolk” Two books - “Speak 
Norfolk Today” by Alice Inez Buffett 
and “A Dictionary of Norfolk Words 
11 
\ 
and Usages” compiled by Beryl 
Nobbs Palmer and published by 
the Norfolk Island Sunshine Club 
- aid their efforts. Professor Peter 
Mulhauser of the Adelaide Univer- 
sity School of Linguistics is also a 
great champion of the language. 
While it may be endangered | 
feel sure that “Norfolk” lovers - all 
658 of us - will never let it die out. 
Tom Lloyd, 
Australian journalist 
born on Norfolk Island 
Nursery rhyme 
compiled by 
Norfolk lover 
Professor Archie Bigg: 
Baa baa blaek shiip 
Yu gat eni wul? 
En waa brada, 
Thrii saek ful 
Wan f° daa gehl 
En wan f* daa mien 
En wan f° dem letl salan »

## [Page 12](186521eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

DE a 
Some languages are spoken by very few people but are still very much alive, while others 
have been preserved by the isolation of their speakers. Marleen Haboud from Ecuador explains 
WEEE TJ ELE LAE TED [or] Ho] [21g [ody (=) 


### 186543: An Epidemic is threatening indigenous languages

  
AN EPIDEMIC 
[S THREATENING 
INDIGENOUS 
LANGUAGES 
Marleen Haboud, 
a specialist in Andean languages, 
talks to Lucia Iglesias Kuntz 
(UNESCO). 
What is the status of Central 
Andean languages, in terms of 
their viability? 
In the Central Andes (Ecuador, 
Peru, and Bolivia) the estimate is 
that one hundred indigenous lan- 
guages are still alive. Determining 
exactly just how alive they are is 
not easy. This varies not only from 
one language to another, but also 
within a given language, depend- 
ing on where it is spoken, the 
age of the speaker, their vocation, 
gender, level of education, etc. 
For example, in Ecuador, Quechua 
is widely spoken in certain regions 
of the country, while it is rapidly 
disappearing from others. In this 
heterogeneous context, and even 
if certain languages continue to be 
used by the new generations, the 
general trend for all languages in 
the region is constant regression. 
How do you explain this 
situation? 
Severalfactors are involved, such as 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
© 
Ma
rl
ee
n 
H
a
b
o
u
d
 
  
 
Community of Quichua speakers in Cotopaxi (Ecuador). 
the living conditions of native speak- 
ers, whether or not they receive in- 
stitutional and social aid, the extent 
to which the language continues to 
function in all modern communica- 
tion contexts, and indeed, the interest 
and pride of the people who speak it. 
In terms of viability, the number 
of native speakers can be a rela- 
tive concept. Some languages 
are spoken by a small number of 
people but are very much alive, 
such as Ai cofan in Ecuadorian 
Amazonia. And, on the contrary, 
the number of speakers of some 
trans-national languages, such as 
Quechua, is dwindling every day. 
Some indigenous languages 
maintain their vitality because of the 
isolation of native speakers, who 
find they have around them all they 
need to live comfortably. But isola- 
tion should not be a condition for 
the survival of one of these languag- 
es; the ideal situation would be that 
they cohabit with the predominant 
12 
languages and societies and that 
they gain in strength, despite the ho- 
mogenizing trends of globalization. 
Why do languages disappear? 
Over the last decades, a com- 
plex set of circumstances has ac- 
celerated the disappearance of 
indigenous languages, including 
contacts with other peoples, the 
death of native speakers, radical 
changes in their way of life, loss of 
land, massive migrations, and so on. 
Only joint actions integrated with 
global society can curb this kind 
of epidemic, which is making in- 
digenous languages and their 
speakers vulnerable. This presup- 
poses that, first of all, society as 
a whole gets to know these lan- 
guages and their speakers, and 
learns to respect and help keep 
them alive, so that we achieve the 
ideal of a truly multicultural society. 
Another very important factor for 
keeping a language alive is the 
(o0°)

## [Page 13](186521eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ma
rl
ee
n 
H
a
b
o
u
d
 


### 186543: An Epidemic is threatening indigenous languages

> N EPIDEMIC IS THREATENING INDIGENOUS LANGUAGES 
  
(o0°) 
image that both its speakers and 
non-speakers have of it. A person 
who is proud of his or her language 
will be more likely to keep it going. 
Could you give examples 
of some national or regional 
initiatives that have helped 
to revitalize languages 
in the region? 
There have been several initia- 
tives in our countries to help main- 
tain minority languages. On one 
hand there have been government 
initiatives. In Andean countries, 
constitutional reforms have given 
hd 
-—- 
5 Bg 
Marleen Haboud from Ecuador is an Andean lan 
(( I speak my favourite language 
because 
that’s who [ am. 
We teach our children our favourite language, 
because 
we want them to know who they are. 
(Christine Johnson, Tohono O'odham elder, 
      
—TEn EL 
Bee Ful 
guage specialist. 
indigenous languages an official 
status. The linguistic and educa- 
tional policies of these countries 
are quite well defined and, even if 
they are still not always widely ap- 
plied, their aim is to preserve the 
languages, culture and identity of 
their speakers, as well as respect 
and equality between peoples. 
At the same time there are the 
efforts being made by speakers 
themselves, both collectively and 
individually. For example, thanks to 
the creation of specific family and 
community-based educational pro- 
grammes, families are 
trying to regain or con- 
solidate their languages. 
Indigenous movements 
in Latin America have 
turned a corner in their 
campaign for the rights 
of indigenous peoples, 
with the creation of new 
bilingual, intercultural ed- 
ucational programmes at 
all levels of formal edu- 
cation, specific health 
programmes and the cre- 
ation of official services 
© 
Ma
rl
ee
n 
H
a
b
o
u
d
 
American Indian Language Development Institute, June 2002). 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 13 
for speakers of certain languages. 
In some countries more than oth- 
ers, the media have also taken initia- 
tives to encourage the public use of 
certain languages, especially those 
with the greatest number of speak- 
ers. Boliviais a prime example of this. 
Throughout history, 
new languages have been born 
while others have died oul, 
why should we be concerned 
about the disappearance 
of languages? 
Just like humans themselves, lan- 
guages are born and die, but we 
have never before seen them die 
at such a rapid rate as during the 
past decades. This means not just 
the loss of words and expressions, 
but also a store of knowledge and 
ways of understanding the world 
and communicating with others, of 
constructing history, of exchanging 
with other human beings, with el- 
ders and younger generations, and 
of conceptualising time, space, the 
living world, life and death. Each 
language is a universe. And, every 
time a word dies, unique and irre- 
placeable stories disappear with it. 
  
For a language to survive it must be passed 
on to the next generation.

## [Page 14](186521eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

  
© 
S
a
m
 
B
r
o
w
n
 


### 186544: Clea Koff: bones never lie

Clea Koff: 
Bones never lie 
Forensic anthropologist Clea Koff 
wrote “The Bone Woman” in 2004, 
to chronicle her experiences during 
seven UN missions to unearth the 
mass graves of Rwanda, Bosnia, 
Croatia and Kosovo. Her grueling 
investigations helped bring some of 
the perpetrators to justice. 
  
  
To mark International Women’s Day on 
8 March, an interview by Shiraz Sidhva, 
Indian journalist based in the United States, 
with a special interest in human rights.   
You have chronicled some of 
the world’s worst massacres. 
What sparked your interest in 
forensic anthropology and how 
were you able to forge a link be- 
tween that science and human 
rights? 
Forensic anthropology was a young 
science in the late 1980s. | was 
drawn to bones even as a child and 
by the time | went to university to 
study archaeology and anthropology, 
| knew | was really interested in the 
human skeleton. Then | went on an 
archaeological dig in Greece, and re- 
alized | didn't want to exhume ancient 
graveyards for research purposes. 
One of the books my father had 
given me to read that summer 
was “Witnesses from the Grave: 
The Stories Bones Tell". Written 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
by Eric Stover and Christopher 
Joyce, the book chronicles the cre- 
ation of the Argentine Forensic 
Anthropology team, which tried to 
identify the remains of Argentines 
“disappeared” during the military 
junta of the 1970s and 1980s. 
That was my introduction to foren- 
sic anthropology. | loved the fact that 
forensics could not only help restore 
someone's identity, but could actu- 
ally play a role in achieving justice. 
Your book is a hard-hitting and 
honest account of what you 
went through on your UN mis- 
sions. You’ve described the 
odors permeating your clothes, 
the hard physical labor, and 
yet talked about the inordinate 
satisfaction you felt as you 
14 
  
Clea Koff, forensic anthropologist. 
excavated bodies. How did you 
manage to override the sadness 
and get the job done? 
As time passes from when | was 
involved in the work as intensely 
as | was, it's actually harder to find 
that balance. From the moment 
we'd start clearing away the soll 
and finding clothing and human re- 
mains, | felt a true sense of happi- 
ness because we were uncovering 
not only something clandestine, but 
people who should have never been 
in that grave in the first place. | knew 
that we were undoing as much as 
could be undone about the crime. 
When | think about the work from 
a greater distance, and when I'm 
not actually at the site, | feel inad- 
equate putting into words what we 
(00°)

## [Page 15](186521eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### 186544: Clea Koff: bones never lie

(00°) 
as forensic scientists should do. By 
our very definition, we arrive after 
the crime has been committed, and 
the strange evolution | went through 
was that though | was a scientist, 
| wish we could have just brought 
people back to life. Because we 
could see these people didn't 
have to die. This was not a natu- 
ral disaster, a tsunami or an earth- 
quake, beyond our control. There 
were clear signs that these were 
planned executions, that policies 
had enabled these things to hap- 
pen, that this was preventable. 
And you wish you could reverse 
the deaths — it's a completely un- 
scientific emotion, and yet, that's 
the distilled emotion | have after all 
this time. Obviously | had to turn 
that around, to find something that 
| could do to feel useful, otherwise 
| wouldn't be able to get out of bed 
every day. That's why I've come to 
focus on the prevention of these 
types of crimes - how forensic evi- 
dence and the bodies of the victims 
themselves play a role in the truth 
that they bring forward, and help 
prevent these crimes in the future. 
You've talked about bones 
speaking, that you could actu- 
ally tell stories from them later, 
and that they never lie. Is what 
we can dig up after it’s all over 
rather limited, especially when 
there is an effort to cover up 
evidence? 
The wonderful thing about the hu- 
man skeleton is that it's recording 
something of our lives every day. 
The bones are able to tell intrinsic 
details, such as a person's sex, age, 
height, ancestry and pathology. 
We are able to interpret marks and 
changes on the bone to discern dis- 
eases or trauma they suffered dur- 
ing life and at the moment of death. 
We are able to make that distinc- 
tion, and also determine the cause 
of death. Teeth are a particular in- 
terest of mine — they tell us a lot. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2   
You've said that people are es- 
sentially the same everywhere, 
and how the bodies unearthed 
from supposedly different con- 
flicts on two continents tell a 
single, very similar story. Could 
you explain the real issues of 
sustainability and power that 
you say are at the root of orga- 
nized violence? 
This perspective of mine came 
about because of the particular 
sites where | had worked. There 
was a perception that Rwanda and 
countries of the former Yugoslavia 
experienced spontaneous outbursts 
of violence, brought about by old ha- 
treds, ethnicity, tribes, and religion. 
But | don't believe these were the 
real issues. Evidence from within 
the graves definitely suggests that 
the violence was not at all spontane- 
ous. As we went to different coun- 
tries, or different areas in the same 
country, we noticed similarities be- 
tween the graves, and similar kinds 
of behavior on the part of the killers. 
We started asking what was to be 
gained from civilians being killed, 
what was worth violating the Gene- 
va Convention or other humanitarian 
laws for, and who was benefiting? | 
© = 
= 
4 
[7] 
Q 
Se 
© 
c 
[¢] 
20 
© 
Evidence of the genocide in Rwanda. 
15 
did not believe that the states and 
the apparatus they were using to 
carry out these killings were deeply 
moved by ancient battles or religious 
issues, because ultimately that's not 
how the economy of a state works. 
That was when | began to see the 
majority of the graves were located 
in sites of strategic value — a river 
bank, a port, treasured agricultural 
land, or any place where trade was to 
be done. | realized that people were 
often eliminated from areas in order 
to gain control of them. | remain open- 
minded about other reasons for the 
killings, but for me, this has remained 
the most powerful reason, which 
seems to crop up in areas of conflict, 
whether in Rwanda, Serbia, Darfur, 
Iraq or Chechnya. Ancient hatreds are 
not passed along genetically. Power 
can use peoples’ sense of discrimi- 
nation as a proxy agent of violence. 
| believe the main reason these 
graves were hidden was because 
the killers knew just how danger- 
ous it is for people at large to find 
out that this wasn't about sponta- 
neous violence, but an organized 
killing to eliminate a particular 
group from a particular region. 
(eee) 

## [Page 16](186521eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### 186544: Clea Koff: bones never lie

(00°) 
Do you believe that internation- 
al tribunals act as a deterrent to 
those who may commit crimes 
against humanity and are you 
happy with the outcome of the 
tribunals your work contributed 
to? 
Yes, the tribunals certainly had a 
huge impact in Rwanda and the for- 
mer Yugoslavia. Mass killings had 
taken place in other parts of the world 
prior to these crimes that caused the 
tribunals to be established, and it 
had taken a long time for details of 
these crimes to emerge. There had 
been no attempts at accountability, 
and therefore it was easier for the 
perpetrators to present a distorted 
version of what had happened. The 
establishment of a criminal tribu- 
nal is an important step, quite apart 
from people's estimation of the value 
of these two tribunals. The fact that 
the killers attempted to hide the evi- 
dence showed some awareness of 
what forensic evidence within a pros- 
ecution setting could actually do. 
The bodies could tell stories, which 
could be used in a witness stand. 
For instance, when the Serbian 
police were getting bodies out of 
Kosovo in trucks and trying to hide 
them behind police stations, there 
are physical traces that these are 
not legitimate targets during a legal 
war, but people who should have 
been protected by law. There will 
always be the risk of killings in dif- 
ferent places, but what changes is 
that people are less likely to agree 
to be co-opted into mass killings, 
making it more difficult for them to 
be carried out successfully. That is 
the main impact of the tribunals, to 
act as deterrents for future crimes. 
| am very proud of having been 
a part of these trials, which have 
mostly used the forensic evidence 
we provided to corroborate the 
surviving ~~ witness testimonies. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
© 
S
a
m
 
W
a
l
k
e
r
 
M
e
 
E
E
 
  
 
Clea Koff was born in 1972 of a Tanza- 
nian mother and an American father, both 
documentary filmmakers focused on hu- 
man rights issues, and spent her childhood 
in England, Kenya, Tanzania, Somalia and 
the United States. Fascinated by bones 
from an early age, Koff earned a bachelor's 
degree in anthropology from Stanford 
University and went on to study forensic 
anthropology at the University of Arizona. 
Between 1996 and 2000, she worked 
as a forensic expert for the United Nations 
International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda 
and the former Yugoslavia. During those 
seven missions, Koff meticulously kept a 
diary because, as she explains, she had 
things to say about how she was feel- 
ing, which she couldn't say out loud as a 
forensic scientist. Those memoirs formed 
the basis of her bestseller, “The Bone   
Woman’, first published in 2004 and now 
available in nine languages in more than 
14 countries. 
In 2006, Koff worked with the United 
Nations Committee on Missing Persons in 
Cyprus, on behalf of the Equipo Argentino 
de Antropologia Forense. She is now 
based in Los Angeles, where she founded 
the non-profit Missing Persons Identifica- 
tion Resource Center (MPID) to help 
identify the enormous backlog of bodies 
in US coroners’ offices — an estimated 
40,000 nationwide. 
Koff believes that “a disappearance is a 
disappearance, whether it occurs in peace 
or wartime!” Her experiences with the living 
people related to the bodies she exhumed 
in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia 
inspired her to help families of missing 
persons in the United States. 
“ 
pg Pe" 0 
. 3 be, -. i 
EA - N : . Nay "4 
E = ’ A ih 4 
r
r
 
y 
PPR PIR 
E BYR OT 
Nn y ) 
| I gr 
x J 
“«w- 
N f 
Kan 
A 
. 
        “ud ¥ ” 
Bosnia-Herzegovina: a family visiting the Potocari memorial, where victims 
of the 1995 Srebenica massacres are buried. 
16 
 

## [Page 17](186521eng.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

    
for World Theatre Day on 27 March. 
The inventor of “Theatre of the Oppressed” and that 
special character, the “spect-actor”, invites us to get up on ka 
life’s stage and create a world that abolishes the duality of 
oppressor-oppressed. 
heatre is not just an 
event; it is a way of life! 
Even if one is unaware 
of it, human relation- 
ships are structured in 
a theatrical way. The use of space, 
body language, choice of words and 
voice modulation, the confrontation 
of ideas and passions, everything 
that we demonstrate on the stage, 
we live in our lives. We are theatre! 
Weddings and funerals are “spec- 
tacles”, but so, also, are daily rituals 
so familiar that we are not conscious 
of this. Occasions of pomp and 
circumstance, but also the morn- 
ing coffee, the exchanged good- 
mornings, timid love and storms 
of passion, a senate session or a 
diplomatic meeting - all is theatre. 
One of the main functions of our 
art is to make people sensitive to the 
“spectacles” of daily life in which the 
actors are their own spectators, per- 
formances in which the stage and 
the stalls coincide. We are all artists. 
By doing theatre, we learn to see 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2   


### 186545: We are all actors

We are all actors 
Popular theatre, radical theatre, interactive theatre, edu- 
cational theatre, legislative theatre, therapeutic theatre... 
in other words, Augusto Boal. This world-famous Brazilian 
theatre director is the author this year of the international 
message issued by the International Theatre Institute atm 
Ai 
 
Brazilian theatre director Augusto Boal is known a as ve 
founder of the Theatre of the Oppressed. 
what is obvious but what we usually 
can't see because we are only used 
to looking at it. What is familiar to 
us becomes unseen: doing theatre 
throws light on the stage of daily life. 
Theatre is 
the Hidden Truth 
Last September, we were sur- 
prised by a theatrical revelation: we, 
who thought that we were living in a 
safe world, despite wars, genocide, 
slaughter and torture which certainly 
exist, but far from us in remote and 
wild places. We, who were living in 
security with our money invested in 
some respectable bank or in some 
honest trader's hands in the stock ex- 
change were told that this money did 
not exist, that it was virtual, a fictitious 
invention by some economists who 
were not fictitious at all and neither 
reliable nor respectable. Everything 
was just bad theatre, a dark plot in 
which a few people won a lot and 
many people lost all. Some politicians 
from rich countries held secret meet- 
ings in which they found some magic 
17 
solutions. And we, the victims of their 
decisions, have remained specta- 
tors in the last row of the balcony. 
Twenty years ago, | staged Racine’s 
Phedre in Rio de Janeiro. The stage 
setting was poor: cow skins on the 
ground, bamboos around. Before 
each presentation, | used to say to my 
actors: “The fiction we created day 
by day is over. When you cross those 
bamboos, none of you will have the 
rightto lie. Theatre is the Hidden Truth”. 
When we look beyond appear- 
ances, we see oppressors and op- 
pressed people, in all societies, eth- 
nic groups, genders, social classes 
and castes; we see an unfair and cru- 
el world. We have to create another 
world because we know it is possible. 
But it is up to us to build this other 
world with our hands and by acting 
on the stage and in our own life. 
We are all actors: being a citizen is 
not living in society, it is changing it. 
Augusto Boal 
  
© 
Au
gu
st
o 
Bo
al

## [Page 18](186521eng.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

Z{0]0}M 
  
LOREAL-UNESCO AWARDS FOR WOMEN IN SCIENCE 
Beatriz Barbuy (Brasil), Athene M.Donald (United Kingdom), 
Akiko Kobayashi (Japan), Eugenia Kumacheva (Russia/Canada) 
et Tebello Nyokong (South Africa) are the Laureates of the 2009 'OREAL-UNESCO Awards. 
or over ten years, awards 
of US $ 100 000 each, 
reward annually five out- 
standing women scien- 
tists from different regions 
of the world. They alternate yearly 
between life sciences and physical 
sciences, recognizing work that ad- 
dresses major challenges in modern 
science. This year's awards in physi- 
cal sciences bring to 57 the number 
of women recognized to date. 
  
The 2009 International Jury, presided 
by Ahmed Zewall, 1999 laureate of 
the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, numbers 
17 leading members of the interna- 
tional scientific community. Professor 
Christian de Duve, laureate of the 
1974 Nobel Prize in Medicine, is the 
Founding President of the Awards and 
Koichiro Matsuura, Director General of 
UNESCO, is Honorary President. 
The LOréal-UNESCO partnership 
also includes a Fellowship programme 
allowing post-doctoral students to 
pursue research in a host labora- 
tory outside their country of origin. 
The LOREAL-UNESCO For Women 
in Science programme has to date 
granted 120 Intemational Fellowships 
and 340 National Fellowships to female 
doctoral and postdoctoral students. 
Worth up to US$40,000 over two 
years, they are attributed to 15 young 
women, three from each of the follow- 
ing parts of the world: Africa & the Arab 
States; Asia-Pacific; North America; 
Europe; and Latin America. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
~~ Photos © Micheline Pelletier/Abacapress 
/ A 
- aw 
Ne CERT ES EE ASS EI OE EL Fe

## [Page 19](186521eng.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

NN 
  
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Organisation 
des Nations Unies 
pour l'éducation, 
la science et la culture 
Organizacién 
de las Naciones Unidas 
para la Educacion, 
la Ciencia y la Cultura 
OpraHunzauus 
O6begnHeHHbIX Haumin no 
BOnpocaM obpa3oBaHus, 
HayKn 1 KYNbTypbl 
Suaiall as 
ny 
BEA 
H/\ 
  
  
    
  
  
E£ 
  
 
 HE. 
Bh ROEHL 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°2 
   
The UNESCO Courier is published by 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization. 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
http://www.unesco.org/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
f.ryan@unesco.org 
Director 
Saturnino Muiioz Gomez 
Editor in Chief 
Jasmina Sopova - j.sopova@unesco.org 
Editorial assistance 
Katerina Markelova - k.markelova@unesco.org 
Editors 
Arabic 
Bassam Mansour - b.mansour@unesco.org 
assisted by Zaina Dufour - z.dufour@unesco.org 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape - w.cauhape@unesco.org 
English 
Cathy Nolan - c.nolan@unesco.org 
Russian 
Victoria Kalinin - v.kalinin@unesco.org 
Spanish 
Francisco Vicente-Sandoval - l.iglesias@unesco.org 
Photo and web layout 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org 
PDF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi 
Web Platform 
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro 
s.roberts@unesco.org 
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be 
reproduced and/or translated providing the credit line 
reads “Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” 
and includes date and hyperlink. Photos without 
UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations 
of the countries and territories concerned. 
19