# [074741](074741engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](074741engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

JUNE 1981 - 4.50 French francs 
  
New ways to learning 
INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF DISABLED PERSONS 

## [Page 2](074741engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

\ 
T
e
e
 
nl
 
o
r
 
a
 
od 
S
A
 
   
  
  
vs 
% A ~ 
oo 5 { 
/ ure 
/ 
TREASURES 
OF 
WORLD ART 
Ethiopia   
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Et
hi
op
ia
n 
In
st
it
ut
e 
of
 
Ar
ch
ae
ol
og
y,
 
Ad
di
s 
Ab
ab
a 
Pre-Aksumite portrait 
This bust is part of a limestone statue (82 cm high) unearthed at Haoulti in 
northern Ethiopia and probably dating from the 5th or 4th centuries of the 
pre-Christian era. The statue represents a seated woman with her hands 
on her knees, dressed in a long robe with narrow vertical pleats. She 
wears a wide three-stranded necklace, and her hair is depicted by rows of 
small lozenges. This portrait in stone dates back to a time when the in- 
fluence of south Arabia, during the supremacy of the kingdom of Saba, is 
widely agreed to have been strong in this part of Africa where, some cen- 
turies later, the powerful kingdom of Aksum rose and flourished.

## [Page 3](074741engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

® 
he y 
eso COUTICT 
A window open on the world 
JUNE 1981 34th YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 25 LANGUAGES 
English Malian Turkish ~~ Macedonian 
Fiench Hindi Urdu Serho-Croat 
Spanish Tamil Catalan Slovene 
Russian ~~ Hebrew Malaysian Chinese 
German Persian Korean 
Arabic ~~ Dutch Swahili 
Japanese Portuguese  Croato-Serh 
A selection in Braille Is published 
quarterly in English, French and Spanish 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris 
Subscription rates 
1 year : 44 French Francs 
2 years: 75 FF 
Binder for a year’s issues: 32 FF 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly (11 issues a 
year including one double issue), 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be 
reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from the 
UNESCO COURIER”, plus date of issue, and three voucher 
copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles reprinted must 
bear author's name, Non-copyright phatos will be supplied on 
request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless 
accompanied by an international reply coupon covering post- 
age. Signed articles express the opinions of the authors and 
do not necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO or those 
of the editors of the UNESCO COURIER. Photo captions 
and headlines are written by the Unesco Courier staff. 
The Unesco Courier is produced in microform {microfilm 
and/or microfiche) by: (1) University Microfilms (Xerox). 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A.; (2) N.C.R. Micro- 
card Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 West 40th Street, 
New York, U.S.A.; (3) Bell and Howell Co., Old Mans- 
field Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
Editor-in-chief: Jean Gaudin 
Assistant Editor-in-chief: Olga Rodel 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
Editors: 
English Edition: Howard Brabyn (Paris) 
French Edition: 
Spanish Edition: Francisco Fernandez-Santos {Paris) 
Russian Edition: Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition: Werner Merkli {Berne} 
Arabic Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi {Cairo} 
Japanese Edition: Kazuo Akao (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition; Krishna Gopal {Delhi) 
Tamil Edition: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition: Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
" Persian Edition: Samad Nourinejad (Teheran) 
Dutch Edition: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese Edition: Benedicto Silva {Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish Edition: Mefra llgazer {Istambul) 
Urdu Edition: Hakim Mohammed Said {Karachi} 
Catalan Edition: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcefona) 
Malaysian Edition: Bahador Shah {Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean Edition: Lim Moun-young (Seoul) 
Swahili Edition: Domino Rutayebesibwa 
(Dar-es-Salaam) 
Braille Edition: Frederick Potter (Paris) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, 
Slovene Editions: Punisa Pavlovic (Belgrade) 
Chinese Edition: Shen Guofen (Pekin) 
Assistant Editors: : 
English Edition: Roy Malkin 
French Edition: 
Spanish Edition: Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Research: Christiane Boucher 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey 
Layout and Design: Philippe Gentil 
All correspondence should be addressed 
to the Editor-in-Chief in Paris.   
page 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
4 SOS PARENTS 
The decisive role of the family 
in rehabilitating handicapped children / 
by Leo F. Buscaglia 
7 AN AFRICAN APPROACH 
by Gustave-Justin Nlo 
8 THEIR HANDICAP IS HUNGER 
10 CHILDHOOD AWAKENING 
A Jamaican experiment 
by Marigold Thorburn 
12 UNESCO AND SPECIAL EDUCATION 
FOR HANDICAPPED CHILDREN 
16 Special schools or integrated education ? 
I. ‘The integration of the handicapped into society 
can be best prepared in special schools’ 
by Vladimir I. Lubovski 
20 Il. ‘Our task is to bring the retarded into the community 
from which they have been excluded’ 
by Marten Sdder 
18 THE RIGHTS OF MENTALLY RETARDED PERSONS 
How far are they observed? 
24 COMMUNITIES THAT CARE 
by Mahfoud Boucebci 
26 SOUNDS FROM SILENCE 
by Li Hongtar and Shen Jiayin 
+28 SELF-RELIANCE AND THE RIGHT TO WORK 
by Ed. Sackstein 
31 DISABLED CHARACTERS 
IN SEARCH OF AN AUTHOR 
by Tordis Orjasaeter 
34 UNESCO NEWSROOM 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
2 TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
IS
SN
 
00
4-
52
78
 
ETHIOPIA : Pre-Aksumite portrait 
No
. 
6-
 
19
81
 
- 
OP
I 
- 
81
-1
 
- 
37
7-
A   Cover 
This issue, a follow-up to our January num- 
ber, is largely devoted to the role of modern 
education in helping handicapped people to 
overcome the problems facing them in their 
search for full integration into society. Photo 
shows a physically and mentally handi- . 
capped child, wearing a protective helmet. 
Photo Laurence Brun © Petit Format, Paris 
3

## [Page 4](074741engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 46335: SOS parents: the decisive role of the family in rehabilitating handicapped children

   
  
Photo © Gilles Cohen, Paris

## [Page 5](074741engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

\ 


### 46335: SOS parents: the decisive role of the family in rehabilitating handicapped children

The decisive role o f the Jamily 
in rehabilitating 
handicapped children 
by Leo F. Buscaglia 
  
vital resource in the process of 
evaluating, educating, and rehabili- 
tating a child with a handicap. Yet, for some 
mysterious reason, the child's parents are 
often seen as ‘the enemy’. They are con- 
sidered by many professionals as uninform- 
ed meddlers who are much too emotionally 
involved in their child's problems to offer 
even the simplest objective insight or 
positive action. They are, therefore, treated 
as secondary citizens in the diagnostic and 
re-educational processes, if not excluded 
altogether, 
This is true, even though research find- 
ings consistently indicate that well inform- 
ed, optimistic, accepting parents have a 
most positive and significant effect upon the 
education, well-being, and adjustment of 
their handicapped child. In the long run, 
their influence is far more productive and 
long-lasting than that of physicians, nurses, 
therapists, psychologists, or any of the 
many other helpers who will encounter the 
child in his lifetime. 
Ph are the most important and 
It is, therefore, of monumental impor- 
tance that parents and professionals strive 
to form a mutually beneficial partnership 
dedicated to the social, physical, 
psychological, and educational growth of 
the child, 
The following four principles are offered 
as a possible guide to action designed to 
achieve this end. 
* To begin with, the parents must be helped 
to understand their emotional and intellec- 
‘tual responses relating to their handi- 
capped child, for these feelings may be 
preventing them from understanding 
clearly, and co-operating fully, in any 
therapeutic process. 
* Parents must be offered an honest, mean- 
ingful, and accurate medical, social, 
psychological, and educational evaluation 
of their child's physical and emotional 
condition, and intellectual abilities. 
* The parents must be given a thorough 
understanding of educational or rehabilita- 
tional programmes designed and recom- 
mended for their child. 
¢ The parents must be encouraged to 
. assume an active role in the re-education 
of their child and be offered a means for 
evaluating the effectiveness of the pro- 
gramme at every stage of its progress. 
At best, it is not easy to be a parent. In 
fact, it is perhaps the greatest and most 
LEO F. BUSCAGLIA, of the United States of 
America, is professor of education at the Univer- 
sity of Southern California, Los Angeles. He is the 
author of many articles and of seven books in- 
cluding: Love; The Disabled and their Parents: a 
Counselling Challenge; The Way of the Bull; 
Human Advocacy; and Personhood. A world 
traveller, he has taught and lectured in many 
countries. His programmes broadcast on United 
States National Public Television have been wide- 
ly acclaimed. 
complex of human responsibilities, Yet, 
most of us are tragically unprepared for this 
demanding task. It is even more difficult to 
be the parent of a handicapped child, for 
birth is, in a very real sense, a gift. It is an 
awesome discovery to learn that one has 
produced an imperfect gift. 
This realization often brings with it natural 
feelings of fear, pain, disappointment, loss, 
guilt, confusion, and general feelings of 
helplessness and inadequacy. Most parents 
have little knowledge of the conditions that 
provoke handicaps and few resources 
necessary to understand them. This lack of 
understanding can produce feelings which 
freeze them into inactivity, depression and 
self-recrimination, and prevent them from 
dealing adequately and productively with 
their handicapped child. 
It is, therefore, inconceivable to expect 
that parents can immediately accept the 
birth of their handicapped child and be ready 
to help in the educational process. They 
must first be encouraged to understand that 
their feelings are appropriate, that it is 
understandable that they should be feeling a 
sense of disbelief and depression; that it is 
acceptable that they are in emotional pain, 
questioning and fearful, that they would 
like to wish it all away; that they should 
curse the fates that brought them this 
“misfortune”. 
At this point it may be impossible for 
parents to imagine that there is anything 
positive about a handicap. It is only with: 
time, insight and re-education that the 
parent can be shown that whatever is 
positive is to be found—not in the han- 
dicap— but in the child who is handicapped. 
Their child is a child like other children. But 
he or she is also a unique creation, a com- 
bination of not only what there is, but also a 
limitless possibility of what, with their active 
participation, can be. So, the first step in the 
rehabilitation process lies in emotionally 
aiding parents through their incapacitating 
feelings, on to acceptance and active 
participation. 
Professionals often feel that it is a waste 
of their time and energies to give medical, 
psychological and educational information 
to parents. After all, they state, it takes 
years of training to prepare a professional. 
Their argument is usually that parents would 
not understand the problem anyway, and a 
little knowledge is a dangerous thing. To 
know ‘the facts” would only confuse and 
frighten them more. 
Nothing could be further from the truth! 
Knowledge and understanding are great 
eradicators of fear providing that the infor- 
mation given is not shrouded in mysterious 
medical jargon or half truths or uncomfor- 
table pronouncements. What information is 
given must be honest, gentle, straight- 
forward, and clear. In addition, diagnosis 
h 
)

## [Page 6](074741engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 46335: SOS parents: the decisive role of the family in rehabilitating handicapped children

) often is nothing more than a statement of 
what is wrong with the child, what the prob- 
lems are, the skills that cannot be perform- 
ed, the abilities the child does not have. It is 
no wonder that parents leave such an ex- 
perience in pain, bitterness and pessimism. 
A real diagnostic presentation must be 
equally concerned with what the child can 
do, at what levels he is able to function, 
those aspects which show promise and 
where the strengths lie— for it is with these 
positive aspects that the therapeutic pro- 
gramme can be actualized. In her book, The 
Siege, Clara Clarborne Clark describes the 
results of such a diagnostic interview follow- 
ing months of tests and examinations of her 
autistic child. She says she needed informa- 
tion and techniques and the professionals 
gave her none. “| needed references,” she 
continues, “| needed to know all about my 
daughter Elly, because whoever else may or 
may not work with her, her main therapist is 
me.” 
Too many professionals, because they 
often feel a general discomfort and inade- 
quacy when faced with the human problem 
A young handicapped girl learning to walk at a centre for the disabled 
in Lesotho, southern Africa. 
  
111 
—
 —
 Mes | 
HHL 
          
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
 
A
 
—
 
—
—
—
—
—
 
     
! 
5 RT 
El 3 
: 
Be 
f
r
e
e
s
 
cr 
Ln ee a SOE | 
Photo Martine Frank © Magnum, Paris 
of talking to parents about their children’s 
handicaps, hide these inadequacies in test 
results, complicated medical case histories, 
mysterious labels and high-sounding jargon 
which only serve to leave parents feeling 
abandoned, confused, and more fearful and 
despairing than ever. 
Parents must be given the facts, for the 
facts will free them and bring them the 
necessary sensitivity and wisdom which will 
lead them to acquire the realistic skills 
necessary for their . participation in their 
child's education and growth. The facts will 
offer them the resources to see and under- 
stand their child in a realistic fashion and 
make them a more knowledgeable and com- 
fortable part of the rehabilitation team. Pro- 
fessionals must realize that no matter how 
many trained individuals work with the han- 
dicapped person in his or her lifetime, none 
will have more consistent contact, or a more 
significant and lasting effect than the 
parents. 
The rehabilitation and education pro- 
grammes for the disabled require the best 
possible interaction between and the parti- 
cipation of many individuals. Depending 
upon the disability, expertise may be needed 
from general physicians, neurologists, 
psychologists, occupational and physical 
therapists, educators, language and speech 
pathologists, and a variety of others. But the 
individuals who give significance and pur- 
pose to this process, and are at the core of 
it, will always be the handicapped individual 
and the parents. 
It is therefore imperative that the parents 
thoroughly understand whatever remedial 
plans are designed for their child. Yet when 
parents bring their handicapped child to 
hospital for consultations or therapy ses- 
sions, which could be great educational ex- 
periences for them, they are more often than 
not asked to “wait outside”. If they ask 
questions they are often put off or embar- 
rassingly talked down to. The inference is 
that information on their own child is private 
and none of their concern, that they are too 
ignorant to understand it even if it were ex- 
plained. It is no wonder, therefore, that 
parents of the handicapped so often ex- 
press feelings of isolation, inadequacy and 
impotence. 
To exclude parents from the educational 
planning for their child, as is so often the 
case, is both ludicrous and counter- 
productive, for no one has a greater need to 
"understand the child than its parents. It is 
they who will experience the daily progress 
or lack thereof. It is they who will observe 
and aid their child through pain and tears as 
the child battles his or her way through the 
therapeutic programme. Professionals must 
understand that parents may not be perfect, 
they may not always know or do “what they 
should know or do’, but nonetheless, they 
will still have to understand and do more 
than anyone else. For who else will be 
spending more time and energy in perma- 
nent, everyday contact with the child? 
Parents are more than willing to take an 
active part in their child's remedial pro- 
gramme and will carry out their charge with 
the tender loving care and consistency that 
most professionals do not have time for. Itis 
logical that since they will be doing 
something anyway, they may as well be do- 
ing the right thing. 
It is important not simply that parents be 
given time to work through their feelings,

## [Page 7](074741engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 46335: SOS parents: the decisive role of the family in rehabilitating handicapped children

that they be given accurate information and 
made integral partners in the planning of the 
programme for their child, they must also be 
encouraged to do something tangible and 
positive with the strength and information 
they have acquired. Knowing is a beginning, 
but the true value of knowledge lies in its 
daily application. 
The rehabilitation process is a long, ar- 
+ duous, demanding journey through which 
the parents must be supported and advised. 
They will be required to learn how to 
schedule their time so as to be able to meet 
their child’s needs, without giving up their 
own personal physical, psychological and 
intellectual requirements for growth. | have 
known parents who have not had time for 
themselves in all the years since the birth of 
their handicapped child. They cannot even 
obtain the help of baby-sitters who often, 
due to their fears or lack of information, are 
reluctant to take responsibility for handicap- 
-ped children. 
Parents will have special motivational 
problems, for the rehabilitation process is 
often slow. So much expended energy on 
their part often seems to produce so few 
tangible results and so little progress. They 
will have to be given the courage to con- 
tinue. In addition, they will have to learn 
how to cope with the problem of rejection 
by society. 
As part of the team they will need to know 
precisely what they can do for their child, 
what realistic demands can be set, and what 
possible limitations there are, They must be 
helped over feelings of inadequacy and im- 
perfection as they involve themselves in the 
learning process. They must be made to 
understand the fact that they are not ex- 
pected to be perfect but rather, only 
human—that, perhaps, their love, concern 
and humanity are their greatest assets. 
If these conditions are adhered to, a 
bridge between parents and professionals 
can be constructed over which the han- 
dicapped child may be guided to in- 
dependence, growth, security and self- 
esteem. 
What is needed is a bill of parental rights 
regarding parents’ partnership with pro- 
fessionals in helping the handicapped child. 
It may be stated as follows: 
* Parents have a right to take the necessary 
time to deal with the myriad confused and 
painful feelings associated with giving 
birth to an exceptional child. 
* Parents have a right to sound medical, 
psychological and educational knowledge 
regarding their child's present condition 
and future possibilities. 
e Parents have a right to a clear under- 
standing of their specific role in meeting 
their child's unique needs. 
* Parents have a right to participate in the 
programme of remediation and re- 
education of their child. 
e Parents have a right to periodic re- 
evaluation and involvement in the con- 
tinual planning for new goals which may 
be required as a result of time, maturation 
and new findings. 
e Parents have a right to information re- 
garding available community support 
systems to meet their financial, intellectual 
and emotional needs. 
¢ Parents have a right to some interaction 
with other parents who have handicapped 
children so that they may share feelings, 
hopes, and general human considerations 
as they meet the challenge of raising their 
handicapped child. 
* Parents have a right to develop in their 
roles as persons, apart from their role as 
parents of a handicapped child. 
Given these rights, parents grow to 
become real assets in the rehabilitation and 
education of their handicapped child. 
As one parent of a handicapped child 
wrote, “You wake one day to realize that all 
the trials, the turmoil, the anxiety, the fear 
have given you a modicum of that which 
you sought—understanding. You find, 
somewhat to your surprise, that the lessons 
you have learned are priceless. Although 
you have sometimes rebelled against it all, 
questioned it, resented it, you would not 
relinquish these lessons. For you have 
begun to acquire that depth you have long 
sought. Your experiences have brought you 
into closer touch with others. Therein lies 
the victory for you. Therein lies your ability 
to appreciate your child. If the child can 
understand that you have grown to this con- 
viction he or she will feel freer, not a burden 
to you or anyone, not a pulling-down ele- 
ment in your life but an uplifting one. If the 
child can understand that, then he will know 
he has given you the opportunity to grow 
with him. And the growing process will con- 
tinue onward. The possibilities are endless, 
Isn't that what it’s all about?” 
To this, | can only add, "Yes—that is truly 
what it is all about! Ml Leo F. B lia 
approach 
lavished on the mentally handicap- 
ped child, who is brought up and 
taught by its mother and father, The 
youngster will be given a taste of work 
in the fields (with the cacao trees, 
groundnuts and maize), of household 
jobs (drawing water at the spring, split- 
ting logs, fetching wood from the 
bush, washing clothes and utensils), or 
he may learn the rudiments of a craft. 
He will be initiated into traditional rites, 
take part in funeral ceremonies, 
palavers and confessional assemblies, 
If the child is seriously handicapped, 
the family will do the best it can to 
educate him and give him the utmost 
help and support in the home. 
In the rural areas the mentally han- 
dicapped child has always been a fully 
accepted member of the African ex- 
tended family, that expansive unit 
whose hospitality is not confined to 
father, mother and children but en- 
compasses aunts, cousins, and uncles, 
Since one advantage of the extended 
family is that all its members feel an 
acute sense of their responsibilities to 
each other, the handicapped child can 
find food and lodging in every 
household in the village. He gives a 
helping hand to all and sundry and is 
cossetted in return, Everyone in the 
village stands by him, for his fate is not 
solely the concern of his father and 
mother. 
The village faces many problems 
when it comes to his schooling. 
Specialized institutions are few and far 
between, and in such schools as exist 
I traditional African society, care is 
GUSTAVE-JUSTIN NLO, of Cameroun, 
is secretary-general of the Association of 
Parents of Handicapped Children, in 
Yaoundé,   


### 46336: An African approach

An African 
by Gustave-Justin Nilo 
in the vicinity no one will agree to take 
him on because he will be a nuisance 
during lessons. Only in rare cases will 
the family be able to afford to send him 
to a specialized institution in town; and 
so he will usually have to stay in the 
village. 
As a rule, the children’s handicaps 
are detected by specialists during infor- 
mal consultations, at school, and in 
child- and mother-care centres, 
Some families are ashamed to tell 
the truth about their child because a 
preliminary examination may diagnose 
his handicap as due to some such 
cause as chronic alcoholism or a. 
hereditary defect, However, such in- 
formation must be noted if the 
teachers are to receive reliable informa- 
tion about the child. 
When a child has been accepted by a 
centre, most parents expect to see him 
miraculously transformed into some- 
one who can be reintegrated into the 
productive world, whereas in most 
cases his “normalization” can only be 
partial. 
In any case, the role of the institu- 
tion is complementary to that of the 
family, which must give regular sup- 
port to the teachers. It is in collabora- 
tion with the teachers, for example, 
that the family will encourage the 
youngster to take up a craft for which 
he shows a special aptitude, such as 
carpentry, basketwork, pottery, sew- 
ing, farming or gardening. Then, when 
the child is properly apprenticed, those 
concerned with following his progress 
will advise the parents how to help him 
make his way in working life, for the 
support of the family will continue to 
be the mainstay of his integration into 
the modern world.   

## [Page 8](074741engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

  
5 
kL ( 
handicapped, one simple truth should 
never be forgotten: a large proportion 
of the handicaps with which they are af- 
flicted could be prevented if the millions of 
starving and malnourished people in the 
world were given an adequate, balanced 
diet. 
In a world in which man is capable of 
reaching the moon, hunger is a scandal 
which every year causes untold numbers of 
deaths among the poor of the Third World 
and leaves millions more marked for life by 
severe physical and mental impairment. Of 
the 450 million handicapped people in the 
world, therefore, a large proportion owe 
their disability entirely to malnutrition. 
I any consideration of the plight of the 
In the Preliminary Assessment of the 
World Food Situation, Present and Future, 
published by the United Nations in 1974, it 
was estimated that “in the Far East alone 
more than 100,000 children go blind each 


### 46337: Their handicap is hunger

Their handicap 1s hunger 
year due to vitamin A deficiency... Iron and 
folate [a vitamin of the B complex] deficien- 
Cy anaemias are widely prevalent in 
developed and developing countries and are 
the cause of ill-health and result in a 
decreased ability to lead an active life... A 
comprehensive world review of endemic 
goitre revealed that there were 200 million 
people suffering from the disease...which is 
usually accompanied by endemic 
cretinism... Half the children under five in 
developing countries are inadequately 
nourished, and for many this will inevitably 
lead to premature death”. The Sixth Report 
on the World Health Situation, published by 
WHO as recently as last year, confirms the 
gravity of the problem. 
Vitamin A deficiency is one of the most 
elementary forms of malnutrition and one of 
the easiest to combat. The 1974 United Na- 
tions World Food Conference, in its second 
report, stated that “considering each child 
  
- 
- 
ik
e 
We
ll
s 
© 
As
pe
ct
 
Pi
ct
ur
e 
Li
br
ar
y 
Lt
d.
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
Pr
ot
o 
M

## [Page 9](074741engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 46337: Their handicap is hunger

World food map: dietary energy supply (per capita), around 1975 
 
  
  
  
Calories 
per person 
per day \ 
"| upto1,750 
’ 1,751 - 1,999 
2,000 - 2,499 y 
2,500 - 2,999 
3,000 and over 
  
 
Source: World population data sheets, 1975 and 1978, Population Reference Bureau, inc., reproduced in the Sixth Report 
on the World Health Situation, Volume |, World Health Organization, Geneva, 1980. No official data available for China. 
has to be given two capsules [of vitamin A}, 
the total annual cost of protecting 100 
million one-to-five-year-old children all over 
the world against the risk of xerophthalmia 
(caused by vitamin A deficiency) would be 
around three million dollars.” In other 
words, with just three dollars, one hundred 
children could be insured against the risk of 
blindness, an infinitesimal sum when com- 
pared with the enormous amounts spent on 
armaments. 
One essential aspect of malnutrition as a 
source of handicaps is the effect it has on 
the brain of the infant both before birth and 
“during the early years of life. Protein-calorie 
deficiency, the cause of maladies such as 
Kwashiorkor and Marasmus which decimate 
the infant populations of the poor countries, 
combined with lack of a stimulating environ- 
ment, is the chief cause of retarded develop- 
ment and brain damage. 
The problem begins with the mother. A 
malnourished mother is unable to supply the 
A Unesco enquiry 
on 
malnutrition 
and 
unborn child with the nutrients essential to 
its proper growth. Mothers whose diet dur- 
ing pregnancy has been deficient in protein 
and calories often give birth to children of 
below average weight and with smaller than 
average brains, 
Recent medical findings have confirmed 
the relationship between low birth weight 
and mental retardation. It has been shown 
that less than one per cemt of newborn 
children of normal weight suffer from men- 
tal deficiency as compared with fifty per 
cent of those who weigh less than one and a 
half kilos at birth. Malnutrition has similar ef- 
fects during the first five years of life, the 
most important period. for human brain 
growth. 
A large proportion of the victims of 
malnutrition, and this includes the majority 
of the children of the developing world, will 
suffer all their lives from irreversible 
disabilities — problems of sight and hearing, 
motor defects, epilepsy, cerebral palsy, etc. 
The result is mental retardation and stagna- 
tion of the faculty of comprehension, with 
all the dire consequences for later life that 
this entails (failure at school, inability to 
learn a trade, failure to adapt normally to 
society). 
Seen against this background, it becomes 
clear that the great effort that has been 
made over the last few years by the United 
Nations and its specialized agencies, such as 
Unesco, to achieve a new world economic 
order is also, in effect, the most important 
step forward ever made towards the preven- 
tion of handicaps resulting from malnutri- 
tion. nm 
Under its Research and Human Needs programmes Unesco has launched a research pro- 
ject aimed at improving our understanding of the effects of malnutrition on young 
children. The project is based on four countries of the Mediterranean but there are plans to 
extend it later to other regions in Africa, Asia and Latin America. The objectives of the 
research project are to identify and evaluate the nutritional, biological, environmental and 
other requirements of infants, young children and pregnant and nursing mothers and to 
propose and promote effective measures to be taken within a given social and cultural 
child welfare context. The research will be undertaken by teams of local scientists in collaboration with 
Unesco and various scientific organizations and will cover many fields including nutrition, 
biology, chemistry, genetics, neurophysiology, sociology and cultural anthropology. 
 

## [Page 10](074741engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 46340: Childhood awakening: a Jamaican experiment

Childhood awakening 
A Jamaican experiment 
   

## [Page 11](074741engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 46340: Childhood awakening: a Jamaican experiment

. 
by Marigold Thorburn 
played with us and gave us toys seldom stop to think how 
important these things were to our eventual growth and 
development. Yet they are of enormous importance, for without 
them we learn slowly, if at all. If you have no toys as a baby how do 
you learn to focus on an object or grasp it? 
It was to remedy situations of this kind that early childhood 
stimulation programmes were devised. In poor countries lack of 
stimulation is more often due to lack of knowledge and poverty than 
to deliberate neglect, but the result is the same — children are slow 
and regarded as dull when in fact they are merely uninformed. 
There are, of course, other causes of delayed development, for 
example, a disability due to illness or brain damage. In these cases 
doctor and therapist have to work very closely together and obtain 
the enthusiastic co-operation of the parent, grannie, auntie or other 
parent substitute. The parent has as much to learn as the child; he or 
she needs to understand that handicapped children are not- 
necessarily helpless or dependent and that given more attention and 
training results can be achieved that make the extra effort involved 
well worth while. When a child suffers from both parental indif- 
ference and malnutrition, the health and social welfare workers have 
to make a special effort to rouse the interest of and motivate the 
parents. In all these situations education is the key. 
The Jamaican Early Childhood Stimulation Project is a continuous 
remedial action programme designed to meet the individual needs of 
the child and to arouse and hold the imagination of the parent, 
usually the mother, and get her involved in the learning process. 
The Jamaican project is based on a North American model 
modified to fit local needs and resources. It consists of four main 
stages. 
First, the children needing help have to be identified. Mothers, 
members of the family and friends are often the first to recognize 
that a child's development is slower than usual. The most common 
signs are lateness in sitting, walking or talking. Sometimes a doctor 
or nurse on a routine visit to a clinic notices the tell-tale signs of late 
development. In other instances late-developing children are 
detected by means of simple tests carried out in day nurseries and 
créches. In all these cases children can be brought to our offices for 
confirmatory checks and examinations. 
At the second stage, if a child is found to have a significant delay 
in development, a further in-depth assessment, including the 
establishment of a full case history and a complete medical examina- 
tion, is carried out in our offices. On the basis of our findings a pro- 
gramme of treatment and intervention is drawn up. 
During the third stage this programme, which consists mainly of 
various forms of teaching and training, is put into practice in the 
child's own home. One very important aspect is that the mother 
becomes fully involved in the programme and herself carries out the 
teaching at home i in between the weekly visits of the social auxiliary. 
The final stage involves a review and evaluation of the child's pro- 
gress. The mother brings the child back to our offices once every 
three months or so for this reassessment and, if necessary, the pro- 
gramme can then be adjusted. 
The Jamaican project is supervised by a public health service 
nurse, but this task could be carried out by anyone with the ap- 
propriate training and experience, such as a teacher or a social 
worker. Identification of children in need of help is the responsibility 
of specially trained workers of the Jamaica Youth Corps. 
Assessments are made with the help of the Portage Check List, a 
systematic, sequenced list of child behavioural skills and aptitudes, 
each aptitude on the list corresponding to a specific item of the 
education programme. In this way the child, the mother and the 
social auxiliary form a mutually dependent team. 
In Jamaica, the auxiliaries, known affectionately as “’Crashies’ 
because they had been through an accelerated training or crash 
T vor of us who grew up in loving homes with parents who 
course, were selected from participants in a special employment . 
programme. In the new project being carried out in St. Catherine the 
auxiliaries have been recruited from the local communities and the 
parents themselves are also being trained. 
MARIGOLD THORBURN, of Jamaica, is regional co-ordinator with the 
Caribbean Institute on Mental Retardation and Other Development Pro- 
blems, at the Northern Caribbean University, Kingston. Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
This innovation has worked well and each auxiliary visits about a 
dozen homes a week. The auxiliaries work under the guidance of a 
supervisor but it is they who keep in touch with the mothers. 
Medical assessment is undertaken by a doctor. Exercises and ac- 
tivities are specially developed for each child and involve the use of 
simple toys, often made from waste materials. 
In 1978, five years atfter the Early Childhood Stimulation Project 
started in Kingston, we decided to take a look at what had happened 
to some of the children who had participated in the project from the 
very beginning. Half of them were still involved in the project and the 
remainder are attending either ordinary elementary schools or 
special schools for handicapped children. 
The progress made by fifty-six children who had had continuous 
care over a period of eighteen months was also assessed. The 
children were divided into three groups— mildly, moderately and 
severely handicapped —and progress was measured by the average 
number of skills learned by the children during the period. This was 
compared with what would be expected of a normal child. Over a 
given period of time a normal child would probably learn six skills per 
month. We found that the mildly and moderately handicapped 
children gained 50 per cent more skills than would have been ex- 
pected in norma! children. The children of the severely handicapped 
group, however, did not do so well, but they nevertheless acquired 
more than twice as many skills as they would have been expected to 
learn without any stimulation. 
Many medical conditions can cause delays in development, retar- 
dation and other types of handicap. Among.the commoner ones 
found in our project were Down's Syndrome, brain damage due to 
complications at birth, jaundice after birth, meningitis, epilepsy and 
rubella contracted by the mother during pregnancy. In almost one 
fifth of the children seen it was impossible to determine the cause of - 
handicap. 
In almost all these conditions early stimulation can produce 
remarkable results and it is anticipated that, in the long run, children 
who have benefited from early stimulation programmes will meet 
with fewer problems in their education and have better prospects of 
achieving” independence i in their adult life. Furthermore, seeing the 
improvement in her child, the mother becomes more optimistic 
about its future. The combination of loving care and well planned 
stimulation can, therefore, produce real progress. 
There are still those who think that it is too expensive and, indeed, 
scarcely worth the trouble to provide help for children with delayed 
development. In Jamaica we have shown that the cost per child can 
be remarkably low (280 Jamaican dollars per child per year), that 
there is no need for highly specialized staff since ordinary, well 
motivated, intelligent people can be trained for the work involved, 
and that, with proper care and attention, children with delayed 
development can become happy, useful, productive and indepen- 
dent adults. MW Marigold Thorburn 
The Jamaican Early Childhood Stimulation Project for children 
with delayed development relies for its success on close teamwork 
between the child, the mother and the social auxiliary (below), 
backed up by the doctor in the clinic. The auxiliaries visit the 
children’s homes once a week, but between visits the mothers 
themselves continue the programme of educational stimulation 
and training {opposite page). 

## [Page 12](074741engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 46342: UNESCO and special education for handicapped children

Unesco 
and special education 
for handicapped children 
 

## [Page 13](074741engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 46342: UNESCO and special education for handicapped children

large proportion of the population 
A in all countries (10 to 15 per cent) 
is affected by handicaps, whether 
sensorial, motor or mental, which limit their 
capacity to benefit from an ordinary educa- 
tion. The handicapped require an education 
adapted to their potential, their capabilities 
and their needs—"‘special education” as it 
has come to be called—which will enable 
them to develop their skills in order to 
become full members of the society to 
which they belong and to achieve personal 
development towards independence. 
Special education is thus the educational 
component of rehabilitation. It is needed for 
all those individuals who experience or are at 
risk of experiencing significant and continu- 
ing difficulties in learning and in adjusting to 
normal educational opportunities made 
available to other persons. 
It need hardly be said that special educa- 
“tion has always been a matter of prime in- 
terest to Unesco, an interest that was 
underlined in 1966 when at its 14th session 
the General Conference of Unesco authoriz- 
ed the Director-General to “develop a pro- 
gramme in special education for handicap- 
ped children and young people on the basis 
of voluntary contributions from Member 
States.” 
Since then significant advances in 
teaching techniques and important in- 
novative developments have taken place in 
the field of special education, particularly 
during the past decade, and much more can 
be achieved in the teaching of handicapped 
persons than was previously thought possi- 
ble. Many of these advances in teaching 
techniques can be adapted to the needs of 
developing countries with limited reserves of 
materials and personnel. 
In the light of these developments the 
General Conference of Unesco, at its 20th 
session held in October-November 1978, in- 
structed the Director-General to “formulate, 
with the assistance of outside experts, a 
comprehensive, long-range programme of 
action designed to enhance the rights of all 
handicapped persons to an appropriate 
education which meets their needs and 
aspirations’’, 
As a first step an international meeting on 
special education, attended by experts from 
fourteen countries, was held at Unesco 
headquarters in Paris in October 1979. The 
experts drew up a statement of principles 
by which Unesco’s programme should be 
guided. 
Reaffirming the right of every child to an 
education, the experts declared that the pur- 
poses and goals of education were essential- 
ly similar for all children, even though the 
techniques required to help individual 
children progress might be different. Some 
children would require substantial modifica- 
tion of the educational programme while the 
needs of others could be met by only minor 
variations. Educational resources for han- 
* dicapped students should be comparable to 
those available for other students and ap- 
propriate to meet their special and often 
long neglected needs. 
The experts pointed out that while special 
educational programmes would necessarily 
entail additional expenditures and each na- 
tion was faced with the fact that it had insuf- 
ficient funds to meet all its purposes, the - 
costs of failing to provide early identification 
and education of handicapped children and 
subsequently to train those children and 
place them in the work force were much 
greater. Studies of rehabilitation and educa- 
tion programmes across the world showed 
that the economic advantages from such 
programmes in productivity, payment of 
taxes by handicapped persons and reduced 
need for welfare assistance and disability 
stipends, outweighed the costs. Failure to 
educate and train handicapped persons in ° 
proportions equal to the provisions of ser- 
vices for the non-handicapped, because of 
the problem being perceived as a lower 
priority, resulted later in expensive pro- 
grammes to care for the untreated disabled. 
Developing nations, as they formulated new. 
approaches to educating children, should be 
aware of the problem other nations had had 
WORLD CONFERENCE IN MADRID, NOVEMBER 1981 
How can physically and mentally 
handicapped persons best be given the 
opportunity to become involved and 
integrated into daily life as independent 
and productive members of their 
_ communities? This question, together 
with the problem of the prevention of 
handicaps, will be the focus of discussion 
at a major international conference to be 
held in Madrid later this year, from 2 to 
7 November. The conference is being 
prepared by Unesco in collaboration with 
the Spanish Government and with the 
help of the competent intergovernmental 
and non-governmental organizations 
{especially the United Nations, the World 
Health Organization, the International 
Labour Organisation and the United 
Nations Children’s Fund). The Madrid 
Conference will be multidisciplinary in 
nature and will provide a forum for a wide 
exchange of experience, views and 
information on the present state of 
education for handicapped people and an 
occasion on which “the main lines of 
international action in favour of special 
- education and in favour of prevention, of 
re-education and of assistance for the 
physically and mentally handicapped will 
be studied and defined”. 
Ph
ot
o 
La
ur
en
ce
 
Br
un
 
© 
Pe
ti
t 
Fo
rm
at
, 
Pa
ri
s  
13

## [Page 14](074741engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 46342: UNESCO and special education for handicapped children

) in following this approach of giving a low 
priority to the handicapped. : 
Special educational services should, the 
experts declared, be tailored to meet the 
assessed and agreed needs of the individual 
student and should lead to clearly stated 
curriculum goals and short-term objectives 
which should be regularly reviewed and 
where necessary revised. They should be 
within reasonable travelling distance of the 
pupil's home or residence except in special 
circumstances where the pupil's needs 
could not be met by these means. They 
should be comprehensive, serving all per- 
sons with special needs irrespective of age 
or degree of handicap. No child of school 
age should be excluded from educational 
provision on grounds of severity of handicap 
or receive educational! services significantly 
inferior to those enjoyed by any other stu- 
dent. They should offer a range of choices 
commensurate with the range of special 
needs in any given community. 
The experts devoted part of their discus- 
sion to the question of the integration of the 
handicapped into the normal educational 
system, a matter about which there is still 
considerable controversy, which is reflected 
in the articles on pages 16 and 20 of this 
issue of the Unesco Courier. 
Special education programmes would in 
the future be found in a variety of settings, 
Photo La Nacion-Unesco 
with some disabled children able to par- 
ticipate in a regular school setting, while 
others would require very intensive pro- 
grammes. There should be, as a basic 
assumption underlying educational and 
other efforts on behalf of the handicapped, 
a commitment to integrating the disabled 
person as fully as possible into the com- 
munity of non-handicapped persons. 
History was replete with examples of un- 
necessary segregation of disabled, and con- 
sequent substandard treatment and 
discrimination. 
Integration of the handicapped into the 
normal educational system was an increas- 
ingly gommon practice. Short - and long- 
term studies showed that achievement 
among handicapped people who were 
educated in a specialized setting was no 
greater than that of .those educated in 
regular classes. The special class or school 
tended from the outset to take a pessimistic 
view of the pupils’ potential, which under- 
mined their chances since they were inclined 
to conform to this pessimistic image. 
It was necessary to stress the positive ad- 
vantages of integration. With integration 
there was less need for costly special 
building and additional highly specialized 
staff; in developing countries, educational 
facilities were extended to more children; a 
handicapped child adapted more easily to 
living in ordinary society the earlier he or she 
began to do so; the non-handicapped grew 
up with the handicapped and learned to ac- 
cept them and their disabilities from the 
beginning. 
The experts pointed out, however, that 
integration was not the answer to every 
problem and it did not mean the mere 
physical placement of handicapped children 
in ordinary schools. It required very careful 
planning and preparation of teachers, and 
the development of support services. 
Care should always be taken to ensure 
that integration was in the best interests of 
the child. For this reason the needs of each 
individual child had to be considered, and 
decisions made as to what type of educa- - 
tional provision, given the options available, 
would best suit him or her. 
Finally, the experts stressed that, in view 
of the discrepancies in types and degrees of 
handicaps as well as the diversity of condi- 
tions in different countries, there was a need 
for a variety of appropriate educational pro- 
vision for handicapped children; some might 
need special schools, others separate pro- 
grammes for part of the day or for certain 
periods of their lives, while other children 
could profit from a regular classroom with 
some extra periods of instruction or help. 
Countries would have to study what was 
best suited to their conditions and develop 
their strategies accordingly. n 
ACCESS TO WORKS 
PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 
In line with objectives of the Intemational Year for Disabled Persons, Unesco has taken steps to 
facilitate access hy disabled persons to works protected by copyright. 
A request has gone out to Member States to help meet a pressing need in developing countries 
for printed works and audio-visual materials. Assistance is also being sought in arranging for the 
holders of copyright to assign the reproduction, translation or adaptation rights for Braille 
publications and audio-visual materials designed for handicapped persons on preferential terms 
to publishers in developing countries. 
A second programme has been undertaken jointly with the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPQ} in co-operation with the World Council for the Welfare of the Blind (WCWB). 
States party to the two major copyright Conventions, the Universal Copyright Convention and 
the Intemational Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, administered 
respectively by Unesco and WIPO, have been asked to consider questions relative to the free 
flow of recorded and embossed reading materials for blind and physically handicapped readers. 
Comments on a study prepared by the WCWB will be used as the basis for recommendations 
aiming to define and harmonize intemational co-operation and provide the widest possible access 
to materials for the visually handicapped. A similar study is being undertaken regarding the 
problems facing the hard of hearing in co-cperation with the World Federation of the Deaf. 
INTERNATIONAL RESPECT FOR 
THE RIGHTS OF THE DISABLED 
What leyal protection is offered to handicapped children by existing international instruments? 
The answer to this important question can be found in-La protection des Droits des 
Personnes Handicapées par Différents Instruments Internationaux {The Protection of the 
Rights of Handicapped Persons by Different International fnstruments”), which is being published 
fin French) by Unesco later this year. (An abridged version in English is in preparation). Most 
international organizations have long been concerned, each in its own field of competence, with 
promoting the rights of handicapped children. But the texts they have produced are scattered as 
to ther sources and of variahle legal value. The Unesco publication presents analytical 
assessments of international texts relating to the handicapped child in the fields of civil, 
economic, professional, social and family life. Through this work Unesco is seeking to persuade 
governments to ratify existing conventions and to respond to the need to generalize these rights 
in a single international convention. Left, handicapped persons demonstrate in defence of ther 
rights in Costa Rica.  

## [Page 15](074741engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 46342: UNESCO and special education for handicapped children

    
        R r 
+ % UNESCO'S CO-ACTION PROGRAMME AND THE ib 
or INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF DISABLED PERSONS ; 
  
       #77 Unesco’s Co-Action Programme, which offers individuals, groups and institutions the opportu: 
CRS Via SE nity of participating in self-help community projects throughout the world, has decided, 
"Photo © Bester Kanyama, Salisbury during the International Year of Disabled Persons, to concentrate its efforts on providing 
much-needed equipment and training facilities to schools and centres for the handicapped in 
the developing countries. Photos show three of the many schools and centres receiving aid. 
Above, the Waterfalls Centre, Zimbabwe, for children suffering from cerebral palsy; below 
left, the Centre for Special Education at Chimbote, Peru, a school for blind and deaf children 
and for children with speech and learning problems, as well as those suffering from multiple 
handicaps; below right, the Sri Sangwal School, Thailand, which accepts physically handicap- 
Photo © Centre for Special ped children from kindergarten to tenth grade. All these establishments are in urgent need of 
Education, Chimbote, Peru funds and Unesco receives fresh requests for help every week. Anyone —individuals, groups, Photo Sudchit Bhinyoying, UNICEF 
Se institutions —can help, either by sending a donation in support of a particular project (Unesco   
  
will supply a list of all the projects in hand) or by making a contribution, however small, to 
Co-Action’s General Fund. Administrative costs are borne by Unesco and the entire sum sent 
will go to the project. You can also correspond directly with the people running the project 
(Unesco will supply the address). Donations, as well as requests for further information, 
should be sent to: Unesco, Co-Action Programme, OPI, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. 
 
  
   
  

## [Page 16](074741engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

\ 


### 46344: The Integration of the handicapped into society can be best prepared in special schools

Special schools 
or integrated education? 
I. ‘The integration 
of the handicapped 
into society | 
can be best prepared 
in special schools’ 
 
by Vladimir I. Lubovski 
~ 
NTEGRATION is one of the most frequently discussed problems 
| of special education. The integration of handicapped children 
into the normal education system has many supporters both 
among workers in the field of special education and (especially) 
among the parents of handicapped children, who are attracted by 
the thought that their child will not be set apart in a special group 
among his normally developing contemporaries. 
At the same time, it must be said that an over-simplified concep- 
tion of integration—an indiscriminate, superficial approach to the 
problem —is widespread. In many cases, the practical application of 
this approach leads to no more than a mechanical solution of the 
problems. The handicapped child is placed in an ordinary class in a 
normal school, among normally developing contemporaries, and is 
given the opportunity to spend a small amount of extra time with a 
specialist in the education of persons with his kind of handicap. For 
all the apparent attractiveness of the slogan "integration in educa- 
tion’, the superficial approach cannot be considered as a step for- 
ward in special education, 
To make this clear, let us look at the concept, and the goals and 
problems, of integration. 
First, since education in schoo! represents only a small part of a 
person's life, and a period during which he is not independent, what 
is of greatest importance is his subsequent integration in society 
when he is independent. The completeness and success of this in- 
tegration depend on how satisfactory the person’s contacts and in- 
teraction turn out to be with those around him, at home and at 
work. 
For a handicapped person, the chances of establishing soundrela- 
tionships with other people and of becoming a successful worker 
are, in their turn, governed by the extent to which he has been 
prepared for such things by his education. This is a matter where it is 
helpful to begin a pre-school education at the earliest possible age, 
aimed at remedying the handicap, and where help is given by the 
whole system of organization and work in special schools, which 
takes account, for each particular kind of handicap, of the 
peculiarities of the child's mental and physical development and of 
his capabilities. In such a school, the child is one among equals. The 
system is designed to develop the personalities of handicapped 
children as comprehensively as possible. 
When he is integrated into the ordinary education system, in the 
sense of being placed in a normal schoo! among normally developing 
children, the handicapped child in effect finds himself in a situation 
of inequality, in far more difficult circumstances than the other 
children. Handicapped children are, as a rule, incapable of 
assimilating subject-matter or of completing exercises at the same 
rate as other children, and, in the circumstances we have described, 
they are deprived of the necessary educational facilities and are 
unable to obtain adequate training for employment. 
In our opinion, the integration of handicapped children during the 
period of their education must, under an advanced system of special 
VLADIMIR I. LUBOVSKI, Soviet expert on special education for the han- 
dicapped, is head of the laboratory of children with educational difficulties at 
the Institute of Defectology of the USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences. 
The author of many articles and several monographs on the problems of 
special education, he is editor-in-chief of the Soviet monthly review Defec- 
tologia. 
16 
 
education, be understood first and foremost as the incorporation of 
special education into the ordinary education system. This in turn 
implies that the sum of knowledge, habits and skills which the han- 
dicapped children will be asked to acquire must correspond to a par- 
ticular stage in the education of normally developing children. The 
mentally handicapped are an exception in this respect, since, 
because of their mental characteristics, there is a substantial part of 
the curriculum of a normal school which they are incapable of 
assimilating, even in specially created optimal circumstances. 
The preparation of handicapped young people for integration into 
society can be undertaken best in special schools. This is so 
because, in a special school, the process of educating and bringing 
up the child is carried out in its entirety by specially trained profes- 
sional teachers using special equipment and methods, at the speed 
and in the order which are appropriate for each category of han- 
dicap. Where necessary, the curricula of special schools are sup- 
plemented by additional material. The schools have special 
workshops with appropriate equipment and skilled instructors to 
prepare the children for employment. It is only within the framework 
of such schools that it is possible to organize specialized medical 
care, including the necessary systematic remedial work. 
In the USSR (where education is compulsory for all children, in- 
cluding of course the handicapped, medical care is free, and special 
schools and pre-school institutions receive additional funds), ex- 
perience of the development of the special education system, in- 
cluding testing of the feasibility of incorporating individual handicap- 
ped children and individual classes for such children into ordinary 
{"”normal”) schools, has confirmed that the most effective means of 
preparing handicapped children for their integration in society is to 
educate them in a special school. 
This does not preclude the possibility of educating in normal 
schools individual handicapped children who, thanks to their 
abilities, to their level of development, and to the fact that they are 
equipped with special aids, are in a position to assimilate the lessons 
on an equal footing with their normally developing classmates. 
Given those conditions, handicapped young people {with the excep- 
tion of the mentally handicapped) are capable of going on to the 
higher levels of the normal education system (specialized secondary 
schools and higher educational establishments) once they have 
completed their studies at the previous level in a special school 
equivalent to the corresponding stage in that system. 
While a child is being educated in a special school, the necessary 
integration with normally developing children is ensured by means of 
extra-curricular activities {games, excursions, club meetings and

## [Page 17](074741engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 46344: The Integration of the handicapped into society can be best prepared in special schools

  Ph
ot
o 
© 
Th
om
as
 
Be
rg
ma
n,
 
fr
om
 
Fi
ng
er
s 
th
at
 
Se
e,
 
Li
be
r 
pu
bl
is
he
rs
, 
St
oc
kh
ol
m 
various forms of amateur activity, etc.); during vocational training, 
integration is ensured through practical work in a general production 
unit, 
Experience shows that, once they have acquired an adequate level 
of general education and vocational training in a special school, han- 
dicapped young people are capable of working successfully on their 
own. For example, the mentally handicapped prove capable, in ap- 
proximately 50 per cent of cases, of working successfully in jobs for 
which they have received vocational training at school. 
From an analysis of the problem, it can be said that genuine (as 
opposed to mechanical) integration of the handicapped into the 
general educational and social structure is possible, subject to cer- 
tain conditions, 
The first of those conditions is the elimination by legislation of all 
forms of discrimination that may exist against the handicapped in 
society (in the field of law, this concerns particularly the regulations 
governing access to employment). Due allowance must, of course, 
be made for the limitations which the handicap in question imposes. 
Thus, in the USSR secondary education for handicapped children is 
prolonged from two to four years. The majority of the schools are 
boarding schools, and the teaching and educational equipment are 
provided by the State. 
The second is the acquisition by the handicapped (with the excep- 
tion of the mentally handicapped) of a sound education {with no 
omissions) to a level no lower than the State-wide mandatory stan- 
dard for normally developing young people. The Youth Employment 
Commission, which sits on all local government bodies in the USSR, 
is bound to set aside, as a matter of priority, jobs for young han- 
dicapped persons. 
The third is vocational training which will give the handicapped 
the ability to work in industry today. Soviet specialized schools are 
equipped with professional workshops which provide handicapped 
young people with a training in various professions. 
The fourth is the provision for the handicapped of supplementary 
social security benefits which will, for example, give them extra 
funds to meet certain needs associated with their handicap. The 
Soviet State spends from three to five times more on the education 
of a handicapped child in a special school than on a child in an or- 
dinary school. 
The fifth condition, obviously, is to educate normally developing 
children to have a proper attitude to people with handicaps. The 
fulfilment of these conditions gives handicapped young people the 
chance to pursue their studies at the higher level, and, when their 
studies are completed, to find employment in all the spheres of 
economic, cultural and scientific activity. | 
  
  
  
  
  
THE GIMBI SCHOOL FOR 
THE BLIND, ETHIOPIA 
In the early 1970s, a group of Ethiopian 
church leaders, with the assistance of an 
organization for the blind of the Federal 
Republic of Germany, established a school 
for the blind at Gimbi, in eastern Ethiopia. 
The purpose of the school was to show 
that, far from needing charity or pity, the 
blind are fully capable of participating in all 
spheres of life. High priority is therefore 
given at Gimbi to preparing blind pupils for 
life in their communities, teaching them 
 
how to handle social and everyday tasks 
and providing them with vocational 
training. Top photo, arithmetic is taught - 
with the aid of special frames and 
Japanese abaci, a gift from abroad. Centre 
photo, two pupils examine the articles on 
the class “discovery board”. Bottom photo, 
with the aid of a teacher, a pupil measures 
part of the school building using a rule with 
a slide made in the school workshops. 
Photos Unesco. From a slide presentation of a Unesco project 
on “Innovative information and examples of good practice in education 
of the handicapped”. 

## [Page 18](074741engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

ARTICLE 1 
The mentally retarded person has, to the 
maximum degree of feasibility, the same 
rights as other human beings. 
o Is the mentally retarded child provided with the same right to life, 
including the same medical life-saving remedies at birth and later, 
as another child? 
es the basic right to have a caring parent or parent surrogate, 
who provides hoth nurture and advocacy, supported to the same 
extent as for a normal child? Can a retarded child be adopted? 
¢|s the retarded child entitled to education for at least the same 
number of years as other children? 
os the mentally retarded adult permitted to vote unless he or she 
has been specifically found ineligible under a general law specifying 
when the franchise may be denied? 
els the retarded person given the same help and protection by the 
police as are other citizens? 
o Is the retarded person advised of his rights and responsibilities as 
a citizen in ways which he can understand? 
* Are the members of the police force oriented to understand the 
retarded person's behaviour? 
olf charged with a crime, is the retarded person presumed inmo- 
cent untl proven otherwise? Is this presumption accepted by the 
general public and the police? 
Are groups of retarded persons or individuals often refused the 
use of public premises such as playgrounds, buses, restaurants, 
etc., simply on the grounds that they are “different” or perhaps 
disconcerting to ather clientele? 
ls there any kind of “oversight agent” to assure that basic rights 
are enforced? 
ARTICLE 2 
The mentally retarded person has a right to 
proper medical care and physical therapy 
and to such education, training, rehabilita- 
tion and guidance as will enable him to 
develop his ability and maximum potential. 
5 there a matemal and child health service which reaches all ex- 
pectant mothers and their infants with prenatal care, well-baby 
care, and early intervention for infants who appear to be “at risk"? 
e Is the medical care given to infants and children who are known 
to be handicapped of as high quality as is given to children believed 
to be “normal”? 
¢|s the same quality of dental care, immunization, routine screen 
ing for hearing and vision impairments, and the like, provided for 
retarded as well as for other children? Is this quality the same in 
the various clinics, group practices and special residential facilities? 
» Do foster parents who care for retarded persons have access to 
medical care for them of the same quality as they would expect to 
secure for their own family members? Do foster children in fact 
receive equal care? 
# Are retarded persons given doses of tranquilizing drugs in excess 
of those given to persons not considered retarded? Is this dane for 
the convenience of the persons caring for them, to make them 
more docile? 
*Can a mentally retarded person with an ordinary physical 
disorder or disease requiring hospitalization be admitted and 
receive the same quality of care, degree of attention to his comfort 
"and wishes, and the same privileges of having visitors, etc, as other 
citizens having the same illness? 


### 46368: The Rights of mentally retarded persons: how far are they observed?

18 
The rights of menta 
How far are t 
The Declaration on the Rights of Mentally Handicapped Persons, proclaimed by the United Nations General 
Assembly on 20 December 1371, marked an important step forward for the world’s mentally handicapped. 
One of the documents on which the UN Daclaration was based was a “Declaration of General and Special 
Rights of the Mentally Handicapped” which had bean developed and adopted by the International League 
of Socistias for the Mentally Handicapped (ILSMH]. The League (now the International League of Societies 
for persons with Mental Handicap) is a Brussels-based non-governmental organization which was foundsd 
in 1960 to promote the interests of the mentally handicapped. Its membership is drawn from over 69 
countries. A study carried out in co-operation with the League in 1974-1975 reached the conclusion that no 
country in the world had then implemented all the rights set forth in the UN Declaration for any of its 
* Are the rights of the retarded person respected to the extent that 
he is encouraged to participate in decisions about his treatment to 
the full degree of his understanding? Are explanations of conditions 
and propased treatments made to him in language he is most likely 
to understand? If he cannot participate, is his parent or guardian 
fully informed and consulted? 
¢ [f there are free public schools for normal children, are there also 
free school programmes especially suited to the needs of the 
retarded of the same ages which are sufficient in quantity, quality, 
geographical distribution and accessibility? if parents pay tuition for 
normal children, do they have to pay more for education of their 
retarded children? Are there provisions for even the most severely 
and profoundly retarded who live at home? 
* Are the educational provisions for children in residential facilities 
at least as extensive and suitable as for those living in natural 
homes? And vice versa? 
{3 the education pragramme oriented toward developing sacial in- 
dependence {as far as possible) for the retarded person? Are there 
programmes leading to appropriate employment in economically 
valued jobs which actually exist in the economy of the country? 
* Does the fact of having been in a special school or class cause 
discrimination in employment unrelated to the person's actual ahili- 
ty to da the job? 
* Are there programmes for the proper preparation of teachers, 
therapists, counselors and physicians to meet the needs of the pre- 
sent and future services? 
ARTICLE 3 
The mentally retarded person has a right to 
economic security and to a decent standard 
of living. He has a right to perform produc- 
tive work or to engage in any other mean- 
ingful occupation to the fullest possible ex- 
tent of his capabilities. 
¢ Are there harriers laws, attitudes) which prevent a mentally 
retarded person from obtaining a job which he is capable of perfor- 
ming? 
¢ Are there circumstances under which he may be paid less than 
another person for an equal amount of work? 
* Are persons in residential facilities who work regularly at tasks 
whith contribute to the running of the facility (anitorial work, kit- 
chen wark, etc, beyond what would be their share in their own 
homes) paid a fair wage for this work? Are they permitted ta keep 
at least part of their earnings for their personal use (rather than 
paying it all toward the cost of food and shelter at the facility)? 
¢ If a retarded adult is unable to eam at least as much as would be 
considered a “living wage” for another warker, is there a system 
(social insurance, compensation) which permits him to receive a 
regular income from public funds as a matter of right? 
os the social insurance or assistance benefit sufficient, consider- 
ing the additional costs of living which handicaps may impose? 
o Are there family allowances or “invalidity” allowances paid to the 
parents (as well as foster parents} who maintain their child at 
home, to assist them in meeting the extra casts of caring for such 
a child, as compared to a normal child? Are similar allowances 
available for disabled adults? 
# |s there a national health service or a natianal system of paying 
for health care such that the services of hospitals, clinics, physi- 
cians, etc. are either free or available at a cost no greater than a 
nan-handicapped person would pay? 
e|s there adequate insurance (or other atemative) against 
unemployment 7 Does the mentally retarded worker have the same 
rights as other warkers? 
o If there are laws which require or favour the employment of han- 
dicapped persons, are the mentally retarded also covered by these 
provisions? 
if the retarded adult needs further training {vocational or other 
adult education) is it available to him on a basis at least com- 
parable to other persons? 
ARTICLE 4 
‘Whenever possible the mentally retarded 
person should live with his own family or 
with foster parents and participate in dif- 
ferent forms of community life. The family 
with which he lives should receive 
assistance, If care in an institution becomes 
necessary, it should be provided in surroun- 
dings and other circumstances as close as 
possible to those of normal life. 
* Do physicians, teachers and other professional persons who ad- 
vise the family give the family encouragement to keep their child 
with them? Is practical help given to make this more feasible? 
* Are parents and foster parents respected as the people who have 
the first responsibility for the care, nurture and education of their 
retarded child as for their normal child? 
* Do professional people share their knowledge of the child's cond- 
tian and potentials for growth with the parents or foster parents, 
and assist them to understand how to foster growth in accordance 
with such potentials? 
¢ Are community recreation and leisure time facilities open to 
retarded persons? Is any effort made to provide adapted program- 
mes {for example, special swimming lessons}? Are these facilities 
physically accessible (free of architectural barriers) to retarded per- 
sons with physical handicaps? Are the churches and religious 
organizations open and receptive ta retarded persons? Are public 
attitudes accepting of people who are different? 
¢|f residential care is provided other than in natural homes and 
foster family homes, are the facilities homelike? Are they situated 
in residential areas? Are the conditions of kving such as to en- 
courage the retarded residents to become as personally indepen 
dent as possible, and ta make choices for themselves in respect to 
activities, friends, articles of persanal use, clothing, etc.? Does the 
individual have a choice among alternative arrangements? Does 
this include a choice to have a single room or to choose with 
whom he will share quarters? If he is unable to make a choice far 
himself, does his personal representative have an opportunity to do 
sa? 
* Do such facilities accommodate persons of both sexes? Are they 
convenient to local transportation? Do the conditions encourage 
the retarded residents to participate in community activities and to 
behave in as culturally normative a way as is compatible with the 
degree of handicap? 
® Are residential facilities distributed in the various residential 
neighbourhoods so that there is not an excessive concentration in 
any one area and so that the residents have opportunity for infar- 
mal interaction with neighbours and normal peer groups? 
« Are the families of residents actively encouraged to visit frequent: 
ly and informally the retarded member who is living away from 
home? Does he have something to say about when and how he 
visits them? 
*Are steps taken to minimize expressions of prejudice of 
discrimination by neighbours toward retarded persons living 
or moving into apartments, hostels, etc. in the community? 
Are architectural barriers to persons with physical handicaps 
reduced to a minimum? 
* Are there appropriate daytime activities outside the home far per- 
sons who are too handicapped to be employed for wages? 
ARTICLES 
The mentally retarded person has aright toa 
qualified guardian, when this is required, to 
protect his personal well-being and interests.

## [Page 19](074741engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 46368: The Rights of mentally retarded persons: how far are they observed?

lly retarded persons 
hey observed ? 
mentally retarded citizens, nor any of the rights fully for all of its retarded citizens. Consequently, the 
League set up a task group to prepare materials which would help its member societies to initiate steps 
toward the implementation of these rights in their respective countries, the first step being to make a 
careful analysis of the extent to which the rights were currently observed in practice. On this double page, 
the Unesco Courier presents the text of the United Nations Declaration, accompanied by a series of 
searching questions drawn up by the League's task group. We hope that these. questions will draw 
increased attention to the condition of mentally handicapped persons and will help readers to work out for 
themselves how well each major right is being applied in their country. 
o [s there a formal procedure for determining whether a person is 
impaired in such a way as to require a guardian {limited or plenary) 
and does such procedure provide for (1) evidence to be presented 
both for and against the finding, (2) fegal representation for the 
retarded person, (3) adequate professional evaluation of his specific 
capacities and deficits relative to his making appropriate decisions 
for himself in his own interest and according to his own 
preferences? 
#|s the legal procedure to declare a mentally retarded person in 
need of guardianship, or the actual appointment of a guardian, as 
the case may he, costly, or are provisions made for these pro- 
cedures to be carried out without cost to the person or his family? 
® When a person identified as mentally retarded becomes of age, is 
he necessarily presumed to be incompetent? Is he so treated by 
parents and others without objective verification? 
o What happens to a mentally retarded person when he is orphan- 
ed or has no family or is abandoned by his family? Are active in- 
terventions assured in this situation? Are there alternatives to ad- 
mission to an institution? 
e Are there available persons qualified to act as guardians of in- 
dividuals when no appropriate relative or friend offers? 
eAre there public or private agencies legally authorized to in- 
tervene on behalf of mentally retarded persons where their welfare 
is threatened? 
+ Do specific guardianship societies for the mentally retarded exist 
independent of agencies providing care and training? Are there pro- 
grammes to assure the appointment of a guardian (limited or 
plenary) if needed? 
o Are there other forms of public or private advocacy of retarded 
persons apart from or instead of, guardianship? Is there active 
recruitment of volunteers to act as guardians or as “citizen ad- 
vocates”? 
els there any public officer who acts as guardian either in an 
emergency of when no other is available? 
* Are the directors of institutions or other persans who serve the 
retarded professionally considered ineligible to act also as guar- 
dians of their clients/patients? 
# Are there legal provisions to assure that the person entrusted 
with the guardianship of a mentally retarded person does not 
neglect the person or mismanage his funds? Are there special 
follow-up programmes for mentally retarded people who have been 
found in need of guardianship? 
els it possible to separate guardianship of thé person and guar- 
dianship of property? 
* Are there provisions for “limited guardianship”, i.e. assignment of 
decision-making responsibilities to the guardian only to the extent 
necessary in the individual case? 
* [5s a seriously incapacitated person who has some residual capaci 
ty to make decisions allowed to take advantage of that capacity? 
ARTICLE 6 (first part) 
The mentally retarded person must be pro- 
tected from every kind of exploitation, 
degrading treatment and abuse. 
* Do the regular protective services for abandoned, neglected or or- 
phaned children extend equally to retarded children? 
*Do nurses, physicians and social workers show equal zeal in 
reporting cases of child neglect or abuse, ar malnutrition, ete. for 
retarded children as for others? For those in institutions also? 
* Are professional protective workers instructed to deal with the 
retarded and how to do it? 
* Are mentally retarded children or adults exhibited or exposed to 
visitations by members of the pubfic or by the press or professional 
workers under circumstances which would be considered inap- 
propriate in a regular public schoo! or hospital? 
Are retarded pupils given the least desirable classrooms in the 
school buildings, or usually expected to use buildings abandoned 
for use by normal people? 
ols “labeling” applied for purposes other than constructive 
diagnosis and prescriptive programming or scientific study? 
* Are there places where the surroundings of the retarded persons 
are made visibly humiliating such as by the use of bars on win- 
dows or by requiring the retarded persons to be seen by Sdngers 
in inferior clothing, or not clothed? 
* Are reporters or comedians rebuked when or if they use insulting 
language in referring to the mentally retarded, or if they make slur- 
ring jokes? 
ARTICLE 6 (second part) 
..If prosecuted for any offence, he shall 
have a right to due process of taw with full 
recognition being given to his degree of 
mental responsibility. 
¢ |s the mentally retarded person entitled to afl the legal safeguards 
due to any other citizen accused of a crime? 
* [5 the persan who is recognized as mentally retarded and who is 
unable to understand police and judicial procedures affarded proper 
assistance in the exercise of his rights? 
* Do the police receive any training and guidance in the recognition 
and pre-trial handling of mentally retarded persons suspected of 
crime? 
* Does the mentally retarded person have a right to the presence 
of a lawyer, relative, or friend during the course of any police inter- 
rogation? Does he (or his guardian or parent} have an opportunity 
to choose the person who will represent him? 
* Daes he have a right to the guiding hard of counsel (lawyer) at 
every stage of a criminal proceeding? 
* In any prosecutorial proceedings, is a person believed to be men- 
tally retarded entitled to a diagnosis and evaluation of his social 
capability by qualified experts? 
* Does that evaluation include a determination as to whether he is 
"fit to stand trial” fie. mentally competent to understand pro- 
ceedings and assist his counsel in his defence)? 
o If found not fit to stand trial, is the retarded person entitled to a 
reasonably prompt opportunity to have a trial or to have the 
charges against him withdrawn? 
*|f the retarded person (charged with crime but found not fit to 
stand trial} is diverted to civil authorities on grounds of his alleged 
dangerousness, is he entitled to proper legal safeguards to the 
same extent as any other alleged “dangerous” person not accused 
or convicted of any crime? 
At a criminal trial, is the mentally retarded person entitled to the 
defence of "diminished mental responsibility” or similar defence to 
mitigate or excuse from punishment in such cases in which the 
person lacked the mental capacity to form a criminal purpose, or 
had some such degree of incapacity? ; 
* {f convicted of a crime, or if otherwise placed in custody, is the 
mentally retarded person entitled to receive treatment in the least 
restrictive setting suited to his needs, his degree of responsibility 
and the public's safety? 
of placed under custody (except for a specified short period of 
time}, is he entitled to an automatic petiodic review and a right of 
appeal to independent, higher authorities? 
ARTICLE 7 
Whenever mentally retarded persons are 
unable, because of the severity of their han- 
dicap, to exercise all their rights in a mean- 
ingful way or it should become necessary to 
restrict or deny some or all of these rights, 
the procedure used for that restriction or 
denial of rights must contain proper legal 
safeguards against every form of abuse. This 
procedure must be based on an evaluation of 
the social capability of the mentally retarded 
person by qualified experts and must be sub- 
ject to periodic review and the right of 
appeal to higher authorities. 
Before any procedures to deny or restrict rights are initiated, are 
other less restrictive or non-estrictive procedures fully considered, 
such as those which provide him with counseling, advice, or social 
and emotional support for his own decision-making and action? 
* Before any restriction is considered, is an evaluation made of his 
sacial capabilities as related specifically to his ability to exercise the 
right in question having in mind that many citizens are expected to 
make decisions for themselves which do ental risk and which may 
not always have the most desirabie results? if rights are to be res- 
tricted, is the determination of need for such restriction preceded 
by a careful evaluation of the retarded person's specific capabilities 
which is carried aut by experts in the evaluation of social compe- 
tence in persons who are mentally retarded? Is the expert evalua- 
tion interdisciplinary? 
o When a person is found incapable of exercising certain rights, is 
this finding based on essential protection, i.e. is the restriction 
necessary to protect the individual himself or others from signifi 
cant harm? 
Is any restriction which is imposed limited only to the specific 
activities (.e. exercise of specific rights) in respect to which the 
person has been found incapacitated, leaving to him those rights he 
may prudently be allowed to exercise? 
«If some restriction is so required, is the restriction carried outin a 
way which imposes the minimum degree of constraint needed to 
accomplish its purpose? {.e. fimited guardianship rather than ple- 
nary guardianship; supervision rather than committment, commu- 
nity based rather than institutional care, if possible, etc.) 
Does the retarded person, his family, or other interested person 
receive prior notice in advance of any serious restrictive procee- 
dings? 
els the person, his family, or his friends entitled to the assistance 
of advocates to act on behalf of the mentally retarded person in 
any proceedings? 
o [oes the retarded person have access to a qualified representa- 
tive (attorney, advocate) whose interests do not conflict with his 
own? 
¢ Are the opportunities to ask for reconsideration ar independent 
review of any restriction, both at the me imposed and later, 
appropriate to the degree and duration of the restriction? Is there 
also automatic periodic review? 
* If the rights involved are fundamental ones, are the proceedings 
judicial in character? 
* Does the mentally retarded person or his representative have 
opportunities of submitting information to the tribunal, appearing 
before it, and challenging information submitted by others? 
os the retarded person or his representative informed of his right 
fo appeal and given assistance, legal and otherwise, in exercising 
that right? 
«Does the retarded person {or his natural advocate, e.g. relative, 
general guardian) have a right to select the attorney or other per- 
sons who may represent him in such proceedings? 
Congress Proceedings. 7th World Congress of 
the ILSMH on Mental Handicap. Edited by 
Lebenshilfe fur Behinderte, Qsterreichischer 
Dachverhand © 1978 ILSMH 
19

## [Page 20](074741engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

Special schools 
  


### 46357: Our task is to bring the retarded into the community from which they have been excluded

or integrated education? 
II. ‘Our task 
is to bring 
the retarded 
into the community 
from which 
they have been 
excluded’ 
by Marten Soder 
T the end of the 1960s, normaliza- 
tion and integration became 
widely accepted watchwords for 
those concerned with the welfare of mental- 
ly handicapped children. According to this 
new approach, the mentally retarded were 
to enjoy the same conditions as other 
children, living with them and attending 
their schools. This outlook was largely a 
reaction to the formerly prevalent view 
which had resulted in the segregation of 
mentally retarded youngsters in special 
schools and institutions. 
The integrationist viewpoint contrasts 
sharply with its predecessor not only on the 
measures to be undertaken on behalf of the 
handicapped but on other important points, 
such as the definition of what constitutes a 
handicap. According to the segregationist 
thesis, mental retardation is an absolute, 
unalterable defect and nothing can be done 
about it. Mentally retarded people are defec- 
tive and the appropriate action is to separate 
them from the rest of society. Segregation is 
in any case part of the natural order of 
things. 
The integrationist position, on the other 
hand, stresses that handicaps are relative, in 
the sense that they only exist in relation to a 
MARTEN SODER, Swedish sociologist working 
with the Swedish Centre for Working Life, has 
been involved for the last 8 years with questions 
concerning the mentally handicapped in Sweden. 
He has also participated as an expert in con- 
ferences sponsored by the United Nations and 
OECD. His doctoral dissertation, Organization of 
Services, /deologies of Care and Integration”, is 
being presented at the University of Uppsala this 
month. 
20 
given environment. This approach is coup- 
led with a more dynamic, optimistic belief in 
the potential of mentally handicapped peo- 
ple than the static pessimism of the segrega- 
tionist view. It holds that integration is the 
“natural” condition, and that segregation is 
caused by social and political decisions to 
separate the handicapped from the non- 
handicapped. Such decisions attach a label 
to the handicapped which stigmatizes them 
and limits their possibilities of living a “nor- 
mal’ life. 
Since segregation is created by social and 
political decisions, so the integrationist 
argument continues, then integration can be 
brought about when the authorities take 
measures which separate the handicapped 
as little as possible from the non- 
handicapped. In schools one might imagine 
a kind of sliding scale of integration whereby 
a handicapped child in an ordinary class is 
“more integrated’’ than he or she would be 
in a special class, while a special class form- 
ing part of an ordinary school is ‘more in- 
tegrated” than a special school. 
In Sweden, integration of the mentally 
handicapped has taken the form of ‘‘facility 
integration”, whereby special schools have 
been assigned classrooms in ordinary school 
buildings, as opposed to “individual integra- 
tion’’ whereby individual handicapped pupils 
are taught in ordinary classes. During the 
1970s, facility integration took place at a 
rapid rate, and today over 90 per cent of 
Sweden's special school classes are in- 
tegrated on ordinary school premises. 
Before examining how successful this ap- 
proach has been, let us first examine the 
  
idea of integration and its implications, 
especially as they appear in the Swedish 
context. 
Many writers who have studied the ques- 
tion have made a sharp distinction between 
a superficial, “organized” form of mixing 
handicapped and non-handicapped persons 
and a more genuine and psychologically 
meaningful integration which they often 
refer to as ‘social integration”. The latter 
assumes that social relations will be 
established between the two groups, and 
some writers also stress how important it is 
in this respect that handicapped persons 
should feel a sense of security in their rela- 
tions with others. 
This distinction calls into question a fun- 
damental assumption of the integrationist 
position, the belief that handicapped per- 
sons are segregated from the rest of the. 
community primarily by the special educa- 
tional measures taken on their behalf. But 
surely this ignores the possibility that 
segregationist mechanisms may also exist in 
the “normal” environments in which the 
handicapped person may be placed. Here 
the integrationist viewpoint runs the risk of 
romanticizing the real world by regarding it 
as a welcoming community in which de- 
viants are automatically accepted in a ‘‘nor- 
mal’ context when decisions are taken to 
place them there. In the desire to abolish 
segregative measures taken by the 
authorities, the segregative measures of the 
real world may be overlooked. 
This leads to another point on which the 
integrationist position is vulnerable to 
criticism. This is its assumption that the in-

## [Page 21](074741engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 46357: Our task is to bring the retarded into the community from which they have been excluded

-
r
 
HA 
tegration of mentally retarded children in 
school is somehow synonymous with what 
sociologists call their "societal integration’, 
their fuli integration into society as 
adults— or at any rate that there is no incon- 
sistency between these two processes. But 
school, it might be argued, is not the same 
as society. Integration into the school, 
therefore, cannot be the same as integration 
into society. In response to this it is often 
said that integration into school constitutes 
a means to the end of societal integration. 
One way of testing whether this is so in 
practice is to examine the avowed aims of 
schools regarding their mentally retarded 
pupils. In the case of Sweden the results of 
such an enquiry are illuminating. According 
to Swedish law, special schools for han- 
dicapped children aim’ to “promote the 
development of the pupils into harmonious 
people and into competent and responsible 
adults.” In this respect there is no 
divergence between the aims of the special 
school and those of the ordinary com- 
prehensive school. However, other texts 
relating to the curricula in the two types of 
school tell a different story. 
In the special school, the teacher is to 
“endeavour to promote [the pupil's] per- 
sonal development”, whereas in the com- 
prehensive school the aim is to ‘endeavour 
to promote his personal maturity into a free, 
independent and harmonious person.” 
Whereas the special school sets out to 
“develop all aspects of the pupil, encourage 
alertness, provide motivation for study and 
work and promote emotional balance”, the 
pupils at the comprehensive school are to 
Photo © Thomas Bergman, from Who Understands Us?, Liber publishers, Stockholm 
"prepare themselves for their roles as active 
citizens in the society of tomorrow.’ In the 
special school, each pupil is to be brought to 
~ "develop his various qualities and come to 
terms with personal problems’’, whereas his 
peers at the comprehensive school are "in 
the long term to be a positively creative 
power in the development of society.” 
This comparison between the aims of or- 
dinary comprehensive school education and 
those of special school education makes it 
clear that in Sweden at any rate the aims of 
the special school centre more on the in- 
dividual than those of the ordinary school. 
The special school sets out to produce well- 
adjusted and “harmonious” mentally retard- 
ed adults who are able to cope with their 
personal problems. The ordinary school sets 
out to produce active, productive and 
critical citizens who are capable of full par- 
ticipation-in society. Given this disparity of 
aims, it is hard to see how integrating 
special schools into the ordinary education 
system can lead necessarily to societal in- 
tegration. 
Another problem arising from the integra- 
tionist approach is its emphasis on social 
goals at the expense of educational ones. 
For although special education may not aim 
at the societal integration of the handicap- 
ped, this does not mean that it has no aims 
as regards the pupil's adult life. in order to 
“promote the development of the pupils into 
harmonious people and competent and 
responsible adults”, special demands are 
made in the special school, such as "the 
need to gear teaching to the individual level 
and special characteristics of each pupil in 
  
o
d
 
S
a
s
.
 
various areas of learning and training”. The 
special measures required consist of 
creating smaller groups for tuition and pro- 
viding more resources than are usual in the 
ordinary school system. 
But these demands for specially arranged 
learning situations always produce segrega- 
tion in some form or other. And so if we are 
seeking to promote social integration, these 
educational demands must be questioned. 
Here there is an obvious conflict between 
the aims of social integration and the educa- 
tional demands ensuing from the need to 
produce ‘‘competent and responsible 
adults”. The integrationist view often 
obscures this conflict of aims. 
The conflict between educational and 
social goals has not yet become acute in 
Sweden, because integration has taken the 
form of facility integration. This is one of the 
conclusions which may be drawn from a 
large-scale project to evaluate the integra- 
tion of special schools for the handicapped 
into the ordinary school system which was 
recently carried out by the department of 
sociology at the University of Uppsala. A 
number of different concepts, each describ- 
ing a different kind of integration, were for- 
mulated as a starting point for our studies. 
We differentiated between four forms of in- 
tegration: physical, functional, social and 
societal. 
By physical integration we mean the 
reduction of the physical distance between 
the mentally retarded and the non-retarded. 
By functional integration we mean the 
reduction of the functional distance bet- 
ween the two groups when they use dif- 
21   )

## [Page 22](074741engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 46357: Our task is to bring the retarded into the community from which they have been excluded

) ferent equipment and resources. Functional 
integration is therefore a question of the 
joint utilization of resources. 
Social integration entails a reduction in 
the social distance between the two groups. 
Social distance implies both lack of contact 
and the psychological feeling of being cut 
off. The mentally retarded are socially in- 
tegrated if they form part of a community 
with non-retarded persons, come into 
regular and spontaneous contact with them, 
and feel themselves to be a natural part of 
the group. 
Societal integration refers to adults, as in- 
dicated above, and signifies that the mental- 
ly retarded have, as adults, the same access 
to resources as others, the same opportuni-- 
ty to influence their own situation, have a 
productive working role, and form part of a 
social community with others. 
By using these terms we were able to 
describe various aspects of integration in 
terms of physical distances and of the extent 
to which resources were jointly used by both 
handicapped and non-handicapped. This 
conceptual framework also enabled us to 
bring into focus the problems involved in 
relating physical and functional integration 
on the one hand, and social and societal in- 
tegration on the other. And this, as shown 
by the above critique of the integrationist 
view, is a matter of particular urgency. 
In Sweden, facility integration has first 
and foremost taken the form of physical in- 
tegration. To some extent it has also involv- 
ed the special school and the ordinary 
school making use of joint resources. Facili- 
ty integration has thus been associated with 
a degree of functional integration. 
Any more advanced form of functional in- 
tegraiton in the shape of co-operation at the 
teaching level has, however, been a relative- 
ly rare occurrence. With respect to social in- 
tegration, in general it can be said that this 
has not taken place. 
Thus one of the big question marks con- 
cerning the integration of special schools in 
Sweden is why so little co-operation and 
social contact has developed from the 
“base” formed by facility integration. For 
such co-operation is usually sporadic, con- 
sisting of joint activities of an exceptional 
nature, 
Nevertheless, schoo! staff were con- 
sistently favourably disposed towards full- 
scale co-operation between the two types of 
school. From a study of fifty integrated 
schools, it emerged that approximately 80 
per cent of teachers in both the ordinary and 
the special school were in favour of co- 
operation in one of the practical subjects. 
Even though there may be a difference bet- 
ween expressing a favourable attitude on a 
questionnaire and accepting the conse- 
quences in practice, it would seem to be a 
simplification to blame the low occurrence 
of co-operation on lack of interest on the 
part of the teachers. 
Perhaps one reason why there has not 
been more co-operation is that co-operation 
has been regarded only as a subsidiary goal 
of integration. Instead, the emphasis has 
been laid on promoting physical integration 
and the co-ordination of certain resources. 
There has been surprisingly little discussion 
of how facility integration affects the actual 
educational work within the special school. 
It is difficult to make any general 
assessments about social integration in the 
22 
facility-integrated school. But if we were to 
attempt to characterize the social relations 
between special school and ordinary school 
pupils, they might best be described as “‘ac- 
cepting indifference’’. The mentally retarded 
pupils were, as a rule, accepted by their 
peers in the ordinary school. There was vir- 
tually never any systematic harassment or 
bullying. But more positive relations were 
also uncommon. Facility integration has not 
resulted in any actual social integration. 
However, the “normal” school environ- 
ment is in itself poorly suited to social in- 
tegration of the mentally retarded. Social 
contact between pupils is largely along class 
lines, and contact between school classes at 
different levels is uncommon, The lack of in- 
tegration of mentally retarded pupils must 
be seen in this light. 
Another factor which renders social in- 
tegration more difficult is that the special 
schools have such large catchment areas. 
“Normal” children attend the same school 
as their friends at home, at least at the 
primary and middle levels. By and large the 
same children mix together at school and in 
their leisure time at home. Mentally retarded 
pupils often have long journeys to school. 
The non-retarded friends they have at home 
go to other schools, and their friends at 
school live near the school. This is a fact 
which also makes it more difficult for men- 
tally retarded pupils in the same class to 
meet during their leisure time. 
The conflict between educational and 
social goals really comes to a head, 
however, where individual integration is in- 
volved—when the mentally retarded pupils 
go into ordinary classes. This is generally 
regarded as the most far-reaching form of 
integration. Although the underlying 
assumption is that putting a handicapped 
child in an ordinary class automatically leads 
to him or her becoming ‘’socially 
integrated’, in a sense integration of this 
type also means that the mentally retarded 
pupil is confronted with the segregative 
mechanisms existing in the class. 
At the same time, when individual in- 
tegration is pursued, the conflict between 
the possible gains that might be made in 
social relations and the educational 
demands made by the curriculum becomes 
manifest. The “normal” school environment 
articulates and puts a premium on those 
very intellectual achievements which the 
mental disability of the retarded pupil does 
not allow him to produce. As in the case of 
social segregation, it is the "normal’’ school 
environment which operates in a segregative 
manner. 
Dictionary definitions of the term integra- 
tion tell us that it means uniting separate 
parts in a whole. According to the integra- 
tionist view, the detachment of the mentally 
retarded as a ‘“‘separate part’ arises as a 
result of social and political decisions and 
the special educational measures which are 
taken by the authorities. Qur task, uniting 
the parts into a whole, consists in bringing 
the retarded into the community from which 
they have been excluded. But this view 
disregards the fact that segregation takes 
place in our society and in our schools ir- 
respective of such official action: the educa- 
tional and social measures of segregation 
are a part of the reality of the “normal” 
school. The problems in what we have call- 
ed the integrationist view arise from a 
refusal to accept that this is the case. 
Hl Marten Sdder 
  
   a HR — 
3 Photos Unesco. From a slide presentation of a Unesco project 
on “Innovative information and examples of good practice 
in education of the handicapped". 

## [Page 23](074741engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

1 Francesco (standing beside blackboard) is a victim 
of Down's Syndrome and suffers from mental 
retardation and serious visual and speech 
impairment. He is one of the 70,000 Italian 
handicapped pupils who attend ordinary schools. 
He is 12 years old and attends a first grade class in 
a lower secondary school. A pupil seated at the 
teacher's desk is explaining to the class the work 
he has done on the blackboard. When Francesco 
starts to interrupt him a girl goes up to Francesco 
and persuades him to go back to his place. She 
does this by touching him and showing 
acceptance and affection. The teacher, who is 
sitting at the back of the class, does not intervene. 
2 Francesco also participates in manual activities. 
Here he is seen holding a cardboard box steady 
while a classmate cuts it out. They are making 
cylinders of different sizes for a geometry lesson. 
3 Realizing that he is unable to follow the outline of 
a drawing correctly, Francesco asks a classmate 
to help him. He takes the girl's finger, puts it on 
his paper and says: "You are the train and | am 
the bicycle that runs after the train. “The girl 
traces the outline of the drawing with her finger 
while Francesco follows her finger with his pencil. 
4 Using a mattress, Francesco has built himself a 
“hut” to which he withdraws when he wants to 
be alone. He goes to the hut to read while the rest 
of the class continues with the lesson. 
Living and learning together 
5 Just over three years ago the primary and 
secondary schools at Munkhiatteskolan, near 
Malmd, Sweden, began to integrate handicapped 
pupils into their ordinary classes. They now have a 
total of twenty handicapped children, with two or 
three in each class. Specially adapted vehicles 
transport the handicapped pupils to and from 
school. Some pupils have up to an hour's journey 
in each direction. 
6 Although some modifications have been made to 
the school buildings to enable handicapped pupils 
to get around more easily, it has not been 
necessary to make any major alterations to the 
classrooms. The disabled pupils are, however, 
provided with desks adapted to their special needs 
and, where necessary, with aids such as electric 
typewriters and reading lamps equipped with 
magnifying glasses. 
7 From the start, the handicapped pupils were very 
well received by their classmates and relations 
between them have remained extremely good, 
both in the classroom and during leisure periods 
when they can often be seen playing together, 
8 A gymnastics department has been created at 
Munkhitteskolan to enable the handicapped 
pupils to follow courses prescribed for them by 
specialists. They also take part in the ordinary 
physical training classes even if they cannot 
participate in all the exercises. 
  
  

## [Page 24](074741engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 46369: Communities that care

Communities 
that care 
by Mahfoud Boucebci 
the term may suggest to the con- 
trary, a distinct, separate form of 
education designed to produce social ““out- 
siders”. Nor is it a single, monolithic activi- 
ty, for the notion of ‘‘mental handicap” 
covers a wide variety of conditions. 
Special education must give permanent 
consideration to the place of the mentally 
handicapped in society today and tomor- 
row. When choosing an educational system 
for the handicapped, preference should be 
given to the one which is least likely to . 
relegate them to a social backwater. As it 
happens, this type of system is best suited 
to the conditions and resources of the 
developing countries. 
Furthermore, it would be very dangerous 
to establish a system of special education 
that excludes the family, for unless the fami- 
ly is made fully aware of the problems and 
allowed to participate in the care and train- 
ing process, the disabled will rapidly become 
a marginal group completely alienated from 
and rejected by the community. 
On the basis of these principles, various 
models of special education may be drawn 
up for the different age-groups. For very 
young children, the largest and most 
neglected group in the Third World, any 
break with traditional ways of stimulating 
and caring for infants must be avoided. The 
fact that specialists are available should not 
cut the child off from its mother or family. 
Educators working with disabled children 
must thus be thoroughly familiar with the 
most widely used traditional methods of 
child care, as well as the place of the han" 
dicapped in the traditional culture. The first 
risk to be parried is that when an infant is 
found to be handicapped it will be rejected 
by its family. 
Motor-sensory stimulation sessions in - 
which several mothers and children take part 
have proved a practical and useful method, 
for they develop a relationship based directly 
on traditional community relations which is 
a source of encouragement and mutual 
assistance. 
Two lines of approach have been 
developed in work with young handicapped 
children in the Algiers area. 
The first involves groups of children of the 
same size or at the same level of intellectual 
development. initially, children with serious 
human relations problems or those deprived 
of autonomy of movement are excluded 
from these groups. But as a general rule 
every effort is made to provide care and 
training for disabled children in nursery 
schools for “normal” children. 
Sie education is not, whatever 
_ 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Sy
lv
ia
 
Qu
ij
an
o 
Go
nz
al
ez
, 
Mi
nu
sv
al
, 
Ma
dr
id
 
 

## [Page 25](074741engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 46369: Communities that care

Information campaigns have helped to 
make the staff of these institutions aware of 
the plight of handicapped children, and it 
has been possible to place them alongside 
normal children. We have been able to do 
this with certain children suffering from 
Down's syndrome, certain deaf children, 
children suffering from motor cerebral defi- 
ciency, epileptic children whose fits have 
been brought under control, and epileptics 
with or without slight mental de- 
ficiency or a motor-neurological deficiency. - 
Placing these children in a “normal” en- 
vironment was not easy in the early days. 
There were very few nursery schools and re- 
quests for admission were many. At the 
same time, failure to recognize the problems 
raised by handicaps, as well as false ideas 
and prejudices reinforced the often negative 
ideas of some of the teachers. However, in- 
formation sessions organized during the pre- 
school teachers’ training courses helped to 
make the staff aware of these problems and 
to dedramatize the situation. 
But the fact remains that the admission of 
disabled children to ordinary nursery schools 
is only successful with certain categories of 
disability, for there is always a risk that 
disabled children will be left out of things. If 
they are too abnormal or raise too many 
problems they will be rejected, with 
traumatic consequences both for them and 
for their families. 
For the other categories of pre-school 
children we have adopted a second ap- 
proach in the form of experimental "district 
centres”. These centres do not have 
elaborate facilities, they are near the 
children’s homes, and they call for participa- 
tion on the part of the parents. The key to 
this type of education is continuity as the 
child grows older, either in the same institu- 
tion or in another school where the basic 
principles of the district centre continue to 
be applied. 
The parents must be involved in 
educating their child, and there must be an 
incentive for them to join in the activities of 
the various associations and societies for the 
handicapped. Where these possibilities do 
not exist, parents should be kept informed 
of the many ways in which they can help 
their child, for paradoxically such oppor- 
tunities are often neglected. The family can 
be told what progress to expect in the short, 
medium and long term, and informed about 
the possible advantages of certain types of 
specialized training, or about whether 
medication is required. One vital point that 
needs to be stressed to the parents is that 
progress may take time, perhaps even a very 
long time. 
Finally, we believe that some types of 
handicap should always be accommodated 
within the normal educational system—for 
example, a class for blind children in an or- 
dinary school. 
The role of institutions such as district 
centres is decisive for young children and 
adolescents who are ‘not capable of 
benefiting from a scholastic education. 
These children can only be treated if the 
family and community are prepared to ac- 
cept the handicap and recognize that it is 
impossible for them to attend school. The 
day centres, with relatively small premises 
and simple but functional equipment, can 
each accommodate between thirty and forty 
local children aged four to thirteen. Children 
with multiple handicaps are admitted provid- 
ed that they are affected with minor motor 
or sensory handicaps connected with men- 
tal deficiency. Bedridden children and those 
with serious personality disorders are not ac- 
cepted. Each centre has between eight and 
twelve teachers. : 
The centres do not aim to provide an 
academic type of education. Their activities 
. are directed towards educating the child in 
- the broadest sense, and all their activities are 
in some way educative. They include: 
e training for daily life, such as washing 
and dressing oneself; household chores 
such as laundry, cooking or gardening; . 
® activities designed to promote better 
knowledge of the environment including the 
discovery of nature: walks in the district, 
visits to the local market, to a public garden, 
a festival or cultural event, a swimming 
pool, pony club, the beach and the moun- 
tains. Through experiences like these the 
child is helped to make progress and ac- 
quires greater independence and ease in 
social relationships; 
¢ educational games, weaving, carpentry, 
sewing and odd jobs about the house which 
are designed to develop sensory and manual 
skills; 
* self-expression activities such as playing 
with water, sand, clay, paints and puppets, 
as well as music (singing and playing in- 
struments) and psycho-motor activities; 
¢ the rest of the child's life at the centre 
— breaks, meals, rest periods, etc. 
This broad range of activities gradually 
leads to improvements in the childs speech, 
in the level of his practical and motor- 
sensory intelligence, and the integration of 
his bodily functions, and helps to develop 
his capacity for observation and expression 
so that he can participate more actively in 
the life of the community. 
Pre-school and school activities that re- 
quire abstract thought are only introduced 
for children who possess this capacity. The 
methods used are always based on concrete 
experience and take account of each child's 
individual learning rhythms and capabilities 
as well as his staying power. 
Each pupil's progress is recorded in detail 
on special attainment and observation 
cards. This enables the teacher to pinpoint 
each child's specific problems and needs 
and to adjust his tuition accordingly. 
The parents have an opportunity to meet 
the educational team every morning and 
evening and are often in contact with the 
psychologists. Regular parents’ meetings 
are also organized, and as members of the 
parents’ association the parents are en- 
couraged to play an active role. 
The atmosphere in the centres is generally 
very relaxed. Children, teachers and other 
staff members form one big family within 
which the child can develop in a secure en- 
vironment and gradually become capable of 
more sustained effort. The centre may offer 
advantages over the home environment—in 
particular nourishing meals provided 
free—which help to promote the child's 
overall development. 
Whatever the stage at which responsibili- 
ty is assumed for a child, the objective is 
that he should be integrated into the com- 
munity. And so, to avoid any break in the 
training process, vocational training centres 
and workshops should be planned right 
from the start. 
The social situation in the developing 
countries and the vast number of children 
and young people in relation to the popula- 
tion as a whole make it imperative to provide 
care and training for these age groups. 
But the structures outlined here and the 
approaches on which they are based should 
not be exclusive: other approaches should 
also be fostered. Craft work seems to be one 
of the most promising types of activity 
—with its possibilities for developing human 
relations— open to certain categories of the 
mentally handicapped. 
The handicapped are still excluded from 
many cultural and leisure activities, especial 
ly in sport, where much remains to be done 
to make people aware of the needs of the 
handicapped. Swimming, for example, is 
one of the most beneficial activities for some 
handicapped persons, but paradoxically a 
handicap often rules out admittance to 
swimming pools. 
Generally speaking, the independent 
African States have retained the main bulk 
of earlier legislation concerning the han- 
dicapped, and this is now outmoded. If 
jurists and sociologists could collaborate 
with educators and medical and health of- 
ficials in the study of these problems, then it 
would be possible to review existing legisla- 
tion and make further provisions for preven- 
tion, care and treatment of the mentally han- 
dicapped and the furtherance of their rights 
to special education and to their rightful 
place in the community. | 
 
MAHFOUD BOUCEBCL, of Algeria, is professor 
of psychiatry at the university of Algiers and 
department head at the university psychiatric 
clinic. He has published many articles related to 
problems of mental deficiency and, more 
specifically, to the question of mental health in 
developing countries, A synthesis of his work ap- 
peared in Psychiatrie, Société et Développement 
(“Psychiatry, Society and Development”) 
Alg.ers, 1979. 
25

## [Page 26](074741engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 46372: Sounds from silence: China's deaf children find a voice

ounds from silence 
China’s deaf children find a voice 
by Li Hongtai and Shen Jiayin 
and thus fail to develop the power of speech, were subjected 
to widespread discrimination and deprived of the chance to be 
educated. 
Today attitudes have totally changed. Education is provided for 
the deaf in schools whose target is to help their students to achieve 
all-round development. . 
Methods also have evolved. In the old days most teaching was 
done by means of gestures and facial expressions. This hindered the 
development of the students’ ability to handle language and express 
their ideas. 
To improve the education of the deaf, the Ministry of Education of 
the Centra! People’s Government decided in 1954 to launch pilot 
speech teaching projects in certain schools for the deaf in order to 
develop the pupils’ oral ability. Two years later, it was decided to 
start oral teaching in all schools for the deaf throughout the country, 
The basis of this speech teaching is the Chinese Phonetic 
Alphabet. This alphabet has a comparatively small number of letters 
and is worked out in accordance with the phonemes, or speech 
sounds, of putonghua, the common speech of the Chinese 
language. It makes it easy for deaf children to learn pronunciation. 
The teaching materials used combine the study of transliteration 
I old China the severely deaf, who cannot hear spoken language 
with recognition of characters and words. The children learn to - 
recognize characters and words and study the language on the basis 
of the learning of pronunciation. This approach overcomes the 
obstacles caused by the fact that the same Chinese character can 
represent a number of different sounds. 
Whenever a new letter is introduced in the textbook, it is il- 
lustrated with diagrams and pictures of lip-rounding. The teacher 
demonstrates the position of the tongue and the lip movements 
while the pupils use mirrors to watch and imitate. Some letters are 
aspirated, some are not. The pupil is made to feel the difference by 
placing the back of his or her hand in front of the mouth to feel for 
the air flow. Some sounds are made with the vocal cords vibrating, 
others are not. The pupil learns to distinguish between them by 
touching the teacher's throat or his own. In a word, the pupil's 
senses of sight and touch, as well as his sixth sense, are brought ful- 
ly into play to help him or her to grasp the correct way to articulate 
each letter, 
The thinking of deaf children is necessarily linked to visual images 
and acts. It is thus essential that the teachers demonstrate real ob- 
jects and use their histrionic gifts to the utmost. It is equally impor- 
tant that the meaning of the words should not be misunderstood. In 
the case of words or phrases that are difficult to define clearly, pupils 
are encouraged to apply them to real-life situations. 
It is mainly through lip-reading that the pupils learn new things. 
However, this does not work with certain sounds such as ge, ke, 
and he. It is hard to distinguish between these sounds unless lip- 
reading is backed up by other means. So far the major tool used for 
this is the hand alphabet formulated in accordance with the Chinese 
Phonetic Alphabet. This alphabet is part of the syllabus in schools 
for the deaf because it can be used to express all the syllables in the 
LI HONGTAI, of China, is dean of Peking’s No.1 school for the deaf. He 
helped to produce the first set of Chinese textbooks for the deaf, and is a 
correspondent with two periodicals for the deaf, The Deaf in China and 
Newsletters for the Education of the Deaf. 
SHEN JIAYIN, of China, teaches at Peking’s No. 4 school for the deaf, and 
was formerly on the staff of the Shanghai school for blind children. She is 
also concerned in the editing of textbooks used in schools for the blind, deaf 
and dumb, and a correspondent with The Deaf in China and Newsletters for 
the Education of the Deaf. 
26 
in
a 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Th
e 
Na
ti
on
al
 
Co
mm
is
si
on
 
to
 
Un
es
co
 
of
 
th
e 
Pe
op
le
’s
 
Re
pu
bl
ic
 
o 
  
Chinese language. By looking at the diagram, forming the hand 
alphabet with his fingers, and uttering the sound with his oral cavity, 
the pupil is using three sense-organs at a time. This imprints what he 
is learning more firmly on his memory and also helps to reinforce his 
grasp of ways of articulation. 
Nevertheless, this hand alphabet has certain drawbacks when it is 
used to spell out a syllable which is usually made up of three 
phonemes. This means making a large number of finger 
movements, which might be acceptable when spelling out words, 
but not when it comes to sentences. Accordingly, some teachers 
began to think of the possibility of using a manual alphabet to spell 
out syllables instead of single phonemes. In collaboration with 
specialists from the Chinese Written Language Reform Research in- 
stitute, we have designed a system for finger-spelling syllables one 
at a time in which both hands are used (see diagram this page). 
A pilot programme using these ‘manual syllables’ is being carried 
out in a small number of schools, and the preliminary results suggest 
that they are easy to use. The changes in lip and finger movements 
are closely co-ordinated, and sign language thus becomes more sim- 
ple, expressive and vivid in supplementing speech. 
Thus the approach to speech training for deaf pupils which we are 
now beginning to systematize is based on oral teaching. Other forms 
of expressing language are used in support, and training in the use 
of the written language is reinforced. 
BM Li Hongtai and Shen Jiayin

## [Page 27](074741engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 46372: Sounds from silence: China's deaf children find a voice

P
h
o
t
o
s
 
Li
u 
Q
u
a
n
j
u
 
©
 
Th
e 
Na
ti
on
al
 
C
o
m
m
i
s
s
i
o
n
 
to
 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
of
 
th
e 
Pe
op
le
’s
 
Re
pu
bl
ic
 
of
 
Ch
in
a 
  
Eloquent hands enable a deaf Chinese youth to bring a smile to the face of his 
deaf companion. In China manual systems of communication {opposite page) 
are used in support of oral teaching for the deaf, to help them overcome their . 
additional handicap of speech difficulties. 
21

## [Page 28](074741engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 46395: Self-reliance and the right to work

  
Ph
ot
o 
In
te
rn
at
io
na
l 
La
bo
ur
 
Of
fi
ce
, 
Ge
ne
va
 
Blind workers assembling books in Braille in an Indian publishing house. 

## [Page 29](074741engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 46395: Self-reliance and the right to work

Self-reliance 
“and the right to work 
major purpose of the 1981 Interna- 
tional Year of Disabled Persons is to 
turn the spotlight on the handicapp- 
ed and help remove the prejudice and 
discrimination which bar their way to “full 
participation and equality’ —the UN theme 
for the Year. 
In most situations, these two goals can- 
not be achieved unless the disabled get the 
opportunity to become self-supporting and 
to participate in active economic life. 
ft means training and jobs. This, of 
course, is easier said than done, for the alar- 
ming fact is that despite all efforts and ap- 
peals for aid, the outlook for handicapped 
people is as bleak as ever. 
The majority of the world's disabled —300 
million—live in developing countries which 
also have a backlog of over 300 million 
jobless or underemployed citizens. 
To contemplate the possibility of placing 
many disabled in the open labour market is 
for most, therefore, just a pipe dream. 
Consequently, the International Labour 
Organisation's main efforts have been 
directed towards the setting up of produc- 
tion workshops on small-scale industry 
lines, small business co-operatives and self- 
employment schemes for Third World 
disabled. 
Nine in every ten of these people live in 
isolated rural communities and, for them, 
the ILO’s efforts are directed to teaching 
practical skills for everyday life rather than a 
specific trade for which there may be little 
demand, if any. 
In the industrialized countries, the current 
economic slump has thrown some 17 million 
people out of work, but no group is having a 
tougher time in the tight job market than 
disabled men and women who often are the 
first fired and last hired. 
ED. SACKSTEIN, of the United States of 
America, is deputy chief of the Vocational 
Rehabilitation Branch of the International Labour 
Organisation, Geneva. A specialist in vocational 
rehabilitation training and psychotherapy, he has 
special responsibility for developing vocational 
rehabilitation programmes for the mentally ill and 
for drug-dependent persons as well as for work 
on the prevention of alcoholism and drug addic- 
tion at the workplace. 
by Ed. Sackstein 
In some places, their rate of unemploy- 
ment is twice that of able-bodied persons. 
Because of sex bias, the situation is doubly 
difficult for disabled females. 
Experience has shown that protective 
legislation which aims at promoting employ- 
ment of disabled people can help but that it 
is no panacea. In the United Kingdom, for 
example, the quota system has proved to be 
relatively ineffective in a depressed labour 
market situation. 
Designated employment and reserved 
jobs programmes, even if implemented, pro- 
vide little relief. Moreover, the jobs in ques- 
tion are usually menial, low-paid and of low 
status. 
ILO specialists say that legislation concer- 
ning employment of the disabled would 
have a better chance to be effective if, in- 
stead of being coercive, it were more flexible 
and formulated in such a way as to stimulate 
private and government initiative. 
Some countries pay grants and 
allowances to employers who offer training 
to disabled persons at the workplace. This is 
a positive development which should be en- 
couraged further, together with financial in- 
centives to make ergonomic and other job 
adaptations that facilitate and increase the 
performance of disabled workers. 
In Sweden, the so-called “adjustment 
groups’’, sponsored jointly by management 
and labour, are helping in many enterprises 
to secure alternative employment for dis- 
abled people. Similar programmes are 
underway in Poland and Norway. 
In other forms of vocational rehabilitation 
training, it is essential that the skills being 
taught are geared not only to the present- 
day needs of the labour market but also to 
future requirements resulting from 
technological and structural change. 
Furthermore, vocational rehabilitation 
specialists must increasingly and directly 
plug in to the world of work if they wish to 
meet the challenge of preparing disabled 
persons in appropriate and realistic ways. It 
might be necessary for rehabilitation profes- 
sionals to shed some of their traditionally 
““hymanitarian’’ approach in favour of one 
which is tempered by the hard realities of 
the market place. The disabled are showing 
professionals and the non-disabled every 
day that they have enormous energy and 
potential to accomplish far more than was at 
one time thought possible. They therefore 
deserve and have the right to more oppor- 
tunities to realize that potential. 
There is also a certain danger in over- 
reliance on professionals. Over recent years 
vocational rehabilitation specialists have 
developed their field of work into a highly 
specialized discipline and the extensive 
research they have undertaken has yielded 
positive and often exciting results. This has, 
however, had the unfortunate consequence 
that the disabled, their families and the 
general public have come to believe that on- 
ly the specialists can find solutions to their 
social and employment problems 
When helping people with disabilities, or 
any group in a community with particular 
difficulties for that matter, higher priority 
should be given to encouraging each com- 
munity to take on part of the challenge itself 
and to come up with simple workable solu- 
tions. This means contacting employers’ 
groups, trade unions, employment ex- 
changes, vocational schools, the press and 
private groups (such as, for example, con- 
cerned parents or citizens who have a direct 
interest in the problem). But let us by no 
means forget to include the direct participa- 
tion of the disabled themselves in planning 
and implementing programmes on their own 
behalf. 
in this context the new concept of voca- 
tional training developed by the ILO, and 
known as “Modules of Employable Skills”, 
holds great promise of improved employ- 
ment opportunity for the disabled. 
The key to this system and its unique 
feature is creating completely self-contained 
training packages—or modular 
units—around each useful function and 
limited to the essential skills, knowledge and 
aptitudes required to perform a task. The 
relevance of this infinitely variable and flexi- 
ble approach to training and employment of 
the disabled is obvious; for it allows the 
training and reintegration of those severely 
handicapped who can only undertake a: 
limited range of activities. 
An important objective of all ILO voca- 
tional rehabilitation projects in developing 
29 
)

## [Page 30](074741engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 46395: Self-reliance and the right to work

) countries is to try and ensure that they 
become self-sufficient and that they are 
profit-oriented right from the start. 
An ILO expert, Edward Johnson, who has 
wide experience with rehabilitation pro- 
grammes in the Third World, states that one 
purpose of rehabilitating a disabled person is 
to make a taxpayer out of him. 
“This helps to convince governments, 
although that is not the main reason”, he 
explains. “The object is to turn the disabled 
person into a self-reliant citizen, standing 
shoulder to shoulder with the able-bodied 
members of the community. Nothing gives 
disabled men and women the confidence 
they need as does the knowledge that they 
are doing a job of work, paying their 
taxes...” 
Rehabilitation of the disabled does pay off 
in hard cash terms. For example, US Depart- 
ment of Labor statistics show that for every 
$1,000 invested in the rehabilitation of a 
disabled person $35,000 will be generated by 
that person's work during his lifetime, part 
of which goes to Federal and State taxes. 
Even more impressive, it is estimated that 
the employment of 100,000 disabled persons 
in the US adds at least $500 million to the 
GNP. And disabled persons who are 
economically independent do not burden 
community public assistance funds. 
If present trends continue, and unless 
resolute remedial action is taken, the 
number of handicapped people seeking help 
might swell to some 800 million by the turn 
of the century. Among them will be an in- 
creasing number of people whose disability 
is an extreme difficulty in adjusting to 
existing social norms, In addition to the 
mentally ill this number will include drug ad- 
dicts and alcoholics. 
“The question of how to tackle the for- 
midable challenge of helping the world’s 
disabled is not one of policies or ap- 
proaches”, says ILO Director-General, Fran- 
cis Blanchard, “These exist, we have 
developed them. What is lacking, however, 
is the political will to act and—putting it 
quite bluntly— money. 
“ILO experts have calculated that in order 
to help stem the tide, the world would have 
to find a minimum of 25 additional cents to 
spend on each disabled person annually— or 
in total some $100 million a year. 
“This at least would help to establish pilot 
vocational rehabilitation programmes in 
those countries where no such services ex- 
ist; equally important, it would provide the 
means to set up some sub-regional and 
regional training centres where much- 
needed specialized staff could be trained. 
“It is a modest, realistic goal’, Mr, Blan- 
chard adds. “And if the term human dignity 
has any meaning at all, these 25 cents 
should certainly be found.” 
HM Ed. Sackstein 
30 
 
   
  
KIDS ON THE BLOCK 
Renaldo Rodriguez, 10 years old, is almost totally blind; Mark 
Reilly, 11 years old, has cerebral palsy and gets around in a 
wheelchair, his “cruiser” as he calls it; Melody James, 9 years old, 
suffers from nothing more than short-sightedness and is very 
curious about her more severely handicapped friends. All three 
(inset), together with Ellen Jane, 17 years old, who has Down's 
Syndrome and works as an assistant to a veterinarian, and Brenda 
Dubrowski, 10 years old, a “normal” child with a weight problem 
{pictured performing below), plus Mandy Puccini, 12 years old and 
deaf (not shown}, are members of an amazing troupe of puppets 
whose purpose is to help children to develop positive attitudes 
towards people with disabilities. Created by Barbara Aiello, a 
former teacher of handicapped children and a writer on special 
education, the "kids on the block’ are three feet tall and wear real 
children’s clothes and shoes, Mrs, Aiello believes that ‘children 
will talk more readily to puppets than to adults or even to other 
children” and that the integration of handicapped children into 
regular classrooms fails less often because of their disabilities than 
because of the other children’s attitudes. "Kids on the Block” has 
two important goals. “First”, says Mrs. Aiello, “| want to teach 
children about handicaps in a non-threatening fashion. Second, | 
want to show non-handicapped children how to develop positive 
relationships with their handicapped peers. The puppets show 
them how they can be friends.” 
Photo Marcel Salvaro, Unesco 
hea vA NAVA, RIAN L0G 
   
“is 
wh 
  
Tam GU 
Photo inset © Kids on the Block, Inc., or ., D.C. |   

## [Page 31](074741engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 46377: Disabled characters in search of an author

Disabled characters 
in search of an author 
  
TORDIS ORJASAETER, of Norway, is 
associate professor at the Norwegian Advanced 
College for Special Education, and the author of 
several books on children’s literature. The present 
article has been extracted from "The role of 
children’s books in integrating handicapped 
children into everyday life”, a background paper 
prepared for the Seminar on Books and Disabled 
Children organized by Unesco in co-operation 
with the Bologna Children’s Book Fair in April 
1981. 
by Tordis Orjasaeter 
to meet themselves in children’s 
books, to see pictures and read about 
children like themselves, their lives, prob- 
lems, feelings, circumstances. And it is im- 
portant for other children to get acquainted 
with handicapped children, since an unfor- 
tunate segregation policy in many of our 
countries has for decades placed many han- 
dicapped children outside our neighbour- 
hoods. It is thus all the more necessary that 
we meet them in books to prepare the soil 
for integration. 
Mentally retarded, physically handicapped 
or other disabled children almost never see 
children like themselves on television or in 
films, unless the programme specifically 
concerns handicapped children. They 
almost never belong to their environments in 
the mass media as naturally as other children 
I is important for handicapped children 
Photo Laurence Brun © Petit Format, Paris 
do. If oné never reads about anyone like 
oneself or meets anyone like that in televi- 
sion or on the radio, it is a sort of affirmation 
that one is not good enough or does not 
belong anywhere or has no value. 
During the last decade quite a few books 
have appeared about handicapped children, 
but many of them are not good encugh. 
They often activate our mechanisms of re- 
jection and make integration even more dif- 
ficult. Because literature influences us for 
better or for worse, especially when we are 
children, it is important to evaluate it critical 
ly. So many books are well-intentioned, and 
their authors have surely tried to encourage 
understanding, and yet the results are disap- 
pointing. 
There is the hidden rejection found in 
many well-intentioned books where healthy 
31 
 
)

## [Page 32](074741engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 46377: Disabled characters in search of an author

) young people who meet handicapped per- 
sons are filled with gratitude for their own 
good health. The underlying attitude is that 
the normal thing is to be healthy, beautiful 
and charming—and the handicap somehow 
is a kind of punishment for our sins. 
In children's books about handicapped 
children we frequently find a certain princi- 
ple of compensation so heavily stressed that 
it constitutes a hidden sort of rejection: blind 
people who automatically, almost by virtue 
of their blindness, are so exceptionally kind 
and good and have such a good ear for 
music; or the brave boy in a wheel-chair. 
The blind characters in children’s books 
are mostly girls—it seems so suitable that 
girls should be sweet and gentle and play 
the piano. The characters in wheel-chairs 
are mostly boys, extraordinarily clever boys, 
the best companions anyone can think of 
and such excellent referees in a football or 
baseball game. The handicap is compen- 
sated far beyond reasonable limits. 
One might say that such books provide a 
certain degree of information about the han- 
dicapped. But on the whole they give a false 
picture. A handicap does not automatically 
make anyone into an extraordinarily fine per- 
son. The opposite pattern of rejection is 
heavily utilized in cheap serial literature, in 
which most frequently the villain is physical- 
ly handicapped. This kind of reading is a 
hothouse for discrimination against the han- 
dicapped. 
There are so many misleading books 
about mentally handicapped children. Some 
typical examples: many authors use the 
description #/ when they write about mental- 
ly retarded children. They are not ill, no 
more than other children unless they have 
measles or colds or something like that, 
They are not ill, they are retarded in their 
mental development. 
Other authors tell us that an autistic child 
can suddenly become normal if his brother is 
kind to him, or a girl stops stuttering if she 
gets a pet, and another boy starts talking 
when he gets a friend, although he has 
never been able to talk before. Such things 
may happen, but very rarely, Handicapped 
children do not become “normal”, they just 
become grown-ups. 
The most common pitfall is to concen- 
trate only on the handicap and make han- 
dicapped children very special, The truth is 
of course that a child with a handicap is first 
and foremost a child. 
We need books containing good 
psychological descriptions of the handicap- 
ped person as one of the main characters 
and books where handicapped children 
belong to their environmeént as naturally as 
do other people. Happily, books exist in 
which the author shows both insight and 
poetic power. A typical feature of many of 
these books is that the author himself states 
that his books are written both for children 
and for adults. Many of these authors have 
experienced a handicap, either personally 
H1=L Le PhA 
Drawings Kasumi Matsushita © Keiko Yoshimura-Kasumi Matsushita, 1980, Publishers Kaisei-Sha, Tokyo 
PHF X 
BFHE-0 
  
THE DISABLED ARE PEOPLE TOO 
If I am honest with myself 
! admit 
! don’t like going out 
1 like people 
But | hate crowds 
I hate places where there are 
likely to be crowds 
Amusement parks are not fun 
for me 
Department stores are hell 
In cinemas | am a nuisance 
If | am honest with myself 
I admit 
I don’t really like going out 
If people stare at me 
f hate it 
If people pretend | am not there 
I hate it 
But why should | feel this way? 
I am “people” too 
{ am not a creature from another planet 
| am not a freak either 
I don’t have to hide away 
32 
  
ble BE-26 SHVRATH 
 
| have an appetite for life, 
| enjoy good things to eat and drink 
1 enjoy feeling 
| sleep, dream and wake 
I think, laugh and cry 
| enjoy feeling 
Why do people stare at me? 
or look away from me? 
Why do they treat me differently? 
My heart behaves normally 
It beats as it should 
It is quite ordinary 
The disabled are people too 
All people are different 
What is so special about my difference 
A friend warned me 
Be strong, be brave, she said 
I thought about being strong and brave 
What did being strong mean to me? 
If am not strong now 
how should | become strong? 
The Disabled are People Too 
is the title of a recently 
published book in the form 
of a poem by twenty-five- 
year-old Keiko Yoshimura, 
who was stricken with 
cerebral infantile paralysis at 
the age of fourteen months. 
It is a frank account of what 
it feels like to be physically 
handicapped and confined 
to a wheelchair. The book is 
. entirely illustrated with 
striking black and white 
representations of a 
wheelchair, the work of 
Keiko's long-time friend, 
artist Kasumi Matsushita. 
If I need to become strong 
there must be a way 
How would | change 
If | were strong? 
Would amusement parks be fun? 
Would | enjoy department stores? 
Would | like crowds? 
A friend warned me 
Be strong, be brave, she said 
I don’t understand becoming strong 
Perhaps being strong 
is not for me 
If I were strong 
People might be afraid of me 
Better by far that | be brave 
People will still stare at me 
or look away from me 
But if | am brave | shall not mind 
Keiko Yoshimura

## [Page 33](074741engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 46377: Disabled characters in search of an author

- 
or among their children, friends or Especially interesting are picture books 
neighbours. made by authors or artists who are 
themselves parents or siblings of handicap- 
ped children using their personal experience 
and love, trying to tell other children how it 
A . , , can be for a family to have a handicapped 
tention is quite obviously to make the Y Pp : . . son or daughter, sister or brother. 
readers identify themselves with these . ) 
children. Books about mentally handicap- In many cases it is a relief to read about 
* ped children are fewer in number and mostly the experiences of others. It can be a help 
written from the point of view of a sister or towards seeing one’s own situation in a 
brother. wider perspective. There is comfort in 
knowing that others have been through the 
During the last decade we have seen a same experience, even if their conditions 
number of photographic picture books and situations in life are utterly different. For 
about handicapped children. Children who some people fiction can be an inspiration 
read them are usually as fascinated by this towards giving new insight, awareness and 
documentary material as by fiction. It ac- acceptance, 
quaints them with handicapped children in MW Tordis Orjasaster 
their daily life. Such books are often ex- 
cellent for handicapped children as well; 
they can look at pictures of and read about 
children who look like themselves and 
have to struggle with some of the same 
frustrations. 
Most children’s books about the han- 
dicapped tell us about children with physical 
or sensory handicaps, and the authors’ in- 
w 
hy 
C
l
l
 
  
Photos Shozo Murase © Graphic Design Associates, Tokyo 
Picture books 
to be seen with the hands 
Why are there so few books for the blind with pictures that can be 
“seen” with the hands in the same way Braille texts can be “read” 
with the finger-tips? This was the question that inspired Japanese 
designer Shozo Murase to produce a five-volume work in which 
the illustrations are in relief, The illustrations on this page are from 
the volume which aims to give blind children an understanding of 
the shape of things in nature and of how they change during the 
four seasons of the year. Photos above, the development of a 
tulip; left, an octopus. 
33  

## [Page 34](074741engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

INESED ESE0ON 
Unesco Clubs support 
IYDP worldwide 
Unesco Clubs--totalling some 2,500, in 
78 countries—are supporting the Inter- 
national Year of Disabled Persons (IYDP)} 
with a wide range of initiatives linked to the 
needs and cultures of the communities to 
which they belong. 
Their efforts are proving to be particularly 
effective in publicizing the objectives of 
IYDP. Many Clubs, notably in Belgium, 
Spain, the United States, France, India, 
Japan, and Mauritius, have devoted all or 
part of their newsletters to articles on IYDP 
themes, as well as producing and 
distributing posters, tracts and other 
documents, 
A sample of IYDP-linked activities by 
Unesco Clubs around the world: in Morocco 
the Federation of Unesco Clubs has 
launched an information campaign in a 
dozen cities, including film shows to raise 
funds for national organizations of the 
handicapped. The 80 Unesco Clubs on the 
island of Mauritius have drawn up a 
questionnaire on the situation of the 
disabled to help in understanding their 
problems and needs. A similar approach has 
been adopted in /ndia. The Mangalore Club, 
for example, has carried out a survey among 
handicapped persons in one of the villages it 
has “adopted”, as a prelude to action on 
their behalf. Also in India, the Nagpur 
“friends of Unesco” have held a public 
seminar on handicap and donated medical 
and other supplies to local centres for the 
disabled. In Gabon, an “IBOBU"” Club 
{Ibobu means “‘handicapped’’ in a Gabonese 
dialect) has been created. In Japan, the 
Federation of Unesco Clubs, which groups 
some 450 associations of clubs for adults 
and young people, has launched a nation- 
wide fund-raising effort for Unesco's Co- 
Action Programme (see page 15} and in [taly 
the Unesco Centre in Florence is extending 
to disabled children its work on behalf of 
literacy teaching for children in hospital. In 
the Congo, a competitive game for 
schoolchildren is being ingeniously used to 
draw attention to IYDP, and Clubs in 
Ecuador have published a brochure ending 
| etters to the editor 
EPILEPSY — 
A NEGLECTED HANDICAP 
Sir, 
The term handicap describes a very wide 
range of conditions, In common parlance, 
however, its meaning is extremely limited 
since when people talk of “the handicap- 
ped” they are generally thinking of persons 
afflicted with a physical handicap. 
And yet those who suffer from other 
kinds of handicap are also handicapped per- 
sons, who face the problems of finding a 
place in society. Moreover, the non- 
physically handicapped often find their prob- 
lems all the more difficult to bear because 
others find it hard to accept their existence. 
Here is an example of what | mean. An 
employer will not create too many obstacles 
in taking on a one-armed person or, a han- 
dicapped person confined to a wheel-chair, 
but he will refuse outright to employ an 
epileptic capable of producing work of an 
equal quality. 
| have been epileptic for 18 years. It is im- 
possible for me to find a job, in other words 
to live like other people, simply because | am 
labelled “‘epileptic’’ —a word which causes 
apprehension for being too little 
understood. 
And yet there has never been any ques- 
tion of ignoring the work of Flaubert, 
Moliere, Dostoevski, Maupassant, Caesar, 
and many others simply because they were 
epileptics. (Needless to say, | am not 
presuming to compare myself with them!) 
I am convinced that providing the public 
with precise information about epilepsy, a 
34 
form of nervous illness which originates in 
the brain but has nothing to do with insani- 
ty, would lead to much greater social accep- 
tance of epileptics and would further their 
integration into society. 
Yves Dupin 
Bordeaux 
France 
BRINGING 
THE WORLD TO OUR FINGERTIPS 
Sir, 
| wish to express the heartfelt gratitude 
and pleasure | felt on receiving the Unesco 
Braille Courier. Your magazine, in addition 
to its cultural importance, offers us, the 
blind, a unique opportunity to learn about 
the international situation. Please put me on 
your list of subscribers. Antoine Tchaby 
Littoral Province 
Cameroun 
A SELF-IMPOSED HANDICAP? 
Sir, 
Your January issue on the handicapped is 
almost entirely devoted to “noble” han- 
dicaps. When can we expect to see a cover 
showing a child suffering from Down's Syn- 
drome? Or, where the misfortunes of the in- 
nocent are concerned, are your attitudes 
moulded by an unconscious (or shrewd) 
ism? racism? Georges Leugé 
Rouen 
France 
with the question; “What can we do to 
help?” 
Unesco to issue bibliography 
on handicapped children 
A worldwide survey of reading materials 
for and about handicapped children has 
been prepared for Unesco by the Interna- 
tional Youth Library (Munich) and will be 
published later this year. 
A broad selection of titles, each followed 
by a brief description in English, is presented 
by country, language, author, reading age 
and type of handicap. The books listed in- 
clude those for handicapped children and 
young adults, children’s and young people's 
books about the handicapped, and publica- 
tions for young adults that help to illuminate 
the special problems of the handicapped. 
The bibliography will be available in the lat- 
ter part of 1981 and may be obtained upon 
request from Unesco, Division for Book Pro- 
motion and Encouragement of International 
Cultural Exchanges, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 
75700 Paris (France). 
 
    
  
  
   
The boundaries on this map do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by Unesco or the United Nations. 
CORRECTION 
Part of the outline of the map of Yugoslavia 
which appeared on page 16 of the 
November 1980 issue of the Unesco Courier 
should be rectified as indicated above. 
Because of its reduced scale, the corrected 
drawing of course only provides a broad in- 
dication of the boundary line. 
B
R
O
D
A
R
D
 
G
R
A
P
H
I
Q
U
E
.
 
C
O
U
L
O
M
M
I
E
R
S
 
- 
Dé
po
r 
le
ga
l 
C 
1 
- 
Ju
ne
 
19
81
 
- 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
 
(P
ri
nt
ed
 
in 
Fr
an
ce
) 
P
H
O
T
O
C
O
M
P
O
S
I
T
I
O
N
-
P
H
O
T
O
G
R
A
V
U
R
E
 
C
H
R
I
S
T
I
A
N
 
P
A
G
N
O
L
I
D
 
= 
6
/
8
.
 
ni
e 
de
s 
En
in
et
te
s 
- 
7
5
0
1
7
 
P
A
R
I
S

## [Page 35](074741engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
ON 
APEACE ANTHOLOGY 
PEACE 
EARTH 
  
UNESCO     227 pages 
Peace on Earth is a selection of writings, some famous, 
some less familiar, through which men and women from 
different cultures, speaking different languages and holding 
different opinions, have described what seemed to them the 
possible ways to peace. These texts, from many historical 
periods and all the world regions, echo the age-old aspira- 
tions of humanity to peace and understanding between 
peoples. Contents include : 
The age-old dream of peace 
* Voices raised against war through the centuries 
* Peace and the role of force 
The role of law and international law 
* The rise of international institutions 
Observance of human rights 
Education for peace 
38 French francs 
  
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors in 
countries not listed, along with subscrip- 
tion rates in local currency, will be supplied 
on request.) 
AUSTRALIA. Publications: Educational Supplies Pty. Ltd. P.O. 
Box 33 “Brookvale, 2100, NSW. Periodicals: Dominie Pty. Subs- 
criptions Dept., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale 2100, NSW, Sub-agent: 
United Nations Association of Australia, Victorian Division, 
Campbell House, 100 Flinders St., Melbourne (Victoria), 3000, 
— AUSTRIA. Buchhandlung Gerold and Co., Graben 31, A- 
1011, Vienna. BANGLADESH. Bangladesh Books International 
Ltd., Ittefag Building, 1, R.K. Mission Rd., Hatkhola, Dacca 3. 
—~ BELGIUM. "Unesco Courier’ Dutch edition only: NV, Han- 
delmaatschappij Keesing. Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurne- 
Antwerpen, French edition and general Unesco publications 
agent: Jean de Lannoy, 202, avenue du Roi, 1060 Brussels, CCP 
000-0070823-13. — BURMA, Trade Corporation No. 9, 550-562 
Merchant Street, Rangoon, — CANADA. Renouf Publishing 
Co. Lid., 2182 St. Catherine Street West, Montreal, Que. H3H 
1M?. — CHINA. China National Publications Import Corpora- 
tion, West Europe Department, P.O. Box 88, Peking — 
CYPRUS. “MAM”, Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 
1722, Nicosia, — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. — S.N.T.L., Spelena 
51, Prague 1 (Permanent display); Zahranicni literatura, 11 Sou- 
kenicka, Prague 1. For Slovakia only: Alfa Verlag. — Publishers, 
Hurbanovo nam. 6,893 31 Bratislava — CSSR. — DENMARK. 
Munksgaard Export and Subscription Service, 35 Norre Sogade, 
DK 1370, Copenhagen K. — EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). 
National Centre for Unesco Publications, No. 1 Talaat Harb 
Street, Cairo. — ETHIOPIA. Nationat Agency for Unasco, P.O. 
Box 2996, Addis Ababa. — FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirja- 
kauppa, Keskuskatu 1, SF-00100 Helsinki 10. — FRANCE. 
Librairie de Unesco, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris, C.C.P. 
1259848. — GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REP. Buchhaus Leip- 
zig, Postfach 140, 710 Leipzig or from [nternationalen Buchhand- 
lungen in the G.D.R, — FED. REP. OF GERMANY. For the 
Unesco Courier (German, English, French and Spanish editions): 
Mr. H. Baum, Deutscher Unesco-Kurier Vertrieb, Basaltstrasse 
§7, D5300 Bonn 3. For other Unesco publications: 
Karger Verlag, Germering/Minchen. For scientific maps only: 
Geo Center, Postfach 800830, Stuttgart 80. — GHANA. Pres- 
byterian Bookshop Depot Ltd., P.O. Box 195, Accra; Ghana 
Book Suppliers Ltd., P.O. Box 7869, Accra; The University 
Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; The University Bookshop of Cape 
Coast; The University Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. 
— GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom, — HONG 
KONG. Federal Publications (HK) Ltd., 5A Evergreen Industrial 
Mansion, 12 Yip Fat Street, Aberdeen, Swindon Book Co., 
13-15, Lock Road, Kowloon, Hong Kong Government Informa- 
tion Services, Publications Centre, GPQ Building, Connaught 
Place, — HUNGARY. Akadémiai K&nyvesbolt, Vici u. 22, 
Budapest V; A.K.V. Konyvtiirosok Boltja, Népkoztarsasig utja 
16, Budapest VI. — ICELAND. Snaebjérn Jonsson & Co., H.F., 
Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. — INDIA. Qrient Longman Ltd., 
Kamani Marg, Ballard Estate, Bombay 400038; 17 Chittaranjan 
Avenue, Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Sa'ai, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
B-3/7 Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi 1; 80/1 Mahatma Gandhi Road, 
Bangalore-560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda, Hyderabad-5000C1. Sub- 
Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery Co. 17 Park Street, Calcutta 
70016; Scindia House, New Delhi; Publications Section, Ministry 
of Education and Social Welfare, 511 C-Wing, Shastri Bhavan, 
New Delhi 110001. — INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers and 
Booksallers, 29 JI.Oto Iskandardinata Ill, Jakarta; Gramedia © 
Bookshop, JI. Gadjah Mada 109, Jakarta; Indira P.T., JI. Dr 
Sam Ratulangie 47, Jakarta Pusat. — IRAN. Kharazmie 
Publishing and Distribution Co., 2B, Vessal Shirazi Street, 
Enghélab Avenue, P.O. Box 314/1486, Teheran; Iranian Nat. 
Comm. for Unesco, Ave. Iranchahr Chomali No. 300, B.P. 1533, 
Teheran. — IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, Al -Rashid Street, 
Baghdad. — IRELAND. The Educational Company of Ireland 
Ltd., Ballymount Road, Walkinstown, Dublin 12. — ISRAEL. 
A.B.C, Bookstore Ltd., P.O. Box 1283, 71 Allenby Road, Tel 
Aviv 61000 — JAMAICA. Sangster's Book Stores Ltd., P.O. 
Box 366, 101 Water Lane, Kingston. — JAPAN. Eastern Book 
Service Inc.,, Shuhwa Toranomon 3bldg, 23-6, Toranomon 
3-Chome, Minato-ku, Tokyo 105, — KENYA. East African 
Publishing House, P.O" Box 30571, Nairobi. — KOREA. Korean 
National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — 
KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., Ltd, POB 2942, Kuwait — 
LESOTHO. Mazenod Book Centre, P.O. Mazenod, Lesotho, 
Southern Africa. — LIBERIA, Cole and Yancy Bookshops Ltd, 
P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. — LIBYA. Agency for Development of 
Publication & Distribution, P.O. Box 34-35, Tripoli. — LUXEM- 
BOURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grande-Rue, Luxembourg. — 
MALAYSIA. University of Malaya Co-operative Bookshop, 
Kuala Lumpur 22-11, — MALTA. Sapienzas, 26 Republic 
Street, Valletta. — MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, 
Bourbon Street, Port-Louis. — MONACO. British Library, 30 
bd. des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. — NETHERLANDS. For the 
“Unesco Koerier” Dutch edition only: KEESING BOEKEN B.V., 
Postbus 1118, 1000 BC Amsterdam. Agent for all Unesco 
publications: N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The 
Hague. — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. Van Dorp-Eddine 
N.V., P.O. Box 200, Willemstad, Curacao. N.A. — NEW 
ZEALAND. Government Printing Offica, Government 
Bookshops at: Rutland Street, P.O. Box 5344, Auckland; 130, 
Oxford Terrace, P.Q. Box 1721 Christchurch; Alma Street, P.O. 
Box 857 Hamilton; Princes Street, P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin; 
Mulgrave Street, Private Bag, Wellington. — NIGERIA, The 
University Bookshop of Ife; The University Bookshop of Ibadan, 
P.0Q. 286; The University Bookshop of Nsukka; The University 
Bookshop of Lagos; The Ahmadu Bello University Bookshop of 
Zaria. — NORWAY, All publications: Johan Grundt Tanum 
{Bocksellars), Karl Johansgate 41/43, Oslo 1. For Unesco 
Courier only: A.S. Narvesens Literaturjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6. 
— PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-i-azam, 
P.Q. Box No. 729, Lahore 3. — PHILIPPINES. The Modern 
Book Co., 926 Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 632, Manila D404. — 
POLAND. Orpan-Import, Palac Kultury | Nauki, Warsaw; Ars 
Polona-Ruch, Krakowskie Przedmiescie No. 7.00-068 
WARSAW. — PORTUGAL, Dias & Andrade Ltda. Livraria 
Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — SEYCHELLES. New Ser- 
vice Ltd., Kingsgate House, P.O. Box 131, Mahé. — SIERRA 
LEONE. Fourah Bay, Njala University and Sierra Leone 
Diocesan Bookshops, Freetown — SINGAPORE, Federal 
Publications (S) Pte Ltd., No. 1 New Industrial Road, off Upper 
Paya Lebar Road, Singapore 19. — SOMALI DEMOCRATIC 
REPUBLIC. Modern Book Shop and General, P.O. Box 951, 
Mogadiscio. — SOUTH AFRICA. All publications: Van 
Schaik’s Book-store (Pty.) Ltd., Libri Building, Church Street, 
P.O. Box 924, Pretoria, For the Unesco Courier (single copies) 
anly: Central News agency, P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. — 
SRI LANKA, Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chittampalam Gar- 
diner Mawata P.0.B. 244 Colombo 2. — SUDAN. Al Bashir 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All 
publications A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl, Hovbokhandel, 
Regeringsgatan 12, Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the 
Unesco Courier: Svenska FN-Forbundet, Skolgrénd 2, Box 150 
50 S- 104 65, Stockholm, ~ SWITZERLAND. All publications: 
Europa Verlag, *5 Ramistrasse. Zurich, Librairie Payot, rue 
Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P, 12.236. — TANZANIA, 
Dares Salaam Bookshop, P.0.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam. — 
THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Ltd., 40-42 Charoen Krung Road, 
Siyaeg Phaya Sri, P.O. Box 402, Bangkok: Suksapan Panit, 
Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok; Suksit Siam Com- 
pany, 1715 Rama IV Road, Bangkok. — TRINIDAD AND 
TOBAGO. National Commission for Unesco, 18 Alexandra 
Street, St. Clair, Trinidad, W.l. — TURKEY. Haset Kitapavi 
A.S., Istiklal Caddesi, No. 469, Posta Kutusu 219, Beyoglu, 
Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Bockshop, P.O. Box 145, 
Kampala. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. ~ 
Box 569, London, S.E.l, and Govt. Bookshops in London, 
Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, Birmin- 
gham, Bristol. — UNITED STATES. Unipub, 345 Park Avenue 
South, New York, N.Y. 10010. — U.S.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaya 
Kniga, Moscow, G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA, Jugoslovenska 
Knjiga, Trg Republike 5/8, Belgrade; Drzavna Zalozba 
Slovenje, Titova C 25, P.0.B. 50-1, Ljubliana. — ZIMBABWE. 
Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd.,, 67 Union Avenue, Salisbury.  

## [Page 36](074741engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
 
em  — -  
  
   
— TE RT A TTT LT TN TT rT CA. 3 
rl d——-
. al pet p—— Vi — " 
     
   
  
  
   
   
RE 
ho a 
-—- 
Ra 
Ti. 
a 
| 
i 
x ny 
   y : ! 
    
    
  
  
| | 
I 5 
” Good vibrations : Ea 
¥ © 
» c 
The question of whether handicapped children should be a | 
& educated in special institutions or integrated, more or less com- 8 
» a pletely, into the ordinary school system is today giving rise to E | 
x widespread debate. Photo shows two pupils, one of whom is 2 | 
ie physically handicapped, in a Paris school. £ 
i 
Eo 
| | 
LL - 
[CTL TEE ha  