# [078378](078378engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](078378engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

“A window open on the world 
$e iw 
ouricr   
  
i 
PE WE 
discovery of the first 
ancient Greek frescoes 
 

## [Page 2](078378engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

             
   
  
    ~ 
e
r
i
e
:
 
i 
EP 
Br
ig
! 
   
oh
 
» 
-
—
 
i r
d
 
3 
a
,
 
» 
B
r
e
e
 
ne
 ¥ 
LN
 
  
 
5
 
r
a
v
 
<
t
@
 
  
TREASURES 
OF hl 
WORLD ART 
   
  
ET 2 Sd "A ay AN Sgaeaingsln, WN 7 a So 
 
    
 
Photo « R. and S. Michaud - Rapho, Paris 
One of Pakistan's popular folk heroes is a man said to have lived some four centuries ago. He is Mulla 
the Onion Eat the Onion Eater, a court jester who earned this name by his fondness for a vegetable more often LE = 
nion er associated with tears than laughter. The fact that Mulla Do Piaza, (“do piaza”: two onions) may not | 
pe even have existed matters little to Pakistanis, who still chuckle over stories of his japes and quips. i 
To them he is a very real person, one who symbolizes the very essence of folk humour, and whose witty | 
  
stories are frequently spiced with shrewd reflections and sharp comments. Mulla is EACLE 
associated with the 16th century Mogul court where his sallies and AAA CUE LI CE RUER LEE I : 
emperor Akbar himself. Mulla’s humour was not dissimilar to that of Nasredin, the famous fi 
RI EE a ST CO CIA CCCR VA EEL Ro IT CT ET COR ELE) B Here, the jovial jester is 
depicted in an 18th century portrait, an exceptional work of Mogul art, which seldom FCI CL 1 
” caricature. A delicately executed miniature, (8 in. by 5), it is now in the Lahore Museum. L 
   

## [Page 3](078378engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

‘mCourier 
  
  
  
APRIL 1970 
23RD YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 13 EDITIONS 
Page 
English Japanese 
French Italian 4| PAESTUM 
Spanish Hindi Discovery -of the first ancient Greek frescoes 
Russian Tamil By Michel Conil Lacoste 
German Hebrew 
Arabic Persian 10| CAIRO 
U.S.A. 1.000 years of history inscribed in stone 
By Abdel-Rahman Zaky 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
17 | AL-AZHAR THE RESPLENDENT 
One of the great universities of Islam   Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢ 
Annual subscription rates: 20/-stg.:; $4.00 
18 | THE FABULOUS TREASURES 
OF CAIRO’S MUSEUMS 
(Canada); 12 French francs or equivalent; 
2 years: 36/-stg.; 22 F. Single copies: 2/-stg.: 
40 cents: 1.20 F. 
7 * 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except 
21 | SAN AGUSTIN 
Archaeological mystery of prehistoric Colombia 
By Fernando Sanz 
in August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese, Italian, Hindi, Tamil, Hebrew and Persian. In the 
United Kingdom it is distributed by H.M. Stationery Office, 
P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.I 
26 | LEPENSKI VIR 
Europe's oldest settlement on the banks of the Darube 
By Jean Vidal 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads "Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 32| NON-SCIENTISTS DISSECT SCIENCE 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos- 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international 33| LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
{U
RE
 
PY L
e 
SRE
 
ER
) 
Si
e 
e
l
 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the Ee 34 UNESCO NEWSROOM 
UNESCO COURIER. - 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Read- F 2 TR EASURES OF WORLD ART 
ers’ Guide to Periodical literature, published by . . 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York, and in Current Con- Mulla the onion eater (Pakistan) 
tents - Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A.   
Editorial Office 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy. Paris-7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
NT Be Cover 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief ! ——— 
K 
René Caloz In summer, 1968, the first Greek 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief ! frescoes known to have survived 
Lucio Attinelli to the present day were uncovered 
in a burial ground near the famed 
temples of Paestum in the Italian 
province of Lucania. They were 
painted in about 480 B.C. In 1969, 
further tombs were discovered, also 
ornamented with many frescoes. 
These were the work of Lucanian 
artists, but were in the same Greek 
style or showed evidence of a strong 
Greek influence (see article page 4). 
The fresco reproduced in the upper 
half of our cover depicts a warrior 
being welcomed home by a woman 
who is, perhaps, his wife since she 
wears the draped headdress reserved 
for married women. The standard 
indicates that this is a Lucanian work 
as the ancient Greeks never carried 
standards. For details of the lower 
fresco see caption on page 8. 
Managing Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition: Francisco Ferndndez-Santos (Paris) 
Russian Edition: Georgi Stetsenko (Paris) 
German Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition: Abdel Moneim EI Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition: Takao Uchida (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition: Annapuzha Chandrahasan (Delhi) 
Tamil Edition: T.P. Meenakshi Sundaran (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition: Alexander Peli (Jerusalem) 
Persian Edition: Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Assistant Editors 
English Edition : Howard Brabyn 
Spanish Edition : Simon Izquierdo Perez 
Photo Editor: Olga Rodel 
Layout and Design: Robert Jacquemin 
Alf correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chlef 
  
Ne
 
4 
- 
19
70
 
MC
 
70
-2
-2
54
 
A 
Photos Unesco - J. Chevalier

## [Page 4](078378engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
 
Photos Unesco - J. Chevalier 
The “Temple of Neptune” (below) was raised in Paestum, south of present-day Naples, 
in the mid-5th century B.C. Modelled on the Parthenon at Athens, it is one of the few 
surviving buildings of Poseidonia (the Greek name for Paestum). The city was founded at the end 
of the 7th century B.C. by Greek colonists, and was captured by the Lucanlans towards the end of the 
5th century B.C. A vast burial ground has now been discovered near the Temple of Neptune, 
and thousands of graves have been unearthed (bottom photo). Some 50 of these tombs 
contain paintings In a remarkable state of preservation—the only classical Greek frescoes ever found. 


### 56848: Paestum: discovery of the first ancient Greek frescoes

PAESTUM 
discovery of the first 
ancient Greek frescoes 
  
   
by Michel Conil Lacoste 
A few fragments of terra 
cotta, some polychrome traces on 
2 pieces of plaster rubble, occasional 
a references to Polygnotus, Zeuxis and 
Euphranor are all that has come down 
to us of the great flowering of Hellenic 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
Re
né
 
Bu
rr
 
- 
AS —_ painting, in the 5th and 4th centuries 
i eu nil B. C., described by Pliny the Elder. 
—— E The great painted frescoes of the 
classical era were doomed to destruc- 
tion at the hand of man. The ravages 
of war and Roman plundering, coupled 
with the fragility of the surfaces used 
by painters of classical times, combined 
to “deprive us of the paintings that 
once adorned the walls of Propylaea 
and private homes. 
CONTINUED PAGE 6 
  
MICHEL CONIL LACOSTE, French art critic 
and historian, is a regular contributor to 
literary and art reviews, and is the author 
of "La Sculpture Européenne d’Aujourd hui” 
(European Sculpture J oday) published by 
Gunther, Stuttgart, 1966. From 1967 to 1969 
he was head of the Unesco Section of the 
International Campaign for Florence and 
Venice, and is co-author with L.J. Rollet- 
Andriane, of "The Unesco Report on Venice” 
(published in Italian by Mondadorl, Milan, 
1969) and shortly to appear in French 
(Robert Laffont, Paris). He Is now a member 
of Unesco's Division of International Dis- 
semination of Culture.

## [Page 5](078378engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 56848: Paestum: discovery of the first ancient Greek frescoes

  
  
 
One of the most surprising paintings found at Paestum Is the diver (below) decorating - 
the roof slab of the oldest of the painted tombs. The scene below Is a detail of the full painting 
which shows the diver silhouetted against a vast sweep of sky in a coastal setting. 
The walls of the same tomb are covered with a series of beautiful paintings of a Greek funeral banquet, 
showing ten young men chatting, drinking and listening to music (above). Painted about 480 B.C, 
this type of banquet painting was known to the world only through the painted vases of Athens. 
  
  
  
  
  
    
         

## [Page 6](078378engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 56848: Paestum: discovery of the first ancient Greek frescoes

PAESTUM (Continued) 
Without direct knowledge of the 
paintings themselves, we can only have 
a small idea of what they were really 
like from ancient Greek vase paintings 
or even more regretfully, from certain 
weak copies by ancient Roman artists. 
This at least was the position until 
one day in the summer of 1968 the 
sun of Paestum filtered into tomb No. 4 
of a burial ground situated one mile 
to the south of the time-worn walls of 
this ancient Greek city in southern 
Italy, Uncovered by a systematic 
examination of the area carried out 
that summer, the tomb revealed wall 
paintings of extraordinary freshness, 
depicting scenes of funeral banquets 
and typically Greek rituals, that had 
lain there untouched for two and a half 
thousand years. 
It was immediately evident that the 
paintings were totally different from 
the few Lucanian painted tombs 
previously brought to light in the 
vicinity. They closely resembled the 
themes depicted on Greek pottery of 
the classical period. On the two 
longer walls of the tomb the eye saw 
a double funeral banquet scene in red, 
black, yellow and blue. Ten bearded 
funeral guests, crowned with laurels, 
were reclining on a couch evoked by 
a single blue brush stroke. The 
painting shows the men listening to 
music and playing a game called 
Kottabos (which consisted of passing 
wine from one wine cup to another in 
a manner that called for great 
dexterity). The scene has erotic 
overtones. On the shorter walls a 
flutist leads the funeral cortege and a 
cup bearer offers wine. 
The harmony of design and the 
delicate use of colour with little modu- 
lation of tone confirm the advanced 
development of painting techniques of 
the Greek artists of Paestum. The 
frescoes are especially significant in 
their portrayal of ancient Greek rites 
for the living and the dead. 
A most unusual scene is portrayed 
on the inner face of the slab that forms 
the covering of the tomb. Here, 
poised between sky and sea, a young 
RESURRECTED CHARIOTS 
IN THE GREEK STYLE 
The Lucanians of the 4th century B.C. 
decorated the walls of the tombs in the 
Paestum burial ground with paintings 
in the Greek style. Themes of battle and 
victory are numerous: the proud warrior 
on his charger (left); a four-in-hand chariot 
race (below right); a winged victory in a 
chariot (above right). In this work, 
branches loaded with pomegranates 
(left of painting) symbolize re-birth 
and the promise of a future life. 
Lucanian artists drew inspiration from the 
Greek vases of Taranto in southern italy, 
but unlike their Greek counterparts, 
they sought for more striking effects 
by a greater use of contrasting colours. 
Below, these stone coffins discovered 
at Paestum are about 1.80 metres 
long and 1 metre wide (about 6 X 3 ft.). 
The 150 painted tomb walls of Paestum 
are regarded as one of the most remarkable 
archaeological discoveries of recent years. 
Photos Unesco - J. Chevalier 
  
ephebe is shown executing a high dive 
from a narrow platform between two 
trees. Hence the name immediately 
given to the find: tomba del tuffatore 
("The Tomb of the Diver”). 
Certain precise stylistic charac- 
teristics, particularly the representa- 
tion of the athlete's eye and his 
musculature, as well as the shape of 
a vase found in the tomb, have enabled 
Professor Mario Napoli, Superintendent 
of Antiquities for the Salerno-Paestum 
district, in charge of the excavations, 
to date it to about 480 B.C. 
At that time Paestum was still called 
Poseidonia. Situated about 80 kilo- 
metres (50 miles) south of present day 
Naples on the Gulf of Salerno, it was 
one of the most important cities of 
Magna Graecia. Its institutions, lan- 
guage, religion, art were all Greek. 
The Lucanian mountain folk had not 
yet come down from the surrounding 
heights to drive out the Greek 
colonists. The paintings from the 
“Tomb of the Diver” are, therefore, 
stylistically, culturally and even politi-

## [Page 7](078378engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 56848: Paestum: discovery of the first ancient Greek frescoes

FavAV VAV'V 
oR aca] 
. ~ . S 
- 
i 
} 
+ 
: 
. -~ 
h Eh S— 
  
M 
- - 
: . , LE oC 
: re re ol or Rae”. *y ah, nF 
cally speaking Greek. There can be 
no doubt that they were painted by a 
Greek hand. 
This was an unprecedented find. In 
the words of Superintendent Mario 
Napoli, it represents “the first and only 
Greek painting of the archaic or 
classical period found anywhere thus 
far.” The same enthusiasm is shared 
by the world's leading experts on 
Greek art and archaeology. 
In his contribution to the volume “La 
Gréce Classique” which has just 
appeared in the famous collection 
entitled “Univers des Formes”, the 
French specialist of Greek art, Francois 
Villard, writes: “Until the most recent 
discovery at Paestum...of a painted 
tomb of astounding expressive power, 
dated around 480 B. C., the existence 
of no original Greek painting, even by 
a minor artist...had come to our 
knowledge.” 
There is another surprising aspect 
to this discovery: no tradition of tomb 
painting was formerly known to exist 
in ancient Greece. Painted tombs are 
found only from the 4th century B. C. 
onwards, and these only on the fringes 
of Magna Graecia, at Pont-Euxin, near 
Taranto and in Apulia where a much 
more geometric style was dominant. 
Etruscan funeral paintings had a more 
esoteric, ritual inspiration, quite dif- 
ferent from the lively themes of the 
“Tomb of the Diver”. However, tomb 
decoration seems to have been an 
established tradition in Lucania. 
Faced with this puzzle, Super- 
intendent Napoli and his colleagues 
have yet to reach agreement on 
two opposing interpretations. The 
first of these is that, while Paestum 
was still completely under Greek rule, 
a non-Greek inhabitant of the city, no 
doubt a notable, was accorded the 
honour of being buried in accordance 
with his native traditions. The second 
interpretation explains the existence of 
the tomb painting as an illustration 
of the Pythagorean notion of “ritual 
immersion”. According to this view, 
the dead man would then have been 
a Greek member of a Pythagorean 
school in Paestum. 
VU TELY B2 ELY BUY Vi 'V Vil ViVi! 
  
But there were further surprises in 
store for the Italian archaeologists. 
On July 12, 1969, the Superintendent 
learned that a farmer named Luigi 
Franco, while ploughing his artichoke 
field with an especially long blade, had 
~ struck the stone cover of another tomb, 
this time 300 metres (330 yards) north 
of the city walls. 
This tomb was unpainted and empty. 
But, in the course of the three months’ 
excavations that followed, 83 under- 
ground tombs were found within the 
same area. Of these, 50 were de- 
corated with frescoes, more than thirty 
of which were well preserved. All but 
four or five of these tombs contained 
vases which were found to date from 
the 4th century B. C.—about 340 B. C. 
Since each tomb had four painted 
walls (the roof slab in each case being 
unpainted} a total of 120 to 140 wall 
paintings of great antiquity were now 
available to the world in addition to the 
“Tomb of the Diver”. Taken together 
they show evidence of a particular 
style which, if not strictly Greek, is at 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](078378engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 56848: Paestum: discovery of the first ancient Greek frescoes

8 
PAESTUM (Continued) 
least strongly marked by Hellenic 
influences, spiced with a lovely touch 
of local colour. 
The walls of these new tombs, like 
those of the “Tomb of the Diver”, have 
been transferred to the nearby 
museum, where they are being allowed 
to dry out slowly. On some of them 
can still be seen the marks made in the 
wet plaster by the ropes with which 
they were lowered into place. And 
when we are studying antique relics, 
traces of handling and techniques 
used, such as these, take us magically 
back in time until we can almost see 
the events unfolding before our eyes. 
Apart from a few bones, little else 
was found in these 4th century B.C. 
tombs, except for some rare jewellery 
and a few vases. The walls of the 
tombs were pre-cut to the required 
dimensions from one or two metres in 
length and 90 cms in height (3 to 
6% ft. x 3 ft.). They were given a coat 
of fresh plaster and decorated probably 
at the last moment. 
On all of them the principal figure 
is surrounded by a frame motif perhaps 
the work of the artist's assistant and 
applied with almost slap-dash haste. 
These motifs abound with streamers, 
floral designs, eggs and pomegranates, 
the latter a symbol of resurrection. 
Sometimes this rather mechanical 
ornamentation constitutes the entire 
decoration—one tomb has as its only 
decoration an intertwined central 
design of the famous roses of 
Paestum. 
it was in one of these latter tombs 
that the only signed vase was found. 
It bears the name of Python, who, 
along with Asteas, was the most 
famous painter of the jars with twisted 
twin handles for which Paestum was 
famous. It seems unlikely that one 
or both of these artists worked on the 
paintings themselves, but as yet there 
is no proof either way. 
The actual figures have often been 
sketched several times as we can see 
if we examine the paintings under an 
oblique light. They depict a whole 
range of horsemen, combats between 
boxers or between Greek foot-soldiers 
known as hoplites, stag-hunting scenes, 
bulls, griffons and mythical birds. 
Others show women combing their 
hair under a canopy; even a set of 
armour and two leg plates have been 
considered of sufficient interest to 
constitute the only theme. 
Scenes from Greek mythology, 
however, are the dominating theme: 
- WORLD OF MYTH 
AND EVERYDAY LIFE 
Paestum artists gave a distinctive 
new style to funerary painting 
by introducing scenes from country 
life and themes based on fantasy. 
Tomb painting, left, illustrates this 
dual originality. In the upper 
* triangular section, Charon, the 
ferryman of the River Styx, 
a Greek mythological figure, 
has been transformed by a Lucanian 
painter into a female form receiving 
the spirits of the dead aboard 
the waiting craft. In the lower section 
(see also front cover), a figure leads 
a calf which Is to be sacrificed 
in honour of the dead person. 
A woman carrying a dish of 
offerings on her head follows 
the animal, and behind her a young 
servant carries bread and 
pomegranates. A mourner completes 
the cortege. The figures recall 
typical Lucanian country folk such 
as might still be encountered in 
that region of Southern ltaly today. 
Above right, winged griffons, 
mythological creatures that figured 
- on 4th century B.C. Greek vases. 
Below right, country scene. The 
farmer's cart is outlined against a 
background of trees, a naturalistic 
touch rarely found in Greek art of 
the 4th century B.C. 
Photos Unesco - J. Chevaller 
Charon ferrying the dead shades 
across the Styx for a fee; Hermes 
harnessed to a child's cart, etc. 
Archaeologists have thus far found 
three successive stages in this magni- 
ficent collection of paintings. On the 
one hand, the typical ancient Greek 
style, on the other Greek archetypes 
interpreted more or less freely in the 
Greek archaic style, and thirdly, a style 
obviously inspired by strong local 
influences. 
Many archaeologists have been 
happy to devote years of their lives 
to reconstructing the walls of an 
ancient city, yard by yard, or in the 
painstaking study of potsherds which 
are important clues to the past. It is 
not given to every archaeologist to 
discover the undisturbed mummy of a 
Pharaoh or the treasures of Troy or 
Mycenae. The archaeologists of 
Paestum have been most fortunate 
indeed. 
it will take years to complete the 
scientific study of their sensational 
find. They are certainly right when 
they say that the 140 wall paintings of 
Paestum, together with the five 
paintings of the 5th century sarco- 
phagus, constitute “a great moment-in 
the history of Greek painting.” ||

## [Page 9](078378engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 56848: Paestum: discovery of the first ancient Greek frescoes

 

## [Page 10](078378engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 56825: Cairo: 1,000 years of history inscribed in stone

‘Since the Pharaoh 7 conquered 
the Nile Delta 5,000 years ago, thus 
~re-uniting north and south, Egypt has 
remained Egypt. And Cairo is the hea 
of Egypt. In Arabic, the word for Egypt 
is Misr, and for many centuries Misr has 
remained the popular name used for the 
Egyptian capital. Thus country and 
capital rightly share a common name, 
for in this great city one can see a 
Synthesis od all of Egypt: s past. 
RN ey Okasha 
Minister of Culture 
10 
by Abdel-Rahman Zaky S.. like pearls on the 
thread of Islamic history, the names 
of the great cities of Islam evoke a 
vision of magical splendour—Cordova, 
Cairo, Damascus, Aleppo, Baghdad, 
Bokhara, Samarkand. The list is end- 
less, yet among these cities none 
  
ABDEL-RAHMAN ZAKY, of the U.AR,, is a 
leading authority on Islamic history and 
archaeology, and on medieval Cairo. He has 
written many studies in these fields and is 
the author of “The Citadel of Salah EI-Din", 
“Cairo: From Gawhar to Jabarti* and “Concise 
Encyclopaedia of Calro™ (in Arabic). Dr. Zaky 
is lecturer in museography at the Institute 
of Islamic Archaeology, Cairo, and adviser 
to the "Committee on Civilization® at the 
Arabic Language Academy. He is editor of the 
“Concise Arabic Encyclopaedia, 1460-1968". 
United Arab Republic 
stands so pre-eminent as Cairo. 
As the capital of Egypt it is as old 
as Islam itself, and down to the pre- 
sent day it has consistently remained, 
not merely a bastion of Islam but a 
treasure house enclosing innumerable 
masterpieces of Islamic art that cover 
more than a thousand years. 
Its history began when Amr ibn 
al-As conquered Egypt for Omar, the 
second of the Mohammedan caliphs, 
inthe year 641 A.D. Amr captured the 
Roman fortress of Egyptian Babylon 
which stood at the settlement said to 
have been founded by emigrants from 
the ancient town of the same name. 
Just to the north of this fortress, whose -

## [Page 11](078378engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 56825: Cairo: 1,000 years of history inscribed in stone

remains still dignify Old Cairo, Amr 
set up his camp and here he founded 
the town named Al-Fustat (signifying 
“the tent”). 
Later rulers were to add other 
administrative centres to Fustat—and 
always to the north—but this was 
essentially the beginning of Cairo, the 
capital standing on the east bank of 
the Nile and replacing ancient Mem- 
phis to the west. In the 9th century, 
for example, Ahmed ibn Tulun, whose 
great mosque still stands, built Al- 
Qatai as his capital, north-east of 
Fustat. 
The name Cairo, however, and the 
beginning of its great splendour date 
from the Fafimids, a Shiite dynasty 
claiming descent from Fatima, the 
daughter of the prophet Muhammad. 
The first caliph of the Fatimid dynasty 
in North Africa was Ubaydallah the 
Mahdi whose reign began in Kairouan, 
Tunisia, in 910. 
Egypt was conquered half a century 
later, in 969, by Jawhar, vizier and 
commander in chief of the reigning 
Fatimid caliph, al-Muizz. The capital 
of the Fatimid empire was at once 
established in the new centre that 
Jawhar had founded and named Al- 
Qahira (The Victorious), a name which 
has passed into English as Cairo. 
Jawhar had left Kairouan in Feb- 
ruary 969 with 100,000 men and am- 
ple supplies and equipment. = By 
July 9, Fustat had surrendered and the 
Fatimid army was encamped on the 
sandy plain to the north of it. That 
same night a new palace-fortress city 
was marked out over a square roughly 
1,200 yards each way. The south 
faced Fustat, the west ran beside the 
ancient canal known as Al-Khalij, the 
east fronted on the Mugattam Hills, 
while to the north lay open country 
and the highway to Asia. 
The original wall and the seven 
gates were of mudbrick. The three 
magnificent stone gateways and the 
section of the wall that survive today 
were part of a grand rebuilding in 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
1

## [Page 12](078378engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 56825: Cairo: 1,000 years of history inscribed in stone

12 
CAIRO (Continued) 
stone on a slightly different alignment 
a century later by the great vizier 
Badr al-lamali. 
The walled Al-Qahira was a royal 
city, entry to which was forbidden 
except to those on official business. 
It was designed to enclose two pala- 
ces for the caliph and his family, 
government offices, quarters for the 
garrison, the treasury, arsenal, stables 
and other buildings. 
Once the walls were begun, Jawhar's 
next task was the foundation of a 
great assembly mosque. On Sunday, 
April 3, 970, was founded Al-Azhar (the 
Resplendent), the mosque that is still 
the glory of Islam. It was finished on 
June 24, 972, and in 988 it began to be 
used by scholars and students. It 
then became what it has ever since 
remained, one of the chief universities 
of Islam. 
Then, as now, students from every 
part of the Muslim world gathered 
within its walls to receive instruction 
from the lips of great scholars in the 
Koran, in theology, the Traditions of 
the Prophet, law, grammar, logic and 
rhetoric. After the time. of Saladin, 
Al-Azhar became the most eminent 
centre of orthodox teaching in Islam, 
a university of unequalled distinction 
and world-wide reputation. 
 
  
SULTAN PUBLICISTS 
OF THE 13th CENTURY 
Under its Mameluke rulers, Egypt in the 
13th century rapidly developed its contacts and 
trade with other countries. Benefiting from the 
fruitful transit trade between the Mediterranean 
ports and the East, Cairo became one of the 
world's richest cities. 
Chronicles of the time tell us that Sultan 
Kalaun (1278-1290) instructed the governors at 
his ports to treat foreign travellers and merchants 
with the utmost consideration, and by cordiality 
and friendship to encourage them to extend their 
stay. Such visitors, he decreed, should be taxed 
with justice and impartiality and required to pay 
only the officially prescribed amount. “They,” 
(the travellers and merchants) declared the order, 
“are gifts to us from the sea to invigorate the 
life of our ports. Whatever they say of us will 
be remembered by others. Our good actions 
towards them (falling like seed on fertile soil) 
will bear fruit which will be borne far and wide 
as their ships, with sails spread like the wings 
of a bird, carry them to other lands.” 
Sultan Kalaun did much to promote Egyptian 
trade, and for this purpose he issued passports 
enabling merchants to travel safely through Egypt 
and Syria as far as India. 
Other Egyptian sultans actually launched 
publicity campaigns, despatching messages to 
traders in East and West to encourage them 
to visit Egypt. The cordial terms and subtle 
phrasing of these messages clearly shows the 
importance accorded by Egypt to its contacts 
with other countries. One text runs: “Let he who 
has chosen to visit our kingdoms look on his 
decision as that of a man to whom God wills 
nothing but good. Let him come to a country 
where no man need possess worldly goods, for 
the visitor will find here a veritable Garden of 
Eden, filled with distractions for he who is far 
from his native land. Let the merchants of the 
Yemen, of India, of China, of Sind and other 
kingdoms who have taken note of our decree, 
make ready to journey to our country. They will 
see for themselves that our words have not done 
justice to reality and that the good fortune 
awaiting them greatly exceeds our promises.” 
/ 
  
Within only a few years of its foun- 
dation, Cairo had grown to such 
splendour that in 985 the Arab 
traveller Maqdisi, could write: “Bagh- 
dad was in former times an illustrious 
city, but it is now crumbling to decay, 
and its glory has departed. | found 
neither pleasure nor aught worthy of 
admiration there. Cairo today is 
what Baghdad was in its prime, and | 
know of no more illustrious city in 
Islam.” 
For Cairo was no longer a provincial 
city, the seat of a mere governor 
appointed ty the Abbasid caliphate. 
It was the capital of a vigorous empire 
    0
 
ww
 
A 
_ = 
A Sa
g

## [Page 13](078378engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 56825: Cairo: 1,000 years of history inscribed in stone

which more than rivalled that of the 
Abbasids. It had become a Med- 
iterranean power, the equal of all its 
rivals to east and west. 
The naval power and wide con- 
nexions of the Fatimids made Egypt a 
new factor in the power politics of the 
area. These and the wisdom of Fatimid 
policies led to Cairo’s rise as a centre 
of trade that flourished on a scale pre- 
viously unknown. 
Writers and travellers have devoted 
many pages to describing its splen- 
dours, climaxed by its two great 
palaces. Between them lay a square, 
Bayn al-Qasrayn (Between the Two 
TARE 
Left, drawing of a Cairo street 
in 1889. Right, street scene 
today in a market area 
of the city. Though Cairo 
today boasts many 
skyscrapers and modern 
buildings, little has changed 
in the appearance of the old 
quarters with their narrow 
twisting streets, where 
crowds throng the stalls and 
open-front shops. Cairo 
became a great cosmopolitan 
and trading centre in the 
time of the Mamelukes 
(13th-15th centuries A.D.) 
when it was the richest and 
most populous city of Islam. 
Goods and commodities 
from many lands were on sale 
in its markets, Even today, 
the aromatic odours of the 
bazaar quarter recall those 
far-off times when Cairo 
grew rich on the trade in 
strange spices brought from 
Arabia Felix and India. 
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Pa
ul
 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Palaces), a name which still survives 
as that of a street flanked by several 
fine mosques of later date. 
The square was used for parades 
and great ceremonies. To the east 
lay Al-Muizz's palace, to the west that 
built by his son Al-Aziz to overlook 
the Garden of Kafur (an earlier ruler) 
that now lay between it and the Khalij 
canal, 
The Egyptian topographer Magrizi 
(d. 1441) devotes nearly two hundred 
pages to a description of the palaces 
with their four thousand chambers, 
including the Golden Hall, a gorgeous 
pavilion in which sat the Caliph on his 
 
golden throne surrounded by richly 
attired attendants, the Emerald Hall 
with its pillars of marble and the Great 
Diwan where he sat in state on Mon- 
days and Thursdays at a window 
beneath a cupola. 
Al-Qahira of the Fatimids was 
indeed a new city. The Fatimids could 
have echoed the words of the Emperor 
Augustus, when he spoke of Rome, 
and boasted that they found their city 
mudbrick and left it stone. Construc- 
tion in stone was an innovation at that 
time, its use having been abandoned 
since the classical era. 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 14](078378engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 56825: Cairo: 1,000 years of history inscribed in stone

14 
CAIRO (Continued) 
 
Golden age of Muslim architecture 
As mentioned previously, Badr al- 
Jamali rebuilt part of the walls and 
gateways (1087-1091). They are monu- 
ments of magnificent stonework. His 
own tomb-mosque on the Mugattam is 
of stone, as was the mosque of Al- 
Akmar (1125). The minaret of Badr's 
mosque was also an innovation for 
Islamic architecture in Egypt. 
The next major change in the plan of 
Cairo came with Salah-ad-Din al- 
Ayyubi (Saladin), who took over from 
the Fatimids in 1169 and ruled till 
1193. He planned a new wall to join 
Al-Qahira and Fustat into one great 
city, thus enclosing an area ten times 
as great as the Fatimid capital. 
Saladin also built what is still the 
dominant architectural feature of Cairo, 
the Citadel. It stands on the foothills 
of the Mugqattam, and it was to the 
Citadel that the centre of government 
was now transferred. The centre of 
gravity had moved from the Fatimid 
city. The old palaces fell into ruin 
and new buildings arose on their sites. 
Only a few fragments of their carved 
woodwork have survived. 
Saladin and his successors, who 
ruled until 1250, brought further 
changes to Islamic architecture in 
Egypt. The college-mosque (madrasa) 
made its appearance, and with it a 
cruciform plan in both mosque and 
madrasa. The pepper-pot minaret and 
the use of stalactite ornament came 
into use, as did the lavish use of 
squinch arches and the external 
ornamentation of the dome. 
Under Mameluke rule, which was 
uninterrupted up to the Ottoman 
conquest in 1517, commercial pros- 
perity led to further expansion of Cairo, 
south, west and north. Beyond the 
northern gates of Al-Qahira there grew 
up a new suburb. Much survives 
from Mameluke times—tomb-mosques, 
Photo © René Burrl - Magnum 
college-mosques, schools, inns, public 
fountains, 
Indeed much of the unique beauty of 
Cairo's architecture is due to the 
Mamelukes. But of their luxurious 
palaces we have nothing except some 
huge walls from Bishtak’'s palace, a 
fine gateway from the Yeshbek's 
mansion next to Sultan Hasan’s impos- 
ing mosque and the better preserved 
mansion of the Emir (known as Beyt- 
el-Cadi). Their sumptuous beauty is 
something that we can but dimly ima- 
gine from the descriptions of travellers 
and the rare and delicate objects that 
adorn our museums. 
We can still see traces of the 
exquisite ~~ mushrabiyah latticework 
that embellished the Mameluke pala- 
ces. Even today, some markets are 
shaded by matting or wooden roofs 
much as they were. in those far off 
times. But the luxurious palaces and 
mansions, the public baths and gar-

## [Page 15](078378engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 56825: Cairo: 1,000 years of history inscribed in stone

dens, the pleasure kiosks and bel- 
vederes, the etreets and inns that were 
the meeting-places of the world, live 
on only in the pages of the historian 
Magrizi. 
Under the Mamelukes, Cairo was 
for two and a half centuries the richest, 
the fairest and the most populous city 
of Islam. Its mosques and other 
buildings testify to the taste and public 
spirit of its rulers. The variety and 
subtlety of the architecture is 
extraordinary. 
The 13th, 14th and 15th centuries 
all have their characteristic master- 
pieces. From Kalaun, whose period 
saw the end of the Crusaders, to 
Qait-Bay and Al-Ghuri, who saw the 
Ottoman menace about to overwhelm 
Egypt at the same time that the 
Portuguese were cutting the vital trade- 
routes to India and the Far East, one 
lovely building succeeded another. 
The fagades, the minarets and the 
interiors grew in delicacy and imagina- 
tive enterprise, 
One particular masterpiece is out- 
standing because it is quite unlike any 
other—the college-mosque of Sultan 
Hasan which was built 1356-1359. Its 
stones were taken from the Pyramids, 
and it is perhaps not too fanciful to 
suppose that something of its uniquely 
massive and monumental character is 
due to that inspiration. Its walls rise 
to a great height and are crowned by 
a magnificent cornice as splendid in 
conception as Michelangelo's on the 
Palazzo Farnese in Rome. 
Everywhere the impression is made 
by size if not by detail. The soaring 
portal rises the whole height of 
the building. The interior court is 
surrounded by four noble arches. The 
whole was once adorned with the 
finest of craftsmanship in bronze and 
enamelled glass, some of which can 
be seen in the Museum of Islamic Art, 
Cairo’s oldest mosque, with 
its spiral minaret, brick pillars 
and stylized arabesques, has 
remained virtually untouched 
since it was built by Ahmed 
ibn Tulun in 879 A.D. 
(photo left). In the backround 
looms the imposing mass of 
The Citadel, the fortress built 
by Saladin in the 12th century. 
Saladin did not live to see its 
construction finished and the 
work was completed by his 
brother the Sultan El-Adel. 
The Citadel! was supplied 
with water from 
“Joseph's Well,” dug out 
of solid rock to the level of the 
Nile. Dominating The Citadel 
are the domes and minarets 
of the famous Mohammad Ali 
mosque, the largest and most 
splendid that remains from the 
Ottoman era. Photo far left, 
a view of the inner courtyard 
of the Ibn Tulun mosque 
as seen from the minaret. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ab
de
l!
 
Fa
tt
ah
 
Ei
d,
 
Ca
ir
o 
while its bronze-plated door now 
beautifies the Muayyad mosque beside 
the Bab Zuwayla gate. 
Arab travellers and writers vied with 
. each other in their accounts of this 
gracious city. Ibn Battuta, the Marco 
Polo of Islam, described it in the most 
glowing terms in 1326. In 1383, lbn 
Khaldun the historian, who ended his 
days in Cairo, called it “the metropolis 
of the universe, garden of the world, 
throne of royalty, a city adorned with 
palaces and mansions, convents, mo- 
nasteries and colleges, and illuminated 
by the stars of erudition in a paradise 
so bounteously watered by the Nile 
that the earth seems here to offer its 
fruits to men as gifts and salutations.” 
During this whole period Cairo was 
the heart of Islam and of Islamic 
civilization. Baghdad was captured 
and sacked by the Mongols in 1258 and 
never recovered its former splendour, 
Cairo welcomed its refugees. Only 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
13

## [Page 16](078378engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 56825: Cairo: 1,000 years of history inscribed in stone

16 
CAIRO (Continued) 
Mameluke Egypt in the whole Middle 
East was able to resist the onslaught 
of the Mongols. Three times they 
were driven back and defeated. 
Egypt's prosperity, indeed, was only 
the greater because of them. It was 
the greater, too, because much of its 
trade passed on to the steadily grow- 
ing markets of Europe. 
The craftsmen of Cairo reached new 
levels of perfection during this period, 
and much of their metal, wood and 
glass work has survived in the mos- 
ques themselves and in Cairo's mu- 
seums. Moreover, the skyline of the 
city is a symphony of domes and 
minarets in which architects and 
craftsmen joined in creating one of the 
most beautiful cities man has made. 
Joseph Gobineau, the 19th century 
French traveller, wrote: "In Cairo the 
memory of the Mamelukes dominates 
everything, so much did they do, so 
many solid and beautiful monuments - 
did they create. Only they could 
carve in stone the world of arabesques 
which adorns with such splendour the 
buildings of all Asia. Though slaves 
only yesterday, the Mamelukes, once 
they laid their sabres down and 
possessed the authority to rule, 
seémed no longer capable of anything 
trivial. Everything that they built is 
without equal among Muslim archi- 
tecture in the rest of the world.” 
With the Ottoman conquest in 1517 
a gradual decay set in. Trade with the 
East steadily diminished. Neverthe- 
less, these centuries are not entirely 
without importance in the adornment 
of Cairo. Neither taste nor skill were 
what they had once been. Yet, in the 
years up to the beginning of the 19th 
century, many buildings were added 
to Cairo that are still a delight to 
behold. 
In 1798, with the appearance of 
Napoleon, the power politics and new 
techniques of Europe exploded upon 
Egypt. Willy-nilly Egypt was dragged 
into the modern world. The changes 
have been as tremendous as they have 
been rapid. 
Walking along the Nile or through 
the streets of the modern city with its 
skyscrapers and broad avenues, the 
visitor may not always be aware how 
old a city Cairo really is until, looking 
to the west, he sees the ancient 
pyramids, or to the east the proud 
citadel of Saladin, 
But in the streets of the older city 
the past is never absent. Cairo, like 
so many other places in the Nile 
Valley, is like a book whose pages are 
of stone inscribed with clear records 
of man's endless endeavour. Each of 
them invites the passerby to wonder 
and to seek to learn the nature of his 
fellow men in other times and places. 
In few cities will such an effort be 
more rewarding than it is in Cairo. E 
    
  
 
Ph 
- ! __- 
: ee Shey = .e 
Left, back home 
from a pilgrimage 
to Mecca, a Cairo 
citizen, in this 
19th century 
drawing, recounts 
in pictures drawn 
on his wall the 
journey he made 
to the chief holy 
city of Islam. 
Below and right, 
two views of the 
Al-Azhar 
University. 
otos © Paul Almasy, Parls 
A 
n - 
   

## [Page 17](078378engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 56825: Cairo: 1,000 years of history inscribed in stone

  
r 
AL-AZHAR THE RESPLENDENT 
Less than one year after the birth of the city of Cairo in 
969 A.D., the new Fatimid rulers of Egypt laid the foundations 
of the great mosque of Al-Azhar (The Resplendent)—the first 
of many architectural masterpieces to be erected by this 
dynasty. 
At the outset, the mosque was intended to be a centre for 
the teaching of the Fatimids’ religious ideas. But within a jew 
years, in 988, the Caliph Al-Aziz gave orders that tuition should 
be provided for 35 students for whom accomodation was also 
made available at his expense. The Fatimid caliphs spared 
no effort in the spreading of knowledge and the encouragement 
of learning. Successive rulers, ministers and wealthy citizens 
contributed funds with the result that the mosque became an 
Islamic university—the oldest in the world—whose splendour 
and influence grew rapidly. As Egypt became the leading 
country of the Muslim world, Cairo became a Mecca for 
scholars from far and wide. 
Since that time, Al-Azhar has been a centre of Islamic 
culture to which theologians, scholars and teachers have come 
to lecture in theology, Arabic linguistics, logic, literature, mathe- 
matics, medicine, astronomy, law and other fields of learning. 
Al-Azhar's renown as a centre for scientific studies spread 
throughout the world during the reign of the Mameluke dynasty 
(13th-16th century A.D.). Even when this period ended and 
invasion and occupation dimmed the brillance of cultural life 
in Cairo, Al-Azhar remained a refuge of religious doctrines 
and teaching and a bastion of the Arabic language. 
EL TEE 
5 
REE Tt —_— whi Lo AA ALT) Sr 
RR EN 
———— 
- 
TYNES 
— “We 2 Stes 
hd be 
  
At the start of the 20th century, Sheikh Muhammad Abdou, 
one of the founders of the modern intellectual movement in 
Egypt, introduced changes in the programmes and teaching 
at Al-Azhar which, while respecting the university's age-old 
traditions, also met the new demands of science and modern 
education. 
More recent transformations have consolidated the vigour 
and increased the influence of Al-Azhar. In addition to its 
institutes for traditional Islamic and Arabic studies, it now has 
faculties in every discipline of the natural and social sciences, 
in agriculture, medicine, commerce, engineering and languages, 
as well as a teacher training institute. 
Al-Azhar also has a women's college, founded in 1962, and 
today attended by 2,000 students from many parts of the world. 
The college is the nucleus of a future women's university, in 
which the existing college departments of medicine, the basic 
sciences, Islamic and Arabic studies, the social sciences, 
languages and commerce, including accounting, business 
administration and statistics, will become faculties. 
In recent years, enrolment at Al-Azhar has grown rapidly 
and today tops 20,000. To meet this rapid influx, a vast 
university complex has been built on the outskirts of Cairo, 
comprising new faculty buildings and a university city to house 
students and staff. But the three oldest colleges—those for 
Islamic studies—are to remain near the 1,000 year old mosque 
which gave them birth. 
17

## [Page 18](078378engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

18 
           
  
  
THE FABULOUS TREASURES 
OF CAIRO’S MUSEUMS 
The accumulated riches of thousands of years of history are 
stored within the walls of Cairo’s remarkable museums. No less 
than 150,000 items are displayed in the Museum of Egyptian Anti- 
quities which contains the world's finest collection of pieces from 
the time of the pharaohs. Hundreds of thousands of other items 
are stored In its repositories. Items taken from the tomb of 
Tutankhamen alone total 1,700 rare pieces, including the famous 
gold funeral mask, above. The rooms devoted to the Early 
Empire (2900 to 2300 B.C.), the high water mark of Egyptian 
civilization, contain countless statues including one of Mykerinos 
who built the Gizeh pyramid. The Middle Empire (2100 to 1750 
B.C.) saw a new flowering of sculpture of which this bearer of 
votive offerings (right) is a fine example. The religious revolu- 
tion during the reign of king Akhenaton (1370 to 1352 B.C.) had 
a strong influence on sculpture, The Museum possesses 71 limes- 
tone statues from this period as well as a quartzite head of Queen 
Nefertiti which is one of the masterpieces of anclent art. The 
Egyptian Museum is no doubt the world's richest repository for 
the study of the evolution of human civilization in Egypt from 
6000 B.C. to the Roman conquest in 332 B.C. The Coptic Museum 
contains statues, architectural fragments, drawings and tapestries 
dating from the 5th and 6th centuries A.D. as well as a number 
of 16th and 17th century icons. The striking painting executed 
on wood (opposite page) was discovered in the Fayum region 
where, from the 1st to the 4th century A.D., Greek artists developed 
a style which foreshadowed the rise of Byzantine art. Some 
70,000 examples of Islamic art—such is the impressive number 
of works in the collection of Cairo’s Museum of Islamic Art, It 
contains ancient Arabic, Omayyad, Fatimid, Mameluke, Iranian 
and Turkish works; pottery, including some pieces 8 centuries 
old, glassware, gem-studded weapons, carpets and earthenware. 
The most complete collection of works of art from the Ottoman 
era is assembled In the Kasr-al-Nii Museum, while works of great 
European artists—Goya, Delacroix, Rubens, Van Gogh, etc.— and 
of Egyptian painters such as Mahmoud Said and Mohammad 
Negui, are displayed in the Moukhtar Museum. 
Fa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Je
an
 
Fe
ui
ll
ie
, 
|
.
 
g 
|  
 
A
 
N
s
 
    

## [Page 19](078378engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
A 
r 
J 
’ PONS NRE “ 
 
 
) A 
 
 
-
 
~ 
> 
a 
o
s
e
)
 
‘
|
u
n
n
d
 
jo 
A
S
I
I
I
 
01044 
s
u
e
d
 
‘missey 
 
0
I
o
y
d
 
 

## [Page 20](078378engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 21](078378engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

by Fernando Sanz 
A vast complex of megalithic 
monuments, stone sarcophagi and 
nearly 400 statues, some over 4 metres 
high, mark the birthplace in Colombia 
of a prehistoric culture which remained 
virtually unknown until the beginning 
of this century. 
The “San Agustin culture”, as it is 
called, takes its name from a nearby 
village that nestles on the eastern 
flanks of the central Andean Cordillera, 
1,700 metres (5,600 ft.) above sea level, 
in a countryside of rolling hills inter- 
spersed with higher peaks and forest 
ranges. . lt is here that the great Mag- 
dalena river rises, the region being 
watered also by the Mulales, Quin- 
chana, Bordones and other rivers. 
In the immediate neighbourhood 
of San Agustin and farther ‘afield, 
scattered over hills and valleys, are 
temples, mounds, tombs, statues and 
other remains, the remarkable heritage 
in stone of a civilization older than 
that of the Peruvian Inca civilization 
which lasted from 1200 A.D. until the 
Spanish conquest in 1532, 
Even today, after years of research, 
many questions concerning the origins, 
chronology and relationships of the 
San Agustin culture with other civiliza- 
tions are largely a matter of conjecture. 
Extending over several hundred square 
kilometres, the San Agustin area is 
today a national “Archaeological Park” 
in which many ancient ruins are 
probably still buried or overgrown with 
forest vegetation. 
Although the Spanish Conquistadores 
explored and occupied the region in 
the mid-16th century, no mention of 
the remains is made in the chronicles 
of historians of the time such as Fray 
Pedro Simon, Pedro Cieza de Ledn, or 
Don Juan de Castellanos. 
The first description of the artistic 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE  


### 56826: San Agustin: archaeological mystery of prehistoric Colombia

SAN AGUSTIN 
Archaeological mystery 
of prehistoric Colombia 
Photos © Michel Hétier, Paris 
Like some strange creatures sheltering from the elements under 
a canopy of stone and branches, the statues, left and above, are two of 
a whole group that has recently been found in the thick jungles and N 
mountains of the Andean Cordillera In southern Colombia. This “San Agustin 
culture”, as it is now called, took shape 2,500 years ago and 
flourished for 15 centuries. The stylized form and gigantic size of the statues 
bear a certain resemblance to those of the Aztecs and Zapotecs In ancient Mexico.

## [Page 22](078378engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 56826: San Agustin: archaeological mystery of prehistoric Colombia

  
© Michel Hétier,  Paris 
  
Many statues in the 
San Agustin region of Colombia 
have a second figure 
perched on their shoulders. 
The meaning of this is not 
known, but certainly must 
have been some form 
of religious symbolism. 
The strange double figure, 
left, measures nearly 2 metres 
(over 6 ft) In height. 
A stone streamer, 
terminating in an animal’s head, 
emerges from the mouth 
of this fanged deity, 
below, who stands just 
under | metre (3 ft} high. 
The significance of this 
curious streamer, which recurs 
in a number of San Agustin 
statues, is not known. 
 
SAN AGUSTIN (Continued) 
The manuscript 
on the island of 
treasures of the area appeared in the 
chronicles of the Spanish friar Juan de 
Santa Gertrudis, who visited the region 
in 1757. He recounts his meeting with 
a Catholic priest from the city of 
Popayan who was eagerly excavating 
the tombs and mounds in search of 
hidden treasure. It was probably due 
to this man and other treasure hunters 
that most of the monuments now known 
were unearthed. Unfortunately, Fray 
Juan de Santa Gertrudis’ manuscript 
lay neglected’in the friary of Palma de 
Mallorca for 200 years and was not 
published until 1956. 
Some forty years after Friar Juan, 
in 1797, the Colombian scholar Fran- 
cisco José de Caldas visited the site 
‘and published a short description of it 
in a treatise on the geography of this 
region, 
Colombian, French, English, Italian 
and German travellers who visited San 
Agustin during the 19th century 
mention its mysterious and spectacular 
stone monuments in their reports. 
However, the full importance and 
richness of its culture was not 
revealed to the world until the German 
archaeologist Konrad Theodor Preuss, 
who worked in the area from 1913 to 
1914, published an account of his 
discoveries in his book “Prehistoric 
Monumental Art", 
In 1935, the Colombian Ministry of 
Education acquired a large tract of 
land and established the "Archaeolo- 
gical Park”, thus bringing the principal 
ruins under government protection. 
In 1936-1937, the Colombian archae- 
ologist, José Pérez de Barradas, 
carried out the first official excavations 
for his country and, in 1943, produced 
the most detailed study of the site 
published thus far. Another Colom- 
bian expert, Luis Duque Gémez, has 
since conducted further excavations 
and research. 
Some thirty major archaeological 
sites have been discovered in the 
general area of San Agustin. Some 
have rather extraordinary names: Alto 
de Lavapatas (footbath mountain), 
Alto’ de Lavaderas (washerwoman 
mountain), Las Mesitas (the small 
plateaux), Alto de Los Idolos (mountain 
of the idols). 
The San Agustin civilization probably 
extended over a period of more than 
1,500 years and is described by Pérez 
de Barradas as a “northern Andean 
megalithic culture”.

## [Page 23](078378engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 56826: San Agustin: archaeological mystery of prehistoric Colombia

  
forgotten 
Majorca 
  
On the evidence of excavations and 
the results of radiocarbon dating tests, 
Luis Duque Gdémez has suggested a 
sequence of three periods: the first, 
lasting roughly from 555 B.C. to 
425 A.D., is characterized by shaft 
graves with side chambers, wooden 
coffins, wooden sculpture, early gold- 
work, pottery bowls and vessels with 
painted and incised decoration, bark 
cloth, maize and root agriculture, 
According to Duque, the middle 
period lasted from 425 to 1180 AD. 
and is characterized by burial urns and 
mounds, monolithic sarcophagi, crema- 
tion and statuary. Metallurgical tech- 
niques such as hollow casting in the 
cire perdue technique and wire-work 
are added. 
The third and last period, lasting 
from the 12th century to an unknown 
later date, is distinguished by its 
realistic stone sculpture, circular 
houses and loom weaving. 
Some authorities believe that the 
San Agustin civilization in the northern 
Andes is related to the Chavin 
civilization in Peru and even to that 
of Tiahuanaco further south in Bolivia. 
It is possible, and some authorities 
believe, even probable, that Central 
America, including Mexico, played a 
role in the development of the civiliza- 
tions of the Andes. In recent years 
evidence has been accumulating that 
the roots of the Chavin culture of Peru 
are derived from a Mesoamerican 
source located in the Olmec country 
(the area now covered by the Mexican 
states of Veracruz, Tabasco and 
Qaxaca). 
Ancient navigators from Central 
America coasting along the northern 
shores of South America apparently 
introduced into Peru the jaguar cult 
and many elements of the associated 
art style, along with maize farming. 
These contacts probably date from the 
Oth century B.C., and it seems likely 
that the idea of the jaguar cult also 
spread into what is now Colombia, 
thus reaching San Agustin about 
500 B.C. But this cultural influx was 
not a one-way process from Central 
America southwards, it was also a 
northward movement from Peruvian 
cultures into Colombia. 
The basic characteristics of the San 
Agustin culture can be classified into 
three categories. According to the 
archeologist Konrad Preuss they are: 
(1) its massive stone monuments, 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
Above, this massive 
statue, measuring over 
2 metres {over 6 ft) 
high and 1% metres 
(almost 5 ft) wide, 
portrays a sun god 
holding a sceptre in 
each hand. It belongs 
to the so-called classical 
period of the Colombian 
cuiture of San Agustin, 
which lasted from the 
4th to the 12th century 
AD. The diadem 
with Its geometric 
designs bears some 
similarity to those found 
In the frescoes of 
Chanchan in Peru. 
This appears to indicate 
contact between the 
Chimu cuiture of Peru 
and the culture of 
San Agustin In 
Coiombia. Right, an 
eagle devouring 
a serpent. 
  
Sl
 
ch
 
a
n
t
l
 
is 
Photos © Michel Hétier, 
 
Paris 

## [Page 24](078378engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 56826: San Agustin: archaeological mystery of prehistoric Colombia

  Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Mi
ch
el
 
Hé
te
r,
 
  
SAN AGUSTIN (Continued) 
innumerable statues, and stone coffins 
weighing tons, sometimes found in 
huge stone-built tombs; (2) the 
recurring forms of stone carving such 
as large mouths with long pointed 
fangs and statues with a second figure 
crouching on the head or back; 
(3) stone streamers emerging from the 
mouths of statues, the tip of each 
streamer terminating in a tiny head. 
San Agustin’s architectural monu- 
ments are its temples and tombs built 
of massive slabs of stone. Embedded 
vertically in the ground, the stone walls 
of the temples strangely recall the 
dolmens, or prehistoric standing 
stones, of Europe and elsewhere. 
The outstanding art form of San 
Agustin culture is its monumental 
sculpture, principally its statues which 
display an extraordinary variety and 
wealth of detail. They range in height 
from 40 cm. to over 4 metres (15 in. 
to 13 ft.) and their forms and styles 
suggest that their development was 
spread over a long period of time. 
According to Pérez de Barradas, 
religion and magic directly inspired the 
sculpture of San Agustin, although the 
treatment of certain images is 
extremely realistic. Like the Zapote- 
cas figures in Mexico, “some of the 
San Agustin statues, for all their 
stylization and contorted forms, reflect 
a rare knowledge of anatomy.” 
But as in the case of the Aztec art 
of Mexico, the San Agustin artists 
worked according to a set of strict 
rules so that the disproportion of head 
and body and the often grotesque 
forms and attitudes of their statues are 
no accident. The effect is impressive,

## [Page 25](078378engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 56826: San Agustin: archaeological mystery of prehistoric Colombia

  
particularly in the case of monumental 
statuary such as the famous triangular 
head nearly two and a half metres 
(8 ft.) high. 
As a rule, the heads are dispro- 
portionately large, the body squat and 
thick-set, the limbs short and rigid. 
The most elaborately worked part is 
the face, which often shows a very 
large mouth with long pointed fangs. 
Half man, half feline, the statues are 
adorned with necklaces and bracelets; 
some hold maces or sceptres, others 
bear trophies or clubs, 
Many have protruding tongues, a 
detail also found on statues in many 
Pacific island cultures, in China and 
south-east Asia and on Indian sculp- 
tures in north-eastern Canada. 
The meaning of the religious sym- 
bolism of the San Agustin figures is 
still obscure since many important 
details are missing in the general 
picture of San Agustin culture. Awe- 
some representations of anthropo- 
morphic gods abound as well as lesser 
deities in the shapes of snakes, lizards, 
monkeys and eagles. 
"The man of San Agustin,” writes 
Pérez de Barradas, “was content to 
spend his life in a straw hut, but for 
his gods he built temples of massive 
stones which by titantic effort he cut 
and carried from his quarry. For his 
own use he made rudimentary imple- 
ments of stone, which he never 
improved; but inspired by his adora- 
tion for the gods, he used these rough 
tools to carve, with infinite patience 
and devotion, the statues of his deities 
which today astound us by their 
immense size and consummate art.” HW 
GODS AND MEN 
IN THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL PARK 
The photos on these two pages show a representative 
sample of the different types of statues belonging 
to the San Agustin culture. They were photographed 
in a jungle area of southern Colombia which 
has now been set aside as an “archaeological park”. 
Photo No. 2 shows a god apparently wearing a hat, 
which is most unusual. Photo No. 4 has been 
described as a flutist. Below, half-human, 
half-animal figure. 
Photos © Michel Hétier, Paris 

## [Page 26](078378engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 56824: Lepenski Vir; Europe's oldest settlement on the banks of the Danube

The remains of a prehistoric village dating back some 
6,000 years B.C., alongside the River Danube on the 
Yugoslav-Romanian border. This is the oldest settlement found 
thus far in Europe. It was unearthed by Yugoslav archaeologists 
while excavating a site in an area due to be flooded by a new dam. 
Facing it across the river stands the Treskavac mountain, 
its curious trapezoid shape rising sheer and barren shove the 8 
Romanian bank. The foundations of the dwellings (foregroun - 
all have this same trapezoidal form, which has led archaeologists to by Jean Vidal 
believe that the inhabitants of the Lepenski Vir village were inspired 
in their architecture by the geometrical shape of the mountain. 
Ea NE of the intriguing Euro- 
pean archaeological discoveries of 
recent times, which has raised more 
questions than it has answered, is that 
of an 8,000 year old settlement at 
Lepenski Vir (“the whirlpool of Lepe- 
na”) on the Yugoslav bank of the Dan- 
ube which forms the frontier with 
Romania about 175 miles east of Bel- 
grade. | 
It came to light in the course of 
salvage archaeology in an area due 
to be flooded by a new dam. In spring 
1964, representatives of the govern- 
ments of Romania and Yugoslavia 
together laid the foundation stone of 
the Djerdap dam which the two coun- 
tries were to build jointly in the scenic 
splendours of the Iron Gates, a moun- 
tain passage of the Danube where, 
until 1896, massive boulders had 
impeded the course of navigation. The 
banks of the Danube would, at this 
point, be engulfed by the waters of 
a vast reservoir lake, 
Dragoslav Srejovic, a young lecturer 
at the Belgrade University Faculty of 
Philosophy, believed that this area 
might be the site of an ancient culture 
that could provide the link between 
mesolithic times and the later neolithic 
culture of Starcevo. Starcevo is the 
oldest neolithic culture of the Balkans 
~ dating back to 5000 B.C. 
Immediate action was called for; it 
would be a race against the rising 
flood waters like that undertaken by 
archaeological teams during Unesco's 
  
   
- I — re TEAR a VA campaign to save the Nubian monu- 
i TL o£ 1 TR ments from the Nile, though of course 
LI my RON ED a a da dll on a much more limited scale. 
a ~ x A special committee, headed by 
Nk ow ~ Professor Lazar Trifunovic of the Bel- 
. , ; A w grade National Museum, gave Dra- 
J : g “a IIe By goslav Srejovic the task of attempting 
Me - = “5 4 to uncover the secrets hidden under 
the banks of the Danube. 
In July 1965, after making a num- 
ber of preliminary probes, Srejovic 
pitched his tent on the banks of the 
river by the turbulent rapids of Lep- 
enski Vir. He knew that, throughout 
the ages, men had been dependent 
upon the Danube. Century after cent- 
ury they had cast their nets there 
  
JEAN VIDAL is a French film producer and 
writer who contributes regularly to various 
popular science magazines. He has produced 
several TV documentary films on archaeolog- 
ical excavations. .  

## [Page 27](078378engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 56824: Lepenski Vir; Europe's oldest settlement on the banks of the Danube

LEPENSKI VIR 
Europe’s oldest settlement 
on the banks of the Danube 
achieving magnificent catches of fish 
trapped by the turbulence of the 
waters. 
It was the turbulence of the river 
at this point that had first caught 
Srejovic’s attention seven years earlier 
in 1958. Would not other men, even 
before the inhabitants of the Starcevo 
era, have throught of establishing 
themselves on this favoured site? 
With a small team he began an 
investigation in depth below the Star- 
ceyo era layers which were spread 
over the district. One day their picks 
hit a solid reddish-coloured object and 
the archaeologist proceeded to clear 
the ground around it. The reddish 
colour persisted, marking out a trape- 
zoidal shape. Could this be the 
foundations laid by men who had lived 
there long before their descendants 
of the Starcevo era? 
Eleven trapeziums were soon unco- 
vered and carbon 14 testing confirmed 
Srejovic’'s speculations. The culture 
of Lepenski Vir was found to go back 
to nearly 60 centuries before the 
Christian era—earlier than any other 
settlement unearthed thus far in 
Europe. 
Lepenski Vir is situated in eastern 
Serbia on the Yugoslav-Romanian 
border in a tiny area, itself in the 
shape of a trapezium, 170 metres long 
by 50 metres wide (560 ft by 165 ft). 
Its total area, therefore, is no greater 
than that of a small hamlet. But, as 
we shall see, the importance of a 
discovery cannot always be judged 
from the size of the site on which 
it is made. 
Protected by thick forests and rocky 
escarpments, the cluster of structures 
was built on a small, clear stretch of 
beach and, for a long time, the river 
remained the sole means of access. 
Considered in the context of its sur- 
roundings, Lepenski Vir .is but an 
insignificant detail on the vast canvas 
of the Iron Gates, the extraordinary 
ravine that forms a little world on its 
own, 
Photos © Jean Vidal, Pars 
On this stretch of 
river bank Yugoslav 
excavation teams 
  painstakingly dug out 
a three-yard thick 
deposit. The first 
remains they uncovered 
were those of a 
culture settlement, 
dating back to 
5000 B.C. Beneath 
these lay the 
foundations of homes 
and numerous artefacts 
belonging to a still 
earlier culture. One 
of the most striking 
features of the 
Lepenski Vir 
excavations are the 
many art objects 
revealed (see 
following pages). 
Facing the settlement, on the Roma- 
nian bank of the river, the.Treskavac 
mountain rises sheer and barren to 
a height of 679 metres (2,230 ft). The 
entire mountain has a curious trape- 
zoid shape and its outline stands out 
sharply against the sky. 
It is curious to observe that both 
the shape of the tiny valley and the 
foundations of the dwellings unearthed 
all have this same trapezoidal form. 
This has led to the conjecture that the 
natural trapezoid shapes directly inspir- 
ed the men of Lepenski Vir in their 
architecture and that its geometric 
shape became a symbol and pattern of 
special significance. 
Four layers, totalling about ten feet 
in depth, have been unearthed thus 
far. This super-imposition of layers 
makes it possible to establish that 
Lepenski Vir was in constant devel- 
opment for a period of over 1,000 
years, from 5800 to 4700 B.C. The 
topmost layer, which is also the most 
recent (dating from 4850 to 4700 B.C.) 
CONTINVED PAGE 29 

## [Page 28](078378engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 56824: Lepenski Vir; Europe's oldest settlement on the banks of the Danube

      
   
   
  
   
   
    
IN
 
L
A
S
 
“ 
- 
. 
P
A
S
S
 
  
   
 
g 
a
 
R
a
a
 
MAN 
FISH 
OR DOODLE? 
 
The sculptors of Lepenski Vir respected the basic shape of their raw material—stones 
rounded and polished by the swirling waters of the Danube. The examples above and 
below right have been variously interpreted as representing fish, human heads 
or as being simply geometric doodles iike those executed on bone by the hunters 
of post-glacial Europe a few millenia earlier. 
The Lepenski Vir people have been referred to as a-ceramic 
or pre-ceramic and the few sherds of pottery found on 
the site (above) have been ascribed to the Starcevo era, 
previously the oldest known neolithic culture of the Balkans. 
However the oldest piece of pottery found at 
Lepenski Vir has been put at 5600 B.C., thus ante-dating 
the Starcevo culture. The incised decorations on a grey 
sandstone plaque (below) may represent hunting scenes. 
  

## [Page 29](078378engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 56824: Lepenski Vir; Europe's oldest settlement on the banks of the Danube

LEPENSKI VIR (Continued) 
consists of a light soil of black ash 
and has two levels of dwellings, A 
and B, in which vestiges of the Star- 
cevo culture are mingled with those 
of lower levels. In the humus of 
level B are to be found tombs of 
historic and prehistoric eras which 
suggest that the more recent genera- 
tions continued to use them as their 
traditional burial places. 
By their colour, structure and their 
remains, the deeper layers (dated 
4950, 5600 to 5000, and 5800 B.C. 
respectively) are clearly distinguish- 
able from the most recent layer. Lep- 
enski Vir, therefore, offers evidence 
of two types of prehistoric cultures— 
the most recent overlapping with that 
of Starcevo and the older one being 
a new phenomenon, the unexpected 
revelation of European pre-history. 
Like the traditional village, Lepenski 
Vir had its central square as a meeting 
place and streets whose pattern chang- 
ed from era to era. The houses, 
about a hundred of which have been 
uncovered, were often built one on 
top of another in succeeding centuries, 
since the tiny site of the settlement 
severely restricted its habitable area. 
The houses had a solid floor made 
of a chalk-based mortar of a reddish 
colour covered with a pink or white 
facing. The walls and roof consisted 
of skins stretched over supporting 
poles and an overhead beam. The 
dwellings were in the shape of a 
trapezium with the roof sloping shar- 
ply towards the shortest side and 
the entrance on the opposite and 
largest side. At the entrance to each 
house two threshold stones were 
placed in such a way as to direct the 
dwellers towards the side walls so 
that they would not, in the dark, 
stumble against the centrally sited 
hearth built of chalk blocks or clay. 
Around the hearth was placed a 
sacrificial altar with sculptures and a 
large rounded stone half buried in 
the ground. This may have been a 
symbol of the sun for it was often 
embellished with a design reminiscent 
of the sun's rays. 
Several hearths were surrounded 
by thin flagstones in the shape of 
isosceles triangles, the meaning of 
which is unknown. 1t has been sug- 
gested that they may symbolize the 
link between man and his dead ances- 
tors. In several buildings were found 
tools, weapons, including clubs mea- 
suring 25 to 50 cm. (10 to 18 in.) in 
length, and ornaments {all these 
objects were made of bone or stone), 
as well as a few sherds of pottery 
dating back to 5000 to 5600 B.C. 
The pottery has been assumed to 
be that of the Starcevo period, since 
the excavators have referred to the 
Lepenski Vir people as a-ceramic and 
pre-ceramic. The oldest dating of 
5600 B.C., however, which antedates 
the Starcevo era, has posed a new 
puzzle for the archaeologist. 
Another surprise was furnished by 
the curved support stones that held 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
The people of 
Lepenski Vir buried their 
dead inside their houses. 
Skeletons (right) were 
found lying beside the 
hearth looking, in the 
words of the excavators, 
“as if they had fallen 
asleep with their hands 
resting under their heads.” 
Excavators found only 
skeletons without skulls 
or else human skulls 
without skeletons. 
The skulls show 
that Lepenski Vir 
man had big brow ridges. 
Stag antlers were placed 
in the graves with 
the human remains. 
The rectangular 
hearths (right) found 
inside each house 
measure about 1 metre 
by 50 cms (3 ft by 
18 ins) and are surrounded 
by curious “A”-shaped 
settings. According to 
certain archaeologists 
these may have had a 
symbolic meaning, but 
others think they served a 
utilitarian purpose as 
sockets for struts 
supporting cooking 
utensils. 
 Lr LA 
Photos © Jean Vidal, Paris 

## [Page 30](078378engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 56824: Lepenski Vir; Europe's oldest settlement on the banks of the Danube

J0 
LEPENSKI VIR (Continued) 
the poles forming the frames of the 
walls and fulfilled a function similar 
to the metal sleeve joints that modern 
campers use in frame tents, 
All but four of the houses faced 
towards the west with the largest side 
turned towards Mount Treskavac in 
such a way that the prevailing east 
wind did not blow through the entran- 
ces but was deflected along the sides 
of the houses. With its carefully 
planned and thought out construction, 
its standardized workmanship, its use 
of applied geometry and the ease of 
movement allowed for in the interiors 
of the houses, Lepenski Vir is almost 
a “modern community” of pre-history. 
The Lepenski Vir people were wild 
fruit gatherers, hunters and fishermen. 
But it is possible that before their 
culture came to an end, they cleared 
some tracts for a rudimentary form of 
agriculture and cattle-rearing. 
It has not been possible to reconsti- 
tute the rites practised in the home 
sanctuaries. Fish, stags and dogs 
were sacrificed. These are the only 
animals depicted in the sculptures and 
remains of all three have been found 
near the altars. 
The Lepenski Vir people were buri- 
ed in their houses. They lay in graves 
beside the fire, in Srejovic's words, 
“as though they had fallen asleep 
with their hands resting under their 
heads.” 
In the oldest clusters of dwellings 
excavators found no skeletons but 
only parts of skulls. If we accept 
that the layers in which these remains 
were buried had never previously 
been disturbed, it seems probable that 
only the heads of the dead were 
preserved. Subsequent generations 
followed the same custom, but in later 
periods the inhabitants sometimes 
buried the whole skeleton and some- 
times preserved “the myth of the 
head” by burying skeletons without 
skulls, or skulls without skeletons. 
The antlers of a stag were invariably 
placed in the tomb beside the human 
remains and sometimes the animal's 
complete skull as well. 
The sculptures uncovered at Lep- 
enski Vir are of great interest. Most 
of the human and animal heads are 
life size, a remarkable fact consider- 
ing that all previous prehistoric sculp- 
tures have been miniature in size. 
The sculptor of Lepenski Vir took 
for his raw material large stones that 
had been rounded and polished by 
the action of the river. He infused 
life into them without altering their 
fundamental structure. Dragoslav 
Srejovic believes that the artist was 
obliged to respect the original form of 
the stone, which was an object of cult 
worship. 
Thanks to the help afforded by the 
government of Yugoslavia, Lepenski 
Vir will be saved from the flood 
waters. Soon the settlement js to be 
transferred to a nearby site out of 
reach of the new water line of the 
Danube. || 
  
wy On LANDS 

## [Page 31](078378engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
v' 
. 


### 56824: Lepenski Vir; Europe's oldest settlement on the banks of the Danube

THE MOURNFUL FACES 
OF LEPENSKI VIR 
Eight thousand years ago, 
the men of Lepenski Vir 
produced these carved images, 
using as their raw material 
the rounded, yellow sandstones 
they took from the river bed. 
Some thirty of these strange 
sculptures have been discovered 
ranged around the hearths 
of the dwellings. The heads 
vary in size from 57 cm. 
(almost 2 ft), shown on left, 
to fist sized or smaller figures. 
Most are life size. Bizarre figure, 
top left, evokes both man and fish. 
Photos © Jean Vidal, Paris 

## [Page 32](078378engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 56856: Non-scientists dissect science

32 
  
Non-scientists 
dissect science 
A. a time when space research has been hotly 
criticized as an excessive, even wasteful expenditure of 
vast sums of public money, it is of special interest to note 
that in the latest issue of “Impact of Science on Society”, 
Unesco’s science quarterly (1), many people from developing 
countries feel that space research—including moon shots— 
is highly worthwhile. This point of view, admittedly based 
on a small sampling, gives an additional dimension to last 
month's issue of the “Unesco Courier” on “Spin-off, the 
fruit of space research” (March 1970). 
The views favouring space research and moon travel are 
among the numerous comments on science and technology 
in all their aspects published by “Impact” in a significant 
issue entirely devoted to the theme “Non-scientists dissect 
science”, 
The “Impact” survey presents the opinions of “the 
average citizen” and of notable “non-scientists”, including 
novelist-poet Robert Graves, painter loan Mird, Kenyan 
leader, the late Tom M'boya, and philosopher-statesman 
Charles Habib Malik of the Lebanon. 
On the question of space research, Mochtar Lubis, 
publisher of the Djakarta daily, “Indonesia Raya”, declares: 
“| cannot agree with the criticisms that have been levelled 
against the great sums now being spent on space and 
nuclear research... For the first time in his long history, 
man is within reach of the stars...This newly-gained 
freedom, this vast extension of our horizons, is bound to 
have great effects on our old habits of thinking, on our old 
attitudes and on the familiar relations between nations.” 
Mrs. Gerénima T. Pecson, Philippine civic leader, agrees 
with him. “Much has already been accomplished in the 
exploration of space,” she says. “The recent fantastic 
flights to the moon prove the range of the power of science 
and its promise of wonderful new things in the future. Let 
the exploration of outer space go on.” 
The survey suggests that feelings against the moon 
landings are strongest in industrially-developed countries. 
For example, Robert Graves sharply disagrees about the 
value of the moon flights and lumps them into a category 
he calls “show-off science”. 
He says: “It reminds me of a man who leaves his wife 
and family to starve while he goes out and fights battles 
against strange foes. Until we have got this world in 
some sort of order, we should abstain from such expensive 
and dangerous nonsense.” 
The famous novelist hits out strongly at science and 
technology. Science, he says, is now dominated by base 
motives, such as making money. It “has gradually fallen 
into the hands of the traders”... "Men of broad vision, 
the true creators and innovators, have long ceased to 
control the evolution or uses made of science.” 
Robert Graves decries the destruction by technology of 
human dignity and individuality and of the warmth of the 
home, with people now condemned to live in unnatural 
“little life-boxes”. Technology, he maintains, is responsible 
for the enormous flood of populations into cities: “Science 
and technology have themselves created the problem that 
science and technology have been vainly trying to solve.” 
Tom Mboya, in what was perhaps the last article he wrote 
before his assassination in July 1969, comments that little 
has been done—and has often been wrongly done—in 
bringing the benefits of science and technology to African 
peoples. He pleads for technology designed to meet the 
needs of African peoples, not just merely exported to 
them. “Importation of technology without appropriate local 
research and development,” he says, “can lead to a painful 
lopsided society, where there is concentration of modernity 
in a few cities while the rural areas remain practically as 
they have always been.” 
Humanists have an 
“Impact.” 
Miguel! Angel Asturias, 1967 winner of the Nobel Prize 
for literature, calls for a closing of the gap between the 
sciences and the humanities, through a re-encounter 
between scientists and non-scientists, intellectuals and 
technicians which, he says, would offer a brighter prospect 
for the settlement of the problems of the Third World. 
Charles Habib Malik, former president of the U.N. Gene- 
ral Assembly and now professor of philosophy at the Ame- 
rican University of Beirut, considers that “the great danger 
today is that the enormous and absolutely merited prestige 
of science and technology might delude scientists into 
believing. .. that they are the absolute masters of the uni- 
verse,” 
Professor Malik sees three areas of danger in the pro- 
gress of science: “the possibility of scientific development 
abolishing privacy altogether, so that not only where | am 
and what | am doing, but even what | am thinking and feel- 
ing can be penetrated and known at any time; the possibility 
of interfering with the genetic development of man; and the 
possibility of upsetting whole equilibria of nature, with great 
damage to our environment.” 
M ANY of our readers—in particular, our scientific 
readers”—says the editorial in this issue of “Impact”, “may 
feel that some of the criticisms of science and technology 
expressed by the non-scientists are unjust, illogical or 
manifest a lack of understanding of how science works, 
what it seeks to do and what it is capable of doing.” 
However, “the significant point,” says the editorial, “is that 
these stances exist, for whatever reasons, however justly 
and with whatever rational validity—and that the majority 
of them have a definite validity cannot be doubted.” 
The "non-scientists’” issue of “Impact” is the second of 
a trilogy of numbers devoted to exploring the alienation of 
science from society. “Impact's” previous number, “The 
Science of Humour, The Humour of Science” (No. 3, 1969) 
emphasized the humanizing role of humour in science—its 
role in helping to re-establish science in the mainstream 
of cultural life. 
Scientists will reply to criticisms of non-scientists in the 
third number of the trilogy which will appear shortly (No 2, 
1970). In this issue, nine eminent scientists, among them 
the Nobel Prizewinner, Alfred Kastler, rebut and some- 
times endorse the opinions expressed by non-scientists, 
and also state their own views on the impact of technology 
on human life. This trilogy of “Impact” studies should help 
to clarify and give perspective to the troubled relationship 
between science and scciety—one of the critical questions 
of our time. | 
important say in this issue of 
(1) "Impact of Science on Society”, Vol XIX (1969) No. 4. 
Single copy: $1.00, 6/- (stg.), 3.50 F. Annual subscription: 
$3.50, 21/- (stg.), 12.50 F.

## [Page 33](078378engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

  
MAN AGAINST NATURE 
Sir, 
Congratulations on the issue devoted 
to the defence of Nature (lanuary 15869). 
My compliments are all the more sin- 
cere coming from someone whose 
country's plants and animals have 
suffered and still suffer from the depre- 
dations of man. Descriptions of Chile 
written at the time of the Spanish 
conquest, in colonial times and at the 
start of the 19th century all describe 
the unique beauty and rare specimens 
of plant and animal life in Chilean 
forests, including a number of animals 
today all but extinct 
Most of the trees in Chile's central 
mountainous region have been felled. 
Erosion is widespread and deserts are 
expanding, especially towards the south. 
Unique plants on the luan Fernandez 
islands (on one of which the mariner 
Alexander Selkirk, prototype of “Robin- 
son Crusoe”, was marooned) have 
vanished. 
The National Committee for the 
Defence of Chilean Flora and Fauna 
‘has endeavoured to impose eleventh- 
hour ‘protective measures, but these 
are still not generally observed. The 
world indeed needs a well-organized 
International Committee for the Defence 
of Nature, as the authors of articles on 
man's ravages point out in your issue. 
Dr. Luis Bisquertt 
Vice-President 
international Federation 
of Physical Education 
Santiago de Chile 
FISHY’ INSCRIPTION 
FROM EASTER ISLAND 
 
Sir, 
May | be allowed some observations 
concerning the article on Easter lsland 
(Special Anthology number, August- 
September 1969). The author, Alfred 
Métraux, and | worked together on the 
island in 1934 as joint members of a 
Franco-Belgian research expedition orga- 
nized by Prof. Paul Rivet of the Musée 
de I'Homme in Paris. 
My admiration for the accomplish- 
ments of the "Unesco Courier” is such 
that | feel obliged to point out a number 
of mistakes which mar the presentation 
of the subject. The article by Alfred 
Métraux, of course, is above reproach, 
but not so the accompanying illustra- 
tions and captions. 
The photo of the wooden fish engrav- 
ed with symbols was used when the 
article first appeared in the “Unesco 
Courier” in 1956. | should have object- 
ed to its use at that time, but the 
matter slipped my mind, and | regret 
this all the more now that the error 
has been repeated. The fish Is a 
crude forgery and the so-called Easter 
Island characters it bears are either 
clumsy copies or mere inventions. 
As for the water colour by Pierre 
Loti (facing page), it was done to 
please the actress Sarah Bernhardt 
and has nothing in common with the 
fine sketches executed on the island 
by the same artist under his real 
name, Julian Viaud, as a midshipman 
on the French frigate “Flore”. 
Letters to the Editor  
Loti's poetic account of Easter Island, 
in his book, “Reflets sur la sombre 
route”, makes no mention of statues 
standing on the shore. These, as Loti 
relates, “have all been toppled over 
and broken". Nor does he refer to 
the group of islanders surrounded by 
human skulls depicted in the water 
colour. Finally, the statues towering 
over the islanders in no way resemble 
the real monuments. 
Loti painted a pretty picture— 
scientifically absurd notwithstanding— 
to please a beautiful and famous lady, 
and for that he may well be excused. 
But the “Unesco Courier” with its 
reputation for factual accuracy should 
not have been caught napping. 
Henri Lavachery 
Hon. Professor of Ethnology 
and Primitive Arts 
University of Brussels, Belgium 
Further research has confirmed Prof. 
Lavachery's assertions. We regret that 
we were misled into believing in the 
authenticity of the fish-shaped wooden 
tablet. In the view of Prof. Kenneth 
P. Emory, Chairman of the Dept. of 
Anthropology at the Bernice P. Bishop 
Museum, Honolulu, the fish “was made 
simply to sell to visitors, bearing cru- 
dely executed copies of characters of 
the Easter Island script with which the 
present-day inhabitants are familiar 
through photographs of the old inscrib- 
ed tablets..." Prof. Thomas Barthel, 
Director of the Institute of Ethnology 
at the University of Tubingen, Fed. Rep. 
of Germany, author of an exhaustive 
study on the writing inscribed on the 
Easter island tablets, agrees that the 
fish tablet is not an authentic work 
and was probably forged between 1900 
and 1930. —Editor. 
FORUM FOR YOUTH 
 
Sir, 
How about a "Letters to the Editor” 
page especially inviting comments from 
youthful readers? 
M.N. Smart 
Salt Lake City, U.S.A. 
GANDHI'S INVOLVEMENT 
IN POLITICAL ISSUES 
Sir, 
Some of the articles in your special 
issue on Gandhi (October 1963), par- 
ticularly those by non-indian scholars, 
are fascinating. | belong to a family 
that has a long ‘tradition of adherence 
to Gandhian outlook and principles. 
To a sage whose mission it was to 
give to others the message of peace 
and brotherhood, of love and service, 
any political change, a united or divided 
India, should not have mattered at 
all. It does occur to me at times that 
Gandhi's involvement in political issues 
has left sad traces. 
Some of my friends and associates, 
who are opposed to our political think- 
ing, often put questions to me for which 
| do not find any satisfactory answer. 
For instance, | am asked how | am 
to explain the incompatibility of some 
of Gandhi's utterances with his creed 
of “non-violence”. During communal 
riots in 1945, Gandhiji observed: “If 
Hindus had the right to be killed, they 
had the right to kill." In 1947, on the 
outbreak of hostilities in Kashmir, he 
stated: “Let Sheikh Abdullah and his 
associates fight for their homeland.” 
|! am asked why, when India took 
over the State of lunagarh in defiance 
of the decision of the Muslim ruler 
to accede to Pakistan, on the grounds 
that the ruler had acted against the 
wishes of his Hindu subjects, Gan- 
dhiji did not condemn this as an act 
of violence. | am further asked why 
Gandhiji went to Kashmir to persuade 
its Hindu ruler to accede to India in 
disregard of the wishes of his Muslim 
subjects. 
Belief often obscures reality. Do 
these utterances of Gandhiji and his 
involvement in politics point to his 
deeper political and cultural motiva- 
tions? And what were those motiva- 
tions? None would dispute the fact 
that all great personalities have had 
weaker facets, a natural consequence 
of devotion to a cause and of sin- 
cerity. | believe, and | hope many of 
your readers will agree with me, that 
in the rational assessment of the facts 
of his life, of the strong and weak 
sides of his personality, lies the real 
greatness of a personage. 
A.H. Rathore 
Rawalpindi, Pakistan 
<COURIER’ IN SWAHILI 
 
Sir, 
What | enjoy most about the “Unesco 
Courier” is its global outlook and cov- 
erage, and the fact that it keeps me in 
touch with modern ideas and attitudes. 
Your presentation of major world 
problems is particularly worthwhile, as 
in the case of Unesco's efforts to 
protect and preserve the cultural and 
artistic treasures and traditions of diff- 
erent countries; what Unesco is doing 
to combat racial prejudice and other 
forms of discrimination; world efforts 
to solve the crisis of food and people; 
the promotion of human rights, of which 
your November 1968 number was a 
striking example. 
To ensure that the “Unesco Courier” 
is known and read throughout the 
world, would you please add more lan- 
guage editions. | suggest one should 
be published in Swahili. People all 
over the world are anxlous to get to 
know one another better, to understand 
the ways and customs of others and 
why they have adopted their own 
special modes of life, 
E.M. Salinwa 
Iringa, Tanzania 
EXCELLENT TEACHING AID 
 
Sir, 
The “Unesco Courier” is an excellent 
teaching aid. 
May Philosof 
Rochester, N.Y., U.S.A. 
Sir, 
| have always found your magazine 
very informative and educational. Teach- 
ers and students borrow it frequently 
from the library where | send it after 
reading. Keep up with the good work. 
Fr. Gerard Rixhon 
lolo, Sulu 
Philippines     33

## [Page 34](078378engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
UNESCORNEWSROOM 
‘Turning Point’ 
for world education 
With a population of almost 1,500 million 
below the age of 15, the world manages 
to give barely a quarter any primary 
education at all—and less than one In 12 
any secondary schooling. This is one of 
the disquieting facts revealed in “Turning 
Point,” a 30-minute television film produced 
by Unesco for International Education Year 
1970 (1). The film reminds the world how 
much remains to be tackled on the educa- 
tion front: shortage of teachers and equip- 
ment, inadequate planning, resistance to 
change, outdated teaching methods and 
programmes. It also shows more hopeful 
aspects: the increasing use of audio-visual 
aids and the new Interest and expansion 
in lifelong education, for example. 
(1) 16 mm. film in black and white, with 
commentaries In English, French. Spanish or 
Russian. Available from UnescofRVI, Place 
de Fontenoy, Paris (7°). 
30,000 towns support IEY 
Throughout this year, the United Towns 
Organization, which promotes links and 
friendship between the world's cities, is 
launching programmes to support the 
objectives of International Education Year 
(IEY) 1970. This year's theme for the 
annual “World United Towns Day™— 
celebrated this month by 30,000 towns and 
cities—will highlight the aims of the IEY. 
Astronautical dictionary 
in seven languages 
An astronautical dictionary, the first of its 
kind, has just been published by the Inter- 
national Academy of Astronautics (1). Pre- 
pared by 100 scientists from 9 countries, it 
comprises nearly 5000 English scientific 
and technical terms and their equivalents 
in Russian, German, French, Italian, Spa- 
nish and Czech. A legal section contains 
900 entries and corresponding translations. 
(1) "Astronautical Multilingual Dictionary of 
the International Academy of Astronautics.” 
Academia Publishing House of the Czecho- 
slovak Academy of Sciences, Vodickova 40. 
Prague 1-Nové Mesto, Czechoslovakia. Price: 
$37.50, £13.10, 207F. 
Smallpox retreating 
Smalipox has declined by almost 60 per 
cent during the first three years of the 
world-wide eradication campaign launched 
by WHO in 1967. Cases dropped from 
128,300 in 1967 to some 56,000 in 1969, 
and countries reporting the disease, from 
43 to 29. 
Chad protects 
its antelope herds 
Chad has opened a wildlife reserve in 
its northern desert to protect the grazing 
area and migratory routes of the addax 
and the oryx, two species of antelope. 
Research by the Food and Agriculture 
Organization showed that 90 per cent of 
the country’s herds (10,000 addax and 
40,000 oryx) had been killed in the past 
20 years. 
‘TidaI’'movements 
of the continents 
Pulled by the sun and moon and pushed 
by the sea, the land masses of the earth 
rise and fall like the oceans every day. 
Columbia University scientists studying the 
continental United States have found that 
the land rises and falls an average of 
12 inches twice daily. Using instruments 
with the sensitivity and long-term stability 
to measure over long periods, they carried 
out the most detailed measurements ever 
made of these solid-earth tides. The earth 
tides are greatly influenced by ocean tides, 
even at points far inland, and also indi- 
rectly by atmospheric pressure and tem- 
perature variations. 
Science and the future 
Scientific events of the past year and 
scientists’ predictions for the future are 
presented in non-technical terms in the 
recently published “1970 Britannica Year- 
book of Science and the Future” (Encyclo- 
paedia Britannica, Inc.,, Chicago, U.S.A; 
448 pages, $12.50.) The Yearbook's 18 arti- 
cles, whose authors include two Nobel 
prize winners, cover many subjects of 
current significance such as space explo- 
ration, the brain, oceanography, sleep and 
dreams, archaeology, game theory and 
molecular biology. A 172-page “Science 
Year Review” analyzes major scientific 
achievements and activities between July 
1968 and June 1969. 
Fish farming on 
‘the roof of the world’ 
Chinese carp, introduced into the water- 
logged rice paddy fields of Nepal, are 
helping to increase the protein content of 
Nepalese diets and to provide a double 
crop from the same land. At Pipley, 75 mi- 
les from Katmandu, an FAQ team, has 
established Nepal's first commercial fish 
farm, comprising nine man-made fish ponds 
which are expected to produce some 
40 tons of fish annually. 
Flashes... 
MW The world fish catch for 1968 attained 
a record 64 million metric tons—3,300,000 
tons more than in 1967—says a recent 
FAQ report. 
WN An Institute of educational research is 
being set up in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, with 
aid from the U.N. Development Programme 
and Unesco. 
WM Soil erosion—often the result of man's 
misuse—affects 15 per cent of the world's 
agricultural land, causing an annual loss of 
over $4,000 million, reports FAQ. 
WM Six Unesco specialists are to help 
launch a technical education project In 
Kuwait which needs to train 1,000 techni- 
cians within the next five years, 
WM The sea floor between Japan and Taiwan 
may contain one of the world’s richest 
oil reservoirs, according to a recent geo- 
physical survey of the East China Sea and 
the Yellow Sea. 
  
  
BOOKSHELF 
  
UNESCO'S TRANSLATIONS SERIES 
CHINA 
HW The Complete Works 
of Chuang Tzu 
Translated by Burton Watson 
Columbia University Press, New York 
and London, 1968 ($10.00; 90/-) 
ROMANIA 
BM Anthology of Contemporary 
Romanian Poetry 
Edited, translated and with 
an introduction by 
Roy MacGregor-Hastie 
Peter Owen, London, 1969 (40/-) 
Dufour Editions, Chester Springs, 
Penn. ($6.50) 
IRAN 
HM An Introduction 
to Persian Literature 
(Persian Heritage Series) 
By Reuben Levy 
Columbia University Press, 1969 
($6.00; 54/-) 
INDIA 
HM Three Mughal Poets: 
Mir, Sauda, Mir Hasan 
By Ralph Russell and 
Khurshidul Islam 
George Allen and Unwin Ltd, 
London, 1969 (48/-) 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 
Mass. ($6.00) 
YUGOSLAVIA 
BM The Land and the Flesh 
By Ivan Potrc 
Translated by H. Leeming 
Peter Owen, London, 
1969 (42/-) 
* 
BW Tales from Eastern Lands 
Retold by Kala Thairani 
Allied Publishers, Bombay, New 
Delhi, Calcutta, Madras, London, 
New York, 1968 (Rs. 12.00) 
BW The Kibbutz: 
A New Way of Life 
By Dan Leon 
Pergamon Press Ltd. 
Oxford, 1969 (hard cover: 35/-, $5.50; 
flexi-cover: 25/-, $4.40) 
BM Of This World: 
A Poet's Life in Poetry 
(The Japanese Haiku poet, Issa) 
By Richard Lewis 
Photographs by Helen Buttfield, 
The Dial Press Inc., New York, 1968 
($4.50) 
BM Language Laboratory Facilities 
(Guide for their selection, purchase, 
use and maintenance) 
By A.S. Hayes 
Oxford University Press, 
1968 (10/-) 
London   im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
— 
Dé
pb
ét
 
1é
ga
l.
 
1°
" 
tr
im
es
tr
e 
19
70
 
-C
 
1

## [Page 35](078378engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Field Manual for Museums 
N° 12 of Unesco's Museums 
and Monuments Series 
MN A handbook of practical advice on techniques and 
methods for organizing expeditions and field work, 
prepared in collaboration with specialists in archaeology, 
ethnography and the natural sciences. 
BH Describes the techniques of archaeological prospection 
and excavation and basic methods of identification and 
documentation. 
BH Outlines methods used for field studies in geology, 
botany, ethnography and zoology. 
  
muscums and monu ents - XI 
Field manual 
for museums 
     171 pages 
$7.00 
42/- (£2.10) 
28 F 
  
Just published 
  
Trilingual : 
English 
French 
Spanish 
549 pages 
Price : $8.50 
51/- (£2.55) 
34 F 
Catalogue of Reproductions 
of Paintings 1860 to 1969 
9th edition, completely revised and enlarged 
HE Unesco’s up-to-date listing of 1,548 reproductions of 
world-famous works comprising a broad international 
selection of paintings covering over a century. 
BR Paintings selected on the basis of fidelity of reproduction, 
significance of the artist and the importance of the 
original work. 
HN Each reproduction printed in black and white with full 
details of the original work and of the reproduction 
(size, price, name of publisher). 
Where to renew your subscription 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language, 
* 
AFGHANISTAN, Panuzal, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA, 
Publications : Educational Supplies Pty. Ltd., P.O. 
Box 33, Brookvale, 2100 NSW ; Periodicals : 
Dominie Pty. Limited, Box 33, Post Office, Brook- 
vale 2100 NSW. Sub-agent. United Nations As- 
sociation of Augustralia, Victorian Division, 4th 
Floor, Askew Hous2, 364 Lonsdale $t.,, Melbourne 
(Victoria), 3000. ($ 2.75). — AUSTRIA. Verlag Georg 
Fromme & C*., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V (AS 82) — 
BELGIUM. All publications: Editions “Labor”, 342, rue 
Royale, Brussels, 3. Presses Universitaires de Bruxelles, 
42, av, Paul Héger, Brussels 5. NV Standaard-We- 
tenschappelijke Uitgeverij Belgiélei 147, Antwerp, 1. For 
the Unesco Courier (170 FB) and art slides (488 FB) only: 
Jean de Lannoy, 112, rue du Trlne, Brussels 5. CCP 
3380.00. — BURMA. Trade Corporation N* (9), 550- 
552 Merchant Street, Rangoon. — CANADA, Queen's 
Printer. Ottawa, Ont, ($ 4.00). — CEYLON. Lake House 
Bookshop, Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata,P.0.B, 244, 
Colombo, 2. (Rs 12.50) — CHINA. World Book Co, 
Led.,, 99 Chungking South Rd. Section 1, Taipeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa). — CYPRUS. "MAM", Archbishop 
Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 1722, Nicosia. — 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. 5.N.T.L., Spalena 51, Prague 1 
{permanent display); Zahranicni literatura 11 Soukenicka 
Prague 1. — DENMARK. Ejnar Munksgaard, Ltd., 
6, Norregade, 1165, Copenhagen K. (Dan, Kr, 19.00). 
— ETHIOPIA. National Commission for Unesco, P.O. 
Box 2996, Addis Ababa. — FINLAND. Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (Fmk. 11.90). — 
FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 
Paris-7¢, C.C.P. 12598-48. (12 F). — GERMANY. Ali 
publications: R. Qldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145,8 Munich,80. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed only) 
Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P, 
276650 (DM 12). = GHANA. Methodist Bock Depot 
" Led., Aclantic House, Commercial Street, POB 100, Cape 
Coast. —- GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingaom. — 
GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, 
Athens; Librairie Eleftheroudakis, Nikkis 4, Athens. — 
HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co.. 13-15 Lock Road, 
Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Akadémiai Ké&nyvesbolt, 
Vici u. 22, Budapest V; A.K.Y. Konyvtirosok Boltja, 
Népkoztirsasig utja 16, Budapest Vi. — ICELAND. 
Snaebjérn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
— INDIA, Orient Longmans Ltd., Nicol Road, Ballard. 
Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; 
36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 3/5 Asaf Ali Road, New 
Delhi 1; Sub-Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery Co. 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16 and Scindia House, New Del- 
hi; Indian National Commission for Unesco, act. The Libra- 
rian, Ministry of Education, ** C*" Wing, Room N°* 214, 
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi 1. (Rs. 13.50), — INDONE- 
SIA. Indira P, T,, D)l. Dr, Sam Ratulangie 37, Djakarta. 
— IRAN, Iranian National Commission for Unesco, 1/154 
Avenue Roosevelt, B.P. 1533, Teheran. — IRAQ. McKen- 
z1e's Bookshop, Al- Rashid Street, Baghdad; University 
Bookstore, University of Baghdad, P.O, Box 785, Baghdad. 
— IRELAND. The National Press, 2, Wellington Road, Balls- 
bridge, Dublin, 4. — ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly 
Biumstein’s Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48 Nahlat 
Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv¢IL. 12.50.)— JAMAICA. Sang- 
ster's Book Stores Ltd., P.O.BRox 366, 101 Water Lane, 
Kingston. — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., P.O. Box 5050, 
Tokyo international 100-31. — JORDAN. Joseph |. Bahous 
& Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Amman, — 
KENYA. E.S.A. Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. 
— KOREA, Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central é4, Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait 
Bookshop Co., Ltd, P.O. Box 2942, Kuwait. — LIBERIA. 
Cole and Yancy Bookshops Ltd.,, P.O. Box 286. 
Monrovia. — LIBYA. Agency for Development of 
Publication & Dustribution, P.O. Box 261, Tripoli. — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg (F.L. 170). —MALAYSIA. Federal Publica- 
tions Sdn Bhd., Balai Berita, 31 Jalan Riong, Kuala Lum- 
pur.— MALTA. Sapienza's Library, 26 Kingsway, Valletta. 
— MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port Louis. — MONACO. Britisn Library, 30, 
Bid. des Moulins, Monte Carlo. — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 10). — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G. C. 
T. Yan Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Cura- 
cao. N.A. (NA fl 5,25). — NEW ZEALAND. Govern- 
ment Printing Office, Government Bookshops at: Rutland 
Street, P.O. Box 5344, Auckland; 130 Oxford Terrace, 
P.O. Box 1721, Christchurch; Alma Street, P.O. Box 857 
Hamilton; Princes Street, P. O. Box 1104, Dunedin; Mul- 
grave Street, Private Bag, Wellington, (3 2.15) — NOR- 
WAY. All publications: A.S. Bokhjornet, Akersgt 41-Oslo 
1. For Unesco Courier only: A.S. Narvesens Litteratur- 
jeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6 (K.2.75). — PAKISTAN. The 
Woest-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., Unesco Publication House, 
P.O.Box 374 G.P.O., Lahore; Showrooms: Urdu Bazar, La- 
hore,and 57-58 Murree Highway, G/6- 1, Islamabad.Pakis- 
tan Publications Bookshop, Sarwar Road,Rawalpindi; Pari- 
bagh, Dacca.— PHILIPPINES. The Modern Book Co., 928. 
Rizal Avenue,P.Q. Box 632, Manila.— POLAND. All publi- 
cations: ORWN PAN Palac Kultury i Nauki, Warsaw 
For the Unesco Courier only: RUCH, ul. Wronia, 23, 
Warsaw 10. — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lda,Livraria 
Portugal, rua de Carmo 70, Lisbon. — PUERTO RICO. 
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor Roosevelt 115. 
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. — SINGAPORE. Federal Pu- 
blications Sdn Bhd., Times House, River Valley Road, Sin- 
gapore 9. — SOUTHERN RHODESIA. Textbook Sales 
(PVT) Ltd., 67 Union Avenue, Salisbury. — SUDAN. 
Al Bashir Bookshop, P. O. Box 1118, Khartoum, — 
SWEDEN. All publications : A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl, 
Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Box 16356, 103 27 Stock- 
holm 16. For the Unesco Courier : Svenska EN. 
Férbundet, Vasagatan 15-IVv 101 23 Stockholm 1 
Postgiro 18 46 92 (Kr. 18) — SWITZERLAND. 
All publications: Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasse, 
Zurich. Librairie Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211, 
Geneva 11, C.C.P. 1-236. — TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND, 
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
(37.50 baht), — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala. — SOUTH AFRICA, 
All publications: Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty). Ltd., 
Libri Building, Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
For the Unesco Courier (single copies) only: Central 
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg, 
— UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie 
Kasr Ei Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, Cairo. Sub-agent: 
La Renaissance d’Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — 
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. 
Box 569, London, S.El, and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham and Bristol. (20/-). — UNITED STATES. 
Unesco Publications Center, P.O. Box 433, New York, 
N.Y. 10016 ($ 5). — U.5.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska 
Knjiga ,Terazije, 27, Belgrade; Drzavna Zaluzba Slovenije 
Mestni Trg. 26, Ljubljana.

## [Page 36](078378engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE