# [070030](070030engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](070030engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
 

## [Page 2](070030engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

cific is still relatively 
known. Photo shows a ¥ 
- carved doorjamb (talé) 
‘and sculptured figure 
Ei Caledonia. i 
‘These architectural carv- 
“ings (5 ft high by | 1/2 ft 
ALD) ‘which flank the 
entrance to the houses 
symbolize the ancestors 
‘and preserve their spirits. 
Upon the death of the 
head of the family, the 
‘house is destroyed and 
the carvings, viewed as 
participating in sorro ys 
are “killed”, i.e. mutilat- 
ed. Most of the carvings ¢   
i=iy of the Southwest = 
a 
still in existence today are 
therefore badly damaged. 
LTT ET TET 
art see page 32. (Photo 
“copyright M. Rousseau, 
Collection Musée dex 
Riga Paris).

## [Page 3](070030engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

The 
  Cm Courier. 
Number 8-9 - 1954 
7th Y EAR 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
3 EDITORIAL 
The problem ol the word's primitive people 
By Alfred Metraux 
5 WHAT IS A PRIMITIVE? 
By Claude Levi-Strauss 
8 THE SOLDIER WHO WOULDN'T SHOOT 
The legendary figure of Brazil's General Rondon 
By Darcy Ribeiro 
14 THE LAST OF THE FUEGIANS 
The tragic end of the Onas of Tierra del Fuego 
18 THE ESKIMOS 
Denmark's achievements in Greenland 
By Kaj Birket-Smith 
23 CANADA’S ESKIMOS CARVINGS 
By James A. Houston 
25 MELANESIA 
“ Black Islands’ of the Pacific, by Margaret Mead 
32 ‘MAGIC’ ARTS OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC 
36 THE HILL TRIBES OF INDIA 
Neither isolation nor assimilation, by Verrier Elwin 
OTHER ARTICLES AND FEATURES 
39 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR ( 
40 IN THE DARK OF THE SUN 
Science chronicle, by Gerald Wendt 
4e HUNGRY READERS 
Our voracious appetite for paper, by’ Philippe Soupault 
46 PERU'S ‘MINIMUM’ LABORATORY 
Teaching with odds and ends, by Daniel Behrman 
49 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
Brief notes on education, science and culture 
* 
Published monthly by 
The Department of Mass Communication of the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, | 9, Avenue Kleber, Paris 16, France. 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Associate Editors 
- English Edition: Ronald Fenton . 
French Edition: Alexandre Léventis 
Spanish Edition: Jorge Carrera Andrade 
.Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
* 
Individual articles not copyrighted may be reprinted from THE COURIER but 
must be accompanied by the following credit line: “Reprinted from UNESCO 
COURIER". Signed articles reprinted must carry the author's name, 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompanied by an inter 
national reply coupon covering postage. 
Signed arucles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of THE COURIER. 
Annual subscription rates of THE COURIER : 6/~; $ [.50 or 300 French frs. 
MC. 54.1 84. A.     
UNESCO COURIER — N°» 8-9 — 1954 
LAST FRONTIERS 
OF CIVILIZATION 
This Indian of the Amazonian jungle is imitating 
the cry of a she-monkey in order to trap the male. 
In many parts of the world there are millions of 
people still living on the frontiers of civilization. 
What should be done with them? Should we 
leave them alone, try to assimilate them, or 
protect them and yet help to preserve their 
traditional ways? (Photo Dominique Darbois.) 
  
] C IVILIZATION today is literally dropping out of the sky on 
“primitive peoples” (we use this term for want of a better 
one). With the aeroplane we have now succeeded in 
breaching the last frontiers which once completely protected 
aboriginal ways of life. 
Up until not so long ago, though, most contacts between our 
civilization and primitives meant long-drawn-out journeys and 
were rarely accomplished except by slow progressive stages. 
In 1880, Karl von den Steinen required months of tedious 
river navigation to reach the tribes of central Brazil. When 
he did reach them, his discovery was one of the outstanding 
events in the world of science at the end of the 19th century. 
Ever since 1948, these same tribes can be reached within six 
hours by an airliner leaving downtown Rio de Janeiro and 
landing at the very threshold of their villages. The first pilots 
who met these Indians brought home stone axes as souvenirs: 
today, they fly in illustrated magazines whose circulation seems 
to have soared among the tribesmen. 
This sudden and abrupt contact of the modern world with 
the frail native cultures is, as a matter of fact, the last act of a 
drama which has been staged in different settings since the end 
of the Middle Ages. Until now, nearly every scene has been a 
cruel one; it is up to us to brighten the final curtain. 
The meeting of the white man and the primitive has always 
followed the same script. It can be summed up in a few lines. 
First, the romantic idyll of discovery with enchantment and 
tenderness on one side-and, on the other, surprise and curiosity. 
Then, still under the charm of this first encounter, the primi- 
tive becomes an enthusiastic fan for all the novelties spread 
before him. ’ 
But the first disillusions follow as the pioneer begins to 
exploit land-—and the people who had lived on it before him. 
The decline of the native way of life coincides with a steep 
drop in population, for new diseases are among the “novelties” 
of civilization. - 
Often, just when native traditions are on the verge of disap- 
pearing, there is a last wave of revolt. Prophets or messiahs 
spring up and preach a return to the past or the building of 
another culture harmonizing old and new for better or worse. 
These attempts to turn back the clock are usually doomed to 
failure. They usher in the final annihilation of a culture or 
resignation to an inevitable fate. . 
Up until the end of the last century the crushing of primitive 
peoples in the path of our civilization was accepted as a natural 
state of affairs. Darwinism served as a legitimate excuse for 
the extermination of weak, backward tribes. After all, didn’t 
this prove the law of the survival of the fittest ? 
Frankly, there was no need of scientific theories to put con- 
sciences at ease. From the earliest days of European expansion, 
primitives all too often were placed in the same category as 
wild animals to be destroyed as if they were vermin or dange- 
rous beasts. 
Poorly armed and incapable of putting up a fight, these 
hapless victims of “civilization” rarely found defenders except 
among the ranks of missionaries sent out to save their souls 
and transform their cultures. Unfortunately, the loss of a 
culture can be as fatal as an epidemic. The Polynesians lost 
their will to live in the 19th century and as a result their islands 
were soon sharply depopulated — all because of the mass 
despair of a people confronted with the collapse of its values. 
During the last 50 years, anthropologists and psychologists 
have done an excellent job of analyzing these contacts between 
different civilizations or cultural groups. ' The question is: will 
we take advantage of their work? 
Although the rapid expansion of our modern industrial civili- 
3

## [Page 4](070030engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

LAST FRONTIERS 
OF CIVILIZATION 
(continued) 
zation is a potential deadly danger for 
primitive peoples, the errors of the past 
are now known. Several governments 
have awakened to their responsibilities 
and are now endeavouring to spare 
their indigenous populations the hard 
lot of other peoples in the same situa- 
tion in the past. 
A good many scientists and philan- 
thropists sincerely believe that pri- 
mitives should be placed in a sort of 
quarantine so that they may be 
sheltered from the evils which our 
civilization seems to insist upon bring- 
ing them. However, the idea of a 
“national park for human beings” 
does not seem feasible. 
Whether we like it or not, there is not 
a single tribe on the face cf the earth 
today which can hope to escape frem 
the effects of our civilization. True, 
this contact is harmful, but it is the 
primitives themselves who demand the 
tools and the knowledge which they 
believe can make life easier for them. 
New diseases threaten their health— 
and only our science can save them. 
The problem consists in finding an 
intelligent way of integrating them 
into modern life without destroying 
what is valuable in their way of life 
and, above all, without destroying their 
self-respect. Of course, there are 
some who will ask what is the use of 
saving people who seem to belong in 
the dark ages of early man. 
The answer is that these primitives 
number in the millions and that hu- 
manity cannot condemn them to death 
and degradation. Our indifference 
would not only ke a crime, but a fool- 
ish policy as well. These men are 
now being called upon to play an im- 
portant role in harnessing the resour- 
ces of their virgin lands. The trans- 
ition will be a difficult one, but it can 
be carried off if it is tackled with 
intelligence and with a deep sense of 
the innate dignity of man. 
What is the nature of Unesco’s role 
in the face of, the responsibilities 
towards primitive peoples which the 
civilized world must assume? Firstly, 
it can ease the process of passing from 
one type of life to another, a transition 
apparently inevitable. TUnesco’s long 
experience in fundamental education 
can prove invaluable in this respect. 
And, secondly, these “savages” have 
the right to preserve their artistic tra- 
ditions, for the loss of these traditions 
would be a loss for all of mankind. 
Unesco is not blind to this danger. 
It has already begun to participate in 
the long task of salvage being under- 
taken by many scientists, all too aware 
that this is cur last chance, 
Alfred Métraux 
 
Dr. ALFRED METRAUX was only 21 when he made his 
first expedition, an archaeological study in Latin Amer- 
ica. Since then his career as a practising anthropo- 
logist has taken him over most of Latin America and 
the South Sea Islands He has conducted several mis- 
sions for Unesco and as a member of Unesco’s staff is 
assoc;oled with Unesco’'s campaign against racial discri- 
mination, Swiss born, Dr Metraux 1s now a citizen of 
the Umited States. He has written numerous studies 
on tribes of South America and the Pacific. 
4 
 
J " TO, 1% Ti igh ' 3a 
ae 3 
Srl 
2 Qt . bd gr ol Hi f ral Tie NX . Ph 
0 J AS 1g : Th Cos . ” Wr ny (Fa he Jans A » NE A ORLA bah * 
ibn i ey A A NE SE ARDEA CAA BER Th 0] 
~ Australian official photograph 
CIVILIZATION LITERALLY drops out of the blue these days onto the heads of “primitive” peoples- 
as illustrated by this photograph of an airfield at Tapini in New Guinea, a country entering the air age 
without ever having passed through the stage of roads and railroads (airplanes are the only practical 
way of reaching its interior). Last year, an aerial map-making crew discovered a “lost valley” on New 
Guinea where some 100,000 aborigines whose existence was previously unknown are believed to live. 
An expedition is scheduled to explore the region, hemmed in by rugged peaks, later this year, 
SRE Sa ; ~~ 
Panay Ce 
ome ar * - I a < 
i ROA J 
a 
 
Photos E. Aubert de la rue and Australian official photo 
“PRIMITIVE”, a bad enough word in itself, does not mean “inferior”, These Kanakas (upper photos) 
in the New Hebrides cope perfectly well with life on Pentecost Island—even if they rub two sticks to- 
gether to light their fires and make their own axes from stone. The Australian aborigines have also 
found a way of life well-adapted to their own environment. Science has turned the corner after first 
regarding “primitive” peoples as unfit for survival—it now recognizes that indiscriminate “improve- 
ment” can be disastrous for them If it destroys their traditional values.

## [Page 5](070030engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 69983: What is a 'primitive'?

WHAT IS A 
-~N " LE, 
» - a 
- 
   
UNESCO COURIER — No* 8-9 — 1954 
PRIMITIVE” 
  
   
»e oN 
A 
a" 
i le Re Nee 
F PL gw : 
. a "= al o “ 
Tribal dance of the Bapendé in the heart of the Congo. (Photo D.F.F.) 
by Claude Levi-Strauss, 
HERE was a time when if you spoke about 
savages everyone had a fairly clear idea what 
you were talking about. Etymologically, the 
savage was a man of the forest, and the term 
denoted those people who lived in close 
contact with nature. The German word naturvolker (nature 
folk) conveyed this idea directly. 
But apart from the fact that all savages do not necessarily 
live in forests (think of the Eskimos), the word soon took on 
a figurative meaning which quickly became derogatory. 
Then too, the idea of living in close contact with nature was 
also confusing. Peasants live much closer to nature than city 
dwellers yet both belong to the same civilization 
Scientists came to realize that you couldn’t classify the 
people of the world according to how close or how far 
removed they were from nature, In fact what distinguishes 
mankind from the animals is that man, with his universal 
use of language, his fabricated implements and tools, and 
his submission to customs, creeds and institutions, belongs 
to a higher order than any living thing in nature. The 
world of man is a world of culture — that is rigorously and 
unequivocably opposed to nature whatever the level of civi- 
lization. Every human being talks, makes implements and 
behaves according to set rules whether he lives in a skyscra- 
per or in a thatched hut in the middle of the forest. And 
it is this that makes him a human being, not the particuliar 
materials he builds his house out of. 
  
Prof. Claude LEVI-STRAUSS knows the life of “primitive” civilizations at first- 
hand, having lived among the Indions of Brazil's Amazon basin. During his long 
career he has taught of the University of Soo Paulo in Brazil, the Institute of 
Ethnology in Paris and served as Assistant Director of the Musée de I'Homme in Paris. 
At present, he is Research Director in the Section of Religious Sciences at the Ecole 
Pratique des Hautes Etudes and Secretary-General of the International Social Science 
Council in Paris. . 
Modern anthropology prefers therefore to use the word 
primitive to designate the people who used to be called 
savage. There are an enormous number of primitive socie- 
ties — several thousand according to a recent estimate, But 
trouble starts when an effort is made to describe the charac- 
teristics of such societies. 
First of all, we can discount the factor of numbers, that is 
the size of the society. Of course, size does have meaning 
from the global point of view, for societies comprising several 
million members appear only rarely in the history of man- 
kind and are found only in a few great civilizations. More- 
over, these civilizations appeared at different historical epochs 
and in regions as far apart as the East and Far East, 
Europe, Central and South America. Yet these are differ- 
ences so great that the factor of numbers or size can have 
no absolute value. Some African kingdoms included several 
hundred thousand persons and oceanic tribes had several 
thousand members but in the same regions of the world we 
find societies made up of a few hundred persons or even at 
times of only a few dozen. 
In addition, such peoples (for instance, the Eskimos and 
some Australian tribes) are often organized in an extraordi- 
narily flexible way : a group is able to expand on festive 
occasions or during certain periods of the year, so as to 
include several thousand persons, while at other seasons it 
splits up into small self-sufficient bands of a few families, or 
even of single families. Obviously if a society consisting 
of 40 members and another of 40,000 can both be called 
primitive for the same reasons, the numerical factor alone 
doesn’t provide an explanation. 
We may perhaps be on firmer ground if we consider au- 
other feature, undeniably present in every culture we call 
primitive: each of them is, or was at least until very 
recently, outside the range of industrial civilization. But

## [Page 6](070030engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 69983: What is a 'primitive'?

PEOPLES WITH A FORGOTTEN PAST 
AT 
    
         ll T
E
 
pa
le
 
C
L
A
 
= 
S
p
 
! x = oa a k & 
HUKA-HUKA is the name these Indians of the Xingu River in Mato Grosso, Brazil, give to their wrestling sport. (Photo S.P.l. Foerthmann.) 
here again, the yardstick won't work. 
Consider the case of Western Europe. 
It has oiten been stated, and rightly, 
that the way of life of Western Euro- 
peans scarcely changed from the be- 
ginning of historic times until the 
invention of the steam-engine ; there 
was no fundamental difference be- 
tween the life of a patrician in Impe- 
rial Rome and that of a well-to- 
do Frenchman, Englishman or Dutch- 
man of the 18th century. 
Moreover, neither Rome in the 
second century B.C. nor Amsterdam 
about 1750 is comparable with a Mela- 
nesian village of today, or with Tim- 
buktu in the middle of the 19th 
century. Civilizations which preceded 
the birth of our industrial civilization 
shouldn't be confused with those which 
existed outside it, and would probably 
have remained outside for a very long 
time if industrialization had not been 
imposed upon them. 
The fact is that when we speak of 
primitive peoples, we have the factor 
of history (or time) in mind. The very 
word primitive implies the idea of a 
beginning, Then, can we say that pri- 
mitive peoples are those which have 
retained or preserved to the present 
day a way of life that goes back to the 
beginnings of human society ? This is 
an attractive hypothesis and it is valid 
within certain limits. But it is also 
liable to cause serious confusion. 
First, we know absolutely nothing 
about mankind's actual beginnings. 
The earliest traces we have discovered 
6 
— arms and implements in chipped 
stone some thousands of centuries old 
— are certainly not the very first pro- 
ducts of the human brain. They 
already reveal complicated technical 
skills which must have developed little 
by little. And above all, these tech- 
niques are found to be the same over 
vast stretches of the earth’s surface, 
implying therefore that they had time 
to spread, to influence one another, 
and to become homogeneous. 
A simple matter 
of relativity 
N the second place, the peoples 
whom we call primitive are all — or 
nearly all — familiar with at least 
some of the arts and techniques that 
appeared extremely late in the devel- 
opment of civilization. Although the 
oldest chipped stone implements may 
date from 400,000 or 500,000 years ago, 
agriculture, stock-raising, weaving and 
pottery appeared only about ten thous- 
and years ago, perhaps less. Thus the 
“primitiveness” of peoples who culti- 
vate gardens, breed pigs, weave loin- 
cloths and make cooking-pots is quite 
relative in the time span of the total 
duration of human history. 
But we can ask another question : 
after all, don’t at least some of 
these peoples continue to follow a 
way’ of life much older than ours, 
much more like that of man in the 
earliest ages? At once, some examples 
~ 
come to mind: the aborigines of Aus- 
tralia or of South America. They lead 
a nomadic life in semi-arid regions, 
live by hunting, and by picking and 
gathering from the earth what food 
they can. They are ignorant of weav- 
ing or pottery, and until quite re- 
cently used stone implements. The 
natives of Australia had no knowledge 
even of the bow and arrow, while those 
of Tierra del Fuego had only a very ru- 
dimentary type. . 
Nevertheless, the progress of ethno- 
Togical knowledge provides the expla- 
nation. It has shown that in these 
cases and in all the others that could 
  
Ceremonial dance, Brazil.

## [Page 7](070030engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 69983: What is a 'primitive'?

be mentioned, the apparently primi- 
tive state is not the result of any mira- 
culous preservation of an ancient mode 
of life, it is the effect of regression. 
The Australians can only have reached 
their continent by boat, so they must 
at some time have known the art of 
navigation, and since forgotten it. 
Men who know nothing 
of writing 
A CHANGE of environment to an 
area which lacks good quality 
clay often explains the disap- 
pearance of pottery, sometimes even 
from human memory. Language 
often proves that peoples whose 
low level of civilization might sug- 
gest “their immobilization and isola- 
tion in the same place from the most 
distant times, have in fact been in 
contact for thousands of years with all 
kinds of much more highly developed 
populations. Far from these alleged 
primitives having no history, it is their 
© history that explains the very special 
conditions in which they have been 
ound. 
For it would be absurd to think that, 
because we know nothing or almost 
nothing of their past, primitive peoples 
have no history. Their remotest an- 
cestors appeared on the earth at the 
same time as our own. For tens and 
even hundreds of thousands of years 
other societies preceded theirs and 
throughout that time lived, endured 
and therefore changed as ours did. 
They knew wars, migrations, periods of 
want and prosperity, They had great 
men who left their stamp on technical 
. knowledge, on art, morals and religion. 
All this past exists; only they know’ 
little about it and we know nothing. 
The latent presence and pressure of 
‘a past that has disappeared are enough 
to show the falsity of the word primi- 
tive, and even of the idea of a primi- 
tive people. But at the same time we 
must take note of a feature which all 
societies we call primitive have in com- 
mon and which distinguishes them 
from ours. It is the reason for ap- 
plying to them all the same term, 
however inappropriate it may be. 
All these societies — from the power- 
ful empire of the Incas, which sue- 
ceeded in organizing several million 
men into a politico-economic system of 
exceptional efficiency, down to the 
small nomadic bands of planft-gather- 
ers in Australia— are comparable in 
at least one respect: they knew or still 
know nothing of writing. 
Colorado Indians in Ecuador. 
They could preserve nothing of their 
past save what human memory. was 
able to retain. This remains true, even 
for the small number who have, for 
lack of writing, developed some system 
of mnemonics (such.as the Peruvian 
knotted strings or the graphic symbols 
of Easter Island and of certain African 
tribes). Although these societies are 
not, strictly speaking, more “primitive” 
than ours, their past is of a different 
kind. It could not be a past preserved 
in writing and thus available at any 
moment to be used for present advan- 
age. 
It was a fluid past which could be 
preserved only in small quantities, and 
the remainder, as it came into exis- 
tence, was condemned to be forgotten 
with no hope of recovery. To borrow 
a simile from the language of naviga- 
tion, societies with some form of 
writing have a means of logging their 
course and therefore of keeping on the 
same track for a long period. - 
On the other hand, societies without 
some form of writing are reduced to 
following an unsteady course which 
may in the end (although the distance 
covered is the same in both cases) 
bring them back vety near to their 
starting point. Or at least it deprived 
them of the means of systematically 
drawing away from it, that is to say, 
of making progress. 
Danger of ambiguous 
expressions 
HEREFORE 1 cannot too strongly 
warn that readers — and even 
scientists themselves — should 
beware of ambiguous terms like savage, 
primitive, or archaic. By taking the 
presence or absence of some form of 
writing as the sole criterion in ovr 
study of societies, we shall, in the first 
place, be invoking an objective quality 
which implies no philosophic or moral 
postulate. And at the same time we 
shall be relying on the only feature 
capable of explaining the real diffe- 
rence that distinguishes certain socie- 
ties from our own. 
The idea of a primitive society is a 
delusion. © On the other hand the idea 
of a society with no form of writing 
makes us-aware of an essential side of 
mankind’s development; it explains 
the history, and enables us to foresee 
and perhaps influence the future of 
these peoples. 
(Photos copyright E. Aubert de la Rue, Gusindé, 
S.P.L) ' 
- 7 
Abron women from the Ivory Coast, 
UNESCO COURIER — N°* 8-9 — 1954 
  
    ma 
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
  
 
   
 
,
 
n
n
 
" 
ge] cy 
Nd oe ‘ RP 
Kakamoceka girls in French Equatorial Africa. 
 
Masai women in Kenya.

## [Page 8](070030engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 69987: The Soldier who wouldn't shoot: 'die if you must but never kill an Indian'

  
  
IH
 
A
 
eed 
oh 
Ee 
So
f 
LA
E 
 
   Be js 
1 i 
ei 
  
   
THE DISTRIBUTION - 
SOUTH AMERICA 
  
 
  
  
 
  
BRASIL B 
| pon, A 
   
OF INDIANS IN 
  
   
  
  
  
  
From ‘Indigenous Peoples” Published By LL. OQ. 
  
    
DISTRIBUTION OF BRAZIL'S INDIAN POPULATION BY STATES 
Number 
State of Indians 
Mato Grosso 500,000 
Acre 300,000 
Amazonas - 200,000 
Pari 100,000 
Goias 100,000 
BRAZIL : GEOGRAPHICAL 
Number 
State of tribes 
Amazonas and Acre Territory 108 
Bahia 2 
Goias 9 
Maranhao 10 
Mato Grosso ’ 79 
Minas Gerais 3 
Para 22 
Number 
State of Indians 
Maranhdo, Espirito Santo, Bahlfa and 
Minas Gerais 10,000 
Parana 10,000 
Santa Catarina 10,000 
Rio Grande do Sul 2,600 
Sao Paulo 2,170 
DISTRIBUTION OF TRIBES 
Number 
State of tribes 
Paraiba 1 
Parana 1 
Pernambuco 1 
Rio Grande do Sul 1 
Santa Catarina 1 
Sao Paulo 3 
Espirito Santo 6 
RAZIL is a country 
where primitive Indian 
tribes still live next to 
huge modern metropolises. 
Brazil is a country of vio- 
lent contrasts, contrasts 
arising both from her enor- 
mous area and the uneven 
rate at which regions with- 
in this area have been pro- 
gressively developed. 
The Brazilians them- 
selves say that, when you 
travel in the direction of 
the setting sun in their 
country, you journey backwards 
through time. Sooner or later, you are 
bound to meet forgotten centuries. 
Even today, the Brazil of the prairies 
and unexplored jungles is only begin- 
ning to be integrated into the life of 
the nation. This Brazil is an ever- 
moving frontier and it marks the pro- 
gress which has been made by Brazi- 
lian society in what amounts to the 
conquest of its own territory. 
This is a borderland where Indians 
and the forces of civilization face each 
other under much the same conditions 
as those of the first nieeting of Europe 
and America. At times, the clash is 
even more violent than it was in the 
past—for it has now been heightened 
by centuries of bloody conflict. 
The Indian who sees an outsider 
move onto the territory of his tribe is 
convinced that there is no hope of any 
agreement. From tradition and per- 
sonal experience he has learned that 
he can expect nothing but the worst... 
  
by 
Darcy Ribeiro 
    
    
and that he has no other course but to 
defend his rights. 
The pioneer, opening up new grazing 
lands or jungle areas, looks upon this 
_ soil as his own. He resents the Indian 
and he is suspicious of him. The atti- 
tudes of both sides being what they 
are, it is no great wonder that a fight 
is inevitable. 
Up to the beginning of the 20th cen- 
tury, Indians who dared to resist an 
invasion of their territory were hunted 
down like wild beasts. Vast regions 
only a few days’ journey by horseback 
from big cities such as Sao Paulo, Vito- 
ria, Ilheus or Blumenau lay untouched 
because they were battlegrounds for 
whites and Indians. 
Entire tribes were wiped out. Gangs 
of professional Killers hired themselves 
out to local governments or colonization 
companies to massacre Indians and 
make room for European settlers, 
The fate of the Indians who lived 
peacefully in contact with white civili- 
zation was no less tragic. They were 
treated mercilessly and frequently they. 
were thrown off their land if it proved 
to be of any value. When they could 
be used in any way as a source of lab- 
our, they were ruthlessly exploited, 
often reduced to slavery and stripped 
of their most elementary rights. Their 
women and children were playthings 
of village tyrants. 
But as the advancing frontier pushed 
    Darcy RIBEIRO, ts the director of the Indian Museum 
tn Rio de Janeiro, and a social anthropologist on the 
staff of the Bureau of Indian Affairs of Brazil. 
For many vears he has had close contact with 
Indians of the Brazilian jungle and ts the author of 
several outstanding studies of thew iife and customs. 
General 
Rondon

## [Page 9](070030engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

"ducts. 
THE 
    
SOLD 
WOULDN"’T 
DIE R 
S 
UNESCO COURIER -— N° 8-9 — 1954 


### 69987: The Soldier who wouldn't shoot: 'die if you must but never kill an Indian'

   
  
'DIE IF YOU MUST BUT NEVER KILL AN INDIAN’ 
the Indian further and further away 
from Brazil's large towns, a new atti- 
tude took form in the minds of the 
distant city-dwellers. The Indian be- 
came a romantic figure, resembling one 
of Rousseau’s “good savages” and a 
flood of poems and novels began -to 
sing his praise, 
This, of course, did not stop the fron- 
tier settlers from painting him as black 
as possible so that the great Indian 
hunt could go on with some sort of 
justification. 
The beginning of the 20th Century 
saw an increase in world demand for 
rubber and other tropical jungle pro- 
This led to the invasion of the 
last of the land where the Indian re- 
mained unmolested. New conflicts 
between whites and Indians sprang up 
and new massacres followed. But, this 
time, an aroused public opinion 
brought pressure to bear on the govern- 
ment to put an end to the slaughter. 
It is against this background of vio- 
lence and murder that the figure of a 
young soldier first appeared.- Soon, 
the eyes of the entire country were to 
be on him, 
This officer, assigned to build a tele- 
graph line linking the Brazilian coast 
with the country’s western border, had 
adopted a new policy towards the In- 
dians. He wanted to demonstrate that 
it was possible to pacify even the most 
hostile tribes merely by persuasion. 
His troops had to push through 
regions occupied by the most feared 
Indians of the interior, regions where 
no white man had ever dared venture. 
They did go through, systematically 
winning the Indians’ confidence and 
with never an act of violence. 
The man behind this miracle was 
Candido Mariano da Silva Rondon. He 
had been a professor of mathematics 
and astronomy at Brazil's military col- 
lege until the day, a few years pre- 
viously, when he decided to find a 
humanitarian way of using the troops 
under his command. 
Rondon was a “positivist”—for the 
driving force behind this epic of the 
Brazilian jungle was the philosophy of 
the French thinker, Auguste Comte. 
Putting positivism into practice meant 
leading an armed expedition through 
territory occupied by hostile tribes 
without ever authorizing the use of 
arms, even under attack... and all of 
this in the name of an abstract prin- 
ciple of justice. 
Rondon became the head of a com- 
(Continued on page 12) 
OYANA INDIANS who live in the border areas between Brazil and the 
French and Dutch Guianas build circular homes whose frameworks are made 
from saplings bent over and tied with lianas. Nails and carpentry joints 
are unknown there. Roofs and walls are made waterproof by an overlapp- 
ing thatch of palm leaves. In a country as vast as Brazil the type of village 
house varies according to the region and the state of tribal development. 
A  —— —— TT —— ———— _— —p— 
  
  
  
 
y

## [Page 10](070030engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

BRAZIL'S INDIANS (Cont'd) 
SCANTY CLOTHING worn by dwellers in the heat and 
humidity of tropical forests is compensated by a profusion of bodily * 
decoration. Beads and rings are worn and body tattooing and 
painting are widespread. Feather decorations include crowns, 
frontlets, collars and cloaks. Feather headdress held by this young 
girl is also decorated with beetles wings. 
  § le i Vi a 
BASIC FURNITURE in the forest Indian’s hut 1s the hammock 
whose suitability for sleeping in the tropics led Europeans to adopt 
it after their first contacts with the Indians, and a low stool or bench 
often carved in the shape of an animal. Woman in hammock 1s 
spinning cotton while her husband makes basket-work fish trap. 
Basketry is a masculine industry.   
INDIAN KITCHEN is merely the centre of a roofed, but unen- 
closed hut, Here the manioc, purged of its poisonous prussic acid 
and now a starchy whitish powder, is either baked on a clay grid 
into thin flat cakes or stirred to produce small white crumbs, 
“farinha” pellets, like those of white bread. Meat or fish which 
would rapidly spoil in the humid climate are baked and smoke dried. 
  
FOOD MAINSTAY of Brazilian Indians, as for all others in 
tropical South America, is manioc, one of a variety of root crops 
from which many dishes and drinks are prepared. In the cooking 
pots shown here, for example, manioc is being fermented to produce 
a strong drink generically called chicha. Before being used for 
cooking, the commonest kind, bitter manioc, is carefully processed 
to remove the prussic acid it contains.   
YOUNG HUNTERS have spotted an Ara, a macaw which 
~. though never eaten by Indians, is much prized for the plumes widely 
used for making ceremonial headdresses, The blowgun and bow are 
basic hunting weapons and several types of arrow heads are used 
including barbed for larger game and blunt ones for stunning birds. 
de dS 
’ 
4 
AS 
    
SUN OVEN is a hut roof on which the manioc cakes are spread. 
Well-baked and dried these will keep for a long time. In addition 
to root crops nearly all tribes grow maize and cultivate many other 
plants for use as food, drugs or poisons, Certain plants when 
crushed in streams give out a sap which drugs fish without affecting 
their edible qualities in any way.   
10

## [Page 11](070030engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Nov 8-9 — 1954 
  
  
MOTIONLESS AS STATUES, TWO INDIANS PATIENTLY WAIT FOR THE FISH. 
\ 
Av 
ORNAMENTAL DESIGNS of human, animal and linear figures 
are used by Indians to decorate weapons, implements, vessels, clothes 
and their bodies. Here, using a twig and a hquid called “genipa” 
customarily employed for body painting, an Indian girl traces simple 
rectangular designs on paper supplied by the photographer. 
  La 
THIRSTY BOATMAN refreshes himself by letting water 
run down his paddie into his mouth. He is tattooed (a form of 
protection against malign influences) but like most Indians has 
removed all hair from his body, from above the eyes and from 
his lips and chin. Indians usually explain that they think hair is 
“ugly”, but there is generally some underlying superstition 
to account for this custom. 

## [Page 12](070030engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 69987: The Soldier who wouldn't shoot: 'die if you must but never kill an Indian'

{Continued from page 9) 
mission which set out to apply Comte’s 
ideas to an army. Rondon’s plan had 
three basic points: the peaceful use of 
troops £0 survey unknown regions, mili- 
tary construction of public works such 
as telegraph lines and, finally, the 
application of humanitarian principles 
such as the protection of the Indians. 
In the cruel history of relations bet- 
ween primitives and civilization, it 
would be difficult to find a policy 
bearing such a stamp of generosity. 
Even the 16th century missionaries who 
brought the Gospel to the Indians of 
Brazil did not disdain to use the secular 
arm. On more than one occasion, they 
asked the aid of the army. But Ron- 
don was the secular army personified. 
He was at the head of a conquering 
army, and he was able to make it an 
instrument which combined both .wis- 
dom and understanding. 
His troops marched under his motto: 
“Die if you must, but never kill.” 
Twenty years of life in the jungle 
brought him into contact with many 
tribes, a good deal of them pacified by 
h.s men. These years gave Rondon 
precious experience in the problem of 
relations existing between Indians 
and Brazilians. 
Eventually, he succeeded in training 
a team of men as conscious as he was 
of the complexity and the importance 
of Brazil's Indian problem. This 
school produced the first of the Brazi- 
lian “Indianists”, men who had learned 
from Rondon that force should never 
be used, even to stand off an attack. 
Above all, they learned that the most 
warlike of tribes might very well be 
peace-loving and willing to fraternize 
with white men—once they had been 
convinced that they were not dealing 
12 
with the usual sort of white men. In 
other words, the Indians had to be 
shown that civilization had a face 
other than the one with which they 
were all too familiar, 
In 1910, when the Brazilian Goverh- 
ment yielded to public opinion and 
decided to create an organization to 
protect the country’s Indians, Rondon 
was immediately hailed as the best man 
to set it up. This was the birth of the 
Servico de Protegcao aos Indios, set up 
to carry out a realistic demographic 
. policy: the preservation of a popula- 
tion indispensable to Brazil because it 
was already occupying vast areas of 
the country. This organization was 
also entrusted with bringing peace to 
regions torn by Indian-white conflicts. 
It was understood that the service 
would be devoted exclusively to aiding 
the Indians and would abstain from 
any religious proselytizing. The law 
 
setting up the service established the 
principle that the Indians would be 
respected as a people with the right to 
be themselves, to preserve their beliefs 
and to live as they wanted to live—that 
is, according to the traditions handed 
down to them by their ancestors. 
This service heralded a new era for 
the Indians of Brazil. No longer were 
all customs, beliefs and institutions to 
be reduced to one all-inclusive stan- 
dard or cast into a foreign mould. The 
new policy was based on what sociolo- 
gists term “cultural relativism”, In 
other words, there was a ‘willingness to 
admit that certain conceptions of the 
supernatural and certain social customs 
could fulfil a useful purpose within the 
framework of a specific society. 
Protection of Indians on their own 
land was another major objective. The 
- service put an end to the old practice 
of forcing Indians to abandon their 
FESTIVAL DRESS 
of Boro Indian in- 
cludes feathers driven 
through the nose 
and ears and beads 
through the lower lip.

## [Page 13](070030engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Ne°® 8-9 — 1954 


### 69987: The Soldier who wouldn't shoot: 'die if you must but never kill an Indian'

BRAZIL'S GENERAL RONDON - 
THE SOLDIER WHO WOULDN'T SHOOT 
homes and eke out a miserable exis- 
tence elsewhere. This method of “civi- 
lizing” Indians had been one of the 
main causes of tribal disorganization. 
Ripped loose from the surroundings 
where he had been raised and where - 
he had learned to fight for life, the 
Indian could not meet his own needs 
and he had been faced with a choice 
of fleeing or submitting. 
No longer would families be separat- 
ed under the pretext of education or 
evangelization. Previously, the remo- 
val of children from the homes of their 
parents had been the cause of specta- 
cular failures and bloody insurrections.. 
Traditions shattered 
"HIS practice had been widespread 
T and justified by the hope of trans- 
forming new generations of -In- 
dians. Unfortunately, it only resulted 
in depriving Indians of an education 
which would have -enabled them fo 
learn how to meet their own conditions 
of existence. It also shattered tribal 
traditions essential to them for surviv- 
al as a society. 
- Considering the period of his work, 
Rondon and the “positivist” policy of 
his service represented a big step for- 
ward—especially in view of the atti- 
tude of anthropologists and sociolo- 
gists of the time. They were mainly 
interested in describing exotic customs 
and had little concern for the future 
of the people they were studying. The 
Indian was a sort of human fossil enab- 
ling them to shed light on the past. 
Rondon’s Bureau of Indian Affairs 
was established in Rio de Janeiro, with 
branches—Inspetorias—throughout the 
country and also a network of “Indian 
outposts.” Each of these outposts rep- 
resented a territory belonging to an 
Indian tribe which was assisted by 
government officials. 
These officials were given the task of - 
organizing Indian economic life, pro- 
tecting the Indians from famine and, 
in general, raising their standard of 
living. In addition, government repre- 
sentatives were in charge of relations 
between their Indian community and 
the whites to prevent exploitation and 
to punish crimes which had been com- 
mitted against the tribe. 
If necessary, officials were empower- 
ed to intervene in quarrels among In- 
dians—but only if the Indians had re- 
course to their authority after failing 
to settle the disputes under their own 
traditional system of justice. 
106 outposts 
INALLY, Indians were given medi- 
F cal aid, mainly to protect them 
against diseases transmitted by 
white men. In short, outpost officials 
had the job of directing the entire 
process of assimilation of the Indian 
to avoid violent change which might 
- harm his traditional way of life. 
Sudden change often proves to be 
harmful when a primitive people can- 
not meet a new situation with its tra- 
ditional ways of life—and when it has 
not yet been convinced that there are 
any valid reasons for changing the way 
-of life it has always known. 
~ Today, thousands of Indians live 
_ under the protection of 106 “outposts”. 
Many of them would not have survived 
without Rondon’s service assuring them 
possession of their land and the right 
to live according to their customs. 
The service has always faced another 
- problem—the pacification of hostile 
tribes. It has devoted itself to this 
task for forty years while Brazil has 
pushed back her frontier. The men 
who followed Rondon continued to use 
only persuasion and several of them 
paid with their lives for the faith they 
showed in the motto : “Die if you must, 
but never kill.” 
       
    
  
     
   
, E . 
g .. ARE a « 
CSS aed Be EEE 
soap, metal tools, etc and that he has 
to work for wages to satisfy them. 
What chance does he have to meet 
these needs with the resources of his 
basically rural economy—an economy 
precarious even for Europeans? It is 
no wonder that the Indian often finds 
that his status is inferior to that of 
better equipped competitors who are 
adapted to a complex civilization. 
Uprooted, the Indian may lose every- 
thing — even his will to live. He no 
longer feels secure in a changed world 
after having lived among men who 
shared his viewpoint and his philoso- 
phy. Among Indians, the loss of tra- 
gy - we 
Ln - ed! \ be) " Pa— 
i» ” : » 
. - y >: : oh 
ns ol. > NE i en i 
re acd! 
“ f- = 
EE pty 
ee p—— 
— — 
A, 
pY - 
- 
ped 
~~ 
HUNTING PARTY of Oyampi Indians who inhabit the frontier lands of Brazil and French Guiana, 
returns to its village, 
This policy has proved profitable for 
Brazil as well as for the Indians. Huge 
regions have been settled peacefully 
and integrated into the national eco- 
nomy. The service has no secret of 
success—other than the patience and 
the spirit of sacrifice which Rondon 
was able to awaken. 
But what can be done with Indian 
tribes once they have been pacified? 
How can they be saved from the harm- 
ful influence of everyday contact with 
their onetime traditional enemies? 
The loss of part of their territory is 
a hard economic blow to Indian tribes 
dependent for survival upon hunting 
or upon plants growing wild. To make 
matters worse, they are killed off by 
epidemics of influenza or measles and 
the high mortality rate destroys their 
social structure and shatters their tra- 
ditional system of maintaining order. 
At the same time, the Indian finds 
that he has new needs—clothing, salt, 
In some tribes canoe hunters use a calabash to imitate the roar of the jaguar. 
Attracted by the call, the jaguar swims out to the canoe where it can easily be stunned with a club. 
ditional values breeds demoralization 
and, above all, loss of self-respect. 
The activities of the Servico have 
posed many questions, some difficult to 
answer. These problems are still await- 
ing solution, a solution requiring the 
contribution of anthropologists interest- 
ed in the future of so-called “primi- 
tive” peoples. General Rondon had 
foreseen these new problems and, in 
1942, he created a research section at- 
tached to the Servigo. 
Millions of men in the present-day 
world live under conditions little dif- 
ferent from those faced by the Indians 
of Brazil. The example of Brazil is a 
lesson: it teaches us that their fate 
need not be tragic. But a profound 
understanding of their problem and of 
the situation which is confronting 
them with the advance of modern civi- 
lization is essential. 
Photographs copyright Dominique Darbois, E. Aubert de la 
Rue, Claude Levi-Strauss. 
13

## [Page 14](070030engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 69988: The Last of the Fuegians

The last of the Fuegians 
N si 
[ 75 pL) 
LJ 
hr : 
4 
~ x
el 
vt 
LE    
 
iia 
    
  
   
 
  
  
  
THE LAND OF THE ONAS—the large island of Tierra 
del Fuego —is depicted here on two maps drawn four 
centuries apart. The first, prepared some thirty years 
ago by Father Martin Gusinde indicates the area (Selke- 
nam) once occupied by members of the Ona tribe. The 
second was drawn in the early part of the |6th century 
from information supplied by Pigaffetta, chronicler of 
the Magellan expedition. Drawing (above) also dates 
from the 16th century. It shows the Onas as they 
appeared to a European explorer of the time. Photo- 
graphs taken by Father Gusinde (below left) reveal that 
four centuries later life had hardly changed for those 
who had managed to escape extermination, : 
           
Geographische Verbreitung der 
Feuerland-Indianer 
Aufl Gewnd der Forschuagon. vou M. GUSINDE, 
water Boslitenng der smtlichon Karten dos dewtschon Roiche 
Marioe Asics, bearbeitet vom K. Streit 
    
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
     
   
   
  
& NA Sew N hh Sie Tope al 
NAOT Moy 
Bint A > a 
~ NAN AN NINN 
75 Ve Parlay | ——— 
An NNN g A % Ge 
he Toh, hs Pig Be Cg 3 
N\ Nery, \ 
EA oS 
DN 
w
y
 
r
e
 
ek
 
2/
7 
EP
 
EV
PP
I 
SE
 Jaf
 
70
0 
2f
     =?
 J 
 
VIR sp 
\ », 
oS 
-“ oo 
CERRY 
=   
 
      y TN de Vf ~ +, bp ig 
~ - p . SE DP Cin, SRE VL fle i hh, . al, A 
J9 4% Hv Ha 4) Aas 46 AT APRs Uv 51 FY 55 6 No css         

## [Page 15](070030engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 69988: The Last of the Fuegians

   
  
      
   
  
  I
 
bd 
4 
- 
A
e
 
pd 
1 
DEFENGE AGAINST 
MALIGNANT SPIRITS 
I TT SE TY RE 
UNESCO COURIER — No°* 8-9 - 1954 
“IE TTYL ait 
1 
I
 
» 
1
7
 
—.
 
" e
s
 
y
r
 
Sf
 
=F
 
® -»
 
y 
#,
 
T
r
:
 
L
d
 
Body painting with red ochre, oil or soot may sometimes serve the Indian as a defence against weather, 
flies and mosquitoes, but is more commonly used as protection against supernatural enemies—the malig- 
nant spirits. Ona tribesmen painted their bodies and wore large conical masks (above) during the kloketen 
rites, the most important of their social and religious functions at which boys were initiated to manhood. 
This was also a male device to frighten the women into submission. Men appeared disguised as various 
spirits, threatening women with punishment for disobedience. Believing that spirits took the form of natural phenomena—the heavens, clouds, thunder, 
mountains, etc.—the Onas used imitative masks. The one representing the heaven, Oleming, was painted with red and white spots. His wife, Jalpen, 
wore a completely white dress to imitate the colour of the clouds. 
N 1880, the Ona Indians of Tierra 
del Fuego at the southern tip of 
Scuth America were a hardy vi- 
gorous tribe numbering more than 
4,000. Today, they can almost be 
counted on -the fingers of two hands. 
What happened in the meantime? 
There could be no more striking illus- 
tration of the tragic destiny of millions 
‘of “primitive” people than the fate of 
the Ona Indians. The details of this 
particularly sordid episode in the his- 
tory of white colonization have been 
obtained from Dr. Martin Gusinde, 
an Austrian-born anthropologist at the 
Catholic University of America in 
Washington, D.C, who knows more 
about this tribe than perhaps anyone 
in the world. 
Hunters become 
the hunted 
FTER several thousand years, 
these Indians had become adapt- 
ed to the harsh physical environ- 
ment of Tierra del Fuego (its name 
means Land of Fire). Primarily hun- 
ters, they roamed the plains and moun- 
/ 
tains of their island tracking the gua- 
naco, an ahimal related to_the llama. 
To the Onas, the guanaco was exactly 
what the bison of the North American 
prairies was to the Redskins. It pro- 
vided them with food, and with skins 
for clothing and shelter, and bones and 
sinews for weapons and tools. 
The Onas’ first contact with the white 
man goes back to 1520, the year they 
were discovered by Magellan as he 
sailed through the straits which have 
since borne his name. In succeeding 
centuries, navigators who braved the 
storms of Cape Horn landed on their 
coasts, but only long enough to murder 
some of the Indians or kidnap a few 
unfortunates to be shown in Europe. 
These incidents had little effect on 
the state of the tribe as a whole, and 
the Fuegians might have survived to 
our own day but for rumours, spread in 
1880, that the island contained gold. 
Adventurers began to roam over it and, 
if they did not grow rich, they at least 
had time to massacre the small bands 
of Indians who crossed their path. 
This first encounter with civilization, ° 
though devastating, was only the pre- 
lude to a drama of mounting horror. 
The Onas believed that if one offended a mountain, it would send rain and winds. 
The bloody history of the Indians of 
Tierra del Fuego began with the estab- 
lishment of sheepfarms in the last 
years of the 19th century. 
Not content with cutting up hunting 
grounds by barbed wire enclosures, 
sheep-raisers, running these enormous 
farms, destroyed the guanacos and 
other game on which the Ona Indians 
depended for survival, 
One pound for 
a pair of ears 
HE starved Indians began to 
T “hunt” the sheep, or “white 
guanacos” as they called them, 
and that enraged the colonists who put 
a price on the Indian's heads, offer- 
ing one pound sterling for a pair of 
ears— the rate paid for killing a puma. 
Hunting Indians became a profitable 
business and people still talk of one 
man who made £452 at it in one year. 
In the interests of efficiency, the “hun- 
ters” organized big beats and their 
human qQuarry—sometimes started with 
the aid of mastiffs—was slaughtered 
without pity. 
15

## [Page 16](070030engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 69988: The Last of the Fuegians

The last of 
the Fuegians 
(Continued) 
The Indians, armed only with bows 
and flint-tipped arrows, were in no 
position to defend themselves. In des- 
peration, they took revenge on the 
sheep. 
At the beginning, the Onas killed the 
sheep in order not to die of hunger; in 
the end, they slaughtered them to vent 
their hatred. They cut the barbed- 
wire fences, stampeded the flocks, and 
trained their dogs to bite sheep. 
Disease, poison 
and deportation 
HIS absurd vendetta only exas- 
perated their persecutors and led 
them to greater cruelty. More 
than ever the Indians were treated as 
dangerous animals, to be destroyed by 
every possible means. “Hunts” became 
more frequent and more cruel, new 
horrors being added to old brutalities. 
Dr. Gusinde recounts that chil- 
dren were captured, purposely exposed 
to contagious diseases, and returned to 
their parents to spread -epidemics. A 
new method of slaughter was employed 
on a huge scale: mutton poisoned with 
strychnine was distributed to the 
starving. 
"This accumulation of horrors finally 
aroused public opinion and authorities 
decided to act, but the measures they 
took proved cruel and deadly. The 
Indians were torn from their land and 
deported without any regard for their 
living conditions. Most of them were 
herded onto Dawson Island; others 
were put into veritable concentration 
camps behind barbed wire. ) 
There is no need to describe what 
happened to the deported Indians. 
The women and children who were 
lent or sold to colonists were probably 
better off as slaves than their kin im- 
prisoned under military supervision. 
Only a handful 
now remain 
HEN Dr. Gusinde went to live 
\X/ among them in 1919, the Fue- 
gians then numbering 279, had 
taken refuge in the southern forests of 
their island. They were trying more 
or less successfully to live according to 
their traditions and to avoid contacts 
with the whites. 
But just when there might have been 
hope for their survival under the pro- 
tection of missionaries, they were deci- 
mated by influenza to such an extent 
that only a handful now remain. 
These “children of nature” had led a 
happy and satisfying existence for 
centuries in their solitude at the very 
southern end of South America, Dr. 
Gusinde writes. Generation had fol- 
lowed generation in a fruitful way of 
life. Other generations might have 
succeeded them without harming a 
soul on the face of the earth. 
Then, the anthropologist continues, a 
handful of fortune-hunting Europeans 
invaded their lands. In less than fifty 
years, an ancient Indian tribe whose 
past went back beyond the dawn of 
history had been exterminated. 
16 
~ 
i 
   
  
 
 
DEATH WAS ONCE 
A TRIBAL GAME 
Death was attributed by the Ona people 
to a supreme being called Temaukel whose 
will was executed through such causes as 
old age, sickness, war etc., and the spells 
of sorcerers. It was also the theme of 
one of their ceremonial games in which 
the leader, named Kotaix (left) painted his 
body and wore a horned headdress. At 
one stage in the game those taking part 
had to lie down and feign death. In 
wintry weather they first spread furs 
on the ground (below). But the game they 
were finally forced to play was far more 
cruel—a ruthless. man-hunt (top photo) 
in which as the defenceless human quarry 
they were nearly all exterminated.

## [Page 17](070030engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 69988: The Last of the Fuegians

UNESCO COURIER —~ No® 8.9 -— 1954 
4 
& 
Y
e
r
 
n 
S
i
g
h
 
w
o
 
e
y
 
i 
: 
a
r
 
: 
Z
h
 
T
t
 
w - 
Ly Wy . cy Ly 
ou ¥ a 
by 
»~ % ’ - 
Bikey aaa 
+  Ritual circle is formed by men in front of the ceremonial hut, which only they can approach, to invoke the spirits 
responsible for the weather. The severity of the climate on Tierra del Fuego over which chilly winds constantly roar 
is proverbial. But the people acquired an amazing resistance to cold. Immediately after birth infants were plunged 
into the sea or a stream and underwent similar treatment as they grew up. Only the most robust survived such a 
A GOL D GLI MATE Spartan childhood. Scanty clothing consisted of guanaco furs, and for shelter Onas built windbreaks of hides. 
  
Games and sports—wrestling, foot races, archery duels—were very popular pastimes among the Onas and all 
FEATHERS SPED THE helped to develop a physique capable of resisting the terrible weather on Tierra del Fuego. But superstitions 
also found their way into sports. Before starting a foot race runners tied a bunch of feathers to the left arm, 
being pursuaded that this would give them greater speed. It is, in fact, difficult to speak of games in the normal   FEET 0 f RU N N ERS sense in relation to peoples for whom almost everything has some link with a superstition or religious rite.    
17 

## [Page 18](070030engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 69988: The Last of the Fuegians

FUEGIANS (Cont'd) 
 * 
ON VIEW AT 18839 
PARIS EXHIBITION 
The first Europeans who came into contact 
with Tierra del Fuego Indians considered 
them as being little better than animals. 
Their language was reported to be rudi- 
mentary, but this idea was completely 
destroyed after the Rev. Ernest Bridges 
went to live among them and later pub- 
lished a dictionary which, though in- 
complete, contained some 23,000 words. 
Their reputation as “savages” was such that 
visitors to the Paris Exhibition of 1889 
were willing to pay to see a group of. 
these “curious animals” who had been 
forcibly taken from their island homes.    
  
PAINTING UP 
FOR “ KEWANIX 
Ceremonial rites such as the initi- 
ation of young men were always 
the occasion for Ona men to dress 
themselves up, But there were 
other ceremonies such as the 
‘Kewanix at which women painted 
their bodies with traditional designs. 
Their strange customs did not 
prevent the Onas from having a 
developed sense of morality which 
required them to live virtuously so 
as to earn the goodwill of the gods..     
 
NEW STYLES FOR 
EVERY OCCASION 
Ona women generally paid little attention 
to their hairstyles except for aslight parting 
and a fringe over their foreheads, Painting 
of the face was the only way of “making- 
up”. Here (from left to right) is the make- 
up for everyday use, for the marriage 
ceremony and the special hairstyle for 
mourning. Another mourning custom of 
the Onas was to gash themselves with 
pointed bones to show their sorrow. 
Men's facial decorations varied in the same 
way. Photos (from left to right) show an 
everyday design, a typical old man’s head 
and the warrior’s decorations. (All photos 
illustrating this article on the Ona Indians 
are copyright by Father Martin Gusinde).    

## [Page 19](070030engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

    
THOUGH SPREAD O!IT OVER AN IM. 
MENSE' TERRITORY ranging from the ‘Aleu- 
tian Islands in the Pacific to Greenland, the 
Eskimos have managed to preserve an amazing 
unity of language and cuiture. This photograph 
of a woman carrying her child in Greenland could 
well have been the inspiration for the statuette" 
executed by an Eskimo artist in Canada. (Photo 
at right copyright Paul Emile Victor, Collection 
Musée de I'Homme, Paris). 
old Eskimo site in West Green- 
land. Human bones were scat- 
tered where the sleeping platform had 
been and all sorts of implements 
appeared during our- digging. Local 
tradition told us that the inhabitants 
had starved to death during a par- 
ticularly severe winter. Some years 
later, when fravelling with some 
Eskimos over the Barren Grounds in 
arctic Canada, we had ourselves to go 
four days without food. 
The Eskimos, living at the northern 
boundary of the inhabited earth, have 
always been in danger of extermina- 
tion. The failing of the hunt, a violent 
epidemic, or a case of ptomaine poi- 
soning might lay a whole settlement 
waste even in Greenland, where living 
conditions are easier than in the arctic 
regions of Canada. 
It should be remembered that 
although Greenland is the largest 
M ANY years ago, I excavated an 
UNESCO COURIER — Nes 8-9 — 1954 


### 69989: The Eskimos: Denmark's formula for world's northern outpost

the eskimos 
    
Denmark’ s-formula for 
“world’s northern outpost 
by Professor Kaj Birket-Smith. 
19

## [Page 20](070030engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 69989: The Eskimos: Denmark's formula for world's northern outpost

NEW SOCIAL IDEALS FOR GREENLAND’S ESKIMOS 
island in the world, about ten times 
the area of Great Britain, little more 
than eleven per cent of its surface is 
free of ice and still less is inhabitable. 
In 1953 the native population 
amounted to 23,360. By far the greater 
part, mostly of mixed descent, lives on 
the west coast south of Melville Bay. 
Farther north, in the Thule District, 
the so-called Polar Eskimos number 
only 372, while 1,588 live on the east 
coast in the Angmagssalik District and 
around Scoresby Sound. 
Except for the period from 1860. to 
1880, the population has been constant- 
ly growing for the last 150 years, and 
the annual increase is at present consi- 
derably greater than in Denmark 
proper. There can be no doubt that 
this gratifying state of affairs is, to a 
great extent, the result of efforts made 
by Denmark. 
For nearly two hundred years after 
the medieval Norse settlements in 
Greenland had disappeared, only a 
few British and Danish expeditions and 
some Dutch whalers visited its coasts. 
However, whaling proved profitable. In 
the early 18th century, the increasing 
number of whalers in Davis Strait 
meant a new threat to the existence of 
the Eskimos, not only because of the 
recklessness of the crews, but also be- 
cause they lured the Eskimos info 
Professor KAJ BIRKET-SMITH, head curator of Den- 
mark's National Museum of Copenhagen, is a veteran 
of expeditions to Greenland, Alaska ond other regions 
north of the Arctic Circle. He is today considered one 
of the world’s leading outhorities on the Eskimos and 
is the author of many books on the subject. 
  
R WET I » “oS LT > ll" ATE 
Korte ERE TN Ta ath 3 , oF sige 
“ia 
    
  
selling products which the Greenlanders 
needed for their own use. 
However, when Hans Egede,” a Nor- 
wegian Lutheran missionary, came to 
Greenland in 1721 with the support of 
the Danish Government, he introduced 
a new era in the history of the Arctic. 
His object from the beginning was to 
revive the belief in the Gospel among 
the descendants of the Norsemen who, 
according to general belief, were still 
to be found in the country. For good 
reasons, this came to nothing ; instead, 
he threw himself with zeal into the 
conversion of the Eskimos. 
It was the intention that the expen- 
ses involved in this work should be co- 
vered by trade, and in the course of 
half a century, trading and mission 
posts were spread over the west coast. 
Much later, posts on the east coast and 
at Thule were established. . 
At first, various private companies 
attempted to carry on the trade, but 
they suffered heavy losses. In 1774, it 
was taken over by the Danish crown. 
This made-it a government monopoly, 
and it was forbidden for others “to na- 
vigate to or trade with the said country 
Greenland and adjacent islands, places, 
and harbours.” 
Right from the beginning, the go- 
vernment trade had quite a special 
character owing to the fact that, as 
expressed in the important Instructions 
of 1782, the leading principle was to be 
the welfare -of the Greenlanders, and 
assistance was to be rendered fo them 
in times of dearth. And it must be 
acknowledged that, in-spite of inevit- 
able mistakes, thoughtful care has 
always dictated the steps the adminis- 
tration has taken. - 
Gradually the old Eskimo culture was 
transformed. Christianity and school 
education were introduced and sanitary 
conditions were improved. The leading 
principle was, however, that sealing 
~ should remain the key industry. As 
hunting requires that the population be 
scattered, a clash of these economic and 
cultural efforts was, to some degree, 
unavoidable. Still worse was the fact 
that, with the breaking down of the 
old cultural pattern, the aboriginal 
Eskimo social ideas disappeared with- 
out being replaced by new ones. 
A sort of general dejection was, in 
fact, predominant within Greenland’s 
population when, at the suggestion of 
the great friend and champion of the 
Eskimos, Dr. H. Rink, the so-called 
“managements” were set up in 1862- 
1863. They were the first step towards 
letting the Greenlanders settle their 
own affairs and creating new social 
ideals. The success of this reform can 
be measured by the steady growth of a 
community spirit amongst the Eskimos. 
* About the beginning of this century 
a new danger turned up. While the 
population was steadily on the increase, 
there was — particularly since 1920 — a 
very considerable decline in the num- 
ber of seals upon which the whole 
existence of the people was based. 
The cause of this unfortunate condi- 
tion cannot be stated with certainty. 
It is probably the result of a coinci- 
dence of factors, among which the most 
IN ADDITION TO THE 23,000 ESKIMOS in 
Greenland, the world’s largest island, sone 22,000 
more live in the Far North of the mainland, Among 
these are the Caribou Eskimos (named after the animal 
which serves as their staff of life) on the barren grounds 
of Canada. (Photo, National Film Board of Canada.) 
 

## [Page 21](070030engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 69989: The Eskimos: Denmark's formula for world's northern outpost

a 
— 3 Re 
Sa #8 
3 ’ ‘ ’ 
  
FROM CLASSROOM TO THE 
COUNCIL ROOM. — literacy 
has disappeared in Greenland where 
schools have succeeded in training 
young Eskimos to shoulder their 
responsibilities as citizens. In [953 
Greenland shed" its status as a 
colony and was incorporated into 
the Kingdom of Denmark; it now - 
sends two représentatives to the 
Danish Parliament. These pictures 
show an adult class in Greenland 
and a provincial council meeting. 
important are the amelioration of the 
climate during the last decades, the 
brutal butcheries ion the breeding 
grounds by foreign sealers, and the 
- Greenlanders’ increasing propensity 
for using the rifle instead of the 
traditional harpoon. 
Whatever the reason may be, it be- 
came necessary to look for new resour- 
ces. Fortunately the improvement of 
climate which contributed to the de- 
crease of the number of seals also 
resulted in a steady northward spread 
of cod, now found along most of the 
west coast. Fisheries have been de- 
veloped by the introduction of improv- 
ed gear and methods, and the appoint 
ment of Danish fishermen as tutors to 
the Greenlanders. There are at pre- 
sent 79 government stations for 
buying, salting and drying cod for the 
export trade. . - 
A new job—sheep farming 
HILE fisheries are a further de- 
\X/ velopment on old Eskimo lines, 
animal husbandry and farming 
involve a breach with all Eskimo tra- 
ditions. A sheep farming experiment 
was started on the initiative of the 
government as early as 1906, and there 
are now about 19,000 sheep in Green- 
land. Experts claim that their num- 
ber may be increased fourfold. 
However, the sheep industry must: 
always, for natural reasons, be limited 
to the southernmost parts of the 
country and hence an attempt has re- 
cently been made to introduce reindeer 
breeding. In 1952, about 300 Lappish 
reindeer, accompanied by some Lapp 
herdsmen as tutors, were transferred to 
the Godthaab District. 
What, then, are conditions in Green- 
land today? It is difficult, not to say 
impossible, to give an adequate pic- 
ture. Since World War II, the radical 
changes which began slowly more than 
200 years ago, have increased with ra- 
pidly growing speed. At present, Green- 
land is actually in a melting pot. The 
transition from a natural to a money 
economy is continuing, and at the same 
time the first steps are now being taken 
towards a gradual abolition of the mo- 
nopoly and an adjustment of the differ- 
ence between the price levels of Green- 
land and the world markets. 
Social care has been improved. Any 
Greenlander more than 55 years of age 
who is not able to support himself or 
his family is entitled to old age assis- 
tance, as also are orphans and widows, 
and there is also ordinary relief for the 
poor. As for sanitary conditions, the 
country is divided into districts, each 
having a medical officer, one or more 
hospital-trained nurses, and a hospital, 
and there are also a large number of 
midwives. In order to improve hygiene 
and make healthy dwellings easily 
accessible, loans are granted by the go- 
vernment to enable the Eskimos to 
start the building of new houses. 
It is generally admitted, however, 
that sanitary organization is insuffi- 
cient and must be further developed. - 
Tuberculosis is, perhaps, the most 
dangerous enemy of the Greenland 
community ; between two and three 
per cent of the population suffer from 
active tuberculosis of the lungs. 
Like sanitary organization, education 
is one of the greatest problems in ° 
Greenland, because the extremely 
scanty population is scattered over an 
enormous area. School attendance is 
compulsory for children between the 
ages of seven and fourteen, and there 
are no illiterates. 
There are four continuation schools, 
one of them for girls, and the seminary 
at Godthaab, which originally served 
only for training catechists (Eskimo 
teachers and assistants of the parsons) 
has been extended to include a two- 
year commercial class, There are now 
also a technical school and a special 
school for wireless operators. 
Among other reforms, the new 
School Act of 1950 provides that there 
be erected bilingnal (Greenlandic and 
Danish) elementary schools. While 
nobody thinks of contesting the rights 
of the native language, in which there 
is already a small hut steadily growing 
literature, it is nevertheless generally 
considered of paramounf importance 
that the instruction in Danish be 
UNESCO COURIER — No» 8-9 — 1954 
(Photos Vagn Hansed, Copenhagen.) 
extended in order to facilitate the 
absorption of European culture, It 
should be added that there are three 
public libraries in Greenland, and that 
for many years, selected intelligent 
Greenlanders have been given an op- 
portunity to study in Denmark through 
fwo-~ or three-years schoarship grants. 
No longer a colony 
HE old-fashioned “management” 
T system, which at one time served 
its purpose so well, has been 
abolished and replaced by municipal 
councils and a council for the country 
as a whole, elected by universal suffrage 
and possessing considerable authority. 
Since 1953, when the colonial status of 
Greenland was rescinded and the 
country was incorporated in the 
Kingdom, the Greenlanders elect two 
members to the Danish parliament. 
There can be no doubt that the 
greatest problem of the future is the 
inevitable transition from a natural to 
a money economy, and as long as it 
has not been completed, considerable 
dangers are involved. It is to be hoped 
that the feeling of responsibility which 
has always characterized Denmark’s 
attitude towards Greenland will finally 
triumph. 
  21

## [Page 22](070030engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 69990: Canada's Eskimo carvings

  
ESKIMO ART portrays subjects through a hunter's 
eyes yet reveals typical traits of playfulness and good 
humour. This httle figure, “Man on Walrus Head with 
Fish”, is work of Ningeeuk, East Coast Hudson Bay. 
  
   
THE QUEST FOR FOOD and animal fat for heat dominates the Eskimo’s entire existence. He 
keenly portrays the other hunters, the animals and objects around him, and manages to infuse 
his carvings with the excitement of the hunt. Each animal is depicted with the concentration ofa 
carver whose whole mind is focussed on his future food supply. Among the Eskimos it is thought 
good luck to carve the animal one is about to hunt. 
ANGRY OWL as seen 
by hunter who approached 
its nest was carved by one 
of the best known of 
Eskimo artists, Kopeekilok 
of Povungnetuk.

## [Page 23](070030engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

  
UNESCO COURIER — No» 8-9 — 1954 
BEAR HUNTING perils are suggested by the 
long fangs and claws which Anudilak, an Eskimo 
from Port Harrison, has carved on his “Angry 
Bearhead”, a seven inch stone figure. 


### 69990: Canada's Eskimo carvings

Canada’s Eskimo Carvings 
F you ask an Eskimo of the Cana- 
_ dian Eastern Arctic if he carves 
sinourak (art objects), he will 
answer “Certainly !” For in a land 
where life is governed by hunting and 
where any one area will produce only 
enough game to support a few 
families there.is no specialization. 
Every family must be able to do 
everything : make a pair of boots, 
build a kayak, fashion a knife, shape 
a harpoon, sing a song—and, of course, 
create a pleasing object of art. Many 
experts believe that their art equals 
or surpasses any native art produced 
on the North American continent. It 
seems strange to find a rich, creative . 
and productive art flourishing in such 
a barren land. 
Living a semi-nomadic life in tents 
and snowhouses along the treeless 
shores - of Hudson Bay and Baffin 
Island, the Eskimos are hindered by 
a severe climate. Fewer than 5,000 
in number and scattered over an area 
of more than half a million square 
miles, they rely entirely on the sea 
and land animals around them to 
provide food for themselves and fat to 
heat their dwellings. 
It seems probable that they first 
introduced tailored clothing in Ame- 
rica.” Their parkas, trousers and boots 
are unequalled for warmth and 
comfort by anything we have yet been 
able to design. The slim kayak is said 
to be the world’s most perfectly devis- 
ed craft. The seal oil lamp, the har- 
_poon and fish spear are unique in de- 
sign and perfectly suited to their needs. 
The Eskimo possesses a cheerfulness 
James HOUSTON, a Quebec «artist, first became 
interested in Eskima art during o trip to the east 
coast of Hudson Bay in 1948. He returned with some 
examples ond interested the Canadian Handicrafts 
Guild, a non-profit organization, and the Canadian 
Government in developing an art project to encourage 
the Eskimos’ carvings ond the sale of their work. 
by James A. Houston 
and tranquility of mind that seems 
almost unknown in our modern civi- 
lization. He finds ample time in his 
life of hardships to carve the fine 
plastic forms that perfectly portray 
his cultural rise above his savage 
surroundings as well as his feeling 
about the people and life around them. 
The surge of civilization that swept 
the North American continent in the 
past few centuries stamped out many 
Indian ritualistic tribal arts, leaving 
in its wake a meaningless souvenir 
trade ; but the Eskimos were protected 
by their geographichl remoteness, and - 
the link between past and present in 
their art remains as yet unbroken. 
The severe climate demands that the 
Eskimo spend a good part of his life 
inside his home; he is invigorated by 
the cold weather. As he has never 
wasted his time on warfare and is by 
nature industrious, he finds time to 
contemplate “and to perfect his 
carvings. 
In his art we see life through the 
eyes of a hunter as he perfectly 
portrays the moving things around 
him with the keen, trained senses of 
one whose very life depends upon 
observation. - 
“When hunting caribou one must 
think like a caribou” say the Eskimos. 
“Try to understand from its move- 
ments what it will do next.” 
As the season approaches for the 
various animals to migrate to his 
land, the Eskimo visualizes the thrills 
of the hunt. As they bring in the 
carvings you can feel the excitement 
of the search for walrus, the snake- 
like thrust of the bear’s head, of the 
seals on new-formed ice, the first 
coming of the geese, the salmon in the 
rivers—the fatness, the cunning, the 
agility of ,the animal portrayed with 
the concentration of a carver whose 
whole mind is focussed on the endless 
quest for food. 
The Eskimo’s expert dissection of 
game gives him a fine anatomical 
kncwledge clearly shown in his well- 
proportioned carvings. 
In their art the Eskimos still use 
many primitive tools. They fashion 
knives shaped to their individual 
requirements using a shard of scrap 
metal set in a bone handle. A steel 
needle is employed for fine detail on 
plastic forms and for incised drawings. 
The bow-drill is operated by placing 
the short rotating drill shaft in a 
bone socket held in the mouth, leaving 
the carver one hand with which to 
work the bow back and forth and the 
other hand free to hold the carving. 
After the stone has been carved and 
drilled into the desired shape, a rough 
stone is used to attain smoothness, 
then the carving is submerged in seal 
oil for several days to allow the grey 
stone to darken, bringing out the rich 
serpentine greens and reds. After 
this the carving is rubbed to its final 
finish with stone dust and much hand 
polishing. 
Some carvers work with infinite care, 
portraying the subject in minute 
detail ; others prefer to create on a 
wider plane, merely suggesting the 
details while concentrating on compact 
form suggestive of movement. However, 
no art controversy exists among them, 
since’ the inherent politeness of the 
Eskimo requires him to praise highly 
the work of his fellow man no matter 
how inferior it may be and to malign 
his own efforts. The finer his carvings 
are, the louder his protests that he 
is unskilled and his work worthless. 
Like the Chinese, the Eskimos keep 
their small objects wrapped away 
instead of on constant display, until 
23

## [Page 24](070030engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 69990: Canada's Eskimo carvings

Eskimo Carvings 
{Continued ) 
they are passed to a guest for in- 
spection. 
Just before a walrus hunt, I visited 
the camp of Kopeekolik at Povungne- 
tuk on the east coast of Hudson Bay. 
He offered me the most perfect stone 
walrus I had ever seen. I praised it 
and asked him if he could make me 
another. After a perplexed silence he 
said “You can see that I can carve 
the likeness of a walrus! Why should 
you want another one ?” As far as 
he was concerned he had proved his 
craftsmanship as a walrus carver and 
that was enough. 
I suggested that I had never seen 
him carve a caribou. After thinking 
about this he became so excited that 
he immediately went off to select a 
‘suitable piece of stone. The Eskimos 
of the east coast of Hudson Bay are 
fortunate in having many deposits of 
stone along the coast suitable for 
carvings and for making their ftra- 
* ditional stone lamps, though it must 
sometimes be quarried under 15 feet 
of water. Baffin Islanders are not so 
fortunate and often must travel long 
distances to obtain okusiksek (literally, 
material for making kettles). 
The Canadian Handicrafts Guild, 
which has collected thousands of 
pieces of carving for sale, is aware 
that a demand for mass production 
has, in the past, destroyed- many 
creative arts. In order not to kill the 
Eskimo’s creative ability, the Guild 
does not seek to increase the present 
volume of the craftsman’s ‘work nor 
change his methods in any way. 
In the past four years the Eskimos 
of the Canadian Eastern Arctic have 
felt a real benefit from the sale of 
their art and craftswork. It has. 
eliminated government relief in areas 
where hunting has failed and has 
given the Eskimo the opportunity to 
support himself and maintain his self- 
respect. It has not disrupted his 
normal way of life since carving is 
done in his spare time when the 
weather will not permit hunting. 
The Eskimos are happy in the 
work of carving objects of art, and 
given proper encouragement and 
protection, it should continue to gain 
recognition as a definite art form of 
which Canada may well be proud. 
. 
  
 
RET RS CREE RR Re ST CL 
3 
Woman and dog, a 6 in. high stone 
* carving, the work of Akeeaktashook, 
Port Harrison. 
Birds in trees, an imaginary subject 
* (no trees grow in Canadian Eastern 
Arctic) by ltorchiak, Frobisher Bay. 
Raven hovering over nest, a stone 
* carving by Toolawak, East Coast 
Hudson Bay. 
Snow geese and their young, carved 
* in stone and ivory by Poota, an artist 
from Hudson Strait. 
 

## [Page 25](070030engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

  AUSTRALIA 
  
D
A
M
N
 
  
       
 
UNESCO COURIER — Non 8-9 — 1954 
ET IRE 
   
  


### 70010: Melanesia; 'black islands' of the Pacific 'Milky Way'

 
I
I
T
 
—
 
       
Black Islands’ of the Pacific 'Milky Way’ 
HE Pacific islands, or “Oceania” as they are often called, 
form.a kind of “Milky Way” some 8,000 miles long, 
stretching from the Philippines and New Guinea to 
lonely Easter Island, about 2,500 miles west of Chile. They 
consist of three great branches — a northern chain, Micro- 
nesia (“small islands”) ; a southern, broken double chain of 
islands, Melanesia (“islands of the blacks”) and, where the 
eastern ends of these two crescents meet, the groups of far- 
flung scattered islands known as Polynesia (“many islands”). 
By far the largest single islands in these three chains are 
found in Melanesia whose most important islands and groups 
of islands are New Guinea, New Britain, New Ireland, Admir- 
alty Islands, Solomon Islands, New Hebrides, New Caledonia 
and the Fiji Islands. ‘ 
Melanesia was given its name (black islands) because most 
of its inhabitants are of Negroid stock. Two races, the Pa- 
puans in the southwestern part and the more numerous Me- 
lanesians in the other regions, make up the greater part of 
the population. In the east there are some Polynesian 
admixtures and in the west live the Negrito, a pygmy people. 
It is probable that the Melanesian Islands, which lie close 
to the Malay Peninsula, were settled before those of Micro- 
nesia and Polynesia. Yet despite their proximity to the 
mainland of Asia, the Melanesians are the most primitive 
people in the Pacific. They are not such accomplished sail- 
lors as other.Pacific islanders, but they are better farmers, 
raising the starchy taro plant, sweet potatoes and yams, ba- 
nanas, squashes and pumpkins in their garcens and small 
fields. Although their social and political cur toms are crude, 
the Melanesians show marked skill in wood c:.rving and other 
decorative arts. (See article on Melanesian at, page 32.) 
Their first regular contacts with European civilization in 
the 19th century, through the arrival of government officials, 
missionaries and traders, gave them an approach to modern 
civilization which was piecemeal and non-comprehending. It 
was not until military forces — American, Australian and 
Japanese '— suddenly arrived in their midst during World 
War II that they were able to see that European life was a 
system in which the various parts — religion, political or- 
ganization, currency, dress, etc. — all fitted together. 
This experience of seeing European customs as part of the 
day-to-day life of a large community instead of encountering 
them in piecemeal fashion has been an unsettling one for a 
people who have hitherto always lacked a feeling of group 
or cultural unity. But, as Dr. Margaret Mead, one of the 
world’s leading anthropologists, has pointed out in the follow- 
ing article, it has also opened up new possibilities for a 
genuine integration of the Melanesians into the modern 
world. 
25

## [Page 26](070030engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 70010: Melanesia; 'black islands' of the Pacific 'Milky Way'

The Melanesians . 
A PRIMITIVE PEOPLDE’S ; 
SUDDEN AWAKENING g 
  
   
  
   
ANCESTOR WORSHIP is a 
widespread cuit among islanders 
who believe that the dead have a 
dual soul, one part of which goes 
to the land of spirits, usually on a 
mountain top or a remote island, 
_the other remaining around the 
village. Communal rites—long ela- 
borate and dramatic spectacles—are 
performed to honour the spirits 
and to ensure prosperity, Apart 
from the dead there are other 
spirits. Shark spirits, for example, 
give safety on the sea, eagle spirits 
success in war, and snake spirits 
success in agriculture. Images 
carved from tree trunks (below) at 
Malekula, in the New Hebrides 
group, are made to honour revered 
"ancestors whose spirits they tem- 
porarily house during the nrites., 
Forest clearing (right) has been 
prepared for a marriage feast. 
Each of the yams (a kind of potato) 
attached to the posts represents a 
chief who will be present, (Photos 
copyright Aubert de la Rue and 
Yan den Brock.)   
26

## [Page 27](070030engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 70010: Melanesia; 'black islands' of the Pacific 'Milky Way'

HE Melanesian people of the Southwest Pacific 
share with other South -Sea Islanders their type 
of habitat, small islands, either coral or volcanic, 
and an occasional larger island which has served 
the function of a “mainland” to the people of the 
smaller islands. Like the other South Sea islanders they 
were cut off from the main body of civilization until the 
19th century, and experienced mainly contact with European 
forms of exploration, trade, missions, recruiting and pros- 
pecting. Like the other South Sea islanders, their original 
  
value to European men was seen as souls to save, labour for 
plantations and’ means to the acquisition of island raw 
materials like copra, beche de mer, and in a few cases 
mineral products. . Pe 
“They differed, however, from the Polynesians — the South 
Sea islander who has become familiar in song and story— 
in having a far less developed type of culture, lacking the 
political ideas necessary for the development of kingdoms, 
by Margaret Mead 
UNESCO COURIER — N° 8-9 — 1954 
the linking together of many people in one group, and lacking 
any developed historical sense. Darker skinned than the 
other islanders — Polynesians and Micronesians — with stiff 
frizzy hair, there was more probability of their being classi- 
fied with the people of Africa and so subjected to attitudes 
developed during African-European contact. 
Characteristically they were divided, one small group from 
another, by differences in language — often a language 
would be spoken by less than a thousand people — and the 
practice of head-hunting, and linked together by, elaborate 
trade arrangements which made possible a great deal of 
geographical specialization. 
Because they themselves lacked any kind of large group 
political organization, and were also so accustomed to 
forming economic ties outside their group, the irregularities 
of their contact with Eurcpeans were accentuated. Different 
missions, different recruiting practices, accentuated by the 
rivalries, compromises, and fortunes of war among the 
27

## [Page 28](070030engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 70010: Melanesia; 'black islands' of the Pacific 'Milky Way'

FROM HEAD-HUNTING 
TO MODERN WAYS 
  
metropolitan powers concerned, have 
given each small island group, or 
sometimes one part of one archipelago, 
a different history from another. 
Where any small group became com- 
pletely missionized it also tended to 
lose its own fragile traditions and sink 
to what appeared to be a less complex 
level of culture, but one which inte- 
grated better with the needs of the 
European economy, with indentured 
labour and trade the basis of the na- 
tive economy of a people who paid 
taxes, went to church and gradually 
became literate at a very low level. 
Those concerned with the fate of the 
Melanesians before World War II felt 
that people with such a rudimentary 
form of political organization, living 
in such small groups, could not hope 
to withstand the advance of civiliza- 
tion with enough vigour to produce any 
distinctive blend between the old and 
the new such as had occurred and was 
occurring in the more populous parts 
of Central and South America and - 
Africa. 
Where the old distinctive tradition 
contained so many elements incompa- 
tible with modern civilization — head- 
hunting, often cannibalism, complica- 
ted initiation rites and men’s cults,” 
extortionist secret societies, sorcery and 
magic — and so few of the social forms 
on which a modern political system 
Dr. Margaret MEAD, one of the world's leoding 
anthropologists, is now associate curator of the American 
Museum of Natural History with which she has been 
associated for 28 years. A specialist on the Pacific area 
where she has conducted extensive studies, she has 
recently returned from a research frip among the Manus 
people of the Admuralty {slands. She is. the author of 
many books on the subject: Coming of Age in Samoa, 
Growing up in New Guinea, Kinship in the Admiralties, 
gnd for Unesco, Cultural Patterns and Technical 
ange. 
18 
" hope was 
can be grafted, such as effective chief- 
tainship, division of labour within the 
society, high level craftsmanship, what 
there that Melanesians 
would survive — except as bodies, to 
become the physical ancestors of peo- 
ple who would know nothing of their 
own pasts. 
It was true that when it came to 
understanding European culture, Mela- 
nesians had one great advantage over 
peoples like the North American In- 
dians. They understand money and 
CHEWING BETEL NUT is an almost universal 
island habit. The nut of the areca palm and the 
fruit of the betel pepper plant are crushed toge- 
ther and mixed with Lime. This man from 
Wogeo (New Guinea) carries his lime in a gourd 
and uses sharpened piece of bone as a spoon. 
THE MELANESIANS (Cont’d.) 
LONG GRASS HEAD- 
DRESS is worn by wo- 
men of Malekula (New 
Hebrides) for village fes- 
tival. In some islands 
husband and wife have 
different dwellings, and 
at dances separate spaces 
are marked off for men 
and women spectators. 
This is a strict rule, as 
dancing is sacred and 
female influence is regard- 
ed as defiling. (Photo 
copyright Vanden Brock.) 
trade ; the whole of their social life is 
shot through with ties based on reci- 
procal economic obligations. They also 
understand that human custom is re- 
lative to human society, that what is 
customary and correct for. one people 
is not customary for their neighbours, 
that custom, like language, has both 
universal and variable characteristics. 
This means that they need not 
oppose one sacred unalterable absolute 
(Continued on page 31) 
VISITING FRIENDS at Longgu, Guadalcanal 
(Solomon Islands). These women have taken 
along wooden bowls of food on their heads—a 
common way of carrying burdens in the islands. 
Babies are carried in slings so that- mothers 
can shelter them from the sun with a mat, 
ST - 
oh \ 

## [Page 29](070030engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 70010: Melanesia; 'black islands' of the Pacific 'Milky Way'

UNESCO COURIER — No# 8.9 — 1954 
= 
. 
D
e
 
W
h
 
s
m
e
 
F
l
e
 
) 
    
J 
1 
) 
i 
ari — ~ Es > 
f : x (Phata copyright Leralle) | 
H 0 U F T T E S Islanders use every conceivable method to catch fish—with hooks and lures, with nets of all shapes 
: S | L and sizes, with poison, with bow and arrow, and with spear. If hand nets are used, each person = 
takes two and the shoal is gradually driven to the shore, Often, however, the fish are surrounded = 
a T U N S E T by big nets dropped from canoes and then speared. Spear and arrow call for fine co-ordination | 
¥ A S of hand and eye. The fisherman stands on a rock close to deep water, poised to shoot or spear, & 2 
to PRN gl Te i uk A Ww ¥l La CRY “ on ae A Ay Loa. bl STA SN = a. " Ne

## [Page 30](070030engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 70010: Melanesia; 'black islands' of the Pacific 'Milky Way'

THE -MELANESIANS (Cont'd) 
"i FR RE ar oly 
  
HUMAN SKULLS both of relatives and of enemies are carefully preserved by people of the Papuan Gulf, New Guinea. 
Papuan widows (above left) carry skulls of their former husbands slung round their necks. In the ceremonial hut (above 
right) skulls are kept.in racks, each in its own compartment. VWooden plaques beneath, decorated with conventional 
faces, are considered very sacred and are associated with powerful spirits of the dead. These plaques are also placed near 
the skulls of enemies killed during head-hunting expeditions as protection against the spirits of the enemy dead, Under: 
the plaques are the skulls of pigs which have been sacrificed. (Photos copyright Demaitre and Hurley.) 
SACRIFICIAL HUT on 
island of Ambryn (New 
Hebrides) can only be 
entered by men. At so- 
cio-religious ceremonies 
men advance in social 
position depending on 
their wealth (number of 
pigs} and the securing of 
masks and statues pres- 
cribed for such ceremo- 
nies. Pigs are killed with 
clubs hanging from hut 
(left), cooked and then 
eaten on the wooden 
tray (right). The white 
woman in the photo is 
a French ethnologist, 
Mme E. Aubert de la Rue. 
30 

## [Page 31](070030engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 70010: Melanesia; 'black islands' of the Pacific 'Milky Way'

(Continued from page 28) 
“way of life to. the - demands of the 
Western world, or conclude that if the 
new lives, the old dies. 
Furthermore our calculations about 
their future reckoned without the 
unprecedented experiences of World 
War II, when the Melanesians encoun- 
tered, not the isolated government 
official, missionary or trader, but large 
groups of men from highly organized 
societies who were concerned with 
their own affairs — fighting a world 
war — -rather than with persuading, 
or foreing a handful of “natives” to 
gather coconuts, bury their 
differently or pay a small head tax. 
Anthropologists know that when 
members of one society immigrate into 
another society where they can witness 
the whole on-going life of a large com- 
munity, they learn much more rapidly 
than when the customs of a country 
are brought to them piecemeal by sin- 
gle emissaries. In the case of the Mela- 
nesiaps whole villages, whole tribes had 
the experience usually reserved for 
single immigrants, and they combined 
with it the security of remaining in 
their own land, where the reefs and 
bush are well known to them, the fish 
and birds familiar. 
Equipped with the by-products of 
the economic relationships of the last 
century — a knowledge of money, and 
a trade language, Neo-Melanesian, 
which is based on the grammar of 
Melanesian with a vocabulary from the 
whole world, although preponderantly 
English in origin — they have begun 
to comprehend with great rapidity that 
European life is a system, a whole way 
of life in which all the various parts 
— religious belief, political behaviour 
currency, dress, sex ethics, medicine — 
all fit together. From an approach to 
modern civilization which was piece- 
meal and non-comprehending, they 
have moved to one which has the possi- 
bility of a genuine new integration. 
The Polynesians like the -Samoans 
and Tongans were able to work out 
new cultural forms which included 
Christianity, literacy and the incorpo- 
ration of European manufactured pro- 
ducts and still maintain their sense of 
dignity because before the coming of 
Europeans they already had the neces- 
sary sense of themselves as a people. 
The Melanesians are getting a similar 
sense of Ethic Identity by having ex- 
perienced the same sense of what being 
a people is, in their contact with large 
Australian, American and Japanese mi- 
litary organizations in World War II. 
All over Melanesia since the war 
there have been attempts on the part 
of local groups to establish a local ver- 
sion of European-American culture. 
Old rudimentary political forms of their 
own, and the systems set up by Euro- 
peans—Ilocal constables appointed by 
government officers with limited police- 
power or liaison duties—have been 
called in question, as the Melanesians 
attempted to work out line.and staff 
organizations, to include “councils”, 
“committees”, “customs”, “passes”, etc. 
into their local life. 
It is they now who are insisting on- 
dead 
the individual right of contract’ and 
right of a man to the money he earns, 
an insistence which is often inconve- 
nient to the trader and recruiter, who 
has learned to exploit the older kin 
organization and “buy boys” from the 
old men, or bribe the government 
appointed constable illegally to use his 
power to recruit labour. 
Local leaders. have set up “armies” 
and “navies”, have collected sums of 
 
UNESCO COURIER — Nor 8-9 — 1954 
two most unfortunate labels, being 
called either “cargo cults”, that is mys- 
tical nativistic cults which arise out of 
the disappointments of contact between 
a more and a less developed civiliza- 
tion, or “Melanesian nationalism”. 
The task before us is to realise that 
this mid-20th century renaissance of 
one of the most primitive groups of 
people in the world, must be seen in 
mid-20th century terms, as part of a 
CANNIBALISM stll exists in the interior of some islands although the open warfare between 
tribes which once provided the victims 1s now infrequent. After wreaking vengeance on their 
enemies, the victors ate them, believing that they would thus acquire the virtues of the dead. 
This old man from Malekula island (New Hebrides) has practised cannibalism but the weapon he holds 
is simply a chopper for cutting his way through the forest, 
money which have been branded as 
“war chests”. There have been diffi- 
culties with the Missions, many of them 
still operating in the climate of opinion 
of pre-World War I, insulated for half 
a century from a world which has pass- 
ed from a belief that it was necessary 
for men to submit to deprivation with 
good grace to a world in which educa- 
tion, medical care and economic ade- 
quacy for every human being is seen 
as an obtainable goal. ’ 
Government officials, most of them 
fresh from the sufferings and hard- 
ships of World War II have tended to 
look with a jaundiced eye on all these 
manifestations which have received 
(Photos copyright Aubert de la Rue.) 
world which has conceived the U. N. 
and the possibility of naiionhood. 
These Melanesian movements are 
not nationalistic—yet—although we 
may make them so by our own mistak- 
en tactics. They are not mere “cargo 
cults”, or blind alley defeatist attempts 
to cut themselves off from the religion 
and politics of a world with which they 
are unable to deal. They are a search 
for an ethnic identity, a sense of them- 
selves as a people, grounded in their 
realization of what being American, or 
Australian or Japanese means. It is a 
20th Century task to find, and that 
quickly, formulas for bringing them 
into the modern world. 
3

## [Page 32](070030engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

      
    
   
   
  
o
o
.
"
 
«r
 
%
.
 
» 
s
s
 
" 
» 
w
T
 
: 
" 
    vl
 
-
 
vw
 
o
n
 
= 
Sn 
\ “ » “ 
rp Shao Sd i 


### 70020: Magic' arts of the South Pacific

    
  AT) 
3 of the South 
Pacifi 
Arusts and craftsmen, like these villagers in New Gunes, have made Melanesia one of the richest 
primitive art regions in the world. 
HE South Pacific in general is an area of such great 
and far-flung diversity—in races, customs, beliefs and 
in material culture—that the arts of this vast area are 
as manifold as its races, and the variety of styles even greater 
than in Africa. 
Of all the arts of Oceania, that of Melanesia is the most 
varied and the most fantastic. The region itself is lush, 
dramatic and often dangerous. Volcanic eruptions, tidal 
waves and storms give to many parts of it a melodramatic, 
violent quality that has strongly affected the lives and beliefs 
of its inhabitants. 
.  Awed by natural phenomena the people attribute them 
to supernatural forces. Believing that spirits invest animals, 
places and objects, they perform long and dramatic rites 
to venerate and gain the favour of these spirits and to invoke 
the aid of ancestors. 
Secret societies, initiation rites, elaborate communal cere- 
monies, masked dancing, head-hunting expeditions and 
cannibalistic practices are so many expressions of Melanesian 
preoccupation with the supernatural.. - 
Melanesian art reflects the same preoccupation. Indeed, 
its relation to ceremonies and occult practices must be taken 
into account in judging 
its effectiveness. An ac- . 
tive cult of the dead ex- 
plains the abundance of 
ancestor figures. A rich 
ceremonial life requires 
. all sorts of objects, inclu- 
ding masks, drums, clubs, 
shields, paddles and orna- 
ments, and many Mela- 
nesian objects must be 
seen as “props” for use in 
dramatic ceremonies or as 
terrifying “tests” sprung 
suddenly on initiation 
candidates. 
The richest flowering 
of Melanesian art is found 
in New Guinea—over 1,300 
miles long and the second 
largest island in the 
world—which has been 
described as one of the 
three most prolific centres 
of primitive sculpture in . 
wood, the others being 
Negro Africa and North- 
 
32 
Small clay mask from the New Hebrides. 
west America. Through- 
out this vast island 
there is hardly any im- 
plement, ritual or profane, 
without a plastic or linear 
decoration of some kind. 
In New Guinea, as else- 
where in Melanesia, the 
aesthetic idiom varies 
greatly from district to 
district, although six main 
different local styles can 
be distinguished. These 
correspond to the six main 
culture-areas: Dutch New’ 
Guinea, in the west; the 
Sepik River and the Huon 
Gulf, in the north; Torres Straits and the Gulf of Papua, 
in the south ; and the Massim Area in the east. 
Among the most striking styles, those of the Sepik River 
and the Gulf of Papua are distinguished by their use of co- 
lour to emphasize design and the effect of violence and sen- 
suality they convey. The diversity of conventions used in the 
representation of facial features and parts of the body by the 
Sepik River artists is bewildering. Eyes, for example, 
appear as pin points or as huge circles, as narrow slits or as 
wide ovals. Heads may be round, oval or diamond shape. 
Such an arbitrary rearrangement Elves to these figures an 
urgent, excited air. 
These carvings—beak-nosed figurines and brooding shell- 
  
Carved neck-rest from New Guinea 
. eyed masks—have a peculiar vitality, a kind of nightmare 
reality. The striking use of colour—red, white, black and 
orange—accentuates the intensity of expression and the 
perversity of form. Never did the primitive imagination 
translate more vividly into art the concepts and creatures 
which haunt it. 
In contrast to this feverish and even morbid art is the 
restrained and delicate carving work of the Massim Area of 
New Guinea. Primarily an art of line, its designs are pre- 
cisely composed and carefully executed. Magnificent designs 
and scrolls, incised on the surface of a hard dark wood and 
filled in with white and red, give it a distinctive character. 
In Melanesia even utilitarian objects are generally adorned 
with motifs derived from the mythology, religions, beliefs, 
ancestor cult or the magic of the tribes. One curious 
example of art stimulation through the ancestor cult is found 
in the carving of mortuary figures called korowaar in the 
Geelvink Bay area of north-west New Guinea. 
Originally a korowaar was simply the relics of a dead per-

## [Page 33](070030engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 70020: Magic' arts of the South Pacific

son, a handful of dried 
bones sewn up in a cloth. 
Then it became the cus- 
tom to place the dead 
person’s skull on a wooden 
support, which in turn 
became the carving of a 
small human figure to 
which the exaggeration 
of the legs, arms and 
head gave a monumental 
character. - 
The figure was carved 
during the life of a per- 
son so that at the mo- 
ment of death the spirit Carved shell ornament, Solomon Isles. 
could enter it. When a - 
village sorcerer wished to contact the ancestors of the tribe, 
he would pick up the figure in his right hand and use it to 
strike the ground until he went into a trance. 
Ancestor worship is reflected strongly in the architectural 
carvings on the houses of the Melanesians, notably in New 
Caledonia. Human heads and faces are found flanking the 
door, on the lintels and windows and on the roof spires. All 
house sculptures are meant as memorials to the ancestor and 
to preserve his protection. During jedo, the mourning cere- 
mony, the carvings regarded as participating in sorrow are 
  
   
         
  
  
   Vip Na CT tLe 2 
& 
“killed”, by being slashed and mutilated with knives. New ~ 
~ 
  
Mask from New Caledonia,  
UNESCO COURIER — N°® 8-9 — 1954 
Caledonian art is essentially a sculptor’s art as many other 
wood carvings show, These include finely shaped pick-like 
or “bird head” clubs, wooden ceremonial knives with heads 
or faces carved in relief, decorated combs and round-headed 
axes—symbols of power. 
Intense effort -has gone into the production of objects used 
at religious ceremonies. This has been specially marked 
among tribes in the Papuan Gulf area whose ceremonies were 
organized in cycles often spread over a decade. Governed by 
strict taboos and ritualistic, often magical, procedures, the 
making of huge, elaborate bark-cloth masks absorbed nearly 
all of this time. Sometimes as many as 100 masks, some of 
them 13 feet high were produced. Ancestor figures and pla- 
ques, shields, belts and clubs were also carved for the rites. 
The vast amount of carved, modelled, painted and fabri- 
cated objects produced by the Melanesians using wood, bone, 
bark, stone, fibre and pith, as well as decorative materials 
such as feathers, shells and leaves, has made their islands 
one of the richest primitive art regions in the world. Here 
are artistic taste and tra- 
ditions which should be 
respected and preserved, 
however much the Mela- 
nesian way of life may 
change through ever in- 
creasing contacts with 
our modern civilization. 
ov 
  
~ 
Bird carving from Solomon Isles. 
Wb 
4 * sR 
- - 
. . 
! 
33

## [Page 34](070030engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

SOUTH PACIFIC ART (Cont'd) 
  
Canoe ornaments from New Guinea and the Solomon Isles.    
Statuette of a “Euro- : ” . 
pean”, New Guinea. Detail of carved wood crocodile, New Guinea. 
     
    
     
WES
, 
  
- 
 
T    
~
=
 
S
E
 
B
e
 
3
 
C
e
r
 
  
Head-hunters’ lances, New Guinea. Sculptured wooden he 
34

## [Page 35](070030engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Not 8-9 — 1954 
     
Wooden roof spire from New Caledonia. 
 
   
. 
ead a ro thd Sgr 
eer LS 
ie TS AR 
-id ee 
Sid’ 
o : ed 
TH hat wh ~ 
‘is ; dui” we 9 "8 
" JR omy 
-rests, New Guinea. . Sculptured wooden mask, New {reland. 
35

## [Page 36](070030engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

- 
I  
Indias policy lot its 20,000,000 tribesmen 
  
   
 
   
PR Ee Ley 
sel He 
R 2 ph J 
: ’ g : N modern times. 
i A there have been 
" : . three different 
HF ~ methods of ap- 
aps ey proach to the 
problem of the 
thirty million tribesmen who live on 
the frontiers of Indian civilization. The 
former British Government tended on 
the whole to leave them alone, partly 
because the task of administration, 
especially in the wild border areas, was 
difficult and unrewarding; partly from 
a desire to quarantine them from pos- 
sible political infection; and partly 
frecm a genuine belief that they were 
happier and better as they were. 
In sharp distinction to this is a 
policy of “assimilation” which has 
tecome very nopular since Indenend- 
ence. Both Christian missionaries and 
Hindu social reformers have, in their 
different ways, desired to see the 
primitive civilized, their “inferior” 
social customs and ideas eliminated 
and their identity assimilated either 
into the Christian church or into the 
general framework of Hindu society. 
The Christlan missionaries have 
had striking successes in some tribal 
areas, though they have failed in 
others. Especially in Assam, they 
have converted a very high percentage 
Dr. VERRIER ELWIN has spent most of the past two 
decades among aboriginal tribesmen in India as 
anthropological consultant to the Indian Government. 
Founder of a settlement devoted te aboriginal welfare 
ard humanitarian research on their problems, he was 
the editor of “Man in India”, from 1943 to 1949 
He is the author of Tribal Myths of Orissa, The Tribal 
Art of Middle India, and Myths of Middle India. 
36 
NOR 
of such tribes as the Lushais, Khasis 
and the so-called Naga groups. The 
Christian Khasis have preserved their 
matriarchal social structure, and the 
Lushais and Nagas have retained 
certain aspects of their life (in par- 
ticular their very beautiful hand- 
weaving), but in the main they have 
lost most of what is distinctively tribal, 
adopting a semi-western culture. 
Similarly, the ambitious program- 
mes of education, reform and change 
now being initiated by most of the 
State Governments, while bringing 
many economic and social benefits to 
the people, are likely to bring to an 
end the older values, good and bad 
alike, of tribal life. For though a 
sincere desire for tribal welfare is now 
everywhere apparent, this is not 
matched by an equal interest in or 
respect for tribal culture. 
You cannot make an omelette with- 
out breaking eggs, and the continued 
existence of the tribes as tribes is 
regarded as of less importance than 
the march of civilization. This policy 
has led to strong zenophobic reactions 
in some areas, and in Bihar, for 
example, the separatist Jharkand 
* Party is the largest opposition group 
in the State Assembly. 
Between these two extremes of do- 
ing too little and doing too much, 
there is a third policy, with which the 
name of the Prime Minister, Mr. 
Nehru, is associated. In one of the 
most remarkable speeches ever made 
by a public man on the problem of 


### 70021: Neither isolation nor assimilation: protection, India's policy for its 30,000,000 tribesmen

NEITHER ISOLATION 
ASSIMILATION 
~PROTECTION - 
by Dr. Verrier Elwin 
HORNED HEAD-DRESS is part of the 
traditional costume of the Durwas of 
Bastar, a tribe in Central India. It will 
remain so under India’s policy of improv- 
ing living conditions among her tribes- 
men—7 % of the country’s population— 
without sacrificing their way of life. 
primitive pecples, Mr. Nehru spoke of 
the strong attraction which he had for 
the tribesmen and described how he 
_ approached them “in a spirit of 
comradeship and not like someone 
aloof who had come to look at them, 
examine them, weigh them, measure 
them and report about them or to try 
   
ar ! & 
RAL el 
HANDICRAFTS are at the base of many tribal 
economies in India. Here, a young Muria prepares 
rope from fibre; other major crafts are basket- 
making, weaving and spinning.     

## [Page 37](070030engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 70021: Neither isolation nor assimilation: protection, India's policy for its 30,000,000 tribesmen

and make them conform to another 
way of life.” 
“I am alarmed”, he said, “when 
I see—not only in this country, but 
in other great countries, too—how 
anxious people are to shape others 
according to their own image or like- 
ness, and to impose on them their 
particular way of living.” He declar- 
ed that he was not sure which, the 
modern or the tribal, was the better 
way of living. “In some respects I 
am quite certain theirs is better.” 
“There is no pecint in trying to make 
of them a second-rate copy of our- 
selves.” He emphasized the. import- 
ance of encouraging the tribal langu- 
ages, so that they would not only 
prevail but flourish. He. insisted that 
a measure of protection must be given 
so that “no outsider can take posses- 
sion of tribal lands or forests or inter- 
fere with them in any way except with 
their consent and goodwill.” 
He hoped that the high sense of 
discipline, the power to enjoy life, the 
love of dance and song would endure 
among the tribesmen. Schemes for 
welfare, education, communications, 
medical relief were no doubt essential: 
“one must always remember, however, 
that we do not mean to interfere with 
their way of life, but want to help 
them to live it.” 
Now this attitude poses a serious 
problem to the administrator. The 
assimilation policy which holds, bread- 
ly speaking, that there is not much to 
be said for tribal life ; that if it disap- 
pears it will not matter greatly ; that 
the “backward” must be brought for- 
ward and that the low are to be 
“uplifted”, is simple and straightfor- 
ward ; it is logical, and it brings many 
benefits—at a price. So did the 
British policy of leaving well alone— 
though at a different price, 
But the new attitude, the Nehru 
attitude, has complex implications. 
_fruit—touch it, 
For unhappily, tribal culture is the 
most delicate thing in the world. Of 
it we may say what Oscar Wilde said 
of innocence : it is a delicate exotic 
and the bloom is 
gone. Tribal social organization in 
India has to some extent managed to 
survive, though many acculturated 
tribal communities have suffered a 
tragic moral decline. The tolerant 
influences of Hinduism have enriched 
tribal religion with a loftier ethic and 
vitalized it with a nobler conception 
of deity, but at the same time they 
have often brought the more dubious 
   
       
     
There is no point in 
trying to make of 
them a second-rate 
copy of ourselves’ 
J. Nehru 
accretions of new gods to be placated 
and new taboos to be observed. 
The contact of civilization has 
generally had an adverse effect on 
tribal art and culture. His exquisite 
taste for design and colour disappears 
when a tribesman enters a shop in the 
bazaar. The splendid tribal dress and 
ornamentation is rapidly abandoned 
in favour of a parody of western cloth- 
ing. The tribal languages have shown 
an alarming lack of vitality when 
cenfronted by a system of education 
in another tongue. In some areas the 
dance has died out altogether, in 
UNESCO COURIER — N°® 8-9 — 1954 
others it has become, woefully debased. 
The tribal craftsman does not seem 
able to maintain his standards before 
external competition. 
The task set by Mr. Nehru, there- 
fore, is no easy one, for it involves 
several ideals that have rarely been 
found compatible. The first is to 
preserve, strengthen and develop .all 
that is best in tribal society, culture, 
art and language. The second is to 
protect tribal economic rights. The 
third is to unite and integrate the 
tribes in a true heart-unity with India 
as a whole, so that they may play a 
full part in her life, And the last is 
to develop welfare and educational 
facilities so that every tribesman may 
have an equal opportunity with his 
fellow-citizens of the open country 
and the plains, 
India has one advantage in attempt- 
ing to fulfil this exacting programme. 
She is starting late. The older 
British administrators, as we have 
seen, rarely attempted anything of the 
kind. This had its disadvantages, but 
at the same time the tribesmen were. 
on the whole spared the exploitation 
and degradation that has overcome 
their brethren in other lands. 
Today India is able to approach her 
task with an informed and enlightened 
public conscience to inspire her and 
the findings cf the anthropological 
and social sciences to direct her. And 
if there is need to protect the tribes- 
men, India is awake to the need of 
protecting and helping all her many 
millions of poor peasants. The tribes- 
men are being integrated into a 
country that is on the move, that is 
vitally alive tc economic inequalities, 
whose Lest men do in fact worship at 
the altar of Daridranarayana, the 
Lord of the Poor, which was Mahatma 
Gandhi's favourite name for Ged. 
(Continued on next page) 
A FEAST in Bastar calls for a table service made of large leaves woven together. 
The diet of Indian tribesmen varies according to their region and their stage of 
development. The most primitive tribes live on forest products—tubers, fruits 
and roots—-and whatever fish and animals they catch. 
THE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM of the Kabuis in Manipur, 
A young girl hauling bambkoo containers. In general, drink 
plays an important part in the life of Indian aborigines—espe- 
cially alcoholic beverages prepared from plants.     
37

## [Page 38](070030engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 70021: Neither isolation nor assimilation: protection, India's policy for its 30,000,000 tribesmen

FASHIONABLE WOMEN among the Juans 
of Orissa wore leaf dresses for ceremonies until 
recently and, in the past, they wore them every 
day. Today, however, they have adopted cloth. 
in general, India’s tribal women still make their 
clothes from local raw materials. On the lofty 
plateaus of the Himalayas, they wear homespun 
clothes of wool produced by their own flocks. 
  
HOMAGE TO A SNAKE GOD is being paid by this Sacra 
shaman in the hills of Orissa as he adds his contribution to 
a cluster of simple gifts. 
instead of thejr tribal religions. 
38 
  
But more and more tribesmen in 
India declare themselves as Hindus or Christians—which adds 
to the difficulty of keeping statistics on their population. 
Today people are classified according to their tribal origin 
  
INDIA’S 
TRIBES      
(Continued from previous page) 
Since Independence, India has done 
a great deal for her tribes. Nowhere is 
this more evident than on the North- 
East Frontier, that great area of over 
30,000 square miles of tangled hill and 
forest, where something like a million 
tribesmen have lived almost untouched 
and largely unknown until recent times. 
Here a special administration of hand- 
picked officers is extending its activi- 
ties—the number of administrative 
centres has risen from 12 to 43 in four 
years—according to a policy based on 
the ideas of Mr. Nehru, that with 
everything possible done for the people, 
there should be no direct interference 
in tribal life and custom. 
To this, however, there were bound to 
be certain exceptions, On this frontier 
the problem of peace has been para- 
mount. As recently as 1942, a former 
Governor of Assam, Sir Robert Reid, 
could write that “general orders stop- 
ping wars would be impossible to en- 
force without constant punitive expe- 
ditions. The remedy might well be 
worse than the disease.” Yet within 
the last few years, inter-village warfare 
has been largely checked and head- 
hunting has become a thing of the 
past. By a combination of friendliness, 
courage and firmness, a method of 
warfare at once heroic and treacher- 
AT
R 
To
a 
a 
a
 
four Juang youths. 
No interference in. 
village life and customs 
ous, valiant and despicable, has come 
to an end. And where formerly life 
was continually disturbed, the people 
are now able to cultivate the arts of 
peace. 
In this area the method of schooling 
being introduced is that known in India 
as “basic education” which, with its 
emphasis on manual activities and the 
tribal languages as medium of instruc- 
tion, is admirably adapted to the needs: 
of simple hill-people. In addition there 
are many centres for training the 
tribesmen in a variety of crafts, care 
being taken that this shall be on lines 
native to them. 
Improvement of agriculture, the first _ 
essential for economic improvement, is 
being energetically pursued, and com- 
munications, of vital importance in 
these wild and lonely hills, are push- 
ing forward. Slavery, which has been 
practised from times immemorial, is 
disappearing; the opium problem is 
being scientifically tackled; the doctor 
and the vaccinator are extending their 
gentle offices of mercy to the wildest 
tribes. And everything is being done 
in a spirit of friendliness and res- 
pect, so that there shall be a mini- 
mum of psychological disturbance and 
no loss of self-reliance-or of pride in 
the classic heritage of tribal culture. 
This is an enterprise, at once scien- 
tific and humane, of which India may 
well be proud. 
PH Hie, NER 4 4 
' a “rt, Poet en - 
he = Hy ¥ - Fate 
Tne 
 
THE LONG DRUM of an Orissa tribal village leaves its shelter on the backs of 
It symbolizes the tribal traditions India is determined to preserve 
within the framework of a campaign against illiteracy. In 1931, only .58 % (one out 
of 172 persons) of India’s tribesmen were classified as capable of reading and writing. 
“It would be over-optimistic to assume that the situation among tribal peoples has 
improved”, the International Labour Organization has commented in a recent survey. 
. However, an active government effort promises to bear fruit for the future.

## [Page 39](070030engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Nov 8-9 — 1954 
  
  
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
Sir, / 
I have been a reader of The Courier 
for some years and ask, why not put 
it on the British bookstalls. I'm sure 
thousands have never heard of it and 
it’s the paper they really want! Also 
why not publish a map or two 
especially, for instance, when dealing 
with “ancient places and trade routes” 
in the Near East, Palmyra etc. A 
good map illuminates the different 
geographic facts printed and answers 
the question “Where is Palmyra?” 
Bristol, EK. Cryer. 
England. ’ 
Sir, 
After reading the issue of your maga- 
zine on Youth of Japan, I have heartfelt 
congratulations for you and the staff of 
the magazine. The first issue on the 
newsstands was not as interesting and 
did not serve the purpose of creating a 
readable magazine that ties the world 
- together in culture instead of tearing it 
apart. The articles about society to 
those interested in the social sciences 
are especially interesting as well as the 
articles on the work that the Unesco 
branch is doing... Keep up the good 
work and we will have a more un- 
derstandable world for tomorrow. 
Bert Cohler, 
The University of Chicago, U.S.A. 
Sir, 
Your special enquiry “Japan of To- 
morrow” is greatly appreciated. It indi- 
cates that if we are understanding and 
cooperative, Japan's youth will have a 
real chance in the new world. 
Stanley I. Stuber. 
General Secretary, The Japan Inter- 
national Christian University Founaa- 
tion, New York, 
Sir, 
In your issue 4-5 of 1954, I read on 
page 46 (“From the Unesco Newsroom”) 
that self service libraries (in Tennessee) 
have been dubbed “booketerias”. In the 
= interests of civilized speech, which 
should also be the interests of Unesco, 
may I suggest that they should be 
undubbed ? 
E. B. Wareing. 
Bad Godesberg, Germany. 
Sir, 
On several occasions I have had the 
urge to write you my reactions to excep- 
ticnal issues of The Courier. I am so 
pleased with the current issue, particu- 
larly with the well illustrated article on 
“Prolonging the Life of our Art Treas- 
ures” and “Story in Stone”. I thought 
that the article entitled “The Land of 
Countless Ruins” was of particular va- 
lue. As a matter of fact, I am filing this 
particular issue with some educational 
materials which I am saving for my 
growing family of four. 
Urban H. Fleege, Ph. D, 
The National Catholic Educational 
Association, Washington 6, D.C, 
Sf, 
7 The weeks are passing by and since 
January at least twice a week I ask if 
The Unesco Courier is in the Informa- 
tion Office of the U.N. in Prague. 
I very much regret we are at present 
not able to subscribe to The Courier. Of 
course not because of its content! The 
only reason is that there is not any 
_ bookseller or any office authorized to 
accept the subscription fee. And that it 
is not possible to send any money 
‘abroad. It is not possible to order any 
foreign books or any publications from 
abroad for any individual now. I myself 
have given up completely when trying 
to get anything concerning the ascent 
of Mount Everest one.year ago. 
_ Please, do not think that there are 
.not people interested in the work of 
Unesco or 1n reading The Courier in our 
country. I am sure that there would be 
as many keen readers of The Courier, if 
not more, as in any other country on the 
globe. Also our people are interested in 
the education for peace, for internation- 
al understanding, friendship and real 
unlimited co-operation as well as in the 
realization of the Declaration of Human 
Rights. I am sure that also in our 
country there would be as many support- 
ers of Unesco work and as many readers 
of The Courier just as among the big- 
gest proportion known in your publica- 
tion office. If possible I would order the 
whole list of publications issued by 
Unesco until now and very many issued 
by other specialized agencies of U.N. Not 
only I—plenty of such orders would be 
pouring like a lifegiving rain from 
teachers and intellectual workers from 
countries such as ours. 
When not able to order and to read 
the issues of The Courler of this year I 
turn back to the previous years and 
with unlimited and ever refreshed inter- 
est I re-read what I read last year and 
earher, . 
What I would like to recommend is 
this : Please, do mind the future needs 
of readers in such countries like our 
country to give them the opportunity in 
reading The Courier and otner publica- 
tions issued by Unesco in the future as 
soon as the free flow of publications for 
education for peace and international 
co-operation will be possible. 
Please, accept my best thanks for all * 
that has been printed in The Courier 
and other publications and all best 
wishes for future work in the spirit of 
U.N. Our prayers are with you and don’t 
forget also WE are your supporters and 
also believe that ALL people are the 
members of ONE family under ONE 
Father and that happiness and the ba- 
lance of spirit and mind cannot be 
established without this sincere open 
mind—co-operation and mutual respect. 
Our hearts don’t recognize any ex- 
ception except of people whose hearts 
are made from stone. The international 
co-operation, friendship, free travelling, 
the realisation of the Declaration of 
Human Rights in its full meamng and 
in 1ts broadest sense is for us more 
important than daily bread and I think 
it is as necessary as fresh air and ihe 
nutrition of our food. I have the full 
comprehension for people who can’t live 
without these basic values. 
Jan Masek. 
Prague, Czechoslovakia. 
Unesco publications, including The 
Unesco Courier, can be purchased in 
Czech crowns through Unesco's Nadlional 
Distributor : Artia Lid. 30 Ve Smekach, 
Prague 2. It is hoped that Unesco’s 
Coupon Scheme enabling individuals 
and institutions to purchase books and 
publications from abroad in local cur- 
rencies will soon be in operation once 
again in Czechoslovakia. —EDITOR’S NOTE.       
  
With the July issue the United Nations fortnightly magazine became a monthly 
review with a new format and a different approach, 
Interesting articles, colourful illustrated features and appraisals of particular 
developments written by specialists provide the background essential to a grasp of 
the aims, scope and global 
ized agencies. 
activities of the United Nations and its related special- 
The United Nations Review shows how nations work together to solve their 
own and world problems and thus aids public understanding of international affairs. 
Published monthly by the United Nations Department of Public Information. 
Annual subscription (postpaid): $ (US) 4.50; 22/6 sterling. 
Single copy : $ (US) 0.40; 2/ - sterling. 
or the equivalent in other currencies. 
Obtainable from Sales Agents for United Nations Publications. 
39

## [Page 40](070030engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 70027: In the dark of the sun

    CORONA PHOTOGRAPHY IS A HUNDRED YEARS OLD 
Due to clouds the recent solar eclipse was only partially visible in many 
countries, but for the first time in history a major effort was made to 
observe and photograph an eclipse from the air (photo above). In 
photo taken over James Bay, Canada, (top of page), a burst of light 
flares out across the moon's rim. This brilliant “diamond ring” effect 
shows the first peep of the sun’s disk as it burst from behind the moon 
after the eclipse. The striking photo (upper right) of the luminous 
“corona” or crown of light with long streamers was taken in Khartoum, 
Sudan, by Dr. W. Jaschek of the Vienna Observatory, during the eclipse 
of 1952. First successful photograph of the corona, a daguerreotype, 
(lower right) was taken at Koenigsberg, East Prussia, a hundred years 
ago. (Photos copyright American Airlines-Hayden Planetarium Eclipse 
Expedition, Deutsche Presse-Agentur). 
40 
~

## [Page 41](070030engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Nos 8-9 — 1954 


### 70027: In the dark of the sun

In the dark of the sun 
tieth of June was an interna- 
tional drama that was seen by 
the largest audience of all time. Never 
before has the shadow of the moon 
crossed an area so large and so den- 
sely inhabited. Its path ran from 
Nebraska in the western United States 
to Jodhpur in India. It was at sunrise 
in America, at sunset in India, Yet it 
T HE eclipse of the sun on the thir- 
was seen almost simultaneously in . 
most of "North America, all of Europe, 
in northeastern Africa and a large part 
of western Asia. In America its climax 
was caught by a telescope at the Uni- 
versity of Minnesota and was broad- 
cast by television into many millions of 
homes. Not until 2151 will an eclipse 
again be visible to so large a fraction 
of the human race. 
Dramatic and mysteriously beautiful 
it was. But it did 
not arouse the panic 
fears of centuries 
ago when an eclipse 
was at best a por- 
tent of disaster and 
at worst an attack 
"on the sun god by a black dragon in 
the sky. The beasts, demons and dei- 
ties that once peopled the heavens 
have vanished under the keen eyes of 
the telescope and the logic of science. 
They have been replaced by less 
childish and more inspiring concepts. 
The world is now convinced that the 
motions of the “heavenly bodies” are 
mechanical and are subject to precise- 
ly the same inexorable laws as the 
fall of an apple or the movement of a 
clock. This recognition of natural law 
is, indeed, one of the criteria of civili- 
zation. But that does not mean that 
eclipses of the sun are commonplace 
or that astronomers have lost interest 
in them. 
Every total eclipse, in which the face 
of the sun is completely hidden by the 
moon, is an opportunity to see and 
photograph what the brilliance of the 
sun’s face usually forbids. 
The great observatories of all nations 
plan for years ahead to find a spot 
where the length of totality is a 
maximum, where the sky is most likely 
to be clear, and that can be reached 
with many tons of costly and sensitive 
instruments. The teams of experts 
with all their equipment often travel 
many thousands of miles to the loca- 
tion, for the shadow almost never falls 
on an established observatory. 
* 
HEN the sequence of operations to 
be done during the brief two or 
three minutes of totality are 
rehearsed on split-second timing— 
every moment must be well spent. 
Often when the time comes the astro- 
nomers themselves see nothing of the 
great show, being intent on their 
instruments and especially on .the 
cameras that provide the permanent 
record. The results—unless clouds get 
in the way—justify all the effort-and 
expense. 
The eclipse of 1919 is an example. 
But for it, atomic energy might still 
The international drama 
of the sun’s total eclipse 
by Gerald Wendt 
be undiscovered. . The story goes back 
to 1905 when the young and unknown 
Albert Einstein published his theory of 
relativity, Few people understood it 
because of its mathematical difficulty. 
Fewer still thought much of it because 
it seemed to contradict common sense. 
It held that at high velocities, compar- 
able to that of light, ordinary stan- 
dards of distance, time and mass no 
longer are valid. As a particle ap- 
proaches the velocity of light its mass 
increases, said he, so that if it could 
attain that velocity—which it cannot 
— its mass would be infinite. Also he 
claimed that theoretically matter can 
be changed into energy and energy into 
. matter. Though 
this is now done 
every day in the 
atomic piles and the 
great cyclotrons (See 
The Courier for De- 
cember, 1953), it was 
then almost unthinkable and could 
not be tested or proved. 
But there was one minor prediction 
of Einstein’s that could be tested by 
exact measurement. It was that light 
rays passing through space could be 
bent by the intense gravitational field 
of a large mass like the sun. This too 
was unthinkable according to older 
theory because gravity acts only on 
~ material objects and particles while 
light was a vibration in the immaterial 
“ether” that was supposed to fill 
empty space. But if Einstein was 
right the light from a distant star; 
passing closely: by the sun, would be 
curved a bit and would thus reach the 
earth at a slightly different angle. So 
the star would seem to have changed 
its position in the sky. Such an effect 
could be noticed only at the time of a 
total eclipse of the.sun, when its great 
light blacks out and the stars emerge 
from behind it. 
By 1919, at the 
first total eclipse 
after the close of 
World War I, astre- 
nomers were ready 
to make the test. 
During the eclipse the star-field around 
the hidden sun was photographed. The 
star positions were then compared with 
those of the same stars six months 
later when they shone by night, with 
the sun on the opposite side of the sky. 
Careful measurements showed that 
they had moved. Since the stars do not 
jump about the sky, the rays of 
starlight must have been bent by the 
sun. Einstein was right! 
That eclipse, observed by a few 
scientists on an island in the South 
Pacific, unnoticed by governments 
and the masses of mankind, was a 
turning point of history. For if Ein- 
stein was right on this point he was 
almost certainly right in his basic 
conceptions of the universe. After 
these eclipse measurements were 
published, the scientific world began 
to take Einstein seriously. One single 
but solid fact overthrew the age-old 
theories of the nature of matter and 
Science’s most productive 
half hour in history 
energy, of light and the ether, of space 
and gravity. 
Unlike most mortals, the scientists 
were ready, whether they liked it or 
not, to change the ideas they had 
always held, not only because of 
Einstein's theory but because of what 
the eclipse proved. Among the many 
consequences was the study of very 
high-velocity particles in the rays 
from radium, which again confirmed 
the theory of relativity. Then came 
the new world of cyclotrons and atom- 
smashers and, twenty years after that 
eclipse, the direct conversion of matter 
into energy which, in 1945 produced 
the atomic bomb and now generates 
useful industrial power from the 
fission of uranium atoms. 
* 
O one could foresee these conse- 
quences when astronomers pre- 
pared for the 1919 eclipse. No 
one knows what any eclipse may reveal. 
It is precisely because of this that each 
eclipse is so important. 
While no eclipse permits a study of 
the actual surface of the sun, the 
most striking revelation is always the 
great luminous “corona”, or crown of 
light, which surrounds the hidden sun 
on all sides and seems to stream 
outward into space with a faint pearly 
or greenish light. It may be seen 
only during the moments of totality. 
In the June eclipse it extended beyond 
the sun for a distance more than twice 
the diameter of the sun itself, almost 
two million miles. 
The cause of the corona is not 
known, nor is its composition. Its 
temperature is extremely high—be- 
tween half a million and a million 
degrees—and thus much hotter than 
the surface of the sun itself. The 
corona does not show the lines of the 
ordinary chemical elements in its spec- 
trum. This may be because at its high 
temperature the 
electrons have been 
stripped from all the 
atoms, leaving bare 
protons and neu- 
trons and probably 
also unattached 
electrons. Matter in this state is not 
known anywhere else. 
Apparently proton or electron beams, 
and perhaps cosmic rays, are ejected 
from the corona into outer space, some 
of them toward the earth. A large 
proportion of the eclipse expeditions 
from the great observatories devote 
themselves to the study of the corona. 
Closer to the sun there are also 
brilliant spots of light. They are in 
fact enormous flames that rise from 
the sun’s surface with explosive speed. 
These jets are from five hundred miles 
up to 100,000 miles in diameter, in 
which an object the size of the earth, 
only 8,000 miles in diameter, would be 
completely lost. Within two to fifteen 
minutes these flames shoot up at super- 
sonic speed to heights of 10,000 miles 
or more. 
In order to study these solar flames 
and to record them on motion pictures, 
41

## [Page 42](070030engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 70027: In the dark of the sun

      
Eclipse 
(Continued) 
an “artifizial eclipse” has been devised 
in recent years, originally in France. 
This is done with a coronograph, a 
cort of telescope which covers the 
sun’s disk with a black plate but 
permits study of the brilliant flames, 
precisely as in a natural eclipse. " At 
the High Altitude Observatory main- 
tained by Harvard University and the 
University of Colorado on one of the 
high peaks of the Colorado mountains, 
motion pictures have been taken- 
which show the luminous ‘gas in 
constant motion, sometimes slow, 
sometimes fast. 
Often knots of gas drop gracefully 
down toward the surface at speeds of 
many thousands of miles per hour. 
Meanwhile other streamers whirl 
upwards like tornadoes to a height of 
100,000 miles, or narrow tongues of 
gas shoot upwards at the rate of 100 
miles a second, Occasionally, a.great 
streamer that has quietly arched up 
from the surface across a distance of” 
250,000 miles will explode; the bright 
arch is lifted at the centre then blown 
far out into space. The flames seem 
to be composed of hydrogen gas at 
temperatures of 15,000 to 30,000 
degrees C. 
They are probably related to still 
another luminous phenomenon that 
is much fainter. This is the “zodiacal 
light”, a luminosity that is so faint. 
that it cannot even be seen at the 
time of the total eclipse because the 
corona is almost as bright as moon- 
light. It zan be seen and photograph- 
ed, hiowever, at the time of the total 
eclipse if the observation is made at 
a point where the totally eclipsed sun 
is beneath the horizon, either just 
before sunrise or just after sunset. 
When the earth itself thus blacks 
out the corona, a long streamer of 
hight seems to extend from the sun 
many millions of miles in the plane of 
. the sun’s orhit. Tt gets its name from 
the path of ‘the sun across the sky, 
42 
RL 
called the zodiac. The cause of this 
light is unknown but its study, done 
in the total darkness at the precise 
spot on the earth where the sun will 
rise in total eclipse, is one of the most 
intriguing aspects of solar research. 
There is one practical aspect of 
eclipse research, namely the meas- 
urement of the size of the earth and . 
of the exact distance between’ conti- 
nents that are separated by the sea. 
The speed of the moon’s shadow, 
moving eastward at an average rate 
cf about 1,700 miles- per hour, is 
exactly known. If then the exact 
moment of the passage of the shadow 
is measured at two distant points, a 
simple calculation gives the exact 
distance between those points, thus 
between a place in Eurcpe and one in 
America. Indeed it permits calcu- - 
lation of the exact size of the earth 
itself. At the June 1954 eclipse ten 
cbserving stations were established for 
these measurements, reaching from 
James Bay in Ontario, Canada, to 
Bandar Shah in Iran, by way of 
Labrador, Greenland, Iceland, the Faroe 
Islands to Sweden. But at most of 
these stations clouds interfered with 
successful measurements. 
The results of cbservations of the 
June eclipse will not be known for 
some time since the photographs will 
need much careful expert study 
before conclusions can be reached. It 
was a disappointing show for most of 
the expeditions because clouds inter- 
fered in Canada and in Sweden, where 
most American and European observers 
were stationed, Yet there will always 
be another eclipse and the curiosity of 
the astronomers is not likely ever to 
be satisfied. All present knowledge 
" has been gained from a sum total of 
only about 30 minutes of totality in 
. all the eclipses that have been observ- 
ed by modern instruments. It is the 
most productive half-hour in the 
history of science. 
  
    
   
  
 
  
  
GERMANY: Professor Rolf Mueller, director of 
_ the solar observatory atop the 6,000 feet Wen- 
delstein mountain in Bavaria, (above) studied 
the eclipsed sun in a cloudless sky and describ- 
ed the results of his observations by radio to 
the whole of Europe. Public interest was 
intense, and throughout the eclipse zone people 
craned their necks and like this group in Ger- 
many (right) watched the phenomenon through 
dark glasses. (Photos copyright Deutsche Presse 
Agentur). ' 
-   

## [Page 43](070030engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 70027: In the dark of the sun

  
UNESCO COURIER — Ne® 8-9 — 1954 
 
  
e
o
 
a
 
. 
r
e
 
Na
 
ot
e 
ve
 
ag 
#4
 
Ass 
Loi 
  
THE UNITED STATES: To study the enormous flames which rise 
from the sun’s surface with explosive speed, scientists use a coronagraph, 
a sort of telescope which covers the sun’s disk with a black plate, thereby 
creating an “artificial eclipse” and allowing the flames to be photographed. 
Photo (zbove left), showing a stupendous burst of hot gases from the sun's 
surface, was taken with the aid of the coronagraph (above right), which is 
housed in the High Altitude Observatory in the Rocky Mountains of 
Colorado, U.S.A. (photo, left). But there are still problems that can 
only be solved by observation during a natural eclipse. (Photos copyright 
High Altitude Observatory, University of Colorado). 
    
  
   
         
      
 
La 
" ~N 
ay ul        
SWEDEN: The photograph of the completely 
obscured sun (below) taken at Joenkoeping, Sweden, 
on June 30, (954, was telegraphed to the world’s 
press immediately after the eclipse. Elsewhere In 
Sweden, at Oskarsham, an American expedition set 
up a 25-ton radio telescope (upper part of photo) 
to receive and record possible radio signals during 
the 152 seconds of the eclipse. Below it is the 
horizontal camera with which the same expedition 
photographed stars in vicinity of blacked-out sun 
so as to measure the bending of light in the sun’s 
gravitational field. (Photos copyright United Press), 
      

## [Page 44](070030engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 70028: The World's hungry readers

The world's hungry readers 
T would be difficult to think of life 
today without paper. Everywhere 
we turn we find it. In fact, the 
only other commodity for which hu- 
manity has a greater hunger is food. 
Because of man’s insatiable desire 
for education and information, paper 
has attained a priceless value, for what 
the wire conductor is to electricity, so 
paper is to knowledge—the medium 
without which its wide conveyance and 
use would be impossible. 
We might even say that our civiliza- 
tion is based on paper. Without paper 
for textbooks and exercise books there 
would be no proper education; without 
cheap and plentiful paper for printing 
newspapers it would be difficult to 
circulate information, and the people 
in different countries would be igno- 
rant of one another’s ideas and activi- 
ties; without letter paper there would 
be no normal cultural, administrative 
and business correspondence. 
The greatest demand is for news- 
print—the endless miles of paper 
which feed the world’s newspaper 
printing presses. In a single year the 
newspapers of the United States and 
Canada, for example, use enough 
newsprint paper to make a band fifty 
miles wide around the earth. In the 
form of the standard roll this paper 
would have a length of. 13,000,000 miles. 
In 1951, the consumption of news- 
Philippe SOUPAULT, a French writer and journalist, 
was formerly editor of “Excelsior” a dailv paper, 
ond a founder (with André Breton} of the surrealisi 
movemeni. In 1933 he goined the Slrassburger Prize, 
owarded for the best article on United States affairs 
published in the world press, Until 1940 he was 
director of Radio Tunis and tn 1945 he headed the 
foreign broadcasts service of the Radiodiffusion Fron- 
caise Since 195] he hos been a member of Unesco’s 
Division for Improvements of Means and Techniques 
of Communication (Press Section). He carried out a 
Unesco study into Press, Film and Redio resources mn 
thirty-four countries and territories, 
by Philippe Soupault 
print throughout the world was 
9,460,000 tons (*) according to a study 
puklished by Unesco (Nos. 10 and 11 of 
the Reports and Papers on Mass, Com- 
munication). During the same year 
the world used roughly 9,000,000 tons - 
of printing paper (other than news- 
print) and writing paper. 
But the world’s hunger for paper 
grows larger each year. According to 
a study made for Unesco by the Intel- 
ligence Unit of “The Economist”, of 
London, (No 12 of the Reports and 
Papers on Mass Communication), the 
world demand for newsprint will pro- 
bably continue to increase so rapidly 
that by 1965 it will be over 15,500,000 
tons. The demand for printing paper 
(other than newsprint) and writing 
paper will be in the region of 
12,500,000 tons. ) 
The basis for these forecasts was an 
analysis of population and illiteracy 
trends, the availability of educational 
facilities, the trend of domestic paper 
production, and political and economic 
developments. An evaluation of each 
of these factors was made for every 
“country and territory. - 
important fact The single most 
which these figures bring home is that 
unless a large-scale effort is made to 
increase paper production the world 
will become more and more starved of 
this vital commodity. That is why 
Unesco, primarily concerned with the 
serious effects this would have on 
educational, scientific and cultural 
development and on the free flow of 
information, has been working with 
the United Nations and the other UN 
Specialized Agencies to put the facts 
before the public. Only a world-wide 
effort in the planning and production 
of printing and writing paper will 
meet the increased demand. 
What are some of the facts brought 
out by the Unesco studies? One of the 
most surprising is the disproportion in 
paper consumption between different 
countries. For example, in 1951, while 
a citizen of the United States “con- 
sumed”, on the average, 35.1 kilogram- 
mes of newsprint a year and 28.6 kilo- 
grammes of printing and writing 
paper, an inhabitant of Indonesia was 
obliged to make do with the meagre 
ration of 100 grammes of newsprint 
and 400 grammes of writing and 
printing paper. 
This is no “freak” example for a 
more general view confirms this lack 
of kalance, and shows the extent to 
which the per capita consumption of 
“newsprint varies from one part of the 
world to another. In 1951, for ins- 
tance, that of the United States was 
over 350 times higher than those of 
Eritrea, Haiti, Indonesia and Pakistan. 
There have also been some striking 
fluctuations in newsprint consumption. 
The United Kingdom which, between 
1935 and 1939 was the world’s most 
hungry newsprint consumer had, by 
1951, dropped to eighth place, coming 
below Hawaii and the Bermudas. In 
the four years prior to the Second 
World War, “Mr. Britain” got through 
26.4 kilogrammes a year, or 1.3 Kkilo- 
grammes more than “Mr. U.S.A.” at 
that time, but by 1951, he had been 
reduced to 11.9 kilogrammes per year. . 
However, as this fall in British con- 
sumption was due to the severe post- 
war restrictions imposed by the 
British Government on the size of 
newspapers, the relative “loss of 
(*) All the quaulilies green are quoted in 
melrie (ons and tn round figures. 
hil OF HAMS 
19 — - Ea SE = 
  
  
10               
PER CAPITA NEWSPRINT CONSUMPTION. PRINCIPAL 
hI OGRAMS 
  
  
  
   
1s 
E25 
  
CONSUMING COUNTRIES 
10 
20 
Average per capita consumption in 
5 1935-1939, 
» E20 
Per capita consumption in 1951.       
44

## [Page 45](070030engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 70028: The World's hungry readers

appetite” can be considered as abnor- 
. mal and unlikely to last indefinitely. 
As a matter of fact, if we disregard 
those countries in which the use of 
paper has been restricted by govern- 
‘ment order, we see that the consump- 
tion per head was almost everywhere 
higher in 1951 than it was before the 
.war, despite the difficulties of obtain- 
ing supplies. This was true not only 
of underdeveloped countries where the 
press has expanded as illiteracy has 
been reduced and education spread, 
and where per capita income has 
increased, but also of very highly 
developed countries, such as the Uni- 
ted States, whose economic activity has 
increased still further and which have 
less difficulty in satisfying their needs. 
The bi ggest appetite 
HE world’s appetite for paper is 
thus growing with amazing 
speed. In 1928, the.world con- 
sumed 6,130,000 tons of newsprint, 
and in 1951 9,460,000 tons, which 
means that, in spite of the economic 
depression _ which began in 1930 and 
the effects of the second world war, 
the consumption of paper went up, on 
the average, by 145,000 tons a year 
between 1928 and 1951. In the United 
States of America which uses more 
paper than any other country, the . 
consumption of newsprint increased 
nearly fourfold between 1915 and 1951, 
and doubled between 1933 and 1951. 
In 1951, 120 countries each consumed 
more than 50 tons of newsprint. These 
120 countries were distributed as fol- 
lows: 26 countries in Africa, 22 in North 
and Central America, 12 in. South 
America, 26 in Asia and 33 in Europe, 
besides the U.S.S.R. 
How can this enormous demand— 
which is getting bigger from year to 
year—be met? While all the countries 
in the world which are able to pur- 
chase enough to meet their needs are 
consuming larger quantities of paper, 
a relatively small number of countries 
are producing this commodity. In 
1951, only 36 countries manufactured 
newsprint, 3. in North America, 4 in 
South America, 7 in Asia, 20 in Europe, 
besides the U.S.S.R., and 1 in the South 
Sea Islands. The world production of 
printing paper (other than newsprint) 
and writing paper is much less central- 
ized than that of newsprint. It is 
estimated that in 1951 42 countries or 
territories each produced over 50 tons 
of these two types of paper. 
Threat to literacy 
Y far and away the largest paper 
producer is Canada. It has held 
this position since 1928, and from 
1932 to 1945 turned out a larger and 
larger proportion of the total world 
output. It was the only country whose 
production in 1951 showed a consider- 
able increase over pre-war figures. 
Between 1945 and 1951 this figure rose 
from about 3,260,000 tons per year to 
rather more than 5,000,000 tons—an 
enormous quantity representing 52.7 % 
of the total world production. 
In 1951 when Unesco began to alert 
public opinion to the dangers of a 
 
UNESCO COURIER — N°» 8-2 — 1954 
  
“DEVOUR BOOKS?” this was the title of a recent —— 
poster published by the National Syndicate of French 
Editors showing the French actor Gérard Philipe 
““ devouring” a pile of books. 
newsprint shortage, the situation was 
already hampering the fight against 
illiteracy in many countries because of 
the difficulty of importing paper for 
primary and secondary school text- 
books and notebooks. It had also forc- 
ed some newspapers to close down. 
At that time, however, it was not 
known how enormously the world 
demand was going to increase. Will 
the existing and planned production 
resources be able to meet the ever- 
increasing demand? The equipment of 
large paper mills involves heavy capi- 
tal outlay and a relatively long study 
of organization and building plans. 
Of course the growth in production 
and consumption noted over the past 
25 years was an indication that a large 
increase was to be expected in the 
future. But other factors such as the 
spread of education, the new literacy 
campaigns undertaken in many coun- 
tries, the continual growth of the 
world’s population and the increase in 
the real per capita income of its in- 
habitants had also to be considered. 
Unesco therefore set out to make at 
least an approximate® assessment of 
man’s future needs in paper. In co- 
operation with the Food and Agricul- 
ture Organization, the Economic Com- 
mission for Europe and the Economic 
Commission for Latin America, Unesco 
collected world information about the 
development of the paper problem. 
It also commissioned the Intelligence 
Unit of “The Economist” which spe- 
cializes in economic investigations on 
an international scale, to work out 
estimates of the consumption of 
printing and writing paper for each 
country and territory. These indicate 
that in 1965 the world will need some 
65 % more newsprint than in 1951 and 
that the rise in the demand for other 
printing paper and writing paper will 
also be considerable. 
Here is a hunger which must be 
appeased. Lack of paper to carry 
information means lack of the aware- 
ness, the interest and the personal 
‘ responsibility that play such a large 
role in sound citizenship. Lack of 
paper for textbooks deprives children 
and adult illiterates of the means of 
learning, and limitation of education 
penalizes all forms of progress. The 
availability of paper—for newspapers, 
for books, for exchanges of facts and 
ideas—is therefore .a matter of world 
concern and world action. 
45

## [Page 46](070030engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 70029: Teaching science with odds and ends

TEACHING SCIENCE WITH 
ODDS AND ENDS 
by 
Daniel Behrman 
INGENUITY AND A SOAP 
PLANT are the main ingre- 
dients of these molecular models 
Elvira Salazar is demonstrating 
to two pupils in a Lima secon- 
dary school. The round pips 
of the soap plant and a few 
lengths of iron wire are all that 
is needed for this introduction 
to the atom. Miss Salazar is 
only one of a team of six young 
Peruvian chemistry teachers 
working with Dr. Jose Martinez 
Cros, a Spanish scientist sent 
to Peru on a Unesco technical 
assistance mission. Faced with 
a shortage of teaching equip- 
ment—and currency—they te- 
cided to devise their own. 
N a freshly-painted room in the Teresa Gonzalez de 
Fanning School in Lima, Peru, Elvira Coloma, a fourth- 
year student, was preparing her laboratory table for the 
production of ammonia, the day’s experiment in inorganic 
chemistry, in this secondary school’s programme. 
First, she half-filled a test-tube with caustic soda solution, 
measuring it by eyedropper from its flask, a syrup bottle. 
She dropped three small lumps of ammonium carbonate into 
the solution and plugged the test tube, using a cork with a 
hole drilled through its centre. On top of this cork, she 
fitted another test tube and then placed the whole affair on 
a wooden ring stand, clamping the test tubes into position 
with a clothes peg. - 
Elvira lit a match to her laboratory burner, an ink bottle 
with a cotton wick, soaked in alcohol, rising through a hole 
punched in the bottle’s metal cap. As she slowly heated the 
solution, bubbles of gas formed and rose into the upper tube. 
She blew out the flame and removed this tube, stopping it 
with her finger. She turned it right-side-up and filled it 
‘with water from a wine bottle with an eyedropper spout in 
its cork. Then she sniffed. A strong smell of ammonia 
came from the tube. To complete her test, she added a drop 
of phenol-phthalein. When the colourless liquid came into 
46 
al _ | 
 
contact with the ammonia, it turned pink. The experiment 
was over and Elvira began to write in her note-book. 
Instead of watching a passive demonstration by a teacher 
or simply memorizing a few passages from a chemistry test, 
Elvira and her eighteen classmates had done the experiment 
on their own. Their laboratory was an ordinary classroom 
not even equipped with gas for Bunsen burners nor with 
water outlets for each laboratory bench. But to do their 
experiments Elvira and her friends had a kit of basic appa- 
ratus, a “minimum laboratory” — quite adequate enough to 
conduct all of the organic and inorganic chemistry experi- 
ments in a secondary school science course. Its total cost — 
12 soles (60 cents or 4/-). 
This “minimum laboratory” has been developed by Dr. Jose’ 
Martinez Cros, a Spanish scientist 'who took leave in 1951 
from the Higher Council of Scientific Research in Madrid to 
join a Unesco technical assistance mission working with 
Peru’s Ministry of Education on the training of science 
teachers. 
A nervously energetic man full of drive, Dr. Martinez Cros 
built up this laboratory with the help of six young Peruvian 
chemistry teachers. Beginning in 1952 they had studied 
with him intensively to become a team of missionaries in

## [Page 47](070030engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 70029: Teaching science with odds and ends

! 
modern science teaching. In their own work, they conducted 
experiments with precision apparatus supplied by the Peru- 
vian Government and installed in the Fanning School while 
it was still the Pedagogical Institute of Lima (it became 2 
girl’s secondary school in 1953 when Peru opened its new 
Central Normal School). 
Precision apparatus was essential for these refresher 
courses, but it was expensive. And it was no answer to the 
problem of introducing experiments by individual students in 
the average school. Another method had to be found— 
otherwise chemistry would remain a dull textbook subject 
or, at best, a demonstration course. 
The Peruvian teachers and Dr. Martinez Cros decided to 
follow a line already traced by science teachers on United 
Nations technical assistance missions for Unesco in Indo- 
nesia, the Philippines and Thailand. In these countries, 
school experiments in chemistry and physics had been 
conducted using equipment built out of anything at hand — 
from electric light bulbs to discarded telephones. However, 
Dr. Martinez Cros and the Peruvian teachers did their own 
research. Dr. Martinez Cros had not brought any prefabri- 
cated ideas into Peru from Spain; nor was there any magic 
- Unesco formula ‘for teaching science without apparatus. 
- In the “minimum laboratory” they built up in Lima, two 
points have been stressed — simplicity and precision, “Home- 
made apparatus is as good from a pedagogical viewpoint as 
expensive equipment”, Dr. Martinez Cros told me. “It has 
one great advantage—if the student is interested in che- 
mistry, he can duplicate it at home and make his own 
experiments.” 
"In terms of precision, the group decided that, while an 
electric light bulb with its metal base filed off may serve as 
a laboratory flask for primary school lessons, it was not 
adequate for experiments at the secondary level. Therefore, 
a set of 16 pyrex test tubes is among the three items in the 
“minimum laboratory” which must be purchased from a 
chemical supply house, the other two being a glass funnel 
and a few feet of glass tubing. ~ 
Using the versatile 
electric light bulb 
HE test-tubes go into a home-made wooden rack with 
T numbered corks to identify their contents. Another 
rack is filled with syrup bottles containing the six 
reagents needed for secondary school chemistry experi- 
ments — ammonium hydroxide, caustic soda, sulphuric acid, 
nitric acid, hydrochloric acid and phenol-phthalein. In the 
interest of safety and economy, they are corked with 
-eyedroppers. Students are never required to pour an acid. 
The wooden ring-stand is a basic feature of the laboratory. 
It consists of a flat wooden base with a dowel nailed to the 
bottom. A horizontal slat of wood is attached to the dowel 
by clothes pegs, permitting it to ride up and down or to.be 
rotated. To this moveable slat are nalled two more clothes 
pegs, one for holding test tubes vertically and the other 
slanted for experiments in which the test tube must be kept 
at an angle to protect the student against escaping acid. 
The laboratory burner is a descendant of the ink bottle 
burners used by Unesco technical assistance workers in Asia. 
Then there are sundry accessories — test-tube holders of 
scrap metal salvaged from shipping crates, waste jars 
consisting of wine bottles with their upper halves filed off, 
pieces of window glass to handle products which might harm 
a wooden table; a heating pan devised from a bottle cap 
with a handle of hent wire soldered to it, small test tubes 
made from glass aspirin tubes (better than the factory-made 
article in some cases because their flat bottoms make it 
easier to calculate volumes), boiling flasks made from the 
bottom half of the versatile electric light bulb, and a length 
of -electric wire and two dry cells for carrying out experi- 
ments in electrolysis. 
The key to the laboratory is the use of materials found in 
Peruvian homes or available in shops at low cost. For 
example, models of molecular structures are made with their 
atoms represented by the hard round pips of a Peruvian soap 
‘plant sold on the market for 3 cents a pound and linked 
together by pieces of iron wire. Molecular models made from 
f 
UNESCO COURIER — Nos 8-9 — 1954 
the soap plant are just as good for teaching purposes as 
those built from imported kits which cost as much as $ 80. 
Dr. Martinez Cros has gone much further in his laboratory 
for training teachers. Although much of its equipment was 
made in the Fanning school, it is at a much higher level— 
a prototype of a rational, low-cost laboratory for a normal 
school, Each table is equipped ‘with bases inserted flush into 
its surface to take metal ring stands, merely lengths of pipe 
threaded at one end to screw into the tables. Gas-operated 
Bunsen burners are used here and they are prepared from 
lengths of 17 mm pipe equipped with jets used by Peruvians 
for their kerosene stoves. The tables are of wood, covered 
with an anti-acid paint. Wood is cheaper than tile in Peru 
and it reduces the breakage of glass equipment. 
: Scales from thread, 
corks, wood and needles 
OST of this equipment is now manufactured in the 
school by Felix Jacinto Bravo, a handy laboratory 
assistant whom Dr. Martinez Cros trained in laboratory 
glass blowing. While no attempt is made to produce com- 
plicated precision apparatus, the laboratory meets its own 
needs in tubing and can handle repairs of broken equipment. 
Training in glass blowing is included in the course which . 
Dr, Martinez Cros conducts for chemistry teachers. 
A similar job of training teachers and improvising apparat- 
us was carried out next door to the chemical laboratory by 
Dr. Raymond Zuckermann, a French physicist who complet- 
ed a Unesco mission in Peru in 1953. While Dr. Martinez 
Cros was conducting experiments with his six chemists, Dr. 
Zuckermann was working with six physics teachers. 
There was one important difference in their tasks. Che- 
mistry experiments require only basic equipment, but physics 
demonstrations need different apparatus for virtually every 
‘principle to be proven. Dr. Zuckermann and his students were 
confronted with experiments requiring equipment far too 
costly for the budget of an average school. They decided to 
go ahead with what they could find. 
The results are in the physics laboratory of the Fanning 
school, a house of ingenious marvels, In this laboratory, 
scales sensitive to 2 milligrams are produced out of thread, 
corks, wood and needles (the scales are so sensitive that they 
cannot be operated with a window or a door open in the 
laboratory). An old Model T Ford magneto and a magnify- 
ing glass have been transformed into a mirror galvanometer. 
A discarded phonograph motor plays a major part in apn 
apparatus for demonstrating the law of falling bodies. 
One of the most fascinating of these instruments is the 
laboratory's extensometer, a device for measuring the expan- 
sion of metals when heated, and contrived from wood, paper 
and wires. When a current is passed into it to heat the metal 
being tested, the expansion is indicated by a wooden needle 
registering on a gauge inked out on paper. Exact measure- 
ment of this expansion requires exact knowledge of the 
temperature to which the metal has been heated. This is 
determined with surprising simplicity: a piece of wire is 
attached to the metal under test by a lump of sulphur and. 
as soon as the sulphur melts, the experimenter knows how 
hot he has heated the metal — because he knows the melting 
point of sulphur. 
Outgoing fellows 
incoming experts 
N this laboratory, as in the chemistry room of Dr. Mar- 
tinez Cros, delicate equipment is used only in working 
with teachers. Here, too, simplified models have been 
devised for use by individual students in physics classes. 
Both of the laboratories are being moved out to the new 
Central Normal School at Chosica, an ultra-modern structure 
basking in year-round sunshine. ‘ 
In Peru the 25 miles from Lima to Chosica equal the cli- 
matic difference between New York and Miami in the United 
States or Paris and the Riviera in France. Lima has a cool 
climate with overcast skies, the gift of the Humboldt Current 
47

## [Page 48](070030engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### 70029: Teaching science with odds and ends

‘Minimum 
Laboratory’ 
(Continued) 
  on the shores of the Pacific. Chosica, 
inland in the valley of the Rio Rimac 
never sees a cloud. 
The new normal school now has an 
enrolment of 280 future teachers. 
Besides developing the science la- 
boratories, technical assistance has 
been able to play a part in the school 
by providing Unesco fellowships for 
two vocational education teachers to 
study at the University of Puerto 
Rico. The director of the school’s 
audio-visual section, Manuel Vera, 
also studied for a year at the Uni- 
versity of Wisconsin in the United 
States under a technical assistance 
fellowship and he is introducing 
films, film strips, records, charts and 
other teaching aids in the normal 
school’s laboratory classes. 
This method of complementing 
incoming international technical as- 
sistance workers with outgoing Peru- 
vian fellows has the unqualified appro- 
val of such Peruvian education leaders 
as Carlos Teixeira, the country’s direc- 
tor of technical education, who be- 
lieves that “the fellow is as important 
to Peru as the expert.” 
Mr. Teixeira is at the head of 
a mushrooming technical education 
system which is placing heavy de- - 
mands on Peru’s available supply of 
teachers of science and trade. From 
- 1948 to 1952, the number of students 
attending industrial, agricultural and 
commercial schools jumped from 9,500 to 20,000. The 
vocational training department in the Central Normal 
School is the first of its kind set up in Peru specifically to 
" train teachers of vocational education to staff the classrooms 
which are being built throughout the country. 
» 
These teachers are badly needed. Early in 1954 among 
those in Peru’s 34 vocational schools, there were only 44 who 
had graduated from a normal school, although Mr. Teixeira 
hoped to double their number before the end of the year. 
“We are giving technical school teachers the same privileges 
 "s 7) i a 
A dd 
. » 
. J a 
hw . 
eh 
, 
Go EN DS - 
THE CHILDREN’S HOUR on this record player is part of the programme of the audio-visual section 
- at Peru’s new Central Normal Schoel at Chosica, 25 miles from Lima. 
for one year at the University of Wisconsin in the United States under a Unesco technical assistance 
fellowship, is now director of this section of the school. 
Manuel Vera, who studied 
and the same salaries as academic teachers”, he explained. 
“This is a fight to dignify technical education so that we 
can attract good teachers—and it is going on elsewhere in 
the world as well as in Peru.” 
“Economic progress brings up the old question of the 
chicken and the egg”, Mr. Teixeira told me. “Should a coun- 
try train skilled workers first or wait until its industries are 
desperately short of labour? We are now going ahead with 
the training of workers and that is why we need more and 
better teachers. We believe that Peru will not stand still.” 
  
EVERY EXPERIMENT required in a secondary 
school chemistry course can be performed with 
this “minimum laboratory” put together by 
Dr. Martinez Cros, which can be used even in 
rooms without water or gas facilities. Here, 
two pupils are conducting an experiment in 
the production of ammonia. 
48 
A BREATH OF AIR 1s enough to disturb 
these scales, sensitive to two milligrams though 
they consist of wood, corks, needles and string. 
Here, Carmen Cassano, a member of the team 
of physics teachers chosen to work with the 
Unesco mission, is seen here testing a scale at 
the end of her “production line”. 
EXPANSION OF METALS when heated by 
an electric current can be measured with this’ 
home-made “extensometer” operated by Mesias 
Huaringa, another member of the team of 
physics teachers. The paper tube around the 
wire prevents it from being cooled by air cur- 
rents during the experiment, -

## [Page 49](070030engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — N° 8-9 — 1954 
From the Unesco Newsroom... 
Brier RURAL EDU- 
CATION:Most people in the 
world today hive on crops they 
grow themselves and spend their 
lives in rural villages or isola- 
ted farms. Their educational 
problems are more difficult and 
mmperative than those of city 
dwellers. To study these spe- 
cial problems and to discuss 
ways of solving them, delegates 
from thirty countries met re- 
cently in Denmark at an inter- 
national seminar organized by 
Unesco on adult education in 
rural areas. 
+ PROTECTING NATURE: 
As the world's population in- 
creases by 25,000,000 every 
year, man must be taught 
how to make the best use of 
nature's resources on which 
he is completely dependent. 
This is the aim of the Inter 
national Union for the Pro- 
tection of Nature founded in 
1048 under the sponsorship 
of Unesco. At its fourth 
annual assembly held re- 
cently in Copenhagen, the 
Union discussed methods and 
means of publicity which 
should be used to enlist pub- 
lic aid in nature protection 
work. Two other subjects giv- 
en special attention were the 
protection of Arctic animals 
and the effect of modern 
insecticides on mammals, 
birds and insects. (See 
Unesco Courier Ne. 4/5,»1954, 
for an article on the pro- 
tection of nature), 
T ne WORLD WARMS 
UP: There is definite evidence 
that the Northern Hemisphere 
is becoming warmer, according 
to M, Jean-René Rivet, deputy 
Secretary-General of the World 
Meteorological Organi- 
zation. M. Rivet said that as 
a result of this, improved agri- 
culture was now possible in 
northern latitudes of Scandina- 
via and Greenland, where crops 
WILLIAM 
HODSON 
Unesco has lost a leading 
member of its staff through 
the death of Mr. William 
Hodson, Head of the Bureau 
of Programme and Budget. 
Mr. Hodson was one of 28 
passengers killed in an airliner 
crash near Shannon, Ireland, 
on September 5. An Ame- 
rican citizen, Mr. Hodson was 
born in Minneapolis on March 
25, 1921, Educated at Har- 
- vard he later entered govern- 
ment service in Washington. 
He joined Unesco in March, 
1947, as Executive Assistant 
to the Deputy Director-Gene- 
ral. In March 1951 he was 
appointed to the post he held 
ot the time of his death. 
Mr. Hodson leaves a widow 
and three children.     
have never previously been 
grown in recorded history. 
(See Unesco Courier N¢ 2, 1954, 
for an article on the world’s 
warmer weather: “It Was Cold- 
er When We Were Younger.) 
FOOD AND PEOPLE: 
In 1953 and again this year 
world food production man- 
aged to stay ahead of popu- 
lation increases, reports the 
Food and Agriculture Orga- 
nization (FAO). Agricul- 
ture production has risen 
by nearly three per cent a 
year over the last four years, 
while the estimated popula- 
tion increase has been about 
one and one-half per cent 
each year. But even though 
the total world food output 
may now be adequate, un- 
even distribution makes for 
surpluses in some areas and 
great shortages in others. 
Pr OLL FOR PARENTS : 
The City of Denver, in the Uni- 
ted States, finds out what citi- 
zens think about its school sys-_ 
tem by taking a public opinion 
poll. The first, taken in 1950, 
showed that 49 per cent of the 
peoble felt the school system was 
doing a “good job", By last 
year’s poll this approval had 
risen to 59 per cent. 
* RURAL RADIO LINKS: 
To overcome one of ils 
biggest development problems 
—lack of communications 
both between its east and 
west territories and between 
its isolated villages—Palkistan 
1s making great efforts to 
extend ifs radio links. New 
broadcasting and relay sta- 
tions are being built and ra- 
dio is now being used in 
conjunclion with a nation- 
unde campaign to educate 
adults in remote villages. At 
present 600 community ra- 
dios are being distributed in 
willages around the relay 
transmitting stations of Chit- 
tagong and Rajshahi in 
East Pakistan, The Pakis- 
tan Government has pur- 
chased 3,000 for distribution 
to rural areas. A new plan 
for training telecommunica- 
tions personnel is also under 
way wn Pakistan. Besides a 
Central Training Centre al- 
ready in operation, three re- 
gional schools will be set up 
at Karachi, Dacca and 
Lahore to train technicians. 
The Lahore school will be 
opened at the end of the 
year, and the Dacca and 
Karachi establishments may 
start working early in 1955. 
BB LackBoarDs IN DIS- 
FAVOUR : A “development 
group” «studying school building 
for the British Ministry of Edu- 
cation has recommended that 
because of its effect on class- 
room colour schemes, the tra- 
ditional blackboard should be 
replaced by a “chalkboard ” in 
such colours as red, brown, 
green or grey. Stressing the 
importance of a school build- 
ing’s colour scheme, the group 
considered it should give a 
positive rather than a neutral 
effect. 
NnTERNATIONAL STU- 
DENT CENTRE: The first 
international student centre in 
Egypt has been set up with 
prefabricated units provided by 
the World University Service, 
on the Cairo University grounds 
at Giza. The Universities of 
Cairo and Heliopolis have given 
money towards its construction 
and provided furniture. The 
centre will form a social meeting 
place for students of all nation- 
alities at Cawro’s various uni- 
versities, and will give conva- 
lescent students a chance to 
regain their health under satis- 
factory conditions. 
* SPEEDIER SCIENCE 
SHIPMENTS : The recenlly 
announced Unesco scheme to 
aid the inlernational ex- 
change of delicate scientific 
measuring instruments 
among science laboratories 
has already received suppori 
from thirty-four member 
states. Seventy scientific la- 
boralories have been named 
as participants. Under the 
plan, measuring instruments 
would be assured safe and 
speedy lransit when being 
shipped from one country to 
another. Each would carry 
a distinctive Unesco symbol 
enabling customs clearance 
to be made at the sending or 
receiving laboratory rather 
than in customs sheds, thus 
avoiding damage or delay. 
The plan is part of Unesco’s 
general programme for the 
free flow of information. 
Wor FACTS : More 
than 230,000,000 radio sets are 1n 
use throughout the world today, 
which means there are 95 for 
every 1,000 inhabitants. ‘The 
Unmted States has about one 
half of these radios, of which 
some 25,000,000 are fitted in au- 
tomobiles. These items of in- 
formation are given in the sec- 
ond edition of “Basic Facts 
and Figures”, a publication in 
which Unesco has 
world-wide mnformation on illi- 
teracy, education, libraries, mu- 
seums, books, newspapers, news- 
print, film, radio and television. 
The booklet also reveals that by 
September 1953 twenty countries 
were broadcasting regular tele- 
vision programmes. The United 
States had the largest number 
of TV receivers — 25,100,000 — 
and the United Kingdom had 
2,900,000 with an mcrease at the 
rate of about 70 per cent a year. 
* SCHOOLS AROUND THE 
WORLD : utch boys and 
girls are hearing what school 
is like for young people all 
around the world—from 
Alaska to Indonesia and 
from Japan to Liberia— 
through a series of special 
programmes being broadcast 
by a Dutch radio corporation 
(VARA). Material for the 
programmes was obiained by 
the Unesco Centrum of Ne- 
derleand from Unesco Natio- 
nal Commissions in 13 coun- 
tries. ‘ 
collected 
* PAPER PROBLEM : The 
problems of establishing new 
pulp and paper industries 
will be discussed in detail at 
two international conferen- 
ces to be sponsored by the 
Food and Agriculture Organ- 
ization later this year. In 
October the problems of 
paper production wm Latin 
America are to be discussed 
at a meeting in Buenos Aires. 
In December the question of 
pulp production will be an 
important item on the 
agenda of the Fourth World 
Forestry Congress at Dehra 
Dur, in India. (See page 44 
for article on the world’s 
growing hunger for paper). 
8 ciencE GOES ON 
TOUR : Since 1950 four science 
exhibitions prepared by Unesco 
have been seen by over 1,200,000 
people 1m 26 countries, Making 
use of graphic displays, photo- 
graphs and demonstrations that 
could be operated by the 
visitors, the exhibits have over- 
come language barriers. They 
have helped people to under- 
stand the world they live in and 
have brought home simple, vital 
facts. After people have looked 
through a microscope at a drop 
of pond water, and have seen a 
million tiny organisms squirming 
and darting about, for instance, 
they are ready to believe doctors 
who warn that such ‘water is 
dangerous to drink. Exhibits 
have covered physics and astro- 
nomy, the human senses, the 
use of synthetic materials in 
modern life and the instruments 
we use to study the universe, 
from atoms to stars, 
* UNESCO ON TV: For the 
last two years, Professor Luis 
Amador Sanchez, of Soo 
Paulo University, Brazil, has 
presented a weekly television 
show on Umnesco’s work over 
Sao Paulo's television sta- 
tion. Senor Amador Sanchez 
illustrates his telecasts with 
views of leading historic 
monuments and universities, 
He also shows Unesco’s tech- 
nical assistance work, as well 
as ballet, theatre and music 
performances. On an aver- 
age, three hundred thousand 
people in the Sao Paulo 
region are watching this 
Unesco show on their sets 
each week. 
Museums IN THE ME- 
TRO : People waiting for un- 
derground {rains at the Opera 
Station in Paris can see a novel 
and fascinating exhibition as- 
sembled by the French Ministry 
of Education, Artistically 
arranged window panels show 
samples of the treasures con- 
tained in various French na- 
tional museums in and around 
Paris. Beautiful oriental por- 
celain suggests the wonders of 
Asiatic art on display at the 
Guimet museum. Quaint house~ 
hold utensils of bygone days 
evoke the curiosities at the 
Museum of Decorative Arts. 
The exhibition is designed to 
introduce the public to lesser- 
known Pans collections as well 
as to famous museums like the 
Louvre. 
49

## [Page 50](070030engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

From the Unesco Newsroom... 
% FLYING CLASSROOMS: 
Schoolchildren in Birming- 
. ham, England, now learn 
geography in flying class- 
rooms. Armed wiih maps 
and accompanied by-a lea- 
cher, groups of them travel 
to London three times week- 
ly on the regular airline 
flights. Aided by sheets 
from the pilot's log they can 
identify landmarks and cities 
along the route during their 
aerial geography lesson. 
Aun ABOUT BRAILLE : 
Unesco has Just published 
“World Braille Usage", a basic 
reference work which recounts 
the history of Braille and 
presents a survey of the efforts 
made towards Braille unifica- 
tion. The author of the book 
is Sir Clutha Mackenzie, who 
was Unesco’s consultant between 
1949 and the end of 1951. He 
is Chairman of the World 
Braille Council. In a foreword 
to “Braille World Usage’, Helen 
Keller writes that in this book 
“a magnificent monument has 
been raised to Louis Braille, 
from whose life-dream has been 
wrought the mental and spiri- 
tual emancipation of the blind 
in every land.” 
+ TUITION BY TAPE: 
Groups of students at Cons- 
tantine (Algeria) are mow 
follownng examination cour- 
ses at Algiers University by 
tape recordings. These re- 
cordings of the courses of 
the faculty of letlers in pre- 
paration for the first degree, 
secondary teacher's certifi- 
cate and the fellowship exa- 
mination for teachers of Eng- 
lish are regularly made and 
sent each week to the Cons- 
tantine students. 
Lar AMERICAN CLAS- 
SICS: A historical novel Ma- 
nuel de Jesus Galvans The 
Cross and the Sword has 
been chosen by the Indiana 
University Press, in the United 
States, as the first of a series of 
Latin American classics to be 
published under the sponsorship 
of Unesco and the Organization 
of American States. The setting 
of the novel, translated by the 
English author and translator, 
Robert Graves, is in the West 
Indies shortly after Columbus's 
voyages. One of the central cha- 
racters is a famous historical 
figure, the Spanish missionary 
Bartolomé de Las Casas who 
fought to protect the Indians 
from the viclence of ruthless 
Spanish explorers and soldiers. 
Manuel de Jesus Galvan, jour- 
nalist, diplomat and educator, 
was born in Santo Domingo in 
1834 and died in 1910. The 
Cross and the Sword is the first 
publication in English of his on- 
ly novel, originally issued in 
1879 as Enriquillo, 
Through the Latin American 
Classics Series, the Indiana Uni- 
versity Press hopes to introduce 
and spread knowledge of repre- 
sentative works of Latin Ameri- 
can literature and thought 
among English-speaking people 
in the interest of better inter- 
national understanding. Other 
n 
50 
Latin American classics plan- 
ned in the series are Selected 
Writings of José Marti, trans- 
lated by C.A. Rossner; and An- 
thology of Mexican Poelry 
translated by Samuel Beckett; 
The Last Days of the Colonial 
Era in Upper Peru by Gabriel. 
René Moreno; Royal Commen- 
iaries of the Incas by El Inca 
Garcilaso de la Vega; Travels 
by the Argentine writer and pat- 
riot, Domingo Faustino Sar- 
mentio; The Boarding School 
(O Aleneu) by Raul Pompela and 
a number of anthologies of the 
social and political thought of 
Latin America. 
+ SOUTH SEA STUDENTS: 
Every year since 1945 some 
15 young South Sea Island- 
ers have won scholarships 
from their homes in the Pa- 
cific to study at New Zea- 
Council for Education announc- 
ed this decision following the 
visit to Chile of Dr. Fernando 
Romero, sent to Latin America 
by Unesco to survey adult edu- 
cation programmes. The Com- 
mittee, composed of the Rector 
of the Technical University of 
Federico Santa Marie, a repre- 
sentative of factory management 
and one for the labour unions, 
is to prepare a comprehensive 
educational plan for adults. 
+ WORKSHOPFORPEACE: - 
The daily work of the United 
Nations Headquarters in New 
York provides the theme for 
a new UN film entitled 
“Workshop for Peace”. The 
camera, roving through the 
buildings, provides a guided 
tour of the Headquarters, 
with forceful commentary, 
for people who are unable to 
  
  
ASSSISTANT DIRECTOR-GENERAL 
| OF UNESCO APPOINTED 
France at Rabbat, he was entrusted with various missions concerning 
the reform of Moroccan education. - 
He joined the Secretariat of Unesco in September 1946 as head 
of the Division of Free Flow of Information, 
In December 1948, M. Jaime Torres Bodet, then Director-Gene- 
ral of Unesco, appointed him Director of his office. 
city he has taken an active part in the preparation and coordi- 
nation of the programme of Unesco. 
M. René Maheu, of France, 
has been appointed Assistant 
Director-General of Unesco. 
The appointment was made in 
July 1954 by Dr. Luther Evans, 
Unesco's Director-General. 
M. Maheu was born in 1905, 
at St. Gaudens, France. He 
graduated from the Ecole Nor- 
male Supérieure and taught: 
philosophy at the University of 
Cologne (1931-33), at the 
French Institute in the United 
Kingdom (1933-39) and at the 
Franco-Moslem College at 
Moulay Idriss, Fez (1940-42), 
As a member of the civil cabi- 
net of the Resident General of 
In this capa-       
~ 
land Colleges. 
tween 12 and 15 years, they 
come from Niue, Western Sa- 
moa, 
nearby islands. Scholarships 
granted under this experi- 
mental scheme enable young 
islanders to continue their 
studies on a higher level and 
become doctors, nurses, engi- 
neers, or teachers. Others 
dre lrained in a irade or 
craft. This year siz island 
students enrolled at a New 
Zealand University, two for 
courses in law, the others to 
study engineering, commerce, 
agriculture, and the arts. 
Eight were students at tea- 
chers’ training colleges, while 
two others were sludying as 
assistant teachers, By 1954 
141 island students had been 
trained in New Zealand un- 
der the plan. 
Ebucarion IN CHILE ; 
Chile is creating a permanent 
committee to study questions of 
adult education. The National 
Aged Dbe- _ 
Ratonga and other. 
join the thousands who visit 
it each day. 
x 
KFicurne DISEASE : 
Successful attacks on typhus, 
yaws, malaria and other dis- 
eases by co-operating teams of 
workers from the United Na- 
tions Children’s Fund, the World 
Health Organization and gov- 
ernments have been reported 
‘recently. Last winter, teams of 
Afghan health workers dusted 
homes, mosques, public baths 
and horse-drawn hacks in Kabul 
with DDT. Not one case of 
typhus was reported there this 
spring. Only a few years ago 
louseborne typhus was epidemic 
in the area. In Haiti, 35,000 to 
55,000 persons afflicted by yaws 
were treated monthly with peni- 
cillin, Almost 100,000 incapaci- 
tated persons have returned to 
work. 
+ WORLD'S NEEDY CHIL- 
DREN: In 1953, the United 
Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF) aded some 
20,000,000 children and ezx- 
pectant or nursing mothers 
im some eighty couniries. 
This year, UNICEF’S goal is 
even higher. . .to reach 
more than 25,000,000 children 
and mothers through mass 
health campaigns and long- 
range nutrition and maternal 
and child welfare program- 
mes. Of the world’s 900 mil- 
lion children, two-thirds are 
stil without adequate food, 
clothing, sheller, sanitation 
or minimum medical prolec- 
ion. 
Crirrien CHILDREN : 
Gifts from véluntary groups in 
many countries have enabled 
the Children’s Orthopaedic Hos- 
pital in Bombay to open an 
Occupational Therapy Depart- 
ment and to equip other de- 
partments of the hospital with 
much - needed material. The 
hospital's needs were made 
known through Unesco's Gift 
Coupon scheme, a voluntary aid 
plan through which a sort of 
international money order can 
be sent as a gift to educational, 
scientific or cultural institu- 
tions in other countries. Through 
the Unesco coupons it received, 
the Bombay hospital is now 
able to provide more effective 
treatment to hundreds of Indian 
crippled children. 
+ KOREAN TRAINING 
CENTRE: Unesco has sent 
Mr. Howard Hayden, a Bri- 
tish educational expert, to 
Korea, where he is to be Di- 
reclor of a Fundamental 
Education Training and Re- 
search Centre, This Cenire 
is a joint enlerprise to be 
started by the United Nations 
Korean Relief Administra- 
tion and Unesco. It will train 
teachers in fundamental 
education techniques, which 
would be applied in the edu- 
cational campaigns in Korea. 
Mr. Hayden goes to Korea 
with a wide knowledge of 
educational problems in the 
Pacific, as well as British co- 
lonial territories. For the last 
year, he was Director of 
Education in Trinidad, and 
from 1946 to 1953 he held the 
same position at Fiji. 
L vine AND LEARN- 
ING: A second infernational 
group of young men and women 
have begun training as funda- 
mental education experts in an 
eight months’ course sponsored 
by Unesco at Mysore, India. A 
similar Unesco study course 
ended there recently, graduating 
seventeen students to work as 
experts in the technical assis- 
tance programmes of the United 
Nations and the. Specialized 
Agencies. The students who 
came from nine countries learn- 
ed technigues, which ranged 
from how to make educational 
films and other teaching mate- 
rials, to training local teachers 
for adult literacy campaigns. 
Like the first group, the second 
will live and work in the villages 
of Mysore, learning by practical 
experience to apply the teaching 
techniques developed by the 
Mysore State Adult Education 
Council. This organization has 
taught 300,000 illiterates to read 
in the past twelve. years. I
m
p
.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
11
, 
ru
e 
C
u
r
i
a
l
,
 
Pa
ri
s-
19
*.
 
—
 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
E
N
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.

## [Page 51](070030engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

  
The 
  
    
  
TO SUBSCRIBE 
In the United Kingdom send your 
remittanee to IL.M. Stationery Offi- 
ce P.O. Box 569, London S.E. 1. 
In other eountries write to National 
Distributors listed below. 
Ii your country is not listed write 
directly to Uneseo Sales Division 
19, avenue Kléber, Paris, France. 
Unesco Courier 
“..d Window Open on the World’ 
COMING NEXT MONTH (N° 10) 
 
CHRISTMAS 
THE STRUGGLE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS 
AND JUSTICE BEFORE THE LAW 
ISSUE (N° 11) 
 
this 
additional cost: 
To ensure receiving your copy 
SUBSCRIBE TODAY 
The little-known masterpieces of world art 
with a supplement of colour photos on 
EGYPT 
INDIA 
AUSTRALIA 
YUGOSLAVIA 
NORWAY 
Only our subscribers will receive 
art number special 
One full year’s subscription only 300 French 
Frs; or 6/~; or equivalent in loeal currencies. 
(U. S. edition $ 2-50) 
without   
Unesco’s Notional Distributors from whom 
the English edition of THE COURIER can be 
obtoined are listed below, Other Unesco 
Distributors are hsted in the French and 
Spanish editions of THE COURIER. 
* 
Australia : Oxford University Press, 346, 
Licele Collins Street, Melbourne. 
Austria : Wilhelm Frick Verlag, 27, Gra- 
ben, Yienna |. 
Burma : Burma Educational Bookshop, 
551-3 Merchant Street, P.O. Box 212, 
Rangoon. 
Canada : University of Toronto Press, 
Toronto. 
Ceylon : Lake House Bookshop, The Asso- 
ciated Newspapers of Ceylon, Ltd, P.O. 
Box 244, Colombo 1. Rs. 5. 
Cyprus : M, E, Constantinides, P.O.B. 473, 
Nicosia. 
Denmark : Ejnar Munksgaard Ltd., 6 Nor- 
regade, Copenhagen, K. 
Egypt : La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9, Adly 
Pasha Street, Cairo. 
NATIONAL 
Ethiopia : International Press Agency, 
P.O B. 120, Addis-Ababa. R 
Finland : Akateeminen Kirjakauppa 2, Kes- 
kuskatu, Helsink. 
Formosa : The World Book Company Ltd., 
99%, Chung King South Rd, Section |, 
Tapeh. 
France ! Sales Division, Unesco, 19, Avenue 
Kléber, Paris- | 62. 
Germany : Unesco Vertrieb fur Deutsch 
land, R. Oldenbourg, Munchen. 
Greece : Elefthéroudakis, Librairie Inter- 
nationale, Athens. 
Hong Kong : Swindon Book Co., 25 Nathan 
Road, Kowloon. 
India: Orient Longmans Ltd., Bombay, Cal- 
cucta, Madras : sub-depots : Oxford Book 
& Stauvonery Co., Scandia House, New 
Delhi; Rajkamal Publications Ltd., Hima« 
laya House, Bombay 7. Rs. 4. 
DISTRIBUTORS 
Indonesia ; G.C.T. van Dorp & Do. NY., 
Djalan Nusantara, 22, Djakarta. 
Iraq : McKenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Israel : Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 35, 
Allenby Road. P.O. Box 5154. Tel-Aviv. 
Jamaica : Sangster's Book Room, 99, Har- 
bour Street, Kingston; Knox Educational 
Services, Spaldings. 
Japan : Maruzen Co, Inc., 6 Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, Tokyo. 
Jordan : J I. Bahous and Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, 
Salt Road, Amman, 
Liberia : Jacob Momolu Kamara, Gurle 
and Front Streets, Monrovia. 
Malayan Federation and Singapore : 
Peter Chong and Co., P.O. Box 135, 
Singapore. 
Maita : Sapienza’s Library, 26, Kingsway, 
. Valletta. 
Netherlands : N. VY. Martinus Nijhoff, 
Lange Voorhout 9, The Hague, 
  
New Zealand: Unesco Publications Centre. 
7 De Lacy Street, Dunedin, N. E. 2. 
Nigeria : C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 174, 
Lagos. 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Storuingsplass, 7, 
Oslo. 
Pakistan : Ferozsons Ltd., Karachi, Lahore, 
Peshawar. Rs. 3. 
Philippines : Philippine Education Co., 
Inc., 1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila, 3.00 
Surinam : Radhakishun and Company Ltd., 
(Book Dept.), Watermolenstraat 36, Para- 
maribo. - 
Sweden : AB.C.E. Friztes Kungl. Hovhok« 
handel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm 16. 
Thailand : Suksapan Pant, Arkarn 9, 
Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 20 ticals, 
Union of South Africa : Yan Schaik’s Booke 
store, Ltd., P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
United Kingdom : H.M. Stationery Office, 
P.O. Box 569, London S.E.lL 
U.S.A. : Unesco Publications Service, 475 
Sth Ave., New York 17, N.Y.

## [Page 52](070030engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

Nebraska to Jodhpur in India had their instruments 
trained on the blacked-out sun. None of them knew E 
‘what might come out of their few minutes of observation 
—for anything could. Observations taken during the 
‘eclipse of 1919 helped substantiate Einstein’s theory of 
Telativiey =and led to the splitting of the atom. Si 
n he 
Swan, Copyright Minneapolis Star). tT 0 Re oe at - 