# [078178](078178engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](078178engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

(i Veco: " 
"mCourier 
  
  
JANUARY 1961 (14th year) - Price : 1/-stg. (U.K) - 30 cents (U.S.) - 0,70 NF. (FRANCE) 
 

## [Page 2](078178engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

                    
    
* 
For centuries leprosy has 
been hated and feared as 
the most hideous of man's 
afflictions and its victims 
“called “unclean”. But medi- 
RE | 
Vr 
: . rehabilitation. (See p. 27.) 
i 
: 
  
cal science now has new 
drugs to arrest and even 
cure leprosy. Above 
Dr. Tokuzo Yokota (son o 
GERTLER ET EL EEL) 
leprologist, Professor Ken- 
suke Mitsuda) probes areas 
of a patient's back made in- 
sensitive by leprosy; be- 
low, physical culture aids 
Photos © Pierre Pittet, Gene 
 

## [Page 3](078178engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

JANUARY 1961 
mC Courier 14TH YEAR   
Contents 
No. i 
Page 
4 BECOMING AN EDUCATED MAN IN OUR WORLD TODAY 
By Margaret Mead 
8 LINCOLN CENTER 
America’s capital for drama, music and dancing 
By Peter D. Franklin 
12 THE KINGDOM OF THE OCTOPUS 
By Frank W. Lane 
16 LEARNING MEANS LIGHT 
~The drive for education in the Arab lands 
By Georges Fradier 
18 BOXING LESSON 
Tunisian schoolchildren learn about “the right diet” 
  
23 50,000 LETTERS ATTEST THE IDEALISM OF LEO TOLSTOY 
By A. Shifman 
COVER PHOTO 
 
From the derricks of 
Kuwait to the pasture 
fands of the Atlas, from 28 JANUARY 29: WORLD LEPROSY DAY 
the banks of the Orontes 
to those of the Upper By Raoul Follereau 
Nile —in all the parched 
lands of the Arab world there is a great thirst for 31 CHRISTIANITY AND ANTI-SEMITISM 
education. A race is now By Father Yves Congar 
on between the population 
i d hools—and 
atcording to a Unesce find- 32 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR ON THE RACISM ISSUE 
ing the schools are going 
hows secariary shay 34 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
girl in modern Sudan, 
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
Published monthly by TE UNESCO COPRIER H published menthly, except in july 3nd Auguss when 
; . . LL. itis bi- y. in English, French Spanish, Russian, German and Arabic. In the 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural United States of America it is distributed by the UNESCO Publications Center. 
Organization U.S.A. BO) Third Avenue, New York 22, N.Y. Plaza 1-3860. Second-class mail 
. . privileges authorized at NewYork, N.Y. (M.C. 61.1.154 A). 
Editorial Offices 
Une : . Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
nesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7+, France the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
Editor-in-Chief of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re. 
Sandy Koffler printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
Assistant Editor articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
a 
h HP h » ) 
Alexandre Leventis i the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton Annual subscription rates: & 3.00; 10/-stg.; 7.00 New 
French Edition : Célia Bertin Francs or equivalent. Single copies [/-stg. 30 cents 
Spanish Edition : Amparo Alvajar (U.S); 0.70 New Francs. 
Russian Edition ¢ Veniamin Matchavariani 
German Edition : Hans Rieben Sales & Distribution Offices 
Arabic Edition : Amin Chaker Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°. 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief.    

## [Page 4](078178engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 63705: Becoming an educated man in our modern world

BECOMING 
AN EDUCATED 
MAN 
IN OUR 
MODERN WORLD 
by Margaret Mead 
IT IS NO LONGER the underprivileged, the 
illiterate or the villagers to whom a new road 
gives access to urban life, who as adults learn 
crumbs fallen from the tables of those who as 
children feasted on the slowly accumulated 
knowledge of the past. Now it is the elite among 
the adults of the educationally elite countries who 
“go back to school”—even this old phrase is out 
ot date—with fellowships, exchange visits and 
small international conferences which accomplish 
in a week more than a year of reading could do.  
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris 
  

## [Page 5](078178engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 63705: Becoming an educated man in our modern world

ERHAPS no fleld of education has undergone such 
profound changes in theory and practice as the 
field once called “adult education,” later expand- 
ed to Include “fundamental education,” and 
now, in those countries which originally sup- 
plied the models, more often referred to as “continuing 
education.” We may identify briefly the underlying ideas 
behind these recognizable stages. 
The early effort in adult education took its impetus 
from the needs of the underprivileged within modern 
Industrialized society, the needs of workers, women, sup- 
pressed minorities, of those who had failed to receive 
“enough” or “their fair share” of that transmissible block 
of traditional knowledge and skills called “a good edu- 
cation”. Programmes designed to make good this deficit 
were motivated by a growing demand from the under- 
educated and a growing sense of responsibility on the 
part of the educated. 
The consclousness of educational inferiority or defleit 
ran through everything that was done: the snobbery 
which identified a higher class level with a higher degree 
of familiarity with “the classics”, “great ideas” and so 
forth pervades the topics chosen for adult education 
Implicitly it was assumed that the gap between those 
who had read Latin and Greek in the original, and those 
who had read nothing beyond an elementary school level, 
could somehow be bridged by reading Latin and Greek 
works—in translation. 
This attempt to make superficially equal the education- 
ally unequal still pervades certain old-fashioned types of 
workers’ education in English-speaking countries. It has 
also had a considerable effect on the kind of low-level 
“higher education” given in those countries where secon- 
dary school education is becoming the ideal for all nor- 
mal children. Hastily assembled, superficial versions of 
what was once taught to the few, as children, and later 
taught, condescendingly, to the less educated as adults, is 
now taught to late adolescents. 
A second stage which later came to be summarized 
under the term “fundamental education” grew out of pro- 
grammes for peasant immigrants in countries like the 
United States, and for peasants who were to be rapidly 
upgraded into active members of their own modernizing 
societies in countries like the Soviet Union. Coupled with 
this was a growing emphasis on the application of modern 
science to the promotion of health, on new forms of medi- 
cal care, public health, community organization, agricul- 
tural practices, and other new techniques. 
Adult education became a device for feeding modern 
health, technological and organizational practices to com- 
munities of adults who were thus being brought up to 
date, or into line, with more favoured, more urban, or 
mote educated portions of society. 
ITERACY became very strictly a means towards 
the conversion of the backward citizen, subject, 
colonial or trust territory member, into a receiver 
and executor of certain necessary techniques: vaccination, 
immunization, baby-care clinics, food supplements, arti- 
ficial fertilizers, and the like. Where the older form of 
“adult education” was grounded in a sense of “educational 
deprivation” to be made up by acquiring access to higher 
things, this new form of practical welfare education was 
grounded in what was seen as either a need already pres- 
ent or one to be stimulated until it became a felt need. 
As in the earlier form, the sense of urgency rested with 
the superior group who were outraged at the low levels 
of literacy, nutrition, and medical care found in the vil- 
lages. Considering how much work was required to find 
community leaders able finally to awaken community 
participation, the rationale of the whole process seems 
more than a little suspect. 
A tremendous amount of waste motion was involved 
because the new technigues—modern latrines, modern 
methods of cultivation, modern methods of handling cre- 
dit—were Introduced without recognition of the impor- 
tance of grounding them in the culture of the recipients. 
Their original culture, whether that of a village in South 
America, an enclave of peasant immigrants in the United 
States, a village in South-East Asia, or an African tribe, 
The Unesco Courier, — Jonuory 1941 
was seen as Intrinsieally inferior to the modern world, 
something to be fought with, got over, got around, by 
hasty, widespread “fundamental education”. 
Those adults who had learned to read, to order new 
sceds, to protect thelr wells, to drain their ponds —those 
who were “modern” rather than “old-fashioned” or 
“traditional”’—were viewed rather like an army of poorly 
equipped recruits who had been furbished up with acce- 
lerated methods to make it possible for them to operate 
within the army setting. Although they had a lot of 
new skills and acceptances, they were not expected to 
be, in any important sense, changed people, merely a 
new and less embarrassing sort of inferior people, 
This kind of catching up at a low level has effected 
the elementary educational systems of the less developed 
countries. As a result, the Ideal of universal education 
which has caught the imagination of peoples all over 
the world is, In fact, an ideal of ralsing the bulk of the 
poputation of countries now 80 or 90 per cent flliterate 
up fo the standard of elementary third of fourth grade 
education In countries with established secondary school 
systems. 
0 the extent that these new systems of education 
borrow from the modern industrialized world, and 
teach 6~-year-olds as if they were first year pupils 
in a 10- or 12-year educational system, the teaching of 
reading, for example, will include vocabulary and allua- 
slons in anticipation of a secandary school education that 
will never be given. Moreover, the essential lack of 
connexion between the literacy taught in school and a 
world in which nothing will ever be read exeent a few 
government notices and forms makes the whole system 
into a mockery. 
The edge is being taken off the hunger for “education” 
—almost more insistent than the hunger for better food, 
in so many parts of the world—by this reflection, at the 
elementary school level, of the essentially superficial Image 
introduced by attempts at rapid “fundamental education” 
for the adult villagers of these societies. 
The most recent phase of the emphasis on fundamen- 
tal or community education indicated a growing acknow- 
ledgment of a “widening gap” between the cconomi- 
cally highly developed and the cconomically underde- 
veloped countries—an idea rapidly replacing our immedi- 
ately post World War II image of a triumphant attack 
on ignorance, poverty and ill health right round the 
world. 
The underdeveloped countries were entering the educa-~ 
tional scene at a perfod when the rate of change in 
knowledge, especially in the sclences, was the fastest 
mankind had ever known: therefore, however fast these 
new countries might move towards universal literacy, 
towards a full complement of clementary schools for all 
chlldren, towards the beginning of secondary schools, 
towards a natlonal university, they would fall farther 
and farther behind in a world race for the number of 
students in universities. 
This lag would be not only quantitative hut also quali- 
tative; fewer students would have a chance of getting 
higher education, so fewer first-rate students would be 
identified. The bright optimism of freedom from {gno- 
rance for all was fading. ’ 
Meanwhile, In the most industrialized countries, it is 
being recognized that the kinds of distinctions which 
were once made between “education” the orderly trans- 
mission of certain parts of our accumulated tradition to 
the young while they were still in statu pupillari, and 
“adult education”, which imparted to adults, In odd 
hours and off seasons, some things they should have 
learned when they were young, are no longer meaningful. 
A great deal of what needs to be taught to adults 
today was unknown when they were young. Continuing 
education throughout life has become 2a necessity in 
almost every field of life, from housekeeping to atomic 
physles. The emphasis is no longer upon the mass of 
materials and skills contained in a “good education”, dis- 
tributed in unequal amounts among the members of dif- 
ferent socio-economic groups within a nation, and among 
CONT'D OM NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 6](078178engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 63705: Becoming an educated man in our modern world

OUR MODERN WORLD (Cont'd) 
STEREOTYPE OF THE ‘HORSE AGE" MENTALITY 
the peoples of the world, In which all would soon come 
to have at least a small and inferior share. 
Instead, attention is being given to the relationships 
between old knowledge and old skills, and new know- 
ledge and new skills, and to the difference in the ways 
of learning of children, uncommitted young adults with- 
out family responsibilities, and mature adults with res- 
ponsibilities. 
This recognition Is coming on the heels of a period in 
history when change was slow enough for the difference 
in the kind of acceptance which was given by grand- 
father and grandson to a new Idea to be explained by 
the Inability of the old to learn new ideas. Elasticity 
and speed of learning were believed to be unique charac- 
teristics of childhood, and all learning was therefore 
scen, although it was not usually put that way, as a 
subtle interference with any other learning. 
AvING learned French made one less able to 
learn English, having learned to plough with 
a hand plough made one less able to plough 
with a draft animal, having learned to make pots by hand 
made one less able to learn to use a potter's wheel 
Grandfather, who grew up in the horse age, was less able 
to adapt to the machine age than his grandson ; this 
observation successfully precluded any recognition that 
the first machines were invented and driven, not by chil- 
dren, but by men who had grown up riding and driving 
horses. 
It was not too difficult to transmute the peoples of 
Asia or Africa into a kind of exaggerated replica of this 
view of grandfather—people who would really never learn 
about the modern world, who would never catch up. 
The break may be sald to have come when it was not 
a question of grandfather, whose ignorance could be 
explained away, but of self, when modern man began 
to realize that his own education was never finished, 
that he could fall behind, in any field, almost overnight, 
that education was no longer a matter of receiving while 
young a body of static knowledge, but had become a 
matter of lateral learning—learning not only from one’s 
clders and one’s peers, but very soon from those younger 
than oneself. Now, with much more rapid change, the 
deficiencies in the old attitude toward learning began to 
show; the need for a new attitude became apparent. 
HE merest flicker of recognition of this new state 
of education where change occurs very much 
more rapidly than normal human growth and a 
man can become outdated (or, in that curiously snobbish 
phrase, dated) not as he attains grey halrs and harden- 
ing arteries, but before he has reached middle age, the 
merest hint of this is enough to change our whole view 
of what was once called adult education. 
It is no longer the underprivileged, the illiterate, the 
newly migrant, the villagers to whom a new road gives 
access to urban life, who as adults learn crumbs fallen 
from the tables of those who as children feasted on the 
slowly accumulated knowledge of the past. Now it is the 
elite among the adults of the educationally elite countries 
who “go back to school”—our words are still out of 
date—with post-graduate fellowship piled on post-gra- 
duate fellowship, with exchange visits and small inter- 
national conferences which accomplish in a week more 
than a year of reading could do. 
Our most massive endeavours at rethinking educational 
devices and methods are aimed at teaching physics, or 
cross-referencing blology. We are experiencing on a vast 
scale what has happened before on a lesser scale, at 
times when a new burst of knowledge, or knowledge- 
6 
producing activity, moved a certain number of men to 
withdraw from the world and spend a lifetime master- 
ing, moulding, and organizing the new knowledge for 
orderly transmission to future generations. 
But if the knowledge with which men must work, 
and think, and orient their actions is changing almost 
daily, there is also a change in the relative positions of 
those whose forebears were educated—in the old sense— 
and those whose forebears were primitive men or isolat- 
ed peasants. 
Becoming an educated man does not depend, as it 
once did, on using the plastic years of childhood to accu- 
mulate a vast static body of Information, of names of 
things, of forms of spelling and rhetoric, but rather upon 
the way in which a child learns to approach change 
itself. When that which was to be learned was settled 
and absolute enough to last a lifetime, the child whose 
parents and grandparents, playmates and neighbours had 
learned most of the same things could safely be taught 
that this particular accumulation of knowledge was true. 
What once constituted an education—a hodge-podge of 
old and new ideas about the universe, old wives’ tales 
and modern untried medical research, the spelling and 
pronunciation of one’s language currently approved in the 
grammar books and dictionaries, the relative status of 
different countries, the intrinsic merits of particular forms 
of government, special forms of law and punishment, the 
whole mass of materials of different ages, different 
degrees of accuracy, provinciality and usefulness—this sort 
of education once served well enough to get each indi- 
vidual through his lifetime in the state of life in which 
he had begun it. 
ND such an education also served effectively to 
prevent much learning of new things. The 
observation that it was easier for an English 
boy to learn Latin than it would have been for a Nigerian 
was partly grounded on the ubiquity of Roman-derived 
elements in English culture, but even more on the expec- 
tation that an English education included Latin. An 
attempt to introduce Chinese into both a contemporary 
English school and a contemporary Nigerian school would 
meet objections because, in both the English school and 
in the Nigerian school modelled on the English school, 
Chinese was not something schoolboys learned. 
The educated man simply acquired more little pigeon- 
holes which it was appropriate for him to fill, sometimes 
even such bold little labels as a bit of “comparative reli- 
gion” or “oriental languages” for the very few; he was 
prepared to add in certain ways, in certain little boxes, 
“the results of research” as long as they did not contra- 
dict too gravely what he had already learned—in which 
case he fought them as furiously as an Asian peasant 
resists a new type of field division. As soon as this was 
recognized, it also became apparent that what was cru- 
cial in the ability to assimilate changing information 
vas not what had been learned but how it had been 
earned. 
The child who had been solemnly taught that there 
is only major categorization of languages, a real language 
spoken by its own group, and “the way foreigners talk,” 
is as effectively blocked off from new learning as the 
peasant’ who was taught to cling, with the desperation 
of the man who grasps only a part of his culture, 
to the way things were done in “his village,” or as the 
nineteenth-century rationalist who believed that all 
problems of the relationship between Science, spelled 
with a capital, and religion had been solved by abolishing 
religion or relegating it to the level of “superstition.” 
Under the old system, children learned better than 
adults; they filled their notebooks and their minds with 
orderly sets of prejudices so arranged that there was 
less and less room for genuinely new ideas which would 
mean fundamental rearrangements at the root of the 
system.

## [Page 7](078178engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 63705: Becoming an educated man in our modern world

  
  
© Three Lions, New York 
THE GREAT CAPACITY for learning which is found in 
early childhood will in future be needed for something rather 
different than in the past. Childhood learning was once devoted 
to impressing on young minds a mass of facts ranging from 
the eternal and the trivial to the provincial and the special. 
For the world of tomorrow children will need to learn about 
the nature of numbers, the nature of time, ways of thinking 
about space and similar problems. Here, children learn how 
separate colours fuse with each other to form new tones. 
Learning a language was not a matter of learning 
about languages—which could be expanded to include all 
known languages, artificial languages, and the creation 
of new languages—but was rather a condensation of the 
tremendous piece of learning, learning to speak, and the 
acquisition of a single language viewed in such a way 
that the learning of most, if not all, other languages was 
successfully prevented. Each knob and twist of the sys- 
tem, each local article of food or hygiene, was elevated 
into a state of absoluteness within which change could 
be introduced only in carefully prescribed areas where 
there were such matters as “fashion” or “new products”. 
But even in the old system, an adult did generalize 
far. more than he was required to. He learned not only 
about franes or shillings or dollars, but enough about 
“money” so that even though he never treated the 
money of a foreign country as real he could still manage 
to use it. A man who had lived in a city knew some- 
thing about the nature of cities, knew how to look for 
terminals and hostels and markets, for places of exchange 
and accommodation—things that, as in the case of money, 
no child knew. As men learned a particular culture, 
were educated in a particular way, they acquired a kind 
of back-handed, semi-realized knowledge of culture itself, 
although this knowledge was heavily hampered by the 
absoluteness with which they learned thelr own system. 
Now today, the premium will be placed on individuals 
who are most able to preserve the kind of charts of pos- 
sible knowledge and possible action into which each new 
experiment and innovation can fit. It will be the adult 
The Unesco Courier. — January 1961 
who has incorporated a new generalization, that is, the 
possibility of change at every point of his whole system of 
knowledge, who will be able to learn most and go fur- 
thest. The tremendous impetus to learning possible in 
early childhood will be needed for something rather 
different than its past uses. 
HILDREN will have to learn that their own 
language Is one among many, their own alpha- 
bet only one of the ways of writing down speech, 
their own system of mathematical notations only one 
among many; that these are not the final systems, and 
often not the best. Childhood learning was once devoted 
to printing indellbly on young minds such matters as 
Sixty seconds in a minute, 
Sixty minutes in a hour, 
I wish I were a little linnet 
Singing in a leafy bower, 
or: 
First William the Norman 
Then William his son, 
Henry, Stephen, and Henry, 
Then Riehard and John, 
or: 
‘I’ before ‘c’ 
Except afler ‘c’ 
And when pronounced ‘ay’ 
As in neighbour and weigh. 
Instead of committing to memory this dreadful hetero- 
geneous pickle of the eternal, the trivial, the provincial 
and the special, children will be required in the future 
to learn about the nature of numbers, the nature of time, 
ways of thinking about space. 
This shift in what the young nced to be taught will 
have a profound effect on the ability of adults, whether 
adult members of a New Guinea tribe, adult peasants, 
adult migrants to a big city, or adult scholars who 
haven't looked at science for forty years, to learn comple- 
tely new things. 
HOSE who have learned that there are many 
systems in the world—language systems such as 
the many unwritten tongues spoken by the 
adjacent tribesmen, or systems of welghts, and measures 
such as the English and the metric systems, or systems of 
transportation (human backs, jeeps, planes) rapidly 
replacing one another within the span of a few years— 
those adults will be recognized as the ones who are able 
to learn new things fast; their experience and expectation 
of contrast and change will be part of the equipment 
which they, as adults, bring to any new required plece of 
learning. 
Instead of pityingly, tolerantly, helping adults to catch 
up with a little symbolic erudition or a few strictly uti- 
litarian skills, we shall make a real search for adults 
who, just because they are adults, can build new know- 
ledge on old in a way that the young child cannot. We 
won't particularly seek out adults who have learncd 
their quota as children, nor steer away from those who 
failed to learn their quota as children; rather we shall 
place our emphasis on the kind of adult mind which 
is able to make swift, accurate transference from older 
experience to newer experience, because neither is felt as 
absolute or exclusive. 
The next few years will be particularly valuable as 
we explore the extent to which adults with extraordi- 
narily simple backgrounds but with thls one requirement 
—-an experience and expectation of change—can move 
into our complex modern culture and contribute new 
models for the way it can be learned, not only by adult 
savages but by adults everywhere. 
This article originally appeared in Unesco’s quarterly 
bulletin “Fundamental and Adult Education”, vol. XII 
(1960), N° 3.

## [Page 8](078178engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 63710: Lincoln Center: America's capital for drama, music and dancing

AMERICA'S CAPITAL 
FOR DRAMA 
MUSIC 
& DANCING 
by Peter D. Franklin 
    
   
Photos © Ezra Stoller, New York 
PANORAMIC VIEW of Lincoln Center for the Performing 
Arts as it will appear when completed is realistically repre- 
sented (top of page) by latest architectural model of the 
$140 million project. Above, the center's section spanning 
New York's 65th Street. On the left, is the Philharmonic Hall; 
in background, is the new Metropolitan Opera House.

## [Page 9](078178engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 63710: Lincoln Center: America's capital for drama, music and dancing

  
  
CULTURAL renalssance Is taking place in New 
York City on a fourteen acre site once dotted 
with slums. It Is embodied In a bold and 
imaginative project, called the Lincoln Center 
for the Performing Arts, undertaken to satisfy the rebirth 
of Interest in the arts, an Interest generated not only by 
New Yorkers and Americans but by peoples of other lands 
as well. 
“Here will occur a true interchange of the fruits of 
national cultures,” said President Eisenhower at the 
groundbreaking ceremonles for the center on May 14, 1959. 
“From this will develop a growth that will spread to the 
corners of the earth, bringing with it the kind of human 
message that only individuals, not governments, can 
transmit.” 
Upon its scheduled completion in the spring of 1964, 
Lincoln Center will offer seven theatres, concert halls and 
educational buildings in which the world’s greatest music, 
drama and dance will be performed before more than 
3,200,000 people a year. Costing more than $140,000,000, it 
is probably the most ambitious civic project ever un- 
dertaken anywhere for the arts. 
The concept of a cultural center has been discussed for 
years by many individuals and organizations but the seeds 
of the Lincoln Center were sown in 1955 when the Metro- 
politan Opera and the New York Philharmonic Orchestra 
each sought a new hall to better their existing facilities. 
Their joint eight-month study revealed that performing 
arts audiences were larger than ever before and the point 
had been reached on the American scene when advance- 
ment of these arts must become a community responsibili- 
ty, in the same way as health, education and welfare. 
Under the chairmanship of John D. Rockefeller III 
further studies were undertaken to determine just what 
problems would lie in a cultural center's path and where 
that path should lead. The following June, Lincoln Center 
formally came into belng to provide New York, the United 
States and other countries with “a new landmark... a 
symbol of our natlonal regard for the arts and our recog- 
nition of their importance in the lives of the American 
people,” the center’s new president sald. 
A site was bought from the city at public auction on 
Manhattan's Upper West Side under a Slum Clearance 
programme. More than 1,600 families were relocated to 
apartments better than or the equal of those they had 
left. One hundred and eighty-eight bulldings were reduc- 
ed to rubble. And a fund raising programme was 
undertaken to solicit grants and contributions from 
foundations, corporations and Individuals. The Initial 
campaign goal was $75,000,000, but because of rising costs 
and expanded concepts this was recently increased to 
$102,000,000. 
Finally, in May 1958, the architects were chosen. 
Wallace K. Harrison, who had designed the United Na- 
tions Secretariat, Rockefeller Centre and Idlewild Airport, 
all in New York, was named co-ordinating architect for 
the center as well as the designer responsible for the new 
Metropolitan Opera House. The other architects are Max 
Abramovitz, for the Philharmonic Hall; Eero Saarinen, 
collaborating with Jo Mielziner, on the Repertory Drama 
Theatre; Dr. Pietro Belluschi, dean of the School of 
Architecture and Planning at the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, who will design the new Juilliard School of 
Music; Philip Johnson Associates, for the Theatre for the 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 10](078178engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 63710: Lincoln Center: America's capital for drama, music and dancing

LINCOLN CENTER (Cond) 
NEW YORK'S NEW 
SKYLINE 
OF ART 
Dance and Operetta, and Skidmore, Owings and Merrill, 
preliminary design consultants for the Library-Museum of 
the Performing Arts. 
To get the best possible sight lines, acoustics, stage 
areas, etc., for each of the performing halls, a team of 
experts, led by Mr. Harrison, toured more than thirty of 
Europe’s finest concert stages and interviewed dozens of 
star performers to get their opinion on what was best. 
In addition a group of European authorities in the field, 
such as Walther Unruh of Germany, Alvar Aalto of 
Finland and Sven Markeius of Sweden, came to New York 
to consult with the center's designers. 
So detailed was this survey that it included a report that 
American hip sizes had grown larger in the last century. 
Therefore each theatre chair had to be designed bigger 
and, for the sake of comfort, the theatres became larger, 
too. “Unfortunately, the volces of the artists haven’t 
become any bigger,” Mr. Harrison said. 
The prima donna of the center will be the $32,000,000 
alr-conditioned Metropolitan Opera House at the head of 
a giant plaza. It will be fronted by ten-story high 
columns separated by glass walls. Behind the lobby and 
stage areas (there will be at least four stages) will rise a 
twenty-story tower, housing a central air-conditioning 
system for the entire project, office space, and shops for 
  
 
GENERAL VIEW shows, clockwise from lower left, 
Theatre for the Dance and Operetta, Damrosch 
Park and bandshell, Metropolitan Opera House, 
Repertory Drama Theatre and Library-Museum, 
the Juilliard School, and the Philharmonic Hall. 
the opera’s productions, such as wig and costume rooms 
and scenery storage. 
Although revered Carnegie Hall has now been saved 
from destruction, it will no longer be the home of the New 
York Philharmonic Orchestra which is scheduled to open 
its 1961-1962 season in a new $13,200,000 hall within 
Lincoln Center. Construction has already begun on this 
2,600 seat auditorium, second only to the 3,800 seats at 
the Met. Here, too, the time-tested recipes for fine 
orchestral music from Europe have been incorporated in 
  
Photos © Ezra Sto'ier, New York 
FOR OUTDOOR CONCERTS, a bandsheil overlooking Damrosch Park (foreground) will be an attractive feature of the Lincoln 
Center. Flanking the park (left) is the Metropolitan Opera House with its facade of ten-storey columns separated by glass walls. 
On right is the Theatre for the Dance and Operetta, a ‘* not so small opera house" with enough room for 2,500 patrons. 
10

## [Page 11](078178engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 63710: Lincoln Center: America's capital for drama, music and dancing

  
the modern design with the latest structural and 
acoustical developments. The highly flexible stage area 
will be able to accomodate with equal ease solo artists, 
dance recitals, small instrumental groups as well as a full 
symphony orchestra with chorus. 
Competing with Old Vic, Comédie Francaise and The 
Abbey Theatre will be Lincoln Center's Repertory Drama 
Theatre, designed to seat 1,100 persons and to capture the 
true spirit of the theatre with great intimacy and 
closeness of the entire audience to the stage. The Theatre 
TERRACE overlooking the North Plaza is formed 
by bridge running over 65th Street. In the back- 
ground is the facade of the Philharmonic Hall whose 
2,600 seat auditorium will incorporate all the 
very latest acoustical and structural features. 
  
   
    
The Unesco Courier. — Jonuory 1961 
for the Dance and Operetta, “a not-so-small opera 
house” for 2,500 patrons, will serve the center as an Opera 
Comlique and bring to audiences major repertory 
companies and light opera groups from the United States 
and abroad. 
“But the center must be more than performance halls,” 
affirms its president. “It must place an Important 
emphasis on education and creative work.” Therefore 
the Juilliard School of Music, one of the finest institutions 
of its kind in the world, will be a major constituent devot- 
ed exclusively to advanced training of highly gifted 
students in the performing arts. 
Along these same lines a Library-Museum of the Per- 
forming Arts was incorporated Into the center offering 
hundreds of thousands of books, reconds, sheet music and 
other memorabilia on the arts to encourage creative 
scholarship. Here, too, will be facilitles for viewing 
motion pictures and slides, playing records and tape re- 
cordings and a children’s theatre for puppet shows and 
the like. 
For outdoor concerts a band shell overlooking a park 
will be an attractive feature, especially in the warn and 
humid summer months. And underneath the entire site 
spaces for the parking of 800 cars is planned. 
New York may not be the only city in the United States 
which Is undergoing a “cultural explosion,” as one writer 
has put it. But “nowhere else are premier performing 
institutions in all the performing arts joined together 
with artistic education in one dynamic union dedicated to 
the service of the people,” says the center’s president. 
The major task still lies ahead, that of actually putting 
the brick and mortar together for artistically perfect 
results. Buf when that work is done and the house lights 
go down for the first production, then New York will be 
the centre of the cultural renaissance of twentieth century 
America. - 
    
  
Photos © Ezra Stoller, Hew York 
PRIMA DONNA of the Center is $32 million air-conditioned Metropolitan Opera House at the head of a giant plaza. Behind the 
lobby and stage areas (there will be at least four stages) there will be a 20-storey tower housing a central air conditioning system 
for the entire project, office space and shops for the opera’s productions such as wig and costume rooms and scenery storage.

## [Page 12](078178engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 63712: The Kingdom of the octopus

  
ALAMARI, Poulpe, Inkfish: most travellers have 
met these on menus, especially in Mediterra- 
nean lands. Yet how many know exactly what 
they are eating: fish, sea-mammal, crustacean 
or what? Actually they are members of the 
octopus family, which means they are molluscs, that large 
branch of the animal kingdom to which the snail and 
oyster belong. 
Scientifically, octopuses and similar animals, belong to 
the Cephalopoda, which comes from two Greek words 
meaning “head-footed”. The “foot” refers to the arms 
or tentacles which spring from the head. Cephalopods 
are found in all the oceans of the world, living in waters 
ranging from those inside the Arctic Circle to those on 
the edge of the Antarctic Continent. They are especially 
abundant in the Mediterranean. 
Altogether there are some 650 known species, ranging 
from midgets that can perch on the end of a finger, to 
the giant squid which sometimes reaches 50ft. and weighs 
12 
a ton or more. This is the largest invertebrate on earth. 
In European waters the best-known cephalopods are 
three in number. There is the common octopus which has 
eight arms and a globular body. It has a maximum span 
of about 10ft. Then there is the common cuttlefish which 
has, in addition to eight arms, two long tentacles which 
shoot out like a pair of living tongs to seize its prey. It 
has a shield-shaped body strengthened internally by a 
large calcareous cuttlebone. With tentacles extended a 
large common cuttlefish may measure three feet. 
Finally, there is the common squid which also has eight 
arms and two tentacles. It has a torpedo-shaped body 
supported internally by a delicate horn-like shell. When 
fully grown it measures some three feet with extended 
tentacles, although larger specimens have been taken. 
Cephalopods are among the most interesting creatures 
in the sea. Just dook at their specification and perfor- 
mance. They have three hearts which pump blue blood 
through their bodies. They possess greater powers of 
 

## [Page 13](078178engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 63712: The Kingdom of the octopus

[eo] ® oO uU S by Frank W. Lane 
  
© Paul Trinksus, Wilhelmuhaven 
LIKE JET PLANES In formation, a group of squids (leit) 
swims leisurely across a tank in the Naples Aquarium. Squids, 
the Pearly Nautilus (drawing below), the cuttlefish (above) 
and the octopus (bottom of page) are all members of that 
division of molluscs called cephalopods. Many of these 
“head footed" creatures with writhing muscular arms set 
with rows of suckers, are quite small; others are tremendous 
monsters like the Giant Squid which can weigh over a ton. 
Drawing by Pstience Forman 
     
© Franz Thorbecke, Lindau/Bodensee 
colour change than the chameleon and have luminescent 
displays which out-rival those of the fire-fly. They emit ©) Laurence E. Perkins, London 
rockets as well. And they shoot through the sea, and some- 
times sail out of it, by the most modern means of travel, 
jet-propulsion. 
It is a humbling thought to realise that one of man’s 
latest inventions has been ante-dated by relatives of the 
snail. Squids were jetting their way through primeval seas 
millions of years before man appeared on this planet. 
The jet’s propulsive force is sea-water, shot in fast- 
repeated pulses from a single nozzle, called the funnel, 
beneath the head. Water enters a cavity in the body, the 
inlet is then sealed, and the heavily muscled walls of 
the chamber contract, forcing the water out through the 
nozzle at high speed. By the law of action and reaction, 
‘as the jet shoots one way, the squid is driven in the 
opposite direction. 
Not much is known of the speed but there is evidence   
 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 14](078178engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 63712: The Kingdom of the octopus

  
© Walt Disney Productions 
BATTLE with a giant squid which has attacked the submarine 
‘““‘Nautilus'' was filmed in the Walt Disney production of Jules 
Verne's *'20,000 Leagues Under the Sea'’, Giant squids, largest 
Invertebrate's on earth, sometimes reach 50 feet in length. 
A
m
 
  
Drawing by Gusiave Doré 
CAVE COMBAT between man and squid was vividly des- 
cribed by Victor Hugo in his novel **The Toilers of the Sea". 
Squids are sometimes called “devil fishes”, incorrectly so for 
this name properly belongs to a skatelike tropical fish. 
  
© Wilhelm Schifen 
DUMMY SQUID is formed by a blob of ink ejected from the 
squid's ink sac which helps to draw an enemy's attack away 
from the squid itself. The ink also acts against the olfactory 
sense of eels which are among the squid's worst enemies, 
14 
    
fo en a a aR EE 
that the fastest squids may reach a speed of 20 m.p.h,, 
although most cephalopods travel much more slowly. 
While the sole means of locomotion of cuttlefish and 
squid is swimming, octopuses frequently ramble about the 
ocean floor, using their arms to move like outsize spiders. 
It is then that they truly lve up to their scientific name 
and “walk on their heads”. 
The ability to change colour is due to tiny pigment 
cells, called chromatophores, which are fllled with diffe- 
rently coloured pigments embedded in the skin. By 
expanding and contracting these, thus spreading or reduc- 
the pigment, colour changes flow over the skin. These 
changes sometimes occur so fast that G.H. Parker, the 
American authority on colour changes, says they “must 
involve a complexity of communications and of controls 
such as are present in the modern electric sign over 
whose surface an ever-changing design may be made to 
pass”. 
Miss Joyce Allan, an Australian zoologist, saw some 
small cuttlefish swimming slowly about an aquarium 
containing variously coloured objects. As the cuttles pass- 
ed over dark, reddish-brown rock they matched its col- 
our perfectly. A few inches away there was some dead 
coral, and as the cuttles passed over it they turned a 
light grey. Then, in turn, light brown for sand, green- 
brown for weeds, and back again to the reddish-brown 
of the rock. 
UCH ability to camouflage themselves is one of 
the defences of cephalopods against their nume- 
rous enemies : another is ink discharge. This used 
to be thought of as a simple smoke-screen but today it 
is known to be more complicated. The ink acts against 
the olfactory sense of eels—the worst enemies of the 
octupus—and, strange as it may sound, without olfactory 
stimulation the eels won't attack. The ink also forms 
shapes or dummies, which simulate the form of the 
cephalopod and draw an enemy's attack away from the 
animal itself, 
D.N.F. Hall, a marine zoologist, had an interesting 
object-lesson in cephalopod escape tactics when he tried 
to catch a small squid in a wooden tub aboard a ship. 
When his fingers were about nine inches away, the 
squid turned dark and seemed to stay still. Hall made a 
grab — and seized a small blob of ink, The squid was 
at the other end of the tub. 
Hall tried again, and this time he watched exactly 
what happened. After turning dark, the squid ejected 
ink which simulated its body, simultaneously turning pale 
and shooting away round the perimeter of the tub. 
Hall had the advantage of watching the squid and its 
ink discharge from above in an enclosed space; in the 
open sea the squid’s chances of escaping would have 
been much greater. 
Luminescence may not have the same defensive quali- 
ties as colour change but it renders some cephalopods 
among the most beautiful ereatures in the animal king- 
dom. The British marine zoologist, Sir Alister Hardy, 
once said of the small deep-water squid Lycoteuthis 
diadema; “It is one of the most beautiful animals I 
have ever seen.” 
The luminescence is produced in several ways but the 
most frequent is by small organs called photophores, 
which ‘become luminous by minute chemical reactions. 
For the technically minded, the source of the light is 
an _enzyme-catalysed reaction, luciferase acting on luci- 
erin. 
The effect of the luminescence is well described by the 
German marine zoologist, Carl Chun, in the following 
remarks about Lycoteuthis diadema: 
“Among all the marvels of colouration which the 
animals of the deep sea exhibited to us nothing can be 
even distantly compared with hues of these organs 
(photophores). One would think that the body was 
adorned with a diadem of brilliant gems. The middle 
organs of the eyes shone with an ultramarine blue, the 
lateral ones with a pearly sheen. Those towards the 
front of the lower surface of the body gave out a ruby- 
red light, while those behind were snow-white or pearly, 
 

## [Page 15](078178engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
The Unesco Courler, — Jonuory 1961 


### 63712: The Kingdom of the octopus

CHAMELEONS OF THE OCEAN 
except the median one, which was sky-blue. It was 
indeed a glorious spectacle.” 
Think of that the next time you eat a calamari’ 
A few squids fire phosphorescent “rockets”—the 
best-known being Heteroteuthis dispar, which is about 
the size of a man’s thumbnail. The light-giving secretion 
Is a form of mucus, and comes from a gland near the 
ink-sac. When the mucus meets the oxygen in the 
water it glows brightly, sometimes for five minutes. The 
“rocket” may serve to startle a pursuer thus giving the 
tiny squid time to escape. 
I suppose the aspect of cephalopods, especially of octo- 
puses, which has captured popular imagination more than 
any other is their alleged danger to man. Let a bather 
—especlally If she be a pretty woman—have a slight 
encounter with an octopus and the newspapers carry 
  
© Pau! Bartsch (1931) 
LIVE OCTOPUS is being used here by a Japan- 
ese fisherman as a living grapple to recover 
sunken pots. In Japan, octopus flesh is an abun- 
dant and important item of diet. The octopus is 
caught by flowering earthenware pots to the 
bottom of the sea with cords. These are entered 
by the animals (on left of drawing) which, when 
once settled, are reluctant to withdraw, so the 
pots may be pulied up before the animals escape. 
a story of a near-escape from a watery grave in the 
arms of a loathsome sea-monster. 
What is the truth? When I was writing Kingdom of 
the Octopus (1), which is the first general popular book on 
cephalopods to be published in any country this century, 
I went into this question carefully. I read widely, I cor- 
responded with scores of people in various countries, and 
I asked in the Press for people able to give authentic 
(1) Published Ly Jarrolds, London; price 30/- 
accounts of attacks to get in touch with me. From the 
results of my research, I believe that the vast majority 
of cephalopods which are normally encountered are 
harmless, but that some of these have occasionally killed 
people, and that there are rare outsize cephalopods (giant 
squids) which have sunk small boats. 
I had a letter from a woman who was an eye-wit- 
ness of an incident In which a bather was seized in 
shallow water by an octopus, and would probably have 
been kllled had not help been at hand. The octopus span- 
ned less than six feet and welghed only a few pounds. 
And In “The Medical Journal for Australia” in 1955 
there was a detailed account of the death of a young 
man after he had been bitten in the neck region by a 
small octopus. It is not generally realized that some 
octopuses can bite and inject polson. 
EPHALOPODS are useful to man in various ways. 
They are the favourlte balt of many sea- 
fishermen: they are fed to animals and spread 
on the land as fertilizers; their bone sharpens the beaks 
of cage-birds and thelr ink has provided pigment for 
artist for thousands of years; and their brains and 
nervous systems provide valuable material for sclentitic 
research, 
Throughout the world thousands of tons of cephalo- 
pods are eaten every year. When I was researching for 
my book I made numerous enqulries about cephalopod 
fisheries and eventually I compiled the first published 
table showing the world catch, country by country. 
By far the largest catch in Europe Is in Italy. In 1953 
22,000 tons were taken. In China the annual catch Is 
around four times this figure. But In Japan, the annual 
catch averages some half a milllon tons! 
Here Is a fruitful fleld for investigation by world 
food organizations. Today the annual catch of cephalo- 
pods throughout the world is probably In the region of 
one million tons, about one pound for every man, woman 
and child on earth. But what would the catch be if a 
really intenslve effort—like that in Japan—were made by 
the world's fishing fleets? A thought well worth pon- 
dering In terms of the world’s desperate food shortage, 
What do cephalopods taste like? Opinions vary from 
“fishy india-rubber” and “a sort of marine tripe” to 
“better than oysters” and “delicious cating”. I think 
it is fair to say that if cephalopods are not prepared 
and cooked properly they may well taste like “india-rub- 
ber.” For anyone who Intends to eat them —bholled, 
baked or fried—there is one invariable rule for all except 
the smallest specimens : pound them until the muscular 
tissues are beaten to a pulp. 
N Spaln one delicacy is stuffed octopus with choco- 
late flavouring. In Portugal octopuses and cuttlefish 
are cooked In thelr own ink and canned for export. 
A Japanese delicacy is toasted octopus cooked in oll over 
a charcoal brazier. 
Since the 1930s another, and potentialy most valuable, 
use has been found for cephalopods. Physiologists and 
medical research workers have been studying the action 
of the nervous system in animals for many years. But 
the work suffered from a severe handicap—the tiny na- 
ture of the material available, for In most mammals a 
nerve-fibre is only 1/1,000th of an inch or so in diameter. 
And that is the value of cephalopods for some of the 
nerve-fibres in, say, the common squid are about 1/20th 
of an inch thick, thus Increasing fifty-fold the width of 
the physiologists’ basic material. 
It has become possible to insert tiny electrodes into 
the living nerve-fibres of squids and obtaln electrical 
measurements hitherto Impossible with other animal 
material. This Information has helped considerably in 
discovering how nerves work—including human nerves, 
And that Is an essential step in learning how to care for 
them in sickness and In health. Who knows, maybe there 
are people today who owe their mental health to a squid ! 
I5

## [Page 16](078178engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 63721: Learning means light in Arab lands

In Arab Lands 
LEARNING ME 
by Georges Fradier 
This is the second of three articles on 
the educational situation of Asia, the 
Middle East and Africa by our special 
correspondent, Georges Fradier. The 
first, on Asia, appeared in our Novem- 
ber issue. Georges Fradier now des- 
cribes the problem in countries of 
the Arab world from Iraq to Morocco. 
N the third century of the Hegira, around the year 
840, a genial moralist with a taste for writing on every 
imaginable subject included in his Book of Exposition 
and Demonstration the portraits of various teachers in 
Baghdad, Kufa and Basra. He carefully differentiated 
between the eminent lecturers in law and theology whose 
discourses enthralled distinguished gatherings and the 
mass of enthuslastic and half-starved schoolteachers who 
grappled with hordes of children. 
In the days of Abu Utman al-Djahiz there was Indeed 
no lack of schoolteachers in Islam. Long before the con- 
quests and conversions there were undoubtedly many more 
teachers in the Middle East than there were in Europe, 
teaching in Greek at one place, in Syriac at another, in 
Hebrew, Perslan or Arabic. By propagating “the world’s 
most read book”, the new faith had stimulated the spirit 
of study and research. Every mosque had its school 
where the Koranic adage was inculcated: “He unto whom 
wisdom is given, he truly hath received abundant good” 
or that injunction of the Prophet's to “Seek knowledge 
even If it be in China, since the seeking of knowledge 
is obligatory upon every Moslem, man or woman.” 
Until the fifteenth century, elementary education—the 
teaching of reading, writing and arithmetic which was 
virtually general in the towns—advanced side-by-side 
with the vast expansion of Arab science and culture. 
The latter, even when they had declined in the Iraqi and 
Syrian towns from which they emerged, continued to 
grow stronger and to proliferate in Central Asia, in Sicily 
and above all in Europe and North Africa. 
But at the end of this period, the great historian Ibn 
16 
 
In the Arabic speaking countries there are now nearly 
5,000,000 children in primary schools—double the number of 
a decade ago. But a wide gap will have to be closed before 
there are enough schools and teachers for all the 15 million 
children of school age, like the Arab boy (above) on a hillside 
overlooking his native village. Often the only kind of edu- 
cation available is in the traditional Koranic schools (below). 
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
    
- Eo lh » - ‘ 
i" ol - -» - » 
> - 4 - ~ . 2 a . f i. “Pe ey - . i 
wi _— py GO A TU ~ CGR Ee , iy 
PO SEP PEE Ie or CE Ses Gi a. 
- i : a, : - fs LL ~ o EER ER ae a som a Sa a gn i 
Ere ale RP NS ant PER Se I a Yoo TE 
>» ti 7 AG a TTY he WT ES el 
-—le TE wd STR wide Sa Ew Re | FEET CE NRCS Sy YEE TR - - dt wi SIRE we ag nS TT #2 all i) 
- -y- - - - —- “ > - " Ww SE AL Ea Sal J ee =x 
” . a a * - ~ rlAT ARTAI en 2S 
—-— - ea at - - - a A 
UNRWA

## [Page 17](078178engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 63721: Learning means light in Arab lands

  
Khaldoun ended a chapter on the “philosophic sciences” 
with the statement, “We are told that in the country of 
the Franks and in the land of Rome and the neighbouring 
regions of the northern coasts (of the Mediterranean) the 
philosophic sciences are greatly in favour, their princi- 
ples have been revived, there are many groups to teach 
them and there is an increasing number eager to study 
them...” Thus, the European Renaissance was proclaim- 
ed in Tunis at the very moment when Arab culture and 
education were about to enter a long period of stagnation 
and even decline. Economic depression, loss of inde- 
pendence, cities sunk in apathy... 
During four centuries, the cultivated population was 
barely able to do more than maintain the tongue of the 
masters of the Golden Age. Their doctrines and their 
works together with their universities became lifeless. 
Elementary education itself became rarer and rarer and 
less and less valued. The small schools survived, gene- 
rally kept going by religious foundations: under the direc- 
tion of ignorant teachers, themselves a vestige of the 
Middle Ages persisting into the nineteenth century, the 
children—the male children—were given an education 
consisting of learning verses from the Koran by heart. 
Nevertheless, the Arab revival had begun in the nine- 
teenth century. Among the Christians of Lebanon and 
the Moslems of Egypt, thinkers, statesmen and poets shook 
the dust from the old books. Reformers introduced the 
disciplines and sometimes the methods of “modern” edu- 
cation into the ancient universities of Al Azhar, of Cairo 
and of Zaitouna in Tunisia. Thenceforward the move- 
ment developed with astonishing speed. Under the 
influence of the new universities in Cairo, Alexandria 
and Beirut, education at all levels has recovered the vigour 
  
The Unesco Courier, — Joavory 1961 
and prestige which had been lost for so long. Taking 
the Arab countries as a whole, {t might seem the solution 
of fundamental educational problems was already in sight. 
Unfortunately, the Arab world is enormous and progress 
has been made at a very different rate in the various 
countries. Some Arab countries lag a good many years 
behind others. In more than one country, hampering 
tensions arise from the co-existence, and some times rival- 
ry, of the traditional schools which are almost wholly 
religious in nature and the undenominational schools mo- 
delled on the Western pattern. By way of compensa- 
tion, In other countries State education—which, inci- 
dentally, provides for regular religious instructlon—has 
been able to develop unhindered, But in all Arab 
countries alike, from the derricks of Kuwait to the 
pasture lands of the Atlas region, from the banks of the 
Orontes to the banks of the Upper Nile, the longing for 
education merges with the will to play a part in the Arab 
renaissance. 
HERE are grounds for believing that this longing 
will be fulfilled. Indeed, taking all Arab coun- 
tries together, one finds that tlie annual rate of 
increase in the number of children at school is about 10 
per cent, whereas the annual rate of increase in the 
number of children of school age is only about 3 or 4 per 
cent. Plainly, the race between population increase and 
the schools is going to be won by the schools if this trend 
persists. 
In those Arab States which are the best-equipped and 
the best situated in the field of education there are still 
thousands of children for whom there is no accommo- 
dation in the schools or whose villages still have no 
school worthy of the name. In yet other countries which 
were only recently able to begin thelr cducational pro- 
gramme, the majority of the children must still be left 
to one side or temporarily forgotten about. 
Sometimes it is nccessary to consider emergency mea- 
sures, the mobilization of available resources In order to 
speed up education; sometimes the authorities are above 
all preoccupled with reforming the content and the tools 
of teaching where these are thought Inadequate to the 
needs of the young and of the community as a whole, 
Almost invariably they are forced back to the same great 
problem: how to train the masters who are now needed 
and who will be needed even more tomorrow? 
N enquiry recently carried out by Unesco in 
10 Arab countries (1) reveals that the most 
urgent problem today is the “shortage of qua- 
lified teachers.” 
In the Lebanon, for example, authorities describe the 
present situation as “particularly disturbing.” In the 
whole country there is only one primary teacher-training 
school and one secondary teacher-training school which 
graduated 97 student-teachers in 1958. But the number 
of posts which must be filled yearly is approximately 
two hundred In respect of primary education and seventy 
in respect of secondary education. In these circumstances, 
it is hardly surprising that a number of classes are 
conducted by teachers whose qualifications are more than 
a little vague, “About half the teachers in the primary 
schools have had a training inferior to a complete secon- 
dary course.” 
The situation is perhaps most serious in Libya where, 
in order to press ahead as rapidly as possible, it was 
found necessary to employ a number of primary school 
teachers who themselves had received little more than 
primary education. In Morocco where at least 2,000 new 
(1) Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Saudi 
Arabia, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Republic. 
  
CONTINUED OM PAGE 20 

## [Page 18](078178engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 63721: Learning means light in Arab lands

        ; » N — i f 
i —r 2 
  
    
        
    
            
   
|
 
  
BOXING LESSON    
A box with six compartments is teaching young Tunisians all 
about the sort of foods they should eat. As they open it in the 
classroom, they find inside models of six typical foods which 
they need for growth, good health and energy. The hexagonal 
box is one of the audio-visual teaching aids—filmstrips, posters, 
flannelgraphs—which are being used in a special nutrition education 
drive that the Tunisian Government is making in collaboration 
with UNESCO, UNICEF (The United Nations Children’s Fund) and 
FAO (U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization). Photos show: 
(1) Tunisian artists preparing posters. Those on walls show the 
“right diet” box. (2/3) Children answer questions after a “good 
food means good health” lesson. Each has been given a “diet 
box”. (4) Pupil cuts out drawings of different food items similar 
to those shown on the blackboard. (5) Youngsters are served 
“right diet” meal in canteen decorated with nutrition posters. 
Photos Unesco-Paul Almasy

## [Page 19](078178engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 63721: Learning means light in Arab lands

Photos Unesco-Paul Almay 
—
 
¥
 
] [=
 
> n
 - n
 -]
 [gp
] 
o [4
 
- n
 - Januory 196) 
 

## [Page 20](078178engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 63721: Learning means light in Arab lands

LEARNING MEANS LIGHT (Cont'd from page 17) 
TEN MILLION CHILDREN IN SEARCH OF TEACHERS 
teachers a year will be needed, the number of student- 
teachers supplied by the teacher-training schools in 1959 
was only 500. In the Sudan, the qualifications required 
of a teacher consist of the diploma granted after the 
first secondary stage plus two years’ professional training; 
but the eight institutions which offer this training are far 
from able to meet current needs since in 1959 they were 
only able to supply the country’s 2,000 schools with 632 
men teachers and 177 women teachers. 
In this regard, one of the great difficulties confronting 
Ministers of Education is to find teachers for provinces 
located far from the capital and, for that matter, for 
villages which are close to the capital but which are 
still only villages. The young teachers, accustomed to 
the comfort of their colleges and the luxury of the big 
cities, find lving condltions in the villages intolerable. 
Attempts have occasionally been made to solve this prob- 
lem by providing the teacher with living quarters in 
accordance with his needs and tastes; but the cost of 
bullding such quarters, even the least luxurious models, 
is far beyond the financial means of almost all the Arab 
countries. 
Payment of indemnities provides no solution since the 
teacher, however modest his requirements, is often unable 
to find a reasonable house in the area to which he has 
been appointed. The solution generally envisaged in these 
countries today is one which has been repeatedly sug- 
gested in other regions: namely, that the ministers 
concerned should recruit more young student-teachers in 
these less attractive areas in the hope that, once their 
training has been completed, they will want to return 
there to teach. 
It is, however, in the secondary and vocational schools 
and in the trade training centres that the shortage of 
teachers seems especially critical. In some countries the 
full gravity of the situation is not yet apparent because 
many of these institutions were founded and are still 
maintained by private groups, religious missions and even 
foreign countries which provide a large proportion of the 
staff and equipment. But with few exceptions, this aid 
does not go far to meet the development which the 
economic progress of these countries requires. 
At the present time, 16 in a hundred pupils go to secon- 
dary schools and the proportion in secondary vocational 
schools is 2 per cent. Thus, without noticeably increasing 
these proportions, it is estimated that secondary Institu- 
Arab refugee boy is among thousands learning 
trades in UNRWA-UNESCO schoo! workshops. 
  BEES, UNRWS 
20 
tions in Iraq in 1965 will have 235,000 pupils, necessi- 
tating the training of 850 teachers per year. As things 
stand, however, the total number of those graduating from 
Iraq’s teacher-training colleges barely exceeds 300. 
In Libya, a number of secondary schoolteachers come 
from neighbouring countries. In the Syrian province of 
the United Arab Republic there is small hope of meeting 
the needs of secondary institutions for several years to 
come, even though private education at this level copes 
with a large proportion of pupils. Egypt, in fact, would 
seem to be the only country at present able to meet the 
growing needs of secondary education. 
Pause for reading 
as a Saudi Arabian 
boy kneels on the 
rocky ground fo pe- 
ruse his textbook 
of short stories. 
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
Even Egypt is short of qualified teachers for certain 
subjects, especially mathematics, science and modern lan- 
guages. Other countries make the same complaint and 
generally with still more cause. It may be possible to 
find first rate students in literature, history or even law, 
philosophy or social sciences who, despite their hopes 
for a different career, nevertheless become satisfactory 
teachers of grammar, literature or the social sciences. 
Their friends who have specialized In science, in English 
or French, are not likely to accept to become teachers. 
Unless they have a positive vocation for teaching, they 
are more likely to take ome of the infinitely more attrac- 
tive jobs offered by industry or commerce or the civil 
service. 
In countries, in the process of development which still 
lack top-level men for the most Important sectors of the 
national economy, it is useless to count on university 
students turning to teaching as a last resort. The teacher- 
training colleges must provide a full training for teachers 
specializing in the different disciplines where neither 
incompetents nor enthusiastic amateurs can be accepted. 
Additionally, the State—and public opinion—must treat 
teaching with the seriousness it deserves. A bad book- 
keeper is dismissed; but too often an incompetent teacher, 
whose shortcomings may have serious consequences, is 
allowed to retain his position. From another point of 
view it would be wholly unreasonable to argue that 
teaching Is such a noble profession that anyone who 
abandons it for a better pald job is blameworthy. 
“Material advantages” cannot anywhere be neglected 
for long. And In every one of the Arab States, the 
Minister of Education realizes regretfully that teachers 
    
  
    
 
A 
Sas In 
AER ot 
3 3 LEER Fao ( “ 
= gL 2s Lo ERY Ch

## [Page 21](078178engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 63721: Learning means light in Arab lands

  
are Inadequately pald. The salary scales may be the 
same, by and large, as those for other elvil servants with 
comparable qualifications and senicrity; but authorities 
recognize that the teacher's modest pay is no longer pro- 
portionate to the amount of work and the professional 
qualities which are required of him. His salary Is a 
hangover from the days when it was thought fitting 
that the schoolmaster should be as poor as he was 
respectable. 
Some governments openly deplore the fact that the 
salaries paid to young teachers are “slightly lower” than 
those paid to other civil servants. Nobody In these 
States denies that the remuneration received by teachers 
is inadequate; on the contrary, there is a real desire to 
improve their living conditions; but so far the burdens 
involved in expanding education have made it impossible 
for most of the States to change things. 
Over recent years, the educational authorities in almost 
all the Arab countries have outlined their aims in docu- 
ments which have been as carefully thought over and 
drawn up as the constitution of a new republic. Despite 
significant variations in regard to one or another aspect 
of the various tasks of education, all agree as to the basic 
objective: to equip the child to play a full part in the 
political and economic life of his country. 
Most of these lands regard themselves as new countries, 
in spite of the antiquity of their traditions. They know 
that they are in the midst of an evolutionary process. 
The citizens of tomorrow are expected to make their 
country stronger, more prosperous, better qualified to play 
a useful role in international life. 
It may be asked whether the education provided in 
primary and secondary schools is linked with and, indeed, 
actually assists the achievement of this ambition. 
No educator on earth can be completely sure that the 
Study in concen- 
tration as two dJor- 
danian schoolgirls 
share a bench in the 
sun at the Hawara 
Education Centre, 
  
Hawara Fundamental Education Centre 
programmes which he recommends or is called on to 
follow are In every way ideally adapted to pupils’ needs, 
especially to their future needs as citizens and followers 
of a career. To take an example from among the coun- 
tries with which we are dealing it is likely that there is 
some doubt in the United Arab Republic as to the desi- 
rability of sharply divided “streams” which result in 
half of all secondary pupils completing two out of three 
years without learning anything at all of mathematics, 
Physics, chemistry or natural sciences. On the other hand, 
their fellow-students in the scientific stream have nothing 
to do with history or geography. The programmes in 
Libya, which have been drawn up on another basis, devote 
The Unesco Courier, — Jonuary 1961 
20 hours a week during the last year (classical option) 
of a five-year secondary course to the teaching of lan- 
guages, and not one hour to mathematics and science. 
A graver defect which Arab educators have pointed out 
In various educational Institutions is the abstract. bookish. 
not to say boring, nature of the teaching. The teaching 
Dressed up and painted for dancing and miming, 
two smiling Moroccan girls entertain classmates. 
© Gerda Bohm, Rabat 
  
methods used in these schools, which vary in number and 
size from country to country, rely overmuch on learning 
by heart in order to pass examinations. Sucli methods, 
Inherited perhaps from the old Mosque teachers who 
concentrated on memorization, no longer suffice: they run 
the risk of developing memory at the cost of logical 
thinking, critical sense, the spirit of research and indi- 
vidual initiative. There are signs that the new generation 
of teachers Is being trained in the modern tcacher- 
training colleges and universities to use very different 
methods. 
Unforiunately, this defect is reflected in the textbooks 
which are still used by young schoolmasters both for 
thelr own studies and in teaching their pupils. The 
books provided—or forced on—the pupils are all too often 
sketchy and dogmatic, dry or ponderous and badly illus- 
trated: it is rare indeed that they Introduce readers to 
the “joy of reading” and the excitement of discovering 
things for themselves. They supply a set of bleak abso- 
lutes which must be humbly imbibed In order to give 
satisfaction and achieve success. 
Additionally, In almost all the Arab States, secondary 
education—and even vocational and technical education— 
has long been synonomous with “Western” education, 
wholly taught in English or French. This is still the 
case in a number of countries where the increased use 
of Arabic in education is the order of the day. This 
is not almed at the abandonment of the European lan- 
guages currently used ncr even at the systematic substi- 
tutlon of Arabic as the teaching language at every level 
and for every subject; but the curricula cannot much 
longer remain based solely on those which emerged from 
another culture, another history, a whole series of different 
factors, In another country. 
In certain cases, the subject-matter itself should be 
radically modified—geography and history, for example. 
In other cases, the relative Importance given to different 
subjects Is in need of revision: the ancient and modern 
literature of a given region or nation cannot be left 
In the background. Finally, there is no doubt that, 
irrespective of the subjects studied and the final alm of 
schooling, the study of Arabic should be made general 
and deeper. 
  
CONT'D ON MEXT PAGE 

## [Page 22](078178engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 63721: Learning means light in Arab lands

LEARNING MEANS LIGHT (Cont'd) 
AN ANCIENT LANGUAGE GETS A MODERN DRESS 
Some countries go further and envisage educational 
reforms which are not only concerned with the national 
language In relatlon to foreign languages. Education ls 
sometimes hindered, to a greater or lesser extent depend- 
Ing on the region, by the differences between classical 
or “literary” Arable and the popular language spoken 
by puplls and masters. 
Between a language spoken by very different peoples 
scattered over great areas and the classical form of that 
language fixed 1,300 years ago In sacred writings, there 
is an Inevitable gulf but it does not seem to hamper 
lterary studles in any way. Moreover, the durability of 
"the classical language has undoubtedly helped prevent 
the growth of great differences between the various dia- 
lects and thus helped ensure the cohesion of the Arab 
world. 
One proof is the use made after some adaptation, of - 
this form of the language 
by press and radlo. None 
of this applies, however, 
when the language is used 
to teach and study scientific 
subjects, using that term 
in its widest sense, which 
have only emerged during 
the last two centuries and 
which may even date from 
as recently as yesterday. 
Possibly because there are 
still not enough original 
works on physics, biology, 
chemistry, soclology or poli- 
tical economy in Arabic, 
the Arab student is often 
puzzled by the vocabulary 
and style used in these 
sciences. 
A number of groups or 
institutions have therefore 
taken on the daunting task 
of adapting to the needs 
of modern education the 
language which the old 
masters restricted to poetry, 
prayer and law yet which 
nevertheless once excited 
the greatest admiration 
when used in the fields of 
logic, history, astronomy 
and algebra. The Moroccan 
Minister of Education 
recently announced the 
setting-up of an institute 
for the development of 
Arabic which, in co-operation with experts from various 
countries, would work for the modernization and uni- 
fication of the different forms of spoken Arabic so as to 
provide a single working language for both students 
and researchers, for laboratories and schools, for news- 
papers and scientific journals. 
The educational void which must be filled most urgent- 
ly in most Arab countries is to be found in technical 
and, generally speaking, vocatlonal training. The pro- 
portion of secondary pupils to primary pupils throughout 
the whole region is 16 per cent. This is, relatively, a high 
proportion, even If the secondary education sometimes 
seems unduly rapid. But the proportion of pupils enrolled 
in institutions for training technicians in industry, agri- 
culture and commerce amounts to only 2 per cent of all 
school enrolments. 
All States which have lald down development plans to 
ensure that their educational system is geared to thelr 
economy envisage a very substantial increase in technical 
education at both the post-primary and secondary 
22 
 
ON A SHADY TERRACE, secondary school girls at Omdur- 
man, Sudan, receive an out-of-doors lesson in home eco- 
nomics. A Unesco specialist is an adviser at this school. 
levels. Morocco, for instance, expects that 44,000 pri- 
mary school pupils will go on to this type of educa- 
tion in October 1964: eight times as many as in 1959. 
Several years ago the Arab States underlined the neces- 
sity of basing the future of their educational systems on 
rational planning to meet their educational, social and 
economic requirements. Some have already taken the 
necessary steps; others still lack qualified staff. 
The representatives of nine countries who studied these 
problems at the Unesco Beirut Conference in February 
1960, devoted themselves in particular to educational 
planning and the relationship between such planning and 
over-all economic and social planning. This conference 
recommended the setting-up, with UNEsco assistance, of 
a Centre for the Advanced Training of Senior Personnel 
in the preparation, execution and continual adaptation of 
educational plans, within the framework of overall 
planning. 
This is one of many pro- 
jects which will unques- 
tionably help the Arab 
States, and especially the 
poorer ones, to overcome 
the obstacles still hamper- 
ing the carrying out of 
basic reforms. Certain ty- 
pes of limited, temporary 
assistance are decisive if 
provided at the right time 
and In carefully selected 
sectors. This would apply 
to the training centre ; it 
also applies to the techni- 
cal assistance missions 
which the United Nations, 
the Specialized Agencies 
and particularly TUNEsco 
continue to send to most 
of these countries; an- 
other example is the Funda-~ 
mental Education Centre at 
Sirs-el-Layyan in the Egyp- 
tian delta which has been 
in operation for seven years 
under the joint patronage 
of the United Arab Republic 
and UNEsco. 
Mention should also be 
made of the work carried 
ouf by UNRWA in the refu- 
gee camps of Jordan, Leba- 
non, Syria and Gaza: the 
382 UNRWA-UNEsco 
schools which have gradu- 
ally been developed in recent years have more than 
100,000 pupils. Finally, the aid provided by the U.N. Spe- 
cial Fund to secondary technical education and higher 
technical education will have far-reaching effects. 
Unesco-Paul Almasy 
Whether for planning and statistics, school building or 
teacher training, trade training centres or engineering 
institutions, most of these States need assistance if they 
are to overcome the barriers. It would be wrong to 
exaggerate the seriousness of all these difficulties 
(temporary shortage of staff and financial problems) but 
they do prevent advances at the very moment when the 
impulse towards progress is at its height. 
Freed of these initial concerns, the Arab States them- 
selves will do the rest—and the rest, as they well know, 
is gigantic. They will have to rid themselves of the 
thousand and one difficulties which long years of isola- 
tion, poverty and sometimes dependence have placed on 
the road leading to the economic, cultural and intellec- 
tual revival which they are determined to achieve.

## [Page 23](078178engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

Trudy 
oF a 
+ 
Leo Tolstoy Museum, Ysanaya-Polyana 
A NEW MODE OF LIFE began for Tolstoy after he renounced 
his worldly belongings and made them over to his wife. He 
did much manual work, learned bootmaking, adopted a vege- 
tarian diet and dressed like a peasant—as he is seen here, 
wearing blouse and boots walking in the grounds of his home. 
The Unesco Courler., — January 1961 


### 63722: 50,000 letters attest the idealism of Leo Tolstoy

50,000 letters 
attest 
the idealism 
LEO 
TOLSTOY 
-Fifty years ago, Leo Tolstoy, the greatest 
novelist the world has known, passed 
away. The author of War and Peace 
had friends and admirers in every coun- 
try and was a tireless letter writer— 
50,000 letters from all nations preserved 
in the Tolstoy archives testify to his 
popularity as do the 95 million copies of 
his books printed in82languages. Below, 
A. Shifman tells of one of the lesser- 
known aspects of the great huma- 
nist's life—his passionate interest in the 
people of the Orient and their destiny. 
by A. Shifman 
of the Léo Tolstoy Museum 
FEw months before his death In December 1910 
Leo Tolstoy was looking through the great 
number of letters he had recelved that day 
from all parts of the world. He turned to a young friend 
who was sitting with him—A. Goldenveiser, the planist 
—and remarked with a smile: 
“I am ashamed to say so, but I do enjoy the authority 
that attaches to the name of Tolstoy. It radlates to all 
the corners of the earth and llnks me with the most 
distant countries—the Far East, India, America, Aus- 
tralia...” 
And on the same day he sald to the circle of close 
friends around him: 
“I know I don't deserve it, but here am I at Yasnaya 
Polyana getting expressions of sympathy with my opini- 
ons from all sides, and that gives me great happiness.” 
And, in fact, there was no country in the world—in 
Europe, Asia, America, In distant Africa and in Australia, 
in which the great Russian writer did not have friends 
and admirers. Messages of affection and of approval 
for his work reached him from all sides, and he sent a 
kindly reply to every one of them. The 50,000 letters 
CONT'D THE NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 24](078178engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 63722: 50,000 letters attest the idealism of Leo Tolstoy

TOLSTOY'S 50.000 LETTERS (Contd) 
‘A day will come 
when force will 
no longer be 
the sole factor 
in freedom’ 
  
bearing the stamps of all nations, which are preserved 
In the Tolstoy archives bear elogent witness to his world- 
wide contacts, 
Tolstoy set great store by his correspondence with peo- 
ple from all countries and continents. He appreciated the 
opportunity it gave him to learn the truth about the 
lives of far-off peoples, which was not always to be 
found in newspapers of the time. 
In his letters, and in his conversations with the visi- 
tors who came to Yasnaya Polyana from so many coun- 
tries, he was able to express himself even more freely 
than in his articles and books—to expound ideas and 
views he regarded as the only true ones, and of which 
he felt mankind to be in sore need. That was why he 
replied with such atacrity to every one of his many cor- 
respondents, regardless of station in life, be he a Russian 
peasant, an Indian philosopher, a Turkish poet, or a stu- 
dent in far-away Australla. 
Among these world-wide contacts, Tolstoy paid great 
attention to the countries of the East. His Interest in 
them grew particularly strong after 1880 when, after 
passing through a profound spiritual crisis he embarked 
resolutely upon a reassessment of the spiritual values of 
mankind. 
Thereafter he turned more and more to the East, to 
the peoples of Asia and Africa. “It seems to me,” he 
wrote, “that it is the mission of the easterm nations— 
China, Persia, Turkey, India, Russia and perhaps Japan 
to show other countries... the real road to freedom”. Real 
freedom meant, for him, a life untouched by tyranny or 
violence, with no exploitation of man by man, no war 
24 
  
IN 1868, Tolstoy (left), now 
40 years old, was engaged 
on his masterpiece ‘ War 
and Peace''., Ten years ear- 
lier he had visited Switzer- 
land, Germany and France 
after which he settled at 
Yasanya Polyana where he 
started a school for peasant 
“children and published a 
journal devoted to the advan- 
cement of his pedagogical 
ideas. He spent the rest of » 
his life at Yasanya Polyana 
where the photo of him ska- EE 
ting (right) was taken in 1898. 
or conquest—a life of peace, friendship and Iinter- 
national brotherhood. 
Tolstoy’s oriental correspondents differed widely in 
their opinions, beliefs and religion and in their social 
background. Indian philosophers, Chinese scholars, 
Japanese writers and publishers, Iranian poets and 
journalists, Turkish lawyers, Arab peasants, teachers and 
students, all regarded the Russian writer as a faithful 
friend of their own peoples and were ready to conflde 
their most private thoughts to him. : 
What drew them to Tolstoy, apart from his merits as a 
great writer, was the breadth of his humanitarian ideals, 
his sympathy for the oppressed and downtrodden, his 
hatred of colonialism and his faith In the victory of the 
righteous cause. 
They told him of thelr intellectual quests, their doubts, 
their joys and sorrows, and of thelr people's dreams of 
freedom and happiness. Some of them described the 
ordeals undergone by their people and begged him to 
champlon them against foreign or native oppressors. 
The first distinguished Eastern intellectual to get In 
touch with Tolstoy was Matsutaro Konisi, the Japanese 
philosopher and writer. While in Moscow early in the 
1890’s, he was introduced to Tolstoy by N. Gret, the Rus- 
slan philosopher, and soon became his assistant in the 
study and popularization of oriental philosophy. With 
Konisi’'s help, Tolstoy published in Russia several books on 
outstanding Asian thinkers. On his return to Japan, 
Konisi translated The Kreutzer Sonata, Master and Man, 
and other works by Tolstoy. 
In 1896 another well-known Japanese visited Yasnaya 
Polyana; this was the publisher Ijiro Tokutomi, who

## [Page 25](078178engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 63722: 50,000 letters attest the idealism of Leo Tolstoy

  
  
used the pseudonym “Soho”. He received a warm wel- 
come from Tolstoy and the two had many conversations, 
enthusiastically reported in Tokutomi’s paper, “The Peo- 
ple’s Gazette” and his review “The People’s Friend”. 
Translations of literary works and articles of Tolstoy's 
also appeared in these publications. 
Hearing that Tolstoy was so kindly and approachable, 
other cultured Japanese were encouraged to get into touch 
with him. The number of his Japanese correspondents 
and visitors increased year by year, and so did his popu- 
larity in Japan. 
1s novel War and Peace, Anna Karenina and 
Resurrection, and his polemical writings, par- 
ticularly My Confession and Bethink Yoursel- 
ves, became favourites with the Japanese public, while his 
philosophy was adopted by a considerable number of 
Japanese intellectuals. 
Tolstoy’s interest in Japanese culture found striking 
expression in his friendship with the eminent essayist 
and novellst Tokutomi Roka, who spent five unforget- 
table days at Yasnaya Polyana In 1906, returned to Japan 
as an enthusiastic convert to the humanitarian views of 
the great Russian, and upheld those views for the 
remainder of his long ard noble life. 
Tolstoy’s influence dominates the entire literature of 
Japan in the early Twentieth century. Tolstoy's ideas, 
according to the critic Naosi Kato, penetrated into every 
corner of the Japanese mind and, like gunpowder conceal- 
The Unesco Courier, = JSonuory 196) 
Photos Leo Tolstoy Museum, 
ed in the crannies of rocks, exploded with such force 
as to shake all existing theories and principles to thelr 
foundations. It was almost a revolution. 
Tolstoy remained in touch with leading figures in 
Japanese culture until the end of his life, 
His bonds of friendship with India were even stronger. 
The Japanese, he felt, had been in too much of a hurry 
to assimilate certain bad features of Western civilization, 
and their inner world was something of a mystery to 
him; but he felt complete sympathy for the Indians, with 
their lofty conception of man’s spiritual mission, thelr 
zeal for moral progress and their tradition of non-violence. 
He closely studied the life of the Indian people, and it 
was a joy to him to be In touch with its representatives. 
In 1901, A. Ramaseshan, editor of “The Arya”, a review 
published in Madras, wrote a series of eloquent letters 
to Tolstoy about life in his country. Referring to India’s 
struggle against British Westernization, he wrote: “We 
are confident that a day will come when force will no 
longer be the sole factor in political freedom, and when, 
after long, peaceful progress, the Indian nation will live 
in peace and harmony with the European natlons.” 
Tolstoy replied to Ramaseshan In a long, sympathetic 
letter giving his views on the future of India. “I entirely 
agree With you”, he wrote. “Your country cannot 
adopt the solution of the social problem proposed to it 
by Europe—which is, after all, no solution at all.” 
Tolstoy considered that India’s future depended on stead- 
fast resistance to oppression and on a social structure 
based on respect for man and the rejection of oppression 
and violence. 
He expanded these ideas in 1908 in his famous “Letter 
CONT'D CN NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 26](078178engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 63722: 50,000 letters attest the idealism of Leo Tolstoy

TOLSTOY'S 50,000 LETTERS (Contd) 
Leo Tolstoy: 
a great link 
between Orient 
and Occident 
  
Leo Tolstoy Museum 
HOLLOW-CHEEKED and with a piercing, 
haunted look in his deep-set eyes, Tolstoy 
is seen here with his daughter, Tatiana, 
towards the end of his life, when he was deeply 
troubled by family differences. In November 
1910 he left home secretly at night and died a 
few days later. His influence was already 
immense and in the last 15 to 20 years of his 
life he was probably the most venerated man 
in the world. His fame reached into China 
and India as well as Europe and America. 
Visitors from all ends of the world turned 
Yasanya Polyana into a centre of pilgrimage. 
to an Indian”—a burning appeal written in reply to 
a letter from another distinguished Indian, Taraknath 
Das, editor of a review, “The Free Hindustan” 
Tolstoy considered that evil arose in India from the fact 
that, however reluctantly, the Indians were submitting 
to foreign rule. He said that if the Indian people, obeying 
the precepts of thelr ancient sages, had refused to sub- 
mit, no earthly force could have enslaved them. Tolstoy 
was an advocate of passive resistance, urging that evil 
should not be met by violence. 
The profound inspiration and warm, benevolent tone of 
Tolstoy's answers to his Indian correspondents caused a 
spate of letters to pour into Yasnaya Polyana for the 
26 
rest of his life. Despite his advanced years and the 
important work on which he was engaged, Tolstoy replied 
regularly to these correspondents, invariably emphasizing 
his respect for their country and its ancient civilization. 
It was In pursuit of his widespread friendly contacts 
with many representatives of India that Tolstoy began 
in 1909 his correspondence with Gandhi, who played so 
important a part in the public life of the Eastern peoples. 
Tolstoy’s ideological and artistic influence left a deep 
impression on Indian intellectuals. It did a great deal to 
develop avant-garde writing in India. There is an affi- 
nity between Tolstoy and the work of Rabindranath 
Tagore, Pram Chand and other eminent Indian writers. 
Pram Chand translated and edited 21 folk-tales by Tol- 
stoy, whose works are among those most widely read in 
ndia. 
Tolstoy did not correspond as frequently with represen- 
tatives of Chinese culture as with their Indian and 
Japanese counterparts, but he was keenly interested in 
China, and stressed in his detters that mankind's salvation 
fay in the refusal to resort to violence between States, the 
renunciation of the oppression and enslavement of depen- 
dent nations, and in the establishment of peace and 
friendship among all peoples of the earth. 
orLsTOoY’s unflagging interest in the East was also 
displayed in his continual study of the philoso- 
phy and literature of the Asian and African 
peoples, including their epic poetry and folklore. 
His attention was first drawn to the philosophical and 
moral doctrines of the Orient in the early 1880's when, 
having renounced the world of the rich, he was engaged 
in laying the foundations of his new conception of the 
world. With passionate enthusiasm he studied Confucius, 
Buddha and Lao-tse, with passionate application he read 
the Vedas and the Upanishads, and the works of Chi- 
nese, Persian and Arab thinkers. 
What particularly impressed Tolstoy in the immense 
storehouse of oriental thought was its humanitarian 
ethic, its concept of the lofty mission of man. Man is 
depicted as the culmination of nature. Happiness is not 
to be found in wealth, nor In the exercise of authority 
by one man over others, but In working for the general 
good. Peace, labour and virtue are the supreme moral 
values of mankind. 
Discovering in the ancient doctrines of the East ideas 
and principles which harmonized with his own, Tolstoy 
set himself to propagating them in Russia. This led to 
the publication of his anthologies, The Cycle of Reading, 
Thoughis from wise men for every day, and The Path- 
way of Life, which assemble the maxims of leading East- 
ern and Western thinkers, together with oriental pro- 
verbs, saws and legends arranged by Tolstoy himself. 
Earlier, in the 1870's, wishing to make the treasures of 
world folk literature accessible to Russian children, Tol- 
stoy had collected and edited with equal care a number 
of Asian tales and fables and included them in his cele- 
brated Alphabet and his Russian readers. Those remark- 
able anthologies contain many examples of Indian, 
Turkish, Japanese, Chinese and Arab folklore, presented 
in polished literary form. The collections of oriental 
tales, legends, proverbs and sayings compiled and 
published by Tolstoy are among the largest and most 
Interesting to have appeared in Europe, 
Not content with this, Tolstoy translated and published 
works of oriental philosophy. A series of books on Chi- 
nese, Indian and Arab philosophy was published in Rus- 
sia under his supervision, including his own translation 
of selected maxims of Lao-tse, taken from the celebrat- 
ed Tao Te King (Book of the Path and of Virtue). 
Tolstoy’s work in this field won high acclaim from 
experts all over the world. “Tolstoy”, wrote Romain Rol- 
land, “was the first, wide spiritual path linking all the 
members of the ancient continent, from West to East.” 
Tolstoy was a great humanist who defended the inte- 
rests and aspirations of the masses and gave tongue to 
the peoples’ protest against war and subjection with a 
vigour and passion never before encountered in literature. 
In him the nations of Asia and Africa had a trusty friend 
and champion.

## [Page 27](078178engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 63723: 29 January: World Leprosy Day

The Unesco Courier. — Jonuary 1961 
Ee LOT le TE 
Rn od 
Par 
ask the person 
B“Why have you arrested that man?” | 
  
27

## [Page 28](078178engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

  
29 
JANUARY      
EPROSY Is the oldest disease in the world. It appears 
to be as old, as man himself, and can be traced back 
to the remotest ages. 
In India it was known as early as 600 B.C., under the 
name of Kustha. About the same time, in Persia, it was 
called Pisaga. Herodotus tells us that no one with leprosy 
might enter a town or have any dealings with other people, 
for his disease proved that he had sinned against the sun. 
Besides these taboos, he was forbidden to own... white 
pigeons ! 
Moses, who had been an Egyptian priest, enforced the 
most stringent measures against those with leprosy. They 
were obliged to live apart, to veil their faces, and to warn 
anyone of their presence by crying out “Unclean, 
unclean!” 
Even at that time, leprosy meant neglect and social 
ostracism for its victim. It would be consoling to find 
that the lot of the leprosy victim had improved with the 
passage of the centuries. But even now, leprosy remains 
one of the greatest scourges of mankind. 
The statistics we have are incomplete and mostly un- 
derestimate the real situation. The number of people 
with leprosy in the world today may be reckoned at 
between 12 and 15 million. This means that there is one 
to every 200 inhabitants, and one to every two T.B. 
patients. 
The highest incidence of the disease is in Asia, in every 
country of which leprosy claims its victims. Africa, has 
between two-and-a-half and three million victims, while 
in the South Pacific region all the islands, with the 
exception of New Zealand, are contaminated. America, 
too, has its sufferers—mainly in the West Indies, the 
Guianas, Mexico and South America. 
From time immemorial leprosy has been regarded as a 
terrifying and accursed affliction, thus causing those with 
it to be segregated from their fellows. At times they have 
been driven from their homes and villages. I have seen 
them thrown together with mental patients or else held in 
what are nothing less than concentration camps, behind 
barbed wire, their guards armed with machine-guns. 
I have even found lepers shut up in a cemetery! Some 
tribes have also been known to make them commit suicide. 
HY this ostracism and cruelty? Because, until re- 
cent years, leprosy was regarded as contagious and 
incurable. It was a “danger” against which protective 
measures had to be taken. The man with leprosy was a 
“hopeless” case, a total loss for the tribe and the city. 
Hence this “social excommunication” which made him 
an outlaw and set a curse on him. Nowadays, leprolo- 
gists are unanimous in their opinion that leprosy is only 
slightly contagious and can be effectively cured. 
In many cases and in many countries, leprosy is not— 
or has ceased to be—contagious. In others, it can be 
contracted only through close, and oft repeated contact. 
The children of parents with leprosy are not born with the 
disease. In fact, according to WHO, “the risks of 
contracting leprosy by association with a leper are far 
fewer than in the case of tuberculosis.” There is therefore 
no reason for condemning the leprosy patient in- 
discriminately to isolation, and still less for driving him 
out of soclety. 
28 


### 63723: 29 January: World Leprosy Day

WORLD LEPROSY DAY 
by Raoul Follereau 
The 1958 WHO Conference at Belo Horizonte and that 
of 1959 at Brazzaville, solemnly condemned segregation 
once and for all, for the following reasons: 
® If the diseased person fears that he will be forced 
to go to hospital, he will conceal his disease; 
Isolation leads to a break-up of the family; ® 
@ Isolation gives rise to serious difficulties in controll- 
ing contacts; 
® 
@® 
Isolation stigmatizes the patient by delaying his 
reintegration into society; 
Isolation is too costly a health measure, in that it 
absorbs the funds needed for the development of 
up-to-date methods of combating leprosy, 
@® Isolation helps ‘to keep popular prejudices alive; 
and, above all, it is utterly inhuman. 
CCORDINGLY treatment for leprosy victims should 
generally be provided in the same way as for any 
other kind of sick person: as an out-patient in mild cases; 
and in special centres or “sanatoria,” if this is required 
by the form or virulence of the disease—exactly as for 
tuberculosis. 
This liberal, humane system of treatment which has at 
times been criticized as incautious, but which recent 
scientific discoveries have proved to be sound, has heen 
applied in recent years in the former territories of the 
French Union. Two sets of figures are enough to illustrate 
its scope and success. In what was formerly French 
Equatorial Africa, at the end of 1951, the known number 
of people with leprosy was 37,508, and the number of 
patients freated was 2,268 or approximately 6%; at the 
end of 1956, the known number of sufferers was 140,000, 
the number of patients treated was 120,000 or 85%. 
These figures reflect action going beyond the 
experimental stage and are more than encouraging. 
Regarding the children of leprous parents the Brazza- 
ville Conference stated that: 
m In countries which have set up “preventoria” for 
the children of leprous parents, these establishments will 
be converted as far as possible into créches; 
mm It is considered dangerous to take children away 
from a leprous mother from the day of their birth and 
to place them in institutions. When this has been done 
the result has been a high infant mortality rate and 
disastrous psychological effects among those children 
who survive; 
m It is essential not to deprive these babies of their 
mothers’ milk. 
The Conference further stated that day pupils might 
continue to attend their schools, provided they were given 
regular {freatment; health education should then be given 
to their fellow-pupils and their families. 
Lastly, congresses and conferences have formally 
concluded that leprosy is a disease which can be 
completely cured by sulphones, which are inexpensive and 
easy to apply. The VIIth International Congress of Lep- 
rology (Tokyo 1958) recommended that the widest possi- 
ble publicity should be given to the fact that leprosy was 
a curable disease and that the existence of a few perma- 
CONT'D ON PAGE 30 

## [Page 29](078178engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 63723: 29 January: World Leprosy Day

The Unesco Courier, — January 196} 
  
  
  
© Pierre Pittet 
‘YOU HAVE LEPROSY’, a World Health Organization doctor tells this youth from Luzon in the Philippines. But as the doctor gives the bad news he drops a kindly hand on the youth's shoulder and tells him that a course of treatment with sulphone tablets will cure him. Today, treatment for leprosy victims is being provided more and more in the same way as for any other sick person—as an outpatient in mild cases ; in special centres only in cases where this is required by the form or virulence of the disease. 
29

## [Page 30](078178engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 63723: 29 January: World Leprosy Day

WORLD LEPROSY DAY (Cont'd) 
- 
& 
  
nent after-effects in certain former victims did not mean 
that In these cases the disease was contagious or had not 
been cured. 
Leprosy sufferers should thus be treated without being 
subjected to any special regulations, and, in the view of 
modern medical science, most of them will be freed from 
what today is no more than an ordinary disease which has 
foolishly been exaggerated into a spectre of horror. 
But can those with leprosy be saved merely by curing 
them? From time immemorial, the victim of the 
Bacillus leprae has suffered from two afflictions: he has 
leprosy, and he is a “leper.” 
He has leprosy. But this can be cured by present-day 
science. Yet what is the use If, once healed, he still 
bears the stigma of the “leper,” and still remains an 
outcast? 
E must see to it that, as soon as the doctors have 
pronounced him to be non-contagious, he should 
immediately regain his place and employment in society. 
There must be no question of punishing him permanently 
for some inexpiable crime, of continuing to condemn him 
to “perpetual leprosy.” 
This 1s the purpose of the petition which I have 
addressed to the United Nations, with a view to securing 
the preparation of a Charter for adoption by all civilized 
countries. 
It can be summed up in two points: those with leprosy 
are human beings like the rest of mankind, subject to, and 
protected by, the same laws; no one has the right to place 
any restriction whatsoever on their freedom when they 
suffer from a non-contagious form of leprosy or hold a 
medical certificate stating that, after treatment, they 
present no further risk of contagion. 
These proposals were approved by a unanimous vote of 
the French National Assembly on 25 May 1954, 
A distinction must be made between the following three 
categories of patients: 
Those who are contagious. In thelr case the fullest 
possible isolation will be necessary. If this cannot be 
arranged at home, they will have to be placed in a special 
centre for treatment. Such a centre need not be a 
hospital for leprosy patients; it can be a sanatorium, or 
simply a special ward of an established city hospital. 
These people are ordinary patients, who should be plac- 
ed on the same footing as any other patients temporarily 
suffering from a contagious disease. And, like other 
patients, they must be fully assured that their isolation 
30 
NO LONGER CUT OFF 
from other people simply 
because of their illness 
these leprosy patients in 
the Philippines are able to 
farm and do other work. 
Attitudes towards leprosy 
are beginning to change. 
Those who have suffered 
from the disease but who 
are no longer contagious 
are now being given the 
chance to return to society. 
© Pierre Pitter 
will not last a day longer than the doctor considers 
necessary. 
Society itself owes them fair compensation. To begin 
with, they should be sure that once their health has been 
restored they will be able to go back to their former jobs. 
It is for the State to set an example by granting long- 
term sick leave to any of its officials suffering from lep- 
prosy, without letting this be any handicap to them in 
their careers. 
Non-contagious patients who have so far been isolated 
indiscriminately. They should .be free to go where they 
like, but this does not mean that they should be removed 
by force from where they are at present. They must be 
given both the means and desire to return to society. 
But they should not be forced to do so. 
To give them a chance to readapt themselves, it is 
both right and necessary for them to receive a financial 
allowance for a period of, for example, two or three years. 
The amount might be the same as what would have been 
spent on them had they remained in the sanatorium. 
This would mean no extra expenditure; nor should any 
“economies” be made on patients who, leaving of their 
own volition, will accordingly feel less apprehensive about 
starting life afresh. 
HE crippled and maimed. Those whose faces, for 
example, will permanently bear the mark of the 
disease, need special homes set up in the form of small 
villages where they will live together, with every measure 
being taken to ease their lot and help them forget the past. 
Though the damage done to them can never be repaired, 
they remain none the less human beings; and society 
which came too late to their aid, owes them its respect 
and a friendly helping hand. 
This Charter should be proclaimed by all countries 
which. believe in human values and pay more than lip 
service to the ideal of freedom. 
This was my aim in instituting the world-wide Leprosy 
Day, which will be celebrated for the eighth time on 29 
January 1961. Its purpose is to ensure that lepers are 
treated in the same way as other sick persons, with full 
respect for their freedom and dignity as human beings; 
and to “cure the sound in body” of the absurd and 
sometimes criminal fear which they.show in regard to 
this disease and those stricken with it. 
Last year, 88 countries were associated in World Lep- 
rosy Day. Let us make no mistake. The emancipation 
of the victim of leprosy, who has been held in terror for 
2,000 years, will go down in history as a victory comparable 
to the emancipation of the slaves.

## [Page 31](078178engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courler. — Jonuory 1961 


### 63724: Christianity and anti-semitism

CHRISTIANITY & 
ANTI-SEMITISM 
s author of The Catholic 
Church and the Race Ques- 
tion, one of the booklets in 
the Unesco series, The Race 
Question and Modern Thought, 
permit me to comment on a number 
of points in the racism issue of THE 
UnNEsco COURIER, 
In his most interesting article 
“A Took at Modern Anti-Semitism,” 
Iéon Poliakov has, in effect, once 
more taken up the thesis of P. Jules 
Isaac, a man whose name I have 
known since childhood, for it was 
from his textbooks that I learned my 
history. His thesis is that a re- 
lationship exists between modern 
anti-Semitism and theological anti- 
Semitism which “dates back to early 
Christian times.” 
As a historian myself, convinced 
that History is a great mistress of 
truth, of human culture and of 
objectivity, and hence of peaceful 
understanding, I think there is an 
undeniable element of truth in 
this thesis. In this respect, 1 
would attach particular import- 
ance not so much to the 
theological arguments of the Fathers 
of the Church and leading theo- 
logians, but to certain popular 
predications such as those delivered 
on the occasion of the Crusades or 
auto-da-fés. A work on the auto- 
da-fés in Portugal at the end of the 
15th century, which I recently 
examined, comes to my mind. Such 
predications helped to spread a 
picture of “The Jew” on which the 
irrational sentiments of the broad 
masses thrived. 
  
UT the exact nature of our 
relations with “others” de- 
pends above all on a critical 
examination of such general 
images through which it is so easy to 
build up a grotesque and even vile 
picture of certain groups of people, 
especially if their life apart makes 
them seem foreign or mysterious. 
Anti-clericalism and criticism of 
monks also thrived in this fashion. 
In point of fact, even when one 
has not been subjected to the in- 
fluence of such images there is always 
a need to reinforce the truth of one’s 
beliefs. Here I might use my own 
experience as an example. Thank 
heaven I have never been an anti- 
Semite and, as far as I know, have 
never injured a Jewish person in any 
way. As a child I had Jewish friends 
who were the children of my parents’ 
friends. And a generation later I see 
that my own nephews have as their 
friend a child who escaped the 
massacre, but whose parents—my 
own childhood comrades—never re- 
turned from the death camps. 
by Father Yves Congar 
Convent of the Dominicans, Strasbourg, France 
Yet even so, from 1938 to 1943 I 
was mentally in agreement with 
discriminatory measures like the 
numerus clausus, as it was applied 
in Hungary, whose unjust and 
dangerous nature I failed to un- 
derstand at the time, I have since 
realized that thls was inadmissible. 
From talks I had with fellow prisoners 
of war who were Jewish, and after 
the frightful events of Auschwitz 
and Bergen-Belsen, I came to see, 
after 1943, that any discrimination 
whatever based on ethnic or racial 
considerations opened the way to the 
negation of justice and love, to the 
denial of human fraternity and, 
eventually, step by step to actions 
of the worst kind. 
should like now to make five 
points concerning the thesis 
of Léon Pollakov (and of 
Jules Isaac). 
1. It is easy to make a collection 
of texts (and of facts) concerning 
Christian anti-Semitism. But facts 
and texts should be considered and 
understood in their proper contexts. 
Originally a polemical atmosphere 
prevailed. The first persecutions of 
the Christians sometimes stemmed 
from Jewish denunciations, in a world 
in which Judaism was still proselytic 
and influential. In his Verus Israel 
Marcel Simon has clearly demonstrat- 
ed the responsibilities on both sides 
for this struggle between Jews and 
Christians during the first four 
centuries of the Christian era. The 
“doctrinal anti ~ Semitism” of the 
Fathers of the Church had as its 
counterpart. an anti-Christianity of 
the Talmud. 
2. This “doctrinal anti-Semitism” 
is truly doctrinal and hence religious. 
It is not racist. It may have had 
practical consequences similar to 
those mproduced by pagan anti- 
Semitism. But in itself It is quite 
different, it seems to me. And to 
come to an objective conclusion 
concerning the theological, religious 
—and non-racist—character of Chris- 
tian anti-Semitism in past centuries, 
I would recall the excellent. Protestant 
book, Antisémitisme et Muystéres 
d’Israél, written in 1955 by F. Lovsky, 
which neither Léon Poliakov nor Ju- 
les Isaac have taken sufficiently into 
account. 
3. Iéon Poliakov is too experienced 
a historian to believe that there was 
once a Jewish people ready to mingle 
with the pagan peoples, and later 
with Christian populations, and that 
the tragedy of the situation which 
led to the Ghettos can be laid en- 
tirely at the door of Christianity. 
Besides the fact that pagan anti- 
Semitism existed before any Christian 
anti-Semitism, Israel was inclined by 
its own Internal laws—that is, by its 
most noble and profound traditions 
—to live apart. Its uncompromising 
particularism could hardly help but 
ralse a kind of “Jewish question.” 
There has also been and still is a 
Moslem anti-Semitism as well as a 
Soviet anti-Semitism which have 
no connexion whatever with the 
doctrinal anti-Semitism of Christians. 
What Dubnov has sald in his 
Histoire Juive on the situation of the 
Jews In the Orient, shows that in 
another way, but all the same in one 
form or another, the Jewish pcople 
are the subject of diserimination in 
that part of the world, 
4. The *doctrinal anti-Semitism” 
of the Christians was not drawn up 
specifically and exclusively for the 
Jews. It rests on an ensemble of 
theological theses which concern 
“the Others,” the non-Christians, the 
“heterodox,” those belonging to other 
religious groups and even the pagans. 
Christian thought of other centuries 
had drawn up on this subject a 
coherent and logical collection of 
theological findings which amounted 
to a kind of jurisprudence. These 
arguments were drawn from an 
entirely objectivist realm of thought, 
inspired by the conviction that Truth 
exists and that it alone has proper, 
defined rights. 
Today we still believe in the rights 
of Truth but have a different way 
of meeting its demands. 
E have nowadays reached 
the point where we -can 
take Into consideration the 
individual viewpoint or that 
of conscience. But it should not be 
forgotten that the ancient theology 
often lald claim to texts of the Old 
Testament. The very idea of “divine 
punishment”, which has led Lc¢on 
Pollakov to detect an odour of 
crypto-Christianity In Le Dernier 
des Justes, because the author, 
J. Schwartz-Bart, had given space to 
it, is not specifically Christian, but 
Biblical. 
What I have just sald was even 
more accentuated under a Christian- 
ity in which religlon and politics 
existed in tight association; in which 
the Kingdom of God took on the 
status of a form of government, in 
which, unhappily, religious or 
dogmatic reproval was translated 
Into soclal or judicial measures. 
5. Finally, the thesis of Jules Isaac 
and Léon Poliakov runs the risk of 
showing only the tragic and un- 
pleasant side of the co-existence 
between Christians and Jews which 
has so often been a sorrowful one 
for the latter. There is, however, all 
the positive slide, often brought out 
 
CONT'D ON HEXT PAGE 

## [Page 32](078178engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 63724: Christianity and anti-semitism

CHRISTIANITY & ANTI-SEMITISM (Cont'd) 
in historical studies which: I could 
quote. This 1s manifested In atti- 
tudes, often merciful and conclliatory, 
made possibie by a legal status, the 
overall result of which was be- 
neficlent. Chrysostom, Augustine, 
Gregory the Great, Bernard and the 
Popes Plus XI and XII took up the 
defence of the Jews. The texts and 
the acts of these last two popes are 
not sufficiently well known. In 1953 
I Included 2a short list in my booklet 
and one could draw up another from 
one of Mr. Pollakov’s own works, 
Les Juifs et le III* Reich, Exact 
history should include all this in its 
balance sheet of facts and in its 
appreciation of realities, 
This, of course, does not mean that 
there 1s nothing more to be done. 
Unhappily there is much to do... But 
Christians are ready to learn and are 
willing and able to revise their ideas 
and actions. We are in full agree- 
ment with Mr. Poliakov and with 
Unesco to continue the effort which 
Is already well under way, but still 
not equal to the need. 
A FEW COMMENTS 
by Léon Poliakov 
It was with emotion that I read 
the letter of Father Congar. I should 
like to say at once that with the 
exception of some slight shades of 
meaning I agree with the first three 
points of his letter. On the fourth 
point I feel obliged to disagree. 
1. The situation of the Jews, as 
heterodoxes or the others in the 
mediaeval world, was very special and 
infinitely vulnerable. It was consider- 
ed at that time that the Jews had 
condemned themselves by their own 
offence to perpetual punishment 
and servitude (this offence was 
firstly *“deicide” and secondly “im- 
penitence,” that 1s, their refusal to 
become Christians). 
2. I agree with Father Congar 
when he recalls that in all centuries 
there have been Christians who have 
defended the Jews (although among 
the great names he quotes one could 
make distinctions) and I would 
add that during every age there 
have been reassuring examples of 
friendship a n d understanding 
between Christians and Jews; and 
even between theologians and rabbis. 
Nor should we forget the great 
Abelard, the only theologian of his 
day who absolved the Jews of all 
responsibility for the Crucifixion. 
To recall such facts can only serve 
the cause of Judaeo-Christian friend- 
ship; it would be false and harmful to 
pretend that Jewish history has been 
nothing but a Vale of Tears. It is 
Important to recognize that even at 
a time when ideas were very different 
from those we have today and when 
laws imposed a rigorous segregation 
between the followers of the two re- 
ligions, understanding and mutual 
esteem were fully possible. Such 
contacts no doubt enabled each side 
to perceive the elements that made 
up (or were missing drom) the 
metaphysical nature of the other. 
Thus life, in its manifold and 
mysterious fullness, transcended the 
doctrines and the laws. 
32 
THE RACISM 
Sir, 
I am cancelling my subscription to your 
magazine, being a firm disbeliever in 
“brotherhood” between peoples. Your 
idealism is no doubt noble, but unfortu- 
nately unattainable. In my view you are 
cherishing dangerous illusions at a time 
when force is the only valid political argu- 
ment. 
J. Morin 
Lillebonne, France 
Sir, 
Would you please send me a copy of the 
Racism issue of THE UNEsco COURIER in 
French. (We already have an entire class 
subscribing to the English edition.) I con- 
sider this problem of such importance that 
I would. like to deal with it in two langua- 
ges with my young girl pupils. 
Sister Maria Domenigo 
Cloppenburg, Oldenberg 
German Federal Republic 
Sir, 
I would like to express my appreciation 
of the excellent issue of THE UNESCO 
COURIER on racism. No doubt the extrem- 
ely interesting analyses and articles will help 
to combat race prejudice. I sincerely hope 
that a translation of the whole issue will 
soon appear in the German edition which 
is now also being published. Many Ger- 
man people stil] have a lot to learn in this 
field, not only as regards anti-Semitism— 
which is, at least in public, generally con- 
demned—but also in their attitude towards 
Africans. 1 could imagine that a special 
drive for this particular number, when it 
appears, would allow the edition to be far 
above the normal, if local Ministries and 
education authorities could be induced to 
get this issue for teachers, students at tea- 
chers' training colleges, adult education 
organizations, etc. 
Nora Walter 
Frankfort-am-Main 
German Federal Republic 
Ed. note. This issue has now been pub- 
lished in our new German edition. 
Sir, 
May I congratulate all who were respon- 
sible for the issue dealing with the prob- 
lem of racism. It was a most impressive 
treatment of a gnawing problem, and can- 
not help but make a positive impact on all 
who are exposed to it. I believe it will 
help dispel some of the discrimination and 
prejudices, even among those of us who 
call ourselves liberals. 
May I be permitted, however, to com- 
ment briefly on two items in the otherwise 
excellent article entitled “Race Prejudice 
and Education” by Cyril Bibby. 
Mr. Bibby is absolutely correct in reject- 
ing the notion of a "Jewish Race,” and 
suggesting that we speak of “The Jewish 
Religion.” However, by using the phrase 
“The Jewish People” he gives credence to 
the Zionist philosophy that there is an 
international unity of Jews beyond their 
religious beliefs, Israeli leaders constantly 
ISSUE 
make reference to “The Jewish Peoples” in 
their efforts to win acceptance of the view 
that Israel is the representative and spo- 
kesman of World Jewry. The long history 
of Zionism—a minority movement among 
Jews—is replete with efforts to give the 
world the impression of all Jews as a “pub- 
lic body”. The much used phrase for 
this purpose is ‘the Jewish people.” 
(Though some Jews through the years have 
used it for strictly religious purposes, it 
now is a sloganized term for Zionism.) 
Further, there is an unfortunate use of 
the stereotype wherein the author refers to 
characteristically “Jewish gestures,” “Jewish 
pattern in family life,” “Jewish occupations 
and cultural interest.” 1 feel sure you 
will agree when we say that there are no 
“Jewish occupations;” there are only occu- 
pations to which Jews may have been 
drawn, because of discrimination in other 
occupations. As for the concept of a 
“Yewish culture,” we maintain that except 
for the obviously liturgical music and reli- 
gious art and literature, the culture of Jews 
is a blend of the culture of the lands or 
lands in which they live or have settled. 
For example, there is no “Jewish culture” 
for American Jews separate and apart from 
what we term our American culture. 
Bill Gotlieb 
The American Council for Judaism 
New York, U.S.A. 
Sir, 
I shall not be renewing my subscription 
to your magazine. Your. revue is not unin- 
teresting, but your action is biased and art- 
fully “camouflaged.” Your issue on Ra- 
cism, in particular, disgusted me. One 
would think that your “brotherhood” was 
only intended for Negroes and Jews. You 
will end up by making people detest them. 
You publish photos taken from films, yet 
there is no shortage of real ones taken at 
places like Qued Zom, in China, in the 
Congo and other places. Reading sanc- 
timonious and hypocritical sentiments “a la 
Tartuffe” has always irritated me. 
Antoinette Mirande 
Le Bex-d’Ytrac, France 
Sir, 
1 have just received your issue devoted 
to Racism in the world and though I 
wholeheartedly approve of the condemna- 
tion of these harmful theories, I cannot 
help deploring the fact that they are almost 
entirely presented as a creation of the 
“white” race. When we consider this prob- 
lem we should not lose sight of the racial 
intolerance shown by coloured peoples, 
which white people are likely to encounter 
more and more frequently in the future. 
Jean-Pierre Bolzée 
Liége, Belgium 
Sir, 
Full honours to THE UNEsco COURIER 
for its focus on racism. This is a vital 
problem which we must solve if this ever 
shrinking world is to live peacefully. Ra- 
cisin is practised by many member states 
of the U.N. even though they openly deny

## [Page 33](078178engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

it. In an official document the Australian 
Government states that: “Australia does not 
approve of racial discrimination policies 
and no such policy exists in Australia.” 
But the main cause for Asian distrust for 
Australia is the controversial “White Aus- 
tralia Policy.” This is racism and colour 
prejudice. To expand as she wishes Aus- 
tralia must have migrants to boost her 
natural increase of population, but the mi- 
grants are chosen people. At the moment 
thirty one different nationalities live 
throughout this vast continent but they are 
all from European countries. All the sin- 
cerity of Australia’s efforts through the 
Colombo Plan and other policies to further 
the advancement of less fortunate countries 
in Asia is lost by this definite taint of 
racism. 
This policy of racism has been criticized 
by many visiting Asian leaders; it has been 
regretted by many Asian students coming 
to Australia under the Colombo Plan. The 
greatest thing Australia could do to raise 
her prestige in Asia would be the abolition 
of the “White Australia Policy.” At the 
moment it is the greatest threat to her 
economic well being and future standing in 
Asian eyes. 
R. Robertson 
Launceston, Tasmania, Australia 
Sir, 
My heartiest congratulations on the very 
fine special issue devoted to the question 
of racism, 
Bernard Lacache 
Chairman, International League 
Against Racism and anti-Semitism 
Paris, France 
Sir, 
I read each of your issues, with the great- 
est interest. I should particularly like to 
congratulate you on the magnificent issue 
devoted to Racism, 
Jacques Lazaras 
Congres Juif Mondial 
Algiers 
Sir, 
I always read THE UNEsco COURIER 
attentively and appreciatively. But I do 
not always agree with the form of its 
themes for I notice that it carefully glosses 
over anything that could go against the 
ultra-nationalism of colour; it does not 
hesitate, following the example of the Uni- 
ted Nations, to accuse the white peoples, 
the same people that the newly indepen- 
dent nations nevertheless accept as a source 
of funds, 
Why do you ignore the black Racism 
which in the Congo provoked the hunting 
of white people and horrors recalling the 
time of Hitler and of Budapest? 
Why dismiss (in a few lines) the Arab- 
Israel conflict as being of political origin 
when in fact the Jews have been for cen- 
turies past the detested pariahs of the 
Arab nations? 
Why pass over in silence the Rucism of 
the Arabs of Maghreb who refuse the Eu- 
ropeans of Algeria—Algerians for more 
than a century past on lands that Arab 
laziness had transformed into desert—the 
right to live in freedom? 
Or again why say nothing about the 
positive anti-racist achievements of the 
white peoples, called colonizers, who for 
half a century have striven to create links 
between Negroes and white men, bonds of 
friendship which begin on the benches of 
the same school or in the tent of the bush 
doctor, 
We should not forget that while it was 
only last year that the Americans decided 
to suppress this stupid racial discrimination, 
in France Negroes have never been relegat- 
ed to special schools of forced to use “Ne- 
groes only” restaurants and buses. 
L. Boyer 
Saint-Etienne, France 
Sir, 
It is a sad commentary on our times—the 
so-called era of great civilization—that 
mankind still suffers from an abscess caus- 
ed by the blind obstinacy of those who 
wish to relegate others to the status of 
an inferior race, even though they are en- 
dowed with equal faculties. It would be 
both naive and unjust to complacently con- 
tinue to perpetuate this myth principally 
on the basis of race and the colour of a 
person's skin. This attitude entirely with- 
out foundation because it is ignores any 
question of human values, plumbs the very 
depths of human stupidity, revealing not a 
state of superiority at all, but one of moral 
deficiency. None of the reasons invoked by 
the supporters of this harmful ideology can 
justify their action, which in any case can 
only lead to the humiliation of others. 
M. Bensahli 
Algeria 
Sir, 
Congratulations on the Racism issue. 
It is objective, magnificent and of burning 
topical interest. We were all the more 
appreciative of this number because we 
have always tried to bring our pupils into 
contact with children of all nations, within 
the limits of our regretfully small resources. 
We also welcomed this issue because follow- 
ing publication of the article about Bouba 
and Jacques (See THE UNESCO COURIER, 
September 1960 —an exchange of letters 
between the children of Costes-Gozon in 
France and those of Pitoa in the Came- 
roons) we received an anonymous letter 
from someone who showed scant enthu- 
siam for our activities. This was perhaps 
the best proof that we have not worked in 
vain, 
P. Cabanes 
Costes-Gozon, France 
Sir, 
As a Frenchman from Morocco 1 should 
like to tell you what I think of your issue 
on Racism. On page 5 you publish a photo 
(Massacre at Sharpeville) showing about 
15 corpses on the ground. However, 
having gone through the 1918-14 war, 1 
am not upset by a few drops of blood and 
The Unesco Courler, — January 1961 
Letters to the Editor 
s0 I can judge things objectively. The 
Afrihaaners and their racism certainly bear 
some responsibility for these corpses. But 
you are lacking in objectivity, Alongside 
you should have published several photos 
of the former Belgian Congo. 
In support of your thesis you evole the 
terrible fate of the Jews during the Second 
World War. But the Jews were not the 
only victims of the Nazis. This terrible 
persecution was chiefly a racial one, but 
the truth is certainly less clearly apparent. 
Collective massacres are one of the out- 
comes of war. In the 17th Century the 
Germanic populations were decimated by 
the Thirty Years War, the Palatinate razed 
by the army of Turenne; in the 19th Cen- 
tury, there was the brutal behaviour of the 
Napoleonic armies, the British prison ships, 
the fate of Dupont's troops in the Balearic 
Isles. That is war, and it is war that must 
be destroyed. 
The Jews are an admirable people. For 
over 2,000 years they have remained Jew- 
ish and will do so for many years to 
come. But they are an impossible people 
to assimilate. It is quite normal for Jewish 
people, refugees in France, to remain’ Jew- 
ish. But in that case they should not 
concern themselves with the affairs of the 
country that has harboured them. This is 
the chief grievance against them. 
Colonialism can claim 1o have done many 
positive things. -You must already have 
gathered that I am a colonialist—] have 
been one for the past 30 years. Having 
been a teacher for 3! years, } have had 
coloured children in my class. I have liked 
them and | have done what I could for 
them. 
M. Malhomme 
Marrakech, Morocco 
Sir, 
Certain areas like those of the industrial 
north of France are ripe for the introduction 
of segregation. The victim: the North 
African. The reason: his own fault. The 
solution: his conversion from the Islamic to 
the Catholic faith. 
Let me explain. In 1940 I was horrified 
by Racism. Like all French people 1 was 
well disposed towards coloured people and 
was a free thinker besides. However 
through my experiences with Arab or Ka- 
byle workers and shopheepers, 1 have de- 
cided that it is best to keep clear of them, 
to lock one's door against them, .to heep 
one's dealings with them on a polite but 
restricted basis and to avoid either hiring 
them or working with them. 
What have we found out through observ- 
ing and living with these people whom we 
should have liked to treat as fellow coun- 
trymen and brothers? They are conceited 
people, vain, unstdble, inefficient, lazy, sy- 
philitic, tubercular, argumentative, dishon- 
est, weak and vindictive. Not al} of them 
are as I have described and they do not 
all suffer from a combination of these 
faults, but each of them carries within him 
at least one of these vices, always ready to 
spring to the surface. 
M. Bourdon 
Comines, France 
33

## [Page 34](078178engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

rom the Unesco Ne 
  
SPECIAL UNESCO STAMPS 
T0 BE ISSUED IN FRANCE 
w 
Q 
wl 
Qa 
- 
el 
w 
= 
  
Three postage stamps valid only on 
mail sent from Unesco House are 
being Issued by the French Post 
Office on January 21 in denomina- 
tions of NF 0.20, NF 0.25 and 
NF 0.50. On January 21 and 22 a 
temporary post office will be open- 
ed in Unesco House to frank let- 
ters and first day covers which are 
being brought out In connexion 
with the issue of these special 
stamps. The design of the stamp 
(above) with its two antique heads 
lilustrates Unesco’s Major Project 
on Mutual Appreciation of Oriental 
and Occidental Cultural Values. The 
occasion will also be marked by a 
philatelic exhibition in Unesco 
House. All these philatelic items can 
be purchased from Unesco’s Phila- 
telic Service which also stocks all 
United Nations stamps currently on 
sale. Information on items avail 
able, their price and mode of 
payment can be obtained by writing 
to the Philatelic Service, Place de 
Fontenoy, Paris-7°     
C ALLING THE FISH ROLL: Every 
kind and shape of fish found in Mediter- 
ranean waters, from the tasty sole to the 
sea horse, are listed in a catalogue recently 
issued by the U.N. Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAQ). The aim is to stan- 
dardize the names of fish so that the 12 
countries in the FAO's General Fisheries 
Council of the Mediterranean can compare 
fishery statistics. The book lists 18 kinds 
of rays from “guitar fish” to “devil fish” 
and 28 types of shark, from “Darkie Char- 
lie” to the six-gilled shark. 
Em BLIND ESPERANTISTS: An inter- 
national Esperantists meeting of an 
unusual kind was held recently in Brus- 
sels: the 75 participants. teachers, stu- 
dents, musicians, masseurs and others— 
were all blind. They came from Fin- 
land, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, 
Norway, the United Kingdom and 
Yugoslavia. 
34 
  
  
  
  
   
KE ROST-PROOF SEEDS: Scientists 
at the Timiriaziev Agricultural Academy in 
the Soviet Union have discovered how to 
make seeds “frost-proof”. They treat 
them with a solution of mineral and orga- 
nic fertilizer which solidifies and forms a 
porous “envelope” around each grain. 
With this protection, which allows air and 
water to penetrate, the seeds can be sown 
in autumn instead of in spring, and during 
the first warm days they start to germinate 
and grow very quickly. Crops of cabba- 
ges, onions and other vegetables grown 
from seeds treated in this way showed 30 
to 50 per cent increases. 
HE WMO’S 10TH BIRTHDAY: The 
World Meteorological Organization 
(WMO), which last year celebrated the 
10th anniversary of its establishment as 
an agency of the United Nations, has 
increased its membership during that 
time from 30 to 100 countries. Its 
tradition of international collaboration 
in the field of meteorology, however, 
dates back to 1878 when the Interna- 
tional Meteorological Organization was 
set up as a non-governmental body. 
Germany's SCHOOL- FORESTS : 
Hundreds of “school forests” have been 
created in the Federal Republic of Ger- 
many to teach children how trees grow 
and how they should be cared for. About 
350 such forests now exist in the Rhine- 
land and Northern Westphalia, many of 
them being planted by schoolchildren under 
the guidance of teachers or forest wardens, 
and often with seedlings grown in school 
nurseries. Sites chosen for tree-planting 
are bare slopes badly in need of protec- 
tion from erosion. In other regions of Ger- 
many, sections of existing forests are main- 
tained by schoolchildren. 
HR ORIENT ON THE SCREEN: New 
countries and old civilizations—whole 
new regions of thought, feeling and 
action—are today being revealed to the 
rest of the world by the cinema which 
explores these new worlds and publi- 
shes its findings in vivid pictures and 
sounds. To act as a guide to Asia 
through the cinema screen, a survey of 
films produced in the countries of the 
Orient has been made by the British 
Film Institute at the request of UNESCO 
as a contribution to its Major Project 
on the Mutual Appreciation of Eastern 
and Western Cultural Values. Entitled 
“Orient: A Survey of Films Produced 
in Countries of Arab and Asian Cul- 
ture”, it deals both with feature and 
documentary and short films. 
A NEW “TALKING BOOK” machine 
for blind people which gives 20 hours 
playing time has been developed. A tape 
recorder of simple design, it uses half-inch 
tape carrying 18 tracks on it. [Each track 
  1 
takes 70 minutes to play and when it has 
finished instructions are given to the listen- 
er telling him how to move on to the next 
track. Because of its operational simpli- 
city, the machine will be particularly valu- 
able to elderly blind people who usually 
find the gadgets of the average tape rec- 
order too intricate. 
HM SCIENCE AND THE HUMAN 
BRAIN: Today scientists are beginning 
to build up a coherent picture of brain 
function in terms of the physical and 
chemical processes that underly the co- 
operative actions of the ten thousand 
million nerve-cells in the human brain. 
They are using information from ani- 
mal experiments, clinical problems and 
dramatic developments in physics, che- 
mistry and mathematics. But the fan- 
tastic complexity of these problems 
calls for action by a flexible, world- 
wide network of scientific intercom- 
munication and co-operation. To meet 
this need an International Brain Re- 
search organization, whose aim is to 
co-ordinate results from scientific 
studies of the brain and to facilitate 
training and research, was recently 
formed in Paris at a meeting convened 
on behalf of UNEsco by the Council of 
International Organizations of the Medi- 
cal Sciences. 
W arcapoc WEATHER SHIPS : 
Nine people were rescued from the sea 
during 1959 by weather ships stationed in 
the North Atlantic, according to a recent 
report of the International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO), an agency of the 
United Nations. The ships also responded 
to 47 appeals for medical assistance, 
received 10 distress signals from aircraft 
and 574 from ships at sea. 
ALEXANDRE LEVENTIS 
THE UNESCO COURIER regrets 
to announce the death, at 56, 
of Mr Alexandre Leventis, 
Assistant Editor. Born in 
France in 1904, Mr Leventis 
came to UNESCO in 1951 after 
many years of experience in 
magazine editing and produc- 
tion in France. For eight years 
he was Associate Editor, in 
charge of the French edition 
of THE UNEScO COURIER. He 
was named Assistant Editor 
for all language editions in 
1959. His death represents a 
deep loss to the magazine and 
to UNESCO itself.     Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
LA
NG
, 
Pa
ri
s.
 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E

## [Page 35](078178engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Study Abroad 
Etudes a I’étranger 
Estudios | 
  
en el extranjero | 
      
 
   
 
     
    
   
  
 
  
 
   
   
  
countries other than their own, 
Just issued: 
Vol. XII, 1961 
 
Last year some 200,000 students enrolled for higher education In 
This fact alone shows the usefulness 
of this most popular Unesco handbook. Volume XII, just published, 
brings you the latest information on 100,000 fellowships offered by 
governments, universities, foundations and other institutions in 
over 100 countries and territories. A perfected system of classl- 
fication will help you to find rapidly all the details: who is entitled 
to a scholarship, course of study, amount of award, and where 
R Po Pe, , 
a 20, el Mogia, hse? 
Nuc J} ling, 1, ol olf, Meraturn his 
diques £loria de Amérk 
m Droft, » Orie roy el or tong cial Universi 
EaiCy. @ France Hingy Moly a) logy gy suntemala 
de Nice on , (8. Flees Par den optar ae 
(32) a; Attribué te, te lq) ©)" Yow Lng Mel 00x coniturion nacion 
el. DE ROYAU. déjin  w ores Eptitudes perso. pals. Se dara prefer 
. Roysumont, pur sciences #, COiEmicos y los estudien peril i vod 
ne-et-Oise, France. correspo “by, ad, * ID pt que se relacionadas con kh 
ilisation franguise; Le sujet “ey; -« a 4, idutos, v - cultura lispanica. 
mnationales et sémi- de 1958 . m, Vajpattie io hayan & Cubre gastos del viay 
1 individuels, elranger be hd (a) ale to 2njero. desde Nueva Orledns 
sngaise 8) pro- de 26 egy, x £55,(c) q Brgy be 2 1 sesion de verano (¥ 
: q et net ope. 4 (0) 1% (a) rola ugosto). 
¥ de recherche et i ln chatiluy, the," the ay 1opUb £140 £7 4 20. 
: ¥ Session of dy 9. Yay The “eps & 5090, ~ Secretario de la Esc 
wlturel de Royau- ls ag ot, er Mar, 2, iversidad de San 1 
{ ressortissants de mW Attaché ad Lo ur Sy 
fesseurs de littéra- sade de UN, ; Who, 
elaliston dos Or 5 i andidat ng fey Erg, go 
SES ES ESS ZFS sm Sev, , kp Ty 
No EYE & [2 . 
SF Ss EF XS ny Ong - domo’ an OF 5, 
Vg Vip Soe 0h weg ug ol Wily 
-~ . -«. Fa has Ine neti 
H " ~ < 
$§235 £3¢. 
§f7¢ 
IEE 
v vi) 
“vo      
    
 
2 ungan et oucnilierato o un grado 
ulvalente, conferido por una escuela 
ofesional, A su regreso ») Feuador, 
att) ARF UCUCA UA Chee | 
JADOR, Minis. cunlquier pas, que re 
Suite, Feuador. clones requeridas pan 
4 universitarios. 
a. 4 Cubre dnicamente 
is § matriculs. 
SF losecuntorianos XT 1 sido scadémico. 
# No determinado, 
Mm Universidad Central 
Departamento de Ri 
rales, Quito. 
to apply. An invaluable manual for anyone contemplating study In 
: a foreign country. An indispensable reference book for ali libraries, 
universities and information centres. A useful instrument in pro- 
moting educational contacts throughout the world. 
$3.00 15/- (stg.) 10,50 NF 
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write 
direct to the National Distributor 
in your country. (See list below} 
names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) 
Payment is made in the national 
currency ; rates quoted are for an 
annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. — Panuzai, Press 
Department, Royal Afghan Ministry of 
Education, Kabul, 
AUSTRALIA, — Melbourne University 
Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, 
C. 1, Victoria. (A. 15/2), 
AUSTRIA. — Verlag Georg Fromme 
& Co, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V (Sch. 
v-) 
BELGIUM. — For The Unesco Courier: 
Louis de Lannoy, 22, Place De Brouckére, 
Brussels, C.C.P. 338.000. (fr. b. 100.) 
Other publications: Office de Publicité, 
16, rue Marcq, Bruxelles, C.C.P. 285.98; 
N.V. Standaard-Boekhandel!, Belgielei 151, 
Antwerp. 
CANADA. — Queen's Printer, Ottawa 
Ont. ($ 3.00). 
CEYLON. — The Associated Newspapers 
of Ceylon Ltd, Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Co- 
lombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
CHINA. — World Book Co, Ltd, 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section |, Taipeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa), 
CUBA, — Libreria Economica, Pte Zayas 
505-7 ,Apartado 113, Havana. 
CZECHOSLOYAKIA, — Artia Ltd, 30 
Ye Smeckich, Prague 2. 
DENMARK. — Ejnar Munksgaard Ltd, 
6 Norregade, Copenhagen K. (D.kr. 12). 
ETHIOPIA. — International Press Agen- 
cy, P.O. Box 120, Addis Ababa. 
FINLAND, — Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (F.mk. 540). 
FRANCE. — Unesco Bookshop, Place de 
Fontenoy, Paris, 7°, C.C.P. (2598-48 
{7 NF.). 
GERMANY. — R. Oldenbourg K.G,, 
Unesco-Vertrieb fur Deutschland, Rosen- 
heimerstrasse 145, Munich 8. (DM. 8). 
GREAT BRITAIN, — See United Kingdom. 
GREECE. — Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, 
rue du Stade, Athens. 
HONG-KONG. — Swindon Book Co., 25, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. 
HUNGARY. — Kultura, P.O, Box 
Budapest, 62. 
INDIA. — Orient Longmans Private Ltd. 
Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay |; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; Gunfoundry Road, Hyde- 
rabad, 1; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. 
Box 386, New Delhi, 1; Sub-Depots: 
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 Park 
Street Calcutta 16, Scindia House, 
New Delhi; Rajkamal Prakashan Private 
Ltd., Himalaya House, Hornby Road. 
Bombay |. (Rs. 6.70). 
INDONESIA. — Bappit Pusat *'Permata”™, 
Djalan Nusantara 22, Dijakarta 
IRAQ. — Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
IRELAND. — The National Press, 2, Wel- 
lington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (10/-) 
ISRAEL. — Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 
15, Allenby Road and 48, Nahlat Benja- 
min Street, Tel-Aviv (15 4.7) 
JAMAICA. — Sangster's Book Room, 91 
Harbour Street, Kingston. } 
Knox Educational Services, Spaldings.(10/-} 
JAPAN. — Maruzen Co. Ltd, 6 Tori- 
Nichome, Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 
Tokyo Central, Tokyo. (Yen 500). 
149, 
JORDAN. =~ Joseph L. Bahous & Co, 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road, P.O.B. 66, 
Amman. 
KOREA. — Korean National Commission 
for Unesco, P.O, Box Central 64, Seoul. 
LIBER|A, — |. Momolu Kamara, 69, Front 
and Gurley Streets, Monrovia, 
LUXEMBOURG. — Librairie Paul Bruck, 
33, Grand-Rue, Luxembourg. 
MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE. ~ Federal Publications 
Ltd., Times House, River Valley Rd. 
Singapore. 
MALTA. — Sapienza's Library, 26 Kings. 
way, Valetta. (10/-} 
MAURITIUS, — Nalanda Company Ltd. 
30, Bourbon Street, Port-Lous, 
MONACO. — British Library, 30 Bld des 
Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF) 
NETHERLANDS. — N.Y. Martinus Nij- 
hoff, Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague. (fl 6) 
NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. — 
G.C.T. Van Dorp & C* (Ned Ant) N.V. 
Willemstad, Curacao. 
NEW ZEALAND, — Unesco Publications 
Centre, 100 Hackthorne Road, Christ- 
church, (10/-}. 
NIGERIA. — C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 
174, Lagos. (10/-) 
NORWAY. — AS. Bokhjornet, Lille Gren- 
sen, 7, Oslo, (N. kr. 10) 
PAKISTAN. — The West-Pak Publishing 
Co, Ltd., Unesco Publications House, 
P.O. Box 374, 56-N Gulberg Industrial 
Colony, Lahore. 
PANAMA. — Cultural Panamena, Avenida 
7a, No. TI-49, Apartado de Correos 2018, 
Panama, D.F, 
PHILIPPINES. — Philippine Education Co. 
Inc., 1104 Casullejos, Quiapo, P.O. Box 
620, Manila. 
POLAND. = "“"RUCH" ul, Wilora Nr, 46, 
Warsaw, 10 (ZI. 50.) 
PORTUGAL, =— Das 
Livraria Portugal, Rua 
Lisbon, 
SOUTH AFRICA. — Van Schaik's Books 
store, Librl Building, Church Street, P.O, 
Box 724, Pretor... (10/-) 
SWEDEN, For The Unesco Courier; Sven- 
ska Unescoridet, Yasagatan | 5-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Xr. 7.50): other publications 
A/B C.E. Fritzes, Kungl. Hovbokhandel, 
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm, 
SWITZERLAND. — Europa Verlag, § 
Rémistrasse, Zurich. 
Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva, C.C.P, 
1.236. 
“Courier” only: Georges Losmaz, I, rue 
des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva, C.C.P, 
1-48) 1), (Fr. S. B). 
THAILAND. — Sukiapan Panit, Mansion 
9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok, 
TURKEY. — Librairie Hachette, 469 Isti 
kial Caddesi, Beyoglu, lstanbul. 
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA. — Van 
Schaik's Bookstore, Libri Building, Church® 
Street, Pretoria {(10/-). 
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). — 
La Renaissance d’Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, 
Cairo. 
UNITED KINGDOM, — H.M, Stationery 
Office, P.C. Box 569, London, S.E.L.(10/.}. 
UNITED STATES. — Unesco Publications 
Center, 80} Third Avenue, New York, 
22,N.Y.($ 3.00.) and (except periodicals): 
Columbia University Press, 2960 Broad. 
way, New York, 27, N.Y. 
U.S.S.R. — Mezhdunaredna 
Moscow. G-200. 
YUGOSLAVIA, — Jugoslovensks Knjiga, 
Terazye 27/11. Belgrade. 
& Andrada Lda, 
do Carmo 70, 
Kniga,

## [Page 36](078178engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

    
   
     
     
R=. ". CEE EER FET TT . RR tr LA : py ’ WEI TE ETAT NEY I _- SE AY 5 : aay \ a 7 x -— “RR FE FE TA FLU A TE =H Wl y E i dn Tra, 
’ py . 5 v tre - - Fy A Ad 
   
   
2.0 
AW 
od =u. 0, 
A xT 
ME
     
2K Te. 
- a TRA pe ~ do) 2 
TET RL 
Lar 
EE 
Lm SE 7 RV NWT 
- AT i Ad Vo 
  
Tat rR
SNL =r 
: _—— 
_—— 
aa LH )) * \\\ 
Il ~ 1 Ae NPP. 
LANA, 
   
IVA Ses 
YNZ X%: 
AL ’” 
Hrs LW 
RANT. a 
Sar Q   
M
A
L
S
 
 
LA
 
       
      
    
 
    
  
      
  
. — . » gid ROR 3 Sy . 
EE BL 2 NAN BREE A S25 
oy re, od A RASA ARAN ATR III 
A.  - . Vv) a 
SRR SrroaS to an atomic energy exhibition in Paris listen Ba RRR ying intensity of clicks given off by a Geiger counter as it Sr 
e
r
 i
e
 
passes over a special table composed of different kinds of metals a With the world changing at a bewilderingly rapid pace a new approach to theory and practice in education for adults ha become a necessity in almost every field of life, from house- AR keeping to atomic physics. The famous anthropologist, Margaret : Se Mead, takes up this important question in the article on page 4. Poa: 
: ANN : . rE 
; Va 3 a b ned 
A NE .y Py J 
: 
en mn . Ad on) ., 3 a RE pd a 2d 
3 x \ a A . Rn a 2 A x OR 3 LEN y J . . shh | 
: a ; O RD Ay PA 2 
. : I E C ER SR 
    
-, [4 -. 
Y
o
 
rot
s! 
ar 
“ 
A
 
s
r
 
r
d
 
L
A
A
 
kr 
. 
r
o
r
s
 
o
o
 
"ed
 * 
So
va
si
n 
= Pe
 “2   
    
 