# [083935](083935engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](083935engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

-l - - 
» 
| A 
SEPTEMBER 1989 45 French francs    
        
\ 
1, GREAT EPICS 
2” HEROIC TALES 
a { OF MAN AND SUPERMAN 
$ THIS MONTH'S INTERVIEW 
\ 
J 
’ 
y 
/ £4, ss CARRIERE 
 

## [Page 2](083935engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

4 
encounters    
as 
hd 
   
       
    
  
a 4 3 ry 
3 ¥ 4 Pub - 
: n Rn i 
NT ge A . . 1} - 
a ot ov > CF Yani a 
. v : . - - 3 
) A = : w ou 
) am a «. 
Nr “A oy &- ¥ 22 Fa 7} \ oF ECS, he Th gy yy 
’ SE : Var WH 
  
      
i
d
 
 

## [Page 3](083935engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
4 
Interview with 
Jean-Claude Carriere 
The Mahabharata, 
the Great History of Mankind 
  
Cover: Dobrynia Nikitich, a legendary hero of 
Russian folk epics, fights the dragon. This 
miniature by P. Parilov appeared in a collection 
of epics published in Moscow in 1938. 
Back cover: Narada at the court of the demon 
king Ravana. An 18th-century illustration of ar 
episode from the Ramayana, the great Sanskrit 
epic poem of India which recounts the heroic 
deeds of prince Rama. The poem is thought to 
have been composed by Valmiki around the 
beginning of the Christian era. 
GREAT EPICS 
HEROIC TALES OF MAN AND SUPERMAN 
THE POET'S TALE 
by Mabmoud Hussein 12 
GILGAMESH, 
THE KING WHO DID NOT WISH TO DIE 
by Jean Bottéro 18 
AENEAS, ROME'S MAN OF DESTINY 
  
by Jean-Paul Brisson 23 
THE EPIC OF THE KINGS 
by Nabal Tadjadod 29 
JLYA THE INVINCIBLE 
by Hélene YvertJalu 32 
THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE MONGOLS 
by Shagdaryn Bira 36 
THE MAHAVAMSA, SRI LANKA'S NON-STOP EPIC 
by Ananda WP. Gurugé 41 
SHAKA ZULU, A LIVING LEGEND 
by Kalame Iyamuse Bosco 44 
KNIGHTS OF THE FAR WEST 
by Gary N. Granville 49 
SCIENCE 
AND SOCIETY 
MAPPING 
THE HUMAN GENOME 
by Jacques Richardson 
The Editors wish to thank 
Ms. Nahal Tadjadod for her 
help in the preparation of 
this issue. 

## [Page 4](083935engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

  
The French author Jean-Claude Carriere is an internationally known dramatist and screenwriter 
who has produced over fifty screenplays, notably for Luis Bufiuel and Andrzej Wajda. Some years 
ago he adapted for the stage the great Indian epic the Mahabharata, Here he talks about this 
remarkable project which took over a decade to complete. 
Jean-Claude Carriere 
 


### 83924: The Mahabharata, the great history of mankind: interview (with) Jean-Claude Carrière

The Mahabharata, the Great History of Mankind 
How do you set about making a work like the Mahabharata 
accessible to a European or an American? 
Over the past two or three centuries the West has suc- 
ceeded in bringing large numbers of Japanese, Africans, 
Patagonians to a sympathetic understanding of Shakespeare, 
Mozart and Picasso. There is no reason why the reverse 
should not be possible, that Westerners in turn should not 
become attuned to the Shakespeares, the Mozarts and the 
Picassos of other cultures. There are, however, a number 
of barriers between cultures which are particularly difficult 
to surmount because they are invisible. 
Take Europe for example. People are still immured 
within a cultural fortress. For years other cultures have been 
kept at bay. It wasn’t until the beginning of the twentieth 
century that some avant-garde artists began to break down 
these walls. 
Before then, from the eighteenth century onwards, there 
had been a handful of solitary pioneers who had set out in 
“search of other worlds. It is astonishing to think that the 
Bhagavadgita, the most famous text in all the East, was not 
translated into English and French until the end of the 
eighteenth century, just a few years before the French 
Revolution... 
Internal resistance, especially religious resistance, was 
fierce. In the fifteenth century, the monk Luis de Leon was 
imprisoned for five years for translating The Song of Solomon 
into Spanish, despite the fact that it was a part of the Bible, 
Bringing into Europe texts foreign to Christian culture was 
an act of heroism which could be undertaken only by people 
of exceptional stature. 
As for the Mahabharata, it remained unknown in Europe 
until the end of the nineteenth century. To translate the 
Mahabharata was, it should be noted, a very considerable 
undertaking. The epic is fifteen times as long as the Bible. 
The poor fellow who embarked on the first French trans- 
lation worked at the task for twenty-five years, on a sub- 
scription basis. At first he had 200 subscribers, but their 
number was gradually diminished by death. Nevertheless, 
he continued with his work, alone and without reward, 
finally dying at his task. Someone else took up the burden, 
but he too died. The epic has never been completely trans- 
lated into French. The only complete translation in a non- 
Indian language is an English translation made by Indians 
and completed in about 1900. In the 1930s, some Ameri- 
cans in Chicago embarked upon a new translation, but were 
obliged to abandon it uncompleted. 
Amazingly, until 1985, the general public in Europe still 
knew nothing of the Mahabharata. 
1985 was the year of the first theatrical performance, direct- 
ed by Peter Brook, of your adaptation of the epic. 
Yes. The play, The Mahabharata, was performed that 
year at the Avignon festival for the first time. Lasting nine 
hours, it was performed either in sections on three differ- 
ent evenings, or, occasionally, which the actors preferred, 
in a single performance lasting all day or all night. The com- 
pany consisted of twenty-five actors and included sixteen 
different nationalities. 
For three years, the show, in French or in English, was 
performed to packed and appreciative houses all over the 
world. We soon realized that, in addition to the charm of 
the story, Peter Brook’s inspired directing and the talent 
of the actors, some profound element in this tale from afar 
touched a chord in a totally unprepared Western public in 
a direct and lasting manner. 
Was it the unmistakable sense of impending doom hang- 
ing over the world? Was it the unwavering search for the 
true meaning of doing what was right? Was it the subtle, 
- sometimes savage, game of dice with destiny? Was it, 
perhaps, that comic-pathetic vision of characters who for- 
get their divine origin to face up to what the Greeks of the 
same epoch called “problemata”—those questions and con- 
flicts of daily life in the resolution of which myth gives way 
to tragedy? 
INTERVIEW

## [Page 5](083935engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 83924: The Mahabharata, the great history of mankind: interview (with) Jean-Claude Carrière

 

## [Page 6](083935engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 83924: The Mahabharata, the great history of mankind: interview (with) Jean-Claude Carrière

In Sanskrit Maha means “great”, or “total”. Bharata is, 
first, the name of 2 legendary sage, second, the name of a 
family or clan. Thus the title of the epic can be understood 
as “Great Epic of the Bharata Dynasty”. But Bharata can 
also, by extension, mean “Hindu”, or, more generally, 
“Man”. Thus the story is no more and no less than “The 
Great History of Mankind”. 
In fact; the central narrative of this “great epic of the 
world” concerns the long, ferocious struggle between two 
related families, the five Pandava brothers, and the Kauravas, 
  
    
The arrival of Queen 
Gandbari. This photo and 
those on pages 7 to 9 show 
scenes from the stage 
version of the 
Mahabharata (Paris, 1985) 
adapted by Jean-Claude 
Carriere and directed by 
Peter Brook. 
Opposize page, the five 
Pandava brothers. 
who number one hundred. This family quarrel, which arises 
and intensifies regarding dominion over the world, cul- 
minates in a titanic battle in which the fate of the entire 
world is at stake. 
How did you summon up the courage to take on such an 
immense task? Did you start by reading the text and, if so, 
did you read it in English or in Sanskrit? 
It all came about through a mixture of accident and 
design. The accident was a chance meeting with an expert in 
Sanskrit, Philippe Lavastine, who today is nearly eighty years 
old. He invited Peter Brook and me to his home one evening 
and began to talk about the Mahabharata in his own genial, 
lively manner. 
We knew virtually nothing about the subject, our 
knowledge being limited to a reading of the Bhagavadgita 
made all the more superficial in that we had read it as an 
individual document apart from the Mahabharata, of which 
it is fully a part. As we sat facing Lavastine, Peter asked him: 
“Who is this Arjuna who is mentioned in the Bhagavadgita, 
and why does he go to pieces before Krishna talks to him?” 
“I shall have to tell you about Arjuna,” Lavastine replied, 
“but telling you about Arjuna, well...” It took him several 
months. 
Once or twice a week we would spend a marvellous 
evening with Lavastine during which he would recount the 
epic to us. Later, I went back to see him on my own and 
began taking notes. Like the Greek bards of old, Lavastine 
was an exceptionally gifted storyteller. He spoke, he gestic- 
ulated, he laughed, he became the poem. 
After four or five months, I was beginning to have a 
picture of the work as a whole and to grasp its extraordi- 
nary complexity, its multiple levels of meaning, in which 
respect it can only be compared to the works of Shakespeare. 
It ranges from the heights of mystic speculation to irresisuble 
farce. The whole gamut of human emotion and thought is 
there portrayed like a rich bouquet. 
The effort needed to enter into.the mysteries of the 
Mahabharata is commensurate with its complexity. Anyone 
approaching it by reading, without preparation, is likely to 
put it aside after the first twenty pages. We were lucky that 
we came to it not by reading but through the agency of a 
storyteller. 
Then came the time when you really had to get down to 
work... 
Within a year I had written a first draft play based on 
the Mahabharata, even before getting down to reading it. 
[ was well aware that this play would never be performed, 
but it enabled me, as it were, to harvest the results of my 
initial labours. I wanted to see if it was possible to make 
an adaptation for the theatre while keeping to the formula 
of the epic poem, that of a narration by a storyteller. It was 
still no more than a narrative not yet prepared for the

## [Page 7](083935engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 83924: The Mahabharata, the great history of mankind: interview (with) Jean-Claude Carrière

theatre, but at least it gave me a time scale and [ knew that 
the whole story of the Mahabharata could be contained 
within a performance time of between five and ten hours. 
From this point on, Peter and I knew that we wanted to 
“do” the Mahabharata. We had committed ourselves. 
The preparatory stage spread over a period of eleven 
years, from 1974 to 1985. We continued working on other 
things, for the theatre and the cinema, but for both of us 
the Mahabharata had become a travelling companion, 
whether we were together or apart. 
We began the “big read” in 1980. I had a photocopy 
of the French translation and Peter had one of the Indian 
version in English. Each of us started reading individually, 
but whenever we had a chance of seeing each other, we ex- 
changed views and shared our joys. 
It takes a year to read the Mahabharata in its entirety, 
but as we were doing other things at the same time, it took 
us somewhat longer. The epic took over our lives. We had 
constantly before us this huge white whale, this Moby Dick, 
this bright vision; and as we went along, we discovered ex- 
traordinary things that even Lavastine had not told us about. 
Then, in 1982, we said to ourselves: “Now is the time 
for us to do a joint read-through.” It took us six or seven 
months, reading together every day in company with Marie- 
Héléne Estienne who was collaborating with us. Compar- 
ing the two versions, French and English, we eliminated all 
the passages that we felt we could do without (about a third 
of the text) and we reread the remainder making a detailed 
comparison of the translations. Whenever a problem arose, 
we consulted an expert in Sanskrit and went back to the 
original text. 
By August 1982, we had completed our joint reading 
and we had a rough idea of what we wanted to include— 
not in theatrical terms, but in terms of content, We also 
knew, for example, that we would telescope the events of 
the three tourneys that figure in the Mahabharata into one. 
Similarly, where the epic recounts two episodes of exile in 
the forest, only one would feature in the play. The first ele- 
ments of the theatrical version were beginning to take shape. 
At this stage we felt well enough prepared to go to India. 
We knew the characters and we could discuss the work with 
the Indians on the basis of an almost equal level of back- 
ground knowledge. Starting in 1982, we made a series of 
enthralling trips to India to examine all the ways in which 
the Mahabharata is staged there—in the various dancing 
schools and among certain tribes, according to the traditional 
Teyyam, Kathakali and Yaksagana dance-drama forms. We 
spent a long time working with various troupes. What we 
were trying to assess was the presence of the epic in the life 
of India today and the precise level of energy required by 
each sequence. 
What exactly do you mean by that? 
India taught us, above all, that a certain dose of vitality, 
of necessary energy, has to be put into a show. Not too 
much, not too little, just the amount required so that it never 
becomes solemn or didactic but remains a lively, lived ex- 
perience. The great lesson we learned from India can be 
summed up in two words: “respectful familiarity”. 
In addition, we wanted to integrate into our vision all 
the images of India, from the maharajahs™ palaces to the 
shanty towns. I made one trip, accompanied by Peter and 
 

## [Page 8](083935engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 83924: The Mahabharata, the great history of mankind: interview (with) Jean-Claude Carrière

Chloe Obolensky, with the sole aim of visiting one cloth- 
seller after another, Strange as this may seem, the warp and 
weft, the very texture of a piece of cloth, can help an author 
to write more truly—or more concisely. 
During these trips, did you remain merely a spectator 
absorbing impressions? 
No, I also began writing. First, however, I made lists 
of words that I forbade myself to use. Words are never in- 
nocent. They exercise their own tyranny and a writer has 
to be véry aware of this when adapting a text from another 
culture. 
‘One has to beware of words which violate, which betray 
the text because they are too culturally loaded, because they 
exert their own exclusivity, because they erase certain ideas 
and images and conjure up others. I could not, for example, 
use such words as “knight”, “sword”, or “sin”, or, for more 
subtle reasons, “silhouette” or “unhorsed”. 
Take the word “unconscious”. If I had used this word 
I would have been perpetrating an imperceptible, but abso- 
lute, irreparable betrayal. In Hinduism and Buddhism there 
is a perfectly understood and defined meaning of “uncons- 
cious” which has not the remotest connection with the Freu- 
dian sense of the word, with its sexual connotations, as it 
is understood today in the West. In India it is known that 
a human being thinks without knowing that he is thinking 
and that his consciousness is more widely extended, in all 
directions, than his thought. 
This concept is rendered in Sanskrit by an expression 
which might be translated as something like “the secret 
movements of the Atman”, Atman meaning “soul”, “vital 
breath”, or “innermost essence”. Obviously one cannot put 
a phrase like that baldly in a play, any more than one can 
translate it by “unconscious”. I searched high and low for 
an equivalent, which I eventually found in the works of the 
great African writer Hampité Ba. 
Reading his novel Wangrin's Strange Destiny, I found 
two very simple words placed side by side: “deep” and 
“heart”, Juxtaposed, they seemed to me to form a magical 
phrase and I used it three or four times in the play. It goes 
very well, as when Krishna says to Bhishma: “Do you not 
feel it, in your deep heart...?”” Imagine how it would have 
come across if Krishna had said: “Do you not feel it, in your 
unconscious...?” 
Later, when reading La potiére jalouse (The Jealous Pot- 
ter’s Wife), by Claude Lévi-Strauss, I found the same image 
of the “deep heart” in a translation from an Amerindian 
text. Did he discover it directly, or did he get it, like me, 
from Hampiteé Ba? I was much moved to come across it and 
to ponder on the beauty of such a linguistic voyage. 
You had to eliminate certain words outright from your 
vocabulary. Were there other words that, on the contrary, 
you made greater use of? 
Yes, simple, accessible words which travel across 
Opposite page, Arjuna and the son 
of King Virata go to war. 
The princesses’ night of love. 
 

## [Page 9](083935engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

cultures without difficulty. Wide-ranging words like 
“blood”, which means the red liquid flowing in our veins, 
the link of kinship, or quality (we refer to a thoroughbred 
horse as a blood-horse); the word “heart”, which means the 
organ that circulates the blood, but also courage (as in the 
phrase “take heart”) or sincerity (as in heartfelt); the words 
“life” and “death”. All these are inoffensive, unaggressive 
words which have their place in texts which pass readily 
from one culture to another. 
While keeping the original names of the characters, I 
elected to eliminate most Sanskrit words and to find equiva- 
lents. However, I made a few exceptions. I kept the word 
“Dharma”, for instance, because it is central to the whole 
theme. After all, it was to “inscribe Dharma in the hearts 
of men” that Vyasa wrote his epic. The concept of Dhar- 
ma is of ancient Indian invention. Dharma is the law which 
governs the order of the world. It is also the secret, personal 
law of behaviour that each one of us carries within and 
which must be obeyed. The Dharma of each individual, if 
respected, is the guarantee of the cosmic order. If the Dhar- 
ma is protected, it in turn protects; but if it is destroyed, 
it destroys. 
This reciprocity between the singular and the multiple, 
between the particular and the general, is peculiar to and 
lies at the very heart of Indian thought, as expressed in the 
poem; a reciprocity which today, as in the past, evokes many 
echoes. 
a hE 
tm - i 
thin 
  
Was it your purpose, in choosing these key words, to mark 
out the space within which two cultures could sing in har- 
mony with each other, and the one within the other? 


### 83924: The Mahabharata, the great history of mankind: interview (with) Jean-Claude Carrière

Absolutely. I was marking out a territory. 
Would you say that the series of trips you made to India 
helped you to rediscover the truth of the Mahabharata 
because it was there that it was created? 
T'would say the “truths” of the work, or at least some 
of its truths. There is no “single” authentic interpretation 
of the Mahabharata. Ask 2 Hindu holy man from the south 
and a marxist professor from Calcutta about it and you will 
get different replies, both of them interesting. We do not 
claim, finally, to have given “the” truth of the work, simply 
one version among many—our version, in the West, in the 
1980s. 
Nor do I think that we should limit ourselves to com- 
mentaries on the work, interesting as they may be. As the 
French specialist on Indo-European mythologies Georges 
Dumeézil said: “...the essential thing is that it should be beau- 
tiful.” In our view, this vast epic, unfolding with the subtle 
majesty of a river of inexhaustible riches, defies all analysis, 
whether structural, thematic, historical or psychological. 
Doors are continually opening, which lead on to other 
doors. The Mahabharata cannot be held in the hollow of 
one’s hand. There are many ramifications. Sometimes seem- 
ingly contradictory, they succeed each wither and intertwine, 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 56

## [Page 10](083935engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

. 
      
ERE 
| Pl =a 
 
  
5

## [Page 11](083935engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

  
The Golden Knight 
(1903), by the Viennese 
painter Gustav Klimt 
(1862-1918). 
HETHER composed by unknown poets, transmitted orally and reshaped from 
century to century, or written by a single known author, epics relate to the birth of a culture, 
the early days of a nation or an empire, sometimes even to the creation of the universe. 
Their setting is often an age when human beings first began to exist outside the realm of 
the gods. Their heroes are denizens of a zone midway between the temporal and the eternal. 
These heroes may no longer be immortal, but they are superhuman. They no longer claim 
to be omnipotent; they are fallible, they are capable of hesitation, failure, love, hate and 
suffering. But they are endowed with exceptional qualities of determination, intelligence 
and energy with which to face their destiny, overcome adversity, and change the order of 
things. They are both explorers of the known world and founders of new cities. 
Because of these qualities, epic heroes have always been a central part of the shared experience 
of traditional societies, which they have furnished with psychological models, ethical, aesthetic 
and religious values, and personal examples for everyone to reflect on. Larger than life, freed 
from some of the constraints that weighed on their fellows, epic heroes have been a source 
of inspiration for many, capturing their imagination and lifting them above life’s tribulations 
and disappointments. 
In village, town and city, bards, poets, storytellers, strolling minstrels and griots sang of 
the exploits of these legendary heroes, relieving the monotony of everyday life, keeping 
alive the community spirit, and maintaining from generation to generation the continuity 
of the national memory. 
The epic has thus survived the vicissitudes of history. But in the last few decades many ] 
barriers to communication have disappeared from the world scene; the image has overtaken 
the written word; the storytellers of old have been replaced by television; the mass media 
have presented to a world audience individualistic heroes who seek a destiny in which the 
traditional and the sacred have no part. How has the epic reacted to this shock? 
As a factor of social cohesion in traditional communities, it slowly lost ground. On the 
other hand, it took on a new lease of life and reached a far wider audience as the theatre, 
the cinema and television seized on the opportunity to adapt versions of ancient legends 
and transpose their themes to different periods and settings. An increasingly wide public 
made the astonishing discovery that there were affinities between the world’s great epics. 
Spectators in places as far apart as Avignon or Caracas felt an immediate rapport with the 
heroes of Persian or Zulu epics and saw similarities between epic figures which transcended 
time and place. 
They thus discovered a truth which, although very ancient, is only now being fully revealed: 
that the dreams of our past are rooted in kinship, not antagonism, and that they express, 
in an infinite variety of contexts and languages, fears of the same mysteries and hopes for 
the same joys. 
11

## [Page 12](083935engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 


### 83925: The Poet's tale

The itinerant poet pays bis 
annual visit to an Egyptian 
village, with memorable 
consequences... 
The poet’s tale 
 
BY MAHMOUD HUSSEIN 
We were waiting impatiently for the return 
of summer, for the rains to stop, for school to 
liberate us from its constraints. Our families 
would then let us run around the village streets 
from daybreak until long after sunset, without 
supervision or rebuke—unless one of us got hurt 
in a fight or an accident. 
Summer also meant harvest time, and harvest 
time meant weddings. All those who lived off the 
land, from the smallest farmer to the wealthiest 
landowner, were waiting for the harvest to be 
gathered in and sold. This was virtually the only 
time of the year when the peasants had any 
money and could go to town and buy, each 
according to his means, a trousseau for the future 
bride. Only with her trousseau would a girl be 
ready to leave her father’s home for that of her 
husband. 
For the children—at a time when radio was 
rare and television unknown—weddings meant 
that troupes of musicians and actors would be 
coming to the village. Above all they meant the 
arrival of a visitor that we awaited with joyful 
anticipation for weeks in advance—the poet. 
The poet usually officiated at the “night of 
the henna”—the eve of the wedding, when the 
hands and feet of the bride were painted with hen- 
na. The musicians would play all the next after- 
noon during the presentation of the trousseau 
   
b
E
 
"N
E 
         m
e
 
An Egyptian village 
storyteller accompanies 
himself on a stringed 
instrument, the rabab.

## [Page 13](083935engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 83925: The Poet's tale

 
 
a
l
 a
 
pe 
I
E
 
 

## [Page 14](083935engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

14 
And then the theatre troupe would follow in the 
evening, associating the whole village with the 
joy of the families which had just been linked by 
marriage. 
We thrilled to every instant of the festivities. 
We loved the familiar music, unchanged since 
pharaonic times; and we split our sides laughing 
at the twists and turns of these comedies whose 
plots turned on conjugal infidelity and just 
punishment of the guilty. But for us the highlight 
of the entertainment, the moment of jubilation, 
was when the poet came on. 
We talked about him in the singular, as if 
there was only one poet, but actually he was 
never alone. He had one or more partners, who 
accompanied him on the viol or joined him in 
reciting some couplets in time to a rhythm. 


### 83925: The Poet's tale

The arrival of the: poet 
The poet usually turned up during the afternoon. 
A few local dignitaries and nearly all the children 
would be waiting for him by the roadside at the 
entrance to the village. The former would greet 
him with words of welcome, the latter with 
cheering and clapping. Then, amidst cries of joy, 
as if he were the future husband, he would be 
escorted to the home of the host family. 
There the poet was hidden from our sight. 
But news of him constantly filtered out from in- 
side the house via a few well-informed friends 
who were either members of the host family or 
the kind of pushy children who go everywhere 
even if they haven't been invited. 
The reports were intermittent or continuous, 
depending on the impudence of the inform- 
ers...right now the poet is drinking syrup or 
coffee...now he’s taking a nap to set him up for 
the long evening ahead...now he’s having his sup- 
per...he’s tuning his instruments. 
We seized upon this precious information 
and discussed its every detail. Every snippet was 
a sign that the long-awaited moment was drawing 
closer—or getting further away—when the poet 
would at long last take the stage. 
A moment increasingly rare and precious 
since more and more families were hesitating to 
invite the poet...and the minute that one family 
finally did so we felt an unspoken anxiety spread 
through the village and increase until the day of 
the poet’s arrival. 
We also noted that special arrangements were 
made in preparation for the evening entertain- 
ment; that meetings were held to try somehow 
or other to divide up the space reserved for the 
‘Ly 
| & “4 0 
> [Le 
nF | ah - 
» NP Ob i} 
7) : 
k 4 ” Jf 7 4 
Two episodes from the Hilaliyya. Above, one of the 
heroes of the epic, El Zeinati Khalifa (left). 
 
audience between the people of our village and 
guests from villages nearby; that the local police 
were ready for action; that many guests from the 
surrounding countryside, especially the young 
ones, were armed with clubs and obstinately re- 
fused to hand them over, in spite of the objec- 
tions of the village dignitaries and elders. 
Only gradually did we connect the tension 
which reigned among the adults, and the precau- 
tionary measures they took, with the later events 
which upset all their calculations and put paid to 
their plans to keep events under control. 
The performance took place in the village 
square, where a platform was set up for the poet 
and his troupe. Mats had been placed around the 
platform for the guests—with the exception of the

## [Page 15](083935engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 83925: The Poet's tale

The village of Takruna, 
near Zaghwan in Tunisia, 
the “Ifriquia® that features 
in the epic poem of the 
Banon Hilal.  
omdah and the dignitaries, for whom seats of 
honour were reserved, specially placed at points 
where their occupants could leave the square at 
the first sign of danger. 
The poet appeared on the platform shortly 
after the evening prayer, giving the guests time 
to make their way to the square after performing 
their religious duty. We children took our places 
long before, as soon as the lighting of the street 
lamps made the evening air shimmer magically. 
We crowded as tlose to the platform as we could, 
never giving a thought to what was causing so 
much concern to those around us. 
We greeted the poet with cries of joy, atten- 
tive to his slightest change of expression. Wé no- 
ticed the proud smiles which our warm welcome 
brought to his features; and we even caught the 
silent questioning glance which from time to time 
betrayed his feelings as he glanced round the 
square, as if to detect the places where danger 
might be lurking, 
Whoever he was, whatever his age, the poet 
always told the story of Abou Zeid El Hilali— 
even though there are many other popular heroes 
in the Arab and Egyptian repertoire, such as Seif 
Ibn Yazan, Zir Salem, and Ali El Zeibaq. But the 
epic of Abou Zeid El Hilali, the Hilaliyya, was 
invariably chosen by the poet. 
The Hilaliyya is the incident-packed epic 
poem of the Banou Hilal tribe, one of those 
which left the Arabian peninsula in the aftermath 
of the conquests sparked off by the successors of 15

## [Page 16](083935engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

16 
the Prophet, and moved north, east and west to 
build what would become the Muslim world. 
The poet (whichever one he was) never be- 
gan the story at the beginning, just as he never 
reached the end. We would leave the square 
without ever learning where the Hilalian advance 
ended. The poet (always) opened and closed his 
narrative somewhere in “Ifriquia”,* at the site 
of a city whose people were determined to hold 
out against the conquering tribe, whatever the 
cost. 
He related, in his own fashion, some of the 
episodes of the confrontation between the be- 
steged city and its assailants. The narrative was 
punctuated by musical interludes in which the 
heroes of the two sides spoke out in turn. Op- 
posing Abou Zeid was the chief of the surround- 
ed tribe, El Zeinati Khalifa. But there were 
countless other characters, and anyone listening 
to the tale for the first time had a hard time keep- 
ing up with it. 
Many romances blossomed between the girls 
of one camp and the warriors of the other, com- 
plicating the issues of a struggle in which the 
audience’s preferences gradually became 


### 83925: The Poet's tale

inextricably confused. The poet skilfully divid- 
ed his emotional flights between the two oppos- 
ing sides. Whenever he praised the courage of one 
side, he went on to recount a new episode which 
glorified the other. And when a Banou Hilal 
woman declared her love for a Banou Khalifa 
man, the poet immediately described the passion 
of a Banou Khalifa woman for a Banou Hilal 
man. 
The storm breaks 
The poet’s art lay in his capacity to hold his 
listeners’ rapt attention by channelling their sym- 
pathies first to one side, then to the other...by 
playing on their feelings of joy in victory and sad- 
ness in defeat, by striking a balance between the 
tenderness of the love scenes and the violence of 
the battle scenes, between the wisdom of the 
elders and the audacity of the young. 
But this skilled game of checks and balances 
could not prevent the audience from splitting 
sooner or later into two camps, one taking the 
part of the Banou Hilal, the other that of the 
Banou Khalifa. Moreover, the supporters of each 
side were always virtually equal in number, 
heaven knows why. It was as if they were mys- 
teriously reflecting the equilibrium sought by the 
poet. 
However, .from that moment, the tensions 
which permeated the story began to spread 
through the audience. The spectators became in- 
volved. As soon as the poet swung the story one 
way, the supporters of that side shouted with joy, 
while the supporters of the other side jeered their 
disapproval. 
The task of the poet became increasingly deli- 
* In present-day Tunisia. Editor 
The Egyptian village of 
Qurna. 
MAHMOUD HUSSEIN 
is the pen name of two 
Egyptian writers who have 
published several books of 
political sociology, most 
recently Versant sud de la 
liberté, Essai sur I'émergence 
de Pindividu dans le tiers 
monde (“The Southern Face 
of Liberty, an essay on the 
emergence of the individual 
in the Third World”, La 
Découverte, Paris, 1989). 
7%
 
x
x
 vo
. 
ics. 
Pad 
 
cate, his mastery of the situation increasingly un- 
certain. The “night of the henna” rarely ended 
with a round of applause. Instead of the audience 
dispersing quietly into the night, and the poet and 
his troupe peacefully settling into the beds which 
had been prepared for them, the evening ended 
in an explosion of violence. 
It was impossible to pinpoint the moment 
when emotion degenerated into confrontation. 
Even today we search our memories in vain try- 
ing to establish the sequence of cause and effect 
which suddenly turned the festivities sour. A 
predictable but unfathomable chain of events led 
to a conflict which was all the more strange and 
brutal since it had been expected, planned almost, 
for days. A word was uttered by someone in the 
crowd, in a hollow, scornful voice. There was an 
immediate menacing riposte, and a club was 
raised, then two, then three... 
In the twinkling of an eye, the storm broke. 
Blows rained down from all directions. It was as 
though the audience had been seized by an ir- 
resistible need to give vent to a terrible, long-pent- 
up frustration. No one dreamt of asking where 
this frustration originated nor how far things 
would go now that the dam had burst.

## [Page 17](083935engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

   fr —— 
Ladd 
ACE Ear ws. 1 
5 
PA pl — et ch cn tl Sr Se Mt 
  
iti 
- 
i.» 
The village dignitaries slipped away. The poet 
and his companions tiptoed off. A cacophony of 
police whistles pierced the nocturnal silence. 
Street lamps were broken and went out. But the 
scuffle continued in the dark—blind, relentless, 


### 83925: The Poet's tale

breathless, until everyone was exhausted, until the 
calming of the anger for which the poet’s tale was 
merely the occasion, its real reasons being buried 
in the past, in the silent march of the centuries. 
The passing of an era 
The years have gone by. The city has removed 
us from the slow rhythm of the country. Study 
and travel, cinema and television, have slowly 
reduced to a faint memory those evenings when 
the heroic acts of Abou Zeid and Zeinati came 
to life so vividly. The “night of the henna” is 
celebrated less and less in the villages. As for the 
poets, the children no longer wait at the road- 
side for them. They have gone, never to return. 
Thanks to books and films we have disco- 
vered other epics; other heroes from many lands 
compete for our affections with those of the 
Hilaliyya. Certain episodes from different epics 
EE A JTL Ee ay 
    
seem to merge curiously with others, and a resem- 
blance between certain characters has appeared. 
Coincidence, mutual influence, a common 
source? How can one help but find in the be- 
sieged city of the Banou Khalifa a replica of the 
city of Troy, and in numerous episodes of the 
Hilaliyya a striking resemblance to parts of the 
liad? 
Surely the atmosphere in which the poets of 
the Egyptian countryside recited their works is 
comparable to that in which the ancient Greek 
poets must have recited their epic songs? Didn’t 
the Greek poets of old also modify their narra- 
tive to suit their audience, expanding or com- 
pressing certain scenes in response to the 
preferences they discerned in their listeners? 
Perhaps that is what we miss today. In liter- 
ature and in film, we learn and understand thou- 
sands of new things each day, a thousand things 
which only yesterday were beyond us. But we 
do not find, nor will we ever find again, the col- 
lective embrace of a stifling square where we hung 
on every word of an itinerant poet, whisked away 
as if by magic to remote cities where we exor- 
cised the realities of the present by reliving 
mythical times. || 
  
Es a & & Wo. 
  
Ef » 
oR 
& . . lM »- nN . : : Hw SBE NBSeas pe tid CER Sa Ba
17

## [Page 18](083935engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 83926: Gilgamesh, the king who did not wish to die

18 
Gilgamesh, 
the king who did not wish to die 
After the death of his friend 
Enkidu, Gilgamesh is forced to 
accept that be too must die one 
day. An epic composed thirty-five 
centuries ago tells how Gilgamesh, 
  
bis dream. of immortality 
shattered, comes to terms with the 
human condition. 
Serigraph by the German 
artist Willi Baumeister 
(1889-1955) illustrates two 
lines from the Epic of 
Gilgamesh: “One double-hour 
be travelled; Dense is the 
darkness and there is no 
light”   
Opposite page, the bero 
Gilgamesh is shown holding 
a lion cub in this 8th- 
century-BC Assyrian bas- 
relief from the palace of 
Sargon II at Khursabad 
(Iraq). 
Warren over thirty-five centuries ago, the 
ancient Mesopotamian epic of Gilgamesh is the 
oldest extant epic in world history. Not only is 
it an immortal triumph of literary creation, it is 
also one of those vivid, venerable documents in 
which the innermost thoughts of the most an- 
cient of our forefathers are still discernible 
through the mists of the past. 
Written in Akkadian, a language distantly 
related to Arabic and Hebrew, and inscribed on 
clay tablets in impressive, wedge-shaped cunei- 
form script, it covers eleven tablets, each of which 
contains about 300 lines; a twelfth tablet was 
added later. So far, over a period of more than 
a century, about two-thirds of the work has been 
recovered as additional fragments have been 
found by chance during excavations in the 
archaeologically-rich soil of Iraq. Today, despite 
the gaps which remain, we can follow most of 
the incidents and vicissitudes of the narration in 
their sequence. Above all, we have a clear picture 
of the scope and significance of the work. 
We also know enough to realize that, from 
the eighteenth century BC, the author, about 
whom we are otherwise totally ignorant, drew 
his inspiration from even more ancient folktales, 
at least some of which had circulated as short, 
individual legends. He succeeded in bringing 
together these scattered threads and weaving them 
into a coherent, original whole which has come 
down to-us in the form of this grandiose, tragic 
epic. 
The human condition 
The author took as his hero Gilgamesh, the cen- 
tral figure of these tales, a former monarch of the 
country, who must have reigned in the ancient 
city of Uruk in the middle of the third millenni- 
um BC. His name tells us little and we have no 
other information about him apart from what is 
recounted in the old legends. Yet despite his royal 
title, duly brought to the reader’s attention 
throughout the epic, Gilgamesh figures in the nar- 
rative neither in a political or military role for 
his battles and victories nor even as a national 
hero. He is portrayed simply as a man, as a pre- 
eminent model and representative of each mem- 
ber of the human community. 
Throughout the work, his over-riding con- 
cern is neither with conquest, the retention of 
power and glory, nor with the prosperity of his

## [Page 19](083935engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

i \ : de SAT ANF
Ur uh il \ 
MT, gh 
LAY ~ ' 
{Bes oy Ra ve ORY 38-2 
  
  
______________________________ 


### 83926: Gilgamesh, the king who did not wish to die

BY JEAN BOTTERO 
country and the diffusion of its culture, but with 
the desperate search for a solution to the most 
terrible of all problems—how to face up to death. 
The Gilgamesh epic is first and foremost an ac- 
count of the drama of the human condition as 
personified by the ancient king of Uruk, with his 
adventures, dreams, hopes, sufferings and his final 
acceptance of failure. 
With total mastery of his art, the author 
depicts the drama of the king’s rise and fall. The 
first six tablets portray his rise to the summit and 
the remaining tablets his downfall. The epic may 
have been set down in writing by order of Gil- 
gamesh himself on his return from his lengthy 
travels, “weary and worn” after having “seen all 
and committed everything to memory”. He 
wanted to pass on to posterity the essential les- 
son of his life. 
The admired and prosperous king of Uruk 
is at first depicted as a virtual superman, conscious 
of his strength, convinced of his superiority and 
tyrannizing the world around him. Alerted by 
the grievances of the people, the gods decide to 
intervene. They place the matter in the hands of 
Enki, the most intelligent among them. Resorting 
to a psychological subterfuge, Enki causes the cre- 
ation of a kind of double and counterpart to Gil- 
gamesh, a rival of equal stature and strength who 
will strip him of his feeling of uniqueness and 
turn him away from his excesses. 
A memory, perhaps, preserved in legend, of 
ancient antagonisms between the refined city- 
dweller and the uncouth, “primitive” nomad, this 
double is a “savage”, born and raised on the 
steppe beyond the limits of the civilized world. 
His name, Enkidu (“creature of Enki’) recalls his 
origins. 
Learning of the existence of this phenome- 
non and wishing to draw him to his presence, Gil- 
gamesh sends to him Lascivia, one of many 
courtesans given up to the delights of “free love”, 
a major prerogative of the advanced civilization 
of the city. Lascivia seduces Enkidu and converts 
him to the ways of city life. The first encounter 
between Gilgamesh and Enkidu is far from cor- 
dial. With each of them burning to assert his su- 
periority, they “grappled. with each other, 
snorting like bulls”. Later, however, “they kissed 
one another and formed a friendship”, for the 
author deliberately sets out to transform the “ser- 
vant” of the legend into the intimate friend and 
companion of Gilgamesh, his alter ego. 19

## [Page 20](083935engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 83926: Gilgamesh, the king who did not wish to die

20 
The two friends 
Together the two companions embark upon the 
great and dangerous adventure of the “Cedar 
Forest”. Popular tradition may have preserved 
the memory of an immemorial urge which in- 
cited the people of Mesopotamia, a flat, bare land 
of clay and reeds, to venture out to distant moun- 
tains in search of wood for building, stone and 
metals. So Gilgamesh and Enkidu head towards 
the northwest, towards Amanus and Lebanon. 
Already the secret desire to transcend death by 
the achievement of fame and glory is taking 
shape: “If I fall,” says Gilgamesh, “1 will establish 
a name for myself... An everlasting [name] I will 
establish for myself”* 
In several long stages, of which we have few 
details except that each of them is marked by a 
dream of good omen experienced by Gilgamesh 
and interpreted by his friend, they reach the dark, 
silent, mysterious immensity of the forest. Ac- 
cording to legend, the forest is guarded by the 
fearsome giant Huwawa (or Humbaba), whom 
the two friends finally overcome. 
At this point the author, aware of misfortune 
brewing quietly in the background, just as a dis- 
tant, scarcely audible murmur presages the com- 
ing of a storm, tells of the heroes’ first error, the 
first weight placed on the scales that will deter- 
mine their destiny. After hesitating as to the gi- 
ant’s fate, they finally kill him. Free now to act 
as they please, they cut down vast numbers of 
the sacred cedars—thus committing their second 
error. Loading the tree trunks on a boat, they sail 
down the Euphrates and back to Uruk, where 
they are received in triumph. 
The two friends are now at the pinnacle of 
their glory. However, a further incident occurs 
which the author skilfully presents as a success, 
but which, added to the two earlier events, will 
be fraught with consequence. The goddess Ishtar 
suddenly falls in love with Gilgamesh. Aware of 
her fickleness, Gilgamesh rejects her advances in 
scathing terms. In revenge, she asks her father, 
Anu, king of the gods, to send against Uruk the 
“Bull of Heaven”, in the guise of which, accord- 
ing to legend, a terrible calamity had previously 
been visited upon the city. 
Gilgamesh and Enkidu slay the monster and 
cut it to pieces. But falling once more into the 
snare of excess which so often entraps the vic- 
torious, they compound this affront to Ishtar 
when Enkidu throws one of the beast’s haunches 
in her face and threatens to make her a necker- 
chief of its entrails. Unaware of the imminence 
of his downfall, Gilgamesh marks his triumph 
with a brilliant celebration held in his palace. In 
a drunken outburst, he declares himself to be “the 
most splendid among the heroes, the most glori- 
ous among men.” 
Just asin life, in which our greatest successes 
often foreshadow and set off a train of events 
which leads to defeat or disaster, it is at this point 
that the errors of the past have their combined 
effect, that the gods react and the storm breaks. 
At the start of the seventh tablet, after a terrible 
nightmare in which he sees the gods in council 
condemn him to death, Enkidu suddenly falls ill, 
goes into a gradual decline and realizes that he 
1s going to die. He curses the courtesan who, by 
raising him to a higher station in life, set him on 
the road to misfortune, and expires in the arms 
of his despairing friend. At first Gilgamesh is un- 
willing to believe that he is dead, refusing even 
to heed the hideous appearance gradually taken 
on by the dead man’s corpse “until the worm fell 
upon his face”. For the first time the hero is ex- 
periencing rea! death and seeing the unbearable 
image and presentiment of his own death con- 
jured up by the sudden extinction of his friend: 
When I die, shall I not be like unto Enkidu? 
Sorrow has entered my heart. 
To rid himself of the thought with which he 
1s now obsessed and to find the remedy for death, 
whose true face has been so cruelly revealed to 
him, Gilgamesh sets off in quest of the secret of 
eternal life. 
‘The gift of life everlasting’ 
He knows that the gods once gave the gift of ever- 
lasting life to one man, Utanapishtim (“I have 
found life”) the sole survivor of the Flood, thanks 
to whom the continuance of the human race had 
been assured. But after granting him this privilege, 
the gods had set him apart from other mortals, 
sending him to the end of the earth. Gilgamesh 
decides to go and seek out Utanapishtim and to 
learn from him the secret of this signal favour. 
Arriving after an amazing, interminable jour- 
ney at the shores of the last distant sea separat- 
ing him from his goal, he encounters a mysterious 
nymph, Siduri (the ale-wife), who lives in that iso- 
lated region and who warns him of the futility 
of his quest: 
Gilgamesh, whither runnest thou? 
The life which thou seekest thou wilt not find. 
[For] when the gods created mankind, 
They allotted death to mankind, 
[But] life they retained in their keeping. 
Thou, O Gilgamesh, let thy belly be full; 
Day and night be thou merry; 
Make every day [a day of] rejoicing. 
Day and night do thou dance and play. 
Let thy raiment be clean, 
Thy head be washed, [and] thyself be bathed 
in water. 
Cherish the little one holding thy hand, 
[And] let thy wife rejoice in thy bosom. 
This is the lot of [mankind]... 
But lost in his dream of eternal life, he does 
not heed her words and continues on his way. 
When at last he finds himself in the presence of 
Utanapishtim, he asks him outright how he ob- 
tained this miraculous favour of the gods. In re- 
ply, Utanapishtim recounts the story of ‘the 
Flood. He tells how the gods decided to destroy 
the race of men they had created to serve them, 
  
  
JEAN BOTTERO, 
of France, is director of 
studies in philological and 
historical sciences at the 
Ecole Pratique des Hautes 
Etudes, Paris, and a 
specialist on ancient 
Mesopotamian civilization. 
Among his recent published 
works are Mésopotamie: 
L’écriture, la raison et les 
dieux (“Mesopotamia: 
Writing, Reason and Gods”, 
1987) and, with Samuel 
Noah Kramer, Lorsque les 
dieux faisaient I'’homme: 
Mythologie mésopotamienne 
(“When the Gods made 
Man: Mesopotamian 
Mythology”, 1989).

## [Page 21](083935engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 83926: Gilgamesh, the king who did not wish to die

      
Gilgamesh and Enkidu destroy the 
Bull of Heaven and other monsters. 
Plaster cast from an early 
Mesopotamian cylinder seal 
(2400 BC), 
The story of the Flood as it is 
recorded in the Epic of Gilgamesh. 
Babylonian tablet from Nineveh 
inscribed with cuneiform writing 
(7th century BC). 
  
| 
{ 
Vi , 
rd . AH ' | 
7 A pd : 
but who had multiplied and whose noise prevent- 
ed them from sleeping. 
Aware of the difficult situation the gods 
would find themselves in once men had all 
vanished, the god Enki, acting on his own, ar- 
ranged for one man to be spared, with all neces- 
sities, in a boat that would save him from the 
Deluge. It was for this reason alone that the grate- 
ful gods had promised Utanapishtim that he 
should never die. It was hardly likely that 
Gilgamesh would ever find himself in a similar 
situation. 
Moreover, to show Gilgamesh that he is not 
really made for everlasting life, Utanapishtim 
challenges him to remain for just six days without 
yielding to sleep, that daily rehearsal of death. Gil- 
gamesh takes up his challenge, but falls asleep on 
the very first day. There is nothing left for him 
to do but to depart, his dream shattered, with 
nothing to show for all his efforts and sufferings: 
For whom have my hands become weary? 
For whom is the blood of my heart being spent? 
Gilgamesh returns home and the author of 
the epic, briefly depicting Uruk as a splendid opu- 
lent city, seems intent on bringing his hero, and 
through him all men, back to the joys of this life, 
which are, as the nymph Siduri had proclaimed, 
“the lot of mankind”: u 
a
 
* Quotations from The Gilgamesh Epic and Old Testament 
Parallels, by Alexander Heidel, Phoenix Books, University 
of Chicago Press, 1963. 
. 
21

## [Page 22](083935engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 
 
 

## [Page 23](083935engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 83927: Aeneas, Rome's man of destiny

The adventures of Aeneas chronicled in Virgil’s great Weirmen between 29 BC and 19 BC, the 
. Roman poet Virgil's epic, the Aeneid, recounts 
poem the Aeneid make a powerful human drama the adventures of the Trojan hero Aeneas, fruit 
whose force is undiminished by time of the union of the mortal Anchises with the 
) goddess Venus. 
Having miraculously survived the destruction 
of Troy, Aeneas, accompanied by his father, his 
infant son Iulus and a handful of faithful com- 
panions, sets sail in search of the place, appoint- 
ed by destiny but as yet unknown to him, where 
Aeneas Ro Cc S an he is to build a new Troy. As his journey unfolds, 
9 he comes to realize that the city’s mysterious new 
site is situated in Italy, in the region of Latium. 
of destiny Warrings and wanderings 
Before reaching his goal, however, he is fated to 
wander the length and breadth of the Mediterra- 
nean for seven years. This is partly because the 
” 
i of 2 BY JEAN-PAUL BRISSON utterances of the oracles, who purport to guide 
Cha { him in his quest, are inevitably far from clear. 
it hh 3 A false interpretation of one oracular message 
id makes him think for a time that his destination 
is Crete until, warned of his error by the outbreak 
of a terrible plague, he is forced to flee the island. 
But the prime cause of his misfortunes is the un- 
relenting hatred of the all-powerful Juno, wife of 
Jupiter, the king of the gods. 
This hatred stems from an ancient incident 
recounted by Homer—the famous judgement of 
Paris, the Trojan who dared to award the prize 
for beauty to Venus rather than to Juno. As 
depicted at the beginning of Virgil’s epic, the 
queen of Olympus neither can nor wishes to for- 
get what she considers to be a personal affront 
for which, through Paris, she holds all Trojans 
responsible. She finds it intolerable that a small 
group of Trojans should have survived her ven- 
geance and have the temerity to want to rebuild 
a city that is for her accursed. No subterfuge that 
may prevent Aeneas from achieving his aim and 
ensure his final downfall is too low for her. 
After seven years of wanderings, Aeneas lands 
in Sicily where his old father dies. By now he 
knows for certain how and where he will discover 
the site to which destiny will lead him and it is 
with confidence and a light heart that he sets out 
for Italy. Seeing him so near his goal, Juno suc- 
cumbs to a murderous rage and bribes Aeolus, 
      
  
  
Aeneas leaves the burning the keeper of the winds, to unleash a furious tem- 
city of Troy, carrying his pest. The Trojan fleet is scattered and largely des- 
father Anchises on bis back. troyed; the few survivors are thrown up on the 
Marseilles pottery, 18th African coast not far from Carthage. 
century. Thanks to the intervention of Venus, anxious 
to ensure the safety of her son, the sovereign of 
those parts, the Phoenician queen, Dido, wel- 
comes the shipwrecked survivors with generous 
hospitality. Taking advantage of these events in 
a further attempt to detain Aeneas far from his 
Le, “Venus appears to 
Aeneas and sends him 
Cupid.” Detail of a fresco 
by Giovanni Battista 
Tiepolo (1696-1770) in the Italian goal, Juno, with the complicity of Venus, 
Aeneid room of the Villa thrusts the unfortunate Dido into the arms of her 
Valmarana, at Vicenza Trojan guest. 
(Italy). Surrendering himself to the delights of a mad

## [Page 24](083935engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 83927: Aeneas, Rome's man of destiny

24 
passion, the Trojan hero forgets his predestined 
mission for twelve long months. When Jupiter 
imperiously takes him to task, however, he 
remembers the duty fate has laid upon him and 
leaves Carthage and the delights of love, setting 
sail to the light of the funeral pyre on which the 
despairing Dido has thrown herself. 
A stop at Cumae gives Aeneas, guided by the 
Sibyl, the opportunity to descend into the nether 
regions where he encounters his father’s shade, 
who presents to him those who will play lead- 
ing roles in the accomplishment of Rome’s fu- 
ture glory. Aeneas next arrives at the mouth of 
the Tiber where the fulfilment of a prophecy con- 
firms that his long voyage is over. Recognizing 
in him the foreigner his diviners have predicted 
will marry his daughter Lavinia, Latinus, the king 
of the region, welcomes Aeneas with open arms. 
Juno, however, returns to the charge. Arous- 
ing the jealousy of Turnus, a suitor of Lavinia 
who cannot bear to find himself set aside in 
favour of the newly-arrived stranger, she sets the 
scene for a desperate struggle. A long series of 
combats ensues in which the warriors of both 
camps distinguish themselves by brilliant in- 
dividual exploits. 
An epic that reinterpreted history 
Finally, weary of the useless carnage, the two 
sides make a solemn pact to leave the resolution 
of their quarrel to the outcome of a single com- 
bat between Aeneas and Turnus. Aeneas, of 
course, emerges victorious and at this point the 
epic draws to a close. However, a number of 
predictions inserted throughout the poem fore- 
shadow the future course of history that the epic 
itself leaves untold—how Iulus, Aeneas’ son, will 
found the city of Alba from whence, 300 years 
later, will come forth Romulus and Remus, the 
twin founders of Rome. 
The choice of such a subject offered many 
advantages. In literary terms it demonstrates 
“Aeneas and the Shrine 
of the Penates.” Detail 
from the marble frieze 
on the Altar of 
the Augustan Peace, Rome 
(1st century BC). 
“Virgil presents Dante 
to Homer.” Detail of a 
fresco by the French painter 
Eugene Delacroix 
(1798-1863) 
in the cupola of the library 
of the Senate, Paris. 
’ CT TT EIR 
  
  
  
  
 
  

## [Page 25](083935engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

    
 
  
 
  
  
  
ee —— 
| . . 
rm—— A — <r | Cmm— CL —— q ry | p— 
LN" 3 ' 4% Fu ) { MN, d 4 SKEW rm Te | $= 0 I TT 
Fe J | - | \— - ER " X - ’ —- a 3 ad n 4 .. 1 3 
| | —— ee || | —_ : — : g—— §) — , 1 | 
So : ¥ ' Sm—— - 
  
fidelity to the Homeric tradition without being 
a slavish imitation of it. Of the twelve books that 
make up the epic, the first six, in which the heros 
perilous voyage from Troy to Italy is recounted, 
conjure up in the reader’s mind overtones of the 
Odyssey; the last six, in which the war in Italy 
incited by Juno is related, are an open evocation 
of the liad. 
Yet though the Homeric model was clearly 
in the minds of both the poet and his readers, it 
was used to tell a quite different tale. Further- 
more, while deliberately placing itself within the 
context of Greek epic poetry, the Aeneid appears 
to be an extension of it, since the action begins 
at the precise point where it ends in Homer— 
with the capture and destruction of Troy. 
Above all, the subject furnished political ad- 
vantages. The legend unfolded in the Aeneid 
provided justification for Rome’s complex rela- 
tionship with the Hellenic world, which involved 
  
military and political domination coupled 
with a certain cultural dependency. Representing 
Rome as a resurgence of a Troy destroyed by the 
Greeks gave the Roman conquest of Greece the 
colouring of legitimate revenge. Virgil did not 
miss the opportunity to put into the mouth of 
Jupiter, in a lengthy prophecy addressed to Ve- 
nus, a proclamation that Rome would destroy the 
most renowned cities of Greece, which were 


### 83927: Aeneas, Rome's man of destiny

responsible for the fall of Troy. 
Yet Rome was indebted to Greece for this 
justificatory legend, which has its roots in the 
Iliad. By the end of the fourth century BC, at the 
latest, Greek historians had given shape to the 
myth of the arrival of Aeneas in Latium and of 
his founding of Lavinium (today Pratica di Mare). 
Thus began a subtle interplay between victor and 
vanquished with the victory of Roman arms over 
Greece finding justification in legendary tales 
evolved in Greece itself. 
  
  
  
  
a fa 
JEAN-PAUL BRISSON, 
of France, is professor 
emeritus at the University 
of Paris X, where he taught 
Roman civilization and 
literature. His published 
works include Carthage ou 
Rome (“Carthage or 
Rome”, 1973) and Virgile, 
son temps et le nétre (“Virgil, 
his time and ours”, 1980). 25

## [Page 26](083935engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 83927: Aeneas, Rome's man of destiny

26 
Not least of the advantages of Virgil’s epic 
was that it glorified Augustus, the first Roman 
emperor. Adopted by Julius Caesar, Augustus be- 
longed to the Julian family which claimed direct 
descent from Aeneas. The claims were support- 
ed by a phonetic play, obligingly echoed by 
Virgil, on the name of Aeneas’ son. From the 
original “Ilus” (which simply means Trojan), 
“Iulus”, then “Iulius”, were derived. The philo- . 
logists of old were very partial to such 
approximations. 
The predictions inserted throughout the epic, 
foretelling the future grandeur of the descendants 
of Aeneas, naturally referred to the one who was 
foreseen to be the most illustrious among them— 
the emperor Augustus. Contemporary readers 
had no difficulty in making the link between the 
great future foretold for the descendants of the 
epic hero and the new régime of their own day. 
By the same token, this new régime no longer 
appeared to be the result of chance but the fulfil- 
ment of an eternal destiny. 
The war that Aeneas was compelled to wage 
to secure a firm foothold in Latium also provid- 
ed the opportunity to foretell the coming of the 
multi-cultural empire over which Augustus was 
to rule. For in his struggle against Turnus, Aeneas 
was aided both by a small Greek community 
established on the site of the future city of Rome 
and by an Etruscan prince. This coalition of 
peoples of such diverse cultures—Latin, Hellenic 
and Etruscan—was already, in itself, a foretaste 
of the cultural situation of historic Rome. 
Furthermore, at the close of the epic, Juno 
renounces her vendetta and accepts the defeat of 
her protégé Turnus on condition that the newly- 
arrived Trojans in turn abandon their customs 
and their language and merge with the native 
~ population to constitute a single people. The 
Aeneid concludes less with the vision of a bloody 
fight to the death than with the promise of the 
harmonious fusion of different cultures within 
the framework of a political union. Thus the Vir- 
gilian epic made Augustus, the prestigious descen- 
dant the oracles were united in telling Aeneas he 
would sire, the guarantor of that fusion and that 
union. 
A poem for all time 
Though it may have been a piece of topical 
propaganda, placed within a historically limited 
context, the Aeneid is well worth reading today 
because it was written by a very great poet, a 
genius of such stature that the style and the events 
of his epic narration are rich in connotations and 
implications that go far beyond the author’s im- 
mediate purposes. 
The modern reader will be all the more at 
ease with Virgil in that the hero of his epic is not 
cast in the monolithic mould of the Homeric 
model. Robots tirelessly performing feats of arms, 
Homer’s heroes maintain virtually unchanging 
patterns of behaviour and feelings throughout his 
narrative and the reader leaves them at the end 
of the epic as they were at the beginning. Virgil, 
however, endows his hero with the full panoply 
of human psychological complexity, with doubts, 
uncertainties and moments of despair. 
The Aeneid breaks new ground in epic poetry 
by its use of the narrative technique to reveal the 
inner feelings of Aeneas. Instead of being related 
by an aloof third person, the dramatic episodes 
of the destruction of Troy and the hero’s wan- 
derings in search of the site on which his city 1s 
destined to be rebuilt are recounted by an “I” 
still pulsating with the excitement of the events 
through which he has lived. From the start, a 
kind of intimacy is established between the hero 
and the reader, to whom he seems to speak per- 
sonally. And this initial intimacy is reflected 
throughout the narrative. 
By introducing the psychological factor, 
Virgil avoids the snare of a simplistic dualism 
  
   
vey i el a 
  
 
i 1

## [Page 27](083935engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

“Aeneas tells Dido about 
the disasters that have 
befallen the city of Troy” 
(1815). A painting by 
Pierre Narcisse Guérin 
(1774-1833). 
  
  
“Juno pleads with Aeolus 
to unleash the winds 
against Aeneas’ boat.” A 
painting by the Italian 
artist Lucio Massari 
(1569-1633). 
between good and bad people. Dido and Turnus 
are, it 1s true, formidable obstacles to the accom- 


### 83927: Aeneas, Rome's man of destiny

plishment of Aeneas’ mission and can be counted 
among the negative characters in the epic. But it 
would be too simple to leave it at that and Virgil 
succeeds in portraying them with sufficient com- 
plexity to make them seem more worthy of com- 
passion than of enmity. His lines on Dido’s tragic 
suicide are among the most sensitive ever writ- 
ten by a poet of Antiquity and even today it is 
impossible to read them without being profound- 
ly moved. 
Finally, what makes the Aeneid an epic apart 
is its initiatory connotations. The difficulties the 
hero has to face to accomplish his mission are a 
poetic transposition of the classic ordeals of an 
initiation ceremony. Aeneas comes through these 
ordeals not only as the victor but as a man trans- 
formed. The Aeneas who finally settles in Latium 
is a new man, destined for a new life. 
The rites and mysteries of the religions of An- 
tiquity may be of little interest to the modern 
reader, but no-one can remain unmoved by this 
lesson in self-transcendence, by this splendid ex- 
ample of a mastered fate. a 27

## [Page 28](083935engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 83928: The Epic of the Kings

  
I 
Et 
Rd
 
d
a
d
 
I 
4 
2
0
1
d
 
hh!
 
w
a
d
 
11
 
I
T
a
R
N
 
- 
R 
L
a
s
t
l
y
 
W
i
 
!     T
1
1
1
1
 
a
i
 
"
M
E
N
 
Li
t 
Iu
 
LA
R 
SY
 
hi 
~ 
L
l
 
    FITIYTITITIE
T
 
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
        
Ee ra eR A a——— 
— el — 
+ yi 3 “iy ar 
Cra BG Sr RL £ . \ ns al i 
Rr 3, To I rn Pa 
ale - : . a ARAN AEEN Te alt 
ba, 4% 

## [Page 29](083935engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

Written almost a thousand years ago, The Epic of the | in Teheran, the capital of Iran, there 
Kings tells the story of the Iranian people from the 
time of the world’s creation. National epic, landmark 
in world literature and a profound expression of the 
Iranian soul, Ferdowsi’s masterpiece is still read and 
recited throughout Iran. 
 


### 83928: The Epic of the Kings

The Epic 
of the Kings 
BY NAHAL TADJADOD 
  
Fordosi and the three poets 
of the court of Ghazni, the 
ancient capital of the powerful 
empire of the Ghazneuvids, in 
what is now Afghanistan. 
The first part of Ferdowsi’s 
poem The Epic of the Kings 
describes how Jamshid, king of 
Iran, taught men how to make 
weapons of war, to spin and 
weave, and to build houses 
and ships. Left, a 17th-century 
miniature showing Jamshid 
giving a lesson in 
craftsmanship. 
is a statue of Ferdowsi: the poet holds his Epic 
of the Kings (Shah-nama) in his hand and gazes at 
the peaks of the Alborz mountains. When I was 
young, my parents often took me to this place 
and while they looked on attentively I recited 
these lines by Ferdowsi: 
I have toiled painfully these thirty years. I have 
restored Iran to life by my verse. 
Henceforth I cannot die; for I live, having 
broadcast the seeds of my verses. 
These words were engraved in the memory 
of the child I was then and I know that they have 
shaped my innermost identity. There is nothing 
astonishing in that. For almost a thousand years 
Ferdowsi’s poem has been read, recited and 
copied in Iran. Even today it is recited in the cafés. 
Early on it became our national epic. 
Why has it always been so popular? Not 
because of the originality of its subject—the 
history of ancient Iran from the time of its first 
mythical king to the last sovereign of the Sassanid 
dynasty in the seventh century AD—nor because 
of the novelty of its content. “What I will say, 
all have already told,” Ferdowsi claimed. The 
poet transmitted; he invented nothing. He drew 
on old oral traditions and on ancient texts such 
as the Avesta, a holy book of the eighth century 
BC, or reworked somewhat earlier tales on the 
same theme. 
The first monument 
of Persian literature 
. This immense poem of 50,000 couplets appeared 
in the tenth century, at a key moment in the 
history of Iranian culture. Since the fall of the 
Sassanids, the literary language of Iran had been 
' Arabic. Middle Persian, the main vehicle of 
Sassanid civiltzation, was disappearing. At this 
moment, a young literature in an Iranian idiom— 
Persian—emerged in the east. Ferdowsi’s poem 
would be its first masterpiece. 
The Epic of the Kings does not describe the 
deeds of a single hero or king nor even a long 
adventure. It begins with the creation of the 
world and relates the history of fifty reigns on 
three distinct planes: the mythical, the epic and 
the historical. 
The first part relates civilizing myths. The 
Pishdadians, the “first created”, teach men to 
clothe themselves, to work metal, to master fire, 
to tame animals and to organize themselves in 
society. After ruling for 700 years, King Jamshid, 
succumbing to pride, has to yield his throne to 
a demoniac creature, the tyrant Zahhak who will 
rule for a thousand years. His malign power will 
finally be conquered by the justice-loving 
Faridun. These heroes, who personify the conflict 
between the forces of darkness and light, 
constitute a religious theme which is typically 
Iranian. 
The second, longest and most truly epic part 29

## [Page 30](083935engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 83928: The Epic of the Kings

30 
of the poem evokes the reign of the Kaianid kings. 
Here, in the centrepiece of the poem, light has 
triumphed. Rostam is the champion of all the 
heroes who live at the Kaianid court. Prodigious- 
ly strong, loyal to his king and faithful to his 
country, he is the terror of the enemy. This peri- 
od is marked by interminable wars against Turan, 
a central Asian country whose ruler Afrasiyab is 
the sworn enemy of Iran. 
In the final part, the poet presents a number 
of historical figures but in a rather fantastic light. 
He gives a notable account of the conquest of 
Alexander the Great (Sekandar), based on the 
Alexander legend of the Orient. The ending, even 
closer to history, tells of the exploits of the Sas- 
sanid rulers until the end of the dynasty. 
Faridun and Zahhak: 
the just man and the tyrant 
The story of Zahhak the tyrant, told in the first 
and most brilliant part of the poem, extols the 
sufferings of a martyred people. 
The courageous but wayward son of King 
Mardas, Zahhak is led astray by Eblis, the devil. 
After making a pact with Eblis, Zahhak usurps 
the throne. Revealing himself to the king in var- 
ious forms, the devil extends his power further 
each day. One day Eblis presents himself in the 
guise of a cook. “The diet is not varied,” he says, 
“for flesh is not eaten,” and he wishes Zahhak 
to eat all kinds of viands, both birds and 
quadrupeds. When the devil, who has gained Zah- 
  Sr nd rl 10 Tb Farid wi 4 Wi ti J » ~ : ANdggtiml] EI ANA Ea Smt | Me) ] vo . wi Lah : 
- i | Puasa 
fe Ace 
Ao » 
   \| 
        
   
  
  
        
    
Ki SoN 
SAUCE EAL 
vy 
ANY § AEA 
2 lacaisla lod [ 
ol , » 
a lmarart Gk
Apap 
Iplotatay oe] 
(Pee A) 
. 
} Hoe’ NE 
pd cite, 
       
    
  
        
   
Sekandar (Alexander the 
Great) is seen visiting the 
emperor of China in this 
I5th-century miniature 
illustrating an incident 
from The Epic of the 
Kings. 
NAHAL TADJADOD, 
Iranian Sinologist, is the 
author of a doctoral thesis 
on the influence of 
Buddhism on Chinese 
Manichaeism which will be 
published shortly by 
Editions du Cerf, Paris. She 
is currently participating in 
Unesco’s Silk Roads Project. 
 
hak’s confidence, embraces him, a black serpent 
thrusts its head out of each of the tyrant’s shoul- 
ders. Whenever he cuts them off they sprout 
anew like two branches of a tree. Then Eblis ap- 
pears again, this time disguised as a physician, and 
proposes as a remedy that Zahhak should eat two 
human brains each day. 
Thus for a thousand years the demons cause 
evil to reign and no one dares talk openly of good. 
But one night Zahhak dreams that he is laid low 
by a young prince who strikes him with a bull- 
headed mace and drags him in chains to Mount 
. Damavand. Plunged in darkness, the world was 
as black as a raven’s wing. The tyrant consults 
the Mubads, the Zoroastrian priests, who read the 
stars and tell him that his vanquisher, who is not 
yet born, will be called Faridun. “He will hate 
you, for his father will die at your hand and you 
will also kill the cow that will serve him as nurse. 
To avenge the cow he will take up the bull-headed 
mace.” 
Mad with anxiety, the king hunts everywhere 
for traces of Faridun. The blessed child is born 
at the same time as the most marvellous of cows. 
He is entrusted by his mother to the keeper of 
the park where the nurse-cow lives, and is 
nourished with her milk. One day Zahhak hears 
of the park and the cow, kills the fabulous animal 
and rushes to Faridun’s house. He finds no one 
there. Overcome with fear, Faridun’s mother has 
taken her son to Mount Alborz. 
At the age of sixteen Faridun learns of his ori- 
gins from his mother and decides to fight the 
tyrant. In anguish Zahhak convokes all the elders 
of the land to seek their support. “I desire you 
to subscribe to a proclamation on my behalf that 
as commander in chief I have sown no seed but 
that of uprightness...and that I would never fail 
to maintain justice.” All consent except one man, 
Kava the Blacksmith, who rises in protest. “Iam 
Kava, seeking for justice. Most of the wrong done 
to me comes from yourself. It is you who cons- 
tantly thrust the lancet into my heart. Why do 
you inflict harm on my children? I had eighteen 
alive in the world, and now only one remains.” 
Overcome with astonishment and fear, Zahhak 
restores the man’s remaining son to him and asks 
him in exchange to add his testimony to the 
proclamation. Kava reads the proclamation, tears 
it into pieces, and tramples them underfoot. 
Kava leaves the palace and the people crowd 
around him. Fastening a blacksmith’s leather 
apron to a spearhead, he calls on the people to 
free themselves from the tyrant’s yoke. Followed 
by a multitude of the stout-hearted, Kava the 
liberator sets out in search of Faridun, who agrees 
to lead the popular rising. The people of the city 
and the army mass before the palace, whose 
guards dare not resist. Faridun rides into the 
palace without striking a blow and seizes the royal 
crown. Attacked by Zahhak, the young prince 
shatters Zahhak’s helmet with his bull-headed 
mace. At that instant the angel Sorush appears 
and stops Faridun killing Zahhak. “Do not strike

## [Page 31](083935engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 83928: The Epic of the Kings

  
him down,” he says. “His time has not yet come. 
Tie him securely inside the mountain.” Faridun 
then drives the tyrant into the mountains and 
wishes to strike off his head, but the angel Sorush 
appears again and tells him to leave the captive 
in fetters on Mount Damavand to endure an eter- 
nal agony. 
A poet of human grandeur 
In the person of Faridun, an era of enlightenment 
and justice succeeds a long period of obscurity 
and tyranny. Here Ferdowsi returns to pre- 
Islamic traditions; he takes this idea of an eternal 
combat between good and evil from Zoroastrian 
eschatology. The interminable wars between Iran 
and Turan are the reflection of this. But Ferdowsi 
does not profess a naive dualism. He shows that 
these two principles coexist in everyone: human 
beings can do good as well as spread evil. 
Thus, after a thousand years of tyranny, light 
and good seem to triumph: the new king, man- 
dated by heaven, serves his people devotedly. But 
evil persists, it has not ceased to exist. This is what 
the angel means when he twice prevents the 
tyrant from being put to death. Zahhak is final- 
ly fettered on the summit of Mount Alborz as 
if to show by his existence that the victory of 
good over evil has not yet been won. 
Ferdowsi bases his poem on the implacable 
TRL 271 ' 
force of destiny. This quintessentially epic theme 
echoes the sense of fatality which is so deeply an- 
chored in the Iranian soul. And yet his charac- 
ters are still men, torn and tortured by doubt and 
sensitive to the misfortunes of the age. They are 
to be pitied rather than condemned. Zahhak, the 
bloody tyrant, the symbol of cruelty, does not 
act freely; he has, after all, sold his soul to the 
devil. He is merely an instrument. As a great trag- 
ic epic poet, Ferdowsi thus creates terrible situa- 
tions in which a man is led to kill his brother, 
or a father kills his son. Links of kinship add gran- 
deur and resonance to the combat waged by the 
individual against higher forces. 
The Epic of the Kings is still a living epic for 
Iranians because it is profoundly in tune with the 
Iranian soul. The Iranian peasant, even if he can 
neither read nor write, responds to the exploits 
of Rostam, the hero par excellence, and weeps 
to think of his sufferings when he is compelled 
to kill his own son to defend his country. 
Neither good nor ill will last for ever: the finest 
thing is to leave good deeds to be remembered by. 
Ferdowsi’s voice still speaks to us across the 
ages. u 
Quotations from the Shah-nama in this article are taken from 
the translation by Reuben Levy which was published as Tbe 
Epic of the Kings by Routledge & Kegan Paul (London,1967) 
and features in the Unesco Collection of Representative 
Works. Editor 
Above, an episode from 
The Epic of the Kings in 
which the great folk hero 
Rostam slays the dragon 
with the help of his valiant 
horse Rakhsh. (15th-century 
miniature.) 
  
31

## [Page 32](083935engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 83929: Ilya the invincible

32 
[lya the invincible 
  
BY HELENE YVERT-JALU 
Lx a famous painting by Viktor Vasnetsov, three 
valiant knights, breastplated and helmeted, 
mounted on powerful chargers, are shown guard- 
ing Russian soil against the enemy. Their names 
are Ilya of Murom, Dobrynia Nikitich and 
Aliosha Popovich, and they are the heroes of 
Russian byliny or epic poems. 
The byliny tradition may go back to the end 
of the tenth century. In the large, bright hall of 
Prince Vladimir’s palace at Kiev, minstrels accom- 
panying themselves on the gusli, a kind of zither, 
sang of the extraordinary exploits of bogatyrs (gal- 
lant warriors), while cup-bearers filled the boyars’ 
and other noblemen’s glasses with “a blend of 
herbal wine and unchanging honey”. 
Heroes that live on 
Since those times, byliny have been transmitted 
orally from generation to generation, an uninter- 
rupted river of poetry in which many historical, 
social and geographical currents are mingled. 
At the beginning of the twentieth century in 
the Arkhangelsk and Lake Onega regions of 
northern Russia, rustic bards known as skazitel: 
still related these heroic deeds. Usually men of 
a ripe old age, they used a special technique to 
recount their stories, keeping up a slow rhythm 
of three or four beats to the bar, which brought 
a majestic grandeur to the old songs. Woodcut- 
ters, fishermen and hunters would gather round, 
listening attentively. 
Lovers of folk traditions have collected ex- 
amples of this national treasure of historic songs. 
In the eighteenth century an Englishman, Richard 
James, was the first to transcribe some of them. 
Fuller collections which appeared in the follow- 
ing century met with tremendous success, and in- 
fluenced literature (Pushkin, Lermontov, Gogol), 
music (Mussorgsky, Rimsky-Korsakov, Borodin), 
painting (Vasnetsov, Repin, Vrubel) and films 
such as Eisenstein’s Alexander Nevsky. The 
popularity of these gallant warriors of legend has 
even influenced the spoken language. In Russian 
today, the word bogatyr designates a man of 
1 lya of Murom and Solovei 
the Brigand. A 19th-century 
example of the Russian folk 
art known as lubok.  
powerful stature or someone of exceptional 
vigour. These epic heroes, mythical figures in the 
national consciousness, have scarcely changed 
down the ages. Above all, they have kept the pro- 
digious strength which enables them “to crush 
ten adversaries with one blow”. Let us follow the 
exploits of Ilya of Murom, perhaps the most 
popular hero of the Kiev byliny cycle. 
Ilya, a peasant’s son, has been paralysed for 
thirty years (thirty-three in some versions), when 
one day three pilgrims pay him a visit, Twice they 
ask him to rise and offer them food and drink.

## [Page 33](083935engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

Even the most terrifying monsters quail before 
lion-bearted Ilya of Murom. This redoubtable 
hero of ancient Russia is still a much-loved 
Ta 
48 
“Alas,” the cripple replies, “I can move neither 
arms nor legs.” At the third demand, Ilya 
miraculously manages to stand up and walk. He 
offers a cup of wine to his guests, who ask him 
to drink of it too. He has barely tasted it when 
he feels within himself 2 Herculean strength. The 
three men then predict that Ilya will be a great 
warrior and that he will not die in combat, and 


### 83929: Ilya the invincible

they disappear. Thus the crippled Ilya suddenly 
becomes an invincible titan. 
Like any Russian peasant of the Middle Ages, 
Ilya first uses his power to clear the surrounding 
fagure of popular mythology. 
forest. In the twinkling of an eye, he uproots all 
the oaks and hurls so many of them into the 
Dnieper that the course of the powerful river is 
dammed. He then heads for Kiev to defend Holy 
Russia, which is constantly under threat. 
In order to procure a mount for himself, Ilya 
follows the instructions of the mysterious pil- 
grims. When he meets up with a peasant leading 
a small, shaggy stallion by the bridle, he immedi- 
ately buys it. Then he walks the animal three 
times through the morning dew. It turns into a 
marvellous steed which “with each stride covers 33

## [Page 34](083935engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Iya of Murom (centre), 
Dobrynia Nikitich (left) 
and Aliosha Popovich 
(right), the three most 
popular knightly heroes or 
bogatyrs of Russian epic 
poetry. Painting by Viktor 
Vasnetsov (1848-1926). 
Tilustrations from Ilya of 
Murom and the Tsar 
Kalin, a cartoon slide 
show. Above, the terrible 
Tsar Kalin; below, 
Vladimir's daughter, the 
kind princess. 
a full verst (1.06 kilometres), leaping from hill to 
hill, over rivers, lakes and forests’. Even better, 
it can speak and warn its master of imminent 
danger. 
Before he reaches Kiev, Ilya engages in several 
combats, including a confrontation with Solov- 


### 83929: Ilya the invincible

ei the Brigand. This “nightingale” (solovei) is a 
strange and terrifying bird which has built himself 
a nest in the branches of seven oak trees at a cross- 
roads in the forest. The bird’s song bends the lar- 
gest trees to the ground and strikes humans stone 
dead. Not a whit dismayed by this terrible sound, 
Ilya draws his bow and pierces Solovei’s right eye 
with an arrow. Solovei falls from the nest and 
Ilya chains him to his stirrup. The monster’s three 
daughters, perched in their father’s nest, send 
their mates to attack Ilya. Solovei asks them to 
negotiate a ransom for him instead. But their ef- 
forts are in vain, as Ilya disinterestedly refuses the 
precious gifts offered to him. 
With his prisoner in tow he arrives at the 
prince’s palace in Kiev, where Vladimir questions 
him. The bogatyr introduces himself and displays 
his captive. Vladimir invites Solovei the Brigand 
to sing, but the monster will only obey Ilya. 
Thereupon Ilya repeats the request, with the 
proviso that the bird must sing only half as loudly 
as usual, in order to spare the prince and his 
courtiers. Solovei mischievously sings as loudly 
as he can, sowing death and destruction. Vladimir 
is saved by the sable-lined coat with which he has 
covered his head. As a punishment for this act 
of disobedience Ilya cuts off the Brigand’s head: 
“Thus Solovet will no longer fill mothers’ and 
fathers’ eyes with tears or make widows of young 
women, and will cease to turn little children into 
orphans.” 
Ilya is appointed ataman, or chief of the 
Prince of Kiev’s bogatyrs, and from then on 
guards the gates of the capital. One day he is 
challenged by a giantess armed with an immense 
club. She is a polenitsa, a wild beast that roams 
the steppe. Ilya emerges victorious from the ter- 
rible fight that ensues. On discovering that the 
giantess is his own daughter, however, he spares 
her life. But to avenge her mother, whom Ilya 
has deserted, she goes into his tent while he is 
sleeping and with all her might plunges a hunt- 
ing spear into his chest. This would have been 
the end of Ilya, but the spear strikes the cross 
weighing a pud-and-a-half (a pud is over 16 kilos), 
that he always wears. Awakened by the noise of 
metal on metal, Ilya opens his eyes and tears the 
treacherous girl to shreds. 
The homéland before the prince 
The enemies which have to be fought, in- 
discriminately referred to as Tatars, are always 
depicted as caricatures. Idolishche the Pagan is 
“two sagens high and one wide” (a sagen is 2.13 
metres). “His head is like an enormous vat, and 
his eyes are mugs of beer, and the nose on his 
face is a cubit’s length.”

## [Page 35](083935engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 83929: Ilya the invincible

  
Facing the massed ranks of enemy armies— 
“all black, like black crows” —the prince’s knights 
are often terror-stricken. Ilya alone proves him- 
self to be a fervent and loyal defender of the 
. homeland. Despite tempting offers from the ene- 
my, he steadfastly refuses to leave the prince’s 
service. He nonetheless has good reasons for do- 
ing so, as Vladimir, who bears little resemblance 
to the historical figure of the same name, often 
rewards the loyal services of his bogatyrs with 
ingratitude. 
One day, after a quarrel with Ilya, the angry 
Vladimir has him thrown into a deep cellar with 
the order to let him starve to death. The other 
bogatyrs, indignant over this unjust treatment, 
desert the prince’s court. Three years go by. Ka- 
lin, the tsar, turns the situation to his advantage 
and attacks Kiev with a formidable army. 
Vladimir grows afraid and his daughter advises 
him to go and set Ilya free. To his great surprise, 
the prince discovers that Ilya is still alive. The 
young princess has dug an underground passage 
leading to the dungeon, and each day has brought 
the prisoner sweetmeats. Vladimir throws him- 
self at the hero’s feet and begs him to save Kiev. 
Ilya agrees to fight “not for the prince, but for 
the churches of the Virgin, for Holy Russia, and 
for the widows and orphans”. 
One of Ilya’s most characteristic traits Is re- 
vealed in this episode: he serves the Russian land, 
not an occasionally despotic sovereign. This cou- 
rageous and unselfish peasant with no false pride 
unhesitatingly speaks his mind when he sees the 
prince abuse his authority. When he is not an- 
gered or engaged in Homeric combat, he is a 
good-natured fellow who likes a joke. Ilya, the 
gallant knight, has become a kind of national 
hero. || 
Lf, A Valiant Knight, 
by the Russian artist 
Mikhail Vrubel (1856-1910). 
  
  
    
  
  
      
Aliosha Popovich, the wily 
companion in arms of Ilya 
of Murom. This band- 
coloured engraving dates 
from the 18th century. 
HELENE YVERT-JALU, 
of France, is a lecturer at 
the University of Paris I. 
She is the author of a 
number of studies on social 
and cultural questions in 
the Soviet Union.

## [Page 36](083935engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

A unique source of contemporary 
information about Genghis Khan 
and the empire he founded, the 
Mongolian national epic blends 
folklore and legend with a vivid 
account of steppe society in the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 
  
 


### 83930: The Secret History of the Mongols

The Secret Histo 
of the Mongols 
BY SHAGDARYN BIRA 
  
'y 
  
  
Alan-gua, the legendary 
mother of the clan of 
Genghis Khan. 
Opposite page, Genghis 
Khan is shown receiving 
distinguished visitors in this 
Persian miniature 
illustrating Rashid al-Din’s 
Jami at-tawarikh, an 
important source for 
36 Mongolian history. 
=,
 
To: Secret History of the Mongols (Mongyol-un 
ni'uCa tobéa’an) is the earliest surviving literary 
monument of the Mongolian people. Its author 
is unknown, and although it is widely thought 
to have been written in 1240, both its original 
title and the exact date of its composition are still 
matters for debate. 
What is beyond doubt is the fact that The 
Secret History is a historical and literary document 
of major importance. Not only does it recount 
the genealogy of the early Mongol khans and the 
life and times of Genghis Khan, founder of a uni- 
fied Mongol state, it also paints a vivid and ac- 
curate picture of the nomadic Mongol way of life 
and provides rich source material for an under- 
standing of Mongol society in the twelfth and 
thirteenth centuries. 
Soviet Academician Boris Vladimirtsov has 
described The Secret History as a “history- 
chronicle” retold in epic style and “impregnat- 
ed with the aroma of the steppe”. A British scho- 
lar, David Morgan, has pointed out that whatever 
hesitations historians may feel about the work 
as a strictly accurate record of historical events, 
there can be no doubt that it provides a unique 
and authoritative insight into the way of life, pat- 
terns of thought and beliefs of the thirteenth- 
century Mongols. 
Genghis Khan, the warrior 
who united the Mongol tribes 
The Secret History may be divided into three 
parts—a genealogy of the ancestors of Genghis 
Khan, stories about the life of Genghis Khan, and 
a short section on his son and successor Ogddei. 
The first part records the legendary history 
of Mongolia as reconstructed from very ancient 
oral traditions—myths and legends, stories and ac- 
counts of historical events. It opens with the 
legend that the forefather of the Mongolian peo- 
ple was “a bluish wolf which was born having 
[his] destiny from Heaven above”, whose “spouse 
was a fallow doe”.! The image of the wolf ap- 
pears in the mythology of many Eurasian peo- 
ples, closely connected with ancestor cults of the 
tribal chief or the founder of a clan. 
The following well-documented genealogy of 
the Mongol khans exalts the glory of the “Golden 
Horde” and is the genealogical basis for studies 
of the early history of the Mongolian people. 
The main theme is developed in the second 
part of the epic, in which legend and myth give 
way to more reliable historical data. Although 
the narrative continues in the epic style, it begins 
to assume the characteristics of a chronicle. An 
ancient Eastern system of chronology, based on a 
twelve-year animal cycle, is used to date events in 
the history of the numerous Mongolian tribes and 
their unification into a single state by Genghis 
Khan, the central figure of the story. 
Genghis Khan is portrayed not only as a

## [Page 37](083935engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 
 
y
y
 
=
 
P
=
 
a
 
-
—
_
e
 
F
p
 
PENG 
o
e
 
=
 
h
i
p
 
y
m
 
Y
i
n
 
-

## [Page 38](083935engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

38 
legendary hero and warrior, the embodiment of 
the “steppe aristocracy”, but also as a great po- 
litical figure and statesman who decided by his 
“iron will” to put an end to the discord among 
the Mongol tribes, where anarchy prevailed: 
The Heaven with stars 
Was turning round about. 
The many peoples were at strife. 
Not entering into their beds, 
They were spoiling one another. 
The earth with crust 


### 83930: The Secret History of the Mongols

Was turning backward and forward. 
The whole nation was at strife. 
Although the main hero of the story is 
Genghis Khan, one of the greatest conquerors in 
world history, the author does not seem to at- 
tach great significance to his military campaigns 
against other countries, as if he had deliberately 
ignored that aspect of Genghis’ career. On the 
other hand, he constantly stresses to readers and 
Genghis Khan. Painting 
on silk of the Yuan period 
(13th-14th centuries). 
   
  
listeners the benefits and privileges to be enjoyed 
within a centralized Mongolian state. 
The third, much shorter, part of The Secret 
History summarizes the reign of Ogddei 
(1228-1241), the second great khan of Mongolia. 
It is thought to be a later addition to the main 
text. 
The cult of Light 
A work of great literary merit, The Secret Histo- 
ry is a unique phenomenon in the history of 
nomadic peoples. It has been compared to monu- 
ments of world literature such as Homer’s [liad 
and Odyssey, Alexander Romance literature, the 
French Chanson de Roland, and the Russian Lay 
of Igor’s Campaign. 
The Mongolian people lived at a crossroads 
of world communications and it would be a mis- 
take to assume that such an epic could have been

## [Page 39](083935engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

  
created by them in isolation from other civiliza- 
tions. The script in which it was written had its 
origins in Phoenician, Aramaic and Sogdian sys- 
tems of writing. Close examination of the text 
reveals traces of religious and mythological con- 
cepts of ancient Oriental peoples, especially the 
influence of the Zoroastrian-Manichaean cult of 
Light. This cult is reflected in the Mongolian 
legend of the immaculate conception of Alan-qua, 
the foremother of Genghis Khan's clan, by the 
“Father-Light”. Alan-qua recounts her experience 
in the epic: 


### 83930: The Secret History of the Mongols

Every night, a bright yellow man entered by 
the light of the hole at the top or [by that] of the 
door top of the tent and rubbed my belly. His light 
was wont to sink into my belly. When be went out, 
like a yellow dog he was wont to crawl out by the 
beams of the sun or moon. 
Scholars have shown that some of the tales in 
The Secret History are of very ancient origin and 
have a close affinity with Central Asian and Eu- 
rasian legends. The following tale of the five 
arrow-shafts tied into a bundle, for example, 
recalls a story that was current among ancient Ira- 
nian peoples, particularly the Scythians: 
One day, in the spring, while boiling the dried 
(flesh of] a sheep, making these her frve sons...to sit 
in a row, she gave unto each [of them) a single ar- 
row shaft, saying “Break [\t}...each [of them] brake 
and cast away. Again, she bound frve arrow shafts 
together in a bundle and gave (them unto them), 
saying “Break [them)!” All frve, holding, every per- 
son, the frve arrow shafts bound in a bundle, were 
in turn not able to break... 
She said, “Ye, my five sons, were born of an only 
belly. If, like the frve arrow shafts of a little while 
ago, ye be each alone, like those single arrow shafts, 
(ye) will each [of you] easily be broken by any one. 
If together [ye] be of one purpose like those arrow 
shafts bound in a bundle, how will ye easily be 
[broken] by any one?” 
Plutarch tells how the Scythian king Skilur 
(second to first century BC) gathered all his sons 
around him before his death and asked each of 
them to break a bundle of darts. When they re- 
fused, the king broke the darts one by one, with 
the admonition that, united, his sons would be 
invincible. 
Genghis Khan (left) and 
Ogédet, bis son and 
SHCCESSO?. 
SHAGDARYN BIRA, 
Mongolian historian, is a 
member of his country’s 
Academy of Sciences. He 
has published many studies 
on the history and culture 
of medieval Mongolia, 
including a book on 
Mongolian historiography 
from the 13th to the 17th 
centuries which has been 
translated into Russian and 
Chinese. 
A sourcebook 
for Oriental historians 
Ever since it was written, The Secret History has 
been known throughout the Orient, and for 750 
years it has been one of the main sources for the 
history of other countries of Central Asia as well 
as Mongolia. It has been used as a source in fun- 
damental historical works of the Orient such as 
Jami at-tawarikh, the universal history compiled 
by the Persian author Rashid al-Din (1247-1318), 
and the Yan shih (“History of the Yiian Dy- 
nasty”), the famous Chinese chronicle of the 
Mongol empire in China (thirteenth to four- 
teenth century). 
As a result of Rashid al-Din’s work, most of 
the contemporary information recorded in The 
Secret History has been retold and reinterpreted 
in many important historical writings of Central 
Asian countries, including those of the Mughal 
empire in India. 
The Akbarnama, the chronicle of the em- 
peror Akbar and his ancestors written by the 
great Mughal historian Abu-l-Faz] (1551-1602), 
gives a detailed version of the Alan-qua story 
which compares Alan-qua with the Virgin Mary, 
raises her to the rank of Mother of God, and 
urges: “If you listen to the tale of Mary, believe 
the same of Alanguwa (Alan-qua)”.? Abu-l-Fazl 
also does his best to prove that Akbar was 
descended from the legendary foremother of the 
Mongols. 
The Secret History has also been esteemed in 
China as a valuable source for the history of the 
Mongolian people, and fourteenth-century 
Chinese bibliophiles actually helped to preserve 
the epic for posterity by transcribing into Chinese 
characters the original Mongol text, which has 
not survived, and by making verbatim and 
abridged translations. In 1866, a first Russian 
translation of The Secret History was made from 
the abridged Chinese version, and since then the 
Mongolian masterpiece has become available to 
the international academic community. u 
1. Quotations from The Secret History of the Mongols, Vol. I, trans- 
lated into English and edited by Francis W. Cleaves. Harvard 
University Press, 1982. 
2. From The Akbarnama of Abu-l-Fazl, translated into English by 
H. Beveridge, Delhi, 1972. 39

## [Page 40](083935engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

40 
The Mahdvamsa is 4 verse 
chronicle which paints a colourful 
Jresco of Sri Lanka’ early history. 
Ler since it was wrirten, 5, the 
sixth century by a Buddhis: monk, 
it has been periodically updated 
   

## [Page 41](083935engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### IGNORE

pT 
  
»
 
y 
4a 
E
y
e
 


### 83931: The Mahàvamsa, Sri Lanka's non-stop epic

  
The Mabavamsa, 
Sri Lanka’ 
non-stop €pic 
  
Lf, a monk and bis 
pupil at Anuradhbapura, Sri 
Lanka. Below, frieze on the 
stupa at Sanchi, India, 
depicts worshippers around 
the Bodhi-tree under which 
the Buddha was sitting 
when Enlightenment came 
to him. 
  
  
BY ANANDA W. P. GURUGE 
[x the last twelve years a group of Sri Lankan 
historians and linguists have been meeting regu- 
larly in Colombo to write their nation’s histo- 
ry. They are engaged on a remarkable project, 
for the history is being written in verse and in 
Pali, a classical Indo-Aryan language which is 
hardly used today except by the Buddhist clergy 
and a small circle of eminent international 
scholars. 
The historians are bringing up to date Sri 
Lanka's national epic poem, the Mabavamsa or 
“Great Chronicle”, whose first thirty-seven chap- 
ters in nearly 3,000 Pali verses were composed 
by a Buddhist scholar-monk named Mahanama 
in the sixth century AD. Publication of the up- 
dated history is awaited with great interest in 
Sri Lanka. 
The origins of the Mabavamsa can be traced 
at least as far back as the fourth century BC. The 
Aryan settlers who had migrated to Sri Lanka 
from the Indus and Ganges basins of the Indian 
sub-continent possessed an exceedingly keen 
historical sense. They kept records of their ex- 
ploits and experiences not merely as ballads or 
sagas of folk or literary interest but more syste- 
matically, as historical accounts seeking to assert 
their cultural identity as a new nation in a new 
land. 
Monks who chronicled 
the exploits of heroes 
The dynastic history of at least two centuries was 
already thus recorded before Buddhism was in- 
troduced in the third century BC. With the ad- 
vent of Buddhist monks, Sri Lanka was assured 
of the continuing services of reliable and dedicat- 
ed historiographers and custodians of its histori- 
cal tradition. - 
Buddhism ushered in several centuries of in- 
tense literary activity. While the Tripitaka, the 
Buddhist Canon, was preserved in Pali (a liter- 
ary form of the vernacular which the Buddha 
used in his discourses), the commentaries elucidat- 41

## [Page 42](083935engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### IGNORE

42 
ing it were produced locally in Sinhala. The 
historical sections, known as Sibala-Atthakatha- 
Mabavamsa (“The Great Chronicle of the Sinha- 
la Commentary”), were periodically updated and 
comprised information drawn from a number of 
sources: early accounts, with mythical overtones, 
of waves of Aryan migrations; a detailed and pos- 
sibly documented monastic tradition relating to 
crucial events in the history of Buddhism; royal 
records of secular and religious achievements in 
the form of registers of meritorious deeds accom- 
plished for the benefit of the Buddhist faith on 
the one hand, and the general public on the other; 
panegyrics and heroic ballads which court poets 
and wandering minstrels had produced to enter- 


### 83931: The Mahàvamsa, Sri Lanka's non-stop epic

tain royalty and edify the population. 
In keeping with the ancient Indian tradition, 
Sri Lanka recognized three categories of heroes: 
Dharmavira (heroes of righteousness), Danavira 
(heroes of liberality) and Yuddhavira (military 
heroes). Many heroes from each category had dis- 
tinguished themselves in the history of the island, 
and tales about them had become part of the liter- 
ary heritage. 
An imperfect attempt to present this materi- 
al entirely in Pali verse was made in the fourth 
century AD in an epic poem known as the 
Dipavamsa (“Island Chronicle) whose author is 
unknown. The imperfections of the Dipavamsa, 
which include grammatical, stylistic and linguis- 
tic inelegance, result from the fact that Pali had 
not yet become a literary language and from the 
technical problems involved in organizing materi- 
al from different sources. Two centuries later, Ma- 
hanama overcame these difficulties and his 
Mahavamsa became the epic poem par excellence 
of Sri Lanka. 
The main literary value of the Mabavamsa lies 
in its effective use of Pali verse to narrate the his- 
tory of the nation in a straightforward style, with 
the expressed purpose of “generating the serene 
joy and emotion of the pious”. 
Excluding the introductory chapters on 
Buddhist traditions and history, the Mahivamsa 
is organized as three epics in one: 
e chapters six to ten: the Vijaya 
Pandukabbaya Epic on the founding and consoli- 
dation of the Sinhala kingdom in Sri Lanka; 
® chapters eleven to twenty: the 
Devanampiyatissa-Mahtnda Epic, which tells of the 
introduction of Buddhism to Sri Lanka and its 
consolidation as the state religion; 
® chapters twenty-two to thirty-two: the 
  
The temple at 
Anuradbapura, ancient 
capital of the Sri Lankan 
kingdom of the same name. 
P ilgrimage to Mount 
Mihintale, Sri Lanka. 
Legend has it that 
Mahinda, son of the Indian 
emperor Asoka, alighted on 
the mountain around 250 
BC when be came to 
preach Buddhism 
in Sri Lanka. 
  
  
  
 

## [Page 43](083935engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
ANANDA W.P. GURUGE 
is Sri Lanka’s ambassador to 
France and permanent - 
delegate to Unesco, where he 
is a member of the Executive 
Board. He is a specialist in 
Asian and Buddhist cultures 
on which he has written 
several books, including The 
Mabavamsa: A New 
Annotated Translation with 
Prolegomena. 
Dutthagamani-Abbaya Epic about the national 
hero of the second century BC who reunified the 
kingdom by liberating the regions under foreign 
domination and left a lasting heritage of magnifi- 
cent monuments to the glory of Buddhism. 
Instead of singling out these themes for iso- 
lated treatment, the historian in Mahanama 
favoured a chronological narrative. Thus the 
Mahéivamsa became a chronicle. The format and 
style of the connecting chapters (i.e. chapters 
twenty-one and thirty-three to thirty-seven) and 
especially the last five chapters provided the 
prototype for all later prolongations of the 
Mabhavamsa. 
25 centuries of written history 
Including the current project described above, 
there have been as many as seven efforts since the 
thirteenth century to update the chronicle. As a 
result, Sri Lanka enjoys the distinction of being 
perhaps the only modern nation to have main- 
tained an unbroken written history over twenty- 
five centuries. What makes this record exception- 
al is that its authenticity has been substantially 
established by archaeological, epigraphical and 
numismatic evidence and from external literary 
sources. 
Notable though it is for literary merit and 
historical authenticity, the Mahdvamsa is essen- 
tially religious in character. The narration of the 
good and evil deeds of kings and other historical 
figures seems exclusively intended to draw a 
moral. Most chapters end with either an admo- 
nition or a reminder of a basic doctrine of Budd- 
hism. The doctrines emphasized relate to 
impermanence, wholesome and unwholesome ac- 
tion, detachment and the proper use of wealth 
and power. True to his didactic role, Mahanama 
displays an admirable degree of impartiality and 
objectivity i n assessing the careers and contribu- 
tions of various rulers, including usurpers and 
invaders. 
Notwithstanding the seriousness of purpose 
that is shown in recording the eventful history 
of a colourful people, the Mabavamsa abounds in 
“human interest” episodes relating to a wide spec- 
trum of human types. It reflects the noble and 
the mean, the wisdom and the foibles, the sub- 
lime and the ridiculous which characterize hu- 
man behaviour at all times and in all societies. 
The fact that the epic deals with real people and 
not with fictional or depersonalized types adds 
to the insights it provides into the strengths and 
weaknesses of humankind. 
Reconstructing the Indian past 
The Mahavamsa came to the attention of the in- 
ternational academic community in 1826 when 
the Pali and Buddhist scholar Eugene Burnouf 
translated it into French. His translation was not 
published, however, as George Turnour, an En- 
glish civil servant resident in Sri Lanka, was in 
the process of publishing the original Pali text 
with an English translation. The Mahavamsa was 
to be of considerable value in reconstructing the 
ancient history of India. 
In the 1830s, the English Indologist James 
Prinsep, the Champollion of Indian epigraphy, 
deciphered the ancient Brahmi script and began 
to read the edicts and pillar inscriptions of an im- 
pressive historical figure whose name appeared 
in the inscriptions as “Devanapiya Piyadasi”. No 
Indian literary record or historical tradition shed 
light on a ruler with such a name. Knowing that 
the Sinhalas of Sri Lanka had a well-developed 
historical sense, Turnour believed that their an- 
cient literary works could hélp epigraphists and 
archaeologists. As he suspected, the Mahavamsa 
established beyond any doubt that Devanapiya 
Piyadasi was Asoka, the third emperor of the 
Mauryan dynasty, of whom the epic gives a full 
account as the foremost patron of Buddhism. 
Background information provided by the 


### 83931: The Mahàvamsa, Sri Lanka's non-stop epic

Mabavamsa, in addition to confirming Prinsep’s 
readings of the inscriptions, proved to be vitally 
important for the pioneering research and discov- 
eries of archaeologists in India. On the basis of 
evidence from the Sri Lankan epic alone, the 
British archaeologist Alexander Cunningham was 
able to identify the names and ascertain the sig- 
nificance of a number of holy persons whose rel- 
ics were enshrined by the emperor Asoka in the 
stupas at Sanchi and Sonari in central India. The 
Mahavamsa and its predecessor the Dipavamsa 
contained detailed information about the mission- 
aries sent to propagate Buddhism in Sri Lanka and 
elsewhere under Asoka’s patronage. When iden- 
tifying the events represented in the sculptured 
gateways of Sanchi, the German art historian 
Albert Griinwedel used the Mahavamsa’s account 
of how Asoka sent to Sri Lanka a sapling of the 
Bodhi-tree under which the Buddha was sitting 
when Enlightenment came to him. 
Last but not least, the Mahavamsa has been 
indispensable to the archaeologists and historians 
of Sri Lanka for whom it has provided the 
chronological framework into which their discov- 
eries can be fitted. Many monuments and reser- 
voirs have been identified only by using 
information recorded in the epic. Confusions 
created by inaccurate popular lore have been 
resolved with the aid of the Mahavamsa even be- 
fore supporting epigraphical evidence was found. 
As many as 3,000 inscriptions hitherto studied 
could hardly have been dated and interpreted in 
any other way. 
The efforts in international academic circles 
to unravel the mysteries of the Mabavamsa, on 
the one hand, and the Sri Lankan project to bring 
it up to date on the other, demonstrate the last- 
ing impact the epic has exercised over the centu- 
ries. One wonders whether the ancient scribes 
who kept palace records and the monks who syn- 
thesized them into a historical narrative could 
have had any idea of the distinction they were 
thus bringing to their motherland. L 43

## [Page 44](083935engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 83932: Shaka Zulu, a living legend

Shaka Zulu, 
ving legend a | 
~
 
“ 
Q 
§ 
«
2
 
3 
v
.
5
3
 
F
E
I
T
 
=
 
X
N
 
S 
= 
RT 
i. 
E
E
 
$§ 
£
3
 
8 
E
E
 
S
E
E
 
L
E
 
0 
§ 
S 
T
E
X
.
.
.
 8 
rr 
A
A
 
S
r
 
W
r
 
Fi 
hr 
a 
Lng 
Gta 
as 
on 
E
E
 
‘ 
-
e
 
. 
“ 
- 
’ 
v
o
.
 
- 
J
 
 
 
            a
 
-— 
A
y
 
— 
r
t
e
 
A
R
    
 
 
g 
o
.
3
 
A 
£E 
E
X
 
x 
A 
1
.
5
3
 
oN 
L
S
 
x 
3 
=
 
3
 
“Ry 
20° 
N
w
 
GV 
5 
o
R
 
DB. 
K
s
 
~ 
™
~
 
N
i
g
 
8
%
 
; 
5
S
 
&
S
 
A 
R
P
.
 
bo 
SC 
$
8
 8 
2
 
8 
E
E
 
= 
X
Q
 
or 
~
 
x 
¢ 
FS 
3 
: 
£3 
44

## [Page 45](083935engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 83932: Shaka Zulu, a living legend

  
Shaka Zulu is an outstanding example of a 
historical figure who became an epic hero. In the 
epic of which he plays the central role, his birth, 
rise and fall are closely associated with those of 
the Zulu empire. 
History relates how the Zulu were a small 
clan of the Ngunis, a Bantu people which migrat- 
ed to southern Africa from the north around 1300 
AD and settled in the Vaal regions east of the 
Drakensberg mountains. The migration trek of 
the Ngunis was led by Malendela, who had two 
sons, Quabe and Zulu. Little is known of Zulu 
except that he became the progenitor of the na- 
tion which bears his name. Chroniclers sum up 
his heritage in these terms: “He left the world 
cumbered with a grave and richer by a nation. 
And therein lie his monument and his fame. No 
feats, no follies, not one word of praise of him 
is recorded.” 
A great nation deserves to be born in more 
splendid circumstances, however, and this is why 
the epic of Shaka is so important. In it Shaka is 
attributed with achievements so towering that 
they qualify him to usurp from Malendela’s son 
the role of father of the Zulu people. 
Birth of a hero 
Shaka was conceived during a pre-marital rela- 
tionship, and his mother Nandi, a member of the 
Lengani royal family, only later became the third 
wife of his father Senzangakhona, king of the 
Zulu. Before his birth, the elders had declared that 
his mother was not pregnant but merely har- 
boured ishaka, an intestinal beetle. This “beetle” 
later became an emperor. 
This beginning of the legend, locating moral 
fault in the conception of Shaka as the root cause 
of his problems, is important for the structure 
of the epic in that it prepares for Shaka’s odys- 
sey of initiation. In fact, Shaka was not really an 
illegitimate son, since among the Zulu people pre- 
marital conception was only considered a crime 
among the lower strata of society. It was tolerat- 
ed among the aristocracy and both Shaka’s par- 
ents were aristocrats. 
Shaka’s early childhood was unhappy. His 
mother’s name, Nandi, meant “the Sweet One”, 
but she hardly lived up to it. Wilful, sharp- 
tongued and authoritarian, she was despised by 
many, including her husband. Her beauty and her 
inferior position in the Zulu royal house pro- 
voked a mixture of jealousy, hatred and scorn, 
and Shaka too was treated with derision. This 
hostility brought together mother and son. Shaka 
adored his mother and this bond was further 
strengthened when the two went into exile. 
Banished by Senzangakhona, mother and 
child were badly received in Nandi’s family. 
Their sufferings actually became much worse 
since a discarded wife had no place in the social 
hierarchy. In addition, a child, and especially a 
boy, belonged by priority to his father’s clan. 
Shaka was made to feel the full force of his 
mother’s humiliation. He was often scolded and 
beaten for no valid reason. Defended by nobody 
but his mother, he developed into a tough, self- 
reliant personality. He was said to have killed a 
hyena and saved the girl it was carrying off, and to 
have performed other youthful feats of bravery. 
Shaka was condemned to enter adulthood prema- 
turely. From this point, the various oral and 
written renderings of the epic diverge. 
There are two major written versions. Ac- 
cording to one, written by Thomas Mofolo in 
1908, Shaka falls into the hands of Issanoussi, an 
all-powerful medicine man who helps him com- 
plete his initiation. 
The second written version of the Shaka epic 
is a poetic rendering by Mazisi Kunene, who is 
himself a Zulu. This version is closer to the histor- 
ical facts and to the Zulu literary tradition. Un- 
like Mofolo, whose version of Shaka’s exploits 
emphasizes the role of magic, fantasy and supra- 
human forces, Kunene dwells more on Shaka’s 
political, military and visionary qualities. He 
takes us directly from Shaka’s childhood to his 
military apprenticeship under his protector and 
mentor, Dingiswayo, the enlightened king of the 
Bathethwa, in whose army Shaka becomes a 
recruit. 
The rise of Shaka 
Shaka’s intelligence soon brought him to the at- 
tention of Dingiswayo. Above all he distin- 
guished himself a$ a skilled military leader with 
ideas which would revolutionize the art of war. 
He advocated the use of the short, wide-bladed 
stabbing spear instead of the long throwing spear, 
claiming that a soldier who threw his spear not 
only disarmed himself, but also armed his ene- 
my. The long spear was also cumbersome and in- 
effective in close combat. According to Shaka, a 
good soldier should be a well-trained profession- 
al, hardened and experienced in the techniques 
‘of combat. Dingiswayo listened to his proposals 
and gave him the command of a group of young 
volunteers who soon proved far superior to all 
* Originally written in the Zulu language, Mazisi Kunene’s 
Emperor Shaka the Great has been published in English as part 
of the Unesco Collection of Representative Works by 
Heinemann Educational Books Ltd. (1979). Its publication has 
not yet been authorized in South Africa in its original form. 45

## [Page 46](083935engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 83932: Shaka Zulu, a living legend

46 
the other troops. Shaka also did away with the 
leather sandals that not only reduced the soldier’s 
speed but also made his feet soft and vulnerable. 
His soldiers toughened their unshod feet by 
dancing on hard ground littered with thorns. 
Shaka then tried to impress on the soft- 
hearted Dingiswayo the idea that an enemy 
should either be completely destroyed or forced 
to declare allegiance to him, and that the art of 
war should be geared to this goal. To this end 
Shaka proposed the use of a “cow-horn” forma- 
tion in battle. Three divisions should be engaged 
in battle. The bulk of the army should make a 
frontal attack with fresh reserve forces at the rear. 
The other two divisions should lie in wait, one 
on the left and the other on the right. Once the 
enemy was engaged in the frontal attack, the 
other two divisions should close in, encircle him 
and cut off his retreat. Dingiswayo was reluctant - 
to put these revolutionary ideas into practice, and 
Shaka had to be patient. 
The return to Zululand 
Shaka’s glory could not be complete until he 
returned to Zululand as legitimate heir to his 
father’s throne. Before his death, Senzangakho- 
na had named the cowardly leader Sigujana as his 
heir. With the blessing of Dingiswayo, Shaka 
marched to claim control over Zululand. His ven- 
ture was successful. At the head of his invincible 
regiment and flanked by his two trusty lieu- 
tenants Mgobhozi and Mqoboka, Shaka entered 
his father’s royal palace and ushered in a new era. 
He was now in a position to put his revolu- 
tionary military and political ideas into practice. 
Bound by respect and loyalty towards Din- 
giswayo, he waited for the latter’s death before 
pursuing expansionist policies. When Dingiswayo 
was slain by Zwide, the dreaded king of the 
Ndwandes, Shaka waged war against Zwide. 
He lured Zwide’s army into a trap by mak- 
ing a tactical retreat which enabled him to gain 
better fighting ground and to wear out his ene- 
my through fatigue and famine. Zwide’s army de- 
pended on provisions collected or looted in the 
battle areas, whereas Shaka had formed a brigade 
of young men to look after the provisioning of 
his forces during mobile warfare. Since Shaka had 
previously devastated the zones along which he 
    
  
  
   
lured the enemy, Zwide’s army inevitably suc- 
cumbed to starvation. His army destroyed, Zwide 
is said to have disappeared in the open mouth of 
a mountain and to have been carried along an un- 
derground stream to the land of the evil dead. 
Having conquered the strongest of his adver- 
saries, Shaka now began to strengthen and expand 
his empire. He had already formed regiments on 
the basis of age: the #Fasimba, a brigade of sixteen- 
to twenty-year-olds, the isimPholo (the 
“bachelors” brigade” of twenty- to thirty-year- 
olds) and the amaWombe (the “battlers”, com- 
prising married men up to forty years old). 
In Shaka’s empire, hierarchy was based on 
merit. More than ever before he made heroism 
a central part of the Zulu ethos. A recognized 
hero exercised greater political authority than a 
born prince. Later this caused conflicts between 
him and his brothers, but it was a guarantee of 
equal opportunities for all who served under him. 
Anyone who defended the interests of the Zulu 
nation became Zulu, and it is often said that most 
of his generals and close comrades were not of 
Zulu descent. 
Shaka’s death was the result of heinous in- BALA AMUSE 
trigues by his envious brothers, Dingane and is a Ugandan writer based 
Mhalangana, with the complicity of Mbopha, his in Paris. His doctoral thesis, 
army commander. His death is seen by many. ~~ "order and chaos in the 
X ) African novel, will be 
African authors as the ultimate betrayal and the published shortly.

## [Page 47](083935engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 83932: Shaka Zulu, a living legend

  
  
   
   
    
  
  
  
Poster and scene from a 
1976 production of Le 
Zoulou, by the Congolese 
playwright Tchicaya 
UTam’Si, at the 30th 
Avignon Festival, France. 
The play was performed 
by Théitre Noir, 
a troupe of African 
and West Indian actors. 
  
A Zulu kraal or village in 
Shaka’s day. 
i — 
=i 
Ags 
murder of a Christ-like figure. The two brothers 
leapt from their hiding place and stabbed him 
from behind. Mbopha struck at the astonished 
Shaka from the front as he fell. Afraid that he 
would rise again, the three assailants continued 
stabbing at him furiously even after he was dead. 
They then placed guards around his corpse in case 
he should rise from the dead. 
Just before his death the visionary Shaka is 
said to have pronounced the words: “So, my 
brothers, you are killing me? And you, Mbopha, 
son of Sithayi! You think you shall rule Zululand 
after my death. No, you shall never rule over it.” 
Shaka is a figure of the pre-colonial era, which 
colonial historians have often endeavoured to 
reduce to a subsistence level of village exploits. 
His image is a challenge to this prejudice. Afri- 
can poets such as Léopold Sédar Senghor of Sene- 
gal and playwrights such as Zambia’s Twanyanga 
Mulikita have composed works inspired by the 
Shaka epic. In all these plays and poems, Shaka 
is depicted as the hero of an Africa seeking to 
overcome tribal divisions before the onset of 
colonial domination. There is often an underly- 
ing theme that the hero will rise again. n 
 
  

## [Page 48](083935engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

    
  
et 
hy , hr 
or 
y 
” 
] 
3 a 
3 TT Ag {5 MAL 
ih "4 
TS 
y ’ 
Le } 
gl | 
Te -.> r J 
4 E sh Iria 
 
Tots a v 
yd we E ul 
‘ N 
R- Tedd 
ed y ati 
3 ra I 5 
p Saf i 
be 
: "“d / f 
™ ob hi rh hd , 
{ R # “ —_. 
. y 2 TT ai , aid 
y rad YS? i” 
. “y ’ » x Ag’ ¥ 
Ch Meda ' ' o EB oi . EB 
- : 
vw fe _-r . a - 
04 Reo " J 
$s Lv wih ! 
wh FATE Lh ih i eh EN a» pr 
  
Cake 
   
Bete Atal 4 NOV per sa 
- ahd " py 
.t Wi ! : oh EL ct 
He ne A dig ih RT ue i 
er - 
: ET oe 
wll ~ 
Py " ¥ Fa 
a > lia oi - : 
- rad N 
vo WEAN EO re ne 
» ww. MD on ye . 23 all 
v - wa BR a LO LE] lo 
- s & - 
RICA TY IN RTE pat ’ 
. . 
ll A. sa ahh dnd RR LI ey = #4 15 A Fy TT 
: y ye lk sh } rm “g ripe wi te pr . 5 
‘" ’ ¥ E 
+ 4 ni LN 4 4 a eer > E . 
J i pd a a ra) wed As pa you Ao 74 {* ard F le 
ihe THR, FF “ v so (INR . Ste “rd , 
p PLA 
Ae - “rt -—" “val . 
* : ou Sal oh Laie - - 
- - fi 
eM : hh Sd HE LT 
: nd of 0 wil ! ! 
a dv yoo dd we ve Aaa FTA nh) 3 * 
a — i On : Fo y te TN 
a we Ln - a, i Faowina o . A 
- B — yr " 
+4 F 4 % ; : I ay he EAR 
- hg » we go +08 a. ’ a v * p - 
nh ) Sa 2 : : i ro — d's : Te po JR TEE Se SL, p ye $ Fide oi i RERRRPARUE RI TLL 5 Le 
- - mn 4 I RE CW Fol ¥ ol p » a. REST Vee} 
)

## [Page 49](083935engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 83933: Knights of the Far West

Knights of the Far West 
BY GARY N. GRANVILLE  
The cowboy starred in epics 
which unfolded on cinema screens 
the world over. Has this modern 
knight on horseback ridden into 
the sunset for the last time? 
ANT P a “iwi 
z 
ty 
Tn 
. et : b 
N - va 4 
. a a by 
x 
“a 
- " r hs » 
~ Li vv As] “i w 
_ ry UR 
. 
A ol bo 
A E Yin ve $v easy oA 4 a Ls . b \ 
- 
} 2 4 - 
ry - - - 
hh FT ree 
a - » ’ 
¢ 5 “a NK WAAR g : phige 
: ral v % . 
ven, BEE Lomo hb 
it i E : - 
; ia dio ~ So ha 
o pe) E h E SE * Tat 
URRi i A " 
— : ni 
hte a a 4 - « 
. ar A . 
. J yd foi 
Sdn My Pe Te " . » f 
WN ~~ . >» 3 YEN . Mt : rs : ’ «Vy A ad oF SIRE 
» " , A ENR Ba abit, APL Tee i pA api i. #, & A Sb Bere {2 
vik 4% nN " a hie 
. FN? 
SEI pV i le, NERS VS Ly thot BR a 4 
IR MELE LT & 4 at: ~ Fo al ' 
ve 114 EO Bh : L, . ”'. ll — » il A os 
: ll wi gh TONASI Go Bd vr vidi -_ v * a Th 
u - aa aL oo. po . yn Nog ¥ “ or al v 
o” A hy # - 
nex pa dd f Rr a " A Lh! 
El an te : ‘ 
i ral REE tn ITN Wr 
5 v vy ¥ } : a Ad 
* L BL a, LR, . vg fe 4 La | 
Tv ede A : : 
xe ,- h uv : op SR itm PTE LE palo 
oN eM; IW Fed AES ‘ Ay X 
- * oy hs oy APE, A PN ru a oA v \ wy 
oy : A Fa ¥Fiwy EL .N » he 
- al do i . wo. Ar AA A 
wR. ny rh . .y wath =, do Se Ie | < 
: a i boyd om J } v oy 
. wing van da . 
roi rE Ld Nig wha - ; EA rt F rud 
a Lk Ry ET Fai 
] 
FN ed wh Ek wolf Whe (1 EA ap = : hy Tg Yay ER rr ag pha A 
£7 =H » als H af » : lw § } An 
a —_— ry hi + al \ For Hin 8 TI a \ 
a bn al SANE] 
fr 4 Rh y iy A iw dda y PRN Ay’ aA Ay “Ay _ 

## [Page 50](083935engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### 83933: Knights of the Far West

50 
-— - r 
+ SITTING BULL. . 
The Sioux chief Sitting Bull and Buffalo Bill 
(William Frederick Cody, 1846-1917) in a spectacular show 
which dramatized life in the Wild West. 

## [Page 51](083935engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

  
No myth is more widespread or more deeply 
woven into the fabric of contemporary culture 
than that of the western. As the twenty-first cen- 
tury approaches, it is striking that a historical 
phenomenon over a hundred years old should 
still be so fresh and alive. The behaviour patterns, 
aspirations, styles of dress, and even the kind of 
food depicted in westerns have become familiar 
models for people the world over to dream about. 
Blue jeans, the cowboy’s trademark, are the 
most popular garment on earth. And clothing, 
surely, is the most visible emblem of the image 
of themselves people want to project. Hundreds 
of millions of would-be cowboys walk around in 
jeans. Why has the western had such a universal 
impact? Two of the main reasons would seem to 
be the archetypal power of the myth, and the 
technological and cultural background of the 
twentieth century. 
From knight to cowboy 
The cowboy is the democratic heir of the mythi- 
cal knight in shining armour. He evokes and 
- adapts for the modern public the countless 
legends that have grown up through the ages, all 
over the world, around the taming of the horse. 
The chivalrous knight is someone who 
masters his animal nature, thereby raising him- 
self above other men. He is more powerful, more 
mobile and freer than they. He shoulders the 
noble responsibility of restoring justice and 
defending the weak and the oppressed. But he is 
vulnerable, because if he wavers and falls from 
grace, he has a long way to fall. He is lonely, too, 
for not everyone can become a knight. The at- 
traction of the myth of the chivalrous knight is 
rooted in the twofold dream we all harbour, of 
achieving self-control and meting out justice. For 
a long time the fulfilment of this dream was be- 
yond the reach of most of us. 
Then, with the American and the French 
Revolutions, the great principle of human equal- 
SELIG 
THE Ho 
TOM MIX 
DOING STUNTS 
WESTERN COMEBY 
IN TWO REELS 
=e 
ity came to the fore and transformed ways of 
thinking. The ideal of the western was the per- 
fect substitute for an over-élitist myth. The dig- 
nity and freedom of the knight were now within 
the grasp of everyone, at least in imagination. A 


### 83933: Knights of the Far West

figure from the New World, the cowboy, was 
grafted onto an ancient myth, ready to captivate 
the whole world. 
The Golden Age of the Far West 
Then along came the cinema, an invention that 
has had inconceivable repercussions. Like Guten- 
berg’s printing press, it revolutionized commu- 
nications. It propagated the same dreams to a 
worldwide audience. As early production and dis- 
tribution techniques were cumbersome and ex- 
pensive, only a limited number of films were 
available to an ever-widening public. 
The sheer size of the American market meant 
that the United States would play a dominant role 
in world cinema: films whose costs had already 
  
     
  
Poster for a western 
featuring the American 
actor Tom Mix and his 
famous horse, Tony. In 
films Tom Mix portrayed 
the decent cowboy, 
committed to the struggle 
for justice. 
51

## [Page 52](083935engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

52 
ZA — 
5 I gryenturas Extraordiy, 
2 
arias 
1 § Hal Don / © BuO B > 
| LANZADOS AL ABISMO 
eal 
: £4 
pt - | 
~ . B. 
Ramén Sepena, editor, Provensa, 83 a 7. Bageeiona 
y : n — 
A 
       
  
Right, three knights on 
horseback (15th-century 
3 French miniature). Left, 
Buffalo Bill depicted on the 
cover of a Spanish 
GARY N. GRANVILLE 
is a Paris-based American 
writer who has worked in 
films, television, 
photography and 
advertising. 
illustrated magazine. 
been recouped at home could be exported at 
prices that defied all competition. Add to this the 
extraordinary popularity of American films, and 
the result was that the whole world began to see 
the same films and to share the same cinema 
landscape. 
In response to the production needs of a 
rapidly increasing output, the American film in- 
dustry set up in California, where there is sun- 
shine practically all the year round. Film-makers 
need décors as well as light and actors—and 
California has plenty of outstanding natural lo- 
cations, ideal for westerns. 
The advent of television meant that the 
myths vehicled by the American cinema reached 
an even wider audience. The whole planet began 
to tune into the Hollywood wavelength. But it 
was the Far West, without a doubt, that most 
strikingly captured the popular imagination. 
© Adventure in the wide open spaces and per- 
manent confrontation with danger gave a man 
the opportunity to reveal the best (or the worst) 
of himself, to go beyond the frontiers of civiliza- 
tion and escape from its reassuring but repressive 
grip. What a thrilling experience for modern 
man, confined to a world of daily routine and 
mundane hopes, ground down by conventions 
and constraints! 
The end of a myth? 
But the values underlying this myth were slow- 
ly turned upside down. The form remained the 
same, but the content changed. The ideal became 
the anti-hero, not the hero. The search for in- 


### 83933: Knights of the Far West

 
dividuality and liberty, the rebellion symbolized 
by the western, persisted, but there was a shift 
in one of the myth’s intrinsic values: belief in di- 
vine justice. This virtually universal idea presup- 
poses that harmony, if disturbed, always 
re-establishes itself, in human society as in the cos- 
mos. Order triumphs over disorder. This notion 
is expressed in the Oriental “karma”, in the 
West's “as you sow so shall you reap”. 
This concept of justice had always been an 
integral part of the scenario (the cavalry which 
always arrives in the nick of time), or a presup- 
position of the narrative (crime doesn’t pay). Just 
as the knights of old defending a just cause in- 
variably came out victorious from the “judge-

## [Page 53](083935engo.pdf#page=53) 0

### IGNORE

] 
: 
: 
a | 
, “UR 
at 
< } 
ment of God”, it was impossible for the “bad 
guy” to draw his gun before the “good guy” in 
their ritual duel. The idea that the forces of good 
always win in the end gave the myth its transcen- 
dent quality. It is perhaps no coincidence that the 
sheriff's badge is a six-pointed star, like Solomon’s 
seal, a symbol of equilibrium and wisdom. 
Until the 1970s, then, audiences delighted in 
the triumph of order, which reaffirmed their faith 
in justice, honesty, in short, in all the great moral 
values. Then ways of thinking changed and these 
values were challenged. Everything was called 
into question, even myths. 
The systematic and sometimes naive moral 
stance commended to us by the American cine- 
de. 
ma, particularly in westerns, was no longer in 
tune with modern thinking. A reaction was in- 
evitable. The idea of divine justice and the stereo- 


### 83933: Knights of the Far West

typed hero were less clearly defined. In recent 
years most westerns have been pastiches of the 
mythical West or have set out to demystify it. 
Now the outlaw is defended, even glorified, and 
there is a feeling that the other traditional adver- 
saries, the Indians, can no longer be seen as the 
bad guys. The keynote is realism, sometimes even 
squalor. The solitude of the cowboy has become 
selfishness, his dignity has become a form of 
provocation. The legendary cowboy no longer 
exists. By a curious coincidence, he died around 
the same time as John Wayne. n 53

## [Page 54](083935engo.pdf#page=54) 0

### IGNORE

  
54 
‘SCIENCE AND SOCIETY 
  
  


### 83934: Mapping the human genome

Mapping the human genome 
BY JACQUES RICHARDSON 
Boocss aided by mathemati- 
cians, engineers, computer specialists 
and a variety of industrial researchers, 
began last January a generation-long ef- 
fort to trace and identify every gene and 
related material representing the hu- 
man body's “blueprint”. This analysis 
of our biological architecture is called 
the human genome study—" genome” 
meaning how a living organism is as- 
sembled in its finest details. 
The research is expected to require 
between fifteen and thirty years of in- 
vestigation, costing perhaps between 
$3,000 and $4,000 million. Sir Walter 
Bodmer, president of the British Associ- 
ation for the Advancement of Science, 
calls the genome plan the “'most excit- 
ing" of all the current, large-scale inter- 
national research ventures. 
Why so much costly effort, and for 
what purpose? One reason is that, af- 
ter a century of intensive biological 
research, we still do not understand pre- 
cisely how the body is built and works 
(or sometimes fails to). We still need to 
learn the complete instructions for 
"making a human being”, how these 
are communicated through all the 
body's cells to the various tissues and 
vital organs—brain, heart, liver and so 
forth—and why some instructions go 
wrong. 
A second reason is that, once we 
have understood how the genome is 
constructed and functions, we should 
be able to take appropriate precautions 
or corrective steps to deal with errors 
in the system: disease and disability. 
Medicine and public health are thus ex- 
pected to benefit enormously from the 
new knowledge. We should then be 
able to resolve, thirdly, some of the 
many mysteries of human heredity. A 
fourth goal is to save some of the en- 
dangered biological species facing pos- 
sible extinction. 
Not counting the blood’s red cells, 
your body or mine contains between 10 
 
Biologists embark on 
a vast new international project 
to identify and locate 
every human gene. 
million million and 100 million million 
cells, so that each cubic centimetre of 
living tissue contains many millions. 
Each microscopic cell has its own 
smaller nucleus, within which the “in- 
structions for living” are coded along 
an extremely long DNA molecule. DNA, 
or deoxyribonucleic acid, is the basic 
genetic puzzle solved in 1953 by three 
researchers, Francis Crick, Rosalind 
Franklin and James Watson. 
The animal organism's cells com- 
bine their structures to form increasingly 
large and complicated components— 
so that cell biology is now more and 
more important for us to be able to un- 
derstand: 
* how oxygen helps decompose and 
absorb food 
e how protein (essential in diet) is 
manufactured 
e the role of water in transporting 
calcium and sodium 
* how cells reproduce 
+ why cells fall ill, and 
+ why these various mechanisms exist 
in so many combinations that each of 
us possesses undisputed uniqueness of 
body and mind. 
THE GENE, THE BASIC UNIT 
OF BIOLOGICAL INHERITANCE 
The cell's nucleus, the very hub of the 
living universe, houses 46 chromosomes 
upon which is distributed the DNA ar- 
chitectural information. This very long- 
chained substance has four nitrogen- 
based components called adenine (A), 
thymine (T), cytosine (C) and guanine 
(G). Depending on how the A, T, Cand 
G are linked, they join to form proteins. 
We call that portion of DNA linkage 
which issues the commands to make an 
entire protein a gene. 
The genes next combine by thou- 
sands to form the 46 chromosomes cit- 
ed: 23 pairs of them, Because the 
chromosomes constituting each pair are 
somewhat different, these miniscule 
differences serve as markers to identi 
fy the constituent genes. In reproduc 
tion, a father and a mother contribute 
a gene corresponding to every chromo- 
some pair found in their offspring. It is 
the combination of the similarities and 
differences that make each of us male 
or female, tall or short, black-haired or 
blond, dark-skinned or light, prone to 
disease (and which ones), long-lived or 
otherwise, mentally alert or handi- 
capped, musical, manually dexterous, 
sports-minded, and so on. 
In terms of poor health, for exam- 
ple, chromosome pair no. 3 is already 
known to bear the “disease genes” for 
maladies such as certain protein defi- 
ciencies, intolerance to some sugars, a 
tendency to develop kidney-cell cancer, 
an inability to process thyroid hormone, 
or difficulty in breathing. 
But the exact location of the 
offending gene or genes is difficult to 
establish because it is tucked some- 
where along what is a very long chain 
indeed. One has to imagine a piece of 
cord 1 cm in diameter, but 10,000 km 
long! This is the nature of the challenge 
facing the genome explorers. 
GENE THERAPY 
TO CURE DISEASE 
What happens after much of the bio- 
logical sleuthing is accomplished? 
Remember the second reason, listed 
above, for all this effort: to improve 
medicine and public health. Here is how 
"gene therapy” could be put to work 
to cure someone with a medical 
problem centred, for example, in bone 
marrow. The technique described is al- 
ready familiar to Courier readers (see 
March 1987 issue) as that of recom- 
binant DNA, in use today in some plant 
and farm-animal biotechnology and in 
the pharmaceutical industry. 
The appropriate gene (embedded 
in some surrounding DNA) is taken from

## [Page 55](083935engo.pdf#page=55) 0

### 83934: Mapping the human genome

a healthy donor, then “spliced” —via a 
microscopic chemical method—to a 
specially prepared virus. The virus is per- 
mitted to “attack” one of the defective 
cells removed from the patient afflict- 
ed with bone-marrow disease. The in- 
fecting virus then inserts the normal 
gene, as part of the DNA material the 
treated virus has brought with it, into 
the DNA of the receiving cell. Finally, the 
manipulated or engineered bone- 
marrow cells are returned to the pa- 
tient, where they reproduce and be- 
come an entire population of healthy 
bone-marrow cells. The patient is now 
well. 
Before the genome researchers at- 
tain this degree of scientific discovery, 
‘a
 a
p
e
s
 
Ml
 
A 
yr 
AAR 
as 
i 
however, there are other factors to be 
considered. Hence, the length of time 
required for research. Even the experts 
cannot be sure, for instance, of how 
many genes might exist. Victor McKu- 
sick of the Johns Hopkins University in 
the United States has advanced a low 
estimate of 50,000, although 100,000 
may prove to be the case once all iden- 
tification has been completed. So far, 
less than 5,000 genes have been given 
labels and only 1,500 of these have 
been located accurately on their host 
chromosomes. 
Ancther factor is that the success 
of the undertaking will lie in its appli- 
cation to men and women everywhere. 
Both the research and its expected 
Genetic Message (1985), 
_ by French artist Nicole d'Agaggio. 
  
results are burdened, furthermore, with 
disturbing ethical problems, Who will 
establish the authority to perform 
genetic interventions? (France has led 
the way; President Francois Mitterrand 
has created a special bio-ethical com- 
mission, at national level, chaired by 
blood specialist Jean Bernard.) What 
might be the technique’s effects in 
terms of law and justice (on whom 
might the technique not be used)? How 
can everyone, regardless of social or 
economic position, be assured of access 
to the new therapies? ' 
The international Human Genome 
Organization, known familiarly as 
HUGO, a non-profit professional associ- 
ation registered in Switzerland and 
headed by Professor McKusick, will 
meet in October of this year under the 
sponsorship of the American weekly 
magazine Science. The experts will ap- 
portion research tasks among almost 
300 workers from nearly fifty countries, 
prepare to reconstruct important early 
biological phases in man's prehistory 
(before records were kept), search for 
genes involved in immune-response 
mechanisms—such as the deficiencies 
leading to AIDS, and try to identify 
genes responsible for growth disorders 
and such devastating illnesses as cystic 
fibrosis or Huntington's chorea (a type 
of degeneration of the brain and ner- 
vous system). 
The HUGO experts include French 
Nobel prize-winner Jean Dausset, 
Michio Ito of the University of Tokyo, 
and Hans Zachau of the University of 
Munich. They hope to achieve major 
results by the year 2005, calling upon 
not only molecular and cell biologists 
throughout the world but also on the 
fast computing machines available 
chiefly in the industrialized countries. 
Unesco's Director-General, Federico 
Mayor, a biochemist, has appointed a 
special consultant to assist in the co- 
ordination of the basic research under 
the aegis of United Nations agencies 
and throughout the global scientific 
family. He has also called directly on the 
resources of the Unesco-affiliated Inter- 
national Cell Research Organization, 
the Microbiological Resource Centres, 
and the International Brain Research 
Organization. | 
JACQUES G. RICHARDSON 
was editor of Unesco's international 
quarterly journal Impact of Science 
on Society from 1972 to 1985. 
55

## [Page 56](083935engo.pdf#page=56) 0

### IGNORE

  
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 9 


### 83924: The Mahabharata, the great history of mankind: interview (with) Jean-Claude Carrière

Interview with Jean-Claude Carriére 
  
56 
The Mahabharata, 
the Great History of Mankind 
but we never lose the central theme of a looming threat, 
to which everything starkly points. We are living in a time 
of destruction. The question is, can we avoid it? 
What guidelines did you follow in making your adapta- 
tion of the work? 
Our first preoccupation was to avoid sacrificing any of 
the levels of the work. The Mahabharata says that Krishna 
1s one of the avatars of Vishnu. Some of the characters be- 
lieve this, others do not. In India there have always been 
divergent views on this. For a marxist, Krishna is a phan- 
tasm, for a rishi, a Hindu holy man, he is a god. We take 
no sides in the argument since we must eliminate no view- 
point on the basis of this or that a priori judgement. The 
uncertainty expressed in the original work has to be respect- 
ed, that’s all. Some members of our audiences must be able 
to see divinity in Krishna; others must be allowed to doubt it. 
Very often in the Mahabharata Krishna does not know 
what is going to happen. How can this be? As a god is he 
not omniscient? I had a discussion on this point with 
Shankaracharya, one of the great living holy men of southern 
India. I put the question to him in a number of different 
ways, but he eluded it good-humouredly. I asked him how 
it could be that, during a battle, Krishna did not know what 
was happening on the battlefield as a whole, and that he 
could be surprised and even worried. Could a god or a man- 
god have human weaknesses? To which Shankaracharya 
replied with a smile and said something like: “It is a human 
weakness to think so.” : 
When you began writing, did you start at the beginning 
of the poem? 
No, I started making a patchwork, by writing certain 
scenes. In the Mahabharata there are a number of set pieces 
or obligatory scenes, such as the one in which Kunti con- 
fesses to Karna that she is his mother. I knew that sooner 
or later [ would have to write scenes such as this. However, 
there were other sequences that were in the form of narra- 
tive in the original and which would have to be turned into 
scenes by creating dramatic situations, confronting one 
character with another and seeing if anything emerged. A 
good third of the scenes in the play are not scenes in the 
original poem. 
I'began, like a dancer, with the set pieces, while still try- 
ing to find the right forms of expression. It took a long time. 
I wrote the first scenes either in Paris or in India. I read them 
immediately to Peter Brook, to our close collaborators and 
to our musicians when they were there. I remember hav- 
ing read scenes in airports between two flights, and one even- 
ing in Madras, in a taxi caught in an interminable traffic 
jam. That is how our Mahabharata came into being, in dribs 
and drabs, written sometimes on a grubby paper tablecloth 
in a café. When I read them out, I could sense whether the 
scenes worked, what should be kept in, what should be left 
out and what would have to be reworked. 
The time came when I had a first draft of all the set 
pieces. [ then turned to the others, those that had to be in- 
vented, and this was much more difficult. Peter asked me 
to take part in the auditions with the actors, to go through 
a three- to four-page scene with them as if I myself was an 
actor. For Peter and his assistant it was a way of audition- 
ing both the actors and the scene. So I had to take the plunge. 
That way you have a much better idea of what works and 
what doesn’t work. There were scenes that I wrote straight 
off, in ten minutes, in which not a word was changed. Then 
there were others that I wrote and rewrote twenty-five times 
without ever achieving a perfect result. 
Finally, there was a really harrowing period. The open- 
ing date for the show was already fixed, auditions were start- 
ing for the actors and I still had not found an overall 
structure to hold the whole play together. There was a story, 
related in a series of scenes, but how could all these scenes 
be made to hang together? I'still hadn't found the solution. 
We were only four months away from the date fixed 
for the first rehearsals. I decided to take a break in the south 
of France, in the country house of some friends of mine. 
There, for the only time in my life, something quite in- 
describable happened to me, something one reads about in 
books without really believing it: inspiration. 
It was three o'clock in the morning. Normally I sleep 
well, but that night I couldn’ sleep. There was something 
on my mind. Suddenly, and I couldn’ tell you how it hap- 
pened, I saw the first twenty minutes of the play, from which 
everything else would follow. 
It was the dialogue between the child and the old 
storyteller with which the play opens: 
-“Can you write?” 
~“No, why?” 
Then the arrival of Ganesha and the beginning of the 
story, everything unfolded before my eyes as if I were a 
member of the audience. It was quite extraordinary. I jot- 
ted everything down. The theatrical key had been found. 
It was based on a triangle—a storyteller, a god and a child— 
and on an uncertainty: which of the two, Ganesha or 
Krishna, had invented the other? The narrator and his

## [Page 57](083935engo.pdf#page=57) 0

### 83924: The Mahabharata, the great history of mankind: interview (with) Jean-Claude Carrière

listener would see the characters acting out their lives before 
them, could touch them and speak to them. I had the 
keystone of my edifice. With relief, I fell asleep. The next 
morning I telephoned Peter and told him about it. “No need 
to look any further,” he said, “you’ve got it.” 
Was it really all over? 
Yes and no. The overall structure, the theatrical foun- 
dation, was in place. But there was so much left to do. I 
attended all the rehearsals, making a thousand and one cor- 
rections to meet the problems the actors encountered. Then, 
at every stage, when the performances started, when we 
made the English version, when we wrote the television 
series, when we went on to the film to which we were put- 
ting the finishing touches, there were many things to review. 
For example, it was only when writing the screenplay for 
the film that I found the solution to a problem I had been 
unable to resolve in the play. Today, if it had to be done 
over again, I would write it differently. 
Has this tremendous experience left you with any specific 
ideas about or overall impressions of the Mahabharata or 
of the epic form in general? 
Georges Dumezil thought that the Mahabharata was an 
adaptation in epic form of a fifth Veda (ancient Hindu scrip- 
ture) which has been lost. I have neither his erudition nor 
his authority, but I have come to the same conclusion. While 
reading the Mahabharata and the Vedas, I could sense a link 
between them but also a difference. It is not easy to ana- 
lyse; one has to try to feel these things, even when one 
doesn’t altogether understand them. 
The Vedas are ascribed to no author. They are revealed 
texts which simply proclaim the truth. All cultures have 
similar texts, written or oral, which proclaim the truth, 
which tell the people where they came from, what their place 
is on this earth and how they must live to maintain that 
place. When an author takes a hand, because he invents, be- 
cause he creates, he deviates from the path of truth, introduc- 
ing an untruth or an error, and in a sense becomes an exile 
from the community which sees itself reflected in that myth 
cal truth. 
Epic poems deviate cautiously from the revealed, mythi- 
cal truth and even from legendary history. An epic is truly 
a creative work, the work of an author, even though it at- 
tempts to keep in contact with the myth. The Mahabharata 
1s, indeed, the work of a creative writer. We can be sure 
of this, even though we may not know anything about the 
author, because from the beginning to the end of the poem, 
someone has, as it were, taken events in hand. At the end 
we find threads that can be traced back to the beginning. 
And the style of writing is the same. Written down and 
copied many times between the fourth century BC and the 
third century AD, this vast epic has, of course, been sub-. 
jected to many alterations and additions. Nevertheless, one 
can sense that it is a single work written by a single author. 
Georges Dumézil was also of this opinion. 
Ithink that this is an important point to make, because 
the introduction of the notion of an author brings with it 
a specifically human element. And this is the point at which 
we deviate from the path of revealed truth to enter the world 
of the epic. In a certain fashion, for better or for worse, an 
epic helps a society to become organized. It is the great com- 
mon saga, drawing inspiration from the gods, but already 
talking about man. This is surely a vital stage in the found- 
ing of a society. Each of the characters in the Mahabharata 
has a divine alter ego at first. Little by little they forget that 
they are the children of gods; they begin to face up to the 
most trivial and mundane problems and, in so doing, they 
become mere humans. This, in a sense, is the function of 
the epic—to cut the cords that bind the leading actors to 
the heavenly world of the gods and set their feet firmly on 
the ground, to set them face to face with their problems 
as individuals and then as citizens. The law, and indeed laws, 
aided and reinforced by the prestige of poetry, have to be 
established. In the chaos of the human world, a lasting, co- 
herent order has to be sought and given some apparent 
justification. 
This seemed very clear to me from the Mahabharata, as 
it does from the Iliad and from the Odyssey. It was the guid- 
ing concept behind the writing of the play and its direction. 
At the beginning, Peter Brook’s setting was light, ethereal 
and unreal, bathed in divine grace. Gradually it grew heavi- 
er, subject to the weight and gravity of life on earth, to end 
unambiguously in the mire. The earth, as a character, plays 
a progressively more important role. We see a society be- 
coming organized and then rent as it cuts itself off from its 
celestial youth. 
How do you feel after this experience? 
In The Conference of the Birds, by the Persian poet Farid 
od-Din ‘Attar, three butterflies discuss the nature of a candle. 
The first one approaches it to have a look and comes back 
saying: “It is light.” The second butterfly goes closer, burns 
its wing and comes back saying: “It burns.” The third 
butterfly goes even closer, {lies into the flame and does not 
return. It has learned what it wanted to know, what it alone 
knows. But it cannot tell the others. This parable cannot 
be bettered. There is always a third and last circle to enter, 
and if you do so you can no longer talk about it. You know, 
but you cannot communicate what you know to anyone 
else. 
So the theatre is merely the second circle? 
I recently read a beautiful Persian poem which said: 
“Last night a voice whispered in my ear: ‘No such thing 
exists as a voice that whispers in the ear at night’.” M 
57

## [Page 58](083935engo.pdf#page=58) 0

### IGNORE

NESCO 
COURIER 
42nd YEAR 
1m 
Published monthly in 34 languages and in braille 
by Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization. 
 
 
31, rue Francois Bonvin, 75015 Paris, France. 
Director: Bahgat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin, Caroline Lawrence 
French edition: Alain Lévéque, Neca El Khazen 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, Araceli Oriz de Urbina 
Arabic edition: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoudi 
Studies and research: Fernando Ainsa 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Hustrations: Ariane Bailey (Tel. 45 68.46 90) 
Documentation: Violette Ringelstein (Tel: 45.68.46 85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions: Sclange Belin 
Secretariat: Annie Brachet (Tel: 4568.47 15), 
Mouna Chatta, Majca Dalal 
Public relations: Claudie Duhamel (Te! :45.68 45 86) 
Selection in braille in English, French, 
Spanish and Korean: Marie-Dominigue Bourgeass 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Georgi Zelenin (Moscow) 
German: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Shri Krishna Kumar Singh (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: H. Sadough Vanini (Teheran) 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra ligazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras | Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Paik Syeung Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwa (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, 
Slovene: Bozidar Perkovic (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: S.J. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Manni Kossler (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larranaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Dao Tung (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Nasir Seham (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
Bengali: Ahmed Hedayet (Dhaka) 
SALES AND PROMOTION 
Manager: Henry Knobil (45 68 45 88), Assistant: Marie- 
Noelle Branet (45.68.45 89), Subscriptions: Marie-Thérése 
Hardy (45.68.45 65), Jocelyne Despouy, Jacqueline Louise- 
Julie, Manichan Ngonekeo, Michel Ravassard, 
Mohamed Salah El Din, 
Customer service: Ginette Motreff (45.68.45 64), 
Accounts: Liliane Tasch (45 68.45 66), Cultural projects: 
Ricardo Zamora-Perez (Tel: 45.68.45 80), 
Shipping: Hector Garcia Sandoval 
ADVERTISING 
Publicat: 17, Boulevard Poissonniére, 75002 Panis 
Tel: 40.2651 26 
Sales director: Benoit Rosier 
Advertising director: Daniéle Michelet 
SUBSCRIPTIONS 
Tel: 4568.45.65 
1 year: 126 French francs 2 years: 234 FF 
Developing countries 
1 year 99 French francs 2 years: 180 FF 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco 
Indwidual articles and photographs not copynghted may be reprinted 
prowding the credit line reads “Reprinted from the Unesco Couner” 
plus date of ssue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor 
Signed articles reprinted must bear author's name. Non-copynght 
photos will be supphed on request. Unsohcted manuscnpts cannot be 
returned unless accompanied by an international reply coupon 
covenng postage. Signed articles express the opinions of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent the opinions of Unesco or those of 
the editors of the Unesco Courer Photo captions and headlines are 
written by the Unesco Courier stalf The boundanes on maps 
published in the magazine do not imply official endorsement or 
acceptance by Unesco or the United Nations. The Unesco Couner 1s 
produced in microform (microfilm and/or microfiche) by (1) Unesco, 7 
Place de Fontenay, 75700 Pars, (2) University Microhilms (Xerox), Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48100, US A, (3) NCR Microcard Edition, Indian 
Head, Inc, 111 West 40th Street, New York, US A (4) Bell and 
Howell Co, Old Mansfeld Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, US A 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE 
(Printed in France) - DEPOT LEGAL C1 - SEPTEMERE 1989 
Photocomposition The Unesco Couner 
Photogravure impression. Maury Impnmeur S A Z| route d'Etampes, 
45330 Malesherbes 
58 ISSN 0041-5278 NOS 1989-OP 89-1-472A 
  
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National Distributor In your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors in countrles not lIsted, along with subscription rates 
In local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
ALBANIA. 'Ndermarra e perpjes se hbnt', Twana. ARGENTINA. Librena et 
Correo de la Unesco - EDILYR, SRL, Tucuman 1685, 1050 Buenos Aires. 
AUSTRALIA. Books only: Educational Supphes Pty. Lid., P.O. Box 33. 
Brookvale 2100, NSW; Periodicals Domine Pty Subscuphions Dept., P.O 
Box 33, Brookvale 2100, NSW. Sub-agents: United Nations Association of 
Austraha, Victonan Dwision, 328 Flinders Street, Melbourne 3000.Hunter 
Publications, 58a Gipps St., Collingwood, Victoria 3066. AUSTRIA. Gerold 
end Co., Graben 31, A-1011, Vienna. BAHRAIN. United Schools Interna- 
tonal, Arab Regional Office, P.O. Box 726, Bahrain; The Arabian Agencies 
and D g Co., Al Mutanabi St., PO Box 156, Manama BANGLADESH 
Kanm International, GPO Box No: 2141, 64/1 Manmipun Para, Teigacn.’ 
Farmgate, Dhaka. BARBADOS. University of the Wes! Indies Bookshop, 
Cave Hill Campus, P.O. Box 64, Bridgetown. BELGIUM, Jean de Lannoy, 202 
Ave_du Roi, 1060 Brussels. BOTSWANA. Botswana Book Centre, PO Box 91 
Gaborone. BRAZIL. Fundagao Getllio Vargas. Servigo del Publicagoes, 
caixa postal 9.042-2C-05 Praia de Botafogo 188, Rio de Janeiro (RJ) 2000; 
Books only: Imagem Latinoamencana, Av. Paulista 750, | andar, caixa postal 
30455, Sao Paulo CEP 01051. BULGARIA. Hemus, Kantora Literatura, 
boulevard Rousky 6. Soha. BURMA. Trade Corporation no. (9), 550-552 
Merchant Street, Rangoon. CANADA. Renout Publishing Ce. Ltd, 1294 
Algoma Road, Ottawa, Ontario K1B 3W8 (Stores 61 Sparks Street, Ottawa, 
211 Yonge St., Toronto. Sales office: 7575 Trans Canada Hwy. Ste. 305, St. 
Laurent, Quebec H4T 1v6. CAMEROON. Cameroon Book Centre, PO Box 
123, Limbe, Commission Nationale, BP 1600, Yaounde. CHILE. Ednronal 
Universitaria S.A, Departamento de Imporaciones, M Luisa Santander 
0447, casita 10220, Santiago, Editonal ‘Andrés Bello, Av. R Lyon 946, 
Casillo 4256, Santiago de Chile: Dipublic, Antonio Varas 671, 2° piso, casilla 
14364. Correo 21, Santiago CHINA. China National Publications import and 
Bookshop Co., Lid, POB 2942, Kuwait; Penodicals only: Farafalla Press 
Agency, P.O Box SAFA 4541, Kuwait. LEBANON. Libraine Antoine A. Naufal 
et Fréres, BP 656, Beirut LESOTHO Mazenod Book Centre, PO Mazenod, 
Maseru. LIBERIA Natonal Bookstore, Mechiin and Carey Streets, PO Box 
590, Monrovia; Cole and Yancy Bookshops Lid, PQ Box 286. Monrovia. 
LUXEMBOURG. Books only: Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grande-Rye, Luxem- 
bourg: Periodical: Messagenes Paul Kraus, BP 1022, Luxembourg MALAWI 
Malawi Book Service, Head Office. PQ Box 30044, Chichin, Blantyre 3 
MALAYSIA. University of Malaya Co-operative Bookshop, Kuala Lumpur 
22-11 MALTA. Sapienzas. 26 Republic St., Valletta MAURITANIA GRA LI.- 
COMA, 1 rue du Souk X, Avenue kennedy, Nouakchott. MAURITIUS. 
Nalanda Company Ltd., 30 Bourbon St, Port-Louis MEXICO. Libreria El 
Correo de la Unesco, Actipan 66, Colonia del Valle, Apartado postal 61 164, 
06600 Mexico DF. MONACO. British Library, 30 Bd. des Moubns. Monte 
Carlo. MORROCCO. Libraine 'Aux belles vnages’, 282 ave. Mohammed-V. 
Rabat; Librane des écoles, 12 ave, Hassan-il, Casaglanca, Societe chertfien- 
ne de distribution et de presse, SOCHEPRESS, angle rues de Dinant et St, 
Saens, BP 13683, Casablanca 05 MOZAMBIQUE. Instituto National do Livro 
edo Disco (INLD), averuda 24 de Julho, 1921 r/ d 12 andar, Maputo. NEPAL. 
Sajha Prakashan Polchowk, Kathmandu. NETHERLANDS. Books only: 
Keesing, Boeken B.V., Hogehilweg 13, Postbus 1118, 1000 BC Amsterdam. 
Periodicals: Faxon Europe, P.O. Box 197, 1000 AD Amsterdam. 
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. Van Dorp-Eddine N VV, PQ Box 200, Willem- 
stad, Curagao, NA. NEW ZEALAND. Government Publishing, PO. Box 
14277-Kilbirmie, wellington. NIGERIA. The University Bookshop of fe; The 
University Bookshop of Ibadan, P QO 286; The University Bookshop ot Nsukka; 
The University Bookshop of Lagos; The Ahmadu Bello University Bookshop of 
Zana. NORWAY. Johan Grundt Tanum, P O.B. 1177 Sentrum - Oslo 1; 
Export Corporation, P O. Box 88, Beying COLOMBIA, Instituto Ce 0 
de Cultura (Colcultura}, Carrera 3A, n° 18 24, Bogota; Books only. Librena 
Buchholz Galena. Calle 59. No: 13-13, Bogota CYPRUS. "MAM, Archbishop 
Makarios 3rd Avene, PO Box 1722. Nicosia CZECHOSLOVAKIA. SNTL. 
Spalena 51-113 02. Prague 1: For Slovakia only: Alla Vertag -Publishers, 
Hurbanove nam 6.893 31 Bratislava; PNS-UED, Jindrisska 14. praha 1; 
Slovan, Gottwaldovo Nam 6. 805 32 Bratislavia. DEM. REP. OF YEMEN. 14th 
October Corporation, PO Box 4227, Aden. DENMARK. Munksgaard Export: 
OG. Tidsskntiservice, 35 Norre Sogade. DK-1970 Kobenhavn K. 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC Ltbrena Blasco. Averida Bolivar, No: 402. esq 
Hermanos Dehgne. Santo Domingo. EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF}. Un- 
esco Publications Centre. No. § Talaat Harb St.. Caro. ETHIOPIA. Ethicpian 
National Agency for Unesco. PO Box 2996, Addis Ababa. FINLAND. 
Akateeminen Kirakauppa, P. O. Box 128. SF-00100 Helsinki. Suomalainen 
Kinat Oy. Ki kuja 2 01640 Vantaa 64. FRANCE. Librane de 
I'Unesco. 7 Place de Fontenoy. 75700 Paris, Periodicals only. Unesco CPD / 
V-1. rue Millis. 75015 Paris. GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Buchex- 
port. Posttach 140, Leninstrasse 16. 7010, Leipzig. FED. REP. OF GER- 
MANY. For the Unesco Couner: Mr. H. Baum, Deutscher Unesco-Kuner 
Vertrieb, Basallstrasse 57. D5300 Bonn 3. UNO-Verlag. Simracksirasse 23, 
D-5300 Bonn 1: S. Karger GmbH. Verlag Angerhofsirasse 9. Postlach 2 
D-8034 Germering ! Munchen. For scientific maps only Geo Center, Postfach 
800830. 7000 Stuttgart 80. GHANA. Books only: Presbyterian Bookshop 
Depot Lid.. PO Box 195, Accra, Ghana Book Suppliers Lid., PO 7869. Accra; 
The University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; The University Bookshop ot Cape 
Coast; The University Bookshop of Legon, PO Box 1. Legon. Periodicals only 
Fides Entreprises. P.O. Box 14129, Accra. GREAT BRITAIN. See United 
Kingdom. GREECE. Elettheroudakis SA. Internaucnal Bookstore, 4 Mikis 
Street, Athens, John Mihalopoulos & Son SA, International Booksellers, P O. 
Box 10073, 541 10 Thessaloniki. Greek National Commission for unesco. 3 
Akadimias Street, Athens HONG KONG. Swindon Book Co, 13-15 Lock 
Road, Kowloon: Federal Publications (HK) Ltd , Tokwawan, Kowloon, Hong 
Kong Government Information Services. Publication Section, Hong Keng: 
Pernodicals only. Beaconsfield House 61h fioor, Queen's Road Central. Victor- 
1a. HUNGARY. Kultura-Bushimport-ABT, P O B. 149-H-1389, Budapest 62. 
ICELAND. Snaebjorn Jonsson and Co.. HF. Halnarstraeti 9, Reylgavik. 
INDIA. Orient Longman Ltd . Kamam Marg, Ballard Estate, Bombay 400038. 
17 Chitaranjan Ave., Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, Madras 2. 
5-9-41/1 Bashir Bagh. Hyderabad 500001 (AP); 80/1 Mahatma Gandhi Rd., 
Bangalore 560001: 3.5-820 Hyderguda. Hyderabad-500001. Sub-agents. 
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.. 17 Park St, Calcutta 70016, Scindia House, 
New Del 11 0001. INDONESIA, Bhratara Publishers and Booksellers, 29. 
J1, Oto Iskandardinata 111, Jakarta: Indra P.T., JI Dr. Sam Ratulangie 37, 
Jakarta Pusat. IRAN. ramian National Commission for Unesco, 1188 Englab 
Ave. Roslam Give Building, PO, Box 11365-4498, Teheran 13158 
IRELAND. Periooi fy. The Ed | Company of Ireland Ltd_, PO Box 
43A, Walkinstown, Dublin 12: Books only TDC Publishers. 11 North Frederick 
Street, Dublin 7. ISRAEL. Literary Transactions. inc., c/o Steimatzky Lid.. 
P.O. Box 628, Tel Aviv, A B.C. Bookslore Lid., P.O. Box 1283, 71 Allenby Rd , 
Tel Aviv 61000. ITALY. Licosa (Librena Commissionana Sanson, Sp A}, Via 
Lamarmora 45, Casella Postale 552, 50121 Florence; via Bartohni 29, 20155 
Milan; FAQ Bookshop, via delle Terme di Caracalla. 00100 Rome JAMAICA. 
University of the West Indies Bookshop, Mona, Kingston 7. JAPAN. Eastern 
Book Service Inc., 37-3 Hongo 3-chome Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113. JORDAN 
Jordan Distnbution Agency, PO Box 375. Amman. Periodicals only" Jordan 
Book Centre Co. Ltd.. PO Box 30t, AlJubeiha, Amman. KENYA. East Alrican 
Publishing House. PO 30571, Nawrobi; Afnca Book Services Lid. Quran 
House, Mangano Street, PO Box 45245, Nairobi. KOREA. Karean National 
Commission for Unesco. P.O. Box Central 64. Seouf KUWAIT. The Kuwart 
Ui Ss u Postboks 307 Blindern, Oslo 
3, Periodicals only. Narvesen A/S, Litteraturt Jenesten, P O.B. 6125 Etterstad. 
N 0802 Oslo 6. PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency. 65 Shahrah Quaid--azam, 
P.O. Box No. 729. Lahore 3: Unesco Publications Centre. Regional Office for 
Book Development in Asia and the Pacific. 39 Delhi Housing Society. P.O. Box 
8950, Karachi 29. PANAMA. Distribuidora Cultura Internacional, Apartado 
7571, Zona 5, Panama. PHILIPPINES. National Book Store Inc., 701 Rizal 
Avenue, Manila POLAND. Orpan-import. Palac Kultury | Nauk, Warsaw: Ars 
Polona-Ruch, Krakowskie Przedmiescie No.7. 00-068 Warsaw. PORTUGAL. 
Dias & Andrade Ltda Livrana Portugal. rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. ROMANIA. 
ARTEXIM Export-Import. Piata Scienteir. no. 1. PO Box 33-16, 70005 
Bucharest SAUDI ARABIA. Dar al watan. Olaya Main Street, Ibratim Bin 
Sulaym Building. Riyadh. SEYCHELLES. New Service Ltd.. Kingsgate 
House. PO Box 131, Mahé: National Bookshop, PO Box 48. Mahé. SIERRA 
LEONE. Fqurah Bay College, Njala University and Sierra leone Diocesan 
Bookshops. Freetown. SINGAPORE. Rightecus Enterprises, P.O. Box 562, 
Kallang Basin Post Office, Singapore 9133 SOCIALIST PEOPLE'SLIBYAN 
ARAB JAMAHIRIYA. General Establishment for Publishing, Distribution and 
Advertising. Sou! Al Mahmoud; St., PO Box 952, Tipo SOMALIA. Modern 
Book Shop and General, PO Box vad, Mogadiscio SPAIN. Mundi-Prensa 
Libros SA. apartado 1223. Castelld 37, Madnd 1: Ediciones Liber, apartado 
17, Magdalena 8. Ondarroa (Vizcaya), Donare, Ronda de Outeiro, 20, 
apartado de correos 341, La Corufia: books only: Libreria Castells, Ronda 
Universidad 13 y 15, Barcelona 7; Libreria de la Generantat de Catalunya, 
Palan Moja, Rambla de los Estudios 118, 08 002 Barcelona. SRI LANKA. 
Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chitampalam Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244, 
Colombo 2. SUDAN. Al Bashir Bockshgp, P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. 
SURINAME. Suriname National Commussion for Unesco, P.O. Box 2943, 
Paramaribo. SWEDEN. A/ B CE. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Regering- 
sgatan 12, Bex 16356, S-103 27 Stockhelm 16; For the Unesco Courrer: 
Svenska FN Forbundet, Skolgrand 2, Box 150 50 S-104, 65 Stockholm; For 
peniodicals only Wennergren-Willams AB, Nordenflychtsvagen 70, $-104,25 
Stockholm; Esselte Tidskriftscentralen, Gamla Brogatan 26, Box 62-101, 20 
Stockholm. SWITZERLAND. Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zunch: Libraries 
Payot in Geneva Lausanne, Basle, Berne, Vevey, Montreux, Neuchatel and 
Zunch. SYRIA. Aleppo University Books Establishment, University of Aleppo. 
Aleppo.” TANZANIA, Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, PO B. 9030. Dar-es- 
Salaam. THAILAND, Nibondh and Co. Lid., 40-42 Charoen Krung Road. 
Siyaeg Phaya Sn, P.O. Box 402, Bangkok; Suksapan Pant, Mansion 9, 
Rajdamnern Ave., Bangkok: Sukst Siam Company. 1715 Rama IV Road, 
Bangkok: ROEAP, PQ Box 1425. Bangkok 10500. TRINIDAD AND TOBA- 
GO. Nanonal Commission for Unesco, 18 Alexandra St, St. Clair. Port-of- 
Spain. TURKEY. Haset Kitapevi A.S.. Istiklal Caddes:, No 469, Posta Kutusu 
219, Beyoglu. Istanbul. UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop. PO Box 7145, Kampa- 
la. UNITED ARAB EMIRATES. Maktabat al Maktaba. PO Box 15408, Al Ain, 
Abu Dhabi. UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office. PO Box 276. London. 
SW8 5DT; H.M.S.0. Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham, Bristol; Third World Publications. 151 Strattord Road. Birming- 
ham B11 1RD; for scientific maps only. McCarla Ltd . 122 King's Cross Rd. 
London WC1X 9DS. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. Bernan-UNIPUB, 
Periodicals Department, 4611-F Assembly Drive, Lanham, MD 20706 4391. 
URUGUAY. Ediciones Trecho, S.A., Maldanada 1092. Montevideo. USSR. 
V/O Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga. Ul. Dimitrova 39, Moskva 113095. 
YUGOSLAVIA, Mladost, Ica 30/11, Zagreb: Cankaneva Zalozba, Zopuar. 
leva 2, Lubljiana: Nols. Terazye 13 / VIII. 11000 Belgrade; penodicais only. 
Jugosolvena Kniga, PO Box 36. YU 11001 Belgrade. ZAMBIA. National 
Educational Distribution Co of Zambia Ltd.. P.O. Box 2664. Lusaka. 
ZIMBABWE. Textbook Sales (PVT) Lid.. 1 Norwich Union Centre, Harare. 
PHOTO CREDITS 
Cover: © Khudojestvennaia Literatura publishers, Moscow. Back cover, pages 28, 29, 30: © Roland and Sabrina Michaud, Paris. Page 2: 
© National Board for the Celebration of the Portuguese Discoveries, Lisbon. Pages 3, 5, 56: © Marcel Salvaro/ Unesco Courier. Pages 6, 7, 
8, 9: © Gilles Abegg, Paris. Pages 10, 51, 52, 53: © Edimedia, Paris. Pages 12-13: Launois © Rapho, Paris. Page 14 (above): © Association 
des Classiques Africains, Paris. Page 14 (below): © Association des Classiques Africains, Paris/Museum of tiie Geographical Institute, Cairo. 
Page 15: Michelangelo Durazzo © ANA, Paris. Pages 16-17; Joseph Viesti © ANA, Paris. Page 18: © Baumeister Archive, Stuttgart. Museum 
of Arts and Crafts, Hamburg. Page 19: © Bulloz, Musée du Louvre, Paris. Pages 21, 31: © Michael Holford, London. Page 22: © Roger- 
Viollet, Paris/Villa Valmarana, Vicenza. Pages 23, 47 (below), 50: © Roger-Viollet, Paris. Page 24: © Bulloz, Paris/Library of the Senate. 
Pages 24-25; © Gallimard, Univers des Formes, Paris. Pages 26-27: © RMN, Musée du Louvre, Paris, Page 27 (above): © Roger-Viollet, 
Paris/Galleria Doria, Rome. Pages 32-33, 34 (below), 44, 47 (above): All Rights Reserved. Pages 34 (above), 35 (left): Izobrazitelnoie Iskusstvo 
publishers, Moscow. Page 35 (right): Nauka publishers, Moscow. Pages 36, 39: Embassy of the Mongolian People's Republic, Paris. Page 
37: Takase © Artephot, Paris/Bibliothéque Nationale. Page 38: G. Mandel © Artephot, Paris/Collecuion of the Hetimandel princes. Pages 
40-41, 41 (below), 42, 43: © J.-L. Nou, Paris. Page 46: © Gilles Aufray, Avignon. Pages 48-49: David Burnett © Cosmos, Paris. Page 55: 
© Josette Brisse, Galerie de Mars, Paris.

## [Page 59](083935engo.pdf#page=59) 0

### IGNORE

  
   
   
       
  
  
  
TL SR 1990 PUBLISHED 
i 
  
© VIENT 
DE PARAITRE 
DE APARECER 
  DE
SK
 
DI
AR
Y 
A
G
E
N
D
A
 
  
  
The World Heritage 
Le Patrimoine Mondial 
El Patrimonio Mundial 
Y NFO UNESO I 
ET 
    
   
        

## [Page 60](083935engo.pdf#page=60) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
    
 
 
A
L
L
 
a
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
 
  
    
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 