# [073683](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073683engo.pdf) 23

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073683engo.pdf#page=1) 3

### IGNORE

  
OU 
UNESCO. 
  
  
 
  
IER 
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL; SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANISATION 
 
Volume I.—No. 2. Price: 10 Cents (U.S.), 6 Pence (U.K.), or 12 Frances (in France only). MARCH 1948. 


### 73685: Executive Board convenes

Executive Board 
Convenes 
HE UNESCO Executive Board, meeting for the first time since 
the Mexico City General Conference, took important decisions 
during its four-day sessions at Unesco House, February 12-15. Among 
these were approval for top-flight appointments to the Secretariat, 
preparations for the Third Session of the General Conference, and 
  
  
the establishement of priorities for the 1948 world programme of 
Unesco. 
A series of eight meetings was 
held under the chairmanship of 
Dr. E. Ronald Walker (Australie). 
Vice-Chairmen included Sir Sar- 
vepalli Radhakrishnan (India) 
and Professor Alf Sommerfelt 
(Norway). 
Fifteen of the eighteen mem- 
bers of the Board were present 
at the sessions with three alter- 
nates for members unable to at- 
tend. Observers included repres- 
entatives of the United Nations, 
the I1L.0.,, the W.H.O. and the 
F.A.O. Present also at the meet- 
ings were Dr. Julian Huxley, Dir- 
. ector-General of Unesco, Mr, Wal- 
ter H. C. Laves, Deputy Director- 
General, and M. Jean Thomas, 
Assistant Director-General, 
Held in a newly-prepared con- 
ference hall on the ground floor 
of Unesco House, the sessions were 
regularly attended by visitors, 
members of the Unesco Secre- 
tariat and representatives of the 
French and international press in 
Paris. 
Early in the first meeting, Dr. 
Walker keynoted the purpose of 
the work ahead when he referred 
to “the absolute necessity of en- 
suring that the money which the 
tax payers of the Member-States 
contribute towards the noble pur- 
pose of Unesco is spent to the 
best advantage . ..” 
New Secretariat 
Appointments 
The Executive Board approved 
five important nominations to the 
Unesco Secretariat, These in- 
cluded the creation of a new post, 
that of another Assistant Direc- 
tor-General, to be filled by Dr. 
Clarence E. Beeby, Director of 
Education of the government of 
New Zealand and twice head of 
his nation’s delegation to the’ 
Unesco General Conference, Dr. 
Beeby will have special responsi- 
bilities in the field of education. 
Theatre Institute 
The International Theatre 
Institute (1.T.1.) will hold its 
Constituent Congress in Mala 
Strana, Prague, at the Palace 
of the National Council from 
May 31 to June 5, 1948. It is 
expected that distinguished 
theatre artists, craftsmen and 
administrators from  aboul 
twenty-five countries will meet 
under the co-sponsorship of 
Unesco and the Czechoslova- 
kian Government. Over fif- 
teen countries are now active- 
ly engaged in forming Na- 
tional Centres and selecting 
delegations to attend the First 
International Theatre Con- 
gress. 
The latter is to be opened 
by J.B. Priestley (United King- 
dom), who is Chairman of the 
Provisional Executive Com- 
mittee of the I1.T.I. It will 
consider adoption of a Charter 
and how best to move forward 
in its purpose, as set forth 
in the Final Draft Charter: 
“to promote international ex- 
change of knowledge and 
practice in theatre arts”.     
Professor Pierre Auger, eminent | 
French scientist and member of 
the Atomic Energy Commission, 
will join Unesco as head of the 
Natural Sciences Section, replac- 
ing Dr. Joseph Needham F.R.S. 
(United Kingdom) who is retur- 
ning to his work at Cambridge 
University after two years 
pioneer work with Unesco. 
Dr. Hadley Cantril, eminent 
American social psychologist and 
Professor of Social Psychology at 
Princeton University, will direct 
the important Unesco project of 
Enquiries into the Tensions Af- 
fecting International Understan- 
ding. 
Professor Pedro Bosch Gimpera, 
leading Mexican archeologist and 
former Dean of the Philosophy 
Department of the University of 
(Continued on Page 2) 
  
  
 


### 73684: Huxley reviews 1948 progress

Huxley Reviews 
1948 Progress 
In a report to the Executive 
Board on February 12, Dr. Julian 
Huxley, Director - General of 
Unesco, reviewed the progress 
made by the Organisation in the 
first six weeks of the year to get 
the new programme under way. 
“Important measures have been 
taken since the beginning of 
1948,” he declared, “to give effect 
to the resolutions adopted by wd 
  
Conference in Mexico.” The Exe- 
cutive Board then heard a state- 
ment which gave details of several 
activities already in progress. 
Dr. Huxley referred to the ad- 
vances made this year in the field 
of educational scientific and cul- 
tural reconstruction, deemed most 
urgent of all Unesco’s activities. 
He also stressed the importance of 
the preparatory work for the 
impending organising meeting for 
the creation of an International 
Institute of the Hylean Amazon 
In the field of Exchange of 
Persons, thirteen further scholar- 
ships ten donated by the French 
government and three by the 
American Chemical Society—had 
so far been awarded through 
Unesco itself, is in preparation, 
he reported. Moreover, the gov- 
ernment of New Zealand had 
offered a fund of £15,000 for the 
financing of further fellowships. 
The creation of an Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural "Produc- 
tion Bureau is well under way, 
the Director-General continued. 
Such a bureau will stimulate the 
publicising and dramatlsing of 
examples 0f co-operation between 
nations and make better known 
the ways of life of peoples to 
their neighbors. Within this fra- 
mework, a scheme is shortly to be 
launched whereby twenty nations 
will be invited to participate in 
preparing a series of 48 special 
documentary films. 
Concluding his report, the 
Director-General stressed that 
though the year was but six weeks 
old “I have been able to observe 
very encouraging signs of a dy- 
namic and effective activity in all 
»* 
$ 
‘ 
Delegates to the forthcoming 
Hylean Amazon Conference in 
Peru will probably see scenes 
similar to one shown below: 
Inca ruins at Macchu Picchu, 
in region of the Source of 
the Amazon River. *     
 
Amazon Meeting Opens 
Ox April 30 of this year a Con- 
ference of interested member 
nations of Unesco will be con- 
vened upon the joint invitation 
of the governments of Peru and 
———————— - 
‘ 
  
fields of the new programme.” 


### 73686: Truman addresses National Commission

Truman Addresses 
National Commission 
RESIDENT TRUMAN, ad- 
dressing members of the 
U.S. National Commission for 
Unesco in Washington, declar- 
ed on February 16 that the 
realisation of Unesco’s pro- 
gramme “will mean peace in 
the world.” 
Convening at their fourth 
meeting, the one hundred 
members of the U.S. National 
Commission and some 150 ob- 
servers also heard addresses 
by Secretary of State George 
Marshall and Howland Sar- 
genat, Deputy Assistant Secre- 
tary of State for Public Af- 
fairs. The convention: was 
called to study the 1948 Unesco 
world programme and to take 
steps to implement it within 
the United States. 
President Truman received 
the delegates at the White 
House and told them: “I sin- 
cerely hope that you will con- 
tinue what you have started; 
that you will work at it hard 
enough so that nine-tenths of 
the decisions I now have to 
make will never come to this 
desk. You can do that. ThatT 
will mean peace in the world.” 
Secretary Marshall told the 
opening session of the meet- 
ing that the work of Unesco 
was of “tremendous impor- 
tance to world peace.” He ad- 
ded: “My heart is in what you 
are trying to do.” 
Dr. Milton Eisenhower, Pre- 
sident of Kansas State Col- 
lege and Chairman of the 
U.S. National Commission for 
Unesco, appealed to the dele- 
gates to carry the Unesco pro- 
gramme to the “grass roots” 
of the nation and to continue 
to reach as many people as 
possible. “Unesco’s high-level 
scholarly attack on the prob- 
lem of peace must be supple- 
mented by activities in which 
great masses of people can 
take part, and through which 
they can make definite con- 
tributions to peace and inter-   national understanding.” 
In Peru April 30th 
Brazil and of Unesco, to consider 
the establishment of the Interna 
tional Institute of the Hylean 
‘Amazon (IIHA). The United Na 
tions, its Specialised Agencies, 
and several interested internae 
tional organisations have been 
invited to participate in the delie 
berations of the Conference. 
Unesco’s activities in connection 
with this meeting stem from 
resolutions passed by its General 
Conference at the recent Second 
Session in Mexico City. The Direc- 
tor-General was instructed to take 
steps to bring this Institute, 
which was originally proposed by 
the Government of Brazil, info 
being in 1948. 
None of the projects sponsored 
by Unesco has attracted more 
interest than this proposed crea~ 
tion of the ITHA, for behind this 
designation is a broad programme 
for the study oh a huge, but very 
little known area of the world. 
Extending from the Andes {0 
the Atlantic and from the River 
Orinoco to the Mountains of Boli- 
via, the Hylean Amazon—the vast 
wooded region of the Amazon Ri- 
ver basin—is some 7,000,000 square 
kilometres in area. Except for a 
few settlements mainly along 
river banks, the only inhabitants 
of this region are about three 
hundred thousand indians, whose 
conditions of life in many cases 
are exiremely primitive. The 
density of population of the re- 
gion is one of the lowest in the 
world. 
Aims of Institute 
The purpose of the Institute 
would be to encourage and con- 
duct scientific studies in the re- 
gion, directed towards the greater 
understanding of tropical nature 
and of man’s relation thereto, the 
practical development of the re- 
gion by the Governments con- 
cerned and towards the further 
ance of international co-operation 
and understanding. 
The project for the creation of 
an international research institute 
in the Hylean Amazon has been 
inspired by the past history of 
the region. Since the’ discovery of 
Amazonia, it has been continue 
ously explored by scientific mis- 
sions of many ‘nationalities with 
the aim of drawing up its bo- 
tanical and zoological inventory, 
of becoming acquainted. with the 
state of social development and 
organisation of its native tribes, 
of determining the essential cha- 
racteristics of its climate and soil, 
of carrying out archaelogical ex- 
cavations and finally of opening 
up the economic wealth and ex- 
ploring the demographic possibil« 
ities of its vast area. 
These long and difficult tasks 
have too often remained fruitless 
for want of a permanent centre 
or body fo co-ordinate them, 
follow them up and pass. them on 
to succeeding generations. Fur- 
thermore, the materials collected 
by various expeditions were often 
lost, and their reports, although 
still extremely valuable docu- 
ments, are largely scattered and 
forgotten. One »f the primary 
tasks is to bring to life all that 
exists in archives, libraries and 
museums concerning Amazonia, 
and further to renew, with con- 
{Continued on Page 8) 
Gandhi 
and Unesco 
See Page 2.     

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073683engo.pdf#page=2) 4

### IGNORE

  
 
UNESCO COURIER 


### 73687: UNESCO deplores death of Gandhi

Unesco Deplores Death of Gandhi 
 


### 73688: Radhakrishnan pays tribute to Mahatma

Radhakrishnan 
Pays Tribute 
To Mahatma 
By Prof. Sir Sarvepalli 
Radhakrishnan, 
Vice-Chairman of Unesco 
Executive Beard 
On February 13, Professor 
Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, 
Vice-Chairman of Unesco’s 
Executive Board was in- 
vited to address a large 
audience at Unesco House in 
Paris on the subject of Mahal- 
ma Gandhi, whose tragic 
death shocked the world on 
Friday, January 30. The 
reader will find below signifi 
cant passages from this mov- 
ing extempore speech. 
ADIES and Gentlemen: I am 
honoured by the invitation to 
speak to you cn Mahatma Gandhi. 
I know from the tributes that 
have been received how much his 
death has been deplored through- 
out the world. 
There are many famous men, 
many important men, big in their 
own way, big in their own space 
and time, but they are small in 
stature compared to Mahatma 
Gandhi. His mastery over himself, 
his courage and consistency of 
life, his profound sincerity of 
spirit, his abounding, all-embra- 
cing charity and that strong 
conviction that he had, and 
shared with other great ones of 
history, that martyrdom of the 
body is nothing compared to the 
refinement of the soul. All these 
great qualities shew, if I may say 
so, his essentially religious genius: 
the impact of religion on life, the 
impact of the values of eternity 
on the shifting problems of the 
world of time. 
When we use the word religion, 
many of us in our time are more 
or less sceptical about it. But the 
kind of religion Mahatma Gandhi 
professed is one to which even 
the most sceptical, even the most 
intellectual highbrows could pay 
allegiance to. Fifteen years ago I 
edited a book on Contemporary 
Indian Philosophy. He sent me a 
page, and in that page he said: 
“There are people who call God 
truth. I say truth is God There 
are men in the world who have 
denied God, but there are no men 
who have denied truth. T am a 
believer in truth. That is God for 
me. 
You may always take it that 
the propnets of the spirit, oy 
simply standing outside history, 
mould history, They leave the 
greatest - impression on history 
simply because they have this 
quality of detachment from any 
king of allegiance to earthly pos- 
sessions themselves. Gandhi be- 
longed to that type. He had no 
attraction for the material things 
of life so far as his personal life 
was concerned, though he was 
anxious to make the material con- 
ditions of life better for large 
numbers of men. 
Freedom 
Freedom for him was not merely 
a political fact, it was a social 
reality. He was anxious that India 
should be converted from social 
corruption and from communal 
strife, and that the people raise 
themselves in their own esteem, 
discover their own dignity in 
their own conscience, in the 
depths of their own souls. 
He felt that while August 15th 
was a day of triumph so far as 
political problems were concerned, 
it was a day of humiliation he- 
cause the country was then 
enslaved by petty communal pas- 
sions, 
He, therefore, kept away from 
the celebrations of political in- 
dependence and went walking in 
the villages of Bengal, lonely, 
barefooted, taking his sustenance 
in the homes of small and 
humble peasants, asking their 
forgiveness and entreating them 
  
«Julian Huxley, 
Ehangi Cclonyy™~ 
Yew Delhi, the 25th May ‘47. 
. As 1 om constantly on the move, 
1 never get my post in time. But for your letter tc 
Farell Nehru in which you referred to your letter to 
mney J might have missed your letter. But 1 see that 
you have given your sddressces ample time to enable them 
to give their replies, 
train. 
1 am writing this in a moving 
It will be typed tomorrow when I reach Delhi 
1 an afraid 1 can't give you 
snything Bpproaching your minimum, That 1 have no tise 
for the effort is true enough, But what is truer 1s 
that 1 am a poor reader of Meret or present 
much as 1 should like to read some of Living 
a stormy life since my early youth, 1 hed no leisure 
to do the necessary reading. 
1 learnt from my illiterate 
but wise mother that all] rights to be deserved and 
preserved came from duty well done, Thus the very 
right to live accrues to us only when we do the Ouly 
of citizenship of the world. From this one fundamental 
statement, perhaps it 1s eesy enough to define hs 
6uties of man and Wan and correlate every right 
to some corresponding duty to be first perfordidd. 
Every other right can be shown to be a usurpation 
herély worth fighting for. 
to remove from their hearts every 
trace of bitferness, resentment or 
ill-will. That is what he was 
doing. His advice to the new 
Government was that the propos- 
ed division of the country should 
not be accepted. Until two days 
before it was actually accepted 
he was arguing against it, but 
the leaders were caught in a mo- 
ment of great frustration. They 
were tired of communal killings 
which had disgraced the country 
for the past few months. They 
were eager and anxious to give 
some kind of relief or security to 
the harassed multitudes of. the 
country. So against their better 
judgment, against the advice of 
Gandhi, they accepted the parti- 
tion of the country. 
“ ..or I die.” 
I met him early in December, 
and when I was discussing the 
political situation with him, he 
said: “Either I heal the differen- 
ces or I die in the process.” He 
died in the process. 
He was nat able to achieve ghat 
communal peace and unity. He 
fought for a free and united 
India. Free, in the political sense 
of the term, India is, but united 
she is not. That social freedom, 
that communal amity, he has net 
been able to achieve. 
And yet if there is any message 
that he has left behind, it is the 
message that we can cure these 
ills only by the methods of peace 
and reconciliation. If communal 
peace is to be established in India, 
the only thing that is open to us 
is to adopt his methods: that is, 
to refrain from anger, io refrain 
from any kind of intemperance of 
thought, word or deed, and not to 
indulge in any expressions of vio- 
lence or any kind of hatred 
knowing that it is hkely to accen- 
tuate animosity, That is the only 
way in which we can build up a 
true memorial for him. 
Whatever we may think about 
Gandhi's part in the liberation of 
India, his essential object was not 
so much the liberation of India as 
the liberation of the world. He 
was trying to use India as zn 
experiment by which he would be 
able to suggest to the world other 
ways by which differences could 
be adjusted and settled. 
There are people who tell us: 
non-violence is the dream of the 
wise, violence is the history of 
man. We know the results which 
yrom dinar) 
nL 
such battles have achieved. But 
there is another battle steadily 
going on in the hearts of men: a 
battle for human decency, for 
human dignity, for the removal 
of physical strife which constricts 
human life, for preparing the 
world for a condition of warless- 
ness. That is the battle which is 
going on, and so far as that battle 
is concerned there has not been 
a greater fighter than Gandhi 
himself. 
He tells us again and again: 
“Take care of the darkness in 
your soul, of the savage intole- 
rance, of misunderstanding, of 
fear, suspicion, resentment and 
all such factors which are the 
breeding ground of wars, and if 
you have to battle for a world 
that is to be free from wars, you 
must expose the darkness which 
is there entrenched in your soul 
You must try to bring some light 
to bear upon it and make people 
believe that the world is one in 
its deepest roots and in its highest 
aspirations. 
Unity of Peoples 
Until we are able to liberate 
ourselves from this feeling of 
resentment and selfishness it wii} 
not be possible for us to establish 
a world on the lines of peace, 
human sanctity and generosity. Tt 
is one thing to bring about chan- 
ges in the social architecture of 
the world. We can go abou; 
establishing world organisations, 
but no world organisation ean 
thrive unless that spirit is there: 
that spirit, that love is stronger 
than hate; that understanding is 
much better than lack of under- 
standing; and if Gandhi stood ou; 
for any ideal, it was for this ideal 
of developing unity of religion, 
unity of peoples, unity of cul- 
tural thought, and for preparing 
the world for a world culture, a 
world conscience. This world 
conscience is the spiritual coun- 
terpart of the material world 
community. These world organi- 
sations cannot be established 
unless the spirit for which Gan- 
dhi stood is there to inspire 
them. 
He has met with the fate 
which awaits all those who are 
ahead of their time; the victim 
of misunderstanding, reaction, 
hatred and violent death. “A 
light shineth in the darkness and 
the darkness comprehendeth it 
     
   
    
    
ho AE 
oN a #7 nee RE > 
ERR Re a 
> 
e 
£ 
r— 
  
In 1947 Unesco undertook an examination of the philesophical 
It asked a number of thinkers and phile- basis of human rights. 


### 73689: Julian Huxley cables sorrow to Pandit Nehru

   
- Julian Huxley 
Cables Sorrow 
To Pandit Nehru 
Following the assassination of 
Mahatma Gandhi on Friday 
January 30, 1948, Dr. Julian 
Huxley, Director - General of 
Unesco, forwarded the following 
telegram to Pandit Jawakarih 
" Nehru, Prime Minister of India: 
PLEASE PERMIT ME CONVEY 
MY PERSONAL PROFOUND 
SYMPATHY WITH YOU AND 
PEOPLES OF INDIA IN TRA- 
GIC DEATH OF MAHATMA 
GANDHI. STOP. HE WILL SUR- 
VIVE AS AN IMMORTAL SYM- 
BOL, OR UNDERSTANDING 
BETWEEN MEN IN A WORLD 
TORN WITH MISUNDERSTAN- 
DING, STOP. 
Julian HUXLEY, 
Director-General Unesco Paris. 
  
sophers all over the world for their thoughts and opinions on the 
subject. We reproduce the original letter whieh Mahatma Gandhi 
sent to Unesco, in reply to this questionnaire, prior te his death 


### 73685: Executive Board convenes

EXECUTIVE BOARD CONVENES 
(Continued from Page 1) 
Barcelona, was named to head the 
Philosophy and Humanistic Stu- 
dies Section. 
M. Gordon Men ies, an exper- 
ienced Australian administrator 
and former U.N.R.R.A. Director 
for Manchuria, joined the Sec- 
retariat as head of General Ad- 
ministrative Services. 
Testifying to the importance of 
the new appointments, Dr. Hux- 
ley said they indicated the great 
strides forward Unesco had al- 
ready taken that it could attract 
ta it men of such distinction. 
The Board unanimously voted 
that M. Roger Seydoux (France) 
replace Professor Auger as mem- 
ber of the Executive Board. Pro- 
fessor Auger had resigned from 
the Board shortly before the an- 
nouncement of his appointment 
to the Secretariat. 
Considering the programme for 
1948, the Board noted that finan- 
cial and staff considerations limit- 
ed the rapid development of all 
. the projects simultaneously. It 
therefore affirmed the principle   
- human glory. 
not.” The whole cosmic process is 
a perpetual struggle between 
reason and unreason, between love 
and hate, between light and dark- 
ness, and those who fought for 
light, for love, for reason, have 
to meet with their opposites of 
darkness, of hate, of unreason, 
and they have sometimes, more 
often when they are sincere, suc- 
cumbed to these forces. 
We made Socrates drink death. 
we nailed Jesus to the cross, we 
lighted the faggots which burned 
the martyrs, and Gandhi has not 
escaped that fate. And yet his life 
has a kind of classical comple- 
teness about it. 
Here he was, laying down his 
life, facing wunreason, hatred. 
anger, dissension, and at the last 
moment with the name of God 
on his lips, and with love and 
forgiveness in his heart. Thus as 
he crumpled down, with blood 
streaming from his lips, he lifted 
up both his hands and greeted 
the murderer who was there 
facing him. You cannot conceive 
of a death more noble, less 
hateful than that. 
Here was Gandhi, who pre- 
sented to this unbelieving world 
everything good that human na- 
ture is capable of, the very 
highest ideals which we can pos- 
sibly possess, He belongs to a type 
that redeems the whole human 
race, which invests it with super- 
His body is reduced to ashes, 
which are scattered on the 
waters, but the spirit in him is   a light from above which will 
penetrate far into space and time, 
and inspire eountless generations. 
that the most urgent activities 
should be the subject of “intensive 
prosecution during 1948,” while 
the remainder should be the sub- 
ject of “limited preparatory work, 
looking towards a more intensive 
prosecution after 1948.” 
On the question of a fourth 
“Pilot Project” in Fundamental 
Education, the Board agreed that 
it would be initiated this year if 
Unesco were invited by the Per- 
uvian government, It had been 
tentatively considered that such 
a project might be developed 
among the Indians in the region 
of Cuzco, ancient capital of the 
Incas. 
Third Session of the General 
Conference 
Important alse during the Exe- 
cutive Board discussions was the 
subject of the Third Session of 
the General Conference, to be 
held in Beirut, the Lebanon, next 
October. 
Presenting a report on condi- 
tions and material facilities avail- 
able in that city, offered by the 
Lebanese government as site for 
the Third Session, Dr, Huxley 
spoke highly of the efforts being 
made there to prepare adequate 
arrangements for such an inter- 
national conference. 
The Lebanese government, he 
declared, was constructing two 
large halls for the conference ses- 
sions. Ample hotel accommoda~ 
tion would be available for dele- 
gates and Secretariat Members. 
Dr. Huxley adc that the loeal 
authorities were most anxious that 
the conference should take place 
in Beirut, and that it should be 
a success. Distinguished foreign 
residents in the Lebanon. he con- 
cluded, had emphasized the poli- 
tical importance of holding the 
conference there “as it would give 
Unesco an opportunity to make 
a very concrete contribution 
towards international understan- 
ding.” 
The Executive Board decided 
that the Third Session of the 
General Conference was tentati- 
vely scheduled to open on October 
14, 1948 and was to last about 
three weeks and a half. 
The Board also considered prob- 
lems of administration, of finance 
and of Unesco's external relations 
during its four-day meetings. 
Special sub-committees of the 
Executive Board had met for sev 
eral days prior to the plenary ses- 
sions. These groups considered 
Unesco’s relations with non-gov- 
ernmental organisations, a ten- 
tative agenda for the Third Ses 
sion of the General Conference, 
Unesco’s work in the field of cul- 
tural reconstruction and questions 
of the status and responsabilities 
of members of the Executive 
Board.

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073683engo.pdf#page=3) 4

### IGNORE

» 
UNESCO COURIER 
 


### 73691: Save the children! Says report to UNESCO on educational problems of child war victims

SAVE THE CHILDREN! 
Says Report To Unesco on Educational 
Problems of Child War Victims 
E OF the tasks assigned to 
the Secretariat of Unesco in 
1947 was a study of the effects of 
the late war on children. 
As a preliminary measure to 
this study, Dr. Simone Marcus, a 
Frenchwoman with a distinguish- 
ed record for work amonst child 
war-victims, was invited by the 
Secretariat to prepare an in- 
terim report. 
On the basis of this report the 
Second Session of the General 
Conference voted to instruct the 
Secretariat to continue its work 
on war-handicapped children, 
stressing the importance of spe- 
cial emphasis on the educational 
problems of these children. 
The Director-General was ins- 
tructed to “draw up a plan of 
study and action on the educatio- 
nal problems of war-handicapped 
children, in collaboration with the 
aational and international orga- 
nisations concerned” and ‘to 
obtain from experts in different 
countries information and fac- 
tual reports, and lo institute a 
field survey of the most signi- 
ficant experiments made in that 
field.” 
Therefore, new educational 
surveys will be undertaken this 
year on this problem and it is . 
hoped that a complete report will 
be ready for submission to the 
Third Session of the General 
Conference in Beirut. 
The interim survey, reported 
below, thus constitues the first 
step in the study of a situation 
which will probably require at- 
tention for many years to come. 
It is useful because it shows the 
urgency of the problem and the 
role that Unesco can play, es- 
wecially in the field of education. 
Quoting the statement of 
Lord Horder: “Let us take care 
of the children, for they are all 
that we have for to-morrow”, 
Dr. Marcus points out that 
amongst the 20,000,000 people 
who lost their lives during the 
Second World War, 3,000,000 
were children (more than a mil 
lion children perished in Poland 
alone), and that the children 
who survived had, in countless 
cases, been orphaned and had 
their health permanently affect- 
2d. Affer.a survey of the purely 
physical harm done by the war, 
Dr, Marcus discusses the psycho- 
logical effects, starting with the 
dislocation or destruction of fa- 
mily life, and the social changes 
brought about by war. 
In the meanwhile, juvenile 
delinquency has increased to an 
alarming extent. Dr. Marcus is 
careful to point out that this de- 
linquency shows itself in two 
forms—one the ordinary variety, 
which she ieels is more of a 
concern for the psychiatrist than 
for the social worker, and the 
other, of a different sort, which 
is much more common at pre- 
sent and which springs from a 
state of insecurity to be attribut- 
ed to the conditions of the times. 
Under enemy occypation that in- 
security was part of a state of 
affairs in which it became the 
duty of the individual to do 
what he could to set at nought 
whatever laws were imposed by 
the occupant. 
Education Disrupted 
The physical and psychological 
difficulties outlined above, 
gether with the damage done by 
invasion and occupation of the 
war devastated countries of Eu- 
rope and Asia, have had as one 
of their results, the complete dis- 
location, if not destruction of 
the educational system of the 
countries concerned, The effects 
of this, in turn, on the general 
behavior and future prospects 
of the children concerned can be 
easily imagined. At the best, 
Yet despite all this, there has 
been. a real hunger for learning 
made manifest by the older stu- 
dents, at least, young men and 
women who during the war 
years ran great risks and work- 
ed with unbounded energy to try 
and make up for what they 
knew that they were missing as 
the result of war and occupa- 
tion. 
With this note of encourage- 
ment, Dr. Marcus turns in her 
report from the ham done by 
war to a description of the ef- 
forts which are being made by 
devoted people throughout the 
world to alleviate that harm. 
Two international consultative 
enterprises described by Dr. Mar- 
cus are the International Study 
Weeks at Zurich and the ad- 
. vanced course in medicine and 
teaching at Lausanne; the In- 
ternational Weeks at Zurich 
have been able to help in France, 
Poland, Austria and Greece with 
gifts of books, etc., and in addi- 
tion have held meetings in Ger- 
many and Italy, the former hav- 
ing taken place at Heidelberg. 
In stressing the need for the 
greatest possible help for chil- 
dren, Dr. Marcus makes the 
point that the help almost im- 
mediately begins to give results, 
as soon as it is forthcoming, so 
elastic are the recuperative 
powers, both mental and physic- 
al, of children. 
“Children’s Villages” 
Chapter III of this report deals 
with the effect of the war on 
schools and education, and the 
measures taken to deal with the 
shortage of trained personnel, 
books and equipment and acco- 
modation, as well as the educa- 
tion of orphan and homeless 
children. Among the most in- 
teresting developments in this 
field which are described by Dr. 
Marcus are the children’s vil- 
lages set up in France, Switzer- 
land, Poland, Hungary and else- 
where; of these, perhaps the 
Pestalozzi Village in Canton Ap- 
penzell, in Switzerland, is the 
most striking example, grouping 
as it does some three hundred 
children of ten or more nation- 
alities—all refugee orphans. 
Efforts of War-Hit Nations 
Hungary, with 200,000 orphans 
is beginning to. deal with the 
problem which ey present in 
the same way, and in Yugoslavia 
villages are being constructed for 
88,000 orphans; the work of this 
sort which has been done in 
Italy since the end of the war 
has attracted great attention all 
over the world. 
Dr. Marcus,. in her report, re- 
cords that this idea is not a 
novel one, instancing the “Chile 
dren’s Republics” created in Pa- 
lestine by the Zionist organisa- 
tions for Jewish orphans arriv- 
ing from Europe, the home for 
THIS IS A WORLD TRAGEDY 
is . pd E 
 
After wandering for a long time he sleeps in a Children’s Home, 
Basque children at Carshalion in 
Surrey and the famous experi- 
ment of Father Flanagan in the 
United States; all these ventures, 
she comments have served to 
show the efficacy of the idea 
which, however, is not to be re- 
garded as a “cure all.” 
As stated above, Dr. Marcus’ 
report is only the first step. This 
year Unesco will extend its work 
on war-handicapped children by 
stressing the educational prob- 
lems that must be met to aid 
these unfortunate children, 


### 73692: A War-devastated country: Hungarian delegate views nation's role in UNESCO

  
A WAR-DEVASTATED COUNTRY 
Hungarian Delegate Views 
Nation’s Role in Unesco 
FoF HUNGARY, participation 
in the work of Unesco does 
not mean quite the same thing as 
it does for most other countries. 
For if is not merely a matter 
of renewing cultural and scientific 
contacts interrupted by the war. 
It is not simply a matter of 
binding up, with Unesco’s aid, her 
smarting war wounds, so that she 
can resume her “traditional place 
among the civilised nations.” 
No. For Hungary, the war was 
not just a break in continuity, an 
unhappy interlude or now for- 
gotten nightmare, but the com- 
plete transformation of her social 
structure and of the elements of 
her cultural life—a transforma- 
tion for which her best thinkers 
and poets had prepared the way. 
When the war ended, Hungary 
found her agricultural and in- 
dustrial population eager for 
knowledge, but without teachers, 
schools or methods. Added to 
this was the tragic 
and imperious ne- 
cessity of carry- 
ing out, quickly 
and effectively, a 
  
  
By 
Edmond FERENCZI 
Permanent Delegate 
of Hungary to Unesco 
education, ,organise leisure, ex- 
pand libraries, salvage works of 
art and build playgrounds. 
It will readily be seen thal 
under these difficult conditions 
Hungary’s membership in Unesco 
has nothing “idyllic” about it. 
A country like Hungary, in the 
process of reconstruction. cannot 
look upon internationalism as 
an end in itself. 
Hungary, then, looks for three 
things from Unesco: 
I.—The possibility of breaking 
away from a certain scientific, 
cultural and educational isolation 
and of maintaining fruitful rela- 
tions in these fields with all 
Member States, in accordance 
with the most ancient traditions 
of our country, 
II.—An indirect means of mak- 
ing contact with the United Na- 
tions, of which she is not yet a 
Member, in the conviction, in- 
creasingly backed by experience, 
that Hungary's 
particular form 
of democracy can 
strengthen the 
comity of na- 
  
  
big programme of 
social, economic and cultural re- 
form. 
Revolutionary means had to be 
called upon, since cultural dev- 
elopment was the condition of 
public safety. Before the war 
Budapest had a people's college, 
the Gyorffy College, where young 
peasants found, besides their un- 
iversity studies, lodging, extratui- 
tion and teaching in languages. 
At the liberation this College be- 
came a prototype, and later the 
headquarters of a vast movement 
of people's colleges, which after 
only 3 years now numbers more 
than 130 institutions and almost 
18,000 pupils. 
Coupled with this amazing. ef- 
fort, are the projects of the Min- 
istry of Education, which form 
part of the “Three Year Plan.” 
This Plan aims, in spite of losses 
and destruction, at giving the 
Hungarian nation a higher stan- 
dard of living and a fuller cul- 
ture than in 1938. 
Energetic steps are being taken 
to increase the number of schools 
of all grades, to swell the ranks 
of the teachers and improve their 
social standing, to standardise 
teaching methods, develop adult 
tions. 
III.—Certain forms of material 
assistance, for which Hungary 
has urgent need, although she is 
aware of the limited resources 
available to, the Organisation. 
In return, Hungary brings -to 
Unesco the support of her thou- 
sand-year-old civilisation, which 
in the three realms of educa- 
tion, science and culture, and 
despite the small size of her ter- 
ritory and the barrier of her 
language, has made note- 
worthy contributions to world ci- 
vilisation. 
She also brings her new ex- 
periments, bold and often im- 
provised (all the more surprising 
in a people crushed by the feel- 
ing of fatalism and now victim 
of a “heroic defeat” complex), but 
which, outside confroversial fields, 
can open new paths to Unesco 
and add a certain philosophy of 
men and things almost unrepre- 
sented within the Organisation. 
The liberation of Hungary not 
only drove out the Nazis, but by 
overcoming the sense of an imn- 
escapable doom, has taken on uni- 
versal significance, since it leads 
IN 
  towards the liberation of all) 
mankind. 
«THE BOOK 
[4 HE BOOK of Needs is 
Unesco’s first account of 
post-war educational and culti- 
ral losses and needs. It is a 
bird’s-eye-view of the present cri- 
tical situation of education, scien- 
ce and culture in fifteen war- 
devastated countries.” 
With these words Dr. Julian 
Huxley, Director-General of 
Unesco, begins his foreword to 
this book published by the Orga- 
nisation at the end of last year. 
Dr. Huxley goes on to say: 
“There is much repetition in 
this report. The same story is 
told again and again with only 
some variety in the different 
settings. The tragedy presented 
is indeed the tragedy of repeti- 
tion: in every country there are 
ruins, lack of equipment, over- 
worked teachers, white-faced 
children, 
“It is perhaps through the full 
realisation of this repetition that 
the enormous extent of the harm 
done by the invader can best be 
appreciated and the immensity 
of the problems which still con- 
front the world.” 
But the Book of Needs is not 
only a survey of the widespread 
destruction of material resources 
in school buildings and school 
equipment. In preparing this re- 
port it was felt that additional 
data concerning the ravages to 
the health standards of children 
and adults, as a direct result of 
the war, were worthy of inclu- 
sion, ’ ; 
As Dr. Huxley says in 
foreword: 
“I hope that this first attempt 
to set forth a picture of losses, 
achievement and meeds in coun- 
tries still lying in the shadow of 
the ruin of war will reach a 
wide public. The reconstruction 
of educational, scientific and 
cultural life in these war-devas- 
tated countries makes a world- 
wide call for help which cannot 
be ignored by anyone who cares 
for the preservation of real va- 
lues in tomorrow's generations.” 
The majority of the schools 
throughout ihe country are ei- 
ther totally destroyed or only the 
shells of the buildings remain. 
The loss of equipment is almost 
total. The report declares: 
“There is no reliable evidence 
that there is any village school 
completely undamaged, with fur- 
niture intact and adequate equip- 
ment.” 
In Greece, for example, the 
report states that the country. 
always poor, is now practically 
destitute: 
In the case of Poland, six mil- 
lion citizens perished and the 
whole counfry was devastated. 
500,000 children lost both their 
parents, 3,000,000 children are 
undernourished; two-thirds of all 
books in libraries were destroyed 
and sixty per cent of the coun- 
try’s educational structure was] 
wiped out. 
The same tragic pattern of 
misery and want is repeated 
his 


### 73693: The Book of needs

  throughout the war-ravaged 
OF NEEDS” 
countries of Europe and the Far 
East. 
The situation is not, however, 
one of unrelieved gloom. The 
fifteen countries whose problems 
are discussed in the Book of 
Needs have not been idle; nor 
are they passively waiting for 
foreign help. Governments and 
national voluntary organisations 
are exerting every possible effort 
towards the reconstruction and 
rehabilitation of their own coun- 
tries. But without outside help 
they” cannot hope_{o accomplish 
all that still remains to be done. 
The book closes on a note of 
urgency, with the following 
words: 
“Much has been done, much is 
being done to help the war- 
devastated countries in their im- 
mense task of educational, scien- 
tific and cultural reconstruction. 
Much remains to be done. It is 
now two years since the war 
ended, but so great was the. 
havoc wrought by the most ter- 
rible war in history that no 
country can yet be said to be 
within sight of real and total 
rehabilitation.” 
(The Book of Needs. Unesco, 
Paris 1947. 112 pp. $1.00 or 5 s Ss.) 


### 73694: School pamphlet to be reprinted

" School Pamphlet 
To Be Reprinted 
A reprint is being made of the 
booklet “Going to School in War- 
Devastated Countries”, published 
jointly by Unesco and the Com- 
mission for International Educo- 
tional Reconstruction (C.I.E.R.). 
The booklet was written by Mr. 
Leonard S. Kenworthy, American 
educator now of the Unesco Se- 
cretariat. 
First published in 1947, “Going 
to School in War-Devastated 
Countries” met with immediate 
success. It shows the difficulties 
under which education is being 
carried on in devastated coun- 
tries because of the lack of such 
simple tools as pens, pencils, 
chalk, notebooks qnd ink. 
But the type of assistance 
needed ranges far beyond these 
elementary supplies. It includes 
technical books and equipment 
for science teaching, dental and 
agricultural schools, fellowships 
and study grants for work in less 
handicapped nations of the world, 
as well as the need for exchang- 
ing educational missions with 
other countries. 
Pointing out that “the very 
basis of international wunder- 
standing and world peace is edu- 
cational opportunity” and that 
“the heroic teachers and students 
tn the countries ravaged by the 
war need your help”, the pam- 
phlet concludes with a plan for 
aid either through contributions 
of goods, services and money to 
existing projects or through the 
launching of new activities by or- 
ganisations or schools large 
enough to make this practicable.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073683engo.pdf#page=4) 3

### 73698: Austria: new member state seeks cultural exchange

  
  
UNESCO IN ACTION TI 
U S A 
National Commission 
  


### 73696: UNESCO and national cooperation

Unesco and 
National 
C ation c-opera 
OE OF the highlights of the 
recent Mexico Conference 
was the importance attached to 
the role of the National Commis- 
sions. As Dr. Milton Eisefthower, 
chairman of the commitiee 
dealing with this question, de- 
clared with vigour: “Unesco is @ 
people’s agency” or, better still, 
a “people’s movement” In this 
sense it is strictly dependent on 
the effective support that the 
peoples of its various Member 
States can give it. 
The Mexico Conference was 
unanimous in urging that Na- 
tional Commissions be rapidly 
created in those Slates where 
they do not as yet exist, and that 
the greatest possible assistance be 
given to National Commissions 
already in existence, especially 
through the publication of infor- 
mation concerning the work and 
achievements of Member States. 
The Unesco Courier is therefore 
presenting on this page, sum- 
maries of a few of the many 
reports submitted recently by the 
National Commissions to Unesco 
and the General Conference on 
the work of their National 
Co-operating Bodies. 
We regret that space permits 
the reporting only of a very small 
number of these highly interesting 
documents—all of which show 
the live interest that the Govern- 
ments and peoples are taking in 
the work of this Organisation, 
Several of these Commissions 
have only recently begun to 
function, Others have already 
gained considerable experience in 
positive action. However, the 
speed of development and the in- 
ternal organisation of each of the 
National Commissions is a ques- 
tion that depends in large meaq- 
sure on its cultural tradition. Na- 
tional Commissions are in fact 
only the reflection of the na- 
tional heritage of the individual 
country. 
For example, the Unesco Na- 
tional Co-operating Body in the 
United Kingdom, which has al- 
ready achieved important resulls 
in its work, is based on a con- 
ception which distinguishes it 
jrom all other now existing Com- 
missions. No central National 
Commission exists in Great Bri- 
tain, but instead nine specialised, 
independent bodies each dealing 
with one of Unesco’s prineipal 
fields of interest. This system 
reflects the spirit of indepenrence 
and the decentralisation which is 
at the base of all British cultural 
life. It would be absurd, and 
indeed Rarmful to seek to deny 
this true diversity of cultural 
tradition which is the solid core 
around which Unesco must build. 


### 73695: U.S.A.: National Commission highlights reconstruction

  
Highlights 
Reconstruction 
N THE occasion of the meeting 
of the U.S. National Commis- 
sion in Washington on February 
16 the entire membership of that 
body numbering approximately 
100 was received at the White 
House, by President Truman, and 
later addressed by Mr George 
Marshall, the Secretary of State. 
These two functions served to 
mark the important place which 
had already been won for itself by 
the U.S. National Commission 
during a life of a little more than. 
a year. The rapid growth of this 
body in prestige and in influence 
is the more striking by reason of 
the fact that when it was created 
*the National Commission was a 
complete novelty in American life, 
for a body of this sort, within 
which the U.S. government, and 
private groups and individuals 
interested in education, science 
and culture could all work to- 
gether, had never before existed. 
In its official report to the 
Mexico Conference, the United 
States delegation observed: 
“The National Commission for 
Unesco is an innovation in Amer- 
ican life. To have stimulated the 
creation of the Commission may 
be deemed the first significant 
achievement of Unesco in its re- 
Jations with the United States.” 
Professional organisations in 
education, science and culture are 
widely represented in the Com- 
mission, but representation is also 
given to many other groups in- 
terested in the objectives of 
Unesco—such as women’s organi- 
sations, youth organisations, la- 
bour unions and religious groups. 
A Secretariat for the Commis- 
sion is furnished by the Devart- 
ment of State; this is known as 
the Unesco Relations Staff, and 
the Director of. the Staff serves 
as Executive Secretary of the Na- 
tional Commission. 
The National Commission 
at Work 
The National Commission, the 
Chairman of which is Mr Milton 
S. Eisenhower, has, since its insti- 
tution, advised the Government 
of the United States on the for- 
mulation and development of the 
Unesco Programme and on other 
important matters concerning the 
organisation—including the com- 
position of the delegation to the 
annual meeting of the General 
Conference. 
In addition, the National Com- 
mission has assumed, as a task 
particularly its own, the duty of 
promoting a greater understand- 
ing of the general purposes of 
- Unesco on the part of the people 
of the United States, and, with 
this aim in view, established a 
Committee of Information. 
The First National Conference 
on Unesco was held in March, 
missions, 
respective countries. And they 
alloted tasks, 
  
peoples of the world and to contribute to the main- 
tenance of peace, will in the long run largely depend 
on the efficiency and activity of National Com- 
They must interpret the purposes and programme of 
Unesco in terms likely to appeal to their own public opinion. 
"They must advise their Governments on every issue relevant to 
Unesco’s functions which interests, 
“T HE SUCCESS of Unesco, its ability to influence the 
information and national collaboration it requires to fulfil ifs 
“A further point to emphasize is, that if they are to fulfil 
their function, National Commissions and Co-operating Bodies 
must be provided with the secretariat, organisational and finan- 
cial facilities required to exercize real activity. 
“A final point is the part that the National Commissions can 
play in the execution of Unesco’s programme, which is not a 
series of operations centrally directed and executed by the Secre- 
tariat in Paris, but a combined effort to which each country 
can contribute. It will call for close and regular contact between 
the Secretariat and the National Commissions.” 
or should interest, their 
should provide Unesco with the 
Dr. Julian HUXLEY, 
Director-General,   
 
  
  
~ (8oLivia) 
LI. 
RAZIL 
Ho de Toeire 
. : 
    x 
i
:
 
h
a
i
l
 
: 
ii
t 
+ 
H
k
h
 
E
H
H
 
i 
LE
 
  
MUL Ferrari.   
‘various subjects on Unesco’s pro- 
‘and cultural reconstruction is co- 
Febryary 19+8 
1947, under the auspices of the National Commis- 
sion in Philadelphia; it was attended by the re- 
presentatives of more than {ive hundred national 
and served to dissem- 
inate widely information concerning Unesco. At 
voluntary organisations 
the same time, to a certain extent, 
to give advice to local communities as to ways In 
which they might best help in the carrying out 
of Unesco's programme, 
To follow up this meeting, to which delegates 
had come from all over the United States, it was 
decided to hold an experimental regional meeting 
in Denver, Colorado from May 
brought together approximately 
1,900 persons from the Mountain- 
Plains region of the United States, 
representing organisations, colle- 
ges, schools and civic groups. The 
Conference organised ilself into 
committees dealing with the 
gramme 
Since then, amongst many local 
meetings held, there are particu 
larly worthy of note those held 
at Milwaukee on April 30, and at 
San Francisco on June 10. The 
former was paid for by a local 
department store, and brought 
together one thousand represen- 
tatives of various organisations, 
while the latter was sponsored by 
the San Francisco Museum of Art. 
Educational Reconstruction 
Participation by U.S. voluntary 
organisations in Unesco’s pro- 
gramme of educational, scientific 
ordinated by a body closely relat- 
ed to the National Commission. 
This is CIER (Commission for In- 
ternational Educational Recon- 
struction). Its functions are to 
stimulate action by voluntary 
organisations in the field of 
educational reconstruction, to 
make known needs in that field 
and to serve as a clearing house 
in the field. 
American voluntary organisa- 
tions during 1946 contributed 
nearly $62,000,000 for educational 
reconstruction, and more than 
$42,000,000 during the first six 
months of 1947. Of this amount 
approximately 80 per cent was 
contributed to Unesco countries. 
Evidence of great growth of 
interest on the part of the Amer- 
ican public in the educational 
reconstruction of war devastated 
countries is provided by the fact 
that more than 300 voluntary 
organisations are now participat- 
ing in this work, as against fewer 
than 40 a year ago.   
it was possible 
  
   
  
 
    
      
  
   15 to 17; this 
 
New Membex 
AUSTRIA 
  
  
Seeks Cultural Ex 
ONE OF the first actions of the 
new Austrian government 
after liberation was the reconsti- 
tution of the old National Com- 
mittee of Intellectual Co-oper- 
ation, marking the beginning of 
a large scale effort to restore the 
cultural relations of Austria with 
foreign countries—relations which 
had been completely broken du- 
ring eight years of German occu- 
pation and war. 
Indeed, Unesco is pleased 
that, in spite .of material and 
technical difficulties, Austria has 
taken the initiative to publish the 
first German-language magazine 
devoted exclusively to the acti- 
vities and aims of the Organisa- 
tion. This periodical, entitled 
“Unesco-Bulletin”, produced its 
first issue in January of this 
year, less than a month after 
Austria’s application for member- 
ship in Unesco was accepted hy 
the General Conference in Mexico 
City. 
Under the auspices of the 
National Committee a great 
many societies have been formed 
for the maintenance of cultural 
relations with foreign countries. 
Typical examples, selected from a 
list of twenty such bodies, are 
the Society for the Maintenance 
of Cultural and Economic Rela- 
tions with the U.S.S.R., a Franco- 
Austrian Society, an Austro- 
British Society, an Austro-Amer- 
ican Society, an Austro-Iranian 
Cultural Federation and 
Austro-Argentine Society. 
To aid in the reconstruction of 
an 
  
    
 
    
the Austrian educational sy 
a Unesco field worker toured. 
country during 1947 .to eval 
the most pressing needs; par 
the 1948 programme of Un 
includes a full survey of 1: 
technical needs of Austria in#. 
fields of press, film and raaid. 
While links with foreign i 
international bodies were 
reforgéd, Austria surveyed 
state of science and educa 
within her own borders; here, 
elsewhere, the war had left m: 
problems in ifs wake. 
In a report on this subj 
made to Unesco just prior to 
admission of Austria to mem 
ship of the organisation, 
from which the details inclu 
in this article are taken, 
Austrian government gives R 
account of some of the stS- 
taken, and pays tribute to 
help received from the relev: 
sections of the Allied Commi 
at present in the country. 
the tasks successfully undert 
by the National Committee si 
the end of the war was 
publication of new books on Af 
trian history. 4 
Contacts between Austrian Ld 
   
   
    
    
foreign youth have been ea 
sought; student exchanges # 
already taking place with Sw- 
zerland, France and the USS 
and International Univers 
Weeks have been held at Sd 
burg and at Alpach in the Tyré 
In the exchange of broadec 
ing material much has been dod 
foreign stations have relay

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073683engo.pdf#page=5) 3

### 73698: Austria: new member state seeks cultural exchange

IROUGHOUT THE WORLD   
 
— 20 
| O field Science Cooperation OFfices 
O Pilot Projects 
5 A! International Institute of the Hylean 
t Amazon . (1: Seal of 1347 conference 
2.Centre.Amazon 3: April May Conference) 
  
  
  
| PERU   
General Conference 
Member States of Unesco (41) 
A. Second Session 
B. Third Session 
  
- : v 
» 
  
80 Unesco Docurmnenlalion. li brary. a Slaristical Services   
  
  
    
60 
  
   
  
State 
change 
Austrian. broadcasts of perform- 
ances at the Salzburg Festivals, 
at the Vienna Opera and else- 
- where, 
Immediately after the libera- 
tion of the country, the univer- 
sities of Austria began to renew 
their relations abroad, and to do 
what they could to make easier 
intellectual interchange with for- 
eign countries. The University of 
Vienna has founded “The Inter- 
national Institute of the Univer- 
sity of Vienna,” which will organ- 
ise lectures abroad on Austria 
and invite foreigners to come to 
Austria to lecture on their own 
countries. 
To a certain extent Austrian 
professors are already able to go 
abroad, and their foreign col- 
leagues are able to come to Aus- 
tria, but it is hoped that much 
more of this kind of travel will 
be possible in the near future. 
Similar arrangements are begin- 
ning to be made for meetings be- 
tween Austrian and foreign stu- 
dents. 
The Austrian League for the 
United Nations has been active, 
notably in its work through 
teachers and through schools. 
Trough the work which has 
been” described in this article, 
and much more which there is 
no room to mention, Austria is 
being’ made once again a mem- 
ber of the comity of peaceful na- 
tions, able to contribute to, and 
to receive from, the general store 
of the cultural treasure 
mankind, . 
  of | 
I 
MEXICO 
  


### 73700: Mexico: Commission stresses UNESCO's education work

Commission Stresses 
Unesco’s Education Work 
HE FIRST stages of the Mexi- 
in government's campaign 
against {lliteracy begun in 1944 
were followed by the world with 
great attention, and the re- 
markable results obtained receiv- 
ed praise from all quarters. 
Less attention, however, has 
been paid to the succeeding 
stages of the operation which, in 
the opinion of the Mexican gov- 
ernment itself, presented prob- 
lems even more difficulf than 
those overcome when the cam- 
paign was first launched and 
when half the people of Mexico 
could neither read nor write. 
In a report made to Unesco at 
the time of the Second Session 
of; the General Conference last 
November, the Mexican govern- 
ment gave a number of reasons 
why the “follow up” of the origi- 
nal campaign had its own special 
difficulties. Among them were 
the following: 
1.) Because the time had pass- 
ed when learning fo read 
and write was novel and 
exciting for the people; 
2.) Because a large number of 
people had already been 
made literate, those illi- 
terates who remained were 
stubborn cases the teaching 
of whom presented special 
difficulties; 
3.) Because it was necessary 
to find ways of maintaining 
and increasing the interest 
of those who had recently 
been taught to read and 
write, 
A nation wide publicity cam- 
paign, to which the president of 
the Republic, Senor Aleman gave 
. all the authority of his person, 
wags instituted, 
A “Corps of Special Visitors” 
was created, members of which 
after selection were given instrue- 
tion and then sent to different 
parts of the country to organise 
and guide the campaign. 
These “Special Visitors”, toge- 
ther with mobile teaching col- 
umns were asked to pay atten- 
tion in particular to the setting 
up of teaching centres in the 
areas for which they were respon- 
sible; 
In the light of the first part of 
the general campaign against illi- 
teracy, it was decided that, in the 
. “Follow Up” teaching should pre- 
ferably be collective, as experience 
had shown that better results 
were obtained at Fundamental 
Education Centres where pupils 
were taught in groups, rather 
than individually, 
A system of priorities was also 
drawn up; those who were to 
have first claim on the instruc- 
tors’ time were children who, for 
various “reasons were not attend- 
ing school; then came young per- 
sons and finally older men and 
women. 
It was also recommended that 
the duration of classes in the re- 
gular Fundamental Education 
Centres should be one and a half 
hours, though in smaller rural 
communities, served only by tra- 
velling teachers, the length of 
lessons could ‘be longer if required. 
In order 0 make sure that those 
who learned to read and write 
during the first part of the funda- 
mental education campaign retain- 
ed and broadened their knowledge, 
a special series of advanced 
primers was ordered to be prepar- 
ed, a wall newspaper for the same 
purpose is to be published, and it 
is hoped also to produce a Sunday 
Supplement to one of the news- 
papers published in Mexico City. 
For the use of those who speak 
no Spanish, a series of primers 
were compiled in such languages 
as Maya, Tarasca,” Nahua, Otomi, 
Hahuatl and Totenaca., 
A system of rewards and punish- 
ments for those taking part in the 
campaign, whether students, 
teachers or municipal officials is 
being drawn up and a nation wide 
publicity campaign has been 
organised,   
FRANCE 
  


### 73701: France: Permanent Commission to broaden activities

Permanent Commission 
To Broaden Activities 
THE INAUGURAL meeting of 
the permanent French Na- 
tional Commission for Unesco will 
be held at the Quai d’Orsay on 
Thursday, March 4, in the pres- 
ence of Mr. Georges Bidault, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. 
Edouard Depreux, Minister of 
Education and Dr. Julian Huxley, 
Director-General of Unesco. The 
first programme session of the 
permanent Commission is sche- 
duled to be held on March 19. 
This permanent National Com- 
mission will thus succeed the 
present provisional one which, on 
its establishment in August 1946, 
was one of the first National 
Commissions to be set up by a 
Unesco Member State. 
In a report recently submitted 
to Unesco ‘the provisional Na- 
tional Commission reviews 
France’s participation in the 
programme of Unesco for 1947 and 
the work of the Commission. 
“It was inevitable”, the report 
begins, “that France, which, at 
the London Conference, gave 
proof of her interest in Unesco by 
inviting he Organisation to es- 
tablish the headquarters of its 
permanent Secretariat on French 
soil, should associate herself ac- 
tively with the work of interna- 
tional understanding undertaken 
by the Organisation”. 
«In spite of the destruction the 
country has suffered”, the report 
continues, “France was determin- 
ed to share to the full extent of 
her means in the world-wide 
campaign undertaken by. Unesco 
for aid to the war-devastated 
countries”. 
The provisional French Com- 
mission consisted of 50 oulstand- 
ing personalities, including mem- 
bers of Parliament, scholars, 
educators, artists, senior civil 
servants and trade unionists. It 
was organised into a number of 
programme committees, whose 
task it was to study the best ways 
by which France can assist Unesco 
in the execution of its programme, 
its surveys and other projects. 
The Arts and Letters Committee, 
for example, of the provisional 
National Commission met last 
year to study Unesco’s proposals 
jor the creation of the Interna- 
tional Theatre Institute. It brought 
together some 30 French experts: 
dramatists, composers, architects 
and decorators, theatrical produc- 
ers and actors. Under the chair- 
manship of Mr. Frangois Mauriac, 
of the “Académie Frangaise”, the 
board approved the broad out- 
lines of the Theatre Institute. 
It also proposed that National 
Theatre Committees be set up in 
each of the Member States of the 
proposed Institute. 
France has shown her interest, 
the report goes on to say, in the 
project for the creation of the 
Institute for the Hylean Amazon. 
In 1947, the French Government 
sent a noted educationalist, Pro- 
fessor Erhart, to Brazil to attend 
the meetings of the Belém Com- 
mission of Experts, 
France has concerned herself 
not only with her own problems 
of educational reconstruction, but 
throughout 1947, has shown active 
interest in Unesco’s programme 
of aid to other war-devastated 
countries. Study and research” 
fellowships were placed at the 
disposal of Unesco by the French 
Ministry of National Educalion. 
The University of Paris offered 
the Organisation 220,000 francs 
for the purchase of French books 
ant teaching material, Furiher- 
more, in June 1947, the Division 
of Cultural Relations of the Min- 
istry of Foreign Affairs gave 25, 
000 copies of French classics to 
Unesco for distribution to war- 
damaged universities and schools 
of other countries. 
The provisional National Com. 
mission from the first attached 
considerable importance to Unes- 
co’s programme of Education for 
for International Understanding. 
Thus the Commission approached 
the Ministry of Education to 
study measures for developing in 
French children and young 
people, a better knowledge and 
understanding of the rest of the 
world. In this connection if is 
interesting to note, that the 
Ministry of National Education 
has already forwarded a circular 
requesting that a special course 
on the United Nations should be 
made compulsory in all French 
universities, 
The provisional National Com- 
mission has also paid particular 
attention to Unesco’s work in 
Fundamental Education. It decid- 
ed to institute surveys and as- 
semble information on the prob- 
lems and results of fundamental 
education in the countries and 
territories of Overseas France, 
and the application thereto of 
Unesco’s work. 
Unesco has never failed to take 
advantage of the experience of 
French experts in the surveys 
and discussions which organisa- 
tions sponsored dealing with all 
aspects of its work. Especially 
noteworthy were the French caon- 
tributions in the fields of philo- 
sophy and humanities, the social 
sciences, the drafting of a De- 
claration of Human Rights and 
the surveying of the technical 
needs of war-devastated countries 
in the fields of mass communica- 
tions. 
French library services keep 
constantly in touch with the 
Libraries work of Unesco, and, in 
this connection, at the Confer- 
ence of the International Federa- 
tion of Library Associations, held 
at Oslo in May 1947, the French 
representatives secured close co- 
operation between the Federation 
and Unesco, and similar action 
was taken with regard to the 
Conference of the International 
Federation of Documentation 
held at Berne last August. 
Finally, it is worth stressing 
that, in its position as host to 
Unesco the French government 
has taken the administrative and 
legal action which has been ne- 
cessary in order that Unesco it- 
self should function effectively. 
23 NATIONAL 
mote the aims of Unesco.   
AND COOPERATING BODIES 
OF UNESCO MEMBERS STATES 
Twenty-three Member Nations have now established National 
Commissions or Co-operating Bodies of Unesco. 
Austria Denmark Mexico Poland 
Australia Dominican Rep.Netherlands U. of Sth Africa 
Brazil France New Zealand United Kingdom 
Canada Haiti Norway U.S. of America 
China India Philippines Venezuela 
Colombia Italy Peru 
In addition, CHILE and IRAN, which are not yet Member 
States have already established Co-operating Bodies to pro- 
COMMISSIONS 
These are: 
  

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073683engo.pdf#page=6) 3

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER 
 La 


### 73702: UNESCO takes part in U.N. press talks

UNESCO TAKES 
PART IN U.N. 
PRESS TALKS 
The principal contrasting views 
on the status and functions ot 
the press existing today were the 
subject of discussion during the 
second session of the U.N. Sub- 
Commission on Freedom of In- 
formation which took place at 
Lake Success from 17 January 
to 3 Pebruary. Unesco was re- 
presented at these meetings by 
the Press chief of the Mass Com- 
munications Sectipn, M. René 
Maheu. ° 
The twelve experts on the Sub- 
QOommission drafted the articles 
of the Declaration and Conven- 
tion on Human Rights dealing 
with freedom of information. In 
addition they prepared a prelim- 
nary report on “The Rights, 
Obligations and Practices on the 
Concept of Freedom of Informa- 
tion” for the forthcoming World 
Conference on Freedom of In- 
formation and the Press, schedul- 
ed to open at Geneva on 23 
March. 
Two opposing points of view 
were expressed, with no compro- 
mise possible between the two, by 
8 majority of proponents of Li- 
beralism and the Russian dele- 
gate who advocated collective 
ownership and State monopoly of 
the media of information. 
Pertinax (M. André Géraud) of 
France and M. Sychrava of 
Czechoslovakia, on the other hand 
stressed the importance of both 
responsibility and freedom in 
news distribution, and pointed out 
that a reasonable “equalisation” 
of technical facilities and equip 
meni should be a necessary pre- 
liminary when considering fair 
international competition. 
Although the Unesco represen- 
tative at the conference did not 
take sides in these ideological dif- 
ferences, he did point out that 
the right of the general public to 
information should take pre- 
cedence over the individual's 
right of expression. By this he 
did not imply in any way the 
enial of individual freedom of 
fotity or expression or an at- 
tack on property rights of au- 
thors .or inventors. If it were 
acknowledged, however, that the 
_ rights of the general public were 
fundamental, it then became pos- 
sible to state the responsibilities 
of spreading information in "erms 
of voluntary self-discipline instead 
of in terms of an external and 
arbitrary tyranny. 
The representative of Unesco 
stressed the vital connection bet- 
" ween the ideas of freedom and 
responsibility, pointing out that 
“we must find a common ground 
between the alternatives of free- 
dom without responsibility — the 
law of the jungle—and responsi- 
bility without freedom—the law 
of the prison”. 
The Unesco representative also 
pointed out the danger that cul- 
ture faced through the *“com- 
mercialisation” of the news in- 
dustries. 
Thus, the meetings of the Sub- 
Commission at Lake Success pro- 
vided valuable information which 
wilt serve as ge basis for the 
forthcoming ussions at Ge- 
neva. Here again Unesco will 
take up the cause of intel- 
lectual freedom and understand- 
ing between the peoples of the 
world by stressing the need for 
mutual respect of ideas and cul- 
tures, 
N 
AFGHANISTAN SEEKS 
UNESCO MEMBERSHIP 
The Director-General has re- 
ceived a letter dated February 
14 from the Minister of Educa- 
_tion of Afghanistan, applying for 
admission te Unesco, 
As Afghanistan is a member of 
the United Nations, her admis- 
sion to Unesco is only contingent 
on her signature and acceptance 
of the Constitution, and on the 
deposit of the Instrument of 
"Acceptance with the British 
Foreign Office. 
  
  
AMI TAL ERRAL LLL 
A view of Beirut, the Lebanon, where the Third Session of 
Unesco’s General Conference is scheduled to take place this October. 


### 73703: UNESCO strengthened by Mexico Conference

  
Unesco Strengthened 
By Mexico Conference 
The following article is reprint- 
ed from the publication of the U.S 
National Commission, 
Commission News”: 
It is difficult to appraise 
realistically the General Con- 
ference at Mexico City. Certainly 
the Organisation itself emerged 
stronger; its program emerged in 
sharper outline; and the goal of in- 
“National 
  
international conferences involy- 
ing military security. In spite of 
a real effort to collaborate, larger 
political alignments affect the 
attitudes of delegations; 
2) The inadequacy of interna- 
tional communications. The world 
has developed its ability to des- 
troy understanding far beyond its 
ability to .preserve it, and its 
  
A power to incite hostility far 
ternational col- By . beyond its power 
laboration in the Tae i i i- cram Lis B30 William BENTON to inspire confi 
tion, science, and 
culture emerged | 0 the Mexico   
Chairman of U.S. Delegation 
dence; 
3) The natural Conference lethargy of men 
as bright as ever. 
At my final press conference 
at Mexico City I said that it 
seems certain Unesco will con- 
tribute something to world under- 
standing; and that it stands 
perhaps a 10-per cent chance to 
live up to the soaring hope of 
its constitution, providing it will 
do four or five fundamental 
things. That 10-percent chance 
seems to me well worth all the 
who feel them- 
selves safe from immediate dan- 
ger- It seems to me that only 
an honest appraisal of the true 
state of world affairs, coupled 
with an effective program to dra- 
matize the need for better under- 
standing, can overcome this 
lethargy, which is perhaps the 
greatest danger to the success of 
Unesco.   


### 73705: Way of life books planned by UNESCO

“Way of Life” Book Series 
Planned by Unesco 
THE great discovery most people 
make who move around in 
the world with open eyes is that 
other nations have ways of doing 
things which are altogether 
strange—and yet work. To this 
discovery there are two typical 
reactions. One is: “That's dif- 
ferent; I don’t like it.” The other 
is: “How interesting; that's a 
new line on things.” Which of 
these two reactions is forthcom- 
ing decides in large part whether 
there is to be international fric- 
tion or international understand- 
ing. 
One way of making it more likely 
that differences will be seen in 
an attractive light is to let the 
traveller into the secrets of the 
foreign people he is visiting. If 
he knows that they have this or 
that peculiarity and then proceeds 
to make the discovery for himself, 
in his own personal contacts, the 
chances that he will be saying 
“How interesting...” are greater. 
One of Unesco’s main tasks is 
to pave the way to international 
understanding by every means 
possible. It is accordingly setting 
out on a piece of work which has 
never been attempted on a world 
scale before. In the course of the 
next two years it hopes to be able 
to present to the peoples of the 
world a small bookshelf—twelve, 
sixteen, twenty volumes perhaps— 
handy in size, with a number of 
illustrations, the titles of which 
will read: “The American Way 
of Life”; “The Brazilian Way of 
Life”; “The British Way of Life”; 
“The French Way of Life”; “The 
Norwegian Way of Life”; “The 
Polish Way of Life”, “The Swiss 
Way of Life”, and so on for all 
the principal peoples of the world. 
Dipping into one of these books, 
we should find a number of as- 
pects of that nation—how the 
people govern themselves, how 
they educate themselves, how 
effort we can put into it. ‘This 
would be true if the chance were 
only 2-percent. 
Here are some of the things 
Unesco must do to win this par- 
ticular one-in-ten bet: 
1) It must find great leader- 
ship. It must attract to its ser- 
vice the ablest men and women 
in the world; 
2) It must develop the means 
by which peoples can talk directly 
to peoples through the great 
modern media of communication, 
so that individuals of each nation 
are in the most direct possible 
intellectual and cultural contact 
with individuals of other nations; 
3) Under Unesco’s leadership, 
standards of popular education 
must be raised throughout the 
world as rapidly as possible; edu- 
cation offers the most effective 
resistance to the appeal of war; 
4) It must deserve as well as 
receive an adequate budget. It is 
true {hat Unesco is prepared to 
spend only $7,700,000 effectively 
in 1948. But it should be looking 
toward the time when it can 
efficiently spend 10 times that 
much. That time will come with 
strong leadership and with the 
further development of vital 
projects. ‘ 
In the field of education, Unes- 
co is now prepared to call the 
best teachers of the world to- 
gether to consider what are the 
best teaching methods; to gather 
the best tectinical information on 
raising literacy standards; to de- 
velop the use of mass communica- 
tions for education; to eall 
regional study conferences and 
adult-education seminars; to sti- 
mulate the schools of the world 
to take a positive approach to 
the teaching of international 
understanding. There are projects 
now ready for the first time to 
be put into practical operation. 
I eonsider the transition from 
ambitious proposals to working 
realities the major achievement 
of the Mexico Conference. I hope 
that Unesco is beginning to at- 
tack in a practical way the prob- 
lems which brought it into 
existence. 
Some of the obstacles, it seems 
to me, to extending this beginning 
are: 
1) The depth and complexity of 
nationa] differences. Strongrooted 
national interests express them- 
selves as surely in debate in 
Unesco Conference sessions as in   
Work of Unesco Important 
To Latin American Countries 
Ecuador Executive Board Member Says 
In an interview recently granted 
to a correspondent of the “Unesco 
Courier”, Dr Benjamin Carrion, 
the newest member of Unesco’s 
Executive Board spoke of the im- 
portance to Latin America of the 
work of the Organisation and the 
literature of his country, Ecuador. 
Dr. Carrion, a distinguished 
man of letters and diplomat of 
the Ecuadorian Republic pointed 
out that “International teamwork 
in the fields of education, science 
and culture is receiving the full 
support of all of the countries in 
Latin America.’ 
“The spirit of Spanish Amer- 
ica,” he added, “is an open one. 
It is essentially intellectual, and 
rejects violence and brute force.” 
“Interest in Latin American 
countries,» Dr. Carrion continued, 
“is at present concentrated on the 
Unesco project for the Institute 
of the Hylean Amazon, since it 
directly affects Brazil, Colombia, 
Peru, Venezuela, Bolivia and 
Ecuador. Unesco is performing an 
important and necessary task in 
summoning representatives to the 
meetings in Peru and Brazil 
which will establish the Institute. 
Whatever the result of these 
meetings—and 1 sincerely hope 
they will be successful—they will 
contribute to the ever increasing 
development of CO ~- operation 
amongst our countries in South 
America.” 
Turning to Unesco’s programme 
in Fundamental Education, Dr. 
Carrion stated that Ecuador has 
been active for several years in 
a nation-wide campaign in this 
field. One publishing house alone 
has already printed more than 
200,000 reading primers, he de- 
clared. “I can assure you that the 
Mexico Conference on Fundamen- 
tal Education was greatly im- 
pressed by our results in this 
field. The work of education and 
culture is difficult and requires 
time. Ecuador for example is 
extremely interested in the work 
to begin soon on the proposed 
Pilot Project in Cuzco, Peru. Cer- 
    
tainly the results achieved in ap- 
plying Fundamental Education to 
the native problems of the Cuzco 
Indians can be usefully and 
effectively applied to other areas 
and other climates.” 
At the close of his interview 
with the “Unesco Courier” cor- 
respondent, Dr. Carrion touched 
very briefly on Ecuadorian litera- 
ture. “Ecuadorian writers of to- 
day,” he stated, “are particularly 
concerned with the social prob- 
lems of their country. The novel 
‘Huasipungo’ (an Indian word 
meaning ‘native land’), for exam- 
ple, written by one of Ecuador's 
18ading contemporary writers, 
Jorge Icaza, is a forceful attack 
against the exploitation of the 
native Indian population. In a 
sense it reflects the social and 
political evolution of Ecuador 
and the important influence of 
the ideas of social justice on the 
younger generation of today. 
‘Huasipungo’ cannot be described 
as a political book, since it is 
devoid of political implications. 
Rather it is a realistic work, the 
product of a particular phase in 
the history of our counfry.” 
Senor 
Ecuador, 
Unesco’s - Executive 
of 
of 
Benjamin 
newest 
Carrion, 
member 
Board. 
  
  
they look upon other peoples, 
what things they have shown 
themselves ready to die for—set 
out in a manner which illustrates 
the peculiar quality of that group 
of human beings, their “national 
character” as it is sometimes 
called, their hopes, fears, beliefs 
and values, their ‘way of life. 
Moreover, if we are particularly 
interested in education, say, and 
would like to know how the dif- 
ferent forms of education are an 
outgrowth of the way of life of 
the different peoples, by reading 
the comparable chapter right 
through this small bookshelf and 
we can have light on the world’s 
idea of education as never before. 
Who would be likely to use such 
a bookshelf? First, clearly, men 
and women in universities who 
are studying international rela- 
tions. The very substance of inter- 
national relations is understand- 
ing the diverse ways of life of 
the peoples of the world, of ap- 
preciating how this diversity 
makes for the richness of life, 
and at the same time of perceiy- 
ing the underlying unity upon 
< which a viable world system can 
be built. Second, in the inter- 
national seminars organised by 
Unesco, these ‘Way of Life’ 
studies would clearly be of the 
utmost value, 
A reading of one another's 
‘Way of Life’ should help to bring 
about a deeper undestanding— 
even if it were no more than an 
‘agreement to differ,’ provided 
that the real source of the dif- 
ference is realised. Third, the 
staffs of the United Nations 
would undoubtedly make use of 
these books. When, for instance, 
a Brazilian member of the Secre- 
- tariat of one of the U.N. organisa- 
tions or agencies is visiting 
Poland for the first time, the 
volume entitled “The Polish Way 
of Life” should be of value to 
him. Hundreds, possibly thou- 
sands, of such cases are likely 
to arise every year. Fourth, when 
a country appoints 3 new mem- 
ber of its consular or diplomatic 
service to some foreign country, 
the “Way of Life’ volume on that 
country should go in his bag. 
Generally, without multiplying 
further instances, all travellers— 
whether travellers in the flesh or 
travellers in the mind—should 
find this series of value. 
A pleasant idea, the critic 
remarks, but how is it to be done? 
In this, Unesco is fortunate that 
it can count upon an Organisa- 
tion built up during the inter- 
war period. The International 
Studies Conference, for a number 
of years before the Second World 
War, had already brought togeth- 
er most of the men and women 
in the world engaged in the 
scientific study of international 
relations. In mor. than twenty 
countries the International Stu- 
dies Conference has National 
Sections which are effective oper- 
ating units. It is these National 
Sections, under the overall super- 
vision of the International Stud- 
les Conference, that are assuming 
responsibility for making the 
'way of life’ studies. 
As will be seen, this provides 
-the means of dealing with the 
two main difficulties encountered 
in an enterprise of this kind. The 
first difficulty is how a country’s 
way of life shall be presented in 
a fashion that other countries 
can understand 
The other major problem is to 
secure that the studies made gre 
not flights of fancy, but scientific 
objective analyses—which, at the 
same time, are readable, for if 
they are not read there is little 
purpose in their being made. To 
deal with this, the National Seec- 
tions will choose an experienced 
writer in this field to make the 
book, while a small group of 
specially chosen experts in inter- 
| national relations will review it 
for its scientific accuracy. 
Four National Sections have 
voluntereed to be what Dr. Julian 
Huxley called the “guinea-pigs,” 
the first to make the experiment. 
It is hoped to bring their spokes- 
men together in Unesco House in 
March and to work out the 
broad lines of this first large- 
scale co-operative study of the 
creative diversity of the peoples 
of the world. 
Percival W. MARTIN.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073683engo.pdf#page=7) 3

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER 
 


### 73707: London, Lake Success and Prague to be host to UNESCO summer seminars; Latin American seminar also planned

London, Lake Success and Prague 
to he Host to Unesco Summer Seminars 
Latin American Seminar also Planned 
S:tes for three Unesco educa- 
tional seminars to be held this 
summer, bringing together out- 
standing educators from all parts 
of the world, were officially an- 
nounced on Februrary 24 at Unes- 
¢0 House. 
Unesco has communicated with 
its fortv-one Member States, re- 
questing Ministries of Education 
to arrange for representative par- 
ticipants in the seminars. The 
participants are to be key educa- 
tional versonnel in each country, 
men and women who will be able 
to influence the teaching prac- 
tices of their home countries on 
their return from the séminars. 
The seminars play an important 
role in the programme of Unesco, 
for through them Unesco hopes 
not only to raise educational 
standards throughout the world, 
but to bring together influential 
persons in the field of education 
and thus strensthen the bonds 
of international understanding 
among all peoples. 
The first of the seminars will 
concern “Teacher Education” and 
will be held for six weeks in or 
near London during July and 
August. The invitation to meet 
in England came from the Brit- 
ish government. 
The second seminar. will con- 
cern “Childhood Education” and 
is planned for Prague for a 
period of six weeks, alsa this 
summer. 
The third seminar on “Teach- 
ing about the United Nations and 
its Specialised Agencies” will be 
held for six weeks during July 
and August at Adelphi College, 
in Garden City near Lake Suc- 
cess, New York. Close co-opera- 
tion in this seminar will be main- 
tained with the United Nations. 
It is planned to have some 
sixty educators attend each of 
the seminars, which are an exten- 
sion of the first such experiment 
by Unesco last year. At that time, 
nearly one hundred key world 
educators attended a six-week 
seminar on “Education for Inter- 
national Understanding,” at Sé- 
yres, near Paris, and was attended 
by representatives of thirty-one 
nations. 
For the three seminars schedul- 
ed this year, Unesco will pay the 
administrative costs and board 
and room expenses of each parti- 
cipant. The governments will be 
expected to arrange for ihe travel 
expenses of their participants. 
A fourth seminar is projected 
for 1948 in which Unesco will co- 
operate with the Pan American 
Union, and which it is hoped will 
atiract representatives from all 
the Latin-American countries. 
Subject, for study at this seminar 
will be “Educational Problems in 
South America” 
In all of the seminars, a similar 
programme will be followed. Gen- 
eral meetings of the participants 
will be held regularly, along with 
small s*udy groups to consider 
specific aspects of the main 
subject. 


### 73706: M. Jean Thomas speaks of 'UNESCO and culture'

M. Jean Thomas Speaks 
of ‘Unesco and Culture’ 
Prior to his departure for New 
York on the 17 February as the 
Unesco representative to the 
recent session of the Economic 
and Social Council of the United 
Nations, M. Jean Thomas, As- 
sistant Director-General of Unes- 
co was invited to address an au- 
dience of professors and students 
at the SLorbonne. He spoke on 
the subject of “Unesco and the 
Problems of Culture” before 
members of the ““Groupement 
universitaire pour les Nations 
Unies” and invited guests. 
M. Thomas pointed out that the 
United Nations might be thought 
of as the sun, and Unesco as one 
oi the planets revolving round 
it, but this did not mean that 
Unesco’s work was secondary or 
strictly dependent on the United 
Nations. Comparing the disap- 
pointments met with in the Lea- 
gue of Nations with the much 
more positive history of the ILL.O, 
(International Labour Office), 
before the war, M. Thomas indi- 
cated that the Specialised Agen- 
cles were often less vulnerable 
than the central political organ- 
isation. “Unesco, of course is not 
entirely unaffected by _ politics,” 
he said, “but on the cultural 
plane, it can achieve agreements 
provided it deals with problems 
from a practical angle.” 
The Assistant Director-General 
thus considered Unesco’s work 
from the practical point of view 
and showed how it was meeting 
real problems arising in the mod- 
ern world on the cultural plane. 
The {first question to which 
Unesco sought an answer, he 
sald, was that of “cultural isola- 
tlonism.” Unesco’s task was 10 
broaden the horizons of the dif- 
ferent peoples of the world. to 
bring them into touch with 
other modes of thought and 
behaviour. This did not mean, 
he continued, that Unesco Was 
seeking to set up a single culture 
or to enable one particular cul- 
ture to dominate the. others. 
“Unesco,” said M. Thomas, “does 
not wish to impose on the world 
either a single school of art or 
a single school of philosophy. 
The very notion of a single cul- 
ture is absurd to-day.” 
The second problem of direct 
Interest to Unesco, with regard 
Thomas stated was that of the 
participation in cultural life of a 
larger sections of society. He 
stressed this as a very important 
aspect of the” Organisation’s 
work. “Unesco,” he said, “atta- 
ches the highest importance to 
the specialised work of scientists, 
philosophers and creative artists, 
and devotes a large proportion of 
11s funds to the dissemination 
and “popularisation” of culture... 
We must bear in mind, the num- 
ber o+ people who can be reach- 
ed to-day by the cinema, gramo- 
phone records, the press and ra- 
dio. The influence of such mod- 
ern instruments of culture is 
vast, and it cannot be said that 
they are at present fulfilling 
their true mission of raising the 
cultural interests of the public.” 
Accordingly, Unesco is encourag- 
ing the production of articles. 
films and radio programmes of 
cultural value he declared, and 
Is taking positive steps to facil- 
itate their distribution in the dif- 
ferent cultural areas of the 
world. 
“Unesco,” he said, “may not 
yet be known to the general 
public. But the main thing is 
that its programme should reach 
the masses through a series of 
concrete results. It is actually of 
minor importance whether the 
public's collaboration is a cen- 
A CHINESE PIONEER 
Sevres, France. 
Director, 
OR ABOUT 
twenty - six 
years I have be- 
longed to the 
Chinese Move- 
ment for Mass 
Education. This 
movement ori- 
ginated, not in 
China, but m 
France during 
the first world 
war. Chinesc 
took part in this 
war on the 
battlefields of 
France; Chinese 
workers shared 
in the work of 
military engi- 
neering corps 
and in war pro- 
duction in Fran- 
nese combatants 
and workers 
were very un- 
happy owing to 
their ignorance 
of the French 
and English lan- 
guages. They 
were isolated. 
and received no news of their 
families or their country. The 
French and British authorities 
asked for velunteers—students— 
to serve as interpreters for these 
men. In this way it came about 
that I embarked for France. 
It was the opinion in China for 
centuries that scholars alone 
should learn to read and write. 
That was the exclusive privilege 
of the scholars. For centuries’ it 
had been the view that ordinary 
folk the people—should not and 
could not read: the farmer, the 
worker could not and should not 
learn such an art. I decided, how- 
ever, to try, and to undertake the 
education of my men. If was my 
idea to form a little school, where 
I could teach them to read and 
write. 
I began with very simple words 
and sentences. I composed pages 
for reading. At the end of my pro- 
gramme of work 35 out of 40 of 
my pupils had entirely succeeded. 
This experiment became known, 
and I was asked to develop and 
apply it to the education of 200,000 
Chinese workers then in France. 
We then joined up with Chinese 
volunteers, like myself, in France, 
Great Britain and the United 
States. We organised in Paris a 
seminar which lasted for some 
ten days, Together we prepared 
and set on foot a precgramme and 
scheme of teaching. Classes were 
organised throughout France.   scious or unconscious one.” 
 
The 1st Congress of the International Theatre Institute will be held 
at the Palace of the National Council, Prague, shown above. A 
to the development of culture, M. seminar on Child Education will also be held in Prague this summer. 
= 
= 
3B 
  
by Dr. James YEN, 
College of Rural Reconstruction, 
Ma Chang, Chungking, China; Founder and Director 
of the Chinese Movement for Mass Education. 
Hsih- 
That was the 
beginning of the 
Chinese - Move- 
ment for Mass 
Education, 
In China, we 
worked out our 
methods of 
teaching more 
thoroughly, 
more scientific- 
ally. We chose a 
vocabulary suit- 
able for the pur- 
poses of aver- 
ages pupil level 
The Chinese 
language com- 
prises some 40.- 
\ 00¢ characters. 
The current lan- 
guage of every- 
the use of be- ce, Great Bri- 
tain and the tween four and 
United States. five thousand 
But these Chi- characters. 
A farmer, a 
worker or a cCi- 
tizen must know 
about 1,300 ba- 
sic characters. 
We have pub- 
lished diction- 
aries and other 
books containing 
the main characters to be learned. 
A programme of work has been 
drawn up providing for one hour’s 
lesson each day, except Sundays, 
for a period of four months. This 
educational scheme enables the 
pupils to read papers, pamphleds 
and other publications issued for 
their benefit. 
We have a service of 100,000 
teachers, all of them volunteers, 
who devote several hours of their 
time each day, without any remu- 
neration, to the education of the 
masses, These teachers beiong to 
every educational grade. 
This movement has constituted 
a veritable revolution in China; it 
has brought together coolies and 
scholars. The thousand-year-cid 
barriers between these two social 
classes have been broken down, 
and a truly democratic movement 
has been set on foot. 
The fight against illiteracy was 
only the first step in the task to be 
accomplished. We wanted to estab- 
lish a complete range of instruc- 
tion, to found a true sducational 
system, . 
In China 85% of the total popu- 
lation of some 400 to 500 millions 
live in the country provinces, 
spread ou; over thousands of 
small villages, We therefore felt 
that the duty of us students, of 
us scholars, was not to visit libra- 
ries but to go inte the country. 
Four Main Difficulties 
The problems to be solved were 
many and vast. but they were 
connected in a general way with 
the following four fundamental 
points: (1) illiteracy, (2) poverty, 
(3) disease. (4) bad government. 
We applied our system. which 
enabled the people to learn to 
read and write in four months 
as a result of one hours work a 
day. 
Six schools for demonstration 
were founded, and were run enti- 
rely at the expense of the Chinese 
Movement for Mass Education. By 
degrees, hundreds of schools were 
established, with the result that 
every village in the county soon 
had a school, known as the 
“school of the people”. 
The result was excellent, for 
after three years’ work this 
movement had, of itself, developed 
to such a point that more than 
80,000 young people, from 18 to 
25 years of age, had passed 
through them. These young 
people feli the need of   
day life involves * 


### 73708: A Chinese pioneer: Dr. Yen describes work of mass education in China

Dr. Yen Describes Work 
of Mass Education in China 
(EDITOR'S NOTE: We reproduce below the abridged text of an 
address by Dr. James Yen, one of the pioneers in the Mass Education 
Movement in China, delivered last year at the Unesco sponsored 
Summer Seminar in Education for International Understanding at 
= 
forming associations— Fellow 
Scholar Associations”. They 
founded a paper called “The 
Farmer”, and also introduced 
radio into the villages. Theatrical 
events were organised; dramas 
and small plays were performed; 
theatrical companies travelled 
from one village to another. 
There is a vast medical problem 
to be solved in China, This prob- 
lem has a dual aspect. In the 
first place, public health in China 
is bad because of the poverty of 
the population. In the second 
place, health services, particularly 
medical personnel, are notoriously 
inadequate. China has only one 
doctor per 75,000 or so inhabi- 
tants. 
We established in our “labora- 
tory county” the following sys- 
tem: we mobilised all the good 
will, all the elements which were 
capable of receiving rapid first- 
aid and medical training. 
The health centre was the 
county, with its hospital and iis 
complete and perfected equipment. 
This system permitted the maxi- 
mum protection of public health 
with the very limited resources 
available. If had such satisfactory 
results that the Chinese Govern- 
ment appointed groups of doctors 
to the different counties, with 
the recommendation that an or- 
ganisation similar to that in our 
“laboratory county” be instituted. 
A Table with Three Legs 
We had set on foot an educa- 
tional, agricultural and a health 
programme. For these to be effeec- 
tive they had to be authorised 
and applied. But for the purpose 
of applying them we had, at the 
head of the county, only one 
authority, that of the governor of 
the counly, generally corrupt; 
dishonest, and above all indiffes 
rent to social problems. 
I sought an interview with 
General Chang-Kai-Shek and told 
“him that we possessed a table 
with three legs—an educational, 
an agricultural and a public 
health leg—and that we abso- 
lutely had to have a fourth leg 
so that the whole structure should 
be solid, This fourth prop was the 
support of the government. I 
asked him to entrust us with a 
single county, our “laboratory 
county” of about 400,000 souls; to 
entrust us with the government 
of that area. A year and a half 
later we received a favourable 
reply. ) 
We are a movement of the 
people. Our action has gradually 
spread throughout al! China. Our 
results were achieved 'in seven 
years, from 1929 to 1936. 
A World Problem 
But these problems are noi 
peculiar to my country. Three- 
quarters of the inhabitants of the 
world are in like case. I have been 
to India, and the problems af- 
flicting China are the same as 
those afflicting India. I have been 
to Cuba, and there the problems 
are the same, 
Unesco is a great institution, 
but in order to succeed it must 
work with the object of using the 
resources of the privileged quarter 
of the world to raise the stands 
ards of the non-privileged three 
quarters. I know that this will 
take a certain time and that it is 
only by degrees that we shall sue- 
ceed in improving the living cons 
ditions of the masses of humanity;

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073683engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER 
 
    
  
The Conference for the establishment of 
the International Institute of the Hylean 
Amazon will meet in Peru on April 30. 
It is expected that the headquarters of 
the Institute will be in Manaus, Brazil. 
Pictures show Indian inhabitants of the 
Hylean Amazon region, 
about three hundred thousand, still liv- 
ing under extremely primitive conditions. 
The density of the population of the area 
is one of the lowest in the world. 
who number 
  
  
“DISCOVERY” (Great Britain), 
February 1948. 
Mr. Ritchie Calder in an article 
entitled ‘Science is Unesco’s 
Strong Point” writes as follows : 
“Without question, the section 
which proved itself the most 
efficient both in execution of its 
1947 programme and in its pro- 
posals for 1948, was the science 
section, Some of the delegations 
were suspicious of the amount 
which was being spent on science. 
They were dubious, for example, 
about the grants-in-aid to the 
Scientific Unions. The experts 
on the working party were in- 
structed to examine and curtail. 
They examined and confirmed. 
- The explanation, of course, is 
that in science Unesco, as in no 
other field, took over a ‘going 
concern’. 
Some dubiely was expressed 
(and removed) about the Hylean 
Amazon project, This was initiat- 
ed at the first Unesco Conference 
in Paris from an offer by Brazil 
to make available an institute, 
as an international centre for 
the study of the problems of 
the Amazon area. That embraces 
a third of the continent of South 
America and involves seven Ssov- 
ereign states and three European 
dependencies—the Guianas, It is 
largely unexplored and there is 
little systematic knowledge about 
its natural characteristics. There 
is the obvious wealth of timber 
and convertible vegetation. 
Humboldt, the German explorer 
and naturalist, called it ‘Hylea’ 
130 years ago. Since then ex- 
plorers have skirmished in the 
area. Weird tales have been 
‘written in serious works as well 
as in the ‘penny-bloods’. Air lines 
ply across it and see only a close- 
ly-knit carpet of green, but where 
is the bulldozer which could drive 
a path through? 
Some of us thought it exciting. 
Or it could be made so and, 
heaven knows, Unesco needs 
something colourful to catch 
the public imagination, Others 
thought it too ambitious for 
Unesco with its Limited resources. 
Others asked why the countries 
concerned could not join up and 
tackle the problems and share 
the cost. That was missing the 
whole point; it is not just a Pan- 
Hylean project but an interna- 
tional one to establish a lien on 
the development of this area not 
merely for he governments con- 
cerned but for the people of the 
area and the benefit of the whole 
world. 
To begin with, it would be the 
hunting-ground of the ‘ologists’ — 
anthropologists, zoologists, archae- 
ologists, climatologists, geologists, 
mineralogists, etc. That would be 
the Unesco phase of research and 
inquiry. But the plain ‘ists’ 
would move in later—the arbor- 
ists, agriculturists, nutritionists, 
the applied chemists and, maybe, 
pilot industrialists under the 
aegis of the Food and Agricul- 
ture Organisation, to work out 
methods of sane development. 
A pipe-dream, perhaps. But all 
that Unesco was being asked to 
do was to endorse a conference 
of international experts which 
had already met at Belem and 
had agreed on the initial steps. 
Unesco was to make a contribu- 
tion to the initial expenses, the 
bulk of which was to subscribed 
by the governments of the ten 
countries, 
Apart from its scientific value, 
just think how Hylean Amazon 
might help Unesco to capture 
the popular imagination. To 
make it so, should be a priority 
job for the ‘Ideas Bureat’ for 
which the British delegation ask- 
ed half-a-million dollars.” 
“WASHINGTON STAR” (USA), 
January 15, 1948. 
“Jungle Venture for the U.N.” 
“The project though still in the 
planning stage, promises to be 
one of the most “interesting and 
exotic ever undertaken on an 
mternational basis. Its practical 
value cannot be measured at 
this time, but its potentialities 
seem great enough to warrant 
co-operative action... Sections of 
it have been penetrated by 
numerous expeditions in the past, 
but there has been no sys- 
tematic exploratory effort com- 
parable to the projected Unesco 
undertaking.” 
“LE SOIR” (Lebanon), 20 Jan- 
nuary 1918. 
In an article entitled “L’Unesco 
au Liban” this paper states: 
“The destiny of a nation does not 
depend on its territorial or geo- 
graphical size. The example of 
the Lebanon is proof of it. The 
Lebanon emerged into the inter- 
national world after a successful 
struggle and at once made a 
place for itself fitting its cultural, 
spiritual and historical past. 
Unesco has chosen the Leba- 
Editor: S. M. KOFFLER., 
IMPRIMERIE 
DU NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE 
21 Rue de Berri - Paris 8e 
non as the seat for its Third 
General Conference. After Mecxi- 
co, our country will soon be host 
to the members of the largest 
cultural organisation in the 
world. The importance that this 
event takes on for the Lebanon 
and the Lebanese need not be 
stressed. 
In this choice one might see 
the fulfillment of the role that 
the Lebanon is filling and must 
continue to fill: that of a bridge 
between the cultures of East and 
West. The Lebanon can be justly 
proud of this role and should" 
take all steps so that the forth- 
coming Conference is a success.” 
“THE QUEENSLAND COUN- 
TRYWOMAN (Australia), Jan- 
uary 1948. 
“Fundamental Education has 
been part of Unesco’s programme 
from the very beginning. It has 
received ‘widespread and en- 
thusiastic support from a score 
of countries as diverse in back- 
ground and in standards of edu- 
cation as Brazil, China, France, 
Iran, Mexico, Norway, Nether- 
lands, Poland, the United King- 
dom, the United States and the 
Union of South Africa! 
“If we turn back to Unesco’s 
definition of the aim of fun- 
damental education, we shall all 
agree it is worth while if it ’ena- 
bles man, as an individual, to live 
a fuller and happier life in ad- 
justment with a changing en- 
vironment’, and promotes the 
Meeting Set for 
Hylean Institute 
(Continued from Page 1) 
tinuity and greater resources, the 
admirable efforts of the past. 
Only an international body, 
jointly maintained by the coun- 
tries of the Amazon forest region 
and those which, although not a 
part of it, are specially interested 
in the problems of the natural 
and social sciences peculiar to it, 
is capable of ensuring lasting 
results to such an undertaking. 
The reception given by Bolivia, 
Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Vene- 
zuela and the three Guianas io 
the project submitted to Unesco 
by Brazil, is proof of the oppor- 
tuneness and possibilities which it 
holds. The support and co-opera- 
tion which the United States of 
America and India have proposed 
to give it are further evidence of 
the international character and 
scientific significance of this plan. 
In close co-operation with the 
different countries and territories 
of the Amazon, the proposed 
IIHA would undertake all work 
which, within the framework en- 
visaged by the Convention of the 
Institute, would be of direct inter- 
est to them. The results thus ob- 
tained would, moreover, be of 
eventual benefit to all the tro- 
pical zones of our planet. 
The first meeting of experts 
held in Belém do Para, Brazil, 
in 1947, with a view to creating 
the YIHA, drew up in detail a 
plan of work. The many problems 
relating to the natural eaviron- 
ment and conditions of life of 
man in the equatorial fores: were 
examined. The scientific surveys 
and researches recommended 
include the subjects of physiogra- 
phy, pedology, botany, zoology, 
agriculture, social sciences and 
education. 
Among the many projects con- 
tained in the general plan of the 
Institute, some can be carried out 
inimediately, while others will re- 
quire many years of patient toil. 
  world peace for which we all 
long.” 


### 73709: Ex-enemy states discussed

EX-ENEMY STATES 
DISCUSSED 
Negotiations are under way be- 
tween Unesco and Occupation Au- 
thorities in Germany to determine 
what elements of the Unesco pro- 
gramme may be carried out in 
that country. Similar discussions 
will be initiated shortly with the 
Allied Control Authority of Japan. 
The Executive Board at its first 
1948 session in Paris during 
Pebruary, reviewed negotiations 
which have been carried on to 
date between Unesco and the 
Allied Control Authorities in Ger- 
many, aimed at the extension of 
elements of Unesco’s world pro- 
gramme into former enemy states. 
It decided also that similar ne- 
gotiations should be undertaken 
immediately with the Control 
Authority of Japan. 
Letters were dispatched by the 
Director-General to the military 
commanders of the four Occu- 
pation Zones of Germany, and 
an answer from General Lucius 
D. Clay (U.S.A) was veceived 
inviting further discussion on 
the subject. 
The Executive Board approved 
a resolution that Dr. Huxley and 
Dr. Walker prepare a joint re- 
port on the overall picture of the 
negotiations for consideration at 
a specially-convened session early 
in April 
of Unesco. 
Kléber, Paris-16e, France. 
Canada : 
Czechoslovakia : 
Lebanon and Sytia:   
SUBSCRIPTION RATES 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly in English, 
French and Spanish by the Public Information Section 
6 month subscription: 2s.6d. or $0.50 or Fr. frs. 60. 
Please write to the Unesco agent indicated below for 
your country, or directly to Unesco House, 19 Avenue, 
Argentina: Editorial Sudamericana S.A, Alsina 500, Buenos-Aires, 
Australia: H, A. Goddard Ltd. 225a, George St., Sydney. 
The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. West. Toronto. 
Cuba: La Casa Belga. R. de Smedt O'Reilly, Habana. 
Librairie F. Topic, 11 Narodni, Prague. 
Denmark : Eipar Murksgaard, 6 Norregade, Conenhagen. 
France: Editions A. Pedone, 13 Rue Soufflot, Paris. 5e. 
Great Britain: H. M. Stationery Office, The Chief of Publications, 
129 Oxford St., London W.1, 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie internationale. Athens, 
Holland: N. V. Martinus Nijhoff's Boekhandel en Uitgevers Maats, 
9 Lange Voorhout. The Hague, 
India: Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House. New Delhi. 
Iraq: Mackenzie and Mackenzie, Booksellers, The Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Librairie universelle, Av. Fouad Ier, Beiruf. 
Sweden: Ab. C. E_ Fritzes. Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm, 
Switzerland: Librairie Payot, Lausanne, 
~ 
  
Among-the suggestions for the 
future work of the Institute are 
the establishtnent of regional 
research centres in such places as 
Iquitos, Peru; Belém, Brazil; and 
Riberalta, Bolivia. 
The proposed Institute would 
work closely with, and, as far as 
possible, through institutes locat- 
ed in the countries of the Hylean 
Amazon region. The programme 
of the Institute would also take 
cognizance of the research under 
way on problems closely related to 
those of this region in resedrch 
institutions in other parts of the 
world. 
It is hoped that, at the forth- 
coming meeting, representatives 
of the interested Governments 
will sign the draft Convention and 
set up an interim commission to 
serve until the Member States 
have ratified the Convention, and 
the Institute comes fo:rraally into 
existence, 
It is estimated that during the 
first year of operatiopr the Ins- 
titute could effectively carry out 
a programme costing approximat- 
ely $300,000, excluding the expen- 
ditures for buildings and per- 
manent equipment. 


### 73710: UNESCO promotes development of national book exchange centers

  
Unesco Promotes 
Development of 
National Book 
Exchange Centers 
The Second General Confe- 
rence, Mexico City. November 
1947, instructed the Secretariat of 
Unesco to “promote the organi- 
sation, maintenance and develop- 
ment of national book exchangs? 
and distribution centres”. 
These book centres are already 
operating in such countries as the 
United States of America and the 
United Kingdom and have, in the 
past, been able to send important 
quantities of books and periodicals 
to war-damaged libraries through- 
out the world. Most of -the ma- 
terial which has in this manner 
been used for the benefit of edu- 
cation, science and culture would 
normally have gone to the paper 
mills and thus been lost. 
Not only in the U.S. and the 
U.K. but in many other coun- 
tries as well, vast and relatively 
untapped reserves of books exist 
which could be made available 
to war-damaged areas provided 
appropriate organisations for 
their collection, allocation and 
distribution can be established. 
It will be the task of the book 
centres which Unesco has been 
instructed to promote wherever 
possible, to collect and distribute 
these books and to get them into 
the hands of those who actually 
require them, and to avoid “book 
dumping”. 
These Centres will be National 
Book Centres, and not centres 
under Unesco’s administration, 
but Unesco’s Clearing House will 
cooperate with such centres in 
the allocation of material to the 
libraries which are the most in 
need of it. 
It should be well understood 
that book centres in war- 
damaged countries should in the 
first place serve the needs of its 
home libraries, and only the ma- 
terial not actually needed within 
the country will be made availa- 
ble to libraries abroad. 
At the same time, these Cen- 
tres will act as focus points to 
which gifts will be addressed 
from donors abroad for appro- 
priate distribution inside the 
country. It is also hoped that in 
due course these book centres 
will develop into permanent ex- 
change centres, used not only in 
the interest of reconstruction 
but also in the service of perma- 
nent library needs, e. g. for the 
exchange of literature usually 
exchanged internationaliy. 
In accordance with the reso- 
{ution above quoted, Unesco with 
the cooperation of the Tempo- 
rary International Council .for 
Educational Reconstruction (T.X. 
C.ER.) has endeavoured to pro- 
mote the creation of a French 
Natibnal Book Centre; and it is 
hoped that this Centre will start 
functioning in the near future.