# [074029](074029engo.pdf) 20

## [Page 1](074029engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

Unesco sponsored the Inter-American Seminar on Literacy 
and Adult Education at Quintandinha, Brazil, which opened 
on July 27. 
On this occasion Unesco published a special edition of 
the “Courier” in Portuguese at Rio de Janiero, The Seminar 
opened too late to be reported in the present editjon of 
the “Courier” Full details of its activities will be given 
in our September issue. 
  
  
 
‘The fact that ploughs and hammers are necessary 
does not mean that books or newspapers are not. 
=Dr, Jaimer Torres Bodet to the Quitandinha Seminar, July 1949, 
  
 
    
     
Te 
x 
. 
3 . 
hd 
<0 AY 
= 
       
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
 
Volume IIL.—No 7. Price: 10 Cents (U.S), 6 Pence (U.K.), or 25 Francs August 1949, 
  THE LAST PRINCE OF POETS : 
  
HE Courier is happy to associate itself with the world celebration 
of the bicentenary of Goethe, who was born at Frankfort-on-Main 
on August 28, 1749. 
As its special tribute to the great German and European poet and 
thinker, Unesco has asked men of letters of several countries to con- 
tribute chapters, written for the occasion, to a volume entitled “Unesco’s 
Homage to Goethe on the Second Centenary of his Birth”, which will 
be published on his birthday. 
Limitat'ons of space prevent the Courier from quoting from al: of 
these contributions, but extracts trom some of them are given in this 
issue. Thz memorial volume will be publ'shed simultaneously in English, 
French and Spanish editions, each containing numerous illustrations. 
We also print on this page part of the letter in which Dr, Jaime 
Torres Bodei, Director-General of Unesco, asked for contributions to 
the memoria’ volume, and an extract from the translation of the first 
part of Goethe’s Faust by the poet Shelley, which though only a frag- 
ment is perhaps the finest rendering into English of any of Goethe's 
worl. 
The portrait medallion of Goethe reproduced on this page was 
executed by the French sculptor, David d’Angers, at Weimar in 1829. 
On page 11 is a curious reproduction of a water-colour sketch made by 
Goethe at the Krench frontier after the Battle of Valmy, in 1792. 


### 74030: UNESCO salutes Goethe's memory

Xx 
Unesco Salutes 
Goethe’s Memory 
HE world is celebrating 
1 this year the bicentenary 
of Goethe’s birth. In such a 
celebration, Unesco sees cogent 
reasons for persevering in the 
work of promoting under- 
standing between cultures 
which has been entrusted to 
it. It is proud to salute 
Goethe’s memory and to re- 
cognize in it an imperishable 
testimony to what the human 
mind can accomplish when its 
desire for knowledge, that is 
for analysis and awareness. is 
combined with the power of 
understanding, that is to say, 
of harmonizing and reconcil- 
ing. That, exactly, is the spirit 
which animates Unesco 
Unesco wishes to demon- 
strate its profound respec: for 
a creative writer whose thirst 
for knowledge remained un- 
quenched until his death. and 
whose whole existence was an 
heroic effort to achieve that 
inner balance, at the same time 
noble and constructive, which 
men and nations attain only 
by vigilant insistence upon 
clear thinking and by seeking 
a culture that shall free them 
from their prejudices. Accord- 
ingly, Unesco has decidea to 
publish a volume in which a 
number of distinguished think- 
ers, artists and writers will pay 
homage to the author of Faust 
and Wilhelm Meister. 
Goethe was a great Euro- 
pean. He was also a great uni- 
versalist. He sought out extre- 
mes, not in order to delight in 
their opposition but to mea- 
sure the distance between 
them and, as often as he 
could, to endeavour to span it 
with his genius. He cared pas- 
sionately for every form of 
culture and his curiosity ex- 
tended to every kind of scien- 
tific investigation. His human 
apprenticeship lasted untii he 
was eighty. He never ceased to 
feel strongly that the essence 
of science and culture consists 
in the fact that they are bene- 
fits which exist only in so far 
as they are transmitted. Hence 
his determination to be an- 
educator and hence his mar- 
vellous fitness for the role. 
  A REMINDER 
“The General Confer- 
ence instructs the Direc- 
tor-Genera! to negotiate 
with Member States and 
National Commissions in 
order to develop plans for 
wider circulation of the 
“Courier”; such plans 
should include proposals 
for facilitating the repro- 
duction of the “Courier” 
by Member States or 
National Commissions, 
either in the present 
working languages or in 
translations provided by 
them.” 
Resolution adopted by 
the General Conference of 
. L . Unesco at Beirut, Novem- 
fer 1948, 
 
    
| HERE is a very complete fusion in Goethe’s own mind of his life as living experience and 
0 his poetry as an expression of that experience. This idea is conveyed in the title he 
gave to his autobiography, Dichtung und Wahrheit. It is admirably summed up by 
Eckermann in words which may seem today to confuse the rele of public man with that of 
poet striving towards a kind of public objectivity. 
Qe HOEVER'’s task it may be to 
W have charge of many ac- 
tivities, to judge, to lead, he 
must also endeavour to gain as many 
insights as possible into these many 
tasks. Thus a prince and a rising states- 
man can hever make himself sufficiently 
many-sided: many-sidedness appertains 
to hig craft, 
“Likewise the poet must strive for a 
multifold awareness. For the whole world 
is his material, which he must hold un- 
der his hand and learn to create in 
speech.” 
We must squarely confront ourselves      with the fact that Goethe was a poet 
of the world. This is the fact above all 
that puts him among those princes of 
poets, Dante and Shakespeare and Ra- . 
cine, who used for their poetry 
the material of the whole world 
B Y tinguishes him from the poets 
who followed him, 
S T E P H E N A very wide experience of what 
it meant to rule, to be at the apex 
of the learning of a cultivated 
aristocratic class in Europe, was 
through Goethe's mind and body; and it was out of this 
that he made his poetry. 
Now it is scarcely too much to say that in his own time, 
and ever since, people have hated Goethe for beirg in tihs 
position, The revolutionaries hate him because they consider 
him counter-revolutionary; the democrats because they con- 
worldly; the romantic because they consider him bourgeois; 
“the sick because they consider him well; the partial because 
they consider him impartial; the aesthetically minded “art- i 
for-art’s-sakers”, because they consider him a philistine. 3 
It is doubtless the fault of society that no poet since 
Goethe has been at the centre of the experience of hig time 
him should not detract from our appreciation of his posi- 
tion. Looked at in this way, Goethe was the last of the poets 
into whose minds their whole time flowed: its power, its 
knowledge, its faith, The tormenting struggle and anguish 
by which an age orders men’s lives and prepares the mind 
of a whole generation of men to create and build and 
works of these poets like motes of dust in a beam of light. 
Since then we have had greater poetry than Goethe. But 
it has expressed other, more peripheral attitudes: rebellious- 
ness, sickness, renunciation, resignation, disgust, quietism, 
“nightmare, mystical belief. 
Goethe’s acceptance of the social forms of his time went 
aristocracy. He did not like the French revolution—but he 
cared for the attempts to restore the monarchy still less. 
He did not like the invasion of Germany by Napoleon, but 
nevertheless he wrote no nationalist diatribes against it, and 
he accepted the invitation to the famous meeting with 
Napoleon. } 
of their time, and which dis- 
> F . N p E R the daily experience which flowed 
sider him a snob; the devout because they consider him 
mn the way that he was. But the impossibility of being like 
believe and then pass on into death, seemed to stir in the 
beyond his being a nationalist or even a defender of the 
(Copyright by Unesco and Stephen Spender.) 
    Xx 
THE SUPPLEMENT 
The Supplement in this month’s ’ 
Courier deals with the Popularization 
of Science and was prepared by the 
Natural Sciences Department of _— a... - 
An Italian “City of Hope” for young war victims 
Unesco. See page 5. 
is described on page 9.     

## [Page 2](074029engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

2 UNESCO COURIER August 1949 
PUBLIC EDUCATION 
  
* 
The twelfth International Con- 
ference on Public Education, 
meeting at Geneva from July 4 
to July 12, considered reports by 
the Ministries of Education on 
developments in Public Educa- 
tion during the school vear 1948 
to 1949 and gave special attention 
to the introduction 1o Natural 
Science in the Primary School, 
the teaching of reading and the 
teaching of geography as a means 
of encouraging international un- 
derstanding. 
Prof. de Berredo Carneiro. per- 
manent delegate of Brazil to 
Unesco, presided. 
In an address to the Con- 
ference, Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet, 
Director-General of Unesco, said 
in part: ’ Co : 
  
P
P
 
T
T
 
T
T
 
T
T
T
 
T
T
T
 
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
 
Y
Y
Y
Y
"
™
 
” 
a
a
d
 
a 
a
a
a
 
d
d
l
 
T
I
 
V
Y
 
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Y
S
 
T
S
N
 
  Fo aa as asad | 
HE 19th century can boast of having 
i] abolished slavery by law, and the 
20th century should devote its 
efforts to the abolition of another form 
of slavery—illiteracy. We are all aware of 
the need for removing that fundamental 
ignorance, but our task is not so much 
to formulate our moral duty as to study 
the various campaigns which have al- 
ready been carried on in various parts 
of the world, and so to develop definite, 
practical and efficient methods which 
will, so to speak, be the tactics to be 
adopted in our struggle. 
You want the teaching of geography 
—which should demonstrate the unity of 
the world in its marvellous diversity— 
ta be a more effective means of develop- 
ing international understanding. We 
have been told of some very interesting 
experiments. Hitherto, you had drawn 
mainly on history for instances of the 
community of interests among men. You 
were right. We must still emphasize that 
point. We should sadly deceive ourselves 
if we thought that present achievements 
in this field were enough to quieten all 
anxiety. We shall not cease our efforts 
to improve the teaching given and to 
secure the revision of history textbooks, 
which, for more or less nationalistic 
reasons, often endanger, if not truth, at 
least the spirit of international co-opera- 
tion. While we shall not forgei these 
still unfinished tasks, we shall, at this 
Twelfth Conference, pay special atten- 
tion to the teaching of geography. Casirot 
we find in geography lessons, from the 
study of climate to the dis ribution of 
natural wealth, excellent opportunities 
to awaken and develop in pupils an 
appreciation of the interdependence of 
humanity? . 
I am glad to be able to tell you that 
Unesco, well aware of their importance, 
is helping to arrange several internatio- 
nal seminars, One of these, dealing with 
the problem of illiteracy on the continent 
of America, has been organized jointly 
by the Brazilian Government, the Organ- 
ization 6f American States and Unesco; 
it will be held at Niteroi (Brazil) from 
27 July to 2 September. Another semi- 
nar will be held this year, with the us- 
sistance of the Indian Government, ear 
Mysore, between 2 November and 14 De- 
cember; this one will deal with adult 
ecucation in rural communities in Asia. 
Preparations are already in hand for 
two seminars to be held next year: one, 
on the improvement of school textbooks 
and in particular of history textbooks, 
will be a sequel to a series of surveys 
and recommendations begun some time 
ago; the other will deal with the teach- 
ing of geography as a means of deveiop- 
ing international understanding. 
Natural Science 
Another item on our agenda, the teach- 
ing of natural science in primary schools, 
has been included because of the grow- 
ing curiosity of teachers and pupils and 
the requirements of the modern world. 
‘We have to discover potential scientists, 
and the development of teclinical pro- 
cesses in both agriculture and industry 
makes it necessary for the workers of 
the future to be trained to understand 
and overcome the difficulties of their 
trade. We must be sure to instil not 
only knowledge but respect for natural 
resources, the waste of which paradoxi- 
cally makes the very increase of popula- 
tion a menace, Such teaching will illus- 
irate the old maxim that “we can com- 
mand nature only when we obey her”. 
In the space of less than thirty years, 
the world has been torn by two great 
wars which, in the number of deaths 
and the precision of the means of des- 
truction used, have surpassed all men’s 
efforts in past centuries to slay and de- 
base one another, Everything which man 
had come to Yeok upon as the triumph 
of civilization—the most marvellous dis- 
    


### 74031: Public education conference meets at Geneva

CONFERENCE 
MEETS AT GENEVA 
an 
coveries in engineering and chemistry, 
the utmost refinements of dialectic and 
eloguence—all these things became sus- 
pect to him when they combined to foster 
hatred, evil and negation instead of 
glorifying life. 
- We had been taught to revere in- 
telligence, and intelligence sometimes 
proved a dread enemy. Whe had 
learned to respect science, and science 
was converted into a weapon eof 
aggression, What did this tragic spec- 
tacle signify? The failure of spiritual 
values, a sharp reversal of all that’ pro- 
gress had achieved? No, most certainly 
not. Philosophy, science and art can 
none of them be held guilty of the abuses 
to which they were put by those respon- 
sible for the vast holocaust in which the 
whole civilization of our time so nearly 
perished. FE Lo 
- 
Liberation not Complete 
T is not of intelligence that we must 
beware but of its secret adversary, 
intelligence without a moral sense, In 
1933 a European thinker, questioned 
about the future of civilization, replied: 
“The process of liberation (begun in 
the 16th century) reached completion 
with the French Revolution and the 
establishment of the democratic political 
regime. Humanity had for centuries 
something to do: to break free from its 
mediaeval bonds. We have now reached 
the end of this stage of development, and 
civilization does not quite know what to 
do. It needs some great task to carry 
ou ” : 
We have a supreme duty—to help, as 
teachers, to organize a society in which 
+ every man will be able to shake hands, 
~~ in brotherly trust and friendship, with 
his kinsman from Europe or Asia, with 
the black man from Africa and the red 
man from America, All races, all peoples, 
all national aspirations must have scope 
for expression in this post-war world. If 
a single voice were to be silent, if a 
single right were to be trodden under 
foot, humanity would have shed its blood 
in vain in those great battles: The pe- 
riod of crisis through which we are pass- 
ing will never find a solution in an 
arbitrary distinction between victors and 
vanquished. A peace founded solely upon 
an improvised balance of power could be, 
at best, only an uncertain truce. 
Life is a Problem 
HAT we need then, in education, 
are teachers who are men first 
ang foremost, and not mere store- 
houses of educational formulae, We be- 
lieve that educating man does not mean 
merely imparting the essentials of tra- 
dition and culture. It means instilling 
an effective confidence in his original 
and creative power; it means providing 
him, from early childhood, with teaching 
Un - 
- -— as 
“You need the teaching of Geography...” 
in which he may recognize life for what 
it is : a problem, a constant process of 
discovery, a perpetual seeking of private 
and communal responsibilities. Then, 
overwhelmed as it were, by the mounting 
wealth of knowledge in the world. he 
- will convert it into a personal capacity 
for renewal, which will endure as long 
as life itself, 
Human personality does not find fulfil- 
ment in the triumph of individualism. 
Freedom is only an instrument for a 
richer development of man, for which 
he must be a member of a community; 
and that membership itself is worthy of 
man only if it is freely chosen. The se- 
cond paragraph of Article 25 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
expresses that synthesis of the individual 
and the community which the true right 
tm education helps to promote: “Educa- 
tion shall be directed to the full deveiop- 
ment of human personality and to the 
strengthening of respect for human rights 
and fundamental freedoms, It shall pro- 
mote understanding, tolerance and friend- 
ship among all nations, racial or reli- 
gious groups, and shall further the activ- 
ities of the United Nations for the main- 
tenance of peace”. This brings to my 
mind the noble motto which I once saw 
inscribed on the pediment of the Town 
Hall of Lugano: libertas in leg bus, 
liberty in law. 
The Soul of the People 
UCH liberty within a community can 
only be fully exercised, as Article 27 
goes on to say, by participation in 
the cultural. artistic and scientific life of 
the group: “Everyone has the right freely 
to participate in the cultural life of the 
community, to enjoy the arts and to 
share in scientific advancement and its 
benefits”. There must be no esoteric 
culture, the monopoly of a favoured few 
The strength and the very survival of a 
culture depend upon its being rooted in 
the soul of the people. 
Unesco is so well aware that freedom 
should increase concurrently with the 
sense of civic obligations, and that the 
simultaneous development of both should 
be the aim of education. that the Organ- - 
ization’s Code of Directives, which has 
been drawn up to guide the preparation 
of its practical programme. and which 
was approved last month bv the Execu- 
tive Board. stipulates that: “In Education, 
Unesco will act as a centre for the ex- 
change and dissemination of ideas and 
practices. in order to encourage the 
growth of effective systems of education, 
seeking especially to bring people to un- 
derstand one another, to train good 
citizens and to give every person, rich 
or poor, in town or country, without dis- 
tizction of colour, race, sex, or creed, 
the opportunity for an education which 
best assures him the possibility to develop 
his personality and carry out his social 
responsibilities”, 
Without doubt the two most difficult 
things for humanity to learn are the 
art of ruling men and the art of educat- 
instead of feeling himself outstripped, 
ing them. For my part, I am inclined 
to beleve that if we had mastered the 
second, the difficulties of the first would 
be appreciably reduced. We must not 
forget that when we are training men 
we are building the city of the future. 
We who are educationists, and those we 
have to guide, must all be the architects 
of that society in which, if we have well 
fulfilled our task, human rights and 
human liberties will flourish. 
Prof. CARNEIRO 
President 
of Education Conference 
Professor Paulo de Berr:zdo Carnei- 
ro, member of the Unesco Executive 
Board and Permanent Delegate of 
Brazil to Unesco, was elected President 
of the Public Education Conference 
for the current year at the opening 
of the 12th Annual Session on July 4. 
Professor Carneiro has represented 
the Government of Brazil at many 
international conferences, notably 
those of the LL.O., the Institute ef 
Intellectual Co-operation and the 
United Nations (first part of the 
General Assembly in London, 1946). He 
was Brazilian Delegate of ILB.E. jn 
1948 and has been appointed as de- 
legate to the 1949 meeting. 
Professor Carneiro hag long been 
associated with the work of Unesco. 
He was a delegate to the Conference 
in London in 1945, where the Constitu- 
tion of Unesco was drawn up; he was 
conczrned with the work of the Pre- 
paratory Commission during 1946, and 
was a delegate to the First, Second 
and Third Sessions of the Unesco 
General Conference in Paris, Mexico 
and Beirut. At the Paris Conference 
he was elected for a three-year term 
to the Executive Board of Unesco. 
On July 23, when visiting Athens, 
Prof. Carncire handed to M. Tatsos, 
the Greek Minister of Education, a 
cheque for 10,850 dollars sent by 
Unesco “as a symbolic gift” to the 
Greek schools which had suffered 
most damage from the War. The pres- 
entation was made in the conference 
hall of the University of Athens in 
the presence of the University Senate, 
the Ministers of Education and of the 
Press, delegates from women's organ- 
izations and other official representa- 
tives.     

## [Page 3](074029engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

August 1949 UNESCO COURIER 
w 
pe - Tr 
Goad | 
s 
  
  
  
   
A model set for “Murder in the Catheral”, by T.S. Eliot. 


### 74032: I.T.I. Congress meets: "the theatre is a living force"

.T.l. CONGRESS MEETS 
“The Theatre is a living force...” 
HE theatre is a form of inter- 
national co-operat’on which 
has existed for centuries. Plays 
by Shakespeare tour the rural 
regions of India; the French 
classics are staged in Rio de 
Janeiro; an Amercan comedy is 
adapted for Czechoslovakian au- 
diences... and these are only a 
few of the hundreds of examples 
of our times. 
The theatre is a living force for 
international cultural exchange, 
which merely means giving the 
peop.e of one country a chance 
to learn how others lve and 
think. The world wants to see 
the theatrical works of all na- 
tions, but then the question 
arises: “How to help the move- 
ment of plays and actors from 
one part of the world to the 
other?” 
This question was foremost in 
the minds of theatre people from 
all parts of the world who came 
to Zurich, Switzerland, last 
month, for the Second Congress 
of the International Theatre Ins- 
t'tute (ITI) which has estab- 
lished 19 national centres, s nce it 
was set up in Prague, just over a 
year ago. 
International Tours 
The Congress was opened in 
Zurich's City Hall, the historic 
“Rathaus”, by Mr. Llewellyn Rees, 
head of the British delegation, 
and held its business sessions in 
the Zurich Museum of Modern 
Art. After considering the pro- 
blems raised by customs and en- 
tertainmerit taxes, transport costs 
and visa regulat'ons, the Congress 
approved a number of “model” 
c.auses concerning international 
tours of theatrical companies, in- 
tended for eventual incorporation 
in international cultural agree- 
ments. 
These clauses cover the promo- 
t'on of theatrical tours, exemption 
from entertainment taxes on non- 
commercial tours, the provision 
of simplified customs regulations 
and the granting of reduced 
transport rates on international 
tours. 
In addit on, the ITI delegales 
urged all countries to set up na- 
tional theatre organizations on 
the lines of Great Britain's Arts 
Council and France's Action 
Artistique. 
The development of mnatonal 
theatre organizations and the 
granting of the facilities covered 
by the model clauses will help to 
make the theatre a stil] greater 
force for international co-opera- 
tion and will ensure a constant 
transfus'on of ideas from one 
country to another. 
International Theatre Week 
OW to “mobilize” the theatre 
in the campaign to spread 
understanding of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights was 
another major question discussed 
by the Congress. 
M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Di- 
rector-General of Unesco, recalled, 
in a message to the Congress, 
that the United States ITI Cen- 
tre had already suggested hold- 
ing an international theatre week 
devoted to the themes of human 
rights and world peace, 
It wou'd not indeed be hard to 
find among all the plays of the 
world, masterpieces on the eter- 
nal subject of the liberation of 
man and, to use Tolstoy’s words, 
his victory over the ‘powers of 
darkness’, said M. Torres Bodet. 
“From Sovhocles to Goethe and 
Schiller, from Aristophanes to 
Moliére, from Shakespeare U0 
Ibsen—what great dramat’c poet 
is there who has not immortalized 
humanity's struggle against des- 
potism, intolerance, injustice, 
ignorance and fear? Such works 
have lost nothing of their vriue, 
and appeal to the imagination 
of the masses as powerfully as 
they ever did. 
“But we can do more than this. 
We can appeal to the creative 
genius of the dramat'sts of to- 
day. Do not the Universal De- 
claration of Human Rights and 
the principles and deeds that it 
implies provide authors, producers 
and actors with an inexhaust Ble 
source of inspiration? 
“There is no question, of 
course’, M., Torres Bodet con- 
tinued, “of imposing subjects or 
reviving the ‘propaganda’ play. 
But such an appeal Jaunched by 
you would show that the con- 
temporary theatre had a hgh 
and compelling conception of the 
part it could play in the life of 
nations and on behalf of inter- 
national understanding.” 
Following M. Torres Bodet’s ap- 
peal, the Congress adopted Lhe 
idea of an International Theatre 
Week to be hed during 1950. 
Theatres in every country will be 
asked to devote this week to the 
themes of world peace and the 
Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. 
U.N.U.T.O. 
7 contemporary dramatists 
'A have already embodied these 
two themes in their works. Last 
year, for example, J.B, Priestley, 
the Eng.ish author and playwright, 
created an imaginary organiza- 
tion, “The United Nations Under- 
developed Territories Organiza- 
tion (UNUTO)” in h's play “Home 
is Tomorrow”. To-day, this play 
takes on a new and topical in- 
terest as the United Nations 
draws up a plan to assist the un- 
der-developed areas of the world. 
One way in which the ITI tries 
to break down the nat‘onal bar- 
riers of the theatre world is by 
making known the latest develop- 
ments in theatre design, stage 
technique and production me- 
thods in all countries. Because of 
war damage, suffered by many 
theatres, information on construc- 
ton is especially important today. 
To enable the delegates to 
follow the trend of theatre archi- 
tecture in various countries, lead- 
ing architects reported to the 
Congress on developments in 
France. Poland, Sweden, Switzer- 
land and the United States. 
Theatre Architecture 
Recognizing the importance of 
theatre reconstruction problems, 
the Congress decided to call an 
international conference on thea- 
tre architecture and stage techni- 
ques next year, in conjunclion 
with the Thrd ITI Congress. An- 
other plan for 1950 provides funds 
jor eight theatre fel.owships, to 
enable young theatre artists pro- 
posed by ITI National Centres to 
study or be trained abroad. 
HE Congress also decided to 
reduce the scope of its pre- 
sent monthly publication, the 
1TI Bulletin, which has provided 
a forum for countries to make 
known their current theatrical 
productions and activities. In 
future its coverage will be res- 
tricted to the world premieres of 
plays, opera and ballet. General 
theatre activities wll be dealt 
with in a new publication, a half- 
yearly World Review of the 
Theatre. : 
Amateur Theatres 
In order to associate amateur 
theatre movements more closely 
with the work of the ITI, the 
Congress recommended that Na- 
tional Centres should have ama- 
teur theatre representation and 
that one representat ve should be 
included in each Congress de.e- 
gation, 
During the Congress, Mr, Mau- 
rice Kurtz, the author and play- 
wright, who has been General 
Secretary of the ITI since its 
foundation, succeeded in this 
post by M. André Josset, the 
French playwright. 
Although it is only just over a 
year old, the ITI has already 
made great progress towards the 
achievement of its broad objec- 
tives, Mr. J.B, Priestley, one of 
its founders, summed these up in 
the early days of the Institute 
when he said: “A well-written 
pay may do more than fifty 
speeches by well meaning polit:- 
cians. A world in which an Inter- 
national Theatre Institute is se- 
curely established is a far safer 
and more civil'zed world than 
one in which the art of drama is 
imprisoned between nigh na- 
tional barriers”.      


### 74033: Film star with Unescan outlook visits the 'Courier': Myrna Loy says...

FILM STAR WITH UNESCAN 
OUTLOOK VISITS THE COURIER 
MYRNA LOY SAYS... 
AN any good thing come 
g out of Hollywood? Can any 
good thing come out 
of Unesco? To both of these ques- 
tions, which the public at large 
may ask itself sometimes without 
being too sure of the answers, 
Myrna Loy, who paid a visit to 
the Courier office the other day, 
returns an emphatc Yes, 
J 
LX 4 
Miss Loy was among the 
earl'est devotees in the United 
States of the Unescan ideal of 
international understanding 
through education, science and 
cu.ture. (She was, incidentally, 
one of the earlest regular sub- 
scribers to the Courier, her sub- 
scriber’s card being No. 87.) She 
represented the Motion Picture 
Industry at the Pacific Regional 
Conference at San Francisco in 
1948. She is a member of the 
Counc’l for Unesco of South Ca- 
lifornia and is Chairman of ils 
Committee to explore problems of 
education by films. All of which 
indicates that Miss Loy has her 
own opnions in these matters 
and that her op nions are worth 
listening to. Miss Loy speaking: 
I think maybe a lot of people 
don't realize how hard the motion 
picture industry is trying to im- 
prove itself culturally, just as they 
don’t realize what Unesco is doing 
and how much the ideals it stands 
for mean to everybody, all over 
the world. People—especially in 
Europe—see gangster films and 
knockabout comedy and think 
that’s all that Hollywood can do. 
But Hollywood does a lot besides 
that, and it’s trying to do mare 
~ all the time. 
In films as in newspapers, there’s 
a tendency to play up crime and 
sensation, death and destruction, 
just because those are the things 
easiest to make exciting without 
making any special effort of in- 
telligence. From that it’s an easy 
step to the idea that cheap sensa- 
tion is “what the public wants”. 
Really there's no reason to think 
that the public prefers bad enter- 
tainment, It prefers the entertain- 
ment that moves, stimulates, or 
amuses it most. But it often has 
to be content with second-rate 
stuff because the firstwaate stuff 
needs the very best writers to turn 
it out and the very best actors 
and producers to make it effec- 
tive 
We know that in Hollywood ann 
we know that constructive ideas 
can be made dramatic, but we 
know also that before we can edu- 
cate the public we must educate 
ourselves. When I think of edu- 
cation I don’t mean just book- 
learning; I mean learning to va- 
lue the best interests of humanity 
and the big constructive ideas 
that will secure them. That's why 
I personally and many other 
people in Hollywood—many more 
than most people think, perhaps 
—believe that the work of Unesco 
and the id=als it serves are so im- 
portant for all of us today. 
J o
p
 
It’s not very easy to make that 
work and those ideals seem real 
TT NAPE 
. 
al ES - " 
  
 
Tentative model of Frank Lloyd Wright's “New Theatre”, the first 
he ever designed, to be erected next Spring near Hartford, Conn, 
U.S.A, The roof is removed. 
and concrete to ordinary, busy 
peopie, and it is very easy for 
them to get the idea that people 
who work for the Urited Nations, 
Unesco and other organizations 
l.ke them are a bunch of un- 
practical dreamers with their 
heads in the clouds. It's always 
easy for the *“hard-headed”—or 
thick-headed?—citizen to poke fun 
at the idealist. What he doesn't 
realize is that there's no essential 
contradiction between the ideal 
and the practical. The ideal thing 
is the best thing possible, and the 
most practical thing in the long 
run. 
I think there's no doubt that all 
worth-while work in films or any 
other medium means the expres- 
sion of ideas, and that at Holly- 
wood, just like any other place 
where people work together, the 
new idea leads the way. Hollywood 
instructs through the medium of 
entertainment, and Unesco can 
entertain while irstructing. It 
must do so if the education it 
tries to promote is to be accepted 
readily and cetained in people's 
minds, 
There’s no limit to what the 
films can do for people if they go 
about it the right way, just as 
there’s no limit to the interest 
and excitement of education if it’s 
made to be alive, not dead, Films 
can make war on prejudices—sev- 
eral recent films on the negro pro- 
blem have done just that. All 
drama is conflict. Some of the 
most exciting films represent con- 
AT ELATED TO AGRICULT 
‘ERTAINS S INTERESS 
\UX PROBLE Agente 
 
flicts of ideas rather than fights 
between gangsters. The first are 
just as exciting as the second, 
and more so when their quality 
is first-class, as it ought to be. 
There’s no reason why the lives 
of good men shouldn't be as excit- 
ing and as good entertainment as 
the Lives of bad ones. A good film 
on the life of Gandhi or Saint 
Francis would be just as enthrall- 
ing and would appeal to a much 
wider audience than a film on 
the life of Al Capone. 
Films can solve personal pro- 
blems, too, or help people to solve 
them for themselves, without los- 
ing anything in entertainment 
value. One of my own films, “The 
Best Years of our Lives”, certain- 
ly helped a lot of people that way. 
After it appeared a woman said 
to me: “I wish I could have seen 
that film a year ago. Then I 
shouldn't have divorced my hus- 
band”. : 
So you see, we in Hollywood 
have just the same problems as 
you here in Paris, We're both 
handling human material and 
trying to do our best with if and 
for it. It’s our mission to make 
people happier by opening and 
broadening their minds just as it’s 
yours to fight against ignorance 
and to teach co-operation. 
The mission of women? Why, to 
civilize men, of course! We want 
healthy babies, not bloody battles. 
At least we have to practise hus- 
band-tolerance, and we think it’s 
time men learnt to practise the 
same tolerance among themselves.

## [Page 4](074029engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER August 1949 
 
—————— A — 
YOUNG SCIENTISTS 
    CROSS aD .arsrbued bg LS aL UM. 
“We rely on Unesco but we 
know that Unesco, with it limited 
means. gives preference to those 
who show that they can help 
themselves, so we have decided 
to show what we can do with the 
limited means at our disposal, and 
we have agreed on a programme 
of international exchange of 
youngsters. 
“Next summer, boys and girls 
from Finnish, Danish, Dutch, 
French and Swiss science clubs 
will visit each other and make 
personal contacts with the friends 
across the borders with whom, 
thanks to Unesco, they have al- 
ready begun to correspond.’ 
It was a young Dutchman, 
22-year old Kees Meijers who, 
after the meeting of Science Club 
Leaders, made these remarks, 
without any flourishes and even 
with a certain shyness, when he 
came to say good-bye to his 
hosts at Unesco. oo 
A 15-year old scientist | 
influences industry 
Kees Meijers was only one of 
the leaders of science clubs—i. e. 
groups of young people who find 
in science pleasure, adventure, 
and opportunities for service to 
mankind — who attended the 
meeting of Science Club Leaders 
held at Unesco House on July 
15 and 16, The meeting and the 
exhibition on “Science Clubs at 
Unesco Studies 
~ Copyright : 
* Problems 
Unesco, ever since its founda- 
tion, has been making efforts to 
  
improve international copyright 
relations throughout the world. 
One,of its man tasks has been 
to carry out a comparative study 
of copyright throughout the world 
so as to bring out significant 
similarities and differences in na- 
tional copyright laws, 
When the survey was sufficient- 
ly advanced last month Unesco 
called a meeting of experts on 
copyright to study the resuits and 
to suggest the best means of 
bringing all the countries 
agreement on copyright. 
The practical value of such 
agreement and the assistance it 
would afford to Unesco’s own 
work in maintaining and increas- 
ing the free flow of culture and 
information throughout the world, 
were stressed by Dr. Jaime Torres 
Bodet, Director - General of 
Unesco, in a message to the com- 
mittee. 
“The world's need, and our de- 
sire”, said Dr. Torres Bodel, “is 
that thought with all its power to 
promote peace and weil-doing, 
Shall regain its rights, 
“It is in that lU'ght, and not in 
terms of a narrow legalism, that 
Unesco regards copyright. What 
we seek is some means whereby 
thought, too, may recover free- 
dom of action, without which it 
can have no true blossoming.” 
On the suggestion of Mr. B.G. 
Crewe, Board of Trade, London, 
the experts formally recommend- 
ed the drawing up Of a new 
Universal Convention on Copy- 
right based on the principle that 
each country must grant to for- 
eign authors the same protection 
it grants to its own cit'zens. 
Universality being the primary 
goal, the experts also adopted the 
suggestion of M. V. de Sanctis, of 
Rome, that the Convention 
should contain any other mini- 
mum standards of protection 
te which all countries are pre- 
pared to agree, 
  
into: 


### 74034: Young scientists shake hands across the borders

SHAKE HANDS ! . 
THE BORDERS 
Work” were opened by the Direc- 
tor-General of Unesco, who said : 
Though a discovery is not the 
more meritorious for being made 
by a young inventor, we cannot 
help a special feeling of admira- 
tion at the thought that before 
the age of 30, Joseph Black was 
carrying out his famous investiga- 
tions into carbon dioxde, Einstein 
was formulating his theory of re- 
lativity, Dirac was revolutionizing 
the mechanism of quanta, W.H. 
Perkin was producing the first 
by-product of aniline and laying 
the joundations of a flourishing 
industry. Last year, the laureate 
of the American Science Talent 
Search was only 15 and he 
had already discovered a very 
important method of synthes- 
izing certain organic compounds. 
All these examples may fire the 
imagination of young people and 
draw them into your clubs. 
Gentlemen, yours is the rare 
pr.vilege of disseminating, hu- 
manizing and advancing the 
cause of science. It enables you to 
help train men who will be not 
mere scientists, but citizens with 
deeper insight into the possibili- 
ties and dangers of the world 
today. Whether they make a name 
for themselves through far-famed 
discoveries or merely perform a 
humble yet necessary task, the 
members of your clubs wil] have 
this in common : they will 
together have fought against 
ignorance and prejudice, worked 
methodically with ever open 
minds, faithfully carried out their 
task, great or small, and, with 
their deeper knowedge of the 
world about them, will better 
understand the bonds which unite 
mankind in a common destiny. 
You know, gentlemen, that Unes- 
co is ready to assist you in a mis- 
sion where our purposes and 
yours are the same. . 
Spirit of the Young 
People Backing Unesco 
During the meeting, delegates 
from nine countries Heard how 
youthful scientists are working, 
from Korea to Copenhagen, from 
Prague to Paraguay. They heard 
about the young cave explorers. 
the speleologists of France, about 
the young astronomers of Brazil, 
the young agriculturalists — tke 
4-Hers—of the U.S.A, and 
many other groups. 
They discussed how the ‘prize’ 
questions” of the Finnish science 
clubs, the “annual talent search” 
conducted by the Science Clubs 
of America, and the “Science 
Fairs” arranged by clubs in Den- 
mark and elsewhere, could be 
duplicated. They passed on to 
Unesco a set of recommendations, 
the most important of which asks! 
for a revision of the whole ques- 
tion of science in education. 
Another recommendation deal- 
ing with the movement originally 
started by the young Dutchman, 
  
A New Unesco 
Radio Service 
For South America 
Since June 30 the Latin-Ameri- 
can Section of the Radio Divi- 
sion of UNO has been giving ai 
weekly 15-minute programme in 
Spanish for all Spanish-speaking 
countries, 
Kees Meijers, should be quoted 
in full as it is linked up with 
two Unesco conferences which 
are being prepared of will already 
be going on when you read these 
lines, The recommendation reads 
as follows : 
Nature Protection Clubs 
for Young People 
The International Meeting of 
Science Club Leaders recom- 
mends that Unesco approach all 
societies and associations for the 
protection of mature and related 
organizations, and draw then 
attention to the successful at- 
tempts in forming special Nature 
Protection Clubs for young people 
which have been made in Hol- 
land and Sweden and which 
could probably be started wherev- 
er Associations and Societies for 
the Protection of Nature exist 
In so doing, it should be stressed 
that the Meeting considers it of 
paramount importance for the 
future work in connection with 
nature protection and the wise 
utilization of resources that the 
interest of youth in these 
matters of vital importance be 
aroused as quickly as possible. 
This recommendation should 
be brought to the notice of the 
International Technical Confer- 
ence on the Protection of Nature 
and the United Nations Scientific 
Conference on the Conservation 
and Utilization of Resources 
(UNSCCUR), 
As soon as it was adopted, Kees 
Meijers rushed out of the con- 
ference room. On his return, he 
explained : “I sent an airmail 
letter to the Dutch Minister of 
Education to be quite sure that 
a Dutch delegation would go to 
the Protection of Nature Confe- 
rence”, 
To this remark, one of the 
visitors at the conference said : 
“As long as the work and the 
ideals ‘of Unesco are backed by 
the spirit and enthusiasm of peo- 
ple like those I have met here, 
Unesco is well off.”   
  
This programme, prepared at: 
Unesco Headquarters in Paris by | 
Prof. Jose de Benito, is entitled | 
“Thursday Commentary” and is’ 
broadcast by the following trans-| 
mitters on the UNO network : 
WRUL. 11790 kcs., 25 1netres ; 
WRUL., 11790 kcs., 25 metres ; 
and WES-28, 18920 kcs., 15.84 me- 
tres, every Thursday at 10.15 pm, 
New York summer time, 
The first four talks were en- 
titled : The Struggle for Peace, 
Hamlet's Castle, July 14 and the 
Rights of Man, and The Marbial 
Valley Experiment in Haiti,   
ar 
or  
¢*Education is the cure” 


### 74035: Education and natural resources

EDUCATION 
AND NATURAL 
RESOURCES 
By DAVID SCOTT 
It is now fairly common know- 
ledge that while world popula- 
tion increases and world food 
population tends rather to de- 
cline, only a small part of the 
world's potential food resources 
are actually being used. The pro- 
portion of the world’s surface 
which could be made to produce 
food is about 30 per cent. At the 
present time, only 10 per cent is 
under cultivation. If even the 
whole 30 per cent could be 
brought into production, without 
any tapping of fresh resources or 
reclamation of land now unfit 
for agriculture, the world food 
shortage that threatens us could 
be staved off for many years — 
always provided that the food 
was fairly distributed. 
Not only have men failed until 
now to make full use of the 
available soil for food produc- 
tion ; they have actually des- 
troyed the productivity of large 
areas by wasteful or short- 
sighted agricultural methods 
and they are still wasting a 
quite unnecessary proportion of 
the resources that remain. Worst 
of all, it is in the areas where 
production is least abundant and 
where the people who depend on 
it can least afford to be careless 
in this respect, that waste is most 
rampant, because up-to-date 
equipment is most lacking and 
ignorance is most profound. 
A Vicious Circle 
- Thus a vicious circle is set up 
and conditions worsen most 
rapidly in the very places where 
improvement is most needed. 
Gradually the poorer areas en- 
croach upon those which are 
most favoured by nature, and 
their populations come to depend 
more and more on supplies ob- 
‘ned from their more fortunate 
neighbours, with the result that, 
if these conditions are not reme- 
died, there will be eventually no 
“rich” areas left in the world at 
all. 
The world's cultivated zones 
vary enormously in productivity, 
but they can be divided roughly 
into two categories: “technically 
. . . Children of an open-air school in Italy. 
advanced” areas, where favoura- 
ble conditions have produced a 
reasonable degree of prosperity 
for their urban and their rural 
inhabitants, and “problem” areas, 
where the masses live on the 
verge of starvation. Western Eu- 
rope and North America may be 
taken as examples of advanced 
areas; India, China and the 
greater part of Africa and South 
America as examples of problem 
areas. Unfortunately the problem 
areas account for most of the 
habitable globe. In these igno- 
rance is the curse and fundamen- 
tal education is the cure. It may 
have to begin by combating 
illiteracy ; in any case it has to 
be established at the lowest social 
level and at the earliest possible 
age, since the best hope lies in a 
new generation, emancipated 
from the errors and limitations of 
the past.. 
City versus Country 
Even in advanced areas, how- 
ever, education has its part to 
play. Here the commonest probl- 
em is that of the urban population, 
which lives on the products of 
tae land but knows little and 
cares less about the means by 
which they are produced. Cities 
are among the greatest wasters 
of natural resources, from the 
basic foodstuffs to such neces- 
sities as fuel and water. They 
also tend to destroy the produc- 
tivity of surrounding agricultural 
areas by polluting streams, by 
dumping waste on cultivated 
land, by poisoning the air with 
factory smoke and petrol fumes 
and simply by spreading outwards 
as their populations grow. Here, 
also, education is called for, but 
it need not be applied, as in the 
problem areas, at the elementary 
level. It must be devised to train 
technicians and to enlighten 
adults, rather than to implant 
elementary knowledge in virgin 
minds, 
Whatever the local conditions 
and the intellectual level of the 
people, any programme for train- 
Ing in the use and conservation 
of natural resources must depend 
on three elements : research, 
legistalive and administrative 
action and, finally educa- 
tion. Research into local con- 
ditions and requirements—the 
state and composition of the soil, 
the most suitable crops, the best 
methods of cultivation for a 
particular area, the need of 
drainage or irrigaticn, land clear- 
ance or afforestation, fertilizers 
or pest destroyers, and so on— is 
necessary before legislation can 
be planned. But legislation and 
administrative action alone will 
be ineffective unless they are ac- 
companied by education, which 
alone will produce lasting 
resulth. The whole population 
must be induced to cooperate in 
the programme and have naster- 
ed the basic facts on which it 
rests. Experience has shown that 
attempts to implant new techni- 
cal methods and ways of living 
among primitive populations 
without fundamental education as 
their basis are fore-doomed to 
failure. In one colonial area, for 
instance, after considerable ef- 
forts in this field, the authori- 
ties reported before the war that 
“the native population showed 
little interest and progress was 
slight”. 
This is not to be wonder- 
ed at_1if the case of another 
colony in the same part of the 
world was typical. Here, accord- 
ing to an independent survey 
made in 1937, the troops of the 
European garrison (who were the 
only executive agents on the 
spot) were ordered to see that 
the natives adopted more up-to- 
cate methods of agriculture. But 
the troops themselves were given 
no preliminary training in such 
matters, and they had no idea 
how to set about their duties 
with the natural result that the 
programme got nowhere. This was 
a perfect example of how not todo 
it : the blind led the blind, and 
both fell into the ditch. 
(Continued on Page 9.)

## [Page 5](074029engo.pdf#page=5) 3

### IGNORE

  FE Se Ap =p ——— I RT Wg pr = - 
re 
ce 
UNESCO 
 COURIE RIER 
Supplement 
 POPULARIZATION OF SCIENCE 
 
  
‘“ Scientists pool their efforts within Unesco, but 
what we call the world centre of scientific liaison is 
not just for the benefit of the few professionals. It is an 
effort to make scientific knowledge more accessible to 
everyone. WE ARE ENCOURAGING THE POPULARI- 
ZATION OF SCIENCE. The great objective of Unesco’s 
intellectual cooperation is to improve the living condi- 
tions of the great assocations of human beings.” 
Dr. TORRES BODET, 
Director-General of Unesco.   


### 74036: Popularization of science

### 74039: We must increase the dosage of science

  
We Must Increase 
the Dosage of Science 
says RODOLFO TALICE 
Professor at the University of Montevideo 
HE first popular scientific exhi- 
bition ever held at Montevideo, 
capital of Uruguay, was visited by 
more than ten percent of the town's 
inhabitants during the twenty days it 
was open in 1948. 


### 74037: The Choice for man: a good life or an unhappy death

HE CHOICE FOR MAN : A GOOD 
LIFE OR AN UNHAPPY DEATH 
Time and time 
again, through the 
activities of press and 
radio, a life is saved 
through a newly-report. 
ed treatment, a novel 
industry or process is 
introduced in a new 
location, or an old 
idea is shown to have 
a new application. 
N fact, the wunder- 
standing of science 
by the people is much 
more than the practice 
of devotion to truth 
or the satisfaction 
of intellectual curiosity 
and thirst for knowledge. 
It is the difference between a good 
life and an unhappy death—often for 
individual men, women and children, 
and, in all probability, for the modern 
world and civilization itself, 
In the three decades subsequent {to 
the first World War, great discoveries 
have become part of daily life. We are 
often, however, to forget the part 
that simple explanations of great ideas 
have played in moulding the physical 
“world and the way we think. 
 
  
ca 
Ee Einstein ~ 
Einstein's theory of relativity and the 
strange ideas of quantum theory have 
trickled dramatically into the philosophy 
of living, although the circle of mathe- 
matical physicists is still a small one. 
Healthiness as contrasted to illness of 
mind—the positive side of psychiafry— 
has received an impetus from those who 
brought sanity to the treatment of 
insanity and the unshackling of sex by 
Freud. 
Mechanical and electrical wonders 
have been developed—airplanes, automo- 
biles, diesels, radio, television, and a 
dozen other specialities that after a few 
months become so much a vart of our 
mores that we forget how young they 
are, We forget that when nfew-—and 
therefore strange—these commonplaces of 
today needed explanation that would 
make them plausible, 
Diabetes, pneumonia, the venereal 
diseases, and a host of other ills within 
the space of a few years have been 
Influence of itr 
deprived of their ability to sign death 
warrants or cause broken 
physician in the early days of our new 
era of science understanding would have 
dared to hope that a single drug would 
by 
Watson DAVIS 
    
  
conquer two-score diseases. Yet the sulfa 
drugs and the antibiotics—pen:cillin, 
streptomycin, chloromycstin, aureomyein 
— do make these deadly diseases less 
troublesome than the common cold. 
To the food of the world and the farms 
of the earth, new aids and supplements 
have come—nitrogen from the air, che- 
mical insecticides, better management of 
the soil, frozen foods, etc. Vitamins have 
been discovered and so have protein 
quality and the need of seven classes 
of food which will build better minds 
and bodies of a better-fed population, 
The ili-fed third of the world have 
at least been recognized. The spotlight 
of publicity is playing on the weak and 
hungry. Starvation, partial or complete, 
is not condoned with hopelessness. 
The means of reaching the millions 
—1ihe daily newspaper, the popuiar ma- 
gazine, the voices of the radio, the film, 
the books of fact and fiction, the 
measured cadences of information circu- 
lating through official channels, and the 
blaring insistence of advertising—all of 
these are closing the gap between dis- 
covery and application. 
Often the public hears through the 
press about a new medical discovery and 
about the availability of a new drug 
before the average doctor has a chance 
to study his medical journal. 
"Importance of 
Science-Writer 
The science writer is often a catalyser 
as well ag a reporter, When the fission of 
uranium, basic te atomic energy, was 
discovered in Germany, in 1939, Science 
Service, the American non-profit orga- 
nization for the Povpularization of 
Science, called the scientific report to 
the attention of scientists; and also teld 
the public through the press about its 
significance, including the vital fact that 
an atomic bomb was probable, as energy. 
lives. No 
for industry could be extracted from the 
atomic nucleus—and an uncontrolled 
chain reaction would not get started and 
wipe out the world. 
Xnsulin for diabetes, liver for anaemia, 
sulfanimide for child-birth fever, strep- 
tomycin for tuberculosis—these were 
greal life-saving stories when they were 
new, They are a continuing opportunity 
to explain the possibilities of modern 
medicine to the people, 
Great Stories 
to Come 
What has been is only the beginning. 
Mhere are great stories of scientific dis- 
covery and application in the making. 
If such things happerya it will be 
because the people continue to support the 
advance of science, spiritually and finan- 
cially, and the talented have a chance 
to do research. We must be confident 
that the people will do this if they are 
allowed to know the facts and implica- 
tions of the most thrilling area of human 
advance-—modern science, 
who changed 
his mi 5 is mind 
This is the story of the mayor of a 
small South American town who was 
forced to change his mind by his 
feillow-citizens. 
To this mayor went a letter from 
the Department of Health asking if 
he had money available for spraying 
houses with DDT. 
He replied: no funds available, 
Two days later, followed an urgent 
cable. It said that morey had been 
obtained, and asked when the spray- 
ing could begin. 
What had happened was that the 
local inhabitants had learned of the 
mayor's reply. They had disagreed 
violently, because popular science 
articles had informed them of the 
benefits of DDT. 
A meeticg of the town council was 
summoned hurriedly, and the mayor 
was persuaded to change his mind.       
‘HE same exhibition, 
which was later 
shown in the capital 
of a province, 400 kilo- 
metres distant, was 
visited by half the 
Jocal population. 
HAT does this 
mean ? That the 
masses want to know 
what is happening. 
To inform them is a 
tremendous task. 
The Latin American 
people have a more 
or less develpped ge- 
neral culture, but 
there is an insufficient 
“dose” of science. This 
insufficiency of scien- 
tific culture applies to all classes, even in 
the most advanced centres, The inevitable 
accompaniments of this are the poverty 
of native science, the scarcity of 
scientists, the lack of encouragement for 
research, limited credits, a certain gene- 
ral indifference, and resistance on the 
part of the lower classes to the changes 
which the new developments impose on 
modern life. 
But, clearly, the blame cannot be 
placed on the shoulders of the people. 
Government and political leaders often 
speak of social problems, which they 
study and try to solve; usually scientific 
principles are completely absent from 
their investigations. 
In universities, scientific activity takes 
second place: instruction in the main 
is for professional training. During the 
past few years, there has been some 
progress, but each step forward Is the 
result of a struggle among university 
directors or in parliament. 
Scientific work continues to be the 
result of isolated, individual effort 
accompanied by sacrifices and often by 
some heroism. 
This disregard for scientific activity 
exists generally. The professional man 
v 10 devotes himself to research instead 
of practising his profession, is held to 
be a failure, Donations from rich people 
for scientific research are the exception 
in Latin America. 
The objective, scientific education 
given to young people leaves much to 
be desired. It should be added that in 
speaking of science, what is usually 
meant is the science of observation and 
not of experiment and research. 
Finally, when science is considerered at 
all, it is spoken of as something harmful. 
But there is a favourable side, The 
lack of tradition allows of quick changes 
in public opinion, Generally, people 
are willing to absorb information if it 
is presented in an acceptable way. There 
is widespread curiosity, for example, 
about new techniques. 
There is, I believe, a great need for 
scientific information, but necessarily, it 
must come in large part from abroad. 
Unesco has a tremendous favourable field 
in which to work on the popularization 
of science. 
  
(Continued en p. 8) 
        N 
a FLT a) : 
take an active interest in science. 
One of the main features in the popularization of science 1 § 
programme of Unesco is to stimulate young people to BL 
The youngsters are 2° 
members of a Danist Science Club who, under the 
guidance of a scientist, mad: excavations in Jutland. | _ 
  
   
    

## [Page 6](074029engo.pdf#page=6) 3

### 74040: Lord Boyd-Orr helped to make an A1 nation

e RITCHIE CALDER, world-famous science writer, 
tells the behind-the-scenes story of a four-years-long scoop 
Lord Boyd-Orr Helped To 
  
QCIENCE correspondents, like all jour- 
nalists, are interested in scoops—the 
new discovery or development which 
“makes the headline”. But this is an 
account of a “scoop” which took four 
patient years to achieve. 
j RN 1932, I was doing a series of scien- 
tific articles on what was happening 
in British laboratories, and, without 
much enthusiasm, visited the Rowett 
Research Institute, Aberdeen, to discuss 
animal nutrition—“menus for pigs”, as 
I irreverently called it. 
NOR was the Director very enthusiastic 
about my visit. Indeed, his attitude 
made me curious and over a reluctant 
cup of coffee I remarked, “Dr. Boyd Orr, 
you seem to be a man with a chip on 
your shoulder”. And discovering that he 
had a sympathetic listener, he told me 
what that “chip” was. 
IMPORTANCE OF | 
NUTRITION 
“ can persuade farmers to take an in- 
terest in nutrition,” he said, “because I 
can prove to them that it pays dividends 
in terms of their stocks and herds. But I 
cannot get them interested in the nutri- 
tion of their own children, let alone the 
children. of other people. Yet I can prove 
as a scientist and as a doctor that 
that would pay incomsparably greater 
dividends” 
ES OE A 
Science Through Film 
The Popularization of Science Unit 
is regularly furnishing the Field 
Science Offices in China, Egypt and 
Uruguay with news on scientific and 
popular scientific films. It has pro- 
cured films for China, Denmark and 
several Latin American countries. It 
has furnished newspapers and week- 
lies with special material on scientific 
and popular scientific films. 
WHR ERE 
He told me of his rankling frustration. 
He had fed 200 children, of underpaid 
miners in Lanarkshire, on milk for a 
year. He had a control group of similar 
children, who did not receive supple- 
mentary diet. 
The contrast between the two grcups 
conclusively proved his argument. The 
milk-fed children “blossomed before his 
eyes”. But in the depression years, when 
Make An 
  
the lesson was even more important, the 
scientific survey had been “lost”. Dr. 
John Boyd Orr was an unhappy man. 
Why couldn't be get the public to listen? 
As I told him, that was my job. The 
immediate article on “The AI Nation of 
Tomorrow” put his argument before two 
million readers at a critical moment. It 
awakened popular interest in nutrition, 
as something more than “diet” or a 
vitamin cult. 
That was not as important as the 
sequel. Subsequent discussion helped to 
er CTT TTT HD 
Science Through Radio 
The Popularization of Science Unit 
has, from Unesco House, arranged 
broadcasts to the United States, over 
the C.B.S. network. It is a steady 
contributor to the Unesco World Re- 
view. It has made recorded broadcasts 
from N.B.C. and the Lowell Coopera- 
tive Broadcasting Council available 
to Radio stations in Europe and else- 
where. Several European radiostations 
have been given help in planning 
Pepular Science programs. 
EE CE A TEU HHT 
stimulate an interest in the scientific 
aspects of the Government’s programme 
for the revival of agriculture, in terms 
of human needs, and Dr. John Boyd Orr 
undertook a classic social survey of the 
relation of food, health and income. 
The results, as they emerged, were 
startling and would, at any stage, have 
made good journalistic copy. But for 
four vears I had to practise a self- 
denying ordinance until the facts were 
fully marshalled and scientifically avo- 
praised, 
In 1935, I “got my scoop”. Dr. Boyd Orr 
announced his results at ihe British 
Association. As his confidant I acquired 
journalistic merit by the fully informed 
account, with all the significance that 
others missed, and with social repercus- 
sions which are still reverberating. 
A MAL-NOURISHED 
POPULATION 
HE “Food, Health and Income” survey, 
scientifically documented, showed 
that in Britain half the people did not 
then have incomes which would gua- 
rantee them the diet necessary for 
health and well being, and that one- 
tenth of the population was definitely 
under-nourished. 
—
—
 
R
d
 
permit? 
You can do so 
full reports: 
Science are: 
“Popularization of Science 
Michelsen; 
  
EX: 
       
  
smith. 
  
  


### 74036: Popularization of science

on Popularization of Science 
Would you like to make a better acquaintance with Arthur Elton, 
Sinclair Road, and JL. Crammer than their articles on these pages 
very easily by writing to Unesco for copies of their 
“Popularization of Science through Film", and “Popularization of 
Science through Cheap Books”. 
Other Reports dealing with aspects of the Popularization of 
through Science Clubs”, by 
J 
“How To Conduct a Science Fair”, by Borge Michelsen; 
“Science Service”, by Borge Michelsen: 
“Methods of Improving the Coverage of Science”, by 
Herbert B. Nichols: 
“The Public Be Informed”, by Watson Davis. 
<1 “Associations of Science Writers: The Case for Their 
\= Stimulation and Development”, by Maurice Gold- 
In preparation for early publication are: b 
“The Story of ICSU (The International Council of 
Scientific Unions): and b 
“Science Writing Awards”, 
L 
Reports : 
p
T
 
T
T
T
,
 
R
E
 
d
d
d
 
Borge 
    
The impact on Britain was immediate. 
Committees Against Malnutrition sup- 
ported by eminent scientists and public 
figures began a drive which had political 
effect. The international outcome was 
the Mixed Commission of the League of 
Nations, which “married” health and 
agriculture, and initiated in Member 
States a series of similar surveys. 
That in the United States of America, 
the richest country in the world, paral- 
leled Orr's results. Elsewhere the evi- 
dence was even more disturbing. 
In Britain. this investigation and the 
popular interest it created prepared the 
“climate” for the painless and specta- 
cularly successful rationing system which 
brought Britain out of six years of war 
a healthier nation than when it had 
entered it. 
RESULTS FINALLY 
SEEN 
THEN international results were seen 
in the Hot Springs Conference and in 
the foundation of the Food and Agri- 
culture Organization of U.N. at Quebec, 
where Sir John Boyd Orr was elected 
the first Director-General, 
When, at the Famine Conference in 
Washington, Sir John Boyd Orr made 
his final speech which roused the weary 
delegates to enthusiasm and acclamation, 
Sir John asked me what I thought of 
his speech. My reply was, “I have liked 
it better every time I have heard it for 
the last fourteen years”. 
“With that remarkable constancy which 
has made Lord Bovd Orr 
scientist-statesman, he was saying in 
that vital assembly (which delivered 
70 000,000 people from the threat of 
privation), with more-facts but no more 
emphasis, what he had said to me at 
the Rowett Institute when I arrived in 
quest of “menus for pigs”. 
‘1 Am Grateful 
To Scientific 
Boswells’ 
To more than the art of printing, niow- 
ever, do we owe the successes and 
pleasures of our vicarioys adventures in 
science. We are also greatly indebted 
to those who can write and will write 
in terms of our limited comprehension. 
Not all the scientists have the facility. 
Sometimes the talk is too tough for us, 
or too curt, They have not the time to 
be lucid on our level and within our vo- 
;abulary, or perhaps their mental inten- 
sity has stunted the faculty of sym- 
pathetic explanation. ° 
When such technical barriers exclude 
from the scientific workshop, it is then 
we like to consult with a clear-spoken 
and understanding interpreter. 
We sit on the back porch of the labora- 
tory, while tie, as middleman, goes inside 
to the obscurities and mysteries, to re- 
turn occasionally with comprehensibie 
reports. In listening to him we hear not 
only his voice, but the overtones of the 
master he interprets. 
I like these men of understanding who 
play Boswell to the specialist. They 
often have a gift greater than that of 
the concentrated workers whom they 
soften up for us. 
For they have breadth and perspective, 
which help us to get at the essence of a 
problem more objectively than we could 
even if we were fully equipped with the 
language and knowledge of the fact- 
bent explorer and analyst. 
The scientific interpreters frequently 
enhance our enjoyment in that they give 
us of themselves, as well as of the dis- 
coverers whose exploits they recount. We 
are always grateful to them, moreover, 
for having spared us labor and possibly 
discouragement. 
HARLOW SHAPLEY, 
Director, Harvard Observatory. 
  
a world © 
  
MORE SCIENCE 
WRITERS 
NEEDED 
There are mow more leading men of 
science capable of presenting their spe- 
cial'zed knowledge to receptive minds 
than ever there were; as is evidenced by 
B.B.C. “feature broadcasts” from time 
to time. On account of the expansion of 
science teaching in schools and colleges 
and the everyday use of products Of 
applied science, many more people have 
their m'nds directed to the implications, 
technical and social, of scientific know- 
iedge. There are plenty of expositors of 
science capable of constructing stories of 
informative value to the general public 
in readable language, but few opporlu- 
nities are available for the publication 
of such articles in the general Press. 
The “Sunday Times” has recently in- 
troduced a feature of ths kind in jort- 
nightly artices by Dr. Julian Huxley, 
who always writes with first-hand know- 
ledge and the lucidity of De Quincey’s 
“literature of power”, It is to be hoped, 
but not much to be expected in these 
days of paper shortage, that other news- 
papers wll follow this example. It is of 
little use to encourage popular exrpo- 
sitors of science to cultivate similar 
powers of literary expression, only to 
find themselves still unwanted in the 
fields of scientific journalism. 
Sir Richard Gregory, Bt, FR.S. 
    
— 


### 74042: More use must be made of the public cinema

More Use 
 
am 
~=p= Te
L 
BUT THIS QUESTION I 
THE WHOLE PROBLED 
HE value of the film for the popul- 
T arization of science is closely bound 
up with its future development as 
a medium. Because it has been widely 
and 
entertainment techniques, its other uses 
associated with entertainment 
as a medium have been impeded. 
 
human 
skeleton as depicted in a British Ministry 
of Health educational film. 
A vivid presentation of the 
Today the enormous appeal of the 
public cinema is not utilized to any full 
extent for popularization. Some countries 
have taken the step of introducing 
legislation requiring the inclusion of one 
documentary film in every cinema pro- 
gramme, 
There are other developments, particu- 
larly the production of films in a group 
or series, - A group of films is easier to 
market commercially, and has the merit 
of achieving a greater cumulatve effect 
on the public. For example, the Amer-

## [Page 7](074029engo.pdf#page=7) 4

### 74043: The Role of cheap books

  
Dr. Frank J. Malina, an 
aeronautical engineer on 
leave from the California 
Institute of Technology, the 
co's Natural Sciences 
Department. To him 
science inspires art after 
the day's work is done. 
Dr. Malina’s pastel has 
been interpreted in words 
by Watson Davis, Direc- 
tor of Science Service, 
Washinglon : 
“When a scientist views 
a picture with the analyt- 
ical insight of reason and 
detailed comprehension 
he must lose or overlook 
thaught.   
> 
some of the meaning in- 
jected into the creation, 
particularly if it is either 
emotional 
is Deputy Head of Unes- trail or the preceding 
shock wave of a disting- 
uished rocketeer.Certainly 
science junctions men- form to 
tally and physically and 
xz, the unknown, is always 
a function of y, synony- 
mous with either some- 
thing known or perpetual 
interrogation (a l'anglai- 
se). “Science focuses and 
brings to a point parallel 
activities and 
Energy is an 
motion in 
most instances — or the tion. 
undulatory 
stripes of the flags of 
many nations run together 
in international scientijic 
co-operation. The beauty 
of curves may mean ap- 
plied biology to some or 
merely the beauly of 
others, The 
wrinkles that impress 
themselves may be merely 
those that will be erased 
jrom a worried world by 
science skilfully and sym- 
pathetically applied. Or 
they may be a symbol of 
the quiet necssity of age.” 
Others who combine science 
and art are invited to submit 
details to Unesco's Division 
for Science and Its Populariza- 
vapour 
lines of   
  
N planning to use books to spread 
information about Science we have to 
think realistically, quantitatively, in de- 
tail 
What sorts of people, and how many 
of them, are reading books on science 
now? Does the price of a book in actual 
fact slop some from reading it? 
What is our aim in spreading scientific 
enlightenment? A statement of our 
ideals indicates for whom our cheap 
books must be written, and what book- 
lists we should develop as publishers. 
  : by 
J.L. CRAMMER 
Editor of Pengu’'n Science News 
 
Finally, why do books cost so much? 
The answer to this may help us to pro- 
duce them more cheaply. 
I am going to discuss these questions 
in turn, using British experience. 
The first group of questions is unfor- 
tunately difficult to answer because very 
little research has been done on reading 
habits, and little is known about the 
sort of people who bu¥ books and why 
they buy them. But something of the 
situation can be gathered by collecting 
a few statistics from publishers and 
comparing their sales with the size of 
the population (see Table I). 
Even from the few figures of this 
table one or two conclusions are indicat- 
ed. Firstly, price is not in itself a deter- 
mining factor: the book with a record 
sale -is the most expensive of the three, 
while the medium-priced one sold more 
than a cheaper book by the same author 
(Sir Arthur Eddington) until the latter 
was published by Penguins. Most scien- 
tific Penguin books sell editions of 
50,000 to 100.000 copies, so it did well 
    
rn  Es 
  
roar onetime? m 
Ar 


### 74042: More use must be made of the public cinema

Must Be Made 
Nr rm 


### 74041: Emotionalism in science

### 74036: Popularization of science

IS BOUND UP WITH THE WAY IN WHICH 
M OF SCIENCE IN EDUCATION IS TREATED 
ican March of Time and the British 
This Modern Age series, as well as spe- 
cialized magazines like This Is Britain, 
for audiences overseas; Mining Review, 
for coal miners; and the Shell Cinema- 
gazine.(It should be noted that mone of 
these magazines deal spec ’fically with 
science, the exception being provided by 
the Soviet Union where special scientific 
film magaznes are produced.) 
The newsreel, too, has the merit of 
by 
ARTHUR ELTON 
Director of the British Film Institute 
F- ; and 
SINCLAIR ROAD 
Secretary of the Film Centre, London     
continuity and could be utilized to a far 
greater extent to present regular items 
or general scientific interest, 
The feature film, generally speaking, 
has not proved a su'table medium, (On 
the other hand, its power lo encourage 
and maintain unscientific attitudes re- 
quires constant attention on the part of 
scientists.) 
A great deal can be done to develop 
the use of filins about scence among 
community organizations. This non- 
theatrical diStribution is not, however, 
economically self-supporting. 
It requ’res a large measure of public 
support in the provision of library facili- 
ties and projection machinery. Because 
non-theatrical audiences are prepared to 
pay much more attention to the fiIms 
they see, money and effort put into this 
kind of distribution can be of far more 
lasting value. 
The encouragement of local film gfoups 
is also of the utmost importance, as 
well as of national scentific film asso- 
ciations—along lines on which the Inter- 
national Scientific Film Association is 
already working. 
In the production of films popular- 
izing sc'ence, the maximum amount of 
government and non-government spon- 
sSorship should be encouraged. Sponsoring 
- Organizations, particu.arly public bodies, 
should realize the value of developing an 
understanding, not merely of the facts 
of scence and its application to parti- 
cular areas of activity, but also the 
actual everyday use of scientific method 
as well as the citizen's responsibility for 
the ultimate use and contro] of the dis- 
cover.es of science, 
Greater care should also be taken to 
relate subjects described to what is 
within audiences’ experience, since a cer- 
tain familiarity is an essent al basis for 
further understanding. 
Finally, national and international 
scientific institutions could profitably pay 
far more attention to the value of mass- 
media. Authoritative statements by such 
bodies about the actual and potential use 
of films on science could influence very 
positively governmental and other agen- 
cies responsible for film production. 
But, ultimately, the fale of sctentific 
popularization, whatever the medium 
used, must depend on the ser ousness 
with which the whole question of science 
in education generally is treated in 
each individual country. 
HETE TE HE HE RTT HTT 
Science Through the 
Press | 
At the initiative of the Populariza- 
tion of Science Unit popular scientific 
weeklies and magazines in U.S.A, 
France and England have been brought 
into contact with one another and 
have started exchange of articles. 
Several newspapers have been given 
help in making special supplements 
on the significance of science to daily 
life, The unit js a steady contributor 
to the Unesco World Feature Service. 
In addition, it has, on request, fur- 
nished newspapers and magazines 
with special news-items and distribut- 
ed articles on Protection of Nature 
and Utilization of Resources for the 
Economic and Social Council. It is 
editing the Natural Sciences serics of 
occasional papers. 
JHE EI REE IERIE sa 
~~ —— 
The Public Ginema 
 
The instruments for the 
Popular.zation of Science are 
many, They include the Asso- 
ciations for the Advancement 
of Science, Science Clubs, the 
science writer, radio, the film, 
the museum, the mobile exhi- 
bits, the book, television, and 
the comic strip. 
The Section for the Populari- 
zation of Science is concerned 
with fostering their develop- 
ment, and where necessary, 
initiating their growth. 
Only a few examples of how 
these instruments can be used 
are mentioned in these pages. 
More can be learned about 
them by writing to Unesco, Do 
not hesitate to do so.     
Secondly, it looks as though we are 
doing well if 1 in 500 of our population 
* buys a book. Is this good enough? 
Another way of trying to gauge public 
interest in Science is to study what 
kinds of books are borrowed from free 
Public Lending Libraries. Table 2 gives 
a few figures for a city I happen to 
know quite well, one which is industrial, 
with a University College, a technical 
school, and many ordinarv schools. 
The issue of science books actually 
includes a certain number of textbooks 
TABLE I, 
 
Title of book Sale in Britain Notes 
“Mathematics for 195000 Translated into 14 
the Million” <(pub- languages (Finnish 
lished 1936 at 12/6) and Swedish edi- 
tions 17,000 each; 
USA 151,000) 
“Nature of the 26,213 Translated inte 
Physical World) 9 languages, 
(published 1933 at 
B/6) ceiiiiiiiiiiiienns 
“The Expanding 16,810 by the author of 
Universe” (1933) 105,000 the preceding book, 
at 5/ en (Penguin edition) 
at 1/ nn 
Population eof Britain ......... 48,000,000 
Pactors in Britain ............... 56.000 
Members of Associations of 
Scientific Workers ............... 18,000 
borrowed by students for their academic 
work. But, ignoring this. we see that 
under conditions where the books are 
free. only 5.6 0/0 of those taken for 
reading are on science, and the number 
of these could be accounted for entirely 
if the educated groups separately listed 
in the table drew five books each in the 
year. 
Or take it on a national scale. If a 
Penguin book of a medical interest sells’ 
50,000 copies, how do we know that it 
has not been entirely bought up by the 
doctors of thes country, just to see what 
it is like? If this is really what happens 
the effectiveness of our popularization 
leaves something to be desired. : 
Sa we come to the question who are 
these popular books for, who are the 
people we want to reach? Insofar as a 
TABLE 2 
(afl figures approximate) 
Total population : 278,000 (all ages) 
consisting of 
Doctors  .oooiiiiiiniiriseraer ae . 120 
Druggists ...oiviiiiiieericestrecesnincsess BO 
Works chemists ....... Sorstae ceneserens 00 
Graduate teachers ......... tereerntenn . 2A 
Non-graduate teachers ............... : 
University, faculty and students... 500 1,400 
Central Lending Library, total issues of 
non-fiction (1946-47): 121,500 ; issues of 
science books only : 6,800, 
"high standard of living may make for 
peace and democracy, science can cer- 
tainly bring this high standard of living. 
To do so, in an undeveloped country, 
more than a few scientists are needed. 
The political leaders must be aware of 
what science can do for their country, 
and there must also be a nucleus of 
trained technicians to work the factory 
processes and the new agriculture. 
(Continued on Page 8.) 
The Seclion for 
the Popularization 
of Science is work- 
ing in close col- 
laboration with 
scientific organiza- 
tions, such as the 
International 
Council of Scienti- 
fic Unions (I. C. 
S.U.). Above, a . 
member of the 
Section is plan- 
ning a conference 
with members of 
the 1.C.S.U.-Com- 
mittee on Science 
and its Social Re- . 
lations. Professor 
Bart Bok, U.S.A. 
(right), speaks to 
Professor Rehberg, 
Denmark (left).

## [Page 8](074029engo.pdf#page=8) 4

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER August 1949 
 
‘A member (left) of the Natural Sciences Department shakes hands 
with the Lebanese Minister of Education at the opening of the 
Scientific Exhibition at Beirut. 
SCIENCE AND DEMOCRACY 
OME years ago a small country 
entered into a contract with 
a foreign oil company, selling the 
right to utilize all minerals that 
might be found in ils wunder- 
ground. 
Nobody protested and the com- 
pany started work; bul when in- 
dications of the presence of oil 
were found, the government was 
severely attacked. 
It was stated that native scien- 
tists long ago had predicted the 
presence of valuable minerals, 
such as oil, 
Why, it was asked, had the gov- 
ernment not paid attention to 
them and thus kept the minerals 
Jor itself, that is to say, for the 
citizens of the country? 
From the debate which followed 
it appeared that some of the 
persons responsible for the bar- 
gain had heard about the seismo- 
log cal, gravimetric and magnetic 
investigations upon which the 
scientists had based their views 
but none had really understood 
what it was all about. 
None of them, as they frankly 
admitted, understood the lan- 
guage of the scientists, the way 
in which they expressed them- 
science to make intelligent deci- 
sions. If the decisions are wrong, 
not only are the government offi- 
cials to blame, but also the voters 
backing them, 
As the language of science to- 
day is made up of symbols and 
dialects that are un’ntelligible to 
the public (and somelimes even 
to those specialists working in 
adjacent fields), a new profession 
has been created: journalists who 
are specialists in interpreting the 
language of the scientists, the 
science writers, 
The need for such specialists 
was clearly felt in the country 
mentioned above when the “oil 
affair’ came up, But too many 
countr’es are still waiting for 
such an “affair” to hit them. 
[JNEsco must make known 
to the greatest possible 
number of people, not only the 
scientific achievements and 
their applications, but the 
trend eof scientific progress. 
The public must be constantly 
selves, 
Public opinion required a scape- 
goat. It was found by a journalist, 
who wrote an article saying: 
“I am the scapegoat in this 
affair, and so are you! In a demo- 
cratic society like ours we are all 
responsible for the slips made by 
our representatives in Parl ament. 
We could have stopped them bul 
did not do so. Let us watch them 
more closely in the future. Let us 
learn more about science!” 
Government officials time and 
again need a knowledge of   
informed of 
that is of science under con- 
struction. The public must 
expect new and important 
scientific progress in the fu- 
ture. It must not lose its head 
over new developments 
come. 
Dr. P. AUGER, Head, 
Department of Natural 
living science, 
Sciences. 
to      


### 74045: Science through television opens a new field

SCIENCE THROUGH 
TELEVISION OPENS 
A NEW FIELD 
ELEVISION, the most-talked 
of means of communication 
today, is being used as an instru- 
ment for the Popularization of 
Science in the USA, England and 
France. 
In England, science and scien- 
tific topics are gradually entering 
the world of television in three 
ways: first, by talks and demon- 
strations in the studio; secondly, 
"by outside broadcasts; and, third- 
ly, by the use of films. 
Since television with its marked 
sense of immediacy, reality and 
intimacy is quite different from 
the recorded material of film, the 
BBC has naturally tended to res- 
trict its pfesentation of scientific 
material to the first two methods 
whenever possible. 
Sudio programmes have covered 
8 wide range of topics and have 
included eminent scientists such 
Scientific film programmes have 
been used rather less, but there 
was a special presentation of 
scientific films in the autumn of 
1948 on the occasion of the Inter- 
national Scientific Film Congress 
in London. 
It may be, however, that a re- 
  
by 
R. Mc V. WESTON 
BBC television science adviser. 
  
    
gular science film magazine wil] 
be started before very long. 
Although films are not used 
when a dicect, living programme 
is possible, the film still remains 
superior to television—and ijn fact 
ulique—when it becomes essential 
to change the time-scale, This is 
not possible with television and 
film must be used in casas where 
motion is either too rapid or too 
slow to be appreciated by the eye. 
Accelerated motion by meang of 
time-lapse films taken in conjunc- 
tion with the microscope have 
been used by Dr. A F.W. Hughes, 
and super slow motion has been 
used in some scientific films made 
by the Shell Film Unit. 
While all the above programmes 
were transmitted to the public, 
mention must also be made of the 
use of television equipment with 
closed circuits for special purposes, 
such as the transmission of images 
of surgical operations for study by 
students outside the operating 
theatre as now done at Guy's Hos- 
pital, and the use of the television 
camera in the Maternity Wards of 
University College Hospital. 
as the Astronomer Royal, and also 
demonstrations of various medical 
subjects such as Blood Transfu- 
sion, Physiotherapy and Mass Ra- 
diography. 
Wide Range 
of Topics 
A recent series of programmes 
was the outcome of a demonstra- 
tion by Jean Painlevé, at the end 
of 1948, that it was possible to- 
televise small living organisms: 
direct with the microscope and 
without the use of an intermediate 
film. 
The “Under the Microscope” 
programmes were used very suc- 
cessfully to show audiences some 
of the methods of biological re- 
search, and to indicate the im- 
portance and usefulness of scien- 
tific research. 
Demonstrations of this kind 
have been given by Dr. M. Aber- 
crombie of University College, 
London, and also by Dr. AF.W. 
Hughes of the Strargeways Labo- 
ratory, Cambridge, who demons- 
strated the recently developed 
Phase-Contrast microscope. 
The use of the microscope di- 
rectly with the television camera 
is, however, subject to several 
disadvantages of an optical na- 
ture, but these could probably be 
minimized with improved televi- 
sion cameras or, in certain cases. 
almost overcome by the use of 
an intermediate film. 
Visit to the 
Royal Mint 
A smaller number of outside 
broadcasts of a scientific and tech- 
nical nature have also been given. 
notably a visit to the National 
Physical Laboratory at Tedding- 
ton, where the Wind Tunnel was 
demonstrated, and also a visit to 
the Royal Mint. It is believed that 
  
COMIC STRIPS 
 
~ Teach Science 
  
   
 
   
SMART BOY, JOHNNY. 
NOW THEY DIDN'T NEED 
THOSE ‘CANNONS’ AT ALL. 
THEY COULD SET UP A 
‘CHAIN REACTION". 
   
  
  
  
 
ay 
THEY DISCOVERED THAT wien 
EACH URANIUM ATOM SPLIT,     
  
 
      
SEE, DLL SHOW YOU. FRG) wily 
MAE BELLE THUG MATCw HEADS 
ARE 735 ATOMS, NOW WE LL 
ARRANGE TUEM Lief TiS 50 
THAT EACH ONE wil LIGHT (OR 
SPLIT | Tw OTHERS, | . 
  
  programmes of this kind will be- 
come more frequent. } 
“EY, COULDNT 
THEY USE THOSE 
NEW "BULLETS 
TO SPLIT OTHER 
ATOMS 77 
      
        
 
New development in popularization of science is the use of the 
comic strip. This has been done in the main in the U.S.A, and the 
above secion of a strip is taken from a comic book prepared by the 
General Electric C°. 
It .is believed that cartoons are particulary useful, not only for 
lower school education, but also for illiterate groups. Techniques for 
their use are being developed, especially in relation to underdeveloped 
areas. 


### 74043: The Role of cheap books

The Role Of 
Cheap Books 
(Continued from p. 7) 
Popularization has, therefore, an im- 
portant job to do in attracting recruits 
for training as technicians and scientists, 
A target we must always have in mind, 
therefore, is the older boys and girls at 
school, and the students in colleges and 
universities. 
The older the man the harder he is 
to convert to a new idea. Our popular 
books are therefore often befter aimed 
direct at the senior schoolboy, rather 
than at the master who teaches him. 
It is an interesting fact that many 
popular scientific books are read by pro- 
fessional scientists. The reason is that 
modern science has become so vast and 
specialized that an expert in one field 
is often completely ignorant in twenty- 
nine others, and quite unable to follow 
developments in subjects which would 
not only interest him but quite possibly 
influence his own scientific work if he 
was aware of them. 
Popularization has a role of growing 
 
importance to play here in preventing 
the threatened fragmentation and col- 
lapse of the scientific world through 
extreme specialization. I know from 
experience that a periodical such as 
“Penguin Science News” serves this func- 
tion. though it was not started with that 
intention—in fact, when we began we 
were ignorant of the need. 
Soon we begin to see that the purposes 
of popularization may be well served 
without our reaching the major part of 
the population, Because we refer casually 
to “the people” of a country we must 
not be fooled into thinking of them 4s 
all equal units of individuality. 
Some are housewives, some are saiiors. 
or greengrocers, or schoolboys, or nurses, 
or lawyers, or bankclerks, and each 
group within the democratic community 
has a different education, a different 
experience of life, different interests and 
different influence in society. Some are 
not interested in science and never will 
be, or are even antagonistic to it because 
it makes more fearful war weapons. or 
is complicated and difficult to under- 
stand, or upsets cherished beliefs. 
But we do not need to worry unduly 
over these antagonisms, which it will 
take more than cheap books to alter in 
any case, If we can reach the young 
and the administrators and the scientists, 
we shall be going a long way to achieve 
our aims. 
Finally, finance. Publishing as a 
business is beset with difficulties. The 
bookseller takes one-third (in some 
countries, half) of the selling price of 
a book for himself, whatever the size 
of the selling price. In consequence, he 
is not interested in selling cheap books 
if he can sell expensive ones, and somes 
booksellers refuse to stock the cheap 
ones altogether. 
Of they money the publisher rece.ves, 
a great deal goes for printing and paper, 
and the author gets very little, quite 
possibly less than he would if his book 
had appeared more expensively and sold 
fewer copies. In periods of unstable pri- 
ces and inflation the cheap book with 
its delicate costing and verv narrow 
profit margins is likely to turn into a 
liability overnight, where a more expen- 
sive volume can weather the financial 
storm. 
Then there are all kinds of interna- 
tional difficulties : tariff barriers to the 
importation of foreign-printed books in 
some countries; difficulties of exchange, 
where dollars are scarce; extravagantly 
high local labour or printing costs. There 
is work here for Unesco: to smocth out 
some of the barriers.   


### 74036: Popularization of science

### 74039: We must increase the dosage of science

We Must Increase 
the Dosage of Science 
(Continued from p. J) 
The idea of a mobile scientific exhibi- 
tion, which is being spoken of, is magni- 
ficent. Its success will be certain, provid- 
ing that the subjects are well chos® 
and the exhibition allows the viewers to 
take part. Visitors will be attracted bv 
practical demonstrations and films, and 
not only by lectures, 
An excellent subject is biology in all 
its forms. In addition, in each country 
ithe Unesco exhibition should include 
a section on native science 
Finally it is to be hoped that some of 
the. specialists accompanying the mobile 
exhibition can stay for a wneriod long 
enough to ensure the formation of 
science clubs, which will stimulate and 
develop the newly awakened local interest 
in science. 
I know that my country could be 
transformed if full use were made of 
science and technology. To do that 
requires a major development in mass 
popularization of science at all levels. 
The immediate road ahead is difficult 
but it is well worth treading.

## [Page 9](074029engo.pdf#page=9) 3

### IGNORE

August 1949 UNESCO COURIER 


### 74046: Boys' town in Italy

    
  
“8° in Italy 
BOYS 
The war left 400,000 Italian children orphaned, homeless and 
destitute, roaming the countryside and living by their wits . . 
N Christmas Eve, 1945, a 
little priest called Don Gui- 
do Visendaz arrived in the 
Italian mountain village of Lan- 
ciano where, he had been told, a 
gang of vagabond boys—the riff- 
yaff and sweep- 
ngs of war — 
were living like 
savages in the 
half-ruined San- 
ta Chiara bar- 
racks. 
"Don Guido had 
heard that the 
boys, typical of 
many of the 
400,000 children 
left homeless by 
the war in Italy, 
had been roving the countey- 
side, stealing and living on the 
proceeds of their robberies, be- 
fore being rounded up by the po- 
Jice at Lanciano and locked in the 
stables at the barracks. 
Making hig way to the barracks, 
Don Guido pushed open the door 
and was met by a chorus of jeers 
and catcalls from the boys who, 
ragged and flea-bitten, lay shiver- 
ing on the bare stone floor. 
You can help the child- 
ren of the “Villagio del 
Fanciullo”, who need finan- 
cial aid, furniture, bedding, 
clothing, school supplies, 
art and music materials 
and textbooks in Italian. 
Gifts should be sent to 
Villagio del Fanciullo, Silvi 
Marina (Pescara - Teramo) 
Abruzzi, Italy.     
Don Guido, who had been a 
chaplain to the Italian troops and 
a prisoner in Germany, was a 
cultured man who could easly 
have found a quiet post in a 
sem:nary. But the boys were a 
challenge to him. He went to the 
town hall and persuaded the coun- 
¢il to remove their guards and 
chains and let 
him take over 
the care of 
the boys. 
Don Guido 
realized that 
he must gain 
their confi- 
dence before 
he could hope 
to improve the 
material and 
spiritual con- 
ditions under 
which they 
were living. 
He began by 
sharing their 
miserable exis- 
tence and liv- 
ing quarters. 
SA First of all 
ol) ——— «. he shoved 
them how to 
clean up the stable and one 
day he began to plaster the broken 
walls. The boys watched him 
sullenly for a while and then they 
too began to work. Very soon he 
had them decorating the walls of 
their one-time prison with painted 
figures. 
Other young orphans heard 
about the community at Lanciano 
and came to join it, They were 
accepted without question, shown 
the rules they must obey and told 
they were free to come and go as 
they pleased. 
The Little Clown 
Under the conditions of poverty 
and want suffered by the com- 
munity at that time, it was only 
the faith of Don Guido and the 
spirit of hope among the boys that 
kept it alive. One of the best ilius- 
trations of this spirit is the story 
of a little boy named Romano, 
who came to join the group. 
  
   
Romano belonged to a circus 
family. His father and two 
brothers were killed during the war 
and his mother died later of a 
brain tumour. Orphaned and fies- 
titute, Romano wandered aimless- 
ly across Italy 
until one day 
when he arrived 
at Lanciano. 
“What can you 
do?”, he was ask- 
ed. “Well”, he 
replied, “I cared 
for my mother 
when she was ill, 
If you have sick 
boys I could look 
after them”, 
Soon there 
were eighty boys aged between 5 
and 18 at Lanciano and the com- 
munity was forced to take over 
the entire ground floor of the 
barracks. But the boys remain- 
ed undisciplined i 
and some of 
them even went 
out at night to 
rob nearby 
houses. 
Theeatened by 
the police and 
angry citizens. 
Don Guido call- 
ed the boys to- 
gether and 
made them a 
proposal. “I must 
be free to try 
and get the food 
and clothes and 
other things you 
need”, he told 
them, “In future 
you must be 
responsible for 
the discipline 
—— 
  
ves. Otherwise I summer's work. 
shail leave you”. 
After this there were 1lo more 
complaints from the local people, 
and inside the community, a strik- 
ing change took place. The boys 
worked out a “constitution”, estab- 
lisheg¢ a bank and a court of 
justice and elected a mayor and 
storekeepers. 
The Cross and the Pine 
This, then, was how the Villagio 
del Fanciullo—the Village of the 
Child—came into being, Outside 
the barracks stood an old pine 
tree from which the boys had cut 
branches for fuel. The top remain- 
ing branches were roughly in the 
shape-of a cross. This gave the 
boys the idea of a symbol for 
their community—a green pine 
sumounted by a cross. 
Gradually the Villagio’s activi- 
ties expanded to include carpentry 
and shoemaking. Gifts began to 
arrive from other countries, in- 
cluding funds from the Don Suisse 
and the Swiss Red Cross. from 
the American Friends’ Service 
Commi:tiee and from Father Ed- 
ward  Flana- ~ 
gan, founder of 
Boys’ Town. in 
Nebtaska, 
US.A. 
By the end 
of 1947, a full 
programme of 
education and 
technical in- 
struction for 
the boys was 
in operation. 
Half the day 
was spent in 
studying and 
the rest in 
learning a 
trade—carpen- 
try, pottery, 
masonry, shoe- 
making and 
metal work. 
For their work 
in the shops. 
boys were paid 
in special Vil-  
SILVI MARINA : 
among yoursel- Jar commemorates the first hard 
 
lagio “currency”. Some of this 
they used to pay for their 
daily needs or for extras in the 
store or restaurant and the rest 
was put aside as insurance against 
illness or injury. 
By March of last year the Lan- 
ciano barracks were no longer 
large enough to accommodate the 
135 boys who made up the com- 
munity and offered Don Guido a 
piece of land on the nearby hills 
of Silvi, overlooking the Adriatic 
Sea. 
The boys visited this land but 
finally decided to build their new 
community on the beach below 
the hills near the village of Silvi 
Marina. This beach was State pro- 
perty but a month after he had 
opened negotiations, Don Guido 
received it as a gift from Signor 
Giuseppe Saragat, Minister of the 
Merchant Navy. 
Then it was the people and 
Lo children of Ge- 
7" neva, Switzer- 
land, who came 
to the help of 
the Villagio. 
They raised 115,- 
000 Swiss francs 
($29,000) towards 
the cost of build- 
ing the new 
community and 
Signor Antonio 
Bandar:n, an ac- 
chitect from Ve- 
nice, undertook 
to plan the new 
Villagio and to 
train the boys 
in designing and 
construction. 
In July 1948 
the community 
moved from Lan- 
ciano to the 
coast, where the 
: boys slept on the 
open beach or in pre-fabricated 
huts sent by the Don Suisse. 
work was held up, however, when 
it was found that the Gernrans 
had mined the beach during their 
retreat in 1944, but once the mi- 
nes had been lifted, the work went 
steadily ahead. 
To-day, a hotel accommodating 
150 boys is almost completed. 
Good progress is being made with 
the refectory, school chapel, hos- 
pital, workshops, streets and re- 
creation grounds. The boys have 
also formed a co-operative cons- 
truction company called the Cos- 
truziono Edilizie Piccolo Pino 
d'Oro (little Golden Pine Cons- 
truction Company) which will un- 
dertake outside building ard de- 
corating work after the Silvi Ma- 
rina community is completed. 
The stone 
Many Problems Remain 
But there are still many pro- 
blems to be solved, the main one 
being to find the $75.000 required 
to finish the Villagio. Meanwhile 
the boys still lack furniture and 
bedding. Many sleep on wire 
netting, with a single blanket. The 
village has no electricity and the 
nearest fresh water is over a kilo- 
metre away. 
Yet, despite all these peoblems, 
Don Guido has maintained his 
education programme tor the 
boys. When he arrived at Lan- 
ciano all the bovs were illiterate. 
To-day nearly 100 have passed 
through elementary school and 15 
are attending high schools. Two 
senior boys, Giuseppe de Loreto 
and Giuseppe Torosantucci, have 
won scholarships and are study- 
ing in Switzerland. 
The Village of the Cross and: 
the Pine, which is a fine example 
for Italy and the rest of the 
world, is now facing the biggest 
problem in its three and a half 
years’ existence. It would be a 
tragedy if the efforts of its foun- 
der and citizens should be thrown 
away because of failure through 
lack of helo. 


### 74047: Czech five-year plan for culture

 
   
CZECH 
Five-Year Plan 
for Culture 
Czechoslovakia is putting into operation a big eultural develop- 
ment scheme as part of its Five-Year Plan for improving the living 
standard of the Czech people, 
Recognizing that to obtain this higher standard of living 
requires not only an improvement in economic conditions but alse 
an extension of existing cultural activities, the Law on the Five- 
Year Plan, enacted last year, laid down that “the material and cul- 
tural level of the people must be increased in such a way as to 
develop te the full their mental and phykical abilities”, 
Details of the cultural side ef the Five-Year Plan were given by 
“Prague News Letter”, 
May 19 last. : 
a Czechoslovak review, in its issue of 
It reports that 5,386 million kopecs—over half of the total in- 
vestments ear-marked for the cultural plan—will be spent on the 
development of educational facilities, including the erection of 
3,700 new schools by 1953—an increase of 12 0,0 compared with 1948. 
The construction of nursery, kindergarten, technical and me- 
dical schools hat already begun in Bratislava and Kosice. 
Basis changes have also been made more class recoms will be pro- 
are now divided inte four grades amd more class rooms will be pro- 
vided to house the increasing number of pupils. 
The plan also aims at the establishment of a new scientific 
library research institutes and the construction or maintenance of 
theatres, art galleries, museums and philharmonic rehearsal rooms. 
The plan provides for the construction by 1953 of 18 Houses of 
Culture and two Halls of Culture in the Czech Lands, while in Slo- 
vakia, 72 Houses of Culture are to be built during the same periods. 
All the cultural education of the people will be concentrated in these 
institutions. 
Mobiles limraries—some of which are already operating—will 
circulate literary works in all parts of the country, plans having 
been made for the purchase of 150 moter cars and 30 buses for this 
purpose. 
New physical culture facilitics will include 1.0600 gymnasiums, 
2700 training grounds and playing fields, 40 swimming pools and 
15 physical culture centres. 
In order to give people a better chance of education and recrea- 
tion after working hours the Five-Year Plan - alse provides for the 
installation of cultural equipment directly in she factories, This will 
include factory shools, libraries, cinemas and physical culture centres, 


### 74035: Education and natural resources

  
Education and Natural Resources 
(Continued from page 4) 
It has been found in practice 
that informal adult education 
through films, radio and the 
press and simply presented read- 
ing matter gives good results in 
the advanced type of community, 
while the teaching of natural 
history, gardening and forestry 
jin schools (if there are any) or 
on selected outdoor sites is ef- 
fective among the more primi- 
five groups. In both cases de- 
monstraticn, rather than precept, 
is the method that has the most 
powerful appeal. Field workers 
get the best results by establish- 
ing themselves in a definite area, 
small enough to be covered ef- 
fectively, and staying there for 
at least a year — long enough, 
that is, for their teaching to bear 
visible fruits. 
Children are easily and keenly 
interested in gardens, small cul- 
tivated areas and stock-raising 
establishments attached to their 
schools. In Poland and Holland 
remarkable results have followed 
the inclusion of natural history 
and simple agriculture in school 
and university programmes. Both 
of these countries now have pe- 
riodical “forest festivals” ac- 
companied by tree-planting on 
a big scale. Children and young 
people take part enthusiastically 
in these festivals, and their in- 
terest in them spreads to their 
elders in time. In a general way, 
youth groups have proved to be 
among the most effective agen- 
cies of popular education of this 
kind. 
‘Whatever the angle of attack, one 
condition 1s essential for success: 
the programme must be coopera- 
tive, it must embrace the whole 
community and every one who 
takes part in it, whatever his or 
her age or social status, must 
understand clearly what is being 
done and why. For this, some 
knowledge of fundamentals is ne- 
cessary; therefore, education is 
the key. Knowledge, in agricul- 
ture as in every form of activity, 
is the foundation of progress. 
‘Whithout the systematic propaga~ 
tion of knowledge in the first 
place. every attempt to inrprove 
the common lot must fall.

## [Page 10](074029engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER August 1949 
 
  
EUROPEAN UNITED NATIONS CENTRE AT GENEVA 
NESCO in my view is in 
the process of emerging 
from its first phase, which 
I would describe as exploratory 
or experimental. During 
phase the prime objective, as 
was natural and indeed neces- 
sary, was to survey the field and 
try out methods. 
As, moreover, Unesco’s field of 
activity was that of the workings 
and fruits of the human mind, 
it is understandable that diver- 
sity should also have been the 
dominating feature of Unesco’s 
first endeavours, It is only 
thanks to the experience gained 
in those early explorations that 
Unesco has today a clearer view 
of its aims and the means to 
attain then 
This better understanding of 
our ends and means, coupled 
with a growing stability in our 
internal administrative structure, 
appear to me to open the door 
to a second phase which shall 
be vigorously constructive. If 
Unesco is to succeed in the path 
of practical achievement it must 
now carefully eschew a dispersion 
of effort. Our resources in terms 
both of money and manpower 
are slight, compared with our 
respensibilities, and concentration 
must become our law. 
Eighteen Directives 
In February last our Executive 
Board adopted a scale of pr.o- 
rities under which the various 
projects in our programme have 
been assigned budgetary means 
correspending to varving rates of 
performance. These steps will 
pave the way for a concentration 
of our programme which wil], 
I hope, become effective in 1950. 
The General Conference at Bei- 
rut itself expressed a desire for 
some order of precedence in the 
programme. It requested the 
Director-General and the Execu- | 
tive Board to prepare a code of 
directives which will later appear 
at the head of our list of projects, 
and the purpose of which is to 
extract the essential purpose of 
those projects. 
A first set of eighteen directives 
has been drawn up. Lying half- 
way between the necessarily 
broad objectives laid down in our 
Constitution and the very precise 
purposes of individual projects, 
{hese directives lay down a gene- 
ral approach which bears witness 
to Unesco's desire for greater 
cohesion. Parallel progress can be 
noted in our methods of work. 
I cannot here review those me- 
- » " Tie 
that - 
thods, but would like to indicate 
the main lines along which our 
activities are developing, 
Cooperation 
First, co-operation between the 
Secretariat and our Member 
States. This is twofold: co-opera- 
tion with Governments, and with 
National Commissions. With re- 
gard to Governments, the action 
of the Secretariat has hitherto 
Sometimes we aim at the estab- 
lishment of contractual rules 
consonant with our aims. A first 
convention, to facilitate the 
international circulation of visual 
and auditory material of an edu- 
cational, scientific and cultural 
character, was adopted at the last 
session of our General Confer- 
ence and is now open to ratifica- 
tion. 
Others are in preparation. A 
draft agreement on the importa- 
concern Unesco. But they ean 
also serve as valuable liaison 
between the Secretariat and the 
intellectual leaders in the dif- 
ferent countries whose co-opera- 
tion is indispensable to Unesco. 
The second direction in which 
our efforts are proceeding con- 
cerns collaboration with non- 
governmental international orga- 
nizations. These bodies offer us 
the aid of communities already 
established and organized for pur- 


### 74049: Economic and Social Council approves UNESCO report

Economic and Social Council 
Approves Unesco Report 
Ii. JAINE TORRES BODET, Director-General of Unesco, submitted the Report to the 
United Nations on the work of Unesco during 1948 tc the United Nations Economic 
and Social Council, meeting in the Palais des Nations ¢t Geneva, on July 18. 2 
On this cccasion Dr. Torres Bodet made an important statement on the activities of 
Unesco of vhich the main points are given below. He also paid a tribute to his predeces- 
sor, Dr. Julian Huxley, whose work as the first Director-General of Unesco laid the 
foundation of its success. 
After a discussion in the course of which the dclegales expressed their general appre- 
ciation of the work of Unesco during the year under review, a resolution approving the 
Report was passed by fourteen votes to none, with four cbstentions. 
Addressing the Council at the opening of ihe day's proceedings Dr. Torres-Bodet said : 
been largely of an informative 
character. We have called upon 
Governments to help us gather 
the data we needed and to 
organize the international ex- 
change of information which is 
one of our most useful perma- 
nent functions, I would refer in 
this context to our work in the 
field of exchange of persons, and 
particularly to the handbook 
which lists over 16,000 fellowships 
and other opportunities for study 
abroad, offered in 37 different 
countries. Such information is 
sometimes collected by means of 
enquiries, not necessarily confined 
to official sources, suci as that 
on technical needs of press, radio 
and film, covering fo date 43 
countries. 
The Secretariat’s activity, how- 
ever, is also—and is increasingly 
becom :ing—stimu’.tive ara ecrca- 
tive. Sometimes we use a method 
which I might describe as per- 
suasion by example, such as the 
revision of school textbooks, and 
our work on teaching for bet- 
ter international understanding. 
PYCCKHA 
  
Dr. Torres Bodet and Prof. Laugier, United Nations Secretary-General 
. of the E.C.0.S.0.C. . 
tion of books, newspapers and 
periodicals has been circulated to 
Member States for first conside- 
ration, and has also been sub- 
mitted for comment to the Con- 
ference of Contracting Parties 
to the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade. We are activ- 
ely engaged in consultations with 
a view to drawing up a draft 
universal convention on Copy- 
right. We have also undertaken 
a systematic analysis of all exist- 
ing cultural conventions, or 
clauses dealing with cultural 
matters in other types of inter- 
national agreements, with a view 
to. the preparation of model 
clauses concerning cultural ex- 
changes. 
Finally, co-operation with gov- 
ernments has in some cases taken 
the form of co-operative assis- 
tance, Such assistance may be of 
a material or a technical nature. 
It has been material, for exam- 
ple, in our programme of re- 
construction of war-devastated 
countries, whom Unesco has 
sought to aid in two ways: first 
by direct emergency supplies, 
paid for out of the Organiza- 
tion’s unfortunately modest re- 
sources; secondly, bv stimulating 
private gifts. As to technical as- 
sistance, we have provided it this 
vear in the education field in 
the form of consultative missions, 
sent at the request of govern- 
ments and paid for in part by 
those governments, to studv for 
their benefit problems formulated 
by themselves. Two such missions 
have been at work in recent 
months, in the Philippines and 
in Thailand; and one is about 
to leave for Afghanistan. 
National Commissions 
As regards the National Com- 
missions, you are aware that the 
very idea of them was originated 
by our Organization. They are 
intended to serve a twofold pur- 
pose. Consisting of exceptionally 
qualified or representative indivi- 
duals, they are designed as con- 
sultative bodies for advising the 
governments on questions which 
poses of international co-opera- 
tion. In their respective fields 
they give practical expression to 
that understanding and agree- 
ment beyond the closed walls of 
political units to which Unesco 
is dedicated. Eighty-two of these 
organizations have been granted 
consultative status and eighteen 
further applications are now 
being examined. To my mind 
this represents a source of great 
strength for us, and one on 
which we should draw for joint 
constructive effort. 
That is what we try to do 
whenever the need for restoring 
international relations between 
intellectual and professional cir- 
cles has caused Unesco to initiate 
action and assume specific res- 
ponsibilities. The relations with 
the International Council of 
Scientific Unions in the domain 
of natural science are a typical 
instance of this kind of work, 
which in the last few months has 
extended to fresh fields. In 
January the International Coun- 
cil of Philosophy and Humanistic 
studies was set up, under Unesco’s 
auspices, Unesco has joined hands 
with the World Health Organiza- 
tion to establish a Council for 
the Co-ordination of Internatio- 
nal Congresses of the Medical 
Sciences. Finally, the Internatio- 
nal Theatre Institute. created last 
vear, is growing steadily. 
Thus, following the upheavals 
of the war, the international 
community of research workery 
and creators, who form the van- 
guard of progress, is in course of 
re-establishment. Numerous con- 
ferences and other meetings, an 
ever closer network of contacts, 
by ensuring the exchange of 
knowledge and comparison bet- 
ween ideas. maintain and deveiop 
this association of minds, 
The third type of collaboration 
in which Unesco participates 1s 
collaboration with the United 
Nations and with the other Spec- 
ialized Agencies. I need not enu- 
merate the almost daily occa- 
sions on which, in 1949 as in 1948, 
we have been associated with 
their work. I will only refer to 
the most recent instance, namely, 
the plan for technical aid to 
under-developed countries. 
A Call To Action 
In order that those unfavoured 
by history and geography may 
catch up with the more fortunate, 
it is not enough to furnish them 
with the means of progress. They 
must be made capable and desir 
ous of using them and, for that 
purpose, it must be “their” prog- 
ress which is involved, and they 
must know it. It is therefore 
essential that technical assistance 
be closely linked with a cor- 
responding effort to guide peoples 
towards an active and intelligent 
participation in the shaping of 
their own destiny as they them- 
selves see it. 
The work of peace to which 
the United Nations as a whole 
is dedicated requires that the 
synthesis of forces and special 
skills, and especially the alliance 
between the intellectual and the 
tectinical, the economic and the 
social shall be built up again in 
the light of real problems viewed 
in all their complexity. That 
synthesis can only take place and 
is even only conceivable in terms 
of the concrete. The problem of 
co-ordination must be posed and 
solved in and through action. 
Fh dd aa a ad ag ola lg lV VS VY TV IV IN TY IY YT TITS SS la 
“It would be dangerous to believe that con- 
centration of effort necessarily means reduc- 
tion of expenditure. Any programme, no 
matter how modest, that aims at obtaining 
tangible results, is more costly than a policy 
that does not succeed in going beyond the 
administration stage . . . 
“If Unesco were simply to give a list of 
promises without possessing the means of 
fulfilling them, it would be in danger of 
deceiving the people. By its very vocation, the 
Organization must serve the truth . . . 
“The tendency to universality should not 
prejudice respect for the genius of each na- 
tion. The aim in view should be not stand- 
ardization but an attempt to ‘enrich ourselves 
by our differences’. All cultures should be of 
mutual help without seeking to dominate one 
» over the other . .. 
~—Dr. TORRES BODET at Geneva, July 18, 1949. 
 
AALLLOPPPI S IN PN

## [Page 11](074029engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

August 1949 UNESCO COURIER 1 


### 74050: Goethe and Germany

      
and Germany 
T has been shrewdly observed that great poets, far from 
being the interpreters and representatives of their own 
peoples, are their critics, correctors and integrators. Remember 
Dante and the Florentines, as he saw them ; Cervantes and his 
Spanish contemporaries, crazy about knight-errantry; Shakes- 
peare and the English—proverbially correct and cold, which his 
dramas certainly are not; and Goethe, serene, well-palanced 
and thoroughly human. in contrast to his Germans—a warlike 
and fanatical race, serious and hard-working, admittedly, but 
with a considerable share of pedantry. 
(ETHE was not to the taste 
of the politically - minded 
among his people, who more than 
once showed that to his supreme 
genius they preferred a poet of 
the second rank, such as Schiller. 
And when the German national 
tradition was intensified to the 
point of delirium, and the first 
centenary of Goethe's death ar- 
rived, in 1932; the demonstrations 
were prepared with a lack of 
enthusiasm which clearly re- 
vealed the gulf, the (strangement 
that separated him from what 
had then become Hitler’s Ger- 
many. 
Now that misfortune has 
smitten his great nation—great 
in its many virtues, its talents 
and its energy—and at the same 
time has smitten Europe, thus 
deprived of a ferce essential to 
its balance and situated in its 
geographical centre, what better 
can Germany do, at this bicen- 
tenary of the birth of her 
mighty poet, than to raise herself 
towards him in spirit, accept his 
message and reflect on it anew, 
« PASSANS, CETTE TERRE EST LIBRE.» 
Acuarelle de GOETHE 
—
—
 
   
 
SER) 
 
     
     
  
Passang bo 
Cerre rane 
EST LIBRE “or 
4 
Paysage + Au bord d une route, au premier plan, un 
mal, Sur leguel eS? fieé un écrifeau portant [inzerip- 
tion : « Paya 
mal, le bonnet rouge 
ans, celle lerre eSP libre ». Au sommet du 
Goethe exécula pendant la Campagne de France, du- 
4 . " ” 
rant la retraite, 'escuifle cui servil pour celle aguareiie 
ef il [envoya a Herder le 16 ectobre 1792. Au mois de 
novembre de la méme année, aprés avoir fait un afez 
* » LF ud . ’ 4 J 
long séjour a Pempelfort chez som ami wy phil sophe 
Jacobi, il lui laiffa en souvenir lacuare”e qui ful 3 q 
aprés sa morl, relrouvée dans sa succeffion. 
  
  
by 
Benedetto 
CROCE 
with such devotion and sincerity 
that it shall restore light to the 
minds and human feeling to the 
hearts of his countrymen? 
I did not accept the invitation 
to participate in the honours 
    
“shown to Geethe in Germany in 
1932, for they seemed to me to 
be insincere. But I turned again 
to his books and re-read them, 
and continued to write critical 
studies about them, as I had 
done during the first World War, 
when Germany was tighting 
against Italy, as I did again dur- 
ing the second war when Italy, 
having become Fascist, was allied 
to a Germany that had become 
Nazi; and as I continued to do 
at the end of the war, amid the 
political tasks that I had ac- 
cepted. And always there came 
to me from Goethe comfort and 
serenity and courage, because he 
always carried me beyond and 
above the things of the day— 
which is the only way of achiev- 
ing real union with them, of 
loving and serving them, 
But it was no longer possible 
for me to speak openly and 
d.rectly with the Germans—I 
mean with those Germans who, 
like myself, were concerned witix 
philosophy and history and 
poetry—as I had been used to 
do in the pre-1914 days, exchang- 
ing ideas and suggestions and 
forming precious and unforget- 
table friendships with them. And 
when, in 1936, a Swiss paper asked 
me to express my opinion about 
the Germany of that day—which 
had recently caused a great scan. 
dal by having, among other 
things, altered the names of its 
cultural publications (for ins- 
tance, transforming the Review 
of Cultural Philosophy into the 
Review of German Cultural Phi- 
losophy), and had removed from 
the pediment of Heidelberg Uni- 
versity the inscription, To the 
Living Spirit, replacing it by: To 
the German Spirit—I sent that 
Swiss paper an article inzpired by 
the feeling of Goethe, who always 
detested the idea and the cxpres- 
sion Deutschtum, and to which 
1 gave the title of “The Germany 
we used to Jove”. This article 
could not be published in Ger- 
many, or even discussed by my 
friends there. 
The period in which Germany 
should take most pride is that 
in which she possessed such a 
poet as Wolfgang Geethe, who 
belongs to the small company 
that is headed by Homer, toge- 
ther with thinkers who te this 
very day are still masterly and 
up-to-date-Kant and Hegel and 
a few others, such as Jacobi, that 
very noble genius, who deserve 
to share their high place, and 
historians and philologists . who 
put fresh life into the study of 
language and history; not to 
mention scientists, physicists and 
mathematicians. Certainly—you 
will say—the Germans take great 
pride in that period when their 
country was centred on Weimar, 
even if they are unable to cease 
loving the other exireme of 
Potsdam, toe which their souls 
are secretly attracted. Yes, they 
do take pride in it. But even 
when they do so with complete 
~ sincerity, they deo not—if I may 
 
Paradise oii carth is Known | 
Through the mossy sods and stones, 
Stream and streamlet hurry down— 
A rushing throng! 
Beneath the vault of Heaven is blown! 
Sweet notes of love, the speaking tones 
Of this bright day, sent doun to say 
That Paradise on Earth is known, 
Reso:.end around. beneath, above. 
All we hope and all we love 
Finds a voice in this blithe strain 
Which wakens hill and wood and rill, 
And vibrates far o'er field and vale, 
And which Echo, like the tale 
Of old times. repeats again. 
(From Goethe's Faust, 
interpreted by Percy Bysshe Shelley.) 
be permitted te say so—properly 
understand its origin and pur- 
pose. They regard it as belonging 
entirely to Germany, er as a 
specifically German reaction to 
and rebellion against the culture 
of Europe as a whole, 
‘What was peculiar to Germany 
in the age of Weimar was a 
galaxy of oulstanding minds, 
such as can only be entirely 
equalled, perhaps, in the Greece 
of Pericles’ day. Germany was 
thus able to exert in the world 
of ideas a hegemony which was 
conferred upon her, not by her 
Deutschtum, her Germanism, but 
by her Europeatum, or rather by 
that world-spirit which, at other 
periods of modern history, had 
conferred the same hegemony 
upon Renaissance Italy or upon 
the France of Descartes and 
Louis XIV, and wilhout which it 
would have been valueless or 
inexistent. 
The Germany of those days 
was the legitimate daughter of 
A sound of song 
P
O
P
P
I
 
S
O
T
T
O
 e
w
 
  
Europe, taking over the manage- 
ment of the ancient house—nog 
a daughter shut out like a foundl- 
ling, and filled with rancour, 
desire for revenge, and the spirit 
of destruction and self-assertion, 
And now this well-deserved and 
much-desired hegemony returns 
to her, in conformity with the 
new feelings and needs of the 
human race, for the good of us 
all; and all of us will greet her 
w.th emotion and admiration; 
and our gratitude will perhaps 
be so great as to make us forget 
how much of our own strength 
we have had to give out, in order 
to revive her and support her 
so that she should completely 
fulfil her mission and net, in her 
turn, yield up the hegemony to 
another nation which has mean- 
while been preparing fer the call, 
as is required by the vicissitudes 
of things human. 
(Copyright by Unesco 
and Benedetto Croce.) 


### 74051: The Complete man

The Complete 
  
‘by Jules ROMAINS 
 
gE complete man will not be 
he who learns out of books 
everything that the special- 
ists know (besides, this is a child- 
ish and ridiculous ambition—in- 
creasingly so). It will be he who, 
within himself, succeeds in reviv- 
ing the various powers and apti- 
tudes of man; he who, by inward 
exercise, gains control of man’s 
various ways of listening, ques- 
tioning, feeling nature, and res- 
ponding to her. 
The complete man—or his 
not all-unworthy approximation 
— must be able hims2lf to assume 
the attitude that forms the start- 
ing-point of a poem, a tragedy, 
a work of historical research, a 
scientific discovery, a philosophic- 
al meditation . . . in short, not 
all the individual attitudes. but 
each of the main attitudes of the 
human mind. 
That is not all. He must also, if 
he can, learn by experience how 
a State is governed. Neither will 
he be satisfied with looking on 
at the daily round of life. He 
must enter fully into life itself, 
experience the passions, arouse 
them in others, discover how they 
may be made to benefit the spirit 
or how they can be controlled. 
For the art of living—one 
of the greatest and most exact- 
ing of all arts—must include 
an understanding of all the con- 
ditions to which life is subject, 
an estimation of the opposing 
forces, the skill to manceuvre 
among them, utilizing or evading 
them turn by turn, as the sailor 
does. 
Count up the men who, since 
the dawn of civilization, have 
been bold enough to conceive of 
their work as Goethe saw his, 
were highly conscious of their 
resources, and even at periods 
when the undertaking was less 
wildly excessive, And not merely 
to conceive it, in a fit of boyish 
lyricism, but to remain faithful 
to it theoughout a very long life 
time, to carry it out with the pa- 
tience of a labouring god. I can 
think of only one precedent— 
that of Leonardo da Vinci, By 
comparison—let us have the 
courage to admit it—Aristotle, 
Dante, Shakespeare were special- 
ists. Of course the comparison 
would lose some of its value were 
it not that in a few at least of 
their supreme achievements, Leo- 
nardo and Goethe rose to heights 
that no one has surpassed. I am 
not suggesting that the men of 
specialized ggnius be less honoue- 
ed because of this. Bui we may 
admit, all the same, that if Leo- 
nardo and Goethe had never exist< 
ed, our conception of man would 
be lesser than it is. 
{Copyright by Unesco 
and Jules Romains.) 
PPP PPP PPP PP PPP PV PP VV OVP Y YUN 
Ya
 
a
a
a
 
a 
a 
a 
aa
 
aa
 
A
a
a
 
a
a
a
 
a
d
a
 
a 
aa
 
a
d
d
a
 
ad
 
a 
Ad
 
A
d
d
 
d
d
 
d
d
d
 
d
d
d
 
POV VYVVVOYYVO Y VV 
COETHE .........coiiiiiiiioinn. 
GOETHE AND THE CONCEPT 
OF JUSTICE ............... I, 
GOETHE AND GERMANY...... 
THE PRESIDENT OF EUROPE 
GOETHE'S “WERTHER™ ...... 
MESSAGE FROM THE EARTH. 
GOETHE AND THE CREA- 
TIVE FACTORS IN CON- 
TEMPORARY CULTURE ... 
GOETHE 
NOTES ON GOETHE........... . 
GOETHE'S SECRET............ 
GOETHE'S MESSAGE: TO 
THE “NEW” NEGROES.... 
THE LAST PRINCE OF 
POETS coors 
GOETHE AND THE EAST....   PP
 
P
P
 
P
P
P
 
P
P
V
 
V
Y
 
V
I
V
I
T
V
V
V
V
 
V
V
 
V
Y
 
V
V
 
V
V
 
N 
nd
 
PP PP PPP VP VP POP PPPPOVvIIY VY 
VVVVVYI V VIFIVVIFIINISSSSD 00a oda 
UNESCG’'S HOMAGE TO GOETHE 
These are the titles of the essavs contained in the Unesco 
memorial volume to Goethe, with the names of their authors: 
Ernst Beutler. 
K.]. Burckhardt. 
Benedetto Croce. 
Jaroshwaw Ieaszkiewics. 
Thomas Mann. 
Gabriela Mistral. 
w 
F.S.C. Northrop. 
Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan. 
Alfonso Reyes. 
Jules Romains. 
Léopold Sedar Senghor. 
Stephen Spender. 
Taha Hussein Bey. 
S
A
S
 
S
A
 
A
l
 
L
e
s
s
 
l
l
s
 
s
s
s
 
s
l
e
s
 
s
s
e
s
s
 
s
e
s
s
 
a 
  Ld A a A A a dA a 4 A Ad 4d NON NTPTEIEE

## [Page 12](074029engo.pdf#page=12) 3

### IGNORE

12 UNESCO COURIER August 1949 
 
    
r
T
 ” 
PT 
S
l
 
d
i
n
 
~
 
N
T
 
ha
 ». 
    
TNA seas IN 
COLOUR 
  
A visitor to 
the Unesco 
Travelling Ex- 
hibition looks 
at a picture by 
Cézanne,    
COLOUR REPRODUCTION: 
Pe 


### 74052: Colour reproduction: UNESCO's first travelling exhibition

Unesco’s First Travelling Exhibition 
EY 
The first of Uneseo’s s travelling exhibitions of Colour Reproduc- 
 
Are You a Courier 
SUBSCRIBER? 
The Unesco Courier is an 
international periodical devot- 
ed to the work of Unesco and 
to activities and deve opments 
throughout the world in educa- 
tion, science and culture, 
Until now some of our 
readers have been receiving 
free copies of our periodical. 
In order to permit us to supply 
the many thousands of new 
readers in almost every coun- 
try in the world, we are under- 
tak'ng a special drive for sub- 
scribers, 
A full year’s subscription (12 
issues) costs only $1.00 U.S. 
or 5/- or 250 French Francs 
(300 French Francs outside of 
France), 
SUBSCRIVE NOW! Tell 
your friends about the Unesco 
Courier and get them to sub- 
scribe too, 
Write to our agent in your 
country listed below, or direct- 
ly to Unesco House, 19, avenue 
Kléber, Paris, 16¢, France, 
N. B. The photo-offset 
American edition is available 
only through our agent, Co- 
lumbia University Press. 
Argentina: Editorial Sudamericana 
S.A., Alsina 500. Buenos-Aires, 
Australia: H.A, Goddard Ltd, 255a, 
~~ George St., Sydney. 
Belgium: Librairie encyclopédique, 7, 
rue du Luxembourg, Bruxelles IV. 
Canada: The Ryerson Press, 299 
Queen St West. Toronto. 
Cuba: La Casa Belga, R de Smedt 
O'Reilly, Habana. 
Denmark: Einar Munksgaard, 6 
Norregade, Copenhagen, 
Great Britain: H.M. Stationery Of- 
fice: London: York House, Kings- 
way (Retail Counter Service : 
P.O, Box 509, London. S E.1. (Post 
orders'. — Manchester 2: 39 41 
King Street, — Edinburgh 2: 13a 
Castle Street. — Cardiff: 1 St 
Andrew's Crescent. — Bristol 1: 
Tower Lane, — Belfast: 80 Chi- 
chester Street, 
France: Editions A Pedone., 13 rue 
Soufflot. Paris. b5e. 
Greece: Eleftheroudakis, Lijbrairie 
internationale. Athens. 
India: Oxford Book and Stationery 
Co., Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Lebanon and Syria: Librairie uni- 
verselle, Av des Francais, Beirut, 
Low Countries: N.V. Martinus 
Nijhoff, Afd. Fondsaministratie, 
9 Lange Voorhout, The Hague. 
Portugal: Unido Portuguesa de Im- 
prensa, Caixa Postal 615. Lisboa, 
Sweden: Ab. O E. Fritzes, Fredsga- 
tan 2, Stockholm 
Switzerland: Librairie Payot. 
sanne 
Lau- 
Uruguay: Libreria internacional 
S.R.L.,Calle Uruguay 133, Monte- 
video. 
US.A.: International Documents 
Service, Columbia University Press, 
2960 Broadway, New York 27, N.Y,   
 
Editorial Offices : 
Unesco, 19, Avenue Kléber, Paris (16e). 
Editor : S.M. KOFFLER. 
Acting Editor : David SCOTT, 
Director : C. a PRATO, 
 
AUTHORISED 
ALL REPRODUCTION 
   
IMPRIMERIE DU “NEW YORK 
HERALD TRIBUNE", 21, rue de Berri, 
Paris (Be). Unesco Publication 330. 
tions was inaugurated at Unesco House in June. 
Eleven similar collections have been prepared 
and will be exhibited by Member States.  - 
OLOUR reproductions of 
OC works of art have become 
very important. They may 
be used as illustrations for art 
hooks, or as inset plates, and 
thus contribute, in the same way 
as black and white photographs, 
to the building-up for modern 
man of that “imaginary museum” 
to which André Malraux alludes 
— a museum that is bound to en- 
rich and enliven our knowledge 
of Art through the ages by 
enabling us to establish points 
of similarity and make com- 
parisons, 
Whatever their technical perfec- 
tion — towards which new strides 
are being made every day — 
colour reproductions can never, 
of course, take the place of the 
original work, They can never 
be more than closer and closer 
likenesses. But they are a very 
valuable medium for the infor- 
mation and instruction Of stu- 
dents, teachers and the general 
public. They make known in the 
remotest corners of the earth the 
most varied, even the most con- 
tradictory, forms of art, thus 
spreading the influence of art, 
in all its rich diversity, through- 
cut the world. In so doing, they 
contribute to a reciprocal know- 
ledge and understanding, in all 
countries, of the different forms 
of art and hence of the dif- 
ferent civilizations from which 
those forms have sprung. 
That is why Unesco is organizing 
a series of travelling exhibitions 
of colour reproductions. The first 
of these exhibitions was inaugu- 
rated at Unesco House in June. 
It comprises about fifty repro- 
ductions, chosen with a view to 
giving as accurate an idea as pos- 
sible of the period from 1860 (lhe 
Impressionists) to the present 
day — a very rich and important 
period from the pictorial point of 
view. The main pictorial tenden- 
cies and the principal painters of 
that period are represented. The 
reproductions were chosen by a 
committee of art experts from 
among the best available, having 
regard both to the technical 
quality of the reproduction and 
to the artistic value of the ori 
ginal from which it was copied 
This exhibition will be sen! 
mainly to countries that have nc 
important collections of original 
works of that period. 
Eleven similar collections of 
the same reproductions have been 
prepared, and offered by Unesco 
to certain Member States, which 
will exhibit them. A catalogue 
will be sent with the pictures. 
containing an introduction by 
Mr. René Huyghe, Head Curator 
of the Painting and Draw- 
ing Department of the Lou- 
vre, and a historical summary of 
the period and biographical notes 
on the artists whose works are 
reproduced. Future exhibitions of 
colour reproductions to be organ- 
ized by Unesco will be concerned 
with important earlier periods in 
the history of art. 


### 74053: Edvard Munch

Edvard MUNCH 
T is difficult to give an ap- 
preciation in a few lines or 
even pages of the complex 
sutput of a life of research and 
experiment. While taking its ap- 
pointed place in history, a living 
work also contains within itself 
the seeds of new meanings. We 
may ask whether it is the work 
itself that reveals new facets in 
terms of new modes of cultural 
expression, ever creating for it- 
self a vast public, or whether it 
is ourselves who read into the 
work, now a part of history, new 
meanings by continual re-inter- 
pretation in our minds and our 
imaginations. 
The Munch exhibition at Unes- 
co House raises this question yet 
again. : 
The revelation of modern 
French Art came to Munch as 
early as 1889 when Impressionism 
had already formulated its major 
dogmas, set its ripples circling 
outwards, and was beginning to 
crystallize into a new convention. 
Hence Munch's quest for poetry 
was to follow other lines. Moreo- 
ver his close spiritual links with 
- the dramatic and literary vision 
of the northern world led him 
instinctively to give each symbol 
a significance transcending that 
of the form alone. The symbol 
becomes expressive in itself. Ac- 
cordingly it is the drawing which 
is the dominant factor in the 
whole of his extensive and care- 
ful work, and which leads him 
to welcome every occasion of giv- 
ing it play; faces, things, street 
and domestic scenes, and even 
the experiments of other artists... 
~ Echoes of the new possibilities 
of expression evolved by such 
artists as Forain, Toulouse Lau- 
trec, or Van Gogh. are easily re- 
cognizable in Munch’s drawings; 
but Munch himself so dominates 
the whole that each such echo 
becomes, more than a face, a 
thing or a scene from a life of 
the century's end, a visual poem 
whose innermost and most secret 
trend the artist has tried to 
grasp. 
The challenge of that other 
great northerner, Van Gogh, is 
echoed and converted into a 
more clear-cut, almost social af- 
firmation which is at the root of 
an occasionally morbid and 
bookish aspect of expressionism. 
It was in Germany principally, 
at the beginning of the present 
century, that that affirmation 
was taken up and clarified, 
foreshadowing already the sor- 
rows and ruins which were to be. 
Schmitt-Rottluff, ¥. Marc, Ko- 
koschka, Hofer, etc... in the first 
twenty years of the century re- 
ceived indeed from Munch a mes- 
sage which, in the expressive vio- 
lence of a symbol, formulated one 
of the most agonizing aspects of 
the modern world and its pro- 
blems. 
  
 
Scream! by Edvard Munch, 


### 74054: Art critics meet at UNESCO House

ART CRITICS MEET 
AT UNESCO HOUSE 
The Second International 
Congress of Art Critics was held 
at Unesco House, Paris, from 
June 27 to July 1. Dr. Jaime 
NS ET 
 
Torres Bodet, Director-General 
of Unesco, opened the congress 
with an address in which he 
outlined the possibilities of co- 
FREE ITI NEG 
Child with Dove, by Pablo Picasso. 
operation between Unesco and 
art critics. 
More than 200 art critics 
belonging to about 35 countries 
were present. The importance of 
the Congress was marked by the 
presence of 13 delegations re- 
presenting the Art Critics 
Associations of the following 
countries: Belgium, Brazil, Cze- 
choslovakia, Denmark. France, 
Greece, the Irish Free State, 
Italy, Mexico, Poland, Switizer- 
land, the United Kingdom and 
the United States. 
The main business of the 
Congress was to set up the Inter- 
national Association of Art 
Critics, whose executive com- 
mittee was formed as follows: 
PRESIDENT: M, Paul Fierens 
(Belgium). 
VICE - PRESIDENTS : Sr. Lio- 
nello Venturi (Italy); Mr. James 
Johnson Sweeny (U.S. A) ; 
M. Raymond Cogniat (France); 
Mr, Eric Newton (Great Britain); 
Sr. Crespo de 1a Serna (Mexico); 
M. G. Knuttel (Holland). 
GENERAL SECRETARY: 
Mme. Gille Delafon (France). 
DEPUTY GENERAL SECRE- 
TARIES : Sr. Milliet (Brazil) ; 
M. Foundoukidis (Greece). 
One of the principal themes of 
the Congress was “Art and So- 
ciety”. A number of papers on 
this subject were read, and 
interesting discussions followed. 
At its last meeting the Congress 
adopted resolutions dealing with 
liberty of criticism, the defence 
of modern art, cooperation with 
Unesco to defend authors’ rights, 
the teaching of art and the for- 
mation of an International Fede- 
ration of Art Critics and Histo- 
rians. The hope was expressed 
that artists themselves would 
soon form an International Fede- 
ration, and that all forms of poli- 
tical discussion would be excluded 
from the proceedings of the Art 
Critics’ Association and annual 
Congress.