# [070070](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
iE SES ARE PEOPLE 
The right to ULE RUT 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

5 
A 
s 
C
W
 
a
”
 
J
 
’ 
C
O
L
 
i f 
oe 
become 
at 
lace 
) 
enough, say 
ied is not 
modern 
pe 
do. Her 
~in a Brit 
‘men occup 
nolog 
emphasi 
ble since pM 
useful work 
i 
ers have be 
i mor 
s shou 
dontheref 
More 
Id be 
orm- 
 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  Cm Courier. 
Number 10 - 1954 
7th © Y E A R 
PAGE 
"3 EDITORIAL 
Human Rights and the law breaker 
4 JUSTICE 
A net freeing the innocent 
but trapping the guilty 
By Reginald Hemeleers 
8 ‘MAN-CAGES’ 3 
_ From “habeas corpus” to a new “habeas animam” 
By Carlo Levi 
Il STORY OF PRISONS 
Their evolution as an agency of punishment 
By Ronald Fenton 
12 SEVEN APOSTLES OF PRISONER RIGHTS 
20 PASSING THOUGHTS 
On the right to life and the death penalty 
By Georges Fradier 
22 A BOY IN TROUBLE 
What can we do to help him? 
By J. R. Rees 
25 BRECOURT 
Where the gate is always open 
By D. Behrman 
30 THE TRAGEDY OF FRANCES 
A case that might have been prevented 
By Prof. Sir Cyril Burt 
33 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
Brief notes on education, science and culture 
34 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
* 
Published monthly by 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, 19, Avenue Kleber, Paris 16, France. 
Editor-in-Chief > 
Sandy Koffler 
Associate Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton 
French Edition: Alexandre Leventis 
Spanish Edition: Jorge Carrera Andrade 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
* 
COURIER", Signed articles reprinted must carry the author's name. 
national reply coupon covering postage. 
represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of THE COURIER. 
MC. 54.1 85. A.     
‘CONTENTS 
The Department of Mass Communication of the United Nations 
individual articies not copyrighted may be reprinted from THE COURIER but 
must be accompanied by the following credit ine: “Reprinted from UNESCO 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompanied by an inter 
Signed articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
Annual subscription rates of THE COURIER : 6/-; $ 1.50 or 300 French frs.   
Unesco Courier. — N' 10, — 1954 
DECEMBER 10, 1954 
"HUMAN RIGHTS DAY 
It may ‘seem paradoxical to speak of human 
rights in connection with men who have been 
legally deprived of one of the most fundamental 
of all rights—freedom. But for centuries writers, 
thinkers and humanitarian men and women have 
fought so that the prisoner might retain at least 
the right of being treated as a human being. 
 
C rns bas been called a many-headed monster with 
tentacles that reach out far and wide embracing people in 
all walks of life. Of the numerous problems that confront 
society in modern times there are probably few that have so 
strong an impact on the general public as that concerning the 
criminal. 
Crime is a world problem of tremendous complexity. It 
directly affects not only the police, the lawyer and the judge 
along with the average person who reads about it in his daily 
newspaper, but the psychologist, the psychiatrist and the social 
worker 
Somehow, though, most of us are apt to forget that it 
also affects the man who has actually broken the law and who 
is “sent away.” We may not realize it but the plain fact is that 
98 per cent of those who go into prison ultimately return to 
their communities and to society. 
A person who has broken the law or committed a crime has 
the same feelings, the same emotions and ambitions as other 
human beings. The act he committed may be the result of 
blind passion or of a life of distorted viewpoints, out of keeping 
with what the rest of us consider right and normal. But the 
mere fact that a man has broken the law and been sent to 
prison does not stamp out his desires and ambitions, or make 
him any less a human being—even though all of us condemn 
his act. 
Today, whether we admit it or not, society still punishes 
for punishment’s sake. The majority of our prisons are still 
grim man-cages, surrounded by high forbidding walls, patrolled 
by armed guards and bristling with other restrictive devices. 
And although much progress has been made in recent years 
in prison reform, the public still believes that merely locking a 
man up will sober him and make him want to be a better 
person. Yet the reverse is usually true. Most men come out 
of such places worse than when they went in, filled with 
bitterness and even hatred for society which deprived them of 
their freedom without giving them a chance to better their 
condition. 
In the past few years, the idea has been gaining consider- 
able ground of prisons without walls, without guns, without 
armed guards, where the dignity of the individual is recognized 
and where emphasis is placed on self-discipline. Such prisons, 
known as “open institutions”, now exist in a number of 
countries, and in 1945 Sweden became the first country i. 
-make them the normal basis of its entire prison system. 
Since 1948, the United Nations has assumed the leadership 
in international activities concerned with the prevention of 
crime and the treatment of offenders (both young and old). 
Through its Department of Social Affairs it has taken over the 
work formerly perfirmed by the International Penal and 
Penitentiary Commission, and has arranged periodic meetings 
of regional groups to re-assess the practical forms of crime 
prevention and treatment of offenders. A world congress on 
this entire subject is now scheduled for 1955. 
Unesco has not done much in the field of criminology. It 
has dealt with certain psychological and social aspects of 
juvenile delinquency, primarily in co-operation with the World 
Federation for Mental Health and the International Federation 
of Senior Police Officials. Since 1950 it has given financial 
aid to the International Society of Criminology which groups 
five international associations dealing with the scientific study 
-of criminal behaviour, and last year helped finance the second 
International Criminological Course at Unesco headquarters. 
For the sixth anniversary of the adoption by the United 
Nations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on 
December 10, the Unesco Courier devotes this issue to the idea 
that prisoners are people, that the person who breaks the law 
is a human being who has the right to be treated as such, that 
prisoners should be returned to society with a better attitude 
than when they entered prison, that they must be taught the 
dignity of work and given an opportunity to acquire new skills 
by which they may make an honest living and once again 
become decent citizens.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 70031: Justice: a net freeing the innocent but trapping the guilty

  
Respect for local traditions and the 
rights of minorities is applied to 
legal matters in French Morocco, 
where several kinds of courts 
function side by .side. Koranic 
courts for Arabs and Rabbinical 
courts for Moroccan Jews deal with 
religious and family questions such 
as marriage, divorce, inheritance, 
etc. Offences carrying sentences of 
less than two years’ imprisonment, 
whether involving Arab or Jewish ~ 
Moroccan citizens, are judged by 
local “Pacha” courts, while more 
serious cases are heard in higher 
“Sherifian” courts. In cases where 
one of the two parties concerned 
1s French, judgment is delivered by 
a French court. Photos on these 
pages show: above, a “Pacha” 
court judge, an accused person and 
his lawyer; below, a Rabbinical 
court and a French court (Photos 
copyright Paul Almasy). 
4 
 

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

Unesco Courter — N' 10, — 1954 
"R 


### 70031: Justice: a net freeing the innocent but trapping the guilty

A net freeing the innocent 
but trapping the guilty 
» 
» IS 
  
v GN ¥ | 
a ; 5 a 
- 
  
  
By Reginald Hemeleers 
O peace- 
loving citi- 
zen with a 
clear conscience 
ever takes to his 
heels at the sight 
of a policeman. 
On the contrary, 
the badge and 
the polished but- 
tons usually give 
him a sense of 
security. He 
knows that they will protect him 
against danger and injustice. 
The role of the policeman—and of 
the entire judicial structure—is to 
protect the security of the citizen. The 
policeman is not an enemy of freedom; 
instead, he is its guarantor. It is he 
who prevents the anti-social citizen 
from disturbing the peace of society. 
Few people will quarrel with these 
statements. But they probably will 
tempt a good many people to wonder 
why men have always fought so 
desperately against excesses of power 
—and why the severest criticism which 
can be levelled against a political sys- 
tem is the label “police state”. 
The answer, of course, is that the 
police can quickly become the worst 
possible menace to individual freedom 
if free institutions are not solidly 
established or, even worse, if the 
morality of society is decaying. 
The police, in themselves, are only 
an instrument. In the hands of 
arbitrary power, this instrument can 
become a blind force of evil. Naturally 
not all authoritarian regimes have 
been inhuman. Despotism can be 
enlightened. Did not Plato proclaim in 
his Republic that men shall be happy 
when kings become philosophers or 
philosophers become kings? Machia- 
velli, Rousseau and a good many others 
meditated over the eternal problem of 
the “good tyrant”. - 
Nevertheless, man prefers not to put 
himself in the hands of fate. Instead, 
he demands guarantees—the t’s crossed 
and i's dotted on his rights. 
Men have fought hard to obtain such 
guarantees of individual liberty from 
  
Reginald Hemeleers was farmerly a barrister at the 
Brussels Court of Appeal. A founder and editor of 
La Revue nouvelle ond a former director of the Belgian 
weekly, La Reléve, he 1s the author of many papers 
on legal questions. Stnce 1953, he has been head of 
Unesco’s Press Division. 
their rulers. In England, centuries of 
struggle led to the Habeas Corpus Act 
adopted under Charles II in 1679 and 
it was this act which spelled out the 
main safeguards of individual liberty 
to be found in most modern con- 
stitutions. The storming of the Bas- 
tille in Paris, a turning point in 
Western history, was no more than a 
popular uprising against a reign of ar- 
bitrary arrests and “letters of cachet”. 
Today, what guarantees do we have 
of individual liberty? First, it should 
be noted that they vary from country 
to country. They have been stated 
differently, having been integrated into 
different legal structures but their 
principles are generally the same. 
The first of these principles is that 
no man can be punished unless he has 
violated a law already on the statute 
books. The second is that his punish- 
ment must be decided by an inde- 
pendent magistrature — independent, 
that is, from the ruling power. At the 
base of this system is the legislator 
who must define prohibited acts in 
advance and lay down penalties to 
enforce his prohibitions. 
Adopted by the United Nations Gen- 
eral Assembly on December 10, 19438, 
the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights states, as a general principle, 
that “no one shall be subjected to 
arbitrary arrest, detention or exile”. 
Then it goes on to underscore the need 
of a legal basis for any condemnation. 
In Article II (section 2), it declares: 
“No one shall be held guilty of any 
penal offence on account of any act 
or omission which did not constitute 
a penal offence, under national or 
international law, at the time when it 
was committed. Nor shall a heavier 
penalty be imposed than the one that 
was applicable at the time the penal 
offence was committed”. 
This is an enormous guarantee. The 
definition of a crime and the fixing of 
its penalty must be established in 
advance and made known. Under this 
article, it is not possible for the state 
to concoct an infraction at the last 
minute to imprison a citizen—as has 
been done so often in the past. 
Still, it is only a guarantee in law. 
It is not enough, unless it is reinforced 
(Cont’d on next page)

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 70031: Justice: a net freeing the innocent but trapping the guilty

JUSTICE cov   
CAMEL-MOUNTED police capture a suspected bandit after a® 
wild chase across Syrian desert (lower photos). Above, suspect 
is interrogated by police authorities to determine whether formal 
charges are to be preferred. (Copyright Paul Almasy). 
by another concerning the enforcement 
of the Iaw. It is the judge, after all, 
who must decide whether or not an 
infraction has been committed and, if 
necessary, pass sentence. He cannot 
do so conscientiously unless he has a 
+ clearly-defined status guaranteeing his 
independence. 
The Anglo-Saxon system of the 
separation of powers, which has been 
widely imitated, safeguards the inde- 
pendence of the judiciary both from 
the legislative and the executive arms 
of government. This independence 
—the law of the land in most nations— 
demands of any judge an acute aware- 
ness of his responsibilities and the 
gravity of his mission. There would 
be no point in protecting .the inde- 
pendence of a judge willing to take 
orders or vulnerable to corruption. 
In France, Henri Francois d'Agues- 
seau, chancellor of France in the early 
18th century, has come to symbolize 
the judge of integrity, fiercely jealous 
of his independence. D’Aguesseau did 
not hesitate to lay down a maxim 
which remains true to this day: “The 
judge who is not a hero is not even 
an upright man.” 
Strictly speaking, the principles of 
the legality of punishment and the 
    " Fale “ 
DUSABALL TO SARE (re Tl EC 
TE PT hE She oy — 0 0 TRANALNRS TS he, x - = 
es I Sea "x - ES AR . Bh saa . o-oo 
gt y : 
  
Wo o_O 
. 
independence of the judiciary are not 
guarantees of individual freedom. They 
are merely two main prerequisites for 
an equitable system of justice. Of 
course, they give a defendant a 
maximum of opportunities to stand on 
- his rights, but they are only part of a 
series of principles whose objective is 
to avoid, insofar as possible, condemn- 
ing an innocent man. 
The entire question of individual 
liberty cannot be separated from the 
problem of preventive custody. Ob- 
viously, if .a man is suspected of a 
serious crime such as a murder, he 
cannot be left completely free until a 
verdict is rendered. There is always 
the risk that he may go into hiding 
or flee the country. Secondly, in a 
serious case, investigators nearly 
always require that the suspect be 
kept in custody-—if only to prevent him 
destroying the evidence of his guilt. 
This principle of preventive custody 
is widely accepted and it does not 
conflict with the Declaration of Human 
Rights (Article II, Section 1) where it 
is stated that “everyone charged with 
a penal offence has the right to be 
presumed innocent until proved guilty 
"according to law in a public trial at 
which he had all the guarantees 
necessary for his defence”. 
  
  
But preventive custody does carry 
the seed of a grave danger to indi- 
vidual liberty—the possibility that, 
once a suspect is arrested, he may be 
simply left to rot in prison by authori- 
ties that never go to the trouble of 
accusing him formally and never give 
him his day in court. 
The insidious growth of a form of 
administrative detention without any 
admitted cause—and without any 
fixed limit in time—must be avoid- . 
ed at any price. A perfect penal code 
would be meaningless if authorities had 
the power of locking up a citizen 
without telling him which of its laws he 
had violated. A corps of honest, 
independent judges would be useless 
if men could be imprisoned without 
their cases ever coming before these 
judges. And the accused man’s care- 
fully-defined right to a defence is 
valueless if he never has the possibility 
of defending himself. Under such 
conditions, society returns immediately 
to the “letters of cachet” which the 
burners of the Bastille thought they 
had destroyed for eternity! 
When burghers fled 
o avoid these abuses, nearly every 
country has laws to limit preven- 
tive custody. In most nations, no 
man can be arrested without a warrant 
delivered by a judicial authgerity. Under. 
the justly-famed principle of habeas 
corpus, charges must be preferred 
against him after an extremely short 
period following his arrest. The burden 
of proof is on the state to show why 
preventive custody is believed neces- 
sary and why the suspect should not 
ke allowed to go out on bail 
In some countries, the procedure is 
somewhat different. There, the state 
must obtain a “confirmation” of the 
warrant in court and, if the warrant is 
not confirmed, the prisoner must be 
set at liberty until his trial. In any 
case, this confirmation is only for a 
short period, usually several weeks, 
and the warrant must be confirmed all 
over again if the suspect is to be kept 
behind bars. 
This is a brief and simplified des- 
cription of the system of preventive 
custody which varies in its finer points 
from one country to another. It is 
intended to provide only a general 

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 70031: Justice: a net freeing the innocent but trapping the guilty

view of a technique which has been 
developed in the- long struggle for 
human freedom to protect the citizen 
in his dealings with authority. 
Earlier, I mentioned that the average 
citizen is usually comforted by- the 
sight of a policeman. This has not al- 
ways been the case. For centuries, 
burghers fled automatically at the 
approach of the watch. Only a few 
years ago, the Nazi regime filled pri- 
sons and concentration camps with 
men who had never been judged, men 
who were to die shamefully without 
ever knowing the reason why. Even 
today, all of the fundamental guar- 
antees of individual liberty proclaimed 
in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights are not fulfilled everywhere. 
On this anniversary of Human 
Rights Day, it might be wise to medi- 
tate for a few moments on the long, 
hard road which men have had to 
travel before their “right to liberty and 
security of person” was formally 
recognized. This is the most basic of 
rights after the right to life itself. 
Until he is condemned, a defendant 
is presumed innocent. It is up to the 
state and its representative to prove 
the accusations against him. 
More than at any other time, it is 
during the phase of investigation that 
the state must remember that the 
accused ls presumed innocent and that, 
even if-he is found guilty, he remains 
a man and must be treated as one. 
The Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights states very simply: “No one 
shall be subjected to torture or to 
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment 
or punishment”, 
Curse of all eras 
HERE is a good deal in this short 
sentence. In its soberness, it 
opens some frightening glimpses 
of the infinite range of human agony. 
Torture was not the exclusive property 
of the Middle Ages. It has been the 
curse of all eras and of all countries, 
For there has always been—and there 
always will be—the irritating case of 
the defendant accused from all sides 
but without any proof against him. 
At this point you can find the 
obsession of nearly every police force 
. —the 
_ trial. In 
extortion of a confession. 
Though the rack and the thumb- 
screw may not be used today, there 
are still endless sessions of grilling 
without food or sleep, to say nothing of 
the more or less refined form of the 
“third degree”. 
No doubt, the job of tracking down 
criminals is a delicate one and basic 
to the survival of society. But a 
balance must be struck between the 
demands of society and an elementary 
respect for the man—who is presumed 
innocent—under accusation. 
‘Occupational disease’ 
T is this preliminary investigation 
which is the most delicate phase of 
the relationship between the citizen 
and the judicial authorities. This is 
the phase which is the least controlled 
by law; therefore, it demands the 
highest degree of education and of 
conscience from judicial personnel at 
all levels. 
Once the investigation is complet- 
ed, the defendant is brought to 
addition’ to those two 
basic guarantees of a legal basis for 
punishment and the independence of 
the judiciary, there are two other prin- 
ciples fundamental to equitable justice: 
a public trial and the presence of 
counsel for the defendant. 
Low blows are always struck in the 
dark. Throughout history, one-sided 
trials have been held behind closed 
doors and often before special juris- 
dictions created to hear a single case. 
' The public trial is a strong guarantee 
of justice. Within a locked room, a few 
accomplices can perjure away the 
weight of evidence, But it is much 
more difficult to do so in public, 
especially in front of press writers 
whose accounts of the testimony may 
be printed for millions to read. 
This does not mean that justice 
should be rendered with an eye to 
public opinion, which is often impas- 
sioned and ill-informed. The verdict 
is the province only of the judge's 
conscience and it is up to him to 
divorce himself from any external 
influences. - 
The right of the defendant to-a 
counsel] of his own choice to aid him 
Unesco Courier. — Nf 10, — 1954 
and act in his name is so essential 
that, without it, all of the other 
guarantees become almost illusory. A 
defendant can be illiterate or, at any 
rate, unfamiliar with legal procedure. 
where only a specialist after all is at 
heme, If a competent person cannot 
act fcr him, then the advantages of the 
prosecution are absurdly one-sided. 
Many countries accord another 
guarantee to defendants facing serious 
charges: the right to trial by jury. The 
jury, you might say, offsets the risk 
that the judge might suffer from a sort 
of “occupational disease” as the result 
+ of his coming into contact every day 
with criminals and, therefore, might 
tend to see criminals everywhere. The 
jury relieves the specialist of his 
heaviest responsibility and confides it 
to a dozen citizens chosen by lot. 
Experience has proved that jurors, 
freed as they are from the grinding 
routine of law, usually perform their 
duties with the utmost conscientious- 
ness—and often lend a more willing 
ear to the Counsel for the defence 
when he argues the weaknesses of the 
evidence presented than might a judge 
who had heard such arguments all too 
often in the past. 
No courts infallible 
NE after another, these guar- 
antees have made justice a net 
whose mesh allows the innocent 
to pass but traps the guilty. The 
guarantees cited here are only the 
most often applied. They provide a 
picture of humanity’s eternal effort to 
bring order to society without menac- 
ing the peaceful citizen. 
Courts have always made mistakes. 
The most perfect technique can only 
serve to reduce the number of these 
mistakes to a minimum. But anyone 
who has studied the problem closely 
will agree that judicial error is one of 
the most flagrant scandals which can 
afflict society, a scandal which must 
be combatted as if it were the plague. 
. When citizens lose confidence in 
justice, they return to the anarchy of 
personal revenge. This means nothing 
less than the death of liberty, the 
oppression of the weak by the stroug 
and the very negation of rule by law. 
  
    
NAAR KATA 
ETO, inn TE 
“ad - FY K : 
4a SERA 
. ——_a TL o> 
TR LR YC | aig + LE 
opi nh ENS + 0 -e 4 ; : vi ‘ AL ell 
a ed EA ERTIES 3 . , SEREY SR I nt a on het - y : 
RISA be RR hod Ca ge & EE oe 
AB EN AY # ST, cm > a - Ne 
h, » i a RYN - | = oa oo Wag, -~ 
. Al 3 . 
f . = 

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 70034: Man cages

   
  
y -— Sam Tale 
BIG, OLD PRISONS are still the rule rather than the exception in the penitentiary systems of all countries. 
Prison design and construction has not kept pace with progress in penal ideals and methods. The result is 
that convicted offenders still serve their sentences in “man-cages”, like the prison above, and are often 
“exercise” in the limited space of a prison yard like the one shown, below. Of these particular 
exercise yards, one observer wrote: “They are a maze of concrete, with sad oases of earth, where a few 
soot-covered flowers turn their defeated faces to the sky. Here the prisoners walk round and round and 
back and forth, clockwise and anticlockwise, as if in a crazy squirrel cage”. 
BR oi 3 ¥ N 
=% Ei : : 
required to 
: i : : ’ " = > , i " 
A ETE RE CL LTR er 
wh, x : he. > SHEEN FS 
 
     

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 70034: Man cages

ne April afternoon many years ago, I found 
myself on the roof of a large school which 
was being built in a suburb of Paris. With 
me were two friends, the architect (one of the 
most famous in France) and an Italian anti- 
fascist political leader who had. recently 
escaped from one of Mussolini’s gaols. 
The three of us were inspecting the new 
building which was almost completed. We 
admired its beautiful lines, its highly rational structure and 
its bold conception. The new school was obviously the 
product of a highly civilized world. It was open to the 
sun and fresh air and dedicated to children who were free 
and carefully looked after. 
From the top of the roof, we stopped to look down on the 
old houses of the suburb 
  
and the surrounding coun- 
tryside. The architect and 
the political leader began 
a discussion on their im- 
pressions. The politician, 
recalling his prison exper- 
ience, said that after the 
defeat of Fascism, the 
architect would have to 
help wipe out the shame 
of our old prisons by 
building new ones design- 
ed like the new school 
—modern, humane, open 
on the world and offering 
every comfort required. 
The architect replied that 
never, at any price. would 
he have any hand in the 
building of a prison. 
Not having any first- 
hand knowledge of prison 
life at the time (though I 
later obtained it quite a 
number of times) I merely 
listened. It seemed to me 
_ that both of my friends 
were guilty of the same 
sin of Utapianism. But if 
I had had to choose be- 
tween the two Utlopias, I 
must say it would have 
been that of the architect 
who wanted to abolish 
prisons altogether rather - 
than that of the political 
leader who wished fo 
make them comfortable. 
When you dream, I said 
to myself, you might as 
well let the dream be as 
perfect as possible. 
I was reminded of this 
conversation some years 
later in a Florence prison 
room where I was being 
interrogated by a member 
of the Fascist political 
police, O.V.R.A. By that time I had become an old hand 
at prisons. To me, a prison had always seemed a 
complete absurdity, like a place that is not really a place, 
or time that is not time, 
On entering the prison room I saw that it was almost 
entirely taken up by a large iron cage something like 
the ones circus people use to exhibit their wild animals. 
The thought that this cage had been built to imprison a 
human being seemed so ludicrous to me that I could not 
reslrain a short burst of laughter. 
We were in the spring of 1943. By then, a session of 
questioning by the 0.V.R.A, police was no longer a terrify- 
ing event. Fascism was already dead from exhaustion. 
 
  
        
A leading Malian writer and artist, Carla Levi suffered imprisonment and was banish- 
ed to South Italy for his opposition to the Fascist Regime. He is the authar of 
Christ Stopped at Eboli and other works. 
“After some months or years, the prisoner loses his sense of time to the point 
where the reality of his own existence blurs and vanishes.” 
Unesco Courier. — Nr 10, — 1954 
I therefore told my police official how ulterly senseless 
and insane the whole idea of prisons seemed to me with 
the iron cage standing as the symbol of our absurd ritual 
of punishment. The police official turned to me with a 
look of pitying stupefaction on his face. Then, he pointed 
his finger toward the cage, and his eyes lit up with ecstatic 
admiration. “What are you talking about, doctor,” le 
exclaimed, “it’s the very foundation of the State !” 
‘What was this State, founded on cages, on walls and 
padlocks, on bars and grills, on blind devotion to authority 
and on the coercive separation of its inhabilants, which 
my police official worshipped? It was the Fascist State. 
But the Fascist State did not invent the “man-cages”. The 
march of history does not mean that the slate of the past 
is wiped completely clean. Too often, ugly practices of 
the past are carried along 
side by side =with new 
ideas, new developments 
and real progress. 
     
Thus even todav, and in 
the most advanced demo- 
cracies of our time, we 
still find certain practices 
and institutions dating 
hack to the Middle Ages, 
aud numerous traces of 
anliquated authorilarian- 
ism. Thal is precisely 
how I feel about our pri- 
sons. To me, prisons are 
a typical relic of archaic 
and cruel cults, one of 
those carry-overs of past 
history which humanity 
lias allowed to subsist al- 
most through indifference 
and inertia, if nol through 
ignorance. 
Let there be no mis- 
understanding about what 
I have just said. It is 
obvious that the Slate, any 
State, must be able to 
defend itself against com- 
mon, even political, crimi- 
nals. 1t is equally obvious 
that when the need arises, 
the State must be able fo 
isolate those dangerous 
elements. And it is fin- 
ally obvious that all mea- 
sures that are truly effica- 
AE cious are legitimate, pro- 
8 Bs 8 viding one condition, hut 
: an essenlial one, is met. 
That is that the criminal’s 
dignity as a human being 
be serupulously respected. 
Various measures exist : 
surveillance, confinement 
lo an institution for the 
mentally ill, restricted res- 
idence, exile, work colo- 
. i nies and finally imprison- 
ment. But as soon as any one of these repressive 
measures becomes an offence against human dignity, 
I believe it is no exaggeration to say that from that 
moment on the punishment itself becomes a crime. 
The idea of punishing people by segregating them from 
the rest of society is based on two somewhat different, if 
not heterogeneous, nolions. There is the legilimale 
desire to safeguard public order, and also a survival of 
archaic beliefs requiring that a crime be expiated by 
ritual sacrifice, 
In a primitive society considered by ils members as an 
organic whole, the individual exists only as an integral 
part of the clan. Any infraction of the- normal rules of 
collective life immediately becomes a stain on the social 
body, and must be erased by the expulsion or even the 
destruction of the guilly member. (Continued on next page) 
9   
  
    
  
7

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 70034: Man cages

WHEN THE PUNISHMENT 
TOO BECOMES A CRIME 
(Continued from previous page) - 
An obvious trace of this mentality remains in our penal 
system in the form of the prison, which implies that the 
offender should be hidden from the eyes of others, so 
that, having shut out the source of the collective stain, 
the public can once again enjoy an easy conscience. 
Christian tradition added its ideas of sin, repentance and - 
redemption to this old-fashioned altitude, endowing 
prisons with the strange character they have today, an 
anticipation of hell and purgatory. And finally, modern 
schools of penal law grafted on to the Christian con- 
ception, the philanthropic idea of re-educating the 
criminal. - ; 
Obviously, re-education should be attempted by psycho- 
logical and moral means rather than by physical com- 
pulsion. For it would be a patent contradiction of the 
idea of re-education to attempt to achieve it by the use of 
restraint. But since the notion of physical punishment, 
which is the basis of the penalty of imprisonment, has not 
vet been submitted to a radical re-examination, it should 
be clear that the idea of re-education, although a healthy 
one in itself, threatens to add to the physical restraint of 
the prisoner a justification of moral constraint which is 
extremely dangerous for the inalienable character of 
human liberty. TL 
‘Habeas Animam’ as well as ‘ Habeas Corpus’ 
t was with this in mind that a young Italian scholar, 
to whom Fascism had extended the dreadful privilege 
of 156 years of prison life, demanded in a series of 
articles that the.“habeas corpus” should be completed by a 
recognition of the “habeas animam”. “In a society 
founded on respect for the human person,” this author 
wrote, the soul of even the most abject criminal should 
be protected by a habeas animam—the sacred right to 
inviolability- from any judge, or any gaoler... Prison, as 
it exists today, is deprived of all redeeming qualities, 
because the prisoner gets used to it, and rots there. But, 
the prison which has been turned into a laboratory of 
redemption, a sanatorium of souls, 1s a mechanism which 
corrupts everyone: those who direct it, those ground down 
by it, and those who believe in its utility.” = ° 
It seems to me that so long as the penalty of segregation 
retains its character of a sacred vengeance, all attempts to 
reconcile imprisonment with the idea of re-education (and 
thus with the idea of human dignity which re-education 
pre-supposes), will be vain. 
The problem posed for modern man 
by the persistence of the primitive 
conception of punishment as sym- 
bolized by prison, cannot be reduced to 
the elimination of physical suffering— 
such as lack of air and light, dirt, bad 
food and the occasional cruelty of 
warders. These are conditions ‘which 
it is certainly worth while trying to 
change; but the cssential problem is 
elsewhere. 
Job, scated on his dung heap, - 
afflicted by a thousand ills and a 
thousand woes, loses nothing of his 
human dignity, nor of his essential 
freedom. Bul the cleanest and most 
scientifically organizéd prison, the 
most humane. in appearance, causes 
irreparable harm fo the personality of 
the prisoner after a certain time, for 
the prison strikes at the very depths of 
man's being, at his consciousness of 
time, Consciousness of time and exist- 
ence of the individual are two expres- 
RY 
sions of the same reality : the living and moving reality 
.of the relations between the individual and the orld 
within eternity. After a cerlain number of months or years, 
the prisoner loses his sense of time to the point where the 
reality of his own existence blurs and vanishes. To 
He lives in a world without dimensions, without future, 
without passions, and thus without humanity. 
An unknown force pushes him down 
NotHeERr Italian intellectual has attempted to draw a 
A mathematical pattern of what he calls “the wait of 
the prisoner”. He says : “after a certain number 
of years, everything lakes place in the conscipusness of 
the prisoner as if his prison term would never come to an 
end. From this moment, all imprisonment is an im- 
prisonment for life. ” : 
“In the ‘Metamorphosis’ of Kafka, when young Gregory 
discovers that each time he tries to get up an.unknown 
force pushes him down again, he abandons all hope. He 
knows at this moment that he has lost the human dimen- 
sion, despairs and dies. A similar metamorphosis takes 
place after a certain time in the personality of the 
prisoner : time disintegrates and death, which dominates - 
his fate, seems infinite and interminable? . . 
The author concludes that nothing can justify a muti- 
lation of the human being which reaches the point of 
altering his deepest feelings and his spiritual life. At the 
same time, he hastens to add, society is probably not yet 
ready for a radical change in the penalties of impri- 
sonment., But the idea that they might be limited to a 
~ maximum of five years, is perhaps not a foolish hope. 
I personally believe that in the existing state of society, 
any attempt at radical reform of these penalties would be 
premature and doomed to failure. But the problem, 
nevertheless, remains, and it seems to me that, together 
with Unesco’s efforts to publicize the Universal Declaration, 
an attempt should be made to make present-day society 
more aware of these particularly acute problems of human 
rights. In my opinion, the problem of the relationship 
between the modern penitentiary system and our con- 
ception of human dignity deserves discussion and thought. 
I cannot help feeling that the present penitentiary system 
—as practised in almost every country—is marked by the 
cruelly, inhumanity and degradation condemned by 
Article 5 in the Universal Declaration. 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

HAT ATR 
  
Al LYS NT TA 1s TRE rt EE i Se A) 
L
E
 
E
R
 


### 70036: Story of prisons: their evolution as an agency of punishment

  
PRISONS Their evolution as an 
agency of punishment 
by Ronald Fenton 
RISONS, said the Romans, 
-two thousand years ago, are 
places for holding, not for 
punishing offenders. Today 
we are slowly coming back 
to’ this ancient Roman definition of 
prisons, which modern penologists feel 
should not be used for punishing an 
offender, but for his safe custody and 
rehabilitation. . 
Does this mean that history is 
repeating itself? Only up to a point, 
for the ideas behind these ancient and 
modern definitions of a prison’s role 
are poles apart. Today we are coming 
closer to theidea thatthe man goesinto 
prison but his crime halts at the gate. 
In ancient times a -man was not 
sentenced by law to spend years in pris- 
on, But he had little to hope for as 
he laid in some dark, filthy cell. He 
might rot there for years awaiting trial 
or because he was unable to pay a fine 
or a debt. - If he had already been 
found guilty of a crime, prison was 
"merely a prelude to brutal corporal 
punishment or a horrible death. 
  
Today hope is no longer locked out- 
side as the prison gate closes behind a 
convicted offender. Society claims 
“the right to punish” and uses prison 
as a weapon of self-defence, but it also 
recognizes the prisoner's right to be 
treated as a human being. 
Slowly, humanity has removed the 
sting of hatred and cruelty from 
punishment. It has begun to look at 
the man beneath the criminal, to see 
the need for helpirg him rather than 
making him suffer. Thus a prison’s 
primary role is to give men and women 
treatment and guidance that can help 
to reform them and to prevent them 
relapsing into crime after their release. 
When we pass by some. prison or 
reformatory and look up at the high 
walls and barred windows we wonder 
what prison life is.like. 
sorry for those inside because they have 
been deprived of freedom or we may 
think, unfeelingly, “it serves them 
right”. But in either case we look on 
prison as the normal way of dealing 
with someone found guilty of a crime. 
People today are so used to the idea 
of an offender being punished by a 
prison sentence that they tend to 
forget how long it took for their fore- 
bears to accept the same idea. They 
forget, too, that it is not so long ago 
since men and women in many coun- 
tries were engaged in one of the fier- 
cest struggles in the history of human 
rights—the fight to end the cruel 
and. inhuman treatment of prisoners. 
We may feel” 
Unesco Courier. — Nt 10, — 1954 
PRISON HULKS like this one in the 
dockyard at Portsmouth, England, were 
used to confine convicts in the last half 
of the eighteenth century. Dirty, crowded 
and unhealthy, these terrible floating pris- 
ons were constantly infected with disease, 
THE PANOPTICON, a circular prison 
with cells around the outside walls, was. 
designed in 1791 by Jeremy Bentham, the 
Enghsh philosopher, jurist and social re- 
former. He called it the “Panopticon™ or 
“inspection house” because of the ease 
with which the whole building could be 
observed from a control point in the centre. 
 
  
                
 
  
HaLr-Pran 
THE-PANOPTICON: - 
+ Sell — en Tr     
Until less than a century and a half 
ago most punishments prescribed by 
law were brutal and even barbarous, 
It is in the code of Hammurabi, 
dating back some 4,000 years, that we 
first meet the lex talionis, the demand 
for revenge of a crime later expressed 
in the Biblical words:“an eye for an 
eye and a tooth for a tooth”. Offenders 
were regarded as “brutes”, and treated 
as such. From earliest times torture 
“was used, not only to extract. con- 
fessions, but also as a punishment, 
Even Aristotle, the great Greek philos- 
opher, condoned torture, and its 
elaborate regulation in Roman law 
became the basis for all the gruesome 
medieval legislation in Italy, Spain, 
France and Germany. Though not 
authorized by common law, torture 
was .practised in England under royal 
privilege in the days of the Tudors and 
the Stuarts. 
Persons condemned to death were 
executed in the most horrible ways 
imaginable. They were crucified, ston- 
ed to death, buried alive, torn apart by 
wild horses, thrown to wild beasts. 
Even when forms of capital pun- 
ishment became more humane, more 
offences became capital ones. In the 
England of 1789 there were, according 
(Continued on page 14) 
i

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

A] 
| 
W 
. 
] 
| 
| 
i
 at
 
E
R
R
 
f
T
 
le
 
g
M
 
A 
J
F
 
T
E
s
 
: 
. 
i 
AE 
8 
ANTAL &. A Beir Tl $0 
3 SERRE SIRE BAT 8 As LES HR SSE 
12 
  


### 70047: Seven apostles of the prisoner's rights

 
Seven apostles 
of the 
prisoner's rights | 
AR 
a hil a Es io : = i Po ua J 
TE Ty 
counting the steps, measur- 
ing the rooms, copying down 
the regulations and testing 
the supplies. He 1s said to 
have spent over £30,000 of 
his own fortune in the work. 
Howard then turned his 
attention to quarantine sta- 
tions, the lazarettos, where 
plague victims or contacts 
were isolated, and coura- 
geously visited those of 
Constantinople and Smyrna. 
Travelling from, Smyrna to 
Venice he purposely chose a 
ship with a foul bill of 
health, knowing that he 
would thus be confined in a 
lazaretto on arrival in Ven- 
ice. He spent 42 days in 
two lazarettos studying 
conditions at first hand. 
There remained the prob- 
lem of military hospitals, 
and knowing those of Russia 
to be very defective he set 
out on what was to be his 
last journey. It took him to 
St Petersburg, Moscow and, 
eventually, to Kherson, in 
the Ukraine, where he nurs- 
ed a young woman suffering 
from “camp fever” and died 
of it himself on January 20, 
790. 
mp— ER 
4 
Philippe Pinel 
(1745-1826) 
About the year 1765, a 
French medical student 
named Philippe Pinel revolt- 
ed against the prejudices, 
case-hardened traditions and 
bookish teachings of his day. 
He wanted to apply to medi- 
cine “a method similar to 
that of the other physical 
sciences”. - He followed this 
idea all of his life, but he 
won his greatest glory as a 
Iiberator. It was not crimi- 
nals who were freed by Pinel 
but the insane who had been 
treated up until then (at 
least in the Western World) 
as criminals and worse. 
As physician to the Bicetre 
Hospital where male lunatics 
were kept in Paris in 1793, 
he could no longer bear the 
sight of these miserable crea- 
tures howling in the cages 
. where they were chained and 
whipped. He wrote to his 
superiors: “Far from being 
criminals who must be pun- 
ished, the insane are sick 
persons whose pitiful state 
deserves all of the considera- 
tion we owe to suffering 
  
A
 A
 
R
T
 
I
T
 
T
e
 
R
E
 
N
P
T
 
D
U
E
 
NX 
V
o
s
 
T
R
Y
 
S
e
 
I 
A
T
T
Y
 
YY 
T
A
N
 
bo
ii
 1] 
  a
e
 
r
R
 
NR
 
n
s
 
R
a
 
ne 
N
B
 
En
 
O
N
 
d
e
s
 
RR
 
E
I
R
 
ER
 
  
FA
 
La
la
s 
  
aaa a Jw 
EHIND the reforms which have gradually diminished the 
horror of prison conditions, there are the works of phi- 
losophers and jurists who fought for equality between 
men, respect for the individual and the supremacy of reason 
over prejudice. There 1s also the example of charity relieving 
suffering and defying unjust laws. The humble devotion of 
a St Vincent de Paul was as important to this movement as 
the genius of a Spinoza or a Grotius. And it is quite clear 
that there is a direct link from Locke, Voltaire, Montesquieu, 
Christian Wolff, Helvetius or Rousseau down to the 
somewhat specialized reformers a few of whom are presented 
here. Here are some of the great men to whom we owe the 
* major features of our modern penal institutions. 
* 
Cesare 
Beccaria 
(1738-1790) 
Few books have had as 
much influence on our penal 
systems as the great work of 
Cesare DBeccana: “Trattato 
dei delitti e delle pene” 
(Essay on Crimes and 
Punishment) which appear- 
ed in 1764. It was an 
immediate success in Italy 
  
  
“Citizen, you must be crazy 
yourself to wish to unchain 
such beasts” he said. 
Pinel's answer perhaps 
went beyond merely the 
insane: “I am convinced that 
the reason why nothing can 
be done with them is because 
we deprive them of freedom.” 
He “unchained” his patients 
and, two years later, he did 
the same for insane women 
at the Salpetriere Hospital. 
The book he wrote on his 
“Research and Observations 
on the Treatment of the 
Insane” spread his ideas far 
and wide. They were daring 
ideas: he preached that men 
could be cured of insanity 
only through the use of 
“reason, sensitiveness and 
persuasion”. “The insane”, he 
wrote, “should be approached 
with a love of humanity 
great enough to inspire the 
courage to conquer routine 
and fear.” 
and in France. Soon, its 
fame spread throughout Eu- 
rope and to America. Even 
more important, its teachings 
were to be embodied several 
years later in the constitu- 
tions of certain nations 
which, in turn, served: as 
models to the lawmakers of 
nearly every country on 
earth. 
Beccaria was a disciple of 
Montesquieu, whose “Persian 
Letters” he read enthusiasti- 
cally at the age of 22, and a 
friend of d’Alembert, Dide- 
rot, Helvetius and Buffon 
" _ - PT NET TT ER an TE 
SAG nll lS ERE EE A a RA BE oe. SB SR RE ER! 
—_5 = 
humanity.” The authorities 
hesitated, one of the leaders Jeremy 
of the Reign of Terror came 
to Bicetre to see for himself. Bentham 
(1748-1832) 
Jeremy Bentham, one of 
the English pioneer prison 
refcrmers, like Beccaria, bas- 
ed his thinking on the great 
principle of utilitarianism: 
the just action is the one 
which brings the greatest 
happiness to the greatest 
number of people. This was 
the foundation of his work 
as a moralist and as a jurist 
which brought him recog- 
nition and admiration from 
such disciples as Mirabeau, 
Thamas Paine and Benjamin 
Rush, from distant corres- 
pcndents such as Mohamed 
Ali and from a large number 
of far less respectful imita- 
tors and plagiarists. Talley- 
rand once commented of 
Bentham: “Though pillaged 
by everyone, he remains 
rich”. In his writings, Ben- 
- tham maintained that pun- 
ishment is an evil in itself 
and can only be accepted “so 
far as 1t promises to exclude 
some greater evil”. 
In his conception of the 
treatment of offenders Ben- 
- 
 
DA ta «TT « dr SNR TER Ne Gl, Ba 
  
  
£ 
y 
i 
. 
! 
: 
i 
A
 
—
—

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 70047: Seven apostles of the prisoner's rights

  
Unesco Courter. — Nr 10 — 1954 
  
the Verri brothers, both ar- 
dent reformers. In Milan, 
Alessandro Verri was known 
as “the protector of pri- 
soners” and he lashed out 
daily against the frequency 
of judicial errors, the irregu- 
larity of court procedure, the 
cruelty and the dispropor- 
 
(1726-1790) 
When John Howard, a 
wealthy English landowner, 
was appointed High Sheriff 
of Bedfordshire in 1773, one 
of his duties was the safe 
custody of prisoners in his 
tham was far in advance of 
his age, but a plan for prison 
reform which he proposed 
was spoiled by the elaborate 
detail which he loved. Under 
this scheme, he declared: 
“Morals would be reformed, 
health preserved, industry 
invigorated and instruction 
diffused.” 
* 
(19th century) 
If a traveller had set out 
in 1835 to visit the world’s 
most modern and most “pro- 
gressive” prison, he would 
- probably have ended up in 
Valencia, Spain. There, Colo- 
nel Manuel Montesinos had 
set up a penal system which 
‘combined liberal ideas with 
firm discipline. He operated 
1t on principles which, even 
today, are sometimes regard- 
ed as novel and surprising. 
Our traveller certainly would 
have been’ struck by the 
appearance of this prison, 
the cleanliness of its cells, its 
. gardens. 
dining rooms and its work- 
shops, and the charm of its 
He would have 
admired the wide variety of 
occupations offered its in- 
mates—in all, more than 
forty trades were taught 
there. But Montesinos’ ma- 
jor innovation was his me- 
thod of individualized treat- 
ment. When an inmate 
arrived at Valencia, he 
underwent a detailed exami- 
nation of “his instincts, his 
culture, his education and 
his moral and religious 
situation”, and this study 
continued until his release. 
It was Montiesinos who de- 
clared: “The crime remains 
outside the door of this ins- 
titution; our mission 1s to 
re-educate the man". 
* 
Cesare 
Lombroso 
(1835-1909) 
When Society had recog- 
nised that the insane were 
  
  
R
A
S
T
 
SS 
T
I
A
 
S
O
 
TY   
A
R
R
 
V
E
Y
 
a
 
A
F
 
A
L
E
 
N
E
 
T
R
 
A R
R
 
I
 
S
A
 
S
O
 
a
R
 
wp 
BEI
 
T
e
 
Th 
: 
  
i
 
yo
 
AT 
rg
 
  
  
1 
houses of correction, he un- 
covered many abuses. When 
the evidence he collected 
was placed before Parlia- 
ment, two bills were passed 
requiring counties to pay 
their prison staffs and to 
clean prisons, and clothe and 
care for the inmates. 
~ 
not criminals, a delicate 
question began to be posed: 
were criminals, In many 
cases, mentally abnormal? 
The answer of Cesare Lom- 
broso of Italy was that “the 
eriminal 1s more often a sick 
man than a guilty one”. A 
psychiatrist and an anthro- 
pologist, Lombroso pleaded 
that nations, instead of 
passing hasty judgments, 
should study ‘the human ac- 
tion called crime”. This stu- 
dy, in his opinion, should not 
be solely the business of jud- 
ges but should be entrusted 
to specialists capable of exa- 
mining a criminal on the 
. basis of “climate, geography, 
race, opulation density, 
birth-rate, diet, alcoholism, 
education, economy, religion 
and, finally, the prison it- 
self.” It was a demanding 
programme. To Lombroso, a 
crime was usually only the 
act of an abnormal or a sick 
perscn. Society's duty in 
connection with crime, 
therefore, should be only 
concerned with “curing the 
delinquent.” “It is time,” 
he declared, “that we change 
our concept of the defence 
of society to one of rehabili- 
tating the guilty man.” 
* 
  
 
Va i A i) 
rE J SN i eal 
ed by either state or chari- 
table institutions. Self ap- 
pointed inspector of prisons 
at home and abroad he tra- 
velled some 50,000 miles, note- 
book in hand, visiting pri- 
sons, hospitals, lazarettos, 
schools and  poorhouses, 
questioning the authorities, 
Franz von Liszt 
(1815-1919) 
One of the most illustrious 
figures in criminal law, Franz 
von Liszt was as illustrious 
in science as was his cousin 
in music. Liszt's life work 
was the scientific foundation 
and reform of criminal law. 
He challenged the principle 
of regarding punishment as 
a reprisal and introduced 
the method of investigating 
the causes of crime. To- 
gether with G.A. ven Hamel 
of Amsterdam and Adolphe 
Prins of Brussels, he estab- 
blished in 1889 the Interna- 
tional Association of Crimi- 
nal Law (I'Union Interna- 
tionale de Droit Penal). The 
Association contended that 
crime and punishment should 
be considered as much from 
a sociological as from a judi- 
cial point of view, and the 
reforms it initiated became 
the basis of modern criminal 
law. Liszt's efforts is favour 
of conditional sentence and 
pardon as well as postpone- 
ment of punishment later 
passed into practice. 
I I EC SR eR I TT TY Re 
e
T
 
T
E
 
er
 
-~
 
- 
I
 
a
 
pe 
" 
- 
a
 
. 
r
T
 
S
T
 
E
E
 
B
E
 
 
—
—
.
—
 
A
.
 
—
_
 
E
T
 
ITS
 
T
E
 
PY
 
Ta
e 
T
N
 
A
T
 
T
R
O
T
 
¢ 
r
R
 
J 
ly 
| 
/ 
2 
: 
; 
! 
  
oy hd id a CE ET ra CEE TE SEERA CA a Ti NBFSSORL S n Re a a | 
a ae a ER Ra Mr Sa FL Hi EE RET Ep TYE EE SER of Sa pi a SS RG i be 
—_— 2 u —_3 = y 
| \ 
-Wwho received him trium- tionate nature of penalties, = county. But unlike others But Howard was still not 
phantly in Paris. tha use of torture and the holding the same office in satisfied. After visiting Scot- 
Applying to criminal law hellish conditions in prisons. | England he was more tish and Insh prisons he 
the main precepts of the “Of Crimes and Punish- concerned about the dread- went to France and visited 
“philosophy of light” Becca- ment”. therefore. was the | ful state of the prisons and the principal Paris jails, 
ria began with the “Social fruit of common meditation the misery of the Inmates although he failed to get 
Contract”, under which the over first-hand evidence. In 5 | than with the problem of inside the Bastille, From = 
individual voluntarily gives fact, this book became known preventing them from escap- here he went to Holland 
small a part as possible—to ples but for its criticism of He was particularly shock- second visit to the con nent | 
society. The only objective the arbitrary and ferocious | ed to find in prison people a more hopes ions in § 
of criminal law, he reasoned, judicial methods of its time. | who had been declared not gland gave Tr the mate- : 
was to defend society and, Those who read this scathing } guilty or agamst whom a al he required Goat is Ta 
therefore, the restraint it analysis (among them was | . Grand Jury had failed to ous work “The ta g of the 
places upon the guilty man the Empress of Russia) were | find a true bill of accusa- ens a Eagan and 
can go no further than 1S ynable to do so without a | . tioms, but who remained Wales”, in whic + a4'30 
absolutely necessary to pro- feeling of shame. In the | there simply because they included accounts of some 
tect society. As for the end, their shame proved 4 could not pay “release fees” ioreign prisons. One of the 
death penalty, it is neither salutary. : | to the prison officers. results was the passing of a : 
useful nor necessary, and, i L x bill authorizing the construc- i 
added Beccaria, it has no It was true that many tion of two penitentiary 
basis in law because no indi- ~ such men and women were houses in which it was 
vidual has ever voluntarily + not likely to stay in prison intended to introduce suc- ! 
given society the right to 4 indefinitely for they had cessful] mesures Howard had 
decide if he is to live or die : every chance of dying seen in Ghent and Amster- 
: : quickly from hunger or dam such as giving inmates 
Beccarla probably neyer . - 8 disease. jloward set out to useful work to do. 
wou ave written is , change what he seen in 
book without the help of two John Howard 3 his county's prisons. Visit- A simple, deeply religious ] 
of his fellow countrymen, E ing jails, poorhouses and man, Howard worked unaid- | 
L
e
 
Rl
 
N
S
 
EE
S 
Y
E
N
I
 E
R

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 70036: Story of prisons: their evolution as an agency of punishment

The horror of 
early prisons 
(Continued from page 11) 
to one authority, no less than 350 
capital crimes, compared with only 
17 in the early part of the 15th 
century. Most of those added after 
1500 were offences against property— 
mostly trivial crimes. 
‘But these brutal laws eventually 
provoked a revolt against capital 
punishment in 18th century England. 
Juries either acquitted the accused or ° 
found them guilty of stealing 39 
shillings (the theft of 40 shillings was’ 
a capital offence) regardless of the sum 
they confessed to stealing or were 
proved to have stolen. 
Flogging and branding 
RUTAL punishments were imposed 
for minor offences. Flogging, 
branding and mutilation were 
the most common. In 16th century 
England a beggar was whipped for a 
first offence; for the second an ear 
was cut off; for the third offence the 
penalty was death. Reasoning that 
“they might as well be hanged for a 
sheep as a lamb,” beggars turned to 
a more rewarding form of crime— 
robbery. 
Nagging housewives were strapped 
in a ducking stool and plunged repeat- 
edly into a pond. For such offences as 
seditious libel, especially in books 
published without a licence, giving 
short weight and brawling in the 
street, favourite instruments of pun- 
ishment in England and the Ameri- 
can Colonies were the pillory and the 
stocks. These pinned the victim’s 
wrists or ankles while he was jeered 
at and pelted with rotten vegetables in 
the market place. 
It was only in the 16th century that 
  
  
  
  
LONGITUDINAL SECTION     
 
i SE Em Em ee 
WORK 
TTT TIT I. 
LF=) =m Yet ol Ji } i 
HALL 
Soy TE TI Tf ST gy Tg TU Te Ey MEST gy TT [STOTT SO 
ddd LLL 
   
Ch) 
 
   
PAPAL PRISON of Saint Michael, built by Pope Clement Xl in Rome, in 1704, was the first important 
prison to house inmates—in this case delinquent boys—in individual cells. 
lined up on both sides of a building whose centre was used as a workshop for the inmates. 
Three tiers of ten cells 
Thirty 
years later the papal authorities built a second prison designed on similar lines for delinquent women. 
prisons began-to be used as places for 
punishment in England. This was no 
humanitarian move inspired by legal 
reforms. There was, in fact, little 
humanitarian improvement in penal 
practices for another two centuries. 
The setting up of prisons was brought 
about by the increase in the number of 
vagrants towards the end of the medi- 
eval system. 
Under the feudal system, the landed 
classes regularly provided for their 
dependents and helped them in sick- 
ness and old age. Such organized 
charity as was needed was provided by 
THE PILLORY was once a favourite form of punishment in England and the American Colonies. 
Pinned by wrists and head, offenders were jeered at and pelted with rotten eggs and vegetables. 
 
ES AN AL ITE) 
a 
Lgl A Wy SL ESAT 
} 
the Church. The end of the medieval 
system cut off this “social assistance” 
and created a serious poverty problem. 
This new situation, together with the 
enclosure of peasant farming land in 
England, swelled the number of unruly 
vagrants to such an extent that the 
authorities set up crude prisons in 
which to confine the army of vaga-, 
bonds, and these early institutions 
were the forerunners of our prisons. 
The first, opened in 1557 at St. Bride's 
Well, in London, gave the name 
“Bridewells” _. to others which were 
established during the next half cen- 
tury. These Bridewells were the earli- 
est work-houses (or poor-houses as 
they were called in Scotland, and later 
in America.) The Poor Relief Act of 
1601 _ directed the overseers of every 
parish to raise funds “for providing a 
convenient stock of flax, hemp, wool, 
thread, iron and other ware and stuff 
to set the poor on work.” But in this 
early period authorities preferred to 
maintain “houses of correction” for the 
punishment of vagabonds. 
Work-houses for the poor then began 
to be built on the Continent, especially 
in Germany and Holland in the cen- 
tury following 1560. But it was not 
until 1773 that the first North Euro- 
pean workhouse which had the main 
characteristics of a modern prison: 
—separate cells and work as a disci- 
plinary and reformative measure— 
was built at Ghent, Belgium. 
Orphans herded with maniacs 
N the 17th and 18th centuries pris- 
I ons were filthy, -fever-breeding 
places in which men, women and 
children - were crowded together 
without ventilation and with virtually 
no food except what friends provided 
or jailers sold. In the workhouses 
authorities herded together orphans, 
—

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 70036: Story of prisons: their evolution as an agency of punishment

old people, criminals, consumptives 
and maniacs in large open dormitories. 
Already in the 17th century men and. 
women were trying to improve con- 
ditions in the prisons and workhouses. 
One man who put his ideas into prac- 
tice by personal example was Filippo- 
Franci. A Catholic humanitarian, 
Franci first set up a small workhouse 
for unruly and vagrant boys in Floren- 
ce, about 1650, and it was probably his 
work and also that of Dom Jean Ma- 
billon, the great Benedictine scholar, 
which inspired Pope. Clement XI in 
"1704 to create a prison for delinquent 
. boys as part of the hospital of St. 
Michael in Rome. 
What distinguished this prison from 
others of the period was its individual 
cells. These lined two sides of a large 
rectangular cell house, the centre space 
being used as a workshop by the in- 
mates. Thirty years later the papal 
authorities made another innovation, 
building a prison on similar lines for 
delinquent women. These two prisons 
were the first to bear any close 
resemblance to those of today. 
Breaking the shackles 
-v Ew and more powerful forces were 
then set in motion by the wave 
of ideas which swept in with the 
Intellectual Revolution of the 17th and 
18th centuries. ‘The rationalism of 
The Enlightenment, as it was called, 
helped to break the shackles of politi- 
cal tyranny, and the humanitarianism 
inspiring this opposition to oppression 
carried over into agitation for penal 
reform and for the abolition of slavery. 
Barbarous criminal laws were attacked 
in the middle of the 18th century by 
Voltaire and also by Montesquieu, 
whose Persian Letters satirized the 
European criminal law of this period. 
But the most influential reformer in 
the fleld of criminal law was the Ital- 
ian nobleman, Cesare di Beccaria 
(1738-1794). 
Punishments, written in 1764, was prob- 
ably the most effective book written 
in the whole history of criminal-law 
reform. Beccaria argued that the 
prevention of.crime was more impor- 
- tant than punishment; that torture 
should be abolished; that punishment 
should be used to deter men from 
committing crimes rather than to 
inflict social revenge on an individual; 
that imprisonment should replace cor- 
poral punishment and that capital 
punishment should be abandoned. 
With the exception of psychology 
and psychiatry which have only recent- 
ly been applied to crime, Beccaria 
suggested most of the essentials of 
criminological progress that have been 
achieved since his work was published 
nearly two centuries ago. 
Beccaria’s book created a veritable 
sensation. It was translated into a 
score of languages, and Voltaire him- 
self wrote an anonymous preface for 
the French edition. Above all, it 
stimulated people to improve prison 
conditions in many lands, directly 
influencing several rulers including 
Catherine II, Empress of Russia and 
the Grand Duke of Tuscany, who abo- 
lished torture and capital punishment 
in his realm. ) 
Beccaria’s ideas inspired British re- 
formers like Sir Samuel Romilly and 
Jeremy Bentham, - and strongly in- 
fluenced the revision of the criminal 
codes of the new American states after 
1776, the new criminal code of Revo- 
lutionary France and the reform of 
His Essay on Crimes and 
the British criminal code in the first 
half of the 19th century. 
One of the blackest chapters in the 
history of punishment concerns the 
penal colonies to which many countries 
at one time sent convicted men. 
Portugal sent many of its criminals to 
Ceuta in North Africa. As early as 
1497 those from Spain were sent to the 
West Indian island of Hispaniola. 
England made the greatest use of 
this form of punishment, but not as a 
humane substitute for other kinds. 
Shipping convicts out of the country 
was merely an easy way of solving the 
problem of keeping criminals in custody 
in England. It was considered con- 
venient and economical and it provided 
a labour force for colonial areas. 
Until the American Revolutionary War 
put an end to penal colonies in North 
America .convicts were sent from 
England to Maryland and other 
southern colonies—more than 50,000 of 
them between 1607 and 1776. 
Then Australia provided a new 
 
RUNNING THE GAUNTLET was one of the 
brutal military punishments of the past in which 
a convicted man had to run stripped to the waist 
between two rows of soldiers who struck at 
him with a stick or a knotted cord. This drawing 
shows the punishment being inflicted in 18th 
century Austria. The victim was forced forward 
at the point of the bayonet, but prevented from 
passing too quickly. between the ranks by a 
soldier preceding him with a reversed musket. 
“dumping ground” when it began to be 
opened up as a British colony. Be- 
tween 1787 and 1852 more than 100,000 
men and women were shipped in filthy 
vessels to the prison settlements of 
Australia, Tasmania and Norfolk 
Island. Many died en route, some 
starved to death in the colonies and 
others escaped to become “bushran- 
gers” who attacked and robbed the 
colonists. Only after a British par- 
liamentary inquiry had denounced the 
system as “unequal, without terror to 
the criminal class, corrupting to both 
conviets and colonists”, was convict 
transportation abandoned. 
The inhuman conditions in which 
convicts were shipped to Australia 
were no worse than those te which 
‘prisoners were subjected aboard the 
“floating  prisons”—the old hulks 
“and Switzerland. 
- slowly developed into 
Unesco Courier. — Nr 10, — 1954 
anchored in British ports. These 
ships were filthy, crowded and con- 
stantly infested with disease. 
Credit for. rousing the public con- 
science to the barbarism of such 
conditions belongs to John Howard, , 
one of the greatest names in the his- 
tory of prison reform. 
Born in 1726, the son of well-to-do 
parents, Howard began his humani- 
tarian work while in his twenties. In 
1754, when he sailed to Portugal to aid 
earthquake victims in Lisbon he ex- 
perienced the harsh prison conditions 
of his day after his ship had been 
captured by the French. 
But it was in 1773 when, as high 
sheriff of Bedfordshire, he visited 
Bedford Jail that he fully realized the 
terrible conditions existing in his own 
country. Horrified by what he saw, 
he launched his great crusade at home 
and abroad, to expose the horrible 
misery which prisoners underwent. 
Howard was particularly shocked by 
the injustice of the system of exacting 
fees for safe conduct and delivery from 
jail levied by the unsalaried prison 
officials. His efforts to obtain salaries 
for them brought Parliamentary action 
in 1774, and the disgraceful fee system 
was abolished. Thanks to Howard 
hundreds of innocent prisoners who 
had been unable to pay the delivery 
fees, were at last released. At his 
own expense Howard had the terms of 
the new legislation printed and sent to 
every jailer and warder in England. 
Howard made four detailed inspec- 
tions of British prisons and went 
abroad to study the conditions in those 
of Germany, France, the Low Countries 
On his return he 
published The State of the Prisons in 
England and Wales. Other reforms 
were sparked by his revelations, in- 
cluding the passing of a bill for setting 
up penitentiary houses in which pri- 
soners would ke confined in cells and 
given work to do. 
The sudden stirring of England's 
conscience by Howard’s crusade was 
the dawn of prison reform - which 
the modern 
humanitarian movement. Howard's 
name is commemorated today in the 
Hcward League for Penal Reform, an 
active British organization. 
‘Hell above ground’ 
. NOTHER great Englishman who 
turned his brilliant mind to the 
problem of legal reform and 
prison conditions was Jeremy Ben- 
tham, philosopher, jurist and social 
reformer, who lived from 1748 to 1832. 
He drew up a scheme for the treatment 
of criminals under which he believed 
“morals would be reformed, health 
preserved, industry invigorated and 
instruction diffused”, and also worked 
out plans for an entirely new prison. 
A circular building with cells around 
the outside walls, this prison was 
known as the “Panopticon”, or “in- 
pection house” kecause of the ease 
with which the whole institution could 
be observed from a central position. 
Early in the 19th Century a devoted 
band of English men and women, the 
“Prison Discipline Society”, was reso- 
lutely carrying on the work launched 
by John Howard, in jails which were 
reported as “relapsing into their former 
horrid state of privation, filthiness, 
cruelty and neglect.” 
Among the worst of these jails was 
Newgate Prison in London, described 
15 —

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 70036: Story of prisons: their evolution as an agency of punishment

The revolt from outside 
  
as a “hell above ground”. Here, 
among the worst possible conditions, a 
young woman named Elizabeth Fry 
began a lifetime of work on behalf of 
the “victims” of prison systems. 
By her amazing courage and per- 
sonality she completely transformed 
conditions at Newgate and then went 
on to become the chief promotor of 
prison reform in Europe. Spurred on 
by her example the reformers in 
Britain campaigned successfully for 
what are now regarded as the first 
principles of a prison system-—separa- 
ticn of the sexes, the classification of 
criminals, female warders for women, 
education and useful employment. 
The Great Quaker Law 
LIZABETH FRrRY’s investigations of 
E other kinds of institutions 
brought about many improve- 
ments in the British hospital system 
and in the treatment of the insane. 
From 1838 to 1841 she travelled the 
Continent, urging authorities to im- ° 
prove their prisons, and before her 
death in 1845, she heard from most 
- parts of Europe that her ideas were 
being adopted. 
European successes in reforming 
criminal laws and making greater use 
of imprisonment as a punishment were 
actually preceded by a great reform of 
Quaker inspiration in one of the 
American colonies. 
In early colonial times the Quakers 
were revolted by brutal corporal pun- 
ishments, especially the shedding of 
blood, and in 1682 an important 
Quaker reform, “The Great Law”, was 
submitted to the Pennsylvania Colo- 
nial Assembly by William Penn, the 
founder of the colony. For the first 
time in the history of criminal juris- 
prudence, it was here provided that 
the majority of crimes should be 
punished by “hard labour” in a house 
of correction. . 
In 1718 the Pennsylvania authorities 
were compelled to abandon this Quaker 
criminal code and to adopt those 
applied in the other colonies, but after 
Pennsylvania gained its independence 
in 1776, imprisonnment was again sub- 
stituted for corporal punishment by a 
law of 1790 supported by the Philadel- 
phia Prison Society—America’s first 
prison reform society. 
The man who gave great impetus to 
this movement was Dr. Benjamin Rush, 
physician, social reformer and pioneer 
penologist, and one of the most remark- 
able figures of his time. “Dr. Rush, 
one of the signers of the American 
Declaration of Independence, was 
16 
! 
_ came 
known to later generations as “The 
Father of American Psychiatry” for he 
wrote the first general study on this 
subject in America and raised the 
study of mental diseases to a scientific 
level for the first time in his country. 
The famous reform group in Penn- 
sylvania, of which Rush was a 
member, included Benjamin Franklin, 
William Bradford and other pioneers 
in American humanitarianism. It laid 
the foundations for the famous Penn- 
sylvania prison system based on indi- 
vidual confinement in cells and work. 
The system came to life in a block 
of cells built between 1790 and 1792 in 
the yard of the Walnut Street Jail, 
Philadelphia. This new type of prison, 
“the first American penitentiary” as 
it has been called, was an improvement 
on others of that time, but the cells 
were still rather grim places to judge 
from a description.written in 1798: 
“In every cell, there is one small 
window, placed high up and out of 
reach of the convict; the window well 
secured by double iron grating, so that, 
provided an effort to get to it was 
successful, the person could perceive 
neither heaven nor earth, on account 
of the thickness of the wall. The 
criminal, while confined here, is per- 
mitted no convenience of bench, table, 
or even bed, or anything else but what 
is barely necessary to .support life, 
without risk of endangering health.” 
The confining of prisoners in indivi- 
dual cells became the guiding factor 
in prison construction. Authorities 
reasoned that solitude would lead to 
reflection and penitence—hence the 
name “penitentiary” for the earliest 
prisons. They also considered that 
separate confinement would prevent 
convicts from corrupting each other, 
with each one adding his own special 
knowledge of crime to the general 
cesspool of viciousness. 
Soon the Pennsylvania system be- 
world famous. A competing 
type—the Aubern system-—provided 
for solitary confinement at night and 
for association in prison shops during 
the day. These two systems struggled 
for supremacy during the 19th centu- 
ry, and while the Aubern system won 
most favour in the United States, the 
Pennsylvania system was widely 
adopted in Europe. 
New frontiers of thinking 
RISONS today are naturally very 
different places from those of 
even half a century ago. 
ment is generally less severe, prisoners 
are given more varied and useful work 
to do and education, -athletics and 
entertainment all figure in the pro- 
gramme of a well-run modern prison. 
But the “humanizing” of prison 
conditions is only one aspect of a 
broader and more significant change 
in the whole conception of crime and 
punishments which the findings of 
criminology are slowly bringing about. 
No one, say modern criminologists, 
inherits “criminal tendencies”, al- 
though people may inherit some quality 
which makes it easy for them to 
become criminals. Crime may show 
" 
(Continued on page 18) 
Treat- 
  
  
 
PRISON LIFE is largely conditioned by the 
surroundings in which the inmates serve their 
sentences and the staff works. Gloomy and for- 
bidding buildings make it more difficult for prison 
administrators to apply rehabilitation training and 
less likely that prisoners will respond to it. Photo,

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 70036: Story of prisons: their evolution as an agency of punishment

    
wh “ri > gi Te 
A, 
taken at Strangeways Prison, Manchester, England, 
shows one of the long cell galleries which radiate 
spoke-like from the hub of the control centre, 
Like many European prisons this, one follows the 
style of prison construction which was conceived 
and first employed in Pennsylvania, U.S.A. 
NEW. ARRIVALS 
are interviewed, clas- 
sified, given a uni- 
form and allotted a 
cell. Others, sitting 
in cubicles, wait their 
turn to join Strange- 
ways’ population of 
900 or so prisoners. 
THE ‘RUB DOWN’ 
as prisoners call this 
search is a regular 
feature of prison life 
in Strangeways. All 
working parties are 
searched at the prison 
centre for scissors, 
knives, razorblades or 
anything else that 
might serve as a 
weapon or could be 
used as an escape tool. 
TEDIOUS WORK 
being done by these 
prisoners consists of 
untying knots — 
“Strangeways love 
knots”, as they «call 
them—in Post Office 
string. Prisoners also 
shred mattress fibre 
and stitch mail 
bags—two mail bags 
every seven hours 
and forty minutes is 
the standard quota. 
Unesco Courier, — N* 10 — 1954 
  
  
» 
 
 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 70036: Story of prisons: their evolution as an agency of punishment

The man inside the criminal © 4 
2 
(Continued from page 16) 
the inability of the individual to deal 
with the world he lives in or the ina- 
bility of society to provide a decent 
environment for all people. Crime is 
often caused by poverty, over-crowded 
living conditions, bad associations and 
accidental factors such as unemploy- 
ment. The criminal may not be to 
blame for his crimes, therefore the 
idea of “punishment” is not an impor- 
tant one in modern criminology. Thus 
it disapproves of courts which seek to 
avenge society against the criminal and 
to “give him what he deserves.” ) 
Psychiatrists have joined criminolo- 
gists in throwing light on the subject 
of crime and have provided useful 
techniques in dealing with criminals 
both in the courts and in prison. But 
cften criminal practice and psychiatric 
theory are in complete conflict. 
Guilt and punishment 
SYCHIATRISTS complain that crimi- 
PP nal law, as practised today, is 
still guided by the idea of punish- 
ment and deterrence, that rehabilita- 
tion and reformation of the individual 
offender is secondary. The psychia- 
trist sees the problem of crime as one 
of treatment rather than of punish- 
ment. He approaches the offender as 
a patient, not as a prisoner; he is 
interested in the individual rather 
than the crime. 
Does this imply the complete abo- 
lition of all unpleasant ways of dealing 
with offenders? No, say psychiatrists, 
for even under the best of systems 
disciplinary measures, such as confi- 
nement in institutions, would still be 
necessary. But such measures would 
be imposed primarily because they 
were felt to be necessary for the 
offender’s own welfare and for the 
welfare of society, and not as punish- 
ment for an offence against the law. 
Psychiatrists, psychologists, sociolo- 
gists, criminologists and jurists have 
proposed a number of reforms to bring 
criminal procedure in line with pres- 
ent-day sociological and psychiatric 
knowledge. . 
They suggest, for instance, that a 
psychiatric service should be available 
to every criminal and juvenile court 
and to every penal and- correctional 
institution, and that a psychiatric 
report should be made on every pri- 
soner before he is released. 
They have also proposed that in cases 
punishable by a prison sentence the 
question of responsibility should not 
be submitted to the jury. The jury’s 
role would simply be to determine that 
the offence. was committed by the de- 
fendant. The disposition and ftreat- 
ment (including punishment) would 
be based on a study of the individual. 
. offender by properly qualified and 
impartial experts co-operating with 
the courts. This means a complete 
separation of the “guilt-finding” and 
the “sentence-imposing” phases in 
court trials, 
They feel that greater use should 
also be made of a flexible indeterminate 
sentence which allows for better indi- 
vidual treatment and release. from 
prison when progress reports show 
that the prisoner is not likely to relapse 
into crime.” * They also call for a wider 
18 
use among adults of the probation 
system so often employed in Anglo- 
Saxon countries for dealing with juve- 
nile delinquents. Probation is usually 
applied in the case of a first offence or 
where there are extenuating cir- 
~umstances. Punishment is suspended 
and treatment and guidance are given. 
Progress in improving prison régimes 
and reforming criminal law during the 
past seventy or eighty years owes a 
great deal to the pioneer movement 
which began in 1872 when the first 
International Prison Congress met 
in London. This Congress declared 
“Moral regeneration - should be the 
primary aim of prison discipline; hope 
should be more powerful than fear.” 
The International Prison Commis- 
sion established by the Congress, and 
later called the International Penal and 
Penitentiary Commission (IPPC), set 
out to internationalize standards of 
treatment for offenders and ifs efforts 
led many nations fo agree on basic 
conditions of imprisonment and me- 
thods of crime prevention. In 1951, 
the Commission became a Foundation 
devoted to scientific research and 
training in criminal science and policy. 
Today the prevention of crime and 
the treatment of offenders is regarded 
more than ever as an international 
problem and as an integral part of 
social defence policies. The United 
Nations has therefore taken over the 
work previously done by the IPPC and 
“through the Social Commission of its 
Economic and. Social Council 
(ECOSOC) and through the United 
Nations Specialized Agencies, is co- 
operating with the non-governmental 
organizations working in this field. 
It has organized regional seminars 
and meetings of experts—lawyers, 
sociologists, judges, police officials, 
jurists, criminologists and many others 
—to study such subjects as probation, 
the indeterminate sentence, standard 
rules for the treatment of prisoners, 
the training of prison staffs, trends of 
crime, open institutions, and the pre- 
vention of juvenile delinquency. 
The most recent of such meetings was 
held at Geneva in September 1954, 
when European experts in criminal 
policy gave . practical guidance to 
countries on probation, prison labour 
and programmes for released prisoners. 
Today’s stumbling blocks 
nals and preventing crime is not 
likely to come, however, until 
the idea that crime cannot be pre- 
vented by repressive measures alone 
becomes more widely accepted by the 
public as a whole. 
R EAL progress in dealing with crimi- 
problem of crime as an inherent part 
of social defence programmes is still 
handicapped by out-of-date ideas still 
widely held. An ECOSOC report on 
social defence programmes published 
last year stressed the need for devel- 
oping a new attitude towards crime as 
part of crime prevention policies. 
“Existing systems of punishment still 
have an emotional content... in which 
segregation and counter agression play 
a dominant role”, it said. “As long as 
this is: not overcome, no real progress 
can be achieved.” - 
Both national] and: 
international action to deal with the" 
js | 
= 
 
WOMEN PRISONERS are given useful occupa- 
tions in Holloway Prison, London. The largest 
women's prison in England, it was built in [852 
as a “House of Correction”. Ideas on prisons and 
prison treatment having advanced since then, the

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 70036: Story of prisons: their evolution as an agency of punishment

old building is far from adequate for present-day 
standards. Prisoners make radio parts, stitch mail- 
bags, mend shoes or work in the kitchen, laundry, 
hospital or garden. In summer, parties are taken 
out of the prison to work on farms ‘near London. 
\ 
         » 
BATH-TIME for babies who are passing 
the first months of their lives in prison. 
Some were born there, others came in 
when their mothers were sentenced, The 
babies spend the daytime in the hospital 
ward, and the night in their mothers’ ceils. 
MORNING EXERCISE for the 500 inmates lasts half an hour, They 
walk singly or in little groups, on a stone path round a grass lawn. 
On one side they see the prison building, on the other, the prison walls, 
Unesco Courier. — Nr 10, — 1954 
= ws 
  
THE DOOR TO FREEDOM opens for a 
woman prisoner, Modern efforts to im- 
prove prison conditions and rehabilitate 
offenders are based on the knowledge that 
practically all people who spend a term 
in prison will one day return to society. 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 70049: Passing thoughts on the right to life and the death penalty

T
T
L
 
UT
 
R
N
 
A
 
e
B
 
Ce
 
I
 
He
 
F
N
S
 1 
T
Y
 
Ea
 
T
e
 
T
R
A
 
ge
 
Lp)
 
PLA
NER
 
000 
FN
 
001
 
od
 P
PE
 
ry
 
in 
ST
 
ed 
Pe
rs
 
B
E
 
»
 oo
 
Re
 
E
h
 
LL
GE
R 
E
E
L
 
ER
E 
A
N
]
 
\, man ever asserts his 
right to life except, perhaps, the man 
who is threatened by death. And even he does 
so in secret, because he is ashamed and also because 
he does not know to whom he could talk about it 
aloud. : . 
Y. the Universal Declaration of Human Rights main- 
tains, in Article 3, “Everyone has the right to life...” 
The phrase is somewhat disturbing. There’s nothing 
obscure in it. But the reader can always add... “the 
right to life, except when it is refused by justice.” 
Noctis tells the condemned 
man: “Your crime deserves the death penalty. We are 
suppressing your right to life.” Society has good 
reasons: it has every intention of defending itself 
against the forces of evil—that is, crime—which might 
endanger it. 
So the right to life isn’t absolute. In certain cases, it 
is wiped off the list of rights. This isn’t very simple, 
mind you. For if I give my children the right to use my 
library and I discover one day that they've torn my - 
books, I can revoke that right. He who gives can take 
away. Is it society, therefore, which grants the right 
to life? From whom did the condemned man receive 
is life? 
I. condemned man is. nearly always a murderer. 
His victim too, had the right to life. The condemned 
man is an individual who, one day, from the depths of 
his passion, his pride or his greed—or from the depths 
of his terror—decreed the annihilation of another. He 
made himself a tyrant. Either calmly or in maniacal 
fury, he set up a reign of selfishness for his own 
; benefits. 
At the time of his deed—or, at least, at the mysterious 
moment when he decided to commit it—he plunged 
into an abyss where no rights and no laws can exist. 
He chose savagery of his own will. Can he then dare 
to demand the privileges of a free man? Human 
Rights didn’t worry him very much when he killed. 
They belonged to a kingdom from which he exiled 
himself. Therefore, it would seem hopeless to try to 
save him today by invoking the principles which he 
sought to destroy yesterday. 
i Te aie Se AL AL en Rs EO a a Os iS 
-I'read here : “Every man has the right to life.” 
E x £ . a hurt 
Georges Fradier 
But, in reality, it is in the name of these very prin- 
ciples that he will be judged, for society considers the 
old law of “an eye for an eye” as barbarous. Once he 
has been imprisoned, the fiercest bandit alive is no 
longer an outlaw. The verdict is pronounced on a 
crime... but it is a man who must serve the sentence. 
Is it completely certain that this man can be gagged 
if he decides to talk about his right to life? Supposing 
he discovers the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights and then pleads guilty. He might say: *“I have 
violated the most important rights on this list and 
there is nothing in it which absolves me of my respon- 
sibility. But it doesn’t absolve you of yours. It does not 
allow me to drag you down into my world of darkness 
This list bears witness to a respected code of values 
I have flouted it on one occasion and now you are 
making me answer to it, You are on the side of justice 
and I appeal to the justice of the Universal Declaration. 
words are overwhelmingly against me. 
read them yourselves.” 
But now you 
Nock protects itself... 
Sceiety condemns... It is too easy to hide behind society. 
We are society... you, me and the rest of us. The cri- 
minal is precisely the man who tried tc leave society. 
Now he has been brought back. It is I who am protect- 
ing myself, and it is I who condemn. 
Happily, I can delegate my powers to a proxy. This 
enables me to hold forth calmly over an after-dinner 
cup of coffee on the pros and cons of the death penalty. 
Of course, there are some very sound arguments on 
both sides... the way things stand today and with the 
evidence available, we shouldn't jump to conclusions... 
our children will find the answer... the tide of human 
progress, etc. etc.. You and I, were independent, 
We're neither judges nor criminals. 
Independent? And what about those judges who 
believe that they condemn in our name? And they're 
right: in law, they speak for us. In reality, too. The 
condemned man stares out from his cell. He sees not 
only the judge who sentenced him, but unconscious 
judges as well—ourselves. Can it be said that we, as 
judges, are hypocrites? 
(one gallows and flames from the stake. During 
the Middle Ages, sc we're told, judges condemned right 
and leit. In the 18th century, too, witches and thieves 
were handed over to the hangman. Our fathers did 
not ask themselves the same questions that we do 
about the death penalty. It wasn’t that they consid- 
~ ered human life cheap. But the problem of life and 
of death was clearer to them than it 1s te us and, if 
I dare put it this way, less serious. Society today 
 CE A HE RY PTT AS Te Saat 
3 : - : 
} - : fo. Zul HES NES i. eh EO 
i eed i te ARE Ee ar i EE RR CL SERED 
 
AERIS LR 
 
These 
  
=

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 70049: Passing thoughts on the right to life and the death penalty

= ZEAL REE 
cannot tell itself that it kills the body of a criminal 
to save his soul. No one talks about the defendant’s 
soul in the criminal courts. It’s true that they don’t 
say much about his body, either. Instead, they analyse 
his psychology... which is neither a concrete thing nor 
an immortal one, 
S. the judges in the Middle 
Ages never worried about excuses (Middle Ages—a 
handy expression to designate societies bound by belief 
in the sacred, as opposed to our modern civilizations 
which claim to be purely human). These judges 
believed that they had a duty to punish and scourge. 
In the death penalty, the word “penalty” took on its 
full meaning. It meant that the scales of Justice would 
swing back into balance. The eriminal atoned for his 
deed—that is, he purged himself of his sin by under- 
going punishment. At one stroke, he washed away the 
stain which he had left on society, and the stain which 
he had placed on his soul. N 
“\ 
end a criminal into the next world”... “He has paid 
the supreme penalty for his crime”... There was a time 
when there was nothing shameful in these phrases. 
They had a meaning, and they gave a meaning to the 
penalty. 
Y.. even today after an 
execution some journalists still describe the criminal as 
having “paid his debt to society.” Do their readers 
feel they have now keen repaid? * 
| n several countries, the courts cling to the terrifying 
and imposing garb of sacred justice: black robes, red 
robes, wigs, etc. And they keep their solemn and 
barely intelligible language. The death sentence is 
pronounced in the name of the people, or in the name 
of the king or in the name of the constitution. 
Who are these people who demand a corpse? Where 
are they? In the eyes and in the mind of the con- 
demned man, what is this constitution suddenly turned 
into an instrument of vengeance, and what is this law 
which demands satisfaction? 
Beeoiione however, are no 
longer a public spectacle. Proclaimed pompously, vir- 
tuously and publicly, the penalty must now be carried 
out stealthily and quickly at dawn. There can be no 
crowd to watch the execution. Even the jurymen are 
not invited. When they answered the fateful questions, 
they knew, of course, what their replies meant, but no 
one asked them to imagine the result. And, at the 
moment of this result, no one shall disturb their 
slumbers. So all of these weeks of questioning and 
testimony and eloquence and headlines, these weeks of 
drama and stage direction finish in the furtive half- 
hour of an official and shameful execution. During the 
trial, with the help of modern means of publicity, 
thousands of actors participated in the drama. At the 
finale, there are only three or four. All that the others - 
will do is to read a brief paragraph absent-mindedly in 
an afternoon newspaper. 
B efore a man can declare himself for or against the 
death penalty, let him first climb the barrier of ab- 
stractions surrounding it and tear away the curtain of 
verbiage. He is not reaching a decision which, once 
taken, can be put out of mind; not discussing a theory, 
Unesco Courter, — N* 10, — 1954 
   
  
: £ ’ | - ‘ o . \) » 1S rm RA STen SR i NR i Ds i nT eel 
but death itself —the final physical act. Let him try 
to understand the reasons (they must be terribly con- 
vincing} which cblige us to kill a man calmly and 
deliberately. ' 
I, it impossible for the 
hecnest citizen, the good husband, the kind father, the 
pillar ci society, to put himself for a moment into the 
shoes of the condemned man? Is it impossible for him 
to visualize himself in a death cell and to tell himself: 
“I am not a criminal, I was when I committed this 
crime (this murder, or this rape, or this crime against 
the State, or this theft, depending on where he lives 
and the laws of his land) but since then, months (or 
years) have passed and I have changed the way every- 
one changes, I am no longer the same man. Which 
man are you condemning? Besides, you do not even 
seek to know me for what I am...” Is it impossible for 
this innocent man to understand why so many 
condemned criminals protest their innocence? Yes, 
there's no doubt—it’s impossible, . 
A t least, every man should be able to imagine himself 
in the jury box or on the judge’s bench. But that only 
means that he would be called upon to make his 
decision on the basis of his knowledge... knowledge of 
law, of philosophy, of anthropology, etc. The one thing 
that he will not have time to examine is the right to 
life, the right of “John Smith” to his life, a life as 
humble, as dangerous, as sad, as miserable and as 
mediocre as you care to imagine it, but the infinitely 
precicus life of the man who does not want to die. No 
he will not be able to examine this life... there are too 
many abstractions in the way. 
: Y... against the death 
penalty? That's easily said, you know. Have you ever 
seen the victim of a murderer? Are you capable of 
imagining the horrors committed by certain killers? 
We are always ready to speak without knowing, and 
without engaging our responsibilities. How many 
opponents of the death penalty changed their minds 
the day they suddenly became “interested parties” and 
had to offer a personal opinion. : 
A. you for the death penalty? Are you ready to 
replace the executioner—replace him officially with all 
of the dignity of his profession? When a man has 
good and honourable reasons to demand the life of 
another man of whom he knows almost nothing, he 
certainly should find the courage to go and take that 
life himself. Why should such a just and salutary task 
be left to obscure mercenaries? 
I, the right to life is not 
an absolute right, if it must -be accompanied by 
restrictions which vary according to time and place, 
then what right can we count on? Is there any one 
right which we can assert under any circumstances? 
Not one, but all of these rights must be asserted so 
that all of them may become absolute. For all of these 
rights stem from a single postulate—Article 1 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights: “All human 
beings are born free and equal in dignity and in rights. 
They are endowed with reason and conscience and 
Should act towards one another in a spirit of brother- 
hood”. 
Deny or neglect this postulate... and the rest is just 
a joke, ) 
  
 
T
T
 
—
—
 
RT
 
C
S
 
T
T
 
a
 
S
T
 
P
T
 
T
T
 
E
P
 
G
0
 
T
e
 
Ee I 3 Im 7 ol se 
: | 
AE
C 
BC
 
ES
BS
 S
l
 
6
3
S
 
Se
d 
dL
 
S
G
 
S
T
L
 
po
 
A
E
 
I
R
E
 
Ra
l 
0

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 70051: A Boy in trouble: what can we do to help him?

A BOY IN TROUBLE... 
by Dr. J. R. Rees 
Director, World Federation for Mental Health 
N many countries of the world 
there is at present a wave of 
concern about juvenile delin- 
quency. It hus been on the increase, 
although now the peak:seems to have 
been passed. There is little doubt, 
however, that more cases of anti-social 
behaviour and crime are.brought to 
public notice now than in past years. 
The explanation of this in part is 
that more cases are reported now and 
that the police of all countries are 
more inclined to take notice of viola- 
tions of the law both by children and 
young people. 
In addition to this there have heen 
marked disturbances created by two 
world wars—and there always is a 
rise of delinquency rates following a 
war. The dislocation of the social life 
of many countries during the recent ° 
war has certainly contributed to the 
increase of delinquency. Children 
have not had the same settled, secure 
home life. Mothers have had to go out 
to work, fathers have in many cases 
been away for long periods in the fight- 
ing services, and this has created a 
situation which was likely to result in 
anti-social reactions among children. 
The moods of anxiety and moral dis- 
approbation of delinquency always 
stimulate the consideration of special 
factors which are regarded as being 
“the cause” of delinquency. Lessening 
of the religious sense, lack of moral 
teaching, the more permissive techni- 
ques of child upbringing and education, 
and the effects of films, television and 
comic strips, have all been blamed. 
They may of course play some part in 
the encouragement of anti-social be- 
haviour, and all should be kept in 
mind, because something could be 
done about them. Scientifically speak- 
ing, there is no clear evidence to 
justify the statement that these are 
causative factors to any large extent. 
~ 
‘Hit them hard’ school 
AMUEL Butler, when he wrote 
Erewhon, displayed extraordinary 
vision in his fantasy that the 
development of physical sickness was 
something which should be punished, 
and that anti-social behaviour necessit- 
ated medical treatment. Few people 
took this very seriously, but there was 
in between the two world wars a cer- 
tain swing towards this point of view, 
and an excessive tendency to claim 
that delinquents could not help being 
as they were, and that treatment 
should always take the place of punish- 
ment. This swing of the pendulum, as 
Dr. J. R. Rees is Director of the World Federation for 
Mental Health and was formerly physician and medical 
director of the Tavistock Chnic for Child Guidance, 
London. He is the author of many books and papers on 
psychological medicine, including The Health of the 
Mind and Modern Practice in Psychological Medicine, 
22 
\ 
in all such cases, was not wise, and the 
present attitude of criminologists, psy- 
chiatrists and psychologists is more 
realistic and better balanced with 
regard to both the causation and the 
treatment of delinquency.’ 
As always, there are three attitudes 
towards those who disobey the rules 
of the community. First, we can 
dismiss them as being degenerates, 
"people whose genetic inheritance has 
decreed that they shall be criminals, 
who must therefore be excluded as 
rapidly as possible from society. Sec- 
ondly, there is the very vocal school, 
which is not only composed of the 
elderly and the pompous, which says: 
“Hit them hard. Give them the most 
rigorous punishment that can be 
devised.” The third attitude, least 
emotional and best balanced, sees that 
there can be no effect without a 
cause; there is no child who is just 
naughty, no adolescent who is just 
delinquent, or adult who is just a 
criminal. ; 
No spiritual aspirin tablet 
I} we are to protect society and help 
the individual, then we must of 
necessity understand something of 
the causes and background which have 
given rise to the particular conduct of 
which society properly disapproves. 
Diagnosis should precede treatment. 
The doctor who merely treats symp- 
toms without attempting to "un- 
derstand the underlying cause of the 
condition is a quack or a charlatan. 
The parent, the teacher or the magis- 
trate who treats disorders of social 
behaviour without concerning himself 
about the reasons for that behaviour 
can also quite properly be called a 
charlatan. There is no spiritual or 
legal aspirin tablet which will cure 
every disorder. - 
Much careful research is being made 
into the fundamental causes of anti- 
social behaviour, and the U.N. Economic 
and Social Council, Unesco and the 
World Health Organization are making 
their contribution to this exceedingly 
important problem. There can, of 
course, be factors of bad inheritance 
which we must consider, but the gene- 
ticists have not produced as yet any 
very convincing evidence that the ten- 
dency to crime is inherited, though 
clearly many defects and limitations of 
personality may be passed on. There 
is no real conflict between the impor- 
tance of heredity and environment, 
We should think always of nature and 
nurture, for both play their part. 
The problem of delinquency is part 
of the much wider problem of mental 
and emotional ill-health, and over the 
past thirty or forty years we have 
become increasingly aware of many 
factors of importance, We know, for 
example, that the general management 
    
      
  
     a SE : 
Sa
g 
- 
—
—
—
 
E
e
 
L
o
p
 dh
 
E
E
 
S
R
E
 
S
a
t
 
(
S
C
 
fa 
ch
ev
 
hd 
a
i
t
 
td 
YOUNG OFFENDER. Parents wait anxiously 
at door of Juvenile Court in italy while young 
offender “hears verdict. Although many coun- 
tries still apply Stone Age methods to punish 
juvenile delinquents, enormous progress has 
been made since the enlightened English jurist 
of the |8th century, Sir William Blackstone, 
could write: “Under seven years of age...an 
infant cannot be guilty of felony...but at eight 
years old he may be guilty of felony.” (Unesco 
Photos by D. Seymour.)   
of small children from infancy 
upwards is very important, that good 
standards and ideals for life and 
conduct must be shown to them by the 
adults with whom they are in contact, 
rather than given to them as mere 
dogmatic statements. Children are es- 
sentially imitative. The child whose 
parents spend time ‘in reading the 
more lurid crime and sex stories in the 
press is obviously more likely to be 
attracted by the “horror” comics than 
he would otherwise be. 
We know that every child needs 
some rules laid down for it, or it will 
feel insecure, and we know, too, that 
every child needs to have sensible and 
wise discipline, which must be main- 
tained. , Spoiling and indulgence is 
exceedingly unfair to the child. We 
know that the threat of a penalty to 
be incurred by some particular act can 
be very harmful if in fact the penalty 
is never imposed. In the past, chil- 
dren used to be told that the devil or 
the policeman would get them if they 
did what was wrong. Nowadays they 
are told that they will suffer some 
¥

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
    v c's . 
eT ia 
Unesco Courier. — Nt 10, — 1954 
a TI EET TT SS NE TT A i | "8 
of. 
pe : 
¥ _r 
“. a : “   
4 
ws 


### 70051: A Boy in trouble: what can we do to help him?

LEE ee TN TE. 
..what can we do to help him ? 
—~ 
deprivation, of pocket money, or 
sweets, or something else that they 
value, if they are not good. But if 
nothing happens children often distrust 
their parents and feel thrown back on 
their own resources to get what they 
want for themselves just when they 
want it. 
These points of view imply better 
education for those who have or are 
going to have children, and if we are 
patient a lot can be done, and it can 
be done in the home—which is the 
right place. Let it never be thought 
that the so-called scientific approach 
to delinquency implies that every child 
who is naughty or anti-social must be 
referred to a doctor or to a clinic. 
There can be no easy evasion of the 
responsibility of parents, teachers or 
others. 
We are probably getting nearer to 
truly causative factors when we recog- 
nize that in disciplining or admini- 
stering the proper form of punish- 
ment, however slight it may be, to a 
child, or indeed to an adult who has 
offended against the rules of society, 
we should always make it clear that 
we strongly. disapprove of the anti- 
social conduct, but that we do not 
disapprove of the individual who has 
made these mistakes; that we respect 
and love him or her just as much as 
ever. Punishment becomes meaning- 
ful in this way, it does not create 
rebellion nor a sense of exclusion and 
insecurity, as often occurs in the indi- 
vidual who is made to feel that he is ° 
bad and outcast. 
For many years physicians and 
others who have tried to deal with 
individual cases of delinquency have 
sald that the commonest cause of 
stealing is a sense of being unloved. 
Because this sounds rather an unusual 
statement, we must look into it a little 
more closely. 
The child in a broken home, or who 
is immured in an old-fashioned type 
of orphanage, may suffer from a 
genuine lack of interest and love. He 
may lack a sense of nearness and the 
feeling that he matters to someone 
and is respected. Equally, the child 
who has had too much demonstration 
of love and affection, who has been 
unwisely indulged and become spoilt, 
may, if he becomes demanding and 
tiresome, which is quite natural, be 
dealt with by irritated adults in too 
strict and arbitrary a fashion, and he 
will then have a great sense of in- 
security and considerable resentment. 
This is the type of child who very 
often decides that since he is no longer 
loved or liked, he must “go it alone”, 
he must get what he wants for himself, 
and certainly can disregard the teach- 
ing and the standards of those who 
have let him down. 
This is logical, and is the explana- 
tion of a good deal of delinquency in 
its beginnings. Many things in the 
process of our police system, courts 
and reformatory institutions tend to 
add to exactly these difficulties, and 
consequently they have led to recidi- 
vism and to the development of an 
anti-social life. - 
In the past few years some very 
significant research has been done in 
a number of countries throughout the 
world, of which the most valuable 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

  
IN TROUBLE 
(cont'd) 


### 70051: A Boy in trouble: what can we do to help him?

A BOY 
    
examples have been collected together 
in a book called Mental Health and 
Maternal Care. (1) These collected 
facts make 1t clear that in a large 
number of cases the child who is in 
the first three years of its life deprived 
of that love and security that. every 
child needs, which comes primarily 
from its mother or mother substitute, 
is likely to develop a deep sense of 
insecurity, and indeed, to suffer a 
distortion of personality which can 
never be fully corrected in later life. 
Children who are deprived, whether 
by a true lack of love, by the broken 
home, or by enforced absence from 
their mothers, have a tendency to grow 
up as embittered individualists, unable 
to love or fo accept love and friend- 
ship from other people. Their feeling 
of insecurity provides a persistent 
difficulty throughout their lives which 
makes them more liable to irrational 
anxiety, and they may have an in- 
creased liability to physical ill-health. 
Many of these children as they grow 
up, looking for something to enhance 
their status, and for companionship,” 
(1) By Dr. John Bowlby. - Published by the 
World Health Organization. 
  
PROBATION is now the preferred method of treatment of juvenile offen- 
ders in the U.S. and Canada, according to a recent U. N, Survey on Juvenile 
Delinquency in North America. But despite the many “model” training 
  
Forced fo go it alone’ 
drift into gangs or undesirable groups 
which lead them to develop their 
delinquent traits, and a good deal of 
the juvenile crime of today occurs in 
young people of this kind. There is a 
high incidence of this type of privation 
of love and security in the histories 
of juvenile delinquents. 
Clearly harsh punitive treatment of 
children like this will give them an 
increased sense of their “badness” and 
their abnormality and add to. the 
inferiority feelings, the sense of isola- 
tion and the general grudge against 
society and life they already have. 
The medicine most needed in the 
world to-day, whether for individual 
children who are difficult, for adults, 
in the family or industry, and for 
nations, is love, and then more love. 
By love, one means interest, respect 
for people and their rights—which 
implies no lack of firmness and no 
sentimentality. There is far more 
sentimentality and emotionalism dis- 
played often by those who punish | 
delinquents in the Courts or elsewhere 
than one can find in the average 
children’s psychological clinic. 
What, therefore, do we need at this 
present time to deal with our young 
delinquents ? Certainly we need to 
kind of futile ‘cold storage’ for troublesome youngsters,” 
TT =, : _— 
i : J 2 
-. - » . » ¥ 
Ed Fi 
. E: od ’ EL Se 5 g 
‘) ian . A - ee. - % E3 
a A “ <0 : 
’ , i * ] 
: : 
Vey oP a 
¥ o 2 p 3 A 
V k x F- BN ¥ . 
= + * » - 
give help and better instruction to 
those who are going to have children, 
to those who have them, and to those 
who teach them. We need much 
better training in the science of peno- 
logy and the understanding of these 
cases for those who are going to be 
children’s magistrates or judges of 
adult courts. Far too often people are 
put into these positions because they 
are skilled in the arguments of defence 
or prosecution, but without any true 
appreciation of the personalities of the 
people ‘with whom they have to deal. 
Similarly, better instruction is needed 
for the probation services, where these 
exist, and for the police. Better pro- 
vision is needed.in most countries for 
the observation and investigation of 
children before any court action is 
taken. We need on the preventive 
side to have far greater encouragement 
of parent-teacher associations in con- 
nection with schools, of youth organi- 
sations of all kinds, which provide 
outlets for healthy occupation and 
interest. We need far more continuing 
serious research into the nature and 
the handling of our problems. Lastly, 
and most important, we need more 
real respect for children and their 
rights and more love of a wise, 
continuing kind. 
schools and detention homes, the U. N. report adds that in many respects 
many “even today have not progressed far beyond their early limitations as a 
(USIS.) 
;

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

~ Unesco Courier. — Nr 10, — 1954 


### 70059: Brécourt: where the gate is always open

BRLGOURT 
Where the 
date is 
  
always open 
       
  
TL 
here is nothing out- 
side the gate of 
Brecourt to indicate 
that it is a “public 
institution of su- 
yw pervised education” 
W,, —or, to really call a 
spade a spade, a 
reform school for girls. 
There -is only a stone post and 
weathered letters . which simply 
announce “Chateau de Brecourt”. 
Twenty-five miles northwest of Paris, 
Brecourt lies in the pastoral setting of 
a valley on the edge of the Beauce, 
France's great bread-basket plain. It 
might be a rich man’s couniry estate 
(it was until the previous owner was 
found to be a spy during World 
War 1 but for one peculiarity: you 
can walk inio Brecourt—and out of it 
—a good deal easier than into 
. Re ARE 
0 
OE 
   
  
 
anyone's country estate. 
There is nothing inside iis gate, 
either, to tell you that Brecourt is a 
reform school. Brecourt is the living 
proof of an experiment that began in _ 
1944 to try a new tack on the old 
problem of what to do with juvenile 
delinquents. 
With the blessings of the French 
Ministry of Justice, two women, 
Dominique Riehl and Genevieve Bou- 
fault, took over a reform school at 
Cadillac, near Bordeaux, a 16th cen- 
tury chateau where young inmates 
had been locked into individual “cells 
at night. Alt Cadillac, they opened 
the doors and, despite a grim setting 
and wartime austerity, their methods 
‘worked. In 1947, they moved to 
Brecourt with Miss Riehl as director 
of the “public institution”, and Miss 
Boutault' as her assistant director. 
A SPECIAL REPORT 
Prepared under the direction 
of GUY SINOIR, French 
Ministry - of Justice 
TEXT BY DANIEL BEHRMAN 
FHOTOS DENISE COLOMB 
Copyright *Unesco Courier’ 
Today, there are G0 girls from 14 
to 21 years f age at Brecourf {when 
a new bu ling is completed in 
November t 2re will be 40 more). 
Their story is the same drab tale of 
juvenile delinquency the world over 
with nothing to appeal to lovers of 
detective novels. 
Nearly always, it is a story of 
delinquent parents (statistics show 
that divorce, separation and shattered 
homes cause 95 per cent of the 18,000 
cases of juvenile delinquency report- 
ed annually in France). The girl 
who is picked up for petly theft, 
. vagrancy or prostitution and sent {o 
Brecourt by a children’s court judge 
is not a hardened enemy of society. 
She merely chose an easy way out of 
2 hard lot. 
“Girls get inlo trouble much less 
often than hoys, but when they do, 
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 70059: Brécourt: where the gate is always open

va 
BRECOURT: 
(Continuedy 
     
   
K
T
S
 
FUTURE DRESSMAKERS ply their needles 
in a sunny room of what was once a rich man’s 
country home near Paris. Brecourt’s delinquent 
THAT PARISIAN LOOK in hand-embroidered THE WORLD WATCHES Brecourt and the school is seldom without visiting students and observers 
blouses takes years of patient practice. Gifted from abroad. Here, a young Brazilian psychologist studying its methods samples the cooking. 
the cause is much more deeply-rooted 
and harder to get at”, Miss Boutault 
told me inside the ivy-covered man- 
sion that now serves as Brecourt’s 
main building. She was a sturdy, 
handsome woman with iron-grey 
streaks in her hair and a frank note 
in her voice. I was willing to believe 
she had done nothing during her life 
except run a country home for five 
dozen youngsters until I learned that 
she also had a doctorate in law.  - 
“The emotional problem is much 
more important for girls”, she 
explained. “Teaching them a trade 
and keeping them busy are not 
enough—you have to prepare them 
for marriage which, after all, is the 
best solution.” : 
This means creating a normal 
environment, which is exacily what 
Brecourt sets out to do, concentrating 
on two main goals—a thorough train- 
~ 
26 
ing in useful trades, and the creation 
of a healthy family atmosphere. 
There is no marching and there are 
no uniforms. There are no rows of 
iron beds in a chill barracks and 
there is no cheerless mess hall. 
The pupils of Brecourt—Miss Bou- 
tault will only refer to them as pupils 
—live in groups of eight. Each group 
has its own apartment, its own dining 
room, and its own “educator”, the 
title of the devoted woman who is 
assigned to each group. She lives 
with her group, she eats with it and 
she shares its problems. The girls 
do not call her “mother”, but she is 
the nearest thing to a mother that an 
institution could provide. And the 
group, all too often, is the nearest 
thing to a normal family that these 
girls have ever known. 
Miss Boutault tock me through the 
home of the La Grappe group (grappe 
means a bunch of grapes in French). 
A raffia painting made by one of the 
girls lent a spot of colour to the walls 
of the dining room. In the bathroom, 
there were four wash basins—one to 
two girls—compartmented off for pri- 
vacy. The bedroom sparkled with 
gay cretonne bedspreads. One girl 
had placed a souvenir Eiffel Tower at 
the head of her bed; another a plush 
donkey. Dolls were common. Though 
all in their teens, the girls of Brecourt 
cling to a childhood of which they 
have liad only a fleeting glimpse. 
“They're a lively bunch, La 
Grappe”, Miss Boutault commented. 
“You see, each ‘educator’ seems to 
stamp her. personality into her 
group... the Gerbes are probably a 
little quieter and less impulsive. We 
try to fit each girl into the group best 
suited to her character, 
During this visit, the apartments

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 70059: Brécourt: where the gate is always open

          
  
girls live to learn their trades—so much so the 
some refuse to leave before completing the 
courses they are given. Co 
girls in Brecourt’s embroidery classes are taught 
to work from their own designs. 
were empty but Miss Boutault still 
took care to keep me aud my nofe- ] 
book out of sight. “These are girls, 
not guinea pigs,” she had said and 
politely, but firmly, refused to allow 
any staged photographs during my 
visit. } 
The apartmenis were emply be- 
cause the girls were in their classes. 
To most of the oulside world, Brecourt 
is known simply as the Public In- 
stitution of Professional Training 
and, unless Miss Boutault told you 
otherwise, you. could not tell the 
difference between Brecourt and a 
modern’ trade schcol with boarding 
facilities for its students. 
‘Every girl at Brecourt learns a 
trade, depending upon her aptitudes. 
She can be taught stenography, or 
dress-making, or hair-dressing or 
even farming but, when she leaves, 
she takes the same examination in 
Unesco Courier. — Nr 10 — 1954 
  
THE LAUNDRY ROOM is not a chore but another class where girls are taught the tricks of hand- 
ironing. Naturally, they learn by doing their own washing, 
Paris or in nearby Pontoise as the 
pupils in any trade school. Her “cer- 
tificate of professional aptitude,” too, 
is the same as that given to any 
other successful candidate. It bears 
no mention of her stay in an “insti- 
tution”, nor does she have a black 
mark in a police record ...or, in fact, 
any police record at all. 
Recently, Miss Riehl and Miss Bou- 
tault made a study of what had 
happened to 100 girls who had gra- 
duated from Brecourt (“gradualed” is 
the right word—often a girl asks to 
stay "to complete her training). It 
showed that 70 were doing well— 
married or holding jobs. Twenty 
had dropped out of sight (once-a girl 
is over 21, she no longer needs to 
reporl to probation officers) and 10 
per cent were not leading what Miss 
Boutault termed “a regular life”. 
- (Continued on page 29) 
 
aa UN 
hy 
170 ACRES OF LAND make Brecourt almost 
self-sufficient. Some girls are trained as future 
farm workers, but all receive an introduction 
to country life in the school’s gardens and in 
its model barns. 
27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 70059: Brécourt: where the gate is always open

Re-education: plenty of faith and 
TTL vi 
feet Ba ag fo re SPR 
7 mal 
~~. 
     : 
A " 
        
    
  
UNIFORMS ARE TABOO 
for the school’s sixty pupils 
who work and live in the 
sort of setting which might 
well be the envy of any 
girl's trade school anywhere. 
  
 
Nbe ve 
gh a 
oH . ~~ y p> We 
Ro, Jar Sit By o 
ER I MEE 
i por ad ey 
or : . 
“Wi ol Mig “Fe Re gg Wi N a, 
THE LOST CHILDHOOD of a Brecourt girl (authorities estimate that 95 per cent of A CAREER WITH A CURLING IRON is very much in 
juvenile delinquency is rooted In shattered homes) is reflected in the dolls to which she clings demand at Brecourt whose beauty salon is always full. Even 
even in her teens. Brecourt girls live in small“family” groups. A group bedroomisshown here. -the school’s directors have their hair done there. 
- 
28 
)

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 70059: Brécourt: where the gate is always open

few illusions 
  
{Continued from page 27) 
Not one, however, had turned to 
crime. “Ten per cent of failures... 
that’s quite a good margin of error 
in any school”, she commented. 
One reason {or these results prob- 
ably les in the “open-door” policy 
applied to Brecourt’s. 170 acres of 
parks, woods and farmlands (occa- 
sionally, a game poacher’ from a 
nearby village is flushed). Girls are 
often senf unaccompanied on errands 
or else visit parents in Paris on Sun- 
days, taking the bus by themselves. 
There are about half a dozen “es- 
capes” a year, bul they are not plann- 
ed “jail-breaks”. A girl mighl walk 
out of the gate on an impulse—but 
she nearly always comes back of her 
own free will. 
None of this should give the im-’ 
pression that teen-agers are pampered 
“at Brecourf. Suzanne or Therese in 
La Grappe or Le Nid begins her day 
at 6.45. From & a.m. to noon, she is 
in her trade class and she goes back 
there from 2.30 to 5.15. She has 
leisure, but it is organized. Idleness, 
the plague of prison "systems, has 
been scoured out of a day at Brecourt. 
Sweet-tooth and nest-egg 
NERE is nothing to stop Suzanne - 
from indulging her sweet-tooth, 
either. . While the girls are train- 
ed for their future professions, they 
earn money, part of which is put 
aside to constitute a nest-egg when 
they leave Brecourt and part of which’ 
they receive as a weekly allowance. 
~ Ilere, too, another effort has .been 
made to prevint the school from 
taking on the heartless character of 
an “institution”. After all, the old 
reform-school with its cells and its 
uniforms could serve only as a pre- 
paratory school for prison later on, 
The purpose of Brecourt, on the other 
BP nd as ~ 
a tld o 
i 3 Ut ) f - - 
. " ong £ = 
* y 2 oa - ¥. ; 2 i Ay - % ¢ 
J - Ad or o » 
- 
ma TL 
Unesco Courier. — NY 10, — 1954 
hand, is lo prepare its girls for life. 
The girls are sturdy and well fed. 
They prepare their own meals with a 
diet based upon Brecouri’s farm 
production (the day I was there, 
pupils were eating veal chops, the 
last of a series of veal menus which 
followed the killing of a calf). Phy- 
sical culture is an important part of 
their programme—all the more so 
because it demands a mental as well 
as a physical effort. As we watched 
a group playing volleyball, I noticed 
that one girl was wearing a skirt. 
_ instead of shorts. 
“It’s taken us a year and a half to 
get her interested in sports”, com- 
mented Miss Boutaull. “Now that 
we've come this far, the shorls can 
wait a little longer,” 
~ Teachers want to learn 
ennaps the most amazing feature 
P of the way Brecourt is run is the 
absence of any dogmalic system. 
Miss Riehl, Miss Boutault and their 
stall of six “educators” and six trade 
instructors are always willing to 
learn, “In re-education, vou never can 
say that you know the answers... 
because that means you are suffering 
from an intellectual hardening of the 
arteries”, said the assistant director. 
/ In one respect, Brecourt runs con- 
trary to methods used in cerlain other 
countries where psychiatric treatment 
is stressed. Of course, Brecourt 
makes use of educational psychology, 
but its direclors—and French rebabi- 
litation authorities in general—feel 
that the methods of the psycho- 
analyst are more valuable in treating 
children at home than girls living the 
life’ of a boarding school type of - 
institution. 
* “There's no formula in this work,” 
commented Miss Boutault. “In re- 
education, you must have a large 
quantity of faith... and a small 
quantity of illusions.” 
LE 
   
y 
? 
      
~ 
iy y : &: 
a :      
     
-~ . - - 
¥ 
- - . wilt i lw u - - § Lp Ce ni" 
- 
THE MENTAL SIDE of sports.is just as important as the exercise in Brecourt’s programme. French educators 
believe it serves an invaluable role by demanding an effort of willpower from girls who had once chosen an easy 
way out of difficulties. But to get the girls interested in sport often calls for plenty of patience. 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 70068: Frances: a tragedy that might have been prevented

a tragedy 
that might 
have been 
prevented 
- 
by Sir Cyril Burt 
~ 
N dealing with physical disorders it has become increas- 
I ingly recognized that prevention, wherever possible, is 
far better than cure. The same holds true of delin- 
quency and crime. To illustrate how urgently such mea- 
sures are needed, let me start with a single. case—typical 
of a vast number—in which cure proved impossible, but pre- 
vention would probably have achieved success. 
Frances, when I first saw her, was a’tall and attractive 
girl of fifteen and a half, who might almost have sat as a 
model for Greuze. With her long fair hair, flushed cheeks, 
and well-developed bust, she locked much older than her 
age. She was born in a London slum a couple of years 
before the outbreak of the war; and, when her father was 
called up and her mother found work in a munitions factory, 
Fanny (as her family called her) was evacuated with her 
older brother and sister to a farm in Somerset. Here she 
ran wild, and by the age of seven had become the terror 
of the village children. 
Returning to London at the end of the war, she proved 
to be exceedingly backward in her lessons; but, apart from 
a tendency to giggle, chatter, and occasionally weep, she 
gave no serious trouble in the classroom. At the age of 
eleven she was reported to the police for stealing money 
from a confectioners till, and referred by the magistrate 
to a child guidance <linic. From the case-file it appears 
that she had been regularly pilfering at home for three or 
four years. The father was described as a rough and 
drunken dock labourer, constantly quarrelling with his wife, 
whom he eventually deserted. The mother was an excitable 
woman, who had freely consorted with other men while her 
husband was overseas and was constantly in debt. 'Non-co- 
operative’, was the social visitor’s final remark. 
After the change from country to town, Frances’ own 
*One of the world's foremost authorities on problems of juvenile delinquency, Sir 
Cyril Burt, is Emeritus Professor of Psychology at the Umversity of London and was 
formerly Psychologist to the London County Council. He was the first psychologist to 
be officially appointed by any education authority in the world. His many books 
include The Young Delinquent (considered a classic in the field), The Backward Child - 
. and The Subnormal Mind. 
30 
health had steadily declined; and, with a few imaginary 
touches of her own, she succeeded in presenting a pathetic 
picture of weak and pretty innocence, neglected by her 
parents and misled by bad companions. At first the attitude 
of those who saw her was pity rather than reproof or punish- 
ment. Later more drastic measures were tried—docking her 
pocket money, corporal chatisement at home and at school, 
daily sessions with a psychoanalyst, and ultimately removal 
to a convalescent home, from which she absconded. 
After leaving school, she was dismissed from one job after 
another. At her last, she took a bundle of five-pound-notes 
from the _cashier’s desk, and vanished from sight. The 
police found her three weeks later, living in a Liverpool 
Jodging-house with a Portuguese sailor; and “Francesca”, as 
she now called herself, was brought back to London. She 
was discovered to be suffering from venereal disease, and 
‘was put on probation. When I saw her, I felt at once that 
she was already a hopeless case. In spite of every effort 
to reclaim her, she drifted about from place to place, de- 
teriorating physically and mentally. And a few months ago 
she died of tuberculosis at the age of eighteen. 
Frances’ history, like that of most others who swell the 
records of recidivists, shows clearly the converging influence 
of two main factors—a difficult temperament and an 
unfortunate environment. By “temperament” I mean the 
child’s inhorn mental constitution. What is inborn can 
obviously never be removed...One of the girl’s school- 
mistresses had indeed declared that in her view the child 
was morally defective and should be certified as such. But 
to make use of wholesale measures of this kind would clearly 
be impracticable. 
Nevertheless, both teachers and doctors still frequently 
cling to the old-fashioned notion that an habitual offender 
must have been endowed at birth with an inherent criminal 
nature, and that nothing can reform him, Today no psy- 
cHologist subscribes to Lombroso’s celebrated theory of il reo 
nato, the criminal who is born and not made. Nor does 
any moralist nowadays believe in the ancient philosophical 
doctrine of an inheritable moral sense, common to all law- 
abiding individuals, but lacking to a greater or lesser degree 
in certain exceptional cases. Moral behaviour is the result, 
y
n
 
> 
LN
 
3 
. 
» 
x) 
25 Ni 
p 4 
¥ ’ “r 
3 
1 
Ag 
’ 2% 
. 

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 70068: Frances: a tragedy that might have been prevented

Unesco Courter — Nr 10, — 1954 
        
  
- 
8
 i
d
 
-
~
 
pr
a 
n
i
t
 
LP
 
per
 V
 
ha - 
- 
h
a
 
    
   
   
    
   
    
   
AR 
pd Med 
ri 3 
"% gl, 4 Ie a . 2 
: VE NEES TYAS 
= . .V a &% » 9 
ol he £9 fe * A : AT i 
AN re PL 
| 1% hw ole po 
! a ' wi A Y ; 
$id Ae oN | 3 , . 
Ah) Hat Wak PA 
2] St 32 a As oe 5. f 
. on REY Jas tad 
y: 4 ¢ a > Ic SEAR 
’ 2 
. Al AEE Cc ee ee Fs 
RWC INERRIRIE 3&0 0 00 HEE A Lt WE yn 
; » ” = pi RE aia ey x ix 3 i ” 
AF Ae 4 erro SE 
2 ¥ Rh i f f # 
vo " : y » Foe i 4 ] 
3 ' x % i : 
. . . 3 ss Bop 18 
not of a single or simple innate faculty, joe ; : FLY § 
put comes from individual experience =~ = ; rd 
and sccial training. # : Fit 
At the same time we are forced to 0% : 
recognize that there are certain tem- : 
peramental conditions which make it 
far easier to. succumb to temptation. = ill m 
Most juvenile delinquents like Frances, 4 Hu ’ o 
exhibit from the earliest years a 1 4 
marked emotional instability which 5 , 
often runs through all the family. 5 
Like the rest of us, they inherit certain i 
specific emotional impulses—anger, fp 
fear, sex, and so on; but, unlike the oe ad - 
calmer law-abiding citizen, they in- : 
herit them with an excessive strength. 
i
 
Sooner or later this highly-strung, 
ill-balanced disposition is apt to give 
way under continued strain, and the 
child breaks down with neurotic 
disorder cr delinquent reactions—ire- 
quently both. ’ - 
Now, what is inborn is only a ten- 
dency; and it is by no means inevitable 
that the tendency should be fulfilled. 
Because a child inherits a liability to 
tuberculosis, we cannot assume that he 
is fated to die of that disease. If the 
potential neurotic or the potential 
delinquent is detected at an early age, 
and suitably protected and cared for, 
the potentiality itself need never come 
to maturity. 
Emotional characteristics are not the 
only qualities that are partly de- 
termined at birth: our intellectual 
abilities, both general and special, are 
also conditioned by our inborn limit- 
- ations. Differences in general intelli- 
gence can be readily measured by 
standardized tests; and, since it is - 
es
s 
t
a
c
 
y 
3

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 70068: Frances: a tragedy that might have been prevented

  
FRANCES (cond) 
An accumulation 
of many straws 
    
essential to consider how far a child’s behaviour is likely to 
be guided by intelligent “or rational motives, his capacities 
should, be assessed at the earliest possible age. 
Frances was tested at the age of eleven and found to 
possess the mental age of an average child of nine. In 
addition, owing to truancy and inattention, she was more 
than four years behindhand in her reading and arithmetic. 
Her bright manner thus concealed an innate incompetence; 
and in after-life one of the chief reasons why she lost her 
jobs was that she was really too stupid to perform her 
work effectively. 
Disrupted homes teach bad habits 
she could be formally certified as mentally deficient. 
Yet, had she been tested as soon as she returned to 
London, and transferred to a school or class for the educa- 
tionally subnormal, her whole history might have taken a 
different turn. Unfortunately at that date no facllities existed 
in her district. Among my own delinquent cases nearly 70 per 
cent have been ‘seriously retarded in their intellectual devel- 
opment; and it is from the ranks of these dull and backward 
pupils that the majority of our future delinquents and 
recidivists are eventually drawn. 
Although we cannot alter a child's heredity, we can do 
much to improve his environment. During early childhood 
the conditions which chiefly affect his moral and emotional 
development are those obtaining within his own home. 
Thirty years ago poverty with its inevitable concomitants— 
hunger, overcrowding, and lack of space and facilities for 
play—generally figured as the most conspicuous charac- 
teristics of households in which juvenile crime was bred. 
Today. as every social worker would agree, it is not so 
much the material conditions as the moral and emotional 
atmosphere that play the decisive part. 
It is comparatively rare for a child who has been brought 
up from infancy in the midst of a stable, intelligent, and 
law-abiding family to embark on a criminal career. But 
when, like Frances, the youngster is deprived of a mother’s 
tender care almost from birth, and when the home itself is 
disrupted by divorce, separation, or mutual conflict, the 
child has little or no chance to form steady habits of his 
own or to acquire a respectful affection for those who 
should control and watch over him. 
But of all the causal factors that are observable in the 
young delinquent’s home, by far the commonest is inefficient 
discipline. Discipline may be too lax, too severe, or (worst 
of all) of the forcible-feeble type where the child is at one 
moment scolded and slapped and at another coaxed and 
cajoled. 
H er lack of intelligence, however, was not so severe that 
Delay will be disastrous 
uch could be done by educating parents—particularly 
M the mothers of the next generation—in the principles 
of child management. Sometimes this will be out of 
the question, and the child must be removed. But in every 
case our motto should be, in the words of The Children’s 
Charter : “For every child a home, and that love and security 
that a home should afford, and for those who need foster- 
care the nearest substitute for a home of his own”. 
It is far easier to change the conditions in the school, or 
to shift the child from a school where he has become 
maladjusted to one more closely suited to his needs. 
Moreover, the school offers the readiest link between the 
supervising authority and the child’s immediate relatives 
and friends. ‘With the English public school as our 
traditional model, we have gradually come to recognize that 
education must embrace the training of character as well 
as the instruction of the intellect. 
Transferred to a small class where every child can be 
studied and taught along individual lines, with a flexible 
32 
  
 
THE PARENT AND CHILD. At a School for Parents opened in San 
Francisco, California, to combat juvenile delinquency, parents whose chil- 
dren have committed serious crimes (above) hear court judge lecture 
as part of mandatory weekly night course. Below, |5 years old delinquent 
submits to lie detector test. (USIS) : 
     ov — 
curriculum adapted to the needs of each, the dullard can 
be supplied with wholesome interests and taught simple yet 
useful forms of skill, his ill balanced temperament can be 
adjusted and stabilized, and the restless and high-spirited 
adventurer can be furnished with outlets for his natural 
impulses through the medium of games, sport, hobbies, 
'dancing, music, and the more elementary arts and crafts. 
To fit the daily work to the capacities of each individual, 
the pupils must be systematically tested and observed; and 
their school record cards should include, not only comments 
on educational progress, but temperamental assessments, 
notes on behaviour out of school as well as in, and full | 
details regarding the home background. 
At the very first sign of irresponsible conduct, appropriate 
steps must be taken before the actions become ingrained as 
habits. When ordinary measures are likely to be of no 
avail, the child should be promptly referred to the child 
guidance clinic. Delay will be disastrous. In almost every 
.instance, as the story of Frances herself so clearly shows, 
there is seldom a single cause of crime : a multiplicity of 
converging factors is nearly always at work. 
It is not the last straw, but the accumulation of straws, 
that breaks the camel’s back; and every adverse or demo- 
ralizing influence must be detected and if possible removed. 
Physical health may need attention; bad companions 
- separated; parents aided with prompt advice as each little 
emergency arises. Above all, the child himself must be 
tactfully handled and helped. 
In most cases, what will be required is not so much 
psychiatric treatment as moral training—an education or 
re-education of the child’s own misguided impulses, with a 
‘view to building up better habits of self-restraint and 
providing him with loftier ideals suited to his individual 
abilities and needs. -

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

Unesco Courter, — N' 10 — 1954 
From the Unesco Newsroom... 
A IDING ASIA'S EDUCA- 
TORS : An International In- 
© stitute of Child Study has been 
set up in Bangkok by the Gov- - 
ernment of ‘Thailand and 
Unesco, It will carry out basic 
research in child development 
and will equip Asian educators 
with the background they need 
to make use of successful educa- 
tional ideas and methods from 
other parts of the world in ex- 
tending and 1mproving ther 
own school systems. The first 
six staff members—six Thal 
educators—recently completed a 
year of special studies mn psy- 
chology at Toronto University, 
Canada, under Professor W. 
Line, Unesco consultant to the 
Bangkok Institute. 
* HUMAN RIGHTS’ FILM- 
STRIPS : Wales is produc- 
ing a series of filmstrips for 
schools to explain the Uni- 
versal Declaration of Human 
Rights. Prepared by the 
Welsh Unesco Committee the 
eight filmstrips deal with 
early Welsh history, the 
right to education and free- 
dom of worship, political 
rights, humaniiarianism, 
science and human welfare 
and Welsh contributions to 
human rights and inter- 
national understanding, 
Commentaries for use by 
teachers and adult education 
groups accompany each 
filmstrip. 
€C iLorens COMMUN- 
ITY CLUBS: A far-reaching 
cultural prcgramme has just 
been drawn up by El Salvador's 
Literacy and Adult Education 
Department. The plan involves 
setting up a network of rec- 
reational clubs across the coun- 
try. The clubs will function 
with the help of local parents’ 
associations and will be super- 
vised by trained educators. In 
these clubs, children will play 
and work together, and also 
will learn about the important 
social problems of their com- 
munity. 
+ EUROPEAN UNIVER- 
SITY PACT : A new nter- 
national convenltion now 
enables students holding a 
diploma giving access to a 
unmwersily of a member 
- country of the Council of 
Europe lo enter umnwersities 
in “other member countries, 
The convention came nto 
. force after the first three 
Ireland 
ratified 
countries—England, 
and Denmark—had 
it. 
[4 
Caan REACTION 
TEACHING : Students from 
eighteen Latin American coun- 
tries, who have graduated from 
Unesco’s Regional Fundamental 
Education Training Centre at 
Patzcuaro, Mexico, are now do- 
mg valuable work in their own 
countries on educational pro- 
jects—often the training of new 
teachers. Graduates who re- 
turned to Honduras, Cuba and 
Venezuela are working in na- 
tional centres along similar hnes 
to the one at Patzcuaro. In 
Costa Rica, five graduates have 
formed a team that travels 
throughout the country giving 
courses for rural teachers. Eight 
graduates are working for gov- 
ernment educational and agn- 
cultural projects in Brazil. Sev- 
eral of the Mexican graduates 
are working with newly-created - 
rural welfare brigades. And 
graduates from Peru, Guate- 
mala, Honduras and other 
  
A\\ % ORLDS LARGEST 
TAPESTRY : The largest ta- 
pestry ever woven (43 1/2 by 
28 1/2 feet) has been presented 
by Belgium to the United Na- 
tions. The tapestry’s themes are 
‘Peace, Prosperity and Equali- 
ty”, and views of the chief cities 
of UN. Member States line the 
borders. The work of art was 
designed by an Antwerp artist, 
Peter Colfs, after a nation-wide 
competition. Fourteen artist 
craftmen put together 94,000 
miles of yarn (equal to four 
times the distance round the 
equator) to create this huge 
work, under the direction of 
Gaspard de Wit of the Royal 
Belgian Art Factory. Working 
on a special loom they added an 
average of two and a quarter 
miles of yarn to the tapestry 
every hour. The UN. Tapestry 
is to hang on the wall of the 
UN. General Assembly Building. 
 
gates. 
ence, 
russia and Chile. 
marine biology. 
recent industrichization,   
UNESCO GENERAL CONFERENCE 
OPENS IN MONTEVIDEO, URUGUAY 
Delegates from Unesco’s 72 Member States were on hand on 
November 12 when the Eighth Session of the Unesco Gener- 
al Conference opened in Montevideo, Uruguay. The confer- 
ence will last four weeks until December 11. 
shape Unesco’s future programme and policies. 
vote on a budget for financing Unesco’s activities. The propos- 
ed figure is twenty-two million dollars for the two-year period 
of 1955-1956, but the final figure must be decided by the dele- 
This is the first time since Unesco was founded in 1946 
that so many nations have been represented at a General Confer-- 
Unesco recently has been strengthened by the adhesion 
of four new member states: the Soviet Union, Ukraine, Byelo- 
In addition, Poland, Hungary and Czechoslo- 
vakia all have recently resumed active membership and Ruma- 
nia and Bulgaria have applied to join. 
Among its work, the conference in Montevideo will be consi- 
dering proposals that Unesco extend greater aid for research 
and experimentation in the peaceful utilization of atomic energy, 
research in desert and humid tropical zones, oceanography and 
Proposals also call for the creation of a South 
Asion centre to study various social problems arising out of 
The establishment of an educational 
film production institute in Latin America ond an educational 
film library for the Middle East is also to be examined. 
Delegates will 
And they will 
      
countries are also at work in 
their home countries. 
+ PARENTS UNIVER- 
SITY : Members of parents 
school committees and work- 
ers in trade union children’s 
ccemmittees are able to follow 
siz month's study courses in 
educational questions at a 
“parents university” in Len- 
ingrad. Since the “unwer- 
sity” was opened, some 'T00 
parents have completed the 
course and have stiice taken 
an active part in public and 
social work. 
PP Lastic ARTISTS : The 
International Association of 
Plastic Arts has just held its 
first General Assembly. The 
meeting” took place 1n Venice 
from September 28 to October 4 
and scores of artists from all 
continents participated. The 
Association was founded two 
years ago by an international 
conference of artists convened 
by Unesco. Its purpose is to 
assure cultural co-operation be- 
tween countries and defend the 
interests of painters, sculptors, 
and engravers of all nations. 
+ MEDICINE'S MAGIC 
EYE : Research with new 
nuclear aids shows that 98% 
of the basic material in the 
human body is replaced year- 
ly, according to Dr. Paul 
Aebersold, Director of the 
Isotopes Division of the 
United States Atomic Energy 
Commission. Studies with 
radioactive isotopes disprove 
the old theory that the body 
takes in food, air and walter 
manly as a fuel to provide 
energy. Findings on the 
body's rate of turnover were 
revealed by scientifically re- 
cording the course of radio- 
active elements in the human 
body. (See the special issue 
of The Courier, “The World , 
Within the Atom”, December 
1953 for an article on radio- 
active isotopes) 
T HE XMAS SPIRIT: For 
the sixth consecutive year, the 
United Nations Children's Fund 
(UNICEF) 1s again selling a se- 
ries of gay and colourful Christ- 
mas cards for the benefit of the 
world's needy children. The 
cards carry as their theme “Joy 
for the World's Children”, and 
show boys and girls at play in 
Indonesia, Korea, Iran, Austria 
and Mexico. Last year, UNICEF 
sold nearly two million cards 
and netted one hundred thou- 
sand dollars, enough to provide 
powdered milk for seventeen 
thousand children once a day 
for a whole year. 
A] 
+ TIE PEACEFUL USE 
OF ATOMS : The first in- 
ternational - scienfific re- 
search lgboralory wn the 
world came into being on 
September 29 when France 
and the Federal Republic of 
Germany simultaneously rati- 
fied the Convention selfing 
up an European Organiza- 
tion for Nuclear Research, 
The Convention, drawn uy 
under Unesco auspices, had 
already been ratified by 
seven countries. The Euro- 
pean Organization will con- 
struct an international labo- 
ratory for nuclear research 
in Geneva and will develop” 
co-operation beliveen eIisi~ 
ing laboratories in theoreti- 
cal studies. The research 
will be of a non-military ne- 
ture, and ifs resulls will be 
published or mode generally . 
arailable. Director of the 
Organization will be Swiss 
seienlist Felix Bloch, No- 
hel Prize Winner, who has 
directed the Institule of 
Physics of Stanford Univer- 
sity (USA)y jor many years, 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

From the Unesco Newsroom... (Continued) 
U NESCO PACTS SIGNED: 
Denmark has become the for- 
tieth nation to sign an inter- 
national convention sponsored 
by Unesco to protect cultural 
property in time of war. The 
convention now awaits ratific- 
ation by the countries who 
signed it. The same number of 
countries have now signed an- 
other Unesco-sponsored agree- 
ment—the Universal Copyright 
Convention—and in October, 
Spain became the third country 
to ratify that agreement. The 
Universal Copyright Convention 
goes into effect as soon as 
twelve nations officially ratify 
it. 
+ REFUGEE TRAINEES 
Over a hundred young Arab 
refugees have been taken 
out of the routine of camp 
life and are being trained at 
a modern vocational training 
centre just outside ancient 
Jerusalem. The centre was 
established by ‘the United 
Nations Relief and Works 
Agency for Palestine Refu- 
gees, with help from the In- 
ternational Labour Organiza- 
tion and Unesco. The Relief 
and Works Agency is caring 
for almost a half-million 
Palestine refugees in Jordan 
alone. It is trying to open 
new horizons for these men 
and women who to-day have 
no way of earning their own 
Iwelihoed. The young men 
at the vocational training 
centre are learning to be- 
come radio mechanics, elec- ~ 
tricians, machinists, plumb- 
UNITED NATIONS DAY 
On October 24—United Nations 
Day—the UN flag waved over 
national capitals, towns “and 
even villages all over the world 
as men, women and children of 
all races celebrated the United 
Nations’ ninth birthday. In Li- 
beria, post offices put on sale 
a new series of Liberian stamps’ 
honouring the United Nations. 
Churches throughout the coun- 
try held services calling for 
world peace. Public demonstra- 
tions included a parade of the 
flags of UN member states 
through the main streets of the 
capital. Australia and the Phi- 
lippines decided to make their 
celebrations a Umted Nations 
Week. Burma arranged film 
shows, public lectures and photo 
exhibits, and India sponsored a 
wide variety of events, radio 
broadcasts, a new postage stamp, 
exhibitions, leaflets and cele- 
brations in the schools. 
In Pakistan, schools and uni- 
versities arranged special pro- 
grammes, and there were exhi- 
bitions, pageants and flag-rais- 
ing ceremonies. Children in 
Thailand, Colombia and the 
Scandinavian countries cele- 
brated wilth folk-dancing and 
singing. In the Soviet Union, 
UN leaflets and posters were 
widely distributed and publica- 
tions of the UN and the Special- 
ized Agencies exhibited. 
UN Day. in Medellin, Colom- 
bia, was marked by the opening 
of the country’s first modern 
public library, a ceremony at 
which Dr. Luther Evans, Direc- 
tor-General of Unesco officiat- 
ed. The new library is a Unesco 
pilot project designed to encour- 
age public library development 
in Latin America. It will be 
34 
ers, carpenters and weld- 
ers. When they graduate, 
they will be helping to over- 
come Jordan's serious short- 
age for skilled workers. The 
centre hopes to train at least 
sir hundred young Arab ref- 
ugees during the next three 
years. - 
WwW OMENS RIGHTS: 
Hungary recently became the 
fifteenth country to sign the 
United Nations Convention on 
the Political Rights of Women 
since it went into force on July 
7, 1954. The Pact grants wo- 
men the right to vote, to be 
elected to public office and to 
exercise all public functions on 
equal terms with men. It wason- ° 
July 7, sixty-one years-ago that 
a national ballot was cast by a 
woman for the first time, In 
New Zealand. 
+ SCHOOLS ADOPT 
FARMS :Geography and na- 
ture study lessons have taken 
on a new meaning itn secon- 
dary schools at Birmingham, 
England, since the children 
began to “adopt” farms in 
nearby counties. The lime 
spent at work on the farms 
by the farm study groups”, 
the follow-up work in the 
classroom and the exchange 
of letters between children 
and farm families provide a 
practical lesson in “citizen- 
ship”—the training for com- 
munity living mn its widest 
sense. 
AROUND THE WORLD 
the first in the country to lend 
books for home reading. Apart 
from its initial collection of ten 
thousand books--which soon will 
grow to fifty thousand—the 
new library also has a sizeable 
record collection and many pic- 
tures and filmstrips. It will 
operaté in close conjunction 
with local adult education 
work. ) 
In Great Britain, the UN Day 
activities included displays in 
shop windows, a great children’s 
gala and special radio and tele- 
vision features. ~ A large UN 
poster was displayed on ten 
thousand outdoor advertising 
sites. Mexico held a national 
essay and poster contest, and 
the prizes will be distributed on 
December 10, Human Rights 
Day. In the United States 
which celebrated UN Day in a 
wide variety of ways, a special 
committee chose as the theme 
for this year’s ceremonies: “The 
UN depends on you.” 
The UN flag flew over towns 
in all parts of France, and in 
Marseilles, a giant illuminated 
banner shone out over the Old 
Port, proclaiming “Journée des 
Nations Unies,” In Paris and 
other cities, schoolchildren saw 
special film programmes or 
visited TUN exhibitions. UN 
programmes were presented on 
radio and television, 
These were just a few of the 
many UN Day celebrations. 
Every land honoured the birth- 
day according to its own nation- 
al characteristics, its history 
and its culture. But everywhere 
prevailed the same hope that 
the United Nations will help win 
the battle for a lasting peace. 
 
    
LETTERS TO 
THE EDITOR 
EDITORS NOTE. — In previous issues, the Unesco 
Courrier has devoted considerable space, in this column, 
to letters from readers on various aspects of auxiliary 
international languages, such as Esperanto, Ido, Interlin- 
gua, Volapuk, etc. Letters from readers in every continent 
and in almost every country in the world continue to 
arrive at our editorial offices in Paris in increasing 
numbers. The Editors wish to take this occasion to 
express their thanks to all our correspondents for their 
interesting remarks and comments, bul regret that the 
huge volume of letters makes it impossible to reply per- 
sonally to each correspondent. However, all lelters have 
been carefully studied by the responsible officials at 
Unesco prior to the opening of the General Conference 
of Unesco in Montemdeo, Uruguay. At this conference the 
. question of Esperanto and international auxiliary langua- 
ges are being examined. 
Sir, 
As I read the article on “The Flag with the Blue and 
White Shield” (issue n° T — Saving Our Heritage in 
Stone) and saw the photos of Samothrace Packed Away, 
it all brought back to me one of the most moving stories I 
ever heard. - 
Shortly after the 1945 Armistice I was in the Louvre 
staring up at the Winged Victory. I was thrilled to 
find this old friend right back where she belonged, at 
the top of her majestic stairway, ready to welcome the 
world chez elle. . 
I turned to a guard standing nearby and smiled 
gratefully. He, in turn, nodded understandingly, walked 
slowly up to me and, with deep emotion, confided in me. 
“Oh. monsieur ! what would you have felt 1f you had 
been in my place at the outbreak of war, the day they 
took ‘her’ off for safe-keeping ? For days they hammered 
away. Boards, machinery, pulleys, and such nose! Ima- 
gine, we got so used to this fuss and bother that we 
didn’t pay any more attention to it. Not like the ‘first 
few days when they took out la Vénus and then la Jo- 
conde. Well, before we knew what was happening, it 
was all over. She was being carefully lowered down the 
stairway, dispossessed, taken away from us. Now what 
would become of her? Who would defend her? Where 
would they hide her? And for how long?.. Quite 
suddenly, yes instinctively, the workers and we -guards 
all stopped in our tracks and stared with disbelief at 
this new disappearance. We took off our hats and bent 
our heads in mourning, the better to hide our tears... Be- 
lieve me, monsieur, we felt that the flag of France was 
being withdrawn...” 
Laurelton, N. Y,, U.S.A. Maurice Kurtz 
Sir, 
I congratulate you on the American Negro issue of the 
Unesco Courier (N° 6 of 1954). It is the sort of thing that 
gives one some hope for the future of the world. 
You must realize that the question of elimination of 
race-prejudice and race-discrimination is one of the 
fundamental questions on the basis of which we are 
going to judge the sincerity and honesty of the whites. 
What is happening in South Africa, Kenya and other 
African regions in the possession of whites is so 
exasperating and discouraging to the non-whites in this 
world that the present issue of The Courier is a ray o 
ope... . : 
Fergusson College, Dr. D.D, Karve 
Poona, India. 
Sir, } 
This summer I came across two copies of The Unesco 
Courier, What, I think, really distinguishes it from 
other reviews and magazines is the spirit which inspires 
it. ' It does not limit its coverage to “superficial” or just 
picturesque facts about peoples from many lands, but 
presents precise and vivid information on what is being 
done to give help, culturally and economically, to people 
who need it. Reading this publication I could sense a 
great current of effective brotherhood flowing from a 
great many hearts filled with goodwill 
..In the issue of the Courier I have in front of me 
there appeared “A Letter to Jennifer”, in which an 
American father tells his daughter about Unesco... I must 
admit, though I blush to do so, that this was the first 
time that I understood and really “felt” what Unesco 1s, 
and how much we need it to protect the human values 
which we still — yes, still — prize today. 
Basel, Switzerland, J.B. . 
Editor's Note. — The ahove lelter was originally published 
tn the letter cohiinn of the co-operative weekly “Co-operation”, 
‘in Basel, Swuzertand,     Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
!l
, 
ru
e 
Cu
ri
al
, 
P
A
R
I
S
-
1
9
*
.
 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

A MAGNIFICENT 
  
An 
OF 
CHRISTMAS GIFT 
NEXT MONTH 
exceptional 
Xmas number with 
6 pages of colour 
plates on RARE 
MASTERPIECES 
WORLD ART 
THE UNESCO COURIER 
1/- 
Francs 
Singleissue: 
or 50 Fr. 
Yearly subscription : 
6/- or 300 French Francs 
TO SUBSCRIBE 
In the United Kingdom send your 
remiltanee to IIL.M. Stationery Offi 
ce P.O. Box 569, London S.E. 1. 
In other countries write to National 
Distributors listed below. 
Ii your country is not listed write 
directly lo Unesco Sales Division 
19, avenue Kléber, Paris, I'rance. 
 
Unesco's National Distributors from whom 
the English edition of THE COURIER can be 
obtained are listed below. Other Unesco 
Distributors are listed 1n the French and 
Spanish editions of THE COURIER 
* 
Australia ;: Oxford University Press, 346, 
Little Collins Street, Melbourne. 
Austria : Wilhelm Frick Verlag, 27, Gra- 
ben, Vienna I. 
Burma : Burma Educational Bookshop, 
551-3 Merchant Street, P.O. Box 222, 
Rangoon. 
Canada : 
Toronto. 
Ceylon : Lake House Bookshop, The Asso- 
ciated Newspapers of Ceylon, Ltd., P.O. 
Box 244, Colombo !. Rs. 5 
Cyprus : M. E. Constantinides, P.O.B. 473, 
Nicosia. 
Denmark : Ejnar Munksgaard Ltd., 6 Nor- 
regade, Copenhagen, K. 
Egypt : La Renaissance d’Egypte, 9, Adly 
Pasha Street, Cairo, 
University of Toronto Press, 
NATIONAL 
Ethiopia ¢ International Press 
P OB. 120, Addis-Ababa. 
Finland : Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Kes- 
kuskatu, Helsinki, 
Formosa : The World Book Company Ltd, 
99, Chung King South Rd, Section |, 
Taipeh, 
France : Sales Division, Unesco, 19, Avenue 
Kléber, Paris- 1 6e. 
Germany : Unesco Yertrieb fur Deutsch- 
land, R. Oldenbourg, Munchen. 
Greece : Elefthéroudakis, Librairie Inter- 
nationale, Athens. 
Hong Kong : Swindon Book Co., 25 Nathan 
Road, Kowloon. 
India : Orient Longmans Ltd., Bombay, Cal- 
cutta, Madras : sub-depots : Oxford Book 
. & Stationery Co., Scandia House, New 
Delhi; Rajkamal Publications Ltd., Hima- 
laya House, Bombay 7, Rs. 4. 
Agency, 
DISTRIBUTORS 
Indonesia : G.C.T. van Dorp & Do. NY., 
Djalan Nusantara, 22, Djakarta. 
Iraq : McKenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad, 
Israel : Blumstein’s Bookstores Ltd., 35, 
Allenby Road, P.O. Box 5154 Tel-Aviv. 
Jamaica : Sangster’s Book Room, 99, Har- 
bour Street, Kingston; Knox Educational 
Services, Spaldings. 
Japan : Maruzen Co, Inc., 6 Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, Tokyo. 
Jordan : 1.1. Bahous and Co, Dar-ul-Kutub, 
Salt Road, Amman. 
Liberia : Jacob Momolu Kamara, Gurley 
and Front Streets, Monrovia 
Malayan Federation and Singapore : 
Peter Chong and Co., P.O. Box 135, 
Stngapore. 
Malta : Sapienza’s Library, 26, Kingsway, 
Valletta. 
Netherlands : N, V, Martinus Nijhoff, 
Lange Yoorhout 9, The Hague, 
New Zealand: Unesco Publications Centre 
7 De Lacy Street, Dunedin, N. E. 2. 
Nigeria : C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O, Box 174, 
Lagos, 
Norway : A{S Bokhjornet, Stortingspfass, 7 
Oslo. 
Pakistan : Ferozsons Ltd., Karachi, Lahore, 
Peshawar. Rs, 3 
Philippines Philippine Education Co., 
Inc., 11 04 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila. 3,00 
Surinam : Radhakishun and Company Ltd., 
(Book Dept.), Watermolenstraat 36, Para- 
maribg. 
Sweden : ABC.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hove 
boktande’, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm !6. 
Thailand : Suksapan Panmit, Arkarn 9, 
Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 20 ticals. 
Union of South Africa : Yan Schaik's Book- 
store, Ltd., P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
United Kingdom : H M. Stationery Office, 
PO. Box 569, London S.E.I, 
U.S.A. : Unesco Publications Service, 475 
5th Ave, New York 17, NY.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/070070engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

         the «city streets 
DELINQUENT GIRLS GET 
THEIR FIRST CHANCE 
(See story page 25) 