# [078370](078370engo.pdf) 4

## [Page 1](078370engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
 

## [Page 2](078370engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

TREASURES 
OF 
WORLD ART 
D 
Korean altar boy 
This unique figure of a Buddhist 
altar attendant was carved in Korea 
during the late Yi Dynasty (18th- 
19th) century. Thirty inches high 
and made of polychrome wood, 
it is now in the Honolulu Academy 
of Arts, Hawaii. No other similar 
figure, either in Korea or elsewhere, 
exists today comparable with it 
either in size or quality. Such 
statues were placed in pairs on 
either side and in front of the 
Buddha in provincial temples of 
Korea. This one originally held a 
bird in its hands. 
Photo © Honolulu Academy 
of Arts, Hawaii.   2 0CT01967

## [Page 3](078370engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

The, mCourier 
OCTOBER 1967 
20TH YEAR 
  =
I
 
NOW PUBLISHED IN 
ELEVEN EDITIONS 
  
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 
Japanese 
Italian 
Hindi 
Tamil 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7e. 
Annual subscription rates: 15/-stg.; $3.00 
(Canada); 10 French francs or equivalent; 
2vyears: 27/-stg.: 18 F. Single copies 1/6-stg.; 
30 cents; 1 F. 
* 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except 
in August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese, Italian, Hindi and Tamil. In the United Kingdom it 
is distributed by H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, 
London, S.E.L 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads "Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will ba supplied on request; Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Read- 
ers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
* 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Lucio Attinelli 
Managing Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition: Arturo Despouey (Paris) 
Russian Edition: Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition: Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition: Annapuzha Chandrahasan (Delhi) 
Tamil Edition: Sri S. Govindarajulu (Madras) 
Research: Olga Radel 
Layout & Design: Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief 
- 
19
67
 
MC
 
67
-1
-2
28
 
A 
Ne
 
10
 
Page 
14 
16 
18 
20 
23 
24 
27 
30 
  
  
THE MENACE OF ‘EXTINCT’ VOLCANOES 
By Haroun Tazieff 
MARIE CURIE 
The life of a woman dedicated to science 
THE RAREST, MOST PRECIOUS VITAL FORCE 
By Marie Curie 
YEARS OF HAPPINESS, WORK AND TRIUMPH 
MARIA SKLODOWSKA 
THE DREAMER IN WARSAW 
By Leopold Infeld 
THE WOMAN WE CALLED ‘LA PATRONNE’ 
By Marguerite Perey 
RUBEN DARIO 
The resurrection of Hispano-American poetry 
By Emir Rodriguez Monegal 
GREAT MEN, GREAT EVENTS 
THE WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME 
A new form of aid for development 
By Colin Mackenzie 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
Korean altar boy 
Cover photo 
 
Photo Archives Pierre et Marie Curie. 
  
One hundred years ago a woman who 
was to become one of the most 
illustrious scientists of our century was 
born in Warsaw. Maria Sklodowska, or 
Marie Curie as the world was to know 
her, dedicated her entire life passionately 
and unselfishly to science and above 
all to the completely new science of 
radioactivity, of which she was one of 
the pioneers (see page 14). The 
“Unesco Courier” has asked a 
distinguished Polish physicist, Leopold 
Infeld, and a French woman scientist, 
Marguerite Perey, who worked for 
several years with Marie Curie, to 
recount the early life of this woman 
of genius (page 20) and the closing 
years of her work for science (page 23).

## [Page 4](078370engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

Mount Bezimianyi “explodes”. This 
“extinct” volcano (its name signifies 
“unnamed”) on the Kamchatka 
Peninsula, to the east of Siberia, was 
considered unimportant by 
volcanologists who focused their 
attention on strongly active volcanoes 
in the region. Suddenly, on March 30, 
1956, a tremendous explosion blew 
the top off Bezimianyi, hurtling debris 
40 kilometres (25 miles) into the air 
at a speed of over 1,000 km/h 
(700 mph) and devastating 1,000 sq.km. 
(400 sq. miles) of forest. This photo 
was taken from 45 km. away. 


### 19208: The Menace of 'extinct' volcanoes

THE MENACE 
OF ‘EXTINCT’ 
VOLCANOES 
by Haroun Tazieff 
    
    
In the almost twenty years | have been travelling 
around the world trying to get to know something 
about the most splendid and violent spectacle that 
have gradually become 
laymen and even 
professional geologists and volcanologists usually 
ignore, and it fills me with dread—the prospect, 
some day soon, of unheard-of volcanic catastrophes. 
nature has to offer, | 
convinced of something that 
  
You may perhaps imagine that only 
the stupid outbreak of nuclear war 
could cause the deaths of a hundred 
thousand, five hundred thousand, or 
a million people within a few minutes, 
but you would be wrong; wrong, be- 
cause, as geological evidence has 
finally convinced me, humanity has so 
far been fantastically lucky and the 
catastrophes of Pompeii and St. Pierre 
de la Martinique are nothing to what 
awaits it. 
A loss of 
HAROUN TAZIEFF, Belgian geologist and 
volcanologist, is well known to our readers 
(see the “Unesco Courier”, October 1963; 
November 1965). He is the author of many 
scientific publications and several popular 
science books and has produced a number 
of prize-winning scientific and documentary 
films on volcanic eruptions. This text is 
taken from a study published in Unesco's 
quarterly, “Impact of Science on Society”, 
No 2, 1967 (annual subscription $2,50; 13/-). thirty thousand, forty 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
A
P
N
 
G
.
S
.
G
o
r
s
h
k
o
v
 
n : 
 
  
1S Ey b 4 
BL alr 
~ 
thousand people killed by the blast of 
a volcano—these were already bad 
enough; but these were small towns 
compared with the enormous modern 
cities threatened at closer or longer 
range by a volcanic outburst— Naples 
and Rome, Portland and Seattle, Mexi- 
co City, Bandung, Sapporo, Oakland, 
Catania, Clermont-Ferrand. . . 
Yes indeed! Rome, Portland, Cler- 
mont-Ferrand: volcanoes regarded as 
well and truly extinct near these cities 
are dead only to eyes that cannot or 
will not see. Men, as we all know, 
have short memories. Political or 
natural, catastrophes cease to worry 
them almost as soon as over, and 
teach them little. A volcano may be 
less than a century dormant and 
people almost cease altogether to 
think of it as such; all the more so 
if a thousand years or more has pas- 
sed. 
But volcanoes are geologically live: 
time, for them, is counted not in years 
or even in centuries, but in millenia and 
tens of millenia. The thousand-year 
sleep that is nothing to them is an 
eternity to men living under their 
shadow—the volcanoes of the Massif 

## [Page 5](078370engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 19208: The Menace of 'extinct' volcanoes

SANA 
J 4 AY As pl . \, x0 Ha WO . 
RT Th) {TA 
r 
Central in France, those of Latium, 
of the Cascade Range in Oregon, and 
of California (although the latter had 
numerous, if "not major,. eruptions 
throughout the last century, and even 
as recently as 1916 in the case of 
Lassen Peak). 
But Clermont-Ferrand, Rome? Com- 
pletely forgotten by the inhabitants, 
the fact remains that only a few mil- 
lenia separate us from the last erup- 
tions. In the course of their lifetimes, 
millions of years long, there must have 
been many lulls, for dozens or even 
hundreds of centuries, and there are 
really no grounds for supposing that 
the present calm signifies the end of 
the volcano's activity rather than a 
period of repose. Obviously the very 
length of these quiet periods is hope- 
ful; centuries, hundreds of centuries 
might pass and Clermont-Ferrand, 
Rome or Seattle not be wiped out. 
But the interval might be much less. 
The two most violent eruptions of 
the twentieth century occurred at appa- 
rently extinct volcanoes; the first at 
the Katmai volcano in Alaska from 
June 6 to 8, 1912, the second at the 
Bezimianyi Sopka in the Kam- 
chatka peninsula on March 30, 1956. 
Relatively little was. known about Kat- 
mai and its neighbouring volcanoes, 
but ten years ago it was thought that 
there remained little to learn about 
. the volcanic chain around the Bezi- 
mianyi volcano—indeed, Klyuchi, hard- 
ly- 50 kilometres away, is one :of 
the best-known volcanological obser- 
vatories, Nevertheless, and despite 
intensive study of the strongly active 
volcanoes in the area, no importance 
was attached to this insignificant 
“extinct” cone, its very name, “Unnam- 
ed" emphasizing its insignificance. 
The explosion of March 30, 1956 
blew the top off the mountain, hurtling 
debris 40,000 metres into the air, blast- 
ing down the forests at its base, and 
snapping tree trunks like matchwood 
up to 20 kilometres away. As in 
Alaska forty-four years earlier, no-one 
was killed, but only because these 
regions are practically uninhabited. 
What would happen in six months, six 
years or sixty times six years if a 
cataclysm on this scale were to strike 
lava or Japan? 
In fact such a cataclysm did occur, 
although fortunately on a smaller 
scale, about fifteen years ago in New 
Guinea. In this case it was not even 
known that the mountain was a volca- 
no; Mount Lamington, near the eastern 
end of New Guinea, had been regarded 
as just’ an ordinary mountain until the 
day when, on January 16, 1951, a thin 
column of vapour was seen rising from 
its summit. The next day slight earth 
tremors were noticed around the foot 
of the mountain. The escapes of gas 
and the tremors increased during the 
next two days, and a small amount 
of ash was ejected. 
On January 20, the eruption had be- 
come spectacular; the wreath of ashes 
reached up over 10,000 metres into the 
sky and rumblings were heard, some- 
times dozens of kilometres away 
On Sunday January 21, the volcano 
was roaring continuously and at 10.40 
a.m. it exploded: a fearsome wreath 
of convoluting clouds of gas, spilling 
ash, lapilli and blocks, shot up to a 
height of 15,000 metres in a matter 
of seconds and formed a huge mush- 
room cloud, while a glowing ava- 
lanche spread over the ground with 
the same terrifying speed. Two hun- 
dred and fifty square kilometres of 
J

## [Page 6](078370engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 19208: The Menace of 'extinct' volcanoes

MENACE OF ‘EXTINCT’ VOLCANOES (Continued) 
Rome, Mexico City, Oakland, Seattle, Bandung, Catania, 
Sapporo, Clermont-Ferrand... on the waiting list 
countryside were laid waste, and 3,000 
people killed. 
| have tried to intimate to readers 
my anxiety about supposedly extinct 
volcanoes; but there is another, yet 
more terrifying menace: the menace 
of ignimbrite flows. 
There has only been one ignimbrite 
eruption in historic times. It was rela- 
tively moderate. | say relatively be- 
cause it nevertheless covered a sur- 
face some 30 kilometres long by S kilo- 
metres wide with a layer on average 
100 metres deep, which, if spread over 
the whole of Paris would bury it nearly 
10 metres deep. This was the eruption 
which created the Valley of Ten 
Thousand Smokes in Alaska in 1912 
to which | alluded earlier. 
The geological history of the earth 
is, however, full of really colossal 
ignimbrite escapes in which thousands 
and tens of thousands of square kilo- 
metres have been suddenly engulfed 
beneath suffocating clouds of gas and 
avalanches of incandescent sand, 
Tce are “a great many 
sheets of ignimbrites in New Zealand, 
where they were described for the first 
time some thirty years ago, and there 
are also many in the United States and 
Italy, lapan and the Soviet Union, 
Kenya, Chad, Sumatra and Central 
America, Latin America, Iran and 
Turkey. 
All these were the result of sudden, 
almost lightning-fast escapes of mag- 
ma, supersaturated with gas, which, 
after forcing open a long fissure, spurt- 
ed up and spread out, allowing for 
differences of scale, somewhat like 
milk boiling over from a saucepan. It 
is almost certain that speeds of over 
100, perhaps even 300, kilometres an 
hour were reached, and the very nature 
of the material spewed out in this 
way—with droplets of lava, vitreous 
fragments of exploded bubbles and 
incandescent fragments of pumice 
suspended in the released gas—made 
it so fluid that it was able to spread 
over immense areas, immediately wip- 
ing out all life. 
As already indicated, the only ignim- 
brite eruption known to have occurred 
in the world in historic times is that 
of the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. 
This name was given to the valley by 
Robert Griggs when, after great effort, 
he and his team arrived in 1917, five 
years after the eruption, at the head 
of the Katmai Pass and discovered the 
extraordinary expanse of salmon-pink 
and golden sand from which innu- 
merable jets of high-pressure steam 
were rising, thousands of fumaroles 
caused partly by the rivers and streams 
trapped under the thick sheet of burn- 
ing ignimbrite sands, and partly by 
the magma gases still imprisoned in 
the sands. 
Fifty years to the day after the erup- 
tion, on lune 6, 1962, it was the turn 
of my friends the geologists Marinelli, 
Bordet and Mittempergher and myself 
to arrive in this fabulous valley: only 
three or four columns of steam still 
rose lazily at the top end of the valley, 
towards Novarupta, the small volcano 
whose detonations marked the end 
of the cataclysm. 
We gazed for a long while at this 
tawny wilderness, stretching away 
astonishingly flat within its ring of 
mountains, But behind the wonder 
aroused by this austere beauty, behind 
the geological interest, behind our 
discussions of how the ignimbrites 
came to be there, there lay the inesca- 
pable thought that an eruption of this 
type might very well occur in the near 
future, not this time in a desert as in 
the Alaskan peninsula or the Tibesti 
Massif of the Sahara, but in some 
overpopulated part of the globe—for 
there are recent ignimbrites throughout 
Latium and California, throughout Japan 
and Indonesia. 
This is what | have in mind when 
| speak of the possibility, or rather 
the probability, of volcanic catastro- 
phes involving a million or even 
several million deaths. Like a giant 
land-mine under our feet, this danger 
threatens vast areas of the globe, 
including a number of countries which 
believe themselves safe from volcanic 
perils. 
Governments, whether “advanced” 
or “developing”, are obviously not 
worried, primarily because of ignor- 
ance, but also through lack of fore- 
sight. Thus, as soon as we arrived 
in a country on a volcanological inves- 
tigation mission, the local authorities 
have sometimes submitted the most 
preposterous projects to us, not merely 
revealing a complete misunderstand- 
ing of what an eruption is but even 
proposing methods for slowing or 
stopping it or for harnessing its energy 
for industrial use; we have really had 
the greatest trouble in convincing 
them that their beautiful plans were 
scatter-brained. : 
During a recent mission to a country 
where an eruption had gone on conti- 
nuously for a year, we could see as 
soon as we visited the volcano an un- 
mistakable threat to the inhabited 
areas around its base; as soon as the 
rainy season started, the valleys would 
be swept by torrents of volcanic mud, 
the terrible lahars which year in and 
year out claim thousands of victims 
throughout the world. 
Civil engineers should have set to 
work months beforehand to protect the 
population, building embankments to 
divert the thrust of the liquid mud 
pouring down at 50 or 60 kilometres 
an hour. 
As nothing of the sort had been 
done, all that remained was to keep 
a watch on the upper slopes of the 
mountain where the lahars would start, 
and get the people ready to evacuate 
the threatened regions calmly and in 
good order at any moment of the day 
or night. | accordingly put a plan to 
the authorities but could see straight 
away that it evoked no enthusiasm 
whatsoever. 
After a fortnight, my friend Ivan 
Elskens, the expedition’s chemist, final- 
ly came up with a psychological expla- 
nation. Whatever a government may do 
to avoid a. catastrophe, natural or 
otherwise, it will still be criticized by 
the opposition. Why lay oneself open 
-—particularly since, whatever efforts 
are made, it is almost certain that they 
will not be totally successful, volca- 
nological forecasting being at present 
no more foolproof than weather fore- 
casting (although it seems as absurd 
not to attempt it as not to attempt to 
forecast the weather)? Natural catas- 
trophes being, by the nature of 
things, beyond the power of govern- 
ments, governments are unwilling to 
chance their funds on undertakings 
which simple prudence would dictate. 
This is, | think, the reason why offi- 
cial contributions to volcanological 
research have been, except in the case 
of Japan, so insignificant. Earthquake 
forecasting, which is much more diffi- 
cult than the forecasting of eruptions, 
receives equally little encouragement. 
The authorities try to forget disasters 
as quickly as possible: ‘despite the 
destruction of San Francisco in 1906, 
the richest and most powerful country 
in the world had to wait sixty years, 
until the Anchorage disaster of 1964, 
before it was decided to invest in the 
necessary seismological equipment 
and try to forecast future cataclysms. 
A FEW more examples like 
Krakatoa, St. Pierre de la Martinique, 
or Pompeii will probably be necessary 
before the decision is made to set up 
observatories which would make it 
possible to forecast the awakening of 
“extinct” volcanoes and the opening 
of fissures from which ignimbrite flows 
escape. 
Providing the indispensable minimum 
of funds are allocated, it should be 
easier today to forecast the awakening 
of a volcano than to forecast the wea- 
ther. This is, alas, still far from being 
the case. Forecasting depends on de- 
tecting significant fluctuations in a 
series of physical and chemical para- 
meters. The difficulty lies in interpret- 
ing the changes observed: some of 
the parameters at times speak a rela- 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 8

## [Page 7](078370engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 19208: The Menace of 'extinct' volcanoes

The 30,000 inhabitants of Pompeii 
and the 6,000 of neighbouring 
Herculanum were taken completely 
unawares when Mount Vesuvius 
began to erupt in earnest on an August 
morning in the year 79 A.D. Pompeii 
had just finished reconstructing 
most of its buildings, devastated in 
the earthquake which ravaged the 
city 17 years earlier. When the hail 
of volcanic ash and pumice descended 
on the city, some people sought 
refuge in their homes while most fled 
across the countryside. Thousands 
succumbed. The city remained buried 
for 18 centuries until it was gradually 
dug out. Today, Pompeii, like 
Herculanum, presents the dramatic 
spectacle of a powerful Roman 
city in the grip of fear and death. 
Plaster moulds of the cavities left in 
the ashes after bodies had mouldered 
into dust show the postures of people 
at the moment they were killed by 
fumes, ashes and debris. Below, 
the outline of the body of a man who 
died in the last moments of Pompeii. 
Left, close to the Forum in Pompeii, 
a statue of Apollo stands out today 
against the backdrop of Vesuvius. 
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
To
ny
 
Sa
ul
nl
er
 
  
Photo © Roger Viollet 
  
Ter A Ta - 
TV ry 
a : — 
wh A 
[ced ELE FA je 
bard Ao   
Bit Aa of 
Jaca }. A gy Ea . 
ut 3 he - 
Ww - : . ; yo
 * 
Be 
et at Ta? - 
£5 hl  

## [Page 8](078370engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 19208: The Menace of 'extinct' volcanoes

Rw Aig Wo 
N n a 
ih. ™ i + 
: Noise n . : he TY 
fe 4 : js La 
MENACE OF ‘EXTINCT’ VOLCANOES (Continued) 
Eruption forecasting could be easier 
than predicting the weather 
tively comprehensible language while 
others remain, for the present at least, 
indecipherable. 
Since we are still at the stage of 
conjecture regarding the causes and 
consequently the mechanism of 
eruptions, these variation which mod; 
ern techniques make it possible to 
measure cannot really be understood 
nor, therefore, can their meaning be 
interpreted with certainty. 
But there is a gradual improvement, 
and successful forecasts of impending 
activity have several times been made, 
the best example being the eruption of 
Kilauea in December 1959-January 
1960: seismographs had given notice 
of the awakening of the volcano nearly 
six months before it erupted. 
Thanks to their excellent observa- 
tion network on Hawaii and on Kilauea 
itself, scientists of the volcanological 
observatory were able to determine 
the focal depth of the tremors: about 
50 kilometres, which is suprising 
enough for volcanic seismic effects, the 
hypocentre of which is usually localiz- 
ed less than 5 kilometres below the 
surface, and still more surprising in 
Hawaii where the lower limit of the 
earth's crust itself is only 15 kilo- 
metres below sea level. 
In the following weeks, the volcano- 
logists noted that the focal depth was 
getting less and less and by measur- 
ing the speed of the rise they pro- 
duced an estimate of the time it would 
take for this depth to be reduced to 
zero, i.e., when the magma would erupt 
at the surface. 
As the measurements continued the 
coefficient of error due to extrapolation 
was reduced. A network of field seis- 
mographs was brought into service in 
addition to the fixed network, allowing 
high-precision determination of the 
       
nl 
whe 
    
Ph
ot
o 
US
IS
 
 
THE CIRCLE 
OF FIRE 
AROUND. THE 
NOT SO 
PACIFIC 
OCEAN 
No less than 62 per 
cent of the world’s 
active volcanoes are 
located in what is often 
called “the circle of 
fire” in the Pacific. 
Left, the majestic cone 
of Mt. Shishaldin in 
Alaska, one of the 
79 volcanoes in a chain 
running through the 
Aleutian Islands into 
the Alaskan peninsular. 
Above, grandiose 
firework displays from 
active craters in the 
Kamchatka chain 
(28 volcanoes).

## [Page 9](078370engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 19208: The Menace of 'extinct' volcanoes

—
z
 
+ 
[a 
NX 
| 
v   
epicentres, i.e., the zones where the 
eruption was likely to take place (with 
this vast shield volcano, eruptions can 
occur equally well in the area of the 
central crater or up to 10 or 20 kilo- 
metres away on the slopes of the 
mountain). 
As the tremors increased in number 
and intensity, the whole volcano 
swelled, probably under the pressure 
of the rising magma—the angles and 
directions of this tumescence, which 
is otherwise quite imperceptible, can 
be accurately measured with the aid of 
instruments know as tiltmeters or clino- 
meters. 
Thus, by carefully following the evo- 
lution of phenomena which had long 
been known to be closely connected 
with the rise of the magma, the scien- 
tists at Hawaii Observatory were able 
to predict with unprecedented accu- 
racy the exact point—the Kilauea Iki 
crater—and moment where the erup- 
tion would take place. 
They went even better: when the 
eruption stopped after three weeks of 
violent and spectacular activity, not 
only were they able to state that it 
had not finished and would start again, 
but were even able to say that this 
would happen 15 kilometres away near 
the small village of Kapoho. As a 
result, it was possible to evacuate the 
population and evef all their movable 
belongings before the earth gaped 
open to release the gas and incandes- 
cent lava which was to destroy the 
houses and fields. 
Unfortunately, it is not always so 
easy to interpret seismograph and cli- 
nometer data. The behaviour of 
volcanoes of the Hawaian type is rela- 
tively straightforward, but that of most 
of the others is not—particularly the 
dangerously explosive stratified cones 
which abound in the circum-Pacific 
“ring of fire". These latter are, how- 
ever, up to now at least, the subject 
of the most wary observation, since 
more than half of the paltry dozen 
volcanological observatories which 
exist are concentrated here, most of 
them in Japan, one in Kamchatka and 
another in New Britain (largest island 
of the Bismarck Archipelago to the 
east of New Guinea). 
There is as yet no means of knowing 
exactly why eruptions of one type are 
fairly predictable and why others defy 
forecasting. The difference appears to 
depend on the nature of the magma, 
on its chemical composition, its visco- 
sity, its content in dissolved gases, 
and perhaps even its origins. 
Let us accept for the moment the 
theory that the substance emitted by 
basaltic volcanoes comes from a deep 
magma, highly fluid and relatively poor 
in gases and everywhere present be- 
neath the earth's crust, whilst the 
circum-Pacific volcanoes are fed by 
limited magma chambers, strung out 
along narrow zones and consisting of 
pockets, within the crust itself, of 
molten rocks whose composition gives 
the substance a high viscosity and a 
high gas content. It is then easy to 
see that the eruptive processes of 
these different types of magma will 
be different and so, therefore, will be 
the premonitory signs which make it 
possible to predict them. 
To reach the surface and erupt, a 
fluid magma coming up from the depths 
of the earth has to force its way 
through kilometres of rock, thus open- 
ing fissures first in the depths of the 
earth and then higher and higher as it 
rises, or widening existing conduits. 
When it finally reaches the last few 
kilometres, this new intruded material 
produces a swelling in the configura- 
tion of the volcano itself and it is 
.chain are a different matter. 
Photos © APN - Vadim Grippenreiter 
this which the seismographs and tilt- 
meters register: the tremors accom- 
panying the opening of the fractures, 
and ine tumescence of the mountain 
itself. 
The magmas of the circum-Pacific 
Probably 
starting life at lesser depths with the 
melting of sediments within the earth's 
crust itself, rich in silica and water, 
they are both viscous and gas-super- 
satured. 
Before going any further, | would 
like to point out that although these 
ideas are based on geological evi- 
dence, they are nevertheless only a 
hypothesis, and the evidence could be 
interpreted in different ways, We know 
a lot less about the inside of our own 
planet than about outer space—a para- 
dox that has various explanations; part- 
ly the nature of cosmic and terrestrial 
matter, but also the incredible dis- 
proportion in the sums allocated for 
these two different kinds of research. 
The inadequacy of the funds allocat- 
ed for the study of the interior of 
the earth shows once again how under- 
estimated is the importance of such 
research. 
Even from the utilitarian point of 
view, the future of mankind lies here on 
earth. Mankind will have to dig deeper 
and deeper into the earth to find min- 
eral deposits when those at the sur- 
face have been exhausted, but the 
old empirical methods of finding them 
will no longer do, and they will have to 
be located before drilling even starts; 
for this we shall need more positive 
theories concerning the origin of these 
deposits than those we make do with 
at present, and we shall find them 
only if we go and look for fresh data 
in the depths of the earth itself. 
Accepting the hypothesis that the 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 10](078370engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 19208: The Menace of 'extinct' volcanoes

10 
MENACE OF ‘EXTINCT’ 
VOLCANOES (Continued) 
Rip-Van-Winkles 
and legends of 
Sleepy Hollows 
circum-Pacific magmas do not stretch 
round the whole globe in a continuous 
layer beneath the earth's crust but form 
pockets within the crust, that because 
of their viscosity, their mobility is 
extremely low, and that they contain 
a high quantity of dissolved gases, we 
can understand why seismographs and 
tiltmeters cannot, as in the case of 
basaltic volcanoes, clearly warn of the 
approach of an eruption. 
If such be indeed the case, the 
magma would normally be quite near 
to the surface and the seismic effects 
accompanying any possible rise of the 
magma would not be distinguishable, 
as in the case of Hawaii, by their focal 
depth from the tremors due to various 
causes which are constantly occurring 
in the upper kilometres of any active 
volcano. 
Moreover, this magma is often so 
viscous that the speed of its rise is 
greatly reduced, if not nil. The seismic 
effects connected with the rise of the 
magma may thus be lost among ordi- 
nary earth tremors, making it very dif- 
ficult if not impossible for the seismo- 
logist to distinguish genuine fore- 
shocks. Tiltmeter readings would be 
equally useless: the volcano will ob- 
viously not swell unless matter is rising 
up inside it. 
How do these volcanoes erupt at 
all if there is little or no rise of the 
lava from the magma chamber towards 
the surface? It may be that the action 
of the gases alone is responsible. 
Years or centuries may pass and 
as yet we have no means of telling 
from the surface of the earth that this 
slow concentration of endogenic ener- 
gy is going on. As a result, such a 
crater will soon come to be classified 
as belonging to an extinct volcano— 
and we know the terrifying conse- 
quences which this may have. 
In these circumstances, how can 
we forecast a renewal of activity? In 
the first place, at the risk of repeat- 
ing myself, 1 would say that we must 
get it into our heads that whatever the 
type of volcano, magma or activity con- 
cerned, we shall never be able to pre- 
dict anything with any accuracy unless 
a constant watch is kept by a specia- 
lized team. 
Once this has been established, and 
accepting the theory that the violent 
explosions of volcanoes of the circum- 
Pacific type are in fact the result of 
the accumulation of gases under the 
roof of the chamber, it would seem 
logical to look for significant signs in 
possible changes in the fumaroles 
which the crater exhales to a greater 
or less extent and which have their 
origins inside the pocket of incubating 
lava. Changes discovered in this way 
may not always be easy to interpret 
—in so far as they can be interpreted 
at all—but logically they must hold a 
clue to what is going on down below. 
I. temperature of some 
fumaroles has been recorded for a long 
time back, on the logical assumption 
that the temperature will rise as an 
eruption approaches. However, with 
acid volcanoes at least, this method of’ 
detecting an eruption has had practical- 
ly no success. This is not surprising if 
we accept the theory that explosive 
eruptions are the result of the building 
up of gas pressure and not of the rise 
of magma, since it is essentially the 
latter which determines the rise in 
temperature. 
We are thus left with the chemical 
composition of fumaroles, which ought 
to depend on the deep-lying processes 
mentioned above. The reflection of 
these processes in the chemistry of 
the fumarole gases should provide 
valuable information. 
Observation of a dormant volcano 
may not require analyses at very close 
intervals, but the development of the 
chemical composition and pressure of 
the fumaroles should at least be follow- 
ed step by step. Since only gases are 
involved, this alone might yield warn- 
ing signs, however slight, by which to 
detect renewed volcanic activity. But 
the best hope for a better understand- 
ing of volcanic activity, and, hence, of 
developing volcanological forecasting 
is to make a close study of the varia- 
tions, both sudden and gradual, in 
the gases given off from the mouth of 
an active volcano sampled at a fixed 
point. 
This is the job with which we have 
been particularly concerned; to try and 
analyse the volcanic gases as nearly 
continuously as possible, and to look 
for warning signs in the variation in 
their composition and in the compari- 
son between this variation and varia- 
tions detected by other means such 
as the seismograph and the clinometer. 
The first samples of gas taken by 
our group were analysed in a labo- 
ratory by Dr. Marcel Chaigneau, direc- 
tor of the Gas Laboratory at the Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique 
in Paris, using the Lebeau and Damiens 
method over a mercury trough. The 
results were extremely accurate but 
the operations took so long that, with 
the resources at our disposal (i.e, 
without special volcanological staff or

## [Page 11](078370engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 19208: The Menace of 'extinct' volcanoes

MOST 
TERRIFYING 
ERUPTION 
OF ALL 
The most formidable form 
of volcanic activity is 
an ignimbrite eruption. It 
results from the sudden, 
almost lightning-fast 
escape of magma which, 
after opening up a long 
fissure in the ground, 
bursts forth and spreads 
out over a vast area, then 
cools to form a solid 
crust. Though such 
incandescent “tidal waves” 
were once common, only 
one has occurred in 
historic times. This 
happened in Alaska 
55 years ago, fortunately 
in an uninhabited region, 
and created what is now 
called the Valley of Ten 
Thousand Smokes. Left, at 
the bottom of this valley, 
glacier-like formations 
mark the extremity of the 
ignimbrite flow. Right, a 
cliff of solidified magma 
(averaging 100 metres; 
330 feet in height). 
  
 SE rt 
equipment) no more than two or three 
series of analyses could have been 
carried out in a year. The problems 
to be solved in fact require the results 
of hundreds of analyses for, primarily, 
what we are trying to do is to detect 
and follow up variations in composition 
which we intuitively feel to be im- 
portant. 
It was at this point that two chem- 
ists in our team, Dr. |. Elskens of 
the University of Brussels, and 
Dr. F. Tonani, of the University of 
Florence, rightly pointed out that the 
high degree of accuracy obtained over 
a mercury trough was not absolutely 
necessary for our purposes, since it 
was more important to detect varia- 
tions and establish relationships bet- 
ween the various constituents than to 
know their exact composition. 
By adopting a new industrial pro- 
cess used for quantitative analysis 
of traces of gas in offices and facto- 
ries, we were able to do two analyses 
a minute and on one occasion when 
the explosive activity was favourable 
(i.e., strong enough and at the same 
time so directed that it was possible 
to get near to the erupting mouth) 
we were able to spend more than 
two hours inside the crater of Strom- 
boli itself and carry out a long series 
of tests, mainly to determine the 
amounts of water and carbon dioxide 
present and with the subsidiary aim 
of determining the hydrochloric acid 
content. Although we expected to find 
fluctuations, the range and rapidity 
of those we did discover amazed us. 
The carbon dioxide content went 
from 0 to 25 per cent in less than 
3 minutes and that of water vapour 
from 0 to 45 per cent in a similar 
time and even from 20 to 50 per cent 
in a few seconds, that is it more than 
doubled almost instantaneously. 
With the hazardous and uncomfort- 
able conditions under which we were 
working, it was difficult, in addition to 
taking samples, to note with accuracy 
the timing of eruptive effects and parti- 
cularly of explosions. It would seem 
however, that there is a close con- 
nexion between variations in water and 
carbon dioxide content and the explo- 
sive activity of the volcano, although 
we still do not have sufficient data to 
draw firm conclusions. 
Continuous sampling at very fre- 
quent intervals is thus absolutely nec- 
essary for a proper study of the prob- 
lems of eruptive activity. On the other 
hand, a watch can be kept quite satis- 
factorily on the fumaroles escaping 
from a dormant crater, which are ob- 
viously subject to infinitely slower 
varations, by less frequent analyses, 
the development curve being deter- 
mined from points obtained at intervals 
of only one a month or even less. 
B UT to reach an understand- 
ing of the mechanism of eruptions 
proper, even our new procedure is in- 
sufficient, particularly since it is un- 
usual to be able to stay more than a 
few minutes or even seconds at a time 
in a really active crater. In fact the 
memorable “Operation Stromboli,” dur- 
ing which we had several times been 
peppered with incandescent projectiles 
(from which our fibreglass helmets 
gave us very good protection), ended 
more or less in a scramble for safety 
after three hours when, following an 
explosion which had produced a parti- 
cularly large number of projectiles, the 
rhotos ©@ Haroun Tazieff 
rubber soles on the boots of the most 
intrepid volcanologist that | know, 
Franco Tonani, caught fire. We took 
the hint and left. 
lvan Elskens, who quite properly be- 
lieves that the mouth of a volcano is no 
place for any man in his right mind, 
decided thereupon to apply himself 
- to the realization of our old dream 
of an instrument capable of carrying 
out continuous and automatic samp- 
ling and analysis of the volcanic gases 
and transmitting the results to a 
recording meter situated at a respect- 
ful distance from the crater. “Then you 
can go and mess about near the 
craters as much as you like,” Elskens 
told us, “and | will make myself com- 
fortable with a glass of beer and a 
book and just look up from time to 
time to keep an eye on the meter.” 
In actual fact, in three years, with 
the assistance of an electronics expert, 
Mr. Bara, he succeeded in develop- 
ing this instrument. On August 29, 
1966, on the slopes of the north-east 
bocca of Etna, Elskens, albeit without 
a glass of beer, used his field tele- 
chromatograph for the first time, 
measuring, to start with, a single cons- 
tituent of the volcanic gas and record- 
ing by remote control the variations 
in the carbon dioxide content of gases 
issuing at a temperature of 1,0000 
from a vent which was belching out 
molten lava. 
It is too early yet to talk about the 
results of this operation or predict the 
potential of the new instrument, but 
| am sure that a very important step 
forward has been made and that the 
simultaneous recording of two such 
fundamental parameters as seismic 
activity and the composition of the 
gas given off by an erupting volcano 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
11

## [Page 12](078370engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 19208: The Menace of 'extinct' volcanoes

12 
a foi Fw eT pape BF wa NS 
i aI oh ah lr 
I Tok ri sat on rs To 
on - s A Wars - : oh Cll Ih 1 » + 4 RE. ~~. hw rd y = Age ger AN 
Roe Fd a od fr =a ae Nog CAND 
Ar aa 2h aA qn EEA ES a a 
- 
. ated i  - Wa » » n . - ro 
MENACE OF ‘EXTINCT* VOLCANOES (Continued) fo gH 1 ped a wort De ar 
FT Rms N h ja) LN A a ih a | 
2 Gia y rr. Pod ges 3 14 Vy Fos, po ca 1 
Rh nt TRY ~ “A a AIST a Tot NY i TR Ls 
Research funds—the weapon 
most lacking to volcanologists 
will enable us to understand this mys- 
terious phenomenon infinitely better 
than hitherto. 
| would lke also to mention the 
two other new aids to observation 
and forecasting. One resembles the 
tiltmeter but provides more easily 
interpretable data than tilt variations 
which, especially with volcanoes of 
the circum-Pacific type, are often mis- 
leading. 
The method consists of measuring 
the diameter of a crater by means of 
a tellurometer. Robert W. Decker, 
whose idea it was, measured the dia- 
meter of Kilauea at fairly close inter- 
vals and discovered that it was increas- 
ing continuously and quite noticeably 
right up to the time of eruption. 
Before instruments were available 
to measure distances of up to several 
tens of kilometres very accurately and 
very rapidly, such operations were 
much too slow and expensive to be 
of practical value in volcanology. It 
is now quite possible that the Decker 
method will produce results greatly 
superior to those obtained by clino- 
meters. 
The second method, used for long- 
range forecasting (several months to, 
perhaps, several years), is based on 
a hypothesis deduced by Mr. C. Blot, 
head of the geophysics section at the 
ORSTOM Centre, Noumea (New Cal- 
edonia), from the relationship which 
appears to exist between certain deep 
(550 to 650 kilometres below the sur- 
face) and intermediary (150 to 250 kilo- 
metres) seismic effects, and certain 
eruptions in the New Hebrides archi- 
pelago. 
§ nee submitting the first 
results of his observations at the 
General Assembly of the International 
Union of Geodesy and Geophysics at 
Berkeley in August 1963, Blot has been 
applying the relationships which he has 
discovered to attempted forecasts of 
the volcanic eruptions in the region of 
the New Hebrides. In the last three 
years, the volcanoes Gaua, Ambrym 
and Lopévi all resumed strong activity 
on dates forecast months in advance. 
In collaboration with Mr. J. Grover, 
chief of geological survey, Solomon 
Islands, it has been possible to extend 
these studies and forecasts to the vol- 
canoes of the Santa Cruz and Solo- 
mon Islands (Tinakula and various 
underwater volcanoes). 
At the last Pacific Scientific Con- 
gress in Tokyo, September 1966, Blot 
and Grover presented a paper setting 
out the results of these forecasts of 
volcanic eruptions in the south-west 
Pacific which ended a follows: 
“It seems more and more likely that 
a relationship exists between deep 
seismic effects, intermediary effects 
and volcanic eruptions. The relation- 
ship between deep effects and erup- 
tions cannot be a direct one, since 
explosions and lava flows do not ori- 
ginate at depths of 400 to 700 kilo- 
metres. 
“However, a certain alteration in 
tensions or an abrupt change of phase 
at these depths could set off a thermo- 
energy phenomenon which—in zones 
where the critical physical conditions 
obtain, particularly under the volcanic 
arcs—could cause other rapid changes 
producing intermediary seismic effects 
at depths between 250 and 60 kilo- 
metres, depending on the regional 
tectonics. These would be the zones 
in the upper mantle where the molten 
pockets occur and where magma 
forms and where, according to the 
views of, for example, Dr. Shimozuru 
and Dr. Gorshkov, volcanic eruptions 
originate. 
“By observing seismic activity in a 
given area following the start of deep 
seismic effects and by the detection 
and localization of intermediary effects 
beneath volcanic areas, it will be 
possible to keep a closer watch on 
one sector or one volcano several 
months before a possible eruption.” 
The relationships discovered in the 
New Hebrides and, with increasing 
frequency, throughout the Pacific show 
that there may be a constant interval 
between the beginnings of phenomena 
at different levels right up to the sur- 
face, if the depth, distances and inten- 
sities of these phenomena and other, 
still somewhat indeterminate tectonic, 
physical and chemical factors can be 
taken into account. 
These intervals appear to be, on 
average, from 10 to 14 months between 
the 650 and 200 kilometre levels (along 
the line of the 600 inclination of the 
deep structures of the Pacific arcs) 
and from 4 to 8 months between the 
intermediary seismic effects 200 kilo- 
metres beneath the volcanoes and the 
actual eruptions. 
If this theory proves true, it would 
be of the utmost value for the fore- 
casting of possible cataclysms. So 
far it has not been possible to verify 
it thoroughly outside the New Hebri- 
des area and, even there, it is a little 
early yet to draw any final conclusions 
regarding the reality of these rela- 
tionships. 
Though some questions remain to 
be answered about the mechanical, 
physical and chemical processes which 
determine the upward propagation of 
endogenic energy at a speed of some 
hundreds of kilometres a year from 
the depths up to the neck of a vol- 
cano, this link, if it really exists, will 
certainly be one of the basic criteria 
in volcanological forecasting in the 
future. 
Photo USIS 
KILAUEA, 
 
THE HELPFUL

## [Page 13](078370engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 19208: The Menace of 'extinct' volcanoes

  
Kilauea, on the Pacific island of Hawaii, gives due warning of its eruptions. It is one of the few volcanoes whose 
behaviour has so far facilitated early forecasts of impending activity. Its eruption in December 1959 was foreseen six 
months earlier thanks to recorded data which volcanologists used to predict with unprecedented accuracy the place and 
time of the eruption, thus enabling the local population to be evacuated in time. Photo shows lake of molten lava 
that fills the Kilauea crater (10 sq. km.: 4 sq. miles in area).

## [Page 14](078370engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 19761: Marie Curie; the life of a woman dedicated to science

14 
MARIE CURIE 
The life of a woman 
dedicated to science 
l a night pierced with 
whistles, clanking and rattling, a fourth- 
class carriage made its way through 
Germany. The carriage had no proper 
seats. Crouched down on a folding 
chair Maria Sklodowska, whom the 
world was to know as Marie Curie, 
was thinking of the past, and of this 
journey which she had waited for so 
long. 
She tried to imagine the future. 
She thought, quite sincerely, that one 
day she would be making her way 
back to her native Warsaw, in two 
years, three years time at the most, 
when she would find herself a snug 
little job as a teacher. 
It was the winter of 1891. She was 
twenty-four. And she was on her.way 
to Paris, to the Sorbonne. It had been 
a hard struggle. To leave the country 
she loved. To save enough for the 
fare. 
What she wanted above all was to 
continue her studies, to work. But 
this was impossible in a Poland, 
groaning under the heel of Czarist 
oppression. The University of Warsaw 
was not open to women. She dreamed 
of studying in Paris. And.eventually, 
by skimping and saving, she managed 
to collect enough for her fare. 
The story of the life of Marie Curie recounted below is 
taken from “Madame Curie”, the biography written by her 
daughter Eve Curie, translated into English by Vincent 
Sheean and published and © 1937 by Doubleday, Doran 
and Co., Inc, Garden City, New York. Drawing on docu- 
ments, narratives and recollections of Marie Curie’s contem- 
poraries and on the personal notes, letters and journals of 
Pierre and Marie Curie, the book evokes with insight and 
understanding the personality, astonishing career and 
scientific achievements of a woman of whom her daughter 
wrote: “She did 
The moment came when she was 
stepping from the train on to the 
platform of the Gare du Nord. For 
the first time in her life she was 
breathing the air of a free country. 
With that ardency which was part 
of her nature, Marie flung herself into 
her new life. 
“She worked...” her daughter, 
Eve Curie later wrote in the biography 
of her mother, “as if in a fever. She 
attended courses in mathematics, 
physics and chemistry. Manual 
technique, the minute precision 
needed for scientific experiment 
became familiar to her. Soon she was 
to have the joy of being responsible 
for researches, which, though of no 
great importance, nevertheless allowed 
her to demonstrate her skill and origi- 
nality of mind. 
“She had a passionate love for the 
atmosphere of the laboratory, its 
“climate” of dedication and silence, 
which she was to prefer to her dying 
day. She decided that one master's 
degree was not enough. She would 
obtain two. One in physics and one 
in mathematics.” 
She had built herself a secret uni- 
verse, dominated by her passion for 
science. Her love for her family 
not know how to be famous”. 
Text © Reproduction prohibited 
and her country had their place in 
this universe, but something which 
had no place, which she had ruled 
out completely from her life, was that 
other kind of love, which previously 
had brought her only humiliation and 
disappointment. Marriage simply did 
not come into her scheme of things. 
“Perhaps,” Eve Curie wrote in her 
book, “it is not surprising that a young 
Polish girl of genius, living on the 
edge of poverty miles away from her 
native land, should have kept herself 
to herself for her work. But it is 
surprising that a Frenchman, a 
scientist of genius, should have kept 
himself for that Polish girl.” 
W.. Marie, still almost a 
child, was living in Warsaw and dream- 
ing one day of coming to the Sorbonne 
to study, Pierre Curie, returning home 
one day from that same Sorbonne— 
where he was already making impor- 
tant discoveries in Physics—confided 
these thoughts to his diary: “Woman 
loves life for the living of it far more 
than we do: women of genius are rare. 
We have to struggle against women 
when, driven on by some ‘mystic’ love,

## [Page 15](078370engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 19761: Marie Curie; the life of a woman dedicated to science

Maria Sklodowska in 
1892, She was 24. And 
she had only been in Paris 
for a few months. At last 
her dream of studying 
science at the Sorbonne 
had come true. Ten years 
later she discovered 
radium and received world 
acclaim as one of the 
greatest scientists of 
modern times. 
we wish to pursue some path which 
is against nature, some work which 
alienates us from the human beings 
nearest and dearest to us.” 
The second son of a physician, 
Dr. Eugéne Curie, Pierre had received 
no “formal” education. He never went 
to school. Instead he was taught first 
by his father then by a private tutor. 
It was a scheme of education that paid 
dividends. At the age of sixteen 
Pierre Curie was a Bachelor of 
Science. At the age of eighteen he 
had a master's degree. At nineteen 
he was appointed laboratory assistant 
to Professor Desains in the Faculty of 
Science—a post he held for five years. 
He was engaged on research with his 
brother Jacques. The two young 
physicists soon announced the disco- 
very of the important phenomenon of 
“piezo-electricity.” 
In 1883, Jacques was appointed pro- 
fessor at Montpellier, while Pierre 
became head of the laboratory at the 
School of Physics and Chemistry of 
the City of Paris. -Even though he 
devoted much of his time to his pupils, 
he continued his theoretical work on 
crystalline physics. This work led to 
the formulation of the principle of 
symmetry which has become one of 
the bases of modern science. He 
Ph
ot
o 
A
r
c
h
i
v
e
s
 
Pi
er
re
 
et
 
Ma
ri
e 
Cu
ri
e 
invented and built an ultra-sensitive 
scientific scale: the Curie Scale. He 
took up research on magnetism and 
achieved a result of major importance, 
the discovery of a fundamental law: 
Curie’'s Law. 
This was the man whom Marie Sklo- 
dowska was to meet for the first time 
in the beginning of 1894. 
“He seemed very young to me,” she 
noted, “although he was then thirty- 
five. His rather slow, reflective 
words, his air of simplicity and his 
smile, at once serious and young, all 
inspired confidence. A conversation 
began between us and we became 
friendly; its object was some questions 
of science upon which | was only too 
happy to ask his opinion." 
Pierre Curie later recalled their 
meeting in these words: “| described 
the phenomenon of crystallography 
upon which | was doing research. It 
was strange to talk to a woman of the 
work one loved, using technical terms, 
complicated formulae, and to see that 
woman, so young and so charming, 
become animated, 
discuss certain 
astonishing clarity. 
"l gazed at her hair, at her high 
curved forehead and her hands, which 
were already stained from the acids 
of the laboratory and roughened by 
housework. | dug into my memory 
for all-that had been told me about this 
girl. She was Polish. She had worked 
for years in Warsaw before .being 
able to take the train to Paris; she had 
no money; she lived alone in a 
garret...” 
In the July of 1895 Pierre and Marie 
Curie were married. 
understand, even 
details with an 
"During these happy days was 
formed one of the finest bonds that 
ever united man and woman’, Eve 
Curie wrote. "Two hearts beat toge- 
ther, two bodies were united and two 
minds of genius learned to think toge- 
ther. Marie could have married no 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
13 
   

## [Page 16](078370engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

16 
MARIE CURIE (Continued) 
other than this great physicist, this 
wise and noble man. Pierre could 
have married no woman other than the 
fair, tender Polish girl, who could be 
childish then sublime within the same 
few moments : for she was a friend 
and a wife; a lover and a scientist. 
In July 1897 their first child was 
born. Iréne Curie was to follow in 
her mother's steps. She took up a 
scientific career, married a fellow 
scientist, the physicist Frederic loliot 
and in 1932, succeeding her mother 
she became director of the Radium 
Institute in Paris. In 1935 Frederic 
and Iréne loliot-Curie shared the Nobel 
Peace Prize in Chemistry. 
At the end of 1897 the balance 
sheet of Marie's achievements could 
show two university degrees, a fellow- 
ship and a monograph on the magne: 
tization of tempered steel. The next 
logical step in her career was a 
doctor's degree. Reading through 
reports of the latest experiments Marie 
was attracted by a paper published by 
the French scientist, Henri Becquerel. 
Becquerel had examined the salts 
of a rare metal, uranium. After Ront- 
gen’s discovery of X-rays, the French 
scientist, Henri Poincaré, conceived 
the idea of discovering whether rays 
like the X-ray were emitted by fluo- 
He observed, instead of the pheno- 
menon he had expected, another alto- 
gether different and incomprehensible. 
Without exposure to light, uranium 
salts emitted, spontaneously, some 
rays of an unknown nature. A com- 
pound of uranium, placed on a photo- 
graphic plate surrounded by black 
paper, made an impression on the 
plate through the paper. 
Becquerel's discovery fascinated the 
Curies. They asked themselves where 
the energy came from, the energy 
which uranium compounds constantly 
gave off in the form of radiation. And 
what the nature of this radiation was. 
Here, indeed, was a subject worthy of 
research, of a doctor's thesis. 
A. that remained was the 
question of where Marie was to do 
her experiments. After certain dif- 
ficulties, Marie was given the use of a 
little glassed-in studio on the ground 
floor of the School of Physics. It was 
a kind of store-room, sweating with 
damp, where discarded machinery and 
lumber were locked away. Its technic- 
al equipment was rudimentary, its 
comfort non-existent. Deprived of an 
adequate supply of electricity and of 
means of making her apparatus work 
in this hole. 
And it was under these primitive 
conditions, on the ground floor of the 
School of Physics in the Rue Lhomond 
in Paris that two new elements were 
discovered : polonium and radium. 
But nobody had seen radium, nobody 
knew its atomic weight. The chemists 
were sceptical. "Show us radium,” 
they said, "and we will believe you.” 
To show polonium and radium to the 
sceptics, to prove to the world the 
existence of their two new elements, 
and to confirm their own convictions, 
Pierre and Marie Curie were to labour 
for four more years... in a wooden 
shack, an abandoned shed, which 
stood across a courtyard from Marie's 
original work-room. This shed had 
once been used by the Faculty of 
Medicine as a dissecting room, but for 
a long time it had not even been con- 
sidered fit for a mortuary. 
"We had no money, no laboratory, 
and no help in carrying out this impor- 
tant and difficult task,” Marie later 
recalled. "Jt was like creating some- 
thing out of nothing. | may say, without 
exaggeration, that for my husband and 
myself this period was the heroic” 
period of our lives. And yet it was in 
that miserable shed that the best and 
rescent bodies under the action of 
light. for the 
Attracted by the same problem Bec- 
querel examined the salts of uranium. patience. 
everything that normally forms material 
beginning 
however, kept her 
She sought and found a 
of 
research, Marie, 
happiest years of our lives were spent 
scientific _jouoted entirely to work. | some- 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 18 


### 19761: Marie Curie; the life of a woman dedicated to science

### 20767: The Rarest, most precious vital force

The rarest, most precious vital force 
by Marie Curie 
On May 15, 1922 the Council of the 
League of Nations in Geneva unani- 
mously named Marie Curie a member of 
the League's Committee on Intellectual 
Co-operation, of which she later became 
vice-president. On June 16, 1926 Marie 
Curie presented to the Committee a 
memorandum on international scholar- 
ships for the advancement of science. In 
it she discussed the problems of working 
conditions in laboratories and the encou- 
ragement of scientific vocations, and 
outlined a plan for the promotion of 
international scholarships in science. 
The following is the preamble of the 
memorandum. 
| shall devote but few words to an affirmation of 
faith in the importance of science for mankind. If at times 
this importance has been questioned and if the words 
“the failure of science” have been pronounced in moments 
of bitter discouragement, it is because man's endeavours 
to achieve his highest aspirations are never perfect, like 
all that is human, and because these endeavours have too 
often been diverted from their path by forces of egocentric 
nationalism and social regression. 
Yet it is through the constant effort to expand science 
that man has risen to his present pre-eminent place on our 
planet and that he is also winning increasing power over 
nature and a larger measure of well-being. We should 
join with those who, like Rodin, pay homage to the devoted 
efforts of scholars and thinkers and with those who, like 
Pasteur, “believe indomitably that science and peace will 
triumph over ignorance and war”. 
If, to judge from the experience of the recent world 
conflict, the aspirations of the elites in different lands often 
appear less exalted than those of the great mass of less 
well educated persons, it is because of the perils inherent 
in all forms of intellectual and political power when these 
are not controlled and channeled toward the high ideals 
which alone justify their use. No enterprise can therefore

## [Page 17](078370engo.pdf#page=17) 2

### 19761: Marie Curie; the life of a woman dedicated to science

### 20767: The Rarest, most precious vital force

THE FAMILY 
OF FIVE 
NOBEL 
PRIZE WINNERS 
  
In 1903, Marie Curie and her husband Pierre (above) 
received, with the French scientist Henri Becquerel, the 
Nobel Prize for Physics. Marie Curie was the first woman 
to receive a Nobel Prize. In 1911 she was also the second 
woman so honoured for scientific achievements, being 
awarded the Nobel Prize for Chemistry. And when a 
Nobel Prize was given to a woman scientist for the third 
time, it went to Marie Curie's daughter, Irene who, with 
her husband Frederic Joliot (photo right) was awarded the 
Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1935. Since then three 
women scientists have been named Nobel Prize winners: 
U.S. scientists Gerty T. Cori (Medicine, 1947) and Maria 
Goeppert Mayer (Physics, 1963) and U.K. scientist Dorothy 
Crowfoot-Hodgkin (Chemistry, 1964). 
have greater importance than those which seek to promote 
international ties between the dynamic thinkers in all 
countries and especially between the young in whose hands 
lies the future of mankind. 
| am sure that no one will deny that even in the most 
democratic of countries existing social systems offer a 
considerable advantage to the wealthy and that the roads 
to higher education, open so freely to children of families 
with ample means, are still difficult of access to children 
of families with limited resources. 
As a result every nation each year loses a large part of 
the rarest, most precious vital force. While waiting for 
reforms in education to resolve this problem once and for 
all, the democratic response in various countries has 
hitherto consisted of a partial remedy, the creation of 
national educational scholarships, thus enabling higher 
education to retrieve some of the young people of whom 
it would otherwise be deprived. 
These national efforts, highly commendable though still 
far from adequate, are not our concern here, but | would 
like to point out that the same problem exists with regard 
to post university studies for the young people who have 
managed to surmount all the obstacles encountered up to 
that point. 
At this post-university stage of their lives, young students 
who contemplate careers in science are brought face to 
face with pressing demands. In most cases the family 
has done its utmost to help the young man or woman to 
come this far and, unable to make further sacrifices, it 
P
h
o
t
o
s
 
A
r
c
h
i
v
e
s
 
Pi
er
re
 
et
 
Ma
ri
e 
Cu
ri
e.
 
now asks them to become self supporting. And even in 
well-to-do families the wish to take up very advanced 
studies may encounter a lack of understanding, such studies 
being considered as an extravagance or a mere whim. 
Yet what in fact are the best interests of society in this 
matter? Should it not give every encouragement to those 
called to a scientific vocation? Is it really so well-endow- 
ed that it can afford to reject the vocations it is offered? 
| believe, on the basis of personal experience, that the 
sum total of the aptitudes called for by a true scientific 
vocation is an infinitely frail and precious thing, a rare 
treasure that it is both absurd and criminal to throw away, 
a gift to which great care must be devoted so that it may 
grow and fructify. 
What, in reality, are some of the qualities required of 
the person who aspires to success in the field of indepen- 
dent scientific research? The intellectual qualities are an 
intelligence capable of learning and understanding; a sure 
judgment capable of appraising the significance of theo- 
retical and experimental demonstrations, an imagination 
capable of creative effort. Equally important are the moral 
faculties: perseverance, zeal and above all the unselfish 
dedication that guides the novice_along a path which, in 
most cases, will never lead him to material rewards com- 
parable to those offered by careers in industry or business. 
Thus to foster and safeguard the scientific vocation is a 
sacred duty for each society which has the interests of its 
future at heart. It is gratifying to see that public opinion 
is becoming increasingly conscious of this duty. 
 
11

## [Page 18](078370engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 19761: Marie Curie; the life of a woman dedicated to science

18 
MARIE CURIE (Continued) 
times passed a whole day stirring a 
boiling mass of pitchblende, with an 
iron rod almost as big as myself. In 
the evening | would be broken with 
fatigue.” 
It was in 1202, forty-five months 
after the day on which the Curies had 
announced the probable existence of 
radium, that Marie finally succeeded 
in preparing a decigramme of pure 
radium. She made a first calculation 
as to its atomic weight — 225. 
Now the sceptics—of which there 
were stll a few—could only bow 
before the facts, before the super- 
human obstinacy of a woman who had 
performed one of the great scientific 
feats of the century. Now radium 
officially existed. 
Marie and Pierre were to have four 
more years together, four years during 
which radium became an industry, was 
used in the field of medicine to cure 
growths, tumours and—most impor- 
tant—certain forms of cancers: another 
daughter, Eve, was born; in 1903 the 
Cures received, with Henri Becquerel, 
the Nobel Prize for Physics; the name 
Curie became world-famous. 
Then one rainy morning in the April 
of 1906 Pierre was making his way 
home up the Rue Dauphine. Crossing 
the street, he was killed when the back 
wheel of a horsedrawn wagon passed 
over his skull. 
On that day in April, Madame Curie 
became, not only a widow, but a pitiful 
and incurably lonely woman. 
W hat was to become of her 
now? What was to become of the 
research Pierre had left in suspense, 
and of his teaching at the Sorbonne? 
On May 13, 1906, the council of the 
Faculty of Science decided, unanim- 
ously, to maintain the chair created for 
Pierre Curie and offer it to his wife. 
In 1911, Marie Curie was awarded 
the Nobel Prize for Chemistry. In 1912, 
she was created Member of the Scien- 
tific Society of Warsaw. In 1913 she 
became Member Extraordinary of the 
Royal Academv of Sciences (Mathe- 
matics and Physics section) Amster- 
dam; Doctor of the University of Birm- 
ingham and Honorary Member of the 
Association of Arts and Sciences of 
Edinburgh. In the same ‘Year she 
attended in Warsaw the opening of the 
radioactivity laboratory, dedicated to 
her. 
in the following year, a small white 
building was completed in the Rue 
Pierre Curie in Pans. Cut into the 
stone, above its entrance, were the 
words : Institut du Radium, Pavillon 
Curie. This "temple of the future” was 
now ready to receive its radium, its 
workers and its director. 
With the outbreak of the First World 
War, Marne Curie foresaw the urgent 
need to organize the manufacture of 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20 
  
in 1895, after studying at the Sorbonne for four years, 
Maria Sklodowska, the Polish student, married Pierre Curie, 
the French physicist (left). Until Pierre’s death in 1906 
they pursued, with the same intense passion, what 
Pierre once called “our scientific dream”. Their eleven 
years together, working with only bare necessities, produced 
a phenomenal result: the discovery of polonium and 
radium. Above, the makeshift laboratory in which Marie 
Curie succeeded in producing the first decigrammes 
of the mysterious white metal: radium. 
YEARS OF HAPPINESS, WORK AND TRIUMPH 
v 
  
  
  
In 1921, seated in a chair and 
encircled by reporters and 
¢ameramen, Marie Curie 
arrives in New York. A 
retiring woman, she now 
underwent the ordeal of being 
famous. To thank the United 
States for the gift of a 
gramme of radium, she had 
conquered her fears and 
for the first time in her life she 
accepted the obligations of 
a great official journey. She 
was the discoverer of 
radium, but lacked the means 
to produce it in the quantity 
needed for her research. 
  
At the University of Columbia, 
in the United States, Marie 
Curie advances to receive 
the honorary degree of 
Doctor of Science. She was 
then aged 54. During her 
lifetime she was so honoured 
twenty times by universities 
in the U.S.A., Britain, 
Poland and Switzerland. 
 
Marie Curie at the wheel of one of the radiological cars she put into service 
during the First World War. More than one million wounded soldiers were 
examined in the 20 cars and 200 fixed posts created by Marie Curie. 
 
All photos Archives Pierre et Marie Curie

## [Page 19](078370engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 19761: Marie Curie; the life of a woman dedicated to science

## [Page 20](078370engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 19761: Marie Curie; the life of a woman dedicated to science

20 
. things differently. 
MARIE CURIE (Continued) 
Roéntgen apparatus as well as the need 
for radiological cars. She equipped and 
put into service 20 of these cars, retain- 
ing one for her personal use. She 
asked no special favour. She who had 
once nearly starved in a garret did 
not find it difficult to transform herself 
into a frontline soldier. 
l. 1922, 35 members of the 
Academy of Medecine of Paris sub- 
mitted the following petition to their 
colleagues: “The undersigned members 
think that the Academy would do itself 
honour by electing Madame Curie as 
a free associate member, in recognition 
of the part she took in the discovery 
of radium and of a new treatment in 
medicine, Curiotherapy.” 
This was a revolutionary document. 
Not only was it proposed to elect a 
woman for the first time to a scientific 
academy in France, but, breaking with 
custom altogether, it was proposed to 
elect her spontaneously, without her 
formally submitting herself as a candi- 
date. Sixty-four members of the Aca- 
demy of Medecine signed this mani- 
festo — thus giving a lesson to their 
brethren in the Academy of Sciences. 
All candidates to the vacant chair 
retired in favour of Madame Curie. 
In the September of 1927—in her 
sixtieth year—and not long after an 
operation to stem the onset of blind- 
ness, she wrote to her sister, Bronya: 
"Sometimes my courage fails me and 
| think | ought to stop working and 
devote myself to gardening. But | am 
held by a thousand bonds, and | don't 
know when | shall be able to arrange 
Nor do | know 
whether, even by writing scientific 
books, | could live without the lab- 
oratory.” 
Madame Pierre Curie died on July 4, 
1934. She was 67. The cause of her 
death was an aplastic pernicious 
araemia. The bone marrow did not 
react, probably injured by a long expo- 
sure to radiation. At the end she did 
not call on her daughters, Iréne or 
Eve, or on any of her relations. At 
the end she was alone with the scien- 
tific work to which she had devoted 
her life. 
A year later, the book Marie had 
completed just before her death, was 
added to the library of the Radium 
Institute in the Rue Pierre Curie. lt 
was a heavy volume. On its grey cover 
was the name of the author: Madame 
Pierre Curie, Professor at the Sor- 
bonne. Nobel Prize in Physics. Nobel 
Prize in Chemistry. The title was one 
word : "Radioactivity". 
As her daughter Eve said of her: 
"She was an eternal student; she 
passed like a stranger across her own 
life. She remained whole, natural and 
almost unaware of her astonishing 
destiny. She did not know how to be 
famous.” 
    
El 
Photo Centralna Agencla Fotograficzna, Warsaw 


### 20886: Maria Sklodowska, the dreamer in Warsaw

MARIA SKLODOWSKA 
The Dreamer in Warsaw 
by Leopold Infeld 
B crore the last war, in 
Warsaw, near the Vistula River stood 
the castle of the Polish kings which 
served as the residence of Poland's 
presidents between the two world wars. 
Nearby lay the Old Town with its 
medieval buildings, known from the 
pictures by Canaletto (See the "Unesco 
Courier’, March 1961). Near the Old 
Town was the "New Town”, built a 
little later. 
The last war destroyed the castle, 
the Old Town and the New Town 
even more thoroughly than the rest of 
 
LEOPOLD INFELD, a Jeading Polish physi- 
cist and a member of his country’s Academy 
of Sciences, is head of the department of 
theoretical physics at the University of 
Warsaw and director of the Institute of 
Theoretical Physics. From 1933 to 1935 
he was at Cambridge University where he 
collaborated with the famous physicist Max 
Born. From 1936 to 1938 he was at Prin- 
ceton University where he worked with 
Professor Albert Einstein and from 1938 to 
1950 he was lecturer and then professor at 
Toronto University. He is the author of 
numerous scientific books, among them: 
“The Evolution of Physics”, which he wrote 
with Albert Einstein. 
Warsaw which was almost completely 
obliterated by the Nazis. 
The present government decided to 
rebuild the Old and the New Town 
exactly (at least externally) as they 
were in the times of the last Polish 
king and are known from old pictures 
and plans. Thus for a man born a 
hundred years ago, the rebuilt Old 
and New Town would seem stranger 
then to someone born 200 years ago. 
In the New Town there is a small 
thoroughfare called Freta Street, and 
at number 16 a plague records that 
in 1867 Maria Sklodowska was born 
there. One hundred years ago—that 
is. four years after the last Polish 
Uprising was crushed. Afterwards 
Czarist repression became even stron- 
ger than before, as did the patriotic 
feelings of the Poles. 
The mother of Maria ran a small 
private school at 16 Freta Street and 
her husband, Wladyslaw Sklodowski, 
was a secondary school teacher of 
mathematics and physics. Maria's 
parents were members of the small 
Polish gentry. They formed a closely

## [Page 21](078370engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 20886: Maria Sklodowska, the dreamer in Warsaw

In this section of 
Warsaw's “New Town” 
(destroyed during the 
last war and completely 
rebuilt since 1945), 
Maria Sklodowska was 
born and spent her 
youth. Later, when she 
became Marie Curie, 
she wrote in her 
autobiography of those 
early days» “| devoted 
most evenings to my 
own education. | had 
heard that a certain 
number of women 
had managed to enter 
schools of higher 
education in 
  
St. Petersburg orabroad 
and | determined to 
\ prepare myself to 
‘ {4 follow them one day.” 
knit family in which there were five 
children, four of them girls—Zosia, 
Maria, Bronia, Helena—and one son, 
Joseph. All, with the exception of 
Helena Sklodowska Szalay, died 
before the last world war. 
There must have been a really cul- 
tured atmosphere in the Sklodowski 
home. Let me quote a passage from 
the biography of Maria Sklodowska 
Curie by her daughter, Eve Curie, 
who writes : 
“It was true that Mr Sklodowski 
knew everything, or nearly everything. 
The poor man, father of a family, 
balancing his budget with the greatest 
difficulty, had found leisure to develop 
his scientific knowledge by going 
through publications which he procur- 
ed by considerable effort. It seemed 
to him quite natural to keep up with 
the progress of chemistry and physics, 
just as it was natural to know Greek 
and Latin and to speak English, French 
and German (as well as, of course, 
Polish and Russian); to translate the 
finest works of foreign authors into his 
native language in prose or verse..." 
The family often moved house, 
depending on the state of their finan- 
ces. Nowolipki, Karmelicka and Leszno 
Streets appear in the early biography 
of Maria. Before the last war | knew 
these streets well. They were in the 
heart of the Jewish district. They 
were ugly, narrow cobble-stoned 
streets, often jammed with horse-drawn 
droskies filled with merchandise. 
In the Russian gymnasia (high 
schools) which prepared students for 
the University, pupils were not allowed 
to talk to each other in their mother 
tongue, They were not allowed to do 
so even in the street. Polish was 
treated and taught as a foreign lan- 
guage. If someone was found guilty 
of the “crime” of speaking Polish he 
was denounced and punished by soli- 
tary confinement. A second offence 
led to a beating and if it happened for 
the third time the culprit was expelled 
from the school and no other school 
could accept him. But the attempts of 
the Czarist authorities to Russify 
Poland by such draconic laws proved 
a completa fiasco. 
Some Polish students attended pri- 
vate schools, at least for the beginning 
of their education. The young Maria 
went to Jadwiga Sikorska's school for 
girls at the corner of Marszalkowska 
and Krolewska Street. Schools like 
this which did not give the right to 
enter university, were centres of Polish 
pafriotism and organized resistance. 
At a moment's notice, when a certain 
bell rang in the class—a warning that 
the Czarist inspector had come to 
visit the school—everything changed 
in a few seconds as if by magic. A 
patriotic lesson in Polish history would 
suddenly become a lesson on mathe- 
matics conducted in Russian. Such 
changes were made easier by the 
rottenness and corruption of the 
Czarist Regime. Almost all the inspec- 
tors were ready to take bribes, usually 
handed to them between the covers 
of a book. 
M ARIA was the best student 
in her class. In order to enter any 
university anywhere she also had to 
finish the hateful gymnasium—which 
she did, winning a gold medal when 
she was barely 17 years old. The 
Czarist university at that time did not 
accept girls. In any case, few Poles 
attended it and from 1905 there was 
an organized boycott of all govern- 
ment schools, including the university. 
Yet it was impossible to curb the 
Polish spirit of learning. As they did 
60 years later under the Nazi occu- 
pation, the Poles organized a “univer- 
sity on the run”: classes were held 
secretly, each time in a different home. 
The students also brought education 
to the workers. The young people 
around Maria felt that what the people 
of Poland needed most was educa- 
tion. 
It was the era of Positivism in lit- 
erature and the time when Polish youth 
rebelled against Romanticism. They 
were influenced by philosophers like 
Auguste Comte and Herbert Spencer; 
they recognized the importance of the 
work of great scientists such as Pas- 
teur and Darwin. Maria was also 
influenced by this trend. Indeed, we 
know from a letter to her father that 
she read Spencer's books on sociology 
in French and "a wonderful book on 
anatomy and physiology by Paul Bert 
in Russian.” 
Maria Sklodowska was 18 when her 
older sister Bronia went to Paris to 
study medicine. 
It is perhaps worth mentioning that 
while in Paris Bronia met and married 
Doctor Dluski, and that after they 
returned to Poland the young couple 
established a sanatorium in Zakopane. 
This health resort, lying in the beautiful 
Tatra Mountains later became a vaca- 
tion resort for Pierre and Maria 
Slodowska Curie, who were among the 
first to discover Zakopane, now known 
as ''the pearl of Poland”. 
While Bronia was in Paris, her father, 
on his salary as a school teacher, 
was unable to go on supporting the 
burden of paying for his daughter's 
studies. Maria agreed to help, and a 
position of governess was offered to 
her by the Zurawski family. 
During the holidays the Zurawski's 
eldest son Karol came home from the 
University where he was studying 
mathematics. A love-affair began 
between Maria and Karol. Maria had 
beautiful platinum blond hair, gray, 
sparkling eyes, and a determined 
mouth. Karol was the first young, well 
educated man in whom she had 
become interested. 
But a marriage between the daughter 
of a gymnasium teacher and the son 
of a landowner was regarded in 19th 
century Poland, as in most of Europe, 
as a "mesalliance”. The parents of 
the boy did not give their consent. 
| met Karol Zurawski when he was 
about 50; | was around 20 and a 
student at the Jagellonian University, 
Cracow, where he was then a profes- 
sor of mathematics. 
He was a good mathematician and 
there is still a theorem in hydro- 
mechanics known by his name. | saw 
him even after the Second World War 
in Warsaw, where he had moved from 
Cracow, and where he died, twenty 
years after Maria's death. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 22](078370engo.pdf#page=22) 2

### 20886: Maria Sklodowska, the dreamer in Warsaw

### 21124: The Woman we called 'la patronne'

22 
THE DREAMER IN WARSAW (Continued) 
Maria's interest in mathematics 
started just at the time when she met 
him. She was always very capable 
and had a good memory. But | believe 
her friendship with Karol showed her 
the first vista of the beauty of mathe- 
matics. 
If one once understands Mathematics 
and Physics, one becomes their slave 
and lover for the rest of one's life 
—as did Maria Sklodowska. 
When she returned to Warsaw she 
worked for some time in the Museum 
of Industry and Agriculture. There, 
urder the guidance of her relative 
Joseph Boguski, who later became a 
professor at the Warsaw Polytechnic, 
the young girl enjoyed her first ex- 
periments in physics and chemistry. 
Because of the disappointment of 
her first love, because of her awakened 
interest in Science and because Rus- 
sian universities were closed to women, 
Maria decided to go to Paris in 1891 
and to study there. She intended to 
return to Poland as a qualified teacher 
in mathematics and physics. Although 
fate interfered with her plans, she 
was always in close touch with her 
family and with her country, which 
she visited many times. 
|. May 1912, after the 
death of her husband, and after the 
Curies had received the Nobel Prize, 
a Polish delegation was sent to Paris. 
Among its members was the famous 
writer Henryk Sienkiewicz, author of 
"Quo Vadis", who urged Maria to re- 
turn to Warsaw to continue her scien- 
tifio work there, 
Maria's daughter writes that it was 
a difficult decision for her to take. 
But I find this hard to believe. 
Warsaw was then a desert as far as 
experimental physics was concerned, 
and no experimental scientist can work 
in a desert. She promised, however, to 
direct from afar the new laboratory 
that was planned and she recommen- 
ded for posts on its staff her two most 
talented Polish students, Jan Danysz 
and Ludwik Wertenstein. 
The laboratory was opened in August 
1913. Money had been provided by 
an industrialist who wished the labora- 
tory to be named after his son, a pupil 
of Maria's in Paris, who had died as 
a young man. So the laboratory, 
named for Dr. Kernbaum, was created, 
and for its inauguration Maria visited 
Poland and gave a lecture in Polish. 
The history of this laboratory, 
belonging to the " Learned Society of 
Warsaw", and the role it played in the 
scientific development of Poland 
deserve a few words. 
Jan Danysz, one of the Polish stu- 
dents recommended by Maria, was 
killed a few years later in the Battle 
of Verdun. His son is now a distin- 
guished physicist in Warsaw, and is 
the co-discoverer, with Jerzy Pniewski, 
oi the fundamental particles known as 
hyperons. 
The laboratory was directed by Pro- 
fessor Wertenstein, undoubtedly the 
most distinguished but officially the 
least recognized experimental physicist 
in Poland of the generation between 
the world wars. It had little or no 
State support, though in 1921 it rec- 
eived an important grant from Maria. 
Yet, because of its scientific work and 
because of the schooling it gave to a 
few young scientists, it became known 
throughout the world as the only 
laboratory in which studies on nuclear 
physics were kept alive in Poland. 
When, after the First World War, a 
free Poland was created, Maria dream- 
ed of building a big institute in 
Warsaw devoted to research on radium 
and its power for healing. But the 
new-born country spent vast sums on 
its military preparations and it was 
left to a specially organized society to 
collect money and to present the 
Institute as "a national gift’ to Maria 
Sklodowska Curie. 
In 1925 Maria came to Warsaw to 
lay the corner-stone for the laboratory 
building, and in 1932, when the hospital 
at the Institute was finished, Maria 
again came to Warsaw to present the 
Institute with a gramme or radium 
which she had received in the U.S.A 
Two years later Maria died, and 
seven years later night fell on Europe. 
Science is an international venture. 
There is no English, French or Polish 
Science. But there are contributions 
of each country to the development of 
science, usually commemorated by 
the names of the men responsible for 
each gigantic step forward. 
On its way science smashes old 
dogmas, looking for new truths. The 
dogma of the Moving Sun was demo- 
lished by the work of Copernicus, 
Gallileo, Kepler, Newton, Laplace, 
Einstein. It would be idle to ask who 
was the greatest. But the first of them 
was Copernicus. 
The dogma that the atom is the 
indivisable, smallest part of matter was 
smashed by Pierre and Marie Curie, 
by Iréne and Frederic Jolliot-Curie, by 
Sir Ernest Rutherford, Niels Bohr, and 
a hundred others who came after 
them. But the first were Pierre and 
Marie Curie. 
Poland can be justly proud to have 
given to the world Copernicus and 
Maria Sklodowska Curie. 
This photo, taken near 
Geneva on a misty day in 
1925, records a meeting 
between two great scientists 
—Marie Curie and Albert 
Einste'n—during a break 
between meetings at the 
League of Nations. In 1922 
the Council of the League 
of Nations unanimously 
named Marie Curie as a 
member of the Committee on 
Intellectual Co-operation. 
In this committee she worked 
ardently to promote the 
development of science 
devoted to the service of 
man (see text page 16). 
  Ph
ot
o 
Ar
ch
iv
es
 
Pi
er
re
 
et
 
Ma
ri
e 
Cu
ri
e 
THE WOM 
by Marguerite Perey 
Marguerite Perey, the distinguished 
French woman scientist, was a re- 
search student of Marie Curie’'s and 
later collaborated with her for some 
years. Here she recalls the feelings 
which Marie Curie inspired in all who 
worked closely with her, and acknow- 
ledges the debt which her own career 
in science owes to her illustrious 
teacher. Five years after the death 
of her “patronne”, Marguerite Perey 
herself discovered a new radioactive 
substance, francium. Today she is 
professor in the Faculty of Science at 
the University of Strasbourg, where 
she directs the nuclear research 
centre (nuclear chemistry). 
|. June 1929, as a shy 
young student not yet 
twenty, | had to face an interview 
with Madame Curie, who had asked 
the Chemistry School to choose a 
new graduate to work with her. 
| was shown into a cheeriess little 
waiting-room, where | was quietly 
joined by a lady in black, very pale 
and frail-looking, with a chignon of 
curly grey hair and thick spectacles. 
| at first took her for a secretary, but

## [Page 23](078370engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

  
to my great confusion, | soon realiz- 
ed that | was face to face with 
“Madame Curie". We talked for a time, 
and | felt | was showing up very badly; 
then she said, “I will let you know in 
the course of the summer whether the 
research fellowship has been granted 
or not.” 
| considered this a most polite way 
of dismissing me, and gave an 
immense sigh of relief when | crossed 
the threshold of the august institution, 
for what was, | was convinced, the 
first and last time: | had been struck 
by the general dreariness and gloom, 
and was delighted to think that | had 
certainly forfeited any possibility of a 
second visit. | went on holiday with 
a light heart, until | received a letter 
from the Institut du Radium informing 
me, to my stupefaction, that the 
- fellowship had been granted, and | 
was to join the Laboratory on 
October 1, 1929. Such was the start 
of my career in the Curie Laboratory. 
Madame Curie herself, the friendly 
atmosphere and the fascinating work 
so completely won me over that the 
few months’ research work | expected 
to put in stretched to twenty years. 
In Paris, | first had to be initiated 
into methods of work and scientific 
problems of which 1 was totally 
ignorant. The big chemistry room, 
facing the redoutable waiting-room of - 
my first visit, looked full South 
towards the garden on the other side. 
fit became a sort of wonderland for 
me, thanks to the help and encou- 
ragement | received from all who 
  : Fo Bop iE p> a $y FF 3 Ain : ‘ ‘ 


### 21124: The Woman we called 'la patronne'

RATE py SAS EA a (RA nL mle 
AN WE CALLED LA PATRONNE 
guided my first steps in “Radioactivity” 
—a field which embraced both 
chemistry and physics. 
Madame Curie loved to have a 
happy, young and eager team around 
her, although our eagerness might 
sometimes break out in slightly noisy, 
emphatic or surprising forms. 
She loved to mix with us and share 
our life. Our favourite meeting-place 
was in the passage, facing her office 
door, at the foot of the stairs. We 
talked about everything under the sun, 
whether or not it had any connexion 
with our work; but | think the talk 
opened up vast horizons for us. We 
usually ended by discussing some 
scientific article which had just 
appeared. 
The garden was another spot 
beloved of Madame Curie, where 
she liked to work with one of us or 
bring us all together. “Her garden” 
was a very modest affair, between 
the “Curie Building” and the “Pasteur 
Building”, where she had planted 
limes and rambler roses when the 
Radium Institute was established. It 
was furnished with spartan chairs, 
benches and tables, and Madame 
Curie planned any number of experi- 
ments with us in the garden, which 
she preferred to her office. 
Receptions for guests of honour or 
new Doctors of Science were held 
there when weather permitted. We 
prepared everything ourselves, and 
tea and ices were served in beakers 
with glass rods. 
- 
Once | was acclimatized, | was 
appointed as assistant to one of the 
research scientists. We worked in the 
“Little Building”, and | spent years 
behind its thickly-barred windows, 
for this isolated building held the 
precious, dangerous stocks of radium 
and other concentrated radioactive 
products. 
Madame Curie would often tell me 
what results she expected, but | had 
to give her the exact results i had 
obtained, after repeating each experi- 
ment several times. She prized inte- 
grity and enthusiasm above all else, 
and as she trusted me, | very soon 
had the immense privilege of work- 
ing with her, 
Everything needed for a delicate 
experiment had to be prepared under 
her watchful eye, and nothing over- 
looked. It was marvellous training to 
work under her supervision and benefit 
from her advice and commentary. It 
was an ample reward for quickness 
and skill when a substance of a high 
degree of purity could be prepared 
and used. 
Marie Curie was the first woman 
to be admitted as Professor at the 
University. It was in 1906, after the 
death of Pierre Curie, that she found 
the courage to carry on her husband's 
teaching at the Sorbonne, and pursue 
their researches. 
| only knew Marie Curie in her last 
years, when radiation had already 
taken its toll, and she was worn out. 
Her classes made great demands on 
her. If there was some special point 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE   
23

## [Page 24](078370engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 21124: The Woman we called 'la patronne'

24 
‘LA PATRONNE' (Continued) 
she wished us to understand, her 
even tone would become resonant, 
her deathly pallor would light up. 
She was obviously most interested 
in the experimental periods which 
followed her classes; but it was with 
her research team that she showed 
herself a surpassing teacher. She 
exacted fervent enthusiasm and 
dogged persistence. Those who were 
not imbued with the spirit of her 
laboratory did not stay long. 
| owe an immense debt of gratitude 
to Marie Curie. If she realized, when 
we were working together, that | had 
lost the thread of her explanations, 
she would go over the ground again, 
and would tactfully “forget” to check 
the relevant pages in my notebook. 
But she made sure, during the next 
few days, that | had worked at and 
fully understood them, before going 
on to the next step. 
Marie Curie often brought wus 
together in the lecture-room, where 
one of the team would explain his 
work. In the early days, | found this 
a most unusual and arduous exercise, 
but Marie Curie could always breathe 
life into it. She was close enough 
to us to understand and feel our joy 
at success, and our. disappointment 
at failure. 
To the very end, in spite of all 
difficulties, she had the gift of wonder. 
As she put it, “| am one of those who 
see great beauty in science. A 
scientist in his laboratory is not a mere 
technician; he is also a child watching 
a spectacle of natural phenomena 
which move him as deeply as a fairy 
tale. Nor do | believe there is any 
danger of the spirit of adventure 
dying out: the most vital force | see 
when | look around me is that very 
spirit of adventure, that indestructible 
urge akin to curiosity.” 
In spite of every care, protective 
measures were very inadequate at 
that time, and the danger of certain 
substances which we often manipu- 
lated was still not fully understood. 
In June 1934, Madame Curie, already 
very ill, was taken to Sancellemoz, 
where she died on July 4. Her death, 
which robbed us of “La Patronne,” 
as we lovingly and deferentially called 
her, was a cruel blow. 
| have tried to keep faith with 
Marie Curie, and continue research 
in the field she opened up, as | pro- 
mised her. Before leaving for San- 
cellemoz, she told me to make all 
preparations to obtain the emission 
spectrum of actinium in Professor 
Zeemars' Laboratory at Amsterdam, 
which had all the necessary apparatus. 
| had to get all the products and 
equipment ready at Amsterdam, and 
she was to be there for the experiment 
when the day came... The following 
autumn, with the help of the lab- 
oratory staff, we were able to carry 
out this experiment by which 
Madame Curie set such store, and 
which was, | believe, the culmination 
of her last experimental work.   


### 21757: Ruben Dario and the resurrection of Hispano-American poetry

RUBEN DARIO 
and the resurrection of 
Hispano-American poetry 
Portrait of the great Spanish American poet by losé Lamuiio. 
Collection Luls Felipe Ibarra, Paris 

## [Page 25](078370engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 21757: Ruben Dario and the resurrection of Hispano-American poetry

by 
Emir Rodriguez Monegal 
A century has passed since 
Rubén Dario was born in a little town 
in Central America—and during those 
hundred years, the child born in 
Metapa, Nicaragua, has become the 
most celebrated poet of the Spanish- 
speaking world, triumphing on both 
sides of the Atlantic, and dying at the 
height of his fame to become immortal 
in his verse, with the other great 
Spanish poets. During those hundred 
years, the antiquated, provincial poetry 
of a whole continent was changed by 
the force of his genius into the new, 
vigorous poetry of a score of modern 
peoples. 
When Dario was born, Nicaraguan 
poetry was practically non-existent, 
Spanish American poetry was known 
in Spain only to the erudite, the 
poetry of Spain itself was dying under 
the weight of tradition, lassitude and 
repetition. Dario changed all that in 
the space of a few years. Striding 
from Nicaragua to Santiago de Chile, 
from Chile to Buenos Aires, from the 
shores of the Plata to Madrid, 
Dario took the provincial, wandering, 
sluggish stream of verse and trans- 
formed it to a pure current which sings 
and dances, flaunts its native or bor- 
rowed brilliance, and delights in its 
own distinctive music. That music is 
still to be heard. 
The success of Dario's first notable 
works, from Azul... to Los raros 
and Prosas profanas, in the torpid 
years of the late nineteenth century, 
scored a victory for the refinements 
of a literature that was deliberately 
and unashamedly literary. Dario (the 
Spanish American) sang to the mar- 
quises and princesses of Versailles, 
delighted in the play of words, was 
shockingly frivolous. 
It was a gentle air, of slow 
. [measures: 
the Fairy Harmony timed its 
[cadences, 
and half-formed phrases and gentle 
[sighs 
the sobs of the 
[‘cellos (1). 
mingled with 
 
EMIR RODRIGUEZ MONEGAL, a Uruguyan 
writer and journalist, is director of “Mundo 
Nuevo" (New World) a Spanish language 
literary review published in Paris. He was 
formerly professor of hterature at the Uni- 
versity of Montevideo. 
It is a joy to follow the intricacies 
of the lines which echo with the 
rippling laughter of the Marquesa 
Eulalia. With these and other poems, 
Dario came to symbolize the emulation 
of all poets in the New World for the 
elegance and refinement of the 
modernists. 
At that time, Paris was the capital 
of their frivolous, luxurious world: 
Dario's poetry mirrored as closely as 
it could the lustre of Paris. Many 
eminent critics reproached him for 
his gallic mentality, and bade him 
(with a certain solemn officiousness) 
return to his own country to describe 
“the girls of his village,” and try to 
forget Paris “where he had spent 
perhaps two or three weeks in his 
life,” 
Other critics maintained, on similar 
grounds, that Dario was not the bard 
of Spanish America, but merely an 
uprooted foreigner. Many viewed his 
poetry as a mere projection of Ver- 
laine and Leconte de Lisle, a strained 
adaptation of the inventions of Poe 
or Mallarmé, the frothy tribute of an 
admirer of French exoticism. As a 
great Spanish writer put it: “In Dario, 
you can see the Indian feathers 
showing under his hat,” implying that 
he, like the Indians, was dazzled by 
the latest European notions. 
But the unjust quip of the great 
Don Miguel de Unamuno touches only 
the superficial Dario. His visits to 
Paris, his active involvement with the 
diplomatic world, his thirst for luxury 
and worldly success, seemed to justify 
such strictures. Dario gave the 
impression of being the typical Latin 
American poet, stifling in our rude 
lands, who cannot abide the “crass 
municipal” populace (as he once 
called it), and has no aptitude for 
paying tribute to a new-born demo- 
cracy or a President of a Republic. 
This incomplete, synthetic, fanciful 
image was thus imposed on many 
critics and readers. Dario himself 
gave it currency, with a mixture of 
amusement and childish impudence. 
He wished to outdo the subtle in 
subtlely, explore the farthest bounds 
(1) Era un aire suave, de pausados giros: 
el Hada Armonia ritmaba sus vuelos, 
e iban frases vagas y tenues suspiros 
entre los sollozos de los violoncelos. 
of the decadent civilization of his time, 
and he loved to scandalize the worthy 
bourgeoisie of Latin America. He 
wrote defiantly in his introduction to 
Prosas profanas: 
“Is there a drop of African, Cho- 
rotegan or Nagrandanian Indian 
blood in my veins? There may be, 
in spite of my aristocrat’'s hand; 
but lo! my verses sing of princesses, 
kings, empires, visions of far-off or 
impossible countries. What would 
you? .[| detest the Ife and times 
I chanced to be born to; and | can- 
not acclaim a President of the Repu- 
blic in the tongue in which | would 
sing to thee, O Halagaball whose 
court of gold, silk and marble | visit 
in my dreams..." 
I... who regarded Dario 
as a mere imitator of the French school 
overlooked his other achievements, 
which were perhaps more important 
than the trivial aping of Verlaine or 
Banville. Dario came to Latin Amer- 
ican literature at the critical moment 
in the development of a new cultural 
tradition. For nearly a century, that 
literature had been struggling to attain 
an identity to match the continent's 
political independence. The romantics 
(who flourished practically throughout 
the nineteenth century) were suc- 
ceeded by the “fin-de-siécle” poets, 
who struck the first blows, in their 
separate countries, for more subtle 
and flexible verse, freer utterance, 
newer and bolder images. 
They were Mexican, like Salvador 
Diaz Miron and Manuel Gutiérrez 
Najera, Cuban, like Julian del Casal 
and José Marti, Colombian like José 
Asuncion Silva or Salvadorian like 
Francisco Gavidia. Each played his 
. part in renovating the Spanish lan- 
guage and Spanish verse; but the only 
one who was acquainted with them 
all, learnt from them all and surpassed 
them all was Rubén Dario. 
Genius that he was, he absorbed 
the spirit of different generations of 
poets and fused their many tongues 
into the unique, matchless, highly 
distinctive voice of one poet: Rubén 
Dario. This was his first feat: to 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
23

## [Page 26](078370engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 21757: Ruben Dario and the resurrection of Hispano-American poetry

26 
RUBEN DARIO (Continued) 
The birth of a new idiom: 
the haunting music 
convert the speech of a scattered tribe 
into an individual poetic utterance. 
His second feat was equal to the 
first: he succeeded: in imbuing other, 
younger poets with the new spirit; 
his genius embodied it in a language 
common to a whole rising generation. 
It was shaped in Santiago de Chile, 
spread to Buenos Aires, and triumphed 
in Madrid. Dario returned to the 
fountain-head (like a modern conquis- 
tador whose caravels were to reverse 
the course of history); he came to 
Spain to restore to its poetry and 
language the life, force and grace 
which they lacked. 
The younger Spanish poets were 
the first to acknowledge the master, 
and joyfully harnessed themselves to 
his triumphal chariot. Antonio Ma- 
chado, Juan Ramoén Jiménez, Ramon 
del Valle Inclan, adopted this Latin 
American as their guide and paid 
homage to him in their verses. 
Before Dario came on the scene, 
these young poets were gagged by 
the prevailing mediocrity. Then Dario 
sauntered in smiling, to open new 
vistas, lighten the prose, electrify the 
verse, 
What Dario, the “Indian”, brought to 
Spain was not the gallic idiom, as the 
older critics complained, but the 
modern idiom: a new idiom of his own 
invention, and yet as old as the lan- 
guage spoken in Spain at the conquest 
of the New World; the speech he learnt 
as a child in Nicaragua, sharing the 
same roots with all its sister langua- 
ges; the Spanish American tongue. 
D.. came home like the 
prodigal son, with no riches but his 
words. He thus returned to the source, 
and brought the mother country the 
language preserved in America by the 
sons of the conquistadors. The 
treasures displayed by this “Indian” 
were intangible, yet they were a 
precious cargo: each word was new, 
and yet immeasurably old. 
Those who still accused him of 
triviality did not look below the 
iridescent surface of his verse. In 
truth: Dario is much more earnest 
than he seems, and the poet's 
fundamental gravity underlies many of 
his poems about flirtatious Marquises 
and sorrowful princesses. He loved 
to juggle with lines, rhythms and 
rhymes, but behind the facade lay a 
passionate, tragic soul. 
His passionate side was obvious 
and easy to copy. His gallant exploits 
went the round of the literati; they 
all knew of his escapades, his mar- 
riages, his many muses of flesh and 
blood. And there was much talk of 
his artificial paradises. The legends 
were no doubt exaggerated, but the 
poet's fame was not solely compound- 
of the soul 
ed of truth; falsehood also played 
its part. 
In reality, Daric was no Don Juan: 
he was a headstrong, vulnerable man, 
who could be possessed or even 
swept away by love. Any number of 
his poems, singing of the joy and 
sorrow of love, are familiar to all 
admirers of poetry. He once con- 
fessed: 
Like an unbridled colt my instincts 
[galloped; 
My youth rode an unbridled colt; 
Intoxicated, with a dagger at the 
[waist; 
If | did not come to grief, it was by 
[God's good grace. 
In my garden stood a beautiful 
[statue; 
It seemed of marble, but was of 
[living flesh ; 
A youthful soul within, 
Sentimental, sensitive, sensuous (2). 
For many years, readers and critics 
closed their eyes to any image of 
Dario but that of the victor, spending 
his life in the pursuit of pleasure and 
the capture of applause. But another, 
very different image lay behind. 
Masked by the harmony of this verses 
is a poet who suffers and is dying 
by inches. One of his most haunting 
poems brings us face to face with 
the reality: it shows him clinging to 
life, passionately hugging it, while 
Death inexorably draws near. The 
poem is Lo fatal (The Inevitable). 
Happy the tree almost bereft of 
[feeling; 
Happier still the rock, impenetrable, 
[insensitive; 
No greater pain than that of being 
[alive; 
No greater sorrow than to live and 
[feel. 
To exist and to know nothing, to 
[have no set course; 
To tremble at the thought of life's 
[quick ebb, 
And the terrifying certainty of death 
[tomorrow; 
To suffer for life and- for the 
[shadow 
For the unknown or the dimly 
[conjectured; 
To feel the temptations of the 
[flesh, sweet and tendril-like, 
And the cold tomb crowned with 
[funeral wreaths, 
And not to know where we are 
[bound, nor whence we came... ! (3) 
His biographers explain that at 
that time, Dario was disintegrating 
physicaly, drinking himself to death, 
dissolving into nothingness, a process 
sublimated into pure poetry. Dario 
had discovered that the flesh is stub- 
born and does not want to die, and 
that the infinite patience of Death is 
a pure fiction. Death consumes us 
implacably day by day; Death shapes 
and overshadows our lives. And in 
his verses—even the best, the most 
mournfully melodious—he is tracing 
the progress of Death's invasion and 
victory. 
Thus, Dario’s third great feat was 
to attain this profound insight for the 
Spanish and American verse of his 
time. Like every authentic creator, 
Dario was constantly at odds with his 
time. The conflict had its vicissitudes, 
periods of peace and even sudden 
gleams of cheerful harmony; but every 
victory in the long struggle compro- 
mised his closest links with his envi- 
ronment. 
A. one time, the Spanish 
language seemed threatened by his 
gallicisms and thirst for modernity. At 
other times, bourgeois conventions 
were endangered by the white-hot 
passion of his poetry. He sometimes 
offended the most sensitive political 
susceptibilities, which can influence 
the destiny of a whole continent. 
For that reason he lived much of his 
life as a fugitive. Although firmly 
rooted in the land and language of his 
childhood, although he had covered 
the whole of Latin America in his 
triumphal progress, Dario lived a large 
part of his life in exile in Paris, and 
became a cosmopolitan. Only thus 
could he become still more deeply, 
more tragically Spanish American. 
Up to the very end of his life he 
took no respite, but went on seeking 
and fighting. Death, which finally 
vanquished him one day in 1916, did 
not have an easy victory. The poet 
refused to yield an inch without a 
struggle, a cry, a lament. Long after 
his death, his poetry (and the poet's 
aspirations) live on. 
(2) Potro sin freno se lanzoé mi instinto, 
mi Juventud montd potro sin freno; 
iba embriagada y con puial al cinto. 
si no cayd, fue porque Dios es bueno. 
En mi jardin se vio una estatua bella; 
se juzgd marmol y era carne viva; 
una alma joven habitaba en ella, 
sentimental, sensible y sensitiva, 
Dichoso el arbol que es apenas sensitivo, 
y mas la piedra dura, porque ésta ya no 
[siente 
pues no hay dolor mds grande que el 
[dolor de ser vivo, 
ni mayor pesadumbre que la vida cons- 
3 — 
[ciente. 
Ser, y no saber nada, y ser sin rumbo 
[cierta, 
y el temor de haber sido y un futuro 
(terror... 
y el espanto seguro de estar mafana 
[muerta, 
y sufrir por la vida, y por la sombra y 
[por 
lo que no conocemos y apenas sospe- 
[chamos, 
y la carne que tienta con sus frescos 
[racimos 
y la tumba que aguarda con sus finebres 
[ramos, 
y no saber addnde vamos, 
ni de donde venimos...l

## [Page 27](078370engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 22385: Great men, great events

GREAT MEN 
GREAT EVENTS 
  
Michael 
Faraday 
 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ke
ys
to
ne
 
I. distinguished British scientist Sir Humphrey Davy was 
once asked what he considered his greatest discovery. 
“Michael Faraday,” was his answer, The son of a blacksmith, 
Faraday (1791-1867) had little formal education, but as a book- 
binder's apprentice, he became fascinated by the scientific 
treatises in the books he bound. He devoured this knowledge, 
attended scientific lectures and at the age of 22, was engaged 
as laboratory assistant to Sir Humphrey Davy at the Royal 
Institution in London. Thereafter, he was to perform experi- 
ments which yielded some of the most significant inventions 
and principles in scientific history. He built the first rotary 
electric motor (1821), the first transformer and the first dynamo 
(both in 1831). Every generator, every electric motor and 
transformer, every one of the innumérable pieces of electric 
equipment all over the world operates today because of Fara- 
day's work in electromagnetism. Faraday also made notable 
contributions to chemistry, including the liquifying of gases by 
use of pressure and the discovery of benzine. His laws of 
electrolysis linked chemistry and electricity and paved the way 
for today's electro-plating industry. Faraday's outstanding 
achievement was the discovery of electromagnetic induction: 
that moving a magnet rapidly near a coil of wire produces an 
electric current. A lady who saw his perform the experiment 
asked, “But, Professor Faraday, even if the effect you explained 
is obtained, what is the use of it?” “Madam”, replied Faraday, 
“will you tell me the use of a new-born child?” 
Johann 
Bernoulli 
Bo in 1667, Johann Bernoulli, the distinguished Swiss 
mathematician, came from a family which left Antwerp to 
escape religious persecution and settled in Basle. Over the 
next two centuries, the family produced so many scientists 
that encyclopedias’today distinguish them by putting a number 
beside their christian names, as in the case of kings. The 
name of Johann Bernoulli, however, stands out above the rest. 
  
  
As a young man he held a minor post in commerce and then 
studied mathematics and medicine. In 1694 he was awarded 
his doctorate at the University of Basle and the following year 
became a professor at the University of Groningen. His next 
post was at the University of Basle where he succeeded his 
brother Jacob (a mathematician celebrated for his work on the 
differential and integral calculus). A friend of Leibnitz, Johann 
Bernoulli discovered the exponential calculus and was the first 
scientist to determine the line of swiftest descent followed by 
a body. Before he died in 1748, Johann Bernoulli trained a 
number of young men who were also to become eminent in 
science—his sons Nicholas |, Daniel and Johann Ii, and Leonard 
Euler. All four made important contributions to the develop- 
ment of mathematics and physics. 
Jonathan 
Swift 
Jonata Swift-(1667-1745) was one of the greatest satirists 
of all time—and one of the most misunderstood. Many people, 
not seeing what lies behind the savage irony of his work, 
have represented him as harsh and misanthropic. Yet the 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
B
i
b
l
i
o
t
h
e
q
u
e
 
Na
ti
on
al
e,
 
Pa
ri
s 
  
venom of Swift's pen contrasts sharply with the humanity * 
and charity he showed to friends, relatives and the poor. 
He left all his modest fortune to build and endow a hospital 
for lunatics, idiots and, as he put it, “those they call incurable.” 
Even his greatest work, “Gulliver's Travels,” intended as a 
ferocious indictment of human nature, delighted the world 
instead of shocking it. The strange lands visited by Gulliver 
had much in common with the countries Swift knew. The 
tiny Lilliputians had the vices and weaknesses of ordinary 
men. “In the island of Laputa, where “wise” men were 
engaged on fantastic projects, Swift parodied some of the 
scientists and philosophers of his own day. Born in Dublin of 
English parents, Swift was educated in Ireland where he entered 
the church in 1695. The country vicar gradually became well 
known through the writing of minor political tracts, but the 
publication of “Tale of a Tub" made him famous overnight. 
This satire on humanity in general and the church in particular, 
and “The Battle of the Books,” a parody of literary controversy 
(both published in 1704) are still read for their comic commen- 
tary on human stupidity. With the “Drapier's Letters” (1724). 
Swift foiled the British Government in its attempts to impose a 
debased currency on Ireland, and five years later he published 
perhaps his most terrible satiric pamphlet, “A Modest Propo- 
sal"—that the people of Ireland eat their children as the only 
way to keep England from starving them to death. Swift 
continued to defend Ireland's cause and for the rest of his 
fe he was the idol of the Irish people. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 28](078370engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 22385: Great men, great events

28 
GREAT MEN, GREAT EVENTS (Continued) 
José Enrique 
Rodo 
  
Aone the score of brillant literary figures flourishing in 
Uruguay at the turn of the century, the one who best embodies 
the hopes and ideals of the times is the essayist and 
philosopher Jose Henrique Rodé (1872-1917). A mostly self- 
taught scholar, Rodé managed to reflect his vast culture and 
love of beauty in a prose of extraordinary flexibility and 
elegance, ill reflected in most of the translations of his works. 
Rubén Dario, whose genius Rodd was one of the first to 
recognize, was to say of him: “José Enrique Rodd is the 
Spanish-American thinker of our times. . . | would say that 
he is a sort of Latin Emerson, with a serenity originating In 
Greece.” For all his love of ancient Greece, Rodo had the 
French philosopher Fenan for an ideological model. His own 
life oddly resembles that of his master. But in a literary 
magazine of which he was a co-founder in 1895, he became from 
the start a penetrating critic of the new Spanish writing. He 
analyzed and praised the work of the young Spanish-American 
poets. “Ariel,” a call to a new idealism published in 1900, 
when the clouds of social change and revolution were already 
gathering in the European skies, was a lesson on democracy 
addressed to the Spanish-American youth; it is interesting 
to note it has lately had quite a revival. The beginning of 
the century was a time of social reforms, the heyday of the 
liberalism and the moderation of which Rodd became a 
champion. A plea for the protection of child labour made 
a sensation in 1903, when he wrote a study on working 
conditions in Uruguay. In 1909, Rodd published his master- 
piece, “Motives of Proteus”: meditations, parables, aphorisms 
and maxims whose central theme is the lifelong evolution of 
man and his need to direct it through self-knowledge. 
Georg Philipp 
Telemann 
  
Sx thousand works, including 44 Passions, 100 oratorios, 
40 operas and 12 cycles of cantatas, each of 52 works 
composed the voluminous musical heritage left by Georg Philipp 
Telemann, a gifted musician and the most prolific composer 
of 18th century Germany. Born in Magdeburg in 1681, he 
composed his first opera at the age of 12, an accomplishment 
that displeased his parents who planned to make a lawyer 
of this born musician. Aged 27 and already famous, he was 
appointed as Kapellmeister at Eisenach where he met Johann 
Sebastian Bach, became his friend and was later godfather 
to Bach's son, Karl Philipp Emanuel. When Telemann died 
in 1767 at the age of 86, his godson succeeded him as director 
of church music in Hamburg. At that time Telemann’'s music 
was admired in every part of Europe. But his works were 
soon forgotten and some fifty years later Franz Schubert 
condemned the world’s neglect of a composer who he 
considered as “a master among the masters”. Today Telemann 
is acknowledged as an innovator who was able to infuse 
into the new classicism all the grace and vigour of Baroque 
music. 
Ph
ot
o 
Pr
es
se
. 
un
d 
I
n
f
o
r
m
a
t
i
o
n
s
a
m
t
,
 
B
o
n
n
 
  
Nicolai 
Lobachevsky 
  
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
A
P
N
 
Fos centuries the world's basic textbook on geometry was 
the “Elements” of the Greek mathematician Euclid written 
about 320 B.C. For nearly 2,000 years no one presumed to 
question Euclid’s famous postulate that only one line parallel 
to a given line can be drawn through a fixed point. The man 
who challenged this by advancing his own “scandalous” 
postulate—that there are two parallels to the given line through 
any fixed point—was the Russian . mathematician Nikolai 
Lobachevsky (1792-1856), who founded the new school of 
“hyperbolic” or “non Euclidean” geometry. Lobachevsky's 
entire academic life was linked with the University of Kazan 
(a city on the Volga, and today capital of the Tatar Republic) 
where he was a student, then a teacher and finally rector. 
His searching mind was to question not only long-accepted 
scientific beliefs but also, and as a result, some of the 
foundations of the philosophy of idealism which affirmed the 
a priori character of Euclidean ideas, without foreseeing that 
this could ever be contradicted. Lobachevsky announced his 
first studies on the new system of geometry in 1826 (when he 
was 34) and completed it in 1855. Conceived and developed 
independently, it agreed with conclusions reached by the 
German mathematician Frederic Gauss and by the Hungarian 
Janos Bolyai. The name of Lobachevsky thus remains 
inseparably associated with non-Euclidean geometry and with 
a striking revolution in human thought. 
  
Petr 
Bezruc 
Ph
ot
o 
Ar
no
st
 
Pu
st
ka
, 
Pr
ag
ue
 
| his homeland, Czechoslovakia, Petr Bezruc is one of the 
best known and appreciated of poets, and some of his 
poems have been translated into many languages. The poet's 
real name was Vladimir Vasek. Petr Bezruc was the pseu- 
donym under which he wrote verses extolling the Czech 
struggle for national rights and denouncing the social, economic 
and ethnic oppression of his people by the Austro-Hungarian 
empire. Petr Bezruc was born in Opava, Silesia, in 1867. His 
father, Antonin Vasek, a schoolmaster and journalist, was one 
of the Czech nationalists whose struggle against Habsburg 
domination grew sharper towards the end of the 19th century. 
Petr Bezruc's first verses were published in 1899 and many 
of his poems were later collected in book form as “Silesian 
Songs” (a selection translated into English was published by 
Artia, Prague, in 1966). He was not a professional poet in the 
sense of having literary aspirations. As he once put it: “Year 
after year, the immense oppression weighed upon me... so | 
wrote down these few poems to give voice to that oppression, 
If they have had effect it is only the truth of rattling chains.”

## [Page 29](078370engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 22385: Great men, great events

Vicente 
Blasco |banez 
  
Vicon Blasco Ibafiez, born in Valencia, Spain, in 1867, 
started writing at the age of 12. At 14, he was already 
completing, in Madrid, the works of a novelist who had engaged 
him as his secretary. His youth was marked by incessant 
pamphleteering and political protest, which forced him twice to 
flee Spain and took him to jail about 30 times. He also was 
elected six times to the Spanish Cortes. In 1909, tired of 
politics, he went to Argentina, whose scene was to inspire 
three of his most famous novels. One of them, “The Four 
Horsemen of the Apocalypse,” published in 1914 more as an 
anticipation than an actual comment on the world conflict, was 
the first international success among modern war novels, 
opening to him the doors of the American literary market and 
Hollywood fame. Blasco Ibaiez died a millionaire. He wrote 
no less than 30 novels which reveal his talent for creating 
characters and his gift for conducting narrative action. 
Charles 
Baudelaire 
Te “case” of Baudelaire is unique in the history of literature 
already rich in examples of misunderstanding and dramatic 
reversals of opinion. Charles Baudelaire, one of the greatest 
names in French poetry, gained the recognition refused him 
in his lifetime long after his death in 1867. Born in 1821, he 
began to write at an early age. Among the poems in Les 
Fleurs du Mal (The Flowers of Evil), a collection published in 
1857, are some he wrote in 1842 and 1843. The book caused 
a scandal and Baudelaire was prosecuted for offending against 
public morals. Although such literary giants as Victor Hugo 
and Théophile Gautier recognized in Baudelaire a writer of 
startling originality, the poet's works were scorned by the 
critics in vogue and he was wantonly vilified. It was perhaps 
less his private life (somewhat wild and unrestrained for his 
day) than the profound distress that imbued his poems and his 
discovery of “modernity” (a word he coined) which earned 
him the suspicion and hatred of contemporary society. That 
society had no wish to question any of the established social 
or literary norms nor to consider the possibility of the 
metamorphosis of such values. Baudelaire created a new 
poetical art that was to make its impact on French literature 
and prepare the way for Rimbaud and Mallarmé. A brilliant 
critic he drew attention to new aesthetic values in many fields. 
In literature, for example, he revealed to his countrymen the 
works of Edgar Allan Poe, in French versions that are 
masterpieces of the translator's art. In music he analyzed 
the revolutionary innovations of Richard Wagner. In painting, 
his studies on Eugéne Delacroix, Constantine Guys, Daumier 
and Edouard Manet brought out the meaning of the new tones 
and forms in colour and drawing. Baudelaire’s personal 
journals speak of his prolonged sufferings and his solitude 
from which a serious illness delivered him in 1867. 
P
h
o
t
o
 
©
 
B
i
b
l
i
o
t
h
é
q
u
e
 
Na
ti
on
al
e,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
A
n
t
o
n
i
o
 
G
a
l
v
e
z
 
  
   Luigi 
Pirandello 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Pu
bl
if
ot
o,
 
Ro
me
 
For nearly half a century, the name of Luigi Pirandello 
dominated Italian Letters. When Pirandello was awarded the 
Nobel Prize for Literature in 1934, two years before his death, 
he had become a world-famous dramatist who had given the 
theatre a new psychological dimension. Born in 1867 at 
Agrigente in Sicily, he first taught Italian literature in Rome 
and began publishing short stories and novels in 1893. Many 
of these deal with the lower middle class milieu or the farming 
communities in Sicily. Though Pirandello wrote some 
300 stories and six novels, his work as a novelist has been 
somewhat obscured by his fame as a playwright, though he 
used the same themes in both media. Novels such as “The 
Late Mattia Pascal” (1904) reveal the same irony, the same 
compassion that inspired the author to create the contradictory 
and vacillating characters found in many of his plays. 
Pirandello’s main themes are the necessity and vanity of 
illusion, the multiform appearances, all of them unreal, of what 
is presumed to be the truth; man is not what he thinks he is, 
but he is “one, no one and a hundred thousand” (the title of 
a Pirandello novel) according as he appears to different 
persons, and is always different from what he creates himself 
in his own mind. Pirandello’s plays have been translated into 
many languages, and have taken their places among the 
masterpieces of the modern theatre. 
‘60th anniversary of the use of 
Arabic in Egyptian schools 
RABIC is today a language fully adapted to the needs of . 
the 20th century with an abundant vocabulary of technological 
and scientific terms which, as it continues to expand, constantly 
adds new, expressive terms to the language of the Koran. 
Scientific works, technical manuals, books and reviews on 
science are written in Arabic or translated into it. The up-to- 
date vocabulary of the spoken word, with its mobility, 
inventiveness and imagery is being grafted on to the traditional 
written language, bringing with it the new ideas of the atomic 
age and the era of space exploration. The swift renovation of 
Arabic is all the more remarkable in view of the decline it 
suffered for four centuries following the invasion of Egypt by 
the Turks in 1517. Until the beginning of the 19th century 
Turkish replaced Arabic which thus was in danger of becoming 
a dead language. Since the first Arabic language university 
was created in Egypt sixty years ago and the use of Arabic 
was established for schools, the press and government 
services, the language has recovered its vigour and powers 
of adaptability. The Unesco General Conference in 1966 
decided to add Arabic to English, French, Spanish and Russian 
as a working language of Unesco. 
Photo Unesco-G. Bohm  

## [Page 30](078370engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 23639: The World Food Programme: a new form of aid for development

J0 
THE WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME 
A new form of aid for development 
by Colin Mackenzie 
M ODERN international aid, 
in the years since the discovery that 
wealth can be shared without too much 
risk, with honour and indeed with pro- 
fit, has come to assume varied forms. 
Cash of course predominates for, as 
Schopenhauer once remarked, money 
is the one thing which is not only a 
concrete satisfaction of one need in 
particular, but an abstract satisfaction 
of all. In addition, however, there is 
a wide variety of material and equip- 
ment. There is also technical advice 
—experts of one kind and another 
spread around the developing coun- 
tries armed with anything from syringes 
to theodolites. And now, as a rela- 
tively new form of aid, there is food. 
Relatively new? After all, as long 
ago as the third century B.C., Hieron li, 
Tyrant of Syracuse, sent grain to Egypt 
in time of famine. Yes, but food aid 
today is something rather different. It 
is not merely concerned with the feed- 
ing of hungry people, for, in the con- 
text of the looming world food crisis, 
such a course would be not only 
completely insignificant in relation to 
the size of the problem but also totally 
irrelevant to the need for curing the 
basic economic malaise which has 
caused it. Food aid, like other forms 
of modern aid, is intended to produce 
something more tangible and materially 
lasting than the prospect of a descent 
of blessings on the givers. 
To get an idea of food in action as 
a stimulus to a country's economic and 
social development, one needs to look 
at some of the projects that the World 
Food Programme (WFP) is aiding. 
In the north of Morocco, some 
30,000 children are being fed in pri- 
mary and secondary schools in seve- 
ral areas, with the result that enrol- 
ment is up by 15 to 20 per cent. This 
means that one day there may be just 
that many more doctors or administra- 
tors or engineers in Morocco than 
there would otherwise have been. 
In 1964, the Programme invested 
some $300,000 to help in the 
reclamation of land in the Republic of 
China. The food was distributed for 
two years to settlers while they went 
about preparing the land and sowing 
their crops. Now, 2,500 hectares 
(6,200 acres) of wasteland have been 
transformed into prosperous farms 
whose annual production will be worth 
five times the original investment of 
food. 
In Columbia, inhabitants of some of 
the poorer city suburbs have worked 
after hours paving their own streets. 
Their incentive—and to some extent 
their compensation—was the food sup- 
plied by the Programme. 
In one village in Senegal, one ton 
of couscous made from WFP sorghum 
was used to mobilize enough people to 
clear and plant enough land to pro- 
duce 45 tons of rice. 
I... are a few small in- 
stances taken at random from the 230- 
odd projects that have been approved 
since the Programme started opera- 
tions at the beginning of 1963. The 
range of development activities it has 
aided is very wide, 
There have been projects for feed- 
ing, not only school-children and stu- 
dents, but also expectant and nursing 
mothers and children still too young 
to go to school—all this investment in 
countries’ future resources in human 
skills. 
The Programme has helped to 
resettle Bedouins in the Middle East, 
refugees in Africa and communities 
threatened with inundation after the 
building of the Aswan Dam. With the 
food it has supplied, previously unem- 
ployed (or underemployed) rural wor- 
kers have set to work planting new or 
more abundant forests, particularly in 
sorely eroded areas around the Medi- 
terranean where there are the ravages 
of 2,000 or 3,000 years to be repaired. 
it provides animal feed to help fatten 
and multiply a country's livestock. 
There is a $10,000,000 project to im- 
prove milk supplies in India. Roads 
have been built—in one instance, in an 
island off Korea, linking up 95 isolated 
villages. There are projects in Tur- 
key to help feed workers in some 
industries and mines and thus boost 
productivity. WFP food has been used 
as part payment of the wages of wor- 
kers repairing the famous Hedjaz 
Railway that runs from Damascus to 
Medina and was originally built 
largely to carry Moslem pilgrims. 
A point to be remembered about the 
Programme's assistance to countries 
in their pursuit of economic and social 
development is that it is only assis- 
tance. It has been found that, on aver- 
age, something like 80 per cent of 
the costs of projects is borne by the 
countries themselves. WFP aid is 
often primarily a stimulus, the extra 
incentive that makes the difference 
between whether a project is started 
or not. 
It was said earlier that merely feed- 
ing the hungry is not enough. But 
there are of course times of dire emer- 
gency when not feeding the hungry 
would also be less than enough. That 
is why the Programme, with the stocks 
of food it has at its disposal, also 
comes to the aid of victims of emer- 
gencies, whether these are sudden, 
unforeseeable catastrophes like hurri- 
canes, typhoons, earthquakes and vol- 
canic eruptions or the slowly punishing 
ravages of a long drought. 
Emergency operations, however, are

## [Page 31](078370engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 23639: The World Food Programme: a new form of aid for development

       
   
not the primary aim of the Programme, 
and so far never more than about a 
quarter of its resources have been 
allocated to them in any one year. The 
success of the operations has varied 
inversely with the size of the emergency 
and the number of victims. In Bots- 
wana, where there was a prolonged 
drought, food supplies at a total cost 
of less than $5.5 million helped to keep 
the entire country going for several 
months when things were at their 
worst, On the other hand, more than 
$13.5 million spent in the last year or 
so on sending food to the drought- 
stricken areas of India, including the 
states of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, has 
had little impact on so wide a sweep 
of suffering. 
The fact is that the resources 
of the World Food Programme, 
as yet, are totally inadequate for 
meeting any kind of famine on the 
scale that now seems to threaten. 
What are these resources? And, 
indeed, how did the World Food Pro- 
gramme come into being at all? 
The story probably goes back to 
the 1930s, when for the first time 
people were struck by the disquieting 
phenomenon of a glut of huge, waste- 
ful agricultural surpluses in some coun- 
tries (notably the United States, 
although in Brazil too, for example, 
75 million bags of coffee had to be 
burned during the period) while masses 
of people in other areas of the world 
went hungry. It was the pressure to 
find an outlet for surpluses that origi- 
nally prompted the idea of food aid. 
From the end of the Second World 
War, the UN. Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) worked hard on 
the problem of surplus disposal, but 
the most important large-scale initia- 
tive for putting food aid into practice 
was taken by the United States in 
1954 with the passage of an Act— 
usually known as Public Law 480—as 
a result of which $13,000 million worth 
of surplus agricultural commodities 
were shipped to other countries in the 
decade that followed. 
By this time, however, the idea of 
development aid on the multilateral 
pattern was gaining ground, especially 
following the heavy influx of newly- 
independent nations into the councils 
of the United Nations and its Specia- 
lized Agencies. 
So the two trends—a constructive 
“i ee Loar oH Lng a : = _ 5 TESS 
HERR 2 J a 5 
a3 3 Y ti "> ' 
  
   
         ¥ » 
      Ad 
-
 
r
h
 
ee 
- ’ - - 
rN A A . - i ws »» - 
- 2 . » 
Photo © H.W. Silvester 
method of surplus disposal and the 
new emphasis on multilateral aid— 
merged. At the end of 1961, follow- 
ing studies carried out by FAO at the 
United Nations’ request, parallel reso- 
lutions in the two organizations set up 
the World Food Programme on an 
experimental three-year basis with a 
target of $100 million in commodities 
and cash. Thus the Programme, 
which formally started operations on 
January 1, 1963, is the child of both 
the United Nations, with its general 
concern for economic and social dev- 
elopment, and FAO, with its special 
competence in matters connected with 
food. 
By the end of 1965 when the ex- 
perimental period was drawing to a 
close, the Programme had sufficiently 
proved itself for the United Nations and 
FAO to decide to continue it “for as 
long as multilateral food aid is found 
feasible and desirable.” Despite the 
fact that by its nature the Programme 
is meant to be only a preliminary 
to plenitude, this looks like being for 
some while yet. 
The Programme lives by pledges of 
commodities and cash from its parti- 
cipating countries—participation is 
-
 
sc 
-— 3 
17 
tir 
4° 
. $ 
» \ 
= (a - 
  
31

## [Page 32](078370engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 23639: The World Food Programme: a new form of aid for development

J 
  
    
       
Cbs 15 
Fog Vs 
hed 
wl IN RT TA 
WGI SLR co aed) is 
3 
THE WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME (Continued) 
open to all Members of the United 
Nations or FAQ. The proportion is 
two-thirds in commodities—food and 
animal feed, with cereals heavily pre- 
dominating—and one-third in cash or 
services such as shipping. During 
the 1963-5 experimental period, the 
target of $100 million was very nearly 
fully subscribed. For the new three- 
year pledging period 1966-8, a much 
higher target was set—$275 million. 
This time the response in pledges has 
been" proportionately much lower—the 
resources at present available to the 
Programme are worth less than 
$60 million a year, a figure which 
should be set against the annual 
$1,500 million to $2,000 million which 
represents the totality of food aid in 
recent years. 
In comparing these figures, it should 
once again be remembered that there 
is a growing preference for mulitila- 
teral aid—not only among the dev- 
eloping countries which would thereby 
have a greater say in events, but also, 
in the case of food aid, among some 
of the major donors which would like 
to see the burden more evenly shared. 
it may thus be that the Programme will 
be allotted a really sizeable part of 
the extra 4.5 million tons of food aid 
that was agreed on in the closing days 
—or nights——of the Kennedy Round 
negotiations, and also that future 
pledging targets—and, even more per- 
tinently, the pledges themselves—will 
in the 1970s go sufficiently beyond the 
$200 million now proposed for the two- 
year period 1969-70 to enable the Pro- 
gramme to measure up more adequa- 
tely for its part to the trials awaiting 
the international community. : 
- The curious might still inquire how 
the Programme actually handles the 
food it already has. The answer is 
simple in general terms, but extremely 
complicated in practice. Everything 
must begin with a country’s request for 
aid which, in the case of development 
projects, is submitted to a formidable 
process of scrutiny by the Executive 
Director and his staff in Rome and by 
whichever of the co-operating inter- 
national organizations is concerned— 
Unesco in the case, for example, of 
a school-feeding project. The preli- 
minaries for emergency operations— 
which have to be authorized by the 
FAO Director-General—are naturally 
much more summary. 
Among the most strenuous com- 
plications are those of earmarking 
and allocating the variety of food- 
ge TARYN kp A ne ¥ MEE (A 2 
  
-; 
i 
l
a
f
 
L
e
e
 
  
 
 
 
   
U. N. Photo 
Tuna fishermen off the coast of Ceylon. 
stuffs from the large number "of 
countries which have pledged them to 
the variety of projects or emergency 
operations needing them—and in the 
quantities and units in which they are 
needed. At the end of 1966, about 
40 countries had pledged food and 
WFP was operating in about 50. In 
addition, unless a donor country pro- 
vides its own shipping, the Programme 
has to organize transport of the goods, 
including insurance, to the recipient 
country. The World Food Programme - 
is very much a business operation. 
So, from what was originally the 
problem of how to make the best use 
of unwanted agricultural surpluses has 
grown a new form of aid for develop- 
ment in the long-term interests of all. 
The need is great, but so are the po- 
tentialities. It is worth recalling what 
John F. Kennedy once said, even before 
he became U.S. President, addressing 
a farm audience at Mitchell, South 
Dakota, in the late fifties. “| don't 
regard the ... agricultural surplus as 
a problem,” he declared. "I regard it 
as an opportunity.” For, he affirmed, 
“...food is strength, and food is 
peace, and food is freedom, and food 
is a helping hand to people around 
the world..."

## [Page 33](078370engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

From the Unesco News 
World's first ‘International 
. Literacy Day’ and the 
Reza Pahlavi Literacy Prize 
The world's first ‘International Literacy 
Day’, was celebrated on September 8 in 
all Unesco’'s member states. On this oc- 
casion, Mr René Maheu, speaking at Expo 
67 in Montreal, and U Thant, Secretary- 
General of the United Nations, called for 
an international effort in support of the 
global fight against illiteracy. On Septem- 
ber 7, Mr Maheu presided at the presen- 
tation of the first Mohammed Reza Pahlavi 
Literacy Prize, during a ceremony held at 
Unesco H.Q. in Paris. The $5,000 prize, 
contributed by His Imperial Majesty the 
Shahinshah of Iran, was awarded to stu- 
dents of the Girls Secondary School at 
Tabora, Tanzania, who as volunteer teachers 
visited homes and community centres to 
give literacy teaching to more than 400 
people. Their example has encouraged 
students in other Tanzanian secondary 
schools to start adult literacy classes. 
Since 1964 Tanzania has developed literacy 
programmes as part of its national develop- 
ment plan. By January 1965, 7,257 classes 
were operating, attended by over 540,000 
adults, of whom about two-thirds were 
women. 
Visitor from 
outer space 
A meteorite—in two main pieces, one 
weighing 12 tons and the other about 3— 
found in a remote part of Western Australia, 
is Australia’s largest meteorite and the 
eleventh largest found in the world. 
Geophysicists believe this visitor from outer 
space is 93 per cent iron and nearly 7 per 
cent nickel, that it crashed to earth tens 
of thousands of years ago and probably 
came from an asteroid belt between the 
planets Jupiter and Mars.’ 
140,000 U.S.-international 
educational exchanges 
Over 140,000 persons—college and 
university students, teachers and scholars— 
were involved in educational exchange 
between the U.S. and 172 other countries 
and territories in 1966-67, according to 
“Open Doors” 1967, the annual survey of 
educational exchange statistics published 
by the Institute of International Education, 
New York. This record figure included a 
total of 100,262 students from abroad 
enrolled in 1,797 U.S. institutions of higher 
learning, which also were hosts to more 
than 10,700 professors, scholars and 
researchers from a record 118 countries. 
Associated schools and 
the Marie Curie centenary 
To mark the centenary of the birth of 
Marie Curie, Polish schools which are 
members of the Unesco Associated Schools 
project have prepared materials on her life 
  
and work for the schools abroad that they 
correspond with. A suggestion by the 
Polish National Commission for Unesco has 
fed to the “twinning” of the Marie Sklodow- 
ska-Curie School in Lublin with the Lycée 
Marie Curie at Sceaux, near Paris. 
A U.S. Directory 
of Correspondence Courses 
Determining the quality of correspondence 
courses before enrolling is usually difficult. 
Private correspondence schools in the 
U.S.A. which meet certain high standards 
are accredited by the National Home Study 
Council which is recognized by the U.S. 
Office of Education as an accrediting 
agency. Anyone can obtain a free copy of 
a “Directory” which lists accredited schools 
and courses they offer by writing to the 
National Home Study Council, 1601 18th 
Street, N.W., Washington D.C. 20009, 
U.S.A. 
New Soviet vessels 
for ‘World Weather Watch’ 
The Soviet Union is building about ten 
new research ships some of which will 
supply vital data for the World Weather 
Watch programme during its first phase 
1968-71. The programme calls for at least 
seven new weather ship stations to fill 
“gaps” in the southern hemisphere. The 
Soviet ships are expected also to under- 
take important work in oceanography, 
communications data, processing, fore- 
casting and, especially, storm warnings. 
As ocean areas cover 70 per cent of the 
surface of the globe and are poorly served 
by meteorological stations, the weather 
watch programme will also make more use 
of merchant shipping for obtaining 
observations. 
Saving grain by 
nuclear radiation 
The world's first plant for saving grain 
by using nuclear radiation to kill insect 
pests is installed at Iskenderun, Turkey. 
Grain from large hoppers falls past a 
powerful source of radioactive cobalt 
whose gamma radiation sterilizes the insects 
in the grain. A degree of protection is 
thus given against reinfestation by the same 
species. World grain losses through in- 
sects total some 5 per cent of all grain 
produced; the amount lost each year could 
feed 100 million people. 
Floating laboratory 
for ocean research 
A new ocean research vessel, the 
“Oceanographer” has been launched in 
the U.S.A. Designed to stay at sea for 
five months at a time, the ship has over 
4,000 square feet of laboratory space, and 
a computer capable of 10,000 operations 
a second. The computer will be used to 
sort, analyze and store data on temper- 
atures, sediments, currents and other mari- 
time phenomena. 
  
BOOKSHELF 
  
    
UNESCO'S TRANSLATION SERIES 
Japan 
M Japan's First Modern Novel: 
“Ukigumo” of Futabatei Shimei 
Translation and critical commentary 
by Marleigh Grayer Ryan. 
Columbia University Press, New York 
and London, 1967 ($10.00). 
Pakistan 
Tree Without Roots 
By Syed Waliullah 
A novel from the Bengali, translated 
by Qaisar Seeed, Anne Marie-Thi- 
baud and Malik Khayyam. Chatto 
and Windus, London, 1967 (21/-). 
China 
B Fifty Songs from the Yiian 
(Poetry of 13th Century China) 
Translated and with an introduction 
by Richard F.S. Yang and Charles 
R. Metzger. George Allen and Un- 
win Ltd, London, 1967 (35/-). 
In the U.S., the Unesco Publications 
Center, 317, East 34th Street, New 
York, can supply all the above 
volumes. 
Brazil 
BW La Vengeance de |'Arbre 
et Autres Contes 
By José Monteiro Lobato 
A collection of stories originally 
entitled “Urupés”. 
Translated from the Portuguese into 
French by Georgette Tavares Bastos. 
Editions Universitaires, Paris, 1967 
(18.50 F). 
* 
BM Glossary of Linguistic Terminology 
By Mario Pei 
An Anchor Original book, Doubleday 
and Company, Inc., New York, 1966 
(paperback: $1.95). 
HB A Guide to Book-Publishing 
By Datus C. Smith, Jnr. 
R.R. Bowker Co., New York, 1966 
($6.00). 
MW Miracles 
(Poems by children of the 
English-speaking world) 
Collected by Richard Lewis 
Simon and Shuster, New York, 1966 
($4.95). 
BW Pakistan 
Edited by Ibnul Hasan with a fore- 
ward by Mumtaz Hasan, S. Pk. 
United Advertisers, 12-A, Block-6 
P.E.CH.S., Karachi-29, (1967). 
* 
Readers are advised that the follow- 
ing books listed in our July 1967 
Bookshelf—"Japanese Architecture”, 
“lapanese Handicrafts" and “Japa- 
nese Gardens”—are no longer dis- 
tributed by Charles E. Tuttle Com- 
pany, Rutland, Vermont. They are 
now available in the U.S.A. through 
Japan Publications Trading Company, 
P.O. Box 7752, Rincon Annex, 1255 
Howard Street, San Francisco, 
California 94119. :   33

## [Page 34](078370engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
Letters to the Editor 
LESSON FROM THE PAST 
 
Sir, 
| have been deeply shocked by the 
recent tragic conflict in the Middle 
East. It has shown once more that 
only an atmosphere of friendship and 
mutual understanding can bring the 
true peace and effective co-operation 
so urgently needed by both Jews and 
Arabs. 
A utopian thought? It may seem 
so nowadays, but there were times, 
indeed centuries, when peaceful co- 
existence and cultural exchanges 
existed between these peoples and 
brought fruitful results—in Medieval 
Spain for example. One need only 
recall the achievements of such great 
thinkers as Maimonides, the Jewish 
rabbi, savant, physician and philos- 
opher and his contemporary, Averroes, 
the Arab scholar, lawyer and phil- 
osopher. 
By publishing a number of the 
“Unesco Courier” devoted to the 
cultural and scientific aspects of Arab- 
Jewish co-operation in the past, 
Unesco could make an important 
contribution to the cause "of peace 
in the Middle East. 
Carlo Rosso 
Madrid, Spain 
NEW LIGHT ON 
POPULATION PROBLEMS 
  
Sir, 
The presentation of the population 
problems facing our children and 
grandchildren (“Unesco Courier”, Feb- 
ruary 1967) was fascinating. How- 
ever, your distinguished contributors— 
and in this they follow most contem- 
porary scientific writers—may have 
accepted too easily the current pro- 
jections of the orthodox demographers. 
In the face of such overpowering 
figures, has objective, and especially 
external judgment of these parameters 
been suspended just a bit? The line 
of man's fate seldom turns out to be 
the shortest distance between two 
points, and it seems time that related 
disciplines brought their gains to bear 
more closely on the demographers. 
In the last few years developments, 
even revolutions, in accepted concepts 
in anthropology, zoology, physiology 
and in particular endocrinology, and 
psychosomatic and psychological 
medicine have produced potentially 
enormous contributions, which have 
not been fully integrated in the main 
demographic stream. There is a wealth 
of deductions to be harvested for in- 
stance from the work of Leakey, 
Keith, La Barre, Marais, Elliott, 
C.R. Carpenter, Wynne-Edwards, Bolk, 
J.J). Christian and A.D. Jonas, to name 
but a few. In some sections, popu- 
larization is abreast or even ahead 
of the academics—exemplified by 
Ardrey’s "Territoria Imperative”, which 
will mean much more to demography 
than has yet been expounded. 
Insights from the disciplines men- 
tioned can provide for instance the 
sort of links which Jean Fourastié is 
seeking In his passage on the “four 
quantities of space”. A striking fore- 
taste of the way in which, when a 
wider range of disciplines is called 
in aid, some of the present question- 
marks in studies of population, in- 
dustrialization and urbanization, and 
medicine fall into place was provided 
in a paper read at the last annual 
meeting of the American Association 
for the Advancement of Science 
by the Swedish demographer, Olin, 
entitled: “Feedback mechanisms in 
human populations: a hypothesis 
about the self-regulation of population 
growth”. This opens up the possi- 
bility of a more hopeful adjustment 
of projections, which the press in 
North America was quick to seize 
upon. 
The rapid mobilization of inter- 
disciplinary influences on contempo- 
rary demography will be a vastly in- 
tricate and highly intellectual task, 
which Unesco should be particularly 
well fitted to foster. 
G. E. Yates 
Valetta, Malta 
* AFRICAN ARTS - 
ARTS D'AFRIQUE * 
  
Sir, 
Readers who enjoyed your excellent 
June 1967 issue devoted to “Africa 
and the African Genius”, may be 
interested to know that in October, 
1967, the African Studies Center of 
the University of California, is bring- 
ing out a new quarterly, African Arts- 
Arts d'Afrique. 
This magazine, richly illustrated (in- 
cluding full-colour pages), will serve 
to record African traditional art and 
to encourage contemporary African 
artists in all fields of artistic endea- 
vour, graphic, plastic, performing, and 
literary. Its mission also is to broaden 
the appreciation of the art of Africa, 
in and beyond Africa. 
Congratulations on the continued 
excellence of the “Unesco Courier”. 
Paul O. Proehl, Director 
African Studies Center 
University of California 
Los Angeles, U.S.A. 
MAN AND HIS RELIGION 
Sir, 
In your April 1967 issue | especially 
loved the centre colour page (stained 
glass, Tournai Cathedral). That naugh- 
ty prelate taking precious cash from 
the bread-seller is admirable. 
On another subject: the EXPO 67 
article is excellent but | wish you 
could have found space for a photo- 
graph of Canada's own pavilion. | 
find the architecture of this pavillon 
quite outstanding—of equal interest to 
that of “Habitat”, for example. And 
the theme of the Canadian Pavilion 
gives the theme of the entire EXPO 
in miniature. Perhaps you could 
publish a separate article about this 
Pavilion in a later issue. 
It is ironic that, among all the 
themes of EXPO, there is no mention 
of Man and his Religion. Perhaps, 
indeed, we modern prelates would 
have been unable ever to agree on 
the contents of such a Pavilion (yes, 
in spite of the World Council of 
Churches and Vatican 11). But this 
omission points up an enormous “la- 
cune” in EXPO 67; an enormous 
“lacune” also in the UN, in Unesco— 
and in the world. However | am old 
enough and (maybe) wise enough to 
realize that | suggest the impossible 
...but since “all things are possible 
with God", | daresay | don't care 
overmuch. 
Please don’t tell me that there is 
a Pavilion devoted to Religion at 
EXPO 67. | know this already, but it 
pays only lp-service to what | am 
trying to say. 
The Rev. G. L. Carnes 
Vicar-General of the Anglican 
Church in Haiti, Port-au-Prince 
HIROSHIMA'S MONUMENT 
 
Sir, 
Reading your article on the statues 
of Rameses Il at Abu Simbel being 
given a new home (February 1967) 
reminded me that we in Hiroshima 
also had a monument awaiting pre- 
servation—the ruins of the municipal 
buildings high above whose dome the 
first atomic bomb was exploded in 
1945. 
The campaign to maintain the ruins 
as a monument began in Hiroshima 
and became nationwide, but municipal 
funds for urgent preservation measu- 
res were insufficient. More money 
was raised and the task is in hand. 
It is not our intention to comme- 
morate hatred or revenge against 
America. We aim to end war for all 
time by instilling the desire for peace 
in the minds of all who will come 
to see the dome. We support the 
Constitution of Unesco. 
Sakuichiro Kanai 
Saitama Ken, Japan 
WELCOME TO MILLTOWN 
 
Sir, 
The Milltown Unesco Group would 
like to hear from young people in 
any part of the world who choose to 
come to Ireland any time this year 
or next. With the co-operation of local 
organizations 1t would be possible 
to accomodate them in managable 
numbers from for one day to one 
month. That is our contribution to 
International Tourist Year. 
Michael O Sullivan 
Group Leader, 
Knockavota, Milltown 
Co. Kerry, Republic of Ireland 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
LA
NG
, 
PA
RI
S.
 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.

## [Page 35](078370engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

We are pleased to announce 
the launching of two new lan- 
guage editions of the UNESCO 
COURIER. 
Publication began in India, in 
July 1967, of a Hindi edition in 
Delhi and of a Tamil edition in 
Madras. 
This brings to eleven the 
number of editions of the 
UNESCO COURIER. The Unesco 
Courier is happy to welcome this 
new international family of read- 
ers which it hopes will give fresh 
impetus to the efforts to promote 
international understanding it 
has deployed since it began 
publication 20 years ago. 
THE UNESCO 
COURIER 
in Hindi 
and Tamil 
= PRI 
Tt 1967 (Wr uw) whe Ww 0.90 0, wo ow vee 
  
   
Eg Furr 
WO LET Sh shar a 1050 sat rf gt 
YX XX 
DARTHB AFT 
   
    
  
A 
        
WHERE TO RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul, — AUSTRALIA. 
Longmans of Australia Pty Ltd., Railway Crescent, 
Croydon, Victoria; sub-agent United Nations Associa- 
tion of Australia, Victorian Division, 4th Floor, Askew 
House, 364 Lonsdale St., Melbourne C. I. (Victoria); 
for the Unesco Courier only : Dominie Pty Ltd, 463 Pitt- 
water Road, Brookvale (N.S.W.) ($A 2.25). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C=, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 70.-). — BELGIUM. All publications: Editions 
“Labor”, 342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-We- 
tenschappelijke Uitgeverij Belgiélei 147, Antwerp. I. For 
The Unesco Courier (140 FB) and art slides (488 FB) only: 
Louis De Lannoy, 112, rue du Tréne, Brussels 5. CCP 
3380.00. — CANADA. Queen's Printer, Ottawa, Ont, 
($3.00). —CEYLON. Lake House Bookshop, Sir Chittam- 
palan Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244, Colombo, 2 (Rs. 7). 
— CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CYPRUS. 
“MAM”, Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 
1722, Nicosia. — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L., 
Spalena 51, Prague 1 {permanent display); Zahranicni 
literatura Bilkova 4, Prague 1. — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, Ltd., Prags Boulevard 47, Copenhagen S. {D. 
Kr. 17). — ETHIOPIA, International Press Agency. P.O, 
Box 120, Addis Ababa (10/-). —~ FINLAND. Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (Fmk. 9.40). — 
FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 
Paris-7+, C.C.P. 12598-48. (10 F}. — GERMANY. All 
publications: R. Oldenbaurg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145, Munich, B. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed only) 
Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 
276650 (DM 10). — GHANA Methodist Book Depot 
Ltd., Atlantis House, Commercial Street, POB 100, Cape 
Coast, — GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — 
GREECE. Librairie H, Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, 
Athens; Librairie Elefcheroudakis, Nikkis 4, Athens. — 
HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, 
Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Académiai K&nyvesbolt, 
Vici u. 22, Budapest V; A.K.Y. Kényvtirosok Boltja, 
Népkoztirsasig utja 16, Budapest VI. — ICELAND. 
Snaebjérn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
(120 Kr.) — INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd., Nicol 
Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Caleutta 13; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson 
House, 1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New Delhi. 
1; Sub-Depots : Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 
Park Street, Calcutta 16 and Scindia House, New Delhi: 
Indian National Commission for Cooperation with 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, New Delhi 3. (Rs. 
10.50). — INDONESIA. P.T.N. “Permata-Nusantara” 
c/o Department of Commerce 22, Djalan MNusantara 
Djakarta — IRAQ. McKenzie’s Bookshop, Al-Rashid 
Street, Baghdad; University Bookstore, University 
of Baghdad, P.O. Box 75, Baghdad — IRELAND. The 
National Press, 2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. 
4. (15/5). — ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly Blum- 
stein’'s Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48 Nahlat 
Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (£8). — JAMAIJCA. Sang- 
ster’s Book Room, 91 Harbour Street, Kingston. (15/-). 
JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome, Nihon- 
bashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo (1,200 yen). 
— JORDAN. Joseph |. Bahous & Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, 
Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Amman. — KENYA. E.S.A. 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi (10/-), — KOREA. 
Karean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Cen- 
tral 64, Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., 
Ltd., P. O. Box 2942, Kuwait — LIBERIA. Cole and 
Yancy Bookshops Led., P.O. Box 286. Monrovia (10/-). 
— LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand- 
Rue, Luxemburg (F.L. 140). — MALAYSIA. Federal 
Publications Ltd., Times House, River Valley Road, 
Singapore, 9; Pudu Building (3rd floor), 110, jalan 
Pudu, Kuala Lumpur (M. § 7.50). — MALTA. Sapienza's 
Library, 26 Kingsway, Valletta, (15/-). — MAURITIUS. 
Nalanda Company Ltd.,, 30, Bourbon Stredr, Port- 
Louis (15/-). — MONACO. Briush Library, 30, Bld. 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (F. 10). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 8.50), — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G. C. 
T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Cura- 
cao. NLA. (NA fl 4,50). — NEW ZEALAND. Govern- 
ment Printing Office, 20, Molesworth Street (Private 
Bag), Wellington; Government Bookshops: Auckland 
(P.O. Box 5344), Christchurch (P.O. Box 1721), Dune- 
din (P.O. Box 1104) (15/-). — NIGERIA. C.M.S. Book- 
shops, P.O. Box 174, Lagos (10/-). — NORWAY, 
All publications: A.S. Bokhjornet, Akersgt 41- 
Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only: AS. Norvesens Litte« 
raturfeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6, (17.50 kr.). — PA- 
KISTAN. The Waest-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., Unesco 
Publications House, P.O. Box 374 G.P.O., Lahore; 
Showrooms : Urdu Bazar, Lahore, and 57-58 Murree 
Highway, G/é-1,|slamabad.— PHILIPPINES. The Modern 
Book Ca., Inc, 928 Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 632, 
Manila — POLAND. All publications: ORWN PAN Palac 
Kultury, Warsaw. For the Unecco Courier only: 
“RUSH”, ul. Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10 (zl. 60.). — 
PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lda, Livraria Portu- 
gal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — PUERTO RICO. 
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor Roosevelt 115. 
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. — SOUTHERN RHODESIA. 
Textbook Sales (PYT) Ltd., 67, Union Avenue, Salisbury, — 
SUDAN. A! Bashir Bookshop, P. O. Box 1118, 
Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publications ; A/B C.E. 
Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stock- 
holm 16. — For the Unesco Courier: The United, 
Nations Association of Sweden, Vasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 12); SWITZERLAND. All publications : 
Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasse, Zurich. Payot, rue Grenus 6, 
1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 1.236. “Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva, C.C.P. 
1-4811. (Fr. 5S. 10). — TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam. —- THAILAND, 
Suksapan Panit Mansion, 9, Rajdamnern Avenue. Bangkok. 
(35 ticals). — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul, — UGANDA. Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala (10/-).— SOUTH AFRICA. 
All publications : Van Schaik’s Bookstore (Pty} Ltd., 
Libri Building. Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
For the Unesco Courier (single copies) only : Central 
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. (R1.-50). 
— UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie 
Kase El Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, Cairo. Subjagent : 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — 
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. 
Box 569, Londen, S.E.l.,, and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham and Bristol. (15/-). — UNITED STATES. 
Unesco Publications Center, 317 East 34th St, New York, 
N.Y. 10016($ 5.00). — U.S.S.R. Mezhdunarednaja Kniga, 
Moscow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. jugoslovenska 
Knjiga Terazije, 27, Belgrade; NAPRIJED, Trg. Republi- 
ke 17, Zagreb.

## [Page 36](078370engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
—
   
— 
a
 
—
—
 
a 
—
—
 
i
 
—
—
—
 
  
  
  
"WORLD OF WANT 
WORLD OF PLENTY 
  
  
 
 
’ 
TH EY ol 3 8 | 
= 3 ol 
A . ! 
hy 
A] 
» . 
1
 
w
i
 
Be
th
 
" . 
L
e
s
 
Ww 
se 
TAR
 
Ir 
bs
 
Wi
 
I
:
 
ck
 
4 
" 
b
i
l
l
 
i 
4 
: 
J 
A
 
L
l
  
Photo © Paul Almay, Paris A 
3} 
In vast areas of the globe millions go hungry while elsewhere countries have difficulty in : 
finding outlets for their surplus food. To meet this paradoxical situation, the United Nations 2 
and the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization five years ago set up a new form of 8 
international aid: the World Food Programme. Today the Programme helps to channel the 
food surpluses of 40 countries to relieve hunger and malnutrition in fifty others. (see page 30). 
T
i
 
he”
 
F
L
 
A A ER RR ERR