# [078268](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
  
Where the Dead Sea 
Scrolls left off 
 
 
Early 
Christian 
manuscripts 
from the sands 
of the Nile 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

   
    
   
    
 
    
       
  
Wr — - “gy 2 at. a Se pret bn A Ta 7 a PRA eT nt Br CTF WLR - 4 
og art on ENE ST Ted a Se Ye 7% APART CLEA TAD TOR «NOS 
+ Lr x AAT v A ” Sota ’ . . . . et ahs bt - a ASF Be 3m FT RN x : 0: 
= ” A > } ok TE oN : “id ! a . * 
AC TEER RY AR 1 LS 20°F 4% : ] ET Ny i SA, 4 WW a € ! v . pt . r Re 
» 4 Sv . 20 " ’ «J 3 Sr Pe er 5 | . a “ha wat . : MEST 1. a . 3 . ’ d . : AN 
= ’ rh n Talon = — : 5s ‘ 
5) > WY . weé A ~ : : 
es SS 3 J ad 
Fey 4 ’ ’ “ ' : 
Fi Lat rt { - 
ERLE San 
"3 ral i,» 
"RI N 
drs : 
a > E 4 4 
At » tom 
Fries ¥ I° : C lal «8 . 
wl Bu ‘ 
’ . ‘ . 
ol . vw 
Ja . a . 
ros + Tr : 
Tat? : 
™ -t . 
«¥ 
a. 1 
d . . 
’ 
ik td - 
oy “ 
“3 ’ 
IW - 
* 
hy a a 3 
» ) 
AL 
+A EN ’ 
p— A ho 
v yo tp a » 
ov 1 
v " 
i LP + 
Sh : 
> 3 ’ 
rte 
oy 
at 
"> 
“A be 
Sh 
» 
 ! 
     
   
FJ 
   
= 
7 
op
 
Z
r
 
v 
oy
 
L
I
T
T
 
x2
 
v 
_
—
 
—
n
 
        
  
ALIS LAY AER, 7. 
T R E A Katharina, aged 20 
Painter, engraver and draughtsman, the great German artist Albrecht Diirer was born exactly 
OF five centuries ago. The drawing, above, of a Moorish girl was made in 1521 when Diirer 
WwW O R LD A RT journeyed to the Netherlands to be present at the coronation of the young emperor Charles V. 
"| painted the Moorish girl with my pencil,“ he noted in his diary, referring to his silver point 
sketch on specially prepared paper or parchment, for which he was already famous 
55) Germany throughout Europe. Diirer committed the girl's name and age to eternity, noting “1521, 
Katharina, aged 20“ alongside his familiar monogram.

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

"WCourier 
  
MAY 1971 
24TH YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 13 EDITIONS 
English Japanese 
French Italian 
Spanish Hindi 
Russian Tamil 
German Hebrew 
Arabic Persian 
U.S.A. 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢ 
Annual subscription rates: £1 stg.; $4.00 
(Canada): 12 French francs or equivalent; 
2 years: £1.80 stg.; 22 F. Single copies: 10p 
stg.; 40 cents; 1.20 F. 
* 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except 
in August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese, ltalian, Hindi, Tamil, Hebrew and Persian. in the 
United Kingdom it is distributed by H.M. Stationery Office, 
P.0. Box 569, London, S.E.l 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issues, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear avthor's name, Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
tha opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Read- 
ers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York, and in Current Con- 
tents - Education, Philadelphla, U.S.A. 
* 
Editorial Office 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7°, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Lucio Attinelli 
Managing Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition: Francisco Ferndndez-Santos (Paris) 
Russian Edition: Georgi Stetsenko (Paris) 
German Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition: Hitoshi Taniguchi (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition: Kartar Singh Duggal (Delhi) 
Tamil Edition: N.D. Sundaravadivelu (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition: Alexander Peli (Jerusalem) 
Persian Edition: Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Assistant Editors 
English Edition: Howard Brabyn 
French Edition : Nino Frank 
Spanish Edition: Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Photo Editor: Olga Rodel 
Layout and Design: Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief Ne
 
5 
- 
19
71
 
MC
 
71
-2
-2
66
 
A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 
4| EARLY CHRISTIAN MANUSCRIPTS 
FROM THE SANDS OF THE NILE 
Unesco to publish 13 codices, sequel to the Dead Sea Scrolls 
by James M. Robinson 
9| THE RIDDLE OF THE ‘ABRAXAS’ AMULETS 
11 | COPTIC VOICES FROM THE PAST 
by Howard Brabyn 
12| TRIESTE—WORLD RENDEZVOUS 
FOR PHYSICISTS 
by Dan Behrman 
17 | THE STONES WITH THE RAISED HANDS 
Funerary art of the Bogomils 
by Miroslav Krleza 
23| THE CULTURE OF MACHINE LIVING 
by Max Lerner 
28 | MAKING LEARNING REAL FUN 
FOR BLIND CHILDREN 
by Elizabeth Freund 
33| UNESCO NEWSROOM 
34 | LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
2| TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
‘Katharina, aged 20°, by Albrecht Durer (Germany)   
 
Cover 
  
These fragments of ancient Coptic 
script are from the papyrus pages 
of some 50 works discovered 
in upper Egypt. Scholars expect 
this “library” of 400 A.D. will throw 
new light on early Christianity 
and particularly on the doctrines 
of the Gnostics (see article page 4). 
Inset, villagers of a Coptic 
Christian community not far 
from the site where the 
manuscripts were found. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
D
e
s
j
a
r
d
i
n
s
 
- 
R
é
a
l
i
t
é
s

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

Where the Dead Sea 
 
Scrolls left off 
 


### 52916: Early Christian manuscripts from the sands of the Nile: where the Dead Sea Scrolls left off

EARLY CHRISTIAN MANUSCRIPTS 
FROM THE SANDS OF THE NILE 
SS... around 400 A.D. thirteen 
books were buried in Upper Egypt, to be dug up by 
pure chance a generation ago. This invaluable little 
library is now to be published in a facsimile edition 
by the United Arab Republic in co-operation with 
Unesco. Nothing is directly known about who buried 
the library. In fact, very little is known about who 
discovered it. But the generally accepted assumptions 
run somewhat as follows: 
Jean Doresse, then a member of 
the Institute of Oriental Archaeological 
Studies (today a noted French histo- 
rian of religion and specialist on 
Ethiopia), had initiative enough to 
track down the site of the find, some 
twenty years ago, when the library had 
only recently surfaced on the anti- 
quities market of Cairo. After their 
purchase in 1951 by the Egyptian 
Government, the manuscripts were 
placed in the Coptic Museum in 
Cairo, and lean Doresse was com- 
missioned by the Museum to investi- 
gate the discovery. 
He equipped himself out for a minor 
desert safari, and after various adven- 
  
JAMES M. ROBINSON js head of the 
Institute of Antiquity and Christianity at 
Claremont Graduate School in California 
(US.A.). He served as secretary of the 
U.A.R.-Unesco International Committee for 
the Nag Hammadi Codices which met in 
Cairo last December. Under his direction, 
an international team of scholars is work- 
ing on the English language publication 
of the Nag Hammadi codices with the help 
of grants from the National Endowment for 
the Humanities. 
tures, including being hospitalized from 
the bite of a wild dog, he reached what 
seems to have been the place of 
burial: a cemetery from Roman times 
near the modern town of Nag Hammadi 
(about two-thirds the way upstream 
from Cairo to Luxor), quite close to 
the small village of Hamra Dom. 
This cemetery was [ocated in a strip 
of desert only some one hundred 
metres wide, running between the 
green vegetation nurtured by the 
Nile and a vertical cliff. At the foot 
of the cliff are masses of fallen stones, 
forming an irregular inclined plane 
which one can scramble up from the 
desert floor to the face of the cliff 
some ten metres above the flat sand 
below. 
At this accessible height on the face 
of the cliff artificial caves had been 
cut about the time of the Sixth 
Dynasty. Some were never complet- 
ed, others were used for burials, and 
one contains the kind of relief sculp- 
ture and painting typical of Pharaonic 
tombs. But all had been looted in 
antiquity, so that by the fourth century 
A.D. they were merely a row of cool 
caves, ideal for hermit habitation, 
Evidence that they must have in fact 
functioned as the cells of monks is 
by James M. Robinson 
supplied in the form of rather crude 
red painting on the walls. Some caves 
have large crosses. One has a long 
text, listing by number and opening 
lines a series of Old Testament 
psalms, perhaps to remind the monk 
which psalm came next as he mumbled 
them in his devotions. One cave 
contained an ascription of praise to 
Zeus Sarapis, indicative of a non- 
Christian (or at least a not-just-Chris- 
tian) holy man. 
Monks inhabiting these caves would 
look out over the cemetery in the sand 
below, where their own burial might 
some day take place. There are 
instances of venerated persons being 
buried with a book, just as possessions 
were more customarily buried with the 
owner in antiquity than today. One 
might also think, in analogy to the 
situation with the Dead Sea Scrolls, 
that the books may have been buried 
for safe keeping, when persecution 
descended upon the monks and extinc- 
tion became imminent. 
As a matter of fact several referen- 
ces in the books themselves could 
have suggested such an idea, for 
several of the documents purport to 
be antediluvian revelations inscribed 
on stone or hid in a high mountain so

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 52916: Early Christian manuscripts from the sands of the Nile: where the Dead Sea Scrolls left off

that in the latter days the chosen race 
would gain access to that primal reve- 
lation—which was in effect a literary 
fiction for legitimizing the speculations 
the “revelations” contained. 
Such a time of persecution may have 
taken place late in the fourth century. 
By this time the Roman Empire was 
officially Christian, and this meant 
orthodoxically ~~ Christian. Bishops 
could and did have condemnations of 
heretical views read in all churches 
and monasteries, and the efficiency of 
Roman provincial government could 
put teeth in such denunciations. 
It so happens that precisely the 
same little bend in the Nile that makes 
of the Nag Hammadi district a bigger 
arable area than usual was the place 
where, toward the middle of the fourth 
century, the whole monastic move- 
ment of Christianity was first launched. 
Pachomius was a young monk who 
first brought individual hermit monks 
together into a communal life or 
monastery. 
With the passing of time these 
monasteries, built in the lush green 
habitable area, might seem all too 
comfortable, too “worldly”, compared 
to the more austere solitary-confine- 
ment life of the venerated saints of 
yesteryear. Such an idea might be 
triggered by evidence that the big-city 
clergy was getting control over the 
monks, and even branding as heretical 
The 13 volumes of Coptic texts, found 
near the town of Nag Hammadi in Egypt, 
in 1945, contain about 1,000 pages of which 
nearly 800 are intact. For four years, 
an international committee of scholars, 
appointed by Unesco and the United Arab 
Republic, sifted painstakingly through 
the jumbled fragments of the damaged 
pages (left). Worms had eaten ‘“inlets” 
and “bays” into the papyrus so that 
it was a matter of placing “peninsulas” 
and “islands” in the correct relation to 
each other. ldentification was usually 
based on translation, and the conjectural 
filling in of the letters in an “inlet” 
or “lake” of missing papyrus. 
Photo Unesco 
some of the more spiritualistic of them 
—for the library does represent a more 
spiritualistic, other-wordly religiosity 
than was typical of orthodox Christian- 
ity. 
‘What would be more natural, under 
such circumstances, than to withdraw 
—voluntarily or involuntarily — and go 
back to the desert cliff's caves, distant 
from the "flesh pots of Egypt’. And 
such “heretical” monks might well 
have taken with them the all-too- 
spiritualistic, “heretical” books which 
inspired them. 
Such a mock-up of the situation in 
which the library was buried is mere 
conjecture, but does seem more prob- 
able than other hypotheses, for 
example that the library was brought 
together not by a heretical group, but 
by an orthodox heresy-hunter both 
seeking documentation for his pole- 
mics and seeking to get the dangerous 
literature out of circulation. The stan- 
dard way of getting rid of banned 
books was to burn them whereas 
burying in a jar was in antiquity usually 
a form of preservation. 
One reason we know so little 
directly about who buried the library is 
that whoever used and ultimately 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 52916: Early Christian manuscripts from the sands of the Nile: where the Dead Sea Scrolls left off

  
  
Left, this forbidding cliff face, near 
Nag Hammadi on a bend in the 
Nile, housed a community of 
cave-dwelling monks during the 4th 
century AD. In the ancient 
cemetery at the foot of the cliffs 
Arab workmen unearthed a jar 
in which a library of bound 
manuscripts had lain for some 16 
centuries. Eleven volumes still 
retain their original form, their pages 
being clipped together and enclosed     
  
in soft leather bindings with 
triangular flaps and secured with 
leather thongs, below left. 
With the exception of one codex 
(right of photo) which is longer 
and narrower, the books measure 
25 to 27 cms by 15 cms. 
Right, the Codex which begins with 
a text entitled “The Acts of Peter”. 
The feather between these pages 
is one of several found in the 
work. These “bookmarks” show that 
this was evidently the volume most 
often referred to by the monks. 
COPTIC MANUSCRIPTS (Continued) 
buried it was not the same as those 
who wrote it. Five or ten different 
scribes were involved in copying out 
the surviving thirteen books. Only 
rarely did more than one scribe work 
on one book. So we need not assume 
all thirteen books were copied by one 
and the same group. 
In fact, there is reason to think the 
library was not originally conceived 
of as a set, but rather was originally 
a series of independent volumes or 
smaller clusters of volumes. For two 
different dialects occur, suggesting a 
few of the thirteen books came from 
a different region from the others. 
And the fact that multiple copies of 
the same work occur in different books 
suggests they were not originally in 
the same library. 
For example, the Bible has only one 
copy of each work. No one book in 
the Nag Hammadi library has more 
than one copy of a document, which 
suggests a similar reticence to produce 
duplicates. In fact, one scribal note 
expresses anxiety lest the scribe copy 
something that would be a duplicate. 
Furthermore, all the instances of 
duplicates are quite different in their 
wording, so that it is clear one did not 
copy from the other, nor did two copy 
from a same non-surviving copy. They 
worked independently. Apparently a 
series of individual books were handed 
down to a single individual or group, 
only then becoming a library. 
Each book is actually a volume of 
collected essays, which do not come 
from the same author—or even the 
same time or place. Actually, the 
library, now in the Coptic language, 
seems to have been all translated from 
Greek (Coptic is the language derived 
from the ancient Egyptian language, 
using Greek letters). 
The translators seem even less uni- 
fied than the scribes. For if a single 
scribe usually copied out a whole 
book, the individual essays in a given 
book seem to have been translated 
usually by different persons. Thus 
behind the thirteen books copied by 
a handful of scribes usually working 
independently we light upon over fifty 
essays usually translated by a still 
larger number of individuals. 
‘When one then moves a step still 
further back, to the Greek originals, 
we have to do with almost fifty inde- 
pendent essays (when one substracts 
doublets). To be sure, one can identify 
clusters that share a common point of 
view, and even seek to identify such 
a cluster with a heretical group such 
as the Valentinians or Sethians about 
whom we know from other sources. 
But what we know from such other 
sources is so scant that it is almost 
like clarifying light by darkness, to 
use them to explain the library. It is 
more likely to turn out the other way 
around: the Nag Hammadi library will 
be the light helping us understand the 
out-of-context quotes, wilful carica- 
tures and defamations, and veiled allu- 
sions found in orthodox polemics.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 52916: Early Christian manuscripts from the sands of the Nile: where the Dead Sea Scrolls left off

       
    
  
   
i 8 BL 
rw 
Hw 
rash My 
  
wa 
Far Gap Ic 
HAY bial 4 we 
As a matter of fact, the two most 
important values of the library for our 
historical understanding today lie in- 
tertwined right here. Of course the 
library has increased tremendously our 
available source materials—in all by 
something over a thousand pages. And 
hence the knowledge of these off-beat 
movements will be immeasurably in- 
creased. But this new knowledge will 
also reflect new light on orthodox 
Christianity, with which much of it 
was in debate. 
For example, Nag Hammadi docu- 
ments not only quote the New Testa- 
ment in line with their own views, and 
claim Jesus and the apostles for their 
side of the argument; they do in fact in 
some cases prove to have carried on, 
even if in a exaggerated or distorted 
way, primitive Christian traditions that 
gradually disappeared from orthodox 
Christianity... perhaps because such 
ideas had ended up in heresy. 
Where this leaves us is, for example, 
with a New Testament that is not 
a 7 at f YE 
wo & A) a AAD ¥ tN ) 1 \ 
: OW +) 
3 MTOM . i 
GUC OO 
re cir om aD UT AA 
TPES VINE TG AN HEN EY 
haa dite 
La 
: 
ATTICS TOT 
“ag 4 € Gf eda RTE RERS 
4 7 Cw GOI AY IIE RTIICLS 
sroc’ CAM WE hE CPoOKT i ho 
ATCO 0 AHESOA NO FIG ety 
pag AM ATE SR PASHIHTY COE , 
© 7a pd LER ORE 1p IN M0 
CA FACE € Paar A Ores 
IX RA Aero 
THC TROO
N TH Ore Cre) 
AM TEE Cyne] MARES RNS SN 
. a 
IA HPC HINO TILL LN 
4 wy wre AFT TN 
AAP XR Tee 2 
nH rE TORO KI AL IL Cp a : 
TT Cpoyn HMC [2 BARE ARN Sh 
PALE MMT GC € NAY IE 
SAIL OW ETE Fa LAs 
Hore” N ZOU Bak ut es Reg 
Fre Trl HAMM TRY TIE ra 
MN ATCA Eroyriut ure jargah 
WYeey prekeoo ANAT hide imy in 
wil comme Casta 
CO RN TIARA ck aw tPA PA 
t THrom on gaat. PE 
LCKNC Ore rhc an i : Aram Tra 
HY TTCAANL CAI eg 7 § on NA Bre HW pe, 
CIC CCA ey TAY . 
, 
oP 
Na] 
    
   
AVSIM vy 
CE EET 
ARO CLA in 
“av 
(SF YE 
LS A 8 FE 
nearly as orthodox as the church fa- 
thers who collected it into the canon 
thought it to be. Some of the New 
Testament books seemed almost as 
readily to point to the other outcome. 
One reason the church fathers may 
have had for including in the New 
Testament some of the latest canonical 
books is that these late works in effect 
superimposed upon the earlier books 
and traditions (such as Jesus’ sayings, 
Paul's letters, the Gospel of John) an 
unambiguously orthodox interpretation 
for it was precisely they to whom the 
heretics appealed. 
Thus what at first sight seemed a 
dusty archaeological find from a rather 
obscure time and place, at least as far 
as the average person is concerned, 
and written in a language most rea- 
ders have hardly heard of, turns out 
to be a whole library of some fifty 
works; part of the Greek language 
literature from which most of our clas- 
sical heritage stems; written in various 
parts of the ancient world, from 
Egypt to Syria; and covering a time 
HO Ero sir od Wg 
AC TH TCIM TH Oey, 
Orr OEIC 1G 
MOU orribar NEFOYX 
Kine MLL oh FE Sh | 
TIME Yc 0, arte val vg. 
dporic Kpisac * “rAd n or ores 
€ KOA 2m 2 NAGE 
NEY IRM OTe" Rrra BRT 
UNAS rr WY Oyu 
Hs te sas ada guy 
J Ckwinpaan 
  
 
    
  
    
SRR TCH rRrA ry, 
EAE ~C hi th REL OR il " 
RE TE "TY TR 
SARE AF LL STE 
Now nis pe pan Ae 22) My, 
S| : MOGI py ey 
FARITTON LC vray 
CH LOLTET IAS wi Nc | a Fo 
HINOYM IO ne LARA AS EST EL WS 
NOMWIAAE PU Ope LR EEL FELT 
MECC TCT XOCE »i 20ne 
va Arras CC Arse a 
LRA SP 
ARE ES 4 
NA inet 
NRL sae, 
TOE wy 
Corpses Lou 
— wo a l 
Idk dy 
TMIACK AS Ire Er Sd 
= UAT 
S01 
-— 
LES PT CN 
EE eS » 
2 LAE EL 
$s ARAL CCAIR C7 cp ry 8 : UNA a, TION 7] : : 
¥ dcey . ~ LA BS Rh TW TF Se : 
9 La 11 LUGE NLS re YET. SIL 3 te "ne Arraisad., rc t 
a ‘A . i C*y bs ~ AR" nA o 2] SLU HLLS PLT IRA YT) "i » ’ ' Ll J : CNAF OMe 
3 . AANA I Oem, ] 
5 : } \ -_ . 
.- 
“i © i - 
2 . 
° WL 3 on 
a TR 
span reaching back into New Testa- 
ment times, picking up the story of 
off-beat sects about where the Dead 
Sea Scrolls leave off. 
For if the latest of the Scrolls would 
be near to 70 AD, when the Essene 
monastery was wiped out in the 
Jewish revolt, the earliest Nag Ham- 
madi text to be dated thus far ("The 
Revelation of Adam) is dated in the 
first century B.C. or AD. And, just 
as the Dead Sea Scrolls document an 
off-beat ludaism later weeded out, the 
Nag Hammadi library not only docu- 
ments off-beat Christianity, but also 
off-beat Judaism, 
Indeed, the shift from "'scroll"—a 
book in the form of a long roll—to 
“codex” —a book in the form of pages 
as we use today—is typical of the 
transition from the "Dead Sea Scrolls” 
to the “Nag Hammadi Codices”. 
In fact, the library is now seen to 
be much more varied than was origi- 
nally supposed. It is usually called 
"gnostic"—the name of a spiritualistic, 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 52916: Early Christian manuscripts from the sands of the Nile: where the Dead Sea Scrolls left off

COPTIC MANUSCRIPTS (Continued) 
speculative, other-worldly religiosity 
that swept the ancient world in early 
Christian times. One used to think 
of Gnosticism as a distortion of 
Christianity, that is to say, as of 
Christian origin, essentially a Christian 
heresy. More recent study had 
already argued that Gnosticism was 
much more widespread and probably 
in its origin too early for such a deri- 
vation. And the Nag Hammadi library 
tends to confirm this more recent 
theory. 
This is especially true of the part of 
the library that has not yet been 
published. For it so happens that what 
has been published thus far, by coinci- 
dence and perhaps in part because of 
its particular interest, has been largely 
Christian gnostic in type. But this 
impression will change when the bulk 
of the library, not yet generally acces- 
sible, is made available through the 
facsimile edition being prepared by the 
U.A.R.-Unesco International Commit- 
tee for the Nag Hammadi Codices. 
} HIS project, first envisaged 
by Unesco in 1961-62, is now approach- 
ing its realization. Prior to the involve- 
ment of Unesco, about half the library 
was assigned out by the Cairo Coptic 
Museum to individual translators, a 
good part of which has by now been 
published, so that something like a 
third of the whole is already available 
in published translations. 
Unesco's intention has been to 
publish photographs of all the pages, 
so that all qualified scholars can work 
on the materials simultaneously. Pho- 
tographs were taken between 1962-66 
through the good offices of the Docu- 
mentation and Study Centre for the 
History of the Art and Civilization of 
Ancient Egypt (set up in 1955 by the 
U.AR., helped by Unesco). 
But since hundreds of fragments 
were unidentified and unassembled, 
many of these photographs, though of 
good quality technically, were not in 
the form in which they should be 
published. The fragments should, to 
the extent possible, be identified and 
reassembled, and new photographs 
made of the newly assembled pages. 
Over the past four years, several 
institutes in the U.A.R., U.S.A., Switzer- 
land, Fed. Rep. of Germany, France, 
etc., painstakingly sifted through the 
jumbled fragments on the basis of 
photographs and transcriptions, and 
identified a large number of the 
fragments, 
This was usually not possible simply 
on the basis of fitting contours, as one 
does a jig-saw puzzle. For the worms 
ate "inlets" and “bays” into the 
papyrus. so that it was a matter of 
placing “peninsulas” and “islands” in 
the correct relation to each other. 
This would have been relatively 
CONTINUED PAGE 10 
ABPACAAABPA 
ABPACAAABT?P 
ABPACAAAB 
ABPACAAA 
ABPACAA 
ABPACA 
ABPAC 
ABPA 
ABP 
AB 
A 
ABRACADABRA 
The word ""abracadabra’” that nowadays 
signifies ““hocus-pocus’’, “an incanta- 
tion”, ““gibberish’’, has come down to us 
from the Gnostics who used it as a 
magic formula to ward off disease or 
misfortune. According to the Gnostic 
physician Quintus Serenus Samonicus, 
it was to be set down as a mystical 
design by dropping a letter on each line 
(above). Hung as a talisman around 
the neck it was said to be a charm 
against fevers and other agues. The 
word is supposed to be derived from 
‘abraxas’ the Gnostic designation of 
the Supreme Power. This drawing with 
its ancient spelling was made by Dom 
Bertrand de Montfaucon in his 18th cen- 
tury treatise, ’Antiquity Explained and 
Depicted”. 
  
  
  
  
   
     
  
   
La...¢ 
ov 
ov, AE Vovi 
YLEvoYIA 1A 
Ory, 
   

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 52916: Early Christian manuscripts from the sands of the Nile: where the Dead Sea Scrolls left off

THE RIDDLE OF THE 
‘ABRAXAS’ AMULETS 
The new light thrown on Gnostic symbolism 
by the discovery of the Nag Hammadi ma- 
nuscripts may help to solve the riddle of the 
strange Abraxas stones. Over the centuries 
these stone medallions with their cabalistic 
carvings, the work of Basilidian Gnostics, 
have been found in their thousands in Egypt, 
Rome and the Mediterranean world, For 
some Gnostics ‘Abraxas’ meant God. The 
letters of the word in Greek notation make 
up the number 365, the number of days in a 
year. Sun worship, widespread in ancient 
Egypt, remained closely linked with certain 
forms of Christian Gnosticism. Winged 
figures (1 and 7) probably represent the 
sun. The serpent holding its tail in its mouth 
is an ancient symbol both for the sun and 
for eternity. In the finely carved scene (2) 
two riders flank a star-spangled figure and 
the serpent symbol is again repeated. An 
angel or a cherub (3) sitting on a lotus 
flower is the sign of the goddess Isis. 
The scarab (4) represented the sun for the 
ancient Egyptians. Many abraxas in the form 
of scarabs have been found. Some, like the 
one here, have ribbons over the eyes showing 
they were intended to be worn round 
thé neck. The cabalistic writing on the 
clothing of the figure (5) are prayers or 
protective incantations. (6) A creature half 
man, half snake. (8) Lion eating a bee. The 
lion was both the sun symbol of Mithraism 
and the symbol of Christ for the early 
Christians. (9) Water flowing from a vase or 
canope topped with the head of the Egyp- 
tian god Osiris. (10) Creature with the 
head of a cock and snakes for legs. 
    
   
  
  
  
  
       
      
     
  
il M1) 35% of fd 
GE a TN Ase 
Ryser se ae cb
te ————_————————————————A—{p—_ 
: i —— 
j ET a ET By som sm— 
| § La . ed, == 3 ” ie 
    
    
BOOK OFLEAD. Scholars are puzzled by most of the mysterious 
symbols on the ‘abraxas’ (left). In 1719, Dom Bernard de Mont- 
faucon, of the Benedictine Order, a great Orientalist of his 
time, described the symbols in great detail in his five-volume 
work, ‘L’Antiquité Expliquée et Représentée en Figures’ 
(Antiquity Explained and Depicted). All the drawings on 
these two pages are taken from Dom Bernard's work. The 
drawings shown above illustrated the 12 pages of a small 
Gnostic book discovered by Dom Bernard in Rome in 1699. 
Measuring 7 cm. by 10 cm., this remarkable little book was 
made entirely of lead—pages, binding, hinges and nails to 
hold them. The inscriptions on the first four pages are 
written in Etruscan and Greek letters, but are still undeci- 
phered. According to Dom Bernard, the figures represent 
the hours of the day. The seventh hour is portrayed by 
Serapis, a Greek solar deity adopted by the Egyptians.

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 52916: Early Christian manuscripts from the sands of the Nile: where the Dead Sea Scrolls left off

10 
COPTIC MANUSCRIPTS (Continued) 
easy, if the original papyrus had been 
available. But it was put in safe 
keeping and had not been available 
since. Hence identification was usually 
based on translation, and the conjec- 
tural filling-in of the letters in an “inlet” 
or “lake” of missing papyrus. 
Often the contours of the ''penin- 
sulas” or "islands" on one page, 
whose identity was certain, would pro- 
vide the basis for placing fragments 
with almost identical contours on the 
preceding and succeeding pages. The 
outcome of combining such methods 
was a relatively high degree of cer- 
tainty in identifying many fragments. 
The results of this painstaking work 
were tabulated on conversion tables, 
which listed each fragment by the 
number of the photograph and its 
position on the photograph, and, be- 
side that numeration, gave the original 
Coptic page number and position on 
that page. This would make it possi- 
ble, in theory or in the abstract, to 
"convert" from the unordered status 
of materials on the photographs to 
a reconstruction of the original page 
sequences and fragment positions. 
HAT remained to be done 
of course was to move from theory to 
practice. ‘When the International Com- 
mittee for the Nag Hammadi Codices, 
convened by the Egyptian authorities 
with Unesco's aid, met in Cairc, on 
December 15-18, 1970, one of its 
recommendations was that a technical 
sub-committee be designated to take 
the conversion tables that had been 
put at the committee's disposal and 
reassemble the actual papyrus frag- 
ments themselves. 
The facsimile edition is planned to 
appear in eight volumes. Those books 
which have been inaccessible thus 
far will be published first, so that the 
scholarly world can move promptly 
toward publishing translations of them. 
The facsimile edition should be com- 
pletely published by 1973. 
Meanwhile a complete English edi- 
tion is being prepared and will appear 
in five volumes. French and German 
translations, which have been ahead of 
English transiations in the parts pre- 
viously published, will also follow soon 
upon the appearance of the facsimile 
edition. 
An open-ended series of volumes 
interpreting the significance of the Nag 
Hammadi library had aiso been re- 
cently launched, at the meeting of the 
International Association for the His- 
tory of Religions In August, 1970 at 
Stockholm. 
Thus the 1970s will be a decade in 
which "Nag Hammadi studies” (to 
make use of the title of this series 
of volumes) wili be a very active and 
important area of research, bringing 
to light what was in effect a hippie-like 
movement in our cultural past. | Ph
ot
o 
M.
 
De
sj
ar
di
ns
 
© 
Ré
al
it
és
, 
Pa
rl
s 
Below, a Coptic Christian community in present-day Egypt 
not far from the site at which the Nag Hammadi library was found. 
There are today some 1,200,000 members of the Coptic Church 
in Egypt and a further 3,500,000 in Ethiopia. Right, the last 
of the 114 sayings attributed to Christ in the “Gospel according 
to Thomas”. The text shown here reads: “Simon Peter said 
to them, ‘Let Mary go out from among us, because women are 
not worthy of the Life.’ Jesus said, ‘See | shall lead her so that 
I will make her male, that she too may become a living spirit, 
resembling you males. For every woman who makes herself 
male will enter the Kingdom of Heaven'.” 
x & 
wis 
» 
; 
~ 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

1 1 6 WT CTIOP EY BOAR GT KATA 
PPC MEN AYAN erocTicNcd Ayn nero 
- 
NAYNEPMATERANAM EICROANTITN Coptic 
IW ENTUOMEMTUGAANK MTWONT TEX ET 
Eee HHTEANOK NACE; 
KAA ces ARCHOS TAG INACTTAD = VOIC@sS 
riewwc NOTTINAEY ONTENEN 
MUTN NTO OY TR ECYMENIMECN LLC 
| HE last half century has been rich in 
discoveries of priceless, historic manuscripts. The Dead 
Sea Scrolls enriched enormously our knowledge of the 
Essenes, who might be described as a “pre-Gnostic” Jewish 
sect; the seven volumes of Manichaean writings found in 
the, El Fayum region of Egypt, in 1930, threw new light on 
the dualistic Gnosticism of the Persian Mani; the Greek 
texts found not far from Cairo, in 1941, clarified our 
knowledge of the thought of the great Christian Gnostic 
Origen.” 
Rivalling all these in importance, the Nag Hammadi 
codices, first discovered in 1945, are now to be published 
in full for the first time by Unesco, in collaboration with 
the government of the United Arab Republic. These Codices 
enable us to view the doctrines of the Gnostics as seen 
through their own eyes and permit us to trace the evolution 
of a movement which has had a marked influence on many 
religions of the world. 
This was explained by Mr. Henri-Charles Puech, an 
eminent French authority on the history of religions, and 
Professor James Robinson, Secretary of the United Arab 
Republic-Unesco International Committee for the Nag 
Hammadi Codices, at a press conference given at Unesco 
headquarters in Paris, earlier this year. 
The scribes who some sixteen centuries ago bent with 
loving and painstaking care over the thirteen volumes of 
the Nag Hammadi texts, said Mr. Puech, belonged to a 
community of Gnostics that flourished in Egypt during the 
first centuries after the birth of Christ. 
Even the specialists find it difficult to define Gnosticism 
with any precision. The movement was responsible for 
many of the heresies of early Christianity, although it is 
now generally thought to ante-date Christianity. Mr. Puech 
described it as “a current of religious thought that attached 
itself to Christianity as it did to other Mediterranean and 
Middle Eastern religions”. 
Many early Christian theologians, such as Valentius, 
Clement and Origen, were Gnostics and their thinking had 
considerable effect on orthodox Christian thought. They 
attempted to combine Christian beliefs with others derived 
from Oriental and Greek sources, especially those that 
were mystical or metaphysical in nature such as the 
doctrines of Plato and Pythagoras. 
The Greek word “gnosis” from which the name of the sect 
derives, was taken as meaning not “knowledge” as we 
understand it, but “revelation”. To the Gnostics the purpose 
of life was ultimate personal salvation and much of their 
literature consisted of apocalyptic writings. 
The Nag Hammadi texts are written in various dialects 
of the Coptic Language but using Greek characters. It will 
a7 OOTY TCNA Rep ik EWR EFPNSTEPF 
aT TT Ye SIITRIRRC ae RC Te 
Wn — 


### 52917: Coptic voices from the past

from 
the past Ph
ot
o 
(C
G)
 
Je
an
 
Do
re
ss
e,
 
Pa
ri
s 
be several years yet before their full significance is known. 
However, the findings already announced are enough to 
whet the appetite for more. 
Of all the texts so far examined, the “Apocryphon (or 
secret book) of John” is, according to Mr. Puech, of the 
greatest importance. It takes the form of a visionary 
account of the revelation made by Christ after the Passion 
to the apostle John, In it all kinds of religious mysteries are 
unveiled—the creation of the world, the fashioning of the 
first man, the future of souls, etc. 
The “Book of the Holy Spirit” is also revelational in cha- 
racter as is the “Gospel of Truth” which is thought to have 
been written by Valentius himself in the middle of the 
second century. A.D. There is a double interest in this 
“Gospel” since it throws light on orthodox early Christian 
dogma as well as on the thinking which led to the Valentian 
version of Gnosticism. 
0. equal importance is the “Gospel according to 
St. Thomas” which begins with the words, “These are the 
sayings of the Living Christ which were written down by 
Didymus Jude Thomas”. 
The text consists of over a hundred sayings of Christ, 
many of which were previously unknown. Some of the 
sayings recorded are variants of sayings that appear in the 
accepted gospels and are of great interest to scholars since 
the variations often conform to tradition as expressed in 
Syriac manuscripts. Each saying, therefore, raises 
fascinating problems of authenticity. The famous Oxyrhyn- 
chus papyrus, published at the beginning of this century, 
is probably a version in Greek of the same text with some 
variations. 
Five of the Nag Hammadi texts are in the form of epistles, 
including one from “Peter to Philip, his elder brother and 
companion”, 
It would be almost impossible to over-estimate the 
importance of the Nag Hammadi texts. In the words of 
Mr. Puech, “The discovery of the Nag Hammadi library 
heralds a complete re-appraisal of our knowledge of 
Gnosticism. Before these texts became available, our 
knowledge, at least of early Christian Gnosticism, was 
based on indirect evidence and writings about heresies 
which were often both over-simplified and hostile. ‘We now 
have at our disposal an abundance of authentically Gnostic 
texts which in number, scope and quality far surpass the 
few later Gnostic texts in the Coptic language previously 
available to us.” H. B. 
1

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 
The International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics, operated 
jointly by the International Atomic 
Energy Agency and Unesco, is housed 
on the Adriatic coast outside Trieste 
in this $2 million building (above) 
donated by the Italian government. 
The Trieste centre, a meeting place 
for minds, has neither cyclotrons 
nor other impressive-looking machines. 
Each year, over 500 scientists, 
mostly from the developing countries, 
make use of its facilities which include 
lectures in the amphitheatre 
{opposite) by some of the “greats” 
of modern physics. 


### 52920: Trieste; world rendez-vous for physicists

 
TRIESTE— 
WORLD 
RENDEZVOUS 
FOR 
PHYSICISTS 
by Dan Behrman

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 52920: Trieste; world rendez-vous for physicists

} VERY year, some five 
hundred of the world's brightest 
young minds in science are exposed 
to the International Centre for Theo- 
retical Physics, a rather unusual United 
Nations institution on the Adriatic 
coast of ltaly just outside Trieste. 
Most of these scientists come from 
developing countries and, under ordi- 
nary circumstances, they would be 
likely candidates for the brain drain. 
This is precisely why the Trieste 
centre is in operation with the joint 
support of two U.N. agencies, the 
International Atomic Energy Agency 
and Unesco, and the Italian govern- 
ment. As a way out of the intellectual 
isolation that drives young scientists 
to emigrate, it offers them training, an 
opportunity to do research at regular 
intervals and, most of all, a place to 
think, talk and work. 
From this scientific centre where 
chalk, blackboards and desks are the 
 
DAN BEHRMAN is a Unesco science 
writer. He is the author of "The New 
World of the Oceans” (Little Brown and 
Co., Boston, U.S.A.), also recently publish- 
ed in a paperback edition. 
only visible apparatus, come more than 
130 papers every year in the basic 
fields of elementary particles, high- 
energy physics, field theory, nuclear 
physics, solid state physics and plas- 
ma physics. 
The centre serves to link east and 
west as well as the developed and the 
developing worlds. Research work- 
shops have brought together the top 
people in the United States and the 
U.S.S.R. on many topics and particu- 
larly plasma physics where problems 
related to the domestication of the 
thermonuclear energy of the hydrogen 
bomb are being studied. If they can 
be solved, the world will be presented 
with a new source of power, pollution- 
free and well-nigh inexhaustible. 
Yet the pursuit of theoretical physics 
cannot be justified in terms of its 
immediate applications. It is the most 
philosophical of sciences for it is 
concerned with the study of the very 
nature of matter. As such, it attracts 
the most talented brains of the devel- 
oping world, the Einsteins, the Fermis, 
the Niels Bohrs of tomorrow and the 
day after. They will not devise ways 
to build better mousetraps but they 
Photos Dominique Roger - Unesco 
learn to think in terms of original solu- 
tions. If they are not given the chance 
to work in contact with others at their 
own level, they languish... and they 
leave. 
Such was the experience of the 
founder and director of the Trieste 
centre, Prof. Abdus Salam. It might 
even be said that it sprang from his 
own life, from the isolation that he 
himself suffered when, after taking his 
doctorate at Cambridge and conduct- 
ing research in Princeton, he returned 
home to Pakistan to teach in 1951. 
“I was the only theoretical physicist 
in the country at that time”, he told me 
as | sat in his office sharing his lunch 
of sesame seeds. “The nearest one 
was in Bombay. You have no idea of 
what than can be like. A theoretical 
physicist has got to be able to talk, to 
discuss, to shout if need be. 
“| remember, | received a cable one 
day from Wolfgang Pauli, the Nobel 
laureate from Zurich, who was in 
Bombay. He said he was alone and he 
wanted me to come to talk to him. So 
| took a plane to Bombay and a taxi 
to his hotel. | went up to his room, 
| knocked on the door. 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 52920: Trieste; world rendez-vous for physicists

TRIESTE CENTRE (Continued) 
The micro-macro world under one roof 
"He told me to come in and then, 
without a word of greeting, he said 
to me: 
“The problem is, if we have 
derivative terms in Schwinger's action 
principle...'”” 
Prof. Salam was called into an 
adjoining office for a moment and | 
had a chance to take in his surround- 
ings. On one wall hung a framed 
16th century prayer in Persian which, 
he had told me, invoked the name of 
Allah to ask for a miracle. A type- 
written notice had been slipped under 
the glass top of his desk: 
“Reminder: Mornings to be spent 
on physics: No visitors—No phone 
calls—No mail (except personal) be- 
fore noon—Administrative matters and 
visitors during the period after lunch 
untif 4 p.m. only. Remaining time to 
be spent on physics.” 
Also under glass on a wall to the 
right of the desk was a quotation: 
"We have all of us to preserve our 
competence in our own professions, 
to preserve what we know intimately, 
to preserve our mastery. This is, in 
- fact, our only anchor in honesty.” 
Prof. Salam might have written that 
himself, but it was signed by the late 
Robert Oppenheimer, one of the 
earliest supporters of the Trieste cen- 
tre. “The day that a director of a 
research centre like this one stops 
being a scientist, he’s useless,” Prof. 
Salam remarked. “Any fool can admin- 
ister. People forget that they were 
made heads of centres because they 
were doing good science. So they 
lose their competence, they become 
manipulators of men just to keep them- 
selves in power.” 
The entire full-time professional 
staff of the centre could fit into a 
small Fiat or a short sentence: Prof. 
Salam, the director; Prof. Paolo Budini 
from Italy, deputy director; and Dr. 
André Hamende, a Belgian, who is 
everything else. At Trieste, Parkin- 
son's Law has been repealed. The 
administrative staff has actually dwindl- 
ed from five to three since the centre 
opened in 1964 but the number of 
scientists it reach~~ every year has 
more than quintupled. 
i HE International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics does all this on a 
budget of no more than $600,000 a 
year, Of this figure, the biggest chunk 
is a generous $250,000 grant from the 
Italian govenrment which also financed 
the construction of its $2 million build- 
ing. Then the International Atomic 
Energy Agency and Unesco each give 
$150,000. The remainder is made up 
mainly of contributions from the 
Swedish International Development 
Authority and the Ford Foundation. 
This sum covers virtually all expen- 
ses from fellowships and publications 
to heating and administration: Includ- 
ed is the operation of the centre's 
library with 6,000 volumes and an up- 
to-date reference section of journals. 
  
The output in physics is so great today 
that one American journal alone runs 
to eighteen volumes in a single year. 
This all began in 1960 when Prof. 
Salam was a member of the Pakistani 
delegation to the General Conference 
of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency in Vienna. He has always 
had a great gift for doing a number of 
things all at once: even today, he is 
still science adviser to the President 
of Pakistan and professor of theo- 
retical physics at the Imperial College 
of Science and Technology in London 
along with his tasks in Trieste. Com- 
muting between such jobs would numb 
, an ordinary man, but Prof. Salam 
claims it enhances his productivity. 
As a delegate in Vienna, he put forth 
the idea of an international centre for 
theoretical physics. “I was naive 
then, | wouldn't dare do it today. Peo- 
ple took it half-jokingly and many dele- 
gations abstained on the vote when 
it was approved for a preliminary 
study. | found out that the idea in- 
terested the poor countries. What | 
wanted to do was to give the poor a 
place of their own where they would 
not have to beg anybody. Why 
shouldn't a bright youngster in Pakis- 
tan have the right to receive the same 
stimulating atmosphere as an English- 
man or an American, provided be 
deserves it?” 
His proposal got over the first hurdle 
in 1960. It was helped over the 
succeeding ones by Prof, Salam’s for- 
tuitous meeting with Prof. Budini at a 
Pencils, paper and 
tools of the theoretical 
physicist. Left, three 
Asian scientists studying 
M. Tint from Burma, 
of Korea and M. Rahman 
from Pakistan. Right, 
Dr. V.K. Samaranyake 
of Ceylon (on right) 
and Dr. Ottaviani of Italy 
compare journals in the 
Trieste Centre library. 
conversation are the working 
a problem are (left to right) 
L.T. Cheon from the Republic

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 52920: Trieste; world rendez-vous for physicists

Many Nobel Prizewinners 
lecture and attend meetings 
at the Trieste Centre. 
No less than eight came 
to the International Symposium 
on Contemporary Physics 
in 1968. Among them was 
Sir Francis Crick, co-discoverer 
with James Watson of the 
molecular structure of DNA, 
the “messenger” that carries 
nature's genetic code. 
Sir Francis Is seen here 
(seated) talking to Prof. 
Abdus Salam, Director 
of the Centre. 
Ph
ot
o 
Fr
an
ce
sc
o 
Ri
cc
ar
di
 
@ 
Ri
ce
, 
Tr
ie
st
e 
symposium in Trieste on elementary 
particle interactions. 
Prof. Budini was also seeking a way 
out of isolation, in this case the geo- 
graphic predicament of Trieste in a 
cul-de-sac at the far corner of ltaly. 
Nationalism did not make much sense 
to this physics professor at the Uni- 
versity of Trieste whose birthplace, an 
island that once belonged to Venice, 
has changed flags three times in his 
own lifetime. He dreamt of a Trieste 
lying instead in the centre of Europe, 
a pole of attraction to fellow physicists 
from the world over. He and Prof. 
Salam had no trouble putting their 
dreams together. 
Photos Dominique Roger - Unesco 
 
Money was put up by a local bank, 
the Cassa di Risparmio di Trieste. An 
offer of land, later converted to money, 
came from Prince Raimondo di Torre 
e Tasso whose nearby castle at Duino 
has played host to Liszt, Mark Twain, 
Rilke and, most recently, to the 1970 
Pugwash Conference. The prince said: 
“Trieste is my daughter and this is 
my dowry.” 
In 1962, the General Conference of 
the International Atomic Energy Agency 
approved the creation of a centre. 
“That was the most momentous day 
of my life,” Prof. Salam told me. “I 
seldom smoke, but | must have smoked 
fifty cigarettes that day and | went 
  
through a kilo of grapes. At the end 
of the debate, sixty hands went up in 
favour—and we had won.” 
The following year, the Italian gov- 
ernment’'s offer of Trieste as a site 
was accepted and, in 1964, Prof. Salam 
and his staff moved into temporary 
quarters in the heart of the city. 
Four years later, they were in their 
present building at Miramare, a long 
double-decker sandwich in concrete 
with two rows of wood-framed win- 
dows as the filling. 
On the grounds of the building, 
there is a small house where Prof. 
Salam lives while he is at the centre. 
It is only twenty yards or so from his 
office window but he can spend two 
weeks at a stretch seeing nothing 
more of the outside world than those 
twenty yards. He has one group 
working in Trieste, another at Imperial 
College in London. In the centre, he 
and his collaborator, John Strathdee, 
share an office decorated principally 
with blackboards and equations. 
Prof. Salam told me they were 
endeavouring to put under one unified 
scheme the micro and the macro 
universes inside the nucleus and 
outside in galactic space to cover the 
frontiers between the behaviour of 
elementary particles measuring 10—1° 
centimetres (that is, the number one 
preceded by fifteen zeroes and a 
decimal point) and the so-called 
quasars that lie 10?7 centimetres (the 
number one followed by twenty-seven 
zeroes) away from the earth. Prof. 
Salam is fascinated by the “black 
holes of gravity” in space occupied 
by celestial bodies that have collapsed 
under the weak but relentless force 
of gravity. 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
13

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 52920: Trieste; world rendez-vous for physicists

16 
TRIESTE CENTRE (Continued) 
The loneliness of the long-distance scientist 
Theoretical physicists, such as those 
found at Trieste, try to explain the 
behavicur of elementary particles. 
But though he may use a computer, 
the physicist's main tool is his mind, 
and he must have contact with other 
minds if he is to keep it honed. 
This problem, a major one for many 
scientists from the developing world, 
was explained to me by Dr. Paul Vitta 
who got his Ph. D. in the United States 
and is now teaching at the physice 
department of the university of Dar-es- 
Salaam, in Tanzania. 
He had come to the centre to attend 
a two-month nuclear theory course 
that was just ending. “In Tanzania,” 
he said, “| am the only nuclear phy- 
sicist. | am in perfect isolation. 
With our teaching load, one very soon 
gives up all hope of research. So you 
pick up a textbook. It gets out of 
date, but you're stuck with it. | simply 
need to come to a centre like this.” 
R. Khalk Leang Lim, from 
the University of Malaysia at Kuala 
Lumpur, is the only Malaysian theor- 
etical nuclear physicist. “There might 
be some outside, but not in the 
country. If you're on your own, you 
can only read scientific journals. It's 
hard to keep up. Your interest fluc- 
tuates when you get tired reading. 
And there is no one to talk to.” 
Dr. Lim is an associate at the centre 
which means that he has the right to 
three three-month stays there over a 
period of five years. Trieste now has 
sixty such associates from more than 
twenty countries. It hopes to expand 
the list until it covers all the estimat- 
ed 200 theoretical nuclear physicists 
in the developing world. The centre's 
activities are now being extended into 
mathematics as well. 
He thinks that basic science is 
necessary to a developing country if 
only because over-specialized scien- 
tists have trouble adapting to change, 
but he certainly does not believe that 
Malaysia needs the whole gamut of 
theoretical physics. His own specia- 
lity, nuclear physics, requires fast 
computers that are not available at 
home. “Here, | must think of some- 
thing to do that requires less compu- 
tation. One cannot change from one 
field to another, but one can change 
within a field. In that respect, the 
centre helps the individual. He can 
meet people in the same or related 
fields, he can learn what's going on” 
Dr. Lim would like to see a similar 
centre some day in Southeast Asia, 
perhaps in Bangkok. He had to come 
all the way to Trieste to meet Dr. |.T. 
Cheon from Korea with whom he is 
now collaborating by correspondence. 
It was once fashionable to remark 
that no Einstein can come out of the 
jungle, but the reply heard at Trieste 
A phy- 
sicist can come from almost anywhere. 
Paul Vitta grew up on a farm in a 
village 600 miles from Dar-es-Salaam, 
of his native Tanzania, 
where he went to boarding school. 
For the educational revolution is pay- 
to that is simply: “Why not?” 
the capital 
ing off. 
Omar El Amin, a research worker at 
the University of Khartoum’s radiation 
and isotope centre in the Sudan, is 
one of five brothers whose father was 
a crewman on a Nile river steamer. 
He reminded me that education in the 
it enabled him to reach 
the point where he was able to go to 
the University of London for his M. Sc. 
Of his brothers, 
one is a textile technician, another is 
also studying science, one is in the 
army and the fourth is working in 
Mr. 
physicist, 
wanted to come to the Trieste centre 
to “see what theoreticians do with 
their long equations and their mathe- 
Sudan is free. 
in radiation physics. 
electronics engineering at Kiev. 
El Amin, an experimental 
matics.” 
Scientists often say that the best 
way to look at a phenomenon is to 
In that res- 
pect, Dr. Toshar Gujadhur certainly 
qualifies as the most isolated of the 
His 
home is on the island of Mauritius and 
he was returning there after an absence 
of ten years that began when he went 
to Imperial College to earn his doctor- 
study an extreme case. 
theoretical physicists in Trieste. 
ate in mathematical physics. 
He was about to take a post in a 
new teacher training institute on Mau- 
“I want to go back, my roots 
are there, but it will mean complete 
paralysis of the mind if | cannot get 
to Trieste every three years or so. 
I'm working in relativity and quantum 
Learning to me is like 
food, | need it. It's a challenge; you do 
I'm here at least twelve 
| arrive 
around eight or nine in the morning, 
sometimes | go home on the last bus 
Some people prefer 
to work only at night so the place is 
ritius. 
mechanics. 
it in spurts. 
hours a day, six days a week. 
at 10:30 at night. 
open twenty-four hours a day.” 
To Dr. Gujadhur, the greatest ad- 
vantage of the Trieste centre is its 
mere existence. “It is a meeting- 
ground, it offers post-doctoral training 
but, most of all, there is the fact that 
one can come back. | must be able 
to tell myself that | will always be able 
to come here for three months. 
Otherwise, one is just cut off.” 
That is a precarious situation for the 
physicist, Prof. Georges Ripka of the 
French Atomic Energy Commission at 
Saclay, who co-organized the nuclear 
theory course with. Prof. Luciano 
Fonda of the University of Trieste, 
believes that the scientist in a develop- 
ing country runs the risk of doing 
“perfectly good but irrelevant work.” 
If he only reads scientific journals, he 
cannot keep up and there is the dan- 
ger that he will do work already per- 
formed elsewhere. “In an hour's 
conversation with a physicist.” said 
Prof. Ripka, “I learn more than in a 
day in the library.” 
The theoretician must also remain in 
touch with the experimentalist, as is 
the case at Trieste. “Research is not 
walking in a garden and waiting for a 
good idea,” said Prof. Ripka. “Physics, 
unlike mathematics, is an approximate 
science. One must construct correct- 
ed theories when new experimental 
data come in. It's not that the old 
theories and experiments are bad, they 
are approximate. In physics, one is 
always guessing. Our guessing is 
never quite wrong, and never absolu- 
tely right.” : 
number of guest lecturers 
participated in the nuclear theory 
course as they do in all the training 
given at Trieste. The centre has be- 
come a sort of crossroads for physi- 
cists in Europe and it is not unusual for 
a man to come down from Germany or 
up from Yugoslavia to lecture for a day 
or two. The centre pays for his stay 
and his own institution pays his salary 
as a contribution by the scientific 
community to Trieste. 
Participants in the course worked 
hard with three lectures a day follow- 
ed by a seminar in which each one 
talked about what he was doing. Most 
of the lectures were in the forefront 
of the subject because, as Prof. Ripka 
remarked to me, it just as easy to 
teach new material as it is to teach 
the old, Prof. Ripka was particularly 
pleased that many participants had 
CONTINUED PAGE 32

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
of
 
Bo
sn
ia
-H
er
ce
go
vi
na
, 
Sa
ra
je
vo
 
Hewn from a solid block of stone, 
this tomb is a typical example of 14th 
and 15th century Bogomil funerary art. 
It is made in the form of a house 
of the period. Some thirty thousand 
of these tombs or “Stetchaks” are still 
to be seen in present day Yugoslavia, 
decorated with engravings which 
are both realistic and symbolic. 
The stags on the side of this tomb stood 
for justice and purity in the religious art 
of the Bogomils (a heretical Christian 
sect which first appeared in the Balkans 
in the 10th century). Front of tomb 
bears stylized cross and vine motif 
—Christian symbol of knowledge. 


### 52921: The Stones with the raised hands: the funerary art of the Bogomils

by Miroslav Krleza 
THE FUNERARY ART OF THE BOGOMILS 
THE STONES 
WITH THE 
RAISED HANDS 
CATTERED throughout 
Yugoslavia, from the Adriatic to the 
rivers Una and Morava, are some 
30,000 ancient tombstones or “stet- 
chaks” (from the Croato-Serbian word 
“stécak”, meaning “standing stone”). 
Massive monolithic blocks weathered 
  
MIROSLAV KRLEZA is Director of the 
Yugoslav Encyclopaedia. Author, poet, 
playwright and essayist, he is a leading 
figure of Yugoslav letters. He has organ- 
ized several international exhibitions of 
Yugoslav medieval art and has written a 
number of books -on the southern Slav 
civilization. 
by the centuries and weighing anything 
from two to thirty-two tons, they are 
also known as Bogomil “marbles”, or 
simply “Bogomils”, from the name of 
an ancient religious cult which found 
refuge in the Balkans in medieval 
times. 
Twelve of the numerous tombstones 
of this type found in Bosnia-Herce- 
govina figured in a recent exhibition 
on “Yugoslav Art from Prehistory to 
Today”, held in Paris. It was the first 
time that such tombstones had left 
Yugoslavia for an exhibition abroad. 
What is known about these tomb- 
stones with their wealth of carved 
CONTINUED PAGE 20 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 52921: The Stones with the raised hands: the funerary art of the Bogomils

Hands in revolt 
Engravings and sculpture carved on the Bogomil tombs of Bosnia 
and Hercegovina proclaim the faith that inspired this medieval 
heretical sect in its struggle against a merciless repression by the Inquisition. 
Many of the Bogomil stone communities of the dead (like the one 
in Hercegovina, below) have survived, with carvings that record 
ancient rites and symbols whose meanings are often difficult to decipher. 
On the upper half of the tombstone, right, figures dance the “kolo” 
—a folk dance still popular in the Balkans— but here the linked hands 
of the dancers clasp a cross. The lower frieze depicts a line 
of stags (see photo page 17). Below right, a cross symbolically entwined 
with vines decorates the end of this tomb (see also page 17). On the side, 
the sculptor has carved the effigy of the dead person, with hands upraised, 
and flanked by two mourners. Far right, a tomb bearing the most recurrent 
feature of Bogomil tomb decoration: a figure with raised hands. 
This may be a symbol of revolt, a challenge, an allusion to the Crucifixion, 
or even a combination of all three. The human figure Is surmounted 
by a crescent moon, a pagan symbol, and by florai designs 
that are still embroidered on traditional local costumes today. 
  
x § 
t 
” 
= 
L
A
E
 
E
n
e
r
 
T
R
E
 
e
n
 
Ph
ot
os
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
of
 
Bo
sn
ia
-H
er
ce
go
vi
na
, 
Sa
ra
je
vo
    

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 52921: The Stones with the raised hands: the funerary art of the Bogomils

   
a
 
c
i
 
J 
W
e
s
 
E
o
 
hath 
0° 
. 
gc. 
isc 
i
y
 
N
p
,
 
p
d
 
AEX 
f
e
r
 
i 
Aes 
L
E
E
 
Suds 
a 
o
Y
 
a 
e
a
l
 
w 
C
3
0
 
oy 
»! 
H 
of 
Was’ 
A
g
 
¥ 
a
)
;
 
W
i
 
¥
 
vd 
7 
{ 
S
i
h
 
™
 
pis 
ty 
ty 
0 
\ 
L
E
 
od 
LS 
’ 
‘ 
/ 
&
 
9 
% 
x
 
Fao) 
» 
I$ 
. 
he? 
S
N
 
~
 
ArT 
- 
F
a
 
L
h
e
 
i 
. 
L
L
 
3 
: 
y 
- 
i 
: 
b
i
o
 
2 
‘ 
: 
                                 
 
 
ee? 
LLL 
 
 
 
R
Y
 
 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 52921: The Stones with the raised hands: the funerary art of the Bogomils

  
    
   
   
  
   
    
    
    
   
    
    
   
    
   
   
   
   
    
    
     
BOGOMIL ART (Continued from page 17) 
 
30,000 sculptured monoliths 
designs, often grouped in vast ceme- 
teries, in remote forest or mountain 
areas, and about those who raised and 
decorated them? 
One of the first writers to describe 
the monoliths in these ancient grave- 
yards in some detail was an early 19th 
century traveller, - Prince Alexander 
Sapieha, who sought to understand 
the meaning of the carved figurative 
reliefs and symbolical designs that 
decorate these standing stones. 
In 1802-1803 he travelled through 
the republic of Dubrovnik and in the 
diary of his journey, published in 
Warsaw in 1811, he noted the strange 
characteristic shape of the stones that 
recalled, as he put it, “the roof of a 
funeral vault.” Prince Sapieha sugg- 
ested that the carved decorations were 
meant to symbolize the eternity of life 
triumphant over the destructive power 
of death. 
But until comparatively recent times, 
no one had systematically studied the 
gravestones or the artistic value of 
their carvings. Dating from the middle 
ages, and certainly from before the 
Turkish invasion in the 15th century, 
they are all hewn from single blocks, 
often so roughly that their simplicity 
gives an impression of force. 
About one-third of the gravestones 
are richly decorated in relief with 
figurative compositions whose meaning 
often remains obscure. A recurrent 
motif, for instance, is the upraised 
human hand, but whether it symbolizes 
a command or a threat, a greeting or 
a challenge, is still not known. 
As a feature of burial decoration, 
carvings of the human hand are known 
to date back to the prehistoric cave 
dwellings of the Dordogne in France. 
The hands depicted on medieval 
tombstones, peacefully joined in 
prayer, have survived from Gothic 
art to the present day; they are a 
familiar sign by which we recognize 
the human form, a detail which is often 
more important than any other feature 
of a human effigy. 
But the knightly, gauntleted hands of 
the Bosnian barons and boyars who 
take leave of us to cross the Acheron, 
the Greek river of the Underworld, and 
who seem to hail us from the opposite 
bank, appear to have an entirely 
different meaning. These Bogomil 
monuments have few recumbent figures 
with their hands folded in prayer at 
the approach of death. 
By contrast with traditional effigies 
of the dead, the massive, dispropor- 
tionately large hands on the “stet- 
chaks”, solemnly and firmly upraised, 
seem to proclaim across the centuries 
that these were hands of iron, hands 
in revolt, symbols of a sturdy breed 
of men who refused to submit to the 
will of the Inquisition as it waged its 
combat against the heretics of Bosnia. 
Sculpted on armour, on shields, 
bearing swords and lances, these 
hands recall the symbolism with which 
the Middle Ages invested the gauntlet 
—the sign of a challenge to a duel. 
In this case it was a challenge to 
ecclesiastical authority, a defiance far 
more radical than that of John Wycliffe, 
Jan Huss or Martin Luther, centuries 
later. 
] HE first printed reference 
to the Bogomil cemeteries is found in 
the ltinerarium, published in 1531, the 
earliest known account of travels in 
the Balkans. Its author, Benedikt 
Kuripesic, a Slovene, acted as inter- 
preter for a diplomatic mission sent 
to Constantinople by the Holy Roman 
Emperor Ferdinand |, ruler of Austria, 
to conclude a peace treaty between 
Austria and Turkey. 
Instead of taking the customary 
“imperial route” via Belgrade and 
Sofia, the travellers went through 
Croatia and Bosnia. Kuripesic noticed

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 52921: The Stones with the raised hands: the funerary art of the Bogomils

these mysterious monuments, and 
copied some of their epitaphs; but 
unfamiliar with the Cyrillic alphabet, 
or else misled by local interpreters, he 
published them in a very free rendering. 
A year later a second Austrian diplo- 
matic mission, following the same 
route, also noted the curious monu- 
ments to be seen “in the valleys and 
on the mountains of Bosnia.” 
But it was not until two centuries 
later that travellers halted before these 
stones and tried to fathom their secret. 
A Dalmatian Franciscan friar, Gaspard 
Vinjalic, in a book published in Venice, 
referred to the Bogomil stone “funeral 
vaults”; and at almost the same time, 
in 1775 a Venetian, Father Alberto 
Fortis, published his famous “Dal- 
matian Journey”. One of the most 
remarkable passages in this account 
deseribes the graveyard located near 
the source of the Cetina, near the 
Church of the Holy Saviour. 
When Dalmatia became a colony of 
Venice great interest was aroused by 
this largely unknown and apparently 
“wild” country. Many years after its 
publication, Father Fortis’ book provid- 
ed Prosper Mérimée with a major 
source of inspiration for his famous 
literary hoax “La Guzla", which was 
supposed to be a collection of Dal- 
matian poetry. All western Europe 
was taken in by this picturesque and 
highly romanticized work, which pre- 
sented an oversimplified picture of the 
Morlachs as a chivalrous people who 
lived on the frontiers of Venice, Turkey 
and Austria, who believed in vampires, 
fought endless battles, carried on 
bloody feuds against their enemies and 
chanted Homeric poems... 
Great figures such as Byron, Geethe, 
Pushkin and Mickiewicz gave credence 
to these flights of poetic fancy. Thus 
Mérimée's work created the legend of 
a barely civilized people, primitive, 
poor and backward, whose silver- 
decorated weapons, splendid national 
costumes, blind bards and local 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
  
A number of stylized motifs, taken 
from 14th and 15th century 
Bogomil sculptures, frame page 20 
opposite. The vertical column 
shows the similarity in designs used 
to represent the cross 
and a man with upraised arms. 
In the horizontal strip the cross 
becomes convoluted and mingled 
with the tendrils of the vine. 
Above, on the front of the tomb 
an elaborately worked floral frieze, 
repeated on the base, sets 
off a carving of a man and a woman 
holding hands. Right, another 
funerary carving representing 
a figure carrying a cross 
beside a vine. 
A 
' 
0 
s
s
 
i
 
A 
i
y
i
     
  
Ph
ot
os
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
of
 
B
o
s
n
l
a
-
H
e
r
c
e
g
o
v
i
n
a
,
 
Sa
ra
je
vo
 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 52921: The Stones with the raised hands: the funerary art of the Bogomils

22 
BOGOMIL ART (Continued) 
customs seemed to make them as 
strikingly picturesque as the wax 
figures in an ethnographical museum. 
Unfortunately, while the works of 
Mérimée and Fortis are well-known, 
the other side of the picture, presented 
by a doctor of medicine from Padua, 
Giovanni Lovrich, is not. Lovrich, who 
died young, published in 1777 his 
“Comments on the Dalmatian Journey 
by Alberto Fortis,” in which he accused 
Fortis of completely misinterpreting 
even the most elementary facts. 
It is Lovrich who should be given 
credit for being one of the first to 
throw light on the problem of the 
relationship between the Morlachs and 
the Haiduks, political outlaws and 
guerilla champions of freedom, who 
for centuries waged warfare against 
the Turks as the spearhead of 
resistance by the southern Slavonic 
peoples. And it was Lovrich who 
drew the attention of the western world 
to the rich historical and artistic past 
of these peoples. 
For six centuries the southern Slavs 
were unceasingly harried and “hunted 
like wolves™ by the Turks. They 
nevertheless raised historical and 
cultural monuments and created literary 
traditions, particularly the Adriatic 
Slavs, who from the 16th and 17th 
centuries onwards produced many 
works of lyric and epic poetry, drama, 
history, politics and science. 
Here, in fact, was a vigorous civiliza- 
tion that had been engulfed by wars, 
though this was naturally not so 
evident to an 18th century observer 
as it is to us today. We now know 
that this is the graveyard of an art and 
culture which, between the 9th and 
16th centuries, bequeathed to us, over 
and above the Bogomil cemeteries, 
innumerable frescoes, countless pala- 
ces, castles, villas, fortresses, chur- 
ches, monasteries, towns, and other 
monuments, embellished with a wealth 
of artistic decoration. 
This unbroken vein of creativeness 
in architecture, sculpture and painting, 
extended from the Lombardo-Raven- 
nine and Carolingian period, through 
the neo-Hellenic and Byzantine fres- 
coes of the 12th to the 14th centuries, 
up to the Ragusan, Dalmatian and 
Slovene painters, sculptors and archi- 
tects of the humanist period and the 
Renaissance. 
It is within the thousand-year span 
of this tradition, but particularly in the 
period between the 11th century and 
the Turkish conquest of Bosnia in 
1463, that the graveyards of “stet- 
chaks"” were raised in Bosnia-Herce- 
govina, which had become a refuge 
for heretics from every point of the 
compass. 
Bosnia was for centuries a Patarene, 
Cathar, Manichaean and Bogomil 
country, but it was mainly to Bogomi- 
lism, a purely Balkan heresy which 
grew up in Bulgaria in the tenth century 
and which was violently repressed in 
the twelfth century throughout the 
Balkans, that the mountainous and 
freedom-loving country of Bosnia 
offered an ideal place of refuge. 
The nature of this heresy is reflected 
in the “stetchaks”, which exalt with 
defiant paganism the earthly pleasures, 
dancing, the joys of the chase, and 
which depict animals and plants 
i RINCE Sapieha, in the 
diary of his travels already referred to, 
guessed at the secret inspiration of 
these great white monoliths from their 
decoration: birds resembling the divine 
Ibis, visions of fabulous animals, rivers 
flowing beneath the stars, knights in 
arms, gazelles in flight, bears, hounds 
and wolves seen against a backdrop 
of endless forests. 
He described the graveyards of 
Stolac and Radimlje, and noted the 
problem they presented for the archae- 
ologist. He explained the heraldic 
significance of certain details; and he 
compared their unusual forms with 
artistic motifs from the north, on the 
shores of the Baltic, also drawing a 
comparison with certain decorations 
on Egyptian and Parthian tombs. 
Other scholars studied the mystery 
of the “stetchaks”, among them a 
Yugoslav, Katalinic, a Frenchman, Ami 
Boué (1794-1881) and an Italian, Fran- 
cesco Cusani. It was, however, a 
famous Egyptologist, Sir John Gardener 
‘Wilkinson, who first dated the tomb- 
stones as preceding the Turkish inva- 
sion, and who has given us the most 
complete account of these cemeteries. 
In 1884, starting at the source of the 
Cetina river and continuing into Herce- 
govina, Wilkinson described in detail 
the shape and sculptural decoration of 
the “stetchaks”. Significantly, he 
noted that their themes were still 
closely linked with local folk tales 
and stories of marriages, the deaths 
of heroes, of conflicts between suitors. 
From Wilkinson onwards up to con- 
temporary writers, comparative studies 
have enriched the body of writing on 
the “stetchaks”. According to one 
convincing thesis, the gravestones re- 
produce features of a very ancient 
type of wood-engraving brought by the 
Slavs when they settled in the Balkans. 
The stylistic motifs of this art form a 
whole, and are linked with both the 
sculpture of the Baltic and the Cau- 
casus, and traditional Scythian and 
Sarmatian art. = 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
La
ur
en
ce
 
Br
un
, 
Pa
ns
 
Ba Fe pa 
  
        

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

  
  ne 55. 
living 
  
    
  
  
, even suggested that there is a daimon 
in Western man, and especially in the 
~ and depict it as the Moloch swallowing American, that is driving him to the 
~ the youth and resilience of American ~~ monstrous destruction of his instinctua 


### 52923: The Culture of machine living

‘manhood. From Butler's Erewhon to life and indeed of his whole civilization. 
Capek's R.UR., European thinkers part of the confusion flows from the 
seized on the machine as the failure to distinguish at least three 
. Some have phases of the machine culture. One 
i is machine living as such, the use of 
: He ~ machinery in work and in leisure and 
ginning in the constant accompaniments of 
mil Uy ‘the day. The second is cultural 
standardization, aside from the mach- 
I or grioan | fi jain “ine, but a standardization that flows 
member of the Social Sciences Faculties of {rom machine production. The third is 
Sarah Lawrence College, Harvard University ~~ conformism in thought, attitude, and 
: $00 ilies Coles. in Me oie Sas i = action. All three are parts. of the 
“empire of the machine but at varying “radio commentator, he was formerly Manag- 
(ing Editor of the "Encyclopaedia of the Social removes and with different degrees 
of danger for the human spirit. 
Sciences." His books include: “Ideas 
Wea, " (1939), “Ideas for the Ice gi 
~The danger in machine living itself is 
‘chiefly the danger of man's arrogance 
  
 
  
  
\% 
pons 
1941), “The Unfinished Country” (1959), " -, 
: (gal) and a Radical Humanism” ( oe: JEN 
in exulting over the seemingly easy 
. triumphs over Nature which he calls YE 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 52923: The Culture of machine living

  
MACHINE LIVING (Continued) 
 
The veneer of uniformity 
“progress,” so that he cuts himself off 
increasingly from the organic pro- 
cesses of life itself. 
Thus with the soil: the erosion of 
the American earth is not, as some 
seem to believe, the result of the 
mechanization of agriculture; a farmer 
can use science and farm technology 
to the full, and he need not exhaust or 
destroy his soil but can replenish it, as 
has been shown in the Tennessee 
Valley Authority (1), which is itself 
a triumph of technology. 
But the machines have been 
accompanied by a greed for quick 
results and an irreverence for the soil 
which are responsible for destroying 
the balance between man and the 
environment. What is true of the soil 
is true of the household: the mech- 
anized household appliances have 
not destroyed the home or undermined 
family life; rural electrification has 
made the farmer's wife less a drudge, 
and the mass production of suburban 
houses has given the white-collar 
family a better chance than it had for 
/ — 
(1) A U.S. federal corporation created in 
1933 to conserve and develop the resources 
of the Tennessee River Valley. 
sun and living space. What threatens 
family life is not the “kitchen revolu- 
tion” or the "housing revolution” but 
the restless malaise of the spirit, of 
which the machine is more product 
than creator. 
E.. in a society remark- 
able for its self-criticism, the major 
American writers have not succumbed 
to the temptation of making the machine 
into a Devil. Most of the novelists 
have amply expressed the frustrations 
of American life, and some (Dreiser, 
Dos Passos, Farrell and Algren come 
to mind) have mirrored in their style 
the pulse beats of an urban mechanized 
civilization. But except for a few 
isolated works, like Elmer Rice's 
Adding Machine and Eugene O’Neill's 
Dynamo, the writers have refrained 
from the pathetic fallacy of ascribing 
the ills of the spirit to the diabolism 
of the machine. 
The greatest American work on 
technology and its consequences— 
Lewis Mumford’'s massive four-volume 
work The Renewal of Life—makes the 
crucial distinction between what is due 
  
Phote © Niepce-Rapho, Parls 
to the machine itself and what is due 
to the human institutions that guide it 
and determine its uses. 
It is here, moving from machine 
living to cultural standardization, that 
the picture becomes bleaker. Henry 
Miller's phrase for its American form 
is “the air-conditioned nightmare.” 
Someone with a satiric intent could do 
a withering take-off on the rituals of 
American standardization. 
Most American babies (he might 
say) are born in standardized hospitals, 
with a standardized tag put around 
them to keep them from getting 
confused with other standardized 
products of the hospital. Many of 
them grow up either in uniform rows 
of tenements or of small-town or 
suburban houses. They are wheeled 
about in standard perambulators, shiny 
or shabby as may be, fed from stand- 
ardized bottles with standardized 
nipples according to standardized 
formulas, and tied up with standardized 
diapers. 
In childhood they are fed standard- 
ized breakfast foods out of stand- 
ardized boxes with pictures of stand- 
ardized heroes on them. They are 
sent to monotonously similar school- 
houses, where almost uniformly stand-

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 52923: The Culture of machine living

    
  
  
  
Uniformly dressed babies (far left) 
. and a moon-flight rocket motor, suggestive 
of a giant robot “nurse”, seem like images 
out of Aldous Huxley's satirical novel 
“Brave New World”, written in 1932. 
But Huxley’s ominous vision of a society 
that disregards individual dignity, worships 
the machine and “manufactures” standardized 
laboratory babies has happily not materialized. 
The machine makes uniformity of life 
possible, says Max Lerner, but it does not 
compel such uniformity. The economics 
of mass production has put a premium 
on uniformity, but for the person who has 
a personality style of his own, standardization 
need not mean anything more than a set 
of conveniences which leave a larger margin 
of leisure and greater scope for creative living. 
  
ardized teachers ladle out to them 
standardized information out of stand- 
ardized textbooks. They pick up the 
routine wisdom of the streets in 
standard slang and learn the routine 
terms which constrict the range of 
their language within dishearteningly 
narrow limits. 
They wear out standardized shoes 
playing standardized games, or as 
passive observers they follow through 
standardized newspaper accounts or 
standardized radio and TV programmes 
the highly ritualized antics of grown-up 
professionals playing the same games. 
They devour in millions of uniform 
pulp comic books the prowess of 
standardized supermen. 
S they grow older they 
dance to canned music from canned 
juke boxes, millions of them putting 
standard coins into standard slots to 
get standardized tunes sung by voices 
with standardized inflections of emo- 
tion. They date with standardized girls 
in standardized tars. They see auto- 
matons thrown on millions of the same 
 Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ro
ck
et
dy
ne
, 
U.
S.
A,
 
movie and TV screens, watching stereo- 
typed love scenes adapted from made- 
to-order stories in standardized maga- 
zines. 
They spend the days of their years 
with monotonous regularity in factory, 
office, and shop, performing routinized 
operations at regular intervals. They 
take time out for standardized “coffee 
breaks” and later a quick standardized 
lunch, come home at night to eat 
processed or canned food, and read 
syndicated columns and comic strips. 
Dressed in standardized clothes they 
attend standardized club meetings, 
church services, and socials. They 
have standardized fun at standardized 
big city conventions. They are drafted 
into standardized armies, and if they 
escape the death of mechanized 
warfare they die of highly uniform 
diseases, and to the accompaniment 
of routine platitudes they are buried 
in standardized graves and celebrated 
by standardized obituary notices. 
Caricature? Yes, perhaps a crude 
one, but with a core of frightening 
validity in it. Every society has its 
routines and rituals, the primitive 
groups being sometimes more tyrann- 
ously restricted by convention than 
the industrial societies. The difference 
is that where the primitive is bound by 
the rituals of tradition and group life, 
the American is bound by the rituals 
of the machine, its products, and their 
distribution and consumption. 
The role of the machine in this 
standardized living must be made 
clear. The machine mechanizes life, 
and since mass production is part of 
Big Technology, the machine also 
makes uniformity of life possible. But 
it does not compel such uniformity. 
" The American who shaves with an 
electric razor and his wife who buys 
a standardized “home permanent” for 
her hair do not thereby have to wear 
a uniformly vacuous expression 
through the day. A newspaper that 
uses the press association wire stories 
and prints from a highly mechanized 
set of presses does not thereby have 
to take the same view of the world 
that every other paper takes. A 
novelist who uses a typewriter instead 
of a quill pen does not have to turn 
out machine-made historical romances. 
The answer is that some do and 
some don't. What the machine and 
the mass-produced commodities have 
done has been to make conformism 
easier. To buy and use what everyone 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 52923: The Culture of machine living

26 
MACHINE LIVING (Continued) 
else does, and live and think as 
everyone else does, becomes a short 
cut involving no need for one's own 
thinking. Those Americans have been 
captured by conformist living who have 
been capturable by it. 
Cultural stereotypes are an inherent 
part of all group living, and they 
become sharper with mass living. 
There have always been unthinking 
people leading formless, atomized 
lives. What has happened in America 
is that the economics of mass ‘pro- 
duction has put a premium on uni- 
formity, so that America produces 
more units of more commodities 
(although sometimes of fewer models) 
than other cultures. American sales- 
manship has sought out every potential 
buyer of a product, so that stand- 
ardization makes its way by the force 
of the distributive mechanism into 
every life, 
ET for the person who has 
a personality pattern and style of his 
own, standardization need not mean 
anything more than a set of con- 
veniences which leave a larger margin 
of leisure and greater scope for 
creative living. “That we may be 
enamored by the negation brought by 
the machine,” as Frank Lloyd Wright 
has put it, “may be inevitable for a 
time. But | like to imagine this novel 
negation to be only a platform under- 
foot to enable a greater splendour of 
life to be ours than any known to 
Greek or Roman, Goth or Moor. We 
should know a life beside which the 
life they knew would seem not only 
limited in scale and narrow in range 
but pale in richness of the colour of 
imagination and integrity of spirit.” 
Which is to say that technology is 
the shell of American life, but a shell 
that need not hamper or stultify the 
modes of living and thinking. The real 
dangers of the American mode of life 
are not in the machine or even in 
standardization as much as they are 
in conformism. 
The dangers do not flow from the 
contrivances that men have fashioned 
to lighten their burdens, or from the 
material abundance which, if anything, 
should make a richer cultural life 
possible. They flow rather from the 
mimesis of the dominant and success- 
ful by the weak and mediocre, from 
the intolerance of diversity, and from 
the fear of being thought different 
from one's fellows. This is the 
essence of conformism. 
lt would be hard to make the 
connexion between technology and 
  
Above, headlights of innumerable cars create brilliant patterns resembling 
a collection of diamond bracelets, as they cross overpass bridges 
on four levels, in Los Angeles, California. Right, twin loudspeakers 
look like bicycle racers in a drive-in cinema where motorists can park 
to watch a film show from their cars. 
conformism, unless one argues that 
men fashion their minds in the image 
of their surroundings, and that in a 
society of automatism, human beings 
themselves will become automatons. 
But this is simply not so. What 
relation there is between technology 
and conformism is far more subtle and 
less mystical. It is a double relation. 
On the one hand, as Jefferson 
foresaw, the simpler society of small- 
scale manufacture did not involve 
concentration of power in a small 
group, was not vulnerable to break- 
down, and did not need drastic govern- 
mental controls; a society of big-scale 
industry has shown that it does. In 
that sense the big machines carry with 
them an imperative toward the directed 
society; which in turn—whether in war 
or peace—encourages conformism. 
On the second score, as De Tocque- 
ville saw, a society in which there is 
no recognized elite group to serve as 
the arbiter of morals, thought, and 
style is bound to be a formless one in 
which the ordinary person seeks to 
heal his insecurity by attuning himself 
to the “tyranny of opinion"—to what 
others do and say and what they think 
of him, He is ruled by imitation and 
prestige rather than a sense of his 
own worth. 
These are dangerous trends, but all 
of social living is dangerous. The 
notable fact is that in spite of its 
machines and standardization America 
has proved on balance less conformist 
than some other civilizations where the 
new iechnology has played less of a 
role. 
Americans have, it is true, an 
idolatry of production and consumption 
as they have an idolatry of success. 
But they have not idolized authority 
or submitted unquestioningly to human 
or supernatural oracles. They have 
had their cranks, eccentrics, and 
anarchists, and they still cling to 
individualism, even when it is being 
battered hard. 
It will take them some time before 
they can become “man in equipoise”, 
balancing what science and the mach-

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 52923: The Culture of machine living

Photo USIS 
ine can do as against the demands 
of the life processes. But where they 
have failed, the failure has been less 
that of the machines they have wrought 
than of the very human fears, greeds, 
and competitive drives that have 
accompanied the building of a powerful 
culture. 
It has been suggested that the 
American, like the Faustian, made a 
bargain with the Big Technology: a 
bargain to transform his ways of life 
and thought in the image of the ma- 
chine, in return for the range of power 
and riches the machine would bring 
within his reach. It is a fine allegory. 
But truer than the Faustian bargain, 
with its connotations of the sale of 
one's soul to the Devil, is the image 
of Prometheus stealing fire from the 
gods in order to light a path of 
progress for men. The path is not 
yet clear, nor the meaning of progress, 
nor where it is leading: but the bold 
intent, the irreverence, and the secular 
daring have all become part of the 
American experience. | 
» 
3
3
 
3 
g
h
 
'y 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Gi
il
ha
us
en
 
= 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
L
R
 
t 
' 
ZF 
a
 
ou
 
bh 
# 
AY
 
_
 
. 
i
 
iE
 
. 
     

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28 
by Elizabeth Freund 
  
blind child clearly cannot 
explore the world around him as 
freely as one who is sighted. No 
matter how hard he tries to “see” 
with his fingers the objects near to 
him, many things will escape him 
completely, either because the objects 
are too big, like most buildings, or too 
small, like anything that can be seen 
only through a microscope. Drawings 
or photos of far-away things are of 
no use to him. 
An education strictly confined to 
book learning or oral explanations 
cannot make up for this great disad- 
vantage, and very often only produces 
mental pictures which do not conform 
with reality. 
At Overbrook School for the Blind 
in Philadelphia, U.S.A., we have tried 
to counteract these difficulties by 
setting up a “Touch and Learn Center”. 
The idea is not new. Most schools for 
the blind have some mounted animals, 
models, feelable maps, etc., but very 
likely none of their collections is as 
large and diversified as ours with its 
1,800 items. It is not a museum in the 
traditional sense, but a very active 
means of instruction in constant use. 
There is a world of difference, for 
instance, between knowing only from 
hearsay how a water pump is worked 
and actually operating it oneself. Chil- 
dren are always astonished to find 
how small a sparrow is— “Such a little 
thing; | thought it was much bigger”. 
And the cured foot of an elephant 
makes them aware how enormous the 
real animal is compared with the small 
models they had handled previously. 
Already, one can almost hear some 
  
ELIZABETH FREUND is Curator of the 
Touch and learn Center at Overbrook 
School for the Blind in Philadelphia, U.S.A. 
She founded the Center in 1959 and has 
since lectured and written widely on the 
use of touch and learn techniques in educ- 
ation for the blind. Her manual on teach- 
ing longhand writing to blind students is 
used in schools for the blind in the U.S. 
and other countries. She is the author of 
“Crusaders for Light™ (1959) which tells 
the story of the pioneers of education for 
the blind in the United States. 


### 52924: Making learning real fun for blind children

Making learning 
real fun 
for blind children 
readers saying: “No wonder, it is easy 
for these Americans with all their 
money to have such a collection.” As 
a matter of fact, our collection did not 
cost very much. The largest expense 
was for a rubber model of the human 
body which can be taken apart, and 
which we had to buy from a school 
supply house. 
Most of the other models were made 
by ourselves or at sighted schools 
and later donated to us. A great num- 
ber of exhibits are gifts from manu- 
facturers, museums, or collectors 
whom we asked for help. 
It would take too long to enumerate 
each and every item in our collection. 
We have a good many objects from 
the Far East, South America, and Afri- 
ca. There is almost a whole zoo of 
mounted animals, from a small shrew 
to an exhibit about whales and 
whale oil. Fortunately, we often 
have the same animals in different 
positions. As a supplement, each 
spring two truckloads of living farm 
animals come for a day-long visit— 
a big improvement on the additional 
visits to the zoo, when there is not 
enough time to really get acquainted 
with the animals. 
There are innumerable models of 
buildings, bridges, and ships. We 
have a model of a coal mine on which 
the elevator goes down to the coal 
layer and comes up with a filled lorry. 
Most of the buildings have detachable 
roofs; machinery can be handled and, 
where possible, there are “cut-away 
windows” so that the student can feel 
how the parts move inside. 
Whenever necessary, the life size 
of a small model is indicated by human 
figures on the same scale; or the right 
key is given by comparing the model 
to some well known dimension, such as 
the size of a football field, the length 
of the school building, or the height of 
the classroom. 
A water-tank is used in the demon- 
stration of a canal-lock, which really 
closes and opens so that a little ship 
can climb from the lower to the higher 
level. With the help of an electric 
pump a water-mill turns a cogwheel 
and makes some bells ring. Any 
model which has movable parts, or 
can make a sound, is better than a 
rigid or silent one. 
The children get the greatest bene- 
fits from exhibits “in action”. For 
instance, when we lecture about inclin- 
ed planes, we let the children go up 
a large inclined board. If they com- 
plain that the board is too steep, we 
can change it into a gangplank by 
adding rungs. They can roll up kegs 
or little wagons, and so discover by 
themselves the advantages of the 
inclined plane compared to lifting a 
heavy weight straight upward. 
Exhibits of Egyptian, Greek, and 
Roman temples and buildings, or me- 
dieval castles with drawbridges and 
moats and a full size knight in armour 
are the best illustrations for these 
periods. For modern times, we need 
not only a large collection of aero- 
plane models, but others of the solar 
system, rockets, the moon, and 
Snoopy, the moon landing module. 
HE most revolutionary new 
invention for the instruction of the blind 
is the electric Thermoform machine 
made in California. It uses a vacuum 
forming process under great heat. You 
write a page in braille on ordinary 
braille paper, cover this “master” with 
a plastic sheet, and push it into the 
heated oven of the machine. A dupli- 
cate is produced in a few seconds and 
this process can be repeated as many 
times as you want. Mathematical prob- 
lems, quizzes, or any other kind of 
information can be duplicated in almost 
no time at all. 
In the very same way “lllustrations” 
to history, geography, science, or so- 
cial studies can be produced. A mas- 
ter is made from a paper base from 
cardboard, netting, sandpaper, tape in 
different widths, small grains, or metal 
pieces—in short from anything that 
will feel different to touch on the 
finished sheet. 
Of course, the resulting picture has 
only two dimensions; but it is easy to 
read and by cutting and underlying 
some parts with an extra layer of card- 
CONTINUED PAGE 30

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 52924: Making learning real fun for blind children

Photo © Jules Shick, Philadelphia, U.S.A, 
  
  
         
n
s
 
SE
S 
3 
¥ 
-
 
x
 
Nd
 
L 
g
s
 wy 
- 
, 
L
e
 
           
         
   
oy — 
May Si | er wa mm 
——— 
raion powers neem, gm ae. semen, aeeseTw pee 
| Trea ee 
— rR er = EP — 
— re 
Spey darn ——p—p—— NA — 
—— 
Er ——n. [rane merntam SewIein A 
Ea lp 
FETE See SR SE SAE SG SW — 
-_— 
SR SE a— Gan S— d— — 
mr Em re rm 
| - 
2's 
re 
ii,  
Thanks to special teaching techniques and equipment the horizons of blind persons 
have widened tremendously in recent years. Overbrook School for the Blind 
in Philadelphia, U.S.A., for instance, has a Touch and Learn Center where students 
are able to get a realistic mental picture of objects by handling them. Most of 
the 1,800 items in the Center's collection—the largest and most diversified of its kind 
in the U.S.—cost very little to produce. A wooden frame and some fine yarn 
are all that is required to “spin” this feelable spider's web. 
N
o
 
w
o

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 52924: Making learning real fun for blind children

  
   
   
i Feelable maps bring geography alive for blind students. 
The shapes of Europe, left, were cut out 
of cork sheet and then stuck to a base representing 
the ocean. 
mark national borders and different types 
of upholstery nails stand for capitals and other 
important cities. On the relief map of Africa, below, 
plastic strips placed in the gaps between countries 
make borders easy to identify. 
Minute gaps between countries 
Photos © Jules Schick, Philadelphia 
Si. 
FUN FOR BLIND CHILDREN (Continued) 
30 
board, a certain 3-dimensional effect 
can be produced, but any kind of pers- 
pective has to be avoided. The stu- 
dents quickly get accustomed to this 
method, and soon have no difficulty 
in understanding it. 
The only drawback to the Thermo- 
form machine is its price—about 
$450—plus the current expenses for 
the plastic sheets. It is a pity that not 
every school for the blind will be able 
to afford the purchase of such a ma- 
chine—its advantages are enormous. 
On the other hand, the size of a Ther- 
moform picture is only 28 by 28 cm. 
(11 x 11 in.) so that some things —the 
larger geographic maps, for example 
—ijust cannot be reproduced. 
To provide our school with good 
maps has been one of our major tasks. 
We had a lot of large, 92 by 123 cm. 
(3x4 ft) wooden maps made in 
jigsaw-puzzle fashion. We improved 
them by glueing the pieces to their 
base, and inserting plastic strips into 
the gaps for borderlines. Another 
method was to nail the lines between 
states or countries. 
We also made maps from cork 
sheets 3 mm. (1/8") thick by tracing 
the outlines of printed maps and 
glueing the traced paper to the cork 
upside down (this makes it easier to 
cut the cork). We cut away 3 mm. at 
the outside of each part so that when 
glueing it to the base a gap between 
states was produced, wide enough to 
be felt easily. 
All names were printed on self- 
adhesive plastic tape in braille and in 
printed letters. The different states 
were painted in brilliant colours for 
the partially blind students. Cork 
maps are especially suitable for desk- 
size maps. 
l is important for each 
student to have a small map before 
him. The large map in front of the 
classroom doesn’t work too efficiently 
with blind pupils. These cork maps 
can be made at negligible costs, and 
serve their purpose better than brailled 
paper maps. 
When blind students are taught how 
to find their way around with a cane, 
it is a great help to have good maps 
of city or neighbourhood at hand. For 
our mobility classes, we made not only 
a map of the school campus and ano- 
ther of its surroundings, but also feel- 
able maps of the subway system, the 
Philadelphia Suburban Railroad Ser- 
vice, a map showing all the suburbs, 
and a big map of the centre of the 
city with markers for all the historical 
buildings, and the places of interest 
to a blind person. 
These maps seem to fill a real gap 
in our instruction, as we can see from 
the enthusiastic reception by our stu- 
dents. For most of the maps we need- 
ed a photo enlargement of the section 
in question from a printed map. Once 
we had it, it was easy and inexpensive 
to build whatever we wanted to show, 
by using cardboard squares for city 
blocks, balsa wood pieces for bridges 
or houses, velvet paper for parks, and 
upholstery nails as markers for rail- 
road stations or important sites. 
A very inexpensive help with the 
instruction of blind children is the 
screen pad. This is a piece of ordin- 
ary metal window-screen stapled to a

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 52924: Making learning real fun for blind children

  
heavy cardboard of approximately 
36 by 46 cm. (14x18 in). If you 
cover this board with thin newsprint 
paper and use an oil crayon, the under- 
lying mesh will hold back the oily 
material of the crayon so that the blind 
student can feel what he is drawing, 
while he is drawing. The screen pads 
can be used in mathematics, geogra- 
phy, etc., by the students themselves; 
or the teacher can use this tool for 
making a quick sketch when explain- 
ing a topic. 
We even found that totally blind 
children who had been deprived of the 
joy and pleasure of drawing pictures 
can do so on these screen pads. 
Characteristic was a conversation 
overheard between two totally blind 
girls of about 12 years of age. One 
said: “What did you draw?” And the 
other told her that she had drawn a 
rabbit. (They had been shown mount- 
ed rabbits before this lesson). “Oh, 
let me see,” said the first girl, and 
“looked” at the picture. She felt it 
carefully—tail, head, body, and paws— 
and then said with great admiration. 
“Isn't that a very nice rabbitl” 
The screen pad was instrumental, too, 
  
  
  
aN Uk is 
75 or £3 KW 
4 WN 
Li BA 
N Sully’ 
  
A revolutionary new invention for teaching the blind is the electric 
thermoform machine. A sort of blind man’s photocopier, it uses 
a vacuum process under great heat to reproduce a sheet of braille writing 
in a few seconds. “Illustrations” made from a variety of materials 
with a different feel (cardboard, netting, sandpaper, tape, metals, etc.) 
can be reproduced in the same way. A sheet of plastic is placed 
over the master copy and pushed into the heated oven of 
the machine. 
made by the thermoform process. 
Photo, above, shows an illustration of the human eye 
Similar illustrations have been 
used to teach about plant growth, place setting at table, 
the development of the human embryo, the human skeleton, etc. 
in teaching the students how to sign 
their names. For this purpose, the 
thin paper was lined in braille. We 
wrote a Manual about Longhand-Writ- 
ing, which is now widely used not only 
at our school, but at other American 
schools, too. Since the students get 
a good mental picture of the shape of 
a letter by feeling it, the results of this 
method are good. 
The largest Touch and Learn collec- 
tion would be of no value at all, if it 
were not used: regularly. In our 
school all the elementary classes 
come for at least one period weekly, 
and are shown exhibits relating to their 
studies. 
Teachers may also borrow material, 
if they want to use it in their class- 
rooms. We arrange exhibits for sec- 
ondary school classes on request. 
Co-operation with the teachers is most 
essential, and once it is established, 
it really works. The teachers ask for 
the models they need and the Touch 
and Learn Center is more than glad 
to make these models, or try to find 
the material wanted. 
A well-kept filing system is funda- 
mental for the best use of a collection. 
Our material is classified not only 
alphabetically, but also by subject, so 
that if a certain exhibit is requested 
we are reminded which other items 
might be used in connexion with this 
lecture. 
We hope that some of the ideas we 
use in Philadelphia may stimulate other 
schools to build up a similar collection. 
As we stressed at the beginning, this 
project need not to be expensive, but 
some initiative and imagination are 
necessary. The work is fascinating 
and the results are most rewarding. 
In our case we know that it has widen- 
ed the horizons of our students immen- 
sely. 
| will be glad to give more details 
or explanations if needed. Please get 
in touch with us—German, English, 
Spanish and French will be under- 
stood (1). 
In any case, may | wish you a lot 
of good luck for your Touch and Learn 
Center. | 
(1) The Overbrook School «for the Blind 
is located at 64th Street and Malvern Avenue, 
Philadelphia, Pa. 19131, U.S.A. 
T—SS————————————————————————————— 
w

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 52920: Trieste; world rendez-vous for physicists

J 
TRIESTE—WORLD RENDEZVOUS 
FOR PHYSICISTS (Continued from page 16) 
arranged to collaborate by post. Such 
arrangements are valid, he thinks, if 
they are preceded by personal con- 
tacts. “In nuclear theory, contacts 
are invaluable. That's how | got start- 
ed myself. | was invited to go from 
France to a conference in New York 
and | talked to a lecturer there. He 
got me going and he put me in touch 
with a student of his in Belgium. After 
speaking to him, | had the drive and 
I'm sure my case is typical. That is 
why | feel responsibility to a fellow 
here. He must go home with all that 
he can.” 
Such courses are far from the cen- 
tre's main function. In fact, every 
time one looks around, another func- 
tion seems to appear. Besides cour- 
ses, associateships, research work- 
shops and occasional symposia, the 
centre has a system of federated ins- 
titutions. They number twenty from 
sixteen countries and each has the 
right to send a scientist of its own 
choosing to Trieste for a period of up 
to 40 days a year. Such is the thirst 
for theoretical physics that some insti- 
tutions send forty scientists for one 
day—and they stretch their subsis- 
tence allowance to cover nearly a 
week by staying in modest boarding 
houses or with friends. 
VEN a week is enough to 
become imbued with the atmosphere of 
the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics. The long corridor that leads 
to Prof. Salam’s office on the second 
floor is punctuated by portraits of the 
centre's spiritual fathers: Einstein, 
Niels Bohr, Oppenheimer, Werner 
Heisenberg, Wolfgang Pauli, Louis de 
Broglie, among others... and a humo- 
rous New Year's card from Lev Landau 
showing the fox who fished with his 
tail. The developing world flocks to 
Trieste and to what these names 
represent. To Prof. Salam, this is only 
the swing of history's pendulum. 
He likes to tell how Michael the 
Scot left his native land in the 13th 
century to travel south to the Arab 
universities of Toledo and Cordova. 
Or how Mamun the Caliph of Baghdad 
in the Oth century, sent the Emperor 
of Byzantium a work concerning “a 
new path in mathematics called Alge- 
bra.” Prof. Salam blames the Mongol 
invasions for the end of Islamic scien- 
ce. “The Mongols systematically 
destroyed libraries. Before printing, 
the destruction of a library meant the 
end of a tradition. When the libraries 
at Baghdad, Bukhara and Samarkand 
went up in flames, Islamic science was 
lost with them.” 
With men like Prof. Salam we are 
witnessing an exciting resurgence of 
Islamic science. Already his work has 
received recognition by the award of 
the “Atoms for Peace” prize—a fitting 
recompense for a man whose name, 
Abdus Salam, means “Servant of 
Peace.” 
With such a name he was almost 
pre-destined to work for the United 
Nations. He now has another dream, 
a world university of which the Trieste 
centre would be but one campus. 
  
UCH a university could 
meet a number of needs. There is 
already a strong movement for an 
institution devoted to the study of 
peace and disarmament which are at 
the heart of the problems that the 
United Nations must solve. 
Secondly, institutes could be set up 
at the postgraduate level to conduct 
research in the basic sciences. Like 
his own at Trieste, Prof. Salam thinks 
that they should use the same built-in 
plug against the brain drain by requir- 
ing their participants to spend most 
of their time in their own countries. 
And thirdly, Prof. Salam foresees 
international campuses with truly 
international faculties for the applied 
sciences. “They could be anywhere: 
Kenya for health sciences, par- 
ticularly tropical diseases, Iran for 
petroleum and petro-chemicals, Nigeria 
or Latin America or Pakistan for 
agriculture, and so forth." Gaps left 
in the network of U.N. centres would 
be filled by federated universities and 
research institutes. “I'm after fifty 
campuses, not five or six,” said 
Prof. Salam. “This must be truly a 
world university. Don’t worry, it will 
come, certainly not tomorrow but 
certainly within twenty years.” 
On that note, | left Abdus Salam. 
His prediction is just a dream, but this 
disconcerting man of faith and science 
must be one of the world's most 
realistic dreamers... L 
  - 
BOOKSHELF 
UNESCO'S TRANSLATIONS SERIES 
  
~~ CEYLON 
| BM An Anthology of Sinhalese Liter- 
| ature up to 1815 
Edited by Christopher Reynolds 
George Allen and Unwin Ltd, London 
1970, 377 pp (£4.50) 
| JAPAN 
MM Snow 
Cranes 
A one-volume Nobel Prize 
edition of two novels 
by Yasunari Kawabata 
Translated by 
Edward G. Seidensticker 
Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1969 
322 pp ($ 5.95) 
Country and Thousand 
INDIA 
M Wild Bapu of Garambi 
(Garambica Bapu) 
By Shripad Narayan Pendse 
Translated by lan Raeside 
Sahitya Akademi, New Delhi, 1969, 
256 pp (Rs. 12.00) 
* 
OTHER BOOKS 
HM Eastern Cultures 
A Unesco Courier Anthology 
Longmans Green and Co., 
Harlow, UK., 1971 (£3.25, $11.50) 
See inside back cover 
8 World Press Photos 69/70 
Over 170 outstanding press 
photos 
Hanns Reich Verlag, Munich, 
Fed. Rep. of Germany, 1970 
(DM 9.80) 
BM Japanese and Western Literature 
A Comparative Study 
By Armando Martins Janeira 
Charles E. Tuttle Co., Rutland, 
Vermont and Tokyo, Japan, 
1970, 394 pp ($10) 
HB Foremost Women 
in Communications 
Women's achievements presented in 
a new directory of the communica- 
tions industry 
Foremost American Publishing 
Corp.-R.R. Bowker Company, 
New York, 1971 
(U.S. and Canada: $25; 
Elsewhere: $27.50) 
BW The Barbarians 
(An anthropological view) 
By Catherine H. Berndt 
and Ronald M. Berndt 
C.A. Watts and Co., Ltd. 
London, 1971 (£1.25) 
hae   
— 
  

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

DRESED HEI 
A world approach 
to education 
Mapping out a world-wide approach to 
the problems of education, encouraging 
national strategies and guiding internatio- 
nal co-operation during the Second Dev- 
elopment Decade—these are the aims of 
the International Commission for the Dev- 
elopment of Education, recently set up by 
Unesco. The seven-member commission, 
headed by Mr. Edgar Faure, a former 
prime minister and education minister of 
France, will survey the state of education 
in the world today and its findings will 
serve as a guide to Unesco's work. 
Unesco appeal 
for Euphrates Valley 
monuments 
Unesco’s Director-General, Mr. René 
Maheu, has called on universities, higher 
educational Institutes and scientific orga- 
nizations in 34 countries to help in 
safeguarding monuments and cultural sites 
in the Euphrates Valley. Some outstand- 
ing monuments and about 30 archaeologi- 
cal sites, ranging from neolithic to late 
Moslem, are due to be submerged by the 
waters of a dam now being built 170 kilo- 
metres from Aleppo in Syria. The appeal 
was made at the request of the Syrian 
Government, which is to present half of 
the finds made during archaeological exca- 
vations to the missions helping to carry 
them out. 
Mexican algae cakes 
Flour made from algae collected from 
ponds in Mexico was the main ingredient 
in some sugar-coated cakes recently sam- 
pled in Rome and pronounced “excellent” 
by members of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization's Protein Advisory Group. 
Algae protein, if made acceptabie and mass- 
produced, could make a significant contri- 
bution to overcoming the world wide protein 
shortage. 
Curbing record ‘pirates’ 
International action to stop “pirates” 
from defrauding the record industry of 
millions of dollars every year is under way. 
“Pirate” industries, which produce records 
and cassette cartridges without paying 
royalties to the companies, artists and 
producers of the original recording, are 
so weli entrenched in some countries that 
they are close to putting legitimate record 
industries out of business. A draft con- 
vention to protect record companies against 
these practices was approved recently by 
specialists from 41 countries meeting at 
Unesco H.Q. in Paris. The text will be 
given final approval at an inter-govern- 
mental conference later this year. 
Egyptian temple 
for Netherlands 
A 2,000 year old Egyptian temple, recently 
shipped in pieces to the Netherlands, is 
to be rebuilt in the courtyard of the 
Antiquities Museum at Leyden. The village 
of Taffeh, in upper Egypt, where the temple 
once stood, has disappeared beneath the 
lake behind the new Aswan High Dam, 
but the temple was dismantled and remov- 
ed in 1960. It has been presented to the 
Netherlands by the U.A.R. in appreciation 
of its aid to the Unesco-sponsored inter- 
national campaign that saved Abu Simbel 
and other Nubian temples from the waters 
of the Aswan High Dam. Other temples 
have been presented to the U.S.A. ltaly 
and Spain. 
The burden 
of military spending 
A panel of 14 consultants appointed by 
U.N. Secretary-General U Thant is to report 
on the economic and social effects of 
world military spending later this year. 
U Thant has asked these specialists to 
propose effective ways to reduce and 
finally eliminate the dangers of the arms 
race and the economic burdens it imposes. 
Such savings, he has said, could be used 
to finance urgent programmes for econo- 
mic and social progress during the Second 
Development Decade. 
Mapping marine 
pollution 
A world-wide investigation of marine 
pollution was proposed by the Consultative 
Council of the International Oceanographic 
Commission at a recent meeting in Bor- 
deaux. Pollution studies are to be a major 
feature of a long term oceanic exploration 
and research programme that the Commis- 
  
Z 
PR
OG
RA
MM
E 
AL
IM
EN
TA
IR
E 
MO
ND
IA
L 
ATIONS UNIES   
FOOD FOR DEVELOPMENT 
The World Food Programme was established jointly by 
the United Nations and 
Organization in 1963. 
hungry people. Like other forms of aid—cash, equipment, 
expertise—sent to the developing coyntries, it is primarily 
intended as a long-term investment in their future. The 
commemorative stamp (left), issued last month by the 
U.N. Postal Administration in 13 cents (US) and Sw. Fr. 
0.50 denominations, marks the efforts of the World Food 
Programme over the last eight years. 
for the U.N. Postal Administration, Unesco’s Philatelic 
Service stocks all UN. stamps and first day covers 
currently on sale. 
lic Service, Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7e. 
the Food and Agriculture 
Its aim was not just to feed 
As agent in France 
For details write to the Unesco Philate-   
sion (set up by Unesco in 1960) is carry- 
ing out for the United Nations. Its first 
task would be to carry out surveys to 
establish baselines from which changes in 
the sea caused by pollution could be 
measured. 
U.N. international 
university project 
An international group comprising eight 
distinguished educators has been appoint- 
ed by Unesco to submit recommendations 
for the creation of an international univer- 
sity under the auspices of the United 
Nations. The idea of setting up a uni- 
versity which would be truly international 
in character and aims was first proposed 
by U.N. Secretary-General U Thant in 1969. 
A report on the feasibility of the project, 
based on the Unesco group's recommend- 
ations and the views of international 
organizations, governments and universities, 
will be studied by Unesco's Executive 
Board later this year. 
Young Finns to aid 
developing countries 
Young Finnish university graduates are 
to work as associates of senior U.N. specia- 
lists on technical aid projects in the 
developing countries. Under a U.N.-Finnish 
agreement, they will be employed on eco- 
nomic and social development projects 
designed to make greater use of natural 
resources, improve urban and rural condi- 
tions, expand basic services and train 
specialized workers. By the end of 1970, 
young associate specialists from European 
countries were working in 30 countries 
of Africa, Asia and Latin America. 
Water prospectors’ school 
Thirty students from four continents are 
learning how to find water and how to 
develop water resources at a course 
organized by the Hebrew University in 
Jerusalem. This six-month course in ground- 
water prospecting, hydrogeology and hydro- 
logy is sponsored by Unesco and the 
Organization of American States. 
Volcanic research centre 
Plans are under consideration for the set- 
ting up in Iceland of a centre for volcanic 
research. Iceland offers broad scope for 
studies in this field, since the frequency 
and variety of its volcanic activity are un- 
equalled in the world. 
Flashes... 
BM A Swedish electrical engineer has 
adapted the Braille alphabet so that it is 
easily intelligible to those with normal 
sight, can be used in a computer and 
remains comprehensible to the blind. 
HM Between 1948 and 1968, over 20,000 
persons benefited from Unesco fellow- 
ships, study and travel grants. 
  
WM Schoo! textbooks used in the Fed. 
Rep. of Germany are examined system- 
atically so as to eliminate all traces of 
prejudice against other countries and 
cultures. 
MM Student enrolment in Brazil rose from 
100,000 to 400,000 between 1963 and 1970. 
Australia's student population now includes 
some 12,000 young Asian men and women. 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34   
Letters to the Editor 
MAN AND VIOLENCE 
Sir, 
As a teenager in the final year of 
secondary school, | would like to say 
how useful | find the "Unesco Courier”, 
culturally and educationally. 
Just one example that comes to mind 
Is the use we made in the classroom 
of your issue “Man and Violence” 
(August-September 1970). It served as 
the basis for study and discussions on 
man’s aggressiveness, during our philo- 
sophy course. 
In my view this was one of the most 
outstanding issues of the past three 
years. | was thus surprised to read 
the letter to the editor (January 1971) 
criticizing the amount of space it 
devoted to describing experiments 
aimed at deducing human nature from 
the behaviour of animals. 
In view of the importance of research 
in this field, | feel that such studies are 
necessary since they help to clarify 
many aspects of a situation that affects 
us all, but to which we often prefer 
to close our eyes. 
M. Laglaine 
Royan, France 
SCIENCE OF SURVIVAL 
Sir, 
Congratulations on the article “Peace 
Research—the Science of Survival” by 
Bert Réling (November 1970). It makes 
clear how imperative it is to analyse 
different ideas on the meanings of the 
same words, since misuses of concepts 
have many times led to war. 
Among interesting features in other 
issues, | would like to mention the 
drawings of the formation of the mid- 
Atlantic Ridge (July 1970). Bravo for 
the December 1969 number on “The 
Sculpture of Vibrations”, with its won- 
derful descriptions and illustrations. 
One suggestion: why not more issues 
on little-known countries? (I have in 
mind the feature you published on 
Mongolia in November 1969). 
| hope your magazine will continue 
to show Man as the builder of the 
broad road of progress (to a world 
where the absurdities of today—poverty, 
hunger, social injustice, colonialism and 
man's systematic destruction of man 
will be things of the past). 
Orfeu Santos 
Lisbon, Portugal 
+ SECURITY COUNCIL® 
FOR NATURE AND MAN 
Sir, 
Your issue on Man and Violence 
(August-September 1970) dealt with 
problems vital to mankind, and | am 
sure it has brought you letters from 
readers the world over. 
While reading the article, “Man, 
Killer of Nature”, it occurred to me that 
Unesco should propose the calling of 
a special session of the U.N. General 
Assembly, to discuss the creation of 
a Council for the Protection of Nature 
and Mankind. This new body within 
the U.N. system could be vested with 
similar powers to the Security Council. 
In my view, the U.N. International 
 
Conference on Problems of the Human 
Environment, to be held in Stockholm 
next year, could prepare material for 
discussion by the special session of 
the U.N. General Assembly referred 
to above. 
M. Pravotorov 
Moscow, U.S.S.R. 
MORE VARIETY ? 
Sir, 
| am afraid | shall not be renewing 
my subscription to the “Unesco Cou- 
rier”. 
My only criticism is that | would 
like you to present more subjects in 
each issue, instead of devoting nearly 
all of them to a single theme. 
Eliane Jacquet 
Limoges, France 
 
INTERNATIONALLY-MINDED 
SCHOOLS 
Sir, 
In the article, “United World Col- 
leges—a new concept in international 
education” (October 1970), we read 
with pleasure your account of a recent 
venture in the development of interna- 
tionally-minded education. But surpris- 
ingly enough no mention was made of 
other “pioneer” experiments In this 
field, some of them dating back a quar- 
ter of a century or more. 
Our own school, the College Ceve- 
nol International, at Chambon-sur-Li- 
gnon, in the Massif Central region of 
France, was founded in 1938. A secon- 
dary school for boys and girls aged 
between 11 and 19, it aims to give a 
“Christian education for peace and 
international understanding”, notably 
through the efforts of its teaching staff 
and its 350 students who come from a 
score of countries on five continents. 
With the support and encouragement 
of many organizations, including the 
International Fellowship of Reconcilia- 
tion movement, it has long practised 
“modern” education in the widest 
sense of the term: co-education, stu- 
dent self-discipline and participation In 
management, contact with nature, and 
manual work closely linked to studies. 
It provides annual summer courses, 
including an international work camp 
and an International programme In 
languages, art and culture. 
Your article rightly refers to problems 
that exist in France, for example, where 
only national diplomas are accepted. 
But one sign of progress it that two 
“pilot” schools in France and two 
others in the Fed. Rep. of Germany 
have now been authorized to follow 
programmes leading to a Franco-Ger- 
man baccalauréat. ‘We ourselves are 
studylng the possibility of preparing 
students for the “International Bacca- 
lauréat”, a project also described in 
your article. It would, of course, be 
far better if such efforts were more 
co-ordinated so that those engaged In 
them would feel less isolated in their 
attempts to accomplish a task for which 
there will never be too many heads and 
hands. 
  
A. Blancy 
Headmaster, Cevenol College 
Le Chambon-sur-Lignon, France 
THE OTHER CULTURE 
Sir, 
In your issue “Cultural Policy—a 
Modern Dilemma” (January, 1971) the 
discussions on culture dealt only with 
those things that ‘are external to man— 
culture as related to science, litera- 
ture, history, politics, etc.,, in other 
words forms of culture that satisfy his 
physical, intellectual and social needs 
and desires. 
But, as we are all aware, the con- 
tinuing development of this culture does 
not stop men from hating and torturing 
one another. 
There is another aspect of culture 
that seems to be neglected—the per- 
sonal, inner culture, which consists in 
developing feelings of solidarity, 
altruism and love for others, in learning 
to understand and respect them even 
if they do not think as we do, in 
eradicating the poisonous roots of 
aggressivity, in helping those who suffer 
by giving freely of oneself. 
In my view, a combination of these 
two aspects of culture would bring 
happiness and peace to mankind. 
C.J. Grandin 
Angers, France 
THE PUBLIC AND MODERN ART 
Sir, 
We have received a copy of the 
Unesco Courier featuring the Toronto 
inquiry into public attitudes towards 
modern art. More than interesting, we 
find that it may be very useful to us 
as a tool. Earl Hatleberg 
The Museum of Modern Ant, 
New York 
JERUSALEM'S HISTORIC SITE 
Sir, 
While the news media are constantly 
bringing to our attention the political 
situation in the Middle East, few people 
realize that the region of Jerusalem is 
being systematically destroyed by 
building activity. Judging by the frantic 
rhythm at which new roads and apart- 
ment blocks are already being built on 
the hills surrounding the old city, it is 
easy to foresee that within a short time 
the exceptionally beautiful region will 
be transformed into an ugly sprawl of 
endless suburbs... 
Jerusalem is just a small city in the 
Jordean Mountains. Yet it has played 
one of the most important roles any 
city has ever played in human history. 
Jerusalem is the Holy City of three 
religions and as a symbol the city has 
far greater importance that mere phy- 
sical size can ever bestow on her. 
By surrounding the Old City with 
massive new developments, its fragile 
hfe will be crushed. 
There are places where one simply 
does not build, and Jerusalem is such 
a place. The architecture of Jerusalem 
exists already—the Old City and its 
landscape creating a unique architec- 
tural space. In Jerusalem no construc- 
tion, however good, can replace the 
architectural beauty it inevitably 
destroys. N. S. Neumann 
Ecole d'Architecture 
Université Laval 
Quebec, Canada 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
— 
Dé
p8
t 
lé
ga
l,
 
2+
 
tr
im
es
tr
e 
19
71
 
- 
C 
1 
  

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Eastern Cultures 
  
   
    
     
   
£3.25 - $11.50 
reo igs 
” W | 
rene 
135 pages Nearly 120 photos and drawings 
- 
problems. 
Announcing a Special 
Unesco Courier Anthology 
What goes by the name of “ World History ” in many countries is 
often western history amplified by a few unrelated chapters on other 
parts of the world. The publication of “Eastern Cultures”, based on a 
selection of articles that have appeared in the Unesco Courier, 
will help to dissipate some of the prevalent Western misconceptions 
about the East. Its material about various aspects of Eastern culture, 
history and contemporary life will help teachers to enrich their lessons 
on Eastern and Western Asia. 
Divided into 12 chapters, the book deals with a broad range 
of subjects such as e languages of Asia e architecture, 
sculpture and painting e music, minor arts and astronomy 
e the impact of Buddhism e Nubian monuments e New Year 
festivals e tradition in transition in Japan e influences of 
great men e the women of new Asia ® economic and social 
This book is totally different from the Unesco Courier Anthology 
published in August-September 1969. 
Published by Longmans, Green and Co., Ltd., Harlow, Essex, U.K. 
Order through your bookseller. DO NOT ORDER THROUGH UNESCO. 
Where to renew your subscription 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language, 
* 
— AUSTRALIA. Publications : Educational Supplies Pty. 
Led., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NSW; Periodicals : 
Dominie Pty. Limited, Box 33, Post Office, Brook- 
vale 2100, NSW. Sub-agent. United Nations Asso- 
ciation of Australia, Victorian Division, 4th Floor, 
Askew House, 364 Lonsdale Sc, Melbourne (Vic- 
toria), 3000 (§ 2.75). — AUSTRIA. Verlag Georg 
Fromme & Ce, Arbeitgasse 1-7, 1051, Vienna, (AS 82). 
— BELGIUM. Editions ** Labor", 342, rue Royale, 
Brussels, 3. Presses Universitaires de Bruxelles, 42, 
avenue Paul-Héger, Brussels 5, NV Standaard-We- 
tenschappelijke Uitgeveryy Belgiélei 147, Antwerp, |. 
Jean de Lannoy, 112, rue du Tréne, Brussels 5, CCP 
3380.00. — BURMA. Trade Corporation N* (9), 550- 
552 Merchant Street, Rangoon. — CANADA. Information 
Canada, Ottawa, Ont. ($ 4,00). — CEYLON. Lake House 
Bookshop, Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244 
Colombo, 2. (Rs 12,50). — CHINA. World Book Co. 
Led, 99 Chungking South Rd. Section 1, Tapeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa). — CYPRUS. "MAM", Archbishop 
Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 1722, Nicosia, — 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L., Spalena 51, Prague {1 
(permanent display); Zahranicni literatura 11 Soukenicka 
Prague 1.For Slovakiaonly : Nakladatelsevo Alfa, Hurba- 
novo nam. 6 Bratislava, - DENMARK. Einar Munksgaard 
Ltd.,6, Norregade, 1165,Copenhagen K. (Dan. Kr. 19.00). 
~ ETHIOPIA. National Commission for Unesco, P.O. 
Box 2996, Addis Ababa. — FINLAND, Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki (Fmk. 11,90), — 
FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, place de Foncenoy, 
Paris-7*. C.C.P. 12598-48 (12 Ff). — GERMANY. All 
publications : Verlag Dokumentation, Postfach 148, 
Jaiserscrasse 13, 8023 Munchen-Pullach. For the 
Unesco Kurier (German ed only) Bahrenfelder- 
Chaussee 160, Hambourg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650 
(DM 12). —~ GHANA. Methodist Book Depot 
Ltd., Atlantic House, Commercial Street, POB 100, 
cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom, 
— GREECE, Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, 
Athens; Librairie Eleftheroudakis, Nikkis 4, Athens, — 
HONMNG-KONG, Swindon Beck Co, 13-15, Lock Road, 
Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Akadémiai, Kenyvesbele, 
Vici u. 22, Budapest V; A.K.Y. Konyvtarosok Boltja, 
Népkoztirsasig utja 16, Budapest VI. — ICELAND. 
Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
— INDIA. Orient Longman Ltd., Nicol Road, Ballard. 
Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; 
36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 3/5 Asaf Ali Road, New 
Delhi 1; Sub-Depocs: Oxford Book & Stationery Co. 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16 and Scindia House, New 
Delhi; Publications Section, Ministry of Education and 
Youth Services, 72 Theatre Communication Building, 
Connaught Place New Delhi 1. (Rs. 13.50). — INDONE- 
SIA. Indira P.T., Djl. Dr. Sam Ratulangie 37, Djakarta. 
— IRAN. Iranian National Commission for Unesco, 1/154 
avenue Roosevelt, B.P. 1533, Teheran. — IRAQ. McKen- 
zie's Bookshop, Al-Rashid Street, Baghdad; University 
Bookstore, University of Baghdad, P.O, Box 75, Baghdad, 
— IRELAND. The National Press, 2, Wellington Road, 
Ballsbridge, Dublin, 4. — ISRAEL. Emmanuel Brown, for- 
merly Blumstein’s Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48, 
Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (IL. 15). — JAMAICA. 
Sangster's Book Stores Ltd., P.O. Box 366, 101 Water 
Lane, Kingston. — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., P.O. Box 
5050, Tokyo Internacional 100-31, — JORDAN. Joseph [. 
Bahous & Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Am- 
man. — KENYA. The E.S.A. Ltd., P.O. Box 30167, Nai- 
robi. — KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait 
Bookshop Co., Ltd., P.O. Box 2942, Kuwait. — LIBERIA. 
Cole and Yancy Bookshops Ltd, P.O. Box 286. 
Monrovia. — LIBYA. Agency for Development of 
Publication & Distribution, P.O. Box 34-35, Tripoli. — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxembourg (F.L, 170). — MALAYSIA, Federal Publica- 
tions Sdn Bhd., Balai Berita, 31, Jalan Riong, Kuala Lum- 
pur. — MALTA. Sapienza’s Library, 26 Kingsway, Yallet- 
ta. — MAURITIUS, Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port-Louis. — MONACO. British Library, 30, 
Bld des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, the Hague. 
(fl. 10). — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G. C. T. 
Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant). N. V,, Willemstad, Cura- 
cao. NLA. (NA fl. 5.25). — NEW ZEALAND. Govern- 
ment Printing Office, Government Bookshops at: Rutland 
Street, P.O. Box 5344, Auckland; 130, Oxford Terrace, 
P.Q. Box 1721, Christchurch; Alma Street, P.O, Box 857, 
Hamilton ; Princes Streec, P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin; 
Mulgrave Street, Private Bag, Wellington (8 2.15), — 
NORWAY. All publications : Johan Grundt Tanum 
(Booksellers) Karl johansgate 43, Oslo 1. For Unesco 
Courier only : A. S. Narvesens Llitteraturjeneste, Box 
6125, Oslo 6 (K. 2.75). — PAKISTAN. The West- 
Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., Unesco Publication House, P.O, 
Box 374 G.P.O.; Lahore; Showrooms : Urdu Bazar, 
Lahore, and 57-58 Murree, Highway, G/6-1, Islamabad, 
Pakistan Publications Bookshop, Sarwar Road, Rawalpindi; 
Paribagh, Dacca. — PHILIPPINES. The Modern Book 
Co., 928. Rizal Avenue, P,O. Box 632, Manila, — PO- 
LAND. All publications: ORWN PAN Palac Kultury i 
Nauki, Warsaw. For the Unesco Courier only: RUCH, ul. 
Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10. — PORTUGAL, Dias & Andra- 
de Lda, Livraria Portugal, rua de Carmo 70, Lisbon. 
— SINGAPORE. Federal Publications Sdn Bhd., Times 
House, River Valley Road, Singapore 9. — SOUTHERN 
RHODESIA. Textbook Sales{PVT) Ltd., 67 Union Avenue, 
Salisbury, — SUDAN, Al Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118, 
Khartoum, — SWEDEN. All publications: A/B CE. 
Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan, 2, Box 16356, 
103 27, Scock-helm 16. For the Unesco Courier : Svenska 
FN. Fér- bundet, Vasagatan 15, IY 10123, Stockholm 1 
Postgiro 18 46 92 (Kr. 18). — SWITZERLAND. All 
publications: Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasse, Zurich. 
Librairie Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, 
C.C.P. 12-236 (Fr. S. 12.-) — TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 2030 Dar-es-Salaam, — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
(37.50 baht), — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul, — UGANDA. Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala. — SOUTH AFRICA. 
All publications: Yan Schaik’s Bookstore (Pty). Ltd, 
Libri Building, Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
For the Unesco Courier (single copies} only: Central 
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. — UNI- 
TED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie Kasr 
El Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, Cairo. Sub-agent: La Re- 
naissance d’Egypte, 9 Sh, Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — UNITED 
KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, 
London, S.E.l., and Government Bookshops in London, 
Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, Birmingham 
(20/-). — UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications 
Center, P.O. Box 433, New York, N.Y. 10016 
($ 5). — W.S.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, Moscow, 
G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska Knjiga, Te- 
razije, 27, Belgrade; Drzavna Zaluzba Slovenije Mestni 
Trg. 26, Ljubljana.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078268engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

i 
! 
H 
- 
Ra 
Ph
ot
o 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 of
 
Bo
sn
ia
-H
er
ce
g 
re 
MEDI EV AL | This tombstone figure with hands joined in prayer is a striking example of 
1 an original and still relatively unknown art in stone that flourished in 
medieval Yugoslavia. Some 30,000 tombs, sarcophagi and coffins decorated 
Ife], BSTONE '\\3) with figures, scenes from daily life and mysterious symbols still survive, 
often in remote mountain and forest cemeteries. This 15th-century limestone 
0] 4 L y\\'/ | A carving (150 cm. by 80 cm.) from Opravdic-Bratunac, is now in the National 
UGOS Museum of Bosnia-Hercegovina, at Sarajevo. (See article page 17). - 