# [105951](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
r
r
 
—
—
—
_
_
_
 
c
c
 
£
O
 
C
C
C
t
t
t
 
C
N
I
I
F
D
 
KI
NG
DO
M,
 
£3
 
FL
AK
 
Ed
 
a
 
(AS
T 
AC
 
- 
S
E
L
G
U
W
:
 
AF
1E
0 
DA: 
CH
S.
7T
5 
« 
US
A:
 
$4
.8
0 
- 
S
W
I
T
Z
E
R
L
A
N
D
:
 
SF
6.
50
 
- 
N
E
T
H
E
R
L
A
N
D
S
:
 
Fi
 
10
 
- 
D
E
N
M
A
N
K
:
 
XR: 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

r N 
L - 
’ de 
Eg © {OSE 7 GENE NEW ~~ += ™ 0" [humm TTIW ng We invite readers to send 
us photographs to be 
considered for publicabion 
in this feature. Your photo 
should show a painting, a 
sculpture, piece of 
architecture or any other 
subject which seems to be 
    
  
   
  
    
E
s
s
 3
 
BS 
h an example of cultural 
cross-fertilization. 
Alternatively, you could 
9 send us pictures of two 
works from different 
cultural backgrounds in 
which you see some striking 
connection or resemblance. 
Please add a short caption 
to all photographs. 
Lb
 
She 
N
S
 
L
A
R
S
 
"on@TEED wl - 5s... gif = Ne - So ge Sg See WL 
“PLUVIOMAGICAL PRAYER" 1996, serigraphy and collage (40 x 30 cm) by Eduardo Gabriel Pepe 
This design by an Argentine artist features a two-headed serpent, a typical motif of the pre-Columbian 
Yocavil culture (850-1480 A. D.) of northeastern Argentina. A good omen associated with rain and 
prosperity, the serpent symbolizes lightning and water. The darker part of the design, extending over the 
edge of the rectangle, evokes past and future and the slow advance of humankind with its attendant fears 
and desires, © Eduardo Gabriel Pepe

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

©U
ne
sc
o/
Ma
ur
o 
Ro
si
 
®S
 
Fa
ut
re
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ri
s 
THE UNESCO (COURIER 
  
Mario Luzi. 
The life and art of a major Italian poet (p. 4). 
Te Wahipounamu (New Zealand). 
One of the world’s most beautiful wild places 
(p. 40). 
u
b
e
 B
l
 
 
contents 
APRIL 
THE BODY AND THE SELF 
Month by month by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 9 
Face values... 10 
by David Le Breton 
Aninvisibleriver................ 15 
by Shigenori Nagatomo 
The Body and the BOOK ............o.oo ooo, 21 
by David Biale 
Alanguageofitsown........................ 25 
by Manga Bekombo Priso 
From selfhood to salvation.............................., 28 
by Romain Maitra 
The gardenofdelights................................................ 32 
by Abdelwahab Meddeb 
Dossier: Body language....................coooiiiii, 35 
Consultant: Romain Maitra 
Commentary Federico Mayor 38 
HERITAGE 40 
Te Wahipounamu, New Zealand's pristine wilderness 
by Ann-Marie Johnson 
GREENWATCH Gardens: a cultural flowering by France Bequette ....... 44 
LISTENING Isabelle Leymarie talks to Rido Bayonne . 48 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR eee 49 
AUTHORS «ooo 50 
 
Cover: A depiction of the “subtle body” with its network of wheels (cakras) and fibres 
(nadis), illustrating pranayama, the discipline of breathing in yoga, which is indispensable for 
spiritual development. © Romain Matra, Pans 
THE UNESCO Gouriern APRIL 1997 3

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 105929: Words, timely and timeless

interview 
THE UNESCO Courier m APRIL 1097 
Mario Luzi 
Mario Luzi is an essayist, playwright and translator, but above all he is one of the greatest living 
Italian poets. His works have been translated into some thirty languages. Among those which 
have appeared in English are For the baptism of our fragments (Guernica, Montreal, 1992) and 
After many years: selected poems (Dedalus Press, Dublin, 1990). Here, Mario Luzi talks to Mauro 
Rosi about his life and work and the role of poetry today. 
Bm Youwrote your first poem at the age of nine. 
What do you remember about that time in your life? 
Mario Luzi: T was an ordinary child, and I took 
part wholeheartedly in the life of the community, 
even if I sometimes had interests that were not 
shared by all my chums. One day, when I was 
playing in the open air with the others, [cht the 
need to leave them and go home, so [ could write 
that celebrated first poem to which you refer, 
and which T have since lost. That was how Lexpe- 
rienced an almost physical need—a need to trans- 
fer the living element of the grass and the park 
where I was playing on to paper, into writing. I 
canstill remember the theme of that first piece 
of poctie creation. At the time I was very 
impressed by Dante’s Divine Comedy, which of 
course I hadn’t read, but which I knew about 
through a series of tHustrated hooklets (strip 
cartoons didn’t yet exist). [ was intrigued by the 
character of Dante and his journey—that mys- 
terious adventure to forbidden plaees, where he 
judged and was judged—and wondered whether 
he had really deserved his fate. 
WM And after that initial experience? 
M. L.: Iremember a poem [ wrote about a volcano 
when I was about twelve. I must have heard 
about an eruption in Italy or somewhere, and 
my youthful imagination had been fired by that 
wondrous element which blazed forth from its 
hiding-place in the earth. 
BM Andthen...? 
M. Ls Fwasn’t very interested in the poems we 
were given to read. My teachers gave pride of 
place to moralistic poetry, chosen for didactic 
purposes, like Giusti’s—not of course his ironi- 
cal poems, but his “devout” and less brilliant 
work. I was far more drawn to the poetry of 
D’Annnnzio and Pascoli, which was modern for 
its time. I couldn’t really understand it but I 
was interested in the way it broke away from 
the set models we were given at school. It was 
only later, when I was at high school, that I {elt 
areal need to express mysellin words. [wrote a 
great deal, mainly letters, almost all of which 1 
have lost. I then gradually decided that I was 
going to devote my life to writing. 
BM You later became a university specialist in 
French poetry. How did yourinterast in that and in 
European poetry in general begin? 
M. L.: That was munch later. First I became inter- 
ested in philosophy and spent a long time study- 
ing it, almost to the point where it began to com- 
pete with poetry. Iwas around eighteen or twenty 
years old. Yet when I approaclied philosophy as 
a specific discipline, T got the feeling it was all 
rather—how shall I putit?—a will-o’-the-wisp. 
was probably more interested in the myth of phi- 
losophy than in philosophy itseH: Loved the wis- 
dom of the P’re-Socraties, Plato and other philoso- 
phers of Antiquity. In other words, I preferred 
philosophy that established a relationship with 
truth and the human element to philosophy which 
saw itself as a process of self-correction. By that 
I mean the kind of finicky philosophy that 
restricts itsell to what Leopardi ironically called 
“rammendi”—"“darnimg” or “mend; ng”. At that 
time, ltalian philosophy was above all orientated 
towards the latest manifestations of idealism, and 
that didn’t suit me at all.

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 105929: Words, timely and timeless

M ario Luzi 
in December 1996 
Poetry is an especially important way of 
approaching truth. 
HM Do you think that in a different cultural context 
you might have ended up as a philosopher rather 
than a poet? 
M. L.: I don’t know. But I would certainly have 
been more responsive to philosophy. I think that 
in this respect my career is similar to Leopardi’s. 
Although he was hest known as a poet, lie con- 
sidered himself a philosopher but didn’t like 
the philosophy of his time. 
It was only late in life that 1 rediscovered 
philosophy, when I was asked by a magazine to 
take part in a discussion with Gianni Vattime 
and Massimo Caceiari, philosopliers who belong 
to what is known as the “weak thought” (il pen- 
siero debole) school. This school, which was 
inspired by Martin Heidegger and ans Georg 
Gadamer, regards language as the “honse of 
being” and believes it plays an essential role in the 
process of the formation and recognition of truth, 
It recognizes the emotional roots of experience 
and therefore its own emotional and poetic 
sources. It holds that poetry, as a radical ere- 
ation in and through language, is an especially 
important way of approaching truth. 
  ©
U
n
e
s
c
o
/
M
a
u
r
o
 
Ro
si
 
HM This relationship with philosophy, especially with 
Heideggerian philosophy, is at one with the religious 
urge, with religious faith, which is a constant 
feature of your poetry, 
M. L.: Heidegger's philosophy does indeed attach 
great importance to the sacred. It constantly 
asks questions of theology—and of poetry too, 
notably Rilke’s and Ililderlin’s. . . . 
MW A hallmark of your generation was its belief in 
the ideal of the committed intellectual. For some, 
thatinvolved a very direct form of commitment, and 
sometimes even activism in political parties. What 
was your experience of that eventful period, and 
what do you think of it with hindsight? 
L. M.: By way of an answer, I will refer you to a 
poem Iwrote some thirty-four years ago, Presso il 
Besenzio. Init I describe a kind of meeting with 
the “committed”, to whom I reply, poetically, by 
defining my own position. | tell them that although 
we are moving in the sane direction my itinerary 
is less direct and longer than theirs; that I also 
have to heed values which transeend current 
events and are in a sense timeless; that my watch 
is regulated by more complicated mechanisms, 
which means that my time is not the same as 
theirs. You mentioned earlier the faith that dri- 
ves my creation. I would simply add that the rela- 
tionship and confrontation between time and the 
timeless is a constant element of my poetry. 
Having said that, [approve of political com- 
mitment when it is ethically inspired and deeply 
motivated, not purely polemical, I've never liked 
the barricades, hut—even though I have not 
courmitted myself to any political movement— 
I’ve always been very aware of the sufferings of 
people victimized by injustice and mindful of 
the velationship between power and freedom. 
HM The universality of poetry is nowadays taken for 
granted. But when one looks closely at the question 
of translation, it seems clear that the language 
barrier can sometimes be an insuperable obstacle to 
the wide circulation of a piece of writing. What's 
your position on this? 
M. L.: The language barrier complicates matters 
and is certainly a limitation. I realize that any » 
THE UNESCO Gouriern APRIL 1997

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 105929: Words, timely and timeless

© 
UN
es
ce
/M
au
ro
 
Ro
si
 
  
interview 
. 4 
Mario 
» translation is debatable, that the legitimacy of 
the choiees made can always be questioned, and 
that translation is always to some extent inade- 
quate or unfaithful. But no one, I'm glad to say, 
has ever been able to prevent translation from 
going on. And, anyway, surely the whole point of 
poetry is that it transcends its original context, 
overcomes the language barrier, and carries its 
message beyond the source from whieh it sprang. 
Without that potential, poetry cannot exist. Itis 
also true that people have always needed to wel- 
come poetry, to receive it as a gift, to be recep- 
tive to it. Despite the imperfections arising from 
the way it is given conerete expression, there is 
something vital and irrevocable in poetry: words 
that are uttered in it are uttered forever and 
can never he annulled. This holds true even if 
they sometimes reach their audience in an “adul- 
terated” form. 
When all’s said and done, translation is about 
human communication in the broadest sense. lt 
is in the nature of human beings to recognize 
and be recognized, to seek and to be sought. In 
Translation is about human 
communication in the broadest sense. 
THE UNESCO Gouin BH APRIL. 1997 
other words, translation is an intrinsic part of 
the human mind. In the biblical episode of Pen- 
tecost, the Word is heard and understood by 
all—though no one (quite understands how. For 
me, that is the “first translation”. 
BW Your were born in Florence, you were educated 
there, you have always lived there, and even if your 
duties have taken you elsewhere, you have always 
returned there, Didn't you ever feel the need to cast 
off your moorings and get away from your origins? 
M. L.: No. My origins have not been an ebstacle to 
my poetry, because Florence has always been, 
apart from one or two moments of eclipse, a pole 
of umversal attraction. Florence’s culture is noth- 
ing if not nniversal. Far from being local or 
parochial, it is open to all that is human, and 
las been at least since the thirteenth century. 
HB Inthe 1930s Florence was a hotbed of poetic 
creativity. Literary historians refer to “Florentine 
hermeticism” as an extremely fruitful movement. 
M. L.: The poets to whom the “hermetic” label 
was attached were not all Florentines, but it is 
true that at that time Eugenio Montale, Carlo 
Emilio Gadda, Alfonso Gatto, Tommaso Lan- 
dolfi, Elio Vittorini and others all congregated in 
Florence. The literary tradition of Dante’s city 
was not the only reason why they were there. 
During the Faseist period Florence was an 
“oasis”, a place “apart” in Italian life. Because 
of its marginal relationship with the country’s 
main political and economic eentres, it enjoyed 
a degree of enltural freedom that encouraged 
the emergence of innovative movements. This 
was an important factor which, on top of the 
prestige of its centuries-old literary and artistie 
tradition, enabled Florence to continue to play 
a leading role despite the political situation in 
Italy. Moreover, our movement was underpinned 
by no specific doctrine or aesthetics. The poetic 
renaissance of the 1930s was driven solely by 
the need to lend poetic language a new, more 
profound and more human credibility. Iler- 
meticism inspired two or three generations of 
poets. Even such already mature and established 
pocts as Montale and Ungaretti underwent a eer- 
tain renewal thanks to the interest and support 
of younger poets. 
BW What were your sources of inspiration and points 
of reference in international poetry at that time? 
M.L.: We wanted to pursue the discourse of the 
Symbolists while at the same time adapting it to 
our environment and our motivations. Our inspi- 
ration was Mallarmé, and also Rimbaud. Our 
movement brought about an important change in 
Italian literary language, which opened up to 
other traditions, especially those of other Euro- 
pean countries, thanks to great translators like 
Giovanni Russo, Renato Poggioli and, for Span- 
ish, Carlo Bo. As for myself, I am sure that living 
and working in that environment left a lasting 
mark on the way | express myself. 
HB In their desire to avoid retreating into a self- 
contained environment, intellectuals today, 
particularly those in the developing countries, are in 
danger of being waylaid by shallow 
cosmopolitanism, commercial culture and a 
superficial lingua franca—all of them examples of 
the decay triggered by globalization. What do you 
feel about this? 
M. L.: Lthinkit’s a very real problem, and I share 
the concern of intellectizals who have looked into 
the question, such as the Egyptian Nobel Prize 
winner, Nagnih Mahfouz. Today’s universalist 
trend, encouraged by historieal events, brings

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 105929: Words, timely and timeless

with it a risk of homogenization and consequently 
a loss of roots and identities. Certain writers, 
notably those belonging to dominant cultures 
that grew out of colonial civilizations, are perhaps 
less sensitive to this problem. Others however— 
and I'm thinking of certain forms of literary 
expression in the Caribhean—have come up with 
original and remarkably brilliant solutions 
through very powerful writing which has 
remained faithful to its roots while at the same 
time being virtually “global”. But the dilemma 
of having to choose between regionalism and cos- 
mopolitanism remains a very real problem in every 
country, including Haly. 
B Ever since Hegel, intellectuals have periodically 
predicted the demise of art. While it is true that 
poetry has blithely ignored such predictions, the fact 
remains that it now leads a shadowy and marginal 
existence. 
M.L.: That’s true. The myth of poetry has come 
to an end. Poetry was more vigorous and more 
important in the past than it is now. Take the 
Renaissance eourt, the medieval city, Dante, 
Petrarch. Poets had no power, but they could 
celebrate power and help define its form. And 
take, on the other hand, the antithetical power 
of poetry: I'm thinking here of Baudelaire and 
the key moment in the rift between power and 
poetry. It was by opposing those in power that 
poetry, in a way, demonstrated its force and its 
virtues. 
After alliance, and then opposition, came 
divorce. And divorce led to indifference, the 
great enemy of poetry. So it was that poetry—and 
sometimes even great poetry—bhegan to flourish 
in a marginal way. Poetry accepted that mar- 
ginality. 
lB Some poets experienced marginality not as an 
ordeal but almost as a privilege. 
M. L.: Yes, as a sense of belonging, an essential fea- 
ture of their identity, But while the myth of the 
poet has completely disappeared today, the 
poet’s discourse is perhaps more alive than ever. 
In tines as muddled and chaotic as ours, all soci- 
ety’s players are called to account. We're all in 
the same hoat. The poet is no longer someone 
special, but he is listened to like the rest of us. 
Of course, you can dodge him or give him a wide 
berth, hut if you eross his path, and heis a true 
poet, you eannot turn a deaf ear to him. Per- 
haps his symbolic role is outmoded, hut he is 
still there, and he is more necessary than ever. We 
Perhaps the poet's symbolic role is 
outmoded, but he is still there, more 
necessary than ever. 
all feel the lack of something essential. And when 
something is lacking we go looking for it in a 
place where we have a chance of finding it. Well, 
poetry is one of those places where the overall 
(quest for meaning manifests itself. 
BW Is there a poem which you would have liked to 
write but have never written? 
M. L.: I believe that all poems exclude. Any poem, 
even the greatest and most perfect, leaves some- 
thing unsaid. That is inherent in the symbolie 
power of poetic language and in its force. His a 
limitation I perhaps feel more keenly than oth- 
ers. ht is greater than I would have liked. It’s 
true I sometimes think 1 could have expressed 
more directly something I have said. Whereas 
we think we mean one thing and set out to 
develop anidea, thatidea may suddenly scem to 
us to be an external object. We sometimes get the 
feeling it has escaped us, even if that is not 
strictly speaking true. In faet, this idea is part of 
us. Without realizing it, we carry it within us 
and we work ont, and at the same time its pres- 
enee influences our behaviour and everything we 
say or do. By externalizingit, we transform it, and 
there is sometimes a lingering regret that we 
have not expressed it straightforwardly. 
Perhaps, on the other hand, the spirit of our 
age deserved a greater degree of dramatization. 
One of my plays, Rosales, is about terrorism. 
Terrorism and . . . eroticism, because, oddly 
enough, the two were closely conneeted at one 
time. Onc of the main eharaeters is a kind of Don 
Juan, who gets caught up in a terrorist operation 
against his will. When I had finished the play, | 
realized there was more to he said on the subject, 
especially about the lurking, stifled yearning for 
liberation and salvation whieh drives us all, and 
which sometimes manifests itself in violence. 
I could liave said more about this highly elu- 
sive dimension-—which some people find in tra- 
ditional religion, while others deny its existence— 
that “something” which perhaps exists, but 
which we do not know how to look for. I believe 
that, while we assert that there is nothing, sonie- 
thing exists, but we cannot manage to give it a 
name. u 
THE UNESCO Gouriern APRIL 1997

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

THUNESCO 
OURIER 
50th YEAR 
Published monthly in 29 languages and in Braille by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
31, rue Frangois Bonvin, 75732 Pans CEDEX 15, France. 
Fax, (33)(0)1 45 68 57 45 
e-mail unesco couner@unesca org 
Internet http //www unesco org 
Director Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gilhan Whitcomb 
English edition Roy Malkin 
French edition: Alain Lévéque 
Spanish edition Aracelt Ortiz de Urbina 
Features: Jasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production Georges Servat 
Illustrations. Anane Bailey (Tel. (33} (0) 1.45 68 46 90) 
Documentation José Banaag 
(Tel (33) (0) 1.45 68. 46 85) 
Liaison with non-Headguarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel. (33) (0) 1 45 68 46 87) 
Film duplication: Daniel Meister 
Secretariat, Annie Brachet 
(Tel (33)(0)1 456847 15), 
Administrative Assistant: Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in Enghsh, French, Spanish and 
Korean: (Tel. (33) (0) 1 45 68 47 14) 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian Inna Utkina {Moscow} 
German: Dominique Anderes (Berne) 
Arabic Fawzi Abdel Zaher (Cairo) 
Italian Gianluca Formichi (Rome) 
Hindi Ganga Prasad Vimal {Delhi} 
Tamil M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian Akbar Zargar {Teheran} 
Dutch’ Bart Chnstiaens (Antwerp) 
Portuguese Alzira Alves de Abreu (Rio de Janeiro) 
Urdu Mirza Muhammad Mushr (Islamabad) 
Catalan Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay Sidin Ahmad {shak (Kuala Lumpur) 
Swahili Leonard J Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene: Aleksandra Kornhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese Feng Mingxian {Beljing) 
Bulgarian: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala Newville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish Rutta Saarinen (Helsinki) 
Basque Juxto Egafia (Donostia) 
Thar Duangtip Surintatip {Bangkok} 
Vietnamese Do Phuong (Hanoi) 
Pashto Nazer Mohammad Angar {Kabul} 
Hausa Alyu Muhammad Bunza {Sokoto) 
Ukrainian: Volodymyr Vasiliuk (Kiev) 
Galician Xabier Senin Fernandez (Santiago de Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION. 
Fax: (33) (0) 1 45 68.57.45 
Subscnptions Marie-Thérése Hardy 
{Tel. (33) (0) 1.45 68 45 65), Jacqueline Louise-Julie, 
Manichan Ngonekeo, Mohamed Salah EI Din 
(Tel (33)(0)1 4568 4919) 
Customer service: Michel Ravassard, 
(Tel (33){0)1 4568 45 91) 
Accounts (Tel (33) (0) 1.45 68 45 65) 
Shipping Dante! Meister (Tel (33) (0) 1 45 68 47.50} 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. 
Tel" (33){0)1 4568 45 65 
1 year: 211 French francs. 2 years 396 FF 
Students 1 year: 132 French francs 
Binder for one year's issues 72 FF 
Jeveloping countries. 
1 year: 132 French francs. 2 years 211 FF. 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco or by Visa, Eurocard or Mastercard 
Indwidual articles anc’ photographs not copyrighted may be repnnted 
providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from the Unesco Courser”, plus 
date of issue, and three voucher copies are sent lo the editor Signed 
articles reprinted must bear author's name Non copynght photos will 
be supplied on request. Unsolicited manusenpls cannot be returned 
unless at panied by an int { reply coupon covering postage 
Signed articles express the opinions of the authors and do not nec- 
essaniy represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of 
the Unesco Couner Photo captions and headlines are writlen by the 
Unesco Courier staff The boundanes on maps pubhshed in the maga 
ane do nol imply official endorsement or acceptance by Lacsco or the 
United Nations The Unesco Couner)s produced in micrgtorm (micro- 
film and/or microfiche) by (1} Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 
Paris, {2) University Microfilms (Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100 
USA, {3)NCR Mcrocard Edion, Inchan Head Inc , 111 West 40th 
Street, New York, U S A, (4) Bell and Howell Co, Old Mansfe!d Road, 
Wooster, Ohio 44681, U S A, 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) 
DEPOT LEGAL C1-AVRIL1997 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - DIFFUSE PAR LES 
NMPP, 
Photocomposition, photogravure, 
Le Courner de I'Unesco. 
Impression MAURY IMPRIMEUR, 
Z 1. Route d’Etampes, 45331 Malesherbes 
ISSN 0041-5278 N° 4-1997-0P1-97-558 A 
This 1ssue comprises 52 pages and a 4-page insert 
between pages 2-3 and 50-51. 
THE UNESCO Gouritrn APRIL 1997 
©J
 
4 
Du
ga
st
 
/ 
Ho
a 
Qu
r,
 
Pa
ns
 
MO
NT
H 
BY
 
MO
NT
H 
 
The body and the self 
by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

aS 
fe 
- 
arg Fie 
“ SN e 
AY -- 
ese 
we - 
rr 
- - 
- a 
Ta? SW 2 
Inthe normal way of things most healthy adults hardly think twice about their bodies until 
some kind of accident, breakdown or illness suddenly reminds them that they have one. Then 
they send in the artillery—doctors, analysts, medication—with orders to put things right. 
When the machine has been patched up, they forget about it again. 
Yet when they really think about it, they realize that life and body are inseparable, 
bound together in a singular partnership. The body is inhabited by consciousness, but this 
consciousness does not exist outside its physical envelope. Life is a marriage, for better or 
for worse, between the two. Divorce is out of the question. 
People who know that this is so and yet continue to pay no attention to their body or treat 
it badly, undermine the body's integrity and in so doing disturb the subtle rhythms and 
necessary harmonies between mind and body. They are the victims of a self-inflicted wound. 
How can people achieve a creative unity based on harmonious relations between body and 
consciousness, matter and mind? These questions have intrigued philosophers and the- 
ologians for thousands of years and are of growing concern for doctors, psychologists and 
psychotherapists today. 
This issue of the UNESCO Courier attempts to give some idea of the variety and complexity 
of the answers that have been offered, particularly highlighting their strong cultural, philo- 
sophical and religious overtones, Differences in approach arise largely from whatis meant 
by the notion of consciousness in different traditions of thought. 
For some monists, consciousness is simply the highest, most refined form of the orga- 
nization of matter. They would define the relations between physical and mental phe- 
nomena experimentally and rationally, using methods of scientific analysis. 
Dualists, on the other hand, believe that there is an irreducible distinction between 
mind and matter. There is a difference in kind between the physical, perishable body and 
the immortal soul, which, though joined to the individual, is part of a transcendent reality 
and is accountable to a divine authority. To contribute to the soul's salvation the body must 
submit to God's commandments, which may, depending on the scriptures and the way they 
are interpreted, sometimes exalt sensual experience and sometimes disparage it. 
A person can also be seen as a triad: a “gross body”, a “subtle body” (or mind) and a 
cosmic substance, the Spirit. The Spirit, the ultimate tevel of reality, can be metaphori- 
cally compared to a single, infinite and eternal Energy. The gross body and the subtle body 
are provisional forms that partake of this Energy. Like ocean waves, they are born, grow and 
fade away without ever ceasing to be part of the ocean. The meaning of life is accom- 
plished insofar as everyone, crossing the gross and subtle body's successive frontiers, 
returns to their infinite nature, rejoining the ocean's reality. 
Mind and body have much to sayto each other. As long as they stay on speaking terms. ll 
THE UNESCO Gourisrn APRIL 1997

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 105935: Face values

| 
Is there more 
to the human 
face than meets 
the eye? 
  
© 
Kn
st
a 
Bo
gg
s,
 
Pa
ns
 
BY DAVID LE BRETON 
THE UNESCO Gourien APRIL 1997 
he American artist George Catlin 
was once painting the portrait of a 
Sioux chieftain, Little Bear, and as 
the portrait was in semi-profile, 
part of the sitter’s face was obscured. There 
was consternation when one of the 
bystanders called out roughly: “Little Bear 
is only half a man”. Little Bear asked who 
it was that had spoken and the man gave his 
name, adding: “ Ask the painter, he knows 
you are only half a man. He has painted 
 
only half your face. He knows the other 
half is no good.” 
A conflict that had been simmering 
beneath the surface of relations between 
the two men had erupted into the open 
over the interpretation, in moral terms, of 
a portrait, a painting wherein the sitter’s 
worth is symbolically represented by the 
face he or she presents to other people. 
Shon-Ka, Little Bear’s adversary, urged him 
to make the painter show him “full face”.

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

@
C
 
Li
on
el
-D
up
en
t,
 
Pa
ns
 
«The face gives living, 
mysterious expression to the 
absolute nature of the 
differences between 
individuals.” 


### 105935: Face values

Little Bear rejected the suggestion, but soon 
the two men were again at loggerheads. 
Shon-Ka challenged Little Bear, shouting: 
“If he is a whole man, let him show it”. To 
save face in the eyes of the others, the two 
men had to fight it out to the finish. Unfor- 
tunately, Little Bear’s wife, knowing her 
husband’s short temper, had taken the pre- 
caution of unloading his rifle, so that when 
the men fired at each other Shon-Ka was 
unhurt but his shot hit Little Bear full in the 
face, lacerating the “no good” part as if sym- 
bolically confirming Shon-Ka’s accusations. 
Shon-Ka did not benefit by his deed. He 
hightailed it out into the prairie pursued by 
his fellow-tribesmen, while Catlin hastily 
packed up his belongings. 
WA mirror of individuality 
Refusal to allow people the dignity of hav- 
ing a face of their own is a prime example 
of how to deny their status as human 
beings. There are a variety of metaphori- 
cal expressions—losing face, putting a bold 
face on things, being discountenanced, and 
so forth—that show how important the 
face is to an individual’s sense of identity 
within the social context. Saving face and 
being able to look others in the face are 
considered serious issues in very many 
societies. In the symbology of racism, the 
suppression of all that is human in people 
requires that the sign denoting their mem- 
bership of the human race be destroyed. 
In racist taunts they are treated as animals » 
4 4 
THE UNESCO Gouriezn APRIL 1997 1

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

| 4 and degraded. To be stripped of their 


### 105935: Face values

human rank they have to be symbolically 
deprived of their faces, the more easily to 
be despised or destroyed. 
In everyday life, it is by our faces that 
we recognize one another. By going about 
with our hands and faces uncovered we 
are exposing those features by which we 
may be immediately differentiated. While 
the body forms the line of demarcation 
between the self and the external world or 
other people, it is in the face that the iden- 
tity which gives social and cultural mean- 
©P
 
M 
Cn
st
of
or
i/
As
k 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ns
 
ing to the individual is displayed. It is the 
THE UNESCO Couniern APRIL 1997 
“ P hysiognomy endeavours 
to dispel the mystery of other 
people, to reduce it to a few 
simple features and a specific 
character, which entails an 
illusion of control that 
becomes a fearsome 
weapon in the hands of those 
who practice it as if it were a 
science.” 
 
face that gives living, mysterious expres- 
sion to the absolute nature of what are in 
fact only minute differences between indi- 
viduals. Faces work an infinite range of 
variations on the same simple theme, cre- 
ating billions of shapes and expressions 
out of the most basic of symbols—eyes, 
nose, forehead, and so on. Facial features 
and expressions relate individuals to the 
community and at the same time allow 
them full scope to assert their differences 
and their uniqueness. 
Of all parts of the body, it is in the face, 
that the highest values are concentrated. It 
is there that the sense of identity is mir- 
rored, there that attractiveness and all the 
gradations of beauty and ugliness are 
recorded. So high a value is placed on it 
that any disfigurement becomes a trau- 
matic experience, almost resulting in a loss 
of identity. The more importance a society 
attaches to individuality, the greater is the 
face’s value. Portrait painting appeared in 
Europe at the time of the Renaissance, that 
is, at the same time as the individualism 
which characterizes Western societies. 
The Florentine painters of the quattro- 
cento, Masaccio, Paolo Uccello and Piero 
della Francesca, were at pains to render 
the facial features of their sitters with 
meticulous accuracy, as were Flemish 
painters, especially Van Eyck, in his Virgin 
with Chancellor Rolin (1435), for example. 
  
© First impressions 
As there seems to be a disturbing corre- 
spondence between personality and facial 
form, there was a strong temptation to 
make the face a kind of stand-in for the 
individual, the outward and visible sign of 
the character within. In religious art, the 
inexpressible and singular nature of the 
face was already reflected in the idea of it 
as the place wherein the soul chooses to

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 105935: Face values

make its dwelling, where the spiritual takes 
corporeal form. 
The importance of the face to the sense 
of identity is clear from the attention that 
lovers pay to itin their relationships, a theme 
plentifully illustrated in literature. “One of 
the signs of love”, says Anne Philippe, “is the 
passion with which the lover looks at the 
loved one’s face; the initial emotion, instead 
of dwindling, continues and swells, and the 
look in their eyes becomes Ariadne’s thread, 
leading each to the other’s heart.” The 
French novelist Michel Tournier sees the 
face as the focus of desire: “There is one 
sure way of knowing whether you love 
somebody,” he writes. “It is when their face 
inspires more physical desire than any other 
part of their body.”2 
The lover’s gaze seems permanently 
on the verge of experiencing some reve- 
lation and feeds upon that anticipation. The 
face always seems to be the place where 
the truth is at any moment about to be 
unveiled. Inexhaustible in its store of new 
or undiscovered meanings, itis like a ter- 
ritory waiting to be explored afresh every 
day, and the end of a love-relationship no 
doubt comes when the lovers find each 
other’ faces ordinary and no longer seek 
out the mystery in them. 
Itis only a step from perceiving, as peo- 
ple often do, a close correspondence 
between the “soul” and the face, and 
believing that a thorough acquaintance 
with other people’s minds can be obtained 
from studying their features. Although, 
as Montaigne says, “The face is a feeble 
surety”, faces nevertheless exert a very 
strong influence when people meet. 
Other people’s faces create a “first impres- 
sion”—of liking or mistrust, curiosity or 
fear—that is not always easily dispelled. 
This emotional reaction, which is felt at 
first glance and in which imagination plays 
a very large part, to some extent directs 
“ I love the face always seems 
to be the place where the truth 
is at any moment about to be 
unveiled.” 
 
the course of future encounters. What the 
Swiss writer Johann Kaspar Lavater (1741- 
1801), the founder of physiognomics, 
called this “physiognomical feeling”, 
though lacking in discernment, is one of 
the things that facilitate or hamper contact 
with others. 
W The fallacy of physiognomy 
Physiognomy therefore set itself the task 
of obliging faces to yicld up their secrets. 
It claimed that individuals’ external features 
faithfully reflect their inner characters and 
that their moral qualities can be immedi- 
ately ascertained from the study of those 
the unesco (OURiER m ArriL 1007 
®C
 
Li
on
el
 
Du
po
nt
 
Pa
ns
 
>

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 105935: Face values

» features. Those who can read the signs of 
the inter-relationship between soul and 
body, whereby the face becomes as it were 
the individual’s moral signature, hold mas- 
tery of their relations with other people. 
Physiognomy endeavours to dispel the 
mystery of other people, to reduce it to a 
few simple features and a specific character, 
and also to reveal, to expose the soul behind 
the body’s disguise—a dubious enterprise 
entailing an illusion of control that becomes 
a fearsome weapon in the hands of those 
who practice it as if it were a science. 
"The vocabulary of physiognomy 
changes from place to place and period to 
period but the illusion of total control over 
others remains constant. It was in the nine- 
teenth century that this pseudo-science 
©
G
 
Da
gh
 
Or
t,
 
Pa
ns
 
THE UNESCO Courier APRIL 1997 
the 
to 
«The Florentine painters of 
quattrocento were at pains 
render the facial features of 
their sitters with meticulous 
accuracy.” Below, a portrait of 
Battista Sforza by the Tuscan 
ainter Piero della Francesca 
(1416-1492). 
P 
 
flourished in Europe. Lavater and to an 
even greater extent his followers reduced 
human individuality to a small number of 
visual clues tied in with a typology of per- 
sonality that psychology has since dis- 
carded. They were in factinterested notin 
the face as a whole but in sets of facial fea- 
tures: merely from the shape of a forehead, 
the curl of a lip, the set of a nose or the look 
in the subjects’ eyes, assumptions could be 
made about their psychological make-up; 
and their moral essence, their tempera- 
ments, hidden vices, qualities or faults and, 
their as yet uncommitted acts of faithless- 
ness could be unambiguously brought to 
light. For the physiognomists, the arrange- 
ment of the features unlocked the secret 
of the individual’s identity. 
The ambivalence and the element of sur- 
prise present in human beings’ relationship 
with their own faces should in fact be 
enough to discourage anyone from trying to 
map out the personality on the basis of facial 
characteristics. The great painters of self- 
portraits such as Rembrandt painted them- 
selves over and over again with different 
faces. “The physiognomy,” wrote the sev- 
enteenth-century French moralist Jean de 
La Bruyere, “though it may serve for the 
purpose of conjecture, is not a measure 
whereby we may judge men.”3 Faces give 
only indications of other people’s person- 
alities, not full descriptions. Itis only possi- 
ble to get to know others by meeting them, 
speaking to them and seeing them in action. 
Faces are not pretty geometrical figures or 
sets of tell-tale features. Only when 
approached delicately, with a special kind 
of gentleness, does a face reveal its innu- 
merable facets. | 
    
1. Miroirs; antoportraits, an anthology edited by Michel 
Tournier. Denocl, Paris, 1973. 
2. Michel Tournier, La goutte d'or, Gallimard, Paris, 1986. 
3.Jecande La Bruyere, Les caractéres ou les maeurs de ce 
siecle, 1688 (first edition).

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 105936: An Invisible river

  
  
     
  
        
  
    
   
 
   
 
[n the Oriental pre 
tradition, f \ 
meditation can Bes 
detect the elusive : 
energy-flows IY 
that sustain the fi 
L
a
l
 
-
t
 
T
o
m
e
s
.
 
a
 
A
y
 
2 | i
s
 
: 
ad
 
body 
      
    
 
       
   
             
   
   
    
   
  
     
   
  
A) ' \ ¥ b+ 4 A tats 
; \ 3 ‘Q a y Ta ‘ Ue TF ‘ ) : “< CATES Te Ne . ot ba vid + : 
AUNT RL Lr a RE. , [& oe, TY on 
bo A Hols, Fee Jo 
SNL Sdn | LEN 
“ nb 
     
    
@ 
De
 
Wi
ld
e 
/H
oa
-Q
u)
, 
Pa
ns
 
n order to understand the East Asian also recognizes a dimension of being that 
idea of the body, particularly thatof the escapes our everyday understanding. This 
Chinesc and Japanese, we mustimag- is important, because our perception of our 
Moris meditating before the ine that instead of having a body, we body influences the method of healing we 
ruins of Ayutthaya, the capital ;,p our body—and more importantly, that think to be appropriate and effective for it. 
of ancient Siam (now . . . . . 
Thailand), north of Bangkok. our body lives us. The East Asian tradition  Withouta clear understanding of the body, » 
Be 
THE UNESCO (ourier B APRIL 1927

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

© 
M 
T
r
o
n
c
y
/
H
o
a
 
Qu
i,
 
P
a
n
s
 
I. April, Laotian women 
celebrate the start of the new 
year in a Luang Prabang 
temple. 
 
THE UNESCO Courier BH APRIL 1907 
» we cannot understand how the body can be 
healed. 
The idea of the body which has been 
cherished in the East Asian tradition is 
based on the philosophy of self-cultiva- 
tion and is derived mainly from experi- 
ence obtained through meditation. In Bud- 
dhism, Daoism and Shintoism, meditation 


### 105936: An Invisible river

is a technique for observing and becoming 
attuned to the intricate workings of the 
life-supporting energy system that exists 
beyond or beneath the psycho-physio- 
logical activity of the living human body. 
W The flowing body 
A characteristic image of the East Asian 
meditational perspective is that of the 
“flowing body”. The body is likened to a 
river whose water 1s, ideally, in pristine 
condition and transparent but cannot be 
seen by the naked eye or be detected 
anatomically as blood vessels and nerve 
fibres can. The body that flows is a “sub- 
tle-body” and since it is invisible to the 
senscs in everyday life, most of us are rel- 
atively unconscious of it. 
It can, however, be detected through 
heightened awareness during meditation. 
When the threshold of self-consciousness 
is lowered in conjunction with the reduc- 
tion of respiration, an advanced medita- 
tor can become aware of a subtle flow of 
energy throughout his or her body. This 
energy, which is called £7 in Japanese (Chi- 
nese, gi), is the source from which both, 
the psychological and the physiological 
emerge. 
Ki-cnergy flows through a network of

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 105936: An Invisible river

The 12th-century Bengali poet 
Jayadeva, author of the 
Gitagovinda (“Song of the 
Cowherd”) bows in respect to 
the Hindu god Vishnu. Indian 
miniature from the Pahari 
school (1730). 
  
  
 
  
a mH J [4 EF . 
nd +1 4 ” ns it 
Cs a a ali Pe SS 
circuits, or “kz-meridians”, beneath the 
skin. According to psychologist Motoyama 
Hiroshi this network is located in the water- 
rich area of the connective tissues of the 
dermis, the deep inner layer of the skin, 
where such chemical substances as sodium, 
potassium, calcium, chloride and collagen 
are found. Since these substances exist as 
ions in the bodily fluids, the flow is electro- 
physiologically detectable, so that the flow- 
ing body is more than just a metaphor. Ki- 
energy literally flows beneath the 
psycho-physiological body of which we 
are ordinarily aware. 
The flowing body knows no bound- 
ary between the interior and the exterior, 
between mind and matter. For this rea- 
son acupuncture medicine maintains that 
absorption and release of ki-energy 
occur—though for most of us, uncon- 
sciously—between the flowing body and 
its surroundings, and between one flow- 
ing body and another. 
The second idea of the body which is 
relevant for religious healing within the 
East Asian tradition is that of the spirit- 
body, a concept which brings us into the 
domain of religion proper. Each human 
spirit-body has a certain form which is dif- 
ferent from that of the individual’s physi- 
cal body and also from other spirit bodies. 
It is defined primarily by the pattern of 
emotions such as love, hate and anger, and 
   
  
  
  
 
their existential repercussions. Whereas 
the flowing body is confined to the imme- 
diate ambience of its physical body (the 
excrnal emission of ki-energy having a 
four- to five-metre range), the spirit body 
is believed to possess relative freedom 
from spatial and temporal confinement. 
In addition to the hierarchy of spirit- 
bodies, however, Buddhists believe that 
there is a hierarchy of divine spirits, whose 
nature and attributes vary, their experien- 
tial correlates depending on the colour of 
their light, which ranges from the primary 
colours such as red and blue, to complete 
transparency. They are deified and wor- 
shipped under different names in different 
belief systems. 
The most significant point about these 
different ideas of the body is that the “vis- 
ible” and the “invisible” are, in principle, 
reversible. Without this reversibility no 
religious healing is possible. 
= Religious healing 
The crucial difference between religious 
healing and other kinds of treatment is in 
their respective goals. The former 
addresses a pathological condition and 
sccks to achieve higher religious cogni- 
tion; the latter are content to restore the 
body to its normal everyday state. 
Another significant difference between 
THE UNESCO (Guricrn APRIL 1997 
© 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
Sa
br
in
a 
Mi
ch
au
d,
 
Pa
ns
 
>

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 105936: An Invisible river

> 
© 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
Sa
br
in
a 
Mi
ch
au
d 
Pa
ns
 
religious and other forms of healing is that 
the pathological condition that calls for 
religious healing is functional in nature, 
and not an organic disorder. 
In religious healing, a pathological con- 
dition is regarded as a necessary step on 
the way to spiritual growth. It strength- 
ens the living psycho-physiological body 
and prepares it for encounters with spirit 
bodies and spiritual beings, and eventu- 
ally for emancipation from this world. 
W Acupuncture 
Acupuncture medicine is particularly 
effective in treating both functional and 
chronic disease. It considers that a patho- 
logical condition is engendered by the stag- 
nation of ki-energy flowing in the merid- 
ians. The “water” in the flowing body 
Fr 
THE UNESCO Gourierm APRIL 1997 
 
becomes polluted, accumulates debris, 
and departs from its ideal pristine condi- 
tion and transparency. This stagnation 
causes an excess or lack of ki-energy and 
an inversion of complementary forces 
(yin-yang phases). There is a departure 
from the harmonious, natural distribution 
of ki-energy between the right and left 
sides of the body, and between its upper 
and lower parts. 
Three interrelated kinds of factor may 
contribute to this stagnation. 
The first is a psychological condition 
brought about by emotional instability. 
People process emotional stimuli differ- 
ently in accordance with “likes” and “dis- 
likes” that originate in their unconscious. 
In their interpersonal relationships and in 
dealing with things around them, this 
(Korea, 15th century). 
   
- 
BANAT 
‘w
 b
Y
 
3
 
Naa
s 
C
p
 
» 
  
Ri 4 
Ph
 
L
h
 
S
t
 
1a
 ’ Ny
 
—-
— 
oe
 
es . 
a he a 
EF ORITLE QAEEWTE 
A Korean shaman or 
mudang. Early 20th-century 
painting on paper 
Tre head of a bronze statue 
used for teaching acupuncture

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 105936: An Invisible river

  
  
  
unconscious propensity unknowingly 
creates emotional distortion and instabil- 
ity; affecting, for example, the proper func- 
tion of the autonomic nervous system. 
The theory of stress and adaptation devel- 
oped by the Canadian scientist Hans Selye, 
when interpreted physiologically, captures 
the significance of this condition. 
Secondly, environmental conditions, 
especially climatic conditions, may help 
to cause stagnation. Acupuncture medi- 
cine warns against the inadaptation of the 
human body to its surrounding “climatic” 
ambience, although in the modern world 
the environment is becoming less and less 
appropriate for the living human body. 
The third factor is our attitude towards 
our health, including such factors as irreg- 
ular lifestyle, negligence, and exhaustion, all 
A emai Ty, 
. H 
A “y 
/ er A ; / oo | 
y » )  \ i’ 
p i, | WiC : 
SEE LTA 
4 ’ WW - g 
a » 
Nd ~ 
Pd : 
‘ 
of which are rooted in the ethical orienta- 
tion of our lives. 
W Curative images 
Another category of healing involves 
manipulation of the flowing body and the 
spirit-body by means of an image-experi- 
ence. Religious healing in Daoism, Bud- 
dhism, and to some extent in Shintoism 
uses visualization techniques of this sort. 
This psychological approach, based on the 
curative effect an image can have on the 
body, is employed because a religious 
image carries transformative power. Jung’s 
“active imagination” is an application of 
this method. 
A general feature of visualization is to 
learn to experience a “sacred” image, ini- 
tially by creating it within one’s psyche. 
THE UNESCO Gourier B APRIL 1997 
© 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
Sa
br
in
a 
Mi
ch
au
d,
 
Pa
ri
s 
>

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 105936: An Invisible river

» But as one advances in this practice, one a 
relics on the spontancous generation of Sometimes affirmed, sometimes 
the luminous form within one’s psyche . ) 
and beyond, until one comes to the fre denied, the body has always occupied a 
generation of any kind of image one : : 
wishes. Using this method, self-healing central place in Jewish thought 
occurs in the course of a spiritual journey. 
However, since this is difficult for the inex- 
perienced to achieve, a healer is called in to 
help. For instance, if possession by a 
malevolent spirit is deemed to be the cause 
of a pathological condition, the healer will 
negotiate with the spirit and try to per- 
suade it to awaken from its fixation on the 
sufferers spirit-body and leave it alone. 
In Buddhism, emptiness-meditation 
may be employed in order to counter pos- 
session by a malevolent spirit by bringing 
about its non-substantiality. Significantly, 
possession by either a benevolent or 
malevolent spirit is closely connected with 
spiritual development or lack thereof. 
Enlightenment 
A third kind of religious healing in the East 
Asian tradition is the Kharmic reconfigu- 
ration of the ripe, kharmic body. This idea 
is predicated on an Indian belief that a 
human being comes into this world in 
virtue of his/her own kharma, and dies in 
virtue of the same, 1.e., the human as a con- 
tingent being. This kind of healing, how- 
ever, is reserved only for the few who 
have become “god-men,” or who have 
achieved the highest satori (enlighten- 
ment), by transcending the temporal 
demarcation. Healing of this type is linked 
with the creative power to effect a change 
in the psycho-physical world, something 
which is still a mystery for most of us. 
What is prescribed to a sufferer in such a 
case, as is true with all religious suffering, 
1s daily prayer and/or meditation, along 
with the strengthening of faith, in order 
to nurture spiritual growth. 
The philosophical background to the 
idea of the body and healing in the East 
Asian tradition is that human beings cohabit 
the world of nature with other living beings. 
By transforming their everyday mode of 
consciousness they can become one with 
the creative activity of nature and awaken 
. . Studying the Talmud in a 
in themselves a natural healing power. HM synagogue in Israel. © 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Ha
rb
ut
t/
Ra
ph
o 
Pa
rs
 
THE UNESCO Courier MN APRIL 1907  

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

BY DAVID BIALE 
he ar 
n the Bible, the foundational text of 


### 105937: The Body and the book

Judaism, the body is treated primarily 
in the context of the cultic laws of 
purity. These laws dictate who is pure 
enough to enter a sacred site and offer a 
sacrifice. Anyone who has touched a dead 
human body, for example, is considered 
impure. Similarly, certain diseases, such as 
some skin disorders, causc impurity. Most 
normal body functions, such as urination or 
defecation, do not create impurity, while 
those related to the sexual organs, such as 
seminal ejaculation, menstruation and 
pathological bleeding from the genitals, do 
render a person and his or her sexual part- 
ner impure. 
The impurity related to genital dis- 
charges, both normal and abnormal, is puz- 
zling, since the priestly laws, in which we 
find these prohibitions, regard sexuality 
very positively. The biblical priests appear 
to have been quite preoccupied with ques- 
tions of fertility and it is they who authored 
the divine blessings “be fruitful and multi- 
ply.” Why did such authors regard sexual 
fluids as impure, if they wished to affirm 
sexuality? The answer seems to be that such 
fluids were seen as divine substances whose 
very power created impurity when they 
left the body. 
Another aspect of the body regarded as 
divine was blood, although normal bleed- 
ing did not create impurity. The biblical 
authors believed that blood is the life-force 
and that spilling blood was a violation of 
the divine order. The blood of animals was 
not to be eaten, but instead returned to 
God in a ceremony expiating the sin of » 
  
THL UNESCO Gouriern APRIL 1997  

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

» killing the animal. Spilling human blood 
could not, however, be expiated in the 
same way. Instead, the only atonement 
for killing a human being was to execute 
the murderer. The Bible’s very severe law 
of capital punishment was a product of 
this holy status of human blood. 
The Jewish religion is not based only 
on the Bible. In the first centuries of the 
Common Era, a parallel body of law, called 
the “Oral Law” or “rabbinic law,” was for- 
mulated and set in writing by Jewish schol- 
ars called rabbis. Although rabbinic law 
had some of its foundations in the Bible, 
much of it reflected the prevailing issues 
of Greco-Roman culture, which was the 
culture in which the rabbis lived. Thus, 
the attitude towards the body in rabbinic 
literature can best be understood in the 
context of late antiquity. 
For Greco-Roman thinkers, such as 


### 105937: The Body and the book

the Stoic philosophers, the body itself 
posed less of a problem than did the pas- 
sions, which could overpower one’s rea- 
son. The rabbis were also preoccupied 
with the passions, which they called the 
yetzer ha-ra (the “evil impulse”). They 
held that the law is designed to restrain 
and channel the passions into construc- 
tive activities. But the body itself they gen- 
erally viewed as a neutral vessel. There 
are, to be sure, negative statements about 
women’s bodies in rabbinic literature, but 
they are typically in the context of the anx- 
icty of the rabbis, who were all men, about 
women distracting them from the holy 
duty to study. 
W The vehicle for the soul 
The rabbis did not believe in a division 
between the body and the soul. One rab- 
binic saying held that the soul is like a lame 
man riding on the back of a blind man. 
Thus the body provides the necessary 
vehicle for the soul, although, by itself, it is 
morally blind. The soul is always embod- 
ied and, in messianic times, the body will 
be resurrected with the soul. However, 
at least one rabbi held that in messianic 
times “there will be no eating, drinking or 
procreation.” For this particular school of 
thought, the body in a “perfected” world 
would not have the same drives and needs 
as bodies in this world. 
This last point brings up the question of 
the rabbinic attitude towards sexuality. In 
general, the rabbis affirmed sexuality and 
held that all men must marry and father 
THE UNESCO Counira APRIL 1997 
children (the law in this case is only directed 
towards men). Men also have an additional 
obligation to give sexual pleasure to their 
wives. At the same time, the rabbis had 
ambivalent feelings about male sexuality. 
Their position seemed to be that the sexual 
desires of the body are legitimate and even 
holy, but only if the sexual act is performed 
with the proper restraint. Sex must be 
potentially procreative, so that, for example, 
masturbation is labeled a capital crime, 
something unknown to the Bible. While 
the rabbis never endorsed celibacy, as did 
the Christian Church fathers, there is strong 
evidence that they were also attracted by 
scholarly abstinence. In some texts, the 
study of Torah (biblical and rabbinic law) is 
invested with eroticism, suggesting that 
intellectual activity might compete with 
the desires of the body. 
Rabbinic law extended biblical law into 
virtually every area of life. As such, it gov- 
erned almost every aspect and function 
of the body, from eating to sex. Although 
rabbinic literature is generally motivated 
by interpretation of the law, which the rab- 
bis believed was revealed at Mt. Sinai, it 
also contains a great deal of medical spec- 
ulation. For example, the rabbis devoted 
considerable attention to trying to under- 
stand female reproductive physiology and 
their theories often owed much to late 
antique medicine. They were particularly 
concerned with the details of women’s 
menstrual cycle, since the law prohibited 
sexual relations during menstruation. They 
developed a whole science of menstrual 
blood to distinguish between healthy and 
pathological female bleeding. Reading rab- 
binic literature confirms the observation 
(meant to be derogatory) of the first-cen- 
tury Christian, Paul, that Judaism is truly 
“Israel of the flesh.” 
= Proper intention 
In the Middle Ages, the rabbinic insistence 
on the unity of body and soul began to 
break down under the influence of Greek 
philosophers such as Aristotle and Ploti- 
nus, who became known to Jewish 
thinkers through the Arabs. Jewish 
philosophers, such as Moses Maimonides 
(1135-1204), often denigrated the body as 
representing the purely material. It is the 
soul that gives form to matter and there- 
fore invests it with holiness. Maimonides 
was particularly harsh in denouncing sex- 
uality as a negative impulse of the material 
  
  
  
 
A Jewish marriage in Paris 
(France). 
  
 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 105937: The Body and the book

  
   
rN SEE 
  
  
body. He condemned the sense of touch 
as the lowest of all human faculties. Yet 
Maimonides was also a physician and 
expounder of Jewish law. Both of these 
disciplines taught him the importance of 
cultivating the body and attending to its 
needs and desires. Maimonides therefore 
tried to strike a middle ground between 
his philosophical asceticism and the bod- 
ily affirmations of medicine and Jewish 
law. His doctrine with respect to the body 
emphasized moderation and self-control. 
A different school of thought in the 
Jewish Middle Ages was the mystical 
(often called “Kabbalah”). The mystics or 
Kabbalists sometimes began their specu- 
lations in explicit rejection of Maimonides. 
An important thirteenth-century text 
called the Iggeret ha-Kodesh (“Letter of 
Holiness”) starts off by criticizing Mai- 
monides’ stand on the body. How could 
the sense of touch be evil, since God had 
created the body and called it “good”? In 
particular, the text insists that Adam and 
Eve had had sexual relations in the Gar- 
den of Eden and had done so without any 
sinful pleasure (this was a theme that could 
be found in both carly rabbinic and Chris- 
tian literature). But, as much as the “Letter 
of Holiness” sought to affirm the body, it 
also placed severe limitations on it. If men 
and women cngaged in sexual relations 
"ATH 
© 
Za
ra
nd
/R
ap
ho
, 
Pa
rs
 
without the proper intention, then the 
purely physical act became a form of idol- 
atry. 
“The Letter of Holiness” placed such 
enormous importance on correct inten- 
tionality because of the Kabbalistic theol- 
ogy which underlay it. According to this 
mystical tradition, God himself consists 
of male and female elements, which are 
engaged in a kind of spiritual intercourse. 
Proper human sexuality can be directed 
towards God by the correct thoughts. In 
this way, human sexual relations actually 
cause the male and female elements in God 
to unite sexually. Improper sexuality or 
improper thoughts cause these elements 
to break apart. Thus, human sexuality has 
cosmic consequences. 
In a similar way, all human activities can 
magically influence God. The Kabbalists 
describe God in anthropomorphic terms, 
that is, as having a body just like a human 
body. This divine body lacks materiality: 
we might call ita “spiritual” body. But since 
God’s body is the model for human bod- 
ies, the way in which human beings use 
their bodies can affect God’s body. If 
human beings remain trapped in their 
material, bodily desires, then they subvert 
the spirituality of God’s body. The task of 
humans is to spiritualize their material bod- 
ies and bring them into harmony with the 
divine body. 
The resurrection of the body 
This doctrine from the thirteenth century 
was to have tremendous implications for 
Jewish thought in the subsequent cen- 
turies. In the eighteenth century, a pietis- 
tic Jewish movement in Poland, called 
Hasidism, created a popular theology 
based on the earlier Kabbalah. The 
Hasidim held that every action of the body 
might be turned into a spiritual act since 
everything in the material world contains 
a spark of the divine. 
Some Hasidic doctrines celebrated the 
material world and spoke of worshipping 
God through the material. A common 
Hasidic teaching held, for example, that 
even the simple act of eating or drinking 
could be transformed into the worship of 
God with the proper intentionality. Oth- 
ers, on the other hand, saw the purpose of 
the worship of God as emptying the mate- 
rial of its divinity. This latter approach, 
sometimes termed “the annihilation of the 
material,” led to a much more ascetic 
THE UNESCO Gurren APRIL 1997

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

> 
© 
Is
ra
el
 
Ta
ib
y 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ni
s 


### 105937: The Body and the book

approach to the body, particularly in the 
realm of sexuality. For these Hasidic mas- 
ters, any sexual act that involved pleasure 
was sinful. 
The eighteenth century also witnessed 
the emergence of a movement of Jewish 
enlightenment which challenged the world 
of rabbinic and medieval Judaism. Part of 
the critique of the Jewish enlighteners 
focused on the treatment of the body in 
traditional Judaism. For example, they 
argued that the practice of early marriage, 
which was common among the Jews of 
eastern Europe, led to disease and bodily 
weakness. They also wished to reform the 
way Jews dressed to make them look 
more “European”. And they sought to 
transform traditional attitudes towards 
sexuality into something like emerging 
bourgeois values. 
A much more radical critique of tradi- 
tional attitudes towards the body devel- 
oped at the end of the nineteenth century 
among the inheritors of the Jewish enlight- 
enment. With the rise of European anti- 
semitism and the perceived failure of Jew- 
ish emancipation, secular Jewish thinkers 
turned towards nationalist solutions of the 
Jewish question. These nationalists adopted 
and extended the earlier Enlightenment 
critique of traditional Judaism. Traditional 
Judaism, they argued, had denigrated the 
body in favour of pure spirituality and, as a 
result, Jews had become physically weak 
and politically impotent. They wished to 
return bodily vigour to the Jews by creat- 
THE UNESCO Gouriten APRIL 1997 
ing what the Zionist ideologue Max Nordau 
called “muscular Judaism.” Following the 
fashionable medical diagnosis of the time, 
Jews were considered “ncurasthenics” 
(victims of a disorder of the nerves). The 
only way to cure this nervous disease was 
to strengthen the muscles. Consequently, 
a whole movement of Jewish gymnastic 
and sporting clubs developed to transform 
the Jewish body. 
The Zionists took this critique one step 
further by insisting that the only real way 
to transform the Jewish body was to trans- 
plant it to the soil of Palestine. Only in a 
Jewish society based on agriculture rather 
than petty commerce (the typical occu- 
pation of the European Jews) could Jews 
become physically strong. This nationalist 
ideal was based on a mythic vision of the 
healthy Jews of the Bible, as opposed to 
the weak and diseased Jews of the Dias- 
pora, but it was equally inspired by other 
European nationalisms, which also 
engaged in a cult of the body. 
One might say that, far from negating 
Jewish tradition, this secular nationalism 
unconsciously continued a persistent motif 
in historical Judaism: the centrality of the 
body. From the Bible, to rabbinic litera- 
ture, medieval philosophy and mysticism, 
the body in all of its facets has played a cru- 
cial role in Jewish thought, at times affirmed 
and at others denied, but never ignored. In 
the final analysis, the “people of the book” 
can never be divorced from the “people 
of the body.” | 
 
[ Cameroon, right, as in 
other parts of Africa, masks, 
costumes and symbolic 
objects are widely used in 
traditional ceremonies. 
A traditional Friday evening 
Jewish family meal in Hadera 
(Israel).

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 105939: A Language of its own

   
—E 
The body is itself 
a medium of 
expression in 
African societies 
based on the oral 
tradition 
AA 
yA ' : A J 
vi ) S Vik QV 
S
e
a
d
 
—
—
 B
e
 
-
 
\ 
BL 
) 
A 
~
 
 
( | J ~f F xr 4 
5 Id J 1 A J 
J A f » fr os 
Ly 
A fricans regard the body (nydlo, 
/ 
overall expression. The idea of the “body- 
nyama) as a “full” object because 
of the organs and substances it 
envelops and of which it is the 
in-itself”, externalized and observed from 
the outside, appears in certain linguistic 
expressions: a person who watches his or 
her body in action sees it tremble (nydlo e 
ma s6wd mbd: body trembles in me), forces 
it to sustain an effort (swe nydlo: force 
body), sacrifices it through suicide (bwd 
| 
U | 
BY MANGA BEKOMBO PRISO 
nyélo: kill body), preserves it from danger 
(sunganyélo: save body). To communicate 
with his or her body, a person puts it to the 
test (senga nydlo: feel body) and gets it to 
relax (bébise nydlo, relax, loosen body). 
Despite the importance of its media- 
tion function, this externalized body is a 
precarious secondary organism which is 
consigned to oblivion when it ceases to 
be driven by the forces around it. It is not 
the body that thinks but the I (Na); nor 
does it dream, that 1s the function of the 
THE UNESCO Gouniern APRIL 1997 
© 
C 
Pa
va
rd
/H
oa
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns
 
>

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 105939: A Language of its own

» Self (Mba), for which the body is merely 
a physical envelope. In African societies 
where the oral tradition predominates, the 
body is a product of the spoken word, and 
as such it is itself a medium of expression. 
This is particularly evident in African 
sculpture, which largely consists of depic- 
tions of the body, sometimes wearing a 
mask, sometimes without. These sculp- 
tures always have a meaning. Whereas the 
body is never represented in order to 
serve as a cult object or to demonstrate a 
particular aesthetic, in African masks and 
statuary it expresses an idea, a desire, a des- 
tiny. It reveals a phenomenon, designates 
a thing, issues an instruction or a taboo. 
As a cultural construct, the body is seen 
in terms of its constituent parts, which are 
  
THE UNESCO Gouricrn APRIL 1997 
-—
 
» 
¥
 
L
i
 
clearly differentiated from each other. Each 
part has a place and a function whose impor- 
tance varies depending on the context in 
which itis perceived and the value attached 
to the objects with which it is associated. 
¥ Good and bad blood 
The body’s symbolism is organized round 
its external parts, which occupy space, and 
its internal parts—the hard, soft or fluid 
substances whose continual interaction 
generates life-giving energy. In some parts 
of Africa, quality of blood reflects the 
body’s amount of efficient energy. In order 
to maximize this energy the blood is 
“washed” by absorbing medicines, and if 
it has been rashly tainted some of it is 
extracted from the body. Blood brings 
A fertility statuette from 
northern Cameroon. 
©G Dagl On, Pans

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 105939: A Language of its own

good or bad luck depending on whether it 
is “good” or “bad”. It is the “breath of life”, 
the “life force”, which may be attacked, 
topped up and strengthened by the med- 
icine man, his opponent, the soothsayer 
and the healer. Blood also has a unifying 
quality that comes into play when oath- 
takers exchange a little of their blood and 
absorb it under the watchful supervision 
of ancestors who are keepers of the law. In 
this instance, blood-sharing is more 
important than verbal promises, for 
although promises are binding, the 
exchange of blood guarantees that they 
will be kept. At weddings, joint con- 
sumption of the blood of a sacrificed ani- 
mal sets the seal on lasting solidarity 
between bride and bridegroom. 
W Head and foot 
During a chief’s consecration ritual in 
southern Cameroon a woman over child- 
bearing age squirts purifying water on the 
chief’s feet at regular intervals, while mak- 
ing a recitation in which the words sdngd 
(father, master), nginya (strength) and 
bolédi (power and fullness) are many 
times repeated. This is because feet are in 
almost constant contact with the earth of 
the village, which is as “pure” as the water 
and the plants that grow from it, as well as 
being the home of the omniscient ances- 
tors who want everything in society to be 
as it should be. Feet symbolize putting 
down roots, the time-honoured presence 
of ancestors and the power that springs 
from the action of a chief. 
As the location of the intellect, the head 
is regarded as a microcosm, as a body-and- 
soul reproduction of the person and the 
“tool” that connects him or her to the cos- 
    
   
   
Mim 
Tha & 
ww, 
» 
; it 
- Hh 
» f 
a 
} 
» 
y ) a
 
N
M
    
mos. Because of this, the head is used in 
separation rituals. When members of the 
lineage leave the village to make their for- 
tune far away, they are like a baby being 
weaned from its mother’s breast. Both 
migrants and babies are bathed and their 
skulls are ritually anointed. | 
Sy 
  
   
  
  
e
R
 
R
e
 
A double-faced helmet mask 
from western Cameroon, It is 
designed to regulate the social 
order. 
THE UNESCO Gourier WB APRIL 1997 
© 
G.
 
Da
g 
Or
t,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

® 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
Sa
br
in
a 
Mi
ch
au
d,
 
Pa
ns
 
BY ROMAIN MAITRA 
a — 
A. 18th-century Indian miniature from Rajasthan 
showing the subtle body. 
   
    
   
  
 
  
    
    
 
  
   
ET a le er 
Nous ANIMA I vr Aeon Dnley 
Kos gt AAC Wize sp YI 
(AMAR A DAA crass, saga ) 
A EL Ne 
#BIRLABAR DENI 0H sypy 
PLM AA 3907288 fYmpanfrd, 
BABEL IRVIN THT IRA ww 
Vases 300 450 ¢ PRADESH 
nomad wlA RRS emery ve 
a hl LA LL Ll 2 4 TP \ 
Wn m0» ae ¢ wHokaviogy 
COARIVOR J vay TT pe 
WEG ey A Waengngg, 
) Hera goa nGaivimaann 
AT BTR) Wn 
\ J RATNER HRA) vr Fy ec 
ges APN BENS Si I Covey 
7 ABABA Ara Gi upg 
AGRA ows ARINC aps rd 
BEER sn ddim wo sens 
wwew HU CAMERA airs win 
ar Mn ae LT 
MAGIA TEATIN YN dey, J 
* ; 
| THE UNESCO Gourier APRIL 1997 
& ) \ 
“\ 
YATVA [|] N 
’ 


### 105940: From selfhood to salvation

In Hindu thought the body is a finely 
tuned instrument always threatened with disharmony 
"nthe Indian tradition, the human body 
3 is viewed as integrating a complex vari- 
~ cty of mental and physical processes. 
+. It is part of a body-mind continuum 
that is regarded as the instrument of a Self 
(Atman) or Soul that is essentially transcen- 
dent and free of its embodied condition. 
The ancient Hindu scriptures, the Upan- 
ishads, contain many passages on the body- 
mind complex and its relation to the Atman. 
The body-mind complex arises from the 
ultimate Atman from which the universe 
came into being: “from Him are born life, 
mind, the sense organs and also ether, wind, 
fire, water and carth.” In the Upanishadis 
the body is also described as “foul-smelling 
and insubstantial”, but another sacred 
Hindu text, the Bhagavad Gita, describes 
it as the chosen vehicle of “the perpetual, 
imperishable and incomprehensible body- 
dweller” in which the Atman breathes and 
from which it radiates. 
Later systems of Hindu philosophy 
assign to each person two bodies—an exte- 
rior or “gross body” and an interior or 
“subtle body”. Perhaps Indian philoso- 
phers conceived of the existence of a sub- 
tle body in order to make intelligible the 
process of metempsychosis or transmi- 
gration of the soul after death. The Vedanta, 
onc of the main philosophical schools of

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 105940: From selfhood to salvation

I, the Himalayas, a yogi and a 
young Buddhist monk practise 
concentration. Hinduism, regards this subtle body as 
incorporating the senses of the body— 
both perceptive and active—and of mind, 
intellect and sensation. 
In this Hindu conception, the subtle 
body links together physiological and psy- 
chological processes. It is believed to be 
made up of a web of numerous arteries 
(nadis) through which the vital energy cir- 
culates, and of a few centres called wheels 
(cakras), receptacles (adbaras) and knots 
(granthis), where the arteries converge 
and meet the nerves of the gross body. 
The three principal arteries—ida, pingala 
and susumna—extend along the spinal col- 
umn between the spot next to the anus, 
the muladbar cakra,and the spot on top of 
the skull, the brabmarandhra, where a 
thousand-petaled white lotus blossoms. 
However, the cakra patterns between 
these two spots vary according to differ- 
ent theological systems and usually cor- 
respond to psychosomatic sites experi- 
enced during yogic practices. 
FE 
WA microcosm of the universe 
A vital goal of Tantra, basically a Hindu 
(also Buddhist) system of esoteric prac- 
tices for attaining spiritual experiences and 
the fulfilment of worldly desires, is to spir- 
itualize the human body which is consid- 
cred to be a microcosm of the universe. 
Tantric discipline enables us to discover a 
mystical geography in the subtle body. 
The spinal cord represents the fictitious 
Mount Meru. The three principal arteries 
running along the left, the right and the 
middle of the spine represent the three 
sacred rivers, Ganga, Yamuna and Saras- 
vati. The breathing process represents the 
span of time. By awakening the female 
force Sakti, lying dormant like a coiled ser- 
pent in the muladhar, and making it move 
upward along the spinal cord to be united 
with the male force Siva at the brah- 
marandhbra, the yogi realizes the supreme 
non-duality of the Self. 
THE UNESCO Gourirm APRIL 1997 
© 
Ro
la
nd
 
Mi
ch
au
d,
 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

> 
© 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
Sa
br
in
a 
Mi
ch
au
d,
 
Pa
ri
s 
the of 
Ayurveda—“the science of long life”— 
In theoretical construct 
life (ayus) arises due to association of body, 
sensory capacities, mind and Self. The 
gross, physical body 1s an arrangement of 
the five elements which are present in 
nature and are genetically transmitted 
through the semen of the father and the 
ovum and blood of the mother. They are 
earth, water, fire, wind and space. 
Wind (vay), fire (tejas) and water (ap) 
are fundamental to Ayurvedic biological 
theory for they are considered as the prin- 
cipal components of life and movement. 
Taken together, these elements generate a 
nutrient fluid (rasa) that nourishes the 
body as a whole. 
THE UNESCO Gurern APRIL 1997 
A. 18th-century Indian 
miniature depicting kundalini 
(from the Sanskrit kundala, 
“coil” of rope), latent energy 
coiled like a serpent at the 
base of the trunk in the subtle 
body. The energy is 
“awakened” by certain yogic 
disciplines. 
 
W The three humours 
Wind (vaya) is dry, light and soft, and indi- 
cates motion. It manifests itself as the 
motor system of the organism which 
includes respiration, swallowing, speak- 
ing, digestion, excretion, ejaculation, the 


### 105940: From selfhood to salvation

labour of childbirth and so on. Fire man- 
ifests itself as the energy system of the 
organism, including bilious secretion 
(pitta) of the liver and the “cooking” 
process of the digestion, the colouring in 
blood and complexion, and the energiz- 
ing of desire. Pitta is hot, bitter, oily fluid 
of bluish colour. Water manifests itself as 
the integrating system of the body, includ- 
ing phlegm (kaph), mucus, plasma and so 
forth and holds together the limbs and tis- 
sues. Kaph is heavy, moist, unctuous and 
white and is conveyed by air through the 
vessels. According to the biological prin- 
ciple of Ayurveda, therefore, vayu, pitta 
and kaph are the overall respiratory, diges- 
tive and integrative components of the 
gross body, its three essential humours. 
When these components are in balance 
and harmony, they contribute to the health 
of the organism, and when they are not, 
they cause illnesses. Thus, the human 
body exists in a state of precarious and 
constantly threatened equilibrium, and 
the task of the physician is to diagnose the 
imbalances that occur in the person and 
restore balance through treatment. 
Ayurveda defines a healthy person as one 
in whom there is equilibrium of the 
humours and where the body substances 
perform normal digestive and excretory 
functions as well as gratifying the senses, 
mind and soul as a result of living a pure life. 
Impurity and bodily pollution are not 
only the ultimate cause of much organic 
illness, but also expose people to diabolic - 
affliction and cut them off from divine pro- 
tection. The state of the body, gross as well 
as subtle, thus provides an index of the state 
of the soul, the Self. The wealth of the yogi 
is his two-fold body and it is by an absolute 
mastery of it that he can achieve salvation. 
The gross body is said to have three 
possible fates: it can be eaten as carrion

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 105940: From selfhood to salvation

 ] i
n
 : 
      
  
Lo 
di - 
. - - — 
[r— -— Ee _. 
a — — 
c— -— - —— RE = 
— - - - - » = 
-- -— > —— — —— - 
> — -_ — - 
- wr - - — a— — 
= —— — - ™ 
- - TLE e— = - = — —— —— 
[— — I —. - J - - 
a ow - . -— oT — | —— - — 
2 —— gly —— -e - a UE — 
a a a rl —— pa . -— a — = 
— - v . — ) . = - wl o —— _— od - 
A aT J——— wr — I — 
— Ta - I — — " 
- AE SEE ) : ir] 
— a “rs db ~— 
hail —— . er — pc -* 
‘ -— wn —_ = — 
- Re p— _— — — 
To a “Ce ! 
~~ y— 
p WS —. 
. a [= E—— ye = 
od 
-is — 
- 
  
and reduced to excrement; it can be buried 
and turned into maggots; or it can be burnt 
and reduced to ashes. The putrefaction of 
the body is regarded as particularly repel- 
lent by Hindus, and incineration is viewed 
as the most acceptable fate since 1t is the 
swiftest way of recycling the five elements 
of which the body is composed. The body 
particles of the dead return to be shared 
with their kinsfolk and the soul is reborn. 
A Hindu is never entirely new when born 
and never entirely lost when dead. MW 
© 
Cl
au
de
 
Sa
uv
ag
eo
t,
 
Pa
ns
 
A religious cremation on the 
banks of the Ganges near 
Patna in northeastern India. 
THE UNESCO Goukier BW APRIL 1997

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

J do BOG é 
¥ 
) ¥/1YVY/ 
Ei LL { 9 Vi 
Some Islamic thinkers believe that cultivation of the 
senses can lead to God 
BY fr MEDDEB 
  
THE UNESCO Couriers APRIL 1997 
ccording to the Book of the Lad- 
der of Mahomet, as the Prophet 


### 105946: The Garden of delights

[ © wasbeginning his “night journey” 
“from Mecca to Jerusalem, a very 
beautiful woman “clad in raiment of every 
imaginable colour” called out to him. He 
stopped and allowed her to draw near to 
him, then went disdainfully on his way. 
Whereupon his guide, the angel Gabriel, 
told him that the woman with her garments 
of many colours represented the world with 
its manifold delights, and that “because you 
waited for her, your people shall be granted 
more solace and more delights than any 
other people that has been or shall be.” 
This anecdote, taken from a medieval 
work of fiction that was translated from 
Arabic into Latin, Spanish and French in 
the thirteenth century, has more to tell us 
than any of the standard works of law or 
theology. Islam had the reputation of being 
the religion of enjoyment, a religion that 
called upon its followers not to spurn 
carthly pleasures but to delight in them as 
God’s blessed gift to humankind. 
The promise held out by Islam to 
believers seems to be that of a garden 
overflowing with everything to gratify the 
senses. This was the charge laid against 
Islam in the inter-religious disputes that 
raged in the Middle Ages, especially in Al- 
Andalus (Muslim Spain). The late thir- 
teenth-century Catalan theologian Ramon 
Llull, for instance, makes such charges in 
his Book of the Three Sages, in which a 
Jew, a Christian and a Muslim take turns in 
vaunting the merits of their respective reli- 
gions to a pagan. 
Such enjoyment of earthly delights in 
the name of God was, on the other hand, 
den of deligh 
  
much appreciated by nineteenth-century 
Western writers and artists who visited 
the East. This experience took them out- 
side of their Judaeco-Christian education, 
which seemed either to repudiate the plea- 
sures of the flesh or to regard them as base 
instincts that ought to be eliminated. 
Reacting against the prudery prevailing in 
their own countries, they saw in Islam an 
alternative life-style, around which grew 
the myth of an Orient where nihilism and 
denial of the flesh were unknown. 
In Ecce Homo, Nietzsche, who 
acclaimed this worship of the body, 
recalled that the first thing the Christians 
did after recapturing Cérdoba was to brick 
up the city’s 700 hammams. These bath- 
houses, which were the latter-day equiv- 
alent of the public baths of Roman Antiq- 
uity and which reflected the central place 
accorded in Islam to the care of the body, 
were seen by a Christian morality based on 
asceticism, abstinence and penitence as 
places of debauchery and depravity. 
For their part, many writers succumbed 
to the charms of Arab eroticliterature. The 
Thousand and One Nights had been well 
known since the late seventeenth century, 
but the French translation by Antoine Gal- 
land had been expurgated, the crude or 
downright pornographic passages being 
toned down in keeping with the classical 
principle of decorum. The fact is that Arab 
and Muslim authors were not afraid to write 
about wild sexual abandon and the trans- 
ports of delight, which was why at the 
beginning of the twentieth century Mardrus 
thought it necessary to retranslate these 
tales, in so doing even exaggerating their 
sexual rhetoric.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 105946: The Garden of delights

pueioy @ 
e
y
d
I
 
Sugg 
‘pn 
2661 TYJV mynd’) ODSIND IHL 
a | 
22% 7 i ow oo AAU Tee thee ~ 1l 
Spa 0 ook (27 la ip 
  
  
  ne vse] alapsed Lent Ty 75 a 
| irri, iad! Am _ “ ws A 
    
  
  
      
I
r
—
—
 
—
 
|| regs, PRI GP , ki 
x : 
| 
I
 
—
 
a
 
 
—
—
 
—
—
—
 
Rl leat Ce Ltr ees 3; 
A 
  “ 
— ——_— —— — — ———" 
| FH of cry Vain erly srr | 
uA 
   
"SIUSIN U0 
pue puesnoy] ay) jo uonipd 
ueuel] Kinjuad-yigT B 
wou |lejop B ‘,$19407 3Y 1} "

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

> 
© 
Ro
la
nd
 
Mi
ch
au
d/
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 


### 105946: The Garden of delights

Such exaggeration is a measure of the 
spell cast by this different world, where 
prudery was unknown and people made 
love in the name of God. The fin-de-sié- 
cle aesthetes’ ideas of the sensualism of 
the East and of Islam was confirmed by 
their discovery of The Perfumed Garden, 
an erotic treatise that was written in the 
fourteenth century by a theologian born in 
southern Tunisia, the famous Shaykh 
Nefzawi, and the anonymous nineteenth- 
century French translation of which is 
reputed to have been reworked by Guy 
de Maupassant. 
Their ideas were in fact scarcely exag- 
gerated: the Murcia-born Andalusian 
  
  
 
  
M usic and dancing. An 
illustration from a 17th- 
century anthology of Persian 
poetry. 
Seas 
      
© THE UNESCO Counier B APRIL 1997 
theosopher Ibn al-Arabi (1165-1240) 
believed that those of a perspicacious mind 
could discern revelations behind all forms 
of beauty and derive enjoyment from 
them, and that such was the secret of spir- 
itual experience. Did not the Hadith pro- 
claim that “God is beautiful and He loves 
beauty”? Within each thing of beauty there 
lies concealed an image of God that the 
individual may perceive through a lovely 
woman, a handsome youth, a garment of 
well-matched colours, a harmoniously 
proportioned object, a stirring song, a well- 
seasoned dish, architecture that creates a 
musical interplay of light and shadow, a 
courtyard where a tinkling fountain over-, 
flows into its basin, or a bed of flowers in 
a shady garden fragrant with the scents of 
spring. 
In short, the presence of God is to be 
sought through the senses: all things that 
appeal to the senses are ways whereby 
God may be glimpsed and the mental 
image of God may be formed. This con- 
ception may explain how it is that the prin- 
ciple of beauty finds its way into the most 
prosaic objects in use in the most mun- 
dane circumstances, and it is perhaps 
because of this belief in the immanence of 
beauty that the decorative arts and crafts 
flourished at that time. 
Again according to Ibn al-Arabi, how- 
ever, it is in the carnal act itself that the 
supreme revelation is granted. Through 
the mystery of the female orgasm, through 
its very excess, the individual is immersed 
in the image of God. In the love-making of 
two people, man and woman, the pres- 
ence of a third, God Himself, is thus made 
manifest. This accounts for the extreme 
importance Ibn al-Arabi attaches to phys- 
ical love: it is through physical love that 
spiritual love is achieved, it is through the 
sexual act, by the transmission of the elixir 
of carnal pleasure, that humans rise to the 
height of divine love. Ibn al- Arabi quotes 
another tradition from the Hadith in sup- 
port of his interpretation: the Prophet said 
“Three things have I'loved in this world: 
perfume, women and prayer”. The shape 
of things conducive to the gratification of 
the senses and the call to fulfil the obliga- 
tion of worship are thus set forth side by 
side in Holy Writ. |

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

DOSSIER Body language 
Often more eloquent than words, gestures constitute a rich medium of 
expression that varies from culture to culture 
Cr fri mL 
(rreeting 
RUBBING NOSES  
Meaning: Friendly greeting, 
Description: The nose-tip is brought into 
contact with the nose-tip of another 
person or with another part of his/her 
head. 
Locality: New Zealand {(Maoris), Finland 
{Lapps) and North Africa and the Middle RISING HANDSHAKE 
East (Bedouin). Also among Malays, 
Polynesians, Melanesians and Inuit. Meaning: Greeting. 
  
 
Description: After a traditional handshake 
the clasped right hands are raised high in the 
air where they are disengaged. 
Locality: Africa, especially among the Bantu.    
  
  
WIGGLING THE THUMB AND SLAP ON THE SHOULDER 
LITTLE FINGER 
Meaning: Greeting 
Meaning: Friendly greeting. Description; When two people meet, they 
Description; The arm is raised, and then the slap each other playfully on the shoulder. 
hand is wiggled gently with the thumb and Locality: Inuit communities. 
little finger extended and the other fingers 
curled. BLOWING A KISS WITH THE 
FINGERTIPS 
Locality: The Hawaiian Islands  
Meaning: Greeting 
Description: The fingertips brush the lips, 
  
x ———————————————————— and the hand is then moved away from the 
HANDS TOGETHER mouth as the bunched fingers are spread. 
Locality: Especially widespread on the 
Meaning: Greeting Mediterranean islands of Malta, Sicily, 
Description: Palms joined, fingers pointing Sardinia and Corfu, Also common in Portugal 
upwards, in front of the chest. Usually (but not Spain) and in Sweden (but not 
accompanied with a slight bow of the head. Denmark). 
Locality: Asia. 
  
THE UNESCO Gourierm APRIL 1997

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
0 
  
  
  
BECKONING HAND (1) BECKONING HAND (2) 
Meaning: Come here! Meaning: Come here! 
Description: Upward movements Description: Downward 
of the hand with the palm up. movements of the hand, with the 
Locality: British Isles, Scandinavia, paim down. 
Netherlands, Belgium, Germany, Locality: Spain, Portugal, Italy, 
Austria, France and the former Malta, Tunisia, Greece and Turkey. 
Yugoslavia. 
  
BECKONING FINGERS    
 
   
Meaning: Come here! 
Description: The arm is extended towards the perscn being called, 
palm downwards, the wrist slightly bent. Then the fingers are 
fluttered. — 
Locality: Japan 
 
  
    
  
BECKONING HEAD POINTING LIPS POINTING CHIN 
Meaning: Come here! Meaning: To indicate a direction. Meaning: Over there. 
Description: The head 1s jerked Description: The lips are protruded Description: The chin is thrust briefly in a 
backwards. in a certain direction, the head often particular direction. 
Locality: Widespread. being slightly turned in the same Locality: Widespread. 
direction. 
Locality: The Philippines, parts of 
South and Central America, certain Source: Bodytalk, The Meaning of Human 
African tnbes and among the Gestures, Desmond Morris, Crown Trade 
Amerindians. Paperbacks, New York, 1994. 
More than 600 gestures are lustrated, 
described and explained in this remarkable guide 
to human gestures from all around the world. 
THE UNESCO Gounicrn APRIL 1997

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

Dr
aw
in
gs
 
Ux
es
co
/P
at
nc
k 
De
ub
el
be
is
s 
    
HAND FAN 
EYEBROW MOVEMENT    FLICKING
 
Locality: Greece 
Meaning: No, 
Description: The open nght hand, palm turned to 
the left, 1s moved back and forth in front of the 
face, like a fan. 
Locality: Japan. 
   
   
   
J ’ J 
Signal 
y 
» 
\ 
  
HEAD TOSSING (1) 
  
HEAD TOSSING (2) 
Meaning: No! 
Description: The head is tilted 
vigorously backwards. 
Locality: Most Arab cultures. 
Known in Europe as the “Greek 
no”, it 1s widespread in Turkey, 
Corfu, Malta, Sicily and southern 
italy. 
Meaning: Yes! 
Description: As no. 1, left. 
Locality: Ethiopia. 
\ Locality: France. 
- THE CHIN 
Meaning: No! 
Description: The eyebrows are raised and Meaning: No! 
lowered rapidly once. The facial expression Description: The fingers brush the 
is usually serious or annoyed. chin several times, and the head is 
tilted backwards. 
Locality: Italy south of Naples, 
Sicily and Sardinia. Alsc common in 
Malta and Corfu. 
NOSE SCREW (1) 
 
Meaning: Drunk. 
Description: The thumb and the 
index finger circle the nose, and the 
hand is then screwed round through 
an arc. 
  
NOSE SCREW (2) 
Meaning: Never mind! 
Description: As no. 1, left. 
Locality: East Africa. 
 
  
FOREFINGERS INDEX FINGERS 
TOGETHER (1) TOGETHER (2) 
Meaning: Agreement. Meaning: Close friendship. 
Description: The two index fingers Description: As no. 1, left. 
are placed side by side. Locality: North Africa 
Locality: Middle East. 
THE UNESCO Gunite APRIL 1907

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 105947: Science and society, 2

Gd
 
Ja
cq
ue
s.
 
Mo
nt
e  
L
E
 
& 
During the Cold War years, the value of science and 
technology tended to be construed in terms of its mili- 
tary and economic applications. While this enabled research in 
many specialities to enjoy a golden age of generous funding in 
some countries, it tended to widen the gap between the rich and 
the poor nations, The ending of this chapter of history has 
brought an opportunity to base civilization on peace, not on war. 
The question is whether we are as ready to pay the price of 
peace as we were to pay the price of war. 
The close co-operation between science and government 
that is needed can flourish only in free socicties, so it is encour- 
aging to observe the growth of democraey in recent years in 
all parts of the world. The twentieth century has so far shown 
us both the apogee and the demise of the totalitarian state, Tt 
was Erich Fromm who described totalitarianism as “the escape 
from freedom”. Totalitarianism promised—in exchange for the 
surrender of personal freedom—a guaranteed utopia that 
would justify the sufferings of the present. In the march 
towards this utopia, science and technology were given a van- 
vuard role. 
For a while, and so long as technology remained predictable, 
centrally planned economies demonstrated a brutal ability to 
ape the successes achieved elsewhere, and even exceed them. 
Many Western intellectuals who visited the Soviet Union in the 
1930s compared the purposive activity there with the apathy 
of the democraeies and made no sceret of their preference. In 
a world dominated by coal and steel, the command economy did 
achieve some successes, at the cost of great human misery. 
But when the focus of development shifted to industries based 
on new knowledge in electronics, biology and biotechnology, 
the price of suppressing free thought and action had to be 
paid. The centrally planned economies, for all their claims to 
be “scientific”, lost the battle because they used science as an 
instrument, obscuring its true nature. The lesson is that nobody, 
THE UNESCO Gouriznm APRIL 1997 
a 
COMMENTARY Feden co M dyor 
  
-. 
however powerful or well informed, can know lor certain which 
scientific ideas will shape the world of tomorrow. Only by allow- 
ing scientists the freedom of action to go where their curiosity 
leads can we be sure that science will flourish and our economies 
will flourish with it. 
Beyond the market 
The problems faced by societies in transition from oppression 
cannot be solved simply by appeals to the free market, effcc- 
tive as it has so often proved to be. The free market—the so- 
called Invisible ITand—is no guarantee of meeting long-term 
needs or of ensuring the best use of human resources. The 
question is whether we possess adequate knowledge to devise 
sound methods of moving from eentrally planned economies to 
a freer but nonetheless humane market. A longer-term view, 
based on investing now to prevent future catastrophes, is 
required, both for practical and ethical reasons. This isin my 
view most important, for those who have been suffering under 
the shadow of oppression or extreme poverty will be very dis- 
appointed if we offer them only the rules of the free market. 
The success of science is based upon shared knowledge. 
Only by open publication of results and the mutnal testing of 
ideas can we be sure that we are moving along the right lines. 
The extent to which knowledge is shared, both within nations 
and between nations, will determine our ultimate success. And 
yet the community at large, all too often including its leaders, - 
remains years hehind in its understanding of the directions in 
which science is moving. 
Scientific illiteracy is one of the key issues we face, Elected 
leaders have neither the time nor the resources to grasp biolog- 
ical or environmental complexity, although they may he required 
to make decisions that will determine the educational, scien- 
tific and ecological priorities for years to come. Voters are unable 
to make rational decisions on issues that require basic scien-

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 105947: Science and society, 2

tific knowledge, because all too often they have never heen pro- 
vided with that knowledge. An nnprepared community cannot 
truly govern itself or plan for its children’s future. 
Welive in a society that depends on science and technology 
without really understanding it. When basic scientific knowl- 
edge was tested in one survey, it was found that less than a 
third of Britons and 43 per cent of Americans knew that elec- 
trons are smaller than atoms. Almost a third of the British 
respondents, and a quarter of the American ones, believed that 
antibiotics kill viruses as well as baeteria. I am not seeking 
here to be critical of any particular nation: there is no reason 
to suppose that these results would be any different if the 
surveys had been conducted elsewhere. 
Achieving scientific literacy 
Nor is there anything new about antipathy to and ignorance of 
science and technology. We tend to think of the nineteenth een- 
tury as a period of confident expansion, ruled by engineers. But 
even then a strong undercurrent of opposition thrived. Itis easy 
to laugh at the Duke of Wellington, who opposed the develop- 
ment of railways because, he said, “they would enable the lower 
orders to go uselessly wandering about the eountry”. But he 
wasn’t alone. The Freneh novelist Gustave Flaubert listed the 
four greatest misdeeds of modern civilization as “railways, {ae- 
tories, chemists and mathematicians”. Yet he happily used the 
railway as a convenient way of meeting his friend Louise Colet, 
who lived in Paris, while he lived near Rouen, 
Many of us harbour the same double standard: we enjoy 
the benefits of technology while remaining largely ignorant of 
its inner workings. We have a society where, in Martin Weiner’s 
words, there is outward acceptance of modernity without inner 
conviction. Few people know, or very much eare, what goes on 
under the bonnets of their cars, or at the other end of the 
high-tension cables that supply their houses with clectricity. 
To them it is all a bit of a conjuring triek. 
It is clearly impossible to provide every person with a pro- 
found understanding of all the important and controversial 
areas of scicnee and technology; impossible because even sci- 
entists themselves do not possess it. A cell biologist does not 
understand particle physies; a metallurgist is unlikely to have 
more than a limited grasp of genetics; and hardly anybody 
understands the wonderful world of high mathematics. What 
singles out scientists and engineers is not their knowledge of 
fields other than their own, but the conviction that they could 
understand these other subjects if they wanted to, a confi- 
denec that is not generally shared by non-scientists. 
This is the confidence we must try to spread more widely. The 
evidence is that when scientific ideas address people’s concerns 
and interests, they show an impressive ability to locate infor- 
mation and translate it into forms they find useful. An interest- 
ing example of this is the annual Aids conferences, ten of which 
have now been held since the disease first challenged the scien- 
tific community to find an answer in the mid-1980s. While osten- 
sibly gatherings to discuss researcliin progress, the conferences 
also invelve many people who arc III V-positive, or who care for 
Aids sufferers. These people are not scientists, but heeanse of 
the immediacy of the issues for them, they rapidly become 
familiar with all the latest research in the fields of virology and 
immunology, two of the mest difficnlt of scientific disciplines. 
Aids activists make life very difficult for scientists, with their 
sometimes unreasonable demands for faster progress. But they 
also make the whole field more stimulating, and help to ensure 
that research is focused on the real problems. 
This gap between what scientists know and what the public 
understands is one of the greatest threats to elear-sighted seienec 
and public policy. In 1931 Albert Einstein said, “Concern for man 
himself and his fate must always form the chief interest for all 
technical endeavour . . . in order that the creations of our minds 
shall be a blessing and not a curse to mankind. Never forget this 
is the midst of your diagrams and equations.” 
On the scientific side we in the laboratories and classrooms 
must share in the blame for the laek of diffusion of our findings 
and concerns through the communities in which we live. On the 
other side of it, however, the political leadership—local, national 
and international—must also bear the responsibility of leaving sci- 
ence in a ghetto of narrow specialities, despite its eentral impor- 
tanee in the world around us, The responsibility for scientific illit- 
eracy is shared and the solution to a continued state of chronic 
ignorance or misplaced sensationalism must be found at the 
meeting point between scientists and community leaders. 
Three ‘musts’ 
There are no easy answers, but it is elear that scientifie liter- 
acy must try to provide at least three things. 
First, a whole picture of the different issues. Only a holis- 
tic approach ean help us evaluate the different options open to 
us. One example is that of energy sources: the costs and risks 
of a power station are evaluated by most economists as if coal 
were a renewable resource, picked from the tree like an orange. 
Coal, hewever, is not renewable. Ilere arc two more examples. 
Can we serionsly address the problems of developing countries 
withont taking into aceount the terms of an equitable inter- 
national trade? Can we try to improve the education of rural 
women without providing the villages with wells and drills for 
obtaining a pure water supply? 
Secondly, it also means a far-sighted vision, bearing in mind 
that in all the most important questions the most fragile and 
cphemeral factor—Dbiologically, at least—is the decision-maker. 
Mortality is part of human existence, but we must learn to 
think ahead for the intergenerational human rights of our chil- 
dren and their children. 
Thirdly, we need a historical and global perspective, in 
order not to forget that there is a past whieh has forged our own 
behaviour and whieh, when consciously understood, can he 
used to changed our ways of being. Nothing is determined by 
some mechanical “logic” of history: everything depends on 
what we do in the here and now. This is the legacy we ean give 
to our descendants, [| 
THE UNESCO Gouriern APRIL 1997

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

— ss — 


### 105948: Te Wahipounamu: New Zealand's pristine wilderness

fillies 
1 Whoo 
by Ann-Marie Johnson 
Extraordinary flora and fauna flourish in Southwest New Zealand, one of the 
world’s most spectacular wilderness areas, which was placed on the World 
Heritage Listin 1990. 
The Fox glacier, on 
the western slopes of 
the Southern Alps. 
© 
S 
Fa
ut
re
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ns
 
Maori people see more than 
a mountain when they look 
at the snow-covered heights of 
New Zecaland’s highest peak. 
Members of the Ngai Tahu tribe 
sec their ancestor, Aoraki, first 
born son of Raki, the Sky Parent. 
In mythical times, Aoraki was 
shipwrecked after his canoe over- 
turned as he sailed in the South 
Pacific. Trying to save themselves, 
he and his crew clambered to the 
high side of the hull . . . 
remained there for eternity. 
and 
Today, the canoe forms the South 
Island of New Zealand, while 
Aoraki and his crew, still clinging 
to the hull, have become the great 
mountain chain known as the 
Southern Alps. 
In due course, Aoraki’s son, 
Tuterakiwhanoa, came searching 
  THE UNESCO Gouriea @ APRIL 1997 
for his father. Finding the remains 
of the shipwreck had turned to 
stone, he began to reshapeitinto 
a snitable home for his human 
descendants. Other atua (demi- 
sods) with skills in landscaping, 
fisheries, birds and horticulture 
helped him, creating the South 
Island eventually inhabited by the 
Ngai Tahu. 
The results of their ancestors’ 
labours can be seen today in one of 
the world’s most spectacular and 
pristine wilderness areas, south- 
west New Zealand, known in 
Maori as Te Wahipounamu. Sinee 
the atua created this vast region, 
man has had virtually no impact on 
it. In fact, no humans at all lived 
there untitabout 1,000 years ago. 
For millennia, the only sounds to 
be heard were the rustling of 
leaves, the rushing water of moun- 
tain streams and birdsong echo- 
ing through the densely luxuriant 
dark-green bush. In the absence 
of predatory mammals, plants did 
not need to develop defence meeh- 
anisms, some birds lost the power 
to fly and did not develop the 
bright plumage seen in the birds 
of more dangerous countries. 
Unique species evolved, their 
development hindered only by the 
cilects of the climate, 
ha 
North Island 
y a 
PSouth Isténd 
y 
PACIFIC DCEAN 
THE PLACE OF THE GREENSTONE 
When the Maori arrived, they 
{ound a land rich in resources they 
could use to sustain their exis- 
tence and aronnd which they 
could build their culture. Abun- 
dant birds and fish provided food, 
the bush gave them timber. But 
the most valuable prize was hewn 
from the rock of Aoraki’s mythical 
canoe and was reflected in the 
name the Maori gave the region: 
Te Wahipounamu, or the place of 
the greenstone, 
Greenstone (nephrite) was the 
most precious of all stone to the 
Maori. It was used for tools, 
weapons and ornaments, and in 
some forms is believed to have spir- 
itual force. 1t was certainly the 
most important item the Ngai

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 105948: Te Wahipounamu: New Zealand's pristine wilderness

  
®
J
 
P 
V
a
n
n
/
V
i
s
a
g
e
/
l
a
c
a
n
a
 
Pa
ns
 
Tahu had to trade with other 
tribes, and the stone from Te Wahi- 
pounamu was spread throughout 
New Zealand. 
In 1642 the Dutch navigator 
Abel Tasman became the first 
European to sight Te Wahi- 
pounamu, but no one landed there 
until the arrival of the English 
explorer James Cook in 1773. le 
and lis erew spent six weeks in 
Dusky Sound, clearing a small 
part of the native forest to make 
way [or an astronomical observa- 
tory. The tree stumps left behind 
:an still be seen today. 
But the first real effects of 
 
The Te Wahipounamu 
wilderness includes 
several national 
parks and nature 
reserves. Above, Mt. 
Cook National Park. 
The kea (Nestor 
notabilis), a parrot 
endemic to New 
Zealand, is found in 
the mountains of the 
South Island, 
A waterfall on one 
of the many rivers 
that run through 
the forest. 
European settlement were not felt 
until more than twenty years later, 
after sealers began to harvest the 
fur seals found along the coast. 
By 1820 the seal population had 
been almost wiped out. Fortu- 
nately they were given legal pro- 
tection in 1875, and the popula- 
tion has since recovered to the 
point where there are now thou- 
sands spread along the coastline. 
Europeans were also largely 
responsible for perhaps the most 
devastating impact on the wilder- 
ness of Te Wahipounamu. The 
introduction of browsing and 
predatory mammals sueh as red 
deer, the Australian brush-tailed 
possum, rabbits and rodents 
wrought havoe in an ecosystem ill- 
equipped to defend itself against 
such creatures. Several bird 
species have become extinct, 
while others are among the world’s 
most endangered. Some palatable 
plants were climinated from 
accessible areas and severe dam- 
age occurred in many places. 
But the untrained eye does not 
notice such things. Te Wahi- 
pounamn’s remoteness and isola- 
tion have saved it from the worst 
encroachments of human civiliza- 
ion, and there are still arcas where 
 
rap 
THE UNESCO Courier B APRIL 1997 
©F
 
Zu
ar
do
n/
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ns
 
| 4 
© 
S 
Fa
ut
re
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ni
s

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 105948: Te Wahipounamu: New Zealand's pristine wilderness

© 
J 
P,
Va
nn
/J
ac
an
a,
 
Pa
ri
s 
| human beings have never set foot. 
“The first major land-based explo- 
® 
J 
Ca
nc
al
os
i/
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ns
 
rations were carried out in the sec- 
ond half of the nineteenth century, 
but a number of the remote valleys 
were still considered to he unex- 
plored as late as the 1970s. 
ALONE IN THE WILDERNESS 
Today experienced trampers can 
find huge expanses whieh offer 
neither tracks nor huts nor any 
other sign of human inhabitation, 
giving them the opportunity to 
revel in the rare and sometimes 
frightening sense of complete soli- 
tude. With no roads, houses, tral- 
fic or noise, walkers casily find 
themselves overwhelmed by their 
insignificanee in the midst of the 
magnificent mountain and forest 
scenery that surrounds them. 
They are left to depend on their 
own resources in the knowledge 
that they are hours away from 
outside help. 
But less hardy—or more gre- 
garious—visitors can enjoy Te 
Wahipounamu’s wonders in a little 
THE UNESCO Courier EH APRIL 1997 
The Kiwi (Apteryx 
australis), a 
flightless bird with 
rudimentary wings, 
lives in New 
Zealand's dense 
forests. It nests on 
the ground and lays 
enormous eggs. 
The rare and 
endangered takahe 
{Notornis Mantelli), 
a flightless bird 
living in the forests 
of New Zealand's 
South Island. 
more comfort. The world-famous 
Milford Track offers guided or 
independent walks of two to five 
days through spectacular scenery, 
as do several other less well-known 
trails, such as the Routeburn, 
Greenstone or Iolyford tracks. 
Numerous shorter walks, ranging 
from thirty minutes to a full day, 
are spread along the length of Te 
Wahipounamu, giving safe and 
easy access to the wilderness. Sev- 
eral of these walks have been 
equipped with informative dis- 
plays to help explorers under- 
stand the sirroundinglandforms, 
wildlife or vegetation. 
But such displays cannot tell 
all there is to know about Te 
Wahipounamu, The region’s 2.6 
million hectares are breathtaking 
in the extent and variety of their 
natural beauty. Forming fully a 
tenth of New Zealaud’s entire 
landmass, the area is united only 
by its diversity. Changes in vege- 
tation and scenery which span 
thonsands of kilometres on the 
eontinents are compressed into an 
area only about 450 km long and 
between 40 to 90 km wide. 
The New 
Zealand’s highest mountains, 
o 
area contains 
longest glaciers, tallest forests, 
wildest rivers and gorges, most 
rugged coastline, deepest fjords 
and lakes, and largest populations 
of [orest birds. It is home to the 
world’s largest buttercup, the Mt, 
Cook Buttercup; possibly the 
highest sea cliff, Mitre Peak; the 
world’s only alpine parrot, the 
friendly but mischievous kea; and 
the total wild population of the 
rare takahe. 
There are dozens of bird species 
in Te Wahipounamu, including 
many found only in New Zealand. 
Among the best known is the kea, 
which shows no fear of intruders, 
and in fact often seems to actively 
seck contaet with humans—often 
to their discomfort. With its strong 
hooked beak, this inquisitive hird 
can destroy sneakers left outside 
overnight, canvas or vinyl bags and 
anything else it decides to take an 
interestin. 
New Zealand’s smallest bird, 
the rifleman, lives in the region’s 
mountain forests, and the tiny 
rock wren can be spotted in alpine 
areas. One of New Zealand’s few 
alpine birds, the rock wren sur- 
vives the harsh mountain winters 
by sheltering in openings within 
the rock debris beneath the snow. 
Further down the mountains, the 
beautifully echoing song of the 
aptly named bellbird, or kori- 
mako, is commonly heard, and 
careful observers can also see the 
tui, bush robin, flocks of sereeeh- 
ing kaka (forest parrot) and 
kakariki (parakeet). Tawaki or 
Fjordland erested penguins 
inhabit parts of the coastline, 
while about 50 pairs of the beau- 
tiful kotuku (white heron) regu- 
larly nest at the northern end of 
the region. Although common in 
other eountries, the kotuku is 
rare in New Zealand and has great 
spiritual significance for the 
Maori, who sce it as a symbol of all 
that is beautiful and rare. 
SURVIVORS FROM A LOST CONTINENT 
Seientists tell us that Te Wahi- 
pounamu is the hest modernrep- 
resentation of the ancient flora and 
fauna of Gondwanaland, the south- 
ern super-continent that broke up 
to form New Zealand, South Amer- 
ica, India, Africa, Antarctica and 
Australia. New Zealand broke off 
80 to 100 million years ago before 
the appearance of marsupials and 
other mammals, and the country’s 
subsequent long isolation enabled 
ancient life forms to survive to a 
far greater extent than elsewhere. 
The great forests of rimu, southern 
heech and kahikatea are the clos- 
est links with Gondwanaland, as 
are unique birds like the {flightless 
kiwi, which New Zealanders have 
adopted as their national symbol. 
The magnificent chain of the 
Southern Alps lics along the 
boundary of the Pacific and Indo- 
Australian plates, two of the six 
 

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 105948: Te Wahipounamu: New Zealand's pristine wilderness

©}
 
P 
Va
nn
/j
ac
an
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
 
gigantic plates making up the 
earth’s erust. This is one of only 
three places in the world where 
a major tectonic plate boundary 
can be found on land. Earth- 
quakes caused by the collision of 
these two plates have helped New 
Zealand gain its reputation as the 
“Shaky isles”, but the fault line 
has also given rise to a dramatic 
landscape of deep fjords and high 
mountains. 
The glaciers of Te Wahi- 
pounamu are also evidence of the 
movements under the earth’s sur- 
face. These glaciers, particularly 
those named Fox and Franz-Josef, 
were among New Zealand's first 
tourist attractions for those 
wealthy enough to undertake the 
arduous trip into the wilderness. 
But the movement of the glaciers 
is so rapid that visitors a century 
ago saw a different sight to those 
we see today as beth glaciers are 
2 to 3 km shorter than wen they 
were first surveyed in the 1890s, 
Fox Glacier is 13 km long, while 
Franz-Josef is 10 km, and both 
flow very quickly, averaging as 
much as 1.5 metres a day, 
although rates of up to 8 in a day 
have been recorded. Nearby, the 
28 km Tasman Glaeier, which 
flows from Mt. Cook (Aoraki), is 
one of the longest glaciers in the 
southern hemisphere. 
The glaciers are very sensitive 
to elimatic changes, advancing 
during periods of heavy snowfalls 
and receding under less severe 
© 
S 
Fa
ut
re
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ns
 
  
Pancake Rocks, 
Punakaiki. 
A brush-tailed 
opossum 
(Trichosurus T. 
Vulpecula). 
weather conditions. llowever, Te 
Waliipounamu’s weather is rarely 
extreme, even thongh the region 
lies across one of the world’s 
windiest latitudes, the Roaring 
Forties. The large amounts of 
ocean surrounding New Zealand 
moderate temperatures, so the 
climate is temperate and avoids 
major seasonal changes. The 
Southern Alps form a barrier to 
the prevailing moisture-laden 
westerly winds coming off the Tas- 
man Sea, with the result that the 
West Coast is subjeet to heavy and 
sometimes violent rainstorms at 
any time of the year. The coastal 
lowlands receive 3,000 to 5,000 
mm of rain a year and this level 
rises with the terrain, so that the 
western flank of the Southern 
Alps ean reeeive more than 
10,000 mm a year, although 
much of it falls as snow. 
Today, the Ngai Tahu are not 
the only people who have reason to 
be grateful that Aoraki was ship- 
wrecked in an isolated part of the 
South Pacifie. Visitors from 
around the world, as well as New 
Zealanders themselves, are inereas- 
ingly diseovering Lhe magnificence 
of this untonched part of the 
world. Even in this age of casy 
travel, Te Waliipounamu’s remote- 
ness means that tourist operators 
and administrators have had time 
to benefit from the lessons learned 
from the effects of nncontrolled 
tourist development elsewhere. 
Althougls recreational use of the 
region is generally encouraged, 
the activities that are available, 
such as boating, fishing, hunting 
and mountaineering, have little 
impact on the environment. 
Growing awareness of the 
importance of conserving the 
world’s few remaining areas of 
nntouehed wilderness ensures 
that Te Wahipounamu wil eon- 
tinue to he preserved as far as pos- 
sible in its pristine state. 1f Tuter- 
akiwhonoa ever returns to survey 
his handiwork, he will not find Te 
Wahipounamu very different from 
the way he felt it. u 
THE UNESCO Gounierm APRIL 1997

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 105949: Gardens: a cultural flowering

  
GREENWATCH 
ardens: a cu 
= 
Ve - 
“As the expression of the 
direct affinity between civi- 
lization and nature, and as a place of 
enjoyment suited to meditation or 
repose, the garden thns acquires the 
cosmic significance of an idealized 
image of the world, a ‘paradise’ in the 
etymological sense of the term, and 
yet a testimony to a cnlture, a style, 
an age, and often to the originality of 
acreative artist.” So says the Charter 
of Florence, which was drawn up in 
1981 by the International Commit- 
tee on Historie Gardens and Sites, a 
specialist organ of ICOMOS, the Inter- 
national Council on Monuments and 
Sites (see page 40). 
Gardening is a universal art. In 
the Bible the Garden of Eden was 
created by God and tended hy 
Adam, a place of delight to which he 
longed to return after he had heen 
expelled fron it. In the Qur’an, par- 
adise is a garden rich in pastures, 
fountains, trees and delicious frit. 
In the arid desert, verdant oases are 
watering places that make life pos- 
sible. In China, the fabulous K’un- 
lun mountains of the west, the gate- 
way to heaven, were festooned with 
hanging gardens. 
Unlike agriculture, which has a 
utilitarian purpose, gardening imposes 
a certain order on turbulent and 
unpredietable nature. This is what 
the park at Versailles has in common 
with a Japanese garden. “A garden,” 
writes Belgian horticultural specialist 
René Pechére, “is a composition. Itis 
always artificial. . . .” Itis a mirror of 
the society whieh creates it. 
Places of power and holiness 
History offers many examples of 
rulers who wanted a magnificent 
park to provide a settling for their 
palaces and express their power. The 
The gardens of the Alhambra, 
Granada (Spain}. 
THE UNESCO Gouriern APRIL 1997 
. 3 tural flo A 
\ MA a a5 Re 
Greek historian and philosopher 
Xenophon wrote admiringly of the 
paradise garden designed and cuhti- 
vated by Cyrus the Younger (in 
about 420 B.C.), king of Persia. Love 
of gardens was at the core of the 
Persian world-view. Not only was gar- 
dening a part of the edueation of 
princes, it was taught to all sehool- 
boys. Two hundred years earlier, one 
of the seven wonders of the world, 
the hanging gardens of Babylon, 
were planted on stepped terraces by 
Nebuchadrezzar Il for his Persian- 
horn wife, who missed the gardens of 
her native land, 
ArINa 
o 
¥ ol whe] 
by France Bequette 
Greece’srocky soil, warm ¢limate 
and lack of water were not very pro- 
pitious for gardening, and in any ease 
hexuriant pleasure gardens associated 
with power and personal prestige 
would probably not have gone down 
well with a people enamonred of 
demoeraey. Gymnasia (schools) were 
established in Athenian parks for the 
conmmon good. Plato shared a garden 
witl his students and established the 
Academy there. The sacred groves 
familiar to the Greeks of Antiquity 
were wildernesses where divinities 
took refuge, and as a result were left 
untouched by human hand. 
  
  © 
P 
Wy
so
ck
i 
/H
ém
is
ph
ér
es
, 
Pa
ns

## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 105949: Gardens: a cultural flowering

i
 
-
 
S
n
.
 
. 
«3 
- 
~ 
  
Egyptian gardens blended plea- 
sure with productivity (wine, fruit, 
vegetables and papyrus). Exotic 
trees and flowers were imported very 
carly on and enriched the country’s 
natural plantlife. Gardens were laid 
out in geometric patterns imposed 
by the presence of irrigation ditches. 
A scale model of a garden with abun- 
dant plantlife, found in the tomb of 
Meket-Re in Thebes (1700 B.C.), 
shows a garden with a reetangular 
layout, surronnded by high walls 
that protected it from the desert 
sands and the Nile flood. 
In ancient Rome gardens were 
made within the confines of villas. 
This example was followed in 
Europe during the Middle Ages. In 
those troubled times city dwellers 
planted their gardens inside rather 
than outside the town walls, and 
lords made gardens in the conrtyards 
of their castles, where women grew 
vegetables and medicinal herbs, as 
did monks in monastery gardens. 
These enclosed places contrasted 
with cemeteries, which at that time 
were public meeting places where 
behaviour was free and easy, if not 
licentious. Located as they were next 
to churches, cemeteries continued 
until the 18th century to enjoy their 
medieval status as extra-territorial 
zones where the right of asylum asso- 
ciated with the church building was 
still enjoyed. 
The Islamic heritage 
In Spain, the Arabs began to create 
pleasure gardens in the 8th century. 
Thousands of them appeared in 
Andalusia. The Moorish gardens of 
Granada—the Athambra and the 
Generalife—are still among the most 
beautiful in the world. In compli- 
ance with strict geometric patterns, 
they were divided into four quar- 
©C
ha
rl
es
 
Lé
na
rs
 
Pa
ns
 
The gardens of 
Versailles Palace 
(France). 
An entrantina 
contest for flower- 
decorated 
courtyards in 
Cérdoba (Spain). 
ters, representing the four elements. 
This pattern, often symbolieally fea- 
tured on carpets, was also fonnd 
among the Moguls of India. In the 
15th eentury the Muslim sultan 
Tamberlaine (Timnr-Lang) used itin 
Samarkand. The vast extent of their 
gardens gave his sueeessors real eon- 
trol of the land, and were invested 
with divine power by making the 
desert bloom. 
In Italy during the same period 
gardens acquired a reputation for 
sensuality. They were places for cel 
ehrations, friendly meetings and 
intellectual and sexnal freedom. 
They provided an image of a well 
tempered, well ordered universe in 
an eternal spring. Water played the 
major role in these Renaissance gar- 
dens. Carefully trimmed evergreen 
shrubs were sometimes used as 
mazes. Marble statuary from Antiq- 
uity had still not been dethroned by 
flowers, 
The triumph of geometry 
Italian artists who travelled through 
Curope inspired “French” gardens 
where architecture took pride of 
place over nature. Very strict geo- 
metric perspectives were nsed to 
show buildings to their best advan- 
tage. The gardens at Versailles, 
designed by André Le Notre, were 
inspired by the sun-symbol chosen 
by King Louis XIV, the main axes 
corresponding to the points of the 
compass. Flower beds edged with 
trimmed box hedges were planted. 
Garden specialist Gabrielle van 
Zuylen sees the influence of Ver- 
sailles at Blenheim Palace in Eng- 
land, in St. Petersburg (Russia), at 
La Granja near Segovia (Spain) and im 
Caserta near Naples (Italy). Le 
  THE UNESCO Gouritrn APRIL 1997 . 
©D
eg
as
/P
ar
ra
, 
Pa
ns

## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 105949: Gardens: a cultural flowering

© 
Bi
bl
io
th
éq
ue
 
Na
ti
on
al
e,
 
Pa
rs
 
> 
Detail from a 14th-century manuscript of 
  
  
  
 
the Latin translation of a medical treatise 
by the great Arab physician Abul Kasim 
(Latin Albucasis), who lived in Cérdoba in 
FURTHER READING: 
v Plants in Garden History, 
the 10th century. Penelope Hobhouse, 
Pavilion Books, 1992, 
journey {rom the outside world into v European Gardens, 
a journal published by The Historic 
Gardens Foundation (London) as part of 
the Council of Europe's Cultural Routes 
Programme, Strasbourg (France). 
In English and French. 
the “Désert”, The park, which has 
an “English-style” layout, contains 
an open theatre and 17 small struc- 
tures or “fahriques”: an Egyptian- 
style obelisk and pyramid, a temple 
v Tous les jardins du monde, 
Gabrielle van Zuylen, 
“Découvertes”, Gallimard, 1994. 
dedicated to the Greek god Pan and 
a votive altar and a tomb evoking 
ancient Rome. A Tartar tent stands 
v Jardins dessinés, 
Grammaire des jardins, 
René Pechere, editor. 
Atelier d'art urbain, 1987. 
on an “Island of Mappiness”, and 
beside a pond there is a Chinese 
house with onthouses and an 
enclosed garden, reflecting ideas of 
China current in France at that time. 
This high spot of the Enlighten- 
ment attracted visitors from allover ture by virtue of its composition;   the world. Thomas Jefferson, for sculpture via the art of landscaping; 
  
a melona ure maa 
mai 
Coon paper olen 1 ale. 
1 mane oma | os 
woolicnm y y 1100 
Notre’s radiating garden paths even 
served as inspiration for the town 
plan of Washington D. C. 
Towards the end of the 18th cen- 
tury, the French garden came to be 
secn as too artificial and gave way to 
the English landscaped park style. 
Lovers of poetry and painting for- 
sook straight lines in favour of “nat- 
ural” landseapes composed of hills, 
woods, ponds and waterfalls. The 
Romantics liked their paintings to 
include ruins and mauvsoleums. The 
garden became a theatre set, 
expressing the aspirations of 18th- 
century man in search of knowledge. 
Landscaped gardens: 
the Désert de Retz 
The Désert de Retz, some 20 kilo- 
metres west of aris, is an astonish- 
ing example of this in France (the 
word “désert” here being used to 
designate an isolated, “deserted” 
place). It is a landscaped garden 
which Francois Racine de Monville 
began to ereate on a 40-hectare site 
in 1774. 
In a vale in the heart of Marly 
Forest, he built a honse in the form 
of an ancient ruined column 15 
metres in diameter. Visitors enter 
the park throngh a grotto which 
leads them on a kind of initiatory 
THE UNLSCC Courier EH APRIL 1997 
example, architeet and future Pres- 
ident of the United States, took 
inspiration {rom it for the Univer- 
painting via the effect of coloured 
trees; music through the rhythms 
of its composition; poetry, theatre 
sity of Virginia in Charlottesville. and even dauce”. 
Visionary film-maker Abel Gance Our round-the-world garden tour 
chose it as a setting for one of his ~~ will be continued in the next issue. 
films. The surrcalists were fasci- | | 
nated by its mystery. 
* See Mr, Jefferson's Dream House by 
Franeis Leary in the February [997 issue 
of the Uxksco Courier, “Radio, a future for 
sound”, —FEditor 
Perhaps rardens are a synthesis 
oO 
of all art forms. René Pechére 
believes that a garden is “architec 
The International Council 
on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) 
The International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) was founded in 1965 at Warsaw (Poland), 
as aresnlt of the adoption the year before of the International Charter for the Conservation and Restora- 
tion of Monuments and Sites, widely known as the Venice Charter. It is the only international non-govern- 
mental organization that works to promote the application of theory, methodology and scientific techniques 
to the conservation of monuments and sites. With IUCN (the World Conservation Union}, ICOMOS advises 
UNESCO on the nomination of new sites to the World Heritage List. 
ICOMOS has 5,300 members in 88 countries. They include architects, art historians, archaeologists, 
town-planners, engineers, librarians and administrators, and constitute ICOMOS National Committees in 
their respective conntries, [ICOMOS has 15 international committees, specializing in fields such as 
stained-glass windows, cave painting, and historic gardens and sites. Each y car ICOMOS organizes sym- 
posia on technical themes, e.g. open-air mnseums, the restoration of cave complexes, the conservation 
of wood, stone or adobe, photogrammetry, and the reconstitution of historic gardens. 
ICOMOS has a well-stocked documentation centre (more than 20,000 documents) that is open to the 
public. It produces a range of pnblications, including the proceedings of national and international sym- 
posia, technical dossiers, reviews (ICOMOS Bulletin, ICOMOS Information and Monumentum) and 
bibliographical and thematic catalogues of all reference works available at the Doenmentation Centre. 
In order to increase awareness of heritage conservation issues, [ICOMOS and UNESCO have declared 
18 April International Day for Monnments and Sites. | 
ICOMOS publications may be ordered from: 
ICOMOS Documentation Centre, 49-51, rue de la Fédération, 75015 Paris, France. 
Tel.: (33) (0)1 45 67 67 70. Fax: (33) (0}1 45 66 06 22.

## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### IGNORE

©P
 
Wy
so
ck
i/
He
mi
sh
er
es
, 
Pa
ns
 
©G
 
Ho
fe
r/
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ri
s 
  
THE AEGEAN ISLANDS, 
EUROPEAN 
CULTURAL PARK 
A number of island groups in the 
Agean Sea are considered the era- 
dle of Greek civilization and have 
remained virtually unchanged for 
centuries, With UNESCO support, 
the Greek government has decided 
to protect them, and to symboli- 
cally declare the Aegean Archi- 
pelago “Cultural Park of Europe”. 
Its pilot “Aegean Archipelago” 
action programme will seek to man- 
age historical centres, modernize 
muscnms and renovate and protect 
monuments. The programme is 
part of the World Decade for Cul- 
tural Development. [| 
RISING CO, 
HITS THE FOREST 
Carbon dioxide (CO,) levels in the 
atmospliere have been rising since 
the mid-19th century as a result 
of increased human activity. The 
I'rench National Institute for Agro- 
nomie Research (INRA) lias dis- 
covered that ene effect of the rise 
has heen an abnormal inerease in 
 
1 
ly 
the diameter of certain trees in 
temperate forest ecosystems. For 
example, the average diameter of 
silver firs in the Vosges massif 
(France) has increased by 160% 
since 1850, and that of the pedun- 
culate oak in Lorraine by 55%. 
The balance of certain forest 
ecosystems may be affected, and 
this is bound to have repercussions 
onforest management and the tim- 
ber industry. [| 
TONGA TURNS 
TO PUMPKINS 
The Kingdon of Tonga, an island 
nation in the Pacifie with some 
104,000 inhabitants, is trying hard 
toimproveits balance of payments. 
After abandoning the idea of incin- 
erating millions of nsed tyres, which 
would have had a disastrous effect 
on air quality, Tongans turned to 
growing pumpkins for sale to the 
Japanese, who insist that their 
pumpkins must be perfectly 
shaped. Tonga is hoping eventually 
to export 8,000 tons a year, but for 
the moment the island kingdom is 
groaning under the weight of imper- 
fectly shaped pumpkins. [| 
EUROPE’S CULTURAL 
ROUTES 
The Council of Enrope’s Cultural 
Routes programme, launched in 
1987, seeks to throw light on the 
itineraries along which Europe’s 
main religious, artistic, seientifie, 
technical and commereial trends 
and movements have spread. 
Themes chosen inclnde Celtic 
routes, monastie influence routes, 
the silk routes, and rural habitat. 
Within the framework of the pro- 
sramme, a guidebook devoted to 
the routes leading to Santiago de   
Compostela, the famous pilgrimage 
centre in northwest Spain, has 
recently heen published in French. 
Lavishly illustrated with photos and 
maps, Guide européen des cliemins 
de Compostelle, ly Jean Bourdarias 
and Michel Wasielewski (Fayard, 
Paris, 1996), gives details of 9 dif- 
ferent routes starting in various 
European countries. [| 
For further information: 
Cultural Routes Secretariat, 
Council of Europe, 67075 
Strasbourg Cedex, France. 
Tel: (33) (0)3 88 11 35 37; 
Fax: (33) (0)3 88 41 27 88. 
NOT SO PROTECTED 
SPECIES 
The ortolan (Emberizia hortulana) 
is a little bird in great danger. Its 
numbers are thought to be declining 
in Europe, where it is a protected 
species covered by the European 
Union’s “Birds” Directive. But 
although ortolan hunting is thus 
strietly forbidden, the bird is threat- 
ened with extinetion in France. Laeh 
year an estimated 50,000 ortolans 
ave killed in southwest France as a 
gastronomic delicacy. [| 
CONSERVATION 
AND THE COMMUNITY 
In Afrtea wildlife conservation 
areas are often set up to the detri- 
ment of the local people, who are 
  
not consulted. The World Wide 
Fund for Nature (WWF) is trying 
to avoid this error in Namibia. In 
collaboration with a non-govern- 
mental organization, Integrated 
Rural Development and Nature 
Conservation (IRDNC), WWI" has 
established a netwock of eommu- 
nity game guards who are directly 
responsible for keeping tabs on 
wild animals and poaching in their 
areas, and, when wildhfe numbers 
permit, for organizing hunts and 
distributing the meat. Villagers 
are also being directly involved in 
tourism so that they ean benefit 
from it while insisting on respect 
{or their enlture. | 
TERMINATING TERMITES 
Hien Lam Cac temple (Sonl Poreh) 
in Viet Nam, one of the mounments 
in the Imperial City of Iloe 
included on the World leritage 
list in 1993, is infested wilh ter- 
mites. Insecticides used so far to 
eradicate the 200-odd species of 
while ants that are playing havoc 
with the wooden buildings and the 
crops outside have heen highly 
toxic but ineffective. To save the 
Hue nronuments, UNESCO has 
appealed to a petro-chemieal com- 
pany that has developed a selee- 
tive insecticide whichis effective in 
small doses and does not pollute 
water, [| 
THE UNESCO Courier BH APRIL 1997 
©S
 
Fa
ut
re
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ns
 
©F
 
Fo
nt
ai
ne
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
, 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

LISTENING 
BM You play several instruments—bass, 
piano, guitar, the drums, African drums and 
the marimba. Do you identify with any 
“particular one? 
Rido Bayonne: No, they all give me some- 
thing. L have a different relationship with 
each one. But it was through playing the 
hass that [ became well known. 
BM Your music has a strong beat. When you 
compose, do you start with the beat, the 
harmony, the melody or the structure? 
R. B.: The beat. Because rhythm is Tife’s 
motor. Ileartheats, breathing and all 
sounds are rhythm, even the silence that 
goes with them. In this sense you can say 
that everybody makes music without 
realizing it. But don’t forget that in 
Africa the drum is the basic instrument. 
In any case, my music is always chang- 
ing, and I never play my picees the same 
way twice. 
BM Where do you get yourinspiration from? 
R. B.: From many sources, but the most 
important thing is that Ihave to feel emo- 
tionally involved. If I'm not, I can’t com- 
pose. l am very receptive to what goes on 
around me . . . a conversation, a erying 
child or even sounds like the clinking of 
forks in arestaurant. Forks striking plates 
can create rhythm and melody. When you 
love music, you hear it everywhere! 
HB Your musicis also the result of various 
traditions. 
R. B.: Besides my African cultural back- 
ground, I’ve learned [rom European har- 
" 
THE UNESCO Gouriern APRIL 1997 


### 105950: Isabelle Leymarie talks to Rido Bayonne

ISABELLE LEYMARIE TALKS TO 
RIDO BAYONNE 
Versatile instrumentalist, band-leader and singer, Rido Bayonne is a musical jack of all trades who blends Bantu, Cuban, jazz, souland funky 
beats into a unique personal style that bursts with vitality. Born in the Congo, near Pointe-Noire, he became his country’s most popular 
drummer before moving to Paris, where he played with a number of international st rs. Since 1985 he has performed in clubs and festivals 
at the head of his big band, with which he recently made a recording, Gueule de Black. 
monics and American music, especially 
James Brown, who has had a big influ- 
ence on me. Bot I was born in a cotton 
field and I first heard the musicians of my 
village during festivities and the impor- 
tant ritual ceremonies that marked birth, 
initiation, marriage and death. We spoke 
French at home, and I had a Western- 
style education. Cultural intermixing is a 
tremendous thing. My fatlier had me lis- 
ten to Franco, a Congolese musician who 
played a very important part in popular 
African music, and also to Miles Davis, 
Duke Ellington, European and American 
popular music and Cuban music. Several 
Congolese of my great-grandfather’s gen- 
eration were sold into slavery in Cuba, 
and my family has always been particu- 
larly fond of Cuban musie. 
BW Did you always want to be a musician? 
R. B.: Always, despite my father’s strong 
opposition. ITe didn’t think music was a 
real job. My late mother told me that I 
was already beating time when I was still 
in her belly. I am self-taught. As a child 
I made my own bongos and guitars with 
the spokes of bicycle wheels. I had no 
idea how to tune a guitar, hut that never 
stopped me from playing. When I was 
eighteen I started composing and har- 
monizingsongs. Five years later [earned 
a bit of money by playing in the Bantu 
National band in Brazzaville—a well 
known band that had an excellent saxo- 
phone section. Then I played in 
Cameroon with Mann Dibango®. In the 
1960s, to keep my [ather happy, I stud- 
icd law for five years. When I finally gave 
that up to devote myself full-time to 
music, my father declared war on me, 
although since then Lhave often helped 
my family get by. My brothers, who 
stayed in the Congo, are liaving a hard 
time, even those who are doetors and 
lawyers, because of the economie situa- 
tion. Eventually my father cane to {eel 
happy about my success and even became 
proud of me. 
BM What kinds of bands have you played 
within France? 
R. Bo: At first I played in dance-halls in 
Lyons, then Paris. There weren’t many 
blacks in France in the 1960s, and peo- 
ple often came to “sec” the band because 
there was a black in it. In fact up till 
then I didn’t even know I was black; 1 
was so caught up in my music that I never 
realized! 
BM What are you doing at the moment? 
R. B.: I’m studying elassical harmony at a 
conservatory. I’m the oldest in the class. 
I’ve got to he humble, because every day 
I see that it is not musicians whe are 
great, but music. It transcends us. I'm 
always amazed to see that everything in 
music that I thought was innate can be 
taught and learned. Recently I had fun 
taking sixteen bars of Mozart's Requiem 
and re-harmonizing them, changing the 
melody and re-orchestrating them for 
brass, voiee, keyboard, piano and drums. 
You can tell it’s Mozart, hut itis actually 
a re-creation. Classical musicians are

## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 105950: Isabelle Leymarie talks to Rido Bayonne

afraid to innovate and certainly can’t 
improvise; whereas jazz and pop mnsi- 
cians are a lot freer and more open from 
that point of view. As far as I'm concerned 
only Mozart is qualified to play Mozart. 
But for the past 200 years people have 
made themselves play and replay his 
works note for note as if they were pre- 
served in amber. Every musician has a 
streak of madness. And to get inside your- 
sell and find this streak of madness and 
your own voice, you've got to be pos- 
sessed. Tike Mozart's madness. Le took 
his obsessions to their very limit. 
BM Yourrecord Gueule de Black was 
recorded at a concert in Bayonne, 
R.B.: Yes, in 1995 an old dream of mine 
came true. I’d long wanted to see the 
city of Bayonne, and it was a revelation to 
me. My family name, Bayonne, originated 
with a Basque sailor who settled in the 
Congo long age and had children he 
named after his home town. So I've got 
Basque ancestors. Bayonne is a great 
town with old buildings that have been 
very well preserved. I gave an open-air 
concert at a town celebration, and every- 
onc there welcomed me with open arms. 
It was incredible. That same year 1 
turned fifty. It was an opportunity to 
bring together dozens of French-speak- 
ing musicians from all sorts of back- 
grounds. Tam a happy man. Music still 
gives me all T could ever hope for. HB 
* See the interview with Manu Bibango 
in the Unesco Courter (“A world of nuisic”, 
March 1991)— Editor. 
DISCOGRAPHY: 
Gueule de Black 
Jazz on the Ramparts 
JAR 64008 
WORDS AND DEEDS 
| have been a subscriber to the Courierfor 
several years and each month | read with 
great interest Mr. Federico Mayor's “Com- 
mentary” column, which expresses in 
straightforward terms ideas with which | 
very broadly agree. In the December 1995 
issue (“Troglodytes, a hidden world”) Mr. 
Mayor wrote that when Unesco speaks of 
“the need for development with a human 
face... itis merely complying with one of 
its basic precepts: the duty to act as the 
conscience of the United Nations system”. 
[ feel that the UN doesn’t often listen to 
the voice of its conscience, that behind a 
facade of good intentions its different 
organs and institutions too often seem 
to act on behalf of a minority of rich and 
powerful countries that increasingly exploit 
the rest of the world. | also feel that, 
instead of really working to construct a bet- 
ter world, institutions like the World Bank, 
the International Monetary Fund and the 
World Trade Organization are playing into 
the hands of the rich nations and financiers 
centred in the Clubs of Pans and London. 
I was not convinced by what Mr. Ismail Ser- 
ageldin said in his interview with the Courier 
{June 1996) about the World Bank's activ- 
ities on behalf of the poor countries, since 
there is widespread agreement that the 
inequalities between poor and rich are 
steadily growing. 
I heartily approve of UNesco's goals in 
the field of social development as 
expressed on pages 30 and 31 of your 
March 1895 issue (“Development, the 
haves and the have-nots”). But how can 
those who possess the necessary politi- 
cal and economic clout be persuaded to 
take the decisions needed to achieve those 
goals? To my mind, the main political play 
ers have no desire to change things. How 
can nations he made to respect the com- 
mitments they make at international meet 
ings? Ought not some aspects of the work- 
ings of international organizations be 
reviewed in the interests of more effective 
democracy and greater justice? 
Mr. Mayor also rightly condemns vio- 
lence and intolerance. | believe that the first 
and most serious type of violence 1s the 
institutional violence of public institutions 
and states which, sometimes under the 
cover of democracy and liberalism, create » 
THE UNESCO Gouritrn APRIL 1997

## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

letters to the editor 
injustices, inequalities and inhuman living 
conditions. Would it not be possible for 
Unesco and the Unesco Counerto denounce 
more openly the institutions, states and 
organs of economic and financial power that 
are leading humanity towards such a prob- 
lematic future? 
Bernard Lucas 
Aigrefeuille-sur-Maine (France) 
VORACIOUS MEGA-CITIES 
After reading Mr. Federico Mayor's column 
devoted to “The city, environment and cul- 
ture” in your May 1996 issue (“Silence”) | 
should like to make the following com- 
ments. | have spent thirty-five years of my 
life working on town and country planning 
In France and elsewhere, and my analysis 
of the reasons for the nse of mega-cities dif- 
fers from that put forward by Mr. Mayor. In 
my opinion these cities are the result of a 
total lack of town and country planning pol- 
icy, a total lack of co-ordinated develcpment 
policy, and excessive economic laissez-faire 
which 18 detrimental to the organization of 
human needs into a hierarchy and to their 
© fulfillment. 
Observation reveals that every city 
has a “zone of attraction” of which it 1s the 
centre because of its administrative, com- 
mercial, educational, sanitary and cultural 
facilities. Mege-cities are monsters that 
devour their environment. If a branch of 
education Is ever devoted to urban living, 
it should teach that an economy based 
on maximum profit should be replaced by 
one based on an organized hierarchy of 
needs, that a market economy should be 
replaced by one based on service, and that 
megalomania and individualistic gigantism 
should be replaced by respect for the 
human dimension and co-operation within 
the community. 
Robert Caillot 
Lyons (France) 
3 | 
© THE UNESCO Courier m APRIL 1997 
MISTAKEN IDENTITY 
There was an error in the article about Colo- 
nia del Sacramento published in your Jan- 
uary 1997 issue (“Helping the poor to help 
themselves”). While it is true that Admiral 
Willam Brown is acclaimed in Uruguay for 
his role in the struggle waged by Latin Amer- 
ican countries against the shackles of colo- 
nialism, he was actually in the service of 
Argentina, where he is regarded as the 
founder of the Argentine navy. it was 
another Irishman, Pedro Campbell, who dis- 
tinguished himself in Uruguay's struggle 
for independence by fighting under the ban- 
ner of General José Artigas and became a 
Uruguayan national hero. 
Victor N. Dodino 
International Maritime Organization 
(London) 
OVERLOOKED! 
The February 1997 issue of the Unesco 
Courter devoted to radio (“Radio, a future 
for sound”) made interesting reading, but | 
was disappointed that there was no men- 
tion of Slovenian broadcasting in the selec- 
tive list of key dates compiled by Prof. 
Bernard Blin. 
Here are a few dates to fill this gap: 
1924: Marij Osana makes an expenmental 
radio broadcast with a transmitter made by 
himself. 
1926: The first experimental radio broad- 
cast of a concert is made in Ljubljana. 
1941: Seven months after the destruction 
of the Radio-Ljubljana station by the Ger- 
man air force, the Slovenian Liberation Front 
founds a clandestine station called Kricac 
(“The Yeller”). 
1944: Radio Liberation Front is founded in 
the liberated territory of Bela Krajina. 
1946: Creation of the Slovenian Radio 
Board. 
Joze Bergant 
Deputy Director, 
Transmitters and Communications 
Department, 
RTV Slovenia 
Ljubljana (Slovenia) 
AUTHORS 
MAURO ROS! is a staff member of the Unesco 
Publishing Office. 
DAVID LE BRETON, a French sociologist, 
teaches at the University of Human Sciences in 
Strasbourg (France). His published works 
include Des visages, Essai d’anthropologie 
(Métal, Pans, 1992) and Anthropologie du 
corps et modermité (PUF, Pans, 1995). 
SHIGENORI NAGATOMOQ, of Japan, teaches 
Japanese philosophy and Buddhism in the 
Religious Studies department at Temple 
University, Philadelphia (U.S.A.). He is the author 
of Attunement Through the Body (State 
University of New York Press, 1992}. 
DAVID BIALE, of the U.S.A., is Koret Professor 
of Jewish History at the Graduate Theological 
Union in Berkeley, California. Notable among his 
published works are Eros and The Jews: from 
Biblical Israel to Contemporary Amenca (Basic 
Books, 1992) and The Invention of Judaism 
(Schocken, 1997). 
MANGA BEKOMBO PRISO, a Cameroonian 
ethnologist, 1s a researcher at the French 
National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS). 
Among his recent publications 1s an edition of 
Défis et Prodiges: la fantastique histoire de Djeki- 
la-Njambé (Classiques africans, Paris, 1994). 
ROMAIN MAITRA is an Inchian anthropologist 
and journalist specializing in the performing arts. 
ABDELWAHAB MEDDEB is a Tunisian writer who 
teaches comparative literature at the University 
of Paris X. He recently published an essay 
entitled Blanches traverses du passé (Fata 
Morgana publishers, Fontfroide, France, 1997). 
ANN-MARIE JOHNSON is a New Zealand 
journalist. 
FRANCE BEQUETTE is a Franco-American 
journalist specializing in the environment. 
ISABELLE LEYMARIE, a Franco-Amercan 
musicologist, is the author of Du Tango au 
reggae, Musiques noires d‘Amérique latine et des 
Caraibes (From Tango to Reggae, Black Music of 
Latin America and the Caribbean, Flammarion, 
Pans, 1996) and Musiques Caraibes (Caribbean 
Music, Actes Sud, Arles, 1996).

## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

announce an 
International 
photo competition 
on the theme of 
    
    
THETHEME: Yah yuay 
2 theme of the competition, inspired by - — 
the Preamble to Unesco’s Constitution, is 
day life. 
A eM - 
  
'ONDITION: 
OF ENTRY: 
s open to pr {1 ~All 
sphrs inl parts of the word k 
tints re Tequesta Tot : oof 
a
the theme “peserinemity Hit, mi 
= 
p
l
?
 
_ 
a
s
i
 
@
 
is 
ze 
15 July 1997. 0 | y A “Unesco Courier- Nikon Pri 
of 
Wo, | 14 I 
will be awarded to the winning entry. 
Prize-winning photos will be published 
in the Unesco Courier. 
For further information, contact: 
“Peace in everyday life” competition 
Unesco Counter 
31, rue Francois Bonvin, 75732 PARIS (EDEX 15 France 
Tel: (33) (0) 1 4568 45 69 
Fax: (33) (0) 1 45 68 57 45

## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/105951engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

HEME OF THENEXTISSUE: 
PEOPLE AND 
LAN DSCAPE 
a 4 
~~ INTERVJ EW, WITH ; 
AME CESARE 
THE ISLAND OF 
 SVIRONMENT: 
JAPANESE GARDENS 