# [135045](135045eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](135045eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

— 
Tie 1 y-a, 
    
  
United Nations Educational, | i | J 
Scientific and Cultural Organization ; 1 
April 2004 
  
  
  
“4 
N A 
A hd “ ) “ Yu Lon dO aad Wl a . ' I VN eld REALL ” y , 
SE A Ns pe nr Ro Pl ars FOS RYN Sed TOS SNR Ry Pedr Te RR ER DIS Ee ERS TR A TST = TINIAN RH I wl LAS AON 3A] —— ud S  SLL EN FAS IN NES SNA 
wg ’ 
Fw . <4 
«Fol Ng yg SA 2d 
    
the world’s Great Apes 
Talicing JUTE Bam: the future o 
1D ER WO CRIGTTELRHLED 

## [Page 2](135045eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### 135070: (Small islands, big issues: editorial)

    
Cover photo: Maldives 
© Yann Arthus-Bertrand 
« La terre vue du Ciel » / Altitude, Paris 
the new Courier is published 
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
Tel: 33 1 45 68 46 85 
Fax: 33 1 45 68 56 52 
Email: unesco.courier@unesco.org 
Internet: http://www.unesco.org/courier 
Editor in Chief: Sue Williams 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief: Monique Perrot-Lanaud 
Editorial staff: Roni Amelan, Jens Boel, 
Peter Coles, Pierre Gaillard, Serafin Garcia Ibanez, 
Lucia Iglesias-Kuntz, Cristina Homme, 
Asbel Lopez, Bassam Mansour, Amy Otchet, 
Marie Renault, Lilian Sampedro, Vladimir Sergueev, 
Jasmina Sopova 
Editorial assistant: Gisele Traiano 
Research and documentation: José Banaag 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey, Niamh Burke 
Editions produced away from headquarters: 
Michiko Tanaka 
Artistic direction: Jean-Francis Cheriez 
Production: Gérard Prosper, Eric Frogé 
Photoengraving: Annick Coueffé 
Distribution: Michel Ravassard 
Printed by: Imprimerie Corlet, 
Condé-sur-Noireau, France 
Electronic version: Richard Cadiou, 
Vincent Defourny, Fiona Ryan-Jacqueron 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted 
may be reprinted providing the credit line reads 
“Reprinted from the new Courier”, including the 
date and issue. Non-copyright photos will be 
supplied upon request. Unsolicited manuscripts and 
articles will not be returned unless accompanied 
by an international reply coupon covering postage. 
Signed articles express the opinions of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent the opinions 
of UNESCO or those of the new Courier. 
Photo captions and headlines are written by the 
magazine’s editorial staff. 
The boundaries on maps do not imply official 
endorsement or acceptance by UNESCO or 
the United Nations of the countries and territories 
concerned. 
ISSN 0041-5278 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
September, experts, civil society and 
N PK Frovcumen representatives will meet 
in Mauritius to assess the health of the 
world’s small island developing states. The meeting follows up 
a conference held in Barbados in 1994, which listed 15 areas 
where these islands are exceptionally vulnerable and where 
national, regional and international action was felt to be 
urgent. Has the situation improved in the ten years that have 
lapsed? Journalist Peter Coles travelled out to the Pacific for 
the new UNESCO Courier to see how island populations in that 
part of the world are coping with the changes being brought 
about by climate change and rising sea levels, for example, or 
increasing urbanization with its impact on traditional lifestyles 
and cultures, AIDS and mass tourism. The resulting dossier, 
presented in this issue, indicates that while paradise is perhaps 
not lost, the challenges facing island inhabitants are still 
daunting than ever. 
Daunting also the scenario presented in the interview with 
Chris Thomas, the lead author of the most comprehensive study 
ever done on the effect that climate change is likely to have 
on biodiversity; a study that foresees mass extinctions, perhaps 
on par with the event that wiped out the dinosaurs. Among 
the species under immediate threat - this time from habitat 
destruction, civil war, hunting and poaching - are humanity’s 
closest relatives, the Great Apes, which are the subject of 
the photo reportage in this issue’s Zoom. An international effort, 
to which UNESCO has lent its weight, is underway to save the 
world’s gorillas, chimpanzees, orangutangs and bonobos. 
If it fails, say the experts, the Great Apes could disappear within 
50 years. 
If these articles sound alarms and signal the need for action, 
other stories in this issue provide proof of the human brilliance 
and ingenuity that will be needed to solve the problems facing 
our societies. The work of Christine Petit, one of the five 
laureates of this year’s L'Oréal-UNESCO “For Women in Science” 
Awards, is a source of hope for millions of deaf people around 
the world. Inspiring also, is the way that the international 
community has pulled together to help the beleaguered 
population of historic Bam in Iran, following the devastating 
earthquake that destroyed much of this remarkable site 
last December. UNESCO is working with the Iranian authorities 
and many other partners on the ancient city’s possible 
reconstruction. Similarly encouraging is UNESCO’s Initiative 
BABEL which is working to develop the use of all languages 
and scripts in modern communication technology, including 
the internet, both breaking down communications barriers, 
celebrating our extraordinary cultural diversity... and showing 
what can be done when there there is the will to make change 
happen. 
Sue Williams

## [Page 3](135045eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

summary 
Talking te 4 
Chris Thomas 
‘Nowhere to run’ 
  
UNESCO in action 
Culture 8 
» Iran: Glimmers of hope in Bam 
After the earthquake, reconstruction 
Science m1 
Scientist of 
the senses 
Interview with Christine Petit, 
one of the laureates of this year’s 
LOREAL/UNESCO For Women 
in Science Prizes 
   
 
Communication 15 
Standardization at the 
service of diversity 
Defending linguistic diversity 
in the digital age 
  
Social sciences 18 
Small coastal cities: 3 
Historical and 
pioneering 
Five mediterranean 
ports opt for sustainable 
development 
Education 23 
Bringing peace 
to the playground 
Teaching children to resolve 
conflicts before they erupt into 
violence 
   
36 
Small islands, big issues 
The future of small island states is under threat. 
Climate change and rising sea-levels menace their very 
existence, while the pressures of a modern, globalized 
world are seriously affecting their traditional cultures  
Partners 48 
New projects underway with a range 
of partners from the public and private sectors, 
as well as civil society and leading figures in the arts 
Zoom 52 
On the brink of 
extinction or 
vanishing cousins 
The life of the Great 
Apes in the parks and 
Becks 5 é reserves of Africa  
Contacts 58 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 4](135045eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### 135067: Talking to Chris Thomas: nowhere to run

talking to 
CHRIS THOMAS 
TV 10 RUN 
  
  
    
© 
Ol
iv
ie
r 
La
ng
ra
nd
/C
on
se
rv
at
io
n 
In
te
rn
at
io
na
l 
Left: Under threat, 
The King Protea, 
South Africa's 
{ JT — 
ou national flowers. 
-— 
Right: For Professor 
Chris Thomas, 
species rarely evolue 
quickly enough to 
adapt to climate 
change. 
More than one million The new Courier: What sets this study apart from 
» : the rest? 
species could disapp ear Chris Thomas: For a number of years, scientists have been 
as a result of climate chatting about whether species might be driven to extinction 
by climate warming. But for the first time, we have asked 
change exp ected to take how many species on Earth are going to be or might be lost 
D lace by 2050. to global warming. Perhaps the most important thing we’ve 
: done is to put together a framework to analyze the problem 
UNESCO speaks with and even to suggest that it is possible to analyze it. 
Chris Thomas, lead 
Did you encounter any political resistance, perhaps 
author of the most when applying for funding? 
. There wasn’t any resistance because there wasn’t any 
HET rehensive study on funding for the collaboration. We just did it. About two years 
this looming Crisis ago, the IUCN (World Conservation Union) sponsored a 
couple of workshops to discuss the impact of climate change 
on conservation. A group of us got talking and before long 
we had a network of teams around the world that were 
already building databases on species patterns in their own 
countries. There was funding in the sense that our salaries 
were paid. But there was no money to collect or analyze 
the data. 
UNESCO | le nouveau Courrier | janvier 2004

## [Page 5](135045eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### 135067: Talking to Chris Thomas: nowhere to run

© 
To
ny
 
J
o
h
n
s
o
n
/
Y
o
r
k
s
h
i
r
e
 
Po
st
 
N
e
w
s
p
a
p
e
r
s
 
 
You describe the report's findings as “terrifying”. Yet arent 
these figures underestimates because the study didn’t 
include habitation loss due to deforestation, for example? 
We thought about trying to include that but we soon ran into 
problems over both the quality and comparability of data for 
land use in different parts of the world. There was nothing 
wrong with any of the studies but they were done in slightly 
different ways. We didn’t have the time or the resources to 
spend the many months required to get all of the data in the 
same format. 
It would be extremely desirable now to put together some 
international funding to project the combined effect of 
changes from climate and land use. 
Are we talking about the next wave of massive 
extinctions comparable to that caused in the past by 
volcanoes or asteroids? 
There are the so-called Big Five extinctions, the best known 
being the event that wiped out the dinosaurs. Even for 
these mass extinctions, we don’t know how many of the 
extinctions occurred by the initial triggering event - be it 
the impact of meteorites or volcanic explosions - and how 
many were caused by climatic fluctuations that immediately 
followed. 
  
There were also quite a lot of smaller extinction events. 
What we are doing with greenhouse gases, in combination 
with habitat destruction, will certainly put us at par with 
one of those events. The question is whether it will rank 
alongside the Big Five. It doesn’t have to happen, but it 
could. 
Why didn’t we see this looming crisis sooner? 
One has to take an international perspective, and it is not 
that easy to put together international-scale studies. For 
example, you can have an excellent detailed study on how 
species might disappear or spread in Britain. But you need 
the international perspective to see that some species won’t 
have anywhere to run. 
Our report is about as dry as we could make it. Yet many 
people said, ‘Oh! You're being very alarmist.” In fact, they are 
alarmed by the numbers reported. So am I. 
How do you respond to the naysayers of climate 
change? 
The naysayers are having a disproportionately loud voice. 
Like so many issues in the media, you get reports that have 
one person defending an argument and another tearing it 
down for the sake of supposed balance, despite the fact 
UNESCO | le nouveau Courrier | janvier 2004

## [Page 6](135045eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### 135067: Talking to Chris Thomas: nowhere to run

  
talking to 
that more than 99% of experts believe one view and only 
a small fraction of a percent believe the second view. We 
have simply built on what the vast majority of climatologists 
are saying. That does not mean that there are no great 
uncertainties, which the climatologists acknowledge. 
We are not in a state of fiction, imagining the possible 
future. In this study, we are fast-forwarding the phenomena 
already observed to be underway. The rising temperatures 
of the past 30 to 40 years clearly indicate the signature of 
anthropogenic climate warming. We know this has affected 
the distribution of plants and animals across the world. 
Some people criticize your report by arguing that animals 
and plants will adapt to climate change. 
Of course they can. But very rarely can species evolve far 
and fast enough, especially with rapid climate change. The 
absolute overwhelming evidence shows that as the climate 
changes - be it in the past 30 years or far back in geological 
time - species do not to stay put and adapt. They move. 
If you are an animal or plant and the climate starts to 
change, you may start to adapt. But your population will still 
decline if you don’t have enough genetic variation to evolve 
and keep up with the rate of environmental change. In the 
meantime, let’s say a competing species arrives, which is 
better adapted to the new environment. You lose. 
In recent years, there has been considerable debate 
as to whether conservation agencies should focus on 
protecting biodiversity hotspots, or areas exceptionally 
rich in unique plant and animal species. You go beyond this 
and take conservation into the arena of greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
It must be said, without a hint of criticism in my voice, that 
the conservation agencies have put more effort on treating 
the symptoms of what is happening to biodiversity rather 
than removing the causes, because the ultimate causes are so 
difficult to deal with. The only viable conservation strategy, 
in the face of climate change, is for everyone concerned to 
start putting immense pressure on politicians so that we end 
up with one of the least damaging climate scenarios, rather 
than one of the worst. 
The golden toad in Monteverde in Costa Rica is the perfect 
example. Here was a species living on top of a mountain 
in an entirely protected area. Every last one of these frogs 
disappeared after the recent drought and the lifting of cloud 
levels. 
I personally think that these biodiversity hotspots might 
be in particular risk of extinction for two reasons. First, they 
contain lots of species in a relatively small area. And if they 
are asked to move, it is less likely the future distribution will 
resemble the current one. 
Second, remember that for the last 10,000 years, we 
have been in the warm phase of an ice age. In fact, we are 
experiencing one of the warmest moments in the last million 
years. Now we see a lot of species living in these so-called 
hotspots. Not all of my colleagues would agree but I think 
many of these species and environments are likely to have 
been more widespread when the climate was cooler. The 
plants and animals have managed to hang on, to survive, by 
concentrating in very small and unique environments. 
What happens if we drive up the temperature during one 
of the warmest moments in the last million years? Imagine a 
small tropical mountain like Monteverde, with some species 
found only right near the top. 15,000 years ago, they would 
have lived further down. If the climate becomes substantially 
warmer, they might get pushed off the top. There’s nowhere 
left to go. 
Oreenho use ghosts 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
ccording to a new study 
led by Chris Thomas, 
professor of conservation 
biology at Leeds University, 
climate change is expected 
to drive a quarter of land 
animals and plants into 
extinction. More than 
one million species could 
disappear. 
Thomas and his team, 
reportedly the largest global 
collaboration of experts to 
study this problem, focused 
on six biodiversity-rich 
regions around the world 
representing 20% of the 
planet's land area. They 
began by considering how 
three different scenarios 
from the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change 
would change the habitats of 
1103 plants, mammals, birds, 
reptiles, frogs, butterflies and 
other invertebrates. They 
then evaluated the ability of 
each species to either adapt 
or move to a more suitable 
area. In the mid-range 
forecast, 15 to 37% of species 
studied would be extinct. 
At the high end, as many as 
58% could disappear. In the 
best of the three scenarios, 
we would lose at least 9% of 
species.

## [Page 7](135045eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### 135067: Talking to Chris Thomas: nowhere to run

© 
F
o
g
d
e
n
 
Wi
ld
li
fe
 
P
h
o
t
o
g
r
a
p
h
s
 
    Above: Gone forever, Right: From tropical 
the golden toad of Queensland (Australia), 
Monteverde (Costa Rica), the Boyd lezard-dragon 
became extinct after a is equipped with an 
prolonged drought internal thermostat and is 
particularly vulnerable to 
climate change 
You predict that entire biological communities will 
disappear. Have we seen this before? 
Not on a global scale in recent history. We are causing a 
major extinction event. Does it matter? From a scientific 
perspective, we know that in the past it has taken millions 
of years before biodiversity recovered from mass extinctions. 
Anyone concerned about the environment is likely to be 
worried by this. 
But we should not think that climate change will only 
affect biodiversity. Last summer in France, it was estimated 
that more than 15,000 people died because of the heat wave. 
In the second half of this century, we could be talking about 
hundreds of millions of people displaced by flooding in delta 
areas around the world. 
What is good for biodiversity, is likely also to be good 
for people - at least in the long run. The normal argument 
that some economists put up is, ‘Well, we cannot afford to 
change all of our technologies and hinder the growth of our 
carbon-based economies.” Well, Britain signed the Kyoto 
Protocal, even though that is a very minor first step, and has 
been one of the better international players on this issue. 
Quoting from Sir David King, UK’s Chief Science Advisor, 
between 1990 and 2000, UK greenhouse gas emissions fell 
by 12% while the economy grew by 30% and employment 
rose by just under 5%. Remember that the UK has been 
competing with other economies with fewer controls in 
place. There is no other route, at least in the long run. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
   
© 
S
t
e
p
h
e
n
 
E
.
W
i
l
l
i
a
m
s

## [Page 8](135045eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### 135048: Glimmers of hope in Bam

UNESCO in action culture 
In the wake of the 
destruction, despair and 
nearly 30,000 deaths 
caused by the recent 
earthquake, the ancient 
Iranian city of Bam 
is starting to look 
forward to a possible 
reconstruction 
  UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
A
l
a
i
n
 
Br
un
et
 
five in the morning on December 
26, 2003, the earth shook with 
tremendous violence for 12 seconds 
in south-eastern Iran, some 1,200 kilometres from 
Tehran. The earthquake, which registered 6.3 on 
the Richter scale, claimed the lives of over 40,000 
people and left a further 75,000 homeless; the 
citadel of Bam (Arg-e-Bam), the largest adobe 
fortress in the world and the quake’s epicentre, is 
now little more than dust and debris. 
Those who were in Bam in the days following 
the catastrophe speak of “destruction on a scale 
that is hard to describe,” of a city that “looked 
like Ground Zero.” Yet even as the most pressing 
needs of survivors were being met, the possibility 
of repairing this jewel of Iran’s heritage began to 
take shape. 
The citadel that used to stand within the 
Old City of Bam, which adjoins a new city by 
  
  
a CANCNS oh 
a aE = on - 
Svat TRS ~ 
the same name, is 300 metres long and 200 
metres wide. Built almost 2,000 years ago, it is 
a remarkable example of ancient Iranian urban 
construction, and along with Persepolis the most 
precious relic of pre-Islamic Persian architecture. 
Most of this magnificent site, which last year 
alone received 100,000 visitors, was destroyed 
in a matter of seconds. Alongside the illustrious 
history of Arg-e-Bam (see inset), a vital source of 
income for the city’s inhabitants also vanished: 
until the earthquake, the citadel had been a major 
tourist magnet, generating considerable revenues 
for the entire region. 
Even so, despair has not overwhelmed the city 
completely. There are excellent records detailing 
many features of the citadel. In addition there is 
ample technical expertise to hand, since Iran has 
many well-trained professionals - over the past 
30 years Iran’s National Council of Monuments

## [Page 9](135045eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### 135048: Glimmers of hope in Bam

} 
marched os 
TA Th E 
“ Jd 
or TE ae 
- a a - yi who yma 5 
. t ——a Th er rts © Sw TID - 
carried out restoration work on the citadel which 
it included on its list of protected historical 
monuments. 
“As always in such cases, caution is the only 
possible strategy,” says the architect and UNESCO 
consultant Hubert Guillaud, a specialist in mud 
and adobe buildings, “but it is still true that we 
have very precise records covering the 32 years 
of work that preceded the destruction of the site. 
Amongst these documents there is a body of very 
solid, interesting and highly valuable material that 
could be used for a possible reconstruction.” 
Moreover, of the 24 historical monuments that 
stood outside the citadel of Bam, half can be 
restored as they have suffered only minor damage. 
These factors underpin a restoration plan 
prepared by UNESCO and the Iranian authorities 
in the wake of a first expert mission to Bam last 
February. The first phase will involve reinforcing 
  
The Bam citadel, 
largest adobe 
fortress in the world, 
in 2001 
A stop on the pay 
Bam also has a long 
history as a stopover on 
the fabled Silk Road. The 
prosperous trading along 
the Silk Road and Bam's 
strategic position close to 
the Pakistan border made 
the city extremely rich, as is 
evident in the opulence of 
its extraordinary buildings. 
Most of the Old City, as it 
stood before the earthquake, 
dated from the most recent 
period of reconstruction, 
carried out by the Safavids 
between 1502 and 1722. 
Three protective walls 
ringed the citadel, which 
housed mosques, mansions, 
a bazaar, a caravanserai 
(merchants’ inn) and a 
residential neighbourhood 
where most of the city’s 
population lived. A garrison 
was located in the highest 
parts of the fortification, 
along with the Four Seasons 
Palace (Chahar Fasl) and the 
governor's residence. The 
citadel was abandoned by 
its inhabitants for the first 
time in 1722 following the 
Afghan invasion, and again 
in 1810, when it was sacked 
by guerrilla forces from 
Shiraz. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 10](135045eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### 135048: Glimmers of hope in Bam

UNESCO in action culture 
  
  
UNESCO | le nouveau Courrier | janvier 2004 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
o
u
n
i
r
 
B
o
u
c
h
e
n
a
k
i
 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
A
l
a
i
n
 
Br
un
et
 
Above and middle: 
Damages caused by the December 
2003 earthquake. 
Below: 
Bam before the earthquake 
the structures that are still standing to prevent 
them from collapsing. Then data will have to 
be collected and all available information about 
Arg-e-Bam studied to lay the ground for the 
reconstruction, which will begin soon after. 
The simultaneous inclusion of Bam's citadel on 
the World Heritage List and the World Heritage in 
Danger List - in a process similar to that involving 
the minaret and archaeological remains of Jam, in 
Afghanistan, in 2002 - would give a much-needed 
impetus to these plans. “Given that the Iranian 
government had intended to propose Bam’s 
inclusion on the UNESCO World Heritage List, 
we will help in the preparation of the candidacy, 
which will be presented before the next meeting 
of the World Heritage Committee in June,” 
declared UNESCO's Director-General, Koichuro 
Matsuura. 
It is certain that the “restoration of the 
monuments that suffered the worst devastation 
will take several years, and will need considerable 
support and solidarity from the international 
community,” added Matsuura. 
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
o
u
n
i
r
 
B
o
u
c
h
e
n
a
k
i

## [Page 11](135045eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO in action science 
  
  © 
Mi
ch
el
in
e 
P
e
l
l
e
t
i
e
r
/
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Christine Petit in her 
office at the Institut 
Pasteur (France). 
Christine Petit, The new Courier: How has your perception of 
deafness changed after your discovery of the genes 
2004 Laureate of the responsible for this condition? 


### 135068: Scientist of the senses

I’OREAL /UNESCO Awards Christine Petit: I no longer think of deafness in the 
] ] singular but rather as “deafnesses” comprising 
For Women in Science, different conditions with different consequences. 
discusses the imp act of A child born deaf will certainly encounter many 
difficulties. But with proper support, he or she 
her research on the deaf will lead a happy and rich life. Yet for an adult 
community an d th es lipp ery whose life is built around oral communication, 
the suffering and anxiety from hearing loss is so 
S lope of eugertics severe that it leads to isolation. 
HM The Institut Pasteur just signed an agreement 
allowing a company to use your research to screen 
newborns for hereditary deafness. A similar test 
could be developed before birth or prenatally. Are we 
heading down the slippery slope of eugenics? 
When I began this research in 1992, I thought we 
were sheltered from this problem. There appeared 
to be about 100 genes linked to deafness and so 
the chances were slim of quickly developing a 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 12](135045eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### 135068: Scientist of the senses

UNESCO in action science 
  
> diagnostic test. So I will never forget the shock 
when we realized in 1997 that a single gene 
was responsible for almost half the cases of 
childhood deafness. On top of that, 70 percent 
of problems linked to this gene were caused 
by a single mutation. This is a small gene and 
therefore easy to test for. Technically, it is possible 
to test prenatally. So I immediately asked for the 
opinion of the French National Committee for 
Ethics, which found that deafness alone does not 
threaten human dignity and therefore doesn’t 
justify terminating a pregnancy. 
HM But what do you think about screening embryos 
for deafness? In July 2003, it was reported that a 
couple who carry a gene that causes deafness had 
their in vitro fertilized embryos screened at a fertility 
clinic in Australia. Apparently, this was the first 
time any clinic in the world screened embryos for 
a non-threatening condition. 
We have been working with a genetic counselor 
to help families with hearing loss deal with the 
diagnostic tools that we might develop. This 
counselor, a pediatrician, actually grew up in 
close contact with people with hearing problems 
and doesn’t view deafness simply as a handicap. 
At this point, only four families have requested 
prenatal screening but they were also at risk of 
transmitting serious illnesses. The real problem 
lies in screening embryos created by in vitro 
fertilization because this means we would be 
heading towards embryo selection [and the notion 
of “designer babies”]. 
HM How has the deaf community responded 
to your research? 
In the beginning, I was warned that the 
community would block our work out of fear 
that our research would lead to eugenic practices 
and the “eradication of deafness”, which some 
people consider a culture. We never encountered 
this resistance maybe because we explained 
our methods and objectives. On the contrary, I 
think people faced with progressive deafness are 
following our work with great hope. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
© 
Mi
ch
el
in
e 
P
e
l
l
e
t
i
e
r
/
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
Mi
ch
el
in
e 
P
e
l
l
e
t
i
e
r
/
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Aun thing but B 
A petite contvibution 
Unit at Institut Pasteur. 
In 2002, she became a 
member of the French 
Academy of Sciences 
and the fifth woman to 
be named Professor at 
the College de France. 
Famous for her research 
on the senses, Christine 
Petit (of France) 
identified the one gene 
responsible for more 
than half of all cases of 
congenital deafness. 
She has also identified 
the gene responsible for 
Kallman syndrome, the 
only hereditary disease 
causing a total loss of 
the sense of smell. 
Professor Petit is the 
Head of the Genetics of 
Sensory Deficiencies 
    
  
© 
Mi
ch
el
in
e 
Pe
ll
et
ie
r/
Ga
mm
a,
 
Par
is 
  
 

## [Page 13](135045eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### 135068: Scientist of the senses

  
  
  
  
BM For some, deafness is more a culture than 
a handicap. What do you think? 
Young people born deaf often form real 
communities, structured around a shared 
language, which is sign language. In the name of 
this language, some want recognition of a distinct 
culture. I think this claim stems in large part from 
the history of the deaf and the abuses by those 
who can hear. Remember that not so long ago 
sign language was forbidden and there were the 
forced sterilizations during the Second World War. 
Then there was the false hope raised by hearing 
aids, as deaf people were told, “Your problems are 
solved!” But in the beginning, these devices were 
very rudimentary and didn’t provide the promised 
improvements. 
ow 
= 
| a 
[a 
I) 
E 
E 
< 
&} 
~~ 
— 
Leo} 
= 
Z 
=z 
[xt 
Lo3} 
E 
T 
= 
= 
= 
© 
AKpavds “fox 
momen in science” 
Christine Petit is one 
of the five laureates 
of the 2004 L'OREAL- 
UNESCO “For Wome 
in Science” Awards. 
Selected by a jury of 15 
eminent members of the 
scientific community, 
each of the laureates, 
from a different region, 
will receive $100,000 
for their outstanding 
research contributions 
and their determination 
to champion the cause 
of women in science. 
Professor Petit is joined 
by: Jennifer Thomson 
the understanding, 
treatment and 
prevention of Chagas 
disease; Philippa 
Marrack (U.S.), for 
her characterization 
of the functions 
of T lymphocytes 
in immunity and 
the discovery of 
superantigens. 
The L'OREAL- 
UNESCO Women in 
Science Program is a 
unique public-private 
partnership designed 
to recognize the 
achievements of women 
  
(South Africa), for 
her development of 
transgenic plants 
resistant to viral 
infections, drought 
and other risks; Nancy 
Ip (China), for her 
discoveries on the 
molecular control of 
growth, differentiation 
in the nervous system; 
Lucia Mendonca 
Previato (Brazil), for 
her achievements in © 
Mi
ch
el
in
e 
Pe
ll
et
ie
r/
 
C
a
n
n
i
o
)
 
Pa
ri
s 
BM Do you feel any responsibilities towards 
this community? 
Yes, to inform people about our discoveries 
and to do everything possible to bridge the gap 
between testing for deafness and treating it. To do 
this, we need basic research into the molecular 
mechanisms of the inner ear’s functions. 
Hl Some people don't like the idea of specifically 
recognizing women scientists like the L'OREAL- 
UNESCO prize. What do you think? 
If women’s science awards were to spring up 
everywhere, like in sports, this prize would simply 
recognize the differences in scientific performance 
between men and women. Obviously, this is not my 
understanding of the LOREAL-UNESCO prize. On 
the contrary, I think it is a wonderful idea, mainly 
because it is attributed to a woman from each 
continent. The prize bears a universal message 
concerning the advancement of women - progress p> 
scientists and raise 13 
the profile of women 
in science globally. In 
addition to the awards, 
about 15 young female 
researchers are given 
fellowships each year 
to continue their work 
abroad. Created in 
1998, the program 
and synapse formation has awarded 31 prizes 
and 60 fellowships to 
women pursuing both 
the life and physical 
sciences in 45 countries. 
Topleft: Jennifer 
Thomson (South 
Africa). 
Bottomleft: Nancy Ip 
(Hong-Kong). 
Topright: Philippa 
Marrack (USA). 
Bottomright: Lucia 
Mendonca Previato 
(Brazil). 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 14](135045eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### 135068: Scientist of the senses

UNESCO in action science 
Dital statistics 
UNESCO's Institute of 
Statistics has released 
new research on women 
pursuing university degrees 
in science and technology 
(S&T) in 70 countries. In 
Ghana, women make up 
21 percent of S&T students 
seeking a bachelor’s 
degree and 14 percent of 
  
p gained not just through the access to knowledge 
but also through the act of creating knowledge 
at the highest level. This message gains continuity 
through the fellowships awarded the young 
women researchers. 
HB What do you think of affirmative action, like 
quota systems, to try to remove the barriers facing 
women in science? 
By recognizing how institutional structures and 
rules affect women, we wouldn’t need affirmative 
action. For example, to pursue a high-level 
scientific career in France, you are supposed to 
direct a group of researchers by the age of 40. Yet 
this is when most women have young children. 
With a bit of flexibility in the system, we wouldn’t 
reject women trying to balance their professional 
and family lives. We need to pay this same kind of 
attention when handing out promotions in order 
to detect the disparities between men and women 
and to analyze the reasons behind them. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
postgraduates. In Japan, 18 
percent of postgraduates 
are women and the figures 
fall to 15 percent in New 
Zealand compared to 
38 percent in Turkey. A 
very different picture 
emerges in El Salvador, 
where 50 percent of S&T 
women and 60 percent 
of postgraduates. Similar 
findings are found in 
Argentina, where women 
make up 59 percent of S&T 
postgraduates. To see the 
data, http://unesdoc.unesco. 
org/images/0011/001181/ 
118131e.pdf 
bachelors students are 
Jennifer Thomson 
in the field: 
inspecting seed 
corn with farmers 
in South Africa 
© 
Mi
ch
el
in
e 
P
e
l
l
e
t
i
e
r
/
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
BM What kind of barriers have you 
encountered? 
Years ago, when I told my research director 
that I was pregnant, I got a violent response. 
No one would dare respond like that today. Yet 
we must remain vigilant. We still have a long 
way to go. Men and women are only starting to 
share the highest level of responsibilities and 
decision-making. We have made progress but 
it is not irreversible. Who knows if we won’t 
slip backwards in the future. At the same time, 
[ think that every woman feels the injuries 
and humiliations suffered by women in some 
countries. 
Hl Some people suggest that research priorities 
might change with more women in science. 
What do you think? 
Who knows? Would military research be such 
a priority? Is there such a thing as masculine or 
feminine research? Clearly, the brain is sexed, like 
any other organ, but not “scientific truth”. It is 
likely that differences in physiology and cultural 
perceptions of the world lead men and women to 
different scientific questions and methods. 
In any case, I dream of a world shaped by 
masculine and feminine creativity, where these 
differences are not only respected but considered 
complementary and mutually beneficial.

## [Page 15](135045eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

  
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
i
a
m
h
 
Bu
rk
e 


### 135056: Standardization at the service of diversity

UNESCO is working to 
increase the presence of 
different languages on 
computers and on the 
internet as part of its effort 
to promote linguistic 
and cultural diversity and 
to support equitable 
access to information 
UNESCO in action communication 
I 
  
 
have become indis- 
Comp ut X'S pensable for people 
wishing to generate, access and share information, 
communicate and trade. But digital technology 
was designed primarily by people using Latin 
scripts, which only serve a fraction of the world’s 
population with its 6,000 recorded languages and 
50 odd writing systems. 
Software has had to be developed to process, 
display, send and print not only scripts that 
go from left to right (as is the case with the 
European languages), but those that go from 
right to left (as with Semitic languages and with 
Mongolian which is, moreover, written vertically). 
Customized programming has been developed to 
deal with the specific features of different scripts 
and languages including, the Latin, Cyrillic, 
Arabic or Hebrew alphabets, for example, and 
symbols such as the accents that are common 
in French and Spanish. Furthermore, in many 
A Chinese translator 
at work. The many 
thousands of 
Chinese ideograms 
are a challenge 
for computer and 
software developers. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 16](135045eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### 135056: Standardization at the service of diversity

  
For example it sponsored a 
study on “The Development 
and Dissemination of 
Ethiopic Standards and 
Software Localization 
for Ethiopia” ahead of 
study covered the issues 
of character encoding, 
keyboard layout, and 
transliteration of Amharic to 
the Latin alphabet. (For more 
see the Babel Website.) 
  
  
          
UNESCO in action commun . . . 
Baseline and direction 
aapruha ai RRs pe weminpon bee whe rgs bons ne 
noth wrpisheavar thos snr dams tor ered res wight be coord an Cees, seth =n, 
hon: froma ochzd ny ssnlbcamzn the bes rz skome md festd meng adi 
( U NS (+ radia ehisecp balm Sore saipe sean tee bres nr nz inns dade 
; U Bottom baseline Centered baseline 
(LN cy bevs pACL Roman Chinese 
- J BAN IO wd 
11 IY 
) oy AF aE ’ AN TC JG 
UNESCO's Recommendation the implementation of a 
on the Promotion and multi-million-government 
Use of Multilingualism computerization project 
| 3 e pel Left to right, top to bottom 
and Universal Access to sponsored by the World Roman 
Cyberspace, a standard Bank for Ethiopia and Eritrea 
setting instrument designed in 2003. The UNESCO ALEC IE — 
to promote the use of the study examines ways to Lg J EH HOOT 1 » - 
world’s different languages enable computers to use SOTVE dN babe Irie Or 4 
on the internet, was adopted the millennial Ethiopic a . 
[=] 
by Member States in late script used in Amharic = : 
ge E i =| Right to left, top to bottom 
003 and presented to - the official language of 2| Hebrew 
the World Summit on the the Federal Government of 3 : 
jal) 
Information Society in Ethiopia and Tigrigna, the g atom hh he a bo Bw ve hm ba 
December 2003. official language of Eritrea EE RNY nn R!] 
0. j . ks EAN LL he dee 2 Be Tr eB 1 dr Be 
Initiative Babel has been — as well as languages in la [sy [ NLS TENT Re sadly 
working in the field to northern Ethiopia, and most Z| ramaa. by NN pr yy 
facilitate the implementation of the Semitic languages 5 Loft ama” AY 
of the principles adopted and some of the Cushitic ES "re 
~N 
in the recommendation. languages of the region. The 1) 
Consortium have developed an ever-growing 
table, and matching computer codes, for all the 
letters, signs and symbols used in recognized 
scripts, addressing the issue of character and 
symbol recognition and use. UNESCO has been 
contributing to this standardization work through 
the Vienna-based International Information Centre 
for Terminology, Infoterm, which it founded 
in 1971. 
The internet poses its own set of challenges 
in the quest for respecting diversity through the 
use of different languages and scripts in digitally- 
based communication. The growth of the internet 
has also increased the need for standardization, 
to ensure that the solutions adopted by various 
operating systems are compatible and that texts 
sent from one computer to another are legible. 
Moreover, standardization is indispensable so 
that browsers and search engines such as Google 
recognize queries in different scripts. To facilitate 
recognition, standardized language tags have been 
agreed upon and embedded in webpages, to tell 
the browser which set of characters of signs is to 
be used. Such tags are, however, not available for 
all languages. 
As far as scripts go, the ISO/UNICODE system 
currently covers the characters and symbols 
of some 50 scripts that support at least 244 
languages. At present it provides over 100,000 
unique codes for characters and symbols. Such 
standardization is essential for the sharing of 
languages letters change shape according to their 
placement in a word - as is the case in Arabic and 
Hebrew - or in a sentence (to become capitals) as 
is the case in Latin and Cyrillic writing. 
STANDARDIZE TO SAFEGUARD 
DIVERSITY 
Chinese with its thousands of ideograms, or 
symbols for words, is radically different from 
alphabet-based scripts. The ideograms pose a 
challenge in terms of keyboard layout, on screen 
rendering, printing and searching. In some cases, 
and in some languages, several systems of writing 
must be used simultaneously compounding the 
challenge. This is the case with Japanese, which 
uses three different writing systems consisting 
of ideograms, syllabaries, and an alphabet. But 
Japanese, like many non-European languages, 
occasionally uses Latin script, which must therefore 
also be supported by software alongside the script 
of the language for which it has been developed. 
The International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) and the UNICODE 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 17](135045eng.pdf#page=17) 0

### 135056: Standardization at the service of diversity

  
Hanging baseline 
Devanagari 
 
Hl oq: 
Top to bottom 
right to left 
Chinese 
  
Top to bottom, 
left to right 
Mongolian 
Am
d3
ii
g 
AR
SU
IY
Y 
i Si
li
ty
 
a
l
 
ly
 
7 
2 
r
r
.
 
  
~
—
—
 
M
a
 
~ 
  — A t
i
d
 
§ 
i 
a
 
—
 
r
e
,
 
NRSI   
 
Above: The chart 
illustrates writing’s 
different directions 
— from right to left 
or left to right, 
horizontally or 
vertically (Source: 
www.sil.org) 
Right. Technology 
is allowing certain 
unwritten languages 
to enter cyberspace. 
Itis too late for 
the language of 
the Zapara people 
(Ecuador and Peru) 
whose culture has 
been proclaimed 
a Masterpiece 
of the Oral and 
Intangible Heritage 
of Humanity. 
information between computers, 
notably on the internet. 
UNICODE is supported by “most 
operating systems, like Microsoft 
Windows, Apple OS and Linux, 
which provide the possibility of 
using the major non-Latin scripts but 
may not cater for all the symbols in 
those writing systems and their local variants,” 
explains Paul Hector of UNESCO’s Initiative Babel, 
which seeks to preserve threatened languages and 
promote multilingualism. 
FLEXIBILITY OF THE SOFTWARE 
UNESCO has also developed an information and 
retrieval software application, CDS /ISIS, which 
can handle different languages and writing 
systems and is available free of charge. UNESCO 
promotes the use of “open-source software” and 
«free software” such as Linux. It has contributed 
to the development of capabilities for Burmese 
and several African languages for the internet 
browser Mozilla, a free-software which is 
available free-of-charge. 
Open source software and operating systems 
can be more easily adapted for a range of scripts 
and languages. «Commercial systems on the other 
hand are generally developed where there is a 
commercial incentive,” explains Davide Storti, of 
Babel. “Thus there are more software programmes 
and webpages in Icelandic, a language only 
In late 2003, UNESCO published 
«Guidelines for Writing System 
Support” intended to help in 
the planning and management 
of projects that seek to solve 
the problem of using non-Latin 
scripts to communicate in 
the digital environment. The 
guidelines provide a framework 
Ouidelines fox 
Wviking System Support 
for the development of 
computer software components 
that support the diverse 
languages of the world. It was 
written primarily for policy 
makers and professionals, but 
it also includes introductory 
technical material. (see the 
Babel Website). 
 
spoken by a quarter million people than for the 
18 million Hausa speakers of Nigeria.” 
It will take time to overcome all the barriers 
that have been preventing some languages from 
entering the digital age, but the commitment 
of governments and growing awareness among 
commercial and non-commercial software 
developers is encouraging, according to Paul 
Hector. He further points out that about 20 
percent of the world’s languages have no written 
form, but that the multimedia capabilities of 
today’s computers offer new opportunities 
for their entry into cyberspace and efforts are 
underway to create standardised writing systems 
for many of these traditionally oral languages. 
Roni Amelan 
\ For more information about 
UNESCO's Babel Initiative, visit 
www.unesco.org/webworld/ 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 18](135045eng.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

: 
NE. 


### 135057: Small coastal cities: historical and pioneering

UNESCO in action 
Everyone is in favour of sustainable 
development. But how does it 
fit into urban planning? Five small 
historical coastal cities around the 
Mediterranean served as case studies. 
First evaluation 
oo 
- hn" Hoi - Pr 
oy > 3 : ge 
Makdia @ x 
  
    
  
5 EssAouiva Tr 
TUNIS A MOROCCO Bi. Send fh i 
1 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
  
  
© UNESCO/Brigitte Colin 
Morocco’s Atlantic coast, 
n Essaouira, city in the wind, 
is a port town with magical 
charm. For decades, the exceptional site and its 
intense cultural life have attracted artists and 
tourists, both Moroccan and foreign. But a slew 
of problems threatens to destroy the wonderful 
attributes of the old Mogador: coastal erosion, 
salt water seeping into the aquifers, depletion 
of natural resources, overpopulation, rapid 
socio-economic transformations, dilapidation of 
buildings - including the famous ramparts filmed 
by Orson Welles for his “Othello”. 
Today, the collective will of the municipal 
and provincial authorities, local associations 
and a number of foreign partners is in the 
process of reversing the trend. They were able 
to combine their efforts when Essaouira in 1997 
became the first “case study” city of the Small 
Historical Coastal Cities Network, launched by 
UNESCO. Within that framework, ramparts and 
monuments have been restored, public spaces 
laid out, and a renovation of the sanitation and 
rubbish disposal systems is underway. A waste- 
water treatment plant and a supervised dump 
are planned.

## [Page 19](135045eng.pdf#page=19) 0

### 135057: Small coastal cities: historical and pioneering

  
      
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
B
r
i
g
i
t
t
e
 
Co
li
n 
Much remains to be done, as the project 
evaluator, Algerian geographer Rachid Sidi 
Boumedine, has noted. He mentions “mixed 
results” in Essaouira. Tourism has picked up, 
for example, notably through an increase in real 
estate transactions, but this economic boost has 
had perverse side effects, such as driving out the 
poorest residents to the city limits. Furthermore, 
the Mellah district, close to the wall, “is still in a 
state of advanced dilapidation when Essaouira’s 
Medina is included (since 2001) on the World 
Heritage List.” 
Nonetheless, a method of operation that 
associates all concerned actors has been put 
in place and has created momentum. This 
inclusive approach is the distinguishing 
characteristic of the “Urban Development 
and Freshwater Resources: Small Historical 
Coastal Cities” project, launched by UNESCO 
in 1996, aimed primarily at helping these cities 
to adopt urban planning policies that integrate 
the four pillars of sustainable development: 
environmental, economic (based in this case 
on tourism and highlighting heritage), social 
and participatory. 
The project is currently underway in four 
other case study cities in the Mediterranean 
with the same problems as Essaouira: Mahdia 
(Tunisia), Omis$alj (Croatia), Saida (Lebanon,) 
and Jableh (Syria). All those involved in the 
project — architects, urban planners, geologists, 
hydrogeologists, mayors and UNESCO experts 
— participated in the project’s first evaluation in 
December 2003, in Essaouira. 
What makes these five port cities special is their 
long, rich history, which goes back to prehistory 
in the case of Saida and Mahdia, also former royal 
capitals, while OmiSalj was once a major spiritual 
centre. They developed on sites that offered 
plentiful water, a sheltered spot for fishing and 
then trade, and surrounding fertile land. 
Though each has a well-defined identity, all five 
now face the same challenges: how to restore a 
historical centre and balance the needs of modern 
urban development with respect for cultural 
heritage? Promote tourism as well as protect the 
environment? Without driving out the inhabitants, 
but on the contrary enlisting their participation 
in the process? And take advantage of the 
opportunity to train local artisans and architecture 
students? In short, how to create sustainable 
development on a small city scale? 
MULTIPLE PARTNERSHIPS 
Because these cities were looking for solutions, 
they chose to join UNESCO’s Small Historical 
Coastal Cities Network — which gave them a 
much broader choice of partners. Omisalj, for 
instance, a small city perched above the Adriatic 
on the Croatian island of Krk, signed a sustainable 
development cooperation accord with Taglio 
di Po (Italy) in 1997. Joining the network in 
1998, it became the focus of a study on water 
resources, nature preservation and safeguarding 
of cultural heritage, a joint effort of the Institute 
of architecture and urban planning of Venice, the 
Gembloux Agronomy Faculty, and the Zagreb 
Architecture Faculty in Croatia. 
The study also made suggestions that made it 
possible to act quickly, with the participation of 
numerous specialists and students from Croatia 
and other European countries. Since 2000, Omisalj 
© Dominique Harger 
Essaouira 
(Morocco). 
Left, northern bastion 
of ramparts. 
Middle. Ruined 
houses behind the 
northern Mellah 
rampart in the 
  
Left page: 
Northern facade of 
the Mahdia (Tunisia) 
peninsula 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 20](135045eng.pdf#page=20) 0

### 135057: Small coastal cities: historical and pioneering

UNESCO in action social sciences 
L Ab—{Houses 
Destined for destruction, a 
house in Mahdia, Tunisia, was 
not only saved, but transformed 
in 1999 into a ‘lab-house’ as 
part of the Small Historical 
Coastal Cities project, thanks 
to the commitment of teaching 
staff at the Nantes School of 
Architecture in France and the 
Tunis School of Architecture 
and Urban Planning, with 
the support of the Institute 
of Tunisian Heritage and the 
Mahdia city authorities. 
A ‘lab-house’ is as much about 
architectural and technical 
experimentation as educational 
and social experimentation and 
everyone learns there, whether 
it be architecture students and 
their teachers, or craftsmen, 
building site workers and 
residents. These come to see 
how the ‘experts’ plan to solve 
problems they encounter in 
their homes. 
Like the ever-present 
dampness, which is solved by 
«covering the brickwork with 
waterproof coverings (such as 
cement or tiles),» the architects 
from Nantes* explain, «when 
in fact it is the capillarity which 
makes the houses constantly 
damp». The solution actually 
exacerbates the problem. The 
traditional Arab lime allows 
walls to breathe, but why 
should Tunisian builders want to 
prepare lime when cement and 
  
   
  
© 
A.
 
De
bo
ul
et
, 
20
00
 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
concrete are readily available to 
use instead? The solution has 
come from ‘organic architecture’ 
and involves a mix of lime and 
hemp, providing an innovative 
answer without breaking with 
tradition. 
A sort of building site school 
has formed around the first 
building, where students 
are surveying houses and >. 
investigating the materials 
and methods used in their 
construction, as well as 
collecting the comments of 
people who have made their 
lives there**. 
In Saida, Lebanon, a building 
site school was opened in 
a listed former Ottoman fl 
palace in 2003 with a group 
of students from Beirut and 
Aix-en-Provence in France, 
under the leadership of Léon 
Telvisian, the head of the urban 
planning department at the Fine 
Arts Institute at the Lebanese 
university. «Because it goes 
from the bottom to the top, 
this project allows us to ask 
questions about coordination 
and participation,» Telvisian 
said. He is going to repeat the 
exercise in 2004, and hopes to 
involve the residents. 
  
  
-_— © 
Lé
on
 
Te
lv
iz
ia
n 
*http://www.unesco.org/most/ 
csimahd_01.htm 
** Une médina en 
transformation: travaux 
d’étudiants a Mahdia, Ed. 
Unesco, 2003, 238 pages. 
Fax +33 (0) 1 45 68 57 28, 
b.colin@unesco.org 
has undertaken archeological excavation of the 
Roman site Fulfinium, restoration work on the 
paleochristian Mirine Basilica and an inventory 
of urban heritage, at the same time starting an 
operation that involves the public. 
Commenting on Omisalj, Philippe Pypaert, 
specialist in UNESCO’s Venice office, explains that 
“beyond responding to a call for technical help, 
UNESCO has fulfilled its role of catalyst — which 
is to be effective but also respectful of local 
culture, and to succeed in promoting development 
based on local capacities. It did so by enlarging 
the debate and urging the municipality to take 
the longer, more demanding road, which was to 
elaborate a complex, well-defined action plan.” 
The project’s strong point is its great flexibility.   
The idea is not to apply the same formula 
everywhere but to allow local actors to come up 
with their own solutions. In Tunisia, Mahdia’s 
distinguishing feature is a medina built on a 
peninsula. Since joining the network in 1999, the 
© UNESCO/Brigitte Colin 
  
 

## [Page 21](135045eng.pdf#page=21) 0

### 135057: Small coastal cities: historical and pioneering

Left: A hammam in 
Saida (Lebanon) 
© 
J. 
Se
pc
ic
, 
Om
is
al
j 
city has decided to build its new marina closer to 
the sebkha (coastal saltwater lagoon) instead of 
on the Punic port, and it has begun to draw up a 
plan to safeguard and revitalize the Medina. The 
line of dunes along the coast on the north beach, 
destabilized by a block of hotels, is now secured 
with new fencing, making it possible to expand 
the beach and use the boulevard again. Other 
projects include a waste-water treatment plant, 
the creation of wetlands, and the relocation of 
polluting industries. And Madhia’s Demonstration 
House is one of the project’s most original 
creations (see box). 
On the coast of Lebanon, Saida - the old Sidon 
- joined the Network in 2001. The first students, 
French and Lebanese, arrived at its Demonstration 
House in 2003 (see box) and its seafront 
boulevard is now a pedestrian promenade, as in 
Jableh, Syria. The latter, which became a case 
study city in 2002, plans to set up a training 
workshop in urban management and regional 
KX Precuvsoy 
of litkevsestorial “Projects 
Launched in 19986, the project 
“Urban development and 
freshwater resources: small 
historical coastal cities 
network” is based on the 
principles of the Istanbul 
Declaration (Habitat II, 1996) 
and the ICOMOS (International 
Council of Monuments and 
Sites) Charter on Historical 
Cities. It was initiated thanks to 
several UNESCO programmes: 
MOST (Management of Social 
Transformations), with its network 
of urban planning experts, 
and the “Coastal Regions and 
Small Islands” Unit (CSI), with 
the participation of the PHI 
(Programme Hydrologique 
International) and the World 
    
 
  
= 
ord Omisalj (Croatia) 
© 
J. 
Se
pc
ic
, 
Om
is
al
j 
  
© 
J. 
Se
pc
ic
, 
Om
is
al
j 
Heritage Centre. It brings together 
the Science, Social and Human 
Sciences and Culture sectors. 
UNESCO's regional offices in 
Beirut, Rabat and Venice now 
direct the project's regional 
implementation. 
For more information: 
WWW. XXXX 
Contact: b.colin@unesco.org 
(SHS); 
a. Phineas 
) 
 
© UNESCO/Pypaert 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 22](135045eng.pdf#page=22) 0

### 135057: Small coastal cities: historical and pioneering

UNESCO in action social sciences 
  
© Fondation Hariri 
© 
U
n
e
s
c
o
/
A
l
e
x
a
n
d
e
r
 
Ot
te
 
Above leftt: The sea 
castle, view from the 
old city 
Middle: Passageway 
to one of the souks 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
development, while Syrian universities and 
institutions have begun the first housing surveys. 
The project has developed its methodology 
and capitalized its assets in the course of action, 
as noted by its evaluator. At the beginning, 
he says, “European universities did mostly 
surveys (architectural surveys in Essaouira) and 
analysed and experimented on a limited scale 
(Demonstration House in Mahdia).” Then, “they 
produced an interpretation and made sense 
of what was going on, as well as formulating 
action plans (Omisalj). Since then, in Saida and 
     
    
Saida (Lebanon) 
Above: Neglected old houses 
are sub-let to the poorest 
inhabitants, who live in them 
in increasingly insalubrious 
conditions 
Jableh, universities are supporting the project by 
providing training for local participants and by 
drawing up plans for intervention.” 
In terms of raising awareness of sustainable 
development, the impact is obvious, and not 
just on local authorities. In Croatia, Pypaert is 
pleased to note “the enormous echo we have 
encountered in the region.” In 2001, for instance, 
seven administrative units in Krk signed a plan 
to manage water resources on the island; Rijeka, 
the capital of the province, is considering creating 
a sustainable development school and Agenda 21 
committees have multiplied along the Croatian 
coast. In Essaouira, a protest movement formed 
in October 2003 to oppose a plan to build a hotel 
complex along the wall. 
Six years after its launch, the Small Historical 
Coastal Cities Network continues to expand. 
Besides the case study cities, it has two partner 
cities, Kotor (Serbia-Montenegro) and La Rochelle 
(France). North and south of the Mediterranean, 
cities, universities and associations have signed 
a number of bilateral conventions. At the 
December evaluation meeting in December 2003, 
participants were unanimous: “Let’s go on!” 
Monique Perrot-Lanaud 
© 
Lé
on
 
T
e
l
v
i
z
i
a
n

## [Page 23](135045eng.pdf#page=23) 0

### 135058: Bringing peace to the playground

RINGII 
IV 
T t | 
Violence in schools has 
become a global problem. 
Teaching young people how 
to resolve their conflicts 
before they erupt should 
be part of every school 
curriculum 
6 
  
i 
  
wars begin in the minds 
« ( Lo 
of men, it is in the 
( nC l, minds of men that the 
defences of peace must be constructed,” states the 
preamble of UNESCO’s Constitution. And what 
better place to start building these “defences” 
than at school, in the minds of youth? Such is 
the thinking underpinning UNESCO’s work in 
the area of peace and non-violence education 
programmes. Yet how to pass the message when 
schools themselves can no longer be considered 
a safe haven from the violence that affects many 
societies, but rather a foyer for it? 
Violence in schools regularly makes headline 
news in many countries. It has its roots in 
the many ills of our societies today: poverty, 
emigration, civil strife or any of the many forms 
of social injustice. There are no simple recipes for 
solving it, says Antonella Verdiani, in charge of 
non-violence education programmes at UNESCO 
and for whom the adage “prevention is better 
than cure” still holds true. “Because once a 
conflict has erupted, it is often too late.” 
That is why it is so important, she says, to give 
teachers, school workers and pupils themselves, 
the pedagogical tools to prevent and transform 
LA 
UNESCO in action education 
DEALE TN   
 
the violence with which they are confronted on a 
daily basis at work (see following article). 
“UNESCO’s aim is to publicize — through 
conferences or publications - the practices of 
non-violence so that they can be of use to primary 
and secondary schools, inspire teachers and 
give rise to solutions to curb the rise of violence 
among young people. Confronted with this 
problem, which is almost global, creativity, a big 
capacity for humour and above all love can help 
the various players to transform a conflict into a 
meeting.” 
  
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
The series of 
photos was taken 
in a classroom of 
14-year-olds at the 
Claude Monet school 
in Argenteuil 
(Paris suburbs) 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 24](135045eng.pdf#page=24) 0

### 135058: Bringing peace to the playground

UNESCO in action education 
   
  
    
» “During this millennium,” writes UNESCO 
Assistant Director-General John Daniel in the 
preface to “Best Practices of Non-Violent Conflict 
Resolution in and out-of-school”*, “we must look 
beyond what the founding fathers, despite their 
visionary approach, intended by the expression 
‘defences of peace’. In the current situation of the 
world, it is not a question of effective defences 
but rather to effect a more radical change: to 
change our vision of the world, our way of 
educating, communicating and living together.” 
Cristina U'Homme 
Sl 
or & = * Available online at: http://unesdoc.unesco.org/ 
& images/0012/001266/126679e.pdf 
Pupils and teachers ( 
] don’t pay attention 
from a school in hey to me!” 
suburban Paris are the teacher complains. 
“She persecutes us!” 
learning to resolve the two students shoot back. 
their c onfli cts without The exchange rapidly becomes more heated. 
The teacher tries imposing her authority, while 
coming to blows the students ask her to explain herself. 
The atmosphere at the Claude Monet High 
School in Argenteuil, near Paris, is explosive. 
Aggressive even. And it all happened much 
too fast. 
This school, designated a “priority teaching 
zone” because of the many problems of its 
area — widespread poverty, social and cultural 
deprivation, a predominantly immigrant 
population, a black-market economy, frequent 
violence - is not an isolated case, and its situation 
could have rapidly worsened. Yet it managed to   Ph
ot
os
: 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 25](135045eng.pdf#page=25) 0

### 135058: Bringing peace to the playground

  
defuse the dangerous tensions. How? By creating 
the structure and spirit of mediation. 
The school’s principal, Christian Comes, has 
a clear appraisal of the problem: schools are 
increasingly multi-ethnic and multi-cultural. 
And school life has become too caught up in the 
difficulties of communication and the violence 
they generate. 
A French association dedicated to mediation 
and training mediators, the Centre de Médiation 
et de Formation a la Médiation (CMFM), teamed 
up with UNESCO in 1997 to start a project which 
allows schools and principals to learn about 
mediation. This partnership gave Christian 
Comes the means to see through his idea. He 
offered pupils a tool, a sort of 12-point rating card, 
to take the “temperature” of their relationship 
with teachers, and organized weekly get-togethers 
to talk over the results. More importantly, he set 
up a space for mediating conflicts that he calls 
a “hearing-out place” where two people having 
a problem can talk in front of a mediator. “A 
place where frustrations, verbal violence, can be 
expressed,” explains Caroline Anville, a modern 
literature teacher. “Where one can be listened 
to without being judged. Because if violence is 
not expressed through language, it ends up being 
expressed through actions.” 
The mediation process is simple: initially, each 
party states his or her case separately. “Then the 
mediator brings them together and asks questions 
in a way to get them to air their feelings,” one 
of the trainers, Colette, says. “Listening and 
empathy can allow a conflict to be resolved 
because an agreement -- if one is reached -- will 
be respected by both sides. But keep in mind that 
mediation is not a miracle solution: the success 
rate is only 35 per cent.” 
To put the structure into place, the principal 
offered mediation training to various adults in the 
each other 
  
At the hearing-out-place 
of a high school in the 
Paris suburbs, conflicts 
are defused by talking to 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 26](135045eng.pdf#page=26) 0

### 135058: Bringing peace to the playground

UNESCO in action education 
Police may be 
called in when the 
situation gets out of 
hand (here in 2002 
in Valenciennes, in 
northern France) 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
  
school, then to students. They learned techniques 
of asking questions that spur a dialogue, and used 
role-playing to further their skills. 
Mediation has given Laurence, a teacher’s aide, 
“a different reading of human relations, one that 
is more distanced, more respectful. I came to 
understand that, if a pupil is being aggressive, it’s 
because he’s suffering.” 
“The arguments are often small to begin with 
- ‘what are you looking at?’ - but the physical 
or verbal violence that follows can be extreme,” 
Florence, a sports and physical education teacher, 
adds. 
The training has proven a hit with the students; 
within two years around 60 of the 650 pupils at 
the school have gone through the course. “The 
students are really happy to be able to talk, to be 
heard. The room is always open,” Charlen, one 
young mediator, says. 
“At the start, they accused us of wanting to 
cut classes by doing the training,” Saba, another 
student in Charlen’s class who is also a mediator, 
recalls. But then an episode happened where 
some pens were stolen, and a game organized 
in the “hearing-out place” unraveled what had 
happened and the objects were returned. 
Saba feels pride, she says, “Even if there are 
  
more failures than solutions, because we’re the 
ones who find them.” 
The teacher and her two students in the 
“hearing-out room” are face-to-face. They 
have spoken as equals and said what they were 
thinking without the threat of punishment 
hanging over their heads. 
“I showed disrespect, I know that,” one of the 
pupils admits. 
“I had the impression she hated me,” the 
teacher replies. 
Cristina Homme 
\ To learn more about preventing 
and resolving disputes: http:/ 
www.unesco.org/education/ 
nved 
© 
Fr
an
k 
C
r
u
s
t
a
u
x
/
G
a
m
m
a

## [Page 27](135045eng.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO in brief 
The Second Protec! 
The Second Protocol to the 
1954 Hague Convention for 
in times of war or occupation 
and establishes the “individual 
the Protection of Cultural criminal responsibility” of 
Property in Event of Armed perpetrators of crimes against 
© 
La
yl
a 
A
e
r
t
s
/
P
h
o
t
o
 
N
e
w
s
/
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Conflict entered into force culture. It also insists on 
on March 9. The Protocol, 
adopted at The Hague in March 
1999, strengthens the 1954 
Hague Convention and its 
  
the need to take preparatory 
measures in peacetime to protect "An AIDS-free generation in 
less than a generation 
This is the name, and the 
such property in times of war, 
and partially limits the notion of 
: Co First Protocol. It reaffirms the “imperative military necessity”, 
for educational institutions, 
which authorizes waivers “immunity” of cultural property 
aim, of a new global initiative, 
proposed by UNESCO and 
adopted by UNAIDS, the Joint 
United Nations Programme 
on HIV/AIDS, last March in 
Livingstone (Zambia}. 
improved financing di tural fo. A 
} regarding cultural property. An 
mechanisms, renewed } 8 8 prop y 
. intergovernmental committee 
non-formal educational } . 
. comprising 12 States Parties will 
opportunities, safe schools ) . . 
i monitor the implementation 
and surroundings, broader i } 
. . of the Convention and its two 
community contact with i 
Protocols and will be able to 
  
The new project, “will consist schools and enhanced ] 
. Aw grant certain cultural property 
of a concerted effort to help national capacity.” A “tool 
. i. “of the greatest importance 
countries to develop an kit”, adaptable to the needs Lo 
for humanity”, “enhanced 
urgent, scaled-up response to of different countries, cultures 
prevention education,” said 
UNESCO Director-General 
Koichiro Matsuura said. “This 
will include the development 
of curricula, teacher-training 
modules, workplace policies 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
T
a
n
g
 
Ch
hi
n 
So
th
y 
and social milieux, will be 
designed and tested in a few of 
the countries worst affected by 
HIV/AIDS, mainly sub-Saharan 
Africa. 
 
46 willion children out-of 
school in South and East Asia 
Despite significant increases 
in enrolments over the past 
decade, there are still some 
46 million children out-of- 
school in the 22 countries of 
South and East Asia, according 
to the South and East Asia 
Regional Report, published 
by UNESCO’s Institute for 
Statistics. 
The Report also reveals that 
only half of the children who 
enter primary school India, 
the Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic and Myanmar, 
will reach grade five. Nepal, 
Cambodia and Bangladesh 
follow closely behind, with 
between 35 and 38 percent of 
children dropping out before 
the end of the primary cycle. 
WWW. UiS.unesco.org 
  
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
G
.
 
Bo
cc
ar
di
 
Strengthening Earth 
seienée research 
On February 10 
at Headquarters, 
UNESCO’s Director- 
General signed 
two Memoranda 
of Understanding 
(MOU) with the 
United States 
Geological Survey 
and the German Geo 
Forschungs Zentrum 
to strengthen 
cooperation in 
the field of earth 
sciences. 
This will mark the 
first MOU between 
UNESCO and the 
United States, since 
its return to the 
Organization. The 
MOU with Germany 
is a renewal of that 
signed five years ago. 
Both are intended to 
prevent and mitigate 
natural disasters, 
notably through the 
exchange of scientific 
and technical 
a 
protection”. 
knowledge and 
the enhancement 
of scientific and 
technical capacities 
in several fields, 
including global 
earth observation 
and continental 
drilling. 
 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
i
a
m
h
 
B
u
r
k
e

## [Page 28](135045eng.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO in brief 
  
The high eost of 
repeating 
Student repetition in Latin 
America costs the region 
over $11 billion annually, 
according to research in 15 
countries by the UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics. 
Over $8 billion of this is 
attributed to Brazil, where 
one in every four primary 
students repeat a year. 
However, repetition rates 
are also high in Guatemala 
(14 percent) and Peru (11 
percent). 
Contact: 
Albert Motivans, UIS 
E-mail: 
a.motivans@unesco.org 
Sustainable 
  
© UNESCO/Eduardo Barrios 
development labs 
A deadly year for journalists 
UNESCO Director-General 
Koichiro Matsuura in January 
deplored the increase in the 
number of reporters killed in 
2003. “It is a source of grave 
concern that the number was 
higher than in any year since 
1995”, he said, commenting 
on reports by professional 
organizations which set the 
2003 figure at between 36 and 
42. In 2002, 19 to 25 journalists 
were Killed, compared to 49 
in 1995, when 22 journalists 
were killed in the conflict in 
Algeria. Fourteen to 19 of 
those killed in 2003 died in 
Iraq, five in the Philippines 
and three in Colombia. The 
Director-General noted that “the 
vast majority of the killings 
remain un-investigated and 
unpunished, despite the pledge 
UNESCO’s Member States made 
in a resolution they adopted 
at the Organization’s General 
Conference in 1997 to bring the 
perpetrators of such crimes to 
justice.” 
Underway 
The Bureaux of 
the International 
Bioethics Committee 
(IBC) and the 
Intergovernmental 
Bioethics Committee 
(IGBC) met with the 
chairpersons of the 
24 national bioethics 
European Union in 
Rome last December 
19 for the first round 
of consultations in 
the preparation of a 
future declaration on 
universal norms in 
bioethics. Towards 
the same end, a 
was launched with 
UNESCO’s Member 
States in January 
focused mainly 
on the scope and 
structure of the 
declaration. 
WWW.UNesco.org/ 
  
committees of the written consultation shs/bioethics 
® © 6 6 oo oo oo oO 
Copyright on line 
Z 
E About 100 legal texts dealing 
/Mm 
S with copyright and connected 
2 rights are now accessible online. 
o The list includes the national 
Meeting at UNESCO " } . ; legislation of UNESCO’s Member 
eeting a comping an mventory 0 States, and is regularly updated hk 
on January 26th, West the reserves’ plants and NT 
] i i ] } by the Organization’s Cultural 
Africa’s environment animals, the project will . . 
oo oo Enterprise and Copyright 
ministers called on the New develop scientific and 
Co Section. Most have been 
Partnership for Africa’s institutional structures to . 
Devel — q 0 translated into at least one of 
eve opmen ( ) to monitor an manage the UNESCO's six official languages 
use biosphere reserves “as environmental impact of A 
laboratories for sustainable 
development”. They also 
launched a new project to 
improve the monitoring and 
protection of the region’s six 
biosphere reserves. While 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
human activities. With a 
budget of more than $6 
million, this will be the first 
UNESCO project to receive 
support from the Global 
Environmental Fund. 
(Arabic, Chinese, English, 
French, Russian and Spanish). 
Internet : http://portal.unesco. 
org/culture/en 
For more information: 
copyright.law@unesco.org

## [Page 29](135045eng.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

Human Rights: 
highlighting research 
antl training 
The World Directory of 
Human Rights Research 
and Training published 
by UNESCO is the most 
complete reference 
available on the subject. 
Produced by UNESCO’s 
Social and Human 
Sciences Documentation 
Centre with the 
participation of the 
Human Rights Division, 
it contains 20,000 
listings, with10,000 of 
them available on line 
in a data bank, allowing 
cross-referencing (http:// 
databases.unesco. 
org/dare/dareintro. 
shtml). First published 
in 1987, the directory 
has just been reprinted 
in its sixth paper edition 
in anticipation of the 
first World Forum for 
Human Rights being held 
from May 16 to 19 2004, 
organized by UNESCO in 
partnership with the city 
of Nantes (France). 
For more information on 
the Forum: 
www.unesco.org/shs/ 
humanrightsforum 
© 
M
u
s
e
o
 
Na
ci
on
al
 
de
 
Co
st
a 
Ri
ca
 
Art alert 
A “Red List of Latin American Cultural 
Objects at Risk”, covering pre-Colombian w 
and Colonial cultural heritage, has been 
published by the International Council of 
Museums (ICOM}, an NGO that works 
closely with UNESCO in the 
struggle against the traffic of 
    
    
  
Nayarit ceramic 
figures from 
México, dating from 
300 B.C to 500 A.D. Similar 
to the Lists published for 
Africa and Iraq, the Red 
List for Latin America is an 
appeal to museums, auction 
houses, art dealers and 
collectors not to acquire these 
objects. 
http://icom.museum/redlist 
Tweé new 
social science Chairs 
At the beginning of 
this year, the Ayrton 
Senna Institute in Brazil 
welcomed a new Chair 
for Education and 
Human Development, 
bringing to 25 the number 
of UNESCO Chairs 
dealing with sustainable 
development. This Chair 
aims to develop research, 
training, information and 
documentation in this 
domain, in collaboration 
with other higher 
education establishments. 
And in Canada, the 
University of Montreal, 
a leader in research and 
teaching of landscape 
architecture, announced 
in February the creation 
of a UNESCO Chair 
in Landscape and 
Environmental Design. 
One of the Chair’s central 
projects is the creation 
of an “International 
Landscape Observatory” 
in cooperation with 
UNESCO’s Management 
of Social Transformation 
programme (MOST) and 
World Heritage Centre. 
WWW. UNesco.org/ 
education/unitwin/chairs/ 
sustain-dev 
www.iforum.umontreal. 
ca/Communiques/ 
3211.htm 
  
E-¢ recommits 
_ 
3
,
 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
B
r
e
n
d
a
n
 
O'
Ma
ll
ey
 
and account for 70 percent of 
illiterate adults and more than 40 
Education ministers from nine 
high population countries - 
Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Egypt, percent of the world’s out-of-school 
India, Indonesia, Mexico, Nigeria children. 
—— 
cultural objects. hl - 
The List includes Cuzco _ — 
and Quito Paintings % LL = 
from the 17th and 4 ho - n 
18th centuries and PEELS © 
Vi
ct
or
 
G
o
n
z
a
l
e
z
 
F
e
r
n
a
n
d
e
z
,
 
I
C
A
N
H
 
C
o
l
o
m
b
i
e
 
  
and Pakistan - reaffirmed their 
commitment to Education for All 
and agreed to strengthen their 
cooperation towards this end when 
they met in Cairo (Egypt) last 
December. These countries, known 
as the E-9 group, are home to over 
50 percent of the world’s population 
In a declaration after the Cairo 
meeting, the ministers pointed to 
increased enrolments, improved 
literacy rates (especially for 
women), and greater access to Early 
Childhood Care and Education 
(ECCE}, but acknowledged that they 
“still face a number of challenges.” 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 30](135045eng.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ya
nn
 
A
r
t
h
u
s
-
B
e
r
t
r
a
n
d
 
« 
La
 
te
rr
e 
vu
e 
du
 
Ci
el
 
» 
/ 
Al
ti
tu
de
, 
Pa
ri
s 
  
be highly vulnerable places that face multiple development challenges, 
such as small population, lack of resources, remoteness, and susceptibility to 
natural disasters. Their economies are usually small-scale, often dependent on tourism, 
yet with high transportation and communication costs, and costly public administration and 
infrastructure. 
F, from the Bali Hai paradise portrayed by Hollywood, small island states can 
Poignant proof of their vulnerability is not hard to find. In late February, freak tides submerged 
large parts of Tuvalu, a small island state in the Pacific. If sea level continues to rise with global 
warming, Tuvalu, will, effectively, disappear. A month before, the island of Niue, also in 
the Pacific, was flattened by cyclone Heta, most of its inhabitants seeking refuge in New Zealand. 
Yet their will to return and rebuild their nation is evidence that islanders’ resilience is often 
more than a match for the challenges they face. 
This special feature takes a series of snapshots of what life on a small island means today, 
in the run-up to an international meeting in Mauritius in August 2004 on sustainable development 
in small island developing states. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 31](135045eng.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

  
-. 
1   
North Male Atoll 
(Maldives) 
Top right: The 
Galapagos Islands 
are famous for species 
not found anywhere 
else, like this iguana 
This feature was 
compiled and edited 
by Peter Coles 
Special thanks to David 
Becker, Dominik Bretteville, 
Tim Curtis, Ralph Regenvanu 
and Itaka Schlubach for 
their help and advice 


### 135059: The Universal island and the island universe

THE UNIVERSAL 
ISLAND AND THE 
ISLAND UNIVERSE 
Louis Brigand, professor of geography at the University 
of Brest (France) and curator of the Iroise Nature 
Reserve explains why much of what is essential about 
a small island is the same in Brittany, where he lives 
and works, as it is in the South Pacific 
What is the definition of an island? 
There are almost as many definitions as there are islands. 
The most basic definition is “land surrounded by water 
on all sides”. But international organisations don’t always 
use the same criteria. For one it might be the area, for 
another how far it is from the continent, whether or not it 
is inhabited, the number of inhabitants. For the European 
Community if there is a capital city on an island it is no 
longer considered an island. 
And from a biologist’s point of view, the summit of a 
mountain, a cow-pat or a clearing in a forest are also islands. 
Some geographers even go so far as to say that Earth is an 
island in the universe. 
Is isolation an important part of the definition? 
It’s essential. All the definitions mention it, whether the 
isolation is geographical, economic, political, or cultural, 
etc. Filmmakers, artists, the military, and religions are all 
interested in islands. They are places to find oneself. And it’s 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
  
> 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
A
n
d
e
s
/
C
Z
A
P
/
A
S
A
 
no
 T
S
.
 
 

## [Page 32](135045eng.pdf#page=32) 0

### 135059: The Universal island and the island universe

foens 
“From Barbados to  Mauvitius and Beyond 
Two terms that are 
very often used when 
referring to the 
41 small island 
developing states 
SIDS) (see www. 
un.org/esa/sustdev/ 
sids/sidslist.htm) are 
“vulnerability” and 
“resilience”. Resilient, 
because, despite 
obstacles due to their 
small size, isolation, 
and exposure to 
natural disasters, for 
example, traditional 
island societies 
have managed, 
for millennia, to 
maintain a healthy 
equilibrium with 
their environment 
and its resources. 
Meanwhile they have 
often used the sea 
as a means of, rather 
than as a barrier 
to communication 
and trade. Yet 
ndustrialisation 
  
Climate change, 
for example, is 
likely to increase 
the frequency and 
severity of the 
natural disasters 
to which SIDS are 
already vulnerable. 
And a further sea- 
level rise of even 
a few centimetres 
could threaten the 
sustainable develop- 
ment, livelihood and 
very existence of 
islands like Tuvalu 
and the Maldives. 
Meanwhile, most 
SIDS do not have the 
resources to diversify 
their economic base 
to participate actively 
in a global economy. 
The strength of 
many SIDS lies in 
the sustainability 
of their subsistence 
economies, often 
steeped in tradition 
and indigenous 
which may not be 
sustainable in many 
SIDS. 
So, two years 
after the 1992 
Earth Summit in 
Rio de Janeiro, 
the international 
community gathered 
in Bridgetown, 
Barbados at the 
Global Conference 
on the Development 
of Small Island 
States (25 April 
—- 6 May 1994). 
The main output 
was the Barbados 
Programme of 
Action, with a list of 
15 areas where SIDS 
are exceptionally 
vulnerable, and where 
national, regional 
and international 
action was felt to be 
urgent. These areas 
were principally 
environmental, such 
Ten years later, 
from 30 August 
to 3 September 
2004, Mauritius 
will be hosting 
an international 
meeting to review 
the implementation 
of the Barbados 
Programme of Action. 
Topics relating to 
environment and 
natural resources 
— such as sea-level 
rise, freshwater 
resources and energy 
— will continue to 
figure prominently 
in those discussions, 
as they did in 
Barbados. But many 
other burning issues 
will also be on the 
table — ranging from 
trade and security 
to cultural diversity 
and knowledge 
management for 
decision making. 
contribution is | 
building bridges and 
networks of various 
kinds, in promoting 
effective collaboration 
between societal 
and organizational 
sectors, between 
regions and between 
generations. An 
additional role is 
highlighting the 
importance of culture 
education and youth, 
in working towards 
a new vision and 
commitment for smal 
islands.   
For the Barbados 
  
Programme of Action, 
see www.sidsnet.org/ 
docshare/other/BPOA.pdf 
For a look at how UNESCO 
locally and in far-off knowledge. These as climate change UNESCO is is working with SIDS, see 
countries across the are often disregarded and sea-level rise, participating http://portal.unesco.org/ 
globe is changing the in the push towards freshwater resources, actively in the islandsBplus10 
balance against these forms of western- natural disasters and Barbados+10 and 
small island states. style development, biodiversity. process. Its special www.smallislandsvoice.org 
For information on 
the Barbados+10 meeting 
in Mauritius, see 
www.sidsnet.org/ 
It can be a long walk 
to get fresh water 
on Cape Verde. But on   some islands there's 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
D
o
m
i
n
i
q
u
e
 
Ro
ge
r 
none to be had at all  
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 33](135045eng.pdf#page=33) 0

### 135059: The Universal island and the island universe

  
© UNESCO/ Claire Servoz 
p> there that hermitages have been built - as well 
as prisons. These are the classical functions of 
islands, linked to isolation. 
Is insularity the same everywhere 
in the world? 
Even on the little islands of Brittany we can find 
everything that characterises insularity elsewhere. 
There are the same problems, whatever the 
latitude. There’s a problem of freshwater on the 
Isle of Molene - even if it rains a lot there. 
Small island states have often progressively 
acquired their status by separating from 
a continental state. Sometimes, in certain 
archipelagos, each island has tried to become 
independent. And all the little islands in Brittany 
have joined together in an association that has 
been running for 25 years (the isles of Ponant) 
with a fairly substantial budget. It’s also one way 
to have a voice with respect to the State and to 
the continent. 
Are there different types of island? 
From a geographical point of view there are 
two main categories. There is the volcanic 
island, that appears relatively suddenly, and the 
pre-continental island, which is due to a rise 
or fall in the level of the water, or because of 
fragmentation. These are parts of the continent 
that have become isolated at a point in geological 
history. The great volcanic islands are found along 
the Atlantic and Pacific ridges. It’s interesting that 
on volcanic islands there is a different way of 
organising space. There is the cone and the steep 
slopes. Often the roads go around the island and 
not so much up and down. And these islands are 
often part of an archipelago. 
AN al 
RE 4 Y 
A Ty Ao oi 
x sa Ch ix pt 
Is an island still an island if there 
is a bridge? 
For me it’s a break with one of the most 
significant components of what makes an island. 
On all the little islands near to the continent, even 
those that are a few dozen metres away, the fact 
that there is a barrier of water changes everything. 
And there are other kinds of bridge that we don’t 
often think about. There is electricity, for example, 
where the underwater cable forms a bridge. Then 
there is drinking water. A pipeline to an island 
from the mainland will completely change the way 
people think about using water, and its scarcity, 
compared to when they have to find ways to get 
it. There is an impluvium on Molene and almost 
every house has a rainwater tank. 
Arriving on an island by bridge is frustrating, 
too. The time to get from the continent to the 
island, whether by plane or by boat, makes all 
the difference. We’re always trying to find quicker 
ways to get to an island, but I'm not convinced 
that’s what people really want. They're not 
particularly interested in gaining 15 minutes on 
the crossing - they even usually enjoy it. 
Islands are important to mariners 
aren't they? 
When I look at old maps, one of the things that 
always strikes me is to see that the islands are 
always represented and that their size is often 
exaggerated. This is a sign of their importance for 
the mariner. 
For the mariner an island is the first land he 
sees before striking the continent and, when 
leaving, it is the last. An island is both a source 
of danger and safety, a haven in which to rest, 
to find provisions, perhaps even a woman. > 
The Sally Lightfoot 
crab is specially 
adapted to resist the 
rough conditions 
of the Galapagos 
Islands 
  
For more than 
25 years Louis 
Brigand has been 
researching, 
teaching and writing 
about small islands 
— a love affair that 
began when, as a 
teenager, he'd go 
looking for rabbits 
on the uninhabited 
island of Beniguet, 
in the Iroise sea 
(France) 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
foeus 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
P
e
t
e
r
 
Co
le
s 
33 
.-
 
 

## [Page 34](135045eng.pdf#page=34) 0

### 135059: The Universal island and the island universe

Pp Why do scientists find islands 
interesting? 
There are hundreds of things to study on all 
small islands, even the tiniest islets. For example, 
biologists may look at endemic species, or those 
that have been isolated and thus don’t have the 
same characteristics as those on the continent. 
Sociologists might look at populations, because 
they, too, will have traits that have been preserved 
because of isolation. And botanists will look at 
the ways plants adapt to certain specific climatic 
conditions. 
On the islands off Brittany, for example, there are 
a great many things of interest to archaeologists, 
because the ground may not have been worked 
intensively, or there may have been no dense 
habitation. Even on the little islets, we see that 
foeus 
almost all scientific disciplines can be applied. 
And also, as an island is surrounded by water, 
the smaller it is, the more it is subjected to 
the forces of erosion and currents. And so the 
coastline can change much more significantly 
than on the continent. So they become very 
interesting places to study phenomena that are 
affecting the planet as a whole. 
It’s no accident that many islands are protected 
by conservation laws, like nature reserves and 
biosphere reserves. 
Do you have a favourite island? 
I try not to put them on a scale. And after all, 
the most beautiful islands are imaginary, aren’t 
they? 


### 135060: Disappearing Tuvalu

DISAPPEARING TUVALU 
The coral islands of Tuvalu in the Pacific Ocean, like the Maldives in the 
Indian Ocean, are set to disappear as sea level rises with global warming 
Panapase Nelisoni has an unusual responsibility. 
Not many government secretaries are charged 
with planning for the end of their nations. 
For six months of the 
year some Tuvaluans 
now have wet feet at 
high tide 
  
Yet Tuvalu faces an unusual threat, possibly 
unprecedented in human history - the 
geographical disappearance of the entire island 
  
© 
Pa
tr
ic
k 
A
v
e
n
t
u
r
i
e
r
/
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
 
nation as a result of sea level rise. 
“We couldn’t just sit back and do nothing,” 
Panapase told me, as we sat in a small office 
in the one-storey white-painted building which 
houses most of Tuvalu’s national government. “So 
far we have received approval from New Zealand 
to allow seventy-five people a year to go there.” 
This is not an ‘evacuation’, he insisted, but more 
of a ‘migration plan’. Either way, Tuvalu’s 11,300 
inhabitants are about to start leaving their homes. 
“We don’t know what will happen in the future,” 
he said. “We may lose our culture, and our identity 
as Tuvaluans. It will take time for our people to 
accept that, once we’re in another country.” 
FLOODING FROM BELOW 
The following day, just as the evening shadows 
were lengthening from the coconut and pandanus 
trees that line Funafuti atoll’s shore, puddles 
began to appear around the airstrip. Water had 
begun welling up through small holes in the 
ground, as the high tide forced seawater up 
through the centre of the island. This is why 
building sea walls around atolls like Tuvalu is 
pointless — coral rock is porous, so the islands 
 

## [Page 35](135045eng.pdf#page=35) 0

### 135060: Disappearing Tuvalu

  
flood from the inside out. By the time the tide 
started to ebb away again, the water had reached 
a foot deep across wide areas. 
Hilia Vavae, Tuvalu’s senior meteorologist, 
was splashing through the waters that had 
surrounded her office. “The floods have increased 
tremendously,” she said. “Last year we were 
flooding during the high tides of November, 
December, January, February and March. When 
I first started work in the Met Office in 1981, you 
would normally see it in February only.” 
There are other signs of rising sea levels, too. 
Pit plantations of pulaka, a root vegetable like 
taro, have been suffering from saltwater intrusion. 
In some places three-quarters of the plants 
have died, leaving people reliant on imported 
foodstuffs. Meanwhile, Tepuka Savilivili, a small 
island on the rim of Funafuti atoll, was washed 
over by waves a few years ago and its vegetation 
destroyed. Tuvaluans consider it a harbinger of 
what is to come for the rest of their homeland. 
COASTAL AREAS AT RISK 
Even so, some sceptics accuse the Tuvaluans of 
being the architects of their own fate, suggesting 
that overpopulation, groundwater extraction or 
the mining of offshore sand from the seabed 
could be to blame for the problems of flooding 
and erosion, rather than sea-level rise. But the 
islanders point out that some of the worst erosion 
is taking place on uninhabited areas of the atolls, 
far from any human disturbance. 
Indeed, the impact of sea level rise is now 
visible in low-lying areas around the world. And 
coral atolls, which average as little as half a 
metre above sea level, are particularly vulnerable. 
According to Professor Patrick Nunn, an expert in 
ocean geoscience at the University of the South 
Pacific in Fiji, current sea level rise is between 
1 and 2mm a year. The UN Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change predicts further rises of 
between 9 and 88cm over the next century. 
“Many low-lying coastal areas are going to 
disappear,” predicted Professor Nunn. “In fifty 
years’ time the geography of the Pacific region will 
be quite different to the way it is today.” 
Mark Lynas 
© 
Pa
tr
ic
k 
A
v
e
n
t
u
r
i
e
r
/
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
foeus 
In 50 years the 
Pacific Ocean could 
look very different, 
as islands disappear 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
7
 
 

## [Page 36](135045eng.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

(Top) How long 
will these children 
of Yenaoloul 
on the island of 
Tanna be safe from 
westernisation? 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
  


### 135061: Peace and respect

RR a 
PEACE AND RESPECT 
Vanuatu (in Melanesia) is probably the 
most culturally diverse country anywhere. 
A unique network of fieldworkers is helping 
keep traditional customs alive and well. 
Bosen Napu leads us in single file through the 
rainforest, and down the steep, winding path of 
a canyon, leaving the coast far behind us. It is 
best to walk barefoot, he says, for a better grip 
on the black, volcanic earth. When we finally get 
to the bottom, we immediately start the near- 
vertical climb up the other side, until we reach 
a wide clearing shaded by giant banyan trees. 
Men and boys are sitting around, wearing only 
their tradiional nambas or penis sheaths. This 
is a nakamal, a sacred meeting and dancing 
space where ancient paths cross, up in the cool 
mountains of Tanna, in the south of Vanuatu. 
Unknown to me, every step we take is not only 
following a physical path between nakamals. 
It is also retracing and re-affirming a multitude 
of other relationships — bonds of kinship, social 
ties and personal genealogies, going back to the 
‘sacred stones’ from which these people say they 
originally came. Almost every tree, stone, animal 
and place we pass is invested with layers of 
meaning. 
Bosen is a cultural fieldworker, one of 60 men 
 ; AW 
  
and 40 women volunteers in a programme started 
by the Vanuatu Cultural Centre in the late 1970’s 
to document, preserve and promote the country’s 
oral history, and especially what is known as 
kastom. This is loosely translated as ‘tradition’, 
but in fact, is much more. Indeed, when Vanuatu 
(formerly the New Hebrides) won independence 
from the British and French condominium in 
1980, kastom was the rallying call that united the 
13 main islands and 70 islets in this Melanesian 
archipelago, with their 100 or so languages and 
almost as many cultural variations. 
KEEPING KASTOM 
The ceremonial expression of kastom is still 
very much alive, and varies from the islands in the 
north, like Santo, Ambae, Pentecost and Malakula, 
to the southern islands of Efate, Erromango, and 
Tanna. In the north, as men (and in some islands, 
women) gain wealth, they can elect to rise in 
status through ‘grade-taking’ ceremonies, using 
pigs’ tusks, woven mats, yams and kava (a root 
used to make a sacred drink at the heart of male 
society throughout much of Vanuatu), as payment. 
In the south, while pigs, mats, kava and yams are 
also favoured forms of exchange, society is not 
so obviously hierarchical - and the pig is more 
important than its tusks. 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
P
e
t
e
r
 
C
o
l
e
s

## [Page 37](135045eng.pdf#page=37) 0

### 135061: Peace and respect

But, as Bosen explains, kastom is much 
more than the flamboyant ceremonies, which 
can involve hundreds of people and years of 
preparation. “In the end, it comes down to peace 
and respect,” he says. And traditional practices 
are, in one way or another, a means to preserve 
harmony, whether between generations, families, #8 
or simply to maintain human life in balance with 
the rest of nature. 
Kastom has come under various assaults since 
white men first came to stay, in the mid-19th 
century. The islands had been visited briefly 
by the Portuguese navigator, de Quiros in 1606, 
then the Frenchman Bougainville in 1766 and 
Englishman James Cook in 1774, who charted 
the islands. But it was Catholic, Presbyterian and 
Anglican missionaries from the 1860s onward, 
who, after meeting fierce resistance, persuaded 
converts to turn away from kastom. Later, 
British and French colonial rule also discouraged 
traditional practices. Today, a great threat to 
kastomn is school (see page 40). 
FIELDWORKER PROGRAMME 
Even in remote Yenaoloul, where Bosen has 
taken me, not so long ago the people were also 
wearing white men’s clothes, but returned to 
their traditions. And as a young man, he, himself, 
left Tanna to work in an abattoir in the nation’s 
capital, Port Vila, on Efate island. But, he says “I 
just worked and sweated and ate bad food.” He 
decided to return home. 
In 1990, one of the island’s chiefs asked Bosen 
to represent his part of Tanna as fieldworker for 
the Vanuatu Cultural Centre. The Centre gave 
him a tape-recorder, batteries and cassettes, 
and basic training in maintenance, as well as 
in ethnographic fieldwork, like drawing kinship 
diagrams, family trees, and writing word lists. 
“I walk from nakamal to nakamal,” says Bosen. 
“I just ask people if they are leading a kastom way 
of life. If they are, I talk to them and record their 
stories. I don’t criticise. We have a story about a 
man who goes fishing for turtles and climbs on a 
rock to get a better view. It is only when it moves 
that he realises he has been standing on a turtle 
all the time. So I remind people, ‘everything you 
need is at your feet.” 
Every year, Bosen goes to Port Vila for a two- 
week training and exchange workshop with all 
the fieldworkers from other islands. Running since 
1982, each workshop focuses on a different topic 
using materials gathered during the year, and 
presented by the fieldworkers. This year the topic 
is language. Last year it was ‘traditional ways of 
© UNESCO/Peter Coles 
(Top) Only men are 
usually allowed in 
the nakamal meeting 
bringing up children’. The women fieldworkers places 
hold their own workshop two weeks before the 
men. 
A BANK FOR CULTURE 
Back in Port Vila, Ambong Thompson, originally 
{Bottom) Ambong 
Thompson has over 
1000 audio tapes 
of oral history to 
from Malakula, is in charge of audio archives archive on CD 
at the Cultural Centre. “After completing their 
recordings, the fieldworkers send their cassettes 
back here,” he explains. He labels each cassette 
and catalogues it in a computer database, before 
storing it in the air-conditioned ‘tabu room’, 
so-called because some of the cassettes contain 
secret knowledge, only for certain members of a 
family, or clan, for example. “The tabu room is 
like a bank to us, where we store all our cultural 
knowledge,” he says. 
The cultural centre has also been building up 
its video archives in recent years. “Now,” says 
Ralph Regenvanu, director of the Cultural Centre, 
“we have far more requests to film events than we 
can meet, as we don’t have the resources to cover 
the transport costs to get there.” But the solution, 
says Regenvanu, is not always extra funding. “It’s 
more an issue of training fieldworkers to use the 
equipment, so that when an event happens, we 
just pack a camera in a box and send it to them, 
so they do the filming.” > 
  
  
 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
P
e
t
e
r
 
Co
le
s 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
R
S
.
 
  
 

## [Page 38](135045eng.pdf#page=38) 0

### 135061: Peace and respect

p Four years ago, grants from UNESCO were 
used to purchase professional digital video 
cameras and an editing suite, so that the Centre 
can make broadcast-quality documentaries. “All 
the emphasis has been on the archives,” says 
Regenvanu. “We have now reached a stage in the 
development of our country where we need to 
start pushing the material back out to the people, 
to raise awareness about culture.” 
Twice a month the Cultural Centre has a slot 
on national television. And, with over 20 years 
of radio broadcasting experience behind him, 
Ambong also makes a weekly programme for 
national radio, using recordings from the archives 
and phone calls from fieldworkers and other 
islanders about their culture. 
“People are moving away from kastom,” 
says Jacob Kerere, head of the Centre’s audio- 
visual archives and chief cameraman. “But the 
programmes we make help bring them back. I'd 
say the future is bright.” 
u 


### 135062: Port Vila's dilemma

~ PORT VILA'S DILEMM 
ESPIRITU 
Urban life in Vanuatu pitches traditions against 
western-style ‘progress’ 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
Port Vila, Vanuatu’s capital, may look like 
a sleepy town, but all is not well. Crime is 
increasing, in pace with youth unemployment; 
sexually transmitted diseases are widespread, 
and, when women are victims of violence, they 
have little hope of justice. Vila, as it is known, 
is increasingly a pole of attraction for those from 
the outer islands of Vanuatu searching for work 
- often to pay for school fees (see page 40). But 
some end up paying an even higher price - the 
loss of their traditional culture. 
“When people come to Vila from the other 
islands they try to stay together, like in the 
village,” explains Jacob Kerere, head of the audio- 
visual unit at the Vanuatu Cultural Centre in 
Vila, who also works as a kind of peacemaker for 
people from his own island, Tanna, who are living 
in Vila. “But Vila just changes their life. Good 
people become aggressive.” 
Vanuatu (Melanesia) of a 
   
     
     
         
  
TORRES ISLANDS | 
BANKS ISLANDS 
oC 
SANTO | | yganville 
Ay oy 
MALAKULA 
Pacific Ocean 
5 of 
   an  
VANUA LAVA " 
GAUA - \d 
AMBAE MAEWO 
' "PENTECOST 
-" TAMBRYM 
SHEPHERD 
ISLANDS     
     
   
“p  EFATE 
PORT VILA 
ERROMANGO 
 
     ANATOM | 
There is a palpable ambivalence in Vila, where 
traditional ways, or kastom (see page 36) are 
pitched against the bright lights of a globalizing, 
urban life. Frank, aged 25, who works in a drop-in 
centre for HIV/AIDS in Vila, set up by the Wan 
Smolbag community theatre group, is a product 
of this ambivalence. “Young people don’t want to 
follow the old ideas. They don’t want to listen to 
the chiefs. It’s better to have schooling and get a 
job,” he says. And yet he also believes that “life is 
better in the islands. You're free to go anywhere, 
and there’s always food. Here if you want a 
coconut you have to buy it.” And, in Vila, the 
work, and therefore the money, is not always there. 
The ambivalence is also seen in a hybrid culture 
growing up in Vila. The sacrosanct traditional 
nakamal where men gather at dusk in the islands 
to drink kava, has been transformed in Vila into a 
kind of pub, where both men and women unwind 
after a hard day’s work, going through empty 
versions of the traditional rituals.

## [Page 39](135045eng.pdf#page=39) 0

### 135062: Port Vila's dilemma

    
     
  
   
  
     
Walcoma 2 oy 
Fort Vile SEA 
ley 
a 
 
wa 
DRE EER SE 27 Lal + J 
The Vila 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
P
e
t
e
r
 
Co
le
s 
To relieve its 
massive energy bill 
for imported diesel, 
Vanuatu is turning to 
its abundant coconut 
oil resource as an 
alternative 
© UNESCO/Peter Coles 
But kastom is surviving in Vila. Traditional 
methods of justice are being used to solve 
essentially urban disputes, like adultery and theft. 
So-called ‘kastom courts’ exist, where each party 
in a dispute pays the other a settlement, such as a 
pig and some mats, and shakes hands. “Then we 
drink kava the same day and chat,” says Jacob. Sibley Nyass teaches 
“It’s like there’s never been a problem. But if you in English but is 
didn’t straighten it out with kastom, you will stay strongly attached 
enemies for ever.” to his culture and 
family, returning 
WHERE POLICE CANNOT GO home at weckends. 
According to a survey carried out by the Cultural Wearing dreadlocks 
Centre’s Youth Project, young people prefer to is a sign of maturity 
be tried by the kastom court, not least because for a young male 
the police have a reputation for brutality. And, 
says Jacob, when the disputes are between 
communities from different islands - often over 
women or land - “it can involve big groups. The 
police cannot stop this kind of fighting. Only 
chiefs can stop this.” 
In some cases, the kastom court decides to send 
a young offender back to his or her native island. 
But returning isn’t always easy. “They lose their 
kastom and forget their place here,” says Bosen 
Napu, who lives a traditional life on Tanna (see 
page 36). “It’s like they're dead for us. They go 
away and come back and don’t know how to 
do the ceremonies. They have no pigs or yams. 
People laugh and say you've lived in Vila for 
many years, but if you buy a pig all your money is 
gone, then what have you got?” 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
P
e
t
e
r
 
Co
le
s 
Peter Coles 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
 
8 focus 
39 
. 
ny
 
 

## [Page 40](135045eng.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

In the remote hills 
of Tanna, children 
still grow up in the 
traditional way, 
though change is 
already coming 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
Vanuatu's education system takes children 
away from their native language and culture. 
A new project aims to reverse this and use 
school to reinforce both 
Ralph Regenvanu, Director of Vanuatu’s Cultural 
Centre does not mince words when it comes to 
the nation’s education system. “School is one of 
the major factors that is breaking the transmission 
of culture,” he says. “We want education to be 
relevant to the community’s needs and to the 
needs of children, so that they feel empowered 
within their own community and not alienated.” 
Which is why the Cultural Centre and some 
non-governmental organizations are helping the 
Ministry of Education make radical changes to the 
curriculum. “It’s ambitious,” he says, “but at the 
moment it’s completely the other way round.” 
At present, explains Regenvanu, children in 
Vanuatu receive primary education locally, but are 
taught in either English or French, with subject 
matter largely divorced from their daily lives. The 
20 percent or so who pass an entrance exam can 
go on to secondary school, which, more often 
than not, can be on another island, hundreds of 
kilometres from home. 


### 135063: Education or alienation?

  
EDUCATION OR ALIENATION? — 
© UNESCO/Peter Coles 
The coup de grace for traditional life looms 
when the parents also move to a town, like Port 
Vila, on the island of Efate, or Luganville, on 
Santo, in search of work to pay for the school 
fees (over 45,000 Vatu or US$400 a year). But, 
even then, says Regenvanu, while a university 
education may help a young person find a good 
job, “less that 2 percent go to university, so the 
majority get pushed out of the system.” The 
informal settlements that have sprung up around 
Vila house many families who gave up everything 
to pay for their children’s education, and can no 
longer afford to return home. 
The key to the new curriculum, already 
government policy for the first year of primary 
school in rural areas, is to teach in the vernacular 
language. “The best vehicle to gain literacy is 
through your own language,” says Regenvanu. 
And, while the Cultural Centre has been pushing 
for this since the 80s, he adds, the idea took off 
only when it got World Bank backing, following a 
national survey. 
“Vanuatu boasts the highest concentration of 
languages per capita anywhere - around 106 
for a population of about 200,000,” he explains. 
Over 80 languages are still very much alive, while

## [Page 41](135045eng.pdf#page=41) 0

### 135063: Education or alienation?

  
—
—
 
- 
Vanuatu's sand- 
drawing is a 
sophisticated means 
of communication, 
now inscribed on 
UNESCO's list of 
Intangible Heritage 
ar 
  
  
  
   
© Vanuatu National Cultural Council 
about 17 are endangered and eight are extinct. 
Malakula alone has 34 languages for a population 
of 18,000. Many people speak three, even seven 
vernacular languages. 
Before teaching materials can be developed, 
these vernacular languages have to be written 
down, and a standard spelling drawn up. So 
far, says Regenvanu, this has been done for 16 
languages. “We have developed really basic 
materials - three books for each of the 16 
languages: one on the alphabet, one on birds and 
one on fish.” 
He hopes that materials in at least 40 languages 
will eventually be available. “Some languages 
are dying.” he says, “It’s inevitable. Then the 
emphasis is just on recording the language for 
posterity.” 
“The syllabus will be based on the seasonal 
calendar, which is how traditional life is organized. 
It’s the yam cycle - or taro cycle in some islands 
— with different times of the year for planting 
crops, spawning times for fish, biological 
and environmental markers for different times 
of the year.” 
“Each year, five new schools are selected to 
begin the first-year vernacular programme,” adds 
Regenvanu. “About 20-30 are already using it. 
The Ministry of Education policy is to have it 
fully implemented in a few years time.” The goal 
will then be to extend it to the first two, and then 
three years of primary school. 
Now, in collaboration with UNESCO’s LINKS 
(Local and Indigenous Knowledge Systems) 
programme, the Cultural Centre is helping to 
develop an indigenous science curriculum for 
high schools, that will use concrete examples of 
traditional knowledge, like the taro plant irrigation 
system, the preservation of plant varieties, 
weather prediction, or a special fishing net that 
can stun the fish. “We’ve done a lot of research,” 
says Regenvanu. “Now we think we can turn 
it into policy.” 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
© 
V
a
n
u
a
t
u
 
Na
ti
on
al
 
Cu
lt
ur
al
 
Co
un
ci
l 
T
E
 
 

## [Page 42](135045eng.pdf#page=42) 0

### IGNORE

: 
i 52 
ial Ari pe 
ra Shel fol 
Natural and cultuval 
hexitage of islands 
Biosphere Reserves 
Australia 
1. Macquarie Island 
2. Morning Peninsula 
and Western Port 
Brazil 
3. Mata Atlantica 
(including Sao Paulo 
Green Belt 
Canada 
4. Clayoquot Sound 
5. Southwest Nova 
6. Thousand Islands- 
Frontenac Arch 
World Heritage Sites 
Australia: 
49. Lord Howe Island 
Group 
50. Shark Bay, Western 
Australia 
51. Fraser Island 
52. Heard and 
McDonald Islands 
53. Macquarie Island 
Brazil: 
54. Brazilian Atlantic 
Islands: Fernando de 
Noronha and Atol 
das Rocas Reserves 
Canada: 
55. SGaang Gwaii 
{Anthony Island} 
Chile: 
56. Rapa Nui National 
Park 
Costa Rica 
57. Cocos Island 
National Park 
Ecuador: 
58. Galapagos Islands 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
Chile 
7. Juan Fernandez 
China 
8. Naniji Islands 
Colombia 
9. Seaflower 
Ecuador 
10. Archipiélago 
de Colon (Galapagos) 
Estonia 
11. West Estonian 
Archipelago 
Gambia 
59. James Island and 
Related Sites 
Germany: 
60. Monastic Island 
of Reichenau 
Indonesia: 
61. Komodo National 
Park 
[taly: 
62. Venice and its 
Lagoon 
63. Pontovenere, 
Cinque Terre and the 
Islands (Palmaria, 
Tino and Tinetto) 
64. Isole Eolie (Aeolian 
Islands) 
Japan: 
65. Yakushima 
Mozambique: 
66. Island of 
Mozambique 
New Zealand: 
67. New Zealand Sub- 
Antarctic Islands 
A A 3 
HH LES SESE UE 
Finland 
12. Archipelago Sea 
Area 
France 
13. Tuomotu 
(Atoll de Taiaro) 
14. Iroise 
15. Archipel de la 
Guadeloupe 
Germany 
16. Rigen 
Guinea-Bissau 
17. Boloma-Bijagos 
Russian Federation: 
68. Cultural and 
Historic Ensemble 
of the Solovetsky 
Islands 
Senegal: 
69. Island of Gorée 
70. Island of Saint- 
Louis 
Seychelles: 
71. Aldabra Atoll 
Solomon Islands: 
72. East Rennell 
South Africa: 
73. Robben Island 
Spain: 
74. Ibiza, Biodiversity 
and Culture 
United Kingdom: 
75. St Kilda 
76. Henderson Island 
77. Gough Island 
Wildlife Reserve 
Viet Nam: 
78. Ha Long Bay 
eo Ce SS 
India Mexico 
18. Gulf of Mannar 26. Alto Golfo de 
California Indonesia 
19. Komodo a Salta gs 20. Siberut 28. Banco Chinchorro 
Ireland Netherlands 21. North Bull Isl orth Bull Island 29. Waddensea Area 
Italy Philippines 22. Ti Isl uscan Islands 30. Palawan 
apan i 23. Yakushima Island POL chin 31. Jeju Island 
Madagascar 
Russian Federation 
32. Commander Islands 
33. Far East Marine 
South Africa 
34. Cape West Coast 
24. Mananara Nord 
25. Sahamalaza-lles 
Radama 
Masterpieces of 
Intangible Heritage 
Cuba 
79. La Tumba Francesa, 
Music of the Oriente 
Brotherhood 
Dominican Republic 
80. The Cultural Space 
of the Brotherhood of the 
Holy Spirit of the Congos 
of Villa Mella 
Jamaica 
81. The Maroon Heritage 
of Moore Town 
Tonga 
82. Lakalaka, Dances 
and Sung Speeches from 
Tonga 
Vanuatu 
83. Vanuatu Sand Drawings 
Since the 1970s, UNESCO has included islands, or some of their sites, on the cultural and natural World Heritage 
List, and more recently, some of their customs and cultural ensembles as Intangible Heritage. A number of islands, 
meanwhile, because of their great biodiversity, are locations for the MAB Programme's Biosphere Reserves. 
Spain 
35. La Palma 
36. Lanzarote 
37. Menorca 
38. Isla de El Hierro 
Tunisia 
39. lles Zembra et 
Zembreta 
United Kingdom 
40. Loch Druidibeg 
United States of America 
41. Aleutian Islands 
42. Channel Islands 
43. Virgin Islands 
44. Hawaiian Islands 
45. Isle Royale 
46. Glacier Bay- 
Admiralty Island 
Viet Nam 
47. Can Gio Mangrove 
Yemen 
48. Socotra 
Archipelago 
For more information 
World Network of 
Biosphere Reserves: 
www.unesco.org/mah/ 
whnbr.htm 
Masterpieces of the 
Oral and Intangible Heritage 
of Humanity: 
www.unesco.org/culture 
World Heritage List: 
whe.unesco.org 
Research: José Banaag

## [Page 43](135045eng.pdf#page=43) 0

### 135064: Coral, cement and seaweed

CORAL, CEMENT 
On Kaledupa Island, 
houses are often 
built on coral rock 
© 
Je
ss
ic
a 
Ha
ap
ki
ld
, 
Pa
ri
s 
AND SEAWEED 
It's not always easy to reconcile 
conservation with the needs of poor 
communities that depend on reef resources 
Sixty-year-old Landau pulls himself across the 
terrace of his house on his stomach, using his 
muscular arms. He lost both his legs in an accident 
12 years ago. So it’s hard to believe that, to 
survive, he mines coral from Langira reef off the 
Indonesian island of Kaledupa, where he lives. 
When he sets out every day, his wife, Pende, has 
to help him into his canoe. But for the past few 
weeks it has been out of the water with a hole in 
its side, so they've had to live off shellfish gathered 
from the shallow waters near their village. Once 
they've fed themselves, there is little left over to 
sell. And their children left a long time ago to work 
on fishing vessels in Malaysia, where salaries are 
much higher. 
“I normally mine two or three times a week,” 
says Landau, “and bring home a whole canoe 
full of coral.” Most is used on the island itself, as 
building material. “I started to mine when I needed 
a foundation for my house,” explains Landau. 
“Nowadays I also sell some in the next village.” 
The average price straight from the canoe is around 
40,000 rupiahs per cubic metre (about US$5). 
 
i —G [ 
A boatload of coral rock sells for 
US$5. But it leaves fish homeless 
Most houses in his village, Sampela, are built 
over the water, on coral or wooden piles three 
metres high. With about 1000 inhabitants living 
in 300 houses that means a lot of coral. And the 
population is growing. “I'd like to start using 
cement,” says Landau, “but I don’t know how 
to make it. And anyway, coral doesn’t cost 
anything.” 
When Kaledupa became part of the Wakatobi 
Marine Park, in 1995, some local people were 
appointed as rangers, to stop coral mining and 
to teach islanders how to use cement or rock 
quarried from the centre of the island. “Our 
message is: don’t mine live coral, it’s home for 
the fish!” explains Djuffri, one of these rangers, 
as he sits down on a couch full of holes, lights 
a cigarette and blows out the smoke. “We prefer 
to educate people instead of punishing them,” 
he explains. Djuffri and his colleague, Udi, are 
part of a team of twenty Wakatobi park rangers, 
patrolling the reefs with speedboats once a day. 
“We see coral miners every day,” says Udi. 
The message is slowly sinking in. “I used to 
mine live coral,” says Landau, “but now I know 
it weakens the reef and takes away the holes 
the fish use as their home. I stick to mining 
only dead coral and coral stone nowadays.” But 
few islanders know that mining dead coral is 
also prohibited in the Marine Park. And, says 
ranger Udi, “we concentrate more on the ban on 
mining live coral. We often turn a blind eye to 
people mining dead coral.” And the punishments 
for offenders are not very severe - often just a 
warning, whereas illegal fishing carries a prison 
sentence. 
Even when it comes to live coral mining, 
ancient animistic beliefs can sometimes be 
as influential as the rangers. “The reef has its 
own spirit,” says Landau. Once, he says, a man 
collapsed on the ground in agony and died when p> 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004   
© 
Je
ss
ic
a 
Ha
ap
ki
ld
, 
Pa
ri
s 
| 
C
N
.
 
 

## [Page 44](135045eng.pdf#page=44) 0

### 135064: Coral, cement and seaweed

Swimming pools become 
oases, when every 
square metre is used to 
accommodate tourists 
Pp he returned form coral mining. “The spirit of the 
reef took revenge on him because he had been 
mining coral” he says. “But this hasn’t stopped us 
going back to the same reef.” 
SEAWEED SALVATION 
Meanwhile, some islanders are abandoning coral  © 
Ya
nn
 
A
r
t
h
u
s
-
B
e
r
t
r
a
n
d
 
« 
La
 
te
rr
e 
vu
e 
du
 
Ci
el
 
» 
/ 
Al
ti
tu
de
, 
Pa
ri
s 
mining to cultivate seaweed. But, at least for 
: Harudu, a coral miner from neighbouring Ambeua 
f 6ous village, the motivation seems to be economic 
rather than ecological, or fear of the rangers. “I To UY (SUA: pYo b lem oy solution? 
started coral mining 10 years ago,” he explains. 
44 “In the busiest times I mined one cubic meter 
a trip. Neither the rangers, nor the marine park 
For some small island developing states, income from tourism accounts 
for over half of GDP. But at what price? 
Co . i . International tourism in small island developing states (2002) 
scientists scared me. Sometimes I mined just 
. . . Numb ional GDP 
outside the marine research station. But these of tourists touriom ravsipts (US$ 
: 0 : (thousands) (US$ million) million} days I cultivate FeaTad full-time and mine coral Singapore 6,996 4.922 86,069 
only now and then, mainly for my own use. Dominican Republic 2811 2736 22.039 
Indeed, a strong smell of seaweed greets the Bahrain* 2,789 630 7,933 
. ) , : Cyprus 2,418 2,083 10,125 
visitor in front of Harudu’s house, as a huge pile Cuba 1656 1633 = 
dries on a wooden table. Bahamas* 1,538 1,636 4,917 
Over the past five years seaweed cultivation Lo how = oe 
. . . . . alta , , 
has increased in the Wakatobi Marine Park, with Mauritius 682 612 4.563 
harvests every two months or so. During the rainy ~~ Aruba 643 898 
United States Virgin Islands 553 1,240 ee 
season (December to March), they can harvest Barbados* 507 687 2,456 
1000 kg of algae, compared to around 300 kg in Maldives 485 318 639 
. . . Fiji 398 267 1,828 
the dry season, selling it for about 3100 rupiahs Trinidad and Tobago* 383 201 9.146 
(about US$0.30) a kilo. Even if the price of coral St Lucia 253 256 660 
: Antigua and Barbuda** 237 290 665 
has doubled over the past two years, explains Netherlands Antilles (Curagao) 218 273 N 
Harudu, it still pays less than he can earn from Haiti* 149 54 3,693 
seaweed - and it’s a lot harder work. But the cost el 132 130 698 
. renada 132 84 414 
of setting up a seaweed farm - US$100 or more Cape Verde 196 B 618 
- is beyond the means of most islanders. The Samoa 89 45 265 
. ; . . St Vincent and the Grenadines 78 81 361 
Indonesian Fisheries Ministry has started a loan Cook Islands 73 16 nN 
system, but so far has only helped set up a few St Kitts and Nevis 68 57 356 
Dominica 67 36 254 
seaweed farms. Palau 59 59 120 
Despite these changes, islanders cannot build Papua New Guinea* 54 101 2,919 
. Vanuatu* 53 46 219 their houses on seaweed. Most do not know 
Tonga 37 9 136 
how to use cement, and there are no trucks to Comoros** 24 15 204 
. . . Solomon Islands*** 21 .. 336 AL rock Yiaiadhon the a, Which, for Federated States of Micronesia® 5 3 230 
the time being, leaves little alternative to coral. Sao Tome and Principe* 8 8 48 
Marshall Islands 6 4 108 
_ Kiribati* 5 3 47 
Jessica Haapkyld Niue 2 
Tuvalu 1 
...:nodata available  *:2001data  **:2000 data  ***:1999 data 
Sources: World Tourism Organization, www.world-tourism.org; International Monetary 
Fund, www.imf.org; World Bank, www.worldbank.org. 
For lack of available data, the following SIDS are not included: Nauru and Tokelau. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 45](135045eng.pdf#page=45) 0

### 135065: The Antilles: fragments of epic memory

  
  
The Antilles: 
{ragments of epic MEMOY) 
In this extract from his Nobel Prize Lecture, on December 7, 1992, the St. Lucian poet, Derek Walcott, pays homage to the uniqueness of his native Antilles, and shows how the casual tourist may miss all that is essential 
(History) is there in 
Antillean geography, in the 
vegetation itself. The sea 
sighs with the drowned from 
the Middle Passage, the 
butchery of its aborigines, 
Carib and Aruac and Taino, 
bleeds in the scarlet of the 
immortelle, and even the 
actions of surf on sand cannot 
erase the African memory, or 
the lances of cane as a green 
prison where indentured 
Asians, the ancestors of 
Felicity, are still serving time. 
That is what | have read 
around me from boyhood, 
from the beginnings of poetry, the grace of effort. 
In the hard mahogany of woodcutters: faces, 
resinous men, charcoal burners; in a man with a 
cutlass cradled across his forearm, who stands 
on the verge with the usual anonymous khaki 
dog; in the extra clothes he put on this morning, 
when it was cold when he rose in the thinning 
dark to go and make his garden in the heights 
— the heights, the garden, being miles away from 
his house, but that is where he has his land - not 
to mention the fishermen, the 
footmen on trucks, groaning 
up mornes, all fragments of 
Africa originally but shaped 
and hardened and rooted 
now in the island's life, 
illiterate in the way leaves 
are illiterate; they do not 
read, they are there to 
be read, and if they are 
properly read, they create 
their own literature. 
    
    
  
But in our tourist brochures 
the Caribbean is a blue pool into 
which the republic dangles the 
extended foot of Florida as inflated 
rubber islands bob and drinks 
with umbrellas float towards her 
on a raft. This is how the islands 
from the shame of necessity sell 
themselves; this is the seasonal 
erosion of their identity, that 
high-pitched repetition of the 
same images of service that 
cannot distinguish one island 
| 2 from the other, with a future of 
\ \'s Polluted marinas, land deals 
negotiated by ministers, and 
all of this conducted to the music of Happy 
Hour and the rictus of a smile. What is the earthly 
paradise for our visitors? Two weeks without 
rain and a mahogany tan, and, at sunset, local 
troubadours in straw hats and floral shirts beating 
“Yellow Bird” and “Banana Boat Song” to death. 
There is a territory wider than this — wider than the 
limits made by the map of an island — which is the 
illimitable sea and what it remembers. 
All of the Antilles, every island, is an effort 
of memory; every mind, every racial biography 
culminating in amnesia and fog. Pieces of 
sunlight through the fog 
and sudden rainbows, 
arcs-en-ciel. That is the 
effort, the labor of the 
Antillean imagination, 
rebuilding its gods from 
bamboo frames, phrase 
by phrase. 
Derek Walcott 
foeus 
45 
Pa
ri
s 
py 
C
a
m
e
r
a
 
P
r
e
s
s
/
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
, 
am
on
n 
Mc
Ca
be
/ 
© The Nobel Foundation 1992 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
  
“
E
e
 
-

## [Page 46](135045eng.pdf#page=46) 0

### 135066: Trouble in paradise: HIV/AIDS in the Caribbean

TROUBLE IN PARADISE: 
HIV/AIDS IN THE CARIBBEAN 
White sand beaches, luxurious flora and 
fauna, picturesque volcanic landscapes, 
warm, laid-back, fun-loving people. This is 
the Caribbean — the epitome of Paradise. But 
all is not well in Paradise. 
Today, it is raining in Portland (Jamaica). Inside 
a dilapidated two-room house in Hope Bay, 
Elizabeth is cringing in a corner trying to avoid 
the water falling through the roof. No one will 
be able to sleep tonight in the cramped bedroom. 
Diagnosed with HIV in 2001, Elizabeth has been 
having a hard time coping with the disease. 
Shortly after diagnosis, one of her family told the 
neighbours. Before long, everybody knew. 
“Since then I have been subjected to rejection, 
discrimination and lack of respect from the 
community. I became a burden to my children, as 
they were teased at school,” sobs Elizabeth. “My 
sole income was based on sewing. But since my 
illness, my customers gradually left. My landlord 
gave me notice. He disconnected my water in 
June 2003 and my electricity in July. I was given 
some land to live on, but because I have AIDS, 
some of the neighbours don’t want me there.” 
Elizabeth is one of the estimated 22,000 persons 
living with HIV in Jamaica with a population 
of 2.6 million, and an estimated 590,000 in the 
Caribbean (population 38.7 million), which 
has the second highest prevalence rate after 
sub-Saharan Africa. And, even though rates 
of awareness of HIV/AIDS and other sexually 
transmitted illnesses are over 70 percent in some 
islands, discrimination and intolerance are still 
major obstacles to prevention. 
In the last two decades, HIV/AIDS has been 
moving steadily throughout the Caribbean. 
In 2003, the Joint United Nations Programme 
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) estimated that up to 
80,000 persons were newly infected. As many 
as 50,000 are estimated to have died from 
AIDS-related illnesses. 
UNSAFE SEX 
Data show that Caribbean children begin to 
have sex as early as 8, 9 and 10 years old, but 
adults are still afraid to talk to them about safer 
sex, feeling it will make them promiscuous. 
Meanwhile, girls are at greater risk of HIV 
infection than boys. Meanwhile, more than 
50 percent of persons infected in the region are 
aged 20 - 39 years old, which means that many 
were infected between the ages of 14 and 19. And, 
for 32 percent of boys and 48 percent of girls, 
sexual initiation was forced. 
Jocial pressuves on men put women And givls at visk 
In Trinidad and Tobago, a 
1999 Ministry of Health report 
showed a female-to-male ratio 
in HIV cases among the 10 to 
19 age group of 7:1. The picture 
is similar in Jamaica, where 
girls in the same age group are 
two-and-a-half times more likely 
than boys to be HIV infected 
(Ministry of Health, Jamaica 
2003). 
“Many young girls are 
caught in a trap of sexual 
vulnerability,” says Robert 
Carr, Executive Director of the 
non-governmental organization, 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
Jamaica AIDS Support. “They 
live in a culture that celebrates 
materialism but has high levels 
of poverty and unemployment. 
They live in a culture that says 
they must go to school. But they 
are not provided with the means 
to do so. They live in a culture 
that celebrates womanhood 
and motherhood, but does not 
always provide the information 
and the experience to do so 
safely.” 
“Each of these paths leads 
young girls into early sexual 
initiation in a context in which 
they often do not have the tools 
they need to manage their 
sexual and reproductive health” 
he adds. 
And, “where women know 
their partners or husbands are 
unfaithful,” says Carr, “they do 
not feel empowered to change 
how, where and when they 
and their partners have sex. 
To insist on condom use could 
bring violence, with death or 
homelessness as a real danger.”

## [Page 47](135045eng.pdf#page=47) 0

### 135066: Trouble in paradise: HIV/AIDS in the Caribbean

Hal £965 2650 062-3284 or Toil Prue 1 RAE AL | 
We 9 wat pou 1 ENG wih ou iw 
© Ministry of Health Jamaica 
The HIV epidemic is also driven by cultural 
practices, where both men and women can 
have multiple sexual relationships. In Jamaica, 
54 percent of men and 17 percent of women in 
the 15 - 49 year age group have had more than 
one sex partner in the past 14 years. Many of 
these are serial monogamous relationships, where 
a person has only one sexual partner at a time, 
even if the relationship may only last a week or 
so. Condoms are rarely used. 
Commercial sex work is also believed to play 
a large role in the epidemic, especially in the 
Dominican Republic and Guyana. But the root 
is still poverty, which forces men, women and 
children to leave home for urban centres to 
sell sexual favours. And poverty affects women 
disproportionately. They are often economically 
dependent on men and unable to negotiate 
safer sex. 
WIDESPREAD 
HOMOPHOBIA 
Widespread and often violent homophobia in 
the region is also forcing male homosexuals to 
marry, or have relationships with women, to 
avoid aggression. And yet studies show that 
homosexuals who are emotionally involved 
with regular partners perceive unprotected 
penetrative sex as not risky, although most do 
not know the HIV status of their partner. Since 
both men and women in this case are considered 
regular partners, the risk of HIV infection is 
particularly high. 
    
Already, many Caribbean countries have AIDS 
prevention programmes. In some, laws make 
HIV/AIDS a notifiable disease (such as Jamaica, 
St. Lucia, Belize and Guyana). In the Dominican 
Republic, the law specifies the rights of people 
infected with HIV while, in the Bahamas, 
legislation obliges rapists and sex offenders to be 
tested for HIV. Meanwhile, in Jamaica, Bahamas, 
Bermuda and Barbados, programmes to prevent 
mother-to-child transmission are doing well. 
Condom distribution has increased from 2.5 
million in 1985 to 10.8 million in 1999, while 
condom use with non-regular partners has moved 
from 37 percent in 1992 to 67 percent in 2000 
among women. 
For Robert Carr, Caribbeans still need to have a 
serious look at their behaviour. “Discrimination 
in its many forms is killing us. Many of our 
habits are self-defeating - for example, when 
we encourage young boys to be aggressively 
heterosexual, or our violent verbal and physical 
repression of men who have sex with men. We 
have to take responsibility for how our norms 
contribute to the harsh and violent society in 
which we live, and their role in contributing to 
the spread of the epidemic in the region.” 
Patricia Watson 
© 
Th
e 
Gl
ea
ne
r 
C
o
m
p
a
n
y
 
Li
mi
te
d,
 
Ki
ng
st
on
 
L's 
These teenagers 
might be 
embarrassed by 
HIV/AIDS education, 
but it could save 
their lives, as they 
are particularly 
vulnerable in the 
Caribbean 
The UNESCO Office for 
the Caribbean is playing 
a leadership role in the 
region in response to the 
HIV/AIDS epidemic. It 
has focused on achieving 
consensus among 
Governments and other 
stakeholders, establishing 
partnerships for action, 
and building expertise in 
member states. 
www.unescocaribbean. 
org/home.htm 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
. 
S
E
T
 
ee
 
N
E
E
S
 
G
T
 
E
R
B
 
  
 

## [Page 48](135045eng.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

Goodwill Ambassadors 
 
SPONSORING MASTERPIECES OF THE ORAL 
AND INTANGIBLE HERITAGE 
  
Woodcrafting 
The Knowledge of the 
Zafimaniry (Madagascar) now 
has a champion in French 
astronaut Patrick Baudry, while 
Malian scientist Cheick Modibo 
Diarra has chosen to promote 
the Cultural Space of Sosso- 
Bala in Nyagassola (Guinea). 
Vigdis Finnbogadottir, the 
former President of Iceland 
will defend the Kihnu Cultural 
Space (Estonia) and Princess 
Firyal of Jordan, both the 
Songs of Sanaa (Yemen) 
and the Iraqi Magam music 
(Iraq)... 
These leading personalities 
are among UNESCO’s Goodwill 
Ambassadors — who place 
their talent and international 
renown at the service of the 
Organization’s ideals. Last 
February 26, at their annual 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
  
  
meeting, the Goodwill 
Ambassadors decided to 
sponsor some of the 47 
Masterpieces of the Oral 
and Intangible Heritage 
of Humanity, in a bid 
to raise public awareness of 
the value of this heritage and 
encourage governments to take 
legal and administrative steps 
for its safeguarding. 
Their action is expected 
to raise funds to finance 
safeguarding projects for 
the masterpieces and help 
incite governments to ratify 
the Convention for the 
Safeguarding of the Intangible 
Cultural Heritage, adopted by 
UNESCO’s General Conference 
in October 2003. 
For his part, Spanish 
navigator and scientist Kitin 
Muhoz has chosen the 
  
Cultural Space of Jemaa el- 
Fna Square, (Morocco), and 
Italian architect Renzo Piano, 
the Vanuatu Sand Drawings 
(Vanuatu). Italian actress 
Claudia Cardinale will promote 
the Sicilian puppet theatre 
Opera dei Pupi; and Greek 
patron of the arts Marianna 
V. Vardinoyannis will focus 
on Azerbaijani Mugham 
music (Azerbaijan). Goodwill 
Ambassador Sheikh Ghassan 
I. Shaker will contribute 
to actions in favour of the 
Cultural Space of the Boysun 
District (Uzbekistan) and 
the Al-Sirah al-Hilaliyya 
Epic (Egypt). To this end, he 
  
    
 
  
gave the Director-General a 
contribution of US$100,000. 
The sponsorship programme 
will be expanded as new 
ambassadors join in and as 
new Masterpieces of the Oral 
and Intangible Heritage are 
proclaimed.

## [Page 49](135045eng.pdf#page=49) 0

### IGNORE

© 
I
Y
H
F
/
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
Learning Centres for Peace: 
   
  
 
 
YOUNG VOLUNTEERS WORKING & 
FOR A BETTER WORLD 
the second half of 2003, 11 young 
nN volunteers were selected from over 
1,000 applicants to spend three months in 
a designated youth hostel organizing and 
providing different activities in the fields 
of conflict resolution, peace education and 
environmental protection. 
The young volunteers from Canada, 
Chile, Croatia, France, Germany, Hungary, 
Korea, Japan, Portugal, Thailand, and 
the US were welcomed at youth hostels 
in Australia, Brazil, Costa Rica, France, 
Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, Northern 
Ireland, Tunisia and the US, specifically 
chosen for their commitment to the UN 
Decade for Peace and Non-Violence for 
Children of the World. 
Their stay was the first step in the 
Peace and International Understanding 
programme, which UNESCO and the 
International Youth Hostel Federation 
(IYHF), the umbrella organization for 
over 4,500 youth hostels and 10 million 
members worldwide, agreed to support in a 
Memorandum of Understanding signed by 
the two parties in Autumn 2003. 
The young volunteers were particularly 
enthusiastic about their stay, saying: «This 
has been a truly life-changing experience 
for me and I hope that I have managed 
to contribute a fraction of what I have 
received from this opportunity” said 
Dalila Capao from Portugal. For Danai 
Wongsa from Thailand: «To be in New 
York on 11 September 2003 was something 
I will remember for the rest of my life. 
To be able to make a small contribution 
to the rebuilding of world peace and 
understanding was an immense honour». 
A short film of the volunteers’ experience 
will be available to download from the 
Hewlett Packard 
© 
I
Y
H
F
/
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
FROM BRAIN DRAIN TO BRAIN GAIN 
© 
I
Y
H
F
/
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
  
IYHF website from 1 July 2004. 
With this first stage currently under 
evaluation, UNESCO and the IYHF 
are considering the ways in which the 
Peace and International Understanding 
programme, and in particular the Learning 
Centres for Peace project, can be expanded 
and developed over the next few years. 
\ For more information about the Peace 
and International Understanding 
programme or the Learning Centres for 
Peace, please contact 
Maria Helena Henriques Mueller, 
Chief of the UNESCO Section for Youth: 
mh.henriques.mueller@unesco.org . 
For more about the youth volunteers’ 
experiences, go to 
www.hihostels.com/peace 
temming South East 
J Europe’s “brain-drain” is the 
aim of a joint UNESCO-Hewlett 
Packard project which moved 
into a new phase last February 
with the delivery of the latest 
GRID computing equipment 
to universities in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia 
and Montenegro. 
The equipment, donated by 
Hewlett Packard, will allow these 
universities to set up networks 
with fellow nationals living 
abroad, tapping into the expertise 
and knowledge of the scientific 
diaspora from these countries. 
An estimated 500,000 people 
have left Serbia and Montenegro 
since 1990. Another 200,000 left 
Bosnia and Herzegovina after the 
signing of the peace agreement 
in 1995. Most of these people are 
between 25 and 40 years old and 
have university degrees in highly 
sought fields of expertise. 
The project is the first in a 
series planned by UNESCO and 
Hewlett Packard and is being 
implemented by UNESCO’s 
Regional Bureau for Science in 
Europe (ROSTE), based in Venice 
(Italy). 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
  
Professor Z. Djurovic from the 
University of Belgrade (left) 
receiving equipment, with lulia 
Nechifor and Howard Moore 
(director) from UNESCO's Venice 
Office 
UNESCO | the new Courier | January 2004

## [Page 50](135045eng.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

partners 
Rozan 
 
YOUNG PAKISTANIS 
QUESTIONING PATRIARCHY 
tudents reflecting on the 
J social construction of 
masculine and feminine roles 
and the way in which men are 
also victims of stereotypes: such a 
scene no longer raises eyebrows in 
many countries, but it represents 
a revolution in Pakistan, where 
the pilot phase of a project entitled 
“Men’s Involvement in the Quest 
for Gender Equality”, launched last 
year by UNESCO’s Islamabad Office 
and the NGO Rozan, has just been 
completed. 
  
This first phase included sensitizaton 
workshops and a creative arts and 
writing project. The workshops were 
held last October in four universities in 
Pakistan (Peshawar, Karachi, Punjab and 
Balochistan) on the themes of self-esteem, 
power, patriarchy, gender-based violence 
and the involvement of boys and men 
in the quest for equality. Participants 
learned about the role of socialization 
in shaping gender roles and looked at 
the way the patriarchal system could 
be found in every layer of society, in 
education, law, economics, politics; media 
and state administration. The women 
participants were surprised to learn that 
in certain situations men felt powerless 
or confused. Some of the young men, 
their confidence boosted by the climate 
of dialogue established at the workshop, 
spoke of the burden of having to look 
after the financial needs of not only their 
own nuclear family, but at times their 
parents and unmarried sisters, along with 
the obligation to “protect” the women 
in their family, or even carry out acts of 
vengeance. 
The creative arts and writing parts 
of the project were carried out with 
students from schools of fine arts and 
mass communication. They prepared 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
  
posters and paintings on the 
theme “male participation ih 
in creating gender equity”, [ 
along with articles, novels 
and poems. Many of the 
artists explored such topics as 
access to educaton, women’s 
segregation, seclusion and dress 
code, unequal treatment of male 
and female children or violence 
against women. The authors 
wrote on discrimination, or looked 
at how a dearth of religious 
knowledge and deviation from 
islamic codes and principles fed 
prejudice against women. 
Their works were presented to Neelofer 
Bakhtiar, the Advisor to the Prime Minister 
on Women, in Islamabad last December 3 
and exhibited at the UN Commission on 
Women in March this year. 
Created in 1998, Rozan works 
particularly on violence against women 
and children. “All of our activities are 
undertaken with men,” explains Maria 
Rashid, Rozan’s director. “Our experience 
has shown that it is crucial to allow 
men to express their feelings and their 
fears and to deconstruct their social 
conditioning.” 
FILL THE GAF . GIVE EQUAL RIGHTS TO WOMEN 
  
 
   
— 
Posters created 
by Fine Arts 
students, as part of 
the UNESCO/Rozan 
project in Pakistan 
For more informations: 
Hl * “Breaking the Mould, Men's 
Involvement 
in the Quest for Gender Equality”, 
available on request from 
islamabad@unesco.org 
or fax. 92-51 2800056 
Hl www.rozan.org 
and rozan@comsats.net.pl 
BW Male roles, masculinities and violence 
(UNESCO 2000) : http://upo.unesco. 
org/bookdetails.asp?id=3268 
 

## [Page 51](135045eng.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

Mediterranean Chamber of Fine Arts 
 
adda Bediaf is not 
the kind of woman 
who brags about 
herself or makes big speeches. 
And yet this weaver from EI 
Golea (the Algerian Sahara) 
is a pioneer. Nearly 15 years 
ago, alone, she started making 
carpets for sale. Today, many 
women in the oasis belong 
to the cooperative she set up, 
which is part of the FEDA 
(Femmes et Développement 
en Algérie) network, and a 
training centre guarantees 
young women a professional 
future. 
In March, carpets from El 
Golea were at UNESCO 
Headquarters as part of 
the travelling exhibition 
Impressions and Colours of 
the Mediterranean, which 
presented traditional crafts 
and contemporary art from 
the region: dresses and bags 
embroidered in Lebanese 
camps by Palestinian women 
who pass the art of cross- 
stitching down from one 
generation to the next, jams, 
honey and chutney from 
Lebanon and Greece, tunics 
with calligraphy by a Lebanese 
designer, French glassware, 
Moroccan leather, jewellery, 
painted wood, wrought iron 
and, of course, carpets. Egypt, 
Jordan, Turkey and Tunisia are 
also on display. 
The driving force behind 
this shimmering explosion of 
colour is an energetic Greek 
artist named Lila Skaveli, 
who in 1992 founded the 
Mediterranean Chamber of 
Fine Arts (CBAM)* with the 
motto, «To be sustainable, 
development must be based 
on local cultural expressions 
and meet the needs of 
the peoples concerned.» 
CBAM offers craftswomen 
management and marketing 
courses and is conducting 
an unprecedented study of 
the history and meaning of 
traditional designs (woven, 
embroidered, painted 
and engraved) in the 
Mediterranean basin. 
In the framework of 
PRODECOM, a European crafts 
and cultural memory project, 
in 1994 CBAM launched 
the idea of a «cultural 
development product « label, 
which UNESCO has backed 
since 2002. The Organization’s 
YY AY 
* Phone/fax: 
+33 (0)1 4567 12 52. 
www.chbeauxarts-prodecom.org 
e-mail: 
ch.beaux.arts@wanadoo.fr 
a a 
Arts, Crafts and Design 
Section campaigns for the 
implementation of adequate 
legal protection geared 
towards craft products in 
the Mediterranean and other 
regions of the world. In that 
connection, UNESCO supports 
the «Seal of Excellence» and 
«Hecho a mano» experiments 
in Asia and Latin America. 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
  
The Chamber 
of Fine Arts of 
the Mediterranean 
is researching 
the traditional 
motifs used 
in Mediterranean 
crafts 
Faw Blk : = 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
| 
  
     
 
© Nathalie Jacquault 
Carpets from 
the southern 
coast of the 
Mediterranean 
y 
| Fle. IE" » 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 52](135045eng.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

   
           
~ ON THE BRINK ( oF EXTINCTION | OUR VANISHING EE | 
      
   
     
EE 0 
. hdd 
TEA Li 
oe 
a    
© UNESCO/Ian Redmond 
     
   
nother wav 6 of extinctions, UNESCC 
an nd the United Nations s Environmenta 
  
a survival plan for these crea oe ow long 
before the pla | leads to action? The 
ivina relatives hanas 
  
UNESco | the new Courier | opi 2004

## [Page 53](135045eng.pdf#page=53) 0

### IGNORE

of Congo).    
Bi otto 1) 
  
Rd 
» | 
> 
Rr A oF 
(CR UNSEISOFIET WE lala] sll 
UNzgco | the new C Courier | Aca 2004

## [Page 54](135045eng.pdf#page=54) 0

### IGNORE

            
   
FARIA 
RE TERES J . 
Ea 
- veg { 
gn | SIRT 
. 
   Fy 
  
UNESCO | the new Courier | A SHE

## [Page 55](135045eng.pdf#page=55) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
    
  
            
     
 
Od : Ny od 
a RRR 
> \ 
  
TE a 
: e, 
- “. 
A 
a
,
 
T
S
E
 
E
R
A
 
i 
: “4 
ul h yf 
El J 
i 
Cy 
   
A
T
 
  
   
 
at 
L
a
 
     WSR 2 
J we ita 
 

## [Page 56](135045eng.pdf#page=56) 0

### IGNORE

books 
THE IMPERCEPTIBLE BALLET 
OF THE CONTINENTS 
  
of the Earth 
in ten steps. 
  
Philippe Bouysse. 
32pp., 21 x27 cm 
16 € 
UNESCO Publishing/ 
By Bruno Vrielynck and 
The Changing face 
The break-up of Pangaea 
and continental drift 
over the past 250 million years 
Commission de la carte géologique 
du monde 
Norian 
(220-210 Ma) 
Pbonal 110 Ye x 
hod - “B) 
A Ma 
——  
 
27TWEN 1OTaME Iie 
Sort cee ooze reign 
= Dazmr rosy bos 
ELE L 
Swbrara ag 
mc AMG a 
ee vam Wh 
ER a 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
his album, based on scientific 
research which was initially 
intended only for expert eyes, 
gives an accessible guide to the 
evolution of our planet over the last 
250 million years and will appeal to 
all those who, in our rushed modern 
world, want to read a story that deals 
in millions of years. 
It takes as its starting point the break- 
up of the Pangaea (the original single 
continent) which led to the continental 
masses we have today. There and then 
began a cycle of the newly emerged 
plates breaking apart or moving closer 
together to join up once again. (This 
happened 1.5 billion years ago and 
then 750 million years ago.) 
  
Mwy = 
 
The introduction gives a clear 
explanation of this perpetual mobility 
and stresses that the Earth, unlike 
Mars or Venus, is a living planet that 
evacuates part of its internal energy 
to the surface. This energy causes the 
movements known as convection, 
which affect the earth’s mantle. These 
constant movements cause the 
lithosphere, or the earth’s crust, to 
divide up into plates, which in turn 
move. This process, known as plate 
tectonics, is one of the main causes of 
earthquakes and volcanic activity. 
This epic adventure is split into 
ten sequences. Each is illustrated 
with a paleogeographic map, which 
shows the Earth at a certain time and 
allows the reader to easily situate 
the illustrations chronologically. The 
accompanying commentary retraces 
the principal geological events of the 
period and gives all the explanations a 
reader could need. 
The eleventh and final map shows the 
geology of the Earth today and the 
ages of rock formations. This package 
is completed by an extremely useful 
glossary and an easy-to-load CD-ROM 
which features all the material in 
the book and includes a Powerpoint 
animation.

## [Page 57](135045eng.pdf#page=57) 0

### IGNORE

A GUIDE 
TO HUMAN 
RIGHTS 
Institutions, 
Standards, 
Procedures 
This publication 
provides brief 
information 
On major 
instruments, 
procedures 
and mechanisms to protect human rights, 
principal events (international conferences, 
decades, years, days, etc.), and institutions 
dealing with human rights issues. It contains 
600 entries and is designed for all those 
who are concerned about, and interested 
in, human rights, primarily educators, 
students, human rights activists and mass 
media professionals. Its purpose is to better 
orient them in the international system of 
promotion and protection of human rights, 
based on international human rights law. 
  
Edited by Janusz Symonides and Vladimir Volodin 
Preface by Koichiro Matsuura 
628 pp., 21 x 13 cm, 
1480 € 
UNESCO Publishing, 
2003 
HUMAN RIGHTS: 
INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION, 
MONITORING, ENFORCEMENT 
This is the third 
and last volume 
of UNESCO’s 
series for teaching 
human rights 
at the higher 
education 
level. It takes 
an institutional 
approach to the 
international protection of human rights, 
first examining the United Nations system, 
which may be seen as universal, and then 
analysing regional systems of protection. An 
indispensable source of information on the 
protection of human rights, the volume can 
also be employed as a practical guide to the 
use of existing procedures in the defence of 
human rights. 
| a Ne Lb ¥ 
Edited by Janusz Symonides 
422 pp., 235x155 cm 
3380€ 
UNESCO Publishing/Ashgate, 
2003 
TOWARDS A MULTICULTURAL 
CULTURE OF EDUCATION 
Based on research carried out in thirty 
African, Asian and Latin American 
countries, this book advocates the use of 
local languages and the mother tongue 
in formal and non-formal education. It 
shows the often striking failure of linguistic 
policies inherited from colonial times and 
highlights the numerous advantages of 
multilingual 
  
teaching. This 
Th] study addresses 
“| not only linguists 
and decision- 
makers but also 
field workers and 
teachers who 
are confronted 
daily with the 
consequences 
of the “single 
language” 
  
ANCHE NCLAL   
    dogma.  
    
Edited by Adama Quane 
490 pp., 21x 14,7 cm 
12,00 € 
UNESCO Publishing/UIE, 2003 
NORDIC STONE 
An invaluable resource on natural stones 
found in the Nordic countries (Norway, 
Sweden and Finland}, providing descriptions 
of all the main stone types, with information 
on their geology and technology. 
It also includes chapters that examine 
the history and heritage of stone in these 
countries, describes the methods for 
exploration, extraction and processing, and 
takes a close look at environmental issues in 
stone production. 
- [lustrated 
with many 
photographs, it 
includes a map 
of natural stone 
deposits, as well 
as indexes of 
locations and 
commercial 
names of the 
various stones. 
Edited by Olavi Selonen 
and Veli Suominen 
64 pp., 27 x 19,5 cm 
16,00 € 
UNESCO Publishing/IAEG 
      
  
SHALL 15 SMALL IS 
WORKING WORKING: 
TECHNOLOGY 
estoy FOR POVERTY 
Puverly REDUCTION 
Reduction The use of low- 
cost, small-scale 
1-1 technologies 
| er: in developing 
countries was 
promoted in the 
1960s by E. F. Schumacher, who published 
Small is Beautiful: A Study of Economics 
as if People Mattered in 1973. The current 
booklet and video bring together research 
and case studies to demonstrate how 
human-scale and sustainable technologies 
can play an important part in processes 
of poverty eradication, especially in Least 
Developed Countries. 
90-minute video (PAL) and 
60-page booklet 
14,80 € 
UNESCO Publishing/ITDG/TVE 
  
Gare Jou SPICE gu Wo 
  TERRA 
The aim of this 
card game is 
to collectively 
solve ecological, 
socio-economic 
and military and diplomatic crises in order 
to keep the peace and maintain conditions 
which allow for lasting development. 
The players must work together and put 
aside their personal interests. If these 
crises accumulate, no one in the world will 
benefits. 
  
Rules of the game in French, English, 
Spanish, German and Catalan. 
19.95 €, 
Editions UNESCO/Days of Wonder, 
2003 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 58](135045eng.pdf#page=58) 0

### IGNORE

contacts 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
  
iii 
  
United Nations 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, 
France 
Tel. +33 14568 10 00 
Internet: 
Www.unesco.org   
Documentation Centres 
Archives (BSS/AM) 
T (33-1) 45 68 19 50/55 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 17 
E-mail: archives@unesco.org 
Coastal Areas and Small Islands 
T (33-1) 45 68 39 34 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 58 08 
E-mail: c.nollet@unesco.org 
Communication 
T (33-1) 45 68 42 67 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 55 82 
E-mail: n.nguyen-van@unesco.org 
Culture 
T (33-1) 45 68 43 43 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 55 74 
E-mail: culture.doc@unesco.org 
Education 
TT (33-1) 45 68 10 29 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 24 
E-mail: sdi@unesco.org 
Information et Informatics 
T (33-1) 45 68 43 99 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 55 82 
E-mail: g.mensah@unesco.org 
Information about UNESCO 
= (33-1) 01 45 68 16 81 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 57 
E-mail: p.morel-vasquez@unesco.org 
Library 
T (33-1) 45 68 03 56 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 98 
E-mail: library@unesco.org 
MAB — Man and the Biosphere 
T (33-1) 45 68 40.59 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 58 04 
E-mail: mab@unesco.org 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004 
Natural Sciences 
T (33-1) 45 68 40 17 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 58 23 
E-mail: p.murugaiyan@unesco.org 
Oceanography 
T (33-1) 45 68 39 82 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 58 12 
E-mail: p.boned@unesco.org 
Photo Library 
T (33-1) 45 68 16 91 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 55 
E-mail: photobank@unesco.org 
Studio Radio-TV, Archives, Audiovisual 
T (33-1) 45 68 00 68 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 56 
E-mail: studio@unesco.org 
Social and Human Sciences 
T (33-1) 45 68 3807 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 77 
E-mail: dare@unesco.org 
Statistics 
T (1-514) 343- 68 80 
Fax: (1-514) 343-68 82 
E-mail: uis.resource-centre@unesco.org 
Hydrology 
T (33-1) 45 68 40 04 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 58 11 
E-mail: ihp@unesco.org 
World Heritage 
T (33-1) 45 68 18 76 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 55 70 
E-mail: wh-info@unesco.org 
Youth Coordination 
T (33-1) 45 68 16 54 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 57 90 
E-mail: ucj@unesco.org 
UNESCO Offices 
Afghanistan 
UNESCO Kabul 
P.O. Box 5, Kabul 
= +93-70-283.008 
Fax: + 873-763 468 836, 
E-mail: martin.hadlow @undp.org 
Bangladesh 
Idb Bhaban (16th floor) 
E/8-A Rokeya Sharan 
Sher-e-Banglanagar, Dhaka 1207 
T (880-2) 912 34 69/6522 
Fax: (880-2) 912 34 68 
E-mail: dhaka@unesco.org 
Brazil 
SAS Quadra 5 Bloco H Lote 6 
Edificio CNPQ/IBICT/UNESCO 
9° andar, 70070-914 Brasilia D.F. 
T (55-61)21 06 35 00 
Fax: (55-61) 322 42 61 
E-mail: brasilia@unesco.org 
Burundi 
Avenue du Luxembourg, 
Bujumbura 
TT (257) 21 53 82/84 
Fax: (257) 21 53 83 
E-mail: bujumbura@unesco.org 
Cambodia 
P.O. BOX 29 
House 38, Samdech Sothearos 
blvd, Phnom Penh 
T (855-23) 217 244, 426 726 
Fax: (855-23) 426 163, 217 022 
E-mail: phnompenh@unesco.org 
Cameroon 
Immeuble Stamatiades, 
(2nd floor), Avenue de 
I'Indépendance, BP 12909, 
Yaoundé 
T (237) 22 57 63 
Fax: (237) 22 63 89 
E-mail: yaounde@unesco.org 
Chile 
Calle Enrique Delpiano, 2058 
Providencia, 3187 Santiago 
a (56-2) 472 4600/655 10 50 
Fax: (56 2) 655 10 46, 655 10 47 
E-mail: santiago@unesco.org 
China 
Waijiaogongyu 5-15-3, 
Jianguomenwai Compound, 
Beijing 100600 
T (86-10) 65 32 28 28 
Fax: (86-10) 65 32 48 54 
E-mail: beijing@unesco.org 
Congo 
134 bd du Maréchal Lyautey, 
Brazzaville 
T (242) 81 18 29 
Fax: (242) 81 17 80 
E-mail: brazzaville@unesco.org 
Costa Rica 
Paseo Colon, ave 1 bis, calle 28, 
casa esquinera, 2810 San José 
a (506) 258 76 25 
Fax: (506) 258 74 58, 258 76 41 
E-mail: san-jose@unesco.org 
Cuba 
UNESCO Regional bureau 
for Culture 
Calzada 551 - Esq. aD 
Vedado, Havana 
T (53-7) 832 76 38, 
(57-3) 33 34 38 
Fax: (53-7) 33 31 44 
E-mail: habana@unesco.org 
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
Immeuble Losonia, 
Boulevard du 30 Juin, Kinshasa 
TT (243) 88 48 253 
Fax: (243) 88 48 252 
E-mail: kinshasa@umnesco.org 
Ecuador 
Juan Leon Mera 130 y 
Ave. Patria, Edificio CEFN 6to Piso, 
Quito 
T 2 5932 2529 085/2 5932 2562 327 
Fax: 2 5932 2504 435 
E-mail: quito@unesco.org 
Egypt 
UNESCO Regional Office 
for Science 
8 Abdel-Rahman 
Fahmy Street, Garden City, 
Cairo 11541 
= (202) 79 504 24 
Fax: (202) 79 45 296 
E-mail: cairo@unesco.org 
Ethiopia 
P.O. Box 1177, ECA Building, 
Menelik Avenue, 
Addis Ababa 
= (251-1) 51 39 53 
Fax: (251-1) 51 14 14 
E-mail: mlconde@hotmail.com 
Gabon 
A la Cité de la Démocratie, 
Batiment N° 6, B.P. 2, Libreville 
= (241) 76 28 79 
Fax: (241) 76 28 14 
E-mail: unesclbv@inet.ga 
Ghana 
32 Nortei Ababio Street, Airport, 
Residential Area, Accra 
T (233-21) 765 497, 765 499 
Fax: (233-21) 765 498 
E-mail: accra@unesco.org 
Guatemala 
Edificio Etisa, Ofic. 7 “A” 
Plaza Espafia, Zona 9, 
Guatemala City 
T (502) 360 87 17, 
360 87 27 
Fax: (502) 360 87 19 
E-mail: guatemala@unesco.org 
Haiti 
19, Delmas 60, Musseau par 
Bourdon, Petion Ville 
= (509) 511 04 60/61/62 
Fax: (509) 257 8158 
E-mail: unescohaiti@hainet.net 
India 
B 5/29 Safdarjung Enclave, New 
Delhi 110 029 
= (91-11) 671 3000 
Fax: (91-11) 671 3001/2 
E-mail: newdelhi@unesco.org

## [Page 59](135045eng.pdf#page=59) 0

### IGNORE

Indonesia 
UNESCO House, Jalan Galuh 
Im 
N° 5, Kebayo Baru, 
Jakarta Selatan, Jakarta 12110 
T (62-21) 739 9818 
Fax: (62-21) 7279 6489 
E-mail: jakarta@unesco.org 
Iran (Islamic Republic of} 
Bahman Building, Sa’ad 
Abad Palace Complex 
Tehran 
T (98-21) 27 40 
141/142/143 
Fax: (98-21) 27 40 144 
E-mail: tehran@unesco.org 
Italy 
Palazzo Zorzi, Castello 4930 
Venice 
T (39-041) 260 15 11 
switchboard 
Fax: (39-041) 528 99 95 
E-mail: roste@unesco.org 
  
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
i
a
m
h
 
B
u
r
k
e
 
Jamaica 
The Towers, 25 Dominica 
Drive, 3rd Floor, Kingston 5 
= (1-876) 929 70 87, 
929 70 89 
Fax: (1-876) 929 84 68 
E-mail: kingston@unesco.org 
Jordan 
Wadi Saqra Street 
Amman 11181 
T (962-6) 551 42 34/65 59 
Fax: (962-6) 553 21 83 
E-mail: registry@unesco.org 
Kazakhstan 
4th Floor, UN Building 
67, Tole Bi Street, Almaty 
T (7-3272) 58 26 37/38 
Fax: (7-3272) 79 48 53 
E-mail: almaty@unesco.org 
Kenya 
United Nations Offices, 
Gigiri, Block C, United 
Nations Avenue, Gigiri 
Nairobi 
T (254-2) 62 12 34 
Fax: (254-2) 62 27 50 
E-mail: nairobi@unesco.org 
Lebanon 
Cité Sportive Av., Beirut 
= (961-1) 8500 13 
Fax: (961-1) 82 48 54 
E-mail: beirut@unesco.org 
Mali 
Badalabougou Est 
B.P. E 1763, Bamako 
= (223) 223 34 92, 
223 34 93 
Fax: (223) 223 34 94 
E-mail: bamako@unesco.org 
Mexico 
Pte Masaryk n.° 526, 3er piso 
Colonia Polanco, 11560 
Mexico, D.F. 
TT (52-55) 5230 76 00 
Fax: (52-55) 5230 76 02 
E-mail: mexico@unesco.org 
Morocco 
35 av du 16 novembre, 
Agdal, Rabat 1777 
T (212-37) 67 03 72, 
67 03 74, 77 81 82 
Fax: (212-37) 67 03 75 
E-mail: rabat@unesco.org 
Mozambique 
515, av. Frederick Engels, 
Maputo 
T (258-1) 49 44 50, 49 34 34 
Fax: (258-1) 49 34 31, 49 45 03 
E-mail: maputo@unesco.org 
Namibia 
Oppenheimer House, 
5 Brahms St., Windhoek 
T (264-61) 291 7000, 
Fax: (264-61) 291 7220 
E-mail: 
windhoek@unesco.org 
Nepal 
Ring Road-Bansbari 
Kathmandu 
T (977-1) 437 40 09, 
Fax: (977-1) 437 30 04 
E-mail: 
kathmandu@unesco.org 
Nigeria 
Street Plot 777, 
Bouake Street, off Herbert 
Maccaulay Way 
Wuse Zone 6, Abuja 
T (234-9) 52 37 088 
Fax: (234-9) 52 38 094 
E-mail: abuja@unesco.org 
Pakistan 
Saudi-Pak Tower, First Floor, 
Blue Area, Jinnah Avenue, 
Islamabad 44000 
= (92-51) 28 000 83 
Fax: (92-51) 28 000 56 
E-mail: 
islamabad @unesco.org 
Palestinian Authority 
17, Ahliyyah College St. West 
Bank via Israel Ramallah 
T (972-2) 295 9740 
Fax: (972-2) 295 97 41 
E-mail: unesco@palnet.com 
Peru 
Avenida Javier Prado Este 
2465 - 8 piso, Museo de la 
Nacion, San Borja, Lima 
= (51-1) 476 98 71, 
224 25 26 
Fax: (51-1) 476 98 72 
E-mail: unescope@ amauta. 
rch.net.pe 
Qatar 
57, Al-Jazira Al-Arabia 
St. Doha 
T (974) 486 77 07/ 77 08/ 
75 49 
Fax: (974) 486 76 44 
E-mail: doha@unesco.org 
Romania 
» UNESCO European Centre 
for Higher Education, 39, 
Stirbei Voda Str., Bucharest 
T (40-21) 313 08 39 / 06 98 
Fax: (40-21) 312 35 67 
E-mail: bucarest@unesco.org 
Russian Federation 
Bolshoi Levshinsky per. 15/28, 
blg. 2, 119034 Moscou 
= (7-095) 202 80 97/ 
202 87 59/202 81 66 
Fax: (7-095) 202 05 68, 
956 36 66 
E-mail: moscow@unesco.org 
Rwanda 
Mineduc Compound 
T (250) 51 58 45/ 44/ 46 
Fax: (250) 51 38 44 
E-mail: kigali@unesco.org 
Samoa 
P.O. Box 615 
Matautu-uta Post Office, Apia 
T= (685) 242 76 
Fax: (685) 222 53 
E-mail: apia@unesco.org 
Senegal 
UNESCO Regional Office 
Dakar and Regional Bureau 
for Education 
12 av.L.S Senghor, 
Dakar 
T (221) 849 2323 
Fax: (221) 823 83 93 
E-mail: dakar@unesco.org 
Switzerland 
Villa «Les Feuillantines» 
CH-1211 Geneve 10 
T (41-22) 917 33 81 
Fax: (41-22) 917 00 64 
E-mail: geneva@unesco.org 
Tanzania (United Republic of) 
Oyster Bay, Uganda Av., 
Plot N° 197A, Dar-es-Salaam 
T (255-22) 2666 623/26 
671 656 
Fax: (255-22) 26 66 927 
E-mail: 
dar-es-salaam@unesco.org 
Thailand 
920 Suhumvit Rd., 
Bangkok 10110 
@ (662) 391 05 77/391 0879 
Fax: (662) 391 08 66 
E-mail: bangkok@unesco.org 
United States ef America 
2, United Nations Plaza, 
Suite 900 
New York, N.Y. 10017 
= (1-212) 963 59 95, 
Fax: (1-212) 963 80 14 
E-mail: 
e.minchenberg@unesco.org 
Uruguay 
UNESCO Office Montevideo 
Regional Bureau for Science 
in Latin and the Caribbean 
Edificio del Mercosur (ex 
Parque Hotel), Calle Dr. Luis 
Piera, 1992 
Montevideo 
T (598-2) 413 2075/413 
2094 
Fax: (598-2) 413 2094, 
E-mail: orcyt@unesco.org.ury 
Uzbekistan 
95, Amir Temur Str., 
Tashkent, 70 000 
= (998-71) 12 07 116 
Fax: (998-71) 13 21 382 
E-mail: tashkent@unesco.org 
Viet Nam 
23 Cao Ba Quat, Hanoi 
T (84-4) 747 0275/6 
Fax: (84-4) 747 0274 
E-mail: registry@unesco.org 
Zimbabwe 
8 Kenilworth Rd. Newlands, 
Harare 
TT (263-4) 77 61 16 
Fax: (263-4) 77 60 55 
E-mail: harare@unesco.org 
UNESCO | the new Courier | April 2004

## [Page 60](135045eng.pdf#page=60) 0

### IGNORE

gallery 
    
  
Walking Man 
1949 
Alberto Giacometti 
(1901-1966) 
1.83 m tall 
added to the UNESCO 
collection in 1965 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d