# [091412](091412engo.pdf) 4

## [Page 1](091412engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

   

## [Page 2](091412engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
   E N C 0 U NT E R We invite readers to send us 
photographs to be considered for 
  
publication in this feature. Your 
photo shoufd show a painting, a 
sculpture, piece of architecture or 
any other subject which seems to Tricontinentale 
be an example of cross- 1991, Montage by Monique Constant-Desportes 
fertilization between cultures, 
ae you could send us Elements from three parts of the world combine in this composite 
different cultural backgrounds in work created by a woman doctor and artist of Martinique. Her 
which you see some striking montage consists of an African mask which she brought back from 
connection or resemblance. a visit to Cameroon, and a piece of basketwork, a typical art 
Pratoaraon 2 short caption to al form of the Carib Indians, the first inhabitants of the Caribbean. 
) The mask is inlaid with European coins, symbolizing the 
Westernization of black peoples. The artist, who describes herself 
as an Afro-European living in the Americas, regards the 
work as “representing the variegated reality of the Caribbean, a 
somewhat incongruous yet at times successful mixture”. 
      
   
NN NAAN NNN HTH 
2 \ Ee Ta ha ' 
WR CrCl pds / p25 > 
NS PEt |r +r 4 
Wa No pe Ts pi 7 WNL Pe HS TE of 
Ys SALLE = LST! IN ¢ 
Sarr ANE FT LE La 
‘ . ¥ 3 wl, % NZS ro ’ . > PLN,” \ 
Ps PUT 
(i) “G, N&O \ V5 Ne 78 
(i [T— Ap— i 
ie 1" in sired Wg- SHA 
fhe “ be woe | 1) De, | 
1 \ \ oor son Bd ‘ a \ 
ae 3 1 - py '     
   
Y, 
N\ \ 
\ AN 
Fn T= A  \ NN 
casa \\ \\ N N\ bh  

## [Page 3](091412engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
id Intervew Contents pe 
Oscar Niemeyer 
    
  
talks to Edouard Bailby 
In praise of tolerance 
presented by Ehsan Naraghi Jsoraton or Pence Sover: 
9 An awkward virtue ea sek cover 
by Bernard Williams ow omen 
by Martine Viala (France). 
14 Voltaire, crusader against tyranny 
by Jean Lessay 
18 Gandhi and the struggle for non-violence 
by Ramin Jahanbegloo 
31 Black Africa's open societies 
by Iba Der Thiam 
44 34 Islam: a conflict of models 
—Leseo i Aeron by Mohammed Arkoun 
NEWSBRIEFS 
38 Against intolerance | Lia A 
AE yuesco wAcron by Edgard Pisani 
23 
WORLD HERITAGE - » 
The road to Sagarmatra 40 The balancing act in the Vondelpark 
rooftop of the world by Niala Maharaj Greenwatch 
by José Serra Vega 
49 recent recon EE ERE 
by Isabelle Leymarie po 
and Claude Glayman 4 : ~ 
50 serens vo i oon Commentary by Federico Mayor 
“The Governments of the States parties to this Constitution on behalf of their peoples declare, 
“that since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed . . . 
The “that a peace based exclusively upon the political and economic arrangements of governments would not be a peace which could secure 
NST the unanimous, lasting and sincere support of the peoples of the world, and that the peace must therefore be founded, if it is not to fail, 
upon the intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind. 
“For these reasons, the States parties . . . are agreed and determined to develop and to increase the means of communication between 
their peoples and to employ these means for the purposes of mutual understanding and a truer and more perfect knowledge of each 
45th year — Published monthly other's lives. . . .» 3 
in 36 languages and in Braille EXTRACT FROM THE PREAMBLE TO THE CONSTITUTION OF UNESCO, LONOON, 16 NoveEMBER 1945 
  

## [Page 4](091412engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

gi visit oF Wy ul A i ae 


### 91400: Interview with Oscar Niemeyer

INTERVIEW 
OSCAR 
NIEMEYER 
talks to Edouard Bailby 
    
W At eighty-four years of age, with more than 
three hundred projects already built or at the 
planning stage and with Brasilia as the pin- 
nacle of your achievement, you can justifiably 
claim to be the most oli architect of the 
century. Do you still feel the urge to carry on 
with your creative work? 
— I have little time left. I no longer travel, so 
as to be free to devote myself to my family 
and friends. However, I still go to my office 
in Copacabana every day from nine in the 
morning to seven in the evening, Saturdays 
included. I am incapable of sitting in an arm- 
chair doing nothing or simply brooding over 
the miseries of existence. 
For me, architecture has always been a 
hobby as well as a profession; it attracts and 
absorbs me, but I don’t attach overmuch 
importance to it. The main thing for me is to 
feel at ease with myself, to remain on the side 
of the needy and to denounce social injustices. 
That said, I have acquired 2 certain renown and 
the commissions il flow in. I have, however, 
reduced my team to four people so as to have a 
quieter life. It is important to remain active 
right up to the end. You only live once. 
WB So you are still working as an architect. 
What projects are you currently working on? 
— I am going to complete the Monumental 
Axis of Brasilia by constructing three build- 
ings which will possibly be the finest in the 
capital—the Museum, the National Library 
and the Historical Archives. They will put the 
final touch to my work as architect within the 
framework of the master plan elaborated by 
Liicio Costa, the great Brazilian town-planner 
to whom I owe so much. 
         
       7” a 
ol ; 
rb - { : we 
a ™ »t 
- 
I have a number of other projects in hand 
that have already been approved, including 
the Museum of Niteréi—a city of 500,000 
inhabitants near Rio de Janeiro—and the 
Brazil-Portugal Centre in the heart of Lisbon, 
I have received orders for others, notably in 
Sio Paulo. The site of my most recent com- 
mission is the Island of Gorée, offshore from 
Dakar. I am particularly committed to this 
one because it will enable me to denounce the 
massive transportation of African slaves to 
our continent in the days of the slave trade. In 
Brazil, we received over four million of these 
slaves. Much as they were humiliated and 
exploited, they nevertheless took part in the 
struggles for independence and made a deci- 
sive contribution to our culture. At a time 
when we are celebrating the five hundredth 
anniversary of the discovery of the Americas 
by Christopher Columbus, it is essential to 
recall their sacrifice. 
WB You have always been alive to the problem 
of human suffering to which you have given 
expression in several monumental sculptures. 
The most famous of these is the bloody hand 
of the Latin American Memorial in Sao 
Paulo, which symbolizes the struggle of 
peoples against oppression. What are you 
planning for Gorée? 
— Through the good offices of an eminent 
personality for whom I have the greatest 
esteem, the Government of Senegal invited me 
EE 
4 8 sie ir Fat As 
J 
One of the most outstanding 
exponents of modern archi- 
tecture, Oscar Niemeyer has 
created buildings of dazzling 
formal inventiveness in 
his own country, Brazil, and 
elsewhere in the world. 
He is particularly noted for 
his work on Brasilia, 
the new capital of Brazil. 
in teliing the Courier about 
his remarkable career he 
recalls that architecture 
Is not only utilitarian, 
but an art form of major 
i, . 
significance, in which 
he give’s pride of piace to 
the imagination. Oscar 
Niemeyer has published 
many articles and 
a number of books 
Including Oscar Niemeyer 
(Milan, 1977). French 
journalist Edouard 
Bailby is the author of 
a book about Niemeyer 
which will be published 
later this year by 
Balland, Paris. 
p— 
re / ™N 
Sh A 
rr 
to take part in an international competition. 
As usual 1 declined the invitation, but offered 
instead to undertake the project without 
charging a fee. My project was approved at the 
beginning of this year and two missions came 
to Rio de Janeiro to see me and settle the 
details. Work should begin shortly, 
The monument itself consists of an 
eighty-metre-high panel in which I have cut 
out the outline of a human figure. Risin 
above the sea, it symbolizes the uprooted 
African slave, vanished into space. The monu- 
ment is linked to the land by a simple foot- 
bridge which in no way detracts from its 
appearance. I have designed a museum, a 
reception room for important visitors and a 
restaurant which will be open to the public. I 
am pleased with this project, the Porm of 
which 1 visualized while out walking, 
because it emerged from deep within me. 
 
W Yet, in looking at your most remarkable 
works, one has the impression that they have 
involved many long hours of meticulous 
research. 
— Like sculpture, architecture demands a cer- 
tain sensitivity and a capacity to escape from 
one’s surroundings. When I am asked to carry 
out a project, I always think about it alone, 
sitting in my office, lying on a couch, or while 
out walking. Usually the broad outlines of the 
roject come to me fairly quickly; I don’t get 
Pogeed down in detail. Sometimes my creative 
LRA ws r— 1

## [Page 5](091412engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 91400: Interview with Oscar Niemeyer

| 
  
  
thoughts come to me as if in a dream. My 
plans for the Mosque in Algiers—which 
unfortunately has not yet been started owing 
to lack of funds—actually came to me in my 
sleep. I imagined it amid the sea, sparkling 
with beauty. As soon as I awoke, I began to 
draw it. I conceived the theatre in Brasilia 
during the three days of Carnival. After I had 
roughed out some sketches early on the fourth 
day, Ash Wednesday, the project was ready. 
I usually draw on a very small scale— 
something which always seems to surprise my 
fellow-architects—and then I write an explan- 
atory text in the clearest and simplest possible 
terms. I don’t like looking up complicated 
terminology 1n the dictionary. When we were 
building Brasilia, each time President Jusce- 
lino Kubitschek read my notes he was imme- 
diately able to grasp the thrust of my ideas. 
Of course, I consult my engineer to see if my 
project Is suited to the terrain, the climate and 
the budget, so as to be able to make any 
modifications that might be needed. But that 
1s a purely technical matter, a question of 
detail. As I am not an engineer or a specialist 
in reinforced concrete, it is not my job to 
resolve problems of stress or-the resistance of 
the materials employed. The main thing is for 
the concept to be there. 
W What is your current conception of archi- 
tecture? Has it evolved since Brasilia? 
— The new technology now available would 
perhaps have made it possible to have 
constructed the buildings of the Square of 
Three Powers in a different way. But I'm not 
absolutely certain. Such modifications as I 
might make today would not necessarily be 
substantial ones. 
Baudelaire once wrote that the unexpected 
and the irregular, surprise and astonishment 
are an essential aspect of beauty. I think he was 
right. An architectural work must be beautiful, 
light, different. I have always rebelled against 
predetermined rules, didactic constraints and 
right angles, which are a rigid, man-made 
imposition. When that marvellous architect Le 
Corbusier, the master par excellence of my 
generation, walked up the ramp to the 
National Congress building, he uttered these 
words which I have never forgotten: “There is 
a spirit of invention here.” 
Imagination is the starting-point in archi- 
tecture, From the time of the building of 
Pampulha, on the outskirts of Belo Hori- 
zonte, 1n the early 1940s, I wanted to do 
something different. I had the good fortune to 
meet Juscelino Kubitschek, a remarkable man 
full of drive and enthusiasm, who was Mayor 
of Belo Horizonte at the time. Despite our 
  
  
political differences, we soon became friends. 
He gave me complete creative freedom and 
this allowed me room to express myself. An 
opportunity such as this is very rare in the life 
of an architect. I have often been attacked 
because I have questioned all the traditional 
classicist and rationalist dogmas, but I have 
remained indifferent to these criticisms, 
MW When you speak of imagination, what 
exactly do you mean? Do you consider your 
style of architecture to be without precedent? 
— People may not like the monuments and 
palatial buildings I constructed at Brasilia, but 
no one can say that they have ever seen any- 
thing like them before. Some attempts have 
been made to imitate the Presidential Palace, 
the Alvorada, and I am flattered, but I don’t 
think imitation should play any part in archi- 
tecture, with the exception, perhaps, of hous- 
ing projects. We have to outdo ourselves, to 
break free from the straitjackets in which we 
are confined and give free rein to our in- 
ventiveness. Heidegger said that reason was 
the enemy of thought, and therefore of imagi- 
nation. Beauty in architecture demands 
freedom, and even more, perhaps, the element 
of surprise. 
Right angles separate and divide. Person- 
ally, I have always loved curves, which are an 
essential feature of the natural world. It is not 
easy to draw curves, to give them the sponta- 
neity they demand and then to organize them 
in space in such a way as to achieve the visual 
ES es me I 
Rr ki by no 
  
wit if Lt ey YE Ly i Wf LE Fg 
  
architectural effect that one is looking for. 
Like Matisse, I maintain that my curves are 
not gratuitous; they have a meaning, At one 
point, even Le Corbusier, who had proclaimed 
the virtues of right angles, began to despise 
them. In the end he admitted that we were 
right. One day he said to me: “What you do is 
baroque, but you do it very well. You have the 
mountains of Rio in your eyes.” 
W You refer constantly to Le Corbusier. How 
well did you know him personally? 
— 1 was working as a member of Licio 
Costa’s team when Costa was Director of the 
School of Fine Arts in Rio de Janeiro. One 
day, I think it was in 1936, he asked me to 
accompany him to the airport to meet Le 
Corbusier. You can imagine what a thrill this 
was for a young architect. Everyone of my 
eneration in Brazil felt boundless admiration 
bor this man from the old continent, highly 
cultivated and full of new ideas. Our architec- 
ture was strictly classical and lacked origi- 
nality. With his wisdom and experience Le 
Corbusier turned everything upside down. 
I was barely twenty-nine years old when 
he produced his design for the Ministry of 
Education and Public Health in Rio de 
Janetro. I already felt that I would be no 
The Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, Brasilia. 
Eh 
_ TR 
 

## [Page 6](091412engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 91400: Interview with Oscar Niemeyer

ordinary architect. I had had a gift for drawin 
from the age of seven and my mother kept i 
the drawings I had made at school. When Le 
Corbusier’s plans came into my hands, I made 
a few alterations to them, for my own per- 
sonal pleasure—for instance I increased the 
depth of the piles from four metres to ten. 
This was a piece of teamwork under Le Cor- 
busier’s direction, and the final plans took ev- 
erybody’s suggestions into account. We sent 
them to Le Corbusier for his approval and he 
had them published in an architectural maga- 
zine with his own drawing of the building, 
B It is often said that you believe that an 
architect should work alone, without calling 
on outside collaborators. Yet your projects 
seem to prove the contrary. At Pampulba, for 
example, you called in the great Brazilian 
painter Candido Portinari. 
— I have always said that it is for the architect 
to choose the painters or sculptors who will 
embellish his work. That is what I have done, 
When I imagine an empty space, 2 room, or an 
amphitheatre, 1 always know in advance 
whether I shall furnish it with a granite wall, 
tapestries or paintings. Architecture is a whole 
which demands a symbiosis between the 
structure and its decoration. When I built the 
headquarters of the French Communist Party, 
in Paris, which is one of my favourite works, 
Jacques Duclos asked me: “Oscar, I have an 
old desk of which I am very fond. It has his- 
toric assoctations. Can I put it in my office?” I 
greatly appreciated his respect for my work as 
an architect. Such respect 1s not always shown, 
. I thought that the seats that were put in the 
nave of the Cathedral of Brasilia were really 
dreadful. The last time I saw Jack Lang, the 
French Minister of Culture, he asked me: “Are 
those chairs still there?” 
BM Why was your design for the cathedral of 
Brasilia so totally different from conventional 
church design? Why did you have a dark 
entrance-way and a nave flooded with light? 
The contrast is really striking, 
— I did not want it to be a place of penitence. 
I am not myself a believer, but I tried to put 
myself in the shoes of a Christian. Worship- 
pers enter the cathedral down a ramp, a dark, 
underground passage, before emerging inside 
the crown-shaped, translucent nave of 
concrete and glass. To enhance the visual effect 
and soften the impact of the Sun’s rays, I 
visualized stained-glass panels designed in 
such a way as not to block out the view of the 
sky. Marianne Peretti’s work on these panels 
was admirable. Lying flat on the ground in a 
most uncomfortable position, she drew the 
sixteen stained-glass panels, each the size of 2 
   
basketball court. Unlike the Louvre Pyramid 
in Paris, the nave of the cathedral opens out 
into space. The first time he saw it, the papal 
Nuncio said to the Bishop of Brasilia: “The 
architect who created this masterpiece must be 
a saint to have achieved so close a communion 
between the Earth and God.” As you can im- 
agine, I was very touched by these words and 
I'am still moved when I recall them. 
B You cannot deny that you are more inter- 
ested in monumental architecture than you 
are in designing low-cost housing. Doesn’t 
this indicate a degree of conflict between your 
political commitment and your work as an 
architect? 
— I could have earned a lot of money if had 
let myself be tempted into undertaking pater- 
nalistic operations or indulging in property 
speculation. But that is not in my nature. I am 
not motivated by profit. I worked on the 
monumental buildings of Brasilia as a salaried 
civil servant, receiving no commission or 
under-the-table payments. In this way I felt 
free and at ease with my work. However, I 
did design some residential tower blocks in 
the new Barra da Tijuca district of Rio de 
Janeiro. I have also recently built some 
schools, using a design which is beginning to 
be generally adopted. Although these are pre- 
fabricated constructions, I tried to make the 
most of a restricted budget. 
Jet FT 
Left, inside the 
cathedral of Brasilia. 
Opposite page, 
the cathedral seen 
from outside with, 
in foreground, 
statues of the four 
Evangelists by 
Alfredo Ceschiatti. 
Architecture, like any other profession, is 
a way of earning a living. But when, as I did, 
you have a patron of the stature of Juscelino 
Kubitschek, you have to seize the opportu- 
nity to extend and fulfil yourself. I have 
always refused to follow the mediocre, facile 
path. Architecture must lead to beauty. The 
problem is how to achieve that goal without 
the risk of error. There have been occasions 
when I have modified a project at the last 
minute because it lacked perspective or as the 
result of an acute observation by a friend. I 
don’t think I am an architect who is imper- 
vious to outside influence. I am prepared to 
make any concession or to introduce any note 
of fantasy that can enhance the plastic beauty 
of an edifice. 
WM Nevertheless, you are quite categorical 
when you state that architecture can only be 
beautiful if it is the fruit of invention or a 
new departure. 
— 1 cannot work up any enthusiasm for 
rationalist architecture, with its functional 
limitations, its structural rigidity, its dogmas 
and its theories. Reinforced concrete enables 
architects with a sense of poetry to express 
themselves. Architecture 1s the product of 
dream and fantasy, curves and large areas of 
open space. The architect must know how to 
invent, while making use of all the technology 
available. Why submit to rules and abstract 
  
EE —-— 
a © 
o ERNE EDA 
ESE 
usa     I-— O ARR CGHIH MTHVIEHrRIRNIIIFPRR 55S

## [Page 7](091412engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 91400: Interview with Oscar Niemeyer

  
principles? When I was working on the 
monuments of Brasilia, I deliberately did not 
read a single architectural magazine, for fear 
of being influenced. 
What I admire most in an architect is a 
spirit of liberty. Gaudi, whose best-known 
work 1s the Church of the Holy Family in 
Barcelona, was an architect whose ideas were 
confused. However, he had the courage to 
break the established rules and this has given 
him a special place in modern architecture, 
even though the role played by Le Corbusier 
was much more important. 
When I designed the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs building m Brasilia, I did not, as some 
writers have suggested, branch out into a new 
form of architecture. I simply wanted to 
prove that it was easy to create something, 
using a form of architecture that was tech- 
nically irreproachable but also generous in 
spirit, that would please everybody whatever 
thei aesthetic background. It is not the build- 
ing that corresponds most closely to my own 
temperament. 
MW If you had to devise a course for students of 
architecture, on what principles would you 
base it? 
— This year I have been asked to produce a 
series of twelve lectures on video cassette for 
the new university of Campos, a city of 
400,000 inhabitants some 289 kilometres from 
Rio de Janeiro. I am going to continue the 
experiment that I began in Algeria in the 
1960s, when I was building the university of 
Constantine. 
I think that the most important thing, 
before students start out on an architectural 
course, is to find out whether they have a gift 
for the profession. The teachers must get to 
know their students, sound them out, discover 
their artistic leanings and their general back- 
ground knowledge, get talking to them so that 
they can point out the hazards of the profes- 
sion. It is also essential that they know ow to 
draw, since this is basic to architecture. Stu- 
dents should spend six months in a school 
learning to make technical and decorative 
drawings; in this way they will develop a sense 
of beauty. When this stage is completed, they 
should be attached to a major architectural 
office where they will learn to study a city 
from both an architectural and an urban plan- 
ning point of view. They should be surrounded 
by people with technical know-how—experts 
In concrete, air-conditioning, water, and so on. 
Then, for a period of three years, they should 
follow, on site, the construction of a town or 
city, or an urban district, from start to finish. 
Then all they would have to do would be to 
learn how to write a clear, concise explanatory 
 
report on a project. During my own profes- 
sional life I have often found that it has been 
what I wrote rather than what I drew that won 
approval for a project. Very few non-profes- 
sionals are Capable of understanding an archi- 
tectural drawing. 
B Brasilia made you world famous, but you 
have never lived there. Why not? 
— I did, in fact, live there for three years, the 
time it took to execute my projects. At that 
time, Brasilia was the end of the world. To 
visit Rio de Janeiro or Sio Paulo meant a 
thousand-kilometre journey along muddy 
roads. I lived in a small room with a bed, 2 
table, two chairs and a cupboard. I had a few 
friends with me, not all of whom were archi- 
tects. There were two journalists, a football- 
player and a poet. At night, for relaxation, we 
used to strum away on our guitars and sing, 
We never talked about work. This is my idea 
of a convivial life. With the workmen with 
whom we rubbed shoulders, the prostitutes 
from their wooden huts and the dogs that 
barked all day long, we all formed one huge 
family. There was a real frontier atmosphere. 
We had the feeling that the world was about 
to change. For the thousands of workers who 
came from every corner of Brazil, but mainly 
from the north-east, Brasilia spelled hope. 
The day in April 1960 when the new 
capital was maugurated, in the presence of the 
President of the Republic and other authori- 
ties and personalities, everything changed. 
The workers found themselves even poorer 
than they had been before. That was the end 
of our illusions. As soon as my work was fin- 
ished, I left. Never again have I experienced 
the same fraternal atmosphere, 
Today, some people criticize Brasilia as 
cold, impersonal, inhuman, empty. But they 
do not know Brasilia. Ask those who live 
there with their families, ask their children. 
They like it. They are far from the bustle of 
the great urban agglomerations. There they 
can enjoy open spaces and tree-lined avenues. 
The light from the sky seems to bring with it 
kindlier ways of living. Licio Costas genius 
has made the new capital a model of urban 
planning As far as I am concerned, I am 
appy to have been the originator of the prin- 
cipal landmarks of the city. It is not our fault 
if Brasilia has fallen victim to the injustices of 
the capitalist society. 
You might well repeat your question and 
ask: “Why don’t you live there, since the city 
is built in your image.” My reply would be 2 
simple one. I was born in Rio de Janeiro, 
beside the sea, at the foot of mountains 
covered in tropical vegetation. I have always 
lived there. I know that this city is becoming 
impossible to live in, with its six million in- 
habitants, its wretched shanty-towns, its vio- 
lence, its disorder, its polluted beaches and the 
frenzied activity of daily life. But this is what 
I am used to. How can you expect me to 
adapt to anything else? I love Brasilia, but at 
Rio de Janeiro I am at home. a 
THANE RET nae 
 YT 
" -— - 
BT Light = ET ES dh aii a i 

## [Page 8](091412engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

  
IN PRAISE 
OF TOLERANCE 
The period between the eighteenth-cen- 
tury Enlightenment and the Second World 
War was by and large—in Europe at 
least—one of optimism. There was a feel- 
ing that progress in science and education 
would gradually make people aware of 
their civic and moral responsibilities, both 
in their national communities and in the 
world at large. Those hopes were dashed 
when the whole of humanity became 
engulfed in the most devastating war in 
history—a war triggered by an ideology of 
exclusion and intolerance that emerged in 
one of Europe’s most advanced and cul- 
tured nations. Optimism retreated and 
gave way to a far more sceptical, circum- 
spect and vigilant attitude, 
The creation in 1946, in the aftermath 
of that war, of an organization such as 
UNESCO, dedicated to the construction of 
lasting peace through education, science 
and culture, was in part a reflection of this 
new concern. The tensions between 
groups, nations and regions in the last 
forty-six years have amply demonstrated 
how farsighted UNESCO’s founding fathers 
were. Peace and understanding between 
peoples are by no means the inevitable 
outcome of progress in the various spheres 
of human activity. No society can be safe 
from the temptation to practise exclusion 
and intolerance unless it shows constant 
determination and vigilance. 
Even societies which at certain points 
in their history may have been open-   
minded and receptive to others are not 
immune to the risk of lapsing into rigid 
intolerance. The past has shown only too 
often that no society, whatever its system 
of values, can claim to be intrinsically 
endowed with the virtue of tolerance; 
conversely, no society can be accused of 
being permanently intolerant. 
Doubtléss human beings feel the need 
of firm convictions. But when required, as 
they are today, to live in ever closer 
contact, they should beware lest their 
convictions lead to bigotry. They must 
realize that, while they are all equal in 
dignity, they possess different talents and 
convictions, and that this difference is a 
source of enrichment for every one of 
them, and for civilization. Provided, that 
1s, that everyone accepts a nucleus of uni- 
versal values. 
The challenge facing us both now and 
in the future is to accept that each of the 
five and a half billion human beings living 
on the planet today can have his or her 
own ideas and preferences, and, without 
denying those 1deas and preferences, can 
admit that those of others are just as 
worthy of respect. It is by relentlessly 
striving to practise what the British philo- 
sopher Bernard Williams calls this “awk- 
ward virtue” that we shall really begin to 
work for peace. 
EHSAN NARAGHI 
Consultant for this issue   I EHSAN NARAGHI, 
founder of the Teheran 
Institute of Social Research 
and currently an adviser 
to Unesco, is an Iranian 
sociologist and historian. 
His published works 
include L'Orient et la crise 
de L'Cccident (Paris, 1977) 
and Des palais du chah 
aux prisons de la révolution 
(Paris, 1991).

## [Page 9](091412engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 91401: An Awkward virtue

An awkward virtue 
 
Peace-lover (1987), a 
painted terracotta 
sculpture by the Iraqi 
artist Dhia Azzawi. 
  
HE difficulty with tolerance is that it 
seems to be at once necessary and 
impossible. It is necessary where differ- 
ent groups have conflicting beliefs—moral, 
political or religious—and realize that there is 
no alternative to their living together; no 
alternative, that is to say, except armed 
conflict, which will not resolve their disagree- 
ments and will impose continuous suffering. 
These are the circumstances in which tol- 
erance is necessary. Yet in those same circum- 
stances it may well seem impossible. 
If violence and the breakdown of social 
co-operation are threatened in these circum- 
stances, it is because people find others’ 
beliefs or ways of life deeply unacceptable. In 
matters of religion, for instance (which, his- 
torically, was the first area in which the idea 
of tolerance was used), the need for tolerance 
arises because one of the groups, at least, 
thinks that the other is blasphemously, disas- 
trously, obscenely wrong. The members of 
one group may also think, very often, that the 
leaders or elders of the other group are keep- 
ing the young, or perhaps the women, from 
enlightenment and liberation. In this case, 
they see it as not merely in their own group’s 
interest, but in the interest of some in the 
other group, that the true religion (as they 
believe it to be) should prevail. It is because 
the disagreement goes this deep that the par- 
ties to it think that they cannot accept the 
existence of each other. We need to tolerate 
other people and their ways of life only in 
situations that make it very difficult to do so. 
BY BERNARD WILLIAMS 
Tolerance, we may say, is required only for 
the intolerable. That is its basic problem. 
We may think of tolerance as an attitude 
that a more powerful group, or a majority, 
may have (or may fail to have) towards a less 
powerful group or a minority. In a country 
where there are many Christians and few Mus- 
lims, there may be a question whether the 
Christians tolerate the Muslims; the Muslims 
do not get the choice, so to speak, whether to 
tolerate the Christians or not. If the propor- 
tions of Christians and Muslims are reversed, 
so will be the direction of tolerance. This is 
how we usually think of tolerance, and it is 
natural to do so, because discussions of tol- 
erance have often been discussions of what 
laws should exist—in particular, laws permit- 
ting or forbidding various kinds of religious 
practice—and the laws have been determined 
by the attitudes of the more powerful group. 
But more basically, tolerance is a matter of the 
attitudes of any group to another, and does not 
concern only the relations of the more 
powerful to the less powerful. A group or a 
creed can rightly be said to be “intolerant” if it 
would like to suppress or drive out others, 
even if, as a matter of fact, it has no power to 
do so. The real problems of tolerance are to be 
found at the level of human relations and of 
. the attitude of one way of life towards another; 
it is not only a question of how the power of 
the state is used. 
If there is to be a question of tolerance, it is 
necessary that there should be something to be 
tolerated: there has to be some belief or prac- 
tice or way of life that one group may think 
(however fanatically or unreasonably) to be 
wrong, or mistaken, or undesirable. If one 
group simply hates another, as with a clan ven- 
detta or cases of sheer racism, it is not really 
tolerance that is needed: the people involved 
need rather to lose their hatred, their prejudice, 
or their implacable memories. If we are asking 
people to be tolerant, we are asking for

## [Page 10](091412engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 91401: An Awkward virtue

10 
something more complicated than this. They 
will indeed have to lose something, their desire 
to suppress or drive out the rival belief; but 
they will also keep something, their commit- 
ment to their own beliefs, which is what gave 
them that desire in the first place. There is a 
tension here between one’s own commitments, 
and the acceptance that other people may have 
other and perhaps quite distasteful commit- 
ments: the tension that is typical of tolerance, 
and which makes it so difficult. 
In practice, of course, there is often a very 
thin or vague boundary between mere triba- 
lism or clan loyalty, and differences in outlook 
or conviction. As Northern Ireland, for in- 
stance, constantly reminds us, an old enemy 
may appear not merely as an enemy but as an 
opponent in the struggle for truth and en- 
lightenment. 
AN ACTIVE TENSION 
Just because tolerance involves this tension 
between commitment to one’s own outlook 
and acceptance of the other’s, it is not, in its 
true sense, the same as mere weariness or 
indifference. After the European wars of reli- 
gion in the sixteenth and seventeenth centu- 
ries had raged for years, people began to 
think that it must be better for the different 
Christian churches to coexist, Various atti- 
 
BROTHERS 
  
From the moment when worship illuminates the soul of a 
man, whatever his race, bis soul takes on the lustre of the mystical 
“diamond”. Neither bis colour nor his birth are of any relevance. 
SALIF TALL TIERNO-BOKAR (1884-1948), AFRICA 
IN FAITH 
  
Quotations relating 
to the main theme of this 
issue have been taken 
from La tolérance, essai 
d'anthologie, an anthology of 
writings on tolerance 
chosen and presented by 
Zaghloul Morsy (Unesco, 
latest edition 1988). 
tudes went with this development. Some 
people became sceptical about the distinctive 
© claims of any church, and began to think that 
there was no truth, or at least no truth dis- 
coverable by human beings, about the validity 
of one church’s creed as opposed to another’s. 
Other people began to think that the 
struggles had helped them to understand 
God’s purposes better: that He did not mind 
how people worshipped, so long as they did 
so in good faith within certain broad Chris- 
tian limits. (In more recent times, a similar 
ecumenical spirit has extended beyond the 
boundaries of Christianity.) 
These two lines of thought in a certain 
sense went in opposite directions. One of 
them, the sceptical, claimed that there was less 
to be known about God’s designs than the 
warring parties, each with its particular fanati- 
cism, had supposed. The other line of thought, 
the broad church view, claimed to have a 
better insight into God’s designs than the war- 
ring parties had. But in their relation to the 
battles of faith, the two lines of thought did 
nevertheless end up in the same position, with 
the idea that precise questions of Christian 
belief did not matter as much as people had 
supposed; that less was at stake. This leads to 
tolerance as a matter of political practice, and 
that is an extremely important result; but as an 
attitude, it is less than tolerance. If you do not 
care all that much what anyone believes, you 
do not need the attitude of tolerance, any niore 
than you do with regard to other people’s 
tastes in food. 
In many matters, attitudes that are more 
tolerant in practice do arise for this reason, that 
people cease to think that a certain kind of 
behaviour is a matter for disapproval or nega- 
tive judgement at all. This is what is hap- 
pening, in many parts of the world, with 
regard to kinds of sexual behaviour that were 
previously discouraged and in some cases 
legally punished. An extra-marital relationship 
or a homosexual ménage may arouse no hostile 
comment or reaction, as such things did in the 
past. But once again, though this is tolerance as 
a matter of practice, the attitude it relies on is 
indifference rather than, strictly speaking, tole- 
rance. Indeed, if I and others in the neighbour- 
hood said that we were tolerating the homo- 
sexual relations of the couple next door, our 
attitude would be thought to be less than 
liberal. 
There are no doubt many conflicts and 
areas of intolerance for which the solution 
should indeed be found in this direction—in 
the increase of indifference. Matters of sexual 
and social behaviour which in smaller and 
more traditional societies are of great public 
concern will come to seem more a private 
matter, raising in themselves no question of 
right or wrong. The slide towards indifference 
may also provide, as it did in Europe, the only 
solution to some religious disputes. Not all 
religions, of course, have any desire to convert, 
let alone coerce, others. They no doubt have 
some opinion or other (perhaps of the “broad 
church” type) about the state of truth or error 
of those who do not share their faith, but at 
any rate they are content to leave those other 
people alone. Other creeds, however, are less 
willing to allow error, as they see it, to flour- 
ish, and it may be that with them there is no 
solution except that which Europe discovered 
(in religion, at least, if not in politics)—a 
decline in enthusiasm. It is important that a 
decline of enthusiasm does not take the form 
of a movement's merely running out of steam. 
As the various sects of Christianity discovered,

## [Page 11](091412engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 91401: An Awkward virtue

ba
d,
 
 o 
X3
 
5 
x 
i 
1; 
Eloge de la liberté 
{c. 1926), oil on canvas, 
by the German-born 
painter Max Ernst. 
a religion may have its own resources for 
rethinking its relations to others. One rele- 
vant idea, which had considerable influence 
in Europe, is that an expansive religion really 
wants people to believe in it, but it must rec- 
ognize that this is not a result that can be 
achieved by force. The most that force can 
achieve is acquiescence and outer conformity. 
As Hegel said of the slave’s master, the 
fanatic is always disappointed: what he 
wanted was acknowledgement, but all he can 
get is conformity. 
THE IDEAL OF AUTONOMY 
However, neither a decline in enthusiasm nor a 
retreat into private taste can solve all problems. 
If everything becomes a matter of private 
judgement or taste, people lose a sense of social 
 
identity and of belonging to a community 
whose interests reach beyond their own. To 
some degree, it is possible for people to belong 
to communities bound together by shared 
convictions—religious convictions, for in- 
stance—and tolerance be sustained by a dis- 
tinction between those communities and the 
state. The state is not identified with any set of 
such beliefs, and does not enforce any of them; 
equally, it does not allow any of the groups to 
impose its beliefs on the others, though each of 
them may of course advocate what it believes. 
In the United States, for instance, there is a vir- 
tually universal consensus that supports the 
Constitution in allowing no law that enforces 
ot even encourages any particular religion. 
There are many religious groups, and no doubt 
many of them have deep convictions, but none 11

## [Page 12](091412engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 91401: An Awkward virtue

12 
  
BERNARD WILLIAMS, 
Fellow of the British Academy, 
has been White's Professor 
of Moral Philosophy at 
the University of Oxford since 
1990. He was Provost of - 
King's College, Cambridge from 
1979 to 1987, and Monroe 
Deutsch Professor of Philoso- 
phy at the University of 
Califomia, Berkeley, from 1988 
to 1990. His many published 
works include Ethics and the 
Limits of Philosophy (1985), 
Utilitarianism and Beyond 
(1982), Moral Luck, (1981, 
ed with A.K. Sen) and 
Descartes: The Project of 
Pure Enquiry (1978). 
 
of them wants the state to suppress others, or 
. to allow any of them to suppress others. 
Many people have hoped that this can serve 
as a general model of the way in which a 
modern society can resolve the tensions of 
tolerance. On the one hand, there are deeply 
held and differing convictions about moral or 
religious matters, held by various groups 
within the society. On the other hand, there is 
a supposedly impartial state, which affirms the 
rights of every citizen to equal consideration, 
including an equal right to form and express 
his or her convictions. This is the model of 
liberal pluralism. It can be seen as enacting 
tolerance. It expresses tolerance’s peculiar 
combination of conviction and acceptance, by 
finding a home for people’s various convic- 
A medley of signs 
by the Tunisian painter 
Gouider Triki 
(gouache on paper). 
tions in groups or communities less than the 
state, while the acceptance of diversity is 
located in the structure of the state itself. 
This is not to say that there is no need of 
any shared beliefs. Clearly there must be a 
shared belief in the system itself. The model of 
a society that is held together by a framework 
of rights and an aspiration towards equal res- 
pect, rather than by a shared body of more spe- 
cific substantive convictions, demands an ideal 
of citizenship that will be adequate to bear such 
a weight. The most impressive version of that 
ideal is perhaps that offered by the tradition of 
liberal philosophy flowing from Kant, which 
identifies the dignity of the human being with 
autonomy. A free person is one who makes his 
or her own life and determines his or her own

## [Page 13](091412engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

convictions, and power must be used to make 
this possible, not to frustrate it by imposing a 
given set of convictions. 
This is not a purely negative or sceptical 
ideal. If it were, it could not even hope to have 
the power to bind together into one society 
people with strongly differing convictions. Nor 
could it provide the motive power that all tol- 
erant societies need in order to fight, when 
other means fail, the intolerant. 
There must be, on any showing, limits to 
the extent to which the liberal state can be 
disengaged on matters of ethical disagreement. 
There are some questions, such as that of abor- 
tion, on which the state will fail to be neutral 
whatever it does. Its laws may draw distinc- 
tions between different circumstances of abor- 
tion, but in the end it cannot escape the fact 
that some people will believe with the deepest 
conviction that a certain class of acts should be 
permitted, while other people will believe with 
equal conviction that those acts should be for- 
bidden. No society can avoid collective and 
substantive choices on matters of that kind, and 
in that sense, on those issues, there are limits to 
tolerance, even if people continue to respect 
one another’s opinions. 
Some critics of liberalism claim that the 
liberal pluralist state, as the supposed enact- 
ment of tolerance, does not really exist. What is 
happening, they say, is that the state is subtly 
enforcing one set of principles (roughly in 
  
A dramatic scene 
from the film version of 
the famous American 
musical West Side Story 
(1961), directed by 
Robert Wise. 
favour of sdcial co-operation and business effi- 
ciency) while the convictions that people pre- 
viously deeply held, on matters of religion or 
sexual behaviour or the significance of cultural 
experience, dwindle into private tastes. Other 
critics will admit that the liberal pluralist state 
does exist and to some extent succeeds in 
expressing tolerance, but will insist that tol- 
erance is at best one political virtue, to be 
weighed against other goods such as the satis- 
factions of a deeply experienced sense of com- 
munity, or of a society in which people’s rights 
(or the lack of them) are taken for granted, 
rather than constantly staked out with fences of 
litigation and explicit argument. 
I suspect that only the future will show 
whether liberal societies can preserve a variety 
of strong convictions on important mat- 
ters. Perhaps it will show, too, how much it 


### 91401: An Awkward virtue

matters to humanity if that variety, and so all 
but a few convictions, fades away. Maybe tol- 
erance will prove to have been an interim 
virtue, serving a period between a past when 
no-one had heard of it, and a future in which 
no-one will need it. For the present, however, it 
1s very obvious that there are still fanatical 
convictions that are only too anxious to insu- 
late themselves against criticism; and there are 
many people whose rights can be asserted only 
by unwelcome speech. It does not look as 
though the time has come yet in which we can 
do without the awkward virtue of tolerance. OJ

## [Page 14](091412engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

  
  


### 91402: Voltaire, crusader against tyranny

Voltaire, crusader against tyranny 
Above and following 
pages: sketches by the 
Swiss painter and engraver 
Jean Huber (1721-1786) 
show Voltaire in a variety 
of moods. ; 
Below, Voltaire pledging 
his support to the Calas 
family, an engraving 
by Pierre-Nolasque Bergeret 
(1782-1863). 
N social terms a value, and in those who 
practice it a virtue, tolerance nevertheless 
seems to have been a new idea in the eigh- 
teenth century. This may not seem to square 
with the usual stereotype of that period, 
which in Europe was supposedly marked by 
great sophistication in all the arts, lively intel- 
lectual curiosity and brilliant social life. But it 
becomes less surprising when we recall that 
the wars of religion were then still fresh in 
everyone’s memory, and that fanaticism, albeit 
in retreat, was not yet dead. 
Conversation in the salons was unfettered, 
but in France many books were forbidden, 
seized and destroyed. Some unconventional 
opinions and behaviour were connived at, but 
 
BY JEAN LESSAY 
that is not to say that they were tolerated: 
tolerating means accepting the existence of 
that which 1s different. Many men tolerant by 
instinct and conviction were to be found even 
among princes and potentates, but that did not 
stop fanaticism from rearing its head under 
cover of the institutions. Exclusion and perse- 
cution stemmed partly from the automatic 
enforcement of laws, even those privately 
regarded as outdated, and partly from the 
demands of a section of public opinion which 
used minorities as scapegoats for its own frus- 
trations and its taste for violence. 
The word tolerance was still viewed with 
caution, mistrust and sometimes hostility. 
Though the Encyclopaedists had already had a 
| 
JEAN LESSAY, 
a French writer specializing in 
the American Revolution, 
published studies on Lafayette 
(Paris, 1983), Washington 
(Paris, 1985) and the Count of 
Rivarol, a royalist in the age 
of the French Revolution 
(Paris, 1989). He wrote the 
present article shortly before 
his recent death.

## [Page 15](091412engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 91402: Voltaire, crusader against tyranny

profound influence in educated circles, there 
were still theologians ready to defend intol- 
erance—in the most spectacular form it took 
in France, namely the prohibition of Protes- 
tantism by the revocation of the Edict of 
Nantes 1n 1685. The negative effects of this 
measure were still deeply felt several decades 
afterwards, both in the intellectual sphere (in 
the form of a brain drain) and in the economy 
(in the form of an exodus of skilled craftsmen 
to work abroad). 
The advent of tolerance, or rather its rec- 
ognition as a factor for civil peace and a safe- 
guard against injustice, was largely the work 
of philosophers, from Pierre Bayle (a refugee 
in Holland) to Diderot, d’Alembert, d’Hol- 
bach, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and especially 
Voltaire, who was its real champion. 
THE CALAS AFFAIR 
From his earliest days as a playwright, Vol- 
tare (1694-1778) indirectly attacked the 
scourge of fanaticism that he was to fight 
throughout his life. Thus in 1728, in his epic 
poem La Henriade, he praised King Henri IV 
for setting out to be the wise, enlightened 
monarch of all Frenchmen, whatever their 
beliefs. The concept of tolerance he tackled 
directly in his Lettres philosophiques (1734), 
his Dictionnaire philosophique (1766) and his 
Questions sur I’Encyclopédie (1772). Three, 
years before his death, under the title Le ori du 
sang innocent (“The cry of innocent blood”), 
he was to petition Louis XVI to review the 
trial of a victim of fanaticism whose cause he 
made famous, the Chevalier de la Barre.’ 
His main contribution to this war of ideas, 
however, is still his Traité sur la tolérance 
(1763). The exceptional importance of this 
text, apart from the cogency of its arguments, 
lies in the fact that Voltaire’s treatise, unlike 
John Locke’s Letter on Toleration (1690), to 
which he pays tribute, is not simply a philoso- 
phical dissertation. Thought here stemmed 
from action, from what we would nowadays 
describe as the writer’s “commitment”. For 
over a year Voltaire had been waging an unre- 
mitting campaign to secure the rehabilitation 
of a fabric merchant from Toulouse, Jean 
Calas, a Protestant falsely accused of mur- 
dering his son. Calas was sentenced to death, 
and in 1762 was broken on the wheel after 
refusing to confess under torture. Actually a 
majority of the judges were out to gratify an 
ignorant fanatical crowd, which accused Jean 
Calas, without a shred of evidence, simply 
because on the basis of hearsay it ascribed to 
Protestants a duty to kill their children if they 
intended to convert to Catholicism. This was 
supposedly the situation of the unfortunate 
son, Marc-Antoine Calas: in actual fact he 
committed suicide. 
Voltaire dissected out all the intricacies of 
this iniquitous business, and stirred up France 
and Europe. Though the press then existed 
 
 
THE STRANGER 
  
Everyone who turneth aside the judgement of the stranger is as 
though be turned aside the judgement of God. 
THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD. TREATISE OF CHAGIGAH, 5A   
only in an embryonic state (France had fewer 
than twelve newspapers), it is no exaggeration 
to speak of a media triumph; the role of the 
media was played by salons, clubs, cafés and 
private correspondence. The Calas affair to a 
large extent foreshadowed the Dreyfus case at 
the end of the nineteenth century: a nation 
-was aroused by the decision of an ordinary 
tribunal which was regarded as an injustice. 
Voltaire won over all liberal-minded people 
in France, even those in circles close to the 
Court, in favour of a formal review of the ver- 
dict and the payment of compensation to the 
innocent victim’s family, and thus gained public 
acceptance of three points: that judges can make 
mistakes; when they do, they must unequivo- 
cally admit as much and take the consequences; 
if a minority is not respected, offenders are 
likely to be sought first among its ranks. 
Though no one religion had a monopoly of 
fanaticism, the ultimate in intolerance (poli- 
tical ideologies did not yet exist), after Louis 
XIV’s decision to deprive Protestants of all 
their rights, including that of possessing a civic 
status, Voltaire came to regard France as fer- 
tile ground for all the abuses of fanaticism. 
1. Beheaded at Abbeville in 
1766 for an “impious crime”, 
though no evidence of it 
was ever adduced. 15

## [Page 16](091412engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

16 
A page of Sebastian 
Miinster's Cosmographia 
universalis (1544) illustrated 
with a portrait of Erasmus. 
The Cosmographia, which put 
forward original ideas 
about the Earth's physical 
features, was censored 
by the Inquisition. 
  
 
  
  
     
  
    
  
407 
menclaturi fciens omitto 
quos ipfe nolti, Kiaque— 
  
Frenruetemeermenil. La 
len. Augufti, anno a Chri 
to fernatore natg M. Dh 
2 
bilitTig (pag 
   
   
   
  
    
 
   
   
Qrai 
is. t - 
us 
  
of Sad i it 
ibu 
Blord 
rd non 
    
ad.   
He recalled that between 1745 and 1762 
eight Protestant pastors had been hanged for 
preaching according to their faith, and hun- 
dreds of their followers sent to the hulks. 
This situation, according to him, could not 
arise in England, Germany or Holland, for in 
those countries religious pluralism existed 
and members of different faiths could “live as 
brothers and contribute equally to the good 
of society”. Doubtless Voltaire painted a 
somewhat idealized picture of what went on 
in those countries as regards freedom of 
belief, but he did so in order to condemn the 
laws in France, where “abuse of the most 
holy religion has produced a great crime [the 
"Calas affair]”. Hence it is “important for the 
human race to consider whether religion 
should be charitable or barbaric.” 
A UNIVERSAL VALUE 
AND VIRTUE 
In order to denounce fanaticism, which runs 


### 91402: Voltaire, crusader against tyranny

counter to the spirit of the Gospels, the 
writer presented a brief survey of religious 
customs in Europe and Asia since Antiquity. 
According to Voltaire, neither the Greeks 
nor the Romans persecuted individuals on 
the grounds that their beliefs offended the 
local deities. The Athenians even took tol- 
erance to the point of building an altar dedi- 
cated to foreign gods they were unac- 
quainted with; and the Romans very wisely 
held the view that it was for the gods them- 
selves to worry about offences committed 
against them. If Christians were martyred in 
the empire, it was not on account of their 
beliefs, but because they disturbed public 
order. 
Voltaire saw evidence of this desire to let 
people believe what they wished even in the 
Old Testament. Not greatly enamoured of 
the Hebrews of the Bible, nor yet of the 
ancient Egyptians, he nevertheless saw “rays 
of universal tolerance” shining out through 
the story of Moses’s followers. The Emper- 
ors of China and Japan also tolerated a 
variety of beliefs when this did not endanger 
the state. “Go to India”, he wrote; “or Persia, 
or Tartary, and you will see there the same 
tolerance and the same serenity.” 
He did not attack any religion, for 
“wherever there is an established society, a 
religion is necessary; the laws guard against 
known crimes and religion against secret 
ones.” But religion, essentially benign itself, 
is corrupted by superstition and tolerance. 
“Superstition is to religion what astrology is 
to astronomy—the very foolish daughter of a 
very wise mother.” 
To combat superstition and intolerance is 
the task of reason, the reason that “daily 
spreads in France, into the merchants’ shops 
and the noblemen’s houses;” it is for reason 
to demonstrate the inanity of ridiculous,

## [Page 17](091412engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

monstrous practices such as the Inquisi- 
tion—whose very name, the Abbé Grégoire 
was later to say, is an offence against the 
Gospel—forced or bought conversions, and 
autos-da-fé. 
The author of the Traité sur la tolérance 
regarded the review of the Calas trial as a 
victory for philosophy, and this can hardly 
be denied. He says that all beliefs should 
have an opportunity to express themselves 
“It would be foolish to claim to bring all 
men to think in the same way about meta- 
physics. It would be far easier to subjugate 
the entire universe by force of arms than to 
subjugate the minds of every dweller in a 
single town.” In his conception of tolerance 
he goes further than John Locke, who in his 
famous 1690 letter excluded papists and 
atheists from it; but he still does not present 
a materialist or atheist view. For him 
atheism, far from being synonymous with 
tolerance, can on the contrary drift into 
fanaticism like any religion. “A rational 
atheist who was fiery and powerful,” he 
wrote, “would be just as disastrous as a 
bloodthirsty superstitious man.” 
Tolerance, the antithesis of fanaticism, is 
respect for others in their difference from 
oneself. Paul Valéry was surely right to say 
that it “can only be conceived, and make its 
way into law and customs, in an advanced 
age, when people have gradually enriched 
and enfeebled themselves by the interchange 
of their differences.” 
For Voltaire, this wvalue/virtue also 
contains an element of gentleness and bene- 
volence, and he often uses the word “indul- 


### 91402: Voltaire, crusader against tyranny

gent” to mean tolerant. “What is needed to 
be happy in the next life is to be just. To be 
happy in this one, insofar as the poverty of 
our nature permits, what is needed . . . is to 
be indulgent.” 
According to him, the fight against intol- 
erance requires recourse to irony and 
S,.cne rad. eS Epmenicd on Outi fo A dain 8 v; 
humour, in order to bring out its grotesque 
inconsistencies. Thus we need to demonstrate 
the absurdity of condemning those whose 
opinions differ from ours to punishment in 
the next world, whilst having to maintain 
courteous relations with these same people 
for purposes of living together. “Fanaticism 
is not merely horrible, it is absurd.” 
In 1787, twenty-four years after the 
publication of the Traité sur la tolérance, 
Louis XVI signed the Edict of Toleration, 
which gave Protestants a civic status which at 
last allowed them to get married, make wills 
and inherit, like the rest of his subjects. This 
was only a modest step forward, but in the 
right direction. Voltaire had cleared the way. 
His aim, however, was not merely to enable 
a category of French citizens to be given 
back the rights they had been unjustly 
deprived of: he claimed tolerance as a uni- 
versal value. No people on Earth, no indivi- 
dual, should suffer for lack of it. His words 
are uncompromising: “I say to you that we 
must regard all men as our brothers. What, a 
Turk my brother? A Chinaman my brother? 
A Jew? A Siamese? Yes, without doubt: are 
we not all children of the same Father, and 
creatures of the same God? But these peoples 
despise us, and call us idolators! Well, I shall 
say to them that they are quite wrong.” 
Eleven years after the writer’s death, 
freedom of thought and expression, for 
whose recognition he had battled so hard, 
were on 26 August 1789 proclaimed to the 
world by the National Constituent 
Assembly in the Declaration of the Rights of 
Man and of the Citizen. In Articles 10 and 11 
of this Declaration, which claimed to be uni- 
versal, tolerance in the widest sense of the 
term at last found its philosophical and legal 
basis—although the word itself was not used. 
All that remained was for people to show 
tolerance to their fellows in daily life. But 
will this struggle ever be won? um) 
Nh 
we Viale 
> . 
od EY La 
  
TRAITE 
SUR LA 
TOLERANCE, 
  
MDCC LX 
B 2: 1%44, 
  
     
Title page of the first edition 
of Voltaire’s celebrated work, 
published in 1763. 
  
Below, one of the last 
thoughts written down by 
Voltaire, a few months 
before his death in 1778: 
“1 die worshipping God, 
loving my friends, hating not 
my enemies and detesting 
superstition.” 

## [Page 18](091412engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 91404: Gandhi and the struggle for non-violence

Gandhi 
and the struggle 
for non-violence 
BY RAMIN JAHANBEGLOO 
18 
T is impossible to discuss the subject of 
tolerance today without referring to the 
thought and action of Mohandas Karam- 
chand Gandhi (1869-1948), known to the 
world as Mahatma (“great soul”). Yet the 
word tolerance appears only rarely in his 
works even though his whole life proved him 
to be a man of exemplary tolerance. This 
paradox is an indication of the difficulty of the 
concept. 
According to Gandhi, to affirm one’s tol- 
erance is to establish a hierarchy between 
one’s own position and that of others. “I do 
not like the word tolerance”, he wrote in a 
letter to his followers in 1930 while he was 
imprisoned at Yeravda Mandir, “but could not 
think of a better one. Tolerance may imply a 
gratuitous assumption of the inferiority of 
other faiths to one’s own, whereas ahimsa 
[non-violence] teaches us to entertain the same 
respect for the religious faiths of others as we 
accord to our own, thus admitting the imper- 
fection of the latter. This admission will read- 
ily be made by a seeker of Truth, who follows 
the law of love. 
“If we had attained the full vision of truth, 
we would no longer be mere seekers, but 
would have become one with God, for Truth is 
God. But being only seekers, we prosecute our 
quest, and are conscious of our imperfection.” 
Here we touch on one of the basic prin- 
ciples of Gandhi’s philosophy. We are in an 
area of spiritual theory in which the very 
concept of tolerance is situated, not in relation 
to a given political or religious context, but in 
relation to a belief in the liberty of human 
 
conscience. Gandhi demands more than just 
respect for another human being; he seeks to 
encourage the quest for truth, whilst being 
convinced that this quest is inseparable from 
obedience to the law of love. Thus, for 
Gandhi, it is impossible to evoke the concept 
of tolerance without affirming the notion of 
truth. This is a crucial point, but it is even 
more important to understand that truth can 
only be respected through the path of non- 
violence. 
The terms “non-violence” and “truth” are so 
closely allied as to be virtually interchangeable. 
“Ahimsa and truth”, wrote Gandhi, “are so 
intertwined that it is practically impossible to 
disentangle and separate them. They are like the

## [Page 19](091412engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 91404: Gandhi and the struggle for non-violence

The champion of 
non-violence towards 
the end of his life, in the 
midst of a crowd of 
respectful admirers. 
two sides of a coin, or rather a smooth un- 
stamped metallic disc. Who can say which side 
is the obverse and which the reverse? 
“Nevertheless, abimsa is the means; Truth 
is the end. Means to be means must always be 
within our reach, and so abimsa is our 
supreme duty. If we take care of the means, 
we are bound to reach the end sooner or later. 
When once we have grasped this point, final 
victory is beyond question.” 
THE SEED AND THE TREE 
Gandhi does not seek to establish a rational 
explanation of the world on the basis of the 
notion of truth, or to favour a traditional line 
of thought. “Truth resides in every human 
heart”, he declares, “and one has to search for 
it there. . . . But no one has a right to coerce 
others to act according to his own view of 
truth.” It is, therefore, impossible to separate 
religious life from political life, as is shown by 
the way in which Gandhi organized his 
struggle both against British repression and 
against the injustice done to the untouchables 
by the Indian caste system. Following the 
Socratic example, Gandhi bravely confronted 
the spirit of tyranny and intolerance of his 
contemporaries with no other weapons than 
fasting and prayer. “The only tyrant I accept 
is the ‘still small voice’ within me, And even 
though I have to face the prospect of a 19

## [Page 20](091412engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 91404: Gandhi and the struggle for non-violence

20 
Gandhi and members of 
his staff during the years 
he spent as a lawyer in 
South Africa (1893-1914). 
minority of one, I humbly believe I have the 
courage to be in such a hopeless minority.” 
By acung on the basis of these principles, 
the Mahatma rid himself of all political reser- 
vations. On the contrary, the standpoint he 
adopted aimed to ensure the victory of the 
humanitarian approach over the political 
approach, which seeks to put ideological 
values before the values of the community. 
His unwavering concern for truth and for the 
equality of all citizens led him to revolt against 
tricks and lies which he judged to be ignoble 
means to noble ends. “Your belief that there is 
no connection between the means and the 
ends 1s a great mistake”, he wrote. “Through 
that mistake even men who have been con- 
sidered religious have committed grievous 
crimes. Your reasoning is the same as saying 
that we can get a rose through planting a 
noxious weed. . . . The means may be likened 
to a seed, the end to a tree; and there is just the 
same inviolable connection between the means 
and the end as there is between the seed and 
the tree.” 
And he continued: “I am more concerned 
with preventing the brutalization of human 
nature than with the prevention of the suffer- 
ings of my own people. I know that people 
who voluntarily undergo a course of suffering 
raise themselves and the whole of humanity; 
but I also know that people who become bru- 
talized in their desperate efforts to get victory 
   
BS 4 py 
: a 
' 
~ “yg 8 N 1 A 
» | 
43 A ND WEA hy 
g fl ATTO|RNEY. | 
     
   
      
N ¥ i 
ne 
* us
y     Ti ‘ 
  
   
|] 
RAMIN JAHANBEGLOO, 
Iranian philosopher, is a spe- 
cialist on Mahatma Gandhi, 
about whose political thinking 
he is currently writing a book. 
Among his published works 
are Hegel and the French 
Revolution and Conversations 
with Isaiah Berlin (Peter 
Halban, London 1991). As a 
journalist, he is a frequent 
contributor to the French 
journals Esprit and Etudes.

## [Page 21](091412engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 91404: Gandhi and the struggle for non-violence

over their opponents or to exploit weaker 
nations or weaker men, not only drag down 
themselves but mankind also.” 
In other words, the “political virtue” of 
non-violence (which Gandhi sees as the ulti- 
mate virtue) stems from the fact that it unites 
the members of the community by stressing 
the role of the individual and by underlining 
the decisive effect of that catharsis, or purifica- 
tion, that we must exercise upon our bodies 
and our minds. Thus our capacity to play a 
part in public affairs and to judge what is just 
and what is unjust is entirely dependent upon 
the individual and collective practice of non- 
violence. The finest lesson we can learn from 
the philosophy of Gandhi is that, for the indi- 
vidual and the community, policies that make 
power the criterion of truth can only lead to 
disastrous consequences. 
THE WORLDWIDE 
INFLUENCE OF GANDHI 
Fully aware of the dangers of political power 
but also of the democratic duty he had to fulfil 
in India, Gandhi declared: “If 1 seem to take 
 
  
THE CONFESSION OF THE DECEASED 
I have not deprived the orphan of his property. 
I have not done what the gods detest. 
I have not calumniated a servant to his master. 
I have not caused pain. 
_ I have not made suffering for anyone. . .. 
I have not made to weep. 
I have not killed. 
I have not commanded to kill. 
THE BOOK OF THE DEAD, ANCIENT EGYPT   21

## [Page 22](091412engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

1. Literally, holding 
onto truth, Name given by 
Gandhi to the technique 
of non-violent resistance as 
practised by him and 
under his guidance. Editor 
Martin Luther King on his 
return to the United States 
after receiving the Nobel 
Peace Prize (1964). 
part in politics, it is only because politics 
encircle us today like the coil of a snake from 
which one cannot get out, no matter how 
much one tries. I wish, therefore, to wrestle 
with the snake. . . . My work will be finished, 
if I succeed in carrying conviction to the 
human family that every man or woman, 


### 91404: Gandhi and the struggle for non-violence

however weak in body, 1s the guardian of his 
or her self-respect and liberty. This defence 
avails, even though the whole world may be 
against the individual resister.” 
The influence of Gandhi's teachings has 
been felt throughout the world. Martin Luther 
King’s struggle for the rights of black Ameri- 
cans is a particularly notable example of it. 
From the Montgomery bus boycott in 1955 to 
the march on Washington in 1963, King 
adopted Gandhi’s non-violent techniques in 
all his protest actions. 
Martin Luther King described Gandhi’s 
influence in his book Strength to Love: “The 
whole Gandhian concept of satyagraha' was 
profoundly significant for me. As I delved 
deeper into the philosophy of Gandhi, my 
scepticism concerning the power of love 
gradually diminished, and I came to see for 
the first time that the Christian doctrine of 
love, operating through the Gandhian 
method of non-violence, is one of the most 
potent weapons available to an oppressed 
people in their struggle for freedom.” He 
added: “If humanity is to progress, Gandhi 
is inescapable.” 
In 1968, the year of his death, these pro- 
phetic words of Martin Luther King were 
borne out in the non-violent resistance of the 
people of Czechoslovakia to the Soviet inva- 
sion. From then on, non-violence was insepa- 
rably linked to the various political and intel- 
lectual movements that for ten years bubbled 
up in the Eastern countries. As Lech Walesa 
declared in the 1980s, when he headed the 
Polish Solidarity trade union whose strikes 
brought about the downfall of the totalitarian 
régime in his country: “The only way we can 
oppose violence is to refuse to use it our- 
selves. . . . We have no other weapons than 
truth and faith.” 
The people of the Philippines also adopted 
the non-violent option in 1986 in their cam- 
paign of civil disobedience against dictatorial 
rule. Since then, various forms of non-violent 
action in Latin America, South Africa and the 
Middle East have shown the topicality and the 
relevance of the Gandhian heritage in the fight 
for freedom and justice. 
 

## [Page 23](091412engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  BALA 
THE UNESCO COURIER - 
    
    
  
   
  
EDITORIAL 


### 91405: Greenwatch: towards a new world ecological order?

Towards a new world ecological order? 
Tn this month of June 1992, the Earth is notquiteas round as usual, for it has sprouted a summit 
in Rio de Janeiro which is by now probably even more famous than that city’s other peak, the Sugar- 
loaf Mountain. From 3 to 14 June, 166 heads of state and government and thousands of delegates 
will be in Rio, gathered round the bedside of our ailing planet. We have treated the Earth very badly. 
A Pollution has taken a heavy toll, what with the greenhouse effect and the ensuing risk of rising 
sea-levels, the hole in the ozone layer and nuclear hazards. 
Pricking people's consciences is a painful process. A heavy price has to be paid for industrial growth 
and the provision of modern amenities. How are we going to foot the bill? Will the main beneficia- 
ries of these forms of progress be prepared to make the necessary sacrifices 2 And will those who have 
hitherto been left out at last begin to reap the benefits or will they be penalized for appearing on the 
scene too late? The preparatory meeting for the Rio Summit, held in New York, led to agreement on 
the draft of an Earth Charter and on Agenda 21, defining sustainable development for the coming 
century, from the protection of forests to the management of toxic wastes. Yet, even if there is a majo- 
rity in favour of the broad principles, how will it be possible to reconcile all the points of view? 
We need only take one example that is symptomatic of the situation. The people living in the North 
rightly denounce the damage caused by CFCs, chemical compounds widely used in refrigeration sys- 
tems, and are demanding—again quite rightly from a strictly environmental standpoint —that they 
should be ba:ined. But what about the people in the South? How will they react to the prospect of 
being denied this modern amenity just when they thought they would be about to enjoy its benefits? 
It has been estimated that it will cost $ 125 billion a year to implement the resolutions set forth in 
Agenda 21. Again, who is going to foot the bill? Whether the Rio Summit turns out to be a display of 
psychological shadow-boxing, an unqualified success or simply a point of departure, the fact 
remains that it is the first of its kind. It will at least have had the virtue of taking place. 
  
JUNE 1992 
E
e
e
,
 
. 
A 
w
e
e
d
 
.
 
In this issue the 
usual architecture of the 
Unesco Courier has 
been modified, with the 
introduction of a 
new section entitled 
Greenwatch which 
appears in addition to the 
main theme and the 
regular features. 
Greenwatch is a kind of 
magazine within the 
magazine. From its 
position on the eight cen- 
tral pages it surveys, 
as its title suggests, current 
developments relating 
to aworld issue of 
paramount importance 
—the environment 
and its survival. Its first 
appearance coincides with 
the Earth Summit being 
held by the United Nations 
in Rio de Janeiro, a 
conference of crucial 
importance for the planet. 
Like the main body of 
the magazine, Greenwatch 
contains an interview 
(in this case with a leading 
specialist in ecology) and a 
round-up of short news 
items, as well as a longer 
article on a major 
environmental issue (the 
depletion of the ozone 
layer) and an extract from 
a classic text evoking the 
relationship between 
humankind and nature 
(the story of the flood from 
the Gilgamesh Epic of 
3,500 years ago) m

## [Page 24](091412engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 91405: Greenwatch: towards a new world ecological order?

24 
World 
 
  
v aie a 
- TLS wn oo 
i Te 
Pio Aen = ro 
Ne ATE Re 
rn 
* 
oJ or - 
RW ty 
: Xx = 3 
s wes KY, 
. a g 
" 5 er 
(ILE EARTIL SUMMIT 
The United Nations Conference 
on Environment and Develop- 
ment, which is being held this 
month in Rio de Janeiro, will be 
seeking to spell out, twenty years 
after the Stockholm Conference, 
the measures that need to be 
taken to protect the Earth, the 
only “living” planet of the solar 
system. In addition to the plena- 
ry sessions to which Heads of 
State have been invited, there will 
be more than 250 meetings, semi- 
nars, workshops, lectures and 
other events, which some 10,000 
people are expected to attend. 
One particularly important venue 
will be the International Forum of 
Non-governmental Organiza- 
tions, since the NGOs, with their 
flexible working methods, are 
eminently suited to be partners in 
furthering the development pro- 
cess and ensuring the protection 
of nature. Among the lecture 
series that are being held, one will 
set out to compare the methods 
of sustainable natural resource 
management used by indigenous 
peoples. | 
 
Bookshelf 
UNDERSTANDING DESERTIFICATION 
eserts occupy about one fifth of the Earth's land surface, an area of approximately 30 million square 
kilometres. They are natural creations which have always existed, but today many of them are 
spreading. This process of “desertification” results largely from human activities which cause 
degradation of the land, reduce its fertility and make it unfit even for grazing, Desertification affects 
certain regions in the developed countries (USA, Canada, Australia), but itis most acute in the 
  
developing countries (in the Sahel, in South America and in the Mediterranean basin, as well as in 
India, Pakistan and Mexico). The problem has been aggravated in these areas by the pressures of rapid 
demographic growth. 
Desertification, its causes, effects and possible ways of combating it are the subject of a “Teaching 
Module on Desertification’, by C. Souchon and J.P. Deleage, published by UnEsco and the United 
Nations Environment Programme as No. 16 in their Environmental Education Series (available in 
French and Spanish only). The example taken is the Sahel. The main themes covered include: The 
interactions of peoples with their environment; water; soils and crops; cattle-raising and grazing-land 
management; energy, firewood and deforestation; general problems of planning and management. 
The booklet proposes a number of practical exercises to increase pupils’ awareness of the state of 
the environment in their region. In addition to educators and their pupils, the booklet also makes a 
useful working tool for all those with an interest in the Sahel, such as technical assistance personnel 
and members of non-governmental organizations. From it they can learn how to make a filter for 
drinking water or a stove that makes more efficient use of fuel, how to combat soil erosion, and how 
to carry out a reforestation project (which species of tree to select, etc). There is also a bibliography 
and alist of useful addresses. n   
  
PROTECTING 
[IIE DJA FOREST 
The luxuriant Dja Forest, in sou- 
thern Cameroon, figures on UNEs- 
co’s World Heritage List as a natural 
site of outstanding beauty and is 
also a part of UnNesco’s Man and the 
Biosphere (MAB) Programme net- 
work of Biosphere Reserves. A vir- 
tually intact example of a primary 
tropical forest, Dja is extraordinari- 
ly rich in flora and fauna. A single 
tree 30 to 40 metres high can be 
home to as many as a thousand dif- 
ferent species of insect, and the 
forest’s streams and rivers support 
some 120 species of fish. Hippopo- 
tami, elephants and rare dwarf 
chimpanzees are to be found in the 
Dja Forest alongside gorillas, snakes 
and a bird population so varied that 
not all its species have yet been 
identified and logged. The Dja 
Forest is the site of a pilot project 
whose objective is to help the 
peoples who live there— including 
Pygmies —to exploit the forest’s 
resources in a rational and sustain- 
able manner and to combat poach- 
ing, which is now reaching massive 
proportions. n 
  
  
WILD BIRDS GROUNDED 
Two airlines, KLM and Garuda, 
have decided that they will no long- 
er transport wild birds to the 
United States. This follows bans 
on this traffic imposed earlier by 
Lufthansa and three US airlines. 
In 1989, 87,300 wild birds were 
loaded by these six airlines for 
transportation to the United States. 
On arrival, 2,430 of the birds were 
found to be dead. "

## [Page 25](091412engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 91405: Greenwatch: towards a new world ecological order?

  
 
TIGERS AND [NY FLOURISH 
Of the 37 species of wild felines, 22 
are endangered to varying degrees, 
according to the World Wide Fund 
for Nature (formerly the World 
wildlife Fund). Agriculture, forest 
exploitation and urbanization are 
gradually depriving them of the spa- 
cious habitats they need. With this in 
mind, the Indian Government and 
the WWF have carried out a vast 
joint campaign for the protection 
of tigers as a result of which India’s 
tiger population has more than dou- 
bled in fourteen years. Similar 
results have been achieved with the 
lynx which, despite protests from 
sheep-raisers on whose flocks the 
lynx preys, has been reintroduced in 
several European countries. n 
  
PRRp— JL SE A EE 
US RACES (55 BILLIOY- 
DOLLAR BILL FOR ENVIRON 
METAL PROTECTION 
The cost of environmental protection 
programmes in the United States is 
expected to rise to over $185 billion by the 
year 2000, according to projections made 
by the US Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA). Over the past twenty years 
the cost of programmes for the protec- 
tion of air, water and the terrestrial envi- 
ronment has almost quadrupled, rising 
from $30billionin 1972 to $115 billion in 
1990 (equivalent to 2.1% of Gross Natio- 
nal Product). Ofthe overall cost the Fed- 
eral Government furnishes 11%, the 
States 3.5%, the municipal authorities 
22.5% and the private sector 63%. m 
WEARS ermine a a mwa arn ge mmm tas mamma am 
TIE GREEN ILLS OF BURUNDI 
The thousand hills of Burundi, once ravaged and laid bare by deforestation, are 
green once more. Staff of the French Tropical Forest Technical Centre have suc- 
cessfully carried out a number of conservation actions. They have taken measures 
to protect the last remaining stretch of primary forest on the Nile/Zaire watershed, 
which is the habitat of a flourishing chimpanzee population and a unique pool 
of genetic diversity. The project began with a vast state reforestation programme, 
the encouragement of smaller, community tree-planting schemes, and the plant- 
ing by private individuals of small copses and anti-erosion hedges. It was not until 
soil and forest degradation had reached an alarming level that the local popula- 
tion prepared to do battle against erosion and re-plant trees. A strong sense of envi- 
ronmental awareness was finally aroused and in the last ten years fifty million trees 
(about one hundred trees per family) have been grown in Burundi. n 
  
iw vn a ah at. —— JNO. 
ISG BATTLES 
AAINST TOLLUTION 
Since 1980 the city of Beijing has 
been involved in a vast clean-up op- 
eration. At night, an impressive fleet 
of water tankers invades the streets of 
the city, crewed by municipal work- 
ers who wash the deserted avenues 
and spray the trees that line them. 
By day, other teams sweep the 
streets, calmly indifferent to the tidal 
wave of cyclists that swirls around 
them. The clean-up campaign has 
included drives to reduce the num- 
bers of domestic animals, birds and 
flies, and the installation of a profu- 
sion of litter-bins and spittoons. 
Today, with the help of a $125-mil- 
lion loan from the World Bank and 
the International Development Asso- 
ciation, the clean-up campaign has 
taken on a new dimension. Work 
now planned includes the construc- 
tion of a 32-kilometre pipeline to 
feed an urban heating network in the 
western sector of the city; the setting 
up of a company to manage a new 
sewerage system; and the construc- 
tion of a 72-hectare waste disposal 
centre capable of handling 2,000 tons 
of waste a day. " 
few] a 
ei 8 
iR
EE
NW
AT
CH

## [Page 26](091412engo.pdf#page=26) 2

### 91445: Earth's ozone shield under threat

### 91405: Greenwatch: towards a new world ecological order?

26 
Dossier 
 
ARTY DAN 
he ozone layer, the tenuous 
layer of gas that surrounds our 
planet between twelve and 
forty-five kilometres above our 
heads, is being rapidly deplet- 
ed. Seasonally occurring holes 
have appeared in it over the 
Poles and, more recently, over 
the temperate regions of the northern 
hemisphere. The threat is a serious 
one since the ozone layer acts as a fil- 
ter that traps almost all in-coming 
ultraviolet radiation, which is harmful 
to all living organisms—humans, ani- 
mals and plants. 
Even though the ozone layer is some 
twenty-five kilometres thick, the 
atmosphere in it is very tenuous and 
the total amount of ozone, compared 
with other atmospheric gases, is quite 
small. If all of the ozone in a vertical 
column reaching up through the 
atmosphere were to be compressed 
to sea-level pressure, it would form a 
layer only a few millimetres thick. 
Monitoring 
and forecasting 
Ozone (chemical formula 03), from 
the Greek ozein, meaning “to smell”, 
consists of oxygen (0) which under 
the effect of solar radiation acquires a 
free atom of oxygen. Ozone is highly 
reactive to chlorine, hydrogen and 
nitrogen. Of these chlorine is the most 
The hole in the ozone layer was dis- 
covered in 1985 and became headline 
news. How serious is the problem and 
what is being done to solve it? 
dangerous since it is very stable and 
has averylong life. When they reach the 
stratosphere, chlorine atoms attach 
themselves to the ozone molecules and 
destroy them, with consequent reper- 
cussions on the quality of life on Earth. 
Detailed study of the ozone layer 
began comparatively recently, in 1930, 
the earliest observations being made 
by the English scientist Sydney Chap- 
man. These initial observations were 
BLD UNDER THAEAL 
taken up by the World Meteorologi- 
cal Organization (WMO) which estab- 
lished the Dobson Network consisting 
of one hundred observation stations. 
Since 1983, on the initiative of WMO 
and the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP), seven of these 
stations have been entrusted with the 
task of making long-term forecasts of 
the likely evolution of our precious 
shield. 
In 1958, the researchers who per- 
manently monitor the ozone content 
of the layer above the South Pole 
began to observe certain seasonal 
variations. From June there was a 
slight reduction in ozone content 
which reached a minimum in Octo- 
ber. In November there was a sudden 
increase in the ozone content. These 
fluctuations appeared to result from 
the natural phenomena of wind effects 
and temperature change. 
However, although the October 
minimum remained constant until 
1979, the total ozone content over the 
Pole was steadily diminishing until, in 
1985, public opinion was finally roused 
by reports of a “hole” in the ozone layer 
and observations were intensified. 
The culprits responsible for the hole 
had already been identified as being 
supersonic aircraft, such as Concorde, 
(although these have now been exo- 
nerated) and the notorious com- 
pounds known as chlorofluorocar- 
bons, or CFCs. Synthesized in 1928 by 
chemists working at General Motors in 
the United States, CFCs are com- 
pounds of atoms of chlorine and fluo- 
rine. Having the advantage of being 
non-flammable, non-toxic and non- 
corrosive, they came into widespread 
use in the 1950s. They are widely used 
in refrigerators (15%), air-conditio- 
ners (20%) and to make the “bubbles” 
in the foam plastic used, for example, 
in car seats and as insulation in buil- 
dings (24%). They are also used as 
propellants in aerosol sprays and as a 
cleansing solvent in the computer 
industry (24%). 
In 1989 they represented a market 
valued at over $1.5 billion and a labour 
force of 1.6 million. Of the twenty-five 
countries producing CFCs, the United 
States, France, the United Kingdom, 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Japan and Germany account for three- 
quarters of the total world production 
of some 1.2 million tons. 
The economic issues 
These figures give some idea of the 
importance of the economic interests 
that are at stake in any decision to ban 
the industrial use of CFCs. But, with 
CFCs incriminated by scientists, the 
question arose as to whether we were 
prepared to take the risk of seeing an 
increase in the number of cases of skin 
cancer, eye ailments such as cataract, 
or even a lowering of the human 
immune defence system, all effects 
that would follow further depletion of 
the ozone layer. Not only humans 
would be affected. So would repro- 
duction and growth of plant-life; phy- 
toplancton, the first link in the ocean 
food chain and an element vital to the 
survival of most marine species, would 
not be able to survive in the first two 
metres below the surface of the ocean. 
UNEP decided that something had 
tobe done, and in March 1985 it orga- 
nized the Conference of Plenipoten- 
tiaries on the Global Convention for

## [Page 27](091412engo.pdf#page=27) 2

### 91445: Earth's ozone shield under threat

### 91405: Greenwatch: towards a new world ecological order?

  
  
    
 
" 
. RA Seadoboheng seasasdeas 
the Protection of the Ozone Layer, the 
Vienna Convention as it has come tobe 
called, which was adopted by twenty- 
two countries. This was followed, in 
1987, by the signing by twenty-four 
industrialized countries of the Mon- 
treal Protocol on Substances that 
  
  
4 
1 
: 
  
  
their alarming statements? In Novem- 
ber 1991 the United States and sixteen 
European countries launched a vast 
project—the European Arctic Strato- 
spheric Ozone Experiment (EASOE). 
Scientists from almost every European 
country, as well as from Japan and the 
a——————— — 
. - - -ol oo . _ 
rT N— Ln 
: : . 
Ozone: 11 Jan 1:992— 
  
nl —— tito, J — 
million tons of volcanic gases into the 
atmosphere. 
Even if the entire world were to 
agree today to halt all production and 
use of CFCs, this would not provide 
an immediate solution to the problem. 
A single molecule of chlorine can des- 
Map of the northern hemisphere 
showing the distribution of 
stratospheric ozone on 11 January 
1992. Concentrations are 
colour-coded from blue (lowest } to 
red ( highest ). The map shows a 
large loss of ozone over the tropics, 
coinciding roughly with the 
plume from the volcanic eruption of 
Mt. Pinatubo ( Philippines) 
in June 1991. 
  
   
Deplete the Ozone Layer, the first world 
agreement aimed at halting the pro- 
duction of CFCs. As more evidence 
emerged concerning the seriousness of 
the threat, it became apparent that the 
protocol was not stringent enough and, 
year by year, its severity was increased 
untilin 1990 in London, seventy coun- 
tries agreed to stop all production of 
CFCs by the year 2000. Clearly it would 
be extremely costly for the richer coun- 
tries to produce satisfactory substi- 
tutes that would meet the require- 
ments of efficiency, safety and 
non-pollution; for the newly indus- 
trializing countries, however, the prob- 
lem would be even greater. 
Two German chemists from the Max 
Planck Institute, Frank Arnold and 
Paul Cruzen, maintain that there has 
always been a hole in the ozone layer 
over the Antarctic. The French volca- 
nologist Haroun Tazieff lays the blame 
on the rays of the sun which, being 
oblique at the Pole, bring an insuffi- 
cient amount of ultraviolet radiation to 
reconstitute the missing ozone veil. 
Have those who incriminate the 
CFCs sufficient evidence to support 
United States, participated. Funds for 
the project were provided by various 
.national research organizations and 
the European Economic Community. 
Observations previously made by 
satellites of the US National Aeronau- 
tics Space Administration (NASA) 
were completed by a series of land sta- 
tions, a ship, four aeroplanes, a num- 
ber of rockets and forty balloons each 
carrying from 20 to 500 kilograms of 
equipment. The objective was to mea- 
sure not only the ozone but also to 
detect the presence of CFCs, methane, 
nitrogen dioxide and other substances. 
The project ended in March 1992. 
A new culprit 
In December 1991, scientists work- 
ing on the project noted a depletion of 
the ozone layer over the Arctic. In 
February NASA announced that the 
* ozone layer was being depleted faster 
than had generally been anticipated 
and that it was also depleting over the 
northern hemisphere. The finger was 
pointed at another culprit, the Pina- 
tubo volcano in the Philippines, which 
erupted in June 1991 releasing twelve 
troy from 10,000 to 100,000 molecules 
of ozone. Furthermore, CFCs have a 
lifespan of between 75 and 400 years 
and they take ten years to reach the 
ozone layer. In other words, what we 
are experiencing now results from 
CFCs emitted ten years ago. 
Industrialists are now urgently 
searching for substitute products. 
Some, such as propane, are too dan- 
gerous because they are inflammable; 
others, the HCFCs, might prove to be 
toxic and to contribute to the green- 
house effect, i.e. to the process of glo- 
bal warming. Nevertheless, even if 
there is no denying that the atmos- 
phere is at present in a state of distur- 
bance, nobody can say that the situa- 
tion will not right itself, whether in the 
short or in the long term, especially if 
we ourselves lend a hand. n 
FRANCE BEQUETTE, a Franco-American journalist specia- 
lizing in environmental questions, has been involved since 
1985 in the WANAD-UNESCO training programme for Afri- 
can news-agency journalists. She has played a leading part 
in the preparation of this “Greenwatch” section. . 
ih 
EE
NW
AT
CH

## [Page 28](091412engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 91405: Greenwatch: towards a new world ecological order?

28 
Interview 
 
[AN il 
Several theories have been advanced 
to explain the formation of the Earth 
and the appearance of life upon it. 
Which of these theories do you sup- 
port? 
— As far as environmental con- 
siderations are concerned, interest 
focuses much more on questions 
about the origins of life on our 
planet. When did it first appear? 
What processes were and are in- 
volved in biological evolution? To 
what extent are we altering or dest- 
roying this tendency for species to 
evolve? For me these are the key 
questions. 
Life on Earth began about four 
thousand million years ago (give 
or take a few hundred million 
years), producing a rich heritage 
of marine and terrestrial species. 
Yet we are affecting the environ- 
ment to such a degree that we are 
quite capable of destroying in a few 
An environmentalist of international 
reputation, Francesco di Castri 
launched UNgsco’s Man and the Bio- 
sphere (MAB) Programme and is 
currently co-ordinator of all UNESCO's 
environment programmes. Published 
heres thefirst part of a long interview. 
hours the fruit of several million 
years of evolution. 
Such destruction is irreversible. 
We can rebuild a city and even, 
sometimes, an ancient monument, 
butit is absolutely impossible for us 
to replace an extinct species. How- 
ever, we should not succumb to 
sentimental dreaming; the disap- 
pearance of a species is a perfectly 
normal phenomenon in the evolu- 
tionary history of the biosphere. 
Long before the spectacular extinc- 
tion of the dinosaurs, other species 
had disappeared. Tomorrow, yet 
others will disappear. 
Ih 
 
What is abnormal is not the 
extinction of species but the rate 
at which they are disappearing. 
According to some experts, we may 
be destroying as many as 50,000 
species a year. Under normal cir- 
cumstances it would have taken 
several thousand years for these 
species to become extinct. Apart 
from the abnormally high rate of 
extinctions, the problem lies in the 
fact that certain species thathave a 
key role to play are disappearing, 
not for biological reasons, but 
because of human activities. 
The objective is not, for some 
abstract reason, to attempt to pre- 
serve all species, but to keep those 
that have a vital role to play, in par- 
ticular those that are essential com- 
ponents in all biological areas— 
such as those species that 
contribute to the functioning of 
ecological systems and to the com- 
position of the atmosphere. 
Which species do you class as being of 
vital importance ? 
—To be able to answer your ques- 
tion with any precision, we would 
need to know one of the great un- 
knowns—the number of species 
the biosphere holds. Estimates 
range from around four million to 
thirty or forty million (the most 
likely figure) and on up to as many 
as one hundred million. At present 
we know of the existence of only a 
tiny proportion of species. As a 
Environmental 
education for 
women in Burkina 
Faso. 
result, many species appear and 
disappear without our even know- 
ing of their existence. 
Today, the words ecology and eco- 
system are on everybody’s lips. What 
exactly do they mean? 
— Ecology is the study of the inter- 
actions of living organisms. This 
includes the interaction of man 
with the physical environment as 
well as the interactions between 
the different physical environments 
themselves. It is not only the study 
of the effects the environment has 
on living organisms, but also of the 
interactions of all the species. The 
human species is one among many 
others, but with this difference that 
   

## [Page 29](091412engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 91405: Greenwatch: towards a new world ecological order?

i 
\ J 
  
) 
# 
it has become capable of having a 
determining influence on the evo- 
lution of other species. Not only 
does itinfluence their numbers and 
alter the conditions of their habi- 
tats, it can also, through biotech- 
nology, create new species. This 
double power, biological and eco- 
logical, that one species can exer- 
cise on the evolution of the entire 
biosphere is a factor unprecedent- 
ed in the history of the Earth. 
The concept of an ecosystem is a 
rather artificial and changing one. 
The fact is that the definition of an 
ecosystem varies according to the 
approach adopted by the research- 
er who uses the term. For some 
people, their gardens, or a culture of 
microbes on a laboratory dish, are 
ecosystems; for others (more cor- 
rectly) a tropical forest is an eco- 
system. Others view the entire globe 
as a single ecosystem. The one fea- 
ture common to all ecosystems, 
however defined, is an internal flow 
of energy, of genetic information 
and, sometimes, of cultural in- 
fluences which pass from one of its 
components to the others. Thus 
ecosystems are complex systems 
that exist at different levels of orga- 
nization, from small population 
groups to the entire biosphere, 
including the atmosphere. 
What were the great landmarks in 
the awakening of awareness about eco- 
logical problems? 
— The basic concept of ecology 
had already emerged in the nine- 
teenth century, but it was looked 
upon primarily as an economic tool 
for increasing the productivity of 
ecosystems. “Agricultural ecology”, 
for example, aimed at increasing 
crop vield by improvement of the 
species cultivated. Thus the mean- 
ing given to the word ecology was 
almost the opposite of that which it 
has acquired today. 
Silent Spring, a book by the 
American author and biologist 
Rachel Carson, was astonishingly 
successful in arousing international 
awareness of the dangers of envi- 
ronmental pollution. Among other 
things, it revealed the drastic dimi- 
nution in the number of bird spe- 
cies caused by the use of pesticides. 
This awareness was accelerated 
by increasing pollution of urban 
air, which became almost un- 
breathable in some cities, such as 
Mexico City. 
When did this “ecological awak- 
ening” occur? 
—Rachel Carson’s book was 
published in 1962, but widespread 
awareness can be dated from the 
1970s. This decade marked a turn- 
ing-point, with the birth of the first 
ecological movements and with 
governments themselves beginning 
to react, as witness the convening 
by the United Nations of the first 
major conference on the environ- 
ment, at Stockholm in 1972. This 
trend has been accentuated by the 
discovery of holes in the ozone layer 
and of the greenhouse effect. It 
became apparent that humankind 
was not only destroying species but 
also the atmosphere that controls 
the climate. 
This enhanced awareness was 
not restricted to the industrialized 
 
  
Francesco di Castri is involved in a wide range of interna- 
tional activities related to the environment. President of the 
Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment of the 
International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), President 
of the International Union of Biological Sciences (IUBS), and 
aresearch director at the French National Centre of Scienti- 
fic Research (CNRS), he has written some 300 scientific articles 
and is the author or co-author of a dozen or so books, the 
most recent of which, Landscape Boundaries. Consequences 
for Biotic Diversity and Ecological Flows, was published ear- 
lier this year. On 25 March 1992, the United Nations Envi- 
ronment Programme (UNEP) awarded him its Global 500 
prize for actions and initiatives to promote the conservation 
of the environment and sustainable development, .   
countries, but extended also to the 
developing countries. The latter 
became aware that their own natu- 
ral resources—their forests and 
regions bordering deserts—were 
being destroyed, not only by their 
own demographic expansion but 
also by anarchic forms of develop- 
ment imposed from outside. The 
necessity to sell commercial pro- 
ducts to the industrialized coun- 
tries in order to acquire foreign cur- 
rency has had serious effects on 
their environment. 
These two aspects of ecological 
awareness—that triggered in the 
industrialized countries by pollu- 
tion and the imminent possibility of 
climate change and that aroused 
in the Third World by the disap- 
pearance of forests and the lower- 
ing of levels of public health—are 
today, I believe, merging to forma 
new “planetary ecological aware- 
ness”. It is now accepted that what 
happens in the North also affects 
what happens in the South, and 
vice versa. To be continued WB 
Interview by Serafin Garcia, journalist with UNESCO's 
Cffice of Public Information 
  
School of 
Rusty Fish, (1988). 
Sculpture in 
resin and oxidized 
metal by Sandra 
and Christian 
Gamby. 8m x 1.5m. 
PR
EE
NW
AT

## [Page 30](091412engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 91405: Greenwatch: towards a new world ecological order?

PR 
EE
NW
AT
CH
 Voices from the past 
[HE GREAT ELON 
he myth of the Great Flood is almost universal. Its many versions relate how the world was engulfed and 
humankind virtually annihilated by the deluge, which left only a few survivors belonging to the human 
race and different animal and plant species. Human sinfulness is one of the main causes of the Flood, 
but so too is the decrepitude of the world, for this is an ambivalent myth in which destruction paves the 
way for regeneration. 
On this page is the story of the Great Flood ast is related in the oldest extant epic in world history, the Gilgamesh 
epic that was composed over 3,500 years ago in Mesopotamia. 
4 
Stunned shock over Adad’s deeds overtook the heavens, 
and turned to blackness all that had been light... 
All day long the South Wind blew... 
blowing fast, submerging the mountain in water, 
overwhelming the people like an attack. 
No one could see his fellow 
they could not recognize each other in the torrent, 
The gods were frightened by the Flood, 
and retreated, ascending to the heaven of Anu. 
The gods were cowering like dogs, crouching by the outer wall. 
Ishtar shrieked like a woman in childbirth, 
  
  
Babylonian 
cylinder seal 
depicting an 
offering to a 
divinity. Syria, 
18th century BC. 
  
the sweet-voiced Mistress of the Gods wailed: 
“The olden days have turned to clay, 
because I said evil things in the Assembly of the Gods! 
How could I say evil things in the Assembly of the Gods, 
ordering a catastrophe to destroy my people ?! 
No sooner have I given birth to my dear people 
than they fill the sea like so many fish!” 
The gods — those of the Anunnaki—uwere weeping with her, 
the gods humbly sat weeping, sobbing with grief, 
their lips burning, parched with thirst. 
Six days and seven nights 
came the wind and flood, the storm flattening the land. 
When the seventh day arrived, the storm was pounding, 
the fiood was a war... 
The sea calmed, fell still, the whirlwind (and) flood stopped up. 
1looked around all day long— quiet had set in 
and all the human beings had turned to clay! 
The terrain was as flat as a roof, 
I opened a vent and fresh air (daylight ?) fell upon the side of my nose. 
Ifell to my knees and sat weeping, 
tears streaming down the side of my nose. 
1looked around for coastlines in the expanse of the sea, 
and at twelve leagues there emerged a region (of land). 
On Mt. Nimush the boat lodged firm, 
Mt. Nimush held the boat, allowing no sway. 
One day and a second Mt. Nimush held the boat, allowing no sway. 
Athird day, a fourth, Mt. Nimush held the boat, allowing no sway. 
Afifih day, a sixth, Mt, Nimush held the boat, allowing no sway. 
When a seventh day arrived 
I'sent forth a dove and released it. 
The dove went off; but came back to me. 
no perch was visible so it circled back to me. 
Isent forth a swallow and released if. 
The swallow went off, but came back to me; 
no perch was visible so it circled back to me. 
Isent forth a raven and released it. 
The raven went off, and saw the waters slither back. 
It eats, it scratches, it bobs, but does not circle back to me. 
Then Isent out everything in all directions and sacrificed (a sheep). 
I offered incense in front of the mountain-ziggurat. 
Seven and seven cult vessels I put in place, 
and (into the fire) underneath (or: into their bowls) I poured reeds, 
cedar and myrtle. 
The gods smelled the savour, 
the gods smelled the sweet savour, 
and collected like fiies over a (sheep) sacrifice. 
Just then Beletili arrived. 
Shelifted up the large flies (beads) which Anu had made for his 
enjoyment (?): 
“You gods, as surely as shall not forget this lapis lazuli around my neck 
may I be mindful of these days, and never forget them! 
The gods may come to the incense offering, 
but Enlil may not come to the incense offering, 
because without considering he brought about the Flood 
and consigned my people to annihilation.” 
The Epic of Gilgamesh, translated by Maureen Gallery Kovacs, Stanford 
University Press © 1985, 1989. 
Companions of the Sun 
An extract from the Gilgamesh epic features in an anthology of texts on the 
relationship between humankind and the natural world which is to be 
published (in French) by Unesco, Editions de la Découverte (Paris) and 
the Fondation pour le progres de 'Homme. Entitled Compagnons du 
soleil (“Companions of the Sun”), the 500-page anthology has been pre- 
pared under the general editorship of the noted African historian Joseph 
Ki-Zerbo, of Burkina Faso, in collaboration with Marie-Joséphe Beaud. The 
idea for the anthology came from the Vézelay Group, an international panel 
consisting of eight members, including Joseph Ki-Zerbo. 
Joseph Ki-Zerbo describes the anthology as a collection of “the fundamental 
or significant texts which, in the world’s different cultures, testify to the rela- 
tions between man and nature’. He adds that “the battle for the health of 
nature will not only be won by recourse to political or legal procedures, 
technical or fiscal remedies, or international agreements, however solemn, 
but by an awakening of society generated by inner motivations, which are 
sustained by the powerful sources of symbolism, ethics and aesthetics. With 
respect to nature, man must choose between symbiosis and suicide.” =»

## [Page 31](091412engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 91406: Black Africa's open societies

ack Africa’s open societies 
 
Painting on a wall 
in Dakar depicting a 
village meeting. 
OLERANCE has always held a pre- 
eminent position mn the thought of many 
African peoples. In West Africa, for 
example, it is the fundamental principle on 
which the entire social life of the Senegambian 
region is built, governing the interaction be- 
tween individuals and ethnic groups as well as 
international relations. 
Nothing illustrates this better than the cen- 
tral place the concept of peace occupies in the 
region’s moral thinking. The Wolof saying, 
“Ci Jaam la yeep xeej”, which signifies that 
peace bears innumerable promises, implies that 
peace is the necessary precondition for social 
stability, political equilibrium, economic pros- 
perity and moral and material progress. 
Even before the experience of the slave 
trade and colonial oppression, the aspiration 
for peace was a deeply-felt need in a society 
exposed for centuries of its long history to the 
vicissitudes of wars fought in the name of 
conquest or in defence of local aristocracies. It 
has left its mark on the most anodyne details 
of daily life. When two people meet, one says 
as a greeting, “Are you at peace?” “Nothing 
BY IBA DER THIAM 
but peace,” the other replies, as if the harmony 
born of universal accord, whatever the philo- 
sophical, religious or moral starting-points or 
choices of the people involved, could bring an 
inner calm and sense of hope more valuable 
than anything else life has to offer. 
The same leitmotif of an aspiration for 
peace and security reappears in the prayer 
offered by each family to call down God’s 
blessings on its members and on all things. In 
the words of one traditional Guinean suppli- 
cation, “Let peace reign in the world! May the 
pot and the calabash not fall out! Let the 
beasts live in harmony! May every bad word 
and unbecoming thought be rooted out and 
packed off to the back of beyond, to the 
depths of the virgin forest!” 
As the principal element regulating rela- 
tions between people and between communi- 
ties, tolerance is the imperative that governs all 
social life. In some African societies it means 
refusing to mistrust other people and rejecting 
both fear and preconceptions in dealing with 
whatever is new, unknown, unusual or out of 
the normal pattern. 
 

## [Page 32](091412engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 91406: Black Africa's open societies

32 
This ivory mask 
with cowrie-shell eyes is 
a product of the expressive 
artistic tradition of the 
Lega (or Balega) people of 
the Congo. 
| 
IBA DER THIAM, 
Senegalese historian, politi- 
cian and diplomat, is involved 
in a wide range of activities 
both in his own country 
and internationally. A former 
Minister of Education of 
Senegal (1983-1988) and 
member of UNESCO'S : 
Executive Board (1978-1983); 
he is the author of a number 
of books on history and 
civics, including Histoire du 
mouvement syndical africain 
1790-1929 (Paris, 1991), 
and of many articles. He is 
also co-editor of the two 
volumes of Unesco’s History 
of Mankind: Cultural 
and Scientific Development, 
covering the 19th and 
20th centuries. 
  
 
THE HUMAN DIMENSION 
Professor Cheikh Anta Diop suggested that 
in the Cayor region of Senegal the election of 
the king was a traditional perquisite of what 
he called the “governing council”. All the 
social groups that made up the nation were 
represented in this institution. The aim was 
not merely to make the body representative 
but also to encourage collegial participation 
and friendly social relations in an atmosphere 
of mutual tolerance and respect. 
Although the diawerigne m’boul, the 
officer presiding over the council, was always 
chosen from among the geer or aristocracy, 
the lamane diamatil, the batalonpe ndiob and 
the badie gateigne, all of whom were gover- 
nors of important provinces as well as council 
members, had to come from the gmegno, the 
ranks of the people of caste, while the diawe- 
rigne boule represented the house-slaves. 
For traditional societies of this sort, 
humankind may be one in essence but it is 
nonetheless diverse in its ways of living and 
thinking and in the manner in which its 
constituent groups come to terms with them- 
selves and other peoples. Consequently they 
made the nitt or human being their principal 
frame of reference. This human essence was 
seen as a generic concept, independent of time 
and place, the supreme embodiment of the 
divine presence on Earth. Stripped of all 
moral, philosophical or political connota- 
tions, it became a sublimated ideal to which 
everyone owed consideration and deference. 
It 1s in this light that the treatment of 
strangers in some African societies must be 
considered. Newcomers are welcomed with 
kindliness and generosity, no matter what 
language they speak or what their sex, age, 
religion or social or political condition may 
be, for they are human beings first and fore- 
most. As such, they have a right to food and 
shelter. Their person, goods and health will 
be protected, and they will be given a decent 
burial if they die. 
In some Wolof communities, it is quite 
common for the head of a family to give up 
his own house and bed, or that of his wives or 
children, to strangers, without giving a 
thought to his own state of health. Among 
the Bassari, custom dictates that the tribal 
chief may even graciously put a female com- 
panion at the newcomer’s disposal, in the 
hope that the possible seed sown by their 
relationship may revivify and strengthen the 
community.

## [Page 33](091412engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 91406: Black Africa's open societies

  
THE SECRET OF 
  
ting oneself and in loving others like oneself”. 
Wisbpom 
The Master said: “My doctrine amounts to one single thing 
that encompasses everything”. Tseng tseu replied: “Indeed”. When 
the Master had withdrawn, his disciples asked what be had 
meant. Tseng tsen replied: “All our Master's wisdom lies in perfec- 
ANALECTS, CONFUCIUS (5512-479? BC), CHINA   
Following this logic, the differences be- 
tween peoples, far from being stressed as bar- 
riers separating humankind, are minimized to 
such an extent that they finally lose much or 
all of their meaning and their divisiveness, 
and are blurred and blunted until they 
become harmless. Integration of this sort 
involves not a denial of the foreigner’s iden- 
tity—and here I have in mind those insidious 
processes of assimilation that are really more 
like mutilation—but a profound and freely 
accepted awareness of the symbiotic comple- 
mentarity linking the individual to other 
people. Unbreakable bonds are forged in this 
fusing of essences. 
RENEWING THE TRADITION 
This was the state of mind in which Africa, 
from the dawn of history, opened itself to 
the outside world. From the time of Queen 
Hatshepsut’s expedition from her native 
Egypt to the land of Punt in the years be- 
tween 1493 and 1490 BC until the nine- 
teenth-century explorers, there is no lack of 
witnesses to the African spirit of tolerance 
and unfailing hospitality. 
It was as a result of the prevailing peace 
that Habib ben Unaida and al-Fazari, around 
800 AD, were able to compile their chron- 
icles, the first to mention the existence of the 
empire of Ghana; that Ibn Hawqal was free to 
visit the lands south of the Sahara; that al- 
Bakri, al-Idrisi, Yakut Ibn Said and al-Umari, 
between the eleventh and the fourteenth cen- 
turies, could give us precious descriptions of 
the kingdoms of the so-called Sudanic belt 
from Senegal to the Nile; that Ibn Battuta 
could visit Mali and Leo the African Tim- 
buktu. Free of dogmatism and sectarianism, 
the spirit of tolerance encouraged dialogue 
and the exchange of ideas. 
The same phenomenon was at work on 
the West African coast. Gomes Eanes 
Zurara’s chronicles of Guinea, and the travel 
writings of Diogo Gomes, Duarte Pacheco 
Pereira, Jodo de Barros and of the Venetian 
La fermiére en buste (1908), 
oil on canvas by Picasso. 
  
Ca’da Mosto all bear witness to the open- 
mindedness of the peoples of Cayor, Baol and 
Sine Saloum, whose humanity would also be 
attested to by other Western visitors from the 
seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries. Tol- 
erance extended to colour, language, religion 
and ethnic and social origin as well as to sex 
and philosophical or moral views. This 
atmosphere enabled Christian missionaries to 
carry out their work without risk wherever 
traders had set up bases and colonizers had 
raised their flags. 
Despite long-held views to the contrary, 
these were in effect open societies where 
freedom and justice reigned. Dare one say 
that democracy and tolerance flourished there 
until the slave trade and colonial conquest 
and all that went with it—native status, taxes, 
military conscription, land seizure, forced 
labour—created an endemic state of violence 
that corrupted social habits and ways of life 
to the point at which they were no longer 
recognizable. 
So a precious heritage lies buried beneath 
the still-smouldering ruins of colonial impe- 
rialism. Contemporary Africa must redis- 
cover it quickly, to create worlds of freedom, 
peace and social harmony in which all its chil- 
dren can find fulfilment. a 
 
33

## [Page 34](091412engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 91407: Islam: a conflict of models

34 
Islam: a conflict of mode 
 
BY MOHAMMED ARKOUN 
“ 
N what sense can we speak of tolerance in 
an Islamic context? The tolerance sought 
after nowadays stems from the very situa- 
tion that down the centuries gave rise to the 
intolerance of the traditional religious sys- 
tems, underpinned as they were by the appa- 
ratus of state power—emperors, caliphs and 
sultans, drawing their justification from reli- 
gious institutions. 
In this respect Christianity and Islam are 
very similar: their expansion as religions went 
hand in hand with the establishment of 
empires and kingdoms committed to a strict 
definition of God’s truth as the basis of 
human laws. God intervenes in men’s affairs 
in different ways depending on their religion: 
but power structures invariably derive their 
justification from transcendent sacred 
teachings whose orthodox versions are pur- 
veyed and sustained by what Max Weber 
called “managers of the sacred”. 
Starting in the eighteenth century in 
Europe, competition developed between two 
historical models for the production and 
reproduction of societies: one gave rise to 
“Societies of the Book”; the other to secular 
societies devoid of any theistic content and 
relying for their legitimacy on universal suf- 
frage and democratic debate. 
So the distinction is not, as commonly 
. stated, between religions such as Christianity, 
Islam, Judaism and Buddhism, but between 
functional religion-state solidarity and the 
collapse of this solidarity in the model that 
stemmed from the French Revolution and the 
Enlightenment. 
Now what becomes of the question of 
tolerance if we look at it in the context of this 
analysis? 
Historically, first, the crucial break in the 
eighteenth century constituted a watershed. 
Before it, tolerance (in the sense of freedom 
of religion and legal protection for basic 
human and civic rights) was psychologically 
and intellectually inconceivable in relation to 
= 
=
 
47 
le
d 
{a
tl
 
Nd
 
I
n
e
 
‘ 
rr
? 
V
d
 
r
i
e
n
 
AR
 
i
w
w
r
o
 
ow
 
» 
e
k
 
ir
e 
an
) 
y
y
?
 
0
:
5
9
 
vi
e 
w
l
 
i
r
r
e
 
n
e
r
 
ar
p 
P
e
p
”
 
7
 
1
D
 
c
i
r
 
Pa
d 
Or
de
 
a
f
 
R
A
R
 
Pi
e 
NM 
- ’ 
B
l
d
 
7
 
i
e
d
 
7
)
 
I
N
G
 
R
r
 
f
e
 
e
v
r
”
 
Lo 7
 
A)
 
s
r
e
 
ry
 
e
n
l
l
i
n
i
t
e
e
 
» 
R
L
 
» f 
J 
70
0 
AL
E 
Co
ls
 
\ N\
 
a 
A 3 { 
  
98% pG Fs porri fp usp if 
~ rota 1p dsb 6 baler Cas’ Cad ls 
W204 O30 tg 
Bl = 300725 B58 Au eshopnlivz | 
3 
SQ. 4 
>a oa By 
b 7 
Fe 
Tv 
- 
a 
DT Ce 2 op Lad) Urals bn 553 | 
1
A
 
n
w
 
L
e
m
 
Ag
 
10
S 
id
, 
y
e
 
N
r
 
. 
f 
r
d
 
. 
  
|» 
K 
% 
|< 
Fp | A 
dill 
WELT | & 
Sands 5 | 
eal 
FAS 
WTA AIP   
28 So pile Sys | 
FPPOICT SIP AVF TF ACES 
55 MLE gb Cols ini | 
Us! Soils is pd par) Bos 0% © ) 3p 
(ora hI) AL 7 Wher iG . .- 
Buss i 05s 1) a ms 213 3 
+) -t . = ee “11351 
| stim edz | 
CZ 2 EES Sadat 
| 0101 Garg tvisy Gul tpn red 
¢ vans cdl sh ERGY, ZF 
PENT Se LL APPA Pel eA 
Hints ZS 3 iiese lr srsgnt 7 | 3 
~ 
« 1 
» 
b
d
 
wh
 
2
0
d
 
Ye 
— 
TC. ~~ 9 
br PN Fn LEIS PO S13 4 
ICI Sp oi ph fre Bp pry MPC R 
Ad ear LY I | EEy Pe SLE 
HE ps Ip Srp se it Grp, Sp yo; 
SEU Er GOI Spite iin op E58 
CH" LL2 5, 30 6 cs Coles ty’ 
- FL EEE Slare™ = -~ . CREE LL

## [Page 35](091412engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 91407: Islam: a conflict of models

mutually exclusive theological systems 
constructed by religious communities for 
their own protection—or perhaps their 
expansion. 
A PROTECTED AREA 
A dogmatic theology claims for its commu- 
nity a monopoly of revealed truth, and hence 
of the power that defends it. Islamic law was 
less exclusivist than other systems: under it, 
Christians and Jews enjoyed the famous 
dhimmi (protected person) status. But this 
was tolerance born of indifference, together 
with humiliating measures designed to 
emphasize the superiority of Islamic truth. 
Judaeo-Islamic and Christian-Islamic polemic 
commonly uses the example of this dbimmi 
status to stigmatize Islam’s fundamental, 
ever-active intolerance. 
It is, however, anachronistic as well as 
unfair to judge one of the Societies of the 
Book in this way whilst sparing the others 
any criticism, and to use the postulates of the 
Enlightenment model to disqualify Islam 
alone. On the Muslim side, one way of an- 
swering such accusations of intolerance 
against Islam formulated on the basis of 
Enlightenment logic would be to use verses 
from the Qur’an chosen to bring out the idea 
of tolerance. This would be equally anachro- 
nistic and manipulative, and I reject it: I know 
very well that the traditional interpretation of 
the verses most favourable to tolerance has 
given way to the theological postulates of 
God’s truth placed under the vigilant protect- 
ion of theologian-jurists who confer on their 
decisions a specially exalted ontological, 
cognitive, legal and spiritual status. 
Certainly the great texts of Islamic 
thought helped, with others, to pave the way 
to tolerance in its modern sense. I am think- 
ing of the writings of the mystics, the intellec- 
tual breakthroughs, the political protests, of 
writers like Hasan al-Basri (d. 772), al-Jahiz 
(d. 869), al-Kindi (d. 870), al-Tawhidi 
Eo
 
 
br [CAN Rs 
Above, the constellation 
of Aquarius. An illustration 
from the Liber de stellis 
fixarum (The Book of Fixed 
Stars), a 13th-century 
Latin translation of an Arabic 
treatise. Opposite page, 
detail of a 15th-century 
Arabic commentary on the 
Elements of Geometry by 
Euclid, the mathematician 
of Greek Antiquity. 
  
~ 
A 
: 
J 
a 
: 
 
(d. 1014) and al-Ma’arri (d. 1058). But all 
these anticipations, intuitions and musings 
form part of what anthologies since the days 
of ancient Iran have called “the eternal 
wisdom” (Javidan Khirad or al-hikma al- 
khalida). 
THE SYMBOLIC CAPITAL 
What happened after the break? 
Islam as a religion, Islamic thought and 
Muslim society remained aloof from events. 
While European societies underwent accele- 
rated change, planned and directed by a capi- 
talist mercantile bourgeoisie, the world of 
Islam was subjected to the reverse process: it 
grew feebler, its intellectual horizons and cul- 
tural activity contracted, and the tribal system 
expanded as the central authority was

## [Page 36](091412engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 91407: Islam: a conflict of models

weakened. These developments helped the 
establishment of the colonial empires, which 
worsened the situation economically, politi- 
cally and culturally and led to the wars of 
liberation following the Second World War. 
This historical résumé, which deserves 
to be amplified with detail, at least shows 
that tolerance cannot be on the agenda in 
societies which since the thirteenth century 
have undergone a process whereby cultural 
and ethnic groups became independent, 
urban élites and popular masses became dif- 
ferentiated, and religion, language and cul- 
ture became homogenized in towns, villages 
and regions. The Ottoman régime, and in 
many respects the colonialists, fostered this 
break-up of societies into particularist 
groups; religion split into sects and fraterni- 
ties, power became hereditary, the economy 
tended towards self-sufficiency, languages 
became diversified into dialects, and culture 
became confined to what the French socio- 
logist Pierre Bourdieu has called “the sym- 
bolic capital”. 
These societies, fragmented into groups 
isolated from each other, jealous of their 
“identities” and often in revolt against the 
government (especially if it was distant), 
remained cut off from modernity until the 
1950s. The colonial régimes certainly encour- 
aged the formation of socio-cultural enclaves, 
in which the need to modernize institutions, 
and ideas about society and intellectual life, 
began to be felt. But it was not until the era of 
political independence that nation-states 
everywhere compelled separatist groups and 
local independence movements to play a part 
in “national reconstruction”. This novel . 
socio-political driving force was very soon to 
- 3 
  
Tradition and Modernity, 
a work by the Bahraini 
painter Ahmed Bager which 
draws inspiration from 
Arab life and festivities. 
MOHAMMED ARKOUN, 
Algerian-born scholar, is 
Professor of the History of 
Islamic Thought at the Univer- 
sity of Paris lll (Sorbonne 
Nouvelle) and Visiting Profes- 
sor at the University of 
Amsterdam. He was formerly 
Director of the Paris Institute 
of Arab and Islamic Studies 
and has lectured at many 
of the world’s academic and 
cultural centres. Among his 
published works are L'Islam, 
religion et société (Paris, 
1981), La pensée arabe 
(Paris, 1985) and Ouvertures 
sur I'lslam (Paris, 1989). 
  
  
[| 
MANY AND ONE 
O mankind! We created 
you from a single pair of a male 
and a female and made you into 
nations and tribes that ye may 
know each other. 
THE QUR’AN, SURAH XLIX, 
THE APARTMENTS (v.13)      
make tolerance as topical and as urgent as it 
was in the Christian societies of eighteenth- 
century Europe. 
Thus we see that tolerance is not a cardinal 
virtue dictated by the great religious and phi- 
losophical teachings, but represents rather a 
response to social and political demand at 
times of great ideological turmoil—a ques- 
tioning of the “values” peculiar to the various 
social groups that make up a nation. 
The practice of tolerance everywhere calls 
for an effort of individual will, plus political 
will on the part of the state. We can say that 
these two wills have so far by and large been 
lacking in many Muslim countries, but this is 
attributable to historical, sociological and 
anthropological factors rather than to the 
silence of religious texts or the inadequacy of 
Islamic thought. 
The Encyclopaedists’ audience consisted 
of concerned citizens, ready to translate the 
ideas of the Enlightenment into political and 
economic terms. A similar audience existed 
for brief periods in the history of Islamic 
society: in the ninth and tenth centuries a 
mercantile middle class in the big towns pro- 
vided scope for the development of an 
Arabic-speaking humanism open to the 
teachings of the “eternal wisdom”, in which 
Islam was but one of several components. 
A similar situation prevailed in several 
societies between 1850 and 1940: this was the 
so-called Renaissance (nahdha) period, espe- 
cially in the Arab world. An intelligentsia 
open to the teachings of the Enlightenment 
sought to promote liberal democracy, espe- 
cially after the abolition of the Ottoman sul- 
tanate; but the narrow social base of this

## [Page 37](091412engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 91407: Islam: a conflict of models

movement, coupled with the political vigi- 
lance of the colonial powers, prevented any 
real development of modernity. Since the 
1960s, population growth and the spread of 
populist ideologies, together with large-scale 
uprooting of settled populations and harsh 
supervision in one-party states, have tipped 
Muslim societies towards violent confronta- 
tions, growing protest movements and a 
sense of collective frustration—all of which 
tend to foster the development of intransi- 
gent doctrines. 
In this brief analysis I aim to suggest— 
and this will be my conclusion—that in 
contemporary societies the tolerance-intol- 
erance question takes on dimensions and 
meanings which make it impossible to res- 
trict oneself to the isolated case of this or that 
society, mode of thought or religion. What is 
so inappropriately called “Islam” cannot be 
removed from the context of the world forces 
that govern the destiny of all peoples. When 
journalists, political scientists and sociolo- 
gists use terms like fanaticism, xenophobia, 
“0 mankind! We created 
you from a single pair of a 
male and a female. ...” 
(The Qur'an, Surah XLIX, The 
Apartments, v 13). 
Calligraphy by Namane Zakri. 
violence and intolerance in relation to pre- 
sent-day Islamic movements, these terms 
need to be understood in the light of the 
internal and external causes that give rise to 
these manifestations. 
This is not to minimize the climate of 
intolerance that has grown up in some 
Muslim societies in connection with what is 
called the “awakening of Islam”. If I stress 
the magnitude of the political and economic 
pressures still being exerted on these socie- 
ties, and argue that the changing importance 
of religions needs to be appraised in the light 
of the historical conditions and social set- 
tings in which they carry out their vocations, 
it is in order to reinforce a tolerant approach 
to the phenomenon of religion in general, 
and hence to suggest a more understanding 
attitude towards the expressions of contem- 
porary Islam. 0 
  
1. Pierre Bourdieu, Le sens pratique, Editions de Minuit, 
Paris, 1980. 
2. Mohammed Arkoun, L’humanisme arabe an IVe/Xe 
siecle. Vrin publishers, Paris, 1982. 37

## [Page 38](091412engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 91408: Against intolerance

38 
Against intolerance 
 
BY EDGARD PISANI 
| 
EDGARD PISANI, 
French politician, has been 
his country’s Minister of 
Agriculture (1961-1966) and 
Minister of Industrial 
Development (1966-1967). 
He was elected to the 
European Parliament in 1979 
and later carried out special 
missions for the President of 
the French Republic. Founder 
and political director of 
the periodical L’Evénement 
européen, he has been 
President of France's Institute 
of the Arab World since 
1288. He has published a 
number of books, including 
Pour I'Afrique (Paris, 1988), 
Persiste et signe (Paris, 1992), 
and Health and Social Welfare 
(Pergamon Press, Oxford). 
HE world vacillates between indifference 
and intolerance. Fellow feeling seems to 
be a thing of the past. 
Indifference is a serious matter. In the big 
cittes, in Western societies, wherever small 
human communities are withering away or 
have already disappeared, the individual is iso- 
lated, and nobody communicates any more. 
We no longer see or listen to each other. Do 
other people exist for us or we for them? Our 
encounters with them are random, self-centred 
affairs and when we do speak we sense only the 
painful vibrations of a voice without echo. 
Little is said about this malady, although it 
is magnified by the media, with their tendency 
to turn everything into a happening. Yet itis a 
destructive sickness that leaves us alone in the 
crowd, alone in our homes, alone in the world, 
alone in a void that our lost sense of the sacred 
1s no longer there to fill. 
Intolerance is just as serious. It is not simply 
the lack of a sense of solidarity with other 
people: it is the rejection of others for what 
they are, for what they do, for what they think 
and, eventually, simply because they exist. 
We are not talking here of the intolerance 
of youth, that potent cocktail of intransigence 
and revolt to which the French novelist Roger 
Martin du Gard was referring when he wrote: 
“I quite like the intolerance of youth. It is a 
good thing for an adolescent to be systemati- 
cally in revolt against everything.” We are 
_ speaking rather of an urge that can soon 
degenerate from irritation to murder. 
Intolerance is probably no more wide- 
spread today than it was in earlier times. It has 
always existed throughout history. It may be 
akin to that instinct for possession and secu- 
rity that impels an animal to defend its terri- 
tory against intrusion. Going beyond the 
spirit of conquest and the desire to acquire 
possessions, it leads to domination and exter- 
mination. Intolerance is a refusal to admit the 
existence of those who do not share the same 
beliefs as oneself. 
Once the others have been exterminated, 
the intolerant man turns on his own brother, 
accusing him of being lukewarm, divisive or 
deviationist. From the Inquisition to the Stali- 
nist régime, the passion to convince gave way 
to an urge to dominate, to twist the written 
word and use it as a weapon. 
Intolerance is an unquenchable desire for 
absolute power, whether to preserve the iden- 
tity of the clan, the purity of the race, territo- 
rial dominion, the triumph of a political doc- 
trine or the glory of the Almighty. 
At a certain stage in their evolution, both 
religion and politics carry within them the 
risk of intolerance. Social and economic life 
too, although in different forms, as well as 
ethnic and cultural matters. Even freedom 
may cease to be a quest and become a doc- 
trine instead. 
Intolerance is the rejection of difference, the 
blood-drenched search for uniformity, the 
exclusion of any form of autonomy or diver- 
sity. It repudiates exchange because exchange 
  
  
  

## [Page 39](091412engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

defuses hatred; it excludes cohabitation because 
cohabitation means accepting differences. 
It is the death of Thought, pronounced in 
the name of an idea. It spurns doubt, which 
enriches our lives by inciting enquiry. It turns 
its back on discovery, because discovery 
upsets established certainties. It abhors inven- 
tion because invention rejects the old patterns. 
It rejects democracy because democracy 
implies freedom, debate and alternation in 


### 91408: Against intolerance

office. It is the negation of diversity, however 
discreet. 
Intolerance and the struggle against intol- 
erance will last as long as there are human 
beings on Earth. But is it possible to fight 
intolerance without becoming intolerant one- 
self? Is there not a danger that what happened, 
for example, in France, in the clash between 
the clergy and the secularists, will happen 
elsewhere and in other circumstances? At the 
outset the secularists spoke out against the 
domination of society by the Church, but this 
soon developed into a struggle against the 
Church simply because the values it stood for 
were different. 
Racism is but one form of intolerance. The 
human species consists of men and women 
who are different, but who are all evidently 
human. Yet there many who deny the diver- 
sity that exists in nature and claim that there is 
a superior race—their own, of course. 
How can we learn to accept the infinite 
diversity of human beings within the evident 
  
 
THE 
  
ALTERNATIVE 
I consider it my duty to make sure I understand others. 
If they act in accordance with the will of God, it would be 
reprehensible of me to interfere in their actions; if they do not, 
they are victims of their own ignorance and deserve pity. 
AXBAR THE GREAT (1542-1605), 
MUGHUL EMPEROR OF INDIA   
The Omnibus (1929), oil on 
canvas, by the Mexican artist 
Frida Kahlo (1907-1954). 
Original and deeply rooted in 
Mexican culture, her work 
had a significant influence on 
the Surrealist movement. 
  
unity of the human species? How can we learn 
that, like order and disorder, unity and diver- 
sity are but two facets of the same truth? 
It is because of the inherent unity of the 
human species that I accept and love its diver- 
sity. It is because of the diversity of cultures, 
heritage, climate, ethnic groupings, beliefs, 
customs, visions, that I seek the unity without 
which diversity would be meaningless. 
Although each taken singly is a relative 
concept, unity and diversity together form an 
absolute good. 
Tolerance is the cultivation of diversity 
within an awareness of and a quest for unity. 
  

## [Page 40](091412engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

40 
balancing act 
  
cloth, dingy and ragged from constant 
contact with the mundane. But it does 
offer wonderful moments. Like yesterday. 
Taking one step forwards then two steps 
back, incipient summer was behaving with 
the coy timidity of a bashful bride, ready to 
burst into tears at any moment. In a fit of 
exasperation I decided to risk it and, grab- 
bing Tonto, my faithful bike, I headed for 


### 91409: The Balancing act in the Vondelpark

the Vondelpark. 
The sky was an indeterminate blue, with 
a touch of violet that threatened a storm. In 
the park, a sparse scattering of young people 
lay on the grass, stripped to the waist, expos- 
ing themselves to the risk of colds or worse 
in the fitful sunshine. After all, when you’ve 
tortured your flesh with thousands of 
stretch-and-flex contortions all winter, you 
can’t let the weather stop you baking and 
tanning the final product. 
But even narcissism was at a low ebb yes- 
terday, confined mainly to willows batting 
i IFE can often be as sordid as a floor 
“feathery eyelashes at their. reflections in the 
canals and little lakes. Beside them, the ubi- 
quitous cyclists doodled along. The faces of 
Amsterdammers, usually topped by tousled 
mops of curly hair, are quite distinctive. 
There is a rugged, weather-beaten quality to 
them that contrasts sharply with the jovial 
blue eyes. As they grow older, Amsterdam- 
mers seem to stiffen into openness, into 
determined good humour as they cycle to 
their graves with a Greenpeace badge on one 
lapel and an Amnesty sticker on the other. 
The floor of the park was the sharp 
drenched green of the polders, a colour that, 
like long afternoons in the swimming-pool, 
leaves you acutely conscious that the human 
body is 92 per cent water. In the sunshine, 
wl he WY 
the reflection of heavy foliage and big trees 
gave the surface of the canals the magical 
green shimmer of ducks” backs. 
As I cycled along, the strains of a violin 
reached my ears, a curious, jazzy melody 
accompanied by a drum. I rounded the bend 
approaching the Film Museum to find a knot 
of stationary cyclists gathered round a small 
amateur band. The quiet unassuming notes 
of a perfect evening raga made a dappled 
melody that blended with the light and 
shadow of the park. Like the others, I stayed 
awhile, perched lopsidedly on Tonto, one 
foot on the path, the other on the pedal, 
caught in the spell of the music. 
In the background rose the imposing 
bulk of the Film Museum, its sunny terrace 
dotted with genteel coffee-drinkers whiling 
away the time at little tables. There was a 
vaguely gallic air about the made-up faces 
and fashionable summer outfits. But the 
Dutch can never quite carry it off. The 
A group of musicians in the 
Vondelpark (Amsterdam). 
 

## [Page 41](091412engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### IGNORE

young look too squeaky clean, their clothes 
too practical and their innocent complexions 
reflect their milk-based diets. 
Round the next bend a surprise awaited 
me. The grass was littered with bicycles, 
their owners reclining beside them. I had 
brought a biography of Van Gogh to read 
and was heading for a sunny corner near the 
lake, when the slow repetitive strains of an 
Arab melody caught my ear. Beyond a vig- 
orous football game, at the foot of a monu- 
ment ringed with flowers, a group of 
Moroccan youths in Western clothing were 
playing ukelele-like instruments and small 
drums, and singing. The distant, archaic lilt 
evoked haunting memories of the ramayan 
groups of Trinidad. Then the tempo speeded 
up as flourishes, trills and a quickened 
drum-beat broke the monotony of the song. 
There is a sudden flurry of activity to my 
right. In a spectacular whirligig of acroba- 
tics, two Turkish youths flicker across the 
| 
NIALA MAHARAJ, 
of Trinidad and Tobago, is a 
journalist with a special 
interest in popular culture and 
cross-cultural issues. 
She has worked as a tele- 
vision producer in her own 
country, as a publications co- 
ordinator in Rome, and as 
an editor in Hong Kong. She 
has contributed to many 
leading newspapers and 
magazines in Europe, the 
Caribbean and Asia. 


### 91409: The Balancing act in the Vondelpark

in the 
Vondelpark 
BY NIALA MAHARAJ 
  
grass, their arms and legs interlooping in 
perfect syncopation as their bodies describe 
graceful arabesques high in the air to a smat- 
tering of hand-claps from the lounging spec- 
tators. Then four more youths join in, their 
shoulder-length curly hair whipping up and 
down as they spring into human pyramids 
vibrant with energy. They pause for 
applause, get it, and flicker down to the grass 
once more as though gravity does not exist. 
Another good-humoured gathering at- 
tracts my attention. At the edge of the path, 
a skinny, blond youth in a garish, orange- 
patterned shirt is giving haircuts. A hand- 
made cardboard sign announces the price— 
ten guilders. He is at work on a long-haired 
Latin American when the proceedings are 
interrupted by his customer’s daughter with 
an imperious demand for a paternal kiss. 
Memory stirs again . . . Sunday mor- 
ning . . . Barbers plying their trade under 
mango-trees in Trinidad. I cannot resist. I 
choose a vacant spot, lower my bike to the 
ground and join in the free entertainment. 
The sharp thwack of ball on racquet 
punctuates the droning Moroccan music. To 
one side of the football game, two muscular 
young women in striped T-shirts hammer 
out a ferocious game of paddle tennis. I have 
never seen the game played with such speed 
and aggression. Nearer the lake, a couple of 
blond teenagers are clumsily engaged in a 
desultory game of badminton. 
The South American’s haircut is finished. 
The plastic cape is withdrawn from his 
shoulders and a brush is flicked over his 
neck. A Surinamese with a bushy Afro hair- 
style 1s beckoned forward and the blond, 
lanky barber begins to sculpture a neat shape 
out of the mass of hair. Near me, a couple of 41

## [Page 42](091412engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 91409: The Balancing act in the Vondelpark

42 
iz 0, EY 
Starry night (1890), oil on 
canvas, by Vincent van Gogh. 
    hid 
UR % 
hy   NT cd 
The" pr i 
Europeans embrace passionately on the 
‘grass, devouring each other with kisses. 
Then, slowly, they ease off and take to 
stroking each other’s face hypnotically. 
I force my eyes back to my book, a cheap 
biography of Van Gogh, one of the coun- 
try’s most glorious figures, but a distant 
flame suddenly catches from the famous 
sunflowers on the open page. I look up. The 
Moroccans have built a fire to warm up their 
drums, just as our tassa musicians in Tri- 
nidad do. The music continues with increas- 
ed vitality, and a skinny girl of Asian appea- 
rance, her dress hitched high, begins a 
sensuous barefoot dance beside the path. 
The spectators smile encouragingly at her. 
Her somewhat ravaged face is veiled by long 
  
  
hair, so I return to Van Gogh. His brother 
has just managed to bribe him away from the 
clutches of a poor prostitute, providing him 
with the money to enable him to begin the 
long pilgrimage that was to lead him from 
his early studies of peasant life to his trium- 
phant discovery of colour. 
Another sound makes me look up again. 
It comes from a ghetto-blaster carried by a 
tall, mustachioed German with a bicycle, 
which he sets down before beginning to 
practise intricate, virile dance-steps, between 
the acrobats and the barber, who is still 
intent on his work. The audience is apprecia- 
tive, but the shadow of a nearby tree has 
lengthened to cover me, so I move to the 
sunny edge of the lake. I become aware of

## [Page 43](091412engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 91409: The Balancing act in the Vondelpark

the ever-present Vondelpark juggler. I am 
surprised how much he has improved during 
the year that I have been watching him prac- 
tise. Now the silver-coloured batons explode 
from his hands like a burst of fireworks in 
the evening sunlight. 
A South American drinks vendor pedals 
up with two blue coolers strapped to his 
bicycle. The red-headed French family 
nearby buys beer. He apologizes that he has 
no mineral water for me. I turn once more to 
Van Gogh and his unquenchable thirst for 
recognition and his developing exile. The 
low throb of a guitar, and I turn round. Two 
Dutch guys and a Peruvian have settled on 
the grass nearby. As I look on, the Peruvian 
produces a small bamboo flute and conjures 
up a delicate, perfectly-controlled jazz piece. 
The Dutch guitarist throws back his head 
and laughs joyously and long. No mere joke 
could have ignited that laugh; the warmth of 
pure well-being radiates so far out from their 
circle that it seems to touch all those around. 
They play Latin songs and sing. Their voices 
are not very good and I can barely make out 
the Spanish words. The guitarist laughs again 
and again. 
I try not to let my envy of their easy 
companionship show by returning to Van 
Gogh. He has cut off his ear and has been 
abandoned by Gauguin, who complains 
that Vincent’s brother looks at his paint- 
ings “with the cold eyes of the Dutchman”. 
The Latin American vendor cycles past 
again, sells a few drinks and then parks his 
bicycle near the group with the guitars. 
They shift to make room for him in their 
circle and he begins to sing in a weak tre- 
mulous voice. I strain my ears in anticipa- 
tion of the Spanish lyrics, but the words 
are English and familiar. 
“.. I am just a poor boy so my story’s 
seldom told. I have squandered my: resis- 
tance for a pocket full of mumbles, such are 
mumbles, such are promises. ...” It is an old 
Simon and Garfunkel ballad that I remember 
by heart from my teenage days in the 1960s. 
“... All lies and jests; still, the man hears 
what he wants to hear and disregards the 
rest....” 
A confused stirring draws attention to the 
other side of the path. The Turkish acrobats 
and the German dancer have joined forces, 
creating a mobile human pyramid with the 
broad German shoulders over the bicycle 
handlebars as its base. More and more of the 
Turks pile on, their locks flowing in the wind 
as the bicycle wobbles down the slope until, 
at the last moment, they scatter to right and 
to left. The spectators chuckle; 1t 1s starting 
to become like a circus. The acrobats and the 
clowns are as one in the fading light. 
 
LOVE AND JUSTICE 
do to you, do you even so to them. 
  
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should 
NEW TESTAMENT, 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST MATTHEW, VII, 12   
“When I left home and my family, I was 
no more than a boy,” the drinks vendor 
sings on, “in the company of strangers, in 
the quiet of a railway station, running 
scared . .. "—the guitar ripples through the 
interlude—“Keeping low, seeking out the 
poorer quarters where the ragged people go, 
looking for the places only they would 
know. ...” 
The Dutchman raises his arm. “All to- 
gether now!” and the group joins in the 
refrain, “Lai la lai . . . lai la lai, lai, lat la 
lai. .. .” Those of us around begin to join in 
hesitantly, but the wind is becoming chilly 
and the crowd in the park is thinning out. 
The drinks vendor’s voice floats out 
again. “Asking only workman's wages I 
come looking for a job. But I get no 
offers. . . .” The note goes too low and he 
dissolves into a mumble. The laughing 
Dutchman stops to adjust his guitar while 
the flute plays on and I turn back to Van 
Gogh. Now he is embracing utter loneliness 
after the people of Arles have petitioned for 
his eviction. His madness scares them. And 
me. I know where it will lead. 
I pause for respite and the guitar strums 
again. “And I'm laying out my winter 
clothes and wishing I was gone . . . going 
home . .. where the New York city winters 
aren’t bleeding me, leading me-ee-ce . . . 
going home. ...” 
As I take up the next refrain with those 
left in the park, the gooseflesh on my arm 
tells me it is time to go. I put away my book 
and pick up my bicycle. But the guitars rise 
crescendo to the final stanza. 
“...In a clearing stands a boxer and a 
fighter by his trade, and he carries the 
reminder of every glove that laid him low 
and cut him, tll he cried out, in his anger 
and his shame, ‘I am leaving, I am leav- 
ing’... But the fighter still remains. ...” O 43

## [Page 44](091412engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

44 
” 
\ 
N\ 
: 
E 
E 
-    
NESCO IN ACTION 
NEWSBRIEFS 
tt ie ;.,,S° bo 
 
l,i 
UNESCO ON VIDEO 
In a changing world, a short video- 
film produced by Unesco’s audio- 
visual information service, shows by 
means of specific examples how 
Unesco—in collaboration with its 
member states, other United 
Nations institutions, non- 
governmental organizations and 
partners from many different 
backgrounds—is endeavouring to 
respond to a number of major 
challenges of our time: the 
development of human resources; 
the protection of the environment; 
the preservation of the cultural 
heritage; and the promotion of 
intellectual exchanges to serve the 
cause of peace. The programme's 
running time is 25 minutes 45 
seconds. It is available in English, 
French and Spanish. Further 
information may be obtained from 
the Audio-visual Production Service 
of the Office of Public Information, 
UNESCO, 7, Place de Fontenoy, 
75700 Paris. 
iE. § 18 31 g AF 
LAND OF THE FUTURE 
Terre d’Avenir (Land of the Future) is 
the title of the First International 
Development Forum, held at Le 
Bourget (France) from 5 to 7 June 
1992. The Forum is being organized 
on the initiative of the Catholic 
Committee against Hunger and for 
Development under the sponsorship 
of the United Nations and Unesco. 
By highlighting the increasingly 
close links between environmental 
and development issues, “Land of 
the future” echoes the 
preoccupations of the Earth Summit 
being held in Rio de Janeiro at the 
same time. The purpose of the 
Forum is to bring together people 
who are concerned in development 
and to inform a wide public of the 
issues involved. The Unesco Courier 
and other Unesco publications are 
being displayed at the Forum. 
DRAWING COMPETITION 
WILL ALERT CHILDREN 
TO DRUG PROBLEMS 
As part of its activities to mark the 
International Day Against Drug 
Abuse (26 June), Unesco, in co- 
operation with the Paris City 
authorities, is organizing a drawing 
competition for children in Europe. 
The competition is open to primary- 
school children in the 10-11-year 
age group, who will be asked to 
illustrate their ideas on how to 
prevent drug abuse. Its purpose is 
to alert families and the general 
public to the gravity of the problem, 
and to provide teachers with an 
opportunity to raise the subject in 
the classroom. Some thirty-three 
European countries have been 
contacted through their National 
Commissions for UNesco, with a 
view to their taking part in the 
competition. The five prize-winners 
and their teachers will be invited for 
a one-week visit to Paris, 
a a nt oe ge 
CANCER, 
AIDS AND SOCIETY 
Ways of integrating science, 
medical practice and health policies 
in a multidisciplinary approach to 
cancer and AIDS were discussed at 
a symposium held at Unesco 
Headquarters from 23 to 25 March 
and attended by 300 internationally 
known physicians, legal experts, 
moral philosophers and politicians. 
Unesco, which took part in the 
meeting along with the World Health 
Organization (WHO), the Council of 
Europe and the European Academy 
of Sciences, Arts and Humanities, 
drew particular attention to the bio- 
ethical dimension of research, 
especially in cases where genetical 
manipulation is involved. 
Among other issues discussed 
were the behavioural and socio- 
cultural aspects of the prevention of 
cancer and AIDS and policies for 
tackling the two diseases in Europe 
and the developing world. 
Participants also raised the 
question of human rights in clinical 
tests and the impact of the media 
on health policies. 
eI. 
A PRIZE 
FOR CREATIVITY 
A Unesco Prize for the Promotion of 
the Arts, established through a 
generous initiative by the Japanese 
painter Kaii Higashiyama and with 
the assistance of the National 
Federation of Unesco Associations 
of Japan, will be awarded for the 
first time in May 1993. Its purpose 
is to reward outstanding creative 
achievements by young artists, or 
groups of artists, in the visual arts 
(painting, sculpture and graphics) 
and in the performing arts, and to 
encourage their further 
development as artists. The Prize - 
will be awarded, once every two 
years, to 5 laureates or groups of 
laureates, by the Director-General of 
Unesco, on the basis of proposals 
from an international Jury of seven 
eminent persons from different 
parts of the world. Each prize will 
consist of approximately 
US$20,000. 0 
  
    
 
Commentary 
Federico 
Mayor 
I 
This text is the first of a 
series in which the Director- 
General of UNESCO will set 
forth for readers of the Courier 
his thinking on matters 
of current concern.

## [Page 45](091412engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### IGNORE

  
T 1 ME O F 
We are living in times of radical change, and the 
international community through the United 
Nations system must address the many challenges and 
opportunities to which these changes give rise, not least 
in the field of human rights. 
With the fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of East- 
West confrontation, ideological disputes on the basic 
concept of human rights have been replaced by general 
agreement on the crucial importance of their obser- 
vance, notably for the maintenance of international 
peace and security. Human rights are assuming new 
dimensions in international relations. A new practice is 
emerging: the scope of domestic jurisdiction is narrow- 
ing and the principle of non-intervention is being inter- 
preted more flexibly. Respect for human rights is now a 
factor influencing bilateral and multilateral relations and 
1s moreover regarded as an important criterion for the 
recognition of newly independent states. This new and 
broader perspective offers the United Nations opportu- 
nities for strengthening human rights mechanisms and 
procedures, as well as for establishing new forms of pre- 
ventive and early-warning action. 
The substantial progress of civil and political rights 
in many regions of the world today—in particular Cen- 
tral and Eastern Europe, Latin America and Africa—is 
obviously a source of great satisfaction. However, such 
progress is hardly matched by improvements in eco- 
nomic, social and cultural conditions. There is a real 
danger that advances in the political sphere will be 
eroded by poverty and underdevelopment. Moreover, 
totalitarian or authoritarian régimes in many countries 
have left behind them a legacy of hatred, intolerance and 
prejudice that can easily express itself as discrimination 
based on differences in ethnic origin, language, religion 
or belief. These risks are naturally increased by a wider 
context of escalating population growth, environmental 
threats and the pressures to which many national and 
cultural communities are subjected. 
TRAINING MINDS 
The founding fathers of UNESCO were surely right to 
affirm that the political and economic arrangements of 
governments are not the sufficient conditions for build- 
ing a more prosperous and secure world. Such a goal 
also requires the intellectual and moral solidarity of 
mankind, universally recognized values, including res- 
pect for international law, human rights, fundamental 


### 91410: Time of promise

freedoms and human dignity. The surest location for the 
defences of peace and human rights is in the minds of 
men and women. It is therefore important that human 
rights education should become part of the curriculum 
from the earliest stages of schooling, since it is the best 
way to forge attitudes, shape behaviour and prepare 
individuals for assuming rights and responsibilities. 
Our ultimate goal is the creation of a comprehensive 
PR OMI S E 
system of human rights teaching and education for all 
citizens and populations, extending from primary 
through university education to out-of-school education. 
There are many areas in which UNESCO can make an 
original contribution to the development of human rights. 
One such area is that of academic freedoms. This issue has 
hitherto been dealt with mainly in terms of the profes- 
sional status of teachers and scientific researchers. The 
time would seem ripe to discuss and analyse the question 
from a broader standpoint—in terms of the rights and 
freedoms of the members of the academic community, 
freedom of scientific research, the right to teach, freedom 
of intellectual co-operation, as well as the special respon- 
sibilities of scientists. Another area concerns the impact of 
scientific and technological progress on human rights. Of 
particular interest here is the study of bioethics. UNESCO 
also envisages activities aimed at further elaboration of the 
concept of cultural identity and cultural rights, which in 
our view cannot be regarded as a sufficiently developed 
category of human rights. 
LIFE IN DEMOCRACY 
But perhaps the most important area of reflection relat- 
ing to human rights at the present time is that of demo- 
cracy. No one can doubt the close links between human 
rights and democracy. The struggle for human rights has 
paved the way for the democratization process we are 
currently witnessing in various parts of the world. 
Equally, it is clear that only genuine democracy can 
guarantee the full implementation of human rights. 
However, democratic institutions can only function 
effectively in a cultural context in which citizens, 
playing their full participatory role as the agents and 
beneficiaries of democratic processes, are able to exer- 
cise the free and informed choices on which democracy 
ultimately depends. 
Democracy rests on cultural foundations—including 
patterns of knowledge acquisition and exchange, atti- 
tudes and values—which ultimately transcend political 
structures. These cultural dimensions of democracy 
merit the same kind of serious reflection that the cul- 
tural dimensions of development are at last receiving. 
Only democracy can provide the framework within 
which minority cultures can find full expression, inter- 
cultural dialogue can effectively take place and tolerance 
can flourish. 
It is our deep conviction that research and education 
on human rights need to be supplemented with research 
and education on democratic practice. Our main objec- 
tive is to assist in the formation of citizens able and 
willing to participate actively in the political, social, eco- 
nomic and cultural life of society and in the decision- 
making process. UNESCO is committed to play a part in 
this endeavour, which we have called “the preparation 
of societies for life in democracy”. J     45

## [Page 46](091412engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### IGNORE

46 
  
"EVEREST, 
  
“~s 


### 91411: The Road to Sagarmatha: Everest, rooftop of the world

E TT   
The road to Sagarmatha 
BY Jost SERRA VEGA 
  
| 
JOSE SERRA VEGA, 
a Peruvian engineer and former staff 
member of the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP), has worked in the - 
Indian sub-continent on technologies geared to 
environmental conservation, during which 
time he spent two months in Tibet. 
AGARMATHA, Everest or 
Qomolangma, as it is known in 
Nepal, Europe and Tibet respec- 
tively, is the world’s highest mountain, 
with an elevation of 8,848 metres above 
sea level. It is also one of the world’s most 
extraordinary places, for at least two rea- 
sons. On the one hand, it is the highest 
point in the Himalaya (a Sanskrit word 
meaning the “abode of the everlasting 
snows”), the great mountain range sepa- 
rating the hot plains of India from the 
high plateaux of Tibet, where two of the 
sacred rivers of Hinduism, the Ganges and 
the Brahmaputra, have their sources. On 
the other, its spectacularly beautiful set- 
ting harbours a wide variety of plant and 
animal life, as well as’ethnic groups with 
highly original cultures. 
ROOFTOP OF THE WORLD 
UNESCO IN ACTION 
WORLD HERITAGE 
 
Some forty million years ago, as a 
result of continental drift, the Indian sub- 
continental plate, which was moving at a 
rate of ten centimetres a year, collided 
with that of the Euroasiatic continent and 
caused a powerful tectonic uplift. “Slices” 
of the sub-continent were piled on top of 
one other like a gigantic layer cake. In this 
way the Himalayan chain began to take 
shape, and from that day to this the 
summit of Sagarmatha has risen at a 
constant rate of two millimetres a year. 
The Tibetan name Qomolangma, 
which means “mother goddess of the 
world”, appears on a map drawn by the 
Jesuits in the seventeenth century. More 
recently, in 1852, it was recorded as “Peak 
15”, the highest mountain in the world, in 
the great Trigonometrical Survey of India 
rR 
x 
¥ 
} 
: 
 

## [Page 47](091412engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### IGNORE

carried out by the British on the initiative 
of Sir George Everest. The survey in this 
part of Nepal, which Europeans were for- 
bidden to enter, was made by Hindu 


### 91411: The Road to Sagarmatha: Everest, rooftop of the world

topographers, often disguised as pilgrims 
and equipped with rosaries with a hun- 
dred beads instead of the usual 108 to help 
them to count their paces and measure 
distances. The surveyors also used. ther- 
mometers hidden in their walking sticks 
to measure the altitude by observing the 
temperature at which water boiled. 
At the foot of Sagarmatha is the high 
valley of Solu-Khumbu, gouged out of the 
rock by the Dudh Kosi, or “river of 
milk”, which rises in the mountain gla- 
ciers. There live the Sherpas—in Tibetan 
the “shar-ba” or “people living in the 
east” —who arrived in Tibet in the six- 
teenth century. The rhythm of their lives 
was punctuated by the transhumance of 
yaks and dzos (a hybrid between the yak 
and the domestic cow) to the high pas- 
tures during the short summer, and the 
movement of caravans which carried 
cereals to Tibet through the Nangpa La 
pass and returned with salt and wool. This 
peaceful way of life was only interrupted 
once in the eighteenth century by an inva- 
sion of Tibet by Gurkha warriors and a 
counter-attack by Chinese forces in a bid 
to help the Dalai Lama, which obliged the 
Nepalese to withdraw and pay tribute to 
the Celestial Empire. 
Around 1950, the king of Nepal 
decided to open his country’s borders. 
Mountaineers from all over the world 
now had an opportunity to pit themselves 
against the world’s highest peaks, but this 
brought a far-reaching change to the 
Khumbu region and the life of the 
Sherpas. In the 1980s international tour- 
ism became a mass phenomenon. In the 
spring and autumn of 1990 alone some 
12,000 tourists (approximately two tour- 
ists for each local inhabitant) visited this 
fragile region. 
SAGARMATHA 
NATIONAL PARK 
In 1976 the Nepalese Government 
decided to create the Sagarmatha 
National Park, with an area of some 
1,240 square kilometres, in order to 
safeguard the region’s exceptional plant 
and animal life. Sir Edmund Hillary, 
who with Sherpa Tenzing Norgay had 
been the first to conquer Sagarmatha, in 
1953, played an important role in this 
initiative. Previously he had also made a 
significant contribution, through his 
Himalayan Trust foundation, to provid- 
ing the people of Solu-Khumbu with 
schools, hospitals, bridges and drinking 
water systems. 
Reforestation is urgently needed and 
several small-scale projects have been 
started using the most common native trees 
found in the Park; such as juniper, pine and 
silver fir. A campaign, targeted especially at 
young people, has been launched to make 
the population aware of the problems 
caused by massive deforestation over a 
long period. Perhaps it would also be a 
 
A snow leopard 
good idea to plant copses around each vil- 
lage to provide the villagers with wood, as 
is the practice in the arid zones of China. 
In addition to Sagarmatha, the Park 
includes some of the world’s highest and 
most beautiful peaks: Lhotse (8,501 m), 
Cho Oyu (8,153 m), Nuptse (7,855 m), 
the majestic Pumori (7,651 m), gigantic 
glaciers and many lakes and ponds. 
A number of rare and endangered 
animal species are found in the Park, They 
include the mysterious snow leopard, 
which is rarely seen in its natural surround- 
ings but whose fur, supplied by poachers, 
can be seen in the shops of Kathmandu; the 
Himalayan thar, a goat capable of scaling 
almost vertical slopes; the small musk deer, 
which Tamang hunters from the foothills 
hunt because of the commercial value of 
the “musk pod”, a gland which is consid- 
ered to have medicinal and aphrodisiac 
properties by the Chinese and whose value 
on the international market is higher than 
‘the average annual income of a Nepalese 
villager; and the striking Impeyan pheasant 
which has plumage of nine colours and a 
green pennant-like crest. 
It would be impossible not to men- 
tion the yeti, “the abominable snow- 
man”. This legendary creature, a pro- 
duct of the Sherpa imagination, is 
supposed to devour villagers, but no 
other proof of its existence can be found 
than a wall-painting and a fur-covered 
skull (probably that of an antelope) dis- 
played in the Pangboche monastery. 
ANCIENT PATHWAYS 
For tourists with enough time and phy- 
sical energy, the best way to reach the 
Park is on foot. It takes around twenty- 
five to thirty days to walk from Lamo- 
sangu to Kala Pattar, directly opposite 
the summit of Sagarmatha, along the 
route from Kathmandu to the Tibetan 
frontier, via Jiri, where the asphalt road 
comes to an end. 
After leaving Jiri, the traveller has to 
cross the peaks of six mountain chains, 
alternately plunging into tropical valleys 
where there are multicoloured butter- 
flies, occasional snakes and, during the 
monsoon, countless leeches, before 
climbing again through woods and giant 
rhododendrons which flower in March, 
to cols some 3,200 metres high from 
~ which the snowbound peaks can be 
seen. The path wends its way through 
villages where the houses have large bal- 
conies decorated with prayer-flags, past 
small Buddhist monasteries with dark 
sanctuaries redolent of yak butter, 
beside many cultivated terraces, over 
precarious bridges crossed by caravans 
of nimble yaks, through pine forests, 
and along the edges of sheer-sided 
gorges. A swing hanging over a 600- 
metre-deep precipice, at the bottom of 
which a stream rushes, is a challenge to 
the bravest. 
Wayfarers can stay in the dwellings of 
hospitable Newar and Gurung villagers 
in the foothills, and share their tasty 
dishes of rice and potatoes. After several 
days’ walk the first Sherpa houses come 
into view. They are built of stone and 
have multicoloured wooden windows, 
flat roofs and Buddhist prayer-flags with 
ribbons fluttering in the wind. 
THE WORLD OF SHERPAS 
The heart of the Sherpa home is the 
kitchen with its burnished kettles, 
copper saucepans and an ever-burning 
fire. Visitors are invited to take part in 
the life of the family, and are offered a 
cup of chang, strong beer made from 
malted rice. In many houses which are 
also small restaurants, Western tourists 
may be offered a menu more suited to 
their taste, with sweetmeats, pancakes 
with honey, cereals and dried apples. 47

## [Page 48](091412engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

48 
Sherpa society 1s exogamous and is 
noted for its extremely liberal sexual 
mores (there is a tradition of both poly- 
gamy and polyandry). It is divided hierar- 


### 91411: The Road to Sagarmatha: Everest, rooftop of the world

chically, with the higher ranks being 
occupied by descendants of the founders 
of the villages; and blacksmiths, basket- 
weavers and butchers belonging to the 
lower orders. However, the opening-up 
of Nepal to the outside world and the 
closing of the Tibetan border by the 
People’s Republic of China in 1951 led to 
far-reaching changes in the organization 
of Sherpa society. Today it is common for 
the more prosperous tradespeople to go 
to Hong Kong and Bangkok to buy tex- 
tiles and electronic equipment. In the 
shops of Namche Bazar, the region’s 
Sherpa centre, 1t is even possible to buy 
Maradona T-shirts. 
The Sherpas, who do not appear to 
have been very religious in the early cen- 
turies of their settlement in Nepal, now 
observe a stricter form of Buddhism, per- 
haps due to the influence of missionaries 
from Tibet. Sherpa society today contrib- 
utes generously to the maintenance of the 
famous monasteries of Thame and 
Thyangboche. 
In the courtyards of these monasteries 
the annual festivals of Mani Rimdu are 
magnificently celebrated in broad daylight 
or at full Moon. Monks dressed in bro- 
cade and wearing masks depicting demons 
or animals, mime the triumph of Bud- 
dhism over the forces of evil and dance to 
the sound of flutes made from human 
shinbones, drums and enormous copper 
trumpets. These festivals provide the vil- 
lagers from all around with an opportu- 
nity to get together, see old friends and 
arrange marriages. 
A Himalayan black bear 
The monastery of Thyangboche 
stands in a spectacular setting amidst high 
snowy mountains, on a summit covered 
with woods that are fast disappearing. 
Not long ago the monastery was badly 
damaged by fire, but it is now being 
rebuilt. On entering its kitchens full of 
enormous bowls and churns for prepar- 
ing the roasted barley flour known as 
tsampa, and salty tea whipped with 
butter, a restorative drink for travellers 
who have just come in from the cold, one 
has the impression of travelling back in 
time to the Middle Ages. 
Beyond the monastery the path con- 
tinues to rise. Trees no longer grow. Tra- 
vellers would be well advised to make a 
halt at Pheriche, around 4,300 metres 
high, or at Lobuche, to let the effects of 
altitude sickness wear off. After two days’ 
walk across wide stretches of glacial 
morane, It 1s possible to begin the ascent 
of the 5,545-metre-high Kala Pattar, from 
which, in late afternoon, the golden peak 
of Sagarmatha can be seen. Makalu, the 
fifth highest mountain in the world, can 
also be seen, along with the great swathe 
of snow joining Lhotse and Nuptse, 
which have still not been fully explored. 
AN URGENT TASK 
The next day’s stage is across the specta- 
cular Khumbu glacier, which is covered 
with masses of extraordinarily shaped 
pieces of ice glistening like thousands of 
diamonds in the Sun, as far as the base 
camp of the expeditions which set out to 
climb Sagarmatha. Sometimes four or five 
groups of mountaineers will be waiting to 
  
UNESCO IN ACTION 
WORLD HERITAGE 
eS. 
 
begin the ascent, each by a different 
route. Tents and containers are every- 
where, and also, unfortunately, piles of 
rubbish which earlier expeditions have 
not bothered to take away with them. 
The federations and clubs to which the 
-mountaineers belong ought to work out 
some kind of scheme to provide funds for 
keeping the site clean. 
It is intended to increase the area of 
the Park to some 3,900 square kilometres, 
and the Chinese government proposes to 
expand neighbouring reserves on the 
Tibetan side to some 10,400 square kilo- 
metres, thus creating one of the world’s 
biggest conservation areas. 
Safeguarding the site is now an urgent 
task because of the increasingly serious 
threats to the environment. Since 1950 
tourism has had a devastating effect on 
the forest resources. Owing to runaway 
growth in the demand for firewood, 
entire stretches of woodland have disap- 
peared. Many small hotels and houses 
have been built along the paths, and 
mountaineering expeditions have become 
complex organizations employing hun- 
dreds of porters and sometimes camping 
for several months waiting for the 
weather to improve before they start on 
the climb. The deterioration of the land- 
scape is extending to other regions such 
as the high valley of the Arun, near Solu- 
Khumbu, which was hitherto virtually 
unaffected but is now being burned and 
cleared to provide farmland and wood 
supplies. 
Some steps have already been taken to 
encourage the use of fossil fuels and to 
oblige expeditions to bring their own fuel 
in the form of kerosene or gas. Two small 
hydroelectric power stations have also 
been built, one for Namche Bazar and the 
other for the Thyangboche monastery. 
By including this exceptional region 
on the World Heritage List, UNESCO is 
contributing to its conservation, but there 
can be no doubt that more financial sup- 
port will be necessary from the developed 
countries, which are the Park’s main 
users, to carry out large-scale reforesta- 
tion and meet the energy needs of the 
population. Only energetic and concerted 
action will make it possible for people, 
plants and animals to continue to live on 
these marvellous slopes for many genera- 
tions to come.

## [Page 49](091412engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### IGNORE

  
RECENT 
RECORDS 
MUSIC FROM AROUND THE WORLD 
Argentina. Tritonic Musics of the 
North-West 
Musics and Musicians of the World 
CD Unesco D 8208 
To the world of music, Argentina is 
the land of the tango, yet it has a rich 
heritage of folk music that is little 
known outside its borders. This 
recording provides an opportunity to get 
to know the music of the indigenous 
peoples of the north-west region of the 
country. With their strange sonorities 
and striking rhythms, the tritonic 
instrumental pieces for percussion and 
wind bear little resemblance to any 
other known musical forms, except 
perhaps for some distant similarity to 
Tibetan horn music. Equally fascinating 
are the tondas and copias, vocal 
pieces chanted in nasal tones in pre- 
Columbian languages. Far less 
westernized than the Indian music of 
Peru or Bolivia, this ancient music 
reveals clear evidence of Asian 
influences preserved over the centuries 
in Indian cultures. 
Stellio et son orchestre antillais 
L’Etoile de la Musique créofe 
CD Music Memoria 30838 
Known to the world as Steilio, the 
clarinetist Fructueux Alexandre grew 
up in French Guyana and in Martinique. 
He it was who brought the beguine to 
Paris, which he first performed at the 
famous Bal Négre in 1929. Here, he 
and his band—trombonist Archange St. 
Hilaire, pianist and ‘cellist Victor Collat, 
violinist Ernest Léardée and drummer- 
singer Orphélien {plus singers Léona 
Gabriel and Jeanne Rosillette on some 
tracks)—offer a range of sparkling 
pieces (mazouk, beguines, waltzes) all 
strongly influenced by the jazz of New 
Orleans, a city close to the Antilles 
both culturally and geographically. 
China. China Wind and Percussive 
Instrumental Ensembles 
CD Unesco D 8209 
These recordings, made in 
Shanghai, illustrate various aspects of 
Chinese “learned” and folk music. The 
first five tracks, performed by a group 
from the Quanzhou opera, are 
reminiscent of Japanese gagaku music, 
which is itself of Chinese origin. Two 
pieces, “Approaching the dressing- 
table” and “Four in one”, played by 
groups from south of the “River” (the 
Yangzi jiang}, are strikingly original. The 
later tracks, played by the Bainigan 
village orchestra, cover a variety of 
themes. The orchestra consists of wind 
instruments (cboes, a flute, a clarinet), 
strings (lute and viols) and percussion 
(gongs, drums, etc.). The intricate 
structures and sophisticated polyphony 
bear witness to the quality of a musical 
heritage that the West is only now 
beginning to discover. 
Mongolia. Traditional Music 
CD Unesco D 8207 
With Mongolia again coming to 
occupy a prominent place on the world 
scene and rediscovering its cultural 
roots, it is fitting that its music should 
be made available to a wider public. 
Mongolian music is essentially vocal 
(Mongolians like to sing to fill the 
empty silence of the steppes) and 
involves complicated techniques. The 
famous diphonic Mongolian chant, the 
Khoomii, has been the subject of many 
studies by ethnomusicologists. “The 
fair Altai”, a love song, is sung in 
homophony in a remarkable 
performance by two men with quite 
different voices who achieve perfect 
synchronization through a series of 
complicated glissando passages. 
Equally astonishing is “The four 
seasons”, played on the flute using the 
continuous breathing technique. 
JAZZ 
EE CE FE T TR 
Abbey Lincoln. 
You Gotta Pay the Band 
Abbey Lincoln (vocals), 
Stan Getz (tenor saxophone), 
Hank Jones (piano), Charlie Haden 
(bass), Mark Johnson (drums), ' 
Maxine Roach (viola). 
CD Gitanes Jazz/Verve 511 110-2 
After a few years of undeserved 
eclipse, Abbey Lincoln (also known as 
Aminata Moseka) has again come to 
the forefront of the musical scene. With 
her husky voice, which can slide from 
velvety softness to metallic sharpness, 
and her unique diction and phrasing, 
Lincoln is a true musician and a 
mistress of understatement. There is a 
lot of love in her songs—sometimes 
wounded love which finds release in 
the wider love of life and of humanity. 
Like Carmen McRae and other great 
jazz singers, Abbey Lincoln knows how 
to draw out the full value of the 
words—never trite—of her lyrics. Sad 
at times, this recording, with solos by 
Stan Getz, is nevertheless beautiful 
and moving. It was recorded just before 
Stan Getz died. 
Archie Shepp Quartet. 
I Didn't Know About You 
Archie Shepp (tenor and alto 
saxophone), Horace Parian (piano), 
Wayne Dockery (bass), 
George Brown (drums) 
CD Timeless Records SJP 370 
At the end of the 1960s, Archie 
Shepp was one of the chief advocates 
of free jazz. Later he spent several 
years as a university teacher. Today his 
improvisations are made against a 
more precise harmonic background, 
but he has lost none of his militant 
sharpness (“Go Down Moses”) or his 
power of expression. “Billie's Bossa”, 
for example, is virile bossa nova, its 
shape emphasized by the forceful 
playing of the pianist. It is a far cry 
from the delicate improvisations of a 
Jodo Gilberto or a Tom Jobim, Shepp’s 
name has now joined the roll of the 
great saxophonists (Coleman Hawkins, 
Dexter Gordon, John Coltrane and 
Sonny Rollins) who have left their mark 
on the history of jazz. 
Tommy Flanagan. 
Positive Intensity 
Tommy Flanagan (piano), Ron Carter 
(bass), Roy Haynes (drums). 
CD Sony Music 467692 2 
Another sparkling recording from 
this sophisticated pianist from Detroit, 
the cradle of several jazz pianists, who 
was for many years accompanist to Ella 
Fitzgerald. Flanagan's playing is calm, 
economical, balanced and, to quote 
the title of one of the tracks cn this 
compact, “Smooth as the Wind”. The 
refined music he distils, notably in 
“52nd Street Theme” (a beboppers’ 
old faithful) classes him as the direct 
heir of Bud Powell. 
HM ISABELLE LEYMARIE 
CLASSICAL 
Karol Szymanowski. 
Work for violin and piano 
Annick Roussin (violin), 
Pascal Le Corre (piano) 
CD Accord 201122 
Situated in time between Chopin 
and the post-1945 Polish School, the 
composer Szymanowski is to Poland 
what Janacek was to Czechoslovakia 
and Bartok was to Hungary. More 
innovative than Janécek but perhaps 
less so than Bartok, his work is, 
undeservedly, far too little known. 
Recordings of his chamber music are 
even more rare than those of his 
symphonic or operatic works. His 
“Sonata Opus 9" reveals the influence 
of Brahms or of Richard Strauss, but 
one cannot fail to be struck by the 
extraordinary, magical beauty of his 
“Myths Opus 30” (1916) in which he 
pays tribute to the Greek myths that 
have always exercised a certain 
fascination over him. His genius comes 
into full flower in his remarkable 
“Berceuse Opus 52". 
Ysang Yun.Garak—>5 Studies 
for flute, Octet, Concerto for flute 
and orchestra 
Pierre-Yves Artaud (flute), Jacqueline 
Mefano {piano), the 2E2M Ensembie, 
CD ADDA 571166 
Ysang Yun was born in Korea in 
1917. After a stormy period of political 
dissent, he has settled in Germany 
where he teaches music and 
composes. The mest ambitious of his 
works on this recording is his 
“Concerto”, written in 1977. It 
contrasts the orchestra, representing 
the metamorphoses of nature, with the 
solo flute, beautifully played by Pierre 
  
Yves Artaud, which evokes a girl and 
her almost sensuous attachment to a 
statue of Buddha. This is an 
entrancing, rather traditional work, 
whose internal rhythms remind us of 
the composer's origins. 
Granados by Alicia de Larrocha 
Allegro de concerto, Danza lenta, 
Goyescas, El Pelele. 
CD RCA Victor Red Seal RD 60408 
The great Spanish pianist Alicia de 
Larocha has recorded Granados’ 
“Goyescas” at least three times—in 
1964 for Erato, a 1967 LP for Decca, 
and in 1989 and 1990 for this 
recording (there is also an old LP by 
Everest Records, which brings together 
recordings made by Granados himself). 
A special tribute to the artist Goya, the 
“Goyescas”, dating from 1911, borrow 
from the fantasies of Goya's paintings, 
Spanish folklore and twentieth-century 
experiments in keyboard technique. 
Alicia de Larrocha brings out the 
morbid undertones and the secret, 
penetrating dance rhythms of the 
“Goyescas” with consummate skill. 
From the resonance of this original 
music she draws out a new sense of 
pathos and melancholy. 
George and [ra Gershwin. 
Girl Crazy 
Under the direction of John Mauceri 
CD 7559-79250-2 
Produced on Broadway in 1930 
during the Depression, this musical 
comedy by George Gershwin had a 
second great success in the 1940s 
with the film version starring Judy 
Garland and Mickey Rooney. The very 
feeble libretto is based on the idea, 
already in vogue at the time, of going 
back to the land. Ira Gershwin’s often 
remarkable lyrics gave rise to a series 
of hit numbers such as “Bidin’ my 
Time", “Embraceable You” and “I got 
rhythm”. One has a feeling that George 
Gershwin is somewhat cramped by the 
musical comedy straitjacket and is 
already thinking in terms of the more 
serious operatic form which he brought 
to fruition with “Porgy and Bess”. This 
compact is a welcome addition to the 
recorded history of his work. 
MH CiLaupE GLAYMAN 49

## [Page 50](091412engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

TEE ey i 
LETTERS 
TO THE EDITOR 
Eo, 0 Tg ft ols 
CALLING ALL COURIER 
READERS 
For many years now, | have been 
a regular reader of the Unesco 
Courier, which provides a window 
on the world and on others and 
seeks to bring people together in 
that noblest of pursuits, the 
quest for knowledge. In order to 
complete my collection of the 
Courier, | am looking for the 
following numbers of the French 
edition: July-August 1956; 
October 1960, January, April and 
July-August 1962, April 1965, 
May 1968 and January 1982. 
In addition, for anybody who 
may be interested, | have on 
offer 113 copies of the French 
edition, covering the period from 
1964 to 1980, including 
complete sets for 1976 and 
1978. 
 
Harold Labesse, 
12, avenue Benolst Lévy, 
94160 Saint-Mandé (France) 
LEAL Se Dh sR Re LE 
EDUCATION IN MEXICO 
In the first instalment of your 
survey of Unesco's first 45 years, 
published in your October 1991 
number (“Children in Danger"), 
you omitted to mention certain 
important developments that 
took place in 1947, 
At the Unesco General 
Conference held in that year, 
Manual Gual Vidal, who was later 
to become Mexico's Minister of 
Education, was the first person 
to put forward a proposal for a 
basic education project. This 
project was approved in plenary 
session and was implemented in 
part of the Mexican State of 
Nayarit. At the same time, an 
experiment along similar lines 
was conducted in the Marbial 
region of Haiti. 
50 A step-by-step account of this 
M exican experiment is given in 
the book Santiago Ixcuintia by 
Mario Aguilera Dorantes and 
Isidro Castillo, published in 
Mexico City in 1970, which is an 
extremely useful source of 
information for teachers in 
Mexico and elsewhere. 
| realize that you cannot go 
into details of all UnEsco’s 
activities in the 45-year period 
covered by your interesting 
chronological survey, but in view 
of the decisive role played by 
your Organization in the field of 
education, especially in rural 
areas, | wanted to make this 
additional point of clarification. 
Maria Elena Guerra y Sanchez 
Patzcuaro (Michoacan), Mexico 
a 
WHAT ABOUT MUSIC 
EDUCATION? 
in your review of the year 1953 in 
“Unesco’s First 45 Years” 
(November 1991 issue on 
“Environment and 
Development”), you failed to 
mention, among other important 
events, the foundation in - 
Brussels of the International 
Society for Music Education 
(ISME). 
Perhaps this was an oversight 
on your part. 
J. Lohmann 
Rébénacq (France) 
The International Society for 
Music Education (ISME} was 
established in 1953 at an 
International Conference on 
Music Education which was held 
at Unesco’s instigation and was 
attended by teachers from forty 
countries. The Society's aim is to 
make music education an 
integral part of general education 
and community life and to 
stimulate it as a profession. For 
reasons of space, we have only 
been able to give a brief overview 
of the wide range of activities in 
which UNEsco has engaged or 
with which it has been 
associated. It is possible that a 
fuller version of this 45-year 
chronology may eventually appear 
in book form. 
  
AEE IRENE 
CITIZEN OF THE WORLD 
As a long-standing reader of the 
Unesco Courier, 1 should like to 
congratulate you on the high 
standard of your publication, 
which | read with great pleasure 
each month. 
Living as | do in the multi- 
ethnic microcosm formed by the 
island of Réunion (who could 
imagine a more aptly evocative 
name?), | particularly appreciate 
the variety and abundance of the 
illustrations, information and 
opinions you put together and 
the way in which they relate to 
one another. 
| hope you will go on working 
for greater mutual knowledge and 
understanding between peoples. 
Sylvie Buren 
La Ravine-des-Cabris (Réunion) 
DEFT g $1 Th 
PHARAOH'S TREASURE 
IN PETRA 
As a lecturer on cultural tours, | 
know Petra well and was glad 
that you published a feature on 
that splendid site in your January 
1992 number (“The Demographic 
Dimension”). 
However, the monument you 
reproduce in the photograph on 
page 47 is incorrectly identified. 
Contrary to what the caption 
states, the monument shown is 
not the Cbelisk Tomb but the 
Khazne Firaoun (or “Pharaoh’s 
Treasure”), which is the most" 
important and perhaps the most 
beautifu! monument on the site. 
Monique Tillot   
a Tha oT fier at] 
THE INVISIBLE WOMAN 
| was amazed to read in Perdita 
Huston’s article “Women and 
Nature: an alliance for survival” 
(on page 15 of your March 1992 
number “Women speak out on 
the environment”) that 
“Women’s labour has been 
unpaid and thus considered 
without ‘value’ since time 
began”. 
What an outrageous ideal 
Quite the contrary, the 
completely unpaid work women 
do, especially in the home, is of 
incalculable value. 
How can anybody make such a 
preposterous statement? 
G. Sirven 
Saint-Céré (France) 
If Perdita Huston had really said 
what you claim she did, your 
indignation would be quite 
Justified But she did not. Her 
view coincides with your own. In 
the passage in question, she 
points an accusing finger at those 
people who consider the unpaid 
work done by women as being the 
“bounty of nature” and who 
refuse to take account of it, since 
they regard it as without “value”. 
The Courier devoted its entire 
June 1980 number (“The Invisible 
Woman”) to an examination of 
the factors which denigrate the 
importance of the economic role 
performed by women in society. 
 
CORRECTION 
We should like to apologize for two inad- 
vertent editing errors made in Annick Tre- 
guer's article “The Chicanos—muralists 
with a message”, which appeared on 
page 22 of our April 1992 Issue on “Art 
in the street”. The second line of the 
piece of dialogue which opened the 
article should have read “Because there 
aren't any museums in East Los 
Angeles” and not “Because there aren't 
any museums in Los Angeles”. The 
lower photograph on page 24 shows a 
scene in Chicano Park, San Diego, and 
not in Estrada Courts, East Los Angeles.     

## [Page 51](091412engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

tt 
J INESco 
= Ungsco 
Published monthly In 36 languages and in Braille by Unesco, The 
United Nations Educational, Sclentific and Cultural Organization. 
31. rue Frangois Bonvin, 75015 Paris, France, 
  
Director: Bangat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Ade! Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: G lian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkn 
French edition; Alain Lévéque, Neda EI Khazen 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, Aracell Ortiz ge Urbina 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Illustrations: Anane Bailey (Tel, 45.68.46,90) 
Documentation: Violette Ringelstein (Tel. 45.68.46.85! 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel. 45.68.46.87) 
Secretariat: Annie Brachet (Tel, 45.68.47.15), Mouna Chatta 
Administrative Assistant: Prithi Perera 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and Korean: 
Marie-Dominique Bourgeais (45 68 46 92) 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Alexander Melnikov (Moscow) 
German; Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Arabic: E!-Said Mahmoud El. Sheniti (Cairo) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: H. Sadough Vanini (Teheran) 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra ligazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Wall Mohammad Zaki (Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras | Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Yi Tong-ok (Secul) 
Swahlli: Leonard J. Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene: 
Blazo Krstajic (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: S.J), Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Basque: Gurutz Larranaga (San Sebastian) 
Vietnamese: Do Phuong (Hano!) 
Pashto: Ghotl Khawer (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sakoto) 
Bangla: Abdullah A.M. Sharafucdin (Dhaka) 
Ukrainian: Victor Stelmakh (Kiev 
Czech and Slovak: Milan Syrucek (Prague) 
Galiclan: Xabier Senin Fernandez (Santiago de Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION 
Assistant: Marie-Noelle Branet (Tel. 45,68 45.89) 
Subscriptions: Marie-Thérése Hardy (Tel, 45.68.4565), 
Jocelyne Despouy, Alpha Diakité, Jacqueline Louise Julie, 
Manichan Ngonekeo, Michel Ravassarg, Michelle Robillard, 
Mohamed Salan El Din, Sylvie Van Rijsewijk, 
Ricardo Zamora-Perez 
Customer service: Ginette Motreff (Tel. 45.68.45.64) 
Accounts: (Te. 45.68.45.65) 
Mall: Martial Ameges (Tel, 45.68.45.70) 
Shipping: Hector Garcia Sandoval (Tel. 45.68,47.50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. Tel - 45.68.45 65 
1 year: 211 French francs, 2 years: 396 FF, 
Birder for one year's issues: 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
1 year: 132 French francs. 2 years: 211 FF, 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to the 
order of Unesco 
Individual articles and photographs not copynghled may be reprinted 
oroviding the credit line reads “Reprinted from the Unesco Courler”, 
plus date of issue, and three voucher copies are sent Lo the editor 
Signed articles reprinted must bear author's name. Noncopyright 
photos will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannol 
he returned unless accompanied by an nternational reply coupon 
covering postage. Signed articles express the opinions of the authors 
ENC 40 not necessary represent the opinions of Unesco or those of 
the aditars of tne Unesco Courier. Photo captions and neaclnes are 
wren by the Unesco Courier staff, The uoundaries on maps 
puzhshed n the magazine do not Imply official endorsement or 
accantance by Unesco or the Unitad Nations. The Unesco Courier is 
produced in microform [microfilm and/or microfiche) by: (1) Unesco, 
7 Place de Fontenoy, 74700 Pans; (2) Universty Microfilms (Xerox), 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100 U.S.A; (3) N,C.R. Mwrocard Edition. 
Indian Head Inc., 111 West 40th Street, New York, L.S.A.; |4) Bel 
snd Howell Co,, Old Mansteld Road. Wooster, Ohio 44691, 
USA, 
  
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) 
DEPOT LEGAL: C1 - JUIN 1992 . 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71842 - DIFFUSE PAR LES 
NMBP 
Photocompasition: Le Courrier de |'Unesco 
Protogravure-impression: Mauryimorimeur S.A 
Z.|.. route d'Etampes. 45330 Malesherbes 
ISSN 0304-3118 N° 8-1992.0P1 92-505 A 
| 
- = E-Ten
 ' 
Sy ole et a Su SSS SS a i be de ORS pS 
Ef 
bl | EN » 
- -» — — - hd — ® 
’ i) . . oF - ~ VY , 
1" SAP I ea TR epee tr 
1 r om a Nt t a gre XS OO 
1 LICIIIC OL LIC HICAL 153 
Ae. Bul Sr dh LL Nut WEL Ded Lg LL Nl Lo LAH 
J 91 '. Aververant 10% 
' RK \ cfm 11920 AN in Bae WN 
av _ } . em WA ’ | i - 
J ma le 
  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Cover, page 3: © V. Balu, Bangalore. Back cover: © Martine Viala, Marseilles. Page 2: © Monique 
Constant-Desportes, Fort-de-France. Page 4: © Edouard Bailby, Paris. Page 5: René Burri 
© Magnum, Paris. Page 6: R. Wollmann © Gamma, Paris. Page 7: Sebastido Salgado © Magnum, 
Paris. Pages 9, 12: © IMA-Philippe Maillard, Paris. Page 11: Roland © Artephot, Paris. Page 13: 
© Cosmos, Paris, Pages 14, 15, 14 17: (portraits of Voltaire) © Viollet Collection, Paris. Pages 14 
(below), 17: © Viollet Collection, Paris. a 16: © Archives Snark/Edimedia, Paris. Pages 18-19: 
H. Cartier-Bresson © Magnum, Paris. Page 20: © Keystone, Paris. Page 21: © Margaret Bourke- 
White/Life /Cosmos. Pages 22, 40-41: Leonard Freed © Magnum, Paris. Page 23: I Mulatier 
© Gamma, Paris. Page 24 (above): Eric Jumelais © Gamma, ae Page 24 (below): Philippart de 
Foy © Explorer, Paris. Page 25 (above): Ferrero/Labat © Jacana, Paris. Page 25 (below): 
FE. A dersor/inton © Gamma, Paris. Pages 26-27: © NASA/S.P.L./Cosmos. Page $s: © C. Sauva- 
cot, Paris. Page 29: © Sandra and Christian Gamby, Paris. Page 30: © Viollet Collection, 
aris/R. d’Uckermann Collection. Page 31: © Noak-Le bar Floréal, Paris. Page 32: Lavaud © Arte- 
hot, Paris. Page 33: Varga © Artephot, Paris-Hermitage, St. Petersburg. Page 34: © Roland 
lichaud, Paris-Millet Library, Innit Page 35: © Roland and Sabrina Michaud, Paris-Biblio- 
théque de I’Arsenal, Paris. Page 36: © AIAP/Bibliothéque des Arts, reproduced from UNESCO, 
40 artists, 40 countries. Page 37: Samuel Jouglet © Namane Zakri, Paris. Pages 38-39: © Fundacién 
Dolores Olmedo Patino FART A ey Paris. Page 42: © Rijksmuseum Kréller- 
Miiller Collection, Otterlo, Netherlands. Page 44: UNEsco/Dominique Roger. Page 41: Thomas 
Laird © Explorer, Paris. Page 47: Varin/Visage © Jacana, Paris. Page 48: Jean-Michel Labat © Jacana, Paris.

## [Page 52](091412engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
  
 