# [099251](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

= "NR > 3 
= 
= 
w 
An 
i | - 
#
 
‘ 
5 3 
| 
We 
gw LA 
a 8 
: 
a. ’ * - 
| 7% SUDHIR KAKAR 
i 
: Fg ~ 
: - 
ba |. 
- 
#. 7 
Y 
I ADAM MICHNIK 
Teas LEY ’ p 
 
  

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
     
    
    
    
We invite readers to send us 
photographs to be considered 
for publication in this feature. 
Your photo should show a 
painting, a sculpture, piece of 
architecture or any other 
subject which seems to be an 
example of cross-fertilization 
between cultures. 
Alternatively, you could send 
us pictures of two works from 
different cultural backgrounds 
in which you see some 
striking connection or 
resemblance. Please add a 
short caption to all 
photographs. 
     | 
  
   
   
[Za 1 
      
Pos wry 
aT LC 
&i \ 
bd ne. : 
ie i 
-
 
we 
w
w
 
» 
  
v
e
r
 
   
] 'N
 
¢ 
Er
) 
   R
e
d
e
s
 
IN 
ve
y 
A
R
 
Untitled j “With my subscription | am enclosing this gift | made 4 
©1992, oil painting (10x 15 em.) to thank you for all the wonderful picture ideas your magazine i 
by Dominique Baroux | 
sent us this small pointillist painting. Fascinated by Persian art 
because it reminds her of the embroidery she did in her 
childhood, the artist has used needles and sharpened bamboo 
to place fine dots of oil paint on paper. The effect “resembles 
grains of sand or tiny pearls,” says the artist. “My work is only 
the end product of long inner questioning, rhythm, prayer and 
By | —e 
R
e
 
i 
to

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  SE Sa py 
Contents 
DECEMBER 1994 
 
Cover: 
Extremists destroy the mosque at 
Ayodhya in India’s Uttar Pradesh 
state on 6 December 1992, 
fomenting violent confrontations 
between Muslims and Hindus. 
[ —~ 
= Interview with Wolf Lepenies 
36 HERITAGE 
The splendour of Spis 
by Edouard Bailby 
41. GREENWATCH 
The sea’s dwindling harvest 
by France Bequette 
34 UNESCO IN ACTION 
4.0 porTRAIT 
Hryhoriy Skovoroda 
An Enlightenment philosopher of the Ukraine 
by Tatiana Zolozova 
45 gLosaL view 
S.0.S. Children 
46 ARCHIVES 
World peace begins at home 
by Cai Yuanpei 
48 ANNIVERSARY 
José Carlos Mariategui (1894-1930) 
Witness to an age 
by Alfredo Pita 
49 BOOKSHELF 
A fresh look at the past 
by Christophe Wondji 
50 Unesco Courier index 1994 
 
  
RELIGION 
AND POLITICS 
TODAY 
8 The comfort of certainty 
by Flora Lewis 
13 The embrace of the community 
by Jean Daniel 
18 Faith and reason 
by Adam Michnik 
20 The fundamentalists and science 
by Faouzia Charfi 
21 From barbarism to tolerance 
by Kanan Makiya 
22 Roads to revolution 
by Ehsan Naraghi 
23 The abdication of thought 
by Tahar Ben Jelloun 
25 Behind the veil of fundamentalism 
by Mahmoud Hussein 
27 Economism, the ally of obscurantism 
by Régis Debray 
28 India: the threat to union 
by Rasheeduddin Khan 
29 Black Sunday 
30 A new Hindu identity 
by Sudhir Kakar 
32 Fact file on world religions 
35 
Commentary by Federico Mayor 
TH rr u N E S CO “The Governments of the States parties to this Constitution on behalf of their peoples declare, 
Cc “that since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed... 
Ou RIER “that a peace based exclusively upon the political and economic arrangements of governments would not be a peace which could secure the 
unanimous, lasting and sincere support of the peoples of the world, and that the peace must therefore be founded, if it is not to fail, upon the 
intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind. 
47th year “For these reasons, the States parties .. . are agreed and determined te develop and to increase the means of communication between their peoples 
Published monthly in 30 and to employ these means for the purposes of mutual understanding and a truer and more perfect knowledge of each others lives...” 
languages and in Braille EXTRACT FROM THE PREAMBLE TO THE CONSTITUTION OF UNESCO, LONDON, 16 NOVEMBER 1945 3

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

THE& UNESCO 
OURIER 
Published monthly in 30 languages and in Braille by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization. 
31, rue Francois Bonvin, 75015 Paris, France 
Director: Bahgat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin 
French edition: Alain Lévéque, Neda El Khazen 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Features: Jasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey (Tel. 45.68.46.90) 
Documentation: José Banaag (45.68. 46.85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel. 45.68.46.87) 
Secretariat: Annie Brachet (Tel. 45.68.47.15), 
Administrative Assistant: Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and 
Korean: Mouna Chatta (45.68.47.14) 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Irina Utkina (Moscow) 
German: Dominique Anderes (Berne) 
Arabic: El-Said Mahmoud El-Sheniti (Cairo) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: Akbar Zargar (Teheran) 
Dutch: Claude Montrieux (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Urdu: Wali Mohammad Zaki (Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay: Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Yi Tong-ok (Seoul) 
Swahili: Leonard |. Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene: Aleksandra Kornhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala: Neville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Basque: Juxto Egana (Donostia) 
Thai: Duangtip Surintatip (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Do Phuong (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Nazer Mohammad Angar (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
Ukrainian: Volodymyr Vasiliuk (Kiev) 
Galician: Xabier Senin Fernandez (Santiago de Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION 
Subscriptions: Marie-Thérése Hardy (Tel. 45.68.45.65), 
Jocelyne Despouy, Jacqueline Louise-Julie, Manichan 
Ngonekeo, Michel Ravassard, Mohamed Salah El Din 
Customer service: Ginette Motreff (Tel. 45.68.45.64) 
Accounts: (Tel. 45.68.4565) 
Shipping: (Tel. 45.68.47.50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. Tel.: 45.68.45.65 
| year: 21 | French francs. 2 years: 396 FF. 
Binder for one year's issues: 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
| year: 132 French francs. 2 years: 21 | FE 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to the 
order of UNEsco 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted pro- 
viding the credit line reads “Reprinted from the Unesco Courer”, plus date 
of issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles 
reprinted must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos will be supplied 
on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompa- 
nied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles 
express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent the 
opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the Unesco Couner. Photo cap- 
tions and headlines are written by the Unesco Courier staff. The boundaries 
on maps published in the magazine do not imply official endorsement or 
acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations. The Unesco Couner is produced 
In microform (microfilm and/or microfiche) by: (I) Unesco, 7 Place de 
Fontenoy, 75700 Paris; (2) University Microfilms (Xerox), Ann Arbor, 
Michigan 48100 US.A.: (3) N.CR. Microcard Edition, Indian Head Inc. 
| 11 West 40th Street, New York, USA. (4) Bell and Howell Co., Old Mans- 
field Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, USA 
IMPRIME AU LUXEMBOURG (Printed in Luxemburg) 
DEPOT LEGAL: CI - DECEMBRE 1994 ' 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - DIFFUSE PAR LES NMPP 
Photocomposition, photogravure: Le Courrier de "UNESCO 
impression: IMPRIMERIE SAINT-PAUL, 2, rue Christophe-Plantin 
L-2988 Luxembourg 
ISSN 0041-5278 N* 12-1994-OPI-94-532A 
This issue comprises 52 pages and a 4-page insert between 
pages 10-11 and 42-43 
  
\ 
onth by month 
It was in Tirana twenty years ago. Our guide—a Party member, of 
course—was unwilling to linger in front of the ageless and clearly 
abandoned mosque. 
“Doesn’t anyone come and pray here any more?” 
The man’s smile was slightly condescending. Surely we knew 
that religion is an optical illusion, a smokescreen laid down by the 
oppressors among the oppressed? Marx had summed up the matter 
perfectly when he described religion as “the opium of the people.” 
There was no reason why religion should survive once its social and 
political foundations had disappeared, as they had in Albania. Clear- 
sighted peoples can look truth in the face. 
What do the clear-sighted see today? One thing is undeniable. It 
is the foundations of socialism that have collapsed, in Albania and 
in the rest of eastern Europe, and that at a time when religion 
occupies an important place in peoples’ lives. Or perhaps it is 
simply reoccupying the rightful place of which its enemies had 
vainly tried to deprive it. 
But the collapse of European communism has generated shock 
waves that go much further than this swing of the pendulum. The 
bankruptcy of totalitarianism in the East, which has led to that of 
authoritarian nationalism in the South, has created a political and 
ideological vacuum that fundamentalism is trying to fill. Where reli- 
gion was until recently gagged by or in thrall to the state, it is now 
being used as a lever with which to challenge the state; yesterday 
excluded from the political reckoning, today it is summoned by the 
fundamentalists to fill the entire political arena. In the process it is 
denying individual values in the name of the community, repressing 
freedom in the name of dogma, and extinguishing intelligence in the 
name of faith. 
The relationship between politics and religion has always been tur- 
bulent, but humanists all over the world are starting to feel alarmed 
about its latest episode—fundamentalism. In an attempt to under- 
stand the emergence of fundamentalism and its extremist deviations 
towards intolerance, violence and crime, a meeting of “Intellec- 
tuals for a Single World” was held in New Delhi earlier this year. Enti- 
tled “Religion and Politics Today”, the meeting was jointly organized 
by the Unesco Courier, the Rajiv Gandhi Foundation and World Media 
Network. 
The present issue presents some of the highlights of the New Delhi 
symposium, contributions to a debate that is far from over. 
BAHGAT ELNADI AND ADEL RIFAAT

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  
Hl Less than two years ago you published 
a book about the bankruptcy of European 
intellectuals. Would you write the same 
book today? 
—A distinction has to be made between the 
rest of Europe and Germany. In Germany, 
intellectuals are unable to handle the new 
situation that has arisen from reunifica- 
tion. The greatest challenge facing the 
country today is how to become a 
“normal” nation-state within the Euro- 
pean Union. Certainly it is not an easy 
task, but intellectuals are not making 
enough commitment to it. And there isn’t 
enough of what I would call “intellectual 
patriotism” (the eighteenth century has 
given us a wonderful definition of patrio- 
ENTER VIEW 
tism as the position adopted by those who, 
without any official power, commit them- 
selves to the public weal). For intellectuals 
this 1s a great time, one that gives them all 
kinds of opportunities to act, but they 
prefer to take up a position that is half 
candid, half contemptuous, or else they 
think about grand, utopian projects. 
Hl In Germany you head a unique institu- 
tion known as the Wissenschaftskolleg. 
What does it do? 
—The Wissenschaftskolleg is an institute for 
advanced studies in the human sciences. 
Every year we invite forty or fifty 
researchers from all over the world to work 


### 99199: Interview with Wolf Lepenies

on their own projects for ten months. The 
WOLF 
LEPENIES 
talks to 
Francois Hartog 
German sociologist Wolf Lepenies is the head of Berlin's Wis- 
senschaftskolleg, a European institute open to researchers from 
all over the world. A member of many learned societies in the 
United States, Japan, the United Kingdom, Sweden and France, 
he held the European chair at the College de France (Paris) from 
1991 to 1992. He believes that intellectuals have an important 
political role to play in Europe today and calls on them to 
abandon purely ideological debates for the sake of more 
immediate, practical problems. 
main idea is to “shake up our guests pro- 
ductively”, so that at the end of a year 
spent in contact with other temperaments, 
other disciplines and other theoretical tra- 
ditions, they can cast a fresh eye on their 
own work and question what had previ- 
ously seemed obvious. We also set up what 
we call priority groups. This year, for 
example, we have two groups working on 
theoretical biology. 
Hl The Wissenschaftskolleg was founded 
in Berlin at a time when the city occupied 
a very special position in Europe. Have 
the collapse of the Berlin Wall and German 
reunification changed its situation? 
—Yes, our role is changing. We thought

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 99199: Interview with Wolf Lepenies

that more and more people would be inter- 
ested in internal German questions and 
that we would have to concentrate far more 
on Eastern Europe. But we are also starting 
to broaden our scope and commitment to 
questions concerning the developing coun- 
tries. We want to extend our work to com- 
parative cultural studies. 
HM Since 1990 Germany has been a nation 
but a nation that is still in the making. . .. 
—Until 1990 we were hoping that the two 
German states would eventually, in the very 
long run, become one. History decided oth- 
erwise. Paradoxically, in a context in which 
we should be thinking in terms of doing 
away with nation states Germany has to 
start by becoming a nation state like any 
other by developing its own national prin- 
ciples. That is Germany's big problem. We 
are torn between our desire to rapidly create 
a united Europe and the need to begin by 
creating a unified Germany. 
WM German unification has been seen in 
various ways. Heiner Miiller, for example, 
talks of a colonial process regarding the 
former German Democratic Republic 
(GDR), and Jens Reich describes the 
impression of foreignness (Verfremdung) 
that someone from the East may feel when 
arriving in the West.” 
—Both views make sense. But it must be 
said that there is a certain reciprocity. This 
sense of foreignness is found in both East 
and West. Even now I feel a foreigner in 
many parts of East Germany, but a for- 
eigner in a positive sense, spontaneously 
discovering something new and unex- 
pected. The real difference is that in the 
West this foreignness is experienced as a 
change of scenery, an encounter with some- 
thing new, whereas in the East itis felt as an 
alienation or a threat. 
As far as colonization is concerned, it 
is true only insofar as West Germans 
assume that they are on the right track and 
that 1t’s up to the East Germans to catch up 
with them. It is a colonialist attitude to be 
  
   
convinced you are right and to want to 
impose your ideas on others. 
We have not asked ourselves enough 
questions about whether there were things 
worth saving in the former GDR. Much 
could be said about this, from the role of 
women to the health-care system and edu- 
cation—the polytechnics, the role of the 
teacher outside the classroom, and so forth. 
But the colonization theory doesn’t 
hold up to closer scrutiny. It doesn’t cor- 
respond to what has really happened. In 
1989 it was possible to believe that a new 
phase of ultra-modern industrialization 
and massive investment for profit was 
beginning. But nothing of the sort hap- 
pened. If a colontalist operation of that 
kind had taken place, we wouldn’t be in the 
economic straits we are now. Today the 
state has to do almost everything that we 
expected of the market economy! 
Moreover, it would be wrong to think 
that the East Germans were taken 
unawares and were forced to adopt 
Western lifestyles. In the East there was a 
sense of expectation along these lines, and 
the West was quick to respond. There was 
a conjunction of interests here. 
WM We are finding out that it is impossible 
to write the history of the GDR without 
rewriting that of the Federal Republic 
because of the extent to which the two 
were intertwined. 
—That 1s true. But the paradox remains 
that although the two histories are bound 
together, the mentalities and lifestyles that 
evolved over the same time-period are not. 
The problem today is how to adjust these 
two mentalities. 
HM Were some of the illusions of 1989 
and the mistakes that followed the results 
of our failure to consider the dimension of 
time? 
—Yes. We didn’t think for a moment about 
what time might signify as an overall expe- 
rience for the individual, for nations, for 
peoples and states. We simply did not ask

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 99199: Interview with Wolf Lepenies

what it might mean for the rest of Germany 
that a large part of the German people had 
lived under totalitarian systems since 1933 
(the Third Reich, then the post-war com- 
munist regime). This was an oversight that 
is costing us dearly in Europe today. 
HB Is the expression “constitutional patri- 
otism” (referring to the 1949 constitution 
of the Federal Republic) suggested by 
Jurgen Habermas still a valid response to 
what is happening today? 
—I don’tbelieve it goes far enough. If one 
tries to promote a widespread and reason- 
able allegiance to German democracy, it is 
not enough to tell the Germans that it is 
necessary and desirable to opt for consti- 
tutional patriotism. For me that is too cold 
and calculating. But we can’t do without a 
certain kind of patriotism, i.e. a feeling of 
belonging to a country and a society. 
B Outbreaks of xenophobia suddenly 
increased in 1991-1992. How worrying 
are these explosions of violence? 
—Of course there is plenty to worry about 
since the symbols of national socialism are 
still being brandished in Germany. All the 
same I think there is a glimmer of hope. 
How many of the people who wave these 
symbols around and commit violent acts in 
their name really should be considered 
neo-fascists? We do not know how far this 
hides a more general protest that seeks to 
express itself in ways that cause the greatest 
outrage—and in Germany the best way 
to do that is via national socialism. 
HB These attacks also bring up the 
problem of immigrant integration. The 
former Federal Republic always claimed not 
to be a country of immigration although it 
has never ceased accepting foreigners. 
How can reality be squared with the 
country’s principles and laws? 
—Germany is in fact a country of immi- 
gration and the problem is that we are not 
ready to incorporate this into our political 
thinking and practice. Immigration rates 
  
‘A lot of consideration can 
be given to cultural 
differences, but a country 
also has a right to expect a 
certain ‘cultural solidarity’. 
Without that the question. 
of nationality will not be 
into Germany are twice those into the 
United States, a traditional country of 
immigration. Let us openly be a country of 
immigration and then set quotas, for no 
country can open its borders to everyone. 
Maybe the fundamental problem is that 
we do not make the distinction between 
requests for asylum and immigration. The 
right of asylum cannot, of course, be sub- 
ject to quotas. I think it would be a good 
thing to introduce a certain sense of reality 
into our legislation. 
Bl Do you think there will be a debate on 
possible modifications to the right to citi- 
zenship? 
—We really must get away from the notion 
that citizenship is determined by lineage 
and birthplace. It should be linked to proof 
of a person’s readiness to adapt to a certain 
culture and live within it. A lot of consid- 
eration can be given to cultural differences, 
but a country also has a right to expect a cer- 
tain “cultural solidarity”. Without that the 
question of nationality will not be resolved. 
BM Does the Wissenschaftskolleg’s sci- 
entific policy fit into a larger political frame- 
work? 
— I'll answer with a specific example. In 
1989 I had the idea of founding a similar 
institute in Budapest. Today this institute 
exists, and its foundation might serve as an 
example of how to avoid certain mistakes. 
The first principle was that it should not be 
a bilateral institution. I am against all forms 
of bilateralism in matters of cultural rela- 
tions. The Collegium Budapest is sup- 
ported by six European countries: Ger- 
many, Austria, France, The Netherlands, 
Sweden and Switzerland. That was an 
important basic condition for its success. 
The second principle was not to play at 
charity. The division of Europe was a hand- 
icap for the West as much as the East. Both 
sides suffered. Both sides must help each 
other by by keeping this common experi- 
ence in mind. 
MW Designed in and for a bi-polar world that 
has ceased to exist, the European Commu- 
nity today seems to be at a standstill. There 
seem to be difficulties in translating the 
new situation into political terms. What can 
intellectuals say or do about this? 
—One of the intellectual’s main duties is to 
attack the polarized image that exists every- 
where in the European Community, 
according to which there are those who 
give and those who receive. There is little 
doubt as to who gives and who receives. 
This Community attitude is derived from 
the idea of financial adjustment. This is 
how we are behaving today towards the 
rest of Europe: we see the possible entry of 
countries like the Czech Republic, Hun- 
gary, Slovakia and Poland from a single 
angle, i.e. just how far can the “giver” 
countries allow themselves “to go”, that is, 
how many more “receiving” countries can 
the Community take in? We are not pre- 
pared to recognize that the entry of these 
countries is an opportunity that would 
make sacrifices worthwhile. I think that 
working for the overthrow of this narrow- 
minded economic point of view in Euro- 
pean thought is a very important intellec- 
tual task for the future. || 
* Heiner Miiller, a playwright; Jens Reich, co- 
founder of the Citizens’ Forum and a 
presidential candidate in the 1994 national 
clections. 
A — 
FRANGOIS HARTOG is a French historian.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

|__—«"N [LEE JES] 


### 99217: The Comfort of certainty

‘The comfort of sortainey 
by Flora Lewis 
  
Some years ago in Mozambique, a Por- 
tuguese settler who had decided to stay 
on after independence was showing me around 
Luanda. We came to a particularly handsome, 
newly restored church, and he explained that as 
part of the recently launched reform policy to 
enhance people’s confidence, the Marxist gov- 
ernment had decided to end its compaign against 
the church. “The trouble”, he said, “was that 
both promised heaven, but we promised to 
deliver it on earth. We haven’t succeeded.” 
That is the straightforward fact which led to 
the collapse of communism-—an attempt to pro- 
vide an all-encompassing secular faith to regu- 
late all aspects of man’s relation to man, making 
the idea of man’s relation to God not only super- 
fluous but subversive. It has failed, and where it 
was imposed there has been a robust revival of 
the traditional religion, a testimony of the deeply 
felt need of all kinds of people with differing cul- 
tures for something to believe in beyond the 
evidence of everyday life. One way or another, 
people do seck meaning, a sense of purpose, 
that politics cannot adequately provide. 
But seldom does religion, by itself, provide 
the organizing mechanisms through which soci- 
eties can deal with the perennial issues of power 
and the need to adapt to changing circumstances. 
That is why there is always an element of poli-

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 99217: The Comfort of certainty

Friday prayers at the Istiglal 
(independence) mosque in 
Jakarta, Indonesia. 
tics, even in the most fundamentalist states, even 
in the most totalitarian dictatorships, though it 
may be hidden in religious rhetoric or a “cult” 
(a word borrowed from the vocabulary of reli- 
gion) “of personality”. People have conflicting 
interests and they can be ordinary. The way 
societies deal with this is politics, whatever it 
may be called. Politics and religion are pre- 
sented as two different worlds, the one material, 
often self-serving, the other spiritual. But they 
are inevitably intertwined, and can no more be 
isolated from each other in social life than body 
and soul can be kept apart in a living person. 
Take that as given. The question then is their 
impact on each other, their differing priorities, 
how they are to be reconciled. The separation of 
church and state, which does not necessarily 
mean their opposition, is a Western idea that 
emerged from the Renaissance and the Refor- 
mation, buttressed by the tremendous advance 
of science into the realms of mystery which 
once could only be penetrated by religion, by 
faith. Just now, quite apart from the familiar 
challenges that knowledge of cosmology, of 
physics, of biochemistry present to religious 
dogma, there are troubling new questions posed 
by innovative techniques in biology, lumped 
under the new word “bioethics”. These have 
to do with genetic manipulation, extra-corporeal 
conception, the possibility of women, fertile or 
not, giving birth to somebody clse’s genetic 
baby. The possibilities didn’t exist before, so 
neither did the questions. Are the answers to be 
supplied by politics (legislation), religious 9  

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

authority, or individual choice? A great debate 
is beginning in Western countries. A bill is 
“already before the French Senate. Religious 
views will certainly play an important role wher- 
ever these questions are being faced. 
One nation, under God 
In any case, separation of church and state has 
never been so complete or so widespread as the 
concept suggests. There are modern democracies 
with formally established churches. Israel and 
England are examples. The Catholic church has 
special status in many countries, such as Italy, 


### 99217: The Comfort of certainty

THE CHURCH 
LUD RET 
In which canons is it 
~ written that the Tsar is to 
govern the Church, change 
the dogmas and incense the 
altar? His only duty is to 
watch over it and protect 
it from the wolves which 
would destroy it, not to 
teach how to believe and 
how to make the sign of the 
Cross. 
ARCHPRIEST AVVAKUM, 
Russian theologian (1620/21-1682)  
Spain and Poland. Germany provides publicly 
funded support for both Catholic and Protestant 
church institutions. In the United States, the 
tax system gives indirect support to churches of 
all kinds, and it can be a matter of political or 
judicial decision as to whether or not any group 
claiming to be a religion actually qualifies for this 
privilege. 
The two countries which historically and 
emphatically insist on separating church and 
state came to that decision for opposite reasons. 
In France, after the 1789 Revolution, it was to 
protect the state from the power of the church, 
deemed abusive under the Ancien Regime. In the 
United States, it was to protect the churches 
from the power of the state, to ensure the rights 
of religious diversity and religious dissidents, a 
major motive for the original colonization of 
North America. 
Nonetheless, the sessions of Congress open 
with a prayer, the pledge of allegiance is “to 
one Nation, under God” and the oath of public 
office is taken with one hand placed on the 
Bible. 
The vehemence of the introduction of reli- 
gious issues in American politics waxes and 
wanes—abortion, prayer in public schools, 
public funding for church-run schools are heated 
current controversies. The Washington Post 
writer E.J. Dionne, Jr., commenting on con- 
temporary arguments about the proper domains 
of religion and politics in the United States, 
concludes that a certain tension between the 
two is desirable, both for government and reli- 
gion, since each would lose from immunity to 
challenge excessive claims of authority. Despite 
the Constitution, whose first amendment 
adopted in 1791 reads “Congress shall make no 
law respecting an establishment of religion, or 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 99217: The Comfort of certainty

prohibiting the free exercise thereof.” The issue 
of religion and politics has never been defini- 
tively settled in the United States and probably 
never will be. Desirable or not, some tension 
persists. What is consistent is the requirement of 
tolerance, room for difference. 
Not just a religion 
This is the core of the issue, the fundamental of 
democracy. It isn’t about the coexistence of reli- 
gion and politics, but about whether religion 
claiming to encompass politics is compatible 
with democracy (or, as in Mozambique, whether 
politics claiming to liquidate religion is com- 
patible with democracy). 
Islam 1s a special case in today’s world 
because some militant Muslims, identified as 
fundamentalists or Islamicists, insist that their 
The Spring ceremony in 
Seoul's Chong Myo sanctuary, 
where the tablets listing the 
names and accomplishments of 
Korea's Confucian kings are 
kept. 
faith gives the basis for all necessary social reg- 
ulation, all functions of government. Aliza 
[zetbegovic, the president of Bosnia and Herze- 
govina, wrote in his Islamic Declaration of 1970 
that Islam is “not just a religion”, an idea that 
helped provoke the conflict in his benighted 
country. Though they used existing secular law 
to run for election in hopes of gaining power 
(thwarted by a coup) Algerian fundamentalists 
in the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) declared 
that once they were in a position to rule, no 
constitution or legislation would be appropriate 
because the Qur’an contains, in God’s words, all 
the regulation that state and society require. 
There 1s no room, in this view, for choice and 
interpretation. Authority claims to know what 
God intends, so disagreement, rebuttal and 
opposition are not just to the mortals who rule 11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

but to the will of God himself. This is not com- 
patible with democracy because, though they 
base their fiats on scripture, these are people 
telling other people what they must believe. 
Even if scripture 1s considered infallible, the 
people who say what it means and how its 
instructions and denunciations are to be applied 
are not infallible. The attempt to impose their 
single-mindedness takes especially ugly, repul- 
sive form in the campaign in parts of North 
Africa to murder intellectuals for the sheer 
reason that they are the ones most able and 
likely to formulate and express other ideas. Nei- 
ther liberty nor democracy can tolerate this vio- 
lent breach of tolerance. 
The phony Islamic threat 
The American Arabist Edward W. Said attacks 
those who raise alarm at what he calls “the 
phony Islamic threat” by pointing out how 
much diversity exists within Islam, how many 
different interpretations have been offered and 
widely accepted over the centuries. The cur- 
rent militant version has no better claim to 
exclusive truth than the others, though it makes 
its assertions more aggressively. It is spawned, 
Said argues, by reaction to “corrupt and 
mediocre governments”, not by the intrinsic 
precepts of religion itself. “Islam is a cultural 
identity”, he says, “not a synonym for bomb- 
throwing. The real danger in the Arab world is 
not the people, but the ruling elites.” 
In any case, the logic of proclaiming “God’s 
will” as the answer to the problems of society is 
a closed circle. If what is must be because God 
Below, Francois Mitterrand at his investiture as President of 
France at the Elysée Palace, Paris, on 21 May, 1981. 
Below right, Bill Clinton, 42nd President of the United 
States, taking the oath of office on the steps of the Capitol 
in Washington, DC, on 20 January 1993. 
  
willed it so, then how is urgent change to be 
brought about? How are people to help them- 
selves and others? How is hope to be found on 
carth, the only place we surely know? This, 
along with violence and persecution, is what so 
offends democrats when they warn against 
allowing religion the upper hand in politics. 
The door is slammed shut against innovation, 
initiative, the individual’s responsibility to think, 
without which there can be no freedom. 
Of course, it is true that not everybody 
values democracy, and those who do also cherish 
other values which it is the duty of democracy 
to protect. Democracy does not pretend to be a 
faith, though so far as I know all religions do 
preach God’s equal concern for all human beings 
and do not make a hierarchical order of those 
who deserve His blessings. Democracy is simply 
a way of enabling society to function. It recog- 
nizes human failings and propensity to error, and 
makes it easier to correct mistakes peaceably 
than systems which claim absolute righteousness 
and can only be obeyed or overthrown. It guards 
against the sin of hubris, always a threat. 
The issue of religion and politics has come to 
the fore again in this period because of a number 
of circumstances, including the spread of democ- 
racy, the immediacy of communications which 
make people much more aware of others outside 
their own communities, and the sense of bewil- 


### 99217: The Comfort of certainty

derment, uncertainty and insecurity which the 
modern world has much magnified. But this is 
not really new; there is a tendency to recur- 
rence. The French writer Emile Zola wrote a 
century ago, “great disorders lead to great devo- 
tions”. They are the times when people most 
want the comfort of certainty. But the human 
condition cannot assure it. People need spiritual 
solace; they also need politics to cope with life 
in an ever more complex society. | 
  
QE FER SSE SC Es 
FLORA LEWIS, 
a distinguished American 
journalist specializing in 
international affairs, is a 
syndicated columnist whose 
work is widely distributed. She is 
the author of several books, the 
latest of which is Europe: Road 
to Unity (1992).

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 99218: The Embrace of the community

   
ill 
 
‘The embrace of the community 
i 
ori 
of the sovereign individual 
endently of his religion and 
ins is a relatively recent 
It was preceded by the idea 
nunity towards which the 
5 . - . 
i ] K ! h iE - 
Let us get down to essentials. We are 
here first and foremost to know whether 
we should render unto Caesar that which is 
Caesar’s and whether the temporal can be sep- 
arated from the spiritual. 
If we believe, for whatever reason, that such 
a separation is impossible, we must conclude that 
religious belief in a divine order should dominate 
  
  
} by Jean Daniel 
BH 
Hl = 
br i 
LE > al a m= 
Bf . & yo = 
| lk i yo ¥ 
Ly i ’ ’ ! v > 
civic organization and we must consider a theo- 
cratic state as legitimate. This being the case, 
one question that arises is whether theocratic 
states can respect their minorities if they hold a 
different religion from that of the state or if 
they have no religion at all. 
However, if we consider that a separation 
between the spiritual and the temporal is desirable 
and possible, we must ask ourselves about the role 
of a secular state. Can political ethics exist without 
a spiritual basis, or laws without a transcendental 
basis? Or is the function of the secular state 
merely to organize the coexistence of different 
religious communities? If it is, then we must 
examine the categorical imperatives of a federa- 
tive government and the natural or civic rights it 
lays down. In other words, are the ethics of a god- 
less state legitimate and effective? 13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 99218: The Embrace of the community

14 
  
God as Head of State 
The English Revolution of 1688, the American 
Revolution of 1776 and the French Revolution of 
1789 were major initiating events of an anti-theo- 
cratic trend. From the Habeas Corpus Act of 1679 
to the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the 
Citizen of 1791 we can sce the emergence within 
the civic community of a movement to pass sen- 
tence of death on God and deny Him a place as 
Head of State. Secularism as it is practised in 
modern states coincides with the definition of 
religion found in Greek and Roman Antiquity. 
A Hindu celebration in 
Malaysia. 
Aristotle and Cicero regarded religion as sepa- 
rate from civic administration. The gods were 
omnipresent, but they were not necessarily obeyed. 
We should now ask ourselves what has hap- 
pened in our secular states to change the nature 
of our expectations of religion and politics. I 
hope that I shall not be accused of Gallo-cen- 
tricity if I refer to the French example, or what 
is left of it, since it is being threatened on all sides. 
In France too religion is separate from the state. 
Furthermore, with the beheading of Louis XVI, 
the death of God-as-Head-of-State was more 
than just symbolic.

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 99218: The Embrace of the community

LIVING IN 
RR 3 
Politics and religion are 
obsolete; the time has 
come for science and 
spirituality. 
. JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 
(1889-1964) 
Speech to the Sri Lankan 
Association for the Advancement - 
of Science, 
- Colombo, 15 October 1962  
In a sense the individual, transformed into a 
citizen, was born in France between 1789 and 
1791, even if almost two centuries went by 
before he reached maturity. This was a hugely 
presumptuous creation. The free thinkers, the 
radicals and the Voltaireans who had contributed 
to the Encyclopédie had contested the power 
of the Catholic church, whilst remaining mis- 
trustful of the people. The Revolutionaries and 
the members of the Constituent Assembly cre- 
ated this promethean idea of the sovereign indi- 
vidual, someone considered apart from his reli- 
gion, his origins, his environment and his social 
class. The republican state was not merely the 
arbitrator between the various communities, 
which had no legal or official existence. It was 
the expression of popular sovereignty by free 
and equal individuals. Now, communities are 
starting to spring up again in France, forming 
ranks and sometimes joining to lobby for some 
reform or other. This is undoubtedly an alarming 
trend, as we can sec today in its ludicrous con- 
vulsive culmination in the United States, in 
Lebanon and even worse in the former Soviet 
Republics and the former Yugoslavia. We are 
living in the era of communalism. 
Why is this? I should like to suggest three 
reasons. 
Man is a religious being 
First, we have forgotten that Man is a religious 
being. He is more than Aristotle’s political 
animal or Hobbes’s man who is wolf to man. He 
is, and always has been, a social and religious 
being. The individual is an invention, a con- 
struction, which appeared late in human his- 
tory. The community existed before the indi- 
vidual, who cannot exist without it. The 
individual keeps wanting to get away from the 
community, yet always wants to return to it. A 
great French Hellenist, Jean-Pierre Vernant, 
admitted that he had spent his life thinking like 
Marx that nation and religions were doomed 
by history. Later, he said, he realized that he 
could understand nothing about his subject, 
Greece, unless he resigned himself to accepting 
the permanence of both concepts within Man. 
The first conclusion is that everything in 
modern life which too brutally assails the indi- 
vidual’s integration into his religious community 
will eventually cause the individual to react, 
sometimes even to regress. The expression “reli- 
gious community” must not be taken to imply 
a community of believers. What is most often 
regretted in religious tradition 1s not faith or 
even belief, but a certain balance in a patriarchal 
society imbued with religious feeling. 
Secondly, we have for some time been going 
through a crisis of reason linked to the emer- 
gence of the individual. The cult of reason, the 
progress of science and the organized cult of 
history and the people have been celebrated 
and experienced in a religious way. The cult of 
reason has even led to totalitarian ideologies. 
The crisis of reason does not only stem from 
the ideologies that led it astray or even from 
the scientific limits that scholars have recently 
imposed on it. According to the French philoso- 
pher Emmanuel Lévinas, it results from the 
tremendous outcome of two ideologies of 
Triumph—Anniversary of the 
Universal Democratic and 
Social Republic, a French 
allegorical engraving, 1848. 

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

16 
The opening session of the 
new German Bundestag, Bonn, 
1992. 
 
progress—liberalism which ended up in nazism, 
and communism which bore Stalinism along 
with it. “World wars and local conflicts, national 
socialism, bolshevism, the camps, the gas cham- 
bers, nuclear arsenals, terrorism and unem- 
ployment—it’s all too much for one genera- 
tion.” I feel I must add to this the horrors of 
colonization and decolonization. This crisis of 
reason leads to either a temporary nihilism or a 
permanent need for transcendence. 
The powers taken from the Gods 
I attach even more importance to the third 
reason. Our century has not only dispossessed 
the Gods of all powers in civic life, of the power 


### 99218: The Embrace of the community

to destroy humanity, to recreate humankind 
and to reproduce ad infinitum. It also enjoys the 
ubiquity of images, eliminating space and time 
by means of waves. What kind of New Man 
will emerge from the mediasphere? We have no 
idea, but we do know that there is only one 
earth, one world, one planet. From a philo- 
sophical point of view, it is disconcerting to 
think that nothing human can remain unknown 
to us. But knowing that the world is one does 
not mean that its unity has been achieved. Quite 
the opposite. And it is to be feared that the 
upheavals we must suffer before we achieve this 
unity will be terrifying. Population movements, 
soaring birth-rates, the mingling of peoples, the 
mixing of cultures and the babelization of the 
world’s languages everywhere gives rise to anx- 
ieties, withdrawals and tensions. 
Remember that Babel, far from being a 
tribute to multilingual cosmopolitanism, was a 
curse. 
The Tower of Babel is a tower of punishment 
and misery. Before accepting to be happy to 
belong to planet earth, we wonder who we are 
and prefer to be what we were or what we 
thought we were. We chase after what is called 
“authenticity”, which often means reinventing 
our roots and claiming to have rediscovered 
our fathers’ religion, a religion whose message 
we sometimes use selectively in order to reject 
others. 
For some the need for the religious expresses 
a lack; for others it expresses nostalgia. It may be 
regret for a world of continuity and immanence 
where an animal feels an integral part of its com- 
munity, like “water in water”. To the French 
writer Georges Bataille, it is a need for intimacy 
with things and with others. It may also become 
regret for a transcendental and original state, 
such as the soul in Plato’s universe or paradise 
before the Fall. The historian of religions Mircea 
Eliade identified and studied rites in ancient 
Greece, India and Christianity which show or 
imply a need and desire to return to an imagined 
time of origins and an age of founding myths 
which can, when necessary, be reconstructed. 
If we contemplate the force of the three rea- 
sons I have just given, we can assess the fragility 
of regimes which claim to counter or ignore it. 
We can also understand how systems that 
manage to satisfy humankind’s basic religious 
needs can have a future, however totalitarian 
these systems may be. Finally, we can see the 
essence of despotism and the precarious nature 
of democracy. 
The sacrifice of Abraham 
We also start to fear a return to the religious 
socio-psychological phenomena described by 
the French scholar René Girard, who sees prox-

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

imity as the key to aggression and its continu- 
ance. For Girard, the enemy is the person next 
door, one’s brother, what the Ten Command- 


### 99218: The Embrace of the community

ments call one’s neighbour. If we are asked to 
love our neighbour as ourself, it is precisely 
because he is the person we are most likely to 
treat as a rival and thus consider hostile. The 
person who resembles me most strongly but 
who is not me is my enemy. He is the part of 
myself which I like in myself but of which I 
am dispossessed because it is outside me, and so 
I wish to destroy it. In other words, fratricide is 
the only real war. We only fully hate what we 
know best, and from which we are separated by 
hardly anything—any little difference will do. 
In this situation there can be no spontaneity 
in love; the initial drive is to appropriate what is 
identical. Love can only exist in this social (and 
Below, a statue of an angel 
with hands uplifted in prayer. It 
stands on a grave in the 
cemetery of Florence (Italy). 
P—— — 1 
|    
  
  
JEAN DANIEL, 
of France, is Editor-in-Chief of Le 
Nouvel Observateur, a weekly 
magazine which he founded in 
1964. Among his recent works 
are Cette grande lueur a I'Est 
(1989) and La blessure (1992). 

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

thus religious) self at the price of immense self- 
restraint, in fact a kind of rape. In the nature of 
the sons of Abraham, therefore, there is an ini- 
tial inaptitude for love because they are reli- 
gious before being the sons of the Prophet. The 
heritage of Abraham and eventually the Judaeo- 
Christian heritage is not one of love at first sight 
but of learning to love. If we adapt the reflexes 
observed between religions, races and nations, 
we arrive at the Balkan proverb quoted today by 
a Croatian leader: “We have no friends. We just 
have allies among the enemies of our enemies”. 
This is a very pessimistic interpretation, and 
we are in no way obliged to share it. However, 
it helps to remind us that religion exists before 
‘religious belief and that initially belicf often 
corrected what was imperfect in natural reli- 
gion. For example, the sacrifice of Abraham 
would lead, through the customs practised by 
the Chaldeans, to human sacrifice. Now, what 


### 99219: Faith and reason

is taken to be a return to religion is often a 
return to what preceded religion and what faith 
corrected, or would have corrected by evolving. 
In other words, there are many reasons for 


### 99218: The Embrace of the community

taking into account Man’s natural religious side, 
but there are even more for resisting the results 
of this drift back to nature. Certainly we must 
fight for the separation of religion and politics. 
In conclusion, I would say that religion 
colours, nourishes and impregnates politics, but 
religion alone cannot inspire the political orga- 
nization of the community. It is one thing to take 
into account the irreducible nature of the reli- 
gious act, but it is quite another to submit the 
institutions of people who have achieved the 
dignity of the individual to the manifestations of 
religious belief. 
We asked how to provide a basis for the 
need to resist Man’s irreducible religious nature. 
I think that the answer lies in the universal 
nature of everything that emerges into con- 
sciousness. The eighteenth-century philosopher 
Montesquieu answered this question in a way 
that has since become widely accepted. It is 
worth recalling here: “If T knew some scheme 
which was advantageous to myself but hurtful 
to my kindred, I would banish it from my mind. 
If I knew of some scheme which was advanta- 
geous to my kindred but hurtful to my country, 
I would try to forget it,” he wrote. “If I knew 
what was of advantage to my country, but 
hurtful to Europe and the human race, I should 
regard it as a crime.” u   
I understand a rationalist when he tells a 
Catholic bishop: Non serviam—I shall 
not serve. 
A secular rationalist is someone to whom I 
feel close. When I argue with him, I argue with 
a part of myself, with a fragment of my biog- 
raphy. I understand his aspiration for freedom 
in the name of a heroic atheism which makes a 
human being a master of the world, the sailor 
and the ship. I understand his disagreement 
with the situation in which someone tries to 
restrict his freedom in the name of God. 
I understand and yet I continue to argue 
with him. 
A good cause 
A secular rationalist certainly represents a chal- 
lenge for a Christian. But this challenge may 
not be a threat, but a noble competition for a 
good cause. It may be a way of “cleansing” 
one’s own religious and philosophical convic- 
tions. A great deal depends on whether the 
atmosphere in which the discussion takes place 
is one of mutual respect or religious war. 
Faith in a world without God, a world ruled 
by enlightened intellect, designed in a laboratory 
and cleansed of religion—such a faith is utopian 
and dangerous. Utopian because there is no his- 
torical evidence to support this belief: secular- 
ization changes the role of religion but does 
not eliminate the need for it. 
For the rationalist, the main axis of the 
Catholic vision of the world is that of a helpless 
individual, enclosed by his feelings of guilt and 
the authority controlling him. I think differ- 
ently: the main pivot of the Catholic view of the

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

world is a human being invested by God with 
such self-esteem that he bends his knees only 
before God. Some repent in the confessional, 
others do it elsewhere. But one has to respect the 
choice of others: the confessional is a place in 
which to give an account of one’s conscience, and 
this 1s essential for everyone. 
In the story of the shepherd and the sheep, 
the rationalist sees the conscious surrender of 
freedom by the Catholic. I think differently. A 
Catholic knows that human beings can accept 
God and his commands only as free subjects. 
That is why a Catholic must always choose 
freedom against slavery. 
But the question remains: how should this 
freedom be exercised? Is Pope John Paul II's 
statement that “freedom is not moral relativism” 
not worth serious consideration? Do we not 
need an institution which will refuse to submit 
to the latest fashions and situations and will 
The annual pilgrimage to 
Czestochowa in Poland, above, 
has attracted crowds since the 
17th century. 


### 99219: Faith and reason

Faith and reason 
by Adam Michnik 
obstinately remind us what is good and what is 
bad? 
I am afraid of a world of rationality without 
limits and of culture without the sacred, for it 
would be a world without morality and without 
culture. I am also afraid of the logic of a religious 
cold war which extremists on both sides of the 
barricade are eager to put forward. 
The need for a confessional 
One can understand the world without visiting 
temples, and want to live without a shepherd yet 
defend the right to have a shepherd and a teacher. 
One can make the effort to see, behind the 
words and institutions, people who deserve 
respect, living with the conviction that Christ 
blessed them with faith and called upon them to 
lead a responsible and compassionate life, a life 
of dignity and hope. 19

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 99219: Faith and reason

20 
  


### 99220: The Fundamentalists and science

  
The 
fundamentalists 
and science 
by Faouzia Charfi 
In several Arab countries fundamen- 
talist students are in the majority in 
scientific institutions in the universities, 
especially in the engineering faculties. This 
is because the exact sciences can be more 
easily dissociated than the human sciences 
from the humanist context in which they 
developed. 
How can rejection of Western values be 
reconciled with the necessary acceptance of 
the scientific revolutions experienced by 
the West? The answer is, by accepting only 
their technological contributions. Funda- 
mentalists prefer technology, which leaves 
little room for doubt, to science that incites 
to reflexion. And they make skilful use of 
technology. During a pre-election meeting 
in 1991, the Algerian fundamentalist leaders 
did not hesitate to use laser technology to 
write the sacred formula “Allah is great” 
on a cloud. 
Fundamentalists only accept what is not 
likely to contest their interpretation of the 
religious texts. At the end of the twentieth 
century, it is difficult not to recognize the 
progress made in physics and biology, for 
example. But itis possible to accept only the 
implications of biological research for med- 
ical development; the theory of the evolution 
of species does not need to be taught. From 
progress in physics they willingly accept 
the remarkable development of the means of 
communication but are ill at case with the 
finite value of the speed of light. . .. 
In the name of an unavoidable reference 
to the sacred, scientific knowledge is muti- 
lated, curbing the cultural and scientific 
development of Islamic countries where 
today scientific thought is less free than it 
was during certain periods of the Middle 
Ages. u 
wr 
FAOUZIA CHARFI, 
a Tunisian physicist, teaches in the faculty of sciences 
of Tunis University.   
Below, Allegory of Reason, a 
French painting dating from the 
revolutionary period {artist 
unknown). 
Opposite page, The Good 
Shepherd. (Italian engraving, 
ahout 1800). 
 
On the brink of mass insanity 
In this world which is dangerously approaching 
the brink of mass insanity, I think that religion 
and secular rationalism should coexist. The con- 
flict between the religious fundamentalist and 
the irreligious nihilist can be transformed into a 
kind of ecumenical peace. The intellect could be 
a guarantor against political doctrines which, 
in the name of ethnic, social and religious soli- 
darity, call for absolute obedience. This will be 
a constant source of resistance to political char- 
latans, but not to the Gospel. 
The totalitarian experience has revealed the 
undisputed importance of the Church. The 
stand taken by the Church then showed its 
other face, its virtuous face, at a time when the 
intellect tended to seek reconciliation with a 
reality which seemed impossible to change.

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 99219: Faith and reason

  
Remembrance of the Cross called upon people 
to fight against slavery. This remembrance was 
a source of courage and the wisdom of the heart. 
I would thus suggest to the Catholic and 
the secular rationalist the following: demand 
from yourself as much as you can; forgive others 
as much as you can. 
A perfectly devout world and a completely 
Cl a 
secular, rationalized world are the two faces of 
" lige this DAM MICHNIK, 
the Same utopia. Every attempt to rea 12¢ this of Poland, is Editor-in-Chief of 
utopia has led to a multiplication of conflictsand Gazeta Wyborcza, Poland’s 
sins. Sin and the defence of the sacred are part of ~~ biggest-selling daily paper. 
; Among his many books are The 
human experience. So too are the absurd and the 
Church and the Left (1977) and 
defence of reason. BM Polish Questions (1987). 
  


### 99221: From barbarism to tolerance

  
From barbarism 
to tolerance 
by Kanan Makiya 
Parts of Europe were very wild and 
cruel places in those times. The con- 
tinent was engulfed in religious wars, some 
small and some not so small. Germany lost 
half its population. Whole tracts of land 
were laid waste, their villages were sacked 
and the people in them massacred. Very 
little value was placed on human life. Some 
historians think that the imprint of all this 
destruction on German culture and politics 
could still be felt in the twentieth century. 
Although religion was the principal ide- 
ology in the seventeenth century, attempts 
to suppress religious dissent always failed 
in practice. In the name of Catholic or 
Protestant ideals, ordinary men and women 
died in droves. 
Did all the fanaticism and destruction in 
Europe usher in a new age “teaching 
mankind by the rudest possible process”, as 
one writer put it, “the hard lesson of tol- 
eration”? Hardly, since national wars very 
quickly replaced religious ones, and ideo- 
logical wars soon found their way back 
into European affairs. But the forms of 
intolerance tended to change in Europe. 
And that is important. Cruelty and forms 
of punishment, for instance, became an 
issue. And if a kinder, less cruel age was not 
ushered in, it is fair to say that a powerful 
new idea was born. ] 
Ls -,,,.,,,—_—., 6-6 
KANAN MAKIYA, 
an Iraqi-born writer on politics and art, is a Fellow at the 
Centre for Middle Eastern Studies at Harvard University 
(U.S.A).   21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 99223: Roads to revolution

22 
by 
From the beginning of the sixteenth cen- 
tury—the time of the foundation of the 
Safavid dynasty during which Shi’ism became 
the state religion of Iran—the Sh’ite clergy shared 
the governance of the country with the monarchy. 
Even the democratic constitution of 1906-1907 
recognized the clergy’s right to name five Shi'ite 
mullahs to verify the conformity of state law 
with Islamic law, the Shar’iah. This clause in the 
constitution was respected during the first legis- 
lature, but after 1912 it was not implemented. It 
gave the clergy a pretext to claim its share of 
government power and legitimized its criticism 
of the monarchy. Furthermore, the clergy kept 
control over two important fields: education and 
justice. However, after 1921, the date when the 
Pahlavi dynasty was founded, this control was 
denied and the clergy were completely elimi- 
nated from responsibility in the field of justice. In 
education, they were still allowed to train mullahs, 
but that was all. Thus a Westernized policy 
replaced the clergy in all fields. This explains the 
immense frustration of the Shi'ite clergy towards 
the imperial regime. 
Modernization and social disorder 
During the following decades, with the accel- 
eration of an anti-democratic modernization 
process and the social disorder created by it, 
the clergy found strong allies in the growing 
numbers of young pcople uprooted from the 
countryside and directed towards the towns, 
and in university students who were firmly kept 
down. Lastly, the clergy won the support of 
the middle class bazaar traders, who felt left 
out by the process of modernization. 
Thus, by the mid-1960s, religion was again 
making a wide impact on social and economic life. 
An cloquent young Islamic intellectual, Ali 
Shariati, painted the picture of a religious utopia 
which held a strong attraction for the young, 
Ehsan Naraghi 
 
Tre Prince and the Saint, a 
17th-century Safavid miniature. 
Beiow, Teheran, 1979: a 
demonstration in support of 
Ayatollah Khomeini. 
i Ud LA 
EHSAN NARAGHI, 
Iranian sociologist and historian, 
is Special Advisor to the 
Director-General of Unesco. His 
most recent published work in 
English is From Palace to Prison: 
Inside the Iranian Revolution 
(1994). 
who had become disenchanted with the Soviet 
Union. Ali Shariati spoke to them of the law of 
the Qur’an and the words of the Prophet and of 
the Prophet’s son-in-law, Ali. As examples of 
Islamic militants he pointed to Ali and his son, 
Hussein, and especially to their martyrdom, 
which became the symbol of the Shi’ite combat. 
The Shi'ite leader Ayatollah Ruhollah 
Khomeini, who lived in exile between 1964 and 
1979, first in Iraq, then in France, made the most 
of being outside government control and 
preached a different message from that of the 
apolitical Shi’ite tradition. Young theologians 
used the errors of the regime (such as the spec- 
tacular celebration at Persepolis in 1971 to mark 
the 2,500th anniversary of the founding of the 
Achaemenid dynasty) to fan popular discontent. 
Finally, during the reign of the Shah there 
were far too many ties with foreign countries, 
especially the United States. The presence of tens 
of thousands of American experts provided a 
pretext for the opponents of the regime to criti- 
cize Iran’s subordination to foreign influence. 
Nationalist language complemented the moral- 
istic discourse. 
By the end of the 1970s, the charismatic figure 
of Khomeini had become the incarnation of puri- 
tanism, radicalism and nationalism opposed to a 
discredited government. u 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 99224: The Abdication of thought

  
* 
: : i nh. 
‘The abdic 
When critical thinking is abandoned, 
giving free rein to all kinds of absurdities, 
and when doubt—either methodical or 
strategic—absents itself, the individual ceases 
to be an individual, melts into the crowd, and 
becomes trivial, stifled and unrecognized. 
Dialogue becomes impossible. 
Rejection of dialogue is inherent in ideo- 
logical extremism, whether religious, political, 
or both. The Other only exists insofar as he 
enters the citadel of certainties and does 
i : Ed Re =A 
a = = 
af | J I 
] i Im; i E+ 
= ay 
: ~ xR “ i= Bay 2 : 
cati 
— 
on of tho 
1p | 
not think of leaving it, still less of voicing a 
rejection or denouncing an error. Society 
is viewed as a monolithic block with all its 
exits sealed, for it senses danger, a threat 
from outside introduced by those who have 
gone astray. 
From within this barricade enemies are 
defined in simplistic terms. They are individuals 
free in thought and deed, and in all kinds of dif- 
ferent thought—philosophies, religions, liter- 
ature, art, poetry. And laughter. 
ht 
by Tahar Ben Jelloun 
Is 1 Ell BNE pa bc ECC = a  
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 99224: The Abdication of thought

24 
lrtar food, signalling the end of 
the Ramadan fast, is taken in 
common in a mosque. 
a, 
TAHAR BEN JELLOUN 
is a Moroccan-born novelist and 
poet who writes in French. 
Several of his works have been 
published in English transtation, 
including The Sacred Night 
(1989) which won the Goncourt 
Prize in 1987, Silent Day in 
Tangier (1991) and The Sand 
Child (1987). 
Humour, a weapon against fanaticism 
Laughter is the special attribute of human beings, 
of free human beings. It marks the birth of 
doubt—it is an admission of the fact that there 
are other ways of thinking and living. Humour 
is a form of self-questioning, a less tense face of 
despair. By its very essence it is anti-totalitarian. 
It mocks the sacred and helps the prisoners of 
authoritarianism to become aware of their con- 
dition. In his novel The Name of the Rose, 
Umberto Eco has shown that the failure of reli- 
gious fanaticism is caused by the ability to laugh 
uproariously; laughter has no respect for dogma 
and is thus intolerable. 
Another systematic enemy of fundamen- 
talism is subjectivity. Voicing one’s individu- 
ality, demonstrating it in one’s own manner, 
expressing it according to one’s own rules, 
making it an asset, an identity~—all this is intol- 
erable for fundamentalism, whose aim has 
always been to make society uniform, to rally it 
under the same banner, and to exclude from it 
the slightest expression of the individual will, 
Among those condemned are all creative artists 
who draw elements of their creations from their 
innermost sclves, all rebels and all those who 
aspire to have a private life. 
From the moment when you are told how to 
dress, what to wear, what should be the length 
of a woman’s dress or the colour of a man’s 
thought, from the moment when someone has 
the right to interfere in your private life, when 
you are told that you are under surveillance 
and that someone can intervene at any moment 
to call you to order, subjectivity becomes sub- 
version and even indecent assault! 
At the base of all monotheistic religions 
there is a totalitarian logic to which one finally 
gives way, through fear or through faith, 
accepting God as the only judge. But when men 
substitute themselves for God, and take the 1ni- 
tiative of speaking and acting in His place, the 
very foundations of religion itself are weakened 
by this encroachment. 
Islam has always been subject to various - 
currents. None has done it greater harm than the 
so-called “fundamentalist” current. Muslim cul- 
tural values can help consolidate an identity 
which has been ill-treated by history and which 
finds it difficult to adjust to modern life. It all 
depends on how these values are analysed and 
interpreted. They were long ignored or 
neglected. That is why, today, some young 
people are identifying with these values and

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

Nw 
clinging to them. Unfortunately, Islamicism is a 
movement whose motivations are more political 
than strictly religious. 
Forcing dialogue 
If the Islamicists are closed to dialogue, is it 
possible for intellectuals to force open this 
armour-plated door? Should one give up and 
adopt an attitude of powerlessness, rejection 
and lassitude? The supporters of totalitarianism 
do not like moderates; they despise those who 
attempt to create links and bring together diver- 
gent points of view. The killing of intellectuals 
in Algeria shows this clearly. 
Existing political systems bear a heavy 
responsibility in the development of protest 
movements of Islamicist origin. Are we going to 
remain silent, withdraw into our ivory towers 
and look on without reacting? The intellectual’s 
role is to seek and find new ways of bringing 
about the triumph of intelligence and the 
advance of the ideas of progress and freedom. 
We must use our imagination and go beyond the 
situation in which we simply acknowledge that 
violence has become a disturbing feature of 
everyday life. || 
i 


### 99231: Behind the veil of fundamentalism

Behind the veil o 
It is impossible to appreciate the real 
danger of fundamentalism if it is reduced, 
as it often 1s, to its excesses, to the manifestations 
of a blind and criminal terrorism, which is only 
its extreme outcome. This political nebula is 
actually divided into many tendencies, some of 
which, although they may be less barbaric, are 
not necessarily reassuring. For this reason it is 
important to grasp the inner logic of funda- 
mentalism, especially those aspects of it that 
may seem attractive. For fundamentalism has a 
message, part of which responds in the modern 
world to unsatisfied expectations. 
The fundamentalists, although themselves 
divided into more and less radical wings, find the 
climate particularly favourable to their develop- 
ment in countries where the powers-that-be 
appear to most people to be iniquitous and to be 
leading to the accelerated dissolution of links of 
social and cultural cohesion as a result of an 
uncontrolled opening up towards the world 
market and a dualization of society. In this context, 
some people adopt Western interests and ways of 
life whilst others feel excluded from them. 
Thus the very identity of these countries is at 
stake. And itis questions like “What has become 
of us?” and “Where are we going?” that enable 
fundamentalists to articulate a global and radical 
approach. Their discourse is a political one. It 
would like to think of itself as submissive to 
God but not to the order of things. It is anti- 
Western and anti-modernistic, but it would like 
to think of itself, paradoxically, as anti-archaic. 
It rejects the fatalism of the traditional broth- 
erhoods just as it rejects the conformism of the 
religious authorities associated with power. 
   
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

~
 


### 99231: Behind the veil of fundamentalism

The absence of a precise message consisting 
of clear and evaluated objectives does not 
weaken this discourse—the religious content 
fills the vacuum. The function of this content is 
not to provide a programme but an incanta- 
tion; its purpose is not to resolve but to exorcise. 
It is not primarily aimed at reason but at blind 
faith. At a time when no one knows precisely 
what form the future may take, the strength of 
fundamentalism lies in its ability to promise 
radical change without having to specify its out- 
lines—since God is claimed as its guarantor. 
The emergence of the modern individual 
In this context, what are the current prospects 
for those who preach secular and republican 
ideals? Some have immersed themselves in the 
study of the sacred texts in the search for quo- 
tations, metaphors and arguments to support the 
democratic ideas they put forward. They are 
fighting from a position of weakness on their 
opponents’ own ground, ideologically and psy- 
chologically trapped. 
As for those who openly defend—some- 
times even at the risk of their lives—a vision 
clearly based on values such as the separation of 
the temporal and the spiritual, equality of status 
for all religions away from the political sphere, 
the freedom of the governed to choose those 
who will govern them, they are, quite obvi- 
ously, in the minority. Not only because they are 
out of place in a climate of general religiosity but 
also because they are only making professions of 
faith that do not yet lead to precise and credible 
proposals for changes in society. 
But what today is the weakness of the 
upholders of a democratic future should in the 
long run become their strength. 
The dual upheaval undergone by Islamic 
societies—their forced entry into a market which 
  
  
HS VEAL ™7 
 
1s becoming global in ways and at a pace which 
are ruthlessly disrupting internal balances and 
hierarchies, and the advent of the autonomous 
individual into the political life of these societies 
in place of the traditional notables and feudal 
chiefs—is tending to increase the fragility of 
the national fabric, the psychic instability of 
individuals and the unpredictability of events. 
But fragility, instability and unpredictability are 
signs of the maturing of a new situation, of the 
transition of societies to a higher stage of com- 
plexity, “plasticity” and ultimately creativity. The 
opening of these societies towards the world 
market—however unjust and cruel the condi- 
tions in which it occurs—brings with it the ferment 
of knowledge, information and innovation, which 
will be assets in the changes to come. And the 
continuing increase in the number of individuals 
responsible for their conscience and their destiny, 
however harrowing their daily lives may be, nev- 
ertheless raises questions, doubts, desire for change 
and self-improvement which are all necessary 
seeds for future rebirths. 
The currents that bear these potentialities 
for openness and change are the only ones that 
can take up, in the long run, the dual challenge

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 99231: Behind the veil of fundamentalism

\_
 
3 
n
r
 
  
  
of globalization and individualization. This 
challenge presupposes an increasing adaptability 
of individuals and groups to dislocation, dis- 
continuity and the irregular pace of computer 
civilization. 
The fundamentalist option and the democ- 
ratic option are two possibilities stemming from 
one and the same reality: the advent of a modern 
individual, accountable for his thoughts and 
actions, and now subject to a dual temptation— 
accepting the gamble of freedom, with all its 
solitude and risks, or seeking refuge in reas- 
suring certainties and solidarities, eclipsing both 
his free will and his fear of the future. 
Hopes for democracy in the South perhaps 
hinge on this: the current globalization is taking 
place under conditions that challenge some of 
the fundamental facts of democracy in the North 
itself. We are all increasingly dependent on each 
other in facing our fundamentalisms and in cre- 
ating together a setting for our freedoms. WR 
a Ei a. i ed 
MAHMOUD HUSSEIN, 
French political scientist and writer. Most recent published 
work: Versant Sud de la liberté: essai sur I'émergence de 
individu dans le tiers monde (1989; “The Southern Slope of 
Liberty: an essay on the emergence of the individual in the 
Third World"). 
Women demonstrate against 
fundamentalism in Algiers on 
22 March 1994. 
Opposite page, a 
demonstration in support of the 
Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) in 
Algiers, 1991. 
  


### 99232: Economism, the ally of obscurantism

  
Economism, 
the ally of 
obscurantism 
by Régis Debray 
Our own utopian and mil- 
lenarian thinking has failed, and 
we are seeing an official return to vintage 
brands that are firmer and less falsifi- 
able. The retreat from politics by disil- 
lusioned people is today opening the 
door to its take-over by the revealed 
religions. The pendulum has swung. The 
laissez-faire, mercantilist and minimal 
state is playing into the hands of clerics 
and mafias who will stop at nothing 
until it unconditionally surrenders. “You 
do not destroy what you replace,” said 
Auguste Comte (the most clear-sighted 
sociologist of his day) prophetically. 
Religion is not the opium of the people 
but the vitamin of the weak. How is it 
possible to keep the neediest pcoplc 
from turning to it if democratic states 
have nothing more attractive to offer 
than material prosperity? Clerical fanati- 
cism prospers anew because there is no 
freely accepted civic religion, no secular 
and agnostic spirituality. Today the 
greatest ally of obscurantism is 
economism. If our cynics in high places 
were less interested in the Dow Jones 
index, perhaps there would be fewer 
dévots in the mosques and basilicas. ® 
iA kh
REGIS DEBRAY 
is a French philosopher, essayist and novelist,   27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28 
In India we use the word communalism to 
designate the political exploitation of reli- 
gion, rather than the word fundamentalism, 
which belongs to the strictly religious sphere. 
Communalism appropriates religious tenets, 
traditions and values and perverts them. It 
exploits religious feelings and fear of others to 
serve certain political interests. It is the enemy 
of the concept of the federal nation-state based 
on secularism and rationality. 
(CI 


### 99233: India: the threat to union

India: the threat to union 
  
Two formations emerged in India after the 
achievement of independence: nationalism, with 
secular overtones, and communalism—Hindu, 
Sikh and Muslim. In recent years the Indian 
state has been besieged by a major opposition 
grouping based on religious militantism. The 
Hindu movement based on the idea of Hin- 
dutva is perhaps the most dangerous. 
The land of the Hindus 
Hindutva is an ideology that gives supremacy to 
the Hindu identity and denies any rights to reli- 
gious minorities, or to Hindus of inferior castes. 
The idea of an exclusively Hindu India has been 
articulated since 1925 and more particularly 
since the entry on the Indian political scene of 
Guru Golwalkar, who launched the idea that 
India should be called Hindustan. In a pam-

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 99233: India: the threat to union

  
A wa painting in Jaipur (India) 
showing Christian, Hindu, Jain, 
Muslim and Sikh at prayer 
together. 
state!”   
Black Sunday 
 
sent shock waves through India 
The destruction of the Ayodhya mosque on 6 December 1992 
“ ‘Black Sunday’ as it was called in the media will remain a disturbing experience in the minds and 
hearts of those millions of our compatriots of all religions who recognize our common mother- 
land as a generous land of pluralism and accommodation,” says Rasheeduddin Khan, 
On that day, in the ancient city of Ayodhya in northern India, Hindu miltants celebrating a 
religious ceremony sacked the mosque erected on the site which, they believe, marks the birth- 
place of the Vedic hero Rama. 
In the hours that followed, there were clashes all over the country. Mosques and Hindu tem- 
ples were destroyed and “pogroms” were organized by small extremist groups, especially in 
Bombay. A number of Muslims were shot by the police during demonstrations. 
The confrontations continued for several weeks. Anti-Indian rioting occurred in several 
Muslim countries, especially in Pakistan and Bangladesh. Almost 2,000 people died. 
This crisis marked a revival of Hindu extremism and widened the gap between the Hindu and 
Muslim communities. 
Vinod Mechta, editor-in-chief of the daily The Pioneer, wrote of an India at war with herself, 
and Salman Khursheed, a Muslim and secretary of state for foreign affairs publicly exclaimed his 
concern about the rise in extremism and what he termed “a declaration of war against the secular   
phlet entitled We or Our Nation Defined (1930), 
he wrote, “Hindustan is the land of the Hindus 
and the land for the Hindu nation alone to 
flourish upon.” He also claimed that “the foreign 
races in Hindustan must adopt the Hindu cul- 
ture and language . . . must entertain no idea but 
the glorification of the Hindu race and culture 
.. . and must lose their separate existence to 
merge in the Hindu race....” 
The amazing conclusion was that non- 
Hindus “may stay in the country, wholly sub- 
ordinated to the Hindu nation, claiming nothing, 
deserving no privileges, far less any preferential 
treatment—not even citizen’s rights.” Golwalkar 
denigrated the work of Gandhi and Nehru, who 
had striven for inter-communal harmony and 
friendship, and associated them with those who 
“have committed the most heinous sin by killing 
the life-spirit of a great and ancient people.” 
Golwalkar’s ideology helped to break the 
already fragile link between Hindus and Mus- 
lims. However, no act of war since the partition 
of the country in 1947 was so traumatic as the 
destruction on Sunday, 6 December 1992 of the 
mosque at Ayodhya, built under the auspices of 
the Mogul Emperor Babur (see box on this 
page). 
This “black Sunday” still disturbs those who 
see India as the land of pluralism and coexistence 
between communities. In direct contradiction 
with centuries of intermingling of populations, 
the attack was the tragic outcome of the Hindu 
nationalist campaign begun eight years before. 
After independence, India had the option 
of becoming either a Hindu state, in response to 
Pakistan declaring itself an Islamic state, or 
remaining a secular state. Finally no definite 
choice was made. India is not a Hindu state. 
Neither is 1t an authentic secular state, Due to the 
pressures of communal politics and confusion in 
the ranks of the secularists, the Indian state is a 
Hindu version of a pseudo-secular state. If it 
wishes to be recognized as a dynamic modern 
state, India must restore its image as a secular 
state. Any secular state should show respectful 
indifference to religions. | 
LESS RS ld LS 
RASHEEDUDDIN KHAN, 
an Indian political scientist, is 
Director of the Indian Institute of 
Federal Studies (Jamia 
Hamdard). Among his published 
works are Federal India: a 
Design for Change (1992) and 
(as editor) Composite Culture of 
India and National Integration 
(1987). 
It is one of the greatest frauds on the people to 
suggest that religious affinity can unite areas which 
are geographically, economically, linguistically and 
culturally different. 
ABDUL KAMAL AZAD 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 99234: A New Hindu identity

30 
A new Hindu identity 
by Sudhir Kakar oy 
Psychoanalysis of a Hindu ideology 
A demonstration in New Delhi 
on 4 March 1991 calling for the 
construction of a temple in 
Ayodhya. 
eA, 
SUDHIR KAKAR 
is an Indian psychoanalyst best 
known for his book Intimate 
Relations: Exploring Indian 
Sexuality (1989). Among his 
other published works are 
Shamans, Mystics and Doctors 
(1989) and The Inner World: A 
Psychoanalytic Study of 
Childhood and Society in india 
(1979). 
In many parts of India today, especially 
the northern and central states, a new 
Hindu identity, Hindutva, is being constructed. 
It is the basis of an amorphous group of Hindu 
parties and groups, the Sangh Parivar, and bears 
only a faint family resemblance to its predeces- 
sors. Analysing the fantasies, images and arche- 
types contained in the campaign speeches of 
the votaries of this new identity, we can dis- 
cern some of the stages in its construction. 
The first notable feature of the speeches is the 
way in which they redraw the boundary of the 
Hindu community by hailing selected gods and 
heroes who are presented as ideals to be shared 
by members of the community in order to main- 
tain its cohesion. 
They also evoke a shared social loss, sym- 
bolized by the Ram temple at Ayodhya. This 
temple is a symbol of the mourning of Hindu 
society: mourning for lost honour, lost self- 
esteem, lost civilization. 
This emerging Hindu identity is presented as 
being constantly threatened by external and 
internal forces. Constant vigilance is needed to 
prevent that which has been recently united 
from being divided. The speeches single out the 
political forces representing this threat. A 
process of idealization and a search for scape- 
goats come next. 
Group narcissism 
Hindu tolerance, compassion, depth of insight 
and breadth of social concern are idealized. 
These are the qualities inherent in a Hindu 
group self which makes the individual member 
feel righteous and pure. This increase in self- 
esteem can be maintained only by projecting 
the bad, the dirty and the impure onto another 
group, the Muslims. 
The process of splitting activates the group’s

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

persecution fantasy. The Muslim ceases to be a 
stereotype and becomes an archetype—the 
archetype of tyranny. A note of helplessness 
creeps into the speeches at this stage, engen- 
dered by fear of persecution. This feeling reveals 
the fragility of the group’s self. The positive 
self-image of the Hindu is tarnished by his fear 
of being impotent to change the material or 
social conditions of his life. Are we tolerant or 
are we merely weak? Or are we tolerant because 
we are weak? 
The crumbling self demands restoration 
through forceful action. The campaign speeches 
channel this need by calling for collective and 
united action in the political arena. They hold 
out the possibility of some kind of self-assertion 
through the electoral process, where all the per- 
secutory anti-Hindu forces, from within and 
without the Hindu fold, can be engaged and 
defeated. 
The Sangh Parivar cannot be faulted for fos- 
tering Hindu pride. This is a normal aim of any 
group’s narcissistic economy. The question is 
when narcissism becomes deviant or abnormal. 
THE COMMON LIGHT OF DAY 
There will always be many who, by tradition and 
temperament, find solace in belonging to a partic- 
ular sect. Also, there will be others who think that 
such solace can only be allowed as legitimate within 
the pale of their own. Between such, there must be 
quarrels. . . . Has India, in her religious ideals, no 
space for the common light of day and open air for all 
humanity? The vigour with which the sectarian 
~ fanatic will shake his head makes one doubt it; the 
bloodshed which so frequently occurs for trivial causes 
‘makes one doubt it; the cruel and insulting distinctions 
between man and man which are kept alive under 
the sanction of religion make one doubt it. is 
~ RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
| (1861-1941)  


### 99234: A New Hindu identity

This group pride and narcissism have made 
it possible for the Hindutva forces to offer a 
specific vision of India’s future. The pivotal 
issue for them is not the acceptance of global 
techno-science and the economic institutions 
and forms of modernity, but their possible 
impact on Hindu culture and identity. Such 
an approach will have great appeal to the 
emerging middle classes and sections of the 
intelligentsia which are committed neither to 
[————— I 
who is high 
wearecail /= e 
4 ae EQUAL 
Insist on 
vour civil rights 
AA 
universal modernism nor to post-modern tra- 
ditionalism. 
In a society in the throes of modernization, 
there is a pressing need for continuity with the 
past in order to maintain a sense of individual 
and collective identity. It is this need for a con- 
tinuity of collective memory, or more accu- 
rately for a collective representation of the past 
in times of rapid change, even turbulence, which 
the Sangh Parivar addresses with considerable 
social and political success. nu 
| L 
who is low ? 
A poster in Calcutta. 
nA 
— 
  
  
_— 

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 99235: Fact file on world religions

FACT FILE 
— — " J -—
A - . ——— ) 
rod b, Hy fa 
\ 4 " oA = 
h. 
i 
La 
Wy 
- 
: 4s 
nN \ 
\ 
a y \ 4 ur 
oO > “ 
i . 
» ; 
h 
. val 
> 
7 a 
T— ET Word religions 
Source: Atlas des religions, editorial 
director Antoine Sfeir © Plon-Mame, 
  
  
    
    
Paris, 1994. 
112 + Islam 
1000) Catholicism 
875 
fi Hinduism 750 | 
625 Protestantism 
Buddhism 
  
Orthodox Catholic Church 
Chinese religions 
Animism 
  
   

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 99235: Fact file on world religions

ON 
~ Catholicism 
Protestantism 
Orthodox Catholic Church 
© Judaism 
Islam 
© Hinduism 
~ Buddhism 
~ Shintoism and Buddhism 
Chinese religions 
~~ Animism 
Coptic Church 
Thinly populated regions 
WORLD RELIGIONS 
  
ABRAHAM (monotheism) 
MOSES (Judaism) 
ZOROASTER (Zoroastrianism) 
LAO TZU (Taoism) 
BUDDHA (Buddhism) 
CONFUCIUS (Confucianism) 
MAHAVIRA (Jainism) 
JESUS CHRIST (Christianity) 
MUHAMMAD (Islam) 
NICHIREN (Japanese Buddhism) 
NANAK (Sikhism) 
LUTHER (Lutheranism) 
HENRY VIII (Anglicanism) 
CALVIN (Calvinism)   
PRINCIPAL FOUNDERS OR REFORMERS OF RELIGIONS 
(in chronological order) 
about 1850 B.C. 
about 1250 B.C. 
650-583 B.C. 
605-520 B.C. 
563-483 B.C. 
551-479 B.C. 
540-468 B.C. 
4 B.C.-30 A.D. 
570-632 
1222-1282 
1469-1539 
1483-1546 
1491-1547 
1509-1564 
Source: Les religions de I'humanité by Michel Malherbe, Criterion publishers, Paris, 1992 © Criterion, Paris, 1990. 
LUE TET DIET 
@® THE STATE AND RELIGION 
Spiritual authority and temporal power in the Indian theory 
of government 
Ananda Coomaraswamy, Kraus, New York, 1942. 
Religion and politics in the United States 
Kenneth D. Wald, Congressional Quarterly, Washington, 
D.C., 1991, 326 pp. 
Religion and political culture in Kano 
John Paden, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1973, 
481 pp. 
Religions of immigrants from India and Pakistan: new 
threads in the American tapestry 
Raymond Williams, Cambridge University Press, New York, 
1988, 335 pp. 
Law and revolution: the formation of the Western legal 
tradition 
Harold J. Berman, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 
Mass., 1983, 672 pp. 
The crisis of Church and State, 1050-1300 
Brian Tierney, University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1988, 
212 pp. 
Churches and politics in Latin America 
Daniel Lewis, Sage Publications, Beverly Hills /London, 
1980, 288 pp. 
Religion and nationalism in Soviet and East European 
politics 
Pedro Ramet (ed.), Duke University Press, Durham, North 
Carolina, 1989, 516 pp. 
Church and State through the centuries: a collection of 
historic documents with commentaries 
Sidney Z. Ehler and John B. Morrall (eds.), Biblo and Tanner, 
Cheshire, Conn., 1988, 625 pp. 
® FUNDAMENTALISM 
Islamic fundamentalism 
Youssef Choueiri, Twayne, New York, 1990, 224 pp. 
Fundamentalism 
James Barr, Trinity Press, Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, 1981, 
400 pp. 
Fundamentalism and American culture: the shaping of 
twentieth-century evangelicalism 1870-1925 
George M. Marsden, New York, Oxford University Press, 
New York, 1980, 320 pp. 
©® RELIGION AND POLITICS 
Global economics and religion 
James Finn, Transaction Publications, New Jersey, 1983,   277 pp. 
Iran: religion, politics and society 
Nikki Keddie, Frank Cass, London, 1980, 256 pp. 
The sociology of religion 
Max Weber, Beacon Press, Boston, 1993, 384 pp. 
History of political philosophy (3rd ed.) 
Lec Strauss and Joseph Cropsey (eds.), University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1987, 992 pp. 
Religion and politics in the modern world 
Peter H. Merkl and Ninian Smart (eds.), New York University 
Press, New York, 1983, 296 pp. 
The social teaching of the Christian churches 
Ernst Troeltsch, University of Chicago Press, 1981 
(2 vols.) 
Kings or people: power and the mandate to rule 
Reinhard Bendix, University of California Press, Berkeley, 
1978, 704 pp. 
The political and social ideas of Saint Augustine 
H.A. Deane, Columbia University Press, New York, 1966, 
356 pp. 
Religion and political conflict in Latin America 
Daniel Levine, University of North Carolina Press, Chapel 
Hill, 1986, 266 pp. 
The Church and the Left 
Adam Michnik, (trans. David Ost), University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago, 1993, 301 pp. 
® GENERAL 
The encyclopedia of religion 
Mircea Eliade (ed.), MacMillan, New York, 1987, 17 vols. 
New Catholic encyclopedia 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967, 15 vols. 
The Oxford dictionary of the Christian Church 
F. L. Cross and E. A. Livingstone, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1983, 1520 pp. 
A dictionary of Hinduism 
Margaret and James Stutley, Routledge, London, 1977, 
372 pp. 
A popular dictionary of Buddhism 
Christmas Humphreys, Curzon Press, London, 1976, 224 
pp. 
The Encyclopaedia of Islam (New Edition) 
E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1983-1994, 7 vols. 
Encyclopaedia Judaica 
Cecil Roth {ed.), MacMillan, Jerusalem, 1972, 16 vols. 
African religions and philosophy 
John Mbiti, Heinemann, Londen, 1990, 288 pp. 
The world's religions 
Stewart Sutherland, Leslie Houlden, Peter Clarke and 
Friedhelm Hardy, Routledge, London, 1988, 995 pp.   33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
UNESCO IN 
Ai. Ee gs a 
THE THIRD-MILLENNIUM 
GENERATION, A NEW 
PEACE-KEEPING FORCE 
From its inception in a Paris suburb in 
1981, the organization known as Le 
"Chemin des enfants (The Children’s Way) 
has been committed to a struggle against 
violence, overpopulation, poverty and 
war. It is now launching a new project, 
Génération Troisiéme Millénaire (Third 
Millennium Generation), intended to offer 
young people an opportunity to make a 
practical contribution to peace. With help 
from the World Federation of Unesco 
Clubs, Centres and Associations 
(WFUCA) it hopes to recruit from 
Unesco clubs worldwide young people 
between 18 and 30 who would meet with 
the leaders of present or potential 
conflicts round a table to express their 
rejection of force and destruction. “We 
firmly oppose the use of force,” these 
new peace-keepers will say. “It is our 
absolute right, for when a conflict breaks 
out somewhere in the world, we are 
involved, we are the losers.” 
For further information, contact Marcel 
Canetti — Le Chemin des enfants, B.P. 14, 
92193 Meudon Cedex, France. Tel.: (33-1) 
4626-0852 
FT I 
A TRIBUTE TO GANDH! 
To mark the [25th anniversary of the 
birth of Mahatma Gandhi, UNesco has 
issued an official medal bearing his 
portrait. Engraved by the French artist 
Trémois, the medal is available in gold, 
silver and bronze. Etched beneath the 
profile of the Mahatma (“great soul”) is 
this message of hope: “In the midst of 
darkness light prevails”. The medal may 
be ordered from UNEsCO’s Numismatic 
Programme, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 
Paris, France. Tel.: (33-1) 4568-1808. 
ene TO ER 
UNESCO GIVES PRIORITY 
TO WOMEN’S LITERACY 
On 8 September, the Director-General of 
Unesco presented UNEscO’s 3 literacy 
prizes at a ceremony held to mark 
International Literacy Day. The 
International Reading Association Literacy 
Award went to the Malawi National 
Centre for Adult Literacy and Education, 
which has taught 645,000 people, 85% of 
o
n
 
.
 
 
Since its foundation 48 years ago, 
UNICEF (the United Nations 
Children’s Fund) has helped to 
improve the conditions of 
millions of needy children in 
many countries by providing 
medical care, food, safe drinking 
water and educational supplies. It 
relies heavily on voluntary 
donations from governments, 
private donors and proceeds 
from the sale of greeting cards, 
games and gifts. This year artists 
from many countries have again   
UNICEF GREETING CARDS 
contributed a wide range of 
designs for UNICEF Greeting 
Cards, which are now on sale at 
UNICEF sales points throughout 
the world. Designs include 
snowy landscapes, festive streets, 
traditional and contemporary 
religious motifs, comic and 
fantastic drawings, Christmas 
trees, “animated” and 
“silhouette” cards in kraft or 
parchment paper hand-made in 
Nepal and invidually printed with 
wooden blocks. [|   
them women, how to read. A Roman 
Catholic school for girls, Loreto Day 
School in Sealdah, Calcutta (India), was 
awarded the Noma Prize, notably for its 
“Barefoot Teachers” programme for 
training high-school dropouts to teach 
primary school in slums, and for its 
“Rainbow” programme that invites 
homeless street children into the school 
at any time of the day. The National 
Union of Tunisian Women received the 
King Sejong Literacy Prize for its work in 
improving the status of women and its 
programmes to improve school 
attendance rates. In the address he gave 
during the award ceremony, the Director- 
General called attention to “the essential 
links between women, education, 
demographics and development”. 
A A I A i 
THE FIRST INTERNATIONAL 
TEACHERS’ DAY 
International Teachers’ Day was 
celebrated for the first time on 5 
October, marking the anniversary of the 
adoption of the Unesco/International 
Labour Organisation Recommendation 
Concerning the Status of Teachers in 
1966. Since 1966 the number of teachers 
worldwide has risen from 16 to 47 
million, and that of pupils from 372 to 527 
million. Classes are often overcrowded, 
especially in the poorest countries, where 
the average number of pupils per teacher 
ranges from 29 in Yemen to 90 in the 
Central African Republic. In addition to 
deteriorating working conditions, 
teachers are also facing a drop in salaries, 
which have decreased by an average of 
[0% because of the economic crisis and 
structural adjustment policies. In this 
difficult context, International Teachers’ 
Day is intended to highlight a profession 
whose important role in society is not 
always fully recognized. 
e.g 
MOTHERHOOD TODAY 
In the International Year of the Family, as 
ever, it is timely to remember that the 
fundamental unit of society, the family, is 
based on motherhood. With this in mind, 
two French associations concerned with 
protecting children in danger and 
supporting families in difficulty have 
organized a symposium on “Motherhood 
Today”, to be held at UNEsco 
Headquarters in Paris on 5 December. 
Although medical progress has reduced 
the risks of having children, the 
Association de Maternologie of Saint-Cyr- 
L'Ecole and the Fondation pour LEnfance 
point out that many aspects of 
motherhood still remain mysterious. At a 
time when more and more women are 
bringing up children on their own and may 
need help and support, they hope that the 
symposium will draw particular attention 
to the psychological aspects of 
motherhood. [|

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
: COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR 
10 two years ago, Cairo 
yesterday, Copenhagen and 
Beijing next year—this extremely 
important series of United 
Nations confercnces™ reflects a 
growing awarencss that the chal- 
lenges facing our world are 
universal. These meetings are 
stages on the long road to 
the management of our global 
interdependence. 
They can be seen as part of a 
trend that is leading to a signifi- 
cant shift in thinking about 
development. Economism, one of the most persistent of this cen- 
tury’s reductionisms, is in retreat. Development is increasingly rec- 
ognized as a process encompassing all aspects of human exis- 
tence and as a right due to all human beings in their diversity. 
 
A NEW APPROACH 
The regulation of population growth is undoubtedly one of the 
most urgent challenges facing us. But tis only one factor in a com- 
plex equation that can spell the difference between greater pros- 
perity for all in a more equitable world, or increased poverty, envi- 
ronmental degradation and social and political tensions of all 
kinds. Population policies must therefore form part of an inte- 
grated sustainable human development strategy that includes 
protection of the environment, the promotion of economic well- 
being and the furthering of social progress, notably through 
enhancement of the status of women. 
To be effective, such a strategy must be radical, in the sense of 
going to the root of our problems. I believe that this means, first 
and foremost, investing in education—that is to say in knowledge 


### 99239: Education, key to the future: commentary

and knowledge creation, in individual awareness and respon- 
sivencss. All the available evidence suggests that there are enormous 
dividends to be reaped from investing in education. Experience in 
many countries has shown that it 1s the key not only to eco- 
nomic growth but also to political development and social 
progress. 
Nationally and internationally, we continue to invest in a 
shortsighted way. Our investments are still geared to past threats 
or to dealing with the symptoms of problems. We are largely 
unprepared or unwilling to address current challenges of a non- 
military nature that constitute actual or potential threats to human 
security. Every day we confirm our perverse preference to pay the 
heavy human and financial costs of peace-keeping and relief oper- 
ations rather than make relatively modest investments in the 
social sphere. We ignore, at our peril, the need to tackle our prob- 
lems at source. 
Everywhere, in all social and cultural contexts, increased edu- 
cation for girls and women means lower fertility rates, as wcll as 
reduced mortality and morbidity levels. This shows that women’s 
Education, key to the future 
reproductive choices depend on a process of empowerment, 
which can only come from improved educational provision, 
training for cconomic self-reliance and the enhancement of 
women’s legal and social status. 
Special efforts need to be made to reach the large section of the 
female population that has so far proved unreachable—the 29 per 
cent of girls worldwide not enrolled at primary school, the 65 per 
cent of the world’s 900 million illiterates who are women. This will 
call for a whole range of innovative learning and teaching methods, 
including interactive and distance education, and for learning 
facilities to be made permanently available to people of all ages, 
without formal academic requirements. 
The family is the basic unit of society and the reflection of local 
cultural and religious patterns. The search for endogenous solu- 
tions to development problems must respect the fundamental 
role of the family in social life. In particular, the control of fertility 
should not be based on coercion or technocratic prescription. Nor 
should it involve the imposition of external models or dogmatic 
interferences. The only sustainable basis for fertility control is the 
informed choices of empowered men and women, fully con- 
scious of their human rights and dignity. 
A LIBERATING FORCE 
It was for this reason that UNESCO joined with the United 
Nations Population Fund in organizing the first International 
Congress on Population Education and Development, which 
was held in Istanbul in April 1993. The Congress recognized that 
population problems should not be viewed in isolation from 
overall development issues and recommended that “to ade- 
quately prepare the younger generations to meet the challenges 
of the twenty-first century, population education programmes 
should be extended to the various levels of the education system 
.and be developed as an integrated dimension of educational 
curricula.” 
Education is more than the provision of education and instruc- 
tion. It is the awakening of human creative potential; it is the 
building of endogenous capacities; it is forging attitudes of toler- 
ance and understanding; it is providing individuals with the ability 
to master their own destiny. For too long the lives of too many 
people have been dependent on powers exercised by others, on 
others’ visions, on ignorance, on oppression. Education is liber- 
ation. It 1s the main gateway to peace, equity and justice. Those 
who hold the key to this gateway—teachers, parents and partic- 
ularly mothers—have a crucial responsibility: the world we leave 
to our children will depend on the children we leave to our world. 
[| 
* UN Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 
1992; International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 
1994; World Conference for Social Development, Copenhagen, 1995; 
World Conference on Women: Action for Equality, Development and 
Peace, Beijing, 1995. 

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 99242: The Splendour of Spis

The splendour of Spis 
A unique ensemble 
by Edouard Bailby 
of medieval fortifications in Slovakia 
~ HEsite is dramatic. Perched atop a 
rocky outcrop 634 metres above 
sea-level in the centre of Slovakia, 
Spis castle—Spissky Hrad—dominates a 
green carpet of rolling hills and valleys. 
Bathed in light, buffeted by the wind 
blowing off the Tatra mountains, its ram- 
parts dominated by an imposing keep and 
looming watch-towers bear witness to a 
troubled history that stretches back into 
the Middle Ages. No other castle in eastern 
Europe has such extensive fortifications. 
The visitor needs a fairly detailed map 
of Slovakia to find the way to Spis castle. It 
lies about ten kilometres from the town 
of Levoca (population 17,000), whose 
church of St. James boasts a Gothic altar- 
  
piece of gilded wood that is 18.6 metres 
high, the tallest in the world. The entire 
region abounds in such treasures, largely 
unknown to tourists, who tend to favour 
the sunny forests of the Tatras in summer 
and their ski-slopes in winter. 
The castle is built round akeep and an 
inner courtyard, which are protected by 
two romanesque inner walls with forti- 
fied access gates and an outer wall in 
which the main gate is located. There are 
also a chapel, garrison buildings and a 
large barbican. The castle is reached by a 
narrow, winding country road barely wide 
enough for two cars to pass each other. 
Sometimes coaches pull up at the foot of 
the walls and disgorge streams of school- 
  
 
. 
Above, the imposing ramparts of Spis 
castle. Left, the church of the Holy 
Spirit (13th century) in the nearby 
village of Zehra.

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 99242: The Splendour of Spis

© ee 
- LJ 
r 
children, who love to play in the ruins—at 
least those open to the public—and 
scramble along the ramparts that run 
along the crest of the hill. There is a small 
museum where they can learn about the 
castle and its history. 
An eventful past 
Archaeological excavations have shown 
that this area has been peopled since 
neolithic times, i.e. the fifth millennium of 
the pre-Christian era. In the first century 
A.D. people of Slavic origin began to build 
an ingenious network of mud walls, ves- 
tiges of which are still visible today. Early 
in the tenth century Magyar tribes came 
down from the Ural Mountains, settled in 
the Carpathian Basin and extended their 
dominion as far as the Tatras. For a thou- 
sand years, right to the end of the Habs- 
burg Empire, Slovakia was ruled by Hun- 
garian monarchs, who left many traces of 
their presence. One of them is Spis castle. 
To crush Slovakian peasant uprisings 
and check foreign invasions, a system of 
fortifications was built at the beginning 
of the twelfth century. It included a tower 
"(22.5 metres in diameter), which was sited 
on a geological fault and eventually col- 
lapsed. It was not until the thirteenth cen- 
tury that a genuine castle began taking 
shape on the rocky outcrop. Work stopped 
in 1241 when the area was invaded by Tar- 
tars, Mongolian horsemen who pillaged 
the region. Eventually, however, the Hun- 
garian king Bela IV expelled the Tartars 
from his kingdom, established a system 
of feudal Jordships to bring prosperity 
back to his lands, and built a number of 
defensive fortresses. Spis castle was 
embellished in 1249 with a palatial 
romanesque building and in 1270 with a 
) 
  
BEER To A Ct

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 99242: The Splendour of Spis

‘Restoration work will take ten 
years and cost about 
$1.6 million, and we're going to 
have a hard time raising this 
sum without international 
help,’ says the director of the 
Spis museum. 
magnificent keep. But in less than a cen- 
tury another enemy invasion caused mas- 
sive damage. 
Then in the fourteenth century, King 
Lajos I of Hungary (1342-1382) decided 
to rebuild the castle in the Gothic style. 
Two vast courtyards were built within the 
walls, and the expanding castle became 
one of the pillars of the Hungarian defence 
system. Each succeeding owner con- 
tributed to its growth. The Zapolsky farnily, 
whose descendants still bear the heredi- 
tary title of “Governor of the County of 
Spis” built the chapel of St. Elizabeth in 
the late Gothic style and added fortifica- 
  
tions on either side of the main entrance 
gate. In 1531 the castle passed into the 
hands of the Hurzd family, which owned 
the country’s biggest foundries and intro- 
duced Renaissance elements into the 
castle’s architecture. The most recent 
changes were made by the Csaky family, 
one of the wealthiest in the Austro-Hun- 
garian empire. 
When Stephan Csaky died in 1663, his 
kinsfolk moved a few kilometres away into 
the Hodkovce and Bijacovce palaces. Only 
a small garrison remained in Spis castle, 
leaving in 1780 after the castle was gutted 
by fire. The local people plundered what 
remained. They took timber for their 
houses, fuelwood, iron sculptures and 
stone for building. 
The years passed, the tide of war ebbed 
and flowed, and the castle was forgotten. 
Only its ruins survived, neglected and aban- 
doned to the elements. In 1945, in the after- 
math of the Second World War, Spis castle, 
which still belonged to the Csaky family, 
was declared a national cultural monu- 
ment by the Czechoslovak Republic. 
In the 1970s restoration and archaeo- 
logical excavations were conducted at the 
castle, but they proved to be very expensive, 
were suspended on several occasions and 
were finally abandoned a few years ago. 
When Slovakia became an independent 
republicin 1993, it asked for three historical 
sites in the Spis region to be included on 
Unesco’s World Heritage List: the wooden 
village of Vlkolinec, the mining village of 
Banska Stiavnica and Spis castle. In 
December 1993 the sites were added to the 
List. 
‘We need tourists’ 
Eva Spalekova, the director of the Spis 
museum, is responsible for administering 
the castle. She received us in her office in 
Levoca, across the road from St. James's 
church. “We have calculated that restora- 
tion work will take ten years and cost about 
$1.6 million,” she explained. “And we're 
going to have a hard time raising this sum 
without international help.” Last year part . 
of the ramparts collapsed, and the rest 
had to be shored up. But work was delayed 
by an unusually hard winter and the 
extremely strong winds that blow at certain 
times of the year. We noticed a huge crack 
in another wall that supports the keep. 
“We're counting heavily on tourists,” Eva 
Spalekova continued, “who pay a small 
entrance fee. Their presence is a great 
encouragement to us. We need them.”

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 99242: The Splendour of Spis

-
 
5 
5 
¥ = 
4)
 
a
r
 
Spis castle is part of a complex of 
medieval military, political and religious 
monuments—=Zehra, Spissky Podhradie 
and Spisska Kapitula—that has no equal in 
central and eastern Europe. The sites form 
part of the castle’s estates and are associ- 
ated with it on the World Heritage List. In 
the charming village of Zehra at the foot of 
the chalky hill, a staircase leads to the late- 
thirteenth-century church of the Holy 
Spirit with its immaculate white walls. 
Remarkable frescoes dating from the thir- 
teenth to the seventeenth centuries line 
the interior, but they are under attack from 
mildew and will not survive much longer 
without restoration. 
The little town of Spissky Podhradie at 
the foot of the castle was razed by the Tar- 
tars in 1241 but rebuilt two centuries later. 
A fine example of medieval town plan- 
ning, it also has a romanesque parish 
church and seventeenth-century Renais- 
sance-style houses. 
Standing above the town, of which it 
now forms part, Spisska Kapitula was orig- 
inally a fortified religious complex and is 
certainly the most astonishing site on the 
old feudal estate. The castle provost lived 
there in the monastery of St. Martin, which 
has not survived. Despite the Tartar inva- 
sion in the thirteenth century and the fre- 
quent Bulgarian raids that forced the 
inhabitants to build fortifications that are 
still intact, many architectural vestiges of 
the complex have survived. Within the 
oval area enclosed by its ramparts a maze 
of narrow streets climb to St. Martin's 
cathedral. Founded in the thirteenth cen- 
tury and added to over the years, the cathe- 
dral is a blend of romanesque, Gothic, 
Renaissance and baroque elements. In 
1819 the first teacher-training college in 
the kingdom of Hungary was opened in 
the adjoining episcopal palace, which is 
mainly Gothic. The hamlets twenty-three 
listed buildings belong to the Catholic 
Church and are much in need of repair, 
especially the old houses along the main 
street, most of which are in ruins. 
1t is urgent that the international com- 
munity should become aware of the uni- 
versal quality of Spis castle and the three 
sites associated with it. Without its aid, this 
unique medieval ensemble and the mas- 
terpieces of Gothic and Renaissance art 
that it contains may one day disappear. ® 
A party of schoolchildren climb 
the narrow path to the castle 
(above) before making a 
spectacular tour of the 
ramparts (opposite page). 
FR 
EDOUARD BAILBY 
is a French journalist who has 
been a correspondent with the 
weekly L'Express and a press 
officer in Unesco’s Office of 
Public Information. He is the 
author of guides to Cuba {6th 
edition, 1993) and Hungary 
{1991), published by Arthaud, 
Paris. 39

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 99243: Hryhoriy Skovoroda: an Enlightenment philosopher of the Ukraine

40 
portrait 
Hryuoriy SxovorobpaA 
An Enlightenment philosopher of the Ukraine 
Nan old district of Kiev, the Podol, a monu- 
mental statue looks out over Peter Mogila 
- Academy Square. It depicts a gently smiling 
man who looks for all the world as if he has just 
stopped for a chat with the bystanders. He is 
wearing a simple Cossacks outfit, and slung over 
his shoulder is his faithful knapsack in which one 
can easily imagine a flute, a Hebrew Bible and a few 
manuscripts. The monument is a memorial to 
Hryhoriy Skovoroda, one of the Ukraine's most 
brilliant thinkers. Engraved on the pedestal 
beneath the statue is the epitaph he wrote for 
himself: “The world wanted to take me over, but it 
didn’t succeed”. The words sum up the beliefs, the 
destiny and the thought of a man who sacrificed a 
clerical and university career and abandoned the 
comforts of life as a court poet and musician, 
choosing instead to live in freedom as an itinerant 
philosopher. 
Skovoroda was born in 1722 to a Cossack family. 
After studying the Bible and learning Latin and 
singing at the school in his native village, Cher- 
nuhy, at sixteen he entered the Peter Mogila 
Academy, the leading university in eastern Europe 
and the most prestigious Western-style establish- 
ment in the Ukraine at that time. While there he 
studied the works of great European thinkers such 
as Bacon, Descartes, Leibniz, Locke, Spinoza and 
Bruno. In 1742 he went as a singer to the court of 
the Tsarina Elizabeth in Saint Petersburg, but he 
did not take to court life and returned to Kiev to 
continue his philosophical and theological studies. 
When the time came for him to leave the Academy, 
it was suggested that he enter holy orders, but he 
decided instead to accept a diplomatic mission 
that would take him to many countries over the 
next four years. Back in the Ukraine, he taught 
poetry in a seminary at Pereiaslov, not far from 
Kiev, then at the high school in Harkiv. But his 
modern teaching methods created a scandal, and 
he was forced to turn his back on official institu- 
tions. At this point the richest, most exciting and 
most fruitful period of his life began. 
For twenty-eight years, between 1766 and 1794, 
Hryhoriy Skovoroda wandered alone, taught in 
market places, and wrote. During this time he wrote 
eighteen philosophical treatises, works with titles 
such as Narcissus: A Conversation about Knowing 
Thyself, The ABC of the Universe, and Of the Ancient 
World. He also produced a book of poetry, a col- 
lection of fables, seven translations of ancient clas- 
by Tatiana Zolozova 
sics, and a voluminous correspondence in Latin 
and Ukrainian with his pupils and friends. 
In the spirit of the Enlightenment, he called 
for the return of authentic values, a free spiritual 
life and a just society. His adherence to modern 
European philosophy did not prevent him from 
admiring the scholars and poets of Greek Antiquity, 
the Old Testament prophets, St. Paul and St. Augus- 
tine and the sages of non-Christian religions. He 
owed much to Plato and the teachings of the Bible, 
which he regarded as the supreme expression of 
human wisdom. 
Skovoroda’s poetry, the most outstanding poetry 
written during the baroque golden age in the 
Ukraine, is inseparable from his philosophy. In 
addition to his philosophical and satirical stories 
and poems, his investigations into the natural 
rhythm of language and into types of poetry, we 
owe a debt to this inspired poet for introducing a 
profound feeling for nature into traditional 
Ukrainian lyricism. He was the Slavic harbinger of 
Romanticism. [| 
 
Hryhoriy (Grigori) Skovoroda, 
1722-1794. 
A a ey 
TATIANA ZOLOZOVA, 
cultural attachée at the 
Ukrainian embassy in France, is 
the author of a book on French 
instrumental music since 1944 
(Kiev, 1989) and of many 
articles and essays on the arts 
and philosophy.

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 99245: Greenwatch: the sea's dwindling harvest

GREENWATCH 
THE SEA’S 
DWINDLING HARVEST 
BY FRANCE BEQUETTE 
Tuna fishing in the 
Mediterranean. 
¢ E are risking another dis- 
aster,” says Eduardo 
Loayaza, fisheries advisor 
with the World Bank's Agriculture 
and Natural Resources Department. 
“There are too many fishing boats 
chasing too few fish. It's like defor- 
estation but it’s invisible because it’s 
happening under water.” Who is to 
blame? The fishermen, who have 
been described as “the last race of 
hunter-gatherers, out to snatch what 
they can, while they can”? Govern- 
ments? International organizations, 
which seem unable to enforce regu- 
lations drawn up after tough negoti- 
ations? Or technological progress 
that makes fishing boats and equip- 
ment increasingly efficient? 
A LIMITED RESOURCE 
On one point everyone is agreed: 
the seas are emptying. Once they 
were very full. There are more than 
20,000 species of marine mammals 
grouped into 350 families. Some 
fish, such as cod, mackerel, sardine 
and tuna, are migrators. Others such 
as salmon and eel divide their lives 
between sea water and fresh water. 
Others still, such as grey mullet, red 
mullet, sole and skate, live near 
coasts. Four-fifths of the earth’s 
animal life lives in the seas and 
oceans, which provide the world’s 
population with an average of 4% of 
its food. In Asia alone more than a 
billion people depend on fish and 
seafood as their major source of 
animal protein, while approxi- 
mately 60% of the people in devel- 
oping countries derive 40% or more 
of their animal protein from fish. 
How are fish stocks evaluated? 
At the beginning of the 20th cen- 
tury the countries of northern 
Europe created the International 
Council for Exploration of the Sea 
and launched the first programmes 
to measure the impact of fishing on 
fish resources. In the 1940s mathe- 
matical models were established 
and were widely used by special- 
ists. For several decades, attention 
focused on fish resources and their 
management, and quotas were 
fixed. 
More recently the question of 
resources management began to be 
studied by fisheries biologists, 
  
whose mission, as described by 
Jacques Guegen of the French 
Research Institute for Exploiting the 
Sea (IFREMER), is “to quantify 
marine animal (or plant) stocks in 
order to define the catch that may 
be taken without endangering a 
species’ continued existence.” Fish- 
eries biologists have several 
methods at their disposal. One is 
experimentally fishing a given stock 
(i.e. fish with similar biological char- 
acteristics living in the same region) 
and then extrapolating the results to 
the entire geographical area. 
Another is to count the eggs mixed 
in with the plankton in spawning 4 
- 
 

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 99245: Greenwatch: the sea's dwindling harvest

42 
WORLD 
  
SWITZERLAND'S DYING FORESTS: A 
FALSE ALARM? 
In 1983 dire warnings went out in Switzer- 
land that the country's forests were dying 
and that something had to be done quickly 
to curb the air pollution that was killing 
them. Measures were duly taken, not all of 
them very popular. Speed limits were 
reduced; unleaded fuel was promoted, 
and catalytic convertor exhaust-pipes 
imposed. Four years later the picture 
already looked less black, and today sci- 
entists are saying that ten years’ study is 
too short to confirm that the deterioration 
will continue. Switzerland's forests are still 
there, although it is true that they are not 
. in the pink of health. The scientists refuse 
to dramatize, however, and are calling for 
more data. The same goes for global 
warming. Perhaps we should wait a while 
before planting palm-trees in Siberia. W 
CAN HUNTERS TURN 
GAME-KEEPERS? 
The Pan-African News Agency (PANA) 
reports that wildlife resource manage- 
ment is still posing problems in West 
Africa. The increasing rarity of game is 
due mainly to the proliferation of firearms, 
the spread of cash crops and pastoral 
farming. In Senegal, for example, wildlife 
specialists point out that entrusting wildlife 
management to hunters is ineffective, and 
that game is disappearing from the wide 
open spaces that were once reserved for 
traditional hunting. Data needs to be col- 
lected on the structure and reproductive 
capacities of each animal population and 
policies should be unified under a single 
authority that would reconcile wildlife 
protection and hunting. In Senegal, wildlife 
protection is in the hands of the national 
parks department, and the department of 
water, forest and hunting issues hunting 
permits, usually without knowing the state 
of existing stocks. | 
MACEDONIA’S THREATENED LAKES 
Environmentalists in the Republic of Mace- 
donia have launched an appeal to save 
Lakes Ohrid, Dojran and Prespa. Lake 
Dojran is shared with Greece, and Lake 
Ohrid, which is included on UNESCO's 
World Heritage List, with Albania. 80 per 
cent of the animal species found in Lake 
Ohrid are endemic and of ancient origin, 
and the lake is known as a "museum of 
living fossils”. The level of Lake Dojran 
has fallen to 2.5 metres below the min- 
imum set by an agreement between 
Greece and Macedonia, and that of Lake 
Prespa, which is shared by Macedonia, 
Greece and Albania, has dropped 5 metres 
in the past |4 years. Studies are currently 
underway to determine whether this is 
due to natural causes or human activity— 
I 
FURTHER 
READING 
@ Fisheries 
Enforcement 
Issues, OECD, 
1994. 
« Reports of the 
Committee on 
Fisheries, FAO, 
1993. 
o Jt can’t goon 
forever, 
The implications 
of the global 
grab for 
declining fish 
stocks, 
Greenpeace 
International, 
1993. 
  
 
grounds. Alternatively, schools of 
fish can be detected by means of 
sonar, a technique used in subma- 
rine warfare. Mathematical models 
are used to establish a link between 
fishing methods and the amount of 
fish caught. They enable experts 
working in the laboratory to draw 
practical conclusions, e.g. calling 
for larger mesh in fishing nets, 
increasing or reducing the amount 
of fish caught or modifying the 
fishing season. 
According to statistics published 
by the Food and Agriculture Orga- 
nization of the United Nations 
(FAO), marine catches grew from 
20 million tons in 1950 to reach 86 
million tons in 1989. In a document 
published in 1993 FAQ stated that 
“the world fish catch has increased 
more than four times in the past 40 
years, but the over-intensive use of 
modern technology and search for 
short-term benefits, coupled with 
continuous government support 
for otherwise uneconomic produc- 
tion, has had a devastating impact 
on many important fish stocks. 
Commercial fleets have driven 
some species to commercial extinc- 
tion and sometimes close to bio- 
logical extinction, by destroying 
ecosystems such as coral reefs and 
algae fields.” In 1989 there were over 
one million large-scale—and twice 
as many smaller scale—fishing 
boats on the world’s oceans and 
seas. A factory ship can freeze and 
store up to 20 tons of fish fillets per 
day taken from 40 to 50 tons of fresh 
fish. But to operate economically 
The fish market in 
Tokyo (Japan), 
such vessels need to be supplied 
with large catches. Boats are there- 
fore constantly being modified and 
increased in size. 
Modern fishing techniques 
include the use of long-lines that 
may be up to 100 km long; bottom 
trawls that rake the sea bed; purse 
seine nets (up to 1,000 metres long 
and 100 metres high) that encircle 
shoals of fish; gill-nets (up to 60 km 
long) that are made of hard-to-detect 
nylon filament and are maintained 
vertical by a system of floats and 
weights. The non-governmental 
organization Greenpeace reports 
that one of the world’s biggest trawl 
nets measures 110 metres by 170 
metres at its mouth and has an 
overall capacity of 30,000 m?, large 
enough to encircle twelve Boeing 
747s. An even bigger net, now under 
construction in Iceland, will have a 
30% larger opening. FAO has clas- 
sified almost every commercial fish 
species in every ocean and sea as 
“depleted”, “fully-exploited” or 
“over-exploited”. 
Fish are a limited resource. For- 
tunately they are highly fertile, but 
they need time to reproduce. It takes 
cod, for example, seven or eight 
years to reach sexual maturity. As 
Alain Maucorps, of the Department 
of Fish Resources of IFREMER, 
writes, “Extreme overexploitation 
occurs when not enough young fish 
reach reproductive age. There is a 
fertile biomass (the cumulative 
weight of the stock) threshold 
beneath which the number of 
exploitable fish and thus the very 
survival of the stock can be seri- 
ously endangered. Simulation 
models demonstrate that as soon 
as this threshold is reached, the 
stock can disappear very quickly.” 
WASTE 
Catching fish when they are too 
young is thus dangerous for the 
species. And yet from 50% to 80% of 
the hake caught in the Bay of Biscay 
(between France and Spain) are 
smaller than the regulation min- 
imum because net mesh-size is too 
small. Waste is another very serious 
problem. In Guyana, for example, 
for every 5,000 tons of shrimp taken, 
fishermen throw away 20,000 tons

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 99245: Greenwatch: the sea's dwindling harvest

of dead or dying fish they don't 
want, The International Council for 
Exploration of the Sea estimates 
that 80 million cod were thrown 
away off the north Norwegian coast 
in 1986 and 1987 because they were 
too small to sell, a waste of nearly 
100,000 tons. Other annual catches 
of which Greenpeace is strongly 
critical are the 100,000 blue sharks, 
the 48,000 Gulf of Mexico sea turtles, 
birds (an estimated 750,000, 
including 44,000 albatross) and 
marine mammals such as whales 
and dolphins, especially in the trop- 
ical eastern Pacific where the purse 
seine nets used by tuna fishers 
imprison not only fish but also 
cetaceans looking for the same 
food. 
EE ————————— 
SAVING FISH TO SAVE FISHING 
In a document calling for the pro- 
hibition of driftnets, the French 
environmental group Equipe 
Cousteau considers that without a 
total ban on this gear “fishing will 
soon be nothing more than a 
memory”. The Cousteau team 
recalls that “in 1991 the United 
Nations General Assembly voted for 
a ban on driftnets longer than 2.5 
kms., to take effect in 1992. The 
United States, then the European 
Union, decided to adopt this rec- 
ommendation, but France, where 
about forty vessels practise tuna 
fishing with driftnets, was granted a 
special exemption.” 
The United Nations Convention 
on the Law of the Sea was adopted 
in 1982, and although it has not yet 
entered into force, its principles are 
widely accepted as customary by 
fishing and coastal countries. In the 
Convention, the principle of free 
access to fisheries resources is aban- 
doned and fish, previously consid- 
ered res nullius (belonging to no 
one), have become res communes 
(whose users can be defined at the 
international level). Coastal states 
have Exclusive Economic Zones 
extending 200 miles from their 
shores (except in the Mediter- 
ranean) in which they must monitor 
fishing boats and the gear they use. 
But no one really has the means to 
do this. 
Another problem lies with devel- 
oping countries which transfer their 
fishing rights, then see their waters 
plundered by industrial fishing 
fleets which deprive them of an 
indispensable source of protein. 
This is particularly hard to accept 
when the fish is converted into fer- 
tilizer and food for domestic ani- 
mals, chicken, cattle and even... 
pen-reared fish! 
The situation is critical. It remains 
to be seen which will die out first, 
the fish or the fishermen. [| 
British fishermen in 
the North Sea. 
  
FRANCE 
BEQUETTE 
is a Franco- 
American 
journalist 
specializing in 
environmental 
questions. Since 
1985 she has 
been associated 
with the 
WANAD- UNESCO 
training 
programme for 
African news 
agency 
Journalists. 
  
Processing fish on 
board a French 
trawler. 
  
WORLD 
excessive use of pesticides by apple- 
growers near Lake Prespa has resulted in 
soil and water pollution. An appeal for aid 
has been launched by the “Ecological 
Movement of Macedonia” in Skopje, Tel.: 
(389) 91 220 518; Fax: (389) 91 331 434. 
CHILDREN MEET THE FOUR 
ELEMENTS 
An Indian scientific journalist, Dilip M. 
Salwi, has sent us four short children’s 
books written by him and charmingly illus- 
trated by Atanu Roy. Clear, easy-to-read 
and informative, they introduce children to 
the four elements: air, fire, earth and water. 
Already published in Hindi and English, 
they could well be translated into other 
languages. The author can be contacted c/o 
Ratna Sagar Publishers, Virat Bkavan, 
Mukherjee Nagar Commercial complex, 
Delhi 110009, India. Tel.: 7122505. =m 
WOOD GETS 
THE GREEN LIGHT 
Swiss architects are rediscovering wood. 
Engineers have calculated that it takes 
from five to ten times more energy to 
build with metal and concrete than with 
wood. Solidity and quality being equal, 
wood comes out on top. It takes 3.8 times 
more energy to manufacture a 7.5-metre 
beam using steel than it does using wood, 
5 times more using concrete and 16 times 
more using aluminium. The same process 
causes | | times more pollution using steel 
than using wood, 20 times more using 
cement and 50 times more using alu- 
minium. In view of the widespread belief 
that wood is highly inflammable, it is inter- 
esting to learn that insurance companies 
and firemen are encouraging its use as a 
building material. = 
 
A YOUNG PEOPLE’S 
ENVIRONMENTAL SUMMIT 
A 10-day Global Youth Environmental 
Summit is being organized in the United 
States for June 1995 by the Thompson 
Valley High School (Colorado) and the 
Niles West High School, Skokie (Illinois) in 
collaboration with the United Nations 
University for Peace in Costa Rica. Two 
students from each US. state and from 
each country in the world will attend, as 
well as political leaders from different parts 
of the world. The summit’s major objective 
is to educate participants on environ- 
mental issues and to help them “acquire 
the social action skills necessary to create 
positive change in their community”. For 
further information, contact Nicole Reak, 
Thompson Valley High School, 1669 Eagle 
Drive, Loveland, Colorado 80537, US.A. 
Tel.: (303) 669-0801: Fax: (303) 667-1628. 
" 
G
R
E
E
N
W
A
T
C
H
 
43

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

G
E
R
R
E
E
N
W
A
T
C
H
 
INITIATIVES 
  
THE GREENING OF PIURA 
  
~ InNovember 1993, El Tiempo, a daily newspaper 
' in the Peruvian city of Piura, decided to launch a 
tree-planting campaign. To carry out this “Green Cru- 
sade”, the paper called on concerned citizens and insti- 
tutions to make a joint effort to defend the environ- 
ment. A brigade of volunteer foresters was created, 
consisting of some fifty agronomy students from the 
national university of Piura and the Almirante Miguel 
Grau Advanced Institute of Technology. Its task was to 
mobilize the population, and draw up plans for green 
spaces and planting points. The Provincial Council 
chipped in with a donation of 3,000 saplings, the Regional 
Department of Agriculture gave 5,000 more, and con- 
tributions were also received from the National Food 
Aid Programme, the College of Engineers and non- 
governmental organizations. 
The aim of the Green Crusade was to create 33 parks 
and green spaces in a year in some 50 educational cen- 
tres. “Everybody who wanted” was invited to join in, the 
only qualification being that volunteers had to be ready 
to work hard. The participants attended a three-day 
course at the university in order to learn how to plant 
and reproduce the chosen species of forest, ornamental 
and fruit trees. It might have been feared that the initial 
enthusiasm would wane after the first flurry of activity, 
but that was not how things turned out. El Tiempo 
awarded prizes to the most productive groups. And 
the young volunteers who worked to the end of the 
project received a professional training programme 
A 
pr 
certificate from the university, as well as a straw hat 
and a pair of pruning shears. 
February 1994 was declared “Forest Action Month”, 
and the people of Piura were invited to a planting ses- 
sion attended by political, military and religious leaders. 
Two hundred trees were planted on the Plaza Civica in 
the San Martin neighbourhood. In March, which was 
proclaimed “Tree Month”, a lecture was given on envi- 
ronmental policy. April was devoted to environmental 
education, and May to an awareness campaign aimed 
at mothers. Meanwhile, 500 saplings were planted at Fe 
y Alegria High School in the El Indio district. Teachers 
taught their students how to use a tree-nursery, fer- 
tilize and irrigate, design gardens, and prune and graft 
trees. 
Ten thousand trees have already been planted in 
twenty green spaces. The most significant result so far 
is that the people of Piura are now convinced that the 
environment must be protected and that steps must be 
taken to improve living conditions in general. Now all 
that remains to be done is tend the trees—a safe bet 
given the enthusiasm with which El Tiempo intends 
to continue its campaign for the greening of Piura. =| 
|
LUZ MARIA HELGUERO, 
Director, El Tiempo, 
Jr. Ayacucho 751, apartado 114, Piura, Peru. 
Telephone: (51) (74) 32 51 41. 
Fax: (51) (74) 3274 78.

## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 99247: Global view: S.O.S. children

glob 
- & 
S.0.S. Children 
00000000000 eenvvcccsne § 
To mark the close of the International Year of the Family, ¥ 
here is a portrait of a family with a difference 
In the space of ten years, Virginie 
Kankoua has had thirteen children, 
five of whom are now old enough to leave 
home. One of her older daughters, who 
suffered from depression as a child, has 
started a small sewing business, Another 
has opened a beauty parlour. Their mother 
is proud to see them well integrated into 
society. It is her greatest reward for the 
long years of hard work, patience and 
devotion she has given to these children. 
 
 
Child care—a new 
yardstick of progress 
The Progress of Nations 1994, the latest 
issue of an annual report published by 
UNICEF, the United Nations Children’s 
Fund, ranks the world’s nations 
“according to their achievements in child 
health, nutrition, education, family plan- 
ning and progress for women”. Based on 
data collected from various United Nations 
agencies {including Unesco), the report 
shows that some developing countries 
meet the needs of their people better 
than some wealthier countries. We learn, 
for example, that Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe 
both have a per capita Gross National 
Product {GNP) of less than $600 dollars 
yet still manage to provide 90 per cent of 
their children with at least four years of pri- 
mary education, i.e. twice that of Brazil 
with an annual per capita GNP of nearly 
$3,000. Nearly 30 per cent of the children 
in Guatemala are suffering from malnu- 
trition, but less than 5 per cent in 
Paraguay, which is not much wealthier. 
Viet Nam has a per capita GNP of only 
$240 but its child-survival rate is higher 
than that of Algeria, whose GNP is about 
seven times higher. Disparities like these 
show that social development does not 
automatically result from economic 
progress but constitutes a goal in itself 
that should be pursued and evaluated 
directly. n     
ew... gic 
Not one of them is a natural child of hers, 
for “Mama Virginie” works in the S.0.S. 
Children’s Village of Kara, Togo, where she 
takes in orphaned or abandoned children, 
cares for them, secs that they go to school 
and loves them. 
The village of Kara, built between 1974 
and 1979, today consists of ten houses, an 
administrative building, a kindergarten, 
a primary school, a nutrition centre, a 
farm, a cafeteria and a youth club. Nine 
“mums”, helped out by five “aunts” live 
there with about ten children each. 
Brothers and sisters are never separated. 
The director, the educators and the main- 
tenance men are all “dads”. The village 
also has sponsors. The children don’t know 
them since they tend to live far away from 
the village, but thanks to their material 
support, their presence is felt. 
There are 315 other S.0.S. Children’s 
villages in 122 countries. The first one was 
founded in 1949 in Imst (Austria), where a 
young medical student named I[{ermann 
Gmeiner had the idea of bringing together 
war orphans and widows or unmarried 
women in a few houses that he had built 
for them. Ten years later the idea had 
caught on in France and elsewhere in 
Europe. In the 1960s it spread to Asia, 
South America and Africa. 
In 1964 the International Federation 
of S.0.S. Children’s Villages was founded 
and today it is the biggest non-govern- 
mental organization working on behalf of 
children in distress. Based in Innsbruck 
(Austria), it has consultative status with 
the United Nations and UNESCO. 
From Imst in the Tyrol Mountains to 
Antananarivo in Madagascar, from 
Busigny, France, to Bamako, Mali, from 
Choglamsar in northern India to Teguci- 
galp, Honduras, from Pokhara, Nepal, to 
Port-au-Prince in Haiti, S.0.S. Children’s 
villages are giving thousands of children a 
chance to enjoy a real childhood. 
To subscribe to the S.0.S. Children’s 
magazine Villages de joie (French only), to 
make a donation or sponsor a village, 
please contact Village d’enfants S.0.5., 
6, Cité Monthiers, 75009 Paris. 
Tel.: (33-1) 4526-7179; Fax: (33-1) 4995-0285. 
EW.. 
  
The 1994 UN Population 
Award 
The 1994 United Nations Population 
Award has been won by to President Hosni 
Mubarak of Egypt and by the Turkish 
Foundation for Health and Family Planning. 
The award is made annually to persons or 
institutions who have raised public aware- 
ness about population problems and pos- 
sible solutions. “We are not only hon- 
ouring the laureates. . . ,” declared UN 
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali 
at the award ceremony, “we are also sig- 
nalling our continuing concern for people’s 
needs and aspirations for a peaceful world 
in balance with population, environment 
and development.” = 
  
 
More than 100 million 
victims of sexual 
mutilation 
Female sexual mutilation is commonly 
practised in 28 African countries, and 
the World Health Organization (WHO) esti- 
mates the number of women and girl vic- 
tims of these practices at between 85 and 
114 million. No religion prescribes these 
mutilations which belong to traditions 
intended to preserve virginity and repress 
female sexuality. Apart from their 
degrading and traumatic nature, they may 
lead to death, haemorrhaging, tetanus, 
septicemia and the spread of Aids. In the 
long run they compromise sexual activi- 
ties and may cause infections and com- 
plications during childbirth. Combating 
such practices is difficult, and according 
to a recent WHO report the women them- 
selves must take the lead. Several orga- 
nizations, including the Inter-African Com- 
mittee for the Elimination of Harmful 
Traditional Practices, are trying to con- 
vince women that they can renounce such 
customs without betraying their cultural 
values. n 
Further information may be found in 
Mother and Child Health and Family 
Planning: Current Needs and Future 
Planning, a report by the Director- 
General of WHO to the WHO Executive 
Board, 12 January 1994.   45

## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### IGNORE

46 
Pd
 


### 99248: World peace begins at home

A R C H 
World peace begins at home 
Published below are extracts from a letter by the Chinese thinker Cai Ynanpei 
(Ts'ai Yuan-pei; 1863-1940) which first appeared in Correspondance, the 
journal of the International Institute of Intellectual Co-operation, in 1933. In 
the letter Cai Yuanpei discusses what he regards as the regrettable propensity 
to dissociate private morality from public morality and to demand of the 
individual the kind of rational and altruistic behaviour that is not expected 
of the state. 
To the Chairman of the International 
Committee of Intellectual Co-operation 
Academia Sinica (Shanghai) 
In the book Taz Hsueh (“The Great Learning”) 
we find a unifying conception of world order 
which seeks to lay its foundations in the 
psychology of the individual. 
This book was written two thousand 
years ago by Tseng Ts'an, a disciple of Con- 
fucius, later incorporated in the Li-Ki by 
the Han scholars, and finally chosen, as 
one of the Four Books to be studied by every 
schoolboy, by the scholars of the Sung 
Dynasty... . The passage I wish to refer to 
reads as follows: 
“In ancient times, those who wished to 
make clear their virtue before the world 
would first put their country in order; those 
who wished to put their country in order 
would first bring about right relationships 
in their family; those who wished to bring 
about right relationships in their family 
would first cultivate their own self; those 
who wished to cultivate their own self 
Ii 
Text selected and presented 
by Edgardo Canton 
would first rectify their own heart; those 
who wished to rectify their own heart 
would first make their will sincere; and 
those who wished to make their will sin- 
cere would first try to attain knowledge; 
and they would attain knowledge by 
studying matter. 
“When matter is studied, then knowl- 
edge may be attained; when knowledge 
is attained, then the will becomes sincere; 
when the will is sincere, then the heart is 
rectified; when the heart is rectified, then 
the self is cultivated; when the self is cul- 
tivated, then there exist right relationships 
in the family; when right relationships 
exist in the family, then the country is in 
order; when the countries are in order, 
then there is peace in the world.” 
The end to be aimed at is described as 
“world peace”, while the method of 
attaining this peace begins with “making 
clear one’s virtue before the world”. This 
virtue is regarded as rational conduct, and 
proceeds, neither from superstition, nor 
from blind acceptance, but from the exer- 
cise of intelligence. The development of 
intelligence is again described as the 
attainment of knowledge through the 
objective study of matter. It is therefore 
characteristically free from theological 
and metaphysical fancies. 
The conception of world order was 
further elucidated in the Kung-Yang Com- 
mentary on the Spring and Autumn 
Annals. According to Kung-Yang, a Con- 
fucianist, there are three stages in the 
development of world order, as follows: 
“In a world of chaos, everyone is loyal 
to his own state but hostile to the other 
Chinese states; in the secondary stage of 
world peace, everyone is loyal to the Chi- 
nese states, while hostile to those outside 
China; in the final stage of world peace, all 
the barbarian (non-Chinese) states, large 
and small, far and near, have come up to 
the same level of civilization, and every 
citizen conducts himself as a perfect gen- 
tleman.” 
| 
WELL EDUCATED CITIZENS 
Expressed in modern terminology, the first 
stage is the stage of nationalism; the 
second stage, when one is loyal to all the 
Chinese states while hostile to the others, 
may be regarded as rather similar to the 
American Monroe doctrine and the con- 
ception of a federation of Europe; the final 
stage is more or less foreshadowed by the 
League of Nations. 
“Peace” is thus regarded as a stage 
when all the large and small, distant and 
near states are treated alike. The final ref- 
erence to every citizen conducting himself 
as a perfect gentleman points to the stage 
when all should be so mentally disciplined 
that they can successively form the ever- 
widening units which culminate in a world 
of universal peace. 
European philosophers have evolved 
theories wherein either individual liberty 
or state sovereignty is pushed to the 
extreme, both of which are incomprehen- 
sible to the Chinese mind. The Chinese 
scholars think that the successive units of 
human society—from the cell to the indi- 
vidual, the group and the higher groups 
like the state and the world—differ in size 
and complexity, but not in their behav- 
iour. 
What is regarded as good or evil in a 
small unit is also regarded in the same 
way in the larger units. Chinese scholars 
are sincerely puzzled when one holds that 
honesty is a virtue as between individuals 
but could be ignored in international 
diplomacy; that while mutual considera-

## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 99248: World peace begins at home

tion, as stated in the Confucian or Chris- 
tian Golden Rule, should be the rule for 
intercourse between individuals, the 
reverse attitude of aggression and whole- 
sale slaughter should be countenanced; 
that while selfishness is regarded as a 
shame and self-sacrifice a virtue in indi- 
vidual conduct, self-aggrandizement 
should be the norm for international poli- 
cies; that while in individual conduct 
chivalry consists in helping the weak and 
defenceless, the dictum that might is right 
should be accepted as the rule in inter- 
national relationships. 
|
ANEW WORLD ORDER 
The League of Nations is, I believe, com- 
mitted to a new conception of world order 
and dedicated as an instrument to abolish 
dishonesty, unkindness, unrighteousness 
and lack of mutual consideration from 
international politics. The International 
Committee of Intellectual Co-operation 
has especially the duty of bringing about 
the support of the scholars of the world for 
this new conception. If it is accepted that 
the successive units of human society are 
causally related as described above, then 
we may deduce two principles which are 
worthy of our own effort and may well 
cover our multifarious activities: 
1) All supporters of the idea of intel- 
lectual co-operation should try to live up 
to the norm of individual conduct, which 
will thus serve as the ideal for group con- 
duct also. 
2) All should co-operate in the work 
of objective study and investigation of 
facts bearing on all international prob- 
lems, analyse the causes and effects and on 
the strength of this objective study make 
recommendations for the consideration of 
the proper authorities. 
I believe the above two proposals are 
well in accord with the Confucian political 
philosophy and with the aims and objects of 
the Institute of Intellectual Co-operation. m 
CAI YUANPEI 
 
K'ung-Fu-Tzu 
(or Confucius), circa 
551-479 B.C., a portrait 
dating from the 
18th century. 
47

## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

48 
  
  
       
XX WY 
José Carlos Mariategui, a wood engraving by the 
Mexican artist Alberto Beltran. 
trUVIANS called him—and still do— 
the Amauta, the Quechua lan- 
guage word for “master”. In his 
lifetime, and after his untimely death at the 
age of thirty-five, he was regarded as a 
master not only in Peru but in many other 
parts of Latin America, and today, more 
than sixty years after his death, the influ- 
ence of his life and work can still be felt 
thanks to the publication of several dozen 
of his books, his letters and much of his 
journalism. 
José Carlos Mariategui was born in 1894 
and died in 1930. His short life, in the last 
few years of which he was confined to a 
wheelchair and suffered the amputation of 
a leg, was remarkable for its richness and 
creativity. As one of his biographers has 
observed, his considerable output of work 
is “a triumph of intelligence over pain and 
an unceasing battle of the will to domi- 
nate a precarious destiny”. 
He stood apart from the Peruvian and 
Latin American intellectual landscape in 
the early part of the century. This land- 
scape, which his tragic life and the pow- 
erful influence of his activities were to 
transform, was then dominated by the 
modernist movement in literature and by 


### 99249: José Carlos Mariátegui (1894-1930): witness to an age

Witness to an age 
the early working-class and student strug- 
gles. A frail young man from a poor provin- 
cial family, he became an apprentice 
printer on the Lima daily, La Prensa, in 
1909, and while still an adolescent con- 
tributed light pieces to the paper under 
the pen name juan Chronicler. He soon 
founded and ran an opposition paper, La 
Razén, an act that forced him to leave for 
Europe where he spent three years and, as 
he said later, “got married and espoused 
the ideas 1 would later defend”. Right to the 
end of his life he was publisher and editor 
of the cultural and literary journal Amauta, 
which had a crucial influence on Peru’s 
intellectual development. 
Maridtegui showed remarkable insight 
as a witness and analyst of the spiritual 
and material crisis of his time and as a 
polemicist and popularizer of contempo- 
rary ideas, from surrealism and avant- 
garde literature (including the work of 
Joyce) to socialism (starting with Marx, 
although he also grasped the importance 
of Gramsci with astonishing intuition and 
was a lucid interpreter of Sorel and Croce) 
and psychoanalysis. One of his many note- 
worthy accomplishments was to discover 
and explore the affinity between Freudi- 
anism and Marxism. 
The development of a theory of myth as 
a driving force in modern man’s behav- 
iour and a clear-sighted analysis of the 
spell cast on the European masses by their 
demagogical and populist leaders were 
important features of Maridtegui’s work 
in the 1920s, when he also organized a 
trade union and the first Peruvian Marxist 
party, which he called “socialist” rather 
than “communist”. He became swept up in 
the turmoil of the times, was condemned 
by the Communist International and then 
virtually excommunicated from the move- 
ment. The perspicacity of his social 
thinking was matched by the indepen- 
dence of his political activities and he suf- 
fered the consequences. 
It was in the columns of Amauta that 
the distinctive nature of Peru and of Latin 
America in general was discussed for the 
first time in a universal context. Maridtegui 
Jost Carros M ARtATEGUT (1894-1930) 
by Aliredo Pita 
took part in the debate on the indigenous 
Americans—a first attempt to understand 
in depth and from the inside the cultural 
schism that prevented Peru from being a 
nation. But when the problems of educa- 
tion and agricultural production in Russia 
became headline news, for example, he 
turned his attention to them and also 
wrote of Jean Jaurés and Rolland, of Bar- 
busse and Valéry, of Pirandello and Trotsky. 
Although confined to a wheelchair, the 
master continued to work indefatigably, 
and welcomed a wide circle of people to 
his home in Lima—students, workers and 
trade unionists, poets such as Martin Adin 
and José Maria Eguren, and intellectuals 
like the liberal American writer and 
thinker, Waldo Franck. 
In 1927 the Peruvian government 
banned Amauta and Labor, another 
journal Maridtegui had founded in support 
of the working class, and he thought of 
going into exile again. “1 prefer exile,” he 
wrote, “to resigning myself to silence. 
Without Amauta and Labor, without a 
platform from which to express myself, I 
shan'’t be able to resist my overwhelming 
need to breathe the air of a free land.” 
Amauta reappeared, however, and its 
editor stayed. He then published the 
extremely influential Seven Interpretative 
Essays on Peruvian Reality. 
His death brought an end to an 
inspiring and many-sided career and 
sounded the death knell for Amauta, a 
very great loss for Latin American letters. 
From 1923 to 1930 Maridtegui had written 
in Amauta of revolution and the crisis of 
socialism, of the links between revolution 
and intellectuals, of the processes of Fas- 
cism, the awakening of the Orient and the 
rise of anti-Semitism. What other themes 
might he have tackled if he had lived ten or 
twenty years longer? | 
a y I sl 
ALFREDO PITA 
is a Peruvian journalist who is presently working with 
Agence France-Presse in Paris. He has published 
several collections of poems and short stories, and 
a novel, Ef cazador ausente (1994; “The Absent 
Hunter").

## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### IGNORE

| BOOKSHELF 
py | ld Ato. oI 
A FRESH LOOK AT THE PAST 
Presenting the first volume of the new 
HISTORY OF 
HUMANITY 
-
;
 
I N 1946, UNESCO's first Director-Gen- 
eral, Julian Huxley, wrote that “The 
chief task before the humanities today 
would seem to be to help in constructing 
a history of the development of the 
human mind, notably in its highest cul- 
tural achievements”. With these words, 
Huxley set forth the idea which led to the 
production under UNESCO’s auspices of 
a six-volume History of the Scientific and 
Cultural Development of Mankind, an 
enterprise which began in 1950 and took 
almost twenty years to complete. 
The ink of the first edition was barely 
dry before Paolo E. de Berrédo Carneiro, 
President of the International Scientific 
Committee in charge of the project, was 
thinking about bringing it up to date. 
“The day will come when what we have 
written will, in its turn, have to be 
replaced,” he wrote. “I like to think that 
our successors will attend to this, and 
that a revised edition of the work we 
have begun may be published at the 
dawn of a new millennium.” 
Now UNESCO is embarking on the 
publication of an entirely revised and 
updated edition of this major work. Enti- 
tled History of Humanity and com- 
prising seven volumes, the new history is 
far more than a simple revision. Both in 
structure and content it is radically dif- 
ferent from its predecessor. “If the first 
history could be thought of as a summing 
up,” says S. J. De Laet, editor-in-chief of 
Volume I of the new History of 
Humanity, “the second is more like a 
new point of departure.” 
Published in June 1994, Volume I is 
entitled Prehistory and the Beginnings 
of Civilization. It consists of two parts. 
The first covers the period from the ori- 
gins of humankind to the beginnings of 
food production; the second continues 
the story to the appearance of the first 
societies, 5,000 years ago. Some forty 
internationally known specialists have 
contributed studies of the world’s dif- 
ferent geo-cultural areas—from Africa 
to China, from Europe to the Andes, 
from North America to Australia— 
giving a comprehensive picture of the 
infancy of humankind. 
With more than 700 pages of richly 
documented text, as well as detailed bib- 
liographies, many figures, tables and 
maps, this is an attractively produced 
book as well as an important contribu- 
tion to scholarship. u 
CHRISTOPHE WOND]JI 
Head of UNESCO's Section of General 
and Regional Histories 
History of Humanity, Volume 1, Prehistory 
and the Beginnings of Civilization, 
edited by S.J. De Laet, 
co-edited by A.H. Dani, J.L. Lorenzo, 
R.B. Nunoo, published by UNESCO, Paris 
& Routledge, London, 1994 
(850 French francs from UNESCO; 
£85.00 from Routledge). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Cover, pages 3, 30: Baldev © Sygma, 
Paris. Pages 5, 6: Christian Irrgang © 
Wolf Lepenies, Berlin. Pages 8-9, 23, 
24-25: Abbas © Magnum, Paris. 
Pages 10-11, 22 (above), 28, 31: © 
Roland and Sabrina Michaud, Paris. 
Page 12 (left): © Gamma, Paris. 
Page 12 (right): Roger Sandler © 
Cosmos, Paris. Page 13: © Digital 
Art/Westlight/Cosmos, Paris. Pages 
14, 17: © Patrick Lagés, Paris. Page 
15: © Jean-Loup Charmet, Musée 
Carnavalet, Paris. Page 16: Laurence 
Chaperon © Gamma, Paris. Page 19: 
© Alain Guillou, Le Croisic, France. 
Page 20: © Tapabor, Paris. Page 21: 
© Jean-Loup Charmet, Bibliothéque 
des Arts Décoratifs, Paris. Pages 22- 
23: Alain Mingam © Gamma, Paris. 
Pages 26, 27: Benito © Sygma, Paris. 
Pages 32-33: Atlas des Religions © 
Plon/Quarante-quatriéme Paralléle, 
Paris. Page 35: UNesco/Ines Forbes. 
Pages 36, 37, 38, 39: © Edouard 
Bailby, Paris. Page 40: © Tatiana 
Zolozova. Page 41: Jean Gaumy © 
Magnum, Paris. Page 42: Bruno 
Barbey © Magnum, Paris. Page 43: 
Harry Gruyaert © Magnum, Paris. 
Page 44: Veiller © Jacana, Paris. Page 
47: © Explorer Archives, Bibliotheque 
Nationale, Paris. Page 48: © Peruvian 
Embassy, Paris. 
49

## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

50 
 
JANUARY. DESERTS. Interview with Théodore Monod. The dry 
lands (M. Batisse). The call of the wilderness (J-C. Carrizre). A place 
of trials (M. Tajadod). A painter’s paradise (M. Zaalouk). Screenplays 
in the sand (M. Berrah). Hidden waters (D. Balland). A long look at 
the world’s arid lands (M. Batisse). Africa: learning to manage the 
desert (M. Skouri). Greenwatch: Protecting wetlands (E Bequette). 
The price of peace (FE. Mayor). Archives: A greater awareness of 
truth (Rabindranath Tagore). Heritage: The Stone Age temples of 
Malta (Ann Monsarrat). Books: (C. Wise). Music (I. Leymaric). 
FEBRUARY. WORLDS WITHIN WORDS. Interview with Yves 
Coppens. The gift of tongues (S. Wurm). Babel revisited (P. 
Mihlhiusler). Nigeria’s choice (A Bamgbose). Language death in 
Siberia (V. Belikov). The chicken and the banana (compiled by S. 
Wurm). Of gifts and gaffes (J. Tian). Greenwatch: Can Angkor be 
saved? (FE. Bequette). The spirit of Granada (F. Mayor). Archives: The 
way to coexistence (A. Toynbee). Heritage: The royal palaces of 
Abomey (J. Sopova). Music: (I. Leymarie). 
MARCH. HUMAN RIGHTS. Interview with Edouard J. Maunick. 
The birthright of humanity (EF. Mayor). The U-word (I. Fall). NGOs: 
the fight to be heard (S. Bessis). One and indivisible (A. Bernard). Free 
speech—democracy’s watchdog (H. Darbishire). States of bondage 
(M. Nowak). Seedplot for the future (S. Hessel). UNESCO: the rights 
of all (F. Fournier). A new departure (A. Mock). Greenwatch: Small 
islands: dreams and realities (EF Bequette). Dossier: The Vienna Con- 
ference. Heritage: Haiti: King Henry's fabulous works (F. Leary). 
Archives: Venice: a picture of harmony (Lc Corbusier). 
APRIL. MODERN MANAGEMENT AND LOCAL TRADITIONS. (I. 
d’Iribarne). Interview with Jean Malaurie. Business cultures (G. Hof- 
stede). Togo: Going by the book (A. Henry and Y. Badjo). Tunisia: 
They do it their way (R. Zghal). Mexico: Local loyalties: a hidden asset 
(J. Ruffier and D. Villavicencio). Eastern Europe: Voices from the 
past (I. Globokar). Japan: The new samurai (J. Harford). Green- 
watch: The national park dilemma (E Bequette). Preventing pollution 
(FE. Mayor). Heritage: The Vallée de Mai (G. Lionnet). Archives: Art 
and the home (Le Corbusier). Cziffra (S. Kol). Anniversary: Ulugh Beg, 
the astronomer-king (J. Sopova). Books. Music: (I. Leymarie). 
MAY. A NEW LOOK AT THE HISTORY OF COMMUNISM. Interview 
with Trinh Xuan Thuan. An end and a beginning (FE Hartog). Russia: 
Wanted: a new language (N. Kopossov). Romania: Past imperfect (Z 
Petre). Georgia: The historian’s responsibility (G. Charachidzé). 
Poland: Myths that die hard (H. Samsonowicz). The Czech Republic: 
Lost illusions (E. Schmidt-Hartmann). Bulgaria: When memory 
plays tricks (L. Deyanova). UNESCO's historical works (C. Wondji). 
Africa: An authentic picture (J. Devisse). Greenwatch: Inventing 
the urban future (FE Bequette). An active pact (FE. Mayor). The Yoko- 
hama conference. Archives: The collectivist betrayal (T. Mann). Her- 
itage: Quebec (A. Charbonneau, Y. Desloges and M. Lafrance). 
JUNE. BIOTECHNOLOGY. Interview with Antoni Tapies. Biotech- 
nology for beginners (M. S. Swaminathan). Achievements, expecta- 
tions and challenges (A. Sasson and E. J. DaSilva). The state of the art 
(T. Yoshida). The magic of mushrooms (P. Atthasampunna and S. T. 
Chang). Creative ferment (P. L. Rogers). UNESCO's international 
network of microbial resources centres. A rising tide (R. Colwell). 
From the green revolution to the gene revolution (I. K. Vasil and L. 
Herrera-Estrella). Art and the science of life (J. Hodgson). Green- 
watch: Defeating decibels (E Bequette). Sharing the future (F. Mayor). 
Heritage: Butrinti rediscovered (Z. Xholi). Anniversary: Martin 
Luther King, Jr. (E. J. Maunick). Archives: The downfall of idealism 
(T. Mann). Music: (I. Leymaric). Books: (E. Reichmann). 
JULY-AUGUST. SURPRISING STRANGERS. Interview with José 
Donoso. Elvis the African (G. Darley-Doran). Borshch and sympathy 
(N. Santy). Lost illusions (N. Bissoondath). ‘Living like savages’ (P. 
Jacquin). Inuit blues (interview with Pavel Lounguine). The genius 
of peoples (J. Malaurie). The Fulbe and the Samurai code (R. Ogawa). 
The hornbill’s quest (K. Sulang) A photographer in Tibet (P. Nor- 
mantas). Dreams of twenty young women (H. T. Simon). ‘One 
turning planet’ (D. Harris). Mexico City: the shock of discovery. My 
friends the Gypsies (interview with Aleksandar Petrovic). The son of 
Polish Jewish immigrants looks at the Palestinians (M. Rajsfus). A 
European artist discovers the salt of the earth (J. Leenhardt). We are 
Siamese if you please (M. Sportes). Café society (R. R. el-Tahtawf). 
Getting to know Chief Iamory (L. G. Binger). When the Mom- 
buttu women cried hosanna (G. Schweinfurth). Greenwatch: Coral: 
taking the pulse of the planet (EF. Bequette). Social development and 
quality of life (FE. Mayor). The rescue of the Bulgarian Jews in 1943 
(E. Vaillant). Anniversary: Olexander Dovzhenko (L. Hosejko). 
Heritage: Letter from Borobudur (E. Hattori). Archives: The new 
obscurantism (T. Mann). The Delhi Declaration. The U.N. goes to 
school (S. S. Shelley). Books: (R. Silva-Cacéres). Music: (I. Ley- 
maric). 
SEPTEMBER. BIOETHICS. Interview with Noélle Lenoir. Scientific 
knowledge and human dignity (J. Daussct). The prospects for gene 
therapy (R. Dulbecco). Prenatal diagnosis: forctelling the quality of 
life (H. Galjaard). Genetics in the market-place (E. N. Suleiman). 
UNESCO and bioethics (G. B. Kutukdjian). Fact file. What happened 
to development? (E Mayor). Heritage: The Tower of London (E 
Leary). Melina’s last battle. Greenwatch: Of men and mountains (EF. 
Bequette). Portrait: Mercator, cartographer of genius (J. Portante). 
Anniversary: Seoul at age 600 (C. Chong-Hyon and Y. Tong-Ok). 
Global View: Human development: a question of security. Archives: 
Haiku by Bashd. Listening: The maroons (I. Leymarie). Elvis the 
African, part 2 (G. Darlcy-Doran). 
OCTOBER. SLAVERY. Interview with Yehudah Amichai. Under the 
whiplash (O. D. Lara). Who was responsible? (E. M’Bokolo). A slave’s 
story (M. Grandy). A continent of fear (M. Gueye). The Black Code 
(L. Futcha). The long road to abolition (N. Schmidt). 1794: The French 
Convention abolishes slavery (L. Sala-Molins). Forced labour (G. 
Thullen). The slave route (interview with Doudou Digne). Fact file. The 
challenge of cultural pluralism (E Mayor). Heritage: The Danube 
delta (M. Cazacu). Anniversary: Hermann von Helmholtz (R. 
Schroder). Greenwatch: Saving the Aral (E Bequette). Global View: The 
plight of the world’s street children. Books: (E. J. Maunick). Archives: 
The future of culture (G. Marafién). Listening: The guitar (I. Leymarie). 
Reflections: Elvis the African, part 3 (G. Darley-Doran). 
NOVEMBER. NOMADISM. Interview with Myung-Whun Chung, 
Nomads and the modern state (A. Bourgeot). The Tuareg (Photos by 
F. Dal Chele). The myth of the Moken (J. Ivanoff). The return of the 
Bedouin (R. Bocco and R. Jaubert). The Gypsies (P. Williams). Forest 
rovers of the Amazon (H. Reid). The vanishing African herdsman (J. 
Galaty). A halt to advancing deserts (FE Mayor). Heritage: The 
monastery of Alcobaga (J. A. Seabra). Greenwatch: Red alert for 
the earth’s green belt (EF. Bequette). Global view: Literacy: How to 
reach the excluded. Anniversary: Rabelais: the ribald scholar (A. 
Frontier). Archives: Marie Curie. Listening: (Interview with Catherine 
Francais). 
DECEMBER. RELIGION AND POLITICS TODAY. Intcrview with 
Wolf Lepenies. The comfort of certainty (F. Lewis). The embrace of 
the community (J. Danicl). Faith and reason (A. Michnik). The fun- 
damentalists and science (FE. Charfi). From barbarism to intolerance 
(K. Makiya). Roads to revolution (E. Naraghi). The abdication of 
thought (T. Ben Jelloun). Behind the veil of fundamentalism (M. 
Hussein). Economism, the enemy of obscurantism (R. Debray). 
India: the threat to union (R. Khan). A new Hindu identity (S. 
Kakar). Heritage: The splendour of Spis (E. Bailby). Greenwatch: The 
sea’s dwindling harvest (FE. Bequette). Portrait: Hryhoriy Skovoroda 
(T. Zolozova). Global view: .5.0.S. Children. Archives: World peace 
begins at home. Anniversary: José Carlos Mariitegui (A. Pita). Book- 
shelf: A fresh look at the past (C. Wondjj).

## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

  
VENTE EN LIBRAIRIE 
 
G. ARCIIIBALD 
LES ETATS-UNIS ET L'UNESCO 
1944-1963 
Les reves peuvent-ils résister 
a la réalité des relations internationales? 
1994 - 380 p. - 170 F 
| PUBLICATIONS DE LA SORBONNE 
RELIGION ET POLITIQUE 
Ed 
 
: II. TOUATI 
ENTRE DIEU ET LES HOMMES 
Lettrés, saints el sorcicrs 
au Maghreb (XVlle s.) 
1994 - 312 p. - 190 F 
D. VIDAL, G. TARABOUT et E. MEYER (eds) 
VIOLENCES 
ET NON-VIOLENCES EN INDE 
Purushartha, 16 
1994 - 288 p. - 195 TF 
  
EDITIONS DE L'ECOLE DES HAUTES 
ETUDES EN SCIENCES SOCIALES 
 
E. NARAGIII 
ENSEIGNEMENTS 
ET CHANGEMENTS SOCIAUX 
EN IRAN DU VIle AU XXe S. 
Islam et laicité : legons d'une expérience 
séculaire 
1992 - XI + 224 p. - 120 F 
EDITIONS DE LA MAISON DES SCIENCES 
DE LTIOMME, PARIS 
 
~ M. CIIARLOT (ed) 
RELIGION ET POLITIQUE 
EN GRANDE-BRETAGNE   1994 - 190 p. - 120 F 
PRESSES DE LA SORBONNE NOUVELLE 
M. MESLIN (ed) 
CAHIERS D'ANTHROPOLOGIE 
RELIGIEUSE 
Volume 3 : 
L'expérience mystique 
1994 - 112 p. - 80 F 
. C.GUIMBARD 
OU VA L'ITALIE? 
1994 - 472 p. - 130 F 
PRESSES DE L'UNIVERSITE DE PARIS-SORBONNE 
G. VINCENT et J.-P. WILLAIME (eds) 
RELIGIONS 
ET TRANSFORMATIONS 
DE L'EUROPE 
1993 - 428 p. - 180 F 
PRESSES UNIVERSITAIRES DE STRASBOURG 
® Centre 
Interinstitutionnel 
pour la Diffusion 
de publications 
© IL FF Uu 81 O H cn sciences humaines 
131, boulevard Saint-Michel « 75005 PARIS 
 
  | Tél. (1) 43 54 47 15 « Fax (1) 43 54 80 73 
  
  
    re—— 
  
  
  
religion 
pour 
memoire 
Daniele Hervieu-Léger 
Effondrement de la pratique religieuse, 
montée des fondamentalismes, nouveaux 
mouvement religieux... Comment s'y reconnaitre 
dans un paysage religieux bouleversé? 
Cet ouvrage permet d'élucider les transformations 
qui affectent les “grandes religions”, et ouvre 
des perspectives instructives sur le fonctionnement 
de notre civilisation sans reperes. 
Coll. “Sciences humaines et religions” 
274 pages, 120 FF 
= cxmmceryf 
  
  
  
PROJET EN 
RELIGION ET POLITIQUE 
SI LOIN, SI PROCHES 
Au politique, I'espace public ; au religieux, la 
sphere privée : cette distinction a pacifié, en 
Europe du moins, des rapports hier conflictuels. 
N'est-clle pas remise en question ? 
Rapprochées par leur crise commune, a I'ére 
des croyances relativisées et privatisées, mais aussi 
de l'irruption d’autres traditions, religion et poli- 
tique doivent-elles redéfinir leurs rapports ? 
  
Avec les contributions de : A. Bastenier, 
J.-M. Donegani, D. Hervieu-Léger, 
F. Khosrokhavar, E. Marienstras, P. Michel, 
J. Roman, P. Valadier, J.-P. Willaime. 
En vente dans les grandes librairies 
Cen® (128 p.): 65F 
PROJET ® 14, rue d’'Assas - 75006 PARIS 
= (1) 44 39 48 48 - Minitel : 36 15 SJ* PROJET 
Etranger : 70 F     

## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/099251engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

    
   
   
     
    
     
   
    
EE UNESCO COURIER 
Pe SUBSCRIBERS: OFFER YOUR 
“%  FRIENDS—AND YOURSELF— 
COPIES OF THIS NEW PUBLICATION 
ey From 40 internationally-kno 3 
‘specialists, the latest thinking on th 
pre JLT) EB of Sevel: pment in the world 
Tneme 1CIe 
“What happened to development?” 
~ contains résumés of the participants’ 
“contributions and a synthesis of il i 
discussions. A 90-page round-up of 
current ideas on the problems 
associated with development 
today, in the North and 
Ys in the South. 
THEME OF 
THE NEXT ISSUE 
(JANUARY 1995) 
ALSO FEATURING AN INTERVIEW 
WITH THE SPANISH SINGER 
MONTSERRAT CABALLE