# [111114](111114engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](111114engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
   
    
      
    
   
  
HERITAGE: 
NAZCA (PERU) 
M 1205 - 9803 - 22,00 F V | 
| LAMM TRL

## [Page 2](111114engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNEsco ((Ourier Nikon INTERNATIONAL PHOTO 
COMPETITION 
A selection of photos entered in the competition will be PEACE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
featured on this page in forthcoming issues. The photos may 
also be seen at an exhibition being held at Unesco's Paris 
Headquarters (see inside back cover). 
N E A : - 
  
© 
Eu
ge
ni
o 
Ma
ng
hi
, 
Br
nz
io
, 
it
al
y 
Nunavut, Inuit country. Eugenio Manghi (Italy) 
@ 
Ri
ch
ar
d 
Ma
ni
n 
Pa
ns
   
Mobile cinema in Kyrghyzstan. Richard Manin (France)

## [Page 3](111114engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNESCO (COURIER 
   
© 
S 
Ba
ss
ou
ls
, 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
  
INTERVIEW 
Paulo Coelho 
A celebrated Brazilian novelist talks about 
bis personal quest. 
© 
Jo
rg
e 
Pr
ov
en
za
, 
Ca
ra
ca
s 
 
Ca a | | 
HERITAGE 
44 
Nazca (Peru) 
The enigmatic meaning of immense designs 
traced in the soil 
more than 2,000 years ago. 
  
Cover: © Alan Kearney/Viesti Associates/Ask Images, Pans 
CONLeNnts 
MARCH 1998 
Ife beyond 
Month by month by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 
  
Africa: the breathoflife... ........................... 
by Nimrod Bena Djangrang 
China: a down-to-earth hereafter................... 
by Frangoise Aubin 
India: cycles of birth and rebirth.................... 
by A. S. Ghanasambandan 
Medieval Europe: the antechamber of eternity .. 
by Jacques Le Goff 
A materialist vision of the afterlife.................. 
by Greg Oxley 
Living totellthetale.................................. 
by Peter Fenwick 
Consultant: Souad Waheidi 
Commentary Federico Mayor 
GREENWATCH Healthy housing by France Bequette 
LISTENING Ton-That Tiét talks to Isabelle Leymarie 
Words for music by Adam Fellegi 
AUTHORS 
SR 15 
ee 19 
SSO 25 
SS 29 
38 
THE UNESCO Gourier BH MARCH 1908

## [Page 4](111114engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNESCO 
OURIER 
51st YEAR 
Published monthly in 27 languages and in Braille by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
31, rue Frangois Bonvin, 75732 Pans CEDEX 15, France. 
Fax' (33)(0)145 68 57.45 
e-mail unesco courer@unasco org 
Internet http //www unesco org 
Director: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition Roy Malkin 
French edition. Alain Lévégue 
Spanish edition Araceli Ortizde Urbina 
Features Jasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production Georges Servat 
Illustrations Anane Bailey {Tel {33)(0) 1.45 68 46 90) 
Documentation: José Banaag 
(Tel. (33) (0} 1 45 68 46 85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press 
Solange Belin (Tel. (33) (0) 1 45 68 46 87) 
Film duplication. Daniel Meister 
Secretanat Annie Brachet 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1.45 68 47.15), 
Administrative Assistant Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and 
Korean. (Tel. (33) (0) 1 45 68 45 69) 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Irina Utkina (Moscow) 
German: Dominique Anderes {Berne) 
Arabic Fawzi Abdel Zaher (Cairo) 
Italian: Gianluca Formichi (Rome} 
Hindi. Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi) 
Tamil M Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: Akbar Zargar (Teheran) 
Portuguese. Alzira Alves de Abreu (Rio de Janeiro) 
Urdu: Mirza Muhammad Mushir {Islamabad} 
Catalan: Joan Carreras 1 Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur) 
Swahili Leonard J Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene: Aleksandra Kornhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese Feng Mingxia (Beijing) 
Bulgarian Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala: Neville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish Rutta Saannen (Helsinki) 
Basque Juxto Egafia (Donostia) 
Thal. Duangtip Surintatip (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese Ho Tien Nghi (Hanoi) 
Pashto Nazer Mohammad Angar (Kabul) 
Ukrainian: Volodymyr Vasiliuk (Kiev) 
Galician. Xabier Senin Fernandez (Santiago de Compostela} 
SALES AND PROMOTION. 
Fax’ (33)(0) 1.45 68 57 45 
Subscriptions Marie-Thérése Hardy 
(Tel. (33) (0} 1 45 68 45.65), Jacqueline Louise-Julie, 
Manichan Ngonekeo, Mchamed Salah Et Din 
{Tel (33)(0) 1 45 68.43.19) 
Customer service: Michel Ravassard, 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1 45 68 45 21) 
Accounts” (Te! {33)(0)1 45 68.45 65) 
Shipping Daniel Meister {Tel. (33} (0) 1 45 68 47.50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. 
Tel (33}(0) 1.4568 45 65 
1 year: 211 French francs 2 years 396 FF. 
Students 1 year 132 French francs 
Binder for one year's Issues 72 FF 
Developing countries. 
1 year 132 French francs. 2 years 211 FF. 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco or by Visa, Eurocard or Mastercard 
  individual articles and pholographs not copyrighted may be reprinted 
providing the credit ine reads "Reprinted from the Unesco Courier” plus 
date of 1ssue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor Signed 
articles reprinted must bear author's name Non-copynght photos will 
be suppled on request Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. 
Signed articles express the opimons of the authors and do not nec- 
essanly represent the opimons of Unesco or those of the editors of 
the Unesco Courier Photo captions and headlines are writlen by the 
Unesco Couner staff The boundanes on maps published in the maga 
ang do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by Unesco or the 
United Nations The Unesco Courier 1s produced in microform {micro- 
film and/or microfiche} by {1} Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 
Pans, {2) University Microfilms (Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100 
USA, (3}NCR Microtard Edition, Indian Head Inc , 111 West 40th 
Street, New York US A, {4) Bell and Howell Co , Old Mansfield Road. 
Wooster, Ohio 44691 US A 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) 
DEPOT LEGAL C1 -MARCH 1998 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - DIFFUSE PAR LES 
NMPP. 
Photocomposition, photogravure 
Le Courrier de I'UNESCO 
Impression Maulde & Renou 
ISSN 0041-5278 N® 3-1998-0P1-98-569 A 
This issue comprises 52 pages and a 4-page insert 
between pages 2-3 and 50-51 
THE UNESCO Courier RB MARCH 1998 
- 
R
E
 
J 
 
© Mark Downey/Viesli Associates /Ask Images, Pans 
  
- 
—

## [Page 5](111114engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

. 
" 
  
A pilgrim takes a ritual bath in 
the Ganges at Benares (India).   
by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 
ho can fail to wonder about the mystery of the hereafter? 
Even those who do not believe in an afterlife feel driven to ask them- 
selves why so many others do. Materialists, for example, view such a belief as 
aresponse to the travails of life on earth. The promise of a hereafter replete 
with everything that has been lacking in this earthly life compensates for an 
earthly existence bereft of hope and mired in poverty, ignorance and fear. In 
other words, the afterlife is a necessary illusion. 
Most religions, however, regard the hereafter as the supreme reality— 
although they do not all visualize it in the same way. Monotheists link the soul 
to asingle life on earth and see the hereafter as a place where a terrifying last 
judgment—ascent into Heaven or descent into Hell—is made on human 
beings. Animists regard the beyond as simply the other side of the here and 
now. They would maintain that life is a cosmic principle which both encom- 
passes and transcends individual births and deaths, enfolding us all together 
in time and space. Believers in reincarnation, on the other hand, consider after- 
life to be the one intemporal and omnipresent reality. They see the manifes- 
tations of existence as incomplete reflections of this reality, illusions to 
which we cling because of desire and fear and through which we must pass 
one after the other in order to reach the ultimate principle. 
But experience of the beyond does not necessarily have anything to do 
with organized religion. Descriptions of the so-called near-death experi- 
ences (NDEs) undergone by millions of people in many countries who have been 
revived from “clinical death” are strikingly similar. Irrespective of their reli- 
gion, most of those who “return” are convinced that they have seen a light 
beyond, which has removed their fear of death. 
The NDE contains echoes of a more profound experience, the spiritual 
quest pursued by mystics since time immemorial. All mystics, whatever the 
religious tradition to which they belong, describe a state of beatitude that 
transcends not only religious particularities but all imaginable forms of 
expression. It exists outside ordinary awareness based on the five senses, a 
normally functioning brain, the use of language and the expression of an 
ego. And yet all those who have attained this state of grace testify to its 
manifest and incontrovertible authenticity. Incontrovertible yet surpassing 
all understanding because of its links to a Reality beyond time and space, a 
Life that flows eternally within us and joins us to the Whole which is also part 
of our innermost being. 
This ineffable state, as Paulo Coelho suggests in this month's interview, 
may be revealed to the simplest of mortals as long as they remain true to them- 
selves on a lifelong journey to self-fulfilment. [| 
vie unesco (COURIER  marcH 1998

## [Page 6](111114engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

@ 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Lé
na
rs
, 
Pa
ns
  


### 111115: Africa: the breath of life

Africa: the breath of life 
BY NIMROD BENA DJANGRANG 
In African tradition, the material and spiritual worlds 
are contiguous 
At some time or other, every school- 
child in French-speaking Africa has 
recited this poem: 
Listen more to 
Things than to people 
The voice of Fire can be heard, 
Listen to the Voice of Water 
Listen in the Wind 
To the sobbing bushes: 
It isthe Breath of the Dead Ancestors, 
Who have not departed 
Who are not beneath the Earth 
Who are not dead. 
The Senegalese poet Birago Diop (1906- 
1989) called this poem Breaths, to describe a 
person’s space. All beings everywhere overflow 
the place where they are, surpass their specific 
  
  
THE UNESCO Courier ® MARCH 1998 
location, have more to them than their body. 
Only a single side of a person is ever visible, 
while the other remains invisible. This division 
also explains the importance of the shadow 
thata person bears, a shadow or nether side of 
the body. Looked at in this way, the beyond 
is less a metaphysical notion than something 
rooted in tangible reality, its soul, energy and 
Breath. 
Diop’s poem, like a well-sung song, is an 
invitation to understand the “Breaths” that 
invigorate “things”: fire, water, wind, grass, 
bushes, huts, a woman’s breasts, forests. [tis a 
list of everyday things, an inventory of the 
rural African’s environment. One criticism that 
can be made of Diop is that his usc of capital let- 
ters for Fire, Voice, Ancestors and Earth is inap- 
propriate. It1s perfectly natural for the spirit of 
the dead or the gods to find embodiment in 
these phenomena. In the African tradition, the 
gods arc usually approachable. 
At home with the gods 
The gods are the breath of the universe. African 
religions could be described as an attempt to 
define nature in terms of vital force and har- 
mony. This is why the word animism is often 
used to describe them. The poet invites us to 
listen to the “Voice of Fire”, the “Voice of 
Water” or the “sobbing bushes” because they 
are the crucible of energy, the place where the 
world’s harmony prevails. 
Into the intangible content of “breath” 
comes a fragment of the cosmic force which 
underpins the natural equilibrium. In West, 
Central, Eastern and Southern Africa, human 
beings are regarded as an integral part of nature 
The idea of dominating or using nature does 
not exist. Religion is about increasing the cos- 
mic energy of which human beings are a con- 
stituent part. Lack of respect for nature is seen 
© 
Ma
na
ud
/i
co
ne
/H
oa
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns
 
 
Left, carved mythological 
figures adorn the door of a 
Dogon granary (Mali), 
 

## [Page 7](111114engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

  
as an energy failure or breakdown. There is no 
such thing as sin or blame. Sacrifices are 
intended to repair the field of living forces. 
Nobody is exempt from this system. In 
the voodoo religions of the Gulf of Benin, a 
priest-medium who can no longer attend to 
the replenishment of energy because of illness 
or old age is simply done away with, because 
his incapacity imperils nature and society. It is 
possible for the flame of the world to be extin- 
guished, but this must not be allowed: the 
flame must burn for ever. 
As we noted carlier, the “flame”, “breath” 
or natural energy is not something “beyond” 
the world, but rather the “secret” of the world, 
its most intimate part. Elsewhere, Diop writes 
that “Those who are dead have never 
A village among the sand 
dunes in the region of Gao 
(Mali). 
oy Nah 
Ea ——— 
departed/ They are inthe Shadow which lights 
up/And in the shadow which deepens/They 
are in the tree that rustles. . . /They are in the 
Hut, they are in the Crowd/The dead are not 


### 111115: Africa: the breath of life

dead”. In a sense, the visible world scems only 
to connect with its invisible counterpart, so 
that the dividing linc between life and death is 
crased. The “visible” must keep watch over the 
“invisible”, and the “body” over “breath”. 
So thereare only the living, visible or invis- 
ible. Life is so constituted that the visible owe 
gratitude and goodwill to the invisible. This is 
why prayers to the gods and the spirits, and 
the sacrifices owed to them, are made with 
great discretion; there is no need for altars or 
monumental temples. Ritual and other reli- 
gious practices are performed at home, with » 
THE LINFSCO Courier ® MARCH 1998

## [Page 8](111114engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

@ 
De
mi
s 
Hu
ot
, 
Ho
a 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ni
s 


### 111115: Africa: the breath of life

» cveryday food—grain that has just been har- 
vested and water that is sprinkled on the dry 
ground as a libation before people drink. 
Worshipping the dead 
Looking more closely at the poem “Breath”, 
we can see that it contains intimations of the 
immortality of the soul. Or at least this is 
hinted at. We usually think of breath as being 
as inconsistent as the soul, which we imagine as 
something indeterminate, hardly evenair, “vir- 
tual nothingness”, as the French philosopher 
Vladimir Jankelevitch called it. This “virtual 
nothingness” distinguishes the immaterial 
nature of the soul from absolute nothingness 
and denotes a soul which vegetates, thereby 
surviving the disturbances caused by the com- 
ing of death. 
These moments when the soul “vegetates” 
outside life are not a form of purgatory. Exiled 
between heaven and earth, the soul cannot take 
refuge in God, who is not interested. The leg- 
ends of the Dogon people of Mali tell how 
God went away after creating the world, never 
to return. The Xhosa of South Africa regard 
God as not only inaccessible but unconcerned 
about human beings, who have to fend for 
themselves from the moment of their creation. 
   
  
Hence the malicious urges of the souls exiled 
between heaven and earth. If they make a baby, 
a hunter or a confused rich man ll, it 1s because 
they are asking to come back to life. This hap- 
pens when they become someone’s “sponsor” 
or “ancestor” —in other words the surplus 
energy of the living. 
This 1s how people tune in to the strength, 
the breath of the universe, which is “physi- 
cally” speaking an “organ” wafting air that is 
cool, or at least damp. In many African lan- 
guages, the same term is used to designate the 
spirit, the act of breathing and the faculty of 
thought. The dead too want to “breathe”. 
Their transition from the other side of life is 
evidence of what they were: like cfficient 
“functionaries” they have fulfilled their oblig- 
ations to life. Thus, if they want to become liv- 
ing creatures again, in other words ancestors, 
altars and sacrifices must be made for them, 
followed by regular, permanent rituals. 
Sacrifice renews the vital force of the dead, 
restoring balance to the world in general. “The 
dead are thirsty”, say Dogon “initiates”. The 
living are called upon to nourish the dead. In 
so doing, they prevent the dead from exhaust- 
ing their energy, which in this instance is 
described as “thirst”. This “thirst” disturbs 
families which have not yet built altars to hon- 
  
pal Lag 
“In Africa, human beings are a 
constituent part of cosmic 
energy”. Below, the Masai 
Mara National Reserve, Kenya. 
  
’ . a v a "A 5 Gagan dl > ‘ - I 
Laat a el h aT NE RE FE 
y 0 WH tte Radar RE Ms Eg dg 5 a hr i EL RR Pe pw ow sen : - y ny , ART rN a = 
A re % ~~ ok RN oe 5 eC (San wr 
Vo ar . Wo & - LOL Os i wr : dong el 1 
a vs eel “i Rha a y A aks & bE: 
: \ 3 - r od 
- - rn 
 
8 THE UNESCO Gourier EB MARCH 1998 
ve 
Lal Aa Si a 
a br . 
Gude aR Lode

## [Page 9](111114engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

Sa WS 
Wns? 7A 
oh YY 
wy 
11 fil J / 
J a7. 
/ wi 
NN 
PLIES, 
. 


### 111115: Africa: the breath of life

our their dead. Failure to do this puts the dead 
in a delicate position and the living do not 
fare much better. Uncasiness and tension build 
up in such families, which are destined to suf- 
fer illness or accidents. 
At this point, a mediator appears in the 
shape of the village soothsayer or sorcerer. He 
tells them that ancestor worship is their way to 
salvation. The ancestors must be brought back 
to life by “breathing” into them the energy 
contained in the blood and food that are indis- 
pensable to the living. For as long as the dead 
remain unhonoured, they will always be 
troublemakers who disturb the peace of the 
living. In order for them to become acclima- 
tized, they must be allowed to “leave death 
behind”. There is a “no-man’s-land” that is 
beyond life and just short of death. Removing 
them from this limbo is the only way to com- 
pletely restore them to the status of the living. 
As the French ethnographer Marcel Gri- 
aule noted, African religious thought is a 
hymn of praise to the restorative powers of 
water. Water is the breath and the rich soil in 
which something can take root and give birth 
to all aspects of life. Thinking about an after- 
lifc is the act by which the living and the dead 
drink living water from the same gourd. MH 
Entrance door to a fortified 
farmhouse, or tata, of the 
Somba people (Benin). 
Outside the house, protective 
conical altars, trophies and 
fetishes are used for sacrifices 
to the gods and ancestors. 
A 19th-century bronze 
Dogon sculpture of an 
ancestral couple (Mali). 
   
THE UNESCO Gounier B MARCH 1998 
© 
Be
at
ri
ce
 
Pe
ti
t 
Br
us
se
ls
 
© 
G 
Da
gh
 
Or
t,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 10](111114engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

® 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Lé
na
rs
, 
Pa
ns
  


### 111116: China: a down-to-earth hereafter

China: a down-to-earth hereafter 
BY FRANCOISE AUBIN 
In Chinese 
civilization, the 
dead, the gods 
and the living 
have sound 
practical reasons 
to keep in contact 
THE UNESCO Gourier BH MARCH 1998 
Chinese civilization has never held a hard- 
and-fast view of the hereafter, although 
some aspects of it have never changed. The gods 
are believed to be all-pervasive: they are an imma- 
nent part of the earthly world, and if carefully 
handled they can help fulfil human aspirations 
to material well-being, In Mediterranean soci- 
cties, on the other hand, the gods (or the one 
God the creator) are transcendental and live 
outside the perceptible universe. According to 
another time-honoured Chinese tradition, the 
human soul is divided into a series of superior 
souls, destined for a spiritual future after death, 
and a series of inferior, material souls linked to 
the corpse and the grave. 
When China was united into an Empire 
in the third century B.C., popular expecta- 
tions of the afterlife were couched in terms 
of a rather dismal sojourn at the springs of 
the Yellow River. Those who could do so tried 
to avoid this fate by engaging in a frantic quest 
for immortality and in mystic journeys under 
the guidance of a Taoist master. The disciples 
of Confucius, on the other hand, sought only 
to achieve a state of moral righteousness with 
which to serve the ruler. They regarded immor- 
tality only as an allegory for mental purity. 
Between the third and sixth centuries A.D., 
the introduction of Buddhism revolutionized 
the religious landscape, and the different reli- 
gions began to adapt to cach other. The Indian 
religion soon became a Chinese onc as its writ- 
ings were translated and as it came to absorb 
local beliefs and practices. Taoism, for its part,

## [Page 11](111114engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

  
On the occasion of a Taoist 
festival in Singapore, “paper 
money” is burnt as an offering 
to the dead by their 
descendants. 
The turtle and the snake, 
symbols of yin and yang, 
feature en a contemporary 
Chinese print (right). 


### 111116: China: a down-to-earth hereafter

made substantial borrowings from Buddhism. 
Meanwhile, the popular religion practised daily 
by lay people of all social classes took from 
Buddhism and Taoism a pantheon of protective 
gods, and Confucianism continued to uphold 
filial piety as the model of all virtue, 
Underworld tribunals 
By about the ninth century, the shape of the 
hereafter had been clearly established. A man is 
endowed with three souls or series of souls. 
Women are rarely mentioned, except to con- 
firm that they follow their menfolk in the next 
world, as they do in this one, although usually 
without laying down their lives to do so. 
Of the three souls with which men are 
endowed, the hun or spiritual soul remains 
attached to the gravestone in memory of the 
deceased on the family altar and receives trib- 
ute from the descendants in the form of offer- 
ings of incense and food. The earthly soul, 
p’o, resides in the grave, and is also sustained 
by the gifts of descendants during festivals 
honouring the dead. The third soul is tried 
by a series of tribunals in an underground 
world located, according to the most com- 
mon tradition, on the Eastern Sacred Peak of 
T”ai-shan, in Shantung province. 
The pragmatism of Chinese civilization 
shows itself here. The underworld tribunals, 
although Buddhist in origin, are structured 
and run on the lines of imperial tribunals. The 
dead person is held there as a prisoner accused 
of a crime. But, as in carthly justice, a 
favourable verdict can be bought from an 
underworld tribunal with paper money 
handed over by the family of the deceased. 
The time spent beyond the grave is not an 
everlasting confinement but a period of transi- 
tion, varying in length, between two earthly 
episodes. The usual period is three years, except 
in the case of particularly heinous crimes, which 
earn the culprit a longer roasting over the fires 
of hell. Usually, and especially if the descen- 
dants have been moved by their filial piety to 
pay the proper price for their salvation, the 
deceased awaits the end of his three years in a 
purgatory similar to the earthly surroundings 
to which he was accustomed. All his needs are 
provided for by his pious descendants, who 
burn for him all kinds of objects in the form 
of paper—a house, furniture and money and 
even, these days, a car and a television set. 
The burning of paper objects is the stan- 
dard way of transferring goods to the hereafter. 
Hell’s treasury carefully counts the paper 
money sent to it by fire. In exchange for good 
treatment by his children and grandchildren 
after his death, the deceased shows them that 
he is an effective guardian ancestor. In accor- 
dance with the Buddhist theory of transmi- 
gration of souls, the rulers of the hereafter 
allow him to return to earth, and he is usually 
reincarnated in his own line of descendance, in 
accordance with the Confucian theory of the 
supremacy of the family. 
A scemly death is one where the deceased 
leaves behind enough descendants and prop- 
erty to feed the souls of the family. A soul 
has to be properly nourished with meat and 
rice before it can be benevolent. If spirits are 
hungry, they come back to carth and roam 
about as ghosts which take pleaure in attract- 
ing misfortune. Various methods of counter- 
ing their malign influence have been found, 
from the “spirit wall” blocking off their entry 
to villages to fireworks and mirrors meant to 
scare them off and a general gift of food which 
they are offered when the jails of hell open 
their gates to allow the inmates a day out on 
the midsummer Feast of the Spirits which has 
become popular not justin China but also in 
Viet Nam, Japan and Korea. 
Gods from the grassroots 
Between the ninth and thirteenth centuries, 
the services of these forlorn souls were grad- 
ually enlisted so that their violence could be 
channelled for the benefit of the community 
which worshipped them. They thus became 
  
THE UNESCO Courier B MARCH 1998 
@® 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
Sa
br
in
a 
Mi
ch
au
d/
Ra
ph
o 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 12](111114engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 111116: China: a down-to-earth hereafter

  
  
  
 

## [Page 13](111114engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 111116: China: a down-to-earth hereafter

» the guardians of the supernatural good order 
and the material welfare of a particular location. 
This grassroots creation of a vast pantheon of 
protective gods, most of whom had met vio- 
lent deaths in wars or accidents, is a key phe- 
nomenon whose importance in the Chinese 
notion of the hereafter has only come to be 
appreciated in recent years. It meant that lay 
people took over management of the super- 
natural, which had hitherto been the preserve 
of specialists in Taoist or Buddhist liturgy, 
and thereby established direct two-way links 
with the deities. 
If the gods really want to live, they must 
be effective and protect the community which 
sponsors them (and which they sponsor in 
return) from such dangers as epidemics, rob- 
beries and floods, and grant the wishes of the 
faithful as to their descendants, success in 
examinations, healing and wealth. If they do 
not do this, they are abandoned by every- 
body and are forced to return to the ranks of 
lost souls. The most effective gods, on the 
other hand, receive imperial recognition in the 
form of an honorary title which may be fol- 
lowed by a promotion in the hierarchy of 
nobility if they merit it. 
Between the tenth and the thirteenth cen- 
turies, when the coastal area of southern China 
became much more prosperous, gods were 
born and travelled around with pilgrims and 
merchants. They were honoured by roadside 
sanctuaries and were transformed themselves 
as new needs grew. At the time of the inva- 
sions which engulfed northern China, the 
people of the south called more fervently than 
ever on warrior gods and protectors. 
Since the start of the present millennium, 
the gods have taken firm control of all strate- 
gic sites. In towns, the god of ditches and walls 
is of key importance. In houscholds, the gods 
of the cooking-stove, the threshold and the 
cesspit hold sway. Mass-produced coloured 
New Year prints showing the gods and aus- 
picious scenes are put up in every home and are 
changed every year. 
The heaven of the Jade Emperor 
The emergence of all kinds of gods during the 
second millennium revolutionized the notion 
of the hereafter, which was softened and 
humanized, especially when female gods 
become increasingly important from the four- 
teenth century onwards. It also offset the hell- 
Opposite page, a 10th-century painting on silk from 
Dunhuang entitled the Paradise of Amithaba, or the 
“Buddha of Infinite Light”. At centre of painting, the 
seated Buddha is shown preaching. 
Below, painting on silk by 
Korean artist Chai Mying 
Kyong (1567-1621) depicts a 
group of Immortals dancing 
with a crane. The 8 Immortals 
are mythological figures 
blending elements of Taoist, 
Confucian and Buddhist 
traditions. 
like hereafter, with its repression and red tape, 
with a heavenly one comprising a court of 
kings and emperors benignly presided over 
by an old god from ancient mythology, the 
Jade Emperor. 
The lesser local gods, however, stay close to 
everyday life, mounting guard in houses, 
towns and villages and at roadsides. When the 
god of the stove, the main household divin- 
ity, makes a detailed report at the turn of the 
lunar year on the behaviour over the past year 
of all the household’s members who have fed 
him and over whom he has kept watch, he 
does not descend into hell but flies up to 
heaven, to the Jade Emperor’s court. 
Heavens belonging to the two established 
religions (those with a liturgy supervised by 
religious specialists, in contrast to popular reli- 
gions) have also existed at least since the sixth 
 © 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
Sa
br
in
a 
Mi
ch
au
d/
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 14](111114engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 111116: China: a down-to-earth hereafter

> 
> 
® 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
Sa
bn
na
 
Mi
ch
au
d/
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
century. The Taoist heaven, centred on Mount 
T’ai-shan, the holy mountain containing the 
entrance to hell, is populated by immortals, 
who are delightful and elusive beings. 
“Their skin is as fresh as crisp snow, they 
are delicate and modest as virgins. They eat no 
grains, but breathe the wind and drink the 
dew. They climb onto the clouds and the wind 
and fly off astride giant dragons to disport 
themselves beyond the four oceans [i.e. the 
inhabited world].” All Taoists, who practise 
asceticism, who have renounced worldly cares 
and who fast and eat plants from the moun- 
tains, aspire to such a passage to immortality. 
Buddhism offers two kinds of heaven. 
One, messianic and apocalyptic, 1s the Future 
World, presided over by the Buddha Maitreya, 
hopes of which have inspired the ideology of 
countless popular uprisings throughout his- 
tory. The other is a heaven which offers salva- 
tion—the Pure Land, located in the West and 
adorned with flowering lotus and precious 
stones, which the Buddha Amithaba opens 
to all the male faithful (women are excluded) 
who have made a sincere appeal to him. 
However, this enchanting, ultimate paradise 
was prevented from taking serious root in Chi- 
nese society by resistance from local beliefs. 
The notion of irrevocable salvation, putting 
an end to repeated reincarnations, offended the 
feclings of devout sons who venerated their 
father’s soul in the gravestone and of families 
seeking souls to perpetuate themselves through 
reincarnation in future generations. | 
  
  
Ax+b2Z 5 EZ 5 
HEE RIAA EE Ne 
  
THE UNESCO Courier W MARCH 1993 
Household gods pictured on a 
contemporary Chinese print. 


### 111117: India: cycles of birth and rebirth

  
  
India: 
cycles of 
birth and 
rebirth 
BY A. S. GNANASAMBANDAN

## [Page 15](111114engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

  
What role has the time-honoured belief in reincarnation played in Indian society? 
Above, ritual cremation on the 
banks of the Sabarmati River 
outside Ahmedabad, a town in 
Gujarat State (India). 
~ Once upon a time a snarling dog was 
© standing outside an Indian temple. 
Another dog came up to him and asked why he 
was so angry. The first dog replied: “I was a 


### 111117: India: cycles of birth and rebirth

priest in this temple in my previous birth. The 
trustee of the temple, a powerful man, goaded 
me into becoming his accomplice in the theft of 
thejewellery of the goddess of the temple, and 
asaresult lam now born asadog. I am waiting 
to see that fellow. As soon I see him, I shall 
pounce on him and tear out his throat. The 
second dog said: “Please don’t do that. I was 
that trustee in my previous birth.” 
This story and others like it were often told 
by Indian sages to illustrate the belief, com- 
mon to all schools of Indian philosophy, that 
life is a cycle of births and rebirths. After their 
death, human beings are reborn into this world 
in various forms; all of them have passed 
through several carlier births and will pass 
through several future births. What they think 
and do in this life will determine the form 
(human, animal, insect, etc.) in which they will 
live their next life, as set forth in the doctrine of 
Karma (action) and rebirth. “Accordingly as 
one acts, accordingly as one behaves, so does 
one become in the next life,” says the ancient 
treatise known as the Bribadaranyaka Upan- 
ishad. “The doer of good becomes good, the 
doer of evil becomes evil. One becomes virtuous 
by virtuous action, bad by bad action.” 
What happens to the soul after death and 
before rebirth? Each school of Indian philos- 
ophy has its own answer to this question, 
although they all agree that there is a celestial 
world and that those who do right things and 
live a godly life go to itand enjoy its benefits 
while awaiting their return to the terrestrial 
world. 
Because there are differences in the amount 
- 
THE UNLSCO Gourier BH MARCH 1998 
® 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
Sa
br
in
a 
M
i
c
h
a
u
d
/
R
a
p
h
o
 
Pa
ns
 
>

## [Page 16](111114engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 111117: India: cycles of birth and rebirth

     
     
we so, - 
eri HF ie 
a 0) % S 1 Xx ai 
TA L2 
lila ALA how   
  
    
   
(ADA LR 
gif J a Si 
th 
  
    
  
hf 
tf i 
©X
 
Zi
mb
ar
do
/H
oa
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns
 
Lake Brahma in the Thar 
{Great Indian} desert, 
» and quality of good and evil that people do, ~ Rajasthan. in the Atman [eternal self] masters his will, He 
the upper world 1s divided into seven regions Knows no disquiet in heat or in cold, In pain ox 
or loras; the underworld where evildoers go 1s pleasure, In honour, or dishonour.” Only 
also divided into regions. The doers of good someone who transcends the pairs of oppo- 
go to one of the seven different upper worlds sites attains the lotus feet of the Lord. 
depending on the quality and quantity of the Even if a person’s soul reaches the seventh 
good they do. The lowest upper world, for upper world it is still not entitled to achieve 
example, is reached by those who do good emancipation if a very small amount of 
and lead a pious life, performing the prescribed desirc—even desire for emancipation—remains 
rituals to propitiate the gods, but do not con- in his mind. 
trol their senses and mind. To go to a higher “Eradicate desire,” wrote the southern sage 
upper world one must control one’s senses Tirumoolar. 
and one’s mind, and as far as possible one’s “Eradicate it even if the desire 1s to attain 
inner mind also. the lotus feet of the Lord. 
Only a human being can achieve emancipa- The more you desire the greater will be 
tion (moksha) from the cycle of birth and your suffering.” 
death. This fate is reserved for the select few Some believe that the life which goes out 
(jnanis or yogis) who are unaffected by worldly of the body has a form, the sukshma sarira or 
things or by the pairs of opposites (dwandas) astral body, with which we accede to the upper 
such as suffering and happiness. According to world or lower world according to the good or 
the Bhagavad Gita: “The serene one absorbed bad that we have done in this one. Another 
16 © THE UNESCO Courier B MARCH 1998

## [Page 17](111114engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 111117: India: cycles of birth and rebirth

  
Ei - or 3 ol £ 
ah ed : 
v/ Fic ; A 
vie   
belief is that a dying person’s last thought gives 
an indication as to their next birth. This is why 
Indian philosophy stresses that you should 
go to bed with pure thoughts, repeating the 
name of the Lord. If you die in your sleep, the 
purity of your last thought will ennoble your 
soul through the next birth which will cer- 
tainly be into a higher spiritual life. 
Karma and caste 
How far have these philosophical tenets and 
beliefs been practised in society? Traditional 
Indian society was broadly divided into a 
minority of intellectuals and philosophers 
and a majority which fully accepted their 
teachings about the cycle of birth and death. 
Even today, illiterate villagers say that some- 
one who harms another person will be born as 
a street dog in his next birth. 
The doctrine of Karma and rebirth has long 
Below, a painting of the Wheel 
of Life, one of the most ancient 
Buddhist symbols. Gripped by 
the claws of Yama, the Lord of 
Death, the image depicts the 6 
worlds of potential rebirth. 
influenced people to do what would lead them 
to a good afterlife. It might be said that they 
were motivated by a foolish fear of the other 
world, which may or may not exist. But what 
about the postulates of modern science regard - 
ing the atom, electromagnetic force and energy, 
which cannot be perceived by our senses, but 
whose existence we accept because we can see the 
results of their actions? 
There is however one big difference 
between the findings of modern science and the 
Indian “life chain” philosophy. The Darwin- 
ian theory of evolution postulates that life 
can only evolve upwards, whereas according 
to Indian philosophy, those who have reached 
avery high spiritual level can come down in the 
next birth to the lowest level if they commit 
anaction in a fit of emotion or anger. There is 
no guarantee that people will always rise from 
onc birth to the next. Their next birth is 
decided by their thoughts and actions in the 
previous one and by the Karma that they have 
already accumulated. 
7 fia, 
 
THE UNESCO Gourier @ MARCH 1998 
© 
M
o
n
i
q
u
e
 
Pi
et
n,
 
Pa
ni
s

## [Page 18](111114engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

> This deeply rooted faith in the life chain 
has shaped Indian society from time immemo- 
rial. As an explanation of why some are more 
talented and enjoy higher social status than 
others, and why some suffer while others 
cnjoy good fortune in this life, it led people 
to accept what was inevitable and at the same 
time enjoy peace of mind. When people feel 
that they alone are the cause of the good and 
evil which befall them, they do not try to 
blame others for their situation. In the words 
of a Tamil poem written in the third century 
B.C.: “All places in the world arc ours, all 
human beings are our kinsmen; good and bad 
which befall us are not inflicted by others.” 
However, as the centuries went by, an intel- 
lectual hierarchy began to rule society and its 
.members realized that they could use the doc- 


### 111117: India: cycles of birth and rebirth

trine of Karma and rebirth as a weapon to sub- 
jugate the majority and thereby perpetuate 
their power. The caste system came to be 
twisted into an inegalitarian hierarchy based on 
birth. The higher castes began to assert that 
the lower castes in the hierarchy were meant to 
serve them. Since the majority of the lower 
A 13th-century bronze figure of 
dancing Shiva from southern 
India. The supreme divinity of 
Hinduism, Shiva is both static 
and changing, destructive and 
creative. 
he unesco (OuRIER m MARCH 1998 
rank were deliberately left without education 
and intellectual pursuits they had to accept 
this incgalitarian structure based on birth, 
which determined what work they should do 
in this world. 
So for many centuries the theory of a chain 
of birth and rebirth helped perpetuate the 
inequalities and injustices of the caste system 
based on birth. Saint Tiruvalluvar’s dictum 
that all souls are born equal in this world could 
not exert much sway over the majority of pco- 
ple because they were denied the capacity to 
read it and understand it. 
It is hard to know how far modern Indians 
believe in the doctrine of Karma and rebirth 
and how much they think about it. Modern 
Indian society 1s a competitive society in which 
the pursuit of wealth is accompanied by many 
pressures and evils. And yet the majority of 
people still have a wonderful way of keeping 
their peace of mind. Of someone who acquires 
wealth by wrongdoing they are inclined to say 
peacefully: “Let him earn, he is not going to 
carry anything he acquires now into his next 
birth. He has to go empty-handed.” | 
- 
CE 
  
This article is an edited 
version of a longer study 
prepared for the UNESCO 
Courier by Professor 
Gnanasambandan. 
© 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
Sa
bn
na
 
Mi
ch
au
d/
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 19](111114engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 111118: Mediaeval Europe: the antechamber of eternity

Medieval Europe: 
the antechamber 
of eternity 
BY JACQUES LE GOFF 
The medieval Christian Church 
in Europe created a complex 
system of the afterlife which 
played on fear 
~The view of the hereafter current among 
© men and women in medieval Europe was 
largely the Christian one. Although it included 
elements borrowed or inherited from Greco- 
Roman paganism, from Oriental religions and 
beliefs, from the Old Testament and from 
Judaism, ; it was based mainly upon the New 
Testament, the Gospels in particular. 
Christianity, with its doctrine of salva- 
tion, flourished in those early years of the 
Christian era that have been referred to as an 
“age of anxiety”, and a preoccupation not only 
with what became of men and women after 
their death but also with the question of where 
they would spend the afterlife occupied a 
prominent place in it. 
Christianity proclaims the resurrection of 
the body, of which the resurrection of Jesus 
after his earthly life ended on the cross is the 
exemplar and the guarantee. What happens to 
resurrected human beings depends on the will 
of almighty God, but in accordance with rules 
that He Himself has laid down, whereby the 
fate of the resurrected is made to depend on 
their conduct during their earthly life. They are 
consigned after the resurrection, which occurs 
atthe last day, to different, opposite places in 
the beyond, in accordance with a binary sys- 
tem. The “good” live forever in a place of 
delights, Paradise, while the “bad” are doomed 
to dwell eternally in a place of torments, Hell. 
A distinction must be drawn between 
Heaven and the earthly Paradise, its eternal 
mirror-image, Eden. Similarly, “Hell”, as a 
place of torments for those damned eternally, 
is not to be confused with the infernal regions, 
closely resembling the Jewish Sheol and the 
Greco-Roman Hades or Tartarus, where the 
righteous who have not known Christ and 
thus could not be baptized (including Adam 
Heaven and Hell, 
a 15th-century painting of the 
School of Bologna (l1taly). 
    
and Eve, the first human couple) wait for 
Christ to come and free them. 
The precincts of Paradise 
From the carly centuries of Christianity and 
throughout the Middle Ages, the hereafter was 
the subject of a whole range of apocryphal texts 
and stories that grew up around the fringes of 
Catholic orthodoxy. This was one of the areas 
that most exercised the medieval imagination, 
inspiring many literary compositions and an 
abundant iconography that bear witness to the 
fertile creativity of medieval artists. 
Christians had from the very beginning 
great difficulty in dealing with the Last Judg- 
ment/Hell/Heaven system. The situation of 
the two afterworlds in relation to the Earth 
was established soon enough: Hell was below 
the Earth and Heaven was above, in the sky. 
The terms Heaven and Paradise became syn- 
onymous, although for along time the topog- 
raphy of the world beyond the grave distin- 
guished several heavens, Paradise being “the 
highest Heaven”. In general terms, two heav- 
ens coexisted: the natural heaven, or sky, knowl- 
edge of which was the province of science (the 
THE UNESCO Gounir W MARCH 1998 
©G
 
Da
gh
 
Or
t 
Pa
ns
 
Pi
na
co
te
ca
 
Na
zi
on
al
e,
 
Bo
lo
gn
a

## [Page 20](111114engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 111118: Mediaeval Europe: the antechamber of eternity

  
Middle Ages had borrowed heavily from the 
cosmology of Ancient Greece); and a meta- 
physical Heaven, the everlasting abode of God 
and the elect. 
The two main questions posed by the here- 
after concern the timing of the judgment 
whereby God consigns the departed either to 
Heaven or Hell, and the possibility of defer- 
ring the final reckoning to some point in the 
period between the death of the individual 
and the Last Judgment. 
There were two opposing views, both of 
them accepted by the medieval Church, on 
the first of these points. Some held that all the 
deceased must await the Last Judgment at the 
end of this world to know their fate in the 
world beyond. Others held that God wel- 
comed into Heaven those who were indis- 
putably among the clect, the saints, immedi- 
ately after their death. Either they were exempt 
from the Last Judgment or it was in their case 
a mere formality, a foregone conclusion. 
Various answers were put forward to the 
question as to whether those destined to be 
among the elect would be able to await the res- 
urrection in a specific place. In the early cen- 
turies of Christianity, such a place was imagined 
as a refrigerium, a haven of coolness, the very 
THE UNESCO Counter BH MARCH 1998 
d 
’ 
W
n
 
> 
antithesis of the devouring fires of hell. Accord- 
ing to another idea, which continued to be held 
until the thirteenth century and was frequently 
depicted in religious art, the elect-to-be rested 
in Abraham’s bosom. In all these scenarios 
those so privileged after death would be spared 
punishment and suffering but would never- 
theless be denied the supreme bliss enjoyed 
by those definitively admitted into Heaven, 
that of being accorded the grace to see God 
face to face, the beatific vision. The invention 
of Purgatory in the twelfth century was to 
overturn these conceptions. 
Guided tours 
Living mortals could learn, at least in outline, 
about Heaven and Hell from the meagre infor- 
mation supplied by the Bible, and especially 
the Gospels, and from the stories of those who 
had travelled to the world beyond the grave. 
These stories, originating in the Jewish and 
Christian apocrypha from the beginning of the 
Christian era, developed in the Latin West 
mainly from the seventh century onwards. They 
were the accounts given by those to whom God 
had accorded the grace to visit Hell and Heaven, 
often under the guidance of an angel or

## [Page 21](111114engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

Above and opposite page, 
detail from The Last Judgment 
by the Italian painter Fra 
Angelico (1387-1455). Above, 
the Damned; opposite page, 
the Elect. 
ET TE ERE HH RE 4 
  
Wy 
11 poe 
\ 
archangel, except for the celestial Holy of Holies 
where God abided, hidden from their sight. 
The principal Latin accounts of these jour- 
neys take the form of visions granted mainly to 
monks (monasteries being regarded as places 
midway between this world and the next, 
between Earth and the hereafter). In the twelfth 
century, the account written by an English Cis- 
tercian of the knight Owen’s visit to “St. 
Patrick’s Purgatory” in Ireland definitively 
shaped the changed landscape of the afterworld 
by localizing Purgatory in a specific place. 
As may be seen from the descriptions of 
Heaven and Hell in these stories, most Chris- 
tian imagery of the hereafter was drawn from 
earlier sources. It owes little to the Old Testa- 
ment or to the Jewish tradition, except for 
the two paradisiacal themes of the Garden of 
Eden and the celestial Jerusalem. Judaism 
makes no clear distinction between the grave 
and the world beyond it, and the Jewish hell, 
Sheol, is a grim and gloomy place that does 
not lend itself to description. 
The main borrowings of imagery for the 
torments of hell are from India and to an even 
greater extent from Iran and Egypt. In ancient 
Greek mythology, Orpheus, Pollux, Thescus, 
Heracles, and Odysseus (in Book XI of the 
BRI TN RR 
A    
 
  
 
   J ENTE Ni
Odyssey) all descend into the underworld, but 
the main heritage in this respect is from Rome, 
namely from Aeneas’ voyage into the infernal 


### 111118: Mediaeval Europe: the antechamber of eternity

regions, in Book VI of Virgil's Aeneid. This 
was where the two abodes of the dead were 
reached, by first going down into the cavern 
that served as an antechamber, through the fields 
where the souls of the unburied dead wandered 
and across the river Styx, before turning either 
left into Tartarus (Hell) or right into the 
Elysian Fields (Heaven). 
The main features of the Christian image of 
the world beyond had taken definitive shape 
by the early Middle Ages. 
Torment and delight 
To get there involved standing trial either col- 
lectively, at the Last Judgment, or individually. 
In the former case, the leading role was played 
by Christ, throned in judgment in a setting 
reminiscent of the courts of Ancient Rome, 
and verdicts were handed down after consul- 
tation of the books kept by the angels, in 
which men’s good and bad deeds are recorded. 
In the latter case, the crucial moment comes 
with the weighing of souls after the resurrec- 
tion. The Archangel Gabriel holds the great 
THE UNESCO Courier @ MARCH 1998 
© 
G 
Da
gh
 
Or
t,
 
Pa
ns
/S
an
 
Ma
rc
o 
Co
nv
en
t,
 
Fl
or
en
ce

## [Page 22](111114engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 111118: Mediaeval Europe: the antechamber of eternity

» scales, while the gatekeeper of Heaven, St. Peter, 
and the Master of Hell, Satan, vie for posses- 
sion of the soul by pulling down on one side 
or other of the scales. When the verdict has 
been rendered, the elect ascend into Heaven, 
where St. Peter opens the gate for them, while 
the damned are pitched into the jaws of Hell. 
Heaven is a place of peace and rejoicing 
where the senses of the elect are delighted by 
flowers and light for the eyes, songs for the 
ears, fragrant odours for the nose, the taste 
of delicious fruits for the mouth and fabrics 
soft to the touch (since in their modesty the 
elect usually wear beautiful white robes, only 
a few artists portraying them as restored to 
the naked state of the innocent in Eden before 
the Fall). Heaven is sometimes shown as gir- 
dled with high walls of precious stones and 
consisting of concentric areas, also surrounded 
by walls, where the colours, the fragrances, 
the tastes and the harmonies become more and 
more delightful the nearer they come to the 
Centre, the abode of God, who holds the 
beatific vision in reserve. Whereas in Genesis 
Paradise was a garden, in keeping with the cli- 
matic conditions and the mythopoecic tradi- 
tions of the East, in the medieval West, a world 
of towns ancient and modern, Heaven was 
generally conceived of as a walled city, on the 
model of the celestial Jerusalem, and it was 
strictly reserved for the righteous who had 
been baptized, baptism being the necessary, 
albeit insufficient, passport to Paradise. 
The invention of purgatory 
Hell is a place of inextinguishable flames that 
unrelentingly burn the damned, giving off 
blackish smoke and a fearsome red glow that 
sheds the only light on a world of darkness, ter- 
rifying cries, noises and stench, a hell in red 
and black. Worse still, the damned are forever 
doomed to suffer cruel torments inflicted by 
hideous demons. The landscape, when it can 
be glimpsed, is a horrible scene of steep moun- 
tains, deep chasms, stinking rivers and lakes of 
molten metal, reptiles and monsters. The way 
into hell is either by being cast down a wellshaft 
or by taking a bridge over the abyss that 
becomes narrower and more slippery the fur- 
ther one goes across it. Hell is sometimes 
divided into different parts that receive differ- 
ent categories of sinners; at other times it is all 
of a piece but arranged in circles, cach specializ- 
ing in some particular punishment for the 
damned, or in levels of ever-increasing dark- 
ness and burning heat that lead down to the 
ultimate depth where Satan reigns in person. 
Although medieval Christian imagery of 
the hereafter owes a great deal to that of pagan- 
ism, it differs from it structurally in one essen- 
tial way. Heaven and Hell are not next door 
to cach other in the underworld but are placed 
on a vertical plane, in symbolic accordance 
with the Christian representation of space, 
with the heavens above (good) and the infer- 
nal regions below (evil). 
THE UNESCO Courier B® MARCH 1998 
© 
Al
in
an
 
Gi
ra
ud
on
, 
Pa
ni
s/
Pa
la
zz
o 
Pit
ti,
 
Fl
or
en
ce
 
Relations existed in time and space between 
the quick and the dead, God, Satan and peo- 
ple; in other words the eternal world beyond 
made its presence felt in carthly life. Angels 
continually descended to Earth and mounted 
up into the heavens again, as, more seldom, 
did the Son of God and the Virgin, while the 
wicked demons and Satan himself likewise 
came and went between Earth and Hell. The 
hereafter played arole in earthly history. Quite 
apart from the rare voyages of a few favoured 
individuals to the realms beyond, visions, 
miracles, signs and portents established what 
medieval Europe saw as the relationship 
between this world and the next. 
Orpheus in the Underworld 
(1594), oil on copper by the 
Flemish painter Jan Bruegel, 
known as Velvet Bruegel 
(1568-1625).

## [Page 23](111114engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 111118: Mediaeval Europe: the antechamber of eternity

ipl He, i 
d We d 
g 
The linchpin of the system, however, was 
not Heaven, but Hell. To urge Christians to 
work out their salvation, the Catholic church 
employed fear of hellfire rather than desire for 
Heaven. In the face of death, they were less 
afraid of dying than of Hell, and Christianity 
thus became, with some slight variations of 
cmphasis, a religion of fear. 
The bipolar character of the Christian after- 
world continued more or less unchanged until 
the twelfth century, when major religious and 
social changes resulted in a new society witha 
new view not only of this world but also of 
the next. 
St. Augustine had divided men into four 
categories: the “entirely good”, who were des- 
tined for Heaven, the “entirely evil”, who were 
consigned to Hell; and the “not entirely good” 
and “not entirely evil”, the fate ordained by 
God for these last two categories being some- 
what uncertain. It was supposed that those 
who died with only a “light” burden of sin 
upon them would rid themselves of it in the 
afterlife by undergoing “purgatorial penal- 
ties”, passing through “purgatorial fire” sim- 
ilar to hellfire, in “purgatorial places” whose 
location remained very vague. In the latter half 
of the twelfth century, a separate place was 
invented for those whose admission to the 
number of the elect had been deferred. This » 
THE UNESCO Courier @ MARCH 1998

## [Page 24](111114engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 111118: Mediaeval Europe: the antechamber of eternity

> 
© 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Lé
na
rs
, 
Pa
ns
 
was Purgatory, the “third place of the world 
beyond”, midway between Heaven and Hell, 
which would vanish at the Day of Judgment 
and would be emptied when all its inhabi- 
tants rose up into Heaven. 
The amount of time spent in Purgatory 
depended on three factors. It was in the first 
place proportional to the number of sins 
(referred to thereafter as “venial”, ie. 
redeemable and thus allowing the sinner to 
avoid damnation, as against irredeemable mor- 
tal sins) with which the dead were burdened at 
the time of their death. It depended next on the 
suffrages (prayers, alms and masses) offered by 
living relatives and friends to reduce the length 
of time spent by certain “souls” in Purgatory. 
Lastly, the Church could obtain a remission of 
the time still to be served in Purgatory, in 
return for money—the indulgences i n which 
the Church carried on a growing trade from 
the thirteenth century onwards. Purgatory, it 
should be added, was a one-way street. Souls 
could only go on from there to Heaven, and 
not back towards Hell. 
This “third place”, which reduced the pop- 
ulation of Hell and replaced the binary system 
of the afterworld by a more complex, less rigid 
system in keeping with the evolution of the 
“estates” of socicty on Earth, and which was 
THE UNESCO Gourier ® MARCH 1998 
In a Purgatory resembling Hell, 
an angel's hands reach out to 
a soul which has completed its 
time of penitence, Detail of a 
17th-century mural from the 
church of Saint Laurent in the 
Tinée valley, southern France. 
  
 
widely disseminated by the friars of the Men- 
dicant orders established in the early thir- 
teenth century (Dominicans and Franciscans), 
was of the greatest importance. 
The triumph of death 
It brought about the triumph of the idea of 
individual judgment at the moment of death 
and, in conjunction with the fact that at least 
one yearly confession was imposed on all indi- 
viduals by a decree of the Fourth Lateran 
Council in 1215, it contributed greatly to the 
affirmation of the individual in relation to 
groups and orders. It transformed the social 
structures and behaviour patterns in the world 
of the living and resulted in 2 mathematical 
attitude to sins and penances that gave rise, at 
this point in history when trade and the mer- 
chant class were developing rapidly, to a kind 
of book-keeping approach to the afterlife. It 
also contributed to a great increase in the 
power of the Church (which in the thirteenth 
century designated the existence of Purgatory 
as dogma) over the dead, inasmuch as the suf- 
frages and indulgences of which it was in charge 
gave it an authority, previously exercised by 
God alone, to administer justice in the after- 
world of Purgatory. 
In this period when the new society of the 
thirteenth century was being put in place on 
Earth, the geography and system of the after- 
world (that of St. Bernard and St. Thomas 
Aquinas) took definite shape. The basic system 
was that of the essential “three places” Hell, 
Purgatory and Heaven—made up to five by the 
addition of two limbos: the limbus patrum, or 
limbo of the patriarchs, the former abode of 
the just who died before Christ’s incarnation 
and the institution of baptism, the place that was 
to be emptied by Jesus when He descended into 
Hell to take its inhabitants up into Heaven; and 
the limbus infantium, or children’s limbo, the 
abode of infants dying without baptism. 
It was this new arrangement of the after- 
world that inspired the great masterpiece of 
medieval Christian literature, Dante’s Divina 
Commedia (carly fourteenth century), in 
which the author, guided by the ancient 
Roman poet Virgil, visits every part of the 
afterworld—the circles of the Inferno where 
the damned are punished severally according to 
their respective categories of mortal sin, and the 
terraces of Purgatory, which is presented as a 
mountain that has to be climbed to attain the 
beauties and joys of Paradise. 
A study of fifteenth-century texts and 
images raises the question as to whether by 
the end of the Middle Ages people still believed 
in Hell. It scems that, despite the best efforts 
of the Church, such a belief was by that time 
much watered down. Christians, showing 
signs of the emergence of 2a modern sensibility, 
were now afraid notso much of Hell as of the 
phase thatimmediately precedes the afterlife— 
death itself. | 
-

## [Page 25](111114engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

   
The Ladder of Virtues, 
facsimile of an illustration 
from a lost medieval 
illuminated manuscript, the 
Hortus Deliciarum (Garden of 
Delights). 
      
The story of the hercafter in human 
- thinking is almost as old as humanity 
itself. The material conditions in which early 
man strove for survival posed problems to 
which empirically acquired knowledge, the 
primitive “science” of the times, could not 
provide answers. The history of human beings, 
as distinct from the history of apes of amore 
or less advanced type, begins with the history 
of their production of the means of their own 
existence. The degree of sophistication of the 
tools and weapons developed by primitive 
humans, of the “means of production” of the 
necessities of everyday life, conditioned their 
mental representation of the world. 
To the extent that the laws of nature 
remained hidden froin human understand- 
ing, natural phenomena necessarily appeared as 
being animated by wild, uncontrollable forces 
which influenced human fate. Imaginary “spir- 
its” inhabited the trees and forests, the rivers 
© 
Se
lv
a,
 
Pa
ns
/B
ib
li
ot
he
qu
e 
Na
ti
on
al
e 
Un
iv
er
si
ta
ir
e 
de
 
St
ra
sb
ou
rg
, 
St
ra
sb
ou
rg
 


### 111119: A Materialist vision of the afterlife

/ = A materialist 
vision of the 
afterlife 
BY GREG OXLEY 
For Marxists, the hereafter is an 
instrument of power wielded by 
the dominant social classes 
and marshes, animated the skies, the rain, the 
wind, light and darkness, and the animals man 
hunted. In his own dreams, in his ideas and 
imagination, man was inclined to see the man- 
ifestations of a spirit within himsclf. 
With the emergence of the early civilizations, 
and with the corresponding increase in human 
power over the environment, the general trend 
in human thought, which can be traced in var- 
ious forms through surviving artistic represen- 
tations and inscriptions, was to separate the 
world of gods and spirits from the environ- 
ment, and to imagine their existence in another 
world. From their distant abodes, the gods 
weighed the greatness and virtues of humankind, 
and rewarded or punished earthly beings. 
Each new step in the acquisition of pro- 
ductive techniques led to changes in the rela- 
tions between humankind and the natural 
world, and also in the social and cconomic 
relations existing between the producers them- 
selves. These changes would in turn shape and 
transform the fantastic representations of the 
world in human minds. Once worldly phe- 
nomena are understood as the consequence of 
a natural process, the belief in divine or spir- 
itual influences is weakened and tends to dis- 
appear, not immediately, but after a certain 
delay. “Human consciousness lags behind 
events”, as the materialist philosophers of the 
nineteenth century explained. 
Thus the development of the means of travel 
and of commercial exchange and the emergence 
of common language over wider areas, under- 
mined locally-based folklore and gave way toa » 
1’ 
he unesco ((OuriEr ® march 1008

## [Page 26](111114engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 111119: A Materialist vision of the afterlife

® 
Se
lv
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
new, more universal, hierarchy of beliefs and 
attendant rituals. The emergence of monothe- 
ism, the belief in a single divinity, reflected the 
understanding of the world as a “whole”, as a 
single entity whose different component phe- 
nomena are related to and in interaction with 
one another. 
Historically, therefore, through many dif- 
ferent forms, the basis of the belief in the exis- 
tence of other worlds was the human attempt 
to explain the material environment, filling 
the gap, asit were, left by the sull rudimentary 
level of empirically acquired knowledge. 
Ideological pressures 
However, this is not the only reason for the 
rooting of such beliefs in social conscious- 
ness. When the level of development of pro- 
THE UNESCO ours BH MARCH 1998 
Monks are shown collecting 
tithes from the people at the 
time of Pope Innocent 11 (12th 
century) in this illustration 
from a 19th-century French 
History of the Popes. 
ductive technique renders possible the eman- 
cipation of a part of society from physical 
labour, dividing society into different and 
mutually antagonistic social layers, people’s 
relationship with the world of spirits becomes 
not only the expression of a given level of cul- 
tural development but also an expression of 
the social relations established between groups 
and classes. The perception of gods and super- 
natural powers becomes an element in social 
conflict. The dominant layers of society create 
for themselves a heavenly justification for the 
perpetuation of their rule. 
The history of the Christian religion is a 
clear illustration of this. At each historical 
stage, Christian ideas about the world reflected 
not only the general cultural and scientificlev- 
els reached by society, but also the ideological 
and political pressures of the contending social

## [Page 27](111114engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 111119: A Materialist vision of the afterlife

  
forces of the times. The hierarchy of the 
Roman Church spent centuries haggling over 
the origins of the Devil, his role in the world, 
the extent of his powers, his relation to God. 
It would be wrong to sce in such scem- 
ingly interminable debates only the product of 
over-excited imaginations. Underlying the 
need to give a more precise definition to the 
role of the Devil, for instance, was an essen- 
tially political problem. To minimize the pow- 
ers of Satan would weaken allegiance to the 
Empire as a safeguard against devilish male- 
dictions. On the other hand, Rome was con- 
cerned that the tendency to see the “work of 
the Devil” behind the most ordinary misfor- 
tunes would lead to a greater respect for the 
Devil than for his divine opponent, whose 
influence was perhaps less perceptible to poor 
peasants. Thus the need to give a more restric- 
tive definition of the powers of the Devil on 
carth. 
The ideological conservatism of the Church 
reflected its position as an integral part of the 
ruling land-owning classes within feudal soci- 
ety. The imagery of heaven and hell used by the 
medieval church reflected and idealized the 
existing social order. God, the king, was pic- 
tured as sitting at the head of a pyramid of 
orders, the lower orders owing deference to the 
higher, whose place and authority was con- 
ferred by God himself. Heaven was depicted as 
a place of joy, peace, and general well-being. 
On the other hand, those who, during their 
passage on carth, fell foul of God, whose 
© 
Se
lv
a 
Pa
rs
 
© 
Je
an
 
Lo
up
 
Ch
ar
me
t,
 
Pa
ri
s 
At Wittenberg, on 10 
December 1520, the German 
religious reformer Martin 
Luther burns the Papal bull 
Exsurge Domine calling on 
him to retract his ideas. (19th- 
century French engraving). 
The German reformer Thomas 
Miinzer preaching in the 
Klettgau region. {19th-century 
engraving). 
a 
Li in Ta
hr LE ie Eh 
pl ay 
“word” was infallibly interpreted and commu- 
nicated to them through the laws of the Roman 
Church, would be condemned to everlasting 
torture in hell. To this day, the walls of many 
church buildings are decorated with the most 
horrifying representations of what hell reserved 
for those who strayed from religious con- 
formism. The concepts of heaven and hell were 
inseparable. It can be safely assumed that, in the 
mind of a medieval peasant, one of the best argu- 
ments for doing whatever was necessary to get 
into heaven was to avoid being sent to hell! 
Social unrest 
and religious beliefs 
When social antagonisms reach such a point 
that conflicting interests break out into open 
struggle and warfare, the interpretation of the 
“holy word” and the role attributed to the 
“hereafter” in earthly affairs form part of the 
 
THE UNESCO Courier ® MARCH 1998

## [Page 28](111114engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

> ideological expression given to the needs and 
interests of the contending forces. 
A great many illustrations of this idea could 
be given, and not, of course, solely in relation to 
the Christian world. But perhaps one of the 
most striking examples is to be found in the 
period of the reformation and of the peasant 
war in Germany which took place in the first 
quarter of the sixteenth century. When Martin 
Luther launched his attack on the clergy of the 
Roman Church, this was seen as a signal for 
revolt on the part of all those social strata who 
sought to free themselves from its domination. 
The burghers, the lesser nobility and the princes, 
joined by some elements of the lower clergy, 
stood to gain from a weakening of the power of 
. Rome and from the confiscation of Church 
  
® 
Se
lv
a,
 
P
a
n
s
/
B
i
b
l
i
o
t
h
é
q
u
e
 
Na
ti
on
al
e 
L 
lands and property, much of which had been 
acquired by means of forced tributes, forged 
documents, or political blackmail at their 
expense. The peasantry, which bore the entire 
feudal hierarchy upon its back, stood to gain 
most of all from a change in the social order. 
Initially, Luther himself adopted a particu- 
larly virulent tone in relation to Rome and the 
ruling layers of society. But with the outbreak 
      
Ti. 
J (0S [Eo [a 
a I ihr\n\-‘™hb*t"™ 
The City of God, 
facsimile of a medieval 
miniature from the Hortus 
Deliciarum (Garden of 
Delights). 
  
 
w
d
 
© mrunesco (Durer ® MARCH 1998 
   
of a peasant uprising on a massive scale, he 
changed his tone in favour of mere “passive” 
opposition to the Catholic hierarchy. He turned 
against the “murdering peasant hordes”, and 
called upon the princes to “stab and strangle 
them”. After a bloody civil war, the peasant 
armies were finally defeated, and their most out- 
standing representative, Thomas Miinzer, was 
among those put to death. 
Heaven on earth 
For Miinzer, the notion of heaven as another 


### 111119: A Materialist vision of the afterlife

place, visited in another life, was a snare for 
the poor. He brought paradise down to earth. 
It was to be established here and now by the 
revolutionary realization of the will of God. 
Hell was pictured as being no different from 
the existing social order, ruled as it was by 
“robbers and murderers”. 
Miinzer’s doctrine was a striking example 
of the translation into religious terms of the 
social and economic aspirations of a particular 
social class, namely the poor peasantry of his 
times. His vision of the Kingdom of God was 
one of a classless society, where work and 
rewards for work were to be shared, without 
private property, or, at any rate, with an equal 
sharing of property. 
The same phenomena occurred during the 
English revolution which overthrew the 
Monarchy in 1649. Early protestantism in 
England, and particularly that preached within 
the ranks of Cromwell’s “New Model Army”, 
was very close to Miinzer’s doctrine, and was 
accompanied by a flourishing of movements 
aiming to establish “heaven on earth”, form- 
ing communities based on the sharing of prop- 
erty and earnings. Faith in salvation in an after- 
life is most prevalent in times of social inertia, 
and recedes as soon as social forces move into 
action on a massive scale. Even Cromwell’s 
famous battle-cry shows the entirely subor- 
dinate place the “Defender of the Faith” attrib- 
uted to heaven in earthly affairs: “Trust in 
God... and keep your powder dry!” 
The prevailing religious ideas of a given soci- 
ety ina given epoch are established not ina vac- 
uum, not as the result of “pure” reasoning, but 
in close relation to the societies and modes of 
existence in which they emerge. The role attrib- 
uted to the “afterlife” by human beings hasa 
definite function within human society, and 
is constantly shaped and altered to bring them 
into conformity with the requirements of the 
different social groupings and classes within it. 
In the final analysis, no religious beliefs can 
stand above the social and economic foundation 
upon which they rest, nor free themselves from 
the influence of the material interests of con- 
tending social forces in a given epoch. ||

## [Page 29](111114engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 111120: Living to tell the tale

Living to tell the tale 
BY PETER FENWICK 
Many people have crossed to the ‘other side’ and 
returned with surprisingly similar stories 
In the American film Heaven 
Can Wait (1978), Warren 
Beatty, above, plays a 
footballer who dies 
prematurely and is given a 
second lease of life on earth. 
  
* Raymond Moody, Life 
after Life, Bantam Books 
(38th printing, 1983). 
It is likely that for as long as man has 
been aware of the certainty of death he 
has contemplated the possibility of survival. 
There is nothing particularly new about the 
notion that people can “die” and live to tell the 
tale. Myths and legends recounting these tales 
go back well over 2,000 years. But it was not 
until 1973 when the American psychiatrist Dr. 
Raymond Moody collected the first contem- 
porary accounts of near death experiences 
(NDEs) that it was recognized that these were 
worthy of serious scientific study.” 
Studies of the NDE produced some fasci- 
nating data, and raised some interesting ques- 
. tions. It is clear that these experiences are not 
specific to near-death situations—they also 
occur as a response to extreme stress or terror 
or pain, in childbirth, under anaesthesia, spon- 
taneously, and possibly also during sleep. 
© Steve Schapiro, Sygma, Paris 
Moreover, not everybody who comes near 
death has an NDE. 
Although cross-cultural studies indicate 
that NDEs have a strong cultural component, 
itis unlikely that they are entirely the product 
of cultural expectations, because thereare many 
accounts of children too young to have such 
expectations who have had NDEs. If they are 
dreams or hallucinations, why do so many 
people dream more or less the same dream, or 
have more or less the same hallucination? 
The other side 
No two near death experiences are identical, 
but there are uncanny similarities between 
them. In the majority of cases the NDE is a 
profoundly emotional experience, vividly 
remembered for years. Dr. Bruce Greyson, a 
psychiatrist and editor of the American Jour- 
nal of Near Death Studies, has laid out a blue- 
print of a characteristic experience, although 
the features do not always occur in the same 
order, and few people experience every event. 
The experience often starts with feelings 
of peace, joy or bliss, described as more than » 
THE UNESCO Gourier EH MARCH 1998 2 9

## [Page 30](111114engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 111120: Living to tell the tale

  
  
 

## [Page 31](111114engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 111120: Living to tell the tale

» ordinary happiness. If there is bodily pain, it 
drops away. The out-of-body experience often 
follows, the person seems to leave his or her 
body, and can look down on it from some 
vantage point, usually near the ceiling. They 
may then enter what is usually described as a 
dark tunnel, which they pass or float through 
rapidly without making any physical effort. 
Atthe end of the tunnel is a pinpoint of light 
which grows larger as they approach it. 
For many people the light is the most sig- 
nificant part of the experience. It is nearly 
always described as white or golden, brilliant 
but in spite of its brightness not dazzling. 
Often the person feels drawn towards it. 
Sometimes it manifests itself as a “being” of 
light, an intensely emotional and positive pres- 
ence that is warm and welcoming and loving. 
At some point people sense a barrier 
between them and the light, sometimes a phys- 
ical barrier such as a gate or fence, sometimes 
simply a feeling that this is a point beyond 
which they cannot pass. They may glimpse an 
idyllic pastoral scene beyond the barrier, or 
sec people, usually dead relatives, sometimes 
beckoning to them, sometimes signalling to 
them that they should go back. 
The feeling that it is not yet their time to 
go is avery common feature of the experience. 
Sometimes people will make the decision to go 
back themselves, usually because they feel their 
families still need them. Sometimes they are 
sent back either by the being of light or by the 
relatives they have met. 
Morerare is the “life review”, a sort of Day 
of Judgment which some people experience, in 
which their past actions are reviewed. Some 
have a life preview, in which they are shown 
events which are to take place in their future, 
and told there are tasks ahead of them which 
they must go back to complete. The return 
to the body is sudden and rapid, often 
described as a “snapping” back into their body 
as if on the end of an elastic cord. 
Cultural variants 
Nearly everyone who has the experience says 
that through it they lose any fear of death. 
Often their attitudes change in other ways. Life 
often seems to have an added purpose and value 
after such an experience. It may confirm reli- 
gious belief for those who previously held it 
and many of those who have no particular reli- 
gious belief return believing that death is not the 
end. A few people believe they have been given 
The Hereafter (1938), 
oil on canvas by the Belgian 
painter René Magritte. 
Opposite page, “The Elect”, 
detail of Heavenly Paradise, a 
panel from Visions of the 
Hereafter (¢. 1500-1518) by the 
Dutch painter Hieronymus 
Bosch.   
psychic powers such as precognition or the gift 
of healing, after the experience. 
The near death experience is intriguing for 
two major reasons. First it is very common— 
some studies suggest that between a tenth and 
a third of people who have had a cardiac arrest 
had an NDE. This makes a prospective study 
feasible. Secondly it seems to be a universal 
human experience and nota culture-bound one, 
although it is, as might be expected, influenced 
by the particular culture in which it occurs. 
In Indian experiences, for example, the pos- 
itive feelings of peace and joy which seem to be 
a significant hallmark of Western experiences are 
much less often reported. Out of body and 
tunnel experiences are rare. Instead the subject 
is taken by “messengers,” and as a result of 
some bureaucratic bungling, usually a case of 
THE UNLSCO Gourien BH MARCH 1998 
© 
P
h
o
t
o
t
h
é
q
u
e
 
Re
né
 
Ma
gr
it
te
 
/G
rr
au
do
n 
/A
DA
GP
 
Pa
ri
s,
 
19
88
, 
pr
iv
at
e 
co
ll
ec
ti
on
 
>

## [Page 32](111114engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 111120: Living to tell the tale

» mistaken identity, is finally brought or pushed 
back. Stigmata seem to be a quite common 
phenomenon of the Indian NDE. In one 
reported case, for example, fissures were seen in 
the skin on the front of the knees of a man 
who had had an NDE in which he reported 
having been captured by ten people who cut 
his legs off at the knee to prevent his escape. 
Relatives or friends do not play a significant 
partin Indian experiences, while well-known 
figures in Hindu mythology do. 
But even within Western cultures thereare 
differences in the NDE. The life review, for 
example, is far more often reported in Amer- 
ican experiences than British ones, religious 
figures tend to figure more prominently, and 
the experiences have an evangelical quality 
which probably reflects the more fundamen- 
talist religious culture of that society. 
The NDE is almost always a positive expe- 
rience. Glimpses of Hell are rare. Is this because, 
where life after death is concerned, we are all 
past-masters at giving ourselves the benefit of 
the doubt? Or because the stereotypical view 
of heaven, with pastoral landscapes and fig- 
ures in flowing robes, is more frequently 
depicted and more likely to be fixed in mem- 
ory than archetypal visions of Hell? 
It has been suggested that the reason why so 
few hellish experiences have been described is 
that they are quickly forgotten. However, it 
seems more probable that people who have bad 
experiences are just as strongly affected by them 
as people who have good ones, but they are 
much more reluctant to talk about them. But 
perhaps the most likely explanation is that 
when an experience includes feelings of peace 
or joy, as about 80 per cent do, these are para- 
mount and override everything else, so that 
whatever else occurs is interpreted in this pos- 
itive light. Many experiences include moments 
of terror and in the absence of positive emo- 
tional feelings these may colour the experience 
so that it is felt as neutral or even “hellish”. 
The search for an explanation 
Is there any scientific explanation for the 
NDE? Is it nothing more than a hallucina- 
tion, a trick played by a brain disordered by 
drugs, pain, lack of oxygen, or sickness? Some 
experiences are clearly drug induced. Of the 
other explanations which have been advanced— 
anoxia, hypercarbia, the release of endorphins 
during pain or stress—while some of these 
may be involved in the NDE in some cir- 
32 THE UNESCO Gourier HW MARCH 1998 
© 
Mo
ni
qu
e 
Pi
et
n,
 
Pa
ns
  
This statue of Vaishno Devi, a 
form of female energy or 
“shakti”, stands in the Hindu 
sanctuary at Kulu, Himashal 
Pradesh State (India). 
REE Ca fs wal 
cumstances, none can account for every aspect 
of the experience or are applicable in every sit- 
uation in which NDEs occur. 
The NDE confounds many of our assump- 
tions about how the brain works, and it is dif- 
ficult to find a rational scientific explanation 
for it. Many NDEs occur during uncon- 
sciousness, when the brain 1s theoretically inca- 
pable of building the coherent and often com- 
plex models which people who have had NDEs 
report. Moreover, memory does not function 
in unconsciousness, so even if the brain was 
able to make such models, they should not be 
remembered. From the point of view of both 
memory and model-building, it should be 
quite impossible to have an NDE when brain

## [Page 33](111114engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 111120: Living to tell the tale

function is seriously compromised or the brain 
is seriously damaged. And yet thereare casesin 
which this has happened. To explain it we have 
to postulate that the brain can retain the capac- 
ity for making images in unconsciousness and 
that when the memory circuits are damaged, 
memory can be retained by some other means. 
There is evidence, stretching back to the 
first brain mapping experiments of Wilder 
Penfield in the 1930s and 1940s, for the 
involvement of the temporal lobes. Penfield 
found that stimulation of the temporal lobes 
produced sensations of leaving the body, fecl- 
ings of tranquillity, hallucinations of people. 
Some people reported having flashes of mem- 
ory. The right temporal lobe ts primarily con- 
cerned with emotion, and the NDE is a very 
emotional experience. Most people say that 
the NDE is ineffable, impossible to describe 
or categorize, and this suggests that it may be 
arising in the right hemisphere, which is con- 
cerned more with spatial than verbal func- 
tions. The loss of spatial boundaries and deep 
feelings of unity which are characteristic of 
the NDE arc probably due to an alteration in 
right hemisphere function. 
Perception of time is often altered during 
an NDE and the misordering of events in time 
is yet another right-hemisphere function. 
NDEs always seem to carry the feeling of 
absolute reality; often they are felt to be more 
real even than everyday life. This attribution of 
certainty to ongoing perception is possibly 
another temporal lobe function. A similar feel- 
ing of “knowing” something emotionally is 
sometimes experienced by people who have a 
right temporal epileptic focus. 
Beyond the frontiers of science 
Thus it seems likely that the NDE is mediated 
by the temporal lobe. But this still leaves two 
questions unanswered. How does such a coher- 
ent integrated experience like the NDE occur 
during unconsciousness when it is impossible 
to postulate an organized sequence of events in 
a disordered brain? And why is it that spon- 
taneous experiences in which it seems highly 
unlikely that there can be a physical or psy- 
chological mechanism at work, also sometimes 
occur? 
One possibility is that the NDE is a form 
of mystical experience, and the brain struc- 
tures which mediate it are probably the same 
structures which mediate any mystical expe- 
rience. The nineteenth-century Canadian psy- 
  
chiatrist Richard Bucke (1837-1902) was one of 
the first Western scientists to try to define the 
characteristics of the mystical experience. The 
nine features he listed were: feelings of unity, 
feelings of objectivity and reality; transcen- 
dence of space and time; a sensc of sacredness, 
deeply felt positive mood; paradoxicality— 
the experience is felt to be true even though it 
violates Aristotelian logic; ineffability; tran- 
siency; positive change in attitude or behaviour. 
The probability is that the NDE is a mys- 
tical experience, timeless and independent of 
death, but part of the spectrum of normal 
human experience. If we accept this, it explains 
why not everybody who is near death has one, 
and why there is no common cause. 
Does the NDE do anything to confirm the 
continuation of personal consciousness after 
death? People who have had the experience say 
that it does. But to accept this we have to step 
beyond the boundaries of science, which does 
not accept subjective experience as evidence. 
Only by trying to establish a new science, which 
does attempt to explore and to validate human 
subjective experience can we decide whether 
there is in fact meaning behind the mechanism 
of the NDE and perhaps even allow for the 
continuation of personal consciousness. MW 
HAN MAHI SO0K 
LE CJ IANT ME] ODIEUX 
DES AMES 
    L I drmallan 
The world of the hereafter is evoked in two books published (in French) in the 
Unesco Collection of Representative Works. One, Gan Bao’s In Search of Spirits 
(Sou shen ji; published by Gallimard, Paris, 1992) comes from ancient China; the 
other, Han Mahlsock’s The Melodious Song of Souls (Arumdaun Yongga, 
published by L’'Harmattan/Unesco Publishing, Paris, 1995) is frem modern 
Korea. Although very different in tone, both works are a hymn to life and love in 
which the dead are closely linked to the everyday experience of the living. 
THE UNESCO Courier | MARCH 1998

## [Page 34](111114engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

interview 
HM In the two centuries since the Enlightenment, 
man has become the measure of all things. This 
attitude of mind has changed many things for the 
better, but it gives short shrift to the spiritual 
dimension of human existence. People today need 
to rediscover a relationship with transcendence, but 
only on condition that it is through their own 
experience and that they freely consent to that 
experience, which should not be subjected to any 
religious authority. By putting forward a model for 
an individual spiritual quest in your novel The 
Alchemist, you put your finger on this overriding 
concern of people today. Perhaps this is one of the 
reasons for its tremendous success. 
Paulo Coelho: The Enlightenment did not pre- 
vent people from having their irrational side or 
rule out intuition or enthusiasm. Humanity 
gradually turned its back on them for other rea- 
sons. Yet I am convinced that humanity is now 
quietly opening its doors again to things which 
it had rejected and ceased to respect. The most 
important of these seems to me to be the idea 
of mystery. This is something that must be 
understood—not so much the fact that there is 
a limit to human knowledge as the fact that mys- 
tery is part of the human condition. When I fall 
in love, it 1s not because the person I love is the 
best in the world or even the best person for me. 
Loveis beyond reason, and so is spiritual quest- 
ing. Why do we need spirituality? I do not know. 
That's part of the mystery. Some people have 
sought a recipe for the human condition. “You've 
got to do this,” they tell us. “You've got to do 
that.” I don’t trust them. But I do trust those 
who have sufficient humility to respect the mys- 
tery surrounding our lives and to acknowledge 
that thereare major reasons that are beyond our 
THE UNESCO Courier B MARCH 1998 
   
  


### 111121: Interview with Paulo Coelho

Paulo Coelho 
| 
4 v Me 
k , v (41 A 
¥ £ AR 
: TARR 
y Ea 
>> : AY 
¥ Zh y : AL 
1) yo 
 
A . 4 
Brazilan writer Paulo Coelho has won international acclaim with his prizewinning 
philosophical tale The Alchemist, which has sold more than 10 million copies worldwide. 
He is also the author of Diary of a Magus: Lessons in the Art of Self-Discovery, an account of 
a pilgrimage he made to Santiago de Compostela, and of By the River Piedra I Sat Down 
and Wept. His most recent book, Mount Five, which retraces the life of the prophet Elijah, 
has just been published. Since 1997, Paulo Coelho has been a special adviser to the 
Director-General of Unesco for the “Routes of Faith” project. 
Here he is interviewed by Baghat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat. 
* See the Unesco Courier, May 1995, “The Pilgrim's Way”, p.16 
understanding. When I wrote The Alchemist, 1 
obviously did not know that it was going to be 
sucha success. I only wanted to write about what 
I firmly believe, which is that everybody needs to 
live out their personal legend. 
HB This is what's new, that people who feel the need 
to get down to essentials no longer have to go 
through a priest, a rabbi or an imam, The Alchemist 
suggests that they can find self-fulfiiment by 
pursuing a personal quest which is a source of 
fulfilment rather than a curtailment of their 
freedom. This changes a lot of things. 
© 
S 
Ba
ss
ou
ls
, 
Sy
gm
a,
 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 35](111114engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 111121: Interview with Paulo Coelho

P.C.: We all feel an inner need to see the world not 
only as it appears to our senses but as a vaster 
intangible reality embracing the Whole. This is 
what I called the “soul of the world” in The 
Alchemist. Spirituality, which caters for this need, 
can therefore only bea personal quest. Theresa 
path to God, marked by signs which are so many 
letters of an alphabet ensuring direct communi- 
cation with the divine. However, this does not 
preclude the need at certain times for collective 
adoration and prayer. At those times, we turn 
to religion. Religion is there to satisfy a desire to 
belong to the community, to find brothers and 
sisters. But it does not show us the path to God. 
This path starts from within each of us. Itis up 
to us to unravel the thread.... 
HM Yet your own personal quest first led you in 
different directions. At one time you were a hippie 
and then you flirted with left-wing politics. . . . 
P.C.: Yes. I have tried just about everything. I 
have wanted to live my life to the hilt. I was raised 
by the Jesuits, which is the best way of com- 
pletely losing your faith, because God is forced 
on you. I left the Catholic church precisely 
because it had been forced on me. I returned to it 
later after a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela, 
not because it is the best or ultimate religion but 
simply because I carry it within me. The world 
opened up in the 1960s. People, especially young 
people, started to travel, meet and make contact 
with cach other. It was a magic moment, a 
moment in the history of humanity when an 
entire generation set about answering basic ques- 
tions such as: What am I'in this world for? Who 
am 1? Why was I born in Brazil instead of in 
Egypt? These questions have been pursuing peo- 
ple ever since the dawn of time. They can’t be 
avoided, even if pcople sometimes feel they have 
given up on them. In an attempt to answer them, 
people have explored the three paths of art, sci- 
ence and spirituality. These are three very differ- 
ent things, but they impinge on each other. In 
fact, the three overlap and blend together. But 
there are certain things that it is very dangerous 
to mix up. Spirituality and art can cross-fertilize 
one another and great scientific geniuses often 
have poetic intuitions. But when people want 
to find some kind of scientific basis for religion, 
the result is catastrophic. The experience of faith 
belongs to an order of reality that cannot be 
reduced to the world of concepts or be forced 
.into a scientific mould. 
HM Collective religious experiences are creating 
many conflicts, instead of prompting people to 
understand each other better and share things. . .. 
I am convinced 
that humanity 
is now quietly 
opening its doors 
again to the idea 
of mystery. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
& The Alchemist, a fable 
about following your dream, 
Harper, San Francisco, 1993 
& By the River Piedra I Sat 
Down and Wept, Harper, San 
Francisco, 1996 
« Diary of a Magus: Lessons 
in the Art of Self-Discovery, 
Harper, San Francisco; 1995 
P.C.: The experience of true faith always brings 
us back to the Other. This being so, the first per- 
son I see 1s my neighbour. There is a sense of joy 
which I want to share with him or her. If that joy 
1s not shared, 1t ceases to be joy. On the other 
hand, in sadness thatis truly shared there is room 
forjoy.... 
WM Even misfortunes are opportunities to learn the 
price of things. 
P.C.: Yes, provided we persevere along the path of 
our own personal legend, provided that we do 
not give up. Unfortunately, in the course of their 
journey, many people betray the dream which 
connects them to the soul of the world. They sac- 
rifice it to the acquisition of social status. If a per- 
son’s truc vocation is to become a gardener and if 
by becoming a gardener that person achieves self- 
fulfilment, nothing should deter him or her. 
However, in our day, people will be forced more 
and more often to abandon their dream—often 
under family pressure—and become lawyers or 
doctors. They will forget their personal legend, 
they will lose their sense of belonging, they will 
no longer have the resources to transform cach 
experience and cach misfortune into a fresh oppor- 
tunity to lift themselves up. ... 
No sooner has the hero of The Alchemist 
decided to follow his dream than he is robbed. 
You can imagine his disillusionment! He who 
had found the inner strength to fulfil his personal 
legend, who thought, as if by right, that the 
whole world would conspire on his behalf, finds 
himself alone and penniless. You need courage 
to launch out into an unknown world, aban- 
doning all you possess. At the threshold of our 
quest, the fear of stepping into an unknown 
world and the desire to stay at home lie in wait 
for us. Itis a crucial moment of initiation. But we 
cannot stand on the threshold for ever. We must 
dare to move. Only corpses do not move. Life is 
movement. But where to? This is what we all 
have to discover for ourselves, 
HM The need to cast off from our moorings. ... 
P.C.: To do this, we have to give free rein to our 
rebellious side. I am a great believer in inner rebel- 
lion—not lifelong rebellion or rebellion without 
cause or restraint, but rebellion against the force of 
habit, against the fear of change—which is really 
fear of living—rebellion that will enable us to 
make our own way by strengthening our deter- 
mination. Take the example of the struggles we 
have to wage with the family from childhood on. 
My mother was always opposed to my personal 
destiny. But at the same time she helped me find » 
He unesco (COURIER B MarcH 1908

## [Page 36](111114engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 111121: Interview with Paulo Coelho

» the strength and skills to control myself, persevere 
and find my own way. Without this conflict, I 
would never have developed willpower. These are 
quite legitimate struggles! 
I do not know where this rebellion comes 
from. It is a force which is liberated in us and 
which liberates us in turn. Itis the quest for per- 
sonal space and time. We cannot accept that our 
life span should be measured in terms of so many 
years of primary school, followed by secondary 
school and then a job. All this is only our col- 
lective space-time and it should on no account sti- 
fle our personal space-time. It is necessary to 
strike a balance between the two. a
’
 
v
A
 
PL 
I
E
E
 
BH You say that we do not know where we are 
going, and yet you speak of rebellion. Isn’t there a 
contradiction in this? 
P.C.: Yes there is, fortunately. This is what free- 
dom is all about. There has to be rebellion against 
the forces of inertia and death in order to liber- 
ate the forces of life and creation, which are not 
programmed in advance. Otherwise, there would 
be no freedom. By that I mean freedom in its 
existentialist sense, in other words a compro- 
mise. am free, I can leave this room right now, 
but I won't because I have freely imposed a cer- 
tain code of behaviour on myself. I am also free 
to write a book, but to do so I have to sit at the 
computer for several hours a day. I impose this 
constraint on myself in complete freedom. On 
the other hand, if I am sitting in front of the 
computer and all the ideas are already in my head, 
there will be nothing creative about it. We have to 
leave a space so that inner freedom can express 
itself. 
MS
E.
 
he 
al
s P
i
e
l
 
pe 
CR
IN
 U
SL
T 
R
R
R
 
Ne
 
iy
 
L-
 
od
 
i
l
s
 
th 
C
e
 
o 
I 
3 
¥ \- 3 
| 
: A
 Ww 
bs 
HW How did you set about writing The Alchemist? 
What ideas did you start out with? Did you know 
how the story would develop beforehand? 
P.C.: You may be amazed to learn that the story 
of The Alchemist comes from the Thousand and 
One Nights. It is quite a short tale, only a few 
lines long, about a hidden treasure for which the 
hero searches far from home, only to find iteven- 
tually within himself. I took four guiding ideas 
from it: the personal legend, the language of 
signs, the soul of the world and the need to lis- 
ten to one’s heart. I started the novel with this 
very short tale as my guide. The rest was vague, 
like being in a fog. The only thing I knew was 
that the boy would eventually return to his start- 
ing point. There were times—and this is the expe- 
rience of creation—when I felt as if I was trapped 
by my own story. At one point, the boy has to 
transform himself into the wind. It is a matter of 
life or death. He has to do it. But how do you 
  
   
THE UNESCO Gourier B® MARCH 1998

## [Page 37](111114engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 111121: Interview with Paulo Coelho

Alchemist seeking start describing such a thing? As you can imag- 
the philosopher's ne. | fh t f d If stone (1848), 01 11 [myself have never transformed myself into 
on canvas by the awind. [ panicked.... ThenItold myself that I 
French painter had to take the plunge and I went right on to the 
Jean Vetter. 
end of the book. 
HM Hemingway used to say that when he started a 
novel he had no guiding theme, but that when he 
stopped writing in the evening, he knew what he was 
going to write on the following day.... 
P.C.: In my youth, when I came across quota- 
tions like that, [ used to say to myself that they 
were hooey. Now I know they make sense. The 
wellsprings of creation bubble up in ways that are 
to some extent unpredictable. In Hemingways 
case, the limits of the predictable were on the 
following day. The day after that was always a 
blank page. Writers are like pregnant women. 
They have made love with life and have a child 
without knowing who the father is. 
In my own case, I don’t write all the time. 1 
let two years go by between one novel and the 
next. Things happen during those two years 
which, together with many others that happened 
long before, beget a novel in me, like begetting a 
child. Everything we say today may find its way 
into some future book. 
ey
 
E
R
 
i 
=
a
 
Gy
 
E
g
 
i 
p
r
 
a 
od
s 
o 
BL. 
- 
A
R
 
.
 
_ 
p
r
i
m
a
,
 
d 
b
e
 
-
 
L 
ow
 
BM Frédéric Rossif, the well-known film director 
who died some years ago, once met a Sufi mystic in 
a cave in Iran and asked him: “What is a saint?” The 
holy man’s answer struck everybody to whom Rossif 
told the story. It was: “A saint is a man who has 
pardoned God”. 
P.C.: That was a brilliant answer. It strikes a par- 
ticular chord with me since my book Mount 
Five starts out from the idea that we should 
struggle with God. According to the Bible, God 
should be accepted as a father. Personally, as I 
said earlier when talking about my mother, I am 
rather more inclined to wrestle with Him. Itisa 
legitimate struggle. Pardoning God implies that 
one has already fought with him, as a way of 
gradually coming closer to Him. 
f
t
 3 
E 
pt
 
i
g
 
F 
q 
"
 
ah 
w
y
 
“H
e 
- 
h
e
s
 
: 
. 
3 
we 
id 
S
d
 
Pa
p 
. 
yf 
4
h
 
ey
 
b 
i
 
4 
yu
 
r
y
 
—
.
 
L 
p 
‘ 
3 
. 
7
%
 
Ww 
O
S
 
- 
: 
a
l
 
. 
y 
5 
, 
RA
S 
. 
3 
# 
E
E
S
 
Y 
J 
‘ 
n
y
 
a
b
 
. 
p 
y 
‘4 
or 
p
y
 
he
e 
a
l
 
’ 
" 
: 
£ 
- 
f
a
 
A 
w
y
 
’ 
y 
r
y
 
§ 
iF 
p 
L
a
 
: 
~ 
5
 
4 
» 
AS
 
h
a
a
 
p
=
 
y 
A 
Y 
tg 
B
T
 
ad
 
i 
2 
o 
: 
y 
< 
bi
d 
AE
 
F 
E — » 
3. |
 
S
y
 
E 
y 
A 
. ot
 
e
a
 
2 
H 
‘S
at
! 
N 
} 
- 
by 
Te
, 
: 
a 
#
1
 
T
A
 
MB By raising all these questions, The Alchemist 
has gone well beyond the realm of literature. 
P.C.: The novel has inspired a classical symphony, 
composed in the United States, which will be 
he played at Tarifa in Spain next June. This concert 
BA ERE Ya re ¢ 2 will also be an occasion for an international debate 
to be held on religions and on ways and means of 
defusing the religious wars that are threatening us. 
It 1s 1n this capacity, in fact, that I have been 
appointed an adviser to the Director-General of 
UNEsco. u 
I 
PR
 
C
a
r
i
 
i 
B
Y
E
S
 
i
y
 
S
Y
 
i 
j
i
m
 
WY 
—
 
v
A
 
M
N
 
1   ® 
Gi
ra
ud
on
, 
Pa
ri
s/
An
ge
rs
 
Mu
se
um
 
THE UNESCO Gounier B MARCH 1998

## [Page 38](111114engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 111122: Africa and the world

  
The international community formed by the 186 Member States 
of UNESCO, conscious as iL is of what Afriea has to offer yet wor- 
ried about the difficulties it is experiencing, has made the 
continent one of the priority targets of its action. As a lollow- 
up to this decision, 1 convened a meeting entitled “Audience 
Africa” at UNESCO's Paris Headquarters in 1995. The primary 
aim for all of us was to “tune in” to the continent, to give ils 
countries an opportunity fo express their needs and priorities 
and, perhaps for the first time, to set forth their own approach 
to the solutions that could be applied by Africans themselves, 
The factis that itis for Africans to determine and nap out 
the paths their future will take, even when they resort to exter- 
nal assistance. | have recently set up in UNESCO an Interna- 
tional Fund for the Seientific and Technical Development of 
Africa becanse I know that no conntry today can elaim to enjoy 
effective autonomy without endogenous scientific and teehni- 
cal capacities. However, decisions in this field are political. 
The African countries must make sure that at least 3 per cent 
of the resources managed by the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) are earmarked for seientific and technical 
development and itis elearly up to these countries to invest a 
reasonable proportion of their gross domestic product in scienee 
and technology. 
It would be sufficient for them—and Lam velerring here to 
UNDP’ iluman Development Report—to redeploy 4 per cent 
of their military expenditure in order to reduee adult illiteracy 
by half, generalize primary edueation and give women a standard 
of education equivalent to that of men. Unfortunately, Tam only 
too well aware that when the possibility of reducing arms expen- 
diture is raised with African leaders, many of them veply that otli- 
ers should be the first to set an example! Lalso gather that a sim- 
ilar response is made by the countries whieh sell them arms and 
whieh are obviously in competition with one another. 
That being said, the very great majority of African countries 
are just as aware of their difficulties as they ave of their respon- 
sibilities. Whenever they have the opportunity to express them- 
selves in a multilateral lramework—at follow-up meetings to 
THE UNESCO Gourier HW MARCH 1998 
  
commentary Federico Mayor 
  
Audience Afriea or at meetings concerning the United Nations 
New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s or the 
United Nations System-wide Speeial lnitiative on Africa—the 
African countries clearly state their wishes and plans: they 
mean to beeome partners in progress. For that purpose, in 
addition to significant debt relief, they demand an improve- 
ment in the world climate—in so many words, markets that 
are move open to their goods, 
The entire international community realizes that if Africa 
takes off economically, the rest of the world will derive cou- 
siderable benefit beeause the integration of the African 
ceonomies into the international system will he less fragmentary. 
The African countries are also stepping up their determination 
Lo pursue the struggle against poverty for the sake of social 
development and the demoeratization of political systems. 
The right to peace 
Peace, development and democracy ave three interdependent 
coneepts working in synergy with cach other. They are the 
three apexes of an interactive triangle whieh we are endeav- 
ouring to creale in co-operation with our sister institutions of 
the United Nations system by supporting the efforts made by 
the authorities of the African countries. Itis only in a demoe- 
ralie framework preserving plurality, diversity and difference 
in accordance with rules aceepted by everybody that individ- 
uals ean fulfil their potential and society can move forward. This 
demoeratic framework alone meets the conditions lor devel- 
opment and allows the full exereise of the human rights set out 
in the Universal Declaration, that landmark instrument whose 
fiftieth anniversary we are celebrating this year. 
However, just as development and the spread of democ- 
racy are bound up with the existence of civil peace, these 
human rights cannot he respected in the absenee of one essen- 
tial right, and that is the right to peace for which so many men 
and women are clamouring in countries stricken by conflict. 
This is so powerful an aspiration that it can no longer be ignored. 
vorld 
_-

## [Page 39](111114engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

I accordingly took the initiative of drawing up a draft Deela- 
ration on the ITuman Right to Peace, the ideas behind whieh 
were approved by UNESCO's most recent General Conference 
held in the autumn of 1997. This idea of the right to peace is 
gaining ground and I hope that it will win widespread recogni- 
tion on the occasion of the celebration of the fifticth anniver- 
sary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
In addition to recognition of this right, since 1989 1 Lave 
been endeavonring to focus UNESCO's activities on the estab- 
lishment and promotion of a culture of peace worldwide. This 
concept, which was difficult to narrow down at the outset, 
has made considerable 
progress: it has been recog- 
nized by the General Assem- 
bly of the United Nations, has 
become part of the vocabu- 
lary used by politicians, the 
military and teachers, and 
serves as a common denomi- 
nator for all kinds of practical 
initiatives in a wide variety of 
fields, including basic eduea- 
tion, environmental protec- 8 
tion, preservation of the her- 
itage and the struggle for press freedom, 
In Africa, there have been conntless activities coming under 
this heading. The Peace Week held in Mali from 24 to 28 
March 1997 and the International Conference on the Culture 
of Peace and Good Governance held in Mozambique from 1 to 
4 September 1997 are among the events at which a number of 
leaders voiced their commitment to peace, widespread dia- 
logue and the peaceful settlement of disputes. 
A delicate fabric woven thread by thread 
Innorth-western Mozambique, a coomtry which still displays the 
gaping wounds caused by thirty years of war as avesult of col- 
onization, the liberation struggle and civil war, there is a small 
town called Chiputo. Half of its 15,000 inhabitants, mostly 
farmers, {led to other regions of the country or else to Zambia, 
Malawi or Zimbabwe. In exile, some of them were given train- 
ing and emergency assistance, while others were given noth- 
ing, and even lost everything they had. With the end of the 
conflict, they are all retnrning home, but their resettlement is 
not without its upsets. Untsco has undertaken to help these 
communities achieve suecessful integration and learn afresh row 
to live together. 
What is above all necessary is to get them to focus on a 
common purpose, so that the diversity of individual situations 
will become a source of eollective enrichment rather than divi- 
sion. In Chiputo, two teachers provide instruetion for 650 chil- 
dren in a primary school; the people who will supervise the 
future adult literacy campaign have alecady been trained; a 
sports ground, a eommunity development eentre and a see- 
ondary school are under construction; and a community radio, 
with a range of six kilometres, is planned. 1tis true that these 
activities are on a fairly modest scale, owing to the limited 
resources available, hut they are lielping to piece together a 
social fabrie that was in tatters. Through projects which are 
  


### 111122: Africa and the world

Through projects which are jointly 
accepted and undertaken and which 
focus on values such as solidarity and 
tolerance, the community is regaining 
confidence in itself and in the future. 
jointly accepted and undertaken and whieh focus on values 
snchas solidarity and tolerance, the community is regatuing con- 
fidenee in itself and in the luture. 
In Bujumbura, the capital of Burundi, a Unesco House 
for a Culture of Peace has been in existence for the past three 
years, Itis a simple building, with a large number of windows, 
in which five people are hard at work. 1t night be thought to 
be a rather insignificant venture, considering the scale of the 
recent tragedy and of the task of reconstruction. Slowly bnt 
surely, however, it is making headway. Its activities are pri- 
marily addressed to young people who are, sometimes in spite 
of themselves, a prey to ethnie 
hatred. It is urgent to give 
then scope for dialogue. In 
1996 and 1997, two festivals 
for peace brought together 
Hutu, Tutsi and Twa children, 
who realized, rather hesi- 
tantly, that living together is 
possible when they can take 
pleasure in a shared project 
and festive happening. 
In the very few secondary 
schools whiell have been 
immune [rom the “balkanization” of the country, the pupils 
bring the violence surrommding them into the elassroom. Then, 
from time to time, a team from UNESCO arrives, brings the ehil- 
dren together and calls on them to speak about the acts of vio- 
lence they have suffered and the violence they themselves have 
inflicted—and to try to understand its causes. 
In Burundi, however, where the conflict has heen responsi- 
ble for a 7 per cent drop in secondary enrolments, it is neees- 
sary to go beyond the confines of the school and reach out to 
those young people who have not had any schooling. This is 
what we are attempting to do by organizing reconstruction 
training seminars for them, for example. 
Itis very difficult to evaluate the impact of all these ini- 
tintives, which are Tike a delicate fabric woven thread by 
thread. Less violence was observed in schools in Burundi in 
1997, but it is diffiendt to say to what extent we have con- 
tributed to this. In view of this uncertainty, of the inadequate 
resources, of the political fluctuations and the demands of the 
moment, we press on, in the modest yet deep-seated convielion 
that it is through edueation, and edueation alone, that it is 
possible to foster, develop and enhance the chanees of dia- 
logue, for as UnNESCO’s Constitution so aptly puts it “since wars 
begin in the minds of men, it ts in the minds of men that the 
defences of peace must he eonstrneted”. 
The fact remains that time is not the same everywhere. 
“World time” only exists on computer sereens. “Real time” 
could well turn out to be something different from what it 
means in laboratories and cybercafés, Perhaps time is what 
was inscribed eentnries ago on a sundial in Bavaria: “Time hur- 
ries, time tarries, time divides, time heals”. All these contra- 
dictory properties are characteristic of time in Africa, time 
that is both pitiless and generous, heart-hreaking and ercative. 
This being so, we need to know hot how to overtake time—in 
cases where itis that of division and hatred—and how to trust 
time when it is that of dialogue and rejoicing. |_| 
r= Lp ar 
THE UNESCO Gouritr HB MARCH 1998

## [Page 40](111114engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 111123: Healthy housing

Greenwatch Healthy 
housing   
© 
F 
An
ce
ll
et
/R
ap
ho
, 
Pa
ns
 
BY FRANCE BEQUETTE 
~ Although indoor pollution is 
© often overlooked, it directly 
orindirectly affeets the health of a 
broad spectrum of people, from 
those living in mud huts to those 
whose homes are in modern sky- 
scrapers. This pollution can come 
from three different sonrees: ont- 
door air pollution (whose planetary 
impact was deseribed in our Decem- 
ber 1997 issue); building materials; 
and the activities of occupants. 
A" healthy home must be 
designed to protect its inhabitants 
from extremes of cold and heat, rain, 
noise, dust, insects, and rodents. It 
must be constructed on a well- 
drained site, and have access to run- 
ning water and a waste-disposal sys- 
tem. Overcrowding should be 
avoided to reduce the risk of conta- 
gious discases. Neither the heating 
system nor the cooking facilities 
shonld give off noxious [umes. 
Unfortunately, not everyone living in 
 
THE UNESCO Gourier HB MARCH 1998 
the Third World or inindnstrialized 
countries hives tn these conditions, 
The very poor have to make do with 
insalubrious shelters on the edges 
of cities and endure a range of Hif- 
ferent kinds of pollution. 
Another situation that is often 
overlooked, although itis very com- 
mon, 1s that where the home is also 
a workplace. In such cases, the nse 
and storage of toxic or dangerous 
chemical snbstances needs to be 
reviewed in order to make sure that 
people are better protected. In adhi- 
tion, the stress cansed by the cost of 
housing, insecurity of tenure, and 
the threat of expulsion when a ome 
is being illegally occupied, can have 
an important bearing on mental 
health. 
A POLLUTED ENVIRONMENT 
In industrialized countries where cur- 
rent standards are well respected, 
these risks are generally very low. 
town) of Viaigal, 
Rio de Janeiro 
= OL | a (Brazil). 
® 
Ch
ri
s 
St
ow
er
s 
/P
an
os
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
 
Lo
nd
re
s 
 
Architects ave closely concerned with 
the strueture of buildings and with 
the quality of building materials. The 
World Health Organization (WII0) 
nevertheless observes that in these 
countries, “the adveut of air condi- 
tioning and energy conservation mea- 
sures have been accompanied by 
erowing problems of indoor air qual- 
ity. . . . Some pollutants arise from 
insulation products, some from 
kerosene heaters, and others from 
modern housing materials. As many 
Luropeans spend up to 90% of their 
lives in buildings, the health effects 
of theindoor climate are significant.” 
Some construction materials, 
including fibreboard, insulation 
foams and certain glues (for carpets or 
rugs, for example), emit organic prod- 
ucts such as formaldehyde. eat and 
humidity inerease formaldehyde 
emissions and the gas seriously irri- 
tates the eyes. Paint, lacquer, varnish 
and other resins can also release 
volatile organic compounds into 
indoor air. 
In 1976, members of the Ameri- 
can Legion, an organization of U.S. 
war veterans, met in an air-condi- 
tioned hotel in Philadelphia. More 
than 200 of them came down with 
Children's 
drawing of the pucumonia and 34 of them died. 
favela (shanty Later, the bacteria that caused their 
deaths was identified and named 
Legionella pneumophyla. These

## [Page 41](111114engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 111123: Healthy housing

bacteria proliferate in humid arcas, 
in toilets, and poorly maintained 
bathrooms. Steps can be taken to 
prevent what became known as 
Legionnaire’s Disease by means of 
simple hygiene measures, starting 
with very careful, regular cleaning 
of sanitary appliances. 
The land on which buildings are 
sited may also contribute to pollu- 
tion. Some kinds of granite or similar 
rocks contain traces of radium. As it 
breaks down, this naturally radioac- 
tive element produces radon, a 
radioactive gas that seeps throngh 
tiny cracks in walls, porons floors 
and building materials, and makes 
its way into home interiors. The bet- 
ter the homes are insulated, the 
more the gas acenmulates. Radon’s 
main affect on health is to increase 
the risk of lung cancer. Ten years 
ago in the United States, radon panic 
made radon detection all the rage. 
People bought themselves detectors 
similar to those used by nuclear 
technicians, even in areas where 
there was no danger whatsoever! 
THE RAVAGES OF ASBESTOS 
Construction materials can cause 
serious damage, especially when 
they contain ashestos. Asbestos is 
naturally present in rock formations 
worldwide. It belongs to a family of 
mineral substances composed of 
solid, non-combustible fibres. These 
Public housing in 
Hong Kong 
(People’s Republic 
of China). 
Removing 
asbestos from the 
Headquarters 
building of the 
European 
Commission in 
Brussels 
(Belgium). 
Taking a last look 
before being 
expelled from a 
squat in the 
London suburb of 
Peckham. 
properties make asbestos a highly 
songht-after construction material. 
Its production and commercial use 
began in the Western world at the 
turn of the century and became very 
widespread after World War II. As 
early as 1931, however, public 
health officers in the United King- 
dom revealed the connection 
between inhaling asbestos dust and 
respiratory diseases (asbestosis, lung 
cancer). 
Asbestos workers were the first 
to be affected. Professor Bignon, a 
French hung specialist, claims that 
no epidemiological study has so far 
proven incontrovertibly that there 
is a link between lung cancer and 
exposure to rooms where asbestos 
has been used. Nevertheless, pre- 
cautionary measures should be 
taken to eliminate asbestos as 
quickly as possible from buildings 
(as has been done at UNESCO Head- 
quarters in Paris), and especially 
from rooms used by children. 
New Caledonia offers an inter- 
esting casc in point. The island’s 
inhabitants suffer [rom a very Ligh 
incidence of pleural cancer, a rare 
  
form of asbestos-related cancer that 
affects the moist membrane lining 
the chest cavity and surrounding the 
lungs. This cancer scems nnrelated 
to any indnstrial activity, however. 
The French National Institute for 
IIealth and Medical 
(INSERM) carried ont an investiga- 
tion which determined that a white 
Research 
plaster coating, called pé, used by 
the Kanak tribes to protect the walls 
of their homes, was toxic. The plas- 
ter is produced locally from a 
crumbly rock that turned out to be 
a form of asbestos. Pé was very 
widely used from the 1930s onwards 
the 
encouraged indigenous Caledonians 
when colonial authorities 
to replace their traditional branch 
and leaf huts with mud-walled 
houses on the grounds that these 
were more hygiente. The alfected 
dwellings must be identified and a 
new technique developed to elimi- 
nate the asbestos from the mud 
walls. 
PARASITES, LEAD AND SMOKE 
In Latin America, from the south of 
the United States to Tierra del 
 
tHE unesco (COURIER m MARCH 1998 
© 
Ma
rk
 
Mc
Ev
oy
/P
an
os
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
| 4 
© 
Be
at
ri
ce
 
Pe
ti
t,
 
Br
us
se
ls

## [Page 42](111114engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 111123: Healthy housing

© 
Se
an
 
Sp
ra
gu
e 
/P
an
os
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
 
Lo
nd
on
 
v 
 
Fuego, Chagas’ disease, also known 57 je] EH] 
as sleeping sickness or Ameriean try- 
panosoutiasis, affects 18 million peo- 
ple and threatens 100 million more. 
First described at the turn of the 
century in Brazil by Carlos Chagas, 
this parasitic disease is transmitted 
to humans by a trypanosome carried 
by blood-sucking bugs of the Redu- 
viidae family. In Brazil itis respon- 
sible for one in every ten deaths 
among 25- to 64-year-olds. The lar- 
vaelivein the crevices of walls and in 
the dust of poor rural dwellings, and 
they thrive particularly well in 
warm, moist areas. Plastering the 
walls and regularly spraying them 
with insecticide would solve the 
problem, but this solution is too 
expensive. 
Lead poisoning is another illness 
linked to the age and decrepitude of 
housing. Paint in old buildings con- 
tains a great deal of lead. Children 
swallow some of this when they 
break off bits of peeling paint and 
put them in their mouths. This type 
of poisoning also allects people who 
drink water which has remained in 
tead piping for some length of time. 
Children with lead poisoning have 
behaviour problems and perform 
poorly in school. 
The gas and smoke given ofl by 
fuels used in homes can also prove 
dangerous. When coal burns in an 
open or poorly designed fireplace or 
in badly ventilated rooms, it gives 
ofl dense toxic fumes, particularly 
of sulphur dioxide. In cold regions 
such as the Himalayas, the high- 
lands of Papua New Guinea and cer- 
tain Chinese provinces, families are 
exposed to smoke [rom open 
THE UNESCO Courier HB MARCH 19938 
  
Solar panels on 
the roof of a 
private house 
(United States) 
HELPING COMMUNITIES 
TO HELP THEMSELVES 
Improving household living and health 
conditions is the goal of Health in 
Housing (HIH), a U.S. research centre 
that works with the World Health Orga- 
nization (WHO) and the Pan-American 
Health Organization. Auxiliary centres 
are located in universities worldwide 
and courses are given by doctors, 
nurses, architects, health workers, 
engineers and other professionals work- 
ing in this field. HIH does not impose 
solutions but tries to encourage com- 
hearths. Heating stoves can also pro- 
duce indoor pollution. Oil-fired 
. . . m 1H i i 
stoves give olf nitrogen oxide and unities to be actively involved, and to 
work out what theywant and can do to 
improve their living conditions. 
carbon monoxide. Biomass [uels, 
such as wood, animal dung and agri- 
 
cultural waste produce hundreds of Contact address: 
highly carcinogenie chemical com- Health in Housing (HIH) 
: School of Medicine and Biomedical 
pounds. This problem can only be Sciences 
solved by using efficient smoke- State University of New York, 167 Farber 
Hall extraction methods and providing 
Buffalo, NY, 14214, U.S.A.   adequate ventilation. |_|   
initiatives 
MEDICINE FROM GARDENS 
A French ethnopharmacologist, Dr. Jean-Pierre Nicolas, has recently set up an association called & y 
_—s 5 gl 
Jardins duMonde (“Gardens of the World™), which seeks to develop traditional pharmacopeias and 
promote the use of medicinal plants in southern hemisphere countries where most people have no 
access to basic medicines. 
In the Quiche department of Guatemala, for example, Dr. Nicolas has contacted a number of 
Indian populations—the K’iche, 1xil, Kekchi and Mam—and has worked with several French non- 
governmental organizations including Médecins sans Frontidres, Médecins du Monde and Vétérinaires 
sans Frontiéres, as well as various dioeesan organizations. 
Dr. Nicolas started out by condueting field investigations, discussing traditional know-how with 
local practitioners including Mayan priests, midwives, liealers, bone setters, elders and mothers. He 
then had to make an inventory of available natural and cultural resources, and work out a strategy 
with the local populations for combating discase. To encourage the traditional uses of plants, he 
set up medicinal gardens planted with local scientifically recognized, non-toxie species that are elfec- 
tive, available and well known. A team of health workers maintains and develops these gardens that 
are both nurseries and training schools. Mothers help with the gardening and are given plants and 
seeds that enable them to have their remedies on hand. 
As Jean-Pierre Nicolas points out, “a wound immediately treated with Aloe vera gel does not 
get infected, ambrosia helps reduce worm infestations, and Indian carnations ealm diarrhoea.” 
The success of this initiative has led to a flow of requests for the creation of medicinal gardens, includ- 
ing [rom other countries. There are a growing number of similar projects in llonduras, Nicaragna, 
Colombia and the countries of the Cariblean. 
The same respect [or local populations and their traditional knowledge ean be found among the 
250 members of the French Ethnopharmacology Society, spread over 30 countries, particularly 
in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Jardins du monde, Laboratoire de botanique, Faculté de Pharmacie, BP 83, 59006 Lille, France 
Tel.: (33)-(0)3-20-96-40-40, Fax: (33)-(0)3-20-95-90-09 
Société francaise d'ethnopharmacologie, 1 rue des Récollets 57000 Metz, France 
Téléphone: (33)-(0)3-87-75-81-83. Fax: (33)-(0)3-87-36-41-98

## [Page 43](111114engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Je
an
 
Po
tu
ie
r/
Ra
ph
ao
, 
Pa
rs
 
CURITIBA: A MIRACLE 
OF URBAN PLANNING 
Cuntiba, the capital of the southern 
Brazilian State of Parana, has 1.6 
million inhabitants and the cleanest 
atmosphere of all the cities in Brazil, 
partly due to a master plan for urban 
planning which was drawn up in 
1964. The city's development has 
been organized around a number of 
3-lane traffic axes, the central lane 
of which is reserved for a 500-kilo- 
metre network used by a growing 
number of increasingly efficient low- 
cost buses accessible to the dis- 
abled. Nearly 70% of the population 
takes public transportation every 
day, as a result of which fuel con- 
sumption is 30% lower than in other 
Brazilian cities of comparable size. 
Qld buses are used as classrooms, 
clinics and libraries. ao 
MINKE WHALES 
UNDER SIEGE 
Between May and June 1997, in defi 
ance of the moratorium on whaling 
decided in 1993 by the International 
Whaling Commission, Norwegian 
whalers harpooned 503 minke 
whales, an increase of 100% over 
the previous year. Including Japan's 
440 captures made for “scientific 
reasons” in the Antarctic sanctuary 
and its 100 captures made in the 
North Pacific, 1,000 minke whales 
are now being killed annually. - 
TOGO'S LOST SOIL 
Of Togo’s 4.2 million inhabitants, 
90% make their hving from agrncul- 
ture. Subsistence crops account 
for 85% of the agncultural sector. 
Soll resources are therefore 
extremely important. However, a 
study made by the French Institute 
of Scientific Research for Co-opera- 
tive Development (ORSTOM) has 
shown that soil is deteriorating 
 
owing to a set of factors including 
reduction in the tength of time when 
fields lie fallow, deforestation, 
uncontrolled brush fires, overgraz- 
ing, and industrial activities. If fore- 
casts are correct and the popula- 
tion triples before the year 2035, 
each inhabitant will have no more 
than one quarter of an hectare to 
provide subsistence (the world aver 
age is close to two hectares). If soll 
degradation continues unchecked, 
$10 million will be needed to restore 
the 90,000 hectares of seriously 
affected land. a 
PAKISTAN’S MANGROVES: 
REPLANTING HOMES 
FOR SHRIMP 
Mangrove trees afford protection 
against erosion and provide shelter 
for many kinds of animals, especially 
certain species of edible crus- 
taceans. The destruction of these 
aquatic forests threatens the 
shrimp and crab populations that 
reproduce in them. To combat this 
trend, the World Wide Fund for 
Nature (WWF) has launched a refor- 
estation project in Sonmiani Bay on 
the western coast of Pakistan, 
where villagers use mangrove wood 
 
to build their homes and for cooking. 
While the project initially met with 
considerable scepticism, local peo- 
ple eventually agreed to build nurs- 
eries on more than 2.5 hectares, 
where 60,000 saplings are already 
growing. With the help of explana- 
tions about the project given by the 
village schoolteachers, children have 
come to understand that “planting 
a mangrove means harvesting 
shrimp.” They now spend their free 
time working on the project. a 
MANAGING 
DROUGHT 
The warm Pacific Ocean current 
known as El Nifio contributes to 
global chmatic changes, and partic- 
ularly to drought. Without effective 
water resources management, 
drought is an extremely costly propo- 
sition. In California drought resulted 
In losses of up to $710 billion 
between 1987 and 1992, and 
drought crises in Africa and else- 
where have prompted the World 
Bank to examine the possibilities of 
long-term strategic planning to tackle 
the problem. During the 1991-92 
drought in Zimbabwe, the stock mar- 
ket declined by 62% and GDP by 
© 
Pa
ul
 
Sm
it
h/
Pa
no
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
La
nd
on
 
11%. During the same drought in 
South Africa, agncultural production 
fell significantly. In order to improve 
drought management, rational water 
allocation policies must be designed 
and investments made in commu- 
nity groundwater gardens, con- 
veyance and storage facilities, and 
irrigation structures. . 
OECD 
ON THE ENVIRONMENT 
The Organisation for Economic Co- 
operation and Development (OECD) 
has recently published the 1997 edi- 
tion of its bilingual (French-English) 
Environmental Data Compendium. 
Statistical data compiled from QECD 
Member countries link pollution and 
natural resources with energy, trans- 
portation, industry and agriculture. 
One piece of information to be 
gleaned from the Compendium, which 
addresses air, inland waterways, soll, 
forests, wildlife, and waste, 1s that 
more than 20,000 species of mush- 
rooms have been identified in the 
United Kingdom compared with only 
300 in Iceland! 2 
SENEGAL'S DJOUDJ PARK: 
OF BIRDS AND MEN 
Senegal's Djoudj National Park is a 
16,000-hectare wetland in the Sene- 
gal River Delta. The world’s third 
largest bird sanctuary, it 1s a haven 
for nearly 400 species and is 
included on the World Heritage List 
and on the Ramsar Convention's 
list of wetlands of international 
importance. A biological station has 
been built in the Park with assis- 
tance from Germany's North Rhine- 
Westphalia region. The local pepula- 
tion is not necessanly involved In 
protecting the Park, however. Live- 
stock graze in the regularly flooded 
fields and fishing deprives birds of 
their food supplies. What could be 
done to settle this clash of inter 
ests between men and birds? + 
 
THE UNESCO Gouritr BH MARCH 1998 
© 
M 
R
e
n
a
u
d
e
a
u
/
H
o
a
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 44](111114engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Jo
rg
e 
Pr
ov
er
nz
a 
Ca
ra
ca
s 
HERITAGE. 
  
F 3 Colombia 
\ Ecuador 
L 
3 
4 
| 
: Brazil 
A UMA Peru 
\ 
 NAZCA 
a , 
Pacific Ocean RON 
Below, wells {puquios) spiral into the 
earth along the vast network of 
underground irrigation channels that 
cross the Nazca valley. 
THE UNESCO Gourier 8B MARCH 1998 
  


### 111124: The Nazca mystery

AZCA mystery 
by Parisina Malatesta 
Vast networks of lines etched in the soil of Nazca (Peru) 
over 2,000 years ago form uncanny designs whose meaning 
still puzzles many archaeologists. The site has been on 
Unesco’s World Heritage List since 1994. 
The desert air, already 
shimmering in the heat 
despite the carly hour, roars 
through the windows of the small 
aircraft in which we are overfly- 
ing the world’s largest and most 
impressive concentration of geo- 
slyphs—grooves incised in the 
earth. Bencath us is the archaco- 
logical site of Nazca, in southern 
Peru, which has been on the 
World Heritage List since 1994, 
The lines, which form geo- 
metrical designs or figurative 
motifs, mirror a cosmogonie sys- 
tem which we are only just begin- 
ning to understand. Traced more 
than 2,000 years ago by the peo- 
ple of the Nazca culture, like 
writing on a giant slate, they cover 
anarca of almost 500 square kito- 
metres of arid land surrounded 
by outcrops of roek. 
As if fascinated by the spee- 
tacle beneath it, the small one- 
engined plane slowly cireles over 
the huge designs—a pelican 285 
metres long, a guanay (guano 
bird) of 280 metres, a lizard of 
180 metres (cut in two by the 
Pan-American highway!). The 
number of these large etchings in 
the soil and the period of time 
over which they made—{rom the 
fourth century B.C. to the fifth 
century A.D.—are equally 
astounding. Virtually invisible 
from the surface, they ean only 
be fully taken in from the air. 
Their existence was unknown for 
centuries, and even today they are 
an archaeological enigma. 
Who were the Nazca, the peo- 
ple whose culture flourished in 
 
Above, an aerial view 
of the humming-bird, 
one of the impressive 
animal outlines 
etched into the 
Nazca desert. 
Opposite page, one 
of many specimens of 
Nazca pottery in 
Peru’s National 
Archaeological 
Museum in Lima.

## [Page 45](111114engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 111124: The Nazca mystery

ale ro $a NR 
os . 
(WL 
‘ 
¥ 
AL TY a 
vu JF WotR ad, ) 
’ . 
a as 
  
  
  
 
this sun-scorched and windswept 
region of the world? What is the 
meaning of their designs? 
A COMPLEX CULTURE 
Although the spiritual universe 
of the Nazca—children of the off- 
shore winds blowing in from the 
Pacific and ancestors of the [Tuari 
culture—is still shrouded in mys- 
tery, sufficient vestiges of their 
culture and craftsmanship have 
survived for us to answer the first 
question. If the early ceremonial 
centre of Kawacli is included, 
their territory extended hetween 
the rivers Grande and Nazca. It 
included the oases of the Ingenio 
and Palpa river valleys situated 
between the cordillera of the 
Andes and the Pacific and the 
uninhabited alluvial plains 
stretching between the towns of 
Palpa and Nazca, where the geo- 
elyphs are to be found. 
It is in this inhospitable 
region—one of the most arid on 
that the Nazea devel- 
oped a complex and industrious 
  the planet 
enlture. Much of their history is 
reflected in their eraft produe- 
tion, such as textiles, beaten gold 
artefacts and above all funerary 
pottery, in which they used as 
many as seven colours, whose dif- 
ferent shades mark an amazing 
contrast with the austere tones of 
the surrounding desert. The 
National Archaeological Museum 
of Peru has some 2,500 of these 
ceramic picees, which have a per- 
feet finish and are in an excellent 
slate of preservation owing to the 
region’s dry atmosphere. 
Further proof of the level of 
development reached by the 
Nazca can be scen in the vast 
hydranlic engineering works 
which they built to make up for 
the shortage of water and fertilize 
THE UNESCO Gourier @ MARCH 1998

## [Page 46](111114engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 111124: The Nazca mystery

Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Jo
rg
e 
Pr
ov
en
za
, 
Ca
ra
ca
s 
> the land and which are still in 
working order. They form an 
extensive network of underground 
chanuels, sometimes conveying the 
water for kilometres before 
emerging from time to time in 
superbly designed wells known as 
puquios. Seen from the sky, these 
lines of funnel-shaped cavities spi- 
ralling into the carth appear to 
stitch together whole stretches 
of the valley. 
AN IMMENSE SLATE MADE OF SAND 
Over the eight centuries during 
which they were created, the geo- 
glyphs seem to have evolved from 
figurative motifs to increasingly 
geometrical and symbolic patterns. 
Whether or not this is the case, 
two main kinds of design can be 
distinguished. The first category, 
comprising some seventy items, 
consists of drawings of animals and 
plants. The largest and most spec- 
tacular concentration of animal sil- 
liouettes is on the slopes of the 
Ingenio river valley and includes a 
monkey, a spider, a dog, a hum- 
ming-bird and a killer whale. The 
few human figures, such as the 
thirty-metre-tall “astronaut” or 
owl-man etched into a hillside near 
Jumana, are creatures of fantasy. 
Other drawings depict flowers, 
plants or twisted trees, and every- 
16 
- THE UNESCO Gurr BB MARCH 1998 
A dog {above) and a 
monkey (top) are 
among the most 
readily identifiable 
Nazca designs. 
Top right, a monkey 
with a coiled tail on 
a piece of Nazca 
pottery resembles 
the one etched in the 
earth. 
 
day objects, such as a weaver’s 
loom. 
These figurative motifs moved 
towards a more consolidated sym- 
bolic form. which gave rise to the 
second category of geoglyphs. 
These are lines which look as if 
they have been traced with a ruler 
and cut through the plain, some- 
times for kilometres on end, to 
form a variety of geometrical fig- 
ures such as triangles, spirals and 
rectangles. Others span outwards 
from a central promontory or 
 
encircle it like the quipu cords 
used in Inca accounting systems. 
Yet another group is formed of 
“paths” for the guidance of peo- 
ple travelling on foet. 
Most of the motifs, figurative 
and geometrical alike, ave found 
on pottery and textiles dating from 
the same period. Maria Reiche, 
who spent many years studying the 
Nazca lines, came to the conclu- 
sion that these geometrical draw- 
ings were symbolic writing in which 
the same words were sometimes 
written in giant characters and in 
other instances in small letters. 
The technique used hy the 
Nazca to produce these designs 
was both simple and ingenious. All 
they had to do was to rake back 
the dark and gravelly topsoil to 
uncover the much lighter-coloured 
clay layer and to pile the waste 
material in 30-centimetre-high 
hanks on cither side of the line. 
The high degree of oxidation of 
the soil and the moist winds at 
night, which clean out the furrows 
clogged with sand by the winds 
blowing during the day, have pro- 
tected the Nazca lines until the 
present time. In addition to these 
engraved intaglio-like designs are 
some executed in relief and oth- 
ers, which are much older, incised 
into the sides of mountains.

## [Page 47](111114engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 111124: The Nazca mystery

Tow did the Nazca solve the 
problems of scale? According to 
Maria Reiche, they had plans on 
which they plotted short dis- 
tances, which they then had only 
to multiply and transpose using 
stakes and ropes like a gigantie 
set of compasses. The precision 
of the measurements and angles 
shows that they had a thorough 
command of geometry. 
THE MYSTERY UNVEILED? 
When the Peruvian scholar Mejia 
Xesspe first saw the Nazca lines 
in 1926, shortly after their acci- 
dental discovery, he thought that 
they were “sacred roads”, since 
some of then were like paths along 
which it was possible to walk. 
  
However, it was not until 1941 that 
the first scientific exploration mis- 
sion was organized under the dire c- 
tion of the American historian Paul 
Kosok, with the assistance of the 
Peruvian air force. 
On 22 June 1941, the shortest 
day of the year in the southern 
hemisphere, Kosok noticed that 
the sun set precisely at the end 
of one of the lines. He concluded 
thatitwas a solstice line and thus 
came to regard the Nazca geo- 
glyphs as being the world’s biggest 
astronomy book. 
The following year, Kosok 
returned to Nazca with Maria 
Reiche, a German translator from 
Lima. Stunned hy the spectacle 
and intrigued by the mystery of 
Left, a viewing 
platform beside the 
Pan-American 
highway allows 
tourists to look at 
the giant figures 
engraved in the 
earth. 
Some pottery pieces 
are decorated in as 
many as seven 
different colours, 
right. 
the geoglyphs, she was to spend 
the rest of her life elucidating the 
enigma of Nazca and protecting 
the site. 
According to Reiele, who e¢on- 
firmed this aspect of Kosok’s the- 
ory, the Nazca lines are a gigantic 
astronomical calendar recording 
the passing of the seasons and pre- 
dicting eclipses of the sun and the 
moon. In her book Contribuciones a 
la geometria y astronomia en el 
antiguo Peri” (1993, “Contribu- 
tions of ancient Peru to the history » 
Left, the owl-man, or 
astronaut, one of the 
very few 
anthropomorphic 
Nazca designs. 
Right, this jug 
illustrates the highly 
skilled craftsmanship 
of the Nazca potters. 
  
  
  
    
Above, a frigate bird, 
a seabird with a very 
broad wingspan. 
  
~ 
THE UNESCO Courier B® MARCH 1998

## [Page 48](111114engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### 111124: The Nazca mystery

> 
© 
Jo
rg
e 
Pr
ov
en
za
 
Ca
ra
ca
s 
of geometry and astronomy”), she 
wrote: “The Nazea knew about 
the movements of the heavenly 
bodies and knew how to calculate 
exactly when to start sowing and 
when to gather in the harvest. 
They can accordingly claim to rave 
their place in the history of astron- 
omy”. In her opinion, the stars 
were the template for the orien- 
tation of the Nazca lines. The 46- 
metre long spider, for example, 
was connected with the constella- 
tion of Orion and the spectacular 
110-metre-long monkey with the 
Pleiades. 
ITowever, the theories of Kosok 
and Reiche are countered by 
research conducted by the astro- 
physieist Gerald S. Tlawkins, who 
in 1967 reconstituted by com- 
puter the changes in the map of 
the sky in the Nazca region over 
the past 7,000 years. lle demon- 
strated that 80 per cent of the 
eeoglyphs bear no relation to the 
movement of the forty-five main 
heavenly bodies in the sky over 
 
THE UNESCO Gourier BH MARCH 1998 
Nazea and that only thirty-nine 
lines coincide with the movements 
of the sun and moon. 
OPEN-AIR TEMPLES 
Disregarding the far-fetehed the- 
ories of Erich von Daniken, Ilunt 
Wiliamson and others, who 
looked upon the lines as landing 
strips meant to be seen from the 
sky by extraterrestrial creatures, 
most scientists now agree that the 
geoglyphs performed a ritual 
function connected with astrou- 
omy. The designs were probably 
totemie representations connected 
with the organization of clans (ayl- 
lus}, which helped to maintain the 
social and religious hegemony of 
the Nazca over the centuries. 
Some archacologists regard the 
designs as fantastic open-air tem- 
ples which made it possible for the 
people to enter into communion 
with the cosmic force of the spirit 
they vepresented. It is true that 
most of the drawings have a clearly 
identifiable “entrance”. For exam- 
ple, itis possible to start ont from 
the coiled-up tail of the monkey 
design, which like the others is 
formed by a single unbroken line, 
and follow the whole figure in out- 
line right back to the starting 
point. It can he readily sunnised 
that sueh continuity must have 
had a ritual purpose. 
Like a large map of the celes- 
tial world, these lines on the 
pampa challenge us not only to 
decipher their meaning but also to 
preserve themin an environment so 
fragile that every footprint leaves 
its mark. Through Maria Reiche’s 
endeavonrs, a viewing platform 
lias heen built for visitors, but this 
does not prevent motor vehicles 
from driving on the existing tracks 
and leaving indelible tyre-marks 
in the landscape. Unless the nec- 
essary protection measures are 
taken, this exceptional archaeo- 
logical site, which has come down 
to us intact after more than 2,000 
years, could disappear forever in 
the space of a few decades. HW 
Some theorists have 
maintained that 
these long straight 
lines traced in the 
desert indicate 
landing strips for 
extraterrestrial 
creatures. 
 

## [Page 49](111114engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 111125: Ton-That Tiêt talks to Isabelle Leymarie

Listening 
Ton-That Tiet 
talks to ISABELLE LEYMARIE 
  
Ton-That Tiét, who was born in 1933 in Hue, the former capital of imperial Viet Nam, and has 
lived in Paris since 1958, is a composer who has succeeded in marrying Western musical styles 
with a profoundly Oriental form of thinking and sensibility. Silence, as well as the expressive 
beauty of sounds, plays an important part in his works, which reflect their author's 
preoccupation with the harmony between humanity and the universe. 
 
HM How did you come to Western music? 
Ton-That Tiét: When I was abont fourteen or fif- 
teen, I wanted to play the violin. My brothers and sis- 
ters clubbed together to buy me one, which they 
arranged to be sent from France. One of my cousins, 
who played the violin a little, gave me lessons, but 
when he emigrated to France, I found nobody in 
ITué to replace him and I had to work on my own, 
with a method and scores which T ordered specially. 
BM How did you continue your studies? 
T.-T. T.: I dreamed of going te Paris and entering 
the Conservatoire. I worked and saved for two years 
inorder to pay for the journey. When I got to Paris, 
I'wasintroduced to a teacher at the Conservatoire, 
Georges Dandelot. My knowledge of musie theory 
was so sketchy that I had to start all over again, or 
almost. I had so much work that I had to give up 
the violin. I soonlearned that I could not work at an 
instrument and go in for advanced theoretical stnd- 
ies at the same time. I also studied counterpoint 
with Madame Ionegger at the Paris Ecole Nor- 
male de Musique. At the end of two years, | 
 
obtained a degree in harmony and applied for a : Le Select discography 
place at the Conservatowre. Hy Vong 267 (CBS) 
Incarnations Structurales (Erato) 
BM Were you already composing? Tuong Niem (G.L.B.) 
T.-T. T.: Not yet. [fowever, inorder to be accepted Terre-Feu (CRI) 
Niem/Trung Dzuong 
in the composition class, I had to submit some- 
thing. I composed a piece for string quartet which For further information: 
left no abiding impression. When I started to study 
Association 
composition in the carly 1960s, I was attracted by France-Viet Nam pour la musique 
serial music and started studying it by myself. At 16, rue du Dauphiné 
the time, many of my fellow students were com- Crt 
posing in that idiom. However, my teacher Jean France 
Rivier advised me to give it up. One day he said to Tel: (33) (0)14883 7328 
  
me: “Go back to Asia aud try to find your own way”. 
IIe encouraged me to go deeper into my knowledge 
of Asian traditional music and to study Oriental 
philosophy. André Jolivet, who took over from him, 
was also a considerable inflnence on me in that 
respect. Rediscovering Oriental thinking was an 
important step, becanse it created a mental uni- 
verse which enabled me to find my own personal 
style. At the end of three or four years, Jolivet saw 
that the path had chosen was beginning to emerge. 
BM How did you rediscover Vietnamese music? 
T.-T. T.: The Guimet museum in Paris has a col- 
lection of recordings of Vietnamese nmsie and used 
to hold concerts of Oriental music. The musicolo- 
gist Tran Van Khé, who worked there, introduced 
me to Buddhist musie. 
BM How did you come across the idea of composing 
on the basis of the five elements: wood, fire, earth, 
metal and water? 
T.-T. T: By studying Chinese philosophy, and espe- 
cially the Yi Ching. My first work, an orchestral picee 
called Five Elements, which was based on the Yi 
Ching, was coruposed in 1972, and I returned to the 
same theme in 1981. However, 1 did not use the Yi 
Ching in a random fashion, like John Cage, or as a div- 
inatory form, since that did not interest me. What 
fascinates me in the Yi Ching is the explanation it 
sives of the evolution of the universe. I also took an 
interest in Great Vehicle Buddhism, but strictly 
from a philosophical standpoint, since Ido not prae- 
tise any religion. The two main themes of my work 
are humanity and the universe. Buddhism and the 
other Oriental philosophies stress universal love and 
the fact that all human beings are brothers. 
THE UNESCO Courier @ MARCH 1998 
© 
Ol
wi
er
 
To
n 
Th
at
, 
Sa
in
t-
Ma
ur
-d
es
 
Fo
ss
és
 
Fr
an
ce

## [Page 50](111114engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### 111125: Ton-That Tiêt talks to Isabelle Leymarie

Listening 
HM Do you use Asian instruments in your 
compositions? 
T.-T. T.: L used a single-stringed instrument on one 
occasion, in a piece for {lute and magnetic tape 
comumisstoned by the French Institute for musi- 
cal-acoustical research and co-ordination (IRCAM). 
HM What projects do you have in hand at the moment? 
T.-T. T.: T am working on a second ballet for the 
Régine Chopinot company—I already wrote one 
for them in 1996 on the theme of fire, in harmony 
and opposition with the five elements. I am now 
looking into the concept of time. Lam interested in 
handling this theme in the Oriental rather than 
Westernmanner. The West invented linear and eycli- 
cal time, whereas in Asia the concept of time draws 
on its absence, since time does not exist in the uni- 
verse. The Yi-Ching speaks neither of beginning 
nor end. There is no original “big bang”. 
HM You are also endeavouring to safeguard the 
musical traditions of Viet Nam. 
T.-T. T.: In 1992, 1 liad an opportunity to attend 


### 111126: Words for music

Words for music 
In spite of the large number of festivals, concerts 
and cultural gatherings, often of a very high stan- 
dard, that are held worldwide cach year, classical 
European culture, traditionally the culture of 
clites, is attracting fewer and fewer young people. 
Artists themsclves—painters and musicians 
alike—Dbear their share of responsibility {or this 
deplorable state of affairs. Since they disdain 
change and are indeed hostile to it, they rely on 
refining their art, in the hope that virtuosity alone 
will be sufficient to bring baek the audience which 
they no longer command. The grave error they com- 
mit is that they do not make adequate allowance for 
public expectations and disregard the fact that, in 
art, lack of communication rules out any possibil- 
ity of communion with the work. 
My own experience as a pianist has taught me 
that a few simple but well-chosen words of intro- 
duction often make it possible for the public to go 
deeper into the work Tam about to play and to appre- 
ciate it all the more. The form which this brief intro- 
duction takes matters little: it may be a formal or 
historical analysis, a biographical overview, putting 
the work in perspective through comparisons or a 
general cultural commentary. The important thing is 
to give an idea of the work being presented. 
THE UNESCO Courier B® MARCH 1998 
some courses on traditional muste at Hanoi Con- 
servatory and I was appalled at what 1 heard: the 
music had been altered and harmonized and new 
features had been tacked on to it. 
The following year, in Hanoi, I met a very old 
woman who was a wonderful exponent of catru, a 
style of singing notable for its vibrato and special 
vocal techniques. She was the only surviving expo- 
nent of this style. I asked her to train some young 
singers, so that the tradition would not be lost. In 
fact, the family of musicians accompanying her 
had a danghter who sang some cetru. Madame 
Quach Thi II6 agreed to take her under lier wing. 
In ITué, I contacted all the performers of tra- 
ditional music. Lorganized a meeting with the three 
leading master musicians and asked them to recre- 
ate a court music orchestra. 
Thicy regularly sent me cassettes, so that Leould 
hear what progress they were making. After one 
year, the imperial orchestra was proficient, but 
the younger musicians still had to be trained. 1 was 
amazed to find that the girl who was learning catru 
had perfectly mastered the vocal technique. I was 
snhsequently able to organize a concert of tradi- 
tional Vietnamese music at the Maison des Cul- 
tures et du Monde in Paris in 1995. || 
Obviously, the length of the introduction should 
not exceed that of the piece itself. The performer 
speaking should he sincere and convinced of what he 
ts saying, and should use language that a ehild can 
understand. Care should be taken to avoid technical 
jargon. It is essential for the performer in person to 
present the work abont to be played. Using a tape 
recorder to play a pre-recorded message is likely to 
alienate the audience, On the other hand, the con- 
tortions and mimicry in which a virtuoso in swallow- 
tails may indulge while playing can have a deterrent 
effect on wonld-he music-lovers. 
At cach of my recitals I endeavour to say a few 
words, in four languages, about the masterpicees 
which I am going to perform, masterpieces which 
are now so seldom played in public, such as the 
sonatas of Mozart and Beethoven or Bacl’s The 
Well-Tempered Clavier. Through this approach, I 
believe that I have found a way of combating one of 
the afflictions currently affecting the world of 
music. Unfortunately, the e[fectiveness of such an 
approach does not prevent it from being disre- 
garded by professionals who, like me, have heen 
brought up to worship the technicalities of per- 
formance, to the detriment of a broader approach 
to the work and its reproduction. | 
AUTHORS 
ab SH S 
NIMROD BENA DJANGRANG, a 
Chadian poet, short-story writer 
and novelist, 1s editor of Aleph, 
Beth, areview of the arts, 
philosophy and literature published 
In France. 
FRANGOISE AUBIN, a French 
sinologist and a specialist on Islam 
and Christianity in Chinese 
civilization, is a research officer at 
the French National Centre for 
Scientific Research (CNRS). 
A.S. GNANASAMBANDAN, an 
Indian philosopher and writer, is a 
specialist in Tamil literature, on 
which he has published over 30 
books. He 1s also the author of a 
comparative study on Western and 
Eastern philosophies. 
JACQUES LE GOFF, a French 
medievalist and former President of 
the School of Advanced Studies in 
Social Sciences (EHESS) in Pars, Is 
the author of many published 
works, including La naissance du 
purgaloire (“The Birth of 
Purgatory”; Gallimard, Pars, 1981) 
and, more recently a biography of 
St. Lows (Gallimard, Pans, 1996). 
GREG OXLEY, a British journalist 
and photographer, 1s head of the 
English language section of the 
French academic review Etudes 
Orientales. 
PETER FENWICK, a British 
neuropsychiatrist and specialist in 
epilepsy, is a consultant at The 
Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford. He 1s the 
author of a large number of research 
papers and, with his wife, of a 
study on near-death experiences 
entitled The Truth and the Light 
(Headline Press, London, 1895). 
FRANCE BEQUETTE Is a Franco- 
American journalist specializing in 
environmental Issues. 
PARISINA MALATESTA, an Italian 
writer and Journalist who lives in 
Venezuela, is the author of a 
collection of children's stories Les 
Aventuras de Juany Juana ("The 
Adventures of Juan and Juana”, 
1995). 
ISABELLE LEYMARIE, a Franco- 
American musicologist, is the 
author of La musique sud- 
américaine, Rythmes et danses d'un 
continent (“South American Music, 
a Continent’s Rhythms and 
Dances”, Gallimard, Pans, 1997). 
ADAM FELLEGI 1s a Hunganan 
pianist whose recordings include 
works by Bartok, Berg and 
Schoenberg.

## [Page 51](111114engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
  
    
| J Ren a ali: 2m 
axhibitior 
. 
| AE | I Es, 
 
   
Les revues s exposent au 
a = ng a - LL a : a — 
Ne a BT TR I 
   
   
a
 
A
]
 
   
 
   
   
 
’ ! lr Hi 
journée professionnelle lundi 23 mars 
® Ln site internet pour s'informer sur le salon 
et découvrir des revues de I'étranger : 
hitp:/salondelarevue.reed-oip.fr 
4 ® Plus de 500 revues de toutes disciplines 
* Des animations, des débats pour 
L
E
E
 
H
E
 
a
e
 
N
e
y
 
     ~ 
i - le grand public et les professionnels. 
® Des revues des Frats-Unis. 
os d'lalie. de Belgique et du Brésil 
ww Tous les jours de 10h a 19h 
Nocturnes jusqu’a 22h 
  
i oe . 
a le samedi 21 et mardi 24 mars 
£ | 4 Prix d'entrée : 30 Frs 
o 
   
er ———. Invited d’honneur 
_LEDITION le Brésil 
| 2 Livre     
     

## [Page 52](111114engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

oN a 
E NEXT ISSUE 
. 
4 Cam 
: wn _ ~ 
 