# [109505](109505engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](109505engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

     
     M1205-9710- 22,00 F 
JAMIL 

## [Page 2](109505engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

FERS SQ 
PRR gy 7 Ll Bm We invite readers to send us 
3 Ed i i photographs to be considered for 
A a i publication in this feature. Your 
: : photo should show a painting, a 
CN dR MLE) A pony, SEE . 5 sculpture, piece of architecture 
TAT RE Tx : | R a or any other subject which seems 
EE : a Xe & en to be an example of cultural 
ve 3 mas A Tare \ ESE . cross-fertilization. 
\ h 13 Eri i Alternatively, you could send us 
A) hr N 2 oF : pictures of two works from 
Rielfian a c A different cultural backgrounds in 
ya WU rd “A ; Eo which you see some striking 
{ SL an Tv 3 . a A connection or resemblance, 
. ALTE Salat pe 1 hE Re ES Please add a short caption to all 
: SOE wl ney | . ; hd rX : SA photographs. 
THE HERO WITH 
A THOUSAND 
WOUNDS 
  
by Balzan 
1996, wood 
(height: 159 cm, 
width: 72.5 cm, 
depth: 53.5¢cm) 
Balzan is a French artist 
who practises sculpture as a 
form of ideography. The 
shape of this work, which 
evokes the dignity of the 
upright and resolute human 
figure, recalls that of the 
Chinese ideogram for man.   © Balzan, Templeuve, France

## [Page 3](109505engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNESCO ((OURIER CUI ILE! ILS 
OCTOBER 1997 
Natural disasters 
WH
O,
 
Ge
ne
va
 
  
  
 
  
INTERVIEW Month by month by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 5 
48 oo SAfEtY fIISt]........ot tite eee 6 
Colombian scientist by Badaoui Rouhban 
Manuel Elkin Patarroyo, 
who has developed auvaccine that marks A decade for intemational action... 8 
an important stage in the struggle Interview with Frank Press 
apd aria. 
gainst malaria Nature onthe rampage... 11 
by Walter W. Hays 
Making citiessafer..............ccoo iii, 16 
by Mustafa Erdik 
The do’s and don'ts of risk reduction...................................... 19 
by Barbara Carby 
" Sounding the alarm... 23 
3 by Fabrizio Ferrucci 
: Womeninthefrontline............................ i... 21 
° by Debarati Guha-Sapir 
42 Insurance: halting an ominous trend..................................... 30 
. by Gerhard Berz 
Taxila (Pakistan), 
once the capital of the ancient region of FACE IIE... o.oo eee eee eee 34 
Gandbara, is an archaeological site of major 
importance. Consultant: Badaoui Rouhban 
Commentary Federico Mayor 36 
GREENWATCH New Caledonia: threats to biodiversity by France Bequette 38 
REFLECTIONS Spreading the word by Odon Valiet 45 
Cover: 0 
A tornado in Nevada (U.S.A.) in 1996. AUTHORS 50 
© Keister/Liaison/Gamma Pans 
THE UNESCO Gourser BH OCTOBER 1997

## [Page 4](109505engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNESCO 
OURIER 
50th YEAR 
Published monthly in 29 languages and in Braille by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
31, rue Francois Bonvin, 75732 Pans CEDEX 15, France. 
Fax {33)(0)145 6857 45 
e-mail, unesco.courner@unesco.org 
Internet http //www.unesco org 
Director: Adel Rifaat 
EDITDRIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin 
French edition. Alain Lévéque 
Spanish edition Araceli Qriz de Urbina 
Features: Jasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production Georges Servat 
Illustrations Anane Bailey (Tel (33)(0)1 45 68.46 90) 
Documentation: José Banaag 
(Tel. {33) (0) 1.45 68. 46 85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press 
Solange Belin (Tel. (33) (0) 1.45 68 46 87) 
Film duphcation. Daniel Meister 
Secretanat Annie Brachet 
(Tel. {33) (0) 1.45.68 47.15), 
Administrative Assistant Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in Enghsh, French, Spanish and 
Korean: (Tel. (33) (0) 1.45.68 45.69) 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian Inna Utkina (Moscow) 
German: Dominique Andetes (Berne) 
Arabic. Fawzi Abdel Zaher (Cairo) 
Italian: Giantuca Formichi (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Oelhi} 
Tamil. M Mehammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian’ Akbar Zargar (Teheran) 
Dutch: Bart Christiaens (Antwerp) 
Portuguese. Alzira Alves de Abreu (Rio de Janeiro) 
Urdu Mirza Muhammad Mushir (Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras | Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay: Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur} 
Swahili: Leonard J Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene. Aleksandra Kernhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese: Feng Mingxia (Being) 
Bulganan: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek- Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala: Neville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish Ruta Saarinen (Helsinki) 
Basque: Juxto Egafa (Donostia) 
Thai: Duangtip Surintatip (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese- Ho Tien Nght (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Nazer Mohammad Angar (Kabul) 
Hausa Aliyu Muhammad Bunza (Sckoto) 
Ukraiman Volodymyr Vasiliuk (Kiev) 
Galician: Xabier Senin Femandez (Santiago de Compostela} 
SALES AND PROMOTION. 
Fax. (33)(0) 1 45.68.57.45 
Subscriptions Mane-Thérése Hardy 
(Tel. (33} (0) 1.45.68 45.65), Jacqueline Louise-Jule, 
Manichan Ngonekeo, Mohamed Salah EI Din 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1 45 68 42 19) 
Customer service: Michel Ravassard, 
(Tel {33)(0)1 45 68 45 91) 
Accounts. (Tel. (33) (0) 1.45.68 45 65) 
Shipping Daniel Meister (Tel {33}(0) 1 45 68 47.50) 
  
SUBSCRIPTIONS. 
Tel :(33}(0)1 45684565 
1 year: 211 French francs 2 years: 396 FF, 
Students: 1 year: 132 French francs 
Binder for one year's 1ssues: 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
1 year: 132 French francs. 2 years: 211 FF. 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco or by Visa, Eurocard or Mastercard 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted 
providing the credit ne reads “Repnnted from the Unesco Courier”, plus 
date of Issue, ang three voucher copies are sent to the editor Signed 
articles reprinted must bear author s name Non-copyright photos will 
be supplied on request Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompamed by an intemational reply coupon covenng postage 
Signed articles express the opinions of the authors and do not nec- 
essarlly represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of 
the Unesco Courier Photo captions and headlines are written by lhe 
Unesco Courier staff The boundanes on maps published in the maga 
zine do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by Unesco or the 
United Nations The Unesco Courier is produced in microform {micro- 
film and/cr microfiche} by (1) Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 
Pans, {2} University Microfims (Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100 
US A.{3)NCR Microcard Edition, Indian Head Inc , 111 West 40th 
Street, New York, U S A, (4) Bell and Howe!i Co.. Old Mansfield Road, 
Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S A 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE {Printed in France) 
DEPOT LEGAL: C1 - OCTOBER 1997 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - DIFFUSE PAR LES 
N.M.P.P. 
Photocomposition, photogravure: 
Le Courrier de "Unesco. 
Impression MAURY IMPRIMEUR, 
Z.1 Route d"Etampes, 45331 Malesherbes 
ISSN 0041-5278 N° 10-1997-0P|-97-563 A 
This issue comprises 52 pages and a 4-page insert 
between pages 2-3 and 50-51  
©) Hartley, Panos Pictures, London 
4 THE UNESCO Gouri @ OCTOBER 1997

## [Page 5](109505engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
MONTH BY MONTH 
by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 
here does fatality end and human willpower step in? 
Myths, religions and philosophies have long sought to 
pierce the mystery of this shadowy line of demarcation which 
runs like Ariadne’s thread through the labyrinth of human 
experience. Perhaps the most striking expression of this mys- 
tery is the confrontation between humankind and the nat- 
ural elements. How otherwise can we explain why some peo- 
ple go on living at the foot of a volcano or in an 
earthquake-prone area, though they are fully aware that in 
so doing they risk their lives? 
Until a few decades ago humankind seemed to be partic- 
ularly helpless in the face of earthquakes, cyclones and volcanic 
eruptions. It was impossible to predict when they would hap- 
pen and what their effects would be. Human intellect and 
determination could only bow to divine caprice. 
But worse was to come. It became apparent that in some 
cases human activity could actually trigger disasters or aggra- 
vate theirimpact. It was discovered, forinstance, that unwise 
and anarchic land use caused drought, and that deforestation 
could be linked to flooding. Then came new disasters that 
were not of natural origin but were no less dramatic, such as 
the radioactive cloud that blew from Chernobyl, the green- 
house effect and the hole in the ozone layer. 
All the same, there is no need for “catastrophism”. What 
is in question is not progress but the ambivalence of its poten- 
tial effects, the dark side that is inherent in any newinvention. 
But let us not forget the bright side. Progress has made it 
possible for us to take effective action to mitigate and some- 
times even prevent the worst consequences of some natural dis- 
asters, as well as those caused by human activity. 
We are no more capable of preventing earthquakes today 
than we were in the past. But we can map high-risk areas and 
assess the probabilities of future occurrence by taking para- 
meters from the past into account. We know what building 
techniques and materials to use in high-risk areas, what pre- .. 
cautions to take when certain warning signs appear and what _ — $e ia 3 
to do in the immediate aftermath of disaster. T— 
Experience has taught us to take three key steps: to assess 
the risks from natural hazards as far as possible so as to mit- 
igate their most devastating effects, and to educate people — »sstsss————C——— 
about potential dangers and ways of coping with them. We ~~ WFRESEEEE EE 
must also train the most active members of the population = ie 
and—perhaps most important of all—make decision-makers Iss 
aware of their responsibilities. If we want to get the most out fs. Rk 
“of existing knowledge and skills, the whole of the population . Tod So 
must be mobilized. [J 
     
ree SRS pigs tre lees 
SRE YA ares 
  
    
  
A dust storm 
in Burkina Faso. 
© J, Hartley, Panos Pictures, London 
* RE. cad 
THE mesco Counter 8 OCTOBER 1997 5

## [Page 6](109505engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

Ju
li
en
 
Fr
yd
ma
n 
© 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ns
 


### 109506: Safety first!

\ afety first 
 
THE UNESCO Courier BR OCTOBER 1997 
hroughout history, the violent side of 
nature has manifested itself in 
destructive phenomena such as floods, 
volcanic eruptions, severe storms, wildfires, 
earthquakes and tidal waves. Disasters and 
risks area part of our life, and they will con- 
tinue to threaten, kill and destroy. “Zero 
risk” is out of reach in the contemporary 
world. The basic problem is how to prevent 
hazards from causing increasingly large-scale 
a cE 
BY BADAOUI ROUHBAN 
disasters. The answer is that the disastrous 
effects of natural phenomena will only be 
eliminated, reduced or stabilized when peo-. 
ple decide to make cities, settlements, infra- 
structures and houses safer. 
A culture of prevention 
For people are the agents of disaster. “It’s 
not the bullet that kills, it’s the hole”. Earth- 
quakes and windstorms do not kill; the col-

## [Page 7](109505engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 109506: Safety first!

  
When Colombia's Nevado del 
Ruiz volcano suddenly erupted 
on 13 November 1985, it 
struck the towns of Armero 
and Chinchina and claimed 
nearly 25,000 lives. Above, 
victims flee the disaster. 
The eruption of Vesuvius 
in 1794 (anonymous 
19th-century painting). 
lapse of houses and buildings from shak- 
ing 1s the main cause of death. Natural haz- 
ards themselves are not on the increase; nor 
are they likely to be in the future. Itis the 
frequency of natural disasters that is 
expected to grow, as well as their complex- 
ity, scope, gravity and destructive capacity. 
There will be an increase in multiple or syn- 
ergistic-type disasters causing society-wide 
impacts. In a time of globalization, Jarge- 
scale damage caused by an earthquake in a 
world financial centre such as Tokyo or Cal- 
ifornia is bound to have an effect even on the 
economies of faraway countries. 
Natural disasters are not always entirely 
“natural”. On the one hand, natural forces 
are at work on a planet whose environment is 
being altered day after day by humankind: 
floods are made moresevere by deforestation, 
global warming more preoccupying by the 
unchecked emission of greenhouse gases. On 
the other, natural disasters will increasingly 
generate or magnify concurrent technological 
 
disasters. Floods can devastate chemical com- 
plexes, carthquakes can affect critical plants. 
The good news is that disaster reduction 
is both possible and feasible. While we cannot 
prevent an carthquake or a windstorm from 
occurring, or a volcano from crupting, we 
can use the scientific knowledge and technical 
know-how that we already have in order to 
increase the carthquake- and wind-resistance 
of houses and bridges, and to issue and dis- 
seminate carly warnings of volcanic eruptions 
and organize proper community response to 
such warnings. The extent to which society 
puts this knowledge to effective use depends 
upon its social, cultural, political, economic, 
and even religious specificities. 
Informing the public 
Disaster prevention and preparedness start 
with improving our understanding of risks 
by assessing the distribution in time and space 
and the intensity of the natural phenomena » 
THE UNESCO Gouritr BM OCTOBER 1997 
© 
P 
Bo
ur
se
ll
le
r/
DU
/H
oa
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns
 
Al
fa
no
 
Mu
se
um
, 
Po
mp
e:

## [Page 8](109505engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 109506: Safety first!

» involved and the exposure of people and struc- 
tures to them. On the basis of this assess- 
ment, protective measures may be taken such 
as land-use restrictions, adequate construc- 
tion measures and wise environmental man- 
agement. Detection and warning systems may 
be installed, and contingency and emergency 
plans be set up. One permanent measure of 
paramount importance is the education and 
information of the public. 
A number of cases show that loss of life, 
injuries and physical damage can all be sig- 
nificantly reduced by the application of bet- 
ter warning and disaster prevention mea- 
sures. Because of inadequate use of, and 
response to, warning, more than 300,000 
people died in Bangladesh due to a cyclone 
in November 1970. In May 1985, better pre- 
diction and proper response to warning of 
a cyclone of the same intensity kept the 
death toll below 10,000. Similarly, appro- 
priate warning and evacuation saved the 
30,000-strong local community during the 
1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the 
Philippines. The population of the city of 
Armero in Colombia had been less fortunate 
in 1985 when a comparable eruption of 
Nevado del Ruiz volcano caused 25,000 
deaths within minutes. 
Disaster prevention measures cost much 
less than relief and reconstruction expendi- 
ture following a disaster, yet many deci- 
sion-makers tend to focus on relief and to 
treat disaster situations in an ad hoc way 
when they are presented with them. Today 
most typical strategies are crisis-oriented. 
Furthermore, information about natural 
hazards and disaster reduction techniques 
1s not well disseminated, and planners, pro- 
ject managers and communities do not inte- 
grate hazard management into development 
planning. Resources spent on relief and 
recovery continue to account for 96 per cent 
of all resources spent on disaster-related 
activities annually, leaving a pitiful 4 per cent 
for disaster prevention. It is high time to 
make a shift in emphasis from post-disaster 
reaction to pre-disaster action. | 
8 THE UNESCO Gouriermocroser 1997 
  


### 109507: A Decade for international action

  
a Decade for 
HM In 1984 you became the first person to call 
for an international decade to reduce loss of 
life and property from natural hazards. 
— Yes. One of the highest callings of scientists 
and engineers is to improve the lives of people 
everywhere. Natural hazards do not recognize 
international boundaries, nor does any one 
nation have all the knowledge or material 
resources needed to cope with them. Only 
through international co-operation will signif- 
icant progress be made, especially in developing 
countries with limited resources and few pro- 
fessional workers. 
M What are the successes of the Decade so 
far? What happens when it's over? 
— The Decade has raised the priority of disaster 
mitigation in many countries, particularly in 
the developing world. Government disaster 
offices have been established and risk assessments 
have been carried out in many countries. Train- 
ing programmes were implemented and inter- 
national teams organized to assess the dangers 
of particular disasters. Many countries have pre- 
pared national plans for the first time and shared 
them with the international community. 
More could have been done, particularly to 
help developing nations, which suffer most from 
natural disasters. Unfortunately we have not been 
able to raise enough funds to realize the Decade’s 
  | 
a
n
d
 V 
Kr
af
ft
 © 
Ho
a 
Qu
i,
 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 9](109505engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 109507: A Decade for international action

  
nternational action 
full potential. Nevertheless, we are grateful to the 
countries whose financial support enabled us to 
achieve some results. Hopefully the momentum 
inspired by the Decade will not be lost. 
HB Do you think natural hazards are a world 
issue which deserves, amid other proliferating 
environmental and societal issues, priority 
attention? 
— Mitigation of natural disasters in the form of 
environmental protection, preservation of biodi- 
versity, prevention of disease, education and the 
dissemination of knowledge, and equitable eco- 
nomic growth must be priorities on the agenda of 
a civilized and humane global society of the twenty- 
first century. Science can contribute to all of these. 
HB What are the primary decisions that the 
government of a hazard-prone country should 
take? 
— Almost every country is prone to one or more 
natural hazards. Within the governmental structure 
there should be a body responsible for disaster 
mitigation and relief. Among its tasks would be 
assessment of risks from natural hazards, disaster 
relief planning, land use and construction regula- 
tions appropriate for indigenous hazards, public 
education, warning systems, evacuation planning, 
training and drill and arrangements for interna- 
tional co-operation. I emphasize that many devel- 
ll a 
Interview with FRAN K PR ESS, 
President Ementus of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences 
and ‘father" of the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (1990-2000) 
  
Left, building a barrier to hold 
back mud-flows caused by 
volcanic eruption in 
Galunggung (Indonesia). 
Right, earthquake drill at a 
Los Angeles school (U.S.A.).   = 
© 
Ba
ch
ra
ch
, 
Al
ex
an
dr
ia
, 
U 
S 
A 
oping countries will need help in establishing such 
programmes. 
BH Can the public participate in disaster 
reduction? 
— Some governments have educated their citi- 
zenry in public safety measures. Unfortunately 
many countries have yet to achieve this degree of 
preparation. 
BH What is the link between dealing with natural 
disasters and potential human-made disasters? 
— All of these disasters result in human suffering 
and should be tackled by the international com- 
munity. Perhaps we could dedicate the new century 
to reducing all aspects of human suffering. How- 
ever, these potenttal disasters differ, have various 
causes and solutions, and affect nations differ- 
ently. It will be hard to get universal agreement 
on how to address such complex global problems. 
It may be worthwhile to treat these several cate- 
gories of disasters separately in the short term, 
BM Dealing with disasters requires co-operation 
between many disciplines and between the 
public and private sectors. How can this best be 
achieved? 
— First by establishing an organizational structure 
Once astructure is in place, a strategic plan or road 
map will have to define the roles to be played by 
professionals in diverse disciplines and by public 
and private sectors. All are currently involved one 
way or another but not in a truly collaborative 
enterprise. They meet and share information— 
more on disaster relief than pre-disaster planning 
and mitigation. 
Electronic communication, universally acces- 
sible data archives, software for learning from 
experience and building “virtual teams”, spin-offs 
of bureaucracy-free entities are some of the mech- 
anisms used to spur collaboration and increase 
efficiency in attacking complex problems. ~~ M 
: . pd Ta . ‘rr Fw ~- . a. - a » Ke r y 
nN A LE EY 
THE UNESCO Gourier BH OCTOBER 1997 9 
© 
Gi
bo
ux
/L
ia
is
on
/G
am
ma
, 
Pa
ri
s  

## [Page 10](109505engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

TRUE OR FALSE? 
This test, created by Dorothy Hoffmann and Gilbert Padey 
of the World Health Organization (WHO), was reproduced 
from the Jan./Feb. 1991 issue of WHO's World Health magazine. { le 0 N 
1. In case of disaster, an immediate appeal for internaticnal a U 
medical personnel should be sent out. True or false? 
     
2. When a disaster occurs, people in other countries should not 
react by immediately organizing the collection and despatch of 
whatever can be obtained in the way of medicines, clothing, 
equipment, etc. True or false? 
3. Afew weeks after a disaster occurs, things are usually back 
to normal and most of the major services are restored. True or 
false? 
4, Disasters cause fewer deaths in rich countries than in poor 
countries. True or false? 
5. Disasters bring out the worst in human behaviour. True or 
false? 
6. When disaster strikes, outbreaks of infectious diseases are 
inevitable due to the presence of unattended dead bodies. 
True or false? 
7. Mass hunger can be avoided after a disaster strikes. True or 
false? 
8. Following a disaster, it is best to house people as close as 
possible to their own dwellings rather than in settlement camps. 
True or false? 
9. In case of hmited food supplies following a disaster, prionty 
should be given to the young and old. True or false? 
10. When disaster strikes, individuals should take care of their 
own families and belongings first? True or false? 
11. The intensity of two earthquakes in Armenia and San Fran- 
cisco was the same but in Armenia several thousand died 
whereas in San Francisco sixty people died. This is mainly due 
to the difference in earthquake-proof construction. True or 
false? 
12. The Sahelian drought 1s caused by a combination of cli- 
matic and human factors. True or false?   
  
  
Answers on page 34 


### 109508: Nature on the rampage

a hazards originate 
EVERY YEAR from the air (storms, wildfires, 
ON EARTH THERE ARE: droughts), the ear ih (eart quakes, 
+100,000 thunderstorms landslides, volcanic eruptions) or 
*10,000 floods water (flooding). 
«Thousands of landslides When communities cannot cope 
«Over 100 earthquakes which cause damage with them they turn into disasters, 
sHundreds of wildfires 
sScores of hurricanes, cyclones, typhoons and 
tornadoes 
s Dozens of volcanic eruptions, tsunamis and 
droughts 
} 
THE UNESCO Courier B OCTOBER 1997

## [Page 11](109505engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 109508: Nature on the rampage

the rampage 
a» Gyumri, formerly 
Leninakan 
(Armenia), 
stricken by an 
earthquake in 
December 1988. 
 
& Earthquakes 
Small quakes happen every day all over the 
world. Large ones, which are rarer, can cause 
more damage than floods and severe storms. 
Earthquakes are dangerous because they strike 
without warning, trigger disaster in less thana 
minute and forecasts of their effects are difficult. 
Undersea earthquakes can generate tsunami 
flood waves which can have effects at great dis- 
tances. Buildings and communities near active 
earth-fault zones, or on soft or unstable soil 
or slopes, or at the water’s edge are especially 
vulnerable to ground shaking, earthquake-trig- 
gered fires and tsunamis. Some recent earth- 
quake disasters: 
& Kobe (Japan), 17 January 1995. This 6.9 mag- 
BY WALTER W. HAYS 
nitude! tremor was the world’s most costly 
earthquake disaster, with losses of about $140 
billion. Centred 20 km from Kobe, it struck 
just before dawn and destroyed 200,000 homes, 
set off 600 fires, put the city’s port out of oper- 
ation, severely damaged the Hanshin elevated 
expressway, and left 6,000 dead and 34,000 
injured. 
@ Northridge, California (U.S.A.), 17 Janu- 
ary 1994. Also striking before dawn, this 6.8 
magnitude quake affected 3.5 million people 
and led to the highest earthquake insurance pay- 
out in history—more than $13 billion in claims. 
Its centre was 20 km from downtown Los 
Angeles and damage was estimated at $40 billion. 
It damaged parts of the elevated freeway sys- 
tem, left 50,000 people homeless and 15,000 
injured. Sixty-one people were killed. 
@ Spitak (Armenia), 7 December 1988. A 6.9 
magnitude carthquake in mid-morning, it 
demonstrated the well-known weakness of unre- 
inforced old buildings. But many new reinforced 
concrete buildings collapsed too, among them 
schools and hospitals. Some 25,000 people were 
killed and reconstruction cost $16 billion. 
@ Mexico, 19 September 1985. Its epicentre was 
400 km (240 miles) from Mexico City, but its 
magnitude (8.1) brought down 400 government 
buildings, hospitals, schools, businesses and 
high-rise apartment blocks in the old lake bed 
area of the city. Between 5,000 and 10,000 peo- 
ple were killed and losses were estimated at $5 
billion. 
@ Tangshan (China), 28 July 1976. A 7.8 mag- 
nitude quake which struck in the middle of the 
night while most of the million people living 
and working in this industrial and coal-mining 
centre in northern China were asleep. The city— 
mostly unreinforced buildings—was devas- 
tated. Atleast 240,000 people died and 800,000 
were injured. Reconstruction took more than 
a decade. 
1 The Richter scale is widely used to express the - 
magnitude of an earthquake by the quantity of energy 
released. The highest value yet registered is 9.5. Editor 
THE UNESCO Gourier A OCTOBER 1997 1 1

## [Page 12](109505engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 109508: Nature on the rampage

© 
Je
re
my
 
Ha
rt
le
y/
Pa
no
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
wr
 
  
€ Droughts 
Droughts may be annual or may occur once 
every few years. They can last for many years, 
devastating agriculture and creating deserts. 
Two major droughts: 
@ The Sahel (Africa), 1969-73. From 1968, 
a lengthy drought in West Africa extended 
across the Sahara Desert southwards in the 
Sahel countries of Mauritania, Senegal, Mal, 
Burkina Faso and Chad. It was no worse 1 
than many previous ones, but 250,000 peo- - 
ple died and millions of refugees poured 1 
into cities. Millions of head of livestock Vv 
died. Farm production dropped sharply. 
@& The “Dust Bowl,” Mid-Western U.S., 
1930s. This 10-year drought spread across 
the entire Great Plains from North Dakota 
to Texas. One dust storm in May 1934 car- 
ried hundreds of millions of tons of earth 
® 
Ira
 
Sc
hw
ar
tz
/R
eu
te
rs
/M
AX
PP
P,
 
Pa
ni
s 
for thousands of kilometres. In one day, 
. . ea . St. Charles (U.S.A.), one of many towns in 
Chicago was covered with 12 million tons of In Somalia, a the states of Illinois and Missouri that 
development 
were flooded in July 1993 when the 
worker and a local Mississippi River overflowed its banks. 
dust and distant New York City had many 
gloomy, dusty days. Wheat and corn pro- official discuss a 
. ° sand dune 
duction fell by up to 75%. Hundreds of stabilization 
thousands of people fled the area for places programme 
designed to combat 
further west. desertification. prs | 
  
Right, chart 
showing the travel- 
time of a tsunami 
caused by an 
undersea 
} Fa " earthquake in the 
. : a, : : middie of the 
st et I. a i oli © ~~ Pacific. 
1 2 he unesco (COURIER B OCTOBER 1997

## [Page 13](109505engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

  
& Floods 
The most common natural hazard, mainly 
caused by flash floods after very heavy rain or 
from melting ice and snow. Towns and villages 
on the coast or in river plains are most at risk. 
Floods cause property damage, social disruption 
  
“
A
 
8 ® 
In
te
rn
at
io
na
l 
Ts
un
am
i 
in
fo
rm
at
io
n 
Ce
nt
er
, 
Ho
no
lu
lu
 
and health care problems and damage the envi- 
ronment (mainly soil erosion and pollution). 
Some major recent floods: 
@ The U.S. Midwest in April 1997 and the east- 
ern U.S. in January 1996. Heavy snowfall and 
then a rapid thaw along with heavy rain flooded 
North Dakota in 1997 and river valleys from 
New York to Philadelphia to Virginia in 1996. 
More than 100,000 people, including entire 
communities, were evacuated. Losses exceeded 
$2 billion—mainly damage to buildings, infra- 
structure, dams and bridges. 
@ Ttaly, 4-5 November 1966. After many hours 
of rain, the River Arno burst its banks. Florence 
was soon under five metres of water. Moving at 
more than 130 km/hour, the flood made 12,000 


### 109508: Nature on the rampage

people homeless, inundated more than 5,000 
homes, destroyed some 10,000 cars and the 
contents of half the city’s shops, knocked out 
the electricity, water and sewage systems and 
destroyed bridges. Worst of all, oil from bro- 
ken oil tanks mixed with nearly a million tons 
of mud and ruined more than a million art 
treasures. 
Tsunamis 
These are usually set off by undersea earth- 
quakes and can travel across oceans at the speed 
of a jet airliner, smashing into coastal towns 
and villages with waves 30 metres high. 
On 22 May 1960, a 9.5 magnitude undersea 
earthquake set off a tsunami which destroyed 
400,000 houses along 1,000 km of coastline, 
leaving 5,000 people dead. The ground shook for 
three and a half minutes and subsided as much 
as two metres. Tsunamis with waves as high as 
10 metres affected every Pacific rim country, 
damaging ships, flooding coastal areas and 
destroying buildings and factories. 
THE UNESCO Gourier W OCTOBER 1997 1 3

## [Page 14](109505engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 109508: Nature on the rampage

  
€ Landslides 
These occur daily all over the world and are 
caused either by heavy rains or earthquakes. A 
big quake can can set off tens of thousands of 
landslides of all sizes. 
One such disaster occurred in Peru, on 31 
May 1970, when a 7.6 magnitude earthquake 
centred 25 km off Chimbote, on the north 
coast of Peru, caused Latin America’s biggest 
recorded landslide. A mass of ice 5,500 metres up 
Mt Huascaran was dislodged and in three min- 
utes had slid down a glacier and travelled another 
10 km to bury the towns of Yungay and Ran- 
rahirca, killing all but 400 of their 20,000 inhab- 
itants. In Chimbote, 96% of the town’s adobe 
  
houses were destroyed by ground tremors and 
more than a thousand people killed.   
November 1970. Winds of up to 240 km/hr 
and a storm surge flood killed about 596,150 
® Hurricanes, cyclones, 
In the wake of 
Hurricane Gilbert, 
Jamaica 
{September 1988). 
  
typhoons and tornadoes 
These tend to be seasonal and confined to cer- 
tain parts of the world. Coastal settlements are 
most at risk. Physical damage and social dis- 
ruption are caused by high winds, storm surge 
floods, very heavy rain, beach and coastal ero- 
sion, lightning and hail. 
Notable storm disasters in recent years: 
« East Pakistan and Bay of Bengal, 12-13 
  
    
  
14 THE UNESCO Gouriern OCTOBER 1997 
€ 
Ri
ch
ar
ds
/L
ia
is
on
/G
am
ma
 
Pa
ns
 
people in Bangladesh. More than four million 
people were affected, 335,000 houses damaged 
and 264,000 head of cattle killed. 
@ Bangladesh, 30 April 1991. A typhoon 
whipped up an eight-metre storm surge which 
hit the city of Chittagong after midnight, leav- 
ing 10 million people homeless, some 200,000 
dead and 139,000 injured. More than 1.5 mil- 
lion buildings were damaged. An early warn- 
ing system, evacuation and the use of cyclone 
shelters meant that casualties were fewer than in 
the 1970 disaster. 
® The Caribbean, 10 September 1988. Hurri- 
cane Gilbert, dubbed “the storm of the cen- 
tury”, hit the eastern Caribbean and caused 
unprecedented devastation as it swept across 
Guadeloupe, Martinique, St Lucia, Puerto Rico, 
the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica and 
Mexico. A fifth of all the houses in Jamaica were 
destroyed or badly damaged by high winds and 
half a million Jamaicans were left homeless. 
Banana plantations, coffee trees and food crops 
were ruined by flooding, winds and landslides. 
Surprisingly few lives were lost but economic 
losses were more than a billion dollars.

## [Page 15](109505engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

A village 
devastated by a 
mud flow during 
the eruption of 
Mt. Pinatubo 
(Philippines) in 
June 1991. 
A forest fire near 
Marseilles (France) 
on 26 July 1997. 
More than 3,000 
hectares of pine 
forest and scrub 
were destroyed. 
 
@ Volcanic eruptions 
The world’s 500 active volcanoes erupt infre- 
quently, but when they do, the effects can be 
devastating. Nearby towns can be affected by 
clouds of volcanic ash (which can also seriously 
threaten aircraft in the area), lateral blasts, pyro- 
clastic flows of red-hot rocks and gases, lava 
flows and lahars (debris flows). A major explo- 
sive eruption can affect the world’s climate. 
Notable volcano disasters include: 
© 
Av
en
tu
ri
er
/L
ov
in
y/
Ga
mm
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
# Mt. Pinatubo, in the Philippines, 15-16 June 
1991. This was the biggest volcanic eruption of 
the century. It lasted 15 hours and sent ash 30 
km into the sky and set off pyroclastic flows 
and lahars. More than 200,000 people, including 
those at the U.S. Clark Air Force Base, were 
evacuated—the largest-ever evacuation before a 
volcanic eruption. Typhoon Yunya passing 50 
km to the north added to the disaster. Because 
of the evacuation, the death toll was limited to 
320, but the region was economically devas- 
tated. Strategic military alliances were altered 
by the eruption as the Clark base was 
abandoned. 
# Nevado del Ruiz (Colombia), 13 November 
1985. After being dormant for 140 years, the 
volcano erupted and hot pyroclastic material 
melted the mountains ice cap and set off lahars. 
These travelled at 30 km/hr along four river 
beds to the towns of Armero and Chinchina. 
The debris buried the towns late at night, killing 
24,740 people, injuring 5,485 and destroying 
5,680 homes. 
« Agung (Bali), 1963. Two violent eruptions 
in March and May generated a huge hot ash 
cloud and set off lahars, which killed 1,148 peo- 
ple and injured 296. Seventy-three villages were 
destroyed, leaving 70,000 people homeless and 
400,000 destitute. They also destroyed 54,289 
hectares of farmland and 11,745 hectares. of for- 
est and swept away bridges and roads. 
  
© 
Ph
il
ip
pe
 
La
ur
en
so
n/
Re
ut
er
s 
/M
AX
PP
P,
 
Pa
ns
 
& Wildfires 
Thousands of wildfires flare up every year 
around the world, threatening towns and vil- 
lages. Many are caused by hot, dry summers 
and set off by lightning. Others are started by 
lava flows or triggered by earthquakes. A few are 
the result of arson. 
One recent major wildfire disaster occurred 


### 109508: Nature on the rampage

in Great Khingan Range (China), on 6 May 
1987. Fanned by high winds for 20 days, the 
fires burned down 750,000 cubic metres of for- 
est over a million hectares—13% of the total 
forested area or a fifth of the annual timber 
production of the region. The fire killed 191 
people. | 
THE UNESCO Gourier BW CCTOBER 1997 1 9

## [Page 16](109505engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ha
ru
yo
sh
 
Ya
ma
gu
ch
i/
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
  
  
  


### 109509: Making cities safer

The defences of overcrowded cities with fragile buildings and vulnerable infrastructures 
must be strengthened 
making Ces safer 
1 6 THE UNESCO Gourierm ocroser 1997 
ll over the world, economic expansion, 
use of new technologies and growing 
interdependence are boosting the risk 
of natural disasters. Cities need to draft mas- 
ter-plans to cope with them—assessing threat, 
predicting its effects and proposing action. 
Earthquakes, which cause most natural dis- 
asters, can set off chaos in the crowded slums 
of poor countries and topple badly-con- 
structed, badly-located buildings. In rich 
countries, ageing populations and a growing 
reliance on technology are weakening the 
EER 
BY MUSTAFA ERDIK 
defences of towns and cities. There is also more 
of value to be destroyed. 
Landslides arc another big cause of urban 
disasters, often related to earthquakes, when 
housing is built on steep or unstable hillsides: 
Volcanoes are more predictable than earth- 
quakes, but because they lie dormant for hun- 
dreds of years, the danger from them is often 
ignored and people build and live on their 
slopes. Severe flooding threatens towns and 
cities which are set among denuded mountains 
where there are frequent thunderstorms.

## [Page 17](109505engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 109509: Making cities safer

The aftermath of 
the Kobe (Japan) earthquake 
of 18 January 1995 
A rescue team extracts a 
survivor from the ruins of a 
Mexico City building after the 
1985 earthquake. 
Natural disasters can wreck social structures, 
production, employment and income, as well as 
cause physical damage. Building regulations are 
crucial. In the 1995 Kobe earthquake in Japan, 
countless buildings were destroyed because of 
inadequate rules. Where they exist in developing 
countries, such regulations are seldom enforced. 
In the Erzincan (Turkey) quake of 1992, half 
 
the medium-sized reinforced-concrete build- 
ings were destroyed. This is four times more 
damage than at Kobe and twelve times more 
than at Northridge (California) in 1994. Even 
where modern buildings are only slightly dam- 
aged, their movable contents—in the case of lab- 
oratories, hospitals, offices, museums and art 
galleries—can be destroyed. 
me unesco (Courier m ocToser 1997 1 [{ 
©T
 
Ca
mp
io
n/
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 18](109505engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 109509: Making cities safer

> 
© 
Bl
ak
e 
Se
ll
 /
Re
ut
er
s/
MA
XP
PP
, 
Pa
ns
 
Roads and bridges are vital in an emergency. 
But earthquakes move and damage them. At 
Northridge, ten viaducts and 157 overpasses 
were heavily damaged, costing some $1.5 bil- 
lion. At Kobe, the loss was from four to five 
times greater and the urban transport system 
was damaged in 1,257 places. Rescue and recov- 
ery from a major earthquake in Istanbul would 
depend heavily on vulnerable roads and bridges 
linking the city to Europe. 
Underground pipelines can also break, leak- 
 
Vehicles were crushed when an 
apartment building collapsed 
onto its parking lot during the 
Northridge (California, U.S.A.) 
earthquake in January 1994. 
An old house in a Turkish 
village which collapsed after 
being weakened by several 
earthquakes. 
A ¥ 
S00 theunesco Gurier mocroser 1997 
ing water and gas and setting off fires. This 
hampered rescue work at Kobe, where more 
than 150 fires could not be put out because 
the water supply to fight them failed, as did 
the damaged road network. 
In human terms, single-parent families, 
women, handicapped people, children and the 
elderly are the first victims of a natural disas- 
ter. Indirect economic damage from an earth- 
quake includes loss of production and tax rev- 
enue and increased unemployment payouts. 
Northridge was the most costly earthquake 
in U.S. history. At $200 billion, Kobe was the 
most expensive urban disaster of modern times. 
In both, the damage worked out at between 
$40,000 and $50,000 per affected person. At 
Erzincan, it was only about $10,000 because of 
the very limited infrastructure and industry. 
Such huge losses will occur again. A big 
quake in Istanbul would probably cost about 
$50 billion—about a fifth of Turkey’s 1996 
Gross National Product (GNP). A repeat of the 
1923 Kanto earthquake in the Tokyo region 
would cost perhaps sixteen times more than 
Kobe, or two-thirds of Japan’s 1994 Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP). Another San Fran- 
cisco quake as big as the tremor of 1906 (8.3 on 
the Richter scale) would cause losses seven times 
greater than at Northridge. [| 
 © 
Ma
rk
 
Ed
wa
rd
s/
St
ll
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on

## [Page 19](109505engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

What individuals 
and societies can 
do to cut the toll 
of human and 
economic loss 
   
Above, the European 
Laboratory for Structural 
Assessment in Ispra (Italy). 
© 
En
zo
 
Si
gn
or
el
l/
Ga
mm
a,
 
Pa
ns
 


### 109510: The Do's and don'ts of risk reduction

  
he most effective disaster mitigation 
measure that can be taken at commu- 
nity level is for people not to build in 
high-risk areas such as unstable slopes, river 
beds or flood plains. Local knowledge about 
these hazards is usually good, especially among 
older people. Sometimes though, 2 hazard such 
as a geological fault is not obvious or visible, and 
surveyors and geologists have to be called in. 
 
he do’s and don'ts of risk reduction 
Is UE 
BY BARBARA CARBY 
People can also ensure they reduce risks in 
their houses. Roofs should be secured against 
hurricanes. Roof shape is important for wind 
resistance. A flat roof is much more likely to 
be blown off than a pyramid-shaped one. 
Some worry about the cost of such measures, 
but they are no more than a small percentage 
of the total cost of the building and are well 
worth the investment. 
THE UNESCO Gourier 8 OCTOBER 1997 1 9

## [Page 20](109505engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

  
   
       
    
      
  
Par vg Da) ~ 4 Map showing earthquake 
-. ta! - La Py 6 ne 3 monitoring centres in southern 
hike fF Ce Be sy Am . California (U.S.A.). 
: | a =< . - 147 
ee 2d - -- ’ | ix . ir 1 
. fr : : , - . ~~ : ! \ 
5 ey ak Aor “a. ir \ » 
ras TEL LY - 1 A a t 
4 J rer AA 
A » FS -r—— day yf - ; 
[fe hat a = | 
pr - ay ‘ 4 ’ ! 
LE 117 4 beni BH o x 
rt - N a Co. 04 - \ 
/ % . “-. oy Ml -. 
, -. - . - ans -* ia \ » 
A Gn i » " 
ha -’ po 
Dra po at { ; i" 
: it - - A To — “" Po ! \ pA \ . A 
Ra oa 5 TT -— at \ : - 
! . 1 a A - A ha. 5 - R ed 
oa Va } . Yay - ye 
LR» i la Nm Bob 
bo ~ N ' . i : - Ye fH) 
2 gh L- - or - Tee "0 oS \ -», - 
£ i” *. . [LN - 3 : NE we 5 - Aor 
¢ TRL ee. i SORE rN 
H ~ A i ta “ae * ne .. - -- \ x % : 
3 i; La 1 an = em, o® pa. 
3 : Fo) WN — dN bo i FY. \ Web h on | De SN Togs 
a my A Et 1 hg “ie nA - = 
2 JCatann « X= M1 Fa ‘ J Wie 4a \ 
3 y Ve Po. pl, HIE SS -_ Se PINS edn   


### 109510: The Do's and don'ts of risk reduction

 
» Earthquake mitigation focuses on building 
codes, including correct use of steel and the 
strength of concrete mixes. Wooden build- 
ings can be reinforced by braces and tying cor- 
ners so as to make the structure react as a box. 
Hazards in the home are not all structural. 
If you live in an earthquake-prone area, you 
should check the following: 
= Are heavy objects like cabinets, TV stands 
and entertainment centres attached to the 
wall? 
Are heavy objects on the lowest shelves? 
Are water heaters and gas cylinders bolted 
to the wall? 
Do household members know how to 
turn off the gas, electricity and water sup- 
ply? 
Are hanging objects such as fans and ceiling 
lights securely fastened? 
Are shelves fitted with wire or board to 
prevent objects falling off them during 
tremors? 
Are dangerous substances like fuel, poi- 
sons and chemicals secured against spillage? 
Are plate-glass windows and doors covered 
with safety film to prevent shattering? 
At the national level, governments should 
include mitigation in their disaster manage- 
ment policies. Zoning and land use laws should 
ensure thereare no buildings in an area likely to 
2 0 THE UNESCO (Courier nm ocrosr 1997 
be flooded, say, once every thirty years. Golf 
courses and parks could be built there instead. 
Steep slopes would be left as wooded areas. 
But planners and policy makers do not 
usually have this freedom. Many rivers already 
flow through towns, so mitigation will take 
the form of reducing loss of life and damage 
after a flood. Ground floors can be designated 
non-sleeping areas, levees can be built and flood 
warning systems and evacuation plans can be 
developed. 
Building codes should be drafted and 
where they already exist, should be reviewed 
and strengthened. They should ensure that 
buildings can survive a 7 magnitude earth- 
quake or 200 km/h winds. 
W Standards of safety 
Many buildings were put up before codes were 
drafted, so they need to be “retrofitted” by 
strengthening. This is more expensive than 
building to resistant standards. Large public 
buildings and bridges are prime candidates for 
retrofitting. But small traditional buildings 
should be strengthened too. Much work has 
been done on this in India and Peru. Chicken 
mesh and mortar has been effective in rein- 
forcing walls of adobe-type buildings against  earthquake damage.

## [Page 21](109505engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 109510: The Do's and don'ts of risk reduction

Emergency facilities such as hospitals, 
police stations and shelters, along with water, 
electricity and sewage systems, must also be 
able to remain functional after a disaster. They 
should be designed to a higher standard of 
safety than other buildings and retrofitted 
where necessary. This especially applies to hos- 
pitals—crucial after a disaster—as they can be 
knocked out of action without structural 
damage. So non-structural mitigation mea- 
sures are vital. 
Cost is one of the reasons cited for lack of 
mitigation measures in poor countries. But one 
could say that such countries cannot afford not 
to take measures. Tropical Storm Debby set off 
extensive flooding and landslides in the small 
Caribbean island of St. Lucia in 1994. Agricul- 
tural losses alone were about 12 per cent of the 
tsland’s 1993 Gross Domestic Product (GDP). 
Vulcanologist Maurice Krafft 
measures the temperature of a 
lava flow using a device called 
a thermocouple. 
Even reducing direct damage by one per 
cent through mitigation would have been 
worthwhile. But political support for miti- 
gation is hard to drum up because little work 
has been done on quantifying the benefits of 
mitigation as opposed to cost. 
 Hurricane-resistant roofs 
Bangladesh is a mitigation success story how- 
ever. Improved warning systems and the build- 
ing of cyclone shelters has sharply cut loss of 
life and livestock. In Jamaica, Hurricane Gilbert 
in 1988 showed the benefit of roofs shaped 
for wind resistance. Many specially-designed 
buildings which went up after a hurricane in 
1951 kept their roofs in 1988, while more 
modern and expensive structures with fash- 
ionable flat or slightly-sloping roofs which 
went up in the 1970s and 1980s, did not. 
  
THE UNESCO Gounier B OCTOBER 1997 2 1 
l.
an
d 
V 
Kr
af
ft
 
© 
Ho
a 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 22](109505engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

> 
A Sri Lankan engineer 
inspects coastal hurricane 
defences south of Colombo. 


### 109510: The Do's and don'ts of risk reduction

Recent earthquakes in California and Japan 
have successfully tested earthquake-proof 
buildings. In California, many old masonry 
structures which had been retrofitted survived. 
But little 1s heard about this success since news 
is about buildings which collapse. However 
the media can do alot to publicize the advan- 
tages of mitigation, especially just after a dis- 
aster when mitigation measures should be 
included in repair work. 
Mitigation is also very important in the 
natural environment. Action taken in water- 
sheds in the mountains will eventually affect 
the marine environment, especially in small 
countries where the distance between water- 
2 2 THE UNESCO Gunn BH QCTOBER 1997 
  
Damage in a San Francisco 
(U.S.A.) store after an 
earthquake in October 1989. 
Thine Mite 
ol 
Treammly 
  
@ 
Pe
te
r 
Ba
rk
er
 
/P
an
os
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
shed and sea is small. Eroded soil washing 
down into the ocean results in silting which 
kills off coral and fish. Coral reefs help control 
beach and coastal erosion, and if they are dam- 
aged the coast is more vulnerable to flooding 
which will in turn cause more erosion. Coral 
reefsare also important fish hatching grounds, 
so loss of reefs will harm the fishing industry, 
especially in island states. Destruction of reefs 
and beaches also harms countries which live 
off tourism. Chemical spills into waterways 
eventually reach the sea and also damage coral 
reefs and marine life. Damaged or stressed reefs 
are more vulnerable to natural hazards because 
they are less resistant to wave action. ) 
Dialogue between environmental and dis- 
aster managers is essential. For mitigation to 
work, the entire society must be involved. Pro- 
grammes should ensure local communities take 
partin planning at the same time as they ensure 
political and financial support at national and 
international level. Mitigation must be part of 
our daily life. If the present century “invented” 
mitigation and moved disaster management 
beyond mere response, the next must see that 
mitigation becomes an integral part of plan- 
ning at all levels of society. | 
 ©C
 
Ch
ar
le
s/
Ui
ai
so
n/
Ga
mm
a,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 23](109505engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 109511: Sounding the alarm

sounding the 
Hurricane Fran (September 
1996) as seen from a weather 
satellite. 
larm 
   
he tolling of bells was once the usual way 
to warn people of impending disasters 
like floods, fires or approaching armies. 
Warnings based on eye-witness reports 
were passed on from town to town. The fur- 
ther away the town was from the disaster, the 
longer it had to prepare its defences. These 
days, the approach is much the same even 
though the technology is very different. Warn- 
ings are still issued at onc point and propa- 
gated across a network of users who deploy 
skills to mitigate the impact of the event. 
Today’s warning systems rely on measure- 
ment techniques, mostly from physics and geo- 
physics, and on communications technology. 
The science of risk prediction is young, and the 
From tolling bells to remote sensing 
by satellite, disaster warning 
systems have come a long way 
  
CEE 
BY FABRIZIO FERRUCCI 
systematic observation of natural processes is 
not much older. Quantitative meteorology dates 
back to the 1940s, quantitative seismology to the 
1960s, and quantitative vulcanology is only 
about twenty years old. Remote-sensing from 
space only began in the late 1970s. Meanwhile, 
advances in communications technology have 
made it possible to speak to people anywhere on 
carth from a disaster site. 
= Technological risks and 
natural risks 
Technological, or human-made risks are usually 
limited in time and place, even if they cause 
dramatic and long-term effects. Warning 
THE UNESCO Gourier B OCTOBER 1997 2 3 
Ph
ot
o 
& 
NA
SA
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ns
 
>

## [Page 24](109505engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 109511: Sounding the alarm

> 
© 
Pe
te
r 
Fo
wn
es
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
 
Pa
ri
s 
systems are built into industrial plants and are 
based on all possibilities of failure known to 
the designers. Natural risks are much more dan- 
gerous because they involve the biggest energies 
on earth, and because we have less access to risk 
sources that were not designed by human 
beings. 
The concept of warning implies forecasting 
in space, time, or both. In some cases warnings 
can be issued if we can foresee the short, 
medium- and long-term evolution of an 
impending event, and its consequences. In oth- 
ers they are possible if we can identify minor 
events that are precursors of a much bigger one. 
Good examples of early warning are the fore- 
casting of weather conditions twelve, twenty- 
four and forty-eight hours ahead, and of extreme 
meteorological events such as hurricanes, their 
path and timing. A bad example is earthquake 
prediction, which is seldom attempted and when 
it is all too often fails. The Table on this page 
shows today’s capacity to forecast the occur- 
rence of some major natural events. 
Asageneral rule, the capacity to issue reliable 
carly warnings requires: good approximate 
knowledge of the specific source of the hazard 
in question; availability of one or more mod- 
els allowing description of the event in time 
and place; appropriate surveillance systems being 
in operation; transmission of information 
ahead of the development of the hazard. 
Sometimes one type of risk is linked to 
 
mm 
. "yy Rs 
- 3 43 E 
: el 
a g { ad 
| 
. 
© 
Jo
hn
 
Pr
yk
e/
Re
ut
er
s/
MA
XP
PP
, 
Pa
rs
 
Houses in flames as fire 
spreads through a city block 
following the January 1995 
earthquake in Kobe (Japan). 
Opposite page, 
decontaminating a building at 
Chernobyl (Ukraine) in 19886. 
A mother and daughter look 
on helplessly as their house 
burns down. 
 
another. Extreme meteorological events may 
lead to flash floods, plain floods and land- 
slides. Industrial fires may lead to explosions, 
severc chemical pollution of air, ground and 
water. If there is full control of the source of 
primary risk, warnings about secondary effects 
arc possible. 
How do we stand in practice with regard to 
warning techniques of some natural phe- 
nomena today? 
* Weather forecasting 
Weather forecasts are gencrally reliable because 
meteorologists can model in detail the behav- 
iour of large masses of air and because a very 
As the Table below shows, we must answer a categorical “no” about the reliability of many 
types of forecast in time. This does not exclude the possibility that, locally and sometimes, 
correct forecasts are issued. However, these cannot be “generalized” and extended 
successfully to other places and other scenarios. F. F. 
IS IT POSSIBLE TO FORECAST THE OCCURRENCE OF DISASTROUS NATURAL EVENTS? 
IN SPACE 
Earthquakes Yes 
Extreme meteorological events Yes 
Flash floods Yes 
Forest fires Yes 
Landslides Yes 
Plain floods Yes 
Volcanic eruptions Yes 
IN TIME 
Long term Medium term Short-term 
(a year or more) (month to weeks) (days to hours) 
Yes, almost No No 
No No Yes 
No No Yes /almost 
No No No/almost 
Yes Yes Yes /almost 
No No Yes 
Yes Yes No/almost

## [Page 25](109505engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 109511: Sounding the alarm

  
"
J
e
 
' 
i. 
i 
- 
~ 
— 
- _— 
-t- 
~ 
~ 
~~ 
a 
complete set of worldwide observations at all 
scales is available. Weather satellites provide a 
flow of images of cloud distribution over con- 
tinents and oceans, while a dense network of 
ground stations reports continuously updated 
information about temperature, humidity 
and wind direction and speed at ground level 
and in the troposphere (the lowest level of 
the atmosphere). 
Earth observation from space and efficient 
telecommunications on land and with space 
make it possible to combine national forecasts 
into a global system which can predict extreme 
events in time for precautions to be taken. 
Weather forecasts can warn of heavy rainfall 
which may lead to flooding because of its con- 
centration in space and the structure of river 
basins. Ground-based weather radar plays an 
important part in short-term flood warning 
by making it possible to estimate the location 
and amount of rainfall, whose effect on a river 
  ©R
 
| 
A
/
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ns
 
basin can be monitored by sensors which make 
it possible to issue short-term warnings and 
take steps to avoid or limit overflows. A good 
topography of the river basin and the river 
bed are needed to predict the behaviour of 
flood waters on the basis of rainfall density 
and duration and soil type. 
Although flood warnings are not always 
timely, many recent instances show that lack 
of co-ordination rather than lack of warning 
is the weak point in flood risk mitigation. 
W Volcanic eruptions 
Itis relatively feasible to predict volcanic erup- 
tions because the volcanic process is condi- 
tioned by many physical and chemical factors 
that can be individually monitored. Eruptions 
are always preceded by intense seismic activity 
and ground inflation, and the reawakening of 
a dormant volcano can easily be detected by 
just afew seismic instruments, making it pos- 
sible to issue a long-term warning. 
As the magma makes its way to the sur- 
face, ground inflation will begin and new gas 
vents will appear, along with changes in the 
gas composition and local disturbances in the 
earth’s gravity and magnetic fields. The appear- 
ance and growing intensity of these phenom- 
ena make it possible to issue a medium-term 
warning based on data provided by a complex 
blend of instruments including a seismic net- 
work, networks for monitoring the hori- 
zontal and vertical components of the ground 
deformation, a network of magnometers, a 
network for measuring very small changes in 
the local gravity field, and instruments for 
analysing volcanic gases. 
At this point forecasting becomes more 
complex. Firstly, as the magma gets close to 
the surface, its effects are concentrated in an 
ever-smaller area, so many more and closer 
spaced instruments are needed to pinpoint the 
highest area of risk. 
Secondly, the shallow part of the earth’s crust 
(2-3 km) is much weaker than the intermediate 
crust where the magma was earlier and so erup- 
tion is easier. The moment of eruption is pre- 
ceded by much more rapid physical and chem- 
ical changes. The closer we are to eruption time, 
the greater the forecasting uncertainties. 
Short-term warnings of eruptions are 
therefore still rare and mostly unreliable, how- 
ever, because the complete range of measure- 
ment networks is only available for one per 
cent of the world’s active volcanoes. 
THE UNESCO Courier ® OCTOBER 1997 2 5

## [Page 26](109505engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 109511: Sounding the alarm

> 
©E
 
Fo
ma
ci
an
/G
am
ma
, 
Pa
ns
 
In the case of explosive volcanoes, which 
pose a major threat to people living nearby or 
to aircraft flying into the dense volcanic ash 
thrown up—a medium-term warning should 
lead to the establishment of no-go zones but 
this is difficult to enforce for understandable 
social and economic reasons, especially in 
densely populated areas. 
Earthquakes 
The accuracy of earthquake prediction is poor, 
the main reason for the failure of short-term 
forecasting being the abundance rather than 
the lack of events that precede an earthquake. 
Many earthquakes are preceded by tremors, 
sizeable ground deformation, local changes in 
the earth’s electrical or magnetic fields, changes 
in the level of water wells, and emissions of 
radon, carbon dioxide and other gases along 
fault lines. But these events also occur inde- 
pendently of earthquakes, and in the case of 
big quakes have neverall occurred together or 
been observed on the right scale by use of a sin- 
gle instrument network. 
Although we know alot about the source 
of earthquakes these days, we do not know 
much in detail about the earthquake prepara- 
0 
— 0 THE UNESCO Courier HW OCTOBER 1997 
tion process nor about the exact meaning, at 
any given moment, of a hundred or so poten- 
tial earthquake precursors. So it is easy to 
understand why governments and scientists 
are reluctant to risk their credibility by issu- 
ing warnings. The most reliable warning that 
can be given for earthquakes today is in fact 
simply to note where and when they have 
occurred and act accordingly. 
Regional networks of seismographs can be 
set up in these earthquake-prone areas. Data can 
be processed in real time or near-real time 
through automated systems which make it 
possible to pinpoint the time, magnitude and 
epicentre of a quake a few minutes after the 
event. In this way rescue services can be alerted 
and directed to the places where they are most 
needed. 
Today early warning of natural disasters is 
either possible or else we know why it is not. 
There is every reason to believe that through 
technology, our disaster-warning capacity will 
improve and that soon it will be possible to 
organize a timely response to all natural risks. 
Until then, keep an car cocked for the 
tolling bells. It may be just a wedding, but 
you never know. | 
A demonstration provoked by 
the escape of toxic fumes 
(dioxin) from a chemical plant 
in Seveso, near Milan {italy}, 
in 1976. 

## [Page 27](109505engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

“Women in traditional rural 
societies feel reluctance to 
consult male doctors. The use 
of women health workers and 
nurses would be a step in the 
right direction.” Above, a 
community health worker (at 
right) informs Bangladesh 
village women about medical 
treatment for children. 


### 109512: Women in the front line

  
in disaster preparedness and relief 
t too often goes unreported that women 
and children usually suffer more than men 
in natural disasters, especially in the coun- 
tries of the South. 
Preparedness and prevention programmes 
mostly ignore their vulnerability and few relief 
programmes are designed with them in mind. 
Since they play only a marginal role in com- 
Women in developing countries should be key players 
SCs 
GUHA-SAPIR 
  
munity decision-making, they can rarely com- 
mandeer relief supplies or have a say in post- 
disaster rehabilitation. 
Most of the 100,000 people who died in the 
1991 Bangladesh cyclone, for example, were 
women. Many died trying to protect their chil- 
dren and some because they stayed in their 
homes and kept away from the cyclone shelters 
THE UNESCO Courier H OCTOBER 1997 2 1 
© 
Ma
rk
 
Ed
wa
rd
s 
/S
ul
l 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
>

## [Page 28](109505engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ba
ld
ev
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ri
s 
| 4 because they felt obliged to safeguard their 


### 109512: Women in the front line

property. Although the cyclone warning system 
was in place, it was only partly effective because 
gender was ignored. Furthermore, the absence 
of women doctors meant that many women 
and girls needing care did not venture to emer- 
gency clinics for treatment. 
In severe droughts, women face a sharply 
increased workload because men often migrate 
insearch of work. Their health suffers, and as 
water tables get lower and lower they have to 
fetch water from further and further away. 
Hygiene deteriorates as the physical strain 
takes a tol] on their already malnourished bod- 
ies. High mortality of cattle means less milk 
and meat to go round. 
And yet women in traditional communities 
can play a key role in disaster preparedness and 
relief in areas they are used to handling such as 
distribution of food, water, blankets and jer- 
rycans and the siting of lavatories. They take 
decisions about the welfare of children, includ- 
ing their evacuation, feeding and safe keeping in 
hee 8 the unesco (ousier macros 1997 
chaotic times. Education and public informa- 
tion campaigns should take account of these 
social and cultural responsibilities. Informa- 
tion on where food or other supplies can be 
obtained and the claims to such relief should be 
spelled out for the general public but should 
keep women very much in mind. Illiteracy and 
other factors may limit a woman’s access to 
such information. 
Drought preparedness programmes should 
strengthen women as farmers in their own 
right and ensure that water distribution plans 
recognize that they are usually responsible for 
this task. 
Cultural and social constraints also aggra- 
vate the problems displaced women face in 
using health and sanitary services. Althoughit 
is widely known that women in traditional 
rural societies feel reluctance (in some cases 
reinforced by taboos) to consult or be treated 
by male doctors, standard relief response does 
not seem to take this into account. The use 
of women health workers and nurses, rather 
Above and above right, victims 
of the cyclone that hit 
Bangladesh in May 1991.

## [Page 29](109505engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ba
ld
ev
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ns
 
x 
X
S
 
FJ 
a
 


### 109512: Women in the front line

. 
than male doctors, would be a step in the right 
direction. 
Risk mapping in disaster-prone areas 
should identify the vulnerable population by 
sex and identify ways in which women are 
particularly at risk. The development of 
women’s networks and community groups 
to discuss disaster preparedness, examine past 
experiences and decide on solutions should 
also be encouraged. 
Reporting of sex-differentiated mortality 
and morbidity data would improve field inter- 
ventions. In camps for persons displaced by 
natural disasters registration for services such 
as food or health care should also be done by 
sex of recipient. Knowledge of the different 
ways in which men and women use services is 
critical in planning and targeting unreached 
population groups. 
There has been a spectacular rise in relief 
funding in the last few years, and donors under 
pressure from relief and development agencies 
clamouring for increasing resources are raising 
“Since women play only a 
marginal role in community 
decision-making, they rarely 
have a say in post-disaster 
rehabilitation.” Below, a scene 
of devastation in Bangladesh 
after the 6 May 1991 cyclone. 
questions about traditional approaches. Relief 
operations are coming under greater pressure 
to provide better quality of service and higher 
levels of cost-efficiency. A first step towards 
reducing the vulnerability and number of dis- 
aster victims would be to integrate women 
more fully into the planning and execution of 
disaster preparedness and relief schemes.  H 
 
THE UNESCO Courier W OCTOBER 1997 
© 
Ba
ld
ev
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ns

## [Page 30](109505engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 109513: Insurance: halting an ominous trend

nsurance: halting 
  an ominous trend 
Rs SE 
BY GERHARD BERZ 
The insurance industry is adapting in response to growing risk from natural disasters 
ver the last ten years, major natural dis- 
asters have caused economic losses 
amounting to more than $400 billion 
and insured losses of some $100 billion. Com- 
pared with disaster losses in the 1960s the eco- 
nomic loss burden has increased eight-fold, 
discounting inflation, and insured losses by as 
much as fifteen-fold. 
Individual disasters like Hurricane Andrew 
(U.S.A. 1992) have cost as much as $30 bil- 
This dramatic and skewed growth of 
insured losses is changing the insurance indus- 
try. Availability of cover against natural disas- 
ters used to be mainly a matter of the right 
price. Nowadays it is much more a matter of 
capacity. The world reinsurance industry, which 
handles most catastrophe risks and had a huge 
stake in recent disasters—98 per cent in both the 
1985 Mexico earthquake and Hurricane Gilbert 
(Jamaica, 1988) and 65 per cent in the Euro- 
pean winter storms of 1990—has realized the lion in economic damages, two thirds of which ob ha 
precariousness of giving unlimited propor- was borne by the insurance industry. Where 
there was only one insured disaster loss exceed- 
ing $1 billion before 1987, eighteen such dis- 
asters have occurred since then. 
These trends toward a new dimension of 
loss potential are primarily caused by a rapidly 
growing concentration of people and prop- 
erty in towns and cities, especially in coastal 
regions and other areas highly exposed to nat- 
ural hazards. 
Natural disasters: $ billion insurance losses 
Rank Year Event Area Insured losses Total costs (in 
(milion U 5.9) millions of dollars) 
17 1983 Hurricane Alicia United States 1275 1650 
6 1987  Winterstorm Western Europe 3100 3700 
5 1989 Hurricane Hugo Caribbean, United States 4500 9000 
4 1990  Winterstorm Daria Europe 5100 6800 
16 1990  Winterstorm Herta Europe 1300 1900 
8 1990  Winterstorm Vivian Europe 2100 3250 
15 1990  Winterstorm Wiebke Europe 1300 2250 
3 1991 Typhoon Mireille Japan 5200 6 000 
1 1991 Oakland fire United States 1700 2000 
1 1992 Hurricane Andrew United States 20 000 30 000 
12 1992 Hurricane Iniki Hawaii (U.S.A.) 1600 3000 
10 1993 Blizzard United States 1750 5000 
19 1993 Floods United States 1000 12000 
2 1994 Earthquake United States 12500 30000 
7 1995 Earthquake Japan 3000 100 000 
18 1995  Hailstorm United States 1135 2000 
14 1995 Hurricane Luis Caribbean 1500 2500 
9 1995 Hurricane Opal United States 2100 3000 
13 1996 Hurricane Fran United States 1600 3000   As of 01/97. Original figures, not adjusted for inflation. © Manchener Ruck, 1997 
3 0 THE UNESCO (ourir mocroser 1997

## [Page 31](109505engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 109513: Insurance: halting an ominous trend

tional catastrophe coverage and has switched 
to limited non-proportional coverage. 
This shrinkage of insurance capacity will 
mean more even distribution of disaster risk 
among the four parties concerned—insurer, 
reinsurer, insured and government. The first 
two will still bear most of the burden, but 
where losses look like being more than the 
insurers could bear, governments will have to 
help out as “last-resort” insurers or else give tax 
relief so as to preserve the insurance companies’ 
catastrophe reserves. Even so, the insurance 
industry must scize every opportunity to 
stop or reverse the ominous rising trend in 
loss burdens from natural disasters. 
Preparing for the worst 
Insurance is by definition a form of disaster 
preparedness. It represents an important, if 
not decisive, prerequisite for many economic 
activities. Without insurance cover, engineer- 
ing projects in highly exposed regions, such as 
offshore installations in the North Sea, or 
power stations in earthquake zones, would 
  
Great Natural Disasters 1960-1996 
Decade 
1960-1962 
Number 16 
Economic losses* 48.4 
Insured losses * 6.5 
* All figures in U.S. $ billion {1996 price level) 
Damage caused by Hurricane 
Andrew to a mobile-home park 
in Florida (1992). 
—— 
© 
Fr
an
k 
Si
te
ma
n/
As
k 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ns
 
Decade Decade Last Factor Factor 
1970-1979 1980-1989 10 years 80s5'60s Last 10 years: 
1987-1996 60s 
29 70 64 4.4 4 
93 147.6 404.4 3 8.4 
10.9 29.8 98.8 4.6 15.2 
© Munchener Rick, Munich 
be a gamble with a high risk of failure that no 
business enterprise could take on. 
Consequently the development and appli- 
cation of modern technologies and the eco- 
nomic development of regions where the risk 
level is high or unknown have always been 
accompanied and promoted by the insurance 
industry. Often enough these ventures have 
ended with adverse results and sometimes in 
total loss. This makes it all the more important 
for insurers to assess the risk as realistically as 
possible and to bring all available knowhow to 
bear on the process. In so doing, they very 
often find themselves at the forefront of sci- 
entific and technological development. 
Financial incentives 
Once people are insured for a risk, they often 
forget aboutit and lose interest in taking any loss 
prevention measures. Insurers must counteract 
this mode of thought and behaviour, and they 
can best do so by applying financial incentives. 
If they unload part of the loss onto the 
insured by means of a substantial deductible— 
a clause in the insurance policy relieving the 
insurer of responsibility for an initial amount 
of the loss—or some other form of “co-insur- 
ance”, butat the same time reward him or her 
with an equally substantial premium rebate, 
they can very effectively motivate the policy- 
holder to prevent losses. 
The number of loss cases eligible for set- 
tlement in natural disasters is drastically 
reduced by relatively modest deductibles, 
because such disasters always entail a large, 
sometimes enormous number of minor losses. 
0 Alerting the public 
Insurance companies publish information in 
the form of leaflets, brochures, films and TV 
spots in order to alert the public to risks and 
draw attention to the precautions they could 
take. In the past, such information campaigns 
have concentrated on fire, accident and bur- 
glary prevention, but today efforts are shift- 
ing more and more to natural hazards, where 
many possibilities for loss prevention have so 
far scarcely been tapped. 
THE UNESCO Gounier HW OCTOBER 1997 3 1

## [Page 32](109505engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 109513: Insurance: halting an ominous trend

> 
posal comprehensive worldwide loss experi- 
ence which it uses not only in calculating pre- 
miums and in classifying hazard areas, known 
as rating zones, but also in tracing relationships 
between eventintensity and loss intensity and 
estimating loss potentials from realistic disas- 
ter scenarios. In these and other areas of disas- 
ter preparedness, mitigation and relief it can 
contribute a wealth of experience to worldwide 
The insurance industry also has at its dis-  
50 great natural disasters of 1996 
  
21 
 
50 
co-operation with governmental, non-gov- 
crnmental and scientific institutions, industry 
and the media. In the insurance industry the 34 
International Decade for Natural Disaster 
Reduction has a natural partner and ally which 
can help to ensure that its success endures far 
beyond the present decade. [| 
Number con the map Event/Date Number Economic Insured 
Area of deaths ___losses losses 
{U.5.$ millions) 
1 Indonesia Flooding/January 24 110 
2 Australia Tropical windstorm, flooding/January 
3 United States Winterstorm, flooding /January 85 1200 600 
4 United States Snowstorm, frost, floods/January 54 3000 1200 
5 Morocco Storms, flooding /January 25 35 
6 United Kingdom Snowstorms, flooding/January 600 495 
7 China Earthquake/February 304 60 
8 South Africa Flooding/February 42 
9 Brazl Flooding /February 58 
10 Costa Rica Flooding/February 6 250 
11 Indonesia Earthquake, tsunami/February 102 4 
12 United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait ~~ Flooding, hail/March 290 
13 India Drought/Apnil 570 
14 Mongolia Forest and grassland fires/Apnl-May 26 6 
15 United States Tornadoes, hail /April 4 650 300 
16 United States, Mexico Drought/May-June 3600 
17 Australia Flooding /May 4 2 1 
18 United States Storms, tornadoes, flooding/May 1 700 300 
19 Bangladesh Tornadoes/May 600 
20 United States Tornadoes, storms, flooding/May 1000 375 
21 United States Forest fires/June 40 
22 Yemen Flooding/June 338 
23 Italy, Austria Flooding, storms/June 38 32 13 
24 China Flooding, debns flows/ June-August 2700 24000 445 
25 South Africa, Lesotho Winter damage /July 17 
26 United States, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands Hurricane/July 10 400 195 
27 Bangladesh, India Flooding, landslides /July 325 150 
28 United States Flooding, tornadoes/July 2 200 110 
29 Canada Flooding, landslides, hailstorms/July 10 1100 370 
30 Philippines, Thailand, China Typhoon, flooding/July 43 110 
31 Viet Nam, Thailand Tropical cyclone /July-August 100 310 
32 Dem. Pecple's Rep. of Korea, Rep. of Korea ~~ Flooding, landshides/ July 67 2300 
33 Nicaragua, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, 
Honduras, Mexico, Venezuela Hurricanes/ July 67 200 
34 United States Forest fires/Summer 30 
35 China Typhoon/ July-August 89 1200 115 
36 Spain Flash flood, landslide/August 86 
37 Pakistan Flooding /August 111 
38 India Cold spell, storms/August 226 
39 United States Hurncane, flooding /September 22 3000 1600 
40 Caribbean (esp. Puerto Rico), Canada Hurricane/September 26 250 150 
41 China, Viet Nam Typhoon/September 163 1500 
42 Sudan Flooding/September-October 100 
43 Iceland Volcanic eruption/ October-November 17 
44 Viet Nam Flooding/October-November 162 360 
45 India Flooding, storms /October 338 90 
46 United States Storms, flooding/ October 4 350 240 
47 United Kingdom, Germany, Netherlands, 
France Winter storm/October 7 300 240 
48 India Tropical cyclone, flooding/November 970 1500 
49 Europe Cold spell, snowstorms/December 170 300 200 
50 United States, Canada Winter storms, flooding/December 20 750 370 
7 
© THL UNESCO Gouriermocroser 1997 
a3 
10 
|  
Earthquake 
Windstorm 
Flooding 
Others D
P
O
o
o
 
Symbols shaded if number of 
deaths 2 200 and/or economic 
losses 2 U.S. $300 milien and/or 
insured losses 2 U.5.$100 million 
  
Great natural disasters 
i» Hurricane Fran, United 
States 
5-8 September 
22 deaths 
Total losses: 
$3 billion U.S. 
Insured losses; 
$1.6 billion U.S. 
Ww Floods in China 
June-August 
2,700 deaths 
Total losses: 
$24 billion U.S. 
Insured losses: 
$0.455 billion U.S.

## [Page 33](109505engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 109513: Insurance: halting an ominous trend

  
43 
  
    
  
    
   
6 
47 
49 
36 23 
5 24; 
41 35 
37 ; 
12 
19 
38 27 
22 13 
42 a5 aa 30 
48 31 
1 1a 
2 
17 
25 
8 
Number of loss events Percentage 
distribution 
AFRICA I 49 worldwide 
AMERICA Wi Ea 195 
ASIA WM i 184 
» 
Earthquakes Il 
AUSTRALIA Il 30(5/16/5/4)* 
EUROPE | ¥] 136 
Storms 
wor 554 Haths 
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 Others 
Number of deaths Worldwide breakdown: TN 
percentage according he 
AFRICA 530 to type of event »    
AMERICA ! 1020 
ASIA Jie 9525 
AUSTRALIA 67(6/10/6/45)* 
EUROPE 720 
WORLD 11860 
0 5000 10000 15000   Earthquakes [ll 
storms 
Flooding 
Others   
* (Earthquake/Windstorm/Flooding/Others) 
THE UNESCO Gur ER ® OCTOBER 1997 
19
97
, 
M
u
n
i
c
h
 
© 
M
a
n
c
h
e
n
e
r
 
Ri
ck
, 
M
i
n
c
h
e
n
e
r
 
Ru
ck
, 
M
u
n
i
c
h
 
- =

## [Page 34](109505engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

FACT FILE 
BUILDING A CULTURE 
OF PREVENTION 
The International Decade for Natural 
Disaster Reduction 1990-2000 
In 1989, 155 Member States of the United Nations co-sponsored 
a UN Resolution which declared the years 1990 to 2000 the 
“International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction” 
(IDNDR). The purpose of the decade is to marshal the politi- 
cal resolve, experience and expertise of each country to reduce 
loss of life, human suffering and economic losses from natural 
hazards. 
According to IDNDR targets, by the year 2000 all countries 
should: 
COMPLETE NATIONAL RISK ASSESSMENTS 
@ Identify natural hazards which pose the threat of disaster 
Evaluate the geographic distribution of hazard threats and 
their frequency and impacts 
Assess the vulnerability of the most important concentra- 
tions of population, development and resources 
IMPLEMENT NATIONAL AND/OR LOCAL PREVENTION AND 
PREPAREDNESS PLANS 
* Adopt land-use and construction practices that will reduce 
disaster risks 
Adopt emergency-response plans that identify hazard sce- 
narios, essential actions and responsible organizations 
* Implement awarcness programmes to educate people about 
risks and training programmes to improve the capabilities of 
responsible personnel 
« Implement concrete measures to mitigate damages and 
increase resilience to hazards 
IMPLEMENT GLOBAL, REGIONAL, NATIONAL AND LOCAL 
WARNING SYSTEMS 
* Implement systems for monitoring and predicting threat- 
ening phenomena in time to reduce impacts 
« Implement communication systems for disseminating warn- 
ings 
# Educate decision makers about hazards and options for 
reducing disaster risk. 
Source: United Nations, IDNDR 
IDNDR Secretariat 
UN Department of Humanitarian Affairs 
Palais des Nations 
1211 Geneva 10, Switzerland 
Tel: (41-22) 798 6894 
Fax: (41-22) 733 8695 
Email: idndr@dha.unicc.org 
Documentation available on request: 
Cities at risk, 1996. (also in French, Spanish and Italian) 
Learning about natural disasters, 1995 (also in French, Spanish, 
Chinese, Russian, Hindi, Farsi, Macedonian, Turkish, Alban- 
ian and Serbo-Croat) 
Yokohama Strategy and Plan of Action, 1995 (also in French and 
Spanish) 
World Disaster Reduction Campaign (information bulletin) 
Stop Disasters (quarterly magazine, also in French, Spanish 
and Italian) 
Also available: posters, stickers, video catalogue. 
34 THE UNESCO Gouritrn OCTOBER 1997 
World Disaster 
Reduction Day 1997— 
making communities 
safer from floods and 
drought 
Coastal and river flooding are the most frequent natural disasters and 
drought is the disaster that affects more people than any others. For 
this reason the 1897 World Disaster Reduction campaign, an annual 
programme within IDNDR, is designed to stimulate efforts to reduce 
the social and economic impact of floods and droughts. The high 
point of the campaign, an annual programme within IDNDR, is World 
Disaster Reduction Day on Wednesday 8 October. 
TRUE OR FALSE? 
Answers to quiz on page 10 
1. False. Local health services are normally able to cope in case of disaster. They have the advan 
tage of speaking the local language and are familiar with the health service infrastructure. For- 
eign teams may provide specialized skills and equipment, but they have to be housed and fed. 
2. True. A fast international response to disasters is not necessarily the best solution. An eval- 
uation of the most urgent needs should first be made so that communication channels do not 
become blocked by unessential items or by outdated medicaments and food products. 
3. False. Although disasters may disappear from the news headlines, their impact may last for 
years. There 1s often permanent damage to water supplies and health services; reconstruction 
and rehabilitation are time-consuming and costly. 
4, True. Poverty leads to poor living conditions and the poor are more vulnerable in case of dis- 
aster. The richer countries have the resources with which to rebuild their lives and are usually 
better prepared. 
5. False. Although some people might encourage us to believe that looting and other forms of 
selfish behaviour are common following disasters, it has been shown that disaster situa- 
tions bring out the best in people and solidarity is strengthened. 
6. False. Dead bodies do not cause epidemics or disease transmission during the first 72 hours; 
after this, the decomposition process may cause contamination of water supplies. First pri- 
onty following a disaster should be to care for the injured. 
7. True, Disasters such as earthquakes do not damage crops although drought, hurncanes 
and floods do. However, If adequate preparations such as storage and rationing of foods have 
been properly organized, there should not be any serious hunger. When international assistance 
is requested, seeds and tools are often more important than food. 
8. True. Keeping people as close to their homes as possible is best; settlement camps should 
be a last resort since they create other problems. International assistance in the form of 
building materials and tools may be desirable. 
9. False. Careful rationing should be organized so that everyone is fed. Those involved in sal- 
vage work and reconstruction are particularly in need of a regular food supply. 
10. False. Team work is the most efficient way of dealing with the aftermath of disaster. Train- 
ing of teams prior to a disaster so that each person knows his or her responsibilities is indis- 
pensable for the proper management of a disaster. 
11. True. Strict adherence to the building code in earthquake-prone areas significantly dimin- 
ishes the loss of human life. 
12. True. Overgrazing, a failure to plant trees and mismanagement of land use lead to soil ero- 
sion. In the Sahel, when added to the effects of climate change, all this means an advance of 
the desert.

## [Page 35](109505engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO AND NATURAL DISASTER REDUCTION 
UNEscO’s Unit for Disaster Reduction seeks to encourage the adoption of 
policies and action designed to anticipate potential risks and favouring a 
shift in emphasis away from post-disaster reaction and response toward 
pre-disaster planning, preparedness and prevention. 
For further information: 
Unit for Disaster Reduction 
Bureau for Coordination of Environmental Programmes 
Science Sector 
Unesco, 1, rue Miollis, 75732 Paris Cedex 15, France 
Tel: (33) (0)1 45 68 41 20. Fax: (33) (0)1 45 68 58 30 
Email: b.rcuhban@unesco.org 
Documentation available on request: 
Standing up to natural disasters, 1991 (also in French and Spanish) 
w El ON LA I. a a ia Rl 
Many Unesco programmes have proven experience 
in the scientific study of natural hazards. They include: 
HM THE INTERNATIONAL HYDROLOGICAL PROGRAMME (IHP) 
[HP is designed to improve management of the world’s freshwater 
resources. Its activities include 
« improving scientific knowledge of the water cycle 
* cathering information, e.g. on climate, surface and groundwater con- 
ditions, and water use 
® helping train personnel that will minimize risks in hazardous situations 
«developing models and observing systems to help forecast river floods 
and storm surges 
International Hydrological Programme (IHP) 
Division of Water Sciences 
Unesco, 1, rue Miollis, 75732 Paris Cedex 15, France 
Tel: (33) (0)1 45 68 40 44. Fax: (33) (0)1 45 68 58 11 
Email: ihp@unesco.org 
Internet: http: //www.pangea.org/orgs/unesco/ 
HM THE MAN AND THE BIOSPHERE (MAB) PROGRAMME 
MAB studies long-term natural hazards such as drought and human- 
induced desertification. These can can be just as devastating as rapid- 
onset events, but reducing their impact calls for a different set of skills, 
particularly the fostering of greater ecological and social awareness. MAB 
projects to mitigate the effects of drought and desertification in Africa 
have notably concerned the Sahel countries and the Turkana region of 
Kenya. 
Programme on Man and the Biosphere (MAB) 
Division of Ecological Sciences 
Unesco, 1, rue Miollis, 75732 Paris Cedex 15, France 
Tel: (33) (0)1 45 68 41 51. Fax: (33) (0)1 45 68 58 04 
Email: mab@unesco.org 
Internet: http://www.unesco.org:80//mab/themabnet.html 
HM THE INTERNATIONAL GEOLOGICAL CORRELATION PROGRAMME 
(IGCP) 
To understand the changes which will affect the future of the earth’s con- 
tinents and islands, it is necessary to study past and present geological 
processes. IGCD, a joint venture of UNESCO and the International Union 
of Geological Sciences (IUGS), compares and correlates geological processes, 
events and formations, including rocks, fossils and mineral deposits. Pro- 
jects make use of and contribute to the further development of scientific 
knowledge and technology, from deep-core drilling to space imagery. 
International Geological Correlation Programme {1GCP) 
Division of Earth Sciences 
Unesco, 1, rue Miollis, 75732 Paris Cedex 15, France 
Fax: (33) (0)1 45 68 58 22 
HM THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL OCEANOGRAPHIC COMMISSION 
(10C) 
In 1965, in the aftermath of the great destruction caused by the tsunami 
which struck the coast of Chile on 22 May 1960, the IOC accepted an offer 
made by the United States to expand its Tsunami Warning Center in Hon- 
olulu to become the headquarters of an International Pacific Tsunami Warn- 
ing System. Today 25 nations belong to the Pacific System, plus some terri- 
tories that maintain stations for it. Besides the main Centre in Honolulu, there 
are regional tsunami warning centres in Alaska, Japan, Russia, Chile and 
French Polynesia which transmit warnings in their respective areas. 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission {10C) 
Unesco, 1, rue Miollis, 75732 Paris Cedex 15, France 
Fax: (33) (0)1 45 68 58 12. Email: i.cliounine@unesco.org 
Internet: http://www.unesco.org/ioc 
International Tsunami Information Centre (10C/ITIC) 
737 Bishop Street, Suite 2200, 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813, U.S.A. 
Tel: (1-808) 532 64 22, Fax: (1-808) 532 55 76. Email: itic@itic.noaa.gov 
NH THE DIVISION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE 
When disaster strikes, the cost of losing part of the cultural heritage must 
be added to the toll of human life and suffering. If requested, UNESCO 
will intervene and advise on restoration or safeguarding of the cultural her- 
itage. Some of the best-known international campaigns for cultural soli- 
darity have had their starting point in the emergency that followed a nat- 
ural disaster. 
Division of Cultural Heritage 
Culture Sector 
Unesco, 1, rue Miollis, 75732 Paris Cedex 15, France 
Fax: (33) (0)1 45 68 55 96 
HM THE EDUCATIONAL BUILDINGS PROGRAMME 
One of the main activities of UNESCO's educational buildings programme 
is the development and design of educational structures able to withstand 
disaster forces. Practical advice is given on how to build schools that will 
be relatively safe if a natural disaster occurs. UNESCO damage-assessment 
and rehabilitation missions to disaster-stricken countries have led to the 
development of schools that can be used as refuge and relief centres. 
Architecture for Education Section 
Education Sector 
Unesco, 7, Place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
Tel: (33) (0})1 4568 09 06. Fax: (33) (0)14568 56 31 
INTERNET ADDRESSES 
IDNDR Internet Conferences: http: //www.quipu.net/ 
International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction: 
http://hoshi.cic.sfu.ca.hazard /idndr.html 
Emergency Preparedness Information Exchange (EPIX): 
http://hoshi.cic.sfu.ca/epix 
Environmental Organisation Web Division - Disasters: 
http: //www.wcb.directory.com/disasters 
Global Emergency Management Disaster Counselling Support Network: 
http://tin.ssc.plym.ac.uk/geme.html 
Natural Hazards Research and Applications Information Centre, University of 
Colorado: http://adder.colorado.edu/hazctr/home.html 
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) Emergency Preparedness: 
http://www.paho.org 
US Agency for International Development (USAID): http: //www.info.usaid.gov 
US Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): http://hoshi.cic.sfu.ca.hazard 
Volunteers in Technical Assistance (VITA): http://www.vita.org 
OTHER ADDRESSES 
IDNDR Regional Office for Latin American and the Caribbean 
Apartado 3745-1000. San José, Costa Rica 
Tel; (506) 257 2141. Fax; (506) 257 2139 
Email: hmolin@undpcos.nu.or.cr 
Documentation available on request: 
IDNDR Informs (Newsletter, also in Spanish) 
“Stop Disasters” International Institute 
Via di Pozzuoli 110, “Villa Medusa”. 80124 Naples, Italy 
Tel /fax: (39-81) 570 6340 
Sources: IDNDR Secretariat and IDNDR Disaster Preparedness and Response: An Audit of UK 
Assets, D, Sanderson, |. Davis, J. Twigg, B. Cowden, Oxford Centre for Disaster 
Studies/Intermediate Technology, 1995, 
 
THE UNLSCO Gounier B® OCTOBER 1997 3 5

## [Page 36](109505engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 109514: Water and civilization

  
Un
t 
sc
o/
Gl
 
Ja
co
ue
s,
 
Mo
nt
ré
ed
 
& @ 
Water and civilization are indissociable. The earliest civiliza- 
tions arose in the great river valleys of the Euphrates, the Nile, 
the Indus and the Yangtze, where the transition could he made 
from subsistence farming to agrieultural surplus. Today, the 
future of the world’s water supplies depends on the civilized 
use of this finite and vulnerable resource. 
Human civilization is a response to challenge, and I take a 
more optimistic view of the water crisis than the prophets of 
doom who speculate on the prospect of resource wars in the cen- 
tury to come. Water scarcity can be a source of conflict among 
competing users, particularly where combined with other fac- 
tors of political or cultural tension. But it can also be an induce- 
ment to co-operation, as evidenced by the growing number of 
water allocation agreements today being signed and imple- 
mented, even in high-tension areas. I believe that human civi- 
lization can find within itself the resources to respond suc- 
cessfully to this global challenge. 
To say this is not to underestimate the scale of the challenge 
facing us. The warning signs are clear: severe water searcity in many 
regions of the world, falling water tables, shrinking rivers and 
lakes, widespread pollution, creeping desertification. To these we 
must add the human cost of water shortage—malnutrition, dis- 
ease, abandonment of rural areas, swollen urban settlements and 
the increased burden placed on women in water-scarce environ- 
ments. All this—and the nced to remain alert to the threat of 
climate change—adds up to a challenge of the first magnitude. 
In this century, total world demand for water has increased 
seven-fold. This compares with a three-fold increase in world 
population over the same period. The fact that demand for 
water in this century has increased at twice the rate of popu- 
lation growth underlines the point that changes in lifestyle 
linked to socio-economic development are the principal source 
of increased water use. This is bad news inasmuch as demand 
will continue to accelerate as living standards worldwide hope- 
fully improve. But itis good news inasmuch as it points to a sub- 
stantial margin for water savings through the modification of our 
priorities, policies and practices. 
3 6 THE UNESCO Gourirr HE OCTOBER 1997 
commentary Fed eri CO M dyO0 r 
Fresh water represents 0.26 per cent of the total water 
mass on the surface of the carth—0.007 per cent if we discount 
groundwater resources and polar ice. This scaree resource, 
essential for life, must be seen as a natural treasure, as part of 
the common heritage of humankind. 
To provide for foreseeable future needs, water resonrces 
development must be placed at the top of national and inter- 
national agendas. New water projects—conceived in an eco- 
logically sensitive way—take [rom fifteen to twenty years to 
plan and implement. If we delay, the pressure to quench the 
thirst of needy people in water-scarce environments may force 
the recourse to ecologically or otherwise unsound projects. In 
many parts of the world, the solution of water problems should 
orient the formulation of socio-economic development goals. 
Integrated river basin and watershed planning and manage- 
ment at scales ranging from the regional to the international are 
animportant element in such a strategy. 
A new ethic 
Everywhere, water resources development mnst go hand in 
hand with energetic policies for conservation, re-use and the 
elimination of all forms of wastage. Better technical informa- 
tion and the deployment of new technologies have an important 
part to play in the more rational management of water use. 
Yet itis doubtful whether technical solutions alone are suffi- 
cient to achieve a sustainable relationship between supply and 
demand. The challenge posed by the water crisis is ultimately 
one of values. 
This has important implications for our decision-making 
processes in the environment and development field. [ am a 
strong believer in the need to increase scientific input and the 
participation of scientists in policy making at all levels. But we 
should not entertain the illusion that the solution to problems 
lies in perfect data. In a world of uncertainty, data are never 
complete. In the hydrological field, for example, there is an 
increasing awareness that our emphasis on measures of averages 
and trends has led us to underestimate the impact of extreme 
-

## [Page 37](109505engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 109514: Water and civilization

events and random climate changes. To put off making urgent 
decisions on the grounds that all the data are not available is 
to forget that time—in the form of irreversible events—has an 
ethical dimension. The perfect diagnosis is an autopsy. But a 
post mortem review of water and civilization is something we 
cannot afford. 
Dealing with uncertainty and risk is part of the human con- 
dition. This is why, while daring without knowledge is risky, 
knowledge without daringis fruitless. Daring, caring and shar- 
ing are among the human parameters within which solutions to 
the water crisis will be found. 
One aspect of technological progress that is worth noting is 
its role in the creation of transhoundary networks of co-oper- 
ation and solidarity. New forms of software and visual display 
are now facilitating the joint creation of water resource mod- 
els by political and technical stakeholders. Satellite technol- 
ogy gives countries and authorities the ability to build a fairly 
accurate picture of water flowin other jurisdictions. This tech- 
nological capability is transforming the relationships and nego- 
tiations among jurisdictions and is being disseminated and 
democratized faster than anyone could have foreseen. 
To address the problem at source, we need to promote a new 
attitude to water—I would go so far as to speak of a new water 
ethic. Pricing policies and market mechanisms—although they 
pose some difficult problems of social equity and public 
accountability—clearly have a role to play in the revaluation of 
water and a reduction of demand. But so too does education. 
Cross-frontier agreements 
Education for water awareness has a rich imaginative heritage 
on which to draw, Water connects us. It connects us by flowing 
across imposed boundaries, by linking diverse terrains and set- 
tlements. In religion, myth and legend, water is a universal sym- 
bol of wholeness and purification. It is the original element, a 
source of life, a metaphor for natural and mental process, the 
image of all that unites us in time and space. This civiliza- 
tional inheritance is one that education can and must turn to 
account. 
Of course, the problems with which water management has 
to contend are very complex. They include a whole range of com- 
peting interest groups and established structures of rights, 
values and priorities. Reconciling differences and reforming 
structures to take account of new realities implies difficult 
legal, administrative and investment changes. It risks pitting dif- 
ferent constituencies—such as urban and agricultural com- 
munities—against one another. 
The situation is even more complicated at the international 
level, where differences of perceived interest may be greater, 
traditions more divergent, and the search for agreement vitiated 
by political tensions. llere, we need to be aware of the water- 
sharing rules and traditions to be found in most cultures. The 
sharia—Islamic law—embodies precepts for water use and 
public water management as well as community-based conflict 
management strategies. The Jewish tradition includes similar 
prescriptions for not prejudicing the interests of other river- 
dwellers. Shared principles of this kind can provide a useful 
basis for the building of cross-frontier agreements. 
Throughout history, human beings have responded to the 
need to pool their efforts and share resources in the interests 
of larger security. Water, in particular, hasbeen one of human- 
ity’s historic learning grounds for community building, and we 
should see it as a potential source not of conflict but of agree- 
ments that can serve as a paradigm for the constructive shar- 
ing of knowledge and resources essential for the transition {from 
a culture of war to a culture of peace. 
A resource to be shared 
UNESCO's International llydrological Programme (111%), which 
was launched some twenty years ago and is the only science 
and education programme within the United Nations system 
devoted to freshwater problems, addresses most of these issues 
in association with its many governmental and non-governmen- 
tal partners. Its main concern is with the promotion of techni- 
cal co-operation worldwide: upgrading hydrological knowledge 
and research capacities in our Member States; working with 
bodies such as the World Climate Programme to understand the 
links between hydrological processes and climate change; 
studying with our Man and the Biosphere programme factors 
of vulnerability in the land-water system; assessing problems of 
groundwater contamination; examining hydrological processcs 
in arid zones and the humid tropics; and supporting post- 
graduate hydrology courses for participants from the developing 
world. 
At the same time, taking advantage of UNESCO's position at 
the crossroads of science, education, culture and communica- 
tion, the HIP also ranges more widely. For example, it analyses 
needs for integrated urban and freshwater resources develop- 
ment—as in the case of our recently launched project in the his- 
toric city of Essaouira (Morocco). Under its auspices, we are also 
instituting a new interdisciplinary programme entitled Water 
and Civilization. Conceived as part of UNESCO’ broader Culture 
of Peace programme, it will include among other things a com- 
ponent aimed at providing technical support for water-related 
conflict resolution. 
The water issue is vast and diverse in its inplications. Water 
is life, and life is sharing. Let water he a source of life, of mutu- 
ality, of progress. Let it irrigate the smiles of our children and 
their children, testifying that we, the inhabitants of planet earth 
on the threshold of a new millennium, have proved equal to the 
ethical, political and scientific challenges of our time. | 
a" 
“ ; 
THE UNESCO Gourier B OCTOBER 1997

## [Page 38](109505engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

® 
Fr
an
ce
 
Be
qu
el
te
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Oro Bay on the Isle 
of Pines. 
GREENWATCH 
threa 
§ ~ New Caledonia is a French 
“Territoire d’outre mer (over- 
seas territory forming part of the 
French Republic) in the southern 
part of Melanesia, half-way between 
Australia and New Zealand. Unlike 
its neighbours Vanuatu, the Solomon 
Islands and Fiji, the island is not of 
voleanie origin but heeame separate 
from the great landmass of Gond- 
wana 80 million years ago, whereas 
the 1,600-km barrier reef sur- 
rounding it and the three Loyalty 
Islands of Maré, Lifou and Ouvéa 
were formed much more recently. A 
range of mountains runs down the 
centre of New Caledonia, which is 
nicknamed “le Caillou” (the Rock). 
With an area of about 19,000 sq. 
kin,, the main island of Grande Terre 
is slightly smaller than Wales but has 
only 165,000 inhabitants, of whom 
65,000 live in the capital, Nouméa. It 
is a place of diversity in every respect, 
starting with population, since 
Kanaks, Wallis Islanders, Indonesians, 
Ni-Vanuatu, Arabs and Europeans 
live there side by side, It is ranked 
3 8 THE UNESCO Couneamocroser 1997 
ho] 
MN. 
fourth in the world for its biological 
diversity and second for the extent of 
its coral reefs and atolls. Tt has 3,250 
species of flowering plants (76% of 
them endemie to the island), 4,500 
invertebrates, 148 birds and many 
species of reptiles sueh as turtles, 
lizards and geekos. But unfortunately 
this haven of wildlife is being gravely 
threatened by human activities. 
The landscape is very varied. 
While the south and west of the island 
are relatively dry (1 to 1.5 
rainfall a year), average annual rain- 
fallin the east is between 1.5 and 3.5 
metres (and as much as 8 metres on 
metres of 
the island’s highest mountain, Mont 
Panié), and it is in that part of the 
island that the tush tropical vegeta- 
tion, the thousands of streams, the 
famous colonial pines (of the Areu- 
caria family), tree ferns and orchids 
are found. 
RICH PLANT AND ANIMAL LIFE 
According to the American non-gov- 
ernmental organization Conservation 
International, researeh carried out 


### 109516: New Caledonia: threats to biodiversity

 
New Caledonia: 
ts to NM i1odiversity 
by France Bequette 
by botanists Norman Myers and Russ 
Mittermayer, the organization's Pres- 
ident, show that New Caledonia is 
one of the richest places in the world 
in terms of biodiversity, and one of 
the places where biodiversity is most 
threatened. 
The fanna of New Caledonia is 
typical of a remoteisland. There are 
many endemic species. Out of 116 
species of nesting birds, 18 are 
endemic. The most extraordinary of 
them, the big grey woodland bird 
known as the kagu (Rhynochetos 
jubatus) is the eountry’s emblem. 
Like the extinct Mauritian dodo, it 
is flightless and thus an easy prey for 
wild dogs and cats. Today, like the 
ITawaiian goose (Branie sandvicen- 
sis), it survives only because it is care- 
fully protected, having heen made 
the subject of an active conservation 
policy in 1990. Luckily for the hird, 
itis not a gastronomic delicacy and is 
not hunted, unlike the notu (Duculia 
goliath), the world’s largest pigeon. 
The island is also home to the largest 
known gecko, the Rhacodactylus 
leachianus. Asregards insects, 4,000 
species have so far been recorded hut 
no-one can tell whether this repre- 
sents half or even a fifth of those actu- 
ally living in New Caledonia. No thor- 
ough study of the istand’s fungi has 
yet been carried out, 
The most serious threat to the 
island’s vegetation is that affecting 
the dry (sclerophyllous) forest on 
the eastern side, of which only 2% 
remains, in isolated clumps. Its dis- 
appearance is duc to the combined 
effects of forest fires, encroachment 
by grazing lands and urbanization, 
and introdueed species such as the 
Timor deer (Cervus timorensis), the 
population of which has grown since 
the end of the last century to nearly 
110,000 and which trample or eat 
the saplings, preventing any regen- 
eration of the forest cover. The rain- 
forest and scrub which cover 20%

## [Page 39](109505engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 109516: New Caledonia: threats to biodiversity

and 24% respectively of the terri- 
tory represent the principal habitat 
of the endemic plant species (88% 
and 81% respectively). Some of 
these species are now only repre- 
sented by a few specimens, while 
others have disappeared altogether. 
Conversely, a new species of wild rice 
(Oryza neocaledonica) was tdenti- 
fied in 1994 near Pouembout, which 
goes to show that much remains to 
be done before a complete inventory 
is made. 
Research is also being conducted 
to determine on an objective basis 
the therapeuntie value of plants used 
in traditional medicine. The Kanak 
have, for instance, treated the trop- 
ical food poisoning known as ciguat- 
era (see box) for centuries with an 
infusion of the leaves of the false 
tobacco plant (Argusia argentea) or 
a maceration of the false pepper tree 
(Schinus terebenthifolius). Although 
the toxins causing this illness have 
been isolated, no Western medical 
treatment is capable of curing it, let 
alone preventing it. 
‘FIRE PAINTS 
THE MOUNTAIN BLACK’ 
A drive through the country will show 
whether the pessimism expressed by 
Conservation International over the 
state of natnre conservation in New 
Caledonia is justified. The road from 
Nouméa to Koumac runs along the 
west coast of the main island. Bare 
A flooded forest in 
the artificial lake 
behind Yaté dam. 
  
   
hillsides with occasional patches of 
vivid green forest dominate the savan- 
nah from which emerge the white 
trunks of the niaoulis (Melaleuca 
quinguenervia), close relatives of the 
eucalyptus, and large trees grow in 
profusion along the river hanks, hut 
the countryside has heen ravaged by 
fire. Plumes of smoke and the scars 
left by previous conflagrations are a 
constant reminder that fire is an ever- 
present danger (it rages through more 
than 50,000 hectares every year). Its 
main causes are carelessness, slash- 
and-burn cultivation, the setting of 
fires to {lush out game animals or 
exterminate rats and other vermin, 
  
CIGUATERA 
Ciguatera, the tropieal food poisoning commonly known as “la gratte” 
or “the itch” because of the pruritis it often causes, affects all the trop- 
ical regions, from the Caribbean to the islands of the Indian Ocean, but 
is particularly widespread in the south Pacifte. In 1993, it was estimated 
that in Nouméa and the adjacent area alone nearly 20,000 people— 
25% of the population—had contracted it at least once. 
The illness is caused by eating reef-dwelling tropical fish conta- 
minated by the microalgae (Gambierdiscus toxicus) which prolifer- 
ate when coral reefs are disturbed by natural eauses such as cyclones 
or earthquakes or by human activity such as coastal land-use devel- 
opment, the building of sea walls and marinas or the extraction of sand 
from the lagoons. 
As the toxins accumulate in the food chain, consumers have also 
to be wary of large carnivorous fish like barracuda, loach, moray eel 
or shark, and, in badly infested areas, of fish at the bottom end of the 
chain, parrotfish and surgeonfish. The food poisoning in itself is usu- 
ally mild, but the digestive, nenrological and cardio-vascular disor- 
ders it brings on can, in serious cases, cause paralysis, coma and even 
death. | |   
Plants grown in 
this nursery will 
bring greenery to 
slopes disfigured 
by mining. 
—
 
ow
 
  
  
the hurning of rubbish, and arson, 
and its results are impoverishment of 
the soil, the acceleration of erosion, 
shrinkage of naturalforests, the dis- 
appearance of unique plants and the 
destruction of the nests of rare birds 
and insects. Everything Lurns, even 
the sheerest mountain sides. “Fire 
paints the mountain black,” say the 
Kanak. Only the tropical rainforest 
areas manage to resist. 
STRIP MINING 
Respect also needs to he shown for 
New Caledonta’s soil, which is 
extremely rich in nickel, chromium, 
cobalt, manganese and lead—all of 
them usually toxic for plants. Nickel 
(probably the world’s biggest deposit), 
discovered here in 1864, is so abon- 
dant that the country is one of the 
world’s largest producers, and stocks 
are nowhere near exhausted. When 
ore was found on the tops and slopes 
of the mountains, the early mine-own- 
ers did not hesitate to strip them bare. 
From far off, the access roads look 
  
THE UNESCO Gurier HW OCTOBER 1997 Rg 9 
© 
Fr
an
ce
 
Be
qu
et
te
, 
Pa
ns
 
> 
© 
Fr
an
ce
 
Be
qu
et
te
, 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 40](109505engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 109516: New Caledonia: threats to biodiversity

© 
Fr
an
ce
 
Be
qu
et
te
, 
Pa
ns
 
v 
 
like great steps cut into an orange 
pyramid. 
Until the 1970s, spoil from the 
mines was unceremoniously shoved 
down the mountain sides, taking with 
it the thin layer of fertile humus. 
Planting of the spoil-hieaps is now 
being carried out by private compa- 
nics, in collaboration with ORSTOM 
(the French government agency for 
overseas scientific and technical 
research) and CIRAD (Frances Inter- 
national Co-operation Centre of Agri- 
cultural Research for Development), 
using local species specially chosen 
for their capacity to tolerate heavy 
metals and fix nitrogen, but the task 
is amammoth one. Furthermore, the 
alumina and iron oxide leached out 
by the rains pollute first the rivers 
then the coral lagoons. 
UNRELIABLE PROTECTION 
Another problem is erosion: the rate 
in New Caledonia is one of the highest 
in the world, since the effects of min- 
ingare combined with those of defor- 
estation. Sandalwood, rosewood and 
the tall kauri trees (Agathis lanceo- 
These niaouli 
trees, left, have 
survived a fire. 
part of the 15,900-hectare Haute 
Yaté wildlife reserve, covers 9,045 
hectares. In one spot, a forest has been 
engulfed by the Yaté reservoir, from 
whose bright blue waters emerge tree- 
trunks seemingly carved out of ivory. 
In another, the botanical reserve of 
the Chutes dela Madeleine, the local 
autborities have, to the fury of ecol- 
ogists, laid out a recreation area with 
shelters, barbecues and toilets. Even 
worse, Neocallitropsis araucarioides 
trees belonging to a rare species with 
a distinctive twisted shape, which 
were probably a thousand years old, 
once grew near to the river but have 
been felled for their perfumed essen- 
tial oils. 
© 
Fr
an
ce
 
Be
qu
et
te
, 
Pa
ns
  
Fires, mining and poaching are 
wreaking slow but sure destruction 
upon natural sites of exceptional 
value in New Caledonia. Small areas 
and pockets have, it is true, been 
declared land-based or marine 
reserves, but do they really provide 
protection? The delisting, in 1980, 
of the Oro peninsula nature reserve 
on the Ile des Pins shows just how 
unreliable such protection is. A 
hotel complex will soon occupy this 
exceptionally beautiful site, once a 
sacred Kanak burial-ground— 
prompting Russ Mittermayer to 
remark that, in New Caledonia, the 
protection of the environment is not 
a priority. | 
The extension of 
grazing land for 
cattle farming, 
above, is one of 
the many causes 
of deforestation. 
lata) have all but disappeared. There 
is still a single giant kauri, the sole BT 3 
Yim 
Shy Re 
RR TANS £ 
rT 
surviving witness to a bygone age, in 
Riviere Blene Park, south of Nouméa. 
Some 800 years old, 40 metres tall 
and with a trunk nearly three metres 
ot . . A mining site on 
in diameter, it has become a visitor 
the east coast 
attraetion. The Park, which forms near Poindimié.  © 
Fr
an
ce
 
Be
qu
el
te
 
Pa
ns
 
30 “ THE UNESCO Courier W OCTOBER 1997

## [Page 41](109505engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 109516: New Caledonia: threats to biodiversity

\ e
 
g 
J
a
b
 
v 
N 
-,
 
e
r
 
A
N
 
” 
y 
.
!
 
N 
Pr 
6
,
 
A
S
A
E
.
 
a 
E 
y
o
 
: 
h 
N 
fh
,’
 
4
 
A
R
E
Y
 
A> 
ug
 
A! Ngo + 
Ea 
rt 
Te Fn
 
  
initiatives 
In defence of New Caledonia 
The Association for the Protection of Nature in New Caledonia 
(ASNNC), which was founded in 1971, is one of many local organi- 
zations that act to protect the environment on Grande Terre. It has 
4,000 members, and publishes and distributes free of charge a 
news magazine (Le Journal vert) and educational material. It also car- 
ries out a range of field activities, including a recent operation on the 
Islets to the north of Grande Terre to tag loggerhead turtles (Caretta 
caretta), which are eaten during traditional ceremonies and hunted 
by poachers. ASNNC has taken steps to have these islets classified 
as a reserve, but the declassification of the Oro Peninsula in 1980 
for the construction of a hotel complex (scheduled for completion in 
1998) raises the spectre that similar kinds of declassification could 
happen again, especially since legislation does not oblige promot- 
ers to carry out impact studies on the coastline. ASNNC hopes that 
a Biosphere Reserve will one day be established in Kouakoué mas- 
sif inthe southeastern part of the island. This would be tangible evi- 
dence that New Caledonia is taking part in the world-wide move- 
ment for the conservation and sustainable development of natural 
resources. 
In 1992 breakaway members of ASNNC started a new associ- 
ation named Action Biosphére, whose activists alert the authorities 
and public opinion whenever they think a project is a threat to the env:- 
ronment. One of the cases they are dealing with at the moment 
arises from the presence of Australian Red Claw crayfish (Cherax 
quadricarinatus) which have been illegally introduced to the island. 
The introduction of new species to a biotope is usually detrimental 
to one or more indigenous species, especially when the new species 
is predatory. These crayfish are especially hardy and prolific and 
are dangerous to the local fauna. One threatened local species is a 
very rare fish {Nesogalaxias neocaledonicus), a veritable living fos- 
sit that dates back 135 million years. [| 
ASNNC, BP 1772, 98 802 Nouméa. 
Tel. and fax: 00 687 28 32 75. 
Action Biosphére, BP 120, 98 810 Mont Dore, 
New Caledonia. Tel. and fax: 00 687 41 83 87. 
CITY SPECIAL 
World Resources 1996-97, A guide to the global envi- 
ronment, the Tthreport in a series produced by the 
Washington-based World Resources Institute, devotes 
a special section to urban environmental problems 
in developed and developing countries, and analy- 
ses policies for addressing them. The second part of 
the report surveys trends in population growth, 
forests and land cover, food and agriculture, health, 
water and fisheries, atmosphere and climate. Core 
data is provided for 152 countries. This valuable tool 
for all concerned with environmental issues is avail 
able from the World Resources Institute, 1709 New 
York Ave. N.W., Washington, DC, 20006, U.S.A. = 
REMEMBERING IRELAND'S POTATO 
FAMINE 
On 1 June 1997, the UN Food and Agriculture Orga- 
nization {FAO) commemorated the potato famine 
that raged in Ireland between 1846 and 1850, claim- 
ing the lives of over a million people and forcing at 
least as many to emigrate. During this period, a fun- 
gus known as “late blight” (Phytophthora infestans} 
devastated the potato crop, the main source of food 
in Ireland. FAO took this opportunity to recall the 
dangers of genetic uniformity, which leaves crops 
susceptible to attack by pests and diseases, and to 
underline the importance of protecting biological 
diversity for farming and food production. ® 
MANATEES IN DANGER 
In 1996, biologists counted a record 2,60C mana 
tees off the Florida coast but also a record 415 car- 
casses. A large number of the aquatic mammals 
were killed by motorboats. In 1997, despite a mild 
WaGaukal. ud 
winter and a smaller number of reported carcasses, 
the observed manatee population had dropped to 
2,229. There are fears that the species is heading for 
extinction in the U.S.A. Enforcing motorboat speed 
limits would be one way to start protecting them, 
but is the manatee lobby strong enough? 
ENVIRONMENT-FRIENDLY DOG 
With its turquoise lagoon, white sand beaches and 
forests dominated by 40-metre-high araucarias, the 
lle des Pins (Isle of Pines) is a well-known vacation 
paradise located south of New Caledonia. But tourists 
do not always keep it tidy, and their tendency to leave 
litter along the roadside and on beaches led islander 
Roland Kaatheu to start an association named “Des- 
tination Paradise, Clean Island”. A big black dog 
called Police has become an unlikely ally in his war 
on litter. When Police is riding on a litter-picking truck 
and spots a can on the ground, he jumps down, picks 
it up and adds it to the pile in the back of the vehicle. 
Roland trained Police to do this job because he 
thought it was wrong to get schoolchildren to collect 
the litter left by adults. = 
PESTICIDES WARNING 
In many developing countries, unsafe use of pestr- 
cides of chemical origin is a serious threat to health 
and the environment. According to FAO, farm work- 
ers are in the front line because they often do not 
know enough about pesticides, cannot read instruc- 
tions on handling, do not wear masks or protective 
clothing and use spraying equipment in poor condi- 
tion. Groundwater pollution caused by indiscrimi- 
nate use of pesticides is spreading in some coun- 
tries. For many years, FAQ has been recommending 
integrated pest management, especially through the 
introduction of insects. Until plant-based pesticides 
like pyrethrum are more extensively used, FAQ is 
appealing for “good, standard quality equipment and 
operator training”. n 
SWITZERLAND'S DRY MEADOWS 
Since the 1950s, Switzerland's dry meadows have 
become increasingly endangered. Today an estimated 
40% of therr flora are threatened throughout the coun 
try and 70% on the Plateau or Moyen Pays. “About 
13% of Swiss plants, representing over 350 species, 
are found on the dry meadows and grasslands”, says 
Switzerland's Federal Office for the Environment, 
Forests and Landscape. “Since the average plant 
hosts over ten animal species, the diversity of the 
fauna in these areas is easy to imagine. About half 
the country’s butterfly species depend on this type of 
environment.” Contrary to a widely held belief, these 
meadows have to be grazed or cut every two or three 
years for their nich flora to survive. n 
GREEN TAXES 
Taxes, charges and auctioned permits are the main 
economic instruments used in environmental policy. 
The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Devek 
opment (OECD) has published a report evaluating the 
effectiveness of these tools and how they work in its 
Member States. In Sweden, sulphur taxes introduced 
in 1991 have resulted in a 40% drop below legal norms 
of sulphur contents in oil-based fuels. In Australia, 
Canada, Denmark, Finland and Sweden, the promotion 
of lead-free fuel and catalytic exhausts led to such a 
steep fall In the consumption of leaded fue! that the lat- 
ter was pulled off the market. In several American 
cities, unit charging for household refuse disposal 
has reduced the volume of household waste. u 
THE UNESCO Gourier MB OCTOBER 1997 4 1

## [Page 42](109505engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### IGNORE

iE wR Slut 
 
Afghanistan 
ZT eat Pa— { 
Gulf of Oman 
    
ma 
  


### 109517: Taxila: the cradle of Gandhara art

the cradle of Gandhara art 
by Laurence Gourret 
Traces of several ancient civilizations of the north 
Indus basin have survived in present-day Pakistan at 
Taxila, a site that was included on the World Heritage 
Listin 1980 
The archaeological site of 
Taxila, which lies in a well- 
irrigated, fertile valley forty kilo- 
metres from Pakistan’s capital, 
Islamabad, hears the traces of unin- 
terrupted human occupation 
extending back 6,000 years. It 
emerged onto the arena of history 
during the second millenniun B.C. 
when the snake-worshipping Takka 
people chose it as the site for their 
city, Takshasila (in Sanskrit, “hill 
of Takshaka”, the serpent-prince). 
Its rapid development in the course 
of the following millennium was due 
to its exceptionally advantageous 
geographical situation at the junc- 
tion of three great trade routes link- 
ing the Indian subcontinent with 
central and western Asia, and to the 
introduction of iron-working tech- 
niques in the Gandhara region, of 
which it became the capital. 
In the sixth century B.C., Gand- 
hara was absorbed into the Persian 
empire of the Achaemenids. The 
city drew great economic and cul- 
4 2 THE UNESCO Courier HW OCTOBER 1997 
Meditating Buddha, 
a stone sculpture in 
the Jaulian monastery 
(Gandhara art, 
2nd century A.D.). 
@ 
La
ur
en
ce
 
Go
ur
re
t,
 
Pa
ns
 
tural benefit from this contact with 
the West, among other advances 
developing a system for transcribing 
vernacular Sanskrit, later replaced 
by the Brahmi script. Next, Alexan- 
der the Great’s conquest of the Per- 
sian empire marked the beginning 
of Hellenistic influence on the city, 
which was to give rise to an original 
art, that of Gandhara. 
There were four decisive phases 
in Taxila’s development: the Indian 
dynasty of the Maurya (c. 321-189 
B.C.), the Greeks of Bactria (189-50 
B.C.), the Parthians (50 B.C.-60 
A.D.}, and domination by the pow- 
erful Central Asian Kushan dynasty 
(until ¢. 230 A.D.). Thereafter the 
city’s political decline, as a result of 
dynastic quarrels, led on to its eco- 
nomic and cultural decline, which 
was precipitated by the incursions of 
the Huns in the fifth century. 
Taxila, which was excavated by 
British archaeologists in the latter 
part of the nineteenth century and 
the early years of the twentieth, 
contains the vestiges of three suc- 
cessive towns and many small monas- 
tic sites, bearing witness to the 
refined nature of the city’s spiri- 
tual and cultural life during its hal- 
cyon days. 
THE FIRST CITY: BHIR 
Bhir was the first urban community 
on the Taxila site (sixth to second 
centuries B.C.). When Alexander 
the Great arrived therein 326 B.C., 
he found the main strect badly 
paved and unprepossessing and the 
architecture rndimentary, the 
houses built of stones bonded with 
mud, the roofs flat and the walls 
vividly painted but without windows 
on to the street. The town had a 
central refuse tip and a network of 
open drains, but no wells. The 
inhabitants drew water straight 
from the river, which was where 
they washed themselves and did 
their laundry. 
In the third century B.C. 
Asoka, the grandson of Chan- 
dragupta, founder of the Mauryan 
dynasty, converted to Buddhism. 
He built the great stupa of Dhar- 
marajika, placing therein the relics 
of the Buddha in a golden casket. 
Vandals many times mutilated the 
sacred edifice as they vainly 
searched for this casket. Over the 
years, the stupa was enlarged by 
the addition of large numbers of 
other religious structures (small 
votive stupas, chapels, etc.). 

## [Page 43](109505engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 109517: Taxila: the cradle of Gandhara art

M y : =~ 3 ward 
LY " \"J 3 AN 
Ia 
Cattle graze among 
archaeological 
remains on the Taxila 
site, 
FURTHER READING: 
Taxila, by Ahmad Hasan 
Dani, Unesco/The Centre 
for East Asian Cultural 
Studies, Paris/Tokyo, 
1986 
“Taxila: ancient 
university centre of the 
Orient”, by Syed Ashfaq 
Naqvi, Unesco Courier, 
October 1972 
AG I We ‘Alde 
RL Xa ; ) wh ROUSSE 
This monument was largely 
destroyed by an earthquake in 30 
A.D., but it was rebuilt and its 
imposing mass (15 metres high and 
50 in diameter) was shored up hy 
several retaining walls, which resem- 
ble the spokes radiating out {rom 
the hub of a wheel and thus recall 
the dharma-cakra (the wheel of 
law), from which the site complex 
takes its name, 
The surrounding wall of the 
stupa, embellished with painted 
and gilded statues of the Bnddha, 
dates from early in the second cen- 
tury A.D. Further north, all that 
remains are the ruins of a monastery 
that had a hundred monks’ cells. 
It was completely sacked by the 
ITuns in 455 A.D. 
THE PARTHIAN CITY: SIRKAP 
Sirkap (second century B.C. to first 
century A.D.), the second town on 
the Taxila site, is half an hour’s 
walk north from the site of Bhir. 
Excavations have brought to light 
the city walls, dating from various 
periods, including these built by 
the Parthians in the first century 
A.D., which were six metres thick, 
had tall bastions and were in places 
nine metres in height. 
When Saint 
brought the Gospel to India, vis- 
ited the Parthian king Gondophares 
Thomas, who 
  
  
in 47 A.D., he {found a flourishing 
town where caravans from China, 
India and the distant western lands 
all met. Unlike Bhir, Sirkap was 
bnilt according to a plan, with 
streets regularly laid out along two 
perpendicular north-south and east- 
west axes. Scattered among its 
huge, rectangular dwelling-honses, 
in the oriental style, with rooms 
arranged around an open central 
courtyard, were Jain stupas, Bud- 
dhist altars and private chapels. 
Like Bhir, Sirkap had neither wells 
nor mains drainage. The main thor- 
oughfare was lined by a large num- 
ber of open-fronted shops with 
wooden stalls. Numerous Greek- 
inspired objects have been exca- 
vated, including a silver head of 
Dionysos and a cornelian seal with 
representations of Eros and Psyche. 
One particularly remarkable 
stupa, known as the shrine of the 
double-headed eagle (first century 
A.D.), provides a perfect illustration 
of the fusion of Indian and Greek 
styles: pilasters with Corinthian cap- 
itals, recesses decorated in a nian- 
ner inspired by Greek architecture, 
and Bengali-style roofs. A similar 
cross-fertilization of cultures is evi- 
dentin the sculpted representation 
of the Buddha and bodhisattvas at 
the foot of the votive stupas. The 
way in which the robes hang, the 
smiles and the facial features, exe- 
cuted in accordance with the stan- 
dards of the Hellenistic school, are 
combined with the traditional med- 
itative poses of Buddhist art. 
On the Jandial site, near the 
northern gate, are the ruins of two 
temples built by the Bactrian 
Greeks. Pillaged by the Seythians 
in the second century A.D., they 
disappeared in the earthquake of 
30A.D. 
THE KUSHAN CITY: SIRSUKH 
Sirsukh (first to fifth centuries 
A.D.), the last of the three fortified 
towns on the Taxila site, was the 
regional capital of the Kushan, who 
originally came from Central Asia 
and brought to Taxila their own 
ideas of town-building and their own 
construction methods. We have less 
information about the life of the 
inhabitants than in the case of 
Sirkap since few excavations have 
been carried out here. It neverthe- 
less appears that Gandhara art ben- 
efitted considerably from the con- 
tributions made by the Kushan, 
who encouraged local sculptors and 
promoted the development of Bud- 
dhist monasteries. 
Taxila’s decline, resulting {rom 
internal dynastic dissension, began 
at the end of the second century 
A.D. The town seems to have 
THE UNESCO Gurr 8 OCTOBER 1997 4 3 
M 
Se
rr
ai
ll
er
 
@ 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
>

## [Page 44](109505engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 109517: Taxila: the cradle of Gandhara art

M 
Se
rr
ai
li
er
 @ 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
EE — 
HERITAGE 
escaped the Sassanid invasions, 
although Sassanid influence may be 
discerned, partieularly in the 
eoinage. The preponderant influ- 
ence thereafter was Indian. The 
Brahmi script came into use, Ilindn 
divinities like Shiva and Vishnu 
made their appearance in local stat- 
uary art, and the influence of clas- 
sical Gupta art made itself felt in 
that of Gandhara. Taxila’s economic 
and cultural ruin was, however, 
largely due to the ITuns, who swept 
into Gandhara in the middle of the 
fifth century. 
MONASTERIES 
Taxila also became an influential 
centre of Buddhism. It was said to 
be here that the Buddha, emaci- 
ated by the long practice of asceti- 
cism, beheaded himself, as a sym- 
bolic gesture the 
renunciation even of thinking, in 
order to attain illumination. Stu- 
denoting 
dents came from all over northern 
India to follow the many courses of 
study on offer, which in addition to 
Mahayana Buddhism included the 
teaching of the Vedas, military sci- 
ence, medicine, law, political econ- 
omy, astronomy, mathematics, the 
arts and letters. Among the students 
was the celebrated Indian gram- 
marian Panini (c. 400 B.C.). 
As well as the sites of the three 
fortified towns, Taxila contains those 
of many Buddhist monastic estab- 
lishments which testify to its reli- 
gious significance. Scattered about 
beyond the walls of the three towns 
4 4 THE UNESCO Gounier B OCTOBER 1997 
but always built near to a spring, 
most of them date back to the 
Kushan and post-Kushan periods. 
Dharmarajika is undoubtedly the 
most important of them, hut men- 
tion should also be made of the 
monasteries of Khader Mohra and 
Akhauri, which, with two others, 
form the four corners of a vast 
quadrilateral with sides measuring 
hetween 400 and 500 metres. Prol- 
ably erected in the Kushan period, 
these builldings show signs of a cer- 
tain evolution in monastic architec- 
ture. In three of them, the stupa is 
separate from the monks’ cells, 
which are arranged around a central 
courtyard, while two of them have 
neither a refectory nor commons. 
Kalwan (“the caves”), the largest 
of the Buddhist sites at Taxila, also 
dates from the Kushan period. It 
comprises three groups of cells, each 
built around a cloister, and a central 
stupa encircled by smaller stupas and 
by numerous shrines decorated, in 
particular, with clay and stucco stat- 
ues of the Buddha and hodhisattvas. 
The floors of the living quarters were 
of rammed earth, while the court- 
yards were generally cobbled with 
stones from the river-bed. The roofs 
were made of rough, clay-covered 
beams. Water was drawn from an 
enormous well nearly four metres in 
diamcter, with a stone ining almost a 
metre thick at the mouth. 
Among the many other monas- 
teries, Mohra Moradu lias some of 
the finest examples of stucco statu- 
ary, and Jaulian, built on a hilltop, is 
 
Meditating Buddha 
{2nd century A.D.}. It 
forms part of a series 
of reliefs adorning 
the base of a stupa 
at the Jaulian 
monastery. 
The main street of 
Sirkap, a city on the 
site of Taxila founded 
by the Parthians in 
the 2nd century B.C. 
  
one of the best preserved in Taxila. 
Excavations conducted here by Sir 
John Marshall in 1912 uncovered 
various buildings such as the com- 
mons, refectory, kitchens and store- 
rooms. The monastery probably 
catered for many pilgrims and trav- 
ellers, which would explain its many 
outbuildings and the fact that it had 
One of these 
opened on to the southern slope of 
three entrances. 
the hill, where the wells providing 
the monastery with water were sunk, 
while the eastern entrance gave 
access to the living quarters proper. 
The northern entrance opened 
directly into the lower courtyard in 
which stood stupas decorated 
around the base with many statues 
of the Buddha. At the feet of these 
statues was a stucco frieze depicting 
allegorical scenes from his life and 
showing him surrounded by bod- 
hisattvas, lions and elephants. In the 
central courtyard stands the dlome— 
originally gilded—of the great 
stupa, more than 20 metres high 
© 
La
ur
en
ce
 
Go
ur
re
t,
 
Pa
ns
 
and surrounded by a score of votive 
stupas, all of whose bases are richly 
decorated with animals, bod- 
hisattvas and columns in the form 
of human figures. At the base of the 
main stupa is a “healing Buddha” 
which has a hole where the navel 
should be: for centuries, believers, 
while praying to he healed, put their 
fingers in this hole. n

## [Page 45](109505engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### IGNORE

Retracing the 
highways and 
byways taken 
by the world’s 
great religious 
ideas (See the 
June 1997 
issue, ‘How 
ideas travel’). 
i 
REFLECTIONS 
  
} ahh 0] Fb #4] 


### 109518: Spreading the word

preading the word 
by Odon Vallet 
ee I ESE EAL = 
ust as a rumour spreads from street to 
“good news” (which is the street, so 
meaning of the word “gospel”) can travel 
from village to village, from oasis to oasis, and 
in this way cover thousands of kilometres 
without its bearers needing to travel them- 
selves. In Black Africa, the prophet Muham- 
mad’s message was conveyed from one water- 
hole to the next, and Islam spread southwards 
in this way without the Faithi{ul ever having 
to leave their native region. 
For thousands of years, religions have heen 
propagated in this way, by capillary action 
rather than by transplantation, and their his- 
tory has been shaped by the gradual spread of 
influences as much as by brutal invasions. To 
take onc example, the [ace of the Buddha, 
which was never portrayed in carly Buddhism, 
made its appearance carly in the Christian era 
in Gandhara art (in what is now Pakistan), 
which represents it with the features of a 
Greek Adonis or a mustachioed warrior. 
Seen [rom Europe, and especially from its 
Western marches, all religions seem to origi- 
nate in the Orient: first the Greek and Roman 
religions, then Judaism, Christianity and Islam, 
which came from the Near Last. But scen from 
the eastern extremities of Asia, all religions 
inevitably come from the West. China, Korea 
and Japan received Buddhism from India, and 
Indonesia received Islam from Arabia. Jodo, 
the Pure Land of Amidist Buddhism practised 
in Japan, lies in the West and it is to the West 
that Indonesian Muslims turn to pray. 
Paths of peace and war 
The great religions spread along paths that 
were by turns peaceful and warlike. Buddhist 
monks and Muslim traders propagated the 
message of their respective religions along the 
silk route. Mithraism (an Iranian religion 
whieh grew out of Zoroastrianism), Judaism 
and Christianity were Eastern religions that 
spread along Roman roads. Islam travelled on 
liorseback up through Spain and through 
France as far as Poitiers. On the roads of 
Greece stelae dedicated to Ilermes were 
replaced by statues of St. Christopher. With 
the progress of navigation, Buddhism spread 
along the coasts of China and Indochina. From 
the sixteenth century onwards, European 
ships carrying monks, soldiers and settlers 
took Christianity to the continents of Amer- 
ica, Africa and Asia. 
The purpose of religions is twofold: they 
try to spread a message and to unite a com- 
munity around that message. In a sense, all 
religions are “catholic” —in the etymological 
meaning of the word (i.e. “universal”). Even 
Judaism has been taken to the four corners of 
the earth by the diaspora of emigrant or 
exiled Jews. Ilinduism draws its origins from 
the common heritage of Indo-European reli- 
gions and is beginning to expand to all five 
continents. Yoga, born of the Indian tradi- 
tion, is now practised by many Westerners. 
A coherent message 
In the ancient Greek city-state, on the other 
hand, the local religion was reserved for citi- 
zens alone, That is the principle of religions 
for initiates, esoterie cults which, in a period 
of globalization of trade and blending of 
beliefs, are experiencing a renewal to which 
the proliferation of sects hears witness today. 
Aecording to the two Latin etymologies of the 
word sect (sequi, to [ollow and secare, to cut}, 
believers follow a charismatic leader and 
break with the mnain or dominant religious 
movements. 
A religion must possess a certain degree of 
coherence before it can expand. Beliefs must 
AE 
4 Ne 
he unesco (Qurier @ ocToBEr 1997 “

## [Page 46](109505engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 109518: Spreading the word

© 
Ab
ba
s/
Ma
gn
um
, 
Pa
ns
 
> be harmonized so that they can be distributed 
as widely as possible and passed on to future 
generations through families and schools. The 
secular authorities are bound to be involved 
in these attempts to promote harmony against 
schiismatic movements and heretical doctrines 
because they alone possess the necessary legal 
and economic resources. The Christian faith 
was spread by the apostle Paul, who had a 
vital safe-eonduct, his Roman citizenship, 
which saved him from execution by the local 
anthorities. Then it acquired official status 
at the instigation of Emperor Constantine who 
in 32 A.D. convened the Nicene Council, which 
promulgated dogmas of orthodoxy that still 
obtain today. On the Buddhist front the Indian 
King Asoka seems to have convened a similar 
Council (at Pataliputra, in the mid-third cen- 
tury A.D.) to reduce doctrinal differences 
hetween monasteries. 
The dissemination of religions, like that 
of secular ideologies, requires both the 
putting down of roots and propagation. In this 
regard the work of St. Paul is remarkable. 
Ile deepened the Christian doctrine and dis- 
seminated it through his epistles, while 
4 6 THE UNESCO Gourier B OCTOBER 1997 
regarding himself as an “apostle”, a title 
which in the Athenian city-state designated 
the liead of a diplomatic mission or a mar- 
itime expedition. 
Religion and global 
communications 
By turns nomadic and sedentary, faiths first 
travelled on foot. Buddha, Jesus and Muham- 
mad were great walkers who delivered their 
messages on camp-sites and recruited disci- 
ples at every halt. As these messages beeame 
religions they assumed immobile form in pago- 
das, churches and moseques. Today, stupas, 
bell towers and minarets rise skywards like 
so many lighthouses to guide the earthly trav- 
eller. Sometimes, the age-old solidity of these 
places of worship that are vesistant even to 
earthquakes and radically changing hife-styles 
leads to ossification, parochialism and a 
refusal to engage in dialogue. 
Today modern technology can help indi- 
viduals both to become rooted in their own 
convictions and to become receptive to the 
beliefs of others. Coverage of the Popes jour- 
neys is beamed all over the world. Imams 
Extracts from the Qur'an are 
read at the burial of a Uygur in 
Kashgar, north-western China.

## [Page 47](109505engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 109518: Spreading the word

© 
St
ev
e 
Mc
Cu
rr
y/
Ma
gn
um
, 
Pa
ns
 
record their sermons on cassettes for believ- 
ers in other countries, and religious broad- 
casts can be picked up from distant coun- 
tries via satellite dislhes. 
Thanks to air travel, Catholics and Mus- 
lims from all over the world make pilgrimages 
to Lourdes or Mecca. Kathmandu airport has 
opened Ilimalayan Buddhism to the West, 
and Denpasar airport has done the same thing 
for Balinese llinduism. 
As a result of modern technology the reli- 
gious message is now communtieated world- 
wide with the same audiovisual accuracy. The 
time is past when story-tellers could embroider 
the sacred stories and copyists amend the 
scriptures. Could the founder of a religion 
today, a trne prophet, adjust to the transmis- 
sion of his message in real time? After all, the 
microphone and video camera seem to bring 
fame while abolishing mystery. Churches have 
their crypts and monasteries their precinets: 
there can be no religion, however open, without 
secrets. Each sacred treasure is guarded by 
iron bars and each spiritual path hides a 
labyrinth. 
Another aspeet of technical progress con- 
sists of the pollution and nuisances of all kinds 
which have led, by reaction, to the rise of 
environmentalism, whiclt is neither more nor 
less than a scientific version of the old reli- 
gion of nature. It is no coincidence that the 
first national parks were created in the late 
nineteenth century in the American West (Yel- 
lowstone, Yosemite) where the Indians ven- 
erated the snn, the moon and the trees. In a 
world whicli is becoming a dusthin, humanity 
harks back to the old animist religions. It1is 
transforming nature into a sanctuary with 
reserves as sacred enclosures. Tourists from all 
over the world travel to Asia to venerate ele- 
phants, just as, in times past, people prayed 
to Ganesh, the elephant god, son of Shiva. Or 
else they go into ecstasy before birds which 
evoke Garuda, the eagle with a man’s body, 
Vishnu’s mount. 
Those who believe in Ileaven and those 
who do not here join in the same movement to 
safeguard ereation—which some prefer to 
call the ecosystem—threatened with destrue- 
tion by terrible exploitation. The blessed and 
the infidel reach the same conelusion: we have 
only one Earth. | 
A candlelight procession in 
Lourdes (France), a Catholic 
pilgrimage site. 
 
THE UNESCO Gourier BR OCTOBER 1907

## [Page 48](109505engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### 109519: Interview with Manuel Elkin Patarroyo

interview Manuel Elkin Patarroyo 
4 
In 1986 Colombian physician and 
biochemist Manuel Patarroyo made a 
synthetic vaccine, SPf66, which has since 
shown considerable efficacy in the 
struggle against malaria, one of the 
world’s most widespread diseases. In this 
interview with Flor Romero he looks back 
to the day when he vowed to follow in the 
footsteps of Louis Pasteur. 
‘Science with conscience’ 
> Te 
© THE UNESCO Gurr mocroser 1997 
HB How did you first become interested in science? 
Manuel Patarroyo: I think my scientific curios- 
ity was whetted for the first time when I was five 
years old, on the day when my aunt Alicia turned 
up in Ataco, the village where I was born, with 
two little dog-shaped magnets. It was then that 
I heard the word magnetism for the first time. I 
insisted on being told what it meant. Ever since 
then I have always needed to understand. When- 
ever I went fishing and came back with a catch, 
it wasn’t to cook the fish but to open them up and 
see what was inside. 
When I was eight years old, I read a biogra- 
phy of Louis Pasteur in a book my father gave 
me. From that day on, Pasteur became my hero, 
my model. I decided that I too would make vae- 
cines to serve humanity. I have devoted my life to 
fulfilling this childhood dream. 
I don’t know how much credence should be 
given to what the ancient Greeks called fatum, the 
destiny that shapes a person’s life and leaves lit- 
tle room for freedom. But the fact is that even as 
achild already knew what I wanted to do. I have 
never been tempted to leave my chosen path. 
BH But how did you manage to develop a chemical 
vaccine against malaria in a country without a 
scientific tradition and without the necessary 
infrastructure for such an important discovery? 
M.P.: The story of this vaccine, SP{66 (Synthetic 
Plasmodium falciparum, 66th tested formula) 
     
   Fa 
F3 ; 
Eee 
Th. wy 
4 
i a 
# 
4 
Vr 
  
h 
4 
hegan in 1978 after we had mastered the method- 
ology developed by Bruce Merrifield, who won 
the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1984. The first 
step in our research was to isolate Plasmodium 
falciparum, the deadly parasite that causes 
malaria, from cultures of infected blood. Then 
we had to isolate the proteins of which it is com- 
posed. After vaccinating Amazonian monkeys with 
these molecules, we exposed them to the parasite. 
We succeeded in defining four molecules that 
were immunologically useful. We established 
their molecular structure and then synthesized 
them and endeavoured to find the combination 
that protected the infected monkeys. The 66th 
combination was the successful one. This was how 
SPf66, the first entirely synthetic antiparasite 
vaccine, was discovered in January 1986. 
And yetI would be incapable of explaining in 
detail why the product works. No one knows 
parasites’ pathogenic mechanisms. 
BM Was this why the scientific community reacted 
oddly to your discovery? 
M.P.: We were blamed for having discovered this 
vaccine empirically, in a situation involving mul- 
tiple combinations of falciparum molecules. 
We first of all tried the vaccine in the owl 
monkey, Adotus trivirgatus, which is one of the 
few animal hosts of the human malaria parasite 
and is plentiful in Colombian Amazonia. The 
results, published in the scientific journal 
Nature, met with considerable scepticism from 
the seientific community, and so did the first 
human trials in 1987. 
I understand this scepticism, not only because 
WH
O,
 
Ge
ne
va

## [Page 49](109505engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 109519: Interview with Manuel Elkin Patarroyo

of the synthetic nature of the vaccine but also 
because my country has no scientific tradition, 
Butno one can deny thatin Colombia we have dis- 
covered a vaccine which is revolutionary on two 
counts—as the first antiparasite vaccine and as 
the first totally synthetic vaceine. And while for 
the moment it is only partially effective, SPf66 
ean prevent around a million deaths cach year. 
WM Can a higher standard of protection be 
achieved? 
M.P.: Since 1986, we and other research teams 
have discovered other molecules on the surface 
of the parasite. In order to maximize the vae- 
cine’s efficacy, we have tried to find out more 
about these parts of the parasite which enable 
it to adhere to the cells and invade them. We 
are continuing to werk along these lines so that, 
hopefully, the vaccine can one day be adminis- 
tered orally. 
At present the vaceine’s efficacy in Latin 
America varies between 38.9 per cent and 60.2 
per cent, depending on patients’ age. The vaccine 
seems to be much more effective on children 
under five. The side-effects (which do not affect 
more thai 5.6 per cent of patients) are limited 
and require no medication. It is an absolutely safe 
vaccine without any of the problems associated 
with biological vaceines. 
Under the auspices of the World Health 
Organization (W110), the vaccine has heen tested 
in the most malarious areas of the planet, the 
United Republic of Tanzania, and Gambia. In 
late 1994, the prestigious medical journal The 
Lancet published the results of vaccinations in 
the United Republic of Tanzania, after a twe- 
year trial between 1992 and 1994 whose objec- 
tive was to determine the efficacy of the vac- 
cine on children aged from one to five in an arca 
of intense malaria transmission. The results 
showed that the proteetive efficacy of SPf66 
was 31 per cent. 
The epidemiological situation in Tanzania 
provided a particularly stiff test for SPl66 
because people living in this part of the world are 
a hundred times more exposed than those living 
in Colombia to the bites of the mosquito that 
harbours felciparum. In these conditions, as 
Nicholas White of the Oxford Tropical Medi- 
cine Research Programme pointed out, the pro- 
tection obtained with our vaccine is a positive 
and important result. 
But we must be realistic. This vaceine will 
make it possible to reduce the incidence of 
malaria, but will net eradicate it completely. We 
must continue to control the disease, diagnose it 
and use medicine and inseeticides. Only a prag- 
matic and multifactorial approach to the problem 
will make it possible, if not to eradicate this 
scourge, atleast to reduce the number of victims. 
WM How do we stand with regard to malaria today? 
M.P.: Malaria currently kills more people than 
any other disease. It occurs in hot, humid trop- 
ical regions, i.e. where the vast majority of peo- 
ple in the developing world live. It affects 40 
per cent of the world’s population and causes 
between 2 and 3 million deaths each year, far 
more than Aids, for example. 
But malaria is not equally virulent every- 
where. Some ethnic groups are more resistant 
to infection than others. Susceptibility to malaria 
isrelated to blood group. In Africa, for example, 
the epidemie is particularly intense and can 
worsen during the rainy scason. It is the world’s 
malaria hot spot. One and a half million children 
under five die of malaria in Africa each year. 
HM You have developed a top-level scientific 
laboratory in Colombia... 
M.P.: Yes, and | am extremely proud of the team 
I work with. Most of its dynamic young 
researchers (average age thirty) are Colombian 
chemists, physicists, bacteriologists, molecular 
biologists and medical doctors. 
In the grounds of Bogota’s San Juan de Dios 
hospital, where 1 worked, there was a derelict 
building constructed at the beginning of the cen- 
tury by a Colombian architect who had studied 
in France. Incredible though it may seem, in a 
kind of delayed-action response to my childhood 
drcam, this building was an almost identical 
reproduction, albeit in ruins, of the Pasteur 
Institute in Paris. I was able to take it over and 
use it as the premises of the Bogota National 
Institute of Immunology, where thousands of 
doses of SPf66 are made today. 
BM What was the most difficult time in your life as a 
researcher? 
M.P.: The most anxious moment of my life was 
when I administered the vaccine to thirteen vol- 
unteer soldiers. Experiments had already been 
carried out on monkeys, but their kidneys and 
brains are not identical to those of human beings. 
For nine months I woke up at three o’clock in the 
morning feeling sick with anxiety. 1 said to myself 
thatif their kidneys were damaged a transplant 
was always possible. Butif their livers were dam- 
aged these young men would be exposed to incur- 
able hepatitis. The thought that these thirteen 
boys might die was a nightmare. 
When the time came to introduce the para- 
site into their veins, for eleven days I was unable 
to sleep. 1 visited the hospital at all hours of the 
day and night to see how they were. 
One day, in Cartagena, | went to the heach and 
threw myself into the water. Iwas so panic-stricken 
that I wanted to drown nyself. Fortunately every- 
thing turned out all right. The results of the tests 
turned out positive. 
$ 
The untsco (COURIER W OCTOBER 1957

## [Page 50](109505engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### 109519: Interview with Manuel Elkin Patarroyo

» MB As achild you saw the ravages of tuberculosis 
at close quarters. Have you ever thought of trying 
to find a synthetic TB vaccine? 
M.P.: There are currently 27 million cases of 
tuberculosis in the world, and two and a half 
million people die of the disease each year. 
Tuberenlosis is my wife and malaria my mistress. 
I can say that] have spent as much time with the 
one as with the other. 
After a long spell of secret work at the San 
Juan de Dios Institute of Immunology, we suc- 
ceeded in identifying the molecules exclusive to 
the tuberculosis bacillus and synthesized them 
chemically. 1 hope it will be possible for this 
vaccine, which we will call COLT UVAC (Colom- 
bian Tuberculosis Vaccine), to be used on a mas- 
sive scale by the year 2000. 
MB You have given the patent of the malaria vaccine 
to humanity via the World Health organization, 
M.P.: I received very tempting offers from a num- 
ber of American, European and Asian laborato- 
ries. But the vaccine should be made available to 
governments so that they can organize massive 
vaccination campaigns. It should notbe sold and 
Ido not want to earn money from it. That is why 
I offered it to WIIO for nothing, because in my 
opinion WHO is the most suitable organization to 
distribute it in the countries where it is needed. 
BM Didn't you think of using proceeds from your 
discovery to develop your Institute and improve its 
research facilities? 
M. P.: Giving is giving, not a form of exchange. To 
gesture. But Pasteur said that though the results 
of science are universal, the scientist has a conn- 
try and his merits belong to that country. That is 
why I wanted the vaccine to bear the name of 
Colombia. I also want the main production plant 
to be in Bogota and the price of the vaccine to be 
very low so that it will be accessible to the needy. 
So far the price has been calculated as thirty 
U.S. cents for the three “adult” doses and half 
as much for a child’s dose. 
MB It’s your way of fulfilling your cherished dream 
of becoming a benefactor of humanity... 
M.P.: One should fight to fulfil one’s childhood 
dreams. The world we live in has lost the capac- 
ity to dream. We should teach children to dream 
and encourage them to work for the good of their 
fellows. Aptitudes are fostered in the home dur- 
ing childhood, not in universities. 
BM You have often talked of demystifying science. 
What do you mean by this? 
M. P.: One of the problems of science is that it 
tends to lock itself up in an ivory tower and invent 
a coded language that only initiates can under- 
stand. That is a mistake. The scientist is a product 
of society and must act in and for society, Knowl 
edge must help to free and elevate the human 
being. If it does not, we are condemned to suicide. 
We must vaccinate the world against selfish- 
ness and pessimism. Solidarity, goodness and gen- 
erosity must not be empty words. Researchers 
have a moral responsibility to work for the wel- 
fare of all humanity. “Science with conscience” 
 
  
ask for something in return would tarnish the should be their watchword. | 
AUTHORS 
a A ,. ELE ) 
BADAOU! ROUHBAN BARBARA CARBY, FRANCE BEQUETTE 
is a civil engineer who is chief of Unesce’s Unit for 
Disaster Reduction. 
FRANK PRESS, 
a distinguished American geophysicist and 
seismologist, 1s a former president of the U.S. 
National Academy of Sciences (1981-1993). He is a 
principal of the Washington Advisory Group LLC, a 
company of high-level consulting experts in scientific 
and technical matters. Notable among his published 
works 1s Understanding the Earth (1994, with 
Raymond Siever). 
WALTER W. HAYS, 
an American engineering seismologist, directs 
various research application activities in the 
Chimate/Hazards team of the Geological Division of 
the United States Geological Survey. 
MUSTAFA ERDIK, 
of Turkey, is chairman of the Department of 
Earthquake Engineenng at Kandilli Observatory and 
Earthquake Research Institute, Bogazigi University 
(Istanbul), where he also teaches. 
of Jamaica, is a researcher in the Department of 
Geography and Geology at the University 
of the West Indies’ Mona Campus and a member of 
the Scientific and Technical Committee 
for the International Decade for Natural Disaster 
Reduction. 
FABRIZIO FERRUCCI, 
of Italy, is professor of seismology and applied 
geophysics at the University of Calabria and advises 
the Italian government on land and space-based 
methods for reducing natural risks. 
DEBARATI GURA-SAPIR, 
an Indian epidemiologist, is a professor in the 
Department of Public Health in the Faculty of 
Medicine of the Catholic University of Louvain 
(Belgium). 
GERHARD BERZ, 
a German geophysicist and natural-hazards expert, is 
a senior manager with the Munich Reinsurance 
Company. 
is a Franco-American journalist specializing in 
environmental questions. 
LAURENCE GOURRET, 
a French journalist and expert on Asia, recently 
published a book about former Pakistani Prime 
Minister Benazir Bhutto entitled Benazir, I'envers du 
voile (“Benazir, the Other Side of the Veil”, Dencél, 
Pans, 1997). 
ODON VALLET, 
of France, teaches political and religious 
anthropology at the Universities of Paris | and VII. 
His most recent publications include Les religions 
dans le monde (“World Religions”, Flammarion, Paris, 
1995) and Jésus et Bouddha (“Jesus and Buddha”, 
Albin Michel, Panis, 1996). 
FLOR ROMERO, 
a Colombian writer, founded Mujer de América 
(“Woman of America”) magazine and 1s the author of 
many works of fiction, mcluding La calle ajena. (“The 
Street of Others”). 
5 0 rhe unesco Courier mocroser 1997 
 

## [Page 51](109505engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

http://www.unesco.org 
  
  
   
      
  
Currently on-line are: an index of the contents of the last 22 issues of the Unesco Courier 
UNEesco press releases, addresses, fax, telex and electronic mail numbers of UNesco’s re 
gional offices, National Commissions and Unesco Clubs, the directory of Unesco databa 
and information services, colour images of the Japanese Garden and other architectu 
sites at Unesco Headquarters, as well as works of art such as Henry Moore's reclini 
sculpture. 
directly with suggestions and comments, type: 
~~ unesco.courierQunesco.org   
 
      
    
  
mh 1998-1999 
= Entries in English, 
et = French or Spanish accor- 
Ri ob ding to the country Your passport a Crimes 
> MD - | 30th edition 
to learnin J ) \ ISBN 92-3-003401-0 
ff UN 5 we 1,300 pp., 120 French 
0 p po rtu nt es ou’ francs (+ 30 FF postage) 
abroad oo} ] New! 
a) Study Abroad 
— on CD-ROM 
Scholarships and > ISBN 92-3-003403-7 
financial assistance — 120 FF 
Special offer: 
University-level courses Book plus co-rom: 
180 FF 
Entry-level upgrading 
and short-term courses 
(+ 30 FF postage) 
The co-rom provides 
quick and easy access to 
all the information 
contained in the book. 
Runs on PC and Mac. 
Student employment possi- 
bilities 
Facilities for 
handicapped students     
Extramural and continuous 
sducation possibilities education p UNESCO Publishing 
Fon ini 1, rue Miollis [raining courses 75732 Paris Cedex 15, offered by international or- France 
Fax: +33-1 45 68 57 41 
Internet: 
http://www.unesco.org/ 
publications 
sanizations 
E
s
t
u
d
i
o
s
 
en
 
el 
ex
tr
an
je
ro
 
  

## [Page 52](109505engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

  
IN THE NEXT ISSUE: v 
THEATRE TODAY 
V 
INTERVIEW 
~ ANDREE CHEDID 
v 
HERITAGE 
IRONBRIDGE GORGE (UNITED 
KINGDOM), HEARTLAND OF THE 
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION 
Vv 
ENVIRONMENT 
SERVICEABLE SEAWEED