# [191580](191580eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](191580eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
  
July-August 2006 « ISSN 1993-8616 
    WORLD HERITAGE 
GROWS RICHER 

## [Page 2](191580eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
S
e
r
g
e
 
Sa
nt
el
li
 
» i 
Lt
 
=
A
 
&o
 
4 
a
)
 
~ 
> 
¥ 
YF 
a 
-
 
t
p
 
ar
 
F 
w
y
 
X
T
 
x 
"
i
 
2
3
 
      
   
 
® 
hy 
. 
WORLD HERITAGE 
GROWS RICHER 
The Convention concerning the protection 
of the world cultural and natural heritage, 
adopted in 1972 by UNESCO, now recognizes 
830 properties of “outstanding universal value”. 3 
IRAN: 
MEMORIES OF BISOTUN 
s Professor David Stronach, archeologist 
74 le 'S ~ and former Director of the British Institute 
of Persian Studies in Tehran (1961-1980), looks back fondly 
on his experiences at Bisotun (Islamic Republic of Iran), 
a monument in bas-relief and cuneiform that is located 70 meters 
above the ground. 4 
A BRIDGE SPANNING 
TWO WORLDS 
At the end of the 19th century, 
Martin Alberto de Palacio y Elissague 
was given the task of building a bridge over the Nervion, 
in the Basque country (Spain), with one prerequisite: 
uninterrupted river traffic. To meet the challenge, the engineer 
dreamed up the first metallic bridge with a gondola. 6 
 
  
Contents 
JULY-AUGUST 2006    
~ WORLD HERITAGE GROWS RICHER 
& | Eighteen new sites have been just added to UNESCO’s World Heritage List, 
| bringing the total number of protected properties to 830. 
These sites not only fulfill scientific criteria necessary for inscription in the List, 
59 i Th they are also places that are alive and tell their own stories. 
Visit five sites which have just received UNESCO’s coveted label. 
: 4 ) The Egyptian Mosque in Harar Jugol (Ethiopia). 
_ #' THE PAST BEHIND CLOSED 
a DOORS 
Time seems to stand still in the town of Harar 
(Ethiopia), entrenched behind its encircling wall. 
Yet the market and mosques are pulsing with life. 8 
     
. TEQUILA-TINTED 
LANDSCAPE 
Lagave, qui pousse dans les vallées de Jalisco 
(Mexique), ne sert pas seulement a fabriquer 
la célébre boisson mexicaine. Cette plante bleue donne 
son identité a toute la région, désormais inscrite 
sur la Liste du patrimoine mondial. 9 
  
Nd PANDAS ROAM FREE 
+ IN CHINA 
| Zhang Hemin, director of the Wolong 
aed nature reserve, a major part of the Giant 
Panda Sanctuaries in Sichuan. The sanctuaries, one of the few 
places in the world where giant pandas still live in the wild, 
has just been inscribed on the World Heritage List. 11 
‘woRLD HERITAGE TIMELINE 13 
ze COURIER LOOKS BACK 14 
e UNESCO Courier has devoted many issues to world heritage. Here is a glimpse at some of them. B 

## [Page 3](191580eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

Ss] CEN I EVE CER ETN o CE BITE To fe Te ROR UL SE oo oR eTg [0 fo [11 2 Ts [oR HES A 
bringing the total number of protected properties to 830. 
hese sites not only fulfill scientific criteria necessary for inscription in the List, 
they are also places that are alive and tell their own stories. 
Visit five sites which have just received UNESCO’s coveted label. 


### 191689: World heritage grows richer

  
WORLD HERITAGE 
GROWS RICHER 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
!
 
Ca
rl
os
 
T
o
m
a
s
 
Agave plants, Jalisco (Mexico). 
 
A 
he agave cutters in Jalisco Mexico 
ay not hear the news. It will proba- 
ly have little impact on the harvest of 
he “pifia”, used to make tequila. Yet 
n 12 July, the agave landscape and 
he old Tequila industrial installations 
ere inscribed in UNESCO's World 
Heritage List. 
This Mexican landscape is one 
of the 18 sites proclaimed by the 
World Heritage Committee, in Vilnius 
(Lithuania) from 8 to 16 July. The Con- 
vention concerning the protection of 
the world cultural and natural heri- 
tage, adopted in 1972 by UNESCO, 
now recognizes 830 properties of 
“outstanding universal value”. Given 
thatthere are 1500 sites onthe waiting 
list, the number of the chosen may 
seem modest. In fact, it shows the 
Committee's resolution in recent 
years to reduce inflation in the num- 
ber of inscriptions. 
The latest proclamation also reflects 
the general composition of the List, 
which has included a majority of cul- 
tural sites from the beginning. There 
   
   
    
    
The UNESCO Courier - July-August 2006 
are actually 644 cultural properties 
versus 162 natural and 24 mixed 
(both natural and cultural). 
The lion’s share 
are cultural sites 
This year too, the cultural sites 
bagged the lion's share. The List is 
= ¥ —we - 
gE Y erry eh TR TER 
Ds - hall WS 5 - — = : 
A ATE take gr % ae e 
8 = Thy vy JUS > Comb BA 
3 or EERE REL I = AAS 7 C  : ahh 2 YEW = 
Or. i a Aa RL 
Shei 2 03 A LOS Th TENE TE yy RAE RMN LE I Dee z TH ERR AFC aa NER RAR 
pe ESE A hs © ; = PAL ' n ” oo - 
ay Es: at oN Oa | 
NS « iW = 3 Lp eT d " Te- 
Fr Ri '~ x1 » a Jd 
of 3 : SAS 
. a "l 4 
’ 3 » oo” 
 
hon Z side of a mountain, a bas- relief 
arius’ victory over ten rebel kings, 
of soar, (Islamic Republic of Iran). 
3 
enriched by several more archeo- 
logical properties with the Bistun 
(Islamic Republic of Iran) bas-reliefs. 
Sculpted on an imposing cliff-face, 
the most famous of the bas-reliefs 
was executed in 521 BC at the order 
of the Achaemenid king, Darius |, to 
celebrate his victory against an en- 
emy. An inscription in three languag- 
es — Elamite, neo-Babylonian and 
old Persian — is engraved along the 
carved panels. It represents the only 
text by an Achaemenid king relating 
to an event that marked his reign. It 
is furthermore thanks to this inscrip- 
tion that a British officer in the 19th 
century was able to decipher old 
Persian cuneiform script, in the same 
way that Champollion had solved the 
mystery of hieroglyphics with the Ro- 
setta stone. 
Another site singled out: the his- 
torical town of Harar, in Ethiopia. 
Perched at an altitude of more than 
1800 metres, it was once the gate- 
way to Abyssinia. The fortified wall 
four metres high that still encircles 
the town testifies to the conflicts that 
began in the 16th century between 
the independent Muslim kingdom 
and the Christian emperors holding 
sway over the country. Although tra- 
ders’ caravans from the Abyssinian 
mountains or the Gulf of Aden tra- 
ding posts no longer come as before 
to sell coffee or ivory, Harar remains 
a noisy and vibrant town where com- 
merce still holds an important place. 
Recent heritage 
is highlighted 
Following a noticeable trend in the 
last few years, the List is giving grea- 
ter recognition to recent heritage. An 
example is the Biscay Bridge, in the 
Spanish Basque country. The metal- 
lic construction was made to join the 
opposite banks of the Nervion river, 
in Bilbao, without obstructing boat 
navigation. To meet the double chal- 
lenge, the engineer Martin Alberto 
de Palacio y Elissague innovated:

## [Page 4](191580eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### 191689: World heritage grows richer

© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
 
N.
 
Bu
rk
e 
  
The Biscay Bridge, Basque country (Spain). 
he designed the world’s first bridge 
equipped with a gondola. 
It was in the 19th century too that 
the Mexican valleys of Jalisco saw the 
development of distilleries for making 
Tequila, the incendiary beverage de- 
picted by Hollywood. With the selec- 
tion of the cultural landscape of the 
Jalisco valleys, the entire kingdom of 
agave is crowned. 
As the first legal instrument to pro- 
tect both cultural and natural proper- 
ties, the Convention also defends as- 
sets such as the Great Barrier Reef 
(Australia) or the Everglades National 
Park (United States). This year, 2 
natural properties were added to the 
List. Among them is the Giant Panda 
reserve in Sichuan, China. The re- 
serve is one of the few places in the 
world where these animals, 12 million 
years old, still live in the wild. Their 
situation is most precarious, however, 
with only 1500 individuals remaining 
of this endangered species. 
Agnes Bardon 
[2 {0} {=X fl 0 EV SS (oY F-Tot MOET fod ToT CoTe TES A:T [oI {od gig [=I @ 0 IT (To (oT lo i 4s TM 21 410 Ey 
nstitute of Persian Studies in Tehran (1961-1980), looks back fondly 
on his experiences at Bisotun (Islamic Republic of Iran), a monument 
bas-relief and cuneiform that that is located 70 meters above the ground. 


### 191690: Iran: memories of Bisotun

 
IRAN 
MEMORIES OF BISOTUN 
    
  
   
ven though decades have passed 
inee my first trips to Bisotun, | re- 
mac each of them most vividly. 
Any archaeologist with a concen- 
tration on Achaemenid Iran, and es- 
pecially one with an interest in the 
ign of Darius the Great, has as- 
suredly paid close attention to the 
texts and relief sculpture that came 
to be carved on the cliff face at Bi- 
sotun in commemoration of Darius’ 
rise to power in 522 BC. In my own 
case, | quickly came to regard Biso- 
tun as a unique store of knowledge 
to which | would need to return 
again and again. 
  
Climbing the ledge 
and finding 
some surprises 
“My legs are dangling, and | am all 
too conscious of the long drop to the 
nearest ground below me’ 
All the same, when | think of Bisotun, 
one particularly graphic and very per- 
The UNESCO Courier - July-August 2006 
= 
2 
Ee 
[5] 
w 
4 
© 
Q 
[33] 
m 
~~ p— 
S - 
@ ~ - 
= 3 
= » ™e i 
© ) y 4 
: : 
w 
- 
~ 
— 
- - 
wl 
edie "Me 
we ite . po iv _g ori > 
Ah > 
fil ¥ 
Bas relief, Bisotun, Iran. 
sonal recollection usually comes to 
mind before all others. My eyes are 
tight shut (they have just filled with 
swirling dust), my fingers are pressed 
4 
into two small recesses in the rock 
face, my legs are dangling, and | am 
all too conscious of the long drop to 
the nearest ground below me. You

## [Page 5](191580eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

“My legs are dangling, 
and | am all too conscious 
of the long drop 
to the nearest ground 
below me’ 
might well ask how an individual, not 
necessarily known for totally reckless 
behavior, would manage to get him- 
self into such a predicament. 
At the time | had managed to bor- 
row an unusually long ladder and was 
making my first visit to the high ledge 
that runs along the base of Darius’ ex- 
traordinary rock-cut monument. | tried 
to take in as many expected and unex- 
pected things as | could. | found that 
Major (later Sir) Henry Rawlinson, the 
first recorded modem visitor to reach 
that narrow ledge, had in fact carved 
his name on its flat surface. 
   : 
E 
8 
B isotun. 
And then, out the corner of my eye, 
| spotted — on the opposite side of 
a fissure of a certain width — what 
looked like a hitherto undetected 
rock-cut fire bowl. | am interested 
in fire altars and fire bowls (two 


### 191690: Iran: memories of Bisotun

frequently encountered material re- 
flections of Iran's ancient Zoroastri- 
an identity) and | can only think that 
thoughts of Rawlinson’s intrepid de- 
termination to copy each of Darius’ 
trilingual inscriptions somehow 
made me unduly adventurous. At 
all events luck was ultimately with 
me. My eyes cleared. | pulled my- 
self up. | confirmed that the putative 
fire bowl was indeed such a feature 
(even if | have no definite answer as 
to why it was placed where it was). 
And then | managed to make my 
way back, this time with a better- 
judged jump, to the relative safety 
of the main ledge. 
‘| can bear witness to certain as- 
pects of this ‘last cuneiform adven- 
ture’ at Bisotun 
The UNESCO Courier - July-August 2006 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
B
a
b
a
k
 
Se
di
gh
i 
A second visit to Bisotun, made in 
the company of Professor George 
G. Cameron, served to remind me 
still more vividly of that great site's 
storied past. It is common knowl- 
edge that Rawlinson, first in 1836 
and then again in 1847 made ex- 
ceptional efforts to secure reliable 
copies of the various cuneiform 
texts. 
A trip with George 
Cameron 
However, Rawlinson himself was 
never able to reach the one “unap- 
proachable” overhanging rock on 
which Darius’ Babylonian inscrip- 
tion had been placed. Finally, as 
Rawlinson relates, “a wild Kurdish 
boy... volunteered to make the at- 
tempt’ Space does not permit a full 
description of the way in which the 
boy drove in one wooden peg on 
one side of the inscription and then 
“used the slight inequalities on the 
bare face of the precipice” to cross 
the rock and drive in a second peg 
from which, with the aid of a rope and 
a short ladder, he created “a swing- 
ing seat, like a painter's cradle!” But 
it was upon this fragile device that 
© 
Da
vi
d 
S
t
r
o
n
a
c
h
 
Professor Cameron with Hasan at Bisotun 
in 1963.. 
the boy, following Rawlinson’s direc- 
tions, proceeded to make a paper 
squeeze of the Babylonian text. 
Notwithstanding the essential 
success of this perilous endea- 
vor, George Cameron, who had 
served as the epigraphist on Erich 
Schmidt's expedition to Persepolis 
in the late 1930's, was well aware 
that a new record of the hard-to- 
reach Babylonian text was greatly 
5 
“| can bear witness 
to certain aspects of this 
‘last cuneiform adventure’ 
at Bisotun” 
needed — and, in the early 1950's, he 
decided to do whatever was neces- 
sary to obtain a state-of-the-art la- 
tex impression. By an odd chance | 
can bear witness to certain aspects 
of this “last cuneiform adventure” 
at Bisotun. Towards the end of his 
long life, and some ten years after he 
had succeeded in obtaining his latex 
copies, Professor Cameron decided 
to revisit the Bisotun cliff. He felt the 
need for a younger companion and, 
since he already knew me, he was 
kind enough to ask me to accom- 
pany him. 
After we had borrowed a long lad- 
der from the oil refinery at nearby 
Kermanshah (now Bakhtaran) and, 
as we took the road back towards 
Bisotun, George Cameron told me 
how, years ago, he, too, had been 
able to find a clever helper of his 
own in a young man from the local 
village who was called Hasan. He 
described how Hasan essentially 
repeated the actions of the Kurd- 
ish boy and in this way managed to 
erect a new swinging seat; and then 
he related how he carefully eased 
himself into the seat and duly paint- 
ed on the latex solution before he 
waited for it to dry and then, at the 
last, peeled off the precious record. 
Finally, as we pulled up at Bisotun, 
Professor Cameron asked someone 
who was standing at the roadside 
if he could find Hasan and let him 
know that he — Cameron -- had re- 
turned. In no time Hasan came in 
view: now a slim, neatly dressed 
man in his forties. Fervent greetings 
were exchanged. Then | looked 
beyond our little group to see an 
unexpected sight. It seemed that 
half the population of the village 
had gathered on the slope below 
us. The word had clearly gone out: 
“Cameron was back!” 
David Stronach, 
University of California 
at Berkeley (USA).

## [Page 6](191580eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

  
At the end of the 19th century, Martin Alberto de Palacio y Elissagu 
was given the task of building a bridge over the Nervion, 
1 the Basque country (Spain), with one prerequisite: uninterrupted river traffic. 
LR CTR NG ELT Te TM RET To [1 EET AG TET Tle TT oR oR {TS na Cel Toll oT fe fe TERN JE Lo [e Lo EB 


### 191691: A Bridge spanning two worlds

 
A BRIDGE 
SPANNING TWO WORLDS 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
i
a
m
h
 
Bu
rk
e 
i 
I 
n 
py 
   
    
n Bilbao's ria is the first trans- 
These were the induce- 
ments for taking us to Las Arenas 
when we were children, to see the 
Biscay Transporter Bridge, an ar- 
chitectural masterpiece combining 
functionality and esthetics. 
As for my grandfather, he would 
explain that when he was a child, 
the place looked like a rubbish 
dump, and the only attraction was 
the bridge. He would also say that 
the bridge united two worlds - the 
right bank, attractive and mani- 
cured, country retreat for rich peo- 
ple, and the left bank, ugly and ill- 
kempt, where the factory workers 
lived. 
The transporter bridge joins the 
two banks of the Nervion at its 
mouth, it is made entirely of iron 
and it is 160 metres long. Resting 
The UNESCO Courier - July-August 2006 
TE 4 . 
A gondola is suspended high above passing ships. 
  
   
 
on four towers 43 metres high, it 
boasts the singularity of incorpo- 
rating a suspended “gondola” to 
transport passengers, vehicles 
and merchandise. 
The bridge was thought up more 
than a century ago by the Biscayan 
engineer Martin Alberto de Palacio 
y Elissague. The local authorities 
had assigned him the project of in- 
“On Bilbao's ria is 
the first transporter bridge 
ever built in the world. 
It is gigantic, splendid 
and made of metal beams like 
the Eiffel tower” 
venting a bridge that would make 
it possible to transport people and 
goods while still allowing naviga- 
tion on the Nervidn, essential for 
the region's steel industry. 
A visionary 
design 
Having studied the different op- 
tions that existed at the time, both 
in transport mechanisms (rails, 
barges, platforms) and types of 
bridge (lifting, swinging, high-level, 
underground), the engineer came 
up with the design, which he him- 
self named the “Palacio Transporter 
Bridge” He thus succeeded in 
meeting the double challenge put 
to him. 
The work began on 10 April 1890 
and lasted just over two years. The 
main structure was built first, then 
the transport “gondola”, compris- 
ing a covered section for first-class 
passengers and an uncovered area

## [Page 7](191580eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### 191691: A Bridge spanning two worlds

£ 
3 
Mm 
= 
£ 
8 
Zz 
~~ 
Q 
O 
0 
Ll 
z 
= 
Ok 
“My grandfather 
would certainly have been touched 
to see this bridge 
inscribed on 
the World Heritage List! 
for second-class travelers, mer- 
chandise and livestock. 
Inaugurated in 1893, the bridge 
was the first in history with such 
characteristics. It gained interna- 
tional fame and was soon com- 
pared to other iron monuments, 
such as the Eiffel Tower. The en- 
gineer Gustave Eiffel was in fact a 
personal friend of Palacio. 
When the Spanish civil war be- 
gan in 1936, the Biscay bridge 
became a focal point for General 
Franco's troops, intent on occu- 
pying the Basque country. On 26 
April 1937, the Condor legion, a 
squadron of German planes Hitler 
had sent to Franco's aid, bombed 
¥
 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
i
a
m
h
 
Bu
rk
e 
  
  
  
Guernica. Barely two months lat- 
er, on 17 June 1937, the Northern 
Army Engineers, a Republican 
battalion defending Biscay, blew 
up the bridge to prevent Franco's 
troops from crossing over. 
Reconstruction 
lts reconstruction was completed 
two years later and featured some 
technical improvements, such as 
a suspension system and cross- 
bars. The bridge was back in 
working order by 1941. 
It now stands in the midst of a 
natural setting. The blue water, the 
slope of the western bank and the 
groves of trees along the shores 
The suspended bridge helps the river traffic. 
The UNESCO Courier - July-August 2006 
seem protected by a benevolent 
colossus. 
We have grown — the contrasts be- 
tween the two banks and the deca- 
dent atmosphere described by my 
grandfather have gradually faded. 
The creation of the Guggenheim 
museum in 1997 modernized 
Bilbao, but the childish glee in- 
spired by crossing from one side of 
the river to the other in this urban 
cable-car remains intact. My grand- 
father would certainly have been 
touched to see this bridge inscribed 
on the World Heritage List. 
Laura Berdejo 
in Bilbao 

## [Page 8](191580eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

[CECE ER ES EN LES (RT RO ER (01 el fl ETE TH SL [6] oF) 
entrenched behind its encircling wall. 
CIAOTRNET GENTE ETE CRUEL RTO RT 


### 191692: Harar: the past behind closed doors

  
HARAR 
THE PAST BEHIND CLOSED DOORS 
—
 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
S
e
r
g
e
 
Sa
nt
el
li
 
The walls of Harar Jugol 
   
   
    
    
erched at an altitude of more than 
#800 metres, the town is surrounded 
by a fortified wall four metres high, 
cut through by five gates. Inside is a 
maze of 362 alleys bordered by small 
traditional houses, with broken-down 
old cars circulating wearily in their 
midst. Welcome to Harar, located 
more than 500 kilometres east of Ad- 
dis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital. 
Less known that other towns in 
the country like Aksum, Lalibela or 
Gondar, it is nonetheless “one of 
the rare examples of a still intact 
pre-industrial town,’ notes Jara Hailé 
Mariam of the Ethiopian Authority 
for Research and Conservation of 
Cultural Heritage. The proof is in the 
incessant click-clack of old sewing 
machines heard during the day in the 
tailors’ district, and the blazing red of 
the forges gathered together in the 
district alongside the Buda gate. 
The UNESCO Courier - July-August 2006 
 
Ivory and coffee 
trading 
At dawn, the call of the muezzins re- 
sounds in the town with 82 mosques. 
Not for nothing is Harar considered 
the fourth holiest city of Islam. In the 
16th century, it became the capital 
of an independent Muslim kingdom, 
at the price of merciless struggle 
against the Christian emperors then 
ruling the country. A significant ves- 
tige of this period of rebellion is the 
encircling wall or Jugol that still sur- 
rounds the city. 
As in the past, the gates are shut at 
nightfall. Each has a name: Choa ber, 
Buda ber, Erer ber, Fellana ber. 
A gateway to Ethiopia 
Several commodities made Harar 
famous: ivory, leather and particu- 
larly coffee. 
Traders would come in and out 
8 
of the gates in the days when 
Harar was the point of access to 
Ethiopia, arriving from the Gulf of 
Aden coast. Several commodities 
made Harar famous: ivory, leath- 
er and particularly coffee. Trade 
in the precious bean was in fact 
what brought an unusual travel 
ling salesman to the town at the 
end of the 19th century. His name: 
Arthur Rimbaud. The French poet 
began his stay in 1880. It was a 
time when the caravans brought 
merchandise from the Abyssinian 
A maze of 362 alleys 
bordered by small traditional 
houses, with broken-down 
old cars circulating 
wearily in their midst.

## [Page 9](191580eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### 191692: Harar: the past behind closed doors

EE 
ft 
© 
w 
o 
[SE 
[ad no bY 
lo} 
O 
n 
ii 
Zz 
=> 
©     
The Horse Market at Harar Jugol. 
mountains in the west and the 
trading posts of the Gulf of Aden. 
When the Addis-Ababa-Djibouti 
railway line was opened at the be- 
ginning of the 20th century, it her- 
alded the town's decline. 
Commerce is nonetheless alive 
and well in Harar. At the big Gidir 
Magala market, a bustling crowd 
 Ny “a 
SSS a JA 
The Shoa Gate at Harar Jugol. 
of Somalian, Amhara and Oromo 
women draped in brightly-coloured 
garb shop for spices, vegetables, 
cotton cloth, grains and medici- 
nal herbs. They are also after the 
famous khat leaves, which can 
be ingested as tea or chewed to 
produce a mildly euphoric state. 
Enough to forget that between now 
and nightfall, when the shadows 
of the minarets lengthen in the twi- 
light and the gates are closed, hy- 
enas will descend from the moun- 
tains and encircle the town. 
Agnes Bardon, 
in collaboration with 
Francis Anfray. 
LEE EIA GET [QC RG CRE EVER ETE (Sh 
SI IL A(T EL RG CR ETN [TER EYL RIT] A 
The blue plant confers identity on the whole region, which is now inscribe 
on the World Heritage Lis 


### 191702: Tequila-tinted landscape

  
TEQUILA-TINTED LANDSCAPE 
     
   
of blue, the shade of neither 
sky nor water, with a tinge of green 
rey, colours the austere lands 
Jalisco valleys. This sea of aga- 
tches from the slopes of the 
Tequila mountain to the deep gorges 
carved out by the Santiago river. 
From the mountain top, the kingdom 
of agave appears in all its immensity. 
The spiny plants shaped like bluish- 
green stars trace well-defined lines. 
They form a vast mantle of pointy 
leaves patiently absorbing the rays 
of the sun to transform them first into 
sugar and then, through human inter- 
vention, into tequila. 
© 
UN
ES
CO
Q/
Ca
rl
os
 
To
ma
s 
 
A sea of blue agave. 
“This sea of agave 
stretches from the slopes 
of the Tequila mountain 
to the deep gorges carved out 
by the Santiago river’ 
The UNESCO Courier - July-August 2006 9

## [Page 10](191580eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### 191702: Tequila-tinted landscape

  
 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
C
a
r
l
o
s
 
T
o
m
a
s
 
. a r . - 
> 1 - ‘ 
: ~ oo” , > YW . . 
a . : . - 
Agave plant. 
They say agave is tough, like the 
people who live around it. That it 
takes root in ard lands from which 
it draws life and blooms. It is fibrous 
and resistant. Patient, but also joy- 
ful. Its long and robust leaves fan out 
from their spherical stem, which they 
render almost invisible. It is the pifia, 
the ball, head or heart of the agave, 
the ground-level tabernacle where 
the plant stores the juice that one day 
will be transformed into tequila. 
Long-term 
harvest 
You have to wait at least eight years 
for agave to mature. Then comes 
harvest time. The jimador, the per- 
son in charge of the harvest, chops 
off the agave leaves one by one to 
clear the heart, which weighs at 
least 20 kilos. 
Patience. You can't hurry nature. 
Nor the good tequila drinker. He 
knows about the number of years 
agave plants need to mature, the 
experience of the men who cut 
them one by one, the hours if not 
days of roasting, at low tempera- 
ture. He knows you have to wait 
until the juice ferments, then put 
the juice through the stills the 
Spanish imported. And after that 
let it rest peacefully, in the dark and 
cool of the casks. 
Thatiswhythe gooddrinkersipste- 
quilawhenheissettledinhisequipal, 
large wooden armchair typical of 
the region, in the cool shade of a 
The UNESCO Courier - July-August 2006 
(Fos (a 
; Y— 
~ : 
-. 
patio or terrace. He drinks it with 
the respect you give to an ances- 
tor, and with the gratitude you owe 
to someone who has taught you to 
appreciate waiting. 
Agave is equally generous to chil- 
dren and sober people. The pifa 
is comprised of segments that are 
easily separated once it is cooked. 
The pieces, which in the heat of the 
oven take on a bright coffee colour, 
make a delicious treat. Along the 
side of the road, on town squares 
and during village fiestas, people 
sell this peculiar delicacy, which 
you chew to extract the very sweet 
io
la
 
- 
. 
© 
Ig
na
ci
o 
G
o
m
e
z
 
Ar
r  er 
- Fo 
juice until you are left with taste- 
less fiber, which you then spit out. 
Agave is also a source of honey. 
Incendiary spirit 
Tequila has acquired a reputation as 
an acrid beverage. The golden age of 
Mexican cinema portrayed it as an in- 
cendiary spirit that burned the throats 
of brave Mexican caballeros and in- 
cited them to fight. But now finally 
tequila has shed its image as a drink 
reserved for men. It is often enjoyed 
at home with the family as a cocktail. 
Even though it can be mixed with 
sodas, connoisseurs prefer it “dry”, 
which is to say pure. They serve it in 
a caballito, a small glass designed to 
accommodate all the aromas of te- 
quila, or else in little earthenware jars. 
An increasing number of women also 
appreciate it. Some mothers even 
dip their finger in tequila and rub 
their children’s gums with it to soothe 
toothache. 
In Mexico, cloudy afternoons that 
inspire contemplation and intimate 
conversation are called tardes te- 
quilaras, but any day is good to sip 
this national drink, produced with pa- 
tience and wisdom in the magnificent 
blue sweep of the Jalisco fields. 
Juan Carlos Nuiiez Bustillos, 
in Guadalajara. 
      
Alambiques at San José del Refugio, Jalisco, Mexico. 
10

## [Page 11](191580eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

PA FL Tol g CT0 [Ta MEG [Tes (oT fe) 1 [CY Wolong nature reserve, 
NEI ELE RUC CET ERE [a TET CER Ro TET Ml | CEE Li [TET] 
ne of the few places in the world where giant pandas still live in the wil 
EERIE fl oT-TT ol Eloi] oT=Te aT IAs ER (oT 4 [0 ll [1g To [0 HEY 


### 191704: Pandas roam free in China

  
PANDAS ROAM FREE 
© 
W
o
l
o
n
g
 
Na
tu
re
 
Re
se
rv
e,
 
Si
ch
ua
n,
 
Ch
in
a 
oe 
oo ONE TY 
Giant Panda of China. 
Why do you think 
it is important to protect 
the giant panda? 
First of all, because it is en- 
dangered. At present China is 
the only country where giant 
pandas continue to live in the 
wild, with a population of only 
1,500 individuals. Beyond that, 
the existence of giant pandas 
is extremely old in the history 
of evolution, going back 12 mil- 
lion years. In the middle of the 
Pleistocene, the oldest period 
of the quaternary era, the gi- 
ant panda went through a pe- 
The UNESCO Courier - July-August 2006 
IN CHINA 
 
Interview by Weiny Cauhapé 
riod of very rapid development. 
After an evolution of three mil- 
lion years as a carnivore, the 
giant panda became a “vege- 
tarian” with bamboo as its prin- 
cipal food source. Outside of 
China, fossils of great pandas 
were discovered in Burma and 
Vietnam. Unfortunately, the radi- 
cal change in climate proved fa- 
tal to many families of pandas. 
The survivors fled to the moun- 
tains and deep valleys in three 
Chinese provinces, Sichuan, 
Shanxi and Gansu, where they 
still live. 
11 
In your opinion, will being 
inscribed on the World Heritage 
List have direct consequences 
for the site? 
Certainly, because for a long time 
now, the giant pandas have been 
located in separate and scattered 
areas, or “islets”, where encounter 
and interaction between different 
groups is difficult. In this context, 
inbreeding is inevitable, which re- 
sults in their having reduced ca- 
pacity to adapt to environmental 
change, a lower reproductive rate 
and less resistance to disease. 
Inscription on the World Heritage

## [Page 12](191580eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

    
  
© 
W
o
l
o
n
g
 
Na
tu
re
 
Re
se
rv
e,
 
Si
ch
ua
n,
 
Ch
in
a 
¥
 
E
M
 
Zhang Hemin plays with pandas. 


### 191704: Pandas roam free in China

List should allow us to gradually 
extend the giant panda zone to the 
mountains in Minshan, Liangshan, 
Xianglingshan and Qinling, to cre- 
ate one single reserve. The giant 
pandas will then have the opportu- 
nity to free themselves from these 
“islets” and the environment will be 
greatly improved. 
Aren’t you afraid that it will also 
cause an influx of tourists 
to the reserve? 
| think not. In our reserve, an eco- 
tourism programme allows us to 
limit the number of visitors. In ad- 
dition, the size of the area open to 
visitors represents only 1% of the 
total surface of the reserve. And 
furthermore we are setting up an 
advisory committee of recognized 
experts in environment, tourism 
and land use, which will supervise 
eco-tourism development and con- 
servation. 
To what extent is the local 
population involved 
in protecting the site? 
The number of inhabitants on the 
reserve at present is 4,500. We 
have carried out an awareness 
campaign. For instance, we hired 
a number of people to participate 
in monitoring patrols and manage- 
ment of forest lots. In parallel, we 
have encouraged farmers to prac- 
tice off-season market gardening, 
to diversify their source of revenue 
and avert excessive use of moun- 
The UNESCO Courier - July-August 2006 
Panda numbers 
1,500 
population in the wild 
20-30 years 
lifespan of pandas in captivity 
135 days 
average panda gestation period 
250 pounds 
weight of male pandas 
90 to 130 grams 
weight of pandas at birth 
15 types of bamboo 
that pandas eat 
tain resources — cutting down 
trees and hunting wild animals. 
Many trees and animals have been 
saved in this way, and the giant 
pandas’ habitat protected. And we 
have also developed eco-tourism 
in a pilot area. The idea was to 
encourage people who live in the 
mountains to come down into the 
valley to take advantage of tourism 
opportunities. In exchange, they 
pledge to restore their fields to 
their original condition, as natural 
forest or bamboo forest. 
What is your relationship 
to the giant panda? 
| love this animal. | obtained a 
degree in biology, specializing 
in animals, from the University 
of Sichuan in 1983, and my first 
12 
[uv] 
£ 
= 
O 
© 
Wo
lo
ng
 
Na
tu
re
 
Re
se
rv
e,
 
Si
ch
ua
n 
job, for three years, was at a gi- 
ant panda observation station. 
In 1987, when | was doing my 
Master's degree at the University 
of Idaho, | realized that in-depth 
research was being devoted to 
many ordinary species, while 
research on the giant panda, a 
rare and precious species, was 
still in its embryonic stages in 
China. When | returned to China, 
| started research with the goal 
of increasing the reproductive 
rate of giant pandas living in cap- 
tivity. The idea was to increase 
the population in groups of wild 
pandas. Some of the pandas we 
raised were released and now 
live in the wild. They seem to be 
living a normal life, but to reach 
any definite conclusion, we need 
a follow-up of careful study in the 
long term. 
Be a 
0%    
  
   

## [Page 13](191580eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### 191706: World Heritage timeline

World Heritage timeline 
  
  © UNES
CO
/H
at
to
ri
, 
Eij
i 
  
View of the site of Borobudur, temple, 
Buddha, sunset. 
1959 
UNESCO launches an international 
campaign and collects US$80 million 
to save the Abu Simbel temples 
in the Nile valley. A draft of 
the convention on the protection 
of cultural heritage is prepared. 
1962 
UNESCO adopts the 
Recommendation on the Safeguarding 
of the Beauty and Character 
of Landscapes and Sites. 
1965 
A conference at the White House 
in Washington, D.C. (USA) 
calls for a World Heritage Trust 
to protect ‘natural and scenic areas 
and historic sites! 
1966 
UNESCO spearheads an 
international campaign to save 
Venice (Italy) after disastrous floods 
threatened the city. 
1968 
The World Conservation Union (IUCN) 
develops a proposal similar to the 
World Heritage Trust for its members. 
1972 
Following a United Nations Conference 
on the Human Environment 
in Stockholm (Sweden), expert groups 
involving IUCN, the International Com- 
mittee on Monuments and Sites 
(ICOMOS) and UNESCO 
The UNESCO Courier - July-August 2006 
  
come together with proposals 
for the Convention concerning 
the Protection of World Cultural 
and Natural Heritage. UNESCO's 
General Conference adopts it 
on 16 November. 
1975 
The Convention becomes 
operational, upon ratification 
by the first twenty countries. 
1976 
In accordance with the Convention, 
the General Conference establishes 
the World Heritage Committee 
and World Heritage Fund. 
1977 
The Committee holds its first meeting 
to draw up statutory texts 
and directives. 
1978 
The first twelve sites are inscribed 
on the World Heritage List. 
1992 
The year marks the 20th Anniversary 
of the Convention, the creation 
of the UNESCO World Heritage 
Centre, and the adoption 
of the cultural landscapes category 
by the World Heritage Committee, 
making the Convention 
the first international 
legal instrument to recognize 
and protect cultural landscapes. 
13 
The idea of creating 
an international movement for protecting heritage 
emerged after World War I. 
The 1972 Convention concerning the Protection 
of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage 
developed from the merging of two separate 
movements: the preservation of cultural sites 
and the conservation of nature. 
1994 
The Committee adopts a global strat- 
egy in order to achieve better regional 
balance and greater thematic diversity 
in the World Heritage List. 
It encourages the nomination of sites 
in underrepresented parts of the world, 
especially in categories which are not 
yet fully represented on the List. 
1994 
UNESCO launches a project 
to mobilize young people's participation 
in heritage protection and promotion. 
2002 
The General Assembly proclaims 
2002 the United Nations Year 
for Cultural Heritage, with UNESCO 
as lead agency. 
2002 
To mark the 30th anniversary 
of the Convention, UNESCO 
organizes the International Congress 
“World Heritage: Shared Legacy, 
Common Responsibility” in Venice 
(Italy). 
José Banaag 
Sources : World Heritage 
Information Kit, 2005; 
Léon Pressouyre, 
The World Heritage Convention, 
twenty years later, UNESCO, 1996

## [Page 14](191580eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

The Courier looks back 
Since it began publication, The UNESCO Courier has devoted 
many issues to world heritage. Here is a glimpse at some of them. 
Issues 
A tribute to the past 
November 2005 
Over 30 years after the signing 
of the World Heritage Convention, 
the UNESCO label on remarkable sites 
represents national pride combined with 
the benefits of tourism. But further efforts 
are needed to make the list more 
representative. 
World Heritage - Seven writers 
in a world of wonders 
December 2000 
Seven writers from different parts 
of the globe take us on a personal 
voyage, sharing their vision of a selection 
of wonders chosen from the hundreds 
of cultural and natural sites on the List. 
Safeguarding heritage 
(Tourism and culture; 
rethinking the mix) 
July-August 1999 
The boom in cultural tourism, by the sheer 
weight of numbers involved, may harbour 
the seeds of its own destruction 
by eroding the very cultures and sites 
that are its stock in trade. 
Troglodytes: a hidden world 
December 1995 
Down the centuries, subterranean 
dwellings have created a little-known form 
of architectural heritage that demon- 
strates exceptional versatility 
and resourcefulness. 
The UNESCO Courier - July-August 2006 
Articles 
“Angkor’s role in the search 
for a lost unity” 
May 2002 
This renowned temple complex 
is a powerful symbol of unity for a people 
rebuilding their identity, and a source 
of much needed cash for a country 
under reconstruction. 
“Mostar, a bridge to peace” 
May 2002 
The 16th-century bridge destroyed 
during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
is being rebuilt by the communities 
it has always linked. 
“Shinto and shoguns: 
a return to Itsukushima” 
February 2001 
A novelist returns to the cherished site 
of a venerated shrine where rituals set 
the skies and waters ablaze with music 
and the echo of bygone rulers. 
“Toxins and the Taj” 
July-August 2000 
India’s most celebrated monument 
continues to be threatened by pollution 
despite various court orders to close 
down harmful factories in Agra. 
“Historic Lima 
gets a new heart” 
July-August 2000 
Although not a metropolis every urban 
planner would dream of, Lima 
no longer has the dubious title 
of one of Latin America's dirtiest 
and most polluted cities. 
“Dubrovnik reborn” 
Feb. 2000 
Seriously damaged by the conflict 
in former Yugoslavia, 
the great medieval city on the shores 
of the Adriatic has been restored 
in record time. 
“Carthage’s long-awaited 
rescue” 
Sept. 1999 
Despite 30 years of protection, 
the site of the great city of Antiquity 
is still being eroded by urban pressures. 
14 
A major conservation project should pave 
the way for new excavations. 
“The world heritage, 
a legacy for all” 
August 1988 
The issue offers an overview 
of the different categories and groups 
of properties on the World Heritage List, 
with brief descriptions of a selection 
of them. 
“Borobudur rescued, 
a masterpiece 
of world heritage” 
February 1983 
UNESCO launched an international 
campaign in 1972 to restore 
this Buddhist temple dating from 
the 8th and 9th centuries. This dossier 
marks its successful conclusion. 
“Nature and culture, 
the human heritage” 
August 1980 
We visit the List's first 57 entries, 
aware that the roots of human existence 
are at stake in the preservation of these 
masterpieces we have inherited from 
our forebears. 
“Victory in Nubia” 
February- March 1980 
A double issue celebrates the end 
of UNESCO's twenty-year international 
campaign to save the Nubian monuments 
from the rising waters of the Nile. 
“The Acropolis in peril”, 
October 1977 
The Greek government takes urgent 
steps to preserve and restore 
this masterpiece. The issue devotes 
a study of the site from ancient times 
to today. 
“The heritage of Nepal” 
December 1974 
Nepal embarks on a major plan 
to preserve its rich cultural heritage 
and natural environment while meeting 
the needs of modern social and 
economic development. 
José Banaag

## [Page 15](191580eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

rN 
T 
| J           
  
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Organisation 
des Nations Unies 
pour I'éducation, 
la science et la culture 
Organizacion 
de las Naciones Unidas 
para la Educacion, 
la Ciencia y la Cultura 
OpraHu3aups 
O6beanHeHHbIX Haun no 
BOMpOCaM 0b6pa30BaHUs, 
HayKu MU KYyNbTYpbl 
Saaiall asYl Lalas 
Llaslly alally Ly 
EEA ET. 
Ba Ui AH] 
  
  
=H
 
  
         
  
  
The UNESCO Courier is published 
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
+ 33 (0)1 4568 15 88 
http://www.unesco.org/fr/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
f.ryan@unesco.org 
+ 33 (0)1 4568 15 88 
Director 
Saturnino Munoz Gomez 
Editors 
Arabic 
Bassam Mansour 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape 
English 
Edna Yahil 
French 
Agnes Bardon 
Russian 
Vladimir Sergueev 
Spanish 
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz 
Editorial Assistant 
José Banaag 
Photo 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org 
PDF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi 
Web platform 
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro 
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be reproduced 
and/or translated providing the credit line reads 
“Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” and includes 
date and hyperlink : http://www.unesco.org/courier 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Photographs belonging to UNESCO may be reproduced freely. 
They must carry the following caption: 
© UNESCO and photographer's name. For high resolution, 
please contact the Photobank: photobank@unesco.org 
Photographs without UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations of the countries 
and territories concerned 
 