# [063381](063381engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](063381engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
mCouricr 
NOVEMBER 1963 (16TH YEAR) - PRICE 1/-STG. (U.K.) - 30CENTS (CANADA) - 0.70F (FRANCE) 
Constantin Stanislavsky 
THE MAN 
WHO REVOLUTIONIZED 
THE THEATRE 
 

## [Page 2](063381engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
 
  
 
  
   
     
   
 
  
————— r———— a  h— i A— 
  
  
 
  
  
are 
9 i 
EE ER 
BR SH 2 
AW 
19%. 80. 
    
   
P
r
d
 
ir 
C
i
 
AR
 
| oo
d 
S
E
 
NO 
we
 
» 
= 
VL
 
, 
e
o
 
7%
 
; y-
 
i
 
i
 
T
E
E
S
,
 
’ 
- 
4 
¥ 
C R
R
L
 
o
m
 
  
       
   
. - 
AE TAS NRPS ER ALL ® CR RRR N SU 
” INTL A ne SLES 
} NS RL A NS IR NA 
NY : 
  
; i] U | A x) i J. \ y 3 ~The painted exterior walls of the Moldavian churches of northeastern Rumania with their figures 
and scenes are like the open pages of giant illustrated books. This majestic 16th century fresco, 
depicting The Last Judgment covers the western facade of the monastery church of Voronet 
P A I MN 1) 3 )) which was completed and decorated In 1547. Some of the finest examples of this art have now 
been collected in ** Rumania: Painted Churches of Moldavia *’, a new album in the Unesco World 
C i U BR C A 3 S Art Series. Published by the New York Graphic Society by arrangement with Unesco, this album, 
~ printed in Italy, has 32 full-page colour illustrations and is priced at $18.00 or equivalent. 

## [Page 3](063381engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

id wiNpOW 
"mCourier 
Contents 
No. 11 
PUBLISHED IN 
NINE EDITIONS 
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 
Japanese 
Italian 
  
COVER PHOTO  
This year marks the one- 
hundredth anniversary of 
the birth of the Russian 
actor and stage producer, 
Constantin Stanisiavsky. An 
inspired and meticulous 
artist for whom no effort 
was too great, he gave a 
completely new form to 
dramatic art. A quarter of 
a century after his death the 
impact of his work conti- 
nues to be felt in all parts 
of the world. (See page 12) 
Official Soviet photo 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Page 
12 
15 
20 
23 
24 
28 
30 
33 
Sclentific and Cultural 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7+, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
NOVEMBER 1963 
16TH YEAR 
UNESCO IN THE CONGO 
By Garry Fullerton 
CONSTANTIN STANISLAVSKY 
Revolutionary of the modern theatre 
By Grigori Kristi 
MY LIFE IN ART 
Last pages of Stanislavsky’s spiritual testament 
LEAVES FROM STANISLAVSKY'S NOTEBOOKS 
ONE LANGUAGE FOR THE WORLD? 
By Mario Pei 
ALLO! - HALLO!..: 
A Unesco film puts communications in a nutshell 
UNICEF GREETING CARDS 
THE UNSOLVED MYSTERY OF MARAJO 
What caused the decline and death of an island people? 
By Alfred Métraux 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
(M.C. 63.1, 185 A) 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, sxceptin July and August when 
itis bi-monthly (11 issues a year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German. 
Arabic, Japanese, and Italian. In the United Kingdom jtis distributed by H.M, 
Stationery Office, P. O, Box 569, London, S. E. I. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies ars sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Readers’ Guide to 
Periodical Literature published by HH, W. Wilaon Co., New York. 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Russian Edition : Veniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Editlon : Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
Annual subscription rates : 10/-stg. ; $3.00 (Canada) ;7.00 
French Francs or equivalent. Single copies |/-stg. 30 
cents: 0.70 F, 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Parls 7°. 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief.

## [Page 4](063381engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 63372: UNESCO in the Congo

UNESCO 
IN THE CONGO 
by Garry Fullerton 
N o one in Leopoldville or anywhere else in the 
Congo knew whether the secondary schools 
would open in the fall of 1960. And if they did open, no 
one knew how many teachers would be on hand to greet 
the returning students. 
Education, like ali other public services, was a victim 
of the political and military instability of the new 
republic’s first few months of independence. Thousands 
of European technical and professional personnel— 
teachers, doctors, lawyers, civil servants, journalists, 
engineers, business people—had left the country and few 
Congolese specialists had beeen trained to replace them. 
Answering the appeal of the Congolese Government, 
the United Nations and the specialized agencies tried to 
fill the breach. A vast co-ordinated programme of civilian 
assistance, covering nearly every fleld of activity, was 
launched in July and August, 1960, and grew rapidly until 
it became one of the most extensive international eflorts 
of its kind ever undertaken. 
In UnEesco’s part of the programme, secondary schools 
were by far the most urgent problem. First of all, there 
were virtually no Congolese teachers and it was not 
known how many Belgian teachers would return after 
their summer holidays in Europe. Secondly, although 
secondary school graduates were desperately needed in 
every sector of government and industry, enrolments 
were extremely low and only 152 Congolese graduated in 
1960. 
The picture was equally grim in primary education, but 
there the problem was one of quality rather than quantity. 
By the official statistics, nearly 1,500,000 children were in 
primary schools throughout the Congo in 1960. They 
constituted 71.5 per cent of the age group 5 to 14, one of 
the highest enrolment ratios in Africa. But only 3,500 of 
the 16,000 schools provided teaching beyond the second 
grade, and nearly 70 per cent of the pupils left school 
before completing four years, the minimum necessary to 
maintain literacy. Only nine percent finished the full six 
years. 
Similar situations prevailed in the flelds of science and 
of mass communication with which UNEsco 'was also 
Unations 
concerned. Many European journalists had left, and the 
Congolese who had received journalistic training fre- 
quently rose to positions of prominence in the new 
government. ‘Thus newspapers and radio were left with 
staffs who lacked both professional training and a good 
cultural background. 
To solve the secondary school problem, Unesco helped 
the Congolese authorities recruit teachers from other 
countries and establish a National Institute of Education 
to train Congolese teachers. 
Although initial recruitment was slow, UNEsco managed 
to send 66 teachers to the Congo during the ‘winter of 
1960-1961. Together with a number of Belgian teachers 
who volunteered to remain at their posts under a bilateral 
technical assistance programme, these teachers made it 
possible to re-open or keep open a number of schools 
which otherwise would have had to close their doors or 
reduce the number of classes. 
By the 1962-1963 school year, some 556 teachers had 
been recruited with UnEsco’s help for Congo schools, about 
one third of the entire teaching force. These teachers are 
actually employed by the Congolese government, but 
UNEsco pays one third of their basic salaries in foreign 
currency, as ‘well as a bonus of $1,200 a year. 
Among the 25 nationalities represented by this corps of 
teachers, Haitians are the most numerous, followed by 
Belgians, French and Lebanese in that order. But there 
are also teachers from Spain, Italy, United Arab Republic, 
Syria, Greece, Afghanistan, Poland, Canada, Honduras, 
Vietnam, United States, Norway, Switzerland, Netherlands, 
China, Luxemburg, Mexico, Rwanda, United Kingdom, 
Colombia and Sweden. Several school faculties have as 
many as a dozen different nationalities, and one—the 
athenée at Goma—has 15. 
Despite difficult living conditions (especially food and 
housing) and teaching conditions, most of these teachers 
have done a job of which they can be proud. A few have 
been outstanding. 
CONT'D ON PAGE 6 
READING BY STREET 
LIGHT. Thirst for educa- 
tion impels young men and 
women to buy books when 
they have little money for 
food and to spend long 
hours at night studying 
under the streetlamps of 
Leopoldville (right) when 
their homes are too noisy 
or too crowded or have no 
light. In 4 years secondary 
school enrolment has more 
than doubled inthe Congo. 
Left, one of hundreds of 
secondary school teachers 
recruited with Unesco’s help 
is seen in a history class. 
 

## [Page 5](063381engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 63372: UNESCO in the Congo

   Eb NR es oe 
 § ‘ 
  
Unesco - Unations - Basil Zarov

## [Page 6](063381engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 63372: UNESCO in the Congo

TT PE TT 
  
      
      
    
»- 
JoA— 
Fearbiiiiediiig 
11 1144 LUARMATY LA 
Fhsserenrine ee ‘ 
    
     
 
Jet oh > x — 
we = 
at a. i 
Unations photos 
LOVANIUM UNIVERSITY, above, traces its origins to 
1925 when the University of Louvain, Belgium, established 
a medical foundation and agricultural centre near Leopoldville. 
Given university status in 1956, Lovanium now includes 
faculties of law, medicine, philosophy and arts, theology, 
science, political and social sciences, and polytechnical 
studies. [ts research facilities include Africa's first nuclear 
reactor. In 1961-62, 1,100 students were enrolled in Congo 
institutions of higher education, eight of which now exist. 
NEWSPAPERS have a larger circulation in the Congo 
than in any other French-speaking African country 
according to a Unesco report. Its six dailies now total 
34,000 compared with 24,000 before independence, 
and there are about a dozen weeklies besides. During the 
past year Congolese newspapermen have been attending 
courses combining journalism and general education 
run by Unesco specialists. Below, Unesco expert Antoine 
DesRoches explains some aspects of front-page layout. 
CONGO (Contd) 
Decolonizing of the 
“Unesco’s aid has been extremely precious to us in the 
difficult years following independence,” Michel Colin, the 
Congo’s minister of education, told me last May. Other 
Congolese authorities acknowledge too that without the 
foreign teachers there would be no secondary education in 
the Congo. 
The ministry of education has estimated that the need 
for foreign teachers will continue to grow until 1967, 
reaching a peak of 7,000, before leveling off as Congolese 
are trained to take their places. Whether this many can 
be supplied either through international or bilateral tech- 
nical assistance remains an open question. Perhaps 
Congolese secondary schools will remain short-staffed for 
some years to come. 
Meanwhile, however, the National Institute for Educa- 
tion will begin in 1964 to graduate about 100 teachers a 
year. The institute, better knovm by its French initials, 
IPN (Institut Pédagogique National), opened its doors in 
1961 and is a prime example of international co-operation. 
Headed by a Congolese director, its staff includes Unesco 
experts from 12 nations. It receives financial assistance 
from the Congolese government and the United Nations, 
as well as from the United States AID programme and the 
British Council. 
IPN’s student body Includes young people from all 

## [Page 7](063381engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 63372: UNESCO in the Congo

mind 
 
MOBILE UNESCO TEAMS are now touring the Congo giving refresher courses 
in education to many of the country’s 42,000 primary school teachers. Each team is 
made up of three Unesco educators as well as a UNICEF nutrition-hygiene specialist. 
provinces of the Congo, selected without regard to ethnic 
origin or religious belief. In addition—and this Is 
something of a novelty in a country where women have 
traditionally received very little education and teaching 
has been mostly a male monopoly—it is open to women as 
well as men. 
The institute's programme of studies lays heavy stress 
on African linguistics, African and Congolese history, 
cultural anthropology and sociology. By emphasizing the 
Congo’s own heritage, it hopes to become what Joseph 
Ngalula, former minister of education, called “an instru- 
ment of mental decolonization.” 
Antonio Chiappano, the Unesco expert responsible for 
the school’s curriculum, feels very strongly that it must 
combine the best experience of all nations and yet be 
adapted specifically to the needs of the Congo. 
“We know that the experience of one country is not 
directly transferable to another country,” he sald, “but 
we don’t know yet what can be saved and what must be 
discarded. We are in a process of constant revision and 
self-correction. The institute is above all experimental. 
What we learn here will be applied when additional 
teacher training institutions are set up.” 
This same pragmatic philosophy also guided the work 
Above, a group of young Congolese teachers get a “live” demonstration in child care. 
of the reform commission establlshed by the Congolese 
government with the help of Unesco to overhaul and 
streamline the entire structure of secondary education in 
the Congo. The reform Involves both modernization of 
the system to take advantage of the latest educational 
research (similar to efforts being made in most other 
nations) and emphas!s on Africa, particularly in such 
subjects as history and geography. 
The commission, appointed In February, 1961, was 
headed by Henri Takizala, secretary-general of the Congo- 
lese ministry of education. It included representatives of 
the administration, the Catholic Office of Education, the 
Protestant Office of Education, the University of Lovanium, 
primary education and technical education, as well as 
Unesco advisers. 
The group proposed that secondary education be 
divided into two cycles: a first “orientation” cycle of two 
years, during which all students would take the same 
courses; and a second cycle of four years with specialized 
sections for sclence, the humanities, commerce and 
administration, agriculture, teaching and technology 
(mechanics, electricity, construction and Industrial 
chemistry). 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](063381engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 63372: UNESCO in the Congo

8 
CONGO (Cont'd) 
On the long road to school 
The principal difference between the new system and 
the old is that the new one is “promotional,” seeking to 
advance as many students as possible without sacrificing 
quality, rather than limiting itself, through rigid selection, 
to the education of a tiny elite. Whereas the old system 
produced a large number of academlc failures, ill-adapted 
for any sort of occupation, the new one is so designed that 
students can interrupt thelr schooling at any one of 
several points and begin useful careers with the informa- 
tion already acquired. 
The orientation cycle has already been put into effect 
in most Congo schools, and the first year of the four-year 
cycle is beginning this year. Formidable obstacles stand 
between the plan on paper and its application in reality, 
however, including the shortage of teachers, the shortage 
of textbooks and the shortage of funds. An ideal system 
of education, and this plan comes close to that, cannot 
be bought cheaply and it may be many years before the 
transition from old to new is complete. 
F INALLY, although the reform has received over- 
whelming approval from most Congolese edu- 
cators, a small but vocal minority has remained opposed 
to it. In part this opposition stems from the natural 
conservatism of educational traditionalists; in part it 
reflects a suspicion, quite unfounded incidentally, that 
the reform Is an attempt to “water down” the old curri- 
culum for Congolese consumption. 
These psychological obstacles are gradually being over- 
come, however, and if the tough problems of teachers, 
books and money can be solved, the reform can become a 
reality. Should this happen, this might well constitute 
UNEesco's most significant contribution to the Congo. 
‘With Unesco’s help, the Congolese government Is 
tackling all aspects of education simultaneously and at 
all levels. One Unesco expert traveled 24,000 miles in a 
five-month period early this year as a school architect, 
designing and supervising the construction of classroom 
and laboratory buildings and student and faculty resi- 
dences, both for secondary schools and higher education. 
Another acts as purchasing agent for all books and school 
supplies used throughout the system and supervises the 
sale of UNeEsco Coupons for this purpose. To date more 
than $7,000,000 worth of these Coupons have been used 
in the Congo. Still other experts are helping the central 
and provincial governments reorganize and strengthen 
the administrative and financial services of their 
ministries of education. 
Some of the most exciting ‘work, however, has been that 
of UNnEsco’s four mobile teams which travel across the 
Congo giving four-week refresher courses to primary school 
teachers. These teachers, In contrast to the secondary 
school teachers, are almost exclusively Congolese, but the 
level of their professional qualifications and general 
education is often extremely low. 
I met one of these mobile teams, two Frenchmen, a 
Frenchwoman and a Haitian, in the steamy river port of 
Kindu one day last April. A few days earlier they had 
set out from Bukavu, 700 kilometres away, to cross the 
parallel ranges of mountains which separate the East 
African lakes from the Congo River basin. It took them 
three days to make the journey. Their heavily-loaded 
Jeep station-wagon had averaged 20 km an hour over 
roads that were little more than jungle paths, across 
slippery pontoon bridges rocked by churning flood waters, 
through swamps where mud choked the axles and water 
reached the floorboards. 
CONT'D ON PAGE 10 
FOCAL POINT for science in the 
Congo is the Institute of Scientific 
Research in Central Africa. Its 
principal installation (below) at 
Lwiro on Lake Kivu includes the 
best equipment in Africa for 
seismological and geomagnetic 
measurements as well as extensive 
botany and zoology laboratories. 
The Institute also serves as a 
meeting place for regional and 
international scientific congresses, 
One such meeting, a seminar on 
seismology and geophysics spon- 
sored by Unesco in April 1963, 
supplemented its work with visits 
to the nearby Niragongo volcano 
and the Goma lava fields (right). 
  
   
 
Ee FTE = 
  
ah 
       
AARAN 
  
Dy - 
Ms 7 
 
  

## [Page 9](063381engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 63372: UNESCO in the Congo

ie 
: 
eo 
-* 
  
RESEARCH STATION at Uvira 
on the shores of Lake Tanganyika 
concentrates on hydrobiological 
studies. Scientists aboard its 
research vessel, the President Paul 
Ermens (right) have identified and 
classified more than 400 species of 
fish in its waters, a fact of major 
importance for the diet of Congo- 
lese and Tanganyikans. Other 
scientific facilities in the Congo 
include a network of more than 
100 meteorological observation 
stations, linked with the central 
bureau at Binza, near Leopoldville 
where student forecasters (below), 
learn the use of meteorological 
equipment. The World Meteorolo- 
gical Organization is organizing this 
training of Congolese weathermen.  
A. Gille 
 
Unations

## [Page 10](063381engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

————     
  
he Z 
A RR 
LAND OF VAST NA 
With 15 million inhabitants scat- 
tered over an area the size of 
Western Europe, the Congo (Leo- 
poldville) is one of the largest 
and potentially one of the richest 
of all African countries. It pos- 
sesses vast untapped sources of 
hydro-electric power and some 
of the world’s greatest mineral 
deposits. The mines of Katanga 
(right) supply seven per cent of 
the world’s copper and two- 
thirds of its cobalt. The develop- 
ment of a future tourist industry 
is possible in the lake district of 
Unesco - Unations - Basil Zarov 


### 63372: UNESCO in the Congo

10 
CONGO (Cont'd) 
One quarter the size of Europe 
While such Journeys are not everyday events for the 
mobile teams, they illustrate the kind of difficulty these 
modern day ploneers can expect to meet. They also face 
formidable odds in thelr efforts to improve primary 
education in the Congo. As Indicated previously, the 
quality of both the instructors and the teaching in many 
primary schools is quite low. 
Thus, theoretically, French is now the official language 
of instruction for all schools in the Congo. In practice, 
however, much of primary teaching is still done in the 
four major African languages which the Congo uses—Lin- 
gala, Kikongo, Tshiluba and Swahili. 
Then, too, there is the matter of school equipment. 
Although some schools in the larger cities are well- 
equipped, the average school in the “bush” consists of 
four poles and a thatched roof. Very often there are 
no tables, chalrs, desks or benches, no blackboards, chalk, 
notebooks or pencils, few textbooks and no visual alds of 
any kind. 
In the face of this situation, Unesco’s four mobile teams 
(plus a fifth which supplies them with audio-visual 
materials) can only scratch the surface of what needs to 
be done. However, the project which began in October, 
1962 on an experimental basis has already proved its 
worth. 
In Kindu, for example, I talked with Benoit Kayombo, 
a primary school inspector, who told me how he had put 
into practice a number of ideas he had picked up in an 
earlier refresher course in Bukavu. All his teachers now 
instruct their pupils in hygiene (one of the points the 
team stresses), and he has begun shifting his better 
teachers to. the first and second years of school, where 
they can do the most good, instead of reserving them for 
the upper grades. 
As of April, 1963, some 1,702 Congolese teachers had 
taken part in courses given by the mobile teams at 14 
different places, and at least that many more had to be 
turned away and persuaded to wait for later sessions. 
Present plans call for the creation eventually of more 
teams and more courses, but for longer periods of time and 
with fewer participants. It is also hoped that Congolese 
experts may soon be associated with the teams and 
eventually form teams of their own to continue the 
activity. ’ 
In addition to improving primary education and expand- 
Ing secondary education, Unesco has helped the Congo 
create two new institutes for technical training at the 
post-secondary level. These are the Institute of Building 
and Public Works in the Leopoldville suburb of Ozone, 
and an Institute of Mines all the way across the Congo 
in Bukavu. 
Both Institutes, staffed entirely by Unesco experts, give 
intensive practical and theoretical training to a limited 
number of students who will become engineering tech- 
nicians, fleld supervisors or works supervisors in the

## [Page 11](063381engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 63372: UNESCO in the Congo

TURAL RESOURCES 
the Congo's eastern border, around 
Lake Kivu (left) for example. 
Among this region's attractions 
are a relatively cool, pleasant, cli- 
mate, volcano-surrounded lakes 
and the immense (1,926,600 acres) 
Albert National Park (below). 
No part of the tropical world has 
been the subject of such long, 
careful and exhaustive study, 
carried out by specialists of fifteen 
different nationalities, according 
to Unesco’s recently published 
“Review of the Natural Resources 
of the African Continent”. 
  
  
A. Gille 
mining and construction industries. Some of them may 
also continue thelr studies at the university level to obtain 
degrees as architects or engineers. Many, at least for the 
next few years, will be drafted for administrative positions 
In the central and provincial governments. 
From the relatively modest beginnings in the autumn 
of 1960, Unesco’s ‘work In the Congo has grown until it 
now embraces virtually every problem in the field of 
education. Much of these activities would have very 
little lasting result, however, if there were not at the same 
time efforts to train Congolese experts to assume the 
tasks now being performed by foreign specialists in the 
central and provincial ministries of education. This has 
been done in two ways: first, by in-service training in the 
Congo itself, and secondly by sending Congolese personnel 
abroad for speclal study. Two groups of senior educa- 
tional officials, for instance, have been sent to Geneva 
for nine months of intensive training in a programme 
sponsored jointly by Unesco and by the International 
Bureau of Education. Their studies at the University of 
Geneva and In special seminars were supplemented by 
study visits to Swiss, French, Italian and Austrian school 
systems. 
Unesco’s aid to the Congo in the field of education has 
been accompanied by assistance in mass communications 
and sclence, as well. During 1963, four experts in radio 
and the written press have helped the Congolese govern- 
ment reorganize its ministry of information, drafted sta- 
tutes to govern the operation of the Congo radio and a 
national news agency, provided in-service training for 
reporters, editors and newscasters, and improved the scope 
and efTectiveness of educational radio programmes. 
 
  
  
Unations 
In sclence, the major effort has been the safeguarding 
of the Congo's principal scientific research Institutions. 
One of these In particular, the Institute for Scientific 
Research in Central Africa (IRSAC), boasts some of the 
finest laboratory equipment in Africa for study of the 
earth sciences. Another, the Institute of National Parks 
In the Congo (IPNC), is extremely Important for the 
conservation of African wildlife. Unesco has been 
instrumental in securing Interim financing for these 
Institutions from the Congolese and Belgian governments 
and from private foundations. At the same time, a 
UNEsco expert has helped draft a charter for the co- 
ordination of all sclentific research in the new nation, and 
another to provide for the transition of the institutes from 
being Belgian organizations to becoming Congolese ones. 
In the autumn of 1963, Unesco’s activities In the Congo 
probably reached thelr peak. Nearly 800 foreign teachers, 
recruited with Unesco’s help, were teaching in Congolese 
schools thls year. More than 80 experts in education, 
science and mass communication are helping the central 
and provinclal governments of the republic move toward 
a better future. 
Within the next year or so, it Is expected that there 
will be a gradual lessening of this type of emergency ald 
and a “normalization” of relations between the Congo and 
the various specialized agencles of the United Nations 
family. 
Readers may be interested in a forthcoming booklet, “Unesco 
in the Congo”, by Garry Fullerton, which tells the story of 11 
Unesco’s share in the vast United Nations programme of 
assistance to the Republic of the Congo.

## [Page 12](063381engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

STANISLAVSKY 
Revolutionary of 
the modern theatre 
by Grigori Kristi 
  
This year is the centenary of the birth of 
Constantin Stanislavsky, Russian actor, 
director and theatrical producer, whose 
ideas on the teaching and practice of 
dramatic art have revolutionized the dev- 
elopment of world theatre. On the follow- 
ing pages ‘The Unesco Courier” 
presents some aspects of the life and 
work of this great man of the theatre.   
Official Soviet photos 
  
   
  
rr y 3 CR 
> 3 EE a pa : 
y oo» SR e 
» 3 £45 : ™ a 
*»     
FROM HIS SEARCH for a way to 
help actors master their art, Stanis- 
lavsky (left) evolved a system whose 
influence has spread from the theatre 
to the world of the cinema. One 
of Stanislavsky’s innovations was the 
theatre studio where students and 
professional actors too could experi- 
ment, improvise and work out their 
art together. America, in particular, 
adopted his studio idea and from 
the American theatre studios a 
whole modern tradition has sprung, 
known in America as “The Method.” 
The now well-known Actors’ Studio 
in New York is associated with the 
names of many talented actors and 
actresses of stage and screen, and 
these include Geraldine Page, Paul 
Newman, Joanne Woodward and 
Marlon Brando. Marlon Brando is seen 
above in the film “On the Waterfront,” 
produced by Elia Kazan, a former 
co-director of the Actors” Studio. 
Nearly half a century ago, Stanis- 
lavsky wrote: “Modern cinemato- 
graphy actors will teach real actors 
how to live. Everything is exposed on 
the screen and anything stereotyped 
is recorded forever. Here you are 
able to see more clearly the difference 
between the old and the new art.” 
  

## [Page 13](063381engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
( ONSTANTIN STANISLAVSKY 1s one of the great 
names in world theatre. The 75 years of his 
life were marked by events which brought great changes in 
world history. Stanislavsky was born in Moscow in 1863, 
soon after the abolition of serfdom in Russia; he lived 
through the First World War and the Russian revolution, 
and he died in 1938, on the eve of another world war. 
Enormous changes took place during these 75 years. 
Stanislavsky’s art, which echoed the needs of the times, 
also underwent constant changes. Its development is 
marked by continuous research, fresh attempts and new 
achievements. 
Constantin Alexeyev (he later adopted the pseudonym of 
Stanislavsky), came from a well-to-do family of the 
Moscow bourgeoisie, which from the second half of the 
19th century played an increasingly important part in the 
cultural and social life of Russia. Among members of this 
cultivated middle-class, close to his family, were Pavel 
Tretiakov, founder of the Museum of Art, Savva Mamon- 
tov, patron of the arts and creator of a private opera, 
Sabachnikov, the publisher, and Morozov, an industrialist 
who gave considerable help towards the building of the 
Art Theatre in Moscow. 
From the age of 14, young Stanislavsky played on a 
family stage. The theatre was a tradition In his large 
family and the education he received stimulated his inte- 
rest in the stage. His mother was the daughter of a 
French actress, Marie Varley, and his two sisters and 
two brothers all later became actors or producers. 
In 1888, Stanislavsky became director of a troupe in 
Moscow, the “Society of Patrons of Art and Literature.” 
He played many roles, from vaudeville characters fo parts 
in the tragedies of Shakespeare and Schiller. 
It was at this time that he first tried his hand as a 
stage producer and at once attracted the interest of artls- 
tic circles In Moscow. Stanislavsky’s productions were 
Columbia Pictures - Cashiers du Cinéma 
startling for their reallsm and the new Ideas he expressed. 
He used novel production methods and had an entirely 
new concept of the role of the actor. From the start, he 
declared war on old theatrical conventions and outmoded 
aesthetic judgements. To a French critic who accused 
him of violating tradition in his production of “Othello,” 
Stanislavsky wrote: “Believe me, the work of our gene- 
ration consists in doing away with outdated traditions and 
routine. To save art, we must give free rein to imagina- 
tion and creativeness.” 
In 1898, Stanislavsky, together with the critic and play- 
wright Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko, founded the 
since famous Moscow Art Theatre. The first play produced 
by the Theatre was Alexis Tolstoy's historical tragedy 
“Czar Fedor Yoannovich,” but its real premiére was the 
production of the “Seagull” by Chekhov. In Chekhov, and 
later in Gorky, Stanlslavsky and Nemirovich-Danchenko 
found authors whose work reflected the problems of the 
time. Their plays contributed to the rapid growth of the 
Art Theatre and determined the course of its development. 
To-day, the “Seagull” has become the emblem of the 
theatre, which was later named after Gorky. 
Stanislavsky was bound to Chekhov by lterary and 
artistic interests which later developed into a warm per- 
sonal friendship. Chekhov's plays were fresh and original; 
they called for a new treatment. With them was born the 
art of stage-craft in its modern sense, the idea of the play 
seen as a whole. 
Stanislavsky’s interpretations of Chekhov's and Gorky’s 
characters have become classics. But the Art Theatre was 
also famous for its production of works by contemporary 
playwrights from other countries: Hauptmann, Ibsen, 
Maeterlinck and others. Almost every new production, 
every new role, was in the nature of a discovery. In his 13 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 14](063381engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

14 
STANISLAVSKY (Cont'd) 
youth, Stanislavsky tried to create a stage Impression 
close to naturalism, and later he was drawn to symbolism. 
But with time he turned to slmpler and more expressive 
forms, which, he maintained, were best fitted to render on 
the stage all the complexities of the human spirit. 
After the setting up of the Soviet regime, Stanislavsky 
continued his efforts on behalf of realism. The Revo- 
lution had opened the doors of the theatre to a new pro- 
letarian spectator who, as Stanislawsky sald, needed 
plays “with real human feelings expressed in a simple 
and understandable, yet strong and convincing form.”.. 
“In art, as in his food,” sald Stanislavsky, “he is not 
accustomed to piquant delicacies that stimulate appetite.” 
He did not confine himself to modern plays, but 
extended his repertoire to include Russian and foreign 
classics, producing works by Ostrovsky, Gogol, Pushkin, 
Shakespeare, Moliere, and Beaumarchalis. 
Nor did his reforms affect only the dramatic stage. In 
1922, in his apartment on Leontievsky street, he produced 
Tchalkovsky’s opera “Eugene Onegin” in an entirely new 
setting which broke with all traditional ideas regarding 
the lyric theatre. From then on he spent his time between 
opera and drama. 
On the basis of his own experience on the stage, Stan- 
islavsky tried to deflne the principles of acting. For 
young actors, to whom everything seemed simple and 
easy, he listed the qualities necessary for a stage career. 
An actor, he said, must be able to observe; he must be 
sensitive; have a good memory, fantasy and imagination 
so as to bring his part to life; he must have taste, intelli- 
gence, a sense of rhythm and timing; he must be musical, 
sincere, spontaneous, ingenious and know how to control 
his emotions; he must be prepared “to follow a hard and 
painful path, covered with brambles and thorns, spurning 
fame and devoting himself entirely to his craft.” 
M.: years of research, trial and error, led to 
the formulation of Stanislavsky’s “system” 
which subsequently became famous. This “system” 1s a 
collection of methods designed to set the actor on the 
right path by encouraging him to make a more or less 
“systematic” study of the dual instrument he possesses, 
his mind and his body, and of the psycho-physical tech- 
nigues of dramatic art which spring from them. 
Stanislavsky continually repeated that no technique, 
however perfect, could bestow genius. “The theatre,” he 
wrote, “is the most important of all the chairs of learning, 
more important even, through its influence, than books 
and the press... The task I have set myself, to the limit 
of my ability, consists in showing to the rising generation 
that the actor is the apostle of beauty and of truth.” 
But this task was no simple one. He was obliged to 
make a stand against dilettantism and stale custom, 
against a naturalism that was barren and a formalism 
without spirit. 
Stanislavsky trained several generations of producers, 
of whom two of the best known in Russia are Meyerhold 
and Vakhtangov. Many actors and opera singers were 
also his pupils or his disciples. A few, like Mikhail Chek- 
hov, Sanin and Boleslavsky continued his teaching in 
other European countries and in the United States. Stan- 
Islavsky had bonds of friendship with many leading 
figures of the Western theatre—Gordon Craig, Max Rein- 
hardt, André Antolne, Jacques Copeau—who visited Russia 
or whom he met while on tour with the Art Theatre com- 
pany abroad. 
Today the Influence of this Russian stage producer 
continues to make a profound and ever-widening impact 
on the development of the theatre in all parts of the 
world. Well-known actor-producers like Jean Vilar, of 
France, and Eduardo de Filippo, of Italy, have acknow- 
ledged the debt they owe to Stanislavsky and so have 
other leading men of the theatre In Great Britain, the 
United States, Japan, China, Czechoslovakia, Poland and 
many newly-independent countries. 
GRIGORI VLADIMIROVICH KRISTI is a Soviet producer who teaches 
in the school of the Moscow Art Theatre Studio. He was a friend 
and pupil of Stanislavsky, under whose direction he made his 
débuts as an opera producer and as a teacher in the studio of 
dramatic art created by Stanislavsky in 1935. 
  
  
               
 
Official Soviet photos 
FAMILY TRADITION. Stanislavsky made his 
first stage appearance at the age of three in the miniature 
theatre at his family’s country house in Lioubimovka, 
near Moscow (right). By the time he was 14 he was 
appearing regularly in plays and entertainments produc- 
ed by his family who had a deep and traditional 
interest in the theatre. Stanislavsky’s mother was the 
daughter of a French actress, Marie Varley, and his 
two sisters and two brothers all eventually became 
actors or producers. Above, in 1881 at the age of 18, 
Stanislavsky plays the part of Megrio in an amateur 
dramatic group production of “A Woman's Secret.” 
The following year he produced his first play. 
  

## [Page 15](063381engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

  
8 


### 63389: My life in art: last pages of Stanislavsky's spiritual testament

MY LIFE IN ART 
Last pages 
of Stanislavsky's 
spiritual testament 
  
 
| am no longer young and my life in art is approaching its last 
act. The time has come to sum up the results and to draw 
up a plan of my last endeavour in art. As a stage director and actor I 
have worked, on the one hand, in the fleld of production, and, on the other, 
in the actor's sphere of Inward creativeness. 
Having tried In the theatre all the means and methods of creative work; 
having paid homage to the enthusiasm for all types of productions along 
all the lines of creativeness—costume drama, symbolle, ideological and 
others—having learned the production forms of various artistic movements 
—realistlc, naturalistic, futuristic, schematized, exaggeratedly simple 
(with statuary, drapes, screens, tulle and all sorts of lighting eflects)— 
I have come to the conclusion that all these things are unable to offer 
the background which the actor needs to display his creativeness to the 
full. And while my studles of scenery and stage design convinced me In 
the past of its limitations, I can now say that its possibilities are indeed 
exhausted. 
The sole ruler on the stage is the talented actor. But I have never 
succeeded in finding for him the scenle background which would not 
interfere with, but help his complex artistic work. What 1s needed is 
a simple background, a simplicity created by a wealth of imagination, not 
a lack of it. Unfortunately I have not yet learned how to keep the 
simplicity engendered by a rich imagination from being even more 
conspicuous than very luxurious theatricality. It attracts more attention 
than ordinary scenery, to which our eye is accustomed. We can only 
hope that a great painter will one day solve this, the most difficult of all 
scenic problems, by creating a simple yet artistic background for the actor. 
The situation in the sphere of Inner creativeness is entirely different. 
Here everything is dependent on talent and intuition, and in the 
overwhelming majority of cases pure dilettantism reigns supreme. The 
laws of acting have not been established, and many think that they would 
be unnecessary and even harmful. 
A passionate search for truth 
  
There is a very old belief that the actor needs only talent and inspiration, 
There is another opinion, very widespread in our profession, that the 
thing most needed is technique, though, of course, talent is also acceptable. 
Is it not because such people are afraid of genuine emotion and of living 
their part on the stage that they are unable to do 50? 
Nine-tenths of an actor’s work lies in feeling the role spiritually, in living 
it. When this is done, the role is almost ready. It is senseless to leave 
these nine-tenths to mere chance. Let exceptional talents feel and create 
their roles at once. Laws are not written for them: it is they who write 
them. But astonishingly enough I have never heard them say that 
technique Is unnecessary and that talent is the only requirement, or that 
technique comes first and talent second. On the contrary, the greater the 
actor, the more he is interested in the technique of his art. 
This need to acquire experience and skill is particularly apparent in 
theatrical art. The tradition of painting is preserved in museums and art 
galleries; the tradition of literary art in books: the wealth of musical forms 
in scores. But the tradition of stage art llves only in the talent and 
ability of the actor. This is the sphere of living tradition. This is a torch 
which can be passed only from hand to hand; and not on the stage, but 
through instruction, through the revelation of mysteries, on the one hand, 
and exercises and stubborn and Inspired effort to grasp these mysteries, on 
the other. 
The malin difference between the art of the actor and all other arts is 
that other artists may create whenever they are inspired. The actor, 
however, must be the master of his own inspiration and must know how 
to call it forth at the time announced on the theatre’s posters. This is 
the chief secret of our art. Without this the most perfect technique, the 
greatest gifts, are powerless. And this secret, unfortunately, 1s most 
jealously guarded. 
With but few exceptions, the great masters of the stage not only do not 
try to disclose this secret to their younger comrades, but keep it behind 
an impenetrable curtain. The absence of any tradition in this sense 
doomed our art to dilettantism. 
Among the thoughts and ideas that have reached us are those of 
Shakespeare, Moliére, the Rlccobonis (father and son), Lessing, the great 
Schroder, Goethe, Talma, Coquelin, Irving, Salvini and other law-makers 
in our art. But all these valuable thoughts and counsels have not been 
systematized and classified. That is why we still lack the sound principles 
which could guide instructors in our art. All that has been written about 
CONT'D ON PAGE 17 
15

## [Page 16](063381engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 63389: My life in art: last pages of Stanislavsky's spiritual testament

“| am a character actor” said Stahislavsky. His capacity for character- 
ization was, indeed, phenomenal. 1t was due to his clear and precise 
understanding of the character he was playing and because beneath 
his mask of make-up he was able, without reserve, to express the feel- 
ings of the person he was portraying—handsome or ugly, good or 
wicked, ridiculous or exalted. These photographs of Stanislavsky 
in six contrasting roles illustrate the wide range of his repertoire. 
Below, he appears as Argan in Moliere’s “The Imaginary Invalid”. 
Official Soviet photos 
TAREE 
   
ACTOR WITH 
A HUNDRED FACES 
We
 
W
e
l
d
 
) 
-_
— 
f] 
~ oS 
3 
  
“A Month in 
the Country” 
by Turgenev. 
*The Living 
Corpse” by 
Tolstoy. 
“Uncle Vanya“ 
by Chekov. 
“Wit Works 
Woe” by Gri- 
boyedov. 
“Lik,” an oper- 
etta by Hervé.

## [Page 17](063381engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 63389: My life in art: last pages of Stanislavsky's spiritual testament

STANISLAVSKY (Cont'd) 
the theatre is either pure philosophy—sometimes very Interesting, aptly 
describing the desirable goals in art—or criticism which applies to the 
value or uselessness of what has been achieved. 
These works are valuable and necessary, but not for practical uses, for 
they say nothing of how final results are to be achieved, or what we should 
do with the beginner or with the over-experienced and spoiled actor. 
What kind of “solfeggio” exercises does he need? What scale and arpegglo 
does an actor require to develop his creative mood and to live his part? 
The exercises he needs should be numbered, as problems are numbered 
In an arithmetic book and systematically practised In school and at home. 
But books and treatises on the theatre say nothing of this. There is, In 
fact, no method handbook. There are only attempts to create one, but 
it is either too early to speak of them, or they are not worth speaking about. 
It is obvious that there can be no system for producing inspiration. 
Just as there cannot be a system for playing the violin llke a genius or 
singing like Challapin. Both have been endowed with the most important 
thing—a gift from the gods. But there is something, small yet Important, 
equally indispensable both to Challapin and the ordinary chorlster, since 
they both have lungs, a respiratory system, nerves and physical organism 
—however better developed in one case than in the other—which must 
produce sound according to laws of nature. The same applies to the 
sphere of psychlc, creative life, since all actors, without exception, absorb 
food for creation according to these laws of nature, retain what they 
receive In their intellectual, emotional or muscular memory, digest these 
materials in thelr artistic Imagination, give birth to the image and life 
of the human spirit, and incarnate it according to known, natural laws 
that are incumbent upon all. 
Like a prospector in the wilderness 
The creative laws that can yield to our consciousness are few. They do 
not play a purely honorary role; they have well-defined professional uses. 
These laws should be studled by every actor, for it Is only with thelr aid 
that he can set In motion his superconsclous whose essence, it seems, will 
forever remain a mystery to us. The more talented the actor, the greater 
and more enigmatic the mystery and the more he needs the technical 
methods accessible to consciousness; it is by these that he penetrates the 
innermost recesses of the superconsclous to call forth inspiration. 
We must try to understand the perspectives, the goal the younger 
generation is seeking to attain. It is very interesting to live and watch 
what is going on in the minds and hearts of youth. 
But In this new situation I would like to avoid playing two roles. I am 
afrald of becoming a young old man who flatters the young, tries to look 
their age and share their tastes and convictions, or fawn upon them. Nor 
do I want to play the role of the too experienced old man, who has seen 
everything, who is impatient, Irascible, opposed to everything that is new, 
forgetful of the experiments and mistakes of his own youth. 
In the last years of my life I would like to continue being what I am 
In reality, what I must be according to the laws that have ruled my life 
and my work in art. What am I? What do I represent in the new theatre 
of today? Can I, as tn the past, fully understand all that goes on around 
me, all that enthuses youth? 
Organically I feel I can no longer understand much in the aspirations 
of present-day youth. One must have courage to admit this. You know 
from what I have told you how we were educated. Compare our life with 
the life of the present generation of youth brought up amidst the dangers 
and trials of the Revolution. 
We know from our own experience the meaning of a permanent art and 
the path outlined for it by nature, and from our own experience we also 
know the meaning of fashions in art and thelr transitory nature. We had a 
chance to see how useful it is for a young man temporarily to turn from the 
highway leading to a well-defined future on to a side road and to roam 
freely along It. It would be dangerous, however, to leave completely the 
highway art has followed from time immemorial. 
How can I share with the younger generation the results of my 
experience and warn them against mistakes that are bred by inexperience? 
When I look back on the road of my life in art, I feel like comparing myself 
to a gold prospector who first has to roam the wilderness to find a vein of 
gold, then wash tons and tons of sand and rock to get a few grains of the 
precious metal. And like a prospector, it is not my labours, my quest and 
privations, my joys and disappointments that I can bequeath, but only 
the few grains of gold that I found... 
The above text is extracted from the final chapter of Stanislavsky’s “My Life in 
Art”, written in 1925 and translated into English by G. Ivanov-Mumfjiev (Foreign 
Languages Publishing House, Moscow). Stanislavsky wrote an earlier and shorter 
version while in the U.S.A. in 1924 and that edition, published by Little, Brown 
and Co. is the one known to most English-speaking readers. The Moscow trans- 
lation was published over a quarter of a century later. Another important work 
by Stanislavsky, “An Actor Prepares”, has been published in the U.S.A. by Theatre 
Arts Inc. The publication of the “Works of Stanislavsky’ in eight volumes is now 47 
in progress in the U.S.S.R. under the supervision of the Soviet Academy of 
Science Press.  

## [Page 18](063381engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 63389: My life in art: last pages of Stanislavsky's spiritual testament

STANISLAVSKY (Cont'd) 
    
wr 
Official Soviet photos 
~ All the work of the Russian actors at the Moscow Art Theatre is admirable,” wrote Gordon 
Craig, the English actor, stage designer and producer, in 1908. Whether they are dealing with 
an episode of modern life or a fairy story, they display a sure, discriminating and masterly skill.” 
Above, members of the Moscow Art Theatre listening to Chekov reading from his work, “The 
Seagull” in 1898. This was the new theatre's first important success and to this day it carries 
a seagull painted on its curtain in memory of its debt to Chekov. Stanislavsky and his actress 
wife, Lilina, are seated on either side of Chekov. Standing, far left, is Vladimir Nemirovich 
Danchenko, playwright and joint founder, with Stanislavsky, of the Moscow Art Theatre. Far 
right, seated, is Vsevolod Meyerhold, theatrical producer and one of Stanislavsky’s disciples. 
Right, a page from Stanislavsky’s Notebooks, with a sketch and working notes for “ The Seagull.” 
A 
) 
5 
4 
= 
  
 
il    
 
ACTOR- 
PRODUCER 
AT 
WORK 
zon eh: R10: 2 
NY] 72 LO fadsi)y 1th 2p 4 
7 in At CALB_gsrn i +0 , ALLL at 
Ut) 3 fans Ce ru rR 
Auris Y tn Yo Gert { po 
Mot Ma 24 Leila y evo [hs \ 
* FEZ REN LR, 1 | 
5% / A a 
Eg 7% 0 = i 
Ve 
Ye y <= | Mac AMor <c- 
VM won fa 
Pr) ry Ahad 
Net ai Cauim 
pf CA { of \ tix 
RE 
Qa Yezecofte FATA 
I A easton 
y EE FY Zo ih 
pia cpa / Cl nin 7/9 2%. 
PR Led Puld it ats AN 
tof AA (= 22) CAAA ¢ CO Lex) AY 
Lal 8 Wp, [at , CAULSA LAB $f etn 
  
| 14 C « i . CL a 4AA vo aah acy d Sat) 
PE Pel SRW LUA EY, Hatin ot 
~ 0 
Ad Naa + RAL NM Pe AAA Ny 
MRA Al RPAINI AR Bats Bil ili

## [Page 19](063381engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 63389: My life in art: last pages of Stanislavsky's spiritual testament

  
  
      
           Log 3 RE 
RR PEN 
YR OE VY 
TRAa ———— a —    
  
 > a—— = 
1 y 
  
Stanislavsky did not believe 
that acting, the kind worthy 
of being called an art, 
could be left to chance. 
The perfection he sought 
in acting and in theatrical 
production was attained 
at the price of repeated 
effort, careful reflection and 
a scrupulous attention to 
details. "There are no 
small parts,” he once said, 
“only small actors.” Above, 
a scene from Molidre's 
~Tartuffe,”” a production 
undertaken by Stanislavsky 
shortly before his death 
on August 7, 1938, but 
only presented the follow- 
ing year. Right, in “The 
Lower Depths” by Maxim 
Gorky (1912), Stanislavsky 
(centre) plays the part of 
a tramp. While preparing 
this play, he and other 
members of the cast visited 
the place in Moscow where 
tramps congregated, to see 
exactly how they lived. 
The doss-house scenes in 
this play created a new 
standard in realism for the 
theatre of that time. Left, 
a scene from “The Govern- 
ment Inspector” by Gogol. 
  
 

## [Page 20](063381engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 63389: My life in art: last pages of Stanislavsky's spiritual testament

LEAVES FROM STANISLAVSKY’S NOTE 
Throughout his life, Stanislavsky jotted down in his note- 
books comments on everyday occurrences as well as his 
professional observations and reflections. There are over 
100 of these notebooks in the literary archives of Stanis- 
lavsky, now kept in the museum of the Moscow Art 
Theatre. Many of the notes, a short selection of which is 
published here, appear in more developed form in the 
eight-volume collection of his works. 
1899-1911 
When you play an evil man look for his 
good points. 
Intuition is not an ideal guide for every 
actor. For instance, when | forget myself 
| act badly: | talk too much, | make mean- 
ingless gestures, my voice squeaks, | grim- 
ace and make a hash of everything. 
People go to the theatre to be enter- 
tained, but leave it either enriched with 
knowledge or with their problems solved; 
with questions put into their minds which 
they will try to elucidate, or with their eyes 
opened to something that happens every 
day, but that only a genius has noticed 
(In Gogol's The Inspector General, for 
example). 
So long as an actor is striving towards 
an ideal he is an artist; but when that ideal 
has been reached he becomes an artisan. 
In order to express silence there has to 
be some sort of noise. In order to express 
the idea of the emptiness of a street a few 
extras have to walk along it. In order 
to express gaiety you must show .dullness. 
All these moods depend on their relations 
to their opposites. 
If the producer lacks the sensitivity and 
imagination to add even an insignificant 
detail that is not shown or that has been 
omitted by the author, but which follows 
the author's intentions, then he is unworthy 
of his calling. Even when working on the 
great Shakespeare the producer must invent 
details to interpret the author's idea and 
convey it more successfully or to help an 
insufficiently gifted actor to communicate 
the author's thought... for it is impossible 
for the author to foresee every chance 
element in the complex life of the stage. 
| am reproached with underestimating the 
importance of the actor and enhancing too 
much the role of the author. That is not 
so. On the contrary, | extol the importance 
of the actor, making him a collaborator with 
the author. That is a far more honourable 
role than the one actors choose for 
themselves when they try to use other 
people's creations in order to display 
themselves. It is far more honourable, for 
example, to collaborate with Shakespeare 
than to exploit him. 
  
    
 
Critics and public of narrow views who 
fail to understand the breadth of a work 
of art are frightened by novelty of any 
sort; they are afraid of being confused. 
They surround art with a mass of rules 
and conventions without which they them- 
selves cannot exist. 
1912-1918 
This morning, December 16, 1912, ex- 
hausted after the performance of “Uncle 
Vanya" | felt so reluctant to give last night. 
At first it was agony. But the audience 
listened so’ attentively that it forced me to 
act and by the middle of Act One | found 
myself under the influence of the excellent 
atmosphere reigning in the hall, and played 
with pleasure as if in a new and well-master- 
ed part. One has to admit that the audi- 
ence is the third creator of a performance! 
Theoreticians butt their heads against 
theory and see nothing on the other side 
of that wall. 
M 
Academicism has no failings, only virtues, 
and for that reason it is dead, dry and 
lifeless. 
| 
An actor's playing is the fulfilment of a 
number of creative ends corresponding 
to’ the author's intentions, and these ends 
are only achieved by truly living the part. 
Find tasks, not by reasoning but by 
acting. 
  
  

## [Page 21](063381engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 63389: My life in art: last pages of Stanislavsky's spiritual testament

BOOKS 
Sentimentality is bearable up to the point 
when it rouses your feeling for creative 
work and warms your heart; but the moment 
it begins to crowd out feeling, substituting, 
sloppy lyricism for real transports of love, 
it is bad. 
When | am in the auditorium | understand 
everything, just what | have to do and 
how. | go on stage and at once | become 
an idiot who doesn’t understand the sim- 
plest thing about feelings and inter-relations. 
To understand, to remember and to feel— 
these are different domains. 
Don’t analyse intonation but the emotion 
that gave birth to it. 
Now it is clear that the crisis of the 
theatre of representation and entertainment, 
the theatre of spectacle, has already begun 
and is inevitable. In terms of outward 
effects, in a purely professional sense, 
cinematography has defeated the theatre. 
Decoration, in the sense of naturalness 
(and stylization too), crowd lighting, pro- 
cessions, scenes of everyday life, thun- 
derstorms, wind—these are incomparable 
in cinematography. In a matter of a few 
years there will be sound cinematography 
too. Besides, in cinematography those 
emotions which are felt by the actor at an 
early stage, when the role is fresh, before 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
During his tours in Europe and the 
U.S.A, Stanislavsky was given a 
warm welcome and hailed as the 
great renovator of dramatic art. 
Right, in New York in 1921, he 
visits the Paramount Studios during 
the filming of “Monsieur Beau- 
caire”™ and meets a star of the 
silent screen, Rudolph Valentino 
(standing beside Stanislavsky). 
The actresses seated on-the right 
are Bebe Daniels and Lois Wilson. 
Far left, Stanislavsky meets Marion 
Anderson, the singer, and, left, 
dines with George Bernard Shaw. 
Official Soviet photos 
 
     
In 1918 Stanislavsky undertook to improve the dramatic side 
of the Moscow Bolshoi Theatre's operatic productions. He 
set up an Opera Studio which functioned at his home for 
the next seven years. Above, Stanislavsky (seated) with the 
Russian bass, Chaliapin (on left). The portrait is of Anna Pavlova. 
 
 
  
    21

## [Page 22](063381engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

22 
  
TNP-Agnés Varda 
 
A WORLD-WIDE INFLUENCE. Stanislavsky lived to see his ideas adopted in theatres far 
from those of his own country. “And his influence is far from spent,” writes Jean Vilar, the 
French theatrical producer. “The many thousands who flock to theatres each evening in 
New York or Moscow, Rome or Paris, London or Berlin, are unaware that much they find to 
admire, from the individual play of the actor to the composition and disposition of groups on 
the stage, comes from the teaching of Stanislavsky.” Above, Jean Vilar (foreground) in a 
production of Balzac’s “Le Faiseur” presented at the “Theatre National Populaire” in Paris. 


### 63389: My life in art: last pages of Stanislavsky's spiritual testament

Stanislavsky’s 
his feelings have grown stale and stereo- 
typed, can be repeated again and again. 
The actors are constantly seeing themselves 
and their work and this gives them a chance 
of perfecting themselves... 
Shakespeare is so boundless that each 
of his works requires its special form of 
production. 
1. The Tempest—stage it as a mystery- 
play (god, people, monkey forebears). In 
front—a chorus (orchestra unnecessary, 
chorus of voices without words, with closed 
lips). 
2. Julius Caesar, Corialanus—should be 
read as speeches in parliament. 
3. The Merchant of Venice—Find a fairy- 
tale form. Against a gold background and 
a dirty wall. 
4. King Lear—Against black drapes 
where Lear's sufferings are terrible, against 
rich tapestry where he is in his glory, 
against white where Cornelia is pure, 
against red where the evil daughters express 
their true selves. 
” 
Actors are superstitious because they 
place themselves in direct dependence on 
chance inspiration. 
 
notebooks (cod 
...Picture of a new theatre, with a mu- 
seum back stage, music, lectures, etc. In 
the new theatre the orchestra ought not to 
be in the house as now, but in the wings. 
Words should become a means, not an 
end. 
’ 
You can imagine, see or hear in your 
mind how you or some imaginary person 
would act or speak at a given moment in 
studying a certain role. These pictures 
evoked within himself allow an actor to 
copy the thing imagined. In other words, 
this way leads to an imitation, a portrayal 
of a role. But you can approach a role 
in a different way, by putting yourself in 
the place and situation of a character. You 
can feel your fellow actor at your side, like 
the very soul of the character he portrays; 
you can then set out to influence, to a greater 
or lesser degree, this living soul of the 
character your partner is playing. Only 
then do you begin to fulfil your task, when 
you begin to act instinctively, according 
to your experience of life. That is the 
path to living one’s role, to creative acting. 
Actors are always concerned about "how" 
they should play, not "what". 
Producers make a grave mistake when 
they impose their feelings and their own 
conception of a role on the actor. That is 
to use force. The function of a producer 
is something else. He ought above all to 
understand the inclinations of the actor, 
the designer and all those -who take part 
in the performance. He must take from 
them all the spiritual creative material they 
can offer and then consider what use can 
be made of it and how this is to be done. 
If he imposes his own feelings he will not 
obtain a vital, living substance from his 
actors, and out of dead material will come 
a dead work. 
If a critic has talent he can be a friend 
to the actor and help him in his work and 
also as an intermediary who explains to 
the audience what is good in the actor. 
A critic who lacks talent does great harm 
even when he praises an actor. 
Nothing repeats itself in life. There are 
no two persons, thoughts or feelings alike. 
The feelings an actor experiences on the 
stage to-day are not repeatable to-morrow. 
That is why emotion itself can never be 
fixed; it has to come afresh.

## [Page 23](063381engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 63393: One language for the world?

ONE LANGUAGE 
FOR THE WORLD? 
U NIVERSALITY was implicit in the ancient world 
of the Romans and in the mediaeval world 
that followed it. The language of Rome, which had 
served the universal Roman Empire and the universal 
Christian Church, continued to be the common language 
of western scholarship until the dawn of the Renaissance. 
But modern progress, the invention of printing, and the 
spreading of literacy to upper and middle classes that had 
been largely Illiterate in the past, coupled with the 
beginnings of the modern national states, brought the 
spoken vernaculars of the masses to the fore. The fif- 
teenth century witnessed the final triumph of the national 
languages over the Latin that had dominated the 
thousand-year perlod since the fall of Roman Empire 
by Mario Pei 
natural, national languages be used, singly or in combi- 
nation, In stralght or modified form, for International 
purposes. 
But the proposal advanced in 1629 by the French phllo- 
sopher Descartes was of a radically different nature. 
Answering a letter written him by a Father Mersenne, 
who had enclosed in his missive an anonymous Latin 
prospectus concerning the desirability of an International 
language, the great philosopher presented his own views 
on the subject. 
Beginning with an attack on the difficulties of national 
grammars, ‘which prevent people from seizing the meaning 
of a passage by referring to the dictionary alone, Des- 
cartes goes on to advocate the creation of a tongue whose 
LEBTOREONFO PEETOFOSENSEN 
PIFTOFOSENSEN = 
Honour thy father and thy mother 
of the West, and Europe assumed its modern linguistic 
aspect, with an array of national tongues, both literary 
and official. 
It is therefore not to be wondered at that many minds 
began to turn to the problem of a single language that 
‘would serve for the new and numerous cultural exchanges 
that were being established. Latin no longer sufficed. 
In the thirteenth century, the traveling scholar would 
care to communicate only with his peers, and they all 
knew Latin. In the seventeenth, his desire was for oral 
communication with all sorts people: merchants and 
sallors and soldiers and nobles and perhaps even peasants, 
and they knew no Latin. The vernaculars were not 
merely too numerous ; they were too much broken up into 
local dialects. 
Yet Comenius, a seventeenth-century educator with an 
international background, came out with the startling 
proposal that the leading languages of eastern and 
western Europe be used in international fashion, with 
Russian serving the east and French and English the 
west. 
These proposals have been repeated, in one fashion or 
another, from that day to the present. The Monde Bilin- 
gue movement, the zonal languages of Stalin, the advo- 
cacy of English in normal, Basic, or revised-spelllng form, 
are only three of the many suggestions that existing, 
grammar will be so simple that it can be learned ‘without 
effort by anyone, by reason of its absolute regularity and 
logic. 
Along with this, he proposes a ‘word-coining system 
whereby there ‘will be, among the ideas of the human 
mind, the same order that prevalls among numbers in 
mathematics, so that just as there Is in mathematics a 
logical progression from the known to the unknown, the 
same process may be possible ‘with ‘words. If this is done, 
he concludes, peasants will be able to determine truth in 
better fashion than do philosophers at present. 
What Descartes advocates, though he gives no example 
of it, Is a constructed language of the a priori or philoso- 
phical type, whose grammar will depart from known 
grammars to the extent that it will be regular and 
without exceptions, and whose word-stock will not be 
haphazard, but logically connected. Such a language, 
based on the analogy of mathematical operations, is per- 
fectly possible, but does not coincide with the structure 
of any known tongue. 
Descartes supplied no sample of his ideal international 
language, but such samples were immediately forthcoming 
from several of his contemporaries, Dalgarno, Urquhart, 
Wilkins, Leibniz. Cave Beck, in 1657, offered an ingenious 
system based on combinations of letters and numbers to 
CONT'D ON PAGE 28 
23

## [Page 24](063381engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 63395: Allo, hallo..., communications in a nutshell

24 
UGH EY GH oY LU LL RA 
 
The drawings on these pages, made especially for The Unesco 
Courier by lon Popesco-Gopo, a leading Rumanian artist- 
producer of animated cartoons, offer readers a brief preview of 
Gopo’'s humorous little film, “Allo!-Hallo!: Communications in a 
Nutshell.” “Allo!-Hallo!” is a history in miniature of man learning 
to communicate with man. Homo sapiens, the little character 
shown in these drawings, progresses—sometimes by accident, 
but always by using his brain—from smoke signals, graffiti and 
hieroglyphics to telephones, radio and international TV by satellite 
relay. Gopo ends his story with a forward-looking peep at the 
interplanetary communication of tomorrow. “Allo!-Hallo!” was 
made for Unesco by Bucarest Studios and was produced in col- 
laboration with the Rumanian National Commission for Unesco. 
Unesco photos 
 
  
ION POPESCO-GOPO,seen 
here at work on “Allol- 
Hallo!” in the film studios 
at Buftea, near Bucarest, 
is a former newspaper car- 
toonist who found his real 
vocation in animated car- 
toons. Since 1950 his 
films have won numerous 
_ Festival awards (Edinburgh, 
Cannes, Tours, Karlovy- 
Vary, San Francisco). Last 
year he decided to try his 
hand at a feature-length 
cartoon and took as his 
theme the need to use 
atomic energy exclusively 
for peaceful purposes. He 
is now working on another 
full-length cartoon, enti- 
tled "Steps on the Moon.”

## [Page 25](063381engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 63395: Allo, hallo..., communications in a nutshell

  
      
  
  
  25

## [Page 26](063381engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 63393: One language for the world?

26 
(Cont'd from page 23) 
ONE LANGUAGE 
FOR THE WORLD? 
be used in writing, while the numbers ‘would be replaced 
by sounds in actual speech. 
“Honour thy father and thy mother” would appear in 
Beck's written system as “leb2314 p2477 pf2477,” which 
would be read lebtoreonfo peetofosensen piftofosensen 
(each numeral stands for a spoken syllable) It is perhaps 
obvious why this system did not take hold. The strain 
imposed on the memory is tremendous. 
Since the days of Descartes, Leibniz and Beck, it Is 
estimated that at least six hundred different proposals 
have been advanced for the solution of the ‘world’s lin- 
guistic troubles. Their chronological sequence has Inte- 
resting features. Once we are past the seventeenth cen- 
tury, popular interest seems to flag. Between 1800 and 
1850, only four important projects appear, but one of 
them Is Sudre’s famous Solresol, based on the notes of 
the scale. This attracted enormous attention, was later 
sponsored by such people as Victor Hugo, Lamartine, 
Humboldt and Napoleon III, and had at one point a 
considerable body of speakers, with die-hard followers as 
late as 1500. 
Statistically, combinations of the syllables do, re, mt 
fa, sol, la, st yleld seven ‘words of one syllable, 49 of two, 
338 of three, 2,268 of four, 9,072 of five. Shifts of accent 
from one syllable to another then yield the possibility of 
changing the function of a word from noun to verb or 
adjective or adverb. The language could be sung or 
played or hummed instead of spoken; it could be written 
as muslc; khocks, or even colors, could be substituted for 
the syllables for distant communication. A phrase like 
“I don't love” is dore do milasi. 
That the constructed language of the a priori type, 
having no connexion with existing languages, has not 
fully dled out is proved by two interesting twentieth- 
century samples, both of American origin. One is Foster’s 
Ro of 1912, in which the first part of the Lord’s Prayer 
runs: Abze radap av el in suda, ace rokab eco sugem, ace 
NO VILOB ELI BUKI, 
SOD UNI BUKI = 
| don't want the book, but a book 
rajda ec kep: ace va .eco uz in suda asi in buba. The 
other is Russell's Suma of 1957, in ‘which the beginning of 
the First Book of Genesis runs: talo moti sima baki boto 
e beto e beto te peka e ena gide € ena doba. 
Far more numerous and varied are the languages of 
the a posteriori type, based on one or more existing natu- 
ral languages. Here a distinction must be made between 
modifications of single existing tongues and language 
blends of various kinds. 
Typical of the modified natural language is Basic 
English, which Is ordinary English restricted as to voca- 
bulary, so that “participate” has to be rendered as “take 
part”, and “selfish” paraphrased into “without thought 
of others.” The claim (not altogether substantiated) is 
that with 850 English words at our disposal we can cover 
the entire vast range of human language needs. 
Basic English does not interfere with normal English 
sounds or grammar; but other modified languages prefer 
to leave the vocabulary alone and change the gramma- 
tical structure. In 1903, Peano presented a system called 
Latino Sine Flexione (Flexionless Latin), in which the 
endings of Latin are dropped or merged: Studio theorico 
proba que es necessario nullo regula de grammatica, nullo 
suffizo de derivatione (A theoretical study proves that no 
grammatical rule, no derivational suffix, is necessary). 
Language blends run all the way from barely disguised 
modifications of Latin and Romance to systems that pro- 
pose to give what amounts to proportional representation 
to all of the world's great language families. The original 
idea, that arose in the middle of the eighteenth century 
and replaced the earlier striving for “logic” in language, 
was that of “the greatest ease for the greatest number.” 
But since, at the time when this principle was enunciated, 
“the greatest number” referred only to speakers of 
western-type languages, many of these blends, even today, 
resolve themselves Into combinations of Latin, Greek, 
Romance, occasionally Germanic, still more seldom Slavic, 
with little or no attention paid to the vast numbers of 
speakers of other types of tongues. 
The first a posteriori language to meet with favour was 
Schleyer’s Volapitk of 1885, a tongue which blends Latin- 
Romance, English and German elements. “I don’t want 
the book, but a book” is in Volapuk No vilob eli buki, sod 
uni buki.’ 
By 1890, the vogue of Volapiik had come to a standstill, 
and Zamenhof's Esperanto assumed international im- 
portance. Here, too, we have a predominance of Classical, 
Romance and Germanic elements, with other languages, 
including the Slavic, largely left out of the running (this 
is surprising, since Zamenhof was a Pole)*. 
The popularity of Esperanto continues to the present 
day, and it is estimated that eight million people through- 
out the world speak it in one fashion or another. But 
the popularity of Esperanto seems to have had the effect 
of encouraging rather than discouraging further attempts. 
  
In the course of the present century, well over 400 cons- 
tructed languages have been offered to the world. 
Most of them are of the same basic type as Esperanto, 
with a grammar that is more or less arbitrary and a 
vocabulary drawn from the ‘western languages. This is 
true even of languages constructed by some of the world’s 
great linguists (de Saussure and Jespersen, to cite only 
two names). 
On the other hand, some very ingenious schemes have 
been advanced to give some measure of representation to 
other major language groups. Cheshikhin’s Nepo of 1910, 
for instance, adds Slavic to the Latin-Romance-Germanic 
combination (Vatero nia, kotoryja estas in la njeboo, 
heiliga estu nomo via 1s the beginning of the Lord’s Prayer 
* For an article on Zamenhof, the Father of Esperanto, 
see The Unesco Courler, December, 1959.

## [Page 27](063381engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 63393: One language for the world?

in Nepo). Hogben'’s Interglossa of 1943 presents a Graeco- 
Latin vocabulary, but with a Chinese word-order (Na 
Parenta in Urani; Na dicte volo; tu Nomino gene revero). 
Steiner's Pasilingua of 1885 makes provision for syno- 
nyms from Latin-Romance and Germanic: “good” may 
be either bono or gulo; “God” is Deo or Gotto; “often” is 
saepe or oftis. Fred Mill's Anti-Volapiik of 1893 goes even 
further, combining international connecting words, taken 
largely from Latin-Romance, with nouns and verbs of the 
speaker's own language, with the proviso, presumably, 
that each speaker will learn enough of the other Speaker's 
nouns and verbs to be at least able to understand them. 
Thus, the sentence “I think he is in the street” would 
come out in the following English, French, Italian, Spanish 
and Russian versions: 
a western European blend to the exclusion of other lan- 
guage groups, which in the modern world are acquiring 
an ever-growing importance. 
The corresponding disadvantage, to which many ln- 
gulsts object, Is that the constructed language, not having 
grown from the soll, is not the bearer of cultural values. 
For a language that is meant to be, at the outset, a 
vehicle of material communication rather than an instru- 
ment of cultural imperiallsm, this is not a disadvantage, 
but the opposite. 
History teaches us that cultures grow around languages 
which were originally rough, crude, material tools of 
communication. If a world culture grows in similar 
manner around a world language, that will be all to the 
good. At any rate, Esperanto, with Its numerous original 
WO-TI NAMA MATA-HARI: 
WO MIRU PER NI-TI FENESTRA — 
I am called the sun; I look into your window 
“Io think ke le es in le street.” 
“Io croire ke le es in le rue.” 
“Jo credere ke le es in le strada.” 
“Jo creer ke le es in le calle.” 
“Jo dumat’ ke le es in le ulitsa.” 
Most comprehensive among proposals designed to give 
representation to all major language groups is the recent 
one of Leidenfrost that a Universal Grammar and Voca- 
bulary be constructed by a commission of language specia- 
lists on the basis of a blend of ten representative lan- 
guages: Iraql Arabic, Mandarin Chinese, English, Hin- 
dustani, Hungarian, Indonesian, the Kpelle of Liberia, 
Russian, Spanish and Swahili. This still leaves out two 
major language groups, the Japanese-Korean and the 
Dravidian of southern India, both of which have well over 
100 million speakers. 
The dangers of these too extensive blends are pointed 
out by Dr. Gode of Interlingua, a language constructed by 
a team of language experts on the customary basis of a 
combination of western tongues. In Interlingua as it is, 
he offers the following passage: “Le sol dice: ‘Io me 
appella sol. Io es multo brillante. Io me leva al est, e 
quando io me leva, il es die. Io reguarda per tu fenestra 
con mi oculo brillante como le auro, e io te dice quando 
{l es tempore a lever te.” . 
Now he shifts to an intercontinental version that 
includes Chinese, Japanese, Indonesian and other Orien- 
tal tongues: “Mata-hari yu: ‘Wo-ti nama mata-hari. Wo 
taihen brillante. Wo leva wo a est, dan toki wo leva wo, 
ada hari. Wo miru per ni-ti fenestra sama wo-ti mata 
brillante como kin, dan wo yu ni toli ada tempo a levar 
ni’.” His points are that no westerner will even begin to 
understand the second version without very special study, 
and (perhaps even more important), that the Indonesian 
speaker, who supplied mata-hari, will not understand the 
Chinese wo-ti, ni and yu, or the Japanese taihen. 
One final word may be added, in connexion with the 
desirability (or lack thereof) of a constructed tongue vis- 
a-vis a national language adopted for international use. 
One of the great advantages postulated by the proponents 
of constructed languages is their internationality or neu- 
trality, the fact that no nation need object to them on 
the ground that they are vehicles and standard-bearers 
of allen cultures. 
This is quite true of the a priori languages, which are 
based on no known tongue. It is far from true of the 
majority of a posteriori languages, which definitely reflect 
works, both in prose and In verse, shows us that a con- 
structed language, once it is in use, Is perfectly capable of 
creating its own cultural values. 
Two conslderations of a highly practical nature offer 
themselves. National languages, big or small, seldom have 
a system of perfect phonetic notation. This is particularly 
true of languages of century-old clvilizations, such as 
French and English, where the time-lag between the nor- 
mal evolution of speech and the bringing up to-date of 
the spelling has worked to deepen the separation between 
speech and writing. 
Constructed languages, on the other hand, are normally 
completely phonetized, with absolute sound-for-symbol 
correspondence (Esperanto is a good example). This 
means that any national language selected for interna- 
tional use would have to go through a process of spelling 
reform, at least for international purposes, before it could 
be properly put into operation, while a constructed lan- 
guage could go into operation at once, without further 
study or change. 
Even more important is the fact that national langua- 
ges normally show deep dialectal divisions, with frequent 
uncertainly as to a standard form. This is particularly 
true of English and Spanish, somewhat less true of 
French and Russian, where a “correct” standard exists, 
whether or not It is followed by all the speakers. But the 
constructed language is normally fully standardized, and 
the only problem is to keep it that way once It goes into 
operation. 
These two characteristics of constructed languages, pho- 
netization and standardization, are perhaps of greater 
importance than a “neutrality” which seldom appears, 
and which can In no case be made altogether perfect. 
They are, in the opinion of this writer, of sufficient Impor- 
tance to warrant serious consideration of a constructed 
language for international use along with the numerous 
national tongues, old and new, that are offered for 
candidacy. 
  
MARIO PEI, an American linguist, is Professor of Romance 
Philology at Columbia University, New York. He is the 
author of “The Story of English”, recently published by 
Fawcett World Library in the United States. Readers will 
Jind a more ample development of the ideas contained in 
the above article in Mario Pet's book, “One Language for 21 
the World”, published by Devin-Adair Co., 23 East 26 
Street, New York 10, N.Y. U.S.A.

## [Page 28](063381engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28 
  
   
Starlight, by Adolf Oehlen 
of the German Federal Re- 
public. This card is printed 
on airmail paper. 
The Family, a painting 
by British sculptor Henry 
Moore. Chosen as the 
official United Nations card, 
it has been issued in a 
special large-format series. 
For further information, orders 
etc., write: UNICEF G.C.F., 13, 
Heddon St., London W.I., G.B.: 
National UNICEF Committee, 
280 Bloor St. West, Toronto 5, 
Ont.,, Canada (Attention Mrs. 
G. Richards); U.S. Committee 
for UNICEF, P.O. Box 22, Church 
Street Station, New York 8, 
N.Y. (Att. Miss Olga Gechas) or 
UNICEF, Fonds des Cartes de 
Veeux, 24, rue Borghese, Neuilly- 
sur-Seine, France. 
  
 
Homework, by the French 
artist, Jean Commeére, de- 
picts children at home busy 
with their work and games. 
UNICEF 
GREETING 
CARDS 
RAST year the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) 
sold 26 million greeting cards the proceeds of 
which were used to pay for milk, vaccines and other 
disease-preventing measures for millions of children 
Each box of UNICEF cards sold can provide a daily 
glass of milk for one week for 45 children or enough 
vaccine to protect 60 children from tuberculosis. Each 
year artists from different lands donate drawings and 
paintings to help the Fund. The 18 cards on sale this 
year were designed by 11 artists. Some of the designs 
they contributed are reproduced here. Others have 
been made by Gordon McCoun, a “Sunday painter” 
of U.S. nationality, now living in Peru; by Otto Nielsen, 
a Danish artist; and by Jeanyee Wong, a U.S. artist of 
Chinese ancestry. UNICEF cards come in boxes of ten, 
priced at 7/6 "WK: $1.25 (U.S.) and 6F. (France) 
per box. Write to addresses listed below for a 
free, illustrated, full-colour brochure giving full details. 
So ui

## [Page 29](063381engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

     
         
   
     
- 
» 
- 
a sO 
. .. p A 
\ . 
:- ad 
A 2 - Cp pad : a = - ER ————— p J 
. v Cr —_—— M 
eV eR n! “ ou 
” Ts ’ ‘ 
FIR : Pf - E . 8 gi = pina wv B oe ’ 
TARE : ww : : £ Vi 55 2 
: as, r 
    
     
  
    
al Sh 
| ii il 
  
   
| 
   
ETN    - — Bd ah 
- : 0 3 ~ \ 
- os he Say POULT SY Ra . ee 
ey 
. ae 2 a tm mi = : a : 
RE ~ : — EY 
"= Was. : ~ pr . 
wo Be cA PIRATE) Rb] Soa— «3 
= E 1 _— - - - E , Wu 
Marketplace, one of two 
designs by Lena Stockli of 
Switzerland, illustrating her 
impressions of Peru. 
Reindeer Fantasy, a de- 
sign by Ruben Freidwall, 
who was born in the 
“reindeer country “ of north- 
ern Sweden. 
Magic Carpet is one of 
five designs by British artist 
Edward Ardizzone on the 
theme of children’s dreams 
around the world. 
  
Candy Floss, one of two 
gay designs by Aida Marini, 
of Lebanon. 
  
Clown, one of two paint- 
ings donated by Karel Svo- 
linsky of Czechoslovakia. 

## [Page 30](063381engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 63397: The Unsolved mystery of Marajo

Ao the many civilizations whose remains are 
scattered through the New World few have so 
Intrigued archaeologists as that which once flourished on 
the island of Marajo at the mouth of the Amazon, We do 
not know who were lts artisans; it was the work of men 
who had vanished before Europeans landed on the coast 
of Brazil. 
The existence of this centre of civilization In so unex- 
pected a place had already inspired the most venturesome 
theories In the 19th century. What, indeed, has not 
been written on the subject? Egyptians, Phoenicians and 
even Vikings were all named In turn to explain the con- 
trast between these remains of a people which had 
reached a relatively advanced level of civilization and the 
wretchedness of the local physical and human environ- 
ment. There was something paradoxical in the fact that 
an art which was both original and refined should be 
found In a part of the continent which one might imagine 
had always been the stronghold of barbaric tribes. 
Moreover, there was nothing about this alluvial land 
below the Equator to favour its development as an artistic 
centre. Depending on the season, the large island is 
turned into lakes and swamps or into dusty plains. When 
the streams are in spate, natural or artificlal hills emerge 
here and there from the water and provide a refuge for 
men and animals. These are conditions barely sulted to 
primitive groups engaged In rudimentary farming com- 
bined with fishing and hunting. Such, indeed, was the 
way of life of the tribes which the Portuguese found there 
in the 17th century and which they promptly set about 
exterminating. 
Yet part of the island was once occupied by a seden- 
tary people who knew how to make the best use of their 
land. Their villages were built on slopes which today are 
littered with shards of pottery. Their burial-grounds are 
also filled with pottery fragments and objects made of 
clay, and from these we have able to reconstruct in part 
the culture of a people whose very name Is unknown. 
The as we may call them for con- “Marajoaras,” 
= 
» 
  
    LJ \ | Ws kb 
SIE SST 
 
   
 
venience, certainly possessed relatively complex social and 
political structures: the works they carried out mark them 
as a disciplined people governed by chlefs or by an aristo- 
cracy. It would be difficult to explain how they bullt arti- 
ficial hills 25 feet high, some 400 feet long and 130 feet 
wide unless there were some common determination and 
leadership. Isolated communities like those of the pres- 
ent-day Indians could never have achleved such a feat. 
That the ancient Marajo society had a hierarchic char- 
acter may be inferred from the lavishness of certain 
tombs which archaeologists have uncovered in the burial- 
grounds side-by-side with more modest graves. 
The Island of Marajo contains only a small quantity of 
An island as large as 
Denmark, Marajo stands 
between the Amazon and 
Para rivers, almost touch- 
ing the Equator. One of 
the most important regions 
for cattle raising in all 
northern Brazil, its herds 
number well over 600,000 
head. Its ranchers are 
skilled riders, using horses 
and also the saddle oxen 
(left) which offer greater 
security as mounts in 
periods of heavy rains that 
transform the flat coun- 
tryside into lakes and 
swamps. The Marajo cow- 
boy rides barefoot and, 
only placing his big toe 
in the stirrup can dismount 
with speed and agility. 
© Marcel Gautherot, 
Ric de Janeiro 
  iy ar, 
i

## [Page 31](063381engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 63397: The Unsolved mystery of Marajo

OF MARAJO 
by Alfred Métraux  
rock. Thus, ceramics are almost the sole relies left by this 
mysterious people. Like the Sumerians and the Babylo- 
nlans, they delighted In making clay versions of many 
objects whose prototypes were normally fashioned of some 
other material. For example, terra cotta cylinders seem 
to have been used as ornaments for the lips and ears. 
Terra cotta seats have been found which are identical in 
form with those which the Indians carve from wooden 
logs. Finally, excavations have turned up great numbers 
of triangular plates, slightly convex and perforated at the 
ends. Their shape, the signs of wear they show and their 
proximity to female skeletons have led to their being 
identified as a tanga, or slip. They bear some resemblance 
to those triangular pieces of bark which are the sole 
garment worn by the women of certain tribes of the 
Amazon. 
All we know of the religious beliefs of this people are 
their funeral rites. They either cremated the dead or 
preserved their bones in urns. Statuettes of crouching 
women have been found in the tombs and may have some 
ritual significance. The style of Marajo pottery is essen- 
tially geometric and is also distinguished by the use of 
various decorative techniques—modelling, Champlevé ena- 
mel and painting. Certain vases are decorated with 
reliefs showing men and animals. There are burial urns 
on which paintings and reliefs embody the rough image 
of human beings whose eyes are often marked with an 
oblique stroke which gives a sad expression to the face 
as though the artist had sought to suggest mourning and 
   
   
ATLANTIC OCEAN 
BRAZIL 
 
Island of Marajo 
     
grief. Only actual illustrations give a proper idea of the 
richness and varied arrangements of the motifs they used. 
What is known of the origins of this civilization? 
Scholars have sought in vain for any reference to this 
mysterious people in the old chronicles and documents 
dealing with the exploration and conquest of the Amazon. 
None of them has anything to say on the subject. The 
mystery would therefore have remalned absolute had it 
not been for the work of two American cthnographers, 
Clifford Evans and Betty Mecggers. 
Despite all the obstacles with which the bush and the 
swamps confronted them, they carried out a series of 
excavations in the island of Marajo. They were able to 
establish that the civilization of the “Marajoaras” had 
been preceded by three other archeological phases of 
a much more primitive kind, the first comprising a people 
of hunters and fishermen. There is no link whatever 
between these anclent phases (which in many respects are 
little different from those of today’s Amazon Indians) 
and the most culturally advanced one. 
0: day, which the two archaeologists place in 
the XIIth century, a mysterious people 
emerged at the mouth of the Amazon, bringing with 
them an artistic tradition which was already fully formed. 
The invaders established themselves in the plains of the 
large island and lived in villages built on the helghts of 
artificial hills. 
Far from prospering in their new home, they gradually 
declined. The pottery on the most recent sites is less 
finished and less beautiful than in the older deposits. The 
objects connected with burials grow poorer and more uni- 
form, which suggests that with the general decadence 
there came a levelling out of the social classes. 
Finally, at a period which was probably not long before 
the discovery of America, the Marajo civilization came to 
an end as if those who had created it were no longer capa- 
ble of preserving it. The people seem to have succumbed 
to forces the nature of which is still wrapped in mystery, 
since excavations have revealed no trace whatever of wars 
or invasions. 
The Marajo civilization Is therefore a late one. It was 
introduced already formed by emigrants who, cut off from 
their original home, were unable to develop or even to 
preserve it. Once these facts were established it then 
remained to discover the birthplace of the unknown 
people who settled on the edge of the Atlantic. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
31

## [Page 32](063381engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 63397: The Unsolved mystery of Marajo

32 
MARAJO (Cont'd) 
3000-mile migration 
along the Amazon 
Comparative studies which 1t would take too long to 
describe here convinced Evans and Meggers that thelr 
research should be directed towards the Andean reglon 
and more especlally in Colombia. Scattered finds along 
the Amazon seemed to mark the route followed by the 
“Marajoaras” and it was In the hope of finding fresh 
traces of this migration that they recently carried out 
excavations on the banks of the Rio Napo, one of the tri- 
butaries of the Amazon, which has always been a means 
of access from the Andes to the Amazonas, 
T= eleven archeological sites which they 
explored fully confirmed the theory which 
had led them there. The ancestors of the “Marajo peo- 
ple” had travelled down the Napo and had stayed there 
for sometime. The pottery which was discovered there 
was frequently identical with that of the Marajo. The 
Napo had therefore been one of the stages in the 
migration which started in Colombia and ended at the 
mouth of the Amazon, some 3,000 miles further on. 
The unknown tribe which crossed the continent did so 
relatively quickly for the layer of archeological deposits 
of the Napo Is not particularly thick and corresponds to 
a relatively short occupation. It is probable that the 
bearers of the new civilization also stopped during thelr 
journey on the Middle Amazon since pottery was 
discovered in the Manaos area which In shape and orna- 
mentation resembled both Napo and Marajo pottery. 
But the actual birthplace of Marajo civillzation which 
must lle somewhere in Colombia has not yet been dis- 
covered. Similarities between various Colombian cultures 
and those of the Amazon have been recognized but the 
Ceramics, like the pottery vessels shown here (above 
and below), are almost the only relics left by a mys- 
terious people who once lived on the island of Marajo. 
Their pottery bears geometric designs and is richly 
decorated with modelling, enamel work and painting. 
Musée de I'Homme. Paris 
  
    
  
      
   
  
 
we 2 
and [A109 he 
TP 
“Heit ion) \s Fz 
& his | A | ] 
2 PX 
7 & 5), 7s \ 
& JQ ne A 2-3: 
i; E—— 
be fre I UREN Tada 3 
Xe AACE Lille 3 
1 
j 
Wil N cI 
archaeologists have not so far been able to identify the 
area where those elements typical of the Marajo clviliza- 
tion might have originated. In archeological terms, 
Colombia still happens to be a little-known country. 
According to Evans and Meggers, the decline and then 
the disappearance of the Marajo civilization was solely 
due to economic causes. Like all the tropical tribes, the 
Marajoaras practised shifting cultivation on burnt-out 
land with the result that the soil was exhausted within a 
few centuries. The time eventually came when the 
Marajo people were no longer able to produce enough 
food for their fairly dense population. With the decline in 
numbers, the speclalized craftsmanship which had encou- 
raged the development of pottery and other industries 
could no longer survive. The fate of the Marajo people is 
somewhat similar to that of the Maya empire which 
likewise came to a sudden end. Today, the economic 
explanation of the death of tropical civilizations is 
contested. Hence the problem is far from resolved and 
we are forced to admit that without that explanation 
the mystery remains intact. 
This is one of the last articles that Dr. Alfred Métraux sent to 
The Unesco Courier. A regular contributor to this maga- 
zine since its foundation in 1948, Dr. Métraux died in 
April of this year. Anthro- 
pologist and writer, he won 
international repute for his 
expedition to Easter Island 
and others amongst the 
South American Indians, and 
for his work on behalf of 
racial equality. Three of his 
most noted books are “Eas- 
ter Island” (1941); “Haitian 
Voodoo” (1959) and “The 
Incas” (1962). The series 
of books on race which 
Unesco published over the 
past twelve years were pre- 
pared under his editorship. 
 

## [Page 33](063381engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

Letters to the Editor 
FAR NORTH CULTIVATION 
Sir, 
In the July-August 1962 issue 
accompanying an excellently reproduc- 
ed photograph of a reindeer team, is 
a paragraph that cannot be called 
anything but idle fantasy. It says: 
“Alaska’s lands now under cultivation 
cover 100,000 square miles, or about 
half the area of France.” According 
to official American figures, the area 
under crops in the state of Alaska in 
1959 was 6,900 hectares (about 17,000 
acres) and total ploughlands, includ- 
ing those abandoned amounted to 
9,700 hectares (about 25,000 acres)... 
This strange error is followed by an- 
other: “On the Taimyr Peninsula, 
within the Arctic Circle, Soviet far- 
mers are growing maize and potatoes.” 
If the author of this text had been 
better acquainted with the state of agri- 
culture on the Taimyr Peninsula, he 
would have known that maize does 
not grow there. The northernmost 
point at which maize is produced is on 
the Yenissei on the 57th parallel, about 
1,500 kilometres south of the southern 
frontier of Taimyr. 
Potatoes are planted in the Taimyr 
National Area on a few hundred square 
metres of land; even this small patch 
is in the south of the Taimyr National 
Area and on the Peninsula there is 
no farming of any kind. 
Such distortions arouse the indigna- 
tion of a reader who is acquainted 
with the real state of affairs, and 
make him wary in respect of other, 
truly magnificent, achievements in 
conquering the Soviet Far North. 
VY. Andreyev, Professor, 
Director, Far Northern Agricultural 
Research Institute U.S.S.R. 
LANGUAGE IS THE KEY TO 
THE HEART OF A NATION 
{Johann Gottfried von Herder) 
Sir, 
In your December 1962 issue, 
E. D. Allen, of Dunedin, New Zea- 
land, suggests that Esperanto should 
be adopted as a second language 
throughout the world, now that 
modern transport has brought nations 
so close together. 
The very fact that nations have 
now become near neighbours offers 
many facilities for the general public 
to gain a knowledge of foreign 
cultures which in the past was reserved 
for privileged individuals or specia- 
lists. Languages are the key fo this 
knowledge, for the ideas and cultural 
values of a nation find their liveliest 
expression in its language. The semi- 
nar on the Teaching of Modern Lan- 
guages, organized by UNESCO in 
Ceylon in 1953, demonstrated beyond 
a doubt that the student of foreign 
languages is taking the surest and 
most direct—probably, indeed, the 
only—way towards a knowledge and 
understanding of other cultures and 
peoples, There is no better method 
of gaining an insight into the spirit 
of a foreign culture. 
At a time when unprecedented 
opportunities for cultural exchanges 
are beginning to present themselves, 
ought we to restrict them by limiting 
ourselves to the study of an artificial 
language as an adjunct to our own? 
Recognizing that considerations of 
technical utility should not be allow- 
ed to narrow down the spiritual 
horizon of mankind, the International 
Federation of University Women, at 
its Conference, at Mexico City in 
July 1962, adopted the following 
resolution on the subject of language 
study: 
“The International’ Federation of 
University Women affirms the impor- 
tance of studying the language and 
culture of people of all parts of the 
world as one of the most essential 
means of promoting international 
understanding and friendship; and 
urges national federations and asso- 
citations to encourage the study of at 
least one foreign language and culture, 
under qualified teachers, not only in 
secondary schools and universities but 
also, as far as possible, by children 
in primary schools and by adults in 
various out-of-school programmes.” 
I feel convinced that this would 
make a useful contribution to the 
solution of many current problems. 
Magda Staudinger 
Freiburg-im-Breisgau 
Federal Republic of Germany 
BOTTICELLI WORKS 
RECOVERED 
 
  
Sir, 
Your June issue referred to the 
disappearance of 88 original Botti- 
celli drawings (illustrations for Dante's 
“Divine Comedy’) which prior to 
the war were kept in.the Print Room 
of the Berlin Museum. Though these 
drawings were indeed thought to have 
been lost during the war I am glad 
to be able to tell you that they came 
to, light again a few years ago. 
Twenty-seven have now returned from 
Wiesbaden to West Berlin and 61 
have come back to East Berlin from 
Moscow. 
Paolo Peterlongo 
Milan, Italy 
NO BALLOON 
FOR PHILEAS FOGG 
 
Sir, 
I should like to point out an error 
in the back cover caption of your 
September issue: 
“A ceremony commemorating Jules 
Verne's novel, Around the World in 
80 Days, whose hero, Phileas Fogg, 
accomplished one stage of his journey 
in a balloon.” 
Phileas Fogg never used a balloon. 
(Is there some confusion here with 
Verne's Five Weeks in a Balloon or the 
opening of The Mysterious Island?) 
There is balloon episode in the film 
version of Around the World... but 
not in the novel... 
Aldo Dami 
Geneva, Switzerland 
Ed note : Our reader is correct. 
The balloon in our illustration was 
used at a ceremony marking the Paris 
release of the film version of “Around 
the World in 80 Days" in which 
several new episodes were added to 
the Jules Verne story. 
FROM ‘THE LIONS’ REFUGE’ 
Sir, 
For the past 20 years I have lived 
alone with wild animals in Central 
Africa and have worked with other 
defenders of African wildlife to try 
to halt or at least reduce the mas- 
sacre that has become general despite 
so-called measures, good intentions 
and parodies of protection for wild 
animals. In the Chad, in particular, 
our work will never be effective 
unless there is a reduction in the 
large-scale importation of arms for 
hunting and as long as there are 
too few pcople conscientiously work- 
ing to ensure that hunting regulations 
are properly respected which, as it 
happens, is practically never the case. 
There is also the fact that veterinary 
services are authorized to use poison 
to destroy carnivorous animals. 
The ‘Lions’ Refuge,” which I 
continue to run without any govern- 
ment help, is of immense value to 
me in my campaign among both 
Africans and Europeans. My ama- 
zingly friendly adult lions are now 
known in Europe and in America. 
To show them to people is perhaps 
the most convincing way to pursuade 
the hunters to stop their massacres. 
Our campaign slogan is “Don't kill 
animals, photograph them. Take a 
camera instead of a rifle.” But the 
work is difficult and the upkeep of 
my animals is a heavy burden, for 
all I have to live on is my salary as 
secretary to the Chamber of Com- 
merce in Abéché. 
Johanna Luciani 
Abéché, Republic of Chad 
  
Mme Luclani shows her lioness, 
Tanit, to an African visitor. 
33

## [Page 34](063381engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

From the Unesco Ne 
TH Soviet cosmonaut, Yuri Gagarin, 
who made the first earth-girdling 
space flight on April 12, 1961, addres- 
sed the 14th International Astronauti- 
cal Congress held at Unesco's H. Q. 
In Paris from September 25 to Octo- 
  
  
ber 1. On this occasion he was receiv- 
ed by Unesco's Executive Board, whose 
chairman, Dr. C.E. Beeby, hailed him 
as “the living symbol of the capacity 
of the spirit of man to transcend 
the limits of his physical environment.” 
 
Unesco-Dominique Roger 
Colonel Gagarin during his visit to Unesco. With him, (from left to right) are 
Professor A.P.Pavlov, permanent delegate of the U.S.S.R. to Unesco; H.E. 
Serge Vinogradov, U.S.S.R. Ambassador to France; M. Georges Fleury 
president of the French Astronautical Society; Professor Edmond Brun, 
President of the International Astronautical Federation. 
FRICAN PROBLEMS: “Assignment 
Children” a new review published by 
the European Office of UNICEF (The 
United Nations Children’s Fund, 24 Rue 
Pauline-Borghese, Neuilly-sur-Seine, Fran- 
ce) has devoted its first issue to some major 
African problems. Articles by leading 
educators, doctors and writers point out 
the dangers—springing from poverty, hunger, 
illiteracy and disease—that now threaten 
the children of Africa’s developing coun- 
tries, and describe what needs to be done to 
eliminate these evils. “Assignment Chil- 
dren” is to be published twice yearly in 
English, French and German language 
editions. 
ARTH OF DENTISTS: There should 
be at least one dentist for every 1,000 
people, but figures issued by the World 
Health Organization reveal a serious world 
shortage: one dentist for every 283,700 peo- 
ple in Indonesia, one for 108,000 in India, 
for 5,100 in the U.S.S.R., for 3,900 in the 
United Kingdom, for 2,700 in France and 
for 1,700 in the U.S.A. 
OOKING INSIDE ROCKS: The 
internal structure or rock formations 
1s now being studied at the University of 
Georgia Geology Department by the use of 
X-rays. Through this technique, the geo- 
logist can determine details of internal 
structures and fabrics which greatly in- 
fluence the localization of ore minerals and 
the movement of fluids like petroleum and 
ground water. 
EARNING AT THE WHEEL: Phy- 
} sicians in the United States have now 
an ingenious means for keeping abreast of 
the latest developments in medicine. Medi- 
cal societies in several states issue weekly 
tape-recorded lectures on current research 
and discoveries in such special fields as 
pediatrics, obstetrics, surgery, or cardio- 
vascular diseases. Doctors subscribe to the 
series which interests them and play the 
tapes on portable machines while driving 
between home and hospital or patients’ 
homes. 
EGINA’S ‘ARMCHAIR LOUVRE" 
The city of Regina in Canada offers 
its people an “Armchair Louvre” where 
they can go and enjoy masterpieces of art 
from all parts of the world. This minia- 
ture gallery comprises over 500 books and 
folios of high-quality reproductions repre- 
senting all the great art movements. It is 
visited regularly by students, art apprecia- 
tion and adult education groups, artists 
doing research and people who simply go 
there for their own pleasure. 
ETEOROLOGY INSTITUTE FOR 
POONA: The United Nations in 
collaboration with the World Meteorolo- 
gical Organization is helping India to set 
up an Institute of Tropical Meteorology at 
Poona. Its work will include research into 
monsoons and their forecasting, warnings of 
tropical cyclones, medium range weather 
forecasting for the benefit of agriculture 
and flood forecasting. 
EACHERS FOR AFRICA: At the 
request of African educational autho- 
rities UNEsco has set up an information 
service to help African countries obtain 
foreign teachers who are needed to help 
staff universities, teachers’ colleges and 
high schools until enough African teachers 
can be trained to replace them. The first 
bulletin published by this “Teaching 
Abroad” service lists 400 teaching jobs 
offered in 17 African countries. 
News Flashes... 
  
Wm Two figures reflect the growing role of 
Africa in Unesco’'s work: African member 
states now number 32 as compared with 8 
before 1960; over 27% of the total current 
budget for Unesco activities, including extra- 
budgetary resources, is devoted to program- 
mes in Africa. 
ml Enrolment has doubled this autumn at 
Moscow University with 6,240 young 
people beginning their first year studies. 
Most of them have worked for two or 
more years in industry or agriculture. 
Wl 44 countries have now joined the Unesco 
Agreement on the Importation of Educa- 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Materials 
which exempts books, newspapers, maga- 
zines and works of art from import duties. 
Latest country to join this “Free Flow” 
treaty is Somalia. 
Ml Miniature nuclear power packages are 
being developed to generate electricity for 
satellites and spacecraft, with many poten- 
tial applications down on earth. Already 
such packages are being used in robot 
weather stations and in ship navigation 
devices. 
HONOURING THE U.N. GENERAL ASSEMBLY 
= 
> 
: -H 
Low ] 
- 
[2] 
SE 
-_ 
lanl 
(2) 
jiu tog | 
OSbEAMHEHHBIE HALLWM 
 
The fourth U.N. commemorative 
stamp for 1963 honours the U.N. 
General Assembly. Bearing a design 
depicting the U.N. Headquarters in 
New York, the stamp is being issued 
this month in 5¢ and 11c denomi- 
nations. .As agent in France of the 
U.N. Postal Administration, Unesco's 
Philatelic Service stocks all U.N. 
stamps and first day covers currently 
on sale, and those issued by Unesco 
member states to commemorate impor- 
tant events in the history of Unesco 
and the U.N. For prices and further 
details write to The Unesco Philatelic 
Service, Place de Fontenoy, Paris (7¢). 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.

## [Page 35](063381engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
Volume I: Paintings Prior to 1860 
— Lists nearly 900 recommended colour reproduc- 
tions and 
Africa, Australia and Central Europe. 
Price: 30/-(stg); $6.00; 21 F. 323 pages. 
In the Federal Republic of Germany, Switzerland 
and Austria, a special Unesco-Oldenbourg Verlag 
edition (with German text) is also available. 
includes many examples from Asia, 
wey i 
’ “1860 A 1963 
paintings 
1860 to 1963 
fatilogo de 
reproducciones en color 
| Py 
: de reproductions ) 
i» en couleurs de peintures 
  
UNESCO CATALOGUES OF 
COLOUR REPRODUCTIONS 
OF PAINTINGS 
Two volumes presenting an up-to-date listing of 
colour reproductions of world-famous paintings com- 
piled from the Unesco collection of reproductions selec- 
ted by internationally-known experts on the basis of 
fidelity of reproduction, the significance of the artist 
and the importance of the original painting. 
Each painting in these beautifully presented volumes 
Is reproduced in black and white together with full 
details of the original, name of publisher and price of 
colour reproduction. 
   
JUST PUBLISHED 
  
Volume [I : Paintings 
from 1860 to 1963 
— A new and completely 
up-to-date edition of 519 
pages. 
— Contains descriptions 
and illustrations of 1440 
reproductions available in 
full colour prints including 
28 artists represented for 
the first time. 
Price: 
30/- (stg); $6.00; 21°F. 
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; rates quoted are 
for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO COU- 
RIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Tradco Agencies, 109 Swanston Street, G. P. O. 
Box 2324 V, Melbourne C. |. (Victoria) ; United 
Nations Association of Australia, Victorian Division, 
8, th Floor, McEwan House, 343 Little Collins St, 
Melbourne C. |. (Victoria). (A. 15/-). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C*., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 60.-). — BELGIUM. Editions * Labor ", 
342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-Boek~ 
handel, Belgelei 151. Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (100 FB) and art slides only: Louis de Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. CCP 3380.00. — 
BURMA, Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoon. (K. 5.50). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont. ($ 3.00). — CEYLON. The Associated 
Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd., Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Colombo, 2 (Rs. 9) 
— CHINA, World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CUBA. 
Cubartumpex, Apartado 6540, La Havana. — 
(2.25 pesos). —_ CYPRUS. Cyprus National 
Youth Council, P.O. Box 539, Nicosia, — CZE- 
CHOSLOVAKIA, Artia ltd, 30 Ve Smeckich, Prague 
2. — DENMARK, Ejnar Munksgaard, A/S Tidsskriftaide- 
lingen,Prags Boulevard 47 Copenhagen $ (D.kr. 12). — 
ETHIOPIA. International Press Agency. P.O, Box 120. 
Addis Ababa, — FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (Fmk. 540). — FRANCE. Librai- 
rie de "Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7*,C.C.P.12598- 
48. (7 F.).— GERMANY. R. Cldenbourg Verlag, Rosen= 
heimer strasse 145, Munich. For the Unesco Kurer 
(German ed. only) Bahren-felder-Chaussee 160, 
Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650 (DM 8). — GHANA 
Methodist Book Depot Ltd. Atlantis House, Commercial 
St.,, POB 100, Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See 
United Kingdom, — GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 
28, rue du Stade, Athens. — HONG-KONG. Swindon 
Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. 
Kultura, P. OQ, Box 149. Budapest, 62. — ICELAND. 
Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co. H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik 
— INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd, Indian Mercan- 
tile Chamber, Nicol Road, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Ave- 
nue, Calcutta 13; Gunfoundry Road, Hyderabad, 1; 36a, 
Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson House, 24/1 Asaf Ali Road, 
P.O. Box 386, New Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: Oxford Book & 
Stationery Co., 17 Park Street, Calcutta 16, Scindia House, 
New Delhi. Indian National Commission for Co-operation 
with Unesco, Ministry of Education, New Delhi 3, (Rs. 7). 
— INDONESIA. P, N. Fadjar Bhakti, Djalan 
Nusantara 22, Djakarta. — IRAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. — IRELAND. The National Press, 
2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (10/-}. — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein's Bookstores 35, Allenby Road 
and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (1£ 5.50). 
— JAMAICA. Sangster's Book Room, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston. Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
(10/-}. — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
(Yen 670). — JORDAN. Joseph L. Bahous & Co., 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.C.B. 66, Amman, — 
KENYA. E.S.A, Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi, — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.C. Box Central 64, Seoul. — LIBERIA. Cole 
and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg, — MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE. Federal Publications Ltd., Times House, 
River Valley Rd., Singapore (M. 8 500) — MALTA. 
Sapienza’s Library 26 Kingsway, Valetta. (10/-). — 
MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port-Louis. —MONACO, Briush Library, 30 Bld 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF.). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. ¥. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 6). — NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. G. C. T. 
Yan Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Curacac. 
— NEW ZEALAND Government Printing Office 20, 
Molesworth Street (Private Bag) Wellington, Government 
Bookshops,: Auckland (P.O. Box 5344), Christchurch, 
(P. O. Box 1711), Dunedin) P.O. Box 1104 (10/-). 
NIGERIA, C,M.5. Bookshop, P.O. Box 174, Lagos, 
(10/-). — NORWAY. AS. Bokhjornet, Lille Grense. 
7 Oslo For the Unesco Courier only: A.S. Narvesens 
Licteratur Tjeneste, Stortingsgt. 4 Oslo, Postboks 115 
(kr 1.320 — PAKISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Cor 
Ltd., Unesco Publications House, P.O, Box 374 §6-N 
Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahore. — PANAMA. 
Cultural Panamena, Avenida 7a, No. T1-49, Apartado de 
Correos 2018, Panama, (D.F. Balboas 3-). — PHILLIPI- 
NES, The Modern Book C o., 508 Rizal Avenue P.O. Box 
632 Manila, — POLAND, *"RUCH"' ul, Wiloza Nr. 46x 
Warsaw 10 (2). 50). —- PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrada 
Lda, Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — 
PUERTO RICO. Spanish English Publications Apartado 
1912, Hato Rey. — RHODESIA & NYASALAND. The 
Book Centre, Gordon Avenue, Salisbury, Southern Rhode 
sia. ~ SUDAN, Al Bashir Bookshop, P. O, Box 1118, 
Khartoum. — SWEDEN. A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbok- 
handel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm, — For The Unesco 
Courier: Svenska Unescoridet, Vasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 7.50); SWITZERLAND. Europa Verlag, 
5 Rimistrasse Zurich. Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva 
C.C.P. 1-236. ** Courier "only: Georges Losmaz, 1,rue. 
des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P, 1-4811, (Fr. 5. 8), 
— TANGANYIKA, Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 
9030, Dar-es-Salaam, — THAILAND. Suksapan 
Pant, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. (35 
ticals). — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Isuklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. = UGANDA, Uganda 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala, — UNION OF 
SOUTH AFRICA. Van Schak’'s Bookstore, Libri 
Building, Church Street, Pretoria, For the Unesco Cou- 
rier (single copies) only: Central News Agency, P.O. 
Box 1033, Johannesburg. (10/-). — UNITED ARAB 
REPUBLIC (EGYPT). La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9*Sh. 
Adly-Pasha, Cairo, — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M, 
Stavuonery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l. (10/-). — 
UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 
317 East 34th St, New York, 16, N.Y, ($5.00) 
and (except periodicals): Columbia University Press, 
2960 Broadway, New York, 27 N.Y. — U.S5.S.R. Mez- 
hdunarodnaja Kniga, Moscow, G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA 
Yugoslovenska Knjiga, Terazne 27/11. Belgrade.

## [Page 36](063381engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

-
 
4 2
 
~
Y
 
EY
 
P
l
 
E
S
 a 
r
o
 
Ex
 
SE
A 
E
N
O
 
J
 -
 
Lo 
a
 
  
YEARS 
OF CHANGE 
IN THE CONGO 
   
   
  
  
 
% “tent 2 A [eepeepe rrp 
| hd 
     
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
Since 1960 when it became an independent African nation, the Republic of the Congo 
has been rebuilding and expanding its educational system on all levels with help from 
Unesco. (See story page 4). During the same period the population of its capital, 
Leopoldville, has more than doubled and now numbers over one million. This statue 
is one of the figures in the memorial to Henry M. Stanley, a pioneer of African explo- 
ration, which stands on a hillside near Leopoldville, overlooking the broad Congo River.