# [105101](105101engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](105101engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

    
  
T 
F
E
B
R
U
A
R
Y
 
1
9
9
7
 
  
UNESCO 
OURIER 
DE LIBERA DIO 
A FUTURE FOR SOUND 
    
HERITAGE 
MR. JEFFERSON'S 
DREAM HOUSE 
ENVIRONMENT \ 
EARTHWATCHING 
SATELLITES 
   M 1205 -9702-22,00 F : | 
IAS Tw 
ILEANA 
 

## [Page 2](105101engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
N 
We invite readers to send us 
photographs to be considered for 
publication in this feature. Your 
photo should show a painting, a 
sculpture, piece of architecture or 
any other subject which seems to be 
an example of cross-fertilization 
between cultures. 
Alternatively, you could send us 
pictures of two works from different 
cultural backgrounds in which you 
see some striking connection or 
resemblance. Please add a short 
caption to all photographs. 
UNTITLED I 
1996, acrylic, pencil, 
colour photocopy 
applied on paper 
(63.4 x 49 cm) 
by Enam Huque.  
ENCOUNTERS 
Enam Huque is a Bangladeshi artist whose work explores cross-cultural themes and 
attempts to foster cross-cultural communication. In this painting he has superimposed a 
motif of white palms decorated with henna on a background of designs inspired by the 
folk art of eastern India. Henna is widely used as a decorative substance in India, the 
Middle East and Africa. 
© Enam Hugque, Toronto, Canada

## [Page 3](105101engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

® 
Da
ni
el
 
Mo
rd
zi
ns
ki
, 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
L.
R.
 
Pa
st
or
/I
nc
af
o,
 
Ma
dr
id
 
THE UNESCO (COURIER 
   INTERVIEW A’ 
Alain de Libera, 
aspecialist in medieval philosophy, 
looks at the history of Western thought 
from anew angle (p.4). 
  
Monticello, 2 masterpiece of American 
neoclassical architecture built on a hilltop in 
Virginia by Thomas Jefferson, 3rd President of 
the United States (p. 43). 
contents 
FEBRUARY 1997 
RADIO 
 
Month by month vyBahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 11 
Onthecrestofthewaves ....................ooiiiiiiiil, 12 
by Hervé Bourges 
The first half century (1895-1945) ...............ocoiivvoieii, 16 
by Bernard Blin 
The second half century (19454995)... .......................... 22 
by Gareth Price 
Apublic service. .............o 27 
by Knud Ebbesen 
From short wavetosatellite................................. 28 
by Ray Gallon and Diane Seligsohn 
By the people, forthepeople..........................l 32 
by Carlos A. Arnaldo 
Villages find their VOICE. ..............oo ooo 34 
by Wijayananda Jayaweera and Louie Tabing 
All powerto the microphone! ...............................l.. 36 
by Armen Oganessian 
FAC file ooo oo 39 
Consultant: Carlos A. Arnaldo 
Commentary Federico Mayor 40 
HERITAGE 42 
Mr. Jefferson's dream house by Francis Leary 
GREENWATCH 46 
Earthwatching satellites by France Bequette 
AUTHORS 50 
Cover: © Paul Young/S15, Paris 
« 
te unesco (OuriER® FEBRUARY 1997

## [Page 4](105101engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 105084: The Arab forebears of the European Renaissance

interview 
THE UNESCO Courier FEBRUARY 1997 
Alain de Libera 
French historian and philosopher 
Alain de Libera, an authority on 
medieval thought, talks to Rachid 
Sabbaghi about some unjustly 
neglected chapters in the history of 
Western philosophy. 
BW How did you first become interested in Arab- 
Istamic philosophy? 
Alain de Libera: It was when I embarked on my 
work as a historian of medieval philosophy. I read 
a book by the French philosopher and historian 
Etienne Gilson called L’Etre et ’Essence (“Being 
and Essence”), which contained two extraordi- 
nary, thought-provoking chapters on Avicenna and 
Averroés. Ever since, my interest in Arab-Tslamic 
philosophy has been indissoeiable from my inter- 
est in medieval philosophy. 
The received wisdom at the Sorbonne when 
I was a student there was that the Middle Ages 
were a kind of tong parenthesis in the history of 
humankind. The nineteenth-eentury French 
scholar Ernest Renan called it an appalling 
period, a “1,000-year disaster”. The traditional 
view insisted that nothing happened between 
Aristotle and Descartes. As a philosophy stu- 
dent, then, I'saw the Middle Ages as a neglected 
period of history. 
When I read Gilson’s book, I realized that 
at the core of this neglect was neglect of the 
Arab-Islamie dimension within medieval philos- 
ophy. I then heeame convinced of two things: 
first, that medieval thought as a whole had a 
contribution to make to philosophy that was as 
important as that of Greek or classieal philoso- 
phy; and secondly, that a key reason why it was 
overshadowed was the overshadowing of Arab- 
Islamie philosophy, which I then approached 
from the most difficult philosophical angle, the 
metaphysical angle. 
HM Was the contribution of Arab culture to the 
making of modern Europe not overlooked as well? 
A.del.: Yes, without doubt. But it must be said

## [Page 5](105101engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

© Daniel Mordzinski, Paris 
  


### 105084: The Arab forebears of the European Renaissance

The medieval European university, which came into being 
in the 13th century, was based on the map of knowledge 
drawn by Al-Farabi. 
that there was something diabolical in this 
neglect, since it went hand in glove with the 
recognition of a certain debt. This debt is often 
referred to as though it should be taken [or 
granted, as when people say: “The existenee of 
an Arab-Islamic legacy is so obvious that theres 
not much point in discussing it.” The debt is so 
patent that it distracts attention from the 
neglect. People say: “Of course the Arabs passed 
on the bulk of Greek science to the Cliristian 
West.” But we must be careful here: when itis 
 
admitted, objectively and dispassionately, that 
the Arals were “transmitters”, they are denied 
any other role or any other contribution to the 
overall history of Western thought. Recognition 
of this kind, through a process of total assimi- 
lation, turns the Arabs into the continuation, in 
another form, of the Greeks, into people whose 
only role was to pass on what they had received, 
just as relay runners hand over a baton or torch. 
They passed on a seience that was not theirs, a 
science they simply reproduced and perpetu- 
ated. They passed it on, then stepped aside; 
their job was done. They withdrew from the 
European stage, where they had no business to 
be and where they had never had anything to do 
but serve as intermediaries. 
Now this image is fallacious. The Arabs made 
a mich more important contribution to the his- 
tory of European thought than that. 
HB Howwould you define this contribution? 
A. de L.: I should find it very hard to answer the 
question: “What contribution did Greek phi- 
losophy make to the lorming of a European iden- 
tity?” The question you have asked has equally 
wide implications. The influence of such thinkers 
as Avicenna and Averroés on European culture 
is as vast a subject as that of Plato’s or Aristotle’s 
influence. One is tempted to treat the subject 
comprehensively, and looking at it in detail it is 
hard to know where to begin. But I will try to sug- 
gest some basie guidelines. 
Perhaps the simplest thing would be to start 
with the notions of science and scientificity, In 
the twelfth century the Christian world realized 
that there existed a considerable corpus of sci- 
entific work in Antiquity {which had up to then 
been lost or known only ina very fragmented and 
indirect form)—a systematic organization of 
knowledge, a division of the sciences, a classifi- 
cation of scientific disciplines, an articulation, a 
system, a hierarchy of disciplines. The West made 
this discovery when the catalogue of seiences 
drawn up by Al-Farabi was translated into Latin. 
With Al-Farabi the Christian world obtained 
its first signposts to the corpus of knowledge 
bequeathed by late Antiquity organized so as 
to provide a kind of map of the knowable. The 
West then went on to make a detailed examina- 
tion of cach of these sciences, which ranged from » 
THE UNLSCO Courier FEBRUARY 1997

## [Page 6](105101engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 105084: The Arab forebears of the European Renaissance

© 
Da
ni
ef
 
Mo
rd
zi
ns
ki
, 
Pa
ns
 
interview 
~~ 
     
  
Side 
Alain de Libera    
» astronomy and metaphysicsto psychology, hiol- 
ogy, botany and meteorology. In cach case it dis- 
covered an Arabic text which, if it was not always 
a founding text, had the elfeet of accompanying, 
boosting or accelerating knowledge. 
Between the end of the twelfth century and 
the middle of the thirteenth eentury, the Latin 
West became scientifically literate as a result of 
two great batches of translations of Arab seien- 
tific works, which became the very foundation of 
the university system. The medieval European 
university, which came into being at the beginning 
of the thirteenth century, was in a sense the insti- 
tutional manifestation of the map of knowledge 
drawn by Al-Farabi. The Aral learning that was 
translated and passed on to the West formed the 
basis and the scientific foundation of the uni- 
versity inits living reality—the reality of its syl- 
labus, the content of its teaching. 
The historical paradox is that this Arab learn- 
ing, which never spawned a university in the 
Islamic world itself, provided the Latin West 
with the substanee of an institution that enabled 
itto develop rapidly and acquire a growing aseen- 
dancy over the rest of the world. The influence 
of that learning was therefore quite inestimable. 
It was not just a ease of progress in this or that 
ficld or discipline, or a speeifie contribution to 
this or that aspect of an existing or nascent sei- 
ence. It was the very idea of the university and its 
reality as an institution that grew out of the 
Arabs’ systematization of knowledge. If you want 
to talk about the profound influence of Arab- 
Islamic philosophy on the Latin West, you have 
to approach the phenomenon from this angle, 
[rom the notion that science, ideology and, to 
some extent, history, the history of thought, 
took shape in a nnique institution, the university. 
HB What about the disciplines themselves? 
A. de L.: I think a distinetion needs to be made 
. between two aspects of this question. As far as 
the Middle Ages are concerned, one aspect of 
the medieval output of knowledge is linked to an 
activity whieh today seems very outmoded: the 
commentary. There was a phenomenon that 
might be called medieval “commentarism”; 
medieval culture was based on texts. lt is rea- 
sonable to assume that about half the texts read 
and commented upon in medieval universities 
were of Arab origin. There was the corpus of 
Aristotelian physies and its Aral sequel, the cor- 
pus of Aristotle’s De Anima (On the Soul) and its 
Arab sequel, and the corpus of his Metaphysics 
and its Arab sequel. 
But the manner in which knowledge was trans- 
mitted is only one aspeet of the question. It is 
more important to see how new disciplines 
emerged, how new knowledge was acquired, how 
sciences came into being. At this point we leave 
behind the aspect of “commentarism” and the 
transmission of texts, however interesting it may be, 
as a phenomenon of another kind begins to emerge. 
HB What kind of phenomenon? 
A.deL.: I deliberately referred to Aristotle’s De 
Anima. It would be stretching a point to deseribe 
this as the founding text of psychology as a sci- 
ence. It presents an extraordinarily complex doce- 
trine of the soul, which was adapted, annotated 
and partly rewritten over the centuries. In this 
context, a work such as Averroés’s great com- 
mentary on the De Anima is not just another 
piece of annotation, but one that raises fresh 
problems that bring out inconsistencies and gaps 
in Aristotle’s discourse. And the realization by 
Averroés that Aristotle’s work led nowhere, that 
tliere were residual difficulties in his system— 
or what was assumed to be a system—and that 
the very formulation of his founding prineiple 
was faulty means that Averroés had something 
more to contribute than annotation or ¢commen- 
tary. Ile caused the very foundations of philos- 
ophy to be questioned. 
This being the case, the issue cannot be 
approached from a purely (quantitative point of 
view. One cannot simply say that Averroés added 
200 pages to Aristotle’s 100. What Averroés 
added was the astute perception that Aris- 
totelianisin is something that had to be built, that 
it was not “ready-made”, and consequently, that 
the seienee of the soul had to be built. Its funda- 
mental tools and its broadest concepts needed to 
be defined. As soon as Averroés became known, 
there was a debate about what the science of the 
soul might be. Before Averroés, what Aristotle 
had said was simply repeated and reprodnced. 
I'insist on this point because Averroés is usu- 
ally made out to be no more than a commentator 
on Aristotle. In fact he was more than this. le 
In ancient Greece, the wise man tried to grasp eternal verities, by detaching himself to some 
extent from the material world. For Averroés, the wise man should know things as they are, 
going into the detail of a changing world. . . 
THe unesco COURIER W FLBRUARY 1997

## [Page 7](105101engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

certainly repeated what his predecessor said in 
some areas, but always with the aim of develop- 
ing a body of knowledge that obeyed the model 
of science as Averroés defined it—a model that 
was essentially demonstrative and strongly argued 
from a logical point of view, a model that songht 
to be consistent and systematie. It may conse- 
quently be said that it was Averroés who, in a 
sense, invented the seience of psychology, 


### 105084: The Arab forebears of the European Renaissance

The European individual as a type came into being at the 
heart of the medieval world, prompted by the notion— 
which is not Greek but Arabic—that work liberates. 
whereas all Aristotle did was pass on the corpus 
and the terms on which the science would be 
built. 
BM What did Averroés contribute to psychology apart 
from the idea that it could become a science? 
A. de L.: Ile contributed the basis on which he 
tried to ereate that science, namely the critique 
of materialism, It was important in his eyes to rec- 
ognize psychical reality as such, as something 
thoroughly independent, autonomous and sepa- 
rate from the biological sphere (what today we 
would tend to call the materialist sphere). Ile 
made a distinction between the theory of thought 
and the theory of cerebral functions. Ile believed 
there was an absolute moral irreducibility 
between the physical world and the “noetic” 
world—i.c. the psychological and cognitive 
processes, scientific thought itself. lle strove to 
put across a view that preserved Aristotelian 
empiricism as far as possible, but diverged from 
it when that empiricism tended to reduee 
thought to its material clements alone. 
Averroés posed the question of the psycho- 
logical subject, the thinking subject. And he 
posed it by eriticizing any interpretation that 
might reduce the soul and thonght to products 
of the body, to forms secreted by the body. He 
regarded the psychological subject as indepen- 
dent of its corporal substratum. 
BM What theory did he propose? 
A.deL.: Tle set up a model that the history of psy- 
chology has shown to he iinmensely fruitfnl— 
what might be called a topological model. Ile 
tried to see the act of knowing in terms of ele- 
ments that are neither corporal nor non-eorporal, 
hut purely psychical—what he called the intel- 
lect. In the intellect, he distinguished between 
a passive dimension which reeeives concepts, and 
an active dimension which produces those con- 
cepts. There is therefore an interaction between 
  three agencies—imagination, receptiveness and 
activity. 
So Averroés proposed a theory which, 
although it broke away from materialism, was 
not a theory of the individual subject, of the 
thinking ego, of what Descartes would later 
describe as “the thinking being”. Averroés did his 
best to steer clear of the twin pitfalls of materi- 
alism and psychologism. 
When students say to me: “What on earth is 
all this talk of active intellect and passive intel- 
leet? What does it mean?”, I reply: “What is 
the ego, what is the snper-ego?” They are not 
entities that ean be located in the brain, nor are 
they egos within the ego. They are agencies that 
form part of a dynamie vision of the psyehe. 1 
believe that if people could think in this way 
about Averroés, they would appreciate his rad- 
ical novelty: the introduetion of a model that 
was unknown before him. Ilis approach involved 
finding a space which is neither that of materi- 
ality (the corporeal), nor that of an ego entirely 
in control of itself and of its eonseious aets. It may 
be alittle difficult to grasp, but it does seem to 
me that this topological model of the soul, which 
was unknown before Averroés, has not yet yiclded 
all its riches. 
WM Inyour book Penser au Moyen-Age, you even put 
forward the theory of an Arab contribution to the 
appearance of the European mentality. You suggest 
that Arab culture could have made possible the 
emergence of that curious creature which 
subsequently conquered the world: the modern 
individual. 
A. de L.: Let’s start with the notion of the intel- 
lectual. An intellectual is someone who lives in a 
speeifie institution, the univevsity, and has a spe- 
cific task, whieh is to understand, to find out, to 
know and to act within the general framework of 
a practice whicl is that of the scientist. In the 
aneient Greek world, the wise man adopted a con- 
templative attitude. Ile wanted to find out the 
intelligible structure of reality by detaching him- 
self to some extent from the material world, the 
world of sensations and appearances. This is the 
thoroughgoing Platonism of ancient philosophy, 
whieh is found even in Aristotelianism, since the 
ideal of the wise man, as expressed by Aristotle in 
his Nicomachean Ethics, is summed up in a sin- 
gle Greek word: theoria, i.e. “contemplation”. A 
man of this kind lives a life of leisure: he is wealthy 
and has a small cirele of friends. lle does not work 
and he is free, 
What fresh contribution dees the Arab- 
Islamic vision of the wise man make to this » 
"= 
THE unesco (COURIER W FEBRUARY 1997

## [Page 8](105101engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 105084: The Arab forebears of the European Renaissance

© 
Da
ni
el
 
Mo
rd
zi
ns
ki
, 
Pa
ri
s 
interview 
_— 
  
A. 
Alain de Libera 
 
» model? I would say that in a sense it rehabili- 
tates the work of the intellectual. Intellectuals 
no longer contemplate eternal intelligible strue- 
tures, hut know things as they are, going into 
the detail, reality and substanee of a changing 
world that has its own reality and consistency 
and is subject to a number of laws. Not a sepa- 
rate and eternal world, hut this world, in all its 
coliesion, beauty, organization and structure. So 
where is the dividing line between work and con- 
templation? It does not exist, because itis impos- 
sible to De involved in the science of optics or 
medicine, or to investigate certain meteorologi- 
cal phenomena, without observing, seeking, inves- 
tigating, looking, workiug and organizing. This is 
partiendarly true of optics, which was the great 
triumph of Araby science and its finest export to 
the Latin world. 
B Was this change of perspective also a change in 
the way people related to work? 
A. de L.: Yes. Finding out about things is work. 
But itis not a constricting experience. Far from 
it, it has a liberating effect. It does not belong to 
what were known as the mechanteal arts, those 
“adulterous” arts which ended np enslaving 
humans to matter instead of liberating them, 
The whole relationship between seientific work 
Avicenna contributed an idea of extraordinary novelty— 
the reconciliation in one and the same person of the 
scientist and the prophet. Knowing in order to gain 
foresight. Natural, not supernatural, prophecy. 
THE UNESCO Courier A FEBRUARY 1997 
and the contemplative attitudeis thus radically 
altered. And it was in the universities that this 
new type of intellectual most thrived. 
I would say that the emergence of the indi- 
vidual began when the relationship between wis- 
dom and knowledge, and between contempla- 
tion and work, was completely redefined. 
Universities were able to expand because they 
were societies of individuals effectively linked by 
a whole series of reciprocal services and social 
obligations. The seientific ideal, the ideal of 
shared knowledge, of a community of lives based 
on the communication of knowledge and on the 
joint discovery of the reality of things—all these 
went far to shape the individual. In this context, 
individuals are ueither aristocrats living off their 
resources and savouring from time to time the 
joys of intellectual contemplation, nor wretches 
enslaved hy the demands of their jobs, but mem- 
bers of a society of human beings who have gath- 
ered to share a moral code, a task and an ideal. 
Obviously this ideal does not at first concern 
the whole of society. But it is already a model. 
The modern notion of the individual does not 
really come into its own nntil there is an overall 
social dimension, until there is a general society 
of individuals, a civil society which parts company 
with the medieval world of hierarchies, obliga- 
tions and Iighly codified social roles. 
Universities helped to bring about the tran- 
sition from one world to the other. They were 
laboratories in which the notion of the European 
individual was invented. The latter is always 
defined as someone who strikes a balance 
between culture, freedom and enterprise, some- 
one who has the capacity to show initiative and 
innovate. As it happens, and contrary to a widely 
lield view, this new type of person came into 
being at the heart of the medieval university 
world, prompted by the notion—which is not 
Greek but Arabie—that work liberates. 
B Can you be more specific about this non-Greek 
notion? 
A.deL.: Itis the idea, developed notably hy Al- 
Farabi and Avicenna, which holds that the aet of 
knowing, the work of the scientist, generates 
wisdom. After Avicenna, the Latins eventually 
adopted this theory, according to which the 
plilosopher and the prophet come together in a 
single temperament. It is the idea of natural 
prophecy. For the Latins it becomes synonymous 
with knowing in order to gain foresight. Tt is not 
prophetic revelation; itis the ability to say what 
must happen on the basis of one’s knowledge of 
the reality of things. In other words, it is nat- 
nral, not supernatural, prophecy. 
This is an extraordinary novelty: the recon- 
eiliation in one and the same person of the sci- 
entist and the natural prophet. It takes us to 
the origins of the new conception of European 
science, science whieh is neither purely con- 
templative nor purely technical, but presup- 
poses a reconeiliation of the two, 
BR Could you briefly outline for us the successive 
stages of your philosophy as expounded in your three 
major works, Penser au Moyen-Age, la Philosophie 
Médiévale and Averroés et l'averroisme? 
A. de L.: In Averroés et 'averroisme, | wanted to 
write a little hook that would show more sympa- 
thy for its subject than Renan did when he wrote 
about Averroés in the last century. My idea was to 
give an account of the multiplicity of Averroés’s 
legacies and filiations. I devoted alot of space to 
Jewish Averroism, because I wanted to show that 
while Averroés’s influence on posterity was wide-

## [Page 9](105101engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 105084: The Arab forebears of the European Renaissance

The idea that philosophy originated in Greece and made its way directly to the minds of 19th- 
century German thinkers does not hold water, I have tried to rehabilitate the Arab and Jewish 
contribution to that history—the forgotten legacy. 
  
1. Penser au Moyen Age, Seuil, 
Paris, 1991. 
2. La philosophie médiévale, 
new edition, PUF, Paris, 1995; 
Averroés et Uaverroisme, 
(co-author), PUF, Paris, 1991. 
ranging, it was particularly strong on Jewish think- 
ing. It could be said that a good deal of medieval 
Jewish philosophy, and certainly its most original 
stde, camein Averroés’s wake, Penser au Moyen 
Age was written in a different, freer and more 
personal way. Sometimes it is more aggressive, 
and sometimes more ironical, 
HM What is the book's thesis? 
A. de L.: After making a diagnosis of the 
deplorable state of political debate in Franee 
as regards Islam and the Aral world, based on 
observation of the devastating effect on people’s 
minds of Jean-Marie Le Pen’s ideology in partic- 
ular and of xenophobie ideology in general, and 
on a realization that the Arab world was being 
mixed up with the Muslim world, and both of 
them associated with a hotchpoteh of fanati- 
cism, intolerance and ignorance, I said to myself 
that the prime task of the historian was perhaps 
to recall what the “forgotten legacy” had been. 
That is the subjeet of one chapter of the 
book, and although there are other chapters I 
think it represents the eore of the hook. My aim 
was to draw attention to European culture’s pro- 
found and usually overlooked debt to the Arab- 
Islamic legaey, or Andalusian model, as it has 
also been called. As a result my book, which 
aimed to give the Middle Ages a new place in the 
history of European eulture and in the making of 
the European identity, focused on a erucial 
moment in history—the Arah-Islamic moment. 
La Philosophie Médiévale is an academic 
account of what Penser au Moyen Age sets forth 
in a polemical form. It is based entirely on the 
notion that philosophy did not die out with the 
Greeks. The history of philosophy between late 
Antiquity and the end of the Middle Ages needs 
to be seen in terms of a shift in the eentres of 
study, a kind of migration. Philosophy was a 
migratory bird whieh left the East—Baghdad— 
in the ninth century A.D. and, after making its 
way along the Mediterranean, moved up through 
Andalusia into northern Europe, where it finally 
reached the land of its choice. But it never died 
out in any of the places it traversed during its cen- 
turies-long journey. 
Basically I wanted to show that the history of 
philosophy based on the Graeco-German myth, 
which holds that philosophy originated in Greece 
and made its way direetly to the minds of nine- 
teenth-century German thinkers—simply does 
not hold water. Embarking on a perfectly nor- 
mal process of academic research, I set out to 
rehabilitate the Aral and Jewish contribution to 
that history, in other words the forgotten legacy. 
BM How does your most recent book, Saint-Thomas 
d’Aquin contre Averroés, fit into this scheme of 
things? ) 
A. de L.: It throws light on a particular moment 
in the proeess whereby Averroés was accepted by 
the Latin West, the moment when two models 
of psychology openly confronted each other— 
Averroés’s model, which Tattempted to describe 
above (and whichis based on a rejection of both 
materialism and the Cartesian cogito), and 
Thomas Aquinas’s theory, which was eloser to 
Aristotle. Aquinas defended Aristotle against 
Averroés, whom he accused of having heen a cor- 
rupter as well as a commentator, and turned back 
to Aristotle as someone who exalted the person 
and personal thought, the ego and the I, against 
what Aquinas regarded as Averroés’s scandalous 
elaim that there is such a thing as transperson- 
ality of thought. 
What I wanted to do was to give an account 
of probably the best and most powerful eritique 
of Averroés produced during the Middle Ages. 
And, because I so much enjoy working on Aver- 
roés, I also wanted to describe what form anti- 
Averroism could take. 
BM What are your plans for the future? 
A. de L.: I have several projects. The main one 
that concerns us here is a translation of Aver- 
roés’s commentary on Aristotle’s De Anima. As 
you know, the commentary has survived only in 
Latin. The original Arabie version has been lost, 
and the ITebrew translation is based on the Latin. 
The Latins pass on to us something that was 
passed on to them and which no longer exists 
anywhere else: there eould be no better illus- 
tration of the silences of history. When trans- 
lating the text, I shall do my best to make sure 
that it does not come across as a kind of anti- 
(uated curiosity, but as a high point in the his- 
tory of psychology. I'shall try to make a modern 
interpretation of it, using the instrnments appro- 
priate to the kind of debate and discussion that 
currently foeuses on the relationship between 
body and soul. || 
0 
THE UNESCO Courier B FEBRUARY 1997

## [Page 10](105101engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

THs UNESCO TH 
OURIER 
50th YEAR 
Published monthly in 29 languages and in Braille by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization. 
31, rue Frangois Bonvin, 75732 Pans CEDEX 15, France. 
Fax: {33}(0}1 45.68.57.45 
e-mail: unesco.courier@unesco.org \ 
Internet: http://www. unesco.org ¢ 
Director: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin 
French edition: Alain Lévéque 
Spanish edition: Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Features: Jasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey (Tel. {33} (0) 1.45.68.46.90) 
Documentation: (Tel. (33) (0) 1.45.68. 46.85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel. (33) (0) 1.45.68.46.87) 
Film duplication: Daniel Meister 
Secretariat; Annie Brachet 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1.45.68.47.15), 
Administrative Assistant: Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and 
Korean: (Tel. (33) (0) 1.45.68.47.14) 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Irina Utkina (Moscow) 
German: Dominique Anderes (Berne) 
Arabic: Fawzi Abde! Zaher (Cairo} 
Italian: Gianluca Formichi (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian; Akbar Zargar (Teheran) 
Dutch: Bart Christiaens (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Alzira Alves de Abreu (Rio de Janeiro) 
Urdu: Mirza Muhammad Mushir (Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay: Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur} 
Swahili: Leonard J. Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene: Aleksandra Kornhauser {Ljubljana} u 
Chinese: Feng Mingxian (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala: Neville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish: Katri Himma (Helsinki) 
Basque: Juxto Egafa (Donostia) : 
Thai: Duangtip Surintatip (Bangkok} 
Vietnamese: Do Phuong (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Nazer Mohammad Angar (Kabul) 
Hausa: Aliyu Muhammad Bunza (Sokoto) 
Ukrainian: Volodymyr Vasiliuk (Kiev) 
Galician: Xabier Senin Fernandez (Santiago de Compostela) h 
SALES AND PROMOTION. 
Fax: (33) (0}1.45.68.57.45 
Subscriptions: Marie-Thérése Hardy 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1.45.68.45.65), Jacqueline Louise-Julie, i 
Manichan Ngonekeo, Mohamed Salah El Din 
(Tel, (33) (0) 1.45.68.49,19} 
Customer service: Michel Ravassard, 
(Tel. {33} (0) 1.45.68.45.91} 
Accounts: (Tel. (33) (0) 1.45.68.45.65) r 
Shipping: Daniel Meister (Tel. (33) (0) 1.45.68.47.50) 
  
SUBSCRIPTIONS. 
Tel.: (33) (0) 1.45.68.45.65 
1 year: 211 French francs. 2 years: 396 FF. 
Students: 1 year: 132 French francs 
Binder for one year's issues: 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
1 year: 132 French francs. 2 years: 211 FF, he 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco or by Visa, Eurocard or Mastercard 
Indwidual articles and photographs not copynghted may be reprinted 
providing the credit ine reads “Reprinted from the Unesco Courier”, plus 
date of issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed 
articles reprinted must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos will 
be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. 
Signed articles express the opimons of the authors and do not nec- 
essarily represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of 
the Unesco Couner. Photo captions and headlines are written by the 
Unesco Courier staff. The boundaries on maps published in the maga 
ine do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by Unesce oi the 
United Nations. The UNEsco Couner is produced in microform {micro- 
film and/or microfiche) by: {1) Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 
Paris; {2) University Microfilms {Xerox}, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100 
U.S.A; (3) N.C.R. Microcard Edition, Indian Head Inc., 111 West 40th 
Street, New York, U.S.A.; {4) Bell and Howell Co., Old Mansfeld Road, 
Wooster, Ohio 44691. U.S.A. 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) 
DEPOT LEGAL: C1 - FEVRIER 1997 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - DIFFUSE PAR LES 
N.M.P.P. 
Photocomposition, photogravure: 
Le Courrier de I'Ungsco. 
Impression; MAURY IMPRIMEUR, 
Z.1. Route d’Etampes, 45331 Malesherbes 
ISSN 0041-5278 N° 2-1997-0P1-97-556 A 
—
 
This issue comprises 52 pages and a 4-page insert 
between pages 2-3 and 50-51. @© 
St
oc
ks
ho
ot
er
/H
oa
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ri
s 
THE unesco (COURIER W FEBRUARY 1997 

## [Page 11](105101engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

Radio's bright future 
by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 
Radio, which recently celebrated its centenary, is widely undervalued. Peo- 
ple tend to forget how far it helped to shape ways of thinking in the twen- 
tieth century and to minimize the role it is earmarked to play in the 
twenty-first. 
The radio age ushered in a perception of the world in global terms, 
something that now seems self-evident but which drastically changed 
parish-pump mentalities and linked the destinies of villages and city dis- 
tricts alike to the unfolding events of our turbulent century. It was over the 
airwaves that news of revolutions, coups d'état and wars came to the illit- 
erate populations of the Nile and Ganges deltas, and that Indian, African 
and Caribbean music was widely heard in Paris and London for the first 
time. Ubiquitous, quick to purvey news based on a diversity of sources, 
radio brought a new area of experience to all countries and every social class. 
It would be hard to over-emphasize the important part the new medium 
played in the spread of democratic pluralism. 
Allwell and good, one might say. Let's bury radio under a mass of vale- 
dictory flowers and leave it at that. Radio blazed the trail for television and 
tomorrow's information superhighways. It has a glorious past but no future. 
This is not true. Just as the globalization of financial and technologi- 
cal flows will not dissolve national identities and local cultures, so tele- 
vision will not replace books or kill radio. It is a fact that old habits are going 
by the board, and familiar landmarks are disappearing. Various kinds of ret- 
rogression are in the air. But the further our antennae extend and the fur- 
ther afield we look, the greater our need for roots. 
In this issue, Hervé Bourges notes that radio will continue to be indis- 
pensable “to cover news in each world region, in each country, in real time” 
and to enable young people to keep their finger on the “musical pulse” of 
their choice. In short, it will go on providing people with the freedom to make 
their own considered personal choices from an increasingly wide range of 
possibilities. 
Paradoxically, one advantage of radio is that it is not accompanied by 
the image. The chief quality of the TVimage—that it seems so realistic— 
is actually its main flaw because it inhibits our imagination and our capac- 
ity to stand back and think. We shall always need sound without image as 
part of our right to interpret for ourselves, as we tune in to the morning news, 
the meaning of world events. ® 
: 
THE UNESCO Gourern FEBRUARY 10907 8 -

## [Page 12](105101engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

® 
L'
ll
lu
st
ra
ti
on
/S
yg
ma
. 
Pa
ri
s 


### 105085: On the crest of the waves

ON THE CREST OF 
THE WAVES 
  
® 
G.
 
Ba
ss
ig
na
c,
/G
am
ma
, 
Pa
ns
 
A. antenna fixed to a mast, 
near Antibes in southern 
France (1901). 
THE Unesco (COURIER m FEBRUARY 1997   
BY HERVE BOURGES 
gh 
- 
 
ith hindsight, the coming of 
wircless scems to have been 
inevitable, like that of most 
great modern inventions. It 
was announced almost simultaneously in two 
places—in Russia by Aleksandr Popov, and 
"in Italy by Guglielmo Marconi. 
Initially, as its name indicates, wireless was 
a system of long-distance communication with- 
out wires. Transmitted in real time, the radio 
signal defies distance, geographical barriers and 
geopolitical frontiers. Ubiquitous and instan- 
taneous, radio was the first technological man- 
ifestation of a virtual reality whose mysteries are 
still being explored today. It took a generation 
before its cultural significance was fully per- 
ceived. At first transmitting the language of 
telegraphy, it was soon being used in the mer- 
chant navy, in aviation and above all in the 
armed forces, where it had many applications. 
Broadcasting only became an important 
  
medium of mass communication in the indus- 
trialized countries in the late 1920s; the trend 
was reinforced in the following decade. The 
expansion of radio was steamrollered by two 
very powerful forces that are still at work. 
One was industrial development; the other 
was political and commercial propaganda. 
From crystal set 
to satellite 
The development of radio as a medium of 
mass communication was shaped to a large 
extent by the arrival on the market of succes- 
sive generations of receivers. 
The valve receiver, which replaced the pio- 
neering crystal set, was a heavy piece of walnut 
or rosewood drawing-room furniture. What 
did it matter if amplitude modulation (AM) 
coverage (on medium wave, long wave and short 
wave) was still somewhat hit and miss? Radio 
was entering the home at the speed of sound.

## [Page 13](105101engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 105085: On the crest of the waves

In the United States, big companies like 
RCA broadcast musicals featuring the stars 
of Broadway. While the cinema was still silent 
radio hummed to the rhythms of jazz and 
ragtime. In Europe, where post and telecom- 
munications ministries monopolized the air- 
waves, programmes tended to be more for- 
mal—concerts from the Royal Albert Hall, 
classics from the Comédice-Francaise, and deco- 
rous tea dances. 
But on both sides of the Atlantic a new 
social ritual came in as people gathered to lis- 
ten to the wireless. In the 1950s the TV set 
would become the focal point of a similar 
kind of convivial relationship. 
Reaching 
a world audience 
The transistor radio came on the scene in the 
carly 1960s, when the TV set was gradually tak- 
ing the place of the radio in the home. Along 
with the record player, it soon became a cult 
object of the consumer society. Cheap enough 
to be a mass-produced instrument of personal 
entertainment, it was a symbol of teenage eman- 
cipation in the rich countries. From the North 
Sea pirate stations to the studio that appears 
in the film American Graffiti,awhole genera- 
tion celebrated its values, its counter-culture 
and its music (rock) on the air. 
The cheapness of transistor sets also made 
radio the mass medium best suited to the poor 
countries, above all in regions where distances 
and infrastructural weakness meant that com- 
munication had to take place over the airwaves. 
At the same time, radio became mobile. 
This was the age of the car radio. Soon, fre- 
quency modulation (FM) was encouraging 
programme proliferation, neighbourhood 
radio stations and audience segmentation. The 
extent of the latter, especially in the United 
States, seems to have gone so far thatit is hard 
to know what people really do listen to. 
Will the time come when radio no longer 
federates distant audiences and different socio- 
cultural backgrounds? Will digital broadcast- 
ing turn it into an elite medium, for exam- 
ple? Some European manufacturers seem to 
be opting for systems such as digital audio 
broadcasting (DAB), which offer high defin- 
ition sound and multimedia services, but 
require far more expensive receivers. Perhaps 
consumers will make different choices. 
Broadcasting policies have followed the 
main trends of twentieth-century history so 
Satelite broadcasting 
transmits news all over the 
world. In left foreground, two 
dish antennae in Bahrain. 
  
closely that they are almost mirrors of our 
time. The turning point came during the 
period of reconstruction after the Second 
World War, when governments realized that 
audiovisual communication was a key instru- 
ment in public life, a sensitive area that ought 
to be controlled in the public interest. 
From monopolies 
to pluralism 
After first national, then international, allo- 
cation of frequencies came the development 
of state radio systems. Once the age of total- 
itarian illusions was over propaganda radio 
stations became champions of sovereignty and 
tn some cases supporters of national libera- 
tion movements. 
Public audiovisual networks put out pro- 
grammes containing a mix of light entertain- 
ment, news and educational broadcasting— 
the main strands in the fabric of contemporary 
THE UNESCO Courter BM FEBRUARY 1997 
© 
Gu
y 
Ma
ns
fi
el
d 
/P
an
os
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
L
o
n
d
o
n
 
>

## [Page 14](105101engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

® 
P. 
So
ll
ow
ay
/F
or
ma
t,
 
Lo
nd
on
 
> 
© 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s 
    
  
culture. They were organized in different ways 
in different countries: kept under relatively 
close supervision by the executive in countries 
such as France, Spain and Portugal; shared 
between political parties (Italy); air time 
divided between voluntary service and reli- 
gious groups (The Netherlands); separate ser- 
vices for different language communities 
(Switzerland and Belgium). 
This kind of regulatory set-up came to 
4 
ad + THE UNESCO Courier m FEBRUARY 1997 
fiw 
{IT 
Women disc jockeys at a 
pirate FM radio station in 
Leeds (United Kingdom, 1993}. 
A French family listens in 
(1926}. 
       
prevail on almost all the continents, except 
North America. Over two centuries ago the 
United States wrote into its constitution an 
amendment which prevents congress from leg- 
islating to establish a religion or abridge free- 
dom of speech or the press. To appreciate the 
astonishingly progressive nature of sucha pro- 
vision, it is hardly necessary to recall that royal 
or imperial censorship existed in most Euro- 
pean states at that time and that censors vio- 


### 105085: On the crest of the waves

lated the sccrecy of private correspondence as 
well as keeping tabs on printed matter. 
The fourth 
estate 
Audiovisual regulatory frameworks in Europe 
are not totally consonant with an American- 
style liberal approach. Their foundations were 
laid pragmatically. The Board of Governors 
of the BBC, the body responsible for guar- 
anteeing the independence of public broad- 
casting in the United Kingdom, may have 
served as a model, butit was the development 
of FM radio, and later of commercial television 
in Italy that really set things moving. Politi- 
cal authorities soon came to realize that 
monopolies were rapidly becoming obsoles- 
cent and that anarchy threatened. Most coun- 

## [Page 15](105101engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

  
tries set up systems designed to separate the 
audiovisual media from the state. 
The criteria varied from country to coun- 
try. The United Kingdom put licences up for 
auction; the French went in for pluralism; the 
countries of Africa and Asia created institu- 
tions designed to guarantee the implementa- 
tion of a multi-party system and protect 
national cultural identities. Democratic change 
was thus transposed into the field of the 
audiovisual industry. 
Digital radio 
People often talk of the golden age of radio, as 
if this hundred-ycar-old medium were out of 
date. The fact is, however, that in the South as 
well as in the North radio, like the written 
word, has remained an incomparably vital 
medium, which others can complement with- 
out ever being able to replace. 
It is true that satellites are bringing to tele- 
vision some of the qualities of radio such as 
instantaneous transmission and planetary cov- 
erage. But no TV news channel, however pow- 
erful it may be, will be able to cover news in cach 
A Bolivian youth listens 
to a radio bought in town with 
his earnings. 
Ry
 - 
| y 
pe 
=» 
A ” 
r
u
.
 
fo
ri
 
{ 
i
d
 
world region, in each country, in real time, as 


### 105085: On the crest of the waves

radio does. Satellite music channels can never 
keep their finger on the pulse of rapidly chang- 
ing tastes. Young people find the music they 
want on the FM band of radio. It will be a long 
time before television becomes interactive and 
hands over the microphone to the public except 
in specially staged circumstances. 
But radio is also adapting to the age of 
satellites and digital communication. On the 
Internet, some information services are already 
offering a combination of written and audio 
material. Radio France Internationale, for 
example, can now be picked up all over the 
world on a multimedia personal computer. 
Soon, individual receivers with low-cost dish 
antennae will make it possible to receive in 
digital form, anywhere in the world, the main 
international radio networks relayed by geo- 
stationary satellites; the same signal will be 
able to transmit complementary data to screens 
with liquid crystals. 
And so, in the age of multimedia and on- 
line communication, there is still plenty of 
room for radio. [| 
15 
THE UNESCO Gounierm FEBRUARY 1697 Nn 
© 
Rh
od
ri
 
Jo
ne
s/
Pa
no
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on

## [Page 16](105101engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 105086: The First half century, 1895-1945: milestones in radio

THE FIRST HALF CENTURY 
Milestones in radio 
BY BERNARD BLIN 
I ., 
cL 1 1h38e8 _ Ll 
p> Aleksandr S. Popov (Russia) 
invents the lightning-recording 
antenna. On 7 May he presents 
the first receiver of 
electromagnetic waves to the St. 
Petersburg Physical and 
Chemical Society. 
» Near Bologna (Italy) 
Guglielmo Marconi carries out 
the first experimental 
transmission of wireless signals 
over a distance of 400, then 
2,000 metres. 
aye 
» 2 June: In England, Marconi 
files a patent for a system of 
wireless communication, and 
later transmits and receives 
Morse code signals over a 3 km 
distance. 
Jef Lla8er 0 0 
» Eugéne Ducretet (France) 
experiments with wireless 
telegraphy. 
> Marconi founds the Wireless 
Telegraph and Signal Company, 
Ltd., in London. 
» Karl Ferdinand Braun 
(Germany) invents a device which 
completes “the tuned circuit”, 
matching the wavelength of 
transmitter and receiver, a 
procedure discovered by Sir 
Oliver Lodge (U.K.). 
LLL 2 1808 § LOH 
» 5 November: Ducretet 
describes to the French Academy 
of Sciences transmissions 
between the Eiffel Tower and the 
Pantheon in Paris (4 km). 
TUNER LL RE 
> A 42-km link is established in 
France between two cruisers 
equipped with Ducretet-Popov 
devices. 
» 28 March: Marconi makes a 
wireless transmission across the 
English Channel from Dover to 
Wimereux., 
THE uNesco (COURIER FEBRUARY 1997 
» Popov makes transmissions 
covering 50 km. from the shore 
to Russian ships. 
yar lig900 Lo 
» Marconi obtains a patent for a 
process enabling an operator to 
select a wavelength. (The first 
receivers picked up all 
frequencies at the same time.) 
February: The first commercial 
wireless station is set up, on the 
island of Borkum (Germany). 
» 12 December: Marconi makes 
the first transatlantic wireless 
transmission, using Morse code, 
between Poldhu in Cornwall 
(U.K.) and St. John's, 
Newfoundland. 
(fl LLL 1903 
» In Germany Siemens and 
Allgemeine Elektrizitats 
Gesellschaft create a joint 
affiliate, Telefunken. 
p> Valdemar Poulsen (Denmark) 
invents a means of producing 
continuous waves by “arc 
transmission”, later used to 
construct high-frequency 
alternators for sending 
continuous radio waves. 
» Gustave Ferrié sets up a long- 
distance telegraph station on the 
Eiffel Tower. 
» The London Times and the New 
York Times receive information 
about the Russo-Japanese war via 
radio. 
fla r008 
p First experiments with 
telegraphic radio links in Spain. 
» In France a commercial 
maritime radio network is set up 
under the control of the Ministry 
of Posts and Telegraphs. 
» 16 November: John Fleming 
(U.K.) invents the thermionic 
two-electrode valve, or diode, 
making possible sound 
transmission. 
P A radiotelegraphy station is 
  
1895-1945 
+ The Russian engineer Aleksandr 
Stepanovich Popov (1859-1906). 
  
In December 1901 
Guglielmo Marconi 
received the first 
trans-Atlantic radlo 
signal. Below, Marconi 
at St. John’s, 
Newfoundland, with 
the receiving 
apparatus he used. 
Marconi’s assistants 
attach the receiving 
antenna to a kite 
(bottom photo). 
Marconi is at far left. 
v 
© 
No
vo
st
i.
 
pa
ri
s 
  
  
© 
Di
te
/U
si
s,
 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
L'
ll
lu
st
ra
ti
on
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 17](105101engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 105086: The First half century, 1895-1945: milestones in radio

built on the Adriatic coast in the 
principality of Montenegro. 
» In Canada, the Wireless 
Telegraph Act stipulates that a 
licence must be obtained for 
wireless telegraphy. 
» First wireless communication 
in Spain, between El Ferrol del 
Caudillo and La Coruna. 
» Discovery of the properties of 
galena (lead sulphide) as a 
detector of radio-electric signals. 
1 1908 0 0 
» Reginald Fessenden (U.S.A) 
constructs a high-frequency 
alternator and succeeds in 
transmitting the human voice via 
radio. 
» 25 Cctober: Lee de Forest 
(U.S.A.) applies for a patent on 
the triode, a 3-electrode valve 
that makes possible the 
detection, transmission and 
amplification of radio signals. 
» 2 April: De Forest experiments 
with his triode in France by 
broadcasting from the Eiffel 
Tower. 
» 13 January: A broadcast from 
the Metropolitan Opera House in 
New York featuring Enrico Caruso 
is arranged by Lee de Forest and 
is heard 20 km away on a ship at 
sea. 
» 15 April: Radio amateurs pick 
up the SOS sent out by the 
Titanic. 
    
» Amateurs with galena-crystal 
radios listen in to the first regular 
weekly musical programmes 
broadcast from a wing of the 
Chateau de Laeken (Belgium). 
» A federation of radio clubs, the 
Wireless Society of London (later 
the Radio Society of Great 
Britain) is founded in London. 
» March to August: a weekly 
concert is broadcast from the 
Chateau de Laeken (Belgium). 
LL 3918 © 0 
p> First international broadcasts, 
from Germany, of daily news 
reports. 
» 25 October: The American 
Navy station in Arlington, Virginia 
(U.S.A) establishes a link with 
the Eiffel Tower in Paris. 
sat LLL 
» The Bolsheviks use radio to 
influence the Germans during 
negotiations for the Treaty of 
Brest-Litovsk. 
» 8 November: A decree on the 
press establishes censorship that 
will last for 72 years in Russia. 
» 17 October: The Radio 
Corporation of America (RCA) is 
founded, absorbing the American 
subsidiary of the Marconi 
Company and amalgamating 
General Electric, Western 
Electric, AT&T (American 
Telephone and Telegraph) and 
Westinghouse. 
» 16 November: In Germany 
Hans Bredow organizes political 
and economic news broadcasts 
for the press and industry. 
» Many American radio 
amateurs receive on their crystal 
sets regular broadcasts from 
Pittsburgh (U.S.A.) by Frank 
Conrad. On Wednesday and 
Saturday evenings the station 
plays records chosen by the 
listeners. This marks the 
appearance of broadcasting as 
opposed to wireless telephony, 
where a connection is made from 
one peint to another, between two 
correspondents. 
iL 020 
» Broadcasting on a regular daily 
basis was born in the United States. 
» The first demonstrations of 
radio broadcasting in Australia. 
» The appearance in France of 
battery-powered receivers with 
valves and headphones. 
» The Amsterdam stock market 
(Netherlands) broadcasts stock 
prices and financial news. 
» 23 February: The Marconi 
Company organizes a radio- 
telephone concert (featuring 
Dame Nellie Melba) that is 
broadcast from Chelmsford 
(U.K.) and heard in France, 
Norway, Italy, Persia and by ships 
at sea. The British Postmaster 
General protests against the 
“frivolous” use of a public service 
and suspends broadcasts in 
November. 
» Autumn: Soviet international 
broadcasts begin. 
» 2 November: The Westinghouse 
station KDKA in Pittsburgh 
announces the victory of Warren 
G. Harding over James Cox in the 
American presidential election. 
®t
 
Wu
st
ra
ti
on
/S
yg
ma
. 
Pa
ns
 
® 
Je
an
-L
ou
p 
Ch
ar
me
t.
 
Pa
ri
s 
 
 
A 
Arecital by the Italian 
tenor Enrico Caruso was 
broadcast from New York 
in 1910. 
«4 In1903 
radiotelegraphy 
equipment was installed 
on the Eiffel Tower in 
Paris. For many years the 
Tower's transmitter was 
one of the most powerful 
in the world. 
American farmers with a 
radio receiver on their 
way to a dance (1924). 
A 4 
dee 
 
THE UNESCO Courier H FEBRUARY 1997 
© 
Bo
ye
rV
ia
ll
et
. 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 18](105101engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 105086: The First half century, 1895-1945: milestones in radio

» The first radiotelegraph 
(Maracay) service begins in 
Venezuela. 
» 2 January: KDKA broadcasts 
the first religious programme, 
“Church of the Air”. 
» In France Gustave Ferrié 
makes the first radio broadcasts 
from the official “Paris PTT" 
transmitter on the Eiffel Tower. 
» 9 May: A play is broadcast for 
the first time on the air, direct 
from the Davis Theatre in the 
U.S.A. 
» 2 July: An RCA station 
broadcasts the world heavyweight 
championship fight between 
Georges Carpentier and Jack 
Dempsey from Hoboken, New 
Jersey (U.S.A). 
» August: Radiokomintern is 
launched in the U.S.S.R. 
» Regular public broadcasting 
(news and music) begins to 
spread in many countries, 
including Argentina, Denmark, 
Canada, the U.S.S.R. and the 
United Kingdom. 
» The Canadian government 
imposes a one-dollar tax on radio 
receivers. 
» Publication of Spain’s first 
magazine devoted to radio, Radio- 
Sport, coincides with the 
inauguration of the country’s first 
transmitters. 
» In France a wireless industry 
employers’ federation and an 
International Wireless 
Committee are formed to 
examine legal, economic and 
administrative issues connected 
with wireless. 
» Rules for the control of 
wireless telegraphy in time of war 
are adopted at The Hague 
(Netherlands). 
> 16 August: AT&T launches 
station WEAF in New York 
(U.S.A.), the first station funded 
by advertising. 
» 17 September: The first 
programmes are broadcast from 
Moscow to all Soviet radio 
stations. 
» October: The BBC (British 
Broadcasting Company) is formed. 
6 big companies own 60% of the 
capital, the rest being divided 
among 200 private companies. 
» Marconi demonstrates the 
range of short waves. 
» There are 700 licenced radio 
stations in the U.S.A. 
» The first Chinese radio station 
starts up in Shanghai. 
THE UNESCO Courier H FEBRUARY 1997 
» Radio broadcasting starts in 
Cuba. 
» The first regular broadcasts in 
Germany, Belgium, Finland, 
Norway, Switzerland, 
Czechoslovakia and Australia. 
» 8 February: In Italy radio is 
nationalized by royal decree and 
placed under the authority of the 
Ministries of Posts, of the Army, 
and the Navy. 
» Colombia sets up a Ministry of 
Posts and Telegraph and an 
international 
radiocommunication staticn. 
» 30 June: A French law extends 
the principle of state monopcly 
on telegraphic transmissions to 
the broadcasting and receiving of 
radioelectric signals. 
» A private Radio Club is founded 
in Madras (India). 
» Japan's minister of 
communications regulates radio 
broadcasting by decree and bans 
radio advertising. 
» The first experiments are 
carried out by the Ceylon (now Sri 
Lanka) Telegraph Service. 
First broadcasts in Prague 
(Czechoslovakia). 
» First broadcasts by the Finnish 
Radio Society from Helsinki. 
» The federal Mexican 
government authorizes the first 
commercial radio station. 
» 27 April: The Unione 
Radiofonica Italiana (URI, a 
jointly-owned company with a 
majority participation by the 
state) is set up in Italy. 
» October: Radio broadcasting 
begins in Austria with the 
founding of the RAVAG, a semi- 
public body that takes over from 
the Viennese Radio-Hekophon 
experimental station, 
inaugurated in 1923. 
» Regular broadcasting begins 
in Sweden. It is funded by licence 
fees, carries no advertising and 
has an educational mission. 
Radiojanst (Sverige Radio) is 
granted exclusive rights. 
» In France Paris-PTT broadcasts 
debates at the League of Nations. 
» 14 December: URI obtains 
exclusive rights to broadcast in 
Italy. 
> A long-wave station is founded 
in Mexico and a state-run 
educational station is opened. 
» The Philips Company launches 
the Hilversum (Netherlands) 
station. Programmes are managed 
by a listeners’ association. 
» Experimental broadcasts in 
Ceylon. 
» In the U.K. the BBC broadcasts 
its first programmes for schools 
and young people. 
» Radio Moscow transmits on a 
regular basis. Its programmes are 
produced by Radioperedacha, a 
joint body associating the unions 
and the People’s Commissariat for 
National Education. 
» KDKA broadcasts on short 
wave to South Africa. 
» Radio broadcasting starts in 
Hungary, Latvia, Poland, Romania 
and Mexico. 
» The Union internationale des 
radio-amateurs (International 
Union of Radio Amateurs) is 
formed in Paris. 
» 25 March: Independent 
companies funded by private 
capital open the first Japanese 
radio stations in Tokyo, Osaka and 
Nagoya. 
» 3 April: The International 
Broadcasting Union (UIR) is 
formed in Geneva under the 
auspices of the League of 
Nations. 
P Association Radio-Luxembourg 
is established with a 50-watt 
transmitter in the Grand Duchy. 
» 20 June: The first Peruvian 
radio station (OAX) is founded. 
» August: Polskie Radio is 
created in Warsaw (Poland) as a 
limited liability company (40% of 
the shares are state-owned). 
» The first regular radio service 
in a British colony opens in 
Ceylon. 
» The United Kingdom's most 
powerful transmitter is opened at 
Daventry. It covers 85% of the 
population and transmits on long 
Wireless being used in 
central Africa (1924). 
v 
wave the BBC's first regular 
broadcasts to North America. 
» Venezuela's first radio 
broadcasting service, AYRE, 
starts up. 
» Radio broadcasting starts in 
Estonia, Iceland, Lithuania and 
Yugoslavia. 
» A radio station is established 
in Beijing (China). 
The Indian Broadcasting 
Company (an affiliate of British 
Marconi) is authorized to open 
radio stations in India. 
» A radio broadcasting monopoly 
is set up in Japan with the 
establishment of NHK (Nippon 
Hoso Kyokai), a public utility 
incorporating the existing Tokyo, 
Osaka and Nagoya stations. 
» Following a resolution from 
the UIR and seeking to avoid or 
settle differences between radio 
broadcasting bodies, the League 
of Nations examines the dangers 
of international radio for world 
peace. 
» 3 to 12 May: In Britain the 
general strike hits the press, and 
the BBC becomes the only source 
of news and public information. 
» Inthe U.S.A. RCA sets up the 
NBC (National Broadcasting 
Company) network, based on two 
existing networks. 
» Radio Zagreb is opened in 
Yugoslavia. 
» 1 January: The British 
Broadcasting Company becomes 
the British Broadcasting 
Corporation, established by Royal 
Charter, and is granted the 
broadcasting monopoly by licence 
for an initial 10-year period. It 
becomes a public service funded 
by a licence fee and managed by 
an independent Board of 
Governors. 
  
© 
L'
ll
us
tr
at
io
n/
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 19](105101engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 105086: The First half century, 1895-1945: milestones in radio

© 
Di
te
/U
ss
s,
 
Pa
ri
s 
» 23 February: In the U.S.A. the 
Radio Act grants radio protection 
under the First Amendment to the 
Constitution (on free speech) and 
sets up the Federal Radio 
Commission (FRC). From now on 
a licence is required in order to 
broadcast. 
» The Austrian, Czech, German 
and Polish radio networks use 
telephone circuits to exchange 
symphony concerts. 
» The Japanese colonial 
authorities set up a radio station 
in Seoul (Korea). 
» The Indian Broadcasting 
Company Ltd. opens in Bombay 
and Calcutta. 
» Eindhoven {Netherlands) 
transmits the first radio 
broadcasts to the East and West 
Indies. 
» The BBC starts educational 
broadcasting. 
» 11 November: The BBC starts 
broadcasting on short wave from 
Chelmsford. 
» The Columbia Broadcasting 
System (CBS) is established in 
the U.S.A. 
1928 
» The Kuomintang sets up the 
central Chinese broadcasting 
station at Nankin. 
» The Zeesen station relays 
German national programmes to 
Germans overseas. 
» The first short-wave 
broadcasts in Kenya and in 
Tanganyika {now the United 
Republic of Tanzania). 
 «{ Reporters use a 
walkie-talkie radio during 
floods in Louisville 
(U.S.A.) in1927. 
» 11 February: The Lateran 
Agreement between the Holy See 
and Mussolini's Italy provides for 
the establishment of a radio 
station in Vatican City. Radio 
Vatican is organized by Marconi 
and inaugurated in 1931. 
» April: Representatives of 27 
countries attend an international 
conference in Prague 
(Czechoslovakia) and reach a 
long-term agreement on the 
allocation of radic-electric 
frequencies in Europe. 
» October: Radio Moscow 
International starts short-wave 
broadcasts in German, French 
and English, in compliance with 
its missions under the first 5-Year 
Plan. 
» Colombia’s first radio station, 
“Voz de Bogota”, starts to 
broadcast. 
» Danish national programmes 
are relayed on short wave. 
» 7 October: The first Spanish 
radio news programme, “La 
Palabra” goes on the air. 
» In France, the radio station at 
Agen warns of the sudden 
flooding of the Garonne before 
being swept away by the 
floodwaters. 
» Station 1 BC in Caracas 
(Venezuela) starts regular 
broadcasting. 
» In Sydney and Melbourne 
(Australia), Amalgamated 
Wireless launches “The Voice of 
Australia”, the first regular world   
British archaeologist Walter 
Emery broadcasts to 
America from the burial 
chamber of the great 
pyramid of Cheops (Egypt, 
1930). 
Radio Moscow 
headquarters {around 
1930). 
A studio at the Tokyo 
radio station {Japan), 
around 1930. 
v 
 
broadcasting service in the 
southern hemisphere. 
» A schools broadcasting 
service is launched in Ceylon. 
» From Ecuador, station HCIB 
(Heralding Christ Jesus’ 
Blessings) broadcasts religious 
programmes in 11 languages 
under the auspices of the World 
Radio Missionary Fellowship. 
» Japanese radio comes under 
state control and censorship 
becomes more stringent. 
» 29 April: A Madagascar station 
broadcasts music and 
information in French and 
Malagasy for two hours a day. 
» A short-wave transmitter 
makes occasional broadcasts in 
Thailand. 
» The International 
Telecommunication Union {ITU) 
succeeds the International 
Telegraph Union, founded in 1865. 
40 
THE UNESCO Courier a FEBRUARY 1997 
© 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s 
   
© 
Ro
ge
rv
io
ll
et
, 
pa
is
 
® 
Ro
ge
rV
io
ll
et
, 
Pa
rs

## [Page 20](105101engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 105086: The First half century, 1895-1945: milestones in radio

» Radio plays a leading role in 
the U.S. presidential election 
campaign (Hoover vs Roosevelt). 
193300 1 0 
» 13 March: A Ministry of 
Popular Education and 
Propaganda is established in 
Germany to control the press, 
cinema, theatre and radio 
broadcasting. The RRG 
(Reichsrundfunk Gesellschaft), 
set up in May 1925, becomes a 
state body. 
» The Ente Radio Rurale 
broadcasts “educational” 
programmes to Italian rural 
areas in support of a campaign to 
increase farm output, 
» May-June: The broadcasting 
countries (members of the UIR) 
attend a conference in Lucerne 
(Switzerland) to negotiate an 
agreement on the distribution of 
wavelengths. 
» 1 January: A law regulating 
radio broadcasting in India 
comes into force. 
» The South American Radio 
Broadcasting Union (SARBU) is 
formed. 
» 12 February: Austrian Radio 
(RAVAG) broadcasts official 
information and practical advice 
during riots in Vienna. 
» In Austria, the Dollfuss 
government organizes the 
jamming of Nazi propaganda 
broadcasts from Germany. 
» The first Mongolian radio 
station is set up at Ulan Bator, 
serving 1,700 receivers. 
» The Radio Club of Lisbon 
(Portugal) broadcasts to Brazil, 
North America and the 
Portuguese colcnies. 
» 19 June: In the United States, 
the Federal Communications Act 
sets up a Federal 
Communications Commission” 
(FCC) to regulate transmissicn 
and reception of all 
communications, internal and 
external, to grant licences and 
allocate frequencies. There is no 
censorship, but indecency, 
vulgarity, false or deceptive 
signals, etc. are forbidden. 
» Radio Vatican starts 
broadcasting religious services 
and liturgical and spiritual 
commentaries. 
flings 00 
» Meeting in Brussels 
(Belgium), jurists of the 
International Wireless Committee 
propose a “code of good conduct” 
ie unesco (COURIER B fE8RUARY 1907  
for international radio 
broadcasting. 
» China starts broadcasting to 
other countries. 
Radio broadcasting begins in the 
Gold Coast (now Ghana). 
Italian radio starts to broadcast 
in Arabic (anti-British 
propaganda} and jams 
broadcasts from Ethiopian radio. 
» 1 June: Japan starts 
broadcasting programmes to the 
west coast of the Americas, 
Hawaii and the Pacific, in order to 
defend its foreign policy after 
leaving the League of Nations. 
» 10 August: A radio- 
communications agreement 
between Argentina, Bolivia, 
Brazil, Chile, Paraguay and 
Uruguay sets up technical co- 
operation and bans broadcasts 
detrimental to good international 
relations. 
L296 C1 
» Number of radio receivers per 
1,000 population: 
Algeria: 7 
Australia: 131 
United States: 189 
France: 62 
Hungary: 40 
Italy: 15 
Kenya: 77 
New Zealand: 146 
Poland: 20 
Romania: 8 
Czechoslovakia: 63 
U.S.S.R. 22 
» Anew radio centre 
broadcasting on short wave is set 
up at Zeesen (Germany) on the 
occasion of the Berlin Clympic 
Games. 
» April: A Radio-Club station is 
set up in Congo Brazzaville. 
» 11 July: In Spain a Falangist 
group seizes the Union-Radio 
station in Valencia and 
announces that revolution is 
imminent. There is widespread 
of 
© 
Ha
ri
in
gu
e 
Vi
ol
e.
 
pa
ns
 
fighting for control of Spain's 
radio stations. 
» 23 September: The 
International Convention on the 
use of Broadcasting in the Cause 
of Peace is signed at Geneva 
{Switzerland). 
» Hong Kong starts short-wave 
broadcasting to China and 
Europe. 
» The BBC's first big scoop: a 
report on the fire at the Crystal 
Palace (London), with on-the-spot 
commentary and background 
noise. 
os 1927 
» Number of receivers per 
thousand population 
Germany: 122 
France: 76 
Netherlands: 118 
Canada: 122 
» 5 January: A radio transmitter 
is inaugurated at the Albert | 
college, Kinshasa (Zaire) on the 
initiative of the Jesuits. It later 
becomes “Radio-Leo”. 
» Radio supports—within Japan 
and externally—Japan's military 
campaign against China. Aban is 
imposed on listening to foreign 
radio programmes. 
» The United Kingdom has 10 
radio transmitters and over 8 
million receivers. 
» The United States adopts a 
@ 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s 
A 
, 5 
Peas 
«4 An outdoor loudspeaker built to 
broadcast Hitler's speeches (1933). 
A mobile transmitter in 
France (¢. 1935). 
v 
oo. 
   
“Radio Code": information is a 
social duty and should be in the 
public interest. Radio should 
provide entertainment, education 
and information that is not 
subject to censorship and serves 
objective truth. 
» October: Roosevelt gives a 
radio talk against the rise of 
fascism, terror and international 
lawlessness. 
» U.S. commercial radio 
advertising receipts total $70 
million. 
> A law sets up military 
censorship in Spain. 
» There are 650 transmitters and 
26 million receivers in the U.S.A. 
» 30 October: Orson Welles's 
programme based on H.G. 
Wells's War of the Worlds is 
broadcast on CBS and sows panic 
among thousands of listeners. 
EL jg30 |__| 
» Germany transmits external 
broadcasts in 26 languages. 
» September: The German 
government makes listening to 
foreign radio broadcasts a capital 
offence. 
» The French Ministry of Posts, 
Telegraphs and Telephones 
establishes Radio Dakar in 
Senegal.

## [Page 21](105101engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 105086: The First half century, 1895-1945: milestones in radio

© 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
Ro
ge
r-
Vi
of
te
, 
Pa
rs
 
© 
Di
te
/U
si
s,
 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
Vi
ol
le
t 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
Pa
ns
 
  
   
  
 
« Arms upraised, 
Orson Welles 
directs a rehearsal 
of a radio 
programme in 
1938. His 
broadcast on 30 
October of an 
adaptation of H.G. 
Wells's War of the 
Worids sowed 
panic among 
listeners who 
thought the 
country was being 
invaded by 
Martians. 
«4 Algerians listen 
totheradioina 
café (1939). 
  
A A BBC mobile 
recording unit 
during the Second 
World War. 
«4 Radio operators 
of the French 
Resistance {around 
1943). 
Boh CLL 
» German radio broadcasts a 
single national programme, 
» 24 April: The first Iranian radio 
station, supervised by the 
Ministry of Posts, Telegraphs and 
Telephones, is inaugurated. 
» 15 May: Belgian radio destroys 
its facilities in Brussels and 
moves to France, where it 
broadcasts from Lille and later 
from Montpellier. 
» 18 June: Broadcasting from 
London on the BBC, General de 
Gaulle calls on the French people 
to resist. 
» 27 July: In occupied Belgium, 
a decree makes listening to 
British radio broadcasts an 
offence punishable by forced 
labour. 
» 1 August: General de Gaulle 
launches an appeal to French 
Canadians from London. 
» 28 September: Radio-Belgique 
is established in London. 
> 24 October: Regular news 
broadcasts begin in Ewe, Fanti, 
Hausa, Ga, Tiv and French in the 
Gold Coast (now Ghana). 
» Radio Omdurman is created 
in Sudan to serve the Allied 
cause. 
» Radio Douala (Cameroon), 
broadcasts programmes in 
support of the Free French. 
» Negus Haile Selassie | sets up 
a radio station broadcasting 4 
hours a day in Amharic, Arabic 
and English, independent of 
colonial control. 
» Radio Nairobi (Kenya) 
broadcasts in Hindustani, Urdu 
and Gujarati. 
» The Geneva Studio 
(Switzerland) begins broadcasts 
in support of humanitarian action 
by the International Red Cross. 
P August: A commission led 
by Colonel W. Donovan is set up 
in the United States to 
combat Axis radio propaganda 
worldwide. 
» The Yugoslav radio network is 
destroyed. A transmitter is built 
at Skopje. A clandestine 
transmitter of the Central 
Committee of the Communist 
Party of Croatia is established at 
Zagreb. 
» Radio starts up in Northern 
Rhodesia (now Zambia). 
| : 1942 4 Jah] 
» 24 February: The Voice of 
America (VOA) starts short-wave 
broadcasts in English, French, 
ftalian and German. 
» 14 July: Following an appeal 
launched on the BBC, tens of 
thousands of French people 
gather around war memorials 
and then parade through the main 
streets of French towns. 
» The Office of War Information 
(OWI} is set up in the United 
States. 
» 18 June: “Radio-Brazzaville- 
Voix de la France Combattante” is 
inaugurated in the Congo. 
» Radio Kudu is set up at 
Hargeisa (Somalia) for the British 
army. 
> The BBC starts broadcasting 
English-language lessons and 
halts its Russian-language 
broadcasts at the request of the 
Soviet government. 
» 4 July: The American Forces 
Network (AFN) is set up. 
ELS 
» Chinese communist stations in 
the Shaanxi-Yanan region start 
broadcasting. 
» 1-5 June: Coded messages 
broadcast on the BBC announce 
the imminence of the Allied 
landings (which take place in 
Normandy, France, on 6 June} and 
alert resistance fighters for 
action. 
» 23 March: In France, all 
private radio stations are 
nationalized by decree and the 
state broadcasting monopoly is 
strengthened. 
P11 April: The Sarajevo 
(Yugoslavia) radio station starts 
broadcasting. 
» 19 May: The Berlin Rundfunk 
starts broadcasting. 
» 9 June: Radio broadcasting in 
the Soviet-occupied zone of 
Germany comes under the 
contro! of the Soviet military 
administration. 
» 15 August: The Emperor of 
Japan makes his first radio 
broadcast, announcing his 
country's capitulation. 
> 10 September: A 
memorandum on “Freedom of 
expression and freedom of the 
press” in Japan abolishes all 
restrictive laws promulgated 
under the previous regime, 
> 11 December: A memorandum 
reorganizes NHK. Government 
control is abolished and private 
radic is banned. A committee of 
representatives of the Japanese 
people is formed. | | 
THE UNESCO Courier FEBRUARY 1997

## [Page 22](105101engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 105089: The Second half century, 1945-1995: a continuing struggle for access to the airwaves

THE SECOND HALF CENTURY 
  
© Keystone, paris 
Duting the Hungarian 
uprising in 1956, crowds 
gathered to air their demands 
outside the Radio Budapest 
building, its facade pitted with 
gunfire (above). 
THE UNESCO Couniern FEBRUARY 1997 
adio has an image problem. It lacks 
the maturity of the newspaper 
industry and the modernity of tele- 
vision. Unlike the newspaper, radio 
has to be understood immediately and unlike 
. TV itlacks an appeal to young people attracted 
more to visual images in an increasingly multi- 
media world. And yetit continues to hold the 
largest audiences of all media and it has been 
party to the most dramatic political develop- 
ments during the past half century. 
National radio stations have had an enor- 
mous impact on the political lives of their cit- 
1zens. Was it not Moscow Radio which broad- 
cast Khruschev’s message to Kennedy in which 
he anounced the dismantling of Russian rocket 
bases in Cuba? Egyptian radio broadcast Pres- 
ident Nasser’s announcement of the national- 
ization of the Suez Canal, Hungarian radio 
reported the crushing of the Hungarian revo- 
lution, Czech radio reported the demise of 
the “Prague Spring”. 
Nothing, however, allows radio to give 
greater value than times of crisis or war. The 
Gulf War was dubbed the first war to be con- 
ducted in the media. It has always been 
assumed that the media in this context meant 
TV. According to research, however, the first 
source of knowledge that war had broken out 
in the Arab States was “word of mouth” for 
the majority of people in Egypt, the United 
Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia. Radio sur- 
passed TV in all three of these countries as a 
source of further information. 
But when a normally credible station such 
as the BBC is based in a country which gets 
involved in a crisis such as the Gulf War it too 
can be mistrusted. “If an uneducated person 
hears the news on the BBC, he’ll believe it even 
if it’s wrong... they can start rumours....” And

## [Page 23](105101engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

1945-1995 
  
   
      
        
P resident Nasser of 
Egypt used the radio to 
proclaim the 
nationalization of the 
Suez Canal in 1956. After 
the broadcast he was 
acclaimed by the crowds. 
A big crowd 
turned out for 
the opening of 
Malopolska Fun, 
Poland’s first 
free foreign 
radio station, in 
Cracow (1990). 
| r 
© 
J.
-M
. 
Tu
rp
in
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ri
s 
BY GARETH PRICE 
© 
Ke
ys
to
ne
. 
Pa
ri
s 
Cucr radio gave up-to-the- 
minute reports of events 
during the “Prague Spring” of 
1968. Above, a lorry carrying 
young patriots passes a 
detachment of Soviet tanks 
parked on the pavement. 


### 105089: The Second half century, 1945-1995: a continuing struggle for access to the airwaves

so we are back with accusations of propaganda, 
with the eternal philosophical debate concern- 
ing the existence of objectivity. Perhaps it is 
easier for the pragmatic journalist to aim for the 
slightly different goal of credibility. 
Jamming the airwaves 
Itis the fear of an audience believing a radio sta- 
tion which leads to jamming of the airwaves, a 
phenomenon that came to its height during the 
cold war of a communist era that only eased off 
in 1985 with the accession to power of Presi- 
dent Gorbachev. Jamming by the Soviet Union 
in the early 1980s was calculated to cost $800 
million per year because the jammer has to trans- 
mit a blocking noise as strong as the incoming 
signal—and even then some signal docs get 
through. It was always difficult to cut off the lis- 
tener determined to receive the broadcasts. 
The world of transfrontier radio since the fall » 
's Ls 
THE UNESCO Gourierm FEBRUARY 1997 
I.

## [Page 24](105101engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 105089: The Second half century, 1945-1995: a continuing struggle for access to the airwaves

© 
J. 
La
ng
ev
in
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ns
 
> 
 
of communism is more complex. After the acci- 
dent at the Chernobyl nuclear power station in 
the Soviet Union in August 1986, Radio Liberty 
carried out an audience research investigation in 
order to establish how listeners had discovered 
the facts about the crisis. More respondents 
quoted Western radio stations as their prime 
source than those watching Russian TV. A 
majority of the sample who had first heard of it 
on TV switched to Western radio for added 
knowledge. In some post-communist coun- 
tries, the broadcasters now have less resources 
with which to compete with the Western media 
HE unisco (COURIER m FEBRUARY 1097   
The antenna of a radio 
station in support of Kanak 
independence in New 
Caledonia (1985). 
  
in reporting a major crisis. Even during the 
Bosnian conflict, the Bulgarian media were heav- 
ily reliant on reports from the West because 
they could not afford to send correspondents 
to the war arena next door to them. 
The transistor revolution 
Transfrontier broadcasting is a costly business 
but it has many participants. In Francophone 
Africa, for example, Radio France Internationale 
(RFI) and the commercial Afrique Number 
One broadcasting from Gabon may dominate

## [Page 25](105101engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

the airwaves but they face stiff competition 
from the Soviet Union, China, South Africa, 


### 105089: The Second half century, 1945-1995: a continuing struggle for access to the airwaves

Germany, the U.S.A. and the U.K. In recent 
years, rebroadcasting of international radio ser- 
vices on national networks as well as on cable 
systems has increased considerably. 
In this age of satellites it is now difficult to 
imagine the problems of radio transmission in 
carlier days, particularly the problem of world- 
wide reception. Short-wave transmissions faced 
obstacles galore—limited range, the sun, ionos- 
pheric storms, the seasons. Today's obstacle is 
congestion of the airwaves. 
From the listener’s point of view, how- 
ever, the invention of the transistor in the 
1950s was particularly important in revolu- 
tionizing radio. Until then the majority of 
sets were in Europe and North America. The 
transistor opened up listening in sub-Saharan 
Africa, in China and in India from an esti- 
mated 2.5 million sets to 90 million sets in the 
space of twenty years after 1956. 
In the last twenty years alone radio set 
ownership has doubled again around the 
world and even today the potential for growth 
is incredible. There arc over twice as many radio 
sets tn existence as there are TV monitors. 
The rise of local 
broadcasting 
The interesting fact about even transfrontier 
broadcasting is that in any one country lis- 
tening to broadcasts from international oper- 
ators always peaks when the national or ver- 
nacular languages are used. And this is why 
local broadcasting has now come into its own. 
One has only to consider the number of 
languages used in some countries to realize that 
TV cannot compete with radio in servicing 
multi-ethnic and mulu-linguistic audiences. In 
some emerging democracies, strenuous efforts 
are made to embrace the linguistic maze. In 
Namibia, for example, the constitutional prob- 
lem of language was solved by adopting only 
one language—English. But NBC, the national 
broadcaster, caters for the real linguistic needs 
of Namibian listeners with seven services in all 
including the major indigenous languages and 
Afrikaans. In neighbouring South Africa, eleven 
languages are given equal status in the consti- 
tution. Radio copes with all eleven, while TV 
struggles to embrace but a few. 
It 1s difficult for TV to reflect national cul- 
A Zambian villager listens to 
a radio hooked up to added 
battery power. 
tural mosaics. Radio is better able to embrace 
the national cultures, in music as well as in the 
spoken word. The demand for music, whether 
classical, folk or pop, gives an option to peo- 
ple’s lives which can only be satisfied on radio. 
A sense of place 
All the same, there are limitations to the num- 
ber of languages which radio can cope with. It 
is unrealistic to even consider the possibility 
of all of Papua New Guinea’s tens of dozens of 
languages getting airtime in the short run. There 
arc also worries that tribal differences in Africa 
or ethnic divisions in the former Yugoslavia 
have led to the development of radio of the 
worst possible kind. It is for governments to 
promote the media in a regulated way within 
the context of a democratic society. 
Thereare legitimate needs within each state 
 
HE UNEscO COURIER B FEBRUARY 1997 
» 
@ 
Co
nn
ie
 
T
r
e
p
p
e
/
F
o
r
m
a
t
,
 
L
o
n
d
e
n

## [Page 26](105101engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

2 
© 
UN
Ee
sc
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 


### 105089: The Second half century, 1945-1995: a continuing struggle for access to the airwaves

which do not necessarily conform to the state 
boundaries. This is where national radio’s role 
in several countries has been challenged by the 
strengthening of local commercial radio pro- 
viding services in local languages and a greater 
depth of national and local identity. This is 
an important concept best dubbed “a sense of 
place” and it is the very antithesis of trans- 
frontier broadcasting. In 1996, the retiring 
chairman of the European Broadcasting 
Union’s Programme committee, Geraint Stan- 
ley Jones, delivered an important lecture which 
embraced the essence of the argument: 
“Broadcasters have a special role in main- 
taining a culture and cherishing identity,” he 
said, “for itis not just, indeed it may not even 
be principally about information. It is as much 
about culture—music, art, education, language 
and so forth. At its best it reflects back to a 
community the richness which that commu- 
nity contains. There is no other medium which 
can do it; and at the end of the twentieth cen- 
tury if public service broadcasters don’t do it 
other broadcasters will swamp the airwaves 
with other messages. I would now argue that 
credibility in broadcasting, requiring as it does 
identity between the broadcaster and his or her 
audience, also now requires much more atten- 
tion to be paid to cultural differences than to 
national mass. In a Europe with fewer national 
boundaries people will be freer to develop and 
 
THE Unesco {COURIER B FEBRUARY 1997 
deploy their local identities as part of the 
broader whole. And broadcasting needs to 
reflect and celebrate and foster that. It can only 
be public service broadcasters who will do it.” 
But public broadcasting has to be carefully 
defined because it is not always to be found in 
the state or national broadcaster, certainly as far 
as independent journalism is concerned. One 
of the basic problems facing journalistic ind e- 
pendence in most countries of the world dur- 
ing the past half century is the repressive atti- 
tude of the governments of new states, often 
termed emerging democracies, towards their 
own national or local media. 
Threats to independent 
reporting 
When the “winds of change” released dozens 
of countries in Africa and Asia, the South 
Pacific and the Caribbean from the bonds of 
colonialism in the 1950s and 1960s, few 
emerged successfully either as true democracies 
or with anything other than large state radio 
stations tied to a government information 
policy. The majority of countries even today 
have retained these large state broadcasters who 
have a valuable role to play in the “nation- 
building” process albeit at the expense of inde- 
pendent journalism. They have contributed 
to the struggle for better health and hygiene in 
development and educational programming. In 
A woman mechanic is 
interviewed for Buenos 
Tiempos Mujer {El Salvador), a 
community radio programme 
produced by and for women 
and designed to help the 
country’s needy women, The 
programme was launched by 
Unesco with support from the 
Salvadorian government and 
funding from Germany.

## [Page 27](105101engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 105089: The Second half century, 1945-1995: a continuing struggle for access to the airwaves

that sense they have had an important role as 
a public broadcaster but one deprived of inde- 
pendence in reporting on government itself. 
The irony of that situation is that it has 
been left to the emerging private radio stations 
to test the waters of actual reporting in its truest 
sense. Similarly, the major feature of the 1990s 
in the post-communist world has been the dif- 
ficulty of persuading governments which claim 
to be democratic that independent media are 
the prerequisite for good government and 
underpin a truly democratic nation. Such a sea- 
change requires media which stop being mes- 
sengers for politicians and start servicing the 
audiences who elect those politicians. In other 
words, journalists should report on govern- 
ment performance between elections. 
Iris a difficult enough task to get this mes- 
sage across in all the countries of Central and 
Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of 
Independent States (CIS) in their difficult 
transformation from communism to free mar- 
ket economies. It is even more difficult in coun- 
tries such as Bosnia and Serbia where hate is 
ingrained on all sides. In the emerging democ- 
racies the hope for independent journalism lies 
not with the state “public” broadcasters but 
with the small private and commercial operators 
who dare to take a different approach. Itis they 
who build credibility and therefore audiences. 
Unfortunately thereare all too few coun- 
tries even today which allow for freedom of 
speech. While journalists in the more sophis- 
ticated democracies tend to indulge in varying 
degrees of self-censorship, those in emerging 
democracies have little pretence to subtlety 
when interviewing their favourites. But there 
are those even worse off, such as the journal- 
ist in one country I shall not name who, when 
asked by a Western journalist in 1992 whether 
he submitted questions in advance for a min- 
isterial interview, answered “No, the Minister 


### 105090: A Public service

gives me the questions. And if I change the 
script I could be shot”. In fairness to journal- 
ists paid by governments, they cannot be 
expected to report on their paymasters. 
The clash between ideology and idealism 
will continue for years to come, complicated by 
the increased pressures on public broadcasting 
on the one hand and commercial survival or 
profit on the other. The good news is that the 
choice of radio channels available to audiences 
throughout the world is rising every day. M 
A PUBLIC 
SERVICE 
BY KNUD EBBESEN 
P.sic service broadcasting means providing a service to the 
publicin all its diversity, not only to important or interesting 
parts of the public. 
Its implications were well defined by the President of the 
European Broadcasting Union, Professor Albert Scharf, when 
he said: “Public service programming calls for such duties as 
accuracy, reliability, objectivity, truthfulness in disseminat- 
ing facts, honesty and fairness of comment, impartiality in all 
matters of public controversy. Majorities have to be reflected 
as such; silent minorities must also be respected as such, i.e. 
the right balance must be found. This does not, however, exclude 
commitment to new ideas and unthought thoughts; it does 
not prohibit provocation. On the contrary, the trust that broad- 
casters must serve includes a commitment to promote inno- 
vations and new trends, to advance the creativity that is hid- 
den within society.” 
For the British broadcaster David Attenborough, “Public 
service broadcasting is not just a schedule with a peppering of 
good programmes, nor is it a broadcaster with claims to a 
social conscience, It is a system which strives to provide the 
widest possible range of programmes and is enabled to do so 
by being beholden neither to commerce on the one hand nor gov- 
ernment on the other. ... Public service broadcasting, uniquely, 
can thus be free from pap on the one hand and propaganda on 
the other”, 
The editorial and political freedom of a public service broad- 
casting organization has to be defined in its charter and secured 
by legislation. Its funding also has to be considered carefully and 
no method or combination of methods is ideal. Even limited 
dependence on advertising revenue creates a conflict of inter- 
est, diverting broadcasters from public service standards. Licence 
. feefunding has fewer drawbacks than other methods but can only 
be introduced in countries where the general public has suffi- 
cient paying power. 
Even where appropriate legislation has been passed and 
an adequate funding mechanism exists, governments some- 
times find it difficult to abandon control of the media. They fear 
public criticism and find ways to encourage self-censorship 
among broadcasters and management. 
The public service concept of radio broadcasting has proved 
to be a valuable toolin supporting the continuing struggle for 
democracy and people's participation in social development at 
both local and national level. | 
THE UNESCO Gouritrs FEBRUARY 1997

## [Page 28](105101engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

© 
L’
il
lu
st
ra
ti
on
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ns
 


### 105091: From short wave to satellite

FROM SHORT WAVE TO SATELLITE 
28 ‘ THE unesco (COURIER B FEBRUARY 1997 
or almost seventy years, short-wave 
transmission has been the most effi- 
cient method of delivering pro- 
grammes across long distances. Today, 
however, the development of new technologies 
such as satellite transmission, digital audio 
broadcasting and interactive two-way cable is 
forcing many international broadcasters to 
reconsider the choice of short wave as their 
principal medium for the future. 
The phenomenon known as “short-wave 
radio” is actually the result of a combination 
 
of transmission technology and the clectro- 
magnetic properties of the earth’s atmosphere. 
Just as the waves of the ocean are caused by 
the vibration of water molecules, radio waves 
result from the vibration of electromagnetic 
particles. The rate at which they vibrate is much 
faster than that of ocean waves—several thou- 
sand times per second, or even several hun- 
dred thousand times per second. 
The number of vibrations (or cycles) per 
second is the frequency of the wave. The cycle 
per second is named the hertz (abbreviated 
Hz) after the German physicist Heinrich 
Hertz. The higher the frequency of a radio 
wave, the shorter its wavelength—the distance 
between two consecutive cycles. Radio waves 
of different lengths arc used for different pur- 
poses, because they have distinct physical

## [Page 29](105101engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 105091: From short wave to satellite

BY RAY GALLON AND DIANE SELIGSOHN 
Le, a Mongolian nomad 
camp in the Gobi Desert 
around 1930. 
B elow, Somalis listening to 
the BBC World Service learn 
that Mogadishu has fallen 
(1991). 
  
properties. Radio stations are allocated fre- 
quencies according to a system ratified by a 
series of international conventions. They are 
often identified by their number on the dial, 
which corresponds to a frequency in kilohertz 
(kHz) or megahertz (MHz). 
Hopping round 
the earth 
Short-wave transmissions are in the frequency 
range of 3 to 30 MHz. They are used for inter- 
national broadcasting because their physical 
and electromagnetic characteristics (wavelength, 
energy level, etc.) allow them to be reflected 
by the ionosphere, a layer of electrically 
charged particles in the upper atmosphere. 
Unlike domestic broadcast transmissions, 
which are beamed at the horizon and cover a 
broad but local area, international short-wave 
broadcasts are pointed at the sky. When a radio 
wave emitted from a transmitting antenna hits 
the ionosphere, it “bounces” back towards 
the earth. This is called a “hop”, and carries 
the signal a distance between 2,000 and 4,000 
kilometres. 
The wave is then reflected back towards the 
ionosphere by the earth’s surface, making 
another “hop” as it again returns to earth. 
After several “hops” the signal can reach the 
other side of the globe. The more powerful 
the transmitter, the farther the signal can travel. 
But the ionosphere also causes problems 
for long-distance broadcasts. The generation of 
radio waves in the ionosphere is strongly 
affected by the time of day, the season and 
sunspot activity. Small but rapid changes in 
the ionosphere’s altitude and makeup alter its 
reflecting abilities, affecting the quality of 
reception. 
Static also interferes with short-wave recep- 
tion. It can be caused by electrical charges such 
as those produced by ignition systems in auto- 
mobile and aircraft engines. But lightning is the 
most common culprit. Radio frequency inter- 
ference produced by these atmospheric dis- 
charges can travel thousands of kilometres. 
Since there is almost always a thunderstorm 
somewhere within a few thousand kilometres 
of any radio, static is a constant disturbance. 
This is why short-wave broadcasters often 
send the same programme simultaneously on 
several frequencies, and periodically change 
these frequencies. But as a consequence, the » 
or 
  
Ve 
  
tHE unesco (COURIER FEBRUARY 1997 
© 
Ha
mi
sh
 
Wi
ls
on
 
/P
an
os
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on

## [Page 30](105101engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 105091: From short wave to satellite

» spectrum of frequencies is often overloaded, 
increasing the likelihood of interference and 
restricting the introduction of new services. 
Technological innovations and improved 
co-operation among countries arc now mak- 
ing it possible for international broadcasters to 
provide alternative solutions to ensure recep- 
tion and improve sound quality. For exam- 
ple, they now often transmit programmes by 
satellite to local FM stations, which retransmit 
them as part of their domestic schedule. 
Rebroadcasting is fast replacing short wave in 
some parts of the world, especially in Russia 
and Eastern Europe. 
In areas where co-operation agreements arc 
not yet possible, the same technology is used 
to relay signals to short-wave transmitters in 
the target region. The closer the transmitter, the 
fewer “hops” necessary to reach an audience, 
resulting in greater listening comfort. 
Satellite direct 
broadcasting 
Short wave has been called the “first genera- 
tion of international radio”. The second gen- 
eration, according to Simson Najovits, deputy 
editor-in-chief of Radio France Internationale’s 
foreign language services, is the system of pro- 
gramme placement and leasing of domestic 
FM transmitters. “What is strange,” he says, “is 
that the second generation is not likely to last 
for many years. What's likely to overtake it 
is the third generation called mobile radio.” 
Mobile radio, also known as Satellite Digital 
Audio Broadcasting (Satellite DAB), means 
digitally encoded signals, similar to the digi- 
tal sound on a compact disc, sent directly from 
satellites to radio receivers in homes, cars, or on 
the street. This, in the opinion of Najovits, 
will relaunch the idea of international radio. 
“It will suddenly make international radio 
from several countries available everywhere in 
the world with a simple mobile receiver,” he 
says, “which if mass-produced would be sold 
for perhaps $100. A whole new horizon will be 
opened, both in information and entertain- 
ment. It will mean almost a new medium.” 
The technology exists already, and prototype 
receivers have been built. 
The proliferation of Satellite DAB is 
dependent on a typical chicken-egg scenario: 
receivers will only be manufactured if there 
are broadcasts to receive, and broadcasters will 
only use the technology if the potential audi- 
ence has receivers. Market studies indicate that 
most radio listeners are unlikely to spend $100 
on a new radio just to receive international 
broadcasters. The market will be driven by the 
conversion to DAB by domestic broadcasters, 
initially in developed countries where the 
THE UNESCO Courier B FEBRUARY 1997 
® 
Ma
rk
 
Ed
wa
rd
s 
/S
ti
ll
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
  
means to Invest In expensive new equipment 
are more available. The dilemma for the large 
international broadcasters is that the majority 
of their audience is in the developing world. 
The North-South gulf 
“We're finding that there’s an increasing split,” 
says Jonathan Marks, Director of Programmes 
at Radio Netherlands and organizer of a recent 
conference on the future of international 
broadcasting. “In some parts of the world 
technology is leaping along very quickly, but 
if you look at the statistics, there’s an enor- 
mous gulf between North and South.” There 
is a large existing base of short-wave receivers— 
particularly in Africa and in the former Soviet 
republics, where short wave has also been used 
for domestic broadcasts across large stretches 
of territory. 
“Alot of people in Third World countries 
depend on short wave,” explains Victor 
Goonetillike, a teacher and writer who mon- 
itors international broadcasts from his home 
in Sri Lanka. “They listen to it for informa- 
tion, not for stereo music quality.” He empha- 
sizes that $100 can represent an entire month’s 
income for a family in a poor country: “The 
technology will be able to reach the audience,

## [Page 31](105101engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

  
- 


### 105091: From short wave to satellite

but whether the audience can reach out for it 
is another matter.” 
“People are still listening to short wave,” 
confirms Andres Sennitt, editor of the World 
Radio and Television Handbook. “The broad- 
casters on the other hand have limited budgets. 
They want to invest in new technologies 
because that’s obviously what’s going to be 
important in the future. And in order to do 
that they’re having to cut back on some of 
their short-wave broadcasts. So they’re hav- 
ing to make difficult choices—whether to 
invest for the future and risk losing some lis- 
teners in the short term that they might regain 
later on, or whether to stay longer with short 
wave, and risk being squeezed out of the dig- 
ital medium. There are only going to be so 
many satellites and if the big broadcasters have 
already taken up the space, there won’t be any- 
thing left for the ones that come along later. 
“The real irony,” as Dr. Kim Andrew Elliott, 
producer and presenter of “Communications 
World” on the Voice of America, and the 
VOA’s former director of research, points 
out, “is that we already have DAB TV as a 
reality, but DAB radio is a distant dream.” 
One possible compromise which would 
permit the continued use of short-wave trans- 
mission for the short to medium term, and at 
A satellite dish brings 
telecommunications to 
Bhutan. 
the same time improve the quality of recep- 
tion, 1s to relocate short-wave transmitters 
which currently deliver their energy (via the 
“hops” described above) to distant places, but 
not to neighbouring countries. For small to 
medium external services such as Radio Prague 
International, the most effective way to oper- 
ate is regionally, targeting neighbours with 
similar interests and cultures to their own. 
Relocating transmitters 
The current short-wave system was set up at 
a time when international co-operation was 
difficult or impossible to achieve in this area, 
and stations had to use powerful transmit- 
ters in their home countries, not necessarily the 
best locations for reaching their target audi- 
ences abroad. 
Now that there is a greater spirit of co- 
operation among international broadcasters, 
says Oldrich Cip, co-ordinator of frequen- 
cies and adviser to the management of Radio 
Prague International, “We should start co- 
operative projects which would relieve the 
enormous pressurc on the space of the short- 
wave spectrum. We could introduce integrated 
projects such as streams of multinational 
broadcasts on special channels. They would 
be broadcast from strategically located posi- 
tions on the outskirts of Europe, let’s say 
from Russia towards western Europe or from 
the Iberian peninsula towards eastern Europe. 
This would deliver 100 per cent reliable sig- 
nals into these target arcas. The homeland- 
based transmitters could be switched off and 
the spectrum would be cleared and improved.” 
In western Europe, Cip says, “you would 
hear a stream of programmes, perhaps includ- 
ing Radio Prague and other stations from 
Central Europe at very good strength, whereas 
if you listened to those programmes from the 
transmitters within central Europe you would 
probably hear very little or nothing, especially 
during the winter evenings because of physi- 
cal conditions.” 
If the lure of new technologies is irresistible 
for international broadcasters, short wave still 
has a powerful hold on listeners, even in rich 
countries. Oldrich Cip believes that short 
waves are here to stay for at least two more 
decades, and probably for much longer. “Short 
wave as a natural resource will always remain 
within the spectrum of radio frequencies. Even 
if we change to digital, we still have some space 
which has to be utilized somehow. I am con- 
vinced that the condition of short waves can 
be reversed so that they can be very effective 
and relatively reliable. Of course, some of the 
vagaries of the ionosphere never change. But 
this is also one of the fascinations of short- 
wave reception.” | 
THE UNESCO Courier B FEBRUARY 1997

## [Page 32](105101engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 105092: By the people, for the people

BY THE PEOPLE, FOR THE PEOPLE 
A young member of a street 
theatre group in Sri Lanka 
invites villagers to come to a 
show that will he broadcast 
on radio. 
THE UNESCO Couriern FEBRUARY 1997 
he concept we developed was very 
simple: a radio built by and for the 
community that would be small and 
effective, and capable of being main- 
tained, repaired, programmed, produced and 
aired by the people themselves. 
There would be no large freight cases, no 
need for heavy trucks to meet the shipments 
at the pier or the airport, no tall shiny metal- 
lic cabinets to hold electronic gear. The whole 
station would fit in a suitcase. So successfully 
were these specifications met that our consul- 
tancy visits to prospective community radio 
stations often began with, “Yes, welcome, but 
uh, where is it?” 
The beginnings 
Historically this kind of community radio 
arose from a combination of two factors: lim- 
1ting transmitter power so as to keep costs 
down, and using radio constructively to get 
members of a community to work with each 
other for social and economic improvement. 
BY CARLOS A. ARNALDO 
Ee i 
Technically the concept became feasible in 
the late 1970s, when silicon chips were taking 
over the tasks (amplifying, finc tuning sig- 
nals, selecting frequencies, controlling low- 
power electric currents) of vacuum tubes in 
transmitter design. This meant that the basic 
transmitter (the exciter) could be the size of a 
small book instead of a bookcase; it could be 
assembled in a few hours instead of a few days 
or weeks; it would not heat excessively and 
therefore did not need large and noisy cooling 
fans; it would cost less to ship, to maintain, 
to replace and to handle. 
An FM (frequency modulation) trans- 
mitter of this size, designed for UNESCO by 
Martin Allard, produced only 10 to 15 watts. 
But with a 10-metre mast and a simple antenna, 
and with no interference from other FM sta- 
tions in the immediate area (which is the case 
in many developing countries), this trans- 
mitter could cover an area up to 15 kilome- 
tres in radius. Given the dispersion of rural 
populations in many countries, this would 
© 
Ca
rl
os
 
Ar
na
ld
o/
UN
es
co
, 
Pa
ni
s

## [Page 33](105101engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 105092: By the people, for the people

mean from about 20,000 to a maximum of 
100,000 people. 
The prototype: 
Homa Bay 
Homa Bay Community Radio, which was 
installed on the shores of Lake Victoria in 
Kenya in 1982, was UNESCO's first attempt to 
set up a station based on this newly designed 
low-cost, low-powered equipment. Engineers 
assembled a small transmitter and a six-channel 
mixer designed by the former Director of Tech- 
nical Operations of the Ghana Broadcasting 
Corporation. Microphones, tape recorders and 
other components in the semi-professional 
range could be purchased at reasonable prices. 
Later, engineers also designed an FM receiver 
and an amplitude modulation/short-wave 
(AM/SW) receiver adapter, both presented in 
kits for local assembly. 
Homa Bay Radio primed the enthusiasm 
of the local folk for their “own radio”, and 
sparked their interest in local affairs. But the 
station was short-lived. After two years, it 
was dismantled. Independent FM community 
radio in 1984 was a little ahead of its time in 
Kenya, but the experience was valuable to 
many other countries. It showed that radio 
could be made by the community and that it 
did not have to cost millions. It cost only 
$25,000 to finance Homa Bay. 
Village 
volunteers 
In Sri Lanka, the opportunity for another 
experiment arose when Guirandurokotte, a 
newly established township in the heart of 
the Mahaweli Development Area, was chosen 
to be the site of a new development centre and 
a community radio station. In 1979 when the 
project was launched, Guirandurokotte was a 
grassy field crossed by a feeder road lined with 
a handful of shanties where saronged old men 
sold tea and cakes to weary travellers. It was 
located in an upstream area of Sri Lanka where 
there were fertile valleys and vegetable gardens, 
small temples set amidst majestic coconut trees 
and rich greenrice terraces. Downstream, where 
the river dried up before it could reach the 
plains, the land was hard-caked and dry. The 
cattle were thin and mortality rates for infants 
and farm animals were high. Dirt roads octo- 
pussed into the interior, where there were more 
dried mud and shrivelled crops. 
The basic plan of the Mahaweli Develop- 
ment Authority was to build a network of   
reservoirs upstream, store water, and then 
releasc it regularly through newly constructed 
canals to ensure all-year-round irrigation to 
the downstream regions. When the valleys 
were flooded, some one million settlers would 
have to move downstream to the drylands 
which would eventually be watered by the 
new canals. One could imagine the anguish of 
farming families at having to uproot their 
homes, farm implements and religious shrines 
and settle in some unknown dry region down- 
stream. Whole villages with their sacred tem- 
ples would soon be underwater. 
Alongside the Mahaweli Plan, a joint 
UNEsCO-Danish International Development 
Agency (DANIDA) project aimed to create 
and train a team of mobile radio producers 
who would visit the villages both before mov- 
ing and after resettlement and would produce 
programmes to smooth the transition to their 
new homes. 
The Guirandurokotte Community Radio, 
Sri Lanka’s first permanent FM Station, was a 
key feature of this project. From this station, 
built by its own technicians, the production 
team related to the immediate community. The 
technicians also designed and built their own 
mobile audio mixing console for fieldwork, 
and when the transmitter developed faults, 
they altered the design themselves and kept 
the station on the air. With the exception of a 
few weeks during the critical stages of the civil 
® 
Ca
rl
os
 
A
r
n
a
l
d
o
/
U
N
e
s
c
a
,
 
Pa
ns
 
  
  
Avo, a news producer of 
the Bhutan Broadcasting 
Service (BBS) prepares her 
programme, 
Top, recording a quiz for 
Bhutanese farmers. The BBS 
received aid under a UNesco- 
Danida multilateral project 
between 1989 and 1993. 
disturbances in Sri Lanka in 1988 and 1989, » 
© 
Ca
rl
os
 
Am
al
do
/U
NE
sc
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
A recording studio at the 
Guirandurokotte community 
radio station (Sri Lanka). 
HE UNEsco (COURIER FEBRUARY 1997 
     ’ 
@ 
Ca
rl
os
 
Am
al
do
/U
NE
Sc
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
J

## [Page 34](105101engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ge
or
ge
s 
Du
po
nt
 
/U
NE
SC
O 
Pa
ri
s 


### 105092: By the people, for the people

  
   
   
» the station has been on the air continuously 
since 1986 and is still operating today. 
The team recruited a number of volunteer 
producers and assistant technicians from 
among the villagers. One volunteer, a farmer’s 
daughter, opens the station every day with 
the sign-on announcements; others assist in 
announcing duties and production tasks. The 
station has also sponsored a clinic where village 
folk were taught the basics of health and 
hygiene and spread this learning both by radio 
and person-to-person campaigns. The station 
regularly promotes income-earning activities, 
such as breeding goldfish for sale in the town 
market and recording music cassettes of local 
songs and poems. Guirandurokotte has been 
eminently a people’s station. 
New targets 
Now after more than ten years of experience, 
new targets have been set, using community sta- 
tions in Welikande, Batticoloa, Trincomalee and 
further north, possibly as far as Jaffna, to sup- 
portthe peace accords which are seen as a major 
springboard to rural development nationwide. 
The basic philosophy behind this work has 
been to encourage communities to undertake 
their own communication tasks and run their 
local media facilities to further development, 
catalyse their evolving culture and bring about 
a lasting peace. In many ways, radio brings 
power to the people of these communities. H 
THLE UNESCO Couric a FLERUARY 1907 
© 
Ge
or
ge
s 
Du
po
nt
 
/U
ne
sc
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
r 
W
o
w
 
0,
 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
Ge
or
ge
s 
Du
po
nt
/t
es
 
Kenya's first community 
radio station, operational 
from 1982 to 1984, was set up 
by Unesco at Homa Bay. 


### 105093: Villages find their voice

VILLAGES 
he 20-watt transmitter was hit 
by lightning and broke down in 
May,” begins the Project Man- 
ager’s report for 1994. “It has 
been replaced. The local technicians were 
advised to install a lightning arrester to fore- 
stall repetition of the accident.” 
The people of Banga, a small town in the 
province of Aklan, in the Philippines, are quite 
capable of taking preventive measures of this 
kind. After all, it was they who set up their 
small community radio station on the campus 
of the Agricultural College and mounted its 
antenna on top of a concrete structure on a 
small hill nearby. The station, one of five sim- 
ilar set-ups in the less developed areas of the 
Philippines, was established several years ago as 
part of Tambuli, a community radio projectin 
which UNESCO, the Danish International 
Development Agency (DANIDA) and the 
Philippines are collaborating. (Tambuli is the 
traditional way of calling villagers to an impor- 
tant meeting.) 
In this kind of project, the initiative comes 
from the communities. The local folk build 
the radio station, and after group discussions, 
they set the guidelines for the broadcasters. 
They organize the radio team, drawing on all 
sectors of the village. There is no lack of vol- 
unteers. At Banga, Lyn Villasis, a beautician 
turned broadcaster, reads fairy tales to children 
over Radio Manduyong, modulating her voice 
to evoke the characters in each story. A health 
programme is hosted by a midwife. On Radio 
Tambuli in Laurel, a little town in Batangas 
province, Nerrie Bihis gives talks on develop- 
ment topics, town cleanliness and good man- 
ners, while a local police officer hosts a weekly 
awareness programme on law and order. 
Village problems 
get an airing 
Two Christmases ago the Banga community 
went carolling to raise funds for the purchase 
of a karaoke sing-along system for their radio 
station. In Baranggay Bugtong Bato, where 
Radio Ibajay did the organizing, Vicente 
Pagayonan played indigenous songs on a flute

## [Page 35](105101engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ca
rl
os
 
Ar
na
ld
o 
/U
Ne
sc
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
"IND THELR VOICE 
  
made from a PVC plumbing pipe! Whatever 
the music, people sing to cultivate a sense of 
belonging and identify with their commu- 
nity in the context of a larger national culture. 
In Banga, karaoke is more than just a sing- 
along machine. Karaoke time is time for their 
baranggayan sa himpapawid (village on the 
air). Live interviews, and discussions with local 
officials are broadcast between spontaneous 
musical performances, problems are raised and 
solutions are sought in what amount to village 
meetings aired over the local radio station. 
Olutunga is a small island near the south- 
ern tip of the Philippine archipelago, which 
comprises some 7,000 islands. Toto Val 
Samonte, manager of Olutanga Island Radio 
(DXOI), wants it to become “the best island 
in the world”, an ambition that reflects the 
confidence of his fellow townsfolk in the 
power of radio to make Olutunga a better 
place in which to live. 
Community radio stations regularly hold 
forums—often linked to karaoke sesstons—on 
gambling, irrigation, relief during floods and 
typhoons, fishing rights and education. One 
programme which revealed that cement used in 
road construction had not complied with con- 
tract specifications alarmed the contractor and 
persuaded the local authorities to investigate. 
Local initiative 
In Banga, local radio mobilized community 
efforts to build a footbridge. Another station 
successfully campaigned to clean up a big poul- 
try farm to reduce air pollution. Some families 
    NL 
p I; you city folks have car 
stereo, we have car-abhao 
{water buffalo) stereo!” say 
Filipino villagers reached by 
community radio, ahove. 
Above left, a “village on the 
air” programme being 
recorded at 1bajay, in the heart 
of the Philippine archipelago. 
BY WIJAYANANDA JAYAWEERA 
AND LOUIE TABING 
© 
Lo
ui
e 
Ta
bi
ng
, 
Ta
mb
ul
i 
Co
mm
un
it
y 
Ra
di
o 


### 105093: Villages find their voice

and neighbourhood groups have started small 
pig farms, fish traps and prawn production. 
In Laurel, Batangas teenagers used the radio to 
collect donations for the construction of their 
basketball court. Often people tune in to com- 
munity radio to find out whether the local 
bus has arrived! On islands like Batanes, which 
only has three flights a week to the mainland, 
it is very important to know the arrival and 
departure times of local flights. 
Community radio stations have made a 
lot of difference to these “sleepy towns”, usu- 
ally found at the bottom of the development 
list. They have encouraged people to analyse 
their problems and come up with their own 
solutions, with contributions from the local 
political and administrative authorities. Live 
discussions on the air ensurc a continuing dia- 
logue on issucs of concern to the community 
and perform a watchdog function by making 
sure solutions stick. More civic organizations 
are being formed, and new income-generating 
activities are being started by families and 
neighbourhood groups. There is a more con- 
structive dialogue with local officials 
“Were it not for Radio Tambuli, the Ban- 
gans would still be sleeping,” said one munic- 
ipal officer. “Tambuli has made the big people 
listen to the voice of the small people.” Added 
Porfirio Bullo, Banga’s station manager: 
“Before we used to just listen to radio; now we 
are the ones who are listened to.” | 
THE UNESCO Gunite s FEBRUARY 1997

## [Page 36](105101engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 105095: All Power to the microphone

ALL POWER 
T0 THE 
MICROPHONE! 
BY ARMEN OGANESSIAN 
i 
oF EE 
hroughout its history Russia has felt 
a need to link up its vast spaces, and 
in the early years of the twentieth 
century radio took over from the rail- 
ways as the instrument of this grand design. 
At the third Pan-Russian Electrotechnical 
Conference, in February 1904, engineer Alek- 
sandr Popov gave the first demonstration of 
radio transmission of the human voice. He 
had already invented a lightning detector, and 
in 1896 developed a radiotelegraph system 
which transmitted Morse code. It was first 
used by the Russian navy, which later owned 
Russia’s first large radio stations. 
But Russian industry lagged behind 
Popov’s genius. Russia’s first radio factory in 
St. Petersburg was established by the Marconi 
THE UNESCO Courier B FEBRUARY 1997 
© 
RI
A-
No
vo
st
i,
 
Pa
ri
s 
  
Lenin during a recording 
session in the Kremlin (1919). 
  
 
company, and the country’s first radio com- 
pany was founded some time later, in 1910, 
under the auspices of the naval authorities. 
A propaganda tool 
Lenin and his followers immediately grasped 
the possibilities of this new medium of com- 
munication, and in their hands radio became a 
powerful weapon in the exercise of political 
power. 
On the eve of the October 1917 coup d’état 
the Bolsheviks issued orders to armed patrols 
via radio. They asked the railwaymen to stop 
troop trains bringing battalions loyal to the 
provisional government from reaching St. 
Petersburg (renamed Petrograd). The rebel 
sailors seized the naval radio station and the

## [Page 37](105101engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 105095: All Power to the microphone

© 
RI
A-
No
vo
st
l,
 
Pa
ni
s 
next day Lenin wrote his “Address to the cit- 
izens of Russia” on the delegation of power to 
the Armed Revolutionary Committee. 
After the transfer of the Soviet government 
to Moscow, the radio station at Khodinsk 
became “the megaphone of the Russian revolu- 
tion”. It broadcast government decrees, mes- 
sages for foreign states and peoples, and news 
from the Russian telegraph agency. At a time 
when millions of Russians, for the most part 
illiterate, had to be reached and persuaded, radio 
had the edge on the written word. It was, in 
Lenin’s words, “a daily that knew neither paper 
nor distance”. 
Significantly, Lenin ordered the best Russ- 
ian engineers to be released from the jails of the 
Cheka, the Bolshevik secret police, and sent to 
work in the radio technology laboratory at 
Nizhni-Novgorod. In 1920, the laboratory 
produced a radiotelephone with a loudspeaker, 
and some time later, a short-wave transmitter 
whose signals could be received in Britain, 
France and Iraq. By the end of the decade 
Moscow was broadcasting to other countries, 
first in German then in the other main Euro- 
pean languages. 
At the same time, the content of Russian 
programmes became more diversified and music 
was given air time between speeches and propa- 
ganda programmes. In 1924 private citizens were 
authorized by decree to buy a receiver for per- 
FP 
 
Radio reaches distant parts 
of the Soviet Union {1929). 
D.iing the Second World 
War, people in a Russian city 
street listen to Yuri Levitan, 
Radio Moscow's chief 
announcer. 
 
  
  
sonal use, and daily newspapers began publish- 
ing programme schedules. Scientific and sport- 
ing news, poems and stories went out over the 
airwaves. Then came the first live broadcasts from 
stadiums; the first radio correspondents and 
children’s programmes appeared. 
A popular hit 
According to Russian historian M. Miriukov, 
radio was regarded by the people as a “real mir- 
acle”. The Communist Party press was espe- 
cially interested in the audience’ reactions and 
its opinion of programmes. 
In 1928 A. Chorin, an engincer who had 
also been freed on Lenin’s orders, patented a 
recording and sound-reproduction machine 
developed under his responsibility. His device 
provided Russian radio journalism with a pro- 
totype of the tape-recorder. Later advances in 
recording techniques in the 1930s were decisive 
for radio broadcasting during wartime. 
In the mid-1930s two Moscow radio sta- 
tions broadcast images as well as sound twice 
a week, thus paving the way for the coming of 
television. In 1935, hermetically scaled as the 
“iron curtain” then was, Moscow stations 
broadcasta concert given in the United States, 
while in response ninety American stations 
broadcast a concert performed in Moscow. 
On the eve of the Second World War there 
were more than a million radio receivers and 
nearly 5 million relays in the Soviet Union. 
The broadcasting network covered nearly the 
whole country. 
At noon on 22 June 1941 Moscow radio 
announced that the Soviet Union was at war 
THE UNESCO (Gourier HW FEBRUARY 1997 
® 
RI
A 
No
vo
st
i,
 
Pa
ni
s

## [Page 38](105101engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

© 
RI
A-
No
vo
st
i,
 
Pa
ns
  
Tre Moscow radio tower built 
in1922, 
THE UNESCO Gourierm FEBRUARY [997 
» with Hitler’s Germany. Although German 
troops advanced deep into the country, radio 
stations continued to transmit, and the voice 
of Moscow could be heard throughout occu- 
pied Europe, including Germany. 
The triumph of radio 
The leaders of the Third Reich, especially Josef 
Goebbels, the Minister for Propaganda and 
Information, wanted to silence the transmit- 
ter. The Soviet Radio Committee was among 
the strategic targets of the Luftwaffe bombers, 
and Radio Moscow’s chief announcer, I. Lev- 
itan, was on the hit-list of people to be exe- 


### 105095: All Power to the microphone

cuted if Moscow fell. Later Levitan talked 
about his work during this grim period: 
“Preparation was hard going. Your words had 
to show no sign of panic or despair, and you 
couldn’tallow your voice to shake. The voice 
of the radio was heard all over the country, at 
the front and abroad. Resistance fighters and 
partisans listened in. Radio brought hope, 
helped people forget wounds and fatigue, and 
called for victory over the enemy.” 
With the army, radio was the war’s great 
victor. With the coming of peace, its triumph 
as the most successful medium of mass com- 
munication seemed incontestable. In the 
immediate post-war years, Soviet radio began 
broadcasting on three networks for several 
hours a day. Some time later the appearance of 
areceiver capable of receiving three programmes 
set the seal on this success. Radio was listened 
to everywhere. At the time it was so popular 
and people were so convinced of its indis- 
pensability that they could not imagine that 
it would one day be supplanted by television, 
then in its infancy. 
This complacency, especially among people 
working in radio, was probably partly to 
blame for radio’s decline in popularity once 
television began to catch on. But radio did 
not give up the ground it had won in the 1920s 
without a fight. When one of the networks 
interrupted a concert to transmit the radio 
signals from the first carth satellite, Sputnik, 
as it drew closer to Moscow, tens of millions 
of listeners were glued to their radio sets. 
The thaw 
Shows devoted to pure entertainment, apart 
from opera and concerts, were unknown on 
pre-war and wartime Soviet radio. It was dur- 
ing the years of political thaw under Nikita S. 
Khrushchev that entertainment programmes 
first appeared mornings and evenings. The peo- 
ple in charge of these programmes were famous 
nationwide. 
The defining radio event of the 1960s was 
the creation of a round-the-clock station, 
Mayak (“The Lighthouse”), which broadcast 
only music and news. It currently reaches 221 
million listeners throughout the Common- 
wealth of Independent States. Under Leonid 
Brezhnev a number of directives were issued to 
strengthen artistic, political and social news 
programmes. New stations were created, and 
the network grew and diversified. 
Mikhail Gorbachev’s rise to power brought 
changes to radio although the main contours of 
the broadcasting scene remained essentially the 
same. During his period of office the first steps 
to dismantle the state broadcasting monopoly 
were taken. ||

## [Page 39](105101engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

  
UNEsco Radio is different, unique 
even, according to some listeners. 
UNESCO began to produce radio 
programmes in the late 1940s. The aim 
has always been to contribute to the 
understanding of the ideals that the 
Organization stands for, through dis- 
cussion of issues in the fields of edu- 
cation, science, culture and commu- 
nication. 
Around fifteen 30-minute feature 
programmes are produced each year in 
English, French, Spanish or Russian. 
Their subjects, chosen on the basis of 
their interest both for UNESCO and the 
general public, cover a vast field rang- 


### 105097: UNESCO on the air

Number of radio receivers 
[MBSR Unesco on the air 
ing from Aids to astronomy, from bio- 
diversity to bioethics, from street chil- 
dren to indigenous peoples, from the 
violence of war to the culture of peace. 
The programme catalogue contains - 
hundreds of recordings which are 
offered on tape or cassette to over 400 
national, public and community radios 
in all parts of the world (257 stations 
broadcasting in English, 60 in French, 
60 in Spanish and 42 in Russian) as 
well as to international short-wave 
broadcasters. 
For the last two years, UNESCO 
Radio has been taking part in the 
Nexus-International Broadcasting 
Number of receivers in millions 
Association Internet experiment of 
RealAudio on demand. All UNEsco 
progammes will shortly be available 
via the Nexus RealAudio server (for 
details, consult http://www.nexus. 
org/IRN) and will eventually be put 
on UNESCO’s Internet site. 
Catalogues, recordings and tran- 
scriptions may be obtained from: 
Erin Faherty-Mella, 
Radio Producer 
UNESCO 
7 Place de Fontenoy Paris 07 SP 
France 
Tel: (33) (0) 145 68 16 92 
Fax: (33) (0) 1 45 68 56 55 
Number of receivers per 1,000 inhabitants 
1970 1980 1990 1994 1970 1980 1990 1994 
World total 771 1307 1877 2008 209 294 355 357 
Africa 19 49 108 122 51 104 71 173 
America 350 566 711 756 687 926 991 991 
Asia 78 254 568 621 37 96 178 183 
Europe 314 418 464 481 481 604 643 662 
Oceania 10 20 26 28 526 871 996 1007 
Developing countries 123 323 724 790 46 ar 177 179 
Sub-Saharan 10 36 77 88 35 92 151 152 
Arab 14 28 55 62 110 166 247 251 
Latin America and Caribbean 45 a3 153 168 160 261 348 354 
Eastern Asia and Oceania 29 117 328 349 25 82 196 197 
Southern Asia 18 42 102 114 24 45 85 88 
Least developed countries ~ 7 20 48 55 23 51 95 98 
Developed countries 648 984 1153 1218 629 881 969 1009 
Source: Unesco, June 1996 
How radio works 
Radio transmits sounds over long distances 
using waves, invisible clectric impulses that 
travel through the atmosphere and space. 
These waves, known as Hertzian waves 
(from the name of the German physicist 
Heinrich Hertz, who demonstrated their 
use in 1888) or radio waves {from the Latin 
word radius = ray) travel at the speed of 
light (300,000 km per second). 
To make a radio connection, a trans- 
mitter and a receiver are needed, cach con- 
nected to an antenna. The waves travel 
between the two antennae in some cases 
by bouncing back from certain layers of 
the atmosphere. Satellite transmission sys- 
tems exist today. 
Sound vibrations are changed into 
electrical waves, which are then changed 
into radio waves by the transmitter. The 
radio waves are picked up by the receiving 
antenna and changed back into an electri- 
cal signal which is amplified and further 
processed before being changed back into 
sound by the loudspeaker. 
There are different kinds of waves. 
Long waves cover almost 2,000 km. 
Medium waves travel a few hundred km. 
Short waves can travel all round the world. 
Amplitude modulation (AM) 1s a 
broadcasting method in which the sound 
changes the power of the wave. Frequency 
modulation (FM), which guarantees bet- 
ter quality reception, is a method in which 
the sound changes the frequency of the 
wave, 
In simple terms, it may be said that 
the transmitter codes the signals, the 
waves carry them and the receiver decodes 
them. [| 
He unesco (COURIER W FEBRUARY 1997

## [Page 40](105101engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

| COMMENTARY 
THE UNESCO Gouri FEBRUARY 1997 
  
  
fr
 Federico Mayor 
. yoga eel Mee aha = 
“The more experience I gather, the more I realize that 1 o 
Man himself is the cause of his happiness as well as his 
misery,” said Mahatma Gandhi. We should take inspi- 
ration from the words of this great Indian sage and 
politician if we wish to establish a globally sustainable 
energy systeni. 
Such a system is an important facet of the ehanges 
we must make in order to reduce current asymmetries 
in the sharing of resources. These asymmetries, which 
are morally unacceptable, generate frustration and 
violence and threaten world peace and security at the 
dawn of a new millennium. 


### 105098: Energy for all

It is estimated that 2.4 billion people today have no 
regular access to electricity. The lack of a reliable means 
of heating and lighting the homes, clinics and schools of 
some 40 per cent of the world’s population—living 
mainly in rural or remote arcas of the developing world— 
acts as a significant brake on the development process. 
In such areas, people—more often than not women and 
children—are obliged to make long journeys to find 
drinking water and fuelwood. 
Renewable energy electrification would help meet 
the basic needs of isolated populations in terms of heat, 
light, thie pumping and purification of freshwater, edu- 
cational opportunities, basic communications, medical 
care, income-geucrating rural activities and improved 
agricultural methods and techniques—in short, all 
those facilities we think of as necessary for a healthy, 
developing community.

## [Page 41](105101engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 105098: Energy for all

Leaders of the world’s nations wlo met at the United 
Nations Conference on Environment and Development 
in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992 recognized the risk of 
rapid climate change caused by gas emissions (some 
of them with clear greenhouse impact) and prepared a 
Convention designed to stabilize the earth’s climate. 
The Conference laid stress on the development of envi- 
ronmentally sound energy systems, partienlarly new 
and renewable sources of energy, to the benefit of 
industrialized and developing countries alike. 
Industrialized countries can profit from the incor- 
poration of renewable energies into their national 
energy programmes. Denmark, for example, today pro- 
duces 3.5 per cent of its electricity from wind, at a 
cost that is competitive with traditional fossil fuels. 
Renewable energy sources 
The widespread use of renewable energy sources as 
part of a global energy system requires increased 
knowledge of the various technologies and their adap- 
tation to different contexts and fields of application. The 
importance of further research, education and training 
of engineers and technicians cannot be over-empha- 
sized. The availability of unrestricted information and 
its communication to decision-makers and the public at 
large will serve to influence opinion and the all-impor- 
tant energy consumption patterns of the population. 
Only if we enhance the quality of life in rural areas 
shall we achieve our target of reaching those who are 
excluded from the benefits of progress. Only then will 
population growth rates and the consequent emigration 
flows decrease. The three main—interdependent— 
dimensions of this initiative are therefore social, edu- 
rational and environmental. Ilere the media have a 
major role to play. 
Public awareness and participation are the keys to 
success, as in so many other fields. The regional eon- 
sultations that preceded the World Solar Summit held 
in Ilarare (Zimbabwe) in September 1996 identified 
education, training and public understanding in the 
field of renewable energy as a strategie priority. 
The Solar Summit 
The World Solar Summit marked the start of a ten- 
year plan of almost unprecedented international and 
national action and co-operation. The World Solar Pro- 
eramme 1996-2005, which comprises some 300 renew- 
able energy projects, is a major international initiative 
with which UNESCO is pleased to be associated. Its exe- 
cution requires the commitment of national authori- 
ties, the relevant organizations of the United Nations 
system, niltilateral and regional development banks, 
intergovernmental and non-governmental organiza- 
tions, academic and research institutions, and the pri- 
vate sector. 
We now know that integration—at the sub-regional 
or regional levels—will never happen if it is only based 
on economic interest. {tis clear thatinoney divides if it 
is the only ingredient of alliances. Integration is 
achieved with common values, with the democratic 
ideals of justice, freedom, equality and solidarity 
enshrined in UNESCO's Constitution. There can he no 
sustainable peace without development; there can be 
no sustainable development without a social context 
coverned hy democratic principles; there can he no 
sustainable development without a human face. 
We have too often forgotten the human face. We 
have forgotten that science and technology are there 
to mitigate human suffering. A system based on equal- 
ity collapsed in 1989 because it had forgotten free- 
dom. A system based on freedom can also fail if it for- 
ects equality. And neither system takes into account 
fraternity. We must tirelessly build peace in the minds 
of men through our everyday conduct, which is the 
supreme expression of our culture. Let ns exercise 
our responsibilitics and make the indispensable and 
urgent transformations that human dignity demands. In 
a word, let us create a culture of peace. || 
THE unesco (COURIER 1 FEBRUARY 1097

## [Page 42](105101engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 105099: Mr. Jefferson's dream house

HERITAGE 
Mr. WP efferson’s dream house 
corse $ by Francis Leary 
  
Virginig 
United States of America 
  
OS 
Pacific Ocean Mexico ” Atlantic Ocean 
Monticello, the mansion builtin Virginia by Thomas Jefferson, third President of the United 
States and principal author of the Declaration of Independence, is a jewel of American neo- 
© 
Di
te
/U
SI
S,
 
Pa
ri
s 
classical architecture. In 1987 it was placed on Unesco’s World Heritage List. 
Thomas Jefferson 
(1805) by the 
American painter 
Rembrandt Peale. 
 
THE UNESCO Courier ® FEBRUARY 1297 
On the first day of 1772, 
twenty-cight-year-old Tom 
Jefferson brought his bride, 
Martha Wayles Skelton, a widow 
of twenty-three, to Monticello, 
“Little Mountain” in Italian, their 
new home. As a carriage could not 
traverse the route in a snowstorm 
at night, they had ridden on horse- 
Dack over the mountain. 
Thongh only the one-room 
South Pavilion was completed, 
Tom was cager to welcome Martha 
to the house he was building {or 
them. While outside the storm 
raged, Tom build a fire in the 
hearth and produced a bottle of 
wine; a black servant prepared a 
meal for the honeymoon couple. 
The romantic aura of this firelit 
snowbound first dinner at Monti- 
cello reflects Thomas Jefferson 
throughout his life. 
A correspondent, to whom he 
had written about his bride, 
remarked that his description of 
Martha was “the most Romantic 
and Poetical that I ever did read.” 
A comment that might also apply to 
Jellerson’s feelings about Monti- 
cello. This tall lanky youth with red 
lair, freckles and grey eyes was a 
complete man inthe Romantic tra- 
dition, Ile towered over other men 
in height as he would tower over 
them in intellect and inspiration. 
Most planters built their homes 
on their plantations, on the low-lying 
Tidewater land where tobacco was 
the chief cash erop. Jefferson chose 
a mountain-top in the Blue Ridge, 
two leagues or six miles (10 km.) 
from the town of Charlottesville. 
His classical studies at the College 
of William and Mary had revealed to 
him a new architecture for the 
house he was already planning 
before his marriage. 
In a 4-volume edition of the 
Renaissance architect, Andreas 
Palladio, Je[ferson found what he 
wanted. The designs of the Italian 
master were inspired by the tem- 
ples and villas of Ancient Rome. 
Palladio projected one-story 
structures with donuble-columned 
porticoes on each {rout and a hall 
that extended the length of the

## [Page 43](105101engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 105099: Mr. Jefferson's dream house

  
Monticello is an 
outstanding example 
of a neo-classical 
villa inspired by the 
architecture of 
Antiquity and 
Palladio. 
building, while living and dining 
rooms opened off the central hall. 
Local materials were employed 
in the construction of Monticello. 
Jefferson burnt bricks in a kiln in 
the deer park on the southeast 
side of the mountain, wheve the 
deep-red clay was ideal for mak- 
ing bricks. lle sawed the planks 
for the flooring and had limestone 
quarried for porticoes. He relied 
on cabinet-makers in Williams- 
burg for interior furnishings and 
embellished the estate with 
orchards and vegetable gardens. 
Plantation slaves performed the 
hard labour of eonstruetion as well 
as working in the tobacco fields. 
Jefferson had inherited 5,000 
acres (2,900 hectares) from his 
father, Peter lefferson, and had 
[50 field hands to eultivate this 
acreage. The extensive Hemings 
family acted as maids and house- 
hoys. They were never called 
slaves, though in fact they were. 
The first black slaves were 
brought to Virginia in [619. 
Tobaceo soon proved to be the 
small colony’s leading export, and 
slave labour and tobacco farming 
became intertwined. By 1790, 
Virginia’s population of 750,000 
would be almost equally divided 
  
between whites and blacks. 
For Jefferson, the slave system 
was “a firebell in the night”. Newly 
elected to the Virginia legislature 
at Williamshurg, he proposed a 
bill to phase out slavery in the 
colony, but he failed. The planters 
felt that they could not manage 
without slaves. Indeed, for Jelfer- 
son to try to build his dream house 
without slave labour would have 
been almost impossible. 
A FIREBELL IN THE NIGHT 
During the War of Independence, 
two English deserters, skilled 
craftsmen, boarded at Monticello. 
Billy and Davy made furnishings 
for the house and built an elegant 
phaeton to Jefferson’s design. 
Soon after independence was 
achieved, Jefferson received a visit 
from the Marquis de Chastellux, 
who had served with the French 
army during the war. Most 
impressed by his host, Chastel- 
lux commented: “Mr. Jeffersons 
the first American who has eon- 
sulted the Fine Arts to know how 
to shelter himself from the 
weather.” 
The marquis also visited the 
deer park on the southeast side 
of the mountain. There he saw a 
score of white-tailed deer, very 
different from the European 
chevreuil and so tame that Jef- 
ferson fed them Indian corn out 
of his hand. 
Jelferson’s happy life at Mon- 
ticello was abruptly ended by 
Martha’s death. Torn apart by the 
tragedy, he needed to get away 
and accepted an appointment as 
Minister to France in 1784. With 
his elder daughter Martha and his 
body-sevvant, James Hemings, Jel- 
ferson came at last to the coun- 
try whose history and culture had 
long fascinated him. On his return 
to America, Jefferson's French 
{urnishings filled eighty-six erates 
for shipment. Nothing like it had 
ever heen seen in the new nation. 
Inspired by the classical archi- 
tecture of Paris, Jefferson decided 
to remodel Monticello. Ie was cap- 
tivated by the létel de Salm, 
newly-built on Palladian lines, on 
the rue de Lille, across the Seine 
{rom the Tuileries. This princely 
residence gave the effect of a soar- 
ing single storey under a shallow 
dome, an impression produced by 
rooms of oval and octagonal shape, 
great skylights and tall windows 
extending from the top and open- 
ing at the ground level. It was a 
THE UNESCO Courier BH FERRUARY 1997 
® 
L. 
R.
 
Pa
st
or
/I
nc
af
o,
 
Ma
dr
id
 
>

## [Page 44](105101engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 105099: Mr. Jefferson's dream house

> 
blo buiR sidualauuubodk 
AI Ch I Ss EN. bt tt 00 LL ee 
design ideally suited to Virginia 
scorching summers. 
Jefferson preferred the nat- 
ural beauty and wonder of Eng- 
lish gardens to the geometrical 
perfection of the French. At 
Painshill Park in Warwick, he 
found the roundabaout walks, 
mazes and serpentine walls that 
he wanted for Monticello. lle was 
enchanted by the temple of Bac- 
chus at Painshill, built by Charles 
Hamilton, a genius of cighteenth- 
century landscape gardening, who 
had created the park. 
THE TRANSFORMATION OF 
MONTICELLO 
The entire east front and eentral 
stairease of Monticello were torn 
dewn to make way for a grande 
entrée, a lofty portico of single 
columns topped by Doric eapitals, 
whieh led into a great hall that was 
connected by double doers with 
the salon beyond. These automatic 
glass doors were worked by a chain 
in the floor wound around two 
cylinders, so that when you opened 
one door, the other also opened, a 
contrivance of Jefferson, who 
delighted in such tricks. 
North and south wings were 
lowered to conform to the height 
of the lofty salon on which the 
dome rested. On the cast and west 
fronts, the windows of the second 
floor were elonga tions of the first- 
floor windows, which opened at 
ground level. Thus did Jefferson 
preserve the illusion of a ene- 
storey mansion under an elegant 
dome, as in the IT6tel de Salm. 
In reality, the new Monticello 
comprised four storeys. The hase- 
ment was connected by a series of 
tunnels to outlying “dependen- 
cies”, a large kitchen with char- 
coal-burning ovens ol 8 burners, a 
wine ecllar, ice house, dairy and 
smoke house. These additions Jef- 
ferson had buried under terraces 
on the hillside to preserve his 
panoramic vistas. 
1 A 
THE UNESCO Courier W FEBRUARY 1997 
pr 
Jefferson's bed at 
Monticello, Located 
in an open alcove 
between his bedroom 
and his study, it 
could be raised using 
a pulley system 
Jefferson invented. It 
was on this bed that 
Jefferson died on 
4 July 1826. 
    
 
To make Monticello completely 
self-sufficient, Mulberry Row, an 
avenue 300 metres long near the 
house, was lined with seventeen 
small structures of logs or stone. 
llere were more slave quarters and 
workshops for both white and 
black artisans, joiners, weavers, 
blacksmiths. 
From Mulberry Row, a gate 
through a ten-foot fenee led into a 
400-trec orchard and vegetable gar- 
den on the south slope, where Jef- 
ferson experimented with seventy 
different kinds of vegetables. In 
the large Fruitery, whieh included 
the North Orehard of cider apples 
and peaches for distilling brandy, 
grew not only all the American vari- 
eties but such exotic delights as 
figs, Spanish almonds and the 
prized Breast of Venus peach. 
A romantic grove of shade trees 
and glades erowned the mountain 
top. Twenty oval flower beds blos- 
somed around the house, while on 
the West Lawn a Roundabout Walk 
evoked an English garden, as at 
Painshill Park. 
All this beauty and praetical 
© 
Di
te
/U
SI
S,
 
Pa
ri
s 
functions took seventeen years to 
achieve. As Monticello was slowly 
taking form, the master himself 
was creating a new nation. As Pres- 
ident of the United States (1801- 
1809), he grasped the opportunity 
to purchase the vast Louisiana ter- 
ritory from the Emperor Napoleon 
in 1803. The size of the infant 
Republic was increased by 140 
per cent and new stretched from 
the Atlantic to the Pacific. 
A7,000-BOOK LIBRARY IN 
‘HONEYMOON COTTAGE’ 
When he was at home, Jefferson 
often retreated to a sanctum sane- 
torum in the south wing, the orig- 
inal “honeymoon eottage”, where 
he had his library of 7,000 books, 
his study and bedroom, with alcove 
bed. In the study, he kept his tele- 
scope, polygraph machine, revolv- 
ing table, reading stand and a 
swivel ehair with holes in the arms 
for brass candlesticks—all conve- 
niences invented by Jefferson. 
In the north wing was the din- 
ing room, with an octagonal tea 
room leading off it. The rooms 
opposite were guest bedrooms, 
each with its alcove bed. Addi- 
tional bedrooms on the second 
floor were reached by steep nar- 
row staircases enclosed within the 
north and south passages. 
Another flight of ladder-like 
stairs gave aecess to the dome 
room, “a noble and beautiful apart- 
ment with eight circular windows 
and skylight”. It was usually oecu- 
pied by one of Martha’s twelve chil- 
dren. The yellow walls contrasted 
vividly with the floor, painted 
“grass-green”, as was the parquet 
of the entrée, on the advice of 
Gilbert Stuart, famed portrait 
painter of Revolutionary heroes. 
Jefferson died on 4 July 1826, 
the same day as his [riend and 
political rival, John Adams. tt was 
exactly lifty years after the adop- 
tion of the Declaration that had 
resounded around the world. Death 
had come as he had desired, at 
Monticello. [|

## [Page 45](105101engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 105099: Mr. Jefferson's dream house

The Academical 
illage 
   
     
         
   
    
3 
i 
   
— 
ha -—— 
    
~ 
Top, the University of Virginia (1814-1825) or “academical village” in Charlottesville, 
designed by Thomas Jefferson, embodies the Enlightenment ideal in architecture 
applied to a large educational institution. In background is the Rotunda with its neo- 
classical portico. Students’ and teachers’ quarters stand on each side of the grassy 
quadrangle. 
Above, view of the Rotunda. A half-sized replica of the Pantheon in Rome, the Rotunda 
dominates the academical village. 
Right, extensive colonnades link the university buildings. 
  © 
Ge
or
g 
G
e
r
s
t
e
r
/
R
a
p
h
o
,
 
Pa
rs
 
ILI i | 
Jefferson devised a plan for what he 
called an “Academical Village”, a Uni- 
versity that would serve as a model 
for the education of American youth. 
He believed in a liberal non-sectar- 
ian formation and he devised a cur- 
riculum comprising all the intellec- 
tual currents of his time. 
According to Jefferson's plan, the 
university was to have eight schools, 
including both classical and modern 
languages, mathematics, natural his- 
tory, anatomy and medicine, moral 
philosophy and law. A flexible elec- 
tive system, the first of its kind, pre- 
vailed; a student who had completed 
six schools would graduate from the 
university. 
The “Academical Village”, as it 
was built in Charlottesville, was 
grouped around a complex of ten pavil- 
ions, five on a side, before a grassy 
quadrangle, the Lawn. Pavilions on 
either side were connected by colon- 
naded walkways. 
At the Lawn’s north end, a majes- 
tic Rotunda dominated the scene, its 
dome crowning three storeys, with 
marble steps ascending to a columned 
portico, To the south, the Lawn offered 
students the lofty vistas of the Blue 
Ridge Mountains. 
His classical inspiration prevail- 
ing, Jefferson designed the pavilions 
with no two alike, “to serve as speci- 
mens for the architectural lectures.” 
Each facade would exhibit details 
     
  
   
© 
Ge
or
g 
Ge
rs
te
r/
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
derived from Antiquity. One Pavilion 
would display Ionic columns with Doric 
capitals, another the Corinthian order 
of Diocletian’s Baths, the august 
Rotunda would be a smaller scale copy 
of the Roman Pantheon. 
When the University opened in 
1825, 109 rooms were available for the 
40 students admitted. Soon, however, 
a double occupancy became the rule. 
Today, the original “Jefferson rooms” 
are eagerly sought. 
As the University outgrew the first 
design, new buildings sprang up to 
house the Faculties of Law and Medi- 
cine. The classrooms, student and fac- 
ulty quarters of the Pavilions were con- 
verted to other uses: public meetings 
and social events. While the facades 
were unchanged, rear extensions sup- 
plied amenities such as bathrooms, 
toilets, modern kitchens. 
The “Hotels” or dining halls now 
harbour faculty and student rooms and 
the editorial offices of the Virginia 
Quarterly Review. The Rotunda, once a 
library, burned down in 1895. It was 
restored to its pristine splendour in 
1976 and is now an administrative cen- 
tre. The Dome Room is used for large 
public gatherings and formal dinners. 
The original concept of the Academical 
Village is preserved. With a library of 4 
million volumes, a faculty of 1,700 fine 
scholars, this great University annually 
gives diplomas to over 5,000 students. 
MF. L 
  
- 
h
a
 
y 
v 
=
 
E
E
.
 
| 
t
s
 
3 
- 
. 
a 
 
—
—
—
—
 
N
L
L
 
. 
THe unesco (COURIER ® FERRUARY 1007 
© 
L. 
R.
 
Pa
st
or
, 
in
ca
fo
, 
M
a
g
n
d

## [Page 46](105101engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 105100: Earthwatching satellites

© 
De
 
Wi
ld
en
be
rg
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ns
  
GREENWATCH 
by France Bequette 
Landsat, Spot, Topex-Posei- 
don, ERS, Polder, Argos, 
NOAA, Cosmos, Sarsat, Meteosat, 
Himawari, GOES, Tiros, Nim- 
hus—mysterious words that often 
appear in news reports—are the 
names of artificial satellites. 
The satellite era began on 4 
October 1957, when the Soviet 
Union successfully launched Sput- 
nik (“fellow traveller” in Russian) 
into orbit around the earth. An 
observation tool weighing almost 
84 kg, Sputnik circled the earth 
for three months at altitudes rang- 
ing from 228 to 947 km. 
Bolstered by progress in infor- 
mation technology, satellite tech- 
nology has come a long way sinee 
then. Today we rely heavily on 
THE unesco (COURIER FEBRUARY 1997 
these eyes in the sky to tell us 
about the environment and help us 
to manage the earth’s resources. 
Eyesin the sky 
Artificial satellites today observe 
the atmosphere, the oceans, and 
the eartl’s land surface from 
space. They provide information 
using two different techniques, 
data collection and remote sens- 
ing. With the first technique, they 
receive data from various points on 
the carth’s surface and then beam 
it back to earth, With the second, 
they use their instruments to 
analyse information contained in 
electromagnetic radiation emitted 
by the earth. 
The choice of orbit is extremely 
The SPOT-1 
satellite under 
construction in 
Toulouse (France) 
in 1984. This 
family of earth- 
observation 
satellites provides 
black and white 
photos of the 
earth within an 
accuracy of about 
10 metres and 
reconstitutes 
relief, 
The ERS-1 satellite 
on its Ariane 4 
launcher (total 
height 58.4 
metres) at the 
Kourou space 
centre (French 
Guyana) shortly 
before lift-off on 16 
July 1991.  
ke. rthwateching datellites 
important. A satellite in geosta- 
tionary orbit some 36,000 kilo- 
metres above the earth appears 
immobile since it moves at the 
same speed as the revolving globe. 
Geostationary satellites continu- 
ously observe a wide area hut are 
hampered by their distance from 
the earth. A satellite in polar orbit, 
on the other hand, covers the 
entire planet without remaining 
permanently ahove a single region. 
Geostationary satellites and 
satellites in polar orbit do not have 
thie same uses, and their capaci- 
ties complement each other. Both 
kinds are used in meteorology, for 
example, a field where satellites 
have proven to be of vital impor- 
tance. Five geostationary satellites 
© 
A, 
No
gu
es
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 47](105101engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 105100: Earthwatching satellites

enable weather watchers to keep a 
constant eye on the carth’s weather 
system in toto, while polar orbital 
satellites provide more precise 
measurements at different points 
on the earth’s surfaec. 
Satellites, whose weight ranges 
from a few kg to several tons, are 
launched by extremely powerful 
rockets. The United States, Rus- 
sia, France, Japan, China, India 
and Brazil are among the countries 
that possess such launehers, and in 
sonte cases launch satellites for 
other countries. Canada and the 
Arab states, for example, have had 
satellites launched by the United 
States and France respectively. 
Once in orbit, satellites record 
images by means of still photogra- 
phy, TV cameras, scanners or 
radar. Filin from manned satellites 
is returned to earth for process- 
ing. Unmanned satellites either 
process the images themselves or 
transmit them to terrestrial receiv- 
ing stations in different parts of 
the world. Each image is ordered 
in advance from the satellite by 
computer and identified in detail. 
This battery of observational 
technology has great potential for 
environmental monitoring. In July 
1991, the European Space Agency 
launched ERS-I (an acronym for 
European Remote-Sensing Satel- 
lite), Europe’s first environmental 
satelite, whose work was later car- 
ried on by its sister eraft ERS-2. 
The European 
Remote Sensing 
Satellite (ERS-1), 
Europe's first 
earth-observation 
satellite. 
Radar sensors enable the satellites 
to “sce” at night and through 
cloud cover. One system generates 
100-km x 100-km scenes of regions 
over which the satellite flies and 
measures wind speed and direc- 
tion and wave energy. Another mea- 
sures wave height to within 2 em. 
A third system is an infra-red 
detector that measures sea sur- 
face temperature to an acenracy of 
0.3°C. 
High resolution images 
“Our only way to obtain an overall 
vision of the state of ocean biology 
at any moment is satellite obser- 
vation of the ocean’s colours,” 
explains John Withrow, a member 
of the Intergovernmental Oceano- 
graphic Commission (IOC). “Data 
on the colour of the ocean will 
enable us to monitor such impor- 
tant ficlds as biogeochemical 
cycles, the direet effects of biology 
on the physics of oceans, coastal 
resources and sustainable fishing.” 
It is only by observing colour that 
we can also study carbon dioxide 
absorption by the oceans, a phe- 
nomenon which has repercussions 
on the abundance of marine algae. 
Remote sensing is an efficient 
tool for monitoring ice, especially 
in the Baltic Sea. In the northern 
reaches of the Baltic, the ice sea- 
son lasts on average more than six 
months of the year and obstrnets 
shipping. Since 1989, ice-break- 
Ry 
>> 
ers of the Finnish Shipping Office 
lave been equipped with a work- 
station for processing iinages sent 
by the NOAA aud ERS satellites. 
If the image arrives quickly and 
has a resolution of at least 100 
metres, the captain of the iee- 
breaker can choose his optimum 
route and transmit to other ships 
information that will help them 
throngh the iee without any need 
for his ship to intervene. 
In July 1994, fire raged through 
some 140,000 hectares on Spain’s 
east coast. Using their high-reso- 
lution imaging systems and trans- 
mitting four times a day, the Tiros 
and Landsat polar orbiting satel- 
lites monitored the advance of the 
fire, identified at-risk zones and 
assessed the damage. Even at night 
they were able to warn of new out- 
breaks of fire and smoke, enabling 
the fire services to use their 
resources to maximnm effect. 
A map-making tool 
Satellites ean also help us to take 
stock of the natural environment. 
They have, for example, been used 
to map old growth forests in Ore- 
gon and Washington State in the 
United States which have suffered 
from over-logging. They identified 
three levels—the oldest trees (400 
years old), 160-year-old trees, and 
a lower level, and used three para- 
meters: rate of coverage, diameter, 
and structure and nature of species. 
THE UNESCO Gouriirm FEBRUARY 1997 
© 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ni
s 
>

## [Page 48](105101engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### 105100: Earthwatching satellites

© 
D
i
t
e
/
N
a
s
a
 
The American yew (Taxus bre- 
vifolia) lives in the lowest level of 
these forests. When taxol, an ant- 
cancer drug, was extracted [rom 
its bark, large numbers of the trees 
were felled. Later, a synthetic mol- 
ecule for the drug was created, 
and logging was halted. If it had 
continued, however, satellite map- 
ping would have helped mobilize 
the authorities and improve forest 
management. Another unexpected 
beneficiary of satellite mapping is 
the nortliern spotted owl (Strix 
occidentalis), which lives only in 
these old growth [orests and would 
disappear if too many of their trees 
were felled. Its survival has 
become a priority target of nature 
conservation in the United States. 
Brazil and Thailand have high- 
powered data-receiving stations 
and use ERS, Landsat and Spot 
satellites to monitor their plant 
resources, In Amazonia, defor- 
estation is assessed every three 
years by satellite and its conse- 
(uences are measured—regional 
warming and declining rainfall. 
Agrienlture is one of Egypt’s 
main resources, and satellite data 
are extremely valuable tools for 
agricultural resource management 
THE UNESCO Courier B FEBRUARY 1997 
Above, a photo of 
northern 
California taken by 
the Landsat 2 
satellite from an 
altitude of 914 
kilometres. It 
shows the San 
Francisco Bay 
area, the great 
valley of central 
California and the 
coast south of San 
Francisco. The 
white patch over 
the Bay is 
industrial smoke. 
Crops, trees and 
other plantlife 
appear in bright 
red, and the built- 
up and industrial 
areas in green and 
dark grey. The 
broad white 
diagonal band at 
right of the image 
is a thick blanket 
of fog covering the 
valley. 
The northern 
spotted owl (Strix 
occidentalis).  
and forecasting. The Agricultural 
Land Information System (ALIS) 1s 
designed to measure and (ollow the 
evolution over time of arcas where 
the main crops are grown, to con- 
trol urban sprawl in these arcas 
and to develop new areas. This pro- 
ject, devised by Spot Image, which 
distributes imagery provided by 
Spot remote-sensing satellites, 
began in France, where twelve 
Egyptian specialists were trained. 
As a result of outside funding, the 
specialists are now continuing their 
© 
A. 
Me
rc
ie
ca
/J
ac
an
a,
 
Pa
ri
s 
work in Egypt with the most 
advanced equipment. 
Using maps made by this process 
it has been possible to study 4 mil- 
lion hectares, to identify 6,240 plots 
of land and obtain aceurate statis- 
tics on Egypt’s ten main crops. This 
inventory of land use has also helped 
to map urban development with a 
view to preserving the agricultural 
potential whichis vitally important 
to Egypt. 
A non-stop 
observation system 
Will it be possible to increase and 
improve the use of environmental 
satellites? Manned flights bring 
back plenty of experimental 
results, and virtually the whole 
planet reaps the benefits of 
progress made in weather and com- 
munieation satellites and is ready 
to help fund them. But natural dis- 
asters continue to happen without 
being predicted, and itis no longer 
enough simply to note increasing 
desert encroachment, soil erosion 
and deforestation. Is the {ate of the 
carth too general and too long-term 
a problem to motivate governments, 
groups of nations and private com- 
panies to act? 
André Lebean, a former offi- 
cial with Frenelh and European 
space programmes, believes that 
if we are to fully understand the 
global environment, we must devise 
and implement a permanent sys- 
tem for observing the earth in 
which satellite observations would 
he supplemented by other 
notably aerial —observation at a 
much lower cost. “The need for a 
system of this kind,” he notes, “is 
not directly perecived either at 
the individual ov institutional level, 
or even by nations. It only becomes 
really obvious when we consider 
the future of humanity as a 
whole—and since that is every- 
body’s business, it tends to be 
nobody’s business.” nu 
  
TO FIND OUT MORE: 
v 
L'observation par satellite 
et environnement 
Ministry of the Environment, 
Paris, January 1996

## [Page 49](105101engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Fr
éd
ér
ic
/Y
ac
an
a.
 
Pa
ri
s 
Woo rid 
WHEN DOLPHINS AND MULLET END UP IN THE SAME BOAT 
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) has asked the government 
of Mauritania to ban harmful fishing practices in the coastal waters off 
the Arguin Banks National Pavk, which lias been listed under the 
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of International Importance and 
included on UNESCO’s World Heritage list. Non-Mauritanian boats 
fish illegally there, particularly for grey mullet spawn. The use of seine 
nets and other huge industrial nets recently caused the death of 130 
dolphins. WWI”s request is also an alarm signal because these practices 
are a threat to the fishing resources that aceount for 2/3 of Mauritania’s 
annual income, | 
THAILAND'S PESTICIDE GRIM CORNUCOPIA 
PROBLEMS 
Within less than 10 years, Thai- 
land has deubled its imports of 
pesticides, reports The Asian Wall 
Street Journal Weekly. In 1991, 
Rhinos don’t have much luck, 
but in this ease neither did a gang 
of rhino horn smugglers. In Lon- 
don in September 1996 the 
British police seized the largest 
3,672 different products were haul of illegal rliino horn on 
used officially. Many farmers record: 105 Liorns weighing in at 
exceed prescribed quantities to 240 kg with a market value of 
obtain higher yields with the almost £3 million, Only some 
7,000 white and 3,000 black 
rhinos are still alive. Although 
result that during the first seven 
months of 1996 1,760 people were 
hospitalized, and 16 died. [| they are a protected species, 
A DIVERSITY OF CREATURES 
A new book about biological diversity in France published by the 
French Ministry of the Environment is packed with information about 
every aspect of the country’s plant and aninal wildlife. * It eontains 
case studies of the canses of speeies depletion and summaries of pro- 
grammes designed to protect a variety of species and habitats, The 
book describes, among many other topies, what to de if you want to 
help to clean up a river; the role of different government environ- 
mental protection agencies; and the extent to which such species as 
the little owl (Athene noctua), the European sturgeon (Acipenser 
sturio) and the wild tulip (Tulipe Liliaceae) are threatened. [| 
* La Diversité Biologique en France. Programme d’Action pour la Faune et lu Flore 
Saurages, 318 pp. 
 
they areinereasingly threatened 
because of Western interest in 
Oriental medicines and eon- 
sumption of “medicines” con- 
taining powdered rhino horn and 
even hear bile! [| 
OFFSHORE 
GENERATORS 
The World Bank’s Energy and 
Industry Department has eome 
up with a smart idea to bring 
eleetricity 10 developing coun- 
tries with a shoreline: harge- 
mounted diesel generators. If 
properly maintained, the genera- 
tors work well, and standard 
engines can produce from 5 10 50 
megawatts, depending on need. 
Up to 100 megawatts can be 
obtained by placing several gen- 
erators on a single barge. Among 
the countries using the genera- 
tors are Guatemala, Jamaica, 
the Dominican Republic and 
the Philippines. In spite of draw- 
baeks such as oil spills, waste 
disposal problems, noise and 
atmospheric emissions, the gen- 
erators have a number of attrac- 
tive features inclnding mobility, 
space-saving (particularly useful 
when providing energy for small 
islands), respect for sites on land 
and, above all, the production of 
low-cost cleetricity. | 
UNPROTECTED PROTEIN 
In Gabon, “bush meat” (game) 
is one of the main local sources 
of animal protein, and cach 
month 4 million tons of it are 
sold on the markets of Libre-   
ville. Unfortunately, much of it 
comes from protected species. 
In 1995, a non-governmental 
organization, “Vétérinaires sans 
Frontieres”, eame up with the 
idea of raising cane rats (Thry- 
onomis swinderianus) for their 
meat to reduce pressure on these 
These 
animals live on a diet of inseets, 
threatened ereatures. 
weeds and erop waste, and their 
meat is rich in protein. Farmers 
seem interested in raising this 4- 
to 5-kilo rodent because initial 
outlay is minimal and the addi- 
tional income is more than wel- 
come, [| 
GUINEA AND SENEGAL 
IN PARK MANAGEMENT 
PARTNERSHIP 
Guinea’s Badiar National Park 
and Senegal’s Niokolo-Koba 
National Park are joining up to 
form a single, cross-border park 
and biosphere reserve. Eight 
years after a draft agreement for 
joint management of the two 
parks was signed, 125 km of 
trails have now been created and 
an environmental protection train- 
ing and researeli centre has been 
setup in Dalaba (Senegal) helped 
by funding from the European 
Union. The Pan-African News 
Ageney (PANA) reports that the 
centre is training 30 Senegalese 
soldiers in environmental issues 
and policing to combat poaching, 
and will Tater host courses for 
people from the 2 neighbouring 
countries. The aim is to prevent 
confliet arising from management 
of their joint resources. | 
THE UNESCO Courier B FEBRUARY 1097 
© 
C.
 
So
ur
d/
Bi
os
, 
Pa
ns

## [Page 50](105101engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

AUTHORS 
RACHID SABBAGHI is a Moroccan writer and 
journalist. 
HERVE BOURGES, of France, is president of his 
country’s Higher Audiovisual Council {CSA) and 
a former director of Unesco’s Office of Public 
Information. Notable among his published works 
is La télévision du public (Flammarion, Paris, 
1993). 
BERNARD BLIN, of France, is a professor of 
international communications. 
GARETH PRICE, a British media specialist, is 
Director of the Thomson Foundation in London. 
Formerly Head of Programmes and Controller, 
BBC Wales, he acts as adviser to several 
broadcasting organizations in different parts of 
the world. 
KNUD EBBESEN, of Denmark, is director of DR 
Multimedia, a division of the Danish 
Broadcasting Corporation. 
RAY GALLON, of Canada, is a consultant in 
communications. He is currently a professor in 
the film, television and radio department, Tisch 
Schoo! of the Arts, New York University. 
DIANE SELIGSOHN, of the United States, trains 
journalists at Radio France Internaticnale’s 
international training department in Paris and is 
Paris correspondent for the magazine Radio 
World International. 
CARLOS A. ARNALDO, of the Philippines, is 
head of the Free Flow of Information and 
Communication Research section in UNesco’s 
Communications Division. 
WIJAYANANDA JAYAWEERA, of Sri Lanka, is a 
programme specialist in Unesco's 
Communicatiens Division. 
LOUIE TABING, a Philippine specialist in 
communications and radio broadcasting, is 
manager of the joint Unesco/Danida (Danish 
Agency for International Development) Tambuli 
community radio project in the Philippines. 
ARMEN OGANESSIAN, a Russian journalist, is 
head of the Voice of Russia, formerly Radio 
Moscow International. He is the author of many 
articles on the media. 
FRANCIS LEARY is an American writer and 
journalist who has written several novels and an 
essay on life in 15th-century Europe entitled The 
Golden Longing. 
FRANCE BEQUETTE is a Franco-American 
journalist specializing in environmental 
guestions. 
3 
THE UNLSCO Courierm FLBRUARY 1997 
SAFEGUARDING THE CULTURAL 
HERITAGE: A GLOBAL CHALLENGE 
An international symposium, “World Cultural Heritage, a Global Challenge”, is being 
held in Hildesheim (Germany) from 23 February to 1 March 1997 under the patronage 
of Unesco and sponsored by the Deutsche Bundesstiftung Umwelt and the EXPO 2000 
Hannover GmbH. 
International specialistsand amateurs with aninterest in the preservation of cultural 
property have been invited by the city of Hildesheim, the Roemer Pelizaeus Museum, 
Hildesheim University and the Fachhochschule Hildesheim/Holzminden to report on their 
experiences, exchange ideas and suggest strategies for the protection of the cultural 
heritage in the 21st century. 
The symposium will seek to prepare the ground for the EXPO 2000 world fair that 
will be held in Hanover (Germany) in theyear 2000 on the theme “Humankind—Nature— 
Technology”. 
  
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 
BRIGITTE MAYERHOFER, 
EXPO-Biiro Hildesheim. 
Tel: (49) (0)5121 301 649; Fax: (49) (0)5121 301 707; 
e-mail: wch-expo@zfw.uni-hildesheim.de; 
Internet home page: http://www.uni-hildesheim.de/wch-expo 
The 7th Exhibition 
of Magazines, 
Journals and 
Reviews 
THE UNESCO ((OURIER 
will have a stand at the 7th Exhibition of Magazines, Journals and 
Reviews, which will be held at the Parc des Expositions, Porte de 
Versailles, Paris, from 12 to 17 March 1997. More than 500 magazines will 
be represented at the Exhibition, which is part of a major combined 
event—the Paris Book Fair, the Multimedia and Electronic Publishing Fair, 
the Book Trade and Industries Fair, the High-School Student’s Fair and 
the Video Fair. 
Building on the success of the Book Fair, this complex of events 
offers a panoramic view of present-day culture. 
For further information, please contact: 
REED-OIP 
11, rue du Colonel Pierre Avia, BP 571-75726 Paris Cedex 15 
Tel.: (33) (0)1 41 90 47 40; Fax: (33) (0)1 419047 49 

## [Page 51](105101engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

  
nterne 
| http://www.unesco.org   
Currently on-line are: an index of the contents of the last 22 issues of the Unesco Courie 
Unesco press releases, addresses, fax, telex and electronic mail numbers of UNesco’s re- 
onal offices, National Commissions and Unesco Clubs, the directory of Unesco databas 
nd information services, colour images of the Japanese Garden and other architectu 
ites at Unesco Headquarters, as well as works of art such as Henry Moore's reclining 
ulpture. 
directly with suggestions and comments, type: 
| unesco.courier@unesco.org a     
 
 
Les revues s'exposent 
au 
17¢ Salon du Livre 
12-17 Mars 97 
Paris Expo+Porte de Versailles 
Tous les jours 10h - 19h, Nocturne le jeudi 13 jusqu’a 23h 
 
le Japon, invité d'honneur 
ET . a Dah —  — i.    
Pour toutes informations complémentaires : Reed OIP, Contact : Marie-Héléne Pasdeloup, 
do 1 I, ruc du Colonel Pierre Avia - BP 571 - 75726 Paris cedex 15 - France - Tél. et fax 04 67 65 81 69 ou tél. 0141904740 L A 
wT il a iL Mi us er a pig SEE GE SE RS 

## [Page 52](105101engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

   
   
  
    
 
THEME OF THE NEXTISSUE: 
~~ MULTICULTURAL 
CITIES 
 NTERVIEW WITH 
~ PEDRAG MATVEJEVIC ,»o 
~ VIDOSAV STEVANOVIC, 
TWO WRITERS FROM THE FORMER 
UGOSLAVIA 
NERITAGE: a 
~ AMIENS CATHEDRAL 
~ (FRANCE) 
By ENVIRONMENT: 
LARGE DAMS 
 
   
 