# [083185](083185engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](083185engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

¥ a 
as A 
IS san 
i—~—_— 
bes 
  
) 
ad 
oh Cathet * Wap po 
” . Soke * Pee ' B eo 
_ ’ a 2

## [Page 2](083185engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
he <8" {» 
WH 
HEY 
   

## [Page 3](083185engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

TO OUR READERS 
 
Since the Unesco Courier was launched over forty years ago profound transformations 
have taken place in the scope and limits of human knowledge, in forms of creativity, 
in the power of communications, and in ways of teaching and learning. Everywhere—in 
the North as in the South, in the West as in the East—the pace of life and work is acceler- 
ating. People belong to an increasingly close network of reciprocal influences and in- 
tellectual exchange. They may seek different forms of fulfilment, see the world in different 
terms and have unequal chances of success and failure, but they feel more and more strongly 
that they share a common destiny. 
It is part of Unesco’s mission to foster this awareness by encouraging a spirit of mutual 
respect and solidarity. The Unesco Courier was created to be a mainspring of this process. 
Over the years it has been produced in conditions which have sometimes been favour- 
able, sometimes less so. There have been occasions when, in the face of international 
tensions, much perseverance has been required to keep the magazine firmly targeted 
on its course as an instrument of hope and understanding. 
Now a new chapter in the history of the Courier is about to open, at a time when 
the prospects for world co-operation and especially for intellectual and cultural co-operation 
are steadily improving, when there is a growing determination everywhere to break down 
barriers of exclusion and distrust, to increase contacts and exchanges on the basis of a 
common respect for fundamental human rights. The Unesco Courier is responding to 
this challenge by adopting a new editorial formula which will enable its contributors 
to express their differing viewpoints and its readers to appreciate each month the 
diversity of the world. 
It hardly needs to be said that these innovations, which will be described in detail 
in the next issue, will follow the guidelines which have for so long earned the Courier 
the loyalty of hundreds of thousands of readers worldwide. At the same time it is hoped 
that expanded coverage and wider perspectives will attract hundreds of thousands more. 
Tomorrow, as in the past, the Unesco Courier will seek above all to create, in homes 
and schools, universities and offices, arts and leisure centres, a bond of solidarity which 
transcends frontiers and combats prejudice, in order to build the defences of peace in 
the minds of men, through education, science and culture. 
    
Federico Mayor 
Director-General of Unesco

## [Page 4](083185engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

Th
is
 
iss
ue 
co
mp
ri
se
s 
40 
pa
ge
s 
an
d 
a 
4-
pa
ge
 
ad
ve
ru
si
ng
 
ins
ert
 
be
tw
ee
n 
pa
ge
s 
2-3
 
an
d 
38
-3
9.
 
April 1989 
4 


### 83171: The Dawn of a new age

The dawn of a new age 
by Luis Filipe Barreto 
10 
Of caravels and cartographers ... 
by Luis de Albuquerque 
14 
Japan in early Portuguese maps 
by Alfredo Pinheiro Marques 
17 
Luis de Camdes 
Portugal’s great epic poet 
by Vasco Graga Moura 
26 
The Lusiads 
From national epic to universal myth 
by Eduardo Lourengo 
28 
Camdes and Brazil 
by Josué de Souza Montello 
30 
Rivalry in the Red Sea 
Portugal's impact on the fortunes 
of Mamluk Egypt 
by Ibn Iyas 
33 
‘Christians and spices’ 
The Portuguese in India 
by John Correia Afonso 
35 
Portuguese art in the maritime era 
by Rafael de Faria D. Moreira 
37 
Fernando Pessoa and the spirit 
of discovery 
by José Augusto Seabra 
Detail from the polyptych for Sio Vicente, a 
masterwork of Portuguese art painted by Nuno 
Gongalves between 1458 and 1462. Dominated 
by the figure of St. Vincent, the 6 panels of the 
polyptych portray a cross-section of Portuguese 
society, Shown here is the “Panel of the 
Archbishop”, in which St. Vincent is 
4 surrounded by clergy and knights. 
The Courier II 
A window open on the world 42nd year 
Published monthly in 35 languages English 
French Spanish Russian German 
Arabic Japanese Italian Hindi 
Tamil Hebrew Persian Dutch 
Portuguese Turkish Urdu Catalan 
Malaysian Korean Swahili Croato- 
Serb Macedonian Serbo-Croat 
Slovene Chinese Bulgarian Greek 
Sinhala Finnish Swedish Basque 
Thai Vietnamese Pashto Hausa 
ed
it
or
ia
l 
Intercontinental travel by rail, sea and air is today 
readily available to anyone with the means to pay for it. 
Accurate detailed maps, charts and guidebooks help 
travellers choose their route, decide where to stop off, tell 
them what kind of weather to expect and describe every 
place they could possibly wish to visit. 
It is not easy nowadays to imagine what a 
fragmentary and fantastic picture of the world our 
ancestors once had. A glance at the maps produced as 
late as the fourteenth century in Europe, Asia or the 
Arab world is enough to show the incompleteness of 
geographical knowledge and the extent of the mystery 
which then veiled the contours of the Earth. 
A radical change in outlook took place in the 
fifteenth century when Portuguese navigators began to 
explore the coasts of Africa; when Bartolomeu Dias 
rounded the southern extremity of the continent in 1487; 
and when Vasco da Gama opened up the sea route from 
Europe to the East in 1498. These men, who crossed 
with astonishment “seas no man had ever sailed before”, 
were plunged into a host of unexpected encounters 
between the languages, values and customs of peoples 
meeting for the first time. 
The present issue seeks to give a glimpse of this key 
period when human history assumed global dimensions. 
An intellectual, aesthetic and technological revolution 
had prepared the ground for a process which led 
eventually to a truly global perception of the world. 
Centuries later the enterprise of discovery would justly 
be described by the Portuguese poet Fernando Pessoa as a 
“civilization-creating act”. 
We have not attempted to tell the full story of this 
complex act of creation. We have chosen instead to 
describe some major events and those who played an 
important role in them, including the Portuguese poet 
who splendidly immortalized the voyages of discovery in 
his epic poem The Lusiads, Luis de Camoées. 
Without glossing over the difficulties, 
misunderstanding and conflicts which marked this great 
human adventure, we have sought above all to define its 
essential contribution to history: the irreversible 
discovery of human diversity. 
  
The Editors of the Unesco Courier wish to thank the following for their 
kind help in the preparation of this issue: the National Board for the 
Celebration of the Portuguese Discoveries, especially Professor Alfredo 
Pinheiro Marques; the Permanent Delegation of Portugal to Unesco; and 
the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, Paris. 
  
Covers: A flotilla of 16th-century Portuguese ships as portrayed in an 
anonymous Dutch painting of the period. Vessel on back cover is the 
Santa Catarina do Monte Sinai, then considered to be one of the biggest 
ships ever built. A somewhat fanciful representation of the port and city 
of Lisbon can be seen in right background of front cover.

## [Page 5](083185engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83171: The Dawn of a new age

THE DAWN OF A NEW AGE 
  
  — te ~~ bo "5 , 
BENGE Wh EL hep TU led a

## [Page 6](083185engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 83171: The Dawn of a new age

  
T the end of the fourteenth cen- 
A the extent of the known 
world was, at most, equivalent to 
barely one quarter of its true area. Islam- 
ic civilization was the repository of this 
knowledge. When, during the fifteenth 
and sixteenth centuries, gaps in geo- 
graphical knowledge were gradually 
filled, it was on the initiative of Christian 
Europe. 
As a result of the great maritime ex- 
peditions of this period Portugal became 
largely responsible for bringing Europe 
closer to Africa, Asia, the Americas and 
Oceania. The significance of the Portuguese 
discoveries in the history of civilizations is 
that they made an extraordinary contribu- 
tion to the opening up of the planet. As 
a result of Portuguese endeavours, Euro- 
peans sailed round the Capes of Tarfaya 
and Bojador, the traditional limits of navi- 
gation along the west coast of Africa, 
which had only seldom been passed. 
They went on to reach equatorial regions 
and the southern hemisphere and gave the 
lie to the traditional European idea that 
these regions were uninhabitable. These 
discoveries established for the first time 
that there was a link between the Atlan- 
tic and Indian Oceans—the so-called 
“route to India”—thus refuting the 
widely-held traditional view that the 
Indian Ocean was landlocked. 
  
A new world-picture 
 
As a result of this revolution in com- 
munication and knowledge, a relatively 
accurate picture of the planet began to 
emerge for the first time. The tropics and 
the southern hemisphere were not inferi- 
or to the northern hemisphere but differ- 
ent, possessing a wider variety of 
minerals, and plant and animal life. The 
The Tower of Belém, left, has stood like a 
sentinel at the mouth of the Tagus since the 
early 16th century, when it was built to 
defend the port of Lisbon. This jewel of 
Portuguese Renaissance architecture became 
the symbol of the voyages of discovery. From 
here sailed ships bound for India, the 
Americas, Africa, China and Japan. 
revolution also made a decisive contribu- 
tion, in both theory and practice, to the 
discovery that humankind, one and the 
same, existed all over the world. 
The new awareness of life on a plan- 
etary scale, which came into being with 
the discoveries of the fifteenth and six- 
teenth centuries, began to stimulate a 
world economy based on the unequal 
terms of trade which the Europeans im- 
posed in their dealings with other socie- 
ties. A mercantile economy centred on 
cities such as Lisbon and Seville came into 
being, with central and northern Europe 
and the Italian cities providing the main 
outlets and sources of finance. 
The first signs of a world culture also 
began to emerge. Books, letters, reports 
and maps were published and circulated 
in southern Europe but also in Goa, 
Macao and Nagasaki. The Portuguese dis- 
coveries thus made a fundamental contri- 
bution to the transition from an age of 
tightly-knit societies to a wider, more 
open world. 
Portuguese navigators settled in 
Madeira and the Azores in the 1420s and 
1430s and then advanced through the At- 
lantic and along the west coast of Africa. 
Gil Eanes rounded Cape Bojador in 1434. 
Between 1440 and 1460 further progress 
BY LUIS FILIPE BARRETO 
was made along the coast of Guinea and 
the Cape Verde islands were discovered. 
The islands of Fernando Po, Sio Tomé, 
Principe and Annobén were discovered 
in 1470. In 1483, Diogo Cio reached the 
River Congo and then, in 1487-1488, 
Bartolomeu Dias established the existence 
of a link between the Atlantic and Indian 
Oceans by sailing round the Cape of 
Good Hope, which he called the Cape of 
Storms. Vasco da Gama’s great voyage of 
1497-1499 opened the sea route between 
Europe and Asia. 
In the sixteenth century, the drive for 
expansion took the Portuguese into the 
interior of Africa, with the exploration 
of the Monomotapa empire (present-day 
Zimbabwe) in 1514, and to the Americas, 
with the arrival in 1500 of Pedro Alvares 
Cabral in Brazil and of the Corto Real 
brothers in Newfoundland. Jodo Rod- 
rigues Cabrilho played a decisive role in 
the exploration of Florida in 1539 and of 
California in 1542-1543. The Portuguese 
also went on to Asia and Oceania, reach- 
ing Malacca and the East Indies in 
1509-1511, China in 1513 and Japan in 
1542-1543. 
Other European peoples spread out 
into the wider world later than the Por- 
tuguese, who can be said to have ushered 
This map drawn in 1519 by the Portuguese cartographer Lopo Homem is an attempt to reconcile 
new data collected by European navigators with the time-honoured canons of Ptolemaic 
geography. The regions of the East and Far East seem to be joined to the lands discovered in the 
West by Portuguese and Spanish explorers. 
  

## [Page 7](083185engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 83171: The Dawn of a new age

  
in a new era of knowledge and human 
history in the 1420s and 1430s. The first 
significant date in Spanish expansion was 
1492, when Christopher Columbus 
(1451-1506), who had been enlisted in the 
service of the Catholic monarchs Ferdi- 
nand and Isabella, reached the West 
Indies. French and British expansion only 
began in the 1530s. Portugal’s geograph- 
ic discoveries were not only ahead of 
those of other European countries, but 
the Portuguese were also the first to reach 
all the continents (Africa, Asia, the 
Americas and Oceania) and the major 
oceans (the Atlantic, the Indian and the 
Pacific). 
As a result of this vast enterprise, Por- 
tugal became the repository of a data 
bank on a planetary scale. For the first 
time, a worldwide system of material and 
intellectual exchanges took shape. Never 
before had such a mass of information in 
so many fields—from the determination 
of latitudes, watersheds, and magnetic 
declinations to botany, zoology, 
mineralogy—been compiled and classi- 
fied. The first attempts were also made 
towards the systematic application of in- 
formation gathered from different oceans, 
continents and societies. 
  
An age of expansion 
  
    
   
   
  
B NET 
- - wT | . - 
’ >, 3» ._\ROTA PROVAVEL DE" 
nk, kK... AN - — Vv I 7; T.VASCO DA GAMA 
! y. WP, WAR 
; J: 4 h : es i / 3 hY C or R >on
| g . oO —— \ 
d x \ 
] 
J 
SPS Q ¥ ] 7 
-— RY — 
| -l ~ ’ = i. C 
|| £5 tly 0) 
(¥p - » wi — 
ARE wa 4 0 i — A 
Q 4 — J \ - ~ a 
, — TL y J ab — 
ig) ne < VIAGEM DE DA, 1497-98 
f h— . 
aif : ( - - ——— A a 
3 Re IS / 5 tr —— ——cn a *Oule 
1 | 3 2 — XK : 
| ye ln: C VIAGEM DE VOLIA, 1496.99 
      
Modern marine charts on this page and opposite show (above) the route taken by Vasco da Gama 
along the coast of Africa and (opposite page) the Atlantic voyages of Diogo Cio, Bartolomeu Dias 
and the route of Pedro Alvares Cabral to Brazil. 
 
There were two main stages in the 
Portuguese discoveries, separated by a 
period of recession between 1460 and 
1469, as a result of the death of Prince 
Henry the Navigator and of hesitations 
in the geostrategical policy of King 
Afonso V (1438-1481). 
The first stage began in 1415, with the 
conquest of Ceuta in Morocco, and end- 
ed in 1460 with the arrival of the Por- 
tuguese in Sierra Leone. This period 
corresponded to the emergence of a so- 
cial, technical and ideological structure 
geared to the expansion of Portuguese 
power in the Atlantic and Africa. The 
thrust of this expansion was directed 
towards three main objectives: settlement 
in North Africa, a determination to sail 
further south than Cape Bojador, and the 
6 __ 
organization of an area of production in 
Madeira and the Azores. 
The first stage was dominated by 
Prince Henry the Navigator (1394-1460), 
a great figure who strove to coordinate 
the activities of the nobles and merchants, 
who coveted wealth from agriculture and 
trade and aspired to control the trade 
routes, and to reconcile these activities 
with the imperatives of nationhood and 
Christian Europe (as dictated by the 
Papacy and the Order of Christ, a reli- 
Jodo de Castro (1500-1548), a Portuguese 
scholar and explorer who served for a time as 
viceroy to India, made a major contribution 
to the science of navigation with his 
celebrated roteiros (pilot books). This portrait 
is from the Codex Lisuarte de Abreu (1558), 
in the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York. 
 
gious order of which Henry was made 
grand master in 1420). 
The second stage lasted from 1469, 
when King Afonso V made a contract 
with Ferndo Gomes for the exploration 
of the African seaboard, to 1498, when 
Vasco da Gama arrived in Calicut (in the 
present-day Indian state of Kerala), and 
opened the way for the establishment of 
a maritime link between Europe and 
Asia. King Jodo II (1455-1495) was the 
main figure behind the organization of 
this move to conquer the south Atlantic 
and to link the Atlantic and Indian 
Oceans. As a result of his policies, Por- 
tuguese expansion was largely state- 
controlled and mercantile. The spheres of 
influence of the Portuguese crown under 
its new policy were laid down in the 
Treaty of Tordesillas concluded with 
Spain in 1494, which defined the limits 
to the area of Spanish and Portuguese 
conquest in the Americas. However, the 
prime goal of Portuguese policy was the 
Orient, as witnessed by the overland jour- 
neys of Péro da Covilhi, with the empha- 
sis being placed on navigational 
technology and science. 
  
Strategic locations 
 
All through the sixteenth century, the 
Portuguese strove to develop communi- 
cations within their Estado da India 
(“State of India”) and to create a new so- 
ciety in Brazil. The “State of India” con-

## [Page 8](083185engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

sisted of a vast network of relations 
between different civilizations stretching 
from the Cape of Good Hope to Japan. 
It was a system in which Portuguese 
seafarers, explorers and merchants were 
at their most mobile, ranging far and wide 
from East Africa to the Orient in an in- 
tensive effort of dissemination and change 
based on a minimum of linguistic, reli- 
gious and political unity. The “State of 
India” was organized on the basis of a 
small number of territorial possessions 
covering the widest possible geographi- 
ca) range. Portugal’s maritime trading net- 
work drew its inspiration from the 
example set by Islamic “thalassocracy” 
(mastery of the seas). 
In order to hold sway over the largest 
possible area with a small number of ter- 
ritorial possessions, it was necessary to en- 
sure control over the high seas from a 
number of strategic locations, such as 
Hormuz, Goa and Malacca, and it was 
this plan that Afonso de Albuquerque put 
into effect between 1509 and 1515. In the 
meantime, from 1502 onwards, this mar- 
itime hegemony, which was instrumen- 
tal in securing partial control of the seas 
and the circulation of goods, became a 
reality, as the Portuguese came to impose 
the cartaze or safe-conduct system on 
navigation by non-Christian vessels in the 
Indian Ocean. 
The basic features of the “State of 
India” were its maritime activity, its mer- 
cantile economy and its urban demo- 
graphic structure. The key social unit was 
the individual committed to the state and 
the Church and spurred on by personal 
initiative. The economic basis of the 
“State of India’s” prosperity was mercan- 
tile, its end-purpose being to foster trade 
both between different regions of Asia 
and between Asia and Europe. The main 
commodities involved in this internation- 
al traffic were pepper and ginger from 
Malabar and from Indonesia and Malay- 
sta; mace and nutmeg from the Banda Is- 
lands in the East Indies; cinnamon from 
Ceylon; cloves from Ternate; horses from 
Persia and Arabia; gold, silk and porcelain 
from China; and gold from south-eastern 
Africa (the Monomotapa empire) and 
Sumatra. 
The social system of Brazil, unlike 
that of the “State of India”, was based on 
the landowning colonial families. Society 
was based on the aristocratic and slave- 
owning model and wealth took the form 
of agricultural holdings and slave labour, 
with stockraising and the monoculture of 
sugarcane. 
The Portuguese of the fifteenth and 
sixteenth centuries thus practised on a 
large scale the intermingling of cultures 
and peoples. They established links be- 
tween the Christian, Jewish and Islamic 
civilizations, purveyed commodities and 
syncretized religions and customs. 
At the time of the great discoveries, 
the Portuguese language came to be the 
main vernacular of maritime and mercan- 
tile communication, especially along the 
coasts of Africa and the Orient. The fact 
that Portuguese today has more words of 
Asian, African and Amerindian origin 
than any other European language is one 
result of this far-reaching dialogue be- 
 
LUIS FILIPE BARRETO, Portuguese historian of 
Angolan origin, is professor of history at the Clas- 
sical University of Lisbon and author of a number 
of works on the Portuguese discoveries, including 
a tri-lingual (Portuguese/French/English) publica- 
tion entitled Portugal: A Pioneer of the North/South 
Dialogue (Imprensa Nacional, Lisbon, 1988). 
  
 
  
    
- sq. - - 
tween civilizations. | 
I WEE © i » = Y —. © _ on » » w i] 
ACORES / 
. o LISBOA | £ © 
~ — re . ROTAS PROVAVEIS 
Fl TEE [a yl Mbt Sa << 
2 : - DA 
< MADERA fi ol S 
|PRIMEIRAS VIAGENS ATLANTICAS 
ae — CANARIAS 7 / ! ® 
- YT gen wn Cl of 
yw 5 CABOJADOR COMENTS () vonos wascs 
P / OTA » VON'OS CRAs ! 
‘ 2 3 | ' 
“. 1 CYERDES 
. Santco|®, A F 
he x COLOMBO L408 -—o ‘ SERRA LEOA ’S ’ [ » 
# y \ MINA, 7 
} r & . pogo 
RE oath ed LL 
| Ne" NORONHA a ho ANO-BOM\ a 
| ~~ \GSROE »FATEU3 ? NA Luks 
SS PERAMBl cacoer oY ASRSI0 \ 
tet, w. d > " ’ J : 
h I » / ’ | Q- pls ouro SHELENA 
M PASCOAL. 3 { 
o1L™ TRNDADE \ be 
FRO - 1.08 
(1 \AssVOLTAS 
od Ny 
RIO GR Ss V 4 a Wn 
CEA ESPERANCE aks | 
LEROA 1947 am, = “a 
oividdn TR DA.CUNHA 
(° 0 «0 *r » a — w 0 » bo AD)     

## [Page 9](083185engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

  
Pioneers of 
ocean exploration 
  
Prince Henry the Navigator 
and King Jodo II 
rince Henry (1394-1460), son of 
King Jodo |, is known as ‘the 
Navigator’ because he inspired, 
financed and organized the early 
Portuguese voyages of discovery. He 
epitomized Portugal’s drive for 
religious, political and economic 
expansion, which was given further 
impetus in the second half of the 
15th century by his great-nephew 
King Joao Il (1455-1495), who 
continued exploration of the African 
coast and the quest for the route to 
India. Above, detail of a panel from 
the polyptych for Sao Vicente, by 
Nuno Gongalves, shows Henry with 
the future Jodo Il at his side. (See also 
page 2.) 
Diogo Cio 
ing Jodo Il commissioned Diogo 
Cao, a knight of the royal 
household, to explore the west coast 
of Africa. The first European to set 
foot on African soil south of the 
Equator, he established friendly 
relations with local rulers in the Congo, 
Angola and Namibia. During his first 
voyage, in 1482, he explored the coast 
between Cape Catarina and Cape 
Lopez (in present-day Gabon). On a 
second voyage he passed Pointe-Noire 
and sailed upriver to explore the 
interior of the Congo and Angola. 
Like other Portuguese navigators, he 
set up engraved stone pillars (padrées) 
in the places he visited, as a result of 
which it has been possible to retrace 
his steps. The padrdo shown here is in 
the possession of the Lisbon 
Geographical Society. 
Bartolomeu Dias 
knight of the royal household, 
Bartolomeu Dias (d. 1500), is 
famed for the voyage (1487-1488) in 
which he rounded the southernmost 
point of Africa, the Cape of Good 
Hope, which he named the Cape of 
Storms. He thus confirmed King Jodo 
II's hypothesis that it was possible to 
reach India by sea. Ten years later a 
fleet commanded by Vasco da Gama 
  
set sail from the Tagus estuary in 
search of the legendary eastern land 
of spices and gold. Dias carried out 
further expeditions and died when his 
ship went down not far from the 
cape he had discovered. The map, 
below, was produced by the German 
cartographer Henricus Martellus 
around 1489 and shows the 
immediate impact of Dias’ voyage on 
European cartography. 
— 3 L r, 

## [Page 10](083185engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 83172: Of caravels and cartographers: an age of innovation in nautical science and technology

  
  
Vasco da Gama 
asco da Gama (c. 1468-1524), the 
most celebrated of the Portuguese 
navigators, carried out several missions 
for King Jodo Il before being 
appointed admiral of the fleet which 
sailed around the Cape of Good Hope 
and opened the sea route from 
Western Europe to India in 1498, a 
major achievement for the Portuguese. 
(Six years before, Christopher 
Columbus, sailing under the Spanish 
flag, had tried to find a western sea 
route to Asia, but instead reached 
America, the existence of which had 
not been suspected by Europeans.) Da 
Gama'’s fleet sailed from Lisbon on 
8 July 1497 and arrived at Calicut, on 
the south-west coast of India, in May 
the following year. He met the 
Zamorin (ruler) of Calicut and gave him 
a letter from King Jodo’s successor, 
Manuel |, proposing an alliance and a 
commercial treaty. After his return to 
Lisbon, Da Gama was made 
Portuguese viceroy to India. His great 
voyage of discovery inspired Luis de 
Camoes’ epic poem The Lusiads. 
Ferndo de Magalhies 
(Ferdinand Magellan) 
Men (c. 1480-1521) 
commanded the first expedition 
to sail round the world (1519-1522). 
While in the East as a soldier in the 
service of the Portuguese crown, he 
learned much that proved useful 
during his great voyage. At that time 
many Portuguese navigators were 
offered large sums by foreign rulers to 
command maritime expeditions, and 
Magellan entered the service of the 
Emperor Charles V, who was also 
King of Spain. The major commercial 
rivals of the Portuguese, the Spaniards 
were seeking a western sea route 
which would take them around the 
Americas to Asia. Magellan's proposal 
to sail westwards to the Spice Islands 
or the Moluccas received royal assent. 
On 21 October 1520 his ships 
rounded the southern tip of South 
America via what would later be 
known as the Strait of Magellan and 
entered the ocean which he called the 
Pacific”. The great navigator did not 
live to see the conclusion of his 
project. He was killed in a skirmish in 
the Philippines and the voyage was 
completed by the Spaniard 
Juan Sebastian Elcano. This portrait of 
Magellan is in the Naval Museum, 
Madrid. 
DN MAGELLANY ’S « SVPERATIS 
ANTARTIC" Ta mene 
  
   
Pedro Alvares Cabral 
fter Vasco da Gama's discovery 
of the sea route to India, Pedro 
Alvares Cabral (c. 1467-1520) was 
appointed captain of the second 
Portuguese fleet bound for Calicut. His 
orders were to establish commercial 
and political relations with the port, 
which was then the centre of the 
spice trade. The fleet, which left 
Lisbon harbour in 1500, drifted off 
course and headed west, finally 
reaching the Brazilian coast at a point 
which Cabral named Vera Cruz. In 
spite of the belief that Brazil was 
discovered by chance, there are 
several indications that King Manuel | 
of Portugal had ordered Cabral to find 
a route to the “West Indies”, as the 
Americas were known. Both the 
Portuguese and the Spanish were 
exploring these regions, and the 
two nations had drawn up the Treaty 
of Tordesillas in 1494 in order to 
define the limits of their respective 
spheres of influence in the New 
World. Above, statue of Cabral in a 
Lisbon square.

## [Page 11](083185engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83172: Of caravels and cartographers: an age of innovation in nautical science and technology

OF CARAVELS AND 
CARTOGRAPHERS... 
An age of innovation in nautical science and technology 
   
  
       
ER 
WARS : 
~ ’ 
* a La A 
ow. ela vl 
oi 
  
  
    
  
   
       
Above: a Portuguese mariner can be seen navigating with the aid of a compass on the deck of a 
16thcentury ship in this engraving by Jan van der Straet. Right: 17th-century Portuguese vessel 
of a later type than the caravel, the craft which was widely used on the great 15th-century 
voyages of discovery and was the main Portuguese innovation in shipbuilding. 
— 10 _

## [Page 12](083185engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83172: Of caravels and cartographers: an age of innovation in nautical science and technology

HE scientific and technical de- 
velopments which took place in 
sixteenth-century Portugal had 
their roots in the Atlantic navigation of 
the previous century or, to be more pre- 
cise, in the conditions created by ocean 
navigation and the new possibilities it 
opened up. 
Around the middle of the fifteenth 
century, navigators began to study sea 
currents and wind directions as a first step 
towards understanding the geography of 
the great oceans. Improvements were also 
made in shipbuilding techniques, and in 
: the accuracy of navigational instruments. 
p = The art of cartography developed in Por- 
Ra a tugal during the early years of the centu- 
PRA ry, initially inspired by Mediterranean 
fil : 7 Td (Italian and Majorcan) models, but even- 
tually acquiring an originality of its own 
and gaining acceptance in other countries, 
- especially France and Japan. Prolemy’s 
geographical theories, which enjoyed a 
revival of popularity from the second 
decade of the century, were soon being 
revised in the light of new information. 
BY LUIS DE ALBUQUERQUE 
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
  
Sailing the high seas 
 
The study of currents and winds and 
their variations began when Portuguese 
merchant and exploratory ships ventured 
ever further south along the west coast 
of Africa. The outward voyage was not 
particularly difficult, but the winds and 
currents encountered on the return jour- 
ney frequently slowed down the ships or 
brought them to a complete halt. The ef- 
forts made to overcome these obstacles 
had three important consequences. Initial- 
ly, a technique was evolved for dealing 
with a head or beam wind by going about 
     
  
¥ : RE ER 
    ay Tr RE 1 , : , 
ae 1 
! or rh a 
“a. — - 
b x 
or tacking, then a lighter vessel better 
suited to this type of navigation was 
designed—the caravel. Eventually, return- 
ing sailors realized that they would reach 
their destination more quickly by head- 
ing out into the open sea to avoid the 
problem zones. This manoeuvre, which 
no doubt accounted for the frequent stops 
in the Azores, is referred to by modern 
historians as “the return by the open sea”, 
whereas in the fifteenth and sixteenth cen- 
turies it was called the “Guinea return” 
or the “Mina return”. (On the way back 
from So Jorge de Mina, the Portuguese 
trading-post on the Gold Coast, now 
Ghana, ships would change course and 
head northwest until they reached the 
approximate latitude of Lisbon.) 
These navigational tactics, which ob- 
liged ships for the first time to take to the 
open sea, were bound to confront pilots 
with unexpected problems. Even when 
Mediterranean ships sailed beyond the 
Strait of Gibraltar to the Channel or 
North Sea ports, they hugged the coast- 
line and could check their position vir- 
tually every day by reference to a point 
on land. On the other hand, the return 
voyage by the high seas from Guinea, and 
later from the Gold Coast, to Lagos (in 
Portugal) or Lisbon, involved sailing 
“blind” for anything from three weeks 
to two months. The best moment to 
change course and head eastwards 
towards the Portuguese coast could be in- 
dicated by the winds, the currents, the 
colour of the water, or the sea-birds, but 
this kind of “natural” indication could 
be extremely unreliable. A means had, 
therefore, to be found to check the ship’s 
position every day in the absence of any 
landmark. 
  
Meridians and magnetism 
 
At first pilots calculated the meridian 
altitudes of the stars (the Pole Star and 
certain others, and also the sun). Then, 
at some point in the ocean, with the aid 
of sextant or astrolabe (later replaced by 
the quadrant), they compared these celes- 
tial observations with the altitudes of the 
same stars at their meridian transit above 
Lisbon or some other fixed point of 
reference. 
Initially this procedure was nothing 
more than an adaptation of a method 
which John of Hollywood had recom- 
mended in his thirteenth-century treatise 
Sphaera mundi, for measuring the length 
of one degree of a meridian. 
11

## [Page 13](083185engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

  
This technique was a major innova- 
tion in the history of navigation, in that 
it enabled latitude to be determined 
almost daily on board ship. However, 
early-sixteenth-century navigators still 
lacked a means of determining longitude, 
which would have made it possible to fix 
the ship’s exact position. If some of them 
came up with the wrong solutions in 
their experiments, others would point 
out their errors, thus enabling different 
problems to be solved. 
Even erroneous calculations were put 
to immediate use. Convinced that longi- 
tude was in direct linear relation to the 
Earth’s magnetic declination, the Por- 
tuguese navigators of the sixteenth cen- 
tury noted all the values of this 
declination (which they would later use 
as “sightings” or indicators of their posi- 
tion). These accumulated data would 
prove useful to the English pioneer 
researcher into magnetism, William 
Gilbert, and the Flemish mathematician 
Simon Stevin, when, towards the end of 
the century, they were studying 
phenomena connected with the Earth’s 
magnetism, theories regarding which 
were still at a rudimentary stage. 
  
Portolan charts 
  
The art of navigation had made rapid 
strides in the second half of the fifteenth 
century. Pilots had quickly learned to de- 
termine latitude from the altitude of stars, 
or from that of the sun using daily decli- 
nation tables (showing the distance of the 
sun’s zenith north or south of the Equa- 
tor on any given day). Apart from these 
basic data, they possessed readings of the 
number of leagues covered by different 
wind-zones (from one compass point to 
another) and by one degree of latitude, 
as well as timetables of tides at various 
points along the coast. The earlier naviga- 
tional techniques, improved and adapted 
to the new methods, were also still in use. 


### 83172: Of caravels and cartographers: an age of innovation in nautical science and technology

All this information was recorded in 
the navigation manuals and charts known 
as portolans. The first two of these 
anonymous guides were published at Lis- 
bon in 1509 and 1516, with some differ- 
ences between the two editions. Based on 
sailing experience, they contained the 
data already mentioned, together with the 
latitudes of the places most frequented by 
navigators and an occasionally inaccurate 
translation of John of Hollywood's trea- 
tise, in which pilots learned the rudiments 
of cosmography. 
12 __ 
  
   
  
One of the oldest maps depicting Portuguese 
voyages of discovery. It was produced in 
1485 by the Portuguese cartographer Pedro 
Reinel and shows for the first time the 
African coastline as far as the point reached 
by Diogo Cio. 
Despite some inconsistencies, these in- 
novative works, the oldest of their kind, 
gained widespread acceptance and were 
wholly or partially imitated until the six- 
teenth century. Some extracts from them 
were even translated into French, En- 
glish, Italian and German. 
  
Carawvels, carracks and galleons 
 
Fifteenth- and sixteenth-century navi- 
gation had an equally strong impact on 
shipbuilding. When the first forays took 
place beyond Cape Bojador, there was as 
yet no typical vessel, as different designs 
were being experimented with. But once 
voyages of coastal reconnaissance, or the 
exploration of river estuaries, became 
more frequent, the caravel (or rather 
caravels, as there was never a standard 
model) became the type of vessel 
preferred by explorers, because it was fast 
and light—qualities which shipwrights 
were determined to maximize. 
Caravels still formed part of the first 
fleets to reach India in the early sixteenth 
century, but they were gradually replaced 
by the larger, heavier carracks and 
galleons which could transport more car- 
go. However, caravels continued to be 
built in the Portuguese shipyards, not 
only for the reconnaissance missions be- 
gun in the Atlantic in the fifteenth cen- 
tury, but also, owing to their lightness, 
to provide fast connections between the 
forts scattered along the route to India. 
Around this time also, ships began to be 
equipped with a superstructure which 
enabled cannon to be mounted in them. 
The oldest treatises on shipbuilding 
that have come down to us, by Fernan- 
do Oliveira, Jodo Baptista Lavanha and 
Manue] Fernandes, are documents of in- 
estimable value for the history of naval 
architecture. 
  
Progress in cartography 
  
Two significant events sum up the 
contribution that the transoceanic 
voyages made to scientific geography. 
Firstly, about a year after Bartolomeu 
Dias completed the voyage which virtu- 
ally proved that the Atlantic and Indian 
oceans were connected, the German car- 
tographer Henricus Martellus drew a map 
of the African coast as far as the Rio 
Infante (not far from the Cape of Good 
Hope, which Dias had named the Cape 
of Storms), based upon the data collect- 
ed by Dias and his predecessors. For the 
areas beyond—the Gulf, the Red Sea and 
Ceylon (present-day Sri Lanka)— 
Germanus relied on the Ptolemaic model. 
Equally important was the publication 
in the fifteenth century of a Latin trans- 
lation of Ptolemy’s Guide to Geography, 
which had been forgotten throughout 
most of the Middle Ages. Reprinted in 
1475, the Geography reached its seventh 
This page from a manual for use by 
navigators forms part of an atlas produced in 
1571 by the Portuguese cartographer Fernio 
Vaz Dourado. 
 
— — — 
   
x : t 
53 
# 
1 
() 
  
  
  
          

## [Page 14](083185engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
The Portuguese were the first sailors to use the astrolabe, a device for taking the altitudes of 
celestial bodies, as a navigational instrument. This 16th-century example is preserved in Lisbon’s 
Maritime Museum. 
edition in 1490. It reappeared in 1507, and 
the eleventh edition, published in Stras- 
bourg in 1513, included new maps, the 
tabulae novae, which showed the config- 


### 83173: Japan in early Portuguese maps

uration of all the lands and inhabited 
islands which had been recorded by navi- 
gators up to that time. 
A planisphere included in the Stras- 
bourg edition is modelled on the anony- 
mous Portuguese map of the world, the 
so-called Cantino map (after Alberto 
Cantino, the Italian who purchased it in 
Lisbon). Although not dated, it was prob- 
ably made in the early autumn of 1502. 
The Equator and the two Tropics are 
represented for the first time on this map 
(see centre colour pages). Later, on a map 
of the Atlantic which has been dated at 
1504, Pedro Reinel incorporated a scale 
of latitudes—the first in the history of car- 
tography. 
Portuguese sixteenth-century cartog- 
raphy won wide recognition, not because 
of its revolutionary nature, but because 
it showed with some degree of accuracy 
many parts of the world which were 
previously unknown, or little known, in 
Europe. Portuguese cartographers were 
also to be found at this period in Spain 
(Jorge Reinel and Diogo Ribeiro), France 
(Lopo Homem and Bartolomeu Velho) 
and England (Diogo Homem), where 
their work was generally very well paid. 
Dutch engraved cartography of the late 
sixteenth century also made occasional 
use of the services of Portuguese car- 
tographers such as Luis Teixeira, found- 
er of a dynasty of map-makers which 
flourished until the end of the seven- 
teenth century. 
  
The discoveries recorded in guide- 
books and travelogues 
  
The achievements of the Portuguese 
voyages of exploration were to culminate 
in the discovery of Brazil, the opening of 
a complex network of maritime routes in 
the Indian Ocean, the occupation of 
Malacca and the penetration of the 
western Pacific, followed by the Por- 
tuguese arrival in China and the Moluc- 
ca Islands and finally in Japan. Many 
men, driven by the pursuit of wealth and 
profit, no doubt, but also curious and 
observant, travelled through previously 
unknown lands and cities, cast anchor in 
faraway ports, mixed with peoples who 
differed from them in language and cus- 
toms, and discovered many kinds of fau- 
na and flora. All these discoveries were 
passed on in works that are remarkable 
for the accuracy of their information and 
the understanding and respect they show 
for people’s myths and beliefs. 
Around 1513, for example, A Suma 
Oriental by Tomé Pires, an apothecary 
who died in China, provided not only bo- 
tanical observations but a veritable com- 
mercial guide to the Orient. Duarte 
Barbosa produced a similar work in 1518, 
and Francisco Alvares wrote a mono- 
graph on Abyssinia which was published 
in 1540. In 1587, Gabriel Soires de Sousa 
completed a wide-ranging treatise on the 
Indians of the Brazilian coast, the scien- 
tific rigour of which would do credit to 
a modern ethnologist. Father Gaspar da 
Cruz wrote about China and Hormuz, 
an anonymous author left a description 
of the Moluccas, and Garcia da Orta and 
-Cristévio da Costa produced excellent 
studies of the medicinal plants of the East. 
If we add to this list, which is far from 
exhaustive, the texts on the art of navi- 
gation which were written in the same 
period, if we think of the role played by 
the portolans, travelogues and, especial 
ly, the innumerable marine charts, and if 
we point out that some of these works, 
in translation, found their way into the 
priceless collections of the Italian 
geographer Giovanbattista Ramusio and 
of other scholars, we gain at least some 
idea of how a small country, with a 
population of less than two million, 
participated in the birth of the modern 
era and in the irresistible European 
expansion that was destined to last for 
four centuries. The Portuguese and their 
cultural and geographical neighbours thus 
contributed to the construction of the 
world in which we live. u 
 
LUIS DE ALBUQUERQUE, Portuguese specia- 
list in the history of science, is Professor Emeritus 
at the University of Coimbra. A member of the 
Portuguese Academy of History and of the 
International Academy of the History of Science, 
he has published over 800 works including Histéria 
dos descobrimentos (1985), Navegadores, viajantes e 
aventureiros portugueses (1988) and, in English, 
Nautical Instruments (1988) and Astronomical 
Navigation (1988). 
13

## [Page 15](083185engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83173: Japan in early Portuguese maps

JAPAN IN EARLY 
PORTUGUESE MAPS 
  
            
  
  
BY ALFREDO PINHEIRO MARQUES 
  
  
    
This 16th-century Japanese screen showing the arrival of the Portuguese in the Land of the Rising Sun is a typical example of Japanese nanban 
art in which European ships, figures and goods were depicted. 
of Japan, and such fantastic and muddled information as 
existed was largely culled from a single source, The Book 
of Marco Polo. Although the Venetian traveller never reached 
the Japanese archipelago, he wrote about a mythical land, 
Cipango, which Christopher Columbus was hoping to find on 
his first voyage in 1492. 
The Portuguese were the first to discover the sea route to 
India and the Far East, and sometime in the early 1540s a group 
of adventurers which included the famous Fernio Mendes Pinto 
I oo medieval Europe possessed only sketchy knowledge 
— 14 __ 
(author of an exciting travelogue, Peregrinacio) became the first 
Westerners to set foot on Japanese soil. Their arrival marked 
the start of an exemplary cultural exchange which was to last 
for almost a hundred years, and which was a source of mutual 
enrichment to Japanese and Portuguese alike. 
Cartography was one field in which this encounter between 
cultures found expression. The Portuguese were at that time 
the European masters of navigation and of mapmaking tech- 
niques. As they became more familiar with the Japanese ar- 
chipelago, they included it on their charts and maps and

## [Page 16](083185engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83173: Japan in early Portuguese maps

thus helped to make Japan known in 
Europe, where these maps were much 
sought after. 
A Portuguese, Tomé Pires, was also 
the first Western author to use the name 
Japan (Jampon) in a non-cartographical 
work, A Suma Oriental (1512-1515). Ac- 
cording to Professor Armando Corteslo, 
the first accurate depiction of Japan in 
European cartography after the coun- 
try had been visited by Westerners is 
on an anonymous Portuguese map 
(c. 1550) preserved in the Vallicelliana 
—
 a“ 
    
  
’ 
AJ 
4 
a 
r
d
 
C
r
 
g
e
 
- 
~
~
 
~ 
_
—
 
- 
-
 
am
e 
3
0
.
 
  
Library in Italy. This is also the first 
European map on which the name 
Japan appears. 
Japan had previously been depicted 
conjecturally on a number of Europe- 
an maps, notably the Insularium illus- 
tratum by the German cartographer 
Henricus Martellus (c. 1490) and in the 
work of a number of Portuguese car- 
tographers such as Francisco Rodrigues 
(1515), Pedro Reinel (c. 1517) and Lopo 
Homem-Reinéis (c. 1519), based on secondhand information 
gathered in the Orient, in Malacca and in Indochina. 
= 
~~
 
In the 1550s and 1560s, the Italian cartographers Paolo 
Forlani and Giacomo Gastaldi drew maps which were based, 
not on Marco Polo’s reports but on information from the writ- 
ings of St. Francis Xavier, the Spanish missionary who preached 
Christianity in Portugal’s Asian possessions. But these maps 
had no great following, unlike those of the Portuguese, which 
were widely copied and became the model for the representa- 
tion of the Japanese archipelago in Western cartography. At 
this time the influence of two Portuguese mapmakers, the 
brothers Lopo and Diogo Homem, was widely felt. Between 
1560 and 1580 another Portuguese, Bartolomeu Velho, produced 
a series of maps in which the orientation and configuration of 
the Japanese islands were depicted with increasing accuracy. In 
1569 the Flemish cartographer Gerardus Mercator combined 
Gastaldi’s map with the anonymous map of the 1550s. In 1570 
Abraham Ortelius of Antwerp followed Bartolomeu Velho’s 
model when including Japan in his world atlas. 
Meanwhile, another type of map of Japan was being 
produced by Portuguese cartographers, showing the archipela- 
go in the form of four crescent moons with their extremities 
turned towards the south. This model appears for the first time 
in the anonymous Portuguese atlas which accompanies the 
Livro de Marinharia (Book of Seamanship) de Jodo de Lisboa, 
published around 1560. Although less accurate than Bartolomeu 
Velho’s map, this model came to predominate and was widely 
accepted in Europe, where it was diffused by Fernio Vaz 
Dourado (a Portuguese cartographer born in Goa of an Indian 
mother) in the many atlases he produced between 1560 and 
1570, and thus is often known as the “Vaz Dourado type”. 
Towards the end of the sixteenth century, more accurate maps 
were being produced by the Portuguese cartographer Luis Teixeira, 
and these were further refined by his son, Jodo Teixeira Albernaz, 
during the first half of the seventeenth century. 
The Portuguese were responsible for making known the im- 
age of Japan in Europe, but this was not a one-way process. On 
the contrary, it is thought that Japanese maps were used as sources 
by the Portuguese, especially in the earliest period and notably in 
the work of Lopo Homem, in which the influence of Japanese 
 
  
Detail, above, from a mid-16thcentury map by an anonymous 
Portuguese cartographer may be the oldest depiction of Japan in 
European cartography. The map is now in the Vallicelliana 
Library, Rome. 
  
  
Japan is more accurately shown in this map drawn by the Portuguese 
cartographer Bartolomeu Velho in 1561 (Library of the Academy of 
Fine Arts, Florence). 
15

## [Page 17](083185engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

  
maps of the “Gyogi” type can clearly 
be seen. 
Moreover, as Professor Kazutaka 
Unno of the University of Osaka has 
shown, the development of modern 
Japanese terrestrial and marine cartog- 
raphy was based on Portuguese naviga- 
tional maps rather than on those of the 
Dutch, as had formerly been thought. 
This influence became apparent in the 
sixteenth century and continued to 
bear fruit for 200 years, even after Por- 
tuguese relations with Japan had come 
to an end. 
This mutual influence in cartogra- 
phy is surely one of the most interest- 
ing aspects of the cultural exchange 
between two nations, so different and 


### 83174: Luís de Camões: the eventful life and times of Portugal's great epic poet

yet so close, which set an example of peaceful and fruitful 
dialogue between civilizations of Orient and Occident in the 
sixteenth century. | 
ALFREDO PINHEIRO MARQUES, of Portugal, is professor of history at 
the University of Coimbra. His most recent publications include Origen e desen- 
volvimento da cartografia portuguesa na epoca dos descobrimentos (1988), and, 
in English, The Dating of the Oldest Portuguese Charts (1989). He is currently 
preparing an International Bibliography on the Discoveries and Overseas Encounters 
and serving as scientific co-ordinator on the Portuguese Commission for the 
Seville Universal Exhibition of 1992. 
  
Maps on this page show the increasing accuracy with which 
Portuguese cartographers depicted Japan. Map below dates from 1571 
and shows Japan in the form of a half moon. It is now in the 
Portuguese National Archives, Lisbon. In the map above, produced in 
1640 by a cartographer of the school founded by the Teixeira family, 
Japan is much more correctly depicted (Library of the Port of Toulon, 
France). 
    
    
: Ld iN
 
" N 
4. ng 7 AD 
, N CH H RG Y NN x 
¢ yg \ rr CR 
boN pr 50 
  
4 
“\ 
W 
     
  
ul || OF N \ RD: 
i | ANE 
hy 4 eB 
- } lamia\y » 
| \ 5 ~ |g 
\ vy \   
BW ) ». ) | "rs 4 
omy > - -   
     
        
       
  
 
  
A QL NVOTAL i= a 
\ IN 
    — | lo A 
I   

## [Page 18](083185engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83174: Luís de Camões: the eventful life and times of Portugal's great epic poet

LUIS DE CAMOES 
The eventful life and times of Portugal’s great epic poet 
  
Possibly the most faithful of the few surviving portraits of Camdes is this copy of a work, now 
lost, by his contemporary Fernio Gomes. 
T HE little that is known about the 
life of Luis de Camdes can be 
summed up in a few lines. He was 
probably born in Lisbon in 1525, but 
even this is not known for certain. Noth- 
ing is known about what he studied or 
where (possibly in Coimbra) and next to 
nothing about his life until he set sail for 
the Orient, where he spent seventeen 
equally obscure years. A few biographi- 
cal hints can be gleaned from his writings. 
It seems, for example, that he had a rather 
hectic love-life, and it was perhaps be- 
cause of his way of life that he was 
banished from the court as a young man. 
He is known to have served as a soldier 
in Ceuta, Morocco, around 1547-1548 
and to have lost his right eye there. 
In 1552, he spent several months in 
prison in Lisbon for taking part in a 
brawl and after his releasé in the spring 
of 1553 embarked for India on three 
years’ service, as was the rule at the time. 
While in India, he took part in a number 
of military expeditions. Sometime be- 
tween 1556 and 1558, he set out for the 
Far East, perhaps as a junior official 
responsible for taking care of the effects 
of people who died on the voyage. It is 
not known with certainty whether it was 
on the outward or return voyage that he 
was shipwrecked in the Mekong estuary, 
BY VASCO GRACA MOURA 
swimming ashore carrying nothing but 
his manuscript. 
When he returned to Goa, he was 
again thrown into prison. After his 
release he lived on the island of Mozam- 
bique between 1567 and 1569, returning 
to Portugal in 1570 in a state of dire 
poverty. By then, however, the text of 
his epic poem was virtually ready for 
publication. 
He published Os Lusiadas (The Lusiads) 
in Lisbon in 1572, and then two short 
poems in 1576. In 1572, the king granted 
him a small pension, but Camdes later 
had to submit a claim for arrears of 
payment. 
Nothing more is known about his life 
in Portugal after 1570. He appears to have 
been the butt of epigrams composed by 
authors who were in favour at court, 
which may suggest tha. he was envied 
either on account of the stature of his 
work or because of his pension. He may 
then have gone through a mystical, 
“penitential” phase if, as is supposed, 
his magnificent verse commentary on 
Psalm 137 (“By the waters of Babylon”) 
was written after The Lusiads. In 1574, 
a short but enthusiastic critique of his 
work was published, in which the author, 
Pero de Magalhies Gindavo, wrote: 
“Look at the work of our celebrated poet 
Luis de Camdes, whose fame will outlast 
time.” 
We know neither the precise date of 
his death (sometime between 1579 and 
1580) nor the location of his tomb in the 
Santa Ana church, which was destroyed 
in the Lisbon earthquake of 1755. Not a 
single manuscript in his own hand has 
survived, and even the portraits of him 
are disputed. 
In the sixteenth century, The Lusiads 
was twice translated into Spanish, and 
there appeared a collection of his unpub- 
lished writings, editions of his lyric 
poetry (1595 and 1598) and two more edi- 
tions of The Lusiads, one (severely muti- 
lated) in 1584 and the other in 1597. 
From then on a strong and still continu- 
ing interest began to be taken in Camdes’ 
life and work and attempts began to be 
made to decipher the mysteries in which 
they were veiled. 
Camdes lived during the last phase of 
Portuguese expansion, at a time when his 
country was on the verge of decline and 
— 17

## [Page 19](083185engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
  
LVSIADAS. 
de Luis de Ca. 
mocs. | 
COM PRIVILEGIO 
REAL. 
LprefTar em Lishoa , com formga da 
3 legos dn, 5 do Ordigse 
(aja de Atom 
[) 3 mn 
0d, ale Impre Jor. 
157%   
 
    
«0S LVSIADAS 
DE LVIS DE 
CAMOLS, 
* Canto primeiro. 
$5 armas , & os ba- 
RS rdes af malades, 
Que da Occidental prays Lufie 
tana, 
Por mares nics de antes ae 
  
megados, 
PafJaram , tinda alewm ds Taprobina, 
Em periges, tr guerra esforyadns, 
Maus do que prometia a forga humana, 
E entre gente remota cdfrcardo 
Nowo Remo , que tanto fublenar do, 
E tambewm as memorias glviofas 
Paguelle; Reis, que fe vo didatando 
A Fee, 0 lmperie , & as terran Woof 
I Pe Affrea ie de Afiaandario deuaflnle, 
E agneles que por obras valer ofus 
Sevioda key da Morte Ghertando, 
Sr t[patharey por toes 
¢ d Lanto me apdar 0 Cigenhe ts wite, 
A (fem   
Frontispiece and opening page of the first edition of The Lusiads published at Lisbon in 1572. The 
work is now in the National Library, Lisbon. 
political collapse. His death one or two 
years after the defeat of Alcazarquivir 
(1578) more or less coincided with Por- 
tugal’s loss of independence to Spain, a 
situation which was to last until 1640. 
Yet, at the same time, Camdes lived 
through a period of intellectual activity 
which has a remarkable place in the so- 
cial, cultural, economic and political his- 
tory of Portugal, Europe, and the world. 
The values enshrined in the classical 
humanism of the Renaissance, which be- 
gan to spread through Europe from Italy 
at the end of the fifteenth century, came 
to be blended with echoes from the teach- 
ings of the Dutch humanist Erasmus and 
with the multifarious debates and con- 
flicts sparked off by the Reformation and 
by the growing theoretical and practical 
consolidation of centralized power. The 
geographical discoveries brought in their 
wake a mass of new information about 
the extent and true appearance of the 
world. They led to encounters with many 
other peoples, and brought into contact 
a profusion of different cultures and civili- 
zations. Much-coveted produce and new 
sources of wealth arrived daily in the 
ports of Europe. The secrets of the planet 
were gradually being discovered. The cir- 
culation of printed information was in- 
creasing. 
These upheavals brought with them 
a growing sense of unease which was 
reflected in the arts by a transition from 
classicism to mannerism, in politics by in- 
creasingly authoritarian forms of govern- 
ment, and in civil and intellectual life by 
18 ___ 
censorship, the repression exercised by 
the Inquisition, the concealment of un- 
orthodox thinking, and fear. But they 
also led to rapid changes in customs, at- 
titudes and social structures, greed, the 
discovery of new ways of making easy 
money, changes in patterns of consump- 
tion, and the depopulation of inland areas 
due to the attraction exercised by com- 
mercial life in the capital and overseas. 
Science in turn began to concern it- 
self with the quantifiable aspects of the 
world and with the criticism of empiri- 
cal data, while emphasis was placed on ex- 
perience and new ideas which would 
prove the Ancients wrong. 
  
An age of ferment 
 
The voyages of discovery opened up 
new and often contradictory ways of 
thinking, and new and sometimes 
startling horizons beckoned to those with 
a taste for adventure and enterprise, will- 
power and daring, speculation and 
wealth, travel and danger, freedom of ac- 
tion and fatalism. The times incited men 
to live dramatic lives in an age in which 
the most clear-sighted of them saw the 
Portuguese venture as a form of Euro- 
pean expansion whose common denomi- 
nator was the propagation of the 
Christian faith, even though, like 
Camdes, they criticized the divisions 
among the Christians and claimed for 
Portugal the role of prime agent of 
Catholicism outside Europe. Camdes was 
undeniably the poet of a system of values 
proper to the European culture and civili- 
zation of his age. 
The dominant ideology took full 
measure of the universal impact of the 
Portuguese discoveries, compared them 
and found them superior to the legendary 
exploits of the heroes of classical Anti- 
quity, and wished to hear them celebrat- 
ed in the classical form of the epic poem. 
The voyage of Bartolomeu Dias round 
This depiction of Lisbon in the 16th century appeared in a great atlas, Civitates orbis terrarum 
(“Cities of the World”, 1577), published by Georg Braun and Frans Hogenberg. 
 
  

## [Page 20](083185engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
N
 
. 
  
  
  
“Mmayl : 
rola. | 
ofa manl™ 
™ \ » 
aed Ia 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
    
      
    
  
.f 
+linba.c 
  
caftelloda 
  
  -
g
 
i 
AR
TA
 
» 
x 
»
 
f
w
 
Te
w 
on
y 
Gd
 g 
> 
T
E
L
L
)
 
—
 
-—ly 
<Q
 - = - 
LE
S 
  

## [Page 21](083185engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
~ br mix Roald: 
’, a ad 
eluted |   

## [Page 22](083185engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

a Ly 
AE 
— 
4 
: i Ch Wl ay 5. oO
Cis 
    
F
O
R
N
E
Y
 
Wy 
IN 
Te Tl 
BEN 
CON 
TR 
Ty 
A
X
 
N
A
R
 
S
h
i
k
 gy 
N 
$ 
A 
Re! 
|
 
} 
   
© Ones Ties merhwnals: 
      — 
  
  
“ 
» 
TAG 
Sa 
- 
  
  
    
    
 
 
- 
  
Cilus armas: 
       
! | 
&
 
| 
—
 
—
 
5 
: 
| 
"Ti 
a
i
a
 
a 
[
1
%
 
_
 
0 
3 
:
 
| 
 
g
 
k
y
 
| 
£1 
EY 
- 
, 
3
 
— 
  
. 
- 
= olives sptrnaf

## [Page 23](083185engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 83174: Luís de Camões: the eventful life and times of Portugal's great epic poet

  
  
    
    
   
  
       Hl Talal bee Regents magn bralilie &fF 2 20 parm smdentales 
Tnnkas caltelle res obnner Bone uae vind mgeelconns Solon s. 
Foca & snasantTins sarmbae hum mine ushers ANS SAXEm gd arcu 
- 
   
: gpme creme unin Pec plvrac Heriho sows alicep numere a 
nee fereq menlbruolc : cr Sdemuaz pla Guen repenuntue pl 
pamags arbor nalamie que ball nuncupara uchhbus purpaces colo 
   re nae nadia Oppo rhuna cenlchur .»   
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  

## [Page 24](083185engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 83174: Luís de Camões: the eventful life and times of Portugal's great epic poet

  
the Cape of Good Hope in 1488, four 
years before that of Columbus, revolu- 
tionized geographical concepts and 
marked the threshold of a new era. Ten 
years later, the voyage of Vasco da Gama 
made an even more radical contribution 
to the transformation of European civili- 
zation and world history. In the ensuing 
decades there were many other Por- 
tuguese voyages of major importance. But 
there was no creative work of art to extol 
the feats responsible for these sweeping 
changes. 
  
A poet of bis time 
 
It was against this background that 
Camdes lived and wrote his epic and lyri- 
cal work, in which so many contradicto- 
ry elements coexist: tradition and 
innovation; Platonism and Aristotelian- 
ism; erudition and raw experience; 
mythology and Christianity; piety and 
cruelty; feudal nostalgia and the concept 
of the modern state; a sense of order and 
disorder; joy and anguish; the Renaissance 
and Mannerism. In Camdes, there is a 
tension between the concept of man as 
a “mean creature of clay” and the gran- 
deur of his accomplishments on a global 
scale, between the frail microcosm who 
can overcome obstacles when aided by 
heaven or by valour and daring, and all 
the harm that can befall him if he be- 
comes the mere plaything of the occult 
forces of Nature, fortune or destiny. 
At sea by such rough storms and griefs 
forespent! 
So many a moment when Death stands 
alert! 
Ashore such strife and treacherous intent, 
Where horrible necessity can burt! 
How can weak man escape the harsh event, 
And how misfortune from brief life avert, 
Where calm Skies range not nor take arms 
alway 
Against so mean a creature of the clay? 
The Lusiads,* 1, 106 
However, a similar tension also exists 
between Camdes’ national pride and his 
harsh and biting criticism of the very hu- 
man reality whose praises he is singing: 
Alas! my Muse, alas! because my lyre 
Is wholly out of tune and my voice hoarse, 
Not from my song, but knowing I must 
quire 
Always for a people who are deaf and coarse. 
The favour which sets genius all on fire 
My land grants not to song, but runs 
perforce 
After its envious lusts and brutishness, 
Sunken in harsh, depraved, and gross 
distress. 
The Lusiads, X, 145 
These antagonistic ideas are repeated 
again and again throughout the complex 
structure of a poem in which the symbol- 
ic linking of different levels of meaning 
represents a striking and innovative feat 
of literary “engineering”. 
Thus Camdes’ account of the Por- 
tuguese discoveries is based on the unique 
relationship which he established be- 
tween the tradition of classical Graeco- 
Roman culture as it was expressed in the 
AY 
Clockwise from top: Frontispiece of a Spanish 
version of The Lusiads published in 1580 and 
the earliest editions in English (1655), Italian 
(1658), French (1735) and Dutch (1777). 
  
  
LOS CANTO QVINTO. 
‘ L 
I Vv S | N t ocr Lanpeliproda 
- . A D A S 4 “Muna © enticnden, 
- 3 cmerole, 
DELVYYS DE CaAMOLRS, rel wp agen que al syre oniatpe snnenden, 
Tradurudor emoduas vimas Cale. Negra Tuma y poche tencheotas 
Wats poe Brawo Caldera, wvenes goe Al mundopor mu od le enden, 
redbdones on Cone, Po meoocor ir dine que gran yerre, 
sungue vale yo la vot debiemro, 
COLOUR PAGES Denil Ba. See oman Via Pg a BE ta a bola boqpondade far, Lot cabon vr ¥ redoranaraneres 
> dela fama) powerd Inge fom, fowyamachn o lorgaesperioncia) 
Page 19 
eeenan pow emorkemper y verdaderse 
a lurcolas pagandoen iparencie. 
  
   
 
 
     
   
    
   
  
Above: The sea’s eternal mystery, a constant 
source of attraction to the Portuguese, suffuses 
this painting entitled The Siren by Portuguese 
artist Vieira da Silva (b. 1908). The mermaid is 
curved like a caravel, a type of ship much-used 
on the voyages of discovery, and is surrounded 
by lines from Camédes’ poem The Lusiads. 
Below: In 1482 King Joio II of Portugal ordered 
the construction of Elmina Castle (on what is now 
the coast of Ghana) in an attempt to preserve a 
monopoly in the gold trade. The fortress is shown 
on this map produced by the cartographer Jodo 
Freire in 1546. 
LEANER Y pow ager Fy stalin 
wee samdo lecrerorcscondsdon, 
perpan pot ‘allon 0 mal envondedot. 
"” 
smener sque! reiplandor vive, 
tle a 
   
  
CON PRIVILEGIO. 
Imprefio en Alcala de Henares por lad Gracin. — 
Ado de M.D.LXXX ; a 
Centre double page 
The work of an anonymous cartographer, the 
Alberto Cantino map (1502) is world famous as 
the oldest known Portuguese planisphere. 
Mediterranean Europe and Africa are depicted, 
together with regions of the East and the Far East. 
In the west, the Spanish possessions of central 
America are framed by Newfoundland to the 
north and parts of Brazil to the south. 
Page 22 
Detail from a map of Brazil by Lopo Homem- 
Reinéis, which shows Teira Brasilis for the first 
time with 2 certain unity. Indians and specimens 
of the local flora and fauna adorn the map, which 
forms part of the Miller Atlas, one of the finest 
treasures in the history of cartography. 
  

## [Page 25](083185engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 83174: Luís de Camões: the eventful life and times of Portugal's great epic poet

  
literary forms imported from Italy and 
the renewal of the literary language, and 
the historical events of his time, especial- 
ly the information accumulated about the 
great ocean voyages. 
Camdes made use of the epic form in 
a new way, so that actual geographical 
regions and mythical regions, real or con- 
temporary time and mythical or absolute 
time, historical events and cosmic desti- 
ny, were all welded together and “con- 
taminated” one another. Even the hero, 
who, in the grand tradition of the classi- 
cal epic, personifies an entire people, is 
here not so much Vasco da Gama alone 
as a host of figures represented by the 
“illustrious Lusitanian breast, to which 
Neptune and Mars bowed down in obe- 
dience”, With those figures are connect- 
ed a series of events, facts, individual and 
collective deeds indissociable from the 
course of Portuguese history. 
Camoes witnessed the world-shaking 
events of his time with classical eyes in 
both life and literature, blending the mag- 
ic of paganism with the tenets of the 
Christian faith and indeed—in a daring 
and brilliant stroke—transporting the 
mainsprings of his plot to the plane of ac- 
tion of the pagan gods who symbolized 
the forces of Nature, some favourable and 
some hostile to the Portuguese venture. 
At the same time, however, he wit- 
nessed the planetary revolution of his 
time with a modern outlook that enabled 
him to reject earlier models and to strike 
a new balance between what his genius 
could extract from them and what the age 
required him to introduce and treat in an 
original and concrete manner. His aim 
was to set the literal truth of recent histor- 
ical events and exploits against the legen- 
  
  
  
dary character of the ancient epics and, 
in so doing, to underscore the role which 
the Portuguese had played in the discov- 
ery of the world (“... and if there are 
other worlds, they will reach them ...”). 
He clearly saw the revolution of his 
time in terms of the then geocentric view 
of the structure of the universe, and this 
enabled him to construct one of the most 
moving episodes in the poem, that in 
 
Two illustrations from an edition of The 
Lusiads published at Madrid in 1639. Above, 
portrait of Vasco da Gama, the hero of 
Camdes’ epic. Below, the gods meet in 
council, an Pras from the poem. 
   
Sy prp—————— r Crp y— FLEA a- 
24 __ 
which Vasco da Gama’s sailors are wel- 
comed to the Island of Love by the god- 
dess Thetis and the navigator is allowed 
to cast his eyes on the “universal 
machine” and to know the future in a 
cosmogonic vision which is the culminat- 
ing point of the apotheosis of love and 
glory, rewards reserved for heroes: 
This universal vast machine you see, 
Ethereal, elemental, He could found 
By deep, high wisdom of infinity, 
Who no begining has, or mete or bound. 
He, in His circle set eternally, 
The whole sphere’s well-smoothed surface, 
hedging round, 
Is God, Whose nature none can comprehend 
For human wit cannot so far extend. 
The Lusiads, X, 80 
  
An encyclopaedic work 
 
Since Camdes was singing of real 
things rather than of “vain and fantastic 
exploits that are false and deceitful”, he 
attached the highest importance to histor- 
ical narratives and authentic eyewitness 
accounts of voyages by Vasco da Gama 
and other navigators, to details of navi- 
gation, technology, the calendar, wind 
systems, climates, natural phenomena, 
peoples and their customs, and to the ac- 
curacy of other aspects of Portuguese 
history. 
Thus, apart from its inestimable liter- 
ary and aesthetic merits, The Lusiads is a 
kind of encyclopaedia or compendium of 
much of the theoretical and practical 
knowledge available in its author’s life- 
time. It contains information on history 
and geography, anthropology, technolo- 
gy and science—ranging from flora and 
fauna to astronomy—and especially on 
the data gathered as a result of the ocean 
voyages and discoveries. Even when he 
refers to such natural phenomena as 
waterspouts and St. Elmo’s fire, it can be 
assumed that he does so because they 
were recorded by Jodo de Castro 
(1500-1548), a Portuguese naval officer 
who made important contributions to the 
science of navigation. 
Almost every time he describes peoples, 
landscape, geography, the exotic features of 
Africa or the Orient, or incidents during 
Vasco da Gama’s voyage, he bases his ac- 
count on a chronicle, travelogue or some 
other document in an attempt to achieve 
strict accuracy combined with the mytho- 
logical transpositions mentioned above.

## [Page 26](083185engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 83176: The Lusiads: from national epic to universal myth

  
  
Two Africans from the Cape of Good Hope. This illustration and those on pages 30 and 33 are 
from a mid-16th-century codex by an anonymous Indo-Portuguese painter who depicted peoples of 
Africa and the Orient with whom the Portuguese came into contact during their voyages. The 
manuscript is preserved in the Casanatense Library, Rome. 
As the poet of the discoveries and of 
the epic of modern man, Camdes did not 
lose sight of the two main driving forces 
behind maritime expansion. The first of 
these was the propagation of the faith, 
which was not to be construed exclusive- 
ly as a crusading ideal dictated by the 
Ottoman threat to the eastern approaches 
to Europe, but also as the starting-point 
for the dissemination of a European cul- 
ture. The second was the organization of 
trade on a worldwide scale for the benefit 
of all peoples. Camdes was a European 
poet in the temporal sense, in that he en- 
hanced, used and re-created a cultural 
heritage many centuries old. In a spatial, 
geo-political and economic sense, he was 
also a European poet who singled out 
Europe as a region with specific ties of 
solidarity and interests. 
This is why Camdes saw the voyage 
of Vasco da Gama not only as an expedi- 
tion “to the greater glory of God” but 
also as a commercial venture, at the out- 
come of which the navigator presented 
the ruler of Calicut with proposals for en- 
gaging in peaceful trade to the mutual 
benefit of the King of Portugal and 
himself: 
And if thou wilt with treaty and with pact 
Of peace and friendship, open and divine, 
Trade out of superfluity enact 
Between his country’s merchandise and 
thine, 
Thus greater gain and plenty to attract 
(For which in toil and sweat men chiefly 
pine); 
Unto thy realms, then there will surely be 
For him great glory, and great wealth for 
thee. 
The Lusiads, VII, 62 
This epitomizes the idea of trade be- 
tween distant peoples as a source of 
wealth and abundance, of profit and 
glory. Here again, Camdes’ viewpoint is 
highly topical, in that he extols the skills 
and dignity of enrichment through trade 
based on the principle of reciprocity 
(while also seeking to impose moral con- 
straints on such trade). Vasco da Gama 
showed determination and discipline in 
executing the orders given by the king, 
who became one of the world’s leading 
traders when the era of major trading net- 
works began. 
Camdes lived a full life. For seventeen 
years, he knew the fluctuating fortunes 
of a voyage to India, went to war, 
travelled to the Far East and experienced 
exile, adversity, disgrace, suffering and 
despair. In short, he paid a personal toll 
for the great discoveries. 
Traces of his experience can be found 
in a number of main themes of The Lu- 
siads. Equally skilled with the sword and 
the pen, he bitterly laments the oblivion 
or injustice of which he is the victim. He 
mentions the shipwreck he survived. He 
refers to the crises of his love affairs, 
which he personifies in the pathetic figure 
of the giant Adamastor and in the perse- 
cution of the nymphs on the Island of 
Love by the soldier Leonardo Ribeiro. 
He asserts his awareness of his genius and 
abilities and his readiness to continue 
singing to the present and future glory of 
his native land. 
The entire corpus of Camdes’ work, 
with its hundreds of lyric poems, its let- 
ters and plays, highlights the contradic- 
tions inherent in a man who was torn 
between nostalgia for a supreme harmo- 
ny and an acute sense of the absurdity and 
confusion of the world, between an af- 
firmation of the values enshrined in hu- 
man liberty and a sense of outrage at 
being nothing more than a puppet in the 
hands of fate, and between the inescapa- 
ble and everlasting presence of unhappi- 
ness and the all too fleeting moments of 
life and human happiness. The ultimate 
contrast is that between the evil of the 
present and the good of the past, which 
inspires some of the most poignant fea- 
tures of Camdes’ work. | 
* Translation by Leonard Bacon from The Lusiads 
of Luiz de Camdes, published by the Hispanic Soci- 
ety of America, New York, 1950. 
 
VASCO GRACA MOURA is a Portuguese writer 
who has published a number of studies on Cam&es, 
the most recent of which is Os penbascos e a serpente 
e outros ensaios camontanos (“The Rocks and the Ser- 
pent, and Other Essays on Camdes”, 1987). He is 
currently serving on the National Board for the 
Celebration of the Portuguese Discoveries and as 
Portuguese Commissioner for the Seville Univer- 
sal Exhibition of 1992. 
— 25

## [Page 27](083185engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83176: The Lusiads: from national epic to universal myth

The Lusiads FROM NATIONAL EPIC 
TO UNIVERSAL MYTH 
   
~ 
S
I
R
E
N
 
vy
 
5
 
“i
 
L
h
 
o 
A 
|
 
i 
P
o
e
 
>» 
x,
 
f
i
v
e
 
: 
e
o
 
i
n
 
| A
R
 
A
E
E
.
 
bo y 
Imaginary portrait of Camdes is taken from a French edition of The Lusiads published in Paris in 
1817 with illustrations by European artists. 
HE Western maritime discoveries 
of the fifteenth and sixteenth cen- 
turies, in which Portugal played 
a leading role, were the culmination of 
an odyssey which had begun in ancient 
times. They extended the bounds of the 
adventure embarked on long before by 
the Phoenicians and the Greeks to all the 
seas of the world. The cycle of modern 
discoveries was symbolically closed in 
1520 by Ferdinand Magellan, a Por- 
tuguese navigator who sailed for the King 
of Spain. After him there began an era of 
methodical, scientific exploration of what 
the twentieth-century poet Fernando 
26 ___ 
Pessoa called the “endless sea”, the mare 
nostrum of the Romans enlarged to 
global dimensions. 
If this image exaggerates the real mar- 
itime area traversed by the navigators of 
Portugal, Italy, Spain and other European 
nations between the beginning of the 
fifteenth century and Magellan’s voyage, 
it epitomizes the difference between the 
voyages of the Ancients and those of the 
modern era. In the first decade of the six- 
teenth century, Westerners acquired firm 
evidence that the Earth is round, and 
knew from “knowledge which owes 
everything to experience”’—to quote a 
  
BY EDUARDO LOURENCO 
line of The Lusiads—of a sea that extend- 
ed from Europe to Japan and from 
Greenland to Tierra del Fuego. 
This knowledge was acquired the hard 
way, after more than a century of sporad- 
ic but methodical exploration whose 
modest beginnings led to the reconnais- 
sance of the south Atlantic and the entire 
west coast of Africa. Underlying this 
exploration was the dream of sailing 
round 2a continent which was still little 
known to Europeans, in order to reach 
the Indies. The most amazing feature of 
this enterprise was that it should have 
been pursued for so long by a single coun- 
try, Portugal, which often employed 
foreigners (Genoese, Catalans, even 
Castilians) in its service, while cther, 
much richer and more powerful nations, 
which also possessed a maritime tradition, 
made no attempt to follow suit. The main 
reason for this was that most of the 
Portuguese voyages were not private un- 
dertakings like those of the great 
Genoese, Catalan and Venetian shipown- 
ers of the same period, or of the later 
French and English navigators, but a kind 
of state enterprise, even though their 
initiator was a prince, Henry the Navi- 
gator, and not the king. 
The Portuguese maritime adventure 
was modern both in its means and in its 
results, but paradoxically it was 
“medieval” in character. By this we mean 
that it was simultaneously technical, mer- 
cantile and religious in character. When 
Camdes wrote his epic a century and a 
half after the beginnings of maritime 
exploration, in a context that was already 
fully modern, this medievalism still domi- 
nated his vision of the world. 
The aim pursued by the Portuguese 
navigators was tantamount to a crusade. 
The Christian cross emblazoned on the 
sails of their caravels was more than 
merely symbolic. At that period, from a 
really “modern”, bourgeois standpoint 
like that of the Genoese or the Venetians, 
such an emblem would have been seen as 
an obstacle to communication with peo- 
ples of other cultures and religions. But 
the Portuguese voyages of exploration in 
the fifteenth century were undertaken on 
the initiative of an institution that was 
both religious and military, not to say 
militant. Later the enterprise became 
“royal” and therefore more “secular” —if 
such a word had any meaning in the Por-

## [Page 28](083185engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 83180: Camões and Brazil

  
tugal of that time. But the religious aspect 
of the discoveries was always present. 
This is what made them an extremely 
complex episode in the history of 
Western culture. 
No one understood this complexity 
better than Camdes. He celebrated the 
discoveries both as an extraordinary ad- 
venture of the human spirit, a fantastic 
acceleration in our knowledge of the 
universe and its mysteries—in other 
words, a challenge assumed by men 
against the gods—and as a crusade by 
Christian man, bearer of a faith that had 
recently been assaulted in other parts of 
~ Europe. 
A unique poem in European as well as 
Portuguese culture, The Lusiads has always 
provoked perplexity as well as admiration 
among figures as various as Cervantes and 
Ezra Pound. It was written at a turning 
point in history. Its context is the end of 
the Renaissance—a twilight era full of 
energy and sensuality—but also the dawn 
of the baroque age, with its ambiguous 
interplay between day and night. Camdes 
combines glorification of the daring 
modernity of his countrymen’s maritime 
exploits with a fascination for ancient cul- 
tural models. Yet this attraction is far 
from passive. Indeed, it contains an ele- 
ment of challenge. Literally and figurati- 
vely, The Lusiads stands at a crossroads in 
history when the West, and especially the 
Iberian peninsula, was hesitating between 
exposure to a new historical situation, of 
which the discoveries were themselves 
the signal, and withdrawal into ethical 
and religious certainties which had been 
shaken by the material and conceptual 
upheavals of the Renaissance. 
Camdes emphasizes above all the chi- 
valrous aspects of the Portuguese disco- 
veries. But this chivalry, unlike that 
evoked by the Italian poet Ariosto 
(1472-1533), is realistic rather than dream- 
like. He rejects the moral disorder which 
conquering expansion brought in its 
wake—the unbridled ambition, the cor- 
ruption, the abuse of power, whose devas- 
tating effects he saw for himself in the 
East. 
Above all—and this is where the poem 
elevates a national epic to the dignity of 
a universal myth—he was not content to 
transpose the Portuguese voyages into a 
heroic episode in the history of planetary 
discovery. He transmuted them into a 
kind of noble hymn to Eros, a naturalis- 
tic but also neo-Platonic version of the 
great Jtalian poet Petrarch’s “Triumph of 
Universal Love”, in which the Portu- 
guese in a sense play the role of Argo- 
nauts. Petrarch’s celebrated theme, still an 
 
abstract vision, becomes in the hands of 
Cambdes fully dionysiac, a link and a place 
of harmony not only between Heaven 
and Earth but between humanity 
hitherto divided by space, race and pre- 
judice. All Nature participates in the feast 
which crowns the exploits of Vasco da 
Gama’s sailors. In the “Island of Love” 
episode, what begins as a hymn of natio- 
nal rejoicing becomes an epic of love, in 
which spirit and senses mingle. The 
heroic adventure, man’s struggle with 
hostile elements, ends allegorically on this 
island, a dream of paradise where the 
force and violence of war assume the 
colours of love, and love assumes the 
  
colours of a new alliance between 
peoples. 
Of course, the poem is marked by cer- 
tain Western prejudices. It belongs to an 
era in which religious militancy was par- 
ticularly fierce since Westerners felt that 
their faith was threatened. Despite this 
inevitable eurocentrism, and thanks to its 
universalist impulse, its ethical force, and 
its treatment of the whole range of 
human physical and spiritual experience, 
The Lusiads is far from being a mere 
eulogy of the Portuguese discoveries as an 
episode in the history of a people. Even 
more than a great hymn to a glorious 
moment in the destiny of Portugal, it is 
the epic of the European movement to 
new shores, to infinite possibilities in 
space and time. [| 
 
EDUARDO LOURENCO, Portuguese essayist 
and literary critic, won the Prix Européen de I’Essai, 
awarded by the Charles Veillon Foundation of Lau- 
sanne, in 1988. He has taught in several European 
universities and from 1965 to 1988 was professor 
of literature at the University of Nice, France. His 
published works include a number of studies on the 
poet Fernando Pessoa. 
Above, an illustration from the 1817 French edition of The Lusiads. It shows a scene described 
towards the end of the poem, the arrival of Vasco da Gama and his men on the “Island of Love”. 
Below, a scene from the film A Ilha dos Amores (1982) by the Portuguese director Paulo Rocha 
which was inspired by the same episode. 
 

## [Page 29](083185engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83180: Camões and Brazil

CAMOES AND BRAZIL 
BY JOSUE DE SOUZA MONTELLO 
      
   
      
         
  
    
Portuguese colonization of 
Brazil began after the arrival of 
Pedro Alvares Cabral in 1500. 
In the 16th century settlement 
was limited to the coastal plain. 
Penetration into the hinterland 
in the 17th and 18th centuries 
was largely carried out by 
groups of adventurers known as 
bandeirantes, who went far 
beyond the limits which the 
Treaty of Tordesillas (1494) bad established to 
divide Portuguese and Spanish spheres of influence 
in the Americas. “A country the size of a 
continent” thus came into being, with almost 
half the area and half the population of South 
America. At the beginning of the 19th century the 
new state obtained independence virtually without 
conflict, and Dom Pedro, son of the king of 
Portugal, was proclaimed emperor. 
Despite the violence inherent in any form of 
conquest, in the 15th and 16th centuries the 
Portuguese gave priority to sea-borne trade as 
opposed to military occupation. In the 17th century 
they began to consider the region as a second 
fra boy» “la 
_— 28 __ 
es a qr 
: C Stat Amv rita 3 7 
A balou, « foe fs 
! bund, mala gvergy 
~ ’ J if | 
JC 
« 8 Pvdvalig ou 
 gat 
en We tgal oe prude on Yeniv Hy I 
PE FT ewinde ’. “ry aneffas on 1 
we pays detedn Tyrie 
  
rent clganyeon’ 
7 whey ter a tagiSo xi ih 
Be calle J quiin da phy, o’ 
8 TWO Seemeon from @ | 
    
    
f. Iv Yeh gored da siluad 
bovtide idm at ments 
rn S— 
€ beuivlamen diag » 
pe slave alyxrm nite 
buds gs pornos X. i | 
Ships of Pedro Alvares Cabral’s fleet which reached Brazil in 1500 are shown in this illustration 
from the Livro das Armadas, preserved in the Academy of Sciences, Lisbon. 
homeland rather than simply as an overseas 
colonial market. According to the Brazilian social 
anthropologist Gilberto Freyre, this process of 
integration is due to the fact that at the outset of 
her age of global expansion Portugal bad been 
enriched by cultural and ethnic interchange between 
Europe and Africa. 
The writings of Luis de Camées play an 
important role in the fraternity of Portuguese and 
Brazilian cultures. In the view of Brazilian writers 
such as Manuel Bandeira and Josué de Souza 
Montello, Camdes’ work is a familiar landmark in 
the cultures of all the Portuguese-speaking peoples 
and a bond between them.

## [Page 30](083185engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 83181: Rivalry in the Red Sea: Portugal's impact on the fortunes of Mamluk Egypt

  
the corpus of Camdes’ writings, 
yet the great Portuguese poet has 
had a profound and highly significant in- 
fluence on Brazilian literature, both 
directly and through the numerous 
studies that have been made of his work. 
The imprint of Camédes is evident in 
the clarity of the heroic, eight-line stan- 
zas of Prosopopeia, an epic poem inspired 
by the impressions evoked by a new 
land and new people, by Bento Teixeira, 
one of our earliest poets and considered 
by some as the father of Brazilian liter- 
ature. In his Histéria Concisa da Liter- 
atura Brasileira, in the introduction to 
a chapter on the most important 
authors of the colonial period, Alfredo 
Bosi, one of the most knowledgeable 
specialists in this field, writes: “There is 
constant imitation of Camédes’ Lusiads, 
including the use of the same textual 
structure, mythological allusions and 
even specific turns of phrase.” 
The greatness of a poet lies not only in his own writings but 
also in the works he inspires and in his acceptance as a model— 
as though his contemporaries and successors want to revolve wi- 
thin his orbit. Permeating the different literary trends, from ba- 
roque to romanticism, from realism to symbolism, and even to 
modernism, the undisputed influence of Camdes has affected 
poet, essayist and critic. 
Joachim Maria Machado de Assis (1839-1908), as great a poet 
as he was a writer of prose, did not hesitate to admit Camdes’ 
influence. Nor did Alberto de Oliveira (1857-1937) who, by vir- 
tue of his masterly handling of the strict formalism of Parnassi- 
an verse, his vision, the breadth of his poetic work and the 
technical competence with which it is executed, has become ac- 
cepted as the leading Brazilian of this school, in any way dis- 
count the ascendancy of Camdes. 
The following anecdote illustrates the great devotion to 
Cambdes of the author of Cangdes Romanticas (1878). One day, 
while at the Brazilian Academy of Letters, Oliveira was stricken 
with a sudden respiratory problem. His doctor, Professor Aloysio 
de Castro, immediately came to his aid, but, instead of proffer- 
ing him the usual medicaments, he quoted a line from The Lu- 
stads and then asked from which stanza it came. Whereupon, 
Alberto de Oliveira, who by then was an old man, recited in 
a low and quavering voice the entire section of The Lustads from 
which the line came. Then, suddenly, with a smile on his lips, 
he informed the doctor that his malaise had disappeared. 
At the time of the rise of Modernism, Manuel Bandeira 
(1886-1968), originally a poet of the Symbolist school, wrote the 
following sonnet, inspired by Camdes’ poetry, while in a sanato- 
rium in Switzerland in which he found himself in the company 
of the French poet Paul Eluard. 
Bie does not figure largely in 
When the nostalgic humours of your race 
With heavy doom clouds do the soul downweigh, 
Seek still the glory time cannot efface 
In the heroic beauty of your lay. 
Genius through misfortune brought to grace 
Warrior poet, Nature's non-pareil, 
Love of the homeland, Portugal, blessed place, 
In you there burns with fire as bright as day. 
 
Motifs inspired by the Americas, including representations of Brazilian Indians, appear in 
Portuguese art from the 16th century onwards. Above, allegory of the Americas on ‘painted and . 
glazed tiles (azulejos) is in the Municipal Museum at Viana do Castelo, Portugal. 
While yet ring through our minds the fiery lays 
Of that proud stock who dangers did defy 
On every continent the cross to raise. 
For want of soldiers, poets, shall not die 
The tongue in which you boldly sang in praise 
Of mighty deeds of arms and blazons high. 
In my opinion, this short poem is the most beautiful tribute 
rendered to the work of Camées by Brazilian literature, through 
the medium of one of its greatest contemporary poets. 
What are the essential merits of Camdes’ work? In the first 
place, its rich variety of forms of expression, brilliantly adapt- 
ed to the poet’s own feelings and to the sensibility of the peo- 
ple to which he belonged, at a time when Portugal was 
consolidating its expansion. At times, the care Camdes devotes 
to poetic expression and his continual concern for innovative 
techniques make him seem surprisingly modern. 
Having scoured the literature written in Portuguese in search 
of a refinement comparable to that of Camées, I can only con- 
firm that Portuguese poetry from medieval times to the present 
day has been extraordinarily enriched by that clarity which is 
one of the essential characteristics of Camées work. 
Finally, here is another revealing anecdote. In his book Vida 
e Morte do Bandeirante (*‘Life and Death of the Bandeirante™), 
which is a compilation, based on a variety of legal documents, 
of the major episodes in the conquest of the hinterland of Brazil 
in which Portuguese, Spaniards and Brazilians took part, 
Antonio Castilho de Alcintara Machado (1901-1935) refers to 
the literary works mentioned in these documents, whether in 
wills or in inventories. There he found the works of Camdes 
alongside those of Quevedo; the epic, lyric poet beside the Span- 
ish master satirist. And one bandeirante did in fact write his 
will on the back of a page of The Lusiads. n 
JOSUE DE SOUZA MONTELLO, Brazilian writer, has published many 
novels, plays and social and political studies which have earned him literary 
prizes both in Brazil and abroad. A member of the Brazilian Academy of Letters, 
the Portuguese Academy of History and the International Academy of Portu- 
guese Culture, he is currently serving as his country’s Ambassador to Unesco. 
29 ____

## [Page 31](083185engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83181: Rivalry in the Red Sea: Portugal's impact on the fortunes of Mamluk Egypt

RIVALRY IN THE RED SEA mma 
Portugal’s impact on the fortunes of Mamluk Egypt 
8 eca da bandada ‘ 
Arabi As gn 
   oy ORE : REAL FIN A ee 3 
  
      
  
        8 (V: 2) 
ES 
“Arab merchants inhabiting the strait of Mecca, on the side of Arabia”, the inscription on this illustration from a Portuguese codex is testimony to 
the Portuguese presence in the Red Sea in the 16th century (see caption page 25). 
Ibn Iyas, born in 1448 in Cairo, was the author of 
a 6-volume history of Egypt, totalling over 3,000 
pages. The chronicle opens, as was the custom at that 
time, with the creation of the world and closes in 
1522, shortly before its author’s death. 
During the last period recorded by Ibn Iyas, 
Mamluk Egypt was experiencing her final days of 
glory. The Egyptians were faced with a dual 
challenge. To the north-east, Ottoman Turkey was 
exerting growing pressure as a prelude to ber 
domination of the entire Islamic world. To the 
north-west, Portugal, whose ships had rounded 
Africa, thus gaining access to the trade routes of the 
Indian Ocean, was threatening to destroy the 
commercial lifeline which linked Egypt and the 
Arab world with southern Asia. 
In 1498, three ships under the command of Vasco 
da Gama had dropped anchor at Calicut, 
on the south-west coast of India. 
— 30 __ 
The first European ships to reach India, they were 
followed by fleet after fleet of Portuguese 
merchantmen. In 1500, an Egyptian fleet lying 
off Calicut was bombarded by the Portuguese, 
and Portuguese vessels were stationed at the outlet 
of the Red Sea to bar the way to Egyptian and 
Arab ships bound for the Indian trade routes. 
Egypt was to concede defeat on both counts. She 
lost control of the seas at around the same time as 
she relinquished ber political independence to 
Constantinople. For four long centuries, Egypt 
would be shown on the maps of the Ottoman 
empire as a mere administrative division. 
We publish below an extract from Ibn Iyas’ 
lively and detailed account of this 
dramatic turnabout in the history of Egypt, 
in which he concentrates on the effect that the 
Portuguese were having on Arab trade and on 
Egyptian life.

## [Page 32](083185engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

  
expeditionary force to resist European incursions along 
the coast of India. A large number of soldiers were 
mobilized and the preparation of equipment was actively 
pursued. 
 Djoumada II (November): This force included reservists 
and Mamluks of the sultan’s guard, most of whom were 
Maghrebians, black archers and Turkomans. The sultan added 
masons, carpenters and labourers to their number to build for- 
tified towers and a wall to surround the city of Jeddah. On Mon- 
day 6 (4 November) the army corps which had been assembled 
for the Indian expedition left Cairo, to the cheers of a great 
crowd. Husayn Mouchrif commanded the Mamluks, the Tur- 
komans and the Blacks, and the Maghrebians were under the 
orders of Nour al-din Maslati. These troops, who had to travel 
to Jeddah by sea, left Cairo to embark at Suez. By order of 
the sultan, they were accompanied by a number of vessels load- 
ed with provisions and weapons. 
Safar 912 (July 1506): News was received of the detachment 
on it3 way to India to resist the European incursions. As soon 
as he arrived at Jeddah, the commander-in-chief Husayn had 
begun to construct towers along the coast, with the collabora- 
tion of Sonqour, the armourer, and Maslati, the Maghrebian. 


### 83181: Rivalry in the Red Sea: Portugal's impact on the fortunes of Mamluk Egypt

This was the wisest thing to do, and the constructions were 
very fine. The same army seized the port of Suakin unopposed, 
the spices stored there were confiscated and the population 
deported. The sultan greatly rejoiced at these successes. 
Dhoul-Hidjdja (April-May 1507): The courier of the pil- 
grimage came back to report that the Egyptian army had 
entered Mecca and had made the Pious Halt at Arafat. He added 
that the Europeans were still making forays along the Indian 
coast; that Husayn, the commander in chief of the army bound 
for India, had begun the construction of towers on the shore 
near Jeddah as well as round the city itself; and that ships were 
ready to leave for Aden. The sultan appeared pleased with this 
news. Later, the audacity of the Europeans knew no bounds: 
over twenty of their ships dared to enter the Red Sea, attack- 
ing the Indian merchant vessels, lying in ambush to intercept 
the convoys, and seizing cargoes, with the result that the impor- 
tation of many goods was interrupted. Because of this it was 
very difficult to procure turbans and muslin veils in Egypt. 
It was said that the Europeans had succeeded in breaching 
the sea wall built by Alexander the Macedonian, son of Philip. 
This breach had been made in a stretch of land separating the 
sea route to China from the Mediterranean. For years the 
Europeans had been desperately trying to widen this opening 
to allow their vessels to enter the Red Sea. Such had been the 
beginnings of this commercial war. 
Cha’ban 914 (December 1508): It was learned that the army 
sent to India under the command of Amir Husayn had won 
a victory over the Europeans who were overrunning the Indian 
Ocean. A great quantity of booty had been taken. On the orders 
of the sultan, who was overjoyed with this news, the sound 
of drums resounded for three days together. Husayn asked for 
reinforcements to bring the European troops to their knees. 
11 Moharram 915 (1 May 1509): The chamberlain, Ala ad- 
din, left for Tor to oversee the construction of vessels inten- 
ded for the Indian expedition. 
Safar 915 (June 1509): It was learned that the army in India, 
commanded by Husayn Mouchrif, had suffered 2 crushing 
defeat. The Europeans had wiped it out and had plundered all 
its ships. The sultan appeared extremely dismayed by this news. 
Safar 916 (May 1510): An envoy from the Prince of 
Cambay, Mahmoud Shah, together with other Indian nobles, 
R= IT1 911% (September 1505): The sultan formed an brought missives in which these princes insisted that troops 
should be sent to the Indian coast, which was overrun with 
European pirates. The audacity of the Europeans knew no 
bounds and, following their victory over Husayn, the 
commander of the Egyptian expeditionary force, they were 
contemplating settling in the country. 
Thursday, 30 Ramadan 918 (9 December 1512): This day 
saw the return, after an absence of almost seven years and three 
months, of Amir Husayn, the same who had led the Indian 
expedition. In the course of his campaign he had fought 
engagements with the Europeans and had thus been faced with 
many tribulations and untold dangers. It will be recalled that 
he had been responsible for the construction of the surroun- 
ding wall and towers at Jeddah and that these were fine pieces 
of workmanship. At that time he had taken on the role of gover- 
nor of Jeddah and had shown himself to be arbitrary and 
conceited. A tax of ten per cent had been imposed on merchants, 
and the people, who had greatly suffered under his injustices, 
had found him intolerable. He had established friendly rela- 
tions with certain Indian princes and, on his return to Egypt, 
he brought back an envoy from King Mozaffar Shah ibn Mah- 
moud, Prince of Cambay, whose father had recently died. This 
diplomat had come to ask the caliph to accord diplomatic cre- 
dentials to Mozaffar Shah. The sultan issued courtly robes to 
Amir Husayn and to this envoy, and they left the Citadel in 
solemn procession. 
Year 920 (1514): No cargo was delivered at the port of Jed- 
dah because of the European corsairs sailing in the Indian 
Ocean. It had been at least six years since merchandise had been 
unloaded in the port of Jeddah. 
Contemporary portrait of Afonso de Albuquerque, early 16th-century 
governor of the “State of India”, at a time when Portuguese activities 
in the Indian Ocean were leading to commercial and military rivalry 
with the Islamic countries of the region, as documented by Ibn lyas. 

## [Page 33](083185engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

  
J 
j' AM \ nw 
: 7d 5 
IN b . 
  
Mombasa (in present-day Kenya) as depicted in an engraving from 
Civitates orbis terrarum (see lower photo page 18). The city, fortified 
by the Portuguese in the 16th century as part of their trading network 
around the Indian Ocean, was a centre of Portuguese and Arab rivalry 
for over a century. 


### 83182: Christians and spices': the Portuguese in India

Thursday, 13 Djoumada I 920 (6 July 1514): A detachment 
was assembled to go to India with the aim of resisting the Eu- 
ropean attacks, which we had heard were again on the increase. 
Thursday, 20 Djoumada I 920 (13 July 1514): The gover- 
nor of Jeddah made it known that the Europeans were con- 
tinuing their attacks on the Yemen coast and that they had just 
taken Kamaran, the trading-post for Indian merchandise in the 
Red Sea. General Husayn begged the sultan to send reinforce- 
ments before the Europeans occupied the entire Yemen coast. 
Moreover he feared that there would be an attack on Jeddah. 
Monday, 12 Djoumada I 921 (24 June 1515): The sultan 
took up quarters at the Hippodrome to review the fifth regi- 
ment. More than 600 of these soldiers were conscripted to go 
to India; among their number were young recruits, Mamluks 
of the sultan’s guard, veterans and reservists. Having been told 
of the ravages that the Europeans were constantly perpetrat- 
ing in the Indian Ocean, which was overrun with European 
ships, the sultan decided to have some twenty ships built at Suez, 
and to load them with weapons, guns, and cannons, as well as 
with other engines of war. Salman the Ottoman was appoint- 
ed admiral of this fleet, with many seamen under his command, 
both Ottoman and Maghrebian, in all 2,000 men, perhaps more. 
Having picked the soldiers, the sultan asked them to leave as 
soon as possible. 
The month of Cha’ban 923 (August 1517): This month 
saw the return of the Ottoman admiral, Salman, who had ac- 
companied the flotilla sent to India by Sultan Ghauri. It was 
then learned that this admiral had had Husayn, the governor 
of Jeddah, thrown into the sea. This was the outcome of an 
old quarrel, going back to the reign of Ghauri. After the lat- 
ter’s death, Salman, now the more powerful of the two, had 
killed Husayn: such at any rate was the rumour. Salman brought 
back a certain number of Europeans captured in the Indian 
Ocean, where they were engaged in a trade war and were in- 
tercepting merchant ships traversing those waters. Admiral 
Salman, together with Husayn, had conquered several Indian 
towns, which had brought them untold riches. 
The month of Djoumada II 924 (June 1518): According 
to sources in Mecca, European corsairs were sailing in the Red 
Sea and intercepting merchant ships. The sharif had sent a report 
to the prince of the amirs, governor of Egypt, requesting him 
to send an expeditionary force as soon as possible, because fears 
32 
were mounting of a surprise attack on the port of Jeddah, and 
the Muslims could not prevent the city’s defeat. 
Ramadan 925 (September 1519): It was learned from Mecca 
that the presence of around forty European vessels had been 
reported in the Red Sea, in the vicinity of Jeddah, which were 
attacking and intercepting merchant ships. In the light of this 
information, the prince of amirs, governor of Egypt, after a 
review of Circassian Mamluks and other troops, designated 
some 300 soldiers, both Mamluks and volunteer horsemen, to 
escort the pilgrims and to establish a garrison at Jeddah in order 
to resist the Europeans in the event of a surprise attack. 
Thursday 28 Ramadan 925 (23 September 1519): This was 
the day of departure for the corps bound for the port of Jed- 
dah. The contingent which started its march this day was made 
up of Circassian Mamluks and Turkomans, in all some 300 men 
who had been taken from these two regiments. The comman- 
der was an Ottoman named Husayn, commander of the light 
cavalry. They went to Suez, from whence they embarked on 
the Red Sea for Jeddah. The destructive raids of the Europeans, 
who were sailing in the vicinity of the port of Jeddah and were 
terrorizing merchants, were much spoken of at this time. B 
* Islamic chronology, reckoned from the date of the hijrah (Hegira), the Pro- 
phet’s journey from Mecca to Medina. Editor 
The central regions of the Portuguese “State of India”, including India 
itself, Persia, Arabia and the Red Sea, are shown on this Portuguese 
map from an anonymous book of seamanship published in 1560 and 
preserved in the archives of the Ministry of Finance, Lisbon. Fortified 
ports such as Goa, Hormuz and Aden are also indicated. 
    
£ 
- 
! 
rr
 
T
a
 
A
 
1.
3 
i
v
i
}
 
A
.
 
2 
A

## [Page 34](083185engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83182: Christians and spices': the Portuguese in India

‘CHRISTIANS AND SPICES’ 
The Portuguese in India 
AMOES masterpiece The Lusiads, Portugal’s national 
epic, tells the story of a small nation which in the space 
of a little over a century carried its flag and its faith 
far across the seas to Africa, to Brazil and as far away as Japan. 
Singing of “heroes who, leaving their native Portugal behind 
them, opened the way to Ceylon and beyond, across seas no 
man had ever sailed before”, it reminds us that Portugal played 
‘an important part in unrolling “the Great Map of Mankind” 
in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, beginning with Vasco 
da Gama’s great voyage to India in 1497-1498. 
We do not deal here with the impulses behind the Age of 
Discovery. Suffice it to mention that, according to British 
historian Charles Boxer, the four main motives which inspired 
the Portuguese were, in chronological order: crusading zeal; 
desire for Guinea gold; the quest for Prester John*; and the 
search for spices. 
Whatever their motives, the Portuguese, by their discover- 
ies, not only extended the limits of the world known to Europe, 
but contributed greatly to its more accurate representation. At 
the end of the fifteenth century, a revolutionary cartographi- 
cal innovation was made with the introduction of a scale of 
  
  
BY JOHN CORREIA AFONSO 
latitudes, and subsequently, following the great discoveries, 
Portugal became the European centre for geographical and car- 
tographical knowledge. Alberto Cantino’s famous planisphere 
(1502) is the earliest dated map to delineate the Portuguese dis- 
covery of India (see centre colour pages). 
However, the Portuguese did more than sail and chart the 
seas. They also traded, and conquered and settled lands. The 
domination of the Portuguese on the coasts and seas of Africa 
and Asia is essentially and peculiarly connected with the be- 
ginnings of that maritime expansion of Europe and Christen- 
dom, which, above all else, marks off the modern from the 
medieval world. 
Here indeed was the beginning of a New Age, for before 
the Iberian discoveries the most striking feature of the history 
of civilization was the dispersion and isolation of the different 
branches of mankind. 
As Boxer points out, “it was the Portuguese pioneers and 
the Castilian conguistadores from the western rim of Christen- 
dom, who brought together, for better or for worse, the wide- 
ly sundered branches of the great human family. They thus first 
made humanity conscious, however dimly, of its essential 
unity.” 
This unity was given new meaning by the bonds of trade. 
Not only were the two hemispheres brought closer to each 
other, but the European merchants engaged in coastal trade also 
helped to bring parts of Asia closer to one another, linking In- 
dia, South-East Asia, China and Japan. 
The Portuguese also showed Europe how to trade profita- 
bly in areas of advanced civilization, and although they were 
not devoid of cruelty in their relations with native princes and 
their peoples, their relations with native rulers were generally 
speaking based on mutual respect and even ‘“‘cousinly” 
friendship. 
Contrary to popular belief, the Portuguese were more con- 
cerned with trade than with conquest. In the sixteenth centu- 
ry, there were probably no more than 10,000 able-bodied 
Portuguese in all Portugual’s overseas territories. It would have 
This illustration from the Casanatense Codex attests to the Portuguese 
presence in China, which they reached in 1513. 
hoiuar swale In A Tim fy eitumen — he. 7% 
”~ . 
Jadbian be ow Kia wary xe in 
  
    
  
  A ) Wise '

## [Page 35](083185engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83183: Portuguese art in the maritime era

been foolish of them to believe that 
India could be conquered and held by 
such small numbers. And so the high- 
sounding term Estado da India (“State 
of India”) in fact designated basically 
a series of trading posts along commer- 
cial sea routes controlled by Portugal 
in varying degrees. 
If desire for commercial gain rather 
than military or political motives was 
the driving force behind Portuguese 
expansion, this was allied to evangeli- 
cal and missionary zeal. The reported 
answer of Vasco da Gama’s men when 
questioned at Calicut about the reason 
for their long journey is well known: 
“Christians and spices”, they alleged- 
ly replied. This close association 
between God and Mammon was the 
hall-mark of the empire founded by the 
Portuguese in the East, and, for that 
matter, in Africa and in South America. 
Catholicism of a rather autocratic 
nature, and the fact that in territories 
under Portuguese control no effort was 
made to adapt Western Christianity to the culture and outlook 
of the Indian people, has led many historians to regard Por- 
tuguese evangelism as a phase in and a tool of European expan- 
sion. Others maintain that the missionaries did to some degree 
seek to divorce themselves from the political and economic am- 
bitions of their fellow-countrymen. 
It is often claimed that there was no colour-bar or racial 
discrimination in the Portuguese colonies. This is an exaggera- 
tion. It is true that the Portuguese were usually more liberal 
in this respect than the Dutch, the English or the French 
colonizers. On the whole the Portuguese rulers took the line 
that religion and not colour should be the criterion for full 
Portuguese citizenship, and that all Asian converts to Chris- 
tianity should be treated as the equals of their Portuguese co- 
religionists. Yet for a very long time the religious orders in the 
Portuguese possessions would not admit non-whites to their 
ranks and, in India, among the Portuguese themselves, odious 
distinctions were made between the Reinois (those born in 
Portugal itself) and the Indiaticos (those born in Asia of 
Portuguese parents). In India, the Portuguese kings usually 
favoured the policy of inter-racial marriages initiated by Afonso 
de Albuquerque, the conqueror of Goa. 
Another reason for the greater permanence of Portuguese 
influence in Asia was the wide acceptance of their language, 
which became a commercial lingua franca in the East. Even the 
Dutch, who defeated the Portuguese at sea, found that it was 
futile to take drastic measures against the use of Portuguese, 
which was “an easy language to speak and easy to learn”. 
Vasco da Gama sighted India on 18 May 1498, and two days 
later dropped anchor a few kilometres north of Calicut, at the 
port of Capocate. It was not till the end of the month that he 
was received by the Zamorin (ruler) of Calicut who was far 
from impressed by the gifts da Gama brought, although appar- 
ently pleased with the contents of the letters of which he was 
the bearer. 
A second Portuguese fleet, under Pedro Alvares Cabral, 
arrived in 1501. Cabral became embroiled in a quarrel with the 
Zamorin, and, learning that the ruler of the rival port of Cochin 
hated the Zamorin and was eager to trade with the Portuguese, 
— 34 _ 
 
Detail from a Flemish tapestry commissioned in the early 16th century by the King of Portugal. 
A fine example of the influence of Oriental motifs on the European art of the period, it shows 
some of the animals that Portuguese navigators brought back from their voyages. 
he called at Cochin, established friendly relations there, and 
loaded a cargo of pepper. Next he made friends with the Rajah 
of Cannanore. 
However, the most important event in the establishment of 
the Portuguese Estado da India was the capture of Goa from the 
forces of the Sultan of Bijapur in November 1510. Goa provided 
the Portuguese with an excellent natural harbour and was better 
situated than Cochin as a naval base. This conquest also convinced 
the Indian rulers that the Portuguese meant to stay. Moving north- 
wards along the west coast of India, the Portuguese also acquired 
the ports of Bassein, Bombay, Daman (Damio) and Diu. 
The Portuguese were the first Europeans to establish them- 
selves in India, and the last to leave. Four and a half centuries 
were to pass between the conquest of Goa and the lowering 
of the Portuguese flag in that territory in 1961. During that 
time they put down deeper roots than did the Dutch, the 
English and the French elsewhere in India. One has only to 
travel along the west coast of India to see the stamp of the 
Portuguese presence. Religion, language, architecture, music, 
cuisine—these are some of the areas in which we recognize 
Lusitanian traits. 
As the Portuguese chronicler Jodo de Barros wrote in 1540: 
“The Portuguese arms and pillars placed in Africa and in Asia, 
and in countless isles beyond the bounds of three continents, 
are material things, and time may destroy them. But time will 
not destroy the religion, customs and language which the Por- 
tuguese have implanted in these lands.” Pretentious as this 
prophecy may sound, it has, in fact, been substantially borne 
out for four and a half centuries. J 
* Legendary sovereign thought in medieval Europe to rule a Christian kingdom 
in central Asia. Later reports, especially by Portuguese explorers, situated him 
in Ethiopia. Editor 
JOHN CORREIA AFONSQ, a Jesuit priest from Goa, India, is director of 
the Heras Institute of Indian History and Culture, Bombay, and editor of the 
Institute’s review Indica. A former professor of history at Xavier College, Bom- 
bay, he has organized a number of international seminars on Indo-Portuguese 
history. His published works include Jesuit Letters and Indian History (Oxford 
University Press, Bombay, 1969).

## [Page 36](083185engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
J EEE 
[FEET 5 E | 
Et 
: 
:   
  
 
The voyages of discovery strongly influenced the Late Gothic form of Portuguese architectural ornamentation known as the “Manueline” style, in 
which marine and nautical motifs are prominent. Above, pillars and vaulting of the Jerénimos monastery in Lisbon, one of the most typical 
examples of this style. 


### 83183: Portuguese art in the maritime era

PORTUGUESE ART 
IN THE MARITIME ERA 
URING Portugal’s Golden Age 
D of Discovery—from the conquest 
of Ceuta, Morocco, in 1415, to 
the death of Prince Henry the Navigator 
in 1460—Portuguese art was predominant- 
ly Gothic, then the common aesthetic 
standard throughout the Western world. 
Yet this was not the exuberant, florid 
Gothic of the great French cathedrals, but 
a simpler, more down-to-earth, less eru- 
dite and intellectual version, closer 
perhaps to the vernacular and to the less 
ornamental architecture of the mendicant 
religious orders and of the Cistercians. In 
modest buildings such as the still essen- 
tially Romanesque Hermitage of Our 
Lady of Guadaloupe, near Sagres, and 
constructions built to a serene, rigorous- 
ly geometric design (such as the lesser 
cloisters of the monasteries of Batalha and 
Tomar) it is possible to detect the per- 
sonal tastes of Henry the Navigator. His 
was a classical ideal of beauty which 
found its full expression in the canvases 
of the court painter Nuno Gongalves 
whose paintings exude a powerful mystic 
force and a sentiment of respect for the 
value of the individual (see pages 2 and 8). 
It would, however, be a mistake to 
take this Franciscan humility as a sign of 
weakness. According to Reynaldo dos 
Santos, the polyptych for Sio Vicente, six 
BY RAFAEL DE FARIA D. MOREIRA 
panels painted by Nuno Gongalves for 
the See of Lisbon between 1460 and 1465, 
as the city’s tribute to the leader of the 
conquest of Morocco, “reflects a new vi- 
sion of Nature and of man”. As redolent 
of Mediterranean humanism as it is of 
nordic realism, this work is one of the 
masterpieces of European painting. 
Moreover, the buildings in English Late 
Gothic style (such as those built by the 
French architect Huguet between 1402 
and 1438 at the monastery of Batalha), the 
Tuscan-style paintings that Prince Henry 
seems to have admired so much (proba- 
bly the work of Jodo Gongalves who in 
1432 painted the fine Renaissance frescoes 
— 35 ——

## [Page 37](083185engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

  
in the Abbey of Florenga) as well as the 
Moorish style of the Royal Palace at 
Sintra where King Jodo I (1385-1433) 
received foreign envoys and visitors 
(among them the great Flemish painter 
Jan van Eyck) in exotic surroundings 
suited to his status as “Lord of Ceuta”, 


### 83184: Fernando Pessoa and the spirit of discovery

are all contemporary aesthetic manifesta- 
tions whose cosmopolitan nature is an 
expression of human diversity and 
receptivity. 
Once feudal dominion over the 
Maghreb had been established, the sea- 
borne thrust towards India became 
Portugal's national goal. Old legends 
were revived, fuelled by medieval 
accounts of fantastic voyages, of the 
conquests of Alexander the Great and 
tales of Troy which pictured Asia as a 
region of fabulous wealth inhabited 
mainly by Christians. To the subjects of 
King Jodo II (1455-1495), an alliance with 
Prester John was not only a possibility 
but a necessity in the context of expan- 
sionist ambitions in which greed for gold 
became inextricably mixed up with the 
goal of recapturing Jerusalem and spread- 
ing the Christian message. 
This ideal undoubtedly had a strong 
influence on the arts and on the collec- 
tive “‘cultural imagination”. Even before 
the “discovery” of the sea route to India 
(which was not achieved until Vasco da 
Gama landed at Calicut in 1498, although 
after 1486 it was considered only a mat- 
ter of time), the mere expectation of such 
a great feat was enough to provoke a 
heightened tension in the final phase of 
the Gothic in Portugal. The situation in 
the arts at the end of the fifteenth centu- 
ry, with its experiments in the incorpo- 
ration of the exotic (through such hybrid 
forms as Afro-Portuguese ivory art) and 
the lavish ornamentation favoured by the 
artists at court, could be seen as a prepa- 
ration for Vasco da Gama’s “encounter 
with history”. 
There has been much discussion about 
oriental influences on the development of 
the distinctively Portuguese style, known 
as Manueline art as a tribute to King 
Manuel I (1469-1521) who gave it the 
standing of official style of the kingdom. 
It has rightly been pointed out that direct 
contact with Indian art would only have 
occurred after the process of conquest 
was well advanced. It was, however, an 
“imagined India” rather than any direct 
influence from the subcontinent that 
proved suchtan irresistible fount of im- 
pressions and experiences. 
Whatever its source, Manueline art 
was first and foremost a royal, Christian 
art, strongly linked to the medieval tra- 
36 
a 
AER ar  
This window in the Convent of Christ monastery at Tomar is a masterwork of Manueline art. 
Tomar was the headquarters of the Order of Christ, which played an important part in the 
Portuguese voyages of discovery. 
dition and to a system of mythical values 
of which this style claimed to be the 
definitive statement. It was a “modern” 
art form in the sense that it adopted con- 
temporary thought as a strident and eu- 
phoric affirmation of faith in history. 
Nothing could be more instructive than 
to observe the way in which the king had 
himself portrayed in these works—as a 
man, kneeling in the divine presence as 
a humble donor; as a king, in the regalia 
of one of the Three Kings or as King 
David, that is to say, as one who leads the 
way to an era of greatness. 
Let us take as examples of this com- 
plex symbolic framework reflecting the 
Manueline notion of modernity two 
related monuments (both recently in- 
scribed by Unesco on the World Heritage 
List) in which the intervention of King 
Manuel can be seen. Along the River 
Tagus on the outskirts of Lisbon, at 
Restelo, the point of departure of succes- 
sive fleets on their voyages of discovery, 
the huge Jeronimos monastery houses the 
tombs of the king and his family, guard- 
ed by a small extravagantly decorated 
fort. There, at the gateway to the ocean, 
at the most westerly point of Europe, the 
monastery (begun in 1501) and the Tower 
of Belém (1514) are monuments to the 
wealth and invincible power of the king 
who ordered their construction. 
Further north, at Tomar in central 
Portugal, stands the Monastery of Christ, 
built by the military Order of Christ, 
which played an important role in the 
voyages of discovery. In 1510, the origi- 
nal rotunda of the church was extended 
by the addition of a huge nave, the 
proportions of which were identical with 
those of the Sistine Chapel in the Vati- 
can and which was intended, like the Sis- 
tine Chapel, as a setting for great and 
solemn ceremonies. The famous window 
in the upper part of the west fagade is an 
epitome of the aesthetic message of 
Manueline art, a piece of religious and 
political rhetoric transposed into stone. 
However, the Golden Age announced 
by the ideologists of the Portuguese court 
and visually expressed by the artists of the 
time was to lose its attraction—and the 
Manueline style was to lose its topicality— 
with the turning of the page marked by the 
end of the great discoveries (without any 
of the millenarian prophecies being ful- 
filled) and with the bloody consolidation 
of Portuguese power in the East. 
Lord of the trade routes from Brazil 
to Japan, first maritime power of the 
modern era and one of the greatest of all 
time, Portugal alone could be compared 
to the Roman empire. Was Manueline art 
to serve as a model for a new form of ar- 
tistic expression of the might of Christen- 
dom? Just as Portuguese power declined 
throughout the sixteenth century, so too 
did Manueline optimism wane; it was to 
be the post-medieval spirit of the Italian 
Renaissance that would satisfy the need for 
a new form of artistic expression. n 
RAFAEL DE FARIA D. MOREIRA, of Brazil, 
is a lecturer in the history of art at the New Uni- 
versity of Lisbon. He is the author of a monograph 
on the Jerbnimos Monastery, Lisbon, a thesis on 
léth-century Portuguese architecture, and many 
specialized articles. An expert on military architec- 
ture, he is preparing a history of Portuguese fortifi- 
cations around the world for publication in 1990.

## [Page 38](083185engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83184: Fernando Pessoa and the spirit of discovery

FERNANDO PESSOA AND THE 
SPIRIT OF DISCOVERY 
BY JOSE AUGUSTO SEABRA 
  
HE Portuguese voyages of disco- 
The left behind them a broad, 
- indelible wake on the surface of 
modern history and culture. In literature, 
not only did they inspire the sixteenth- 
century epics of Camdes, they also pro- 
foundly marked the works of his spiri- 
tual successor, Fernando Pessoa, 
Portugal’s great modern poet. In Pessoa’s 
writings, however, the voyages of disco- 
very are treated not simply as a tribute 
to a glorious past, but as a prophetic pro- 
jection of that past into the future. In the 
first poem of his Mensagem (**Message™), 
a collection of verse published in 1934, 
Pessoa writes of the “future of the past”, 
and throughout the book he develops the 
visionary, messianic theme of the “Fifth 
Empire”! and of the “Portuguese Sea” 
symbolically spreading out to become the 
“universal mother”. 
  
 
Two of Portugal’s greatest poets, Luis de 
Camoes and Fernando Pessoa, as portrayed by 
the Portuguese artist José Almada Negreiros. 
— 
i A | 
  
\s m 
a Ar 
a 3 4 2 
We \ ge EN &£ A @ p 
  
Pessoa, the poet of many hetero- 
nyms,” made no attempt to duplicate 
The Lusiads, the national epic that 
recounts Vasco da Gama’s voyage of dis- 
covery against the background of the his- 
tory of Portugal. Instead he transforms 
his country’s history into an initiatory 
voyage with other ships and other sea- 
farers, symbolic figures on a spiritual 
quest for the occult, like the quest for the 
Holy Grail, under the banner of the 
Rosicrucians. Dom Sebastian, the 
“Longed-for, Hidden King” of the Por- 
tuguese, is the mythical embodiment of 
that quest and his return, like that of 
Ulysses, is awaited with endless patience. 
Returning to the homeric sources and tra- 
cing through Greek, Roman, Christian 
and European tradition, Pessoa announ- 
ces the advent of a “New Renaissance” 
that Portugal would bring to the world 
3

## [Page 39](083185engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

  
and whose minstrel would be a “Super- 
Camdes”. 
This prophecy had already figured in 
the first major writings to appear under 
Pessoa’s signature on his return to 
Lisbon, fired with patriotism that had 
religious and universalist overtones, fol- 
lowing his childhood and adolescence in 
South Africa. These writings were pub- 
lished in the magazine A Aguia (“The 
Eagle”) of Oporto, the organ of the “Por- 
tuguese Renaissance” movement. In the 
Republic then established in Portugal, 
this movement preached the values of 
“Lusitanian civilization”, invoking 
saudade® in the sense of nostalgia for the 
past, but also for the future. 
Drawing inspiration from the move- 
ment’s charismatic poet, Joaquim 
Teixeira de Pascioes (1877-1952), Pessoa 
attempted to define the trends of the 
“new Portuguese poetry”, under the pre- 
text of carrying out a sociological and 
psychological analysis, so as to draw from 
it the elements of a poetic form of a sta- 
ture to match his exalted vision of new 
caravels setting out to discover a “New 
India”, not an earthly geographical and 
historical place but a transcendent land 
of dream. “And its true, supreme destiny, 
of which the deeds of the navigators were 
but an obscure and flesh-bound dress 
rehearsal, will achieve divine fulfilment” 
he concludes, in an outburst of messia- 
nic zeal. 
It can be sensed that, in his mysterious 
pronouncements, the poet, who surrep- 
titiously equates himself with the “Super- 
Camdes”, takes as his starting point the 
concept of ‘“‘discovery”, to which he 
attaches more importance than to the 
actual discoveries themselves, giving it a 
new meaning which, like King Sebastian, 
remains for ever hidden. He goes from 
the exoteric to the esoteric; the more one 
discovers about things external to oneself, 
the more deeply is the truth hidden; error 
piles upon error and deviation upon 
deviation. The initiatory voyage is, in 
fact, always an interior voyage. As he 
wrote in another poem from Mensagem: 
Far from ourselves we go in search 
Of who we really are. 
And in the same poem he talks of the 
impossibility of return, since “God allows 
us no departure”. 
In his writings Pessoa constantly harks 
back to the Portuguese discoverers, whom 
he sees as the creators of the “modern 
world”. But their discoveries were, above 
all, a cultural, a “civilization-creating act”. 
This is why the founding of a colonial 
empire never was and never would be of 
importance to Portugal. “Colonies are not 
38 
 By a 
The emblem of Lisbon is a ship, sometimes 
shown with 2 ravens as in this allegorical 
depiction dating from the late 16th century. 
necessary for what I imagine to be the des- 
tiny of Portugal”, he wrote in 1934. For 
Pessoa dreamed of a Portugal which he 
conceived of as a “cultural empire” and a 
“spiritual force”. For the “ridiculous old- 
fashioned imperialism” of the “generals” 
and the “politicians” he substituted “the 
imperialism of the grammarians” and “the 
imperialism of the poets”. 
As the poet of a language become 
homeland, a universal homeland, neverthe- 
less, with multiple tongues and many iden- 
tities, the Super-Camdes would be the poet 
par excellence of this new imperialism. The 
same Pessoa who wrote “my country is the 
Portuguese language”, also affirmed, faith- 
ful to his religious, Rosicrucian ecumenism, 
that “God speaks every language”. 
This God who, in the spirit of Pessoa’s 
“neo-paganism”, encompasses all other 
gods, is not the God of Camées. Nor are 
the gods of the Mensagem the same as those 
from pagan mythology who throng the 
pages of The Lusiads, superimposing them- 
selves upon the Christian God. Pessoa’s 
gnostic brand of Christianity, like that of 
the Templars, proclaims another kind of 
“Holy War”, the struggle for peace and 
fraternity made possible by the Portuguese 
discoveries which brought into contact the 
beliefs and civilizations of East and West, 
of North and South: 
For God desired that all the world be one, 
And that the sea unite and not divide. 
This is the divine plan traced out in the 
poem dedicated to Prince Henry the Navi- 
gator, the opening poem of the Portuguese 
Sea, the second part of Pessoa’s anthology. 
And in The Ascension of Vasco da Gama, 
after the “Gods of the Tempest”, symbo- 
lized in myth as “The Monster”, we see 
“the heavens open up to receive the soul 
of the Argonaut”, the “Last Captain” who, 
following the route traced and marked 
with stone pillars by Diogo Cio and 
Bartolomeu Dias, finally rounded the Cape 
of Good Hope and opened up the long- 
dreamed-of route to India. 
The “New India” has now become an 
India where berth caravels built of “such 
stuff as dreams are made on”, where the 
symbolic and the imaginary dissolve into 
a new reality of which the myths of 
“Sebastianism” and the “Fifth Empire” are 
the poetic expression. 
It is to this new spirit of discovery and 
voyaging that Pessoa invites the Portuguese 
of today: “We must begin by intoxicating 
ourselves with this dream, absorbing it into 
ourselves and embodying it... Then, in the 
very soul of the Nation, will occur that un- 
foreseeable alchemy from which will spring 
New Discoveries and the Creation of a 
New World ...” n 
1. A reference to a myth which relates that King 
Sebastian of Portugal, who died at the battle of 
Alcazarquivir (1578), will one day return to found a 
“Fifth Empire” of universal peace. 
2. Pessoa created a series of alter egos (“heteronyms™) 
whom he endowed with their own life-stories and 
whose poems he wrote for them. (See Unesco Courier, 
November 1988). 
3. A feeling of intense nostalgia and of being torn 
between the call of the sea and attachment to the 
homeland. Editor 
JOSE AUGUSTO SEABRA, Portuguese poet and 
essayist, is professor of literary theory and of 
Portuguese literature at the University of Oporto 
and a specialist on Fernando Pessoa. A former 
member of parliament and Minister of Education, 
he is currently serving as his country’s Ambassador 
to Unesco. 
 
Photo credits 
Allillustrations in this issue, apart from those mentioned 
below, are published by kind permission of the National 
Board for the Celebration of the Portuguese Discover- 
ies, who are the sole copyright holders. 
Covers: © National Maritime Museum, London. 
Page 19 (above): © Vieira da Silva, ADAGP 1989, 
Paris/private collection of Agustina Bessa-Luis, Oporto, 
Portugal. Pages 24, 27 (above): © Calouste 
Gulbenkian Foundation/Portuguese Cultural Centre, 
Paris. Page 27 (below): © Jean-Loup Passek, Paris. 
Pages 28, 31: © Jean-Loup Charmet, Paris. Page 29: 
© Alfredo Pinheiro Marques, Lisbon. Page 37 (below): 
© Modern Art Centre, Calouste Gulbenkian Found- 
ation, Lisbon, 
The early Portuguese maps and charts in this issue are 
reproduced from a collection entitled Portugaliae 
Monumenta Cartographica, by A. Corlesdo and 
A. Teixeira da Mota, which was reissued in 1988 by the 
Imprensa Nacional and the Casa da Moeda, Lisbon.

## [Page 40](083185engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

The Courier II 
A window open on the world 
  
Published monthly in 35 languages by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization 
A selection in braille is published quarterly 
in English, French, Spanish and Korean 
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Office: 
Unesco, 7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700, Paris. 
Editorial staff (Paris) 
Director: Bahgat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaar 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin, Caroline Lawrence 
French edition: Alain Lévéque, Neda El Khazen 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, 
Aracelli Ortiz de Urbina 
Arabic edition: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoudi 
Braille edition: 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Research: Violette Ringelstein 
Liaisons with non-Headquarters editions: 
Solange Belin 
Sales and subscriptions: Henry Knobil 
Non-Headquarters editions: 
Russian: Georgi Zelenin (Moscow) 
German: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Japanese: Seiichiro Kopma (Tokyo) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Sri Ram (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew: Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian: H. Sadough Vanini (Teheran) 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra Ilgazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras | Mart (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Abdul Manaf Saad (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Paik Syeung-Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwah Dar-es-Salaam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene: 
Bozidar Perkovic (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: SJ. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Manni Kaossler (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larrafaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Dao Tung (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Nasir Seham (Kabul) 
Hausa; Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
Subscription rates 
1 year: 90 French francs. 
Binder for a year's issues: 62 FF 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted 
may be reprinted providing the credit line reads 
“Reprinted from ig Unesco Courter”, plus date of issue, 
and three voucher copies are sent to the editor. 
Signed articles reprinted must bear author's name, 
Non-copyright "A will be supplied on request. 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless 
accompanied by an international reply coupon 
covering postage. Signed articles express the opinions 
of the authors and do not necessarily represent the 
opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of the 
Unesco Courier. Photo captions and headlines are 
written by the Unesco Courier staff. The boundaries 
on maps published in the magazine do not imply 
official endorsement or acceptance by Unesco or the 
United Nations. The Unesco Courier is produced in 
microform (microfilm and/or microfiche by: 
(1) Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris; 
(2) University Microfilms (Xerox), Ann Arbor, 
Michigan 48100, US.A.; (3) N.C.R. Microcard 
Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 West 40th Street, 
New-York, U.S.A; (4) Bell and Howell Co., Old 
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, US.A.   
All corres nce should be addressed 
to the Editor-in-chief m Paris 
Imprimé en France (Printed in France) - 
Dépon legal: C1 - Avril 1989 
Photogravure-impression: Maury-Imprimeur S.A, 
The Portuguese maritime expeditions exacted a heavy toll in human lives. This 21x ous TEs 35333 Malesherbes 
illustration from the Codex Lisuarte de Abreu (1558) shows a Portuguese shipwreck in the Indian ISSN 0041-5278 
Ocean (Pierpont Morgan Library, New York). N“4. 1989. OPI - 89 - 1 - 467 A

## [Page 41](083185engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### IGNORE

  . E we 
& ™ - p pr W . 
, a Cal a wv Pe hry : 
of re I “oh > LP. si - :  _BETT Lal