# [061468](061468engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](061468engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

| A WINDOW OPEN ON THE WORLD . 
  
  
% L- Aad ¥ - ‘ > 4 y "l 4 h ae 
Jess AA 1.9) Tras : ”) v, Zi ‘3 
Le af Pir df 24 PAV 
AY 4 0 : 2h A » : 
ar a 4 
’ W 
4 , > 
" » 
" . 
y ~N 
4 ‘ Ss \ | 
yy . 
EN 
3 - 
4. A : . ' { 
i 3 ww 
* ” - 
1 NY, 
» 
' / 
a 7 fr 
aS 
N / 
M of 5 | 
‘ » : 
wy LY - : 
oo 4 ’ + 
n ¢ 4 
. | BN 
; yy ; 
‘A 4 | * ’'d 
. > 5 ’ . 7 E 
¥ 
; A 4 
: - sa 
Fr . 
fy 
\ A 
ly ~ 4 £ 
» 
L) . 
Ra a 
L 
J 
V
N
 
d
e
l
 
“
4
 
\ 
== 
A
 
C
L
 
¥ 
Ran 
T
A
 
28
 
Na
l 
‘ 
~
 
ON
 
X
N
 
> f
w
 
a
 
> 
w
o
 
RE
. 
a
r
 A 
 

## [Page 2](061468engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

National History Museum, Mexico- 
L. Limon Aragon 
SN) nd 0), os 
HO)! (3) 
SMA 
PI
R®
: 
QO
TT
SS
 MASTERS 
OF THE PEN 
Ta
re
 
(() 
-
 
C
E
T
 
V
i
 < 
C8e Aah dinads)ide Oct. 0.0, 
ably dedesus py     RN" Ds g 
A a 
Photos from * Eccentric Typography * by Walter Hart 
Sz Fr MZ 2257 = ded ner Blumenthal, published by Achille J. St. Onge, Wor- 
et es ec 4 
ay Cr . oes 
cester, U.S.A. 1963 
3 op CP Le i ZN . dec — 
pa Zits 2g be y 7% inn: falas he all Te ZA ¥ Many artists have made use of writing and 
Ha fo red ras s0 tlhe pS ; calligraphic designs in their paintings and 
~~ EAI rd cect %, op gh drawings, Above left, an oil painting of 
edo Ss A Fred rnd 2%! Count de Galvez, an 18th century Mexican 
po JE La £ Gens, ar iy 
nobleman. It is the work of two priests, Friar 
  
   
  
 
     
   
   
     
   
              
        
   
   
   
 
( i ted ac 
x, ; Ae Father San J i 
of, los nage S Aa Pki oe Le Jo lz idhoy ys Pablo de Jesus and Father San Jeron mo, 
<3 rellf fed Gar TK “ is Sor = a painter, and a calligrapher. Above, a 
ps > Cis et. er” Eo A £5" centaur designed in rustic capitals, taken 
oy J & Ci roth dp eon) ARP = Chie)p NY — 
from a 10th century manuscript of Cicero's 
“Aratea”, in the British Museum. Below left, 
a portrait of Abraham Lincoln, President 
o of the United States, appears like a work 
: GZ, ha in filigree through a calligraphic presentation 
f= 4 £45 na? rigid Gv A Giaty C5 oO Slot? of the Emancipation Proclamation, the 
\ N fb A eh Ca 2% Go og) Tam wt) Sleteal OL 
TX Lp i AR La ee e DW hos centenary of which was celebrated last year. 
ral 
«rT “ 
Lal 
55 4 oh 44 
Tr “ (froped an 7 “x 
” : A oF; : 
eT d es cnn ra 
pony : By If ol 7A 
(ed gh Feo ni i ud ads re AE Y rill a id LR 
yr Zn) elu “a 
x — bo Ce, 8 5 er [ 7 =. 
sat best feo Wy Leake AA ak 
Un 4 Garp es 7 uP 
a 2 Haslicpinst ihn
? =e eA ea 
(o> J lead sorey &e swale. Ee gh M—— 
~ Y oer : a Ne WB II A 
(o> J Soro Plz feangs FOAL Sr ra 
> % OPP 0% J Le leick a IE Sed AS 
3 of lhe lr iy cored LAL UHR, Le a 
ox 
5A 
= « a / { writ Sd PIA MARS “t ot 
er A G foiih i re ape) ried Pecspomt ia 3 rib 2 ies « So” Zoos 2 
= 7 cot tet) a prel Dr lair ZR ec IBC ETL Cg at 
ew i, PA sods mt arr ell Sot JEL pon Gent's PL hy He +7 a 2 
be - hr "oe Acayse ere op addin PHYS bd pects EL bx 
“ elm prem Cer Capets a Ze ve 52 
Ve o apred ne @ So a = 2 Hd CELA 
A. of w PER Cel cde 
Corr NL fe Hal 
Ke = 
warty ) Cra? EAP Pe 3 
= = eo epee 
er Ae % de weclwiis a! 
\e =
rd wiewe 
Wn 18 l=

## [Page 3](061468engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

The   corer 
    fl
e=
 
PUBLISHED IN 
NINE EDITIONS 
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 
Japanese 
Italian 
  
COVER PHOTO 
 
The * singing wood ” tablets 
{also called ~ talking woods ”) 
of Easter Island are entirely co- 
vered with mysterious symbols 
of men, animals, fish and birds 
which no one as yet has been 
able to decipher. Cover shows 
portion of one of these wood- 
en tablets. Inset outlines 
six of these undeciphered 
figures (see page 26). 
© Musée de I'Homme, Paris 
m(Courier 
Page 
10 
13 
14 
17 
18 
20 
22 
24 
30 
MARCH 1964 
17TH YEAR 
THE ART OF WRITING 
HITTITE AND MAYA GLYPHS 
CHAMPOLLION DECIPHERS EGYPT'S HIEROGLYPHS 
THE BIRTH OF CUNEIFORM 
THE EMERGENCE OF THE ALPHABET 
IN THE PATH OF SACRED BOOKS 
A FAMILY OF ASIAN SCRIPTS 
HOW EUROPE BEGAN TO WRITE 
ECHOES FROM THE STORY OF WRITING 
ELEVEN CENTURIES OF THE CYRILLIC ALPHABET 
SCRIPTS SHROUDED IN MYSTERY 
IDEOGRAMS FROM ANCIENT CHINA 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Russian Edition : Veniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-lchi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Layout & Design 
Robert jJacquemin 
THE UNESCO COURIER iy published monthly, exceptin July and August when 
itis bi-mpnthly (| 1 issues a year) in English, French, Spanish, Kussian, German, 
Arabic, Japanese, and ltalian, In the United Kingdom itis distributed by H.M, 
Stationery Office, P. O. Box 569, London, S. E, 1, 
Individua! articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed musc bear author's name, Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an internacional reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is Indexed monthly in The Readers’ Guide to 
Periodical Literature published by H. W. Wilton Co., New York, 
Annual subscription rates: 10/-stg. ; $3.00 (Canada) ;7.00 
French Francs or equivalent. Single copies I/-stg. 30 
cents ; 0.70 F. 
(M.C. 64.1, 183 A) 
Ne< 3, 1964 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief. 
“mr

## [Page 4](061468engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

0 n January 21, 1964, a Unesco Travelling Exhibition, The Art of 
Writing’' was inaugurated at the Staatliche Kunsthalle, in 
Baden-Baden, Federal Republic of Germany. Its fifty panels with their hundreds 
of photographs and explanatory texts present the story of writing : the birth and 
evolution of different systems and their subsequent impact on the life of man. 
The Unesco exhibition was prepared by Willem J. Sandberg, former head of 
the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam, in collaboration with Dr. Dietrich Mahlow, 
head of the Staatliche Kunsthalle, in Baden-Baden, according to a plan drawn up 
by Dr. Marcel Cohen, professor emeritus in the School of Modern Oriental 
Languages at the Sorbonne, in Paris. Specialists from other countries also gave 
their help. 
In this issue The Unesco Courier has made extensive use of illustrations and 
texts from this exhibition, which will later visit other countries. The catalogue of 
+The Art of Writing’ is a richly illustrated 130-page volume with a preface by 
Professor Etiemble, of the Sorbonne, and an introduction by Dr. Marcel Cohen, 
from which the following text has been drawn in slightly abridged form. The 
catalogue has already appeared in German; English, French and Spanish editions 
are in preparation. 
The vast panorama of the art of writing is not only of historical interest; 
in an age when illiteracy is recognized as a challenge to the world, it reminds 
us that writing is still, as always, a basic condition of all human progress. 
ok ao XK ak dG A 1 AY 
wk Fr Ti Trg 
Md t Ww YAY 
NESE PRT AR 
Fam Aka I ree 
cab R yA *e h22 PY dr a 
ARE RR RENE Bit rs 
FL IEEE Ya 
  
   
  
      
  
= 
  
2 Fr 
  
   
 

## [Page 5](061468engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

THE ART 
OF WRITING 
The first “texts” were “stories without 
words” told in drawings (pictographs). 
Signs shown here are memory-aids made 
by the Cuna Indians of Panama. They 
are for use by the singers of a ritual chant 
describing the quest for the fugitive soul 
of a sick man. The lines run alternatively 
from right to left and from left to right 
Unesco 
oF tis 1 
seh ®r 
mt 8 
i pee 
» PAS Te, 
A » 
Viki (Fhe. 
D LTR 
Botha A] X 
mpg A 
  
By Marcel Cohen 
| HE story of writing has had many beginnings 
in many different places. Though no more 
than a single moment on the time-scale of human history, 
it is nevertheless one of immense importance. 
Recent discoveries suggest that as much as half a million 
years ago there may already have been human beings who 
possessed tools, weapons and utensils—stone implements 
that still survive and other artifacts of which no trace 
remains because they were made of vegetal! materials. 
Only In comparatively recent times—probably not more 
than 40,000 years ago—do we find man as we now know 
him (in terms of brain development), not only equipped 
with some comparatively well-designed implements but, 
In the case of certain peoples, also able to engrave, shape 
and palnt Images of living creatures that are pleasing to 
modern tastes. 
It Is clear that for these far-off peoples, esthetic and 
utilitarian considerations were already closely linked. 
They appear to have belleved it useful to produce llke- 
nesses, in certain conditions, and to use them {In appro- 
priate ways (In conjunction with spells and rites invol- 
ving touching or transilxing) to ensure plentiful game and 
fruitful hunting. Their pleasure probably stemmed from 
the actual work of creation and from contemplating what 
they had fashioned in the dim, uncertain light of their 
cave homes. 
Nor was thls modelling of figures, whatever magical 
value may have been attributed to them, thelr sole 
artistic outlet. Even everyday objects reveal ornamental 
features, and jewellery was also made and worn. 
During the gradual evolution of speech into a perfected 
instrument it is probable that ways were found of 
replacing it and also of preserving it to a certain extent. 
This brings us to the “signs” (taken In a broad sense) 
which preceded writing and which have survived along- 
slde it for various uses. 
Art, or at least a graphic skill which takes its place, 
Is the basis of all systems of representing speech by visual 
means. All these have thelr origin In pictography (from 
the Latin root “to paint” and the Greek root “to trace 
or write”). The earliest form of plctography can be seen 
in the various types of embryo writing, where a fragment 
of speech is represented in such a way that anyone 
seeing it can grasp its message, although it Is not broken 
up into words, and thus there is no actual link with a 
particular language. 
Generally speaking, these are “stories without words,” 
representing situations by pictures or objects by signs. 
The form and use of these signs vary in the different 
societies which employ them, all of which have remained 
at a low level of economic development as Is the case with 
hunting, fishing and simple farming communities in 
Africa, Northern Asia, America and Oceania. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](061468engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

ART OF WRITING (Cont'd) 
  
A 6,000-year-old history 
In a quite different category are the memory-ald 
pletographs. These are devold of descriptive details and 
merely serve professional narrators as memory-alds for 
thelr recitations. 
Genulne writing, involving the breakdown of sentences 
into words represented consecutively—a new sign of 
powers of observatlon and abstractlon—emerges only in 
socletles which have advanced to the stage of town 
. building. This presupposes complex, regular trading, 
particularly for the supply of food to the towns from the 
country, and above all, the development of architecture at 
the hands of craftsmen and artists. 
AA enmorocss have been unable to trace any 
written documents going back further than 
about 4,000 B.C. Broadly speaking, then, writing, which 
is not one of the strict necessities of life, has a history of 
about 6,000 years. Even now it Is not yet in universal 
use, since nearly half the population of the world still 
does without it. 
In an ideal, truly pictographic script, each word would 
have to be represented by a recognizable speclal sign, 
which Is called the rebus system, or, more accurately, 
the “straight” rebus system—still employed nowadays for 
certain games, with various additional conventions. For 
instance, a circle with rays would mean “sun,” a drawing 
of some headgear would represent “hat,” and animals 
would be represented by conventional drawings. 
Such object-symbols are at the same time word-slgns; 
as the meaning they convey has no relation to the sound 
of the words, they are used ideographically and are thus 
known as ldeographs. As regards form, so long as the 
drawings are realistic, they may be described as hlero- 
glyphs In the broad sense of the term, from the name 
given by the Greeks to the characters used in ancient 
Egyptian writing: (hieros “sacred” and glypho “carve”). 
If these ldeographs represent whole words, as single 
units, the system can be used regardless of the pronuncia- 
tion of the words, and can therefore be read in different 
languages. A great number of different drawings would 
of course be needed to cover a variety of themes. 
In the next stage of invention, we find sounds being 
represented, and writing becomes—at first and only to a 
limited extent—a phonetic notation (from the Greek phone 
“sound”). But plcture-writing or ldeography is still the 
basls of the system although use is now made of a 
“transferred rebus” procedure. This calls for a thorough 
analysis of a glven language. It may then be seen, for 
instance, that it Includes short words with “homophones” 
(the same sound); thus a sign can be saved, for example, 
by using the same one for “sun” and “son”. : 
Going further, and breaking down words into their 
constituents, we can split up some words of more than 
one syllable; for instance, the word “pantry” could be 
written by combining conventional symbols for a “pan” 
and a “tree.” The writing here, though stlll ldeographic 
in form, is now directly connected with the language 
concerned and its sounds. 
When telling the story of writing, it is usual to begin 
with the Central American systems even though this is 
chronologically incorrect. The reason Is that Central 
America is the only place, as far as we know, ‘where a 
pictographic or hieroglyphic script developed without any 
schematization. 
That is why thls empirical classification would still hold 
good even If the present-day efforts to decipher Mayan 
and Aztec documents were to bring to light a mixture of 
ideographic and phonetic systems, such as we find in the 
more anclent writings of the Old World. 
An urban stage of clvillzation, including the use of 
writing, had been reached in Central America. The Mayan 
Empire seems to have been In existence by the fourth 
century A.D., but after various vicissitudes it had to all 
intents disappeared even before the Spanish conquest in 
the sixteenth century. 
R= bear witness to the advanced stage of 
development reached in Mayan architecture, 
with Its pyramids and monumental stalrways. And 
writing was closely bound up with the architecture, large 
hieroglyphs being carved on the steps of stalrways. 
Stucco figures and frescoes have also come down to us. 
The Mayas also produced codices on parchment or 
paper, painted in colour with figures or characters of 
varying size, arranged in carefully aligned squares. Many 
of the figures were stylized and some imaginary, suggesting 
that all sorts of legends and myths were connected with 
them. It Is said that only the families of priests and 
great lords knew the Mayan script. But the carvings on 
monuments were there for all to see and must have served 
for explanations, in the same way as the statues and

## [Page 7](061468engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

ey ta ip) ALAN dae Daa UAT 
~ From Koch-Grii 
~ Felszeichnungen, 
Viele 
stained-glass windows of Europe’s Romanesque and Gothic 
cathedrals. We also know that one of the bellefs in 
the Mayan civilization was that the same events perlodi- 
cally recurred. The Mayas, therefore, must have thought 
it worth while to set down any facts which would help in 
making future predictions. ’ 
" The Aztecs, who established themselves in Mexico In 
the fourteenth century and whose civilization was’ in- 
fluenced by that of the Mayas, must also have bullt 
" monuments, but little trace of them was left after the 
Spanish conquest. Fortunately, whereas only three 
authentic Mayan manuscripts are known to exist, scores 
of Aztec manuscripts have been preserved, Some contain 
religious and others historical and geographical informa- 
tion; place-names recorded in the Aztec documents have 
provided examples of transferred rebus-writing. 
For instance the town Coatlan is represented by a ser- 
pent, and below it two teeth. complete with thelr gums, 
the meaning conveyed being “the place of serpents.” 
“Coatl” is the word for “serpent,” but to indicate the 
place, the preposition “tlan” (in the place of) is repre- 
sented by the sign tlantli (disregarding the ending) mean- 
EMBRYOS 
OF WRITING 
The earliest olements from which true 
writing gradually developed were the 
images —drawn, carved or painted— with 
which ancient pastoral and hunting peoples 
marked a route or a site or commemo- 
rated some experience. Some signs were 
figurative and their subjects are easily 
identified. Others, like the primitive signs 
shown here, are abstract in form and their 
exact meaning still escapes us. From left 
to right: a moon-shaped form and an outline 
with two stars at its extremities (prehis- 
toric rock paintings from Spain); rock- 
carved figure which was found in Brazil, 
ing “teeth.” By this phonetic analysis the complete sign 
indicates the pronunciation as ‘well as the sense. 
It Is also because of the mechanics of its system of 
writing that we now turn to Chinese, which goes back 
only to the middle of the third millenium B.C. instead of 
to the scripts of which we have the earllest evidence. The 
Chinese system comes close to the ideal form of picto- 
graphy in that, in principle, there is one drawing, i.e. one 
character, for each word, which is itself an jnvariable 
monosyllable. 
While this is perfectly true, linguists do agree that 
in fact, in many cases two words are often joined to form 
a kind of compound. There are thousands of characters, 
and one needs to know about 3,000 of them In order to 
read ordinary texts, while dictionaries for scholars con- 
tain over 40,000 characters—even more if rare words are 
included. 
These characters are phonetically associated with par- 
ticular groups of sounds. Many of the sounds have come 
CONT'D ON PAGE 9 
WORD 
AND 
ORNAMENT 
The art of representing speech 
by visual means springs from a 
graphic skill, wh:ch was first used 
as a means of ornamentation. 
Right, two Elamite decorative 
motifs. The Elamites, who lived 
to the north of the Persian Gulf 
and to the east of the Tigris, 
lost their independence to Assyria 
about 640 B.C. The script 
which they evolved and used for 
five centuries later fell into disuse. 

## [Page 8](061468engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 9](061468engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ar
a 
Gi
ll
er
, 
Is
ta
nb
ul
 
HITTITE 
& MAYA 
GLYPHS 
The Hittites, a group of peoples who 
inhabited Asia Minor and northern 
Syria, were already using their own 
form of hieroglyphic writing in 1500 
B.C. Later they came to use the 
Babylonian cuneiform writing. De- 
signed for the needs of religion, the 
Hittite writing was reserved for 
inscriptions on monuments (left). 
It was only when cuneiform writing 
had been deciphered that it became 
possible to tackle the hieroglyphs 
with the aid of a few existing bi- 
lingual texts and by searching for 
keys to the Hittite language through 
a careful analysis of monuments. 
(See Unesco Courier, Feb. 1963). 
Almost 20 centuries later the Mayas 
of Central America employed a 
form of hieroglyphic writing closely 
linked with sculpture and architec- 
ture. This writing was used by 
the rulers of a theocratic state for 
their religion and the remarkable 
calendar they devised. About one 
third of all the characters discovered 
relate to this calendar, and they 
have now been deciphered (See 
Unesco Courier, March 1962). Right, 
two Maya full figure initials heading 
a series of glyphs and symbolizing 
periods of time (7th century A.D.). 
ART OF WRITING (Cont'd) 
Stones that speak 
to denote a variety of objects, and in order to differentiate 
their meanings, keys or radicals of varying complexity 
(consisting of 1 to 17 strokes), and ideographic In cha- 
racter have been added. 
The system is thus both ideographle and phonetic. It 
has survived down to the present day, despite the diffi- 
cultles it puts In the way of learning how to read and 
write. Latin-type script has recently been used for 
teaching reading before pupils go on to master the old 
characters, some of which have also been simplified. 
HERE Is no doubt that most of these characters 
-are complicated, consisting of a number of 
small strokes applied with the tip of a brush. The practice 
of writing, which was once confined to educated people 
such as government officials and members of the wealthy 
classes, is today taught almost universally in China. 
Aesthetic considerations are of major importance. Each 
minute character, occupying an imaginary square, each 
at a regular distance from Its neighbour (punctuation 
marks belng used to indicate groupings), is a miniature 
work of art. The work of skilled calligraphers, pro- 
fesslonal or otherwise, has always been as highly esteemed 
In China as the drawings and paintings of artists, and 
writing is often used as a decorative element. 
From inscriptions on monuments and documents brought 
to light In Egypt, we know that as long ago as 3.000 B.C. 
there were organized states there with large citles where 
writing was In use. This was composed of hleroglyphs 
with elegant lttle drawings of recognizable objects 
(though some of the signs probably represented conven- 
tional gestures). 
Used in monuments, Including small stele with 
 
Unesco 
inscriptions carved on them, and in paintings on inner 
walls of funerary chapels, these carved or painted pletures 
were still being made almost up to about the beginning of 
the Christlan era. They then gave way to alphabetic 
script borrowed from the Greeks for the transcription of 
Coptic, which Is a later development of the Egyptian 
language, still preserved today for Christian Mturgical use. 
After a thousand years or so, a cursive form of writing 
developed alongside the monumental style. For this every- 
day form Ink was generally used, and the signs lost thelr 
pictorial character, belng systematically simplified for 
rapid execution. This is the first instance to be cited 
where the need for speed In writing counted far more 
than clarity for the reader. But in thls cursive form of 
writing, which was modlifled at different perfods (the 
earlier characters being known as hieratic and the later as 
demotic) the fundamentaj system remained the same. 
It was a complex system, so that once the tradition was 
lost, it became difficult for scholars accustomed to the 
alphabetic system to decipher hieroglyphic texts. Most 
of the symbols were ldeographic word-signs which orl- 
ginally denoted objects either by direct representation 
(straight rebus-writing) or by transfer of ideas, without 
breaking them up into constituents, in the case of words 
with similar meanings. With the help of these two 
systems, the number of signs could be reduced to a few 
hundred, thus placing far less strain on the memory for 
learning the outlines, but creating ambiguities for the 
reader. 
Accordingly, two additional devices (In the form of signs 
not Intended to be pronounced) were adopted In order 
to facilitate reading. The first type of sign, derived from 
the existing ideographlc symbols, specified categories of 
meanings (human beings and thelr actions, animals, 
utensils, etc.) and are similar to the Chinese keys or 
radicals. 
CONT'D ON PAGE 12

## [Page 10](061468engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

10 
  
  
         
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
es 
oe J " ’ L. | 
x key a 4 \: hed 
Ga HEX gonii 5 
= | a NRL <0 ry A LAH bs 
» -~ - ri \ 
> Tq Ww 
A) lA 
if 'F 
he & ’ | 58 } 
* mn: = l. 4 (owi3 JF 
- = _ THs , 
: 1 3 \ ] i | - % 
gy '" Adi! 
’ yb 
rate] 4 - -> : 
\ ad ey rn 
’ Lath J » 
WR <3 wi 
» : ~~ 2%, 0 3 \y Ve (hens ort 
) -r 
A 4 ¢ 
. # ; 
- 
_ - 
’ JN . 
ff wr’ - 
J » A on 
" 
{ 
3 A 3 3 En yet 
  
  
      
be f ! 
Oe . AL 
a FAS Y 3 
matty Bt 5 
AA rv v A 4 Mel WAY 
? 
£ w 
Aiyow) ox 
\J NF -~ EE a SER 
- aber J a LL 
hat > ray, Bl Mow 
Qo 3 ) Baral or; — A . nN aL . 
NY LAY y ro a . A '% PALA LS 
ve AM \ tHe y $y ALE TH 97 Urbs BAT ro SC 
wrth 0 rar ; - C1 
nt NATTY we ‘rn PET "A \ 
     
British Museum, London-Kunstarchiv Arntz, The Hague 
The Rosetta Stone takes its name from the town in the Nile Delta a few miles 
from where it was found in an ancient fortin 1799. This black basalt stele 
was inscribed with a decree dating from 196 B.C. and defining the honours 
to be rendered to Ptolemy V in the temples. The stone bore three versions 
of the same text. The first was composed of 14 lines of ancient Egyptian 
hieroglyphs; the second had 32 lines in demotic (an everyday script derived 
from hieroglyphs) ; the third had 54 lines written in the Greek tongue and 
’ 
-~ 
  
 
  
En) 
PTOLEMY 
Above, the name of the Pharaoh Ptolemy, as it 
appears on the Rosetta Stone; right, Cleopatra. 
LEOPATRA 
PTOLEMY 
AVE CHAMPOLLION 
S MISSING CLUE 
  
a 
ha 4 
l 4 
8] 
=       
CLEOPATRA 
Right and below, Champollion’s original 
drawings which accompanied his let- 
“ter to the Académie des Inscriptions 
announcing his remarkable success. The 
letter and drawings with their explanations 
were published in Paris in 1822. Right, 
Champollion gives in demotic script and 
hieroglyphs a series of names he identi- 
fied, including Ptolemy, Cleopatra, Alex- 
ander and Berenice. In the bottom cor- 
ner he has signed his name in hierogly- 
phic form. Below, part of a table of 
phonetic signs from the demotic and hi- 
eroglyphic scripts of the Egyptians to- 
gether with corresponding Greek letters. 
Unesco photos 
Yeon 
— 1 - 
C a Ble ded J ‘grees Plyom clr Aue ° . 
der clritirres hicroglyphigue c Arisa gree ces Trceend Cgypteess 
 
Aetlucee 
Oursqua   
S 1yeees NN (matiqued 
c 
Mapes Fiereqbpplo quate’ 
- 
® 
TT
 
N
m
 
DP
 
1 
wv
 
» 
W
z
 
XX
 
>»
 
x 
  ~ 
93
 
MM
 
wv
 
a 
0 
script. In the part shown above, the name of Ptolemy figures in the sixth 
line in a cartouche (one of the oval figures enclosing royal or divine names). 
L.u. 
Ly de. 
x 
< <- 
tl. 
iy. JH. <f-n.   
| ee o%  — 3.9 
<< oe 
|   
| 
WANS LIL 
& & LJ «7. 
~~ 
- yy oy 
Hy 
00 #8.00.88 53 00 00d mea 
ad 1} WY. ma FT 
A See BE ar WE er ROomMmn aoc ra.bd ® 4g <4 
RAL B10 9e 
OB. WH 
<< o> Ab og 5 G22 a va 
18 ~— eq er- XK KAN dh wm .— ph 
~ 
JE a= Ian GFA 
  
    
I — - =e 
      (= 
[ £2) 1 pili Ai as 111i) 
Ry ars TPE it : 
N September 22, 1822, a young French scholar who 
was passionately interested in Egyptology burst into 
the room in the French National Institute, in Paris, where his brother was 
working. He had hardly the time to cry out “Je tiens |'affaire” (I've got 
it} before he collapsed in a dead faint. Jean-Francois Champollion, 
poor and exhausted by overwork, had just solved the riddle of Egyptian 
hieroglyphic writing. A few days later when he had recovered, Cham- 
pollion announced the great news in a letter to Monsieur Dacier, the 
secretary of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, in Paris. 
Although eight years earlier, an Englishman, Thomas Young, had 
managed to recognize the cartouche with the name of Ptolemy in hiero- 
glyphics on the trilingual Rosetta Stone, no further progress had since 
been made. 
In 1821 Champollion made a capital discovery. Counting the hiero- 
glyphic signs on the Rosetta Stone and the words of the corresponding 
Greek text, he found the hieroglyphs outnumbered the Greek words 
three to one; thus it took several hieroglyphs to form a single word. 
Using a demotic script written on papyrus, he confirmed the hieroglyphic 
form of the name Ptolemy and, in 1822, succeeded in deducing and 
writing with almost perfect accuracy the name of Cleopatra. He now 
had 11 letters as a basis for future decipherment. His findings were 
confirmed when he deciphered the name Thutmosis and he thus opened 
the way for a complete understanding of hieroglyphs—the key to ancient 
Egyptian history which had been lost for 1,500 years. 
For the Egyptians, pictures and hieroglyphs continued to be closely 
associated even after the hieroglyphic script had become syllabic and 
its signs given phonetic value regardless of their original meaning. For 
three thousand years hieroglyphs remained the basis of monumental 
writing because of their artistic qualities. 
1

## [Page 11](061468engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

## [Page 12](061468engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

ART OF WRITING (Cont'd from p. 9) 
Ingenious 
triangles 
baked in clay 
The second type, an aid to the pronunciation of the 
signs, consisted of phonograms or phonetic complements 
representing only the consonants of short words (one or 
two consonants) to indicate the pronunciation, without 
regard to the sense. In the unl-consonantal signs, the 
most common of all;*we have the equivalent of the letters 
used at a later stage. 
These phonograms, which represent the detailed 
breaking down of words into thelr components, were used 
by themselves to show sufflxes and prefixes, as the word- 
signs represented word roots only. This system is there- 
fore a mixture of ideographic and phonetic writing. 
There must have been early examples of this writing 
serving utilitarian purposes, but being on fragile materials, 
they have perished. The oldest surviving documents are 
narratives of contemporary events. Documents relating 
to everyday life, as well as commemorative writings, have 
come down to us from a later period. Pictures of groups 
of scribes, writing apparently from dictation, show the 
beginnings of the practice of multicopying texts, in other 
words of compiling books. 
The engraving of characters on scarabs used as seals 
was one of the very earliest uses of writing, to judge by 
remains from civilizations like that of the Indus Valley 
cities, roughly contemporary with the earliest Egyptian 
kingdoms, and where the only objects found bearing 
writing (n a script which has not yet been deciphered) 
arc seals.   
): another part of what, for Europeans, Is the 
Near East, there developed at practically the 
same time a system of writing similar in concept to the 
Egyptian but executed in a very different way. Nearly a 
thousand years separate the pictographic accounts refer- 
red to above (dating from c. 3500 B.C.) and the classic 
cuneiform writing adopted for two languages which 
played a great part in the religion and literature of this 
region: Sumerian, whose linguistic affiliations have still 
to be established. and Akkadian (Assyro-Babylonian) or 
Eastern Semitic. 
The original, rather crude drawings without any artistic 
grace gradually evolved Into combinatlons of strokes 
with a small triangle at one end, resembling nails, and 
other triangles with two sides extended to produce an 
arrow-head or wedge shape (hence the term cuneiform 
writing), made by pressing the tip of a sharpened reed, 
lichtly or heavily, into a clay tablet before baking. This 
material has demonstrated its power of survival. 
The many Mesopotamian scribes, whose intensive studies 
included grammatical comparisons between the two 
languages they used, developed a real calligraphic art 
with their angular tools. They arranged thelr texts with 
great ingenuity, fitted an astonishing amount of minute 
writing Into small areas, and cleverly arranged their blank 
spaces. 
This type of cursive writing on soft material was used 
by skilled stone-carvers on small monuments, particularly 
stele, the walls in miniature found in conjunction with 
the majestic Mesopotamian architecture and its often 
colossal sculptures. 
As in Egyptian, most of the signs (about 500 in the case 
of Old Sumerian) are word-signs derived from former 
plcture-symbols. Aany Sumerian words are monosyllabic, 
with a vowel between two consonants, and others are even 
shorter (a vowel alone or a vowel plus a consonant). 
In both Sumerian and Akkadian the same signs are used 
12 to express different meanings. Sound-transfer was used 
  
Louvre Museum, Pans - M. Chuzeville 
Detail of the “family” relief depicting King Urmnanshe of 
Lagash on a carved limestone plaque dating from about 
2400 B.C. The king caries on his head a ceremonial contri- 
bution of mortar for building the temple; beneath him 
CONT'D ON PAGE 14% are officials. Script and figures are closely intermingled.

## [Page 13](061468engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
CUNEIFORM SCRIPT 
 
- 
British Museum, London - Kunstarchiv Arntz, The Hague 
A Sumerian cylinder seal dating from about 2250 B.C. The name engraved 
on the seal is illustrated with a scene depicting the release of the Sun-god. 
Born from the point of a reed 
TY Sumerians in Lower 
Mesopotamia rank with 
the Egyptians, the Cretans and the 
Chinese as the earliest inventors of 
an efficient system of writing. They 
took the first step from the picto- 
graphic to the syllabic system and 
thus helped to develop writing as 
we know it today. About 3000 B.C., 
the Sumerians made seals, used as 
property marks, and then employed 
word-signs picturing the object re- 
ferred to. These original “picto- 
How some Sumerian pic- 
tographic signs developed 
into cuneiform script. The 
word is first represented 
by a drawing. This turns 
on its side, then becomes 
schematic when written 
with a stylus on a clay 
tablet, and finally, in an abs- 
tract form, becomes an 
efficient syllabic method 
of writing. Thousands of 
tablets and texts have been 
Ei 
discovered on sites in Me- Le al 
sopotamia and deciphered. 
Right, from top, signs ori- 
ginating as a bird, a fish, 
a donkey and an ox 
From “ A Study of Writing * by 
1.J. Gelb, University of Chicago 
Press, 1963 
graphs” were then given phonetic 
values resulting in a greater de- 
scriptive precision. This was now 
a “rebus-writing”, a word that was 
difficult to render pictorially being 
shown by the sign for another word 
with the same or similar sound. It 
thus became possible to write 
almost any combination of spoken 
words. By 2500 B.C., the writing 
had evolved into a few wedge-shap- 
ed strokes from which the name 
“cuneiform” is taken. It was writ- 
Art ae TN 
ten on tablets of damp clay with a 
stylus—often the sharpened point 
of a reed. The Babylonian and As- 
syrians—and later the Hittites and 
Persians—took over the cuneiform 
script from the Sumerians and 
adapted it to their own languages. 
Sometimes an explanatory picture 
was included with the writing to 
guide the illiterate. But pictures 
and script now had no need of each 
other. Reading and writing began 
to spread throughout Mesopotamia. 
 13

## [Page 14](061468engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

14 
  
Middle East Museum, Berlin-Maribor 
ART OF WRITING (Cont'd) 
MEN 
OF 
LETTERS 
One of the most momentous 
developments in the history 
of writing occurred in the 
Near East, one of the busiest 
highways of the ancient world. 
In the 2nd and 1st millennia 
B.C., the cuneiform and hiero- 
glyphic syllabic scripts no 
longer met the needs of inter- 
national trade and commerce. 
Efforts were made to produce. 
an alphabetic script using only 
20 to 30 signs. The Phoeni- . 
cians, a roving people, now 
spread their highly practical 
script which proved easily 
adaptable to most languages. 
It took root, especially in their 
North African colonies. In its 
Aramic and Greek versions it 
threw out two mighty bran- 
ches which finally covered 
a large part of the world. 
Left, Aramaic inscription on 
the bas-relief of King Barra- 
kab of Zenjirli (c. 750 B.C.). 
The emergence of the alphabet 
in both languages, either for short words or for parts of 
long words, but (in contrast to Egyptian) a vowel was 
always included in the phonogram. Because Akkadian 
took over Sumerian characters with their meanings and 
added others by breaking down Semitic roots, it is 
especially rich in signs with many different meanings, 
which can often be differentiated only by their context. 
The cuneiform signs were used in much the same ‘way 
as the Egyptian, word roots being usually represented by 
an ldeograph. There are fewer determinatives than in 
Egyptian, but Akkadian has more than Sumerian. Reading 
Is made possible by the use of phonograms or phonetic 
complements, which are used for both word-endings and 
word-beginnings, not only for affixes but also for parts of 
the root, whether or not an affix is added. In any case, 
reading was always a complicated operation and only 
possible for someone who had studied thoroughly the 
different meanings of any given symbol. 
Cunelform writing, with its use of ideographic and 
Syllable phonetic signs, spread as a vehicle of civilization 
south-eastwards to Elam, where an early hieroglyphic’ 
system of writing had ceased to develop: in the middle 
of the third millenium, the Elamites adopted the cunei- 
form script, making partlcular use of {ts phonograms. 
In the second millenium, a hieroglyphic systemn and 
cunelform writing were both used in the Hittite country 
to the northwest of Mesopotamla. The great number 
of ldeographs used here have helped in the decipherment 
of Inscriptions by giving a general idea of their content. 
In the AEgean Islands, Crete and Cyprus, distinctive 
civillzations developed whose writing also began with a 
hieroglyphic stage. The use of phonograms apparently 
started fairly soon, with words being systematically 
broken up Into syllables consisting of a consonant followed 
by a vowel. 
The number of fairly complicated characters in these 
scripts Is much smaller than in the combined ideographic- 
phonetic systems. (Minoan Linear B, for instance, has 80 
and Cypriote 55). No records in languages used before the 
Hellenic Indo-European Invasions. have been deciphered. 
Of the syllabic scripts, scholars have succeeded in reading 
Greek of c. 1450 to 1200 B.C. in Crete and on the continent 
at Mycene, before the Greeks had received the alphabet. 
They have also deciphered texts from Cyprus dating from 
about 500 B.C.,, when the Greeks elsewhere had already 
been using the alphabet for some time. 
We do not know exactly how or where the alphabet ori- 
ginated on the Eastern shores of the Mediterranean. Like 
other scripts, it was probably pictographic in origin. But 
attempts to establish a relation with certain hieroglyphic 
records from Pheenicla have falled; nor is there any cer- 
tainty that it Is connected with some Inscriptions found 
in Sinal, possibly dating from c. 1800 to 1500 B.C. con- 
talning a small number of signs more or less resembling 
crude drawings. 
What is certain, however, is that in the region of the 
main scripts of the Near Eastern civilizations, and two 
thousand years after them, the alphabet was invented

## [Page 15](061468engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

* 
Te
l 
Nn 1B  A
n
d
r
é
 
Vi
gn
ea
u,
 
Ed
. 
: Sia 
The Pheenicians introduced their system 
of writing to their colonies, including 
Carthage, where this inscription was 
found on a Neo-Punic votive stone. 
  
36+ afis 10 
$0.10 J fia FI4I00H 430 
i ariedts dpi i ne FTE LAR 
i HE Rte LE RE a 
From La grande invention de I'écriture et son évolution, by Marcel Cohen, Paris, 1958 
only once, so far as we know, in the form of a phonetic 
system of writing, based on the smallest components of 
words. It thus consisted of very few characters (hardly 
mere than 20) with simple outlines not representing any 
object. This ushered in the reign of sound-signs or letters. 
It was a moment of capital importance when man 
reached a clear appreciation of the internal structure of 
his speech and made practical use of thls understanding. 
This happened in a region of small city-states, whose 
prosperity was apparently maintained by trade with 
distant lands across seas or deserts, and In which the citi- 
zens probably took a fairly large part in government. As 
a skill possessed by more and more people, writing was 
thereafter to become a growing force in the development 
of the intellectual aspects of civilization. 
The history of the alphabet, from its beginnings to the 
present day, is a complex one. It includes the ways in - 
which the alphabet spread under the impulse of events, 
the emergence of national differences in the shapes of 
characters (reflecting, to some extent, different msthetic 
tastes), the choice of different ways of supplementing 
phonetic symbols (in particular, the representation of 
vowels) and the various methods used in delimiting words 
while taking ideographic needs into account, 
Paradoxically enough, the first confirmed use of the 
alphabet is found on tablets unearthed in Ugarit (in 
Northern Pheenicla), bearing cuneiform characters writ- 
ten from left to right. These tablets are believed to date 
from between 1600 and 1200 B.C. and the language used 
  
  
  
ve 
From * The Alphabet”, by David Diringer, London, 1949 
The Iberian inscription on the piece of pottery 
(above) is written from right to left, like 
Pheenician script on which it is probably 
based. It is believed to date from about 400 B.C, 
Left, extract from a letter written 
by a Touareg woman of 
Africa. This writing, still used in the 
Saharz, derives from Punic script. 
North 
Is a form of Western Semitic closely akin to Aramalc. 
The characters which were to develop Into our alphabet 
made thelr appearance in Phaenicla and the neighbouring 
regions, in the case of both Canaanite and Aramaic, at 
least as early as 1000 B.C. (some archazologists say 1300 
B.C. In the case of certain Pheenician monuments). 
This alphabet had 22 letters, all consonants, from which 
It is concluded that since there must have been vowels, 
the latter were merely Ignored and the letters In fact 
represented syllables with vowels not indicated, so that 
they constitute an intermedlate stage between the sylla- 
bary and a fully developed alphabet. 
The letters vary In slze, with some extending upwards 
or downwards above or below the two imaginary parallel 
llnes limiting the body of the small letters. The first 
impression is of a cursive script (with the characters 
separated), adopted for use on the hard material of 
sarcophagl or funerary stelm. In the early Inscriptions 
and In the only one known In Moabite, another Canaanite 
language, the words are generally separated by dots. The 
direction of writing Is from right to left. 
At its beginnings (c. 1000 B.C.), Aramalc, another Western 
Semitic language, had almost the same shaped characters 
and was also written from right to left. 
The adoption of the consonantal Semitic alphabet hy 
the Greeks, possibly about 1000 B.C., either by direct 15 
borrowing from the Phcenicians or by some channel of 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 16](061468engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

ART OF WRITING (Cont'd) 
Journey from alpha to 
propagation in Asia Minor, had far-reaching consequences. 
The first was the completion of the alphabetic system by 
the addition of letters denoting consonants and vowels. 
If they were to represent their language clearly, the 
Greeks could not do without vowel signs, and they found 
a simple means of writing vowels by using letters repre- 
senting Semitic consonants which did not exist in Greek. 
In this way the phonetic principle was fully applied. 
As regards the actual writing, the direction, after some 
hesitation, became established from left to right. "For 
what we call capital letters, the Greeks adopted a more 
or less rectangular form, not extending above or below 
the line, and with a pronounced lateral symmetry, thus 
effecting a definite esthetic improvement. Later on, for 
rapld manuscript work, quickly-written small letters came 
into use. 
Writing must have made its appearance in India some- 
where about the fifth century B.C. Although it was 
almost certainly borrowed from the consonantal Semitic 
alphabet, the shapes used from the beginning for the 
majority of the letters differed sufficiently to throw some 
doubt on this theory. What is certain is that a system of 
vowel-notation grew up differing greatly from that of 
the Grecks and leading to the formation of a syllabary 
alphabet. The characters by themselves are read as a 
consonant followed by the vowel a, which occurs most 
commonly: signs (and not letters) following, preceding 
and above or below the body of the letter denote vowels 
of different tones, either short or long. Words are not 
separated within the sentence, but the sentence ending is 
indicated. 
There is not just one Indian system of writing, but a 
variety of different scripts, with different forms of calli- 
graphy, the direction of writing running from left to right. 
I: Is fascinating to follow the fortunes of the 
alphabet in the different parts of the world to 
which writing has penetrated in varying degrees for 
diverse uses: its journeys along trade routes and in the 
steps of religion, the changes in its outlines due to the 
materials employed, the differing relations between calli- 
graphy and other arts, and the variations in the extent 
to which a given alphabet was suited to the spelling of a 
particular language, etc. 
It was not only the Canaanite and Aramaic branches 
which derived from the early Semitic prototype; a south- 
ern branch is represented mainly by the South Arablan 
inscriptions, with symmetrical characters (probably in- 
fluenced by Greek): and the practice of writing alternate 
lines from right to left and from left to right, which is 
often found in large monumental inscriptions, is an aid 
to continuity in reading for anyone looking up at a 
facade. The Ethiopian writing derived from this branch 
runs from left to right. 
As an offshoot towards the West we have the Libyan- 
Berber script, not used over a wide area, which also had 
symmetrical characters of distinctive appearance, arranged 
in columns on ancient stelee and read upwards. 
In the Semitic area where the Aramaic language itself 
gradually ousted Canaanite, Ugaritic, Akkadian (and 
Sumerian). Aramaic writing developed differently into 
various distinctive forms read from right to left. One was 
the “square Hebrew,” which is now the official script of 
the State of Israel; others were the Syriac of the minor 
State of Edessa, which still survives as a religious script, 
and the Palmyrene of another little State, Palmyra, which 
soon disappeared after providing the first examples of 
letters joined together. These linked letters were more 
often found in another small centre on the fringe of Ara- 
bia where the Nabataean script was used. 
Outside the Semitic area, Aramaic writing was carried 
northwards into much of Asia, among Iranian, Turkish 
and Mongolian-speaking peoples. 
16 In the south of the Semitic area itself, the Bedouin of 
Arabia borrowed their writing from the Nabataeans. With 
omega 
the rise of Islam this innovation was to have enormous 
consequences for writing. The Arabic script is a rapid 
linked form of cursive, especially with the omission of the 
vocal punctuation above or below the characters, which is 
used in the case of the Koran and for teaching. It lent 
itself to all sorts of calligraphic exercises and refinements, 
in which some stylization was used, but it was also widely 
employed ornamentally on both objects and monuments, 
particularly on sections of ornamental stucco. Being used 
by Moslems other than Arabs, it spread through Near and 
Central Asia, through parts of India and of the Malay 
archipelago, and in various regions of Africa. 
The Indian scripts covered the area in which Indo- 
Aryan languages are spoken, reaching as far as Nepal, 
and the area in which the Dravidian languages are used, 
to the south: but, following Buddhism (which was not to 
survive in India itself), they reached Tibet in the north 
and part of Indo-China and most of the Malay archipe- 
lago in the south-east. The letters forming these different 
scripts represent syllables, and the variations between the 
scripts, unlike the slight differences to be found in Arabic- 
type alphabets, are such that each one is quite distinct 
from the other. 
The Greek script, in its classic form, has always re- 
mained confined to a limited area. It nevertheless 
  
           
A783 Inn» 
apAly YT aq 
Panay Ne 9 
a he 
Aan EEN 
The script now used in the state of Israel is basically the same 
kind of “square Hebrew“ shown above on a 5th century A.D. 
dedicatory inscription. It comes from the synagogue of Naaran. 
   
  
   
     
Kufic writing is a beautiful, monumental script which takes its 
name from the Mesopotamian town of Kufa and its school, 
where the script was practised by famous calligraphers from the 
end of the 7th century A.D. Below, a Koranic inscription in Kufic. 
| 
Unesco photos. 
 

## [Page 17](061468engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

expanded within this area in a variety of ways, undergoing 
relatively substantial changes at different times and In 
different directions. Eastwards, we should not overlook 
the existence in antique times of certain now extinct lan- 
guages of Asia Minor such as Phryglan (although at least 
some of these languages may have received the Semitic 
system of writing at the same time as Greek did, or even 
before it). With the spread of Christianity, Greek script 
was used in Africa for Coptic and for the language of the 
Nuba people. For a time, to the north of the Blaek Sea, 
it was used to write the Germanic language of the Goths. 
G REEK script then took the form still used for 
the Slavonic languages—the Cyrillic alphabet, 
with its distinctive but very similar characters—as it 
followed the path of the Eastern Church (Greece itself 
belng an exception). Aberrant imitations, incorporating 
elements from a different source, were used for the Arme- 
nian and Georgian languages. The Soviet Union is now 
extending the use of the Cyrillic alphabet, to many of the 
regional languages, including Finno-Ugrian, Turkic and 
Mongolian, replacing Arabic characters in some cases. 
Westwards, alphabetic writing spread in antiquity as 
the result of cultural influences and apparently without 
any particular religious implications. It dld so above all 
in Italy, both among the Etruscans, whose mysterious lan- 
guage has still to be deciphered, and, either through the 
Etruscans or by some other means, among the Italic 
speakers of Indo-European 
Latins, 
A northern varlety, In the Alps, apparently gave rise 
to the runes, the characters used in the ancient Germanic 
and Scandinavian alphabets, which In the Scandinavian 
countries had a certain magical significance. 
The characters of the Latin capital-letter script, like 
the Greek, were largely symmetrical in shape and very 
clear. This script was thus well sulted for monumental 
Inscriptions; when need arose the characters could be 
made large enough to be read from a distance. For every- 
day use and the writing of books, all sorts of different 
forms were adopted; these have their own distinct history 
in which msthetlc tastes and the practical need for recon- 
clling speed and legibility both played a part. 
In the sixteenth century came the Gothic book-hand, a 
script curiously reminiscent of the ogival architectural 
style, found in the latest manuscripts and in incunabula; 
contemporary with this was a particularly badly formed 
cursive which was succeeded by the outstandingly neat, 
clear form known as the humanistic script, on which our 
printed characters are still based. 
The Latin script spread throughout Europe, first with 
the Roman administration and later on, with the gradual 
extension of the Roman Church, as far as the frontlers 
of the Cyrillic script. Thereafter, with European naviga- 
tion and colonization, it reached much of the rest of the 
world, including the Americas. It Is now by far the most 
widely spread. 
languages, especially the 
CONT'D ON PAGE 20 
IN THE PATH ESESL02alogaipls J kailnilie 
OF HOLY BOOKS 
In the 9th and 10th centuries B.C. 
when the many small Aramean States 
in Northern Syria fell one by one 
under the domination of the Kingdom 
of Assyria, most of the people were 
deported. This enforced migration 
had an unexpected result. The Ara- 
maic language and script spread across 
the whole of Assyria. For over one 
thousand years Aramaic was the 
language of trade and commerce from 
the Mediterranean to India. Writing 
and religion became increasingly linked 
as Judaism, Christianity and Islam 
set forth their doctrines in sacred 
_ books. The spread of religion also 
disseminated the script in which it 
was written down. Today, for in- 
stance, Arabic script is used not only 
for the Arabic language, but also 
with added signs for many other 
languages of Muslim peoples. It 
was from Aramaic that the text now 
known as “square Hebrew’ deve- 
loped, and parts of the New Testament 
were originally written in Aramaic. 
Right, a 15th century manuscript of Uighur 
writing. (The two upper lines are written in 
Arabic). The Uighurs were a Turkic people 
of Central Asia. Their writing came indirect- 
ly from Aramaic and was the 12th century 
official script of the Mongol 
Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris-Kunstarchiv Arntz, The 
Hague 
 
  
     
   
Fg BD 
 
e
e
 
emperors. 
  
   
  
  
 
PCR RCI TRE Shoals 2 1555 Opp Le sis 
  Pp Gr Opp —  —mil) BN —y, “nt 
- 
 . 
A —rky,  —t of) POD Ly ont St fot * ap : 
——   — tly edits MIP BEd Sup, an dPP nll] Geen) PRY Pt Sn 
    
  

## [Page 18](061468engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

  
     
         
   
   ty BENT ETS UAT 
2 SAY FATE DEE (TA 
ed lk ddl] J Sal : 
  
  
  Archeological Seminar of the University of Halle, Federal Republic of Germany 
j uN Ll Li" 4 . a Lal ir 4 iis 1 —_— mi AA ea jit. ©) 
BS i I 
OF 3 BoA | FIST LARR X TR AT CART Ta tg +A TA BRL BI) es 
Re na Foo hd AH! ria) C0 Vy ad : 
AEF RE So “5 3 a! Lhe 1} ~ 
ho IF tind g 
LT uf bestiary © elephant v SARE TTI OER 
~~. tigers, and rhinos intermin- RY AA GR 
CIEERTR UR G EIGER ETE CTE Ta A ae So LNA OX 
and still undeciphered inscrip- LF) 
CLERC UR GCE CELE EE Cl AR UTS 
BCCI CR RUC LT VERVE TI EI TET 
BC EL TTCERE: LL ETE ERG EL TI ET 
ELT CEN AEE TERE SE SL CR TEL RY 
“writing by thisancientcivilization 
‘2 - An 18th-century manuscript 
r n Gujarati, which began to 
CRE EUATEEL ELE BGIER {GTR TY 
11th century A.D. 
. ah Hala 
3 - ATibetan woodcut for pri t- 
ing. Around the figure of a 
“winged horse are inscriptions 
“cut in reverse. The people of 
‘Tibet still use the Indian writing 
‘they adopted in the 7th century. 
4 - A 16th century nuptial stele 
by from Mysore, India. Texts 
surrounding the dancers are 
BC [77-777 1 CI 1 13 STC 1 AVR TEL:T. I 
script in southern India. 
'B = Manuscript in [ELE GIED] 
5 script which is read down- 
“wards and from left to right. 
Top line is written in a Tibetan 
script. Mongolian script is deri- 
~ ved, with various additions, from 
the writing of : 
~ Turkic people. 
» 
_ 
    
% i haa 2 ay ll Cor mies Yadn 
IL LTET-TR TTT TY A TH 
| 
  
i le UR, Re TE Per EE yy ' pl 
Indian systems of writing did not evolve columns in the time of King Asoka (272- hodian, Balinese and Batak (in c 
fro ine script used in the Indus Valley 231 B.C.— show that there were FICE (A TT FI) ] 
~ nearl , 5,000 years ago. They made their two types in use. One of these, Brahmi, Modern Indian scripts are divided into 
appedrance about 1,000 years before the spread throughout India and is the two main groups: those employed res- 
present era, in a highly developed Indian basis of all later regional scripts. The pectively in north and south. The classic 
civilization in which sacred texts had other, Kharoshthi, was used only in the northern script is the Deva-nagari, now 
LECT GTEL IVE TT ET TES CT I TL TT TEN he northwest. The direction of these Indian being increasingly used for writing San- 
The ancestor of India’s present systems scripts, written from right to left, indi-  skrit and thus replacing the many local 
of writing was probably introduced about cates their Semitic origin. a writing systems that were formerly em- 
600 B.C. by traders coming from places ployed. Many other languages have their 
~ where Aramaic writing was used. (The The spread of Indian civilization soon own scripts derived from ancient forms. 
influence of Aramaic was felt as far as brought its writing to distant peoples. In Southern India Tamil ETUC 
Mongolia). Thus, Gupta, a variation of the ancient about 18 million people) has a precise 
A L YC 4 Jon Brahmi, reappeared in East Turkestan. and practical script whose outlines 
J most ancient examples known Tibetan writing also derives from an contrast strongly with heavily orna- 
. 
—ins iptions: carved on “rocks anda fe Indian: sores, as do Burmese, Si se sented forms of writing such as Sinhalese, 
[Em

## [Page 19](061468engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

## [Page 20](061468engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

20 
ART OF WRITING (Cont'd from p. 17) 
The onslaught 
of the machine 
Through its use in schools opened by missionaries, 
the Latin script has been adapted to the needs of the 
Malagasy language in Madagascar and of Vietnamese In 
Indo-China. It has also been adopted by the Indonesian 
and Philippine Republics for thelr natlonal languages. 
In mainland China, it has been employed In the case of 
minorities which had no written language, and it Is now 
also being taught to the population at large. It is also 
being used for African and Amerindian languages. 
With the addition of certain conventional signs it Is 
used for the transcription of other alphabets and for pho- 
netic notation. 
Throughout its history, the development of writing has 
been linked with that of artifacts—the materials used for 
writing on, the writing instrument, the liquid used for 
writing. For a long time it depended on the manual skill 
of carvers and other copyists. A major turning-point was 
reached when texts were multi-copied thanks to printing 
processes, the prerequisite for which was a paper industry. 
The history of multiple prints began In China in the 
second century A.D. Wood-engraving was practised In 
the sixth century. Movable type goes back to the eleventh 
century in China and Korea. In Western Europe, after a 
limited use of wood-engraving, the manufacture of mova- 
ble type and presses in the fifteenth century opened the 
way to the development of books and broadsheets, result- 
ing In a vast extension of reading, even though education 
was not yet general. Needless to say, the printing Industry 
required new kinds of technically skilled workers. 
In the nineteenth century, we find simultaneously a 
very great quantity of printed material, including daily 
newspapers (thanks to constantly improved machines), 
and general education in countries with a developed In- 
dustrial civilization. 
I: the age of electricity, the accelerated pro- 
gress of industry, to which writing as an 
intellectual tool contributed so much, has produced 
various alternative means of satisfying the needs for 
which writing caters: Improved communications, record- 
ing, transmission and general diffusion of information, 
education, publicity and advertising and entertainment. 
The telephone, cinema, radio, T.V. and the tape-recorder 
are encroaching on the field of correspondence, news- 
papers, textbooks and novels. 
The position of writing still seems to be unchallenged 
for at least some of the uses to which it was first put, 
earlier than the book, that is, for authentication in all its 
forms: certified communications, contracts, formal com- 
memorations, edicts or judgements, religious texts to be 
repeated word for word, testaments and officlal legislative 
and judicial records. There seems little doubt that it will 
also continue to be used for private correspondence, 
personal records, and the notes and jottings of authors 
and writers. 
To what extent the mechanical recording of speech will 
also affect these uses, and how much writing (by hand or 
in the form of typescript) will continue to be used for 
the actual preparation of various forms of recordings, are 
questions to which the answers are still uncertain. 
To what extent will the mechanical recording of speech 
affect all these uses and how much of writing will actually 
remain In use to prepare these same recordings? These 
are all questions for tomorrow. 
MARCEL COHEN .is director of lhe Ecole Pratique des 
Hautes Etudes in Paris and professor emeritus in the 
School of Modern Oriental Languages al the Sorbonne. 
He is the author of many works on languages, including 
the monumental Les Langues du Monde (Languages 
of the World), wrilten in collaboration with Anloine 
Teillet. 
  
  
HOW EUROPE 
BEGAN 
TO WRITE 

## [Page 21](061468engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

Inscription on a column 
dating from the early 7th 
century, on Lemnos, an 
Aegean island. The writ- 
ing, as yet undeciphered, 
is in a language which 
has many analogies with 
Etruscan. The two may 
have had a common origin 
in continental Greece. 
From LEcriture et la Psychologie 
Jes Feuples. Armand Colin, Pars, 
i 
, 
y 
ol 
5 
i 
Fy 
H < 
Bi 
Etruscan tomb inscription. 
The development of this 
alphabet, initially borrow- 
ed from the Greek, con- 
tinued during seven cen- 
turies of Etruscan history. 
From Buonamici, Epigrafia etrusca, 
Florence, 1932   
8th century B.C. The Etruscans, like the Pheenicians, wrote About 1000 B.C. the Pheenician alphabet was transmitted 
from right to. left (see page 28). Their alphabet was adopted to the Greeks, probably by Semitic traders. Characters in 
the oldest Greek inscriptions have much in common with 
Pheenician ones and, like them, are written from right to 
left. The Greeks perfected the alphabet by using separate 
letters for the vowels, since vowels did not exist in Semitic 
texis. Later the new alphabet was written from left to right. 
Greek settlers introduced writing to Italy, where the 
Etruscans were the first to practise it, probably from the 
Right, 
by the Romans who gave it a new form in which it spread 
throughout the world. 
It was also from the Greeks that the peoples of Eastern 
Europe received the alphabet. Germanic runic writing is a 
developed and modified form of certain north Italian alpha- 
bets and appears to have been used in Scandinavia in the 
3rd century B.C. Early Slavonic scripts evolved from Greek. 
one of the 
oldest Latin inscrip- 
tions (about 600 B.C.). 
It is carved on the 
“Black Stone’ found 
in the Roman Forum. 
Alinari, Florence 
A rock-carved design 
from Sweden. A my- 
thological hero, Sigurd, 
kills the dragon Fafnir, 
whose body is covered 
with runic inscriptions. 
Early Germanic sagas 
abound with instances 
of the magic power of 
runes and treatises 
were also written on 
their use for magic. 
Kunstarchiv Arntz, The Hague  

## [Page 22](061468engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

22 
ART OF WRITING (Cont'd) 
  
CALLIGRAM 
COMPOSITIONS 
Arabic characters forming the fanciful 
impression of a nightingale (right). 
This 19th-century Arabic calligram is a 
quotation from the Koran promising 
entry to Paradise to those who do 
good during their lifetime. Left, 
letters of an imaginary alphabet are 
used in this calligram composition 
by the Swiss painter, Paul Klee, 
Unesco photos 
ECHOES FROM THE STORY OF WRITING 
On these pages we present 
extracts from * L’Ecriture et la 
Psychologie des Peuples * (Writ- 
ing and the Psychology of 
Peoples), a work recently pub- 
lished by Armand Colin, Paris. 
In this volume of 18 studies, 
eminent scholars explore the 
connexions between the history 
of writing and the psychological 
and sociological characteristics 
of different peoples. 
EGYPTIAN HIEROGLYPHS 
The hieroglyphic system of writing is 
remarkably precise and If its rules are 
followed exactly, there is little chance of 
mistakes being made. Another of its 
advantages is that it can be written from 
left to right or from right to left, in lines 
or In columns. In nearly all cases the 
direction chosen is the contrary to our own 
system. The orientation of a text Is linked 
to those hieroglyphs that represent living 
things or objects of unsymmetrical shape. 
When these are turned to the right, the 
inscription should be read from right to 
left; when they are turned to the left the 
text should be read from that side. Texts 
can thus be arranged in a great variety of 
ways. 
JEAN SAINTE FARE GARNOT 
Signature of Charlemagne. The 
Emperor merely added his own 
flourish to the monogram already 
painted for him by the copyist 
on documents which were 
prepared for his signature. 
THE SCRIBES OF SUMER 
Towards the middle of the third millen- 
nium B.C. there were already schools of 
writing throughout the land of Sumer. 
Records of the period reveal that there 
were several thousand. scribes. There 
were the “junior” and “high” scribes, 
scribes of the temple, and “royal” scribes 
of the palace and scribes specialized in 
particular kinds of administrative work... it 
was a man's profession; and in Sumer it 
was also one which carried with it great: 
prestige. Several of these professional 
writers rose to high government rank and 
some even became rulers of the country. 
Some time later, in the days of the 
Assyrians and the Babylonians, the profes- 
sion of scribe was opened to women. 
RENE LABAT 
A BATTLE OVER BOOKS 
The story of the book as a vital part of 
everyday life begins shortly after the start 
of the Alexandrian Era, about the middle 
of the 2nd century B.C. It is closely linked 
with the results of Alexander's conquests, 
with the development of culture in general 
and with the creation of the great schools 
of philology. This, then, was the opening 
of an era that has since moulded human 
existence: the era of books. At the same 
time the problems of writing and book pro- 
duction became inter-related to some extent. 
Several common factors determined the 
development of writing and of books. One 
of these was the expansion of papyrus- 
making; another was the increased use of 
the Greek script among peoples who were 
not exclusively Greek in origin. An 
Egyptian,. for example, was obliged to learn 
Greek as a schoolboy of today learns a 
foreign language. An added stimulus to 
cultural growth was the rivalry existing 
between the great Hellenistic cities. 
Pergamum, in Asia Minor, an active and 
often successful rival of Alexandria, invent- 
ed a new writing material, “pergamum”, 
now known to us as parchment. 
Early in the 2nd century AD. a conflict 
arose over the use of papyrus or parchment 
for book-making and over the form of 
books: between the “volumen® and the 
“codex”. The “volumen” was a long roll 
with writing only on one side; the “codex” 
was made of a series of sections written on 
both sides. These sections were placed In 
the order required and were protected by a 
  
binding or cover. The “codex”, especially 
the parchment codex, seems to have 
developed more rapidly in the Occident 
than in the Orient. 
This battle over the different kinds of 
books was waged over a long period and 
in many ways. 
sometimes skilfully fashioned from papyrus, 
but book-makers also used papyrus and 
parchment sheets in the same volume. 
Not only were “codices” 
ALPHONSE DAIN 
A ‘* ballot paper’ bearing 
the name of the Athenian 
statesman, Themistocles 
(471 B.C.) and used on the 
occasion of his banishment. 
According to Greek custom 
a potsherd or tile or even 
a shell (ostraca) was used 
in such cases, and on it was 
written the name of the 
person being sent into exile. 
From ‘ ostraca '' we now 
have the word ** ostracize’. 
CHINESE ‘NOBLE’ ARTS 
The formal and scholarly aspect of the 
most ancient Chinese writing suggests that 
it was once a more or less jealously guarded 
prerogative of a restricted circle or élite. 
History and archzlogy have now confirm 
ed that this was so. 
It is already significant that writing was 
once regarded as one of the Six Arts: 
rituals, 
writing and the science of numbers (that is, 
basically, the art of soothsaying). According 
music, archery, chariot . driving, 
: pe i 
‘Despite their archaic air these cha- 
racters are a modern creation: a sylla- 
bic form of writing evolved for the 
= ST ToT) SR o-Ty F-Te = U=T1 CET TG Te | 
“also has a modern ring : “ First Confe- 
peratives. “ vance ef ishe Avstic io

## [Page 23](061468engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

  
to Confucian traditions, all these activities 
were designed to contribute to the education 
of the “superior man”; but instead seem 
to have formed the basis of “noble” arts 
linked with magic. 
With the growth of the imperial power 
early in the Han Dynasty (2nd and 1st 
centuries B.C.) the code of ethics of the 
nobility and the ritual practices of antiquity 
were restored and given a new Interpre- 
tation in the interests of the State. It was 
thus a ritualist concept of writing which 
developed among the ruling classes. The 
emperor became the guardian and sole 
arbiter of standard writing practices, and 
writing itself became an affair of state. 
Because writing was regarded as a collec- 
tlon of symbols used to represent and evoke 
all living persons and because it was 
accepted that the emperor's chief function 
was to allot to each person his name and 
station, no changes could be made In 
writing by those who used it. The emperor 
alone was authorized to proscribe certain 
signs and to Introduce new ones. 
JACQUES GERNET 
CALLIGRAPHY 
The fact that Chinese writing soon led to 
a complex and scholarly art form is due to 
its graphic wealth and stylized forms. Its 
esthetic aspects and functions are thus 
far more developed than those of other 
scripts. Unlike the hieroglyphic writing of 
Egypt, with its immutable outlines, or Arabic 
script, it has more than a purely ornamental 
value. It constitutes an art In its own 
right, In which the individual personality 
of the calligrapher finds full expression. 
That is why processes for the accurate 
reproduction of calligraphic work were 
developed in China even before techniques 
were evolved for the everyday diffusion 
of texts. The practice of making impres- 
sions in stone appears to date back to 
  
about 500 A.D., but Is still employed today 
because It offers a cheap and effective way 
of reproducing examples of skilled calligra- 
phy; it In no way encroaches on the 
purpose of ordinary printing which is de- 
signed to meet quite different needs. 
JACQUES GERNET 
ROMAN STREET SIGNS 
In the Roman world of Augustan times 
(63 B.C. to 14 A.D.) many citizens could 
read but few had the means to assemble 
a library. However, as the teaching of 
writing seems to have occupied an impor- 
tant place in the education of slaves there 
must also have been numerous individuals 
who managed to constitute a library by 
borrowing books and then having them 
copied in their own homes. 
By the middle of the 1st century A.D. 
the Romans had ceased to think of writing 
in its exclusively utilitarian role; they disco- 
vered its aesthetic possibilities. Painted 
inscriptions began to be used to ornament 
the streets, along with signs bearing figures 
and designs. A book page became a work 
of art, 
ROBERT MARICHAL 
EARLY BEST-SELLERS 
Along with the books found on the 
shelves of collectors there already existed 
in the 16th century the equivalent of our 
present-day newspapers and magazines— 
the vast collection of printed matter 
consisting of news items recounting impor- 
tant events. Some of these works came 
into the hands of a very large public. For 
example, one unpublished inventory reveals 
that the stock of a Parisian bookseller in 
1540 included 250,000 prayer books. Ano- 
ther bookseller had 30,000 devotional 
books. Counting together all the published 
editions of Luther's translation of the Bible, 
the total number of copies would run to 
several hundred thousand. By 1560 the 
number of copies of works bearing Luther's 
name could be reckoned, if not in their 
millions, at least as having exceeded the 
one million mark. | discovered in a 17th 
century inventory references to 30,000 
copies of various dramatic works, including 
10,000 copies of plays by Corneille; at this 
period, theatrical works were widely read. 
HENRI-JEAN MARTIN 
  
 
 
 
 
EE a RE === 
 
  
For further 
reading 
WRITING AND 
THE ALPHABET 
By A.C. Moorhouse 
Cobbett Pross, London. 1946. 
A STUDY OF WRITING 
By I.J. Gelb 
The University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago and London, 1963. 
THE ALPHABET 
By David Diringer 
Hutchinson's. London and New York, 
1949. 
(new edition in preparation) 
VOICES IN STONE 
By Ernst Doblhofer 
Souvenir Press Lid., London, 1961, 
HISTORY OF MANKIND 
Cultural & Scientific Development 
{sponsored by Unesco) 
Vol. I, Prehistory & the Beginnings 
of Civilization; Chap. 6, Languages 
& Writing Systems by Sir Leonard 
Woolley. London: George Alien & 
Unwin Ltd. (75/-) ; New York: Harper 
and Row (S 12.50),   
African king's alphabet 
In 1899, Njoya, King of the Bam- 
ouns, in the Cameroons, Africa, 
invented a system of writing. It 
began as a picture language to be 
used for secrecy in sending messages. 
When he realized that the same 
drawings could be used to represent 
groups of sounds, the King trans- 
formed the system into a syllabic 
one and put it to use in his kingdom. 
Five years later he revised hs system, 
giving it a purely alphabetic character. 
ALFRED METRAUX 
The Unesco Courier, Nov., 1950 23

## [Page 24](061468engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 61469: Eleven centuries of the Cyrillic alphabet

  
ELEVEN 
CENTURIES OF 
THE CYRILLIC 
ALPHABET 
U NEsco recently commemorated the 11th centenary of the Slavonic 
or Cyrillic alphabet. It was in 863 A.D. that Cyril the Greek 
missionary (whose real name was Constantine) and his brother Methodius left 
Constantinople to go among the people of Moravia in Central Europe, to preach 
to them In thelr own Slavonic tongue which had no alphabet. 
The Slavs invaded the Balkans as early as the 6th century and settled around 
Salonika and on the Aegean coast, where Slav was spoken as much as Greek. 
As the Slavonic tongue had not split up into the various distinct languages that 
are spoken today, Cyril's Aegean coast dialect was easily understood by the Mora- 
vian Slavs who were already partly converted to Christianity. 
Cyril, one of the most brilliant minds of his time, trained by the great masters 
of Byzantium, combined the qualities of theologian, diplomat, teacher and scho- 
lar. He brought the Slavs an alphabet of his own invention, different both from 
the Greek and the Latin. This was a completely new alphabet which made it 
possible to write down very precisely the ancient Slavonic tongue with its com- 
plicated phonetical structure that could not be recorded accurately by any other 
alphabet of the period. The writing invented by Cyril was called “Glagolitic” 
from the Slavonic expression *“glagol,” meaning “word.” 
Despite objections by the Germano-Latin clergy for whom the only valid lan- 
guages were Greek, Latin and Hebrew, Cyril persevered in his task. On his death 
  
The inscription on this stone is written in Old Slavonic and dates 
from the 11th or 12th century A.D. Discovered recently at Tulcea, Ruma- 
nia, it shows how the Cyrillic alphabet spread rapidly to other lands 
after it was finally evolved in Bulgaria at the end of the 10th century. 
Bucharest Museum of Antiquities 
  
  
| ! 
Cyrillic letters being carried in procession 
through the streets of Sofia, the capital 
of Bulgaria. Every year since the 19th 
century the Bulgarians have celebrated 
  
  
           
  
x - A 
BUONE-A-NE-  
 GyA- DAsYIEL: rRA- El“ 
(JOD) BONOKP & MA -Hpo 
ESAT Ah ME TETEAPTS 
BAALTANHKISTROBEAH 
YAK MBHMA-} ENE AK VARMA H 
NE 0 POAMApE KEN 
LJ ) - » 
RSE sparacro ro 
MOBACEMBEAAL-HXKE 
FYE AAILIAN ASL .YIAIaAn 
Historical Museum, Moscow 
Page from an early 12th century gospel 
in Cyrillic characters. The Bulgarians 
   
  
          

## [Page 25](061468engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 61469: Eleven centuries of the Cyrillic alphabet

¥, 
: a 
dll ee 
\ yy I 
the Festival of Cyril and Methodius who 
produced the first Slavonic alphabet 
in the 9th century. (Banner on the right 
bears the images of the two brothers. 
CANEEELERBICTAPAK: 2° 
TRE CHCNAMOHBRTAN 
EAENRIH-0TERE AA 
Lb POROAHYRA: EE%A- 
NE eyA. Tasy- vAA- Ri 
AV 3 
“lf 2) BONED EMA H 
APL" REX HIER AICO 
TPAMBAECAT A 
MARAE TANATH 
NAM LNA LAA 
~~ KOMANHMBEE- 
od 
MAT ANDRA -AERATH 
- 
ae — -- -— 
  
     
   
gave Hellenic forms to the characters 
of Cyril's original Slav alphabet. 
 
RTH CRA 
(ANTIN 
BLA ELTA 
(RULER 
Willy Pragher, fnbourg 
in 869 A.D. his brother, Methodlus, carried on the work, tralning new disciples 
and teaching the people in thelr own language, until his own death in 885 A.D. 
The disciples of Cyril and Methodius were then accused of heresy and driven 
from Moravia. But another Slav country, Bulgarla, opened Its doors to them. 
In Bulgaria the only written language was Greek. The Bulgarlnas now 
received the new alphabet brought from Moravia and adopted It after making 
some modifications. The curved and rounded forms of the Glagolitic script were 
replaced by the clear and simple Greek ones. In other words, while retalning 
Cyril's script as a phonetic alphabet fully representing the sounds of the Slavonic 
language, they systematically Hellenized the characters. 
Thus, around 940 A.D.—80 years after the creation of Glagolitlc, the first Slav 
alphabet—there appeared a new, entirely reconstructed version, the Cyrillic 
alphabet. Bulgarian literature of the ninth century is the direct ofispring of 
the work of Cyril and Methodius. Ancient Bulgarian inscriptions—Ilke the Mostic 
Inscription discovered In eastern Bulgaria ten years ago—Illustrate the form of 
the Cyrillic belng used in the 10th century. 
Cyrillic writing, however, was to expand enormously. After taking root in 
Bulgaria and Macedonia it spread to Serbia, Bosnla and above all to Russia after 
the Russlan conversion to Christlanity In 988. In Rumania Cyrillic characters 
were replaced by the Roman Alphabet in the 19th century. 
With only slight modifications to adapt it to modern Slavonic languages, Cyrillic 
has retained the form in which It was originally created in the 10th century. 
In Russia It was simplified early In the 18th century on the orders of Peter the 
Great. Cyrillic characters were also further simplified after the Russian Revo- 
lution in 1917. 
Cyrillic, In forms which vary slightly between different languages, ls now 
used over a vast area. Since the Soviet Union decided on its general application 
it has been employed for a varlety of non-Slavonic languages spoken in the25 
U.S.S.R., Including Finno-Ugrian, Turkic and Mongolian, and it has travelled 
across Siberia to the Pacific coast.

## [Page 26](061468engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 61504: Scripts shrouded in mystery

  
SCRIPTS 
SHROUDED 
  
MYSTERY 
N 1908 an‘ltalian mission working at Hagia Triada, 
near Phaistos, in Crete, brought to light a script of 
which only one example exists. It was Inscribed on 
a flat terra-cotta disc about six and a half inches in 
diameter which was found in an outbuilding of the 
Minoan Palace. Next to it was a broken tablet 
inscribed with the Cretan Linear A script that has 
been dated to about 1700 B.C, 
On either side of the terra-cotta disc is a text 
impressed with a hitherto unknown form of hierogly- 
phics arranged in bands spiralling to (or from) the 
An outstanding feature of the great advances in 
archaeological research in the 19th century was 
the decipherment of many of the ancient languages 
brought to light. At the beginning of that century 
not a word could be read of the hieroglyphic system 
of writing of the Egyptians, one of the earliest used 
by man. Yet 22 years later the code had been 
cracked, and now documents covering three 
millennia of civilization have become an open book. 
The cuneiform scripts used by the Sumerians, 
Babylonians and Assyrians were all deciphered 
during the 19th century. The 20th century itself 
has seen the decipherment of two more cunei- 
form scripts, (the Ugaritic script of Ras Shamra, 
The undecipher 
centre. The signs, which seem to have been stamped 
by means of 45 different wooden and metal punches, 
number 241 in all and are divided into 61 groups 
of characters (which might represent words or sen- 
tences) separated by vertical lines. The script is 
considered to be a syllabic one: there are too few 
Spiralling lines of 
a unique and still 
mysterious hierogly- 
phic writing cover 
this clay disc found 
in an outbuilding of 
the Minoan Palace 
in Crete. The signs 
on it were probably 
pressings of indivi- 
dual seals. Dated 
to about 1700 B.C. 
Editions Arthaud Paris = 
© Michel Audrain 

## [Page 27](061468engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 61504: Scripts shrouded in mystery

Syria, and that of the Hittites) as well as the 
Hittite hieroglyphic script. In 1953 came the 
decipherment of Minoan Linear B. More recently 
important work has been done on the Mayan 
hieroglyphic script by the use of electronic 
computers (See Unesco Courier, March 1962). 
To all these results scholars in many countries 
have contributed. It is to be hoped that with 
the tools of modern science, the remaining 
“mystery” languages will one day find their 
decipherers. Below, we describe five of the 
most famous of the undeciphered scripts 
extant. 
R. J. Spector 
ed Phaistos disc 
characters for a: pictographic script and too many 
for an alphabetic one. : 
Archaeologists and classical scholars have been 
trying, right from the start, to decode this script on 
the basis of internal evidence—the only evidence 
existing, in the absence of a bilingual key such as 
the Rosetta stone. Sir Arthur Evans himself con- 
cluded, from the warrior element discernible in 
various signs, that it was the text of a sacred song 
of victory, and he considered it to come from the 
south-west coast of Asia Minor. 
The main difficulty is that no-one knows what lan- 
guage the text was written in—it has been variously 
adjudged to be Philistine, Lycian, Carian, Greek, 
Cypriote, Libyan, Anatolian and Semitic—or even 
whether it was written from right to left, or the 
reverse. J. Chadwick, of Cambridge University, the 
collaborator of Michael Ventris in the decipherment 
of Minoan Linear B, took the latter view. He drew 
particular attention to the use of punches, and des- 
cribed it as a remarkable anticipation of the inven- 
tion of engraving and printing. It was hard to believe, 
as he significantly pointed out, that the preparation 
of the set of 45 punches would have been under- 
taken solely for the production of one disc. Thus, 
companion pieces may one day be found. 
Some examples of the results achieved by would- 
be decipherers give an idea of the hazards involved. 
An English investigator, in 1931, took the language to 
be Greek, ascribing to each character a syllabic value 
and expanding each sign-group to form a phrase. 
Thus one five-character group, which she read as 
an-sa-ko-te-re, was expanded into Ana, Sad, kod, 
thea, R&, which she translated as “Arise, Saviour! 
Listen, Goddess, Rheal” A Greek scholar favour- 
ed Semitic, and produced a partial “rendering” 
in 1948: 
" Supreme - deity, of the powerful thrones star, 
Supreme - tenderness of the consolatory words, 
Supreme - donator of the prophecies, 
Supreme - of the eggs the white...” 
Professor S. Davis, of the University of Witwaters- 
rand, Johannesburg, who has made a close study of 
the disc during the past few years, initially inter- 
preted it as relating to a votive ceremony conducted 
by King Nokeul of Phaistos to mark the consecration 
of the palace. His latest findings are due to be 
published shortly in book form. 
  
Seals of 
the Indus 
ROM the valley of the Indus (Pakistan) comes 
an enigmatic script of which many examples 
abound. They are variously dated to about the 
third or second millennium B.C., before the Indo- 
Aryan invasion, and were brought to light In the 
excavated cities of Mohenjo-Daro (Punjab) and 
Harappa (Sind) as well as in some smaller towns. 
They take the form of stone, copper or ivory seals 
or amulets. Similar material has been found at 
various Mesopotamian sites, and it Is considered that 
the Indus and Sumerian cultures may have been 
related. 
Because of the 
striking similarity 
between the In- 
dus Valley script 
(on left) and the 
writing of Easter 
Island (on right), 
somo scholars 
havo tried to osta- 
blish connexlons 
between the two 
dospite the dis- 
tanco boetwoon 
the two piaces. 
From “Tha Alphabet” 
by David Diringer, 
London, 1949 
The writing appears to be pictographic, but all 
attempts at decipherment have so far failed. Calcu- 
lations of the number of signs range from about 250 
to 400 (some authorities regarding certain of them 
as graphic variations of others). Taking a mean 
figure of about 300, it is clear that the script cannot 
be either alphabetic or syllabic, nor yet purely 
ideographic. 
It is therefore assumed to be partly ideographic 
and partly phonetic (probably syllabic), and that it 
also contains some determinative signs (like Egyp- 
tian, Linear B etc.). Since most of the inscriptions 
are seals (or amulets), it is likely that they mainly 
represent proper names. The absence of other 
inscriptions implies that some perishable material 
must have been used. 
Theories advanced connect the script with early 
Hittite writing or with early Elamite; B. Hrozny, the 
famous Czech decipherer of Hittite, related it to the 
Brahmi script (which is now given an Aramaic origin). 
One bold researcher, Father Heras, S.J, ascribed 
syllabic values to the characters and deduced that 
they represented a language which gave birth to the 
Dravidian tongues of South India. 
21

## [Page 28](061468engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28 


### 61504: Scripts shrouded in mystery

SCRIPTS SHROUDED IN MYSTERY (cones 
  
From H. D., Die Schrift 
Signs written in Linear A, a still unde- 
ciphered script from Crete. Found on 
monuments and clay objects and 
sometimes even written in ink, it is 
believed to date from about 1750 B.C. 
Texts 
from Cretan 
monuments 
NE of the many conjectures made during 
0 the long efforts to decipher Etruscan 
texts was that the language had con- 
nexions in Crete. This idea was destined to 
bedevil for years the decipherment of another 
script brought to light in Crete and given the 
name of Minoan Linear B. 
It was only after he had discarded the idea 
of Etruscan as the key to Linear B and had 
turned to Greek instead that the English lin- 
guist Michael Ventris succeeded in decipher- 
ing and reading it. (1) But another Cretan 
script, known as Linear A, which has about 48 
signs in common with Linear B, still awaits its 
decipherer. It has been dated to about 1750 
B.C. and may still have been in use about 
1450 B.C. 
Inscriptions in Linear A, which derives from 
Cretan hieroglyphics, have been found on 
stone monuments and clay objects, and there 
are even examples written in ink. Unlike 
Linear B, none of them occurs outside Crete; 
and so the script, consisting of 85 signs plus 
obvious hieroglyphs and figures, is widely 
believed to convey the non-Greek language of 
the autochthonous Cretan population. And, 
indeed, the elements of Linear A are particu- 
larly ill-suited to the Mycenaean Greek of the 
former. In particular, the view that Linear A 
could be Greek has been forthrightly discount- 
ed by J. Chadwick, Ventris' collaborator. 
Dr. C. Gordon, the American expert on 
Semitic languages, has equated it with Baby- 
lonian Akkadian; and Professor Davis, has 
also suggested Semitic affinities. Others, like 
Dr. L. Palmer, the Oxford University philo- 
logist, have suggested that it may contain an 
Indo-European language other than Greek, and 
that it is possibly related to Hittite and the 
other earlier languages of Anatolia. 
(1) See “The Case of the Four-landled Jars”, The 
Unesco Courier, March-April 1935. 
‘Talking woods’ 
of Easter 
Island 
ASTER Island, 2,500 miles west of Chile, in the Pacific, 
is famous not only for its huge stone images but 
also for the mysterious wooden tablets inscribed with 
pictographic characters which were found there. At pre- 
sent, about 15 of them remain. They are mainly fragments, 
of all sizes up to 6 feet, and are known as kohau rongo- 
rongo, or “talking woods.” 
The signs (500 different ones in all) were inscribed with 
a shark's tooth, in a continuous serpentine system in which 
— and this is the unique feature of the Island script—every 
other line was upside down, so that the reader has to 
turn the tablet round at the end of each line. 
According to local tradition, Hotu-Matua, the ancestor of 
the Easter Islanders, came to the island (in the 12th or 13th 
century A.D.) in two big boats manned by 300 warriors, 
bringing with him 67 of the inscribed wooden tablets. 
Many of the characters have an external likeness to those 
The enigma 
five centuries ago with the discovery of some inscribed 
tablets at Gubbio, near Perugia, in Italy. The now 
celebrated Iguvine tablets (from Iguvium, the ancient name 
of the site) were inscribed with a script devised from a 
Greek model by the Etruscans, a mysterious people whose 
T science of decipherment of languages began almost 
  
From The Alphabet *, by David Diringer. London. 1949 
Model of a calf’'s liver made in bronze by the 
Etruscans and found at Piacenza in Italy. It 
is inscribed with the names of Etruscan deities 
and was used to teach apprentice soothsayers.

## [Page 29](061468engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 61504: Scripts shrouded in mystery

of the Indus script, as pointed out by the Hungarian scholar, 
G. de Hevesy ; but according to the anthropologist, the late 
Alfred Metraux, the similarities were the result of small 
adjustments—changing of proportions, obliteration of 
details, etc.—and there was no evidence of a corresponding 
identity of phonetic values. A recent attempt at decipher- 
ment by Thomas Barthel, a German ethnologist, has been 
said to indicate that the language was Polynesian and that 
the Easter Islanders came from Rangitea, one of the Friendly 
Islands, 1,500 miles away. 
  
© Musée de I'Homme, Paris Wooden fish, one of the tablets and other objects Inscribed with pictographic 
characters found on Easter Island, in the Pacific. These hieroglyphs were inscribed 
with a shark’s tooth. They depict human beings, animals and ceremonial objects. 
of the Etruscans 
origins are still unknown, but who passed on to Rome, 
and hence to the world, much of its culture and its alphabet 
(which gave rise, in its Latin dress, to all the Western 
European alphabets). 
Most of the Iguvine tablets were actually inscribed in 
Umbrian (a Latin-type language) written in a script which 
was an offshoot of the Etruscan. But interest in the Etruscan 
people, once stimulated, continued to grow and received 
fresh impetus from the humanists of the Renaissance. 
Over the centuries, slow but steady progress has been 
made in reading the alphabet, culminating in 1880 with 
the identification of the last outstanding letter. 
However, although we can now spell out all the mass 
of. Etruscan inscriptions that have meanwhile been un- 
earthed, it has still not proved possible to understand more 
than a fraction of their contents. The Etruscan language 
itself remains an enigma, 
Altogether there are about 1,000 inscriptions, the great 
bulk of them. are short funeral ones giving little more 
than names and indications of ancestry. The fuller docu- 
ments include a clay tablet containing about 300 words, 
a bronze replica of a calf's liver inscribed with the names 
of Etruscan deities, and a linen manuscript originally in 
the form of a roll and later cut into strips and used as 
" swathings for the mummy of an Egyptian woman of the 
Graeco-Roman period. This text, now in the Zagreb mu- 
seum, provides more than 5,000 words, and is still un- 
translated. 
In the absence of bilingual texts of any importance, the 
decipherers have had to rely on internal evidence. The 
repetitiveness of the funeral inscriptions has been a 
positive help in this connexion: the meaning of a list of 
about 100 recurrent words compiled by the eminent Etrus- 
cologist Professor Pallottino Is now quite certain, and 
many short phrases and sentences can be conjecturally 
interpreted. 
We know the Etruscan for the numerals up to 6 (although 
we are not sure of their exact order). They are mach, 
zal, thu, huth, cl, sa. A typical inscription reads : “larth 
alethnas arnthal ruvfialc clan avils LX lupuce,” meaning 
“Larth (Lars, in Latin) Alethnas, son of Arn (Arruns) and 
Ruvfi, died at 60 years.” - 
Clearly, this strange language is unlike any other known 
to us, especially the Indo-European ones. Many experts 
agree with Herodotus, who ascribed to the Etruscans an 
Oriental origin and said that they came to Italy by sea 
in the early centuries of the first millennium B.C. No 
certain cognate has yet been found, but one conjecture 
is that there are affinities between the Etruscans and the 
Lydians, whose last (and most famous) king was Croesus, 
and who lived on the west coast of Asia Minor. 
Their script, too, is still practically undeciphered, but their 
language is believed to have been non-Indo-European. 
29

## [Page 30](061468engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 61506: Ideograms from ancient China

The upper Chinese character (right), 
means “woman” and is pronounced 
nd. The lower one means “child” 
and is pronounced tzu. Placed 
together (far right) the characters 
are pronounced hao and signify 
“good”, “well” and, in a wider 
sense, “friendly”. Thus an abstract 
idea is expressed by a symbol formed 
with two concrete characters, each 
representing a word sign and a sound. 
. AX 5 
A 2 a3 
23 
ZN 
x 
A 
¥ 
ERR) 
30 
5 
4 >. 
NA =/ 
9 
6 
10 11 
8 
i 
2 
‘KEYS’ 
TO CHINESE 
In Chinese writing the same characters 
can have different meanings. To 
differentiate these meanings a small 
ideographic sign is added. These 
“keys” form part of the whole 
character but are not pronounced. 
In the examples shown on left, 
character 3, pronounced sang. means 
mulberry bush or tree. It is made up of 
yu (1) which formerly meant “hand ” 
and of mou (2) which means 
“wood “ or “tree”, and which serves 
as a key. Sang can also mean 
“throat” (4) when the character 
k'ou (5), “mouth”, is added to 
it as a key. Fang (6) means “square”. 
It becomes “plank” (7) when the 
key mu (2), meaning “wood” or 
“tree “, is added. Fang also means 
“to spin® (8) when the key mi (9) 
indicating “silk” or “textiles” is 
added. Character 10, Fang, means 
“to ask about” when the key yen (11) 
“words “ is added.- The character for 
“words” is simply “mouth” (5) 
with several additional strokes. 
    
f 
 

## [Page 31](061468engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 61506: Ideograms from ancient China

      
      
D
R
A
N
K
 
E
R
 
S
N
S
 
  
—
 
—_
— 
     
    
  
  
28
4%
 
dye 
Me 
a 
12
0 
26 
Fr)
 
& 
   x 
I
 
-
 
~
 
Unesco 
SHOP SIGNS IN HONG KONG 
Shop signs in Chinese characters are a strikingly decorative feature of this Hong-Kong street. 
The graphic beauty of the characters used both in China and Japan have enabled writing to 
evolve as a work of art. Those of particular grace and beauty are used to decorate even 
the most everyday objects. Chinese decorative script is a specialized branch of study. 
Nz one-quarter of 
the world’s population 
still uses a form of writing which ori- 
ginated In China over 3,000 years ago. 
Chinese writing is In a class on its 
own. It Is not an alphabetic script 
and cach character represents a com- 
plete word. As a symbol and as an 
image, each character also has artis- 
tic and philosophical significance. 
During its evolution, however, this 
script has long ceased to be figurative. 
It has become a styllstle expression of 
the material to be communicated. 
Since the completion of its develop- 
ment, however, It is no longer figu- 
rative, It simply indicates stylistically 
the essential of what it has to express. 
Indeed, it is not even possible to say 
‘whether {t was ever entirely figurative 
in origin for no document has ever 
been found that would confirm this. 
The oldest examples are the “oracle 
bone” Inscriptions dating from about 
1400 B.C. Anlmal bones and tortoise 
shells were suspended over a fire until 
cracks appeared and these were then 
fashioned by soothsayers into signs 
which they “read.” Already at that 
time, the signs had an abstract linear 
construction. 
It is probable that up to the 8th 
century B.C. the sole users of writing 
were scribes versed In magle and 
soothsaying. Then, some two cen- 
turies later, the concentration of 
power and increased authority of the 
State brought many changes to the 
Chinese world. Knowledge and use 
of writing now passed to government 
officlals and the “technicians” of 
that time. Writing thus tended to 
become a simple method of communi- 
cation and of recording ideas. 
In 221 B.C. the Chou Dynasty, 
which was based on Confucianism. 
was eliminated by the rulers of the 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
31

## [Page 32](061468engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 61506: Ideograms from ancient China

32 
Chinese 
ideograms co 
Ch'in Empire. The new soverelgn, 
Ch'in Shih Huang-ti, a despotic ruler 
who united China, devised a form of 
writing far simpler than the one used 
under the Chou Dynasty. The new 
writing, known as Small Seal, or hsizo 
chuan, had 3,000 characters and was 
primarily designed for use by stu- 
dents and schoolchildren. 
_But the seal characters in Chinese 
writing, with thelr sinuous ornamen- 
tation, were still too difficult for 
everyday needs. Durlng the Han 
Dynasty (206 B. C. - 220 A.D.) a 
superintendent of prisons invented 
official 1 shu wrlting, in order, It Is 
sald, to simplify prison administra- 
tion. It is from li shu that the basic 
forms still In common use derive. 
These forms underwent changes down 
the centuries, the trend belng towards 
a greater systematization and styliza- 
tlon. The invention of paper In Chl- 
na in the 2nd century A.D. did much 
to facilitate the advancement of 
writing. 
BS coo: of its graphlc 
wealth and its stylized 
forms, writing quickly gave birth to a 
new form of art, calligraphy. As an 
early Chinese author wrote: “Speech 
expresses what Is In the mind, and 
writing portrays 1t.” It was this prin- 
ciple which gulded the calligrapher 
in his alm of combining the strokes 
of a character Into a complete and 
harmonious whole. 
Many peoples In the Far East 
adopted the Chinese characters In 
whole or in part, or drew upon them 
in evolving thelr own script. The 
Japanese may have adopted them as 
early as the 4th century A.D. but 
the first known example of Japa- 
nese writing dates from 712 A.D. 
This Is the Kojiki, the oldest Japanese 
historical work. Because of the poly- 
syllabic structure of the Japanese 
language syllabic characters had to 
be added to Indicate grammatical 
inflexions phonetically. The first 
attempt in this direction was made 
in the 8th century. 
In the following century the Japa- 
nese adapted from Chinese characters 
a set of phonetic syllables for in- 
flexions, the sogana, later called hira- 
gana. Another more angular form of 
writing, katakana, was invented at 
the same period and is nowadays used 
mainly for the transliteration of 
foreign words. 
The Koreans also tried to use the 
Chinese characters phonetically and 
this led to the invention of the Idu 
script of which very few traces 
remain, In the 15th century a pho- 
netic alphabet covering all the sounds 
in the language was invented. 
But even earlier, in 1403, the 
Koreans had already invented print- 
ing with movable type: (Gutenberg, 
the “father” of printing in Europe 
was only a few years old at the time). 
Unesco photos 
     
     
      
   
   
a
 
i“
 
R
e
 
To
 
N\
 
> 
h
a
 
-
 
” 
EEE Lr des 
© #18 % - Sah KS 
Ae 2 A x £3 . J AT ix 
LEE TET A 50s By, dh Re et AE 
ib Lo oo het oy 5. oF 
BERR Soir dy 20 
® P7 Led gr By 
gash ry b wt AS 
€ 2TH 2p 2 HA ar 7 
ak AR ¥ A gy 7% By 
. A tL Baty 
5 
Pe 
03
. 
93
4 \ 
¢ da
g 
Se
r 
o
d
 
5
 
S
N
 
e
e
 
e
y
 
a
l
l
y
 
o
e
’
 
n
 
&
 
EP
PR
NG
C 
m
e
 
Sa
ke
t 
"
A
R
 
oy
 
3
 
ts
 
. 
E
h
 
I
Y
 
© 
ay
 
2 
t&
 
(g
b 
i 
Lo
a haF
 
Sve 
N
E
 
| 
GR
 
Y
=
 
d
u
e
 
n
d
e
 
- PR
IA
 
° 
a
,
 
-
Q
,
 
-
 
d
r
 
A
C
O
A
 
4)
 
E3
 
a 
w
e
b
 
 F
YE
OS
 
EDR 
DS
 
T
E
s
 
a
r
 N
 
na
d 
—
 
R
o
 
Sv
 
xe
);
 
F
g
 
JU
RV
IR
E-
7 
G
e
 
HE
 
th 
2s
 
F
R
e
s
 
h
E
 
i
 
er 
WE
 
. 
Calligraphy, in the eyes of the Chinese, is just as much afine 
art as painting. Writing is so close to painting that many 
Chinese artists are also authors. Text and image is often com- 
bined to form a single work of art. Above, text and figura- 
tive drawing on the page of a manuscript by Tsen Yen-tung.

## [Page 33](061468engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 61506: Ideograms from ancient China

DEERE OIE AL Ld 
es 
. 
Eh A HARE 
y y, | ari St 
  
  
To compose a newspaper in Chinese a printer needs a case of 7,000 
characters, and composition is done by hand. In Japanese about 
2,000 characters are required and the work can thus be done by a 
monotype composing machine. Efforts are now being made to develop 
a composing machine capable of dealing with texts in Chinese. 
  
   
 
a
 
= 
Fe
 
Bo
 
Rr
 
EB 
L
E
T
   
     >
LH, Place 
CH HRtk Xho 
The Japanese make simultaneous use of three forms 
of writing : hiragana, a phonetic syllabic writing 
which indicates grammatical inflexions, katakana, 
whose angular characters are mainly used for 
‘foreign words and Chinese characters, called kanji 
in Japanese. Above, text taken from the Japanese 
edition of The Unesco Courier includes all three 
forms of writing, plus the Latin letters used to 
indicate the magazine's editorial address in Paris. 
FROM CALLIGRAPHY 
T0 PRINTING 
Kneeling in the traditional posture of ancient 
scribes, girls in a Tokyo secondary school paint 
banners for New Year celebrations. In Japan 
and China, calligraphy, is taught in school 
and in Japan magazines are devoted to this art. 
     Br
 
ee
 
R
D
 
B
m
 
Unesco-Tamagawa Gaknen, Tokyo 
33

## [Page 34](061468engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
Letters to the Editor 
FIRST GLOBAL VOYAGE 
 
Sir, 
The article, “A Portyguese Sancho 
Panza in the Far East” (April 1963) 
states that “in 1522 the world was first 
circumnavigated by Ferdinand Magel- 
lan, a Portuguese.” This is not so. 
Although Magellan conceived and 
organized the enterprise, he, like 
Columbus, turned to Spain for means 
to finance it. During its course he 
was killed by tribesmen in the Philip- 
pines. Juan Sebastian del Cano, a’ 
Spaniard, completed the voyage. 
P. Valenciano Martin 
Madrid, Spain 
UNIVERSALISM AND 
NATIONAL CULTURES 
 
Sir, 
In the article “Uncharted Lands” 
(February 1963 issue) we read: “..the 
ties which bind us to our cultural 
background remain strong. We may 
even think of this culture as universal 
and world-embracing. But we know 
it can only lay claim to such resound- 
ing titles in so far as it has drawn 
upon all the world had to offer and 
if it gathered this nourishment in 
almost every corner of the globe.” 
I support this statement, although 
I think (and I hope you agree) that 
universalism, or global culture, does 
not preclude the national or concrete, 
social character of that culture. 
Tue Unesco Courier has paid 
extremely little attention to “cultural 
relations” between countries in the 
past. We know that until compara- 
tively recent times, historians devoted 
considerably more time and effort to 
the study of social and political ties 
and relations than to cultural ties, and 
that it is only in the last decades that 
a more important place in history has 
been allotted to the study of interna- 
tional cultural relations. 
I should like to see this type of 
material in your magazine. Personally, 
1 devote a great deal of my time to 
the study of Russo-American relations 
(prior to 1917) and have some valuable 
and interesting material on this subject. 
Z. Dicharov 
Leningrad, U.S.S.R. 
WATER, A WORLD PROBLEM 
Sir, 
Thank you for the wonderful, and 
informative October 1963 edition of 
THE UNEsco Courier. (Probing the 
interior or the Earth). Now for more 
editions of this nature and quality. I 
think that a topic which could be 
handled well by your magazine and 
which would be of interest to the 
layman and the professional is the 
Water Problem in the world today. 
Water is the concern of such contrast- 
ing countries as Great Britain and 
Egypt, and it would prove a valuable 
subject for discussion. 
Is there an adequate water supply 
for the world’s expanding popula- 
tion? How far will sea water aid 
man’s fight against the shortage of 
crops? Is man at last making an all- 
out effort to solve this problem of 
water supply for domestic, industrial 
and agricultural uses the world over? 
Surely such a magazine of the quality 
of THE Unesco Courier could answer 
these questions and other problems 
which inevitably result when dis- 
cussing this topic. 
W. L. Robling 
Cardiff, Wales 
Ed. note: A special issue on hydrology 
will appear later this year or early 
next year. 
ROUSSEAU REVIVAL 
 
Sir, 
I particularly appreciated your spe- 
cial issue on Jean-Jacques Rousseau 
(March 1963). At a meeting held 
in Melilla for discussions on Rous- 
seau’s famous work, Emile, a young 
writer from Tangiers, Enrique Jimenez 
Gross, proposed that.youth organiza- 
tions be formed in all countries to 
study Rousseau's ideas. and when 
possible “ to apply them within the 
individual frameworks of national, 
customs and beliefs. What do your 
readers think of this idea? Dissillu- 
sioned young people of today need to 
be reminded of the noble ideas of 
which man is truly capable. 
Antonio Garcia Marin 
Melilla, Spain 
SPORTS FOR THE DISABLED 
 
Sir, 
I have just seen the article “What 
Makes the Athlete Run?” in the Jan. 
1964 issue of THE Unesco COURIER. 
This is indeed an interesting presen- 
tation and I wish also to acknowledge 
with appreciation the fact that you 
have made reference to the role of 
disabled persons in sports events. 
You may be interested to know 
that the Working Group in whose 
name I am writing organized,. in 
July of 1963, the First International 
Games for the Disabled at Linz, Aus- 
tria. There are a number of impor- 
tant and interesting aspects of specia- 
lized sports for the disabled which 
we are seeking to clarify so that this 
activity may be of benefit both in 
the rehabilitation of the disabled and 
in providing lifelong recreation and 
exercises for disabled persons. 
Norman Acton 
President, International Working Group 
on Sports for the Disabled 
Paris, France 
POPULATION PROBLEM 
 
Sir, 
I have just seen the pamphlet on 
the “Anatomy of Economic Develop- 
ment,” reprinted from THE UNEsco 
Courier, I must say I was shocked 
that the whole emphasis was on 
agricultural and technological deve- 
lopment, without any reference to the 
difficulties caused by the growth of 
the population, These are especially 
great in already heavily populated 
under-developed countries like India. 
As is now perfectly clear, if the rate 
of human increase is not rapidly 
brought down—for India, Cole and 
Hoover said about 50% in about 
40 years—a point of no return will 
be passed, and viable industrial and 
scientific-agricultural economy cannot 
be set up. I feel very strongly that 
the time has come for UNEsco to 
consider the problem of population 
increase with the utmost seriousness, 
and then publish its findings (rather 
as it did with the matter of race). 
The fields where research is perhaps 
most urgently needed is that of human 
reproduction and its control, and that 
of the dissemination .of information 
on the subject, how to persuade people 
of the need for a population policy, 
and the position of family planning in 
national ‘activities. Many of us believe 
that it is quite essential that family 
planning should become the official 
responsibility of the Ministries of 
Health of the countries of the world. 
Julian Huxley 
London, England 
Ed. note: For an article on the prob- 
lems of population and food -supply 
see our special issue on “Freedom 
from Hunger” (July-August 1962). 
400 MILLION RADIOS 
Sir, 
“M. Muller does not want 400 mil- 
lion needy families in Africa, Asia 
and Latin America to have low-cost 
radio sets .because she hears nothing 
but rubbish from the Paris radio ser- 
vice (December 1963, Letters to the 
Editor). What kind of logic is this? 
Is she so sure that the developing 
countries can do no better than Paris? 
James Cunningham 
Paris, France 
SPELEOLOGISTS OF CUBA 
 
Sit, 
Some members of our organization, 
which is concerned with the study 
and exploration of caves in Cuba, 
subscribe to your magazine, and at our 
meetings we often read your articles. 
We have noticed, however, that no 
study on speleology or related sciences 
has appeared. May we suggest that 
you devote an entire issue to this mar- 
vellous though little-known science? 
Manuel Iturralde Vinent 
Secretary, Martel Speleological Group 
Havana, Cuba 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.

## [Page 35](061468engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Ka 
Ay 
A 
; 
iE 
he 
A - i 
Binders for your 
collection of 
THE UNESCO COURIER 
We offer subscribers a special binder for 
their copies of THE UNESCO COURIER hold- 
ing a year's issues of the magazine. Hand- i 
somely produced in halfcloth with the spine 
in an attractive blue and the title (in English, 
embossed in gold, these convenient and 
\ - 
INL 
French or Spanish according to the edition 
‘to which you subscribe) and Unesco colophon 
attractive binders, costing 12/6 stg., $ 2.50, or ok 
6 F., can be ordered from UNESCO Agents. 
e Tp 
Mm A compact guide 
to all aspects of 
teaching about the 
work and aims of 
the United Nations 
and its related 
agencies Hk 
NN Suggests : : 
ways of teaching | 
Wl 
~ designed for : 
  
ps 
A recent UNESCO publication 
Leonard S, Kenworthy 
o the 
LOTY 
J 
® 
a 
New approaches to teaching 
about the United Nations and 
its related agencies 
21 IN-166 pages: i EER 
~ 6l-(stg), $ 2.00, 4.50 F 
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA, 
Tradco Agencies, 10% Swanston Street, G. P. O. 
Box 2324 V, Melbourne C. 1. (Victoria) ; United 
Nations Association of Australia, Victorian Division, 
8th Floor, McEwan House, 343 Little Collins St., 
Melbourne C. I. (Victoria). (A. 15/-). — AUSTRIA. 
Yerlag Georg Fromme & C*., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 60.-). — BELGIUM, Editions ** Labor ", 
342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NY Standaard-Boeke 
handel, Belgiélei 151. Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (100 FB) and art slides only: Louis De Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. CCP 3380.00. — 
BURMA, Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoon. (K. 5.50). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont, ($ 3.00). — CEYLON. Lake House 
Bookshop, 100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Colombo, 
2. (Rs. 9). — CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (For- 
mosa), — CUBA.Cubartimpex, Apartado 6540, La Ha- 
vana, — (2.25 pesos). — CYPRUS, Cyprus National 
Youth Council, P.O. Box 539, Nicosia. — CZE- 
CHOSLOVAKIA, Artia Ltd., 30 V2 Smeckich, Prague 
2. — DENMARK. Ejnar Munksgaard, Prags Boulevard 
47 Copenhagen S (D.kr. 12). — ETHIOPIA. Interna- 
tional Press Agency. P.O. Box 120. Addis Ababa. — 
FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, 
Helsinki, (Fmk, 540). — FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, 
Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7° C.C.P. 12598-48. (7 F.). — 
GERMANY, R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145, Munich. 8, For the Unesco Kurier (German ed 
only) Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenield, 
C.C.P. 276650 {DM 8), — GHANA Methodist Book 
Depot Ltd. Atlantis House, Commercial St., POB 100, 
Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United King- 
dom. — GREECE. Librairie H. Kaufmann, 28, rue du 
Stade, Athens. — HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 64, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Kultura, P. O. 
Box 149. Budapest, 62. — ICELAND. Snaebjorn Jonsson 
& Co. H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik — INDIA, Orient 
Longmans Ltd. Nicol Road,, Bellard Estate, Bombay 1: 
17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; Gunfoundry Road, 
Hyderabad, 1: 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson House, 
1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O.Box 186, New Delhi, 1;Sub-Depot: 
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 Park Street, Calcutta 
16, 5cindia House, New Delhi, Indian National Commission 
Co-operation with Unesco, Ministry of Education, for 
New Delhi 3, (Rs. 7). — INDONESIA. P. N. Fadjar Bhakti 
Djalan, Nusantara 22, Djakarta. — 1RAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. — IRELAND, The National Press, 
1, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (10/3). — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein's Bookstores 35, Allenby Road 
and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (1% 5.50). 
— JAMAICA. Sangster's Book Room, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston. Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
(10/-). — JAPAN, Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, P.C, Box 60S Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
(Yen 670). — JORDAN. Joseph L, Bahous & Co., 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B, 66, Amman, — 
KENYA, E.5.A. Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi, — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — LIBERIA. Cole 
and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O, Box 286, Monrovia. — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg. — MALAYSIA Federal Publications Ltd., 
Times House, River Valley Rd., Singapore (M. $ 500) — 
MALTA. Sapienza’s Library 26 Kingsway, Valletta. (10/-). 
— MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port-Louis. — MONACO. British Library, 30 Bld 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF.). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 6). — NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. G.C.T. Van 
Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Curacao, N.A. 
— NEW ZEALAND Government Printing CHice 20, 
Molesworth Street (Private Bag) YWellington, C. 1 Govern- 
ment Bookshops,: Auckland (P.O. Box 5144), Christ 
church (P.O. Box 1721), Dunedin (P.O. Box 1104 (10/-). 
NIGERIA. C.M.5. Bookshops, P.O. Box 174, Lagos 
{1 6 — NORWAY. AS. Bokhjornet, Lilla Grania. 
7 Oslo For the Unesco Courier only: AS. Narvesens 
Litteratur Tjenests, Stortingsgr. 2 Oslo, Postboks 115 
(kr 13.20) — PAKISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Co, 
Ltd., Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374 56-N 
Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahore. — PANAMA. 
Cultural Panamefa, Avenida 7a, No. T1-49, Apartado de 
Correos 2018, Panama (D.F. Balboas 3-). — PHILLIPI. 
NES. The Modern Book Co. 508 Rizal Avenue 
Manila, — POLAND. "RUCH" ul. Wilozs Nr. 4éx 
Yarsaw 10 (ZI. 50). — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade 
Lda, Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon, — 
PUERTO RICO. Spanish English Publications, Eleanor 
Roosevelt 115, Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. — RHODESIA 
& NYASALAND. The Book Centre, Gordon Avenue, Sa- 
lisbury, Southern Rhodesia. — SUDAN. Al Bashir Book- 
shop, P. O.Box 1118, Khartoum. —~ SWEDEN. A/B C.E, 
Friczes Kungl, Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm 16. 
— For The Unesco Courier: Svenska Unescoridet, Vasaga- 
tan 15-17, Stockholm, C (Kr. 10); SWITZERLAND. 
Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasse Zurich. Payot, 40, rue du 
Marché, Geneva C.C.P. 1-236, ** Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva, C.C.P. 
1-4811. (Fr. 5. 8). — TANGANYIKA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030, Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue. Bangkok. 
(35 ticals). — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala. — UNION OF 
SOUTH AFRICA. Yan Schaik's Bookstore, Libri Building, 
Church Street, P.O. Box 724 Pretoria. For the Unesco 
Courier (single copies) only : Central News Agency, P.O. 
Box 1013, Johannesburg. (10/-), — UNITED ARAB 
REPUBLIC (EGYPT). La Renaissance d'Egypte. 9 Sh. 
Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. 
Stationery Office, P.O, Box 569, London, S.E.l. (10/), = 
UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 
317 East 34th St, New York, N.Y. 10016 ($5.00) 
and (except periodicals): Columbia University Press, 
1960 Broadway, New York, 27, N.Y, — U.S$.S.R. Mez- 
hdunarodnaja Kniga, Moscow, G-200.— YUGOSLAVIA 
Yugoslovenska Knjiga, Terazije 27, Belgrade. 

## [Page 36](061468engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
- 
a. 
- a - 5 a 
y 4 Fr ait / v 
; al ox Po 
; Se 
> Po 
< 2 - 
I — 
Cuneiform writing—so named for its 
wedge or nail-shaped strokes—was 
once used by many of the ancient 
CE CER A CEL EEN EETR ET ER EK) 
(CL RUC CE Ela RR WER I GREE 
tury alabaster tablet of Nabu-opal- 
iddin, King of Babylon, is the cuneiform 
LAT AUC CEC RG ELE RGR GTR TT TT 
ERC UCR CRUG ULE: FERS ET EES 
Relief shows worshippers praying to 
the god, symbolized by a solar disc. 
British Museum, London-Kunstarchiv. Arntz. 
The Hague } 
   