# [062706](062706engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](062706engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
    
   
   
    
hes ~~ 
  
A WINDOW OPEN ON THE WORLD 
sm ouric 
Ro 1963. (BT YEAR) - PRICE 1/-STG. (U. K.). - 30 CENTS (CANADA, - 0.70 F (FRANC) 
   
  

## [Page 2](062706engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

   
   
    
Ro 
PA §: ow 
 
 
    
spn aa A vimomn wav. » 
) dy {room pons ad LL Ta 
2 Hil TRE; 3d 
ol ies ager:
     
   
. ibis = RRR wore . ddd a 
(ved atta Ronsdatd NSAI Rd 
Cal E Lach ahd Ao Spemorrer, sa haat ied PRTOION Candid do oven A 
RNS POIINOIN Ghidvwrve PONIES e SSIES PIN Ra RE 
© Unesco 
of life and beliefs in the Ancient World, from hunting scenes to mythology and from 
religious rites to secular games. In Tunisia numerous pavement mosaics have 
been uncovered. A collection of some of the most striking is now offered in ‘‘ Tuni- 
0 . A N C | I N T sia: Ancient Mosaics'’, the 18th volume in the Unesco World Art Series. This de- 
tail of a fishing scene (3rd cent. A.D.) is in the Susa Museum, Tunisia. Published by 
T U N | S ! A the New York Graphic Society by arrangement with Unesco, this album, printed 
in Italy, has 32 full-page colour reproductions and is priced at $18.00 or equivalent. 
M 0) S A ! C S The art of mosaic work which flourished at the time of the Roman Empire is a mirror

## [Page 3](062706engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

4 WINDOW OPIN ON THI WORLD 
Ouricr 
Contents 
No. 5 
MAY 1963 
16TH YEAR UNESED 
PUBLISHED IN 
NINE EDITIONS Page 
English 
Fone 4 FOR THOSE IN PERIL ON THE SEA 
Russian A world-wide network for maritime safety 
German By David Woodward 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 10 A LOOK AT WORLD CO-OPERATION IN SCIENCE 
Japanese By N.M. Sissakian 
Italian 
17 STAINED GLASS—400 YEARS IN ONE FAMILY 
A great artistic craft in the shadow of Reims cathedral 
Photo-story by Paul Almasy 
21 THE USELESS BARRIERS 
The Hidden Face of the Cinema (5) 
By Paul Léglise 
25 OPERATION ‘NORDESTEFE’ 
Brazil’s bold programme in the hunger campaign 
By Josué de Castro 
  
30 STAMPS AGAINST HUNGER 
PHOTO 
Fires aboard ship have always 33 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
been one of the greatest 
hazards faced bythe Seafarer. 
esearch into ways of Impro- 
ving safety equipment carried 34 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
by ships has produced these 
awesome-looking fireproof 
asbestos suits for fire 
fighters. (Story on Safety 
First at Sea, page 4) 
U.S. Navy 
COVER 
(MC. 63.1.180 A) 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations Educational, Sclentific and Cultural 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Russlan Edition : Veniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edltlon : Shin-lchi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin july and August when 
it is bi-monthly (11 issues a year) in English, Franch, Spanish, Russian, German, 
Arabic, Japanese, and ltalian, In the United Kingdom itis distributed by H.M, 
Stationery Office, P. O, Box 569, London, §. E. I. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor, Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's. name, Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER, 
The Unesco Courier la indexed monthly In The Readers’ Guide to 
Periodical Literature published by H. W. Wilion Co., New York. 
Annual subscription rates : 10/-stg. ; $3.00 (Canada) ;7.00 
French Francs or equivalent. Single copies [/-stg. 30 
cents ; 0.70 F. 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°. 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief.

## [Page 4](062706engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 78198: For those in peril on the sea

FOR THOSE IN PERIL 
ON THE SEA 
by David Woodward 
D URING the years 1960 and 1961 nearly 200 ships, 
totalling more than three quarters of a million 
gross tons, were lost at sea. The exact figures were 
114 ships of 418,195 tons In 1960 and 78 ships of 355,362 
tons in 1961. But while details are available for ships of 
a certain size—only vessels over 500 tons are included in 
the figures given above—it is quite impossible to obtain 
precise figures for small craft or the loss of life by 
drowning. 
The most nearly authoritative guesses speak of about 
200,000 lives lost annually in every kind of drowning acci- 
dent from a collislon between passenger liners in the 
North Atlantic to the destruction of scores of tiny fishing 
vessels and their crews by a typhoon in the Far East. 
Accidents at sea are thus so numerous that the dead go 
unnumbered. The sea is still cruel and there are times 
when even the best-found, best-handled ship is at its 
mercy. 
To prevent folly or greed from jeopardizing ships and 
the lives of seafarers, regulations have existed since Noah 
limited the passenger capacity of the Ark. The Greeks 
and Romans established regular laws. Emerging from the 
Middle Ages, 600 years ago, the English and the French 
made laws to regulate the traffic by sea; already in the 
Twelfth Century, the Crusaders, using mostly Italian ships, 
had marked on the sides of their craft a cross, the arms 
of which indicated the maximum depth to which the ship 
might be loaded. The mark of the Crusaders made its 
way with the flow of trade to the Baltic and within a 
hundred years it had been adopted by the merchants of 
Visby on the Swedish island of Gotland. 
This use of a load line was of course on the same prin- 
ciple as the famous Plimsoll line adopted by British 
shipping in 1876 after a tremendous battle in Parliament. 
Plimsoll himself was by no means careful of the accuracy 
of the charges which he flung about the House of Com- 
mons. But fundamentally, he was right. Many men were 
being sent to sea in overloaded or inadequate ships for 
the sake of galn; such ships were too often disaster-prone 
in bad weather. When Britain stipulated that her ships 
should not be overloaded, the British Government also 
laid down that foreign ships using British ports should 
conform to the same regulations. 
The problem of safety at sea had become especially 
grave by the nineteenth century because of the great 
development in world trade and because iron steamships 
could sustain greater hazards than wooden sailing ships. 
However, for centuries before the Industrial Revolution, 
the training of sea captains, pllots and seamen had been 
an object of concern to the principal maritime powers. 
Henry the Navigator of Portugal had, perhaps, first of all, 
  
This is how a German 
artist, Willy Stcewer, 
visualized the nightmare 
of April 15, 1912, as 
panic-stricken survivors 
struggled to get away 
from the rapidly-sink- 
ing “Titanic” after it 
crashed head-on into an 
iceberg. Only 711 people 
were saved. The death 
toll was 1,517. This 
tragedy eventually 
brought about measures 
to promote safety at sea, 
including the setting up 
of iceberg patrols and 
stringent regulations 
about the proper num- 
ber and proper equip- 
ment of lifeboats to be 
carried by all vessels. 
© UPI  
tried to systematize these matters; the Emperor Charles V 
had followed his example, and Henry VIII of England 
founded the establishment known as the Brethren of Tri- 
nity House which, to this day, controls lights and pilotage 
matters in British waters. In France and the Low Coun- 
tries, similar arrangements date from the sixteenth 
century. 
Nevertheless, much more than that was needed for the 
training of seafarers in the first half of the nineteenth 
century. The Foreign Office in London, through its 
consuls abroad, began a long agitation to ralse the 
standards of conduct and technical proficiency in the 
British merchant service—not only for . humanitarian 
reasons but for economic ones as well. The consul at Riga 
reported in 1843: 
“Foreign shipmasters are generally a more respectable 
and sober class of men than the British. I have always 
been convinced... that British shipowners... are great

## [Page 5](062706engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 78198: For those in peril on the sea

losers from the serious delays occasioned while on the 
voyage and discharging and taking in cargoes, growing out 
of the incapacity of their shipmasters and their intem- 
perate habits. I have had occasion to remark... that 
American vessels, in particular, will make three voyages to 
two of a British vessel, in this way having an immense 
advantage over their competitor” (1). 
Developments in the fleld of trade and in naval con- 
struction had brought increased problems to the seafarer, 
but at the end of the nineteenth century developments in 
telecommunications more than redressed the balance. 
Nevertheless, when radio telegraphy was first introduced, 
it began In a state of confusion. Ships and shore stations 
were often fitted with different types of equipment 
operated by different companies. Competition became so 
keen that the employees of one radlo company would not 
handle the traffic of another; sometimes they would even 
jam rival signals or broadcast abuse of each other. It 
took two big International conferences held at Berlin in 
1903 and 1906 to bring some order to the situation and to 
secure an acceptable agreement between the various 
countries. 
A little later, In 1909, came the first use of wireless tele- 
graphy to summon ald to a vessel in distress, when the 
White Star liner Republic was sunk in collision off 
Nantucket. A young man who was the ship's radio opera- 
tor made history and a name for himself by sticking to 
his post and summoning ald which was brought by ships 
of five different nationalities. These immediate replies to 
the Republic’s distress signals were an extension of the 
unwritten law of the sea whereby a response must be 
given to appeals for help. There is also a material side, 
since the first ship to answer effectively an appeal for 
help may be able to earn her owners and crew very con- 
slderable sums for salvage. 
(1) Seafarers and Their Ships, London, H.M.5.0., 1955, p. 22. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](062706engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

6 


### 78198: For those in peril on the sea

PERIL ON THE SEA (Cont'd) 
Lessons of the ‘Titanic’ 
The original radio distress call had been the letters 
CQD—Come Quick Danger—but by 1912, this had been 
changed by international agreement to SOS—not because 
those letters stand for anything, but because the com- 
bination of three dots, three dashes, three dots in Morse 
code was judged to be especially ear-catchlng. The signal 
is sent “SOS0OSOS...” while a lesser degree of emergency 
is signified by the letters “TTT.” Much later, with the 
over advent of radio telephony, the phrase “May Day” 
(from the French m’aidez) was used for a spoken, as 
opposed to a Morse appeal for help. 
Three years after the loss of the Republic came the 
sinking of the Tilanic, perhaps the greatest peacetime sea 
disaster in history. 
Even after fifty years crowded with terrible events, the 
story of this disaster still has power to horrify. In 1912, 
when the nations had experienced no world war for 
almost a hundred years, it came as a blow so shocking 
that it made men doubt the whole order in which they 
lived. 
Briefly. four vital factors had caused the disaster and 
the enormous loss of life which accompanied it. They 
were: 
@® The failure of the iceberg warning measures. 
® Insufficient ilfe boats to hold all the passengers and 
crew, 
@® Poor water-tight compartmentation, so that the ship 
flooded easily, and 
{ To 0 ~ 
© Nordisk Pres A seiner CURE 
@® Confusion over radio traffic, which hampered recep- 
tion of the Titanic’s SOS. 
A conference of the principal sea-faring powers was 
convened in London during the winter of 1913-14 to deal 
with these points on an international basis. Although the 
agreements were never officially ratified, because of the 
outbreak of World War I, they did bit by bit come off the 
conference table and begin to shape the lives of those 
who worked or travelled by sea. 
First and foremost of these agreements was the for- 
mation of the North Atlantic Ice Patrol. This was set up 
by the United States Coast Guard with international 
financial support and functions to this day, using ships 
and aircraft to spot dangerous icebergs. 
The Titanic’s boats held only 1,178 people, and the ship 
had on board at the time over 2,200 people. In fact owing 
to the difficulty of loading and handling the boats, not 
more than 700 actually found places in the boats, and 
1,517 people lost their lives, hundreds of them not 
drowned, but found next morning floating in their life 
jackets, frozen to death in the icy waters. 
Accordingly, “boats for all” became a popular slogan, 
and the 1913-14 conference laid great stress on these 
being provided in the future—perhaps too much stress, 
because there are many occasions upon which a ship sinks 
so fast that there is no time to complete the launching 
of boats, and extra life rafts would be more valuable than 
boats. 
Regulations were also proposed by the Conference to

## [Page 7](062706engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 78198: For those in peril on the sea

"FOR THE SAFETY. 
OF SEAFARERS 
~ Vigilance and courage sup- 
LL CL VA ET EV DEE TT 
~ technological progress— 
~ these are man’s weapons in 
~ his never-ending struggle 
~ tosavelivesatsea.(1) French 
~ explorer Dr. Alain Bombard, 
~~ who spent months alone 
on a tiny ‘raft in the 
~ North Atlantic carrying out 
BE GR TTT E10 LITE (FU SC) ST] 2 
~ vival research.” He was 
able to obtain “water” by 
~ catching fish and squeez- 
~ ing them in a small press. 
~ (2) The latest in lifeboats, 
~ devised and built in Den- 
~ mark. With its hatch closed 
~ down it is virtually unsink- 
~ able and can ride out the 
~ roughest seas. (€)) An 
~ R.A.F. helicopter plucks two 
~ French sailors from the 
wreck of their trawler, on the 
~ jagged rocks at Land's 
-UT PRU IO VET TIED TB 
Gy 
Improve the standard of water-tight compartmentation, 
and also to diminish confusion over radio messages 
warnings of icebergs had falled to reach the Titanic’s cap- 
tain, and his SOS went unheeded by a ship within sight 
of the lights of the stricken liner, because her radio 
operator had gone to bed. 
At the conclusion of World War I and with the creation 
of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) In Gen- 
eva, another approach was made to the question of safety 
of life at sea. The ILO’s principal preoccupation was 
with working conditions and hours, but their immediate 
relevance to safety may be seen when efflciency Is con- 
sidered In terms of a well-fed, well-rested and healthy 
crew compared with one which Is not. 
Crowded forecastles, where men sleep In damp straw, 
eat badly-cooked mixtures of food from a single dish, 
after it has been carried from the galley across an open 
half-deck, where there is a struggle to dry soaked clothing 
and as hard a struggle to get sufficient fresh water, are 
not quite a thing of the past. But the picture is certainly 
brighter than it was thirty years ago and International 
action can take much credit for the Improvements that 
have been made. 
While the conference room has thus been productive 
of reform at its own tempo over the past four decades, the 
laboratory and the electrical workshop have within the 
past 15 years or so provided a serles of revolutions of their 
own in the fleld of maritime safety. At the end of both 
world wars, international co-operation at sea on a large 
scale was necessary to sweep the hundreds of thousands 
of mines laid by both sides. 
In between 1914 and 1918 some 240,000 mines were laid, 
while that figure was nearly doubled In the Second World 
War. The mines were most thickly strewn in European 
waters and in the three years after V-E-day, 1,900 mine- 
sweepers took three years to sweep safe channels of some 
125,000 miles. In theory, these mines become useless after 
a period of years, but no chances can be taken. After all, 
live mines from the Russo-Japanese war of 1904-5 were 
still being reported in the 1930's. 
Some wartime developments for detecting ships and alr- 
craft have resulted In entirely new devices which have 
revolutionized navigation, especially In dangerous waters. 
Nor is there any sign of this process of change being com- 
plete—{future developments, it would seem, will be just 
as far-reaching as those which have occurred since 1945. 
Radar and its refinements have combined to offer solu- 
tions to a great many of the mariner’s safety problems, 
although they have In turn set problems of their own. 
Briefly, radar's supersonic electrical impulses, reflected 
off objects which they strike above the surface of the sea, 
reveal the presence In fog or darkness of rocks, other 
ships or other obstacles. At the same time, the electric 
Impulses of asdic or sonar can reveal the depth of the 
sea and the presence of submerged obstacles. 
These new sclences are still In their infancy. Refine- 
ments of radar are now being developed whereby stations 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](062706engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 78198: For those in peril on the sea

PERIL ON THE SEA (Cont'd) 
World network for 
safety at sea 
ashore and on board a ship, working together in coastal 
waters, can indicate a ship's position as a tiny disc of 
light on her own chart. Experts point out, however, that 
these and other devices are only alds to navigation, and 
that the first line of defence agalnst disaster is the mari- 
ner himself, his eyes and his brain. 
The precision of such developments is such that the 
suggestion has now been put forward that in crowded 
waters and fog—the seaman’s worst enemy—the move- 
ments of ships should be controlled from the shore in the 
same manner that the landings and take-offs of aircraft 
are controlled from the ground. The traditional indepen- 
dence of ship-masters is likely to give this proposal a 
discouraging reception but as trafflc grows, it may be 
necessary to impose it, nevertheless. It is at any rate 
a far cry from the fog-horn hitherto the only ald to 
safety and navigation in thick weather. 
A similar measure of control which has been proposed 
is the introduction of a kind of one-way traffic system 
in the Straits of Dover, whereby west-bound ships use 
one channel and east-bound ships another. The Straits 
are still the busiest sea lane in the world, with 750 ships 
passing every day. 
  
Tiny white specks in the sea 
are actually massive icebergs 
—those in the centre are excep- 
tionally large ones—that have 
“calved” from ‘the glacier seen 
- in this aerial photograph taken 
off the east coast of Green- 
land. These ice-islands become 
deadly serious maritime hazards 
when they drift southwards into 
the Atlantic shipping lanes. But 
ships and aircraft of the North 
Atlantic Ice Patrol are on the 
watch and warn shipping of 
the presence of the icebergs. 
Somewhere at sea a ship is in 
distress. Out goes an SOS and 
other ships change course to 
bring help. Here a U.S. Coast- 
guard patrol boat picks up sur- 
vivors of a vessel lost in a hur- 
ricane. To reach the ship- 
wreck it braved waves 60 feet 
high and winds of 90 m.p.h.  

## [Page 9](062706engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 78198: For those in peril on the sea

IMCO, to which this proposal has been referred, is the 
Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization 
which was set up in London in 1959 as the maritime 
agency of the United Nations. In its first four years of 
existence, more than 50 nations with most of the world’s 
shipping, have become members. One of its maln tasks 
is to place the international work on safety of life at 
sea on a permanent basis, which was hitherto the task 
of international conferences summoned from time to 
time at sporadic intervals. The first such conference ‘was 
that already mentioned after the Titanic dlsaster in 
1914-15; two more followed In 1929 and 1948. 
However, IMCOQ's concern is not only with the safety 
of life at sea; the agency aiso deals with discriminatory 
actions and restrictive practices in the field of shipping, 
organizes the exchange of Information between govern- 
ments and considers any maritime question that may be 
referred to it by the United Nations or by any of the 
other specialized agencles. 
In May and June 1960, IMCO held a conference in 
London on the safety of life at sea, at which fifty-four 
nations were represented. This meeting thrashed out the 
technical aspects and drew up a new Convention which 
© French Polar Expeditions Paul-Emile Victor 
included up-to-date provisions on the use of radar and 
modern types of lfe-saving equipment. The safety of 
nuclear-powered ships, signalling, fire-fighting, electrical 
equipment and collision regulations were all included In 
the final Convention. The measures adopted represented 
another step forward to reduce the risks run by sea- 
farers. 
But in the struggle with the sea there can be no final 
victory. Vigilance, courage and ingenuity are always 
required. International regulation and electronic inven- 
tion can strengthen these qualities, but are no substi- 
tutes for them. A note of the grim reality which lies 
behind IMCO's work 'was provided recently by that 
organization's request to the World Health Organization 
to set up an expert committee to investigate the contro- 
versial problem of whether shipwrecked mariners should, 
in an emergency, drink sea water. The experts unant- 
mously decided against such a remedy, despite recent 
claims that this is one way In which the castaway can 
prolong his life. 
Davip WoopwARD is a documentary writer-producer for 
the British Broadcasting Corporation, London.

## [Page 10](062706engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 62707: A Biologist looks at world co-operation in science

  
  
  
 
 
usis

## [Page 11](062706engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 62707: A Biologist looks at world co-operation in science

THE FISHERMAN'’S 
FRIEND: The chemist, 
the biologist, the geolo- 
gist and the physicist 
are all keenly interested 
in the sea today and 
international co-opera- 
tive research in these 
fields is growing. Efforts 
to Increase our food 
supply from the oceans 
depend not only on the 
fisherman but the marine 
biologist. Here scien- 
tists on the deck of an 
oceanographic research 
vessel are seen gathering 
microscopic specimens 
from the sea in the course 
of a research cruise. 
J ust as life itself depends on biological exchange 
for its normal development, so sclence needs 
the exchange of ideas, methods and principles for its own 
enrichment and to strengthen the control of man over 
nature. Perhaps nowhere does the need for scientific co- 
operation on an international basis emerge with such 
clarity as in the field of biology, or, putting it more 
broadly, in the fleld of life sciences. 
This co-operation is all the more indispensable as, 
within present-day natural sclences, the biological 
sciences are progressively assuming an ever-larger place ; 
the part they play in the promotion of welfare for all 
mankind is becoming more and more influential. If we 
consider the matter in its broadest perspective, mankind 
is faced with a number of vitally important problems, 
which we cannot afford to ignore. 
With steadily widening economic, scientific and cultural 
contacts between peoples, I believe the foremost obliga- 
tion of scientists is the unification of creative efforts for 
the successful elaboration of the following scientific 
problems: 
@ Assurance of unlimited resources of energy for the use 
of mankind; 
<< Enlargement of food resources to meet the needs of 
all peoples of the globe in foods of full nutritive value; 
< Elimination of all infectlous diseases and the creation 
of material and hygienic conditions for longevity, along 
with conservation of vigour, capacity for work, and 
physiological activity at a sufficlently high level; 
<€ Exploration of other worlds of the universe, the un- 
derstanding of their laws and the utilization of these 
for the welfare of all mankind. 
National Institute of Oceanography, Great Britain 
These problems of sclence, which concern all 
humanity, inspire the scientists of the whole world—those 
true sclentists for whom the great power of science must 
serve exclusively the Interests of peace, friendship and 
happiness of all people. These !deas and problems must 
and should, I believe, serve as a basis for the organization 
of international scientific co-operation. 
In this respect, we have positive experience to work on. 
The co-operation of scientists In the programme of the 
International Geophysical Year, the creative work of 
scientists from several countries In the Antarctic, the 
beginning of large-scale research on marine life within 
the framework of Unesco, the experience gained as a 
result of mutual agreements on scientific co-operation 
among many countries of the world—all this represents 
an important contribution to mutual understanding and 
co-operation between peoples. 
International scientific co-operation may be realized in 
various ways and at various levels. In particular, the 
organization of international symposiums and widely rep- 
resentative scientific meetings can do much in this res- 
pect. For ‘example, the International Biochemical 
Congress held In Moscow In August 1961 proved to be a 
magnificent forum for the blochemists of the world. 
If the problems of securing permanently available 
energy resources for all of mankind must be solved by the 
efforts of physicists and power specialists, the other prob- 
lems which I have listed will have to be dealt with by 
representatives of an Intricate complex of blological 
sciences, 
A number of important problems may be cited which, in 11 
CONT'D ON KREXT PAGE

## [Page 12](062706engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 62707: A Biologist looks at world co-operation in science

SCIENTIFIC CO-OPERATION (Cont'd) 
my view, may serve as a basis for international co-opera- 
tion: 
© The study of forms of llfe, of laws of reproduction and 
the Increase in biological productivity of the world’s 
oceans; 
<% Elucidation of the nature of photosynthesis so as to be 
able to reproduce thls truly cosmic process otherwise 
than in chlorophyllous plant life; 
<< The multi-disciplinary study of the brain. 
The study and the utilization of the world's oceans, 
like meteorological and geophysical research, Is the most 
appropriate and the most necessary form of International 
scientific co-operation. 
The ocean is the largest integral natural object on our 
planet, in which all processes and phenomena are inter- 
dependent and Interdetermined. The study of the ocean 
calls for co-ordinated research in several disciplines such 
as physics, chemistry, blology and geology. 
T= scientific study of the ocean and of the 
problems of its practical utilization must be 
treated as a single coherent entity. There must be 
no schism whatsoever between theoretical Investigation 
utilization of its mineral resources; the geological 
findings will also result In Important progress In 
navigation and port-building. Bio-oceanological re- 
search is necessary for the full and rational utilization 
of the vital resources of oceans and for the solution of 
navigation problems. A fuller knowledge of the ocean will 
help us to develop rational means of protecting the ocean 
from pollution, from the deterioration of its blological 
resources, and from dangers to the health of mankind. 
The present rapid development of such studies is 
explained by the fact that this branch of sclence and its 
practical aspects lagged behind others in the past, as well 
as by the application of many new methods of research 
and the realization of the tremendous scope and signifi- 
cance, from both theoretical and practical viewpoints, of 
the perspectives of scientific and economic mastery of the 
global ocean. 
In working out an International programme for bio- 
logical Investigation of the ocean, the international study 
of the Indian Ocear which was started in 1959 and which 
should continue for the next 3 to 5 years under the joint 
supervision of SCOR (Scientific Committee for Oceanic 
Research) and Unesco must be taken into account because 
of its great importance. Yet these Investigations should 
in no way impede the development of general Interna- 
tional research in oceanography within the programme of 
the Intergovernmental Oceanographic CommIission, one of 
whose tasks is to determine the character and intensity 
of biological processes which take place in various parts 
of the global ocean—In other words, to elucidate all aspects 
of the biological structure of the ocean. 
and practical problems. 
Studies of the physical processes in the watery mass of 
the ocean and the interaction between it and the 
atmosphere will bring solutions to many problems concern- 
ing navigation, climatic forecasting and the utilization 
of the power resources of ocean waters. Chemical and 
geological studies of the ocean will lead to the CONT'D ON PAGE I4 
© E. Aubert de la Rue 
So Gl 
=~ MARINE PLANTS 
~~ = & PY 
—et=———=====- The tiniest of seaplants 
 —— are mostly invisible to 
T= eee = the naked eye. Their 
———— a — hidden beauty, however, 
=~ is revealed by micro- 
photography, through 
whose penetrating eye 
the cluster of common 
algae (right) is seen to 
resemble a delicate fan 
richly studded with gems. 
Fronds of giant seaweed 
(left) line the banks of 
a fjord on the Kerguelen 
Islands in the Antarctic. 
Seaweeds have long been 
used as a source of 
iodine and vegetable gela- 
tin and many kinds are 
eaten directly because 
they are a rich source of 
vitamins and minerals.   
  

## [Page 13](062706engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 62707: A Biologist looks at world co-operation in science

 

## [Page 14](062706engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 62707: A Biologist looks at world co-operation in science

14 
SCIENTIFIC CO-OPERATION (Cont'd) 
direction of wind 
RH Sr Wty Sp #00 Sa 
 
Mysteries of photosynthesis 
The basic task of marine research must be the study 
of the character and tempo of biological productivity at 
various latitudes and in various parts of the global ocean, 
the qualitative and quantitative structure of its plant and 
animal life and their blological peculiarities. The process 
of production undergoes regular changes according to the 
physical and chemical conditions experienced in the 
various geographical zones; from pole to pole, from the 
shores to the central parts of the ocean, and from its 
surface to its depths, the quantitative changes may vary 
a hundred-, a thousand-, and a hundred-thousand-fold. 
The international programme of biological reseach must 
include the study of plant and animal organisms as 
possible carriers and concentrators of radioactive waste 
matter, and the phenomena of blocirculation as one way 
by which such matter may be dispersed in the ocean. 
T= biological data thus obtained must form 
the oceanological basis for the recognition and 
evaluation of fish and other kinds of resources in regions 
whose resources have so far been barely used or left 
completely untouched. Nevertheless, the tremendous 
amount of information collected by international oceano- 
graphic programmes should not be kept separate from 
practical considerations, such as those which affect the 
fishing industry. In no case should incomplete utilization 
be permitted of the data obtalned in the investigation of 
the ocean, for such data can be of use to various branches 
of economy, including the fishing industry. 
Today the photosynthesis of plants (in which the plants 
perform the primary synthesis of organic substances and 
store the energy from solar radiation) is practically the 
only primary source of food for all living organisms on 
earth, including man. 
There is no doubt that in the future, too, the decisive 
role in this area will be played by the natural photo- 
synthesis of plants, for only the cultivation of highly 
productive plants over tremendous territories can guar- 
antee the abundance of food needed for the world's 
population no matter what its size, and can satisfy the 
needs and tastes of man in respect of the composition 
and variety of such food supplies. 
At present, the green plants of the globe create through 
photosynthesis hundreds of times more organic substances 
than are needed as food by the population of the Earth. 
Even so, the problem of food resources is one of the most 
acute problems of contemporary mankind. This problem 
has social and biological-technical aspects. 
For example more than 90 per cent of photosynthetic 
production occurs in the plants of seas and oceans and of 
forests and prairies, yet the percentage of this production 
used for food is extremely low (about 0.02). Cultivated 
plants produce only 10 per cent of the total photosynthetic 
production, but the proportion of utilization of this pro- 
duction for food is high: the cultivated food and fodder 
plants yield not less than 80 percent of the food used by 
human beings. 
Nevertheless, this production does not fully satisfy the 
food requirements of mankind. Furthermore, to the prob- 
lem of assuring food supplies of the requisite nutritive 
value for present generations must be added that of 
providing for the constant growth of the population. For, 
after all, it is the potential products of photosynthesis and 
the extent to which mankind can utilize these products 
for food that will determine the population potential of 
the globe and its standard of living. i 
For this reason, the photosynthesis of plants, the in- 
crease of photosynthetic production and the control of 
plant photosynthesis as a source of food are among the 
most important problems of mankind. 
The adequate, rapid and most advantageous solution of 
the problem of photosynthesis in the above context 
depends to a large degree on the co-ordination of research 
on an international scale. Let us consider the following 
examples: 
@ According to contemporary calculations—which, 
however, are neither precise nor final—about 80 per cent 
of the total photosynthetic production of plants of the 
globe is carried out by the photosynthesizing organisms 
of seas and oceans (mainly unicellular seaweeds). 
CONT'D ON PAGE 15

## [Page 15](062706engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 62707: A Biologist looks at world co-operation in science

Painting by David Pratt repro- 
duced from the book ''Oceans'’, 
produced and © by Geographi- 
cal Productions Ltd., and pub- 
lished by Paul Hamlyn, London 
(50/-) 3 
“Seas. Maps and Men", 
lished 
 U. S. edition entitled 
pub-~ 
by Doubleday ($9.95). 
 
LIFE LINES IN THE SEA 
Present knowledge of large parts of the oceans is still pitifully small. 
Only within the past few decades have we begun to understand some 
of the processes taking place in their depths. The most important of 
these from man's viewpoint, since it affects the food harvests from the 
sea, is the cycle of food chains shown here in coastal and oceanic waters. 
(1) As marine animals die and decompose, their remains sink to the 
  
deeps and are reduced into salts by bacteria. (Creatures shown at the 
bottom are “garbage eaters” only found in the depths of the ocean.) 
Upwelling of deep waters returns the salts to the surface where (2) 
floating masses of microscopic green plants (phytoplankton) turn them 
into food by photosynthesis through the light of the sun. This “grass” 
of the sea is then eaten (3) by the smallest floating animals and these in 
turn become food for “carnivorous” zooplankton (4). The final food 
chain (5) runs from tiny fishes through progressively larger creatures 
to sea mammoths like the sperm whale, Here the cycle begins again.

## [Page 16](062706engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 62707: A Biologist looks at world co-operation in science

16 
SCIENTIFIC CO-OPERATION (Cont'd) 
Exploring the workings of the brain 
But this production is used by man as food almost 
exclusively through industrial fish and other animals, by 
way of complicated and often clrcultous food chains. 
As a result the coefficient of utilization of the photo- 
synthetic production of seas and oceans for food for man 
Is so small as to be almost negligible. This situation is 
made worse by the total absence of attempts to regulate 
the photosynthetic activity of phytoplankton of seas and 
oceans, the lack of serious attempts to reconstruct and 
improve the food chains, and also above all by the pri- 
mitive methods used to bring in the harvest of fish and 
animals, which are both insufficient and often predatory 
In character. 
Finally, it is Important to determine the extent and 
possibilities of regulating and utilizing the photosynthetic 
production of oceanic vegetation. This potentially tre- 
mendous source of food and of other valuable material for 
man must no longer remain neglected as it has done in 
the past. 
@ As to plants on the earth's surface, especially culti- 
vated food and fodder plants which In the future, too, 
will constitute the main supplies of food for men, the 
basic factor determining their possible and final produc- 
tion Is solar radiation energy, the principal force of the 
process of photosynthesis. In fact, all agriculture 
constitutes a system of processes the object of which is 
the utilization of solar radiation energy to form organic 
substances with the help of photosynthesis. 
0 vr knowledge concerning the solar radiation 
energy which can be used for photosynthesis 
In various zones of the globe and on the globe as a whole 
Is far from complete and certainly insufficient. 
To change this present unsatisfactory situation calls 
for broad unified efforts In bio-actinometrics over as large 
areas of the globe as possible. 
In the final analysis wide-ranging and well co-ordinated 
studies in photosynthesis and in the optimum use of solar 
radiation energy for this purpose, will open up for man- 
kind unlimited possibilities for the solution, on any scale 
desired, of the most important biological and technical 
problems. Complete, rapid and radical solutions to these 
problems will only come through unified efforts of scien- 
tists within a broad framework of international co-opera- 
tion. 
The exceptional significance of cerebral activity in the 
history of man, in his productive efforts, his cultural life, 
his education and In so many other fields, is drawing more 
and more scientists to study of the workings of the 
human brain. 
No matter how successfully we try to “relieve” the 
human brain by such means as the automation of 
Industrial processes and the use of computing machines, 
no matter how inuch we improve conditions of life, the 
growth of science and technology makes more and greater 
demands on the activity of the human brain. 
In this respect, special recognition is now being given 
to the new fleld of neuropharmacology—or psychophar- 
macology as it is called—which has developed as a result 
of successful studies concerning the functions of separate 
brain centres, their interrelationship, their reaction to 
drugs, as well as of specific metabolic processes in various 
parts of the brain. 
Drugs have been discovered which, by changing the 
metabolism of specific regions of the brain, raise or lower 
the tonus of the cortex, bring about changes in behaviour 
and affect the activity of internal organs. Medicine has 
acquired potent means for the treatment of a number of 
psychic diseases and epilepsy. And there is no doubt that 
if they continue on this path scientists in the near future 
will acquire even more effective means and methods for 
the directional regulation of brain activity. 
H ERE we refer not only to the treatment of brain 
diseases and their prevention in hereditarily 
tainted persons, but also to the re-establishment of the 
complete and efficient working of the brain in persons 
with neurotic tendencies and insomnia and the treatment 
of narcomanlias (alcoholism, caffeinism, ete.). 
Furthermore the development of contemporary science 
and technology stimulates the need to find ways of 
increasing the working efficiency of the brain and of 
boosting intellectual activity. In other words, we must 
find ways of raising the speed of memorizing and the 
extent of memory, of fighting against premature brain 
fatigue and of maintaining a normal tonus of nervous 
activity. 
It is obvious that apart from other general measures 
this will be achieved through action on the metabolism in 
the central nervous system and the ability to regulate it. 
Particularly difficult conditions, usually referred to as 
extreme conditions, are occurring more and more 
frequently during the working activity of man. Here, too, 
methods affecting the nervous system, based on neuro- 
physiological and neuroblochemical studies, should play 
an important role along with general measures to safe- 
guard the normal activity of the brain. 
All these problems are extremely complex; not only are 
those sciences which must work directly for their solution 
challenged but other forces must also be brought to bear 
if we are to reach successful solutions rapidly. Scientists 
of different countries who work in this field must co- 
ordinate efforts in the further study of the mechanisms 
which regulate the activity of the brain and in the search 
for new directional means which would have no side 
effects on the basle nervous processes in the brain of man. 
While scientists of the Soviet Union are ready to share 
the results of their investigations, they are also eager to 
learn what is happening in the Institutions of other 
countries. Thus every encouragement should be given to 
the work of international scientific conferences, congresses 
and symposia for each one Is a step towards international 
scientific co-operation and towards the development of 
friendship and mutual respect among the representatives 
of science from all countries of the world. 
NORAIR MARTIROSOVICH SISSAKIAN is Vice-President of the 
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and Chief of its Biology 
Branch. A leading Soviet biochemist, he has carried out 
research on enzymes in the metabolism of organisms and 
in the cell structure of plants. He is a member of the 
Executive Board of UNESCO.

## [Page 17](062706engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 62708: Stained glass: 400 years in one family

  
cn i \N : i 
© © Paul Almasy, 
eh lh A 
I: the anclent French cathedral city of Relms 
lives a family which can look back over four 
centuries of unbroken dedication to a great artistic 
craft—the design and execution of stained glass windows. 
The history of the Simon family as makers of stained 
glass began in the 16th century when Paul Simon settled 
In Reims and opened a workshop in the shadow of the 
soaring Gothic cathedral. Here he began to work in 
stained glass—an artistic craft that originated in anti- 
quity and gradually spread throughout Europe. 
Paul Simon could hardly have foreseen that his humble 
little workshop would survive him by many centuries and 
that in time it would become one of the most highly es- 
teemed of all places where stained glass is made. In 
founding it, he also created a dynasty of artist craftsmen 
who handed on the tradition from father to son unin- 
terruptedly down the years. 
A few years ago it looked as though the famous 
workshop in Reims would pass Into other hands. The 
head of this oldest established firm of stained glass makers 
in France, Jacques-Paul Simon, was thinking of retiring 
and he hoped his son would succeed him. But Luc Simon, 
a young painter, told his father that he had decided not 
to follow the family tradition. Instead he wished to 
devote himself exclusively to painting. 
x 
A 
~ the oldest-established 
~~ firm of stained glass ma- 
~ kers in France belonging 
~ to the Simon family of 
~ Reims has been handed 
~ down uninterruptedly 
BRCIUREIGTIS CITT, [TN 
~Jacques-Paul Simon, 
who restored the shai- 
tered windows of Reims 
~ Cathedral after the First 
~ World War works with 
his daughter and son-in- 
law on a modern-style 
ari 3 _ stained y 
This was a hard blow for his father. It now seemed 
almost certain that the dynasty would come to an end. 
Then Jacques Paul's daughter, Brigitte, an art student 
In Paris, stepped forward. “Ill try to carry on the work.” 
she told her father. 
Jacques-Paul Simon accepted immediately, and Brigitte 
left the art school in Paris and came to the workshop 
in Relms. She began her apprenticeship with enthusiasm 
and from the energy and talent she displayed, It was soon 
clear that she had the makings of a first-class artist In 
stained glass, one worthy of the famlly name. 
These expectations have since been confirmed and 
today Brigitte Is in complete charge of the workshop. 
Nowadays her father only pays occasional visits to the 
workshop to Inspect ‘with pride and satisfaction the work 
Brigitte is doing. Brigitte shares thls work with her 
husband, Charles Marq, a former student of philosophy 
who, when he married, also declded on a change of career, 
and who has since become a fine stained glass artist. 
Examples of the skill and artistic talent of the members 
of the Simon family who ran the workshop In the 16th, 
17th and 18th centuries are recorded in the family archives 
and preserved In the windows of many French churches. 
However, perhaps the most striking achievements were 
CONT'D ON PAGE 20 
17

## [Page 18](062706engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 62708: Stained glass: 400 years in one family

18 
STAINED GLASS (Cont'd) 
  
CARRYING ON THE 
FAMILY TRADITION Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris 
  
   
 
In the workshops where the 
ancient art of stained glass 
is still maintained today, 
over 1,400 different colour 
tones are used. Above left, 
Jacques-Pau! Simon, who used 
600,000 fragments of shatter- 
ed glass as a basis for restor- 
ing the war-damaged windows 
of Reims Cathedral, examines 
some glass samples. Left, his 
daughter, Brigitte, works on 
a window that will be placed 
in the French church of Vitry- 
le-Frangois. Above, Brigitte 
preparing a project for a

## [Page 19](062706engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 62708: Stained glass: 400 years in one family

  
los 
\ 
He gi hugs 
new window. She has execut- 
ed windows based on designs 
of such well-known artists as. 
Chagall, Joseph Sima, Braque 
Bissiére and Villon. Below, 
the Simon family team in the 
workshop founded by their 
ancestor, Paul, in the 16th 
century. Right, the great 
south Rose Window in Reims 
Cathedral. An entirely new 
window, it was executed after 
the First World War by 
Jacques-Paul Simon, to replace 
a 16th-century window des- 
troyed in a bombardment. 
  

## [Page 20](062706engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 62708: Stained glass: 400 years in one family

20 
  
STAINED GLASS (Cont'd) 
Marc Chagall, at work on 
a series of windows for 
Metz Cathedral, is watched 
by Brigitte Simon and her 
husband, Charles Marq. 
This husband-and-wife team 
executed all the windows 
for the Synagogue in Jeru- 
salem which were also 
designed by Marc Chagall. 
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
Save the old & create the new 
those of Plerre Simon in the 19th century and of Jacques- 
Paul, the present head of the family, in the 20th. 
About 1830, Plerre Simon, who was then responsible for 
the upkeep of the stained glass in Reims Cathedral, 
decided to make records of every panel in these windows. 
He did so on paper applied directly to the panels which 
he had previously coated with a light oil paint—easily 
removable afterwards—in the appropriate tint. He thus 
obtained a complete record of the leads, the outlines of 
the figures and designs in the windows and even the half 
tones. The method also enabled him to work unhindered 
by opacities due to dirt or poor transparency. 
All these records were carefully stored in the family 
archives and later, Plerre’s son, Paul, completed his 
father's work by making a precise colour catalogue of 
every individual piece of glass. 
A few years later all these records were an invaluable 
ald to the Simon family. In 1866 a great storm damaged 
the cathedral, shattering the great Rose Window above 
the central portal and leaving it full of gaping holes. 
From the detalled information collected by his father and 
himself, Paul Simon ‘was able to make a perfect restora- 
tion of the damaged window. 
Half a century later, a similar work of restoration, 
though on a much larger scale, was carried out by Jac- 
ques-Paul Simon, then at the start of his career. The 
First World War was raging and Reims was close to the 
front line. In April 1917 a violent bombardment shattered 
all the windows in the cathedral. When the war ended, 
the French Ministry of Fine Arts asked Jacques-Paul 
Simon if he thought it was possible to restore the windows. 
After a long examination of the records collected by 
his father and grandfather the young man decided to 
accept the task which he knew would be delicate and 
arduous. He assembled a team of six craftsmen and set 
to work. 
About 600,000 fragments of stained glass were collected 
from around the cathedral and ‘within the building itself. 
Each window was slowly and painstakingly rebuilt with 
these fragments and areas of missing glass were replaced 
with new pieces painted in exactly the original tints. 
Altogether these artist-craftsmen reconstructed over 
16,000 square feet of stained glass: eight windows in the 
nave, eight more in the transepts and a further eleven 
in the chancel. The results were greater than had ever 
been hoped, but the work took 20 years to complete. 
During the same operation the team completely restored 
the rose window on the south side of the cathedral. This 
was the only window at Reims which did not date from 
the 13th century. The original 13th-century rose window 
was destroyed in a fire and 'was replaced in the 16th 
century by a craftsman named Nicholas Derodé. Jacques- 
Paul Simon created a completely new rose window based 
on the subject of the earlier work. 
Remarkable new works have come from the Simon 
workshop since Brigitte and her husband have taken over 
its management. Brigitte herself has executed a modern- 
style stained glass window for the baptismal font chapel 
in the cathedral which offers new proof of her talents. 
In the church of St. Remy at Reims, Jacques-Paul Simon 
has executed a rose window in the north transept and 
Charles Marq has been responsible for a flamboyant 
window on the south facade of the same church. 
Working from designs by the famous artist, Marc Cha- 
gall, this husband and wife team executed all the 
windows for the Synagogue in Jerusalem. Today they are 
engaged on a new series of Chagall-designed windows for 
Metz Cathedral.

## [Page 21](062706engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 62709: The Hidden face of the cinema, (pt.5): The Useless barriers

THE HIDDEN FACE OF THE CINEMA (END) 
THE USELESS 
BARRIERS 
by Paul Léglise 
  
     
In this, the fifth and final article condensed from a special world study 
~ describing lesser-known aspects of the cinema industry, Paul Léglise 
BC IELITERL ERT TU TRS GER ICL EI ER EEL EL TR OER GEG ENR EUR CL EU T 
BCL (LLU EREUT REL TERT VL EEL RELL I OTT ETE END ERE TER CDT 
BR CRC REV CITER CENTER OR OTE (T08 {TVT 8 {11) EP of TET LTT EO 
~ now working on a final Shaper LER EEL RGR GER TTC RO CRAT TT Fi 
i ‘The Editors hope. to publish portions of this text in a fulure issue. Ey Sark: ak 
ey en  
HE movement of films across frontiers 
can do much to advance mutual under- 
standing between peoples. Specifically, 
the cinema gives a direct stimulus to trade 
through its industrial, technical and agricultural 
films. A well-proved asset in the field of 
mass communication, it is able to bring home 
to vast audiences, through newsreels, docu- 
mentary and information films of every kind, 
the significance and purpose of national and 
international projects for economic develop- 
ment. And, thanks to scientific, art and 
educational films, it plays an all-the-more 
decisive role in cultural exchanges. 
The whole economy of the cinema, however, 
is dominated by the concept of the film as 
a form of entertainment. Films become 
consumer goods whose profitability depends 
largely on box-office returns in countries 
where they are imported. 
National laws and regulations which affect 
international trade in films seek, in reality, to 
protect home-produced films and at the same 
time to encourage their export. These regu- 
lations, however, are applied indiscrimi- 
nately to all classes of films. Today, efforts 
are being made to change this situation. 
Firstly there is an increasing trend towards 
economic, technical and artistic co-operation 
of the kind mentioned in an earlier article 
in this series on international co-productions. 
Secondly, efforts are being made to place 
cultural, educational and scientific films in a 
special category to free them from obstacles 
that hinder their development and free 
movement across frontiers. 
J usT over half the Income of filin companies In 
the U.S.A. comes from the export carnings of 
their productions. Roughly the same figure can be 
applied to most of the other major film-producing coun- 
tries: 60% in Italy and 50% in the United Kingdom, for 
example. 
These are significant figures and they have an equally 
important counterpart: the export of films leads to a 
corresponding increase in the circulation of foreign films 
within the exporting countries and a resulting decrease 
In the screening of national films on the home market. 
From these facts alone we can recoghize the lmpor- 
tance of the problem and understand the two-fold 
reactions of governments anxious to facilitate world- 
wide export of their countries’ films and to protect these 
films within their own frontiers. Some have cnacted 
laws under which exported films receive financial help 
and others give subsidies to the organizations responsible 
for the distribution of their countries’ films abroad. 
The second kind of official reaction is the traditional 
protectionist kind that can take many forms. Of these 
the most long-standing are customs duties whlch protect 
home markets and contribute to national revenues. 
Through exchange control the State can keep an eye on 
all payments involving foreign currency as well as on 
the transfer of national capital abroad. 
The most common form of control is the import licence 
which must be presented by any importer wishing to 
obtain foreign currency. This licence is not always dell- 
vered automatically, for restrictions can be imposed on 
the importation of certaln articles according to thelr 
nature (films are a case in point) or to their origin. A 
ceiling Is sometimes imposed on the amount of foreign 
currency that can be spent on certain imports. Finally, 
export licences enable a country to retain its cssential 
resources, or to plan and control the flow of its foreign 
trade, encouraging exports towards hard-currency coun- 
tries and placing restrictions on those with soft-currency 
countries. 
Unesco has carried out a systematic survey, country 
by country, of these methods In so far as they apply to 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 22](062706engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 62709: The Hidden face of the cinema, (pt.5): The Useless barriers

22 
CINEMA (Cont'd) 
Dubbed films or sub-titles ? 
educational, scientific, and cultural materials. The result- 
ing report, “Trade Barriers to Knowledge” is of first- 
rate importance for everyone concerned with problems 
of international trade. 
Protectionist action aiso takes the form of quotas. 
One type limits the number of import licences granted 
for foreign films; another requires cinema proprietors 
to show a certain number of nationally produced films 
during a specified period. 
The Import-quota system Is simple to enforce: a sti- 
pulated number of foreign fllms Is authorized for entry 
during a given period. 
The internal-quota system was introduced for the first 
time in the United Kingdom in 1927, and gave a remark- 
able boost to the British film Industry, whose annual 
production rose from 26 films to 128 within two years 
and reached 225 by 1937. The general principle of the 
internal-quota system is the one applied in France 
today: all cinemas must show French films for five weeks 
in every quarter. In the United Kingdom, 30% of the 
feature films shown in a cinema must be British (25% 
in the case of short films). In Italy, 100 days in every 
year are reserved for the screening of nationally-pro- 
duced films chosen by a jury. 
These restrictions on the free movement of films are 
thus justified by the desire of governments to make sure 
that film companies in their own countries are not 
deprived of the substantial revenue offered by the home 
market. But the walls of cinematographic protectionism 
are undermined to a certain extent by bilateral, and 
sometimes even by regional agreements for co-production 
and exchange which are stimulated by the obvious 
advantages to be gained from entering foreign markets. 
Although International action aimed at bringing about 
the free circulation of educational, sclentific, and cultural 
films Is a real possibility, action of this sort becomes a 
much more complicated affair when it concerns the 
kind of commercial films usually shown in ordinary 
cinemas. 
0: of the greatest difficulties is language. An 
imported film must undergo transformation 
before it can be shown to audiences speaking a different 
language. Sub-titles are still the cheapest solution to 
this problem. But generally speaking audiences have been 
found to prefer to hear the dialogue or the commentary 
in their own language without having to read sub-titles 
at the moment when their attention should be focused 
on the picture. Nevertheless the true cinema lover by 
far prefers undubbed films which preserve the original 
voices and sounds of the film without distortion. 
Dubbing, on the other hand, gives a film a greater 
commercial value, but costs far more. A mere translation 
is not enough. The dialogue must come as close as 
possible to the original text so as to avoid major discre- 
pancies between the lip movements seen on the screen 
and the syllables that are actually spoken. 
The complexity of this problem is soon brought home 
to us when we consider the number of languages spoken 
in the world. In India, fllms are dubbed in 13 different 
languages. Recording studios and laboratories carry out 
this work of post-synchronization in many countries. In 
some countries the dubbing of all imported films has 
been made compulsory in order to keep the teams of 
actors and technicians who do this work in full employ- 
ment. 
But what happens in countries in which technical 
facilities are lacking? Conferences held at Bangkok, 
Santiago, Paris, and in Chile were all obliged to go into 
this question. While the problem is less serious In Latin 
America than elsewhere thanks to common linguistic 
links there, it is very much more difficult to resolve in 
Africa or in South-East Asia. It has therefore been 
proposed that regional centres should be established and 
equipped to produce local versions of educational and 
documentary films. 
These regional centres would also house the technical 
equipment needed for making film coples; or, failing this, 
would see that this work was done by existing services 
in different countries of the region on a co-operative 
basis. Lack of technical equipment is, in fact, another 
major barrier to the movement of films. 
Therefore in order to facilitate exchanges of educa- 
tional, scientific, and cultural films within these regions, 
Unesco has been asked to encourage countries with 
developed cinematographic services to place their labo- 
ratories at the disposal of others which have none. 
One new difficulty has appeared in all countries during 
the last few years, as a result of the most recent dev- 
elopment in film technology. This is the wide screen, or 
the “panoramic format.” This has become very popu- 
lar; moreover the use of 70mm film has made it possible 
to project onto very wide screens. The width of the 
LR 
ye 
Lk 
> 
’ 
  
A scene from the 
Argentine film 
“Shunko”, evoking 
problems of primary 
education in the rural 
areas of northern Ar- 
gentina. Chilian di- 
rector-actor, Lautaro 
Murua, is here seen 
as a schoolmaster, 
teaching Angel Greco 
(Shunko - the boy's 
name in Quechua) 
to count. with the 
help of an impro- 
vized abacus. The 
film won first prize 
for the best Spanish- 
speaking film at the 
International Film Fes- 
tival of Mar del Plata, 
Argentina in 1961. 
From the film * Shunko  
rg | 
 

## [Page 23](062706engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 62709: The Hidden face of the cinema, (pt.5): The Useless barriers

projected image is twice, and sometimes even more than 
twite that of its height. 
As a result, the old format now seems quite outdated. 
That is why many cinema proprietors use a wide screen 
at all times, even when they are showing standard-sized 
films which have not been expanded horizontally. In 
such cases, the projected Image is considerably distorted. 
There 1s, in fact, little co-ordination in the development 
of new cinematographic techniques, and there is no 
doubt that the introduction of new sound and picture 
processes, all demanding widely differing filming and 
screening techniques has led to a disquieting situation. 
The image undergoes wide and indiscriminate modifi- 
cations. As a result, the audience often sees on the screen 
something which bears little relationship with what the 
producer of the film wanted them to see: actors are 
shown with their feet or the tops of their heads cut off 
(and sometimes the subtitles are cut off, too); propor- 
tlons are faulty, there is distortion at the sides of the 
picture; as for the so-called sterephonic effect, it often 
turns out to be mere cacophony. 
René Clair has sald: “The cinema is on the decline 
‘when the universal character given to it fifty years ago 
Is threatened by the existence of too many different 
    
      
systems. In these conditions, all progress Is mere illu- 
slon. What Is a landscape without the tops of trees, 
without sky and clouds? What is a palace without Its 
ceilings?” 
Unesco realizes the cultural Importance of this tech- 
nical problem and at the 1958 General Conference, it 
referred to the International Cinema and Television 
Council the Idea of studying the possibility of "an inter- 
national Instrument to secure standardization of prints 
of 35mm. cinematographic film.” 
The principles are virtually identical in the case of 
commercial shorts, The chief obstacle to the free cir- 
culation of such films is the way in which they are dis- 
tributed and screened. They are chiefly used as pro- 
gramme fillers and they are usually obtained very 
cheaply, sometimes even without charge. Their prospects 
are thus closely linked with those of feature fllms and 
their production should be lower, or at any rate, not 
exceed that of feature films. In facet, more are pro- 
duced than can be absorbed by the international market. 
In France, the producer of a feature film is granted 
additional financial help when his film has been awarded 
a special mentlon, provided that a short filin of similar 
CONT'D ON PAGE 32 
rn 
- 
¥ 
- 
R 
b 
   

## [Page 24](062706engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

OPERA 
Drought and resulting famine periodi- 
cally strike the Sertao, the backlands 
of northeastern Brazil, and are fol- 
lowed by a mass exodus from out of 
this parched land. Carrying only a 
few belongings, men, women and chil- 
dren set off down the roads leading 
to Brazil's more prosperous areas. 
© P. Verger 


### 62716: Operation 'Nordeste'; Brazil's bold programme in the hunger campaign

  &s : 
Ah ARP BRT eT PETES v bn 

## [Page 25](062706engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 62716: Operation 'Nordeste'; Brazil's bold programme in the hunger campaign

Brazil's bold programme 
 
in the hunger campaign 
ORDESTE' 
by Josué de Castro 
   
here is more talk of hunger today than 
at any time in the past. Hunger, in fact, 
has become one of the great issues of 
our time. It almost seems as if it had never 
existed before—a calamity that only appeared 
in the 20th century. 
This, of course, is a completely false im- 
pression. Hunger has always existed side 
by side with wealth and abundance. Neither 
hunger nor poverty are new facts in the world 
of today. What is new, as India's Prime 
Minister, Pandit Nehru, has told us, is that the 
hungry peoples have come to realize as never 
before the true facts of their condition and 
are showing a mounting impatience to be 
freed from the yoke of hunger and poverty. 
It is the new awareness of the social and 
economic inequalities in the world now 
shown by these hungry millions—the so- 
called underdeveloped peoples—that has 
brought the problem to the fore—on the radio 
and in the press, in speeches by statesnien 
and on the agendas of world congresses 
and international meetings. 
0: of the chief and persistent causes of 
present-day social tensions Is the world's 
economic disequilibrium and {ts resulting social 
Inequalities. The deep economic gulf which separates 
economically-developed from underdeveloped countries is 
one of the greatest threats to world peace. Growing 
wider all the time it thus causes discord and fear and 
gives rise to political and ideological conflicts. 
Economic inequality is the baslc cause of innumer- 
able other types of inequality which are often 
blamed on racial or climatic factors. It is responsible 
for a life expectancy in most underdeveloped regions 
of 30 years (in India, 27) whereas in countries of Europe 
and North America, life expectancy is 65—or more than 
twice as high. It has a decisive influence on the infan- 
tile mortality rate in the rich and the poor areas of 
the world. In some places this mortality rate rises to 
around 200 per thousand and yet in others it is only 30 
per thousand—seven times lower. 
The United Nations’ “World Social Survey” highlights 
CONTD ON NEXT PAGE  

## [Page 26](062706engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 62716: Operation 'Nordeste'; Brazil's bold programme in the hunger campaign

26 
OPERATION ‘ NORDESTE' (Cont'd) 
A scheme to revitalize 117th of Brazil 
clearly and In great detail the stark contrasts prevailing 
between prosperous and poverty-stricken countries. 
Facts and figures In every fleld from production to 
health, and from education to levels of consumption, 
reveal the precarlous state of the underdeveloped 
regions. 
But the most striking feature, the darkest and 
most constant blot on the economic and soclal 
condition of the underdeveloped regions, is the chronle, 
widespread hunger from which the mass of the people 
suffer—the “vast disinherited masses,” as Tlbor Mende 
has called them, whose only inheritance from generation 
to generation has been their unchanging share of hunger 
and 'wretchedness. 
The very fact that huge concentration camps exist In 
time of peace—whlich Is what the underdeveloped areas 
really are—underlines the sombre realities of our 20th 
7 “ern area of Brazil ia 
(shaded) covers 
i 460,000 square : 
; : country) but the 
23 million who 
5 live there repre- 
sent one-third of 
century as gathered in the statistics of the U.N. Special- 
Ized Agencles—namely, that at least two-thirds of 
mankind live on a inadequate diet or In a state of chronic 
hunger. Out of the 2 1/2 thousand million individuals 
who live on our planet, almost 1,700 million have still 
not succeeded in escaping from the iron grip of hunger. 
Lamennais spoke the truth ‘when he said that hunger 
was both the whip and chains for the slaves of our 
civilization. 
x us present ‘world situation, expressed in the 
precise and unemotional language of stati- 
stics, was revealed to the 10th Conference of the Food and 
Agriculture Organization held in Rome in 1959. It led 
the Conference to approve a resolution, submitted by 
Dr. B. Sen, Director-General of FAO, for the launching of 
a World Freedom from Hunger Campaign, and calling on 
governments of FAO member states and national and 
international bodies concerned with social welfare to take 
part. 
Approval of this FAO resolution is a victory for the 
ideas of a small group of pioneers who for years have 
fought to make the whole world recognize that here was 
a problem basic to mankind's future that must be faced. 
This resolution made it possible to break the silence of 
dominating majorities who had sought to stifle the cry 
of the hungry masses, to conceal the true facts of their 
everyday existence and to avoid even the mere mention 
of hunger. 
Thanks to this resolution, the taboo surrounding hunger 
has been removed and a new era In international policy 
has begun: the struggle against the scourge of hunger is 
no longer a question of benevolent ald designed only to 
make the effects of hunger less intolerable and to prevent 
the explosive revolt of the hungry; it is a struggle which 
goes to the very root of the problem. This new philo- 
sophy of action is based on the premise that hunger Is 
merely the biologlcal expression of the whole complex 
of economic underdevelopment and that, In the final 
analysis, the struggle agalnst hunger is part of the 
struggle agalnst underdevelopment. 
The first meeting In May 1960 of the campaign’s 
advisory committee In Rome, at which the writer had the 
honour of presiding, approved a report in which there 
was the following passage: “The Campaign must attack 
the roots or basic causes of hunger in the world and not 
restrict itself to the adoption of palliatives.” Thus, in 
1960, began the ten-year period of the World Freedom 
From Hunger Campalgn which was subsequently 
broadened by the United Nations resolution establishing 
the Development Decade, one of the basic aims of which 
Is the struggle against huneer, 
I: is an immense task to eliminate a world- 
wide scourge with roots deeply embedded in 
the soil of the soclo-economlic structures prevalling 
throughout most of the globe. With the limited 
resources available to the Unlted Nations, It Is obvious 
that the problem cannot be attacked simultaneously in 
its full range and in every region where it exists. 
It therefore seemed preferable to establish the 
campalign’s precise philosophy of action and to launch a 
limited number of reglonal plans or pilot projects. 
During the 1961 FAO general conference we suggested 
the use of northeastern Brazil as a pllot area for the 
campaign and the reasons we gave led the FAO to accept 
this proposal made by the Brazilian Government. The 
result has been closer co-operation between FAO and 
Brazil almed at ellminating the scourge of hunger from 
northeastern Brazil through a realistic development of 
the region. 
To understand why we considered the Nordeste as 
an appropriate pilot zone for the tampaign against 
hunger and proposed its choice to FAO, one needs to 
take a look at the geo-economic characteristics of the 
region. 
Northeastern Brazil comprises an area of 1,200,000 
square kilometres (460,000 sq. miles, or 14% of the whole 
country) stretching from the State of Bahla to the State 
of Maranhao. The region is neither geographically 
homogeneous nor has it a clearcut geo-economic unity. 
It comprises two typical and complementary reglons: the 
eastern Northeast and the western or central Northeast. 
The eastern Northeast consists of a narrow stretch of 
land near the coast with an average width of 50 miles; 
the soil is dense and fertile and the climate is 
distinguished by regular and abundant rainfalls. Sugar- 
cane monoculture has developed on this strip of land, 
wiping out the forests which once covered it and 
occupying every inch of arable land with terrifying 
thoroughness. 
It is in this area that the sugar industry has been 
established on the basis of monoculture and large estates, 
an industry ‘which, via a feudal land system and slavery, 
CONT'D ON PAGE 29

## [Page 27](062706engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 62716: Operation 'Nordeste'; Brazil's bold programme in the hunger campaign

DROUGHT & 
OVERPOPULATION 
ATE 
Eire dh 's N 
  © 
P.
 
V
e
r
g
e
r
 
Much of northeastern Brazil is an unsmiling land, a spiney wilderness of twited 
dwarf shrubs surrounded by cactuses (left).  Overpopulstion in anothec serio 
problem in this "Polygon of Drought”. Young men on a alway station platform 
(below) are migrating ""Retirantes’ waiting for a train to take them to more fortunate 
regions where they may find jobs. Farming here is always at the mercy of the 
weather. One long-established activity is culuvation of small shrubs (beng harvested, 
above) the fibre of whose stem is dried and turned into sacking, ropes and nets 
  
ntonio Ronek © QO Cruzeiro, Rio de Janeiro 
os¢ Pinto © O Cruzeiro, Rio de Janeiro 
a % } 
. 5 a yy 4 
. a 
  
an 5 
  
 

## [Page 28](062706engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 62716: Operation 'Nordeste'; Brazil's bold programme in the hunger campaign

o
n
 
S
i
 
f 
a
b
r
-
w
 
#
3
 A,
 
a
E
 
"XR
 
A
L
 
b
e
 
W
W
 
7 
d
e
e
m
s
 
—
 
-
v
 
&
 
h
o
 
X
3
4
 
¥ 
k
s
 
jg 
f
a
 L
R
 
rs 
i 
- 
) 
- 
-
 
=
 
- 
- 
A 
- 
- 
- 
- 
v 
. 
" 
_ 
‘ 
Tp 
4 
¢ 
vr
 
- 
a
l
,
 
OF 
~ 
J 
: 
y 
o
S
 
b 
Fy 
) 
. 
r 
2 
a 
N
L
 
- 
* 
a 
1 
v 
ee
. 
9.
 
a
s
 
-
 
  
FAO

## [Page 29](062706engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 62716: Operation 'Nordeste'; Brazil's bold programme in the hunger campaign

AL dy 
OPERATION ‘NORDESTE' (Cont'd) 
A 10-point guide for development 
now forms the basis of the region's economy while at the 
same time completely upsetting the regional economy 
as a whole and preventing any possibility of other types 
of cultivation. 
The other Northeast—the central or western—consists 
of semi-arid land known as the Serfiao. This Is the 
“polygon of drought,” periodically subject to a complete 
absence of rain or to inadequate rainfalls which disor- 
ganize the region's entire economy and thus bring epi- 
demics of hunger during the drought seasons. The 
economy of this sector 1s based on cattle-raising and 
cotton-growing together with food polyculture which, In 
ralny years, makes it possible to provide a well-balanced 
diet. 
HE 23 million people who live in the Northeast 
—one-third of Brazil's total population—have 
a very low standard of living. The average gross per 
capita income in Brazil Is 320 dollars; in the Northeast 
it is only 100 dollars. This is the largest population group 
in Latin America to have such low productivity and so 
small an income. Thus, while Brazil can point to some 
remarkable advances, this northeastern region continues 
to be widely regarded as a problem area, since there 
hunger remalns a pitiless scourge. 
In fact, the Northeast suffers from two types of hunger. 
The sugar-growing region Is plagued by chronic 
hunger caused by a lack or insufficlency of various 
elements in the everyday diet which is based on 
manioc and beans. The affliction of the Sertao 
region is acute hunger, epidemics of hunger provoked 
periodically by periods of drought. 
This dismal picture of the northeastern economy has 
given many people the impression that the Northeast, 
with its complex and unfavourable geo-economic 
situation, can never be reclalmed. Nothing could be 
further from the truth, and more void of scientific reason 
than this hasty and pessimistic Interpretation of the 
Northeast’s economy. The hunger and poverty of the 
   
   
. » ¥ a &. 
Sp RP Tg Cosh : 
 Unesco- E. Aubert de la Rue 
PHOTO LEFT is not the bombardment of some lunar 
landscape but heavy rain falling on soil, loosening and 
lifting it, and thus making it more vulnerable to erosion. 
Northeastern Brazil's real plague is irregularity of 
rainfall rather than a dearth. When the rains come 
they fall in torrents and bring a quick harvest... but 
they also wash away huge quantities of topsoil, leaving 
a parched eroded surface like the one shown above. 
Northeast are not attributable to natural conditions—to 
basically poor physical characteristics—but rather to the 
deformations and errors that accompanied its economic 
exploitation. 
This is proved by the surveys and research in economic 
semlology which have been carried out with scrupulous 
sclentific care. The ills of the Northeast are structural 
ills whose origin les in the colonlal-type exploitation, 
in the monoculture and large estates. Some of the 
original social characteristics of these large land 
holdings which the Portuguese colonists established 
there four centuries ago still survive today. 
Surveys carried out by SUDENE, an organization set 
up specifically to assist the development of the North- 
east by Integrating its economically marginal population 
in the national economic system, leave no room for doubt 
on this point. The great difficulty in the Northeast is 
not, as has so long been claimed, the intermittent pheno- 
menon of drought but the archalc feudal structure of the 
system of agrarian ownership which results in both the 
fajlure to use the region's natural resources and to the 
non-employment of the working capacity of the north- 
eastern population. 
It would be difficult to find any other regions in the 
world so well-suited to a pilot experiment in the struggle 
against hunger as northeastern Brazil. It is a thickly 
populated area, in which different types of hunger are 
rife and the situation therc is socially explosive because 
the population has become aware of the reasons for its 
sufferings. It 1s also suitable because it has poten- 
tialities for recovery and possesses technical organizations 
like SUDENE which are equipped to carry out properly 
planned large-scale projects. To this array of factors 
favouring the experiment we may add the fact that 
several years ago, at our instigation, a plan for the 
struggle against hunger was initiated In this region 
through the World Association for the Campalgn Against 
Hunger (ASCOFAM). 
We the framework of the present experi- 
ment, here, broadly, Is what has already been 
done and what is planned for the years ahead. In Brazil, 
ASCOFAM has concentrated its work on the Northeast, 
dividing its efforts between a broad educational pro- 
gramme as well as the shaping of a practical philosophy 
of action, and the execution of projects designed to 
stimulate the public response vital to any attempt to 
transform the economy of the region. 
Let us examine some of these activities In both sectors. 
ASCOFAM initiated surveys and research on the agrarian 
structure of the Northeast and its eflect on the economic 
and food situation of the region. On the basis of these 
surveys, it even drew up an economic plan for agrarian 
reform in the region, including the total Investments 
this would require. It organized seminars on reglonal 
problems, including one on endemic diseases in rural 
areas and undernourishment. The basic conclusions 
of this seminar which took place in 1958 with the 
participation of outstanding scientists, deserve to be 
widely publicized. They present an analysis of the corre- 
lation between the problem of endemic diseases and the 
problem of hunger In underdeveloped regions with an 
objectivity which makes them valld for any under- 
developed region in the world. 
These are the 10-point conclusions reached at the 
seminar: 
“1. The current socio-economic situation of the North- 
east, resulting from the serious mistakes made over many 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
29

## [Page 30](062706engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 62716: Operation 'Nordeste'; Brazil's bold programme in the hunger campaign

OPERATION * NORDESTE ' (Cont'd) 
Peaceful upheaval 
in the backlands 
years, is primarily responsible for the deficient diet of the 
population and has thereby helped to aggravate the ende- 
mic diseases prevalling there. 
2. The bulk of endemic diseases cannot be eliminated 
without changing the socio-economic structure and diet- 
ary habits. 
3. Ald programmes and public health programmes, 
while essential, do not generally provide results any 
more lasting than long-term social objectives unless 
parallel action is taken to change the soclo-economic 
Infrastructure and the dietary conditions of the people. 
4. The Northeast must be incorporated in the national 
economy and has need of public and private action 
capable of raising the economic level and improving 
the distribution of wealth. 
5. The reglonal phenomenon of drought, although 
serious, cannot In the light of the present level of techno- 
logy and science be clalmed as the main factor in the 
Northeast’s economic stagnation. 
6. The productivity levels for the Northeast must be 
ralsed as a matter of urgency in order to improve health 
standards and overcome the Incidence of regional en- 
demic diseases. 
7. Under-capltallzation and under-employment are 
major obstacles to the rational exploltation of the North- 
east’s wealth and potentlalities and, coupled with the 
bad distribution of agricultural property, are serious 
handicaps to production, acting as a brake on the 
reglon’s agricultural economy. 
8. Sugar-cane monoculture, because of the form It 
takes and despite the wealth It produces, 1s a serious 
negative element in the social and dietary Imbalance 
of the peoples in the Northeast. 
9. Emergency projects and action can only relleve 
specific situations of a temporary or catastrophic kind 
but will not lead to permanent results, 
10. Industry and agriculture In the Northeast should 
not be regarded as conflicting activities but both require 
technical organization and financial assistance to reduce 
production costs, to create and expand markets and to 
ensure that useful individual man-power is fully occupied 
and thus ensure the firm establishment of the north- 
eastern peoples.” 
A: part of Its programme to turn Brazillan and 
world attention to the problem of the North- 
east, ASCOFAM has produced a film entitled “The 
Tragedy of Drought.” This presents an eloquent picture 
of the soclal reality of the semi-arid Northeast and points 
to the possibility of solving this regional problem through 
- the struggle against drought and hunger. 
30 
ASCOFAM's main achlevement, however, has been the 
artificlal enrichment of the region's basic foodstuff— 
manioc flour—by the.addition of proteins and mineral 
salts. Three small pilot factories set up in northeastern 
Brazil turn the flour—the sole source of hydrocarbons 
and calories—into a foodstuff rich in acids, mineral salts 
and certaln vitamins. The process is economical and 
practical and thus helps to combat habitual diet defi- 
ciencies of the region. 
A year-long experiment carried out in the town of 
Surubim, one among the main centres of endemic pella- 
gra, revealed that the general use of this enriched flour 
CORREOS DE CHILE 
8 Chile's commem- : 
. orative stamp, 
depicting mother 
; protectively crad- 
ling her emaciat- 
ed child in her 
arms, symbolizes 
sufferings of mil- 
LCT ERC TE LE Pa 
nm 
i 
] CAMPARA MUNDIAL oONTRAEL AMBRE 
  
GL] tend 
24) ROYAUME ou LAOS 
“Nn 
He Rice Vatvastiig. and 
threshing of the white 
~ grains that are staple 
~ food of half the world’s 
~ people EY TYE 
campaign stamps from 
Laos ‘and Viet- Nam. . 
cn RI I a PE LB   
 
virtually banished this deficiency disease from the region. 
Enrichment of manioc flour has so far been effected 
on the basis of fat-free soya flour and a mixture of salts 
and vitamins but ASCOFAM Is currently studying a still 
more practical and rational process which consists of the 
addition to the usual manioc flour, made from the plant’s 
roots, of a flour made from the actual leaves of the 
manioc which contain some 20% of proteins and 
which have a high content of betacarotine (provita- 
mine A). 
Efforts are now being turned to a total utllization of 
manioc through a project to be carried out in the town 
of Nazareth, a semi-urban, semi-rural community which 
Is typical of the sugar monoculture region. 
In this selected pilot area, technlques, relatively simple 
but capable of greatly increasing the region’s well-being, 
wlll be used to develop production of certain items, mainly 
foodstuffs, to increase and improve basic services In the 
flelds of health and education and to develop avallable 
social capital. 
In short, the Nazareth project consists of ‘mobilizing 
within this experimental area all the unused or inade- 
quately used local production resources, primarily labour, 
land, building materials and a certain physical capital 
such as tools, working animals, etc. 
Once the results of this experiment have been collected 
and collated, they will be passed to other national and 
international groups which are looking for co-operation 
techniques capable of promoting community - develop-

## [Page 31](062706engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 62716: Operation 'Nordeste'; Brazil's bold programme in the hunger campaign

Be IB TEN EC ERC CEE EE I (CL SU ERE CE EUS ET EE FU ALT 
Freedom from Hunget Week, mid-point in the five-year, world-wide 
~ crusade of the U. N. Food and Agriculture Organization to improve 
~ production and distribution of food supplies. Commemorative stamps 
CIC TCG EAC EE LE EUR I LTS (ENC LEC LC LE TC TTL TR ETH 4 
CRC CT CRTC LEER RO CR CO EHC LEU ETO EDRUE CR CIT TPE 
the gravity of the world hunger situation and to enable people 
BC CAUCE ER CRG EN OA GEG EE NERV OR GEN oF: TH EI LIES ETT EE TV I 
~ here and others issued in support of the Campaign can be obtained 
~ from the Unesco Philatelic Service, Place de Fontenoy, Paris (7°). 
a ur 450 TI j Er ro PP Dep Pa ER 0 ge HA i pre ral ft I 
oF 
~ 
E
E
R
E
 
a
 
=
 
- ~ Special French stamp incorporates, - 
do most other issues, heads of wheat, 
symbolizing FAO's concern with raising 
~ nutritional andards t vorld, 
YT ut lt Np ll OO 
  
  
Stamp above depicting a child, 
eagerly drinking his milk, has 
been issued by Argentina. The 
i drawing was inspired by photo 
~— (right) taken by Paul Almasy 
and published on the back 
cover of the special Freedom 
from Hunger (July-August 
- 1962) issue of The Unesco 
Courier. Argentina has litho- 
  
POUR UN MONDE AFFRANCHI DE LA FAM 
- 
<< 
= 
= 
a 
3 
oe 
oo 
= 
a 
ul 
a 
‘Mali’s efforts to raise food production 
~ through improved farming methods 
17) recalled in design of this stamp. 
NA
 
MU
ND
IA
L 
CO
NT
RA
 
EL
 
HA
MB
RE
 
~ Nutritional needs of children are also 
~ emphasized in this stamp from Finland. 
It bears Campaign slogan in Finnish and 
~ Swedish, Finland’s official languages. 
er See 
ment In other areas afflicted by similar problems. 
In addition, FAO, in co-operation with Unicer (the 
United Nations Children’s Fund) is carrying out a pro- 
gramme of dietary education in the Northeast. This 
aims to introduce Improved dietary habits and to encour- 
age the production, preservation and better use of 
foodstuffs possessing a high nutritive value. Several 
other projects are now being examined by the World 
Food Programme which might contribute, as a form of 
investment capital, some of the food for workers engaged 
in these development projects. 
SUDENE has now laid down as one of its objectives the 
improvement of food resources in the region, thus contri- 
buting to the direct struggle against hunger and under- 
nourishment. SUDENE’S activity includes the following 
projects: redistribution of the population so as to make 
better use of surplus manpower in certain areas, encour- 
agement of stock-breeding by increasing the quantity of 
fodder plants adapted to the ecological conditions of the 
region, a programme of agricultural expansion and im- 
provement of production by gradual changeover to new 
products. 
In co-operation with the programmes of the Alliance 
for Progress and other international bodies, SUDENE 
co-ordinates many activities designed to combat 
hunger i11 the region. 
FAO has already sent a technical commission to the 
Northeast to survey this experiment. Many of the reso- 
graphed over two million. 
     
lutions adopted by the last FAO regional conference for 
Latin America, In Rilo de Janeiro, related to problems of 
agricultural structure, and the Brazilian Government has 
taken account of these In Its recovery plan for the cco- 
nomic and food resources in the Northeast. 
Northeastern Brazil is today being watched by the world 
whose Interest has been drawn to this geographical area 
by the obvious complexity of its problems, the surprising 
vitality of its people and the soclal tensions which 
threaten it internally. It may render the world an Ines- 
timable service since it is the scene of a peaceful revo- 
lution In which the application of science, technology and 
planning will make it possible to uproot the scourge of 
hunger, the most characteristic feature of economic and 
soclal underdevelopment. 
  
JOSUE DE CASTRO, the distinguished Brazilian nutri- 
tionist, is President of the Association for the World 
Campaign Against Hunger, and a former President of the 
Council of the UN. Food and Agriculture Organization. 
He is the author of many works on ‘the problems of food 
production and nutrition, of which the best known is 
“The Geography of Hunger.” He is now chief of the 
Brazilian permanent delegation to the international 
organizations in Geneva with the rank of ambassador. 
31

## [Page 32](062706engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 62709: The Hidden face of the cinema, (pt.5): The Useless barriers

32 
CINEMA (Cont'd from page 23) 
Top priority freedom 
category is always shown on the same programme during 
the first three years of the feature film's life. This bolls 
down to saying that only those short films which have 
received an award stand a chance of being chosen to 
accompany a French feature film. In Italy and in Argen- 
tina, short films in the top category have a certain num- 
ber of days set aside every year for them alone. In 
Italy, the minimum number of days is 180. 
In Argentina, category “A” films which are not taken 
up by any cinema proprietor within one month are allo- 
cated by lot to certain cinemas which are obliged to 
show them. The aim is to keep down the number of 
home-produced films to reasonable proportions, thus 
ensuring an improvement in their quality. 
What are the general characteristics of international 
trade in newsreels? Most of such trade is subject-matter 
(l.e. sequences dealing with a particular event or subject 
included in a newsreel). There is rarely a market for a 
complete newsreel, for not all the items even in a speclal 
national edition would appeal to local tastes. Most news- 
reel irms have trade agreements by subject with their 
colleagues In other countries. 
Unesco keeps a watchful eye on all problems to do 
with educational, scientific, and cultural films. When all 
the immense and varied difficulties that must be overcome 
before international agreements applicable all over the 
world can be reached are taken into account, there are 
indeed grounds for satisfaction with results achieved. 
In 1961, when It received the report on International 
relations and exchanges in the flelds of education. science. 
and culture prepared for the UN. Economic and Social 
Council, Unesco’s Executive Board pointed out that these 
international contacts, apart from their general alm of 
developing peaceful relationships between natlons, had 
two no less important objectives: 
1. The organization between nations of exchanges of 
persons, information, knowledge, ideas and equipment; 
and 
2. To enable the more fortunate and better equipped 
nations to aid the less privileged ones. 
This general aim and this double objective are an 
intrinsic part of UNEsco’s action in the field of educational, 
scientific, and cultural films. Permanent contacts have 
also now been established between UNEsco and interna- 
tional organizations concerned with the cinema, thanks 
to the creation of the International Film and Television 
Council. 
Uso has already achieved some impressive 
results in the field of international agreements 
for the circulation of objects of educational, scientific, or 
cultural interest. Films benefit from the many facilities 
which have been obtained in this way. 
Unesco has adopted an international instrument, known 
as the Florence Agreement, which facilitates the free 
circulation of books, publications and educational, scien- 
tific and cultural materials. 
Films which meet these conditions are covered by the 
agreement, which provides for exemption from customs 
duties and from certain import dues; it also makes provi- 
sion, as far as possible, for the granting of foreign 
exchange and import licences. 
Certain limitations, however, are imposed on the scope 
of the convention where fllms are concerned. Films must 
be imported only by organizations approved by the com- 
petent authorities of the Importing country for the 
purpose of duty free admission of such material and may 
only be exhibited by the approved organizations; in 
practice, this means that the films in question can be 
used only for non-commercial purposes. 
The other important international agreement adopted 
by Unesco, the Beirut Agreement, facilitates the Inter- 
national circulation of visual and auditory material of 
an educational, scientific and cultural character. This 
instrument differs from the preceding one in that 1) it 
for films 
applies only to visual and auditory materials, 2) it grants 
exemption not only from customs duties but from 
quantitive restrictions on imports and the need to apply 
for import licences, and 3) in general, it does much to 
reduce difficulties arising from the international circula- 
tion of educational, scientific, and cultural films, even 
when these are shown commercially. 
Three drafts which were drawn up by the Customs 
Co-operation Council in conjunction with UNEsco were 
adopted by this Council in 1961. These new provisions 
supplement the measures already adopted concerning 
temporary importation. Temporary importation is an 
arrangement by which states allow educational, cultural, 
and scientific films to enter a country and suspend the 
application of customs duties for a limited period. 
We are these new agreements? First of all, 
there is one which makes use of international 
carnets to exempt importers from a large number of 
formalities to which they were previously subject. Second- 
ly, all professional and cinematographic equipment needed 
for film-making In a foreign country has been brought 
within the scope of temporary importation regulations. 
The third agreement concerns the temporary importation 
of material for international exhibitions. 
International trade is controlled by agreements of a 
worldwide, regional, or bilateral nature. There are other 
agreements which deal specifically with cultural 
exchanges. Rather than describe these in detail, or make 
an analysis of their application to the international cine- 
matographic trade, let us simply take a brief look at the 
general way in which they work. : 
The General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (G.A.T.T.), 
which came into operation in 1948, has turned out to be 
one of the most decisive steps in freeing international 
trade from hampering restrictions. 
Through it, the quota system has been considerably 
reduced in many countries, and many categories of 
articles, particularly those of an educational, scientific, 
or cultural nature, have been freed from various forms 
of control. For example, during a conference held at 
Geneva in 1956, Unesco asked that tariff reductions 
should be granted on a series of articles and many 
countries agreed, and on films in particular. 
There are also regional agreements affecting film 
exchanges. The European Economic Community, better 
known as the Common Market, was established by the 
Treaty of Rome. This treaty Is concerned particularly 
with the economic aspects of European trade, and for its 
purposes films are treated as trade commodities. 
In our fleld, therefore, the aim of the treaty is the 
integration of the film industry on Common Market lines, 
the implication being that national help and fiscal charges 
will be brought info line and trade made easier. 
In other parts of the world, there are regional 
agreements which make a slmilar attempt to create 
economic communities or to establish the foundations 
of cultural co-operation. One example, is the Council for 
Mutual Economic Aid which brings together countries 
having a socialist economy, although fllms do not seem 
to play an important role here. Amongst regional agree- 
ments with a more pronounced cultural nature, is the 
convention signed by the members of the Organization 
of American States with a view to encouraging inter- 
American cultural relationships, and also the activities 
of the Cultural Committee of the Nordic Council (Nordisk 
Kulturkommission). 
This brief survey of the different agreements covering 
cinematographic exchanges highlights the Importance of 
the problems involved and the extent of the interest 
shown In them by national authorities as well as by 
regional and international bodies. 
Films, as consumer goods, follow the general trends 
of trade liberalization. But as intellectual and culture 
products, they deserve an even more rapid liberation on 
a world-wide scale—a top-priority freedom.

## [Page 33](062706engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

PROS AND CONS OF ESPERANTO 
Ed. note: We have received a volu- 
minous correspondence following the 
publication of Robert H. J. van Kuyk’s 
letter on the drawbacks of Esperanto 
(March issue). Space permits us to 
publish only excerpts from a few: 
Sir, 
Mr. van Kuyk's conception of the 
role of Esperanto is much too limited, 
and it is not clear whether he thinks 
we must learn all the great languages 
(virtually an impossibility) or only one 
or another of them (which would still 
leave vast numbers of people without 
a common language.) It would be 
unwise to give much weight to opi- 
nions expressed by one who reasons 
that because Esperanto removes the 
need to learn other languages, there- 
fore it prevents one learning them! 
C.M. Cather 
Torquay, England 
Sir, 
Offering an excuse for Mr. van Kuyk 
I would say that he has never had the 
occasion to work in the field of expe- 
rience available daily to a teacher. 
He was lucky enough to be born in 
the Netherlands—it is a well-known 
fact that the Dutch people are tradi- 
tionally more or less polyglot—and 
he is also blessed with rather rare 
and special natural gifts—qualities 
with which he seems to believe his 
fellows are equally well endowed. 
If he was in daily contact, as we 
teachers are, with hundreds of chil- 
dren and adolescents he would soon 
realize what an effort the average 
pupil has to make even to be able, 
at the moment of his “Baccalaureat”, 
to stammer out a few phrases of a 
language learned during seven years 
in a secondary school... If he had 
this experience he would not say with 
such assurance “it is far better to 
learn languages like English, Russian 
and Chinese...” And what about the 
millions of adults in the world who 
have never set foot inside a secondary 
school? 
P. Dennis 
Bar-le-Duc, France 
Sir, 
Mr. van Kuyk's objections have 
long been refuted. 1 need only quote 
the famous Danish linguist Otto Jes- 
persen who—as early as 1928—wrote: 
“An objection which is often raised 
against constructed languages is that 
they can never be as good as natural 
languages. It is true that our Inter- 
language is not as rich as English, 
not as elegant as French, not as vigo- 
rous as German, not as beautiful as 
Italian, not as full of nuances as Rus- 
sian, not as ‘homelike’ as our mother- 
tongue. But note this well, that all 
these good qualities, which one appre- 
ciates and praises in the national lan- 
guages, are found only when they are 
spoken or written by natives. And 
the Interlanguage may very easily be 
Letters to the Editor 
richer than the English spoken by a 
Frenchman, more elegant than French 
as spoken by a Dane, more vigorous 
than the German of some Italians, 
more beautiful than the Italian of the 
English, more full of nuances than the 
Russian of the Germans, and more 
homelike than my own tongue spoken 
by Russians. And as our language is 
an auxiliary language, it can only be 
compared fairly with natural langua- 
ges as usually spoken by forcigners.” 
—An International Language, London, 
Allen and Unwin. 
Dr. S.M. Auerbach 
London, England 
Sir, 
Esperanto is drawn from the same 
roots as the world's living languages 
and is an outgrowth of them. Nothing 
could be more false than to describe 
it as an “artificial” language. It is 
in fact a living link between other 
languages. Congresses of young 
Esperantists coming from many coun- 
tries are an undeniable proof of this. 
René Llech-Walter 
Perpignan, France 
Sir, 
How can such people as a farm 
worker in the Massif Central {or Lower 
Saxony) a postman in the Pyrenees (or 
Croatia), a housewife in Britanny (or 
one in Sicily or Norway) learn lan- 
guages “like English, Russian, Chi- 
nese, Arabic”"—even supposing they 
wanted to? 
F. Lenz 
Paris, France 
Sir, 
I support Mr. R.H.J. van Kuyk. 
Learning a real language is an excit- 
ing adventure into another culture; one 
learns of the climate, scenery, history, 
arts, institutions, philosophies, reli- 
gions, and daily problems and customs 
of the people. Surely, these are the 
very things we want to understand! 
If I may exaggerate a little, Esperanto 
is rather like a catalogue compared 
with real languages. It is better to 
learn mere smatterings of several than 
to waste time on it. Arriving in a 
foreign country for work or for plea- 
sure, how much more enjoyable and 
more friendly to try to share a little 
in the normal social life and culture 
than to confine oneself to Esperanto! 
Most languages seem to have some 
unnecessary difficulties which are only 
perpetuated by the tireless and misguid- 
ed efforts of teachers. They seem to 
serve only as a barrier, showing up 
the so-called “well-educated” from 
others who may, in fact, be better 
educated in more worth-while aspects 
of language and life. Dropping this 
pedantry, perhaps in twenty years 
three-quarters of school-leavers could 
have some knowledge of about five 
other languages, about one-quarter 
speaking them fairly fluently, with 
many skilled linguists becoming avail- 
able for exacting work. 
B.M. Johns 
Cambridge, England 
CO-AUTHORSHIP IN FILMS 
 
Sir, 
My article describing the machin- 
ery for distributing films in the world 
(The Hidden Face of the Cinema Pt.2 
- January 1963 issue) included a brief 
explanation of how copyright is 
applied to films. From this simpli- 
fied definition readers may have gain- 
ed the impression that this was a uni- 
versally accepted idea synthesizing 
various current practices in the world 
today. However, on the question of 
“authorship” the long-standing dis- 
agreement, which I briefly evoked, bet- 
ween the notion of the producer as 
an “author” of a film and as an 
“intellectual creator” is still not settled 
today and still involves multiple shades 
of meaning. The correct balance 
between these two conceptions seeins 
to have been adopted in a French law 
of 1947 which considers a producer 
as co-author of the film only when 
he can be said to have made an intel- 
lectually creative contribution towards 
it. But the problem is 100 complex 
to be explained in the few lines 1 was 
able to devote to it and which simply 
touched on the subject. The ideal 
international solution has not yet come 
forth. Let us hope that one will 
soon be produced. 
Paul Léglise 
Paris, France 
RUDOLF STEINER'S 
NATIONALITY 
 
  
Sir, 
In your February 1963 issue you 
refer to Rudolf Steiner as “the Ger- 
man philosopher and educator™. Stei- 
ner was, in fact, born at Kraljevic, on 
the Austro-Hungarian frontier, on 
February 27, 1861. The tremendous 
scope of the work he accomplished 
in so many ficlds during his short life 
is presented in *“‘Rudolf Steiner”, a 
booklet published for his centenary 
exhibition in 1961 and edited by the 
Goctheanum, in Dornach, Switzerland, 
Marguerite Bourdier 
Rome, Italy 
Ed. note: OQur reader is correct. 
Rudolf Steiner was, in fact, Austrian. 
GREAT ILLS IGNORED 
 
Sir, 
My only complaint regarding your 
magazine is that you give too much 
space to information on the Arab 
countries and tend to neglect such 
great ills of our time as alcoholism, 
prostitution and juvenile delinquency. 
I would suggest that you visit the in- 
stitution at Lannemezan in the Hautes- 
Pyrénées department. You will find 
enough material there to fill a very 
interesting issue. 
E. Haro 
Pau, France 
33

## [Page 34](062706engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
From the Unesco News 
JPOWER LINE AIR SPIES: Airborne 
inspection of Sweden's 20,000 miles 
of overhead power lines has reduced costs 
by 50% compared with conventional 
ground patrol inspection. Flying at tree- 
top height in helicopters or light planes, 
the inspectors dictate their observations to 
portable tape-recorders. 
Jor AFRICA’S NEW TEACHERS: 
Nearly 300 fellowships providing train- 
ing for teaching staff in African universities 
will be granted under UNEsco’s 1963-64 
fellowhip programme. They will be avail- 
able in 22 Unesco Member States, offering 
theoretical and practical study at the uni- 
versity level in science, social science, the 
humanities and mass communications. 
M\ IDDLE EAST QUESTS: The search 
for the early origins of civilization 
will this year take archzologists from the 
Oriental Institute of the University of 
Chicago to four ancient sites in the Near 
and Middle East. They will be investi- 
gating how man the hunter lived in cen- 
tral and southern Turkey 11,000 years ago 
and how Christianity moved from Pales- 
tine to Mesopotamia in the 6th century. 
Two other sites to be studied are an 
ancient town in Iran, Jundi Shapur, and 
Khirbat al Kerak in Israel, where remains 
dating from the third millenium B.C. have 
been found beneath a Sth century A.D. 
Byzantine church. 
CASTLE ART TROVE: Fifty lost paint- 
ings including masterpieces by Tinto- 
retto, Rubens and Veronese have been 
found in a dusty attic of Prague Castle. 
They are part of the collection of Rudolf 
II, which was dispersed in the 17th and 
18th centuries. The works remaining in 
Prague were hitherto assumed to be only 
minor ones. 
NP ESERT LABORATORY: Scientists 
from the University of California are 
using a stretch of desert 15 miles square 
as a research laboratory to study the 
evolution of plants and animals in arid 
regions. In this “living laboratory”, with 
no buildings or complicated scientific equip- 
ment, scientists are seeking the answers to 
such questions as how desert animals live 
and adapt themselves to the conditions of 
heat and drought. 
IBRARY SERVING THE BLIND: 
Delhi Public Library, established by 
Unesco and the Indian Government as a 
model for South Asia in 1951, has now 
opened a Braille section for blind readers. 
Another activity it has greatly developed 
is the publication of booklets for new liter- 
ates. Stocks of the first 36 titles of these 
booklets ‘were soon sold out. 
AST-WEST MIMES ON FILM: A 
documentary film, “The Language of 
Movement-Mimes of East and West”, made 
by UNEsco as part of its East-West major 
project to encourage mutual appreciation 
    
  
of cultural values, is available to TV sta- 
tions all over the world. Mimes and 
dances from eight countries—Italy, France, 
Turkey, India, Japan, Poland, USA, Nether- 
lands—offer a convincing display of the 
universality of this art. 
Pacr AGAINST DISCRIMINATION: 
The Convention designed to combat 
discrimination in education—adopted in 
1960 by the Unesco General Conference— 
has now been ratified by Kuwait, New 
Zealand and Czechoslovakia. This brings 
to 15 the number of countries that have 
ratified the Convention which entered into 
force in May 1962. 
& OLAR BATTERY POWER: A silicon 
solar battery designed by a Soviet 
scientist at the Uzbekistan Institute of Phy- 
sical Technology has developed a power 
of 150 watts although it has a surface of 
only four square feet. This remarkable 
achievement in solar engineering has been. 
obtained by increasing ten-fold the con- 
centration of the sun’s rays falling on the 
battery surface through mirror focusing. 
This solar power station powers a pump 
which in one hour can raise over 1,300 
gallons of water to a height of 20 feet. 
NEw FARMING FOR NIGERIA: Today 
nearly 60,000 young men are being 
trained in modern farming methods under 
a scheme launched by the Government of 
West Nigeria in co-operation with the U.N. 
Food and Agriculture Organization. Farm 
institutes and settlements are being created 
where newly-trained young men become 
tenants of a “farm unit” growing such 
crops as cassava, yams, sorghum, maize, 
peas, beans, cocoa, rubber, oil palm and 
coconuts. Each settlement or village 
consists of about 200 families and is orga- 
nized on a co-operative basis. 
UR UNCHARTED PLANET: Sixty 
scientists from forty countries—the 
Commission for the Geological Map of the 
World—who met in UNEsco House recently 
approved plans to go ahead ‘with the prepa- 
ration of a world geological atlas which 
is to be published with UnEsco’s aid. 
Their meeting was a reminder that while 
we are looking into outer space, we still 
do not possess a unified map of the 
world's sub-soil. 
ACATIONS ABROAD: Hundreds of 
choices for unusual holidays offered 
by over 1,000 organizations and institutions 
in 81 countries are listed in the 15th edition 
of UNESCO's “Vacations Abroad” (*). 
They range from opportunities to learn a 
new language (open to almost everyone) 
to conducting orchestras, for which a 
conservatory education is required. 
* Vacations Abroad XV, 1963, Unesco, Place 
de Fonienay, Paris (7°). Price : 6/ - (stg), $1.75; 
4.5 . 
EAPPEARING AMERICANS: The 
Indian population in the United States 
reached its lowest point at the end of the 
19th century but since then has made a 
steady comeback. During the past 30 
years it has increased about sixty per cent 
to well over half a million. 
400 MILLION RADIOS: Nearly 70 
per cent of the world's people, 
most of them in Africa, Asia and Latin 
America, lack receivers to pick up even 
local radio broadcasts. Over 400 million 
additional sets, according to a UNEsco 
estimate, would be needed to provide a 
receiver for each family in these regions. 
To meet this need the International Tele- 
communication Union and UNEsco have 
jointly studied the designing of transistor- 
ized receivers which could be mass produc- 
ed for the developing countries for as little 
as $5.00. 
& TOCKTAKING AT SEA: Two French 
trawlers equipped as floating laborato- 
ries will set out this year on a fishing expe- 
dition to take stock of the marine resour- 
ces of the Gulf of Guinea as potential 
food supplies for Africa. Carrying inter- 
national teams of scientists, they will co- 
ver 5,600 miles over the African conti- 
nental shelf during two cruises this year 
and next. In addition to taking meteoro- 
logical and hydrological observations, the 
ships will sweep the sea bottom at inter- 
vals of thirty or forty miles to take a 
census of its population. 
USIC IN EDUCATION: Music- 
ogists, musicians, composers and 
music educators from all over the world 
will be meeting in Tokyo in July to discuss 
contemporary trends and developments in 
music and music education in both Orient 
and Occident. They will be attending the 
Fifth International Congress on Music 
Education. 
Flashes... 
  
MM Mexico has launched an eleven-year 
plan to expand education at all levels and 
is now devoting 22% of the federal budget 
to education. 
‘Ml Fatal road accidents are on the increase 
all over the world with the exception of 
the United States where the trend has been 
reversed, reports the World Health Orga- 
nization. 
MW Unesco Coupons—an international me- 
dium of exchange, enabling, “soft” cur- 
rency countries to buy educational, scientific 
and cultural equipment in “hard” currency 
areas—have now made possible $50 million 
worth of transactions. 
‘WM The worlds population increase has 
brought the proportion of the “under- 
twenties” to over 50% in some countries. 
The total of young people in school in- 
creased 62% from 257 million to 417 
million between 1950 and 1960. 
Wl Meteorological information from around 
the world is now supplied by 8,000 fixed 
weather stations as well as by 3,000 mer- 
chant ships and 3,000 aircraft. Weather 
satellites now supplement this network. Im
p.
 
GE
OR
GE
S 
LA
NG
, 
PA
RI
S.
 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.

## [Page 35](062706engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
CATALOGUE OF COLOUR 
REPRODUCTIONS OF PAINTINGS 
1860-1961 (Revised and enlarged edition ) 
An up-to-date listing of colour reproductions 
of world-famous paintings compiled from 
the Unesco collection of reproductions sel- 
ected by internationally-known art experts. 
The highest standards guide their choice: 
fidelity of reproduction, the significance of 
the artist and the importance of the original 
painting. Only the most worthy paintings 
are chosen for Unesco's catalogue, which 
contains descriptions and illustrations of 
1,347 reproductions available in full-colours 
prints. 485 pages. 
Price ; 28/6; $6.00; 20 F. 
CATALOGUE OF COLOUR REPRODUCTIONS 
OF PAINTINGS PRIOR TO 1860 
Revised and enlarged edition 
 
— lists nearly 900 recommended colour reproductions 
— gives more examples from Asia, Africa, Australia and Central 
European countries. 
Offers detailed information 
 
— A beautifully presented volume of 323 pages. Each painting 
is reproduced in black 
and white accompanied 
by full details of the ori- 
ginal, name of publisher 
and price of colour re- 
production. 
Price : 30/- (stg) ; 
$6.00; 21 F. 
“ In the Federal Republic of 
Germany, Switzerland and 
Austria, a special Unesco-0l- 
denbourg Verlag edition (with 
German text) also available.  
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below: names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; rates quoted are 
for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO COU. 
RIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA, 
Melbourne University Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, 
Melbourne, C. I, Victoria. (A, 15/-). — AUSTRIA, 
Yerlag Georg Fromme & C*., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 60.-). — BELGIUM. Editions '" Labor ", 
342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-Boek- 
handel, Belgiélei 1S1. Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (100 FB) and art slides only: Louis de Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. CCP 3380.00. — 
BURMA, Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoon. (K. $5.50). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont. ($ 3.00). — CEYLON. The Associated 
Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd.,, Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Colombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
— CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CUBA. 
Libreria Econémica, Pte Zayas 505-7, Apartado 113, 
Havana. (2.25 pesos). — CZECHOSLOVAKIA, Arta 
Ltd., 30 Ye Smeckich, Prague 2. — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, A/S Tidsskrifcafdelingen, Prags Boulevard 47 
Copenhagen 5 (D.kr. 12). — ETHIOPIA. International 
Press Agency. P.O. Box 120. Addis Ababa. — FINLAND, 
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
(Fmk., 540). — FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, Place 
de Fontenoy, Paris-7*, C,C.P. 12598-48. (7 F.). 
— GERMANY. R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosens- 
heimer strasse 145, Munich. For the Unesco Kurier 
(German ed. only) Bahren-felder-Chaussee 160, 
Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650(DM 8). — GHANA 
Methodist Book Depot Ltd. Atlantis House, Commercial 
St, POB 100, Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See 
United Kingdom. — GREECE. librairie H. Kaufimann, 
28, rue du Stade, Athens. = HONG-KONG. Swindon 
Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. 
Kultura, P.O, Box 149. Budapest, 62. — INDIA, Orient 
Longmans Ltd. Indian Mercantila Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; Gun- 
foundry Road, Hyderabad, 1; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, Naw 
Delhi, 1: Sub-Depot: Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16, Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Indian National Commission for Co-operation with 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, New Dethi 3. (Rs. 7). — 
INDONESIA, PP. N. Fadjar Bhakti, Djalan 
Nusantara 22, Djakarta. — |RAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. — IRELAND, The National Press, 
2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (10/-). — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein’s Bookstores Ltd, 3S, Allenby 
Road and 48, Nahlatc Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv(1£ 5.50). 
— JAMAICA, Sangster's Book Room, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston. Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
(10/3). — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd, é Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
(Yen 670). — JORDAN, Joseph L. Bahous & Co. 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Amman. — 
KENYA. E.S.A. Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — LIBERIA. Cole 
and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg. — MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE. Federal Publications Ltd., Times House, 
River Valley Rd., Singapore (M. $ 500) — MALTA. 
Sapienza‘'s Library 26 Kingsway, Valetta. (10/-). — 
MAURITIUS. Nalanda Cempany Lltd., 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port-Louis. — MONACO. British Library, 30 Bld 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF.). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague, 
(A. 6). — NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. G. C. T. 
Yan Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.Y. Willemstad, Curacao 
— NEW ZEALAND Government Printing Office 
Wellington, and Government Bookshops, Auckland, 
Wellington, Christchurch, Dunedin (10/-). — NIGERIA. 
C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 174, Lagos. (10/-). — NOR. 
WAY. AS. Bokhjornet, Lilla Grense. 7, Oilo 
For the Unesco Courier only: AS. Narveiens Litteratur 
Tienesta, Stortingsgt. 4, Oslo, Postboks 115 (kr 13.20 
—_ PAKISTAN. The Waeit-Psk Publishing Cor 
Ltd., Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 174, 56-N 
Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahora, — PANAMA, 
Cultural Panamena, Avenida 7a, No. TI1-49, Apartado 
de Correos 1018, Panama, D.F. (Balboas 3-). — PHI. 
LIPPINES. The Modern Book Co., 508 Rizal Avenue 
Manila. — POLAND.  RUCH *' ul. Wilozs Nr. 46, 
Warsaw 10 (ZI. 50), — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrada 
Lda, Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — 
PUERTO RICO. Spanish English Publications Apartado 
1912, Hato Rey. — RHODESIA & NYASALAND. The 
Book Centre, First Street, Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia. 
— SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop,P.O,Box 1118, Khart- 
oum.— SWEDEN. A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbok- 
handel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. — For The Uneico 
Courier: Sventka Unescoridet, Vatagatan 15-17, Stock. 
holm, C (Kr. 7.50); SWITZERLAND, Europa Verlsg, 
5 Rimistrasse Zurich. Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva. 
C.C.P. 1-236. ** Courier " only: Georges Losmaz, 1, rue 
des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P, 1.4811, (Fr. S. 8). 
— TANGANYIKA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookihop, P.O.B. 
9030, Dar-es-Salaam, — THAILAND. Suksapan 
Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. (35 
ticals), — TURKEY. Librairia Hachette, 469 Istikial 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala. — UNION OF 
SOUTH AFRICA. Van Schaik's Boolatore, Libri 
Building, Church Street, Pretoria. For tha Unesco Cou- 
rier (single copies) only: Central News Agency, P.O. 
Box 1033, Johannesburg. (10/-). — UNITED ARAB 
REPUBLIC (EGYPT). La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh, 
Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. 
Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.I. (10/.). — 
UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 
801 Third Avenue, New York, 22, N.Y, ($ 5.00) 
and (except periodicals): Columbia University Press, 
2960 Broadway, New York, 27 N.Y. — U.5.5.R. Mez- 
hdunarodnaja Kniga, Moscow. G-200.— YUGOSLAVIA, 
Yugoslovenska Knjiga, Terazija 27/11, Belgrada.

## [Page 36](062706engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

| = , The makers of stained glass in Europe achieved their reatest master- 
rel} TAINED GLAS ARTISTS pieces in the 12th, 13th and 16th centuries. In LUCE CLIT TTA 
Ky “ Bo RN id fe 8% young French stained-glass craftsman opened a workshop in the shadow 
. og or Mea : : ‘of the great Gothic cathedral at Reims. Since LU CLUR UCR EUR ECC LY EE 
(0) WE 0))) .\ i ‘been handed down uninterruptedly from father to son. Now, for the first 
    
     
   
 
   
 
       
  
time, it has passed to a daughter (shown here working on a window) who 
he renown won by her ancestors. (Story page 17) 
ll re we AR a J! r 3 © y 
- > 3 . ¥ na 
      is adding new lustre 
Oy re we 
 