# [084191](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

       
 
12 
- = 
a a - 
EY 
a i  —-— a 
pe Vil ES fh - SIA] - 
Pik mys in 
SR Cg Ed 
re ne + vl nN 1 ” 
oo 
© Ménilmontant 
1985, painting (1m x 0.50m) 
by Annette Ghéan-Bisciglia 
© "I have always dreamed of 
the Tropics but have never 
been able to go there,” 
writes the French painter 
Annette Ghéan-Bisciglia. 
"But now the Tropics have 
come to Paris.” The 
painting shown here was 
inspired by the immigrant 
presence in Paris. 
B I 
 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Today there are no more 
unexplored continents, unknown 
seas or mysterious islands. But 
while we can overcome the 
physical barriers to exploration, 
the barriers of mutual ignorance 
between different peoples and 
cultures have in many cases still 
not been dismantled. 
A modern Ulysses can voyage 
to the ends of the earth. But a 
different kind of Odyssey now 
beckons—an exploration of the 
world’s many cultural landscapes, 
the ways of life of its different 
peoples and their outlook on the 
world in which they live. 
It is such an Odyssey that the 
Unesco Courier now proposes to 
you, its readers. Each month 
contributors of different 
nationalities will provide from 
different cultural and professional 
standpoints an authoritative 
treatment of a theme of universal 
interest. The compass guiding this 
journey through the world’s 
cultural landscapes will be respect 
for the dignity of man 
everywhere. 
O 
COURIER   
  
    
STRANGERS 
ON THE SCREEN 
  
CREATURES FROM INNER SPACE 
by Clande Aziza 12 
 
MACUNAIMA, THE ETERNAL OUTSIDER 
by Antonio Rodrigues 14 
GERMANS SCREENED 
THROUGH FRENCH EYES 
by René Prédal 18 
 
AN ORIENT OF MYTH AND MYSTERY 
by Abbas Fahdel 25 
 
TRISTAN AND PAVLOVA 
THROUGH THE LOOKING GLASS 
by Marilyne Fellous 30 
 
BEHIND THE VEIL 
Women on both sides of the camera 
by Assia Djebar 34 
 
CHARLIE CHAPLIN, 
STRANGER AND BROTHER 
by Marcel Oms 38 
  
Interview with 
Jean Lacouture 
CHAMPOLLION, 
A HERO OF THE 
ENLIGHTENMENT 
 
REFLECTIONS 
‘SLAVES OF ONE MAN’ 
by Chantal de Grandpré 
48 
SCIENCE 
AND SOCIETY 
UNDERSTANDING 
GLOBAL CHANGE 
by Alison McKelvey Clayson 
  
Cover: Illustration by Brigitte 
Salom 
Back cover: Detail of Blanes Bild 
(“Blue Picture”, 1928), by the 
German sculptor and painter 
Oskar Schlemmer (1888-1943). 
The picture forms part of an 
exhibition entitled Peinture- 
cinéma-peinture to be held in 
Marseille, France, from 15 
October 1989 to 14 January 199. 

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

    


### 84180: Interview (with) Jean Lacouture: Champollion, a hero of the Enlightenment

  
INTERVIEW 
Jean Lacouture 
Champollion, a hero of the Enlightenment 
 
The Frénch writer and journalist Jean Lacouture has travelled the world, notably covering major events in the emergence of the 
former colonized peoples. He is also the author of major biographies® in which historical intuition and psychological analysis 
are combined with outstanding reportorial talent. In this Unesco Courier interview he describes the intellectual odyssey of Jean- 
Frangois Champollion, a man in whom the ideals of Unesco seem to have found expression two centuries before their time. 
Your portrait of Jean-Francois Champollion might have 
been specially designed to illustrate Unesco’s mission of 
bringing the world’s cultures into closer contact. Your bero’s 
short life was dominated by his determination to enable 
Europeans to decipher the secrets of Egypt. 
— Champollion was born in 1790, towards the end of the 
Enlightenment, of which he was one of the most worthy 
heirs. He was born a few months before the first perfor- 
mance of Mozart's Magic Flute, that crowning glory of the 
civilization of the Enlightenment. 
Yet he came from Figeac, a small town in the Quercy 
region of France, which had scarcely been touched by the 
Enlightenment and was sull shrouded in darkness. 
[feel that it 1s quite staggering, almost Promethean, that 
Champollion should have been born in such circumstances, 
with a father who was a bookseller but had had little edu- 
cation, and a mother who may well have been illiterate, and 
yet he should have torn himself away, little by little, from 
the ties of the land 10 step out into the world of communi- 
cation and knowledge. Admittedly, he embarked on his 
career with the help of his elder brother, who was some- 
thing of a pathfinder. No pun intended, but it was his 
brother who “oriented” him. They were a fascinating pair. 
The close rapport that grew up between them was one of 
the main factors that prompted me to write the story of 
Champollion. 
The first ray of light in the life of Jean-Francois was his 
schooling in Grenoble, first at the lycée and then at the 
university. This was the standard route by which it was pos- 
sible to climb the cultural ladder in the late eighteenth and 
early nineteenth centuries. Champollion was to negotiate it 
at prodigious speed. He arrived in Grenoble at the age of ten, 
went to the [ycee at thirteen and became a university profes- 
sor at nineteen, after having studied at the College de France 
and the Ecole Pratique des Langues Orientales in Paris. He 
shot out of the darkness into the light like an arrow. 
The same kind of lightning career can be seen in the 
* Including his recent Champollion, une vie de lumiéres (Grasset publishers, 
Paris, 1988). Volume 1 of his 3-volume life of Charles de Gaulle was pub- 
lished in English in 1988 as Charles de Gaulle: The Rebel by Holmes and 
Meier, New York, who have also published his biographies of Léon Blum 
(1982) and Pierre Mendes-France (1984). 
Third World in our time, with such outstanding people as 
Taha Hussein, the son of an illiterate peasant and blind 1nto 
the bargain. Yet he became a university lecturer and then 
a minister, and his literary output was of the highest order. 
A career like his, which went straight from almost total ig- 
norance to a masterly command of ideas and language, is 
very striking and indeed moving. 
To come back to Champollion, he must surely have had 
quite exceptional ability and talent? 
— There were three sides to his genius. In the first place, 
he was a highly gifted linguist. In the field of Oriental lan- 
guages, his abilities were quite extraordinary. Before he was 
fifteen, he had learnt Arabic, Hebrew, Persian, Geez, Syri- 
ac and Aramaic. In order to have something to do on Sun- 
days, he asked his brother to send him a Chinese grammar, 
He had already made up his mind to decipher hieroglyphic 
script and he felt that Chinese might prove useful in his 
research. When he was fifteen he started to learn Coptic, 
but we'll come back to that. 
He was also a dedicated historian. The lectures he gave 
at the University of Grenoble have been found and they 
show that he was already taking a critical approach to his- 
tory, a discipline which was starting to equip itself with the 
tools of scientific thinking. 
Thirdly, he was an artist, a man with a very keen aes- 
thetic sense, and that was to be a very important factor in 
his attempts to decipher hieroglyphs. He was captivated and 
inspired by the beauty of Egyptian art. He already sensed 
that there was a fundamental link between the art and the 
writing of Egypt and that the script itself was an art form. 
His artistic sensibility was therefore to be one of the means 
he used to penetrate the mysteries of hieroglyphic script. 
He continually progressed on the linguistic, historical and 
aesthetic planes alike. 
Moreover, he was an extremely generous, warm-hearted 
man who Joved his fellow men. It was perhaps because he 
had had an unhappy love-life that he projected onto Egypt 
the very deep affection he felt within himself and trans- 
formed his loving urge into the desire to plumb the secrets 
of that great civilization and identify with it.

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 84180: Interview (with) Jean Lacouture: Champollion, a hero of the Enlightenment

 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 84180: Interview (with) Jean Lacouture: Champollion, a hero of the Enlightenment

Shouldn’t bis love for Egypt also be seen against the back- 
ground of his time? 
— It’s true that Champollion grew up in a period marked 
by what has been called “Egyptomania”, when Egypt 
aroused great interest. Eighteenth-century Europe was avid 
for Egypt in all the senses of that term. Quite apart from 
the colonial projects that were afoot and the looting of the 
country’s works of art, there was also, in many instances, 
a disinterested passion for knowledge. 
Colonial appetites were whetted by Egypt, as they were 
by many other countries. However, Egypt appears to have 
been the object of a special fascination, as if the Europe 
of the Enlightenment had sensed that it held the secret of 
a source of wisdom affecting the whole of mankind. 
— This period was, quite simply, a second Renaissance. The 
first Renaissance, in the sixteenth century, had come about 
through Europe’s rediscovery of Graeco-Roman Antiqui- 
ty, while the second, in the eighteenth century, stemmed 
from its recognition of the ancient cultures of the eastern 
seaboard of the Mediterranean, such as Assyria, Babylon, 
Persia and, above all, Egypt. Europe was on the look-out 
for other civilizations and was intent on discovering the en- 
tire world. 
This is the deep-rooted significance of the spirit of the 
Enlightenment. Mankind was one and indivisible. The 
imprint of mankind should be sought everywhere, True 
humanism was universal: it was no longer confined to 
Europe, as it had been in the sixteenth century; it was 
worldwide. Like Montesquieu and his Persians, Diderot 
and his “Savages”, and Rousseau and his natural man, 
Champollion wondered who the real savages were when a 
tribe of Osage Indians visited the Louvre. 
What is more, as Champollion saw things, the world 
existed not only in space but in time, across the centuries. 
He recognized that, in the eighteenth century, mankind ex- 
isted in China, Morocco or Peru just as much as in France, 
but also that mankind had existed forty-five centuries earli- 
er, when the Pyramids were being built. In deciphering hi- 
eroglyphs, he made a stupendous vertical breakthrough, 
plumbing the depths of the universe and coming closer to 
mankind's early roots. In so doing, he demolished many 
preconceived notions about human origins. 
In his view, Egypt occupied 2 fundamental place as a 
matrix of history. He saw the first organized social unit as 
having emerged in Egypt, the source of European civiliza- 
tion filtered through Greece. 
It’s important to remember that he had had first-hand 
information on Egypt from a very early date, through 
meeting people who had been there. 
— Among other things, European “Egyptomania” had 
spawned Bonaparte’s expedition! Opinions may differ on 
the value of the different aspects of that expedition, but its 
scientific contribution was clearly admirable. It produced 
three treasures which gave rise to all subsequent research, 
especially the decipherment of hieroglyphs. These were the 
Description de Egypte, the tllustrated report made by Vivant 
Denon, and the Rosetta Stone. 
In the first decade of the nineteenth century, people be- 
gan to draw inspiration from the works of Vivant Denon. 
The Rosetta Stone began to be studied, and the Description 
was published. It was around this time that Champollion 
reached manhood. The coincidence between the blossom- 
ing of his own talents and the compilation of a stock of 
detailed knowledge on Egypt was entirely fortuitous. 
In addition, Champollion was fortunate enough to meet 
three remarkable men—Fourier, Dom Raphael de Monachis 
and Cheftitcchi—who had been involved with Bonaparte’s 
expedition. Who could have imagined that Bonaparte would 
have the preposterous idea of appointing Joseph Fourier, 
the leading French physicist of his time and his companion 
  
in Egypt, as Prefect at Grenoble, where he asked the Cham- 
pollion brothers to help him write the preface to the Descrip- 
tion? Or that Raphael de Monachis, a priest of Greek-Syrian 
origin, would come to visit Fourier in Grenoble and make 
the acquaintance of the brothers, thereby enabling Jean- 
Frangois to improve his Arabic? Or that a Coptic priest 
named Cheftitchi would be appointed as an assistant at 
a church near to where Jean-Francois lived? Champollion 
was thus granted an opportunity of practising to his heart’s 
content that little-known language which, he was convinced, 
was the key to everything. Champollion’s command of the 
Coptic language was to be an important factor in the advance 
which he gained over his competitors in deciphering the hi- 
eroglyphs, since it was the spoken version of those same 
hieroglyphs. No great discoveries are ever made without a 
stroke of luck, and luck smiled generously on Jean-Frangos. 
Even so, be didn’t start out from zero. Research had been 
carried out earlier and others were working in the field... 
— Champollion was, of course, heir to what had gone be- 
fore him. That is true of all inventors. Nothing important 
is ever discovered without the previous work of pioneers

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

  
   
who may already have covered two-thirds or even three- 
quarters of the ground. The first of his precursors was prob- 
ably Kircher who, as early as the seventeenth century, ad- 
vanced the hypothesis that the language spoken in the palaces 
of the Pharaohs was the same as that still heard in psalms 
sung 1n the Coptic churches of Cairo. This was a vital clue. 
Drawing of an Egyptian 
ornament taken from 
Champollion’s work 
“Egyptian Pantheon, or 
Collection of the 
Mythological Figures of 
Ancient Egypt” (1823-1825). 


### 84180: Interview (with) Jean Lacouture: Champollion, a hero of the Enlightenment

    
    The second path was opened up by the Abbé Barthéle- 
my, who suggested that the “cartouches”, or oval shapes 
surrounding some groups of hieroglyphs, contained the 
names of kings. Since there were only a few dozen names, 
there was only a like number of possible readings in each 
cartouche. And there were only a few cartouches in the hi- 
eroglyphic inscription on the Rosetta Stone, one of which 
was known to contain the name of Ptolemy, since that name 
was mentioned in the Greek translation of the inscription. 
The third breakthrough came right at the end of the 
eighteenth century, just before the actual discovery of the 
Rosetta Stone, when Niebuhr and Zoéga came to the con- 
clusion that the hieroglyphs must contain a number of pho- 
netic values. 
After the discovery of the stone, Silvestre de Sacy, the 
leading Orientalist of the time, set about deciphering parts 
of it, The Swedish diplomat Akerblad thought that it was 
possible to draw up an alphabet of fifteen signs, and although 
this was to prove unworkable, it enabled ideas on the sub- 
ject to move forward. Eventually, the great English physi- 
cist Thomas Young drew a spectacular comparison between 
sets of Greek signs and hieroglyphs on the Rosetta Stone. 
Young was the last and most brilliant of Champollion’s 
precursors. The findings he arrived at by inspired step-by- 
step guesswork were ingenious. But there was no underly- 
ing method. It was Champollion who was to find the key 
to the hieroglyphic system. 
 
Young had managed to decipher the name of Ptolemy 
on the Rosetta Stone more or less correctly. Champollion 
adopted a more rigorous approach and found each of the 
values composing that name, as well as the name of 
Cleopatra. However, his most authentic discovery, 
representing the real break with the trial and error methods 
of the past, came with his decipherment of the classical Egyp- 
tian names of Ramses and Thothmes. 
In what way was that revolutionary? 
— Until then, people—primarily Young, after the rough ap- 
proximations of Akerblad—had managed 10 read a few 
names of Ptolemaic kings and queens, with signs that were 
all phonetic, such as Ptolemy (p, t, I, m) and Cleopatra (k, 
, p, t, r). Two things then seemed credible: that the hiero- 
glyphs were mainly phonetic, representing sounds, and that 
they had been invented in the Ptolemaic period to translate 
the names of contemporary sovereigns of Greek origin. In 
short, the script was confined to that period of decline and 
only made 1t possible to decipher the leftovers of Egyptian 
civilization, without providing any clue to the writing of 
that civilization at its zenith. 
Champollion’s revolution was based on two crucial dis- 
coveries, namely that the hieroglyphs were identical from 
one Pharaonic era to another and that the underlying prin- 
ciple was that they were composed of a mixture of phonet- 
ic and ideographic elements. That was his “Eureka!” That 
was the core of the discovery which led to the realization 
that the phonetic approach adopted in the Ptolemaic peri- 
od was nothing more than a late simplification of a general 
rule. It was also understood why it had proved so difficult 
to find the key to the hieroglyphs. In fact there were two 
keys: one phonetic and the other ideographic.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 84180: Interview (with) Jean Lacouture: Champollion, a hero of the Enlightenment

By what path did Champollion reach that fateful moment 
of discovery? 
— He reached it through deciphering the names of Thothmes 
and Ramses, two kings from the great classical period of the 
18th and 19th dynasties. He came face to face with the main 
secret of the script. On a copy of one cartouche which had 
been sent to him, he found a red disk, which was bound 
to be an ideogram representing the sun. He translated it into 
Coptic, which gave him the word Ra, and then, below the 
disk, he found two signs with the phonetic values “m” and 
“s”, giving “mses”. By pairing the ideographic and phonetic 
values, he came up with “Ramses”. In the case of Thothmes, 
the ideogram was an ibis, which represented the god Thoth, 
with the same two phonetic values “m” and “s”. This took 
place on 14 September 1822. 
Other pieces of the jigsaw fell into place in quick suc- 
cession. Champollion noticed that some words were writ- 
ten from left to right, and others from right to left. He also 
discovered that some signs were there merely to signify 
gender or a family of meaning. This was how he realized 
that Hatshepsut was a woman. The identification of the de- 
terminative signs was another fundamental feature of the 
decipherment process. 
So the celebrated date of 14 September 1822 was a tremen- 
dous moment, the point when he suddenly realized that be 
had grasped it all? 
— Yes. It was a moment of incredible intensity for him. He 
had discovered the principle, the key. But he had no sooner 
announced the news to his brother than he fell into a sort of 
trance. He lay prostrate, as though he had been over- 
whelmed, as if the fantastic sum of the efforts he had made 
over a period of twenty years had triggered off an explosion, 
like a terrifying discharge which condemned him to exhaus- 
tion and total emptiness, now that the goal had been attained. 
Yet it was not all over. There still lay before him the 
formidable task of drawing all the conclusions from the 
discovery and of systematizing them. 
— Naturally. But there were two other moments of extreme 
intensity in his life. These were when, armed with his dis- 
covery, he went first to Italy and then to Egypt, in search 
of the civilization on which he had shed light and which 
he was to read like an open book. 
In the first place, during his visit to Turin to examine 
the wealth of Egyptian treasures in the museum there, he 
discovered the beauty of Egyptian art. His reaction was one 
of pure emotion. In Paris, the linguist had won the day, but 
in Turin it was the aesthete who was overwhelmed. It was 
not long before the historian, in his turn, was excited by 
the piles of papyri which nobody before him had been able 
to decipher. 
But there was another dramatic moment, which he 
described in a passage worthy of Chateaubriand: the papyri 
 
 
were so fragile that they crumbled into dust as soon as he 
touched them. We can well imagine the feeling that took 
hold of him. There he was, so near to his goal, with all the 
skills needed to discover, in each of those documents, a page 
of history that had lain buried for thousands of years, and 
then that page disintegrated in his hands. All those dynasties 
that were reunited before his eyes were decomposed in a 
flash. It was both marvellous and terrifying for him. 
Champollion tells us that these papyri had been taken 
from their natural environment. They had been produced 
in Egypt from an indigenous plant and were meant to be 
covered and kept in bamboo canisters, but here they were, 
instead, placed in packing cases, tossed about for weeks on 
end on the sea voyage, exposed to the deadly effects of 
humidity, and dumped any old how in the rooms of the 
Turin museum. Fortunately, museum science has made 
progress since then... 
Then came, at long last, the voyage to Egypt, where the 
country, its light and its people revealed themselves to him. 
It was as if his decipherment of the hieroglyphs bad 
miraculously opened a door to Egypt and enabled him to 
identify with its civilization. 
— The comparison that comes to my mind is with the great 
mystics. When Champollion entered the Hypostyle Hall

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
   
Champollion’s camp at Philae is depicted in this 
watercolour by Nestor L’Hote, an artist who 
accompanied the great French Egyptologist on bis 


### 84180: Interview (with) Jean Lacouture: Champollion, a hero of the Enlightenment

expedition to Egypt in 1828-1829. 
or when he descended into the tomb of Ramses VI or of 
Seth, I think that he felt the emotion of a mystic discover- 
ing the countenance of Christ. It was not so much the cul- 
minating point of his work as the crowning glory of his life. 
His decipherment of the hieroglyphs gave him a direct in- 
sight into Egyptian civilization. The monuments spoke to 
him through their very beauty. He saw their architecture 
as a kind of prayer, a form of expression responding to that 
of the hieroglyphs. As he said in one of his letters: “Egypti- 
an statuary is a simplified form of hieroglyphic writing.” 
Whenever a Pharaoh built a temple to his own glory, 
the symbolic language he used was more direct and posi- 
tive than that of a cathedral. There was a physical link be- 
tween the art and the writing of the Egyptians. Champollion 
threw himself heart and soul into substantiating this idea. 
He spent eighteen months in Egypt—eighteen extraordinary 
months during which he went back across the centuries and 
fathomed the innermost meaning of Egyptian civilization. 
In this setting, the cry he uttered on 14 September 1822 be- 
came a magnificent hymn to knowledge. But it was also to 
be his swansong,. 
What makes that hymn even more moving is the fact 
that it projected on Egyptian civilization a beam of light 
which swept away a number of preconceived ideas about 
Judeo-Christian civilization and which conveyed to Europe 
a message glimpsed in the eighteenth century but perhaps not 
very well received in the nineteenth—that Egypt was the 
cradle not only of human history but of religious thought. 
Could monotheism have been invented in Egypt? Such 
a hypothesis is often accepted. However that may be, the 
great Christian Trinity seems to have been founded on that 
of Osiris, Isis and Horus. The originality of Christian dog- 
ma is thus called into question. Champollion sparked off 
a genuine cultural and spiritual revolution. He clearly felt 
this himself, just at the time when he was returning to the 
Christian fold. His Song of Egypt was not altogether free 
of a note of anguish. 
Moreover, Champollion’s dialogue was not only with 
ancient temples, but with the flesh-and-blood Egyptian 
people, with the Egypt of bis time. 
— That's true. Not only was he appalled by the state of op- 
pression and dire poverty to which the Egyptian people were 
reduced, but he ran the risk of speaking openly about it to 
the Pasha—not the most obvious course to take. Muham- 
mad Al had received him cordially and had allowed him 
to go wherever he liked in the country for as long as he 
liked—and remember that this was scarcely one year after 
Egypt had suffered the debacle of the Battle of Navarino 
against the French and English fleets. Champollion could 
therefore have simply turned a blind eye to the situation, 
since his mission was not a humanitarian one. But he chose 
not to. Shocked by the sufferings of the Egyptian people, 
he made a point of voicing his dismay to Muhammad ALL. 
The example he set was not followed by every Orientalist. 
He also drafted a fourteen-point memorandum on “the 
safeguarding of the monuments of Egypt”, a document in 
advance of its time. He had very strong views on the need 
for the in situ protection of the monuments at their origi- 
nal sites and, above all, on the need to respect the right of 
Egyptians to keep their masterpieces of art in their own 
country. Some years earlier, when the zodiac in the Tem- 
ple of Hathor at Dendera had been dragged out and shipped 
to France to be erected in Paris, Champollion had written 
that the best home for the monument was at Dendera itself. 
Nor should we forget the plans which Champollion 
made for the Egypt of his time, such as the proposal to ex- 
plore the sources of the Nile which he put to Ibrahim Pasha. 
The idea of suggesting a peaceful scientific expedition to that 
great warrior seems to me to be worthy of the spirit of the 
Enlightenment and far ahead of its time. 
The two hundredth anniversary of Champollion’s birth 
will be commemorated in 1790. The time is ripe for a 
celebration and I imagine that Unesco will be marking the 
occasion. n

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
A scene from the film 
Alien (1979). 
INCE Homo sapiens first trod the earth some five hundred thousand years ago 
mankind has been torn between an instinctive fear of the unknown and an 
unquenchable thirst for knowledge. For early man all that was unknown was hostile. 
The unseen was a menacing presence that lay in wait for the unwary. Only within 
the familiar ordered confines of the clan was safety to be found. 
Today the bounds of the known world have been extended to their limits, the 
frontiers of knowledge have been pushed back and contacts and exchanges with others 
have multiplied beyond all expectations. Everywhere men have come to acknowledge 
the existence of their fellow men and the destinies of communities and individuals 
have become interlinked on a worldwide scale. 
The cinema, one of the major art forms of this century, has played an important 
role in this process and in making us more fully aware of the diversity of the human 
condition. It has shown us the splendours of the Taj Mahal and the Pyramids, the 
onion-shaped domes of Moscow, the temples of the Maya, the skyscrapers of New 
York. We have seen great cities devastated by earthquake, fire and flood, peoples 
decimated by famine and all the man-made horrors of war. We feel that we are 
beginning to know what other peoples are like, what they love and what they fear. 
Nevertheless, even today, “others” too often continue to be, if not totally unknown, 
at least strangers and potential enemies. For this too the cinema bears some 
responsibility. The eye behind the camera sometimes sees and records happenings 
that seem to confirm our deeply-ingrained prejudices. It would seem that we still 
feel threatened by “others”, that the need remains to continue to set up boundaries, 
to draw demarcation lines, to mark out for ourselves and for our kind a clearly 
defined territory—whether physical, spiritual or psychological —from which “others” 
are excluded. 
We need not despair. More and more film-makers are rejecting facile, stereotypic 
representations and showing us the kinship that underlies the glory and the wonder 
of the human pageant. The barriers of taboos and fears are being torn down to reveal 
“others” miraculously transformed into “brothers”. 
11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 84181: Creatures from inner space

  12 
Extraterrestrial 
phenomena created 
_ for the screen by 
directors from 
Mcélies to Spielberg 
often reflect human 
fears and anxieties. 
    
Creatures 
from inner space 
I: it is accepted that science fiction is a literary 
form that has existed since Antiquity, then ex- 
traterrestrial phenomena or “ETs”, can also be 
acknowledged as enjoying the same venerable sta- 
tus. Admittedly, the travellers in the ancient 
Greek satirist Lucian’s Vera Historia (True Histo- 
ry) and in the seventeenth-century French writer 
Cyrano de Bergerac’s L’Autre Monde (A Voyage 
to the Moon with some account of the Solar World) 
visited only the Sun and the Moon, the two most 
familiar heavenly bodies. But the ET in Voltaire’s 
Micromégas (1752) came from the star Sirius— 
whence his rather special outlook. These imagi- 
nary creatures were simply a mouthpiece for their 
creators’ political, metaphysical or psychological 
ideas. 
Terrifying ETs which had lives of their own 
first appeared in the late nineteenth century in 
the stories of H.G. Wells. Their aggressiveness, 
as in the case of the Martians in The War of the 
Worlds (1897), was a reflection of the imperialis- 
tic currents of the time. This trend persisted for 
several decades, at least in the Western world. 
Around this time, the extraterrestrial made 
its début in the cinema, then in its infancy. In 
his celebrated film Le voyage dans la lune (“Trip 
to the Moon”, 1902), the French director Georges 
Meélies depicted the Moon itself as being endowed 
with life. After Méliés, who was primarily in- 
terested in magical effects, came the age of the 
comic strip and the film cartoon. But the worlds 
* visited by Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers were 
still very like the real world. 
Then came the memorable day—30 October 
1938—when Orson Welles terrified millions of 
American listeners when he announced during 
a radio programme based on H.G. Wells's War 
3 
' 
~ 
“ "4 
Poster for Spielberg’s E.T. 
(1982), in which a crew 
member of an alien 
spacecraft is left behind 
in a Los Angeles 
suburb and makes friends 
with a small boy. 
  
  
BY CLAUDE AZIZA 
of the Worlds that invaders from Mars had land- 
ed. Behind these imaginary Martians it was pos- 
sible to glimpse the dark scourge looming on the 
other side of the Atlantic. 
The war followed, with its horrors and ob- 
sessions, including spy mania. Then, around 1947, 
flying saucers began to be spotted at every street 
corner. With the coming of the Cold War, hordes 
of creatures from outer space invaded cinema 
screens, setting a pattern for the next ten years 
or more. 
The scene was set in 1950 with Kurt Neu- 
mann’s Rocketship X-M, which depicted Martians 
who had lapsed into the barbarous practices of 
the Stone Age. Thereafter, ETs were uniformly 
belligerent and repulsive, from the slimy invaders 
of Byron Haskin’s The War of the Worlds (1953), 
which was based on H.G. Wells’s novel, to the 
giant octopuses of Val Guest's The Quatermass Ex- 
periment (1955), the first in a series of adventures 
featuring Professor Quatermass, and the 
gelatinous mass in Irwin S. Yeaworth’s The Blob 
(1958). 
Some films were less far-fetched, and some- 
times not without ambiguity. In Edgar G. Ul- 
mer’s The Man from Planet X (1951), the solitary 
ET which lands on the Earth and dies there is 
actually the forerunner of a coming invasion. 
There are both good and bad ETs in Joseph New- 
man’s This Island Earth (1955). Robert Wise’s The 
Day the Earth Stood Still (1951) is the only film 
of the period with something positive to say, in 
the sense that its hero, Klatoo, brings a message 
of peace from another planet. 
In the 1960s, détente was the order of the day. 
Even though the hideous ET persisted here and 
there, times were changing. Japanese films still 
showed ET's avid for flesh, as in Inoshiro Hon- 
da’s Chikyu Boeigun (“Prisoners of the Martians”, 
1958), Italian film-goers shuddered when they saw 
Mario Bava’s Terrore nello spazio (1965), and in 
Britain hideous plants were intent on destroying 
the human race in Steve Sekely’s The Day of the 
Triffids (1962), based on a novel by John Wynd- 
ham. Americans, however, were already smiling 
at the amorous antics of an ET and a pretty 
rock’n’roller in T. Graef’s The Teenagers from 
Quter Space (1959), being moved by a strange

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

In The Day the Earth 
Stood Still (1951), Klatoo 
(centre) arrives on Earth 
from another planet with a 
message of peace. 
CLAUDE AZIZA, 
of France, teaches Latin and 
history of the cinema at the 
University of Paris III 
(Sorbonne-Nouvelle). He 
writes regularly on the 
cinema for the French daily 
Le Monde, and has 
contributed to a special 
issue of CinémAction 
magazine on religious films 
(October 1988) and to the 
catalogue for the Festival of 
Biblical Cinema held in 
Paris in March 1988. 
visitor in H. Green’s The Cosmic Man (1959), and 
splitting their sides with laughter at the blunders 
committed by a Martian played by Jerry Lewis 
in Visit to a Small Planet (1959). Had the ET 
finally been tamed, domesticated, humanized? 
People may have come to realize that political 
enemies, whether within or without, were less 


### 84181: Creatures from inner space

dangerous than the enemy stalking in their 
unconscious. This was the message, albeit clothed 
in symbolism, that was hinted at as early as 1956 
in F. McLeod Wilcox’s Forbidden Planet. 
Aliens and monsters 
ETs accordingly seemed to have been discarded 
among the unused props, as films began to reflect 
the realistic approach demanded by the conquest 
of space. Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey 
(1968) marked the end of an era of far-fetched sci-fi 
films and raised metaphysical questions amidst a 
profusion of scientific detail. 
But what science fiction writers called the 
“hard science” of the conquest of space did not 
satisfy young film-goers who had grown up with 
space travel and looked in vain for the fantasy 
which their parents had enjoyed. In an effort to 
win them over, there was a return to the epic 
form. George Lucas’s Star Wars (1977) rekindled 
childhood dreams and revived medieval legends. 
Only a short step separates the epic from mysti- 
cism, and that step was taken by Steven Spielberg 
in his Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977), 
in which he retold the Bible in his own fashion, 
and subsequently in E.7. (1982), his version of the 
New Testament. As the Christ-figure of the space 
_ age with limitless powers, capable of dying and 
of coming back to life, the film’s hero brought 
tears to American eyes. Would ETs now be part 
of a world of wisdom and humanism? That was 
unfortunately not to be, for new causes of anxiety 
were starting to emerge. 
The end of the millennium promised to be 
apocalyptic. Fear of others was personified in the 
“alien”, a term which was to have considerable 
success and was first used in 1979 in Ridley Scott’s 
film of that title, in which a monster from outer 
space conceals itself in the entrails of its victim. 
A year earlier, similar alien creatures had lived 
off the brains of human beings transformed into 
vegetables in Philip Kaufman's Invasion of the 
Body Snatchers. In John Carpenter's The Thing 
(1982), the creature is capable of adapting to and 
assuming the appearance of all forms of life. 
People can no longer trust each other and are 
condemned to live with the threat of imminent 
annihilation. 
Aliens (the title, incidentally, of the sequel 
to Carpenter’s film, made by James Cameron in 
1986) sprouted everywhere, harking back to the 
tradition of the 1950s but borrowing the most 
gruesome aspects of the popular horror film. 
These films covered the whole gamut—{rom the 
metamorphosis of fathers (H. Broomley Daven- 
port’s XTRO, 1986), to menaced progeny (Nor- 
man J. Warren’s Inseminoid, 1980), vampires 
from outer space (Tobe Hooper's Life Force, 1985) 
and a ferocious monster (J. McTierman’s Preda- 
tor, 1987). And then to cap it all along came Jack 
Sholder’s Hidden (1988), in which the Earth is 
simply a vast outlet for the aggressive instincts 
of an ET which even turns to bank robbery. 
A few films have attempted to portray friend- 
ly child ETs (John Hough’s Return from Witch 
Mountain, 1978), meetings between human and 
ET teenagers (Joe Dante’s Explorers, 1985), and 
understanding visitors who can restore lost youth 
(Ron Howard’s Cocoon, 1985, and its sequel, 
Daniel Patrie’s Return of Cocoon, 1988). ETs have 
even taken the form of glamorous blondes that 
Earthlings can marry, as in Richard Benjamin’s 
My Stepmother is an Alien (1988). 
But, on the threshold of the 1990s, there is 
a persistent sense of danger. It may be a danger 
that has infiltrated society from within, as in John 
Carpenter’s They Live (1988), or it may come 
from outside, from Martians seeking regeneration 
through nuclear energy in the aptly titled televi- 
sion series Contamination, or the New War of the 
Worlds, made by Colin Chilvers and Winrich 
Kolbe in 1988. In the same year Tobe Hooper's 
Invaders from Mars and Chuck Russell’s The Blob 
were again on the rampage. 
Fortunately, there is some humour among all 
these atrocities. In addition to Martians, a come- 
dy by Patrick Read in which the Martians, after 
hesitating, decide to take control of Earth, F. 
Brown’s novel Martians Go Homel, a crazy farce 
based on the fantasies of a science fiction writer, 
is being adapted for the screen. Such fantasies in- 
spire the thousand-and-one metamorphoses of 
ETs, those ambivalent creatures spawned by the 
anguish, hopes and repressions latent in every 
society. | 13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 84182: Macunaïma, the eternal outsider

  
From a Brazilian 
film-maker, a fable 
about individualism 
told through the 
astonishing 
adventures of a 
protean hero. 
BY ANTONIO RODRIGUES 
14 
Macunaima, 
the eternal outsider 
Ix a structured, well-defined society it is easy 
to pick out the outsider, the person who is differ- 
ent from everyone else. In France, the United 
Kingdom or the Federal Republic of Germany, 
the cinema returns repeatedly to the theme of im- 
migration, turning out naturalistic films about 
second-generation immigrants. The latter are seen 
as foreigners, outsiders, since a clear, if arbitrary, 
line of demarcation still separates them from the 
local population. 
The situation is more complicated in emerg- 
ing countries or in mixed societies. In Brazil, for 
example, on the outer edge of the Western world, 
a variety of races, cultures and ways of life which 
span the archaic and the modern coexist side by 
side. Brazil is European in its language, its legal 
code and some of its customs, but African in its 
beliefs and patterns of everyday life. In this 
melting-pot almost anyone could see his neigh- 
bour as an outsider and no one is truly represen- 
tative of any particular social category. 
The film Macunaima, made in 1969 by Joa- 
quim Pedro de Andrade (1932-1988), has become 
a classic of modern Latin American cinema pre- 
cisely because it succeeded in conveying the cu- 
rious state of ‘generalized otherness” that exists 
in Brazil. One of the merits of the film—a fable 
in which, provided that you can interpret a few 
clues, Brazilian society can easily be recognized— 
is that it can be understood by and is attractive 
to. film-goers who have only a superficial 
knowledge of Brazil. 
The hero, Macunaima, is 2 black man born 
into an Indian tribe. One day he decides to set 
out with his brothers for the big city. On the 
way, he walks through a magic fountain and 
miraculously turns white (one of his brothers, 
who arrives too late, only has the palms of his 
hands and the soles of his feet turn white). On 
reaching Rio de Janeiro, he has a number of ad- 
ventures. He marries a woman guerrilla fighter, 
is widowed and then tries to steal a talisman from 
a rich giant. Finally, tired of it all, he returns to 
the jungle with a whole range of consumer goods 
(air-conditioners, refrigerators, etc.). Caught up 
once more in a life of idleness, he ends up being 
devoured by a river siren. 
The film is an adaptation of a novel of the 
same name by Mario de Andrade, published 
in 1928. However, the director filled out the 
story with new episodes (those concerning the Poster for Macunaima.

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 84182: Macunaïma, the eternal outsider

  
  
  
24000 EDU 
KM ECKSTEIN 
A WRDDRDE  

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 84182: Macunaïma, the eternal outsider

16 
M. acunaima’s 
hut. 
sister-in-law outside a straw 
mother and 
  
party. 
Mucunaima s enemy, the 
capitalist (left) throws a 
her shoulders. 
Macunaima’s mother 
carries her young son on 
 
 
            

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

  
guerrillas were of topical interest in Brazil in 
1969), and left out passages in the book that were 
primarily of linguistic interest. Furthermore, he 
adopted the typical stylé of a certain class of 
comic film popular in Brazil, particularly in the 
sequence dealing with the birth of Macunaima 
and 1n regard to the physical appearance of the 
giant. 
Thus the mainspring of Macunaima, in the 
words of its director “a Brazilian film devoured 
by Brazil”, is otherness. 
In turn Indian, Black and White, savage and 
city-dweller, proletarian and profiteer, Macunai- 
ma never belongs to a clear-cut category. He is 
always an outsider, even though he seems at ease 
in all situations. The notion of otherness implies 
a clash between cultures, a confrontation, or at 
least a sense of difference. In Macunaima there 
is no clash. The hero goes from one extreme to 
the other, from a poverty-stricken tribe to the 
financial district of Rio de Janeiro, a city which 
he reaches in a truck full of immigrant workers 
and in which he mixes with prostitutes, terrorists 
who die through their own carelessness (they do 
not know how to handle their bombs), and 
greedy industrialists. However, Macunaima is not 
just a passive, disillusioned onlooker observing 
the world in which he finds himself. Even though 
his primary objective is the search for easy pick- 
ings (he becomes a kept man and, to acquire 
riches, attempts to steal the giant’s talisman), he 
takes part, in his own fashion, in the life of the 
very different circles in which he moves. 
This social mobility and his succession of ap- 
parently disconnected adventures find their own 
logic within the context of an extravagant, ex- 
uberant fable. The film tells a story with a be- 
ginning, a middle and an end, with episode 
following episode in a far from haphazard 
order. Macunaima is a piece of story-telling rather 
than the illustration of a thesis. 
The only world to which the hero really be- 
longs is his family, which consists of the entire 
tribe into which he was born. Outside this fami- 
ly he constantly finds himself face to face with 
a world which he distrusts and in which he sees 
only adversaries. Macunaima takes each succes- 
sive adventure as it comes. A brothel or the 
guerrilla girl’s hiding-place are for him no more 
than provisional, interchangeable stopping-places, 
where, with no concern for others’ motives, he 


### 84182: Macunaïma, the eternal outsider

looks to his own immediate interests. It is as if 
the words of the truck driver who took him to 
Rio are still ringing in his ears: “Now it’s every 
man for himself and the devil take the hindmost.” 
He is the eternal outsider, never putting down 
roots or becoming integrated anywhere. He is the 
new arrival, always embarking on some new en- 
terprise which will never be carried through to 
the end. Macunaima never acquires any more 
than a superficial knowledge of those he meets 
and himself remains unaffected by these encoun- 
ters. He looks no further than the immediate, all- 
devouring present, until the day when he him- 
self is devoured. Not knowing what he is seek- 
ing, he follows his chosen path unquestioningly. 
The comic tone of the film and its presenta- 
tion as a fable conceals a deeper truth—we are 
hostile or indifferent to outsiders because we do 
not know what motivates them. Macunaima is 
not a solitary hero in the style of the wandering 
cowboy or lawman of the western; he lives only 
for the moment and is constantly having to save 
his skin in a world which, in the words of the 
director of the film, “is essentially cannibalistic”. 
For Macunaima, as for all those without code 
or creed and entirely absorbed by themselves, 
other people are always an impenetrable mystery 
and the world is opaque. Everyone else is 
“Them”. u 
At the end of the film, 
Macunaima (right) returns 
to his tribe from Rio de 
Janeiro with a load of 
modern gadgets, 
ANTONIO RODRIGUES 
is a Brazilian film critic 
based in Paris. 
 

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 84183: Germans screened through French eyes

  18 
Although 
sometimes drawn as 
stereotypes, 
German characters 
in French films are 
often portrayed far 
more subtly. 
Germans screened 
through French eyes 
  
BY RENE PREDAL 
Tiere is nothing in French cinema like Ger- 
mania anno zero (1947), in which the Italian direc- 
tor Roberto Rossellini portrayed the material and 
spiritual ruins of post-war Germany. Nor is there 
anything comparable to All Quiet on the Western 
Front (1930), the American director Lewis Mile- 
stone’s film version of Erich Maria Remarque’s 
novel about life in the German trenches of World 
War I. There is certainly nothing similar to The 
Desert Fox (1951), the film in which another 
American director, Henry Hathaway, attempt- 
ed to restore the reputation of Field Marshal 
Rommel. 
French film-makers do not find it easy to put 
themselves in alien shoes, especially when that 
alien is a German. Similarly, German roles in 
French films are almost always played not by 
French actors but by actors of Germanic origin. 
Whereas the English actor James Mason played 
Rommel in Hathaway's film, the German roles 
in Les dimanches de Ville-d’Avray (Serge Bourguig- 
non, 1963) and Le franciscain de Bourges (Claude 
Autant-Lara, 1968) were played by Hardy 
Kruger. The bluff intriguing figure of Curt Jur- 
gens became familiar as the German in countless 
French-made thrillers; Jess Hahn featured as a 
German musician who became a tramp in the 
Parisian summer of Le signe du lion (Eric Roh- 
mer, 1959); and Gert Froebe was often cast in the 
role of the fat, antipathetic German. 
Erich von Stroheim carved out for himself 
an unusual film career, playing noble, generous 
soldiers in La grande illusion (Jean Renoir, 1937) 
and Macao, I’enfer du jen (Jean Delannoy, 1939) 
and civilians driven out of Germany by the nazis 
in films such as Les disparus de Saint-Agil 
(Christian-Jaque, 1938) and Piéges (Robert 
Siodmak, 1939). 
The nazi as evil personified 
French spy films made during the 1930s were 
often set outside a specific historical time-frame, 
and adversaries were generally treated with 
   
£1 scene from French 
director Serge 
Bourguignon’s Les 
. dimanches de Ville- 
d’Avray (1963), which 
describes the friendship 
between a former German 
pilot suffering from 
amnesia (Hardy Kruger) 
and a nine-year-old French 
girl (Patricia Gozzi). 
F rangois Truffaut’s film 
Jules et Jim (1962) tells the 
story of two friends, an 
Austrian (Oskar Werner, 
right) and a Frenchman 
(Henri Serre) and their 
constantly shifting 
triangular relationship with 
Catherine (Jeanne Moreau).

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 84183: Germans screened through French eyes

 
 
 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 84183: Germans screened through French eyes

20 
The friendship between a 
captured French officer 
(Pierre Fresnay, left) and 
the commandant of his 
German prison (Erich von 
Strobeim) is portrayed in 
Jean Renoir’s masterpiece 
La grande illusion (1937). 
chivalrous respect (Deuxiéme bureau, Pierre 
Billon, 1935; Les loups entre eux and L'homme a 
abattre, Léon Mathot, 1936-1937; Le capitaine 
Benoit, Maurice de Canonge, 1939). Nazism 
changed this situation totally. 
A shadowy figure whose presence made it- 
self felt in deserted places and in the eyes of his 
victims (Nuit et brouillard, Alain Resnais, 1955), 
the nazi boss personified the horror of the con- 
centration camp, both in the extraordinary but 
true odyssey of Martin Gray (Ax nom de tous les 
miens, Robert Enrico, 1983) and in Armand 
Gatti’s L’Enclos (1961). 
In’ Le sauveur (Michel Mardore, 1971), a 
German played by Horst Bucholz passes himself 
off as an English parachutist in order to penetrate 
the Resistance. He succeeds in this by seducing 
and then subjugating an adolescent girl whom he 
induces to commit betrayals, with terrible con- 
sequences. In Jacques Rouffio’s La passante du 
Sans-Souct (1981), based on a novel by Joseph 
Kessel, the odious Von Leggaert kills during the 
war the father of a small boy whom he maims 
for life. He also orders the execution of a liberal- 
minded editor and his wife, who had given her- 
self to him in an attempt to save her husband. 
Returning several years later as a successful in- 
dustrialist, he is killed by his former victim. 
In Shoah (1985), Claude Lanzmann questions 
nazis who participated in the holocaust, and 
Klaus Barbie is the subject of another cinéma- 
vérité inquiry in Hotel Terminus (Marcel Ophuls, 
1987). Twenty years earlier there had already 
been an evocation (this, though, was far from be- 
 
ing ‘“‘direct’’ cinema) of the trial of Adolf Eich- 
mann in La cage de verre (Philippe Arthuys, 1965), 
as well as the disquieting Authentique procés de 
Carl-Emmanuel Jung (Marcel Hanoun, 1966), in 
which the characters and the judgement were fic- 
titious but exemplary. 
Whereas the Jewish tragedy was treated with 
deep respect, the story of the Wehrmacht was 
deliberately lampooned in a series of mediocre 
comedies in which French cinema practised a clas- 
sic form of compensation therapy. The histori- 
cal fact was that the French army had been 
defeated, and script-writers rehashed again and 
again the story of isolated individuals who, in the 
midst of general pandemonium, use their French 
resourcefulness to run rings round German sto- 
lidity. In Papy fait de la Résistance (Jean-Marie 
Poiré, 1983) a French grandpa works for the 
Resistance under the very nose of fat Marshal 
Von Apfelstrudel (Jacques Villeret); in La vache 
et le prisonnier (Henri Verneuil, 1959), a French 
prisoner of war, played by Fernandel, crosses 
Germany with a cow; in La grande vadrouille 
(Gérard Oury, 1966) Bourvil and Louis de Funés 
succeed in crossing the enemy lines, as do the 
squaddies in Mais ou est donc passée la septiéme 
compagnie? (Robert Lamoureux, 1973). 
The occupation 
“Occupation” films constitute a sub-category of 
their own among French war films. Members of 
the occupying forces appear in minor roles in 
often interesting productions such as Léon Morin 
RENE PREDAL, 
of France, is professor of 
communications science at 
Stendhal University, 
Grenoble. He is the author 
of many books, studies and 
articles on French cinema. 
His most recent published 
work is Dictionnaire des 900 
cinéastes francais 
(“Dictionary of 900 French 
Film-makers”).

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 84183: Germans screened through French eyes

prétre (Jean-Pierre Melville, 1961) and Un sac de 
billes (Jacques Doillon, 1976). 
However, in other films about the occupa- 
tion, such as Lacombe Lucien (Louis Malle, 1974), 
Les wviolons du bal (Michel Drach, 1974), Les 
guichets du Louvre (Michel Mitrani, 1973) and Mr 
Klein (Joseph Losey, 1976), “‘the villains are not 
German but French and their cruelty is less phys- 
ical than verbal and indirect ... There are no nazi 
brutes, a decision which was less an evasion than 
a desire to redefine the enemy ... since the Jews 
of Paris lived in greater fear of being denounced 
by the French than of German bullets.”! 
This statement is not always supported by the 
evidence. In Les honneurs de la guerre (Jean 
Dewever, 1961), for reasons of military honour, 
a German officer refuses to withdraw without a 
fight at the time of the pull-back of August 1944 
and causes a pointless slaughter. And in Au revoir 
les enfants (Louis Malle, 1987), the Gestapo tracks 
down Jewish children to send them to the death 
The Gestapo raids a 
French school in Louis 
Malle’s Au revoir les 
enfants (1987), a film based 
on an episode from the 
director’s own childhood. 
1. Quotation from 
Lbholocauste a l'écran, 
by Annette Insdorf, 
Editions du Cerf, Paris, 1985. 
 
camps. Although Dewever treats the members of 
the Resistance hidden in the church no better 
than he does the German officer, Louis Malle 
depicts a German officer who, to please a pretty 
woman, sends packing a French militiaman who 
wants to eject a Jew from the restaurant in which 
they are dining. 
Dissociated from their nazi leaders, the Ger- 
man people are often portrayed sympathetically 
by French film-makers. In Le passage du Rhin 
(André Cayatte, 1960) Roger, a wartime prisoner 
at the Kessler farm in Germany, returns there of 
his own accord to rediscover love and dignity. 
In Le franciscain de Bourges, Claude Autant- 
Lara pays a noble tribute to the saintly friar-nurse 
Alfred Stanke. Edgardo Cozarinsky’s La guerre 
d'un seul homme (1982) gives a picture of occupied 
France in which official shots from French news- 
reels are combined with disillusioned comments 
from the diaries of Ernst Jiinger, a German officer 
in Paris—a unique example of a film in which the 21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 84183: Germans screened through French eyes

a
 
ET
 
. 
b 
w
y
 
2 
: 
- 
LA
TE
 
IR
 A
 
- 
- 
leading character is a German portrayed “from 
inside”. 
In a number of iconoclastic films, Germans 
are even shown, despite the dramatic circum- 
stances, involved in flirtations, as in Jean-Paul 
Rappenau’s La vie de chateau (1965), or caught 
up in a Cornelian dilemma, like the German in 
Le silence de la mer (Jean-Pierre Melville, 1949, 
based on a novel by Vercors), who is uneasy in 
the role of occupier and turns away from passion- 
ate love to bury himself in solitude. The German 
soldier in Hiroshima mon amour (Alain Resnalis, 
1959, from a screenplay by Marguerite Duras) 
embodies youth and love, but also intolerable 
suffering. So often the executioner, the German 
here, on the contrary, is an expiatory victim of 
the war. 
Many French films, therefore, seek out the 
man behind the German uniform. Even the 
historical inquiry in Le chagrin et la pitié (Marcel 
Ophiils, 1969) opens with the wedding in Ger- 
many of the daughter of a Wehrmacht captain 
who as a young man had been stationed in 
Clermont-Ferrand between 1942 and 1944, thus 
attempting to bring together the army and 
civilian society, past and present, without any 
trace of manichaeism. 
This insistence on human complexity is even 
more evident in The Memory of Justice (1976), a 
film about the Nuremberg trials in which the 
director, Marcel Ophiils, son of the German film- 
maker Max Ophiils and married to a German 
woman who was a member of the Hitler Youth 
organization, does not hesitate to implicate him- 
Alain Delon and Juliet 
Berto in a scene from 
Joseph Losey’s Mr Klein 
(1976), a study on the 
theme of identity, 
indifference and the search 
for truth. 
~~ * a - NA 
we Fa 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 84183: Germans screened through French eyes

  
Eiji Okada and  
  
Emmanuelle Riva play the 
lead roles in Hiroshima 
mon amour (Alain 
Resnais, 1959). 
self directly. Nazism is thus shown in terms of 
its impact on everyday life and not simply as an 
ideological concept. 
Philippe Nahoun’s Une fille unique, which 
also appeared in 1976, drew a complex and rather 
disquieting fictional portrait. During the summer 
of 1935, Sophie, bored and tired of her husband, 
a militant communist, becomes attracted to Tho- 
mas, a young German Jew who accidentally kills 
a fascist. Thomas comes to exercise a strange fas- 
cination on her. To a journalist who asked why 
the young woman should be drawn out of her 
humdrum life by a man who happened to be a 
both a Jew and a German, Nahoun replied: “‘be- 
cause it was horrible to be a German Jew in 
1935.72 After the black and white judgements of 
other films, this work examines nuances that are 
too often reserved for portrayals of national 
heroes. 
In Menaces (1939) Erich von Stroheim played 
the role of a poor lodger in a small Paris hotel. 
This was the first in a succession of characters 
who projected an unexpected image of the Ger- 
man as vulnerable and humiliated. The story of 
a former pilot who returns from the war suffer- 
ing from amnesia and attempts to recover a 
precarious happiness with a nine-year-old girl, 
Les dimanches de Ville-d’Avray, despite occasion- 
al stylistic affectations, is a sensitive film. This 
man, a stranger to himself, joins forces with some- 
one else who is excluded from society in an at- 
tempt to build a better world. 
Similarly, the character of the Austrian Jules, 
in Jules et Jim (Frangois Truffaut, 1962, based on 
a novel by Henry-Pierre Roché), is richer and 
more profoundly explored than that of his 
French friend Jim. He is the first to be deceived 
by the woman that they both love, and it is he 
who is left when Catherine commits suicide, tak- 
ing Jim to his death with her. 
Unlike the German tourist of Ascensenr pour 
Véchafaud (Louis Malle, 1957), murdered by a 
young car thief who finds him unpleasant, the 
young geologist in La maison des bories (Jacques 
Doniol-Valcroze, 1969) is the epitome of Ger- 
manic seductiveness; Matthieu Carriére glows 
with sun-drenched romanticism opposite Marie 
Dubois as the virtuous wife of a man who does 
not deserve her. 
On the whole, therefore, portrayals of Ger- 
mans in French cinema are less stereotyped than 
one might have been led to believe. u 
2. Philippe Nahoun in Cinéma 76, No. 215, November 1976. 23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

  
Western cinema’s 
distorted image of 
the Arab as a 
mysterious and 
often shifty figure 
from a world of 
harems and palm 
trees has still not 
faded from the 
screen. 
Rudolph Valentino, 
superstar of the silent 
screen, in The Son of the 
Sheik (1926), one 
of the films that created 
the stock Hollywood image 
24 of the Arab. 
R
a
 
oF
 
c
o
t
e
 
’ 
5 
: 
’ 
: 
: 
4 
’ 
] 
 
 

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

    
  
An alluring picture of the 
Orient of the Arabian 
Nights is presented in 
Jacques Becker's version of 
Ali Baba and the 40 
Thieves (1960) starring 
Fernandel and the Egyptian 
dancer Samia Gamal. 


### 84184: An Orient of myth and mystery

n Orient of myth 
and mystery 
  
BY ABBAS FAHDEL 
Tee picture of the Arab in Western cinema is 
often a product of fantasy and imagination, 
reflecting the West’s fascination with and fear of 
the Arab Muslim East, that other world so near 
and yet so far. 
This colourful, mysterious and exaggerated 
picture, this Orient made in Hollywood, Paris, 
or Rome, would perhaps be less offensive if it was 
not peopled by rascally and barbaric Arabs, recog- 
nizable by their shifty looks and dissolute man- 
ner. They are hot-tempered and always seem on 
the point of whipping out a dagger. Lustful and 
polygamous, they like to kidnap young Western 
girls and sequestrate them in their harems. 
In fact, Western cinema is no more than a 
reflection of widespread prejudices, some of them 
dating back to the Crusades, which were widely 
held under colonial rule, when, after all, North 
Africa was known as the Barbary Coast. 
If some films such as Morocco, Casablanca, Un 
de la Légion, and The Lost Patrol purport to be 
set on Arab soil yet contrive not to show a sin- 
gle Arab, in others Arabs have walk-on parts and 
provide a splash of local colour, along with the 
minarets, palm trees and camels. 
Even so, the range of roles played by male 
Arab actors is wider than that available to Arab 
women. A man can be a valet, a shoeshine boy, 
a guide, a snake charmer, a looter or even an 
official, whereas a woman is limited to the roles 
of prostitute (in a tradition stretching from Pépé 
le Moko in 1936 to Grand frére, which came out 
seven years ago) or belly-dancer (La maison du 
Maltais). 25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

26 
The “Moorish woman is 
often depicted in films as a 
prostitute, top (Julien 
Duvivier’s Pépé le Moko, . 
1936), or as a dancer, 
above (La maison du 
Maltais, Henri Fescourt, 
1927). 
 
Scantily dressed, lascivious and voluptuous, 
she provides entertainment for legionnaires and 
adventurers slumming it in disreputable casbahs. 
Occasionally she may display fidelity and hero- 
ism, like Yasmina, the dancer in Fleur de sable 
who dies in the arms of a European intelligence 
officer after helping him thwart a conspiracy. 
Hitchcock’s three minarets 
Just as little respect is paid to the Arab landscape 
as to the people who live in it. Reduced to a hand- 
ful of clichés—picturesque alleys, teeming mar- 
kets and palm groves surrounded by sand 
dunes—it is no more authentic than Arab charac- 
ters played by Western actors with brown-stained 
faces. Lack of authenticity is not confined to films 
made in the studio with painted scenery and plas- 
tic palm trees. In many films made on location 
in Arab countries the natural beauty of the sur- 
roundings is heightened with artificial splendours 
intended to add to the exotic effect. In The Man 
Who Knew Too Much, Alfred Hitchcock shows 
not just the famous single minaret of the Kou- 
toubia Mosque, Marrakesh, but three of them! 
In Pépé le Moko the Algiers Casbah becomes a 
hideout for crooks and gangsters, while in 
other productions Beirut, Cairo, Tangiers and 
Casablanca are shown as capitals of vice, crime 
and corruption. 
Film-goers should not be surprised, therefore, 
to hear Egyptians speaking a Tunisian dialect, or 
to see Iraqis dressed like Moroccans. These incon- 
gruities exist because many films set in the Middle 


### 84184: An Orient of myth and mystery

East are actually made in the Maghreb. Some 
directors make no distinction between the various 
Arab peoples, and others mix up Arabs and Mus- 
lims, thus robbing their works of the little eth- 
nological interest they might otherwise have had. 
The casual way in which Western film- 
makers appropriate Arab landscapes, characters 
and stories and reshape them as they please in a 
rubbishy celluloid Orient is evidence of a long- 
standing unscrupulousness. 
The colonial film 
After the end of World War I, the Arab rebel- 
lion against foreign domination became increas- 
ingly widespread. Its repercussions reached the 
European countries, and the cinema, which could 
not ignore such a burning question, also entered 
the fray. Thus the colonial film was born and be- 
came popular in the 1920s and 1930s. This kind 
of film glorifies the skills of the colonisers (Les 
hommes nouveaux and Le bled were made for the 
centenary of the French conquest of Algeria) and 
what were known as “peacekeeping” operations 
(Fen, Les fils du soleil, Beau Geste, La voix du desert). 
Its heroes are the legionnaires and soldiers of the 
colonial armies, and the villains are the “recal- 
citrant” Arabs. 
Not all the natives are shown as hostile and 
treacherous. Sometimes, among the ranks of the 
local officials, we come across “good” Arabs who 
choose to join the colonial forces and fight against 
their rebellious brothers (Lame du bled, Capitaine 
Ardant).

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 84184: An Orient of myth and mystery

The police check up on 
Algerian immigrants in 
France during the Algerian 
war in this scene from 
Michel Drach’s Elise ou la 
vraie vie (1971). 
On the other hand, Arab revolts, particular- 
ly the most dramatic one in Algeria, are handled 
with a great deal of embarrassment. In the 1960s 
and 1970s, a few films such as Elise ou la vraie vie, 
Muriel, and Le petit soldat, depicted the Algerian 
war summarily and indirectly, but only one 
French film squarely faced up to the subject, the 
American director James Blue’s Les oliviers de la 
justice, and that was an anachronism since it called 
for reconciliation when the breaking point had 
already been reached. 
It was not until the 1970s that two French 
film-makers, René Vautier and Yves Boisset, cou- 
rageously denounced the colonial war in Avoir 
vingt ans dans les Aurés and R.A.S., stories of 
young conscripts forced to take part in 
“mopping-up” operations in Algeria. In 1989, the 
director Gérard Mordillat dealt with a similar sub- 
ject in Cher frangin. 
The French output is not very substantial in 
comparison to the many American films on the 
Viet Nam war. The only Western director to 
show the war from the Algerian point of view was 
the Italian Gillo Pontecorvo, whose courageous 
The Battle of Algiers was long banned in France. 
The Arab-Israeli 
conflict 
It seemed that the end of the colonial era and the 
independence of the Arab countries might her- 
ald the opening of a new chapter of less conten- 
tious relations between East and West. But the 
old demons were awakened by the Arab-Israeli 
conflict. Some Western directors took sides in 
their treatment of this conflict. In Otto 
Preminger’s Exodus, which retraces the creation 
of Israel, all the Arabs are unpleasant characters, 
except for one who wants to get along with the 
Jewish colonists and is assassinated by his co- 
religionists. 
Preminger’s 1974 film Rosebud deals with the 
Palestinian question from the terrorist angle. 
Other American films such as Victory at Entebbe 
and The Little Drummer Girl reflect a similar ap- 
proach, while the problems of occupation were 
raised by the politically-minded film-maker 
Costa-Gavras in Hanna K. 
Sein Sug 
RE 
 
Scene from The Battle of 
Algiers (1970), Gillo 
Pontecorvo’s courageous 
film about the Algerian 
war (1954-1962). 27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 84184: An Orient of myth and mystery

28 
In other films, antagonism between East and 
West takes the form of doomed romances be- 
tween Arabs and Westerners. From Fazil, the 
story of a Frenchwoman who falls in love with 
an Arab prince and eventually escapes from the 
harem where she has been confined (and where 
a muezzin calls the faithful to prayer by singing 
“Oh my love!) to Pierre et Djemila, a modern 
version of the Romeo and Juliet story transposed 
to a suburban low-rent housing estate (where 
native-born French people and North African im- 
migrants live side by side without mixing), these 
films usually end with the death of one of the 
protagonists, if not both. Rare exceptions, such 
as Baroud and Rex Ingram’s The Arab, have hap- 
pier endings. 
Certain films, inspired by actual events and 
real people, rise above this allegedly insurmount- 
able antagonism and evoke the experience of a 
few fervent lovers of the East who have gone in 
search of the Arab Muslim world. Such produc- 
tions include Lappel du silence, which tells the 
story of Charles de Foucauld, a French viscount 
who became a desert hermit, and above all 
Lawrence of Arabia, which had a worldwide suc- 
cess. But even in these films, the facts were often 
sacrificed to the demands of a fictional treatment. 
The East of a Thousand and One Nights 
Another kind of film about the East is based on 
stories and legends such as the celebrated Thou- 
sand and One Nights. These tales that paint the 
splendour and refinement of the golden age of 
Arab Muslim civilization in glowing colours pro- 
vide an inexhaustible treasury of wonderful 
material which has been adapted for the cinema 
with varying degrees of success. 
The first screen adaptation of the adventures 
of Aladdin appeared as early as 1899. In 1902, it 
was the turn of Ali Baba, and in 1919 that of Sind- 
bad the Sailor. They were followed by several 
hundred more films from the West, including 
four masterpieces: the two versions of The Thief 
of Baghdad (USA, 1924 and UK, 1940), Ali Baba 
et les 40 voleurs (a comedy starring the French ac- 
tor Fernandel and the delightful Egyptian dancer 
Samia Gamal), and the Italian director Pier Paolo 
Pasolint’s Il fiore delle mille e una notte. Pasolini 
was the only film-maker to show as much interest 
 
in the fantastic and aesthetic aspects of the 
tales as the profound wisdom contained in them. 
These films often provide pleasant entertain- 
ment, but curiously enough their success has had 
the deleterious effect of encouraging many 
Western directors to depict an imaginary East 
instead of the real thing. The problem is that 
some of these “imaginative” films misleadingly 
claim to give an accurate picture of Arab life. One 
of them, Arthur Joffe’s extraordinary Harem, 
depicts a fantasy Orient which no Arab would 
recognize.

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 84184: An Orient of myth and mystery

   
     
 
     
  
dd 
i 
Recently the cinema has begun to examine 
the problems of immigration. Some films about 
immigrant communities facing an uphill struggle 
to win acceptance popularize widespread clichés 
such as that of the delinquent Arab. Others, such 
as Yves Boisset’s Dupont-La-joie and Roger 
Hanin’s Train d'enfer are warm-hearted films 
which nevertheless confine the immigrant in the 
role of victim and scapegoat. Rainer Werner Fass- 
binder’s Angst essen Seele auf (Fear Eats the Soul) 
and Michel Drach’s Elise ou la vraie vie are two 
of several exceptional films which offer a critique 
ty 2 David Lean directs Peter 
O’Toole and Omar Sharif 
(inset in close-up) during 
the filming of Lawrence of 
Arabia in 1962. 
-8 
of racism while at the same time presenting 
complex and subtle portraits of attractive 
characters. 
The last few years have seen the emergence 
of a new generation of immigrants’ children who ABBAS FAHDEL.. 
. . . . . of Iraq, is a journalist with 
find it easier than their parents to integrate. the Paris periodical Présence 
Among them are a number of film-makers includ- ~~ du Cinéma Frangais. He has 
ing Mehdi Charef, Rachid Bouchareb and Abdel. ~~ directed several short films 
; and has contributed to a 
karim Bahloul, who have already had some number of books on cinema 
success in presenting a more complex, subtle and ~~ and television, including Les 
x . cinémas arabes (Paris, 1986) 
accurate picture of the Arab community. od Los LlPetiinns du iene 
| (Paris, 1988). 29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

   
30 
Co-operation, 
not caricature, is 
the new watchword 
in relations 
between American 
and Soviet cinema. 
* John Ford's The Lost Patrol 


### 84185: Tristan and Pavlova through the looking glass

(1934). 
Tristan and Pavlova through 
the looking glass 
Tristan a male American dolphin, and 
Pavlova, a female Soviet dolphin, are trained for 
combat at military bases in their respective coun- 
tries. Then, one day, they meet under water and 
fall in love... : 
This is the plot of a recent animated cartoon 
series co-produced by a Soviet studio and an 
American company. Only a few years ago, col- 
laboration between the United States and the 
Soviet Union on a theme relating to military con- 
frontation would have been inconceivable. For 
Americans, the Russian represented the threat of 
communist subversion. The Soviet image of the 
American was fuzzier. The West epitomized all 
that was alien, but historically its image had 
varied from that of the despised adversary to that 
of the fascinating model. 
In 1908, when Russian cinema was born, the 
West already led the field. To conquer the 
market, Russian companies had to woo the pub- 
lic with films which were as attractive as Ameri- 
can action films or French comedies of manners. 
As early as 1912, in addition to historical dramas 
and adaptations of great works of Russian litera- 
ture, many films were made about fashionable so- 
ciety, directly inspired by the Western films the 
Russian public loved so much. With few excep- 
tions, such as Yakov Protazanov’s Jenny the Ser- 
vant (1917), these stories reflected a taste for 
melodrama and tragic endings. 
The 1917 revolution and foreign intervention 
brought an increasingly strong ideological colour- 
ing to the rivalry between Russian and Western 
cinema. The Western countries were no longer 
taken as models but as examples of a depravity 
which had to be denounced. In Soviet cinema, 
America, the symbol of capitalism, became the 
rival and the enemy. 
Lev Kuleshov’s evocatively titled The Extraor- 
dinary Adventures of Mr West in the Land of the 
Bolsheviks (1924) strikingly reflects the spirit of 
the 1920s. A number of enduring stereotypes 
  
BY MARILYNE FELLOUS 
were created in this odd parody of an American 
action film. The characters are one-dimensional 
representations of the social class to which they 
belong. West, the cowboy, is the archetypal 
spoiled child. A rich land-owner consumed with 
fear and hatred of the Bolsheviks, he sets off for 
the Soviet Union with his assistant and 
bodyguard, Dejddy. The latter, as a representa- 
tive of the working classes and thus a more at- 
tractive figure, soon finds his way around in a 
world very different from his own. Meanwhile, 
Jenny, the secretary, has plenty of time to get to 
know and like the Soviet Union. 
However, while they seemed to be denounc- 
ing the anti-Soviet campaigns which raged in the 
United States, the authors of this kind of film did 
not take the stereotypes they used too seriously. 
In the 1930s, the class struggle and great pow- 
er rivalry intensified, but the trend for remakes 
continued unabated. In his memoirs the Soviet 
film-maker Mikhail Romm wrote this account of 
the origins of his film The Thirteen: 
“Iwas sent for by the Head of Cinematogra- 
phy, Boris Shumyatsky. The script-writer lossif 
Prut was summoned at the same time. Neither 
of us knew what for. 
“ ‘A comrade—his name is immaterial—has 
seen an American film in which a desert patrol 
perishes in a combat after carrying out its mis- 
sion,” Shumyatsky said.* “The film is imperialist 
and hysterical, but this comrade has suggested 
that something similar should be made about our 
frontier guards. Will you try? You can write the 
scenario together.’ 
“ ‘Can we see the film?’ 
““ ‘No, it’s already been sent back. But that 
doesn’t matter, The important thing is that we 
need a desert (we've got some terrific ones), front- 
ier guards and Basmachis, and that everyone dies 
at the end. Almost everyone, but not everyone, 
don’t forget that, comrade Mikhail!” ” 
In other words, in order to depict the struggle

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 84185: Tristan and Pavlova through the looking glass

N
T
 
e
e
 
a
n
.
 
   
   
   
v
a
t
 
e
y
 
A
A
  
Lev Kuleshov’s The 
Extraordinary Adventures 
of Mr West in the Land 
of the Bolsheviks (1924) 
used stereotyped characters 
to parody American 
comedy films of the 1920s. 
-
_
   —
 
vi a 
- 
against the ideological enemy within, Soviet 
cinema fell back on ideas from the ideological 
enemy outside its frontiers. 
In 1953, in the middle of the Cold War, 
Abram Room was commissioned to make a film 
called Silver Dust, in which a corrupt American 
scientist discovers a method of mass destruction. 
He wants to experiment with it on Blacks, but 
is prevented by “representatives of the people, 
peace campaigners, one of whom is his eldest 
son”. Finally he sells his discovery at an exorbi- 
tant price to gangsters who murder him. His 
younger son, a fascist, dies from the effects of the 
terrible silver dust. All the ingredients are there: 
corruption by money, the neo-nazi danger, and 
the people’s struggle for progress and peace. 
: » 
A 
A 
x 
£ x 
1 
- | 
1b 
 ] 
3 
Ideological struggles 
a
 
. 
First and foremost, this type of film was a denun- 
ciation of the ideological poison of nazism and 
neo-nazism. In Off Season (1968), which was pat- 
terned on an American spy thriller based on a 
true story, a Soviet spy in “a Western country” 
is ordered to neutralize a mad scientist who is 
nostalgic about nazism. The spy is here the 
saviour of humanity, a role which each country 
simultaneously and in competition claims for 
itself. 
In the field of the “ideological struggle”, the 
films of the Brezhnev period satisfied two de- 
mands. They responded to anti-Soviet films 
produced in the United States by using a similar 
genre and themes, but above all they illustrated 
official policy, which was to seek an agreement 
to halt the arms race. Thus the films proclaim 
the Soviet desire for peace and at the same time 
the absurdity of war, even explaining the tensions 
between the two great powers in terms of the 
folly of certain individuals. 
Sergei Mikaelian’s Flight 222, in which a 
Soviet dancer refuses to return home from a tour 
La
 
R
a
g
 
- 4 
jo
s 
A
 
a
t
 
x 
r
d
 
-
 
» 
l
v
 
g
h
 
T
R
E
E
 
a 
L, 
p
a
 
H
A
R
 
» - 
0
 
N
E
 
T
E
 
ia
l 
TR 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 84185: Tristan and Pavlova through the looking glass

32 
in the United States, is an example of a duplicat- 
ed film. The American intelligence services put 
pressure on his wife so that she stays too. This 
is a response to the American film White Nights, 
in which the dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov, an 
émigré to the United States, plays himself. 
A. Tumanishvili’s Solitary Navigation is an exam- 
ple of an anti-war protest film in which a Soviet 
ship manages to avoid a world catastrophe 
planned by the commander of an American 
atomic submarine who goes mad during the Viet 
Nam war. 
The rejection of the West appears in another 
form, less official but just as durable, in the con- 
flict between Slavophiles and Westernizers. This 
issue, which divided the Russian intelligentsia in 
the nineteenth century, re-emerged with the re- 
ligious revival in the middle of the 1960s, of 
which the flagship film was Andrei Tarkovski’s 
Andrei Rublev (1966). The epitome of triumphant 
technology and the renunciation of spiritual 
values, the West hurtles inexorably towards an 
apocalypse from which Russia alone can save it. 
Konstantin Lopushanski’s Letters from a Dead 
Man (1986) gives a detailed description of a 
nuclear catastrophe which takes place outside the 
Soviet Union. 
‘Eternal Russia’ 
The West is interesting to these film-makers 
above all as a way of asking what lies beyond the 
familiar world. Whether the subject is a visit to 
another country (in Alov and Naoumov’s The 
Shore a writer visits a decadent Federal Republic 
of Germany), or voluntary or involuntary 
emigration (in Naoumov’s The Choice two old 
friends meet again, one of whom escaped during 
the Second World War and now realizes that he 
is a failure because he left his homeland; Tarkov- 
ski’s Nostalgia, made in Italy in 1983, evokes its 
author’s exile)—all these films show how hard it 
is for Russians to live far from their native soil 
and how they cannot adapt to a savage, hostile 
world which they consider to be on the verge of 
bankruptcy. 
But this tendency to fall back on the values 
of an “eternal Russia” is matched by another 
which, by authorizing and even encouraging co- 
productions with other countries, establishes the 
West as a friendlier place, offering a welcome to 
Russian émigrés who bear with them the values 
of a past which their country is at last beginning 
to rehabilitate. 
Here too, an animated cartoon sets the tone. 
A US-USSR co-production directed by Efim 
Gambourg, its title is Stereotypes. Constructed in 
the form of a parody of an American show, it 
portrays bearded and threatening mujiks armed 
with hammers and sickles and cynical cigar- 
smoking businessmen, their feet on the table. 
[| 
  
The Soviet director 
Mikhail Romm’s film 
The Thirteen (1936), above, 
is thought to have been 
inspired by John Ford's 
The Lost Patrol (1934), below. wll 

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
EE 
¥ 
N 
i 
A
E
 
» 
MARILYNE FELLOUS, 
of France, an expert on 
Soviet cinema, is Paris 
correspondent of the 
specialist journals Sovestski 
Ekran (Moscow) and L’art 
sovietique (Tbilisi). She is 
one of the authors of a 
book entitled Film totem, 
film tabou (Le Parc, Liege, 
1989), and is currently 
preparing a doctoral thesis 
on the cinema and society 
in the Soviet Union. 
Nostalgia, filmed in Italy 
in 1983 by Andrei 
Tarkouski, evokes the 
homesickness of Russians 
living far from 
their native soil. 
P reliminary sketches for 
the animated cartoon 
Stereotypes (1988), a 
Soviet-American co- 
production directed by 
Efim Gambourg. 
/ — 
LS wo

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 84186: Behind the veil: women on both sides of the camera

  34 
BY ASSIA DJEBAR 
An Algerian film- 
maker and writer 
reflects on the 
image and self- 
image of people in 
Third World 
societies and 
especially 
on women’s new 
perceptions 
of the world. 
Ore night in December 1976, in a farm rent- 
ed from some peasant farmers 70 kilometres from 
Algiers, with a team of seventeen technicians and 
two actors, I was shooting an interior night 
scene—a man looking at his sleeping wife. 
Nothing very special about that! Nothing 
special about the action... except for the duration 
of the look (a minute and a half), or rather of the 
double look—myself, the technicians, and later 
the film audience, looking at the man, the Other, 
looking at an Algerian woman lying heedlessly 
asleep, like a Venus in an Italian Renaissance 
painting. It was as if all art (at that time Arab cine- 
ma could, objectively, be said to be at a stage of 
development similar to that of Florentine or 
Venetian painting of the Quattrocento) had to 
begin by going through this first discovery of 
how another person—the Other—looks at a 
woman in an unguarded moment and how, in 
turn, we look at him looking at her. 
In the film, La nouba des femmes du mont 
Chenoua, the woman is lying on the marital bed, 
her hair bound up in a red scarf; only the pure 
lines of her face are visible. I had worked out the 
décor down to the last detail—the silky glimmer 
of the bedclothes and the pillows contrasting with 
the rough whitewashed walls, the carpets on the 
floor, and wool, lots of wool all around. Enve- 
loped in the wide bed, the sleeping woman seems 
passive, serene. Then, from her few disordered 
movements, we gradually sense the beginnings of 
a struggle against a nightmare—the memories, as 
we will later learn, of a wartime past. 
Stolen glances 
What of the onlooker, the man motionless in the 
doorway of the bedroom looking at his wife? 
Will he join her on the bed? No. Though there 
is desire in his look (is not the explicit or implicit 
impulse of desire an essential ingredient of true 
cinema?), it is not observed with sufficient insis- 
tence to suggest shared pleasure, the promise of 
Intimate union. 
The Other’s way of looking at the desirable 
woman, a look on which we too are spying, is 
not the look of a voyeur. Slowly and with increas- 
ing intensity (a minute and a half can be a very 
long time), he is, despite himself, contemplating 
his impotence and the pain of separation. It is a 
look which faces up to and makes more distinct 
the dividing line between a couple, between the 
sexes. 
I should, perhaps, have indicated earlier that 
the man is immobilized in a wheelchair which 
he has propelled along the wall to the open door. 
Even at a distance, the woman fascinates him. His 
 
hand grips the door-frame. Behind the camera, 
I capture the movement of the seated man as he 
struggles to rise, inch by inch, his face in profile 
twisted by the effort, and in the background the 
bed, the sleeping woman with the red kerchief— 
two masks, one so near, the other so distant. 
Long after, I began to wonder if it was really 
just by chance that I had decided to shoot this 
interior night scene. At the time I had sought 
only the pleasure of composition, as much in the 
manner of a painter as of a film director. Had

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Behind the veil 
I not chosen the scene in spite of myself? After 
all, for me as a writer, as a film-maker, or simply 
as an Arab woman, was not the real problem the 
painful search for an answer to the question as . 
to the nature of the Other’s look at woman, in 
a culture in which, for centuries, the eye had been 
closely guarded? One eye only existed, the eye 
of the master of the harem who forbade all visual 
imagery and invoked religious taboos to reinforce 
this dominance. The look of the Other, unless 
it is the look of a voyeur (an aggressive, invasive 
look), perceives nothing but the image of the 
woman, a mirage enshrouded in poetry and 
melancholy. 
By looks possessed 
This whole question of what it means to be 
scrutinized by others is a paramount concern of 


### 84186: Behind the veil: women on both sides of the camera

Arab cinema today. Yet I feel it is relevant to go 
beyond the personal experience I have described 
above, and to speak of the placing, in the not too 
Women on both sides 
of the camera 
35

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

#2
 
  T
-
_
|
\
 
\ 
T
N
   LAN 
C— 
= 
or 


### 84186: Behind the veil: women on both sides of the camera

P hotos taken during the Thus, for about a century and a half, as in 
filming of La nouba des the days of pagan magic, people were 
femmes du mont “possessed” —both in the sense of being dominat- 
Chenoua. Left, the 4 oo tricked—bv th . 
director, Assia Diehar, with ed and of being tricked—by the annexation of 
one of the actors, Above their image in an operation in which they took 
Algerian villag . worm en no part. People communicated with each other 
who appeared in the fim. OD pictures of Arabs or Blacks who themselves 
36 
  
distant past, of entire societies under the micro- 
scope of the alien eye of the colonizer. Arab, Afri- 
can and Eastern cultures were all thus checked, 
recorded and “illustrated” by the scrutiny of the 
dominator. 
This other eye was that of the Western artist 
(the painter of battle scenes, then the orientalist 
painter of fantasies, of caravans, bedouins, 
dancers, children begging against a background 
of sand dunes and ruined mosques), and then of 
the traveller-photographer of the years between 
1880 and 1900, when the great colonial empires 
were at the height of their power. This period 
saw a profusion of postcards, which were 
despatched in their thousands—pictures of beau- 
* tiful, more or less scantily clad “fatimas™ across 
which, or on the back of which, tourists, soldi- 
ers and short-stay residents inscribed their mes- 
sages with apparent indifference. 
were excluded from communication. Did they 
really look at the persons represented? No. Their 
images, and their apparent difference, became a 
pretext for the circulation of ideas, words and ba- 
nalities without their being even symbolically in- 
volved. The innermost identity of the persons 
thus observed was even more totally rejected. It 
was as if their difference were no more than a 
matter of fashion, of folklore, a mere décor. For 
decades, a whole genre of “colonial cinema” 
flourished, ranging from documentary to fiction 
films; once successful, it has today completely dis- 
appeared. It was as though, everywhere at that 
time, blind cameramen were filming mirages. 
The look unveiled 
And then, suddenly, women began to open their 
eyes and look around them. Women who until 
then had no right to look, who walked with 
lowered eyes, their faces, their foreheads, their 
entire bodies enveloped except for a tiny orifice 
left so that they could see a few paces ahead. At 
last they had a right to the world outside, 
to schooling, to study, to space. They forgot 
themselves so far as to contemplate the sky, trees, 
nature, foam on the waves, to observe the city 
streets and crowds, to look at others—other 
women, all humanity. 
I venture to return to my own modest ex- 
perience of scrutinizing intensively over a period

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

of time, because, for me, the strength of the cine- 
ma lies in its scrupulous, meticulous examination 
of ways of looking, in its way of looking at those 
who cannot look and of encountering those, 
whether men or women, who look for the first 
time. 
Let us, therefore, go back to the first scene 
of La nouba des femmes du mont Chenoua. A 
woman is standing with her back to the audience; 
all that can be seen of her is her hair and the out- 
line of her head against a wall. She rubs her fore- 
head against the stone wall; perhaps, through 
impatience or helplessness, she has just banged 
her head against it. Any explanation is possible, 
since she refuses to let us see her, rejects me, re- 


### 84186: Behind the veil: women on both sides of the camera

jects the camera’s scrutiny. Yet this is how I chose 
to show her. 
She walks on, searching, persisting in her re- 
jection of the audience. Suddenly her voice breaks 
out, and with it all her inner feeling of revolt: 
“I speak, I speak, I speak!” Then silence. “I 
don’t want anybody to see me,” she says. 
And then she adds, and we understand that 
the man is also there in the room, waiting: 
“I don’t want you to see me.” 
Thus, the heroine of the film, who will live 
out her life before us in the next two hours, be- 
gins by proclaiming her refusal to be looked at. 
Then she turns and faces us, because, above all, 
she wants to speak, to communicate. Perhaps she 
is unaware that it is difficult to speak out in front 
of others, or that to speak into the void and into 
the silence is even more difficult. Yet her desire 
to express herself is manifest: “I speak, I speak, 
I speak!” 
In other words the screen might be no more 
than a ribbon of darkness, a non-image pierced 
from time to time by the distant profile of a 
woman to remind us that the woman is there; 
"only her voice occupies time-space, to become a 
real presence—a word preceded by her shadow. 
My conclusion is that films made by 
women—from the Third World as well as from 
the Old World—are an expression of a desire to 
speak. It is as though film-making means for 
women a new mobility of voice and body, of a 
body unobserved and therefore unsubordinated, 
with a rediscovered autonomy and innocence. As 
a result, the voice takes wings and dances. At last 
the outsider is seeing with her own eyes. 
Looks exchanged 
In La nouba des femmes du mont Chenoua, the 
young woman architect who returns to the land 
of her childhood does indeed begin to speak, and 
she goes out too, rediscovering old haunts. As she 
wanders her eyes seek out places, houses, rivers, 
even those that have run dry, and forests, even 
those that have been burnt down. She meets 
other women who look at her in their turn. And 
through this exchange of looks, often slow, some- 
times furtive, or simply blank, with the blank- 
ness of waiting, dialogues are opened—concerning 
the present and the past. And all around, these 
women among women are accompanied by the 
pervasive presence of scores of idle, noisy, laugh- 
ing children and their uncertain bursts of song. 
As I follow the heroine, I look at the other 
women. Or rather, I watch her, a young indepen- 
dent woman, savouring her rebirth. I watch her 
discovering the other women. As she looks at the 
peasant women her look opens the flood-gates of 
speech, until then firmly closed—women’s talk 
about the banalities of daily life and about the 
still vivid past, about the embers of memories still 
painful despite the balm of forgetfuless. “How 
can I weep, when I have no tears left?”, exclaims 
an old peasant woman, with a dried up face but 
a proud bearing. 
A woman looks at other women. And in that 
look desire plays no part. The barren gap between 
Mesre, phot, Bikers 149 
human beings disappears, conversations inter- 
weave. Returning home as dusk falls, the young 
woman is enveloped in the warmth of those who 
have spoken to her. It is as if the voice always 
preceded the body and the eyes and thus, far from 
the rapine of voyeurism, in these half-blind fum- 
blings were to be found love, tenderness and 
recognition. 
Can it be simply by chance that most films 
created by women give as much importance to 
sound, to music, to the timbre of voices record- 
ed or captured unawares, as they do to the image 
itself? It is as though the screen had to be ap- 
proached cautiously and be peopled, if need be, 
with images seen through a look, even a short- 
sighted, hazy look, but borne on a full, com- 
manding voice, hard as stone but fragile and rich 
as the human heart. | 
Postcards of the colonial 
period showed “beautiful, 
more or less scantily clad 
fatimas’ ... on the back of 
which tourists inscribed 
messages with apparent 
indifference”. 
ASSIA DJEBAR, 
Algerian writer and film- 
maker, is the author of 
many short stories and 
novels which have been 
widely translated. Her first 
film, La nouba des femmes 
du mont Chenoua 
(1976-1977) won the 
International Critics’ Prize 
at the Venice Biennale 
in 1979. 
  
37

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

  
How Charles 
Chaplin created 
+ his “little tramp”, 
the outsider who 
lurks inside 
all of us. 
  
BY MARCEL OMS 
Crore Chaplin, who was born a hundred 
years ago this year, was one of the world’s best- 
loved public figures, greeted by cheering crowds 
wherever he went. Yet he also attracted suspicion, 
dislike and even hatred. 
There is a disturbing contradiction in these 
two extreme responses, neither of which can be 
said to be totally undeserved or totally justified. 
Perhaps it is the fate of brilliant clowns to em- 
body both the white-faced clown and his stooge, 
the auguste, and, when they abandon their 
motley, to attract both love and hatred accord- 
ing to the temper of the times, as if they were 
trying to reveal themselves, and us, as complete 
human beings. 
This kind of fundamental misunderstanding 
came to a head in 1927, when Chaplin, attacked 
by the gutter press and a wide sector of public 
opinion, was defended from the fury of his crit- 
ics by the surrealists in a tract entitled Hands off 
Love. This text, probably written mainly by 
Louis Aragon, contains some admirable expres- 
sions of faith in the Chaplin myth: “Obedient 
to the dictates of love, he has always been obe- 
dient to the dictates of love, that is what his life 
and all his films unanimously proclaim.” And the 
text concludes: “Suddenly we understand the 
place of genius in this world. It takes possession 
of a man, makes him an intelligible symbol and 
the prey of real brutes. Genius tells the world the 
moral truth which universal folly obscures and 
tries to suppress. So thank the man who, on the 
vast screen of the West, over there on the horizon 
where the suns are setting one by one, today 
projects your shadows, great human truths, 
perhaps unique moral truths, which are worth 
more than all the Earth.” 


### 84188: Charlie Chaplin, stranger and brother

TITTLE
 
Charlie Chaplin, stranger 
and brother 
That same year, 1927, Chaplin made The Cir- 
cus. In this film featuring clowns, an equestrienne, 
wild beasts, a conjuror and an acrobat, he rev- 
ealed his debt to the traditions of the sawdust ring 
and paid tribute to the set pieces, classic acts and 
conventions of the circus. A tramp on the run 
from the police, Charlie takes refuge in the big 
top, disrupts the show, unwittingly puts on a star 
performance in the ring, and enters the magic 
circle of the circus. 
The Circus puts the Chaplin problem in a nut- 
shell. The hero tries to escape his fate and is 
trapped inside the show that makes his name. 
Then when he wants to escape from the show, 
which is alienating him, he has to knuckle un- 
der. This skilful dialectic of rejection and attrac- 
tion encapsulates the Chaplin tramp character. 
Although seemingly the most ordinary of men, 
he is actually an outsider. He is a rejected out- 
cast, a wanderer desperate for affection, a tramp 
destined to beg forever. 
The public were loyal to Chaplin partly be- 
cause they recognized him for what he was and 
identified with him and partly because they felt 
the revulsion we feel for a side of ourselves that 
we cannot accept. The surrealists who held out 
a friendly hand to Chaplin the victim later strong- 
ly condemned his ““sentimentalism”. Luis Bufiuel 
reproached him for allowing himself to be “crip- 
pled by the intellectuals of the whole world” and 
for “trying to make us weep with hoary sen- 
timental commonplaces”. 
The Kid (1921) 
Charlie the guardian of an 
abandoned child.

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 84188: Charlie Chaplin, stranger and brother

   
  
  
A master of 
modern comedy 
Born a hundred years ago 
          
5 
’ 
1 
a 
= 
§ 
»
 
T
e
 
ot) 
- 
i 
ne 
" 
vd 
n 
] 
- 
- 
o
i
 
E 
4 
w 
- 
4 
T
I
 
b. 
T
e
 
vw 
-
 
i
 
, 
ly 
R 
- 
i. 
ed 
; 
EE 
= 
   
. 
. 
T
y
 
=
 
ae 
Ly 
Pr 
i 
i 
ha 
. 
OX 
2 
A
A
R
 
R
N
 
P
E
A
 
Pua, 
IB 
. 
he 
SS 
3
 
R
e
e
d
 
B
e
 
* 
y 
a
 
‘
s
i
s
 
Sallie 
be 
o
S
 
= 
o
e
 
hy 
i
 
-
 
" 
§ 
rT 
a 
A
 
1
 
     
” 
a 
2) 
- 
L
o
 
L
y
 
p
e
 
) 
t
 
M
o
 
>
 
-
y
 
» 
.
 
. 
. 
R
L
 
3 
§ 
fi 
a
 
1h 
E
a
s
 
f
a
t
s
 
L
h

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 84188: Charlie Chaplin, stranger and brother

40 
FROM LEFT TO RIGHT: 
The Pilgrim (1923) 
The escaped convict . 
disguised as a clergyman 
preaches bis first sermon. 
The Gold Rush (1925) 
Prospecting for gold in 
Alaska, Charlie takes refuge 
from a snowstorm in the 
cabin of outlaw Black 
Larson (right). Also driven 
into the cabin is Big Jim 
Mackay (centre) a 
prospector who has found 
gold. 
The Circus (1927) 
Charlie’s accidents in the 
ring make a hit with the 
audience. 
  
    
Such passions, contradictions and inconsisten- 
cies reveal the strength of the feelings which 
Chaplin has aroused. 
The ‘little fellow’ 
Charles Chaplin first visited the United States in 
1911 with Fred Karno’s music-hall troupe. He 
returned the following year and stayed on to ap- 
pear in vaudeville routines whose growing suc- 
cess owed much to the traditions of English music 
hall. He soon established a reputation with a 
number of classic sketches which he later adapt- 
ed for the cinema. Two of them, A Night in a 
London Club and An Evening in an English 
Music Hall, were built around the character of a 
fractious drunk and could be constantly varied 
depending on the reactions of the audience. 
When he started out in films in 1914 Chaplin 
played bit parts. The screen character for which 
he is remembered did not yet exist. He was feel- 
ing his way, trying to find his style. After a long 
period of improvisation in which he played ag- 
gressive, vindictive roles, he became a kind of bad- 
tempered Harlequin kitted out in the ragged 
clothes he remembered from his London days: 
“I ended up by thinking of those Englishmen 
whom I had so often seen, with their little black 
moustaches, their bamboo canes, their ill-fitting 
jackets. I decided to model myself on them.” 
Chaplin’s famous duck-footed gait owed 
something to Little Tich, an English music-hall 
clown with huge, floppy feet, to a drunken old 
ostler Chaplin had seen staggering around 
Lambeth when he was a child, and to other come- 
dians from Karno’s troupe such as Walter Groves 
and Fred Kitchen. 
Whatever inspired it, this faltering and un- 
certain appearance created the image of the soli- 
tary tramp which Chaplin never changed, even 
when, or especially when, the character grew in 
humanity, subtlety and range of emotion. “Man, 
intoxicated with intelligence, dancing on the 
peaks of despair”, as the critic Elie Faure said of 
Chaplin in 1922, immortalizing this initiation 
into endless vagabondage: “Each of his feet, so

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### IGNORE

painful and so burlesque, is one of the two poles 
of the spirit. One is called knowledge, the other 
desire. By leaping from one to the other he seeks 
that centre of gravity of the soul that we no soon- 
er find than we immediately lose again.” 
Chaplin’s quest never ended, even if its course 
sometimes disconcerted his warmest admirers. 
Haunted by the spectres of a mentally unstable 
mother and an alcoholic father who had once 
stared at him without recognition in the street, 
he channelled into his creation all the love which 
had been denied him in his childhood. 


### 84188: Charlie Chaplin, stranger and brother

Charlie the stranger 
As well as performing in the melodrama that he 
used as the mainspring of his dialogue with the 
public, Chaplin was always an active and mili- 
tant witness of his times, starting with his early 
campaigns in support of American intervention 
on the side of the Allies in World War I. The 
Bond, a not very convincing propaganda short, 
and the masterpiece Shoulder Arms, both made 
in 1918, were his contribution to the mobiliza- 
tion effort, but above all they were a denuncia- 
tion of the folly of war. 
In these films Chaplin refined the character 
whose mere appearance was a challenge to the 
established order. He became increasingly a 
“stranger” in the sense that Albert Camus gave 
to the word in The Myth of Sisyphus (1942): 
“Strangeness creeps in: perceiving that the world 
is ‘dense’, sensing to what degree a stone is for- 
eign and irreducible to us, with what intensity 
nature or a landscape can negate us. ... Men, too, 
secrete the inhuman. At certain moments of lu- 
cidity, the mechanical aspect of their gestures, 
their meaningless pantomime, make silly every- 
thing that surrounds them.” 
Charlie has only to appear at a spa where he 
is taking a cure, drunk from the first scene, and 
a whole world of hidden vices, shameless gossip 
MARCEL OMS, 
French educator and 
historian of the cinema, is 
the author of several 
published works, including 
a recent study on the 
French director Alain 
Resnais (1988). 
4344 11433
319383333
33 
41

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 84188: Charlie Chaplin, stranger and brother

  
FROM LEFT TO RIGHT: 
Modern Times (1936) 
Charlie is caught up in the 
machine age. 
The Great Dictator 
(1940) 
“Had I known of the 
actual horrors of the 
concentration camps, I 
could not have made The 
Great Dictator. I could 
not have made fun of 
the homicidal insanity 
of the nazis.” 
Limelight (1952) 
The aging and despondent 
music-hall artist 
Calvero, who had once 
42 been a great star. 
and puritanical preaching is shattered (The Cure, 
1917); an escaped convict, he disguises himself in 
the stolen clothes of a clergyman, and all kinds 
of hypocrisy are unmasked (The Pilgrim, 1923); 
a jark-of-all trades in a pawnbroker’s shop, he 
dismantles and totally destroys a clock in order 
to determine its value (The Pawnshop, 1916); on 
the run again, he is taken in by a woman and her 
pretty daughter whom he saves from drowning. 
He wakes up next morning and, a victim of a 
comedy of transposition in which each object 
seems to suggest something else, he imagines that 
the pyjamas he has been lent are prison uniform 
and the bars of his brass bed are those of his cell. 
Later he drenches the pretty girl’s arrogant beard- 
ed swain with soda water, and at the end of an 
apocalyptic final scene in which the ladies are 
embroiled in a riotous melée, he wins the pretty 
girl—for an all-too-brief moment (The Adventurer, 
1917). 
After skilfully denouncing capitalist duplicity 
in City Lights (1931), Chaplin attacked the 
alienation and loss of creativity produced by the 
“mechanical gestures” of mass production in 
Modern Times (1936). An idyllic digression in 
which Charlie and the waif set up home together 
in a shack is a grotesque yet touching variation on 
the myth of the golden age which cannot blind us 
to the fact that even this dream has become alien. 
An artist’s testament 
The dream turned into a nightmare with the rise 
of nazism. The Great Dictator (1940), Chaplin’s 
first talking picture, is a satire on Hitler (both 
Chaplin and Hitler were born in the same month) - 
in which a Jewish barber is mistaken for a 
dictator. 
The myth of the clown is the tightrope walk- 
er’s poetic response to the values of a world 
which is hostile, indifferent and absurd. Chaplin 
had perfectly adapted circus skills to the cinema. 
His little tramp was an anti-establishment figure, 
the caricature of a dandy; his poverty was the 
other side of the coin of social success. 
 

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

  
         
. 
4
 
J i
 
pl 
    5 
A 
"
5
 
as 
=   
  
But Chaplin’s testament is Limelight, made 
in 1952, a film which is not so much an autobi- 
ography in disguise, as critics have said, but a lu- 
cid and serene reflection on the subject of origins. 
The film, whose hero Calvero both is and is 


### 84188: Charlie Chaplin, stranger and brother

not Charlie himself, is set in the places where 
Chaplin grew up and at the time when he was 
starting out in the cinema, and several members 
of the Chaplin family acted in it. But in spite of 
many autobiographical allusions, Limelight is 
much more than autobiography. This nostalgic 
look in the mirror in which wrinkles have etched 
the face of youth could perhaps best be described 
as a portrait of the artist as a showman. Again 
words from Camus’ The Myth of Sisyphus spring 
to mind: “Likewise the stranger who at certain 
seconds comes to meet us in a mirror, the familiar 
and yet alarming brother we encounter in our 
own photographs is also the absurd.” 
In a famous scene in The Gold Rush (1925), 
all alone in his cabin on New Year’s Eve after 
the girl he has fallen in love with fails to turn up 
to have dinner with him, Charlie faces up to a 
kind of death. On a night when the rest of the 
world is laughing and celebrating, the lonely out- 
sider spears two bread rolls with forks and makes 
the miniature feet thus formed perform a dance. 
It was in the midst of the festive season that 
Charles Chaplin died, on Christmas Eve 1977. It 
is tempting to write a scenario for his last exit... 
On a snowy night the wind is howling against 
the door of the wooden shack on the edge of the 
cliff and the long drop into oblivion. The last log 
is flickering out. With a shrug of the shoulders, 
Charlie wraps himself in his shroud. He shakes 
off the snow, kicks his heels, and with waddling 
gait takes leave of the world. | 
r
e

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

  
  REFLECTIONS 
  
    
‘Reflections’ is a Unesco Courier feature intended to stimulate thinking on a topic unrelated to 
the main theme of the current issue and will in some cases, as here, enrich our coverage of a theme 
treated in a previous issue. 


### 84189: Slaves of one man'

‘Slaves of one man’ 
BY CHANTAL DE GRANDPRE, 
 
  

## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 84189: Slaves of one man'

As a follow-up to our June 1989 
issue (“1789: An idea that changed 
the world”), we publish this 
assessment of the portrayal of the 
American Indian in 17th- and 18th. 
century French literature. 
Descriptions of Indian life were used 
by the philosophers of the 
Enlightenment as a powerful and 
subversive means of expressing 
criticism of French society. 
  
Tee discovery of the New World was a power- 
ful influence for change in the social structure of 
the ancien régime. The American Indians had made 
their appearance in French literature in the six- 
teenth century in the writings of Montaigne, but 
it was not until the following century, when France 
in her turn ventured into colonization, much later 
than Spain, Portugal and Britain, that there emerged 
a corpus of travellers’ tales in which the Indians took 
pride of place. 
The first French incursions into North Ameri- 
ca were linked to the fur trade. The Indians of 
Nouvelle France had no fabulous cities bursting with 
riches to arouse the greed of the European new- 
comers and, in the early days, there was no urge 
to acquire land at all costs. Under these circum- 
stances, the Indian was seen as an indispensable 
trading partner. He was an equal whom the Europeans 
hoped soon to fashion into their own likeness. 
With this in mind, from 1632 onwards, the 
Jesuits found themselves taking on an evangelizing 
role, the success of which depended on the seden- 
tarization of the main tribes (with the exception 
of the Hurons who were already sedentary and in 
  
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, a 
portrait by the British 
painter Allan Ramsay 
(1713-1784). 
In 1839 the French king 
Louis-Philippe 
commissioned from 
Theodore Gudin 
(1802-1880) this painting 
showing the discovery of 
the St. Lawrence river 
by the French explorer 
Jacques Cartier. 
whose midst a number of missions were soon 
established), and on learning Indian languages. From 
then until 1672, the Jesuits sent back to France Re- 
lations (narrative accounts), describing their expe- 
riences in the New World, which met with huge 
success. The Indians were unquestionably the leading 
characters in these accounts. Their physical 
appearance, qualities, defects and beliefs were 
described at length, with an infectious curiosity and 
sympathy. 
The Jesuits were not to remain for long the only 
ones interested in the Indians. In the eighteenth cen- 
tury a profusion of texts appeared which confirmed 
or contradicted each other. The French traveller and 
writer Baron de la Hontan was perhaps the first of 
those whose avowed aim was to make a critical as- 
sessment of his contemporaries. In 1703, he 
published Voyages du Baron de la Hontan dans 
I'Amérigue septentrionale (* The Travels of Baron de 
la Hontan in North America”). His work was so 
successful that it was reprinted twenty-five times bet- 
ween 1703 and 1758. In his Dialogue ou entretiens 
entre un sauvage et le Baron de la Hontan (“Dialo- 
gue or Conversations between a Savage and Baron 
de la Hontan™), the baron ridicules the evangeliza- 
tion project and reports the words of an Indian, 
Adario, who takes issue with the dogmas of the 
Catholic Church and then attacks the person of the 
king: “... we are born free and closely united, each 
as important as anyone else, whereas you are all the 
slaves of one man.” 
In 1724, outraged by the opinions of La Hon- 
tan, Father Joseph Lafitau published Moeurs 
des sauvages amériquains comparées aux moeurs des 
premiers temps (“Customs of the American Savages 
Compared to those of Ancient Times”), a laborious 
comparative history of the Indians and the ancient 
Greeks designed to demonstrate that the peoples of 
the New World were not devoid of religion. He also 
atmed to correct the thrust of Jesuit accounts which 
had affirmed the lack of any religious beliefs among 
the peoples of Canada, so as to convince metro- 
politan France of the need to convert them. Above 
all, his book was a vigorous counter-attack against 
the views put forward by Baron de 1a Hontan who 
sought additional justification for his atheism in the 
standpoint of the Indians. 
The Indian as a critical tool 
The year 1770 saw the publication of Abbé Raynal’s 
monumental Histoire philosophique et politique des 
érablissements et du commerce des Européens dans les 
deux Indes (“A Philosophical and Political History 
of European Colonies and Trade in the Two In- 
dias”), to which Diderot has been shown to have 
made a large contribution.! Raynal made use of the 
Indians as an instrument of criticism, the virulence 
of which mounted as edition succeeded edition 
between 1770 and 1798. The divine right of 
monarchy, property and inequality were all roundly - 
condemned: 
“The inequalities of status which we consider 
so necessary to the maintenance of societies is, in 45

## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 84189: Slaves of one man'

46 
  
the eyes of a savage, the height of folly .. but what 
strikes them as an infamy, as a degradation below 
that of wild beasts, is that men, who are by nature 
equal, should degrade themselves so completely as 
to become dependent upon the desires and whims 
of a single man.” 
Everywhere, and especially among the 
philosophers of the Enlightenment, the Indian is 
used as a powerful means of expressing criticism of 
French society. When Rousseau wrote his Discours 
sur l'origine et les fondements de ['inegalité parmi les 
hommes (“A Discourse upon the Origin and Foun- 
dation of Inequality Among Mankind”, 1755), he 
did not draw only upon the English example; 
since 1750, many works had been written on America 
and Rousseau had read Lescarbot, Lafitau and 
Baron de la Hontan. From these texts he drew in- 
spiration for his theory of the natural goodness of 
man, a commonplace of eighteenth<century litera- 
ture.2 He radicalized and gave a political dimension 
to what had previously been limited strictly to the 
field of observation. 
Nevertheless, the Indian did not represent the 
same idea to all the philosophers of the Enlighten- 
ment. In this regard, Voltaire, Rousseau and Diderot 
cannot be lumped together, their ideas being often 
irreconcilable. The Huron Indian in Voltaire’s 
story L'Ingenu (“The Innocent”) was far from 
gentle in his condemnation of French customs and 
politics, but his viewpoint is biased in that he was 
a false “Noble Savage”, being of French parentage. 
Voltaire used his Huron to refute Rousseau’s 
theories on education (L’Jngénu became a savage 
although he was naturally a Frenchman), as well as 
those of Lafitau on the European origin of the 
Indians. 
Furthermore, the Enlightenment philosophers 
did not exalt the merits of the same Indians; some 
preferred the tribes of the north to those of the 
south, and vice versa, and the picture they painted 
of the Indians varied according to whether they were 
progressives (like Diderot) or not (like Rousseau). 
Most of them, however, derided the activities of the 
Jesuits, who were ferociously caricatured by Voltaire 
in L'Ingénu. In this tale surprise is expressed that 
the Hurons are not all Catholics. “Haven't the 
Reverend Fathers converted them all?” asks 
Mademoiselle de Sant-Yves ingenuously (or 
perfidiously?). 
However opposed to the Jesuits the majority 
of the authors of certain travellers’ tales and the 
philosophers of the Enlightenment may have been, 
it cannot be denied that the seed of the ideas they 
expressed on inequality, the monarchy and property 
was contained in the Jesuits’ Relations. 
Parnstaking and scrupulous observers as they 
were, the Jesuits noted down everything they saw. 
- No doubt they wanted to reform the Indians, but 
they also hoped to learn lessons from them that 
could be applied to the French. They were thus the 
first to make comparisons between the two societies 
and to weigh their respective values against each 
other; and in this confrontation French society did 
not always come off best. The Jesuits could not but 
approve of the frugal lifestyle of the Indians and 
of their generosity, which was a corollary of the 
absence of private property and the concept of 
profit. Thus their readers gradually became 
accustomed to the idea that man could be happy, 
free and equal, without a king, without laws and 
without codified rights. The effect of all this on their 
contemporaries was undoubtedly detrimental to the 
interests of the monarchy, since their eulogies of a 
democratic form of government was an implied criti- 
cism of the monarchical system. 
Three themes, which were continually being 
developed and radicalized throughout the eighteenth 
century, appear in the pages of the Jesuits’ Relations: 
criticism of the monarchy, man’s relationship with 
nature and the Indian's right to speak out, and 
thence his right to power. 
The Indians as Republicans 
In Nouvelle France, though not in France itself, the 
Jesuits were opposed to royal power, They dreamed 
of setting up in Canada a system such as they had 
launched in Paraguay and California—a Jesuit 
theocratic state which was often seen as a socialist 
state in embryo. They were the first to see the 
Indians as “Republicans” in the mould of the 
ancient Romans. 
For them this assimilation justified their boost- 
ing of the republican governmental system of the 
Indians whose egalitarian values and spartan rigour 
brought into question the France of the day. Father 
Brébeuf, who lived among the Hurons from 1634 
until his death, at the hands of the Iroquois, in 1649, 
wrote two Relations about the Hurons. In the 1636 
version he described in detail their system of govern 
ment, whose democratic nature he lauded. He relat- 
ed that the Hurons had two chiefs, one for war and 
one to take care of internal affairs. The “captains” 
of the sub-divisions of these two authorities were 
elected on the basis of “their mtelligence, populari- 
ty, wealth and other qualities which earned them 
esteem in the Land”. 
In case his meaning was not sufficiently clear, 
Brébeuf took care to contrast Huron society with 
that of France: “They attain this level of advance- 
ment partly by inheritance and partly by election. 
They are not normally succeeded by their own chil- 
dren but by their nephews or their grandchildren. 
Even for them succession to these petty kingships 
is not automatic, as is the succession of the Dauphin 
to the throne of France or of French children to 
the heritage of their fathers; it is dependent upon 
their having the necessary qualities, on their accept- 
ing the honour and on their being acceptable to the 
whole Country.” 
In this system Brebeuf detected “the spirit of 
all republics” and he also praised the freedom of 
speech which was the rule among the Indians and 
which he saw as being indissociable from the im- 
portance placed on oratory: 
“So accustomed are they to this that, since most 
of them have good minds, they become alert and 
train themselves wonderfully, to the extent that vir- 
tually all of them are able to discuss and reason clear- 
ly, and in well-rounded phrases, those things about 
which they have some knowledge. The Councils 
which are held in the villages almost every day, con- 
cerning all kinds of events, are yet another way in 
which they learn the art of discourse. Although the 
elders hold the centre of the stage and the decisions 
taken depend upon their judgement, anyone who 
so wishes may attend and everyone has the right 
to express an opinion.” 
The Jesuits’ position with regard to nature was 
more complex and contradictory. Although they ad- 
mired the way in which the Indians lived in har- 
mony with their natural surroundings, the Jesuits 
nevertheless wanted to “civilize” them, in other 
words to destroy their privileged links with nature. 
Paradoxically, however, they also tried to keep 
the Indians away from Europeans. This is where the 
widespread notion of the corrupt civilized man first 
arose. Although they lived precarious lives, the 
savages were better than their European counterparts 
and, once converted, would be superior to them. 
In praising Indian children, “more lively and more 
intelligent” than French children, the Jesuits were 
giving their seal of approval to the Indians’ “natur- 
al” way of life. 
Finally, the Jesuits let the Indians have their say; 
and often what they had to say turned into an in- 
dictment. 
“These skilful dialecticians,” wrote Gilbert 
Chinard, “were so enamoured of well reasoned argu- 
ments that they could not help reporting at length 
the disquisitions addressed to them by Indians hos- 
tile to their influence. At times they even admitted, 
sotto voce, that perhaps their interlocutors were 
right.” 
The Indian free-thinker 
In 1634, while spending the winter with a group of 
Montagnais, Father Lejeune crossed swords with the 
witch-doctor in the course of a series of oratorical 
jousts in which he did not always come off best. The 
witch-doctor evaluated Christian dogma and turned 
Lejeune’s own arguments against him. When the 
Jesuit extolled the merits of life in the next world, 
the witch-doctor confessed that he was afraid of dy- 
ing, but assured his opponent that if “I believed that 
the other world was so full of delights, I would kill 
myself so as to enjoy it”. But when the Frenchman 
replied that God forbade us to kill ourselves, the 
witch-doctor taunted him, as Lejeune reported: 
“ ‘Well, in that case don’t kill yourself, I shall 
kill you to please you, so that you may go to 
Heaven and enjoy the pleasures of which you speak.”

## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 84189: Slaves of one man'

/ 
y
m
 
“ 
A 
+
 
£y
/ 
“.
 
/ 
“
 
W
s
!
 
Si
 7
 
A 
Spada 
Tllustration from Baron de 
la Hontan’s book 
“Dialogue or Conversations 
between a Savage and 
Baron de la Hontan” 
(Amsterdam, 1704), in 
which the author ridicules 
the evangelization of the 
North American Indians 
through a fictitious dialogue 
with the Indian Adario. 
CHANTAL 
DE GRANDPRE, 
of Canada, is a lecturer in 
the literature of Quebec at 
the university of Paris X. 
She is the author of many 
articles and studies 
including an essay on 
American literature written 
in collaboration with Denis 
Egan and published in the 
encyclopaedia Clartés 
(Paris, 1988). 
I'smiled and replied that I could not accept that any- 
one could take my life without sinning. ‘I see very 
well,” he replied mockingly, ‘that you do not want 
to die any more than I do.” ” 
Quite apart from the fact that the Indian of the 
Jesuits was in no sense a “Noble Savage”, it was the 
Jesuit, the European, who cut a childlike figure, with 
no patience, no sense of humour and, above all, no 
oratorical talent. 
The mythology of the western film has ac- 
customed us to the idea of Indians mumbling halt- 
ingly in the language of the colonists. The Relations 
of the Jesuits, on the contrary, portrayed them as 
being highly eloquent and stressed the linguistic in- 
competence of Lejeune at whom the Indians scoffed 
because he could not express himself correctly in 
the Montagnais language. “In the end I told them 
that I was a child and that children make their fathers 
laugh with their stutterings,” he wrote. 
The multiplicity of these accounts of scenes from 
Indian life, in which the writers are bold enough to 
demonstrate the inefficacy of European speech, is 
indicative of an overturning of values. By revealing 
to their contemporaries the Indian as a critic rather 
than as a “Noble Savage”, the Jesuits showed that 
French society could also be held up to judgement. 
              
  
  
  
This subversive image of the Indian transmitted 
in travellers’ tales and in the Relations was to con- 
tribute to the ferment of thought of the Enlighten 
ment. In the writings of a Montesquieu or a Voltaire 
(who had the Jesuit missionary Charlevoix as his 
source) it strengthened the conviction that the 
widening of geographical horizons entailed a 
broadening of the mind. Despite their hostility to 
the Jesuits, many “philosophers” (Montesquieu, 
Grimm, Raynal) saw the “socialist” experiments in 
Paraguay in a favourable light. From Montaigne’s 
essay on “cannibals” to Rousseau’s Discourse on In- 
equality, the Indian’s role as a social and political 
critic grew increasingly important in Western ideol- 
ogy. And this fascination with the Other contribut- 
ed in no small measure to the great explosion of 
1789. | 
1. Michéle Duchet, Diderot et Ihistoire des deux Indes ou 
Vécriture fragmentaire (1978). 
2. Gilbert Chinard, Influence des récits de voyages sur la 
philosophie de Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1911). 
3. Gilbert Chinard, L'amérique et le réve exotique dans la 
ol frangaise au 17¢ et au 18¢ siecle (1913, reissued 
1970). 47

## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 84190: Understanding global change

48 
  
SCIENCE AND SOCIETY   
Understanding global change 
BY ALISON McKELVEY. CLAYSON 
F.. more than a decade, many scien- 
tists have warned that industry and agri- 
culture were spewing enough gases 
into the atmosphere to heat up the 
Earth and eventually produce disastrous 
climatic changes. The gases are known 
as “greenhouse gases”, while the phe- 
nomenon of global warming is called 
the “greenhouse effect” because the 
gases that accumulate—like the glass 
panes of the greenhouse—trap the 
Sun's heat and prevent it from escaping 
back into space. 
Some of these gases are also res- 
ponsible for destroying the protective 
layer of ozone in the Earth's atmosphere. 
This too is very serious because without 
its protective blanket, the Earth absorbs 
increased amounts of ultraviolet radiation 
from the Sun, which can cause skin 
cancer, cataracts and certain immuno- 
logical diseases. 
Despite the scientists’ warning, 
global warming trends received little 
public attention until a string of 
weather-related disasters in 1988 
seemed to drive the point home. Heat 
waves and drought throughout the 
United States, humicanes in the Caribbean, 
and flooding in Bangladesh could all be 
previews of what will happen with 
increasing frequency if the atmosphere 
warms by between 2° and 5° by the 
middle of the next century, as some 
scientists have predicted. 
Excess carbon dioxide is the main 
culprit, although other gases such as the 
 
A cloud of ice in the stratosphere. 
Scientists think ice clouds may encourage 
chemical reactions leading 
to the destruction of the ozone layer. 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used to 
pressurize aerosol sprays and insulate 
refrigerators are also implicated, as are 
natural gases such as methane. Meth- 
ane is produced by bacteria in the guts 
of termites and cattle, in the green 
muck of rice paddies, in the rotting gar- 
bage of landfills, and in the world's 1.5 
million square kilometres of peat bogs 
and tundra. 
In 1880, the concentration of car- 
bon dioxide in the atmosphere was 290 
parts per miflion (ppm). it is now about 
350 ppm. Most of the extra carbon has 
come from burning fossil fuels such as 
coal or oil, and as a side effect of de- 
stroying forests: when 1 tonne of carbon 
in the form of coal is burnt, it pro- 
duces about 4 tonnes of carbon dioxide. 
Studies of air bubbles trapped inside ice 
cores from the Antarctic confirm that 
roughly the same concentration of car- 
bon dioxide persisted throughout the 
past 10,000 years—until the industria! 
era disturbed the balance. 
Of course, the disasters of summer 
1988 may have had nothing to do with 
the greenhouse effect. They may just 
have been part of the random and na- 
tural variations in weather that occur 
everywhere. The scientists themselves 
do not agree in their interpretation of 
these events, but no one disputes the 
fact that the amount of carbon dioxide 
in the atmosphere has increased, that 
the rate of climate change is likely to 
be faster than at any time in human his- 
tory, and that such change will be fun- 
damentally destabilizing and disruptive 
to our planet since living organisms and 
the ecosystems they inhabit cannot 
adapt that readily to rapid change. 
THE CONSEQUENCES 
OF GLOBAL WARMING 
An increase in world temperatures over 
the next fifty years seems likely to cause 
a chain reaction. According to com- 
puter models used to predict what might 
happen, the greenhouse effect will dra- 
matically alter patterns of rainfall: 
some places will be wetter, others drier. 
This will affect vegetation, which in turn 
will affect the animals that depend on 
plants for survival. Changes in vegeta- 
tion can themselves cause changes in 
climate. Giobal warming may devastate 
food crops in some areas, encourage 
soil erosion and create conditions in 
which pests are unleashed in a new 
environment, 
The consequences for agriculture 
are equally serious: we have seen the 
sad effects of the regional warming 
trend over the past twenty years in sub- 
Saharan Africa, where a growing popu- 
lation, deteriorating soil conditions and 
changing climate have combined to 
overwhelm the fragile food supply 
system, and there have been famine 
and misery. In China, the desert is 
spreading at the rate of 1,500 square 
kilometres a year. 
One of the most significant results 
of the greenhouse effect is that it causes 
the sea level to rise. The oceans have 
already risen about 13 cm in the last 
century. What would societies do if the 
oceans were to rise by 1-1.5 metres, as 
some scientists predict? Major cities like 
New York, Bangkok, Calcutta, Rio de - 
Janeiro and Seoul could be flooded out; 
countries like Bangladesh and The 
Netherlands might eventually disappear, 
while entire populations could become 
refugees from low-lying coastal areas. 
Another factor in sea level rise is the 
melting of icecaps. Researchers suspect 
the greenhouse effect to be at work, 
for a whole series of massive icebergs 
have been breaking off the Antarctic ice 
shelf and melting into the sea. Higher

## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 84190: Understanding global change

  
global temperatures not only melt polar 
ice, they make water expand, thus 
causing floods. 
THE QUICKENING PACE 
OF CHANGE 
In 1800, at the beginning of the Euro- 
pean Industrial Revolution, there were 
a thousand million human beings on 
the Earth. By 1930 the number had 
doubled, and by 1975 it had doubled 
again, If current birth-rates hold, then 
the world’s present population of 5.1 
thousand million should double again 
during the next 40 years, with 90 per 
cent of that growth occurring in poorer, 
developing countries. 
Still, it is not so much the numbers 
that alarm—although the prospect of 
feeding and providing for 10 thousand 
million human beings is daunting—but 
rather the effect that Homo sapiens will 
have on the Earth's environment, and 
the rate at which human-induced change 
and degradation will occur, tt is the need 
to provide for so many people that puts 
an unbearable pressure on natural 
resources and the environment. 
Change is natural. But in recent 
years man has accelerated the rate of 
change—by profligate burning of fos- 
sil fuels such as oil and coal, by wan- 
ton desecration of forests, by careless 
introduction of poisons into the soil and 
water supplies, and by uncontrolled 
emission of dangerous automobile and 
industrial fumes into the air—so that the 
delicate equilibrium that has always 
regulated the total Earth system and its 
component parts has been destroyed: 
the geosphere (the planet), the at- 
mosphere (the air around the Earth) and 
the biosphere (that overlapping area 
between the two where life exists) are 
out of kilter. Man has undermined his 
own life-support system, and the con- 
sequences may well be irreversible. If 
they are, then the 10,000 years since 
the last Ice Age may have witnessed the - 
dawn and the decline of modern man. 
THE MOST COMPREHENSIVE 
STUDY OF EARTH EVER 
UNDERTAKEN 
To understand what has happened, it 
is necessary to understand the impact 
of human activity on the environment, 
on the concentrations and mixtures of 
gases found in the atmosphere, on cli- 
Ey 2 Tea I da aie 
! ¥ 
i 
i 
  
A balloon is launched 
at Kiruna (Sweden) early in 
1989 as part of an international 
scientific research 
project to monitor the ozone 
layer above the Arctic. 
mate, and how these interact. The 
scientific community has accepted this 
challenge, and through a worldwide 
non-governmental organization called 
the International Council of Scientific 
Unions (ICSU), it has launched an inter- 
national study of Global Change known 
as the International Geosphere- 
Biosphere Programme (IGBP). 
The subject of the study is the Earth 
itself and the process of change, 
whether induced by human beings or 
natural forces. The scientists will seek 
to describe and explain these occur- 
rences, perhaps also to predict them. 
But the ultimate goal of the Programme 
is to translate this knowledge into terms 
the decision-makers will comprehend so 
that appropriate actions can be taken 
at national and international levels to 
minimize the destructive consequences 
of such changes for man’s well-being 
and survival, 
The Global Change study will be 
the most comprehensive investigation 
of Earth ever undertaken. It will link 
scores of research institutions, inter- 
national organizations and academic 
centres, and will engage thousands 
of scientists in every continent. For 
the first time, the work of physicists, 
astronomers, biologists, chemists, data 
processors, geographers, oceanographers, 
meteorologists, palaeontologists, geolo- 
gists, and many other disciplines will be 
harnessed for a common objective, 
studying and interpreting changes in the 
Earth's physical, chemical and biologi- 
cal systems viewed as an interacting 
whole. 
 
tn 1988, under the aegis of ICSU, 
a Global Action Plan was drawn up by 
a Special Committee of 19 scientists 
from 16 countries and six continents. 
Their Plan identified four basic research 
themes. 
Documenting and predicting 
global change: This will require a 
worldwide network of monitoring 
“observatories”, both on-the-ground 
and by remote sensing from space. 
Improving understanding of 
major forces of change: Variations in 
the Earth's orbit and in amounts of so- 
lar energy reaching the biosphere can 
have profound effects on life systems. 
So can volcanic eruptions of gases and 
dust, which some scientists believe may 
be held accountable for mass extinc- 
tions of the past. Human activities are 
change forces of comparable magni- 
tude. The Global Change Programme 
will assess the relative importance of 
such factors. 
Understanding interactions in 
the Total Earth System: The study of 
how physical, chemical and biclogical 
systems, including those influenced by 
man, interact in a self-regulating Total 
Earth System, is a very new science. 
Assessing the effects of global 
change on our resource base: As 
knowledge about global change im- 
proves, it must be used to predict local 
and regional effects on resources such 
as agriculture, forests, and fisheries. 
These themes are very broad—too 
broad, really, to be of much use in de- 
signing specific research projects, 
although they are helpful in providing 
a general context and framework. In- 
stead, they are being broken down in- 
to smaller chunks and parcelled out 
among an expanding number of com- 
mittees and other groups whose mem- 
bers are drawn from institutions 
affiliated with ICSU. The interested par- 
ties include Unesco, the World Mete- 
orological Organization (WMO), the 
United Nations Environment Program- 
me (UNEP), regional organizations and 
national scientific bodies including 37 
national committees, to name but a 
few. In the interdisciplinary spirit of the 
IGBP, the main project areas being de- 
veloped focus on the linkages between 
systems. For instance: 
» Terrestrial biospheric-atmospheric che- 
mistry interactions, 
* Marine biosphere-atmosphere 
interactions; 
* Biospheric aspects of the hydro- 
logical cycle; 
» Effects of climate change on terrestrial 
ecosystems; 
» Global changes of the past. 
A WORLDWIDE PROGRAMME 
OF SCIENTIFIC CO-OPERATION 
The challenge of a scientific pro- 
gramme like this one is to go beyond 
sectoral viewpoints and disciplinary 
biases to achieve a sense of the Total 
Earth System and the interaction of its 
component parts. Two working groups 
whose mandates cut across all specia- 
lizations have been established. One will 
study the ways in which modern data 
and information systems can be used 
in handling the vast and complex mass 
of data generated by the IGBP, and the 
other will look specifically at the es- 
tablishment of Regional Research 
Centres. It is proposed to set up about 
10 multi-purpose centres for the analy- 
sis, interpretation and modelling of data 
based on regional observations. These 
centres will be linked to worldwide 
monitoring networks and research sites. 
The IGBP is a long-term effort to 
study the causes and effects of global 
change, Some projects may be ac- 
complished in a few years, while others 
may take 20 to 30 years just to accu- 
mulate a useful data base. What mat- 
ters in the end, however, is that all the 
different pieces of the mosaic we call 
Earth should be seen as a whole, 
without regard to geographical or dis- 
ciplinary boundaries. Only a worldwide 
programme of scientific co-operation 
and research can hope to achieve such 
a goal. [| 
ALISON McKELVEY CLAYSON, 
of the United States, is 
information officer for the 
International Council of 
Scientific Unions and the former 
Editor of Unesco’s environment 
journal Nature and Resources. 
49

## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

50 
JI INEsco 
me LINESCO © 
[HL 
Published monthly in 34 languages and in braille 
by Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization. 
31, rue Francois Bonvin, 75015 Paris, France 
 
42nd YEAR  
Director: Bahgat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin, Caroline Lawrence 
French edition: Alain Lévéque, Neda El Khazen 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Arabic edition: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoudi 
Studies and research: Fernando Ainsa 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
INustrations: Ariane Bailey (Tel: 45.68.46.90) 
Documentation: Violette Ringelstein (Tel.: 45.68.46 85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions: Solange Belin 
Secretariat: Annie Brachet (Tel : 45.68.4715), 
Mouna Chatta, 
Public relations: Claudie Duhamel (Tel 45.68 45 86) 
Selection in braille in English, French, 
Spanish and Korean: Marie-Dominique Bourgeais 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Georgi Zelenin (Moscow) 
German: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Shri Krishna Kumar Singh (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: H. Sadough Vanini (Teheran) 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra ligazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras | Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Paik Syeung Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwa (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, 
Slovene: Bozidar Perkovic (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: S.J. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Manni Kossler (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larranaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Dao Tung (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Nasir Seham (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
Bengali: Ahmed Hedayet (Dhaka) 
SALES AND PROMOTION 
Manager: Henry Knobil (45.68 45 88), Assistant: Marie- 
Noélle Branet (45.68 45 89), Subscriptions: Marie-Thérése 
Hardy (45.68.45 65), Jocelyne Despouy, Alpha Diakité, 
Jacqueline Louise-Julie, Manichan Ngonekeo, 
Michel Ravassard, Mohamed Salah El Din, 
Customer service: Ginette Motreff (45.68.45.64), 
Accounts: Liliane Tasch (45.68.45.66), Cultural projects: 
Ricardo Zamora-Perez (Tel.: 45.68 45.80), 
Shipping: Hector Garcia Sandoval 
ADVERTISING 
Publicat: 17, Boulevard Poissonniére, 75002 Paris 
Tel.. 40.26.51.26 
Sales director: Benoit Rosier 
Advertising director: Daniéle Michelet 
SUBSCRIPTIONS 
Tel: 4568.45.65 
1 year: 126 French francs. 2 years: 234 FF. 
Developing countries 
1 year: 99 French francs. 2 years: 180 FF. 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco 
Individual articles and photographs not copynghted may be reprinted 
providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from the Unesco Courier”, 
plus date of issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor 
Signed articles reprinted must bear author's name. Non-copynight 
photos will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be 
returned unless accompanied by an international reply coupon 
covering postage. Signed articles express the opinions of the authors 
and do not necessanly represent the opinions of Unesco or those of 
the editors of the Unesco Courier. Photo captions and headlines are 
written by the Unesco Courier staff. The boundanes on maps 
published in the magazine do not imply official endorsement or 
acceptance by Unesco or the United Nations. The Unesco Courier 1s 
produced in microform (microfilm andlor microfiche) by: (1) Unesco, 7 
Place de Fontenay, 75700 Paris, (2) University Microfilms (Xerox), Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48100, US A; (3) NCR Microcard Edition, Indian 
Head, Inc, 111 West 40th Street, New York, US A; (4) Bell and 
Howell Co, Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohwo 44691, US A 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE 
(Pnnted in France) - DEPOT LEGAL : C1 - OCTOBRE 1989 
Photocomposition: The Unesco Couner 
Photogravure impression: Maury Imprimeur S.A, Z| route d'Etampes, 
45330 Malesherbes 
ISSN 0041-5278 NO 10.1989 OM .89.1.473 A 
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for-other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National Distributor in your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors In countries not listed, along with subscription rates 
in local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
ALBANIA. ‘Ndermarrja € perpjes se ibn’, Trana ARGENTINA. Libreria el 
Correo de la Unesco - EDILYR, SRL. Tucuman 1885, 1050 Buenos Ares 
AUSTRALIA. Books only” Educational Supples Pty Ltd, P.O. Box 33. 
Brookvale 2100, NSW; Periodicals: Dominie Pty Subscriptions Dept. PO 
Box 33, Brookvale 2100. NSW. Sub-agents- United Nations Association of 
Australia, Victonan Division, 328 Flinders Street. Melbourne 3000.Hunter 
Publications, 58a Gipps St. Collingwood, Victoria 3066. AUSTRIA. Gerold 
and Co., Graben 31, A-1011, Vienna, BAHRAIN. United Schools Interna- 
tional, Arab Regional Office. PO Box 726, Bahrain: The Arabian Agencies 
and Distributing Co.. Al Mutanabi St.. PO Box 156, Manama BANGLADESH 
Kanm international. GPO Box No: 2141, 64/| Mamipun Para. Tejgaon. 
Farmgate. Dhaka, BARBADOS. University of the West Indies Bookshop, 
Cave Hill Campus. P.O. Box 64, Bridgetown, BELGIUM. Jean de Lannoy. 202 
Ave. du Rol, 1060 Brussels BOTSWANA. Botswana Book Centre. PO Box 91 
Gaborone. BRAZIL. Fundacao Getulo Vargas, Servigo del Pubhcagoes. 
caixa postal 9.042-2C-05 Praia de Botalogo 188, Rio de Janewo (RJ) 2000; 
Books only Imagem Latinoamencana. Av. Paulista 750. | andar, caixa postal 
30455, Sao Paulo CEP 01051. BULGARIA. Hemus. Kantora Literatura, 
boulevard Rousky 6. Sotia. BURMA. Trade Corporation no, (9), 550-552 
Merchant Street. Rangoon. CANADA. Renoul Publishing Co. Ltd. 1294 
Algoma Road, Ottawa. Ontario K18 3W8. (Stores 61 Sparks Street, Offawa, 
211 Yonge St, Toronto. Safes office” 7575 Trans Canada Hwy. Ste 305, St. 
Laurent, Quebec H4T 1v6. CAMEROON. Cameroon Book Centre, PO Box 
123, Limbe, Commission Nationale, BP 1600, Yaounde CHILE, Editonal 
Universitana S A. Departamento de Importaciones. M Luisa Santander 
0447, casilla 10220, Sanhago; Editonal ‘Andres Bello’. Av. R. Lyon 946, 
Casilio 4256. Santiago de Chile, Dipublic, Antonio Varas 671, 2° piso, casilia 
14364, Correo 21, Santiago. CHINA. China National Publications Import and 
Bookshop Co., Ltd, POB 2942, Kuwail. Penodicals only’ Farafalla Press 
Agency, P.O Box SAFA 4541, Kuwait. LEBANON. Libraine Antoine A. Naufal 
et Freres, BP 656. Berut. LESOTHO Mazenod Book Centre, PO Mazenod. 
Maseru, LIBERIA Natonal Bookstore, Mechlin and Carey Streets. PO Box 
590, Monrovia: Cole and Yancy Bookshops Lid., PO Box 286, Monrovia.- 
LUXEMBOURG. Books only: Librane Paul Bruck, 22, Grande-Rue. Luxem- 
bourg; Periodical: Messagernies Paul Kraus, BP 1022, Luxembourg MALAWI 
Malaw Book Service, Head Office, PO Box 30044, Chichin, Blantyre 3. 
MALAYSIA. University of Malaya Co-operative Bookshop, Kuala Lumpur. 
22-11. MALTA. Sapienzas, 26 Republic St., Valletta. MAURITANIA GRA L|.- 
COMA, 1 rue du Souk X, Avenue kennedy. Nouakchott. MAURITIUS. 
Nalanda Company Lid., 30 Bourbon St., Port-Louis. MEXICO, Librena EI 
Correo de la Unesco, Actipan 66, Coloma del Valle, Apartado postal 61 164, 
06600 Mexico DF. MONACO. British Library. 30 8d. des Moulins. Monte 
Carlo. MORROCCQ. Libraine ‘Aux belles images’, 282 ave. Mohammed-V, 
Rabat, Librairie des ecoles, 12 ave, Hassan-Il. Casaglanca, Société cherfien- 
ne de distribution et de presse. SOCHEPRESS, angle rues de Dinant et St, 
Saens. BP 13683, Casablanca 05 MOZAMBIQUE. Instituto National do Livro 
edo Disco (INLD), avernda 24 de Julho 1921 r / d 1° andar, Maputo NEPAL, 
Saha Prakashan Polchowk, Kathmandu. NETHERLANDS. Books only: 
Keesing. Boeken B V., Hogehilweg 13, Postbus 1118. 1000 BC Amsterdam 
Periodicals Faxon Europe, P.O. Box 197. 1000 AD Amsterdam, 
NETHERLANCS ANTILLES. van Dorp-Edding N V., PO Box 200. willem- 
stad, Curacao. NA. NEW ZEALAND. Government Publishing, PO. Box 
14277-Kilbrmig, Wellington, NIGERIA. The Unversity Bookshop of Ife: The 
University Bookshop of Ibadan. P O 286; The University Bookshop of Nsukka: 
The University Bookshop of Lagos: The Ahmadu Bello University Bookshop of 
Zana NORWAY. Johan Grundt Tanum, P.CB 1177 Sentrum - Oslo 1: 
u Bokhandelen. Universitetssentret, Postboks 307 Biindern, Oslo Export Corporation, P Q. Box 88, Beipng. COLOMBIA. Instituto Colombiano 
de Cultura {Colcultura), Carrera 3A, n® 18 1 24, Bogota; Books only: Librena 
Buchholz Galena. Calle 59, No; 13-13, Bogota. CYPRUS. "MAM', Archbishop 
Makarnos 3rd Avene, PO Box 1722, Nicosia. CZECHOSLOVAKIA. SN.T.L.. 
Spalena 51-113 02. Prague 1. For Slovakia only. Alfa Verlag -Publishers, 
Hurbanovo nam. 6.893 31 Bratslava: PNS-UED, Jindrisska 14, praha 1: 
Slovan, Gottwaldovo Nam 6, 805 32 Bratislavia. DEM. REP. OF YEMEN. 14th 
October Corporation, PO Box 4227, Aden DENMARK. Munksgaard Export- 
OG. Tidsskrittservice. 35 Norre Sogade. DK-1970 Kobenhavn K 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC Librena Blasco. Avenida Bolivar, No, 402, esq 
Hermanos Deligne, Santo Domingo. EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). Un- 
esco Publications Centre. No. 1 Talaat Harb St. Cairo. ETHIOPIA. Ethiopian 
National Agency for Unesco. PO Box 2996. Addis Ababa. FINLAND. 
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, P. O. Box 128. SF-00100 Helsinki, Suomalainen 
Kinakauppa Oy. Kovuvaarankuja 2 01640 Vantaa 64 FRANCE. Librare de 
"Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy. 75700 Pans. Periodicals only. Unesco CPD / 
V-1, rue Miolhs, 75015 Pans GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Buchex- 
port. Postfach 140. Leninstrasse 16, 7010, Leipzig FED. REP. OF GER- 
MANY. For the Unesco Couner: Mr. H. Baum. Deutscher Unesco-Kuner 
Vertrigb, Basaltstrasse 57. D5300 Bonn 3; UNO- Verlag, Simrockstrasse 23, 
D-5300 Bonn 1, S. Karger GmbH. Verlag Angerholsirasse 9. Postlach 2 
D-8034 Germenng { Munchen For scientific maps only’ Geo Center. Postach 
800830. 7000 Stuttgart 80 GHANA. Books only: Presbytenan Bookshop 
Depot Ltd, PO Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Ltd.. PO 7869. Accra, 
The University Bookshop of Ghana. Accra, The University Bookshop of Cape 
Coast; The University Bookshop of Legon. PO Box 1. Legon Periodicals only: 
Fides Entreprises. P.O. Box 14129, Accra. GREAT BRITAIN. See United 
Kingdom. GREECE. Eleftheroudakis SA. international Bookstore, 4 Nikis 
Street. Athens, John Mihalopoulos & Son SA. international Booksellers, P.O. 
Box 10073. 541 10 Thessaloniki. Greek National Commission for unesco. 3 
Akadimias Street. Athens. HONG KONG. Swindon Book Co, 13-15 Lock 
Road, Kowloon; Federal Publications (HK) Ltd , Tokwawan, Kowloon; Hong 
Kong Government Information Services, Publicaon Section, Hong Kong: 
Periodicals only: Beaconsheld House 6th floor. Queen s Road Central, Victor: 
1a. HUNGARY. Kultura-Bushimpon-ABT, P.O B. 149-H-1389, Budapest 62 
ICELAND. Snaebjorn Jonsson and Co.. HF Hafr , Reykjavik 
INDIA. Orient Longman Lid. Kaman Marg. Ballard Estate, Bombay 400038: 
17 Chitaranjan Ave , Calcutta 13, 36a. Anna Sala, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
5-9-41/1 Bashir Bagh. Hyderabad 500001 (AP); B0/1 Mahatma Gandhi Rd., 
Bangalore 560001; 3-5-8320 Hyderguda. Hyderabad-500001 Sub-agents. 
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.. 17 Park St.. Calcutta 70018; Scindia House, 
New Delhi t1 0001. INDONESIA. Bhralara Publishers and Booksellers, 29, 
J1, Oto Iskandardinata 111, Jakarta; Indira P.T.. JI Dr. Sam Ratulangie 37, 
Jakarta Pusat. IRAN. Iranian National Commission for Unesco. 1188 Englab 
Ave., Rostam Give Building. PO. Box 11365-4498, Teheran 13158. 
IRELAND. Periodicals only The Educational Company of Ireland Ltd , PO Box 
433A, Walkinstown, Dublin 12; Books only. TDC Publishers, 11 North Frederick 
Street, Dublin 7. ISRAEL. Literary Transachons. Inc., c/o Steimatzky Lid, 
P © Box 628, Tel Aviv: A B C. Bookstore Lid , P O Box 1283, 71 Allenby Rd., 
Tel Aviv 61000. ITALY. Licosa (Librena Commissionaria Sanson. Sp A }. Via 
Lamarmora 45, Casella Postale 552, 50121 Florence, via Bartoli 29, 20155 
Milan; FAQ Bookshop, via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome. JAMAICA. 
University of the West Indies Bookshop, Mena, Kingston 7. JAPAN. Eastern 
Book Service Inc. 37-3 Hongo 3-chome Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113. JORDAN 
Jordan Distribution Agency, PO Box 375, Amman Periodicals oniy: Jordan 
Book Centre Co Ltd. PO Box 301, Al Jubetha, Amman. KENYA. East Alncan 
Pubhshing House, PO 30571, Nawobi; Africa Book Services Ltd, Ouran 
House, Mangano Street, PO Box 45245, Nairobi. KOREA. Korean National 
Commission for Unesco, P O Box Cenliral 64, Seoul. KUWAIT. The Kuwan 
3: Periodicals only Narve en A/S, Literaturt Jenesten. P O B 6125 Etterstad, 
N 0602 Oslo 6. PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency. 65 Shahrah Quaid-razam, 
P.O. Box No, 729. Lahore 3: Unesco Publications Centre, Regional Office for 
Book Developmentin Asia and the Pacific, 39 Delhi Housing Society. P O. Box 
8950, Karachi 29. PANAMA. Distnbuidora Cultura Internacional, Apartado 
7571, Zona 5, Panama. PHILIPPINES. Nationa! Book Store Inc, 701 Rizal 
Avenue, Manila. POLAND. Orpan-Impon. Palac Kultury | Nauki. Warsaw: Ars 
Polona-Ruch, Krakowskie Przedmiescie No.7 00-068 Warsaw. PORTUGAL. 
[has & Andrade Ltda Livrana Portugal, rua do Carmo 70. Lisbon. ROMANIA. 
ARTEXIM Expont-import, Piata Scienten, no. 1, PO Box 33-16, 70005 
Bucharest. SAUDI ARABIA, Dar al Watan, QOlaya Main Street, loramm Bin 
Sulaym Building, Riyadh. SEYCHELLES. New Service Lid. Kingsgate 
House. PC Box 131. Mahé, National Bookshop. PO Box 48, Mahé SIERRA 
LEONE. Fourah Bay College. Njala University and Sierra leone Dwcesan 
Bookshops. Freetown. SINGAPORE. Righteous Enterprises, P.O. Box 562, 
Kallang Basin Post Office, Singapore 9133. SOCIALIST PEOPLE'S LIBYAN 
ARAB JAMAHIRIYA. General Estabishment for Publishing. Distnbution and 
Advertising, Souf Al Mahmoud: St., PO Box 952, Tripok SOMALIA. Modern 
Book Shop and General, PO Box vad, Mogadiscio. SPAIN. Mundi-Prensa 
Libros SA, apartado 1223. Castell 37, Madrid 1; Ediciones Liber, apartado 
17, Magdalena 8, Ondarroa (Vizcaya): Donare. Ronda de Outero, 20. 
apartado de correos 341, La Coruna. books only: Librena Castells, Ronda 
Universidad 13 y 15, Barcelona 7. Librena de la Generalitat de Catalunya, 
Palan Moja, Rambla de los Estudios 118, 08 002 Barcelona. SRI LANKA, 
Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chitampalam Gardiner Mawata, P OB 244, 
Colombo 2. SUDAN. Al Bashr Bookshop. PO. Box 1118, Khartoum. 
SURINAME. Sunname Natonal Commussion for Unesco, P.O. Box 2943, 
Paramanbo, SWEDEN. A 7B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Regering- 
sgatan 12, Box 16356, S-103 27 Stockholm 16, For the Unesco Courier. 
Svenska FN Forbundet, Skolgrand 2, Box 150 50 S-104, 65 Stockholm; For 
periodicals only Wennergren-Willams AB. Nordenflychtsvagen 70, S-104, 25 
Stockholm: Esselte T alen, Gamla B 26, Box 62 -101, 20 
Stockholm. SWITZERLAND. Europa Verlag. 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich, Libraines 
Payot in Geneva Lausanne, Basle, Berne. Vevey, Montreux, Neuchétel and 
Zunch SYRIA. Aleppo University Books Establishment, University of Aleppo, 
Aleppo - TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P OB. 9030. Dar-es- 
Salaam. THAILAND. Nibondh ang Co. Lid, 40-42 Charoen Krung Road, 
Siyaeg Phaya Sn, PO Box 402, Bangkok; Sul vy Panit, M. 9, 
Rajdamnern Ave., Bangkok; Suksit Siam Company, 1715 Rama IV Road, 
Bangkok: ROEAP, PO Box 1425, Bangkok 10500. TRIN!DAD AND TOBA- 
GO. National Commission for Unesco, 18 Alexandra St. St. ‘Cla, Pont-of- 
Spain. TURKEY. Haset Kitapewi A S.. Istklal Caddesi, No 469, Posta Kutusu 
219, Beyoglu, Istanbul. UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, PO Box 7145, Kampa- 
la. UNITED ARAB EMIRATES. Maktabat al Maktaba, PO Box 15408, Al Ain, 
Abu Dhabi. UNITED KINGDOM. HM Stationery Office. PO Box 276. London, 
Sw8 50T; H.M.S.0. Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Belfast. Manchester, 
Birmingham, Bristol; Third World Publications, 151 Stratford Road, Birming- 
ham 811 1RD: for screntific maps ony. McCarta Lid., 122 King's Cross Rd. 
London WC1X 90S. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. Bernan-UNIPUB, 
Periodicals Department, 4611-F Assembly Drive, Lanham, MD 20706 4391. 
URUGUAY. Ediciones Trecho, S A., Maldonado 1092, Montevideo. USSR. 
V/Q Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga, Ul. Dumitrova 39, Moskva 113095. 
YUGOSLAVIA. Mladost, lica 30/11, Zagreb; Cankarjeva Zalozba. Zopitar- 
jeva 2, Lubliana; Nolit, Terazne 13/ Vill, 11000 Belgrade: penodicals only: 
Jugosolvena Kniga, PO Box 36, YU 11001 Belgrade ZAMBIA. National 
Educational Distribution Co. of Zambia Ltd, PO. Box 2664, Lusaka 
ZIMBABWE. Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd, 1 Norwich Union Centre, Harare. 
PHOTO CREDITS 
Cover, page 3 (left): Brigitte Salom © The Unesco Courier. Page 2: © Annette Ghéan-Bisciglia, Paris. Page 3 (right): S. Bassouls © Sygma, 
Paris. Page 5: T. Orban © Sygma, Paris. Pages 6-7: © Roger Viollet, Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris. Pages 8-9: © RMN, Musée du Louvre, 
Paris. Page 10: D. Cameron © Sygma, Paris. Page 12: J. Guichard © Sygma, Paris. Pages 13, 16, 17, 19, 20, 31, 32-33 (above), 39, 40, 4243, 
43: Cahiers du Cinéma, Paris. Page 15: Jean Loup Passek, Paris. Page 21: ].L. Bulliard © Sygma, Paris. Pages 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28-29, 32 
(centre), 37, 40-41, 41: © Abbas Fahdel Collection, Paris. Page 23: © All Rights Reserved. Pose 28 (inset): © Sygma, Paris. Page 32 (above), 
32-33 (below): © Russian edition of The Unesco Courier, Moscow. Pages 34-35, 36: © Assia Dje 
Paris. Pages 44-45: © Bulloz, Paris, Musée de Versailles. Pages 45, 47: © Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris. Pages 48, 49: Boursei 
ar, Paris, Page 42: © Cinémathéque Frangaise, 
ller © Sygma, 
Paris. Back cover: © Colorphoto Hinz Allschwil / Musée des Beaux arts, Bile, 
Correction (September 1989 issue): Page 14: Photos from Histoire des Beni Hilal et de ce qui leur advint dans 
leur marche vers I'Ouest, by M. Galley and A. Ayoub, Association des classiques africains, Paris, 1983. Top 
illustration: a lithograph from the Museum of the Institute of Geography, Cairo; lower illustration shows a 
Tunisian painting on glass (M. Galley collection) which featured as the cover of the book mentioned above.

## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

SAVE 
  
  
   
   
    Following the most ambitious archaeological salvage 
operation of all time—saving the temples of Abu 
Simbel in Egyptian Nubia from being submerged by 
the waters of the Nile—and the reconstruction of one Te” 
of the world’s renowned holy places, the Buddhist i: 
b 
 
sanctuary of Borobudur in Indonesia, Unesco is now 
campaigning for the safeguard of 27 other groups 
of monuments and sites which are in need of assis- 
tance if they are to survive. 
’ 
~l 
You can play a part in this valuable work by making 3, 
a donation, specifying the campaign that you wish ~~“. & 
to support* Contributions may be sent by cheque h 
to the order of Unesco to the following address: Cul- 
tural Heritage Division, Unesco, 1 rue Miollis, 75015 
Paris, France. 
  
    
* Herat (Afghanistan), Jesuit Missions of the Guaranis (Argentina, Bra- 
zll and Paraguay), Paharpur Vihara and Bagerhat (Bangladesh), Plaza 
Vieja of Havana (Cuba), Museums In Aswan and Cairo (Arab Republic 
of Egypt), The Acropolis (Greece), Monuments of Guatemala, Monuments 
and sites of Haiti, Venice (Italy), Monuments and sites of Maita, Fez 
(Morocco), Ancient cities of Mauritania, Kathmandu (Nepal), Moenjo- 
daro (Pakistan), San Francisco de Lima (Peru), island of Gorée (Sene- 
gal), Cultural Tangle of Sri Lanka, Sukhothal (Thailand), Tyre (Lebanon), 
Carthage (Tunisia), Istanbul and Goreme (Turkey), Hue (Malta), Sana'a 
(Yemen Arab Republic), Wadi Hadramawt and Shibam (People's Demo- 
cratic Republic of Yemen), Montenegro (Yugoslavia), Cultural Heritage 
of East Africa (Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania). 
  
  
hi 1? it (30 - i COM 5 : 5 
La 
: 3 Bs 4 A Wy! wh yh ikl A " ay 
J ' 4 SE J J i". yg! Ny J bl 7 
. HN { Ni! FETS ME | JO. . . -e ’ Al 
| ad rf 4 A) 1h A / / ¥ / Re 3) ! la A 
J i ! } a . AFT 0 J Bi - ’ - 
. ‘ yadd id : i Lg $ ) 
J] ' w J Wh en A 
H J by ’ 
     

## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/084191engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
I -S