# [102874](102874engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](102874engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 
 UN
IT
ED
 
K
I
N
G
D
O
M
:
 
£3
 
- 
F
R
A
N
C
E
:
 
22
F 
F.
 
- 
A
U
S
T
R
A
L
I
A
:
 
AS
7.
90
 
- 
B
E
L
G
I
U
M
:
 
BF
16
0 
- 
C
A
N
A
D
A
:
 
C$
5.
75
 
- 
US
A:
 
$4
.8
0 
- 
S
W
I
T
Z
E
R
L
A
N
D
:
 
$F
6.
90
 
- 
N
E
T
H
E
R
L
A
N
D
S
:
 
FI
 
10
 
- 
D
E
N
M
A
R
K
:
 
K
R
3
8

## [Page 2](102874engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
IN THE NEXT ISSUE: 
CORRUPTION 
v 
INTERVIEW WITH ISMAIL SERAGELDIN 
VICE-PRESIDENT AT THE WORLD BANK 
  
HERITAGE 
THE MONASTERY OF RILA (BULGARIA) 
ENVIRONMENT 
LIVING ON WATER 
  
» 
three good 
hats a PEE 
~ reasons for 
” TT Peery 
offering yo ur 
Fo 
Mens agih i be i . i hv 
Sen £0 2 hogs wh 
Yio 3 
£ 
~1) 
: 
thst id pe 0 
{guages nina by mtole o ovis of ole I 20 wie 
Ehe He i 
ws a 
1 SS 
0) hb A! . : ; - y 
i, ¢ Fd 48 LR 
n Each mont 1, essen ial Vir a i A \ C? Lad © 
a hy. bl | Se 
: E . : 
. i MLL 1 : n 
Vy i 4 “ By, 
\ Es a 3 Fh ] 
A Ha acai mit ile s isons tine “oe = 
BE 

## [Page 3](102874engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNESCO ((OURIER 
49th year. Published monthly in 30 languages and in Braille 
Hervé Bazin 110: 
OMe ap YaT11¢ 
© 
My
ri
am
 
Sm
ad
ja
, 
Pa
ri
s 
silence 
© 
IC
OM
OS
, 
Pa
ri
s 
4 | T
 NN
 
J 
     
S.
 
Ba
ss
ou
ls
 
© 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
© 
Ma
ri
sa
 
Du
ha
ld
e,
 
Fi
lm
s 
Ni
ép
ce
 
E 
8
3
 
my 
CONTENTS 
MAY 1996 
J 
Interview with Hervé Bazin 
Letters to the Editor 
Month by month 
by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 
Men of few words 
Interview with Christophe Wondji 
Between two worlds 
by Myriam Smadja 
The last refuge 
by Miguel Benasayag 
The Height of Silence 
Interview with Hervé Nisic 
A mystic journey 
by Kudsi Erguner 
Music, time, etemity 
by Elizabeth Sombart 
Painting the void 
Interview with Kumi Sugai 
A moment of fulfilment 
by Claude Louis-Combet 
An inner experience 
by Jacques Castermane 
Consultant: Myriam Smadja 
Federico Mayor: Commentary 
HERITAGE 
The rune-stones of Jelling 
by Jens Boel 
GREENWATCH 
World tourism: where next? 
by France Bequette 
GLOBAL VIEW 
LISTENING 
Isabelle Leymarie talks to Marcel Khalifé 
As it was... the Unesco Courier, October 1953 
Henri Matisse 
Cover: Sunset in the Philippines. 
Valdin © Diaf, Pans

## [Page 4](102874engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 102875: Interview with Hervé Bazin

Hervé Bazin 
The French writer Hervé Bazin, who 
died in February at the age of 84, made 
his reputation with the virulent 
attacks on the institutions of family 
and motherhood conlained in his 
autobiographical novel Vipere au 
poing (1948; Viper in the Fist, 1951). 
His later novels on social themes and 
psychological conflict won him a wide 
popular readership and a nmnber of 
literary prizes in France and elsewhere. 
Among his best-known novels are Qui 
jose aimer (1956; A Tribe of Women), 
Madame Ex (1975; “Madame X”} and, 
most recently, Le neutieme jour (1994; 
“The 9th Day”), Hervé Bazin gave this 
interview to the UNESCO Courier 
shortly before his death. 
WM Let's talk about your latest book, Le 
neuviéme jour... 
Hervé Bazin: God ereated the world in 
six days. On the seventh he rested. On 
the eighth he expelled Adam and Eve 
from the earthly paradise. We are now 
living on the ninth day. We have entered 
the ninth era, the time when faustian 
man takes the place of the Creator. 
ITuman intelligence gives us access to var- 
ious highly sophisticated forms of cre- 
ation, which also have a strong potential 
for destruction. Ilumanity has the choice 
between happiness, which will never be 
absolute, and universal suicide. 
HM You write to warn, to keep the 
public on its toes. ... 
H.B.: My long experienee in journalism 
has taught me a utilitarian approach to 
writing, an approach I would describe as 
committed and designed for direct com- 
munication. I have always been driven by 
the problems facing contemporary 
society. At the present time it is impor- 
tant to set them down in books because, 
given the speed of modern communica- 
tion, there is a constant turnover of news; 
however important events are, new ones 
happen and push the earlier ones into 
limbo. People need permanent landmarks 
to help them put things in perspective, 
touchstones to help them distinguish 
between real threats and those that are 
simply passing fads. 
Nuclear power is dangerous, for 
instance, and we shall have to live with 
Interview 
\
9
 
it until the end of time—I mean that we 
must make sure the bomb is never used— 
but I don’t think it is a major peril 
because it is closely monitored and small 
states are not in a position to manufac- 
ture atomic bombs. Biology is dangerous, 
however, because it is accessible to any 
lab assistant who can tinker with viruses. 
WM In Le neuviéme jouryou give 
fictional treatment to a scientific fact. 
H.B.: The subject I deal with in Le neu- 
viéme jour had been in my mind for a long 
time. The novelis more effective than the 
essay in bringing to a wide public a uni- 
verse whichis, alas, very real and not at all 
science fiction. In my novel I imagine a 
strain of influenza, a “superflu” far worse 
than the Spanish flu epidemie of 1918—on 
which known vaccines have no effect. To 
prevent a catastrophe, an all-purpose pre- 
ventive vaccine has to be found very 
quickly. The main character, Monsieur 
Alleaume, discovers that it is possible to 
make such a vaccine. But of course that 
isn’t the end of the story. A researcher may 
be motivated by a desire to benefit 
humanity, but we also have to reckon with 
competition between firms in the health 
business which—to quote from my novel— 
“would be very unhappy if they were 
beaten to the post and had to abandon 
their sacred profits to rival companies”. 
And so my novel is a warning. Be careful! 
Man has taken the place of God. Ileis free 
to destroy himself and the earth with him, 
because he has equipped himself with the 
resources to change and invent all kinds of 
Biology will only continue to be beneficial if it is closely 
monitored, like nuclear power.

## [Page 5](102874engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 102875: Interview with Hervé Bazin

  
—
—
—
—
T
e
y
 
- 
a
 
A
 
 
—
_
—
—
 
R
S
 
A 
T
T
 
m
n
 
—
_
—
_
"
.
 
a
 
m
y
 
: 
«SS A 
things. We don’t know the precise origin of 
Aids, for example, hut researchers know 
how to create the virus in vitro. 
HM What forms can the ‘biological 
peril’ take? 
H.B.: Today other methods of racial selec- 
tion exist than those designed by ITitler. 
There may be some Fausts among the 
researchers who are working away in the 
shadows. The viruses they diseover may 
become a form of currency, instruments 
of pressure and oppression, diabolical 
weapons. But the propagation of a virus 
can be deliberate or accidental. In 1978 
in Birmingham, a researcher named Ienry 
Bedson was working on the monkey 
smallpox virus, which was suspected of 
being transmissible to people. The virns 
       
  
infiltrated from the laboratory through an 
air duct with a defective filter to the next 
storey of the building, which was inhab- 
ited, and caused the death of two people. 
In despair, Bedson committed suicide. 
But people like to keep quiet about this 
kind of incident. 
M ... Examples of man playing 
around with nature? 
H.B.: Biologists know that natnre uses the 
same chemical language for all living crea- 
tures whose genes are interchangeable. 
In other words, researchers can cross har- 
riers. I picked out some funny but 
authentic examples from the animal, veg- 
etable and human worlds. Biologists 
working on sap have done sone astonishing 
things. There’s no need to dye cotton jeans 
S.
 
Ba
ss
ou
ls
 
© 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Hervé Bazin in 1994. 
any more, for example. All you have to do 
is splice a gene from a blue {lower into 
the cotton plant. One third of the vegeta- 
bles and cereals grown today are trans- 
genic—they have reeeived additional 
genetic material to endow them with new 
characteristics. Scientists are licking their 
lips over all these possibilities. 
One of my friends, a plant research 
specialist, is trying to inake luminous 
tobacco using genes from glow-worms. 
What on earth is the use of tobacco that is 
luminous at night? None at all, you might 
say. Well, think again. It proves the unity 
of life: animal and vegetable get on well 
together. By replacing one gene with 
another, you can make anything you like. 
Ilere’s another amazing, crazy and dia- 
bolical example. There is an extremely 
useful medicine based on lactoferrin, a 
substance produced in very small quanti- 
ties by women who breast-feed their chil- 
dren. The lactoferrin gene has been taken 
from a human being and transmitted to a 
bull that later inseminated fifty-odd cows 
that now produce masses of the stuff. 
There are plenty of examples of this 
kind of thing. California is a big producer 
of strawberries. Unfortunately, strawher- 
ries are sensitive to frost. A late frost can 
ruin the whole crop. But now it’s possible 
to prevent strawberries from [reezing by 
introducing into them a gene from plaice, 
a fish that is resistant to cold. It’s soon 
done! Just imagine! The Americans, whose 
regulations are extremely strict, rejected 
the idea out of hand. So the growers and 
researchers turned to countries where 
there is amore relaxed approach. 
HM How does public opinion react? 
And the scientists, who have access to 
confidential reports? Do they veto this 
kind of thing? 
H.B.: In Japan, public opinionis imposing

## [Page 6](102874engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 102875: Interview with Hervé Bazin

Interview 
  
a slowdown on this sort of way-out 
research. The same thing is happening in 
the United States. But the downside can 
lead to beneficial discoveries. Ilow won- 
derful it would be if we could discover 
genes to combat cystic fibrosis! Biology 
will only continue to be beneficial if it is 
closely monitored, like nuclear power. The 
trouble is that it costs a fortune to make an 
atomic bomb, whereas it costs much less to 
start a laboratory. Mad scientists do exist. 
Firmini was a wise man. Ile discovered the 
disintegration of the atom and took his 
secret with him whereas Einstein made it 
known to the world. Myxomatosis is a 
classic example of this kind of thing. A 
researcher who lost his temper when his 
vegetable garden was destroyed by rab- 
bits, and infected them with the disease, 
which he had discovered in his laboratory. 
Unfortunately, there was a hole in his 
garden fence and the two rabbits escaped 
and propagated the virus. 
BH Many people associate you with a 
chaotic rather than a peaceful world, 
an impression strenigthened by your 
rebellious subjects and writings. 
H.B.: Rebellion is not totally negative. I 
had my say against the family in 1948 in 
my novel Vipére au poing, the story of my 
battle-axe of a mother. That book brought 
me success but it also scandalized many 
people. It was in a way my psychoanalyst’s 
couch and also an act of revenge. With a 
start in life like mine, biting comes easy. 
Actually, it’s quite healthy, and you start 
bitinginto other subjects. Later I became 
more self-detached. A story is a story, 
there’s no need to go on and on. You 
change, you live your life, you have new 
S.
 
Ba
ss
ou
ls
 
© 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ri
s 
experiences. And so I left hatred of the 
family behind me. I became a novelist 
instead of a memoir-writer. Characters 
were bornin me. 
After writing about the cruelty of 
family life, I turned to its joys in La mort du 
petit cheval (1950; “The Death of a Small 
Ilorse”). I have always been attracted by 
the world of outsiders, in this case the men- 
tally ill, especially after the French news- 
paper France-Soir commissioned me to 
find out what was happening in the world of 
French psychiatry. This helped me to write 
about the psychology of the mentally ill 
in La tete contre les murs (1949; Head 
Against the Wall, 1952) and the psychology 
of a pyromaniacin L'huile sur le feu (1954). 
It is widely known that the pyromaniac is 
someone who wants to be a great purifier. 
The book is based on the true story of a 
fireman who started fires so that he could 
put them out. With this novel I really 
moved away from autobiogaphy. In the 
sequestered world of madness I also dis- 
covered an administrative system that was 
adept at closing files when families wanted 
itto and was not above drugging patients to 
destroy the minimal mental faculties they 
had left. The mentally ill don’t do anything 
to help to keep society’s wheels turning 
and so they must be eliminated. 
Eventually, however, I found peace 
thanks to the country life I wrote about in 
Qui jose aimer (1956) and Chapeau bas 
(1963). After three marriages, with chil- 
dren and grandchildren, IT discovered 
loving fatherhood (Au nom du fils, 1961; 
Le matrimoine, 1967), in contrast to the 
delinquent motherhood I had described 
in my first novel. [also wrote ahout people 
who have to fight against the death of 
the body, and the mental repercussions of 
this, in novels such as Léve-toi et marche 
(1952; Constance, 1955}, not forgetting 
the time, described in Le démon de 
minuit (1988), when in the evening of his 
days a man sees lis approaching death 
almost like a spectator. 
BH You are particularly fond of one of 
your novels, Les bienheureux de la 
désolation (1970), which symbolizes 
the break between the peaceful world 
of the past and the modern, 
destructive world. 
H.B.: It’s my greatest social novel. It is 
based on something that actually hap- 
pened and that intrigued sociologists. 
About 250 people lived on the desolate 
island of Tristan da Cunha, in the south 
Atlantic. A volcanic eruption forced them 
to leave and take refuge in England, where 
they discovered the joys and sorrows of 
civilization. It made me think of the 
Indians and Eskimos and other indige- 
nous peoples killed by so-called civiliza- 
tion. In the end, the islanders returned to 
their devastated island and recreated it, 
using technology to tame hostile nature, 
not harming it but not letting it get the 
better of them either. This is a lesson from 
the awkward squad, whose members range 
from the youthful rebels of May 1968 to 
eighty-year-old ecologists. These are the 
people who link the old world and the new. 
This is an example of a civilization 
that refused to give up being itself, that 
preferred the quest for itself to wan- 
dering and exile. The people of Tristan da 
Cunha belong to a community that finds 
adventure on its own doorstep, and enjoys 
freedom, equality, solidarity and mutual 
help without competition or domination. 
A community where need keeps out 
luxury. There now! I almost feel that I’m 
making a politician’s speech on the eve 
of an election! But we have to admit that 
those islanders actually did what we 
waste our time talking and writing about 
without making any contribution to 
human progress, since politicians look no 
further than their own navels, and our 
civilized and industrialized societies now 
have poverty knocking at their door. 
Hl How do you write your books? 
H.B.: On an old typewriter, an ancient, 
Writing is a social art.

## [Page 7](102874engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 102875: Interview with Hervé Bazin

noisy Underwood that requires fingers of 
steel. I just ean’t bring myself to use a 
word processor. [ need the physieal effort 
of writing. Ink gives shape to the informal, 
to mental processes. I ean sit at my Under- 
wood from seven in the morning until two 
0’ clock the following morning with only 
short Dhreaks for meals. Fictional char- 
acters are very possessive, Some of them 
are elusive and try to run off the page, 
while others are too demanding. When 
you write like that it’s like boxing—and 
sculpture. When all’s said and done, 
writing is a very physieal activity. 
HB It’s true that you don’t give your 
readers a very easy time. You shake 
them up, you hector them, you never 
let them relax. Bazin is often 
synonymous with hardness and 
cruelty. Your pen is a scalpel. 
H.B.: As I told you, I like good clean bites. 
Our age is built on pretenee. Everyone 
wears masks. Mine is described by some- 
thing Sartre once said. “One writes to 
warn”. Writers are angry witnesses. They 
are watchdogs who bite. But that doesn’t 
stop me from being a member of several 
organizations that work to promote peace 
and save the planet. But writing isn’t a 
gratuitous act. The Freneh writer 
Georges Bernanos said, “God didn’t put 
a pen in my hands for me to have fun”. 
The aesthetics of writing and researeh 
forits own sake are not my thing. Writing 
is a social art. It is socially useful and 
looks at subjects via a witness called a 
character, who has to tell things in a lively, 
effective way. Writing is not a game; itis 
engraved in the memory. The world’s hest- 
sellers are the Bible and the Qur’an. 
BM The poet Rainer Maria Rilke, a man 
of great sensibility, said that writing is 
like ‘rutting’. 
H.B.: Yes. It’s also a way of breathing and 
to a certain degree, a drug. It’s impos- 
sible to do without it. “It’s divine”, we 
say pretentiously. And in front of the 
blank page, we always feel stage-fright, 
panic. You say to yourself, “Is it going to 
come? Will the magic happen again?” 
Writing is always unpredictable. Like a 
page of life you live each day; you have a 
vague idea of what is going to follow on 
from yesterday’s chapter, and then, sud- 
denly, something turns up. And off you go! 
Our age is built on pretence. Everyone wears masks. 
Mine is described by something Sartre once said: 
‘One writes to warn.’ 
When that happens you write for hours 
because you have to maintain contact: 
there’s a prompter somewhere in the 
wings. We are not entirely responsible for 
what is happening. If, for example, at 
the start of a novel you describe one of 
your characters in a certain way, you don’t 
change it later on. You ean’t do it. Ratio- 
nality has nothing to do with it. It’s more 
like metaphysics or even spiritualism. 
HB You are president of the Goncourt 
Academy, which awards a prestigious 
French literary prize every autumn. 
How does the selection process work? 
H.B.: Edmond Goncourt, who outlived 
his brother, weleomed innovative writers 
to his literary salon in his so-called Gre- 
nier, two rooms in his house at Auteuil. To 
perpetuate this practiee he left his for- 
tune to endow a literary academy—the 
Goncourt Academy. Awarding an annual 
prize is quite a job. I have to read about 
150 books—no manuseripts. This means 
that my brain has to be an empty shell 
s0 as to be receptive to every sentence. 
When you've read fifty pages, you can 
already feel whether a writer has talent or 
is a mediocrity. So many people want to 
write! It’s like a marathon: a thousand 
start, only fifty reach the finishing-line. 
And you can sense the writers with only 
one book in them and those who will cover 
several generations; the ones who will be 
a nine-days wonder and the ones who even- 
tually will be read in schools; the ones 
with stamina and the ones with asthma, 
One talks about authors in the same 
way as one talks about fine wines. I must 
confess that for some years there have 
been no fine vintages, no great years. The 
Goncourt Prize is not the national lot- 
tery. There is no favouritism, no vote cast 
for one of my publishers. But in order to 
stay impartial and neutral you really do 
need to be deaf and blind to pressure 
from the media. To return to the wine 
metaphor, it sometimes happens that we 
lose our nose for quality. The classic 
example of that was when Gallimard 
rejected the manuscript of Marcel 
Proust’s novel! Talent is the most impor- 
tant thing the Goneourt jury is looking 
for—a traditional quality that needs to be 
brought hack in many fields. Another 
important thing is a kind of spontaneity, 
so that the reader sees the pageant of 
events just as if he or she were looking at 
it out of the window. 
HB What does Hervé Bazin do when he 
isn’t writing novels? 
H.B.: I love astronomy, and so does my 
eleven-year-old son Nicolas, my seventh 
reincarnation. He stargazes and plays the 
violin. Will he heeome a writer? Looking at 
the stars always makes me think of the 
ereation of the world, and the planets 
make me dream about the time of chaos, 
when the inchoate universe was still 
nothing but a primeval soup of fire, gas 
and molten dust, with the inklings of the 
soul that would lodge in our cells. And I 
like to stay in contact with people and 
nature. To stop myself becoming a dry 
stick, I draw plans for my house, [ potter 
about, I cut wood, I do masonry. Physical 
effort gives a writer balance. I garden, and 
in summer, with my wife, Odile, I tutor 
my son. Now that I’ve rediscovered my 
provincial roots in Angers, I eut down my 
trips to Paris; I take the train there and 
back the same day. I feel the Paris social 
and literary worlds are very artificial. 
I’m over eighty, but as far as age goes 
[ decided to stop my clock at forty. Forty 
is a nice compromise, a good point from 
which to look backwards and forwards. 
My mind and body are as alert as those of 
a forty-year-old. I must confess that for 
me nothingness doesn’t exist. My recipe 
for living ean be summed up in one word. 
Itis absolute and it goes along way: “Be!” 
|| 
Interview by MARTINE LECA

## [Page 8](102874engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNESCO 
OURIER 
Published monthly in 30 languages and in Braille by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization. 
31, rue Francois Bonvin, 75732 Paris CEDEX 15, France. 
Fax: (33-1) 45.66.92.70 
Internet: unesco.courler@unesco.org 
Director: Bahgat Einadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin 
French edition: Alain Lévéque 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Features: Jasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey (Tel. 45.68.46.90) 
Documentation: José Banaag (Tel. 45.68. 46.85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel. 45.68.46.87) 
Secretariat: Annie Brachet (Tel. 45.68.47.15), 
Administrative Assistant: Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and 
Korean: Mouna Chatta (Tel. 45.68.47.14) 
Artwork Consultant: Eric Frogé 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Irina Utkina (Moscow) 
German: Dominique Anderes (Berne) 
Arabic: Fawzi Abdel (Cairo) 
Italian: Anna Chiara Bottoni (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: Akbar Zargar (Teheran) 
Dutch: Claude Montrieux (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Moacyr A. Fioravante (Rio de Janeiro) 
Urdu: Javaid Igbal Syed (Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras | Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay: Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Kang Woo-hyon (Seoul) 
Swahili: Leonard J. Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene: Aleksandra Kornhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala: Neville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish: Katri Himma (Helsinki) 
Basque: Juxto Egana (Donostia) 
Thai: Sudhasinee Vajrabul (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Do Phuong (Hanol) 
Pashto: Nazer Mohammad Angar (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
Ukrainian: Volodymyr Vasiliuk (Kiev) 
Galician: Xabier Senin Fernandez (Santiago de Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION. Fax: 42.73.24.29 
Subscriptions: Marie-Tnérése Hardy (Tel. 45.68.45,65), 
Jacqueline Louise-Julie, Manichan Ngonekeo, Michel 
Ravassard, Mohamed Salah El Din (Tel. 45.68.49.19) 
Customer service: Ginette Motreff (Tel. 45.68.45.64) 
Accounts: (Tel. 45.68.45.65) 
Shipping: Daniel Meister (Tel. 45.68.47.50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. Tel.: 45.68.45.65 
1 year: 211 French francs. 2 years: 396 FF. 
Students: 1 year: 132 French francs 
Binder for one year's issues; 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
1 year: 132 French francs. 2 years: 211 FF, 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco or by Visa, Eurocard or Mastercard 
Individual articles and photographs not copy nghted may be repnnted providing 
the crud ine reads “Reprint tec from the Unesco Courier”, plus date of issue, 
and three voucher copies are sent to the editor Signed articles reprinted 
must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos will be supplied on request, 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompanied by an 
international reply coupon covering postage. Signed artic'es express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent the opinions of 
Unesco or those of the edit uner, Photo captions and head: 
lines are written by the Ua f. The bo undari 2S ON Maps pub- 
  
  
  
   
  
Unesco or the United Nation 
(microfilm and/or mic i 
Pans; (2) University Ims (Xerox), Ann A Aor, ! 
N.C.R. Microcare Editio dian Heaa Inc., L11 1 West 40th Street, N ow York, 
USA: (4) Bell and Howell C o., Oia ransfield Roac Wooster, Ohio 44691, 
USA 
 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France| 
DEPOT LEGAL: C1 - MAY 1996 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - DIFFUSE PAR LESN.M.P.P 
Photocompasition, photogravure: Le Courrier de |'Unesco 
Impression: MAURY IMPRIMEUR 
Zl. Route d'Etampes, 45331 Malsherbes 
ISSN 0041-5278 N® 5-1996-0P1-96-548 A 
This issue comprises 52 pages and 2 4-page Insert between 
pages 2-3 and 50-51 
FIGHTING DESERT ADVANCE 
On page 41 of your October 1995 issue 
(“The United Nations—Why it matters”) 
you show a green area created by the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations (FAO) in Keita (Niger) 
as part of a development project. I know 
of others in the area, especially in the 
Tahua distict. 
This is a good opportunity to pay 
tribute to the FAO and all the other spe- 
cialized UN agencies that are engaged 
in development projects. More work of 
this kind should be done to bring back a 
green environment to countries hit by 
desertification. 
Abdou Tini Kano 
Tibiri/Maradi 
(Niger) 
RIGHTS AND DUTIES 
Your November 1995 issue (“Peace, a 
new beginning”) contained the text of the 
Universal Declaration of ITuman Rights 
proclaimed in 1948 by the United 
Nations. 
Could we ask the UN to add to the 
title of this document the word “duties”, 
since duties are described in it. As the 
19th-century French theologian Lamen- 
nais once wrote, “Rights and duty are 
like palm trees, which bear no fruit if 
they do not grow near each other”. 
Evelyne Chapeau Woodrow 
Le Verdut/Saint-Brice 
(France) 
THE NOTION OF ‘RACE’ 
Your March 1996 issue (“The roots of 
racism”) insists that human “races” do 
not exist and that humanity cannot be 
classified in such terms. 
I was all the more surprised, there- 
fore, to see that the notion of race 
appearsin your back cover subscription 
advertisement: “3. [The Courier] asso- 
ciatesits readers with UNESCO's mission of 
furthering ‘universal respect for justice, 
for the rule of law and for human rights 
and fundamental freedoms . . . without 
distinction of race (my italics), sex, lan- 
guage or religion. ...’” 
Vincent Nicolas 
Conflans-Sainte-Honorine 
(France) 
This quotation containing the word 
“race” is taken from the first article of 
UNnesco’s Constitution, which was 
adopted in London in 1945. The term — 
less criticized then than now—empha- 
sized the universal desire for world 
peace extending to all human groups. 
Since then, use of the word “race”, as 
you correctly point out, has become more 
debatable. Editor 
TOO CLEVER BY HALF? 
Congratulations on the articles by Fed- 
erico Mayor and Edgar Morin in your 
November 1995 issue (“Peace, a new 
beginning”). 
Edgar Morin writes that the planet is 
in trouble. It might be useful to 
remember what the great Taoist philoso- 
pher, Chuang-tzu, said on this topic three 
hundred years before the Christian era: 
“Excessive intelligence creates disorderin 
the radiance of the moon and the sun, 
breaks up mountains, dries up rivers and 
upsets the seasons. These evils even go 
so far as to disturb the fearful worms and 
the tiny insects in their habits. What dis- 
order does not the love of ingenuity bring 
to the universe?” 
Patrice Théret 
Singapore 
A LINGUISTIC AID 
As a teacher of Russian at the Higher 
Institute for Interpreters and Transla- 
tors in Milan (Italy), 1 often use your mag- 
azine in my classes because of its cultural 
value and open-mindedness. 
Adele Oldani 
Milan 
(italy)

## [Page 9](102874engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

onth by month 
In July 1967, the Unesco Courier published an issue entitled “Noise pollution”. The contributors 
to it reported on what was then being done to halt the invasion of noise in the modern world and 
to mitigate its harmful effects on the human body and on society at large. 
In that issue of the Courier, silence was perceived negatively, as the absence of noise. 
But there is more to be said about silence than that. Rather than an absence, it can be a 
presence—in the self, in the world, in the sacred. It is closely associated with religious expe- 
rience—asceticism is often achieved through silence—and with art—the poet's words speak 
out across silence, which is at the heart of painting and the fount of all music. 
Contributors to the present issue bear witness, each in their own way, to the power of 
silence when it is the culmination of an inner journey or a bond with others. 
Historian Christophe Wondji describes the importance of the spoken word of the traditional 
African chief, whom silence surrounds like a sacred halo, and ethnologist Myriam Smadja 
describes the secret harmony that a ritual of silent mourning creates between the living and 
the dead of West Africa’s Tammariba people. Psychiatrist Miguel Benasayag, author of a 
first-hand account of torture in the gaols of the Argentine dictatorship, and film-maker Hervé 
Nisic, who has made a silent documentary about Sarajevo abandoned to martyrdom by a 
cynical world, suggest that there are some situations to which silence is the only dignified 
response. 
Other contributors describe the role of silence in mystical rapture (flautist and musicologist 
Kudsi Erguner), in musical performance {concert pianist Elizabeth Sombart), in poetry 
(Claude Louis-Combet) and in painting (Kumi Sugai). Silence is felt with particular intensity when 
there is harmony between body and mind. For physiotherapist Jacques Castermane those 
who achieve this silence have learned a lesson in the art of living and the practice of peace. 
BAHGAT ELNADI AND ADEL RIFAAT 
9 .

## [Page 10](102874engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Pr
at
t-
Pr
ie
s/
DI
AF
, 
P
a
n
s
 


### 102876: Men of few words: interview with Christophe Wondji

Men of few words 
intervie w with Christophe Wondji 
 
The word of an African chief is the sacred fruit of a 
long and silent apprenticeship 
A village chief 
in Botswana. 
     
B Africa attaches great importance to oral 
tradition. Is there such a thing as an ‘African 
silence’? 
Christophe Wondji: There are several kinds of 
silence. The silence of the night and the silence of 
the forest contrast, for example, with the sound of 
tom-toms during festivities and merrymaking, and 
with the eloquence of the griots—~musicians and 
folk-historians. There are also the profound silences 
that punctuate the utterances of wise men, such as 
those of Ogotommel, the old Dogon sage ques- 
tioned by the French ethnologist Marcel Griaule. 
Speech is an act. It comes from the depths of 
one’s being. It is a form of commitment. That is 
why the head of a family or a village speaks only 
at the appropriate time and place. Words spoken by 
a chief can be divisive. They can wound and even 
kill. A chief is therefore very careful about deciding 
when he should speak. There is an Akan proverb 
which says that the spoken word is worth its 
weight in gold. In other words, it is comparable to 
0 
\d -= -- 
‘ _— - ’ 
the signs engraved on the little bronze statuettes 
that were once used in parts of West Africa as 
weights for weighing gold dust. The only way of 
access to this word is by going through successive 
stages of silence, which “weigh down the tongue”. 
HB Who can receive the words of an elder? 
C. W.: A father chooses the quietest of his sons, 
the one least prone to lose his temper, the one 
said to be “like a grave”, in that he takes in words 
but does not utter any. His attitude shows he is 
keen to learn: he remains in the company of 
“elders”, but keeps silent in their presence, thus 
showing that he knows his place. 
One day the father takes the son he has chosen 
to one side and says to him: “My son, I want to 
give you some fragments of the Great Word—the 
word that concerns the origins of our family. You 
shall reveal nothing, I am sure: your belly is deep.” 
A person whose belly is not deep—who 
immediately repeats what he has been told—is 
left out, because “everything comes out of him 
easily”. If he is incapable of keeping his mouth 
shut when he is young, how will he be able to 
keep an important secret later on in life? It’s easy 
to spot a man “with a light mouth”. Just tell him 
something of no importance and make him swear 
to keep it to himself. If he boasts about it to the 
first person he meets—and during the heat of the 
day gossip circulates fast beneath the straw 
roofs—the blabbermouth is disgraced forever. 
BM How is the word passed on? 
C. W.: By keeping one’s mouth shut and one’s 
ears open. The young man lets the elder speak. 
The master expresses himself slowly, in a rather 
low voice. His speech is punctuated by long 
silences, so that his words can penetrate the 
younger man and become part of him.

## [Page 11](102874engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 102876: Men of few words: interview with Christophe Wondji

  
  
The griot (village musician 
and historian) of a Guinean 
village with his grandson. 
  
 
HM Does the disciple make any comment while 
he is receiving his instruction? 
C. W.: He never interrupts the elder with untimely 
remarks. For many a long year he simply listens. 
And as a result of his patient listening, his spirit is 
clevated and gradually approaches the truth 
embodied by the master. 
It is only when he feels he has understood a 
little that he starts asking questions, but he is in 
no hurry to do so. Until he has made the elder’s 
  © 
Co
rd
ul
a 
Kr
op
ke
, 
Ha
mb
ur
g 
words his own, he will be unable to use his knowl- 
edge properly. That moment will not come until 
he in turn is in charge of a family, a group of 
hunters or a whole village. 
For some time now, educators have been 
striving to introduce new methods of “expression 
and communication” in Ivory Coast schools— 
following a Western fashion. The emphasis is on 
dialogue. “Put your point of view across,” very 
young pupils are told. “Formulate your doubts 
11

## [Page 12](102874engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Bé
at
ri
ce
 
Pe
ti
t,
 
Br
us
se
ls
 
and your criticisms.” [tis easy to see why the pupils 
find it hard to adjust to a practice so totally alien to 
their tradition of respecting a master and a corpus 
of knowledge. 
BM Can the silent listening of a disciple be 
compared to that of a hunter lying in wait? 
C. W.: Ina sense, yes. In Akan, silence is defined 
by the following expression: “Nothing can be 
heard from the deep forest.” The young hunter 
holds his breath and remains motionless as he 
learns how to recognize animals by certain sounds 
they make—the growl of the leopard, its muffled 
tread, the flapping of an elephant’s ears, the rustle 
of grass under an antelope’s hooves. There is an 
attitude that corresponds to each animal, but also 
an appropriate way of shooting it. When faced 
with a leopard, a solitary and combative animal 
that is quick to scent danger, the hunter has to 
adopt a completely different strategy from the 
one he will use with an antelope, which is timid 
and guileless. The arrow has to hit the leopard 
first time, in the head or the heart, otherwise itis 
bound to get you. 
In the same way, the head of a family or a vil- 
lage, or indeed an Ashanti king, has to resolve 


### 102876: Men of few words: interview with Christophe Wondji

conflicts with a good deal of tact, and without 
being unfair to either party. Like the hunter lying 
in wait, he seems to be keeping out of it. His “cane 
carrier”! conducts the debate in his place. The 
chief’s words concern each person and are 
 
Elephants in Chobe Natural 
Park (Botswana). 
  
Br
un
o 
Ba
rb
ey
 
© 
Ma
gn
um
, 
Pa
ri
s 
-
 
L
A
 
—
 
LE 
 
addressed to all. They therefore need to be 
selected, or “sifted”, by the cane carrier. They 
are full of unspoken thoughts, which are 
extremely important, and which the elders know 
how to decipher. 
The chief, then, listens patiently without inter- 
fering. Used as he is to staying in the background, 
in an attitude of attentive observation, he has learnt 
how to fathom the human soul. He can see 
through masks and contradictions. When he 
intervenes itis to bring matters to a close—using 
only afew words. He is expected to take the right 
decision courageously. He, too, has to “aim accu- 
rately”, in other words recognize the trouble- 
maker but not exclude him: “He who is wrong 
must not sleep outside.” 
HM You're talking about words spoken in 
public. What about those spoken in private?

## [Page 13](102874engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 102876: Men of few words: interview with Christophe Wondji

CHRISTOPHE WONDIJI 
is head of the General and 
Regional Histories section of 
Unesco’s Division of International 
Cultural Co-operation. His 
published works include La cdte 
ouest-africaine du Sénégal a la 
Cote d Ivoire, Géographie, 
sociétés, histoire, 1500-1800 
(“The West African Coast from 
Senegal to Céte d'Ivoire: 
Geography, Societies, History, 
1500-1800", Paris, 1285), 
  
C. W.: A chief does not speak to all and sundry, at 
any time or in any place, except via his cane car- 
rier. If 2 “well-intentioned” person comes to sce 
him and makes indiscreet remarks about one of 
his collaborators, he will simply say “I heard, thank 
you”, turn away and refuse to receive the person 
again. How can someone who divulges a secret 
be trusted? What's more, the informer surely casts 
doubt, by his very act, on the chief’s discrimination. 
It is as if he were saying to him: “You don’t know 
how to choose your associates.” The chief knows 
full well that a slanderous remark actually seeks to 
destabilize his power. 
The chicf’s authority resides above all in his 
ability to keep calm and control himself, a faculty 
which he has developed since his youth, and 
which enables him to maintain a certain distance 
from himself and curb his temper. 
One day, the inhabitants of a Bété village who 
Fuiani leaders returning from 
a ceremony (Nigeria). 
felt they had been aggressed by the chief’s men 
came to insult them. When the chief appeared, 
they redoubled their insults, because the chief 
embodies the whole village. The chief first listened 
to their vociferations without uttering a word, then 
decreed: “You are within your rights"—and invited 
the malcontents to join him over a jug of bangu: 
(palm wine). They all fell into an awkward silence, 
then ended up admitting: “We went too far.” 
The chief is responsible for war and for peace. 
He has to find words that soothe, not words that 
incite, for when he dies he will have to leave his 
children a vigorous, united and prosperous society. 
And for that he will have to answer to his ancestors. 
| 
Interview by MYRIAM SMADJA 
1. The chicf’s spokesman, who also carries the chief’s wooden 
canc, the symbol of his power. Editor 
13

## [Page 14](102874engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

© 
My
ri
am
 
Sm
ad
ja
, 
Pa
ri
s 
. 


### 102878: Between two worlds

Between two worlds 
In a silent ritual in black Africa the living 
communicate with the dead 
MYRIAM SMADJA 
is a French ethnologist 
specializing in the funerary and 
initiatory rites of the Temberma 
people of northern Togo. She is 
the author/director of a 
documentary film on the 
Temberma, entitled Tibenti, 
14 
Silence fills the Atakora valley on the 
nights when the Tammaribat celebrate a 
tibenti, a mourning ritual practised by the 
clders of the clan. All the elders come and sit in 
front of the dead man’s takienta—his house, a 
small carth-built fortress with windowless walls 
flanked by two towers topped by granary- 
lofts with pointed roofs, out in the middle of 
 
by Myriam Smadja 
the fields. In the moonlight the takienta, whose 
name means “that which guards” (the living), 
shows its real face—the gigantic face of the dead 
person, and through it, the face of the ancestor 
who founded it. 
Itis the dry season. Blowing off the desert, the 
harmattan brings clouds that blot out the stars. 
The clan members are motionless and silent, 
sceming to melt into their surroundings. Their 
cars are filled with the sound of the wind. “When 
an elder passes on, a violent wind gets up.” 
Why this long silence? “It is through silence 
that the living communicate with the dead.

## [Page 15](102874engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 102878: Between two worlds

© 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Le
na
rs
, 
Pa
ri
s 
  
Silence is the true word.” In observing this 
silence, the clan makes contact not only with 
the breath of the recently deceased but with the 
breath of all the ancestors of his line, which goes 
back to Dinabaa, a mythical place from which 
came the first Tammariba and the first men. 
The breath of the ancestors 
When the moon rises, the breath of the dead 
elders leaves the tombs in the cemetery and 
makes for the houses, where each one of them 
hasan altar. The silence of the clan calls to them 
and invites them to join the living. They too will 
take up position in front of the house and pre- 
pare to guide the recently dead clan member 
down the road to “the place where one goes”. 
But if “the night is on the side of the dead, as 
the day is on the side of the living”, it also 
belongs to the real masters of the place, i.e. 
“those underground”, who come in the guise 
of the wind. By day, these underground spirits 
are curled up in the roots of trees, in the depths 
of springs and under rocks. They coil up in the 
folds of the “Earth’s thick skin”, which is like 
the inside of the skin of the immense female 
python who is the mother of the Tammariba or 
“Kneaders of wet earth”. The name the Tam- 
mariba give themselves thus refers both to 
their own origins and to that of their takienta, 
which they have shaped with the flesh of Earth 
irrigated by waters from underground. 
 
 
Opposite page, at the end of 
the second day's mourning, 
villagers walk to the cemetery. 
Below, a chicken is sacrificed 
in front of a house in 
mourning. 
Betow left, baokab trees. 
From earliest childhood, the Tammariba 
know that at nightfall they must lower their 
voices and lighten their step. In the evening 
the underground spirits, in the form of white 
mares, take possession of their territory—trees, 
rocks and the “beloved” marshlands. They 
hate the noise made by humans: the loudness 
of their voices, the stamping of their feet, the 
pounding of pestles and the smith’s hammer. 
But they put up with this as long as they are 
forgotten at night, when the world returns to its 
primal state, “still beautiful, filled with silence”, 
when all that can be be heard is the wind 
sweeping over the surface of the earth. 
By keeping silent, the members of the clan 
René Char (1907-1988), French poet 
15 
© 
My
ri
am
 
Sm
ad
ja
. 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 16](102874engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 102878: Between two worlds

© 
My
ri
am
 
Sm
ad
)a
, 
Pa
ns
 
sharpen their hearing to a pitch comparable to 
that of the underground spirits and the dead. 
“Isn’t hearing the last sense remaining in the 
grave?” 
 
An inaudible call 
At the moment when the “dogs themselves 
stop barking”, a call seems to ring out. A man 
who has climbed unobtrusively onto the bal- 
cony has uttered the name of the deceased, 
the secret name of the master of the takienta, 
the name it was forbidden to call him in his life- 
time. The call has not been addressed sky- 
wards, but simply murmured through a hole 
linking the upper part of the house with the 
lower floor. It was “whispered in a breath”, or 
“muttered inaudibly in the throat”. 
But the silence has dug such a space in each 
of them—a space as broad as the surrounding 
plain—that the controlled voice of the Caller 
has sounded with the force of a horn. 
“At the sound of his name, the dead man’s 
1» soul has jumped!” Drums and flutes begin to 
play. The breath, separated from the shadow, is 
now ready to live again ina child. The power of 
this call to the dead to bring forth a new life 
  
only exists because of the silence from which it 
draws support—a silence as vast as the night, 
swollen by the breath of the living massed 
before the takienta. 
Among the Tammariba, silence is the 
pedestal on which the clan’s solidarity is based. 
For each generation, this tibenti or collective 
listening before a house in mourning weaves 
unbreakable bonds between the members of 
the clan. The Tammariba avoid using “the lan- 
guage of daytime, which is kept for arguing 
and joking,” to name that which is greater than 
they are—the mystery of death. That which, 
from death, again becomes life. Rather than 
betray, deform or make a mockery of this mys- 
tery, the Tammariba prefer to keep silent about 
it, knowing that “others, like themselves, have 
felt the same”. 
The Tammariba might echo Ludwig 
Wittgenstein’s phrase: “Whereof one cannot 
speak, thereof one must be silent”. | 
1. The Tammariba (singular Tammari) are hunters, 
herdsmen and farmers who live in the Atakora 
mountains and valley on cach side of the frontier 
between Benin and Togo. They number around 100,000 
and in Togo are more commonly known as Temberma 
and in Benin as Somba. A typical fortress-like 
earthen house of the 
Tammariba people of Togo. 

## [Page 17](102874engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

Fa
br
ic
e 
Pi
ca
rd
 
© 
Vu
, 
Pa
ri
s  
Avove and following page, 
The gardens of Lucifer, by 
photographer Fabrice Picard. 
MIGUEL BENASAYAG 
is an Argentine psychiatrist who 
hes published a number of 
essays, including Penser la 
liberté: Le hasard et la décision 
(“Thinking about Freedom: Chance 
and Decision”, 1994). He has also 
written about his incarceration 
and torture in Argentinian jails in & 
book, A pesar de todo (“In Spite of 
Everything", 1982). 
There are some things I cannot talk 
about; they are too painful for me and 
even remembering them overwhelms me. But 
at the same time they are like a scream that is 
locked in my throat and wants to come out; 
by staying pent up inside me it wounds me 
even more. Perhaps I shall be able to talk about 
these things, in one way or another. 
To talk under torture is “to collaborate with 
the enemy”. But how can you not talk, when 
they put you through the mill? 
The footsteps cone closer, ever closer. 
They touch me on the shoulder and whisper in 
my ear: “Let’s go!” They help me to get up. 
Hell.... take off all my clothes. They stretch 
me out on a metal bedstead covered with a thin 
foam mattress, fasten an electric wire to my 


### 102879: The Last refuge

toes, another around my penis, another around 
my fingers. At this moment, the torturers 
seem big and you end up by thinking that they 
know everything, thatitis impossible to trick 
them. 
You let it happen, what does it matter now 
whether torture, rape or killing is allowed or 
not? The time for words is over. There’s no 
point in saying, “It’s scandalous”. It’s not a 
scandal. It’s something that exists. It’s happening. 
The last 
refuge 
by Miguel Benasayag 
fel ll us 
What it means to be silent 
under torture 
I catch myself thinking that it would be 
better if they were to kill me. Now I couldn’t 
care less when one of them pretends to exe- 
cute me. Why go on suffering? 
This is the moment they are waiting for. 
Butitis a moment that belongs to the victim. It 
is the victim who holds the key to the situa- 
tion and decides whether to talk or not to talk. 
  
Why not talk? 
Under torture, the idea of death seems to me 
the most natural thing in the world. I have lost 
the tragic sense that normally accompanies 
death. The moment arrives when they come to 
to kill us and when they find us prepared. 
We can die under torture, without talking, 
to cover up for our comrades and brothers 
and also our political work which will survive 
us, but all that has nothing to do with heroism. 
We die because we have reached the point 
where death has ceased to matter. 
We refuse to talk, because that is the only 
way of saving something of ourselves. Those 
who believe in heroic speeches are wrong— 
with the best will in the world. It’s something 
much smaller, more mundane, more confused, 
more human and ultimately more beautiful — 
17 
14

## [Page 18](102874engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 102879: The Last refuge

Fa
br
ic
e 
Pi
ca
rd
 
® 
Vu
, 
Pa
ri
s 
  
  
 
giving a meaning to our life by giving a meaning 
to our imminent death. 
... Behind the window, near the inter- 
phone, he was looking at his woman friend. It 
was visiting day at the prison. She recognized 
him. Deep in his eyes she again saw light, 
strength and love. Pedro had survived. He had 
not talked under torture; he could talk to her. 
The point of no return 
There is a time when a man can decide to be 
reduced to nothingness. He cracks up under 
torture. “I’ve had enough. I'll say and do all 
you want!” The point of no return is reached. 
El Negro betrayed his own wife. He was 
crazy about her. Brought face to face with her 
in the torture chamber, he repeated his accu- 
sations against her. He wanted the torture to 
stop. 
A man “who has talked” feels crushed, 
incredulous, a stranger to himself. Demolished. 
How and why should he go on living? He is no 
longer a man who could say to his wife: “I love 
you.” To love someone you have to be 
someone yourself. By betraying others, he has 
betrayed himself. In his own eyes he has ceased 
to exist. By saving his life he has lost everything. 
18 
Roberto Juarroz (1925-1995), Argentine poet 
I remember El Negro as a shadow haunting 
the corridors of Resistencia prison. Trembling, 
bowed head. ... A piece of flotsam. When he 
spoke he merely groaned. We tried to give him 
a little human warmth: he was not there, he 
was at grips with unbearable anguish. We all 
shared the chill that gripped El Negro. | 
 Fa
br
ic
e 
Pi
ca
rd
 
© 
Vu
, 
Pa
ns

## [Page 19](102874engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

Faces of Sarajevo. 
Stills from Hervé Nisic's 
film The Height of Silence 
(1995). 
     
   
    
   
a 0 
ww 
     
HB What role does silence play in your film? 


### 102889: The Height of silence

Hervé Nisic: It is the whole essence of it. When 1 
first went to Sarajevo during the war, I was struck 
by the fact that people were fed up with trying 
to explain to foreigners what was really happening 
there, the stories that were not told by the mass 
media. They also seemed to be fed up with 
listening to people promising help and then not 
following through. 
Sarajevo had become a kind of no-man’s-land 
of broken promises and inaction. Its people had 
reached a point where words were useless and 
meaningless, and were being used as a kind of 
phony communication, a point where it was 
The Height 
f Silence 
interview with Herve Nisic 
The Height of Silence, a 
documentary filmed by Hervé 
Nisic in the beleaguered city 
of Sarajevo in 1995, consists 
entirely of ‘silent interviews’ 
in which men, women and 
children gaze at the camera. 
Here, Canadian journalist 
Hadani Ditmars asks Nisic 
about the meaning of silence 
in his film. 
  
 
better not to say anything. There was a feeling 
that “Everybody knows that the situation is bad, 
everybody's tried everything, let’s just shut up 
about it.” 
Even if they thought that you might be honest 
and really wanted to help them, there was still a 
feeling of why bother? nothing will change. There 
will still be bloodshed and massacres no matter 
what we do. Things had reached that point in 
Sarajevo. 
There was a feeling that I was just visiting people 
in a kind of prison, that I could go back home but 
that they had to stay there. As the “visitor” I could 
go away, but they had to stay there, under siege. 
19

## [Page 20](102874engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 102889: The Height of silence

Somehow, silence felt like the only possible 
basis for real communication with the people of 
Sarajevo. But it was also a kind of test. I often felt 
that the people were asking me, with their eyes, 
“Are you really able to stand the way that I look at 
you? If you can do that, then perhaps I might talk 
to you afterwards.” 
All communication was through the eyes. 
lM So is silence a sign of despair or a sign of 
defiance in your film? 
H.N.: Silence is very ambiguous, and this is why I 
chose to use it as a means of communication in 
my film. I don’t think there is a word in any lan- 
guage that can describe the situation in Bosnia. 
Silence is the only way of transmitting its com- 
plexity and the people’s feelings. There is an 
immense dignity in the people of Sarajevo. You 
can see it. [ am sure that anyone who looks at the 
images in my film will see how dignified those 
people are. Everything is contained in those 
images. Words don’t add anything. You can’t 
make any further comment on such images. Even 
as I'm talking now, what can I add? If you've seen 
those images, then you understand. There is no 
need for words. 
lM Does silence play a role in Bosnian 
tradition? 
H.N.: Silence has always been part of the way that 
you're welcomed. It’s based on respect. When 
you go into a café, for example, if people have any 
interest in you, they will stare at you and stop 
talking. It can last for quite a while. 
But this film is not about the Bosnians. It’s a 
film about the relationship we Westerners have 
with Bosnia. It’s a film that implicates the viewer. 
The silence of the Bosnians responds to the 
silence of the West in the face of the tragedy. It’s a 
direct reaction to the impotence of the West, to its 
apparent inability to act, to its “false presence”, 
and its official line—which is: “We are here, but 
we won't intervene, because we don’t want to 
provoke things.” 
This official attitude carries in itself its own 
condemnation, and there is no better condem- 
nation than silence. The Bosnian people don’t 
want to be angry with us, with the West, with our 
governments. They want to keep their silence. I 
suppose that this silence is also a way for the 
Bosnians to say “We despise you.” But at the same 
time the way that they look at us is full of hope. 
They are saying with their silence, “Look, here 
we are, we're human beings just like you, see 
what we are.” 
20 
Hl So in a way, your film bears witness to the 
real situation in Bosnia. 
H.N.: Yes. The silence in my film was a way of 
bearing witness, but also of crying, of shouting, in 
a way that is so dignified that it denies any 
response or counter-attack. If someone shouts 
at you, it’s easy just to shout back at them. If 
someone shouts at you silently, what can you do? 
Mm Is silence, then, a kind of protection for the 
people in your film? 
H.N.: Yes. It’s a kind of protection, but it’s also a 
way of trying to make the other person think or 
reflect. It 1s as if the Bosnians were saying, “If I 
remain silent when I’m a victim, what do you 

## [Page 21](102874engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

think of that?” The other person is forced into a 
position of reflection. Itis also a way of provoking 
another level of understanding in the viewer. This 
became clear when I was making the film. I 
described my project to every person that I 
filmed. I told each one, “I want you to look at the 
camera as if you were looking at the people who 
were beyond the limits of Sarajevo—on the other 
side of the siege.” The gaze of the Sarajevans was 
intended as a gaze that would pierce through the 
camera, through me who was filming, through 
the viewers on the other side—through time and 
space. 
WB Is it more difficult to twist silences than 
words? 
H.N.: We all know that, if you consider the amount 
of information that goes from one person to 
another, perhaps something like 10 per cent goes 
through actual words. Perhaps another 20 per 
cent goes through the way we express our- 
selves—through tone of voice, and so on. And 
the rest, that is to say most of the information, 
comes from the whole body. When we see or 
make films, we tend to think that dialogue says 
itall. It’s not true. Dialogue says only 10 or 20 per 
cent of it. The rest is presence. The film under- 
lines the power of non-verbal communication. 
B But didn’t people talk to you, in between 
your silent “interviews”? 
H.N.: Oh yes, sometimes it took me three or four 
hours just to get the right three-minute take. 
Sometimes, it took us that long just to get used to 
cach other. The only rule was that there was only 
one shot, one frame, one take. So I had to wait for 
the right moment, when everybody had agreed on 
when and how we would do the take, when 
everybody felt comfortable. There is no artificial 
light in the film. Everything was filmed in a very 
natural way, to show the people as they are. 
HB In your shots of the landscape of Sarajevo, 
there is a sense that the ruined buildings and 
the barren fields are also keeping silent, as 
witnesses to a tragedy. 
H.N.: What I would say is that this kind of silence 
is really a basis for dialogue. I hope that my film 
will make people talk. 
B What effect did it have on you to film the 
Sarajevan “gaze”? 
H.N.: [t would have killed me if it were a weapon. 
Iwas hurt by those glances. But I was happy that 
they projected such strength. Usually the 
Bosnians are shown as victims in the media. And 
the more you see people as victims, the more 
you accept that they are treated as victims. 
I was offered the opportunity to film people 
who had been wounded in the war, but I refused. 


### 102889: The Height of silence

I wanted to show the Bosnians as beautiful, strong 
people, not as victims or complainers. I didn’t 
want to be a voyeur, either. By giving them the 
opportunity to be silent in front of the camera, I 
was giving them a chance to show their dignity 
and humanity. Using silence was the strongest 
way to do this. A film about silence became the 
only real means of communication. u 
HADANI DITMARS 
is a Canadian writer and journalist 
who writes about issues related to 
intercultural dialogue. 
21 
ta

## [Page 22](102874engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 102890: A Mystic journey

Jalal ad-Din ar-Rimi. 
© Marisa Duhalde, Niépce Films 
Muslim brotherhood, E i 
a film by Pierre-Marie 
Goulet about the dervi 
by Kudsi Erguner 
icjourney Am y 
st] Be 
1 
 

## [Page 23](102874engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 102890: A Mystic journey

The Sufi musician draws 
his notes from a well of silence 
Silence is the spring from which the Sufi 
musician draws his music. In that he is 
akin to the earth in labour. The musician does 
not know what will emerge, or when, but he 
cannot let the moment go by; he must be there 
when the seed sprouts. 
Likewise, no one can know in advance what 
will come from the seed buried within them. 
Only the sound of the ney—arced flute—can 
reveal the face of this other person who is one’s 
real self. The sound of the ney re-opens inus a 
wound from a past time when we were totally 
at one with plants, stones, water and stars. The 
memory of this union vanishes at our birth. 
But when, in silence, we hear the first notes of 
the ney, memories rise up in us, and we 
remember this lost homeland. 
“We have all heard this music in Paradise,” 
wrote the thirteenth-century mystic poet Jalil 
ad-Din ar-Rlim1. “Although the water and clay 
of our bodies have cast doubt over us, some- 
thing of this music drifts back into our 
memory.” 
According to Islamic tradition, the zey has 
this power to command memory because “the 
reed quill was the first thing created by God”. 
Like humankind, the ney was cut from its 
roots, the reed-bed by the pond’s edge. “Ever 
since then,” complains the ney in Rimi’s 
words, “my dirge makes men and women 
lament. I call to a heart torn by separation to 
show it the pain of desire.” 
The ney is thus man’s double. Both have 
wounds on their chests and are enwrapped in 
bonds. Both are empty and desiccated because 
the earth no longer nourishes them. Each is 
voiceless without the other. The reed flute is 
made to sing; it only comes to life at the musi- 
cian’s lips. Hearing its notes, the musician 
glimpses the inaudible vibration of the celestial 
vault and remembers the time when he was 
wedded to its movements. The time when, 
unveiled, he contemplated the shining face of 
God. “We are the flute,” sings Rimi. “Our 
music comes from Thee.” 
The sama is the spiritual concert where the 
ney is accompanied by the daf (a frame- 
A dervish and his reed flute, 
the ney. 
KUDSI ERGUNER 
is a Turkish architect and 
musicologist who himself plays 
and teaches the ney. He founded 
the Mewlana Association in Paris 
(France) where he teaches the Sufi 
tradition and classical music. 
Among his many recordings is 
The Turkish Ney (Traditional 
Musics of Today Collection, 
Auvidis/Unesco, 1990). 
 
mounted drum), the tanbur (a long-necked 
lute), the kanun (zither), the #d (short lute) and 
the kemence (violin). It takes place in the 
cvening in a tekke (a large room in half-light). 
The musicians, who are gathered on one side 
and surrounded by an audience on carpets and 
couches, only begin to play after several hours 
have elapsed, when along silence has settled in. 
  
Listening 
Sama means “listening”. During the sama the 
musicians play compositions from onc of the 
modes (maqam) in the repertoire or impro- 
vise on this mode. Some magam belong to a 
tradition that may go back to the fourteenth 
century. They vary little in their form and are 
well known to the audience. But they are never 
played or listened to twice in the same way. 
23 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
Sa
br
in
a 
Mi
ch
au
d 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 24](102874engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 102890: A Mystic journey

© 
He
nr
i 
Ca
rt
ie
r-
Br
es
so
n,
 
Ma
gn
um
, 
Pa
ri
s 
A flute player 
in a Turkish village. 
Persian proverb 
During a sama, the listeners are invited to 
embark on a journey of the soul. The route is 
spiral-shaped, and each stage of it is marked by 
asilence, as if wishing to test the solidity of the 
foothold reached before continuing the ascent. 
The musician, said Rimi, provides the foot- 
prints. The ney player indicates a direction and 
creates a favourable environment for the 
journey. A specific atmosphere goes with each 
musical mode. 
No one at the beginning of a sama can guess 
how the journey will end. Perhaps in a joyful 
meeting with the Beloved? Perhaps it will not 
be long, or the traveller will have to turn back. 
... Everything depends on the hal (state of 
mind) of the audience and the musician. But 
the two are so intertwined that it is impossible 
to know which influences which. 
The word hal does not denote a vague 
feeling caused by a vagrant mood but the 
degree of elevation which a person with a 
“pure heart” achieves at the end of a period of 
inner asceticism. If he aspires to the divine, he 
must control his instincts without repressing 
them. The horseman who listens to his mount 
rather than guiding it has little chance of going 
far. In the same way, we must silence our inner 
sounds—our carnal passions—and concen- 
trate our listening powers so that they become. 
sharper and more watchful, sensitive to the 
slightest change of tone. 
Sometimes the silence of the audience may 
be so complete that it feeds the silence from 
which the ney player draws the force and soft- 
ness of his notes. At these moments the mir- 
acle of breathing becomes palpable for 
everyone, musician and listener alike. Inhaling 
and exhaling seem virtually automatic. In an 
almost unreal silence, the sound of the ney isa 
reminder that an instant of life is won with each 
breath. The musician’s ear is schooled in the 
harmony of the celestial vault. By filling the 
reed’s tube, his breath prolongs the contin- 
uous rhythm of the universe. He becomes the 
echo of its unending movement. || 
- 
   
  

## [Page 25](102874engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

b=. al g' £ J el 
AF, Ze 
Co ; ¥ = fr 4 iy ! FY 
fl 5 Lar 


### 102892: Music, time, eternity

Music, 
time, eternity 
by Elizabeth Sombart 
| innerselfmustbe 
filled with silence.   
I am eleven years old. I am about to walk 
on stage for my first concert. All is 
silence here in the wings, far from the hubbub 
in the hall as the audience arrives. I am over- 
come by a fear that I’ve never felt before. I 
walk on stage accompanied by the sound of 
my footsteps and those of the audience. Sud- 
denly deep within me I feel I must return to 
the long silence offstage before I play my first 
note. How extraordinary that I need all these 
people in front of me to feel the absolute neces- 
sity for silence that is required before music 
can be played. 
25

## [Page 26](102874engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

The truth dawns on me that noise is some- 
thing that we merely hear. To experience 
music, we must listen to it, and to be able to 
listen, there must be an inner silence. Without 
this silence, there is no music. I must imme- 
diately forget the concert hall, the audience, 
the noise, the doors that open and close in the 
muffled velvet atmosphere. ... I must hear 
only my ownssilence, the silence that lives deep 
in my heart. Breathe decply. Breathing must 
make my fingers move. “Breathe the music 
and you will be inspired,” our music teacher 
says. 
The first note bursts from my fingers, my 
body, my soul, from the wonderful silence that 
fills me and uplifts me. How could I have been 
afraid? It is fear that makes us want to make 
noise; this evening I realize that noise is the sin 
of music. In music, the “frills” are what we 
project from our inner noise, from our fear of 
silence. My feet are firmly on the ground, my 
head is in the clouds and my hands fly over 
the keyboard. Every gesture that spells out 
music 1s “sacred”. Sounds die out as I play, but 
no one notices that they are gone. They die 
without dying. They are absorbed in the body 
and soul of the listener and go on living there. 
The subtle music of inner silence. Music lives in 
all of us. The audience and I are now one, 
bound by this music that rises from my fin- 
gers like a meadow moved by silence. 
A timeless moment 
“You can’t get to sleep?” 
“Who are you? How do you know I can’t 
sleep?” 


### 102892: Music, time, eternity

“I am an old man who lives in the silence 
of eternity. Your concert this evening was very 
good.” 
“Did you think so? I don’t know whether I 
played the music or whether the music played 
forme....” 
“It played neither for you nor for anyone in 
particular. It played, that’s all. Music is the 
meeting place of the temporal and the time- 
less, the vertical and the horizontal. The 
meeting place is your heart, the seat of all the 
emotions expressed by music. This is how the 
universe advances in harmony with us. It is 
our heart, and our heart is the universe. A single 
26 
The hand of 
Charles Munch conducting 
the Boston Symphony 
Orchestra. 
 
soul, like yours, contains the feelings of all 
humanity.” 
“Eternity is in my heart?” 
There is no one in my room except for my 
little teddy bear, who has been my night-time 
companion since I was born. I must have 
dreamed. I close my cyes again and drop off 
to sleep. 
“Haven’t you ever dreamed of music while 
you sleep?” 
“You again! All Icantell you is that when 
play, I do nothing else and I think of nothing 
clse. If ever I think, I hit a wrong note. You 
know why? Wrong notes are noise. Noise 
comes from fear, the fear that distances us from 
the silence of music. And then we fall... . you

## [Page 27](102874engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

“Tell me again, where do the notes I play 
goto?” 
“You send them back to where they come 
from: infinity.” 
“I'm not sure what you mean by infinity...” 
“Every movement, every vibration, every 
true word you utter represents sounds that 
are in direct contact with the world, with the 


### 102892: Music, time, eternity

wavelengths of your heart. Like you, they have 
a past, a present, a future and a natural tendency 
to return to infinite silence. People think they 
die, but they do not die because time does not 
exist. Music 1s the metaphor of time and time is 
the metaphor of the Eternal.” 
“I don’t know what a metaphor is. But I 
understand that these three words—music, 
time, eternal—are the same.” 
“How else would you describe the joy you 
spoke of earlier, when sounds mix and swell 
like a firework display in your heart, then 
scatter into a thousand emotions, fall away and 
fade into the silence of the night.” 
“Itis love.” 
“Yes. Love is to music what silence is to 
infinity.” 
The old man disappears in a rustling of stars. 
I close the lid of the piano. The concert is over. 
I fall asleep. || 
ELIZABETH SOMBART 
is a French concert pianist who is currently preparing a series of 
programmes for a French TV channel on the history of the piano from 
Bach to Bart6k.   
Constantine Manos © Magnum, Pans 
sce? When we play well, when music plays 
through us, we lose track of time. Musical time 
isn’t the same thing as ordinary time. Not at 
all! In musical time, there is no place for fear 
or for thinking. I feel such great joy and peace 
when I serve music, in this silence... . It is a 
timeless moment.” 
“When you began to play this evening, you 
did what all musicians should do: you took a 
vow of silence. Only then can each sound 
become a hymn to life, an explosion of unimag- 
inable force that changes the course of events. 
Music was given to men and women so that 
they could understand, in the immediacy of 
this experience, that the present is the point 
where time touches eternity. ” Ohiyesa or Charles Alexander Eastman (1858-1939), Sioux Indian physician and author, 
27

## [Page 28](102874engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 102893: Painting the void: interview with Kumi Sugai

Painting the void 
28 
BM Silence is central to your creative work as 
a painter. How would you define it? 
Kumi Sugai: As a state of inner emptiness and 
fullness, to which speed is an effective mode of 
access. When I drive my sports car at almost 200, 
kilometres an hour, my mind becomes extremely 
vigilant. T know that the slightest error could cost 
me my life. As I hurtle along in a straight line, I 
feel a sense of void and at the same time absolute 
joy. Suddenly Ifeel free and infinitely powerful. 
In 1967 I had a very serious accident—I was 
nearly killed—with my first sports car, which was 
red. The one I've got now is white. 
HM It was around that time that you started 
painting red and black circles on a white 
background... 
K.S.: I draw them and paint them by hand, taking 
all the time I need for them to be perfectly 
  
 
formed. Alone in my studio, I rediscover the 
void that I experienced when driving my car at 
top speed. 
Hl Working slowly in the studio, do you try to 
prolong the heightened experience you have 
on the road? Does the straight line of the road 
become on your canvas a spiral sucked in by a 
black hole, a kind of orbit of silence? | 
K.S.: You could say that. I need two conditions to 
be able to paint: plenty of light and complete 
quietness. For me, the ideal studio would be four 
white walls, silence, isolation. Even if T accept that 
the sight and sounds of nature are beautiful, they 
do not inspire me. When I fly above the clouds in 
a plane I sometimes admire the colours of the 
sunset, but the sight does not give me a creative 
shock. What does, is the aircraft's landing on the 
runway, the speed of the car on the highway, or

## [Page 29](102874engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 102893: Painting the void: interview with Kumi Sugai

interview with Kumi Sugai 
the sight of any man-made perspective with pure 
lines—the architecture of the La Défense neigh- 
bourhood in Paris, for example. My friends say 
that being in my dream studio would soon drive 
anyone crazy. But I am sure that it is there, in that 
bare and silent space, that I could best express the 
inner void that inspires me. 
HE Could you tell us what you try to express? 
Do you want to capture delirious states of 
mind, like Rimbaud, the delirium of an age 
taken over by speed? Or do you want to make 
contact with the ‘other world’, like a shaman? 
K.S.: There are no words to define what I do. My 
paintings have something in common with road 
signs—which are in my opinion a model of imme- 
diate and total communication. On the highway, 
road signs transmit a clear message that any driver, 
irrespective of nationality or culture, can grasp 
A Japanese painter who finds a 
creative shock in speed 
 
Tratfic, Mexico City (1963). 
Top, Espace 84 
(1984, 202 x 689 cm.), 
acrylic on canvas, a diptych 
by Kumi Sugai. 
29 
© 
J. 
Hy
de
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Er
ns
t 
Ha
as
 
© 
Ma
gn
um
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 30](102874engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

© 
J. 
Hy
de
. 
Pa
ns
  
in a fraction of a second. In the same way, [ only 
want to use the most direct terms, like the indi- 
visible elements of modern physics. This is why I 
use basic primary colours. 
BM Cadmium red, white and black, which are 
also the colours of your sports cars. In what 
sense are these colours ‘basic’ for you? 
K.S.: Red, black and white are colours that 
everyone knows. Even though the light may 
change according to time and place, in our hearts 
red stays the same. Blue or violet on the other 
hand change with the light—and so do my states 
of mind! I will always pres ent white, red and black 
as they are. Straight, without any frills. What mat- 
ters, finally, is not so much the colours particularly 
as the way in which my canvases fit together. 
S circles (1994, 200 x 113 cm.), acrylic 
on canvas by Kuml Sugai. 
| 
Alejandra Pizarnik (1936-1972), Argentine poet 
They form a totality, like a body, in which I am 
fully myself. In the past, before I changed styles, 
before I acquired my first red sports car... 
HM ... before your terrible accident in 1967? 
K.S.: Yes. At that time I “voided” myself in certain 
works, I gave them everything I'd got, whereas I 
stayed on the surface with others, in which put 
less of myself. I felt divided. I needed to stand 
back. And so I decided to stop doing things that 
did not flow from the depths of my being. It was 
more honest for other people and for myself. 
Since then, with the aid of my brushes and my 
primary colours, I have given to others “some- 
thing” that does not yet have a name. Something 
that can be immediately given and received, not 
only today but in three hundred years’ time, or 
later. Something that is beyond current human 
language. It is impossible and even useless to 
express anything in front of one of my paintings. 
You can only absorb the shock in silence. 
Hl So what you do has little in common with 
art, past or present? 


### 102893: Painting the void: interview with Kumi Sugai

K.S.: Modern society is a society of gadgets, of 
the superfluous, where only certain needs such as 
food and shelter are considered useful and there- 
fore necessary. Everything else is an extra, 
including art, including a painting by a great master. 
I am convinced that we are entering a new age 
whose first inklings are these buildings with right 
angles, pure lines. 
BM This futuristic architecture regarded 
by its detractors as the reflection of an inner 
void. .. 
K.S.: Itis in a completely denuded and perhaps 
even speechless universe where people will only 
communicate via signals that art as I see it will 
become indispensable. When we have got rid of 
everything that is unnecessary, art will become 
necessary: it alone will be able to support a world 
reduced to its simplest form of expression. HM 
Interview by MYRIAM SMADJA © 
Je
an
-M
ar
c 
Wu
ll
sc
hl
eg
er
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 31](102874engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 102894: A Moment of fulfilment

A moment of fulfilment 
by Claude Louis-Combet 
In a celebrated lecture, the German poet Rainer 
Maria Rilke spoke of “the great silence that reigns 
around things”. This close silence exists to calm the 
passions and to increase the acuity of our perception of 
other creatures. It is a silence of plenitude and grace 
that even bursts of speech and laughter cannot spoil. 
[t is part and parcel of the words we need to hear in 
order to fully exist, and of an appearance and a counte- 
nance that encourage communication. Without silence, 
! there would be no speech. 
There is always a moment when time’s tensions 
slacken and when space retires. We seize this moment 
from the intensity of a beloved face or in the profound 
harmony that unites us with the contours and rhythm 
of a landscape. Itis an instant of silence and an instant of 
  
   
   
  
presence in the tumult of life   solitude, perhaps, but 
ol) 3105 Furc irte | of 
without isolation or dislocation. 
The contemplative side of our being, which the tur- 
moil of the day has not destroyed, then holds sway and 
lets us feel the continuity of our being with the elec- 
\ inh pte Ee 7 a ™ . y " 3 . ~ ahi : 
} 6 alias rl i ER Ne vane id ; FERRE I og yo 
  
    
   
  
tive realities that people our inner lives. All the mystics 
  
have lived with this experience in the background. But 
the man whose only faith is in man and whose only 
love is in the world, is not necessarily deprived of the 
BM certainty of such a bonding. Itis possible in the silence 
a of stilled passions. m 
Be : - 
Vk #3 CLAUDE LOUIS-COMBET ga 
is a French poet and writer whose recently published works include 
Ei Rae Blesse, ronce noir (“Wound, Black Bramble”, 1995) and Miroirs du texte 
BRR (“Mirrors of the Text”, 1995).

## [Page 32](102874engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Pa
tr
ic
k 
La
ge
s,
 
Pa
ri
s 


### 102895: An Inner experience

  
An nner experience 
Mysterious experiences that lead to inner 
silence and a sense of life's unity 
Silence is usually defined as the absence 
of noise. However, it is also an inner 
experience, and one that affects each of us on 
different levels. The happy, fulfilled person 
finds comfort in silence. The old fisherman 
sitting for hours on end gazing at the sea and 
the farmer who looks out over his land both 
know this soothing silence, the fruit of a life of 
by Jacques Castermane 
toil. And we are all familiar with the emotion 
that wells up during the silence, however brief, 
that honours the dead. This silence has a special 
quality, questioning those who observe it about 
the meaning of existence. Anyone who has 
entered a temple in Kyoto or a cathedral in 
Europe has been struck by it, a silence which 
stops the visitor short as soon as the threshold 
is crossed. Itis disturbing, and even sometimes 
threatening, because the visitor feels it to be a 
door opening onto mystery. 
But the silence of the inner life is even more 
profound. When people experience this 
 

## [Page 33](102874engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 102895: An Inner experience

Above, on the coast near St. 
Malo (France). 
Right, Hindu ascetic or sadhu 
in Nepal. 
 
silence, they know the unity of life. Such an 
experience can be the starting point of spiri- 
tual development. 
All experience is ephemeral. But with prac- 
tice, experience of profound silence ean 
become a permanent condition. It is the state of 
being of someone who has achieved maturity, 
a mental disposition whereby a person dis- 
cerns, through the conflicts and clashes of 
everyday life, an essential unity. Those who 
display this unity in their daily lives have pro- 
gressed from adulthood to maturity. 
The art of silence opens the doorway from 
transient to lasting experience. 
The promise of beauty 
Various moments in life provide the condi- 
tions for such an experience—contemplation 
of nature or art, for example, or the love that 
joins two persons. Wherever the promise of 
beauty takes you, there is an opportunity to 
experience inner silence. 
Japanese proverb 
What is beauty? If we agree with Kant, 
beauty is a quality that is innate to an object. 
But while it concerns the object, we must 
admit that it also concerns the subject. When I 
listen to a piece of music, what makes me say 
“it’s beautiful” 1s not only the work as it is inter- 
preted, but also and above all the way in which 
I am affected by the interpretation. Is this a 
matter of taste? It is judgment based on taste, 
says Kant. At all events, the word “beautiful” 
denotes a quality experienced by a person and 
agreeable to that person. Sometimes, when 
you listen to a sonata or a symphony that you 
have heard a hundred times, the quality that 
affects you on this specific occasion is such 
that the word “beautiful” is no longer adequate 
to express your feelings. This is an experience 
in which one’s feelings cannot be described by 
words. 
It 1s a strange moment during which one 
can sometimes even feel alien to the object. It 
may happen that there is no more object, no 
33 
©J
ea
n-
Ma
rc
 
Wu
ll
sc
hl
eg
er
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 34](102874engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Je
an
-M
ar
c 
Wu
ll
sc
hl
eg
er
, 
Pa
ns
 
Thomas Carlyle {1795-1881), Scottish historian and philosopher 


### 102895: An Inner experience

more symphony, no more orchestra, no more 
conductor! In this unexpected experience 
there is no longer an object that is distinct from 
a subject. There is no longer a distinction 
between subject and object. At this point you 
are gripped by silence. 
This silence, this absence of all materiality, is 
the inexpressible presence of what lies beyond 
the subject-object differentiation, beyond 
duality. 
What can be said of this silence? This is how 
it was once described to me by someone who 
had experienced what she called “a curious 
moment”. 
“Iwas strolling on the sea-shore, watching 
the sun go down. I stopped. It was beautiful. 
No, suddenly, it had nothing to do with what is 
called beautiful. It was peculiar. It was as if 
were immersed in a totally different reality. 
Everything within me became astonishingly 
calm, and I felt a very great inner force... 
freedom. I knew nothing, and yet I knew 
everything. I no longer belonged to myself, 
  
     
and at the same time I was in a sense more 
myself than I had ever been. A wave of silence 
suffused me. I shivered. A shiver of joy and at 
the same time a shiver of fear. It was as if TL had 
rediscovered something known while con- 
fronted with the unknown. Then I heard 
someone say, ‘It’s magnificent, isn’t it?’ I lis- 
tened, and then it was all over.” 
At the moment when consciousness, 
which makes the distinction between subject 
and object, reasserts its ascendancy, “it’s all 
over.” Immediately, the experience fades away 
into memory. Few people try to understand 
what has really happened during such a 
“curious” moment. 
These are experiences in which what is called 
silence reveals a reality that transcends ordinary 
reality. What is discovered is transcendence. 
The word “transcendence” has several 
meanings. It can denote a reality thatis beyond 
the space-time horizon, infinitely beyond 
human beings and the condition in which they 
live. It can also denote an experience that opens 
pwn We Serr 
  
The Phaung Daw U 
pagoda on Lake Inlee 
(Myanmar).

## [Page 35](102874engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 102895: An Inner experience

human consciousness to another dimension 
of the self. In this case transcendence is imma- 
nent in the individual. 
It may seem highly subjective to say that 
what is experienced in a state of silence touches 
on a reality that surpasses ordinary reality. But 
that is the case! 
The person as subject is the seat of subjec- 
tive experiences. What interests us when we 
talk about inner silence is the person as sub- 
ject. The person as subject cannot be defined 
using the objective criteria that enable us to 
study the person-object. The person as sub- 
ject 1s someone who feels, experiences, and 
suffers, who knows joy and sadness, well-being 
and hardship, confidence and mistrust. 
Clearly this subjective side must be rele- 
gated to the background in a science labora- 
tory, where objective measurement is all that 
matters. Human feelings may lead to error by 
subverting the objectivity demanded by sci- 
entific research. 
But when we are concerned with the 
person as subject, it is objective criteria that 
may lead to error. To say dismissively that 
“what you felt is purely subjective!” is to 
reduce the human being to an object, a thing! 
What I feel when I walk in the forest or 
Vaulting in Exeter Cathedral 
(United Kingdom, 
13th-14th centuries). 
Er
ns
t 
Ha
as
 
© 
Ma
gn
um
, 
Pa
ns

## [Page 36](102874engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 102895: An Inner experience

slowly make my way to the top of a mountain 
is, fortunately, a subjective experience. Lis- 
tening to Mozart or Debussy is also a subjec- 
tive experience. And when tenderness unites 
two persons who love each other and when 
they become one, this too is a subjective expe- 
rience in which they rediscover the great 
silence that rises from the depths of being. 
When we go to concerts and museums or 
into the world of nature, is it not to enjoy and 
repeat the experience of this transcendent “I”? 
When we tenderly draw near to the person 
we love, is it not to re-live the experience of 
immanent transcendence, that of the person 
as subject? 
 
The art of silence 
But itis not the sunset, nor the piece of music, 
nor the loved one that is the cause of the fulfil- 
ment, the inner order and the unity we feel. 
These are merely the circumstances that reveal 
our innate potentialities. While this experience 
lasts, we fleetingly perceive what we are in the 
depths of our being. 
This is why it is important to ask oneself 
the question, “How can I become what I have 
experienced, how can I make the transition 
from a short-lived experience to a permanent 
state of being?” 
The answer is by practising silence, the art 
of silence. 
Etymologically, the Latin word for art, ars, 
means “way of being”. It is even “a way of 
stretching towards an order dictated by the 
gods”. Ina sense, artists are always concerned 
by transcendence. In the same way, human 
beings growing to maturity must take them- 
selves in hand, just as a craftsman takes a piece 
of unfinished work in his hands. Self-perfec- 
tion is the goal. Permanent inner silence is the 
fruit of this accomplishment. 
A scene from 
Fuoco centrale (1995), a play 
staged by the Teatro Valdoca 
Company in Italy. 
Alfred de Vigny (1797-1863), French poet 
  
  
 
Western spirituality tends to be so con- 
cerned with the creation of something external 
that a longing for inner creation, for the great 
peace of the soul, is considered a waste of time 
or even an attempt to escape from the real 
world. 
In the West a person who regularly prac- 
tises an art generally seeks to acquire knowl- 
edge that culminates in a performance. The art 
of silence, on the other hand, is directed 
towards knowing how to be, achieving the 
capacity to feel and to remain calm, peaceful 
and serene in the circumstances we face in our 
daily lives.

## [Page 37](102874engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 102895: An Inner experience

  
What 1s the “material” that must be worked 
on and shaped by the artisan’s hand? It is his 
or her own body. 
Butisit really possible that a physical exer- 
cise can lead humankind to the “greatest 
good”? Let us not forget that the body con- 
sists of three factors. It is substance, matter. It is 
also form. The substance assumes feminine or 
masculine form, youthful or elderly form. But 
these two factors are characteristic of a corpse 
as well as a living body. They do not define a 
living person. Living consists of doing, of 
action, of all the actions through which people 
are present in the world. 
The practice of silence relates to this last 
factor. The art of silence consists in raising 
actions that are normally unconscious to the 
level of conscious experience. The most com- 
monplace act can then become the object of a 
specific excercise: sitting down, walking, 
breathing. All the arts, from singing to making 
pottery, dancing and even archery or fencing, 
provide those who practise them regularly 
with the opportunity to become themselves. 
They provide an opportunity to achieve matu- 
rity, they open the person to immanent tran- 
scendence, which is manifested “silently” in 
every aspect of their lives. | 
  
JACQUES CASTERMANE, 
of Belgium, is director of the 
Durckheim Centre (France). He is the 
author of Les legons de K. G. 
Dirckheim. premiers pas sur le 
chemin initiatique (“The Lessons of 
K. G. Dirckheim: First Steps on the 
Initiatory Path”, 1988). 
37 
  
© 
Pa
tr
ic
k 
La
ge
s,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 38](102874engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

Un
es
co
/G
il
 
Ja
cq
ue
s,
 
Mo
nt
ré
al
 
  
  
THE 
"AND C 
t the dawn of the twenty-first century 
urban living poses a major challenge to 
which effective, and above all timely, 
responses must be found. No treatment can work 
unless a diagnosis is made in good time. 
It is true that we produce studies, analyses and 
reports on the critical situation in cities and the damage 
inflicted on the environment and on citizens, but we 


### 102915: The City, environment and culture

have a moral obligation to deal with these problems 
by taking preventive action. This “time ethic” is 
important if action is to be effective. Any clinical ana- 
lyst knows that a diagnosis should be good without 
aspiring to be perfect, for only an autopsy can provide 
the perfect diagnosis, and by then it is too late. The 
same applies to the environment. Since any process 
is potentially irreversible, we must have the courage 
to act, however unpopular that action might be, while 
treatment is still possible. 
If current demographic forecasts turn out to be 
correct, by the year 2000 one human being out of 
every two will be living in a city. By 2035, three thou- 
sand million more people will be living in the urban 
settlements that exist today. These forecasts may 
not materialize if we succeed in containing popu- 
lation growth. We cannot tell the 250,000 new- 
comers that our planet welcomes each day that there 
1s no room for them and that we do not want them. 
So how can we slow down population growth? 
Education—especially the education of women 
in urban and rural environments—is the key factor. 
Education can, independently of ideological or reli- 
FEDERICO MAYOR: COMMENTARY 
CITY, 
ENVIRONMENT 
ULTURE 
gious belief, help to reduce fertility rates rapidly by 
something like 50 to 60 per cent. 
In December 1993, at a meeting held under the 
auspices of UNESCO, UNICEF and the United 
Nations, the world’s nine most populous countries 
(the home of 72 per cent of the world’s illiterates 
and 56 per cent of world population) agreed that 
only education could enable every woman and 
every man to control their own destinies. Some of 
these countries, including India, have already 
decided to increase the percentage of their gross 
domestic product set aside for education. This kind 
of measure could restrain population growth while 
ensuring respect for individual freedom. 
Megacities under fire 
It is also necessary to improve the quality of life, 
above all in rural areas. This is the only way to pre- 
vent migration from these areas to the outskirts of 
big cities and even to other countries seen as more 
prosperous. To this end we must mobilize solidarity 
between and within nations in order to distribute 
resources more evenly. If we can boost education— 
doubling investment in it—and at the same time 
improve the quality of life, we shall succeed in con- 
taining population growth, 
If we fail to do this, we shall have to build a thou- 
sand cities of three million inhabitants in the next 
forty years, twenty-five a year. These figures starkly 
demonstrate the extreme magnitude of the urban 
phenomenon. 

## [Page 39](102874engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

  
Cities, which have generated such vital concepts 
and practices as civic virtues, urbanity, civilization, 


### 102915: The City, environment and culture

politics and democracy, which were once a well- 
spring of community solidarity, have for many 
people become synonymous with disorder, chaos 
and radical upheaval, with violence, pollution, inse- 
curity, the breakdown of social cohesion, wastage 
and delinquency. Cities, it is said, are machines for 
manufacturing poverty and social inequality. They 
are machines for destroying the natural environ- 
ment and the human environment. When people 
talk about cities they use such terms as disruption, 
dislocation, dehumanization. 
When leading experts look at the megacities of 
the north and the vast, sprawling conurbations of 
the south, whose identity is precarious or non-exis- 
tent, they even talk of the end of the city, the death of 
the “polis.” 
 
A modern scapegoat 
I do not share this pessimism. I feel that we are at the 
beginning of something new. For centuries we have 
been living in a war culture. Today we are moving 
from the argument of force to the force of argu- 
ment. We arc at the beginning of a universal cul- 
ture—the culture of peace. Now we must invent a 
new kind of city. 
With the destructuring of industrial society, the 
factory has been replaced as the battlefield of what 
was formerly known as the class struggle by the 
urban fabric, by the city itself, the place where the 
new fissures in society appear. But let us not confuse 
cause and effect. The deterioration of community 
living in the fringe areas of big cities 1s not the reason 
why their inhabitants are the victims of segregation; 
on the contrary, it is the social exclusion of citizens 
that is responsible for the precarity of urban life and 
the troubled situation in these neighbourhoods. 
It is tempting to blame the city for our feelings of 
dissatisfaction whereas they are actually the result of 
the shortcomings of today’s economy and social 
structure. We have been unable to reconcile increased 
productivity with increased employment, wealth 
creation with widespread well-being, self-assertion 
with community solidarity, personal self-reliance with 
social cohesion. To blame all this on cities is to turn a 
blind eye to problems so complex that it is only too 
casy to indulge in escapism and find excuses. 
We must face up to the complexity of today’s 
problems, drawing not only on our own resources 
and imagination but on the experience of others, of 
those who in similar situations have found appro- 
priate responses. Experience is the outcome of suc- 
cesses and failures and it can help save time by 
diverting us from the false trails that in similar cir- 
cumstances have led others to grief. Experience 
prompts us to make use of ideas which initially 
nobody believed in and which in the end were the 
only ones that proved effective. 
The urban challenge 
The Earth Summit held in Rio de Janeiro in June 
1992 launched some of these ideas and invited the 
international community to promote sustainable 
development in a world at peace, a world in which 
access to decent urban housing should also be a 
basic human right. UNESCO, which has made sus- 
tainable development and the rehabilitation of cities 
two of its major objectives, is making an important 
new contribution in this field. 
We have enlisted the support of cities, through 
their mayors, in an endeavour to introduce the prin- 
ciples of a culture of peace into everyday life. We 
must rise daily to the challenge of constructing the 
defences of peace in people’s minds, and this is why 
we have added to the intergovernmental dimen- 
sion of UNESCO the dimension of close contact that 
1s found in the local urban environment. [| 
39 
 

## [Page 40](102874engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

       
       
    
»
 
- IIA ® 
IC
OM
OS
, 
Pa
ri
s 
L
A
 
   
ref ~ ara yy ? 


### 102916: The Rune-stones of Jelling

THE RUNE-STONES OF JELLING 
Runic inscriptions and imposing 
burial monnds over a thousand 
years old record the encounter 
between paganism and Christianity 
in a Danish village site that was 
registered on UNESCO's World 
Heritage List in 1994 
JENS BOEL 
is head of Unesco's Archives department. 
40 
by Jens Boel 
he little village of Jelling, in the heart of 
the peaceful countryside of Eastern 
Jutland, ts dominated by two large burial 
mounds shaped like truncated cones. 
Between them is a typical Danish village 
church, a simple white-washed, medieval 
stone building. In front of the church stand 
two runie stones. The mounds and rune- 
stones form one of the most important 
Viking sites in Scandinavia. 
The runc-stones were raised more than a 
thousand years ago, one by the Viking King 
Gorm the Old, and the other by his son, King 
ITarald Bluetooth. Each of them bears wit- 
ness to an ancient culture and to the transition 
from pagan Norse religious beliefs to Chris- 
tianity. Today, many eenturies later, we do 
not know the full significanee of the runie 
stones and mounds nor why the site was con- 
structed at all. However, we are not com- 
pletely in the dark. The writing on the stones 
can be deciphered and archaeological exea- 
vations have lifted part of the mystery. 
The mounds and stones date from the 
mid-tenth century and are outstanding 
examples of the pagan Nordic culture. The 
present church was construeted around 
1100, but it was preceded by at least three 
wooden ehurches, all of which were 
destroyed by fire. Tle first church was 
probably built by King Harald, who con- 
verted to Christianity around 965. 
Harald’s runic stone is three-sided. It 
is the biggest of its kind in Scandinavia (2.5 
metres high). Unlike the smaller one, it 
stands in its eriginal position, exaetly 
midway between the two mounds. Its 
inscription reads: “King Ilarald bade this: 
monument be made in memory of Gorm his 
father and Thyra his mother, that ITarald 
who wou for himself all Denmark and 
Norway and made the Danes Christian.” 
The inscription is surmounted hy a 
carving of a typical Nordic dragon in inter- 
laced ornament. On the southwest face of 
the stone the earliest depiction of Christin

## [Page 41](102874engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 102916: The Rune-stones of Jelling

Scandinavia can be seen. [leis standing sur- 
rounded by ornaments from which he seems 
to emerge, and beneath him runs the final 
words of the inscription: “and made the 
Danes Christians”. 
The original position of the smaller stone 
is not known, but around 1630 it was moved 
to its present location next to [Tarald’s stone. 
The inscription on it reads: “King Gorm 
made this monument to his wife Thyra, 
Denmark’s ornament.” 
The message conveyed by these words 
has provoked much debate among scholars, 
at least since some local people acciden- 
tally discovered a burial chamber in the 
north mound when they were searching for 
water during the summer of 1820. 
FACTS AND FICTION 
Some facts are incontrovertible. During the 
reigns of Gorm and his son, Harald Blue- 
tooth, Jelling was a royal manor, although it 
is uncertain whether the kings resided there 
permanently. Both father and son ruled a 
realm known as Denmark, and Ilarald 
Opposite page, detail of the runic inscription 
engraved on King Harald’s stone. 
Right, the runic stones of King Gorm (foreground) 
and King Harald. The latter is adorned with a 
depiction of Christ. 
The Jelling site 
A. Protected area 
B. Church and cemetery 
C. The mounds 
D. The two runic stones 
  
     
claimed to be the ruler of Norway as well. 
King Gorm erected a stone in Jelling in 
memory of his wife, Thyra, and arald did 
the same for both of his parents after 
Gorm’s death in 958. There is every probh- 
ability that Gorm was buried in the north 
mounel. 
It may be assumed that the two mounds, 
today regarded as cxcellent feats of engi- 
neering, were laid out by Gorm after 
Thyra’s death as a joint funerary monu- 
ment. Ilowever, the south mound was only 
completed in 972, and it contains no burial 
chamber. Archaeological excavations have 
led to the discovery of a grave chamber in 
the first wooden ehureh, containing the 
skeletal remains of a man. The excavations 
revealed that the burial and the building 
were established at the same time and that 
the man in the grave had been buried else- 
where once before. Archaeologists conclude 
that King Harald probably transferred his 
father’s bones to the impressive wooden 
church he built after he had officially intro- 
duced Christianity to Denmark. By giving 
 
King Gorm a Christian funeral [Harald made 
a elear religious and political demonstra- 
tion. As for Queen Thyra, no trace of her 
grave has yet heen found, and the mystery 
of where she was buried remains. 
A SITE OF NATIONAL 
IMPORTANCE 
Every new generation interprets historyina 
different way corresponding to the kind of 
world and problems that confront it. In the 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries the 
national importance of the Jelling site was 
stressed. [ere could be seen in a clear and 
instruetive way the emergence of Denmark as 
a unified kingdom with the succession 
passing from father 10 son, Christianization 
was also emphasized as evidence of a major 
victory for eivilization and progress. 
Today these views are regarded as far 
too simplistic. It is not at all clear what the 
notion “Denmark” aetually mcant at that 
time. Although it is generally accepted 
that the Christian faith was formally intro- 
duced in Denmark during thie reign of King 
© 
IC
OM
OS
, 
Pa
ri
s 
-
 . 
a

## [Page 42](102874engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 102916: The Rune-stones of Jelling

© 
IC
OM
OS
, 
Pa
ri
s 
ud ’ foe 
ben 0 ot 
The northern mound and 
church at Jelling. 
  
SOME KEY EVENTS: 
The Viking Age: ¢. 750-1050 
First Viking attacks in Western Europe: 
Vikings besiege Paris: 885-886 
King Gorm is buried in Jelling: 958 
King Harald Bluetooth converts 
to Christianity: circa 965 
before 792 
King Sweyn Forkbeard conquers England: 
1013 
 
  
JELLING 
LJ 
  
 
42  
[Tarald it should not be forgotten that 
pagan peasant traditions persisted for cen- 
turies in Christian disguise and continued to 
play an important role. The Danes did not 
become Christians overnight. 
It wonld he tempting in 1996 to see the 
Jelling monuments as evidence of a peaceful 
meeting of cultures, a transition to Chris- 
tianity that deliberately included pagan 
mounds. After having been reeeived into 
Christianity, King [Tarald may have wished 
to establish an awe-inspiring memorial hy 
fusing the pagan monnments to the new 
Christian monument, the church. As the 
leading expert on the Jelling monuments, 
Knud J. Krogh, has written: “. . . con- 
sciously or unconsciously the new monn- 
ment becomes an expression of eontinnity in 
the midst of religious change”. 
THE VIKING SAGA 
Until recently the traditional image of the 
Vikings as prescnted in generations of 
schoolbooks was that of bloodthirsty 
invaders who plundered and hurned monas- 
teries in England, I'rance or Ireland. This 
was primarily due to the fact that the dom- 
inant historical sources were written by 
monks and other vietims of Viking pirates. 
Today it has become widely acknowl- 
edged that the Vikings were much more 
than warriors and pirates. Most Seandina- 
vians in the Viking age, ¢. 750-1050, lived 
rather undramatically and peacefully, cul- 
tivating the land, breeding their animals, 
plying their trades, doing business and so on. 
But itis also true that adventurous travel- 
ling was an important part of the Viking 
civilization. Among the Vikings were kings 
engaged in high polities, engineers who 
built castles and bridges, merchants who 
traded with Russia or Ireland, and explorers 
who colonized the Faroe Islands, Iceland 
and Greenland. Vikings reached America 
aronnd the year 1000, the first Europeans 
todo so. 
The Vikings became masters of the sea 
because of their sophisticated ships. They 
travelled, bargained and plundered and some- 
times settled in the lands they discovered. 
For three centnries they left their mark in 
the Northern and Western hemispheres as 
{ar away from Scandinavia as Byzantium. 
[Tarald’s runic stone in Jelling, on the 
other hand, testifies how cultural influence 
from the South, in the shape of Christianity, . 
changed the Viking civilization by blending 
with traditional beliefs and gradually domi- 
nating and taking over from them. Pagan 
beliefs were defeated by Christianity 
because the latter appeared more powerful 
than the traditional religion. For the Vikings 
conversion was probably a way of coping with 
the strong continental European powers. 
Thanks to contemporary written sonrces it is 
possible to date the official Danish conversion 
rather precisely and to give a fairly accu- 
rate account of how it happened. 
At a feast at King [Tarald’s court one 
evening around 905 a priest named Poppo 
was present. [le claimed that the Vikings 
worshipped false gods and that there was 
only one true God whe was one with Jesus 
Christ and the Holy Spirit. King Harald asked 
whether he was prepared to prove his state- 
ment by undergoing an ordeal. Withont hesi- 
tation Poppo said that he was. The King then 
ordered the priest to be taken into custody. 
The following morning he heated a very heavy 
piece of iron and then ordered the priest to 
carry it, thus hearing witness to his Christian 
faith. Poppo grasped the glowing iron and 
carried it as long as the King wished. le then 
showed that his hand was uninjured, thereby 
convincingeverybody present about the truth 
of the Christian faith. The upsliot was that 
King Ilarald converted to Christianity and 
commanded his people to reject pagan idols. 
This is the story according to contempo- 
ravy accounts. Several historians have argued 
that the incident was contrived hy Harald 
and some of his close advisors in order to jus- 
tify a conversion believed to be a political 
necessity. The German King Otto [had been’ 
crowned as Roman Emperor in 962 and had 
thus become the supreine secular master of 
Christianity. Ile had already taken measures 
showing that he was not prepared to respect 
the sovereignty of King Ilarald’s pagan 
kingdom. In order to show the powerful 
Christian Chureh that it could count on lim, 
Harald may have converted as a way of coping 
with this potential threat. |

## [Page 43](102874engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

@© 
Ar
di
to
/P
an
da
, 
Bi
os
, 
Pa
ri
s 
<< The quest for environment-friendly tourism 
Above, used 
batteries at the 
foot of K-2, the 
world’s second 
highest peak, in 
the Karakorum 
mountain range. 
FRANCE BEQUETTE 
is a Franco-American 
journalist 
specializing in 
environmental 
questions, 


### 102917: World tourism: where next?

WORLD TOURISM: WHERE NEXT? 
by France Bequette 
hen some 2,000 years ago 
the Greek geographer 
Strabo described how the priests 
of Crocodilopolis in Egypt waited 
for the arrival of Roman “tourists” 
before they hegan the ritual animal 
sacrifice to feed the sacred eroco- 
diles of the god Sebek, little did he 
know that tourism was destined to 
become so popular that one day 
half a billion people would De vis- 
iting the earth’s most beautiful 
places. 
World Tourism Organization 
(WTO) forecasts indicate that by 
the year 2000 international tourist 
arrivals will total approximately 
661 million, an annual growth rate 
of 3.8 per cent. The hundreds of 
millions of tourists who each year 
travel in their own countries can 
be added to this figure. ITow can 
environmental protection, the bal- 
anced exploitation of natural 
bn A, . . 
~~ Ng 
resources, equitable access to 
the world heritage—major chal- 
lenges of our time—Dbe reconciled 
with the expansion of the tourist 
industry? 
A CHILD OF PROSPERITY 
Tourism is undeniably a powerful 
tool for development, but the forms 
it has taken so far havc often been 
criticized for such negative 
impacts as excessive use of land, 
water and energy, the production 
of waste, and heavy pressure on the 
social environment and the historic 
and cultural heritage. 
The Council of Europe— 
Europe is the world’s most impor-- 
tant region for “generating” and 
receiving tourists—considers that 
one reason for these negative 
impacts is lack of planning and 
management. Whether tourism has 
good or bad effects will hinge at 
- Lrg . ~~ RN 4 eA LS : 5 . vg : . = 
+ UNAM 7 pe NE Wi Sgt SE ci 
least partly on what management 
initiatives are taken by the tourist- 
generating and receiving countries. 
The major advantage of tourism 
is that it brings in currency. In 1992 
the turnover from tourism was 
some $3.1 trillion, and the tourist 
industry employed around 130 mil- 
lion people, or one in fourteen 
workers worldwide. In a recent 
study entitled Tourisme et envi- 
ronnement en Méditerranée 
(“Tourism and Environment in the 
Mediterranean Region”) Robert 
Lanquar notes that tourism is pri- 
marily a social phenomenon. “In 
comparison to the main traditional 
areas of economic activity, tourism 
is not a response to people’s basic 
needs but to a lifestyle made pos- 
sible by the prosperity of broad 
social strata in the industrialized 
nations. It is a recent historical 
phenomenon.”

## [Page 44](102874engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 102917: World tourism: where next?

©)
 
A 
Mc
Ne
el
y,
 
G
a
r
e
v
e
 
The days of “real journeys” 
offering what the French anthro- 
pologist Claude Lévi-Strauss called 
“a spectacle in all its splendour, not 
yet spoiled, contaminated and 
ruined” are over. We must accept 
the fact that there are no more 
unvisited places on earth and that 
everyone has the right to go any- 
where. But that is no excuse for 
turning the Ilimalayas or the Sahara 
into rubbish tips, for tour organizers 
to advertise religious ceremonies in 
Bali as tourist attractions or for cre- 
ating an amusement park in the 
heart of Angkor Wat, Cambodia’s 
complex of sacred temples. 
Of course many tourists steer 
clear of the concrete holiday mega- 
centres that disfigure the coasts of 
France, Spain, Mexico and Thai- 
land. But even off this well-beaten 
  
Above, tourists in 
Thailand. 
Above right, one of 
the Maldive 
Islands. 
24-29 April 1995, 
in the 
WTO and UNEP, 1992, 
Enjeux et prospective,   
FURTHER READING 
Tourism and Environment in European Countries, 
Council of Europe, 1995. 
Charter for Sustainable Tourism, World Conference on 
Sustainable Tourism, Lanzarote, Canary Islands, Spain, 
Santa Cruz de Tenerife, 1995 
(in English, French and Spanish). 
“Sustainable Tourism Development” 
Industry and Environment journal, 
Vol. 15, no. 3-4, UNEP, July-December 1992. 
Nature Conservation and Tourism in Protected Areas, 
a Council of Europe seminar, 1991. 
Guidelines: Development of National Parks 
and Protected Areas for Tourism, 
Tourisme et culture, De la coexistence au partenariat, 
Editions American Express, Paris, 1993. 
Tourisme et environnement en Méditerranée, 
Robert Lanquar, preface by Michel Batisse, Les Fascicules du 
Plan Bleu no. 8, Editions Economica, Paris, 1995.   
44 
C.
 
Es
th
er
 
® 
As
k 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ri
s 
: 
! 
- 
L 
ke 
track, too massive an influx of visi- 
tors can harm the plant and animal 
life and even the social fabric of the 
regions they frequent. “Too many 
of the people, companies and even 
politicians involved in tourism,” says 
the Council of Europe, “are only 
interested in maximizing short-term 
profits.” All too often they succeed 
in circumventing the laws protecting 
the environment. Such “dispensa- 
tions” pose an extremely difficult 
problem. 
 
THE RIGHT CHOICE 
The world’s natural and cultural 
heritage is an inalienable posses- 
sion that should be transmitted 
intact to future generations. Many 
states that lack exploitable nat- 
ural resources depend on tourism 
for a considerable percentage of 
their income. But tourism must be 
carefully planned and controlled 
if it is to be sustainable. 
The mountain kingdom of 
Bhutan, and the Maldive Islands in 
the Indian Ocean have been studied 
by Edward Inskeep for the United 
Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP). Bhutan, which is located 
high on the eastern slopes of the 
Himalayas and has a Buddhist cul- 
ture, possesses a chain of fortified 
monasteries and palaces. In 1995 
only 5,500 tourists from non-neigh- 
bouring countries (exclusively in 
organized groups) were allowed into 
the country. Their average stay was 
nine days, and they spent a min- 
imum of 200 dollars per day and 
per person. Tourists in Bhutan stick 
to carefully planned routes, and new 
buildings made to house them must 
comply with the canons of tradi- 
tional architecture and be equipped 
to treat sewage. In 1987 a commis- 
sion investigated the negative influ- 
ence of tourists on the religious   
  
practices of young people and made 
a number temples out of bounds to’ 
foreigners. 
The Maldives, a small chain of 
islands in the Indian Ocean, is a 
Muslim country with a limited land 
area. Income from tourism repre- 
sents nearly 20 per cent of Gross 
National Product. Holiday instal- 
lations for tourists have been set 
up on uninhabited islands to pre- 
vent the social and eultural life of 
the local population (less than 
200,000 people) from suffering. 
THREATS TO TIIE 
MEDITERRANEAN 
  
Almost one third of the world’s 
tourists are visitors to the Mediter- 
ranean countries, where the growth- 
rate of tourism in some coastal 
areas has been spectacular. Malta is 
a case in point. In 1993, this small 
island (with an area 316 km? and 
350,000 inhabitants, it has one of 
the world’s highest population den- 
sities) received 1,063,069 visitors 
who spent an estimated $542 mil- 
lion. 
The increase in numbers, espe- 
cially in the summer months, 
imposes considerable strain on the 
supply of water, which is very scarce 
on Malta—it has been estimated 
that tourists use twice as much 
water as the permanent residents. 
Desalination plants consume a great 
deal of energy, and a new power sta- 
tion is being built to meet the 
increased demand. Most of the 
sewage is flushed untreated into the 
sea, and some sandy beaches often 
risk becoming polluted. Tourist 
pressure on historic sites and local 
communities is also very strong. The 
city of Mdina, for example, is vis- 
ited by an average of 1,500 tourists 
each day, a high influx that is 
causing various kinds of harm. 
 

## [Page 45](102874engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 102917: World tourism: where next?

Ma
rt
in
 
Pa
rr
 
© 
Ma
gn
um
, 
Ba
ng
 
The Maltese government has 
taken steps to plan tourism devel- 
opment and manage access to sites 
and monuments in order to respect 
their carrying capacity, a concept 
defined by the World Tourism 
Organization as “the level of vis- 
itor use an area can accommodate 
with high levels of satisfaction for 
visitors and few negative effects on 
resources.” | 
A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 
UNESCO is aware of the need to 
strike a balance between tourism, 
culture and development, and 
encourages study and action in four 
areas: defence and promotion of 
the cultural heritage and cultural 
identity; protection of the natural 
environment against inroads from 
tourism; encouragement of a form 
Af 
Sher F, Nt 
 
A tourist with 
local people in 
Goa (India). 
Tourists on the 
Acropolis in 
Athens (Greece). 
  
of tourism that respects the social, 
cultural and natural environment 
and provides a basis for develop- 
ment; extension of cultural tourism 
activities that may generate income 
and jobs, especially for young 
- people in developing countries. 
A World Conference on Sus- 
tainable Tourism, whose sponsors 
ineluded UNESCO, via its Man and 
the Biosphere Programme (MAD) 
and World Ileritage Centre, was 
held on 27 and 28 April 1995 in 
Lanzarote in the Canary Islands 
(Spain). The 500 participants 
adopted a Charter for Sustainable 
Tourism which emphasizes that 
“tourism is ambivalent, since it can 
contribute positively to socio-eco- 
nomic and cultural achievement, 
[but also] to the degradation of 
the environment and the loss of 
local identity, and should there- 
fore be approached with a global 
methodology”. 
Beautiful places are bound to 
attract visitors. Everyone involved in 
tourism must aet responsibly. Oth- 
erwise the only solution will Le to 
close threatened sites and monu- 
ments to visitors and make copies of 
them, as France has done for the 
prehistoric caves of Lascaux—or 
else to organize virtual-reality 
tourism with computer-generated 
images. 
Tourism for peace 
  
i
n
i
t
i
a
t
i
v
e
s
 
t a time when Israel, Palestine and 
é their Arab neighbours are involved in 
a peace process, it is vital that the 
heritage of these countries, among the 
richest in the world, should become a factor 
in cultural, economic and social development 
and a pivot of understanding and exchange 
for people all over the world.” 
These words were spoken in October 
1994 by Gilbert Trigano, until 1993 presi- 
dent of the internationally known tourist 
organization Club Méditerranée, when pre- 
senting to Heads of State at the Middle 
East-North African Economic Summit a pro- 
ject for a university of tourism and culture for 
peace. The Summit, held in Casablanca under 
the presidency of Morocco’s King Hassan, 
gave the project an enthusiastic welcome. 
In all probability, the first two branches of 
the university will be located in Israel and 
Palestine. 
The project was endorsed by King 
Hassan, and Tunisia, Italy and France have 
already expressed a desire to take part. A 
three-year course involving 900 hours of 
coursework per year will be offered to stu- 
dents via satellite television links, which will 
considerably reduce costs. Teachers will visit 
each branch campus in turn so as to make 
personal contact with their students. Theo 
retical studies will alternate with paid training 
periods in the tourist industry totalling three 
or four months a year. 
The first year will concentrate on the basics 
common to all jobs in the tourist industry and 
will emphasize the importance of the cultural role 
of tourism. The second and third years will con- 
centrate on the main fields of activity in the 
industry, with the final semester being devoted 
to the goal of “becoming an entrepreneur”. The 
television equipment is being tested this spring, 
and the university will “open for business” in 
September. 
In recognition of the fact that this ini- 
tiative is in line with Unesco’s goals, on 25 
June 1995 Director-General Federico Mayor 
signed a convention.of co-operation with the 
“Association en faveur du Tourisme et de la 
Culture pour la Paix” (Association of Tourism 
and Culture for Peace), which was also ini- 
tialled by the Secretary-General of the World 
Tourism Organization, Antonio Enriquez Sav- 
ignac. Gilbert Trigano feels a mixture of hope 
and anxiety. Anxiety because this is the first 
interstate operation of its kind; hope because 
of its potential for promoting understanding 
and peace. a   
45 
Ma
rt
in
 
Pa
rr
 @ 
Ma
gn
um
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 46](102874engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### IGNORE

  
CALLING 
ALL FROG-LOVERS 
For the second year running, a French association 
called “Espaces naturels de France”, has been trying 
to save batrachians {frogs and toads), whlch in 
spring emerge from their winter shelters and hop to 
their mating grounds under cover of darkness. Many 
of the unfortunate amphibians are run over when 
crossing roads. The association has appealed to all 
frog lovers to identify crossing points and signpost 
them for motorists. Information is centralized in a 
“frog clearing house”. In Germany, Switzerland and 
eastern France special underground “frogways” have 
been built at considerable cost. Frogs and toads 
are excellent indicators of awetland's state of health, 
and scientists are concerned about their declining 
numbers worldwide. 
10 YEARS OF ACTION 
TO SAFEGUARD 
THE OZONE LAYER 
The Convention on the Protection cof the Ozone 
Layer, signed in Vienna (Austria) in 1985, calls for 
the phasing out of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and 
other chemical ozone-depleting substances (0DS) 
that destroy the vital veil of ozone that protects us 
from the sun’s damaging ultraviolet radiation. An 
international effort in this direction is being co-ordi- 
nated by the World Meteorological Organization 
(WMO) and the United Nations Environment Pro- 
gramme (UNEP). In 1987, the Montreal Protocol was 
adopted. Among its requirements are an eventual 
50 per cent reduction in the use of five CFCs before 
the year 2000. A $240-million Multilateral Fund has 
been created to help developing countries eliminate 
CFCs and ODS. By 1995 elimination was well 
underway in the developed countries and there had 
been some progress in the developing countries. 
However, the overall decrease masked a 46 per cent 
increase in develeping-country CFC consumption 
and a world increase in HCFC (hydrochlorofluorocar- 
bons) consumption of 130 per cent. 
WASTE NOT, WANT NOT 
Gunter Pauli, director of the Zero Emissions Research 
Institute (ZERI) of the United Nations University 
(see page 43 of our March 1995 issue), has come up 
with a way of using wastes in some parts of Africa. 
Namibia and Tanzania export dried seaweed to 
46 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ch
. 
Li
on
el
-D
. 
Du
po
nt
, 
Va
ll
au
ri
s 
Europe, the United States and Japan. When certain 
products intended for food, medicine or other uses 
have been extracted from the seaweed, the waste 
is discarded. Over 30 per cent of the people in the 
region suffer from iodine deficiency disorders, yet a 
variety of seaweeds are rich in iodine. Instead of 
depending on drugs sent by the World Health Orga- 
nization to fight these diseases, Pauli suggests pro- 
viding the population with iodine by using seaweed 
residues with other seaweed as an additive to cattle 
and poultry feed. 
THE WHALE-WATCHING 
INDUSTRY 
Whale migration sites are attracting increasing num- 
bers of tourists. Whale watching is growing by nearly 
10 per cent annually in Argentina, Brazil, the 
Caribbean, Mexico, Japan, New Zealand, South Africa, 
Norway and the United Kingdom. In Japan, for 
example, 55,000 tourists went whale-watching on 
the high seas in 1994, netting over $200 million for 
21 communities that make a living from this new 
kind of photo safari. But too much intrusive obser- 
vation by eco-tourists from boats or aircraft may be 
dangerously stressful to the marine mammals. 
A DISCREET 
MONKEY 
In 1984 British ecologist Mike Harrison discovered a 
monkey hitherto unknown to scientists, the sun- 
tailed guenon (Ceropithecus solatus) in Gabon's 
“forét des Abeilles” {forest of the bees). Known to 
hunters as Mbaya or Makina, the monkey is extremely 
skilful in concealing itself. It feeds on plants and 
roots, like gorillas, but also on insects. By eating 
fruit, it helps to broadcast seeds and regenerate 
the forest. As an endangered species, it has been 
fully protected under Gabonese law after a campaign 
led by primatologist Jean-Pierre Gautier, director of 
studies at the Makandé Research Centre. 
  © 
J. 
P. 
Ga
ub
ie
r 
  
KARIBA'S TROUBLED 
WATERS 
David Manyonga, a Pan African News Agency corre: 
spondent, reports on the catastrophic situation in 
Kariba, a Zimbabwean town on the northern edge of 
the world's largest artificial lake. Established for a 
population of 5,000 persons in the 1950s at the 
same time as the lake, the town now has 25,000 
inhabitants. “Our sewage,” says the head of the 
town council, “was supposed to be treated then 
emptied into the Zambezi River below the dam, but 
the treatment machines broke down.” Untreated 
sewage, iron and phosphates are now being dumped 
into the lake, and aquatic plants like the water 
hyacinth and Kariba grass {Salvinia mosesta), are 
impeding navigation. The fish supply is also affected: 
in 1995 more than 40 tonnes of contaminated fish 
had to be destroyed. Tourism, an important source 
of income, is threatened, as well as the health of 
the townspeople. 
MIGRATING MONARCHS 
Milions of orange and black monarch butterflies 
(Danaus plexippus) migrate every year from Canada (a 
5,600-kilometre trip) and the United States to winter 
in the forests of Mexico. The winter of 1995-1296 
was particularly cold and snowy, and a vast number 
of the butterflies died. Specialists are not unduly 
worried so far, for the butterflies are extremely prolific. 
However, there are fears that increased logging in 
the monarchs’ wintering sites pose a threat by 
removing the protective cover that shields the but- 
terflies from periodical cold waves. 
THE INDONESIAN 
CORNUCOPIA 
Indonesia's 17,000 islands are home to 10 per cent 
of the world's remaining rain forests, 10 per cent of 
all plant species, 12 per cent of all mammal species, 
16 per cent of all reptile and amphibian species, 17 
per cent of all bird species and 25 per cent of all the 
world's freshwater and marine fish species. Scien- 
tists estimate that 30 per cent of its plants and 90 
per cent of its animals and insects have not yet 
been studied, identified or documented. Many are 
unique to the area. To protect its abundant biodi- 
versity Indonesia has begun cataloguing and moni- 
toring its rich biological resources as well as training 
researchers. 
© 
Ch
ri
st
op
he
 
Le
pe
ti
t,
 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 47](102874engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### IGNORE

GLosB aL 
LR 
OUR CREATIVE DIVERSITY: 
CULTURE AND DEVELOPMENT IN 
THE 21ST CENTURY 
An unprecedented report on the rela 
tionship between culture and devel- 
opment on a world-wide basis has 
been completed by the independent 
World Commission on Culture and 
Development, chaired by former 
United Nations Secretary-General 
Javier Pérez de Cuéllar. The product of 
three years work by the Commission, 
which was set up at Unescoin 1992, 
the report is entitled Qur Creative 
Diversity and is now available in book 
form from UNesco*. “Development 
begins in human culture,” notes Mr. 
Pérez de Cuéllar. 
In addition to theoretical con- 
siderations on the cultural dimen- 
sion of development, the report 
makes specific proposals for cultural 
and development policies. Among 
its recommendations are: drawing 
up a list of cultural rights which are 
not protected by existing interna- 
tional treaties; defining the bases of 
a new global ethics; and organizing 
an international forum of reflection 
on violence and pornography in the 
media. 
In choosing the title of the 
report, the Commission wanted to 
emphasize its support for diversity, 
its concern for common welfare and 
the need to invent a new model for 
development. 
* Qur Creative Diversity. Report of the 
Worid Commission on Culture and 
Development. 302pp. 150 French francs. 
a I A EB I, RE a , 
DEVELOPMENT DIALOGUE 
Development priorities and problems 
are critically discussed by interna- 
tional contributors in Development 
Dialogue, a journal published twice a 
year (in English) by the Dag Ham- 
marskjold Foundation of Uppsala 
(Sweden). The first issue of 1995, 
entitled “Making National Drug Poli- 
cies a Development Priority”, con- 
tains a strategy paper and 6 country 
studies (on Norway, Sri Lanka, 
Bangladesh, Australia, India and 
Mexico). An editorial notes that 
“about 2.5 billion people—or half 
the world's population—continue 
to be denied their right to health”, 
that “the global pharmaceutical 
industry is estimated to turn over 
about $220 billion annually, out of 
which Third World countries, with 
three-quarters of the world's popu- 
lation, account for only $44 billion” 
and that “about 90% of the world’s 
production of pharmaceuticals orig- 
inates in industrialized countries, 
which also account for 80% of con- 
sumption”. 
Issue no. 2 of 1995 focuses on 
the funding of social and economic 
development. Among the contents 
are the opening address and final 
report of a conference held in Kam- 
pala (Uganda) in 1995 on “the role 
of independent funds as intermedi 
aries for channelling money for social 
and economic development”, and 
case studies from Ecuador, the Philip- 
pines, and several African countries. 
“Plant genetic resources and agri- 
cultural biodiversity” is the theme 
of the first issue of 1996, which is 
still in press. 
+ Copies of Development 
Dialogue may be obtained from the 
Dag Hammarskjéld Centre, 
Ovre Slottsgatan 2, S-753 10 
Uppsala, Sweden. 
Tel: (46-18) 1054 72; 
Fax: (46-18) 1220 72; 
Telex: 76234 DHCENT S; 
Cable: DHCENTRE. 
BANGLADESH: AN ACTION PLAN 
FOR CHILDREN 
As a contribution to Bangladesh's 
national action plan to improve child 
health, UNICEF, the United Nations 
Children’s Fund, has earmarked $250 
million ($50 million per year) between 
1996 and 2000. One of the first 
nations to ratify the United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of the Child 
(3 August 1990), Bangladesh 
launched the plan, comprising 26 
objectives to be achieved before the 
year 2000, in 1992. The objectives 
include reducing the infant mortality 
rate from 84 to 50 per thousand and 
the malnutrition rate of children under 
five from 68 to 38 per cent, increasing 
primary school enrolment from 81 to 
95 per cent, and reducing the rate of 
maternal mortality. 
UN LAUNCHES PROGRAMME TO 
BOOST AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT 
On 15 March 1996, Mr. Boutros 
Boutros Ghali, Secretary-General of 
the United Nations, launched a multi- 
billion dollar programme to boost 
development in Africa over a ten-year 
period. 
V 
Coming on top of a series of UN 
actions carried out in the last 20 
years by the United Nations to pro- 
mote development in Africa (which 
contains 33 of the world’s 48 least 
advanced countries), the UN 
System-wide Special Initiative on 
Africa is unprecedented in its scale. 
It is the UN's most significant mobi- 
lization of support for the people 
of a single continent and its largest 
co-ordinated action. The estimated 
cost of implementing the Initiative 
is $25 billion. The World Bank has 
agreed to lead in mobilizing over 85 
per cent of this amount, the bulk of 
which will go to improving basic edu- 
cation and health. 
The Special Initiative comprises 
14 components, grouped into four 
themes reflecting development priori- 
ties defined by African governments 
and the international community. 
Theme one is called Give Devel- 
opment a Chance. It consists of 
actions designed to create a propi- 
tious climate for development by 
contributing to peace-building; 
improving the mobilization of Africa's 
internal resources and encouraging 
external support; stimulating 
domestic savings and investment; 
and facilitating access to informa- 
tion technology. 
Theme two is named New Hope 
for the Upcoming Generation. The 
largest resource commitment of the 
Special Initiative ($12.5 to $15.5 bil- 
lion), it seeks to ensure basic edu- 
cation for all African children, increase 
the provision of health care and 
encourage job creation and the devel 
opment of sustainable livelihoods. 
Theme three, Strengthening the 
Capacity for Governance, is designed 
to expand capacities for transparent, 
responsible and effective gover 
nance, to help build independent 
judicial systems, support the func- 
tioning of parliaments and electoral 
processes and strengthen pluralist 
forces (unions, women's organiza 
tions and workers’ associations). 
The fourth theme, Urgency and 
Survival Issues, includes pro- 
grammes designed te provide long- 
term food security and drought man- 
agement (reducing land degradation, 
improving soil quality and increasing 
desertification control) as well as 
ensuring household water security 
for drinking and sanitation for at 
least 80 per cent of the population. 
While taking part in each of the 
14 components of the Special Ini- 
tiative for Africa, Unesco will be the 
lead agency in four programmes: 
BE OW 
Basic Education for all African Chil- 
dren, Communications for Peace- 
building, Harnessing Information 
Technology for Development, and 
Solar Energy. 
A i MINCE ilk yh 
NORTH-SOUTH SOLIDARITY 
From 27 to 29 October 1995 in Vichy 
(France) some 1,500 supporters of 
France’s Catholic Committee against 
Hunger and for Development (CCFD) 
and more than fifty of its partners 
from the Third World attended a 
meeting held to discuss North- 
South partnership in development. 
The meeting divided into 17 work- 
shops, each of which examined a 
specific example of international sof 
idarity in a local development initia- 
tive. Among the participants were 
the 1980 Nobel Peace-prize winner, 
Adolfo Pérez Esquivel (Argentina), 
Milica Lucic-Cavic, former president 
of the Centre for Anti-war Action of 
Belgrade, and the African historian 
Joseph Ki-Zerbo (Burkina-Faso). 
«For further information about 
CCFD, please contact: 
Comité catholique contre la Faim et 
pour le Développement, 
4, rue Jean Lantier, 75001 Paris, 
France. 
Tel: (33-1) 44 82 80 00. 
= Sls SS EEL A RE BT 
MEDITERRANEAN COUNTRIES 
MEET IN BARCELONA 
Representatives of social, economic 
and cultural life from the European 
Union countries and the entire 
Mediterranean region met in Barcelona 
for the Forum Civil Euromed organized 
by the Catalan Institute of the 
Mediterranean from 29 November to 
1 December 1995. The topics dis- 
cussed included communication, eco- 
nomic dynamics and social and cul 
tural dialogue between peoples of the 
Mediterranean countries. 
In collaboration with the Mar- 
seilles Chamber of Commerce 
(France), the Agnelli Foundation of 
Turin (Italy) and the Government of 
the Balearic Islands (Spain), the Insti 
tute is also engaged on a study of 
the strengths and weaknesses of 
the “Latin Arc”, the countries of the 
north-west Mediterranean region. 
«For further information: 
Institut Catala de la Mediterrania 
d’Estudis i Cooperacid, 
Av. Diagonal, 407 bis, planta 21, 
08008 Barcelona, Spain. 
Tel: {34-3) 292 00 05; 
Fax: (34-3) 415 93 30; 
e-mail: icem@cc.uab.es 
47

## [Page 48](102874engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

SH 
A 
O° 
EH What kind of music do you remember 
hearing as a child? 
Marcel Khalifé: My paternal grandfather, 
who was a mason, played the ney—areed 
{lute with seven holes—superbly and had 
a beautiful voice. When I was a child I 
would climb on his shoulders and shake 
the tassel of his tarbush to the rhythm of 
the Lebanese folk songs that he hummed. 
The soft sounds lie produced from his 
ney during family gatherings filled me 
with joy. 
In the streets of the village where 1 
was born, Amchit, near Byblos, gypsies 
danced and played to the sound of the 
bouzouk, a string instrument, and the 
tabla, a drum. My father and grandfa- 
ther would invite them home to drink 
arak, and then the fun would begin. My 
grandfather accompanied them. I always 
awaited these occasions eagerly and 
longed to learn their songs. 
My uncle gave me a record-player and 
that opened up all kinds of possibilities 
for broadening my musieal horizons. I lis- 
tened to Beethoven, Mozart and other 
classical composers but also to songs by 
the Egyptian musician Sayed Darwish, 
and recordings by the Ralibani brothers, 
who were of Lebancse origin, and many 
other tunes. 
Religious musie also had a very strong 
influence on me. St. Elisha’s church 
echoed to splendid « capella monodic 
chant; that of the Marist brothers to rich 
polyphonic melodies. I belonged to the 
choir, which was accompanied by a har- 
monium. And then, of course, I would 
hear the vibrant voice of the muezzin 
rise from a nearby mosque. 
1 have always felt nostalgic for the 


### 102918: Isabelle Leymarie talks to Marcel Khalifé

48 
Isabelle Leymarie talks to 
MARCEL KHALIFE 
sounds of my village, and in my composi- 
tions I try to rediscover their melodies, 
which are buried deep within me. 
HW When did you form Al Mayadine? 
M.K.:T had just completed my studies at 
the National Conservatory of Beirut when 
the Lebanon war broke out. I wondered 
whether there was any point in writing 
music at a time when death was sweeping 
through the country. However, I was 
looking for a way of saving myself and 
others from the horror around us. I regis- 
tered my protest through music. I got 
some other musicians together and started 
Al Mayadine (plural of the Arab word 
midan, the name for the village square 
where festivities are held). We have per- 
formed in the world’s most war-torn 
regions. Our music rose above the cannon’ 
roar, and I'd like to think we were able to 
bring solace to a few wounded souls. On 
the world’s theatre stages it was also a way 
of communicating with another language 
than that of violence. 
EH How do you see the role of the udin 
Arab music today? 
M. K.: The evolution of Arab music is 
forcing us to redefine the functions and 
possibilities of our musical instruments. 
How can we get them to express them- 
selves in an original, modern fashion? What 
musical paths should we trace out for our 
contemporaries and future generations? 
Why shouldn’t we re-examine our methods 
of writing music and our ud-playing tech- 
niques? How can we improve the instru- 
ment? I am trying to create a family for it 
comparable to that formed by European 
string instruments such as the violin, the- 
mandolin or the balalaika. It would, for 
example, be possible to widen the neck 
to take as many as twelve strings, which 
would extend the instrument’s possibili- 
ties. Could we obtain a more “musical” 
sound by playing the ud with the fingers 
instead of a plectrum? What new timbres 
orregisters could be produced by changing 
the size of the body or the soundboard, 
or by lengthening the neck? We could also 
create a bass ud, with longer and thicker 
strings like those on a bass guitar, and by 
getting rid of the double strings. That 
would make writing music for the ud dif- 
ferent. I have tried my hand at some of 
these experiments in my most recent com- 
position, “Jadal™, which is an ud duet. 
The two uds in the group are tuned dif- 
ferently and their registers are distinct. 
Since I proposed new ways of using the 
ud, we had to rehearse a lot. 
HM What are you doing at the moment? 
M.K.: Al Mayadine is continuing its inter- 
national tour, first in London, then in 
Tunisia and Japan before returning to 
Beirut. Recordings of three of my com- 
positions, “Elegy for the Orient”, “Return 
Symphony” and “Concerto for ud and 
orchestra” will be appearing soon. The 
score of “Jadal” is going to be published 
in Lebanon, as well as an ud handbook 
whieh will present new forms of writing 
for ud solos, duets, trios and quartets. 
HM ‘Jadal’ contains sophisticated 
counterpoint and occasional unexpected 
harmonies. Is that your personal 
contribution or are similar techniques 
found in traditional Arab music?

## [Page 49](102874engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 102918: Isabelle Leymarie talks to Marcel Khalifé

   
   
  
   
M. K.: Harmony and counterpoint have 
long existed in Arab music. In the four- 
teenth century the Arab historian thn 
Khaldun described, in the chapter of his 
Muqaddima devoted to music, a musical 
ensemble consisting of a hundred-odd 
instruments, including woodwind, brass, 
plucked or bowed strings, percussion, 
etc, which played harmonies like a sym- 
phony orchestra. 
But Arab music, like all other kinds of 
music, has been exposed to a variety of 
influences. When I began to study musi- 
cology, I applied Western analytical tech- 
niques to the different forms of tradi- 
tional Arab music. I discovered that these 
forms had already achieved a certain 
degree of perfection before reaching 
Europe. Music schools already existed 
in the ninth century: the composer and 
singer Ziryab, the head musician at the 
court of Cordéba, founded the first con- 
servatory of music in Andalusia. 
HM How do today’s Arab composers see 
the future of their music? 
M. K.: One of the questions we are asking 
is to what cxtent we are still worthy of 
our musical heritage. Studying it again 
may teach us much that would be useful 
for the future. If our music had con- 
tinued to make progress, as it did in the 
Arwad Esber ® Maison des cultures du monde, Paris 
past in Andalusia, we would be riding 
high today. The loss of Andalusia caused 
a profound break in continuity. 
After that there was a long period 
when nothing moved in the closed world of 
Arab music. “Jadal” reflects my interest 
in all kinds of music. [ have tried to open 
up new horizons, but with a familiar land- 
scape as my starting point. I draw inspi- 
ration from maqams (modes) and tradi- 
tional Arab rhythms, while moving 
towards new forms of expression and aes- 
thetic concepts. “Jadal” is a very free 
composition which ignores the technical 
restrictions imposed by the ud. 
Hm Your music sometimes brings to mind 
Renaissance madrigals and motets. Is that 
because the guitar is a derivative of the ud 
and that some European traditions spring 
from the Arab-Andalusian tradition, or is it 
a deliberate choice on your part? 
M. K.: There has always been an interpen- 
etration between Oriental and Western 
music. In music, melody, rhythm and 
musical and cultural traditions in general, 
it is impossible to put civilizations in a hier- 
archical order. Composers such as Borodin, 
Mussorgsky, Rimsky-Korsakov, Bartok, 
Ravel, Saint-Saéns and Debussy dug deep 
into the folklore of Oriental peoples. The 
German lied, for example, cane from the 
Lebanese-born Marcel Khalifé is one of the greatest 
living exponents of the ud (a lute with strings that 
are plucked) and the architect of a revival of 
traditional Arab music. His group, Al Mayadine 
(Marcel Khalifé: ud, Charbel Rouhana: ud, Ali El 
Khatib: riqq, Abboud El Saadi: bass guitar), is 
currently on an international tour. Left, Marcel 
Khalifé in concert (Paris, February 1996). 
Arab muashah—it is an instrumental 
muashah. Even symphonic composition 
has been influenced by Arab music. At the 
same time, great Oriental composers such 
as Aram Khachaturian, who knew the 
Western tradition as well as their own, con- 
tributed to the enrichment of their national 
culture. Music knows no frontiers. 
My life in music has been shaped by a 
variety of influences and Tam receptive to 
everything beautiful and new that music 
from anywhere in the world can bring me. 
But the starting point of my work is an 
ancient language, that of the Lebanese tra- 
dition. I try to strike a balance between 
two trends that are threatening Arab 
music: on the one hand extreme conser- 
vatism, which rejects all forms of change, 
and on the other extreme modernism which 
tries to cut itself off from tradition. My 
music is generally considered to he clas- 
sical Arabmusic, butof anewkind. HB 
1. Marcel Khalifé/Al Mayadine 
“Jadal-—ud duo” 
Box of 2 CDs 
Nagam Records NR 1009 
PO Box 820706 
Houston, TX 77282-0706 U.S.A. 
  
ISABELLE LEYMARIE, 
a Franco-American musicologist, recently published 
Du tango au reggae, Musiques noires d Amérique Iatine 
et des Caraibes (“From the Tango to Reggae: Black 
Music from Latin America and the Caribbean”, 
Flammarion, Paris, 1996). 
49

## [Page 50](102874engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

As it was... 
(ou “IER October 1953 
f
u
n
y
   
BE
 
S
A
A
S
 
S
h
 
. 


### 102920: Looking at life with the eyes of a child

      
Looking at life with the eyes of a child 
by Henri Matisse 
French painter (1869-1954) 
Creation is the artist’s true function; where there is no cre- 
ation thereis no art. But it would be a mistake to ascribe this 
creative power to an inborn talent. In art, the genuine creator 
is not just a gifted being, but a man who has succeeded in 
arranging, for their appointed end, a complex of activities, of 
which the work of art is the outcome. 
Thus, for the artist creation begins with vision. To see is 
itself a creative operation, requiring an effort. Everything that 
we sec in our daily life is more or less distorted by acquired 
habits, and this is perhaps more evident in an age like ours 
when the cinema posters and magazines present us every 
day witli a flood of ready-made images which are to the eye 
what prejudices are to the mind. 
The effort needed to sce things without distortion takes 
something very like courage: and this courage is essential 
to the artist, who has to look at everything as though he 
saw it for the first time: he has to look at life as he did when 
he was a child and, if he loses that [aculty, he cannot express 
himself in an original, that is, a personal way. 
To take an example. Nothing, I think, is more difficult (or 
a true painter than to paint a rose, because before he can do 
s0, he las first to forget all the roscs that were ever painted. 
I have often asked visitors who came to see me at Vence 
whether they had noticed the thistles by the side of the 
road. Nobody had seen them; they wonld all have recog- 
nized the leaf of an acanthus on a Corinthian capital, but the 
memory of the capital prevented them from seeing the thistle 
in nature. The first step towards creation is to see every- 
thing as it really is, and that demands a constant effort. To 
create is to express what we have within ourselves. Every 
genuine creative effort comes {from within. We have also to 
nourish our feeling, and we can do so only with materials 
derived from the world about us. This is the process whereby 
the artist incorporates and gradually assimilates the external 
world within himself, until the object of his drawing has 
become like a part of his being, until he has it within him and 
can project it on to the canvas as his own creation. 
When I paint a portrait, I come back again and again to my 
sketch and every time it is a new portrait that Fam painting: 
not one that I am improving, but a quite different one that 
am beginning over again; and every time I extract from the 
sanie person a different being. 
In order to make my study more complete, I have often 
had recourse to photographs of the same person at different 
ages; the final portrait may show that person younger or 
under a different aspect from that which he or she presents 
at the time of sitting, and the reason is that that is the 
aspect which seemed to me the truest, the one which 
revealed most of the sitter’s real personality. 
Thus a work of art is the climax of along work of prepa- 
ration. The artist takes from his surroundings everything 
that can nourish his internal vision, either direetly, when 
the object he is drawing is to appear in his composition, or hy 
analogy. In this way he puts himself into a position where he 
can create, He enriches himself internally with all the forms 
he has mastered and which he will one day set to a new 
rhythm. 
Itis in the expression of this rhythm that the artists work 
becomes really creative. To achieve it, hie will have to sift 
rather than accumulate details, selecting for example, from all 
possible combinations, the line that expresses most and gives 
life to the drawing: he will have to seek the equivalent terms by 
which the facts of nature are transposed into art. 
In my “Still Life with Magnolia™, 1 painted a green marble 
table red: in another place I had to use black to suggest 
the reflection of the sun on the sea; all these transpositions 
were not in the least matters of chance or whim, hut were the 
result of a series of investigations, following which these 
colours seemed to me to be necessary, because of their rela- 
tion to the rest of the composition, in order to give the 
impression I wanted. Colours and lines are forces, and the 
secret of creation lies in the play and balance of those forces. 
In the chapel at Vence, which is the outcome of earlier 
researches of mine, I have tried to achieve that balance of 
forces; the blues, greens and yellows of the windows compose 
a light within the chapel which is not strictly any of the 
colours used, but is the living product of their mutual 
blending; this light made up of colours is intended to play 
upon the white and black-stencilled surface of the wall 
facing the windows, on which the lines are purposely set 
wide apart. The contrast allows me to give the light its max- 
imum vitalizing value, to make it the essential clement, 
colouring, warming and animating the whole structure, to 
which itis desired to give animpression of boundless space 
despite its small dimensions. Throughout the chapel, every 
line and every detail contributes to that impression. 
That is the sense, so it seems to me, in which art may be 
said to imitate nature, namely, by the life that the creative 
worker infuses into the work of art. The work will then 
appear as fertile and as possessed of the same power to 
thrill, the same resplendent beauty as we find in works of 
nature. 
Great love is needed to achieve this effect, a love capable 
of inspiring and sustaining that patient striving towards 
truth, that glowing warmth and that analytic profundity 
that accompany the birth of any work of art. Butisnot love 
the origin of all creation? || 
(Text recorded by Régine Pernoud) 
C
a
c
 
LA
R 
N
G
L
A
A
I
E
 
4 
ed
 
EN
 
ef 
A
P
 
2 
  ~r or a 
  
     

## [Page 51](102874engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

     
  
J interne il 1 ¥ 
gopher.unesco.org 
or 
http: //www.unesco.org 
Currently on-line are: an index of the contents of the last 22 issues of the Unesco Courier, UNESC 
press releases, addresses, fax, telex and electronic mail numbers of Unesco’s regional office 
National Commissions and Unesco Clubs, the directory of Unesco databases and informatio 
services, colour images of the Japanese Garden and other architectural sites at UNEsc 
Headquarters, as well as works of art such as Henry Moore's reclining sculpture, 
p
a
)
 
directly with suggestions and comments, type: 
5 UNESCOo.courier@unesco.org 
AIDS 
‘A WORLDWIDE 
3 13:{c13,[H) @ 
Join in the fight against Aids by 
buying a T-shirt E 
 
fi J
m
™
 fF 
i 
 

## [Page 52](102874engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

   
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
  
We invite readers to send us 
photographs to be considered 
for publication in this feature. 
Your photo should show a 
painting, a sculpture, piece of 
architecture or any other 
subject which seems to be an 
example of cross-fertilization 
between cultures. 
Alternatively, you could send 
us pictures of two works from 
different cultural backgrounds 
in which you see some striking 
connection or resemblance. 
Please add a short caption to 
= all photographs. 
EE = Tr a Te 
  
  
   
  
    
 
   
ER s rr —— : 
   
   
,
 
“ i 14 (ges — 
pe ee Rl 
AhiiA > $A ou 7, Wai = 3 
Moov “ye kd 
 
   
 
5 » 
>» 
wv 
2 ee 
i. 
Pra 
  
    a hated Ne 4 i ip 
ie 
 