# [073516](073516engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](073516engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

i 
publication 
No. 768 
  
a 5 A ’ : 
UU b 1 
  
 
 
— : VOLUME IV — N* 4 — APRIL 19 
[Prien 548 cants (US): = 6 pence (UK), or 20 Fr (FRANCE). i a a A A 
   
    
This unusual chair, formed by two figures, 
one stooping and one upright, symbolizes 
the Icvelopment of a contemporary Afriz== 
 
   
native art. 0 Rar 
! SEE STORY on pages é and 7. 3 : MEY NEY 
gh \ ~ ESS RM AS EET $5 Gar a CAR SF

## [Page 2](073516engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 
 
UNESCO HOUSE 
19, Ave. Kléber, PARIS-1 6 
* 
Editor-In-Chief : S. M. KOFFLER 
EDITORS 
English edition : R. S. FENTON 
French edition : A. LEVENTIS 
Spanish edition : J. DE BENITO 
* 
All reproductions authorized 
* 
Imprimerie GEORGES LANG 
11, rue Curial, Paris. 
  
UNESCO Publication 968 
The UNESCO COURIER is an inter- 
national periodical devoted to the 
work of UNESCO and to activities 
and developments throughout the 
world in education, science and 
culture. . 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) 
costs only $1.50 U.S. *or 5/- or 200 
French Francs. 
Write to our agent in your country 
listed below, or directly to UNESCO 
House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris-16e, 
France. 
Argentina : Editorial Sudamericana, 
S.A., Aisina 500, Buenos Aires. 
Australia H.A. Goddard Lid., 255« 
George Street, Sydney. 
Austria : Wilhelm Frick Verlag, 27 Gra- 
ken, Vienna. 
Barbados : S.P.C.K. Bookshop (Regional 
Office Caribbean Area), Broad Street, 
Bridge‘own. 
Belgium : Librairie Encyclopédique, 7, 
rue du Luxembourg, Brussels IV. 
Bolivia : Libraria Selecciones, Av. 16 de 
Julio 216, Casilla 972, La Paz. 
Brazil : Livraria Agir Editora, Rua 
Mexico 98-B, Caixa postal 3291, Rio 
de Janeiro. 
Burma : Burma Educational Bookshop, 
551-3 Merchant Street, P.O. Box 222, 
Rangcon. 
Cambodia : Comptoir Cambodgien de 
Ravitailiement, 38, rue Van Vollen- 
hoven, Phnom-Penh. 
Canada : English speaking : University 
of Toronto Press, Toronto. 
French speaking : Benoit Baril, 4274, 
rue de la Roche, Montréal 34. 
Ceylon : Lake House Bookshop, The 
Associaied Newspapers of Ceylon, 
vid, Colombo 1 
Chile : Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 
924, Santiago de Chile. 
Colombia : Emilio Royo Martin, Carrera 
Sa, 1731, Bogota. 
Cuba : La Casa Belga, René de Smedt, 
O’Reilly 455, Havana. 
Czechoslovakia Orbis, Narodni 37, 
Prague I 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard, 6 Norre- 
gade, Copenhagen. 
Ecuador : Casa de la Cultura Ecuato- 
riana, av. Mariano Aquilera 322, 
Casilla 67, Quito. 
Egypt : Librairie James Cattan, Four- 
nisseur de la Cour, 118, Rue Emad 
el Dine, Cairo. 
Finland : Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
France : Maison du Livre Francais, 
4, rue Félibien, Paris (6°). (Book- 
sellers only.) UNESCO, Sales Service, 
19, avenue Kléber, Paris (16¢). (Indi- 
vidual sales.) 
Germany : Florian Kuplerberg Verlag, 
Eleonorens‘rasse 6, Mainz-Kastel. 
Greece : Elefthéroudakis, Librairie 
In‘ernationale, Athens. 
Hungary : “Kultura”, Akadémia-u, 10 
Budapest V. 
India : Oxford Book and Stationery Co., 
Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Indonesia : G.C.T. van Dorp and Ce 
NV., Djalan Nusantara, 22, Djakarta. 
Israel : Leo Blumstein, Book and Art 
Shop, 35 Allenby Road, Tel Aviv. 
Italy : Messaggerie Italiane, Via Lo- 
mazzo, 52, Milan. 
Lebanon and Syria : Librairie Univer- 
selle, Avenue des Frangais, Beirut, 
Lebanon. 
Malaya and Singapore : Peter Chong 
and C», P.O. Box 135, Singapore. 
Mexico : Libreria Universitaria, Justo 
Sierra 16, México 
Netherlands 
Lange Voorhout 8, The Hague. 
New Zealand : Whitcombe and Tombs, 
Ld. G.P.O. Box 1526, Wellington, 
Nigeria : C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O Box 
174, Lagos. 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 
. Oslo. 
Pakistan : Thomas and Thomas, Fort 
Mansions, Frere Road, Karachi 3. 
Peru : libreria In‘ernacional del Peru, 
S.A., Giron de la Union, Lima. 
Philippines : Philippine Education Co., 
Inc., 1104 Castillejos Quiapo, Manila. 
Sweden : A.B. C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hov- 
bokhandel, Fredsgatan 2; Stock- 
helm 16. 
Switzerland : French speaking cantons 
Librairie de 1'Université, 22-24, rue de 
Remont, Fribourg. German speaking 
cantons Europa Verlag, 5 Rami- 
strasse, Ziirich. : 
Turkey : Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
caddesi, Beyoglu, Is!anbul. 
Union of South Africa : Van Schaik’s 
Bookstore (Pty.), Ltd., P.O. Box 724, 
Pretoria. 
United Kingdom HM, Stationery 
Office : York House, Kingsway, Lon- 
don (Retail Counter Service), or P.O. 
Box 569, London, S.EI (Orizis by 
post). Tr 
Unit~2 States of America : Columbia 
University Press, 2960 Broadway, 
New York 27, N.Y. 
Uruguay : Ceniio de Coogeracion Cien- 
tifica para lo Brerica Lating, Unesco, 
Putevar Artigas 1320, Montevideo. 
+Qutside of the United States, $ 1.   
N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, 
  
  
APRIL 1951 
ON 
EE 
ce 
 
 
ECAUSE of his masterly translations of the Bible 
in the 4th century, St. Jerome is regarded as 
“The Patron Saint of Translators’. Were he 
alive today, St. Jerome would certainly be 
interested in another kind of “bible” — one used 
by the publishers, writers and translators of the 20th 
century. 
Bearing the latin title “Index Translationum™, this 
publication is an International Bibliography of Trans- 
lations prepared by Unesco. It was actually first 
published as a quarterly bulletin by the Institute of 
Intellectual Co-operation from 1932 to 1940, and, after 
an interruption of ten years, it was revived by Unesco’s 
Department of Cultural Activities. 
The first issue in the new series published last year, 
covered translations made during 1948 in thirty 
countries, as compared with 14 countries covered by the 
last pre-war issue of the Index. The second volume 
which is now available, is even more comprehensive 
than the first, and shows clearly a general rise in 
translations as compared with 1948, 
Examination of the Index 
brings out the striking fact 
that neither the most popu- 
lated countries nor those 
with the most highly deve- 
loped publishing industries 
produce the greatest number 
of translations. 
It shows that in 1949 Ger- 
many took the lead with, 
1,290 translations followed by Poland and Italy (937) ; 
France and Bulgaria (784) and the Netherlands (756). 
Since the languages of four of these countries are not 
widely used or spoken outside their borders, these 
countries would obviously appear to have greater needs 
for translations of scientific and literary works. 
When three or four countries have a common 
language, however, it would be wasteful of them 
to undertake separate adaptations of foreign works. 
How much more efficient it is to share the labour 
and thereby avoid unnecessary duplication. Unfortu- 
nately, this is not always as easy as it may 
appear. In fact, one work is sometimes translated 
several times during the same year in the same country! 
For example, a certain writer translated a work by 
Bergson, unaware that two other writers in his own 
country were doing the same thing at the same time. In 
Italy two Milan publishers simultaneously translated 
“Three Men in a Boat”, and three German versions of 
a novel by Alphonse Daudet appeared in 1949. 
A Linguistic Approach 
o look at the problem from another angle, statistics 
for nations speaking the same language show 
other inequalities. Compared with 1,730 German 
+ anslations (Germany, Austria and Switzerland) there 
were only 980 French translations (France, Switzerland, 
Canada and Belgium). Then 2ggihi, English transla- 
tions (Great Britain, the United States, South Africa and 
Canada) numbered 854, while in Spanish (Spain, 
Mexico, Cuba, Argentine, etc.) there were 597. 
A grouping of the Scandinavian countries ~ Denmark, 
Sweden, Norway, as well as Finland, which publishes 
a percentage of books in Swedish — shows the number 
of translations during one year as 1,082. 


### 73515: Under the aegis of Saint Jerome

Under the Aegis 
of Saint Jerome 
Of the thousands of translations made each year, by 
far the most are from American, English and French 
books. People living in Eastern Europe, however, are 
offered a larger selection of Russian translations than 
those in other parts of the world. 
Most Translated Authors 
cc HICH authors are the most translated ?” This 
\X/ question, which has been asked by most people 
at one time or another, can be answered by 
examining the Index. The first impression one gets is 
that few translations enjoy more success than those of 
Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin, until one remembers 
that there are some ten Slavonic languages, and that 
many different dialects are spoken between the Cau- 
casus and Manchuria. On the whole, publishers favour 
other great writers: Goethe and Balzac led the ‘field in 
1949 — the year of their centenaries. In the same 
year, works by Victor Hugo, Dickens and Tchekov were 
translated in thirteen languages. 
After these writers came 
a group which included such 
names as Pearl Buck, Feni- 
more Cooper, A.J. Cronin, 
Dostoievsky, Ehrenburg, Kip- 
ling, Jack London, Mark 
Twain, Stendhal, Alexandre 
Dumas, and Plato whose 
works were translated in 
eleven languages in 1949. 
Almost equally sought after were the works of Alphonse 
Daudet, Tolstoi, Upton Sinclair, Maupassant, Karel 
Capek, George Amado, and ex aequo, those of Winston 
Churchill and St. Thomas Aquinas. 
Novels Take First Place 
place. The Index shows the choice of literature, 
in its broadest sense — ranging from philosophy 
to verse — varies from country to country. 
Italy, the United States and France appear to prefer 
books on history and geography. Hungary and 
Bulgaria demand works on the social sciences and 
pedagogy. This is true too for Poland, which shows 
great interest in philosophical and religious work as 
well. Russians and Spaniards prefer works on the 
natural and applied sciences, while books on meta- 
physics and theology are in the greatest demand in 
Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland and Great 
Britain. 
~ But perhaps the most important help that the Index 
Translationum can give to publishers and translators is 
to show — by oniission — the large number of important 
works which still remain to be translated. Editors 
sometimes ignore a particular work because they feel 
sure that it has already been translated. Often this is 
not the case at all and here, the Index stands as a handy 
guide and indispensable reference book. 
The uses that can be made of the Index are unending. 
It can, for example, provide the basis for research on 
the {ranslation of book titles, since these are all- 
important from a sales viewpoini, There is, for 
example, the case of “Clothemerle”, Gabriel Chevalier’s 
semi-classic of Gallic humour, which caricatures life in 
a French village. In its Italian translation, the title 
became — “Sins in a Provincial Town". 
Or all translations published, the novel takes first 
 

## [Page 3](073516engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

APRIL 1951 


### 73514: Brazil: land of harmony for all races?

BRAZIL 
Land of Harmony 
For all 
HE traveller who visits Bahia, 
the great Brazilian “Negro 
Metropolis”, comes away with 
two apparently contradictory 
impressions. On the one hand 
he is struck by the obvious multiplicity 
of African survivals which have so 
deeply marked the life of the city, and 
on the other, by the small number of 
really “black” Negroes he meets, even 
in the most crowded quarters. 
While nearly all Bahia’s population 
is “coloured”, the inter-marriage 
between Whites, Indians and Negroes 
has created an original type which 
may ultimately develop in this part of 
the world as a new race. 
To anyone familiar with the voodoo 
cults of Haiti, there is nothing more 
strange than to witness their Bra- 
zilian counterparts. The orixa (spirit 
gods), the rites, the songs are almost 
the same, and if they differ from those 
of Haiti, it is only that they have a 
more distinctly African flavour. For 
at Bahia, the African coast is distant 
neither in time nor space. Yet Baba- 
lorixa (priests), maes de santo 
(priestesses) and filhas de santo (ser- 
vants of the god) are sometimes so 
light in colour that it is difficult to 
consider them as Negroes. 
It is in this extraordinary mixture 
that the racial tendencies which have 
prevailed since colonial times are most 
clearly seen in Brazil. They are also 
exemplified by a famous anecdote told 
by Henry Koster, an English traveller 
in the 19th century. When he asked 
one of his friends whether a certain 
Capitao-mor (provincial military gov- 
ernor) was a mulatto or not, he re- 
ceived the following reply: “He was a 
mulatto once, But now he is not.” On 
being asked to explain this, his friend 
exclaimed in surprise: “How can a 
Capitao-mor be a mulatto?” 
True Heirs Of Portugal 
HIS story sums up the essential 
difference in attitude towards 
the race problem in Brazil and 
in some parts of the Anglo- 
Saxon world. While, in the United 
States and South Africa, coloured peo- 
ple are classed as Negroes, even if they 
have only a little negre blood, in Bra- 
zil itis a person’s social position which 
counts much more than the colour of 
his skin. In this respect, the Brazil- 
ians are true heirs of the Portuguese 
who never attached much importance 
to race and who inter-married freely 
with all the native peoples they con- 
quered and colonized. 
In the Portuguese colonies, and later 
in the Brazilian Empire, the slaves’ lot 
was usually easier than in the French 
or English colonies, for religious and 
legal traditions favoured the slaves 
and tended to respect their human 
dignity. 
Colour Is No Barrier 
there were numerous examples 
of the rapid rise of mulattos 
and of the impcrtant part they 
played in Brazilian society. They .be- 
came in fact ¢ kind of middle class 
between the black slaves and the 
whites. For although the imperial 
regime maintained slavery it never- 
theless favoured the mulattos and 
opened up the iiberal professions to 
them. The most intelligent took 
advantage of this opportunity and 
won distinction and honour in their 
careers. 
Many are the distinguished Brazi- 
lians who were coloured and who 
elsewhere would have been subjected 
to all the drawbacks of racial dis- 
crimination. This rise of the mulatto 
to the highest intellectual and poli- 
tical positions continues even today, 
and if, as it is said, a former Brazi- 
lian President, Nilo Pe¢anha had 
Negro blood in his veins, then here is 
an example of 4 coloured man reach- 
ing the very top of the social ladder. 
Colour, in Brazil, is not the barrier 
it is in some parts of the United 
States. This is proved by the steady 
absorption of the dark elements by 
those with lighter skins. As Donald 
Pierson points out in his book *“Ne- 
groes in Brazil”, the whites absorb 
the mulattos, and the mulattos absorb 
the Negroes, and this is recognized 
and accepted by public opinion. 
But it would be misleading to try 
to paint an over-simplified picture of 
the race situation in Brazil. Though 
inter-racial marriages are frequent, 
they occur between individuals of the 
A S far back as the 18th century, 
Races ? 
By 
 
  
 
The Master's Man- 
sion or Casa grande 
and its adjoining sla- 
“ve quarters of the 
colonial period played 
a dominant role in the 
evolution of Brazilian 
society. The colour 
line was rarely drawn. 
At times the master 
was a light-skinned 
mulatto and the slave 
very often was partly 
white. Above is an 
early 19th century 
Mansion in the State- 
of Bahia, still inha- 
bited today. 
* 
A typical cabecio 
—or peasant—of nor- 
thern Brazil, In whose 
veins runs the blood 
of three races: Indian, 
Negro and white.   
L 
Alfred METRAUX, So 
— 
FL 
Meu Negrinho. The * 
phrase meu negro 
(my Negro) spoken in 
soft tones is a term of 
endearment in Brazil, 
used even by whites 
in speaking to other 
whites. Occasionally 
one hears the ex- 
pression on the lips 
of a beggar asking 
alms of a white per- 
son and, if he appears 
well-to-do, of a mu- 
latto as well. Colo- 
nial letters often en- 
ded with “Your affec- 
tionate cousin and 
very much your Ne- 
gro”. 
  
 
same Social class Vg Jarely lake 
place between peopie & e opposi 
ends of the colour scale. 
Good Things That Are Black 
RAZIL, it is true, provides an 
B example of a country where rel- 
ations between the races are 
relatively harmonious. It would 
be an exaggeration, however, to claim 
that race prejudice is unknown. Some 
Brazilian writers have expressed 
racial pessimism with regard to the 
Negroes. In Brazilian folklore, too, 
one finds a series of racial proverbs 
with disparaging undertones. A well 
wn. song reveals this latent pre- 
udice : 
Negro era o olhar de 
E a barba de Sao José 
S60 branco nao qué se preto, 
Mulato tambem nao qué. 
It tells of a Negro who lists all the 
good things that are black — coffee, 
the fruit of the jaboticaba tree, Mary's 
eyes and St Joseph’s beard, but who 
notes, ironically, that “nevertheless, 
neither the white man nor the mulatto 
want to be black”. 
These taunts do not prevent the 
ordinary people from getting on 
together in spite of colour differences, 
but as one examines the higher end 
of the social scale, the signs of race 
prejudice become more numerous. 
They are never expressed cynically, but 
rest upon tacit conventions — almost 
“gentlemen’s agreements’, concluded 
to the disadvantage of the Negroes. 
Another shadow is cast over the 
traditional picture of racial relations 
in Brazil by the growth of an un- 
mistakable racialism among the 
working classes of cities like Sao 
Paulo or Rio de Janeiro. Ifs origins 
are economic, for it expresses the 
white workers’ fear of competition 
Page 3 — UNESCO COURIER 
  
  
  
  
   
  
    
  
    
   
from an unskilled proletariat deserting 
the countryside to answer the call of 
an expanding industry. 
Confusion Of Class And Colour 
PPEARANCES, however, can be 
A deceptive. Statements made in 
racial terms are often only the 
expression of a class feeling. 
Owing to the comparatively recent 
emancipation. of slaves— in 1888 — 
the coloured people still belong chiefly 
to the lower classes of urban and rural 
workers. It is for this reason that the 
idea of colour is so often associated 
with the common people in Brazil 
Thus a coloured person of small means, 
lacking refinement (in manners or 
taste) may have to endure a certain 
amount of disdain, yet by the same 
token a rich or educated negro can 
become “white”. 
Negroes and mulattos have expressed 
their bitterness and disappointment in 
racial terms, but their protests are 
aimed, in fact, at social not racial 
inequality. If the coloured man feels 
disappointed or cheated, it is not so 
much because he was born black, but 
because he belongs to a poor class and 
has been unable to get an education, 
one of the first steps towards social 
betterment in Brazil. 
Although everything may not be 
perfect in the matter of Brazilian race 
relations, the frictions described here 
are not likely to raise serious problems 
in the future. Racial prejudice, if it 
exists at all, is condemned by the 
country’s mores and is considered con- 
trary to the ideals which inspire not 
only Brazilians but Americans in 
general. But the force of tradition has 
made it easier to solve the dilemma 
in Brazil. The Brazilian intellectuals 
are proud of the racial democracy 
which they have brought about, and no 
candidate for public office today would 
dare express racial feelings. 
A Queen Set The Example 
always opposed racial prejudice 
and discrimination. Even at the 
time of the Empire, when 
slavery still existed, it was considered 
improper to display such prejudice. 
The experience of a famous mulatto 
architect, André Rebouca, illustrates 
this clearly. He was invited one day 
to a Court Ball given by King 
Pedro II, but instead of mingling with 
the other guests, he remained standing 
alone near a window in evident em- 
barrassment. The Empress, noticing 
this, crossed the flor, smiled at him 
and asked him to dance with her. 
It is because of this whole set of 
circumstances that Unesco recently 
began a full, on-the-spot study of the 
various factors — social, economic and 
anthropological — which condition 
race relations in Brazil today. The 
eagerness shown by the Brazilian 
sociologists working with Unesco to 
explore all favourable and unfavoura- 
ble aspécts of the question alike, 
shows the feeling of confidence with 
which Brazilians everywhere regard 
the racial situation in their country. 
T HE Brazilian Government has

## [Page 4](073516engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Pag: 4 


### 73517: Opening the door of hope for the blind

Opening the Door 
~ Of Hope 
For the Blind 
  
    
v. 
  
areas.   
by Sir Clutha Mackenzie 
ir Clutha Mackenzie, one of the world’s lead- 
S ing blind welfare workers, was totally blinded 
himself in 1915 during the Gallipoli campaign 
of World War | while serving with the New Zealand 
Expeditionary Force. 
first students at St. Dunstan's Hostel for Blinded 
Soldiers, Sailors and Airmen, founded in Lon- 
don in 1915. Returning to duty, he edited the 
New Zealanders’ Army newspaper in Europe, 
sometimes acting as his own tront-line reporter. 
When war ended, the field of blind welfare became 
his life's work. 
work in New Zealand. 
In 1942, at the request of the British War Office, 
he re-entered the army to take charge of rehabili- 
tating and resettling the war blind of South-eastern Asia. 
Sir Clutha, a well-built man of 56, has travelled alone throughout most 
of the world in 30 years of working in his field. Now Unesco’s Consul- 
“tant on Braille, he has concerned himself during the past two years 
with the problem of setting up a single international system of Braille 
symbols for the blind of all nations. In February, Sir Clutha attended 
an international conference on Braille, held in Beirut under Unesco's 
auspices, which agreed to a uniform Braille alphabet for 5 million blind 
persons in India, South-East Asia, the Middle East and Africa. The 
new alphabet will replace over 20 local Braille scripts now in use in these 
  
He became one of the 
In 1935, he was knighted for his 
  
N a number of western coun- 
tries today all normal, healthy 
blind children, as well as 
adults who lose their sight, have 
the opportunity to be trained and 
educated for a useful job in life. 
Not only can they have wage- 
earning occupations but homes and 
families, sports and hobbies, com- 
munity interests and responsibili- 
ties. To reach this goal has been 
a long uphill job. 
Alas, the countries in which this 
ideal has been achieved are all too 
few. About three-quarters of the 
world’s blind live in Asia and 
Africa where “liberation” has been 
granted to no more than one per 
cent. The vast majority still lives 
by begging in streets, bazaars and 
outside temples. Many only 
manage to exist by a traditional 
family system which makes 
stronger members of the family 
responsible for sick, maimed or 
aged members. But it is a negative 
existence. Minds and muscles are 
left to atrophy. : 
One of the interesting jobs 
which fell to my lot during World 
War II was at a rehabilitation 
centre for war-blinded men of 
India and south-eastern Asia. 
There was, for instance, Corporal 
Bishan Das whom I came across 
in a hospital ward in Karachi, 
THE BLIND ARE OF ALL AGES. 
“read” the time by means of a specially modelied Braille clock with raised numbers. 
Pakistan, soon after he was 
brought back from North Africa. 
Utterly crumpled, he answered my 
questions only with sobs. He 
declared that life was ended for 
him and that he must accept 
God’s will with submission. Never- 
theless, he finally agreed to come 
to our centre for training. He was 
the first to complete the eighteen 
months course. He learned type- 
writing, Braille reading and writ- 
ing, rope-making and the weaving 
of newar (a webbing used instead 
of springs on Indian beds). When 
finished, he left for his distant 
home in a high Himalayan valley. 
The Blind Scribe 
year later, Bishan Das was back 
to see us to discuss a business 
proposition. Prosperous and 
happy, he had become an im- 
portant man in his village. His 
two trades of rope-making and 
weaving kept him very busy. In 
addition, he had become the village 
scribe, writing letters in Roman 
Hindi on his typewriter. Men sat 
in groups before his house, smoking 
and telling yarns, while their 
business was transacted. His 
opinions were treated with respect. 
Now he wanted to harness a 
vigorous mountain stream which 
roared past his house and build 
  
Here a small boy of four—sightless since birth—learns to 
Often, a 
Braille watch is the first crack in the opening door of hope for the newly blind. 
a flour mill. Would we finance 
him ? We did, and Bishan Das 
continued to prosper. 
There is a bond between fellows 
like Bishan Das and myself. I had 
been through it all after being 
blinded by a shell in Turkey in 
1915... When I arrived in an 
English hospital a few weeks later, 
Sir Arthur Pearson, the able, blind 
leader of St. Dunstan’s took me 
in charge. Still in bed, I learned 
to type. Still in bed, I wrote a 
press article at his suggestion. A 
few days later the post brought 
me an envelope. It contained a 
copy of a leading London paper 
which carried my article and—a 
five-guinea cheque. With such a 
journalistic beginning, my fears 
and depression began to vanish. 
Within a year I was back with the 
Army, running a newspaper for the 
‘New Zealand Expeditionary Force. 
So I knew how Bishan Das felt 
when he was wounded. I knew 
the joy he experienced as he 
mastered his dark new world by 
regaining a full place in life. 
Devotion Of Father Jackson 
OUR of the other men at our 
Indian training centre, a Sikh, 
a Bengali, a Punjabi Mussul- 
man, an English captain, were not 
only totally blinded but had lost 
both hands as well. Their lot was 
a hard one until the British 
Ministry of Pensions had sent the 
special fittings they needed for 
substitute hands. How depressed 
we were when the first package of 
the plaster casts of their stumps 
went astray on its air journey to 
London ! 
One of the soldiers, Gulam Qadir, 
was only 18 and full of ambition. 
We taught him English and type- 
writing and prepared him as a 
public speaker and demonstrator 
who would arouse the public to a 
practical interest in the blind. His 
typewriter, incidentally, was a 
specially designed machine oper- 
ated by a key attached to his 
stump. 
In the eastern countries, mis- 
sionaries often were the pioneers 
in helping the blind to lead fuller 
lives. There was Father Jackson, 
for example, a young blind priest 
of the Church of England. He 
went to Burma about 35 years ago 
and, by a tremendous effort and 
devotion, he built one of the best 
organizations in Asia for the educ- 
ation of blind boys and girls and 
for the practical employment of 
men and women. 
In grilling heat and drenching 
monsoon— clad in cassock and san- 
dals—he walked the highways and 
byways of that vast country 
preaching the gospel and at the 
same time opening a new and 
wonderful world for the blind. He 
APRIL 1951 
   
working to the last, 
but not before his zeal left a per- 
manent mark in the field of blind 
welfare. 
died young, 
Pioneer Asian Schools 
ISSIONARIES having shown 
the way, ruling princes and 
volunteer philanthropic 
groups—and even a few govern- 
ments— set up a number of schools. 
Such early efforts, however, affect 
ed only a small proportion of the 
afflicted although they vividly 
illustrated that the blind Chinese, 
Indian, Persian and Arab are 
potentially just as active in mind 
and body as the European blind 
person. 
But schooling alone is not 
enough. Practical workshops and 
vocational training for future 
employment are necessary too. A 
modern school for the blind, for 
example, must have special ap- 
paratus in addition to more 
ordinary equipment. Today, 1 
know of at least fifty small pioneer 
schools in Asia, where the gift of 
such equipment for teaching the 
blind would be an untold blessing. 
Each blind student needs a Braille- 
writing machine, the rather ex- 
pensive thick paper on which to 
write, and a round-pointed stylus. 
To write, one pierces the sheet 
from behind—looking-glass fashion 
—making the combinations of dots 
for each Braille letter. This is 
cheap and simple. But it is slow, 
and the pupil cannot read his work 
while writing. 
Therefore there are typewriter- 
like machines. With the latest 
model, the student’s written work 
appears on the upper side of the 
paper so that he can read and 
check his script as he works. 
There are many other ingenious 
aids including special measures 
and liquid measuring units and a 
variety of trade tools. Invaluable 
is a Braille watch. Not infrequently 
it is the first crack in the opening 
door of hope for the newly blind. 
I remember, for example, the 
tragic figure of Rifleman Saw 
Jacky, a young Burman Karen 
blinded by a spray of machine-gun 
fire during the war. For a fort- 
night after he arrived at the 
Indian training centre, he would 
only lie miserably on his bed. He 
refused food and all attempts to 
rouse his interest. “If I can’t have 
my eyes back, I only want to die”, 
he repeated. Then, an English 
officer—armless and blind—gave 
Jacky a Braille watch. He made 
him feel his handless arms, and 
explained that he was luckier. 
Jacky at least could feel the watch 
even though he couldn't see it! 
The gift of a Braille watch was 
the first step for Saw Jacky and 
succeeded in giving him fresh nope 
and a feeling that all purpose had 
not departed from his life.

## [Page 5](073516engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

APRIL 1951 
Syria 
Page 5 — UNESCO COURIER 


### 73518: Syria decrees general mobilization of all civil servants as part-time teachers

Decrees General Mobilization 
Of All Civil Servants As Part-Time Teachers 
new kind of revolution 
is taking place in Syria. 
Though it affects all 
levels of national life, 
the greatest changes are 
taking place in the cultural 
field. 
It is a bloodless revolution! 
While other countries, 
caught up in a world arma- 
ments race, are passing laws 
for military conscription, 
<£ Syria has ordered a different 
1 UR kind of mobilization — in 
: the service of education. 
In its Constitution, adopted last October, Syria 
declared its intention of sweeping away all illiteracy 
within its borders during the next ten years. To- 
day, from the banks of the Euphrates to the 
mountains of Lebanon, from the deserts of Central 
Arabia to the rivers Tigris and Taurus, an energetic 
campaign is being waged to give men, women 
and children — city-dwellers, peasants and nomad 
bedotins — the right of free access to education 
and culture. 
Sufficient funds are being made available to the 
Ministry of National Education to ensure the suc- 
cess of the campaign, and the introduction of 
compulsory social service has solved a primary 
probiem, by providing an army of teachers. Every 
Syrian, man or woman, possessing a school certifi- 
cate or a diploma for more advanced studies is 
required, by law, to become a teacher, thus ensuring 
a permanent teaching staff in each “School for 
the People”. 
These “Schools for the People” now being opened 
throughout the country are cultural centres located 
in the primary schools. Their purpose is to spread 
practical, useful knowledge among the people and 
in particular to wage a campaign against illiteracy. 
 .- aM as 
Schools for nomads 
VERY person holding a school diploma issued 
during the last ten years must assist in this 
teaching campaign. Anyone wishing to ener 
the Civil Service is also obliged to provide his 
services for three months, and later receives a 
certificate signed by the headmaster of the school 
and attested by the provincial Director of Education. 
In this way, postmasters, court clerks and customs 
officers, will later have the satisfaction of recalling 
- - —— — TT ——— 
JEAN PICART LEDOUX /5¢ 
  
by Camille Aboussouan     
the time when they took part in this community 
service. 
Educators were faced with difficult problems even 
with the general mobilization of everyone capable 
of assisting in the work. How could Syria’s nomad 
tribes, numbering several hundred thousand people, 
be provided with sufficient schools ? How could 
equipment such as blackboards and maps be con- 
tinually moved on the backs of camels, as the pupils 
wandered from pasture-lands to winter quarters ? 
Despite such difficulties, fundamental education 
has achieved some remarkable results. The present 
aim is to increase the num- 
ber of schools with a teach- 
ing programme adapted to 
desert conditions. Instruc- 
tion on rearing of stock—a 
daily factor in the life of 
these tribes—is given spe- 
cial prominence; land cul- 
tivation is also taught, for 
it is hoped to induce the 
nomads to abandon their 
wandering life and settle 
permanently on small farms, 
gaining their livelihood from 
agriculture. 
Reviving “A Glorious Age” 
THER schools are being established for small 
towns and isolated rural populations where 
pupils receive primary education and are 
taught trades. Local inhabitants are asked to 
contribute to the building of schools, and in this 
connection, a fund-raising experiment has been 
introduced in the regions around Damascus, the 
Euphrates and Aleppo. 
In these places municipal authorities are imposing 
a one piastre tax on every kilo of cereals sold at 
the Corr. Office, on sale of drinks and on radio sets. 
The proceeds from this indirect taxation are used 
to benefit the very inhabitants who have paid these 
taxes. Thus, a café habitué, watching a school 
being built in solid stone or good timber, has the 
satisfaction of knowing that he has played his part 
in this work, because he was a good taxpayer... or 
a good drinker... 
A ——— 3 & 
An equal drive is being made in the cities: 
teaching at primary school level and instruction in 
the trades is preparing youthful citizens for their 
future callings, thus ensuring an adequate supply 
of skilled labour. 
A real wave of enthusiasm has swept the people 
of Syria, who see in the opening of the doors to 
education a chance of reviving once again the 
glorious age when classical Moslem culture was 
producing the most significant works in philosophy, 
the sciences and the arts. 
Proud of the Arab heritage 
NE of the impressive results of this cultural 
revolution is the fact that already, elementary 
schools have increased in number from 1,070 
to 2,000 and secondary schools from 64 to 110. Ten 
trade training schools and six teachers’ colleges 
have also been opened. But perhaps the most 
striking transformation is the opening of educa- 
tional facilities to women. To-day, girls represent 
one third of the school-going children of Syria 
and one fifth of the students at Damascus Uni- 
versity. In ten years, it is expected, their numbers 
will equal those of the boys. 
One of the best measures of Syria's effort is the 
share Education receives of the country’s budget. 
This is 20 % for 1951; it will be increased to 20 % 
in future years. 
The paramount role of education was laid down 
in Syria’s Constitution in these words : “It should 
aim at the training of a generation with strength 
of mind and body, believing in God, virtuous, proud 
of the Arab heritage, possessing an adequate intel- 
lectual background, conscious of its duties and its 
rights, zealous for the public welfare, imbued with 
a spirit of solidarity and brotherhood.” 
These words are to-day 
becoming a living reality. 
Damascus, capital of the 
Ommeaydes; Damascus, 
whose three hundred mos- 
ques with their blue mina- 
rets dominate the most an- 
cient city in the world, is 
the heart of a powerful cul- 
tural revival which is 
preparing a country rich in 
tradition to fulfil its role in 
the present and future life 
of the world community. 
  
  
Arab States 
The chroniclers of the Middle Ages might well have scolled had 
they been 10id that one day, the governments of the Arab States would whose mpoasing 12th century mass don 
ning has also been made on 8 (20,000 rebuilding scheme for Beaulort, 
nates the passe from Damascus 
be allocating part of their budgets for the restoration and utkyep of to Sidon At Sidon, the Chateau de Mor, now lies with seven of sig 
the casties of the Crusaders. Ye! this is exactly what is taking place arches of its Bridge at the mercy of the sea. Ap eMort is beng made 
» today in the Middle East, where the Departments of Antiguities In 10 salvage and rebuild at a cos! of (8.000. Four months work will be 
P Beirut and Damascus are preparing thelr summer schedules of res- put in thus year. Further up the blue coast, at Geball—ancient Byblos 
res e roi ng toration and repair. Despite the passing of centunes. these casties restoration work was cared out last your on the Port Tower, Alten 
still appear to the traveller of today 10 look down with undiminished thon is now to be given to the cathedral. Elsewhere slong the old 
» majesty. The Syrian and Lebanese Governments do not intend that Phoenician coast and inland, where Crusaders’ fortresses and oviposts 
they should fall completely In1o SeCay and they therelore devote a part have weathered six Co ures, lesser restoration projects are in hand 
(Crusaders of the funds they make svalable annually or work in the nich archaeolo- The work of prosgervation is unfortunately limited by economic condi 
gical field they have inherited, to this work of restoration. An oul tions in these two Middle East countries where the Ne f ant 3 | 
standing example of the architecture of the Crusades is the famed 5 extremely vas! 1 Ihe attempts that are being made 10 Preserve 
Strongholds Krak des Chevaliers, near the high road from Tripoll to 
is In an excellent state of preservation 
receive its annual allocation from Syrian antiquity funds. A begin- 
Homa which 
This year. it will contings to 
these mony with 
the legends of Saracen chivalty towards the Crusaders who built 
these strongholds. 
ents of Christian real are therefore well in heaping

## [Page 6](073516engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

Eo ’ Re re 
  
  
A WOMAN, 
ELEPHANT. No thought of precedence entered 
the mind of the man who carved this pole. He 
was guided solely by considerations of aestheti- 
cism and nature. 
A MAN, A PANTHER, AN 
  
BLUE BATIK ROBES, a panther skin encircled by feathers, a pearl decorated hood, a cone-shaped 
head-dress covered with small figures, a whip, a horse's tail and a monkzy-skin sleeve — these are some 
features of the native dance used as art motifs by Abossolo Simion, 
THE LESSON OF ABOSSOLO SINION, 1 
   
TWO BAMILEKE GIRLS whose skulls have been deformed by the use of 
massage, as is the local custom, until the bones finally hardened. 
FRICAN cultural problems have a special interest for Unesco in con- 
nection with its efforts to help all countries develop their cultures 
according to their traditions and characteristics. To this end, 
Unesco has worked in close collaboration with the International African Ins- 
titute since 1949 and through grants made to this Institute, has enabled ethno- 
logists to carry out important research in this field. 
Thanks to Unesco’s help, the Institute has published an African analytical 
bulletin and several sociological works and is today organizing an interna- 
tional mission of ethnologists. 
Unesco has itself made available two fellowships to young African scholars 
and has organized a committee of experts to discuss the preservation of 
popular arts. 
Many of this commitiee’s recommendations related to Africa and stressed, 
above all, the need for a spirit of understanding for peoples and a respect for 
local cultures. Such recommendations, which are in accord with the general 
principles guiding Unesco, find a confirmation in the story of Abossolo Simion, 
an African craftsman, which is told in the reportage on this page. : 
URING the past thirty years, arts in 
D Africa have ceased to be regarded 
with a certain disdain rather as if 
they were barbaric curiosities. Such arts 
have inspired European painters; they 
have helped Matisse and later Picasso to 
“reduce nature to its geometrical ele- 
ments.” 
But while artists (rather than the gene- 
ral public) appreciate the aesthetic value 
of the statuettes, masks and ritual objects 
donated by travellers to museums or 
sold to art dealers, even these artists 
are unable to explain the meaning or 
significance of such objects. Their ap- 
- preciation is related solely to the imme- 
diate visual or emo- 
is that this art, when it is really authen- 
tic, is always a sacred one. Before these 
ancestral effigies, funeral masks and sac- 
rificial instruments which other peoples 
examine with mere curiosity, the black 
peoples show a reverence which, while it 
may sometimes be aesthetic, is always re- 
ligious. 
A Threat To Negro Art 
structures which, during many cen- 
turies have given rise to these crea- 
tive forms, are greatly altered or are even 
neing destroyed. New 
celigions (Shamanism, 
T oDAY, the beliefs, customs and social 
tional impression; as 
to the intrinsic va- 
lue and symbolism-of 
these art forms to   
By Georges FRADIE 
Islam, Christianity), 
and new institutions 
—those of colonial or 
protectorate powers— the African crafts- 
men, explanations are 
usually left to ethnologists. 
Yet this is a vitally important aspect of 
such art. The marvellous sculpture of the 
entrance to Chartres Cathedral, for exam- 
ple, evokes admiration. But at the same 
time, such work conveys the religious fer- 
vour that inspired the artist to fashion 
these virgins, angels and kings. The 12th 
century artist actually carved or painted 
a virgin and not just a statue or a stained 
glass window. 
The same is true of African artists, say 
the ethnologists, who thus give a timely 
reminder that there can be no true un- 
derstanding of the art of these peoples 
without a knowledge of their social, tech- 
nical and religious background. The signi- 
ficant fact that emerges from such a study 
R 
are rapidly spreading 
right to the heart of the African continent. 
Whether these changes should be extolled 
or deplored, the fact remains that they 
appear to have had a most disastrous in- 
fluence on traditional arts. To quote Mar- 
cel Griaule, the French ethnologist : 
“Everywhere that the institutions of the 
Negro peoples come in contact with new 
cults or administrative measures, art either 
is transformed or disappears.” 
This conclusion, however, sufficient 
though it may be for the ethnologist, far 
from satisfies the Africans or the artisis 
who have wholeheartedly accepted, in their 
definition of art, the works of the Sudan 
and the Congo. When the myths which 
bind together his universe lose their power, 
will the Negro become incapable of aesthe- 
tic creative work? Is it not possible for 
him to evolve, since “evolution” seems 
inescapable, without abandoning the art 
forms inherited through tradition, but 
which at the same time, are the expression 
of his oneness with his society, his world, 
or, in a word, his culture? 
Perhaps the most adequate reply to this 
question is provided by the experience of 
a young French teacher, M. Raymond Le- 
coq, who, arriving in Africa five years ago, 
was obliged to solve, on a small scale, a 
practical problem which today confronts 
all people who, thirty years ago, were still 
regarded as “primitive.” 
No Right To Teach Drawing 
N 1945, when M. Lecoq was sent to 
the Cameroons, instructional centres 
existed at Douala and Ebelowa for 
training masons, carpenters, joiners, bas- 
ket-makers and railwaymen, as well as for 
a group of youths whose role was appa- 
rently to perpetuate the “popular arts.” 
At Ebelowa, a craftsmen’s co-operative 
served more than a hundred workers, ap- 
prentices and pupils, and M. Lecoq was 
appointed by this co-operative to take 
charge of one of its schools. At the same 
time, he was asked to work on a plan for 
the organization of craftsmen’s centres for 
all the Cameroons. 
He found himself in the midst of an en- 
Pages 6 and 7 — LE COURRIE! 
BE Tol a Barat IE CE 
        
     
; J » : rf ye Bi 
nN: NN Pa aA J 
be A A . _—y 
La = : 
we = ¥ 
FAAS LY 
   
 
 
THE CHIEF'S SEAT: a panther, coloured in red och 
and white pearls on the 
  
 
THE CHIEF'S THRONE is also decorated with 
pearis. One figure supports the seat, the other 
forms the back. 
thusiastic crowd of young men who, 
throughout the day in the sculpture class, 
devoted their efforts to making poor imi- 
tations of European, Moroccan and Chinese 
curios and trinkets. Having visited the Co- 
lonial Museum and the Museum of Man in 
Paris, and having studied specialised re- 
views on African art, M. Lecoqg felt he un- 
derstood the subject. He had, therefore, 
hoped for something different from what 
he found at Ebelowa. 
His mission, it seemed to him, would be 
unproductive if the craftsmen entrusted to 
his care, had lost their inherent capacity 
of perception and feeling and their crea- 
tive ability and if they were to be hence- 
forth in the tow of bazaar vendors and 
manufacturers of decorative articles. Then 
he had the idea of asking his native pupils 
for a design on a free subject and this test, 
he relates, revealed “two things: Firstly, 
out of the hundred designs submitted, there 
were about twenty which, uninfluenced 
by pictures in books, showed a rich depth 
of feeling and inspiration and the vision of 
the “primitive” artist, who, ignoring ordi- 
nary laws of perspective, depicts by the 
simplest means, superimposing thoughts 
and pictures and accentuating the most 
characteristic delails. 
“Secondly, 1 had no right to teach them 
to draw; my Western knowledge, I felt, 
must nol impose itself on their sincerity 
and their native power of observation.” 
 

## [Page 7](073516engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

    IR iE L'UNESCO — APRIL 195¢ 
    
hre,ultramarine and black and white, with large blue 
8 mse and forehead. 
A HARLEQUIN which would not seem out of 
plce at a Picasso exhibition. Only the panther 
recalis its African origin. 
¥ Stay Away From School !” 
NCOURAGED by the results of his ex- 
E periment, Lecoq then asked his pu- 
pils to make either a clay model or 
a piece of sculpture based on a scene in 
tieir everyday life. This test gave final 
prof: about half-a-dozen statuettes reveal- 
e¢ the touch of true artists, One crafis- 
mn was especially gifted and this man 
wis to be of the greatest assistance to the 
Fench instructor in his work. He was 
nd only a talented sculptor, but a creative 
arist who followed the traditions and aes- 
tietic ideals of his people. 
This craftsman and artist, Abossolo Si- 
mon, ran the risk, despite his talent, of 
sffering the fate of his comrades and of 
siking, consciously or not, into unfruit- 
fd imitatien. Seeing the influence the 
s@ool had on his pupil, the teacher advis- 
ec him not to come any more, to work at 
héne and just to show the work he had 
dae at the end of each month. The result 
wis unbelievably successful. Abossolo set 
ut a studio with six apprentices and his 
wrk, sometimes drawing inspiration from 
loal life, sometimes from mythology, was 
asounding. 
IF'wo years later, the work produced by 
tir co-operative at Ebelowa was almost en- 
tiely patterned on models provided by 
APSsolo who changed his designs as often 
aspossible to discourage standardized pro- 
gy EER NAT NS NY 
1} 
  
> 
a 1 ¥ —— 
“BY FOR 11 1 Un 
Tel ml wal 
RESPECT DUE TO STATUES OF ANCESTORS was shown by the artist who carved these figures: 
(from left to right), the present chief, his father and his grandfather. These figures, placed against a wall 
at the entrance to the chief's hut, retain an air of dignity and serenity despite exposure to the elements. 
duction and keep constantly alive the ar- 
tistic value of the crafismen’s work. 
Furniture, statues, portraits, stylised ani- 
mals—his sculptures perhaps are no longer 
endowed with the spiritual power of a re- 
ligion which impregnated the whole life of 
the ancestors of Abossolo. 
are at least derived from elaborate designs 
which date back many centuries to the 
borders of the forest and the banks of the 
Niger; there is the same simplicity, the 
same vision, often the same techniques and, 
in the words of the French teacher “the 
same impression of power and things eter- 
nal.” 
No Need To Pass The Torch 
HIS is the lesson fo be learned from 
the story of Abossolo Simion. His 
art is no longer a social function. 
It no longer embodies a tradition, a cus- 
tom, a faith; his talent was, in a sense, 
available, and he could have debased it by 
working for commercial interests. Or 
again, under the influence of a European 
teacher, he could have become just ano- 
ther sculptor, without roots, orthodox and 
mediocre. But he was fortunate enough to 
meet an instructor with sufficient judg- 
ment and experience to encourage him, to 
free him from any sense of inferiority and 
allow him, in fact, to become a fine native 
sculptor, not only for his own develop- 
But the forms - 
ment but for the cultural enrichment of 
his compatriots. 
The story seems simple enough, but its 
full portent cannot be overstressed at a 
time when the economic development of 
Africa is going to require great perception 
by educators, if they are to safeguard the 
creative talent of those peoples whom they 
are trying to help. 
Culture lives through exchange and not 
by forced loans. Recently, a “colonial” 
magazine made the following statement: 
“Since the evolution of the native races 
includes the teaching of history, geogra- 
phy, Latin the sciences etc... why should 
not the sfandard measures for depicting 
the human form be instilled at the same 
time, thus passing on the torch which our 
artists went as far back as Greece and 
Ancient Rome to rekindle?” 
If such pretensions were to carry the 
day, both the native races and civilization 
would be the losers. The words of the 
young French teacher have a truer ring: 
“I'm convinced,” he says, “that an artist 
with the courage to forget his Western 
culture, and prepared to study the art 
forms of the country where he is called 
upon to guide and direct native craftsmen, 
can and should safequard the natural ar- 
listic perceptions of the Africans, for such 
peoples are too apt sometimes lo imitate 
us in a superficial fashion, even while we 
are seeking among them our lost youth.” 
LI
, 
U LUFF 
M : 
sy 
B11 
  
 
DANCE TOM-TOM. Caryatids support the body of 
the drum which is decorated with serpents, chame- 
leons and small reclining figures.

## [Page 8](073516engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 8 APRIL 195} 
 


### 73520: San Marcos de Lima: "dean of American universities", four centuries of uninterrupted teaching

San Marcos de Lima: “Dean of American 
Universities Four Centuries of Uninterrupted Teaching 
by José de Benito  
N 1551, the Pe- 
ruvian City of 
the Kings 
(which to-day 
we call Lima) 
was a newly-built 
town on the banks 
of the Rimac where, 
some 15 years before, 
it had been founded 
by Francisco Pizarro. 
Its shape gave it the 
“chessboard” appear- 
ance of a Roman garrison town, with nine 
streets running lengthwise crossed at right angles 
by thirteen others. From a distance —a certain 
Fray Reginaldo de Lizarrago noted— its spring- 
ing vines and many groves of fruit-trees made 
it look more like a forest than a town. 
Another old writer, Cieza de Leon, described 
its broad plaza and narrow streets, its substantial 
—sometimes elegant— houses with towers and 
walled gardens standing four to the block. In 
reality, however, many of the 458 homes pro- 
jected still remained to be built and of those 
completed the majority had only mud walls and 
roofs of matting. The only exceptions were 
the churches and convents constructed by the 
religious orders; their 
both the wealth of the new-found countries and 
the faith of the missionaries. : 
Such, then, was the city which had petitioned 
Emperor Charles V for a university where the 
local “Creoles” could prepare themselves for the 
liberal professions. The decree issued in Valla- 
dolid on 12 May 1551 conferred on the new insti- 
tution certain of the privileges of the ancient 
and famous university of Salamanca, founded in 
1220, with its 6,000 students and 60 professorial 
Chairs. 
A long tradition already marked the university 
life of Spain. By the thirteenth century no less 
than eleven laws — the Partidas of Alfonso the 
  
Wise — covered almost every aspect of university . 
life: courses of study, student associations, 
competitions for nomination of professors and 
even the location of bookshops near the 
universities. 
Within a few years after its foundation, the 
new University in America had established 
Chairs not only of Law, Medicine, Arts, Astro- 
nomy, Theology and Canon Law, but also of the 
Quechua language. 
The general atmosphere of the colony in those 
days, however, was not an easy one for a 
university. The early history of the University 
of San Marcos reflects not only the quarrels 
between Pizarro and Almagro and the suspicions 
of the newly converted or as yet unconquered 
natives, but the ambitions of the different 
religious orders to increase their own influence. 
The Dominicans, in whose convent the university 
had been set up, tried to monopolize the 
teaching posts and to exclude lay teachers and 
members of other religious orders. 
seeking A Home 
number of stinging incidents, however, 
A quickly convinced the Viceroy of Toledo 
of the need for making the university 
independent of the religious orders. And on 
30 December 1571 a decree obtained from King 
Philip II, formally ordered the removal of the 
university from the Dominican House in Lima. 
It made two moves, first, to a building near 
the church of San Marcelo and then to a 
permanent home in the “House of Refuge for 
the Mestizo Daughters of the Conquistadors” 
a A TR 1h Fo I A EH or 
FOUN- 
IN Lina 
As. he das wie Ss 
) vines ang many 
AN ANCIENT 
A ) ¢ Cily 
 
than a toan 
- e 
4 
e
e
 
a - _
 ru
 -
 
.s
 
c
a
 = 
5
 
  
architecture reflected 
aay 
EEE NN 
» ' ! 
 
  
s | 
~ 
BARE LITT TT ian Jira 
"eli 
UE Fer 
LIMA'S HANDSOME PLAZA: Four hundred years ago, Cieza de Leon, a Spanish writer, described the “substantial, sometimes 
elegant houses with towers and walled gardens™ of the newly-founded city of Lima. ki 
dedicated to St. John of Penitence. The new 
site, chosen by the Viceroy himself, with the 
advice of the Rector, doctors and other persons 
“zealous for the public welfare” closely followed 
one of the ancient Laws of Castille calling for 
buildings “with access to the country and the 
public squares to enable students to meet 
together, discuss their studies and refresh their 
minds." 
¢¢ Out of the Hat” 
HE Patron Saint of the university, strangely, 
was determined by chance. As an absolute 
majority of university officials could not 
be secured for any proposal, the names of a 
number of saints and evangelists were literally 
“put into the hat”. The name drawn out was 
that of St. Mark the Evangelist. To-day, after 
four centuries of uninterrupted teaching, the 
university is still known by his name throughout 
the world. 
As early as 1577 
there were sixteen 
professorial Chairs and 
in the same year the 
first native-born gra- 
duate, Dr. Jean Val- 
voa, began lecturing 
on “The Language of 
the Indians”. de la Salle 
Jean-Baptiste 
franchises throughout the West Indies as are 
enjoyed in this realm (Spain) by graduates of 
the University of Salamanca, including immu- 
nity from taxation”. 
Zealous in maintaining its independence, the 
University of San Marcos has always defended 
its freedom and safeguarded the high intellectual 
standards of its teaching staff. Senior profes- 
sorial posts are still filled by public competition 
and the President of the University is chosen 
independently by free elections. 
Like every other ancient institution it has 
known days of glory and of difficulty, days of 
bitterness as when fire ravaged its splendid 
library, and hours of solemn thankfulness like 
those through which it will live as it comme- 
morates this year its birth four hundred years 
ago. Because of its antiquity and its continuous 
service to learning, it has now the title of “Dean 
of the Universities of the Americas”. : 
  
He had never allowed his long 
experience and his strange gifts for 
research to be used in the service of a 
theory. Official science scoffed at his 
By 1588, the uni- 
versity had gained 
such prestige, that the 
King issued a decree 
granting all graduates 
—bachelors, licencia- 
dos and doctors—*“the 
same liberties and 
dis 
  
The man who was to become known 
as the forerunner of modern teaching 
was born at Rheims on the 30th April, 
1651. Canon and Doctor of Theology, 
nothing seemed to him so Important 
as the education of the poorest chil- 
dren. When, aged 30, he formed a 
group of teachers, whom he named 
“Brothers of Christian Schools’, he 
ordered that all lectures ni his schools, 
should be given in French instead of 
Latin: this daring innovation caused 
a clash with the ecclesiastical autho- 
rities. But La Salle was undaunted 
and introduced further innovations: 
group teaching, object lessons, the 
“Socratic” method of discussion to 
replace dreary lectures. 
In 1684 he opened a seminary to 
train competent teachers for the vil- 
lages and hamlets; it was the first 
school ¢f its kind in Europe. Fifteen 
years later, he established at Paris 
“public lectures on science ,art and 
religion”, undoubtedly the beginning 
of the first popular university. The 
day after his death, his ex-pupils 
began extolling the saintliness of their 
master. In 1900, the Pope gave his 
official sanction to their act. 
Luther Burbank , 
written in a quiet poetic style, was 
published thirty years ago to show 
“How plants are trained to work for 
man." ‘The author has long been 
acclaimed. Hugo de Vries dubbed him 
“the gardening genius”. Since 1875 
the book's author, Luther Burbank 
had been continually experimenting 
with plants in his Californian garden. 
He had studied thousands of species 
and given to the world hundreds of 
new varieties: fruit, flowers and vege- 
tables came out of his garden-labora- 
tories, every year producing richer and 
finer specimens. 
objections to the Mendelian doctrine 
of heredity. His work had led Burbank 
to believe very strongly in the here- 
ditary of acquired characteristics and 
in the constantly changing nature of 
the species. Scientists, at least, never 
charged him with heresy, though many 
laymen accused him of subversive 
atheism. 
But Burbank, a staunch defender, at 
that time, of Charles Darwin, remained 
unperturbed. As a young man, he had 
said: “I shall be content, if, because 
of me, there shall be better fruits and 
fairer flowers.” 
Otterino Respighi, 
who died 15 years ago on April 18, 
1936, was not perhaps the best-known 
of Italian composers at the beginning 
of the twentieth century which also 
knew Puccini and the “véristes”. 
Although a “modern”, he wrote works 
which were quickly appreciated by the 
general public. 
Today the critics, while praising his 
“Fountains of Rome”, the Trittice 
Botticelllano and the Lauda per la 
Nativita del Signore, find it difficult 
to put their fingers on the art of this 
great musician from Bologna. Even a 
knowledge of the influences he under- 
went in his musical career, explains 
little about his style, — even the fact 
that he was a pupil of Rimsky-Korsa- 
kov at St. Petersburg in 1901. But 
there is general agreement on some of 
his masterly qualities: his sense of 
form, elegance, the sureness of his 
orchestration. Recently, an Italian 
critic, speaking of Respighi, said: 
“His hedonism sets limits on his 
genius, but when the composer took 
care to keep within these limits, he 
wrote works which posterity will 
always remember.”  

## [Page 9](073516engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

APRIL 1951 
Cosmic Bullets 
Reveal Secrets 
- 


### 73521: Cosmic bullets reveal secrets of our planet and universe

Of Our Planet 
And Universe 
* J ds  
       
   
    
     
   
- \J - - 
- 
" he - } fe - 
| - N ’ Ror aa 
, ® 28 - BN - 
A VIVID PICTURE OF A NEW COMET photographed by an 18-inch camera 
with a 5-minute exposure at California's Mount Palomar Observatory. The 
short streaks of light are stars, for the comet moves quickly and it is that which 
. was followed. - 
By Maurice GOLDSMITH 
recently been received on earth. This is a scientific 
fact of the greatest importance in the centuries’ long 
story of man’s attempt to understand his universe. 
Yet, the facts about this impressive piece of research work 
and an explanation of its significance have not yet appeared 
generally in the Press. On the other hand, many newspapers 
were recently responsible for a great public disservice when, 
with scare headlines, they declared that an unknown body in 
outer space was approaching the earth at great speed — and 
that there was danger of a collision. 
Any science writer, had he been consulted, would have 
described this story as “bunkum”. He might instead have 
suggested that the Press tell the story of how two British 
radio astronomers, using the world’s largest radio telescope, 
found, a few months ago, that Andromeda was “broadcasting” 
on a wavelength of 1.89 metres. . 
Radio astronomy, a new branch of science, although it dates 
back 20 years, is opening ap a new “window” in the earth's atmo- 
sphere for us. 
Until recently, astronomy was a visual science, with obser- 
vations made by the naked eye and the telescope. The new 
“window” is provided by the radio waves which find their 
way to the earth. (See Unesco Courier, March 1951.) 
R ‘eee waves from the great Nebula of Andromeda have 
90 MINUTES IN THE LIFE OF THE STARS: Above is shown 
the result of a simple photographic experiment. On a clear, moon- 
tess night, a camera was aimed at the Pole Star and the shutter 
was left open for one and a half hours. The resultis shown above, 
each star having described its track in the form of an arc. The Pole 
Star is responsible for the thick track a little above the centre of 
the photograph. As the earth rotates on its own axis, 
all the stars seem to rotate around the Celestial Pole. In the fore- 
ground is the outline of an astronomical dome with its shutters 
. open and interior illuminated. 
Page 9 — UNESCO COURIER 
 
Our nearest neighbouring universe 
is the Great Nebula of Andromeda. 
In magnitude, in number of stars, 
and in structure it is similar to our 
own galaxy. The more we learn 
about it, the more we shall know 
about ourselves. In fact, when wc 
look at Andromeda we are looking out 
into space and back into time, for it 
is about 800,000 light years away — 
which means we see it not as it is 
now, but as it was before our ances- 
tors were men. 
What Happens in Space 
E have learned a great deal 
about our planetary system 
since the day three and a half 
centuries ago when Galileo, applying 
his eye to the first optical telescope 
devised by himself, began to see in 
the heavens the proofs of the Coper- 
nican theory — a theory that was to 
make a tremendous revolution in the 
thinking of mankind. We know now 
that we live or one of the smallest 
satellites of a dwarf star in a local 
system of one of millions of Milky 
Ways. 
Our scientists seek every opportunity 
to find out what is happening in inter- 
planetary space. That is why great 
interest was shown in the report of 
the recent discovery in the barren 
lands of Ungava, in Canada’s Nor- 
thern Quebec, of the biggest meteorite 
crater in the world. ¥rom a study 
of this, and the region above the 
earth's surface whence it came, we 
shall obtain more information of the 
kind that will eventually help us to 
travel in outer space. 
_ A crater helps us to find out what 
is happening in outer space, because 
it is blasted out of the hard earth by 
a meteorite, which is a cosmic 
“bullet” come to earth. Those cos- 
mic bullets that do not fall on land 
are known as meteors. They can be 
seen on any clear, moonless night 
darting across the sky as flashes of 
light, 
The only living persons known to 
have seen a meteorite hit the 
earth are the inhabitants of the 
Siberian vil'age of Novopokrovka, a 
few hundred miles from Vladivostok. 
It was at 10.35 in the morning, almost 
four years ago, when “startled by a 
brilliant flash like a bolt of lightning 
from the sky, children from the local 
village school hurried out of doors. 
Against the blue of the sky they saw 
a ball of light as brilliant as the sun 
and about the size of the full moon. 
It travelled across the sky towards the 
south, shedding showers of sparks and 
carrying in its immediate wake a 
brightly coloured track which quickly 
turned into a thick black trail. Wi- 
thin four or five seconds, the object 
had disappeared in the general direc- 
tion of the Sikhotaalin Mountains of 
Eastern Siberia’. (This is the descrip- 
tion given by Dr. Otto Struve, Profes- 
sor of Astronomy in the University 
of California, in the “Scientific Ame- 
rican” for June, 1950.) 
A scientific expedition from Moscow 
investigated the region where the 
meteorite had fallen and found a 
series of more than 100 holes, some of 
them 30 to 40 feet deep, and as wide 
as 75 feet at the top. All around 
there was tremendous destruction 
caused by the “rain of iron”. The 
ground was strewn with pieces of 
meteoritic iron —— some weighed seve- 
ral hundreds of pounds; others were 
specks. The meteorite originally 
must have weighed about 1,000 tons 
and had a diameter of some 30 feet. 
Meteors Can Help Man 
ISIBLE meteors are related to 
comets and to the cosmic dust 
clouds of the Milky Way. A me- 
teor makes bright flashes because of 
oe
 
Gy
 
. 
To
d 
THIS CRATER was blasted out of the earth in Arizona by a meteorite which fell in prehistoric times. This single huge hole in the ground is 
about a mile across and several hundred feet deep. 
the speed at which it travels. When’ 
it enters our upper air it may be 
moving about 25 miles a second. The 
further it falls, the more resistant the 
air becomes and the meteor is slowed 
down by the atmospheric friction. 
The study of this slowing-down of 
meteors has become of importance in 
recent years with the development of 
new techniques (the radio astronomer 
has made some interesting studies into 
meteors). It has been possible, for 
example, to get an idea of the tempe- 
rature of the upper air. It has been 
discovered that it is much hotter 40 
miles up than at the earth’s surface 
— a surprising fact in view of the sub- 
zero temperatures in the stratosphere. 
As Dr. Harlow Shaply, Director of 
the Harvard College Observatory, has 
said : “Precise information on this 
region of the atmosphere is exactly 
what we need for the development of 
high altitude, jet-propelled airplanes, 
as well as for the rocket ships of the 
near future.” 
Is not this whole story mors 
exciting than the nonsensical fabri- 
cations that are sometimes published, 
and which horrify readers, who are 
unsware of the limitations of science 
and the significance of its routine dis- 
coveries?   
The Hazards 
of Technical 
Translation 
The Riddle 
Of The 
Spade 
HEN is a spade not a spade ? 
The answer depends on the 
fanguage in which you describe 
this most primitive of implements. 
  
 
  
This was demonstrated by the late 
Ernest Slater, in an introduction to one 
of the best-known engineering dictio- 
naries in existence. 
He wrote: “Take the very best English- 
Spanish or English-Portuguese dictio- 
nary, find the equivalent therein of the 
English ‘spade’. There are many parts 
of Southern Europe and South America 
where, if you speak of a ‘spade’ the 
farmer will think of a hoe; he speaks 
to you of a ‘hoe’ and you think he is 
referring to a ‘spade’. 
“The only way to avoid it is not to call 
it a spade but to call it a shovel. This is 
inexact, for the English shovel is thinner, 
wider, and has curved-up edges; it is 
a dished spade, not the cutting spade 
that you would think of. Nevertheless, 
there are parts of Spain, Portugal, 
Brazil, Peru and Chile where ‘shovel’ 
is the best that can be done in the way 
of commonly understood words. 
“Now this simply arises from a diffe- 
rence in practice. The Englishman 
wears a thick sole on his shoe and he 
uses his foot to his spade. But in the 
districts referred to, the labourer wears 
hempen sandals (alpargatas) or even 
goes barefooted. The blade of the 
spade is almost always turned at right- 
angles to the haft; it becomes a hoe. 
The labourer raises it, brings it down 
with a dexterous cut (often cornerwise), 
and then drags it towards him...” 
What Slater wrote about the spade 
applies equally to other objects and 
expressions which, if incorrectly rende- 
red, may cause wastage and losses in 
international trade and create barriers 
to international understanding. 
Here then is a serious problem. it is 
one considered by Dr. J. E. Holmstrom, 
of Unesco, in his “Report on Interlingual 
Scientific and Technical Dictionaries” 
(available through the Unesco Sales 
Agents in English and French editions 
at the price of 25 cents, Is.6d., 75 French 
francs). 
The Report discusses the rationale 
of technical translating, the need for 
dictionaries relating to specialized sub- 
jects, and the means whereby existing 
deficiencies may be remedied by enlisting 
the co-operation of international! techni- 
cal organizations. 
These proposals are timely because 
there is now general agreement that 
technical terms should be clearly defined 
and their equivalents in different langua- 
ges standardized. Scientific exchange 
and the passing on of knowledge is 
handicapped unless words can be used 
as tools of precision. 
This situation, dangerous enough 
within one language, becomes formi- 
dably so when other languages are invol- 
ved, for it is rare for a word in one lan- 
guage to mean exactly the same, and to 
carry precisely the same implications as 
the words of another equated to it in 
dictionaries. 
Many dictionaries are out of print and 
most vary at random in their arrange- 
ment, convenience of use, quality and 
up-to-dateness as well as in the lan- 
guages and scope of subject matter to 
which they relate. A separate biblio- 
raphy accompanying the Unesco Report 
{oriced at 65 cents, 4s., 200 French francs) 
classifies no less than 1,044 special 
dictionaries under 224 subject heads 
and in 45 languages. 
Unesco, the refore, is hoping to play a 
part in evolving improved and more 
economical techniques both for compiling 
and printing technical dictionaries with 
a view to recommending them to inter- 
national scientific unions and other 
suitable bodies which need them. M.G. 
   
   
 

## [Page 10](073516engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 10 
er . 
   
ia : J 
i YL 
BRITISH, FRENCH AND AMERICAN WORKERS shown above at an evening party while 
sttending workers’ education school of the French Trade Union Federation (Force Ouvritre) 
at S51. Malo, France 
A Unesco Report on 
» 
IFTY years ago, if a traveller 
wanted to buy a sleeping-car 
ticket on a European railway, 
he was told he could only ride first- 
class. Since there was no market 
for any cheaper tickets, there were 
none on sale, 
To-day, travel is coming out of 
the luxury bracket. Organized 
tours, family rates on railways, 
summer colonies... they all have 
contributed to bring travel abroad 
which, after all, is the only first- 
hand lesson available in internation- 
al understanding, within the reach 
of more and more persons, 
The largest group of potential 
travellers is composed of the world’s 
working population. To-day, in 
more and more countries, holidays 
with pay have become an accepted 
part of the economy. 
A recent survey made by M. Ar- 
thur Haulot for the International 
Union of Official Tourist Organiza- 
tions showed that an estimated 
150,000,000 workers throughout the 
world received holidays with pay 
every year. 
Translated into personal terms, 
this means that 150,000,000 workers 
and their families every year ask 
themselves the same question : 
“Where shall we go ?” 
It is not an easy question to 
answer. Despite efforts made at 
bringing down the cost of travel, it 
is still a heavy burden for most 
persons dependent upon salaries. 
(In one European country alone, it is 
estimated that 40 per cent of 
workers enjoying holidays with pay 
never leave home.) 
Unesco and the International 
Labour Organization (ILO) have 
been working on the problem for the 
past year. The result is a book, 
called “Workers Abroad”, which is 
scheduled to be published this 
month as a supplement to Unesco’s 
annually-issued handbook on inter- 
national fellowships and scholar- 
ships, entitled “Study Abroad”. 
‘Stronger International 
Links”’ 
T== objective of the volume is 
described in a foreward written 
by M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Unesco’s 
Director General, in which he 
declares : 
“ ‘Workers Abroad’ is issued as a 
service to manual and non-manual 
workers in Unesco’s Member States 
and to their voluntary organizations 
with the aim of stimulating and 
extending the various types of 
educational activity designed to 
break through national cultural 
frontiers by bringing together people 
from different countries who do the 
same job”. . 
M. Torres Bodet also pays tribute 
to the pioneering efforts made by 
labour organizations in showing 
their members how other people live 
and work. He points out that: 
“Dating from the turn of the 
century, the international links 
between workers’ organizations have 
become immeasurably stronger, and 
APRIL 1951 
dh dh TT = 
   
BRITISH WORKERS AND FAMILIES leave Westmunster peer, London, for summer day 
Cruise along Thames. it is estimated that 150,000,000 workers ail over the world now receive 
holidays with pay every year. 
Workers 
 
FRENCH WORKERS EDUCATION TEAM recently completed a six-week study of 
trade union methods in the United States 
me! father at airport, so got free ride back to town, 
in “ sl. _ lt 
have been accompanied by increased 
attention to the educational and 
cultural needs of workers...” 
“Workers Abroad” presents a 
picture of international travel oppor- 
tunities for workers from several 
points of view. For the year 1951, 
it lists international study tours and 
group travel, international summer 
schools and seminars, scholarships 
available to workers, and, finally, 
programmes designed to encourage 
the international movement of 
trainees. 
Unesco’s Exchange of Persons 
Service, which helped compile the 
pamphlet in co-operation with the 
ILO, points out in “Workers Abroad” 
that this first effort is not a complete 
survey. It is confined mainly to 
workers’ travel opportunities offered 
in European countries and the 
United States. 
It shows that 103 organizations in 
thirteen countries offer workers’ 
scholarships of varying durations. 
At the same time, seventy-two 
organizations in eleven nations will 
be conducting group study tours this 
year. 
Learning Each Others Ways 
I” the book, Unesco points out that 
opportunities for employment 
interchange, although the most 
difficult to realize, are the best way 
Above, Dus returning team to Paris vs 
- - Sr la Ls ath 
in which workers from different 
countries can learn to understand 
each other. Under this system, for 
example, textile workers in the 
north of France and in Britain's 
Midlands might visit each others’ 
countries and, by working beside 
their opposite numbers in the other 
country, learn something of their 
lives. 
The principal obstacles to this 
form of travel, lie in administrative 
complications, such as labour per- 
mits, and in material problems, such 
as wage differentials and payments 
to dependents who remain at home. 
The financial picture presented in 
Workers Abroad also shows need of 
improvement. In most cases of 
short-term exchange, the cost of 
the trip is the responsibility of the 
individual ‘worker. 
There are happy exceptions. One 
of chese was a three-week tour of 
the United States organized in 1950 
by thirty-one Swedish newspapers 
and Folket i Bild, a magazine, in 
which the sponsoring organization 
paid all expenses. 
The examples of travel opportuni- 
ties cited are indicative of a healthy 
trend. Take the case of the study 
tours organized by the Association 
Touristique des Cheminots (Rail- 
waymen’s Tourist Association) in 
Paris. This year, the association 


### 73522: Taking travel out of the luxury bracket; a UNESCO report on workers abroad

Abroad 
Taking Travel Out of the Luxury Bracket 
has organized fifteen tours for rail- 
waymen from France, Switzerland, 
Tunisia, Luxembourg, Austria and 
Finland. The tours will take them 
just about anywhere from Scandi- 
navia to North Africa. 
In Belgium, the International Art 
Weeks Federation, has worked out a 
plan for ten-day tours to Austria, 
Belgium, Denmark, France, Italy, 
the Netherlands and Switzerland. 
Similar examples can be found in 
Workers Abroad for all the countries 
listed. The Workers Travel Asso- 
ciation in London has announced 
five eight-day tours of London, 
including visits to factories, and to 
a workers’ rehabilitation centre for 
Norwegian factory workers. In the 
Netherlands, the Volkshogeschool 
Brabantsee at Vught has announced 
a waterborne educational tour for 
Belgian, German and Dutch workers. 
Workers ‘‘Entente Cordiale”’ 
A section on international summer 
schools shows an equal variety 
of opportunity. At Elsinore in 
Denmark, the International People’s 
College is offering its traditional 
low-cost courses through August 
and September in such subjects 
as modern languages, international 
relations, and social legislations. 
The Force Ouvriere, one of the 
three major French trade union 
federations, has organized a summer 
school in England in conjunction 
with the British National Council of 
Labour Colleges, and, in turn, it 
will run its own summer school in 
France for members of Belgian trade 
unions. 
One chapter of the book is 
devoted to an ILO survey made of 
agreements now in existence to 
permit the international exchange 
of trainees. These agreements, some 
drawn up by governments and 
others by private organizations, aim 
at extending the possibilities for 
young workers in industry, com- 
merce and agriculture to work side 
by side with their fellow workers in 
other countries. 
Once published, Workers Abroad 
will be sent without charge fo some 
2.000 organizations such as trade 
unions, co-operatives, workers’ travel 
and workers’ educational organiza- 
tions and other groups conducting 
workers’ educational programmes in 
Unesco’s member States, 
This edition will be printed in 
English and French with an abridged 
version in Spanish as very little 
information was received about 
workers’ travel opportunities in 
Latin American countries. A special 
edition will also be published in 
German. 
Workers Abroad represents a 
natural extension of Unesco’s efforts 
to reduce the barriers now blocking 
the free movement of peoples. It is 
being published to provide workers’ 
organizations with another tool in 
their continual campaign to pull 
down these barriers — a campaign 
which has been carried on by most 
of these organizations since their 
foundation.

## [Page 11](073516engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

~ APRIL 1951 
  
Director and Founder of the Dramatic Centre of Paris 
the theatre today to see either 
conventional, experimental or 
avant-garde plays. This is a 
fact—at least in Europe. Does it mean 
that present-day youth has lost in- 
terest in the drama? In my opinion, 
no, for never have they shown more 
curiosity or more enthusiasm for dra- 
matic art. But nowadays young people 
want the theatre fo offer more and 
mean more to them. Their demands 
therefore are more exacting, and little 
by little they are forming their own 
opinions and judgments—in short, re- 
discovering the theatre for themselves. 
They are adopting new doctrines, new 
ethical and aesthetic standards inspir- 
ed by the ideas and examples of such 
men as Constantin Stanislavski, Appia, 
Fuchs, Gordon Craig, Granville Barker 
or Jacques Copeau. 
Perhaps the clearest, 
most significant evidence of 
this curiosity and enthu- 
siasm by young people is to 
oe found in the non-profes- 
sional theatre—in schools 
and universities, youth as- 
sociations, industrial or 
agricultural centres, wor- 
kers groups or in the Army 
and Navy. 
It is in these amateur 
groups, drawn together by 
the same artistic and hu- 
man motives that I see the 
promise of a rebirth of the 
true spirit of the theatre. 
It is here that we can 
discover the really “pop- 
ular” theatre-in-the-making, free of 
commercialism, which Jacques Copeau 
has so ably defined in his latest work, 
Le Thédtre populaire. . 
The “Mother-Cell” of Drama 
AV (fri we may ask, do these enthu- 
F EWER young people are going to 
siastic young people hope to get 
from the theatre? Their studies, 
their trades and professions allow 
them very little leisure time, yet they 
come together, form little troupes and 
produce their plays even under the 
most trying material circumstances. 
Why do they forego their free time 
at the end of a full days work, and 
without thought of financial profit, ac- 
cept the rigours of the stage—with its 
demands on nerve and muscle control, 
diction development, and the concen- - 
tration and effort needed to translate 
the words of a tragedy or comedy into 
the appropriate scenic gesture? 
Why? Because, deep down within 
themselves, they feel a certain yearn- 
ing, revolt, agitation, which they wish 
to express in the form of characters. 
And through their self-expression they 
attempt to present a true personifica- 
tion of their feelings to those about 
them—not to mere spectators but to 
  
companions (and companiens who 
lack their gift or talent for the stage). 
Some begin at the beginning by 
forming a Chorus. For they see in the 
contemporary tragic or comic Chorus, 
which is an adaptation not an aping 
of the Greeks, the embryo or *“mother- 
cell” of all dramatic expression reduc- 
ed to its basic essence and purpose. 
True, the results are often unskilful, 
but who could fail to perceive, beneath 
these unpolished and sometimes fal- 
tering efforts, the hope and faith of 
our generation in the ideals of beauty, 
justice and the sublime? 
Amazing Mediaeval Revivals 
AST spring, in Paris, I personally 
L witnessed a moving example of 
this kind during the final stages 
of a competitive examina- 
tion for young theatre com- 
panies (Jeunes Compa- 
gnies), organized by the 
French Government at the 
Thédtre de UAtelier. About 
a dozen boys and girls, all 
members of the Association 
of Youth Hostels, were 
present. Their “team” had 
worked together for several 
years inspired by the prin- 
ciples and techniques of 
the Copeau school. As I 
heard them speak their 
lines, sing and act out the 
hopes of the community 
which they felt they re- 
presented, I asked myself: 
“How can these young 
people be helped to find equilibrium, 
contentment and peace of mind? How 
can we use our more mature experience 
to assist them without distorting or 
falsifying the fresh originality of their 
youth? How to help them “find them- 
selves” and better themselves?” 
I recall another case, this time in 
a school in Paris—the Lycée Louis le 
Grand—formerly the Collége de Cler- 
mont where Moliére once studied the 
classics, learned to appreciate Plautus 
and Terence and was taught music 
and dancing. There I watched ad- 
vanced students bring to life forgot- 
ten works by Schiller and Marlowe and 
attempt a performance of Britannicus. 
Their productions were staged with 
such intelligence and warmth and even 
technical competence, that they would 
have won the praise of professional ac- 
tors had any been present to see this 
unpretentious student performance. 
And to whom do we owe the amaz- 
ing classical and mediaeval revivals of 
the Oresteia, The Miracle of Théophi- 
lus, The Passion of Greban, and the 
troubadour romance of Aucassin and 
Nicolette? To the students of the Sor- 
onne. 
Workers of the French National 
  
NON-PROFESSIONAL THEATRE in the USA is one of most active in the world today. 
Above, a scene from Goethe's Faust, staged by students of the University of California at 
Los Angeles who produce 10 major plays and hundreds of one-act plays each year. 
Page Il — UNESCO COURIER 


### 73523: Amateur theatre today: promise for tomorrow

Amateur Theatre Today — 
Promise For Tomorrow 
By Léon CHANCEREL 
 
THESE FOUR MASKS and expressive hands aptly symbolize the spirit of the theatre and convey 
the sincerity of these young players presenting Arthur Rimbaud's “A Season in Hell, at a 
Concours des Jeunes Compagnies (Young Peoples’ Theatre Competition) in Paris. 
Railways have set up a theatre in one 
of the railway stations in Paris, and 
the critics have been unanimous in 
praising the productions of these ama- 
teurs as among the most remarkable of 
the Parisian theatre season. 
A New American Theatre 
HAT I have said about the en- 
thusiasm for the stage by non- 
professionals in France, is equal- 
ly true of other countries. Armand 
Salacrou, for example, recently declar- 
ed that in his opinion a new Ameri- 
can theatre would one day emerge 
from the college campus and its dra- 
matic organizations. 
In England, where even the Old Vic 
has a school open to future profession- 
al and non-professional actors, ama- 
teur theatre groups are very active. 
Their importance has been recognized 
by the British Drama League which 
encourages amateurs and professionals 
alike to meet in the interest of the 
theatre instead of regarding each other 
with suspicion as so often happens 
elsewhere. 
Not long ago, in Italy, I saw the 
great effort being made by university 
and amateur troupes in Rome, Padus, 
Florence and Todi; and one gets the 
same impression in Brazil, Switzerland, 
Belgium and Luxembourg. In fact, all 
over the world, interest in dramatic 
art is awakening and young people are 
organizing new theatre groups. 
How then can we help these young 
people? The answer, I think, is clear. 
If we really want to work and prepare 
for the theatre of tomorrow, we must 
not only look to the polished produc- 
tions of the recognized leaders of the 
stage today; we must also turn our 
gaze beyond—and search out the small, 
non-professional troupes. For here 
unpublicized talent and creative ability 
still lie hidden away and need the un- 
derstanding, encouragement and sup- 
port that official and private educa- 
tional organizations can provide to sti- 
mulate their growth and fullest deve- 
lopment. 
  
  
HEN the International Theatre 
Institute (ITI), set up under 
Unesco’s sponsorship, held its 
first Congress at Prague in 1948, 
it comprised a headquarters in 
Paris and eight national centres. 
Today, the number of these 
centres is more than three times 
that figure. Next month, for 
example, representatives of 
26 centres are due to attend # 
the Institute’s 4th Congress | 
to be held in Oslo from NG 
May 31 to June 8. «a 
All branches of 
  
professional stage. 
While working to im- 
orove theatre techniques. 
the ITI also strives to “bring 
peoples of the world together on 
the spiritual level through the 
medium of the theatre”. This 
aim finds one means of expres- 
sion through the Institute’s illus- 
trated review, “World Theatre”, 
which is published in English 
and French. 
Another ITI effort with the 
same objective is the granting of 
study and travel scholarships to   
‘Working For a World Theatre 
a 
sa * tone. 
alone, amateur and profes- 
’ 
the » 
theatre will be represented 
at the Congress by authors, 
producers, actors, designers 
and stagehands, as well as 
by members of the non- £ > 
— 
young theatre people. Recently, 
for example, young student-pro- 
ducers from Belgium, Austria and 
Italy were able to study theatre 
techniques in England, while 
their English counterparts were 
visiting Denmark, France, or the 
United States. 
Under the Institute’s sponsor- 
ship, many countries are 
this year organizing a 
series of productions with 
strongly international 
In the United States 
sional groups have given 
more than 500 presenta- 
tions, with special emphasis 
on plays of European ori- 
gin. Norway, Holland, 
Great Britain, Switzerland 
and Mexico are planning 
similar activities. 
Such efforts help to highlight 
the theatre’s important education- 
al role and the influence it has 
always had on adults. But, 
looking to the future, the ITI sees 
another urgent task — that of 
educating children and youth 
through the same medium. This 
question is included in a work 
plan prepared by the ITI Secre- 
tary-General, M. André Josset, 
for discussion at the Oslo Congress.   

## [Page 12](073516engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 12. 
  
i 
i. 
i. 
| 
Ke ISB Hi tel etl ra fea SewnST a 
  


### 73524: Benjamin Constant, fighter for freedom, defender of the press

  
Fig 
Benjamin 
~~ Constant 
hter For Freedom, 
» pall . o 4 
A
T
s
 
  
  
  
Defender Of The Press 
By Jean Bloch-Michel 
 
Bo BE OA ST ott Baie LAF 
always been made along the road of 
freedom of thought. Similarly, the 
path leading to real democracy based 
on mutual! understanding among men and 
peoples dgpends in its essence on free 
availability of information and the freedom 
of the press. 
It was in this spirit that the United Na- 
tions Commission on Freedom of Infor- 
mation met at Lake Success in January 
and February this year. Representatives 
of fifteen countries: Saudi Arabia, Cuba, 
Ecuador, Egypt, France, Great Britain, In- 
dia, the Lebanon, Mexico, the Netherlands, 
Pakistan, the Philippines, the United States, 
the U.S.S.R. and Yugosiavia, drew up a 
convention which will be submitted to 
member states of the United Nations and 
forwarded to the Economic and Social 
Council for adoption at its session in July. 
~ The article below recalls the inspiring 
struggle waged more than a century ago 
by a champion of freedom of the press, 
the French thinker, Benjamin Constant. 
* 
¢C I find my life only within 
GS inays and cultural progress has 
myself” wrote Benjamin Cons- 
tant in his personal diary during 
March 1805. Nine years later, how- 
ever, on 7 July 1814, he wrote : 
“I must become something!” Constant. 
a dreamer who wished to become a 
man of action, was perpetually torn bet- 
ween a taste for working in seclusion, 
and an urge to be famous. Based on 
such inconsistency, his life was inevi- 
tably chaotic. But under this facade of 
inconsistency, behind a series of appa- 
rent recantations, the life, which he 
found “only within himself”, never- 
theless produced a profound unity in 
the ideals of Benjamin Constant. 
tinder the Directoire he publicly and 
enthusiastically affirmed his regard for 
freedom. But, when the First Consul 
created the Tribunate to maintain his 
authoritarian regime, Benjamin Cons- 
tant demanded and then obtained a 
place in it. An act of self-betrayal? In 
his first speech before this assembly 
he attacked Bonaparte's policy so vio- 
lently that he was not only forced to 
quit the Tribunate, but obliged to leave 
France and follow Germaine de Stael 
into exile. 
When Napoleon returned to France 
in 1815, Benjamin Constant in a cele- 
brated article, which, unfortunately for 
him, his contemporaries did not forget, 
loudly proclaimed that he would not 
serve “the tyrant”. But, when he was 
summoned by the Emperor to the Tui- 
leries a few days later he agreed to 
draft the “Acte Additionnel™ (a supple- 
mentary act to the Empire Constitution, 
introducing certain reforms). Another 
act of self-betrayal? Constant did not 
think so and seized, what he described 
in his journal of 30 March, 1815, as “a 
chance for freedom”. And at the end 
of the “Hundred Days”, he wrote with 
bitterness: “The wretches! They served 
him with enthusiasm when he was 
crushing freedom. When he establishes 
it, they abandon him.” 
A Partisan 
Of All Freedoms 
W- cannot judge such behaviour 
according to today's standards 
created by a century of parlia- 
APRIL 1951 
  
  
  -— (A Teh Century cae 
‘* Blow, blow, you will never put it out.” 
Cature Gepict   ng lorces working 
against the lreedom of the press) 
elected as Deputy for the Sarthe Depar- 
tement, and undertook to carry on his 
fight in parliament. For a long time, 
he had been “someone”. Now, he had 
finally become “something”. 
At that time, there were not many 
clear-cut ideas on the subject of press 
freedom. The opinions of those favour- 
able to complete freedom “had disap- 
peared”, wrote Pasquier in his memoirs, 
“during the long silence imposed by 
the imperial regime, and discussions 
concerned little more than the extent by 
which repressive measures would be 
increased.” There were demands that 
these should be extreme. “It is in the 
nature of man to be dependent”, said 
Duplessis de Grenedan, adding, “free- 
dom is not the goal of government.” 
“Wherever the press is free”, said Fon- 
tanes, the former Grand Master of the 
Imperial University, “I will never look 
upon myself as free.” 
  
“contempt of State religion”. He de- 
monstrated the difficulty in discriminat- 
ing between contempt and simple cri- 
ticism of certain bodies or ecclesiastical 
Institutions. Speaking of the Jesuits, he 
said: “If the statements he once made 
against these associations were written 
by Pascal today, he would undoubtedly 
be condemned under the terms of this 
law.” 
Every year, when the budget vas 
being voted, or press laws were being 
renewed or altered, he returned to the 
attack. Not only did he speak in par- 
liament, but he asked the public to 
judge his cause, by publishing Lis work 
“The freedom of hooklets, political pam- 
phlets and newspapers considered from 
the government's viewpoint.” 
During his loag and assiduous efforts, 
he made many statements expressing 
the basis of his ideals: For instance, on 
March 7, 1820, he said: 
“I nave always looked  
  
 
The seizure of the Paris "Temps" printing works in 1830 
- which caused a demonstration of public disapproval tha 
helped to bring about the triumph of ideals fought for by 
Benjamin Constant. 
mentary democracy. In the time of 
Constant, one served a master or a po- 
ley. To a French royalist it was of 
little interest that the Emperor ruled 
in a manner resembling that of 
Louis XIV. He had usurped the throne, 
und between him and his subjecls the 
bonds of hereditary dependence inherit- 
ed from the feudal system no longer 
existed. If, on the other hand, one 
served a policy, it made little differ- 
ence which regime applied it. This 
attitude was illustrated by the case of 
Talleyrand ; other less brilliant figures 
also adopted it. 
Benjamin Constant appears to have 
been strongly influenced by the doc- 
trines of Bentham, especially the one 
which taught that regimes and consti- 
tutions are only empty frames. Accord- 
ing to Bentham a monarchy can be libe- 
ral, a democracy despotic; all efforts 
towards freedom must be made within 
the framework of the state, and with- 
out consideration of the kind of consti- 
tution. These were the ideas that guid- 
ed Benjamin Constant during his whole 
life. He was a liberal, a partisan of all 
freedoms, and his most consistent 
struggle was for the freedom of the 
press. 
In 1819, he managed to get himself 
The Press Must Be 
A Common Possession 
ENJAMIN CONSTANT strongly oppos- 
ed such attitudes. On 14 April, 
1819, when he spoke for the first 
time to the Assembly, it was to defend 
in forthright fashion the right of the 
press to express itself freely. On 
1 and 5 May of the same year, he de- 
manded that Parliament reject the law 
of “security”, under which anyone 
printing a newspaper was obliged to 
make a preliminary payment and give 
certain guarantees. “It has been esta- 
blished”, he declared, “that the press is 
a weapon and as thus it must remain 
a common possession. The common 
law demands that anyone who misuses 
a weapon to commit a crime or offence, 
be punished, but the common law does 
not ask anyone to give a guarantee that 
he will not misuse it.” 
In spite of his opposition, the law 
establishing “security” and restraining 
press freedom was approved. The 
following year, Benjamin Constant 
again took up the cudgels when he 
spoke on the penalties contemplated for 
F 
t 
with envy upon those 
friends of freedom, 
who, when a revolu- 
tionary struggle began, 
were the first to suec- 
cumb. Their fate pre- 
vented them from wit- 
ness'ng more frightful 
events.” 
¢¢ Neither 
Executioners 
Nor Victims ”’ 
ENJAMIN CONSTANT 
was not a revolu- 
tionary. All attacks 
on freedom, no matter 
what the principle mo- 
tivating them, horrified 
him. And if he denied 
other political parties 
the right to oppress 
anyone, he also denied 
such rights to his own 
with the same vigour. 
“We struggle against 
all censorship”, he de~ 
clared at the tribune on 
7 July, 1821 ; “not like 
greedy pretenders who 
destroy what they can- 
not seize, but as men 
who will neither tole- 
rate nor employ means 
of oppression; as men who desire for 
others, as for themselves, freedom, 
security, justice...” 
  
In these words, Benjamin Constant 
defined, not so much a political attitude, 
as a moral position. Circumstances may 
change, society may take on another 
appearance, economies, frontiers, modes 
of life, civilizations may alter, but the 
words of Benjamin Constant will never 
be denied. The defenders of liberty 
will always be those who wish “neither 
to tolerate nor employ means of oppres- 
sion”, who refuse to become either 
executioners or victims. 
On the 10 December, 1830, at the age 
of 63, Benjamin Constant died. Some 
days earlier, he had accomplished the 
last act of his parliamentary career. 
This had begun on 14 April, 1819, when 
he made a speech on iiie freedom of 
the press. It ended after he presented 
a draft bill, later rejected, on the free-- 
dom of the printers’ trade. 
All the honours refused to him during 
his life-time were rendered him after 
death. His coffin was carried to the 
Pere Lachaise Cemetery in Paris, 
escorted by the national guard, and 
followed by ministers, members of 
Parliament and a huge crowd.