# [073774](073774engo.pdf) 9

## [Page 1](073774engo.pdf#page=1) 3

### IGNORE

  
  
  
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
 
Volume I.-—No. 5. Price: 10 Cents (U.S.), 6 Pence (UK.), or 20 Francs. JUNE 1948. 
           
oF AMET TR TE SR RT SLT RE 
Iquitos Conference Establishes 
Seat of THA in Manaus, Brazil 
Conference for the creation of an International Institute of the Hylean Amazon, called 
jointly by the governments of Peru and Brazil and by Unesco, has successfully concluded 
its deliberatigns at Iquitos, Peru. Lasting for eleven days from April 30 to May 10, the 
Conference agreed upon a convention establishing the Institute which will come into force 
upon final acceptance by the founding nations. Pending the initiation of the operation of the 
Institute, an Interim Commission was established with headquarters in Manaus, Brazil. 
The following nations signed the final act of the Conference: Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, 
Ecuador, France, Hoiland, Italy, Peru and Venezuela. 
Unesco’s activities in connection with this Conference stem from 
 


### 74502: Work-plan for Germany prepared by Secretariat

WORK-PLAN 
FOR GERMANY 
PREPARED 
BY SECRETARIAT 
JYETAILS of the Urssco pro- 
: gramme to be sxtended 
shortly to Germany luive been 
made known in Paris. The work- 
pian, which is to be carried out 
-in co-operation with the appro- 
priate allied authorities, was pre- 
pared after the Executive Board's 
approval for such action at a 
special meeting at Unesco on 
Apri! 5, 
The programme, as approved 
by the Sub-Committee of the 
Executive Board, covers five main 
fields of activity which Unesco 
will develop in Germany. 
These deal with: methods to 
acquaint the German people with 
the aims and activities of Unesco, 
the development of publication 
exchanges between Germany and 
other countries, studies of tex- 
bock revision and improvement, 
studies of the problems and op- 
portunities for the exchange of 
persons between Germany and 
the outside world and invitations 
to German experts to attend cer- 
tain technical meetings called by 
Uaesco. 
Agreement on the programme 
has been secured from the Bri- 
tish, French and United States 
Miiitary Governors in Germany, 
and the projects will be initiated 
as soon as necessary administra- 
tive details have been completed 
The programme as formulated by 
the Sub-Committee was submit 
ted to the Military Governors of 
the four zones of occupation. To 
date no answer has been received 
from the Soviet Military Gover 
nor. 
First priority mn the Unesco 
work-plan is given to the distri- 
bution to interested groups and 
educators in Germany of the 
basic Unesco documents and pu- 
-blications to make known as 
widely as possible the aims 
of the Organization. Means 
(Continued on Page 2.) 
 
X Hadley Cantril: Inter- 
national Tensions. P. 2. 
X Teaching About the UN. 
- Center Page. 
M Armand Salacrou : 
France and the Theatre 
Institute. Page 6. 
X Two Vital Studies on 
Unesco Policy, by Wal- 
ter H.C. Laves and R. 
Maheu. Page 7.     
resolutions passed by its General Conference at the Second Session 
iti Mexico City. The Director-General was instructed to take steps to 
bring this Institute, which was originally proposed by the Brazilian 
Government, into being in 1948. 
The Hylean Amazon the 
vast wooded region of the Ama- 
zon River basin comprises 
some 7,000,000 square kilometres 
extending from the Andes to the 
Atlantic and from the River 
Orinoco to the Mountains of Bo- 
livia. A huge, but little known 
ares of the world, it is inhabited 
by about 200.000 Indians except 
for a few settlements along river 
banks. 
The aims of the Institute will 
be to encourage and carry out 
scientific studies in the Hylean 
Amazon region so as to provide 
a greater knowledge and unders- 
tanding of tropical nature and 
the practical development of the 
regions by the Governments of 
South America directly concer- 
nea 
At the Iquitos Conference the 
scientifie scope of the Institute 
(Continued on Page 2.) 
    
   
   
 
      
List of Chief Delegates 
to Iquitos Conference 
Bolivia: 
Dr. Martin Cardenas 
Brazil: 
Dr. Linneu Albuquerque Mello 
Dr. Heloisa Torres 
Colombia: { 
Dr. Enrigue Perez Arbelaez (| 
Ecuador: ) 
Dr. Rafael Alvarado 
Italy: A. Volpiceli 
France: Paul Rivet 
Netherlands: 
Mr. V. Savelberg 
Peru: 
Dr. Luis Alavza y Paz Soldan 
United States: 
Dr. Clarence C. Boonstra 
Venezuela: 
Mr, William Phelps Jr. 
Dr. Tobias Lasser 
      
    
    
    
        
    
    
    


### 73786: UNESCO friendship train asked at San Francisco

      
  
UNESCO FRIENDSHIP TRAI 
ASKED AT SAN FRANGISC 
U.S. Regional Conference Ends Three-Day Sessions 
Over 3,000 Delegates Attend 
ROPOSALS that a “Friendship 
Train” be sent through the 
western region of the United 
States to collect supplies tor 
schools, universities and centres 
of* learning in devastated coun- 
tries were made at the Pacific 
Regional Conference on Unesco 
held in San Francisco last month. 
The conference, which lasted 
from May 13-15, was attended ty 
over 3,000 civic leaders and edu- 
cators from seven western states. 
Alaska and Hawaii and was the 
first meeting by a U.N. agency 
in San Francisco since the world 
organization was born in 1944. 
Resolutions and recommenda- 
tions adopted by the delegates 
stressed the importance of in- 
formed exchange between indivi- 
duals as well as 1ations. The con- 
ference agreed that studeat 
groups should be encouraged to 
participate in community and 
Unesco affairs by setting up 
Unesco Community Councils. 
In addition it was urged that 
groups and individuals stimulate 
newspaper, radio stations and mo- 
tion picture organizations to in- 
sure better coverage of the ac- 
tivities of the United Nations, 
Unesco and other U.N. Agencies. 
The Conference held three ple- 
nary sessions dealing with “The 
Nature of the Present World Cri- 
sis—Unesco’s Role,” “Our Ap- 
proach to a Changing World” 
and “Community and Personal 
Responsibility.” Five section meet- 
ings were also held to discuss 
problems and positive methods of]. 
action in the fields of Education, 
Communication, Human and So- 
cial Relations, Cultural Inter- 
change and Natural Sciences. 
(Continued on Page 6.) 
 
Dr. Albuquerque Mello of Brazil is shown addressing ‘one of the. 
Plenary Sessions of the Iquitos Conference-in Peru which established 
the International Institute of the Hylean Amazon. 


### 73776: UNESCO sets programme for classics translation

  
Unesco Sets Programme 
For Classics Translation 
HAT are the great books of 
each of the different coun- 
tries of the world ? What are 
the world’s 100 best books ? 
Unesco is attempting to obtain 
an answer to these and other 
questions from the Member Sta- 
tes of the Organization with a 
view to making great books avai- 
lable on a universal scale in 
translation. 
The plan for the translation 
of the great books of the world 
stems from a request by the 
U.N. General Assembly made to 
Unesco through the Economic 
and Social Council and aims at 
making available the most outs- 
tanding written works of each 
culture in all languages. 
From May 18-21, at unesco 
House in Paris, experts represent- 
ing leading editors, publishers, 
librarians and educators from 
eleven different countries, met 
to discuss methods of prepar- 
ing national lists of great books 
for translation, the actual work 
of translation and the distribu- 
tion and exchange of the finished 
product on an international basis. 
The meetings were held under the 
  
World Educational Leaders 
To Meet at Geneva 
DUCATIONAL leaders from 
all parts of the world will 
meet in Geneva June 28-July 3 
at ghe Eleventh International 
Conference on Public Education. 
Seventy-one nations have been 
invited to send delegates to the 
meétings which are jointly spon- 
sored by Unesco and the Inter- 
national Bureau of Education 
(I.B.E). 
Progress reports on the deve- 
lopment of educational standards 
and facilities in each country will 
be submitted by the delegations. 
The Conference will study three 
main questions, the role of school 
psychologists, the teaching of 
writing, and teaching about the 
United Nations and its Specializ- 
ed Agencies. 
At the forthcoming Eleventh 
Conference, the materials submit- 
ted and the text of the discussions 
will be published jointly by 
Unesco and the I.B.E. in French 
and English editions. Hitherto, 
these have been published by the 
I.B.E. in French only. 
Unesco is co-operating in plans 
for the Conference and has beea 
responsible for some of the ma- 
terials to be used. Unesco has 
also prepared a wall exhibit and 
a booklet of recommendations 
and suggestions for Teaching 
about the United Nations and its 
Specialized Agencies (See middle 
page).   
By —— 
H. M. BARNES, Jr. 
Acting Head of the Bureau of 
Unesco’s Plan for Translations.     
chairmanship of M. Julien Cain, 
Director of French National 
Library. 
Unesco’s project for transla 
tions, which was originally limi- 
ted to “classics”, has been broa- 
dened to include great books in 
all domains. The panel of experts 
agreed. that the initial lists 
should be drawn up in three ca- 
tegories: recognized classics writ- 
ten before 1901, modern classics 
up to 1939 and contemporary 
great books, It was proposed that 
all countries should establish Na- 
tional Committees to centralize 
and co-ordinate the work. Such 
committees should prepare lists 
of the works of their own authors 
whose writings they felt, should 
be widely translated, and of fo- 
reign authors whose works should 
be rendered into the local 
guages. : 
Already replies have been re- 
ceived from several Member Sta- 
tes with their lists of great books. 
Unesco’s role in the programme 
will consist, at the outset, in e¢ir- 
culating to Member States copies 
of each official list as it 1s recei- 
‘ved. 
On the basis of these lists, and 
with the advice of experts in 
different countries, the Bureau of 
Unesco’s plan for translations will 
draw up a provisional list of 
some 75 works (from the 1irst 
category of works written before 
1901) which can be considered 
universal classics. After a second 
consultation with the National 
Commissions, or other appro- 
priate agencies, indicated by the 
governments of Member States, 
it will be possible ultimately to 
issue a representative list of the 
hundred best works. - 
Unesco could be of vital assiss 
tance in the translation project, 
the experts agreed, by suppiying 
information on the best and latest 
methods of translation, by pro< 
{Continued on Page 3.)

## [Page 2](073774engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

uU NESCO COURIER Yolume 1.—No 8 
 


### 73778: Tensions affecting international understanding

| Tensions Affecting 
  
International Understanding 
  
AS one reads the headlines these 
days, it is sometimes hard to 
jmagine that there may eventually 
come a time when news—in what- 
ever novel technical form it may 
be carried—will not be primarily 
concerned with stories about the 
difficulties represemtatives of the 
human species have living toge- 
ther in amicable fashion. But it 
must have been even harder for 
many a Neanderthal philosopher 
to have imagined a social unit 
large and efficient 
make it unnecessary for him to 
use brute force in his daily strug- 
gle for existence. 
It is in the light of man’s long 
social development that I like to 
view Unesco’s project on “Ten- 
sions affecting international un- 
derstanding”. In his book “Evolu- 
tion and Ethies”, Dr. 
Julian Huxley notes that 
enough 0 
A Social 
Scientist 
ViewsUnesco 
Project   
  
men. Men can only live together 
in peace when they have common 
purposes and when they leam 
through experience that in the 
long run they can only carry out 
their own purposes successfully 
when they recognise the purposes 
of others, and when they rid them- 
technological developments and 
population changes. Here, we are 
obtaining the advice of an cut- 
standing population expert, M. 
Sauvy, who will help us map out 
_ a program in this field. In order 
to keep ourselves fully abreast of 
the work of the Population Com- 
mission of the Economic and So- 
cial Council, Professor Henry 
Pratt Fairchild has been appoint- 
ed as an observer to attend the 
Population Meetings in Lake Suc- 
cess, 
We are finding social scientists 
everywhere anxious to co-operate 
when they see that their research 
can lead to some concrete action 
which they desire as citizen-scien- 
tists. It has been most encourag- 
ing to find that, in the six weeks 
selves of those abstractions which — our full program has been going, 
B 
not a single response to 
our suggestions or appeals 
“Biologice.l or organic 
evolution has at its upper 
end been merged into 
and largely succeeded by   
HADLEY 
 
CANTRIL 
for help has been trea- 
ted cynically or cava- 
lierly. 
Whatever our concrete   conscious or social evo- 
Jution.” As I see the 
“Tensions Project” its essential job 
is to try to speed up this social 
evolution by gathering together 
and focusing what knowledge 1s 
now available from the work of 
the human scientists. 
It is only with such perspec- 
tive that one can work on this 
project without feeling a hope- 
less frustration. For neither our 
project, nor any project, can dis- 
cover a magic formula for solv- 
jing immediately problems such as 
those of Palestine. and India. or 
of East versus West. 
project can, irrespective of what 
we hope will be its concrete re- 
sults, serve as a symbol that men 
who live in many parts of the 
World, and under very different 
conditions, have at last decided 
that they should have themselves 
examined by some of their own 
kind who pretend to be experts 
in this thing called “Human Na- 
ture”. It is high time this hap- 
pened and is itself a sign of social 
evolution. 
At the particular stage of man’s 
social evolution when the human 
scientists have, for the first time, 
been called in for a diagnosis by 
a world-wide instrument of man’s 
own creation, we find men sepa- 
rated essentially because of their 
loyalties to a number of different 
abstractions, such as “Nation”, 
“Religion” and “Race”. Because 
people believe in these absirac- 
tions, it is difficult for them to 
see each other as fellow human 
beings. All too frequently, on the 
other hand, they see each other 
as potential threats to some par- 
ticular interest. 
One of the most crippling of 
thes® abstractions at the moment 
is that of “Nation”. The idea of 
national sovereignty gives us very 
foggy vision indeed of our fellow 
But our, 
Meeting to Study 
Agressive Nationalism 
A meeting at which specialists 
in the fields of sociology, history, 
psychology, psychiatry and eco- 
nomics, designed to enquire into 
the nature of tensions leading to 
agressive nationalism will open 
at Unesco in Paris on June 28; it 
is expected to last about three 
weeks, 
This gathering is designed to 
form part of the Unesco project 
for the study of tensions af- 
fecting international .understand- 
ing. In addition to a general 
examination of the problem, it is 
intended that recommendations 
should be made so as to promote 
a world-wide co-ordinated pro- 
gramme of research by social 
scientists into the factors which 
create friction between peoples 
and the factors which lead to 
agressive nationalism. 
Among the experts who have 
accepted invitations to attend the 
meetings are Prof. G. W. Allport 
(Harvard), Prof. Arne Naess 
(Oslo), Dr. John Rickman 
(London), Dr. Henry Stack Sul- 
livan (Washington), Dr. Alexand- 
er Szalai (Budapest), Prof. Gil- 
berto Freyre (Pernambuco, Bra- 
zil) and Dr. Max Horkheimer 
(New York),   
stand in the way of this mutual 
recognition of the common pur- 
poses people everywhere have as 
human beings. 
Our program is now under way. 
The words of the 1948 resolutions 
are being transformed into con- 
crete projects. Here are some of 
our current undertaking: 
For one thing, we are asking 
social scientists in some twenty 
countries to report for us on re- 
search now under way that is rele- 
vant to our problems. They will 
let us know what people, organi- 
zations and facilities are available 
for potential cooperation. An- 
other project will under way is 
the preparation of a series of mo- 
nographs through the Internatio- 
nal Studies Conference with M. 
Vernant in active charge. These 
monographs are on the “Way of 
Life” of many of the principal 
peoples of the World. Four pilot 
studies are now being prepared 
and will be followed by similar 
monographs in another dozen 
countries. At present the follow- 
ing distinguished scholars are pre- 
paring the first four books: Pro- 
fessor Ludwik Gelberg (Poland), 
Professor Frede Castberg (Nor- 
way), M. Gabriel Le Bras (Fran- 
ce), M. Denis de Rougemont 
(Switzerland). 
In an attempt to discover what 
conceptions people in one nation 
have of themselves and of people 
in other nations we are planning 
special studies on children and 
adolescents, and surveys on stra- 
tified samples of the adult popu- 
lations in eight different coun- 
tries, We are also engaging the 
assistance of experts such as Dr. 
H.E.O. James of the Institute of 
Education, University of London, 
who will help us gain a more ac- 
curate picture of just how, and 
under what conditions, the vari- 
ous conceptions people have of 
themselves and others develop 
during the course of life. 
We are maintaining a ciose 
working relationship with those 
planning the International Con- 
gress for Mental Health, which 
will be held in London this sum- 
mer, Members of the “Tensions 
Project” secretariat will take an 
active part in the conference. We 
are also calling together a two 
weeks meeting this year of 8-10 
distinguished social scientists 
from various countries to see if 
they can state for us in general 
terms what is now known about 
human nature, and the conditions 
that must obtain if national 
aggressions are to be decreased, 
and the principles that must be 
followed to avoid serious tensions. 
Those who have already indicated 
that they will be able to accept 
our invitations for this meeting 
are: Professor Gordon W. Allport, 
U.S.A.; Dr. Gilbetto Freyre, Bra- 
zil; Professor Arne Naess, Nor- 
way; Dr. John Rickman, Great 
Britain; Dr, Henry Stack Sulli- 
van, U.S.A. 
It is our hope that the results 
of this meeting, as well as the 
data and interpretations of some 
of our other projects can be pub- 
lished in book form, 
Another area of our activities 
concerns tensions arising from 
results may be at the 
end of 1948 or 1949. 
I repeat that perhaps the chief 
value our project can have is that 
of symbolising the emergence of 
man’s desire for co-operative self- 
examination. So our very exist- 
ence as a project seems to me an 
encouraging sign, and a challenge 
which no one in the human 
sciences can refuse to take se- 
riously, whatever doctrinaire 
approach he may currently follow. 
  
Dr. Kuo Leaves 
For Far East Tour 
Dr. Kuo Yu-Shou, recently ap- 
pointed Special Adviser on Asia 
and the Far East, left Paris on 
June 5 on a three-month mission 
to ten Far Eastern countries. 
Dr. Kuo will visit India, Pa- 
kistan, Ceylon, Afghanistan, Bur- 
ma, Siam, Indonesia, Philippines, 
China and Japan. 
His visit is aimed at strengthen- 
ing relations between countries of 
Asia and the Far East and ensur- 
ing a wider knowledge of the 
aims and programme of Unesco. 
Dr. Kuo will represent Unesco at 
the Third Session of the Econo- 
mic Commission for Asia and the 
Far East which began at Ootaca- 
mund, Madras, early this month. 


### 74502: Work-plan for Germany prepared by Secretariat

  
  
Work-PlanforGermany 
Prepared by Secretariat 
(Continued from Page 1.) 
will be studied by which such 
documents, translated into Ger- 
man, may be reproduced in Ger- 
many for even wider distribution. 
German institutions—librairies, 
universities, learned societies, etc., 
whill be asked to supply Unesco 
—whith lists of current German 
publications within the range of 
Unesco’s aims. In this way, Unes- 
co will include Germany in its 
clearing-house activity, bv aavi- 
smg Member States on publica- 
tion matters and promoting di- 
rect exchanges between Germa- 
ny and other countries. 
Museums 
Periodical 
To Be Issued 
in July 
new international museums 
review, the first of its 
kind since the war, will shortly 
be published by Unesco. En- 
titled MUSEUMS - MUSEES, 
the publication will be a quar- 
terly survey of activities in the 
field of museogzraphy. 
The magazine will be to 
some exient a successor to 
MOUSEION, a journal pu- 
blished for many years bv the 
International Museums Office. 
The Unesco publication, howe- 
ver, will be considerably broa- 
der in scope, dealing on a pro- 
fessional level with all fypes 
of museums, from aquaria to 
zoological gardens. 
MUSEUMS-MUSEES will be 
published in both French and 
English, It will serve as a fo- 
rum for presentation and dis- 
cussion of significant new de- 
velopments in the museogra- 
phical world. Its Beard of Edi- 
tors is composed of leading 
specialists in their fields from 
many countries. 
The first issue will he off 
the press by July 1, to coin- 
cide with the opening of the | 
First Biennial Confcrence of 
the International Council of 
Museums (I.C.O.M.) in Paris. 
It will be a special issue devo- 
ted to the reorganization and 
reorientation of French mu- 
seums since the end of the 
war, with contributions from 
key figures in the profession,       
Found ing 
medal commemorating the 
founding of Unesco has just 
been produced by the .French 
Government. The medal, which 
fulfils a wish often expressed 
since the inception of Unesco in 
November, 1945, is now available 
in bronze and in silver. 
Executed by the French en- 
RIGHTS OF MAN 
MEETING 
The third meeting of experts 
on the philosophical basis of the 
Rights of Man will meet at 
Unesco House from July 6 to 9. 
Their work will consist in a study 
of replies received to Unesco’s 
request for the views of leading 
thinkers of the world on the sub- 
ject. Selections will be made 
from these replies for publication   in a symposium. 
French Medal Commemorates 
  
of Unesco 
graver, M. Georges Lay, the me- 
dal was selected by Dr. Julian 
Huxley, Director-General, from 
among several designs presented. 
The face displays Peace on 
Earth, symbolized by a feminine 
figure in relief holding a laurel 
branch against the globe which 
is encircled by the initials of 
Unesco. The reverse of the me- 
dal depicts a trilogy of allegorical 
figures symbolizing the aims of 
Unesco in the fields of Educa- 
tion, Science and Culture. This 
side also displays the date of the 
Constitutive Conference of Unes- 
co, held in London in November, 
1945, 
The medal may be purchased 
through the “Editions Francaises 
de la Monnaie? 11 Quai de Conti, 
Paris, 6¢. The price of the medal   in pronze is 360 francs, and in 
silver 2,390 francs, . 
The appropriate allied autho- 
rities will be invited by Unasco 
to submit a review of their expe- 
rience in the field of revision and 
production of teaching materials 
in Germany. These will be ana- 
lyzed by Unesco experts on a 
ccmparative basis, and the allied 
authorities in turn will receive 
information on Unesco’s work 11 
this field. Secretariat officials 
will be available for consultation 
on all problems concerning the 
in:provement of textboks and 
teaching materials 
Unesco will also study pro- 
bl2ams involved in and the oppor- 
tunities existing for the excnange 
of persons between Germany and 
o’her countries, A questionnaire 
will be sent to the appropriate 
allied authorities in Germany 
and all States throughout the 
world requesting that they sup- 
ply available information on the 
question. A full report. based on 
the replies to the questionnaire, 
will be published in a register of 
international fellowships early in 
1949. 
German experts will be invi- 
ted to attend certain technical 
meetings called by Unesco, with 
* the exception of seminars. 
HYLEAN 
IAMAZON 
(Continued from Page 1.) 
was outlined and a budget of 
approximately $300.000 was set 
for the first year of the Institu- 
te’s operation. A financial proto- 
co! was also signed by Bolivia, 
Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, France, 
Holland, Peru and Venezuela, 
which determined the scale of 
national contributions toward fi- 
nancing the Institute. 
Observers from the United Sta- 
tes and the United Kingdom 
expressed great interest in the 
Institutg, and will study wavs of 
bringing about active participa 
tion by their countries. 
A+ the opening session on April 
30, Dr. Linneu Albuquerque de 
Mello (Brazil) and Dr. Rafael 
Alvarado (Ecuador) were elected 
Vice-Presidents. 
The Conference recommended 
that Manaus be established as 
the seat of the ITHA because of 
its geographical situation and 
that centres of study should be 
developed in Belém (Brazil) to 
cover the Lower Amazon, in Iqui- 
tos (Peru) for the Upper Amazon, 
in San Fernando de Atabapo (Ve- 
nezuela) for the northern region; 
in Riberalta (Bolivia) for the 
scuthern region, and in Archi- 
dona (Ecuador) and Sibundoy 
(Colombia). It was clearly un- 
derstood that although the seat 
of the ITHA would be in Manaus, 
the actual work of the Institute 
would be conducted in various 
parts of the Hylean Amazon. Re- 
commendations were made for an 
initial survey to be undertaken 
in the Rio Huallaga valley in 
Peru 
Of the $300.000 budget propo- 
sed for the first year of the Ins- 
titute, Brazil has been assessed 
150.000 dollars, Colombia and Peru 
$40 000 each, Venezuela $25.000, 
France $15.000, Bolivia $9.000 and 
Ecuador and Holland $5.000 each: 
At the close of the Iquitos Con- 
ference the Brazilian Government 
provided air transport from Iqui- 
tos to Manaus for the first meet 
ing of the Interim Commission 
of the ITHA which lasted for five 
davs from May 13 to May 17. 
The work of the Commission 
was mainly .technical. It concen- 
trated its attention on the deli- 
mitation of the area of the Hy-. 
lean Amazon, the setting up of 
a secretariat for the Commission, 
its finance and duties, The coms 
mission confirmed Manaus as the 
seat of the ITHA and arranged 
that, while the Director-General 
of Unesco should be asked to fi- 
r.ance the secretariat in 1948. the 
member nations of the Interim 
Commission would undertake the 
responsibility of continuing the 
secretariat in 1949 at their own 
expense. It recommended the 
appointment of EJH. Corner, 
Principal Field Science Coopera- 
tion Officer in charge of Unesco’s 
Latin-American F.S.C.0., as Exe- 
cutive Secretary.

## [Page 3](073774engo.pdf#page=3) 3

### 73776: UNESCO sets programme for classics translation

Volume 1.—No 5 UNESCO~- COURIER 


### 73779: Copyright expert views conflicting national laws

COPYRIGHT EXPERT VIEWS 
CONFLICTING NATIONAL LAWS 
[On June 6 a twenty-day Conference for the Revision of the Berne 
Convention opened in Brussels under the sponsorship of the Belgian 
Government and the International Berne Bureau. M. Jean Thomas, 
‘Assistant Director-General and M. Francois Hepp, copyright spec’alish 
are attending this conference as observers for Unesco. On this occasion 
" we publish below an article by M. Hepp on the problems of inter- 
national copyright and Unesco’s aims in seeking an answer to these 
problems. ] 
F all forms of proprietary 
rights, the rights of literary 
and artistic property were the 
slowest in achieving legal reco- 
gnition. It is less than two cen- 
turies since such rights were first 
admitted by law givers. Even today, 
on the international level at least, 
these rights are the most. difficult 
to exercise and their protection 
most uncertain, 
In point of fact it is less the 
Jack of any copyright law than 
the multiplicity of discordant sys- 
tems which lies at the root of 
many difficulties still found in 
the application of the principle of 
copyright. 
~~ But here we come up against 
two difficulties, the first being 
the non-recognition of foreign 
copyright by certain countries. 
Not only do they vary from 
country to coun- 
try, but gener- 
ally speaking, 
By 
Francois HEPP 
some cases on the same footing as 
the creative artist, in others by 
affording their work special pro- 
tection as an adaptation, and in 
others again under the terms of 
a different but parallel law. 
The same is true of the legal 
enactments protecting transla- 
tions. 
Thus it may happen that an 
American, acting in good faith 
but lacking exatt information, 
may find that certain of his 
rights are not protected in Eu- 
rope, unless he takes certain con- 
tractual precautions, while, on 
the other hand, without his know- 
ing it, other rights, unrecognised 
by his own national law, are pro- 
tected. 
Similarly the European in 
America may believe himself 
fully protected, but have no such 
prolection un- 
less he has 
complied with 
  
  
they are appli- , iaht the necessary 
cable only with. | ¢ad of Unescos Copyrig formalities. 
in the boun- oo For this rea- 
daries of ihe son radio trans- 
country of origin, An attempt has 
been made to remedy the diffi- 
culty through international con- 
ventions, and partial success has 
been obtained; but these conven- 
tions are not in agreement on all 
points and there are frequent va- 
riations between them, both "as 
regards their provisions, and as 
regards the individuals for whom 
they provide. 
Thus, when a work is exported 
from one country to another, we 
find that the legal protection af- 
forded in one is either lost in the 
other, or, at the least, varies pro- 
foundly from country to country. 
The real obstacles to overcome 
or, rather, the source of these 
obstacles, are gaps in the law, 
complexity, or in short, copyright 
anarchy. How are we to surmouns 
this? It is no answer to ride 
rough-shod over copyright, as 
some think, 
An 18th century writer has said 
that if you destroy the springs 
you must not grumble at having 
nothing to drink. 
What we really have to do is 
to adapt copyright to the requi- 
rements of the new means of dis- 
seminating thought. To resolve 
the harmful anarchy of present 
international legislation we must 
standardize, if we do not unify, 
that legislation on modern bases 
of umversal application. 
This is what Unesco seeks to do 
in the near future, with a vivid 
sense of thewurgency of the task. 
But there is still a third cause 
of disagreement which is the lo- 
gical result of the first two: igno- 
rance. 
In too many cases authors, 
mitting stations have to maintain 
an extremely costly legal branch 
and in many cases have to 
withhold transmissions of works 
where they are not entirely clear 
as to the legal position, or 
withhold authority for relays and 
re-transmissions by foreign sta- 
tions. 
There are other examples: the 
proprietor of a French newspaper 
owns ‘the copyright of articles 
published in his paper, while the 
author of the article owns the 
rights for other means of publi- 
cation (e.g. collected volumes) and 
no further formalities. are ne- 
cessary. 
But if a work is published 
without the explicit retention of 
rights in some countries, or in 
others without legal deposit—e.g., 
in Turkey deposit at the end of 
the year—anyone can reproduce 
or translate it without seeking 
authority. All the countries of the 
Middle and Far East can repro- 
duce such works without restric- 
tion; the same is true in the 
US.S.R.; the same is true in the 
~ Argentine Republic if the legal 
deposit has not been effected, or 
in the United States if the copy- 
right has not been filed at 
Washington. 
Similarly an European painter 
who sells his pictures to galleries 
throughout the world, finds that 
there are wide variations in the 
rules concerning the rights of re- 
production. If he sells his works 
in France he retains the right of 
reproduction and the gallery must 
seek his authority for this. If he 
sells his works in America, the 
mere fact of selling them deprives 
him of the right of reproduction. 
loses or retains the rights of re- 
production as provided in the bill 
of sale. But if mo provision has 
been made in this respect he may 
be found, in fact, to have lost. 
or have retained such right ac- 
cording to the decision of the 
courts on the particular cir- 
cumstances. 
These few examples show that 
for most authors, technicians. or 
business men, even the most ex- 
perienced, this is a labyrinth 
with no Ariadne to provide the 
thread. 
Unesco wants to be the Ariadne 
in this strange and perilous 
scene. Without seeking to require 
the various sovereign states to 
modify their own laws, the Or- 
ganization invites them to con- 
sider realistically, practically and 
in good faith, the possibility of 
reaching agreement on certain 
major principles of sense, justice, 
honesty and practical utility, and 
to consider their universal adop- 
tion so as to secure their strict 
observance thereafter on a world 
scale.   
LOW-PRICED BOOKS 
 


### 73780: Low-priced books: a neglected medium of mass communication

A Neglected Medium 
of Mass Communication 
PRESS. film and radio are gen- 
erally first thought of as the 
chief media of mass com- 
munication, and these three have 
certainly shown their importance 
in influencing—for good or bad— 
the minds of men during the last 
decades. 
But the book is often forgotten 
in this connection, due to the con- 
servatism of the book publishing 
trade. Book publishing has on the 
whole adapted itself less well to 
contemporary needs than the 
modern forms of mass media. 
The low-priced book is ideally 
suited to meet the steadily in- 
creasing mass demand for access 
to factual information, views and 
opinions. The results obtained by 
pioneer publishers in this field 
are proof enough. It is also cer- 
tain that the potentiality of the 
cheap book as a means for a 
wider exchange of views and opi- 
nions inside and across national 
frontiers and for the raising of 
educational standards generally 
has not often been fully realised. 
 
Photo shows different kinds of low-priced, good books produced by 
publishers in Poland, Great Britain, France, Mexico, Argentina and 
the United States. 
  If he sells them in England he 
Plan for Translation 
of Great Books 
{Continued from Page 1.) 
viding a medium for internatio- 
nal liaison among editors and 
publishers and by serving as a 
coordinating centre, 
At a later stage, Unesco will 
give all possible assistance to 
countries which are faced with 
difficulties in the translation, pu- 
do not know the precise scope of 
their rights or obligations, nor 
what steps they should take to 
protect the one and comply with 
the other. 
A few short examples will de- 
monstrate this: 
In many countries it is essential 
to carry out copyright formalities 
which in some cases are simple 
enough, but in others highly 
complex, while in many cases 
their cost is prohibitive. Unless 
these formalities are complied 
with, and within a time limit. 
the law authorizes the appropria- 
tion of an idea. This is the case, 
for example, in U.S. copyright; if 
is the same regarding the filing 
with the Argentine national re- 
gister of contracts for translation. 
Again, the applied arts have 
no artistic protection under Amer- 
ican law, but are so protected in 
many other countries. The law 
varies even within the Berne 
Union. The rules for press €opy- 
right, photographic copyright, ci- 
nema copyright and radio copy- 
right vary from country to coun- 
try. Certain countries afford pro- 
tection to performing artists, in   
Dr. Huxley Ends Tour 
of Middle East Nations 
r. JULIAN HUXLEY, Direc- 
tor-General of Unesco retur- 
ned to Paris last month after a 
five-weeks’ tour of the Middle 
Eastern countries, during which 
time he conferred with leading 
personnalities and Government 
officials of the Middle East. The 
Director-General's tour was aimed 
at encouraging full participation 
in the Third Session of Unesco’s 
General Conference which is 
scheduled to be held in Bgirut 
this October, and at stimulating 
interest in the work and aims of 
Unesco, 
During his five-weeks’ tour, 
Or. Huxley visited Istanbul, An- 
kara, Beirut, Damascus, Amman, 
Baghdad, Teheran, Cairo and Tu- 
nis. 
In all the countries visited the 
Director-General was received by 
top educational, scientific and 
cultural leaders who expressed 
their desire to co-ordinate their 
work along the lines of Unesco’s 
aims. 
As a result of Dr. Huxley's visit 
it is hoped that Turkey and Le- 
banon will set up Unesco Na'io- 
nal Commissions and that Iraq 
will shortly ratify the Constitu- 
tion. 
In Tunis, Dr. Huxley was met 
by Professor Jean Thomas, AsSis- 
tant - Director - General, and by 
M. René Maheu of the Unesco 
Secretariat, who, representing the 
Director - Gene al, visited the 
North African countries while 
Dr. Huxley returned to Paris 
On June 7, Dr. Huxley left Pa- 
ris for a goodwill tour of Eastern 
European countries. 
  
blication and distribution of the 
classics chosen. Several of the 
experts spoke of the serious shor- 
tage in their countries of paper 
and of materials required for 
hook-binding. 
Dr. Charles Malik, chairman of 
the United Nations Economic and 
Social Council, and long an advo- 
cate of the measures which the 
committee set up, emphasized the 
permanent and profound signifi- 
cance of the project of trans.a- 
tions in a message which he sent 
to the Director-General for the 
opening of the Expert Commitiee 
meetings. “Certain nations and 
cultural groups”, he wrote, “are 
dangerously deficient in know- 
ledge of the great classical litera- 
ture of other peoples. This cultu- 
ral inequality in respect to the 
ultimate questions of truth, beau- 
ty and the value of social ideals 
is a profound cause of misun- 
derstanding, distrust and war”. 
He stressed the cardinal service 
which Unesco could perform by 
means of this programme, which, 
he feels, “will render greater ser- 
vice to peace and understanding 
than most of the political activity 
going on at present”, 
  
The experts included: Julien Cain 
(Chairman); Jean Sauvaget, Reberte 
Ibanez, Taha Hussein Bey, Allen Lane, 
N.K. Sidhanta (Vice-Chairman); A.D. 
Tavares Basies, Frederick C, Melcher, 
Vittore Branca, Jesus Silva Herseg, V.S, 
Pritchett, Ru Min Li, Stephen Lelkes.   
Outstanding results have been 
achieved in cheap book publish- 
ing in many countries. The Pen- 
guin, Home University Library 
and Everyman series in Britain, 
Pocket books, the Modern Library 
series and Bantam books in the 
United States, Russian mass- 
produced books, only to mention 
a few examples, show what can 
be done. The exwveriences already 
made by the leading publishers 
in this field serve as a starting’ 
point for further exploration and 
study. 
The implication of the techno- 
logical revolution of our time, tha 
current political and social isstes, 
the place of arts and letters in 
society, our cultural heritage, the 
contribution of different coun- 
tries and cultures to world civili- 
sation, all these are examples of 
tnemes that actively interest a 
large number of citizens in many 
countries. Their demand for gui- 
dance in these matters must be 
met in an intelligent and intelligi- 
ble way, their interest acknowledg~ 
ed and further stimulated. 
What subjects need to be 
treated in a way suitable for 
inclusion in. cheap book series? 
What subjects can be treated in 
this way? To what extent can 
authors consciously address the 
masses? 
Scores of questions of this type 
emerge as soon as one starts to 
think over the cheap book prob- 
lem, and some of the answers 
will probably be given by an 
analysis of the assembled ex- 
periences and opinions of experts. 
Unesco does not wish to enter 
into the publishing field: it 
wishes to co-operate in the many 
excellent efforts now being made 
and through the factual infor- 
mation and expert opinions as- 
sembled in Unesco to help with 
advice to get more cheap books 
of cultural value out on the world 
market. 
The subject, as mentioned 
above, is the first point to con- 
sider. But style is as important 
as subject matter. The standard 
book on the principle of 
international arbitration is more 
likely than not to be tho- 
roughly unsuited to mass circula- 
tion because of its academic lan- 
guage. But if the subjects is of 
general interest there is no reason 
why the same theme should not 
be treated in a popular way and 
be read and discussed by thous- 
ands of people. It is up to the 
publisher to find the right man 
for the job, to assist him by giv- 
ing him general] directives based 
on the very special experience 
of cheap book publishing. 
The ordinary type of cheap 
paper-bound book, for instance, 
is not really cheap for the public 
brary, as it cannot in most cases 
be rebound because of its narrow 
margin. Consequently it goes out 
of service very quickly and has 
to .be replaced. It might be pos- 
sible to encourage publishers to 
produce cheap books in two edi- 
tions—one for sale to the public; 
another for library use. 
The popular demand for good 
books has in most countries far 
outgrown the supply—not only 
because of technical shortages 
and deficiencies, but mainly be- 
cause of lack of imagination on 
the part of responsible author- 
ities, authors and publishers. 
Trevelyan’s “Social history of 
England” sells almost as well as 
“Gone with the Wind.” In Nor- 
way the Phaidon edition of Van 
Gogh's reproductions sold more 
than 50,000 copies and in Sweden 
Mumiford’s ‘Condition of Man” 
is now a good seller. Books 
written and produced for the 
mass of the people form part 
of the increasingly -accepted 
human right of equal access to 
educational opportunities, and it 
is among Unesco’s tasks to ad- 
vocates and emphasise this point. 
Unesco’s main task in the cheap 
book field will therefore be to 
enlist the active support of pro- 
gressive publishers, writers, edu- 
cators, and librarians to spotlight 
the need for the full utilisation of 
the book as a medium of mass 
communication.

## [Page 4](073774engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

   
    
W
N
 
S
s
 
—
 


### 73783: Teaching about the United Nations: some suggestions and recommendations

  
| TEACHING 
Some Suggestions 
and Recommendations 
VERY boy and girl should 
| learn about the United Na- 
tions system as an essential 
part of his or her education—this 
is the main recommendation in a 
pamphlet entitled “Teaching 
about the U.N.—Some Suggestions 
and Recommendations”, which 
has just been published by the 
- Education Section of Unesco. 
This 10-page booklet will be 
presented for discussion at the 
Eleventh International Confe- 
rence on Public Education, called 
by the International Bureau of 
Education and by Unesco, and to ~ 
be held in Geneva at the end of 
June. Later it will be considered 
by the various Unesco Seminars 
meeting this summer. 
The report covers a wide field. 
It begins by defining briefly why 
teaching about the United Nations 
system is important. 
It tries to answer some of the 
questions which teachers in many 
parts of the world find puzzling. 
At what age, many of them ask, 
can instruction on the United 
Nations usefully begin? It suggests 
that with young children it is 
most important to develop “atti- 
tudes of co-operation, friendliness 
and fair play and the development 
of skill in learning to live together 
and to assume responsibility”. Pro- 
grammes of instruction must, it 
points out, be varied according to 
age levels. Accounts follow. 
showing how education can be 
adapted from simple lessons of 
co-operation for very young chil- 
dren up to more direct teaching 
for adolescents. 
In many parts of the world 
teachers are asking what special 
means have proved most successful 
in presenting the United Nations 
outside the classroom. The booklet 
describes briefly the use that can 
be made of bulletin boards, of 
school assemblies, of clubs and 
study groups, of model assemblies 
T 
EE ENG: x,      
- the subject. 
From THE 
of the United Nations, of school 
publications, of special contests, o 
celebrations and of activities such 
a8 international voluntary work. 
camps. 
Another problem is how to train’ 
teachers who will know how to 
present the work of the United 
Nations in relation to other efforts 
to achieve a better world society. 
Since the school is not the only 
agent concerned with the educa- 
tion of children and young people, 
proposals are made for enlisting 
the help of the local community. 
It is recommended that local orga- 
nizations, public libraries, mu- 
seums, the local press, radio sta- 
tions and theatres should be used 
as far as possible to assist in 
presenting the United Nations and 
its Specialized Agencies to school 
children. . 
The final sections of the pam- 
phlet cover the need for suitable 
materials and for encouragement 
and assistance from Ministries of 
Education and educational autho- 
rities. 
In a much fuller form, this do- | 
cument will be presented to the | 
next Unesco General Conference. | 
Then if approved. it may become 
an official Unesco statement on   
 


### 73782: Students learn of UN in UNESCO Member States

Students Learn of UN 
In Unesco Member States 
N the summer of 1947, enve- 
lopes of varying bulk were 
delivered to Unesco in Paris 
from many different corners of 
the world—from the tiny Domini- 
can Republic to the vast terri- 
tories of India and China. Their 
contents had a common purpose— 
to report on what was being done 
in schools to teach about the 
United Nations and its Agencies. 
The reports came in response to 
& questionnaire which had been 
sent out to Member States in 
April, 1947. By the end of the year, 
twenty-one countries had replied. 
‘The following extracts from this 
round the world survey give some 
idea of the extent of the teaching: 
Australia: Teaching is generally 
confined to secondary schools and 
universities, but in Victoria chil- 
dren as young as ten years have 
some lessons on the United Na- 
tions. Outside the classroom, clubs 
for the discussion of international 
affairs are encouraged, and speak- 
ers have been invited to talk in 
the schools on the United Nations. 
The work of the U.N. has been 
included in the Australian Broad- 
casting Company's programme 
“The World in Which We Live”. 
Austria: A study of the U.N. is 
included within the framework ot 
regular school subjects. At the 
time of the report, educational 
groups were planning to in- 
crease the teaching, working in 
close connection with the Austrian 
League for the United Nations. On 
June 26th, every school celebrated 
United Nations Day. 
Belgium: Some study of the 
U.N. is included in the regular 
school courses, and in the courses 
taken in the teacher training col- 
leges. Groups for discussion of cur- 
rent events have been formed in 
the secondary schools, and the 
school broadcasting svstem has in- 
eluded the United Naticns in its 
programmes. 
United Nations Day was cele- 
brated in the schools, and pam- 
phlets are being prepared specially 
for school children and students. 
Canada: In the different pro- 
vinces of Canada a varying 
amount of instruction is given in 
the higher grades of the schools. 
“Bulletins for Teachers” include 
references to the U.N, and the 
importance of the study was stres- 
sed at the Teachers’ Annual Con- 
vention in 1947. School broadcasts 
and “United Nations Programmes” 
in the schools. have been arranged 
to stimulate international under- 
standing. 
China: Special recommendations 
have been made to teachers by the 
Ministry of Education to use the 
Students in a schoel in 
courses in languages. history and 
civies as a means of spreading in- 
formation about the U.N. Plans 
for increasing the study have al- 
ready been made, in which the 
Ministry of Education is co-ope- 
rating with the Unesco National 
Commission. 
Czechoslovakia: At the time of 
the report, no special texts on U.N, 
had been produced for schools, but, 
every child and young person from 
the age of twelve to eighteen has 
some instruction within the fra- 
mework of other lessons: 
Denmark: The winning papers 
of a competition arranged by the 
Danish Teachers’ Organization 
and the Danish United Nations 
Association have been published 
for use as background material 
for the study of U.N. in primary 
and secondary schools. 
France: Plans have been made 
by the Ministry of Education to 
include the United Nations in its 
programme of lectures, and to en- 
courage the forming of interna- 
tional clubs and societies. A weekly 
column on international problems, 
with special reference to the 
United Nations and its Agencies, 
is to be published in the magazine 
“Education nationale”. 
India: November 29th was cele- 
brated widely in India as Unesco 
Day. Special school broadcasts 
were arranged on Unesco for that 
day, and exhibitions and film 
shows were arranged in several 
provinces. 
New Zealand: Every pupil in 
the post-primary schools takes a 
course in social studies, which in- 
cludes some work on the League 
of Nations and the United Na- 
tions. Most of the schools have a 
weekly current events session, 
which covers news of the U.N. 
Norway: Some mention of the 
United Nations is included in the 
new textbooks used by Norwegian 
children from seven to fourteen 
years, and considerable material 
is included in the books for pupils 
from fourteen to nineteen vears. 
A pamphlet on the U.N. has been 
issued specially for use in schools. 
United Kingdom: Much of the 
teaching on the United Nations is 
included in current, events classes. 
and in individual schools and 
youth organizations group projects 
have been carried out with great 
interest. The Council of Education 
for World Citizenship—a national 
voluntary organization—has been 
very active in stimulating the in- 
terest of both students and 
teachers in international affairs 
and U.N. in particular. The Coun- 
cil has published study guides 
and pamphlets such as the booklet 
“Unesco—What it Is and What it 
Does”, and arranged conferences 
and lectures which have been at- 
tended by thousands of school 
children. School broadcasts are 
widely used and encourage interest 
in current events. 
United States: A study of the 
United Nations is finding a 
regular place in the curricula of 
many secondary schools, especially 
in courses in world history and 
current history. Study courses 
have been drafted and model as- 
semblies held, and the radio is 
used to advantage in discussions. 
Libraries and museums in some 
districts have co-operated in plan- 
ning exhibitions on U.N.. and a 
large number of books and pam- 
phlets have been published for 
students and teachers. Films and 
filmstrips on the subject of United 
Nations are used in many of the 
school systems. as well as charts 
and photospreads. 
 
Michigan, USA, re-enact a meeting 
of the United Nations. 
  
Bibliographie on UN 
‘and its Agencies 
An extensive bibliography of 
books and pamphlets in English 
on “Education for International 
Understanding and on the United 
Nations” has just been issued by 
the Exchange of Information and 
Education Sections of Unesco. It 
is now available for distribution 
free of charge and should be use- 
ful to teachers, librarians, students 
of international affairs, and others 
‘interested in the United Nations. 
It may be obtained by writing to 
Unesco, 19 Avenue Kleber, Paris 
16e. y 
A similar bibliography in lan- 
guages other than English is being 
prepared and will be 
shortly. 
The publication just issued not 
only lists important books and 
pamphlets in several fields, but 
also includes brief factual anno- 
tations. 
* Xx * 
Part I of the bibliography is 
devoted to the United Nations and 
its Specialized Agencies. Small 
sections are devoted to the Eco- 
issued . 
nomic and Social Council, the 
International Court of Justice, the 
Security Council, the Trusteeship 
Council, the Atomic Energy Com- 
mission, while other parts are 
given over to bibliographies and 
general publications on the United 
Nations. Each of the Specialized | 
Agencies is then treated sepa- 
rately. 
Part II treats the topic of Edu- 
cation for International Under- 
standing, and is followed in Part 
II by #a2e more specific subject of 
Education for International Un- 
derstanding in the Schools. 
The final Part is a bibliography 
on Teaching about the United Na- 
tions in the schools. This list in- 
cludes materials for teachers and 
references to the few materials 
which exist for pupils. 
Most of the titles are of fairly 
recent publications and should be 
available for purchase. A few | 
books are of older date but are 
included because of their parti- 
cular. intevest and value. The 
source is listed for publications 
which may not be obtained easily. 
  
UN TO BE SEMINAR THEME 
AT ADELPHI COLLEGE 
INE nations will be repre- 
N sented on the staff of 
Unesco’s Seminar on 
Teaching about the United Nations 
and its Specialized Agencies, 
which will be held from July 7 to 
© August 18, 1948, at Adelphi College, 
Garden City, New York, and at 
Lake Success. The personn# which 
will assist the participants from 
Member States of Unesco and of 
the United Nations in their pro- 
duction of materials for school use 
on the United Nations are as fol- 
lows: 
Director ............... Dr. Y.R. Chao 
: (China), 
Programme Direc- Dr. Archie Troel- 
tor iii strup (U.S.A.). 
Adminisirative As- Mr Antoni Manue- 
sistant .............. lides (Greece). 
Chairmen of Study 
Groups: 
Radio and Re- Mr Mavor Moore 
cordings ......... (Canada), 
Films and Film- Mr Walter Harris 
strips (New Zealand). 
Written Materials M, Georges Fon- 
tanet (France). 
Mr Leonard Ken- 
worthy (U.S.A). 
Mr Antoni Woj- 
cieki (Poland). 
Aims and Meth- 
ods of Teaching 
Mr Bryant Mumford (United 
Kingdom), Director of Special Ser- 
vices in the Department of Public 
    
  
Information of the United Nations, 
will be in charge of all liaison 
work with the United Nations. Mr 
Solomon Arnaldo (Philippine Re- 
public), Acting Head of the Unesco 
office in New York, will be in 
charge of relations with Unesco. 
‘The Social Director, Miss Renée 
Fulton, and the Librar.an, Mr 
Reuben  Weltsch, are both 
Americans. 
Directing all the activities of 
the Seminar will be Dr. Y.R. Chao, 
distinguished Chinese educator 
who is teaching at the University 
of California. Dr. Chao has had 
wide experience in international 
affairs. He was acting chief of the 
Chinese delegation to the First 
General Conference of Unesco in 
Paris and a member of the de- 
legation to the Second General 
Conference in Mexico City. In 
1932-33, he was Director of the 
Chinese Educational Mission to 
the United States; in 1943-44 Chief 
of the Language Programme of 
AS T.P. at Harvard University, 
and from 1932 until the present 
time Chief of the Section of Lin- 
guistics at the Academia Sinica. 
He was the co-founder of the 
Science Society of China and has 
 

## [Page 5](073774engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 73783: Teaching about the United Nations: some suggestions and recommendations

  
  
.:N the past year tangible 
evidence of the increasing - 
interest in the Uniied Na- 
“fons has appeared on ihe book- 
thelves of Unesco in the shape of 
wooks and pamphlets published in 
ndividual counl!ries. Particularly 
mcouraging is the number of pu- 
slications prcduced specially for 
young people, and for use in 
chools. 
‘A fifteen—page pamphlet— 
ynesco “..in the minds of men” 
jublished in Australia by ‘the 
jommonwealth Office of Educa- 
jon, describes the structure and 
of Unesco in a simple and 
firect style, with charts and 
fiagrams to illustrate it. The 
preword says that the pamphlet 
jas been published in response to 
hn Ausiralia—wide demand for 
pformation”. 
 Forenede Nationer priniled in 
Panish for the use of teachers is 
} pamphlet on the origin, back- 
tround and purposes of the United 
Jations. Within ils thirty-one 
sages it also includes a brief out- 
fine of the League of Nations, 
€otes on the Specialized Agencies, 
md a short glossary of lerms. The 
jamphlet was chosen as the win- 
ha paper in a competition for 
jeachers organized by the Danish 
nited Nations Association. 
Number one of the Modern India 
ries is a pamphlet on Unesco 
posed of essays on different 
Five of the organization con- 
    
   
ibuted by well-known Indian 
tfriters and educationisis. It is 
  
   
; nferences, and reproductions of 
dintings by Indian artisls. 
The Education Department of 
few Zealand has produced the 
frst two numbers of a series of 
pst-Primary School Bulletins for 
senior forms written by FH. 
rner. Behind. the United Nations 
es ihe historical background, 
m the Middle Ages onwards, 
aowing the need today for a 
orld society to match modern 
economic and technical develop- 
nts. The United Nations de- 
iribes the efforis made to achieve 
rid organization, with a brief 
tory of the League of Nations, 
$id an account of the structure 
4d work of the United Nations. 
e Forente Nasjoner is an illus | 
tated pamphlet written in Norwe- 
dan. It is inlended for young 
-ersons over fifteen years of age, 
nd is recommended as a teacher's 
Jandbook on the United Nations. 
§ was writlen by O.H. Jensenius 
Nations Publish 
Books, Pamphlets 
For School Use 
during a visit to the Uniled Na- 
tions headquarters at Lake Suc- 
cess, wilh the express purpose of 
helping ieachers {0 carry out the 
resolution of the U.N. General 
Assembly in 1947 concerning ins- 
truction about the organization. 
From the U.S.A. comes a num- 
ber of publications printed spe- 
cially for schools. The Universily 
of Nebraska has produced Unesco 
and Nebraska Secondary School 
Youth, a handbook of recommen- 
dations for teachers on how to 
present Unesco in and outside the 
classroom. In addition to the ac- 
count of the structure and pur- 
poses of Unesco there is a detailed 
list of study outlines, suggestions 
for correlating the work vith other 
subjects, and original ideas for 
enlivening the study. 
One World in the Making by 
William G. Carr, is a textbook for 
school children emphasizing the 
United Nations Charter. Difficult 
phrases are explained in marginal 
notes, and it is illustrated with 
charts and maps, and a reproduc- 
tion of ithe signatures to the 
Charter. 
“Senior Scholastic”, a magazine 
for secondary school pupils, has 
devoied one entire issue to the 
Uniled Nations, entitled United 
Nations in Action—A Student's 
Handbook of the World Organi- 
zation. 
Another United Nations hand- 
book for school students is pu- 
blished by the American Education 
Press. -Besides articles, photo- 
graphs and explanatory notes, it 
gives lists of questions at the end 
of each section, and pinpoints im- 
porlant facts, There are also sug- 
‘gestions for forum discussions.   
  
UNESCO SPONSORS ESSAY 
~ AND POSTER GONTEST 
AN Unesco be of interest to 
[ boys and girls of school 
age? The last General Con- 
ference of Unesco thought it could, 
and, as part of its work to encou- 
rage knowledge about the United 
Nations and its Specialized Agen- 
cies, decided to sponsor two com- 
petitions on Unesco for young 
people in the schools of Member 
States to begin in September, 1948. 
The full title for both competi- 
tions is “Together We Build a New 
World, An Essay and Poster Com- 
petition on Unesco’s Work”. The 
first will be open to those between 
15 and 18 years of age, and the 
second to those from 12 to 15. 
Entries may be submitted in either 
of two forms: an essay of between 
1,000 and 2,000 words, or a poster 
not exceeding 48x66 cms. 
To allow plenty of time for the 
competitions to be made known all 
over the world, and to take into 
account the differences in the aca- 
demic year of the northern and 
southern hemispheres, Unesco has 
suggested that Member States an- 
nounce the competitions in Sep-~ 
tember or October, 1948, and ask 
for entries to be submitted to 
them by May 1st, 1949. 
The first preliminary selection - 
of winning essays and posters will 
be made nationally. Then each 
Member State is asked to send to 
Unesco by airmail not later than 
July 1st, 1949, the ten best entries 
in each competition. 
The’ final awards will be made 
for Unesco by a panel of interna- 
tionally-known men and women 
selected by the Director-General. 
The results will be announced 
before the Unesco General Confe- 
rence meets in 1949. 
The prizes will be awarded in 
the form of grants to enable the 
winners either to travel abroad. to 
attend a conference on world af- 
fairs, to acquire further education 
(if possible in another country), 
or to purchase books and other 
educational material. 
In. the first competition, the 
first prize for an essay will be 
$250, and the same for the win- 
ning poster; the second prize will 
be $200 for the essay and $200 for 
the poster. There will be 8 addi- 
tional prizes of $50 each. In the. 
.second competition, the first prize 
for the essay will be $150 and the 
same for the poster; the second 
prize will be $100 for the essay 
and $100 for the poster. Again 
there will be 8 additional vrizes 
of $50 each. ‘ 
It is hoped that other prizes will 
be offered by the government, or 
by interested organizations or in- 
dividuals in the Member States. 
Unesco suggests that where this 
can be done it may be worthwhile 
to propose a third form that the 
competition might take. It is 
- thought that in some schools a 
welcome alternative to the pro- 
duction of essays or posters might 
be a group project consisting, for 
example, in writing a play on 
Unesco’s work, in making a scrap 
book of articles, or in constructing 
a model illustrating one of Unes- 
co’s activities. Because of the diffi- 
culty of making an international 
award for projects of this kind, 
. Unesco is not suggesting this as 
the third form in iis own scheme. 
Special materials to give young 
people the necessary information 
about Unesco are obvious]v essen- 
tial and pamphlets are being pre- 
pared in the Education Section of 
Unesco to meet this need. 
It is expected that a selection 
of ‘the essays and posters will be 
reproduced in connection with 
Unesco publicity, and it is hoped . 
that an exhibition of them can be 
shown at the Fourth Session of 
the General Conference in 1949. 
   General view of a recent meeting of the UN Economic and Social Council at Lake Success 
‘¥en President of the Linguistic 
Sciety of America. 
Dr. Archie Troelstrup, Professor 
a Stephens College, Columbia, 
Missouri, will be the Programme 
Hrector of the Seminar. Dr. 
droelstrup has had great expe- 
#nce in Seminar-workshops for 
tachers and has written several 
piblications for use in the schools. 
¥e bas taught seven summers at 
‘Pachers College, Columbia Uni- 
ersily, and in various summer 
gminars. He has had a wide 
wriety of teaching positions rang- 
# from work in rural districts 
# large metropolitan areas. He is 
$e author of Teaching War and 
Pstwar Problems, published by 
"Public Affairs Commitiee and 
Foreign Policy Association. a 
dflege textbook on Education for 
— 
_
—
 
  
o
g
 
-
—
 
 
Dr. Y.R. CHAO. 
Living, a teaching guide for high 
schools on Housing in the United 
States, a booklet on Paying for the 
War, and editor of the Yearbook 
of the National Council for the 
Social Studies on Economic Edu- 
cation. 
The Administrative Assistant, 
Mr Antoni Manuelides, is a 
member of the Bureau of the 
Comptroller of Unesco. 
Mr Mavor Moore, Chairman of 
the Radio and Recordings Study 
Group, has had wide experience in 
school broadcasts with the Cana- 
dian Broadcasting Company and 
has alse had experience with the 
United Nations. oo 
Mr Walter Harris was a member 
of the Ministry of Education in 
New Zealand, working on audio- 
visual methods, until he recently 
joined the staff of the United 
Nations Department of Public In- 
formation. 
The two Chairmen of Study 
Groups on the preparation of 
booklets, study guides and other 
written materials, were both 
members of Unesco’s Seminar at 
Sevres. M. Fontanet is Professor 
at the Lycée Louis le Grand in 
Paris and at the School of Ad- 
vanced Commercial Studies in 
Paris, and is the author of several 
publications on education. Mr 
Kenworthy is Programme Spe- 
cialist at Unesco on Teaching 
about the United Nations and its 
Agencies. 
Mr Antoni Wojcicki is a staff 
member of the Cultural Activities 
Division of the United Nations 
and has been particularly con- 
cerned with reports from Membper 
States on Teaching about the 
United Nations. He was also a 
tutor in the Unesco Sévres Se- 
minar. 
The Social Director, Miss Renée 
Fulton, is Principal of the Forest 
Hills High School in New York 
and former President of the 
American Association of Teachers 
of French. The Librarian will be 
Mr Reuben Weltsch, Librarian of 
Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio. 
As general background for the 
discussion groups, members of the 
Seminar will participate in a series 
of lectures and discussions by 
 highranking personnel from the 
United Nations and its Agencies. 
Mr Benjamin Cohen, Assistant 
Secretary-General for Public In- 
formation, will speak on the 
“Structure, Aims and Principles of 
the United Nations”. Dr. Andrew 
Cordier, Executive Assistant to the 
Secretary-General will discuss the 
“General Assembly”, Dr. C.K. Chu, 
Assistant Director of the World 
Health Organization, will describe 
the work of that Agency, Mr John 
J. McCloy will speak on the Inter- 
national Bank, and several other 
outstanding persons will discuss 
other aspects of the United Na- 
tions’ system. Alsc participating 
in this series of lectures and dis- 
cussions will be a group of internes 
frecm mary nations who are 
working at the United Nations 
Headquarters, and graduate stu- 
dents from colleges and univer- 
sities in New York and vicinity.   
Columbia 
University Gives 
Unesco Course 
Probably the only special 
course on Unesco in any insti- 
tution in the world is being 
given at Teachers College, Co- 
Iumbia University. The course 
is entitled “International Edu- 
cation and Unesco” and. is 
being given by Professor 
Donald Tewksbury. The class 
meets once a week for a two- 
hour period for lectures and 
‘| discussions on recent develop- 
ments in international educa- 
tion. Outside lecturzrs are in- 
vited to speak at the course. 
Particular emphasis is given to 
the ‘purposes, organization, 
and progress of Unesco”. 
W.F.U.N.A. 
Conference on U.N. 
A two-weeks conference will be 
held in Geneva by the Student 
Commission of the: World Fede- 
    
ration of United Nations Associa- | 
tion on the best methods of im- 
plementing the United Nations 
resolution on Teaching about the 
U.N. and its Agencies. Particular 
attention will be given ‘to methods 
of presentation in universities 
around the world. The 
ference will be held from July 
con-|   15 to 29. 
You 
and Unesco 
@e ETS VISIT UNESCO 
|B HOUSE” is the title 
of a pamphlet which 
Unesco will publish soon for boys 
and girls between 12 and 15 years 
of age. It has been prepared by 
Mr Leonard Kenworthy, of the 
Education Section, to provide in- 
formation for school pupils en- 
tering for an Essav and Poster 
Competition on Unesco. It has an 
attractive red and white cover, 
and its 30 pages are illustrated 
with nearly 60 photographs, charts 
and maps. . 
It describes how an imaginary 
party of children from many na- 
tions meet at Unesco House in 
Paris. Some of them have arrived 
on bicycles, by bus, or by train; 
others by boat, and a few by air. 
They have come to visit one of 
the few international houses in 
the world. 
As soon as they arrive, they are 
welcomed by a guide who takes 
them around the building, and 
explains what the people working 
there are trying to do. The party 
attends a meeting of the Executive 
Board, is welcomed by Dr. Huxley 
in his office, and visits the heads 
of different departments to ask 
them questions about TUnesco’s 
programme. . 
For older boys and girls another 
pamphlet has been written by Miss 
Monica Luffman of the Education 
Section, entitled “You and Unes- 
co’. As being of particular inte- 
rest to young people, Unesco’s re- 
construction work, its educational 
activities, its scientific programme, 
and its efforts to help people all 
over the world to exchange ideas, 
have been stressed. Each chapter 
of this 40 page pamphlet is fol- 
lowed by five or six questions to 
encourage the readers to think for 
themselves. It is being printed in 
black and white, with a cover in 
two colours, and illustrated with 
some 40 photographs, diagrams, 
and maps. 
Specimen copies of both pam- 
phlets will be sent to Me ber 
States of Unesco at the beginwing 
of July. It is hoped that they will 
then be translated where necessary 
and re-published for wide distri- 
bution. 
PYVIVVVVVIVVVIVVVVYVVYVVIVIVVYS 
On the middle page of the May issue 
of the “Unesco Courier’ our readers 
will find additional information cen- 
cerning the Adelphi Seminar on 
Teaching about the UN. Details of the 
IBE-Unesce Conference are 
on Page one of this issue. 
reported

## [Page 6](073774engo.pdf#page=6) 3

### IGNORE

Volume 1.—No 3 
  
  
  
Experts who attended recent meeting on Art in General Education: From left to right: AH. Cor- 
rea de Azevedo and Dr. Kuo Yu- Shu of Unesco; M. Zoltan Kodaly (Hungary); Herbert Read (UK), 
(France); Chairman; Dr. Thomas Munro 


### 73784: Some blunt words from critic Read

SOME 
FROM CRITIC READ 
  
(US); M. Georges Faure 
Ministry of Education, 
  
[The following interview expresses certain opinions with which 
the editors of the “Unesco Courier” cannot agree. We feel, however, 
that Mr Read’s observations represent an attitude which is fairly 
frequent among the world’s intellectuals, particularly among belle- 
lettrists. As such, we present them in the hope that they will stimulate 
discussion. | 
ME HERBERT READ, noted British philosopher of art, and author 
of several books on art and aesthetics, granted a special interview 
on May 15 to the “Unesco Courier”, during which he criticized Unesco 
and its Constitution, though affirming his belief in the importance of 
its role in the world today. Dr. Read came to Paris last month to 
preside over the meeting of ex- 
perts on Art in General Educa- 
tion which met at Unesco House 
from May 11 to 15. 
“Any criticisms I make of 
Unesco”, Mr Read began, “are 
based on a desire to co-operate, 
They are not inspired by any 
fundamental animosity to the 
aims of Unesco.” 
“At the same time”, Mr Read 
continued, “I do feel that a cer- 
tain presupposition about the 
nature of culture and the means 
of promoting it have been made 
which are fallacious. The false 
assumption to which I refer, and 
which seems to be present in the 
Constitution of Unesco, is that 
culture is something ready-made, 
already formulated and develop- 
ed, and has merely got to be 
shared by the largest part of the 
people in order to bring about a 
peaceful state of the world.” 
“Root Stimulation” 
“But culture and civilization 
are a growth, a creative process, 
an activity. Our aim should be to 
stimulate that activity at the 
roots. This ‘root stimulation’, 
however, involves an activity not 
contemplated in the Constitution 
of Unesco. The energies of 
Unesco are being dissipated in 
intellectual and organizational 
activities which are seldom con- 
crete in their results.” 
“The most effective way of 
changing the minds of men 1s 
through education. Yet educaiion 
must be understood in a sense 
not evident in the Constitution 
of Unesco since it interprets edu- 
cation in a spirit of intellec- 
tualism and scientific humanism. 
I feel that education, to be ef- 
fective, must be much more ‘ac- 
tivist’, relying more on practical 
and creative activities and less 
on book knowledge and literacy.” 
Anasthesia 
“Unesco ignores this problem”, 
he went on. “But in my opinion, 
more serious than illiteracy is 
‘the problem of anesthesia’—that 
is lack of taste and sensitivity 
which affects not 10 to 15% but 
90% of the population of the 
world.” 
“Unesco’s work”, Mr Read conh- 
tinued, “should be simed more at 
people than at ideas. It should 
establish practical instifutions 
rather than communities of good- 
will and this should be done on 
a big scale.” 
“I suggest for example”, he 
said, “the ereation of an Institute 
of Experimental Education, where 
new methods of education would 
be demonstrated and where 
teachers could come to learn of 
progressive methods of educa- 
tion.” 
Criticizing the distinction made 
in the title of Unesco between 
Education, Science and Culture, 
Mr Read cited T. S. Eliot's phrase 
‘Science and education are in 
themselves a part of culture’ 
“If you separate science and 
education from. culture”, 
Read declared, “why not dis- 
tinguish art and religion? The 
very fact that science and edu- 
cation were picked out by Unesco 
reveals a bias—perhaps an un- 
conscious bias—in the minds of 
those who established it. That 
science is distinct from culture is 
a modern develepment which to 
the Greek philosopher would 
have seemed quite monstrous. It 
represents a materialistic point of 
view of civilization which is sus- 
picious of the world culture ana 
seeks to correct it or counter- 
balance it with the term scten- 
tific.” 
Turning to three of the cultural 
projects in which™~®megco is 
playing an important role, Mr 
Read cited the International 
Theatre Institute, the programme 
for the translation of the classics 
and copyright. - 
“I helieve”, he said, “that the 
circulation of theatrical produc- 
tions on an international scale 
may gradually stimulate the 
dramatic activity. But even here. 
I think the effective form of 
stimulation is due not to the clir- 
culation of masterpieces by them- 
selves, but rather to the encou- 
ragement of creative effort on 
the amateur levels.” 
In conclusion, Mr Read re- 
affirmed his belief in the work of 
Unesco. } 
“I believe an organization on 
the lines of Unesco to be es- 
sential”, he said. “If we do not 
agree with the Constitution and 
Unesco’s procedure, we must not 
stand aside and merely condemn, 
but at any rate make an effort 
to transform it. If one has any 
belief in peace and the future of 
world culture, an organization of 
this kind is essential and must 
be criticized until it does its job 
more and more effectively.” 
  
Mr. 
Chinese Educator Named 
Unesco Representative? 
Professor Chen Yuan, promi- 
nent Chinese educator and since 
1940 a member of the People’s 
Political Council, has been ap- 
pointed Chinese Representative to 
Unesco. 
Professor Chen has been for the 
past two years a member of the 
Unesco Executive Board and in 
this capacity has been closely 
associated with the activities of 
the Organization, His appoint- 
ment as Chinese Representative 
at Unesco House in Paris was an- 
nounced by the Chinese Ministry 
of Education. 
“Born in 1896, Professor Ohen 
was educated in China and in 
Great Britain. He was stvcoessive- 
ly Professor at the National 
Peking University in Peiping, and 
at Wuhan University in Wuchang. 
Before the war he was Dean of 
the College of Arts at Wuhan. He 
has published several volumes of 
essays and translations into 
Chinese. 
UNESCO COURIER 
Mr. EM. Dicky (UK) eof the 
$ 
  
Call for Better 
Art Education 
HE development of the place 
of the arts in general edu- 
cation programmes throughout 
the world and the better utiliza- 
tion of art for strengthening in- 
ternational and inter-cultural un- 
derstanding was urged during a 
meeting of experts at Unesco 
House in Paris last month. 
Called by Unesco for a five-day 
conference (May 11-15) to study 
the role of art in general educa- 
tion, the experts recommended 
the creation of National Commit- 
tees in each Member State. Such 
committees would stimulate ‘the 
improvement and expansion of 
art instruction in school 
adult education. 
The recommendations of the 
expert panel are at present under 
study by Unesco and will be con- 
sidered when the Organization 
submits a draft programme in 
this field to its forty-one Member 
States. Proposals included the 
establishment by Unesco of an 
International Council for the 
Arts in General Education ‘to be 
supported by the National Com- 
mittees in each country. 
Such an International Council, 
the experts declared, would serve 
as a focal clearing-house 1or in- 
fermation regarding improved 
methods for teaching the arts 
the circulation of exhibitions, 
translation and publication of 
important books and articles in 
the field. It would also promote 
international federations of tea- 
chers and students on a seuo- 
larship basis. 
Dr. Herbert Read (United King- 
dom) presided over the meetings 
and Dr. Thomas Munro (United 
States) was Rapporteur. Other 
experts present included M. Geor- 
ges Favre (France) and M. Zol- 
tan Kodaly (Hungary). Mr. E, M. 
Dicky, representing the British 
Minifry of Education, was also 
present. 
and}, 


### 73785: The Role France in the I.T.I.

    
The Role of France 
Inthe L T. I. 
AST summer, twenty-four 
theatre experts from fourteen 
different countries came together 
at Unesco’s suggestion to plan an 
International Theatre Institute. 
The decisions they took and the 
objectives they set themselves last 
year have been carried out. In a 
few. weeks’ time their goal will 
have been reached. 
The experts had recommended 
the establishment of an Interna- 
tional Theatre Institute, indepen- 
dent of Unesco and supported by 
National Centres which reflected 
as faithfully as possible the 
“theatre life of each nation. 
By e— 
Armand SALACROU 
Noted French Playwright, 
Member of the Executive 
Committee of the ITI and 
President of French Na- 
tional Theatre Centre.     
A truly international institute 
representing the world’s theatre— 
that was the idea on which the 
ITI was based. To make it so, all 
members of Unesco as well as the 
United Nations were invited to 
attend the Constituent Congress 
of 1948. The setting up of truly 
representative National Theatre 
Centres was also recommended. 
Eight such National Centres are 
now functioning. 
It may be of interest to indi- 
cate how we, in France, proceed- 
ed. 
First of all we set up a Theatre 
Committee made up of 30 mem- 
bers, on the model of the French 
National Commission for Unesco. 
The Theatre Committee consists 
of four high officials and seven- 
teen distinguished personalities 
elected by the Prench theatre as- 
sociations (the National Theatre 
Federation, the Society of Authors 
and the various trade unions re- 
presenting writers, directors, act- 
ors, producers and so on). In turn, 
these twenty-one members of the" 
Theatre Committee named nine 
prominent theatre men to form 
part of the Committee. 
In this way, it was felt, the 
French Theatre Committee would 
truly represent all of the Theatri- 
© cal activities of France and thus 
be able to study all theatre ques- 
tions arising in France. At the 
same time such a Committee 
would be able to offer practical 
solutions to the international pro- 
blems which will be discussed at 
the Prague Congress. 
Naturally there are many pro- 
blems and some, at the moment, 
cannot be solved. The first pro- 
“country will continue to work   


### 73786: UNESCO friendship train asked at San Francisco

Unesco Friendship Train 
(Continued from Page 1.) 
Among the noted speakers who 
addressed the plenary sessions 
were George V. Allen, U.S. Assis- 
tant Secretary of State for Pub- 
lic Affairs, William G. Carr of 
the U.S. National Education As- 
sociation, George V. Stoddard, 
President of the University of 
Illinois, Vera Micheles Dean of 
the Foreign Policy Association 
and Margaret Mead, anthropolo- 
gist of the American Museum of 
Natural History. 
“What Unesco needs, if it is to 
accomplish anything, is co-opera- 
tion of organizations and colleges 
and schools and local groups and 
individuals all over the world,” 
Mr Allen said at the opening ses- 
sion of the Conference. “We have 
charted a course of international 
co-operation,” he continued. “The 
pursuit of that course is fraught 
with difficulties . . . The faith 
in which Unesco was created is 
the faith which animates us to- 
day. The Governement of the 
United States reaffirms that this 
. peace.” 
people look upon the current in- 
ternational scene . . . The task 
is to call the American people to 
wage the peace. We must get 
down fo such practical questions 
as educational reconstruction, stu- 
dent and teacher exchange, revi- 
sion of textbooks, co-operative 
scientific investigations, interna- 
tional systems of library refer- 
ences, international use of ra- 
dio...” ’ 
Addressing the final plenary 
session on May 15; Dr. Stoddard 
declared that “the unique, per- 
manent and exciting business of 
Unesco is to contribute to a just 
peace—to a world-wide, self-im- 
posed security resting on cultural 
understanding and exchange.” 
“It seems to me,” he said, 
“that Unesco must choose and 
choose fast whether to stay in 
quiet waters far from danger or 
significance or to consider itself 
a militant organized force for 
with all other countries which 
share this faith to achieve the 
objectives set forth in the consti- 
tution of Unesco.” 
“William Carr told the 3,000 dele- 
gates that the task before them was 
to overcome the sense of futility. 
the sense of benumbed resignation 
with which all too many of our   
Unesco Exhibit on UN 
A fivepanel pictorial exhibit on 
teaching about the United Na- 
tions is to be presented at the 
IBE-Unesco Conference in Ge- 
neva and at the Economic and 
Social Council meeting in Geneva 
blem, that of the legal constitu- 
tion of the International Theatre 
Institute, wille be eliminated once 
the draft Charter, drawn up by 
the experts in 1947, has been 
examined and finally adopted. 
But then a host of other pro- 
blems will come up. 
Painters and musicians are 
more fortunate than we of the 
theatre : their language is inter- 
national, We, however, must con- 
.tend, not only with {ranslation 
problems but with customs diffi- 
culties, passport complications, 
and the financial risks in sending 
theatrical troupes abroad. Making 
theatre news available on an in- 
ternational scale also poses a’ 
serious, highly complicated pro- 
blem. 
French Role 
at Prague Congress 
At Prague, the French Delega- 
tion will pursue a policy of 
obstinate moderation. It is con- 
vinced that the more modest but 
effective the work of the Congress 
the greater the chances will be for 
a living Institute. The French 
Delegation will try, therefore, to 
keep to concrete facts and will 
urge the adoption of only those 
projects that can actually be 
carried out under present world 
conditions, 
- Yas 
At the end of May, the following 
countries had made known their in- 
tention to be represented af the 
First Congress of the 1.T.I., to be 
held in Prague from June 28 to 
July 3: 
Austria, Australia, Brazil, Bel- 
gium, Chile, China, Egypt, Finland, 
France, Maiti, Hungary, Italy, 
Luxembourg, Switzerland, United 
Kingdom, United States, Union of 
South Africa.     
This is not to say that we do 
not doubt that the International 
Institute has a great future. We 
think, indeed, that the birth of 
the Institute, of itself, is concrete 
proof of a great enterprise: In 
Prague, the centre of poor, ruined 
Europe, men of the theatre from 
all countries, from Finland, and” 
South America, from the Soviet 
Russia and the United States will 
meet to study common problems, 
exchange information, form 
. friendships and embark upon a 
constryctive task in the interests 
of human culture. Is not this, in 
the year 1948, a great achieve- 
ment? 
And the congresses which will ~ 
permit theatre representatives 
from all over the word to meet 
in a different capital each year 
—do not these of themselves jus- 
tify the Institute svhich is to be 
created in Prague in tle next few 
weeks? 
  next month. 
Brazilian Educator 
Calls for Increased 
Interest in Unesco 
Dr. Fernando Tude de Souza, 
of the Brazilian Ministry of Edu- 
cation, in an important address 
delivered at the Casa Roosevelt 
in Sao Paulo on May 25, describ- 
ed Unesco as “a new and perhaps 
unique opportunity for liberty 
and democracy loving peoples to 
live in peace”. 
Speaking on “Unesco and the 
Struggle for Peace”, Dr. de Souza: 
calted for an untiring campaign 
to wipe out illiteracy in Brazil 
and stressed the need for greater 
participation of his countrymen 
in the work of Unesco. “Unesco 
and its ideas”, he said, “should 
be explained in schools. in the 
public squares, in parliamentary 
bodies, so that... in serving Brazil 
we can at the same time serve 
the cause of all humanity and 
contribute to the diffusion of 
knowledge... Education, according 
to Unesco, aims at giving the 
masses of the people a true idea 
of its veritable mission”. 
“Brazilians should take a great- 
er interest in the work of Unes- 
co”, Dr. de Souza stated. “We 
speak of peace, though our hopes 
may wane. But time has not yet 
run out. It is vital that we con- 
vince both governments and 
those governed of the need to 
strengthen the bulwarks of peace 
through Unesco”.

## [Page 7](073774engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

Volume 1.—No § UNESCO COURIER 


### 73787: Two vital studies on UNESCO policy: coordinating the U.N. family

| Two Vital Studies on Unesco Policy 
NE of the most difficult 
{ problems facing the United 
Nations and the Specialized 
Agencies tike Unesco is how to co- 
ordinate their separate efforts 
towards the achievement of peace 
and security. 
The United Nations system for 
international co-operation was 
created on the basis of having a 
central United Nations Organiza- 
tion and a series of Specialized 
United Nations Agencies. As a 
result the United Nations and the 
several Specialized Agencies have 
individual charters, different 
memberships, different bases of 
financial contribution and dif- 
ferent methods of operation. 
Their common objective, to find 
world solutions for world prob- 
lems, requires however that the 
Agencies work in the closest pos- 
sible co-operation. Only thus can 
they hope to contribute to the 
peace and security of the world. 
The co-operation required 
touches two principal fields: pro- 
gramme and administration. It 
can be achieved by three prin- 
cipal means: The Economic and 
Social Council, the administrative 
officers, and by Member Govern- 
ments. 
Under the United Nations 
Charter, Articles 63 and 64, the 
principal responsibility for co- 
ordinating policies and program- 
mes of the Specialized Agencies 
rests with the Economic and 
Social Council. Of necessity, such 
co-ordination, based upon discus- 
sions, reports and recommenda- 
tions, must be on a general high 
policy level. The Council, a deli- 
berative body, meeting a few 
times each year, cannot deal ef- 
fectively with the details of or- 
ganizational relationships and 
procedures for the execution of 
individual Agency programmes. 
The Economic, and Social 
Council must, however, keep 
under continual review the range 
of activities of the various Agen- 
cies, for the purpose both of 
watching for possible overlapping 
and of recommending concerted 
policies for the attaining of com- 
mon ends. It may also recom- 
mend particular programmes and 
activities to the various Agencies 
or to the United Nations Secre- 
tariat. 
The heaviest responsibility for 
co-ordination in the execution of 
programmes equally rests upon 
the chief administrative officers 
of the United Nations and Spe- 
cialized Agencies. They are en- 
gaged in the day-to-day execution 
of programmes. They know in 
greatest detail the principal prob- 
lems and issues that arise in 
" carrying out the diverse program- 
mes of the various Agencies. In 
addition, however, the chief ad- 
ministrative officers must provide 
Jeadership for the legislative bo- 
dies of their Agencies in the for- 
mulation and development of 
both programme and administra- 
tion. 
The Third ond Fourth Meetings 
of the Co-ordination Committee, 
held last February 24 and 25 and 
May 27 and 28, provide evidence 
of determination .on the part of 
the administrative officers to 
meet their responsibilities in this 
regard. Those meetings have es- 
tablished bevond doubt that  ex- 
tremely little, if any, overlapping 
exists in the work of the Agen- 
cies. 
In addition a high degree of 
agreement has now been reached 
about the desirability and pessi- 
bility of co-ordination in budget 
presentation (te assist govern- 
ments in evaluating and veting 
upon budgets) and in personnel 
policies (with a view to esta- 
blishing a United Nations Civil 
Service). Significant steps have 
been taken towards the more ef- 
fective use of common adminis- 
trative services, such as travel, 
transport and documentation 
services, 
The most recent of these 
meetings, held at Lake Success, 
led to the clarification of the 
functions of the Committee and 
the establishment of simple con- 
sultative procedures whereby the 
various Agencies can take up 
systematically, as they arise, 
problems of administrative co- 
ordination as well as of program- 
ne execution, and such technical 
and politically complicated prob- 
lems as income-tax reimburse- 
   
CO-ORDINATING 
  
U. N. FAMIEE YY 
  
By Walter H. C. LAVES 
staff as- internal 
sessment systems. 
Formal procedures have thus 
been developed, both under the 
ment and 
Charter, through the Economic 
and Social Council, and by direct 
action on the part of the prin- 
cipal administrative officers. Fur- 
thermore, problems of co-ordina- 
- tion will tend to disappear as 
Member States recognize more 
clearly the importance of de- 
veloping and pursuing consistent 
policies on their part in their 
dealings with the various Spe- 
cialized Agencies to which they 
belong. 
The lack of such consistency 
has been a serious problem in 
the past. If, in addition, those 
States represented in the Eco- 
nomic and Social Council will. in 
the Council, follow policies con- 
sistent with those which their 
representatives follow in the Spe- 
cialized Agencies, few real prob- 
lems should remain. 
Unesco has recognized from the 
start the importance of deve- 
loping its programme in full re- 
cognition of the responsibilities 
of the other members of the 
United Nations family. The New 
York Office exists largely to 
maintain continual liaison with 
the United Nations at Lake Suc- 
cess. On this basis it keeps Paris 
headquarters posted and advised 
on Unesco’s role in United Na- 
— 
Deputy Director-General of Unesco 
tions and other Specialized Agen- 
cy matters. It frequently repre- 
sents Unesco in important 
meetings of United Nations. 
The task of the New York Of- 
fice has not been an easy one, 
because it is so far from Paris. 
The Office, however, has made 
important contributions towards 
the clarification of Unesco’s pro- 
gramme in the minds of partici- 
pants in meetings at Lake Suc- 
cess. At the same time the New 
York Office has kept head- 
quarters in Paris informed re- 
garding developments which 
must be taken into account in the 
growth of Unesco's own pro- 
gramme, 
In the development of Unesco’s 
programme in medical science 
there has been close co-operation 
with the Interim Committee of 
the World Health Organization. 
Similary the agricultural science 
programme is being developed in 
consultation with the Food and 
Agricultural Organization. Plans 
for the Fundamental Education 
Pilot Project of the Government 
of Haiti have been developed clo- 
sely with the World Health Or- 
ganization and the Food and 
Agricultural Organization, as 
certain phases of the Hylean 
Amazon Project. 
At the request of the Human 
Rights Commission of the Eco- 
nomic and Social Council, Uneasco 
has brought together a sym- 
posium of papers dealing with 
the philosophical and intellectual 
basis of Human Rights. In the 
development of plans for statis- 
tical services, Unesco has con- 
sulted regularly with corres- 
ponding bodies of the United Na- 
tions and other Specialized Agen. 
cies. Unesco co-operated with the 
United Nations in the work of 
the Freedom of Informaticn Con- 
ference, held at Geneva early this 
year. In Unesco’s fellowship pro- 
gramme, the requirements of 
other United Nations Specialized 
Agencies have been taken into 
account and the beginnings of a 
system of regular consultation 
have been established. 
Special efforts are being made 
to ensure the application of 
Unesco’s broad programme in the 
fields of education, science and 
culture to non-gelf-governing ter- 
ritories in close collaboration 
with the United Nations Secreta- 
riat. 
“In respect to its salary and 
allowance system, personnel poli- 
cies and many administrative 
procedures, Unesco has fcllowed 
closely the practices of United 
Nations and the recommendations 
of the Consultative Committee on 
Administrative and Personnel 
Practices, which includes repre- 
sentatives of all the Specialized 
Agencies and the United Nations. 
- However, the 
In recent months, important 
steps have been taken in Paris to 
provide, through Unesco, central 
administrative services and assis- 
tance to Specialized Agencies re- 
quiring such services as travel 
and transport in the Paris area. 
So long as there was available 
space, Unesco provided rooms for 
UNRRA, ECITO and UNICEF. 
Perhaps the biggest step re- 
maining to be taken towards 
achieving cc-ordination is that 
of advance programme co-ordi- 
nation. Thus far, of necessity, 
each agency has developed its 
programme in the light of resolu- 
tions voted by its own legislative 
body. There has been little op- 
portunity to consider in advance 
what kinds of programme should 
be undertaken by the Specialized 
Agencies jointly or in collabora- 
tion with United Nations. The 
need for such advance co-ordi- 
nation has been regularly recogn- 
ized by the Co-ordination Com- 
mittee which has recently been 
taking positive steps towards this 
- end. 
~ This is admittedly the most 
difficutl task because the mem- 
bership of the various Agencies is 
not identical and because the an- 
nual legislative meetings of the 
Agencies reflect the immediate 
interests of their Member States. 
increasing strains 
in the international scene, com- 
bined with requirements of eco- 
nomy, and a real desire on the 
part of the principal administra- 
tive officers for greater effec 
tiveness in furthering the come 
mon ohjective of United Nations 
and the Specialized Agencies, will 
compel more continuous and 
more positive steps in this direc- 
tion in the immediate future. In 
this respect, Unesco will not only 
show its willingness to co-operate 
but may be expected to continue 
to provide leadership. 
(Editor’s Note: M, René Maheu, 
head of the Organization’s Freedom 
of Information programme of the 
Mass Communication Section, went 
to Geneva last month as chief of the 
Unesco delegalion to the U.N. Cen- 
ference on Freedom of Information. 
We publish below some observations 
especially written for the Unesco 
Courier hy M. Maheu eon this con- 
ference, the first political meeting at 
which Unesco was represented. M. 
Maheu has not shrunk from rais- 
ing the fundamental question of 
Unesee’s role in a world torn by 
ideological strife and political con- 
flict, His article, we believe, should 
touch off an interesting discussion 
on this role.) 
HE part played by Unesco in 
wT the United Nations Confe- 
rence on Freedom of Infor- 
mation, held at Geneva from 
23 March to 21 April has already 
been described ‘mn previous issues 
of the Uresco Courier. It might 
be well however to consider cer- 
tain aspects of the situation in 
which the Organization’s repre- 
sentatives found themselves pla- 
ced. Important questions are in- 
volved regarding TUnesco’s pur- 
pose and its relations with other 
international bodies. ’ 
In the first place. the Confe- 
rence consisted of official govern- 
mental delegations; Unesco was 
represented by members of the 
Secretariat. There was a funda- 
mental difference between the 
status of the national delegates 
and the international officials. 
Only the former had the right 
to vote and the decisions there- 
fore rested entirely with them. 
In such circumstances, should 
the Unesco representatives have 
taken no part in the debates? 
Should . they merelv have helped 
their colleagues of the United 
Nations Secretariat with prepa- 
rations for the Conference and 
its technical organization? 
Should they have been content 
to act as interested, but passive, 
spectators? There could be no 
question of that. Our Constitu- 
tion itself lays down that one of 
the primary purposes of the Or- 
ganization is the promotion of 
“the free flow of ideas bv word 
and image”, [It is a subject on 
which we cannot remain neu- 
tral. 
The distinguishing feature of 
the Specialized Agencies is that 
they were set up within the Uni- 
ted Nations to carry out spe-   cific tasks. It follows, therefore, 


### 73788: An Opinion on UNESCO's role in political meetings

AnOpinion onUnesco’'s Role 
In Political Meeting 
that when one of those funda- 
mental tasks is concerned— and, 
for Unesco, freedom of informa- 
tion is undoubtedly one of them— 
the Secretariats of the Specia- 
lized Agencies are obliged to take 
.an active part in the discussion 
of the problems themselves, 
unlike the Secretariat of the Uni- 
ted Nations which is merely res- 
ponsible for arranging for con- 
tact and negotiations between 
governments, 
The members of the Secregga- 
riat who represented Unesco at 
Geneva were therefore entitled, 
and indeed obliged, to take part 
in the discussions of the govern- 
ment delegates, in order to state 
the Organization’s point of view. 
They were likewise committed to 
this course by the governments 
of their Member States in the 
By 
René MAHEU 
Head of Press Division 
of Mass Communications 
terms of Resolution 2.2.2.1.3. 
adopted by the General Confe- 
rence at Mexico City. 
Unesco’s point of view must, by 
definition, be international. What 
Unesco had to do—and did—at 
Geneva was to bring to the dis- 
cussions between the national de- 
legations a truly international 
and objective outlook. That was 
the essence and originality of 
the part played by the Organiza- 
tion. 
The fact Unesco’s representati- 
ves could exercise an influence 
only by persuasion, certainly res- 
tricted considerably what they 
were able to do; but it did not 
lessen their obligations. Rather 
the reverse. Similarly, the fact 
that not all the States attending 
the Conference were members of 
the Organization (1) undoubtedly 
lessened our influence but made 
(1) Out of 45 States Members &f the 
United Nations, with the right to 
vote, and 9 Non-Member States. not 
entitled to vote, 28 and 2 respectively 
were not members of Unesco.  
it all the more incumbent upon 
us to promote the ideas which 
Unesco exists. 
We therefore had to speak on 
the subjects under discussion. 
The nature and conditions of the 
debate must also be borne m 
mind. 
This debate was essentially po- 
litical. It could not be otherwise, 
as the subject concerns not only 
the practices of governments but 
the very structure of States. 
Unesco, however, like all the 
Specialized Agencies, is concer- 
ned with purely technical ques- 
tions, and the Organization's 
constructive intervention at the 
Conference was limited to the 
technical side of the discussions. 
As a result, not only was the 
influence of Unesco’s representa- 
tives restricted in scope but there 
was a fundamental difference in 
outlook between them and the 
government delegations. 
Each delegation proceeded ac- 
cording to its own particular his- 
torial tradition, political ideo- 
logy, social needs, economic struc- 
ture and technical equipment; 
and the idea of freedom of in-. 
formation which it supported was 
founded on those individual fac- 
tors. In shori, each delegation 
came to the Conference with an 
opinion determined in advance. 
The only problem was to discover 
how that opinion could be recon- 
ciled with those of others. 
Unesco, as a non-political, inter- 
governmental organization, was 
not in a position to form such 
a decided opinion—an opinion 
challenging the constitution and 
administration of States. The 
Organization was obliged to admit 
all the factors, not only as 
obvious facts but also as indis- 
putable principles. 
Faced with the alternative of 
national prejudice (in the ori- 
ginal meaning of the term) which 
the Organization has to rise 
above, and the impossibility of 
giving a supra-national judg- 
ment, from which it is prohi- 
bited. Unesco, as an instrument 
of international co-operation, 
could only try to discover a basis 
for mutual understanding and 
practical co-operation, since a 
solution combining the various 
factors was impossible, 
That was the aim of the 
speech in which the Director- 
General described Unesco’s posi- 
tion. By emphasizing the idea of 
need as the basis of the idea of 
cal definition of freedom of in- 
formation, Dr. Julian Huxley was 
trying to define an area of 
common agreement, leading the 
discussion away from conflicts of 
interest and political tenets to 
keep it concentrated on the two 
subjects—broadly speaking, com- 
plementary and interdependent— 
of the technical requirements of 
the profession and the intellec- 
tual aspirations of the public. 
It was not for lack of clarity 
or energy that Unesco’s 
appeal was not better under- 
stood by the government delega- 
tes and did not meet with a 
better response. The speech, at 
least explains—and, we think, 
justifies— the line followed by 
the Organization's representati- 
ves at the Conference, ‘who rte- 
frained entirely from taking parf 
in the political discussions and 
concentrated on the technical 
facts and intellectual principles 
on which, in practice, freedom of 
information depends. 
The turn taken by the political 
debate is now well known. There 
were two rival camps. Both sides, 
rejected compromises. Decisions 
were taken by the vote of the 
majority. 
These unbending tactics and 
this rigid division constituted an 
additional complication for the 
reprensentatives of Unesco. Were 
they to take sides and support, 
(Continued on Purse §)

## [Page 8](073774engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER Volume 1.—No 3 
 


### 73789: International work camps

International 
Work Camps 
THE Conference of Organizers 
Work Camps, held on 22 and 
the end of the first stage of Unesco’s work in this 
field, and the progress so far made can be surveyed 
with some satisfaction. 
The first post-war international 
were organized in 1946. Unesco began to take an 
interest in this question in the spring of 1947 and 
camps—at Boussu-Bois 
Lidice (Czechoslo- 
vakia) and Lucimia (Poland), Observers from the 
Secretariat paid visits to the camps. 
It was clear from the outset that international 
Work Camps had a double value. 
volunteers were making a considerable voluntary 
contribution to the restoration of the educational 
life of war-devastated countries (by the rebuilding 
or equiping of schools, playing fields, youth hostels, 
ete); and secondly, the camps had the great advan- 
decided to 
(Belgium), 
sponsor four 
Cauterets (France), 
tage of bringing together young 
will of different nationalities to 
mon task. Valuable opportuni- 
ties were thus provided for 
truly international education (de- 
velopment of mutual understand- 
ing through team-work, establish- 
ment of yseful contacts between 
the volunteers and the local popu- 
lation, organization of talks, lec- 
tures and discussions on interna- 
tional problems), 
A report was therefore sub- 
mitted to the Mexico Conference, 
which resolved that Unesco should 
give increased assistance to Work 
Camps. The Temporary Interna- 
tional Council for Educational Re- 
construction (TICER) subsequent- 
ly appointed a Committee of Ex- 
perts on International Work 
Camps. At the Committee's first 
meeting, at the beginning of 1948, 
the principle of co-ordinatirg the 
activities of the associations re- 
presented on it was agreed upon, 
and the members of the Com- 
mittee were very soon able to 
embark on joint undertakings, 
particularly as regards the ne- 
cessary propaganda for Work 
Camps. The Committee also advis- 
ed the Unesco Secretariat on the 
preparation of the agenda for the 
Conference of Organizers of In- 
ternational Work Camps and on 
other matters included in its pro- 
gramme, 
The Conference has been held. 
Eighteen international organiza- 
tions sent expert delegates; and 
it provided an instance—seldom 
seen—of a Conference at which 
the average age of the delegates 
was under thirty. the atmosphere, 
from the beginning, cordial and 
non-academic. 
And now, what has come out of 
those two days’ work? 
Firstly, the Conference un- 
animously agreed on the need for 
co-ordinating the work of the 
various associations to promote 
Work Camps and elected a stand- 
ing Committee to establish the 
necessary working contacts and to 
be responsible for co-operation 
with Unesco. 
Secondly, at the meetings, the 
delegates pooled their experience 
of the countless technical pro- 
blems involved in the setting up 
of Work Camps and the despatch 
of volunteers. A most interesting 
document has thus been prepar- 
ed—the preliminary outline of a 
thorough treatment of the ques- 
tion; this document will be par- 
ticularly valuable to organizations 
~ which are trying to interest their 
members in Work Camms for the 
first time. 
of International 
23 April, marked 
Work Camps 
Firstly, the 
people of good 
work at a com- 
Lastly, the delegates submitted 
to Unesco and TICER specific re- 
quests for assistance in solving 
the difficult problems facing their 
associations (how to obtain mate- 
rials, equipment, visas, travel 
vouchers, support from public 
authorities, etc.). 
* 
Unesco's activities in connexion 
with Work Camps are primarily 
intended to stimulate the work 
of the associations. For example, 
the Secretariat has supplied arti- 
cles to various publications, has 
By 
Ingertha Sviggum 
Programme Specialist, on Interna- 
tional Voluntary Work Camps. 
organized broadcasts and is at 
present arranging for the publica- 
tion of a popular leaflet. 
publicizing of Work Camps is in- 
tended to make their existence 
known to all young people who 
may be prepared to work as 
volunteers and to official bodies 
which may be able to help. 
Unesco also aims at co-ordinat- 
ing as far as possible the activi- 
ties of the various associations 
which organize ‘Work Camps or 
send volunteers. This was one of 
Thanks to this action, the vari- 
ous associations which had pre- 
viously been working in isolation 
have now embarked on more 
fruitful combined operations. 
Lastly, Unesco is trying to 
make the Work Camps as effi- 
cient as possible by supporting 
organizers in their approaches to 
governments to discover which 
camps should have priority and to 
obtain materials, equipment, visas, 
etc. 
These efforts have produced re- 
sults. Work Camps have been 
opened in countries, such as Po- 
land or Greece, which had never 
had them before. 
As regards co-ordination, there 
have been interesting results this 
year in connexion with the camp 
organized by the Women’s World 
Fellowship at Burdignin (Haute- 
Savoie) for the purpose of setting 
up a children’s village. In March 
1948, the Fellowship, which had 
never before organized interna- 
tional Work Camps and had very 
little information on the matter, 
had neither volunteers nor equip- 
ment, nor a camp leader. There 
was a risk that the materials 
collected would have to remain 
unused owing to the lack of work- 
ers. 
Through the Secretariat, volun-: 
of Unesco. 
Kleber, Paris-16e, France. 
Czechoslovakia : 
Castle Street, — Cardiff: 
Tower Lane. — Belfast: 80 
Lebanon and Syria: 
Low Countries: 
SUBSCRIPTION RATES 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly in English, 
French and Spanish by the Public Information Section 
6-month subscription: 2s. 
Please write to the Unesco agent indicated below for 
your country, or directly to Unesco House, 19 Avenue 
Argentina: Editorial Sudamericana S.A., Alsina 500. Buenos-Aires. 
Australia: H, A. Goddard Ltd. 253a, George St.. Sydney. 
Canada : The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. West, Toronto. 
Cuba: La Casa Belga, R. de Smedt O'Reilly, Habana. 
Librairie F. Topic. 11 Narodni, Prague, 
Denmark : Einar Murksgaard, 6 Noirregade, Copenhagen. 
Great Britain: H.M. Stationery Office: London: York House, Kings- 
way (Retail Counter Service) 
orders). — Manchester 2: 39/41 King Street. — Edinburgh 2: 
1 St. Andrew's Crescent. 
France: Editions A. Pedone, 13 Rue Soufflot. Paris. 5e. 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie internationale, Athens. 
India: Oxford Book and Stationery Co.. Scindia House, New Delhi, 
Iraq: Mackenzie and Mackenzie. Booksellers. The Bookshop. Baghdad. 
Librairie universelle. Av. Fouad Ier, Beirut. 
N.V. Martinus Nijhoff. 
9 Lange Voorhout. The Hague 
Sweden: Ab. C. E Fritzes. Fredsgatan 2. Stockholm, 
Switzerland: Librairie Payot, Lausanne, 
6d. or $0.50 or Fr. frs. 100. 
; P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.1. {Post 
13a 
— Bristol 1: 
Chicaester Street. 
Afd., Fondsaministratie     
This - 
 
Youths from different countries are shown in ac- 
tion at two International Voluntary Work Camps. 
Above, clearing a field in Finland. Right, helping 
to build the Yugoslav Railway. 
teers have been found from} 
among various international or- 
ganizations. Workers are now pro- 
mised (for more than three 
months, some 50 volunteers of at 
least three nationalities will work 
in turn); furthermore, the Wo- 
men’s World Fellowship has been 
put into touch, by the Secretariat, 
with the French Ministry of Re- 
construction which, it is hoped, 
may be able to help in finding 
tools and a camp leader, 
On the educational side, libra- 
ries have been supplied for the 
four camps sponsored in 1947. 
Others are being assembled for 
the 30 camps to be sponsored in 
1948. 
Unesco is making every effort 
also to induce the authorities in 
the countries in which the Work 
Camps are to be held to give 
extensive help with the organiza- 
tion of cultural activities (by send- 
ing lecturers, supplying films, re- 
cords and books, arranging visits 
to schools and factories and con-   tacts with youth organizations. 
ow
 
B
n
 
a 
<P 
oy 
. x WN 
- 2 
_y 


### 73788: An Opinion on UNESCO's role in political meetings

 
An opinion on Unesco’s Role 
in Political Meetings 
{Continued from Page 7) 
with the weight of the organiza- 
tion, one camp against the other? 
Apart from the fact that the di- 
vision into camps was based on 
reasons which Unesco is not 
competent to judge, #here were 
Member States of the Organ.za- 
tion in both camps, and it is not 
a Secretariat's role to decide 
which of its Members are right, 
which wrong. 
The role of a Secretariat is to 
translate into action. so far as 
it can, agreement (when they 
exist) reached by the Member 
States which it represents. In 
this case there was no previous 
agreement of principle that the 
Secretariat could call upon Mem- 
hers to observe, It is true that 
resolution 2.2.2.1.3 of the Mexizo 
  
NEWS IN BRIEF 
Netherlands National 
Commission 
The third meeting of the 
Netherlands National Commission 
for Unesco met at the Hague on 
May 12. The members, represent- 
ing leaders in the fields of 
science, education, theatre, mu- 
seums, were welcomed by the 
chairman, Dr. HR. Kruyt. Among 
those present were Dr. JH. Rel- 
nink and Dr. F. Bender, of the 
Ministry of Education, Art and 
Sciences, Dr. F.LLR. Sassen, Vice- 
président of the Dutch National 
Commission and Miss Lunsingh 
Meyer, head of the section for 
UN affairs in the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. 
The Commission discussed 
means of spreading information 
in the Netherlands concerning 
Unesco, teaching about the UN 
and its Specialized Agencies, 
items of the 1948 Unesco pro- 
gramme and details regarding the 
Unesco conference for universi- 
ties, scheduled to be held in 
Utrecht (Netherlands) this Au- 
gust. Dr. Kruyt, Dr. Bender and 
Dr. Sassen were appointed Na- 
tional Commission delegates to 
this conference. 
* kX 
First World Congress 
Of Art Critics 
Leading art critics, coming 
from 24 countries, will meet this 
month at Unesco House in Paris 
for the Pirst World Congress of 
Art Critics. The Congress, meet- 
ing for one week from June 21 to 
28, will discuss the establishment 
of an International Association 
of Art Critics and will be devot- 
ed to a discussion of some of the 
major artistic and aesthetic pro- 
blems of our time. 
The distinguished Belgian cri- 
tic and historian M. Paul Fierens 
will preside over the Congress, 
which will include such famous 
world figures as Jean Cassou of 
France, Lionello Venturi of Italy, 
James Johnson Sweeney of the 
United States, Herbert Read of 
England and M. Van Eck of 
Czechoslovakia. 
Universities 
Conference to Meet 
in Utrecht 
On August 2-13, Unesco will 
convene at Utrecht, Holland, the 
first general conference of uni- 
versities held since the war. In- 
vitations to the Preparatory Con- 
ference of Representatives of 
Universities have been extended 
to all the nations of the world to 
send a specified number of par- 
ticipants and observers. A num- 
ber of international organiza- 
tions interested in higher educa- 
tion, including student groups, 
have also been invited to send a 
representative. 
Five public meetings will be 
held with addresses on such 
issues as: “New Horizons in Uni- 
vepsity Development”; “Relations 
of Higher Education and the 
State”; “The University as a 
Force in. World Co-operation”; 
and “Unesco and Higher Educa- 
tion”. 
During the regular sessions of 
the Conference and in sectional 
meetings, current university pro- 
blems will be discussed. Special 
attention will be paid to ways in 
which higher education can con- 
tribute to world understanding 
and permanent peace. 
Addresses of welcome will be 
given by representatives of the 
Netherlands Government. The 
speakers will include Dr. Julian 
Huxley, Director - General of 
Unesco and other world leaders 
in higher education. Representa- 
tives from various countries will 
describe the growth and problems 
of higher education in different 
parts of the world. Problems to 
be considerered by the partici- 
pants will include: the changing 
functions of the university; impro- 
vement of academic standards, 
financing and facilitating higher 
education; university education 
in international understanding; 
and the development of ways to 
continue international co-opera- 
tion among universities. 
Conference instructed the Direc- 
tor-General to “promote at the 
Conference on Freedom of Infor- 
mation the... policies adopted ny 
the General Conference”. But ‘n 
fact the question of these policies 
was never settled in Mexico, and, 
insofar as it was discussed, the 
exchanges of views both in the 
plenary meetings and in the Mass 
Communication Working Party. 
brought out obvious and profound 
differences of opinion (1). 
In these conditions the Secre- 
tariat did not consider it should 
take sides in the “political” de- 
bate at Geneva. I do not doubt 
that some people have criticized 
this intentional discretion, which 
they wrongly attribute to excessi- 
ve timidity or to culpable negli- 
gence. I believe that on reflexion 
it will be clear to them. not only 
that the representatives of the 
Secretariat could not do other- 
wise, but also that in the interests 
of the Organization theirs was 
the only course compatible with 
the universal nature of a techni- 
cal organization which cannot 
make political pronouncements of 
its own without hopelessly com- 
promising itself. 
I came back from Geneva 
convinced of the immense poten- 
tial moral authority possessed by 
Unesco; in order to become an 
active force, this authority has 
only to prove its effectiveness by 
practical achievements. 
In order ts achieve its aims. 
Unesco must use this potential 
influence to further a construc-. 
tive policy. There must be a 
“Unesco point of view” which, by 
its originality, will gradually win 
the sympathy of peoples and the 
respect of governments. In other | 
words, Unesco must adopt a reso- 
lutely militant attitude. 
But this militant attitude and 
this constructive policy cannot 
spring from the arbitrary inven- 
tion of a Secretariat of officials 
nor from passive conformity, 
however well-intentioned, to the 
will of a political group. Unesco 
must, above all, voice the agreed 
opinion of its different Members 
met together to carry out specific 
technical tasks. And the more 
its universality and its irdepen- 
dence are recognized, the more 
weight will be attached to its 
words. 
f1) ef. Unesco Courier, vol. I n. 2, 
May 1948, page 6. 
Unesco Pamphlet Published 
in German 
“The Teacher and the Post- 
War Child”, a pamphlet written 
by Mr. Leonard Kenworthy of 
the Unesco Secretariat, and first 
published in English in 1946, has 
now been translated and printed 
privately in Germany. The print- 
ing was made by arrangement 
with Unesco and the U.S. mi- 
litary authorities in Germany. 
Editorial Offices: 
Kléber, Paris (16¢). 
Editor : S.M. KOFFLER. 
Director: H. KAPLAN. 
Unesco, 18, Avenue 
Reproduction of all articles authorized.   IMPRIMERIE 
DU NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE 
21, Rue de Berri - Paris 8e