# [191578](191578eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](191578eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
June 2006 + ISSN 1993-8616 
= = < ® = > = 7p. 
= - 
 
 
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization

## [Page 2](191578eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

© 
UN
ES
CO
/A
lf
re
d 
Wo
lf
 
  
     [D0 S100 Tg 
iso Contents 
  
  JUNE - 2006 
 
DESERTIFICATION 
Desertification - Dogon Country (Mali). 
In the 1950s, scientists thought that technology could green the world’s deserts. 
Today, technological optimism has been replaced by realism and concern. 
On the occasion of an international conference on the future of drylands 
to be held in Tunis on 19-21 June 2006, this edition of the UNESCO Courier 
is dedicated to the topic of desertification.   
I TURNING BACK 
THE SANDS OF TIME? 
In 1996, the UN Convention to Combat 
Desertification (UNCCD) was adopted 
“to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought 
in countries experiencing serious drought and/or 
desertification, in particular in Africa’. 3 
. . ~ -— 
       
MYRTLE AND BROOM, 
THE REAL MEDITERRANEAN 
LANDSCAPE? 
Mediterranean island landscapes have 
experienced deforestation and desertification 
since classical times. Today, rising tourism and farming 
increasingly deplete groundwater resources and threaten 
to accelerate desertification. 4 
  
   
   
 
# FIGHTING DESERTIFICATION 
TO IN KENYA, ONE TREE AT A TIME 
: ~~ Despite a ban on logging and cutting down 
trees, increased use of charcoal contributes 
to desertification in Kenya. New legislation and environmental 
activism aim to fight this trend which threatens to turn 
the country into a desert. 6 
| EE “ HARNESSING 
. THE SUN'S ENERGY 
£—. TO MAKE DRINKING WATER 
“Scientists working in Egypt learn a valuable 
lesson: if they are to involve local villagers in dryland conservation 
projects, they must first propose a solution to the community's 
drinking water shortage. 8 
   
  
© CHINA'S SEASON OF DUST 
Hn aa. Increased farming and rising global | 
| temperatures are expanding the Gobi Desert 
r “| in China. Are tree planting initiatives enough 
to return wildlife and vegetation to the region? 10 
     
  
   
— DESERTIFICATION? 
Every year desertification gains ground 
in developing countries. We may be able to reverse these effects 
if we act quickly says Professor Charles Hutchinson, 
Director for the Office of Arid Lands Studies at Arizona University 
(USA), a regular collaborator to UNESCO. 11 
tw ~ 5 ARE HUMAN BEINGS 
% s _ /. . TOBLAME FOR 
IMELINE 13 
 
United Nations. :  
ams AND FIGURES 14 
eresting facts and figures on desertification. : 
Te COURIER LOOKS BACK 15 
ince it began publication, The UNESCO Courier has devoted many articles to desertification. Here is a glimpse at some of them. : 

## [Page 3](191578eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

In the 1950s, scientists thought that technology could green the world’s deserts 
(To \VAR (=o [3 Tod [oo Tor WoT 1 i133 TES MG EEE o ET WCC To Tess WoL A C1 [ES J Ty Co oT) Lo 
On the occasion of an international conference on the future of drylands to be held in Tunis 
19-21 June 2006, this edition of the UNESCO Courier is dedicated to the topic of desertification 


### 193844: Turning back the sands of time?

  
TURNING BACK 
THE SANDS OF TIME: 
©
 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
 
Wo
lf
, 
Al
fr
ed
 
   
: ~~ AAR AA 3 oN 
UE SR Ne 
» N , 
APY. 
Desertification - Dogon Country (Mali). 
n the 1950s, a sense of great opti- 
ism prevailed that we could green 
he world's deserts. It was believed 
hat techniques such as cloud seed- 
ng using silver-iodide could bring 
ainfall to dry areas, improved irriga- 
tion techniques could boost agri- 
cultural production in the drylands, 
and selective breeding could create 
livestock less dependent on water. In 
short, we thought that poverty in the 
world’s drylands could be reduced 
through technology. 
Half a century later, technological 
optimism has been replaced by rea- 
lism and concern. The belief that we 
can control our climate has given way 
to concerns about human impact on 
the environment, in particular global 
warming. 
Current climate scenarios predict 
that the driest regions of the world 
will become even drier. The availabi- 
lity of freshwater, the most precious 
resource in drylands, is reaching criti- 
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
cal quality threshold levels, even in 
temperate zones. Despite technolog- 
ical advances in genetic modification 
of organisms to be drought and pest 
resistant, dryland countries are still 
among the poorest in the world. 
The last fifty years have shown us 
that the ecological and socio-eco- 
nomic situation in drylands is not a 
simple equation governed by fac- 
tors such as climate, soil, water and 
vegetation. Market speculation and 
enormous price fluctuations in com- 
modities such as cotton can affect 
the income of a rural farmer in a re- 
mote village in Mali, in the same way 
that droughts or floods will affect his 
or her harvest. 
From realism to hope 
Despite these challenges, there is 
hope for drylands. The world has re- 
cognized the degradation of drylands 
by proclaiming 2006 the International 
Year of Deserts and Desertification. 
3 
Also, in 1996, the UN Convention 
to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) 
was adopted “to combat deserti- 
fication and mitigate the effects of 
drought in countries experiencing se- 
rious drought and/or desertification, 
in particular in Africa’ 
Drylands were at the centre of 
UNESCO's earliest efforts at inter- 
national scientific cooperation in the 
study of natural resources. In 1951, 
the Organization launched its first in- 
ternational research programme deal- 
ing with arid zones. Today, UNESCO 
2006: 
International Year of Deserts 
and Desertification 
1996: 
UN Convention to Combat 
Desertification (UNCCD)

## [Page 4](191578eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### 193844: Turning back the sands of time?

programmes, such as the Programme 
on Man and the Biosphere (MAB), 
and the International Hydrological 
Programme (IHP) continue to inno- 
vate. Both programmes run dryland 
research projects worldwide, such as 
at the Omayed Biosphere Reserve in 
Egypt which provides clean drinking 
water to Bedouins using solar power. 
Bringing children 
and teachers onboard 
To help future generations to com- 
bat desertification, a wealth of exist- 
ing scientific knowledge has been 
transformed into educational tools 
for primary schools. The “Education 
Kit on Combating Desertification” in- 
forms students and teachers alike on 
the problems of drylands, and gives 
examples of simple measures every- 
one can take. This kit has now been 
translated into Arabic, Chinese, Eng- 
lish, French, German, Hindi, Mongol, 
Russian and Spanish. 
The MAB Programme is currently 
developing a new teaching resource 
kit for dryland countries to stimulate 
students’ creativity in environmental 
education. 
The Future of Drylands Conference, 
to be held in Tunis in June 2006, will 
review the current state-of-knowl- 
edge of dryland ecosystems and the 
socio-economics of dryland develop- 
ment in order to provide scientific and 
technical advice to decision-makers. 
lt also aims to define future paths of 
research into drylands, specially pro- 
moting application-oriented science 
for the sustainable development of 
dryland regions. 
This conference marks 50 years of 
dryland research in the UN System: 
let us be optimistic again on the fu- 
ture of drylands by fostering global 
partnerships for development in line 
with the Millennium Development 
Goals. 
Thomas Schaaf 
ELE EW EEL RE ELT REDD Eo oT EVERY ET [Tg [o=Te Me [53 {ol CTS 21 To) 
nd desertification since classical times. Today, rising tourism and farming 
ncreasingly deplete groundwater resources and threaten to accelerate desertificatio 


### 193845: Myrtle and broom: the real Mediterranean landscape?

  
MYRTLE AND BROOM 
THE REAL MEDITERRANEAN LANDSCAPE: 
o the hundreds of thousands of 
orth European tourists who visit 
he Mediterranean every year, the 
arob groves and scrubland that 
urround many an ancient site are 
he region's archetypal scenery. 
But a visit to a natural history 
museum will reveal that that this 
landscape is not the one that an- 
cients saw. Until Classical times, 
the sea’s larger islands had thick- 
ly forested mountainous interiors 
that once harboured elephants 
and rhinoceroses. 
The low-growth scrubs of myrtle 
and broom or aromatic herbs we 
today think of as typically Mediterra- 
nean are largely the result of man's 
activity in chopping down primeval 
forests for agriculture, fuel or build- 
ing homes and ships. 
But the process does not stop 
there -- further erosion of the soil 
can create barren steppeland 
where only thistle and asphodel, 
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
©
C
h
a
r
l
i
e
 
O
n
i
a
n
s
 
® 
—
 
~ 
—
 
[S 
2 INGE. "of — 
‘ : 
pes \ 
Agricultural land in Cyprus struggles against a combination 
of irregular rainfall and year-long sunshine. 
symbol of the underworld to the an- 
cients, survive. 
At the far eastern end of the 
Mediterranean, the resort island of 
Cyprus has retained one of the re- 
gion's most diverse fauna and flora, 
with its relative isolation giving it 
4 
one of Europe's highest numbers 
of endemic species. 
But each spring southerly winds 
from nearby Africa dump Saharan 
sand from Egypt and Libya in a re- 
minder of the fragility of the island's 
ecosystems.

## [Page 5](191578eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### 193845: Myrtle and broom: the real Mediterranean landscape?

Myrtle and broom are not 
“typically Mediterranean” 
This landscape resulted when 
primeval forests were chopped 
down for agriculture, fuel and 
building homes and ships. 
In 2000, Cyprus ratified the UN 
Convention to Combat Desertifica- 
tion. Two years later, it submitted 
its first report, which identified the 
principal threats as climate change, 
soil erosion, overuse of water and 
the impact of man. 
A changing 
environment 
Analysis of weather data from the 
past century suggests the island 
is growing hotter by up to 0.01 
degrees centigrade per year and 
growing drier by about one millime- 
tre per year in precipitation. And it 
is growing drier from a low base. 
Although the island as a whole ave- 
rages around 480 millimetres of 
rain or snow per year, large parts 
receive less than 200 millimetres. 
The southern foothills of the main 
Troodos mountain range and the 
Mesaoria plain between the capi- 
tal Nicosia and the eastern city of 
Famagusta are the worst affected 
and among the most prone to de- 
sertification. 
©
Ch
ar
li
e
 
O
n
i
a
n
s
 
Existing water supply is also being 
used ever more plentifully as the 
island's agriculture becomes more 
intensive. 
“Overexploitation of (groundwa- 
ter) usually results in sea intrusion 
and destruction of the aquifers thus 
adding to the desertification prob- 
lem, the government report ac- 
knowledges. 
The island's small Green Party, 
which forms part of the governing 
coalition, has been particularly ac- 
tive on the issue, pressing for more 
research into a problem that threat- 
ens not only the island's natural 
environment but also much of its 
tourism potential. 
“An affiliated scientific organiza- 
tion is working on a scientific basis 
to document the level of desertifi- 
cation in Cyprus, said the party's 
environment spokesman Costas 
Papastavros. 
“We need to understand more 
about the parameters of the 
problem. The landscape issue is 
a very hot issue for the tourism 
industry as well” 
Sustainable water 
management 
The conservation group Birdlife 
Cyprus also conducts research. 
But for its director Martin Hellicar, 
the key is sustainable agriculture. 
“It boils down to water manage- 
ment. Agriculture in Cyprus over 
  
of the Cyprus capital 
kilometres from the beach. 
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
icosia, more than 30 
“Deforestation 
in the 20th or 21st century 
Is man-made’ 
Artemis Yiordanli, 
environmental group leader. 
the past 20 or 30 years has be- 
come more and more water-hun- 
gry, Hellicar explains. “The ques- 
tion is: Is this sustainable?” 
“What is happening is that the 
areas that are intensively farmed 
are becoming more intensively 
farmed," he says. “More marginal 
farms in upland areas are being 
abandoned. This is not what you 
want. 
Artemis Yiordanli heads envi- 
ronmental group Terra Cypria, 
which has been active trying to re- 
verse the exodus of young people 
from marginal rural communities 
through the introduction of sus- 
tainable development concepts 
like agro-tourism. 
“Deforestation in the 20th or 
21st century is man-made, she 
says. “More lands are being aban- 
doned from agriculture. Some 
return to forest if they are high 
enough, some go to low-growth, 
especially when you have over- 
grazing. The implication for biodi- 
versity is obvious. 
Since the 1980s the government 
has been engaged in afforesta- 
tion of some land in extreme con- 
dition. By 2001, 4,300 hectares 
had been afforested under the 
programme and another 10,000 
hectares are planned over the 
current decade. 
But the issue is a complex one, 
and the scheme is not without 
its critics. 
“Reforestation needs to be ap- 
propriate, says Hellicar. “lt is not 
always necessarily a good thing to 
have trees. Bird species like the lark 
or stone curlew, which are of Euro- 
pean importance, are dependent 
on drier, more open landscapes” 
Steve Kirby

## [Page 6](191578eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

Despite a ban on logging and cutting down trees, 
[0 (CE TLTo MECN oy fo EI (ele E Wee] 1 [id] o JTL CER (Xe [ELT gn) Tor Vie LNT HACE 
New legislation and environmental activism aim to fight this tren 
hich threatens to turn the country into a dese 
  
© 
Bo
si
re
 
Bo
go
nk
o 
  
   
   
ishevelled, soiled and covered in 
38S is thriving now that the coun- 
try has begun recovering from a se- 
vere drought. 
He collects about 500 shillings 
(about seven dollars) a day, a con- 
siderable sum in a country where 
more than 60 percent of people 
survive on under one dollar a day, 
before returning home to the near- 
by Mukuru slums. 
Njuguna is among around 30 oth- 
ers on the same road, and thou- 
sands across the country, scram- 
bling to meet customer demand. 
Since rains resumed in Kenya after 
a prolonged drought, rising costs of 
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
A temporary storage facility in northem Wiajir district, 
a region where the effects of desertification are widely felt. 


### 193846: Fighting desertification in Kenya: one tree at a time

FIGHTING 
DESERTIFICATION IN KENYA 
ONE TREE AT A TIME 
fuel have contributed to the rise in 
demand for charcoal. 
“We are forced to buy charcoal 
because we cannot afford fuel or 
electricity, said Maria Kimuta, a pri- 
mary school teacher. Nearby a row 
of women frying fish and pancakes 
on the roadside say they need a 
steady flow of charcoal - mostly 
from indigenous hard wood - to 
stay in business. 
“We are used to this charcoal 
since it is efficient when cooking on 
“| request every Kenyan 
to plant a tree so that we can 
make afforestation in Kenya 
a success’. 
Alfred Mutua 
| 
6 
  
the wayside,” said Mary Nyagothi, 
a fish monger in Nairob’s Gikomba 
Open air market. 
Experts say increased use of char- 
coal over the years in Kenya has 
increased deforestation in several 
parts of the country, mostly in the 
Mau Forest, which acts as the main 
water catchment area in the east 
African nation. 
Activism 
and legislation 
In addition to banning logging, 
government officials have outlawed 
the cutting down of trees, war- 
ning of an increasing desertification 
across the country. 
“The situation is very bad and we 
must all work to change this habit 
of recklessly cutting trees. | request

## [Page 7](191578eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Bo
si
re
 
Bo
go
nk
o 
  
Fr NI A NB 
’ 4 
= oh» 3] 
A NL H Al 4 g * ed 
A Kenyan Turkana woman drawing water from a deep well in northern Kenya. 
  
In Nairobi as in the rest of Kenya, charcoal is 
the most commonly-used fuel. 
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
© 
Bo
si
re
 
Bo
go
nk
o every Kenyan to plant a tree so that 


### 193846: Fighting desertification in Kenya: one tree at a time

we can make afforestation in Kenya 
a success, Kenyan government 
spokesman Alfred Mutua said. 
Mutua said deforestation has in- 
creased the effects of drought, 
which has affected around 15 mil- 
lion people in east Africa, of which 
eight million of them are in dire need 
of relief supplies. In Kenya alone, 
some 3.5 million need food aid. 
Environmental activists like 2005 
Nobel Peach Prize winner Wangari 
Maathai are concerned that ram- 
pant tree cutting will alter rain pat- 
terns and expand deserts. Rapid 
desertification in Africa “is a result 
of deforestation, devegetation, es- 
pecially due to poor farming prac- 
tices and soil erosion that made 
riverbeds red-brown, Maathai said 
in Nairobi. 
Alarmed by years of forest mis- 
management, Maathai lobbied 
7 
“The continent's growing 
population is often 
forced to migrate 
in order to find water” 
several lawmakers to pass a forest 
law last year that, if effectively 
implemented, will go a long way 
to protect Kenyan forests. After 
a near 10-year delay, the Kenyan 
parliament approved The Forest 
Bill 2005. The bill replaces a law 
adopted during British colonial rule 
of Kenya in 1947 that has failed to 
protect the country’s forests. 
Since independence in 1963, 
Kenya's forest cover has shrunk 
from 10 percent of its 582,650 
square-kilometre (224,962-square- 
mile) territory to a mere 1.7 percent, 
according to environmentalists who 
campaigned for the new law. 
Migration contributes 
to desertification 
“The continent's growing popula- 
tion is often forced to migrate in or- 
der to find water”. 
According to regional environmen- 
tal experts, more than two-thirds of 
Africa is either arid, semi arid or 
just plain dry lands. The continent's 
growing population is often forced 
to migrate in order to find water and 
grazing lands for their livestock. 
“This migration, usually with their 
livestock concentrated in one area, 
usually ruins the environment and 
contributes to expansion of deserts 
and to some extent climate change,’ 
said an environmentalist who had 
done studies in parts of east Africa. 
The Worldwide Fund for Nature 
has warned that Africa is losing two 
million hectares (five million acres) 
of forest every five years, moving 
the continent closer to becoming 
one huge desert. 
Bosire Bogonko

## [Page 8](191578eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

Lo NE CRT [RL I =e) LA CELE RCI LTE CR EE 
ROE TCR RT INCH [Toe RUT ET LV ERT We [TI ET Lo Mole ECTATE Tio] Wo] fo) [Ton £5 
LOS ANTE RTE Ao] (o] ENE Eo] [T1i To] I (ol) (ER In UT TEI LL LC [REL Et [oT Te [= 


### 193847: Harnessing the sun's energy to make drinking water

  
HARNESSING THE SUN’S ENERGY 
TO MAKE DRINKING WATER 
© 
B.
 
S
a
l
e
m
 
  
   
    
    
   
a 
he first meeting took place in a 
rowded Bedouin tent. We, the 
cientists working for the SUMA- 
AD (Sustainable Management 
f Marginal Drylands) project in 
gypt, were there to assess the 
eeds of the Bedouin community, 
the desert people who live in the 
Omayed Biosphere Reserve, and 
to offer our help. 
Initially, our intention was to ad- 
vise this impoverished population 
against overgrazing and uprooting 
the sparse local vegetation. We 
thought we would work with them 
on several rotational grazing re- 
gimes and dry farming to improve 
their livelihoods in a sustainable 
way. In the process we would gain 
some of their traditional knowledge 
on coping with drought. 
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
 
Final Layout of the solar systems in Omayed Site. 
They had a different idea. One 
youth said immediately “We will take 
your advice, give you facilities, but 
give us drinking water first!” 
“Water for us is like gold, very pre- 
cious and hard to find, another Bed- 
ouin continued. “The water in our 
wells is very salty. We get our fresh 
water from trucks and travel a long 
way to get it” 
“We walk ten km carrying bu- 
ckets on our heads. Our population 
Is growing, and so is our need for 
water, an old woman with a face full 
of wrinkles joined in. “You civilized 
people, help us. We need water, 
not T-shirts with ‘protect the environ- 
ment’ written on them!” 
We could only agree that the 
Bedouins faced a critical situation. 
Omayed Biosphere Reserve (OBR) 
8 
  
is part of Egypt's Western Coastal 
Desert, located on its Mediterranean 
coastal edge, an area rich in natural 
resources. 
Groundwater, 
a scarcity 
Water resources, however, are 
scarce and variable. Groundwater 
in the Omayed Biosphere Reserve 
comes from the Moghra and Wadi El 
Natrun Aquifers, which are saline due 
“Water for us is like gold, 
very precious 
and hard to find”

## [Page 9](191578eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

© 
B.
 
S
a
l
e
m
 
    po 
  
Delivery of water to households at Omayed Biosphere Reserve. 


### 193847: Harnessing the sun's energy to make drinking water

to over-extraction and infiltration. 
In the four villages that OBR covers, 
with a population of about 12,000, 
there is not enough fresh water for 
irrigation, livestock and domestic 
needs, so many people use the salty 
and environmentally-damaging well 
water. Many travel far and pay high 
prices for drinking water delivered by 
trucks. Contaminated by storage in 
corroded tanks and open cisterns, it 
can cause serious intestinal diseases. 
At the meeting, the challenge to 
SUMAMAD was clear. If we wanted 
to involve OBR villagers in our dry- 
land conservation projects, we had to 
propose a solution to their clean wa- 
ter shortage: a desalination process 
for well water. Although large-scale 
desalination technologies have been 
used in Egypt for many years, they 
have not yet become widely available 
in a form that would fit the needs of 
the Bedouins. 
For the process to be sustainable 
in the OBR, water must be pumped 
in amounts permitting its natural re- 
plenishment. The technique must be 
simple, clean, environmentally friend- 
ly and compatible with local culture, 
and it must use minimum energy, fit 
the natural conditions and require 
minimum maintenance. 
Fortunately, the solution already 
exists: a small-scale, solar-powered 
desalination system invented by a 
German scientist that meets all the 
above criteria. 
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
With the community's strong sup- 
port, a pilot project was established 
in the OBR village of Awlad Gebreel. 
Inhabitants helped in every way they 
could, donating 150 square meters 
of land including a salt water well 
for the installation of the desalination 
units, a small building and a pump. 
A solution that works 
The system is now operating. Gravity 
causes raw water to run from the tank 
to four distillation units that separate 
What you need: 
150 sq meters of land 
1 salt water well 
1 pump 
4 distillation units 
How it works: 
Gravity causes raw water 
to run from the tank 
to distillation units that 
separate salt from water 
using solar energy. 
Output: 
100-120 liters 
of drinking water per day. 
    
salt from water using solar energy. 
About 100-120 litres of distillate are 
produced per day depending on the 
amount of sunlight. Even on cloudy 
days, there is enough to provide five 
families - 40 to 50 people - with drin- 
king water. The process also produ- 
ces salt crystals that can be used for 
tanning leather. 
To further the project's participa 
tory aim, we held an open day with a 
workshop in the community meeting 
hall and later at the site. We explained 
at length how the system works and 
stressed the importance of hygienic 
conditions for the pump and freshwa- 
ter tank. We also organized a special 
course for members of the community 
who will be responsible for the plant's 
maintenance. 
The Bedouin community showed 
great appreciation. The women were 
especially happy that their children 
could now have clean water. They 
even expressed their feelings in songs, 
singing that “the dream of having wa- 
ter flowing easily has come true’ 
Dr Boshra Salem, 
Assistant Professor, Department 
of Environmental Sciences, 
Faculty of Science, 
University of Alexandria - Egypt. 
Andreas Schneider, 
Managing Director, 
Clear water Solutions, 
Switzerland — Egypt.

## [Page 10](191578eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

Increased farming and rising global temperatures are expanding 
the Gobi Desert in China. Are tree planting initiatives enough 
LRG RCN CET [ORE [I Yio RoR CH (Te [0] Ig 


### 193848: China's season of dust

  
CHINA'S 
SEASON OF DUST 
  
| 
@V
ic
to
ri
a 
Ha
mi
lt
on
 
Trees in the desert, which was once a town (inhabited in the 1960s and 70s). 
his year, on 16-17 April, a single dust 
torm dumped nearly 300,000 tons 
f sand on Beijing before moving 
n to Korea and Japan. Sentinels 
f desertification, the storms have 
ome to be known as the “fifth sea- 
son” or dust season. 
Desertification in China's most fa- 
mous desert, the Gobi, has been in 
progress since before the 1950s, 
but it was from this point on that the 
desert’s expansion accelerated into 
full force. According to China's En- 
vironmental Protection Agency, dur- 
ing a three year period in the mid- 
nineties, the desert had expanded 
by 52, 400 square kilometers. And 
with the Olympic Games com- 
ing up in 2008, the Gobi Desert 
creeps nearer to the capital at a 
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
rate of 3km per year. Today, it lurks 
just 160km outside Beijing. 
Planting trees 
to reclaim the desert 
Beginning in 1978, a huge “green- 
ing" campaign was waged to com- 
bat desertification. In the 1980s, a 
tree planting initative was organized 
for the protection and management 
of forest resources culminating with 
Average 
annual temperatures 
have been rising 
0.5 — 2.0 degrees Celsius 
since the 1970s. 
10 
the creation of National Tree Planting 
Day. On 12 March each year, people 
from all walks of life plant trees around 
the north regions of the country in the 
worst hit areas. 
In the late 1970s global warming 
became a hot topic in China as ave- 
rage annual temperatures began to 
nse by 0.5 — 2.0 degrees Celsius, 
causing the surface soil to become 
especially dry. 
Deserts throughout different cli- 
mates have always expanded and 
— when cool enough precipita- 
tion is available — reduced back to 
their original size. But if the climate 
does not get any cooler, problems 
begin to arise. 
The dramatic rise in temperature 
and sparse vegetation cover of

## [Page 11](191578eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### 193848: China's season of dust

© 
Vi
ct
or
ia
 
Ha
mi
lt
on
 
4 
5
 
  
huge environmental concern. 
Mongolia, with over 40% of its terri- 
tory encompassed within the Gobi 
Desert, makes desertification here a 
huge environmental concer. It has 
been estimated that around 80% 
of its total territory is under serious 
threat of desertification. With inad- 
equate livestock water supplies and 
poor pasture utilization, due to both 
a population and domestic animal in- 
crease, it seems humans are chiefly 
to blame for what has already hap- 
pened, and what will happen in years 
to come. 
Reasons for hope 
It seems that some reforestation pro- 
jects are bearing fruit, such as efforts 
being made in the Maowusu Desert, 
located between the southern Inner 
Mongolia Autonomous Region and 
northern Shaanxi. Forty years ago, 
the desert was just 500 meters away 
from the city of Yulin; as of June 2005, 
it stands over 50km away according 
to Yao Zhongxin of the Shaanxi Pro- 
vincial Forestry Bureau. The area of 
desert in Shaanxi has been pushed 
back 275,000 hectares since 1999. 
That is a marvelous feat and some- 
thing Beijing should strive towards. 
The problem of displacement is also 
a concern in the Gobi. With the des- 
ert growing anywhere from 2,000- 
10,000 square kilometers per year, 
the resulting number of refugees is on 
the rise. Chinese scientists report that 
there are now desert refugees in three 
provinces—Inner Mongolia, Ningxia 
and Gansu. In Gansu province alone 
there are around 4,000 villages that 
face abandonment. Over the next de- 
cade, 180,000 residents living close 
to Beijing will need to relocate as well 
due to all the measures that will be put 
in place to decrease desertification 
gaining in on the capital. 
Today, tourists in the Gobi are told of 
times past when “instead of a lifeless, 
flat expanse of hot, arid land, the area 
was rich with wildlife and vegetation, 
inhabited by camel breeding families” 
This reminds us that the deserts are 
not some wild force out of our con- 
trol fighting for survival, but indeed 
fragile eco-systems needing proper 
care and attention. Attention that is 
desperately lacking. 
Victoria Hamilton 
in Beijing 
Every year desertification gains ground in developing countries. 
We may be able to reverse these effects if we act quickly says Profess 
Charles Hutchinson, Director for the Office of Arid Lands Studies 
at Arizona University (USA), a regular collaborator to UNESCO. 


### 193849: Are human beings to blame for desertification?

  
ARE HUMAN BEINGS 
TO BLAME FOR DESERTIFICATION: 
We generally associate 
the idea of deserts 
with that of desertification. 
What’s the difference 
between these two concepts? 
Deserts are a natural feature of the 
Earth's climate. The great subtropi- 
cal deserts include: the Sahara, 
the Gobi in central Asia and the 
Takla Makan in western China. 
Some argue that desertification 
is not possible in deserts, outside 
of oases, because they are largely 
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
Interview by Donatienne de San 
  
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
a
n
t
e
t
,
 
Be
rn
ar
d 
11 

## [Page 12](191578eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
Professor Charles Hutchinson. 
devoid of plant and animal life. 
Instead, they say that desertifica- 
tion is found more commonly in 
adjacent semiarid and sub-humid 
areas, and is largely caused by hu- 
man activity. 
Droughts aren’t the only cause 


### 193849: Are human beings to blame for desertification?

of desertification. 
What are some others? 
Semi-arid areas are relatively 
dry, but their main feature is their 
extreme variability in rainfall from 
year to year and also from place 
to place. It is variability, a pe- 
riod of good years followed by 
a bad stretch that often leads to 
problems such as desertification 
or a decline in land productivity. 
In good rainfall years, pastora- 
lists or ranchers may add animals 
to their herds. Similarly, farmers 
who rely on rainfall may begin to 
cultivate areas that were marginal 
farmlands. When droughts return 
larger herds will exert damaging 
pressure on rangeland vegeta- 
tion. Farmers’ crops in marginal 
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
fields will fail. Both situations will 
deplete the soil and expose it to 
erosion. 
Climate variability is one cause, 
but so is population pressure to 
bring new lands into production, 
or government policies that en- 
courage the development of mar- 
ginal lands. 
Also, certain governments try 
to raise exports by encouraging 
farmers to cultivate commercial 
goods such as peanuts or cot- 
ton, which are less adapted to the 
climate than the indigenous prod- 
ucts they replace. 
How are desertification 
and poverty linked? 
Poverty generally occurs when 
rural populations have no alter- 
natives to making a living. How- 
ever, people are resilient, and 
they are able to find alterna- 
tives, often outside of their im- 
mediate area. 
It has been suggested that the 
increasing movement from rural 
12 
to urban areas -at least by some 
family members- has provided 
new sources of income to local 
households and reduced some 
of the pressure on rural lands in 
many parts of the world. However, 
these migrations also affect 
household and community struc- 
tures because immigrants are 
usually young males who are the 
main part of local labor forces. 
Is desertification 
a phenomenon specific 
to developing countries? 
There are, or have been, prob- 
lems of declining productivity in 
most of the world’s drylands, even 
in developed countries. However, 
the factors that make some areas 
more “drought proof” than others, 
such as strong governance, vital 
integrated economies, mature ser- 
vice infrastructure, access to water 
and other resources are often lack- 
ing in developing countries. 
Is desertification 
a reversible process? 
At one point in time, the answer 
was, “yes.... if you have enough 
money.” Now, it might still be a 
tentative yes, but one highly de- 
pendent on local conditions -- cli- 
matic, ecological, economic and 
social. There are reports of im- 
proving conditions without mas- 
sive infusions of money, particu- 
larly in the Sahel region. Here, 
local communities have come 
together to construct low-tech- 
nology water control structures 
from local materials (i.e., earth 
and rocks) to minimize runoff and 
promote rainfall infiltration. 
These are hopeful and, again, 
point to the resilience of many 
rural economies and communi- 
ties. However, as things improve 
there is often a tendency to be- 
come complacent and to assume 
that the problems have been 
solved for good. During this re- 
cent period, climate has been 
relatively favorable. But, as we 
know, drought will definitely re- 
turn. Whether the reported gains 
can withstand another round of 
bad years is unclear.

## [Page 13](191578eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### 193850: Important dates on desertification in UNESCO and the United Nations

Timeline 
Important dates on desertification 
in UNESCO and the United Nations. 
1947 
The Director-General of UNESCO 
suggests that comprehensive 
international laboratories for the arid 
zone should be established within the 
United Nations system. 
1948 
The 3rd UNESCO General 
Conference in Beirut (Lebanon) adopts 
a resolution proposed by India 
to examine the possibility of an 
international institute for the arid zone. 
The Central Arid Zone Research 
Institute (CAZRR) in Jodhpur (India) 
is launched with the support 
of UNESCO in 1959. 
1949 
A group of experts meets in Paris 
(France) and recommends 
the establishment of an international 
advisory committee. 
1951 
The Advisory Committee on Arid Zone 
Research holds its first session in 
Algiers. Composed of 15 members 
from different countries, this is the 
origin of UNESCO's Arid Zone 
Research Programme. 
1957 
The research programme is upgraded 
to a Major Project on Scientific 
Research on Arid Lands. 
1965 
The Advisory Committee on Natural 
Resources Research holds its first 
session, replacing the earlier 
committees on arid zones 
and the humid tropics. 
1968 
An intergovernmental conference 
on the “scientific basis for rational use 
and conservation of the resources 
of the biosphere” meets in Paris, 
focusing on all the world's ecosystems. 
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
1971 
The international coordinating council 
of the new Man and the Biosphere 
(MAB) Programme holds 
its first meeting. 
1973 
The UN sets up the Sudano-Sahelian 
Office to spearhead efforts to reverse 
the spread of desertification in West 
Africa. Over 200,000 people died, 
as well as millions of their animals, 
in the drought which began in 1968. 
1976 
In cooperation with the United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP), 
UNESCO begins a 12-year 
Integrated Project on Arid Lands (IPAL) 
in northern Kenya to improve traditional 
livestock farming systems. 
1977 
The UN Conference on 
Desertification meets in Nairobi (Kenya) 
and adopts an action plan to combat 
desertification. UNESCO's 
contribution includes a new map 
of the world's arid and semi-arid 
regions. 
1980 
UNESCO and UNEP initiate 
a second integrated project on arid 
lands, this time in southern Tunisia, 
to update research findings on the 
region and put them to better use. 
This project is to last five years. 
Similar projects follow in the 1980s 
and 1990s in Lesotho and in various 
West African countries. 
1992 
The UN Conference on 
Environment and Development, 
also known as the Earth Summit, 
is held in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil). 
lts Agenda 21 calls on the General 
Assembly to preparea legally-binding 
instrument on the problem 
of desertification. 
13 
1994 
The UN Convention to Combat 
Desertification (UNCCD) is adopted 
in Paris on 17 June. The same day 
is proclaimed World Day to Combat 
Desertification. 
1996 
The Convention enters into force on 
26 December, after 50 ratifications are 
deposited. 
1999 
The Convention's permanent 
secretariat opens its doors 
in Bonn (Germany). 
2001 
UNESCO and UNCCD launch the 
“Education Kit on Combating 
Desertification” for use in primary 
schools. The kit now exists 
in nine languages. 
2002 
The World Summit on Sustainable 
Development in Johannesburg 
(South Africa) calls on the Global 
Environment Facility to become 
Convention's financial mechanism. 
2004 
The comparative research project 
“Sustainable Management of Marginal 
Drylands (SUMAMAD)" is launched. 
Linking eight countries from China to 
Tunisia, it is sponsored by UNESCO, 
the United Nations University (UNU), 
the International Center for Agricultural 
Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA) 
and the Flemish Government 
of Belgium. 
2006 
The UN General Assembly proclaims 
2006 as the International Year 
of Deserts and Desertification. 
José Banaag 
Sources : United Nations, UNESCO.

## [Page 14](191578eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

Facts and figures 
© 
Ya
nn
 
Ar
th
us
-B
er
tr
an
d 
“E
ar
th
 
fr
om
 
Ab
ov
e”
 
/ 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
Mali, near Mopti. 


### 193851: Interesting facts and figures on desertification

     
Interesting facts and figures on desertification. 
Human impact 
Desertification directly affects over 
250 million people. It threatens the lives 
of some 1.2 billion people in 
110 countries who are among 
the world's poorest and who depend 
on land for most of their needs. 
Environmentral impact 
A third of the Earth's land surface, 
or over 4 billion hectares, is threatened 
by desertification. 
Drylands 
Drylands constitute about 41 per cent 
of the Earth's surface and support more 
than 2 billion people; between 
10 and 20 per cent of drylands 
are degraded or unproductive. 
Economic loss 
Each year, desertification and drought 
cause an estimated $42 billion in lost 
agricultural production worldwide. 
The annual cost of fighting land 
degradation is estimated at $2.4 billion. 
Mass migration 
Some 60 million people are expected to 
eventually move from the deserted areas 
in sub-Saharan Africa towards northern 
Africa and Europe from 1997 to 2020. 
Arable land 
Estimates are that in 2025, there will be 
considerably less arable land 
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
available worldwide than it was in 1990. 
The decline is expected to be two-thirds 
in Africa, one-third in Asia and about 
one-fifth in South America. 
Water 
In 19 selected countries in the dry zones 
of Africa and the Far East 1,300 cubic 
metres of water were available per head 
in 1990. In 2025, only half of that 
— 650 cubic metres per head — 
are expected to be available. 
Africa 
Two-thirds of the continent is desert 
or drylands, in a continent where a large 
percentage of the population 
is dependent on natural resources 
for their livelihoods. 
Latin America and the Caribbean 
One quarter of the region is deserts 
and drylands. 
Northern Hemisphere 
Over 30% of the land in the United 
States is affected by desertification. 
In Spain, 31% of land is under serious 
threat. 
Endangered species 
According to the World Conservation 
Union, the dama gazelle (Gazella dama) 
of the Sahara has suffered 
an 80% decline in numbers over the past 
10 years. Asian antelopes face similarly 
14 
bleak futures due to habitat loss 
and illegal hunting. 
The biosphere 
Many desert ecosystems, recognized 
under UNESCO's Man and the 
Biosphere Programme, form part 
of the 482 sites in the World Network 
of Biosphere Reserves. 
World Heritage 
Desert cities and natural landscapes 
are among the 812 inscribed 
on UNESCO's World Heritage List. 
The intangible heritage 
The traditions of desert cultures are some 
of the 90 proclaimed UNESCO 
Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible 
Heritage of Humanity. 
The Sahara Project 
This project aims to help Member States 
with the Sahara in common and the 
region's tourism actors to implement 
a strategy of cooperation based on 
the promotion of sustainable tourism. 
Traditional music 
Launched in 1981, this UNESCO CD 
collection of traditional music, many of 
them recorded in situ, includes the vocal 
and instrumental music of desert cultures. 
José Banaag 
Sources: United Nations, UNESCO, 
UNCCD, IUCN

## [Page 15](191578eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### 193852: The Courier looks back

The Courier looks back 
Since it began publication, the UNESCO Courier has devoted many articles to desertification. 
It also explored other aspects of the desert environment, for example, as the natural setting 
of a World Heritage site, or as an inspiring force for the human soul and the artistic spirit. 
Or even as a challenge to ingenuity. Here is a glimpse at some of them. 
  
  
ALIN TOATYVRING 
ATTAIN wn 
THEODORE MONOD 
A HALT 
TO DESERT 
ADVANCE 
TEE SG | 
" 4 J \ . 
mC ouricr 
  
The UNESCO Courier - June 2006 
  
Issues 
Deserts 
January 1994 
This issue looks at the many facets 
of the desert — as a source of inspiration 
for artistic creation, a place of 
enlightenment for ascetics and mystics, 
or a sought-after provider of precious water 
which challenges man to create master- 
pieces of hydraulic engineering. 
A halt to desert advance 
July 1977 
What causes deserts to advance? 
How helpless is man faced with the 
ravages of desertification? These are only 
two of the disquieting questions raised 
in this issue, published on the occasion 
of the first UN Conference 
on Desertification in Nairobi (Kenya). 
Sahel - land of no return? 
April 1975 
Years of disastrous drought have left 
destitute many of the nomad peoples 
in the Sahel. The fragile balance between 
man and the environment which enabled 
these herdsmen to subsist appears 
to have been destroyed. 
The issue examines their tragic plight 
and uncertain future. 
Conquest of the desert 
August/September 1955 
The mystery of how the camel can go for 
so long without water has been solved 
by a UNESCO-sponsored research team 
in the Sahara. This issue reviews 
the present status of the campaign to make 
the desert habitable and extend man’s 
realm to the driest regions of the planet. 
Pushing back 
the desert frontiers 
July 1952 
The nine scientists in UNESCO's 
new advisory committee on arid zone 
research see two major difficulties in the 
struggle to make arid zones productive: 
lack of information on what is being 
done and insufficient research 
on the international level. UNESCO 
seeks to fill in this gap. 
15 
Articles 
“The San : sustainable 
development before its time” 
May 2005 
The indigenous San community, 
in the desert region of the southern Kalahari 
(South Africa), possess a centuries-old 
knowledge of water management based on 
respect of the local ecosystem. Read online. 
‘“Europe’s thirsty desert” 
October 2003 
The Spanish government strongly defends 
its decision to shift water from the Ebro 
basin to the parched southern province 
of Almeria — but environmentalists disagree. 
“The world’s environment 
in danger” 
May 2002 
The impact of human activity on the global 
environment threatens the survival of the 
biosphere and future generations. 
“The treasures 
in Mauritania’s dunes” 
December 2000 
Once, Mauritania’s ksours were thriving 
centres of trade and learning. Today, 
the country is struggling to save them 
from sand, wind and oblivion. 
“Petra’s new invaders” 
July/August 1999 
Petra was declared a world heritage site 
in 1985. Since then, it's been an uphill battle 
to protect Jordan's glorious ancient city 
hewn from pink rock. 
“Soils in torment” 
January 1999 
The earth's thin coat of soll, which helps 
to feed us and is vital for planetary 
ecosystems and climatic balance, 
is becoming increasingly threadbare. 
José Banaag

## [Page 16](191578eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

rN 
T 
| J           
  
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Organisation 
des Nations Unies 
pour I'éducation, 
la science et la culture 
Organizacion 
de las Naciones Unidas 
para la Educacion, 
la Ciencia y la Cultura 
OpraHu3aups 
O6beanHeHHbIX Haun no 
BOMpOCaM 0b6pa30BaHUs, 
HayKu MU KYyNbTYpbl 
Saaiall asYl Lalas 
Llaslly alally Ly 
EEA ET. 
Ba Ui AH] 
  
  
=H
 
  
         
  
  
The UNESCO Courier is published 
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
+ 33 (0)1 4568 15 88 
http://www.unesco.org/fr/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
f.ryan@unesco.org 
+ 33 (0)1 4568 15 88 
Director 
Saturnino Munoz Gomez 
Editors 
Arabic 
Bassam Mansour 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape 
English 
Edna Yahil 
French 
Agnes Bardon 
Russian 
Vladimir Sergueev 
Spanish 
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz 
Editorial Assistant 
José Banaag 
Photo 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org 
PDF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi 
Web platform 
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro 
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be reproduced 
and/or translated providing the credit line reads 
“Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” and includes 
date and hyperlink : http://www.unesco.org/courier 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Photographs belonging to UNESCO may be reproduced freely. 
They must carry the following caption: 
© UNESCO and photographer's name. For high resolution, 
please contact the Photobank: photobank@unesco.org 
Photographs without UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations of the countries 
and territories concerned 
 