# [063659](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

» CENTS (U.S) 
SMELL 
1 
a 
4 
1 | 
~
 
X =
 
0) [ed 
7] L
o
 
= = 
©
 [+ 4 
[+ 8 
ry : 
"> B* S
r
 
ey : 
S HIDDEN LANGUAGES OF 
» 
Karl von Frisch 
I 
    
Ee 
NATURE 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

0 
a 
= - 
yr 
ey 
JB 
.- 
"3 ‘ 
eT 
“ar > 
er 
  
a TT od 
- 
  
4 
3 ¥ iy 
¥ 
- i 
# 
ed 
£ 
a 
EYE 
: 
Ww 
. 
- 
y 
~
~
 
p
—
—
 
. 
F
L
 .
 
S
R
R
 
4 
§ 
or 
I 
L
A
T
T
E
 
b 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

The =~. Tremere Tene OCTOBER 1962 
WON_OUTICT 15TH YEAR 
Contents 
No. 10 
PUBLISHED IN 1 gait it . * CRT 
EIGHT EDITIONS | 
Page : 
English 
French 4 NATURE'S HIDDEN LANGUAGES OF SMELL 
Spanish By Karl von Frisch 
Russian : 
German G 10 RAMESES’ MYSTERIOUS ENCOUNTER AT DAWN 
Arabic 7 Strange links between the temple of Abu Simbel and the rising sun 
U.S.A. By Jan K. van der Haagen 
Japanese 
16 NIKO PIROSMANI 
A new find in primitive painting 
By Jean Keim 
25 BUILDING A FUTURE FOR YOUNG ARAB REFUGEES 
By Richard Greenough 
  
29 WILL THE INDIAN OCEAN YIELD ITS SECRETS ? 
  
  
cinated men since early an- 
tiquity. Yet only In recent 
years have we come to un- 
derstand the amazing mech- A 33 
anism of the bee's sensory ; 
organs, In the article on 
page 4, Karl von Frisch 
reveals the Important role ’ 
of the bee's sense of smell. “ 34 
History’s most ambitious venture in oceanography 
By Daniel Behrman f 
COVER PHOTO 
The life of the bee has fas- a 32 THE FIRST U. N. MEMORIAL STAMP 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
Photo shows a worker from % & 
a wild-bee colony returning ; 
to a hollow-tree nest, Its legs 1 
heavily loaded with pollen. 
From the film "Secrets of Life". 
(©) Walt Disney. 
  
I A eT af oa A evs 2 
(MC. 62.1.173 A) 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Parls 7°, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Russlan Edition : Venlamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except in July and August whan 
itis bi-monthly {} § issues a year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German 
Arabic and Japanese. In the United Kingdom it is distributed by H, M 
Stationery Office, P, O. Box 569, London, S. E. I. 
Educational, Scfentific and Cultural 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER™, plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier Is indexed monthly In The Readers’ Guide to 
Periodical Literature published by H, W. Wilion Co, Naw York. 
Annual subscription rates: U.S. 8 3.00; 10/-stg.; 7.00 
New Francs or equivalent. Singie copies |/-stg. 30 
  
German Editlon : Hans Rleben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Layout & Deslgn 
Robert Jacquemin 
cents (U.S5.} ; 0.70 New Francs. 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7. 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief.  

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

NATURE'S HIDDEN 
  
LANGUAGES OF SMELL 
by Karl von Frisch 
  
So odours please us; others we dislike. To 
most people the perfume of a hunch of roses 
in a room is an agreeable odour but nobody would dream 
of putting an arum lily there in a vase, for it gives off 
a pungent smell of decay. 
Nevertheless, men and animals do not find the same 
smells pleasant or disagreable. Moreover, many animals 
have a much keener sense of smell than human beings. 
For example, dogs, sniffing close to the ground, can follow 
a trall whose existence no man would ever have suspected. 
It has actually been shown that the fatty acids which 
make up a large part of the secretion of the human 
skin can be smelt by a dog in a solution a milllon times 
more diluted than that which the human sense of smell 
can detect. 
There is nothing surprising in this if we compare 
human and canine anatomical characteristics. The 
nasal cavity, in which the olfactory cells are located, is 
particularly developed in dogs; the olfactory mucous 
membrane covers a far bigger area than it does in the 
human nose, and the nerve centres in the dog’s brain 
which record and assimilate smell messages are much 
more developed. This is also true of many other ani- 
mals. For nearly all mammals smell is more important 
than sight just as it is for many fish and for certain 
insects. Smell is the determining factor in their exis- 
Professor Karl von Frisch, 
famous for his discovery of the 
“language” of bees, recounts 
here some surprising facts 
about the sense of smell among 
insects and fish. Even in the 
“language” of bees, smell plays 
a vital role. Bee (left) extract- 
ing nectar from a flowering 
shrub, can direct other bees in 
its hive to this food supply by 
**dancing’’. The others identify 
the tree or flower by smelling 
the odour on the scout’s body. 
© J. M. Baufle, Paris 
  
tence, guiding them just as we ourselves are guided 
by sight. 
We must bear this in mind if we are to understand 
the behaviour of certain animals. 
One particular case which has long intrigued biologists, 
giving rise to some strange hypotheses, is that of the 
bombyx butterfly. Entomologists have found how to 
catch large numbers of the extremely rare male bombyx 
butterflies with the help of a fertile female of this species 
placed under a wire-mesh cover. 
The abdomen of the female bombyx contains a gland 
which gives off a smell quite imperceptible to us. When 
the female wants to attract a male, she turns this gland 
round and it diffuses an attractive scent. Now an 
insect’s sense of smell is located in the antennae and any 
butterfly collector can distinguish at a glance a male 
bombyx from a female by the male’s antennae, which 
are large and contain innumerable olfactory cells. The 
big penniform antennae of the bombyx show its highly 
specialized olfactory powers and correspond, anato- 
mically, to the well-developed “smell receptors” in a dog's 
nasal tavity. 
The male bombyx butterflies are attracted by the smell 
of the females. They are not at all interested in their 
CONT'D ON PAGE 6

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

   
Mantids generally have thin 
filamentous antenna, but this 
species has unusual feather- 
like ones. The increase of an- 
tennal surface allows for a far 
farger number of sense organs. 
3 > a a . : 
San REN oo al Fe Sh Fes 
© A. Bandsma an 
    
   Nx 4% 
d R. Brandt, Wellington, New Zealand

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

LANGUAGES OF SMELL (Cont'd) 
Perfumes for 
a bumble-bee 
wedding 
ANTENNAE CLEANING TIME. 
Long-horned grasshoppers have long 
sensitive antennae which are conti- 
nually waving about, “feeling” the 
path of these insects. Because of 
their important function they are 
kept meticulously clean. Here a 
grasshopper cleans its antennae. 
© A. Bandsma and R. Brandt 
- appearance. For them, smell alone is the quintessence 
of feminine charm. This was proved by removing the 
scent gland from a female, a small operation which in 
no way altered her appearance, and then placing the 
scent gland beside her. The males which had been 
attracted to the spot turned their attention from the 
female to the gland, and tried to mate with it. 
Another species of nocturnal butterfly whose males 
are attracted by the smell of the females is the mulberry- 
eating bombyx. The caterpillar of this moth is the 
silkworm, which has been bred by the Chinese for 
thousands of years. Silkworm breeders supply the worms 
with food (mulberry leaves) and the male moths with 
females. Sheltered from their natural enemies, the 
bombyx multiply freely, but as with other domesticated 
creatures, their natural instincts tend to deteriorate. 
The males no longer need to fly off in search of a mate. 
In fact they have one put under their very noses, or— 
more precisely—under their antennae. As soon as they 
smell the attractive odour, their wings begin to flutter 
and they rush towards the female. 
Scientists have studied the chemical composition of 
this scent. After twenty years’ investigation, a team 
of research workers led by Professor Adolf Butenandt, 
Nobel Prize Winner in 1939, succeeded in isolating the 
substance from the scent glands, and in analyzing its 
 
chemical composition. This difficult task was made all 
the harder because of the extremely small amount of 
odoriferous substance produced by the gland. No less 
than 500,000 females were needed to make 12 milligram- 
mes of a pure extract of the substance which attracts the 
males. Its chemical composition is simple, being what 
is known as a non-saturated alcohol. 
Once the formula was known, the research workers 
succeeded in making a synthetic substance which has 
turned out to be just as effective as the natural product. 
A minute quantity of it on the end of a glass rod brings 
the males hurrying along just a effectively as the pre- 
sence of a female, which shows quite clearly that it is 
the smell which attracts the male towards the female. 
With other species, the males produce the odoriferous 
substance which is love’s messenger. One of these, the 
bumble-bee, for a long time managed to keep the secret 
of its amorous rendezvous, and the mystery was explained 
only a few years ago. 
In a forest on a sunny spring morning, a male bumble- 
bee can sometimes be seen flying towards the base of a 
tree-trunk; he touches the bark here and there, and then 
flies off again. A few dozen yards or so further on, he 
lands on the lower branch of another tree and goes 
through the same performance. He touches the edges of 
the leaves with his jaws, flies off again, makes another

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

puzzling halt, and eventually returns to his starting 
point, after having flown round a wide circle in which 
he has made a number of mysterious landmarks. 
The fact is that there is a scent gland at the base of 
the bumble-bee’s jaws and the strange smell these glands 
give off is perceptible even to us. The bumble-bee has 
left traces of this smell on the bark and on the leaves 
during his morning flight. He will go round the circuit 
for hours on end, often from morning until night, 
stopping for a moment at each point and adding a drop 
more scent if need be. Elsewhere in the forest other 
males are blazing the same kind of trail. 
Bumble-bees which were captured and marked, resumed 
their endless round as soon as they were set free. 
Hunger eventually drove them to feed off the flowers In 
the nearby flelds but they quickly rushed back to their 
rounds. The bumble-bee’s secret is that the females 
pick up the smell given off by the landmarks and wait 
for their ardent suitor at one of them. 
As there are several species of bumble-bee in the same 
area, how can a female be sure that the “invitation card” 
she finds has been left by a male of her own species? 
Nature has provided for every contingency. The scent 
in the jaw glands of the male varies according to the 
species. As a further safeguard the various species follow 
different itineraries on their sentimental journeys. Some 
leave their scent on the lower branches of trees or on 
roots just showing above the ground. Some go to the 
leaves at the top of a tree. Others prefer gramineous 
stalks or grass in the fields. Instinct tells the females 
where to look for a male proposal. 
The purpose of these alluring smells is the perpetuation 
of the specles. But the part played by odours in the hunt 
for food is no less important. The attractive smell given 
off by flowers helps scores of insects to find food, and 
at the same time ensures the perpetuation of the plants. 
Two birds are killed with one stone, as it were, for the 
scent of the flower attracts the insects, which find nectar 
and pollen in the calyx. Flying from flower to flower, 
they carry the pollen which sticks to their bodies on to 
the stigmata of other flowers of the same species, thus 
Sasieng the fertilization and the development of the 
seed. 
As honey seekers, bees play an essential role in this 
fertilization. They gather the nectar not only for imme- 
diate food needs but also to build up stocks for the 
SEDUCTION - AND WARNING. The 
female of the mulberry-eating bombyx (the 
caterpillar of this moth Is the silkworm) has 
a scent gland which secretes a substance attrac- 
tive to the male of the species (right). Con- 
versely, a substance in the skin of minnows if 
released by the slightest scratch is immediately 
“scented” by other minnows and causes them 
to flee for their lives—a timely warning if it is 
a pike that has begun to attack the shoal. 
    on Sg 
- ow 
ip 
- - ” 
        
    
  
  
winter. That Is why they fly unceasingly from flower to 
flower. Bees have another peculiarity: they are 
“faithful”, each one adopting a particular specles of 
flower. This is essential if pollenization Is to be effective. 
but they can be faithful only if they are able to distin- 
guish the chosen species with ahsolute certainty, The 
scent of the flowers, which varies with the species, plays 
a decisive role In their recognition. In addition, the 
scent has a special significance for the bees. 
When one of the scouts finds a new supply of food—a 
lime-tree in flower for example--it returns to the hive 
and announces the discovery by dancing on the cells 
of honeycomb. This lively dance tells the other bees 
how far away the new supply of food is and in which 
direction it lies. Some of the bees gather round the 
dancer, and touching the messenger’'s body with their 
antennae, they plck up the smell of the Hme-tree with 
which it is impregnated, and then fly off in the direction 
indicated. The scent of the flower thus plays an Impor- 
tant role in the “language of bees.” 
A: the time when llme-trees are In flower and 
full of nectar, other flowers are in bloom too. 
And so the hive Is divided up into several teams of honey 
gatherers, one of which deals with limme-trees, another 
with robinia, and a third with yet other flowers. The 
members of cach team recognize immediately from the 
smell of the dancers If the message 1s meant for them or 
for another team. The members of each team identify 
one another in the hive through the scent of the flower 
which each bee gives off, and these specialized honey 
gatherers form tightly-knit communities. They stick 
together when resting, just as they do when at work. 
Not all flowers have a pleasant scent. Some give off 
an utterly repugnant odour and thus attract flies whose 
habits is to lay their eggs on rotting flesh. Scenting a 
familiar odour of decay, the flies are lured to these 
flowers and taken In in more senses than one. Mere, 
nature's Ingenious arrangement of the flower's structure 
keeps the {lies prisoner and does not set them free until 
they are well powdered with pollen. 
Yet the flies are not clever enough to learn a lesson 
from this unpleasant experience. Attracted by the same 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
© R.H. Noailles, Paris.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

LANGUAGES OF SMELL (Contd) 
Mr. Wasp taken in by an orchid 
smell of putrefaction coming from another flower of the 
same specles, they are taken In again and in this way 
the pollinization of the stigmata is assured. 
Some orchids—amongst them the ophrys—are even 
more perfidious in their use of insects as polienizing 
agents. The females of burrowing wasps—those of the 
gorytes species, for example—produce a special smell to 
attract the males, just as the females of the mulberry 
bombyx do. The flowers of the ophrys orchid have 
succeeded in imitating the smell of the female wasps. 
The males are attracted, they land on the flower and, 
completely deceived, they try to mate with it. 
The illusion does not last for very long, but the contact 
has been enough to ensure the fertilization of the flower. 
The fact that these orchids produce no nectar is itself 
significant. They have, indeed, no need of this bait; 
their scent alone is enough to ensure the co-operation of 
the Insect. 
It is well-known that in the case of mammals, smell 
plays a vital role in the quest for food. The exceptional 
sense of smell In dogs and in other mammals has already 
been mentioned. It is far less well-known that fish, 
too, have a highly developed sense of smell. Their 
olfactory organs are not part of their breathing apparatus 
but are concerned only with the detection of smelis. 
Experiments have shown that certain fish can find 
their food and recognize members of their own species 
entirely by sense of smell, after being deprived of their 
sight. It Is the eel which has the most highly developed 
olfactory organs, its sense of smell being on a par with 
that of the dog. 
Some fish migrate over great distances and during 
their journeys make special use of their sense of smell. 
Salmon are often born in the fresh water of small streams 
and creeks flowing into rivers. The young salmon follow 
the river down to the sea where they spend several years, 
often far from the mouth of the river. Once fully 
grown, they return to the river and we still do not know 
how they manage to find their way back. Nevertheless, 
it has been proved by marking young salmon that not 
only do they reach the river they came from, but they 
also get back to the very tributary in which they were 
born. 
The riddle has been partly solved today, for samples 
taken from different parts of rivers show that the smell 
of the water varies. This is no doubt due to differences 
in the geological formation of the river bed as well as 
  
From the film “Secrets of Life", © Walt Disney 
to the diversity of water plants. It has also been proved 
that salmon which have been deprived of their sense of 
smell cannot find their way back to the stream where 
they were born. It Is the “smell memories,” then, of its 
earliest youth that urge the salmon to make its way back 
to its birthplace. 
We have seen that smells can be used as a balt. They 
can also be used as a means of scaring other animals 
away. 
In North America and In South America there are 
several varietles of skunk, a relative of the badger. 
When attacked, they squirt out a jet of foul-smelling oily 
liquid, which is secreted by the anal glands. A man who 
has been unlucky enough to be sprayed by this liquid is 
not fit company for some time afterwards, even though 
he may take a bath and change his clothes. 
Many Insects too have adopted this method of defence 
—amongst them, the stink bugs. Some brightly-coloured 
specles are spared by insect-eating birds, for they have 
glands which secrete an unpleasant-smelling liquid. It 
has recently been discovered that they very successfully 
protect themselves, in much the same way as the skunk, 
against such enemies as ants. 
| cou go on giving examples but I would 
rather mention a case in which a protective 
smell of this kind sowed panic amongst the members of a 
same species. 
I was carrying out some experiments on the sense of 
hearing in fish, and had trained a shoal of minnows to 
pick up sounds made below the water near the shore of 
the Wolfgangsee. I had to check whether all the mem- 
bers of the shoal used the same feeding ground, so I 
caught one of the minnows and, with a needle, severed 
a small muscle, the destruction of which makes the tail 
turn a very dark colour. I then put the fish into the 
water again. 
No sooner had it joined up with the other flsh than 
something quite unexpected occurred. The minnows 
panicked, sought refuge on the bottom, grouped together 
again, and then fled into deeper water in the centre of 
the iake. For several days they were very timid and 
wary and it was only after repeated distribution of food 
that they again became as familiar as they had been 
before. 
ANT DAIRY-MAIDS. Many ants 
keep *‘cows’’—sap-sucking insects such 
as aphids—and feed on their excess 
juices. They take out their “livestock” 
to graze on plant stems and roots and 
later bring them back to the nest in 
the same way as this ant dairymaid 
herding closely a tiny scarabaeid beetle.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

D 
At
la
s 
R.
H.
 
No
ai
ll
es
   ©  
IN HIVE OR FIELD the bee is an industrious worker who has many surprising lessons to teach man. The male 
bees or drones are born from unfertilized eggs laid by the queen bee. Inside the hive the female worker bees keep 
a strict control over the proportion of the sexes in the colony and decide when to get rid of the drones. Left, 
worker bees dispose of the larva of a drone. Right, a worker bee sucks nectar from a flower with its long tongue. 
Could the wounded minnow have told the others about 
his unpleasant experience? Obviously not. A beheaded 
minnow caused just the same panic, and so did one that 
had been minced into small pieces. In fact, the filtered 
julce from these small pieces was enough to scare the 
shoal away. 
I tried to find out from which part of the body this 
warning came, and finally decided that it lay in the skin. 
So far it has not been possible to Isolate the substance 
contained in the skin. All that is known Is that {t must 
be soluble In water and that fish can smell it. Normal 
minnows are very sensitive to it whereas minnows which 
have been deprived of their sense of smell are quite 
unaffected. An extract taken from a tiny plece of skin 
Is enough to put a whole shoal of tamed fish to flight. 
Even the minute quantity diffused in the water following 
a needle prick—as had been the case when I noticed the 
phenomenon for the first time--has this effect. 
We can hazard a fairly close guess at the biological 
significance of the phenomen. Minnows are preyed upon 
by many types of fish and thelr greatest enemy is 
undoubtedly the pike. When a pike catches and devours 
a minnow, its numerous sharp teeth are bound to scratch 
and tear the minnow’s delicate skin, and the panic- 
creating substance spreads into the surrounding water. 
Thus, any minnows which happen to be near are warned 
of the danger; they flee and remain on the alert for 
some time. It is for this reason that a pike does not get 
a chance to destroy an entire shoal. 
I was interested to find out if the phenomen Is peculiar 
to minnows, or if this strange form of “life insurance” is 
practised amongst other fish. Exhaustive experiments 
have since shown that it 1s unknown amongst sea fish, 
but that it Is very common amongst fresh-water fish, 
being limited, however, to the group which zoologlsts 
call “ostariophysl.” All fish related to the carp—l.c. the 
cyprinides and the slluridans, many kinds of which are to 
be found In America, Asla and Africa—helong to this 
group. The skin of the fish of all these species contains a 
warning substance which is released by a scratch, and 
which produces the same effect as the one noticed in the 
case of the minnows. 
It has also been shown that the warning substance 
from minnows acts upon other members of the cyprinides 
family, but its power decreases with the remoteness of 
relationship. The same experiments have made it possi- 
ble to verify suggestions based on anatomical data 
concerning the race history relationship of the ostario- 
physi group of fish. 
Whereabouts in the fish Is the warning substance pro- 
duced? Recent microscope research has shown that 
there is a particular type of unicellular gland in the skin 
cells only of those fish which produce the warning 
substance. The secretion from these glands is not 
released unless the skin is scratched. We may presume 
from this that the glandular cells make up the warning 
substance itself, and that it is their function to send a 
rapid farewell message of warning to the rest of the 
shoal when onc of its members Is seized by some 
marauding fish. 
Dr. KARL von FriscH, world famous zoologist, was awarded 
the Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of Science in 
1959. Former director of the zoological institutes of Ros- 
tock, Breslau, Graz and Munich, he is the author of 
“The Dancing Bees” and “Bees, Their Vision, Chemical 
Senses and Language.”

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 63662: Ramses' mysterious encounter at dawn at the Great Temple of Abu Simbel

F ORGOTTEN for many centuries, engulfed by 
desert sands and finally rediscovered in 1813, 
Abu Simbel is still a storehouse of secrets. What myste- 
rious purpose determined the activities of the engineers 
who executed the orders of Rameses II? Why does it 
embody such curious lighting effects which can hardly 
result from mere chance? With what intent was the 
interplay of rock and sunlight so expertly combined? 
At a time when Unesco is leading a world campaign to 
save these unique temples from being swallowed up for- 
ever by the swiftly-rising waters of the Nile (See THE 
Unesco CoURIER, Feb. 1960 and Oct. 1961) one special 
aspect of the Great Temple deserves closer study: the 
relationship between its structure and the rising sun. 
The facade of the great temple faces east, but not due 
east; it runs slightly north-east/ south-west. Throughout 
the year it receives the first rays of the sun practically 
full on as soon as the sun rises from the hills lying on 
the opposite bank of the river. 
The sun first lights up the frieze of baboons, over six 
feet high (there were once 22 of them) topping the temple 
facade. The Egyptians had observed that baboons are in 
the habit of uttering loud cries just before sunrise. In 
Egyptlan mythology they became the helpers at the birth 
of the god Re every sunrise after his dangerous journey 
through the darkness of the underworld. 
At dawn the Sun god leaves his nocturnal bark for the 
ship of day and resumes his triumphal journey through 
an eternally blue sky. The cohort of baboons dances 
with joy to celebrate his victory over the lethargy of 
night: C ) 
A few moments later, the rising sun is greeted by what 
seems to be his own image: the god Re Horakhti (the 
sun rising on the horizon) standing in an oblong niche 
beneath the cohort of baboons above the high doorway 
leading into the underground temple. His falcon head is 
surmounted with the sun disc from which a cobra spits 
fire. On his left hand and on his right, the pharaoh 
offers up the supreme gift of an absolute sovereign: the 
image of Maat, goddess of balance, of justice and of 
truth. 
But is the statue really that of Re Horakhti? Under 
his right hand is a dog-headed sceptre (In Egyptian 
“user”) and, under his left hand, the traces of a small 
statue of Maat, which is difficult to recognize today but 
which appeared clearly in the drawings made at the 
beginning of the 19th century when the temple was 
rediscovered. 
These elements, with the name of the god himself, 
complete a rebus of the name Rameses chose for himself 
when he acceded to the throne: User-Maat-Re. Thus, 
here Is an identification of the pharaoh with the god—just 
as, thousands of years later at Versailles, another “sun- 
10 god”, Louis XIV, identified himself with Apollo. 
CONT'D ON PAGE 13 
  
  
  
DANCING BABOONS 
As the sun rises over the mountains 
it lights up a frieze of baboons atop 
the facade of the temple. Thus 
begins the first act in the myste- 
rious relationship between the 
sun and the temple that has long 
intrigued egyptologists. In Egyptian 
mythology the baboons salute the 
sun god, dancing with joy to cele- 
brate his new victory over night. 
THE SUN GOD 
Moments later a new phase begins 
in an ingenious reconciliation of 
religious symbolism and architec- 
turai creation. Sunlight bathes the 
statue of Re Horakhti, the sun god, 
standing in a niche above the en- 
trance to the underground temple, 
his falcon’s head surmounted with 
the sun disc decorated with a 
cobra. The Pharoah, Rameses II, 
identified himself with this god. 
Photos Unesco-Almasy 
INTO THE MOUNTAIN 
Still rising, the sun shines full upon 
the four giant statues of Rameses 
that form the facade. The next 
phase, as the rising sun penetrates, 
at certain times of the year, within. 
the temple, eventually reaching the 
sanctuary 200 feet from the thres- 
hold, evokes the enigma of Abu 
Simbel. Why did the Pharoah's 
priests and astronomers choose 
this site in Upper Nubia to carve 
out the great temple? Was the 
construction of the galleries and 
chambers deep within the moun- 
tain “married” purposefully to the 
yearly course of the sun in such a 
way that its first rays reach the 
gods in the sanctuary at fixed dates ? 
And why are these dates significant ? 
Unesco ~ van der Haagen 
RENDEZ VOUS

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 63662: Ramses' mysterious encounter at dawn at the Great Temple of Abu Simbel

  
   
WITH THE SUN IN THREE ACTS - Cor NST NN EN eT SA De Seg RI Se TER A NL TE Es ER

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 
  
        
— 
— 
Ax
is
 
of
 
T
e
m
p
l
e
 
18 O aL 
\ 
SING 
"OVER THE HILLS 
J. van der Haagen 
y Position of sun above horizon: 
Up to 4 degrees inner sanctuary (B) is fully illuminated. 
: Above 54 degrees no rays of sun enter the temple. 
| 
   
 
  
        
     
    
’ ced a a 
| 
| 
CROSS SECTION OF TEMPLE AXIS 
A. Entrance hall with colossi 
B. Inner sanctuary 
i 
+ 
J ll IN ee zzz) - / EILXTTII7 
— 200, ——— 
  
  
   
       
Inside entrance hall (A in drawing on right). Inner 
sanctuary is in far background (B in drawing). 
The sudden illumination of the statues of the 
sun gods in the sanctuary deep in the heart of 
the rock at Abu Simbel is a breathtaking spect- 
acle. Its religious meaning is clear: divine light 
seeks out from within the bowels of the earth 
“he who holds divinity within him”. But what 
is the deeper significance of the dates, in February 
and October, when this phenomenon occurs? 
Perhaps the whole vast undertaking of construct- 
ing the temple was linked with the important 
ceremony that took place on the Jubilee of 
Rameses Il in the 30th year of his long reign. 
Other evidence suggests a link between the 
temple and a brilliant star in the constellation 
A of Orion which, about 126 0B.C., rose in the vicin- 


### 63662: Ramses' mysterious encounter at dawn at the Great Temple of Abu Simbel

i ity of the axis of the temple. Photos on these 
=3 pn = pages show how astronomers, builders and engi- 
" Soll rt neers enticed the rising sun to illuminate the 
( R ; colossi inside the entrance hall (left) and finally 
RE Yo x pa reach the gods seated in the sanctuary (right).

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 63662: Ramses' mysterious encounter at dawn at the Great Temple of Abu Simbel

  
   
= sd 
a ul 
rx 
= f « 
| la 
'RAMESES THE KING-GOD TR 
~ On rear wall of sanctuary his statue pt ANS 
is completely illuminated by the 
first rays of the sun twice each.y 
  
Unesco-Almasy 
  
SL ALN TF BE AND Pe a SNe 
ENCOUNTER AT DAWN (cont'd) 
A faint glimmer 
on the wall 
A few moments later, still rising, the sun lights up the 
colossal statue of King Rameses (more than 65 feet high) 
who has now discarded his divine metamorphosis. While 
It was customary to place the statue of a sovereign close 
to the entrance of a temple built on his command, here, 
at Abu Simbel, the entire facade actually consists of the 
four statues of the king. 
Between the moment when it lights up Re Ilorakhti 
and the moment when it shines full upon the statues of 
Rameses, the rising sun reaches the entrance of the tem- 
ple. Its first rays faintly illuminate the upper part of the 
wall at the back of the famous chamber of statues. This 
chamber or entrance hall corresponds to the “first court” 
in classic Egyptian open-air temples. It is divided into 
three alsles by a double row of four pillars against each of 
which stands a statue of the pharaoh. 
Although these pillars are generally called “Osirian”, 
they represent Rameses and not Osiris. It is true that 
the pharaoh holds in his hands the crook and the scourge 
which are the attributes of Osiris, soverelgn of the 
Empire of the Dead, but these objects had already long 
become the insignia of royalty. 
In conformity with the classic Egyptian plan, the corri- 
dors become narrower and narrower, and the successive 
chambers smaller and smaller, the ground sloping upwards 
as the roof slopes downwards. 
Viewed from any spot on the globe, the sun is seen to 
rise at the same point only twice a ycar. Consequently, 
In the underground temple of Abu Simbel the play of light 
deep within the earth varies constantly. When the sum- 
mer solstice comes round and the sun rises to the north 
of the axis of the temple, the seat and legs of the statue 
of Rameses on the facade to the north of the entrance 
prevent the first rays of the sun from penetrating the 
temple, and a little later in the morning it is the lintel of 
the doorway that serves as a screen. 
N or until September 10 do the sun's rays reach 
the face of the first colossus on the left in the 
big chamber. On the following days they reach further 
in, and a photograph which I took on October 6, 1959, 
shows that the last colossi on the southern side were the 
first to receive the light. 
The culminating point of the cycle lies between October 
10 and 30, during which period the first rays of the sun 
reach the last chamber, the holy of holies, situated in the 
heart of the mountain 200 feet from the threshold. It is 
at this time that the sun-gods seated against the back 
wall are illuminated, either separately or in pairs, and 
each totally or partially according to the date. 
These gods are Amon, the sun-god of Thebes (the capi- 
tal at the time), Re Horakht! and, seated between them, 
a god among gods. Rameses himself. The god Ptah, one 
of those who preside over funeral ceremonies, is not en- 
titled to the divine light and, except for his left arm, he 
remains in perpetual darkness. 
Henri Bonneval, leader of the Geographical Institute 
of Paris expeditions, who made the photogrammetric 
recordings of all the temples In Egyptian Nubia, has estab- 
lished that the sun appears on the horizon exactly in 
the axis of the temple on October 19 and on that day its 
first rays largely illuminate Amon and Rameses. 
As autumn draws to a close the sun’s first rays reach 
the colossi on the north side and finally those seated 
nearest the entrance. After November 30, the sun is once 
more banished from the sanctuary. But less than a 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

14 


### 63662: Ramses' mysterious encounter at dawn at the Great Temple of Abu Simbel

ENCOUNTER AT DAWN (Cont'g) 
Search for a forgotten star 
month after the winter solstice, on January 20, it shines 
inside once again, and in January, February and March, 
the phenomena just described take place in the opposite 
order. Amon and Rameses are reached by the first rays 
on February 21. 
The sudden illumination of these statues deep under- 
ground is breathtaking. Its religious Implication seems 
clear: divine light seeks out from the very bowels of the 
earth the man who holds divinity within him. As the 
temple seems deliberatly to have been constructed on an 
axis not exactly at right angles to the facade—which 
had to run according to the cleavage plane of the rock— 
the question arises as to whether the dates of February 
21 and October 19 have a particular significance. 
The spring equinox (March 21 or 22) and that of 
autumn (September 22 or 23) immediately jump to mind. 
Searching for an explanation of the difference of one 
month. I wondered whether the phenomenon called the 
precession of the equinoxes might not be involved. In 
the Platonic year, which lasts nearly 26,000 ordinary years, 
the celestial poles describe wide circles, finally returning to 
their point of departure. Thus the entrance of the Pyra- 
mid of Cheops was orientated according to the French 
astronomer Camille Flammarion towards a star which 
then played the part of the pole star. Similarly, might 
not the axis of the great temple at Abu Simbel be orien- 
tated towards a point which today has no particular 
significance, but which, when the temple was built, was 
that of the rising sun at the time of the equinox? 
A STRONOMY soon brought me the proof that the 
precession of the equinoxes played no part 
here; so I had to look for another explanation. Could the 
dates of October 19 and February 21 have been of special 
importance in Egypt in the time of Rameses II? 
The French Egyptologist, Louis Christophe, who retraced 
the history of the construction of the underground temple, 
after detailed studies of the figures carved on the facade 
and the bas-reliefs inside, concluded that the decoration 
of the oldest parts must have been completed before the 
26th year of Rameses IT's reign, and that of the principal 
chambers before the 34th. The temple would thus have 
been built towards the time of the sovereign’s Jubilee, 
in the thirtieth year of his reign, the famous Heb-Sed. 
The Heb-Sed was one of the important ceremonies in 
Egypt at the time of the Pharaohs and probably the 
survival of a prehistoric custom which consisted in putting 
the head of the tribe to death with great pomp lest he 
become senile and harmful to the community. On the 
occasion of his Jubilee, the Pharaoh had to prove that he 
was still in full possession of his faculties, after which he 
was enthroned as his own successor. 
According to Louis Christophe, the first sculptures at 
Abu Simbel are, as it were, a tentative move to identify 
Rameses with the sun-god. The identification grew 
closer as his reigi1 proceeded, to become complete in the 
30th year. But what was the exact date of Rameses 
first Jubilee? It seems to be unknown. Nevertheless, the 
Jubilee was followed by others at much shorter intervals 
and we know that the fifth and sixth Jubilees of Rameses, 
who reigned for nearly 70 years, were celebrated during 
the first days of the fifth month of the civil year. In 1260 
B.C. that day corresponded to our own October 22. 
From this fact, Louls Christophe concluded that the 
bullding of the temple was begun with the Heb-Sed in 
‘mind, and that it was on that solemn day that the 
Pharaoh had been deified. 
It will be noticed that there is a difference of two or 
three days between the date of the royal Jubilee estab- 
lished by Louis Christophe and the date at which the 
sun rises in the axis of the temple. Perhaps it Is possible 
to reduce this difference to one or two days. 
Here is how I think this may be done. It seems 
probable that the astronomer In Thebes or Membhis 
who was asked to determine the exact point where the 
sun rises on October 22 at Abu Simbel did not know 
details of the site—Memphis, for example, is nearly 800 
miles from Abu Simbel. The astronomer may in conse- 
quence have based his calculations on an “ideal” horizon 
situated on the same level as the temple. In reality the 
sun rises at Abu Simbel about five minutes after it crosses 
the “ideal” horizon since on the right bank of the Nile, 
about 3,600 yards from the temple, there runs a chaln 
of hills sufficiently high to delay the sun’s appearance. 
Moreover, since, in the month of October and at that 
place, the orbit of the sun makes an angle of about 66 
degrees with the horizon, the first segment of the sun’s 
disc appears at a slightly more southern point than that 
where the sun clears the “ideal” horizon. The problem 
is further complicated by the fact that the crest of hills 
is far from level and at one point dips steeply. 
But does the “astronomical error” really provide a full 
explanation? Even taking into account the phenomenon 
which led to the introduction of the blssextile year, it is 
evident that a discrepancy of at least 24 hours exists 
between the day the sun rises in the axis of the temple 
and the date of the Jubilee. Now, if Louis Christophe’s 
theory is correct and the temple offers proof of the deifi- 
cation of Rameses II on the day of the Heb-Sed, the date 
on which the first rays fully illuminate the statue of the 
king is much more important than that on which the 
sun rises In the axis of the temple. 
The rays of sunlight do so a little after October 19, and 
a photograph taken on October 21, 1961, shows the sunlit 
statue of the king. Taking into account the difference 
of one day which we have just mentioned as a possible 
“astronomical error”, this brings us to the day of the 
Jubilee, At the same time, the fact that the depression 
In the crest of the hills is not in the axis of the temple, 
but slightly to the south of it, takes on particular slgni- 
ficance. On October 21 and 22, the sun seems to keep its 
point of rising as long as possible in the neighbourhood 
of the depression as if to give its first rays the longest 
possible opportunity of lighting up the sun-god. 
This explanation, of course, is based on the assumption 
that the ancient Egyptians had great ability in the fields 
of theory and practical skills. We know this was already 
the case one thousand years before Rameses. Moreover, 
once the main lines of the undertaking had been estab- 
lished by calculation, it was still possible for the builders 
to make rectifications. The size of the statues, for 
example, enabled them to regulate the play of light 
precisely—as it happens the statues are not all the same 
size. For this reason it would perhaps be wiser to belleve 
that around the year 1260 B.C., the Heb-Sed fell, not on 
October 22, but on the day we now call October 21. 
HERE remains another hypothesis—the possi- 
bility of there being a link between the temple 
and the fixed stars. Although the precession of the 
equinoxes does not change down the centuries the 
direction in which the sun rises, it is equally true that the 
appearance of the night sky was very different 3,000 years 
ago from what it is today. One may reasonably wonder 
whether the axis of the temple was not related to the 
appearance of a star which was important to the 
Egyptians. 
At my request, Henri Bonneval carried out research on 
this question and his findings are astonishing: for a 
number of years around 1260 B.C. an exceptionally 
brilliant star in the constellation of Orion did in fact rise 
in the immediate vicinity of the axis of the temple. 
Orion was one of the rare constellations in ancient 
Egypt that modern astronomers have been able to iden-

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 63662: Ramses' mysterious encounter at dawn at the Great Temple of Abu Simbel

  
’ 
PRIESTLY VIGIL IN THE CHAPEL OF RE HORAKHTI. A 
little building known as the Chapel of Re Horakhti. What was 
south instead of at right angles to the terrace ? One of the hy 
torical and astronomical research throws new light on this que 
posted in the centre of the chapel would, at the moment of the winter solstice, 
there has been no direct evidence that the Egyptians determined the solstlces. 
tify with certainty. Everyone is familiar with the three 
brilliant stars of Orion's belt, known for centuries as the 
Three Wise Men. The middle star, the one we are concer- 
ned with, bears the Arable name of Alnitam. 
Today, thanks to the famous “astronomical ceiling” 
on the tomb of Senenmut in the necropolis of Thebes, 
we know that. Orion, or rather, the three stars in Orion's 
belt, were of great significance to the Egyptians. Various 
texts also make it clear that Orion (Sah for the Egyptians) 
was Identified with Osiris, the god of resurrection. 
“Osiris has reappeared in Orion” says one of the texts 
of the pyramids. 
It seems that the Egyptian calendar was based on the 
heliacal rising of Sah and Sothls (our Sirius). The 
200-feet-long tunnel formed by the temple was obviously 
an invaluable aid in determining the moment when the 
rising star first appeared in the faint light of dawn. The 
tunnel formed an ideal screen against the rays of the sun 
when it rose immediately after the star. 
There is yet another hitherto unsuspected relationship 
between the great temple at Abu Simbel and the yearly 
course of the sun. At the northern extremity of the 
terrace which runs along the great temple, a terrace 
bordered with statues which represent Rameses and 
Horus the Falcon alternatively, there is a curious small 
edifice without a roof. The eastern facade has something 
of the form a pylon and the building is known as the 
Chapel of Re Horakhti. 
* A small staircase and door lead up to it. In the centre 
of the building stands what is generally called an altar. 
However, this altar is not intended for offerings. A stone 
staircase leads up to it and the priest in office, surrounded 
by four stone baboons, one in each corner, could watch a 
particular point on the horizon from between the crennels. 
The baboons and the small obelisks standing to the north 
and to the south of what is conventionally called the 
altar (now preserved in the Cairo museum) prove that it 
—7as indeed a sanctuary consecrated to the sun. 
’ 
a_i wa. TiS so a. oN 
t the northern end of the temple terrace at Abu Simbel stands a 
its original purpose and why was its axis pointed nearly 30 degrees 
potheses outlined by Jan van der Haagen following his intensive his- 
stion. The chape! appears to be orientated in such away thata priest 
see the rising sun exactly In its axis. Until now 
Photo, Documentation Centre on Ancient Egypt 
But there Is something unusual about this hullding. 
Its orientation is very different from that of the terrace 
and consequently from that of the great temple. The 
little temple 1s orientated further to the soutl. 
What Is the reason for this? I wondered whether the 
axis might not have been urientated In such a way that 
the priest looked stralght at the point where the sun 
appears in the winter solstice—a point which makes an 
angle of 116 degrees with the north. Vital Information 
on this point came from the Geographical Institute of 
Paris. The axls of the small temple makes an angle of 
about 118 degrees with the north. The difference of two 
degrees 1s necgligable considering that the axis of the 
small temple is only a few metres long. 
Finally, we may recall that the eastern wall of the 
little chanel has the form of a pylon, According to the 
theory advanced by Mrs. C. Desroches-Noblecourt (Chair 
of Egyptian Antiquities. Ecole du Louvre, Paris) the pylon 
embodies an anclent Egyptian myth ahout the creation 
of the world and does so to celebrate the winter solstice 
and the rebirth of the young sun-god who succeeds 
Oslris. 
What will remain of the play of light between the sun 
and the temple when Abu Simbel has been ralsed over 
200 feet—a height about equal to the towers of Notre 
Dame Cathedral? The llne of the horizon to the east 
will be a little lower, and In consequence the baboons 
will greet the sun five minutes earlier than they have 
been doing for centuries. But, as three thousand two 
hundred years ago, with a difference of barely one or two 
days, the rays of the sun will light up Rameses and the 
sun-gods at fixed times, leaving Ptah in eternal darkness. 
JAN K. vAN DER HAAGEN, former chief of the Museums and 
Monuments Division in Unesco’s Department ol Cultural 
Activities, is now director of Unesco’s Nubian Monuments 
Service. He is the author of works on 18th century 
landscape painting in the Netherlands and on icono- 
graphy. 
15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

16  
  
Feast during the grape harvest (10 ft xX 3 1, ft). 
NIKO PIROSMANI 
Sl NEN _ v — ER A “tL Io LE RE 
Still life (small painting: 27 X &in. ). 


### 63665: Niko Pirosmani; unknown master of primitive art

UNKNOWN MASTER 
OF PRIMITIVE ART 
A beauty from Ortastchal (46 in. X 20 in.). 
of 
 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 63665: Niko Pirosmani; unknown master of primitive art

N every age and land there have been painters 
who in all simplicity and without special 
study have sought to express their picture of the world 
in paint. They were little interested in being classed as 
artists and in fact they were not recoginized as such since 
their works clashed with the artistic canons of their time 
and were not considered “beautiful.” 
But the present half century, for the first time since 
the Renaissance, has withessed the disintegration of the 
more or less official rules of academic art as the existence 
and importance of hitherto neglected forms of art came 
to be appreciated, such as the Romanesque, Pre- 
Hellenic, Oceanian, and African art, the art of ancient 
civilizations unearthed by archaeologist as well as that 
of prehistoric man. 
by Jean A. Keim 
Subsequently, art historians also began to turn their 
attention to a style of painting termed “simple-hearted 
painting” in Germany, “primitive painting” in the United 
States and Yugoslavia and “naive painting” in many 
countries. 
This variety of labels shows how difficult it is to find a 
suitable classification for those unsophisticated artists for 
whom the world was a great canvas to be reproduced 
as simply as possible. Perhaps a better name might be 
the one used as the title of a Paris exhibition in 1935: 
“Popular Masters of Reality.” 
The most famous of these artists was a Frenchman, the 
Douanier Rousseau, whose paintings are now eagerly 
prized by museums the world over. But when Rousseau 
held his first major exhibition' In Paris in 1912 his 
canvases were greeted with sniggers of scorn by the 
fashionable critics of the day. 
Sie then countless other such painters have 
been discovered, some good, some bad—for 
simplicity alone does not make a great artist. A fairly 
representative selection of their works was shown at the 
New York Museum of Modern Art in 1938. 
Today many pages would be needed to list all the 
painters who can be grouped in this same category yet 
whose works are as markedly different one from another 
as Dietrich of Switzerland, Generallc of Yugoslavia, 
Greffe of Belgium, Guillen of Nicaragua, Hyppolite of 
Haiti, Metelli of Italy, Grandma Moses of the United 
States of America, Ociepka of Poland, Paps of Germany, 
Pasada of Mexico, Shalom of Israel, Theophilos of 
Greece, Urtiaga of Peru, Vivancos of Spain, and Wallis 
of Great Britain. 
Each day brings us the name of a new artist, of greater 
or lesser talent, as well as many unsigned works the 
authors of which are now being sought by art collectors. 
A number of these painters are of exceptional merit yet 
their names still await the world recognition they fully 
deserve. Foremost among these is the Georgian popular 
painter Niko Pirosmanashvili, or Pirosmani as he is known 
for short. 
CONT'D ON PAGE 21 
- 
O
E
 
A 
LY
 
WE
 
ET
 
EL
 
NL
 
RT
 
A 
E
R
Y
 
  
  
NIKO PIROSMANASHYVILI, 
or PIROSMANI (1860- 
1917). A photograph published 
in a Georgian review in 1916, 
THE COOK (42 in. X 18 in.). Niko Pirosmani often 
chose his models from the simple folk he knew best. 
  
17 
DAN

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 63665: Niko Pirosmani; unknown master of primitive art

18 
¢ 
—
 
I
R
 
a 
E
E
 
E
Y
 
S
e
 
N
E
 
a
 
NI (Cont'd) 
AUTUMN DAYS 
AND 
HARVESTS 
“i SE Sten So RE RE EE 
 
In Niko Pirosmani's works the same themes 
appear time and again—scenes from rural life 
or of craftsmen at work, sometimes arranged in 
anecdotal groups. Above, “Harvesting”: from 
the grape and fruit harvest to the wine press. 
The painter was fond of poetic touches like 
the autumn pumpkins (foreground) and the 
flight of migrating birds (left rear). Painting at 
right is entitled “The Childless Millionaire with 
Poor Woman and Her Children” (52 in. x 
45 in.). As canvases for his paintings, Pirosmani 
employed a wide range of materials including 
wood, tinplate, black oilcloth and shop walls. 
Strikingly rich colour characterizes’ his work.

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 63665: Niko Pirosmani; unknown master of primitive art

A 
   
  
RE ee . 
dr 
   
19

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 63665: Niko Pirosmani; unknown master of primitive art

PIROSMANI (Cont'd) 
  
  
20 MARGARET THE ACTRESS. (3 ft. 10 in. x 3 fr.) 
This striking primitive painting is aglow wih colour.

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 63665: Niko Pirosmani; unknown master of primitive art

    AL FRESCO FEAST. Though he 
himself often went hungry, Niko 
Pirosmani was fond of painting 
others at table, thus combining 
portraiture with studies of still life. 
Above, a vintager, detail from 
* Feast During the grape Harvest 
a painting reproduced on page 16. 
 
In a dark cellar, a lonely 
Pirosmanashvilli was born in 1860 In a small village in 
the Kakhetli district of Georgia. When he was still a 
boy his parents died and he found himself alone in the 
world. He made his way to Tiflls, the capital of Georgia, 
where he found work with some small traders and taught 
himself to read and write. But all the time he was 
doing sketches and drawings. 
In 1882, at the age of 22, he joined up with a painter 
and opened a small paint business but his commercial 
sense was very poor and he was soon forced to close shop. 
He then found a job as a labourer on the railways, and 
later opened a small dairy and finally a butcher’s shop, 
but all these ventures ended in failure. 
Aon in the world, without either friends or 
relatives, Pirosmani llved a miserable, hand- 
to-mouth existence. He wandered about Tiflis trying to 
scrape a bit of money together by decorating restaurants 
and cellars, and painting signboards. It was not long 
before his health failed and he sought refuge from his 
frustration and bitterness in alcohol. In the words of 
one authority, Professor Dudchava, “he drank to paint 
and painted to drink.” More often than not he received 
no money for the work he did; instead the tradespeople 
paid him with food and drink, estimating that it was 
cheaper to allow Pirosmani to decorate thelr walls with 
frescoes than to hire an ordinary house painter to redo 
their walls. 
In 1912 he was discovered by a French artist named Le 
Dentre, then by the Zdanevich brothers of Tiflis, painter 
and poet respectively, and Pirosmani’s name began to be 
mentioned in art circles. In 1916 the Union of Georgian 
Painters expressed concern about him and sent the 
painter Gudlashvili to try to help him. Gudiashvill has 
left us a description of him as “a very tall, grey-haired 
man with a small beard and drooping moustache; pale 
and exhausted by his life, but gentle and serene; his 
jacket and trousers covered with paint stains; living in 
extreme poverty in a dark cellar.” 
 
man 
One day, when a meeting was in session at the head- 
quarters of the Painters’ Union at Tiflls, the door opened 
and Plrosmanashvili walked in. He sat down, folded his 
arms and stared dreamy-eyed in front of him. Only once 
did he open his mouth during the discussion. “Well, 
brothers” he sald, “Do you know what we need? We've 
got to build a big house In the centre of town where we 
can all meet, buy a big table and a samovar to keep us 
going, and talk about painting.” lle later left, never to 
return. A Tiflis newspaper published a photograph and 
then a caricature of him. This apparently infuriated him 
and he decided to break with his fellow painters. 
Some time afterwards the Unlon agaln sought to come 
to his ald, but Pirosmani{ had left Tiflis and disappeared. 
The search for him went on in vain. When he did 
return he was a dying man. Three days later a friend 
found him lying in a cellar and had him transported to 
a hospital. There he died on May 5, 1917. His place of 
burial is unknown. 
Pirosmanashvill was a noble-hearted, proud man who 
never complained of his sad fate. His works are simpie 
and unsophisticated; he painted what he saw, as it stood, 
with a purity of feeling and lyricism which reveal his 
true love of mankind. In all his painting one senses hls 
deep attachment to ordinary folk, and the vitality of his 
decorative art is vividly expressed In a combination of 
brilliant colours, sharp greens, bright yellows and intense 
blues often set agalnst a background of deep black. 
Again and again he painted the same themes, on re- 
quest, depicting scenes of abundance and plenty which 
he himself had rarely known: Harvest Festival, Gay 
Feasts; Banquet Under the Trees. But in the apparent 
galety of these scenes his own inherent melancholy can 
always be felt. 
His models were the simple people he knew: the Inn- 
keeper, the Cook, the House Porter. Today, their por- 
traits strikingly illuminate a gallery of the Tiflis Museum. 
He painted the Noble Lord, the Wealthy Peasant Holding 
CONT'D ON PAGE 24 
oS 
B
h
 
R
E
S
 
S
U
A
S
 
S
o
 
  
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 63665: Niko Pirosmani; unknown master of primitive art

PIROSMANI (Cont'd) 
  
  
  
  
  ve he: y £ oh 
* = " - am a) TP 
eT A [s i afd fi 18 LLL ad so 
PANORAMA OF HUMBLE This painting, “Religious Festival”, which measures 
17 ft. x 3 1/2 ft. is one of many huge-sized works 
for which Pirosmani had a predilection. Below, “The 
LIFE AND NOBLE DREAMS Tavern”. Right, “Three Princes Feasting in a Meadow”. 
CE 
ATTY RAY 
  
22

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 63665: Niko Pirosmani; unknown master of primitive art

  
NS ATG ER A 0 oh a WN Ce a 
. x ’ A “ N v -. 
r . A. 
Lh 0 
- 
 
n
a
a
 
In
 
R
N
A
S
 
i
e
.
 
SB
 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 63665: Niko Pirosmani; unknown master of primitive art

, " . i is 
! 
  
LION AND GIRAFFE. Animals were one of Pirosmani’s 
favourite subjects and, like the Douanier Rousseau, he 
painted many that he had never seen in the flesh. 
a Riding-Crop, the Millionaire with a Poor Woman and 
Her Children, and later a Prolest Meeling... perhaps an 
unconscious gesture of revolt against the social conditions 
of his time. 
He had a great love for animals and portrayed them 
in many works. He painted bucks and does, like The 
Wounded Hind; bears and cubs as In the magnificent 
She-Bear Under the Moon, eagles, as in Eagle and Hares; 
and even a Lion and a Giraffe. 
For Pirosmanl also painted subjects he had never 
actually seen. Though his whole life was spent in and 
near Tiflis he has left us some remarkable scenes like the 
Port of Batum, a Hunting-Party in India, and views of 
the Russo-Japanese War. 
Steeped in the history and legends of his country, he 
painted portraits of Tsarina Tamara, and the Georgian 
national poet Rustaveli, and illustrated sallent passages 
from the Man in the Tiger-Skin. He also painted innume- 
rable still lifes showing shashlik on a skewer, Georgian 
vegetables and fish, and the traditional glass of red wine. 
Although he was Georgian to the core, Pirosmani’s 
works stand apart from those of hls contemporaries 
which were completely dominated by European influen- 
ces; nor can they be placed in the tradition of the-ancient 
frescoes which adorn Georgian churches. A born genius, 
his style was all his own, and without affectation he 
painted what his heart led him to paint. 
After the Revolution, the Soviet Union began to give 
prominence to his work. In 1930 hls pictures were 
exhibited in Tiflis, Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev and Kharkov, 
and in 1938 and in 1960 important exhibitions of his 
works were held in Tiflis. Many poems have heen 
written about him, and his life is the subject of a play 
now being performed at the Rustaveli Theatre in Tiflis. 
Years after his death a renown has come to this “ill- 
starred” painter which he did not seek and certainly 
never expected. Special tribute to Pirosmanil was paid 
to the artist In 1960 with a retrospective exhibition of his 
paintings in Tiflis Museum. In the catalogue published 
on that occasion, the director of the Tiflis Museum, 
Academician Amiranashvili wrote: “In the history of 
modern Georgian art prior to the Revolution, the work 
of Pirosmanashvili stands out as a great milestone. And 
it is to Soviet art criticism that we owe the present 
understanding and appreciation of his painting.” 
But far beyond Georgia, by virture of his genius and 
humanity, Niko Pirosmanashvili belongs to world art. 
  
24 Jean A. Kem, former Cultural Attache alt the French 
Embassy in Moscow, is a member of the International 
Association of Art Critics. 

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 63667: Building a future for young Arab refugees

BUILDING A FUTURE 
FOR YOUNG ARAB REFUGEES 
by Richard Greenough 
H OWEVER it Is examined, in human, political or 
simply numerical terms, the problem of 
the 1,180,000 Arab refugees living In Jordan, Leba- 
non, Syria and the Gaza Strip seems as far away as 
ever from solution. In fact, those closely associated with 
the problem admit that it has, year by year, taken on a 
more stubborn and a more chronic nature in terms of any 
ultimate solution. The situation remains explosive, 
charged with highly inflammable emotion. 
But having said this, it is agreeable to be able to report 
that a determined and constructive start has now been 
successfully made by means of vocational training, towards 
equipping some of the young men and women with skills 
which will enable them to lead useful and productive lives. 
An encouraging aspect of this work is that it 1s being 
greeted with Interest and enthusiasm, especially among 
the younger refugees, and that the Arab host governments 
are also, in general, supporting the projects with facilities 
for ‘land, local services and funds from the more than 
$5 million a year they are allocating for overall assistance 
including UNRWA. 
Since 1950 UNRWA—the United Nations Relief and 
Works Agency—has been providing food, shelter, health, 
welfare and educational services for the Palestine refu- 
gees. Education which now reaches a total of more than 
200,000 children in 398 of UNRWA's elementary, prepara- 
tory and secondary schools, situated mostly in the 57 
camps where 40% of the refugees live, or in government 
schools subsidized by UNRWA, and taught by some 4,000 
teachers, is being carried out with Unesco providing tech- 
nical responsibility. 
a education services are being improved 
and expanded wherever possible by more and 
better trained teachers, by more classrooms to avoid 
double-shift schools, and by new streamlined teaching 
methods. Refugee children are, in principle, guaranteed 
nine years at elementary and preparatory schools with 
orportunities for three more years at secondary school. 
But over and above this, great new emphasis has now 
been placed on long-range plans for vocational and 
teacher training centres. These plans, to produce any 
real impact and to achieve the expected snowballing 
effect, are predicated on and must continue far beyond 
the present UNRWA mandate due to end in June 1963. 
UNRWA also regards this vocational training as more than 
just training for an occupation but as an alternative form 
of secondary education much more suited to the great 
majority of young refugees than the normal academic 
secondary course. 
Specifically and thanks largely to $4.5 million subscribed 
& UERr Doce v 0 i ore » i SS gE 
   
ats 
5 
. —— E— 
TR nr oT BH ENA 
ro Y 
  
  
  
  
HOMEWARD BOUND from school, these Arab girls 
are some of the 3,000 children being educated in 
UNRWA-Unesco schools now operating within the 
Aqabat Jaber Camp outside Jericho in the Jordan Valley, 
during World Refugee Year (1959-1960), a thrce-year, $8 
million programme {is well under way which will: 
(a) Expand vocational and teacher training among the 
Arab refugees to a point where UNRWA can turn out 
2,000, possibly 2,500, graduates a year compared with 300 
in 1960. 
(b) Increase the number of scholarships awarded 
annually to students in Middle East universities from 90 
to 180. 
(c}) Improve the agency's basic elementary and 
secondary education programmes partly as a means of 
supporting the two previous steps and of properly relating 
this to the educational trends of the host countries. 
(d) Continue a modest loan-grant programme of 
helping qualified refugees put thelr acquired skills to 
productive uses In enterprises of their own. 
This $8 million is part of a £16 million increase over the 
regular annual UNRWA income of some $34 million 
voluntarily subscribed by 41 countries. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 63667: Building a future for young Arab refugees

26 
ARAB REFUGEES (Cont'd) 
~~ 
— 
Ee ’ 
  
  
MANY SKILLS & TRADES are taught to young 
Arab refugees in the string of vocational training 
centres set up in four Middle East countries by 
UNRWA in co-operation with Unesco. Above, 
a trainee reaches for an electric arc-welder in the 
Kalandia Centre where more than 20 trades 
are taught. Left, typing practice for some of 
the students attending the commercial course. 
Training for 22 trades & professions 
However, all this should be considered against the grey 
background of the fact that the refugee population 
increases by about 30,000 a2 year—30,000 more children 
become adult, their places being taken by 30,000 to 35,000 
new babies each year. 
The whole Arab refugee problem has thus, with time, 
shifted to the younger adults as more children grow to 
maturity each year. Today of the 1,180,000 refugees, 
approximately half are children under 18, half adults. Of 
the nearly 600,000 adults depending on UNRWA, three out 
of five have reached adulthood as refugees. The problem 
is also compounded by the fact that maturing refugees 
have hitherto been given so little chance adequately to 
develop their latent productive talents that this deficiency 
is, in itself, a major contributing cause to the continuous 
increase in the number dependent on UNRWA. The 
tragedy of this situation is not accurately reflected in 
this rate of increase, but must be evaluated in terms of 
idle hours, vanished hopes, wasted talents, thwarted lives. 
But UNRWA feels the picture is not hopeless. The 
talents of these maturing young men and women can be 
salvaged and put to constructive use. 
In the words of Dr. John H. Davis, of the U.S, 
Commissioner General of UNRWA: “The three-year pro- 
gramme of UNRWA is not intended to be a solution of the 
Palestine refugee problem. Rather it is based on the 
humanitarian premise that young refugees should be, and 
must be, given an opportunity to put to useful purpose 
the basic talents with which they have been richly 
endowed... It is important to bear in mind that specializ- 
ed training, in and of itself, in no way prejudices the 
ultimate solution of the refugee problem, in that young 
persons reaching maturity will need specialized skills 
regardless of where they may ultimately live.” In other 
words, try to ease a situation where the bottleneck of 
refugees anxious to go out and make their way in the 
world is forever growing tighter while the bottle of refu- 
gees grows bigger. 
So UNRWA, with co-operation from Unesco in the form 
of 24 international education experts drawn from 12 
countries to help and train the Arab instructors at the 
centres, has now established a string of vocational and 
teacher tralning centres through the four Middle East 
countries. UNRWA has its own team also of 28 interna- 
tional education experts at these centres. 
Nine centres are now working. A training capacity of 
nearly 4,000 young men and women—633 of them girls— 
is aimed at by next academic year, with an annual 
graduation from then on of 2,000 to 2,500 students. Of 
these some 1,700 will be for special vocations, the rest will 
become teachers. All trainees are selected from among 
those refugees entitled to draw rations on the form of 
food supplies of a basic subsistence rate of 1,500 calories 
a day in summer, 1,600 in winter. Of the 1,180,000 
registered refugees, about 870,000 are entitled to these 
rations, and of the balance who are not so entitled 
because they earn a self-supporting wage, all but a very 
few are nevertheless entitled to medical, welfare and 
other UNRWA services. 
N this part of the world where the Bible is 
the ordinary man’s Baedeker, the sites of 
these nine centres are almost as rich in historical asso- 
ciation as some of the refugee camps, which can be found 
in Jerusalem itself, Bethlehem, Hebron, Nablus, Jericho, 
Damascus, Aleppo, Baalbek, Tyre, Sidon and Gaza. 
The nine centres are situated: one in Lebanon, at Siblin 
near Sidon; two in Syria, at Homs towards the north and 
on the outskirts of Damascus; two in the Gaza Strip, at 
Gaza itself and at Beit Hanoun; four in Jordan, one in

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 63667: Building a future for young Arab refugees

  
  
UNRWA, Photos 
 
NURSING STUDENT studies microscope slides at a refugee training centre. A pre-nursing 
course has also been introduced for 16-year-old girls who, if they do not choose to take up 
regular nursing, may instead specialize in child care, midwifery or public health services. 
Wadi Seer on the high ground above the capital, Amman, 
one at Kalandia and two at Ramallah, both places a little 
way out of Jerusalem on the old Roman road to Nazareth. 
At Ramallah are the men’s teacher training college and 
also, opened September 1962, a combined teacher training 
and vocational centre for girls, the latter a ploneer of 
its kind in the Middle East. It will ultimately have a 
capacity of 633 and is housed in fine, hewn stone buildings 
in 20 acres of hillside given by the Ramallah municipality 
for a nominal rent of I Dinar ($2,80) a year, complete 
with 1,050-o0ld olive trees. 
Twenty-two trade and professional courses, mostly two 
years, some one, are offered the men. They include 
carpentry, building, surveying, radio/TV, auto, electrical 
and general engineering, sheet metal work, welding, 
telecommunications, accountancy and commercial courses. 
The favourite courses, nearly always oversubscribed by 
three requests for every vacancy, are radio/TV and auto 
mechanics. 
The selection of courses is based on the best informa- 
tion presently available to the agency with respect to 
employment prospects in the area. They are planned on 
a flexible basis so they may be modified as more adequate 
information becomes avallable. A word on this matter 
of job placement later. 
Six types of courses are offered to the women. Typing, 
shorthand, secretarial work, known as “office arts” to 
avoid any suggestion of direct competition with the men’s 
commercial courses; home and Institutional management; 
infant leader courses for day nurseries and the like; 
various types of dress design and dressmaking, known 
rather unglamorously as clothing construction; pre- 
nursing: and haltdressing, manicure and pedicure. 
The last presents special problems in the Arab world 
according to Miss Marie Geldens, of Holland, chief UNEscO 
expert In vocatlonal training for girls, Ilalrdressing 
training must be almed at first chiefly for home atten- 
dance as the western idea of women going to halrdressing 
salons has only been adopted In very few places In the 
Arab world. “But the habit 1s slowly growing and more 
salons will open up,” sald Miss Geldens. 
Nursing as a carcer for women 1s still rather looked 
down upon in the Arab world and women who have 
regularly tended men patients In hospitals find thelr stock 
quoted low In the marriage market. As a result this pre- 
nursing course has been introduced to Interest girls 
while they are still young, 16 or so, as the top age limit 
for entry Into the centre is 19, in the hope that if they 
don't choose to take up regular nursing, they may specla- 
Ize In children’s nursing, midwifery, public health or 
become doctors’ secretaries. 
As with the men’s courses, there has been no lack of 
applicants for the girls’ centres at Ramallah. For the 
300 vacancies this current year in both teacher and voca- 
tional training, there were over 600 applications. 
O- heartening factor In the UNRWA-UNEsco 
education and training programmes is the 
growing number of Arab girls in school at all levels, and, 
more Important, those who remain in school now instead 
of dropping out as so often in the past for work at home, 
in the flelds or an carly marriage. The attractlon of 
vocational training that this UNRWA-UNEsco centre at 
Ramallah has ploneered in the Middle East is gaining 
ground especially now that the entry of women into 
teaching has become an accepted fact in the Arab world. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 63667: Building a future for young Arab refugees

28 
ARAB REFUGEES (Cont'd) 
For a more prosperous Middle East 
As to the finances of this three-year programme and for 
the future of the vocational and teacher training pro- 
grammes, most of the new centres and the expansion of 
existing ones were financed through the §4.5 million 
gathered during World Refugee Year, over 80% of it sub- 
scribed by three countries, the USA, Canada and the 
United Kingdom, plus extra donations from the govern- 
ments of Kuwait and Morocco. Cost per trainee lis 
$500 per 11 months academic year. 
To train the 2,000 students will cost $2 million during 
1962 and 1963. Encouraged by the results of World 
Refugee Year, UNRWA'’s chief, Dr. Davis decided to appeal 
to voluntary organizations, private persons and in some 
cases to governments, to “adopt” these refugees by 
buying scholarships for them to attend the centres at the 
rate of $500 per head per year. 
The result has been encouraging. Funds have come 
from such divergent sources as the United Steelworkers 
of America and the Finnish Girl Guides ; from a commu- 
nity of North American Indians living in Canada and a 
group of voluntary organizations in‘New Zealand; from 
the Arabian American Oil Company (ARAMCO) and U.N. 
staff associations; from Swiss cheesemakers and the 
Oxford Committee for Famine Relief. 
Obtaining a job after finishing the courses is a crux of 
the whole training programme. Placing teachers presents 
few problems. Besides going into the Agency's refugee 
schools where there is always a need for more and better 
equipped teachers, there is now a steady demand for 
trained teachers throughout the Arab world and recently, 
the total output of nearly 500 teachers trained over a 
period in UNRWA-UNESco colleges, was absorbed not only 
in the refugee schools but in Kuwalt, Saudi Arabia, Qatar 
and Libya. 
W z= regards to the graduates from the voca- 
tional centres, where hitherto only a maxi- 
mum of 300 a year have so far had to find, and have found 
jobs, UNRWA believes that the increased output can he 
absorbed into a Middle East which is now undergoing 
rapid technological development. The real test of this 
will come, of course, when the first 2,000 or so come on 
the labour market next year. 
From surveys made by UNRWA placement services, 
there seems reason to be optimistic. In the various host 
countries, those in charge of national development pro- 
jects as well as private industry have apparently expressed 
readiness to take on trained refugees in addition to their 
own native cltizens. 
In Syria, for example, Mahmoud Hamad, director of the 
Damascus centre which will have a capacity of 392 
trainees, sald that Syria’s own new oil industry would 
need a growing number of trained people. Electrical 
foundations, telephone and water companies were busy 
extending services to rural areas and also needed skilled 
people. One company, he said, was ready to take on 
80 plumbers for bullding projects as soon as they could 
be provided. 
In Jordan, Wadi G. Dides, principal of Wadi Seer (capa- 
city 404 trainees), said that the Jordanian government 
was ready to take all his graduates in the telecommuni- 
cations field and that civil aviation companies expanding 
activities through the Middle East, were also asking for 
more telecommunications experts as well as skilled radio 
men and electricians. 
At the Gaza centre (capacity 369 trainees), the director, 
Abdel Kaher Nagi, said that last year all his 126 graduates 
were taken on by the United Arab Republic, and he hoped 
for the same result, in all branches of trades taught, this 
year. In Lebanon, in the Gaza Strip and the UAR with 
which Gaza is associated, the situation is a little more 
complicated. Refugees, from Gaza are allowed to work 
in the UAR provided they have definite jobs offered; they 
cannot enter the country looking for work. However, 
recently the UAR has started opening up large numbers 
of places for the graduates from the training centre, for 
further industrial training. In Lebanon, though refugees 
do not have the rights of Lebanese citizenship, work is 
available. 
It is likely that a good proportion of the graduates will 
have to cross international boundaries to obtain work, as 
has been the case in the past with the smaller number 
of graduates turned out by centres. The obvious spots 
are other Arab countries with a developing economy, or 
with oil wells. 
R =o Mr. Ahmad Tuqgan, of Jordan, a 
seasoned UNEsco expert in general education, 
toured a number of the Arab countries, particularly 
those in the Persian Gulf, and returned with enthusiastic 
reports that there was still a thirsty labour market for 
nearly all trades, and one which looked like continuing 
for a while. He cited specially, the Sheikhdom of Abou 
Dhabi, one of the Trucial States, until recently a small 
community of some 15,000 people, but where oil has been 
lately discovered in such abundance that output may 
eventually rival that of Kuwait, and annual income 
should reach something like $150 million in a year or so. 
Moreover, the Sheikh Shakhbout plans to use much of 
his new income in social and economic development for 
his people. There will be room for many teachers and 
builders, home economic experts and hairdressers, as well 
as for pipe-line welders, accountants and auto mechanics. 
By making the learning of English compulsory at the 
vocational centres, trainees are also being better equipped 
for work both inside and outside the Arab world. 
It would be idle, and wrong, to assume that by launch- 
ing this ambitious vocational and teacher training pro- 
gramme, which can in any case only cater for a small 
percentage of refugees at the present time, though there 
is always hope and provision for expansion, UNRWA 
seeks to find a solution to the problem of the Palestine 
refugees. That is not UNRWA’s job anyway. The refugees, 
many of them, still cry out after 14 years, to be allowed 
to return to their homes, a step which, though many 
today feel to be no longer very practical, is nevertheless 
acknowledged in U.N. resolutions within the fiamework 
of a general settlement. Alternatively, they demand 
compensation. 
HE U.N. Conciliation Commission for Pales- 
tine is still actively at work, and early last 
summer combined renewed energy with muted hopes for 
a possible compromise plan, though political tension has 
perhaps run too high for anything much to be achieved. 
All that can be said in the meantime, however, is that 
UNRWA and Unesco are seeking every means to restore 
to the refugees some economic independence, while at the 
same time educating their children and {raining their 
youth so that, whatever the future may bring, the new 
generation will not grow up in conditions of stagnation, 
and will have a chance to play its part in the develop- 
ment of the Middle East.

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

THE INDIAN OCEAN which 
represents 14 per.cent of the 
earth's surface is the least 
known of the earth’s oceans. 
Since 1959 science has explored 
its mysteries on three levels—at- 
mospheric, surface and under- 
water. Right, trainees from 
South-east Asia at work on 
the research vessel “Stranger”. 
Unesco - Mattson 


### 63668: Will the Indian Ocean yield its secrets? Twenty-nation scientific expedition

20-nation 
scientific 
expedition     
  
RR En Ne ES oh IrN A ER Be, 
A ese international fleet of forty vessels 
will be setting out over the next two years 
on a voyage of discovery in which the factor of the un- 
known looms almost as large as it did to the first naviga- 
tors to venture over the horizon in the past. 
This fleet is the International Indian Ocean Expedition, 
history’s most ambitious co-operative venture in oceano- 
graphy, a science as old in its origins as seafaring and 
yet as new and as challenging as the exploration of outer 
space. Twenty countries in all are participating. Since 
1959 several exploratory vessels have already been cruising 
the Indian Ocean as part of the Expedition. 
These research vessels are to cover the Indian Ocean 
which represents 14 per cent of the earth's surface and 
28 million square miles, of which so little is known that 
they have been only semi-facetiously termed as “inner 
space.” The mysteries which this expedition is seeking 
to crack, sound at times as if they had come from the 
pen of a Jules Verne or an H. G. Wells. 
For example, in the northwestern corner of the Indian 
Ocean alone, running from the Arabian Sea to a line ten 
degrees south of the Equator, vessels next year will be 
trying to learn if the actual geological boundary of the 
African continent extends almost to the middle of the 
Arabian Sea instead of running along an offshore contin- 
ental shelf. 
Others will be Investigating the physical processses of 
this ocean to find out why it suddenly appears to become 
deadly to its fish population. In 1957, a Soviet vessel 
bound from Ceylon to the Gulf of Aden encountered a 
mass of dead fish floating over 60,000 square miles, a 
tonnage estimated as equal to the world’s commercial 
fish catch for an entire year. 
At one point the expedition will become a combined air- 
and-sea operation; the atmosphere will be converted into 
an open “prism,” miles in height, by weather planes flying 
triangles or pentagons with surface observers at the end 
of each 100 mile leg. The difference in readings at both 
ends of the “prism” is expected to provide clues to the 
flow of heat and water vapour over the ocean. This is 
another step in the process of attempting to learn how 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 63668: Will the Indian Ocean yield its secrets? Twenty-nation scientific expedition

INDIAN OCEAN (Cont'd) 
Hunting the elusive coelacanth 
the earth’s atmosphere actually works in order to put 
weather forecasting on a more scientific basis. 
Generally speaking, the Indian Ocean itself is a gigantic 
laboratory for studying the effect of wind on currents. 
It is the world’s sole ocean in which the direction of 
prevailing winds—and, consequently, that of prevailing 
currents—changes twice a year with the onset of the 
northeast and southwest monsoon seasons. Oceanogra- 
phers are extremely eager to investigate these reversals 
because they are directly linked to the ocean’s fish pro- 
ductivity. 
What do currents have to do with fish? Very much, 
In the case of the Indian Ocean and other tropical seas 
where a warm layer of surface water blankets cold food- 
laden deeper layers’ and prevents normal mixing. 
Currents produce upwelling of these deeper layers, bring 
ing up “fertilizer” in the form of phosphates and nitrates 
needed to sustain life. 
The importance of these studies in the Indian Ocean 
is obvious. Around its shores live some of the world’s 
most heavily-populated countries. The possibility of 
“farming” the Indian Ocean for fish protein cannot be 
overlooked. 
Another biological aspect of the International Indian 
Ocean Expedition is even more appealing to the imagi- 
nation. In 1964, one vessel is to go out on a latimeria 
hunt. The latimerla, a species of coelacanth, was believed 
extinct until scientists learned, almost by accident, that 
  
  
| Oc 
i ny 
J 
one had been caught in African waters in 1938. Physiolo- 
gists are anxious to study its waste-elimination processes 
which are an intermediate stage on the path of evolu- 
tion leading to present-day fish. 
These are some of the highlights of the International 
Indian Ocean Expedition brought out at a recent meeting 
held in the United Kingdom. Oceanographers from the 
Federal Republic of Germany, France, India, Pakistan, 
the United States and the United Kingdom met at the 
British National Institute of Oceanography at Wormley 
to co-ordinate future operations in the northwest Indian 
Ocean. The meeting was called by the Intergovernmental 
Oceanographic Commission which, together with the 
Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research of the Inter- 
national Council of Scientific Unions (the body which 
organized a similar joint venture, the International Geo- 
physical Year) and UNEsco, is sponsoring the expedition. 
T was an appropriate meeting-place, even 
though the British National Institute of Ocea- 
nography is high and dry in the green hills of Surrey. 
It stands on a knoll as a plain redbrick structure, but it 
is surrounded by seabattered buoys, tidal gauges and rows 
of barrels containing whale ovaries (one of the institute’s 
tasks is to keep track of the world’s declining whale popu- 
lation.) 
  
Chart by U.S. Navy Hydrographic Office, Washington 
LT 
  
aa 
 
balla ot 
¥ 
Spider's web of 
lines on this chart 
spotlights the recent 
scientific activities in 
the Indian Ocean and 
  
| projected work until 
1964. Each line is a 
® cruise track of expedi- 
tions whose activities 
have turned thelndian 
Ocean into a vast 
research laboratory. 
 

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 63668: Will the Indian Ocean yield its secrets? Twenty-nation scientific expedition

  
Unesco - Bill Simmons 
  
pL) 
OCEAN PROFILE IN PLASTIC. A clear picture of the ocean bottom is shown in 
relief by the plastic profile (right) used by scientists in their studies of the world under 
the waters. Beside it is a classic profile chart of the ocean depth. One of the new tools 
which has transformed oceanography is the precision echo-sounder capable of measur- 
ing the outline of the ocean bed to one fathom (six feet) at a depth of 3,000 fathoms. 
A closer inspection of the institute in these bucolic 
surroundings reveals even more startling wonders. One 
entire corridor is lined like a champagne wine-cellar with 
hundreds of samples af sea-water from all over the world 
in glass ampules. A room no larger than an ordinary 
office is occupied by the North Sea—that is, by a mathe- 
matical model where the effects of tides and storm surges 
on the flooding of coastal regions in Northern Europe are 
studied. 
Some of the equipment being used by oceanographers 
in the Indian Ocean Expedition has been developed or 
tested here. Two of these devices serve as excellent 
illustrations of the new tools which have transformed 
the science of oceanography within the past decade or so. 
One is a precision echo sounder, accurate to one fathom 
at a depth of 3,000 fathoms. This instrument has enabled 
geophysicists to study the great abyssal plains of the 
ocean floor sloping almost imperceptibly (with gradients 
less than one in one thousand.) Previous sounders had 
a margin of error as wide as fifty fathoms—which meant 
they could “see” a plain as rolling hills and valleys. 
The second is a deep-water current-measuring instru- 
ment which can be set to float at a predetermined depth 
where it drifts and emits a radio signal thence its 
nickname of “pinger”) enabling it to be tracked. This 
instrument, which has also been called an “underwater 
sputnik,” has helped revise many long-standing ideas 
concerning the stillness of the ocean depths. For 
example, it has detected a current moving twenty miles 
a day at a depth of 4,000 metres. 
The activities of the British National Institute of 
Oceanography are under the efficient and good-natured 
command of Dr. G.E.R. Deacon, who also served as chair- 
man of the meeting to dicuss operations in the northwest 
ocean. Dr, Deacon, at fifty-six, is one of Britain's leading 
oceanographers and he is typical of the scientist who has 
had long months of patient observation at sea. He seldom 
speaks and, when he does, it is In a low tone calculated 
not to distract his fellow scientists working under condi- 
tlons reminiscent in many ways of the long voyages in the 
days of sall. 
As a matter of fact, Dr. Deacon is the first to remind 
a landsman that the study of winds and currents was a 
flourishing science during the heyday of the sailing vessel 
until it fell into a state of wrongful neglect with the 
advent of steam. Present-day oceanography has revived 
this study with modern techniques, particularly the ana- 
lysis of waves. Precise information on wave conditions 
has enabled certain vessels to cut thelr time across the 
North Atlantic by 10 per cent in recent years. 
O CEANOGRAPHERS, In general, have a more than 
sentimental interest in salllng vessels. Right 
now, for example, the three-masted schooner “Vema,” an 
American research shlp operated by the Lamont Geological 
Observatory of Columbia University, is crulsing the Indian 
Ocean. At low speeds or while heaving-to for observa- 
tions, such a ship can be more comfortable than a more 
modern vessel. 
It is interesting to note that the “Atlantis II,” the 
new research ship now being built by the Woods 
Hole Oceanographic Institution in the United States, 
Is powered by steam reciprocating engines rather 
than by turbines or diesels. This “antiquated” technique 
offers less noise interference in certain studies, particu- 
larly the propagation of sound. The “Discovery,” Bri- 
tain’s new research vessel launched last July and sche- 
duled to cruise the Indian Ocean next year, has adopted 
diesel-electric drive as an economic solution to problems 
of low-speed operation. Both new vessels will be equipped 
with “wells” amidships allowing Instruments toc be 
lowered directly into the sea. 
In addition to “Atlantis II” and “Discovery,” a new 
2,200-ton research ship now being constructed in the 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 63668: Will the Indian Ocean yield its secrets? Twenty-nation scientific expedition

INDIAN OCEAN (Cont'd) 
The oceans are one of the world’s last 
unexplored frontiers whose topography 
and living things, plant and animal, are now 
being revealed by patient research. Speci- 
mens like those shown here at the Nathrang 
Institute of Oceanography, Vietnam, will be 
studied for years before scientists find all 
the solutions to their many mysteries. 
Unesco - Pierre Pittet 
40,000 miles 
of sea-bed mountains 
Federal Republic of Germany will take part in the Indian 
Ocean Expedition. This means that some of the world’s 
most modern oceanographic vessels and techniques are 
to be tested there. 
These new vessels offer the advantage of being able to 
carry teams of scientists from different disciplines on the 
same crulse which is actually the equivalent of two or 
three cruises aboard smaller vessels previously used. The 
largest ship to work in the Indian Ocean so far has been 
the Soviet Union’s “Vityaz” listed at 5,700 tons. 
The “Vityaz” made an important contribution to the 
Expedition in 1959 and 1960 by investigating layers of 
hydrogen sulphide in the northeastern Arabian Sea and 
in the Bay of Bengal, from depths of 125 to 1,000 metres. 
Thls was also found to be the most oxygen-starved layer 
of the ocean and it will be the subject of further study in 
the next two years to examine its influence on marine life. 
In geophysics as well, the Indian Ocean Expedition has 
already produced interesting findings. This was the case 
of the nine months’ cruise of the “Owen,” a British. vessel, 
which Investigated the Western Somali basin of the 
Arabian Sea. Gravity and magnetic surveys of this area: 
seem to indicate that the African continental structure 
continues more than 200 miles out to sea towards the 
Seychelles Islands. 
To explain the results of these surveys, a theory has 
been advanced that the thick sedimentary layers of the 
continent continue under the ocean. Next year, the new 
“Discovery” and the “Owen” will use underwater seismic 
explosions to determine the nature of the ocean floor in 
this region. These two vessels, using underwater photo- 
graphy apparatus as well, will also seek to chart the 
Carlsberg Ridge, part of a continuous mid-oceanlc ridge 
THE UNESCO PHILATELIC SERVICE. 
The thousands of p ersons who Have & Sivan their 
lives serving under the U.N. Flag, including 
staff members, truce observers and military 
personnel of member states, are honoured by 
the first U.N. memorial stamp (far right). Stamp 
from Panama (centre) isone of many issued by 
U.N. members honouring Dag Hammarskjold. 
Other stamps, issued by the United Arab Rep 
ublic, Afghanistan and Argentina, mark Unesco’s 
15th anniversary last year. The UAR stamp 
also publicizes Unesco’s efforts to save Nubia’s 
ancient monuments. All these stamps can be 
obtained from Unesco Philatelic Service, Place 
de Fontenoy, Paris (7°), which, as agent in France 
of the U.N. Postal Administration, stocks all 
YN: ts :S0il-first gay overs now on sale : 
Pa ity Car 
Sa 
hi   
system comparable to a mountain range 40,000 miles long 
linking the world’s oceans. 
In all, a total of nineteen oceanographic research vessels 
will be at work in the northwestern Indian Ocean next 
year. Among them will be ships from two of the coun- 
tries directly concerned with the results of the expedition, 
India and Pakistan. Both are also offering special faci- 
lities—such as exemptions from harbour fees or storage 
space for explosives used in seismic tests—to vessels in 
the expedition. 
On land, Pakistan is adding to her existing system of 
tidal gauges while India has completed the building for 
an International Biological Centre at Cochin to be oper- 
ated with Unesco assistance. Specimens taken by ships 
will be sent to Cochin for preservation and study. 
The expedition has also succeeded in enlisting the aid 
of merchant and naval vessels crossing its territory for 
supplementary observations. “Air support” will come in 
May, June and July of 1963 in the form of meteorological 
planes from the United States Weather Bureau and the 
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. 
It fell to the men who met at the British National In- 
stitute of Oceanography to co-ordinate these efforts by 
individual nations in order to avoid duplication of cruise 
tracks and to establish agreement on such matters as the 
choice of common reference stations for benchmark 
observations or the maintenance by one ship of recording 
buoys set out by another. Agreement was reached in a 
manner as simple and as straightforward as the oceano- 
graphers themselves who are accustomed to working on 
the high seas, a world without polltical boundaries. 
And this wlll not be the least of the achievements of 
the International Indian Ocean Expedition. 
  
EIANAMA 
UNITED NATIONS 
  S
h
e
i
 
ia
bo
rt
iv
vb
ot
 
ja
 
v 
MU
TN
IV
H 
AM
HH
IH
AT
I9
90
 
| 
[“
NA
CI
ON
ES
 
UN
ID
AS
 
io
r 
| 
i 1 
NATIONS UNIES 

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

WHY ANTARCTICA IS COLDER 
Sir, 
As our earth is orbiting around the 
sun on approximately the equator 
line—west to east—and approxim- 
atively that position all the year 
round, why is it that the North Pole is 
warmer than the the Antarctic and why 
are the Eskimoes able to live in the 
North? 
Colin R. Brown 
Coolangatta, Queensland, Australia 
Ed. Note: 
Dr. G. Laclavére, President of 
SCAR, The Special Committee -on 
Antarctic Research, has been kind 
enough to furnish us with the following 
information: “To produce a complete 
answer for your Australian corres- 
pondent would really call for a lengthy 
raper. However, here are a few 
-sulient facts on the subject. What he 
says is more or less true; a more 
precise astronomical calculation would 
show that, taken over the entire year, 
the South Pole enjoys more sun-hours 
than the North Pole. 
The reasons why the South Pole is 
colder than the North are manifold, 
but basically there is the fact that the 
South Polar area is a vast, raised 
continent, entirely covered by an ice- 
sheet, whereas the North Pole benefits 
from the moderating influence of the 
ccean on which the ice-pack rests. 
Antarctica is screened from the heat 
of the equatorial and tropical areas of 
the world by the circulation of the 
peripheral winds. Here are several 
basic reasons which should satisfy 
your correspondent. But you might 
also tell him that the reasons why so 
much ice has accumulated in the 
Antartic rather than in another 
region of the world are still something 
of a mystery.” 
‘UHURU’ IN NAIROBI 
 
Si, 
I note that mention was made in your 
March 1962 issue (The Awakening 
African Cinema) of the African film 
“Liberté I”. This film has now been 
shown around the world and, dubbed 
in Swahili under the title of “Uhuru”, 
it has had a tremendous success in 
Nairobi, Kenya where 30,000 people 
witnessed its  premiére. Hundreds 
poured in from the outlying districts 
and those who could not get in stood 
on the tops of buses, lorries and cars 
as far away as six hundred yards from 
the massive, specially erected screen. 
The tremendous crowd surged forward 
chanting “Uhuru”, to grasp the hands 
of the stars, Manasseh Moerane of 
South Africa and John Amata of 
Nigeria, who came specially to 
Nairobi. Mr. Amata said, “This film 
will make Kenya the land of 
expectation and hope for Africa. It 
is the right answer, the right place, 
the right time and you are the right 
people to take it to all Africa.” 
Nahashon Ngare and Stanley Kinga, 
who dubbed the film into Swahili, said, 
“We are doing this as our part in the 
struggle to answer tribalism and create 
letters to the Editor 
fundamental and lasting unity and 
make leaders and led incorruptible and 
unselfish as the only guarantee for a 
free, full life for all in an independent 
Kenya.” 
J. Poncy 
Cologny, Geneva, Switzerland 
A SUNKEN OASIS 
  
Sir, 
In the special issue (May 1962) of 
Tue UNesco Courier on “Thirsty 
Lands”, you published photographs of 
a sunken oasis: “A few years ago an 
oasis cast its green shade near Fort 
Flatters in the Sahara. Today it has 
been swallowed up by the creeping 
sands and only the tops of three palm 
trees mark its grave.” As a postscript 
to this I am sending you a photograph 
I took of this oasis in 1923 when 1 
often had occasion to visit it. At 
that time the little pool there provided 
enough water for growing a few 
vegetables and several patches of 
millet, and there were also several fig 
trees and vines. 1 was one of five 
Frenchmen who lived on the edge of 
the oasis which was then the home 
of about a dozen Touareg families. 
The reason for the poor quality of the 
photo is that it was developed at Fort 
Flatters, where the water is heavily 
impregnated with magnesium. 
Y. Mazzoni 
Oran, Algeria 
LOST HYMNS OF GEORGIA 
Sir, 
As a composer and specialist in folk 
music, I was greatly interested by 
“Lost Hymns of Georgia” (May 1962) 
in which a Soviet linguist, Dr. Pavle 
Ingorokva, explained how an ancient 
musical mystery was solved. 1 have 
often had to face similar problems 
during research in the Middle East 
into Biblical music written according 
to the Sephardic Jewish oral tradition. 
In Alexandria, in 1929, I published 
a short brochure in French, in which, 
under the title of “Music of the 
Torah”, 1 grouped all the material 
I had collected. While admiring, 
without reserve, the results already 
obtained with regard to the Georgian 
music, I should have liked Dr. Ingo- 
rokva to explain to us the problems 
cf the rhythm or duration of sound 
with the same precision that he has 
outlined details of the pitch and 
subsequent pattern of tones. 
Alberto Hemsi 
Aubervilliers, France 
Sir, 
Permit me to suggest some amend- 
ments to Dr. P. Ingorokva's “Lost 
Hymns of Georgia”. They concern 
only those points which obligate any 
musicological communication, even 
when addressed to the general pub- 
lic. Mostly the translator and not 
the author, scems to have been at 
fault. 
L Both the nine-stringed square 
instrument in the miniature and the 
triangular one photographed (p. 27), 
were designated as “lute”, which 
neither one actually is. In the minia- 
ture we probably have a kind of 
psaltery  (musicologically:  zither— 
strings over a soundboard, with no 
neck or yoke). This is either held ver- 
tically, or only represented thus in or- 
der 10 evade a problem in perspective. 
The instrument on p. 27 is an angular 
harp (strings stretching from a sepa- 
rate neck and mecting the plane of 
the soundbox vertically). As a “Jute” 
we would define the combination of 
body and handle-like neck, with strings 
parallel to the soundboard, as exem- 
plified by the various kinds of fiddles, 
or the Caucasian “Tar”. 
2. In the same miniature, the wind 
instrument is more probably a trumpet 
of sorts, and not a “flute”, even 
though the painter made its player 
hold it obliquely. At most it could 
be a kind of shawm; if however, the 
miniature is supposed to illustrate 
Psalm 150, a trumpet-like instrument 
is indicated. The *“tabor”, in the 
same miniature, might better be called 
a barrel-drum. 
3. The bronze faun playing a wind 
instrument designated as “aulos” 
(flute) with bulging checks and a 
wrinkled forehead both indicate—even 
though the actual instrument is mis- 
sing—the typical cffect of blowing a 
double-reed instrument, which the an- 
cient aulos in most cases indeed was. 
Therefore—"aulos™ (oboe). 
4. Two points on pape 27: for 
“voice” substitute “mode” or, more 
appropriately, the Byzantine term 
“echos” —melodic class. (The au- 
thor's statement raises a musicological 
point which cannot be discussed 
here); the accompanying voices in 
Western art music for church use (not 
“Roman Catholic church music”, 
which is non-polyphonic to this day) 
began to be written out from the 9th 
century onwards (not the 13th). 
The great value of Dr. Ingorokva's 
communication of course remains 
unaffected in principle. 
Bathja Bayer 
Haifa, Israel 
TOO ‘HEAVY’ FOR TEACHER 
Sir, 
I am continually receiving THE 
UNesco Courier and the Orient/Occi- 
dent Bulletin. I should appreciate if 
they were a little more popular. The 
articles are so “heavy” that it is diffi- 
cult to find time to read and use them 
when the days are filled with teaching. 
We teachers can seldom find time to 
read more than what we can directly 
use in our teaching, and THe UNESco 
Courter does not give us much of 
that. 
Dr. Sten Rodhe 
Malmo, Sweden 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
  
RIUMPHS OF SPACE RESEARCH: 
Two major scientific achievements in 
connexion with space research—the launch- 
ing of the Telstar communications satellite 
on July 10 and the successful completion 
of the longest-yet manned space flights on 
August 15—have been hailed by Unesco. 
Making possible the first transatlantic TV 
transmission, Telstar marked a new era of 
long-distance communication. Congratulat- 
ing the United States, Unesco's Director- 
General described the event as *a sign- 
ificant advance for the free flow of 
information, one that opened up new 
possibilities in international understanding.” 
The Director-General congratulated the 
Soviet Union on the feats of cosmonauts 
Adrian Nikolayev (1,663,000 miles in 94 3 
hours during 64 orbits) and Pavel Popovich 
(1,247,000 miles in 71 hours during 
48 orbits). These latest achievements of 
Soviet science, he said, “marked an 
important further advance toward the 
scientific exploration of outer space.” . 
I OW SALTY IS THE SEA? Scientists 
now find the answer by testing the 
electrical conductivity of sea-water samples 
which gives a more precise indication of 
the salt content than the chemical method 
hitherto employed. Scientists met at 
Unesco’s H.Q. in Paris, recently to discuss 
this question whose importance is related 
to design and construction of ships and 
harbours, the prevention of coastal erosion 
and the behaviour and migration of fish. 
LECTRONIC AID FOR NURSE: 
British scientists have now a device 
which can register changes in a patients 
pulse, breathing, blood pressure or tempe- 
rature and flash them to a central control 
panel. Its purpose is not to provide an 
electronic substitute for nurses but to free 
trained personnel from routine tasks. 
INDERGARTEN LINGUISTS: Chil- 
dren can begin to learn a second lan- 
guage even before they can read and write 
their own with no detriment to the deve- 
lopment of the first language, to intellec- 
tual growth or general school attainment, 
according fo specialists from 11 countries 
who met recently in Hamburg. The 
meeting convened jointly, by the UNEsco 
Institute of Education and the UNEsco 
Dept. of Education, recommended that a 
second language should be taught in 
Kindergarten. 
JANT GAS PIPE: The world’s biggest 
gas pipeline is being built in the 
U.S.S.R. from Ghazli in Uzbekistan 
(source of the gas supply) to the Urals—a 
distance of over 2,500 miles. Cheap gas 
will replace coal which has to be trans- 
ported to the Urals. This is the first time 
that pipes of over three feet in diameter 
have been used to transport gas. 
UIDE TO MUSIC FILMS: Designed 
to serve as a teaching aid in music 
education throughout the world, the first 
international catalogue of music films has 
  
  
  
been published by Unesco with the aid 
of the International Music Council and the 
International Society for Music Education. 
LASSROOM NEWSROOMS: One 
school out of three in the Federal 
Republic of Germany has its own magazine 
and two out of three schoolchildren buy 
it regularly. Journals edited and published 
by schoolchildren now number 570. 
IN PICTURES: A pictorial 
U.N. record of the men, women, 
events and places that have shaped the 
story of the United Nations during the past 
16 years; has now been presented in 
“Pictorial History of the United Nations” 
by Jacob A. Rubin (Published by Thom- 
as Yoseloff, New York, London and To- 
ronto; $7.50 and 42/-stg) . 
ESTERN ART FOR THE EAST: 
More people in India will be able 
to study the art of the West thanks to a 
special gallery which the Government has 
decided to set up in the recently opened 
National Museum in New Delhi. The 
Museum will organize guided tours, tem- 
porary exhibitions and lectures and, as its 
collections of western art increase, will 
become a centre for exchanges with 
museums in other Asian countries. 
ERHART HAUPTMANN CENTEN- 
ARY: The Schiller National Mu- 
seum in Marbach (near Stuttgart) has 
opened a memorial exhibition to mark the 
centenary of the birth of Gerhart Haupt- 
mann, the German playwright and Nobel 
prizewinner (See Sept. issue of THE 
Unesco Courier), The exhibition, com- 
prising some 750 documents—photographs, 
manuscripts and first editions—will remain 
open until October 31. 
N OVIES IN MUSEUMS: In collabo- 
ration with the International Coun- 
cil of Museums, UNEsco is making a world 
survey of film projection rooms and of 
libraries of art and cultural films attached 
to museums with the aim of encouraging 
the wider showing of cultural documentary 
films. Similar surveys will cover libraries 
and universities. 
NEW MINERAL—'GAGARINITE: 
Scientists from the U.S.S.R. Aca- 
demy of Sciences Institute of Geology and 
Mineralogy have discovered a new mineral 
which they have named “gagarinite” in 
honour of the world's first cosmonaut. 
The rare earths which compose more than 
50% of gagarinite are elements widely 
used in electronics and hard-alloy metal- 
lurgy and they may therefore be used in 
the construction of future spaceships. 
EW EUROPEAN SCHOOL: In 
addition to the “European” schools 
already existing in Belgium, Italy and 
Luxembourg, one is to be built at 
Karlsruhe in the Federal Republic of Ger- 
many. It is primarily intended for chil- 
dren of atomic scientists who work at the 
European Institute for Transuranic Ele- 
ments, now being constructed near 
Karlsruhe by EURATOM and the Society 
for Nuclear Research. 
ID FROM ALPS TO ANDES: 
Mountaineers of Valais in Switzer- 
land have generously answered an appeal 
to help poverty-stricken Indian mountain- 
dwellers in the Ayaviri region of southern 
Peru. After hearing, through films and 
lectures, about the plight of the Indians, 
the Swiss villages have generously contri- 
buted towards a fund which will be used 
to open a hospital, maternity clinic and 
schools. Nurses and technicians from 
Valais will also travel to Peru to help the 
Indians. 
— 
EW TAGORE ANTHOLOGY: A 400- 
page anthology of writings by Rabin- 
dranath Tagore (See THE UNESCO COURIER, 
Dec. 1961) has just been published by The 
Hyperion-Verlag in Freiburg, Federal Rep- 
ublic of Germany. Arranged by Pro- 
fessor Amiya Chakravarty, who was Ta- 
gore’s secretary for many years, it includes 
travel-journals, poems, plays, essays on 
education, art and literary criticism, short 
stories and conversations with Einstein, 
Romain Rolland, H. G. Wells and other 
famous figures. 
STRONOMICAL TASK: An arithme- 
tic teacher at an elementary school in 
Osaka, Japan, recently gave his class the 
following task. “Count from one to 
100 million by tomorrow.” The pupils 
began counting aloud, but three hours 
after starting the children had only reached 
4,000. The children’s parents protested to 
the school authorities and the teacher 
apologised for having imposed such a mam- 
moth task: it ‘would have taken the chil- 
dren four to five years, counting 24 hours 
a day to finish this item of homework. 
Flashes... 
  
Wm Each year 3,000,000 people die of tuber- 
culosis and 3,000,000 new cases appear. 
Some 15 million people are estimated to 
suffer from this disease. 
Wm Forty-three countries have now joined 
the UNEesco-sponsored Universal Copyright 
Convention under which states grant foreign 
works the same protection accorded works 
by their own nationals. Panama was the 
latest country to join. 
Wm A world plan designed to reduce adult 
illiteracy by 50% within ten years has 
been drawn up by experts meeting at 
UNescO’s H.Q. in Paris. Today an esti- 
mated 700 million people (half of the 
world’s adult population) cannot read or 
write. 
Wm Soviet engineers have drilled a hole 
nearly 16,000 feet deep in Azerbaijan for 
special studies of the earth’s crust. Work 
has begun on two more bore-holes which 
should reach 23,000 feet, and still deeper 
ones are planned. 
Hl Floating robot laboratories are to be used 
by the International Ice Patrol in the North 
Atlantic to record information on the pres- 
ence of icebergs in the shipping lanes. 
BW Replicas of the Gutenberg Bible, the 
masterpiece printed from movable type in 
1455, have been printed in the United States 
in two-volume sets priced at $750. The 
last sale of an original Gutenberg—of which 
only 47 known copies survive—brought over 
$500,000. 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

current 
trends 
in scientific 
research 
"by Pierre Aupei; special consultant 
CURRENT TRENDS IN 
SCIENTIFIC 
RESEARCH 
245 P.; 33/-, 13 NF, $6.75 
(CLOTH) 
- 
  CATALOGUE OF COLOUR 
REPRODUCTIONS 
OF PAINTINGS 
1860 to 1961 
485 P.;28/6, 20 NF, $6.00 
  
TELEVISION 
TEACHING TODAY 
267 P.; 29), 14 HF, 14.00 
(CLOTH) ; 15/-, 10.50 MF, 
$3.00 (PAPER) 
  
RECENT UNESCO PUBLICATIONS 
  
    pe 
aperman’s 
if win 
SO (1 (IONS 
LJ > all 1 
UNESCO 
  
J 
THE NEWSPAPER- 
MAN'S UNITED 
NATIONS 
219 P.; 11/., B NF, 
$2.25 (CLOTH); 
8/6, 6.25 NF, 
$1.75 (PAPER) 
 
TEACHING ABOUT 
THE FILM 
110 P.; 10/., 14 NF 
$4.00 (CLOTH); 
1S/- 10.50 MF, 
$3.00 (PAPER) 
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
theNational Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; rates quoted are 
for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO COU. 
RIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Melbourne University Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, 
Melbourne, C. I, Victoria. (A. 15/-). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C*., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 60.). — BELGIUM. Olfice de Publicité S.A, 
16, rte Marq, Brussels, CCP 285.98. NV Standaard- 
Boekhandel, Belgiélei 151. Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (100 FB) and art slides only: Louis de Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. CCP 3380.00 — 
BURMA. Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoon, (K. 5.50). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont. (§ 3.00). — CEYLON. The Associated 
Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O, Box 244, Colombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
— CHINA. YYorld Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section |, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CUBA. 
Libreria Econdémica, Pte Zayas S05-7, Apartado 113, 
Havana, (2.25 pesos). — CZECHOSLOVAKIA, Artia 
Led., 30 Ve Smaeckich, Prague 2. — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, A/S Tidsskriltaldelingen, & Norregade, 
Kobenhavn K. (Dkr. 12), = ETHIOPIA. International 
Press Agency. P.O. Box 120, Addis Ababa, — FINLAND. 
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
(Fmk. 540), — FRANCE. Librairie de “Unesco, Place 
de Fontenoy, Paris, 7°. C.CP. 12598-48. (7 NF.). 
— GERMANY, For the Unesco Kurier, Vertrieb Bahren- 
felder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 
276650 (DM 8). Other Publications: R. Ofdenbourg 
Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 145, Munich. — GHANA. 
Methodist Book Depot Ltd. Atlantis House, Commercial 
St., POE 100, Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. Ses 
United Kingdom. —~ GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 
28, rue du Stade, Athens. — HONG-KONG. Swindon 
Book Co.. 64, Hathan Read, Kowloon, — HUNGARY. 
Kuleura, P.O. Box 49. Budazetr, 62. — INDIA Orient 
Longmans Lid. Indian Mercantile Chamber, Hicsl Road, 
Bombay |; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; Gun- 
foundry Road, Hyderabad, I; 3&2, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 241 Asar Ali Pzad, P.O. Box 326, liew 
Delhi, I; Sub-Desct: Oxferd Bock & Suticrery Co, 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16, Same a House, Hew Delha. 
Indian National Commarea for Cocoerztom with 
Unesco, Ministry of Educazom, Mew Cerys 3. (Fs 7) = 
INDONESIA. FP. INL Fafgr Bears, Dalam 
Nusanuara 22, Dakirna. —~ IRAQ. Mucharza's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. — IRELAND. Tie *aneey Pres, 
2, Wellingtea Fzad, Eailateiige, Cusine (12) — 
ISRAEL. Bluraieir’s Zocaazzmes Lz 23. Alaniy 
Road and 42. Nat a2 Eerpumim Some. Tad wow IE S172, 
— JAMAICA. Sarpizer's Bock Faom, F1 bearboor 
Street, Kisgsiem, rex Eiummomul Derece, Sealer 3. 
(10). = JAPAN. Mur zem Cao Le, & Tormrldidtmme, 
Nihontaski, PO. Zcx 413% Towns Carmel Tidws 
(Yen 87C) — JORDAN. jum LU Barcus & Coo 
Lar oun, Suk Fouad, FTI 44, Amvmmur. — 
KENYA. EXA Zocurng, #20 Box TTIET, Meu itn. — 
KOREA. ¥ermm Muacomul Commumizm For neces, 
P.O. Box Cenrcndl 4%, Tail, — LIETIFIA. Coie 
and Yancy Bocuiahegn Lot, 7 2 Foe TTL, ®Morows — 
LUXEMBURG., Lizrura Puil ETeumd,, 23, Gem? «Fame, 
Luxeriurr. — MLLAYIWN FEIDEFATICSN AMD 
SINGAPCHRE. Fare Punlccom Lot, Times bong, 
River Wales 3.2, Smpunzre, — LIT Lugnen oa 1 Literary 
25 Kr rma, dunes (Tay — PATTITTUS Piuwmse 
Comore WE, IL, Toarvom  Towewn, Fori-loum 
— MONACO. Zrewh Lirwy, IT Bo ve Moding, 
Mooree=Cacizn, (7 MF, == METHEFIAMNIS. M4 
Parma MNired], Loge Coeercan, 30 Tre buapoe 
(TL 0 =— MRITWEIILAMNTS WIST [NIIES GCTT. 
Yin Corp & Co. Must Aan jj P&C lemomut, Cures. 
— KEW TERLAIND, Grammer Fenerp CRs, 
Viglingzm, are Gruman: Toewstecn, Added, 
Wi elit prom, Creamery, Timed m (UD -. — NIGERIA 
CME Zccaxtom, F200 Tox 174, rm ([3-) — NOR- 
WAY. For the Unescn Courier only: AS. Farvesers Lit 
terscyr-Tieneste, Stortingige, 4, Oslo, Prattais 11S (kn 
13.20) Other publications, AS. Bob hornet, Lille Greene, 
7, Cilo. = PAKISTAN, The Viete-Pak Putinnkung Cur. 
Led... Unerco Publications House, P.O. Box 374, SCH 
Gulterg Industrial Colony, Lahore. — PANAMA, 
Cultural Panamera, Avenida 72, No, TI47, Aparuadn 
de Corrects 1018, Panama, DF. (Balboas 3-). — PHI- 
LIPPINES. Prulicoine Education Co, Inc., 1104 Castille 
ya. Quago, P.O. Box 6210, Manila. — POLAMD. 
“FPUTH™ wl. iloza Hr. 46, Yiarnaw 10(21. 50), — 
PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrada Lda, Livraria Portugal, 
FPua és Carr TO, Lisbon, — RHODESIA & HYASA- 
LAND. The Busk Cantre, Ferse Street, Salisbury, 
Somer Phodesa. ~~ SWEDEN. For The Unesco 
Corer: Searsis Unerooridet, Vasagatan 1517, Stocks 
beim, C (Kr. 7.50); other publicauons AB CE, Fritzes 
Wurg Morbzehandel, Fredigatan 2, Stockholm, — 
SWITZERLAND. Europa Verlag, 5 FPimistrasse 
Zurn. Payst, 49, ree du Marché, Genera. C.CP. 
1-224. « Counar » only: Georges maz, |, rue des 
Vo.xlore-1lars. Genera. CCP. |-4811. (Fr, S. 8), 
— TANGANYIKA. Dar-etSilaam Bockihop, P.O.B. 
5222, Car-esSalam, — THAILAND. Sués apan 
Fut, Manson 9, Pajdamnern Avenue, Bangkek, (35 
tds) — TURKEY, Librairie Hachette, 449 liuklaf 
Coiiei, EBerzgiu. HBtanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda 
Borwsres, P.O. Box 145, Kampala, — UNIOM OF 
SOUTH AFRICA. Van Schak’s Bookstore, Libri 
Eaulrg, Church Street, Pretoria. For the Unesco 
Courar: Cartral Hews Agency, P.O. Box 1033, Johan. 
LL EPR (10-). — UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC 
(EGYPT). La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh, Adly-Pasha, 
Cars. — UNITED KINGDOM. HM. Stationery 
CT ce. P.O. Box 569, London, S.EL. (10/5). — UNITED 
STATES. Unesco Pubhaauons Cancer, 801 Third 
Aree, Hew York, 22, HY. ($3 5.00.) and (except 
servizais): Columbia University Press, 2960 Broad- 
way, ew York, 27, HY, — U.5.5.R. Mezhdunairodnaja 
Wor g2, Moscow, G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA, |ugoslos 
versqa Knjiga, Terazije 27/11, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063659engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
  
  
J. 
G
i
l
g
e
n
d
o
r
f
 
— 
N
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
of
 
G
e
o
r
g
i
a
,
 
Ti
fl
is
 
NEW FIND IN PRIMITIVE PAINTING 
Niko Pirosmanashvili, called Pirosmani, was a Georgian 
painter who died 45 years ago in utter obscutity, and his 
very place of burial is unknown. Though his name is now 
a little known in the Soviet Union, he is totally unfamiliar 
to art lovers in other countries. Yet he deserves to 
rank among the great masters of modern primitive 
painting. Above, “The Prince”, detail from “Three Princes 
Feasting in a Meadow", which is reproduced on page 23. 
 