# [063847](063847engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](063847engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

PEAKS 
Bre 
= a 
ER 
Er
i.
 
aH
 os
 
ro
 ARIE 
3  
 
 
 
   

## [Page 2](063847engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
   
 
STUDY OF HANDS 
How much effort and how many 
motions are made in getting out of a 
car? Strobophotography captures each 
of these successive movements which 
the eye does not see. Here in a nega- 
tive, the positions of the hands are 
easily distinguishable. For a positive 
of this picture see ‘*Strobophotography: 
What the Eye Cannot See”, page 28. 
Photo © André ). Salesse-Lavergne, Paris 
 

## [Page 3](063847engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

MAY 1961 
"WCourier TH YEAR 
Contents 
No. 5 d 
Page 
PUBLISHED IN 4 ANDRE MAUROIS SPEAKS OF BOOKS AND LIBRARIES 
EIGHT EOITIONS The role of the public library in the world today 
English 14 WORLD PROFILE OF LEISURE AND LEARNING 
French Samplings from the Unesco survey on education 
Spanish culture and mass communications 
Russian 
German I5 BANKS FOR EYESIGHT 
Arabic Legacy of sight for the sightless 
American By David Gunston 
Japanese 
18 BLOOD VESSELS IN BOTTLES 
Modern science’s latest donor bank 
20 MICROPHOTOGRAPHY REVEALS THE INVISIBLE WORLD 
A whole universe of great beauty lies at the bottom of a microscope 
By Daniel Behrman 
28 STROBOPHOTOGRAPHY: WHAT OUR EYES DO NOT SEE 
The strobo-camera captures the world in motion 
By André Salesse-Lavergne 
  
COVER PHOTO 
“Books can take us out of 33 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
ourselves... Books are our 
gateways into other minds 
and other peoples... Books 
are the only way In whic 
we can learn about past ages, 34 FROM THE UNESTO NEWSROOM 
and are the best key to an 
understanding of other social 
groups.” André Maurois 
Speaks of Books, see page 4. 
 
Photo © Steven Trefonides 
(MC. 61.1.158 A) 
Published monthly by THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin July and August when, 
. . . . . itis bi-monthly (| | issues a year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Arabic and Japanese. In the United Kingdom it is dutributed by H. M, 
Organization . Stationery Office, P. O. Box 569, London, S. E. I. 
Editorial Offices Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER”, plus date 
. . . of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
Editor-in-Chief printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
Sandy Koffler unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
Assistant Editor articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO CQURIER. 
Gordon Behrens 
. . The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Readers’ Guide to 
ee irs ol Fenton Periodical Literature published by H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
French Edition : Celia Bertin Annual subscription rates: U.S. S$ 3,00; 10/-stg.; 7.00 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey New Francs or equivalent. Single copies [/-stg. 30 
Russian Edition : Yeniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) cents (U.S.) ; 0.70 New Francs. 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) ’ 
Arabic Edition : Amin Chaker (Cairo) Sales & Distribution Offices 
Japanese Edition : Shin-lchi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin : All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief. 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7,     

## [Page 4](063847engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

Ee AE | iL ; p ; Yi 
En, nay RELI ty EA da 
: o Pay : i 
bd 
Q 
B 
c 
0 
Ld 
Ld 
LJ 
= 
c 
° 
> 
© 
hd 
0 
S 

## [Page 5](063847engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

BY 
ANDRE 
MAUROIS 
of the French 
Academy     
  
UR civilization is the sum of the knowledge and 
memories accumulated by the generations that 
. pS have gone before us. We can only partake of 
Ny de - it If we are able to make contact with ideas of 
these past generations. The only way to do 
this—and so become a “cultured” person—is by reading. 
Nothing can take the place of reading—no lecture or 
image on a screen has the same power to enlighten. 
Pictures are a most valuable means of illustrating a 
written text, but they hardly enable us to form general 
ideas. Films, like the spoken word, flow by and are lost 
to us. Books abide, as life-long companions. 
Montalgne confessed to needing three kinds of 
communion—Ilove, friendship and books. All three are 
much the same. One can love books—they are always 
faithful friends. I would even say that I have often 
found them wittier and wiser than those who wrote them. 
A writer puts the best that is in him into his books. is 
conversation may sparkle, yet it does not endure. But 
one has never finished wrestling with the mysteries of a 
ook. 
Moreover, this friendship can be shared, without 
jealousy, by millions of people ali over the world. Writers 
like Balzac, Dickens, Tolstoy, Cervantes, Goéthe, Dante 
or Melville are a wonderful bond between people who 
appear to be poles apart. A Japanese, a Russian or an 
American may be a stranger to me, but he and I have 
mutual friends—Natasha in War and Peace, Fabrice in 
La Chartreuse de Parme and Micawber in David Copper- 
field. 
Books can take us out of ourselves. None of us has 
had enough personal experience to know other people— 
or, indeed, himself—thoroughly. We all feel lonely in {his 
vast, irresponsive world. We suffer because of it; we are 
shocked by the injustice of the world and the hardships 
of life. But from books we learn that others—greater 
men than we—have suffered and have sought as we have. 
Books are our gateways into other minds and olher 
peoples. Through them we can escape from the narrow 
little world we live in and from fruitless brooding over 
our own selves. An evening spent reading great books 
does for our mind what a holiday in the mountains does 
for our bodies. We come down from those lofty heights 
stronger, our lungs and our mind cleansed of all im- 
purities, and we are better equipped to face with courage 
the battles on the plains of dally life. 
Books are the only way in which we can learn about 
past ages, and are the best key to an understanding of 
social groups that we never frequent. The plays of 
Federico Garcia Lorca can teach me more about Lhe soul 
of Spain than twenty trips to the country as a tourist. 
Chekhov and Tolstoy have revealed to me some aspects 
of the Russian soul which are still true today. Saint- 
Simon's Mémoires have made a France long dead live 
again for me, just as Hawthorne's or Mark Twain's novels 
have helped me to visualize an America that has vanished. 
And my delight is all the greater because of the amazing 
likeness between these worlds, so remote from us in time 
and space, and the world we live In. 
Human beings all have a great deal in common. The 
passions that move Homer's kings are not unlike those 
felt by generals in a modern alliance. When I was lectur- 
ing on Marcel Proust to students at Kansas City, those 
Middle West farmers’ sons saw their own likeness in the 
French characters. “There is, after all, but one race— 
the human race.” Even the great differ from us not in 
essence but In degree, and that Is why the lives of great 
men are of such interest to us all. 
Thus, one reason why we read is to get beyond our own 
CCNT'D ON NEXT PAGE 5 

## [Page 6](063847engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

SWEDEN'S GARDEN-GIRDED MODERN LIBRARIES 
     SCHOOL 
gy 
SCHOOL GAR 
- 
Va
sa
ga
ta
n.
 
  
  
  
  
5 | — ne ane ( 
ANDRE MAUROIS 
SPEAKS OF 
BOOKS 
AND LIBRARIES «os 
lives and understand those of others. But this is not the 
only reason for the pleasure we derive from books. In 
everyday life we are too involved in what is happening to 
see events clearly, too much under the sway of our emo- 
tions to savour them properly. The lives of many of us 
would make a novel worthy of Dickens or Balzac, but we 
get no pleasure from the experience—quite the contrary. 
The writer's task is to give us a faithful picture of life, 
but to keep it far enough away for us to be able to 
appreciate it without fear or entanglement. 
A person reading a great novel or biography lives a 
great adventure without disturbance to his peace of mind. 
In the words of Santayana, art brings before our eyes 
what we cannot find in action—the union of life and 
peace. To read history is good for our health of mind; it 
teaches us moderation and tolerance, and shows us that 
the terrible disputes over which civil wars or world wars 
were once fought are now mere wrangles, dead and 
buried. And that is a lesson in wisdom and in the 
relativity of values. A great book never leaves the reader 
the same as he was before—he is always a better man for 
having read it. 
Nothing, then, is more important for mankind than to 
A few years ago the people of Vasteras, Sweden, 
built a modern library in the heart of their small 
city. Plans were drawn up to construct the building 
near the town’s school with gardens surrounding 
it and a view of the city’s historic cathedral. The 
of less than eight million, has 3000 public Jil 
housing more than 13 and one-half million, 
  
¥ 
re 
he . 
S1its : A 5 
very modern building and interior shown here are, . ". 
like many constructed throughout the Scandi awian* Ce 
countries. Sweden, for example, with a p ion 
“a a) 
* A é    
   
     
       
  
A 4 
 
    
ttn as kph mo 
3 
        
bring within the reach of all, these means of broadening 
our horizons, escaping from ourselves and making 
discoveries which literally transform life and make the 
individual a more valuable member of society. And the 
only way to do this is through public libraries. 
We are living in an age in which, in an increasing 
number of countries, all people have equal rights, share 
in the work of government and shape public opinion, 
which, by its influence on governments, determines in the 
last resort the choice of peace or war, justice or injustice 
—in short, the life of the nation and the world as a whole. 
This power of the people, which is democracy, demands 
that the masses, who have become the source of authority, 
should be well informed on all imporfant problems. I 
agree that, ever more and more, they are receiving this 
instruction in the schools, but the work of the schools 
cannot be complete without libraries to back it. 
Listening even to the best of teachers will not of itself 
produce a trained mind—the pupil must think and reflect. 
The teacher’s task is to provide a sound framework which 
must then be filled in by the pupil himself—essentially, 
by reading. No pupil, no student, however brilliant, can 
hope to do all over again by himself what mankind has 
taken thousands of years to evolve. All worth-while 
refection is, above all, reflection on the ideas of great 
writers. History would be of little value if it were 
reduced to facts and ideas which can be explained in a 
few hours by a school-teacher. But if the student, under 
the teacher’s guidance, searches among memoirs, 
witnesses’ accounts and statistics to find the fabric of 
history itself, then he will learn a great deal about life. 
Reading is more than invigorating mental exercise; it 
makes young people realize that truth lies hidden, that it 
never yields itself ready-made to those who search for 
it but must be pieced together by them by dint of labour, 
methodical work and sincerity, The library is an 
essential companion to school and universiy. I would go 
so far as to say that education is but a key to open the 
doors of libraries. 
wre rcy rove 

## [Page 7](063847engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

v ¥ N 
BLL SER Sl, 
ey 2 M . Lt 
A : 
Sa ey 
'Y 
  
V. x EJ - 4 \ AH, ANE 
N » Ek 3 3 Tg Big fx {a { 47 i 
Si wi i ] a +3 w AA kL : i H . 
wd ' 
: 3 | = 1 | , Rew s — hie : Eh I» . } 4 # 
. - ( wl - “ | : = - ; ARIY - ‘ 
Eh 2 Be > SE SURE: JE 
aan : BR ee 
% 
  
      
Plan and photos from the book “Landsbiblioteket Vasteras.” 
This is even more true of adult education. The citizen 
of a democracy who wishes to fulfil his duties conscien- 
tiously must go on learning all his life. The world does 
not stand still the day we leave our class-room. 
History marches steadily on, posing problems in which 
the fate of the human race is at stake. How are we to 
make up our minds, how are we to uphold what is 
reasonable and oppose what is criminal folly, if we do not 
know what it is all about? 
What is true of history is also true of political economy 
and of all branches of science and technology. In fifty 
years, man’s knowledge has been revolutionized. Who will 
explain these changes to the men and women whose 
lives and happiness depend on them? Who will help 
them to keep abreast of the latest discoveries, and yet 
perform their daily task? Books, and books alone. 
The public library must give children, young people, 
men and women the opportunity to keep in touch with 
their times, in every sphere. By offering them, im- 
partially, works representing conflicting points of view, it 
enables them to. form their own opinions and preserve 
that attitude of constructive criticism towards public 
affairs without which there is no freedom. The library, 
too, may reveal to them their true vocation. Through 
reading the works of the masters, gifted minds still un- 
certain of the path they should take will find themselves 
drawn towards science, literature or the arts and in turn 
will make their contribution to the common heritage of 
mankind. 
Finally, and above all, a well-chosen library open to 
all will enrich the inner lives of its readers. Now that the 
machine, partly replacing man, has given him more 
leisure, this leisure must be used to the best advantage 
both of individuals and of society. Games, sport and 
travel will help, no doubt, but nothing will do as much 
as reading to produce well-furnished minds with a broad 
human outlook. 
Just as scientific and historical works train men’s minds, 
50, too, will novels and plays develop their sympathies. 
A reader who knows the great writers of a country well 
is no longer a stranger there, even if he has never visited 
the country and does not speak Its language. Every 
library is a centre for international understanding. By 
its very existence, free from propaganda and prejudice 
and with no axe of its own to grind, the public library 
serves peace as well as democracy. 
A modern public library is therefore an active, dynamic 
Institution. It goes half-way to meet the reader, anxlous 
to know his needs and meet them, and to attract him by 
offering various ways and means of obtaining informa- 
tion, cultivating his mind and finding relaxation. The 
library’s collections must be suited to thls purpose. Re- 
ference works—dictionaries, encyclopaedias, bibliographies, 
atlases and chronologles—must be there for all to consult. 
The historical section should contain both general works 
(world history, history of the principal countries, par- 
ticularly that of the library's home country, the history 
of the arts, literature and science) and also monographs 
on local history. The biography shelves will always 
attract readers. Books on geography, travel and sclence 
and technical works are also essential. 
As for the classics, only those should be chosen which 
still have their faithful band of readers. Great poets 
are few and it is quite easy to make a collection of their 
works. Novels and plays are the biggest problem. The 
abundance is such that some omissions, however unfair, 
are unavoidable. The main thing is that the library 
should possess the works of the great writers of ali 
countries. 
But the collections must also include technical and 
professional works and textbooks on various trades and 
crafts, especially those practised in the district where the 
library is situated. The library must cater for the nceds 
of its readers and reflect the local economic structure. 
There should be free access to the shelves. Card cata- 
logues must be available to guide the reader to the book 
he wants and to show him, by the classification system, 
 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 7 

## [Page 8](063847engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

ANDRE MAUROIS (Cont'd) 
THE INALIENABLE RIGHT TO READ 
what publications the library has on the subject in which 
he is interested. 
A modern public library's programme also Includes 
various cultural and educational activities—talks, debates 
on literary, artistic or soclal questions, exhibitions, 
theatrical or cinematographic performances and concerts. 
In various ways these activities lead people towards books 
and stimulate the craving to read. 
Thus a public library is a real centre of culture, pro- 
pagating human knowledge and dispensing delight. It is 
a channel for the spread of ideas and provides the 
members of the community with a means of making 
intelligent use of their leisure. Its influence is not con- 
fined to its immediate neighbourhood but reaches the 
people in country districts, who have long been very 
poorly served. Some villages may have a school library, 
but it does not always lend books to adults. Besides, its 
stock of books is very small, and an inquiring mind soon 
exhausts its resources. Some countries have an excellent 
public library network. In other places, similar schemes of 
great interest and promise for the future have been tried. 
Regional libraries have been established in the chief 
town of a province or district and these supply mobile 
libraries which take books to rural communities. 
In each of these communities, some centre—the mu- 
nicipal library, a school library, or the town hall—is 
chosen to serve as a deposit station and someone 
(usually the teacher) is put in charge, to give readers 
advice and, If possible, encourage people to read. The 
director of the central library trains these local librarians 
and they in their turn train the readers. In country 
districts the public library is a co-operative venture. 
This is one system; there are others, but wherever there 
is a public scheme for reading in country districts this 
system has met with immense success among the inhabi- 
tants. It is of the utmost importance that it should be 
organized throughout the world. It is not a luxury—not 
just a way for country people to spend their leisure— 
althougl that in itself is valuable enough; it is essential, 
because it is only through books and reading that civiliza- 
tion can be spread. 
HERE is truth in the saying that today the right 
to read is one of man’s inalienable rights. All 
men and women must have free access to books. 
Books, if they are given the chance, will transform 
human beings, by making them the heirs to the 
accumulated experience of past generations. 
It is in early life that a taste for books and the habit 
of reading are most easily acquired. A public library 
must have a “children’s corner.” Most children have not 
enough money to buy books, nor have their parents 
enough money to give them books. Only in a library 
will they find good books, which will save them from 
reading mediocre or dangerous ones. Although the 
school library is useful, it is often inadequate, owing to 
lack of funds. To an intelligent child, shelves full of 
books among which he is free to browse open up a 
veritable paradise. 
But it is at home, in the evening, or in a garden 
during the summer days, that a child will enjoy most of 
all a long and delightful read. A bright child with a 
thirst for knowledge is a voracious reader. He will come 
to the library to work and do his homework, because he 
will find the library an intellectual centre, where he can 
listen to stories, or take part in play reading, and later 
on in group debates. 
This children’s corner should not be too big. It is 
important for the librarian to get to know each of the 
children who come there, from the recluse who likes to 
be left to himself to the hesitating child who needs 
guidance. The setting should be bright and colourful, so 
that the idea of books may be associated in the child’s 
mind with a feeling of well-being. One cannot fail to 
be impressed by the good behaviour of young readers. 
Reading teaches them consideration for others. 
The library will of course co-operate with the teachers 
of the local schools and with the children’s parents. 
When a teacher is studying a particular subject with his 
pupils, he may ask for a small exhibition on the subject 
to be organized by the library. He may suggest that the 
library purchase books which would be useful to his class. 
Mothers who accompany their youngest children to the 
library may find themselves acquiring a taste for reading. 
The children’s library should not serve too narrow a 
purpose. It should lead on to the adults’ library. For a 
librarian who loves his work, there is nothing more in- 
teresting than watching a child grow into an adolescent. 
There comes a day when children’s books cease to interest 
the young reader and one senses that he is ripe for the 
great writers. This is the moment to guide him towards 
the general library and advise him on books he should 
choose to begin with. If he likes, a children’s librarian 
can be second to none as an awakener of young minds. 
HE librarian plays a tremendous part in community 
life. He has the culture of mankind in his 
keeping and serves as an intermediary between 
the products of that culture, accumulated throughout 
the ages, and the people who are alive and working today. 
There are so many books, and they are turned out so 
fast that nobody can even know which ones he ought to 
read, let alone read them all. The specialist runs the 
risk of wasting his whole life uselessly doing again the 
work that has already been done by someone else. Like 
a planter who has sown too prolific a species and is stifled 
by the very crop he has raised, the reader without 
guidance is likely to be swamped by the vastness of man’s 
culture. 
The librarian can and should protect him. A good 
bibliography and a detailed catalogue can guide people 
through the jungle of man’s accumulated knowledge. The 
year’s crop of books, gigantic though it is, is at once 
digested and assimilated by libraries. Since the number 
of books makes it increasingly difficult to find what one 
is seeking, it is essential that the classification system 
should be constantly improved. It is the task of the 
great libraries—and therefore of their librarians—to 
blaze wide trails through this forest, which otherwise 
would soon become impenetrable. It is their duty, too, 
to see that everything the human mind has produced is 
preserved. 
Even in a small public library, the work of the librarian 
is of no less importance. In a mass civilization such as 
ours, no moral or technical progress can be regarded as 
truly achieved unless it reaches all levels of the popula- 
tion. The librarian who does his work well helps to 
bring this about. It has been said that he acts like a 
filter between the flood of books and the people’s thirst 
for knowledge. This means that he must not only know 
his job but also possess a sound general culture. 
E will need this, too, when building up his 
library. Admittedly when he takes up his post, 
he will inherit a stock of books from his pre- 
decessors. It is important, however, that he should both 
use his funds to the best advantage every year in order 
to add to this stock the best new books that have appeared 
and, even as far as older works are concerned, should fill 
up the gaps in his library in the light of his own 
experience and public demand. 
In every library, the librarian acts as an adviser. He 
guides people in their reading, and shows them how to 
consult the card-index and use the collections. In fact, 
apart from professional qualifications, the job of being a 
CONT'D ON PAGE 10 

## [Page 9](063847engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
         
    
UNESCO   
  
MORE THAN LENDING BOOKS 
Modern libraries throughout the world provide many services besides 
the traditional lending of books. One of the world’s most modern 
libraries in Louisville, Kentucky, U.S.A., houses two FM radio stations 
with a complete control room for the wire network (above). The 
two stations broadcast twelve hours a day, seven days a week, all year 
round. A library card at this library entitles you not only to borrow 
books, but also films, records, paintings, and even an umbrella on 
rainy days. Many public libraries like the one below at Medellin, Colom- 
bia, sponsor regular art shows. Another rapidly growing service of 
public libraries is microfilm viewers which permit visitors to study 
books, documents and newspapers on film not available in the original. 
The battery of viewers at left is In the Royal Library, Stockholm. 
UNLSCO 
  
 

## [Page 10](063847engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

10 
Latecomers take a short-cut through the fence... 
ANDRE MAUROIS (Cont'd) 
PILOT LIBRARIES 
PUT INTO PRACTICE 
UNESCO AIMS 
librarian calls for a real passion for this noble ministry, 
an unbounded passion, unfailing good will and a keen 
desire to help those who are searching for knowledge. 
In Unesco’s educational work, considerable emphasis 
has of course been placed on libraries. All its efforts 
to eliminate illiteracy would be in vain unless reading 
matter could be made available to those who have 
acquired the ability to enjoy it. UNEsco’s main task is to 
work for peace through international culture. In this, 
the public library is its natural assistant. 
Accordingly, Unesco has contributed to the develop- 
ment of libraries, by organizing meetings of librarians 
from the different regions of the world, improving the 
system of exchanges and working methods, sending 
experts on mission, awarding fellowships and—most im- 
portant of all—by setting up model libraries to be a 
driving force in the service of the community. 
The most effective preaching is by example. UNnEsco 
was the first to put into practice the advice it has given 
to countries and cities. It set up pilot libraries, to act 
both as models and testing grounds, and they have met 
with great success. The first pilot library was established 
at Delhi (India). It was founded in 1950 by the Govern- 
ment of India and UNEsco, and inaugurated by Mr, Nehru 
In 1951, its principal object being to provide reading 
matter for new literates, In four languages—Hindi, Urdu, 
Punjabi and English. 
There 1s a travelllng lbrary, which serves fifteen 
 Av 
ACNE PE Lo NE ” 
rae ari SEAVER 3 Ne rs ¥ 
va 
FTE TI A 
A . Fors ap nA, Cari Pera gor RRL I NEN hg a 
4 Boe GR a tam TA Te “- Be ald CL ANANDA IR 
to the tree-shaded park where the story hour is about to begin... 
neighbouring districts, in town and country. The stock 
of books has been rapidly enlarged, and now numbers 
about 165,000 volumes. About 750,000 books are borrowed 
every year. Analysis of the readers’ age groups shows 
that the majority are young people—old people read little, 
or not at all. 
The obvious explanation for this is that education has 
only recently made any progress in that area. Many of 
the reader members had not a single book, and no means 
of obtaining any, until the library was set up. Because 
of the customs of the country, few women came to the 
library, but in many cases the men explain that the 
books they borrow are for their family, and that they 
are often read aloud. Apart from fiction, the favourite 
reading is the lives of famous men and women, handbooks 
on arts and crafts, and the history of India. 
The Delhi pilot experiment has shown that there is a 
great interest in reading. India’s needs are many and 
varied, but reading is one of the most urgent. It is 
especially important that the needs of the new reading 
public should be met, by producing reading matter in 
all the principal languages of the country. A survey of 
readers’ tastes and interests recently conducted by Delhi 
librarians provided valuable information on that subject. 
Unesco has also established a pilot library at Colombia’s 
beautiful university city of Medellin. It was opened in 
October 1954, and now houses nearly 50,000 volumes. The 
central library, branch libraries and bookmobile centres 
together serve nearly a thousand readers every day. 
Here, too, there has been convincing evidence of the 
efficacy of libraries as a driving force in popular educa- 
tion. As in Delhi, young people have been most eager 
to avail themselves of the new facility. Almost as many 
books have been borrowed by children as by adults. And 
the “children’s corner” is as lively as can be. A book- 
mobile serves not only villages but factories as well. The 
central library has become a cultural centre for the 
whole town, providing a full and varied programme of 
cultural activities. 
A similar scheme was launched by UNEsco at Enugu, 
in East Nigeria, This third experiment has proved just 
as successful as the first two. The library, which was

## [Page 11](063847engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

and on the outskirts a timid child listens attentively, 
    
  
his fe . i 3 bf yg J 
A fo Xe \ of SEER EL 
I r a of BE . @ ~ i! _ eo. 
: ole OF {J Feh pm : 
  
   In New York’s punishing summer 
heat with apartments so stifling 
that even TV is out of the question, 
the youngsters take to the parks. 
There the public libraries provide 
a summer programme of reading and 
games. In the borough of Brook- 
lyn, the public library, along with 
eleven of its branches, holds out- 
door story hours every week. The 
ancient magic of the storyteller is 
still as fresh and appealing to the 
present generation as it has been 
for children throughout all the ages. 
Photos © Bernard M. Jaffe 
opened not more than a year ago, has a stock of nearly 
20,000 volumes, and serves about 6,000 readers. Here, too, 
a programme of educational activities supplements the 
work of the reading-room, and the bookmobile serves 
neighbouring districts. A book-box service, by rail, road 
or canoe will shortly bring books to isolated readers and 
to the inhabitants of out-of-the-way areas. 
The aims of Unesco and those of public libraries coin- 
cide, they are: to help the various peoples to know each 
other better; to give a new stimulus to popular educa- 
tion; to promote the ideal of equal opportunities for 
everyone to share in cultural life; to preserve and pro- 
tect the immense legacy of books bequeathed by man to 
man; and to give all nations of the world access to the 
books published by every ‘other nation. This common 
ideal is the best guarantee that there will be ever closer 
co-operation between Unesco and libraries. 
Public libraries already play a very important part in 
the life of modern communities, a part which, for seve- 
ral reasons, will certainly become still greater in the 
coming decades. 
The number of people who can read is increasing every 
year, and will continue to do so. The campaign to elimi- 
nate illiteracy is being vigorously carried out throughout 
the world. It is certainly needed. More and more, people 
who cannot read feel like outsiders in their own times. 
Education is not the exclusive privilege of any one 
class—it has become compulsory for all. As a result, 
hosts of readers are springing up everywhere. It is to 
meet their needs that so many pocket books, cheap edi- 
tions and popular classics are being issued. These series 
are extremely popular everywhere which shows that they 
are meeting a need. 
It is gratifying to note that the standard of the books 
selected is steadily improving. New readers want books 
of real spiritual, educational and literary value. The 
vast majority of mankind, however, has not the where- 
withal to buy even cheap editions. For the masses, the 
only way to get books to read is to go to the public 
library. It should be compulsory for every village to have 
its own public library, just as it is now compulsory for 
it to have a school, of which the public library is the 
complement. 
   
ga 
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
 
     
" ond : ; i oN : AN < ; . r. 
NOTH ofall LOTS iy : IE Lal sn MRT {J % ANAS Bog oe PEL PN 
Cg cA WIV gr 
Economic and technical progress intensifies the need 
for education. It does so In two ways. In the first place, 
it enables people to look beyond their day-to-day needs. 
A poor wretch who does not know where his next meal 
is coming from and who has no shelter from the cold 
and wet has no desire to improve his mind. The higher 
the standard of living, the more concerned people will 
be with their dignity as human beings, and the greater 
will be their demand for the means of educating them- 
selves. 
Moreover, as machines and techniques become more 
and more complicated, a skilled worker has to be educated 
in order to do his work satisfactorily. The machine is 
replacing the labourer, who worked with his hands 
alone; the workman is becoming a technician who uses 
his brain. And so we sce young workmen flocking to 
bookshops as well as to libraries in thelr eagerness to 
learn. Even agriculture, now become a science, demands 
of the farmer a proficiency that he can only acquire 
through books. The need for learning begets a need for 
reading. 
Many countries are suddenly achieving self-determina- 
tion—the right to self-government. This right is a just 
one, if it is accompanied by adequate knowledge not only 
of their own past, their traditions, racial and historical 
peculiarities, their products and consequently their cco- 
nomic future, but also of other countries, their history, 
their place in the world, their characteristics—in short, 
everything that is needed for the maintenance of sen- 
sible and proper relations with them. 
A new State, which is beginning its life as an indepen- 
dent nation, must have a sense of national identity. In 
many cases, however, the new citizens, who formerly 
lived without any strong bond between them and formed 
part of a different political system, cannot have that true, 
deep sense of national identity which comes from a 
knowledge of the past and an understanding of the pre- 
sent. Where can they get this knowledge? They will 
find it in books in which the scattered traditions have 
been brought together. A library is not only a valuable 
instrument for the nation's use—it helps to shape Lhe 
nation itself. 
Civilization creates new needs. Man today is no longer 
CONT'D ON PAGE 13 

## [Page 12](063847engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

  
UNESCO now has three pilot libraries in opera- 
tion, one at New Delhi, India, another at Medellin, 
Colombia, and the most recent at Enugu, Nigeria. 
In addition, UNESCO experts have helped to 
establish, expand, or reorganize libraries in a. 
host of other countries. The pilot project at 
New Delhi has helped to bring books within the 
reach of thousands of people in outlying districts 
thanks to the library's travelling book buses, 
The two youngsters above pore over the shelves 
in the book van as it makes its regular visit to 
their village. The pilot library in Enugu, Nigeria 
(below right), has open shelves and an ever growing 
  
LUI MER LR BAR) 
number of volumes where readers may browse 
at will. The Kochi Citizens Library in Japan 
(below) is typical of more than 800 public librar- 
ies in Japan. Some smaller countries have more 
libraries than Japan but few can boast the astound- 
ing figure of 20 million regular readers, who 
probably make Japan's libraries the best attended 
in the world. The people of the USSR are ardent 
patrons of their libraries as this photo (right) of 
the main reading room of the Leningrad public 
library indicates. The USSR holds the world’s 
record in the number of their public libraries— 
with a total number of more than 130,000. 
UNESCO PHOTOS 
 

## [Page 13](063847engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
ANDRE MAUROIS (Cond) 
content to be a pawn in the hands of powers greater than 
himself. He wants, as far as possible, to know and to 
learn. In the past, only a philosopher or a poet could 
say, “I am a man, and nothing human Is alien to me.” 
Today every man would like to be abie to say this, because 
he knows that the fate of far-off peoples who are stran- 
gers to him will affect his own and also because he has 
become more sensitive, and is moved by an unjust deed 
committed at the other end of the world. Libraries arc 
the most important and the richest source of information 
on problems which concern mankind as a whole. 
Lastly, through the abundant supply of energy and the 
advances made in automation, our civillzation, whether 
we want it to or not, will become more and more a civi- 
lization of leisure. It cannot be anything but gratifying 
to see how working hours are being shortened and man’s 
labour eased. Nevertheless, in the long run too much 
leisure might become dangerous, unless tastes and in- 
terests are broadened at the same time. 
Sports, games, public entertainnients and television 
will of course heip to keep people occupied, but the length 
of time for which they can do so will always be limited 
by the large amount of preparation they require, and in 
any case a man worthy of the name will fairly soon grow 
weary of being a mere spectator. Libraries will provide 
him with the means of creating for himself an unending 
spectacle of space and time. 
Aldous Huxley has sald that “Every man who knows 
how to read has it In his power to magnify himself, to 
multiply the ways in which he exists, to make his life 
full, significant and interesting.” It is this full life, 
enriched by the lives of others, that we would lke all to 
be able to enjoy. Other mass communication media—the 
cinema, television, radio and gramophone records—will 
take new forms, spread and help mankind to share the 
delights of the arts. Yet none of them has so profound 
and lasting an effect as reading, none of them brings 
before us so wide a range of emotion and knowledge. 
When he was opening the Eton Public Library in 1833, 
Sir John Herschel said “..Glve a man the taste of reading, 
and the means of gratifying it, and you can hardly fail 
of making a happy man... You place him in contact with 
the best society in every period of history—with the 
wisest, the wittiest, with the tenderest, the bravest, and 
the purest characters who have adorned humanity. You 
make him a denizen of all nations—a contemporary of 
all ages.” 
We might well say to any community: “Tell me what 
you give your people to read, and I will tell you who 
you are.” 
* 
The text of this article by André Maurois hus been 
published in an attractive fllustraled booklet entitled 
“Public Libraries and their Mission." A limited number of 
copies are available free lo subscribers to “The Unesco 
Courier”. To obtain a copy, write to the Division of 
Libraries, Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris (7°). 
AN IMPORTANT BULLETIN 
ON LIBRARIES 
A few months after the First Session of the UNESCO Gener- 
al Conference In April 1947, the first periodical was pub- 
lished by the newly organized association of states—the 
Unesco Bulletin for Libraries. The Bulletin began its career 
primarily as a means of helping war-damaged libraries to 
rebuild their collections by publishing Information on insti- 
tutions throughout the world which had books and periodicals 
for exchange. Now in its 14th year of publication, the 
Bulletin still continues this important service, but has 
gradually grown through the years in Importance as an 
international medium on all matters concerning libraries. The 
Bulletin appears monthly in separate English, French, Russian 
and Spanish editions. The annual subscription price is $3.50, 
17s. 6d (stg), 10 NF or the equivalent in local currency.     
13

## [Page 14](063847engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 63848: World profile of leisure and learning

WORLD PROFILE 
OF LEISURE 
AND LEARNING 
B RITONS read more newspapers 
than anyone else on the face 
of the earth, but Soviet citizens 
have the largest number of public 
  
library books at their disposal. No 
one goes to the cinema as often as 
an Austrian, even though Japan leads 
the world in the number of full- 
length films produced annually. The 
United States has the most university 
students, but the U.S.S.R. has the 
most students studying engineering. 
These are only a few of the nuggets 
to be gleaned from 182 pages of 
statistical ore contained in the 
newest edition of “Basic Facts and 
Figures" a Unesco annual publication 
which, at first sight, is about as 
attractive reading as a bank state- 
ment or a telephone directory. 
But, despite this dense packing of 
“international statistics relating to 
education, culture and mass com- 
munication” into lists of countries 
(no less than 219 countries and 
territories are mentioned), columns of 
figures and slabs of footnotes, a 
profile of our world in its learning 
and at its leisure cah be drawn from 
“Basic Facts and Figures.” 
S ome of the data are im- 
pressive (only 59 out of 1,000 
Americans do not possess radios) 
and some are rather startling (the 
world’s most fortunate schoolchil- 
dren, and perhaps the world’s most 
fortunate teachers—at least in terms 
of number of pupils per teacher— 
are to be found on St Pierre and 
Miquelon, two French islands off the 
coast of Canada, where there are 
only twelve children per teacher). 
Some of it is tragic, too, in the long 
ranks of nations with only 16 or 17 or 
25 per cent of their school-age 
children actually afforded an oppor- 
tunity to go to school. 
Let’s turn to a few of the facets 
of this statistical portrait (or better, 
panorama) of the world, because no 
one could hope to take in all of them 
in one dose, 
Thumbing through the pages of 
“Basic Facts and Figures”, you learn 
that the United States leads the 
world in the number of university 
14 
students, with 3,236,414, followed by 
the US.S.R. with 2,260,000 (287,164 
American students are listed as 
studying engineering and the parallel 
figure in the Soviet Union is 765,000). 
Next come India with 833,450 
students and Japan with 636,232. 
France leads in Europe with 226,173 
students, followed by the Federal 
Republic of Germany and Italy in 
a near dead-heat : 164,015 and 
163,945 respectively. 
O NE word of warning: there is 
not much agreement through- 
out the world as to what constitutes 
a “university student.” As a famous 
man is supposed to have said, 
“There are lies, damned lies and 
statistics.” 
But the figures do show the United 
States also leads the world in the 
annual number of university 
graduates—438,023—followed by the 
U.S.S.R. with 290,700 (the two leaders 
change places in the figures for 
scientific and technical graduates— 
114,600 in the U.S.S.R. and 96,509 in 
the U.S.A). 
More foreign students—47,245, to 
be exact—study in the United States 
than anywhere else. The next biggest 
attraction is France with 17,456 
foreign students followed by the 
Federal Republic of Germany with 
15,115. 
Rather scanty figures on over-all 
percentages of national income spent 
in 1958 on education show Puerto 
Rico in the lead with 6.9% and Fin- 
land second with 6,5%. 
Now for a digest of what the world 
does in its spare time: for the 
Soviet citizen, there are 752,604,000 
public library books, compared to 
200,000,000 in the United States and 
71,000,000 in the United Kingdom, the 
two runners-up. The U.S.S.R. also 
ranks first in the number of museum- 
goers with 39,900,000 annually, com- 
pared to 10,994,000 in the United 
Kingdom and 10,439,000 in Japan 
(the three leaders according to 
available figures). 
Newspapers are another story. 
Here are the readership rates per 
1,000 in the world’s most newspaper- 
minded countries: United Kingdom, 
573; Sweden, 464; Luxembourg, 429; 
and Finland, 420. The United States 
leads in the number of daily papers, 
1,745, but sells them to only 327 out 
of every 1,000 Americans. On the 
other hand, 475 out of every 1,000 
Americans read magazines of general 
interest, the highest figure in the 
world. 
When the American buys a news- 
paper, he is offered an impressive 
number of pages. That is why news- 
print consumption per capita in the 
United States is 33.6 kilogrammes 
(74 pounds), the world’s highest 
figure, followed by 27.2 kilogrammes 
(60 lbs) in Australia and 25.5 Kg. 
(56 lbs) in New Zealand. 
Other countries appear when you 
turn to the chapter of film attend- 
ance. Austrians are the most 
avid cinema-goers: 17.4 per thousand. 
Next come Malta with 17.3, New 
Zealand with 16.7 and the U.S.S.R. 
with 16.2. In North America, Green- 
land with 14.8 outstrips the United 
States with 12.5, 
Who makes the most pictures? 
The answer is Japan, whose 516 full- 
length films in 1958 rank it first over 
India, 295; the United States, 288: 
Hong Kong, 240; France, 126; and the 
United Kingdom, 121. 
Latest available figures (at the end 
of 1959) for television-viewing show 
that the country with the most sets 
per thousand inhabitants is Monaco 
(a staggering 524). Next are the 
United States, 290; Canada, 196; the 
United Kingdom, 195; and Bermuda, 
182. 
A GAIN, leadership changes 
hands when you turn to 
books. First is the U.S.S.R. 
with 69,072 new titles annually, 
followed by Japan, 24,152; the 
United Kingdom, 20,690; the Federal 
Republic of Germany, 16,552; the 
United States, 14,876 and France, 
12,032. 
The Soviet Union also published the 
most translations in 1958—a total of 
4,457 in the various languages of the 
Union—iollowed by Germany (figures 
are for the Federal and the Democra- 
tic Republics) with 2,512 and Czecho- 
slovakia with 1,462. English was the 
world’s most translated language that 
year: 9,675 works out of a total of 
29,209. Next were Russian, 4,320; 
French, 4,010, and German, 2,951. 
There is some eclectic reading, too, 
to be found among the world’s five 
most translated authors in 1958. 
They are Lenin, Shakespeare, Jules 
Verne, Tolstoy and Dostoevsky in 
that order, with Gorky and Simenon 
as runners-up. The world’s most 
translated single book, though, was 
the Bible. 
Basic Facts and Figures—Unesco, 
Paris. Price: $3; 15/-(stg.); 10,50 NF.

## [Page 15](063847engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

o look into happiness through another man's 
eyes”—the phrase is Shakespeare's but today it 
can literally be true. For through the perfecting 
of corneal graft surgery, it is possible for a blind 
person to regain sight by having a small section of a 
recently deceased person’s eye implanted in his own. 
This quite wonderful operation, the culmination of a 
century and a half of experiment and research by workers 
in many countries, translates into reality a dream as old 
as man, It also gives to each and every one of us an 
opportunity unique in human history: that of giving 
sight to others. For through this operation, modern 
medical science has made it possible for anyone to 
bequeath this most precious gift to those who live after 
us and who are either blind or are in grave danger of 
becoming so. 
No other generation has held so profound and precious 
a legacy In its keeping—yet the world-wide ignorance of 
this subject is appalling. In some small way, it is the 
purpose of this article to disseminate the up-to-date facts 
about corneal grafting and those unique organizations 
set up to obtain, store and provide usable eyes—the eye 
banks of the world. 
At the outset it must be made clear that the implanta- 
tion of another person’s corneal tissue is not a magical 
cure-all for blindness. Many blind people have eye 
defects that are not confined to the cornea, so unfortu- 
nately this modern miracle cannot help them. 
The cornea of the human eye is the transparent surface 
tissue of the eyeball, covering the iris and pupil. In 
normal sight, light Is admitted through this transparent 
window. But if light cannot penetrate the central 
section of the cornea because of its clouding over or 
scarring, vision is impaired and may be completely lost. 
Fortunately, however, the cornea is unique in that it 
is the only transparent and, so far as we know at present, 
the only truly transplantable tissue of the human body. 
Even grafted skin must come from the patient’s own 
body. But corneal tissue from another person, if properly 
implanted, will knit into the surrounding eye tissue, grow, 
and eventually restore the patient's sight. 
At present, between 60 per cent. and 90 per cent. of 
cases can be sure of improvement in their vision, or 
benefit by clearer or restored sight. Even If perfect 
eyesight cannot be guaranteed owing to previous damage 
to the eye by disease or injury, particularly burns, the 
improvement the operation can give ensures a person’s 
independence of movement and activity. 
The only inescapable conditions this operation demands 
are that the donated eye tissue must be healthy and sound, 
and it must be removed within a few hours of death, 
preserved if need be at a low temperature, and grafted 


### 63849: Banks for eyesight

BANKS 
FOR 
EYESIGHT 
by 
David Gunslon 
© Atlantic Press 
within a limited period while the implanted corneal 
tissue is still living. 
It was the British scientific investigator Eras- 
mus Darwin who seems first to have felt that this daring 
operation might succeed. Writing In the period 1794-1796 
he suggested: “Could not a small plece of the cornea be 
cut out with a kind of trephine about the size of a thick 
bristle, or a small crowquill, and would {t not heal with 
a transparent scar?” 
These early attempts were largely made with animal 
eyes: tissues from rabbits, dogs, sheep, plgs, even a 
gazelle, were implanted in humans, but although the 
graft “took”, In each case the patients’ corneas became 
opaque, so no Improvement in vision resulted. 
N the first half of the last century blindness due to 
disease and corneal ulceration was rife and surgical 
treatment became a highly desirable goal. But 
initial work was disappointing and furthermore was 
bedevilled by gross scepticism, both medical and lay, by 
high risk of infection, lack of anaesthetics and imperfect 
instruments and technique. Although a corneal transplant 
was first performed by Frans Reisinger in 1818, and a 
successful case achieved by Bigger in 1837, it was much 
later, about 1878-1888, before the operation could be 
accepted as being more than just a wild experiment. 
In 1879, Wolfe discovered from his own successes that 
a freshly-removed human eye must be used, that the 
graft inserted must be highly accurately sectioned, and 
that the surrounding in the treated eye must not be 
damaged. In the same year, the French eye surgeon 
Louis de Wecher, addressing his fellow surgeons, declared: 
We have no right in these cases to refuse the slightest 
ald to sufferers who have but this one remaining chance 
to recover a little sight; neither should we be deterred 
by the reproach of eccentricity which will certainly be 
levelled at anyone who attempts to graft a cornea. 
But the greatest ploneering figure in this work was the 
German ophthalmologist Arthur von Hippel. From 1878 
onwards he had done corneal grafting in both man and 
animals, and in 1886-1887 publicly showed at Heidelberg 
a patient on whom he had done a successful animal graft, 
keeping accurate records of this case for two years. 
In 1883 von Hippel achieved the first completely 
successful corneal transplantation from one human eye 
to another, though he continued to experiment with ani- 
mal tissue, chiefly from rabbits. Above all, he devised 
an accurate clockwork trephine for cutting the graft 
tissue before insertion into the patient's cornea, and 
under the growing influence of Lister and Pasteur devised 
CONT'D NEXT PAGE 15 

## [Page 16](063847engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

16 


### 63849: Banks for eyesight

BANKS FOR EYESIGHT (Cont'd) 
Amabile Battistello, seventeen-year-old girl of 
THERE IS NO SUCH THING | coin ay. wm pray ecorres 
her sight thanks to the eyes of the Rev. Don 
Carlo Gnocchi who, before dying in Milan 
some time ago, willed his eyes to a blind girl. 
Gnocchi’s legacy. The operation was carried AS A WORN-OUT EYE | setmsiimiini 
surgical principles and technique that still govern this 
operation today. 
In 1905 a Moravian surgeon named Zirm achieved fame 
for skilfully saving the sight of a man blinded by a lime 
splash by implanting tissue from a young boy’s eye that 
had to be removed for medical reasons. He followed 
the man’s improving vision over a long period. Since 
then, the art of keratoplasty, as it is known scientifically, 
has been greatly developed by the unstinting work of 
eye specialists in many countries, notably Elschnig and 
Fuchs, In Germany; Morax, who used graft tissue from 
a patlent’s other eye for the first time in 1912 ; Viadi- 
mir Filatov in Russia from 1922 onwards, who showed 
the value of eyes removed from a corpse; the French 
surgeons Paufique, Sourdille and Offret; Castraviegio 
and Paton in the U.S.A. since 1939; Franschetti, in 
Switzerland: and the British surgeons Tudor Thomas and 
Sir Benjamin Rycroft. 
What exactly is Involved in such an operation to restore 
or repair a person's sight, and how does the eye bank 
come into the story? 
ue remarkable thing is that provided the eye 
tissue used for grafting is itself healthy and free 
of scarring, it matters not what the age, state of 
health, effectiveness of vision or cause of death of the 
donor are. The corneas of elderly people are actually 
better for the purpose than those of young children, and 
even if a person had poor sight or wore glasses, his or her 
tissue after death may prove to be the means whereby 
someone else is saved from blindness or near-blindness. 
In this context, there is no such thing as a “worn-out 
eye”: it is the surface corneal tissue, not the lens, that 
is used. 
The important thing is that the eye or eyes be removed 
from the body as soon as possible after death, ideally 
within two hours, and with an outside limit of perhaps 
ten hours. This naturally causes difficulty, but is essen- 
tial if any subsequent grafting operation is to succeed. 
The removal of the eyes, their enucleation, can be easily 
undertaken by any doctor, and, it should be stressed, 
causes no mutilation or visible disfigurement of a loved 
one’s body. The length of time fresh eyes are in fact 
kept in storage in an eye bank is relatively of less impor- 
tance than the immediacy of their enucleation. 
This is probably the single greatest problem in corneal 
surgery: relatives are naturally loth to grant permission 
so soon after decease, and post-mortem permission may 
all too frequently arrive too late. The complete eye is 
removed, and usually placed on a gauze pad in a small 
glass jar of paraffin oll, the inertia of which protects the 
soft, unsupported tissue. It is then usually sent swiftly 
to an eye bank in a watertight copper container embedded 
inside a metal ice box. 
On arrival at the eye bank an eye is immersed for an 
hour in an antibiotic solution to ensure complete sterility, 
and bacterial cultures are always taken on arrival at the 
eye bank and again 48 hours before use to ensure that no 
infection is introduced into the patient's open eye. 
Ideally, eye tissue is used very soon after enucleation, 
as may sometimes be possible in an eye hospital, or when 
wanted for a patient who has himself supplied the tissue 
from a useless eye to save the sight of the other, called 
an autograft. But in practice, donated corneal material 
must be brought to wherever it is required. 
The problem of effective storage of the living eye tissue 
from someone now dead has received much attention, and 
is an aspect still being widely researched upon. Several 
methods are currently used. For short-term storage, up 
to about four days, the eye is simply kept at 4° C. In an 
ordinary hospital refrigerator after its antibiotic 
out successfully and today, her sight partially, 
restored, the young Italian girl has begun to 
live the normal life of a teen-ager. Her bene- 
factor, who achieved recognition as sponsor 
of Italy’s war-stricken youngsters, has joined 
an ever increasing number of men and women 
throughout the world who have willed their 
eyes to eye banks in their communities to 
provide restored or improved sight for those 
who are blind or suffer f rom defective eyesight. 
Photos © Atlantic Press 
   
immersion. This method is ideal in a busy hospital 
where grafting is regularly carried out. For longer sto- 
rage, the donated eye is kept in liquid paraffin at the 
same low temperature, treated with one or more anti- 
biotics and sometimes nourished with dextrose to feed 
the tissue during storage. 
For even longer storage periods, that is more than 
about three weeks, other methods are currently being 
investigated, notably the slow freezing of the eye in gly- 
cerol immersed in a vial in carbon dioxide “snow” at 
the extremely low temperature of minus 79° C. Another 
method, preferred in the U.S.A, Is to dehydrate the cornea 
and store it in nitrogen gas. When reconstituted, the 
tissue is as good as new. 
In practice, however, the description eye bank ls often 
something of a misnomer, since all available graft mate- 
rial is used just as soon as it can be obtained. The 
walting list for corneal operations is frequently far longer 
than the expected supply of donor eyes. Nevertheless, 
there must often be storage, particularly in large countries 
where great distances between surgeon, donor and patient 
are involved. ) 
The operation itself is a marvellous example of ophthal- 
mic surgical skill. Since 1945 the techniques and 
instruments used have been greatly improved and now 
contribute a strange and striking beauty to this unique 
human feat. All cases are of course most carefully 
selected, and waiting lists are often longer than is gene- 
rally imagined: in the U.8.A., for example, it was recently 
estimated that upwards of 30,000 people could be assisted 
if more donated eyes (and more skilled eye surgeons) 
were available, 
A patient spends between a fortnight and a month in 
hospital. The pupil is contracted with drugs, and drops 
of a local anaesthetic are inserted into the eye at brief 
intervals throughout the operation. Basically, a circular 
concave section of the opaque cornea Is cut away with 
the sharp trephine, which is then used to cut out a disc, 
or graft, of fresh tissue from a donor eye of exactly the 
same size. With infinite care, this tiny section is lifted 
with delicate forceps, placed in position, and painstakingly 
secured with about eight minute sutures of fine braided 
silk or monofilament, stitched with a specially designed 
needle just 4 mm. in length. 
The trephine, still based on von Hippel’s invention of 
1880, can be adjusted at various depths to cut grafts of 
any thickness as demanded by the diseased or injured 
eye. The renovated eye is then treated with atropine 
and covered for several days. The stitches are removed 
in 18-20 days, and although the graft tends to bulge 
outwards a little at first, it gradually flattens out natur- 
ally within six months, and, miraculously, becomes part 
of the patient's living body. 
Above all, he or she finds that sight is improved or even

## [Page 17](063847engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 63849: Banks for eyesight

Ao
n 
S
E
 
. 
NS
 
a 
k
o
t
 
R 
. 
i 
A 
a
e
 
A 
R
e
 
. 
4 
: 
5 
< 
» 
- 
: 
-
 
a 
- 
< 
a
 
Py
 
. 
Y
E
 
restored where before there was only darkness. In many 
countries there are records of people whose vision was 
limited perhaps to a a vague appreciation of movement 
to whom the corneal grafting operation has given normal 
vision for both distance and reading, even with the 
difficult full-thickness graft. And the implanted tissue 
becomes as clear and even as a normal healthy cornea. 
    
  
0 wonder one lady declared in a poetic burst of 
astonished realization: “Through eyes made 
whole by mine, I'll see.” Her sentiments when 
she realized that her own eyes may well help someone else 
to see after her death were well expressed—but unfortun- 
ately are by no means universal. If they were, the 
immense task of keratoplasty surgeons and eye bank 
directors the world over would be greatly eased. 
The eye bank organization Is a recent idea much 
hampered by apathy, ignorance and legal and religlous 
obstacles. Many otherwise enlightened people object to 
eyes being removed after death, while many countries 
cling to outdated legal restrictions more suited to the 
days of body-snatching. For example, some national 
laws specify a 24-hour waiting period before any tissue 
can be removed from the dead, which destroys the 
potential value of the eyes. 
The world’s leading eye bank, and the first to be estab- 
lished, is The Eye Bank for Sight Restoration, set up 
by a few Interested doctors in 1944 at the Manhattan Eye, 
Ear and Throat Hospital, at 210, East 64th Street, New 
York 21, U.S.A, as a non-profit-making organization. 
Now, with a long list of outstanding successes behind it, 
with 16 affiliated eye banks throughout the United States, 
It offers to the rest of the world a wonderful example not 
only in the storage and allocation of donor eyes, but in 
their swift supply to where the need is greatest (by alr, 
if need be), and in the special training of eye surgeons. 
It also runs a weekly clinic for corneal sufferers and 
maintains a unique research laboratory wherein the study 
of donated eye tissue (often after providing a successful 
graft) plays a big part in furthering mankind’s knowledge 
of its optical equipment. Operating at much more than 
a local community level, this eye bank is a major enter- 
prise, backed by the most careful organization. 
In 1948, profiting by a 1947 decree removing the 24-hour 
limitation on eye removal, La Banque Francaise des Yeux, 
now at 21, rue Frangois-1°f, Paris (8%), France, was 
founded, chiefly through the combined efforts of ophthal- 
mologists, veterans’ groups and associations for the blind. 
It now works assiduously on a broad programme, is 
backed by local or regional eye banks throughout France, 
and is well supported both officially and voluntarily. This 
major European development was followed in 1950 by the 
setting up of the Banco Nacional de Ojos, at the IHospital 
Provincial in Madrid, after legislative authorization, and 
this eye bank now maintains a national programme 
throughout Spain. 
In 1952, thanks to a realistic educational campaign, the 
Corneal Grafting Act was passed In Great Britain without 
opposition, and eyes can now be removed promptly after 
death If relatives have no objection, while anyone may 
bequeath his eyes for thls purpose without specific legal 
deposition. A number of eye banks are in operation in 
regional areas as well as in London, and much research 
work goes on, notably at the Queen Victoria Ilospital at 
East Grinstead in Sussex, under Sir Benjamin Rycroft. 
Indeed, U.S.A. France, Spain, Britain and Syria have 
led the way in furthering this noble work by removing 
legal and other hindrances to using fresh eyes from the 
recently dead. But other countries are not so fortunate. 
Italy, for example, needs clearer laws on this matter, and 
the legal requirements vary in Germany, where eye bank 
planning is well behind other nations. 
The law Is insuffielently specific in Canada, Greece, 
Peru and Brazil, while In Venezuela difficulties arise with 
relatives. Morocco has one eye bank and Mohammedan 
spokesmen have helped in allaying religious fears. No 
real legal obstacles exist in Austria or Switzerland, while 
Denmark and Norway are in the happy position of having 
very little eye disease and so the demand for eyes Is 
small. Yet Finland has a condition not considered 
necessary In say Holland, and the legal procedure in 
Sweden Is very different from that In Czechoslovakia. 
Surgeons in Egypt still have to fight ancient prejudices, 
but the greatest need of all is in Indla, where a vast need 
Is met by two small eye banks only, one In Madras and 
one in Aligarh. 
Clearly, there is much need for uniformity of legislation 
controlling the removal of eyes, but the problem goes 
deeper than that. The real need Is for an Eye Crusade, 
since helpful legislation or even tacit agreement about 
the securing of fresh graft material cannot make much 
headway without popular education designed to achieve 
universal enlightenment. 
All too often today the skill and power of this branch 
of eye surgery Is balked by apathy, prejudice and 
conflict. France, Great Britaln, the U.S.A. and one or 
two other countries already apply simple systems whereby 
a person’s witnessed signature on a card or form is suffi- 
clent to ensure that his or her eyes will be used after 
death, but of course many more eye banks (and with 
them, many more surgeons) are nceded everywhere. 
No one who has seen the human tragedy caused solely 
by corneal opacity and the great joy brought to many 
patients by a graft of this kind can doubt the need-—or 
the urgency. 
17

## [Page 18](063847engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 63851: Blood vessels in bottles

  
   
   
BLOOD VESSELS IN E 
    
  
Blood banks, eye banks (see page 15) and bone banks have given the 
world new ways of combating the age-old plagues of man-disease 
and disability. The latest “bank” provided by modern science is the 
Blood Vessel Bank established at the New York Hospital, New York 
City. In certain operations the surgeon is impeded by blood vessels 
which have ceased to function normally and which must be sacrificed 
to ensure a successful operation. Experiments have proved that sections 
of arteries and other blood vessels can successfully be inserted to replace 
malfunctioning ones. This led to the establishment of a bank in which 
grafts from donors are kept in a large double door refrigerator (right). 
The bank sends the blood vessels as they are required to other hospitals. 
The nurse above is withdrawing an aorta from the bank which will 
be sent to its destination In a special refrigerated container. Two or 
more hours at room temperature would damage the graft. Donor 
grafts must be preserved in a special solution of buffered salt to which 
human serum and antibiotics are added. The technician below weighs 
one of the several salts employed in making this special solution. 
  
  
  
  

## [Page 19](063847engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 63851: Blood vessels in bottles

  
  
Because donor grafts must be brought to the bank swiftly, sugeons, technicians and nurses on 
duty all hours must be prepared to move out on short notice both to take grafts from donors 
(recently deceased people in good health so far as the vascular system Is concerned) and to deliver 
grafts to surgeons requiring them for operation. The sterilized 
including two complete surgical kits fill two iarge suitcases. 
sterilized in the bank’ 
equipment and Instruments 
All instruments and equipment are 
s own autoclave (above) and are packed and ready to go at a moment's notice. 
The actual removal of the graft like the one below Is done in as sterile a manner as possible under 
operating room conditions. The graft immediately goes into the prepared solution and Is later 
kept under observation to ensure that it is not diseased. It will be good from four to six weeks. 
All photos © Geor E, Pickow, New-York 

## [Page 20](063847engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 63853: Microphotography reveals the invisible world

MICROPHOTOGRAPHY REVEALS 
THE 
NVISIBLE 
WORLD 
20 
by Daniel Behrman 
world of phantasmagorical shapes, breath- 
taking beauty, nightmarish monsters, sur- 
realist dreams, certain mortality, apparently- 
eternal immortality, baroque fantasy, 
abstract starkness, utter chaos, perfect 
order... this is a world as remote froin our own as any 
undiscovered planet beyond the edge of the solar 
system and yet seldom any further away than our 
fingertips. This is the invisible world, entered not 
through Alice’s looking-glass, but through the 
microscope. 
Men have Deen exploring it since the invention of 
the microscope three-and-a-half centuries ago. It has 
revealed to them countless secrets which have con- 
tained the answers to riddles of life and death. When 
the biologist aims the barrel of his lens upon a deadly 
organism or the chemist focuses upon a mysterious 
crystal, he is usually hunting the answer to one of 
these specific riddles. And yet, there are moments 
when the imperative demands of science or technol- 
ogy are suddenly overshadowed by a vision of har- 
mony or horror. Moments like these are seldom for- 
golten by anyone who has experienced them, even 
though they may have no immediate bearing on the 
progress of science. 
Not so very long ago, this hidden world could be 
scen only by a person lucky enough to have a micro- 
scope available—that is, by scientific research workers 
and a handful of enthusiasts who installed micro- 
scopes in their parlours at a time when their neigh- 
bours were installing magic lanterns. Patient obser- 
vers, it is true, had painstakingly produced drawings 
of microscopic images but they could not hope to 
catch anything more than two-dimensional cross-sec- 
tions in which the added dimension of emotion was 
lacking. 
The eye of the camera changed all this. Now it was 
possible to capture the kinage under the microscope 
in the same way as any image of the normal world. 
Still, it was no easy task. The cumbersome ancestors 
of present-day cameras could be adapted to micro- 
photography only with the help of equally cumber- 
some optical apparatus. 
As a science and as an aid to science, microphoto- 
graphy made a relatively early appearance, but it had 
to await the development of modern cameras to 
become an art... if we accept that definition of art as 
the superfluous which makes life worth living. 
Today, a good 35-millimetre camera, a simple adap- 
tor, a microscope and a stand to keep the camera 
steady (for some exposures may last as long as 
100 seconds) are all that is needed for microphoto- 
graphy. 
Not quite all, though. Perhaps the most important 
prerequisite is that elusive quality of inspiration and 
CONT'D ON PAGE 22 
 
  
Tiny anchors and filigree pendants are not 
from Madame's jewelbox but a microscopic 
bit of the skin of a tiny sea creature. 
  

## [Page 21](063847engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 63853: Microphotography reveals the invisible world

  
This exquisite doily of sheer- 
est lace is only a section of a 
common chestnut tree stem. 
/ 
a
 
~
~
 
—
—
—
 
Feathery reeds in a floral arrangement are 
the microscopic crystals of salicylic acid. 
Photos ©) Louls-Jacques Laporte, Paris 
It might be a wasp's nest, or some strange 
fabric—actually these are bay salt crystals. 
  21

## [Page 22](063847engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

22 


### 63853: Microphotography reveals the invisible world

THE INVISIBLE WORLD (Cont'd) 
FIFTY THOUSAND 
MICROSCOPE SLIDES 
imagination which can distinguish what is beautiful 
or unusual in one microscopic image out of a 
thousand others. And, of course, the thousand other 
images are needed, too. 
There are no less than 50,000 of them in the lah- 
oratory of Dr. Louis-Jacques Laporte in Paris, on one 
of those quiet residential streets in the Passy district 
where nothing ever seeins to happen. Dr. Laporte is 
the leading supplier of microscopic slides for science 
teaching in French universities and lycées, an occupa- 
tion which keeps him busy seventy-two hours a week 
in this age when educators are discovering “audio- 
visual teaching aids”, one of the fields in which 
Unesco is working. It certainly keeps him too busy 
to wonder what the reactions of the groceries-laden 
housewives hurrying past his ground-floor quarters 
would be if they knew that, only a few feet away, all 
the afflictions of man from cancer to the plague were 
in storage (harmlessly, of course) on glass slides. 
Even if they entered his laboratory, as we did the 
other day, they probably would not be very enligh- 
tened. It is one of the last citadels of the lone experi- 
menter in this era of air-conditioned assembly lines, 
functioning to the rhythm of piped-in music selected 
by psychologists. 
The Laporte laboratory, housing one of the world’s 
specialists in the new science of microphotography, 
night well serve as a stage setting for a play by Cour- 
teline, the turn-of-the-century French dramatist who 
delighted in salirizing the bureaucracy of his day. 
All the props are there: roll-top desk, a huge table 
covered with scarred linoleum and assorted flasks, 
bottles and papers, a gas radiator which has a habit 
of turning itself on and off with disconcerting pops, 
and files, files, files climbing the walls to the ceiling. 
Over this citadel reigns Dr. Laporte, a mild, dis- 
tinguished-looking man who wears the discreet 
rosette of the French Legion of Honour in his lapel. 
Adjoining this office is another room containing the 
simple stand used for microphotography, hundreds of 
photographs and more files filled with microscopic 
slides. 
There is also a kitchen, converted into a warehouse, 
whose contents include a few boxes of carefully 
labelled sacks of earth from Barbados, brought back 
after an expedition two years ago in search of new 
specimens of diatoma, the fossilized algae which are 
a delight to the eye of the microphotographer and 
anyone else fortunate enough to see them. 
Dr. Laporte is a rather rare specimen himself—he 
comes quite close to that 18th century notion of a 
“universal man”. He is not only a scientist and a 
photographer, but he also happens to be a singer (he 
is president of one of Paris’s leading choral societies), 
a writer and a painter, True, he hasn't done very 
much painting since he sold sketches of the Luxem- 
bourg Gardens in the Latin Quarter to help pay his 
way through the Sorbonne, but he has been writing 
all his life. Among his books are “The Invisible 
World”, “What You Should Know about the Micro- 
scopic World”, a collection of poems entitled “Souls 
and Landscapes”... and a detective story. 
Yet it might be said that all of his talents—even a 
musician’s sense of harmony—met in one of his most 
recent works, “Panorama of the Micro-\World”. Here, 
as he explained to us in his laboratory, art took pre- 
cedence over science. Its 300-odd illustrations from 
his own collection of micro-photographs and other 
cqually rich collections are a gallery of portraits, 
 
CONT'D ON PAGE 24 
 
 
  
 
The curious baubles, below left, would enhance a Christmas tree, but 
a microscopic one. The pattern is the tooth of a sea fish. In centre 
photo below the design is simply a minute area of the surface of 
an ordinary gramophone record. The abstraction, (below right) 
 

## [Page 23](063847engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 63853: Microphotography reveals the invisible world

The Unesco Courier. — Moy 1961 
b 
- 
af 
l
y
 
r
y
   
—
 
3
 
It could be a brooch of precious stones as seen here magnified 1,860 
times. In reality it Is a secreted valve from a Madagascar diatom cell. 1 
{|
 
F
R
 
=
 
4
 
t
a
l
e
   
would be right at home in a collection of modern drawings—but you'd 
need a microscope to see it. It is an arrangement of body scales from 
a hawk-moth, Above, a cross-section of a vine tendril running with sap 
shows, under the microscope, a great variety of intricate layers. 
  
  
    
Microphotography discovers an unusual plaid fabric design In this 
section of a striped muscle of a sea insect larva magnified 1,340 times. 
23 
   
Photos © Louis-Jacques Laporte, Paris

## [Page 24](063847engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 63853: Microphotography reveals the invisible world

THE INVISIBLE WORLD (Cont'd) 
GALLERY OF NON-FIGURATIVE ART 
landscapes, vignettes and non-figurative compositions 
visible to the naked eye only because they have been 
magnified anywhere up to 40,000 times (a ratio which 
can be achieved with the electron microscope). 
As we browsed through the “Panorama of the 
Micro-World” in his laboratory, Dr. Laporte deter- 
minedly went to work on his morning’s mail, in- 
terrupted occasionally by the doorbell announcing 
students who needed slides for an experiment or a 
thesis. 
“f,ook at this letter,” he remarked, “I only get 
about one a year like this nowadays.” It was from a 
French priest in Le Ilavre who wanted a “Diatoma 
Rose-Window” with some very stern specifications: 
“What is important to me is the beauty of the slide. 
You know that I am very demanding. You have my 
entire confidence.” 
Dr. Laporte sighed. “There you have a vanishing 
race—the diatom collector,” he remarked. This 
species of collector is interested either in individual 
specimens or else in unbelievahly-complicated com- 
positions in which ‘pearl-like diatoma are used to 
decorate floral bouquets composed of butterfly scales. 
A surface of 5 square millimetres is usually enough 
for a picture, 
This is the way Dr. Laporte has described a dia- 
tom collector in his “Panorama of the Micro- 
World”: “lls penchant is revealed the day he sees 
for the first time under the microscope the stained- 
glass window design of a Lepidodiscus elegans and 
his delight never ceases after that. When be. is 
making observations, he forgets his dinner time and 
he consents Lo get some sleep only when dawn comes 
to brighten the windows of his study. 
“If he hears of a species which lives only in the 
tropics and he does not possess it, then he can love 
nothing else. He moves heaven and earth fo obtain it 
and, if it were not for the obligations tying him to 
his country, his family and his modest office job, you 
would see him steal it or sail off to seek it. For it is 
missing -from his collection and he has set aside a 
place for it in his box, as the philatelist does for 
stamps in his album. This empty space hurts his eyes 
and he will not be able to live until it has been filled.” 
And here is the happiest day in the life of a 
diatomist: “In his collection, he has an extremely rare 
diatom which can be gathered only on a certain small 
island lost in the Indian Ocean and found on maps 
only as a nameless speck. And this island, he has 
just learned, has been swallowed up forever in an 
earthquake; the sea has engulfed its beach and its 
rocks, its mangroves, its population—and (he thinks) 
its diatoma. He gazes with renewed love upon the 
unique specimen he possesses. His heart brims with 
happiness...” 
Among microscopophiles and micro-photographers, 
the diatomist is in an extreme class by himself. He 
not only wants to explore the micro-world; he wants 
to change it to suit his own tastes. In a less acute and 
more widespread form, his viewpoint is reflected in 
those who see parallels between the world under 
their lenses and the world around them. Magnified 
21 times, a cross-section of a bramble stem becomes 
the head of a grinning cat. Three caterpillar hairs 
(magnified seventy-five times) reproduce the sophisti- 
cated brushwork of a Japanese artist. The cross- 
section of a sea-urchin’s spike (magnified 300 times) 
could inspire many a jeweller. As common an object 
 
CONT'D ON PAGE 26 
So striking are some of them that even modern artists have been known 
to use them as inspiration for their abstractions, Those pictured below Crystallization of common and uncommon chemical bodies produces some 
of the most beautiful of all photographs taken through the microscope. 
 

## [Page 25](063847engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 63853: Microphotography reveals the invisible world

The Unesco Courier. — Moy 1961 
  
Photos @ Louis-Jacques Laporte, Paris 
Coffee-lovers claim this ingredient keeps them awake at night. Under the microscope however, a crystal of caffeine appears more beautiful than harmful. 
from left to right show, in the first two photos, crystals of a deadly poison washes. The third is crystallization of common soda, and the last which 
(chiorohydrate of pilocarpine) used in the manufacture of certain eye- looks like a butterfly’s wing is the crystallization of vegetable asparagine. 
 

## [Page 26](063847engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 63853: Microphotography reveals the invisible world

THE INVISIBLE WORLD (Contq) 
A UNIVERSE REVEALED BEHIND A LENS 
as a nylon stocking takes on a mysterious pattern of 
endless links when magnified 45 times. There is even 
a micro-painter, René Ferter, in Dr. Laporte’s “Pano- 
rama” who has created landscapes inspired by the 
microscope: for example, the crystallization of tar- 
taric acid is the basis for a landscape, “The Tall 
Palissades,” showing a walled city perched on a 
rocky spur. 
As you might imagine, insects take on new dimen- 
sions under the microscope. Microphotography 
explains many of their amazing feats. Blown up 
100 times, for example, an ant’s head shows jaws as 
cruelly efficient and functional as a pair of wire- 
cutters. Many of the tools which man has taken 
thousands of years to devise, ranging from the drill 
to the bulldozer, have always existed in tbe insect 
world. Some of them even resemble the marvellous 
electronic tools which we are just devising. A photo 
of the antennae (magnified 125 times) of a small 
scaral could easily be mistaken for one of the sensi- 
tive space probes mounted on the shells of artificial 
satellites. 
Up until now, Dr. Laporte had heen talking to us 
mainly about the giants of the micro-world. His pano- 
rama changes completely, however, when it takes in 
organisms which have to be magnified hundreds of 
times before they become visible to the naked eye. 
Then all the landmarks of the normal world disappear 
and you are plunged into a new universe living under 
laws of its own. 
Take the paramecium, for example, a roughly 
-oblong mass with a fringe of delicate hairs which are 
actually the “oars” with which it rows along. Magni- 
fied 860 times, the microphotograph can show the 
paramecium reproducing by division if it is suffi- 
ciently nourished, or else, when food runs low, 
joining with another to form one—but never dying. 
Here, as Dr. Laporte told us, is a world with im- 
mortality. 
Parasites and bacilli which are among man’s dead- 
liest enemies also appear in this world. Some are far 
more horrible than the diseases they cause (we cer- 
tainly would not advise looking at a spotted, flaccid 
liver fluke, for example, before lunch). Others are 
quite innocuous in appearance. Magnified 3,080 times, 
Koch’s bacilli are nothing but little stems meaning 
nothing except to the experienced eye of the physician 
who knows the signs of tuberculosis. 
The great strides which have been made by public 
health in recent years have complicated the task of 
Dr. Laporte. “It’s almost impossible to furnish slides 
to medical students of certain diseases, which have 
been virtually wiped out,” he commented. 
The doorbell in the musty old office housing these 
micro-marvels was now beginning to ring more in- 
sistently. Dr. Laporte, with a trace of regret, closed 
the covers of his “panorama” and returned to his 
everyday profession. He had not covered the subject 
by any stretch of imagination and it is unlikely that 
it will ever be covered. Why not? The answer lies in 
the conclusion he wrote to his book: 
“In the dark night of the Middle Ages, the poet 
showed us Doctor Faust vainly labouring over his 
retorts to learn the mysteries of the world. Yet how 
many ‘ardent hours’ will have to be spent by the 
Doctor Fausts of the future if they want to under- 
stand anything about a living cell, because this cell, 
in order to be understood, apparently must be 
enlarged to the dimensions of a universe!” 
  
An elephant’s trunk? That's almost it. The trunk (or proboscis) of a 
butterfly takes on such elephantine proportions under the microscope. 
26 
Man never seems to go nature one better, not even with braided rugs. 
This handsome specimen is the cross-section of a sea-urchin’s spine,

## [Page 27](063847engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 63853: Microphotography reveals the invisible world

The Unesco Courier, — May 
Ei war 
PAY   
Photos © Louis-Jacques Laporte, Paris The avid diatom collectors Prize such jewel-like creations as this one, arranged with diatoma from Madagascar, 
27

## [Page 28](063847engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28 


### 63854: Strobophotography sees what our eyes do not see

  
Strobophotography sees 
WHAT OUR 
  
  
  
® 
ry he 3 a 
WHICH MAN IS THE PROFESSIONAL? 
Two men striking a nail into a board seem to the ordinary observer 
to be making an almost identical motion. By the process of strobo- 
photography, however, a marked difference between the two is imme- 
diately revealed. Not only does the strobophoto show, even to the 
unpractised eye, that there is a difference in the way the hammer 
descends in the hand of the man on the left as compared to that of 
 
the man at the right, but an expert can look at the two photos and 
tell immediately who is the professional and who is the “Sunday” car- 
penter. Strobophotography tells why. The hammer at the right seems 
to plunge smoothly toward its goal while the one on the left is obviously 
moving along a more jerky path... but the one on the left is being wielded 
by a professional. Now look closely. Up at the top of its trajectory, 
the hammer hesitates (two images). The empty space between these 
two hammers and the five below it indicates that the carpenter has 
decided to strike and the series of five shows that he held back his 
7

## [Page 29](063847engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 63854: Strobophotography sees what our eyes do not see

EYES DO NOT SEE 
  
All Photos © André Salesse-Lavergne 
hammer slightly while he was aiming it. Then there is only a blank 
Space as the hammer crashes down on the head of the nail. This means 
that it was a hard, determined blow (the blurred image between the 
seventh position and the nail is the hammer photographed on the 
rebound, returning upward for a second blow). As for that even- 
spaced movement in the right-hand photo, it actually shows nothing 
but inexperience—the man with the hammer held back his stroke 
all the way down to the nail because he was afraid of missing it... and 
perhaps he was afraid, too, of hitting his finger instead of the nail. 
by André J. Salesse-Lavergne 
AKE a look at the minute hand and the hour 
hand of your watch. Can you see them move ? 
Of course not. Yet, you know from experience 
that they are moving at different speeds but 
always constantly and regularly. 
Now open the hood of a car with its engine running 
and look at the fan. What can you see ? At best, you 
will be able to make out a vaguely circular blur, sur- 
rounded by a halo and shot through with moving lines 
resembling rays without any solid substance. You 
certainly will not be able to describe the exact shape 
of the fan blades. 
Our eye may be very sensitive to certain phenomena 
of light, but it does not enable us to observe directly 
either slow movement (the hands of a watch) or rapid 
movement (the blades of a fan). 
To tell the truth, this relative infirmity of our eye 
does not bother us at all in daily life. All we ask from 
our eyesight and its often-indispensable ally, our 
hearing, is to give us a quick and adequate picture of 
our surroundings so that we can act to preserve and 
maintain our lives. 
Actually, by limiting the range and acuteness of our 
senses to grasp the world surrounding us, nature has 
tried to spare us an Incessant assault by an infinite num- 
ber of sensations which are not really needed for our 
mental or physical activities and which might even 
harm us by creating disturbances in our lives. 
But man in his evolution and progressive conquest 
of the forces of nature has always sought to penetrate 
the mysterious laws which force him to think “univers- 
ally” — that is, beyond the range of his own senses. 
Little by little, he has conceived ways of enabling him 
to expand the frontiers of his knowledge. As far as 
eyesight is concerned, the magnifying-glass, the micro- 
scope and the telescope have opened the long-forbidden 
worlds of the infinitely small and the infinitely large. 
  
   
ITH the invention of photography, man took a 
new and very important step. It meant that 
he could halt the march of time to obtain eye- 
witness evidence and irrefutable proof of phenomena 
which he previously had studied only through guesswork 
and hypotheses based solely upon sensory observations 
—which were often erroncous—or else the whims of his 
memory. 
In other words, photography gave man a new sense. 
It amounted to a concrete form of memory retaining 
only facts. This infallible “memory” certainly meant 
steady progress along the road to an objective study 
of events and facts, but one important element was 
still lacking. 
As we all know, photography can offer us only a 
snapshot of a very brief aspect of an event observed 
in space and time. If all we want to learn is this 
aspect, then we can be satisfied. But if we also want 
CONT'D Od NEXT PAGF 
 
29

## [Page 30](063847engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 63854: Strobophotography sees what our eyes do not see

THE STROBOPHOTOGRAPH 
(Cont'd) 
  
Optical illusion known as the “stroboscopic effect” was discovered 
in 1828 by Plateau, a Belgian scientist who showed that two 
spoked wheels placed on the same axle and rotating at the same 
speed, but in opposite directions, will appear to the human eye 
as a single and motionless wheel. Today, in films, spoked wheels 
of cars or machines occasionally seem to be rotating backwards. 
Each image remains motionless an the screen in front of your eyes 
for 1/24 of a second. If, during this interval, the wheel moves the 
exact distance separating one spoke from another, then the 
spokes and the wheel appear to be stationary (Fig. I). But if 
the wheel moves over a shorter distance than that separating 
two of its spokes, it will appear to be moving backwards because 
your eye will have the illusion that the spoke has moved slightly 
backward instead of forward. Another phenomenon occurs when 
a wheel, during this 1/24 of a second, moves exactly half the 
distance between two spokes. It appears to have twice its true 
number of spokes. At right is shown one of the pioneer 
stroboscopic photos made by General Libessart of France, who 
studied what happens to a golf ball when it is hit. He used a 
device known as “stroborama”, capable of 1,500 images per second.  
Photos () André Salesse-Lavergne 
  
   
HOW TO TAKE A STROBOPHOTOGRAPH. These three In the centre photo, the lens of the camera has been left open while 
photos of the same subject illustrate the difference between strobo- she struck the match, placed it on the candle and then moved the 
photography and photography. At left, a snapshot made at one- candle. The result is a “photogram”. At right, the lens has remain- 
fiftieth of a second of a woman striking a match to light a candle. ed open but the photographer has used a special apparatus, called 

## [Page 31](063847engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 63854: Strobophotography sees what our eyes do not see

  
  
  
  
   
  FRI 
 
Magic of an orchestra conductor’s hand as it creates music is dissected 
here by this strobophotograph, taken in the dim light over his stand. 
Long, delicate fingers contrast with the confident and authoritative 
movements of the baton, none of which could be seen by normal sight. 
Right and wrong way of designing a car’s boot lid are shown in these 
two photographs. In the model tested at far left, the lid showed a 
tendency to smack the startled motorist's nose on its way down, a 
design fault brought out clearly by the stroboscopic camera (the driver 
has to lean forward to close it). At left, a lid comes down effortlessly, 
enabling the driver to stand well clear of it. The manufacturer thus 
knows even before production begins that the problem has been solved. 
a flash generator, which flashed while the candle was being lighted 
with the burning match. This is a true strobophotograph, breaking 
down the individual phases of motion. Industry has already used stro- 
bophotography very profitably and educators now realize its value, 
Photos © André Salesse-Lavergne 
The Unesco Courier. — May 1961 
AMAZING 
SURREALISTIC 
BALLET 
to know what preceded it and what is going to follow it, 
we must have a method of investigation which is capable 
of capturing the event in {ts full run through space 
and time. 
The principle of this method was invented by a French 
physiologist, Etienne Marey, when he succeeded in 
taking successive snapshots at the rate of twelve images 
per second with his famed *“‘chronophotographic gun. 
This enabled him to study the entire process of an object 
in motion. 
Later, other inventors, including the Lumiére brothers, 
discovered a mechanical system for “parading” images 
in front of a lens. This meant that motion could not 
only be photographed but reproduced as well. Chrono- 
photography became cinematography. Both of these 
techniques offered an extremely important new opport- 
unity to scientific research: the events they recorded 
could now be analysed as many times as was required. 
Strobophotography is a method of investigation based 
both on chronophotography and einemaphotography. 
The methods it uses are rather similar. But it presents 
one striking difference which anyone can detect : the 
apparent strangeness of the final result. For a strobo- 
photograph gives us a very unusual picture of human 
beings in motion. Their familiar gestures are turned 
into amazing and surrealistic ballet movements. They 
look as if double exposures had given them additional 
limbs or even bodies. One is even tempted to belfeve 
that it Is all a fake—just as if a number of images had 
been superimposed. It is not a fake however. A strobo- 
photograph is absolutely authentic. It is taken with 
only one shot and during the elapsed time of the motion 
it represents. 
F a person being photographed seems to be using 
five arms to greet a friend or a worker is apparently 
using a dozen identical tools, the explanation is 
very simple. A motion picture film would capture these 
same movements with a number of small images. Each of 
these images Is a “snapshot” of an infinitely small phase 
of the movement. Later, the Images are developed over 
a certain length of film which must then be projected 
for the movement to be analysed. 
But strobophotography does not use a number of 
pictures to capture these different and separate snap- 
shots. Instead, it registers them on a single negative 
which remains motionless inside the camera. On this 
single negative, all the phases of a movement are 
recorded. 
Those multiple hands, ghostly bodies, two-headed 
creatures and doors opening on to infinity form a dream 
world which can inspire artists, attract poets and 
stimulate our imagination. But the scientist and the 
technician are interested in them as well. To tell the 
truth, strobophotography is used most often by scientists 
for it is the child of science. 
In 1934, General Libessart used a “stroborama” invent- 
ed by the Seguin brothers to study what happens to a 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 31 

## [Page 32](063847engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 63854: Strobophotography sees what our eyes do not see

32 
STROBOPHOTOGRAPHY (Cont'd) 
VALUABLE AID 
FOR EDUCATORS 
golf ball when it is hit. It enabled him to determine its 
speed (147 feet per second) and Its rate of rotation (200 
revolutions per minute). Edgerton in the United States 
has been carrying out major research along these lines 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He is 
particularly famous for the shots he made In 1949 of 
Abdessalam, the tennis champion, with the help of a 
lamp flashing at a rate of fifty times per second. 
Since strobophotography can supply the exact data 
needed to solve a large number of problems, it has many 
applications. Among them are : the study of simple 
movements In order to achieve a scientific organization 
of work ; the study of human conduct in the presence 
of natural or accidental situations; the study of indi- 
vidual or group reactions to certain tests; and generally 
speaking, objective observation of outward manifestations. 
Strobophotography can also be used profitably by 
industry. For example, the styling department of a big 
European car manufacturing firm recently put it to work 
in order to study ways of increasing driving safety and 
comfort In its new bodies. 
HERE are two flelds, however, where strobo- 
photography can play an extremely important 
part: education and the preservation of our 
culture. Today, education is making increasing use of 
visual aids which stimulate individual effort through their 
stress on observation, attention, learning by memory, 
reasoning, and aesthetic sensitlveness. Strobophoto- 
graphy would be an extremely valuable aid if educators 
were willing to use it. In developing countries where new 
“active” methods of learning are to be introduced, it 
would help young minds to grasp facts. 
In these same countries, there is also a vital need to 
train workers in those basic movements which are to be 
found in modern industry. In this connexion, you need 
only look at the hammer-blow experiment shown on 
page 29 to realize the contribution that strobophotography 
can make to vocational education. 
As for our cultural heritage, it can also derive great 
benefit from strobophotography. As a result of economic, 
technological and social progress throughout the world, 
traditional gestures are vanishing every day and others 
are condemned to vanish very shortly. Just about every- 
where on earth, customs are dying out, so-called folk 
dances are losing their original meaning and ways of 
life are doomed to oblivion. Yet the least of these customs 
is fraught with joy, suffering, belief, hope or simply 
humble truth making it worthy to be preserved in 
mankind’s heritage. 
We could make a precious contribution to forthcoming 
generations if we recorded these human “relics” which 
are now expressed in so many different ways. Strobo- 
photographic archives would be a priceless treasure for 
etlinology and the humanities. Just imagine for a 
moment if, through some miracle, we had a series of 
strobophotographs showing the life of our Cro-Magnon 
ancestor and, particularly, the way he shaped his flints. 
Then you will understand the value of such archives. 
 
Photos © André Salesse-Lavergne 
Getting in and out of a car is easy... thanks to the engineers who 
have ironed out any design quirks forcing passengers to undergo 
contortions. In running down such quirks, strobophotography is 
an invaluable ally. Above, a passenger gets out of a car’s seat in a 
laboratory. Below, a breakdown of the movement made by the 
passenger sitting next to the driver when he enters a car. For 
a negative of the photo above in which the movement of the hands 
can be studied to greater advantage, see the same photo page two. 
   

## [Page 33](063847engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

TELL US ABOUT FOLKLORE 
Sir, 
The presentation of your magazine 
and the quality of the articles are both 
remarkable. However, I should be 
glad to read some articles dealing 
with the folklore of different coun- 
tries. I believe that a knowledge of 
folklore can help to encourage real 
understanding between peoples. As 
such it is well in line with the princi- 
ples of UNeEsco which stands for bro- 
therhood and mutual understanding. 
G. Carol 
St-Brieuc, France 
CULTURE IS UNIVERSAL 
 
Sir, 
One of your readers recently wrote 
that in his opinion, ‘“UNEesco is found- 
ed on a fiction: the equality of peo- 
ples, nations and races. This equa- 
lity is true before God, but does not 
exist in fact... Your magazine there- 
fore faces two obstacles: either you 
describe the countries of the world as 
they are, thus risking the criticism and 
resentment of your less privileged 
members or else you look at every- 
thing through rose-coloured spectacles 
with the result that you place the 
Papuan tom-tom on the same level as 
Mozart...” 
Learned, anthropologists, theolo- 
gians and others will answer this un- 
realistic criticism of UNEsco better 
than I can... I would say this: it 
is a fact of science that peoples and 
rages are equal, not only before God, 
but also biologically. Some races, 
peoples, and nations are underde- 
veloped culturally as well as technolo- 
gically. Yet every group has some- 
thing to offer from which all may 
learn. For example, the American 
Indians, although they never produced 
a United Nations building in New 
York or a Victor Hugo, did produce 
a working, successful parliament of 
the Indian nations from which the 
founders of the United States are 
believed to have taken ideas. 
As far as UNEscO’s placing of “the 
Papuan tom-tom on the same level 
with Mozart” is concerned, I am not 
aware that UNEsco does this. This 
would be as silly as placing America’s 
singing commercial, which Adlai Ste- 
venson has called our “national 
litany”, on a level with Marian 
Anderson’s transcendent interpretation 
of Brahms’ “Alto Rhapsody”. But, 
UNESCO might give us an anthro- 
pological study of the singing 
commercial, and such a study might 
be not only interesting but valuable. 
There is much in primitive cultures 
that is not good but ‘bad. In our 
effort to “understand” these cultures 
we should not overlook the bad any- 
more than we should overlook the 
The Unesco Courier. — May 1961 
Letters to the Editor 
good. Polygamy and polyandry, for 
example, are not good, but then 
neither is promiscuity—and my own 
country, the United States, is certain- 
ly not free of the latter. So, without 
being the ones to cast the first stone, 
we can at the same time be realistic 
in our evaluation of what is good and 
what is bad. Meanwhile, UNLsco is 
doing a great service in helping nations 
and peoples to understand each other. 
It deserves our wholehearted support. 
Palmer Van Gundy 
Glendale, California, U.S.A. 
THE MENTALLY HANDICAPPED 
The lower jaw of the Heidelberg 
Man (the oldest find in Europe) is 
450,000 years old; the Swanscombe 
skull about  300,000-275,000; the 
remains found by Ehringsdorf near 
Weimar 130,000; and Neanderthal 
Man 120,000-100,000. Homo Sa- 
piens (the present type of man) who 
supplanted Neanderthal! Man can look 
back on at least 100,000 years' exis- 
tence. 
Dr. G.ILR, von Kocnigswald 
Holland 
FOUR.LEGGED GUIDES 
 
Sir, 
I think one issue, or part of an issue, 
of your magazine might be devoted to 
the problem of France's 600,000 men- 
tally deficient children—which is the 
same problem all over the world, 
where mental defectives exist in simi- 
lar proportions. This is a tragedy 
which can strike any family, for con- 
genital mental deficiency (mongolism, 
deficiencies occurring as a result of 
German measles in the mother or 
complications of tubercular meningitis, 
the Rhesus factor, anoxaenia, vacci- 
nal encephalitis or a forceps birth) 
has nothing to do with alcoholism. 
In France there are only 3,000 
classes for the slightly sub-normal, 
whereas over 20,000 are required. 
As for the seriously sub-normal, when- 
ever a vacancy occurs in one of the 
institutions for remedial education 
two or three hundred applicants are 
waiting. 
After school-age the problem of 
mental deficiency is even more tra- 
gic. The adolescent (and there are 
tens of thousands of them) has no 
hope of becoming a worker, or even 
having some occupation. Once his 
parents are no longer there to care 
for him, there is only the asylum. 
Scientific progress saves many child- 
ren who were condemned before the 
discovery of “miracle” drugs, leaving 
doctors with other problems for which 
there are so far no solutions. But as 
Professor Heuyer, creator of the chair 
of child psychiatry in France, has 
said, “Any progress a child can make, 
even at the lowest intellectual level, 
is worth while.” We must not forget it. 
P. Careme 
Virey-le-Grand, France 
THE CLOCK WAS SLOW 
The March issue of the Unesco 
Courier gives a very graphic picture of 
how young—geologically speaking— 
man really is. It is not altogether 
easy to date the fossils that are found, 
but some of the estimates of their 
age given in the article are too high, 
and others too low. The following 
points need to be corrected for the 
period after “six p.m.”. 
Sir, 
In your issue, “New Pathways for 
the Blind” (June 1960), I feel that 
a serious omission was made in the 
lack of any reference to Guide Dogs 
for the blind, or “Seceing-Lye"” dogs. 
This movement, which started in Ger- 
many towards the end of the first 
world war, has now developed, both 
rapidly and soundly, in many coun- 
tries of the world, in particular the 
United States of America and the 
United Kingdom. Australia, South 
Africa and Israel now have training 
centres, too, as have many European 
countries. ’ 
The training of both dog and blind 
person has been developed to a high 
degree, is scientifically based and is 
constantly being improved to give 
blind people the benefit of the most 
advanced training methods and tech- 
niques. The value of a Guide Dog, 
properly trained by qualified trainers, 
is being more and more appreciated 
by blind people who work with them 
or know of them, thus the demand is 
ever increasing. 
Here, in Australia, the movement 
has been established for some ten 
years and this national organization 
is supplying Guide Dogs, trained to 
the highest standards, to blind people 
throughout the Commonwealth. 
J. K. Holdsworth 
Director of Training 
Guide Dogs for the Blind Association 
Belmont, Western Australia. 
Sir, 
As usual I cnjoyed reading your 
issue on ‘New Pathways for the 
Blind”, but in all the articles 1 did 
not see any mention of guide dogs. 
There has been some controversy in 
Australia as to whether there should 
be guide dogs, an cxpensive matter. 
Those against them say that they 
tend to make blind people less inde- 
pendent and self-reliant. 
From a purely lay point of view 
it does seem a tremendous waste of 
time and money to spend on a dog 
which does not live as long as its 
master or mistress. 
A. L. Mackay 
Lindfield, Australia 
33

## [Page 34](063847engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
rom the Unesco New 
  
    
  
     
  
  
successful 
   
Th 
Yuri Gagarine   
UNESCO SALUTES FIRST MAN IN SPACE 
" On the occasion of the first man being fired into 
space from the Soviet Union, Dr. Yittorino Vero- 
nese, Director-General of Unesco, sent the following 
message to the Chairman of the Soviet National 
Commission for Unesco in Moscow : 
“Ilave learned with deep satisfaction news of 
achievement of 
experiment in outer space. 
: people of the Soviet Union may be proud of this 
new scientific achievement. 
to the Soviet National Commission for Unesco and 
to Soviet scientists and engineers my wholehearted 
congratulations. : 
most recent Soviet 
The Government and 
I beg you to convey 
Vittorino Veronese, Director-General.”   
Rerucee CAMPS TO CLOSE: 
There will be no more refugees living in 
camps in Europe by 1962 according to 
Mr. Felix Schnyder, recently appointed 
U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. 
Most camps in Austria, he said, would be 
closed down in 1961, and those in Ger- 
many and Austria during 1962. At the 
beginning of this year, there were still 
13,000 refugees living in camps in these 
countries, under the U.N. High Commis- 
sioner’s mandate. Another 60,000 were 
living outside in sub-standard homes. 
Em MOUNTAIN OF SALT: Near the 
town of Kulab in South Tajikistan, 
US.S.R., there is a mountain of salt 
which, say scientists, is sufficient to 
supply the domestic needs of the world’s 
present population for a million years. 
The hill, called Hoja Mumin, is com- 
posed of pure salt covered with a thin 
layer of wind-borne sand and dust. The 
salt not only rises to a height of 2,600 
feet above the surrounding countryside, 
but penetrates into the earth to a depth 
of nearly two and a half miles. It is 
over five miles in diameter. 
CC LassEs IN THE SNOW: “Snow 
Classes”, an experiment started in France 
in 1953, have proved beneficial to 
children’s intellectual as well as physical 
development say French educators. The 
classes, in which thousands of French 
schoolchildren take part each year, enable 
boys and girls from the cities to spend 
about a month in the mountains with 
their teachers and physical training 
instructors. In the mornings, lessons are 
held as usual, while in the afternoons the 
children are taught skiing and other 
outdoor sports. 
 TAGORE CENTENARY CELE- 
BRATED: Countries all over the 
world are this month honouring the 
centenary of the birth of Rabindranath 
Tagore, India’s celebrated poet and 
writer. As a prelude to this year's 
celebrations, a special performance of 
“Chitra”, a play by Tagore, was given 
in Paris last November at UNESCO 
House, during the UNEsco General 
Conference. Two films are being 
produced to commemorate the Tagore 
Centenary by one of India’s foremost 
film-makers, Satyajit Ray. One is a 
medium-length documentary on Tagore's 
life ; the other is a full-length feature 
based on three of his short stories. 
S CHOOLS FOR AFRICA: Tropical 
Africa, comprising 30 countries from 
Ethiopia to the Congo and from Senegal 
to Madagascar, has 25 million children 
of school age. Yet 17 million have no 
schools to attend and of the “privileged” 
8 million only a minority complete primary 
education. 
tories and five European countries with 
African responsibilities have been invited 
to a meeting in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, this 
month, to discuss ways and means of 
developing education in Africa. Held 
under the joint auspices of UNEsco and 
the U.N. Economic Commission for Africa, 
the conference will be attended by 
Ministers or Directors of Education for 
the African countries. UNESCO’s own 
programme for 28 countries in Tropical 
Africa during 1961-62 amounts to about 
$11.5 million, including sums administered 
on behalf of the U.N. Special Fund and 
Technical Assistance. 
‘Wl MOST MODERN MUSEUM: 
Visitors to the zoo and botanical 
gardens of the future Kuwait National 
Museum won't notice the baking heat 
of the Persian Gulf (sometimes 120 
degrees F. in the shade). They will be 
taken arpund in a glass-roofed, air- 
conditioned train. When completed, the 
Kuwait Museum will be the world's 
most modern. In addition to the zoo 
and botanical gardens, it will have 
sections on ethnology, folklore, astro- 
nomy and the techniques of extracting 
and refining oil (source of Kuwait's 
riches). There will be vessels 120 feet 
long in its naval museum and, in its 
aquarium, a tunnel 40 feet long will 
enable visitors to walk along the 
“seabed” with fish on all sides. 
 
Forty African states and terri-- 
  
THE UNESCO 
PHILATELIC SERVICE 
U
N
I
E
S
 
S
N
O
I
L
V
N
 
T
Q
3
1
I
N
N
 
LN 
z5 
yo 
IS 
ol 
4 
  
The work of the International Mone- 
tary Fund to promote a freer system 
of world trade and payments as a 
means of helping its member coun- 
tries achieve economic growth, 
high levels of employment and im- 
proved standards of living is comme- 
morated in the stamp above, which 
was issued on April |7 by the 
United Nations Postal Administra- 
tion. Issued in 4 cent (blue and 
white) and 7 cent (brick red, yellow 
and white) denominations, this is 
the second of the 1961 series of 
U.N. commemorative stamps hon- 
ouring U.N. Specialized Agencies. 
As the agent in France of the U.N. 
Postal Administration, UNESCO'S 
Philatelic Service stocks all the 
United Nations stamps currently 
on sale, It also has stamps and first 
day covers issued by many UNESCO 
member states to commemorate 
important events in the history of 
UNESCO and the U.N. (inaugura- 
tion of UNESCO'S new head- 
quarters, Human Rights Day, World 
Refugee Year). Information on 
items available, their price and the 
methods of payment will be sent on 
request by the UNESCO Philatelic 
Service, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7+.    
iI
MP
RI
ME
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
im
p,
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
P
A
R
I
S
.

## [Page 35](063847engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
TELEVISION 
TEACHING 
TODAY 
by Henry R. Cassirer 
Educators everywhere are faced with the challenge of 
rapidly-growing school and college populations and the 
need for a new approach to the content and methods of 
teaching. Television may provide one of the answers 
to their problems. Dr. Henry R. Cassirer has under- 
taken a general survey of most of the principal countries 
which are using television for educational purposes. 
Some countries employ television for the enrichment 
of normal classroom lessons, others undertake direct 
teaching of numerous subjects to young or adult stu- 
dents who seek to improve and pursue their education. 
The book presents the problems which television poses 
to teacher and learner alike, and indicates ways in which 
television may be used constructively in support of the 
traditional values of teaching. 
Paper cover $ 3.00 15/- 10.50 NF 
Cloth bound: § 4.00 20/- 14. NF 
Where to ohtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write 
direct to the National Distributor 
in your country. (See list below: 
names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) 
Payment is made in the national 
currency; rates quoted are for an 
annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language, 
AFGHANISTAN. ~ Panuzai, Press 
Department, Royal Afghan Ministry of 
Education, Kabul. 
AUSTRALIA, -- Melbourne University 
Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, 
C. |, Victoria, (A. [5/-). 
AUSTRIA. ~— Verlag Georg Fromme 
& Co, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V (Sch. 
50.) 
BELGIUM. = For The Unesco Courier: 
Louis de Lannoy, 22, Place De Brouckére, 
Brussels, C.C.P. 338.000. (fr. b. 100.) 
Other publications: Office de Publicité, 
16, rue Marcq, Bruxelles, C.C.P. 285.98: 
N.V. Standaard-Boekhandel, Belgielei 151, 
Antwerp. 
BURMA. — Burma Translation Society 
361 Prome Road, Rangoon. 
CANADA. ~ Queen's Printer, Ottawa 
Cnt. (S 3.00). 
CEYLON. ~ The Associated Newspapers 
of Ceylon Ltd, Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Co- 
lombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
CHINA. ~~ World Book Co, Ltd.,, 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section 1, Ta.peh, 
Taiwan (Formosa). 
CUBA. ~ Libreria Economica, Pte Zayas 
505-7, Apartado 113, Havana. (2.25 pesos) 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA, — Artia Ltd, 30 
Ve Smeckich, Prague 2. 
DENMARK. ~- Ejnar Munksgaard, A/S 
Tidsskriftafdelingen, 6 Norregade, Koben- 
havn K. (D.kr. 12). 
ETHIOPIA, ~ International Press Agen- 
cy, P.O. Box 120, Addis Ababa. 
FINLAND. ~— Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. {F.mk. 540). 
FRANCE. — Unesco Bookshop, Place de 
fontenoy, Paris, 7°, C.C.P, 12598-48. 
(7 fe 
GERMANY. — For the Unesco Kurier, 
VYertrieb Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, 
Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650 
{DM 8). Other Publications: R. Older- 
burg, Verlag, Rosenheimerstr, 145, Munich 
GREAT BRITAIN, — See United Kingdom, 
GREECE. — Librairie H., Kauffmann, 28, 
rue du Stade, Athens, 
HONG-KONG. = Swindon Book Co., 25, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. 
HUNGARY. — Kultura, P.O. Box 149, 
Budapest, 62. 
INDIA. -= Orient Longmans Ltd. Indian 
Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, Bombay 
I; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta [3; 
Gunfoundry Road, Hyderabad, I; 36a, 
Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson House, 
24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New 
Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: Oxford Book & 
Stationery Co., 17 Park Street Calcutta |6, 
Scindia House, New Delhi. (Rs. 6.70). 
INDONESIA, == Bappit Pusat **Permata”, 
Djalan Nusantara 22, Djakarta. 
IRAQ. ~~ Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
IRELAND. — The National Press, 2, Wel- 
lington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (10/-). 
ISRAEL, -- Blumstein’s Bookstores Ltd., 
35, Allenby Road and 48, Nahlat Benja- 
min Street, Tel-Aviv (I£ 4.-). 
JAMAICA. — Sangster's Book Room, 91 
Harbour Street, Kingston. 
Knox Educational Services, Spaldings.( 1 0/-) 
JAPAN, — Maruzen Co. Ltd.,, 6 Tori- 
Nichome, Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 
Tokyo Central, Tokyo. (Yen 500). 
JORDAN, ~— Joseph L. Bahous & Co., 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road, P.O.B. 66, 
Amman, 
KOREA, ~— Korean National Commission 
for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. 
LIBERIA. — ). Momolu Kamara, 69, Front 
and Gurley Streets, Monrovia. 
LUXEMBOURG. == Librairie Paul Bruck, 
22, Grand-Rue, Luxembourg. 
MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE. — Federal Publications 
Led.,, Times House, River Valley Rd., 
Singapore. 
MALTA. — Sapienza’s Library, 26 Kings- 
way, Valetta. {10/-). 
MAURITIUS. — Nalanda Company Ltd, 
30Q, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis. 
MONACO. ~— British Library, 30 Bld des 
Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF). 
NETHERLANDS. — N.V. Martinus Nij- 
hoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague, {fl 6) 
NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. ~ 
G.C.T. Van Dorp & C* (Ned Ant.) N.V, 
Willemstad, Curacao. 
NEW ZEALAND. ~ Unesco Publications 
Centre, 100 Hackthorne Road, Chrut- 
church. (10/-). 
KNIGERIA. —~ C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 
174, Lagos. {(10/-). 
NORWAY. — A.S. Bokhjornet, Lille Gren- 
sen, 7, Oslo. {N. kr. 13.20). 
PAKISTAN. — The West-Pak Publishing 
Co, Ltd.,, Unesco Publications House, 
P.O. Box 374, 56-N Gulberg Industrial 
Colony, Lahore. 
PANAMA, — Cultural Panamena, Avenida 
73, No. TI-49, Apartado de Correos 2018, 
Panama, D.F. (Balboas 3.-). 
PHILIPPINES. — Philippine Education Co. 
Inc., 1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, P.O. Box 
620, Manila. 
POLAND, — " RUCH" ul. Wiloza Nr, 46, 
Warsaw, | 0 (ZI. 50). 
PORTUGAL, — Dias & Andrada Lda, 
Livearia Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, 
Lisbon. 
RHODESIA & NYASALAND. — The 
Book Centre, First Street, Salisbury, 
Southern Rhodesia. 
SWEDEN. For The Unesco Courier: Sven- 
ska Unescoridet, Vasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 7.50): other publications 
A/B C.E. Fritzes, Kungl. Hovbokhandel, 
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
SWITZERLAND. ~— Europa 
Rimistrasse, Zurich, 
Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva. C.C.P, 
1-236. 
“Courier” only: Georges Losmaz, |, rue 
des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 
I-4B1 1, (Fr. 5. 8). 
THAILAND. =~ Sukiapan Panit, Mansion 
9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
TURKEY, — Librairie Hachette, 469 lsti- 
klal Caddesi, Beyoglu, lstanbul, 
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA, -— Van 
Schaik's Bookstore, Libri Building, Church 
Street, Pretoria. {10/-). 
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). = 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh, Adly-Pasha, 
Cairo, 
UNITED KINGDOM, — H_M. Stationery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.L.(10/-). 
UNITED STATES. — Unesco Publications 
Center, 801 Third Avenue, New York, 
22, N.Y.($ 5.00.) and (except periodicals): 
Columbia University Press, 2960 Broad- 
way, New York, 27, N.Y. 
U.5.S.R. ~— Mezhdunarodnaja 
Moscow. G-200. 
YUGOSLAVIA. — Jugoslovenska Knjlga, 
Teranije 27/] 1. Belgrade. 
Verlag, 5 
Kniga,

## [Page 36](063847engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
A 
A
t
 
a
l
 
r
o
n
 
b 
Beaieed a ar Pi 
Ake < LA 
EE ) “ 
ho ve 
y- “%P 
a) y 7 
+ 
A i 
  
¢ 
c
r
n
 
R
E
T
 
2 
- 
- 
: 
—
—
 
S
E
E
N
P
L
I
I
C
T
I
T
.
 
S
S
 
S
A
 
di
 
h
a
 
w
r
 
=
 
wn 
g
e
 
—
—
 
S
I
E
 
_
—
—
—
 
i
 a
 
—
_
—
 »~ 