# [074696](074696engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](074696engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

Finoc © 
Publication lio, SVFS2-A 
pE——— 
    
 
 VOLUME IV — 
 
SPECIAL ISSUE THE CINEMA 
nL, CarTiCLES BY: or Michael 
“The Road to Hope”, the 1951 Italian TREE 3 Sars 
ogi mang pels. io pg 1047) 
MIE Ae PRE Ve Me aa Gap LS 

## [Page 2](074696engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 
  
EDITORIAL OFFICES : 
UNESCO HOUSE 
19, Ave. Kléber, PARIS-1 6 
* 
Editor-In-Chief : S. M. KOFFLER 
EDITORS 
English edition : R. S. FENTON 
French edition : A. LEVENTIS 
Spanish edition : |. DE BENITO 
* 
All reproductions authorized 
* 
Imprimerie GEORGES LANG 
ft, rue Curial, Paris. 
  
MC. 81. 1. 62. A. 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) 
costs only $1.50 U.S. *or 5/- or 200 
French Francs. 
Write to our agent in your country 
listed below, or directly to UNESCO 
House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris-16., 
France. 
Argentina 
S.A., Alsina 500, Buenos Aires. 
Australia : HA. Goddard Ltd., 255a 
George Street, Sydney. : 
Austria : Wilhelm Frick Verlag, 27 Gra- 
ben, Vienna 1 
Barbados : S.P.C.K. Bookshop {Regional 
Office Caribbean Area), Broad Street, 
Bridgetown. 
Belgium : Librairie Encyclopédique, 7, 
rue du Luxembourg, Brussels IV 
Bolivia : Libraria Selecciones, Av. 16 de 
Julio 216, Casilla 972, La Paz. 
Brazil : Livraria Agir Editora, Rua 
Mexico 98-B, Caixa postal 3291, Rio 
de Janeiro. 
Burma : Burma Educational Bookshop, 
551-3 Merchant Street, P.O. Box 222, 
Rangoon. 
Cambodia and Associated States of 
Indo-China : K. Chantarik, C.C.R., 
38, rue Van Vollenhoven, Phnom-Penh. 
Canada : English speaking : University 
of Toronto Press, Toronto. 
French speaking : Benoit Baril, 4234, 
rue de la Roche, Montréal 
Ceylan : Lake House Bookshop, The 
Associated Newspapers of Ceylon, 
11d, Colombo I. 
Chile : Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 
924, Santiago de Chile. 
Colombia : Emilio Royo Martin, Carrera 
9a, 1791, Bogota. 
Cuba : La Casa Belga, René de Smedt, 
O'Reilly 455, Havana. 
Czechoslovakia : Orbis, 
Prague I, 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard, 6 Norre- 
gade, Copenhagen. 
Ecuador : Casa de la Cultura Ecuato- 
riana, av. Mariano Aguilera 322, 
Casilla 67, Quito. 
Egypt : Librairie James Cattan, Four- 
nisseur de la Cour, 118, Rue Emad 
el Dine, Cairo. 
Finland : Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
France : UNESCO, Sales Service, 19, 
avenue Kléber, Paris (16°). 
Germany : Florian Kupferberg Verlag, 
Fleonorenstrasse 6, Mainz-Kastel. 
Greece : Elefthéroudakis, Librairie In- 
ternaticnale, Athens. 
Hungary : P.O.B. 149, Budapest V. 
India : Oxford Book and Stationery Co., 
Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Vidya Bhavan Granthagar, Bharatiya 
Vidya Bhavan Buildings, Chow Patty 
Road, Bombay 7. 
Indonesia : G.C.T. van Dorp and Ce° 
NV., Djalan Nusantara, 22, Djakarta. 
Israel : Leo Blumstein, Book and Art 
Shop, 35, Allenby Road, Tel Aviv, 
Italy : Messaggerie Italiane, Via Lo- 
mazzo, 52, Milan. 
Lebanon and Syria : Librairie Univer- 
selle, Avenue des Frangais, Beirut, 
Lebanon. } 
Malaya and Singapore : Peter Chong 
and Ceo, P.O. Box 135, Singapore. 
Mexico : Libreria Universitaria, Justo 
Sierra 16, México D.F. : 
Netherlands : N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, 
Lange Voorhout 9, The Hague. 
New Zealand : Whitcombe and Tombs, 
Li. G.P.O. Box 1526, Wellington, 
Nigeria : C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 
74, Lagos. 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 
, Oslo. 
Pakistan : Thomas and Thomas, Fort 
Mansions, Frere Road, Karachi 3. 
Peru : Libreria Internacional del Peru, 
S.A., Giron de la Union, Lima. 
Philippines : Philippine Education Co., 
Inc., 1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila. 
Sweden : AB. C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hov- 
bokhandel, Fredsgatan 2; Stock- 
holm 16. 
Switzerland : French speaking cantons : 
Librairie de l'Université, 22-24, rue de 
Romont, Fribourg. German speaking 
cantons : Europa Verlag, 5 Rami- 
strasse, Ziirich. 
Turkey : Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul, 
Union of South Africa : Van Schaik’'s 
Bookstore (Pty.), Ltd., P.O. Box 724, 
Pretoria. 
United Kingdom : HM. Stationery 
Office : York House, Kingsway, Lon- 
don (Retail Counter Service), or P.O. 
Box 569, London, S.E.I. (Orders by 
post). 
United States of America : Columbia 
University Press, 2960 Broadway, 
New-York 27, N.Y. 
Uruguay : Centro de Cooperacion Cien- 
tifica pura la America Latina, Unesco, 
Bulever Artigas 1320, Montevideo. 
*Qutside of the United States, § 1. 
Editorial Sudamericana, 
Narodni 37. 
EX Te [oT-To F- Te STA LTS € CET 44 1) 
opinions of the authors and do 
[US QTY LTT TT AVA 2-1 12-10-10 Ol { 12) 
Unesco or the opinions of 
editors of the COURIER.   
 
       
           
7 
i . = rk fF I= a 
.- " F 
= = n 
 
= } E] - 
ni a — EE n v — 
INORG : i 
CINEMA | 
understanding is not a mere intellectual 
exercise. It is part of a continuing study we 
have all got to make in our search for harmony 
in a tortured world. The power of the film to 
entertain and to distract, to move to action, to 
hatred and contempt, to compassion and respect, 
is everywhere agreed. That is probably why 
film is more written about than written, and why 
the film more than any of the other creative arts 
is subjected to a merciless scrutiny. 
To say that the film has the power to interpret 
life and help to create a harmonious world is not 
to suggest that it should in any way depart from 
its duty to entertain. But it is to suggest again 
that in the search for themes it is possible for a 
greater number of writers and producers and 
directors and players in a greater number of 
countries to lift their eyes above the frontiers 
which divide mankind and from whatever vision 
they command help to create a design for life 
instead of a passion or an excuse for death or 
oblivion. Themes may be gay or sombre, flipp- 
ant or serious, but it is the spirit which inspires 
them as well as the creative spark they bear 
witness to, that matters most. 
The responsibility of the film is not greater 
than the responsibility of press or radio. But it 
shares with television a power to dramatize 
beyond the others and an opportunity to play a 
leading part in creating a possible and credible 
world. 
The frontiers which divide mankind are not 
only, and not even mainly, the national or poli- 
tical frontiers. They are frontiers of the mind 
T= study of the film as a means to human 
U.S A — 
” ES 
|. TF a 
’ ov 
\ bon 
. hy 
: » 
a
l
 
  
     
. ; Ahh 
a issu ¥ i“ 
Th “ ™ ITALY 
~ i As — 
3 ~ EEL rasa 
v, " HN N= "3 GERMANY 
v ; NR ux 
3 : 3 a --. 
; : - 
i » * . : - 
a TR TE AE a hE   
Graph shows that for 100.000 cinemas throughout the world, there are a little more than 42 million seats available. 
 
and the spirit which spring from limitations of 
training and experience, differences of memory 
and tradition and belief and taste, and the wilful 
or accidental exploitation of these limitations and 
differences for sinister ends. That is why so 
many are studying now the implications of the 
film for children as well as for men and women. 
Our generation may be hopeless, but none of us 
will agree that our children are, and for them 
especially we seek the hope that they may not 
suffer again the obscene horrors of the last 
decades. Whether the films are made by men 
and women in Mexico or the Argentine, in the 
United States or the United Kingdom, France or 
Italy or Poland or Denmark, in Egypt or India 
or Indonesia or Japan, they all have a common 
duty to the world’s children and an opportunity 
greater than ever before to discharge it because 
of the vast challenge it presents. 
This is not to say that it is or can be an easy 
duty to discharge. There are taboos of many 
sorts which make it difficult to express the faith 
that one has in man. Screenwriters especially are 
bitterly aware of this. There are forces which 
profit from a shattered world and which at every 
opportunity fetter the creative spirit. There are 
problems of finance and facilities and markets. 
There is still a vast job of research and inter- 
pretation before the duty can be done. But it is 
in the faith that it can be done and that it is 
possible for men and women to grow and develop 
together in creative fields of expression and 
research that this issue of the COURIER is 
founded. . 
ROSS McLEAN, 
Head, Films & Visual Information Division, Unesco. 
WORLD'S 100.000 CINEMAS : 42.445.000 SEATS 
  
  
19 
iY 
Na” 
III 
FIERY 
IEEE EERE EEETY 
SERRARRE RL 4 444 
HHH IH ‘a 
AAA Rhian 
BARA 
R RARR aha 
ARRAN EAA   
® 
  
® 
3 
-“ -“ PHILIPPINES 
PRODUCTION OF FEATURE FILMS 
Raw film bands show 
the nine leading feature film producers of the world, the figures indicating the number of feature films produced in one year.

## [Page 3](074696engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
UN RISES ALWAYS Ss Aldo V + produced by  
THE ITALIAN FILM: 
Page 3 — UNESCO COURIER 


### 74606: The Italian film: a mirror of mankind's social responsibility

A Mirror of Mankind's 
Social Responsibility 
by Luigi CHIARINI 
Editor, Bianco e Nero, Italian review of film studies 
HREE fundamental factors, in my opi- 
nion, explain the importance of 
films as a medium for international 
understanding: their immense popular- 
ity and wide circulation; their direct visual 
character which makes them a magnificent in- 
strument for concrete, first-hand knowledge; 
and their artistic qualities born of a concentra- 
tion on significant detail which permit them to 
translate the universal through the particular. 
This implies a two-fold conception of the 
cinema : first, as a means of achieving cul- 
tural, educational and scientific ends, and se- 
condly as an artistic medium, for entertainment 
purposes. But it implies neither vulgar enter- 
tainment pandering to man’s lowest instincts, 
nor some monstrous machine “bombarding” 
the brain with ideological or political dogmas, 
thus insulting the human dignity of the spec- 
tator because it makes no demands on his 
critical faculties. 
It is in the light of these ideas that an as- 
sessment must be made of the Italian cinema’s 
contribution in this stormy, conflict-ridden 
post-war period towards the promotion of in- 
ternational understanding and the active de- 
fence of fundamental human values, without 
which there can be no hope of real progress. 
For reasons of space, and also because of 
the attention attracted by our neo-realist films 
abroad, we shall confine our remarks to “fea- 
ture” films. In the field of the cultural, 
scientific and educational documentary film, 
the Italian cinema has produced little; com- 
mercial obstacles, combined with problems of 
distribution — soon, it is hoped, to be over- 
come — have unfortunately prevented these 
important aids to knowledge from being as 
widely circulated, internationally, as Italian 
feature films. 
Wolf among Wolves 
immoral” art, so there is no such thing as 
“educative” art. This does not mean 
that art is a mere empty form. On the con- 
trary, it contains the essence of all human 
values. Art is, in fact, the full and free affir- 
mation of human personality in its essentials ; 
the true and complete expression, through the 
medium of significant detail, of the human 
spirit. 
Thus art is always, by definition, moral, edu- 
cative and optimistic, in that it lifts man above 
human passions and, while faithfully reflecting 
the national soul, speaks a language which is 
universal. 
The stir made in the world by recent Italian 
films is due to the very fact that they have been 
inspired exclusively by artistic considerations 
— the need to express the seething passions 
roused by the harrowing experiences of the 
war; to reassert, in art, those human values 
which had been trampled and crushed under 
foot; and to combat violence, injustice and 
poverty by claiming respect for the human 
being. 
That is why all the films of which we are 
speaking, whatever the politics of their authors, 
are permeated by a genuine Christian spirit. 
It might seem, at first sight, that art is not the 
prime consideration in these films, and that 
the producers are mainly concerned to discover 
a direct and vivid form of expression, free of 
all technical refinements and complications — 
to concentrate, in fact, rather on what they 
want to say than on how to say it. But it is 
the essence of art to eschew all formalism in 
expressing human truths. 
Thus, Roma, citta aperta (Rome, Open 
City), though it depicts the Italian capital 
under German occupation and though its cha- 
racters are highly individualized, even to the 
point of speaking dialect, is universally under- 
standable; in the Italians, the citizens of 
Rome, the spectator everywhere, whatever his 
nationality, sees man, his passions, his feelings 
and his sufferings; he sees men who, though 
victims of the blind brutality of war, are 
neither conquered nor resigned, but are capa- 
ble of fighting to the bitter end for the attain- 
ment of a better world where man will no 
longer live like a wolf among wolves. 
] UST as there is no such thing as “moral or 
Similarly, Paisa, another film by Rossellini, 
shows the various types of Italians, from 
Sicily to the marshes of Comacchio, with 
their weaknesses, their miseries, their hero- 
ism and their religious faith, during the war 
upheaval caused by the Allied advance north- 
wards. It depicts, through the sufferings of 
the Italian people, the sufferings of peoples 
the world over who have experienced the 
horrors of war. 
Crude Reality 
THER films, especially those of Visconti 
(La Terra Trema — Earthquake), De 
Sanctis (Riso Amaro — Bitter Rice) and 
Germi (Il Cammino della Speranza — The Road 
to Hope), give a picture of the crude and 
moving reality of certain aspects of Italian life, 
and evoke, naturally and without rhetoric, a 
plea for greater social justice. This is a pro- 
blem that is particularly topical in present-day 
Italy, where social inequalities are particularly 
glaring; yet it is a problem that is not peculiar 
to Italy alone. 
In the films of De Sica and Zavattini 
(Sciuscia; Ladri di Bicicletti—Bicycle Thieves; 
Miracolo a Milano — The Miracle) the 
social argument is centred no longer on the 
crowd, but on the individual; the social theme 
is spun around the hero and the other cha- 
racters of the story, and the call for the 
rights of the individual is then once more 
generalized so as to apply to the masses. 
In the work of these two producers, neo- 
realism assumes a less ideological, a more 
warmly human, and one might almost say a 
more concrete form; the centre of gravity 
shifts from the people and the various social 
categories to their individual representative 
~ — man himself, in all his humanity, man as 
a worker, a son, a father, a husband, a com- 
rade, a citizen and a member of a religious 
community; man who has feelings, who be- 
lieves, thinks and works; in fact, our fellow 
man. 
These films, devoid of all the artifices, em- 
bellishments and studied effects characteristic 
of a “spectacle”, and sometimes positively 
stark in their simplicity, have helped 
to give the world a picture of Italy as it is 
today. Avoiding political propaganda, they 
have raised, on the artistic and therefore 
human level, a question of universal concern 
— the need for social justice, harmonized with 
the rights of the individual. These films are 
the expression of a new humanism; they issue 
a call for, and preach, real human under- 
standing. 
No ¢ Escapism” 
UcH is the chief contribution made by 
recent Italian films to international under- 
standing. Using the screen as a mirror in 
which men’s actions are vividly reflected, they 
indicate, in the strongest possible way, the 
need for a sense of social responsibility. Films 
of this type are clearly the very antithesis of 
“escapist” entertainment. 
It is possible that the historical and musical 
films made during this period have also helped 
to spread abroad a knowledge of our art and 
our traditions; but most important today are 
those works which emphasize the affinities, 
rather than the differences, between peoples. 
The Italian cinema can, if it continues on 
these lines, make a valuable contribution to 
the development of a mutual understanding 
that may, in turn, sow the seeds of that com- 
mon conscience which is essential to the estab- 
lishment, across political and religious bar- 
riers, of understanding between the peoples. 
The lesson of art is always a lesson in human- 
ity. 
Side by side with feature films, it is to be 
‘hoped that in future more progress will be 
made in the artistic, scientific and cultural 
documentary, which is a potentially important 
medium for spreading abroad a knowledge of 
our traditions, our genius and our national 
characteristics — in a word, the soul of our 
country.

## [Page 4](074696engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 4 
THE BRITISH 
FILM : 
 
  


### 74607: The British film: showing the people of England as they really are

Showing 
the people 
of England 
as they 
really are 
by Dilys POWELL 
Film Critic, ‘Sunday Times’, London 
HATEVER criticisms may 
be made of the British 
wartime cinema, 1no- 
body can say that it 
betrayed any liking for war. In 
fact, paradoxically enough, it was 
between 1940 and 1945 that British 
films began to make an apprecia- 
ble contribution towards interna- 
tional understanding. 
At a first glance the independent 
observer might say that there 
was nothing particularly interna- 
tional about the British cinema. 
We have rarely tackled interna- 
tional subjects in the way in 
which the Swiss have tackled 
them in The Last Chance or 
Four in a Jeep. We have pass- 
ed over such current racial pro- 
blems as anti-Semitism and the 
colour question (though a version 
of Alan Palon’s Cry, the Belov- 
ed Country is still to come). 
When we have chosen some 
theme of racial or national rela- 
tionships we have not been parti- 
cularly successful in exciting 
popular interest. Just after the 
war we had an ambitious film on 
an important subject to show: 
Men of Two Worlds, a story of 
the battle against the tsetse fly 
and the position of the African 
‘who is torn between his European 
education and the traditional 
superstitions of his own people. 
But Men of Two Worlds, was not 
a popular film; and though the 
things it said were very well 
worth saying I greatly doubt 
whether it made much impres- 
sion. 
And yet I believe that the Bri- 
tish cinema has been a very con- 
  
PASSPORT TO PIMLICO : 
siderable factor in creating inter- 
national goodwill. The obvious 
thing, of course, would be to 
point to our long list of docu- 
mentaries with their impeccable 
democratic principles. And it 1s 
quite true that the documentary 
film can do a great deal to make 
people see one another’s point of 
view — or, almost as important, 
to show the other man that his 
point of view is recognized; 
when Paul Rotha made The 
Wonrld is Rich it was evidence 
that people in Britain were not 
kept in ignorance of conditions in 
hungry India and war-stricken 
Asia. The trouble is that the 
documentary rarely reaches 
beyond an audience ‘which is 
prepared for special pleading. 
Now and then there is an excep- 
tion; for instance Daybreak in 
Udi, a delightful account of the 
building of a Nigerian maternity 
home in the teeth of the witch- 
doctors; here was a piece, fairly 
widely shown, which made its 
effect not by talking about pro- 
gress but by showing us what 
charming and likable people the 
inhabitants of Udi really are. 
Subtle Persuasion 
UT the real strength of the ci- 
nema lies in its power to per- 
suade people who don’t know 
they are being persuaded. That 
is where the American film has 
scored all these years; while en- 
tertaining us it has built up a 
great popular sympathy for 
America. I believe that the Bri- 
tish cinema is making, and 
should make, its impact in the 
same way. In other words, I 
believe that by producing films 
about ourselves we shall make 
our best contribution to interna- 
tional goodwill. Our way of 
doing it cannot be the same as 
Hollywood’s. America is a young 
and ebullient nation, and pan- 
ache comes easily and naturally 
from her. The British are an old 
and disciplined people, senti- 
mental beneath a veneer of re- 
serve, and the British cinema 
must speak in their native emo- 
tional accent. That this is the 
right approach has been proved 
since the war by the success of 
British films with Continental au- 
diences and minority audiences 
in America. To capture the at- 
tention of the American masses 
is another matter; let us not pre- 
tend that we have as yet begun 
to do that. But it is worth noting 
that among the most successful 
of our films in America have 
been some of the most un- 
ashamedly British : Henry V, 
Hamlet, Quartet — films ‘which 
make no concessions to American 
taste. 
The theory that the sharply na- 
tional film appeals to an interna- 
tional audience is borne out by 
the reactions of the French to 
British films. I have to confess 
that I am one of the less fanatical 
admirers of Brief Encounler, 
and I have sometimes been puzzl- 
ed by the enthusiasm of my 
French friends for the piece; but 
to my enquiries they always 
reply: “It's so English!” One: 
A sudden and strange problem of ‘international relations.” 
might be tempted {o suppose that 
their admiration was less for the 
tilm itself than for its evidence of 
British chastity, ‘were one not 
confronted by enthusiasm also for 
two films of a very different 
type Passport lo Pimlico, a 
thoroughly English joke in a tho- 
roughly English setling; and 
Whisky Galore, a thoroughly 
Scottish joke in a thoroughly 
Scottish setting. 
Interpreters 
#TEN, indeed, it is the improb- 
able film ‘which wins hearts 
abroad: who would have. 
thought that Red Shoes would. 
gain a prize in Japan? But proba- 
ble or improbable, the films serve 
as interpreters. As 1 have said, the 
process of liaison began during 
the war, ‘when for the first time 
in the cinema we began to look 
without self-flattery and self-de- 
nigration at ourselves. It goes on 
today with such quiet studies of 
character and background as 
Morning Departure or The Brown- 
ing Version or White Corridor: 
films which observe the beha- 
viour of human beings and pre- 
sent it with sympathy and under- 
standing. What I want from the 
cinema of other nations is a truth- 
ful interpretation of human na- 
ture: 1 can only assume that in 
the long run other people have the 
same tastes. And we in this coun- 
try have passed the stage when 
we could be content to be present- 
ed abroad as a nation of comie 
housemaids and dukes in mono- 
cles. 
A RUN FOR YOUR MONEY: A comedy about London, two mining brothers from Wales, and some everyday men and women from England.

## [Page 5](074696engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 74608: The Feature carries on the documentary tradition

THE FEATURE CARRIES 
ON THE DOCUMENTARY 
TRADITION 
by Sir Michael BALCON 
One of the leading film producers in Great Britain, Sir Michael Balcon has 
given the world cinema public an amazing number of film successes, including 
Passport to Pimlico, Whisky Galore, Kind Hearts and Coronets, Dead of Night, 
The Overlanders, Nicholas Nickleby, The Captive Heart, Next of Kin, They Came 
to a City. 
outstanding success story: not the 
story of an individual, but of an 
approach, a point of view. With the 
reservations that any generalization re- 
quires, it can be said to have started 
with the documentary movement in the 
late 20’s and early 30's. Documentary is 
a term notoriously 
difficult to define, and 
although we all know 
what it means, no sa- 
tisfactory definition 
has yet been found. 
Nor will IT attempt to 
give one: for my pres- 
ent purpose, it is suf- 
ficient to point out 
what it aimed to 
achieve, which, since 
documentarists seem 
also to have been pro- 
lific theorists, I can do 
easily in their own 
words. Documentary, 
said Paul Rotha, “has 
an important purpose 
to fulfil in bringing to 
life familiar things 
and people, so that 
their place in the 
scheme of things 
which we call society 
may be honestly as- 
sessed”. And John 
Grierson declared that 
“it promised us the 
power of making 
drama from our daily 
events and poetry of 
our problems”. 
I need hardly say 
that the documentary 
film makers succeeded 
magnificently. Not 
only did they say 
things that, as every- 
one with the least 
spark of social cons- 
ciousness realized, 
needed saying badly, 
but they developed 
new film techniques 
and trained new per- 
sonnel, in spite of fre- 
quent lack of support 
and difficulties. In 
the period between 
the wars, when the 
British feature-film 
industry had too often 
to concentrate on mere 
survival, it was the 
quality of the docu- 
mentaries that kept 
the reputation of the 
industry as a whole 
alive abroad. That is 
the greatest compli- 
ment that I, as a fea- 
ture-film producer, can 
pay them. The value 
of the work they did 
was out of all propor- 
tion to its footage: 
they made propaganda 
without resorting to 
politics, and they 
made works of art 
without losing sight of 
their social purpose. 
Then came the war, 
and the industry's 
forces combined re- 
gardless of whether 
they came from docu- 
1 N the British cinema, there is one 
get 
mentary or feature, to Fr a fo 
wield what was soon 
realized to be a major 
weapon of war: the 
result .was naturally 
called feature-documentary, and equally 
naturally, its quality profited by this new 
liaison: the British war-time output as a 
whole was far in advance of what had 
gone before. This is not altogether sur- 
prising, since a national emergency always 
seems to act as a tremendous stimulus. 
What is rather surprising is that the gen- 
eral feeling after such an emergency—to 
return to the conditions that existed 
before as quickly as possible—did not 
arise in the British film industry. The 
feature film had learned a great lesson: 
its responsibility as an influence on the 
public, its possibilities as an informative 
and didactic force. The aims were now 
similar to those propounded by the do- 
cumentaries of the 30’s. 
If I say therefore that the feature-film 
has largely taken over from the docu- 
mentary, I do not in any way mean to 
belittle the latter. On the contrary, this 
state of affairs means that their propa- 
ganda has achieved its purpose : the be- 
liefs of the few of the 30's are now wide- 
RL LULL ERIN 
ly held, their aims have become generally 
accepted as being worthwhile, their ap- 
proach to the screen has been vindicated. 
Of course, at the moment, this is only 
the beginning of a new trend in the Bri- 
tish industry, and is not yet completely 
established. But I am convinced that it 
is spreading, and that we are on the right 
lines: .already a num- 
ber of the better 
known documentarists 
are working in feature 
films: under John 
Grierson, the KExe- 
cutive Producer of one 
of the news groups 
organized by the Na- 
tional Film Finance 
Corporation, are John 
Eldridge and Terry 
Bishop, on loan from 
Ealing Studios, Pat 
Jackson and Paul Ro- 
tha have both just 
directed their first 
feature film, and I 
think it significant 
that in the programme 
on Future trends in 
a documentary series 
organized by the Bri- 
tish Film Institute, 
Seven Days to Noon 
should be shown in 
extract. 
Let us “ examine, 
then, a little more 
closely, how the fea- 
ture film today is car- 
rying on the documen- 
tary tradition. More 
and more it is using 
for its backgrounds 
parts of the contem- 
porary scene such as 
made the subject mat- 
ter of the past docu- 
mentary: farm, slum, 
factory. More and 
more it makes use of 
characters and action 
porary problems, such 
as were handled by 
the documentarists : 
labour problems, class 
problems, problems of 
psychology. More and 
more it is prepared to 
break away from the 
studio and its hot- 
house plots, to use real 
places and real people. 
Of course, there are 
disadvantages : the 
problem that makes a 
background in a fea- 
ture film can often not 
be examined as care- 
fully as might be de- 
sirable, as profound- 
ly as could be done in 
a documentary con- 
centrating only on the 
one subject. But on 
the other hand, the 
potential influence of 
much greater: not on- 
ly does it reach a wi- 
der audience, but since 
feature-films by their 
nature must treat all 
problems in terms of 
individual human be- 
ings, they avoid the 
slightly impersonal 
rs application to “the 
Nigel Patrick : Science master people” that often 
mars documentaries, 
and, therefore, bring 
home to the individual human geings that 
make up the audience the problems in a 
much more personal and impressive way. 
That I think, is the road we should 
continue to travel, but it still requires a 
new approach from many people. Above 
all, it means that all concerned with the 
creation of script and film must become 
careful students of the contemporary 
world; they must know and feel their 
people and their country, the difficulties 
and joys that are the stuff of ordinary 
life, so that they can recreate it on the 
screen. If the film industries of all 
countries did this honestly and consis- 
tently, each bringing their own people 
to the screens of the world, then indeed 
we should have made documentary un- 
necessary, we should be making drama 
from our daily events and poetry of our 
problems! In the meantime, the film 
we are at present producing at Ealing 
deals with the clash between old and new 
in colonial administration, and the next 
will be about the probation system. 
arising out of contem- . 
the feature film is 
Page 5 — 
FRR 
KIND HEARTS AND CORONETS 
WHISKY GALORE 
UNESCO COURIER 
  

## [Page 6](074696engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 6 
   
  
   
d sou 
THE BEST YEARS OF OUR LIVES : Three soldiers return home from war. 


### 74610: The American film: more than just sex and gangsters, a trend toward social dramas exposing prejudice and injustice

THE AMERICAN FILM: 
.. Exposing Prejudice and 
_\ More than just Sex and Gangsters, 
A "A Trend toward Social Dramas 
Injustice 
by Bosley CROWTHER 
Film Critic, * New York Times’ 
HERE was a time when it 
was standard — among the 
sharper observers, at least — 
to take a dim view of the 
social and intellectual contributions 
of American films, particularly 
with respect to the picture of 
American life which they presented 
to the world. Fair and responsible 
critics, both at home and abroad, 
could find little more in Hollywood 
movies than glorifications of sex 
and gold, of Cinderella and gang- 
sters, of romance and opulence, as 
though these were solely represen- 
tative of the culture and interest 
of our land. 
And, indeed, the objections of 
such critics were not entirely 
unjustified, for there was a time 
when American movies were dub- 
ious mirrors of the American way 
of life, as well as unflattering 
reflectors of the substantial nature 
of mankind. Sensations such as 
gangsterism were blatantly over- 
emphasized and human behaviour 
inconsistent with nature and logic 
was displayed. Unfortunately, the 
strange impression of America thus 
transmitted to the world — and, 
for that matter, to many of our 
own people with limited horizons 
here at home — established a lurid 
image of American culture that 
was dangerously false. It still 
persists in some quarters and 
remains to be dispelled. 
No one can claim that American 
movies are free of all faults today 
or that they now constitute ideal 
ambassadors of enlightenment and 
inspiration to the world. Hollywood 
still makes lots of cheap films 
which follow the hackneyed for- 
mulas. It also grinds out some 
costly “epics” which gild human 
nature with bright romance. And 
it is a singular misfortune of film 
commerce that virtually all of 
America’s films, the cheap ones as 
well as the fine ones, are sent all 
over the world, which means that 
the films of lesser virtues inevitably 
predominate in quantity. 
And yet a close observation of 
American films over the past six 
years — that is to say, of our 
feature pictures released since 
World War II — has conveyed the 
gratifying realization that Amer- 
ican producers have become more 
sharply aware of the responsibility 
of the motion picture medium as a 
cultural force for social good than 
ever before. : 
Frank Exposures 
HASTY review of the best films 
in this period demonstrates, 
first of all, that a greater im- 
pulse towards reality and candour 
has pervaded American films. An 
outstanding trend in the post-war 
years has been towards dramas 
which frankly expose the festering 
cankers of intolerance and injustice 
in modern society. In a sharp 
melodrama entitled Crossfire, the 
existence of anti-Semitism in 
America was recognized for the 
first time, this unpleasant subject 
having previously been tabooed, 
and this was followed by the film, 
Gentlemen's Agreement, which 
further disrobed the evil of anti- 
Semitic bias. 
The peculiar and complicated 
presence of anti-Negro prejudice in 
this country has also been the 
subject of a remarkable series of 
post-war films. Beginning with 
Home of the Brave, a vivid drama 
of racial discrimination among 
soldiers in the Patific during the 
war, this subjects has been pursued 
with a genuine ervour for the 
ideals of democracy in such further 
films as Pinky, Lost Boundaries, No 
Way Out, and Intrider in the Dust, 
che latter a superlative achieve- 
ment in cinema ar. as well. 
This regard for social justice and 
understanding anong men has 
recently been combined effectively 
with Hollywood's talent for vivid 
war films in a picture called Go 
For Broke! — a drama of the 
heroic action of an American 
regimental combat team made up 
of American-born Japanese sold- 
iers, termed Nisei, in World War 
II. And even sone candid ac- 
knowledgment of iijustice to Ame- 
rican Indians that occurred in the 
period of westward expansion has 
been made in such otherwise 
conventional outdcor films as Fort 
Apache and Broken Arrow, thus 
violating the formula for the 
standard Western film. 
No Punches Pulled 
ERHAPS the nost widely im- 
pressive of America’s post-war 
films, both at home and abroad. 
has been the dmma, The Best 
Years of Our Lives. And that is 
because this pidure not only 
understood in universal terms the 
emotions of servicemen returning 
home after the war, but it fairly 
expressed the veteran's yearning 
for a fuller democracy and oppor- 
tunity for all in th¢ post-war world. 
The American :cene — in its 
light and its dark sides — has also 
been authentically displayed in 
such fine and flaveursome pictures 
as Sitting Pretty, Father of the 
Bride, Father’s Litile Dividend, The 
Jackpot, Miracle on Thirty-Fourth 
Street, Born Yesterday and All 
About Eve, which ire only a few of 
the many rich Anerican post-war 
comedies; and in The Asphalt 
Jungle, The Snak¢ Pit, The Quiet 
One, Sunset Boulevard, Ace in the 
Hole and Treasureof Sierra Madre, 
which have been dramas of the 
darker side. And a special word 
might be mentionel for the picture, 
All the King’s Nen, because it 
pulled no punches .n displaying the 
vulnerability of tie mob to the 
demagogy of an ispiring dictator 
and the viciousness of such a man. 
Its story was based upon the career 
of the American, Huey Long. 
And, then, of caurse, there have 
been any number of smooth and 
light-hearted American films — 
such things as Tie Jolson Story 
and the comedies f Danny Kaye — 
which have had no particular 
social content, saw a genial over- 
flow of good will It is possible 
that such pictures also serve to 
create understanding among men. 
To be sure, the American film 
industry should aot be credited 
with a paramount aim to make 
pictures that will be ambassadors 
of culture and ealightenment in 
the world. Its desre is to turn out 
pictures that will attract and 
absorb an audienc:. But in cater- 
ing to the public’s interests in the 
really pertinent dramas of our 
times, the American producers may 
be said to be coatributing much 
more constructiwly than ever 
before to the good of man.

## [Page 7](074696engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
HE power — or at least the 
| potential — of a film to com- 
municate information, to convey 
ideas and impressions at between 
peoples, has long been generally recog- 
nized. The most obvious example is 
that knowledge of and beliefs (right 
or wrong) about the American “way 
of life” in most parts of the civilized 
world are in the main based on con- 
tact, over the years, with the ubiqui- 
tous Hollywood film. 
Yet remarkably little has been done 
outside the educational documentary 
and the frankly documentary film, to 
make constructive use of this effective 
agency for better international under- 
standing. In the Western world, of 
course, there is always the fear that 
anything which might conceivably be 
branded as propaganda in the realm 
of entertainment will be suspect and 
that this reaction will militate against 
the commercial success at which all 
entertainment films are aimed. 
It is worth noticing that this does 
not apply in the other half of the 
world ; the London “Times” recently 
reported from Singapore an intensive 
campaign in South East Asia to secure 
the widest distribution of Russian and 
Chinese films, which are always Com- 
munist in content, and uncompro- 
mising in their determination to put 
ideological inspiration before mere 
entertainment. But there have been 
from time to time in the West exam- 
ples of the fact that a well-docu- 
mented fiction film can do a great 
deal more than tell a time-passing, 
boy-meets-girl story which presents 
in the last analysis, nothing more 
than a belief that total, absolute and 
constant bliss is within the reach of 
all. 
Mostly the examples have been un- 
  
THERE ARE OSCARS, CUPS, AND PLAQUES GALORE, 


### 74611: There are Oscars, cups, and plaques galore, but here is a film award with a real purpose

Page 7 — UNESCO COURIER 
BUT HERE IS 
A FILM AWARD 
WITH A REAL PURPOSE 
by Stephen WATTS 
Author of a syndicated film column appearing in Canada, Latin America, Italy, 
Portugal, Japan. 
consciously brought into being; at 
least they have sprung from no more 
than a desire to face up to life as it 
surrounds the creators of the film. An 
“Open City” or “Paisa” conveyed 
vividly what life in war-time Italy was 
like, but that was mainly because the 
producers, short of equipment, studios 
and money, but abounding in ideas, 
found their subjects in life, treated 
them with telling directness and sim- 
plicity, and photographed them in 
natural, real settings. Whatever 
“message” they carried was integral 
and unselfconscious. 
Recently a Swiss-sponsored, multi- 
lingual film about the Four Power 
regime in Vienna, “Four in a Jeep”, 
has been earning the kind of praise 
which suggests again what can be 
done along those lines. True, at the 
Cannes film festival the. Russians pro- 
tested, presumably finding the leading 
Russian character portrayed as insuf- 
ficiently heroic, but the film was 
highly praised, as it was again on its 
London presentation and at the Berlin 
film festival. There, although the 
winner of the German language Silver 
Laurel award, to go forward for the 
Golden Laurel final at Venice in Sep- 
tember, was a locally-produced pic- 
ture, “Herrliche Zeiten”, “Four in a 
Jeep” was specially commended and 
will in fact be a candidate for the 
Golden Laurel in its own multi-lingual 
category, 
This film serves as an admirable 
example of what the Golden Laurel 
award is all about; some of the 
reviews of it, using phrases such as “a 
plea for greater understanding be- 
Laurel Award, 1950. 
   BO ’ 
Rs 
» 
fh . 
“ - - 
= i B . - ERE 
' Tah fF 
# py 
" . : 
8 o - 
>= 
y N | 
7 
We - 
ATTACK ON RACISM WINS BRITISH FILM A 
8 AWARD FOR 1950 
principles of the United Nations Charter. 
The British Film Academy awards an annual prize for the best feature film illustrating one or more of the basic 
2 
k 
vOles 10 juslTy 1s presentation 
   
    
   
and after the last World War 
Dust, a full. 
ware 
Catlad The United Natons Award, the pride was created in 1948 ot 
by the Britiah Film Academy in response 10 8 request by the Files Division of the U.N, The Academy Council 
reserve he rpht 10 withhold the United Nations Award f none of the fims : 
a J.   
London film correspondent, 
  
   
CADEMY 
mn thelr opinion, obtaing sulficient 
This was the case in 1TME when no award was presented 
win the prize, presented in TIME, was the Swiss-American MGM. production The Search which ells the 
moving tory of a little refugee Boy — one of the thousands of DP, children separated from thelr parents duting 
Last year, Ihe award went 10 the M.G.M. American production Intruder in the J 
englh feature Him Based on William Faulkner's novel attacking discrimination sgainst Negroes 
in the United States (above). Menty Moore, the austinguished Britiah sculptor designed a statuette for the 
A replica of this in bronie is formally presented to the director of the winning file who receives it 
on behalf of the production studio. The bronze is kept by the studio until passed to the nest Academy winner. 
ARS IS we CR Sl al Tn SE : 
The firnt fim to 
‘New York Times’. 
tween human beings”, are in close 
parallel to the declared purpose of the 
award, defined by its donor, Mr David 
O. Selznick, as “to pay tribute to those 
motion pictures, produced by Euro- 
peans in Europe which have made the 
greatest contribution to mutual under- 
standing and goodwill between the 
peoples of the free and democratic 
world”. 
Last year at Venice the Golden Lau- 
rel award (then being contested for 
the first time) went to the Italian 
film “Donne Senza Nome". 
Awards in the film business are 
legion. “Oscars”, cups, medals, scrolls 
and plaques, even (in Britain) Henry 
Moore statuettes are presented for the 
best this and the most outstanding 
that. For the winners, they make 
prestige and useful advertising mate- 
rial ; too often they also blatantly glo- 
rify the donor. 
But the Golden Laurel award has 
the virtues, firstly of being concerned 
with more long-term, humane values 
than are usually considered in the 
cinema, and also of being free from 
the taint that the donor’s motives are 
disingenuous and commercially rooted. 
Selznick is an American film mag- 
nate, but he has so defined the quali- 
fications for entry that no American 
film can compete, far less win ; indeed 
the winner, by reason of the kudos 
gained, is in a better position to com- 
pete for a place on the world’s screens 
against the product of Hollywood and 
even Selznick himself. The final jury 
in New York, which passes judgment 
on the “heat” winners from the six 
language-groups, includes such public 
      
p
a
.
 
J
c
 
p
a
 
" 
! : A Sa ay 
Re gr BT 
WA | 
LX : 
figures as Dr, Ralph Bunche, of UN 
and Nobel Peace Prize fame, Mr Her- 
bert Bayard Swope, Mr Edward Mur- 
row, Mr John Gunther and Dr. D’Har- 
noncourt of the New York Museum of 
Modern Art. 
This year thirty-two films from 
seven countries have been entered. 
Apart from “Four in a Jeep” and 
“Herrliche Zeiten”, are the “local” 
winners from the United Kingdom 
(“Trio”), France (“Justice est faite”), 
Italy (“II Cammino della Speranza”, 
or “The Road to Hope”), and Scandi- 
navia (“Medan Staden Sover”). 
“Trio” made from three Somerset 
Maugham stories, has some charac- 
teristically shrewd and salted observa- 
tion of the British character. The 
French and Italian pictures are graver 
subjects — one deals with the task of a 
jury of ordinary, people faced with a 
“mercy killing” trial, the other with 
poor émigrants from Sicily who trek 
towards the French border in the hope 
of finding work. 
Whoever may win, the contest can 
hardly fail to stimulate European film 
production and to direct producers’ 
minds to an aspect of their work, and 
its impact on other people which they 
often seem dangerously to ignore. 
One American commentator on the 
Golden Laurel scheme has written “I 
wish Europe would clinch matters by 
establishing its own award for the 
American film which provides the 
soundest information on life in the 
United States”. That is an extension 
of Mr Selznick’s idea which is worthy 
of consideration in the appropriaté 
quarters this side of the Atlantic. 
There cannot be too many film- 
makers aiming their work at the 
target of greater mutual understand- 
ng. M . 
    
    
NACHTWACHE. (Germany) Silver Laurel Award, 1950.

## [Page 8](074696engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 74613: Children's films: for grown-ups only?

CHI 
OWEVER much adults may re- 
gret the role that the cinema 
plays in the lives of their chil- 
dren, it is no good harking back to 
the days “When I was a child..”. 
Good or bad, dangerous or healthy, 
the cinema is here, and it has taken 
a part in our life which cannot be 
excluded. 
Also we can do nothing about the 
fact that children form a large part 
of the cinema-going public. The 
Honourable Mrs. Henrietta Bower, 
member of Britain's Departmental 
Committee on Children and the Ci- 
nema, has given the following signi- 
ficant figures (1). 
Out of a total of 7,000,000 British 
children aged between five and fif- 
(1) Mentioned by Henri Storck in “Le Film 
Récréatif pour Spectateurs Juvéniles”, publish- 
ed by Unesco 
- a \ i 
teen, 1,250,000 go to the pictures at 
least twice a week, and 550,000 at least 
three times. Three shows a week 
mean that the fifteen-year-old has 
already seen 1,560 films—and this does 
not include educational film shows 
given in the schools. 
- Financial Difficulties 
BVIOUSLY, therefore, the cinema 
plays a big réle in the formation 
of the child. If it helps to give adults 
certain ideas about this world, how 
much more so when it comes to the 
more receptive and emotional young- 
ster, who is particularly vulnerable to 
psychological shocks, with their im- 
measurable after-effects. : 
But it would be wrong to say that 
only in the cinema does he get 
these shocks. Apart from what life 
  
N'S FILMS... 
itself teaches him, he has other means 
of learning about the world — books 
and newspapers, for instance. The ci- 
nema is of course, different from 
these, but its effects can be judged 
by a comparison with them. 
Children’s literature has existed for 
centuries. It has its good points, as 
well as its bad, but at least it is 
written to suit its readers. It has 
had its famous authors : Andersen, 
Lewis Carroll, Jules Verne. And 
. generally speaking, children read the 
books and magazines written for 
them, rather than those meant for 
adults. 
But it is just the opposite at the 
cinema. It is adult films which chil- 
dren see most frequently. Westerns, 
gangster films, adventure or love, 
news, documentaries and cartoons 
pass before their eyes with that 
  
    
  
F 
hypnotic force which forbids one’s 
attention to wander from that screen 
in the middle of the darkness. 
Producing special films for children 
means all sorts of problems — finan- 
cial ones, for instance. What producer 
will undertake to make a picture 
which he knows will not be accepted 
by the usual circuits? It would not 
show a profit perhaps in 15 or 
20 years. 
Mrs. Bower's solution for this pro- 
blem is assistance from governments, 
who would create an international 
pool of children’s films. Interesting 
in itself, it is only a suggestion, and 
we must content ourselves with things 
as they are. 
The scarcity of special films means 
that people who organize children’s 
film shows have first of all to choose, 
among films made for adults, those 
which are most suitable for young 
spectators. This poses a question 
which remains to be answered satis- 
factorily : the criteria for making this 
selection. 
It is the fashion in certain circles to 
blame the cinema for everything. 
Children’s misdeeds and crimes are its 
fault. It always leads them, if not 
to delinquency, at least to immorality, 
and shows them how to behave like 
gangsters. Its eroticism—even if 
nothing more than a kiss—seriously 
trouble the young cinemagoers. 
Must all this be guarded against ? 
The answer is : No, it does not matter 
very much. 
Indifferent 
E have a tendency to judge the 
influence of the cinema on 
children by what it does to us. But it 
is quite different with youngsters. Dr. 
Le Moal, who has made an important 
study of this matter, declares that, 
from five years of age to puberty, love 
complications are matters of indiffer- 
ence, even boredom, to children. 
Only girls over 16 prefer love stories; 
the boys continue to opt for adven- 
ture or historical films. 
Accusing the cinema of fostering

## [Page 9](074696engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

Fas 
I 
child delinquency is to ignore the 
social and psychological conditions 
which are at the root of anti-social 
attitudes—lack of adaptability, bad 
family conditions, misery, promiscuity. 
It is quite wrong to imagine that a 
gangster film will lead a boy to crime 
if, after the cinema, he can return 
home to a happy, prosperous and unit- 
ed family. As for the lad who lives 
in a slum and in the street, and sees 
his drunken parents quarrel 
night, does he really need the cinema 
to teach him lawlessness? 
Grave Problems 
EVERTHELESS, it would be wrong 
to say that the cinema does not 
pose grave problems with regard to 
children. Very often it gives shocks, 
with traces that remain. You have 
only to look at some of Mrs. Bower's 
infra-red photos taken in darkened 
cinemas and shown in these pages. 
Such emotions can have dangerous 
effects on such young human beings. 
But the large number of studies of 
this problem have produced very dis- 
similar opinions on its effects. 
Richard Ford, in his book “Children 
in the Cinema”, gives the results of 
an enquiry made by cinema club 
directors into the subjects which 
frightened children most. They were: 
shots of the mysterious, of the 
unknown, of terror; scenes taken in 
the dark showing ghosts, skeletons 
and witches; war crimes; brawls 
which included close-ups of criminal 
faces. 
Can we accept fully the results of 
this enquiry ? Apparently not. Ans- 
wering a question put by Mrs. Bower, 
a child gave what she regards as a 
typical answer : "I like ghost films, 
because I know it could not happen 
to me.” Note that this child did not 
say that these scenes made him 
frightened—in fact, he enjoyed this 
type of fear. 
_Let us take three films meant espe- 
cially for children : Pinocchio, Snow- 
White and the Thief of Bagdad. M. 
Armand Lanous finds in all of them 
each 
sequences which give violent shocks. 
When Pinocchio was swallowed by 
the whale, the children were fright- 
ened to see him inside the monster 
(the young spectator identifies 
himself very much more with the hero 
than adults do). In Snow-White, it 
was the fairy being changed into a 
witch which affected them most, 
while in the Thief of Bagdad they 
were scared by the nightmare fight 
with Faraignée. : 
What about adult films which keep 
on showing scenes of violence as their 
principal theme? Mr. P. Mayer de- 
clares in the “Sociology of the film” 
that often children have been so 
impressed by a picture that they 
have nightmares and insomnia as 
by Jean BLOCH-MICHEL 
     
a result. Some films leave memo- 
‘ries which are not effaced for months. 
That children undergo violent emo- 
tional disturbances as a result of 
seeing films meant for adults—as 
well as those made for children— 
cannot be denied. Only the extent 
of these shocks is disputed. Some 
say they can last a long time. Others, 
like Dr. Elliott Jach, contradict this. 
Dr. Elliott Jach declares that horrible 
scenes are perhaps a good thing in 
that they give the child an outlet for 
his anxieties and instincts. For the 
cinema is an art—or a distraction— 
which only calls for its spectator to 
respond spontaneously, temporarily, 
and with no long-term call on his 
emotions. 
The cinema is thus a cultural ele- 
ment that is new and, one can even 
say, strange. Perhaps it is too soon 
to weigh up its effects. 
But one fact cannot be ignored : the 
cinema demands above all high 
finance. To be profitable it must 
please the greatest possible number of 
people. That is to say, it must follow 
at the same time as it creates. And in a wrong light. 


### 74613: Children's films: for grown-ups only?

R GROWN-UPS ONLY ? 
that, perhaps, is its greatest danger 
to culture. 
The cinema nowadays is at the root 
of many prejudices—or at least it 
does nothing to combat them. On 
the other hand it often presents to 
* children a view of the world and of 
life which has little connection with 
reality. 
Here, for instance, is a list of “cli- 
chés” of the British and American 
cinema which Mr. Roger Manvell has 
gathered together in his book 
“Film” 
Luxury, especially associated 
with women, is normal. 
The full-time pursuit of women 
by unoccupied businessmen and 
rich young rulers is normal. 
Men are a source of money for 
women. 
Sex is probably the most impor- 
tant sensation in life. 
Things of the spirit are either 
funny, eccentric, charlatan or 
ever so wonderful. (Art is 
usually debunked as artiness, 
religion as mania, mysticism as 
a yearn in soft focus.) 
To be foreign is to be under 
suspicion. To be Eastern is to 
be horrific. 
Clearly it is not only in the British 
and American film that one can 
gather such stupidities. They are 
pretty general. 
Evil and Poverty 
AKE the last “cliché” in this list : 
the cinema’s representation of 
the foreigner. This may be the 
only viewpoint many children get for 
years. It can well be the basis of 
misunderstandings, with serious con- 
sequences for the future of their 
country. ) 
There are, of course, exceptions. 
All — whether children or adults — 
who saw “The Last Chance” got an 
opportunity of understanding better 
the problems which passions had put 
In this film, no 
 
matter what language is spoken, 
everybody is just — a human being. 
The conventions which, by force of 
circumstances, the cinema must res- 
pect affects its best work. Thus, the 
conclusions reached by the British 
report on children’s entertainment 
films show that, in order to please 
- children, the actors who play the less- 
attractive roles must bear the conven- 
tional signs of their badness — dirty 
clothes and rags, and ugly faces 
(which, however, must not be repul- 
sive.) 
M. Henri Storck comments on this 
peculiar modern tendency to link evil 
with poverty. In the days of melo- 
drama, he recalls, the bad person was 
the cruel and powerful nobleman. 
Dangerous Ideas 
I T is easy to see the danger which 
can arise from this linking of the 
evil and the poor. After having given 
children a view of life which they are 
most unlikely to find in reality, is the 
cinema going to add some dangerous 
ideas about the superiority of some, 
while others get no less dangerous 
notions about their inferiority? This 
happens often, and the cinema, by its 
conventions, makes it occur still more 
frequently—thus tending to make the 
divisions of society even more rigid. 
To want to transform the cinema 
would be ridiculous. But its possibi- 
lities are immense. There is no hu- 
man progress that cannot better 
humanity and bring it closer together 
— unless it is allowed to worsen man’s 
lot and teach him to hate. 
It is not fruitless to draw the atten- 
tion of those responsible for the evo- 
lution of the cinema to the most 
subtle, the most far-reaching and the 
most serious consequences of their 
activities. 
Whether the makers of films like it 
or not, whether they do something 
about it or ignore it, the cinema is a 
new aspect of culture. The cinema 
must not forget as it forges ahead 
that culture forms part of it.

## [Page 10](074696engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 10 


### 74616: The First cinematic encyclopaedia: French thought in pictures

THE FIRST CINEMATIC mr 
ENCYCLOPAEDIA 
FRENCH THOUGHT IN PICTURES 
FEETI TRN 
  
FTER the passage of two hundred years 
the “Encyclopédie Filmée” is carrying on 
the tradition of.Diderot and the great 
Encyclopaedists. 
“Cow is the feminine of bull ; bull is the 
masculine of cow”, we learn from the French 
dictionary Larousse. Unless you are suffering 
from mushroom-poisoning, it will not occur to 
you to ask the Dictionary for a definition of 
Amanites, especially if you think they are 
animal fossils or members of the French Union. 
Have you ever thought about the word “artery”, 
which applies to cities as well as to the blood- 
stream ? Or of that word “bureau”, which 
has come to denote a solemn Council after it 
once clothed a mediaeval peasant? What 
have you learnt about arithmetic since you 
first stammered through the multiplication 
table? - 
The month of April 1951 marked a mile- 
stone in the history of the cinema, when 
authoritative representatives of French letters, 
arts and sciences joined with scenario-writers 
to revive the tradition of the eighteenth- 
century Encyclopaedists. Duly defined, com- 
mented upon and expressed in the form of 
- pictures, words will follow one another upon the 
screen in a series of films which will make up 
a cinematic encyclopaedia available to the 
general public. 
It is a big task with many difficulties, not 
the least of which is the fact that, despite the 
cinema’s ideals and successes in many new 
fields, it still continues to be regarded chiefly 
as a means of recreation. The scholar may 
give credit to the producer of educational films 
and make the necessary intellectual effort to 
- retain knowledge presented in a more or less 
- didactic form ; but the average cinema-goer, 
who seeks an escape from time and space, a 
journey to what-might-have-been, will not 
~ willingly exchange it for an analysis of the 
meanings of words, however humorous or 
interesting they may be. - 
Diderot discovered the educational influence 
of faithful reproduction two centuries ago. 
~ His Encyclopaedia owed a great part of its 
“initial success to an illustration which pleased 
the Royal favourite, Madame de Pompadour. 
- It was a detailed diagram showing how her 
- stockings could be woven. She was also in- 
terested in finding a good description of how 
cosmetics were made. The admirably engraved 
plates for the different crafts determined their 
vocation for generations of Europeans. Dis- 
pensing with unnecessary comment, the pic- 
ture became an organic link in the story and 
- made it possible to secure greater objectivity 
or a subtle distortion of reality. 
In the course of its growth, the cinema has 
developed steadily towards an ideal marriage 
between language and sensation. The talking 
film has produced science or art documentaries 
as well as sound and spoken newsreels : the 
picture needs, at the same time that it fears, 
- the’ language which confirms or annuls it, 
while words find in pictures virgin soil for the 
development of their harmonies, that void and 
silence which are the essence of poetry. 
Above all, the creators of the cinema ency- 
ATER TT IIE 
by Yves H ACQUARD 
clopaedia are striving to avoid vulgarity, the 
circulation of cheap knowledge. Like La Fon- 
taine, they want to instruct and to amuse at 
the same time and have endeavoured to as- 
semble at the outset all the material necessary 
to success. 
The Editorial Committee for the Film Ency- 
clopaedia includes such well-known writers 
and novelists, essayists, philosophers and dra- 
matists as Marcel Achard, Alexandre Arnoux, 
Jean Cocteau, Pierre Descaves, Roger Ferdi- 
nand, Professeur Monder, Léon Moussinac, 
Marcel Pagnol and Raymond Queneau ; jurists, 
high officials and political personalities such 
as Madame Georges Bidault, Julien Cain, 
Maurice Garcgon ; humorists like Jean Rigaux 
and Jean Effel ; the Director of French radio 
and television, Wladimir Porché ; and a galaxy 
of scenario-writers — Jean Benoit-Lévy, Marcel 
Carné, André Cayatte, René Clair and Jean 
Grémillon. Jean Marin is Secretary-General. 
These modern encyclopaedists will be at li- 
  
berty to deal with each subject just as they 
think fit, without any definite style being laid 
down. The encyclopaedia will rely on inspira- 
tion, on the results that diverse tempera- 
ments can produce with the cinema’s means of 
expression. It plans to give young people a 
chance to show what they can do and to incor- 
porate as many new ideas as possible. 
Filmgoers will be able to see Pierre Kast 
explaining the mystery of numbers, the key to 
the universe. Madame Georges Bidault will 
try to show — in colours — that red-and-white 
mushrooms cultivated by her husband are 
better than any grown in the ground. 
Seated at his worktable, Raymond Queneau 
will humorously meditate before us on the most 
abstruse questions of arithmetic. He will ask 
how he can be sure that he really has five 
fingers, will recall that no cotton reels are equal 
mathematically to no corkscrews and that 
there is only one chance in a billion that a 
saucepan which is put over a fire will freeze 
up. : 
The idea is to draw the spectator’s attention 
insensibly towards wider philosophic or moral 
perspectives. Blue, Jean Grémillon tells us, is 
the colour of the sky, of the policeman’s 
breeches and of the Virgin’s cloak. The Cote 
d’Azur ceases to be azure in Italy, where blue 
symbolizes force and skill. But it is the fiim- 
maker Marcel Pagliero who reproduces the 
delicacy and purity of blue by a very lovely 
bare-shouldered woman wearing a necklace of 
blue stones. 
Work on a dozen words beginning with the 
letter “A” is to be completed by the end of 
this year. Pierre Laroche will gather together 
all the meanings of Age. Madame Simon will 
sing of Actors. Colette Audry will attack 
Absence. Alexandre Arnoux will visit the 
Amazon and its Amazons, while Jean Marin 
climbs Atlas to look at the Atlantic. 
The encyclopaedists not only hope for dis- 
tribution of their work through the normal 
circuits, but also to enter into agreements with 
educational organizations and with television 
networks. A dubbed commentary in different 
languages will bring their lively and imagin- 
ative survey of the French language to many 
countries. 
“In this way a cinematic achievement with 
rich possibilities will carry to the four corners 
of the earth a message of culture, intelligence 
and liberty. With regard to the last item, it 
is true, André Gillois observes, at the end of his 
piece on Automaton, that it will be some time 
before the encyclopaedists reach the letter “L”, 
adding, however, a trifle cynically, that people 
are used to this long wait for Liberty. 
ENGLAND 1S NOW SYNCHRONIZING English 
language sound tracks on foreign Ilhns for 
the first time, following an exchange agree- 
Ww ment signed in Rome. Films imported from 
Fs Italy are in future to be shown in English. 
ww 
LG
 
i
E
 
The first Italian production to be shown in 
English dubbing is Bitter Rice. It is hop- 
ed that six Italian films will be synchronized 
into English every year. 
* 
EDUCATORS IN THE BELGIAN CONGO are 
demonstrating the value of literacy by means 
Th, 4 of da narrative flim entitled Savoir Lire. 
har It tells a simple story of a young man, Al- 
a phonse, who gets into all kinds of difficulties 
Pui and loses a chance to get a job because he 
3 cannot read. Savoir Lire is being effec- 
! tively used by mobile llm units taking part 
o in the Congo’s literacy campaigns. 
* 
| ~ ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA FILMS — the 
a largest producer of educational films in the 
1 world—provides 70 per cent of all fllmsx 
used in American classrooms. This American 
organization has produced over 500 titles 
y covering flelds from the Adventures of Bun- 
ny Rabbit to Electrodynamics and the Mole- 
cufar Theory of Matter. Versions in 13 for- 
2 at eign languages are also available for use 
A in classrooms abroad. 
* 
REVOLUTIONARY THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
FILM, Around is Around, has been produced 
for the Festival of Britain by Normal 
| McLaren, the Canadian animated Nim 
‘ producer who has gained international fame 
+ for hig daring technique of painting or 
etching on raw film without the use of the 
camera. The novelty of this ten-minute flim, 
produced by the National Film Board of 
“Canada in collaboration with the British Film 
Institute, is that it provides three-dimension 
quality both in sound and in images. 
f Members of the audience are provided with 
special spectacles which make the images 
appear to stand out from the screen, while 
the sound “moves away” from the screen 
in all directions at the same time. EXxperi- 
ments in three-dimensional fllms are under 
way in a number of countries. 
* 
AT LEAST 42 COUNTRIES IMPOSE CUSTOM 
DUTIES and other restrictions on the impor- 
tation of films, according to “Trade Barriers 
to Knowledge”, a recent Unesco publication. 
These will he alleviated for newsreels and 
educational, scientific and cultural films as 
soon as two Unesco-sponsored international 
conventions enter into force. The Ars, 
covering films of educational, scientific or 
cultural character, has been signed by 18 
: countries and ratified by four. The second 
er grants duty-free admission to newsreels im- 
ported by organizations. It has been signed 
by 23 countries and ratified by three. Both 
Unesco agreements require 10 ratiftcations to 
become operative. 
UNESCO FILM COUPONS. Film projectors, 
16-millimetre raw film and other fllm mitte- 
rials can be obtained by individuals in “soft 
currency” countries from suppliers in “hard 
currency” countries through Unesco’s Film 
Coupon Scheme. So far 14 of Unesco’s 
ol * Member States have joined this scheme, in- 
cluding all the main film-supplying countries, 
ah . out of a total of nearly one and a half 
: million dollars’ worth of Unesco Coupons 
put into circulation, approximately 10 per 
3 cent have been issued for the purchase of 
1 educational films. The Egyptian Ministry of 
~ Public Health, for example, recently ordered 
Ka 19 documentary films, provided with Arabic 
F sound-tracks, covering such subjects as 
} home-nursing, first-aid, the common cold and 
pi dental care. Another scheme, Unesco Gift 
i Coupons (see COURIER, March 1951) also 
£f can be used to buy educational films and 
w fllm projectors. 
' THE GERMAN FEDERAL REPUBLIC has created 
ay an annual film prize called the “Theodore” 
for producers, authors and actors. Prizes 
are given not to leading stars but to out- 
standing beginners. Awards are also made 
for films judged the most thought-pro- 
voking, the most democratic, for the most 
striking treatment of a social theme, and for 
the best development of a European idea, as 
well as for the best cultural and fictional 
productions. * 
| MONTAGNE EST VERTE (The Mountain is 
| Green), a medium-length documentary deal- 
| : ing with the emancipation of slaves in the 
former French colonies, has received the 
patronage of the United Nations Film Board 
for its high ideals and first-class technical 
0 quality. This French film, produced by 
Hy J.K. Raymond-Millet and directed by Jean 
4 Lehérissey, is a tribute to the memory of 
i Victor Schoelcher whose life-long fight for 
0 the abolition of slavery in Martinique and 
Guadeloupe led to an emancipation law sign- 
i ed by the provisional government of the 
4 Second French Republic in 1848. La Mon=- 
& tagne est verte, produced without Anancial 
iy help from the United Nations, is an example 
+ of how the cinema can make the principles 
= of the Declaration of Human Rights more 
© wide known. 
I * 
E THE USE OF MOBILE CINEMA and radio vans 
$1 in fundamental education is surveyed in a 
Unesco book just published. 
shows that wherever the vans have been 
used their effects have been excellent, parti- 
ry cularly where they serve areas lacking cine- 
rd mas and electric power supply. The book- 
: 2 let is a practical guide to the best uses for 
these vans, complete with blueprints for 
their arrangement and detailed information 
on the best equipment available. 
* 
MOROCCAN YOUTH are seeing more and better 
films these days, thanks to the efforts of a 
film association set up in Casablanca in 1949. 
Performances of flims chosen for their qua- 
lity and educational value are open to mem- 
Lers who range upwards from ten years old. 
* 
THE TASK AMEAD is the title of a new twenty- 
minute documentary flim produced by the 
Film Division of Unesco on some of the Or- 
ganization’s activities in different countries 
and the work of the Secretariat in Paris. 
The flim is distributed in 16 and 35 milli- 
metres with sound tracks in eight languiges: 
English, French, Spanish, Portuguese, Ger- 
man, Arabic, Hindustani, and Italian, 
The survey. 
oA Adel Ebb? 
R
l
l
 
4! 
  
   
         
       
                        
    
        
    
    
    
  
     
    

## [Page 11](074696engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

MR. FILM CENSOR... 
 
“ JUSTICE EST FAITE" 
Page 11 — UNESCO COURIER 
Bann ww wah “* 


### 74617: Mr. Film censor: "Must everything in the garden be lovely"?

“Must Everything in the Garden Be Lovely?” 
‘by Charles SPAAK 
President, Screen Writers Guild of France, 1950-51 
      
-s 
  
" i> % EY 
  
  
 
“ RETOUR A LA VIE" 
ow can the cinema help in fostering 
mutual understanding and, hence, 
mutual esteem, between the na- 
tions of the world? This is an inspiring 
subject for people who are given to long 
speeches, and one which inevitably calls 
forth the most optimistic platitudes. 
Of course it could serve those ends, but 
the organization and censorship of film 
production is such that the result is quite 
different. It is precisely because the 
screen could give us an intimate insight 
into the life of people in other lands 
that governments take such vigilant care 
to ensure that only an official picture 
is given of the areas under their control. 
It should not be forgotten that, of all 
media of expression, the cinema every- 
where enjoys the least freedom, being 
the victim of two equally detestable 
censorship measures : firstly, with regard 
to the home production of films, and 
secondly, with regard to the showing 
of foreign films. In the first case, there 
must be no allusion to any controversial 
topic ; in the second case, whenever a 
problem which the government consi- 
ders dangerous is touched upon, the 
people in one country are not allowed to 
find out what their neighbours think of 
it. So, each nation says to the other : 
I should like to have the ideas that your 
government allows you to impart, but 
only if your ideas are exactly in line with 
what my government allows me to utter. 
So long as this is accepted, nations are 
very willing to exchange information, to 
get to understand and esteem one an- 
other. Yet in all solemnity, responsible 
people wonder what part the cinema can 
play in the lofty task of fostering friend- 
ship between the nations by helping them 
to understand each other’s social, intel- 
lectual or religious characteristics. 
Both entertainment and documentary 
films are victims of the same system. 
The latter which, as their name implies, 
should contain only documentary evi- 
dence, are subjected to an even more 
rigorous control than the others, and 
very little confidence can be placed in 
their objectivity. 
Everywhere censors suppress films 
whose purpose is not in accordance 
with accepted tradition, and film 
producers are paralyzed by fear of 
censorship. What can the Anglo-Saxon 
countries have learnt, for instance, from 
films produced in Paris during the past 
ten years? That you can sit at tables 
on the pavement in front of all the big 
cafés, that exotic dance steps are per- 
formed in cellars, that married couples 
insist on sleeping in the same bed, and 
that some depraved individuals have a 
misguided affection for ladies whom they 
have not married. All that amounts to 
very little. But what have they revealed 
of France's problems and struggles? 
And what film producer would dare to 
allude to such matters? When Autant- 
Lara, producer of Le Diable au corps 
wanted to tell the story of a conscientious 
objector, when André Cayatte, producer 
of Justice est faite — I am deliberately 
quoting only well-known films — tried 
to describe the Seznec affair (the unfor- 
tunate Breton who did twenty years’ 
hard labour for a murder which no 
one now believes he was guilty of), they 
both met with such difficulties that they 
had to abandon their original ideas. 
Don’t mention war, don’t mention jus- 
tice! If they are not religious, but want 
to express their views on religion, if they 
wish to describe social conditions which 
they consider unsatisfactory, if they want 
to express opinions on money, freedom, 
love, life or death, let them beware, for 
the censor’s eye is on them! 
What information value, then, can 
films have abroad if they reflect 
nothing but official or conventional 
views? “Everything in the garden is 
lovely...” It is always the same story. In 
our comfortable seat in the darkened 
cinema, we are lulled into thinking that 
all is for the best in the best possible of 
worlds; any uneasiness aroused by the 
newsreel is dispelled by the documentary 
film and the feature film that follow. 
Although they have revealed so little 
of the nation’s inner, secret life, 
have French film producers man- 
aged, at least, to further international 
understanding through films inspired by 
a generous desire for reconciliation with 
a former foe? A film which leaps at once 
to the mind is La Grande Illusion. In 
that film, Germans and Frenchmen, at 
a time in history when they should have 
been implacable enemies, faced each 
other without hatred. It was banned in 
Germany. And when immediately after 
the last war, it was shown in France, the 
press launched a violent campaign 
against it, trying to get it withdrawn. In 
all honesty, it must be admitted that the 
cinema which is nationalistic in inspira- 
tion does little to advance the cause 
of free international exchange of infor- 
mation which, by its very nature, it could 
do so much to help. 
I am all the more sorry, when I think 
of the splendid purposes which this 
remarkable instrument for the spread of 
knowledge could serve. It is not my 
fault if men today, like animals shrink- 
ing from their own reflection in a mirror, 
are afraid to see themselves portrayed 
with brutal frankness on the screen.

## [Page 12](074696engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 12 


### 74618: Thanks to the cine-camera, scientists are uncovering a strange, unknown world

THANKS TO THE CINE-CAMERA 
SCIENTISTS ARE UNCOVERING A STRANGE, BCD COE WN WORLD 
. 
   
TR by Maurice GOLDSMITH 
not originally to entertain. Before the 
invention of the cinema, the French astro- 
nomer Pierre Janssen in 1874 photograph- 
ed phases of the track of the planet Venus and 
about six years later the French physiologist 
Etienne Marey studied the flight of birds with 
a specially designed camera. 
But the most impressive experiment that 
really begins the story of the scientific film was 
the demonstration in California by the pioneer 
British-born photographer, Edward Muybridge, 
that a trotting horse has all its four legs off the 
ground at the same time. It was Muybridge, in 
fact, who gave the first demonstration in Europe 
of scientific films. That was in 1882 in the 
theatre of the Royal Institution in London. 
His lecture on “The Science of Animal Loco- 
motion in its Relation to Design in Art” 
confounded critics who had declared that the ° 
reproduction of a satisfactory photograph of a 
rapidly moving object was absolutely outside the 
bounds of possibility. Their surprise was 
expressed by a writer in the Illustrated London 
News, who described how “by the aid of an 
astonishing apparatus called a zoopraxiscope... 
animals suddenly became mobile and beautiful, 
and walked, cantered, ambled, galloped, and 
leaped over hurdles in the field of vision in a 
perfectly natural and life-like manner...” 
Today the film has an honoured place not 
only in research and investigation as a scien- 
tific tool, but also as a basic method of popu- 
larizing science and presenting its social impli- 
cations. 
In the research laboratory the cine-camera 
is an indispensable tool because it is an unob- 
served and undisturbing observer; it is insensi- 
tive to atmosphere and fatigue; it can function 
for hours on end with a non-sleeping eye, 
without producing confusion and overlapping 
among successive images; it can delve into and 
uncover a strange, unknown microscopic world. 
In addition, the camera can act as a time- 
. Lo 
expander and as a time-condenser; and it can 
At first glance we are sure this is a painted African mask worn by some Negro warrior brandishing his arms see things in wave-lengths invisible to the ordin- 
in a typical ceremonial dance. In reality itis a magnified close-up fitm of an African cricket from the Cameroons. ary eye. 
Ts film was born to do scientific work and 
  
} L | N E S The eye of the crab (1) is (almost) enough to make the lover of shellfish lose his appetite ; while the eyes gleaming above the 
t huge mouth of this gentle little fish from Madagascar (2) are not very reassuring either. We can only see four of the many eyes 
b A N D of the spider (3) but they are definitely unpleasant. The sea anemone (4) boasts a secre! weapon: a deadly liquid hidden in 
hundreds of tiny “buttons” covering its wriggling tentacles. The tail of a shrimp (5), seen under the microscope film camera, 
C | R C L E S has the warlike appearance of a hedgehog ready to attack. The camera clarifies what the human eye cannot distinguish. 
 

## [Page 13](074696engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 74618: Thanks to the cine-camera, scientists are uncovering a strange, unknown world

  
Baby Seahorse: horizontal. When the baby seahorse is born it assumes the horizontal position 
normal to all fishes and acquatic creatures. 
Adult Seahorse: vertical. But when it reaches maturity the seahorse suddenly assumes a 
vertical position. 
water. 
It is the only vertebrate creature known that lives and moves in this position in 
Another curious fact: the male seahorse—not the femaie—gives birth to its young. The 
female lays her eggs in a pouch below the male’s stomach where they remain for 40 days, and are 
fed by the male’s blood until birth. Photo shows two male seahorses. 
* 
The Lobster and the Flea. The lobster's claw (left) bears a striking resemblance to a parrot's 
beak or a Commedia deil' Arte character. The fresh-water flea (right) reproduces by parthenoge- 
nesis since no males exist in this species. 
 
Scientific photography is 
half-a-century old, and as one writer 
nearly 
has said “has brought many reve- 
lations of the beauty and harmony 
of the physical universe, and some 
notable extensions to our knowledge 
of it.” In astronomy, for example, 
the film has added greatly to our 
knowledge of what is happening on the 
sun, particularly in the behaviour of 
solar prominences — so much so that 
far more problems have been raised 
than it has been possible to answer. 
In an American film Explosions on 
the Sun, it is possible to see in a few 
minutes changes that have taken 
hours to occur, and to marvel at an 
eruptive arch expanding at the rate 
of about 1,000 miles a second. In a 
field at Paracutin, in Mexico, in Fe- 
bruary 1943, a volcano suddenly came 
to life. Within a short while scientists 
came along with a camera and began 
.& unique record of the birth, life and 
decline of this tremendous eruption of 
nature. 
In the biological sciences, the first 
film was made by the Frenchman, 
Jean Comandon, some 40 years ago. 
“In our days”, he wrote, “motion pic- 
tures are a necessity to the scholar 
who wishes to demonstrate to his col- 
leagues transitory. phenomena, delin- 
eate experiments or the general 
observation of things, beings or facts.” 
At the Pasteur Institute at Garches, 
such films of his as Chvampignons Pré- 
dateurs, which deals with a curious 
fungus that preys on worms, and 
Substitution de Noyaux d’Amibes, 
which depicts the technique of the 
removal of the nucleus of an amoeba 
and its replacement by another 
nucleus, have been basic contributions 
to knowledge. His note on this last 
film begins : “For studying the slow 
movements of an amoeba, time-lapse 
and cine-micrography have been par- 
ticularly useful and have revealed 
things which would not have been 
apparent by direct observations.” The 
cine-camera can, in fact, be attached 
to microscopes, telescopes, stereoscopes, 
and all kinds of optical instruments 
which normally produce a picture for 
the human eye to see and to measure, 
and so a recording instrument of 
the finest accuracy can be produced. 
In the medical field, living move- 
ments of lungs and limbs can be 
viewed repeatedly without danger 
of an overdose of X-rays harming 
the individual. It has been said 
that with the introduction of film the 
science of medicine has progressed so 
far that “the same patient can be 
used over and over again.” 
On the technical side, infra-red can 
be used to take photographs in appar- 
ent darkness. It was used to make a 
film for scientists anxious to study the 
contraction and dilation of the pupil 
of an eye when a bright source of 
light was switched on and off close to 
it. TUltra-violet illumination has been 
used, for example, to study the surface 
of red-hot steel bars. During the 
rolling process foreign bodies may 
enter the bars, but it is difficult to see 
what is happening because of the 
glare from the red-hot metal. Using 
a filter over the camera lens and illu- 
minating the bar by either blue or 
ultramarine violet light, it is possible 
to photograph the bar as if it were 
quite cold. 
Science is popularized on the screen 
through the documentary, the teaching 
film, and the feature film. 
The documentary school founded by 
John Grierson has from the outset 
tried to maintain links between the 
specialist and the technician and the 
general public. The documentary is 
distinguished from the teaching, or 
instructional, film in that its job is 
“the creative interpretation of reality”, 
and when it deals with science it is 
concerned with the relations between 
science and society. 
John Maddison, president of the 
International Scientific Film As- 
sociation, describes in “Experiment 
in the Film”, edited by Roger Manvell, 
published by Grey Walls Press, London, 
1949, two good examples of the 
documentary’s power to interpret 
science. The first is Elton and Bell's 
Transfer of Power, in which within 
the space of twenty minuies the story 
of the evolution of a technical device 
is not only told with lucidity and 
coherence but is related to the social 
pattern. In Blood Transfusion, Rotha 
and Neurath drive home the point, 
with an ingenious bringing together 
of actuality, models, and animated 
drawings, that scientific achievement 
is a cooperative international business. 
* 
ADDISON refers to “the work of 
British documentary technicians 
in using films as a mass edu- 
cational technique under Government 
and other sponsorships” and to its 
offshoots in Canada and elsewhere. 
“Its importance it twofold. It has 
illumined the social function of 
science in countless ways. In Enough 
to Eat, Housing Problems and Smoke 
Menace, it has afforded a pulpit to 
such progressive interpreters of 
science as Huxley, Haldane and Boyd 
Orr. During the last war, new labo- 
ratory findings and techniques for 
dealing with such problems as potato 
blight and scabies were made widely 
known to an extent impossible without 
the use of the film. More recently, 
Personnel Selection and Children 
Learning by Experience have shown 
how the camera can expound at- 
tempts to apply objectivity and good 
sense to the more delicate problems of 
human behaviour.” 
He adds : “Not less important than 
the new techniques of production ex- 
plored has been the vast non-theatrical 
experiment in distributing films to 
audiences outside the commercial 
movie houses. Fresh images of scien- 
tific achievement have been carried 
into schoolroom, workshop, byre and 
forest clearing and the thousand and 
one places where men meet together.” 
* 
HE teaching film is known to be 
a stimulating influence for both 
pupils and teacher. A study 
made in the USA concluded that 
“when properly produced and wisely 
used, the motion picture possesses dis- 
tinct pedagogical values over and 
above traditional teaching methods on 
which the same amounts of time and 
energy are expended.” It has been 
found that children studying by means 
of films have learned more than their 
colleagues who have not used this aid. 
Among the best of the British instruc- 
tional films — and pioneer efforts 
when they began in 1921 — is the po- 
pular science Secrets of Nature se- 
ries, begun by the late Percy Smith. 
They were often produced in two ver- 
sions — one for schools, and one with 
a “popular” commentary for the ci- 
nemas. 
The feature film is essentially 
a form of entertainment. There- 
fore, little has been done consciously 
to depict science as an everyday 
vital force, but the effects of 
such films as Pasteur and Madame 
Curie have been very great. In this 
context, the development of the science 
fiction film is a factor of some import- 
ance. These films are very popular 
and some, such as Destination Moon, 
have not been offensive in their 
scientific content. The Russians have 
in recent years used the feature film as 
a serious medium with which to tell 
the personal dramatic story of great 
scientific personalities, such as Zhu- 
kovsky, the pioneer of Russian avia- 
tion, and Michurin the botanist. 
Page 13 — UNESCO COURIER 
   
  
   
Special mention must be made of 
the great contribution of the French 
and the world-wide recognition of the 
work of Jean Painlevé. Maddison des- 
cribes how he has attempted “to 
create a new sort of scientific film 
biography for the ordinary cine- 
magoer. He and Georges Rouquier 
have made an absorbing study out 
of the biological work of Louis 
Pasteur in a film entitled The 
Scientific Achievements of Pasteur. 
Using an unknown unprofessional 
actor, a Paris workman with a 
strong resemblance to the great sa- 
vant, Rouquier has made the scenes 
in which Pasteur fought against the 
prejudices of contemporary scientists, 
come to life again on the screen. But 
the main excitement of the film lies 
in the way which Painlevé, through 
innumerable hours spent with camera 
and microscope in the cine-laboratory, 
has retold the long tale of Pasteur’s 
triumph over microbes. 
In most western European countries 
there are scientific film associations 
doing important work in developing 
the use and understanding of the 
scientific film, and in 1947 there was 
formed an International Scientific 
Film Association. They are working 
for an end of great significance to 
society : to build up through the film 
a living unity between the scientist, 
the artist, and the man-in-the-street. 
The photographs on these two 
pages are published by kind 
permission of M. Jean Pain- 
levé, director of the Institute 
of Scientific Cinematography 
in Paris. These illustrations 
are all extracts from M. Pain- 
levé’s films.     
Battle to the death. A dytiscid gets its victim. This underwater insect has no mouth ; instead 
two sharp hooks, leading directly to the stomach, inject digestive juices into the dytiscid's food and 
then suck them into the stomach. 

## [Page 14](074696engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 14 
 
  
  
  
  
    
  
      
  
  
ANALYSE DES SUJETS DE CINQ JOURNAUX FILMES CONTENT ANALYSIS FOR FIVE NEWSREELS 
p- 2 ke mw al «wx w al a - |:¢ |,» a 
” HAE RET RT of 3 5f| 81 Leds ¢ |3f BE, | Ess |i:..|5. : 
R= a P| P(E | 8 BEI GE OE| EZE PERN ¢F | § |GEnipEE| GREE |MERE[SES| : 
. . ‘ . - + : 
$ S AAR TL | | : 
k “ig rye de dd | ate 8 1 L 
SWEDEN AAR LK A LN TT | PY . he] [ 
oh RAtAR LLL CLASS 4h TT WY wes | EE | ARR 
TN AAA AR | ALK 7 BBR Whi = hr XR WY 4 - a EE oo Annan 
RR | 
FOX RARAAAR 
MOVIETONE AAXAR 
— RRR AR| = | -— 
IN SRITZENLAND AAA ALAA RN 
Art AAAL " " te pr | 
Ena ARRXAX LL&L LL I 1 § BH sus EEE 
i LES AAA ALL 3 oe Lis Tr (0) -a os rey RA 
RAR LALAL 77 B80 WAN ’ I 8 8 . AH sss EEE « annn 
ARRAR KAL 77 BE WAN -- 8 81 dd 4 BH sas KEENE 99 annn 
ARAAR LLL Flat 1 IAS IE ww fr EXT FW Ad th BH sass KEE 99 nnn 
CINE JOURNAL Ru yy. 
SITEERLAND RRR - » : yyy 
Co RAR Em ee Ir ¥YY KE ‘ 
fume ARR : Ly G8 ee ‘ Ir VOY -) ex | na 
3 ISLES AAR AL ” Lh G8 ee hs IX (YEV 44 “» - EE #% AA 
WIN SIND PARES RR - it fr be by yy (BEI ARR» 
Seapiogh inti RAR iv meee bhi TT (PRY ERA 2 J AAR 
: AAR GOR wees bth TTT FRY ARAL AAR 
SANE 110 RRR | Me O08 wees bAEL TER FRY til Be ARAR 
IR AIGHTRY feat an RRR aL LURE ET hh TXT PYY ti BS AAA 
HH any EAA ARR 
" RE RR - AAA 
» LOTIONS 2’ wr we LL 
"ES AR 3 Ra] H 2 2 AAR 
RRR AL | J Na a sr | v LE Be - 4.4 AAR   
  
HOUGH its potentialities have been 
T only partly realized, the news 
film is a universal and powerful 
means of mass communication. Pic- 
tures can be understood by anyone, 
whether literate or illiterate, and make 
him an eye-witness, as it were, of the 
events they portray. In most countries, 
the weekly newsreel has become a 
feature of contemporary life, like the 
illustrated news magazine. 
A report just published by Unes- 
co (1) shows that each person in the 
world attends the cinema, on an ave- 
rage, five times a year and that most 
of the world’s 100,000 cinemas regularly 
include news films in programmes. 
These films are classified as regular 
newsreels, film magazines dealing 
with current events or special topics, 
and general information or publicity 
documentaries. 
Despite their world-wide range, 
newsreels have changed little in form 
during the past 30 years. In company 
with other films, however, they are now 
challenged by a powerful new medium 
television. In countries where 
television has been developed, televised 
news has scored outstanding success 
and promises to become the major 
means of visual communication. 
The story of the newsreel’s develop- 
ment, as told in the Unesco report, is 
fascinating. The world’s first films, 
dating from the early 1890's, were a 
(1)Newsreels Across the World (La 
Presse Filmée dans le Monde) : by 
Peter Baechlin, Swiss film expert, and 
Maurice Muller-Strauss, French film 
historian. Unesco Publication 878. $2.00; 
10/6 ; 500 Fr. fcs. The present edition, 
available at all Unesco sales agents, is 
in French. An English edition is being 
prepared. 


### 74619: The News reel camera: around the world in 15 minutes

                    
THE NEWS REEL CAMERA : 
        
AROUND THE WORLD 
IN 15 MINUTES 
form of newsreel and their producers 
developed the basic techniques of the 
modern film industry, such as the use 
of artificial light, camera tricks and 
techniques and the reconstruction of 
dramatic incidents. 
From Nickelodeons 
to Cinemas 
N those days the cameraman 
I enjoyed less freedom of access 
than he does today and newsreel 
makers often had recourse to 
“reconstructing” topical events, One 
of them, an American named Amet, 
staged a reproduction— in his bath— 
of the destruction of the Spanish fleet 
during the Spanish-American war of 
1898. The film had an international 
success. Amet later created a sensa- 
tion by reconstructing realistic battle 
scenes from the Boer War on waste 
ground in Brooklyn. 
The demand for newsfilms greatly 
increased when permanent cinemas re- 
placed nickelodeons and travelling 
shows around 1907. World War I 
gave the newsreel its great chance to 
assert itself and gain access to scenes 
of world events. 
New films are today produced by 
three groups -— private companies, 
joint undertakings with State partici- 
pation or subsidy, and State-owned 
units. Of the 47 countries covered by 
the report, 40 together have a total of 
160 producing units. Most of these, 
however, produce only “national” 
news films which circulate mainly in 
the country of origin. 
In newsreel production and distri 
bution, a comparatively small number 
of big film companies in the United 
by Philip SOLJAK 
States, United Kingdom, France and 
the Soviet Union have built up inter- 
national networks. These companies, 
whether private or State controlled, 
enjoy a predominance in film reporting, 
rather like that of the great news 
agencies. This primacy is often 
attained by the exchange of news to- 
pics and camera services, by the control 
of cinema circuits and by “block 
booking” of feature films with news- 
reels. A number of countries make 
national newsreels. But since a news- 
reel, to pay its way, must usually be 
shown in at least 1,000 cinemas, it is 
difficult for small countries to maint- 
ain their own newsfilm. 
Largely as a result of these economic 
factors, most newsreels tend more and 
more to follow a uniform standard 
pattern. Emphasis is mainly on the 
“entertainment value” of items select- 
ed, which normally consist of sport, 
general news, fashion and miscellan- 
eous material. The exchange of items 
among a few big producers — a useful 
technical expedient — moreover means 
that the same topics tend to be repeat- 
ed in newsreels shown over most of the 
world. 
The Great Challenge 
of Television 
N order to utilize fully this impor- 
| tant visual medium, wider inter- 
national exchanges of news items 
would be required, as well as the 
extension to more countries and pro- 
ducers of opportunities to obtain 
film material from any area. 
Today, as television spreads around 
the world, newsreels are having to 
adapt themselves to the challenge of 
a new medium which brings scenes 
from near and far directly into peo- 
ple’s homes. Recent developments 
in the United States and United King- 
dom suggest that fully - rounded 
“film digests”, of the documentary or 
film magazine type, will be increas- 
ingly seen both on television and 
cinema screens. 
Films are Part of our 
Daily Lives 
XCHANGES of televised news items 
between the United States, 
United Kingdom and France 
are already under way. Such 
exchanges, while helping peoples in 
different countries to know and un- 
derstand each other better, raise an 
important technical problem. The 
countries where television is most rapid- 
ly developing are those which pro- 
duce new films that are shown through- 
out the world. Any rivalry arising 
between television and newsreels in 
these few countries will, therefore, 
largely determine the character, qua- 
lity and presentation of visual news in 
other, smaller countries which do not 
themselves posses either of these two 
media. 
Films have become part of our daily 
lives. Newsreels can perform a va- 
luable service by highlighting import- 
ant events and trends and by showing 
the ordinary man how his counterpart 
in other lands is living and meeting 
common problems. The parallel deve- 
lopment of news films and television 
provides communication experts with a 
doubly powerful instrument which must 
be used with a full sense of social 
responsibility toward all men, regard- 
less of frontiers.

## [Page 15](074696engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 74619: The News reel camera: around the world in 15 minutes

Page 15 — UNESCO COURIER 
  
THE CAMERA RECORDS CATASTROPHE 
1 1900: Visit to the Paris Exhibition A helicopter crashes on a Welsh hillside (Pathe News) A ship torpedoed at sea during the last war (USIS) 
        
THE CAMERA PRESENTS PEOPLE IN THE NEWS 1901 een Victoria's | ) . CL . : 2 Qu loka’ s Tuners President Soekarno announces indonesia’s independence (UN) Arturo Toscanini poised fora concert opening (March of Time) 
THE CAMERA RECORDS POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION 1909: Furst pir crossing of English Channel by Louis 
3 Blarniot French speed work on Alpine hydro-electric plant (ECA) Refrigerators will condense steam to drive turbines (ECA) 
  
4 100; The Salt foods Pay alsala THE CAMERA RECORDS WORK OF U. N. 
aa A UNICEF provides milk for a little boy in Europe Another boy discards his old shoes for new ones 
* NOL EE pr - alc a 
] 
. —— J Ferd =o BY < 
THE NEWSREEL CAMERA RECORDS SPORTS : a split-second shot of an exciting mishap at a motor-race

## [Page 16](074696engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 16 
i . “ T #030 % Lo ’ 4 
“A 
” 
GP 
  
RRL. 
» 
o _ 
a. >» 
pa 
” - ™ 
pe 5 ) ~ 
Fy 
- 3 . # 
wo . 
) rr 
5 
Flor 
: 
'e 
) 
| 
| \ 
: 
: 
- - 3 
. 
oh } do 
. 
“ : : ’ . * 
: — 5 r 
* - 
| : » wy \ r - » Y 
NT “4 v Shah ] . ’ : 
eA J NY —- ! 4 ~ . 4 : Ee] A 
3 
» 
: » » . | - * cd 5 
4 2 : San) ; ea of \ Cams 
~~ é Pon ¥, - od of 4 : ) 
a) Das 4 iN vo. CONTE Soni LS ££ : A . FANE ' 
A close-up from the Belgian film RUBENS by Paul Haesaerts and Henri Storck, showing Rubens’ eye from his famous 
self-portrait at Windsor Castle. 
  
  
Most of these 
Art Films 
Are Unknown 
ALBRECHT DURER : Die g¢rosse 
Holzschnittpassion (AUSTRIA), 
Ditrer’s wood-carvings of the Pas- 
sion. 
RUBENS8 (BELGIUM), 
Work 
LES FAUX VERMEER (BELGIUM), 
close-ups of Han van Meegeren’s 
forgeries of Vermeers. 
TIRADENTES (BRAZIL), based on 
the fresco by Portinari depicting 
the Brazilian national hero Tira- 
dentes. 
LOON'S NECKLACE (CANADA), an 
indian legend portriyed with the 
help of original masks. 
ART OF CHINA (CHINA), ancient 
architeclure, paintings, sculptures, 
ceramics, embroidered silk. 
NEJSTARSI UMENI (CZECHOSLOVA- 
KIA), prehistoric art. 
CHRISTIAN IV - SOM BYGMESTER 
(DENMARK), story of the Danish 
King who wag called “the Master 
Constructor” for his influence on 
the Renaissance in his country. 
L'AFFAIRE MANET (FRANCE), da- 
guerrotypes, caricatures and news- 
paper cuttings recall the scandal 
in 1865 over Manet’s paintings. 
IMAGES DE LA FOLIE (FRANCE), 
paintings and drawings from the 
first world Exhibition of Psycho- 
pathological Art in Paris in 1950. 
LES CHARMES DE L'EXISTENCE 
(FRANCE), satirical review of art 
shows between 1880 and 1910. 
IMAGES MEDIEVALES (FRANCE), 
the Middle Ages depicted by 14th 
an 15th century miniatures. 
DIE GOTTESMUTTER (GERMANY), 
the Virgin in Rhineland art of the 
Middle Ages, 
EIN MARIENLEBEN (GERMANY), 
Marian scuiptures by Heinrich Dou- 
verminn, 16th century. 
LOOKING AT SCULPTURE (GREAT 
BRITAIN), a tour of the Victoria 
and Albert Museum in London. 
MONT ATHOS (GREECE). 
SAGA IN STONE (INDIA). 
II DRAMMA DE CRISTO (ITALY), the 
Giotto Trescoes at Padua. 
11 DEMONIACO NELL'ARTE (ITALY), 
the Temptation depicted by old 
masters. 
LEZIONE DI GEOMETRIA (ITALY), 
how abstract art develops from 
higher mithematics. 
his life and 
MOSAICI DI RAVENNA (ITALY), 
Byzantine mosaics of the Middle 
Ages. 
MEXICO PRECORTESIANO 
(MEXICO), architecture amd craflts- 
manship of ancient Mexico. 
BISKOPINE (POLAND), prehistoric 
art. 
VAR GAMLA STAD (SWEDEN), 
medieval history of Stockholm and 
its roval palace. 
MICHELANGELO : La Vie d'un Titan 
(A Swiss production, made in 
Rome and Florence). 
FERNAND LEGER IN AMERICA : His 
New Realism (U.S.A.), narration in 
French by the artist on his life and 
work during five years in the 
U.S.A. 
LASCAUX, CRADLE OF MAN'S ART 
(U.S.A), a study of the cave 
paintings at Lascaux, France. 
WORKS OF CALDER (U.S.A.T, a visit 
to the enchanting world of Alexan- 
der Cilder, famed for his “mobile” 
art. 
A.S. PUSHKIN (U.S.S.R,), inspirations 
and work of the poet. 
w
i
n
n
a
n
 
  
«
1
3
1
1
 
  
n
i
e
s
 


### 74620: What happens to art films?

  
  
WHAT HAPPENS TO ART FILMS ? 
HEN a producer makes a short-reel film devoted 
to a work of art or several works of art he 
may be congratulated for his achievement or 
he may receive a shower of brickbats. But whatever 
the reaction, it almost always comes from a small 
number of specialized film critics who, more often 
than not, are his own colleagues. The art film pro- 
ducer may even win some kind of award or other 
official forms of recognition to encourage him to 
continue his work. But what actually happens to the 
film? It is true that the film on art is a relative new- 
comer to the cinema. The first successful ventures 
of the Belgian Henri Storck date from 1936, while the 
Inspirational Themes of Dekeukeleire, the Michel- 
angelo of Curt Certel, and the Mystic Lamb of André 
Cauvin appeared only before the war. But the fact 
is that the number of real masterpieces produced thus 
far in this field is quite high. That many failures 
have also been turned out cannot, of course, be denied. 
The art film producers themselves have recognized 
this and are constantly on guard to avoid the pitfalls 
of stereotyped presentation or mere imitation. That 
is why they keep hunting for new techniques, new 
ideas and fresh approaches more keenly than the 
“commercial” cinema does. But what do they gain 
in the end ? Once again, what happens to their 
films? Unesco has drawn up a list of 476 titles — of 
 Na 
Maillol at work. 
 
A scene from the French film MAILLOL by Jean Lods. 
quite unequal worth it must be admitted — produced 
in 21 different countries (1). But ask the cinema- 
going public about them, those people who go to the 
“pictures” with almost clock-like regularity. How 
many have seen any of these films? How many have 
even heard of them let alone been able to enjoy them? 
(On this page we give a list of some of the better art 
films. But how many of them have our readers heard 
of — or seen?) In first-run and local cinemas the 
documentary stands a chance of being shown both 
in the big cities and in provincial towns ; so does the 
short scientific film. But films on art are apparently 
considered taboo because it has been “decided” that 
the general public is not interested in art. The rare 
occasions when the art film has been shown to the 
general public has proved that this is simply not true. 
In spite of this, Storck, Emmer, Haesaerts ans Resnais 
remain relegated to the “cinema clubs” and “art-film 
houses”. Yet their films could, if given a chance, open 
a small window into the magic world of the painter, 
the sculptor and the architect for those who know 
even nothing of the arts. It would be a revolution. 
But it is perhaps too much to expect. 
Georges FRADIER. 
(1) Published in 1950 and 1951 as an appendix to the two 
volumes on « Films on Art » (4/-: $0.65 or 200 fr. frs.. 
p~ ——— Eas. |