# [073790](073790engo.pdf) 12

## [Page 1](073790engo.pdf#page=1) 4

### IGNORE

  
  
 
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
TEA  
Volume I.—No. 6. Price: 10 Cents (U.S.), 6 Pence (U.K.), or 20 Francs. JULY 1948 
International Theatre Institute 
   
  
    
   
  
  


### 73791: Educators study school reforms

‘Educators Study 
‘School Reforms 
The Eleventh International Con- 
ference on Public Education, 
bringing together prominent edu- 
~cators from forty-six nations, was 
“held at the Palais Wilson in 
Geneva, June 28-July 3, and was 
sponsored jointly by Unesco and 
“the International Bureau of Edu- 
‘cation. 
Nearly one hundred delegates 
were present at the meetings to 
hear detailed reports on education- 
al developments throughout the 
“world during 1947-48. The role of 
school psychologists, the teaching 
_of writing and teaching regarding 
the United Nations and its Spe- 
cialized Agencies were also studied. 
The Chairman of the Confer- 
“ence was ‘M. Marcel Abraham, 
French Inspector-General, who is 
in charge of the Service for Cul- 
“tural and University Relations 
with foreign countries, was also 
head of his country’s four-man 
‘delegation. The three Vice-Chair- 
men were M. Georges Alexits, 
Secretary of State for Public Edu- 
cation in Hungary, Mr. Galen 
Jones, Director of the Secondary 
(Continued on Page 6.) 
LAR 
ds 2 J : 
  
LEFT: Famed “Artists House”, 
Prague, site of 1. T.I. Congress, 
BELOW: From left to right, 
Prof. Jean Thomas, M.B, 
Jedlicka, Dr. J. Huxley and 
»x JB. Priestley (speaking).     
 
 


### 74503: Museum directors gather at first World Conference

  
Museum Directors Gather 
At First World Conference 
Museum directors from nearly 
thirty nations met in Paris for 
the First International Confe- 
rence on Museums, held from 
June 28 through July 3. More 
than a hundred delegates from 
all parts of the world attended 
the six-day meetings. 


### 73073: Child experts meet at Pestalozzi village

CHILD EXPERTS MEET 
AT PESTALOZZ1 VILLAGE 
Problems of war-handicapped 
children were under study early 
.this month at a Conference of 
- educators and psychologists from 
- nine nations in Trogen, Switzer- 
land. The week-long meeting, 
- first of its kind since the war, 
* was sponsored by Unesco and was 
attended’ by some twenty dele- 
. gates. 
The members, including direc- 
tors of children’s villages, exchang- 
"el views and experiences on the 
best methods of re-integrating 
“child victims of the war into 
, normal life. - 
~~ Each delegate presented a re- 
port of his experiences in this 
field, and the combined reports 
will form the basis’ of a study 
of war-handicapped youth to be 
prepared by Unesco. 
The conference held general 
sessions and meetings under two 
commissions. The first studied 
the material organization of chil- 
dren’s villages, problems of staf- 
fing, financing and public rela- 
tions. It drew up plans for an 
international co-ordinating com- 
mittee which will assist in rais- 
ing funds, organizing joint pur- 
chases, and arranging exchanges 
of staff and children, and the 
“internationalising” of the vi- 
llages. 
The second commission inves- 
tigated the content and methods 
of education provided in the villa- 
ges and means of re-integrating 
children into normal life. These 
entailed studies of social and na- 
tional problems, provision of fos- 
ter families, the value of psycho- 
logical and psychotherapeutic 
treatment and the selection of 
children. 
The Conference was held at 
the site of the International Pes- 
talozzi Village for war orphans 
(see Vol. 1, No. 4 of the Courier 
for a more complete story on the 
village). The Pestalozzi Village, 
founded in 1946 to care for child 
victims of the war, has been one 
of the most successful such exper- 
iments.   
Under the Presidency of Chaun- 
cey J. Hamlin, President of the 
International Council of Mu- 
seums, the Conference studied 
problems of scientific research, | 
the training of museum persch- 
nel, restoration of paintings and 
other works of art, museums for 
popular education, and techni- 
ques and materials for museum 
exhibitions. 
This was the first conference 
since the war in most fields of 
museum activity, and the first 
international museum conference 
—including all fields of museum 
work—ever held. Results of the 
Conference are expected to have 
wide influence, especially in de- 
veloping the educational value of 
museums and in advancing tech- 
niques in teaching with objects. 
The Conference opened" 
Unesco House, and then separated 
into five working sections which 
met at the Ecole du Louvre, the 
Musée de I'Homme, the Musée 
Pédagogique, Bibliothéque Natio- 
nale and Palais de la Décou- 
verte during subsequent sessions. 
Among the principal addresses 
were “A Philosophy of Museum 
Education,” by Dr. Charles Rus- 
sell (USA), “Children’s Museums” 
by Miss Margaret Brayton (USA) 
and “Mobile Museums” by Mr. 
M.L. Ashton (United Kingdom). 
The delegates also heard reports 
by M. Edouard Michel (France) 
who spoke of “Museums and 
Scientific Research” in the field 
of art, and by M. A. Leroi-Gou- 
(Continued on Page 3.) 
“Formed in Prague 
  
‘PARIS NAMED AS 
FIRST HEADQUARTERS 
WwW 
ORLD-RENOWNED theatre personalities from twenty countries 
atlended the First Congress of the International Theatre Insti- 
tute at the Artists House in Prague, June 28-July 3, and to- 
gether fashioned a concrete programme to direct their art towards 
the cause of a stronger and richer peace. 
cessful culmination of over two 
year’s preparations for streng- 
thening the bonds between thea- 
tre people in all parts of the 
world. 
More than a hundred delega- 
tes, observers and spectators ai- 
tended the opening session of the 
Congress. Mr, Jindrich Honzl, Di- 
rector of the National Theatre 
in Prague, delivered the inaugu- 
ral address and was followed 
“by Dr. Julian Huxley, Director- 
General of Unesco, J.B. Priestley, 
noted British playwright and 
Chairman of the Provisional 
Executive Committee of the Insti- 
tute, concluded the ceremony by 
thanking Unesco for its help in 
making possible the Congress 
and “the Czechoslovak Govern- 


### 73075: U.S. educational aid exceeds eighty million dollars

  
U.S. Educational 
Aid Exceeds 
Eighty Million Dollars 
United States voluntary agen- 
cies will spend over eighty mil- 
lion dollars on help for educa- 
tional institutions in 21 war-de- 
vastated countries during 1948. 
according to a report from the 
Commission for International 
Educational Reconstruction in 
Washington. : 
During 1947, the report added, 
similar U.S. aid topped eighty- 
eight million dollars compared 
with approximately sixty-two mil- 
lion raised in 1946. 
Help to Schools 
The CIER.s report to Unesco 
was drawn from statements from 
some 400 national voluntary agen- 
cies. A further 115 agencies which 
reported the year before were so 
far unable to total their funds 
raised. “It may therefore be as- 
sumed,” the Commission reported, 
“that American voluntary efforts 
this year are at least keeping 
pace with and are probably sur- 
passing those of 1947.” 
Almost the whole of the total 
has been or will be spent on edu- 
cational materials and services. 
Food, clothing and other basie re- 
lief accounted for less than five 
million of the 1947 figure and were 
supplied solely to schools and 
teacher groups. 
Countries receiving the aid in- 
cluded Austria, Belgium, Bulga- 
ria, China, Czechoslovakia, Den- 
mark, Finland, France, Germany. 
Greece, Holland, Hungary, Indo- 
nesia, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxem- 
bourg, Norway, Philippines, Po- 
land and Yugoslavia. 
Many contributions were made 
by American individuals and in- 
stitutions without using the ser- 
vices of the national agencies re- 
porting to the Commission. These 
contributions have totalled about 
eight million in value annually 
since 1946.   
The meeting was the suc- 
ment for the facilities which had 
been put at the delegates’ disposal 
Huxley Stresses Institute’s 
Independence 
Before an audience which in- 
cluded the Czech Minister of 
Foreigh Affairs, Mr. Vado Cle- 
mentis, and Mr. Zdenek Nejedly, 
Czech Minister of Education, 
Dr. Huxley stressed that although 
Unesco had worked to help creata 
the new organization, the Insti- 
tute would be an indepenhent 
organization. 
He declared that the LT.I. and 
Unesco would probably draw up 
a formal agreement for close 
cooperation and—with the appro- 
val of the Third Session of Unes- 
co's General Conference—Unesco 
might lend financial assistance 
to the Institute during its first 
crucial year. But he pointed out 
that the Institute woula be an 
“independant, autonomous inter- 
national body”. 
Seated on the flower-bedecked 
stage of the Grand Auditorium of 
the Artists House were Professor 
Jean Thomas, Assistant Director 
General of Unesco, Benjamin 
Jedlicka of the Czech Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, Dr. Huxley 
and Mr. Maurice Kurtz, Head of 
Theatre Affairs at Unesco who 
handled much of the preparatory, 
work for the Institute. 
A Force for Peace 
Mr. Priestley in his speech 
pointed out that there existed a 
United Nations fund for children 
and that he hoped the United Na~ 
tions and Unesco would ensure 
that the I.T.I.,, a very new infant, 
would also not starve. 
Any international organization 
crossing frontiers was at least 
one thread in the fabric of a 
world society. The attempt to link 
theatres together and to ensure 
that people enjoyed the best of 
the world's drama showed a mo- 
vement towards international un- 
derstanding. 
The particular nature of the 
Theatre, Mr. Priestley continued, 
compelled those concerned with it 
to deal with human beings con- 
cretely and intimately. From the 
theatre, people could learn how 
(Continued on Page 6.) 
MX Reconstruction Prob- 
lems of S.E. Asia. 
Page 2. 
X Important Statement 
on World ‘Tensions’. 
Page 3. 
X Hylean Amazon Insti- 
tute. Center Page. 
X Middle East Cultural 
Influences. Page 7. 
X UN. Radio Calling 
Peoples of World. P. 8.     

## [Page 2](073790engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

2 oo UNESCO COURIER Volume I.—No. 6 


### 73793: Technical needs workers report on findings

Technical Needs Workers 
Report on Findings 
[Editor's note: Unesco field workers have been visiting seventeen 
countries throughout the world during the past months to obtain 
first-hand, detailed information of the position of press, radio and 
film for the Technical Needs Commission. Philippe Soupault, promi 
nent French author who has also edited a daily newspaper and Tun 
a radio station, tells in the following notes something of his impres- 
sions after surveying five Caribbean countries for Unesco.} 
cog VLAD to meet you!” : 
I think that describes th 
reception I got in the various 
Central American countries I 
visited on mission as a Unesco 
investigator. Now that the initials 
UNESCO have become a known 
By 
Philippe SOUPAULT 
Unesco Field Worker | 
 
  
  
name, they have acquired a kind 
of magic power. 
I spoke the word as an “open 
Sesame” before the many doors 
on which I knocked—and the 
doors were opened. 
Carrying a thick questionnaire, 
I called on ministries, on trade 
unions and statistical bureaux. In 
asking them my hundreds of 
questions, I had to overcome a 
certain amount of uneasiness on 
their part as they realized they 
were being requested an amount 
of research and compilation of in- 
formation which was often con- 
siderable. 
I had sometimes to argue and 
to stress the importance to Unes- 
c0’s Mass Communications pro- 
gramme of knowing the number 
of newspapers in existence, the 
size of their editions, the range 
of broadcasting transmitters or 
the status of the educational film. 
But all the people I consulted 
were extremely interested in the 
results I had obtained. My com- 
monest reward was to hear, 
mixed with advice and explana- 
tions, this kind of remark: 
“You know, this information is 
really useful, If brings out all 
sorts of points which have never 
before been cleared up.” 
To my mind, the value of the 
investigation I undertook in the 
countries of Central America lies 
not only in the results obtained, 
nor in the quality of the answers 
to questionnaires and in the vari- 
ous complementary notes aceom- 
panying them. 
It is to be found also, I think, 
in the person of the investigator, 
which proves to governments, ins- 
titutions of all kinds and to in- 
individuals that, despite the 
thousands of miles which lie be- 
tween them and the Avenue Kilé- 
ber in Paris, Unesco takes an in- 
terest in them, in their work, in 
their needs, and in what they 
have achieved. 
The impression I got was that 
the people I questioned were 
glad to see that the nations form- 
ing Unesco were concerned with 
the special problems of countries, 
in some cases far away in space 
and time alike, from the main 
international current. 
I should like to thank all the 
friends I met as an investigator, 
who answered my questions with 
such care and interest as only the 
published report will fully de- 
monstrate. 
  
  
  
India... Pakistan... 
Alexander Shaw, former film 
adviser to the government of In- 
dia and producer of several Bri- 
tish documentaries, surveyed 
Technical Needs in Pakistan and’ 
India for Unesco. The following 
are some of his impressions of 
conditions in those countries: 
There seems to be an enormous 
potential for films in both cities 
and rural areas in Pakistan. 
Many films showr. are of an 
informational and feature na- 
ture. The dances and songs of 
India, with all their colour, figure 
prominently in most films. The 
Government made a formal re- 
quest that a Unesco-trained do- 
cumentary expert be sent to Pa- 
kistan to train a documentary 
unit there, for only now is the 
first newsreel company being 
formed. 
India, on the other hand, is the 
second film-producing country in 
the world. The three: cenires of 
the industry are in Bombay, Ma- 
dras and Calcutta where no fewer 
than some 400 companies are 
located. 
Indian film production is in 
the neighbourhood of 250 feature- 
films yearly, and their average 
length is nearly twice that of 
Hollywood films. Although tech- 
nical and photographic standards 
are nearly as high as anywhere 
in the world, there is little effort 
to produce complicated plots—due 
probably to the fact that 86 % 
of the population (340 million) is 
illiterate. 
Some two thousand cinemas 
serve the population, showing 
only an oceasional foreign film, 
and these few are usually Bri- 
ish or American. 
Italy... Hungary... 
Pierre Artigue, Belgian foreign 
correspondent and radio com- 
mentator, carried oul the surveys 
‘in Italy and Hungary this year 
for Unesco. Here in brief are 
some of his observations made 
after his return to Paris. 
An outstanding impression Is 
‘that both Italy and Hungary are 
making a great effort to revive 
and expand their mass communi- 
cation systems. 
Italy is seriously hampered by 
a shortage of trained personnel 
and printing equipment, although 
radio networks have attained 
their pre-war level. 
In Hungary nearly nine-tenths 
of all broadcasting equipment was 
destroyed during the war. Yet 
because of the lack of schools, 
lessons are broadcast by radio 
throughout large parts of the 
country. 
Hungary has produced the 
world’s lightest typewriter (barely 
six pounds) made of aluminium. 
The machine is inexpensive and, 
tooling now completed, it will be 
placed on sale this fall, 
  
Unesco House serves as a clearing house for much reconstruction ma- 
terials. Above shows the departure of a shipment of books for war- 
emptied libraries, 
HUXLEY 
VISITS 
CENTRAL 
EUROPE 
Dr. Julian Huxley, Director-Ge- 
neral, undertook during June a 
three-week official tour of five 
central and eastern European 
countries to meet with govern- 
ment leaders and to develop clo- 
ser co-operation between Unesco 
and the countries. The visit in- 
cluded Yugoslavia, Hungary, Aus- 
tria, Poland and Czechoslovakia. 
The Director-General was able 
to acquaint himself with the me- 
thods of teaching and research 
favoured in those countries and to 
note the work being done to safe- 
guard the heritage of folk art and 
folklore and to preserve nature. 
In those countries already having 
National Commissions, these were 
invited to special meetings where 
Dr, Huxley was able to ease their 
work in the early stages by spea- 
king to them in detail of the 
tasks to be accomplished and of 
the best methods to be used in 
the light of experience elsewhere. 
On other occasions, contact was 
made with most eminent repre- 
sentatives of the intellectual 
world who will furnish the nucleus 
of future National Commissions 
Dr. Huxley took the opportunity 
also to recruit willing aid and 
expert ability in mmking effective 
the Unesco programme, and to 
encourage certain countries to 
ratify their membership in Unes- 
co in final form. 
Wherever he went, the Direc- 
tor-General was received with the 
utmost warmth and was able to 
measure the goodwill and en- 
thusiasm with whicn Unesco’s 
work is welcomed.   


### 73795: Reconstruction problem in Southeast Asia

Reconstruction Problems 
in Southeast Asia 
By Mary TREVELYAN 
EN Occidentals talk of the 
war-devastated countries, most 
of them think automatically of 
Europe, some extend their 
thinking to China, but few im- 
mediately think in terms which 
include South East Asia. The 
problems of Europe are so great 
and so urgent and are so con- 
stantly in our minds that it is 
difficult to remember the equally 
great problems of countries so 
remote from us geographically. 
But Unesco, an international 
organization, is interested in all 
war-devastated countries, whether 
in the West or the East and, as 
soon as it was feasible, a survey 
visit was arranged to five war- 
devastated countries in the Far 
East. 
The {five countries surveyed 
were Burma, Malaya, Sarawak, 
North Borneo and the Philip- 
pines. The tour took exactly six 
months, from November 6th 1947 
to May 6th 1948. More than 
30,000 miles were covered, a great 
many by air, approximately 
5,000 by road and 500 by river. 
All the countries visited, with 
the exception of Malaya, have 
sustained a very great deal of 
material damage to school build-~ 
ings, Malaya has been fortunate 
in that respect, but has had a 
full share of damage due to de- 
terioration during the war. Many 
ancient and historic cities in 
Burma have been razed to the 
ground. All the small villages up 
and down the coast of Sarawak 
were totally wrecked by bombing. 
Sandakan, the old capital of 
North Borneo, was 100% destroy- 
  
 
 
This destroyed university is an example of the heavy 
destruction suffered in the Philippine Islands during 
the war, 
  
Canadian Campaign 
For School Help 
A campaign by the Cana- 
dian Council for Reconstruction 
through Unesco and the Cana- 
dian Appeal for Children has 
raised a million dollars which 
will be spent to help restore edu- 
cational facilities and standards 
in countries which suffered most 
heavily during the war. 
Allocations of the fund, which 
was collected by some seventy 
voluntary agencies in a nation- 
wide campaign, include: 
to elementary and secondary 
school supplies—$300,000; 
fellowships for key personnel 
to follow 6-month study courses 
in Canada—$182,000; 
- to university supplies, including 
books ang scientific equipment— 
$150,000; 
for book projects, including a 
book exchange scheme to collect 
and send overseas half a million 
volumes—$66.750; 
to art supplies, food and cloth- 
ing for needy artists—$46,250; 
to assist Unesco’s educational 
reconstruction programme in Eus 
rope and Asia—$25,000. 
Microfilm Readers 
To Twelve Countries 
Libraries and universities in 
twelve war-wrecked countries have 
been allocated thirty microfilm 
readers by Unesco to assist the   
rehabilitation of their services. An 
additional eighteen readers have 
been ordered and will be allocat- 
ed to other libraries shortly. 
Countries in which the recelv- 
ing libraries are located include 
Austria, Belgium, China, Czecho- 
slovakia, France, Greece, Hun- 
gary, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, 
Philippines and Poland. The in- 
struments, useful to libraries in 
areas where books are in short 
supply, were bought by Unesco in 
Paris as part of its reconstruction 
programme. 
Scouts Join TICER 
The Boy Scouts International 
Bureau has joined the Temporary 
International Council for Educa- 
tional Reconstruction (TICER) 
and, through the efforts of its 
nearly five million members, will 
greatly strengthen the Councils 
work in war-devastated regions. 
The TICER, an association of 
26 international voluntary agen- 
cies engaged in educational re- 
construction, works in co-opera- 
tion with Unesco and has head- 
quarters at Unesco House in Paris. 
Council members represent over 
700 national organizations in 
more than 60 countries. . 
Since early 1944, the Boy Scout 
movement has conducted relief 
work in seven devastated Euro- 
pean countries, including organiz- 
ation of child refugee centres and 
aiding youth education program- 
mes in displaced persons’ camps.   
ed, while Jesselton, the new 
capital and the only other town 
in North Borneo, lost 90% of its 
buildings. Manila, once a fine. 
modern city, now lies in ruins; 
huge girders hang from stone 
buildings, streets are still scarred 
with battle, the fine University 
of the Philippines and many 
other colleges in the city may 
never be rebuilt on their old 
sites. : 
The toll of the destruction of 
school buildings in South East 
Asia is enormous, The almost 
total loss of school equipment 
and school supplies is common to 
every country, with no exception. 
The loss of books alone is a 
catastrophic blow to education. 
In fact the story of educational 
losses in South East Asia is the 
story of Europe all over again. 
Such science teaching as there 
was, and the teaching of science 
is not yet far advanced in these 
countries, is now almost at a 
standstill for want of any equip- 
ment. 
But although the comparison 
of losses produces very similar 
pictures in the East and the 
West, there are some assets in 
eastern countries which help 
them greatly in rebuilding edu- 
cation. All these countries have 
a warm climate and perhaps the 
people concerned in reconstruc- 
tion hardly realize how great is 
their good fortune. War strain, 
however severe, is easier to re- 
cover from in a warm and 
relaxing climate, and this is par- 
ticularly so with children. Child- 
ren’s clothing is not a problem. 
European mothers search des- 
perately for clothing to keep 
their children and themselves 
warm during the winter weather. 
Schools often have to close for 
several months because the child- 
ren have not sufficient clothing 
and the schools have no healing. 
In the Far East there are no 
such problems and the children 
wear, if anything, the minimum 
of clothing. : 
In all the countries visited 
there has always been, through- 
out the war, some kind of food 
for the children; not always 
enough and not always the right 
kind of focd, but they have 
never known real starvation. 
Largely due to these two bles 
sings, a warm climate and food, 
there is no real problem of “war- 
handicapped children” as if is 
called in Europe. When the great 
cities were bombed, mothers were. 
able to run with their children 
into the jungle or surrounding 
country-side and live there, 
primitively, but indefinitely. And 
the fact that they never endured 
hunger over a long period is 
shown by the comparatively, 
good health of the children. 
Many of them have skin diseases 
due to malnutrition, but very few 
have been crippled by bombing 
or have rickets and other diseases 
through starvation. 
And thirdly, all these countries 
have wood, an invaluable gift. 
In Burma, for instance, almost 
all the temporary schools are 
built of bamboo. Even the fur- 
niture in some of the very poor 
schools is made of bamboo. 
Everywhere there are temporary 
school buildings, “mat sheds” a9 
they are called. ‘They will not 
last long, not more than three to 
tive years and they cost five 
times more to erect than they 
would have before the war. But 
at least they provide temporary 
shelter from the sun and most 
of them even keep out the 
tropical rains. 
The greatest problem of re- 
construction of all five countries 
is the problem of teachers. In 
each country the position was 
found to be serious, in some the 
solution is hard to see. 
In every country visited Unesco 
received the warmest welcome. 
South East Asia has suffered 
greatly in the war but is making 
gallant efforts towards recons- 
truction with, so far, little help 
from outside. They greatly need 
practical help and encouragement 
and deserve every appreciation of 
what they have already accom- 
plished, ol

## [Page 3](073790engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

Yolume 1.—No. 6 UNESCO COURIER 


### 73796: Social scientists issue joint statement on world tensions

Social Scientists Issue Joint 
‘Statement on World Tensions 
  
Affairs.   
AN has now reached a 
stage in his history where 
he can study scientifically 
the causes of tensions that make 
for war. The meeting or this 
little group is itself symptomatic, 
representing as it does the first 
time the people of many lands, 
through an international organi- 
zation of their own creation, 
have asked social scientists to 
apply their knowledge to some of 
the major problems of our time. 
Although we differ in the em- 
phases we would give to various 
parts of our statement and in our 
views as to its comprehensiveness 
and implementation, no vine of 
us would deny the importance of 
any part of it. 
We agree to the following 
twelve paragraphs : 
War not Necessary 
(A) To the best of our know- 
ledge, there is no evidence to in- 
dicate that wars are necessary 
and inevitable consequences of 
“human nature” as such, While 
men vary greatly in their capa- 
cities and temperaments, we 
believe there are vital needs 
common to all men which must 
be fulfilled in order to establish 
and maintain peace: men every- 
where want to be free from 
hunger and disease, from inse- 
curity and fear; men everywhere 
- want fellowship and the respect 
of their fellowmen; the cnance 
for personal growth and deve- 
lopment. 
(B) The problem of peace Is 
the problem of keeping group 
and national tensions and aggres- 
sions within manageable propor- 
tions and of directing them to 
ends that are at the same time 
personally and socially construc- 
tive, so that man will no longer 
seek to exploit man, This goal 
cannot be achieved by surface 
reforms or isolated efforts, Fun- 
damental changes in social 
organization and in our ways of 
thinking are essential. 
Insecurity Fosters Conflict 
(C) If we are to avoid the kind 
of aggression that leads to armed 
conflict, we must among other 
things, so plan and arrange the 
use of modern productive power 
and resources that there will be 
maximum social justice. Econo- 
mic inequalities, insecurities and 
frustrations create group and na- 
tional conflicts. All this is an 
important source of tensions 
which have often wrongly led 
one group to see another group 
as a menace through the accep- 
tance of false images and over- 
simplified solutions and by mak- 
ing people susceptible to the 
scapegoating appeals of dema- 
gogues. 
(D) Modern wars between na- 
tions and groups of nations are 
fostered by many of the myths, 
traditions and symbols of nation- 
al pride handed down from one 
generation to another. A great 
many current social symbols are 
still nationalistic, hindering the 
free movement of thought across 
political boundaries of what is, 
in fact. an interdependent world. 
(E) Parents and teachers find 
it difficult to recognize the extent 
to which their own attitudes 
and logalties—often acquired 
when they were young and when 
conditions were different—are no 
longer adequate to serve as effect- 
ive guides to action in a chang- 
At the end of June, Unesco brought to Paris eight eminent 
social scientists to consider the causes of nationalistic aggression 
and the conditions necessary for international 
The following statement, signed by each of them, presents the 
: - opinions on which all could agree. Its significance lies in the 
fact that a series of imporiant propositions on the causes of 
international tensions have been formulated and agreed to by 
social scientists widely differing in their ideological allegiances. 
The following men signed the statement: 
Gardon W. Allport, Professor of Psychology, Harvard University; 
Guuerto Freyre, Honorary Professor of Sociology, University of 
Bahia, Brazil, Professor at the Institute of Sociology, University 
of Buenos Aires, Argentina; Georges Gurvilch, Professor of So 
ciology, University of Strasbourg, France, Administrator of the 
Sociolcgical Study Centre, Paris; Max Horkheimer, Director of 
the Institute of Social Research, New York City; Arne Naess, 
Professor of Philosophy, University of Oslo, Norway; John Rick- 
man, M.D, Editor, “British Journal of Medical Psychology”; 
Harry Stack Sullivan, M.D. Chairman, Council of Fellows, 
Washington School of Psychiatry, USA, Edilor, “Psychiatry: 
Journal for the Operational Statement of Inlerpersonal Rela- 1 
tions”; Alexander Szalai, Professor of Sociology, Universily of 
Budanest, Hungary, President, Hungarian Insutuie of Foreign 
‘differences, 
understanding. 
   
ing world. Education in all its 
forms must oppose national self- 
righteousness and strive to bring 
about a critical and self-disci- 
plined assessment of our own and 
other forms of social life. 
Mass Media Strong Ally 
(F) The development of mo- 
dern means of swift and wide 
range communication is poten- 
tially a great aid to world soli- 
darity. Yet this development also 
increases the danger that distor- 
tions of fruth will reach a great 
many people who are not in a 
position to discriminate true from 
false, or to perceive that they are 
being beguiled and misled. It 
must be a special responsibility 
of U.N. organizations to uti- 
lize these means of mass com- 
munication to encourage an 
adequate understanding of the 
people in other countries, This 
must always be a two-way traf- 
fic. It will aid the cause of peace 
if wations are enabled to see 
themselves as others see them. 
(G) The prospect of a contin- 
uing inferior status is essen- 
tially unacceptable to any group 
of people. For this and other 
reasons, neither colonial exploi- 
tation nor oppression of minori- 
ties within a nation is in the long 
run compatible with world peace. 
As social scientists we know of 
no evidence that any ethnic 
group is inherently inferior. 
(H) Many social scientists are 
studying these problems, But so- 
cial scientists are still separated 
by national, ideological and class 
These differences 
have made it difficult for social 
scientists to resist effectively the 
emergence of pseudo-scientific 
theories which have been exploit- 
ed by political leaders for their 
own ends. 
(I) Objectivity in the social 
sciences is impossible to achieve 
whenever economic or political 
forces induce the investigator to 
accept narrow, partisan views. 
There is urgent need for a con- 
centrated adequately, financed 
international research and eau- 
cational programme, 
Research Necessary 
(J) We recommend, for exam- 
ple, the co-operation of social 
scientists on broad regional and 
international levels, the creation 
of an international university 
and a series of world institutes 
of the social sciences under inter- 
national auspices. We believe 
that international scientific fact- 
finding studies could contribute 
useful information concerning the 
cultures of all nations and bring 
to light dangerous insecurities 
and sources of tension, as well as 
legitimate aspirations of people 
all over the world. Equally cer- 
tain to be rewarding are studies 
of educational methods in the 
home, the school, and in youth 
organizations and other groups 
by which the minds of the young 
are oriented toward war or 
toward peace. From the dissemin- 
ation of the information result- 
ing from these studies, we may 
anticipate the emergence of con- 
crete proposals for the guidance 
of national programmes of edu- 
cation, 
(K) The physical and biologi- 
cal sciences in recent years have 
provided impressive demonstra- 
tions of the effect of research. 
Some of the practical results   
have been rather to dismay anu 
disquiet the civilized world than 
to reduce its tensions, The scien- 
tists whose research has been 
used in the development of atom- 
ic and biological warfare are 
not themselves responsible for 
launching a curse upon the 
world. The situation reflects the 
forces now determining the uses 
to which science can be put. 
While other factors are concern- 
ed, we hold that the chances for 
a constructive use of the poten- 
tialities of scientific and techno- 
logical developments will improve 
if and when man takes the 
responsibility for understanding 
the forces which work upon him 
and society both from within and 
from without, 
Real Hope Remains 
(L) In this task of acquiring 
self-knowledge and social insight, 
the social sciences—the sclences 
of Man—have a vital part to 
play. One hopeful sign to-day is 
the degree to which the bounda- 
ries between these sciences are 
breaking down in the face of the 
common challenge confronting 
them, The social scientist can 
help make clear to people of all 
nations that the freedom ° and 
welfare of one are ultimately 
bound up with the freedom and 
welfare of all, that the world 
need not continue to be a place 
where men must either kill ori 
be killed. Effort in behalf of 
one's own group can become 
compatible with effort in behalf 
of humanity, cy 
  
  
  
Model of a mobile museum 
brought to Paris from the U.S.A. 
for the recent Museums Congress. 
Museums 
{Continued from Page 1.) 
rhan (France) who spoke on the 
same subject in the field of ar- 
cheology. 
M. F. Gysin (Switzerland) 
spoke of the training of scien- 
tific and technical personnel of 
Museums and M. T. Rcusseau 
(USA) reported on developments 
in the field of the restoration of 
art works. Other reports cover- 
ed such subjects as ‘“Open-Air 
Museums” (M. Kjellberg, Nor- 
way), “Mustums and Hisworic 
Monuments” (Professor Maiuri, 
Italy and Dr. Lorentz, Poland) 
and the “Creation of a Museo- 
graphic Documentation Centre” 
(M. J. Cain, France), 
Dr. Grace McCann Morley, 
head of the Museum Section of 
Unesco and formerly Director of 
the San Francisco (USA) Mu- 
seum of Art, represented Unesco 
al, the Conference and reported 
on the work of the organization 
in this field. 
The International Council of 
Museums, which sponsored the 
Conference, was formed in Paris 
in November, 1946. It held an 
interim conference in Mexico, 
November, 1947, concurrently 
with the Second Session of the 
Unesco General Conference. 
ICOM. works closely with 
Unesco in the field of museogra- 
phy and serves as a permanent 
body of experts for the UN 
Specialized Agency. Its purpose is 
to further international! co-opera- 
tion among museums and to be 
the co-ordinating their work. 
With Unesco, I.C.O.M. believes 
that museums can have great 
value in furthering understand- 
ing among peoples and can have 
strong thfluence in the educa- 
tional training of both youth and 
adults. 
  
John Rickman, distinguished 
British psychiatrist, was one of 
eight experts who met early 
this month at Unesco House lo 
arrive at a common statement 
3f the basic causes for interna- 
tional tensions. In this article 
Dr. Rickman tells something of 
the meeting and of the state- 
ment prepared by the experts.     
On Tensions Meet: 
JMAGINE eight experts, most of them professors, 


### 73797: A Report on Tensions Meeting, as a psychiatrist saw it

AS A PSYCHIATRIST 
SAW IT 
A Report 
ng 
from different 
    
countries and belonging to different branches of learning, several 
of whom had not met before, though some knew each other well: 
Would you not think that everything was set for a slow-moving and 
“sticky” conference? The organizers of it started with an experiment 
—as soon as we sat down at our table each was asked to give an 
account of himself (not what was on the Academic Records, but what 
we had done with life). = 
Four of the eight of us had 
been in prison, two had to leave 
their country, and two had been 
tortured by the Nazis. This show- 
ed a bit of what life had done 
to us: and these incidents helped 
to make this matter of tensions 
a real one to us. Incidently we 
felt after only an hour or so 
that we knew a great deal about 
each other and that there was 
much that it was worth tolerat- 
ing each other for. 
Some spoke quietly as if in a 
drawing room, one of us as if on 
a public plat- 
ways of thinking and in social 
organization are essential. 
We must also so plan and ar- 
range the use of modern pro- 
ductive power and resources that 
there will be maximum social 
justice. 
Modern wars between nations 
and groups of nations are foster- 
ed by many of the myths, tradi- 
tions and symbols of national 
pride handed down from one 
generation to another. 
Parents and teachers find it. 
difficult to re- 
form—he leaned 
over the table, 
his arms swing- 
ing in trugeon 
strokes as he 
By » 
John RICKMAN, M. D. 
Editor, “British Journal of 
Medical Psychology” 
cognize the ex- 
tent to which 
their own atti- 
tudes and Iloyal- 
ties — often ac-   
propelled upon 
us his appeals that we think 
of ourselves as Workers—yes, but 
we liked him, shouting or silent, 
he was so friendly and sincere. 
We were a mixed lot but we 
each fell the others to be of 
worth as individuals, and I think 
this helped us to see more deeply 
‘into each other’s way of looking 
at things. 
We then each made a state- 
ment about our views and plans 
for research, and questioned each 
other about them. Then we 
parted for a long week-end to 
write our 5,000 word statements 
which are to come out as a book. 
Now few things are so dull as 8 
statements by experts. The reader 
is dragged over the ground 8 
separate times, it’s nearly always 
dreadful. We are trying to give 
that book some of the lively 
cross currents that occurred in 
our discussions; this is the se- 
cond technical innovation of our 
conference. Any contribulor can 
put in notes as often as he likes’ 
and say what he likes about the 
other's statements; no-one will be 
able 10 get away with his 
statement without being ques- 
tioned, but he won’t be allowed 
fo answer his challenger. 
Our opinions range from West 
to East and differ a great deal, 
but we have quite a bit in com- 
mon, so much so that despite 
ideological differences, which 
were hot and strong, we signed a 
common statement. 
Here is an abstract: see if 
you from your experience have 
much to add on broad principle 
to the joint opinion of a Pro- 
fessor of Psychology (I'm taking 
them in alphabetical order of 
their last names), of Sociology— 
two of these—a Director of an 
Institute of Social Research, a 
Professor of Philosophy, two psy- 
chiatrists, and another Professor 
of Sociology. Here, as I said, are 
some abstracts. 
The problem of peace is the 
problem of keeping group and 
national aggressions within man- 
ageable proportions and of 
directing them to ends that are 
at the same time personnally and 
socially constructive, so man will 
no longer seek to exploit man. 
Fundamental changes in our   Afghanistan Becomes 
Latest Member State 
The Kingdom of Afghanistan, 
bordering north-west Pakistan, 
has joined Unesco, thus becoming 
the thirty-ninth full member 
state. Already a member of the 
United Nations, the Afghan Gov- 
ernment notified its intention of 
joining Unesco earlier this year. 
Austria, Switzerland and Hun- 
gary, which were admitted as 
Member-States in November, 1947, 
have not yet completed all the 
formalities of acceptance but are 
treated as full members. Upon 
their signing and depositing the 
Instrument of Acceptance, Unesco 
will have forty-two members.   
quired when 
they were young and when con- 
ditions were different—are no 
longer adequate to serve as effect- 
ive guides to action in a chang- 
ing world. 
The development of modern 
means of swift and wide range 
communication is potentially a 
great aid to world solidarity. Yet 
this development also increases 
the danger that distortions of 
truth will reach a great many 
people who are not in a position 
to discriminate true from false, 
or to perceive that they are being 
beguiled and misled. 
The physical and biological 
sciences in recent yearsyhave 
provided impressive demonstra 
tions of the effect of research. 
Some of the practical results 
have been rather to dismay and 
disquiet the civilized world than 
to reduce its tensions. The 
scientists whose research has 
been used in the development of 
atomic and biological warfare 
are not themselves responsible 
for launching a curse upon the 
world. The situation reflects the 
forces now determining the uses 
to which science can be put. 
While other factors are con- 
cerned, we hold that the chances 
for a constructive use of the 
potentialities of scientific and 
technological developments will 
improve if and when man takes 
the responsibility for understand- 
ing the forces which work upon 
him and society from within and 
from without. 
It is a task of self-knowledge 
and social insight, the social 
sciences—the sciences of Man 
—have a vital part to play. The 
social scientist can help make 
clear to people of all nations that 
the freedom and welfare of one 
are ultimately bound up with the 
freedom and welfare of all, that 
the world need not continue to 
be a place where men must 
either kill or be killed, and that 
effort in behalf of one's own 
group can become compatible 
with effort for humanity. And so 
it goes on... 
But you will want to know the 
Action Paragraphs—what we pro- 
pose should be done. These, with 
the reasons why each one was 
put forward (without the reasons 
they carry little weight) will ap- 
pear in that book. 
Now, that first statement in my 
view is not. the most important 
product of the Conference. We 
were, above all, experimenting 
(again it is my view) with the 
technique of conferring—I rather 
fancy that’s about as important 
a job as any in these days. 
I don't only refer to meetings 
of Foreign Ministers and that 
sort of thing—take the case of 
the last Committee you yourself 
attended. Would you not like to 
know more about what really 
went on? Did the Agenda really 
cover it, or the Resolutions? 
No? And by the way, one of 
my proposals is a study of the 
reporting of conferences.

## [Page 4](073790engo.pdf#page=4) 2

### 73800: 1948 working programme set for Amazon Institute

### 73801: What is UNESCO's role in scientific research?

1948 WORKING PROGRAMME 
SET FOR AMAZON INSTITUTE 
By Dr. Frank J. Malina 
HEADQUARTERS COORDINATOR 
HE programme of Unesco’s Hylean Amazon Project for the 
1 remainder of 1948 following the conclusion of the Iquitos Con- 
ference in Peru and the meeting of the I.I.H.A. Interim Com- 
mission at Manaus has been formulated. This program, directed 
toward the final preparations for the opening of he I.IH.A. in 1949, 
can be divided into two major parts—administrative planning and 
research planning. 
In Latin America the imple- 
mentation of this program is 
_ carried out by the Secretariat of 
the Interim Commission whose 
headquarters are in Manaus, the" 
Brazilian city selected as the seat 
“of IIHA. 
The staff of the secretariat for 
1948 has been provided by Unesco 
and an agreement made with the 
“Interim Commission that this 
staff will carry out functions de- 
  
fined by the Interim Commis- 
sion on the one hand and by 
Unesco on the other, These func- 
tions are complementary and 
have as a common objective the 
initiation of the work of the Ins- 
titute on a sound basis at the 
earliest possible date in 1949, 
Administrative Planning 
The administrative planning 
now underway covers a diverse 
number of subjects, Recommen- 
dations are being drafted to cover 
financial regulations incorporat- 
ing provisions regarding the 
currency in which the contribu- 
tions of Member States of the 
Institute shall be payable, the 
reserve or revolving fund to be 
established and the proceaures 
for financial administration, Staff 
regulations for personnel of the 
Institute and rules of procedure 
for the Council and the Executive 
Committee will also be drafted. 
A report is being prepared to 
serve as a& basis of a special con- 
vention on the privileges and 
immunities of the IIHA with 
special reference to the problem 
of scientific collections to be 
made by the Institute within the 
jurisdiction of the Member 
States. 
- At the Iquitos Conference the 
area of the Hylean Amazon to 
be served by the Institute was 
not finally defined, and therefore 
“the Interim Commission was ins- 
tructed to take steps, in conjunc- 
tion with the countries in the 
region, to specify the area wa- 
“tered by the Amazon and its tri- 
butaries that can be considered 
to have the same biological cha- 
racteristics. The map reproduced 
on this page shows a tentative 
outline of the Hylean Amazon 
together with the seat of the Ins- 
titute at Manaus (Brazil) and the 
working centers that are to be 
developed at Archidona (Ecua- 
dor), Belém do Para (Brazil), 
Iquitos (Peru), Riberalta (Boli- 
via). San Fernando de Atabapo 
(Venezuela) and Sibundoy (Co- 
lombia), 
Each of the States Members of 
the Institute are to set up nation- 
al bodies for the maintenance 
of relations between their respec- 
tive national governments and 
the institute, and for the encour- 
agement of the study and deve- 
lopment of their national sectors 
in accordance with the integrated 
work programme of the Ins- 
titute for the whole region. 
One of the important articles 
- carried out at present 
of the ITHA Convention provides 
for cooperation with public and 
private organizations engaged in 
work related to the purpose and 
functions of the Institute. To 
this end contact is being made 
with these organizations, espe- 
cially with the Specialized Agen- 
cies of the UN. such as the FAO 
and WHO, which are especially 
interested in the agricultural, con- 
servation and health problems of 
this vast tropical region. The 
relationships between the IIHA 
and these intergovernmental or- 
ganizations will be built up 
without the intermediary of Unes- 
co. Coordination of the activities 
of the U.N. Specialized Agencies 
in the Hylean Amazon will be 
“achieved through already estab- 
lished procedures between the 
Specialized Agencies. Lie 
Research Planning 
It has been realized that it is 
not possible to project a research 
program for the Institute into 
the distant future except in 
broad outlines. Of immediate 
concern is the definition of the 
Institute’s program for its first 
year of operation, for which the 
Iquitos Conference set a budget 
of approximately $300,000. 
To assist with these prepara- 
tions Unesco has initiated three 
surveys to guide the formulation 
of the recommendations of the 
Interim Commission to the first 
Council meeting of the Institute. 
One of the basic principles of 
modern research requires a sur- 
vey of work done by researchers 
in the past and now underway 
on problems of interest, in order 
to avoid unnecessary repetition 
and duplication of effort. To this 
end a bibliographical index is 
being put in hand which will co- 
ver available published and ma- 
nuscript knowledge on Amazonic 
problems, 
The scope of the program be 
the IIHA encompasses both e 
natural and social sciences. In 
the field of social anthropoogy, 
the Hylean Amazon region offers 
numerous opportunities for signi- 
ficant research. on man. The ex- 
ploratory community study being 
in the 
lower Amazon is described in a 
separate article on this page. 
At Iquitos the Scientific and 
Program Committee of the Con- 
ference strongly recommended 
that Unesco, as a part of its acti- 
vities during 1948, make an expe- 
riment with a “team” survey of 
   
  
D; = 
A contemporary Brazilian painting inspired by the Tropical Amazon. 
HE recént decision of severa 
nations to establish an In 
ternational Institute of ths 
Hylean Amazon—a step takes 
with Unesco’s assistance and or 
the initiative of its First Genera 
Conference—serves to stress the 
increasingly important role thal 
Unesca is playing in the field of 
international scientific co-opera 
tion. 
It may be yseful to explain thi 
role, because there is considerable 
misunderstanding in scientifi( 
circles, as well as among othel 
groups interested in Unesco’s work 
of the position of this Specializec 
Agency of the United Nations a: 
regards original scientific research 
Frequently Unesco House Tre 
ceives letters and visits fron 
people who believes Unesco ax 
help them to continue thel 
theoretical or experimental re 
search in biology, chemistry 
pathology, soil science or electri 
cal engineering. Also researcl 
institutions often submit request| 
for funds to support worthwhili 
scientific projects or publications 
Disappointment, unfortunately 
usually awaits those who submi 
such requests. - 
Unesco’s role is defined by it 
Constitution. In the field oO 
science Unesco aims at : 
“assuring the conservation am 
protection of the world’s inherit 
ance of books, works of art am 
monuments of history and science 
and recommending to the nation 
  
‘The Hylean A 
SE 
 
a limited geographical area of 
the Hylean Amazon. The valley 
of the Rio Huallaga in Peru was 
proposed as a suitable location 
for this experiment by the Peru- 
vian delegation 
Unesco obtained the services of 
a Mexican entomologist, a Peru- 
vian botanist, an Ecuadorian an- 
thropologist and an U.S. geogra- 
pher who made a rendezvous in 
Lima the first week of July 
where they were joined by a pa- 
thologist and geographer provi- 
ded by the Peruvian Government, 
This team of scienlific specia- 
lists will traverse the Rio Hualla- 
ga valley over a period of about 
three months collecting informsa- 
tion for an integrated report on 
the characteristics and potentia- 
lities of the valley. 
At the close of 1948 Unesco 
will have concluded its role of 
bringing the ITHA into being. In 
1049 the States Members of the 
Institute will finance the major 
portion of the activities of the 
Institute and Unesco will make 
arrangements to have studies 
made by the Institute for the 
purposes of its future program 
within its budgetary means, 
Thus Unesco, through ils good 
offices in bringing together va- 
rious nations at Iquitos, Peru, de- 
monstrated once again how inter- 
national co-operation is possible 
when a specific objeclive of 
common interest {0 diverse peoples 
is chosen. 
Among the few Amazon industries are weaving and pottery making. 
Some Press 
Comments 
Probably no other single 
Unesco project has attracted 
such widespread public inter- 
est as the establishment of the 
International Imstitute of the 
Hylean Amazon, The follow- 
ing are excerpts from a few 
typical articles published dur- 
ing the past weeks, 
Peter van Dresser 
“Scientific American”; 
“..The Amazon offers aq vir- 
gin laboratory in which the 
sciences and social techniques 
of our civilization, perhaps 
grown somewhat more mature, 
may iry their skill. The stakes 
in this effort are the opening 
up of a land very nearly the 
size of the United States—and 
at least equally endowed in 
natural riches...” 
“La Cronica”, Lima, Peru: 
«. This is the first time that 
such an expedition has been 
undertaken under the auspices 
of a world organization and 
the Peruvian Government, with 
useful scientific resources at its 
disposal... Our vast hydro- 
graphical regions hide huge 
resources to be used by man. 
On this operalion are based 
the best hopes of a subsequent 
work in order to justify the 
aims of this great enterprise.” 
The “New Review” 
cutta): ‘ 
“The blueprint for the open- 
ing of the Amazon... marks 
the beginning of perhaps lhe 
most ambitious of internatio- 
nal scientific endeavours... The 
long-range aspects of the huge 
project concern the civiliz- 
ing and settlement of the 
Equatorial vastness, which 
would start with education of 
the primitive inhabitants and 
the promotion of communica- 
tions by water, land and air 
across the now almost im- 
penetrable reaches along the 
world’s greatest river.” 
The Brantford (Ontario, 
Canada) “Expositor”: 
“There is the promise of un- 
disclosed resources through 
making accessible regions 
blocked off for untold centu- 
ries by impenetrable forests. 
There is the thrill of high 
drama in this undertaking. 
More important, it holds the 
possibility of substantial im- 
provement in the life of the 
people of South America and, 
ultimately, the world at large.” 
in the 
  
(Cal-f 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
—— m—    
Five N 
Of Am 
HE Conference which es 
tablished the Internationa 
Institute of the Hyleat 
Amazon was convened by Unesd 
and the Governments of Braz 
and Peru. Delegates and adviser 
from ten countries were presen] 
at the meetings, held in Iquitos 
Peru, from April 30 to May 14 
1948. - 
Countries represented included 
Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecua 
dor, France, Italy, the Nethef 
lands, Peru, the United Stated 
and Venezuela. The Government 
of Great Britain and Switzerlani 
sent accredited observers to thi 
Conference. 
Six international organization 
were officially represented, in

## [Page 5](073790engo.pdf#page=5) 3

### 73800: 1948 working programme set for Amazon Institute

### 73801: What is UNESCO's role in scientific research?

WHAT IS UNESCO'S ROLE 
IN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ? 
concerned the necessary interna- 
tional conventions; 
“encouraging co-operation 
among the nations in all branches 
of intellectual activity, including 
the international exchange of per- 
sons active in the fields of educa- 
tion, science and culture and the 
exchange of publications, objects 
of artistic and scientific interest 
and other materials of informa- 
tion; 
“initiating methods of interna- 
tional co-operation calculated to 
give the people of all countries 
access to the printed and publish- 
ed materials produced by any of 
them.” 
To fulfil these aims, Unesco has 
developed the following methods 
in the field of the natural sctien- 
ces: 
Grants-in-aid: A grant-in-aid 1s 
- an outright pavment to a non- 
. governmental or semi-governmen- 
tal international organization in 
furtherance of Unesco’s constitu- 
tional objectives and general pro- 
gram of work, for purposes spe- 
clfied in each case, and without 
financial return. 
A grant-in-aid may be awarded 
to give “assistance to internation- 
al organizations for initiating 
and operating facilities for the 
world-wide pooling and co-ordina- 
tion qf already-acquired know- 
ledge, the promotion of cultural 
interchange, the standardization 
of terms, techniques and appara- 
tus; the maintaining and ex- 
changing of living samples and n- 
animate objects; and the upkeep 
of laboratories and other institu- 
tions under international control, 
by means of grants for interna- 
tional education, scientific and 
cultural institutions and bureaux. 
It is understood that no grants 
so given may be devoted to the 
expenses of original research of 
creative activity being carried out 
in a country by citizens of that 
country in public or private insti- 
tutions financed by governmental 
or private funds of that coun- 
try”. 
Contracts: This is an arrange- 
ment under which Unesco makes 
a payment to an educational, 
scientific or cultural organization 
for the fulfilment, at Unesco’s re- 
quest, of a task, service, or pur- 
pose specified in each case and 
closely linked with the prlaramme 
of Unesco as approved by the 
General Conference. 
Contracts “may be concluded 
with non-governmental or semi- 
governmental international orga- 
nizations which have been grant- 
ed consultative status for: 
= 1) the organization of interna- 
tional conferences, congresses, 
symposia, expert committees, etc.; 
2) the organization of the Ex- 
change of Persons’ programme 
tration of travel grants, fellow- 
ships, etc.; 
3) the execution of surveys, in- 
vestigations or other studies; 
4) the preparation and publica- 
tion of periodicals. books or other 
material; 
5) the development of new in- 
ternational organizatiory”. 
From a careful study of the 
above rules it will be seen that 
only under exceptional circum- 
stances can Unesco funds be said 
to be directly involved in original 
scientific research. 
Scientists and engineers, when 
they join the Unesco Secretariat, 
leave their instruments and slide 
rules behind. They only carry 
with them a knowledge of the 
scientific method, a familiarity 
with some of the implications of 
science in the modern world, and 
a faith that relations between 
peoples can be improved. 
mazon Institute 
  
  
  
    
  
 
  
Atabape~ ronan 
1 — 
  
  
      
  
  
HYLEAN AMAZON REGION 
® Sear of the J1IHA 
o Marional study centres linked 
with seal of J/HA 
== Region of survey 1948 
\ Seal of conference | 
5
 
188 
2.18458 
“ae oo 
A Vl J 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
      7 r— 
 
  
  
Exchange of Information. 
lajor Functions 
azon Institute 
> cluding: the Pan-American Union, 
the Inter-American Institute of 
Agricultural Science, the In- 
ternational Council of Scientific 
Unions, the International Study 
- Conference, the International Bu- 
reau of Education and Unesco. 
© After examination of scientific 
aspects of the Institute's project- 
ed activities, the Conference pre- 
pared the following general re- 
commendations: 
That scientific expeditions in 
the Hylean Amazon be carried 
out preferably by teams of scien- 
tists and in limited geographical 
areas; 
* That research be concerned with 
matters of general interest, e.g. 
broblems relating to hydro-bio- 
logy, the general nutritional con- 
ditions of the Amazonian peoples 
and the agricultural problems 
connected therewith; 
That in 1948 scientists appoint- 
ed by Unesco carry out research 
work in a selected area of the 
River Huallaga region of Peru; 
That the formation of a biblio- 
graphical index be put in hand 
forthwith at Manaus with the 
co-operation of the scientific 
bodies; 
That a yearly sum be set aside 
for the publication of unpublish- 
ed works and scientific documents 
on Amazonia. 
National membership in the 
Institute, according to the terms 
of its Convention, is open to any 
EN 
~  M.UL.Ferrari 
Member State of the United Na- 
tions or a U.N. Specialized Agen- 
© ~<
 
The ITHA Council is the highest 
authority of the Institute, deter- 
mining its general policies, 
supervising financial matters and 
receives the reports on research in 
the Amazon basin. 
A seven-member Executive Com- 
mittee is designed to make policy 
decisions between the meetings of 
the Council. 
A Director of the Institute is 
to be elected, on nomination of 
the Executive Committee, by the 
Council, and he shall direct the 
Institute’s activities under the 
Council's guidance. 
Although Unesco's role in the 
creation of the Institute was es- 
pecially a preparatory one, the 
Institute “shall conclude, as soon 
as practicable, an agreement with 
Unesco”. 
The Convention also establish- 
ed an Interim Commission to 
function until the first session >f 
the Council of the Institute, which 
—it was anticipated—would be 
held in the first half of 1949. 


### 73802: Social studies planned of Amazon peoples

  
  
SOCIAL STUDIES PLANNED 
OF AMAZON PEOPLES 
By Dr. Charles Wagley 
[Dr. Charles Wagley, Columbia University anthropologist, and 
| Dr. Eduardo Galvao of Brazil are carrying out, under. the auspices 
through promotion and adminis- cof the Unesco Hylean Amazon Project, a community siudy in the 
lower Amazon region in Brazil. The survey will aid in the formation 
of a research programme to be carried out in other areas of the 
Amazon basin by the recently-established 1.I.H.A. Before leaving Jor 
Brazil, Dr. Wagley made the following observations regarding research 
in that part of the world.] 
HE tropical environment, the vast uninhabited territory, and the 
peculiar historial development of the Hylean Amazon region 
offer unusual circumstances tor research in many disciplines cf the 
social and natural sciences. 
Such research should focu$ on 
man and his past, present and 
potential adjustment to the Ama- 
zon environment. To study tis 
general problem, it will be neces- 
sary to call upon many scientists 
with a variety of specialities. Bo- 
tanists must study the plants 
which are used now, which have 
been used by the Indians in the 
past, and which may be useful 
to man in the future. 
Soil experts must furnish us 
with an analysis of the earth 
from the point of view of present 
and future agricultural produc- 
tion, and agronomists must tell 
us what is good and bad about 
the present techniques of tilling 
the soil and must seek new me- 
thods for greater and more effec- 
tive production. . 
Nutritionists will study the 
vitamin, mineral and energy con- 
tent of Amazon foods and will 
tell us what foods are appro- 
priate for the Amazon. Physiolo- 
gists will study the energy output 
and other physiologically deter- 
mined reactions of man under 
Amazon conditions. Each science 
has a definite contribution to 
make to this general prooiem. 
By focusing on the problem of 
man in relation to the Amazon 
environment we do not limit the 
number of scientists and sciences 
which would participate in the 
program, but at the same time 
we do not try to work toward an 
encyclopedic knowledge of the 
Amazon without the benefit of a 
limiting problem. 
In such a program, one of tne: 
first steps would seem to be a 
study of the contemporary cul- 
ture, or way of life, of the pre- 
sent population of the Amazon 
Valley. 
Three racial stocks have con- 
tributed to the contemporary 
Amazon population, and the mo- 
dern culture contains elements 
inherited from Portugal or Spain, 
from Africa, and from the Ame- 
rican Indian, 
Newcomers to the Amazon are 
soon forced to adopt many 
cabocle customs and habits. Fur- 
thermore, any social planning 
must take into consideration the 
habits, values, customs, beliefs 
and in general the organized way 
of life of the people who are 
there. 
Therefore, the problem of the 
social anthropologists in coopera- 
tion with other scientists in the 
Amazon would seem to be to de- 
a 
 
The arrow is still the main weapon for hunting in the 
Region, 
termine the basic patterns or ine 
present culture and to be able 
in the future to advise social 
planners as to the feasibility of 
programs of change in this re- 
gion. Like the physiological orga~- 
nism, human culture has envi- 
ronmental limitations and envi- 
ronmental reactions, and it must 
be handled with care. 
In order to determine the basic 
culture of the Amazon region, 
studies will have to be made by 
social anthropologists in several 
Amazon communities within the 
next few years. 
In making these studies the 
following major points must be 
covered: : ¥ 
1) History of the region; 
2) Sustenance and basic eco- 
nomy (agriculture, fishing, 
collecting of forest products, 
commercial system, etc.); 
3) Diet and Food habits (objec- 
. tive study of food consumed, 
food taboos, preparation of 
foods, cost, etiquette, etc.); 
4) Social Life (education, fa- 
mily life, social position and 
prestige, social classes, clubs, 
religious organizations, neigh- 
bourthood groups, municipal 
and community solidarity, 
etc.); 
5) The Individual Life (birth . 
child training, courtship, 
marriage, relations between 
the sexes, old age, death and 
mourning, etc.); 
6) Religious Life (church orga~- 
nizations, religious festivals, 
cults, mythology and folk- 
lore, etc.).

## [Page 6](073790engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

6 UNESCO COURIER Volume I.-—No. 6 


### 73791: Educators study school reforms

School Reforms Studied 
(Continued from Page 1.) 
®ducation Division in the U.S. 
Office of Education, and M. A. 
Imtiif, Deputy Secretary at the 
Ministry of the Interior, Pakistan. 
Pr. Clarence E, Beeby, Director 
of Education in New Zealand and 
ABsistant Director-General of 
Paesco, represented the organiza- 
tion at the Confererr~e, the se- 
cond to be jointly sponsored by 
Unesco and the IBE, Addressing 
the opening session, he stressed 
y value of co-operation between 
two organizations. 
MIdeas on education travel slow- 
: he said, “and the possibilities 
offered by this Conference of 
transmitting information and opi- 
nlons from one nation to another 
is of the greatest value. 
The IBE with its long experi- 
#nce, its surveys, and its confer- 
ences, has already done fine work 
tn the field of educational re- 
Search. However, these activities 
can usefully be supplemented by 
Unesco’s more practical pro- 
gramme”, 
Mr. Piaget, Director of the In- 
ternational Bureau of Education, 
agreed with Dr. Beeby that im- 
portant results could emerge from 
close TUnesco-IBE co-operation. 
#In the field of education”, he 
said, “example should play a more 
important role than compulsion. I 
am convinced that solutions suit- 
able to the different conditions 
obtaining in the various countries 
should be studied, without any 
attempt to impose a uniform sys- 
tem”, 
The Conference then heard re- 
ports of educational developments 
in various countries during the 
past year. Questions followed and 
some of the most interesting 
points mentionned were these: 
‘Australia.—The school leaving 
age was 15 in New South Wales 
and Victoria and the possibility of 
prolonging school attendance un- 
til that age in other States was 
being examined... besides the State 
Colleges for training in academic 
subjects, the secondary education 
system included special schools 
for agriculture, trades, etc... a new 
experiment is being carried out in 
dourses for immigrants. 
lgium.—Holiday parties for 
workers are a new experiment for 
the spare time and holidays of 
young workers... school broadcast- 
ing is organized differently in the 
Walloon and Flemish parts of the 
ecountry—it was independent of the 
Ministry of Education... medico- 
pedagogic centres are being 
organized in Brussels, Borinage 
and near Antwerp. 
Burma.—Seventy per cent Of 
the population can read and write, 
due largely to the traditional edu- 
cation provided in Buddhist mon- 
asteries... the education of adults 
is being carried out by broadcast 
courses and with the help of the 
Young People’s Associations... lang- 
usage instruction is difficult be- 
cause there are one hundred and 
twenty differents dialects. 
Bulgaria.— Forty-five per cent 
af university students have schol- 
arships... illiteracy has been redu- 
ced to fourteen percent... education 
is obligatory to the age of fif- 
teeh... primary school teachers are 
trained for two years; secondary 
teachers must first attend a uni- 
versity. 
France, — School reforms have 
#80 far affected pupils between the 
ages of twelve and fifteen... tradi- 
tional methods are so far being 
retained for students above that 
age... the experiment of the “New 
Classes” had been carried out 
this year at the level of the 4th 
grade... a training course held for 
teachers in charge of the direction 
of the new classes had continued 
its creative development particu- 
larly as regards the co-ordination 
of teaching, the study of environ- 
ment and the part played by 
artistic, plastic, or musical train- 
ing. 
At subsequent sessions, delegates 
exchanged views on the Teaching 
of Handwriting, School Psycholo- 
gists and on the various problems 
concerned with teaching about the 
purpose and the work of the 
United Nations. A Chinese speaker 
suggested the creation of an in- 
ternational documentation centre 
regarding the UN and its Agen- 
cies, and stressed that “much 
courage and faith” would be ne- 
cessary to overcome the cynicism 
and disillusionment of those who 
@id not believe in such teaching. 
was necessary to demonstrate that 
there were three fundamental re- 
requirements for international 
peace: mutual assistance between 
the nations, the surrender of some 
degree of national sovereignty by 
each country and the organiza- 
tion of collective security. 
A speaker from Brazil pointed 
to the survey Unesco had carried 
out among its Member States re- 
garding their progress in develop- 
ing teaching programmes about 
the United Nations. “Unesco en- 
countered several kinds of obsta- 
cles”, he said, “some of these were 
moral, due to the scepticism with 
which the United Nations was 
viewed”. 
Reports received on educational 
developments in the countries re- 
presented will be published, as 
also will the Conference's recom- 
mendations on Teaching of Hand- 
writing; School Psychologists; and 
Development of International Un- 
derstanding Among Young People 
and Teaching about International 
Organizations,   


### 73803: I.T.I.: a liaison centre for theatres the world over

I.T.I. .. A Liaison Centre 
For Theatres the World Over 
Maurice Kurtz, author and play- 
right, has been closely associated 
with preparations for the Inter- 
national Theatre Institute since 
the idea took tangible form in 
1946. In the following article, he 
explains something of the Insti- 
iute’s purpose and something of 
what it may accomplish. 
By 
Maurice 
KUBTZ 
Specialist in Charge of 
Unesco Theatre Affairs.     
THE International Theatre Institute is the newest organization on 
the scene of international art. With its creation comes to a close 
the two-year production-rehearsal period which focussed upon it the 
attention of theatre artists, technicians and administrators the world 
Over. 
It is an exciting experience to help transform into a living reality 
the inevitably cold, conventional words of a conference resolution: 
“It was resolved fo call an international meeting of ‘theatre 
experis for the purpose of founding an International ‘Theatre 
Institute, . J (First General Conference of Unesco, Nov. 1946.) 
Many months of preliminary investigation and study went into 
the early stages of the IT.I, giving it ‘its raison d’étre and the 
concreteness which earned for it the active guidance of J.B. Priest- 
ley, the enthusiasm and support of Armand Salacrou, Jean-Louis 
Barrault, Clarence Derwent. Tyrone 
 
Reports of educational progress in each country were presented at 
the Unesco-IBE Conference on Popular Education in Geneva. 
  A French delegate urged that it 
Letters from 
The Readers 
To the Editor of the Unesco 
Courier: 
Sir : 
The Unesco Courier pu- 
blished in its June numoer 
(vol. 1, No 5) an interesting 
article entitled ‘Work-Plan 
for Germany’. 
I would like to point out 
that the ‘Fédération de I'Edu- 
cation Nationale’, whose Gene- 
ral Secretary, M. Adrien La- 
vergne, is a member of the 
French National Commission 
for Unesco, has given a good 
deal of attention to the re- 
education problem of German 
youth, 
A survey was made in all 
four zones of occupation, in 
June-July 1947, by a daelega: 
tion of our Federation. This 
delegation of seven members 
was lead by Mile Marie-Louise 
Cavalier, permanent expert of 
Unesco’'s Education Section at 
the French National Commis- 
sion and member of the tem- 
porary Council of the interna- 
tional voluntary organizations 
dealing with Education, Scien- 
ce and Culture, 
The results of our survey 
have been published in a re- 
port of 300 pages entitled ‘Al- 
lemagne 1947’. This book was 
printed by the ‘Société Uni- 
versitaire d’Edition er ae Li- 
brairie’ (Sudel), 
Moreover, the International 
Commission for the Study of 
German School-Books... start- 
ad its survey in 1947. I have 
seen appointed ‘rapporteur 
général’ on this question for 
the Congress of the Interna- 
tional Preparatory Commission 
on Teaching which is going to 
take place in Budapest from 
August 21 to 24, 1948. 
Yours very truly, 
Emil HOMBOURGER. 
Professeur Agrégé de l'Université.     
Unesco Library School 
Planned for England 
The first Unesco International 
Summer School for Librarians. 
will be held in England during 
September, 1948. 
Some fifty working librarians, 
drawn especially from war-devas- 
tated countries, will come together 
to study library techniques and 
equipment during the month-long 
meetings. Close cooperation in 
sponsorship of the school is being 
maintained with the International 
Federation of Library Associa- 
tions. 
Mr. Raymond Irwin, Director of 
the School of Librarianship, Uni- 
versity College, London, will direct 
the school which will be held suc- 
cessively in London and Manches- 
ter. Choice of participants will be 
made by Unesco National Com- 
missions or Co-operating Bodies 
in the member states of the orga- 
nization and by library associa- 
tions. 
There will be lectures by the 
school’s own faculty and by addi- 
tional lecturers. Also included 
will be demonstrations, discussion 
groups, visits to libraries, exhi- 
bitions of equipment and of 
documentary films. Each stu- 
dent will be expected to bring a 
written account of public library 
development in his or her own 
country. 
Librarians who may wish to at- 
tend the school should contact 
their national library association 
or their Unesco National Com- 
mission which will furnish com- 
plete details.   
Guthrie and a host of others: 
professionals, amateurs, public. 
A fies “reading” of the 1.T.I. 
took place last July when Unesco 
invited twenty-five theatre experts 
from fourteen countries in Eu- 
rope, Asia, North and South 
America, to decide for or against 
“production”. 
Within a few days, these busy, 
practical-minded theatre folk put 
together a programme aimed at 
lowering, if not eliminating, the 
obstacles which interfere with the 
international movement of new 
playscripts, opera and ballet 
scores, performing companies. and 
of the various types of informa- 
tion leading to increased and 
better professional relations be- 
tween theatre circles of all coun- 
tries, and therefore, between the 
people of all countries who flock 
to their theatres. 
In the past year since the July 
1947 Conference, I have had occa- 
sion to learn with what genuine 
eagerness many countries look to 
the establishment of the I.T.L In 
fact, twelve of them have given 
concrete proof of this by consti- 
tuting national centres : 
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, 
China, Czechoslovakia, France, 
Italy, Netherlands, Switzerland, 
United Kingdom, U.S.A. 
Other countries, such as: Argen- 
tina, Bolivia, Denmark, Ethiopia, 
Greece, Norway, the Netherlands, 
Poland, Sweden, Uruguay, New 
Zealand and the Philippines are 
in various stages of organization 
of their national centres. 
The importance of these cen- 
tres, springing up like guideposts 
on all continents, has not yet bean 
fully appreciated. For it is an 
entirely new idea in the arts to 
organize a precise, all-year theatre 
programme whose object is to 
serve the stage and its world 
everywhere. 
The Central headquarters is a 
convenient tunnel, a clearing- 
house, if you prefer, but in any 
case, not The Thing itself. Any 
other view, I believe, would be 
pretentious and unrealistic, 
In other words, the LT.I's job 
is to help each nation make 
known, honestly and effectively 
and quickly, its best theatrical 
products: spoken, musical, ballet, 
dance, amateur, puppets, etc... 
The former Société Universelle. 
du Thealre made an admirable 
between - the - wars attempt to 
achieve a solid footing in inter- 
national theatre, but met with 
the insurmountable indifference 
inherent to its day. 
Now that many more nations 
are convinced that man’s happi- 
ness on earth is inseparably 
linked to good international con- 
duct, this fresh and more mature 
understanding of world problems 
gives the IT.I. a better chance 
CALENDAR OF CONFERENCES CONVENED 
BY UNESCO   DATE CONFERENCE PLACE 
69 July Committee of Experts for the Examination of a Manus- Paris 
cript of Essays on Human Rights. 
7-10 — Meeting of Experts—Colour reproductions. Paris 
7 — Seminar: Teaching about the United Nations and iis New York 
18 August Specialized Agencies. 
12 July Temporary International Council for Educational! Re- Paris 
construction (TICER): Committee of Experts, 
12-17 July Unesco Executive Board: 8th Session. Paris 
15 July Seminar: Teachers Education. England 
25 August 
20-22 July Meeting of Experts on Book Exchange Systems and Paris 
Distribution Centras. 
21 July Seminar: Childhood Education. Prague 
24 August - 
26-29 July Committee tn establish a World Music Catalogue, Paris 
2-11 August Commission on Technical Needs. Paris 
2-13 August Meeting of Universily Representatives oa University Utrecht 
Development, Holland 
for development and 
than its pre-war parent. 
With the holding of the First 
Congress a few days ago, the 
programme is now set, The objec- 
tives are clear. The work is be- 
gun—but much more remains to 
be done. 
And it will be, so long as each 
country has a National Centre 
functioning as an aclive source 
of international thealre liaison 
between iiself and the rest of 
the world. 
success 
  
Institute Formed 
(Continued from Page 1.) 
others were living, thinking and 
feeling. 
In Mr, Honzl's brief welcoming 
address to the delegates, he re- 
viewed Czechoslovak theatrical 
packground from a historical point 
of view, and said his country 
would always welcome foreign 
theatrical companies such as 
have already often visited Cze- 
choslovakia from Russia, Yugo- 
slavia, France and England 
Following the opening ad- 
dresses. the Congress went into 
working session. It agreed to 
Rold twice-daily meetings during 
the six-day conference, and the 
proposed Charter for the Insti- 
tute was immediately adopted 
subject to latex committee revi- 
sion. 
In the afternoon session, J.B. 
Priestley was elected President 
of the Congress, and Armand Sa- 
lacrou—the distinguished French 
playwright and head of his coun- 
try’s delegation — and Jinarich 
Honzl were elected Vice-Presi- 
dents, 
Three Committees were then 
appointed, including one of orga- 
nization, headed by Mr, Emil 
Oprecht, President of the Asso- 
ciation of Swiss Theatre Direc- 
tors. A Committee of Informa 
tion was headed by Dr. Yul 
Shang-Yuen, of the National 
Academy of Dramatic Arts in 
Nanking, and a Committee on 
Theatre Artists Abroad was led 
by Dr. Arnold Szyfman, founder 
and Director of the Polski Thea~ 
tre in Warsaw, 
The Committee on Organiza 
tion recommended the establish- 
ment of a National Theatre Cen- 
fre in each Member-State. 
The Committee on Information 
emphasized that the National 
Centres should compile lists of 
all existing endowments, official 
and unofficial, for foreign thea- 
trical students within their coun- 
tries, and should do everything 
possible to promote the interna- 
tional exchange of persons m 
that field. 
The Commitiiee of Theatre Ar- 
tists Abroad urged the National 
Centres to call on their govern- 
ments to reduce the obstacles 
which block and hinder the free 
movement of theatrical produc- 
tions and companies from one 
country to another. 
Following the Committee work, 
the Congress elected an eight- 
man Executive Committee with 
Armand Salacrou as its Chair- 
man. Other members included: 
Erich Nikowitz, prominent actor 
at the Josefstadt Theatre in 
Vienna; 
Maurice Huisman, Director of 
the National Theatre of Belgium; 
S8.I. Hsuing, Chinese author 
and playwribht: 
Jindrich Honzl, Director of the 
National Theatre of Prague; 
Richard Ordynski, well-known 
Polish metteur-en-scene,; 
Llewellyn Rees, Drama Direc- 
tor of the Arts Council of Great 
Britain; 
Emil Oprecht, President of the 
Association of Swiss Theatre Di- 
rectors; 
The temporary headquarters of 
the Institute was placed in Pa- 
ris and, as of Jauary 1, 1949, it 
will be outside Unesco House. 
The Belgian delegation offered 
Brussels for the Second Con- 
gress and the Austrian delega- 
tion proposed Salzburg to coiunciae 
with that city’s famed Festival, 
The Executive Committas also 
named Maurice Kurtz of unesco 
the Secretary-General of the 
1.T.I, an appointment to go into. 
effect at the end of 1948 when 
the I.T.I. budget takes effect.

## [Page 7](073790engo.pdf#page=7) 3

### IGNORE

Volume I.—No. 6 UNESCO COURIER 7 


### 73804: Close links traced between early Greek/Syrian cultures

‘Close Links Traced 
Between Early 
‘(Greek-Syrian Cultures 
VER since its foundation one of Unesco's principal objects has 
been to demonstrate to the nations that they do not exist in 
isolation and to induce in them a certain unity of spirit by 
reminding them that civilizations, so far from being closed systems 
evolving independently, are mutually accessible and enrich each 
other by exchange. 
One of the clearest proofs of 
this truth is the historic example 
pf the contacts between Arab 
and Western civilization, of which 
an account was given to the rea- 
ders of the Unesco Courier (1) 
in connection with Unesco’s nexb 
meeting at Beirut. At a time 
when the dominant idea of man- 
~ kind was religion, could there be 
two worlds more in opposition 
+ ‘than the Islamic and the Chris- 
tian, each having a different 
concept of the Godhead and each 
regarding the other as pagan 
and idolatrous? 
Yet those two worlds did net 
© remain in ignorance of each 
other; they lived side by side 
from the time when the sons of 
the Prophet occupied all the peri- 
phery of the Mediterranean. From 
their frequent contacts, Europe 
gained material wealth and in- 
. tellectual concepts svhich we use 
daily almost without realizing it. 
_ The most important element of 
this legacy from the Arab to the 
Western world is without any 
doubt the intellectual element 
consisting of the sum of know- 
ledge inherited from Greece and 
iransmitted to Mediaeval Europe 
through the Arab scientists and 
philosophers of Spain, Encyclo 
paedic intellects such as Avicenna 
(Ibn Sina, 980-1037), Averroes 
(Ibn Raschid), Atvempace (Ibn 
. Badja, 1138), as versed in phy- 
sical science as in metaphysical 
speculation, transmitted to ihe 
Latins the richest treasures of 
Greece in science and philosophy. 
Thanks to them Euclid, Archi- 
medes, Ptolemy, Hippocrates, Ga- 
len, Aristotle and Plato 
trines of Jacobite Monophysism. 
It was in these surroundings, 
traditionally closed to Greek in- 
fluence alike by language and by 
political and geographical situa- 
tion, that classical culture was 
kept alive. Syrian converts to 
Ctiristianity had to learn Greek 
to read the Old and New Testa 
ment and the writings of the Fa- 
thers, and this introduced them 
simultaneously to science and 
philosophy. 
From the Fifth Century 
onwards there was a veritable 
positive outburst of phil-Helle- 
nism, whose principal centre was 
the Persian School set up at 
Edessa and later at Nisibe and 
Gandishapur in Iran. In these 
singular schools, where thousands 
of students lived cloistered like 
monks and which might be deem- 
ed the first universities since 
the disappearance of the schools 
of Alexandria, Athens and Per- 
gamos, there was taught, in addi- 
tion to strictly ecclesiastical learn- 
ing, all the science of Greece, 
Verbal teaching was backed up 
by a vast labour of translation. 
Works on dialectics, logic, astro- 
logy and medicine were rendered 
from Greek into Syriac. The 
manuseripts which contain them 
are today the richest treasure of 
the great libraries of London, 
Paris and the Vatican, and some 
of them date from the Sixth 
Century. 
A Court of Artists 
and Scientists 
The transformation wrought in 
the politics and religion of Me- 
sopotamia and Persia 
  were known to West- By by the Arab invasion 
ern thought, however reduced this activity © 
imperfectly, long Dbe- J. LEROY little, but did not en- 
- fore Europe could Member tirely suppress it, par- 
the fruits of Hellenic 
‘wisdom, the Arabs, in 
make direct contact 
with them at the time 
of the Renaissance. 
In thus passing on   
of the Asiatic 
Society of Paris. 
ticularly among the 
. Nestorians. Though the 
first successors of the 
Prophet retained his    
the intellectual history of hu- 
~ manity, were the agents of that 
" . “historic continuity” which is one 
of the major achievements of mo- 
dern science. Yet those who no- 
tice dates cannot have failed, in 
reading the previous article, men- 
tioned above to be struck by a 
“break in that continuity. 
C
y
 
‘al-awa’il”, 
Between the closing of the phi- 
losophy schools of Athens, de- 
creed by Justinian in 529 AD, 
and the Arab renaissance, which 
flowered in Baghdad in the se- 
cond half of the Eighth Century, 
more than two centuries passed, 
during which time the Moslem 
world was fully occupied in con- 
quering the Mediterranean basin. 
It had neither time nor occasion 
to take much interest in the 
“wisdom of the Ancients, ulum 
from which Islamic 
orthodoxy at first tended rather 
“to recoil. 
What "then during these two 
‘centuries was the fate of Greek 
thought? Who kept it alive? The 
Syriac-speaking Christians of 
Mesopotamia, 
Singular Universities... 
Christianity appeared very 
early in Mesopotamia. The point 
from which it first spread was 
the little kingdom of Osrohene, 
whose capital Edessa (now Urfa) 
became officially Christian at 
the end of the Second Cenlury. 
From this ancient centre of Se- 
mitic culture, little affected by 
Hellenization, from which it was 
protected by its language, Syriac, 
akin to Aramaic and Hebrew, 
Christianity spread through all 
the lands watered by the Tigris 
and Euphrates, . 
On the Fifth Century theologi- 
cal disputes concerning the na- 
ture ‘of Christ gave rise to schism. 
The Persian churches adopted 
the Nestorian belief (today repre: 
sented by about 100,000 faithful 
dwelling around Lakes Van and 
Urmiah), while those of Upper 
Mesopotamia embraced the doc 
  
“ (1) Cf. the Arab Cultural Heritage; 
vol I, No. 3, April 1948 
simple way of life, op- 
posed to all material 
civilizatton and all’ worldly learn- 
ing, the Ommeyads, established at 
Damascus from 660, converted 
Islam into a centralized temporal 
State, with an army of officials 
recruited principally from Greek 
and Syriac-speaking Christians. 
Soon the Court of Damascus took 
on the appearance of a Byzan- 
tine Court in an Arab country. 
The revolution of 750, whence 
sprang the Abbassid Caliphate, 
accentuated in Islam this ten- 
dency towards a political system 
along the lines of oriental des- 
potism. In Baghdad, founded by 
Al Mansur in 762, the Caliph be- 
came as it were a reincarnation 
of the Sassanian King of Kings. 
Like him, he had his harem, his 
gardens, his hunting, a stump- 
tuous palace, in which were piled 
the treasures and the arts of 
Central Asia, the Indies and even 
China. 
Against this fabulous back- 
ground, worthy of the Arabian 
Nights, there moved a brilliant 
Court, where pleasant living was 
- inconceivable without the pleas- 
ures of the mind. Poets were wel- 
comed there, It was there that 
primitive Arab poetry, rude and 
warlike, gave birth to Court poe- 
try, flexible and playful, “tight 
as the tracery of the Athambra”. 
There, too, philosophic throught 
took wings, exploring problems 
undreamt of by the first readers 
of the Koran, And it was this 
atmosphere of intellectual enqui- 
Ty that the works of Greek anti- 
quity were translated from Syriac 
into Arabic, 
The part played by Spyriac- 
speaking Christians, whom mem- 
bers of Unesco will find at Bei- 
rut represented by the Maroniies 
of the Lebanon, in no way de- 
tracts from the importance of the 
Arab world in transmitting the 
Greek heritage. Without it, the 
vast labour accomplished by its 
teachers, the Syrians of Mesopo- 
tamia, would have rested a dead 
letter, hidden in a tongue hardly 
known in the West before the 
16th Century Renaissance. 
 
Reproduced from Unesco’s latest 
quarterly review “Museum”, an 
example of Oriental antiquity at 
the Louvre, Susa Gallery. Achae- 
menid capital. 


### 73805: Dr. Cheng describes close cooperation between China and UNESCO

Dr. Cheng 
Describes Cl 
Between Chi 
| | Nations may rightfully date 
back to the time of Confu- 
years ago, the great Chinese 
thinker spoke of the world as a 
nion of Dr. Cheng Chi-Pao, who 
is now in Paris to develop closer 
and Unesco. 
Dr. Cheng, as Secretary-General 
sion for Unesco, is well acquaint- 
ed with the efforts of China to 
of nations and to share with 
all other peoples the treasures of 
in Paris he has reported to Unes- 
co on the achievements of China 
tional co-operation. 
The Chinese National Commis- 
1947, has 120 elected members, 
leaders in the fields of education, 
six committees, each representing 
one of the major fields of Unesco 
ed by Dr. Chu Chia-Hua, Minister 
of Education. Its purpose is to 
Unesco in China. 
Reviewing the activities of 
ternational understanding and co- 
operation, Dr. Cheng referred to 
programme fields. 
In the field of Fundamental 
and China had jointly called a 
Regional Conference (September, 
from the entire Far East and 
Pacific areas to discuss common 
ques and materials in mass educa- 
tion. China was also developing, 
a “pilot project” to try out me- 
thods in bringing a basic mini- 
ity living to under-privileged 
peoples... 
Cooperation pera  
NSPIRATION for the United 
cius when, some two thousand 
“single family”. Such is the opi- 
co-operation between his country 
of the Chinese National Commis- 
participate actively in the family 
her past and her present. While 
towards strengthening nterna- 
sion, first organized in August, 
science and culture. Divided into 
activity, the Commission is head- 
make effective the programme of 
China in recent years towards in- 
developments in each of the six 
Education, he recalled, Unesco 
1947), bringing together experts 
problems and to develop techni- 
in close co-operation with Unesco, 
mum of education and commun- 
(Continued on Page 8.)   


### 73806: Some historic elements of Persian painting as a world influence

  
  
Some Historic Elements 
of Persian Painting 
As a World Influence 
Deven to painting is a new discovery for Westerners and perhaps 
even to some extent to the Persians themselves. When in 1910 
the Germans held an exhibition of Persian art in Berlin the 
appreciative eyes of a great many people were turned towards if, 
especially when the Impressionists and the Expressionists had already 
widened the scope of their perception. Since then the French and the 
English have shown their interest in Persian art either by holding 
similar exhibitions or have attempted to study the subject itself. 
Persian painting is in its essence romantic. In its fully matured 
stage it possesses a delicate touch of reality. This appeared towards 
the end of 15th century and continued throughout 16th, when Behzad 
of Herat, the master artist of Timur’s court brought the sense of 
movement, after the manner of Chinese, to his paintings. 
He developed the characteriza- 
tion of his figures, introduced 
landscape and released the art 
from the restriction of beimg mere- 
ly illustrations of texts. Rich 
blue and gold background became 
generally accepted as the condi- 
tion and the carefully coloured 
red background, which prevailed 
for a century if not abandoned 
was skillfully moderated to new 
fashion. 
The art of the age draws the 
season of gaiety where you have 
the element of spring even 1m 
your summer and winter, where 
it is a love-scene or a battlefield, 
a silver-like brightness is over the 
white-flowers and the 
  
  
ally the Manichean artist Mani 
is held by Persians to be the first 
master artist, His illuminated 
books being burned and he him- 
self persecuted due to his religious 
beliefs (A.D. 280), nothing re- 
mains to us of his ‘“Arjang” as 
the collection of his painting was 
called. In his time Persian paint- 
ing is supposed to have developed 
as the servant of religion, because 
later on when Islam was intro~ 
duced into the country, painting 
was denounced on the authority 
of Hadith, though not specifical- 
ly by Quran, (there is no clear 
prohibition of painting in the 
Quran) by the leaders 
leaves are ornamented By —— of religion as some- 
with shining diamonds. ching allied to idol- 
Day and night are atry. } 
often equally bright, Akbar To admire a repre- 
rocks are risen to meet sentation of the pe 
the blue sky, and little man figure was ap 
brooks are rippling M. OSKOUI to result on he _wor- 
while grass shoots up in) of he eure.   
 in tender growth. 
The element of space 
is reduced only to a fantasy and 
everything is brought under your 
eyes. A distant tree in the Euro- 
pean art remains remote always, 
lost and insignificant and its 
values merely lie in the atmo- 
phere which it creates in relation 
to the main theme. This is the 
normal attitude of the European 
painter and shows strict fidelity 
to nature. 
But to the Persian artist a tree 
or a figure behind the object is 
always large and fascinating in 
itself so that is shows a value 
equal to that of the main theme. 
This is held among, many reasons, 
to belong to the creative and the 
free spirit of the artist who looks 
at nature purely from the angie 
of his own imagination. But 
there is a strong influence of 
Chinese here, the fact that the 
spectator is placed at the point of 
vantage above what is represent- 
ed. He looks down as if from a 
raised platform so that not only 
all the figures and object on dif- 
ferent planes could be seen with- 
out confusion but also the other 
side of the curtain would be re- 
vealed as well 
Animal Forms and 
Geometric Paiterns 
The history of painting is very 
old in Persia but by no means 
easy to trace. A continuous tra- 
dition from the Sassanian period 
may be traced supported by sa- 
tisfactory evidence, the relics of 
which are to be found most abun- 
dantly in 12th and 13th Centuries. 
The most striking manifestations 
of this early art were animal 
forms and geometric patterns. 
Herzfeld has traced to Sassanians 
many wall paintings of dancing 
girls, huntresses and floral Geco- 
rations of various kinds, But usu- 
 
An example of a Persian illustration taken from an ancient Persian 
manuscript the “Bidpai Fable” preserved at the Bibliothéque Nation- 
ale in Paris, 
gious authorities have 
never ceased to frown on painting. 
A man during this era, would 
not be so much. represented as 
indicated. 
But the religion did not ban 
painting altogether. It only Ili- 
mited its subject-matter to de- 
signs. Calligraphy starts from 
here. ‘ 
Illustrations for Basra and 
Kufa Quran Manuscripts 
Toward the end of the 7th Cen- 
tury in Iraq, Basra and kufa 
Quran manuscripts with beauti- 
ful designs and decorations began 
to appear, and religion and art 
for a few centuries worked to- 
gether in perfect harmony. 
Faith, the essential element of all 
forms of artistic inspiration, was 
restored, and the artist was con- 
fident to work towards something 
sublime. He no more had the 
fever of an undecided artist wo 
whom the whole world is given 
to be represented, while his spirit 
is divided and his attention dis- 
tracted. His was a strong faith 
and his task specific. 
In the 14th and 15th Centuries, 
art succeeded in releasing itself 
from the narrow lines drawn Jy 
theologians and developed rapidly. 
National literature was revived 
with genuine enthusiasm. The 
epic Shah-Nameh of Firdousi was 
frequently illustrated with repre- 
sentations of Persian heroes. Ni- 
zami and Khadju Kermani be- 
came increasingly common sub- 
jects of painting. The pair of 
lovers, Khosro and Shirin, Leila 
and Majoun were favourite sub- 
jects with artists. 
Strong Chinese I nfluence 
The Chinese influence has been 
great on Persian painting and 
miniatures but it was not so 
strong as to destroy the tradi- 
tion, while on the other hand ‘t 
enriched the hands of master ar- 
tists like Behzad and to some 
extent Reza and the art still re- 
mained Persian in its nature. 
The decline came suddenly and 
since then Persian painting has 
not yet risen to its past glory. The 
decline was after Shah Abbas Saf- 
vid’s reign. 
In the 18th century, European 
painting and engravings were slav- 
ishly copied and the typical themes 
worked by artists were voluptuous 
women of indolent ex;ression, the 
artist attempting unsuccessfully 
to. combine a type of occidental 
and oriental beauty,

## [Page 8](073790engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 73805: Dr. Cheng describes close cooperation between China and UNESCO

UNESCO COURIER Volume I.—No. 6 
 


### 73807: The Story of the United Nations Radio

The Story of the 
United Nations Radio 
HIS is the United Na- 
tions calling the Peo- 
ples of the World.” 
In practically every language 
under the sun this statement has 
gone out over the air, and in the 
four corners of the world people 
have become aware of this new 
voice speaking directly to them. 
When the United Nations organ- 
ization took shape, it was made 
clear that it must have its own 
radio system so that “we the 
people” whose representatives 
signed the Charter could hear 
what our governments’ spokesmen 
were doing when they met toge- 
ther. , 
With the co-operation of the 
U.S. State Department and the 
International Service of the 
Canadian Broadcasting Corpora- 
tion, and later the facilities of 
the World Wide Broadcasting 
Foundation at Scituate, Massa- 
chusetts, the UN Radio Division 
was able to establish a series of 
transmissions beamed, respectiv- 
ely, 10 Asia and Australia, Eu- 
rope, Latin-America, and to the 
Soviet Union. 
From the very first, the United 
Nations Radio facilities have been 
at the disposal of accredited radio 
- correspondents and of Delega- 
- tions who, speaking in their own 
languages, have been able to 
present their own un-censored 
reports to listeners in their own 
lands; and many hundreds of 
correspondents and Delegates 
have availed themselves of this 
«®] 
opportunity during the various - 
important meetings that have 
been held since. 
An accredited radio corres- 
pondent or delegate is able not 
only to speak over a UN micro- 
phone to his own people, but he 
can also avail himself of the 
United Nations Radio recording 
facilities, and prepare his mater- 
ial in advance. Recording studio 
facilities, production guidance, all 
are freely available, and there 
has been a tremendous output of 
information about the United Na- 
tions from this quarter since the 
United Nations entered into the 
broadcasting field. 
It is not enough to broadcast 
short-wave: there must be some 
guarantee that there are listeners, 
not only short-wave listeners, but 
listeners who can hear UN broad- 
"casts on their ordinary medium- 
wave receivers clearly and from 
a familiar station. This fortuna- 
‘tely H®s been made frequently 
possible by the interested and 
generous atfitude of many of the 
national broadcasting organiza- 
tions and local stations. And this 
has no doubt been aided also by 
the excellence and objectivity of 
United Nations news bulletins 
and feature programmes that 
have been either transmitted 
overseas by short-wave or, in 
some cases, recorded and sent out 
by airmail for relay. 
A special programme in 1947, 
celebrating the anniversary of the 
signing of the UN Charter, was 
recorded in the main languages 
of the world, distributed by air- 
mail, and relayed over national 
and local stations. Another im- 
portant programme, prepared on 
the eve of the General Assembly 
held at Flushing Meadows in the 
autumn of 1947, and prophetically 
and perhaps grimly titled “THE 
TIME IS NOW” was broadcast 
on 21] UN transmitters and widely 
relayed. 
It was estimated that, at the 
time, probably over 200 million 
people may have heard this pro- 
gramme, and that it had one of 
  
Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt and France’s René Cassin broadcast their 
impressions of a U.N. conference they have attended. 
Editors Form 
- World Body 
The International Federation 
of Newspaper Publishers and 
Editors was formally constituted 
at Unesco House on June 24 at a 
meeting attended by representa- 
tives of press associations of 12 
countries. 
Members present included pro- 
minent news personalities from 
France, the Netherlands, Switzer- 
land. the United Kingdom, Luxem- 
bourg, Sweden, Norway, Den- 
mark, Italy, Egypt, Belgium. The 
United States was represented by 
two observers. 
US Unesco Commission 
To Meet in Boston 
The Fifth Meeting of the 
United States National Commis- 
sion will be held in Boston. 
Mass., September 27-29. Much of 
the meeting will be devoted to 
reports of the operations in the 
United States during the pre- 
ceeding twelve months and to 
the National Commission's plans 
for extending its work during the 
forthcoming year within the 
framework of Unesco’s pro- 
gramme,   
Unesco Helps Schools 
In War-Torn Lands 
Further shipments of technical 
and educational equipment to 
war-hurt regions have been made 
by Unesco. These supplies, in- 
tended as practical assistance to 
the efforts at reconstruction, 
were purchased from Unesco 
funds set aside for the purpose. 
Included are: 394 radios, 268 
gramophones, 37 typewriters, 40 
epidiascopes, 80 sound projectors 
and 673 sets of artists supplies, 
all of which were bought in the 
United States. The countries re- 
ceiving the allocations were Chi- 
na, Poland, Greece, Czechoslova- 
kia, the Philippines, Italy, Hun- 
gary and Austria. 
Additional materials, including 
books on education, literature and 
the arts, art reproductions, music 
scores, musical instruments, mi- 
crofilm strips and microfilm 
projectors, are being purchased or 
awaiting shipment to the coun- 
tries named. : 
The epidiascopes, which project 
images of solid objects as well as 
coloured pictures, will be used to 
reproduce pages of books, illus- 
trations and maps in overcrowded 
schools lacking visual aids. Ar- 
tists’ supplies consist of oil and 
water colours and canvas panels.   
 
From a broadcasting booth overlooking a U.N. Session at Lake Suc- 
cess, United Nations Radio newsmen prepare on-the-spot analyses of 
proceedings. 
the largest audiences of any sin- 
gle programme. 
One of the most notable suc- 
cesses of the UN Radio Division 
has been in the U.S. “medium- 
wave” field with a daily quarter- 
hour programme, “UNITED NA- 
TIONS TODAY”, made up of 
selections of the recorded voices 
of delegates, dispatches, and in- 
terviews from UN meetings over- 
seas, and the news headlines, 
which has been relayed for up- 
wards of a year throughout the 
United States at a good evening 
listening time. 
“As a complement to this daily 
quarter-hour, a new half-hour 
weekly summary, in ‘magazine’ 
style, was developed for, and re- 
layed from coast to coast by, the 
Canadian Broadcasting Corpora- 
tion. Entitled “MEMO FROM 
LAKE SUCCESS”, this UN pro- 
gramme both carries the voices 
of UN Delegates in important de- 
bates, and dramatizes episodes in 
UN work generally. This show is 
fed, thanks to the Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation’s Inter- 
national Service, to New Zealand 
and—along with the daily pro- 
. gramme—provides the New Zea- 
Jand Broadcasting Service with 
much useful raw material for a 
weekly programme prepared there 
on United Nations. 
Feature Programmes 
- The output of the United Na- 
tions has covered practically 
every important form of talks 
broadcasting. There are regular 
news bulletins, there are talk and 
interview periods, and there are 
dramatized feature programmes, 
combinations of all three, The 
subject matter has usually inclu- 
ded current UN developments, 
using the term in the broadest 
sense and including regular refer- 
ences to,. and broadcasts about, 
the Specialized Agencies, UNES- 
CO itself in particular, but aiso 
FAO, WHO, IRO, and the others, 
according to their activities at 
the time, 
To carry through with the 
plans, the Radio Division staff 
has included a team of twenty 
or more nationalities, all of them 
experienced broadcasters. The 
Director, for instance, is a Ca- 
nadian; the assistant director a 
Chilean. A Mexican and an In- 
dian share shifts on the Radio 
News Desk. Russians and Chinese 
man the Sections broadcasting In 
those languages. Belgians join 
with Frenchmen; Englishmen, 
“South Africans, Canadians, and 
Australians join with Americans; 
and a variety of Latin-American 
nationalities combine, each ser- 
ving, respectively, the French, En- 
glish-language, and Laliu-ameri- 
can programme of the Division. 
And in addition, either on the 
staff, or on a part-time basis, 
Arabs, Swedes, Danes, Norwe- 
gians, and an increasing galaxy 
of others maintain the output of 
special language transmissions. It 
is a busy, interested, picturesque 
group of people, proving by the 
very job they are doing how possi- 
ble international cooperation can 
be on the human, personal level. | 
Thousands of Listeners 
Although much remains to be 
done in order to provide the 
United Nations, and through it 
all the Specialized Agencies, with 
a radio broadcasting system that: 
will keep them in direct touch 
with the individual citizens of the 
world, and although it would be 
unwise to over-estimate what has 
been accomplished, it is nonethe- 
less encouraging to see the extent 
to which the UN has been success- 
ful in the field of radio on sound, 
practical lines, 
Its programmes are widely 
heard, are widely relayed, are 
widely followed. The proceedings, 
which are by no means always 
entertaining, are nevertheless 
followed by thousands of people] 
in different parts of the word; 
and in some circumstances it has 
been possible for people in the 
countries most directly concerned 
to hear as quickly as the audience 
in the Council chamber itself the 
decision taken in respect to them- 
selves, 
Thus, during the various deli- 
berations on Palestine, the argu- 
ments and voting in the General 
Assembly and subsequently in the 
Security Council have been heard 
in Palestine directly, and the in- 
terest in these broadcasts has of 
course been intense, Daily the 
letters come in to the Radio Divi- 
sion at Lake Success, and daily 
the interest of the individual 
listener, and the appreciation of 
the various broadcasting organ- 
izations is made clear. 
“The United Nations calling the 
peoples of the World” is not a 
voice crying in the wilderness. It 
is heard from loudspeakers on 
village housetops and in the 
homes. Slowly but surely it is be- 
coming a living force. Informa- 
tion, facts and fair reporting are 
gaining their hold. 
of Unesco. 
Kleber, Paris-16e, France. 
Castle Street, — Cardiff: 
Tower Lane, 
Low Countries:   
SUBSCRIPTION RATES 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly in English, 
French and Spanish by the Public Information Section 
6-month subscription: 2s.6d. or $80.50 or Fr. frs. 100. 
Please write to the Unesco agent indicated below for 
your country, or directly to Unesco House, 19 Avenue 
Argentina: Editorial Sudamericana S.A. Alsina 500, Buenos-Aires. 
Australia: H. A. Goddard Ltd. 255a, George St.. Sydney. 
Canada : The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. West, Toronto. 
Cuba: La Casa Belga, R. de Smedt O'Reilly, Habana. 
Czechoslovakia : Librairie F Topic. 11 Narodni, Prague. 
Denmark : Einar Mupksgaard, 6 Noérregade, Conenhagen. 
Great Britain: HM. Stationery Office: London: York House, Xings- 
way (Retail Counter Service} ; P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.1, (Post 
orders). — Manchester 2: 39/41 King Street. — Edinburgh 2: 13a 
1 St. Andrew’s Crescent. — Bristol 1: 
— Belfast: 80 Chichester Street. 
France: Editions A. Pedone, 13 Rue Soufflot, Paris. Se. 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie internationale. Athens. 
India: Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House. New Delhi. 
Iraq; Mackenzie and Mackenzie, Booksellers, The Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Lebanon and Syria: Librairie universelle, Av. Fouad ler, Beirut. 
N.V. Martinus 
9 Lange Voorhout. The Hague - 
Sweden: Ab. C. E, Fritzes, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
Switzerland: Librairie Payot, Lausanne, 
Nijhoff, Afd., Fondsaministratie     
Dr.CHENG 
REPORTS 
(Continued from Page 1.) 
In furthering the interchange 
of persons across national fron- 
tiers, China has sent more than 
two thousand students abroad to 
more than ten countries for ad- 
vanced studies during the past 
two years. At the same time, 
China has offered a number of 
scholarships—particularly to Uni- 
ted States soldiers who fought in 
China—to increase understanding 
of the country. Six Unesco 
scholarships are now being 
allocated to Chinese candidates, 
Dr. Cheng reported. 
In the same way, the exchange 
of publications and literature be- 
tween China and other countries 
has been increasing, Dr. Cheng 
said. China has especially benefit- 
.ed from gifts of books from Eng- 
land, the TUnited States and 
France, 
In the field of museums and 
libraries, China still stands to- 
day in great need of small po- 
pular institutions easily accessible 
to the general public. Though 
- there are great showplaces—dis- 
playing the unrivalled cultural 
heritage of thousands of years— 
China needs industrial and agri- 
cultural exhibits which are of 
practical use to the pedple. 
Progress has been made, against 
serious handicaps of finance, war- 
time dislocation and shortage of 
equipment, in developing audio- 
‘visual aids for education. Filme 
= 
  
strips, moving and still pictures, 
phonographs and radios are being 
used in schools on a gradually in- 
creasing scale. - 
Last year, for example, the 
Ministry of Education-distributed 
some 2,000 radio sets throughout 
the country where they were most 
needed. 
China is making a great effort 
to promote teaching about the 
United Nations and its Specialized 
Agencies in schools, but to date 
there are no definite courses. 
In the field of international un- 
derstanding, the problem in Chi- 
na is not as great as in some 
other parts of the world. For as 
long as fifty years ago, textbooks 
had been largely rid of racialist 
and nationalist expressions. Uni- 
versal love, rather than aggres- 
sion and hate, has always been 
the strongly predominant aspect 
of Chinese education—dating back 
to the time of Confucius who was 
perhaps the first to teach true 
internationalism. 
The Chinese press is co-operat- 
ing very well in helping acquaint 
the people with the work of Unes- 
_ co and the other United Nations 
branches. All of the doings of the 
National Commission are always 
fully reported, as is all the news 
sent from the Paris headquarters. 
Dr. Cheng declared that the 
Unesco Field Science Co-opera- 
tion Office in Nanking was fune- 
tioning well, with a sub-office in 
Shanghai. 
In general, Dr. Cheng said, the 
National Commission in China is 
doing its best to match the spirit 
of Unesco and to carry out all the 
essential measures in the Unesco 
programme. His visit to Paris 
would ensure a continuing and in- 
creasing liaison between the head- 
* quarters and the field where the 
real effect of Unesco’s world must 
be felt. 
Editorial Offices: Unesco, 19, Avenue 
Kléber, Paris (16e}. 
Editor: S.M, KOFFLER, 
Director: H. KAPLAN. 
 
All Reproductions Authorized 
IMPRIMERIE 
DU NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE 
21, Rue de Berri - Paris 8e