# [078354](078354engo.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](078354engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
ats, 
" oS. 3 
5 Sa ah 3 
. Nal a : 
0 al 
. 
ey * 
” 4 » 480 TIN 
EL 
. . 4 
oh
 
x A
 
g
h
»
 
L
N
.
 

## [Page 2](078354engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
he § : eT) : 
eed | $ i 
wr 
A 
IN A DYING LAND 
This was once a green pasture where vege- 
tation flourished and life abounded. Long 
spells of drought drained every inch of 
the earth of all moisture and created a 
stark landscape of dying trees, crackrid- 
dled soil and desolation. For the story of 
what science has been doing for the future 
of the world's arid lands, see page 4. 
WMO photo by Max-Pol Fouchet. From ‘‘Indian 
Lands'', published by La Guilde du Livre, Lausanne 
at 
v 
  

## [Page 3](078354engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

A WINDOW OPIN ON THI WOALD 
The ® 
mCourier 
Contents 
No. 5 
MAY 1962 
15TH YEAR 
  
PUBLISHED IN 
y 
EIGHT EDITIONS Page 
English 
French 4 THIRSTY LANDS—PAST AND FUTURE 
Spanish By Gilbert F. White 
Russian 5 (1) THE THOUSAND FACES OF THE ‘DESERT’ 
Berman Il (2) STRATEGY OF SCIENTIFIC CO-OPERATION 
Arabic 16 WHEN THE SAHARA WAS A BLOOMING GARDEN 
U.S.A 
Japanese 18 THE EMPEROR PENGUIN, MONARCH OF ANTARCTICA 
By Jean Prevost 
24 THE LOST HYMNS OF GEORGIA 
A Soviet linguist unravels an ancient musical mystery 
By Pavle Ingorokva 
28 MODERN JAPANESE FICTION 
A break with literary tradition 
By Ivan Morris 
32 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
 
COVER PHOTO 33 REMINISCENCES BY A FRIEND OF TAGORE 
This rock painting at Tassill, 
on the eastern borders of 
the Sahara Desert 1,000 miles 
south of Tunis, Is 5,500 years 
old. Aiong with many other 
recently discovered traces of 34 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
an ancient human occupa- 
tlon, it reveals the fact 
that this now utterly arid 
region was once a green and 
fertile place. {See page 16). 
© J. D. Lajoux 
By Aurobindo Bose 
(M.C. 62.1.169 A) 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin July and August when 
itis bi-monthly (11 issues a year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German 
Published monthly by 
  
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
English Edition ;: Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Russian Edition : Veniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
Arabic and Japanese. In the United - Kingdom it is distributed by H. M 
Stationery Office, P. O. Box 569, London, S. E. I. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Readers’ Guide to 
Periodical Literature published by H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
Annual subscription rates: U.S. 8 3.00; 10/-stg.; 7.00 
New Francs or equivalent. Single copies I/-stg. 30 
cents (U,S.) ; 0.70 New Francs. 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7+, 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief. 
  
 

## [Page 4](078354engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 63568: Thirsty lands

RA 
     
    
  
  
     
   
A
 
Rl
) 
SE
 T
U
 
VI
NE
 
TF 4 
Lu
 
or 
e
T
 TR
IE
 
TS
 
: [ut et : ) ‘ a — A 4 
LA Lm WE 
. — Teka yA ra % 
r * lt "A hh “py 
. 
» 
olf Bd . : 
A) a : . a 
ii — TE rT ys 
v a ar | en a. 
rt £ on Y - ‘ J , n° A = y a Ting 
A 
te 
J " i M a TT, r 
pf - A A ! oy wo - vr Lo 
Like huge snowflakes falling grotesquely onto the parched summer landscape of Morocco, a cloud of 
locusts swoops down on the sparse vegetation, In the arid lands movements of this nomad scourge of 
the insect world often correspond to the appearance of vegetation after seasonal or sporadic rains.

## [Page 5](078354engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 63568: Thirsty lands

    
i
i
 
E
T
 
SA
R 
HR
A 
Wh
 
r
R
 
Es?
 
LTS 
T
E
,
 
F
R
 
Re
 
8 ef 
Photo André Sonine © Reporters Associés, Paris 
  
 @ THE THOUSAND FACES 
Unesco’s Major Project to promote scientific 
research on the world’s vast arid lands is to be 
brought to an end this year after six years of 
operation. This period has seen the amazing 
growth of national and international activities 
for the development of arid lands in which the 
training of new arid land scientists and basic 
research have received a new impetus. The end 
of Unesco’s Major Project will not mean the end 
of this work. On the contrary, it will now be 
carried forward as part of Unesco’s regular pro- 
gramme and on an even wider scale than before by 
direct action made possible through the Technical 
Assistance programme and the United Nations 
Special Fund. In a recent Unesco booklet, Pro- 
fessor Gilbert F. White, head of the Department 
of Geography of the University of Chicago, has 
reviewed the situation of Science and the Future 
of Arid Lands, which we strongly recommend to 
our readers. (Limited supply available on 
request). From this authoritative study the Special 
Report on the following pages has been adapted. 
A: and semi-arid regions cover more than a 
third of the land surface of the earth, while 
cultivated ground represents barely a tenth. For each 
acre of cultivated land, there are three or four acres 
which are practically unused ‘by man because they are 
desert or covered with sparse vegetation permitting only 
a precarious subsistence economy at best. Yet the world’s 
population, which now exceeds 2,700 millions is increasing 
more and more rapidly, and at the present rate will 
double itself in fifty years. 
These regions cover an immense diversity of landscapes: 
majestic expanses of rolling steppe land in central Asia 
and North Africa; dry lake bottoms in central Australia : 
rugged mountain valleys in Baluchistan; nearly flat 
deltas at the mouths of the Nile and the Colorado. 
Archeological evidence suggests that the earliest cities 
were in the dry valley of Mesopotamia. Possibly the 
earliest cultivators and herdsmen were on the dry uplands 
or river fringes of south-west Asia. Whatever the precise 
early chronology, the arid zone has been occupied by man 
since civilization emerged on the earth and it now shows 
both rich fruit from his evolving use of its limited 
resources and deep scars from his protracted misuse. 
In these sectors of the earth’s crust men often scan the 
skies for a sign of rain, for scanty rainfall is the common 
theme and the common problem. Rain is measured in the 
depth that falls in an hour or day or year, and often fs 
expressed as a mean annual depth in millimetres. 
Any land surface in the temperate latitudes with a 
mean annual precipitation of less than 250 millimetres is 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 6](078354engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

SATE 
i CTRL ROTH Br Ral HE Tae fy 
Photos Unesco - J. Dominique Lajoux 


### 63568: Thirsty lands

THIRSTY LANDS (Cont'd) 
 
Overnight magic in the wilderness 
likely to suffer from shortage of moisture for crop 
growth, but gross annual amounts are misleading if taken 
alone, and they must be compared with the amounts of 
moisture that would be used through evaporation or 
transpiration by plants if a true measure of the adequacy 
of water supply for plant growth is to be obtained. While 
a place such as. Tartous, in Syria, may have a surplus of 
moisture in a few winter months, it may have a shortage 
throughout the remainder of the year. 
The term “desert” is used very loosely by both scientists 
and popular writers. The western interior of the United 
States of America was dubbed “desert” by the pioneers 
but would be considered humid by a Libyan herdsman on 
the edge of the Sahara. 
In the lands where summer daytime temperatures 
commonly are high, vegetation, soil and ground water 
also are sparse. Except for generally narrow strings of 
tamarix, cottonwoods or similar trees along water courses 
there are no dense stands of trees, and over large 
expanses the herbaceous and shrubby plants are so thin 
as to support only a few goats or a camel on 100 hectares 
annually. In a few places there are major accumulations 
of fresh ground water but generally these are meagre, in 
many instances floating upon waters that are so saline as 
to be unpalatable for animals and toxic for plants. 
But if the water, soil and vegetation are marked by 
sparsity they are also marked by variability both in time 
and in place. It is not uncommon for a station in the 
Nubian Desert or Negev to go 11 months without a drop 
of rain and then to have a cloudburst of twenty inches in 
a few hours. 
Vegetation knows no orderly time-table here, but 
responds in striking fashion to the vagaries of rain. This 
is epitomized by the bright, delicate carpet of desert 
flowers that may spring overnight from a seared desert 
soil following one of the infrequent rains. Much of the 
movement, of nomads and of the nomad scourge of the 
insect world—the locust—is in response to vegetation 
which flourishes for a time in the wake of seasonal or 
sporadic rains. 
Just as arid lands vary with the years and seasons, they 
vary tremendously from place to place. The unbroken 
vista of sand dunes with uniform ridges, soil, vegetation 
and water conditions—the traditional erg’ of the Saha- 
ra—is in fact relatively rare. 
A expanse of gently sloping plains in the 
western Egyptian arid zone gives at first 
glance a deceptive impression of uniformity. On closer 
examination it is found to have a complex set of soils and 
plants. The spottiness becomes greater to the east when 
areas with greater differences in rock formation and relief 
are investigated, as with the wadi systems that drain the 
Sinaj Peninsula and embrace a wide variety of land forms 
and plant communities. 
Tenacious human beings have established pockets of 
settlement in these lands, leaving vast areas unoccupied. 
From the standpoint of human occupation, scarcity, 
variability and spottiness again are prominent charac- 
teristics. Arid lands encompass several of the great 
uninhabited wastes of the world—the Sahara ergs, the 
Atacama desert of the Chile coast, the Salt Desert of 
Iran, and the Takla Makan of Central Asia.

## [Page 7](078354engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 63568: Thirsty lands

  
    
A
a
a
 
bm
 
> o
T
 
a 
oh
 
3 h
s
 
5 
ae
 Y
r
 
> 
IE
 
a 
e
s
.
 
o
m
a
 
SUNKEN OASIS. A few years ago an oasis cast its green shade near Fort Flatters in the Sahara. 
Today it has been swallowed up by the creeping sands and only the tops of three palm trees (left) 
mark its grave. Nearby is a lunar-like landscape (above) created by strange formations of vegetal 
origin which formerly clung to the roots of trees, now dead and today petrified by time and weather, 
These typically are crossed by caravan tracks and air 
routes which connect settlements within and on their 
borders. There and on the semi-arid borders are four 
major classes of settlement. Perhaps most characteristic 
are the pastoral nomadic groups which range across and 
in the arid areas of the Old World in search of grass and 
water but whose fortunes always are linked by trade or 
tribute with sedentary areas. 
Intensive farming is the rule in the Nile, Tigris- 
Euphrates, Indus, Amu-Darya and Colorado valleys, as 
well as in isolated areas like the Ouargla Oasis in Algeria 
or the Imperial Valley of California and Fayum Depres- 
slon of Egypt, and it is in these areas that the greater 
number of the people of the arid lands is crowded. 
In some places linked with these agricultural areas and 
in other places quite independent of them are fast 
mushrooming cities like Cairo which have long been 
capitals and in many instances owe their existence to 
religious, mining, government, or trade functions which 
are largely independent of the agricultural hinterland. 
Thus Mecca and Jerusalem are holy citles, Karachi 
and Teheran have taken on importance as centres of new 
political administration, Kuwait and Abadan are centres 
for oil exploitation. Quetta and San Diego are military 
bases, and Phoenix and Yuma serve a relatively recent 
invasion of urban dwellers who seek to enjoy the 
amenities of sunshine and dry warmth. 
In addition to the nomads, oasis farmers and city 
dwellers, all of the arid lands have twilight margins of 
semi-arid lands that are occupied in varying degrees by 
sedentary farmers who try to wrest a living out of the 
dry soil in the face of rains sometimes niggardly and 
sometimes copious, and whose fortunes are at times as 
variable as the rains. These marginal lands occasionally 
have been the theatre of large-scale government occupa- 
tion, as in the case of the “virgin lands” programme in 
the arid southern fringes of the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics. 
In the Americas and Australia the arid lands have been 
largely free of pastoral nomadic occupancy although 
their irrigated settlement has been one of the early 
human chapters, and recently their use has turned on 
new forms of urban and mining exploitation of climate 
and location. Swimming pools ripple in the outskirts of 
Los Angeles on land that once was worthless for ferage. 
|: is highly problematical as to how most of 
the arid landscape appeared when the earliest 
agricultural settlements were established. Certainly the 
plant cover has been changed radically since that time: 
Syrian mountain slopes have been largely denuded of 
trees, and grasslands have changed dramatically in plant 
composition. 
The records of abandoned fields and civilizations, 
coupled with these Instances of landscape change, have 
fostered a popular belief that deserts around the world 
are advancing. Sometimes these advances are attributed 
to human destruction of resources, and sometimes to 
climatic change. 
The chronology is still confused and indistinct in many 
periods, but from the patchy data a few conclusions 
begin to emerge: 
  
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 8](078354engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 63568: Thirsty lands

THIRSTY LANDS (Cont'd) 
30 centuries of 
man-made destruction 
1) With the polar recession of the last of the great 
fluctuating ice sheets aridity was widespread in the desert 
lands of south west Asla and Africa. There were marked 
changes In temperature and precipitation during the long 
glacial perlod, so that lakes filled in areas of both Asia 
and America which are now dry, but by the end of the 
period, perhaps 15,000 years ago, a general climatic situa- 
. tion similar to the present had set in. 
2) The prevailing aridity was relieved in Africa and 
western Asia during about 5000-3000 B.C. by a time of 
greater heat and moisture. It was in this Neolithic 
period that the boundaries of the Sahara apparently 
contracted and that it had animals, plants and solis now 
found far from its margins in savannah country. 
3) There have been harrowing, prolonged droughts—as 
in the terrible drought of A.D. 1276-99 in the south- 
western North American lands—and these have been 
followed by more humid times. 
4) During the last 50 years there has been a slight 
tendency toward higher temperatures and lower precipi- 
tation throughout most of the arid zone. This is of the 
order of 5 to 10 per cent reductions, a trend which is 
small by comparison with annual swings in precipitation. 
5) The more dramatic examples of resource destruction 
during the past 3,000 years must be traced to man rather 
than climate. 
W: cannot predict with any confidence that the 
arid lands will become more or less arid in the 
decades immediately ahead. They have been in man’s 
short history on the earth both drier and wetter. While 
aridity as a climatic phenomena is not spreading on a 
broad front, human abuse of arid lands still 1s going lar- 
gely unchecked. The need to halt this deterioration and 
at the same time to make better use of the remaining 
resources as a means of improving the life of its bur- 
geoning population presents the central problem In the 
development of the arid lands. 
Behind the problem of social and economic development 
of the arid lands lies the more basic problem of 
understanding the processes by which resources are being 
destroyed and by which they may be used more effectively. 
While it is often maintained that the pastoral nomads 
make an ideal adjustment to the sparse grasslands of 
the Middle East, moving with their flocks to the places of 
most abundant forage, their record for treatment of the 
grass resource is far from encouraging. 
The combination of inflexible land-tenure systems, a 
heavy goat population on sub-humid margins, and a 
growing human population has promoted grazing prac- 
tices that have not only effected a radical change in the 
total plant cover but have selectively eliminated many 
productive species and have substantially reduced the 
carrying capacity of the ranges. 
The upland pastures in the steppe areas of Syria are 
reported by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
investigators to be subject to continuing replacement of 
forage plants by mnon-palatable species. Over great 
expanses the useful species have disappeared or nearly so. 
Often labelled as Public Enemy Number One or as the 
“black locust”, the goat continues to roam and scalp the 
more humid Middle Eastern grazing lands. 
The striking feature of the arld zone cities is their raw, 
rapid growth. They are expanding at a high rate, 
pushing out into surrounding dry lands, attracting popu- 
lation from agricultural areas, and in turn placing fresh 
demands upon those areas for food supply and raw 
materials. No cities in the United States of America 
have sprawled more quickly over their dry borders than 
Los Angeles and Phoenix. Some of this recent increase 
reflects the mounting exploitation of petroleum reserves. 
Countries like Irag and Saudi Arabia which have 
a
 
A 
Ta 

## [Page 9](078354engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 63568: Thirsty lands

“ - 
WF   es 
© Almasy, Paris 
Daily water minimum in 
Arabian desert: 15 litres 
undertaken alternative development programmes with oil 
revenues may offset some effects of exhaustion. 
What seems abundantly clear in connexion with 
development efforts is that the needs commonly outstrip 
the possibilities of human action and that two of the 
principal barriers to effective action are lack of scientific 
knowledge and failure to translate available knowledge 
into positive action, 
The slow process of scientific inquiry and the careful 
building of educational institutions must be fostered. 
These are the two major channels along which UNEsco 
has tried to move in improving the condition of people 
in the arid lands: 
A Berber tribesman and a California politician have in 
common the question of whether or not there will be 
water enough to go around. Shortage of water is the 
unifying problem of the arid lands. 
The one great source of water on land is the natural 
precipitation. Determining the total supply that preci- 
pitation makes available at one place is complicated both 
by the irregularity and spottiness of the records and by 
the differing amounts of natural demand. Because the 
arid lands are sparsely settled, the number of rain gauges 
is smaller than in more humid regions and certain large 
expanses such as the Salt Desert of Iran are wholly lack- 
ing in gauges. 
In areas like the Negev where a few centimetres may 
be highly important in planning new water control works 
it is necessary to guess at means and annual variations 
from the mean, using records only a few decades in 
length at most, and to try to fill in the great gaps in 
data by extrapolating from other records and from the 
corroborating evidence of geochromology and archelogy. 
Nor is it yet clear how much water a given field of 
plants requires in order to attain optimum growth. There 
are no ready ways of measuring them directly. At least 
six different methods are in use for estimating required 
water consumption, and these differ from each other by 
as much as 30 per cent according to assumptions which 
it is necessary to make about water and soil processes 
that themselves are in doubt. 
The design of new storage dams and canals in Lebanon 
or in Peru depends upon these estimates of optimum 
needs for water. Without them it is difficult to arrive 
at appraisals of water-use efficiency. 
It is not enough to have water of a given quantity; the 
water must be of suitable quality. Water may carry 
injurious amounts of either minerals in solution or solids 
in suspension. One cost of permanent irrigation is 
constant vigilance against salting. 
Si another hazard in water quality is the 
silt load which, carried either in suspension or 
as bed load, may clog up reservoirs and ditches. In many 
ancient valleys, such as the Tigris-Euphrates, the decline 
of early agriculture at certain periods is to be traced in 
considerable measure to the fallure of society to deal 
carefully with the salt and silt menaces. 
There is less doubt about animal and human needs for 
water than there is as to plant needs although man 
exercises wide discretion in the surpluses with which he 
supplies himself, The absolute minimum needed to 
maintain life in a normal adult in the most intense heat 
of the Arabian Desert is about 15 litres per day, Saharan 
workmen need a minimum of 7.5 litres and often more, 
depending upon temperature and type of work. In tem- 
perate climates, daily need is sometimes taken as 3.7 litres. 
Animal consumption of water varies with age, heat and 
feeding conditions. Many mammals, such as the desert 
fox, draw water entirely from their food intake. 
In a strict sense, water can be brought wherever man 
 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 10](078354engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 63568: Thirsty lands

THIRSTY LANDS (Cont'd) 
Tomatoes that drink 
dew in the night 
wishes if he is willing to take the trouble and pay the 
cost of carrying out elaborate engineering works or of 
effecting other changes in the natural cycle of water. 
Increasingly these works are designed to serve multiple 
purposes in an entire drainage basin, as in the Rio 
Grande Basin in Mexico and the United States of Amer- 
ica, or in the Oom er Rbia in Morocco. Canals, aque- 
ducts, pumps, diversion dams, storage dams are common 
devices for changing the place and time of water, but 
their application to arid land conditions is severely 
llmited by factors of design ingenuity, of cost, and of 
knowledge. 
But there are other means than major engineering for 
affecting the time and place of water in dry lands. 
Through the spreading of flood run-off on permeable 
intake areas the supply of water flowing into underground 
storage may be increased, as in the spreading grounds of 
southern California. Plant control may be used in certain 
favourable circumstances to increase the flow of water, to 
reduce canal wastage, or to reduce the flow of water. 
One of the fascinating technical possibilities is that 
of reducing losses occasioned by evaporation from water 
surfaces. In drainage basins like the Colorado the total 
amount of water lost from reservoir surfaces in a year 
may exceed the amount put to actual consumptive use in 
the same basin. If there were a generally efficient means 
of preventing such losses the available supply might be 
greatly augmented. Promising experiments in evaporation 
reduction are under way with mono-molecular films such 
as cetyl alcohol. Practical application on a wide scale 
awaits further refinement. 
The schematic flow of water in the natural hydrologic 
cycle is now seen to be subject to modification at many 
points. Some of these changes, such as storage dams 
and weather modification, increase the amount of water 
effectively available to man. 
HE impact of man and the intricacies of the 
plant-soil complex which he has modifled are 
nowhere more evident than in places where patches of 
arid lands have been protected from goat and plough and 
axe. In 1955 seven enclosures protecting a total of 29 hec- 
tares were established in Mauretania with support by 
Unesco. Each enclosure gave a different combination of 
soil, plant and microclimatic factors. Within one year 
striking changes began to take place in the protected 
areas. The total amount of vegetation increased. 
It is not easy to predict the results of man’s various 
uses of vegetation and soil because there are so many 
points at which knowledge of the basic life processes is 
lacking. This is especially true of the processes by which 
plants use water and by which soil nutrients and solutions 
are formed. 
The selection and breeding of plants for the rigorous 
drought situations of the arid lands can only be as 
productive as that understanding. Thus, if it is recog- 
nized that a tomato plant can absorb dew from its leaves 
at night, the way may be open to finding other plants 
with similar capacities or to breeding up those characte- 
ristics in species which would not otherwise prosper in 
areas with heavy dew fall. 
Likewise, the exact means by which plant nutrients are 
released from their mineral complex in the soil and made 
available to plant roots through the medium of soil solu- 
tion or carried upwards by capillary action or downwards 
by gravity is not well understood. These fundamental 
processes of soil formation and plant nutrition are 
important to the management of arid soils in several 
ways. 
If it were known as well how minerals enter into the soil 
water solution and how plants accommodate themselves 
10 to different minerals, the prevention, cure, and adjustment 
to salinity conditions would be greatly advanced over the 
means now available to irrigation farmers. 
U
n
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
 
© STRATEGY OF 
The desert is popularly viewed as an 
inhospitable environment which repels 
animal and man; actually it supports 
large populations in relatively healthy 
state. Nowhere do extremes set up 
insurmontable barriers to human 
beings, whether roving or sedentary. 
And as our knowledge of the physiology 
of life in arid and semi-arid conditions 
becomes greater the possibility of 
making life more comfortable and 
more productive is also multiplying.

## [Page 11](078354engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 63568: Thirsty lands

  
N Egypt the desert which for centuries has 
been shunned is now seen as a place of 
recreation, and in southern California the arid interior 
valleys once roamed only by mining prospectors are being 
subdivided for holiday use. 
Two of the characteristic urban features in arid lands 
are the rough new mining and oil towns which rise out of 
bare desert wastes and the ghost town which marks the 
site of abandoned mineral operations. The refinery 
towers of Abadan, the pipeline pumping stations of Syria, 
the uranium mines of the Transvaal, the copper mining 
pits of Utah and Chuguicamata, and the well-drilling 
rigs of the Algerian Sahara are samples of vigorous new 
mineral developments. 
What part of the extracted wealth will find its way into 
MIMOSA TREE seedlings being planted in the dunes 
of the Gaza strip under a United Nations Relief & 
Works Agency (UNRWA) desert reclamation project. 
i] EN
 
SCIENTIFIC CO-OPERATION 
stabilized grasslands or flourishing irrigation projects or 
productive towns or in devices to harness solar energy? 
It is estimated that at the current state of exploration 
approximately 55 percent of all the proven reserves of 
petroleum and a substantial part of the potential reserves 
are in the arid countries bordering the eastern Mediterra- 
nean and the Persian Gulf. At present rates of produc- 
tion those fields should last many more decades. 
The known copper reserves of the world are widely 
scattered, but are heavily clustered in a few arid areas, 
chiefly Chile, Northern Rhodesia and the western United 
States. A few other minerals have high local importance. 
Manganese in the Union of South Africa and the Ukraine, 
chromite in Southern Rhodesia, phosphate in Morocco 
and Tunisia, vanadium in Peru and south-west Africa, 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
11

## [Page 12](078354engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

{ 
rr 
ERT ie 38 Cy i 
= SYA fs LI : RE me A of aly 
mY Vom 27 Sy yi OAT a i : ATL al YE 
a $ ’, : : 
J "a" ¥ Xo i o ’ ; 
" 3 » oh 
awl haf iy a 0g 
Ips ” \ yl T* \ ’ A AY os L re : ow A - = i J. : ; 
a Sy SOT ae Ee Sl, ST a or CS MA TI TL fra Th 
Ce We AAR cry 2 ” p X - My 2 C= NN 
} ) 
» 
    
dr! 
¥ 
3 We 
hy - a - *. 
he “ rp NE, 
ny) 
cy 
4 = 3 a , Le . : as 
Tv Ta 2% ‘ “i. Je br Aepals 1 
- 4 x 
LIFE = 
Nant pe 
I le 
* 
| ~w 
a 
rl 
. Ch tA 
i 
{ Woy 
L 
                  
Li 
Wi il Sad Fl Shs A A A 5 v Ly it ae a Lo ASM Le ENTE eT J dt 
Manufacturing processes of plants—the greatest factories in the world—are “taken 
apart” and analyzed in this special agricultural laboratory in the United States. Scien- 
tists have now found that all. growing plants contain a chemical which is activated by 
red rays found both in daylight and artificial light. Part of the red end of the spectrum 
promotes growth while another part encourages flowering. A fuller understanding of 
these processes might enable the farmer of the future to benefit from a “light control” 
of his crops, staggering the harvest season and making his schedule easier. Above, photo- 
i grapher records difference in growth of two plants of same age which received same 
~ amounts of food. Big plant received longer doses of light. Centre, hose lines carry 
by special nutrient solution to cocklebur plants and (right) bean plant. Everything known 
to affect plant growth is strictly controlled and analyzed. Light, temperature, humi- 
12 
~ dity and nutrients are changed at will. Basic research into the processes by which plants 
use water and by which soil nutrients and solutions are form 
» far better use 
A] for knowledge with which to mak 
hr LT oo, Yaa Ae8 VLE LR A 
Th 


### 63568: Thirsty lands

THIRSTY LANDS (Cont'd) 
ed is an essential part of his 
f the world’s arid lands, 
’ 
Slee gl FOE at 
Minerals as economic stimulants 
zine in Mexico, and lead in Australia, are examples. In 
each case, a large share of the regional income is derived 
from exploiting these deposits. 
One of the direct effects of new mineral exploitation is 
to open up new roads and airlines to previously inacces- 
sible areas. In time these developments will place still 
heavier pressures on the remaining local resources of 
grass and soil. There is, however, the possibility of so 
using the income from the mineral resources as to pro- 
mote more effective use of resources which will be avail- 
able when the petroleum is gone. 
During the mid-1950’s, seventy per cent of the petro- 
leum revenues in Iraq was set aside for construction by 
the development board of new manufacturing plants, fer- 
tilizer plants, transport facilities, and water-control 
structures. Similarly, a substantial part of the petroleum 
revenues in Iran has been used since the early 1950’s to 
support resources development, of which the land and 
water programme in Quhistan is a major example. 
The Quhistan regional development programme in- 
cludes construction of a hydroelectric and irrigation pro- 
ject on the Dez River, a new sugar-cane and sugar-pro- 
duction scheme, a polyvinyl chloride plastics plant as the 
beginning of a petrochemical industry, and a fertilizer 
test and demonstration effort. 
In a basic sense, the effectiveness of current use of 
minerals to support permanent occupance of arid lands 
may rest on the wisdom with which research results are 
applied in the management of soil and plants and water. 
Just as the natural resources of the arid lands are 
spotty and variable, so also are the resources of skilled 
scientists and experienced teachers to deal with the 
underlying problems of research and of education. 
Among the newer national units, such as Libya, there 
are some with only a handful of trained scientists while 
in others, such as the UAR (Egypt), there are long-estab- 
lished universities. Few have the highly organized cen- 
tral research facilities that are found in Australia, or the 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, or the widespread 
networks of agricultural experiment stations and agri- 
cultural extension workers that have spread across the 
arid sectors of the United States of America. 
In order to gain the quickest practicable flow of research 
findings into areas where they are needed it is important 
to speed up the conduct of basic and applied research 
and to speed its results. No single country may be con- 
sidered to have solved the troublesome problems of water, 
soil, vegetation, and sun, and the record indicates that 
each must be prepared to draw heavily upon contribu- 
tions from outside its borders if it is to do so in a 
reasonable period.

## [Page 13](078354engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 63568: Thirsty lands

—- 
— 
iv
, 
y 
LL
 
| a ))  
Some of the major centres for research on arid land 
problems lie wholly outside of the arid zone. Basic work 
on the organic content of arid soils is going forward in 
laboratories in Zurich and Paris. Demineralization is the 
subject of lively experiments in Japan and Florida. 
Water balance studies are centred at a station in the 
United States of America. The great Soviet Union soils 
institute has its headquarters in Moscow, and the domi- 
nant agricultural research station in the United King- 
dom is outside of London. 
At the same time there are vital centres of research in 
the midst of arid terrain. Egypt's work on the Nile is a 
monument of hydrologic research. 
An example of the complex international collaboration 
involved in a broad research programme is found in the 
current attacks upon problems of salinity. The frontal 
attack on the possibilities of converting salt water into 
fresh is going forward on several fronts with UnEsco 
serving as a clearing house for information among the 
far-flung operations. 
The problem of salinity recognizes common interests of 
Soviet soil chemists, New Zealand animal breeders, Iraqi 
archaeologists, and Iranian hydrologists in the hydrolysis 
processes of soil formation. This is the view that led the 
Iranian Government to sponsor jointly with Unesco at 
Teheran in 1958 the first world symposium bringing toge- 
ther these diverse scientific approaches. 
There is no precedent for an international operation 
which seeks to speed up the research and the information 
  
and education linked with it for a great expanse of terri- 
tory like the arid zone. Certain scientific disciplines have 
achieved a fair degree of co-operation across national 
boundaries through journals and occasional congresses. 
Thus, the botanists bring together workers in plant 
ecology at intervals of five years, and the geologists 
gather every five years in a different country. The pro- 
ceedings of the International Association of Scientific 
Hydrology regularly carry the latest research findings in 
that field to its members around the world. 
Confronted with the task of speeding up the action in 
all these directions an international organization must 
choose among many methods of helping. Attacking such 
a problem for the first time, Unesco in its arid zone pro- 
gramme gradually charted a strategy that followed three 
major lines. 
Its most ambitious effort was to accelerate the whole 
complex international flow of people and ideas that is 
associated with the advancement of research. Secondly, 
it sought to improve the training and education from 
which scientists and technical workers may be drawn in 
future. Finally, in a much more modest way it sought to 
select critical and basic research problems deserving the 
encouragement of definition and token support. 
One issue of strategy which was raised at the inter- 
national level at the very beginning of the Unesco pro- 
gramme and which lingers to plague every national co- 
operative effort is whether or not a specific research 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
13

## [Page 14](078354engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 63568: Thirsty lands

14 
THIRSTY LANDS (Cont'd) 
Research that will shape the future 
institution should be named or set up as a centre of arid 
zone research. 
Unesco decided against a single centre and instead set 
up an advisory committee representative of the coun- 
tries involved. This, however, only shifted the issue to 
the national level where it continues to provoke debate 
and alternative plans. 
In addition to the long-established research centres in 
other regions, there is now growing up a network of 
institutes within the arid zone. It would be ideal to have 
a complete Inventory of climate, geology, land forms, 
water, soil, vegetation, energy sources and human popu- 
lation for each sector of the arid zone. 
A practicable strategy of scientific co-operation must 
recognize that the basic surveys, like the research work, 
will make a spotted and diverse patchwork which will 
rarely cover any one area adequately. The technician 
and the scientist must be prepared to improvise and 
interpolate, and to draw upon the best that comes from 
workers elsewhere. 
Within the domain of science are numerous channels 
along which research workers and their findings may 
move in advancing the limits of knowledge. The dis- 
tinctively international barriers to scientific advances are 
the special concern of Unesco, and it tries to reduce them 
by strengthening the national scientific agencies and by 
helping speed up and extend international action. Its 
stock in trade is ideas and people who can use them. 
Thus, government committees have been established in 
Iran and Pakistan to promote integrated research in 
those countries and in each case the stimulus came from 
the call to participate in a UnEsco effort on a larger scale. 
Ao and ‘direct way of speeding up the flow 
of new ideas is to bring together represent- 
ative scientists from the chief countries involved to 
exchange findings and views. In each case, papers 
reviewing the current state of research are prepared in 
advance, and then men from as many as two or three 
dozen nations are given an opportunity to criticize that 
work and report new contributions. Both the review 
reports and the symposium papers are then published for 
distribution to the many workers who were unable to 
attend. 
The impact of a scientific symposium of this sort is 
widespread. A Tunisian hydrologist learns of new clima- 
tological methods which he can apply in designing water 
control works at home, and he in turn teaches others the 
concrete results of using archeological studies of ancient 
wells and terraces in the planning of new structures. 
More common is the interchange between workers 
which enables one of them to leap across what otherwise 
would have been years of plodding through already disco- 
vered territory. A scientist returning to his laboratory 
from one of the international symposia may carry only 
a warm sense of fellowship with his workers in other 
countries or he may be the means of radically revising 
the research programme of his agency. 
Universities of good quality cannot be created over- 
night where nomadic herdsmen or caravans make their 
camps. However, for nations that are seeking to leap in 
a generation over economic development that has taken 
300 years in many other societies, a few years time in the 
maturing of scientific workers may seem crucial. 
It has already been noted that much of the resource 
deterioration in the arid zone is in the face of sound 
scientific knowledge of possible ways of preventing much 
of it; from a technical standpoint many irrigated lands 
need pot be salted and the pasture lands need not be 
éroded. 
At least 90 per cent.of the Libyans are illiterate. Of 
the more than 2,300,000 people who inhabit Somaliland, 
Somalia and other dry lands of the “Horn” of Africa, at 
least 1,700,000 are estimated to be pastoral nomads. 
To reach these proud, roving people with new ideas or 
even to facilitate their grazing operations by forecasts as 
to available grass and water in the remote lands which - 
they prowl, is a formidable task calling for devices not 
generally in use. To speak to them either in pictures or 
words in a medium which is suitable requires sensitive 
perception of their culture and an array of printed and 
audiovisual materials that is not now available. 
As one way of helping curb the unknowing abuse of 
natural resources in the eastern Mediterranean area, a 
special effort has been made to prepare simple educa- 
tional materials in the local languages. * Kits of books, 
pamphlets, posters, pictures and filmstrips have been 
developed to give essential ideas about resources and their 
more orderly use to children in the 12-14 age-group and 
to adults in fundamental education centres. 
HESE kits were first tried for children in the 
Arabic-speaking countries of Iraq, Jordan, 
Lebanon, Morocco, and of the United Arab Republic on 
an experimental basis. After some experience, they 
were reviewed and work was begun on a final set of 
materials which might be used widely in areas with 
similar conditions of dryness, plant cover, and grazing 
and farming systems. 
It is in the realm of FAO technical assistance teams 
and co-operative surveys that the outlines of better pas- 
ture management practices begin to take shape, or that 
regional attacks on the vexing question of salinity in 
irrigated soils are planned. 
Man has the tools to produce more from the resources 
at hand but lacks the social skills to use those tools. 
We may regard the arid lands, and particularly their 
sub-humid borders, as a key test of man’s ingenuity in 
applying his technical tools to keep production ahead of 
population growth. 
The role played by basic research in setting the limits 
for social development in arid lands is nowhere more 
apparent than in the struggle to narrow the gap between 
scientific knowledge and practical action in resource use. 
If there were miraculously to be an abundance of 
teachers to work with the Somali grazers and if there 
were adequate funds to pay for whatever pamphlets, 
radio sets, slide projectors or posters they might wish, 
there still would remain the question of what should be 
taught. 
Fone investigation by the anthropo- 
logist and geographer thus must precede 
sound decisions as to effective ways of using the rich 
store of developed technology to advance the basic 
cultural aims of these people. No simple transfer of 
“know how” will do. 
It is remarkable that while there are many descriptions 
of nomadic groups relatively little is known of the migra- 
tion routes they take and of the conditions affecting their 
shifts and their relations to sedentary peoples. The 
whole process by which nomads choose grazing animals 
and schedules is obscure. Yet every sound effort to work 
out an improvement in methods must take such informa- 
tion into account if it is to succeed. 
Clouds of ignorance cover numerous scientific areas 
Which, once exposed, could influence man’s capacity to 
live in and use the arid lands. 
The important need is to get on with the primarily basic 
research wherever there are competent men to direct it. 
No sector of the arid zone has received more concentrated 
applications of technology and education than Israel with

## [Page 15](078354engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 63568: Thirsty lands

  
INVADING SANDS REPULSED. Standing on a sea of sand, a Colorado, U.S.A., farmer points 
to a sea of flowers and grasses, a terrain which he transformed from barren rangeland and unpro- 
ductive sandhills, into a profitable ranch area. For this land reclamation, natural vegetation was 
allowed to grow. Once established, these plants held the soil and furnished shelter for pasture grasses. 
its heavy inflow of capital and trained people. Here, 
there is a tendency to stress applied science, but there 
is also lively concern for basic research. 
What is the rough balance sheet of human gains and 
losses in each of the major types of environmental com- 
plex in the arid zone? 
On the whole, the grazing lands appear to be deterio- 
rating. Notwithstanding large-scale provision of new 
water facilities, the net volume of grassland resources 
seems to be on the decline. Where nomadic grazers are 
in command there is thus far no highly effective means 
of ordering their operations. 
Grassland surveys are setting the ground for needed 
plans of improvement and management methods are 
being perfected. 
As the ability to select and breed drought and heat- 
resistant strains of plants is increased, and as under- 
standing of the physiology of drought resistance and 
endurance in animals is widened, powerful aids in enlarg- 
ing the producing capacity of the grasslands may well 
be released. Meanwhile, social research on nomadic life 
holds the key to unlocking much of the biological work 
already accomplished but bound by custom and organiza- 
tion into compartments outside the daily stream of 
resource management. 
Among the lands already irrigated it has been shown, 
however, that at least three major factors affect the 
prospects for continued use: 
1) The wides> ead problem of salting whose threat to 
the permanency of many fertile lands will be removed 
only as farming practices improve and as the under- 
standing of soil-water relations is sharpened. 
2) The low efficiency of current water use. This also 
may be curbed in part by enlightened management and 
in part by research which in this case might lead to 
closer estimates of crop needs and of means of reducing 
water losses through seepage and reservoirs. 
3) The increasing competition for water as between 
Irrigation and industrial, municipal and recreational uses. 
Taking these factors into account and balancing them 
against the current investments in new irrigation works, 
it appears that for the arid zone as a whole there is a 
net gain in agricultural productivity and in the stability 
of village life as a result of massive irrigation develop- 
ment. The new dams and canals are strengthening the 
productive plant. 
The most rapid growth In economic productivity in the 
arid lands is taking place in the areas of oil and metal 
exploitation, and there the typical sights are new piers, 
refineries, and smelters. 
Essentially, the task of helping make the most of the 
sparse and variable arid lands is one of discovery and 
dissemination: discovery of the fundamental facts about 
social behaviour, water, soils and plants on which refined 
technological advances may be grounded; and dissemina- 
tlon of the new and practicable knowledge to those who 
should use it. Thus, scientific research and education 
march shoulder to shoulder, each reinforcing the other. 
It is this effort to sharpen and speed up the scientific 
and educational processes that has special urgency for 
the arid zone while its waters are not yet fully appro- 
priated, while its soils and plants still have some recupe- 
rative capacity, and while its minerals still provide the 
stimulation of investment capital. 
15

## [Page 16](078354engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 63734: When the Sahara desert was a blooming garden

Soffer is a. typical dried-up and ‘ 0 : - : - LI rR - . g Ar a LR "| Fg, R 
eroded landscape of the eastern Je Je | 
~ Sahara. Yetinthecavesamongthese ~~ hil ; 
. ¢ i A h ul _ Lt ot i Ae : LS ~ bare rocks are paintings and rock 
4" le p wy } 
y 
: J \ L a - ) - - 
hy wir 4 I gy, ms SAE 
} 
ny : ge i a : . Cl Cf ES ei Fo 4 : ah a - 
if - 
- be - 
k J 1 LL 
| uMerveilles du Tassii n'Ajier-, to be pubr : Red = I ODAY withered, fossilized and eroded by 
3 lished hy Editions du Chine, NZ I l= A oe ‘the burning desert winds, Tassili n’Ajjer 
I T= 7¢# in the Sahara (nearly 1,000 miles south 
I) TT TES RTE TI SE [ CT JE TT J = (I CR ET 
5,500 years ago. This has been revealed by 
; innumerable painted and engraved images on 
its rocks. Analyses made of fossilized pollen 
TOCE OTL I(T) OG CET OR TI OI TTT LEAT 
now shown that in this area a Mediterranean 
y" lype vegetation grew profusely. It included 
~ lime trees, alders, hollyoaks, cypresses, 
olive trees and cereals of various kinds. 
Of all this variety and wealth of flora there 
remain today but a hundred cypress trees. 
. diy 
F
E
 
C
a
t
 
B
T
 
Be 
Lo
 
o
d
 
~ BC. Left, these cattle engraved on a rock at Terrarat, 
~ seem to be waiting to drink in the wadi when the next 
rare rainstorm fills it with water. Opposite page, herd ~~ 
~ of cattle, a painting going back to 3500 B.C. Some of 
‘these rock paintings show as many as 100 head of cattle  

## [Page 17](078354engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 63734: When the Sahara desert was a blooming garden

  17

## [Page 18](078354engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 63569: The Emperor penguin, monarch of Antarctica

18 
THE EMPEROR PENGUIN 
MONARCH OF ANTARCTICA 
by Jean Prevost 
OVER 100,000 EMPERORS, 
largest and stateliest of the Antarctic 
penguins, live for ten months of 
each year in colonies on the ice like 
the one shown here, in Adelie Land. 
O-: all the teeming flocks of seabirds which 
breed and raise their young on the islands 
and coasts of the frozen continent of Antarctica and in 
the sub-Antarctic regions to the north undoubtedly the 
most curious and fascinating are the penguins or 
.Spheniscidae., 
Comprising 17 species, the penguin family is primarily 
found in the frozen south, although some of its members 
breed much further north. The more temperate habitats 
of some penguins in southern Australia, New Zealand, 
South Africa and the west coast of South America are 
certainly explained by the existence of cold marine 
currents from the Antarctic. The most striking example 
perhaps are the most northerly colonies of penguins 
which live close to the equator in the Galapagos Islands 
MALE OR FEMALE? With no outward differ- 
ence between male and female emperors, iden- 
tification of the sexes is a difficult business. Weigh- 
ing them, as French biologist, Jean Prévost, is 
doing here, helps to solve the problem as males 
are on the average heavier than females. Studies 
of this kind revealed that heaviest males weigh 88 
Ibs, females 81, at the start of the breeding season. 
1 
  
 
off the coast of Ecuador. (See THE UNEsco COURIER, Sept. 
1961). 
With their endearing and amusing appearance and 
habits, penguins have become the most “popular” and 
best known of Antarctica’s birds. On land they stand up 
straight on short legs and walk with a flat-footed, clumsy 
waddle. They are most at home in the water and, using 
their short flipper-like wings as paddles, they are first- 
rate swimmers. 
While most of the species offer definite possibilities for 
observation and studies, one in particular, the emperor 
penguin, is of special interest. Unlike all other penguins 
it reproduces its young in the depth of the polar winter 
in extreme southerly latitudes on the sea ice near the 
Antarctic continent. 
The dangers of navigation by sea in these regions and 
the utter impossibility in winter of crossing the barrier of 
sea ice which is several miles deep explain the fact that 
the first specimens of this species were only recently 
discovered. It was not until 1820 that the Russian 
explorer von Bellingshausen had the good fortune to 
come across them some distance from the coast. 
Access to the Antarctic continent is only possible during 
the summer months after the break up of the ice. But 
as this break up carries away the emperor penguins, it 
was not until the beginning of this century that a colony 
was first visited and studied, while most of the others 
have only been reached in the last few years. 
Until recently there were very few permanent missions 
on the coast of the Antarctic continent and their limited 
resources in mechanical transport confined them more or 
less closely to their stations. Hence, although four new 
colonies were discovered, it was not until the Inter- 
national Geophysical Year (1957-1958) that new resources 
and the combination of movement by air, land and sea 
with powerful and suitable equipment brought the total 
number of colonies visited to 20. 
The total population of Aptenodytes forsteri (the scien- 
tific name of the emperor penguin) is currently estimated

## [Page 19](078354engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 63569: The Emperor penguin, monarch of Antarctica

  
at more than 100,000, though there is a chance that 
various other colonies exist in some unexplored regions 
of the Antarctic coast. 
A few individual birds may move north as far as the 
60th parallel but the colonies do not go beyond the polar 
circle and they are not found further south than the 
Antarctic coast itself. The most southerly colony is in 
the heart of the Ross Sea, at Cape Crozier, 77° 29’ latitude 
south. 
As already mentioned, the emperor penguin breeds on 
the pre-coastal sea ice. With its heavy gait and relatively 
small steps, the bird is better adapted to the smooth sur- 
faces of sea ice than to the frequently broken contours 
of the continental ice which, moreover, would prohibit 
the semi-permanent winter groupings. Two colonies, 
however, have chosen to install themselves on the con- 
tinent which unquestionably affords better conditions 
and greater security than the surrounding ice floe. 
In consequence of their extreme latitude, these habitats 
have a particularly cold climate. The average annual 
temperature at Point Geology (Adelie Land, 66° 40° S, 
140° 1’ E), where one of the most northernmost colonies 
is found, is in the region of -12° C which is between 
4 and 5 degrees lower than for the Cape Crozier colony 
in the Ross Sea. 
Generally speaking, temperature is the determining 
factor in climate, but in the Antarctic, and especially in 
Adelie Land, it is the wind which, by its regularity and 
strength, plays the paramount réle. Its speed at Point 
Geology reaches between 30 and 33 feet per second, where- 
as 50 miles to the east, at Port Martin, it is twice as high. 
At the latter station, the temperature is two degrees 
lower than that at Point Geology although the latitude 
Is virtually the same. This clearly highlights the ecli- 
matic advantages of the places inhabited by the emperor 
penguins and is surely one of the reasons which guided 
their choice. 
In the course of his extensive research in Adelie Land, 
Dr. Sapin-Jaloustre examined the potentialities of wind 
action by means of a heat loss calorimeter of his own 
All photos © Jean Prévost 
construction; this enabled him to deflne the cooling power 
of various Antarctic environments. Some figures from his 
notes indicate the fundamental importance of this for 
warm-blooded creatures living in the Antarctic climate. 
Given a temperature of -10° C without wind, it takes 
67 minutes 30 seconds for the temperature of the calori- 
meter’s water to fall from 40 to 20 °C whereas it requires 
only two minutes at -15° with a blizzard-laden wind of 
85 m.p.h. 
Dr. Sapin-Jaloustre’s many experiments led him to con- 
clude that while wind may greatly accelerate cooling 
power, its high ice-particle content multiplies this factor 
twofold. The foregoing figures all relate to general cli- 
mate as defined by daily meteorological checks at a height 
of 64 feet for temperature and 33 feet for wind. 
Although the emperor penguins have chosen a specially 
favourable point on the Adelie coast, it is certain that in 
such an atmosphere they would, normally speaking, have 
little chance of living and breeding. But since their 
height is less than 3 feet, they are in fact subject to very 
much more favourable climatic conditions, as revealed 
by the surveys of micro-climates. 
As early as 1950, Sapin-Jaloustre established that, while 
temperature varied little in relation to height, the vertical 
gradient of the wind, on the other hand, was very marked. 
His study of the micro-climate in the colonies of Adelie 
penguins (a micro-climate between ground level and 
20 inches above) led to the conclusion that its thermal 
demand was 50% lower than that of the general climate. 
A few years later, we were able to observe that the same 
was true for the emperor penguin colony. The wind at 
a height of 8 inches was between 50 and 60% lower than 
the reading given at the same moment by the anemo- 
meter at the meteorological station. 
Apart from these climatic advantages, the choice of 
breeding ground would seem to be motivated by a second 
consideration as important as the first. The existence 
near the colony of a permanent opening in the ice or of 
stretches of water free from ice is apparently essential 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
19

## [Page 20](078354engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 63569: The Emperor penguin, monarch of Antarctica

PENGUINS 
(Cont'd) 
ZIG-ZAG TRAIL 
left by tail and feet of 
emperor penguin in 
freshly fallen snow 
betrays a waddling 
gait. Yet despite 
their short legs set 
far back on their bod- 
ies, emperors move 
along with a majestic 
and dignified air 
which probably earn- 
ed them their name. 
Unlike some other 
penguins, Adelies, for 
instance, the empe- 
rors walk with their 
flipper-like wings held 
close to their bodies. 
  
    
  
‘
a
r
d
 9
 
- 
  
to provide the birds and their young with regular food 
supplies thoughout the year. 
The adult emperor penguin is approximately 3'9” in 
length, the males being slightly longer than the females. 
Weight varies greatly according to the time of year. It 
reaches a maximum on arrival at the colony when males 
of 88 pounds and over are by no means rare, with the 
maximum for females being 81 pounds. This variation 
between the sexes persists throughout the year, the ave- 
rage weight being in the region of 55 pounds, and has the 
advantage of greatly facilitating the determination of sex 
in the absence of any sound indication. The sounds made 
by the birds provide the only criterion for separating 
males and females since there is no outward difference. 
HE emperor penguin is a particularly calm 
and apathetic creature which moves over the 
ice slowly and with dignity. This heavy, swaying gait is 
in sharp contrast to the speed and agility which the bird 
displays in the water and his remarkably streamlined 
body and his sleek plumage indicate the extent to which 
his morphology is adapted to the aquatic environment. 
The pectoral muscles are far and away the heaviest in 
the body and have several important functions. They 
cushion the bird’s fall when, in order to get on to the 
ice surface, he throws himself from the water and lands 
on his breast. They also provide considerable power to 
the paddles which they operate and which are used not 
only for swimming but also during fights within the colony 
when the paddle may strike an opponent with sufficient 
strength to knock him down. 
The coloration of the plumage is noteworthy. The 
head, the back part of the body and the flippers are 
covered with a very close blue-black plumage. Two wide 
orange-yellow marks divide the lateral sides of the head 
and meet in the region of the neck where their coloration 
gradually fades into the pure white of the front of 
the body. 
One of the species’ outstanding characteristics is the 
reversal of the breeding cycle. The first emperor pen- 
guins return to the colony site in the month of March, 
the beginning of autumn in the southern hemisphere, 
when the sea ice has only been covering it for a short 
ime. 
The birds at this point are particularly bulky on 
account of the considerable quantity of fat reserves which 
may exceed 25% of the total weight of the body. 
By April, the whole colony of some 13,000 birds has 
assembled and its songs and cries shatter the monotonous 
silence of the Antarctic coast. Each bird seeks a mate, 
and, after a series of mating cries, the couple come toge- 
ther and remain together throughout the mating period. 
The creation of such couples is sometimes accompanied 
by fights provoked by the intrusion of a third bird, gene- 
rally female, competing with the first female and seeking 
to oust her. These momentary conflicts end when the  

## [Page 21](078354engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 63569: The Emperor penguin, monarch of Antarctica

  
PENGUIN NURSERIES 
FOR BUSY MOTHERS 
(1) Handsome emperor couple with their pure white bodies 
and blue-black head plumage at the start of the breeding season. 
(2) Parents take an anxious look at the 4 1/2 by 3 1/2 inch egg 
which is incubated by the male (he maintains a fast for up to three 
months before and during this period) and loses as much as 
459%, of his weight. (3) New-born chick peeps out from beneath 
its parent's feet where it is sheltered during its first two months 
of life. (4) Mother nourishes the chick from the pulpy mixture 
of fish and crustaceans she has stored in her stomach during a 
prolonged feeding period at sea. (5) A “huddle” of chicks who 
quickly learn to emulate their parents by gathering together in 
densely packed groups as a defence against the cold. (6) “Nur- 
sery” of youngsters whose parents are away hunting for food. 
On return the parents “call” in front of the group until they 
have located their own chick. Family life is thus maintained. 
All photos © Jean Prévost 
UPS 
third bird, attracted by the call of a member of the 
opposite sex, abruptly leaves the couple in peace. 
When separated by a scuffle of some kind, the two 
mates almost invariably manage to join up again soon 
afterwards thanks to the calls they utter and aided by 
their ability to recognize one another visually over short 
distances. 
Proof of this recognition was obtained by the use of 
rings. In order to reduce the disturbance caused by this 
operation, we habitually ringed couples after they had 
been formed. The operation calls for three men, two to 
capture the couple and a third to place the numbered 
rings on the paddles. The two birds are then released 
side by side in an isolated spot where they can more 
easily come together fairly quickly. 
The first laying of eggs takes place in May. Each female 
lays one egg weighing approximately 1 pound and having 
a length of 4} inches and a diameter of between 3 and 
3% inches. This volume and weight explains why the 
expulsion of the egg is often slow and difficult. Once the 
egg is laid, the female entrusts it to her male partner 
and leaves the colony in order to seek her food in the 
sea. The females have eaten nothing since their arrival 
and have lost almost 25% of their original weight. 
There are, however, certain exceptions to this quasi- 
general behaviour. In 1956, we had occasion to observe 
several cases of laying by females whose partners, for 
some unknown reason, were absent from the colony. 
Such females may hatch the egg for a period of several 
days but they soon abandon it in order to rejoin their 
kind. 
The incubation of the egg, assured almost wholly by 
male birds, lasts for from 62 to 64 days at a temperature 
above 30°C. To maintain this temperature, the egg is 
placed on the feet of the brooder and protected from 
behind by a sort of incubation pocket and in front by a 
fold of abdominal skin. Even while carrying this fragile 
burden, the male can cover short distances in an upright 
posture and can even glide on his chest without dropping 
e egg. 
See the egg is hatched in the middle of 
winter, it is not surprising that the birds’ 
physical and vocal activity should be greatly reduced. 
Additionally, the brooders have taken no food since their 
arrival and can only do so when their task is taken over 
by the females. How do they manage to go without food 
for so long in such a chilling atmosphere? The system 
they have found is as simple as it is effective. 
To reduce as far as possible their loss of warmth during 
blizzards, the birds gather in extremely densely packed 
groups or “huddles.” Each bird in such groups, which 
may include virtually all the brooders of a given colony, 
is pressed close against the others and benefits from the 
warmth which they radiate. Since the group as a whole 
is all but impermeable to wind, the micro-climate within 
the “huddle” enables each individual bird to effect a 
slight reduction in his central temperature and thus eco- 
nomise on his fat reserves. 
In this way the duration of the foodless period may be 
markedly prolonged. Various experiments, moreover, 
showed us that a bird subjected to total isolation and 
directly exposed to the cold and storms had little chance 
of completing incubation of the egg since his daily loss 
of weight could amount to twice that of those birds able 
to join a “huddle.” 
Some of these experiments were carried out on a 
breeding ground which we set up on the exact site of the 
colony. Between 6 and 12 birds were kept within this 
ground, thus forming a sort of small-scale colony with 
very much reduced means of defence against the cold. 
Some of our captives remained there for over three conse- 
cutive months. 
This special social behaviour or forming “huddles” 
has been made possible by the absence of nests and hence 
of fixed dwelling places and by the reduction of the 
antagonisms and conflicts which are so frequent and so 
extreme among other species of Spheniscidae. 
Having completed their journey in search of food, the 
females return to the colony a few days before or after 
the eggs are hatched. In the latter case, the death of 
the chick might seem inevitable but, in fact, such is not 
the case since the male bird’s crop is capable of secreting 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
21

## [Page 22](078354engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

  
FRIGID ENCOUNTER between an emperor penguin (who 
manages to look stiff and haughty despite his moulting plumage) 
and his smaller cousin, the Adelie penguin. Emperors average 
3 feet 6 inches in height; Adelies are rarely more than 15 ins. 
  
   
FIRST VENTURE into the ocean by young penguin chick (left) marks 
his complete independence. From now on he will hunt for his own food. 
Penguins lose their clumsiness the moment they enter the water. Won- 
derful swimmers (right) they can catch fish under water with great ease. 


### 63569: The Emperor penguin, monarch of Antarctica

of 
THE SNOW EATERS (foreground, above) are demonstrating 
an old penguin custom—drinking from snowdrifts, by plunging 
their beaks deep inside and swallowing snow whose temperature 
is often as low as -20 degrees C. Below, penguins taken from 
main colony by French biologists for heat loss studies. These 
showed that isolated birds exposed to cold and storms could 
lose twice as much weight as those grouped in large “huddles”. 
Fi 
  
Al
l 
ph
ot
os
 
© 
Je
an
 
Pr
év
os
t 
PENGUINS 
(Cont'd) 
Life-saving huddle 
a whitish substance resembling pigeon’s milk even after 
a foodless period of as much as three months. 
The exceptional nutritive quality of this emergency diet 
enables the chick to wait for the pulpy mixture of fish 
and crustaceans 'which the females have kept in their 
stomachs during their time at sea for the benefit of the 
young bird. In July, the thin and famished males (who 
have lost almost 45% of their weight since arriving) set 
off in turn for a period at sea. 
While they take no food during their stay in the colo- 
ny, they do drink regularly, finding this liquid in snow 
they take from small and especially clean drifts. They 
plunge their beaks deep in the drifts and absorb quanti- 
ties of snow ‘whose temperature is often as low as -20° C. 
The “snow eaters” tend be more numerous when the 
humidity level of the air is low and we observed that, 
for some time preceding the thaw, the majority were 
females. This need for ‘water is probably due at that 
time to the preparation of the constitutive elements of 
e egg. 
Chicks weigh approximately 11 ounces when hatched. 
The scattered grey down which they have at birth gra- 
dually thickens with age and eventually forms a sort of 
thick fur an inch or more long. During the first two 
months, the young bird remains sheltered by the feet of 
the male parent or the female who takes over periodically 
in order that her mate can feed. These two months, 
moreover, are not wholly free of danger. A certain 
number of birds of both sexes, having lost thelr own 
chicks, are determined to steal those of their neighbours. 
They sometimes succeed, despite the parents’ resistance, 
but there is every chance of the chick being crushed or 
pecked to death during the fight between the adults. 
A September, the chicks are able to 
maintain their internal temperature at a 
constant level unaided. At this point they are left to 
themselves in the colony. They weigh about 43 pounds 
and are too bulky to remain any longer on the adult’s 
feet. This abrupt transition from family life to freedom 
exposes them suddenly to cold and blizzards. The death 
rate ‘would therefore be relatively high but for the fact 
that the young birds group together for protection in 
. “huddles” like the adults. 
Most deaths observed at this period occur during 
blizzards. The chicks, weakened by undernourishment, 
no longer have the strength to gather in “huddles”; they 
accordingly lie down on the ice to ‘which they are soon 
attached by deposits of snow. This ice gangue insulates 
them from the external atmosphere but thereby only 
prolongs their sufferings. Other chicks fall in the cre- 
vasse ‘which opens at low tide between the land ice and 
the sea ice; 'we succeeded in saving a number from being 
crushed by the closing of the break at high tide. 
From September onwards, the two parents are able to 
go away together hunting for food to satisfy the growing 
appetites of their offspring. Even so this change to an 
independent existence does not lead to a sort of communal 
pooling, with each adult feeding a chick taken at random. 
On the contrary, family life is maintalned and, on 
returning to the colony, each parent calls In front of 
various groups of young emperors in order to locate its 
own offspring. In this search by calling which varies in 
length according to how far the colony is dispersed over 
its territory, visual recognition also plays a part. 
After these preliminaries are accomplished, the chick 
slips his beak into that of the adult which thereupon 
regurgitates a part of his or her stomach contents. The 
chick rapidly grows to a weight of 22 pounds, at which 
point he can consume up to 6 or 8 pounds in a single meal. 
By the beginning of December he weighs close on 
30 pounds and his down begins to fall by patches and is 
replaced by young plumage. When the down has almost 
completely disappeared, the young emperor (who, for 
several days past, has no longer been fed by his parents) 
moves towards the sea. He is then quite independent. 
After spending a complete year on the edge of the ice 
pack, during which period his weight almost triples, he 
CONT'D ON PAGE 24 

## [Page 23](078354engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 63569: The Emperor penguin, monarch of Antarctica

  
b M0? ws PRTRS ' 
) . 
  
All photos © Jean Prévost 
ANTARCTIC RENDEZVOUS for thousands of emperor penguins is in March—start of the Southern 
Hemisphere’s autumn—when they gather at some 20 colony sites like that above at Point Geology in 
Adelie Land (13,000 birds have been counted here). Penguin, below, looking like a block of stone, has 
“turned its back to the howling blizzard. One youngster has strayed from its parents and crouches down in 
the snow to the rear of the penguin in the foreground. The warm side is already occupied by another chick. 
          
    
iy 
  
| : 
bl, Ph BTL, - le 
ye i 
Pry all ble P 
wey NG 
SL

## [Page 24](078354engo.pdf#page=24) 2

### 63569: The Emperor penguin, monarch of Antarctica

### 63571: Lost hymns of Georgia: a 1,000-year-old musical mystery unravelled by a Soviet linguist

24 
FENGUINS (Contd) 
Crushed by an iceberg 
acquires adult plumage at the end of a month-long moult 
on the coast. 
While the death rate for eggs and chicks is low during 
life in the colony (roughly one-quarter of 6,000 eggs laid), 
life on the sea, where virtually all the predators are to be 
found, brings a great increase in mortality. A premature 
break-up of the sea ice, before all the chicks have finished 
growing, may reduce the number of survivors still further. 
But we also saw a still more impressive sight. On 
December 26, 1952, a piece of an iceberg freed by the 
break-up came hurtling down with a fhunderous crash 
onto a group of chicks and scores were crushed to death 
or drowned. 
The emperor penguin’s biology, which was such a mys- 
tery a few years ago, can now be seen and understood 
more clearly. 
The reversal of the reproduction cycle, probably due 
to the winter period spent on the sea ice, enables the 
chicks born in July to complete their period of growth 
by the time the ice break-up takes place. They can 
therefore take immediate advantage of the abundant ma- 
rine life of the summer. 
The adult’s highly developed individual and social 
adjustments enable him to live and breed in the middle 
of the Antarctic winter with a relatively low death rate. 
The emperor penguin is truly a remarkable bird. 
JEAN PREVOST is a member of the biological research staff at 
the National Centre for Scientific Research, Paris. M. Prévost 
spent the winters of 1952 and 1956 at Terre Adélie as biologist 
for the Expéditions Polaires Frangaises. He made a special study 
of the emperor penguin for his doctoral thesis, “L’'Ecologie du 
Manchot Empereur,” which has been published by Hermann, 
Paris, 1961. 
THE STORY 
OF ARTHUR 
& HALF PINT 
In 1952, Jean Prévost and the 
members of the French Ant- 
arctic Expedition encamped 
for the winter at Point 
Geology, Adelie Land, decid- 
ed to become foster parents 
to two young emperor penguins. Their purpose was to 
study the effect of artificial rearing on the growth and 
behaviour of these two chicks. “We had no trouble in 
finding things for them to eat”, writes Jean Prévost, 
“for the ice around was strewn with food which the other 
youngsters in the penguin colony had discarded as too 
large to swallow.” 
  
“Qur two chicks quickly learned to come in answer 
to a special whistle and soon appeared to look on us as 
their parents. . 
“Arthur and Half Pint, as we named them, lived like 
this for five months without ever seeing the colony 
where they were born. Arthur became rather shy, but 
hunger quickly banished fear when mealtimes came. 
“When we left Adelie Land to return to France we 
took the chicks with us. But Half Pint, the weaker of 
the two, died before we reached Australia. Arthur, 
however, quickly got used to the heat of the Indian 
Ocean which probably reminded him of the stove in our 
camp against which he used to warm himself. But he 
was no luckier than Half Pint and died of food poisoning 
while the ship was docked at Port Said”. 
  
  
Fresco painting of Euphemius Mtatsmideli (958-1028 
A.D.) an important Georgian composer of religious 
music. The musical notation used in Georgian mediae- 
val hymns has for long intrigued and puzzled scholars 
and it was only recently successfully deciphered. 
  
Manuscript of ancient hymns copied at the end of the 
10th century under the direction of Michael Modre- 
keli, a great Georgian poet and composer. Miniature 
in the margin depicts John Mtbevari, a Georgian 10th 
century hymnologist and St. Basilius of Caesarea, to 
whom the hymns in this manuscript are dedicated. 
  
Miniature of a 13th century Georgian manuscript 
representing a dancer and his accompanying mu- 
sicians playing cymbals, a lute, a flute and a tabor.

## [Page 25](078354engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 63571: Lost hymns of Georgia: a 1,000-year-old musical mystery unravelled by a Soviet linguist

LOST HYMNS 
OF GEORGIA’ 
A 1,000-year-old musical mystery 
unravelled by a Soviet linguist 
by Pavle Ingorokva 
All photos furnished by the author 
H ERODOTUS, the Father of History, began his 
great work with an account of the relations 
between the Greece and the Colchis of hoary antiquity, 
a full thousand years before our era. Colchis—the 
legendary land of Medea and the Golden Fleece—lay in 
the west of Georgia. Its mention by Herodotus gives some 
idea of ancient sources of Georgian culture. 
Situated in the Caucasus, the crossroads of Europe and 
Asla, Georgia is a land of European culture blended with 
that of the East, a kind of synthesis of both traditions. 
Georgia's links in distant antiquity, with the lands of 
the classical East—Assyria, Babylon, the empire of the - 
Hittites and Urartu—can be seen from monuments of 
material culture and the testimony of cuneiform 
inscriptions dating back to the second millenium B.C. 
Another indication of ancient Georgia's links with the 
West, the world of Hellenism, is the existence of such 
well-known legends as the voyage of the Argonauts from 
Greece to Colchis, which stems from the Homeric epos, 
or the story of Prometheus, chained by order of Zeus to 
a rock in the Caucasus. This wonderful legend originated 
in Colchis, and found artistic expression in Aeschylus’s 
masterly tragedy. 
Later, during the Hellenistic and the Roman periods, 
Georgia was an independant state with a high level of 
culture. In the first and second centuries A.D. Georgia 
played an important part in Rome’s relations with the 
East, the political authority of the Georgian state being 
spoken of by ancient authors, who described the honours 
paid by the emperor Hadrian to Pharasman II, king of 
Georgia, during the latter's visit to Rome in 138 A.D. 
The Georgian ruler took part in an important religious 
ceremony, offering a sacrifice in the Capitol, and having 
an equine monument raised in his honour in the temple 
of Mars. 
Christianity became the State religion of Georgia in 
337 A.D. and during mediaeval times it was one of the 
leading countries of the Christian East. Unlike Byzantium, 
Georgia also saw an efflorescence of secular literature, 
especially in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, which 
may well be called the Golden Age of Georgian culture. 
It was during the latter period that there developed a 
humanistic current comparable with the Renaissance in 
Europe, which came later. This was the era of Georgia's 
great poet, Shota Rustaveli, the author of a poem of 
genius The Knight in the Tiger-Skin, a new translation 
of which is being prepared by Unesco. This work by 
Rustaveli, who can justly be called a great bard of 
humanism, was an early forerunner of the ideas of the 
Renaissance. 
An important place in the cultural heritage of ancient 
Georgia is held by manuscripts of professional music, 
which go back through the Middle Ages to antiquity. 
These records consist of manuscripts of early Christian 
hymns, with the verses of the texts accompanied by a 
musical notation located over and under each line of the 
text. The musical characters are in vermilion, as distinct 
from the text, which is in black. 
The nine extant manuscripts of ancient Georgian music 
refer to the tenth and eleventh centuries. Five of them 
are in Georgia, one is at the Monastery on Mt. Athos in 
  
Faun playing an aulos (flute). Ist century A.D. 
bronze found in Georgia. Flute is missing. 
Greece, and three are in the library of the Convent of 
St. Catherine in Sinal. 
Of these manuscripts, the most important are two in 
the possession of the Manuscripts’ Institute of the 
Academy of Sciences of Georgia. One is a collection of 
hymns copied in the years 978-88 under the guidance of 
Michael Modrekeli, a great Georgian composer and poet. 
The other is a collection, copied by Jordan at the close 
of the tenth century. The repertory of these manuscripts 
pertains In the main to the eighth, ninth and tenth 
centuries. The notation used was found to be much 
older. The manuscripts contain a total of about 1,300 
chorals, the repertory being very extensive. 
The music recorded in such ancient manuscripts, and 
the system of notation used have long intrigued scholars, 
but until recently all attempts to decipher them were 
unsuccessful. 
This interest was enhanced by the fact that the 
evidence of history shows that ancient Georgian music 
was quite independent in character, quite distinet from 
Western, in particular Greek, music. 
An 11th century source speaks of the existence of two 
kinds of vocal music—Greek and Georgian, the former 
being homophonic, and the latter being sung in three 
voices. It is a fact that from most ancient times the 
peoples neighbouring on Georgia knew only homophonic 
music. For instance Greek music, both antique and 
mediaeval, and for that matter right down to modern 
times, was homophonic. The peoples of the East use 
homophonic music to this day. 
( ONSEQUENTLY, Georgian music with its de- 
veloped polyphony—both in folk songs and 
church music, and its original harmonisation—was an 
exception to the environment, a kind of island in a sea 
of homophony. The Christian church inherited this 
polyphony from pagan practice. Ancient sources point out 
that whenever the texts of church hymns were translated 
into Georgian from the Greek, the accompanying music 
was written anew, for, as a twelfth-century Georgian 
source points out, “alien to our people are the Greek 
incantations.” 
The deciphering of ancient Georgian musical notation 
was preceded by an important discovery in the field of 
ancient Georgian poetry, which helped to unravel the 
mystery of the notation problem. 
In the course of my research into the history of ancient 
Georgian literature, I made a study of church hymns, 
i. e. texts supplied with musical characters. At first the 
hymns I studied interested me as literary monuments. 
It should be noted that these hymns were always 
considered purely prosaic works, because there was no 
division into lines of verse in the manuscripts. In ancient 
times, however, verse was not divided in separate lines; 
this is borne out by manuscripts with ancient Georgian 
iambics. 
I found I could discern a complex rhythm in the hymnal 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
25

## [Page 26](078354engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 63571: Lost hymns of Georgia: a 1,000-year-old musical mystery unravelled by a Soviet linguist

   
  
Ghelatl, 
26 
LOST HYMNS (Cont'd) 
Pattern of dots 
texts, and then saw that they had a definite metrical 
structure. I also saw that the dots in the texts could not 
be considered ordinary punctuation marks. They seemed 
to have some other kind of function. When I counted 
the number of syllables between the dots, I found a 
definite pattern. Thus, in the first paragraph in one of 
the hymns the number of syllables between the dots was 
as follows: 7,7, 7, 11, 7, 7, 5; the following paragraphs had 
the same pattern, and so right through till the end of the 
first canto of the hymn. Another text revealed the 
following pattern: 5, 10, 5, 11, 5, 8, 10, and this was 
repeated in all the paragraphs of the text. 
All the hymns, without exception, were built on the 
same kind of pattern. 
It followed that the dots in the texts denoted their 
metrical form—unrhyming verses with a clear strophic 
structure. Each strophe was followed by an antistrophe, 
which repeated the metrical structure of the first strophe 
with absolute fidelity. 
This parallel-strophe structure is analogous to that of 
the ancient Greek choral lyrics, and also of the verses 
sung in ancient Greek tragedies. 
It was in this way that the discovery was made of a 
new and rich fleld of ancient Georgian poetry—the 
hymniec. 
The discovery of the metrical form in the hymns led 
me up to the problem of how thelr musical notation was 
to be deciphered—the close link between musical and 
metrical rhythm in ancient times is well known. In the 
texts examined, too, the complex rhythm and the wealth 
and variety of the rhythmical pattern, as well as the 
metrical conformity of strophe and antistrophe, indicated 
the presence of an unseparable link between the verses 
and the accompaniment. The problem was to uncover the 
secret of that music, whose surge could be felt in the 
texture of the verses. 
! There was one musical character 
whose meaning I realized before I 
started work on the texts of the 
hymns. I have already mentioned 
that the texts were in black, and the 
musical characters in vermilion. All 
the black dots in the texts correspond- 
ed to a red dot in the musical nota- 
tion. There was absolute consistence 
in this relationship, so the evidence 
seemed to show that each red dot had a metrical function. 
To start with, I copied out and classified all the charac- 
ters, of which I found eighteen (including those indicating 
variations). A detailed comparison of these characters 
with those current in the musical notation used in 
medleval Europe showed that they were quite different, 
and, what was of special significance, the Georgian 
characters were fewer in number than the European. It 
was clear that the former differed not only in outline 
but in structure. 
After long consideration as to why the Georgian musical 
characters were fewer in number than the European, 
I reached a conclusion that put me on the right track. 
I realized that the Georgian characters were few in 
number because Georgian notation was based on a 
musical alphabet, distinct from the other mediaeval 
centre anclent 
of Georgian music. 
systems of notation, which were not alphabetic, but 
hieroglyphic. 
The first step lay In establishing the frequency of the 
characters used in the notation—how many times each 
character was used in all the cantos of the manuscripts 
with musical notation, and the number of syllables to each 
character. 
This count revealed that there were eight basic 
characters in the system of notation, the others being 
ancillary and rarely used. The supplementary characters 
were not independent, but were a graphic variation of 
the basic characters. 
The discovery of eight basic musical characters or notes 
confirmed the original surmise that the Georgian musical 
notation was alphabetic, and the fact of eight characters 
coming to light was an indubitable indication that the 
notation was based on the octave—the eight characters 
represented the eight notes of the octaval scale. 
This important step along the road to the uncovering 
of the secret of the ancient musical notation of Georgia 
was followed by an inquiry into the order of the notes 
in the octave. 
The octaval scale, as is well known, falls into two parts 
—the lower tetrachord or diatonic series of four tones, 
and the upper tetrachord, also of four tones. 
  
  
  
   
 
        
5{343} 
Yu 2 . p= , 
7 fs 1 — HTT T= 
=== Pr Tae] 
A i : : 
FFF — — — 
0 fo) [#] 7 [or] <— & [or] = > — 
vr ¢ at 
35-306 3) —aN-BYH-TJ | do—XI-KM hp) —al o 
Pav i 1 t 1 | I A i 
ff——p FoF ou <= 
Modern transcription of a hymn composed by Gregori 
Khandsteli (758-860) a composer of mediaeval Georgia. 
The notation of the leading melody (leader of the voices) 
or “cantus firmus” is given in the centre (above the 
original 10th century notation). This hymn was noted 
down by members of the Georgian Society of Church 
Music in the 19th century. Parts for the accompanying 
voices are noted here on the upper and lower staves. 
The Georgian notation under discussion also has the 
same division of eight notes into two series. One series 
of four characters is written below the line, which makes 
it obvious that it corresponds to the lower series of the 
octave: four characters are written above the line, thus 
giving us the upper series of the octave. 
Next came the question of the order of the four 
characters in the lower series, and the four of the upper 
series. 
This was ascertained from the shape of the characters. 
As was to have been expected, and indeed proved to be 
the case, the notes were not a chance array of characters, 
but followed a definite system, which showed that .the 
graphical aspect of the Georgian notes was built to suit 
the octaval structure. Indeed, the order of the notational 
characters emerged from the graphical links between the 
individual signs, the gradual transition from one to 
another. 
The coincidence of characters and musical pattern 
does not stop at this stage. 
    
GEORGIAN NOTATION 
The first four signs of the oc- 
tave were placed below the line. ( Phir il 
Pat The last four signs of the oc- 
tave were placed above the line, 
The signs (left) which resemble modern shorthand writing are, in fact, ancient 
musical notes. Each one of the eight signs shown either above or below the 
centre line corresponds to one of the eight notes in the octaval scale in the 
Georgian musical notation of the Middle Ages. This notation which might be 
called “alphabetic” was a distinct advance on the “hieroglyphic” systems of 
mediaeval notation (where a sign represented a group of notes or even several 
musical phrases). The first four notes of the octave (the lower ones) become 
simpler and smaller in size as they ascend and the last four (above the line) 
gradually increase in size and become more complex in form as they ascend

## [Page 27](078354engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 63571: Lost hymns of Georgia: a 1,000-year-old musical mystery unravelled by a Soviet linguist

: «ra ( | fe a Fp Hh a a L(y P i, it Ea a - 
Farley We 
sim ¥ 
PY Crd 
Ties 7 \ 
(J 
(4 » fois cones A 
( heals. fied 
Li ie vB i PR EA i vig x re". 
— 
   
BZ 15, “regal em a { 
A If iy fe fe — 
ef 
Ts 1 i yhedgs . 
RT fs 1 oy pe YT 
omit . De i Covi 45 Ve ot, 
  
RA ET av Tk CT RE EE EER yu TE 
aie S30 IRAE A ipl ee a siti AREA : ne 
a R a 
CTAQI SY" oN ; 
NEN ae 
pu i TY , 
\ pe oN SAN . 
LN aor 
The yt 8 a a : 
»Prarnen », 1 dal rig “IM va rau 
Hn Il ho No den -- - . Lupe 
% 1 1 hk . 3 Dot vonerr “Nez < y>q ( ii 
( \ 7 BS Ler ~ FAYE 4 
i gud 
A 21 RAY 7, Wed Dihous Roe oh 1 wy 
"a 
  
y Te TN ROE yaa Fe x ~ © oy 7 ge po & 
cmb Shi SE Ag EN ee a 
Part of a hymn composed in the |0th century by Michael Modrekeli and entitled “The Resurrection 
of Christ.” 
or below th 
The extreme characters, i. e. the first in the lower series 
and the last, the eighth in the upper series are related in 
outline. The eighth sign repeats the outline of the first 
with the addition of a pennant. The parallel is logical, 
since an inverted prime becomes an octave. 
The sequence of the signs was checked in other ways. 
It has been observed that the sign for the fifth tone of 
the octave is of far more frequent occurence in church 
incantations than the octaval, since the fifth forms, as it 
were, the centre of the melody in church music which 
accounts for its having been called the dominant. 
Further: the tonic, i. e. the prime or the eighth note 
in the octave should be heard in the concluding measure 
or bar of each hymn. This was also found in the nota- 
tion under discussion. 
Thus, success attended the efforts made to establish 
the sequence of musical characters in the notation. This 
was the second step towards achievement of the aim set, 
Further study of ancient Georgian sources enabled me 
to find out the names of the signs and the notes of the 
octave, which fully bore out the conclusions drawn from 
the decipherment. 
The next and most radical step was to determine the 
tone denoted by each particular character, ie. to find 
the “key” to a reading of the octaval notes. 
In the early stages of the inquiry I 
noticed that the first line of each hymn 
contained an indication of the voice it was 
to be sung on. In all, eight voices were 
named a sure indication of the diatonic 
tonality typical of the music of the ancient 
Christian church. Each “voice” provided 
a precise indication of the way the signs 
of the octaval gamut were to be read. It 
follows that the “voices” in the ancient 
Georgian notation performed the function of the keynote 
in present-day musical notation. 
This was the final step made towards the decipherment 
of the musical notation used in ancient Georgia. It was 
clear that the inscription as to the “voice” to be used 
showed the existence of eight tones of the octave within 
each voice. Indeed, eight characters were deciphered in 
the manuscripts, all this bearing out the correctness of 
the conclusions drawn. 
It thus became possible to express the hymnic melodies 
in notation. Just as in Roman Catholic church music 
until the thirteenth century, in which only the leading 
voice, the tenor or Cantus firmus was recorded in nota- 
tion, the Georgian manuscripts had the leading melody 
in notation (the so-called dzlispiri—the “leader of the 
voices”) the accompanying voices following the set 
pattern of the Georgian folk harmonisation, and provid- 
ing a background to the melody. 
Reading of the musical texts now became possible, so 
I began to transpose the tenth-century notation into 
  
Woman playing 
the aulos. 
The meaning of these strange little musical characters written in red and placed above 
e texts inscribed in black, and their melodies remained a mystery for over 1,000 years. 
modern notation. I began with a hymn in honour of the 
Virgin Mary, entitled. Gikharoden (“Ave Maria”), and I 
cannot find words to express the thrill of first hearing 
melodies dating back a thousand years. 
Had the decipherment been false, the result would have 
been a mere jumble of sounds. As it was, I heard a 
splendid and impressive melody. In all the eighty hymns 
I next deciphered, the result was the same—music marked 
by integrity and depth of thought. 
I then decided to find out whether the ancient tradition 
had been preserved in the church melodies used in 
Georgia in the 19th. and 20th. centuries, and, if so, which 
elements, and what relation existed betweer. the anclent 
style and the modern. 
The appropriate texts were 
found at various libraries in Geor- 
gia. Among the numerous records 
of 19th century church music that 
were examined, over 300 hymns 
with three-part music were discov- 
ered, whose texts coincided with 
those of the 10th century hymns 
analyzed. They had been taken 
down in notation in the 19th century by members of the 
national society of Georgian church music. 
To what period does the invention of the ancient 
Georgian musical notation belong? What place does 
this music occupy in world musical culture? 
The evidence available indicates that the Georgian 
notation departed from the ancient Greek system, and 
developed into an independent system of notation at the 
beginning of our era. 
The new element in the Georgian system of notation 
lay in the application of the purely octaval principle, 
which facilitated a more accurate expression of musical 
notes, and made it possible to reduce the clumsy Greek 
system of 23 basic signs to a system of eight characters. 
Further, the antique notation had letter-like signs, 
which made it possible to take down the text of music 
for the purpose of study, but was ill adapted for reading 
at sight. The Georgian system made up for this 
shortcoming in the ancient Greek system, whose letter- 
like characters were replaced by simpler signs, which rise 
and fall, their outlines facilitating visual perception of the 
flow of the voice. Just as in the modern staves, a 
definite system of characters helps us to visualise the 
      
SA 
Beri TTT = 
A Georgian lute, 
‘rise and fall in the vocal pitch, whereas the ancient Greek 
notation had all the characters linearly located above the 
text. This was a signal achievement. Ancient Georgian 
church music, holds pride of place with the most ancient 
musical cultures of the world. 
Dr. PAVLE INGOROKVA of the Institute of Ancient Manu- 
scripts, Georgian Academy of Sciences, is an outstanding Soviet 27 
authority on Georgian literature and linguistics and has deciphered 
Hittite inscriptions on Georgian archeological finds.

## [Page 28](078354engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28 
THE TREASURY OF 
SIA is the home of the short story. 
Hundreds, and in some cases thou- 
sands, of years before Maupassant 
and Chekhov, tales that were short stories 
in the modern sense of the term were not 
only being told in the market places but 
were being put into writing in ancient Egypt, 
in other countries which today speak 
Arabic, in Israel, in China, and in Japan. 
The riches of the classical short story of 
the Far East are still, for the most part, 
unknown in the West... 
Although in certain great Asian cultures, 
and in particular India and Persia, story- 
telling was first developed in other genres: 
in the epic poem, the fable and the drama, 
if we consider Asia as a whole, we may 
well say that since ancient times the short 
story form has never died... 
Dozens of stories in the Bible, the Apo- 
crypha and the Arabian Nights, when 
translated into living English, are revealed 
as gems of the story-teller's art... 
In China in particular there has been a 
continuous two-thousand-year development 
from the anecdotes, fables, ‘myths, and 
legends of earliest antiquity to the accom- 
plished stories of the twentieth century. 
That the art of the Asian story-teller 
is still a fruitful and powerful one is amply 
evident from contemporary writing. in 
many Asian lands the short story is now 
the form of literary expression, yielding 
only to poetry in others. There has 
obviously been much influence on contem- 
porary writers by the European and Amer- 
ican masters of the genre, but the 
influence of local tradition is equally strong. 
A Treasury of Modern Asian Stories 
(edited by D.L. Milton and W. Clifford, 
Mentorbooks, New American Library, New 
York), from the foreword of which the above 
is. extracted gives convincing evidence of 
the story-telling riches of the Asian conti- 
nent in its thirty tales selected from the 
literatures of twelve countries and sixteen 
different languages. As the editors of the 
Treasury point out, they had thousands of 
pages of stories, an enormous wealth of 
material, to choose from. “It is high time”, 
* they say, ‘“‘that the world got to know of 
the riches of Asian short-story writing, high 
“time indeed that not one but a number of 
ASIAN STORY- 
anthologies were published, at least one for 
each country and one for each literature.” 
This, in a work published simultaneously 
in England, the United States and Japan, 
Unesco has now done for the Japanese 
short story. Modern Japanese Stories * 
published as part of the Unesco Collection 
of Representative Works, is the fruit of 
several years of co-operative activities by 
the Literary Advisory Board of the Japanese 
National Commission for Unesco, the 
editor, Dr. Ivan Morris, Professor of lapa- 
nese history and literature at. Columbia 
University, New York, and his team of fine 
translators. 
Before the work of translating was begun, 
the Japanese National Commission for 
Unesco consulted a Board consisting of 
the greatest men of letters of contemporary 
Japan, and they, together with the editor, 
finally ‘narrowed down the choice to one 
representative story of twenty-five import- 
ant writers. The result is a thorough 
introduction to Japanese fiction in this 
century, and, in a sense, a picture of the 
contemporary Japanese mind. 


### 63573: Modern Japanese fiction: a break with tradition

MODERN JAPANESE FICTION 
A break with tradition 
HE present literary scene in Japan is one of 
and literary immense activity. Publishers 
by Ivan Morris 
pours. To remain successful he cannot afford to be long 
out of the public eye, and the artistic energy necessary to 
magazines abound, and the number of novels and stories 
published every year is overwhelming. With books 
extremely cheap—an average novel costs the equivalent 
of 6s. ($1.00) and of 1s. 6d. (25 cents) in a paper- 
backed editlon—and the reading public large and alert, 
sales are vastly in excess of those before the war; the 
material rewards for literary success are considerable. 
Some of the most substantial incomes in Japan are at 
present earned by popular writers. 
This situation is not without its dangers—dangers 
almost as great as those that beset the economically hard- 
pressed writers before the war. There is a considerable 
risk that “pure literature” (as it is rather primly termed 
in Japan) will still further lose audiences to commercial 
literature and to the so-called “middle novels,” which 
occupy a place somewhere between the artistic and the 
popular, 
In order to earn money many of the best writers 
produce serial novels for newspapers and magazines of 
large circulation. Sometimes an author will be working 
on two or more serial novels at the same time, as well as 
turning out articles on assorted subjects from birth 
control to Japanese-American relations, giving lecture 
tours and dashing off occasional stories to satisfy the 
requests of the numerous literary and semi-literary 
magazines. 
One popular novelist recently became so confused by 
the number of different things he was writing 
simultaneously that he inadvertently changed the name: 
of the main character in the middle of one of his serial 
novels—an error that was not caught up in proof and 
which caused considerable bewilderment to his readers. 
For the successful Japanese writer it never rains, it 
produce serious work is often dissipated by commercial 
demands. Such conditions are, of course, not limited to 
Japan, but the lack of solid tradition in modern Japanese 
literature adds to the danger. Fortunately the risk of 
total commercialization is recognized and deliberately 
resisted by a number of the better authors. 
The shi-shosetsu tradition of semi-autobiographical 
“fiction” has survived into the post-war period, but it 
is no longer as widely followed as some decades ago. 
Most contemporary writers seem to be aware of the need 
for a wider approach than is usually manifested in the 
“I-novel” and the “I-story.” Nevertheless, the confes- 
sional, diary type of writing, in which everything is seen 
through the eyes of one lone, sensitive individual, 
continues to be far more popular in Japan than in the 
West. } 
After 1945 the torrent of translations from foreign 
languages, which naturally subsided during the war, 
reached new heights. Novels, plays, short stories and 
poems from almost every country in the world were 
translated and published for a public whose appetite had 
been whetted by the years of official zenophobia and 
isolation. The choice of books for translation was often 
indiscriminate, sometimes incomprehensible. Nevertheless 
in the influx a large mass of worthwhile literature from 
the outside world has been made available, 
To what extent, then, is current Japanese literature 
influenced by that of the West? In the first place, it 
should be emphasized that on the whole the influence is 
not nearly as direct as is often assumed by Western 
readers. Japan has now had some seventy years in which 
to absorb the literary traditions of the West. European 
and American literature have come to be taken for

## [Page 29](078354engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 63573: Modern Japanese fiction: a break with tradition

ELLING 
Among the twenty-five authors repres- 
ented are some who are already fairly well- 
known outside of Japan, for example 
Tanizaki, Kawabata, and Mishima, each of 
whom have had novels translated by 
Unesco, and Akutagawa and Kikuchi, both 
of whom have had famous films, such as 
Rashomon and The Gates of Hell, based 
on their work. The reader will also find 
stories of exceptional power and originality 
by men equally deserving of world-wide 
recognition, as Mori, Shiga, Muro, Niwa, 
Sakaguchi, Inoué and Dazai. 
The book also contains a long critical 
“Introduction to Japanese Literature” (from 
which the article below has been taken), 
brief biographies of each of the twenty- 
five authors, and a selective bibliography of 
modern Japanese literature translated into 
English. The whole forms a most attractive 
and helpful guide to modern Japanese 
writing. 
* Published by Eyre and Spottiswoode, 
London ; Charles Tuttle, Tokyo, and Rut- 
land, Vermont, U.S.A. (Price 30/-, $6.50.)   
BOOKSHOP BUSTLE in Tokyo reflects the 
immense activity of the present literary scene 
in Japan where publishers and literary maga- 
zines abound, books are cheap and the reading 
public large and alert. Swarming book-buyers 
here are crowding into a used book fair on 
the Kanda, Tokyo's famous bookshop section. 
granted, and works from the outside no longer carry the 
aura of the exotic and the startling that they had in the 
early days of importation. Even more important, Ja- 
panese writers now have their own great literary figures 
—Natsumé Soseki, Mori Ogal, among others (1). They can 
now look back with a sense of belonging to an indigenous, 
if recent, tradition. 
Although in many ways the Pacific War and its 
aftermath constituted a break with the past as great or 
even greater than that provided by the Meiji Restoration 
(1867-1910) there was no rupture with native literary 
tradition such as occurred in the 19th century. Whereas 
the new Meiji writers tended to look entirely to the West 
for their models, the writers of the present day receive 
their influence both from the West and from their own 
writers of the past sixty years. 
Even in the early days of importation, literary influence 
in Japan rarely produced slavish imitation of certain 
specific European or American models. It was usually a 
much more indirect and complex process. As the young 
post-war writer. Mr. Mishima Yukio, has pointed out, 
Japanese novelists have usually assimilated only those 
elements of foreign literature that are in some way close 
to the recipient. This is more than ever true today when 
the Japanese writer has such an immense selection of 
world literature at his disposal. 
Although the most conspicuous influences have certainly 
come from Europe, it would be a mistake to discount 
the effect of Chinese and Japanese classical literature on 
certain modern writers. This classical influence is re- 
flected in the imagery, the descriptions, the general mood 
and sometimes the structural techniques of many 
  
(1) All names are given in the normal Japanese order, with 
the family name preceding the personal one. 
 on A 
© The Japan Times Weekly, Tokyo 
outstanding post-Melji writers and their successors. One 
of the most interesting aspects of writers like Nagai Kafu, 
Tanizaki Junichiro and Kawabata Yasunari is precisely 
the way in which they succeeded in moulding classical 
traditions with modern Western thoughts and technique. 
However, the fact remains that the modern Japanese 
novel and story are essentially Western forms; in so far 
as literary influence has played a part, most Japanese 
prose writers are indebted to modern Western literature 
far more than to their own country’s classical tradition. 
It is writers like Hugo, Poe, Whitman, Baudelaire, Dos- 
toievsky, Tolstoy, Hardy, Zola, Huysmans, Maupassant, 
Wilde and D. H. Lawrence that have exercised influence 
rather than Murasaki Shikibu, Saikaku, Bakin, and the 
other famous prose writers of earller centuries. 
The remark made in 1910 by Natsumé Soseki, one of 
the most important of the post-Melji novelists, could well 
be uttered by the vast majority of modern Japanese prose 
writers: “What governs my mind at this moment, what 
will influence all my future work, is not, alas, the tradition 
of my ancestors, but, rather, thoughts brought over from 
across the sea, and by an alien race.” 
But few post-war writers in making this statement 
would be inclined to include Soseki’s expression of regret. 
Japan is, of course, not the only country in which 
imported literature has exerted an influence, but the 
historical conditions of the Meiji Period made this 
influence of primary importance. As Mr. Mishima (who 
among the younger writers is particularly conscious of his 
own country’s classical heritage) has said, “In most other 
countries there exists a strong literary tradition into 
which writers can assimilate whatever is imported. In 
Japan our literature does not rest on any such tradition. 29 
Although our talented writers have managed to utilize 
their abilities individually, there are very few of them who 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 30](078354engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 63573: Modern Japanese fiction: a break with tradition

  
©
 
Ro
ge
r 
Vi
ol
le
t 
A CENTURY OF CHANGE IN WRIT- 
ING. After 1868 Japan's efforts to become 
“modern” led to a sharp break with a past 
epitomized by the traditionally garbed figures 
depicted above in this painting by the 19th- 
century artist Kyoden. The main effect of 
Western influence was to encourage Japanese 
writers to describe more realistically the 
brave new world they saw growing about 
them. Realism gave way to naturalism and, 
after the First World War, to a school of 
writing whose chief concern was the social 
condition of city workers, seamen and farm 
workers (right). Students (opposite) in a Tokyo 
bookshop reflect today’s book boom, with 
sales vastly exceeding pre-war figures and large 
material rewards crowning literary success.  
Maupassant : a bombshell in Japanese letters 
have managed to ground their works on secure tradition.” 
In Japan, as in most other countries, the story or tale 
has an extremely long and varied history. Among the 
earliest collections that have come down to us (leaving 
aside ancient mythological collections where the literary 
motive is secondary) are those from the Helan Period 
(794-1185 A.D.) in which brief prose passages serve to 
provide the background for thirty-one syllable classical 
poems or to link a series of such poems by means of 
rudimentary plots. 
The Tales of Isé from the ninth century is the best- 
known example; The Tales of Yamato (tenth century) 
belongs to the same tradition; The Tales of Tsutsumi 
Chunagon (which includes the charming and original 
fragment “The Lady Who Loved Insects”) is a collection 
of ten stories with well-defined plots and considerable 
realism. 
In the eleventh century Tales of Past and Present, 
consisting of over 1,000 stories taken from Indian, Chinese 
and Japanese history and folklore, represents a considera- 
ble advance in construction over the lyrical tales of the 
early Heian Period. Otogi-Zoshi is the generic term for 
collections of popular stories, most simply fairy-tales, 
that were in circulation during the Muromachi Period 
(c. 1300-1600). 
1: a more recent period the numerous collec- 
tions of stories by Ihara Saikaku (1642-93) deal 
in a more or less realistic way with the lives of contem- 
porary men and ‘women, mostly members of the 
seventeenth century townsman class. Tales of the 
Moonlight and the Rain (1776), a famous collection of 
nine ghost stories by Ueda Akinari, belongs to a tradition 
of supernatural tales that goes back to the eighth 
century (2). 
We should also take note of a common form that is to 
be found in much of Saikaku’s work and elsewhere. This 
consists of a collection of stories having a common thread 
or theme: a typical example is Saikaku’s Reckonings That 
Carry Men Through The World (Seken Munesanyo, 1693), 
which is a volume of twenty independent stories all 
  
(2) The English translation is lo be published by the Cam- 
bridge University Press in the Unesco Collection of Represen- 
tative Works—Japanese series. 
dealing with the torments that different groups of 
characters experience on the last day of the year when 
all debts become due for payment. 
Despite this ancient and diverse tradition, the modern 
Japanese story form in this century owed remarkably 
little to the various pre-Meiji collections of which exam- 
ples have been given above. It is true that a number of 
the Meiji Period writers (including Higuchi Ichiyo, Ozaki 
Koyo, Koda Rohan and Tayama Katai) recognized in 
Saikaku’s stories the same vigorous realism that they had 
found in modern French literature. 
Saikaku’s realism, however, served to confirm such writers 
in their already established literary approach, rather than 
to inspire them. When it actually came to writing stor- 
ies, the main influences derived, not from Saikaku or the 
other pre-Meiji masters of realistic fiction, but from the 
recent literature of Europe and America. ) 
The history of the modern story in Japan can be 
considered to date from the introduction of Maupassant’s 
work in the 1890’s. One of the earliest writers to attempt 
to produce in Japanese the type of story that was current 
in Europe was Mori Ogal, who after his return from 
Germany in 1888 did so much to familiarize Japanese 
readers with Western literary forms. 
Of the two masters of the late nineteenth century short 
story in Europe, Maupassant exerted considerably greater 
influence in Japan than Chekhov. The reason is not far 
to seek: the introduction of Maupassant’s short stories 
coincided with the rise of Naturalism in Japanese litera- 
ture and, indeed, was one of the important influences in 
this movement. It was Maupassant’s direct, realistic and 
often harsh approach to his material that affected Japa- 
nese writers, rather than his mastery of the short story 
form itself. 
Although Maupassant, like Chekhov, regarded the short 
story as being a genre in itself and although he contribut- 
ed so greatly to giving it the characteristic form with 
which we are now familiar, his early influence in Japan 
did not on the whole lead writers to make the clear 
differentiation between the novel and the short story 
that is accepted in the West. 
The line of demarcation in Japan between the two 
genres has always tended to be vague. This is reflected 
in the terminology. Both forms are known as shosetsu, 
the word for short story being differentiated only by the 
prefix tampen (short plece). Shosetsu is also used with

## [Page 31](078354engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 63573: Modern Japanese fiction: a break with tradition

  
the prefix chuhen, (middle piece) to describe an inter- 
mediate length of work having about, 40,000 to 60,000 
words; this roughly corresponds to what is sometimes 
known as novelette, but the form is very much more 
popular in Japan than in the West. 
Thus there is a regular continuum from fampen- 
shosetsu through chuhen-shosetsu to shosetsu. The only 
real differentiation is in the matter of length, which 
itself tends to be very indefinite. This is not simply a 
matter of terminology, but extends to the conception—or 
rather, lack of conception—of the short story as a distinct 
literary form. Very frequently we find the same piece of 
fiction being described alternatively as a novel and as a 
short story. 
One result of this vague differentiation is the absence 
from so many Japanese stories of certain stylistic qua- 
litles that we have come to regard as essential to the 
modern short story in the West. This is certainly not to 
suggest that the story is a narrow form with certain 
sirictly defined rules or cannons. Far from it. A genre 
that so greatly antedates the novel is bound to have enor- 
mous flexibility. 
| HE history of the story in the West goes back 
to the Tales of the Magicians (from the Egypt 
of almost 4,000 years ago) and traces its complex descent 
through Aesop, Boccaccio, Chaucer, the Bible and La 
Fontaine, to name only a few of the great landmarks. 
Any neat definition is both impossible and undesirable. 
As the well-known short-story writer, Kay Boyle, has 
sald, “The only continuity it (the story) possesses is that 
it was isolated individuals, sometimes writing centuries 
apart, who spoke with freshness and vigour, in a short- 
winded rather than a long-winded form, of people, and 
lgeas, and incidents, which seemed to the reader moving 
and true.” 
Since the time of Gogol, however, the story has develop- 
ed in a certain manner that we may characterize as the 
“style of the modern Western short story.” Its outstand- 
ing feature is an economy of means. This has involved 
a tendency to compression, to the dropping of inessen- 
tials. The tendency has continued until the present day 
and has been given particular impetus by the short 
stories of Ernest Hemingway, whom Mr. H.E. Bates 
describes as the “man with an axe... (who) cut out a 
whole forest of verbosity” (H. E. Bates: “The Modern 
Short Story.) 
Without economy there can be no short story in the 
modern sense of the term. This, of course, does not pre- 
Photos Unesco - Marc Riboud 
clude the existence of short stories of considerable length. 
The tendency since the time of Tolstoy has certainly been 
in the direction of brevity, but the modern story may vary 
from a few hundred words to 15,000 or even 20,000. What 
Is essential is the close construction, the casting of all 
the material round a single central image and the overall 
compression that have become the marks of the success- 
ful modern short story in the West. 
By these general standards a considerable proportion 
of tampen-shosetsu are not short stories at all; frequently 
they appear to be sketches, essays or truncated novels. 
A large number of Japanese story writers are primarily 
novelists for whom stories tend to be what Miss Elizabeth 
Bowen, has called “side-issues from the crowded imagin- 
ation.” 
Since the novel and the modern short story are two 
totally different genres it is most unlikely that a writer 
will be equally at home in both, and this applies in Japan 
quite as much as in the West. The plethora of literary 
magazines in Japan has encouraged many writers to 
produce stories when their style was better suited to the 
novel. As a result, their work often lacks the stylistic 
compression that is the essence of the modern short story. 
This is not primarily a matter of word-length (though 
it is worth noting that Japanese stories are as a rule far 
longer than their modern Western counterparts,) but 
of failure to apply the indirect, suggestive and dramatic 
methods which are indispensable for economy of style. 
In a country that has produced the most compressed 
forms of poetry in world literature, it is remarkable that 
stories should so frequently be marked by a turgid verbo- 
sity which cries out for the ministration of a red pencil. 
Fortunately a number of good modern writers in Japan 
have treated the short story as an equal and separate 
genre of literature, not merely as an abbreviated novel or 
as a sketch. Of the authors represented in Modern 
Japanese Stories, the three who stand out in Japanese 
letters as short-story writers are Shiga Naoya, Akutagawa 
Ryunosuké and Nakajima Ton. 
The fact that these three writers are all masters of 
literary style is not irrelevent. Like the poem, the short 
story is undoubtedly a type of writing in which style or 
form is all-important. An indifferently written or poorly 
constructed novel may impose by the ingenuity of its plot, 
by the evocation of some unusual scene or atmosphere or 
agaln by the vivid portrayal of a character; but a badly 
written short story is almost bound to fall, regardless of 
its content. 
This article may nothe reproduced without permission.

## [Page 32](078354engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

32 
letters to the Editor 
SPACE TRAVEL 
& CONTAMINATION 
 
Sir, 
Today when we not only have a win- 
dow but also a door towards space, there 
are two related problems your worthy 
publication could help us with. 
Can space vehicles be entirely sterilized 
so that not a single microbe escapes to 
contaminate possible discoveries? Are 
they? Would not researchers themselves 
carry contaminating microbes on their 
explorations? 
In reverse, what are the chances of 
bringing to earth dormant microbes to 
which man has developed no resistance 
through cohabitation of the planet, and 
which, if given the proper conditions on 
earth, would rapidly devastate us? 
These can no longer be considered 
science fiction problems. THE UNESCO 
Courier alone can deal with these topics 
with the authority of the world scientific 
organization. I have much appreciated 
the treatment you accorded to other mat- 
ters of world concern. 
George R, Schiffer 
Montreal, Canada 
Eb. NOTE: A special issue on the Conquest 
of Outer Space is in preparation. 
FREEDOM FROM FEAR 
 
Sir, 
The mass of the world’s people are 
now tortured by fear as they never were 
before. This fear psychology has built 
itself into a widespread neurosis in which 
the fear of nuclear war, with the appre- 
hension and dread of the inconceivable 
horror of its aftermath, has resulted in 
deeply disturbing feelings of frustration, 
insecurity, hatred and suspicion, and these 
feelings are the direct cause of a resur- 
gence of war hysteria, race hatred, juve- 
nile delinquency and crime and general 
discord and disregard of human rights. 
To survive, it is up to us to replace our 
much-used negative emotions of fear, 
hatred, suspicion and deceit, with our 
slightly used endowments of reason and 
judgment, tolerance and understanding, 
together with the will to get along toge- 
ther and to sincerely extend compassion 
and goodwill to all our fellowmen. These 
are the only ways left us sanely to settle 
international disputes, and we had better 
start to use them right now. 
Rufus J. Bean 
Pabellon, Mexico 
ARGENTINA SALUTES TAGORE 
 
Sir, 
We were surprised to see in the Decem- 
ber, 1961 issue of THE UNEscO COURIER, 
dedicated to Rabindranath Tagore, that 
no mention was made of the homage paid 
to his memory in Argentina by the: Com- 
mission formed in. this country to cele- 
brate the centenary of his birth. We en- 
close a list of tributes paid to Tagore. 
Yictoria Qcampo 
President, Executive Commitee, 
Argentine Commission of Homage 
to Tagore on the Centenary of 
his Birth 
Ep. NoTE: This information not having 
been communicated to Unesco earlier, 
The Unesco Courier could not include it 
in its Tagore issue. We are glad to do so 
now. Argentina's centenary celebrations 
included the presentation of Tagore’s play 
“The King's Postman” at the Teatro Na- 
cional de Comedia; a series of eight lec- 
tures at the National Museum of Decor- 
ative Arts, where reproductions of Ta- 
gore's paintings and original manuscripts 
were displayed; the publication of 
Tagore'’s Birthday Book and of 13 poems 
from Puravi; a special issue of the liter- 
ary magazine, Sur, devoted to Tagore; the 
publication of a book, Tagore on the 
Slopes of San Isidro, by Victoria Ocampo; 
the issue of a record with poems from 
Gitanjali, recited in English, French and 
Spanish, the naming of a street in San 
Isidro and the issue of a stamp bearing 
his , portrait. 
SAVE EGYPT'S MONUMENTS 
Sir, 
I feel that Egypt is my true home and 
I can almost believe that I lived there 
2,000 or 3,000 years ago. So I would hate 
to see the treasures, temples and palaces 
of Egypt destroyed by the waters of the 
Aswan Dam. I am only thirteen years 
old and so too young to do anything 
about it. But as someone who loves that 
beautiful country, I ask you to speak 
out against the construction of the dam. 
Jacqueline Lagrandie 
Sarlat, France 
Ep. NoTE: Why disagree with the 
building of a dam which is so badly 
needed in Egypt? It is far better to object 
to the destruction of the temples of Abu 
Simbel and to do everything possible to 
save them” 
MULTILINGUAL PROBLEMS 
 
Sir, 
I refer to the letter from Mr. John C. 
de V. Roberts which you published in 
your February issue. As an editor of 
other publications I know only too well 
your difficulties in producing the same 
publication in several languages. An arti- 
cle written In one language, when trans- 
lated and made to fit a pre-arranged 
space, might sometimes give the impres- 
sion of padding. 
Only this month I had an article writ- 
ten for me by a well-known French jour- 
nalist on a French subject. The original 
manuscript was, in my opinion, brilliant, 
but I had to use it in English. Although 
the subject matter is interesting, the au- 
thor's individual style has been lost and 
I am less satisfied with the result. 
Regarding the suggestion that you need 
better authors, a perusal of one or two 
back numbers chosen at random produces 
such names as Ritchie Calder, ‘Madame 
Desroches-Noblecourt, L.P. Kirwan, Sir 
Julian Huxley, A.W.F. Banfield, André 
Maurois, Enrique Lafuente Ferrari. All 
these are acknowledged experts in their 
own fields and any editor would be proud 
to put them amongst his contributors. In 
my opinion, you do an extremely diffi- 
cult job exceptionally well. 
Reg Holmes 
London, England 
WOMEN IN PURDAH 
 
Sir, 
After reading your article, “Moslem 
Women” (March 1961) I feel obliged to 
make a few corrections concerning Pakis- 
tan. I returned to France in 1961, after 
spending three years in Pakistan includ- 
ing two and a half at Multan, the third 
largest city in western Pakistan, and my 
memories and impressions of Pakistani 
women are still very fresh. 
I do not agree with Mrs. Anne-Marie 
Hussein. What she says is partly true no 
doubt of Karachi, Lahore, Rawalpindi 
and Peshawar, where half the women 
one meets are unveiled. As for the rest 
of the country, and especially Multan, I 
don’t think I have seen more than ten 
women out of purdah during the whole 
of my stay. And there is little hope of 
improvement. On the contrary. 
Wives of doctors or railway engineers 
and women teachers in girls’ schools, who 
do not wear the veil in Karachi or 
Lahore, are obliged to do so here or they 
would be insulted and even molested in 
the street. Schoolgirls go to college in 
purdah. It is a strange sight. 
J. Theureau 
Annecy, France 
JUNIOR UNESCO COURIER 
Sir, 
While I have an unbounded admiration 
for Unesco, I do not care so much for 
Tue Unesco Courier and have decided 
to discontinue my subscription. I am a 
schoolmaster in charge of the school 
library where we have included the Cou- 
rier for the past year, among our other 
periodicals; but I have decided to stop 
our subscription. My experience is that 
it is little read and this, I think, is due 
to its unattractive lay-out. The photo- 
graphs are not too clear, the print is 
uninteresting in appearance, and the sub- 
ject-matter does not beckon the child to 
read it. Nevertheless, I do not apply 
these criticisms on behalf of adults, for 
whom the COURIER is a valuable perio- 
dical. 
Have you thought of producing a 
Junior COURIER? 
E. H. Warne 
Upminster, England 
ED. NOTE: A Junior Unesco Courier has 
been the subject of discussion by both 
the Secretariat of Unesco and the Gene- 
ral Conference. This is a highly complex 
problem which is still being studied.

## [Page 33](078354engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

REMINISCENCES BY A 
Sir, 
Returning from a lecture tour on 
Tagore in Finland, Norway and Sweden, 
I saw your number (December, 1961) 
with pictures and articles on my 
“Gurudev” which put me in a 
reminiscent mood. Perhaps you will 
allow a pupil, who was the tenth to 
join the Poet's experimental school in 
1901, to relate some of his memories. 
Ours was a real, closely-knit family 
over which hovered the benign presence 
of the Master. He was a born teacher, 
and took our classes in Bengali and 
“English, wrote elementary text books for 
us to learn Sanskrit and English, and 
read to us Shelley, Keats, Wordsworth 
and Browning, and Matthew Arnold's 
essays on English Literature. In the 
evenings he would regularly join in our 
“entertainmerny” hour, devising new 
games for us, one of which was called 
“Sense-training” i.e. we had to guess 
from a quick look the length of a table, 
shelf, door, etc. I remember the Poet 
was very keen on this ‘Sense-training”. 
Just as here tn Paul Geheeb’s school, 
the children close their books and are 
off skiing on a particularly fine winter 
morning, so at Santiniketan too the 
children welcomed the rains by rushing 
out to get drenched to the skin, and 
even the Master joined us occasionally. 
We of course had our classes in science, 
carpentry, gardening and Ju-jitsu (a 
teacher was brought all the way from 
Japan). I have often heard the Poet 
nostalgically speak of those early days, 
when thé school was unknown to the 
outside world and he was free to 
experiment and learn by mistakes—so 
unlike today, when many tourists have 
Santiniketan in their itinerary along with 
the Taj Mahal and Delhi's Red Fort. 
Coming from Santiniketan, I was 
naturally interested in progressive schools, 
and so visited the Odenwaldschule of 
Paul Geheeb in 1927. I was so impressed 
by all I saw and it reminded me so 
much of my own Santiniketan days, that 
I gave the Poet no rest till in 1930 he 
visited Paul Geheeb (See THE UNESCO 
CourlER, Dec. 1961, p. 9) whom he 
Lrrrrrrraorrrrrrrr>s.>r 
    
O
N
N
A
N
A
N
A
N
A
A
N
N
A
A
N
A
A
A
N
N
A
N
A
N
A
A
A
I
N
A
A
A
N
S
 
S
A
N
,
 
: 
" 
  
O
A
N
A
A
N
A
N
A
A
N
A
N
A
N
N
N
D
N
S
 
A
A
T
,
 
  
greeted on his sixtieth birthday “as my 
spiritual comrade and friend of Man”. 
This is perhaps the only good deed I 
have done in my life, in bringing these 
two pioneers and revolutionaries in the 
field of education from East and West 
together, 
In the earlier twenties, after finishing 
Cambridge, I was a student of Professors 
Planck and Einstein in Berlin. The Swiss 
Science Congress met in Lucerne in 1925 
and I had the opportunity to speak a 
lot about my “Gurudev” to Einstein, 
especially about his lectures in Japan 
and America during the First World War, 
in which he condemned narrow, aggressive 
Nationalism and preached a larger 
Humanism that embraced East and 
West in bonds of fellowship. These 
were in harmony with the thoughts of the 
great humanist Einstein himself, and he 
was very happy to read the book 
“Nationalism” which I gave him soon 
after my return to Berlin. This was his 
very first acquaintance with Tagore’s 
writings. 
* 
In 1926 when Tagore came to Berlin, 
they met in Einstein's flat for tea and 
I acted as interpreter, as Einstein's 
English was at the time not too perfect. 
I remember that the social implications 
of the extended use of machinery in 
displacing men from industry and 
agriculture, and thus increasing un- 
employment (in Germany the rising 
figures of unemployment was just then 
helping Hitler's mass-movement) was 
troubling the sensitive conscience of our 
great Western sage and on this point 
he put several questions to our Poet. 
I took Tagore in a taxi to Epstein’s 
studio in London, for him to see his 
works. I remember that the robust bust 
of Conrad—a veritable sea-dog—made 
a great impression on our Poet and he 
consented to sit for Epstein. I used to 
sit in a corner watching Epstein work. 
I liked the bust very much at the end 
of the third sitting. But he worked for 
two days more and, at least I felt, spoilt 
THE UNESCO 
PHILATELIC SERVICE 
Arar aE SS SL eS SE 
REPUBLIOUE DU 
DAHOMEY » 
  
P
v
 
IN
MA
IS
Y 
31
80
9 
A
N
A
A
A
N
A
A
A
N
A
A
A
A
N
A
N
A
T
L
A
A
A
N
N
A
A
A
A
A
N
 
  
FRIEND OF TAGORE 
it. He did not, I feel, succeed in capturing 
Tagore’s beautiful and expressive eyes. 
Tagore was really like a child and had 
to be taken about by his secretaries, and 
he never carried a penny in his pocket. 
In Munich station I saw him get down 
from the train in June 1921—like a 
cherub fallen from heaven—his secretary 
with his luggage in the second half of 
the train cut off for some unknown 
reason. Of course he had not a penny 
with him and was boisterously enjoying 
the funny situation. It was here in 
Munich that the Sanskrit professor, after 
Tagore’s lecture in the University, an- 
nounced that the Poet had donated the 
whole of the proceeds from the sale of 
his works in German to feed starving 
students. 
I could write much more but must 
end with just one more memorable re- 
collection. It was June 1921 in Tagore’s 
hotel in Berlin. His visitor was Prof. 
Rudolf Otto of Marburg, whose famous 
book Das Heilige has been translated 
into many languages. 
They spoke for over an hour on how 
to build up a new world from the ruins 
of a devastating war, and suddenly Tagore 
exclaimed with fervour: “Your country 
and mine, both are disarmed.. Let us 
unite our efforts and with the might of 
the spirit bring healing to this world!” 
Alas for the Poet's dream! In a few 
years Hitlerism engulfed Germany, pres- 
aging the outbreak of World War II. 
In these days-to be a cynic is so easy! 
But let us remember Tagore’s very last 
words: 
“I shall not commit the grevious sin 
of losing faith in Man. 
“I shall wait for the day when the 
holocaust will end and the air will be 
rendered clean with the spirit of service 
and sacrifice,” 
THE UNEsco CouRrRIER has done a 
service for the cause of Peace and 
Understanding in bringing out this 
Tagore number, for which please accept 
my sincere thanks. 
Aurobindo M. Bose 
Ecole d’Humanité 
Goldern, Switzerland 
N September 20, 1960, fifteen newly- 
(OO independent African countries be- 
came members of the United Na- 
tions. Some have since issued stamps 
to commemorate the first anniversary of 
their membership. Those shown here are 
from: Republic of Dahomey (right) issued 
in 5, 60 and 200 Fr. denominations; Repub- 
lic of Malagasy (left) 25 and 85 Fr.; Re- 
public of Niger (centre) 25 and 100 Fr. 
These stamps and other philatelic items 
can be obtained from the Unesco Phila- 
telic service. As agent in France of the 
U.N. Postal Administration, Unesco’s 
Philatelic Service stocks all U.N. stamps 
currently on sale. For prices and further 
details write The Unesco Philatelic 
Service, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢, 
33

## [Page 34](078354engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
From the Unesco New 
NTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION 
IN SPACE: The United States regards 
UNEsco as one of the Specialized Agencies 
of the United Nations best suited to further 
international scientific co-operation, and 
hopes it will collaborate with the World 
Meteorological Association in implement- 
ing a recent U.S. resolution in the United 
Nations on atmospheric science and techno- 
logy. This was stated by Mr George 
V. Allen, Chairman of the U.S. National 
Commission for UNEsco, replying to a 
message of congratulations from UNEscO 
on the successful space flight made by the 
American astronaut, Colonel John Glenn. 
Unesco’s message read: “Please accept 
UNEsco's heartiest congratulations on great 
achievement of American science success- 
fully completed.” 
BH UNIVERSITY FOR BRASILIA: Brazil's 
new capital. Brasilia, is to have its own 
university, Work is now going ahead based 
on plans on which the noted Brazilian ar- 
chitects Oscar Niemayer and Lucio Costa 
are collaborating with members of the new 
university's own Faculty of Architecture. 
(ELLOWSHIPS FOR AFRICANS: 
Nine young musicians from Africa 
will be studying in an academy of music 
in Great Britain next year. Hundreds of 
African student teachers will be taking 
courses in countries from Bulgaria to Mexi- 
co and from Sweden to Israel. In Rome a 
student from Somalia will be learning all 
about film production. These are a few 
samplings from a UNEsco’s publication, 
“Fellowships for Africans” which list 
10,000 opportunities for African students 
to study abroad. This 50-page booklet 
(printed in English and French) is avail- 
able free of charge from the International 
Exchange Service, UNEsco, Place de 
Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France. 
BH EDUCATION FOR ASIA’S WOMEN: 
Delegates from 16 Asian countries met re- 
cently in Bangkok at UNEsco’s invitation 
to take stock of the educational, cultural, 
social and economic obstacles to adequate 
education for women in rural Asia today. 
The meeting studied problems at all levels 
from primary schools to adult education 
programmes, and recommended ways of 
improving facilities available to women. 
ROBLEMS OF YOUTH TODAY: 
The problems facing youth in the mod- 
ern world are being studied during a 
series of UNESco-sponsored meetings by a 
working group composed of international 
non-governmental organizations and youth 
associations. The latest, held in Paris, 
dealt with difficulties faced by young peo- 
ple finishing school and setting out to earn 
their living. UNESCO’s inquiry into youth’s 
needs and problems is being made in 15 
countries. It is estimated that young peo- 
ple in the 15-20 age group make up one- 
fifth of the world’s population. 
  
  
  
HM ALL THE WORLD'S SOILS: The Food 
and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and 
UNESCO are co-operating in a joint project 
to make the first soil map of the world 
which will show the major types of soil 
and thus provide a key to better land use. 
The work will take seven years and a first 
outline of the world map will be studied 
at the Congress of the International Society 
of Soil Science to be held in Rumania in 
1964. 
RAINING CENTRE FOR ASIA’S 
EDUCATORS: India and UNEsCO 
have signed an agreement for the setting 
up of a regional centre in New Delhi where 
Asia’s educational planners, administrators 
and supervisors can be trained. This is 
one of four regional centres to be establish- 
ed this year under UNEscO’s programme 
for the development of primary education 
in Asia, 
BH TWO NATIONS JOIN UNESCO: 
Tanganyika joined UNEsco on March 7 
and Sierra Leone on March 28, thus bring- 
ing the total of the Organization’s member 
states to 1085, 
N ORE TEACHERS NEEDED: Ano- 
ther 95,000 teachers will have to be 
recruited in England and Wales by 1970 if 
present educational requirements are to be 
met, according to a recent report entitled 
“Investment for National Survival” pub- 
lished by the National Union of Teachers. 
By 1970, the total teaching force in England 
and Wales for both state and private 
schools, a training college and colleges for 
further education will have to total at least 
420,000, 
EH WOOD HARDER THAN IRON: Two 
rare species of birch tree found in the 
Soviet Union apparently produce wood that 
is harder than iron. Known as the 
“Schmidt” birch and the Temiragach, or 
“iron birch”, they have wood which is 
one and a half times as hard as cast iron, 
sinks in water and is used instead of met- 
al for making gear wheels and other ma- 
chine parts. When the “iron birch” is cut 
down it throws up new shoots within a 
few days. Soviet specialists are now trying 
to transplant these trees into other regions. 
OLAR-POWERED ‘EARS’: Units which 
are described as combination radio 
and public address systems have been 
sent to communities in Paraguay by the 
Administration for International Develop- 
ment, a U.S, government agency. Using a 
small slice of silicon to transform solar 
energy into electricity, they are expected 
to facilitate communications in Paraguay’s 
villages. Similar devices are to be sent 
to India, Pakistan and Afghanistan.   
BH RADICAL CURE FOR MALARIA: 
No one need die of malaria now that fully 
reliable means exist both for curing it and 
for preventing the infection from making 
further victims, says the World Health 
Organization. This was revealed by dis- 
cussions during the Second European Con- 
ference on Malaria Eradication, held recent- 
ly in Tangiers. The Conference noted that 
the radical cure of malaria was now pos- 
sible thanks to modern drugs (the 8-amino 
quinolines, of which the most widely used 
is primaquine). 
ORLD BANK AID FOR GHANA: 
An important boost was given to 
Ghana's economic development plans re- 
cently by the decision of the World Bank 
to make a $47 million loan to help finance 
the construction of a giant rockfill dam 
over the Volta River, 60 miles north of 
Accra. The project will provide power 
for a giant hydroelectric station and will 
create a reservoir stretching 200 miles 
northwards. It will enable new indus- 
tries—rice growing, for example—to be 
started, and will generate electricity to 
work an aluminium smelting plant at the 
port of Tema, 44 miles away. 
ml EQUAL ACCESS TO SCHOOLS: The 
United Kingdom recently became the 
fourth country—after the Central African 
Republic, France and Israel—to ratifiy the 
Convention Against Discrimination in Edu- 
cation, adopted in December 1960 by the 
Unesco General Conference. The Con- 
vention which enters into force on May 22 
defines descrimination as including any 
distinction “based on race, colour, sex, 
language, religion, political or other opi- 
nion, national or social origin, economic 
condition or birth.” 
ERMANY’S COMPUTOR SCHOOL: 
The first electronic computor school 
in the Federal Republic of Germany has 
been opened. Known as.the Federal Tech- 
nical School for Mechanical Manipulation 
of Data, it offers courses in the operation 
of machines used in factories, offices and 
public services, including such subjects as 
electronics and perforated card techniques, 
storage and classification of data. 
BH LATIN-AMERICAN EDUCATORS 
LOOK & LEARN: Educators from 15 
Latin American countries recently wound 
up a three-month European study tour in 
Paris where they visited schools and met 
education authorities. The tour, sponsored 
by Unesco’s International Exchange Ser- 
vice, enabled 43 specialists to make first- 
hand studies of educational planning pro- 
grammes in Spain, Italy, Switzerland and 
France. It was part of UNEsco’s Major 
Project for the extension of primary edu- 
cation in Latin America. 
YE ON THE SKY: Soviet astronomers, 
now have a new and extremely power 
ful telescope for astronomic observations, 
which has been installed at the Astrophysics 
Observatory of the Crimea. Reported to 
be the largest telescope in Europe, the 
apparatus has a mirror weighing 4 tons 
and 2.6 meters in diameter, which was 
fused at a Leningrad optical works factory. 
The rotating lens can be synchronized with 
star movements by means of one of the 
telescope’s 160 automatic electronic systems. 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
Im
p.
 
G
E
C
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
P
A
R
I
S
.

## [Page 35](078354engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

TR we 
/ 
  
tance, 
U.N. 
Nations”, 
Szapiro. 
Cloth-bound: $2.25 
Paper cover: $1.75 
A GUIDE 
TO THE 
UNITED NATIONS 
A compact reference book on all aspects of the 
United Nations and its many associated bodies 
has just been published by Unesco. 
the ideas behind the creation of the United 
Nations, its birth in San Francisco and its early 
history, this book shows clearly how United 
Nations work has evolved and been divided into 
different branches. 
political questions, economic and social problems, 
humanitarian and social work, technical assis- 
the trusteeship system for 
governing territories and the legal work of the 
Called 
this 230-page volume is all that it 
claims to be—a guide for journalists about the 
United Nations and the specialized agencies—and 
more: it is the kind of book that those so inclined 
can pick up and browse through for a few minutes 
or an hour's informative and profitable reading. 
In addition to producing a readable vademecum 
for all who are interested in the U.N., the author 
has compiled a first-class bibliography. 
THE NEWSPAPERMAN’S UNITED NATIONS by Jerzy 
Tracing 
There are, for example, the 
non-self- 
“The Newspaperman's United 
11/-stg. 8 NF. 
8/6 stg. 6.25 NF. 
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; rates quoted are 
for an annual subscription toe THE UNESCO COU- 
RIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzal, Press Department. Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. —~ AUSTRALIA. 
Melbourne University Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, 
Melbourne, C. 1, Victoria, (A. 15/-). — AUSTRIA, 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C°., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 50.-). — BELGIUM. Office de Publicité S.A., 
16, rte Marq, Brussels. CCP 285.98. NV Standaard- 
Boekhandel, Belgielei 15]. Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (100 FB) and art slides only: Louis de Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. CCP 3380.00 — 
BURMA. Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoon. (K. 5.50). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont. ($ 3.00). — CEYLON. The Associated 
Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd,, Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Colombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
— CHINA. World -Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Tziwan (Formosa). — CUBA. 
Librerfa Econdmica, Pte Zayas 508-7, Apartado 113, 
Havana. (2.25 pesos). — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. Artia 
Ltd,, 30 Ve Smeckich, Prague 2. — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, A/S Tidsskriftafdelingen, 6 Norregade, 
Kébenhavn K. (D.kr. 12). — ETHIOPIA, International 
Press Agency. P.O. Box 120. Addis Ababa. — FINLAND. 
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
(Fmk. 540), — FRANCE. Librairie de I’'Unesco, Place 
de Fontenoy, Paris, 7¢. C.C.P. 12598-48. (7 NF.). 
— GERMANY, For the Unesco Kurier, Yertrieb Bahren- 
felder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 
276650 (DM 8). Other Publications: R. Oldenbourg 
Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse |45, Munich. — GHANA. 
Methodist Book Depot Ltd. Atlantis House, Commercial 
St., POB 100, Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See 
United Kingdom. — GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 
28, rue du Stade, Athens. — HONG-KONG. Swindon 
Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. 
Kultura, P.O. Box 149. Budapest, 62. — INDIA Orient 
Longmans Ltd. Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay |; [7 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; Gun- 
foundry Road, Hyderabad, |; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asat Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New 
Delhi, I; Sub-Depot: Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16, Scindia House, New Delhi. 
(Rs. 7). — INDONESIA. P. N. Fadjar Bhakti, 
Djalan Nusantara 22, Djakarta. — [RAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. — IRELAND. The National Press, 
2, Wellington Road, Balisbridge, Dublin. ([0/-). — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 35, Allenby 
Road and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (1 £ 5). 
— JAMAICA. Sangster’s Book Room, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston. Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
(10/-). — JAPAN, Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome, 
Nijhonbashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
(Yen 670). — JORDAN. Joseph L. Bahous & Co., 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road, P.O.B. 66, Amman. — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul, — LUXEMBURG. 
Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, Luxemburg. 
— MALAYAN FEDERATION AND SINGAPORE. 
Federal Publications Ltd., Times House, River Valley 
Rd., Singapore. — MALTA. Sapienza’s Library, 
26 Kingsway, Valetta. (10/-). — MAURITIUS. Nalanda 
Company Ltd,, 30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis. 
— MONACO. British Library, 30 Bld des Moulins, 
Monte-Carlo, (7 NF.) — NETHERLANDS. N.V. 
Martinus Nijhoff, lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 6). — NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. G.C.T. 
Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant) N.V., Willemstad, Curacao. 
— NEW ZEALAND. Unesco Publications Centre, 
100 Hackthorne Road, Christchurch. (10/-). — NIGERIA 
C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 174, Lagos. (10/-). — NOR- 
WAY. For the Unesco Courier only: A.S, Narvesens Lit- 
teratur-Tjeneste, Stortingsgt. 4, Oslo, Postboks 115 (kr. 
13.20} Other publications. A.S. Bokhjernet, Lille Grensen 
7, Oslo. — PAKISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Co. 
Ltd., Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374, 56-N 
Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahore. — PANAMA. 
Cultural Panamena, Avenida 7a, No. TI-49, Apartado 
de Correos 20|8, Panama, D.F. (Balboas 3-}, — PHI. 
LIPPINES. Philippine Education Co. lnc., 1104 Castille- 
jos. Quiapo, P.O. Box 620, Manila. — POLAND, 
* RUCH ” ul.Wiloza Nr. 46, Warsaw 10 (ZI. 50). — 
PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrada Lda, Livraria Portugal, 
Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — RHODESIA & NYASA- 
LAND. The Book Centre, First Street, Salisbury, 
Southern Rhodesia, — SWEDEN, For The Unesco 
Courier: Svenska Unescoridet, Vasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 7.50); other publications A/B C.E. Fritzes 
Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. — 
SWITZERLAND. Europa Verlag, 5 Rdmistrasse 
Zurich. Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1-236. « Courier » only: Georges Losmaz, 1, rue des 
Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. {-4811. (Fr, S. 8). 
— TANGANYIKA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 
9030, Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. Suksapan 
Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. (35 
ticals). — TURKEY, Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda 
Bookshop, P.O., Box §45, Kampala. — UNION OF 
SOUTH AFRICA. Van Schaik’s Bookstore, Libri 
Building, Church Street, Pretoria. For the Unesco 
Courier: Central News Agency, P.O. Box 1033, Johan- 
nesburg. (10/}. — UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC 
(EGYPT). La Renaissance d’Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, 
Cairo. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.I. (10/-}. — UNITED 
STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 80] Third 
Avenue, New York, 22, N.Y. (8 5.00) and (except 
periodicals}: Columbia University Press, 2960 Broad- 
way, New York, 27, N.Y. — U.8.5.R. Mezhdunarodnaja 
Kniga, Moscow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslo- 
venska Knjiga, Terazije 27/11, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](078354engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
    MODERN JAPANESE | 
A BREAK WITH TRADITION    
  
    
  
e
t
 
TL
 
s
s
 
e
T
 
t 
  
  
  
       
 
Shrike on Dead Tree, by Miyamoto Musashi n= Priest, by Ka-o (14th century) 
(17th century) Nago Museum, Kanagawa. Nago Museum, Kanagawa. 