# [078231](078231engo.pdf) 4

## [Page 1](078231engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
The aes A window 208A on the world 
mC ourier 
November 1967 (20th year) U.K.: 1/6-stg. Canada: 30 cents - France: 1 F 
   
  
Ve ae SEE. E 
U.S.S.R. TODAY 
  

## [Page 2](078231engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
   © J . 
| - > 
\ 475 \ 
time “= : 1 
a+% : hn 4 J 
% Yo. AA 2a 
~—. 
ST. SIMEON AND THE SKYSCRAPER 
Mantled in scaffolding and dwarfed by its multi-story neighbour, a 17th-century Moscow church 
undergoes restoration. Located near the Kalinin Prospect, a broad, modern avenue bisecting an area recently 
transformed by town planning, the church is preserved in its modern surroundings. It is dedicated to St. Simeon 
Stylites, propagator of the Greek Orthodox faith and one of Russia's most venerated saints. Two years ago a 
society for the preservation of historic and cultural monuments was set up in the Federal Republic of Russia, 
in the U.S.S.R. Some 30,000 monuments have since been catalogued and many of them are being restored. 
—— Rr ay BREN ae ot : ; 
RY oF Ua "Hey fo HATE SEE Ses Se ie 
  
a a - R 
PER Ms UR mg LR Ju! = 
PTR eer TENN Fa | ga 
Photo @ Paul Almasy, Paris

## [Page 3](078231engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

"mCourier 
NOVEMBER 1967 
20TH YEAR 
NOW PUBLISHED IN 
ELEVEN EDITIONS 
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 
Japanese 
[talian 
Hindi 
Tamil 
  
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7°. 
Annual subscription rates: 15/-stg.; $3.00 
(Canada); 10 French francs or equivalent; 
2 years: 27/-stg.;18 F. Single copies 1/6-stg.; 
30 cents; 1 F. 
* 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except 
in August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese, Italian, Hindi and Tamil. In the United Kingdom it 
is distributed by H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, 
London, S.E.L 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads "Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly In The Read- 
ers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H.W. Wilson Co., New York, 
* 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7%, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
‘Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Lucio Attinelli 
Managing Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition: Arturo Despouey (Paris) 
Russian Edition: Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition: Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition: Annapuzha Chandrahasan (Delhi) 
Tamil Edition: Sri S. Govindarajulu (Madras) 
Research: Olga Rodel 
Layout & Design: Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief Ne
 
11
 
- 
19
67
 
M
C
 
67
-1
-2
29
 
A 
  
  
Page 
4 | U.S.S.R. TODAY 
Metamorphosis of a continent 
By Nikolai Mikhailov 
1 FROM ILLITERACY TO ASTRONAUTICS 
By Viacheslav Elyutin 
14 | FACING THE COMPLEXITIES 
OF MODERN EDUCATION 
By Mikhail Prokofiev 
21 REFLECTIONS ON SOVIET CULTURE 
By Sergei Gerasimov 
22 | NEW SKYLINE IN MOSCOW 
31 | 700000 SCIENTISTS IN THE U.S.S.R. 
By Mikhail Lavrentiev 
32 | A SCIENCE CITY RISES 
FROM THE SIBERIAN TAIGA 
38 | ATV PROGRAMME GIRDLING THE WORLD 
By Pierre de Latil 
39 | JOURNEY TO ETHIOPIA'S PAST 
By Richard H. Howland 
42 | FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
A. Lidov Photo © APN -     Cover photo 
 Le 
and modernized. 
This young girl from Volgograd (for- 
merly Stalingrad) typifies the present- 
day youth of the U.S.S.R. She is seen 
standing before the Komsomol monu- 
ment dedicated to all the young men 
who died here during the famous battle 
of World War Il in defence of the city. 
Reduced to rubble during the war, the 
city has now been completely rebuilt

## [Page 4](078231engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 24541: U.S.S.R. today; metamorphosis of a continent

  
U.S.S.R. TODAY 
Metamorphosis of a continent 
by Nikolai Mikhailov 
Fifty years ago, the October Revolution of 1917 led to 
the creation of the U.S.S.R. — the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics. A major part of this issue of the 
UNESCO COURIER is devoted to developments in 
education, science and culture in the U.S.S.R. today. 
N. country on earth pre- 
sents more diversity than the Soviet 
Union. Primarily this is due to the 
vastness of its territory: more than 
22 million square kilometres (8,500,000 
square miles). 
From north to south the Soviet Union 
stretches for nearly 5,000 kilometres 
(3,000 miles). And from west to east 
still more: in the Soviet Pacific port 
of Vladivostok, at the end of the rail- 
way line running from Moscow, there 
stands a kilometre-post bearing the 
figure “9288” (6262 miles)}—a distance 
to be found in no other single country 
in the world. This is almost equal to 
the distance from the pole to the equa- 
tor. When dusk falls in Vladivostok, 
it is only dawn in Moscow. The New 
Year is rung in 11 times, since the 
Soviet Union is divided into 11 time 
zones. 
In area the U.S.S.R. is the world's 
largest country. It could accommodate 
700 Belgiums, for example. 
Geographically, it would be more 
appropriate to compare the U.S5.S.R. 
not to other countries but to continents: 
it is somewhat smaller than Africa, 
bigger than South America, three times 
as big as Australia. It can even bear 
cosmic comparisons: wherever you 
see the full moon in the sky, know that 
its visible face is smaller than the terri- 
tory of the U.S.S.R.; one would have 
to add Argentina, say, to the moon's 
NIKOLA! MIKHAILOV the Soviet geo- 
grapher and author has written widely on 
the countries he has visited in many parts 
of the world. A U.S.S.R. State Prize 
winner, he has devoted a number of books 
to the geography and evolution of the 
Soviet Union. An English translation of a 
recent work, “Discovering the Soviet 
Union", was published by Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, in 1965. 
hemisphere to bring it up to the size 
of the Soviet Union. 
In view of the vast size of the Soviet 
Union its extreme diversity should not 
surprise us. 
It has mountain peaks reaching above 
the clouds and endless expanses of 
flat lowlands. The Great Russian (East 
European) Plain and the West Siber- 
ian Lowland stretch for thousands of 
miles. Among the highest mountains 
are the Pamirs, the Tien Shan, the Altai, 
the Caucasus. The highest peak in the 
U.S.S.R. (in the Pamirs) reaches to a 
height of 7,500 metres (24,600 feet). 
The climate is equally diversified. 
There are places in Siberia that are 
colder in winter than the North Pole, 
and plains in Central Asia that are 
hotter in summer than the tropics. In 
Yahutia the winter temperature some- 
times drops to minus 70°C, while in 
Turkmenia it is sometimes plus 70°C in 
the sun. In the Kara-Kum Desert in 
summer one can bake an egg in the 
sand, while in northern Siberia, during 
the winter polar nights the mercury 
solidifies in the thermometer and one 
can hear the crackling of the human 
breath as the vapour turns into ice 
crystals immediately. The Yahuts who 
live there call it the “whispering of the 
stars”. 
In Uzbekistan people begin mowing 
the barley, when the inhabitants of 
Petropavlovsk in Kamchatka are digg- 
ing their houses out after another 
blizzard. 
On the shores of the Barents Sea it 
takes a hundred years for a larch tree 
to grow slightly thicker than a ski stick, 
while in sub-tropical Ajaria on the 
Black Sea coast a young bamboo tree 
shoots up over a metre in one day. 
The U.S.S.R. is skirted by twelve 
seas of the Atlantic, Pacific and Arctic 
oceans. The country has the largest 
network of rivers in the world, the 
world's largest lake—the Caspian Sea 
—as well as the world's deepest lake, 
the Baikal {1,620 metres or 5315 feet 
at its deepest point). 
The country is traversed by several 
soil-vegetation zones: in the extreme 
north there is a long bank of treeless, 
boggy tundra covered most of the year 
round by snow; the polar night there 
lasts several months, illuminated not 
by the rays of the sun but by the 
Aurora Borealis. To the south there is 
a forest belt, the world's most abun- 
dant concentration of coniferous 
trees. Further south the forests thin 
out and give way to the steppes; the 
steppe belt with its rich fertile soil 
stretches across the land for several 
thousand kilometres. Still further south 
the steppe turns into semi-deserts and 
deserts which serve for grazing. In 
those places where rivers run down 
into the desert zone from the southern 
mountains, there are irrigated oases— 
bright greenery “against a yellow back- 
ground. Finally, on the Black Sea 
coast and in the southern valleys of 
Central Asia, sheltered from the north 
by mountains, there are sub-tropical 
regions which hardly ever experience 
frost. There the sea never freezes, 
roses bloom in January, and even such 
heat-loving plants as the date palm 
bear fruit. 
So the U.S.S.R. has plants that 
range from dwarf birches to palm, from 
lichens to lotus and animals that vary 
from the snowy owl to the flamingo, 
from the polar bear to the tiger. 
An immense variety of raw products 
are industrially processed in the 
U.S.S.R. Industry has to deal with 
nearly all the elements in Mendeleyev's 
Periodic Table. Soviet power stations 
produce electric current from coal, coal 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6

## [Page 5](078231engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris 


### 24541: U.S.S.R. today; metamorphosis of a continent

  
 Second largest city of the U.S.S.R., Leningrad has a population of over three 
million. Its construction was begun in 1703 by Peter the Great and from 1712 to 1918 (first as 
St. Petersburg and, during the First World War, as Petrograd) it was the capital of Russia. 
The Revolutions of February and October 1917 began in this city. The northernmost 
large city of the world (59 degrees N) it has been called “The Venice of the North" 
since it is built on over 100 islands formed by 66 rivers and canals and has 620 bridges. 
Photo shows rush hour on three-mile Nevsky Prospect, Leningrad’'s busiest thoroughfare.

## [Page 6](078231engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 24541: U.S.S.R. today; metamorphosis of a continent

U.S.S.R. TODAY (Continued) 
Dusk falls in Vladivostok as day dawns in Moscow 
dust, fuel oil, peat, combustible shales, 
natural gas; ever more power is being 
obtained from the energy of falling 
water (600,000 million kwh for 1967). 
And now a contribution is being made 
to the national economy by several 
large atomic power stations. 
Factories throughout the country are 
smelting iron and steel, copper and 
nickel, lead and zinc, aluminium and 
magnesium, tungsten and molybdenum, 
and many other important metals. The 
U.S.S.R. produces machines of every 
complexity—from spaceships and gi- 
gantic walking excavators, each replac- 
ing 15,000 labourers, to instruments 
more sensitive than a human nerve. 
The diversity of climate and soil 
allows a great variety of crops to be 
grown in the U.S.S.R.: rice, cotton, bar- 
fey, tea and flax. 
At present the U.S.S.R. has a 
population of about 240 million. Only 
China and India have bigger popu- 
lations. The population is made up of 
many nations, large and small; it 
includes nationalities of various lin- 
guistic groups: Slavic, Turk, Finno- 
Ugrian, and others; the Russian popu- 
lation exceeds a hundred million, while 
in the Caucasus there is the Archi 
nation, all of whom live in a single 
settlement. 
S OVIET children are taught 
in more than a hundred languages as 
different as are the histories of their 
individual speakers. In the Georgian 
language there are written monuments 
fifteen centuries old, while the Evenki 
(Tungus), who live in northern Siberia, 
have only acquired a written language 
since the Socialist Revolution of 1917, 
just as half a hundred other peoples of 
the U.S.S.R. who had no written lan- 
guage before. The inhabitants of the 
Soviet Union differ widely in appear- 
ance, the colour of their skin, their 
way of life, and in number of 
population (1). 
But in essence they are all quite 
similar. In travelling across the 
U.S.S.R. one can see a Russian engi- 
neer dressed in a European-style suit, 
a4 Ukrainian peasant women in a tra- 
ditional embroidered dress, an Uzbek 
in a vari-coloured robe, a Turkmen in 
a huge fur hat, a Caucasian highlander 
in a sheepskin coat, an inhabitant of 
the cold northland in furs. But what- 
ever the region, all men and women 
share one common feature: absolute 
equality. Naturally, this makes for close 
ties and national unity. 
The landscapes of the fifteen Repub- 
lics, making up the Soviet Union, are 
(1) The U.S.S.R. is a multinational State. 
it comprises over 100 nationalities in 15 Soviet 
Republics, 20 autonomous Republics, 8 natio- 
nai regions and 10 national areas. 
all different. But the people from these 
widely differing areas all live under the 
same social and state structure. 
This unit favours the rapid develop- 
ment of the country. Since all the 
basic riches belong to the state, the 
country is developing according to a 
single plan. In the output of major 
industry the U.S.S.R. has now sur- 
passed Czarist Russia about seventy- 
fold. Industrial output has advanced 
from fourth place in Europe to first 
place. 
Pre-revolutionary Russia provided 
1/25th of the world’s industrial produc- 
tion; now the U.S.S.R’'s share is nearly 
1/5th, thus testifying to the country's 
extraordinary growth and change during 
the past half century. 
I. Soviet Union has be- 
come one of the world's great powers, 
but this does not mean that all its 
problems have been solved. This 
country that was once extremely back- 
ward still has many unsatisfied needs 
and unrealized possibilities. The pros- 
pects for further increasing industrial 
and agricultural production are self- 
evident. These include, among other 
things, the exploitation of its enormous 
natural resources. 
Essentially, the U.S.S.R. has all the 
useful minerals known on earth. lt 
holds first place in the world in 
reserves of iron, manganese, copper, 
lead, and nickel ores, in potash salts, 
apatite (raw material for phosphorous 
fertilizers). The U.S.S.R. has an abun- 
dance of oil, gold, diamonds, uranium. 
It also leads the world in water-power 
resources. 
One-third of all the world's forests 
are located in the U.S.S.R. and no other 
country can boast of such vast stret- 
ches of fertile, chernozem soil (black 
earth). 
Much has "already been done to 
exploit these resources and to raise 
the living standard of the people. 
In the last decades, the economic 
geography of the Soviet Union has 
undergone great change and continues 
to change before our very eyes. The 
economic map has acquired a new 
look. It has become denser and more 
uniform. 
Before 1917, Russia's industry was 
concentrated in a few isolated areas 
in the western part of the nation—in 
Moscow and its vicinity, St. Petersburg, 
the Donbass in the Ukraine, the Urals, 
the Caucasian Baku and the Baltic 
ports. Since then, it has spread 
throughout the land, providing each of 
the Soviet nations and each region with 
a basis for economic and cultural 
advancement and the utilization of vir- 
gin natural resources. The movement 
of industry eastward has been a 
continuing trend. 
Top, supply plane comes 
in to land near a scientific 
research station in the ” 
Soviet Far North. Bottom, Fa A 
combine-harvesters at work sm 
in the fertile black-earth a 
steppe zone that stretches 
for several thousand 
kilometres. The largest 
country in the world, the 
U.S.S.R. reaches from 
the Baltic to the Behring 
Straits and from the Arctic 
to Afghanistan. Washed 
by twelve seas of the 
  
Atlantic, Pacific and Arctic — 
oceans, the Soviet Union 
has more rivers than any 
other country, the world’s 
largest inland sea (the 
Caspian) and the world’s La 
deepest lake (Baikal). No LAH 
less striking is its range of , be 
climates (from minus a 
70 degrees C. in parts of 
Siberia to plus 70 degrees os on 
lp » at = 
in Central Asia). x Pr RA 
- ya 
The Donbass in the Ukraine, the 
nation's principal coal region, develop- 
ed sharply, but its national share in 
coal output fell from nine-tenths to 
one-third because many other regions, 
especially in the east, began mining 
their own coal. Despite their growth, 
the giant oilfields of Baku fell behind 
new oil regions which sprang up bet- 
ween the Urals and the Volga. The 
Urals and the Kuzbass are now com- 
peting with the Ukraine in metallurgy. 
One by one the rivers were deprived 
of their free and useless courses... on 
the Volga and the Dnieper this har- 
    
:! 3

## [Page 7](078231engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 24541: U.S.S.R. today; metamorphosis of a continent

- 
- a a a " r—— "oe i - Fi 
- UE — “rs wa . 
» m : = ZX "hy Ro i - ~— 
— — - P—— _ - 
- - —— “gy 
N — - 
— 
— 
v yr 
- - . 
~~ - ‘ » 
a wh h 
_— ee ad : — — ! > TS >. 
— » Ww 
y rs “ie .- 
. . 
Es 
» 
A 
. _. aerials, - - 
———— M ~ od Sy 
es 
Photo ©@ APN - D. Kozlov 
  
  
        
  
- . b+ —— r = TH ~ LES es by ef SE ality wo ¢ 
- es F, -— Sa A . —_— pris A Nar » -—r 
Le _ 2a he fr, adn 2 nh ee - , - . - f N CN od an I. o » 5 Ne i RE Ps ee at et I EVE ia Ser" f NNT "a —— ’ - Lg Te 
pe na ) Wh Sanit _ Mad as ga, Lo ne pia a inn ie: gris . x SR ——— Crt 
Ne = oy a oP — . = WAT Hmm. - - ~ 35: ren » — : Ne — a 103 pls ” » . J “ee - 4. . . : A : ‘ . - on — ® - \ "dig ly Rd wits - » «N De? A dat : ” Tr aan CTL, wns . 1 al. J 
A ial an ~ et 3 AE - ERY Ye w e J ¥ Lp a 
AL ho Ri SAAT WE RRP A A . en ing ——r — yl em 
- Hans Sg ih NX { EE an SEO NTE ning, | TY SOARS fw | = EL 5 i fino ol at 
: et ah 64 ge, oe Bh phe A bl 45 : . : gS 1% vv a Xi Foo, — 
nT. i "ET ) A hE ie Ut : . tao CF ao fds "vias ‘iy ) v a.
~ Rd Po RE Sd i EY i "ws SR - 
~y, v b 2) N - . . / 
diy AWE ob on 1% i” ee Tn Ue - Eo r a = oe wis 
3 [. ~ ve 4 ama aL - . - 
x * 5 - . hy big - ad | ; ‘er pt .. a = 
AVR RR Co RE a Mo ys aT yA " ai. : : wai; aL i“ ao % Seno pa Up “ . Hh ; 3 a I i atte ila PE Pa . -y - . a a Yoo AR AT et of 8 _ 
win aS gr A X . NS EP A i NT i Te re TR Sm Ln, Pr t RT AR Seer? : 
y . “w! oF owe) W - rr \ 
ed AR i oh : ie . oe LIER \ ab aT may oA WAS Lo RE Ae. 3 eA “ia dy - . Ws 35; 3) $e ry : 
J : “&, 
 
     
  
eh Ws hee. es, 
: boo RAB il i y FES - ! J TA Ved. A A ey : £” ’ 
     
   
   
  
   
CF hs 1 Fr Ee nA 
hig AA AG Fs gt ; 7 cr : ’ Sg 
> a 
Ck pers LET Be Ld Gp ” 4 oh i BI Ti # 5 Wh, wis SY : a SL wv orl dam a JE. J A oi ¥ a TA Th “ £5 ; —— » 3 eX wr vo ; _ _ 
; ne er 2 Ney he a oA ku ol ay § & iy w nn pe Ao Lo vei) CANE, 5s Se RT | = HG SR PSE 3 eo a Wo Tey 
Pra, oi =f SE Alr ed dati ~ ’ 3» fg Thi: TT SEE Sl SAE 0 I : ~ 7 » » ’ ol wi ad vf E ’ , 
Vad - <9 os wipe 2 1, “ul HE + RE ) ci Mt a ) rh : 5 Hy ¥ SRA 5 . - Ar 4 ~ * 3 re : : ‘ ye or ng i iia Hi rt Te i ef A NR Tg & 
Photo © APN . |. Budnievich 
nessing is nearing completion, while Industry and industrial development tion, the Bratsk, has been built; and 
on the great Siberian rivers it is now have spread across the country. Sib- nearby the new town of Bratsk has 
getting into full swing, on a scale eria is a case in point. grown up. Enormous enterprises are 
unheard of in world power engineering. In the past ten years this part of the already operating there, such as the 
Machines are no longer being produced country, equal in area to the whole of aluminium plant and the woodworking 
in a few centres as in the past—we the United States, has witnessed fan- complex whose buildings extend for 
now can see automobiles made in tastic transformations. six kilometres. This year the first units 
Byelorussia and Georgia, tractors from Siberia's economy is based on its of a still larger hydroelectric station, 
the Urals and the Altai, lathes from colossal natural resources and power the Krasnoyarsk, on the Yenisei River 
Novosibirsk, and locomotives from Bu- provided by cheap coal and rivers. is scheduled to go into operation with 
ryatia (beyond Lake Baikal). New Gigantic power stations are under a total capacity of 6 million kilowatts. 
meat, bread and clothes factories have construction and several are already Construction has now begun on an ] 
sprung up everywhere, The solid foun- in operation. For example, on the An- even more powerful station, the 
dations have been laid for a nation- gara River, in an ocean of forests, the Sayano-Shushensk, further north on 
wide unified electrical power grid. world's largest hydroelectric power sta- the Siberian Yenisei River. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](078231engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 24541: U.S.S.R. today; metamorphosis of a continent

U.S.S.R. TODAY (Continued) 
Cities built 
on permafrost 
It is calculated that energy from coal 
and rivers will turn Siberia into one of 
the world’s greatest power centres. 
After all the power stations under 
construction go into operation, Siberia 
will be producing more electric power 
than any Western European country. 
And this is only the beginning. 
The abundance of cheap power in 
Siberia is paving the way to the rapid 
expansion of industry. A number of 
aluminium plants are already operating 
in Siberia: one in Bratsk, another in 
Krasnoyarsk, one near Irkutsk and 
another in the Kuznetsk coal basin. 
Iron and steel production is expand- 
ing. A large iron-and-steel plant was 
built In Novokuznetsk before World 
War Il, and a second one since the 
war. In time, iron-and-steel plants will 
also be built in other parts of Siberia. 
Metal provides a basis for heavy 
machine-building. The city of Novosi- 
birsk on the Ob River, for example, 
now produces as many machines as 
did all of Russia before 1917. Kras- 
noyarsk on the Yenisei has turned into 
a major machine building centre, pro- 
ducing river boats, bridge cranes, self- 
propelled combines, refrigerators, 
washing machines, television sets and 
pianos. 
Recomm one of the 
world's largest oil and gas basins was 
discovered in north-western Siberia, in 
the Tyumen region, in the lower 
reaches of the Ob River. It is already 
supplying oil and gas, and long pipe- 
lines, railways and a motor-road are 
being laid. By 1970 it will be produc- 
ing as much oil as the whole of Azer- 
baijan, with its famous old oil centre 
Baku, did a year or two ago. 
In Yakutia, located in the distant and 
formerly almost impenetrable taiga, rich 
diamond fields have been found and 
mining has already begun. Some of the 
diamonds are as much as 106 carats 
in size, 
New cities are mushrooming in Sib- 
eria, and three-fourths of all the cities 
east of the Urals are new. Some of 
these cities, such as Norilsk, have 
grown up on permafrost, the buildings 
being erected on special reinforced 
concrete piles driven into the ice. 
Maxim Gorky once wrote: “The fabu- 
lous scenes of a future Siberia stagger 
the imagination with their grandeur...” 
We are close to putting these words 
into effect. 
A remarkable Science City has 
recently grown up in a pine forest near 
Novosibirsk, in the heart of Siberia. 
Here have been established 14 insti- 
tutions of higher education, a scientific- 
technical library with 5 million books. 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10 
  
   
  
  
  
 
    
   
     
       
r | 
AB hy 
3 . 
FURARAR £1 RS = 
NR RR a = 
; 
iE 
AX N Sas 
“« \ 
N y 2 CF [ » . ‘ 3 ae 
: 5 
§ ws Sah , hes Ws SR ’ LI 
: 
Los ay ' \ : A \N . 
3 ed Si Tok 1 ¢ AN A LENA 
7 
LE ATE bw BE NE CTR NA 
AOS ME FR) TRIN Wg PRN RS 
ra he Th ‘ 3 Hy ov A SA LON LO ‘ 
; \ x 
~~ 
a7 A rf o ¥ El DRG ~~, 
at : ; 
S ON 
1d rd SPY NA y Sh nga N Ca! 
PR 
Vega {a \ he dt A ING FEAR AR @ A 0S SS 
hols id 708 AEA A AN a Tt MY PE RA RR a NE : i 
eT mae In URN, 5 Vy ARR Ny, eli NE a 
ht 7 SSRN AIRS 3 Zep Tae = ANE A Ba 
GEOLOGISTS ON THE WING 
Geologists are helping to change the economic geography of the U.S.S.R. Last year, 
1,000 planes and helicopters airlifted Soviet geologists to prospection areas. 
of geological probes and drilling was twice that of the earth's diamater at the equator. 
Top right, helicopter 
(Soviet Far East). In foreground are antlers of a reindeer herd. 
virtually unexplored territories. 
candlelight. Siberia keeps engineers and statisticians hard at work revising the figures 
of its known wealth in oil, copper, diamonds, nickel, iron ore and other minerals. 
“taxi” for geologists lands on the tundra in the Chukotka region 
On landing (above) 
geological team sets off for weeks and even months of arduous work and camp life in 
Below, bearded geologist discusses day's ventures by 
Total, length 
Ph
ot
o 
@
 
A
P
N
 
- 
V.
 
T
a
r
a
s
i
e
v
i
c
h
 

## [Page 9](078231engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 24541: U.S.S.R. today; metamorphosis of a continent

   
  
  
se le =k 
a IT Te BT rn ae SL Ty 
de A ow, 
 
  
    
 
n= 
LNA 
 
  
  
   
 
__ a 
Photo © APN - D. Baltermantz 
Below, sculpture of a giant hand holding a lump of iron 
ore symbolizing Siberia’s debt to nature which has 
+ endowed it with natural riches to match its size. 
In background are buildings of the immense steel 
production complex at Magnitogorsk in Western Siberia. 
Photo © APN - L. Lazarev

## [Page 10](078231engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 24541: U.S.S.R. today; metamorphosis of a continent

10 
U.S.S.R. TODAY (Continued) 
The call of the Far North 
A Siberian branch of the U.5.5.R. Aca- 
demy of Sciences has been founded 
there with nearly a score of Academi- 
cians, two score corresponding mem- 
bers, and hundreds of scientific 
workers. 
A simple enumeration of a few of the 
score of institutes there provides an 
idea of the scope of the work being 
done in this new scientific centre: a 
mathematics institute with its own 
computing centre, institutes of physics, 
thermal physics, non-organic chemistry, 
automation and electrometry, kinetics 
and combustion, hydrodynamics, eco- 
nomics and statistics, cytology and 
genetics. . . 
The problems being studied include 
controlled thermonuclear reactions, the 
interior of the earth, cybernetics. The 
hydrodynamics institute has developed 
a water-cannon capable of disinte- 
grating the very hardest rock. A high- 
speed electronic computer has been 
put to the unusual task of deciphering 
the hieroglyphics of the Maya Indians 
who lived many centuries ago in Cen- 
tral America. The average age of a 
scientist in the Siberian Branch of the 
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences in Novo- 
sibirsk is about 34 years. 
A sromisrine changes 
have also occurred in the development 
of the U.S.S.R.’s extreme North. Along 
the former impassable coastal waters 
skirting the north of Siberia there now 
operates a regular North Sea route, 
equipped in summer with ice-breakers, 
including the atomic ice breaker 
“Lenin.” In the once wild Kola Penin- 
sula there has grown up the city of 
Murmansk which has more inhabitants 
than the whole of Iceland. The city of 
Kirovsk has become a world centre for 
the production of apatite fertilizer. 
Research institutes have been founded 
that investigate both the ocean bottom 
and the aurora borealis. Today 90 per 
cent of the inhabitants of the Kila 
Peninsula are city dwellers. 
The Soviet far north-east was once 
a wilder and even more forsaken region 
than Siberia. Today in the areas such 
as the Chukotka Peninsula beyond the 
Arctic Circle modern industrial enter- 
prises have been built and an atomic 
power plant is under construction. 
The same holds true for the far south 
of the U.S.S.R., where forty years ago 
practically the whole population was 
illiterate, while the only form of industry 
was the separation of seeds from 
cotton to facilitate shipping it to the 
centre of the country. Today each of 
the four Central Asian Republics boasts 
its own independent Academy of 
Sciences. 
The new distribution of industry 
caused new lines of communication to 
spring up and, consequently changed 
the face of transportation. 
Not only has the overall mileage of 
railways been doubled and other trans- 
portation between the capital and other 
districts been increased, but the whole 
country is now linked by a vast net- 
work of railways, motor-roads and 
waterways. The so-called Turksib (Tur- 
kestan-Siberian railway) now connects 
Central Asia with Siberia across 
thousands of miles of desert. The 
South-Siberian trunk line passes 
through an enormous zone from the 
Southern Urals to the Kuzbass and the 
Yenisei and beyond. The Volga Don 
Canal forms a water bridge between 
the Volga Valley and the Donbass. The 
Volga-Baltic Waterway provides cheap 
transportation from Leningrad and the 
north to the central regions of the 
country. As for the railways, nine out 
of every ten tons are no longer drawn 
by steam-engines but by electric or 
diesel locomotives. 
The agricultural map of the country 
has also undergone remarkable 
changes. 
With the adoption of co-operative 
methods and the mechanization of 
farming it has been possible to elimin- 
ate those shortcoming in the utiliza- 
tion of farm lands that were born of 
the backwardness of pre-revolutionary 
agriculture, 
The economic map has reflected the 
rapid expansion of cultivation. The 
area of tilled land has increased every- 
where, especially in the East, where 
a large area of the steppes beyond 
the Urals in northern Kazakhstan 
and southwestern Siberia has been 
brought under cultivation. In a very 
short time a valuable natural resource 
that had lain dormant for centuries 
was put to use. Up to the time of 
intense cultivation of the trans-Urals 
virgin and long-fallow lands, the area 
of the arable lands in the U.S.S.R. 
had increased since the Revolution 
by no more than the area of France. 
But in a few years of work on virgin 
Night scene at the 
Dnieproges Dam, the 
“father” of the Soviet 
Unjon’s giant hydro- 
electric installations, 
built across the 
Dnieper (1932). Over 
2,500 feet long, it 
was destroyed during 
World War Il. When 
rebuilt in 1947, its 
total power capacity 
was increased to 
700,000 kilowatts. The 
colossal new hydro- 
electric installations 
in Siberia have even 
larger power capaci- 
ties: Bratsk on the At 
Angara (4,1 million SAY Kan £11 
kw) and Krasnoiarsk oA Be 
on the Yenisei (6 ids rnin 3 
million kilowatts). 
and long-fallow lands the Soviet East 
acquired arable lands exceeding in 
area the whole of Italy. 
Not in all regions was the land 
ready for ploughing. In many places 
it first had to be prepared. In the 
hot south rivers had to be diverted 
to irrigate fields, and in the north bogs 
had to be drained and shrubs cleared 
away. 
N OW nearly all the rivers of 
the far South have been brought under 
control in one way or another—from 
the modest Salgira in the Crimea to 
the Kura in Transcaucasia and the 
Syr-Dariya in Central Asia. The sun- 
parched deserts have been traversed 
by large irrigation canals, the length 
of the new Kara-Kum Canal in Turk- 
menia has already reached 800 kilo- 
metres (500 miles). In many regions 
of the Byelorussian Polesie and the 
Georgian Kolkhida, swamps have been 
turned into fertile ploughlands. Farm- 
ing oases have been created beyond 
the Arctic Circle. The slopes of the 
mountains skirting the Black Sea have 
become covered with plantations of 
subtropical plants. 
To ensure steady and abundant 
harvests in semi-arid regions, a 
staggering measure is being put into 
effect: forest strips are being grown 
in the open steppes, changing the 
whole face of the region. 
Important shifts have occurred in 
the distribution of crops in arable 
regions. Wheat has migrated further 
north into the non-chernozem zone, 
sugar beet has travelled from the 
Ukraine to the Far East, vegetable 
gardens have sprung up around cities, 
apple orchards have conquered the 
Urals and Siberia, where formerly 
there were none. 
Such are some of the important 
changes in the economic geography 
of the U.S.S.R. 
S
e
   Ph
ot
o 
© 
A
P
N

## [Page 11](078231engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 25432: From illiteracy to astronautics

FROM ILLITERACY 
TO ASTRONAUTICS 
by Viacheslav Elyutin 
H.. a century ago when our 
country entered on its new life, the 
entire population—men and women, 
workers and peasants, Russians and 
Ukrainians, Kazakhs and Uzbeks, 
Nentsi and Azerbaijanians—from the 
age of eight years upwards had to learn 
to read and write. Millions of citizens 
were taking their place in the central, 
VIACHESLAV ELYUTIN is Minister for 
Higher Education and Secondary Technical 
Education in the U.S.S.R. A Corresponding 
Member of the U.S.S.R. Academy of 
Sciences, he has written many studies on 
educational questions and has been 
awarded a U.S.S.R. State Prize. 
national and local administrative orga- 
nizations of the country, and the natio- 
nal economy, ruined by imperialist and 
civil wars, had to be set back on its 
feet. 
In 1913, Czarist Russia accounted for 
a little over 4 per cent of the world's 
industrial production, and in 1920 this 
percentage was further decreased by 
the slump resulting from these con- 
flicts. The country’s agriculture had 
also suffered heavily. 
Contemporary statistics show that 
at the beginning of 1917, 30 per cent of 
the country’s population was illiterate, 
while among women, illiteracy reached 
88 per cent. The local populations of 
LH RT 
  
    
Photo © APN 
These Soviet girls are final year 
students at the teacher training 
college of Narian-Mar, chief town 
of the Nenets (Samoyedes) 
National Area which covers 
almost 180,000 sq. kms within 
the Arctic Circle. Fifty years 
ago this vast tundra was peopled 
almost entirely by nomad tribes 
of hunters and reindeer herdsmen 
who were totally illiterate. The 
Samoyede language had not 
even a written form. Today higher 
education is open to the children 
of yesterday's illiterates. The 
U.S.S.R. spends 18,700 million 
rubles (17.6 per cent of its 
annual budget) on education. 
the lands surrounding Czarist Russia, 
Central Asia in particular, were like- 
wise almost totally illiterate: only 5 per 
cent of Tadzhiks, 6 per cent of Kirghiz- 
ians, and 7 per cent of Turkmenians 
could read. Only 1,400,000 out of the 
165 million inhabitants in the whole of 
Czarist Russia had received any 
education above the primary school 
level. In short, the Czarist regime 
bequeathed us a burdensome legacy in 
national education. 
In 1919, the People's Commissariat 
(or Ministry) of Public Education in the 
U.S.S.R. described the level of tech- 
nical knowledge in the new Soviet 
country as follows: “The number of 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 13 
11

## [Page 12](078231engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 25432: From illiteracy to astronautics

  
U
s
 
Time for 
study, 
time for 
play 
ars - 
» 
B
E
X
 
RS
X 
oO 
= 
vd 
a 
o 
E 
o 
re) 
< 
o 
[] 
> 
=) 
® 
oS 
= 
Q 
> 
[] 
= 
o. 
<< 
© 
2 
[=] 
£ 
a. Ph
ot
o 
© 
A
P
N
 
- 
L.,
 
Ch
es
te
rn
ik
ov
 
Phota © APN 
  
R
a
.
 
S
U
 U
F
 
= 
 

## [Page 13](078231engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 25432: From illiteracy to astronautics

  
  
In the Soviet Union one person in three 
studies (not taking into account children 
in nursery schools). Programmes and teaching 
FROM ILLITERACY TO ASTRONAUTICS (Continued) 
One person in three a student 
engineers in our country is negligible... 
Desperately insufficient too are the 
numbers of those with a secondary 
technical education... The general level 
of technical knowledge in Russia is 
OW... 
Knowledge... the nation needed it 
urgently, and people in every part of 
the country aspired to greater learning. 
Emergent countries today are under- 
going a similar experience, with this 
single exception, that in the case of 
the Soviet Union there was no outside 
aid. Nor was there, at that time, any 
international organization such as 
Unesco which could have given help 
in teaching. On the other hand, Soviet 
Russia had a nucleus of avant-garde 
intellectuals, young students, who 
though not very numerous, were full 
of enthusiasm and ready to give their 
energy, their time and their skill to the 
cause of mass education. The schools 
were open to everybody. 
The new students who flocked to the 
institutes and to the universities were 
yesterday's workers and peasants, 
with their children. Few of them had 
the necessary education. So, on the 
initiative of the workers of Moscow, 
"workers' faculties” were created, 
where adults who already had con- 
siderable experience of life could learn 
the rudiments of the subjects required 
for admission to institutions of higher 
education. Workers' faculties were a 
temporary expedient, but, given the 
conditions of the time, they amply 
justified their creation. Now, with the 
growth and improvement of secondary 
education in the U.S.S.R. they are no 
technical, specialized secondary and 
higher education, which the State 
encourages. In the U.S.S.R. all forms 
of education are free. Most students, 
and specialized secondary school 
pupils, too, have grants and free 
lodging. 
Since the Soviets first came to 
power, the schools in the Soviet Union 
have trained close on 7 million spec- 
jalists who have had a higher educa- 
tion and more than 11 million with 
secondary qualifications. During the 
seven-year period from 1958 to 1965 
alone, more than 5 million specialists, 
including 2,412,000 with higher educ- 
ation, were trained in accordance with 
the plan for the development of the 
national economy. 
A the beginning of 1967, 
the Soviet economy was employing 
1,800,000 engineers, over 3 million 
technicians, 320,000 specialists in rural 
economics who had received higher 
education, and approximately 500,000 
who had had specialized secondary 
instruction, 554,000 doctors, nearly 
2 million teachers with higher educa- 
tional qualifications and 1,300,000 with 
specialized secondary qualifications. 
It should be observed that among the 
Soviet specialists who have had a 
higher education there are 2,518,000 
women (52 per cent). Among those 
who have a specialized secondary 
education, there are more than methods are being increasingly adapted to 
the needs of modern scientific development, 
and the length of compulsory schooling has 
been increased. Above left, time off between 
lessons for some high spirited boys and girls 
in a primary school (all Soviet schools are 
co-educational). In certain schools, from the 
first year children are given a specialized 
education appropriate to their needs and 
4,400,000 women representing 62 per 
cent of the total number of specialists. 
From 1940 to 1966, the vocational 
training schools trained nearly 17 mil- 
lion skilled workers for different trades. 
During the scholastic year 1966-1967, 
longer needed. 
Many present-day directors of indus- 
trial and other installations as well, 
and many Soviet scholars of note, 
began their training in the workers’ 
faculties, 
aptitudes. Left, games with equations are 
child’s-play for a rising generation of young 
nfathematicans taking their recreation break. 
Below, this little girl from Tadjikstan, in Soviet 
Central Asia, is already learning to read in 
English. Common denominator of all these 
youngsters js their passion for books (annual 
book production in the U.S.S.R. has now reached 
1,250 million). Above, behind a young reader 
in Moscow Pioneers Youth Club, the familiar 
figure of Don Quixote appropriately 
symbolizes the quest for adventure. 
   no 
Photo © V. Chustov - M. Alpert 
One of them is Professor Evgeni 
Tovstykh, Rector of the Institute of 
Naval Construction in Leningrad. The 
son of a workman, he started work 
himself at 15. From 1926 to 1929, he 
was sent by Komsomol to study at the 
workers’ faculty of Nikolaiev, and 
thereafter, from 1929 to 1933, he 
attended the Institute of Naval Con- 
struction in the same town. Once qua- 
lified as an engineer, Tovstykh, though 
beginning only as a foreman, climbed 
the ladder of promotioh to become 
director of some of the biggest 
shipyards in the country, including the 
Baltic Factory of Leningrad. Since 
1945 he has been head of the Institute 
of Naval Construction in Leningrad. 
He is not only an outstanding scholar 
and professor but also an active and 
militant social worker, 
The right of the citizen to be educ- 
ated is laid down by the Constitution 
of the U.S.S.R. It is guaranteed by 
eight years of compulsory schooling 
and by the constant expansion of faci- 
lities for general secondary, vocational 
the number of Soviet citizens pursuing 
studies of one kind or another amount- 
ed to 72 million, 48 million of whom 
were pupils in schools of general 
education. Today the U.S.S.R. boasts 
767 universities and institutes (or 
seven times as many as in Czarist 
Russia) with 4,120,000 students 
(34 times the number under the old 
régime), and approximately 4,000 tech- 
nical schools, with 4 million students. 
Institutions of higher education in 
the U.S.S.R. are of two kinds: institutes 
and universities. The institutes provide 
a four to six-year course and train 
engineers, agronomists, doctors, teach- 
ers, economists, jurists and other 
specialized practitioners. Such insti- 
tutes are to be found today, as are 
universities, in all 15 of the federated 
republics of our country. 
In 1967, 900,000 new students en- 
tered institutions of higher education, 
405,000 of whom attended day classes, 
the rest going to evening classes or 
taking correspondence courses. Stu- 
dents in faculties and institutes who 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
13

## [Page 14](078231engo.pdf#page=14) 2

### 59693: Facing the complexities of modern education

### 25432: From illiteracy to astronautics

14 
FROM ILLITERACY TO ASTRONAUTICS (Continued) 
Special privileges 
for evening students 
attend evening classes or take corres- 
pondence courses enjoy various privi- 
leges at their places of work. For 
exemple, they can obtain a maximum 
of 40 days’ supplementary leave per 
year for laboratory work, tests and 
examinations, as well as paid leave 
during the last year of study, of four 
months for students at higher educa- 
tional establishments and of two 
months for pupils at specialized secon- 
dary schools, to enable them to pre- 
pare and present their diploma pro- 
jects. 
Courses of study in colleges and 
other institutions of higher education 
are divided as follows: in advanced 
technical colleges almost half the time 
is spent on general subjects (social 
sciences, higher mathematics, physics, 
chemistry, a foreign language, etc.), 
25 per cent is devoted to general tech- 
nical instruction (stress-resistance of 
materials, interchangeability of machine 
parts, theory of mechanics and machine 
design, electro-technology, hydraulics, 
etc.) and 25 per cent to 30 per cent to 
special subjects. Practical work occu- 
pies nearly 25 per cent of the total 
study time and experience has shown 
that, provided the student has a sound 
general training in the theory of each 
subject, this is quite ample. 
It should be noted that colleges and 
universities have not given enough 
attention to the importance of practical 
scientific work as opposed to theo- 
retical training. In the last few years, 
however, contacts with industry and 
agriculture have been developed for 
this purpose to a noteworthy extent. 
At the request of industrial concerns, 
co-operative farms (kolkhozes), state- 
farms (sovkhozes) and various econo- 
mic bodies, student clubs and societies 
now study the operating efficiency of 
industrial and agricultural installations 
and then draw up plans for machines 
and machine-tools, survey the subsoil 
and study demographic problems for 
future scientific development. 
As an instance of this, the students 
of the Institute of Civil Engineering in 
Moscow - have prepared a project 
for an experimental town in the 
Polar regions, and a project for an 
embankment involving improvement of 
the area adjoining the reservoir in 
the town of ljevsk, in the Ural region. 
The students of the Institute of Archi- 
tecture in Moscow have drawn up a 
plan for the reconstruction of the 
industrial sector of lvanovo, north-east 
of the capital. 
The rapid Increase in our scientific 
knowledge (specialists consider that 
the quantity of scientific information in 
the world is doubled every ten years) 
coupled with the relatively short time 
that can be devoted to education de- 
mands constant improvement of study 
methods. Films, radio, television and 
computers are being called upon more 
and more often to supplement tradi- 
tional methods of teaching. The study 
of the problems of programmed learn- 
ing in the U.S.S.R. is of relatively 
recent date, but positive experience 
has already been acquired in this field. 
In collaboration with specialists in 
education, psychology, cybernetics and 
mathematical logic, scientists and stud- 
ents at our institutes have invented 
many varied teaching and testing 
devices. 
From year to year an ever-increasing 
number of young people come from 
abroad to study in the US.SR. In 
Soviet institutes there are many young 
Asians, Africans and Latin Americans. 
At present there are more than 24,000 
foreigners from 130 different countries 
in nearly 300 schools in the U.S.S.R.; 
over 10,000 of these come from Asian, 
African and Latin American countries. 
Among the Soviet institutions of 
higher education which train high- 
ranking staff for the Asian, African and 
Latin American nations, the Patrice 
Lumumba Peoples’ Friendship Univer- 
sity, founded in 1960, plays an impor- 
tant role. Close on a thousand young 
engineers, agronomists, mathematic- 
ians, physicists, jurists, philologists 
and economists have already com- 
pleted their studies at this university 
and, specialists now in their field, have 
returned to their own countries. 
Apart from training foreign special 
ists in Soviet colleges the U.S.S.R. is 
co-operating on the technical side in 
the foundation of study centres in 
developing countries. With Soviet aid, 
22 centres have been or are being built 
in Burma, India, Indonesia, Ethiopia, 
Cambodia, Guinea, Mali, Algeria, 
Kenya, Afghanistan, Tunisia and else- 
where. Soviet establishments of higher 
education help in working out plans for 
teaching methods and send textbooks, 
specialist publications and scientific 
and technical information for these 
study centres. Hundreds of Soviet 
teachers are working there too. 
The most important task of higher 
and specialized secondary establish- 
ments is to improve the training and 
education of specialists with due re- 
gard for the requirements of contem- 
porary producticn, science, technology 
and culture and the possibilities for 
their future development. To this end, 
scientific groups have worked out 
means of determining the scope and 
the content not only of each branch of 
instruction but also of each subject. 
This will be a sound guarantee of 
further successes in the development 
of higher and specialized secondary 
education in the Soviet Union. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
AP
N 
- 
L. 
Us
ti
no
v 
  
   
of modern 
by Mikhail Prokofiev 
I. education of the rising 
generation has long been a subject of 
analysis and criticism in learned jour- 
nals and the popular press, at gather- 
ings and at conferences. It has been 
examined from various angles and at 
various depths, and we now see more 
clearly our strong points and weak 
points and the ways in which we can 
improve public education. 
We are now convinced, for one thing, 
that when the secondary schools in the 
U.S.S.R. attempt to give vocational 
training the result is a lowering of 
scholastic standards, with less atten- 
tion paid to the main subjects. 
It has also become obvious that the 
MIKHAIL PROKOFIEV is Minister of 
Education in the U.S.S.R. A Corresponding 
Member of the UJS.S.R. Academy of 
Sciences, Professor Prokofiev teaches at 
the University of Moscow. He has written 
extensively on problems of university 
education, educational administration In the 
U.S.S.R. and the admission of technicians 
to higher studies.

## [Page 15](078231engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
in aT ARR Jel   
AP er Re th au Lal Sad 3 4 5 
+a A SAE Wy > PP pe 


### 59693: Facing the complexities of modern education

complexities 
Students in this class belong to a new 
generation of scientists and mathematicians 
being formed in the special science training 
centres of the U.S.S.R. In Siberia, students 
qualify for places in these specialized schools 
by entering a Science Olympics competition 
designed to select the most naturally gifted 
young people throughout the region. 
education 
scope, methods and programmes of 
instruction have to be re-examined. 
In a period of rapid scientific and 
technological progress, a period of 
what is called the "information explo-- 
sion,” the teaching of many school 
subjects has remained unchanged or, 
even worse, the old subject-matter has 
been patched up with new and fashion- 
able views that give a semblance of 
bridging the gap between out-dated 
material and contemporary knowledge. 
Formal methods of instruction, with too 
much stress on memorizing, have be- 
come widespread. 
Fifty years ago the main job for our 
country was to liquidate illiteracy. 
When that was accomplished we intro- 
duced universal elementary schooling, 
then a compulsory seven-year educa- 
tion for all children, and now universal 
eight-year schooling. 
We are now on the threshold of uni- 
versal secondary education for young 
people. 
Two or three years ago we were 
telling teen-agers: you've finished eight 
years of school; now get a job and 
repay the nation for what it spent to 
educate you. Now we tell them: 
modern development requires that you 
possess higher education or qualifi- 
cations. Greater knowledge will give 
you more versatility and your life will 
be more interesting. Society will 
appreciate you more if you stay on in 
school until you complete a general 
secondary education or, if you prefer, 
enter a specialized secondary school 
or a vocational school where you can 
learn a good trade and professional 
skills. 
This approach seems simple but it 
is not so easy to put it into practice. 
Nothing is ever accomplished mecha- 
nically in education. Planning and 
facilities may be ideal, but education 
will have an influence on society only 
if we carry out painstaking, individual 
work with the teachers, the pupils and 
the parents. 
It is becoming more and more imper- 
ative that each member of the rising 
generation should be given a thorough 
secondary education. We intend, 
within the next few years, to draw all 
boys and girls into secondary school 
education in one form or another. 
What are these forms? First, a ten- 
year general secondary education 
offering courses in all subjects but 
providing a good knowledge of the 
fundamentals of science sufficient for 
admission to college or university. We 
estimate that from 70 to 75 per cent of 
the young people will choose this road. 
Secondly, young people may choose, 
after finishing eight years of school, to 
enter a technical secondary school 
where, in three or four years, they 
receive a general education and learn 
a trade or skill that will enable them 
to get medium-level specialized jobs. 
These two forms, we believe, plus 
evening schools and study by corres- 
pondence, will enable us to give all 
young people a secondary education. 
There are many problems, including the 
adolescent's possible lack of desire to 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20 
13

## [Page 16](078231engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

  
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
A
P
N
 
- 
V.
 
T
a
r
a
s
i
e
v
i
c
h
 
E
y
 
==
 
po)
 
  
Photo © APN - N. Sviridova 
   Norilsk, in the Taimyr National Area of northern U.S.S.R., has been called “a city unlike 
any other”. It is built on permafrost, eternally frozen ground, and around it are huge 
wooden shields to hold off mountains of snow. It is also a city of youth—average age 
of its citizens is 25. Heated swimming pools are another feature of Norilsk which ranks 
first in the U.S.S.R. for per capita consumption of hot water. Above, children splash 
in a kindergarten pool. Right, Leningrad Youth Club offers concerts, lectures and jazz 
sessions, and its buffet is a convivial centre for relaxation and lively conversation.

## [Page 17](078231engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
     
     
The Soviet Union today is the scene of tremendous changes—at the forefront of which 
young people are playing a leading role. Below, two youngsters direct tree-felling 
operations in the immense forest region of Arkhangelsk in the Soviet Far North. Girl is a 
skilled forestry expert; young man is her assistant. Photo left, like all young people, 
Soviet youth is preoccupied with its dreams, hopes and plans for tomorrow. 
ig 
Photo @ APN - V_ Tarasievich 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Pa
ul
 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
ri
s 

## [Page 18](078231engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
©@
 
A
P
N
 
      
  
      
re TT 
- aT) AUN, pol 
Z 
oa 
< 
© 
2 
© 
£ 
a 

## [Page 19](078231engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ta
ss
 
- 
L. 
La
za
re
v 
  
& —— 
. en . 
ee 9 
3 — — wc    
   
     
  
RE 
PL
 
=
 
‘ * \ 
l
i
d
 
H
e
 
i] E
S
A
T
 
   
 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Pa
ul
 
A
l
m
a
s
y
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
    
  
TTL 
From one generation to another 
(1) “The Defence of Petrograd”, a famous work 
painted by Alexander Deineka in 1928. 
In its mood and tone, the picture is keyed to the 
spirit which animated the Russian people at the time 
when the new political and social regime was 
established. 
@) Animated scene at a Ukrainian winter sports 
centre as a crowd of young skiers arrives 
for a day's sport. 
© Young Kiev girl at work in a factory producing 
high precision electrical equipment. 
Three generation meet at Maharadze 
(Georgian Republic). With the grandfather, 
a veteran farmer, are his son, disabled in the 
Second World War, and grandson, a secondary 
school student, preparing for a scientific career. 

## [Page 20](078231engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 59693: Facing the complexities of modern education

20 
MODERN EDUCATION (Continued from page 15) 
Streamline teaching methods 
and eliminate stereotypes 
continue his studies. Only by working 
in close contact with each family and 
each teen-ager will we be able to attain 
the truly unprecedented goal of a 
secondary education for all. 
To do this we shall have to open, 
equip and staff 8,000 new secondary 
schools this year and in 1968. The 
main lines along which instruction is to 
develop have been mapped out. We 
realize that everything cannot be 
changed all at once and intend to 
improve the school curriculum grad- 
ually and persistently. 
A new pattern of study hours is 
being introduced to relieve the exces- 
sive load the pupils now carry; there 
will be 24 hours of compulsory classes 
a week in the junior grades and 
30 hours in the senior grades. Doctors 
and physiologists agree this is more or 
less the optimal pattern. 
To this we add a programme of 
optional subjects to meet the interests 
and inclinations of the individual pupil. 
Elective courses must be particularly 
well-thought-out. Experts will be invited 
to conduct them, A mediocre teacher 
will never be able to make an elective 
course stimulating. [It degenerates into 
idle talk or a repetition of previous 
lessons, 
0.er the past few years 
a huge team of scholars, college edu- 
cators, methodologists and school- 
teachers has painstakingly analyzed, 
re-examined and, in the main, approv- 
ed new syllabuses. The main idea has 
been to avoid overloading the pupil's 
memory with facts. Instead, the basic 
laws governing the development of the 
material world and social processes 
will be studied from the standpoint of 
our contemporary understanding of 
them. 
In the biological sciences the pupils 
will, of course, gain a picture of the 
great variety of forms of life, from the 
virus to the human being. However, 
the important thing is not to memorize 
the names of the countless species, 
families, etc., but to grasp the basic 
laws governing the functions of the 
living organism. This is what the 
course in general biology now included 
in the syllabus sets out to do, but so 
far it is making slow headway in the 
schools. 
In chemistry the pupils will have to 
learn about a great number of both 
natural and synthesized substances. 
Their efforts will be rewarded by an 
understanding of the laws governing 
the formation of chemical substances, 
presented in up-to-date, comprehen- 
sible form in the courses provided 
in organic and inorganic chemistry. 
The course in the literature of the 
peoples of the Soviet Union and other 
nations naturally cannot encompass 
everything. Not even specialized 
college courses can. The secondary 
school literature programme aims not 
at “covering” a work of fiction but at 
teaching the pupil to think about it, to 
think about the social facts and con- 
ditions and moral principles it deals 
with, discern the beauty of the imagery, 
and develop a taste for reading. 
Methods of instruction must be acti- 
vized and individualized, stripped of the 
stereotypes that sometimes result from 
strictly following set teaching methods 
supposedly suitable for all occasions. 
We believe that the closer instruction 
comes to the principle that “learning is 
an act of discovery” the more success- 
ful it will be. 
Laboratory experiments and demon- 
strations are not always meant merely 
to confirm the generally accepted 
laws recorded in the textbooks. More 
often they are a study of laws and an 
observation of facts that have to be 
understood and explained—a process 
by which the experienced teacher leads 
his pupils up to the discovery of a 
law. In the final analysis, it is develop- 
ment of methods of instruction that 
make the pupil realize science is not 
something complete and unchanging 
but is an ever deeper penetration into 
the sphere of the unknown. 
  
The Soviet Union 
has now more 
than 760 universities 
and institutes 
of higher education 
with over four 
million students. 
In science alone, 
the U.S.S.R. has 
more than 700,000 
qualified men 
and women. 
Here, young scientists 
at a Soviet 
institute meet 
colleagues from abroad. 
That, roughly, is the line reconstruc- 
tion of the curriculum and the sylla- 
buses is now taking. It presupposes, 
naturally, the installation and provision 
of laboratories, study rooms, good text- 
books and manuals, teaching aids 
which include technical equipment and 
machines for programmed instruction, 
and many other items. 
T opevs younger genera- 
tion is living in a fortunate period. 
Human genius has penetrated deeply 
into the essence of social phenomena, 
which man is using to remake the 
world in the name of human happiness. 
Human genius is delving deeply into 
the secrets of the universe and the 
essence of matter. Man has gone out 
into space and is sending probes to 
distant planets. He has discovered 
a new form of energy, nuclear energy. 
He is investigating living phenomena 
and is, as yet timidly, changing their 
lower forms. Progress is only a matter 
of time. 
A generation is growing up of inquir- 
ing, active young people inspired by 
the great ideals of transforming the 
world into a satisfying place for 
everyone. And the schools are doing 
their best to educate a new generation 
of young people imbued with an 
optimistic outlook. 
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris

## [Page 21](078231engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

  
o
x
    
. 
as
 
a 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Pa
ul
 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
ri
s 
 
Twinkling lights in the fadin 
      
g glow of sunset give a fairy-like air to this remarkable photograph 
of Red Square, Moscow. The square and the wall and towers of the Kremlin (on left) are symbols 
of Moscow familiar even to those who have never been there. With its churches, palaces and 
nearly one and a half miles of encircling walls, the Kremlin is the ancient historical, cultural and 
architectural centre of Moscow as well as the seat of government in the U.S.S.R. Silhouetted in 
background is Moscow's historical museum. In 1947, Moscow celebrated its 800th anniversary. 


### 30745: Reflections on Soviet culture

REFLECTIONS ON SOVIET CULTURE 
by Sergei Gerasimov 
Fac of us who lives in the 
twentieth century, even if endowed 
with a very ordinary memory, preser- 
ves an infinite number of images and 
ideas that are contradictory, involved, 
  
SERGEI GERASIMOV has had a dis- 
tinguished career as a film director and 
as an actor. Many of his films have 
gained awards at Soviet and international 
film festivals. A recent production, “The 
Journalist,” for which he also wrote the 
script, was awarded first prize at the 1967 
Moscow Film Festival. Sergei Gerasimov, 
who is a People's Artist of the U.S.S.R., 
directed “The Silent Don", a film based 
on the famous novel by Mikhail Sholokhov. 
tragic and splendid, for the twentieth 
century has compressed events 
upheavals and discoveries with an 
energy hitherto unknown in history, 
The term “culture” if we leave aside 
the dictionary definition, includes a 
great number of concepts and ideas 
and is interpreted in many different 
ways by different people. Still, man 
is inclined to see in this word his 
supreme possession, that which 
remains to him as a reward for all his 
work, sufferings and searchings, that 
which is handed down from generation 
to generation with the spontaneous 
and lofty purpose of improving the 
human race. 
The materialist view on life does 
not, however, claim this process must 
be naively straight-forward, each 
successive advance making progress 
easier. The advance, grim and com- 
plicated, brings mankind up against 
bitterly brutal conflicts and contra- 
dictions, including tragedies such as 
the two world wars, especially the 
second, which took a toll of tens of 
millions of lives. 
Nevertheless, the advance continues, 
gaining more and more momentum. 
To us who are trying to build a 
socialist society it is an enormous help 
to realize that we are doing it for all 
men. 
It so happens that | have devoted 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 27 
       
2 
 

## [Page 22](078231engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 31539: New horizons in Moscow

   
   
NEW HORIZONS IN MOSCOW 
Moscow, capital of the U.S.S.R., is a swiftly growing metropolis. 
Greater Moscow counts some five million inhabitants and in the 
built-up areas that have risen along the main highways from 
the city, live three million more. New plans for urban 
development aim to link up these suburban population centres 
and to create a number of modern cities on the outskirts 
of Moscow. Right, architectural model of one of these cities, 
now under construction. Its designers give high priority to 
the need for greenery and open spaces. Above, 
“master architects” of the new Moscow: Mikhail Posokhin 
(on left) is Minister of Urban Development in the U.S.S.R. and 
President of the Government Commission for Construction 
and Architecture. He was the chief designer of the Palace of 
the Congresses built within the Kremlin in 1961 (see page 26). With 
him is Mikhail Perchine, Chief Architect for Urban Development 
Planning. Below, model of a new development area, today 
completed, along the length of the Leningrad Prospect—main 
highway from the city to the Sheremetyevo International Airport. 
  
  
                                                                            
LF 
   wr Wn 
he 4 el, 
Aah 
i Sy se ia 
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Pa
ul
 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
ri
s 
 

## [Page 23](078231engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 31539: New horizons in Moscow

 

## [Page 24](078231engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 31539: New horizons in Moscow

    
  
   
(WE JE
 
(i WE oe EE Tl TE 
[iE | EE TH WOE Soil | 
[FH | Em EE TRE 8 
[EH 1 HE A Tm 1 KI EE 
(EH 1 EE EE I PA _ 
1 31S TENT ENE WEEE pal 
o
w
s
 
G
T
 
       
     
  
    
   
    
    
       
   
[s Wy f 
0 EES 
EE BEAN 
: 
TRL | [EE TE EWE Fam Bl E 
LLnL nn + 
CT Ld TEI TEE 
A TR 
io) | I NO JO) TT 
PVFn wu NINE 
bed - wl CLR TRL] 
a iipeemett LLL LLL 
4 ores t pla— 1 U] T 
pie Tep—— UT 
= m— 1 ELT -) 
HEF BA) ER) = Ag 3 
[IT 
i 
: 
c
e
a
 
on the Kalinin Prospect 0) and 
fru latest and largest hotel, 
Ty the Rossiya @. Between them is 
  
   
f 
| } 
S  Le
d 
EE 
TANTEI 
YIENYw 
- 
   
      
  
I 
g
i
l
:
 
a 
18
 
NN
 
HI
N 
    
A
A
R
 
A
A
Y

## [Page 25](078231engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 31539: New horizons in Moscow

¥: — PPT TI LL LL TTT TTI TY 
ins 
HT RY f H 4 Hine 
igri {vis If HEElit 
      e
n
h
 T
e
c
 
    T
T
 
Asew|y ( soioyd 
Ll 1 
a
d
 
7} 
N
A
 
I
N
 
= 
x
T
 
T
V
A
 
: 
-
—
 
NS) 
T
A
 
2X 
’. rt " fur) a ; 
X (ie SR mim a 
| i 
10 | <The . .) x 
! 2 . ESS TS I 
peat Ee |) smal 
    
 
: i’ TE TT RT —— ba Saks 
BON | OL SEY NE TN BVNRI DUNN LN NEE NI EINE BRIE MIN CW CET ARNEmmm a a ao PREIS het 
; - A FLU NER .3 Net] 
WIT ON DO ONL ET I DRO RSE EOE I pe re Es 
0 a NRL NB iL NRE NO I JI Ki. RE I L LE: 
  
    
    
L 
i WY A Lo ASS anon va 1a = 
EL IE WEL mn a 4 OL 
gr J IRE BAI UL NRL UK ARE pi TL fem on 22 2 
l aff b Lae DE : - 
rt TT BC EEE WRI I RE pe= wr=o2s
a) ml RUE LR A 12 = = — 
— CLE ~~ 4 
—ag Ee 
A— 
¥ Ne 
L
U
 
  
T
A
I
 
L 
ee \ 
: ; { 
LL 
(ml 
on mn mim LE 
 

## [Page 26](078231engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 31539: New horizons in Moscow

  
  
  
  
    A —— 4 
   
 
as 
Gi Ee — Pe ——— 
  
  
NEW FORMS 
& MATERIALS 
Soviet architecture today 
is characterized by a 
use of bold designs in 
which modern 
forms and functional 
needs are kept in 
mind. Architects use 
marble, ceramics, wood 
and other traditional 
building materials in 
conjunction with more 
modern elements such as 
concrete, glass and 
aluminium. Top left, 
entrance hall of the Palace 
of Congresses in the 
Kremlin. Its chief 
architect, Mikhail Poscokhin 
{see page 22) was 
awarded the Lenin Prize. 
Top right, winged 
silhouette of “The Dove”, 
a terrace cafe 
in Baku, capital of the 
Azerbaijan Republic. Left, 
distinctive semi-circular 
arches in one of Moscow's 
underground stations. 
Right, Palace of Sports in 
Minsk, capital of the 
Byelorussian Republic, 
can seat 6,000 spectators. 
Destroyed during the 
Second World War, Minsk 
has been completely 
rebuilt in a modern style. 

## [Page 27](078231engo.pdf#page=27) 2

### 31539: New horizons in Moscow

### 30745: Reflections on Soviet culture

- 
‘ 
  
   
) 
a
k
 
A
T
 
0]
 
ol ~Y
 
: 
  
   
- 
"4 
R
T
 
I 
A 
: 
I
N
 
V
a
 
X
 
B
h
 
a
 
  
         "
         \|B 
  
  
HI 
WI 
; a y
 
—
,
 
YO
 
yo
o 
b
a
h
a
r
 
a
p
m
 
A 
oh
 
a
 
F
a
l
 
a
a
 
[LF
 
ATDA
A 
TT 
U
A
T
 
A
V
I
 
0
)
 
(0
 
al A
 
PR
IM
I 
S
R
 
 
   
pt 
04 
o
O
 
T
A
 
c
e
 
la
 : 
i 
] 
| 
pl
a . 
wy 
Lag 
: 
J
 
E
A
T
 
I 
S
a
 
~
 
r 
h
E
 
a
g
 
G 
HN
 
of
 
BT 
mi
dn
tc
ms
r 
th
en
 
I
E
W
 
a
 
I
 
| . A 
  
A
G
P
 
H
F
 
   A
N
 
-
 
’ 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
AP
N 
SOVIET CULTURE 
(Continued from page 21) 
more than 40 years of my life to film- 
making, that phenomenal art born of 
the twentieth century, inseparable from 
scientific and technical achievements 
and part and parcel of the mainstream 
of modern life. 
Perhaps the best way to get a true 
picture of our age might be to view 
one after another, all the great films 
of the 20th century, from Griffith's 
“Intolerance” and Eisenstein's, “Battle- 
ship Potemkin” to the pictures of 1967. 
Naturally, the cinema could not have 
performed this historic feat if it did 
not rely on the complex nature of the 
other arts that produced the synthetic 
essence of the cinema and gave it 
life. Consequently, film-makers, giving 
the truth its due, never forget that 
literature is the father of all the arts, 
and music their mother. 
When | go back in thought to the 
sources of Soviet culture, | see, along 
with men who were close to me 
professionally, besides 25-year-old 
Eisenstein, the gigantic figure of Maya- 
kovsky, his contemporary, and 18-year- 
old Shostakovich. 
Their generation started life along 
with the many millions who had just 
crossed the threshold into our great 
era. 
Here it would be well to recall what 
Czarist Russia was like in the opening 
years of the 20th century, an empire 
sprawled across two continents, from 
the Baltic and Black Seas to the 
Pacific. 
When | close my eyes on a sleep- 
less night, the memory that recorded 
childish impressions for my whole life 
brings back a picture of the fat police- 
man who stood on the corner of 
Malakhovskaya Street in Ekaterinburg, 
where | was born, and the street itself, 
knee-deep in mud in spring and 
autumn. | recall the houses of the 
merchants as they stood jutting up 
in the midst of wretched hovels. 
Those houses resembled chests of 
drawers, filled with bed-bugs and fetid 
stupidity, with the arrogance and 
quivering flesh of somnolent gluttons. 
| recall the village where | spent the 
years of my childhood, with its com- 
pletely natural economy, where each 
fed and clothed himself and his family 
from what his pitiful farm could pro- 
duce. 
So it went all over the country, 
with the exception of a few cities 
where living conditions came up to 
the modern standards of amenities in 
the age of steam and electricity. 
Towering over all this were ancient 
Moscow and St. Petersburg, the re- 
splendent capital of the Russian 
empire and the home of Russia's 
wealthiest landowners where, side by 
side with the glitter of court society, 
there arose a great national culture 
that gave mankind such men of genius 
as Dostoyevsky, Pushkin, Tolstoy, 
Chekhov, Gogol and Shevchenko. 
Somewhere far away, vaguely 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 28](078231engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 30745: Reflections on Soviet culture

Soviet conductor 
and composer 
Dimitri Kabalevski 
at rehearsal (ieft). 
Kabalevski, 
born in 
St. Petersburg 
in 1904, has 
written ballets, 
symphonies, 
chamber music 
and operas 
including “Colas 
Breugnon” (1938), 
inspired by 
a work of the 
French writer 
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
AP
N 
28 
  
  
SOVIET CULTURE (Continued) 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
AP
N 
- 
O.
 
Ma
ka
ro
v 
The works of 
Dimitri 
Shostakovich (left). 
who was born 
in St. Petersburg 
in 1906, fall into 
two periods. 
After avant garde 
musical research, 
he turned to major 
works such as his 
“Song of the 
Forests” and his 
well-known 
symphonies, 
including the 7th 
(The Leningrad), 
written in the 
besieged city 
in 1941. 
Kirgiz novelists and Armenian painters 
known to the Czar's officials and quite 
unknown to the city dwellers, were 
tens of millions of men and women in 
tree-bark shoes and homespun cloth- 
ing. And still farther away were the 
alien folk, whom even the Czarist 
governors who ruled them could not 
make out. To the man in the street 
these distant people were no more 
than geographic elements and not 
human beings of different races with 
their own soul or mind or heart. They 
viewed them as objects without feel- 
ings, without language or alphabet. 
All this is what Russia inherited 
when Czarism collapsed. The Octo- 
ber Revolution decided the history of 
our country. It set out on a new road. 
Here is where the sacramental 
question arose, the question Romain 
Rolland later formulated as “On whose 
side are you, masters of culture?” To 
the Russian intelligentsia’s honour, it 
had the insight, spiritual force and 
common sense to make its choice. 
Our people will- never forget that side 
by side with them were such giants 
as Pavlov and Timiryazev, Blok and 
Mayakovsky, Meyerhold and Stanislav- 
sky, Petrov-Vodkin and Nesterov. 
in all justice, it should be noted that 
many of Russia's prominent intellec- 
tuals were unable immediately to 
understand and accept in their hearts 
the immense changes taking place in 
their native land. They were frighten- 
Romain Rolland. 
Photo © APN - O, Makarov 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Fo
to
fi
d,
 
Ma
dr
id
 
Yevgeni Evtushenko the poet, 
born in Zima, Siberia, in 1933, is 
immensely popular with Soviet youth. 
His reputation quickly spread 
beyond his country and his works 
have since been translated »in 
several languages. 
ed by the austere and inexorable early 
years of the Revolution and left. Later, 
many of them returned home. Others 
remained abroad to the end of their 
days. 
The twenties brought many new 
names into the new Soviet multi- 
national culture. The awakening of 
new strata of society and of entire 
nationalities, who for the first time 
received the right to self-determina- 
tion, to a written language, to be 
heard, the peoples who now comprise 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. 
Significantly, many people who 
come to the Soviet Union, whether 
from America, Europe, Africa or 
distant Australia, are eager to visit,

## [Page 29](078231engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 30745: Reflections on Soviet culture

  
  
2a A La uve 
FR 
= ll a Vr 
  
Leningrad, 
long distinguished 
as a centre of the 
performing arts, 
has nearly a score 
of theatres and 
concert halls. 
Audience (right) is 
attending a gala 
performance at 
the celebrated Kirov 
Theatre of Opera 
and Ballet. 
Prestige 
of 
music 
and 
noetry 
Left, Soviet pianist 
Svyatoslav Richter, 
born in 1914, is 
one of the world’s 
great interpreters 
of Bach, Beethoven, 
Hayden, * Scriabine, 
Debussy and 
Prokofiev. He was 
awarded the 
Lenin Prize in 1961. 
besides Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev, 
the Central Asian republics, once the" 
most remote border regions of the 
Russian empire. Whether writers, 
artists or businessmen, they often 
return from Central Asia deeply 
impressed by what they saw even in 
the shortest of visits. [It may be that 
the phenomenal flowering of these 
Central Asian republics is the most 
striking testimony to the moral as well 
as economic victory of our country. 
We ourselves regard this achievement 
as our greatest. To us it is all the 
more revealing because we know what 
those places were like before. 
Any list of the most respected, 
world-famous Soviet artists, writers 
and musicians would be extremely 
long, but the very first names would 
certainly include the brilliant Kirghiz 
novelist Chingiz Aitmatov, son of a 
shepherd; the poet and war hero 
Musa lalil; the truly amazing poet and 
philosopher Rasul Gamzatov; the inex- 
- 
CS an 
ie Pe ae 
haustibly gifted Armenian painter Mar- 
tiros Saryan and his fellow countryman 
Aram Khachaturyan, and Kara Karaev 
of Azerbaijan. 
Having mentioned a few names, 
without which what | want to say might 
seem abstract, | think it would be well 
to consider how it came about that an 
illiterate country, condemned to spend 
its long winter nights by the light of 
rush candles, was able to make such 
a colossal leap forward. Naturally, 
when the country embarked on its 
active post-revolutionary development 
it progressed along with the rest of 
the twentieth century in spite of the 
inevitable isolation it was forced into. 
The tremendous thirst for knowledge 
awakened by the cultural revolution in 
the twenties made the Soviet citizen 
perhaps the most avid reader in the 
world. With books having remained 
silent friends and companions of each 
individual reader, a special Soviet way 
a 
ot nr 
of living with literature has come into 
being. The readers’ conferences held 
regularly at hundreds of thousands of 
libraries and factory and rural recrea- 
tion centres, and poetry readings 
before audiences of many thousands 
are but two of the new features char- 
acteristic of our culture, 
On several occasions | have accom- 
panied visitors from abroad to such 
gatherings. | could not help feeling 
proud of the impression our readers’ 
conferences made on them: The 
heated arguments, keen observations, 
ability to understand the literary impli- 
cations below the surface, and the 
appreciation of style. 
This brings to the forefront an 
important feature of modern social 
man, in the best meaning of the word, 
and that is his unselfish interest in 
matters of common concern, and his 
sense of responsibility for the moral 
achievements, in which each sees a 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
29

## [Page 30](078231engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 30745: Reflections on Soviet culture

  
SOVIET CULTURE (Continued) 
Controversies on the borders of realism in art 
major fruit of his labours. It is not 
only houses, factories, shops and 
handsome streets and cities that 
reveal the level of a civilization. The 
most important yardstick is man him- 
self, his code. of ethics, his attitude 
to the world, to good and evil, to 
strength and weakness, to the goal 
of life. That is what the reader looks 
for in the books he reads, the plays 
he attends, the new paintings and films 
he sees. 
At this point the eternal debate 
arises: what is art, what is its purpose? 
The debate arises with greater and 
greater force at every new dividing 
line in history. Many are inclined to 
accuse us of utilitarianism, of being 
didactic, even of distorting the sacred 
predestination of art by applying it to 
the practical needs of society, to the 
organization of government itself. 
That is both true and not true. 
It would be hypocritical and false to 
dismiss that view—} would not call 
it an accusation—out of hand. We 
have no intention of either cancelling, 
or evasively skirting, the specific fea- 
tures of our way of life. 
Yes, all of us—writers, artists, musi- 
cians and film-makers—are co-operat- 
ing in a gigantic programme on which 
we have embarked at the call of our 
hearts and in the interests of our own - 
people and other peoples who conti- 
nue to be threatened by a great num- 
ber of dangers derived from brutality 
and despotism. 
The programme is so important to 
us and is so much a part of the 
substance and content of our life 
that most of us are unable to draw 
a strict dividing line between our per- 
sonal concerns and the concerns of 
society. Speaking without any of the 
Photo © APN 
2 ZX 
N\ 
i
L
 
 
—
—
 
’ 
oy
 
: 
=i
 
propagandistic accentuation which the 
modern man so abhors, and within the 
framework of discovering the truth, a 
man's work, if he is completely 
engrossed in it, is an integral part of 
his private life, sometimes much more 
so than purely family matters. 
It is this heightened personal atti- 
tude on the part of everyone working 
in the extensive sphere of culture, a 
sphere encompassing all the meridians 
and parallels of our vast country, that 
makes up the essence of our attitude 
to the importance and significance of 
one or another artistic phenomenon. 
? 
In our professional environment it 
is natural that there should be contro- 
versies concerning form, the borders 
of realism, and the breadth of its 
shores. | see no harm at all in the 
fact that the debate often reaches a 
high pitch of intensity. 
It is because they are seemingly so 
innocent and bloodless that literary 
and artistic battles often grow aggra- 
vated with remarkable ease. Here 
the youth naturally play a special part. 
Doing their duty in the succession of 
generations, they logically act accord- 
ing to the dialectical law of “negation 
of the negation.” 
We would be poor dialecticians if 
this circumstance were to fill us with 
undue fears. We know definitely that 
in the development of that law any 
negation must be followed by an affir- 
mation, which will be followed by ano- 
ther negation-affirmation, since in our 
concept of the world everything is 
continuously developing. 
That is why, while we are aiming 
at the future, we cannot discard the 
past with curious arrogance or infan- 
tile naivete. To us, the historical pro- 
Young artists visit 
an exhibition of 
Kinetic Art in 
Moscow. Some of 
these art forms 
are based on 
mathematical 
formulae projected 
in three 
dimensions. Others 
show moving 
elements of light. 
In the past few 
years there has been 
growing interest 
in the U.S5.S.R. for 
modern Kinetic Art, 
and exhibitions 
have been held at 
Dubna and 
elsewhere. 
cess is continuous. This was clearly 
formulated by Lenin in his argument 
with Bogdanov concerning the attitude 
to a cultural legacy. 
To us, modern art draws on the 
greatness of ancient and medieval art, 
the Renaissance, and the art of the 
recent past, in which before our eyes 
there arose the brilliant figures of such 
artists as Picasso, Diego Rivera and 
Siqueiros, men who have never for a 
moment separated their art from the 
interests of humanity and who have 
waged violent battles, sometimes with 
themselves, for artistic truth. 
Hence, to us the names of the young 
poets who now tour many countries 
and have become widely known in 
Europe and America, the names of 
Evtushenko, Rozhdestvensky and 
Akhmadulina, are all signs of the 
times, contemporary features of our 
many-levelled culture, inseparables 
connected with the interests of all 
men. 
Behind these poets stand the people, 
who have the right both to love 
them and to make demands on them 
in keeping with the laws of spiritual 
unity that have become the foundation 
of our community. Again, this is a 
special feature that may appear awk- 
ward, even unbearable, to the solipsist 
artist, whose only life companion is 
himself. This is a principled difference 
we have no intention of either erasing 
or evading. The difference lies in 
the very depths of our society and 
our national traditions, the traditions 
of the Russian intelligentsia, which 
from Pushkin and the Decembrist 
poets, throughout the brilliant writings 
of the nineteenth century by Gogol, 
Shevchenko, Hertzen, Tolstoy and 
Dostoyevsky, showed that it had insep- 
arable spiritual ties with the people. 
Now the people, too, have changed. 
They produce from their depths much 
new talent that is shaped gradually, 
in amateur groups, in factory hterary 
clubs, at public lecture courses on 
the arts. Before you know it, you 
have world-famous groups like lgor 
Moiseyev's folk dance company, which 
has scored a truly unprecedented suc- 
cess all over the world. 
As a film-maker, it would be only 
fitting if | were to pay some tribute to 
cinema art in this brief survey. With- 
out beating about the bush | could 
simply list the dozens of first prizes 
won at international film festivals. But 
what is the use of self-praise and 
self-glorification? History judges us. 
We are only 50 years old, a mature 
age for human beings but youthful for 
a country. 
As | look backward, and then into 
the future, | think: each of us can say 
he is growing older, and that we are 
all mortal, but the advantage of our 
life has been that we have devoted 
it to mankind's youngest cause.

## [Page 31](078231engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 31775: 700,000 scientists in the U.S.S.R. in 1967

       
  
w
i
l
d
 
ON 
A
X
 
a
e
d
 43
 
Ra
pe
 
bo 
| 
’ 
Ten years ago, on October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union opened the Space Age 
by launching the world's first artificial satellite. This achievement heralded 
a decade of space research and exploration that already numbers 
manned space flights, rendezvous between space vehicles and “walks” 
in space by astronauts, scientific instrument probes to the Moon and Venus 
and artificial satellites for long-range weather prediction and colour television 
- via space. This striking photograph (entitled “The Roads to Space”) 
of two research rockets bound for the upper atmosphere wag a prize-winning entry 
in a 1966 Interpress photo contest in Moscow. 
Photo © APN - V. Lebedev 
yd 
ph 
a 
R 
kK 
- 
- 
¥ 
+ 
«5 . - 
Aaya 
» 
Pal 
ary 
pe 
ie 
100,000 
scientists 
by Mikhail Lavrentiev 
|. 1913, scientific workers 
and lecturers in Russion higher educa- 
tional establishments numbered about 
10,000. Today, the Soviet Union has 
about 700,000 scientific workers—a 
quarter of all the scientists in the 
world. Under the Soviet régime, the 
membership of the Academy of 
Sciences has grown to more than two 
hundred times its former size, and 
there has been an almost one-hundred- 
fold increase in the number of scientific 
publications. 
Each Republic of the Union has Its 
own Academy of Sciences, with well 
organized and equipped scientific 
centres engaged in various types of 
research. For example, the Academy 
of Sciences of the Ukrainian S.S.R. 
has about fifty scientific institutes. 
Soviet physicists have synthesized 
chemical elements 102 and 104 of the 
periodic system of Mendeleev. Not 
far from Moscow, near the ancient 
 
MIKHAIL LAVRENTIEV is the founder and 
present director of Akademgorodok, the 
new city entirely devoted to science, built 
in the heart of Siberia near Novosibirsk. 
A Vice-President of the U.S.S.R. Academy 
of Sciences and head of its Siberian branch, 
he is know primarily as a distinguished 
mathematician, but has also won inter- 
national recognition for his work in aero- 
dynamics, hydrodynamics, explosion theory, 
high velocity collisions and seismology. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
J

## [Page 32](078231engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 31775: 700,000 scientists in the U.S.S.R. in 1967

LJ. 
700,000 SCIENTISTS (Continued) 
The mushroom growth 
of research centres 
Russian town of Serpukhov, the 
world’s most powerful particle accele- 
rator, a 70-Bev proton synchrocyclo- 
tron, will soon be in operation, 
It cannot, of course, be said that 
Soviet science began in a vacuum, 
for Russia had great scientists before 
the Soviet Revolution. The history of 
science has an honoured place for 
such researchers as Nikolai Loba- 
chevsky, the inventor of non-Euclidean 
geometry, Dmitry Mendeleev, the 
creator of the periodic system of che- 
mical elements, Aleksandr Butlerov, 
the author of the first works on the 
structure of organic compounds, and 
llya Mechnikov, one of the founders 
of immunology, the science which 
investigates the defensive mechanisms 
of the human organism. 
The Czarist Government, however, 
often attacked daring scientific thought, 
with the result that the general level 
of development in pre-Revolutionary 
Russia was very low. 
Despite the extremely difficult con- 
ditions created by the Civil War (1918- 
22) foreign intervention, the blockade 
and the economic dislocation which 
affected every region of the country, 
Lenin and his colleagues never lost 
sight of the needs of Soviet science, 
then in its infancy. 
It might be thought that, in a country 
whose industry and transport had been 
destroyed and whose agriculture could 
barely provide a starvation level of 
sustenance for the population, the 
first duty of the nation’s leaders would 
be to foster the development of applied 
scientific research yielding immediate 
practical results, and that abstract 
science could wait. 
But it was clear to Lenin that the 
new society could not be built without 
the active participation of the basic 
sciences, for that was the only way 
in which conditions favourable to the 
rapid growth of applied research could 
be created. Otherwise, the U.S.S.R. 
would be condemned to perpetual 
dependence on foreign science. 
Lenin knew that unless a sufficiently 
high level of development were attain- 
ed in mathematics, physics, mechanics, 
chemistry, biology and the other 
natural sciences, plans for building 
socialism would remain merely Uto- 
pian. He therefore used all the means 
in his power to mobilize scientists and 
direct their efforts towards the dev- 
elopment of fundamental scientific 
research and the establishment of 
large, modern scientific centres. 
As early as the years 1918-1920, 
physico-technical, optical and radium 
institutes were set up in Petrograd 
(today Leningrad) while Moscow saw 
the establishment of institutes of 
physics and biophysics and of the 
Central Institute of Aerodynamics—the 
famous “Tsagi” which has produced 
the greatest Soviet mechanicians, air- 
craft constructors and rocket en- 
gineers. From 1920 onwards, the 
number of scientific centres increased 
year by year. 
A second, extremely important 
reason for the dynamic growth of 
Soviet science was the introduction of 
a universal system of popular educa- 
tion which made it possible for talented 
young people to have scientific training. 
Much was also due to the fact that, 
from the very first years of the Revo- 
lution, scientific research was organ- 
ized on the basis of an integrated 
national plan, under which goals and 
objectives for the study and solution 
of the most pressing problems of 
science and technology at any given 
time were fixed with reference to 
scientific developments in the world 
as a whole. The Soviet Union is 
perhaps the first country which has 
organized its scientific planning on a 
nation-wide basis. 
In 1920, Lenin initiated the prepa- 
ration of the famous “Goerlo” plan, 
which provided for the building of a 
vast network of power stations and 
for the development of industry over 
a period of ten to fifteen years. 
Lenin's electrification plan—like all 
subsequent scientific and economic 
plans—proved eminently feasible, for 
the targets set by “Goerlo” were two 
to three times over-fulfilled. 
After the victory of 1945, world 
science embarked on a new course 
mapped out by the whole of its pre- 
vious evolution. Practical applications 
were found for the results of a great 
deal of basic research, notably in 
atomic energy, electronic computing 
and the exploration of space. 
In nuclear physics, Igor Kurtchatov 
contrived to build up around him and 
to organize large groups composed 
of the finest engineers and researchers 
in various special fields. Soviet 
scientists, for instance, were the first 
to use hydrogen as a nuclear fuel 
In the conquest of space a pre- 
dominant rdle was played by Sergei 
Korolyov. He, like Kurtchatov, had 
a genius for co-ordinating the work 
of researchers and constructors. 
Soviet scientists and engineers wers 
the first to put into orbit an artificial 
satellite and a manned capsule. The 
launching of the first sputnik was a 
tremendous spur to the development 
of world science. 
The last ten years have been marked 
by the accelerated growth of research 
centres, both in number and in quality. 
Apart from questions of nuclear energy 
and the exploration of space, there 
are many centres actively engaged on 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 34 
 
A Science City 
rises from 
the Siberian Taiga 
  

## [Page 33](078231engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 31775: 700,000 scientists in the U.S.S.R. in 1967

   
Almost completely undeveloped before 1917, Siberia has 
since undergone startling transformations. Novosibirsk 
(600 miles north east of Lake Balkhash and close to the 
Ob River) had 20,000 inhabitants in 1910. Today it has one 
million. Already a big industrial centre, the city has also 
become the scientific capital of Siberia with the creation 
of Akademgorodok, known as “Science City.” Twenty-five 
miles from Novosibirsk, over 3,000 acres of virgin forest 
were cleared as the site of a campus on which have been 
built 20 research institutes (above right), a university, and 
a special mathematics college for outstandingly gifted chil- 
dren selected by scientific “Olympiads”. Above centre, 
entrance hall of the hotel built to accomodate newly-arrived 
scientists and students. Above left, hidden in the trees are 
the homes of the several thousand scientists who work at 
Akademgorodok. Below left, laboratory at Science City 
whose Nuclear Physics Institute is completing a giant 
proton-antiproton installation with an energy of 1200 BeV 
(thousand million electron volts). Below right, a shopping 
centre, one of Akademgorodok’s many community facilities. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
  
             
 
  
  
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris 
    
    
Sr Fo 
Brad 
 
    
 

## [Page 34](078231engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 31775: 700,000 scientists in the U.S.S.R. in 1967

    
34 
700,000 SCIENTISTS (Continued) 
Siberia, open door to science 
basic research in mathematics, en- 
gineering, solid state physics and 
high energy physics. 
In the last twenty years, mankind 
has been experiencing a tremendous 
scientific and technological revolution, 
which has confronted science with a 
number of complicated scientific and 
organizational problems that are pre- 
occupying not only scientists but 
governments in many countries. 
Answers must be found to questions 
such as that of determining the most 
effective structure and location for a 
n
y
 
4 
\ 
. 
“
S
a
 
- 
O
n
 
o
 
.
 
Y/
 
n
o
g
 
E
Y
 
27
 
on
ly
 
B
A
 
§ 
~
¥
k
e
 
«oe
 
e
s
 
A
 
A
 
"] 
Bi
 
E- 
T
a
n
 
‘
W
y
 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Pa
ul
 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
ri
s 
£ 
4 
[| 
1 
SCIENTIST'STIME OUT 
FOR RELAXATION 
After working hours, scientists, 
researchers and students at Science City, 
near Novosibirsk—young, and not so 
young—have ample opportunities 
to enjoy their favourite pastimes. 
1 Prof. Guri Martchuk, director of 
° the Electronic Computing Department 
at Science City, typifies the 
youthfulness of many top-level scientists 
at the U.S.S.R.’s second largest 
scientific centre after Moscow. 
Average age 33. 
Young scientists enjoy all types of 
modern dancing at one of the 
community clubs. Its name has 
mathematical connotations 
—*“The Integral”. 
Roller-skating provides an excellent 
summer exercise for keeping 
muscles in trim for skiing—a 
favourite winter sport in Science City. 
4 At the doorstep of Science City 
° is a vast artificial reservoir, 
125 miles long—known as “Obi Sea”. 
Many people have taken to boating and 
sailing, and between them now have 
400 to 500 motor-boats and yachts. 
country's scientific institutes; planning 
scientific development at a time when 
the volume of scientific knowledge 
can double in ten or twelve years; 
finding the best ways of selecting and 
training scientists and skilled workers, 
the demand for whom is growing by 
leaps and bounds; and somehow 
strengthening the link between science 
and the national economy. 
As an example of how we in the 
U.S.S.R. are tackling problems of this 
type, | should like to say something 
about the work of my own department 
—the Siberian Section of the Aca- 
demy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. 
From the earliest years following 
the October Revolution, Siberia and 
the Soviet Far East experienced a 
massive development, both economic 
and cultural. Universities sprang up 
at Irkutsk and Vladivostok; schools 
and factories mushroomed everywhere 
and finally a number of branches of 
the Soviet Academy of Sciences were 
established. In brief, this wild region, 
which had previously served chiefly 
as a place of exile, began slowly to 
change into a civilized area. 
During the first Five-Year Plan there 
grew up the new metallurgical centre 
of the Kuznetsk Basin, which today 
has an essential réle in the national 
economy. Siberia's contribution during 
the Second World War is inestimable; 
together with the Urals, it sent to the 
front equipment and fighting men of 
the highest quality. 
Victory won, the Soviet people 
concentrated the greater part of its 
energies on reconstructing its shatter- 
ed towns and factories and restoring 
a devastated countryside. During this 
5 
X » () 
difficult period, only slow progress 
was made with the development of 
Siberia. We had to wait until 1956, 
and the 20th Party Cofgress, before 
a fresh stimulus was given to these 
regions with their fabulous unexplored 
natural wealth. A plan was drawn 
up providing for intensive underground 
prospection, the establishment of an 
infrastructure for industry and energy 
resources and a huge network of 
secondary schools and higher edu- 
cational establishments. Science was 
given a fresh start. 
To achieve rapid and complete 
results it was, of course, necessary 
to reinforce existing establishments— 
mainly regional branches of the 
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and 
government research centres. Above 
all it was essential to create centres 
and institutes capable of carrying out 
basic studies ranking with scientific 
research at world level. 
In 1957 the Soviet Government 
therefore decided to set up a Sib- 
erian section of the Soviet Academy 
of Sciences and to build a big scien- 
tific centre which would be responsi- 
ble for all the branches and institutes 
of the Academy of Sciences situated 
east of the Urals. 
A government committee was spe- 
cially nominated to draw up the 
statutes of the Siberian section and 
to establish a timetable for the 
construction, equipment and launching 
of the new centres. The committee 
was given a programme and, drawing 
upon national and international exper- 
jence, it began by laying down guiding 
principles. 
The site selected for the new scien- 
tific centre was in a pine forest on the 
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
AP
N 
-V
. 
T
c
h
e
r
n
o
v

## [Page 35](078231engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 31775: 700,000 scientists in the U.S.S.R. in 1967

edge of the Obi Reservoir, 25 kilo- 
metres (15 miles) south of Novosibirsk. 
In seeking to attract to Siberia first- 
rate scientists, it was important to take 
full advantage of this natural scenic 
beauty. 
Since its foundation nine years ago, 
Akademgorodok, or “Science City” 
as it has been called, has greatly 
expanded. Its citizens today include 
16 Academicians, 30 Corresponding 
Members of the Academy, 95 Doctors 
of Science and 950 Candidates. 
Workers and office staff number 
16,000. 
The centre is concerned with all 
the major problems of modern science; 
every branch is represented: mathe- 
matics, physics, chemistry, biology, 
geology and the social sciences, and 
each yields results of the greatest 
significance. Some of the work has 
been awarded the Lenin Prize—nuclear 
physics research concerning the induc- 
ed collision of beams of particles, 
studies on the theory of detonation 
and on applied cybernetics. Geolo- 
gists, biologists and mathematicians 
have achieved remarkable successes. 
Scarcely had the organization of 
the Siberian section got under way 
than our research teams established 
close contacts with the industry and 
economy of Siberia and the Far East. 
The specific problems of this vast 
region with its low population density 
have been studied with particular 
attention. Our scientists have given 
hundreds of lectures on current prob- 
lems of science in towns and in large 
factories; we have undertaken a de- 
tailed study on ways in which Siberia’'s 
special climatic conditions hamper 
the development of industry—notably 
the mining industry. 
Though in most instances we have 
had to be satisfied with giving general 
  
advice, joint studies have also fre- 
quently led to close collaboration over 
several years. Today the institutes 
controlled by our centre are in per- 
manent contact with more than 300 
factories and enterprises in the East. 
Joint efforts by scientists and in- 
dustrialists have enabled us to find 
practical economic uses for fundamen- 
tally new scientific concepts. At Novo- 
sibirsk researchers and industrialists 
are together studying the industrial 
application of a new technology which 
uses the method of flash welding to 
obtain laminated materials. This most 
promising technique offers almost un- 
limited combinations of metals to meet 
desired specifications. For example, 
we have some “bi-metals” whose resis- 
tance to heat and whose refractory 
and anti-corrosive properties are quite 
remarkable. These may be of great 
utility for chemical apparatus, electro- 
technical installations, etc. 
I. study of the behaviour 
of dynamically supercharged water has 
given rise to the “impulse currents” 
theory and this in turn has enabled 
us to build a whole range of super- 
powerful presses intended for stamp- 
ing out shaped components in different 
metals. These hydraulic-impulse pres- 
ses giving an impact energy of the 
order of 200 strokes per minute are at 
present undergoing trials in the facto- 
ries of Novosibirsk. This alliance bet- 
ween science and production is bound 
to expand in the future. 
Unfortunately, experience has shown 
that a direct transition from science 
to industry is not always successful; we 
have seen considerable efforts by both 
parties end in failure, each side being 
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris 
“re 
  
peiibd dL RLR ch anid DANO RRA Tr . 
fully convinced that the other was 
to blame. The conclusion we draw is 
that it is no good approaching big 
industry without adequate preparation, 
and without realizing quite clearly that 
the more revolutionary an idea, the 
greater the need to work it out fully 
on the spot and to perfect its techno- 
logy. 
In response to our proposal, the Sov- 
iet Government has decided to set up 
a series of pilot plants and construc- 
tion centres near to Soience City. 
These are intended to be the half- 
way house between a scientific disco- 
very and its practical application. lt is 
here that students or trainees in the 
last year of higher studies can, by way 
of vocational training, gain practical 
experience in new products and new 
technologies so that when we submit 
drawings, technological plans or proto- 
types to industrialists, we can send 
them at the same time young people 
who have played an active part in 
their creation. 
We already have two pilot projects 
of this nature: one specializing in hy- 
draulic stamping equipment and an- 
other dealing with economic evalua- 
tion and planning. The first has per- 
fected a new range of machines found- 
ed upon the principles already des- 
cribed, and giving pressures and 
speeds never before attained. The 
prototypes have been built and are 
now being tested for resistance to wear 
and for stability. The second project 
has a purely economic function; it is 
already dealing with innumerable in- 
quiries concerning optimum layout of 
equipment and buildings and the cons- 
truction of new industrial plants. We 
are now setting up another pilot plant 
for research and construction, specia- 
lizing in small-scale accelerators for 
industrial use, catalysers, precision 
instruments, etc. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
4 
Ww mail 
— A ees Be 

## [Page 36](078231engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 31775: 700,000 scientists in the U.S.S.R. in 1967

  " 3 oF - 
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris 
The man behind 
Science City 
  
Founder of Akademgorodok, Siberia's 
Science City, the distinguished scientist, 
Mikhail Lavrentiev finds time, between 
his research, lectures and 
administrative work, to take an interest 
in every aspect of its [ife. Left, 
Prof. Lavrentiev outside his 8-year-old 
bungalow—the city's oldest house. Above, 
at the wheel of his car he stops for 
a chat with one of his assistants. 
Below, on a boat trip with his daughter 
Vera, also a mathematician, 
and his granddaughter. 
  
700,000 SCIENTISTS (Continued) 
Since its creation, the Siberian sec- 
tion has consistently sought to attract 
young talent and to educate and train 
it. The Soviet Union may justly pride 
itself on possessing the largest net- 
work of secondary schools and higher 
educational establishments in the 
world. 
The attraction exerted by science 
and technology upon Soviet youth is 
unmistakable. In addition to schools, 
technical clubs abound where young- 
sters of 10 to 12 years of age build 
model boats or aircraft, assemble wire- 
less sets and so on. Even so, we 
consider that the development of our 
education lags behind our needs— 
behind the evolution of science and 
technology. 
The shortage of qualified staff is 
particularly acute in centres of higher 
education and in those technical fields 
which are working on the newest scien- 
tific discoveries. When organizing our 
university in Science City, we plan- 
ned to base our teaching on the system 
of laboratories attached to the research 
institutes and to recruit our teachers 
as widely as possible from among both 
the older and the younger generations 
of scientists. That is what we do in 
practice, 
In view of the outstanding educa- 
tional opportunities which we are able 
to offer young people and because of 
the limited capacity of our laboratories, 
we have naturally had to adopt a 
system of selection which ensures 
the admission to our university of 
talented young people who know exact- 
ly what they want to do. 
A S regards mathematics and 
physics, and later chemistry, we solved 
the problem by arranging a selective 
system of “Scientific Olympics,” orga- 
nized in three stages and open to the 
largest possible number of candidates. 
This revealed that in the remote re- 
gions of Siberia mathematical apti- 
tudes are underdeveloped solely be- 
cause of insufficiently qualified teach- 
ing staff. Today, therefore, our selec- 
tion is carried out in depth and we 
have even set up a residential col- 
lege for studies in physics and ma- 
thematics, specifically for young people 
who have a natural talent but an in- 
sufficient stock of knowledge. 
Six years’ experience have convinced 
us of the success of this system. In 
a few years, not only shall we be able 
to provide our own replacements, but 
also to supply other higher schools 
and research centres with large num- 
bers of graduate and of Doctors in 
Science, eminently qualified and pos- 
sessing a high creative potential. 
As Science City itself has grown, 
many branch centres and institutes in 
the East have also been considerably 
expanded. The major impetus has 
been given to the branch at Irkutsk, 
where the local Institute of Energy has

## [Page 37](078231engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 31775: 700,000 scientists in the U.S.S.R. in 1967

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
   
 
 
        
 
  
 
   
     
     
  
  
  
 
    
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
       
  
  
    
           
     
        
 
        
    
      
achieved outstanding results and now 
boasts a first-class electronic comput- 
ing centre. Equally satisfying progress 
has been recorded by the scientific 
establishments at Yakutsk, Magadan 
and Vladivostok. 
Having gradually overcome the dif- 
ficulties of growth, the Siberian section 
is developing and spreading; its net- 
work of research centres is expanding 
and its contacts with the national eco- 
nomy grow stronger. From year to 
year the wealth of our country In- 
creases, as does the role of science in 
its industry and its economy. Yet 
while working at our daily tasks, we 
are also duty bound to look to the 
future, paying special attention to 
training a new generation of the highest 
quality. The future development of 
our country depends entirely upon the 
men and women we train today. 
  
  
      
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Pa
ul
 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
ri
s 
 
  
  
Photo © APN 
Antennae of a giant radiotelescope 
installed near Kharkov, in 
the Ukrainian SSR. It is used to 
pick up natural radio signals 
coming from outer space. 
Left, a prototype hydraulic press. 
Despite its relatively small size, 
it is four times more 
powerful that any similar system 
hitherto employed in industry. It was 
designed by Prof. Mikhail Lavrentiev.

## [Page 38](078231engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 31880: A TV programme girdling the world

38 
  
0. six hundred million 
viewers—one sixth of the world’s 
population—this was the potential 
audience for the remarkable television 
programme, “Our World", broadcast on 
June 25 in 31 countries. Of course, 
not all these six hundred million people 
will actually have switched on their 
sets at that moment; but still one 
is safe in saying that no show on 
earth has had such an audience 
before. 
The newspapers have already car- 
ried detailed descriptions of the pro- 
gramme itself. But what went on 
behind the scenes is less well known 
and just as fascinating. 
The idea was born in Spring 1966. 
For some years now, television sta- 
tions in western Europe have got 
together to organize joint transmissions 
of major sporting events and other 
spectacles of international interest; 
these link-ups, no longer a rarity, are 
arranged by Eurovision, part of the 
European Broadcasting Union. 
At one of the European Broadcast- 
ing Union's meetings, the British 
Broadcasting Corporation put forward 
a suggestion: why not try for one day 
to go beyond purely European colla- 
boration and arrange a world-wide 
hook-up using communication satel- 
lites? 
The European television organiza- 
tions were enthusiastic about the pro- 
ject. But in the United States the 
commercial structure of television 
caused some difficulties: the broad- 
cast was to last two full hours, and 
the U.S. network could hardly accept 
a period as long as that free from 
publicity. However, the National 
Educational Television network (NET), 
a nonprofit organization, agreed to take 
part. But naturally the audience in 
the U.S.A. was not as big as it would 
have been if the programme had been 
carried by one of the major networks. 
What about the other continents? 
Unfortunately there could be no 
question of the programme being seen 
in all countries of the world, and this 
above all for technical reasons. The 
broadcast was relayed from continent 
to continent via satellites in stationary 
orbit 36,000 kilometres (22,500 miles) 
by Pierre de Latil 
above the earth. At present, few 
countries possess the sensitive aerials 
needed to receive signals from these 
satellites. 
Of course, the signals, once receiv- 
ed, can be sent on to other countries 
by conventional means—coaxial cables 
or microwave transmissions—and in 
highly industrialized regions there are 
dense communication networks of this 
kind. But many parts of the world— 
Asia (outside Japan), tropical Africa 
even Latin America—lack such faci- 
lities. 
When the day comes that satellite 
relay transmitters are powerful enough 
to be picked up by less sophisticated 
aerials, direct communication with the 
whole world will be possible. 
The project faced one other major 
difficulty. Co-ordinating the transmis- 
sion of “canned” (pre-recorded) pro- 
grammes is a relatively simple matter. 
But “Our World" was broadcast “live”: 
what was seen on the screen was 
actually happening in another part of 
the world at that very moment. This 
made the whole operation very much 
more complicated. But as it turned 
out, timing was perfect all along the 
line, and world-wide television passed 
with flying colours one of the stiffest 
tests it is likely to meet: perfect co- 
ordination of a long programme made 
up of many short contributions which 
all have to fit together like the pieces 
of a jigsaw puzzle. 
There were tricky problems of “con- 
trol” to be solved. Let's see how 
they were ‘tackled. In each country 
where more than one sequence was 
to originate, the places where the 
various contributions were coming 
from were connected to a “national 
control”. These national controls 
were themselves linked to ‘“interna- 
tional controls”: New York for America, 
Australia and Japan for Asia, and Brus- 
sels for Europe. The signals were 
passed across the Atlantic and Pacific 
via satellite, but within Europe they tra- 
velled by more conventional means. 
The “master control” was in London, 
linked both to Brussels and, by sate!- 
lite, to New York. 
A precise second-by-second time- 
table had been drawn up, so that each 
producer, whether he was bringing to 
the world screen shrimp-fishing in 
Japan, scenes from Romeo and luliet 
in an Umbrian church, or folk-dances 
in a village square in Mexico, knew 
exactly when his “contribution” to the 
programme was due to start. 
The nerve centre in London was 
directed by Aubrey Singer, head of 
the BBC Outside Broadcast Features 
and Science Department. As Euro- 
pean Broadcasting Union Project Edi- 
tor, he had in front of him monitors 
showing the transmission sequence, 
and test pictures from the next two 
sequences to follow. He was also in 
telephone contact with these three 
units, and was thus able to give them 
personally their “countdown” and go 
ahead signal. 
As soon as one sequence went on 
the air, one of the two “waiting” 
screens became free for the next 
sequence in line, coming either from 
Brussels or New York. In the European 
control room in Brussels, where the 
French director Alexandre Tarta was 
in charge, the set-up was the same: 
two sequences “standing-by” on two 
monitor screens, and as soon as one 
of them went on the air, another was 
switched in from Austria, France or 
Sweden... 
So carefully had the two-hour pro- 
gramme been planned that everything 
went off smoothly. 
The timing was perfect too, except 
for one sequence, showing the famous 
painter Miro at work in the South of 
France, which overran a few seconds: 
the artist took a little bit longer than 
expected to finish a drawing. But 
after all, age and art could hardly be 
hurried in the name of technical 
perfection! 
  
This article originally appeared in “Unesco 
Features”, Unesco’s fortnightly bulletin for 
press, radio and television. 
French, Spanish, Russian and Arabic.   
‘UNESCO FEATURES’ 
We wish to draw the attention of press and radio editors to Unesco’s fortnightly 
bulletin, “Unesco Features”, whose feature-length articles, columns and news items 
on education, science and culture reach a world wide public through daily and 
weekly newspapers, magazines, broadcasting services, youth journals, educational 
periodicals, the co-operative and trade union press and other specialized publications. 
“Unesco Features” is supplied free to press, film and radio services but is not 
available to individuals. First published in 1949, the bulletin now appears in English, 
Distributed 
territories, its articles and items are also translated into many other languages. 
in some 150 countries and   

## [Page 39](078231engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

T
a
k
e
n
 
fr
om
 
“L
al
ib
el
a,
 
P
h
a
s
e
 
1" 
- 
In
te
rn
at
io
na
l 
Fu
nd
 
fo
r 
M
o
n
u
m
e
n
t
s
 
In
c.
 
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
An
ge
li
ni
 
19
67
. 
  
  
its buildings among the world’s great cultural monuments and religious shrines. Eleven in 
number, they were each sculptured in one piece down into a mountain about 800 years ago. 
Left, a typical motif of Lalibela. Right, a portrait of Emperor Lalibela of the Zague 
dynasty, 12th century rulers of Ethiopia, from one of the monuments in Lalibela. 


### 32666: Journey to Ethiopia's past

JOURNEY TO 
ETHIOPIA'S PAST 
by Richard H. Howland 
Earlier this year Unesco sent a special mission to Ethiopia to help to 
organize the Ethiopian Antiquities Administration, The mission was headed 
by Professor Richard H. Howland, archaeologist and architectural historian, 
who in this article records his impressions of Ethiopia’s immense 
heritage of ancient monuments and artistic treasures. Professor Howland 
is secretary-treasurer of the U.S. National Committee of the International 
Council of Monuments and Sites and chairman of the Department of Civil 
History at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. 
IT. plane from Rome came 
down at Asmara at 6:30 a.m., with 
dawn flushing the sky and a rosy hue 
everywhere, and the full moon in the 
low western sky pale and fading. A 
neat attractive new airport building was 
alert and alive. Inside an attendant 
behind the bar gave everybody small 
cups of delicious Ethiopian coffee. 
Then the sun rose over the distant 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
3

## [Page 40](078231engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 32666: Journey to Ethiopia's past

40 
JOURNEY TO ETHIOPIA’'S PAST (Continued) 
A major compaign for restoring the three great centres 
of Ethiopian culture: Axum, Lalibela, Gondar 
hill, and the waiting room was flooded 
with horizontal sunshine as the atten- 
dant pulled the blinds at the big 
windows facing due east. Soon back 
in the plane for the 50-minute flight 
to Addis Ababa. 
The landscape below the plane was 
incredible, like blown-up views of the 
craters of the moon. Dry, desolate, 
crinkly, for scores of miles as far as 
the eye could see. No trace of habi- 
tation, cultivation, road, or river: untidy 
sharp dusty hills, a dull red in colour. 
later the landscape became more 
mountainous, with the characteristic 
high plateaus and steep jagged decli- 
vities—the area of the great Rift Val- 
ley. Still no habitations, but gradually 
as we approached Addis and the plane 
descended lower, little communities 
could be seen, some winding paths, 
an occasional stream, and green 
planting. 
0 NLY later, during a series 
of comfortable air excursions to distant 
towns, does one discover the incre- 
dible richness of the antiquities of 
Ethiopia. This is a land of contrasts; 
it is so highly developed as a leader 
in contemporary African affairs, and 
yet so remote and medieval and 
untouched in its hinterlands. 
The antiquities are glorious and of 
international significance to archaeolo- 
gists and art historians, but ane travels 
to seek them outside the capital. In 
Addis there are only two good mu- 
seums, and an excellent display of 
indigenous building types on the 
grounds of the Ethio-Swedish Building 
College. 
One travels far into the countryside 
to see the astounding physical remains 
of the three great peaks of Ethiopian 
culture: To the north, where Axum 
and the surrounding lands are filled 
with obelisks, temples, and tombs of 
the early centuries of the Christian 
era, to Lalibela for the unbelievable 
unique rock-cut churches of the 
Middle Ages, and to Gondar, the 
former capital of the Empire, where 
splendid palaces and churches of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries 
show a sophisticated cultural dévelop- 
ment that reflects Arab as well as 
European connexions. 
The French archaeologists say it is 
difficult to date the great obelisks 
and tombs at Axum more closely than 
from the second to the sixth century. 
The obelisks are called stelae. They 
are monolithic shafts, and there are a 
hundred or so, most fallen. A few 
are still erect or have been erected. 
The largest of the fallen ones (fully 
carved to represent a nine-story 
building with doors and windows) is 
as tall as a nine-story building. It Is 
bigger than any Egyptian obelisk, and 
is probably the largest single worked 
stone ever set up by man! The group 
set in a park is overwhelming. 
Nearby is the infinitely moving old 
cathedral of St. Mary, called the 
Basilica. It is full of life and 
hoary antiquity, although the present 
structure is a replacement of the 
17th century. lt is on the site of the 
most ancient and venerated of all 
Ethiopian churches, and its Axumite 
terrace foundation of the second to 
sixth centuries is clearly visible. 
The stelae at Axum were probably 
erected as memorials, as dwelling- 
places for the spirits of departed 
personages of importance. Many have 
window and door motifs cut in low 
relief, comparable to the fenestration 
and portal designs of palaces of the 
period. The palaces were vast in 
extent, several stories high, and were 
perhaps comparable to similar struc- 
tures in the Arab peninsula across 
the Red Sea, past as well as present. 
The foundations of many palatial and 
religious structures of the Axumite 
period show a sophisticated use of 
stone construction without mortar, 
angles re-inforced with larger stones, 
and rhythmic uses of receding and 
projecting planes in the wall surfaces. 
To reach Lalibela one flies over the 
massive stone “needles” rising in the 
mountainous landscape, on which 
political prisoners were isolated. lt is 
easy to see that they could never get 
down. The unbelievable aspect is 
how anybody ever got up to the tops 
of these shafts that seem to rise 300 
or 400 feet vertically up, with no visible 
slope for ascent. Yet from the plane 
one sees on the top of one of them 
various walls and the ruins of a vaulted 
house. From the airstrip terminal the 
town of Lalibela is 40 minutes away 
by Land Rover, crossing one of the 
most magnificent changing landscapes 
of mountains and valleys in the world. 
} HE town is large, and noted 
for its two-story circular dwellings with 
thatched roofs. At the far side is a 
comfortable hotel, The Seven Olives, 
built a few years ago under the 
direction of Princess Ruth Desta, who 
also has supervised the restoration 
programme of the great rock-cut 
churches here, which has elicited the 
interest of Unesco. 
There are nine major rock-cut sub- 
terranean churches here, all under 
monastic or priestly care and available 
for visits. The Christian faith of 
course is the Orthodox Ethiopian 
branch, akin to the Coptic, and has 
been the religion of the country since 
the fourth century. 
These fantastic structures are cut 
from the living rock, their tops level 
with the hills, and surrounded by deep 
rock-cut trenches to free them, and for 
passage and access. They are 
connected by long tunnels in the rock, 
deep dark passages with crude stairs. 
The rock cuttings, tunnels, and ditches 
are sometimes 100 feet down from 
the surface. 
A major campaign for restoration 
is in progress, involving hundreds of 
labourers under the expert direction of 
two Italian superintendents. The 
cement for repairs is made of broken- 
up and pulverized local stone, so it 
will be the same colour as the original, 
rather red. Some of the churches 
have developed bad cracks. The 
stone “roofs” of some have weathered 
badly, scaling, so that water tends to 
seep through. But a new water- 
proofing is being applied that will 
render the roofs impermeable. 
At Gondar the palaces are clustered 
in a walled compound in the centre 
of the city; a number of beautiful 
eighteenth century country residences 
and churches are in the nearby country- 
side. One of these suburban areas is 
Kusquam, where one sees the ruins 
of a handsome eighteenth century 
country palace of Queen Mentuab. 
M UCH of the principal recep- 
tion room remains—red stone dressed 
trim around the three arched door- 
ways, lions and crosses in relief on the 
facade, remains of several stories and 
many adjacent buildings, with corner 
circular towers, for little private 
rooms, not stairs. Stairs were always 
in a rectangular stair-tower. There 
are exposed wooden floor beams 
inside and frequent balcony beams 
outside. This is sophisticated archi- 
tecture, done by and for the Ethiopian 
rulers who were enlightened patrons 
of the art of architecture. 
In town, the Gondar palaces are 
empty today, and the visitor is free 
to wander through the deserted halls, 
climb to the roofs of some, and 
recreate in his imagination the tur- 
bulent life and excitement of three 
hundred years ago. The crenellated 
wall of the compound has several 
gates, and remains of 20 or so 
buildings, several of which have been 
restored. 
The principal palace is seventeenth 
century, three stories and towers, with 
provision for roof-living. A nearby 
palace (of Yasu the Great, 1682-1706), 
is very like the country palace at 
Kusquam. Several other luxurious 
buildings are scattered through the 
compound, including an elaborately 
decorated pavilion of Queen Mentuab, 
with windows having a series of 
receding lintels and enframements. 
One wing is a miniature version,

## [Page 41](078231engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 32666: Journey to Ethiopia's past

Air view of a group of five 
monuments at Lalibela. They are 
connected by trenches and tunnels 
which are pockmarked with small 
caves that must have once been 
used as cells for monks and 
rooms for pilgrims. Numerous 
frescoes, bas-reliefs and paintings 
adorn the interiors. The largest 
building (top of photo) is the 
Biet Medani Alem. Unesco has 
just completed a mission to 
Ethiopia to study the country’s 
antiquities and their preservation. 
At Lalibela, the restoration of 
the monuments, isolated in rocky 
hills at an altitude of 8,600 feet, 
is being carried out jointly 
by the Ethiopian Government 
and the International Fund 
for Monuments Inc. 
Ph
as
e 
|” 
- 
In
te
rn
at
io
na
l 
Fu
nd
 
fo
r 
M
o
n
u
m
e
n
t
s
 
In
c.
 
Ph
ot
o 
fr
om
 
“L
al
ib
el
a,
 
basically, of the Gallery of Mirrors at 
Versailles! It was built by King 
Bakaffa, 1719-1730. 
Far earlier than these palaces, and 
indeed long ante-dating the second- 
century Axumite remains, are the 
discoveries of early man, coming to 
light in the Awash River Valley and 
farther south in the Omo area. 
Hundreds of sites are yielding stone 
tools and other evidences of primitive 
habitation. A four-nation expedition 
earlier this year, composed of 
Ethiopian, Kenyan, French, and Amer- 
ican scientists, has shown that 
  
primitive man and homonids probably 
arose in this rich section of Africa. 
The Ethiopian range of antiquities 
is indeed great. A recent Unesco 
study, released last June (1), had for 
its purpose the unification of all 
branches of research concerning the 
past, so that the country's excavation 
programmes (by both Ethiopian and 
foreign archaelogists) can be cor- 
related with an expanding museum 
 
(1) “Recommendations for the Organization 
of the Ethiopian Antiquities Administration” 
by R.H. Howland. 
Both of these are to development. 
be co-ordinated with an expanding 
programme of archaelogical studies at 
the Haile Selassie | University. 
Two learned journals 
in Ethiopia, Annales d'Ethiopie 
and Cahiers de [Ilnstitut Ethiopien 
d’Archéologie, share with the scholarly 
world the secrete of Ethiopia's in- 
credibly magnificent past. This is now 
also becoming more and more 
accessible because of the country's 
tourist facilities that are so ably 
developed by the Ethiopian Tourist 
Organization. 
published 
4

## [Page 42](078231engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### IGNORE

42 
From the Unesco News 
Tourists aid Unesco 
literacy projects 
Hotels, travel agencies and guides in 
Lyon, France, have been selling vouchers 
worth one franc (20 U.S. cents) to 
tourists, thus enabling them to make what 
the Lyon Tourist Office calls a “mini- 
participation in the campaign launched by 
Unesco for literacy training in the 
developing countries.” Money raised will 
buy paper, ink and printing materials for 
producing farming instruction booklets and 
mimeographed newspapers destined for 
rural communities in the developing 
countries. 
  
Biography of Marie Curie 
in paperback editions 
Following our publication last month of 
the story of the life of Marie Curie based 
on "Madame Curie”, the biography written 
by her daughter Eve Curie, we have 
received numerous letters from readers 
regarding the availability of paperback 
editions of the book. Paperback versions 
have been published by Houghton Mifflin 
Company, Inc., 110 Tremont Street, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Longmans, Green, Lid, 
  
  
  
Pinnacles, Harlow, Essex, U.K., and Pocket 
Books, a division of Simon and Schuster, 
Inc., 630 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 
10020. The hardback edition of “Madame 
Curie" is available from Doubleday and 
Company, Inc., 277 Park Avenue, New 
York, N.Y. 10017. 
Canadian paper for African 
adult education 
Canada has provided 160 tons of 
newsprint for adult education in East 
Africa. It is being used to produce books 
and other reading material for literacy 
projects. Textbooks made from the news- 
print are already in use in Kenya where a 
literacy campaign for the Masai people has 
been launched. 
Cannons and steambaths 
welcome young tourists 
A new international youth centre was 
opened recently by the “Sputnik” Soviet 
Tourist Office in the picturesque setting 
of an old Russian fortress at Rostov- 
Yaroslavski, on the banks of Lake Nero, 
north-east of Moscow. New arrivals are 
welcomed with a salvo from the ancient 
brass cannons and receive traditional 
Russian hospitality during their ten-to- 
twelve day stay. Guests are not deprived 
of modern comforts: those who find the 
rigours of the old Russian steambath in 
the presbytery washroom too much for 
them can take a shower. 
U.N. training 
for African air staff 
An East African School of Aviation is to 
be developed in Nairobi, Kenya, under an 
agreement between the U.N. Development 
Programme and the governments of Kenya, 
Uganda and Tanzania. The project is being 
supervised by the International Civil Avia- 
tion Organization. 
Press, Paris. 
legally and morally dedicated”. 
 
distributor (see page 43).   
Unesco publishes Apartheid Report 
Unesco has just published its Report on the effects of Apartheid on Education, 
Culture, Science and Information in South Africa (1). 
request of the United Nations Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid in 
South Africa, the report terms the situation in South Africa “alarming” and describes 
in detail how discrimination in the areas studied contributes to maintain an ideology 
which it says is “"unnacceptable to the world of today”. 
on Apartheid, the “Unesco Courier” published advance excerpts from the report.) 
Publication in book form in English and French versions is timed to coincide with 
the submission of the report to the present session of the U.N. General Assembly. 
Unesco drew up the report with the assistance of Folke Schmidt, of the University 
of Stockholm (chief consultant), and with the collaboration of J.P. Clark, Nigerian 
poet and playwright, of the University of Lagos, Prof. P. Sherlock, Vice-Chancellor 
of the University of the West Indies and Prof. F. Terrou, of the Institut Francais de 
Its stated object is "to confront the policies and practices of the 
Government of South Africa in the fields of education, science, culture and 
information with a number of international norms of conduct to which Unesco is 
(1) "APARTHEID, its Effects on Education, Culture, Science and Information”, 224 pp., 
(31.50; 8/- stg.; 5.50 F.). Order from any bookseller, or direct from a Unesco national 
Prepared by Unesco at the 
(In 1ts March 1967 issue 
  
  
  
BOOKSHELF 
UNESCO BOOKS 
BM New Trends in 
Teaching 
Prepared in collaboration with the 
International Commission of Mathe- 
matical Instruction, 438 pp., 1967 
($6.00; 30/-stg.). 
BM Programmed instruction: 
an international directory 
Compiled under the direction of Seth 
Spaulding. 
The International Education Clearing- 
house, University of Pittsburgh, 
Unesco, Paris (Bilingual: English- 
French), 1967 ($2.00; 10/-stg.). 
MB Radio and Television in the Ser- 
vice of Education and Development 
in Asia 
(Reports and Papers on Mass 
Communication, No 49) 1967 ($1.00; 
5/-stg.). 
UNESCO'S 
TRANSLATIONS SERIES 
US.SR. 
HM The Balavariani 
(Barlaam and Josaphat) 
A Buddhist tale from the Christian 
East 
Translated from the Old Georgian 
by David Marshall Lang. 
introduction by llya V. Abuladze. 
George Allen and Unwin Ltd., Lon- 
don, 1966 (30/-stg.). 
  
Mathematics 
Rumania 
BW The Uprising ; 
A novel by Liviu Rebreanu. 
Translated by P. Grandjean and S. 
Hartauer. 
Peter Owen, London, 1964 (35/-stg.). 
* 
BM Water in the Service of Man 
By H.R. Vallentine. 
Penguin Books, U.K., 1967 (Pelican 
paperback: 6/-stg.). 
BM The Foundations of our Society 
By Margaret Lusty. 
Oxford: University Press, London, 
1966 (hardback: 30/-stg; paperback: 
17/6).     
Flashes... 
BW Motor cars are multiplying so rapidly in 
Western Europe (present population 320 mil- 
  
lion persons) that by 1990 that it will have 
an estimated 180 million vehicules—three 
times as many as now. 
HB A recent World Health Organization sur- 
vey covering 23 industrial countries shows 
that accidents—principally traffic accidents 
—are the most common cause of death in 
the ages up to 45 years. 
B This summer, 100,000 students from 
Soviet universities and technical colleges 
have spent their holidays working on build- 
ing and development projects, including 
homes, farms, railways, clubs and schools. 
B Nordic countries—Denmark, Finland, Ice- 
land, Sweden and Norway—are working 
jointly to raise $200,000 to help support 
the Unesco literacy campaign in Tanzania. 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E

## [Page 43](078231engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

  
UNICEF cards come in boxes of ten: price 7/6 (U.K); $1.25 (Canada); 
UNICEF 
GREETING CARDS 
UNICEF Greeting Cards, whose designs are contributed by interna- 
tionally-known artists, are soid for the benefit of the United Nations 
Children’s Fund. They help to bring food, medicine and education to needy 
children in some 120 countries. 
record 50 million UNICEF cards sold last year. 
means a week's supply of milk for 50 children. Sixteen new cards avail- 
able this year by artists from Austria, Canada, Finland, France, India, 
Norway, Spain, UK. US.A. A UNICEF 1968 Engagement Calendar 
Over $3 millon was raised by the 
A box of ten cards sold 
with 54 full-colour illustrations is also available in English-French and 
English-Spanish versions (15/-; $2.00; 10 F). 
Two UNICEF Greeting Card 
designs for 1967-68—“Ride my 
little one” by the Indian artist 
Bhagwan Kapoor (left), and 
“Peace on Earth" by Ossi Czinner 
of Austria. 
8 F (France). large format card (Oskar Kokoschka design) 15/-%; $2.50; 
12 F. For orders write: UK. Cttee for UNICEF, New Gallery Centre, 
123 Regent St., London W.1.; Canadian Cttee for UNICEF, 737 Church 
Street, Toronto 5, Ont.; Comité Francais pour le F¥SE-UNICEF, 35 Rue 
Félicien-David, Paris 16°. Please do not order through Unesco. 
  
  
WHERE TO RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Longmans of Australia Pty Led, Railway Crescent, 
Croydon, Victoria: sub-agent United Nations Associa- 
tion of Australia, Victorian Division, 4th Floor, Askew 
House, 364 Lonsdale St.,, Melbourne C. I. (Victoria); 
for the Unesco Courier only : Dominie Pey Ltd, 463 Pitc- 
water Road, Brookvale (N.5.W.) ($A 2.25). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C-., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 70.-). — BELGIUM. All publications: Editions 
“Labor”, 342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-We- 
tenschappelijke Uitgeverij Belgiélei 147, Antwerp. |. For 
The Unesco Courier (140 FB) and art slides (488 FB) only : 
Louis De Lannoy, 112, rue du Tr8ne, Brussels 5. CCP 
3380.00. — CANADA. Queen’s Printer, Ottawa, Ont. 
($ 3.00). — CEYLON. Lake House Bookshop, Sir Chittam- 
palan Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244, Colombo, 2 (Rs. 7). 
— CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CYPRUS. 
"MAM?”, Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 
1722, Nicosia. — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L., 
Spalena 51, Prague 1 (permanent display); Zahranicni 
literatura Bilkova 4, Prague 1. — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, |Led., 6, Norregade, Copenhagen K. (D. 
Kr. 17}. — ETHIOPIA. International Press Agency. P.O. 
Box 120, Addis Ababa (10/-). — FINLAND. Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki, (Fmk. 9.40). — 
FRANCE. Librairie de Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 
Paris-7°. C.C.P. 12598-48. (10 F). — GERMANY. All 
publications: R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145, Munich, 8. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed only) 
Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 
276650 (DM 10). — GHANA Methodist Book Depot 
Led., Atlantis House, Commercial Street, POB 100, Cape 
Coast. -— GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — 
GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, 
Athens; Librairie Eleftheroudakis, Nikkis 4, Achens. — 
HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, 
Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Académiai Konyvesbolt, 
Vici u. 22, Budapest V; A.K.V. Kényvtirosok Boltja, 
Népkoztirsasig utja 16, Budapest Vi. — ICELAND. 
Snaebjérn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
{120 Kr.) — INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd., Nicol 
Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson 
House, 1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New Delhi, 
1; Sub-Depots : Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 
Park Street, Calcutta 16 and Scindia House, New Delhi: 
Indian National Commission for Cooperation with 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, New Delhi 3. (Rs. 
10.50). — INDONESIA. P.T.N. “Permata-Nusantara" 
c/o Department of Commerce 22, Djalan Nusantara 
Djakarta — IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, Al-Rashid 
Street, Baghdad; University Bookstore, University 
of Baghdad, P.O. Box 75, Baghdad — IRELAND. The 
National Press, 2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin, 
4. (15/5). — ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly Blum- 
stein's Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48 Nahlat 
Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (1£8). — JAMAICA. Sang- 
ster's Book Room, 91 Harbour Street, Kingston. (15/-). 
JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome, Nihon- 
bashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo (1,200 yen). 
— JORDAN. Joseph I. Bahous & Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, 
Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Amman. — KENYA. ES.A, 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi (10/-). — KOREA. 
Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Cen- 
tral 64, Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait Baokshaep Co., 
Ltd.,, P. O. Box 2942, Kuwait — LIBERIA. Cole and 
Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286. Monrovia (10/-). 
— LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand- 
Rue, Luxemburg (F.L. 140). — MALAYSIA, Federal 
Publications Ltd., Times House, River Valley Road, 
Singapore, 9; Pudu Building (3rd floor), 110, Jalan 
Pudu, Kuala Lumpur (M. $ 7.50). — MALTA. Sapienza’s 
Library, 26 Kingsway, Valletta, (15/-). — MAURITIUS. 
Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon Street, Port- 
Louis {15/-). — MONACO, British Library, 30, Bld. 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (F. 10). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 8.50). — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G. C. 
T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Cura- 
cao. NLA, (NA fl 4,50). — NEW ZEALAND. Govern- 
ment Printing Office, 20, Molesworth Street (Private 
Bag), Wellington; Government Bookshops: Auckland 
(P.O. Box 5344), Christchurch (P.O. Box 1721), Dune- 
din (P.O. Box 1104) (15/-). — NIGERIA. C.M.S. Book- 
shops, P.O. Box 174, Lagos (10/-). — NORWAY. 
All publications: A.S. Bokhjornet, Akersgt 41- 
Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only: AS. Norvesens Litte- 
raturfeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6, (17.50 kr.). — PA- 
KISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd.,, Unesco 
Publications House, P.Q. Box 374 G.P.O., Lahore; 
Showrooms : Urdu Bazar, Lahore, and 57-58 Murree 
Highway, G/6-1, Islamabad.— PHILIPPINES. The Modern 
Book Co., inc, 928 Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 632, 
Manila — POLAND. All publications: ORWN PAN Palac 
Kulcury, Warsaw. For the Unecco Courier only: 
RUSH", ul. Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10 (zl. 60.). — 
PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lda, Livraria Portu- 
gal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon, ~ PUERTO RICO. 
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor Roosevelt 115. 
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. — SOUTHERN RHODESIA. 
Textbook Sales (PY¥T) Led., 67, Union Avenue, Salisbury. — 
SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P. O. Box 1118, 
Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publications : A/B C.E. 
Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stock- 
holm 16. — For the Unesco Courier: The United, 
Nations Association of Sweden, Yasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 12); SWITZERLAND. All publications : 
Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasse, Zurich. Payot, rue Grenus 6, 
1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 1-236. “Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1-4811. (Fr. S. 10). — TANZANIA, Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Pant Mansion, 9, Rajdamnern Avenue. Bangkok. 
(35 ticals). — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala (10/-). — SOUTH AFRICA. 
All publications : Yan Schaik's Bookstore (Pry) Ltd., 
Libri Building. Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
For the Unesco Courier (single copies) anly : Central 
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. (R1-50). 
— UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie 
Kasr Ei Nif, 38, rue Kasr E! Nil, Cairo. Subfagent : 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — 
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O, 
Box 569, London, S.E.l.,, and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham and Bristol. {15/-). — UNITED STATES. 
Unesco Publications Center, 317 East 34th St, New York, 
N.Y. 10016 (% 5.00). — U.S.S.R. Mezhdunaradnaja Kniga, 
Moscow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. |ugoslovenska 
Knjiga Terazje, 27, Belgrade; NAPRIJED, Trg. Republi- 
ke 17, Zagreb.

## [Page 44](078231engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

» 
: 
at 
F
A
N
 
2
g
 
y 
3 
A
 
C
i
 
pe 
% 
EAS 
O
S
 
TORS 
S
e
 
- 
—
 
. 
—
 
—
—
—
 
e
—
—
 
—
—
 
\
—
 
o
—
—
 
n
w
 
—
—
 
pemvo— 
p
—
 
      
F
a
—
 
-
—
 
—
 
-
-
 
—
 
—
w
e
r
 
I
~
 
a 
Engh 
—-—-—.N- 
—
—
 
e
h
 
E
r
m
 
e
t
]
 
a
n
t
i
]
 
a
c
m
 
D 
—
—
 
a
w
w
 
m
a
r
c
y
 
Jarry 
om 
J
o
o
n
 
a 
ee 
I
 
FFF 
P 
E
W
E
N
 
S
E
E
N
 
E
E
E
 
       
       
ow 
¥ , 3) Fr dua, o 3 NE & A Re I 
Ry 
0 a 
ig 
A sy 
= I 
1 P—r, 
AE 
¥ Cf . " 
v 1 ew 
N f TYE - - 
u 2 H ‘ » 
" . 
J > "” 
yo 1 BE 
LY Sa 5 
E 
= omg LoTR ATE Se 4 y : hot 
i . wir SRL SX Sy & J 4 GT SRE pet ET ie, be ths J 1 ’ : 1 ol “ J . ry 
iE oh 
¢ : na) : | 
x - L h, Jalt fi j Ry - bod JF 3 ; Ri, bE Ge ae aT » lA Aon - 
en RE Ry Sah ¥ Td es.  N- I r Ie 
. 2 ol i SA Pr rr a ENE Jos x Do ? 0 i [) |! ow sky I ; eat fn 2 3 : ‘ 4 23 A LLL iH A 4 Spoil 07 YR 
4 ud oat hh a 
VA pia Ok Lg ART RR PCP Te] Moe 
S : ALLS weTiAat 
: o" "drei A Fy A da 7 Trt 
a 
: — =m ad i= 
vB 
- 
r  — 
      
 
 
T= Een, 
4 oe 
1 Ui “10 
il 
fi 
¥ H hl Be 
] Nv SR 
oh A a 
] N 
al 
] 
 
 
 
 
ret FRI re N 
LL " eS MOTC id : & hg 
—- " a 4