# [064240](064240engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](064240engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

T
T
 
TT
 
Tf
 
S
f
i
e
—
 
 
 
BT 
The ~~ 
INESL 
[. aa «Tart 
4 -~ x —-— y 13-0 re ET oe 
: Lr NO : 
di . : i : Ps 
J a -——r . 
. 
- 
: 
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 
 
 
OCTOBER 191 (14TH YEAR) - PRICE : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
1/-STG. (U.K.) - 30 CENTS (U 
 
 
  
—— 
8) 
OUricr 
A WINDOW OPEN ON THE WORLD 
 
 
- 
p, 
 
 
| 
0.70 NF (FRANCE) 
      N
a
 
a
 
.
 
S
h
e

## [Page 2](064240engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

ic 
| 
i 
ts of Nubia, : 
ona 
ayptian Documentation 
publ 
e Government 
in counterpart of the aid 
YELLE: G 
CEL BR UCR INGIGE 
ign for safeguard 
receive 
is one of a long list of sta- 
Campa 
Colossal red granite head of 
Amenophis Il, who reigned 
FEU BTL ER LURE YEF TE Te [ON 
tues and other objects being 
offered by th 
of the United 
the monumen 
A Unesco-E 
RL [1-111 {T- oF"] 
 

## [Page 3](064240engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

TON 
rae for 
Jrcrivss 
A WINDOW OPIN ON THI wOALD 
"WCourier 
OCTOBER 1961 
14TH YEAR 
Contents 
No. 10 
PUBLISHED IN Page 
EIGHT EDITIONS 
Hiei 4 ABU SIMBEL-NOW OR NEVER 
Spanish 7 (1) INGENIOUS ENGINEERS OF 3,000 YEARS AGO 
Russian 10 (2) JACKING UP A MOUNTAIN OF STONE 
German by Ritchie Calder 
Arabic 16 HOW PHILAE WILL BE SAVED 
American by Michel Conil Lacoste 
Japanese 
21 NUBIA TODAY: A VAST ARCHZOLOGICAL CAMP 
by Louis A. Christophe 
22 GIFTS FROM THE LAND OF THE PHARAOHS 
26 FLOATING LABORATORIES ON THE NILE 
by Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt 
30 TWENTY-THREE MONUMENTS WILL BE REMOVED 
32 JOURNEY TO THE LAND OF KUSH 
by Rex Keating 
38 NUBIA’S CHRISTIAN AGE 
by L. P. Kirwan 
41 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
42 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
MC. 61.1.162 A) 
 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Educational, 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
Gordon Behrens 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Scientific and Cultural 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy. Paris 7°*, France 
Russian Edition : Veniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin July and August when 
itis bi-monthly (Il issues a year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German 
Arabic and Japanese. In the United Kingdom it 13 distributed by H, M 
Stationery Office, P. O. Box 569, London, S. E. IL 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER, plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name, Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage, Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors ol THE UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly In The Readers’ Guide to 
Periodical Literature published by H. W. Wilson Co.,, New York. 
Annual subscription rates: U.S. ~ 3.00; [0/-stg.; 7.00 
New Francs or equivalent. Single copies 1/-stg. 30 
  
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Amin Shaker (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-lchi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
cents (U.S.) ; 0.70 New Francs. 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°. 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief.  

## [Page 4](064240engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

ABU 
SIMBEL 
  
] ne fate of Abu Simbel Is now In the balance. 
Unesco has addressed a “now or never” 
appeal to its 100 member nations for voluntary contribu- 
tions to save the two colossal temples of Abu Simbel from 
destruction under 200 feet of water as a result of the 
construction of the High Dam at Aswan. The temples, 
hewn out of the solid mountain rock in the 13th century 
B.C., are considered to be among the great architectural 
glories of Pharaonic art. 
Before the end of October of this year, UNEsco’s 
Executive Board will be in a position to know whether 
these testimonials of a former civilization are to be 
considered irreparably lost to mankind, or whether a 
joint international effort will save 
them from disaster. 
monuments of Nubia, a phase that calls for collective 
effort.” 
The cost of the entire Nubian rescue operations 
(exclusive of archaeological and prehistorical excavations) 
has been estimated at $87,000,000. This will provide for 
the dismantling and transfer of 23 temples, tombs, early 
Christian churches and rock-hewn chapels in the UALR. 
and the Sudan (estimated cost $10 million); the preserva- 
tion of the temple-group on the isle of Philae ($6 million); 
and the preservation of the temples of Abu Simbel 
($70 million). 
Four miles south of the present Aswan Dam in central 
Egypt, the new High Dam (Sadd el Aali) is being built 
across the Nile by the United Arab 
Republic with Soviet aid. It will 
contain the river above that point 
  
The appeal is contained in a 
special message on the present 
state of the Nubian International 
Campaign to save the treasures of 
Nubia, addressed on August 4 by the 
Acting Director-General of UNESsco, 
Mr. René Maheu, to all of Unesco’s 
member states. It calls for voluntary 
contributions totalling $67,000,000 to 
save not only Abu Simbel but other 
temples and monuments in Egypt and 
the Sudan which are threatened by 
the future Aswan Dam when in a few 
years’ time it backs up the waters of 
the Nile in a 300-mile long artificial 
lake. Unesco has asked all countries 
to guarantee a contribution, extending 
over the next seven to nine years, in 
the same proportion as their present 
assessment for the Unesco budget. 
The two temples of Abu Simbel are 
to be preserved by what has been 
described as “the most daring 
engineering project of modern 
times.” They will be sliced from the 
mountainside into which they were 
built three thousand years ago, 
encased in concrete boxes, and raised 
by glant jacks over two hundred feet. 
    
Alexandria 
WESTERN 
DESERT 
Mediterranean Sea 
  
   
   
 
U. A. R. 
(EGYPT) 
and form a gigantic artificial lake 
drowning the Nile valley of Nubia in 
both Egypt and the Sudan. 
For Egypt the new lake will mean 
the beginning of an era of great 
regeneration. It will increase the 
total food production of the country 
by nearly one half; some 2,500,000 
acres of desert will be brought under 
cultivation, and an additional 750,000 
acres now flooded will be reclaimed. 
Egypt’s hydroelectric output will be 
increased by the dam something like 
ten times. 
The new dam is an economic 
necessity for Egypt. But there 
remains the fact that everything 
within the Nubian lake area will be 
obliterated by 1968. In 1959, the 
Governments of the U.AR. and the 
Sudan turned to Unesco for help to 
save the temples and monuments 
menaced by the impending flood in 
both countries. On March 8, 1960, 
UNEsco’s Director-General, Mr. Vitto- 
rino Veronese, launched the now 
famous International Campaign to 
save the treasures of Nubia (1). 
The response thus far has been both 
   
Port Said 
» 
  (See story page 10). 
The call to Unesco’s 100 member 
States was made on the recommenda- 
tion of the International Action 
Committee which is advising and 
helping the Director-General of      
SUDAN 
“\ 
generous and heartening. As the 
President of the United States 
recently said, it is “an international 
effort which has captured the 
imagination and sympathy of people       throughout the world.” 
Unesco in fund-raising. The Action 
Committee, made up of representatives 
from all continents, met in Paris last 
June to examine the present state of 
the campaign. They found that the 
rescue operations—except the Abu 
Simbel project—are now almost 
assured, and stressed the urgency of 
obtaining the funds needed if the 
two temples are to be saved in time. 
The overall contract for Abu Simbel must be signed by 
January 1, 1962. Before then, preparatory work must get 
under way, and the main work must begin not later than 
May 1962. 
Before the end of October 1961, enough money must 
therefore be guaranteed from international sources over 
the next seven to nine years to enable UneEsco’s Executive 
Board to give the United Arab Republic the go-ahead 
signal. It is estimated that $20,000,000 will be needed for 
the preparatory operations and the first payments to the 
contractors in 1962, and a further $13,000,000 in 1963. 
President Gamal Abdel Nasser in a statement made on 
June 20 of this year described Abu Simbel as the “most 
important relic of civilization In Nubia... this undertaking 
represents the most serious phase in the salvaging of the 
ed in 1968. 
This map of the Nile valley shows the vast 
artificial lake (shaded) which will be formed 
when the new Aswan High Dam is complet- 
Its waters will submerge 
numerous historical treasures and monu- 
ments in Nubia in both Egyptand the Sudan. 
Unesco Courier Map 
Support has come {rom govern- 
ments, from private and public 
organizations and from private 
citizens in every part of the world. 
Even children from different 
countries have organized collections 
to help. The world's press, radio, 
television and cinema have all joined 
voluntarily to help make the campaign a success. In 
some 20 countries national committees have been formed, 
made up of noted archeologists and other leaders in the 
fields of science and the arts, as well as important 
officials, businessmen and members of civic groups. 
The United Arab Republic has guaranteed a sum of 
$20,000,000 for Abu Simbel. The United States Govern- 
ment has offered (subject to Congressional approval) 
410,000,000—$6,000,000 to cover the costs of saving the 
temples of Philae, $2,500,000 for the removal of certain 
temples, $1,500,000 for archaeological expeditions and 
research in Nubia. 
Announcing the United Arab Republic’s contribution, 
President Nasser declared last March: 
(1) See Unesco Courier, February, May and September 1960. 
 
CONT'D ON PAGE 6 
\ [OAV ®) 9 \ | AVA = 
i 
i 
i

## [Page 5](064240engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

CREAMY 
UA 
  
© Almasy, Paris 
COSTUMES OF ANCIENT EGYPT are worn by a folklore group 
welcoming Unesco specialists and journalists from all parts of 
the world who visited Nubia [ast year at the invitation of the United 
Arab Republic. In the background, their feet separated from the 
lapping waters of the Nile by only a narrow stretch of sand, stand 5 
the mighty figures flanking the entrance to the Temple which is 
dedicated to Queen Nefertari and the Goddess Hathor at Abu Simbel.

## [Page 6](064240engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

ABU SIMBEL (Cont'd) 
NOW OR NEVER 
“The world’s conscience has now awakened to a deep 
awarcness of the importance of safeguarding the monu- 
ments of Nubia in response to the international appeal 
launched by Unesco on March 8, 1960. Through this 
appeal Unesco has sought to arouse the energies and 
goodwill of all peoples in a cause deeply rooted in the 
ancient history of civilization and symbolic of the hopes of 
mankind. 
“We pin our hopes on the High Dam for the 
implementation of our plans of economic development; 
but llkewise we pin our hopes on the preservation of the 
Nubian treasures in order to keep alive monuments which 
are not only dear to our hearts—we being their guardian 
—but dear to the whole world which believes that the 
ancient and the new components of human culture should 
blend in one harmonious whole. 
“The preservatlon of the legacy of mankind is no less 
important than the construction of dams, the erection of 
factories and the greater prosperity of the people... 
“UNEsco has contributed much to the creation of this 
sense of solidarity and to the action undertaken to 
safeguard the monuments through the facilities and funds 
it has made available and through the co-operative spirit 
which has guided the specialists and the groups of 
scientists who have taken an interest in this unique 
endeavour. 
Reflecting similar sentiments, the President of the 
Sudan, Ibrahim Abboud, recently reaffirmed his country’s 
responsibility to the rest of the world for the ancient 
monuments within his borders, “. . . since the history of 
the Sudan is but a part of the history of mankind.” 
HE enormous tasks of the campaign were 
divided into three categories. First there was 
the urgent job of carrying out systematic surveys and the 
organization of expeditlons to excavate archeelogical and 
prehistoric sites the threatened area of both Egypt and 
the Sudan. 
As André Malraux has said, “Nubia, like Chaldea, 
belongs to the dawn of our own history.” It was the junc- 
tion point at which the cultures of inner Africa met with 
the cultures of the Mediterranean world. In the region 
to be flooded, scientists feel, may well lie some of the im- 
portant clues to the riddle of man’s unknown past. 
Today, Nubia has become a vast archeological camp, with 
almost 30 expeditions at work or about to work. 
The second category comprises the dismantling and the 
removal of anclent temples and other historic monuments 
to safety beyond the flood area. These operations are 
now under way and are progressing satisfactorily. The 
U.AR. has already removed the three temples of 
Kertassi, Debod and Taffeh, while the Federal Republic of 
Germany has offered to assume the task of removing the 
great temple of Kalabsha, and France the temple of 
Amada. (See details page 30.) 
The last category includes the two most important 
projects of the campaign—the preservation in situ of the 
temples on the isle of Philae, and the Abu Simbel temples. 
If the United States Congress approves the $6,000,000 
appropriation for Philae recommended by President 
Kennedy, the future of Philae will be definitely assured. 
In his message to Congress, Mr. Kennedy stated: 
“I consider it to be in the interests of the United States 
to assist in rescuing these historic remains of a former 
civilization from destruction—and to join the international 
effort to conduct exploration and research in the 
threatened area of Nubia before it is submerged. 
“The United States, one of the newest civilizations, has 
long had a deep regard for the study of past cultures, 
and a concern for the preservation of man’s great 
achlevements of art and thought... I recommend that 
we now join with other nations through Unesco in 
preventing what would otherwise be an irreparable loss to 
science and the cultural history of mankind.” 
Thus the UNeEsco campaign has almost reached its goal 
—eXxcept for the two temples of Abu Simbel. The “now 
or never’ battle to save Abu Simbel will be decided in the 
next few weeks. Ph
ot
os
 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
= 
Pa
ul
 
A
l
m
a
s
y
 
INGENIOUS 
 

## [Page 7](064240engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 64241: Ingenious engineers of 3,000 years ago

ENGINEERS OF 3, 
  
wey Eel 
YEARS AGO 
by Ritchie Calder 
"A well known British writer, Ritchie Calder 
was this year's winner of the international 
Kalinga Prize” for ihe \bo ylarization of 
science. He occupies the chair of Interna. 
wd onal Relation; at Edinburgh University b 
MASTERPIECE IN PERIL. Built more than 3,000 years ago in the XIXth dynasty of the New Empire, the Great Temple of Abu Simbel is of colossal 
scale. It measures 108 feet in height, |24 feet in width, and extends 200 feet in depth. On the fagade are four colossi of Rameses Il (seen here in a 
striking night photo made by floodlight). They are 67 feet high, their mouths are 42 inches wide and their huge heads are |3 feet from ear to ear 
(the head of the second colossus disintegrated centuries ago). Left a statue of Queen Nefertari (wife of Rameses }l) standing between a pairs of colossi. 
1 
HE greatness of Egypt Is popularly identified 
with the petrified geometry of the pyramids, 
those remarkable examples of civil engineering, veritable 
mountains of masonry. Experts, however, would agree 
that the sublimation of funerary art, combined with 
shrewd scientific insight, were the rock temples. 
There are great free-standing Egyptian temples, superb 
in their proportions, in their pillars and their sculptures, 
but the architects of these were able to choose the best 
artificial site, and the masons to select or discard the 
quarried blocks for their building and ornamentation. 
A sculptor, carving a statue, would pick the most suitable, 
most enduring and most flawless stone for his purpose. 
The architects and the masons of the rock temples had 
no such latitude; instead of choosing blocks of stone they 
had to discover an escarpment or a mountain which 
would conform to their exacting requirements. Once com- 
mitted, thelr artistic ingenuity was hostage to the site. 
 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 8](064240engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 64241: Ingenious engineers of 3,000 years ago

ABU SIMBEL (Cont'd) 
ART & SCIENCE 
CONSPIRED 
WITH NATURE 
Among the greatest of these temples hewn from the 
llving rock were the Great Temple and the Small Temple 
of Abu Simbel in which the immortality of the Gods and 
of Rameses II was embodied in the indestructible rock. 
They were planned by Setl I but executed in all their 
grandeur by Rameses II during his prodigious relgn of 
67 years, from 1300 to 1233 B.C, 
Modern geologists who have examined the site of Abu 
Simbel are unstinted In their tribute to their unknown 
predecessor (or predecessors) who chose this particular 
location 3200 years ago. 
Thirty miles north of the Second Cataract, on the left 
bank of the Nile, where the river turns east, were two 
rocky prominences divided by a gully. Here was a site 
which met a first elementary requirement: that the 
temple, dominating the river, face the rising sun. 
| N the vicinity, the left bank of the valley is 
steep, a cutting by the river exposing about 400 
feet of sandstone cliff, which could have shown the 
ancient geologists the structure of the rocks. But this 
evidence was merely superficial. 
How did they know, as can be determined nowadays, 
that there was little or no distortion of those sandstone 
beds? How did they establish that the interior of the 
mountain could architecturally house the Great Temple 
which they were proposing to excavate? How did they 
satisfy themselves that the consistency of the sandstone 
would lend itself to the carving of colossi and of the 
riezes? 
How much did they know about the chemistry of 
minerals and how the elementary granules of the sand 
were bound together by a cement of iron oxide, which 
glves the rock its colour-gradations, ranging through all 
shades from pink to dark mauve? What did they know 
of the porosity of the rock and the highly solvent power 
of the Nile water, and hence of the water-table below the 
mountain, which, when the rocks were exposed to heat, 
would be pumped upwards by capillary action? This 
“pumping” would mean the dissolving of minerals in the 
rocks, a chemical reaction, and the precipitation of salts 
—all likely to alter the characteristics of the rocks. 
The carved Immortality of their Pharaoh would 
depend upon the durabillty of the rocks they found. How 
much did they know about weathering? How did they 
determine from external evidence that the rocks within 
the mountain would lend themselves to the structural 
engineering of an ambitious temple such as Rameses 
would certainly demand? On decisions like these not 
only the reputations of those ancient geologists and 
engineers depended but, one would guess, their very lives. 
To quote one of the technical reports drawn up by 
engineering experts last year: “The temples of Abu 
Simbel are a wonderful achievement. Apart from the 
Importance of the monuments themselves, we are struck 
with admiration at the deep knowledge of geology which 
the ancient Egyptlans possessed. The presence of hard 
sandstone banks alternating with softer ones was used 
to advantage in creating the temples and the statues. 
The more compact layers were chosen for the ceilings of 
the temples and inner rooms, or to support the greater 
welght of the sitting statues. They aiso made the most of 
the fissures in the rock: the facades of the two temples 
run parallel to the more fissured lines.” 
On what we would nowadays call the “feasibility report,” 
the ancients went ahead with. the construction of the 
     > I RI 1 1 PO 
AIS \ 
  
Biv AR SLE & fo i 0 
Madeleine Pottier 
: ~ EO 
  
two temples—some 300 feet apart—overhanging the banks 
of the Nile. But they did something more; they contrived 
the design of the temples to fit in to the natural landscape 
so that art and science conspired with nature to make 
Abu Simbel one of the wonders of the world. 
The larger of the two rock temples, facing to the east 
and to the rising sun, has a facade 33 metres (over 107 
feet) in height and 38 metres (over 123 feet) in width. 
It was dedicated by Rameses to Ra-Horakhti, Amon-Ra 
and Ptah, the most important gods of Egypt. In its 
proportions and structure it equalled a temple that might 
have been built on the surface instead of underground. 
On entering the underground temple one finds a large 
hall, or temple court. It is divided into three aisles by 
quadrangular pillars—eight of them each with a statue 
of the King 34 feet high. There even remain fragments 
of colour paintings; and the bas-reliefs covering the walls 
tell in life-like sculpture the story of his victory over the 
Hittites and similar battles. The ceiling has paintings of 
winged vultures and tablets in praise of Rameses. 
This gives on to a vestibule, the ceiling of which is 
supported by four quadrangular pillars adorned with 
carvings of war exploits and the protector gods. 
A narrow passage leads to the inner sanctuary where 
are seated the statues of the three gods to whom the 
temple is dedicated, and Rameses himself. And here is seen 
the purposeful ingenuity of the architects and engineers. 
Like skilful stage-lighters, they contrived that the rising 
sun would penetrate 200 feet into the heart of the 
mountain and illumine the faces of only three of the 
immortals. The fourth, the god of the Underworld, Ptah, 
on the extreme left remained eternally in darkness, This 
essential feature of Abu Simbel was one of the things 
taken into account in deciding how the temple should be 
finally preserved from the rising waters of the High Dam. 
Eight smaller chambers are irregularly disposed on 
the right and left of the central ones—presumably so 
that they would not impair the foundations of the main 
halls—and these were apparently functional parts of the 
temples, storehouses and treasure chambers, although 
whatever valuables they may once have contained have 
long since disappeared. 
o Nefertari, his wife, Rameses dedicated the 
Small Temple, several hundred feet away 
across a sandy gully. Its facade measures 88 feet in width 
and 39 feet in height. It is ornamented by six colossal 
statues, each 33 feet high. They are in two separate 
groups in each of which the queen stands between figures 
of the Pharach with, at their feet, their sons. One of the 
pillars states: “The King built this Temple by hewing it 
from the rock of the hill of the country of Takens.” 
In the interior of the hill, there is a hall large and low 
supported by six columns. Three doors lead to the 
vestibule and through it to a modest sanctuary. 
To quote the engineering experts once again: “The 
inspiration of the Abu Simbel monuments rises above and 
beyond the traditional conception of the ancient 
Egyptians, for whom the pyramid was the maximum of 
architectural perfection, as the only conclusion of a long 
process tending to geometrical abstraction. What 
prevails here is the plastic sense of the mass; the 
monument merges into its environment, the architecture 
marries with sculpture, and sculpture actually acquires a 
dominant character in the ensemble.”

## [Page 9](064240engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 64241: Ingenious engineers of 3,000 years ago

‘THE GODS | 
GREET 
i
 
i
b
d
 
rh
e 
  
| any ‘hour 7 of the day the Great Temple of Abu Simbel 
is an impressive sight, but at dawn it offers its most 
~ breathtaking spectacle. There was nothing haphazard 
~ about the choice of its site or in the construction of the 
multiple galleries and chambers deep in the mountainside. 
At dawn the purposeful ingenuity of the architects and 
f ‘engineers of ancient Egypt is fully revealed. Like skilful 
‘stage-lighters, as the photos on these pages show, they 
contrived that the rays of the rising sun after first illumi- 
nating the pantheon of statues on the facade of the 
temple (opposite page) would penetrate deep into the 
interior. Above, from left to right, through the temple 
~ portals, the sun bathes the huge Osirian pillars with its 
golden light and at certain times of the year reaches 
~ 200 feet into the heart of the mountain to the inner sanc- 
tuary. Here it picks out from the Stygian darkness the 
‘seated figures of divinities like Amon, (left) ** The God | 
~ of Thebes "'. Below, the four immortals seated at the 
far end of the sanctuary: Ptah, whose statue remains 
eternally in darkness for he is king of the 9 undetwerid, 
A i Rameses ar 
 

## [Page 10](064240engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 64241: Ingenious engineers of 3,000 years ago

10 
ABU SIMBEL (Cont'd) 
JACKING UP 
A MOUNTAIN 
OF STONE 
12 
ue temples of Abu Simbel are part of 
mankind’s heritage, Irreplaceable heirlooms 
from the culture of 3,200 years ago. Modern needs and 
modern technology may compel and produce the High 
Dam of Sadd el Aall but the Present cannot afford to 
squander the Past. Confronted by the achievements of 
the makers of Abu Simbel, of the scientists (and they were 
scientists as we have seen from the testimony of modern 
geologists); of the craftsmen; and the artists, who were 
dedicating their work not only to their gods but to 
posterity, the least that our modern civilization can do 
is to turn minds and resources to the rescue of their 
creative handiwork. 
As the trustee, for the Future of the Past, UNEsco has 
intervened. How much of the perishable antiquities, like 
the great mud brick forts of Nubia, will be explored and 
their stories deciphered before the waters rise, is a chal- 
lenge which has been thrown to the archeologists and 
the conscience of the world. 
B ur Abu Simbel is a special case and UNEsco, 
with the agreement and support of the 
Government of the Unlted Arab Republic, has taken steps. 
For the preservation of the Abu Simbel monuments, four 
proposals were given serious consideration: 
1. Raising the temples and surrounding rocks above the 
level of the waters; 
9. Building an earth and rock fill dam, to protect both 
temples; 
3. Building a protective concrete dam in front of each 
temple; : 
4, Bullding a large dome concrete dam, to protect both 
temples. 
Of all these possibilities for preserving the temples from 
the flood, two schemes remained at the end of 1960. One 
was a proposal submitted by a French engineering con- 
cern, the Bureau d'Etudes André Coyne et Jean Bellier 
(Paris), to build a rock fill dam to enclose the two temples. 
The size was planned to allow a clear space in front of 
the temples but the dam itself would tower above the 
facades and, among other things, would defeat the ingen- 
uity of those ancient engineers who contrived that the 
rays of the rising sun would penetrate into the heart of 
the mountain. 
Technlcal difficulties of water seepage would have 
meant, in perpetuity, an annual cost of $370,000 for 
pumping. The capital cost of the dam construction would 
be $82,000,000. Another objection raised was that, with 
the filling of the High Dam, the water-table of the land 
around would rise and that, even though enclosed by the 
U
n
e
s
c
o
-
K
e
a
t
i
n
g
 
  
        
~ mI wr 
hl rn 
J “os 
      
   
TREASURES CAPTURED ON FILM. The massive structures of Abu 
Simbel! and its figures are completely carved from the solid rock. Impos- 
sible to dismantle, they must be moved in one piece as they were built. 
Their soft red sandstone is particularly vulnerable to dissolution by 
water, Even a brief submergence would remove completely the colour- 
ful paintings which still survive on walls and ceilings. Long before the 
bold plan to raise the temples out of reach of the invading Nile was pro- 
posed every square inch of the great Abu Simbel group was being mi- 
LEA 
    ) 
  
 

## [Page 11](064240engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 64241: Ingenious engineers of 3,000 years ago

  
nutely examined. Black and white and colour photographs, photogram- 
metric negatives (from which exact models of objects are reconstituted), 
architects’ notes, casts and copies of hieroglyphic texts, graffiti and in- 
scriptions have gradually been amassed. Photos show, above, Jean Jacquet, 
Swiss architect, working on a survey of the great temple; below left, 
photographer perched high on an Osirian pillar; below, scaffolding used 
for making photogrammetric shots between colossi on temple facade. 
Surveys of Abu Simbel were virtually completed this summer. 
A 
4 ied a 
(cI ¥ * 
fed) ~~ A 
po 
      
     
-—
   
it 
  
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
- 
Pa
ul
 
A
l
m
a
s
y
 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
= 
Pa
ul
 
A
l
m
a
s
y
 
protecting dam, the rocks of the Abu Simbel mountain 
would become saturated and the seepage would affect the 
temples imbedded in it. 
The second proposal was of a very different kind. Con- 
celved by the Itallan architect and archeologist, Plero 
Gazzola, it was prepared by three Italian civil engineering 
firms—Italconsult, Impresit and Lodigianl and put for- 
ward to Unesco by the Itallan Government in October 
1960. This suggested encasing each of the two temples in 
concrete boxes and ralsing the rock masses 60 metres 
(200 feet) above the present level of the waters and 
reconstructing the original hill landscapes so that the 
final position of the temples would bear the same rela- 
tionship to the Nile as it does at present—but on a 
higher elevation. 
In January 1961, a Committee of Experts appointed by 
UNEsco in conjunction with the Government of the Unit- 
ed Arab Republic unanimously recommended the accept- 
ance of the Italian project for lifting the temples. Tech- 
nical questions were raised and were referred to another 
committee consisting of experts from Norway and Sweden. 
They confirmed the feasibility of the Italian scheme and 
In June 1961 it was accepted by the Government of the 
United Arab Republic. It will cost $70,000,000. 
The Itallan scheme Is bold, imaginative and grandiose 
and has transferred into twentieth-century idiom some- 
thing of the ancients’ massive thinking, which could con- 
template the Great Pyramid, with its 2,300,000 separate 
blocks each weighing 2 1/2 tons; or the Giant Sphinx, 
240 feet long and 66 feet tall, hewn out of a left-over 
rock of the Great Pyramid; or Abu Simbel, the disem- 
bowelled mountain itself. 
J one one might compare this twentleth- 
century concept to the ziggurats of Mcsopota- 
mia. These ziggurats began as altars on the ground- 
level, but successive generations of the priesthoods 
surpassed each other in ralsing the altars higher and 
higher, by superimposing one =ziggurat upon another, 
producing a man-made mountain with the temple, each 
time, on top. 
At Abu Simbel, the two temples will be lifted separately 
and each will be supported by a honeycomb of concrete 
supports, forming two massive pedestals. The lifting will 
be an engineering feat, ralsing, in the case of the Great 
Temple, a wedge of mountain-rock, weighing a quarter of 
a milllon tons, with a delicacy of movement never before 
attempted. 
Consider again the site. The two temples are imbedded 
In solid rock. The fagades with their massive statuary are 
polsed on the escarpment above the river. The platform- 
rock on which they stand Is 120 metres (390 fect) above 
sea-level. When the High Dam is completed, the water 
will rise to 182 metres (591 feet) above sea-level. So to be 
above water-level the rock-sections embodying the tem- 
ples will have to be raised at least 200 feet, and under- 
pinned. 
Before the lifting operations begin a whole series of 
precautionary measures will have to be taken. The arca 
in front of the temple will have to be protected by a 
cofferdam, an embankment 134 metres (440 feet) high, so 
that the operations can be protected as the dam-waters 
rise. A pit as long as the temple tagades will be dug down 
to the 105 metres level, that ls, about 50 feet deep, from 
which the excavation and clearing of the galleries 
beneath the temple blocks will proceed. 
At the same time, the temples themselves will be care- 
fully reinforced—an operation almost as delicate as the 
mending of cracked porcelain. The structures, including 
the colossl, have already been carefully examined for 
fissures. Some of the cracks probably existed when the 
temple was first bullt. They have caused damage to the 
Ramessid coloss! in front of the Great Temple—and in the 
case of one statue have led to the shearing off of a head 
and arm. 
Inside the temple there are natural pipes, hollowed out 
by percolating water, and veins which were closed with 
CONT'D ON PAGE 13 
 
1

## [Page 12](064240engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 64241: Ingenious engineers of 3,000 years ago

2 250,000 TONS LIFTED 
    
== 
8 3 = (23800 
|O» Q = " Pre ' : “s 
ip |G «| ¢ Drawings on these pages show different stages in the proposed 
iL operation to lift the Great Temple of Abu Simbel. (1) OUT- 
LINE OF GREAT TEMPLE. (Inset) Galleries and sanctuaries 
are burrowed deeply into the rocky hillside. (2) COMPLETED 
POSITION. Temple will stand on a complex concrete structure 
200 feet above its present position here shown by dotted lines. 
(3) PRESENT SITUATION showing a cross-section of the 
temple. Dotted lines show where cuts will be made into moun- 
tain. (4) REMOVAL OF ROCK. A great mass of rock directly 
above the temple will be removed to reduce the size and 
weight of the mass to be lifted. Utmost caution will be needed ; 
blasting will be avoided to prevent damage to the monument. 
(5) BUILDING OF CONCRETE BOX. After the temple block 
has been cut off from the rest of the surrounding rock a huge 
cellular concrete box will be built around it to protect it while 
it is raised. Base of the box will be strongest of all, partly built 
(18200) 
- (182,00 - pil 
Lo a f 
    
 
  
   
  
                             
  
1 
3 
a 17} SNR 
it i i AA » 
LARLY 
WALA 
  
 
  
Ltda 
Pik 
dB 
' 
v 
) 
  

## [Page 13](064240engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 64241: Ingenious engineers of 3,000 years ago

200 FEET 
of fabricated steel elements. (6) LIFTING BLOCK. Cut-away 
drawing shows temple being raised within its protective box 
by a multiple system of jacks working in pairs. (7) GIANT 
JACKS & TUNNELS. In tunnels excavated beneath the temple 
hundreds of giant jacks (left and right in drawing) will lift 
aweight of over a quarter of a million tons. Underelectronic con- 
trol, they will move less than one-sixteenth of an inch at a time. 
After every foot of lift they will be replaced by pre-fabricated 
concrete supports. (8) FACADE ROCK FISSURES. Every 
inch of the temple and the colossi have been examined and all 
fissures recorded. Before any lifting is done the temple will 
be carefully reinforced — an operation almost as delicate as 
the mending of cracked porcelain. The operations illustrated 
here willbe repeated, though on a reduced scale, for the smaller 
Temple of Queen Nefertari — a few hundred feet away. 
Drawings Italconsult 
  
  
  
  
  
  
ABU SIMBEL (cont'g) 
Boxed in concrete 
mortar when the temple was built. There is the risk of 
scaling-off of weathered rock when work begins. Of the 
elght columns in the main hall of the Great Temple, two 
are not carrying any load because of cracks between the 
roof and the column head, and two others have been 
weakened by fractures, 
The walls and roofs are in pretty sound condition but 
the greatest precautions will have to be taken to preserve 
Intact the inscriptions and painting. (This could be done 
by covering them with adhesive textiles.) All this work, 
which would have amounted to a major plece of restor- 
ation even if the temples were not due to be moved, will 
have to anticipate any disturbance of the rock blocks in 
which the temples are encased. 
The proposal is that the blocks, and the temples they 
contain, once cut out of the hill, should be enclosed in a 
reinforced concrete hox so rigid that the separation a! 
one block from the surrounding rock and the subsequent 
lifting will not introduce any stresses or strains. This box 
would have a bottom and four sides and binding tles 
across the top. 
The bottom is a matter of special engineering concern 
because it will have to take the lifting forces. The pro- 
posed bottom grid structure will be 16 1/2 feet high (this 
may be reduced to 13 feet), which will involve the excava- 
tion of three groups of five parallel! tunnels. The side and 
rear walls of the box will be of heavily reinforced con- 
crete. They will be constructed in three groups of vertical 
shafts, excavated and concreted, and each wall section 
will be rigidly connected to the bottom-girders. 
HE front walls have to take care of the facades 
of each of the temples. The space between 
the wall and the facade will be fllled with compacted, 
crushed sandstone-—like packing a fragile present for 
dispatch. 
But, first, the mountain above the rock-blocks has to be 
removed, to reduce the weight and facilitate operations. 
This will mean shifting the overlay from 155 metres (about 
500 ft) above sea-level upwards. This may sound like 
nothing more than a rather elaborate plece of landscape 
gardening (since it Is planned to restore the contours 
around the lifted temples), but it actually is an extremely 
tricky operation. Explosives cannot be used nor any 
method which might cause vibrations lkely to disturb 
the temple-rocks. 
That applies to the whole process of cutting out the 
blocks. Apart from explosive shocks being entirely barred, 
any tools which would cause serious vibrations would be 
dangerous. However, experiments carried out in Norway, 
on rocks which would vibrate more than the Nubian 
sandstone, have shown that compressed alr tools for 
boring and breaking can be safely used. 
In rocks within twenty-four feet of any decorated parts, 
mechanical hammers weighing not more than 30 kilo- 
grammes and giving a thousand blows per minute may be 
used.' At closer range electric saws and chisels will have 
to be used. 
But before anything is done, experiments will be carried 
out reproducing similar conditions to those at Abu Simbel. 
And the experts have recommended that during the oper- 
ations microseismic warning systems—super-sensitive 
earthquake meters—should be installed. In effect, it will 
be a matter of the doctor feeling the patient's pulse the 
whole time, one of the “patients” in this case weighing 
a quarter of a million tons! 
Once the blocks are cut and boxed the most delicate 
operation of all will begin. This is the edging upwards, 
two millimetres at a time, of the concrete “crates” and 
their massive contents. This wiil be done by mechanical 
jacks—on the same principle as those used to hoist a car 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
13

## [Page 14](064240engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 64241: Ingenious engineers of 3,000 years ago

14 
ABU SIMBEL (Contd) 
TH pe 
ye ee BAR   
       
EE dia 
  
    
Lo tS de v3 he 
“5 (AR bik bi LE 
Vv iy - he ~ a. ¥ r A kL ” — fen AH is 
44 Er A. WrEaky 
-
 
SE Se 3 ise 
ve pita] 2 td aE 
Er per i sme 
  
i: es 
a BE
. 
-    
3 Spa 1s — 1 
    
   
   
  
   
     
   
PE i Fy rid Si fg Te 
- —t=i ade! ee 
    
  
   
     
when you have a punctured tyre. 
hy a pap oe 
fr Felt T a. Ye a ” he 3 id . ’ io ed . Py yo wt 
SA Eo TOR © Rd Se ond 2 gf £5 
| OEE { I a FL TEE v aE wn SREY #r he oA } Cpe RT. oe ra i bo IAs , 
vy e " Rh! » at oan, J i y . a — i 2 3 g = ‘ g : EH h~ \ = 
> TT a ae > 1 h ~ , 1 i% & : fees 
iN ! il : 5d ol 1048 : wl ek ~~ ET pe. Eo $1 I A, ~ < oe) rye ) ' $ < Fad at xO "A $d Rr Tas. J % ? coh i | 
TAN hay | am oy TF | 
2 BI ? kl 'o Xo 8 bo AN CIE NT TEMP LE _ TT {rl he 
Ct pe. wa) SET 
x A £7 Ade 
Al EE SRL & REE 
3 “ 3 3 mg 5 i pe Re —— 
rrr & PE % 
48 Cg EE ps 4 baw 
87 BE per ! 
a ae &. - 4 % > 
i A 
   
Outsized versions of the final supporting structure. The stability of all this 
those will be installed within the grid of the bottom struc- 
ture in a lattice so contrived that the points of upward 
pressure will be evenly distributed. 
The original proposal was to use hydraulic jacks. A 
later suggestion was for mechanical jacks with a maxi- 
mum lifting capacity of 2,000 tons each, driven by 
hydraulic stroke cylinders moving a turnable nut through 
a ratchet system. The number of jacks and their lifting 
power are still a matter of debate among the experts. 
Some want more of them—250 with 1,000-ton lift each and 
even duplication of that, so that one set of jacks would 
always be taking the load while the other was being 
retracted. 
Although the edging upwards will be done less than 
1/16 of an inch at a time, one complete lifting cycle will 
raise the temple by one foot. At this stage of the lift, 
prefabricated reinforced concrete blocks of 30 cms will 
be slipped into position to form permanent supporting 
pillars. All this will be carefully synchronized and the 
functioning of each jack will be recorded on a central 
control panel so that the chief supervisor can make sure 
that there is no risk of warping, which would produce 
stresses in the temple blocks. 
As the blocks rise upwards, the jacks will follow on 
taller and taller concrete pillars which will form part of 
stilt-like erection will be guaranteed by horizontal rein- 
forced concrete beams joining the continuous walls. Thus 
in the end, each temple will be standing on the crest 
of what will, externally, be an enclosed pillar, surely the 
biggest of pedestals which museum exhibits have ever had. 
This, the direct engineering process, does not take into 
account the vast “housekeeping” programme involved. 
Already surveys have discovered where the huge supplies 
of suitable sand and aggregate can be obtained in the 
neighbourhood. 
There will be a floating quay, which will rise with the 
waters of the Nile. There will be a network of supply 
roads; an electricity generating station; a settlement with 
a working population, and with civilized amenities which 
will be desperately needed in this tract of desert; work- 
shops, etc., commensurate with one of the biggest en- 
gineering enterprises; and when the “surgical” operation 
of cutting out and transplanting the temples to the point 
where they will be safe from the encroaching waters of 
the High Dam of Sadd el Aali is performed, there will be 
the further job of “plastic” surgery. 
The “scalped” mountain will be restored and the fea- 
ures, even the parting, the gully, between the temples 
will be reproduced, as a replica, on the higher level, of 
what they are today. This is not merely “beauty treat-

## [Page 15](064240engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 64241: Ingenious engineers of 3,000 years ago

  
  
   
  
  
  
ment,” or even ssthetics, although those are properly 
commendable; it is also a question of the future preser- 
vation of the monuments. 
We talk about “living rocks,” transferring a biological 
simile to geology; but it is certainly true that these 
monuments have survived with remarkable durability 
because they have “lived” in balance with their natural 
surroundings. 
The present day experts have a healthy respect for the 
foresight and judgment of their predecessors of 3,200 years 
ago. The Ancients chose the site well, for all the reasons 
which have already been discussed, but they also chose 
an environment in which exposed masonry could endure. 
This involved factors of temperature, humidity, shelter 
from the sand blast, of erosive desert wind and a subtle 
communion with the waters of the Nile. (Only since the 
building of the original Aswan Dam with the resulting 
raising of the water has chemical disintegration, in the 
base of the Small Temple, begun to appear; this minera- 
logical gangrene will be halted by the proposed “surgical” 
operation.) 
When the dam is filled the Nile will be approximately in 
the same relationship to the temples as it is at present, 
and at the higher elevation, contours similar to the pre- 
sent ones will recapture the environment. The orienta- 
   
  
Fan ata v "i 
ts he o L Ay ' ¢ vw . 
it i TA Bagi. yr 
-, vol " wba ar Faas! % ad st be " 
» 
Mighty figures of the Pharaoh gaze 
out over the Aswan Dam Lake, as 
they once contemplated the Nile, 
4 ; in this artist's impression of the 
ie [two temples of Abu Simbel 
" & now standing some 200 feet above 
their former level supported by 
concrete pillars. By using their best 
resources, modern engineers will 
~ ¥ have saved a miraculous construc- 
“tion of their ancient counterparts, 
we
 
e
d
 
- 
Drawing Italconsult 
ate” RITA R 
tion of the temples will be precisely as now and the 
morning sun will continue to bring out of the darkness 
the faces of the Ancient Gods. 
ISSING LINK SOUGHT IN NUBIA: An American anthro- 
pology-geology research team is now exploring theVadi 
Halfa area for relics of the missing iink between the very 
primitive man of Africa and the ancient man of Europe. 
The leaders of the expedition, Dr Ralph Solecki, Associate 
Professor of Anthropology, and Dr Rhodes W. Fairbridge, 
Professor of Geology, both from Columbia University, 
consider the Nile Valley the only well-watered corridor by 
which ancient man might have migrated from the northern 
to the southern hemisphere. They are therefore investigat- 
ing silt deposits which probably contain artifacts dating back 
much further than the Egyptian civilization. The Columbia 
expedition, financed by a $38,500 grant from the US National 
Science Foundation and supported by the Sudanese and 
U.A.R. Governments and Unesco, plans to save such relics 
of ancient man before they are submerged by two hundred 
or more feet of water that will rise behind the Aswan Dam.     15

## [Page 16](064240engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

16 


### 64242: How Philae will be saved

HOW PHILAE 
WILL BE SAVED 
by Michel Conil Lacoste 
Mr. Conil Lacoste is fine arts columnist for the Paris daily newspaper 
“Le Monde". He has also been a frequent contributor to the *New 
York Times Sunday Magazine”, and the French art magazine, “I'Gil". 
From [951 to 1953 he was a teaching fellow at the University of Cairo. 
Fe 60 years the island of Philae has been 
waging a desperate battle against the waters 
of the Nile. This famous shrine of antiquity which, with 
its temples dating back to the Ptolemies and the Caesars 
has long inspired historians of art and religion and tra- 
vellers the world over, has thus far escaped the death 
which Pierre Lot! predicted for it years ago. But now its 
reprieve from the waters of the Nile is gravely threatened 
for all times. 
The crux of the problem can be summed up in a few 
words: 
The island of Philae is located between the old Aswan 
dam downstream (that is, to the north) and the new High 
Dam under construction upstream. When it is completed 
the island will be permanently covered by water and the 
temples will be submerged all year long to half their 
height, the water level fluctuating daily by as much as 
20 feet. 
Unless protective measures are taken the temples, which 
at present emerge completely from the waters of the Nile 
for three months each year, will never again be visible 
in their entirety and the harmonious ensemble will be 
permanently destroyed. But even more important, the 
erosion caused by the daily rise and fall of the waters will 
be more harmful to the monuments than their nine- 
month total immersion now caused by the old dam. In 
the long run the movement of the waters will cut into the 
buildings like a knife, causing them to crumble and 
spelling their certain destruction. 
J csaster of such magnitude appeared unthink- 
able. As soon as the dangers were realized, 
technicians set about to seek ways of saving Philae. In 
1955, an Egyptian engineer, Osman R. Rostem, formulated 
a plan which was afterwards to serve as the basis for the 
adopted scheme to preserve the island. In a study entitled 
The Salvage of Philae he wrote: “The most effective solu- 
tion to the question of Philae is the isolation of the island 
from the rest of the reservoir by building a series of small 
(1) Osman R. Rostem: The Salvage of Philae, Supplement to the 
Annals of the Antiquities Service. Published by the Imprimeries de 
I'lnstitut francais d'Archéologie orientale. Cairo, 1935. 
(3) Netherlands Ingineering Consullants Nedeco, The Hague: Report 
on the safeguarding of the Philae monuments, prepared for Unesco 
by order of the Netherlands Governmenl. November 19060. 
dams round it and thus preventing the water from sub- 
merging the temples without disturbing them by removal 
or raising” (1). 
The plan put forward last year by the Netherlands 
Engineering Consultants (NEDECO) on the initiative of 
the Government of the Netherlands is inspired by the 
same principle (2). It was adopted earlier this year by the 
United Arab Republic Consultative Committee concerning 
the safeguarding of the sites and monuments of Nubia. 
Coming up the Nile, the traveller finds Philae about five 
miles upstream (or south) from the city of Aswan, a little 
beyond the First Cataract. This “City of Temples”, as 
Champollion called it, seems to be floating on the Nile 
near the eastern bank where the river forms a small bay 
strewn with tiny islands, each rich in history, beneath 
rocky heights which rise from the shore. 
Just west of Philae lies the islet of Agilkia, and beyond 
it the large island of Biga. The two islands together form 
a north-south chain which almost isolates this area of the 
river from the rest of the waterway, and Philae lies 
within their protective shield. 
M:= RosteEM’s scheme, carefully studied and 
elaborated by NEDECO, completes this natural 
isolation by a series of three dykes or dams, linking the 
islands together and each one to the river bank. The 
entire system of islands and dams would thus form a 
continuous protective arc to the west of Philae separating 
it from the main stream of the Nile. The level ofthe 
reservoir within the protected area would not be affected 
by the fluctuations of water between the two dams, and 
could thus be kept as low as required so that the island 
of Philae would always be visible in its entirely. 
It was Herodotus who first referred to Philae as the 
“Pearl of Egypt”, but the phrase has now become a cliché, 
and it is perhaps time we dispensed with it. But there 
can be no doubt that the spectacle offered by the sacred 
island of Isis with its pylons, its porticos and temples all 
reflected in the irridescent waters of the Nile is a sight 
which never fails to move the beholder. 
Poised on the edge of the Aswan desert, Philae, the first 
stop in Egyptian Nubia, is unequalled in beauty except for 
Abu Simbel, the last stop before entering Sudanese Nubia 
—if I can be permitted to compare such widely differing 
examples of architecture, 
  
CONT'D ON PAGE |8 

## [Page 17](064240engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 64242: How Philae will be saved

  
   
AX we - - 
PELE LE a 
31 . 
a ‘ts RY | 
ie - : 1 « , 
bed) x § 
en —. a 
| Ea 
|¢ - 
) 
Pa 
a 
ad - 
a 
rh 
hiv A 
—— 
HET 
ic AA wii LE a 
Unesco-Van der Haagen 
WHEN THE NEW ASWAN DAM is completed, the Island 
of Phiiae will be submerged by the Nile to the height shown 
in the photo above, At present, the Island's monuments are 
completely covered by the Nile, save for the tops of the main 
pylon, nine months of the year. Diagram, below left, shows 
PRESENT SITUATION 
Sadd el Aali 
Hew high Dam 
+ 
Lsw m an Da IE 
 
 
    
  
  
 
   
   
FUTURE SITUATION 
  Lae   
   
a       
  
Wo 
a “. ye LY 
4 - 
hed 7 3 
NER . -, 
- 5 - - 2 
i
e
 
ul 
P
g
 
[+S -— I « 
a —
——— 
- a — . - 
— —- 
a — - " 
- cw —— Se 
% Rt ey 
PN a Tey 
. 
¢ 
L
i
 
S
E
E
 
E
A
E
]
 
u
s
 
r
d
 
/ 
 
the present situation, the future situation If nothing Is dono, 
and finally how the temples will be saved by the construction 
of protective dykes. Map of Philac and surrounding area shows 
new and old dams and the position of dykes which will be 
built to protect Philae from the waters of the Nile. 
  
From * Report on Safeguarding Philae Monuments **, NEDLCO, 1960. 
  
ETT . _ . 
STR NT, ad % y; 7 
) / > y 
by 1 yi = ft 
ATE 4 fest SHELLAL a /'@ 
I { MW STATION feof J 
vl 
" 
fo 5 
{ » / / 
    
    
Aswan Pa 
Awpd liland 2") 7 
Salid Li Io! \ : 
4 JF eo, . 7. { (87% ~~} ~— Va 
7 V Agilhie inl Phila \ ? 
& . \ \ 1%; 
Bigs 1] ~ A \ 1 
' ’ f / Lomi 
% hi y 
3 (ake J 
3 4 i] 
  
\ Lx / Te y 
Ig Voie \ f/ 
PL \ ake 
”, |B JiBuggé 
g PAY ra inl . 
1 4 hak 
f ) > 
{ ¢ 
Lr a 4 
7 [ 
=I 
w rd 
- > i 4 
= > 
Loy: 
vb y 
4 
wo - 
wi ? | FAR 
> =P Xn? Af 
@ oe ard XG ni Sn FINLEY 
ra 
{ 
\ = ERD: 
= 1 { 210% 
Id 3 pp fe / 
A Pod TIP, LI } Sates 
A > ry iy , 
™ aged go i “ NL / 
NX =~ EADD EL AALS DAM v ue 
= NAD ill SL mmm prr——— 3 — FD ae FAIRE NS OF THE WETRLILA 
a Ars PHILAL MONUMINTS-LC 
= A IAT ral I a Lo TT [ = 
5 Tadd Te . >, — 
/ " r     
  
 
  
17

## [Page 18](064240engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

18 


### 64242: How Philae will be saved

PHILAE 
(Continued) 
INTERIOR COURTYARD 
of Temple of Isis at Phi- 
lae with famous colon- 
naded ‘‘mammisi’ or 
Birth House of Horus. 
The monuments of Phi- 
lae will be saved by a 
system of three protective 
dykes, a plan proposed 
by Netherlands experts. 
Unesco ~- Albert Raccah 
Before the first Aswan dam was built, a palm grove 
(now ruined by the waters) added a note of cool enchant- 
ment to this “Vision of Paradise”, as the French Egypto- 
logists, Georges Bénédite and Canon Drioton, called it. 
Though deprived of its vegetation, Philae has maintained 
its grace and youthful beauty “like a bird perched on an 
island pointing straight south.” 
Philae Is young not only in beauty but also in time, 
for none of its temples dates back beyond the 4th century 
B.C. This is a short period indeed when compared to the 
470 million years of the natural granite amphitheatre 
which forms the setting for the “pearl” which is Philae. 
But the island is not merely a prodigious site; it is also 
a sanctuary, and “an open alr museum of Egyptian archi- 
tecture and art.” 
A sanctuary, because it was from here that the cult of 
Isis, the universal goddess and mother of Horus, spread 
during Roman times far beyond the realms of Egypt; 
here that “the last refuge of dying paganism” knew its 
long twilight and defied the Christian faith long after the 
triumph of the new religion had closed the gates of all 
other temples along the Nile. 
At every step one stumbles upon the sacred at Philae, 
on nearby Biga and even beyond, on the large island of 
Hesa where funeral steles mark the remains of an anclent 
necropolis In which the faithful were burled at a respect- 
ful distance from the tomb of Osiris. 
Philae is a museum, or more exactly a city of five 
temples, the largest of which is dedicated to Isis. It is 
fronted by two gigantic pylons and the famous mammisi 
or “birth house” devoted to the annual mystery of the 
birth of Horus, the Son-God. 
To the east lies Trajan’s celebrated Kiosk, to the south 
the Kiosk of Nectanebo from which an avenue of sphinxes 
(or dromos) leads to the first pylon of the Temple of Isis. 
These buildings are completed by the famous gate of 
Hadrian with its chapels and three colonnades. 
All these monuments with their delicately moulded pil- 
lars, their exquisitely intercolonnaded walls, recall the 
influence of Greek architecture and form a unique ensem- 
ble in Egyptian art. 
  
  
 
In the light of its artistic and cultural importance, it 
is not difficult to understand that the experts who 
examined the various proposals for saving Philae were as 
often swayed by aesthetic considerations as by the tech- 
nical factors involved. 
One project proposed that a giant wall or earth dam 
30 to 40 feet high be built to isolate the island from the 
rest of the Nile. This was rejected as unaesthetic, for the 
charm of Philae as a floating island would have been 
destroyed. Besides, the scheme was as costly as the pro- 
posal to create an artificial lake. 
A second idea proposed the silting up of the area 
around Philae by building a low dam between the nor- 
thern end of the island of Biga and the shore, but if 
adopted, half of the monuments would have probably 
been buried in silt. A third solution called for dismantling 
the temples and re-erecting them on the same site after 
the ground level had been raised 30 to 40 feet. Such an 
operation would have been very costly and difficult, and 
entailed risk of damage for the sculptures and inscrip- 
tions. Furthermore it could not have been completed 
within the required time limit. 
A om plan involved dismantling the temples 
and transferring them to the island of Biga or 
to the mainland. In addition to the disadvantages just 
indicated, this scheme was ruled out for aesthetic and 
archeological reasons. As Mr. Rostem pointed out as 
early as 1955, removing all the temples was out of the 
question, while choosing two or three of the most beau- 
tiful ones meant destroying the present architectural 
ensemble of the island. Philae’s unique character lies in 
its subtle blending of stone and water against the back- 
ground of fantastic stones and “elephant-feet” boulders 
on the neighbouring islands and river banks. To disturb 
this balance and association would be to ruin everything, 
or almost. 
As to the tranfer of the monuments to Biga ; it would 
have destroyed the precise historical and mythological 
 

## [Page 19](064240engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 64242: How Philae will be saved

  
relationship between the two islands. Philae was the tra- 
ditional abode of Isis, Biga the sacrosanct realm of Osiris, 
unapproachable to humans. Regrouping the monuments 
of both divinities on Biga would have been an act of 
sacrilege in the eyes of Egyptologists, and at the very least 
would have deprived them of their present significance. 
Actually two of the proposed solutions mentioned, i.e. 
the raising of the monuments and their dismantling and 
re-erection elsewhere, had been envisaged at the time of 
the construction of the first Aswan dam in 1902. Fortu- 
nately, the final decision was to leave the island as it was 
despite the risks involved, which were further increased 
by the successive raisings of the dam in 1907-1912 and 
1929-1934. But this brave decision resulted in two vital 
measures being taken on the initiative of the then director 
of the Egyptian Antiquities Service, Gaston Maspero: the 
systematic recording of all the monuments and insecrip- 
tions on the island (just as this is now being done in the 
whole area threatened by the new Aswan Dam); the 
consolidation and reinforcement of the foundations of all 
the monuments. It is to this latter, providential precau- 
tionary measure that Philae probably owes its survival. 
Egyptologists were for a time panic-stricken when the 
first effects of the temple’s long months of submersion 
became known. When the monuments emerged from the 
waters, the sandstone walls had become “so soft that a 
finger could be stuck into them”, and the tourist boats 
indeed caused a certain amount of damage by scraping 
against the supporting columns of this artificial Venice. 
But this damage was insignificant compared to the havoc 
which might have resulted had not the foundations of the 
temples been solidly reinforced. 
All in all Philae has stood up well to the waters. And 
in one sense the annual immersion has even done some 
good. For though the flood waters have effaced the poly- 
chrome blues and whites which formerly adorned certain 
capitals, the same waters have cleansed the stone of 
destructive salts. 
Thus, paradoxically, the total immersion of the temples, 
which was expected to lead to disaster, now appears less 
harmful than the partial immersion which will result 
from the construction of the new High Dam. What is 
TOPS OF PILLARS are 
all that show of the Birth 
House on Philae when 
the gates of Aswan dam 
are opened in the month 
of October and the Nile 
slowly submerges the is- 
land's monuments. 
Photo Christiane Desroches- 
Noblecourt 
more, the 1902 decision to allow the temples to be sub- 
merged part of the year, taken only as a last resort, now 
proves to have been the one solution which did not com- 
promise the future. Had the monuments been raised or 
removed lo another site, today’s “ldeal” solution (which 
apparently was not studied or foreseen 60 years ago) 
would now be out of the question. Thus the drama of the 
1900s has made possible the rescue operation of the 1960s. 
The NEDECO plan, submitted by the Netherlands 
Government and now adopted, wiil safeguard the Isle of 
Philae in its original setting and splendour by the cons- 
truction of three dykes, creating a low lying artificial lake 
within the high Aswan reservoir. In other words Philae 
will be protected by an artificial lake within an artificial 
lake—something like a “double-boiler”. The “inside boiler” 
will be the protective barrier formed by the continuous 
chain of islands and dykes abutting on the shore. 
In the summer of 1960 a Netheriands team carried out 
a preliminary Investigation on the site gathering precise 
data on topography, water levels, metcorology, geology, 
building materials, and the alignment of the dams. Valu- 
able topographical data, results of soundings and aerial 
photographs were made available to the mission by 
various Government ministries of the U.AR. 
HE team also took advantage of the prelimi- 
nary studies previously carried out near the 
Sadd el Aali dam site. They examined vital questions such 
as water evaporation, wind speeds and the resulting waves 
in Aswan lake, water seepage and capillary action. The 
local Nilometer was called upon to furnish much informa- 
lofi voncerning water levels, while the river bed was thor- 
oughly sounded and vertical exploration carried out 
systematically in the vicinity of the sacred island. 
On the bass of this preliminary research, the following 
proposals were put forward. The level of the Philae lake 
was set at 328 feet, the top of the works at 380 feet. The 
north and south dykes would be built first from the bank 
abutments outward. Rock fill would be used near the 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
19

## [Page 20](064240engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 64242: How Philae will be saved

20 
PHILAE (Continued) 
ITS TEMPLES WILL 
AGAIN BE MIRRORED 
IN THE WATERS 
banks and sand in the centre part, reinforced by concrete 
calssons or a double row of steel sheet piling. 
Last of all, the dyke joining the two Islands would be 
built. Though presenting less problems from the tech- 
nical point of view, this dam is the one that will close 
the lake and it will have to withstand currents of 10 feet 
per second. As the gap is reduced, at the final stages, the 
pressure of water will steadily increase. So this centre 
dam will be of the rock fill type. During the actual 
closing, the authorities will be asked to keep the level of 
the Aswan Dam constant. 
The alignment of the dykes proposed in the draft pro- 
ject is a tentative one; the final alignment can be deter- 
mined only after further soundings have been carried out. 
At the end of last year the authors of the report were 
in favour of the shortest span for the northern dyke 
(though this is not always the cheapest in public works). 
This dyke would join Agilkia Island to the mainland at 
Tabyet el Shelkh. They were even more strongly in favour 
of this course for the centre dyke—the one joining Agil- 
kia and Biga Islands, For the southern dyke further 
soundings will be required to determine whether a slightly 
crooked alignment may not be technically preferable. 
This is a question to be discussed and carefully studied. 
The plan Mr. Rostem prepared six years ago provided for 
somewhat different alignments from NEDECO’s. 
W ATERTIGHTNESS Is another problem. Up to a 
point seepage can be prevented by protective 
blankets on the upstream slopes. Grout-curtains will also 
be used to filter out sand and silt. But the Dutch consider 
that it would be more economical to allow for a pumping 
station than a costly array of devices to prevent seepage, 
for these would ralse the costs considerably, Having re- 
gard to the water balance due to inflltration and evapora- 
tlon—closely calculated for the proposed Phlilae Lake 
works—the engineers have determined that a pump 
discharging 350 litres a second would be the most 
economical solution for the annual surplus of from 50 to 
100 million square feet of water seepage over evaporation 
losses. Similarly, the lake waters could be changed, and if 
the pumping capacity were Increased to 465 litres a second, 
the pump could also be used for discharging seepage from 
Shellal on the east bank, in the event that the Egyptian 
authorities decide to put that area under cultivation. 
The Netherlands plan, briefly described here, will thus 
be executed under optimum conditions. Elaborated by 
engineers of a country speclalized by its geographical 
situation In hydraulics, it has been unanimously approved, 
and no alternative plan is under consideration. The 
Government of the Netherlands has offered to perfect it 
and the estimated total cost of -US$6 millions now seems 
assured since the President of the United States last April 
recommended that the equivalent of this sum in Egyptian 
currency be appropriated for the salvage of Philae. And 
yet, actual operations are not scheduled to begin before 
1968... 
This may appear to be an astonishingly long delay, until 
one realizes that at present the Island and its sur- 
roundings are under water for most of the year. It is 
only when the new Aswan dam Is finally completed in 
1968 that the waters of the Nile will be contained and 
engineers will be able to pitch thelr tents on dry land 
and move forward their equipment. 
 
  
. 
REE Xone MW 
Photos Unesco-Van der Haagen 
VIEW FROM PHILAE looking toward Biga Island with its 
tomb of Osiris, husband of Isis, whose great temple and 
pylons dominate Philae. Below, one of the pylons of the 
Temple of Isis showing the wealth of carving on its walls. 
  
apn 
HL 
; = f— 

## [Page 21](064240engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

i. . - ’ » 
> 4 Ne on) ‘ 
In TR as ©
 
Pa
ul
 
A
l
m
a
s
y
 
ALL OF NUBIA IS TODAY AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL CAMP. HERE EXCAVATORS ARE SEEN AT WORK AT THE ANCIENT SITE OF ANIBA., 


### 64243: Nubia today; a vast archaeological camp

NUBIA TODAY: A VAST 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL CAMP 
by Louis A. Christophe 
Louis A. Christophe, a well-known French Egyptologist, Is 
Unesco Representative for the Nubian Campaign in Cairo, 
and Assistant Secretary-General of the Institut d'Egypte. 
UNDREDS of archaeologists from more than 15 
countries are today working against time to 
survey, explore and excavate the complex and long-buried 
vestiges of countless civilizations which, from the be- 
ginnings of man’s history, have left their marks upon the 
Nubian valley. As early as 1955 when the announcement 
was made that the Aswan High Dam would be built, both 
the Governments of the United Arab Republic and the 
Sudan immediately began to consider ways in which the 
archaeological sites situated in the area to be flooded 
could be fully exploited before they are covered by the 
lake waters. 
A priority list of sites to be excavated in the Sudan 
was drawn up on the basis of a thorough aerial survey. 
In Egypt, excavations which had been halted 25 years 
ago along the Nile near Ballana and Qustul were resumed. 
At the same time, the Egyptian Antiquities Department 
suspended excavation work in other areas in order to 
concentrate solely upon the Nublan valley. A request 
was sent out to all foundations and institutions already 
engaged in work at Pharaonic sites in Egypt to concen- 
trate on the Nublan portion of the Nile valley. 
The first response was disappointing. Only two sclen- 
tific expeditions were sent to Egyptian Nubla—one by the 
German Institute at Cairo, and the other by Milan Uni- 
versity. In addition, the Egypt Exploration Boclety of 
London undertook excavations at Buhen in the Sudan. 
With dozens of other sites still to be excavated, it 
became more and more apparent as the months passed 
that some new action was needed to ensure that all 
archeeological features of Nubia would be thoroughly 
explored in the relatively short time which was left. 
The Minister of Culture for tHe UAR, faced with this 
pressing problem, out of all proportion to his nation’s 
resources, appealed to Unesco. The Sudan, whose sites 
In the Nubian valley have been scarcely touched before, 
made a similar appeal. 
In answer to thls appeal, a Unesco mission of experts 
was sent to Nubia and on the basis of thelr report, the 
 
CONT'D ON PAGE 25 
 
21

## [Page 22](064240engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

  
Granite statue of an unknown king 
found at Karnak, probably New 
kingdom (3,000 to 4,000 years old). 
Rare wooden statuette from 
tomb at Saqqgara, the necro- 
polis of Memphis, dates from 
3rd ordth dynasty circa3000B.C. 


### 64244: Gifts from the land of the Pharaohs

    
GIFTS FROM 
THE LAND OF 
THE PHARAOHS 
The art objects on this double page are a few 
of the ancient Egyptian treasures which the 
Government of the United Arab Republic is 
offering as grants-in-return to countries which 
contribute to the Nubian campaign. The objects 
include statues, sarcophagi, alabaster jars and 
vases, statuettes in faience, wood sculptures, 
etc., from the Luxor, Karnak, Giza and Aswan 
sites. Also offered are five Pharaonic temples. 
Both the UAR and the Sudan have also offered 
50 per cent of excavation finds in the area to 
be flooded, and Egypt has generously modified 
its antiquity laws for excavations elsewhere. 
Sandstone cubic statue of an Egyptian 
scribe with hieroglyphic inscriptions, 
standing about four feet high. Karnak. 
  
Unesco — Egyptian Documentation Centre, Cairo

## [Page 23](064240engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 64244: Gifts from the land of the Pharaohs

  Head of a royal personage, from 
Karnak, dates from the 18th dynas- 
ty and is about 3,500 years old. 
  
Head of the famous Heretic King Ame- 
nophis IV (Akhenaton) husband of Nefer- 
titi, from the temple of the Sun at Karnak. 
  Famed King Thut (Thutmosis Ill) who ruled 
more than 3,500 years ago is here depicted 
on an osiriac pillar which bears his name. 
Sekhmet, lion goddess and daughter of Re, 
from the Temple of Amenophis lll at Gurna. 
23 
f
w
 
h
e
r
 

## [Page 24](064240engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 64243: Nubia today; a vast archaeological camp

TOMB 
YIELDS 
CLUE 
TO NUBIAN 
PRINCE 
Prince Heka Nefer of Miam, 
spent his childhood in the 
alace of King Tutankhamon 
hree thousand years ago and 
has long been known to Egyp- 
tologists because of inscrip- 
tions telling his life's story and 
a well-preserved painting on 
the wall of Huy's Tomb at 
Thebes (right) which pictures 
and names him as the foremost 
in a long column of tribute 
bearers before the monarch. 
But the whereabouts of his 
kingdom in Nubia and his 
burial place had never been 
discovered. Recently, an expe- 
dition from Yale and Pennsyl- 
vania Universities, whileexplor- 
ing and excavating ancient 
ruins in the Aniba area which 
will be flooded when the Aswan 
dam is completed, discovered 
a tomb which is believed to be 
that of Heka Nefer. Although 
it was long ago plundered of 
its treasures, Yale archaolo- 
gist William Kelly Simpson 
discovered five small funer- 
ary statues (inset) bearing the 
name and title of the prince. 
Inscriptions on the wall of the 
tomb, as well as rock carvings © William Kelly Simpson 
nearby also identified the tomb 
as that of the Prince of Miam. 
For another important find by 
a Polish expedition, see p. 40.  
FORMER CAPITAL of the viceroys of 
the Pharaohs, Aniba has yielded impor- 
tant finds for archaeologists from Cairo 
University who are excavating here 
  
        
  
     
a - ama 
-~ Ns war py » PL Se 
URN al Lina 3 
; Pes pl Ea ; 
- ' 
   
 
= x 
4 
  
P
h
o
t
o
s
 
©
 
A
l
m
a
s
y
 
  
 

## [Page 25](064240engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 64243: Nubia today; a vast archaeological camp

ARCHAZAOLOGICAL CAMP (Cont'd from p. 21) 
Dividing up the sites 
among the searchers 
appeal was made by the Director-General to save the 
monuments and sites of ancient Nubia. 
This appeal met with an immediate response. Both the 
UAR and the Sudan recelved generous offers of co- 
operation, Archmological work began almost at once and 
now, less than 18 months after the appeal, the results are 
so encouraging that It Is almost certaln that the great 
bulk of archeological work will be accomplished before 
the lake waters bury this area forever. 
Because Sudanese Nubia {Is less well known than 
Egypt, the Sudanese authorities declded to begin with a 
general archeological survey of all the threatened 
territory. The Antiquities Department, with the help of 
three experts made avallable by UNEsco, has now pros- 
pected the whole of the west bank from the Sudanese- 
Egyptlan border down to Buhen. A general survey of the 
east bank from the border down to the northern outskirts 
of Wad! Halfa was made by a joint mission from the 
Scandinavian countries. By the end of the forthcoming 
winter campalgn, all the archaeological sites of Upper 
Nubla threatened with submersion will very probably have 
been explored and identified. 
When the original Aswan Dam was ralsed, first in the 
years 1907 to 1912, then again in 1929-1934, the Antiquities 
Department in Egypt excavated all the anclent sites in 
Lower Nubla. (The Sudan was not affected then as it will 
be by the new dam.) Nevertheless, as an additional pre- 
caution, another general archarological survey was 
recently organized in collaboration with London Unlver- 
silty to make sure that no sites still remained buried under 
the sand. As a result of this survey four Important sites 
have already been discovered between the Sudanese 
border and Korosko. Next season the expedition expects 
to Somplete its survey In the northern part of Lower 
Nubia. 
  
Y = another vital problem had to be solved. 
Nubia’s prehistoric cultures had never heen 
thoroughly investigated on the spot. Now, Columbia 
Unesco - Rex Keating 
under the direction of Dr. Abdel Abu University, USA, has organized an expedition which will 
Bakr. Mummies 5,000 years old, in a make a general survey of the prehistoric sites of Sudanese 
good state of preservation, have been Nubla and the southern reaches of Egyptian Nubla. 
discovered within an ancient necropolis. This mission is expected to cover the whole of the 
threatened area before the flood waters arrive. 
These general surveys are Invaluable. Not only do they 
glve a true plcture of the archeological terrain, but they 
serve as a gulde to Institutes and foundations which have 
not as yet participated in excavations in Nubla, 
As offers of help have streamed in from all over the 
EE ST - world, most institutes and foundations have already been 
m BCT : a allotted the concessions they requested. Nearly all the 
on 0 ml 5: v sites in Egyptian Nubla have already been conceded—and 
am bie in Sudanese Nubia the position will doubtless be the same 
long before the time for submersion. 
lay CEB pg      
Listed in geographical order—starting from the First Cataract and going up 
the Nile to the Second Cataract—the following sites have been allotted 
for excavation: 
Debod - Under the temple, Polish Centre of Mediterranean Archeology, 
Calro 
Dehmit - Egyptian Museum, Turin 
Khor, Dehmlt, Kalabsha - Oriental institute, Chicago, and Swiss Institute of 
Architectural Research, Calro 
Taffeh - South chapel. Czech Archesologlcal Institute, Calro 
Kalabsha, Gerf Husseln - Czech Archesclogical Institute, Calro 
Sabagura - Milan University 
Dakka and Wadi Allagl - Academy of Sclences, Leningrad 
Kuban - Milan University 
Maharragah, 1khmindi = Milan University 
Sayala - Vienna University 
Medik and route to Tomas - Strasbourg University 
Sheikh Da‘ud - Spanish Natlonal Committee for Nubla 
Afya - Leyden Museum 
Anlba - Calro Unlversity 
Ibrim - Fortress and cemeteries. Egypt Exploration Soclety, London 
Ermenneh-Tockhe - Yale and Pennsylvania Universities 
Tamit - Milan University 
Abu Simbel - East bank. Milan University 
Jebel Adda - Necropolis. German Institute, Cairo 25 
Jebel Adda - Fortress. Alexandria Unlversity, Yale and Pennsylvania Unlver- 
sitles. 
Ballana and Qustul - Antiquities Department, UAR 
  
  
CONT'D ON PAGE 40 

## [Page 26](064240engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

26 


### 64245: Floating laboratories on the Nile

FLOATING LABORATORIES 
ON THE NILE 
by Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt 
Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt, Curator of the Egyptian Antiquities 
Department at the Louvre Museum, Paris, is Unesco Consultant to 
the Egyptian Documentation Centre set up by the UAR in Cairo. 
Fo. the beginning of 1955, the normally all 
but deserted banks of the Nubian Nile 
suddenly quickened with life. Archaeologists arrived and 
commenced operations. Teams from the Documentation 
Centre on Ancient Egypt in Cairo worked unremittingly 
from dawn to dusk, winter and summer alike, oblivious to 
their isolated surroundings. 
For the past fifteen years or so, Egyptological studies 
had been at a standstill in the region above the First 
Cataract of the Nile, stretehing as far as the Second 
Cataract close to the Sudanese frontier. It seemed as 
if no excavation or archeological survey had the power 
to lure the successors of Champollion. Only a sparse 
handful of archegeological missions were at work, either 
in the Sudan to the south of the area threatened by the 
High Aswan Dam or in the north of Aswan In that land 
so richly strewn with temples. 
The launching of UNesco’s appeal brought a sudden 
change in the scene of operations. Investigators working 
in accessible sites wound up their studies, packed their 
equipment and, spurred by a sense of duty, feelings of 
loyalty to a common cause or an urge to equal or excel 
their fellow archaeologists, set off for parched and mys- 
terious Nubia. From now on they were initiating them- 
selves into the archaeological story of Nubia which, 
though often seeming to be a distorted image of the 
Egyptian parent stale, had also many lessons to teach 
them. 
Those who today follow the course of the Nubian Nile 
are no longer likely to have the same feeling of solitude 
which, even a few years ago, was a common experience 
for anyone returning to the camp of the Documentation 
Centre where Egyptians and Europeans, latter-day 
ploneers in a modern adventure, together built the 
foundations of a new collaboration In Egyptology. 
Nowadays it is hardly possible to travel 15 to 20 miles 
without finding a boat moored to the bank. Passengers 
in the regular weekly mailboat which serves this distant 
land are always surprised and fascinated by these floating 
camps, which also excite the curiosity of tourists who, 
thanks to the international appeal for the safeguarding 
of Nubia’s monuments, are now rediscovering the great 
forgotten sanctuaries. 
EF. boat encountered is practically certain to 
be the floating home of an archaeological 
expedition: Spanish, Italian (from Milan or Rome); 
Austrian, Yugoslav, American (from Chicago, Yale or 
Pennsylvania) ; Polish, Swiss, German, Dutch, Czecho- 
slovak, Belgian, English (from Oxford, Cambridge or Lon- 
don), French (from Paris, Cairo, Lyons or Strasbourg). 
Others again have been chartered by fact-collecting 
missions—Russian, Japanese, Indian and others. 
The teams from the Documentation Centre are thus no 
longer working alone in Nubia. Many other investigators 
have brought unaccustomed animation to the sun-parched 
river banks. Today too the activities of the Centre 
have been redoubled. Though it has entrusted the 
Oriental Institute of Chicago and the French Institute 
of Oriental Archaeology in Cairo with the completion in 
extenso of the final surveys of the temples of Beit el 
Wadi and Wadi es Sebua, it has itself shouldered the 
immense task of surveying, down to the smallest detail, 
all the other sanctuaries of Nubia. 
During the first meeting of the Consultative Committee 
of Experts set up by the Government of the United Arab 
Republic, the Egyptologist members spontaneously under- 
took to follow a set of rules designed for the common good. 
The system used by the foreign missions for recording 
information about the various monuments is based on the 
techniques developed and perfected by the Cairo Centre 
and follows the demands of Egyptological fact-finding. 
The Documentation Centre which is, in fact, the na- 
tional archives of Egyptian archaeology, is to receive a 
copy of all the monument surveys completed by foreign 
missions, the missions naturally retaining the publica- 
tion rights for these reports for a pre-determined period. 
The Centre, however, is making itself responsible for 
nearly all the surveys. It has already boosted its activities 
tenfold thanks to the construction of a magnificent 
floating-laboratory in which it is possible to go on working 
in the hottest weather (summer temperatures sometimes 
reach 140 degrees Fahrenheit) and which also solves the 
water problem. Heavily impregnated with silt in summer, 
the water must be constantly filtered and cooled for all 
purposes Including photographic development. 
PD): every season nowadays there are always 
several of the Centre’s missions operating 
from fully equipped vessels. Egypt's technical and scien- 
tific teams, well versed In this specialized and delicate 
work of collaboration, aiso are receiving help on an 
appreciable scale from other countries. Unesco continues 
to provide an adviser and several specialists. At this 
phase of the campaign foreign assistance comes indivi- 
dually from countries responding to the appeal. They 
have sent specialists in philology and archeology and 
also technicians, and have provided the funds to maintain 
em. 
The results of all the surveys are centralized at the 
Documentation Centre and following the 1961 summer 
missions a satisfying volume of work has been achieved. 
Surveys on the temples of Abu Simbel are virtually com- 
pleted as are those on the small temples of Abu Oda and 
Jebel Shams. The list of other surveying results is Im- 
pressive: the tomb-chapel of Pennut at Aniba, the Amada 
temple, part of the Dakka temple and the rock-hewn 
chapel at Ellesya, part of the Wadi es Sebua temple and 
the temple of Gerf Hussein; the immense cliff of Ka- 
labsha with its adjoining chapels, the Beit el Wali temple, 
the Taffeh chapels and those of Kertassi (not forgetting 
the astonishing Kertassi quarries) and finally the Debod 
monument. 
At the gateway to Egyptian Nubia, the island marvel 
that is Philae, with all its sanctuaries, has not yet been 
completely surveyed. Long before the Aswan High Dam 
created a threat to the island a French mission and then 
a German one had begun to publish the results of their 
surveys. But these results were minute in comparison 
with all that remains to be done. 
Now, at any rate, the work of systematically examining 
the island, is under way. Last year two French epigra- 
phers sent by the French National Council of Scientific 
Research, joined their Egyptian colleagues in making as 
complete an inventory as possible of the Greek epigraphs 
on the Sacred Island. 
At the same time a mission from the French National 
Geographic Institute, including five photogrammetry 
  
CONT'D ON PAGE 28 

## [Page 27](064240engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 64245: Floating laboratories on the Nile

» 
aa 
© Pau! Almasy 
Unesco-Van der Haagen 
 - 
» : . ¥ Kn 
Fn Ta 
WADI ES SEBUA (below) one of the most beautiful of Nublan temples, was bullt by Rameses || more 
than 3,200 years ago. its graceful row of sphinxes lead to the shore of the Nile. Like many other tem- 
ples In the Nubian valley it is threatened by the waters which will rise 200 feet after the completion of the 
Aswan Dam. Above, a colossal head of Rameses I found In the Interlor court of the temple of Gerf Husseln. 
  

## [Page 28](064240engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 64245: Floating laboratories on the Nile

28 
  
  
    " ¢ - Pf 
be y we 
= % “wm 
NUBIA'S SANCTUARIES are being 
crated up all along the Niie. Above, 
a block the from Kertassi temple is 
numbered and boxed for shipment. 
FLOATING LABORATORIES (Cont'd) 
  
P
h
o
i
o
s
 
E
g
y
p
t
i
a
n
 
D
o
c
u
m
e
n
t
a
t
i
o
n
 
C
e
n
t
r
e
 
  
crating and shipment. Below, temple at 
Debod in process of being dismantled. 
 
RACE AGAINST 
THE RISING WATERS 
specialists worked alongside the team of the Docu- 
mentation Centre and an Egyptian photogrammetry tech- 
nician, to make a complete record (architectural mea- 
surements and photographs) of all the monuments on 
the island and of the island itself. 
Working in the oppressive summer heat, they continued 
their task in the temples which are only freed by the 
Nile waters during this season. They finished making 
surveys of the sanctuaries of Debod, Taffeh North and the 
small kiosk of Kertassi only a few days before these 
monuments were dismantled for removal. This would 
have been the last year in which these sanctuaries would 
have appeared above the waters. 
They went on to make surveys of all the quarries 
at Kertassl, and of Beit el Wali; they completed the work 
at Kalabsha, begun two years earlier, and continued 
operations at the temple of Dendur, at Gerf Hussein 
and at Dakka. 
They even made full surveys of the Byzantine citadel at 
Sabagura which had only been brought to light a few 
weeks earlier. Classical epigraphers carried out research 
and verification work, made impressions, photographed 
and copied all the Greek inscriptions in the KXertassi 
quarries and on the temple of Dakka. 
In this race against time the work has called for perfect 
precision and has raised multiple problems. It has 
demanded from all those engaged upon It a rigorous sense 
of accuracy, great physical resistance and, above all, an 
attitude of complete unselfishness—the ability to sink 
all personal interests in a task for the common good. 
Altogether it has been an extraordinary example of inter- 
national collaboration producing unhoped for results. 
Some of Nubia's sanctuaries can only be pre- 
served in the hallowed sites chosen for them by 
priests and deities for they fit so perfectly into their 
surroundings that it would be difficult to Imagine them in 
any other lieu. But there are others, less famous or whose 
meaning is not so closely associated with their settings, 
and these can be moved and preserved for posterity. 
In contrast to the two major monuments of Philae and 
Abu Simbel there are other temples which must be 
uprooted and taken away if they are not to be lost for 
ever. Some are hewn from the solid rock and their trans- 
fer raises multiple problems, some of which have already 
been resolved. Others are built on the banks of the Nile 
and can most likely be removed piece by piece along with 
their foundations. 
Yet even this operation is not as simple as it sounds, 
particularly when a building is made up of regular stone 
blocks coated with plaster. The plaster, moulded on the 
outlines of the ornamental reliefs, is itself covered with 
paintings which do not correspond in size or form with 
the surfaces beneath them. 
It is thus impossible to remove the stones one by one 
without destroying an essential decorative element or at 
the very least seriously damaging something that has 
come down to us, despite religious feuds, wars or neglect, 
through thousands of years. A case in point is the 
  

## [Page 29](064240engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 64245: Floating laboratories on the Nile

     
    
MASSIVE STONES from 
Debod temple are moved by 
cranes and manpower (above). 
Both Debod and Taffeh tem- 
ples have found a temporary 
home on Elephantine Island, 
opposite Aswan, where they 
have been boxed and stored 
(right) awaiting eventual re- 
construction at another site. 
cnarming temple of Amada. To plan the safety of this 
rare treasure France recently set up a speciai mission 
supervised by an Inspector General of Historic Monuments. 
Another country, the Federal Republic of Germany, has 
decided to carry out the complete removal of the great 
Graeco-Roman temple of Kalabsha — an ambitious 
operation likely to pose many problems. Kalabsha, like 
other temples dating from the Graeco-Roman period in 
Nubia, is built close to the river bank and for the past 
50 years or so it has been swallowed up for nine months 
out of every 12 by the waters of the Nile. The fact that 
its paintings have not survived the annual immersion has 
at least disposed of one of the dismantling problems. 
It was to monuments of this type that the Antiquities 
Service of the United Arab Republic turned its attention 
when it discovered that two small Graeco-Roman temples 
situated near the spot height 100 metres above sea level 
would be freed by the waters for only a few days during 
the next two or three summers. They had to be saved 
while they were still accessible. 
Without waiting for a foreign mission to embark on the 
rescue of these sites, the Antiquities Service, helped by 
the Documentation Centre and several Polish, Belgian and 
French specialists, undertook to dismantle the Debod 
temple and to uncover in a basin at the Kalabsha channel 
the remains of the Taffeh North chapel which had long 
since collapsed and was hidden under the mud of the Nile, 
Between July and September 1960 the teams hastily sur- 
veyed and collected information at these two sanctuaries, 
while specialists numbered the blocks of stone, traced 
their positions on reconstruction plans, packed every 
painted or inscribed stone in cases, established index cards 
for each piece and then took away all this material. 
In many cases the cement used in the restoration work 
dating from earlier this century and supervised by Gaston 
Maspero, the then Director of the Egyptian Antiquities 
Service, which held the blocks together during their 
annual immersion, was found to be more solid than the 
rocks. This made dismantling even more delicate. 
   ve] 
JES 
i” 
RE 
Unesco — Van der Haagen 
Working all day under the pitiless sun in the stifling, 
airless desert atmosphere, harassed by the knowledge that 
the waters would soon rise again and forced to live in 
overcrowded conditions on their boats, the teams never- 
theless finished their task in time and brought to Ele- 
phantine Island the cargos of stones in their wooden cases. 
These temples of Debod and Taffehh have been deslgn- 
ated by the Government of the United Arab Republic as 
gifts for countries which contribute actively to the work 
of saving Nubia’'s monuments. They are not to be recon- 
structed in Egypt. Instead their stones together with all 
the sclentific and technical documentation concerning 
them will be handed over to new guardians. 
In addition, the Ministry of Culture decided to dis- 
mantle and carry away the Kertassi chapel, taking advan- 
tage of the equipment that had been brought to Nubia 
for the original removal operations (boats, scaffolding, 
etc.) and of the presence of specialists used to handling 
large blocks of masonry. 
This operation was completed in September 1960, hut 
before any of the walls and colonnades were dismantled 
teams of photogrammetric specialists made complete 
recordings of the chapel. Kertassi is now carefully stored, 
stone by stone, in packing cases. It will be raised again 
not far from its original site on a cliff on the west Nublan 
bank, overlooking the great lake. 
All that can now be.seen on the former sites of these 
three sanctuaries are traces of their foundations and 
beneath these the remains of earlier temples. 
It is now the turn of the diggers. The recording, inch 
by inch, of these buildings Is to be followed by studles 
and searches on and under the ground. 
Thus a new archaeological phase is due to begin. 
Fresh facts in the story of the great religious edifices 
of the Egyptians kings in Nubia are about to be revealed. 
And whether or not the archaxological prize includes gold 
and precious stones does not really matter. Those who 
search are pledged to rescue priceless artistic treasures 29 
from oblivion and to bring to light the buried pages of 
history.

## [Page 30](064240engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 64247: Twenty-three monuments will be removed

30 
  
TWENTY-THREE 
MONUMENTS 
WILL BE 
REMOVED 
TAFFEH 
Ptolemaic Roman period. Taffeh has just been removed, like Debod, 
in the traditional Pharaonic manner, by the use of human muscle, 
with no devices other than ropes. Taffeh is being offered by the 
Egyptian Government in recognition of foreign aid. 
    
Nr re vat zote 
or RR 
wr .- l . 
{ vp rari Wi 
0 — 
GERF HUSSEIN 
Hewn out of a sandstone 
terrace at the behest of 
Rameses Il. Extraordinary 
colossal statues in a unique 
regional style and probably 
the work of local artists. 
Cannot be saved. Some 
sections will be detached 
and kept in museums. 
  
AMADA 
Belongs to the culminating 
period of Egyptian art. Built 
py the pharaohs some three 
thousand years ago. Harmo- 
nious lines, delicate sculpture 
and marvellous paintings all 
intact. Of great historical 
interest owing to its in- 
scriptions. Must be removed 
in one piece. Method now 
being studied by France, 
  
KASR IBRIM (Chapels) 
~ »  
Four rock chapels dating 
back 3,500 years. The two 
lower chapels are submerged 
when the Nile is in flood. 
Painted reliefs in the two 
upper chapels are still intact. 
Will be sawn out of the 
cliff in several parts and 
transferred to another site. 
Not far from the second 
Cataract. Small temple 
built by Rameses Il. Reliefs 
and inscriptions. The main 
scenes depict Rameses seiz- 
ing two Africans. Lists of 
peoples of Asia and Africa 
conquered by the Pharaoh. 
To be taken to a museum. 
Small temple 10 miles from Philae. 
Augustus and Tiberius appear on 
the fagade amidst the gods. Built 
by a Nubian king. Monumental 
doorway adorned with the symbolic 
winged sun. Offered with four 
other sanctuaries by the Egyptian 
Government in recognition of for- 
eign aid. Debod has already 
been dismantled and removed to 
safety on Elephantine Island pre- 
paratory to re-erection elsewhere. 
  
  
| BEIT 
EL WALI 
~$£.- Rock-hewn temple contem- 
#—-- _-& __poraneous with Rameses Il. 
5c = 3 -- Courtyard, hall of columns 
» and sanctuary decorated with 
"= polychrome reliefs and in- 
scriptions. Battle scenes 
+ &_ depicting the king in com- 
aR | bat. Later used as a Coptic 
—Se. church. Will be removed. gr 4 iz i i 
  
   
   
   
  
Built by a Nubian king during DAKKA 
the Roman Ptolemaic period 
(three centuries B.C.). Decor- 
ated at different periods. Low 
reliefs in a perfect state of 
preservation. Now submerged 
for eight months of the year. 
Will be transferred. 
    
 
          
   
5 
P
T
 
t
d
 
  
 
Rock-hewn temple of the 
time of Rameses Il. Dedi- 
cated to the Sun God Ra- 
Horakhti. One hall is 
decorated throughout with 
reliefs filled with red iron 
oxide and painted. One 
of the five Nubian temples 
Egypt is offering in return 
for foreign aid. Will be 
excavated and transferred. 
Pennut’s Tomb. Pennut 
was Controller of Taxes 
under Rameses VI. The 
inner walls of the tomb are 
decorated with minute paint- vr SE : ; 
ed incised reliefs. To be FE BS 
 
removed in one piece to ~T Spt: ~~ Cm 
another site. —_—mreee—— a TT 
BUHEN (Temple) 
Built by Queen Hatshepsut and trans- 
formed by Thutmosis Ill some 3,500 
years ago. Unusual colonnade alter- 
nating square pillars and round columns. 
Decorated inside with polychrome 
reliefs. Part of the huge fortress of 
Buhen in the Sudan. Made of mud 
bricks, fortress cannot be saved. Temple 
will be dismantled and rebuilt. 

## [Page 31](064240engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 64247: Twenty-three monuments will be removed

KERTASSI (Temple) 
Roman temple. The kiosk must have been similar to the one at 
Philae. Greek and Coptic inscriptions. Now dismantled and packed 
in cases on Elephantine Island, close to Philae. 
  
KALABSHA 
One of the finest examples 
of Roman Egyptian art. 
Known as the “Luxor of 
Nubia”. Temple raised to 
Mandulis, the Nubian Sun 
God. The reliefs are 
connected with his cult. 
Almost as large as Notre- 
Dame de Paris. The German 
Federal Republic has agreed 
to dismantle and remove it. 
  
  
  
  
MAHARRAQAH 
Colonnade similar to those of the Roman Ptolemaic period (Philae, 
Kalabsha, Dendur, etc.). First described by the Swiss traveller and 
orientalist, John Lewis Burckhardt, who discovered the Great Temple 
of Abu Simbel, almost buried in the sand, in 1813. To be transferred. 
  
KERTASSI 
(Quarry) 
This quarry, 28 miles away 
from Aswan, supplied the 
building stone for Philae. 
Its small sanctuary was hewn 
out of the rock by the quar- 
riers. Inscriptions and busts 
of master-builders and super- 
intendents of works. 
  
Known as the Temple of 
Augustus, Dendur was dedi- 
cated to two heroes who 
were drowned, It still has 
its landing-stage on the 
Nile and its monumental 
doorway. Richly decorated 
inside and out with intaglio 
and low reliefs, Offered 
by the Egyptian Government 
in recognition of foreign aid. 
  
WADI ES SEBUA 
Temple dating from the time of Rameses Il. Hemi-speos (that is, 
partly hewn out of the rock). An avenue of tiaraed sphinxes leads up 
to the pylon. Incised and low reliefs abound. Many Christian 
paintings attest to the transformation of the temple into a church, 
ELLESYA 
Speos hewn out of the 
rock 3,500 years ago under 
Thutmosis lll. The inside 
walls are entirely covered 
with reliefs. Offered by 
Egypt in recognition of 
foreign aid. It will be 
excavated and placed else- 
where in the cliff face. 
ABU ODA 
Temple hewn out of the 
rock in 1325 B.C. Con- 
verted into a. church in 
Christian times. Some of 
the paintings that covered _ 4 
the Pharaonic reliefs still _J% 
exist, including a large Christ 
on the ceiling. Will be 
transferred in separate parts 
to a specially prepared site. 
 
SENMNA WEST 
Imposing fortress built two thousand years before Christ. With Semna 
East it defended the southern frontier of Egypt under the Middle 
Kingdom. Temple built by Thutmosis Ill. Numerous coloured 
incisions and reliefs. To be transferred to a nearby cliff on the 
opposite bank of the Ni 
The church stands within 
fortress. Some of the stones 
were doubtless taken from 
an earlier Egyptian temple, 
A column of Aswan granite 
is still standing near the 
apse. Ornamental motifs on 
the arches. To be disman- 
tled and rebuilt nearby. 
JEBEL SHAMS 
    
- vs AN YN \ 
Tiny rock-hewn chapel dedi- = | en ig 
cated to the Nubian Prince ~—’ ~~ =. oy 
Poeri some thousand years a id e = ~~ 
     
before our era. Poeri was A 
known as the Royal Son of \ 
Kush. He occupied the 
important post of Royal 
Fly-flapper. A statue of 
Rameses the Great was set 
up in the chapel. All the 
flgures face this statue. 
SEMNA EAST 
Temple of Sudanese sandstone built under Thutmosis lll. Inscriptions 
and reliefs. In the West basement, hieroglyphs cut into the rock 
recall the fact that in 1800 B.C. the flood level of the Nile was 26 feet 
higher than it is today. It is assumed that the oldest dam in history 
existed towards the rocky spurs of Sep na, The temple will be removed. 
3 RT MI 
 
 
Drawings |talconsult 
31

## [Page 32](064240engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

32 


### 64249: Journey to the land of Kush

JOURNEY TO THE 
LAND O 
by Rex Keating 
O UR train was running slowly across a plain; it 
was a sandy plain blown into wavelets by the 
strong north wind which whistled through the cracks in 
the carriage windows. The train travelled slowly other- 
wise it wouid have torn up the tracks. Inside the 
compartment, choking dust hung in the air like a mist. 
Outside, through the carriage window, tinted as a protec- 
tion from the harsh light, three colours were dominant, 
the yellow of the sand, the blue of the sky and the purple 
of the rocks lining the horizon. Harsh colours all. In 
this stretch of desert south of Wadi Halfa in the Sudan, 
nothing grows, because here It rains perhaps only once 
in ten years. 
Over to the west of the rallway flows the river Nile, 
through landscapes no less harsh and forbidding. This 
land was known to the ancient Egyptians as Kush : 
today we call it Sudanese Nubia. The great lake which 
will build up behind the new High Dam at Aswan will 
flood far south through Egyptian Nubia, across the border 
into Sudanese Nubia, where it will engulf first the Wadi 
Halfa district, then the Second Cataract, finally to end 
just short of the Third Cataract, which is the extreme 
limit of the flood, some hundred miles inside the Sudan. 
W = makes Sudanese Nubia so important to 
archeologists? Professor W.B. Emery of Lon- 
don University has answered this question. “It is the an- 
cient towns, the cemeteries and the old fortresses of Nu- 
bia,” he says, “which cannot be considered beautiful but 
which are absolute treasure houses of information about 
the life, conditions, hopes and aspirations of our fore- 
bears. These remains must be explored and excavated 
without fail.” 
A few months ago, I found myself in one of those for- 
gotten fortresses high above the Cataract. It was Shelfak, 
picturesquely named by the ancient Egyptians—“Curbing 
the Foreign Countries.” In this timeless setting the past 
assumes almost tangible form and I found myself pictur- 
ing an Egyptian sentry of long ago looking out over the 
river to the hostlle desert beyond. 
The wind was blowing strongly, whistling among the 
rocks and sending up swirls of black dust from the mud 
bricks of the sentry-walk below my shoes. With the 
wind in my face, I looked towards the north along the 
length of the Nile, and there about a mile away, was 
a rocky Island, blgger than most and rising to a peak. 
Growing out of the peak was another fortress, its every 
detall visible clearly in the crystal atmosphere. 
My ancient Egyptian. sentry would have seen the rocky 
peak, but he would not have seen the fortress, because 
this was built some 3,000 years after his time by a Chris- 
tian kinglet of Nubia. Neither would he have seen yet 
another fortress, built at the end of the nineteenth 
century A.D. by Kitchener in his advance against the 
Dervish armies. 
From thls remote Nubian fortress, one can span four 
thousand years of history. Forty turbulent centuries of 
life along the banks of this stretch of the Nile. For this 
was always a great highway between the Mediterranean 
civilizations of the north and Africa to the south. 
Armies have struggled along it for close on 5,000 years, 
CONT'D ON PAGE 35 
 
  

## [Page 33](064240engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 64249: Journey to the land of Kush

  
Unesco-Keating 
GUARDIANS OF THE NILE. On their southern frontiers, 
in present-day Sudan, the ancient Egyptians selected this 
site, where the Nile narrows sharply between granite cliffs, 
to build two forbidding fortresses 40 centuries ago. Semna 
West (top of aerial photo) is clearly visible amid the light- 
coloured sandy wastes of the more arid western bank of the 
river. Directly opposite is the fortress of Semna East dis- 
tinguishable from the surrounding maze of rock gulleys 
by the straight lines of its fortified walls. Both fortresses 
will be submerged, but their important temples, dating from 
between 1500 and 1400 B.C., are to be removed to safety. 
Inset Semna West temple amid crumbling fortress walls. 

## [Page 34](064240engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 64249: Journey to the land of Kush

  
  
 
From the ruined walls of this ancient Egyp- 
tian fortress at Shelfak in Sudanese Nubia 
the eye spans 4,000 years of turbulent 
history along the stretch of the Nile it 
once guarded. On a rocky island (upper 
centre) are the remains of a fortress bullt 
.about 1,000 years ago by a Christian king- 
let of Nubia. Away on the horizon is 
yet another fortress, built by troops of 
‘General Kitchener in his advance against 
Dervish armies in the late i9th century. 
This flat-bottomed boat crossing the Nile 
to once strongly fortified island of Uro- 
narti in Sudanese Nubia is almost identical 
to the ones used by the soldiers of the 
Pharaoh Sesostris nearly 4,000 years ago.

## [Page 35](064240engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 64249: Journey to the land of Kush

  
  
— - 
The discovery a few years ago of the great fortress of Buhen 
near Wadi Halfa revolutionized previous conceptions of 
Pharaonic military architecture. Here, workers continue 
the excavation of its vast fortifications which once 
kept careful watch over the strategic area around the 
Second Nile Cataract, dividing Upper and Lower Nubia. 
The people who dwell today near the Second Cataract of 
the Nile offer living examples of Nubia’s remote past. Their 
lives are rooted deeply in unbroken threads of tradition. 
Below, typical portal decoration of a contemporary Nub- 
ian house containing symbols and emblems some of which 
date back through the Christian era to Pharaonic times. 
  
     
  
: it~ ed an 
a ALAA Anat XV 3 
: GT 
\ : KS — 
-~ 
~- 
- 2 
i ne bh Ee - 
All photos Unesco Keating 
LAND OF KUSH (cont'd) 
HIDDEN SECRETS 
OF THE SECOND 
CATARACT 
the soldiers of Pharaoh, the dark-skinned warriors from 
the kingdoms to the south, Greek mercenaries, sweating 
Roman leglonarles, the troops of Islam, the helmeted men 
of Kitchener's army—>5 000 years of marching and count- 
ermarching. 
I reflected that at last peace was to come forever to 
this land, for Nubla with Its rocks, its temples, its 
fortresses, its memories of a past Incredibly remote, Is 
doomed to vanish beneath the rising waters of 
the Nile, the river which has given it life from the 
beginning of time. 
But Sudanese Nubia holds more than monuments and 
relics: it contains the people of the Second Cataract and 
they are a llving example of life In Nubla's remote past, 
as Mr. LP. Kirwan, Director of London's Royal Geogra- 
phical Soclety, recently told me. 
Towards the end of the 19th century the railway from 
Wadl Halfa struck off across the eastern desert, leaving 
these people in a great bend of the Nile and creating 
an archaeological museum filled not only with monuments 
but with memories of the past. 
Their folklore is fascinating In this respect and it links 
up wlth archaeological discovery and literary evidence 
but, as Kirwan pointed out, the people of the Second 
Cataract must leave their ancient land before the waters 
close over {t. They are to be moved to an area some hun- 
dreds of miles away and Inevitably the unbroken threads 
of tradition rooted deep In thelr homeland will be severed. 
Within a generation or so the folklore and traditions will 
be lost so iL Is Important for a social anthropology survey 
to be made before the exodus gets under way. 
Kirwan feels that any such survey should note carefully 
the architecture and decorative designs of modern Nu- 
blan houses: some of the emblems used date right back 
through the Fung Kingdom of the 15th century to the 
early Christlan era and earlier still to Pharaonic times. 
ovens found an example of these enduring 
traditions in the heart of the Second Cata- 
ract. From the Semna fortresses I had followed an 
ancient wall running north along the river bank for about 
seven miles to a point opposite the island fortress of 
Uronart! (“Arti” is Nubian for “iIsland”). I shall never 
forget the setting. 
The island is long and narrow, close on a mile in 
length, and the fortress springs from a crag high above 
the Nile at the northernmost tip of the island. The black 
rocks dazzle the eyes, thelr surfaces polished to a metallic 
hardness by immemorial floods. Here the Nile runs swift 
and deep. 
We crossed In a boat as broad as it was long, flat- 
bottomed, and of a construction unfamiliar to me. And 
here the Second Cataract ylelded up one of its many 
secrets. Professor Torgny Sive-Soderbergh of Upsala 
University, Sweden, with whom I was travelling, explain- 
ed that thls boat was bullt In the tradition of anclent 
Egypt as depicted on the walls of the tombs. So we 
salled across the Nile to the Island of the King, Uro- 
nart, on a craft that would have been familiar to a sol- 
dier of the Pharaoh Sesostris, looking down from the sen- 
try-walk high above our heads. 
Another fortress on the horizon, bullt some 3,000 years 
after Sesostrls’ day was a reminder that Christianity 
endured In this part of Nubla for close on 800 years, unti} 
the Increasing pressure of Islam finally overwhelmed it 
and the many churches and monasteries fell into ruin. 
A few days later, in Khartum, Professor P. Shennie of 
the Unlversity of Ghana spoke to me about this fascin- 
ating period of history. He pointed out that the Christian 
kingdoms of Nubia, lasting from roughly the middle of 
the 6th century till at least the 14th, are hardly known. 
CONT'D ON PAGE 137 
 
35

## [Page 36](064240engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

36 
    
  
PCY Sd, Bo 
ZC ~— Sia ae 
‘ op LT Th 
-prs hr. he  
   
    
   
p
r
 
mM
 
o
n
l
 
- 
5
 
; 
m 
o
f
 
eA
 
A
F
 
    
oR Fe Jpm—— no SRN 
The Rock of Abu-Sir at the entrance of the Second 
Cataract of the Nile in the Sudan overlooks the ancient 
Nubian highway along which, for close on 5,000 years, 
soldiers, merchants, travellers and pilgrims have passed 
A Unesco Radio and T.V. expedition, led by Rex Keating, last year visited 
the threatened sites in Egyptian and Sudanese Nubia. Here Rex Keating 
descends a street of the ancient fortress of Semna West (Sudan) while other 
members follow with gear and equipment. Temple is seen on the skyline. 


### 64249: Journey to the land of Kush

LAND OF KUSH (Cont'd) 
ISLAND WORKSHOP OF STONE AGE MAN 
They begin with the coming of missionaries from Byzan- 
tlum, sent by the Emperor Justinian in the middle of 
the 6th century, who came up through Egypt to the then 
pagan peoples of Nubia. 
Still in existence are the writings of the Syrian, John 
of Ephesus, which give a vilvld account of the coming of 
one of these missionaries, of how he suffered from the 
heat and hid himself in a cave with his feet In a hasin 
of cold water to keep cool during the hot weather, an 
action with which many of us who know the Sudan 
during the summer months will be in great sympathy. 
On many of the little ruined churches of the area are 
frescoes of gods, of the Virgin, of salnts, all showing very 
strong Byzantine characteristics. The pottery of the peo- 
ple Is also of extremely good quality, a flne painted ware 
with many motives derived from the Mediterranean. 
It is also Interesting to see that this State maintained 
its theological links with Byzantium and did not sub- 
scribe to the Monophysite heresy of the Coptic Church 
in Egypt; as a result of this we find gravestones written 
in Greek, although In many cases a very bad Greek, right 
up until the 12th century. 
Professor Shennie pointed out that these are the most 
remote Greek Inscriptions known anywhere in the world, 
and it is quite clear that those who were writing them 
could have had no contact with Greece itself, prob- 
ably for many generations. 
The Nubians live in a valley of the Nile, which, since 
the continent of Africa attained the shape we recognize 
today, has been the maln overland route between north 
and south—between the Mediterranean coast and the 
vast ethnic group of the Negro peoples of Equatorial 
Africa. Man must always have used the Nile valley as a 
convenient highway. Anthropologists have even sug- 
gested that Central Africa may have seen Man's first 
triumph over his material surroundings. This is a 
measure of the importance of the prehistoric sites which 
have yet to be discovered on the banks of the Nile. 
Only two years ago near the extreme southern limit of 
the area to be flooded, a discovery of the first impor- 
tance was made on the prehistoric terraces of the Nile: 
among many animal bones, lay the jawhone of a Nean- 
derthal man. 
Traces of prehistoric man are plain to see on all sides 
in the Second Cataract. On the island of Uronarti, for 
example, Professor Soderbergh showed me what he des- 
cribed as a “Stone Age workshop.” There lying on the 
surface were typical mesolithic implements. Professor 
Soderbergh remarked that Uronarti must have heen 
inhabited for tens of thousands of years and that before 
it was lost it must be surveyed and excavated so that 
its whole history might be revealed. 
This deserted island in its harsh and lifeless, yet aus- 
terely beautiful, setting, induces a fascination that is 
curlously disturbing. On all sides are tangible signs of 
the generations of men and women who once lived here, 
stretching back to the shadowy dawn of history and far 
carlier, for possibly fifteen thousand years and more. By 
comparison, the Mlddle Kingdom fortress on its crag is 
a manifestation of the modern world. 
The earliest of the peoples of ancient Egypt regarded 
the area south of Wadi Halfa with awe. Its inhabitants 
were the fierce cattle owners against whom they bullt 
the immense fortresses which still stand along the length 
of the Cataract, spectacular even in their ruin. Yet a 
thousand years before the fortresses frowned over the 
river, travellers and expeditions from Egypt came this 
way. 
Standing back from the river Nile is an isolated hill; 
a shoulder of rock fallen from the hill above and standing 
a yard or so away from it, conceals on its inner face on 
inscription. This is by far the earliest inscription in 
Sudanese and Egyptian Nubia and it records in archaic 
hieroglyphs that an expedition sent by King Djer of 
Egypt passed this rock on its way to the south. King 
Djer was the third king of Egypt's first dynasty, an incre- 
dibly remote figure who ruled at the very dawn of Egypt's 
history some 5,000 years ago. Yet here, in effect, is his 
signature, a clear indication that he did once exist.

## [Page 37](064240engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 64249: Journey to the land of Kush

between the Mediterranean civilizations to the north 
and those of Central Africa to the south. Here, along 
the length of the Second Cataract, the peoples of 
Ancient Egypt built a series of immense fortresses. 
hag, 
he 4 
On the rocks round about are other inscriptions, left 
by travellers, armies, expeditions, traders, who passed this 
way during the next 2,000 years or so, but it is the Djer 
Inscription with its archalc lettering that stirs the ima- 
gination. Who led the expedition of King Djer and how 
big it was, we shall never know. But we do know that 
they were very brave men. They believed, in those early 
days, that they were venturing Into what they called 
“the Land of Ghosts,” a territory of nameless terrors, 
where glants and pygmlies lived and monstrous animals. 
Worst of all, they were venturing to the very edge of 
Amentat, the dreadful “Abode of the Dead.” How many 
similar rock inscriptions remain to be discovered? 
On the site of an archeological excavation in Suda- 
nese Nubia, I watched the workmen carrying away the 
sand and singing with the voice of Africa. They could 
hardly have known the significance of the objects they 
were helping to uncover, yet these objects may one day 
reveal knowledge of profound importance to scholars 
wishing to trace the influences which have fashioned 
Africa. I suddenly recalled that a few weeks earlier, in 
south-west Sudan, a thousand miles from Nubia, I had 
recorded a mountain people singing with rhythms that 
carried faint echoes of the Nubian song. 
All over West and Central Africa strange similarities of 
form have appeared in widely separated areas. The 
ancient name of Kush is still preserved in the names of 
Nublan-speaking peoples living today in south-west 
Sudan. There are the Kagiddi, for example, who believe, 
they came from the east under the leadership of a queen, 
who they say Is buried in a large mound grave in Jebel 
Meldot. The queen was probably one of the last monarchs 
of defeated Kush, in other words the Nubian Kingdom of 
Meroe, which lasted nearly 1,000 years from about 600 B.C. 
The Kushites were great iron workers. Their capital, 
Meroe, has been called the “Birmingham of the ancient 
world” and from thelr factories, weapons and objects of 
iron spread across Africa, influencing profoundly the 
neighbouring African cultures of that day. They have 
left many indecipherable inscriptions: it is possible that 
in Nubia lies buried the key to the Meroitic tongue. 
To this day in Benine City, Nigeria, bronze objects are 
being made which recall strongly some of the bronzes 
made In Meroe and Egypt to commemorate the Egyptian 
god, Amon. From Ghana too, come two bronze lamps 
Fr
ci
os
 
U
r
e
s
c
o
-
K
e
a
t
i
n
g
 
Ancient hieroglyphs and carvings on this rock slab at Jebel Sheikh el Suleiman, 
in the Sudan, are the oldest inscriptions yet found in Sudanese and Egyptian 
Nubia. Some 5,000 years old, they record that an expedition sent by King 
Djer, third monarch of Egypt's first dynasty, passed the rock on Its way south, 
which strongly resemble the lamps found In burial 
mounds of the 5th Century A.D. in northern Sudan. These 
are faint hints, but significant. 
The link, Professor Sive-Soderbergh maintains, 1s to 
be found in Nubia, on the banks of that 300-mile stretch 
of the Nile which the High Dam will submerge. 
Professor Emery described Nubia to me as the cockplt 
of the ancient African world. From the north, the Egyp- 
tians, representing the highest civilization of that time, 
were pushing south to exploit the gold mines and to 
trade in ivory, preclous woods and other products. 
“The people of the south, whose culture, as we are 
beginning to realize through recent excavations and 
research”, Professor Emery added, “was by no means 
negligible, were pushing north to the more fertile parts of 
the valley of the Nile. Consequently there was an almost 
continuous state of warfare between the peoples of the 
north and the south, and the results of the battles be- 
tween them, small as they were in comparison with our 
modern conflicts, have greatly influenced the course of 
European civilization and, through European clvilizatlon, 
that of the world at the present time.” 
At the University in Khartum, L.P. Kirwan explained 
why he considered the excavation of new sites in Sudanese 
Nubia to be of the greatest importance. 
“This is going to produce world history,” he said. It 
is going to add to the history of Africa, not only of the 
Sudan but also of Africa as a whole. This Is a subject 
which Is of Increasing interest to African students and 
African peoples as they emerge Into independence. 
“The time for all this work is extremely short and every 
effort will have to be made by the nations of the world 
to save history from the floods, so to speak, and to preserve 
the cultural heritage of this part of Africa for future 
generations.” 
We should indeed be grateful for the building of the 
High Dam for it has drawn the attention of scholars 
the world over to this forgotten reach of the Nile. Of 
the slow progress of man from his first faltering steps on 
the tortuous path towards civilization, every foot of the 
river's banks bears evidence, either above ground or below. 
Here truly Is an opportunity unique In the fields of pre- 
history, anthropology and archeology. We now awalt 
the testimony of the spade. 
37

## [Page 38](064240engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 64251: Nubia's Christian age

NUBIA'S CHRISTIAN AGE 
by L.P. Kirwan 
Laurence Patrick Kirwan first began exploring and excavating in Nubia 
in 1929, when he became Assistant Director of the Archaeological 
Survey of Nubia undertaken by the Egyptian Department of 
Antiquities. He later participated in numerous expeditions. Since 
1945 he has been Director of the Royal Geographical Society, London. 
prosperity and power. Thriving cities and townships, 
churches and monasteries, were thickly clustered along 
both banks of the Nile. The administration of Church 
HEN we think of Nubia, and the famous historic 
WwW monuments that are now In danger from the 
High Dam, most of us think mainly of the great temples 
of Abu Simbel and Phil, built by the Pharaohs several 
thousand years ago. Certainly, these rank with the most 
splendid monuments of the anclent world. But they, and 
other smaller temples and bulldings of similarly ancient 
date, are not the only relics of early Nubian civilization in 
danger of belng submerged by the rising waters of the 
Nile. 
In style and origin, these memorials of the Pharaohs 
are not Nublan at all, They are Egyptian; projections of 
anclent Egyptian art and architecture into a conquered 
land; a land which belongs, unlike Egypt north of the 
First Cataract, to the African rather than to the Mediter- 
ranean scene. 
By contrast with these Pharaonic monuments, there are 
many other relics of ancient and medieval times, more 
truly Nubian in character. Some belong to the Sudanese 
kingdom of Meroe, which ruled during the Greco-Roman 
Age over most of the Sudan and most of Lower Nubia 
from its capital, Meroe, a hundred miles or so north of 
Khartum. 
Others belong to Christian Nubia, to the era of the 
Christian Nubian kingdoms. These flourished from 542 to 
1323 A.D. and thus endured for seven hundred years after 
the Moslem conquest of neighbouring Egypt. 
This age of Christianity in Nubia was one of great 
ST PETER (below) replaces Egyptian gods to which 
Rameses Il (still depicted on right of niche) is offering 
flowers in the temple of Wadi es Sebua. Nubia was 
christianized in the 5th and 6th centuries and the temples 
were often converted into churches. Much of the former 
decoration was left alongside the Christian imagery. 
  
i 5g ER EW AEE | 
yA 
wit 
 
U
n
e
s
c
o
-
L
a
u
r
e
n
z
a
 
U
n
e
s
c
o
-
K
e
a
t
i
n
g
 
and State alike was elaborately organized, largely on 
Byzantine lines. A Nubian school of painters flourished 
and adorned the walls of the domed and vaulted white- 
washed Nubian churches with religious scenes in brilliant 
colours. 
Seldom, in the course of their long history, had the 
Nubian people, in architecture, in art, in civil and mili- 
tary organization, in the independent development of a 
national consciousness, achieved such a high level of 
advancement as during this Christian Nubian age. 
If further evidence of the strength of these Christian 
kingdoms is needed, then it can be found in the obvious 
respect which the Arab rulers of Moslem Egypt paid to 
the Christian Nubian kings, and in the formidable barrier 
which Christian Nubia presented, over the centuries, to 
the southward flowing tide of Islam. 
The first of the Nubian kingdoms to be converted to 
Christianity, between 542 and 545 A.D., was the northern- 
most, and the most powerful, kingdom of Nobadia. It 
extended from the First Cataract, the southern frontier 
of Egypt in medizeval times, as far south as Akasha, 
beyond the Second Cataract. It thus covered the three 
hundred miles or so of Nubia which will be flooded by 
the High Dam. 
The Nobades, as the people of Nobadia were called, 
EARLY CHURCH which was built inside a Middle 
Kingdom fortress at Serra East in the Sudan. The archi- 
tecture reveals a marked Byzantine influence, as does the 
painting. It was missionaries from Byzantium who spread 
the Gospel in Nubia. The Christian kingdoms of Nubia 
held out some 700 years after Egypt’s conversion to Islam. 
 

## [Page 39](064240engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 64251: Nubia's Christian age

  
were a warlike people; armed tribesmen riding horses and 
camels. who had often in the past been a menace to the 
Egyptian frontier garrisons. In the years immediately 
preceding their conversion to Christianity, however, the 
Nobades appear to have been on reasonably good terms 
with their Christian neighbours in Byzantine Egypt. 
They traded with Egypt, and their tombs in Lower 
Nubia contained many remarkable treasures of silver, 
bronze and gold from the workshops of Alexandria and 
the Hellenistic world. Perhaps because of this, they were 
sufficiently well-disposed to accept peacefully the closing 
of the pagan temples at Philee on the Egyptian frontier 
in 535 A.D., though the shrine of Isis there had been the 
Mecca of Nubian pilgrims for generations. 
. Wo the first Christian missionary, Julian, 
arrived in Nubia from Turkey a few years 
later, bearing letters from the Imperial Court at Byzan- 
tium, he and his companion, Theodore, the aged bishop 
of Phils, were received not with hostility but with con- 
siderable ceremony by the Nublans and their king. 
The task confronting Julian, as we know both from 
archeological discoveries and from a contemporary 
account of his adventures, was far from easy. The cli- 
mate, torrid and rainless, he found exceptionally trying 
after the cooler airs of Istambul. 
Then there were the Nubian people themselves. Like 
their predecessors in the days of the kingdom of Meroe, 
they were still fervent worshippers of Isis and other 
Egyptian deities. Even at this late date, moreover, when 
their neighbours in Egypt and Ethiopia had been Chris- 
tian for two centuries, the Nobades continued to indulge 
not only in animal but in human sacrifice, in the primi- 
tive belief that horses and camels, slaves, courtiers and 
wives alike must die when the king dled, so that they 
might continue to serve their master in the After World. 
However, despite the rigours of the country and the cli- 
mate and such deeply rooted pagan practices, Julian, his 
successor, the missionary, Longinus, and other missionaries 
whose names we do not know, spread the Gospel, through- 
out Nobadia, and even beyond, across the desert, and 
as far as the distant kingdom of Alodia, the Arabic Aloa, 
whose capital, Soba, lay near the junction of the Blue and 
the White Nile. 
The first visible result of their preaching, as archaeology 
shows, was the conversion into churches of the pagan 
temples of Lower Nubia; the small temple of Rameses II 
at Wadl es Sebua, for example, and the temple at Dendur, 
built by the Roman Emperor Augustus, which was rededi- 
cated as a church in 559 A.D. Then, or soon after, came 
the building of the first churches in Nubia, at Faras, near 
the present Sudanese-Egyptian border, and at Kasr Ibrim, 
both influential centres in earlier times. 
Radiating from such ancient centres, destined to be 
included among the sites of the six or seven Episcopal sees 
CHRISTIAN NUBIA is 
being thoroughly excavated. 
Coptic churches, monaste- 
ries and fortified towns will 
undoubtedly contribute to 
our knowledge of the me- 
diaeval Christian world, Fa- 
ras, left, was once the capital 
of the Christian kingdom of 
Nobadia. (See page 38) In 
the background, are rulns of 
a Dervish fort and a church. 
Unesco-Keating 
of Nubia, Christianity spread to the countryside and by 
the early years of the seventh century Nubia, outwardly 
at least, was a Christian land. 
Greek was probably the language of conversion and of 
the liturgy and prayers of the early Church and this, lke 
the distinct traces of Byzantine influence in religious 
painting and architecture, reflects the predominantly 
Byzantine rather than Coptle (or Egyptian) character of 
Nubian Christianity in {ts earliest phase. Probably after 
the middle of the seventh century, however, as the result 
perhaps of a great influx of Christlan refugees from 
Egypt, Nubla swung over to Coptic Church doctrines. 
The student of Christian Nubia has some rich sources 
of Information to rely upon: literary, and archmxological 
too, in the churches, monasteries, palaces and walled cities 
whose impressive ruins can be seen today all along the 
banks of the Nubian Nile. Many of these were explored 
by the eminent Italian scholar, the late Professor Ugo 
Monneret de Villard. His pioneer work before the last 
War lald the foundations of the history and archaeology 
of Christian Nubla. 
His explorations, {lluminating as they were, were of 
necessity often superfleial, being carried out with few 
resources and in haste, in anticipation of the last raising 
of the present Aswan Dam. 
Now, under the infinitely greater and imminent threat 
of flooding from the High Dam, more than superficial 
exploration Is needed if we are to solve the remaining 
mysteries of Christian Nubia. At least one of the princt- 
pal centres of occupation should be fully excavated: a 
centre such as Faras, the early capital of the Christian 
kingdom of Nobadia, where I myself made some trial 
explorations early last year. The nced to date chrono- 
logically the very remarkable painted pottery of Christ- 
fan Nubla would alone make this worth while. 
R x churches must be surveyed, planned and 
studied architecturally. The delicate remains 
of frescoes, ltke those which adorn so brillantly the walls 
of the little church of Abd el Kadir near the Sccond 
Cataract, must be removed and preserved. 
Tombs, some of them pillared, and cupola tombs like 
those at Kasr Ibrim, must be explored and their skeletal 
remains studied so that we may learn something of the 
racial origins and characteristics of the Christian Nubians. 
Tombstones too must be rescued from the flood for these 
often contain prayers for the dead of great interest to the 
student of the liturgy of the early Church. 
Since archeology is almost impossible during the 
Nubian summer, little time remains in which all this must 
be done. That it should be done, that it should not be 
overlooked at a time when the flood-lights play prin- 
cipally on the world-famous monuments of Ancient Egyp- 
tian Nubia, is urgent. Then, a new chapter will be added 
to the history of Christianity in Africa and a new page 
to the history of the mediaeval Christian world. 
39

## [Page 40](064240engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 64243: Nubia today; a vast archaeological camp

40 
  
   
   
© M. T. Biniewski, Warsaw 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL CAMP (Cont'd from page 25) 
TWO MAGNIFICENT MURALS, their colours 
as fresh as when they were painted, have been 
discovered at Faras West by Professor Michalowski 
heading an expedition from the Polish Centre, 
Cairo. One picturing St. Michael (left) is now 
at the Wadi Halfa Museum. The Polish expedition 
“also unearthed two Christian chapels in this area 
dating from the fifth century. Below, recently 
excavated Christian pottery kilns at Faras North. 
  
SPADES REVEAL CITIES UNDER CITIES 
Sites not previously allotted between Ermenneh and Sudanese border - Oriental 
Institute, Chicago. 
Faras West - Polish Centre, Cairo. 
Aksha - Franco-Argentine Mission. 
Serra-East - Oriental Institute, Chicago. 
Argin « Spanish National Committee for Nubla. 
Sites between the Egyptian border and Gemai (north of Wadi Halfa) - Joint 
Mission of the Scandinavean countries. 
Buhen ~ Egypt Exploration Society, London. 
On the other hand, some finds have filled important 
gaps in history generally or the history of art. 
While excavating cemeteries of various periods at 
Aniba, Professor Abdel Moneim Abu-Bakr of Cairo Uni- 
versity made some interesting discoveries concerning 
methods of burial and the occurrence of epidemics which 
ravaged Nubian villages. The most diverse objects were 
retrieved from tombs. Unsophisticated in style and cru- 
dely finished, they tell us much about the beliefs and 
artistic talents of the people who made and used them. 
The discovery of the tomb of Heka Nefer, Prince of 
Miam, at Toshka East, was a disappointment. It proved 
to be in a very bad state of preservation. It did at least 
yield some details concerning a high-ranking contem- 
porary of Tutankhamon whose name was known to us 
solely by a rock inscription, also at Toshka, and a picture 
on Huy’s Tomb at Thebes. Now we know that Prince 
Heka Nefer was buried in Nubia—as was Pennut two 
centuries later, under the 20th dynasty. The leader of 
the Yale and Pennsylvania Universities mission, Mr. 
William Kelly Simpson, was unable to find the Prince’s 
remains at the bottom of the tomb well, but he did 
unearth five of the funerary statuettes. The two finest 
are of stone and bear classical inscriptions. (See p. 24.) 
The lengthy list of allotments (see p. 25) gives some idea 
of the importance archaeologists attach to excavating in 
Nubia. Egyptologists all over the world interrupted lec- 
ture series and personal research and even sacrificed 
vacation time to respond to the UNEesco appeal. The 
malin attraction, was the possibility of filling in some of 
the gaps in our knowledge of a region which has harboured 
so many different civilizations. 
Very often new cities were built on top of or beside old 
ones. After Debod and Taffeh Temples were removed, 
for instance, excavations were begun under their found- 
ations. Cemeteries and fortresses are also being excav- 
ated with the hope of bringing to light older buildings. 
As a result of international co-operation the history of 
Nubia’s various civilizations may at last be elucidated. 
No extraordinary finds were expected—at least in 
Egyptian Nubia. The excavations carried out from 1907- 
1912 and from 1929-1934 undoubtedly yielded the most 
important in Egyptian Nubia. Similarly, at Buhen fort- 
ress in the Sudan, Professor Walter B. Emery had already 
been excavating over a number of years. Furthermore, 
Nubia was never the centre of an original civilization, 
except when the rulers of Ballana-Qustul controlled the 
route between Upper and Lower Nubia. Yet already 
within a few weeks the efforts of scientific expeditions 
produced archeeologically interesting results. 
Some results have been negative in the sense that so 
little was discovered—e.g. Khor Dehmit-Kalabsha, Wadi 
es Sebua, Amada, the east bank of Abu Simbel—but it 
was at least proved that the previous excavations had 
been thorough. 
Fragments of a long inscription were also found at 
Akasha, in the Sudan, by the Franco-Argentine mission. 
Professor Rosenwasser believes that it is a copy of the 
famous decree of Ptah engraved on the wall between two 
pillars in the Osirian hypostyle hall of the Great Temple 
of Abu Simbel. 
The main finds made by Professor Leclant, leader of the 
Strasbourg University mission at Tomas, concern the 
Meroitic culture (6th century B.C.), of which much evi- 
dence had already been brought to light, especially at 
Ballana-Qustu, and even in the Sudan. Professor 
Leclant’s finds include a big stele with a 24-line inscrip- 
tion and a sacrificial table inscribed on its whole circum- 
ference. These texts are still being studied, but it is as yet 
impossible to judge their importance. 
At Faras, Professor Michalowski, head of the Polish 
Centre in Cairo, found two Christian chapels. Of the 
four steles he discovered, two indicate that Sudanese 
Nubia was being Christianized at the end of the 5th cent. 
The oldest commemorates the first bishop of Faras—or 
one of the first. It is dated 606. 
Archaeologists are understandably reassured with every 
season. Their enthusiastic response to the Director- 
General's Appeal was not inspired by a desire to rewrite 
the history of Nubia, already known in outline. Their 
sole aim was to salvage the remaining documentary 
material and to elucidate certain obscurities by con- 
ducting thorough excavations before a fleld so rich in 
vestiges of successive civilizations was forever engulfed. 
In this they will soon have succeeded.

## [Page 41](064240engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### IGNORE

Sir, 
What a joy to receive your June 
issue, at long last devoted to Latin 
America. What a disappointment to 
note once again the total lack of 
knowledge concerning my country.’ 
Argentina, which according to the 
literacy statistics published on page 33 
is in front place ahead of all of its 
sister nations of America, is referred 
to only four or five times in the 
whole issue—and then only in a 
passing manner. San Martin gets a 
mere “postage stamp” photo, and 
you overlook completely his interview 
with Bolivar at Guayaquil. Buenos 
Aires, the largest capital city south 
of the Rio Grande and one of the 
most populous cities of the world, 
is portrayed by its underground 
“tube” with the worst, out-of-date 
photo when there are so many other 
stations artistically decorated with 
painted tiles which are our pride and 
admiration. Buenos Aires, modern 
buildings, its theatres (among these 
the General San Martin Theatre just 
completed, probably the largest and 
technically most modern of all South 
America), its throbbing cultural life— 
all these do not exist for your 
magazine. The Colon Theatre, on 
a par with the Paris Opera and the 
Metropolitan of New York, our 
enormous agricultural and cattle 
potential, the growth of our indus- 
tries, particularly automobiles, our 
iron and steel industry, in a word, our 
fantastic economic development has 
been omitted, I hope, for a future 
issue. Congratulations to your 
photographer Almasy. But it is a 
pity that no one showed him some 
of the things which we here consider 
essential to know. 
Julio Cesar Saenz 
Hurlingham 
Buenos Aires Argentina 
Sir 
Congratulations for your issues in 
general and the Latin-American 
number in particular. But why 
devote several pages to General 
Simén Bolivar and say so little about 
General José de San Martin. 
The eternal glory of the great 
“Captain of the Andes” is not, of 
course, affected in the least by this 
“mistake” of The Unesco Courier, 
But your magazine has a world-wide 
circulation and in countries where 
the history of Latin-America is little 
known or unknown, the impression 
will be conveyed that the Venezuelan 
hero is the main historical figure 
of the continent, or “the liberator of 
Latin-America’” as you call him. 
And this is false. 
The greatest figures of the Ame- 
rican continent were San Martin in 
Latin America and George Washing- 
ton north of the Rio Grande. Both 
Letters to the Editor 
reached the pinnacle of power and 
withdrew with their moral greatness 
and prestige intact, The same can- 
not be said of Bolivar, whose military 
genius covered him with glory, but 
whose at times turbulent life saw 
"© triumph mixed with (tragedy and 
defeat. 
Let it be clearly understood that 
I am not denying the greatness of 
Bolivar, but I do deny that he is the 
greatest and best known historical 
figure of Latin America; this honour 
must go to the Liberator of Argen- 
tina, Chile and Pert, for whom the 
Cordillera of the Andes was no 
obstacle and who is appropriately 
called "The Saint with the Sword‘. 
Roberto Lavagna 8. 
Morén, Province of Buenos Aires 
Argentina 
Sir 
Your issue on Latin America 
contains gross errors, cither in- 
voluntary or deliberate, though I 
am inclined to believe the latter more 
likely because of the authors you 
have chosen. This is a delicate 
matter, since The Courier circulates 
all over America and Europe; in the 
former it will arouse justifiable anger: 
in the latter it will add to the 
confusion that generally exists with 
regard to Latin America. 
In your map of Latin America the 
Falkland Islands are omitted. These 
belong to Argentina and the South 
American continent, to which they 
are linked by a submarine platform. 
The antarctic areas of Chile and 
Argentina, which are part and parcel 
of both countries, are also omitted. 
In this same page Andrés Bello is 
described as “the man who was to or- 
ganize the juridical systems of the 
Republics which had won their 
independence from Spain”. Nothing 
could be less exact, at least as far 
as Argentina is concerned. Our 
Constitution, drawn up in 1853, was 
inspired by the U.S. Constitution, and 
our Civil Code was based on the 
work of the Brazilian jurist Freitas 
and the Napoleonic Code. 
O'Higgins is described as Chile's 
liberator. Wasn't it really San Martin? 
You state that San Martin was 
forced to seek asylum in Europe 
when he fled the anarchy in Argen- 
tina. Nothing could be farther from 
the truth. You devote three pages 
to Bolivar, and write, “there is no 
more famous name than his in the 
history of Latin America”. I think 
this is biased and misleading. Much 
as we may acknowledge Bolivar's 
merit, it is to San Martin's initiative 
and courage that Argentina, Chile 
and Peril owe their freedom (not only 
the first two countries, as you state) 
and his renunciation in Guayaquil is 
what permitted Bolivar to crown 
South America's liberation. 
You publish only a poor photo- 
graph of Plaza Mayo in Buenos Aires 
but many large photographs of other 
countries. In an issue on Latin 
America, you should have considered 
the continent as a whole, and not 
referred almost exclusively to three 
or four countries which are not the 
most important. The only really 
impartial article in the issue is the 
one by Dr Alfred Métraux, perhaps 
because he is foreign to South 
America, and to a lesser degree those 
of Oscar Vera and Tibor Mende. 
I feel that Argentina, all Latin 
America and historical truth deserve 
a rectification and clarification from 
you—not only to satisfy our national 
pride, but because of the repercussion 
that your errors and incomplete 
information may have, and if you 
are not to lose the confidence of 
your regular readers in the material 
you publish in future issues, 
Jorge Mipucel Aguilar 
Muniz, Province of Buenos Alres 
Argentina 
Sir, 
As a Latin American, I am grateful 
that an international publication such 
as The Unesco Courier has sought 
to let people from distant corners of 
the carth know about the aspirations 
and ambitions of a continent in 
process of constant renovation. 
Latin America expects, not charitable 
help from stronger nations, but under- 
standing and recognition of her ideals 
by all peoples. 
Speaking as an Argentinian, 
however, I have several reservations 
to make about the lack of know- 
ledge of my country displayed in 
the articles of your Latin American 
issue. Surcly Buenos Aires itself and 
Argentina in general present aspects 
far more important than the photo- 
graph of the entrance to an under- 
ground station, even if that under- 
ground be unique in the continent. 
People of other nations can hardly 
have any idea of what my country 
is like from the articles in your June 
issue. 
Gonzalo Ferndindez 
Buenos Aires 
Argentina 
Sir, 
I have just received issue n° 7-8 of 
Tye Unesco COURIER. 
1 think this issue deserves a special 
mention. I found it excellent as re- 
gards both substance and appcarance. 
May I take this opportunity of ask- 
ing you to convey the congratulations 
of the National Commission to all 
those who contributed to the produc- 
tion of this issue. 
Yves Brunsvick 
Secretary General 
French National Commission 
Paris 
41

## [Page 42](064240engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### IGNORE

42 
From the Unesco Ne Sf 
UNESCO 
Tribute was paid 
to the memory 
of Dag Ham- 
marskjoeld, Sec- 
retary - General 
of the United 
Nations, in a 
short and mov- 
ing ceremony 
held in Unesco 
House in Paris 
on September 
19. It was 
opened by Mr. 
  
Akale - Work 
Apte Wold, Am- 
bassador of Ethiopia to France and 
President of the Eleventh Unesco Gen- 
eral Conference. Then Dr. Mohamed 
Awad, of the United Arab Republic, 
chairman of the Unesco Executive 
Board, took the floor to express ‘“‘a 
feeling of consternation and grief for 
the loss of one who literally belonged 
to the whole world.” 
Dr. Awad singled out some of Mr. 
Hammarskjoeld’s achievements: “At 
the time of his appointment, the Unit- 
ed Nations Organization was facing a 
difficult situation in Korea, and he was 
able to emerge with enhanced reputa- 
tion from that experience. A few 
‘mM UNESCO SALUTES PROBE INTO 
SPACE: The following message was sent 
by Mr. Alvin Roseman, Acting Director- 
General of Unesco, to the Chairman of 
the Soviet National Commission for 
UNEsco in Moscow on the occasion of 
the Soviet Union's second successful 
manned cosmic flight: 
“The latest outer space achievement 
of the Soviet Union has deeply impress- 
ed Unesco. [I beg you to convey to 
the Soviet National Commission our 
warmest congratulations for this further 
magnificent contribution of Soviet scien- 
tists and engineers.” 
T EMPORARY IMPORTATION: 
The Customs Co-operation Council in 
Brussels recently adopted two international 
conventions designed to ease the temporary 
admission of professional and exhibition 
equipment. These conventions are open 
for signature until March 31, 1962. The 
first covers materials needed by repre- 
sentatives of the press, radio, cinema and 
television visiting a country for purposes 
of reportage, broadcasting or film pro- 
  
         
               
   
Ee 
ag 
  
  
  J 
  i SIS   
PAYS TRIBUTE TO DAG 
years later, the question of Suez was 
one of deep concern to all the world. 
To that period belong two very great 
achievements: the opening of the Suez 
Canal in record time and far ahead 
of schedule and the creation of the first 
international force which helped pre- 
serve peace in a very troubled region.” 
Mr. Hammarskjoeld, said Dr. Awad, 
“was able to bring about a conciliation 
within the greater part of the Congo, 
and was well on the way to complete 
the task entrusted to him when he fell, 
in the field of duty, a courageous and 
indefatigable warrior whose achieve- 
ments qualify him for a secure place 
among the immortal servants of man- 
kind.” 
Dr. Awad was followed by Mr. Rene 
Maheu, Acting Director-General of 
Unesco, who paid a warm personal 
homage to Mr. Hommarskjoeld, with 
whom he had often worked closely: 
“... far higher and more lasting than 
the flame which charred those horrible 
debris on Sunday night in the African 
bush”, said Mr. Maheu, ‘the flame 
of that inextinguishable hope which 
drove him and consumed him will 
continue to shed light for us in our 
night and in our jungle. 
duction and instruments required by 
experts, scholars, physicians, artists, 
theatre groups, orchestras, etc. The second 
convention covers material for display or 
use at exhibitions, fairs, conferences, inter- 
national meetings—such as films, sound 
recordings, interpretation equipment, film 
projectors. In collaboration with the 
GATT, Unesco and the International 
Chamber of Commerce, the Customs Co- 
operation Council is preparing an ad- 
ditional convention establishing a carnet 
which would replace national documents 
when the conventions on temporary 
importation are being applied. 
m TEACHING GHANA’S GRAND- 
MOTHERS: If you educate a woman, 
you educate a family, says the old 
adage, and this is particularly true in 
rapidly developing countries where very 
often it is in the family, and particu- 
larly among rhe older women, that 
new ideas must take root if they are to 
be effective. This is why Ghana has 
introduced a large-scale programme of 
adult education for women, with classes 
designed to make a special appeal to 
HAMMARSKJOELD 
“We shall no longer hear his voice, 
a soft ‘voice restrained by a reserve 
which threw a veil of delicacy and 
kindness over the sharp-edged expres- 
sion, not devoid of irony, of one of 
the clearest minds and most incisive 
wills ever to exist, But, until the end 
of our days and our tasks, we shall 
hear the call which he tirelessly echo- 
ed even in that desert where he was 
lost forever: the call of freedom, of 
human dignity and of concord.” 
“History will record the decisive 
contribution made by Mr. Hammarsk- 
joeld to the building of the United 
Nations and its efforts for peace and 
economic and social progress,” said 
Mr. Maheu. “It was he,” added Mr, 
Maheu, “who said one day... ‘The man 
does not count, the institution does’, 
No man in our time has left a more 
lasting mark upon the Organization to 
which he consecrated himself with his 
exceptional talents.” 
Well over 1,000 people attended the 
ceremony, including members of the 
United Nations Information Centre in 
Paris, members of Unesco's Executive 
Board, permanent delegates to Unesco, 
representatives of the Diplomatic 
Corps in Paris and members of the 
Unesco Secretariat. 
older women. Results are already being 
felt in home and family circles. By 
persuading the grandmothers and older 
women to accept basic new ideas the 
teacher is helped to implant these ideas 
more firmly in the minds of the young. 
1) NE NEWSPAPER TO 100 
PEOPLE: Nearly 70% of the world’s 
people lack the barest information faci- 
lities. That is the state of the press in 
some of the less developed countries of 
Africa, Asia and Latin America. UNESCO 
has suggested that all countries should 
aim at providing for every 100 persons 
at least ten copies of daily newspapers; 
five radio receivers; two cinema seats and 
two television receivers. Poverty of the 
mass media, UNEsco points out, hinders 
the spread of education and, hence, eco- 
nomic and social progress. A 45-page 
report, Mass Media in the Developing 
Countries, just published by Unesco, 
surveys the problem and suggests action 
which could be taken by governments, 
international organizations and private 
agencies. 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
P
A
R
I
S
,

## [Page 43](064240engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

  
Jie 
 
Yr 
4 reproductions en 
   
Order from any bookseller, or write 
direct to the National Distributor 
in your country, (See list below; 
names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) 
Payment is made in the national 
currency ; rates quoted are for an 
annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. — Panuzail, Press 
Department, Royal Afghan Ministry of 
Education, Kabul, 
AUSTRALIA, — Melbourne University 
Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, 
C. 1, Victoria. (A. 15/-). 
AUSTRIA. — Verlag Georg Fromme 
& Cc, Spengergasse 39, Vienna Y (Sch. 
50.) 
BELGIUM. — For The Unesco Courier; 
Louis de Lannoy, 22, Place de Brouckére, 
Brussels, C.C.P, 338.000, (fr, b. 100.) 
Other publications: Office de Publicité, 
16, rue Marcq, Bruxelles, C.C.P. 285.98; 
N.Y. Standaard-Boekhandel, Belgiélei 151, 
Antwerp. 
BURMA, — Burma Translation Society, 
361 Prome Road, Rangoon. (K. 5.50) 
CANADA, — Queen's Printer, Ottawa 
One. ($ 3.00), 
CEYLON. — The Associated Newspapers 
of Ceylon Ltd, Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Co- 
lombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
CHINA. —~ World Book Co, Ltd., 99 
Chungking South Rd,, Section I, Taipeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa). 
CUBA. — Libreria Economica, Pte Zayas 
505-7, Apartado 113, Havana. (2.25 pesos) 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. — Artia Ltd, 30 
Ye Smeckich, Prague 2. 
DENMARK, = Ejnar Munksgaard, A/S 
Tidsskrifeafdelingen, 6 Nérregade, Kdben- 
bhavn K. (D.kr. 12), 
ETHIOPIA. — International Press Agen- 
cy. P.O. Box 120, Addis Ababa,   
Ne EN RENE FNS ME A as Te 
r reproductions 
Just published : 
  
“% + of paintings 
- 
> ‘ ie 
"a 3 Rt pt -r 
- ried . 
= 4 4 
$3.4 i 
1961 
ha) hSs § 
FINLAND. — Akateeminen Kirjakaupps, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (F.mk. 540), 
FRANCE, =- Unesco Bookshop, Place de 
Fontenoy, Paris, 7%. C.C.P, 12598-48, 
(7 NF). 
GERMANY, — For the Unesco Kurier, 
Vertrieb Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, 
Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.CP. 276650 
(DM 8). Other Publications : R, Olden- 
bourg, Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 45, 
Munich. 
GREAT BRITAIN, — See United Kingdom. 
GREECE. — Librairie H. Kauffmann, 18, 
rue du Stade, Athens. 
HONGKONG. — Swindon Book Co., 25, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. 
HUNGARY, — Kultura, P.O. Box 149. 
Budapest, 612. 
INDIA, — Orient Longmans Led. Indian 
Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, Bombay 
1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta i3; 
Gunfoundry Road, Hyderabad, |; 36a, 
Mount Road, Madras 2: Kanson House, 
24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New 
Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: Oxford Book & 
Stationery Co., 17 Park Street Calcutta 16, 
Scindia House, New Delhi. (Rs. 6.70), 
INDONESIA, — Bappit Pusat *'Permata”, 
Djalan Nusantara 22, Dijakarta. 
IRAQ. = Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
RELAND. — The National Press, 2, Wel- 
lington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin, (10/-). 
ISRAEL. — Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 
35, Allenby Road and 48, Nahlat Benja- 
min Street, Tel-Aviv (IL 4.-). 
JAMAICA. — Sangster’s Book Room, #1 
Harbour Street, Kingston. 
Knox Educational Services, Spaldings.(10/-) 
JAPAN, = Maruren Co. Ltd, 6 Tori 
Nichome, Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 60S 
Tokyo Central, Tokyo. (Yea 670). 
JORDAN. — Joseph L. Bahous & Corrie Eid: 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road, P.O.B. /66, 
Amman, 
4 "1860 to 1961 "ip DEL | 
  
logue today. 
KOREA, — Korean National Commission 
for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. 
LIBERIA. — }J. Momolu Kamara, 69, Front 
and Gurley Streets, Monrovia, 
LUXEMBOURG. — Librairie Paul Bruck, 
21, Grand-Rue, Luxembourg. 
MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE, — Federal Publications 
Ltd., Times House, River Valley Rd, 
Singapore. 
MALTA. — Sapienza’s Library, 26 Kings 
way, Valecta, (10/-). 
MAURITIUS. — Nalanda Company Ltd. 
30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louss. 
MONACO, == British Library, 30 Bid des 
Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF), 
NETHERLANDS. — N.Y. Martinus Nij- 
hoff, Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague. (fl 6) 
NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. - 
G.C.T. Yan Dorp & C* (Ned Ant) NV, 
Willemstad, Curacao. 
NEW ZEALAND. — Unesco Publications 
Centre, 100 Hackthorne Road, Christ- 
church. (10/-). 
NIGERIA, — C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 
174, Lagos. (10/-). 
NORWAY, — For The Unesco Courier : 
A.S. Narvesens Litteratur-Tjeneste, Stor- 
tingsge. 4 Oslo, Postboks 11S (kr. 13.20). 
Other publications. A.S. Bokhjornaet, Lille 
Grensen, 7, Oslo, 
PAKISTAN. ~~ The West-Pak Publishing 
Co, Ltd.,, Unesco Publications House, 
P.O. Box 374, 56-N Gulberg Industrial 
Colony, Lahore. 
PANAMA, — Cultural Panamena, Avenida 
7a, No. T1-49, Apartado de Correos 2018, 
Panama, D.F. (Balboas 3.-). 
PHILIPPINES. =- Philippine Education Co. 
Inc, 1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, P.O. Box 
0, Manila, 
= RUCH" ul. Wiloa Nr. 46, 
. 10 (Zl. 50). 
   
CATALOGUE 
OF COLOUR 
REPRODUCTIONS 
OF PAINTINGS 
1860-1961 
(Revised and enlarged edition) 
An up-to-date listing of colour reproductions of 
world famous paintings compiled from the Unesco 
collection of reproductions selected by interna- 
tionally known art experts. The highest standards 
guide their choice: fidelity of reproduction, the 
significance of the artist and the importance of 
the original painting. 
paintings are chosen for Unesco's catalogue, 
which contains descriptions and illustrations of 
1347 reproductions available In full-colour prints. 
This catalogue Is not only a reference book for 
art lovers, but a shopping guide as well, which 
tells where each of the roproductions can bo 
ordered, the size and the price. Order your cata- 
485 pages. 
“ A good reproduction of a good picture Is a 
much more rewarding thing to hang on the wall 
than a bad original. ” 
Price : § 6.00; 28/6 ; 20 NF 
Only the most worthy 
Also available : Catalogue of colour reproductions of paintings 
prior ta 1860, 5th ed., 1960. Price : § 4,50 - 22/6 - 16 NF, 
here to obtain Unesco publications 
PORTUGAL, == Dias & Aadrada Lda, 
Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, 
Lisbon. 
RHODESIA & NYASALAND, — The 
Book Centre. First Street, Salubury, 
Southern Rhodesia. 
SWEDEN. For The Unesco Courier: Sven- 
ska Unescoridet, Yasagatan 15-17, Stock. 
holm, C (Kr. 7.50); other publications 
A/B C.E. Fritzes, Kung), Hovbokhandel, 
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
SWITZERLAND, — Europa Verlag, 5 
Rimistramse, Zurich, 
Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva, C.C.P, 
1-236. 
“Courier” only: Georges Losmaz, I, rue 
des VYieux-Grenadiers, Genava. C.C.P. 
1.4811, (Fr. 5. 8). 
TANGANYIKA — Dar-es-Salaam Book- 
shop, P,O.B. 9010, Dar-es-Salaam. 
THAILAND. — Suksapan Panit, Mansion 
9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. (35 
ticals), 
TURKEY, — Librairie Hachette, 469 [sti- 
kial Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul, 
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA. — Van 
Schaik’s Bookstore, Libri Building, Church 
Street, Pretoria. (i10/-). 
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). = 
La Renaissance d’Egypte, 9 Sh, Adly-Pasha, 
Cairo. 
UNITED KINGDOM, — H.M. Sutionery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.L.(10/-). 
UNITED STATES. — Unesco Publications 
Center, 801 Third Avenue, New York, 
22, N.Y.($ 5.00.) and (except pariodicals): 
Columbis University Press, 2960 Broad. 
way, New York, 27, N.Y, 
U.S.S.R. == Mezhdunarodnaja 
Moscow, G-200, 
YUGOSLAVIA. = Jugoslovenska Knjlga, 
Teranje 27/11, Belgrade. 
Kaiga, 
: 
RE
 
=
 
W
E
F
 
BT
 
iy 
a
 
M
e
 e
T
 
T
E
 
O
Y
 
T
E
 
O
N
E
 
 

## [Page 44](064240engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

Drawings i Unesco Courier 
LIFTING A MOUNTAIN 200 FEET 
The two temples of Abu Simbel, carved out of solid 
rock over 3000 years ago by Rameses Il, are the most 
impressive monuments of Nubia in the area to be flooded 
by the new high dam at Sadd el Aali. To save them, 
one of the most daring engineering feats of our century 5) 
will lift two mountains of rock 200 feet—the height of the B 
clock-face of London's “Big Ben”. Here, in an artist's 
conception, the smaller temple of Queen Nefertari (below) 
and the Great Temple of Rameses (front cover) are seen > 
as they will appear during the ifting process, encased } 
in their concrete hoxes (cut away to show the fagades). : 
o The Great Temple is probably the largest man-made rock- : 
= hewn structure in the world and weighs in all 300,000 tons. | 
. Front and back covers are not intended to be viewed | 
as a unit. Queen Nefertari’s temple is on the right of 2 
the Great Temple and separated by a sandy gully. 
      
AJ  RE. Fre i 
4 
p i a 
- ‘} _— ad  | 
: ps  — 
fed 
  
  
    
  
  
  
       
   
   
   
   ARG ER AY AAG AW BW A 
a— AR WEN BE S| SN) SE | E- 
mm -. SE 
mw AY 
. — | — 
       
    
      
    
   
  
   
  
      
    
    
  
  
   
  
  
i et i Fa 
Eo Ei a Ra 
Vie Vi ME an B24 
oR hos i fe 
. Bon SN J CC. 
oc he > . : 43 £5 hes 
EN WB Be Be 
‘8 e— © © OBE 
Rl SE I a 5 a IE 
i fe 0 BEE a w.'q ’ = v 3 3A 3 
Ea Bi 5 El H 5 i I 5 : 
pt Oo 6 BN ba  ¥ 
 
  
  
 
is. 
  
  
  
  
EEE em~ : ATTEN SRE FRR — . - 
  
 