# [062672](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

A WINDOW OPEN ON THE WORLD 
OUricr 
APRIL 1963 (16TH YEAR) - PRICE 1/-STG. (U. K.) - 30 CENTS (U. S.) - 0.70 F (FRANCE) 
  
  
  
  

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

ART FIND IN RUMANIA. A re- 
[I ETUEL EG TET AVETSVAEG) SET Fo (TTL 
dating from the Roman era (2nd 
century A. D.) was made in Ru- 
EVIE ER SETTLE EE CEVENT LE 
for the construction of a new rail- 
EV LT CI ETL ICTE |) $5 EXTERNE 
found, one of the most striking 
being this sea deity in reptilian 
form and carved in marble. It is 
now preserved in the museum of 
the Black Sea port of Constanza. 
, © A Tessors, Turin 
   

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

4 WINDOW OFEN ON THI 
‘mCouricr 
Contents 
No. 4 
PUBLISHED IN 
NINE EDITIONS 
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 
Japanese 
Italian 
  
COVER PHOTO 
 
One of the noblest monu- 
ments of Buddhist art is the 
gigantic sanctuary of Bo- 
robudur on the island 
of Java, Dating from 750 
A.D., this man-made 
mountain of stone carvings 
and terraces has 504 statues 
and 1,400 bas reliefs, From 
its summit, this statue 
of the Buddha in medita- 
tion gazes over Java's 
central plain and its 
towering volcanic peaks. 
Unesco = Marc Riboud. 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Page 
4 
14 
20 
24 
28 
33 
34 
Scientific and Cultural 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
APRIL 1963 
16TH YEAR 
Cams? 
ORIENT-OCCIDENT: A STUDY IN IGNORANCE 
By Georges Fradier 
(1) PROGRESS... AND PREJUDICE 
(2) DIALOGUE ON THE FILM ‘THE ISLAND’ 
A PORTUGUESE SANCHO PANZA IN THE FAR EAST 
The voyages and adventures of Ferdinand Mendes Pinto 
By Antonio Jose Saraiva 
DOES LIFE END AT SIXTY? 
By Alfred Métraux 
HOLIDAY CURE FOR BORED TEEN-AGERS 
Two million volunteers for world workcamp projects 
By Arthur Gillette 
CENSORSHIP: A DOUBLE-EDGED WEAPON 
The Hidden Face of the Cinema Pt.4 
By Paul Léglise 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
(M.C. 63.1.179 A) 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin July and August when 
it is bi-monthly (1 | issues a year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German. 
Arabic, Japanese, and lealian, In the United Kingdom itis distributed by H.M, 
Stationery Office, P. O. Box 569, London, S, E, | 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Readers’ Guide to 
Periodical Literature published by H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Russian Edition ; Veniamin Matchavarlanl (Moscow) - 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
Annual subscription rates : U.S, $3.00; 10/-stg.; 7.00 
French Francs or equivalent. Single copies 1/-stg. 30 
cents (U.S.) ; 0.70 French Francs. 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°. 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief,

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

 ORIENT-OCCIDENT 
IGNORANCE el 
  
. Flames from myriads of tiny oil lamps twinkle in the November 
by Georges Fradier night, lighting up a ghat—one of the flights of stairs which lead 
down to the River Ganges—in Benares, the sacred city of the 
Hindus. The time is Diwali, the Festival of Light, a day of cele- 
bration throughout India, marking the triumph of light over 
darkness. Right, a group of Greek children, each carrying a 
lighted candle, takes part in a traditional Easter Eve procession, 
D ida 
From * La Joie de vivre "" (Joy of Living ) published by the Federation des Cocperatives Migros, Zurich 
  = : a A 
   
   
     
3
 
\
&
.
 
4 
§ 
i 
; 
a
e
 
¥
 
di
as
 
. 
4 
       
  
Yo 
= 
HL ¥ : 
N . uf 
» . ~~ 
. : 4 . 
- Mp “a 
  
a 
oh " - NN P ir on A > > re 
“" Fm re RS ay BE iy Fo oa fh Aas 4 | 
a

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  
The article below is taken from '' Encounters and Celebrations *¢, a study on the 
mutual appreciation of cultural values in Orient and Occident by Georges Fradier, 
which is shortly to be published by Unesco. The article on page 8 — ¢* Dialogue 
Between Orient and Occident on the Film ‘The Island’ '' — which comes 
from the same work was written in collaboration with Miss Tomiko Takeda. 
RE you more intelligent than your parents? 
More tolerant? Do you have a more developed 
awareness of things? Is your outlook more forthright 
and independent? Do you think that nations or people 
in general are more friendly today and that the world 
is a less incomprehensible place than your elders found 
it? 
All these are questions which one would like to put to 
young people who talk in an abstract way about progress. 
For the Images and ideas which the word Progress seems 
to evoke nowadays are increasingly vague and obscure. 
Most of the younger generation recognize, of course, the 
existence of progress—in technology, science and medi- 
cine. Only a minority believes in ethical progress or if 
others do believe in it they are afraid to say so. 
As for progress in art, philosophy and literature, this 
is an even more difficult theme. For we have got into 
the habit of describing progress in statistical terms, of 
illustrating development by charts—and some subjects 
simply do not lend themselves to such interpretation. It is 
easy to point to the steadily increasing output of litera- 
ture, music and painting and to the hundreds of millions 
of readers. But it is Impossibe for us to say whether 
the books are better, the pictures finer and the readers 
more perceptive; indeed, the very question lacks meaning. 
One day an attempt may be made to assess the results 
of the Major Project launched by Unesco In 1957 to 
promote the mutual appreciation of Eastern and Western 
cultural values. It will be asked, for instance, whether 
the English—or more particularly the younger generation 
in England—now know more about the cultural values of 
the Chinese, and appraise them with more perceptiveness 
and friendly understanding, and vice versa. Ingenious 
methods and infinite patience ‘will need to be applied here. 
Meanwhile we may perhaps begin to draw a general, and 
let us hope, credible picture of the progress achieved. 
One might, indeed, begin by applauding the substantial 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

STUDY IN IGNORANCE (Cont'd) 
Beware of the superficial 
increase of information now everywhere available about 
the history, development, social and political problems, 
way of life, scenery, religion and art of almost all 
countries. Efforts have been made, for example, in the 
field of education. In several countries studies of the 
history and culture of wide areas which were hitherto 
ignored have recently found their places in official school 
curricula. 
It would be even easier to show the growing influence 
—again in the field of cultural values—of films, broad- 
casting, television, newspapers and magazines, records 
and publications (journalistic reports, surveys, transla- 
tions- of classical works and contemporary novels, etc.). 
Then there is the part played by travel, now becoming 
easier and easier for young people, and by meetings, 
youth festivals and international work camps—not to 
SMILE FROM EUROPE... 
Alongside the saints, angels and demons with which 
they embellished the cathedrals of Europe, Gothic 
sculptors carved remarkable and distinctively human 
portraits in stone. One of these—a young woman 
carrying one of her gloves—adds a note of youth and 
gaiety to the figures on Basle Cathedral, Switzerland. 
From "La Joie de vivre" (Joy of Living) published 
by the Federation des Coopératives Migros, Zurich 
  
C
R
I
 
v 
fy
 
pt 
a
 
2
 
y 
ak 
c
c
 
w
g
 
i 
Lo
an
 
y 
o 
} 
| J
O
N
 
- 
’ 
1
2
3
)
 
JB
 
pi 
B
a
t
 
IT
 
y
o
n
 
’ 
a 
——
——
 
> 
x8 
a
l
 
. 
\l 
W
p
?
 
p
r
 
o
r
 
T
E
T
 
i.
 
e
t
 
aut 
E
l
 
h
y
 
al    
mention the wonderful introduction to international life 
afforded to fellowship-holders studying abroad. 
In other words, the amount of information that young 
people from Western countries, for instance, can pick 
up nowadays about the habits, problems and amusements 
of Eastern countries is out of all proportion to the know- 
ledge that was available on the same subjects twenty 
years ago. 
The casual listener to a radio programme may hear 
a sarode concert or a Balinese orchestra. The cinema 
will already have introduced him to the daily life of 
peasants in the Nile Valley and to the most varied 
episodes of Japanese mediaeval or contemporary history, 
and he may have been lucky enough to come across 
documentary films revealing the beauties of Borobudur, 
Angkor Vat, Isfahan and the Taj Mahal. In daily and 
weekly papers he will have seen a wealth of pictures, 
generally beautiful and always picturesque, of the differ- 
ent “developing countries” whose glories, contrasts and 
mysteries never fail to interest and intrigue. 
Thus, most young people in the West have now a 
broad access to facts about the Eastern countries, and 
the same applies to youth in the East (most of whom 
have become enthusiastically fond of dance music and 
films imported from America and even from Europe). 
Does this mean that the Major Project has achieved its 
aims? That is less certain. A mass of superficial infor- 
mation, unrelated ideas and images arbitrarily removed 
from their contexts as well as isolated statistics may 
well be the raw material for lively conversation, but do 
not necessarily add up to genuine understanding. 
0: the contrary, there is some danger that all 
this information, most of it haphazard and 
passively absorbed, may build up a sense of blasé com- 
placency. After seeing a little of everything and hearing 
epochs and countries brought up in conversation in any 
and every connexion, people quickly come to believe that 
they are well informed and have understood all there is 
to know. 
Information which is too rapidly acquired does not 
always even have the advantage of overcoming prejudice. 
The other day an article on Japan, describing a “typi- 
cal” Japanese family, appeared in a glossy magazine with 
an international circulation. Many such - articles are 
published, and this one was better than most; it conveyed 
a good deal of accurate and interesting information 
about the economic and social life of the ‘professional 
middle class”. 
At the same time, to lend a picturesque flavour to 
his article, the writer stressed those well-known conflicts 
between tradition and modernism which observers are 
always noticing in the East. These conflicts, or tensions, 
take various forms—in terms of language (foreign ‘words 
brought into the vocabulary), in terms of psychiatry 
(people living half in the atomic age and half in a tradi- 
tional environment become schizophrenic), or in terms 
of history (the Middle Ages lingering on into the 20th 
century). 
This last approach is the most popular with the caption 
writers; a pair of trousers symbolizes the 20th century, 
a kimono is medieval; the naval shipyard belongs to 
the 20th century and the Shinto temple to the Middle 
Ages. There is a grain of truth in all this. But to dwell 
on these alleged contrasts is unwittingly to perpetuate 
prejudice. We are told that “the East derives its scien- 
tific culture—even its ‘rationalism’—its comforts, its

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

politics and its amusements from the West ; it is painfully 
or ludicrously torn between the traditional, Oriental mind 
and the modern mentality; the result of adaptation to 
technologies which its culture is unable to absorb can 
only be fatal”, ete. 
In order to come nearer to the truth, I would suggest 
an article written in the same style, with the same skilled 
photography about, let us say, a “typical” family in Wiirt- 
temberg. Nothing would be easier than to underline the 
contrasts, or even the irreconcilabilities between the 
modern life of a German engineer and the medigeval 
traditions that linger in his home. 
H: old mother, his wife and perhaps even he 
himself still read an ancient work called Die 
Bibel, 'which was translated by a monk—revered even 
today—long. before the Industrial Revolution. The man 
works all day in an ultra-modern office. In the evening 
he meets his friends in a building which looks, and may 
even be, Gothic and joins them in drinking a beverage 
made from fermented barley—the formula for which goes 
back to the Teutons and Celts—to the accompaniment of 
ancient ritual choruses. 
A young Chinese spending a few weeks in Stuttgart 
would notice these contrasts without seeing any reason 
to deplore them; he would meet people ready to supply 
a good-natured explanation of them. Knowledge picked 
up during travel is not so piecemeal as that acquired from 
the newspapers; it is more concentrated, and its appeal 
is not solely to the memory. 
Through individual or group travel, and even more 
by international meetings, young people are enabled— 
In greater numbers every year—to discover their distant 
contemporaries in the East or West. Their contacts 
will probably be confined to young people like themselves, 
however, for it is not easy to discover a whole country, 
let alone a whole culture. 
Nothing is better, of course, than to learn to express 
ourselves and be understood on the level of friendship; 
to work together, to play together and to join in reso- 
lutions about peace and harmony—all these are to be 
encouraged. But even the most cordial meetings some- 
times fade to dim memories—and also tend to over- 
simplify the problem of different cultural values. 
EB such cases, the preconception about insur- 
mountable barriers makes ‘way for an as- 
sumption of uniformity, which affirms “We are all alike. 
The world is the same everywhere. We all have the same 
needs and the same ambitions.” This can lead to the 
conclusion that intellectual effort of any kind is super- 
fluous. 
On the other hand, a different danger seems to lie 
in wait for those with more exacting minds, who have 
a taste for history and for currently fashionable his- 
torical theories. The tendency to generalize, while 
excellent as an antidote to narrow-minded specialization, 
sometimes leads people to dip too hastily into the past and 
into human geography and, for the sake of convenience, 
to classify whole nations in one civilization or cultural 
group. 
Whatever may be the advantage of these vast, all- 
embracing explanations as a means of conveying ideas, 
we must not overlook the drawback that they are 
frequently no more than optical illusions. Even the 
most cultivated people may be taken in by them. 
For a long time, for instance, we have heard criticism 
 
at
s 
“
a
h
 
3 
’ 
A 
a
 
7
,
 
$
7
 
fe 
F 
S
r
 
a 
D
N
 
bh 
[13 
& Py ay 
17d 7 hs ots EO TE 
C vf Yr 
Hs LW 
mm
 t % Al 
R
T
 
i
 
4 
V3
 
. %
 
A
Y
:
 
—
 
i 
§
 4 
4 AD
 
aa
 
A
N
 
N
W
 
TA
) 
al »
 b 
ie. 
© Sunil Janah, Calcutta 
... SMILE FROM ASIA 
This graceful Yak sini or nymph was carved over ten 
centuries ago on the Temple of Siva at Bhubaweshar 
in the Indian State of Orissa. A holy place, Bhuba- 
weshar was once known as “The City of Temples”. 
But of 7,000 temples only a few hundred now remain, 
of the sweeping judgments pronounced on Orient and 
Occident; but it is astonishing how they persist. We are 
still told that the East has a monopoly of spiritual 
enlightenment and that all Western nations are mat- 
erialistic. Other concepts, less far-reaching but equally 
unsubstantiated, also survive; authoritative writers still 
publish reflections on happiness “conceived in the West 
as the plenitude of life and in India as release from life, 
as absorption into the Infinite”; in the East one still 
meets distinguished professors leaving for Europe, looking 
forward confidently to unrestricted and profitable meet- 
ings with their opposite numbers in the West, “because 
in Europe all cultivated people speak English, just as 
they do here”. 
In reality problems relating to the mutual appreciation 
of cultural values are by no means simple ones. They 
are still neither outdated nor solved. And even in the 
case of collective problems it is still up to the individual 
to solve them on a personal level by facing up to situa- 
tions in which disputes or misunderstandings are likely 
to occur but in which, providing the necessary effort is 
made, understanding and cultural enrichment can also 
be found.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

STUDY IN IGNORANCE (Part 2) 
    
DIALOGUE BET 
ON THE FILM 
  
  
0: small islet, only five acres in area, was chosen by the film director 
Kaneto Shindo, from among the countless islands that compose the stately 
yet delicate landscape of the Inland Sea of Japan, as the setting for an extraor- 
dinary film which some people consider to be worthy of comparison with the 
work of Robert Flaherty, and in particular with “ Man of Aran”. 
It is a film in which nothing happens. Or, more precisely, in which a host of 
episodes, trivial and yet intense, take place without forming a story. This island 
is an arid waste of stones and poor soil ; but it is inhabited and cultivated (meti- 
culously, inch by inch) by a couple, who are still young and who labour unceas- 
ingly from dawn to nightfall, with the frenzied obstinacy associated with certain 
insects such as bees, ants and termites. 
They have two little boys, the elder of whom is at school all day on the big 
island, where his parents go almost hourly to fetch water. For their own islet 
has no well, no spring—it is completely dry. For the greater part of the year 
the couple spend their lives rowing to and fro in a boat and bringing back water 
in buckets which they carry, slung from a yoke, carefully and slowly to the 
top of their hill, where they meticulously water their beans and their sweet pota- 
toes plant by plant. They also grow maize and wheat. 
Planting, hoeing, watering, rowing, carrying, digging, day after day — such 
is the round of their existence. They hardly pause to eat] or sleep. They 
know nobody in the outer world, on the big island. This is simply the place 
where they go for water, the place where the school is situated, and the shop- 
keepers to whom they pay rare, respectful visits, and also the doctor who arrives 
too late one day, to find the elder boy dead. 
The film is as simple as that; it shows us people living, working and dying 
without uttering a word. It is not a silent film; it is a film in which people do not 
speak. The photography is admirable, but the spectators do not always notice 
the beauty of the scene, they are so gripped by the two chief characters, or rather, 
by the concentrated performances of two great actors, Yasuji Tonoyama and 
Miss Nobuko Otowa. 
Oriental and Occidental impressions of “The Island” are reflected in the 
8 following dialogue between a Japanese girl student (J) and a European man (E) 
both of whom have seen the film several times. -

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

WEEN ORIENT & OCCIDENT 
  On an arid island in 
Japan's Inland Sea a peas- 
ant couple toils around 
the clock tending crops 
and fetching water from 
the mainland. From these 
simple facts Kaneto 
Shindo has made a re- 
markable film in which 
the roles of wife and the 
husband are played by 
Nobuko Otowa (left) and 
Yasuji Tonoyama (right). 
E. — When I was in Japan a few months ago, it struck 
me that “The Island” was very little known or appreciat- 
ed. I asked several people about it but they only said 
vaguely. “Yes... a documentary film?” 
J. — No one in Japan took much notice of it until 
people in the West became interested. A documentary? 
Yes, Shindo Kaneto has a reputation for making shorts 
and feature films in a proletarian spirit, films taken from 
real life, perhaps to show up its injustice: a kind of 
socialist realism. And people admired Nobuko Otowa, who 
usually plays glamorous parts, for agreeing to depict an 
earthy character, whose face is often covered with 
sweat and dirt. Then the film attracted attention abroad 
and won a prize at the Moscow festival; so finally, in 
Japan it came to be classed as a “melodrama.” 
E. — That's a strange description. But let us assume 
for a moment that the film really is a documentary. If 
that is so, what does it teach us about Japan—apart from 
the beauty of the scenery? We see the fields of corn or 
rice looking like gardens, sown in perfectly straight rows; 
scrubbed and polished. There is the impression that the 
sea carries an unceasing traffic of small boats, tugs and 
steamers. We are taken to visit the town, which is of 
course noisy, crowded and industrious. 
J. — That's Onomichi. It is worthwhile, in any case, 
to have a glimpse of a town that is so old and at the same 
time so modern—a medium-sized town—and the scenery, 
both are quite typical. As for the houses, a foreigner who 
has never seen our Japanese houses, except in films, finds 
it very difficult to imagine what they look like. For 
instance, French people think of houses as buildings 
made of stone—a material never used for this purpose 
in Japan—or brick, with a roof of slates or red tiles. The 
first thing we Japanese think of is wooden posts and 
exposed beams, and whitewashed earthen walls which are 
hollow, built upon a framework of woven bamboo stems. 
Photos Kinda Eiga Kyokai 
The roof is thatched, or, in more modern houses, made 
of grey tiles. The building gives straight onto the outer 
world, through big French windows— another term which 
Is likely to give the wrong idea. The paper door (shoji),’ 
the paper partition (fusuma) and the traditional tatami, 
which carpets the whole of the interior, are things one 
has to know about before one can imagine a Japanese 
ouse. 
E. — The film does, I agree, give us a glimpse of all that. 
But the hut on the island where the couple live seems too 
squalid, quite to correspond to this idea of a house. Does 
this mean that all Japanese peasants are as poor as that? 
J. — Certainly not. On the whole they are by no means 
well off, although they create so much wealth for the 
country. But the people in The Island are not really 
destitute. They are in no danger of starvation: they are 
quite respectably dressed. Yet people who live so 
wretchedly and work so hard are a very small minority. 
_ E. — So this may, after all, be a “propaganda film,” 
intended to expose the injustice from which that minority 
suffers: 
J. — Yes... It looks as if the director tried to give it that 
meaning at first. But he was too much of an artist, too 
much of a poet, to be satisfied with that alone. In the 
end it turned into a poetic work. 
E. — I think so too. Even a tragedy. After setting out 
to describe the living conditions of a peasant family in 
a remote part of Japan, the film goes much further. Or 
rather it is not quite a tragedy; just one thing is lacking. 
J. — What do you feel is missing? 
E. — Speech. These people live together and suffer 
together without exchanging a word. The chief quality 
that distinguishes man from the other animals is speech, 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

10 
STUDY IN IGNORANCE (Cont'd) 
Silence that speaks 
from the heart 
or so we are usually told. But these people never, abso- 
lutely never, say anything; one wonders whether they 
are really together, or merely side by side, one person and 
then another, each quite alone. 
J. — Oh yes, the absence of communication! That 
is what always strikes foreigners. Several times already, 
people have asked me, “Have they nothing to say to each 
other?” But believe it or not, I myself did not notice 
the silence at all. In Japan, in moments of the most 
intense emotion, the deepest grief, people say nothing. 
E. — I remember that terrible scene when the young 
wife, after once again climbing the hill with her infinitely 
precious supply of water, stumbles and upsets one of Lhe 
buckets. Her husband looks at her, comes closer, and 
knocks her down with a single blow. That blow is the 
only way he can express himself. 
J. — And yet he loves his 
wife, there is no doubt of 
that. He does not strike 
her out of cruelty. She 
has unintentionally done 
wrong. He is putting 
things to rights. I think 
she understands that. 
Later on, in the evening, 
she is looking across at 
the big island. She is all alone, watching the fireworks 
(it is probably August 16, the Feast of the Dead, associat- 
ed with fire; after the fireworks, ‘we see illuminated boats; 
in the old days this was the season of epidemics, and 
people are still afraid of typhoid fever); she watches. 
Her husband comes up behind her. He says nothing. 
Can he find no word to comfort her? No. He does 
not know how to tell her that he, foo, is unhappy, and 
that he understands her. And she does not even know 
that her husband has paused for a moment to watch 
her, with an aching heart. And without a word they 
both go up the hill, spade in hand, to bury their son’s 
ashes. 
E. — Do you mean they know instinctively that words 
cannot relieve a deep sorrow? 
J. — It's not that; the Japanese, like other people, 
know very well that when one is unhappy it is a comfort 
not to feel alone, and that two people together are better 
able to bear a great grief. 
E. — You mean it is a kind of awkwardness? 
J. — I suppose so. But awkwardness of that kind is 
so common that it does not upset us. That's why I 
found the silence of this film perfectly normal and na- 
tural, apart from the fact that the director wanted it to 
be like that. The members of that family don’t talk to 
one another; and that inevitably reminds me of my own 
family, I wonder how it is that where I come from 
people express themselves so little and so badly—brothers 
and sisters, husbands and ‘wives, even lovers. Perhaps 
we talk more freely to friends or school companions... 
When I first came to Europe I was struck by the way in 
which the children of the family I knew (two teenage 
boys and one younger one) used to argue with thelr 
parents at meals. They had no hesitation about 
contradicting their father’s opinions. And sometimes he 
would say calmly “Yes, you're right.” In my own home 
  
  
  
-1t would never have occurred to me to argue with my 
father! Even if I thought he ‘was mistaken, I would 
never say “Father, I don’t agree. I think so-and-so, 
because...!” I don't know whether he would be angry 
or pleased; I have never tried. I have never talked, really 
talked, to my mother, either, 
E. — Perhaps that is a sign of good behaviour? Obe- 
dience? 
  
Every precious drop of 
water for cultivation has 
to be rowed over to the 
island and then carried in 
buckets slung from a yoke 
to the top of the hill 
     
 where the crops are grown.   
J. — No, let’s make no mistake about it; it is simply 
the absence of argument. I don’t mean chatter... 
E. — But Japanese life is changing, and so is the rela- 
tionship between parents and children... 
J. — Japan has recently experienced social changes 
perhaps more abrupt and violent than those in any other 
country. How can I explain? Two hundred years ago 
our most successful dramatists were writing popular plays 
in which the hero killed his own son in order to save the 
son of his feudal lord, as loyalty required of him. That 
kind of hero was applauded without hesitation. And even 
when those plays are given nowadays, the audience sheds 
floods of tears ‘without pausing to ask itself whether a 
father is entitled to kill his own child. One such play 
was forbidden during the American occupation, because 
its feudal code of morality was contrary to democracy and 
human rights. But a few years later it was revived, and 
received as enthusiastically as ever. Reason and law have 
proclaimed that the individual, starting in childhood, has 
certain rights. And nowadays nobody would sacrifice his 
own son to save the son of his superior. But for all that, 
a present-day audience sees nothing criminal or immoral 
in such plays. 
E. — And what does that show? 
J. — In my opinion, family life is not yet up to date 
in its spirit. We have not entirely shaken off the vestiges 
of the fine Confucianist ethical code. 
E. — You consider it a fine code? 
  
J. — It really was very 
fine. As for married 
couples, they are on a more 
equal footing than fifteen 
years ago. The ‘wife's 
situation has changed. 
There is a scene in the 
film which I find signi- 
ficant. It comes towards 
the end. In a sudden fit 
of rage, the woman deliberately knocks over the precious 
bucket of water; she deliberately repeats the action 
for which her husband had not hesitated to strike her. 
And then she throws herself on the ground and begins 
frantically uprooting the plants... But this time the man 
does not move. With deep compassion, he watches his 
wife, who has lost her self-control because of her child’s 
death. He says nothing. If he were to let himself go, 
perhaps, he, too, would throw himself on the ground. 
But as usual he says nothing. He turns back to his work. 
He quite understands his wife’s grief and her revolt against 
the poverty which caused them to leave their little boy to 
die. She has no other way of expressing herself. Neither 
has he. They are not in the habit of speaking, of 
expressing their thoughts or feelings. 
E. — Sometimes it’s better that way. In Tokyo a woman 
friend took me one day to the Asakusa temple. As we went 
though that district—which might be called the religious 
birthplace of the city—with its cinemas, its places of 
entertainment, and its stalls of souvenirs and religious 
 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

objects, I was expecting to be given all kinds of explana- 
tions about the temple, which was destroyed during the 
war and rebuilt recently, with modern materials, though, .- 
exactly as it had been standing for centuries, down to the 
smallest details. Nothing of the kind, my friends merely 
suggested that I should go up the steps and take my shoes 
off. Then we knelt (or rather, sat down in the Japanese 
fashion) among the congregation. We stayed there for 
quite a time, naturally without uttering a word. And 
words would have been superfluous. In similar circums- 
tances, one of my own countrymen would have shown 
me the statues and ornaments, pointed out the beauties 
of the architecture, and remarked on amusing or 
touching things concerning the behaviour of the monks 
and pilgrims. He would have tired me out. There, 
instead, there was this long, silent contemplation. And 
it left an impression I shall never forget. 
J. — So you do appreciate silence. Yet in the life of a 
family, or of a married couple, it baffles you. A man 
and a woman may be aware that they love each other 
deeply and yet find no words in which to say so. 
E. — Is it true, as I have been told, that the Japanese 
language has no words to express affection? 
J. — It is rather that people don’t know how to use 
them. A young Japanese friend of mine once admitted 
to me that he would find it easier to tell a girl he loved 
her in a foreign language than In his own. I was not 
surprised. A Japanese boy who will say “I love you,” In 
English will not be so ready with the corresponding words 
in Japanese. That Is because he has probably never 
“heard them spoken. He has often read them in romantic 
stories, but they are never used In daily life, and hardly 
ever even between Intimates. Even a couple who are 
madly In love will not speak them aloud. 
E. — Then how do they make themselves understood? 
J. — With their eyes. There is a proverb that says 
“The eyes speak more clearly than the lips.” So Japanese 
lovers.remain silent. It is not necessarily a falling, but 
it is certalnly characteristic. 
E. — Is it also characteristic to remain completely 
silent at a funeral when you have come, as we Should 
say, to offer your sympathy? In “The Island,” I found 
the funeral sequence unbearable. The schoolchildren 
come with their teacher to atiend the cremation of their 
little school-fellow. The bonze (priest) is wilh them, 
young and well-fed, in his beautiful robes; his manner is 
cold and indifferent... 
J. — I have never known a bonze to show emotion. But 
did you notice how serious, how grave the little boys and 
girls were? 
E. — The parents and the small brother go down to the 
shore to receive all these visitors, they greet one another 
politely, one almost expects them to smile. 
J. — They might smile. It would be proper. 
would be even more puzzled, wouldn't you? 
E. — Yes, the smile of Asia... Ortega y Gasset explain- 
ed it as a result of dense population, saying that the more 
people you expect to meet, the more polite you are likely 
be. 
J. — We have heard a lot about the “Oriental smile...” 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
And you 
Planting, hoeing, watering, rowing, carrying, digging, the life of the family on the island is an endless, 
unvarying round of toil. Sometimes interpreted as a cry of protest against the lot of the impoverished, 
Sindo’s film is also seen as a poetic work showing man’s ability to triumph over grief and adversity. 
Photos Kindai Eiga Kyoka 
vr 
re & ee ON 
Mal) 
I hea vd, Al Cy An A ; ) 7 14 jm : \ i 
-— oo Sel ka 
» 
      

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

STUDY IN IGNORANCE (Cont'd) 
A merciless picture of the human condition 
 
A Frenchman who has lived for a long time in the Far 
East told me how his Chinese secretary came to him one 
day to announce the death of his mother. With a smile. 
Anyone would have thought that the secretary was 
either mad or pleased at his mother’s death. Not at all. 
It is simply politeness; the smile sets up a barrier both 
against you and in your own interest. You must not 
express opinions or feelings to your supetior before being 
invited to do so. In the event of misfortune, one Is 
still less entitled to thrust one’s own unhappiness upon 
people to whom one owes respect, such as neighbours. 
This is a hard-and-fast rule, the same In Japan as in 
China or in Viet-Nam. During the funeral on The Island, 
no one sheds tears; but the impression is heart-rending. 
E. — The funeral pyre is still burning. The visitors 
take their leave. The boat sails round the island; the 
little brother runs from field to field, watching till il is 
out of sight. Later, the parents bury the ashes and put 
up a little board on the grave. 
J. — They have written the dead boy's name on it. 
From the top downwards; his name under the Law, which 
the bonze has just given him for his future life, and his 
own name, Taro. 
E. — As you say, the impression is heart-rending. Our 
own feelings can easily be explained, because we are eye- 
witnesses of the unbearable scene; we see the people's 
faces; and besides, we hear the music. Music plays a 
tremendous part in a film, and this is often overlooked. 
J. — Yes, Hayashi Hikaru’s music is perfect for this 
film. A very simple tune, repeated at various moments, 
with slight variations. 
    
 
 
E. — Was Hayashi trying to compose a traditional air, 
the kind of thing one might call “typically Japanese?” 
J. — No, not at all. But the instruments sound very 
Japanese. One has the impression of hearing the 
shakuhachi, flute, and the Koto rather than the guitar. 
E. — The musical score is extremely effective. But I 
would like to point out that what we hear is incidental 
music, intended to work upon the feelings of the audience; 
not music within the film, such as the actors would hear. 
There is hardly any of that. To introduce the Spring 
sequence, a woman's voice sings the beginning of the 
traditional cherry-tree song, Sakura... The characters, 
one may suppose, have it running through their heads. 
And later we hear the schoolchildren singing a little song 
in class. And then a few really ancient folk-songs, in 
two very short scenes—the games and dances of the 
harvest, and the New Year festivities. The two little boys 
are present on these occasions, but do not take part in 
them. Much less their parents, who have no time. They 
do not belong to the world in which people sing, dance, 
play and say their prayers... 
J. — They are very poor. They live apart from the 
community. And it is true that the community, the 
village, the big island, despises and rejects them for that 
reason. They draw their water from a brook, where it 
runs out of the riceflelds. Water that has already been 
used. And the island does not belong to them. When 
they go to deliver their wheat to that horrible man who 
does not even come out to greet them, they are paying 
their rent. I think they sell one sack out of four for 
their own benefit, that brings them enough to buy a 
few groceries and a bottle of saké. 
E. — That's right, they are outsiders, outsiders and 
alone. That must be why I can’t help seeing this film as 
a tragedy, a merciless picture of the human condition, 
or, if you prefer it, of a certain human condition. For 
the people we see in it, life is essentially a matter of toil, 
grief, production, reproduction and death. Once in a 
while there is a digression towards something loftier and 
out of reach; a thought is given to “culture,” lo more 
exalted values—national and religious traditions, as re- 
mote from real life as are the great liners that glide along 
the horizon. These values have not been forgotten; they 
are added ironically, dangled just beyond people’s reach. 
Then there is another thing: these people are poor and 
12 exploited. Could they improve their lot? 
J. — How? By fixing up a, winch to hoist their buckets? 
  

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

Family rejoicing (left) when 
one of the sons catches a 
large fish which will pay 
for a rare visit to the nearby 
city. A poignant moment 
(below) after the death of a 
son, when boys and girls 
from his school arrive by 
boat to attend his funeral. 
The wife (right) is an image 
of grace and serenity even 
as she lifts her heavy buckets.      
Photos Kindai Eiga Kyokai 
By digging a cistern? Perhaps. But I think they are 
too poor, too deeply involved in their work.. As for 
leaving the land and becoming a labourer in the town, the 
husband would never dream of it. He would be just as 
poor and have even less freedom. 
  
E. — Yes, they are prisoners in their existence. Shindo 
» has succeeded in expressing alienation—not only among 
the proletariat, but in ourselves. His view of the world 
is completely pessimistic—though the pessimism has a 
dignified restraint, 
J. — I don’t agree. I do not feel the irony you speak 
of. “The Island” is simply a very beautiful film in which 
the director shows a family that is happy, in spite of 
great material difficulties and in spite of the death of a 
child, which would not have happened in wealthier 
surroundings. We are shown the contentment of these 
peasants, who have complete confidence in the soil. One 
sees the ecstasy which they regard the thirsty earth and 
the young shoots. 
E. — You really call that happiness? 
J. — Yes, enviable happiness. There are moments of 
real delight. When the little boy catches a big fish, they 
are all delighted. The next day they put on their best 
clothes and take the steamer to the town, intending to 
sell the fish to some gourmet for a good price. Finally 
they sell it to a fishmonger, rather too cheaply, perhaps, 
but making the best of it, for fear of disappointing the 
children. And it fetches enough money for them to have 
dinner at a restaurant (a great event), and buy some 
shirts, and go for a ride in the funicular, high above the 
rooftops. All that is gay. But more important, there are 
many other moments of even simpler happiness: those 
that come while working quietly at home during the rainy 
season, and those that follow the hard day’s work in the 
evening. Picking up a handful of leaf-mould. Rowing 
slowly in the morning, at earliest cock-crow. Watching 
the sun as it sinks into the sea. Taking the evening 
bath. You remember that? They heat lots of water. 
The children jump into it first. Then the father. And 
lastly, the mother. Did you notice her smile then? It is 
the smile of a happy woman. 
E. — I feel that in discussing “The Island” you have 
taught me an enormous number of things about Japan.   
J. — You have taught me a great deal about your own 
outlook. And I must admit that it is always my foreign 13 
friends who reveal to me more about my country through 
the interest they take in it.  

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 62674: A Portuguese Sancho Panza in the Far East

¥ r we : 
pe N . oo) =r ke 
Ea V3 = 
wl a ted i 0 wt atop 
2 T M ~ 
= i= 
- RY is Lo
E a 
IRM, ! 
oop LO at 
. Ne pL x 
: ie 
- a. 
Rag Bo yw Tang FEE 
[Lo | « 13 VFL le A Ek SN 
LE PE “4 rT Rye 8 
- 21 Y “ 
\ 
N 
“on 
: 
‘ 
TTY SY ¥ . fae very ow 
# ol a Le - on a, Teh red 
RETEST 0 LS Cab wll i A Ty EL od - 
" 
¥ E 
B i . 
{ 
1 
2 vd 
"were the Portuguese. In 1497, 
4 oe } oy - 
; p EET 
: i he \ = . ' Ne PA TY oa - * 
. i A |} ig =H ’ ‘ 
A en Re Ee i FR » . e 
N ts A + . ¥ 
D : A { 
‘ 
: 
iy * ro y 
N “rr t oA 4% 
PL Vas ‘ = 
iil 2 AL TR ag 
= Fy Wl Cod Y 
TIRES RL ET Tae 
Mat 1 - uv he 1 : : ny Pre raha 
‘ ; " E - a 4 iy 
» EN bs ¥ nd - y 0 3 
x Shand 4 : by * / “1 - sly i Y 
LA \ - Ni i HY a § au hs ap WIE ou we Jv - fn 
W pea £5 - A Sas WM wl 
- ‘ 2 | RNY 
: 
. ! 
pd ’ . 
Nett \ | dh - ¥ 1 
ly 
- 
' 1 hha 
k 
~ b ¥ "y 
: y 4 4 
. “u ow : -i ey 
rly Cn - olny 
ve is Purp boat 
TAME 
. ' ; E 
{ ¥ 
» . 
x - i 
f / 4 
 
  
  
~ Vasco de Gama, sailed to India 
NAS 
y. Jose 
| 
eval oar ~~ and opened a maritime trade 
eh ~~ route to the Orient. By 1519 a 
XH Portuguese cartographer was 
~~ abletodepict with commendable 
illustrated map) countries from 
the Red Sea to South East Asia. 
| ~N the 15th and 16th centuries, the Portuguese 
and Spaniards reached America, the Indies, 
the Pacific Islands, the Malay Archipelago, China and 
Japan, and in 1522 the world was first circumnavigated 
by Ferdinand Magellan, a Portuguese. Next it was the 
turn of the Dutch, the English and the French to voyage 
and to establish settlements in many parts of the globe. 
However, it cannot be claimed that Europeans imme- 
diately penetrated to the spiritual treasures of the civiliza- 
tions they were discovering. The conquerors and traders 
were less interested in souls than in gold, silver and 
spices and also in slaves who were themselves trade goods 
like the rest. Even Christian missionaries saw only 
human error or the wiles of the devil in beliefs that 
differed from their own. 
The crushing of the Aztecs and the Incas and the obli- 
vion in which their remarkable art was doomed to remain 
for several centuries are outstanding examples of this 
failure in understanding which led to the impoverishment 
of the cultural tradition of mankind as a whole. Only 
in our own day has the pre-Columbian art of America 
regained its rightful place in the world’s cultural heritage 
and has made a rich contribution to the originality of 
modern Mexican painting. 
History, however, is not completely void of cases where 
the world’s diversity was accepted and voyagers showed 
a sympathetic understanding of non-European civiliza- 
tions. One of the oldest examples is offered by a Portu- 
guese book of the 16th century, Peregrinacao, by Ferdi- 
nand Mendes Pinto, a Portuguese trader in the Far East, 
who died in 1582. 
Though almost forgotten today, Peregrinacao was at 
one time known throughout Europe. First published in 
1614, it was translated into a number of languages, in- 
cluding French, English, German and Dutch, during the 
17th and 18th centuries. 
The Portuguese navigator, Vasco de Gama arrived at 
Calicut, the present seaport of Xozhikode, on the 
Malabar coast of India, in 1498. In 1511, the Portuguese 
annexed Malacca which gave them a firm control over 
trade in the Far East for some time. In 1517, they sent 
an Embassy to the Emperor of China, but at that time 
the Ming Dynasty had turned its back on the sea and 
closed its frontiers to foreigners; and so the ambassador 
of the King of Portugal failed in his mission. 
Nevertheless, a few venturesome Portuguese merchants 
and adventurers managed to trade between China, the 
Malay Archipelago and the Pacific Islands, by accepting 
the risks which this involved. Private individuals, 
unconnected in any way with the Portuguese State, they 
operated in a more or less clandestine way, building 
small stores and depots on the Chinese coast which 
eventually grew into self-governing mercantile commu- 
nities and trading stations. If the opportunity came 
their way, they were not above acts of piracy. On 
occasion their voyages took them to places hitherto 
unknown to Europeans. 
Thus, about 1542 a ship with Portuguese merchants 
aboard, including Ferdinand Mendes Pinto, who by then 
belonged to this strange world of adventurers, arrived at 
the island of Tanegashima in Japan. Mendes Pinto has 
left us an account of this first meeting between Euro- 
peans and Japanese. 
He was charmed by the chivalrous spirit and noble 
nature of the Islanders and impressed by attention paid 
to questions of honour which was the cause of endless 
feuds between the nobles. He also tells us how one of 
his companlons, Diego Zeimoto, introduced firearms to 
Japan. The first time they saw Diego killing game with 
his gun, the local people tock him for a magician, but 
they quickly learned to make guns themselves since— 
as Mendes Pinto tells us—their craftsmen were extremely

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 62674: A Portuguese Sancho Panza in the Far East

  
  
ve
d 
e
s
 
1IXD AN TRC Ry CL 
. 
-
 
' 
hi 
—
—
—
 
W
s
 
W
e
 
f
n
 
n
t
i
 
 
  
  
  
. MAREINDICV M 
nfo 
  
  
skilful. Pinto also remarks on the graciousness of the 
women and the exquisite politeness of the courtiers. 
This delightful picture of the Japanese is only part 
of the book. Its author boasts of having covered the 
whole Aslan coast from the Persian Gulf to Siberia, with 
detours through the Indonesian Islands and the Island 
of Taiwan, and of having travelled in China by river and 
canal between Pekin and Nanking, where he was as- 
tounded at the huge “towns” of boat-dwellers. 
He claims to have worked as a convict on repairing the 
Great Wall of China and to have been able to measure 
its height and thickness with his own hands. He asserts 
that he was enlisted into the Mongol army which 
invaded China about 1544, that he was taken before the 
famous king who burnt the suburbs of Pekin (probably 
Dayan, King of the Ordos), and that he visited the Holy 
City in Tibet. 
These travels, some of them undoubtedly true, and the 
others imaginary, serve him as a framework for a vi- 
vidly romanticized autobiography. It is packed with 
incident, with land and sea fights, shipwrecks, wander- 
ings, dreadful crimes, glorious exploits and popular 
risings, with anecdotes, with descriptions of customs, 
rites, beliefs, ceremonies, towns, palaces and temples of 
the most wonderful kinds. From its pages speak a mul- 
titude of characters into whose mouths the author puts 
eloquent discourses studded with Eastern imagery. The 
whole is a blend of narrative and description almost 
Homeric in its variety and power. 
The main character, the author himself, is successively 
agent of the Governor of Malacca, merchant, pirate, 
slave, vagabond, beggar, soldier, and finally, slmul- 
taneously ambassador of the Viceroy of Goa to a 
Japanese baron and Jesuit missionary. 
He never depicts himself as a hero but rather as a 
poor booby muddling his ‘way as best he can out of 
v 3 Se A 4 
~~ Bib Nati  Eitiotilnue atime, Par 
  
innumerable misfortunes. Most of the time he is at 
grips with hunger and fear. In a word, he is the com- 
plete “picaro,” the “anti-hero” of the Spanish picares- 
que novels. If we prefer, we can look on him as a 
Portuguese Sancho Panza of the East. He has no notion 
whatever of knightly honour and he is the absolute 
reverse of a “hidalgo” or “conquistador.” 
At most, he is a trader and that is why, even when he 
Is acting as an ambassador, he always appears to be of 
a, lower order than his Eastern interlocutors, be they 
Malay Sultans, Chinese mandarins, Japanese Samurai, 
priests anywhere and everywhere, or even the impo- 
verished fishermen whose slave he was for a while. 
From all these people he receives lessons of every kind 
to which he is obliged to hearken submissively. 
The women too, for 'whom Mendes Pinto has the 
utmost affection, have something to teach the plun- 
derers. A storm hurls them on the shores of the Island 
of Léquia (Taiwan). They are borne off to prison on 
suspicion of being sea-rovers disguised as merchants, but 
the wretched state in which they arrive, naked and 
covered with cuts and bruises, stirs the women to pity. 
When the travellers are on the point of being executed 
the women flock to the main square of the city with a 
moving petition to the King, signed by hundreds, begging 
him to spare the prisoners. The King is moved and 
releases the condemned men, but says that he will not 
receive them “because it ill becomes a king to look on 
men who, though knowing God, do not obey His laws 
and are wont to steal their neighbour's goods.” 
To Mendes Pinto’s Orientals, the Europeans are little 
better than savages: they eat with their fingers, quarrel 
loudly and sometimes come to blows for futile reasons. 
To the East, they are objects of amazement or derision. 15 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 62674: A Portuguese Sancho Panza in the Far East

16 
  
  
2,
 
PORTUGUESE SANCHO PANZA (Cont'd) 
The first European to reach Japan 
Above all, however, Peregrinacao gives us a whole- 
heartedly admiring picture of the civilizations of the 
Far East. As for China, Mendes Pinto depicts it as an 
absolute Utopia: justice is swift, humane and completely 
fair to the accused; the structure of the State prevents 
the corruption of its magistrates and the oppression of 
its subjects; there is no unemployment or famine; manu- 
facturing and trade supply all the needs of man; 
there is a complete system of communications; manners 
are perfect; and “Rome, Constantinople, Venice, Paris, 
London, Seville, Lisbon or any other famed city of Europe” 
do not begin to compare with the capital, Pekin. Men- 
des Pinto even goes so far as to wish that the laws of 
China could be copied in Portugal. 
This description of China is of course rather idealized and 
the indications are that our author did not know China as 
well as he knew Japan. What counts, however, is his 
admiration and lack of prejudice, and his admiration is 
not purely intellectual, but comes also from the heart. 
At every turn we find him moved to wonder by the 
works of art, the towns, the crowds, the colour and 
music, the manner of speech the ceremonies, the beauty 
of the women and the delightful ways of the children. 
  
  
He even gives us descriptions of Chinese and Japanese 
plays, translates forms of greeting and courtesy, and 
provides transcriptions (though how faithful, it is hard 
to say) of occasional words of the tongues of the East. 
Naturally, the picture he paints is not without its blem- 
ishes. It includes accounts of unbelievable atrocities. 
Yet the fact remains that Mendes Pinto was, I am sure, 
the first person to attempt a synoptic sketch of the 
civilizations of the Far East and that he produced one 
that is lively and artistic, and that seeks to penetrate 
to the heart and essence of those civilizations and to 
understand them from within. 
Leaving aside some undeniable mistakes and errors of 
fact, we have in Perigrinacao, which 'was written in 
Lisbon in the second half of the 16th century, a book 
which does not treat men with beliefs differing from the 
author’s own as mere objects, whose sole interest lies 
in the profits and advantages that can be gained from 
them. In other words, for Mendes Pinto the European 
viewpoint is not the only valid one. 
That is why, in any history of European feelings and 
attitudes towards non-European civilizations, Mendes 
Pinto has earned an honoured place.

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 62674: A Portuguese Sancho Panza in the Far East

  
Japanese and Europeans 
met for the first time 
when a ship with Portu- 
guese merchants aboard, 
including Ferdinand Men- 
des Pinto, reached the 
Island of Tanegashima in 
Japan, about 1542. Soon 
other trading vessels 
followed them and the 
arrival of one of these is 
shown here in a Japanese 
screen painting which 
dates from about 1600. 
Kobe City Museum, Japan 
‘THE VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES 
OF FERDINAND MENDEZ PINTO’ 
Extracts from the book with the above title, done into 
English by Henry Cogan and printed in London in 1663. 
OR the better satisfaction of the reader, | dare boldly say, if my 
testimony may be worthy of credit, that in one and twenty years 
space (during which time, with a world of misfortune, labour and pain, 
| traversed the greatest part of Asia, as may appear by this my discourse) 
| had seen in some countries a wonderfull abundance of several sorts of 
victuals, and provisions which we have not in our Europe; yet, without 
speaking what each of them might have in particular, | do not think there 
is in all Europe so much as there is in China alone. 
And the same may be said of all the rest, wherewith Heaven hath 
favoured this climate, as well for the temperature of the air, as for that 
which concerns the policy, and riches, the magnificence and greatness 
of their estate. Now that which gives the greatest lustre unto it, is their 
exact observation of justice; for there is so well ruled a government in 
this country, as it may justly be envied of all others in the world... 
| think it not amiss to make a brief relation here of the city of Pequin, 
which may truly be termed the capital of the monarchy of the world; as 
also of some particular | observed there, as well for its arches and policy, 
as for that which concerns its extent, its government, the laws of the 
countrey, ‘and the admirable manner of providing for the good of the whole 
state. 
TM city of Pequin (Peking) is scituated in the height of forty and one 
degrees of northerly latitude ; the walls of it are in circuit (by the report 
of the Chineses themselves, and as | have read in a little book, treating 
of the greatness thereof, and intituled Aquisendan, which | brought since 
along with me into Portugal) thirty large leagues, namely ten long, and five 
broad... it is environed with two rows of strong walls, where there are a 
number. of towers and bulwarks after our fashion. 
Without this great inclosure, which (as | have said) is not comprehended 
in the city, there is in a distance of three leagues broad, and seven long, 
fourscore thousand tombs of the Mandarins, which are little chappels all 
gilded within, and compassed about with ballisters of iron and lattin, the 
entries whereinto are through very rich and sumptuous arches... 
It hath also five hundred very great palaces, which are called the houses 
of the son of the sun, whither all those retire that have been hurt in the 
wars for the service of the King, as also many other soldiers, who in 
regard of age or sickness are no longer able to bear arms, and to the end 
that during the rest of their days they be exempted from incommodity, each 
of them receives monethly a certain pay to find himself withal, and to live 
upon. 
IKEWISE there are along this river Batampina, whereon we went from 
Nanquin to Pequin, which is distant one from the other one hundred 
and fourscore leagues, such a number of engines for sugar, and presses 
for wine and oyl, made of divers sorts of pulse and fruit, as one could hardly 
see any other thing on either side of the water. 
In many other places also there were an infinite company of houses and 
magazines full of all kinds of provision, that one could imagine, where all 
sorts of flesh are salted, dried, smoked, and piled up in great high heaps, 
as gammons of bacon, pork, lard, geese, ducks, cranes, bustards, ostriches, 
stags, cows, buffles, wild goats, rhinocerotes, horses, tygers, dogs, foxes, 
and almost all other creatures that one can name, so that we said many 
times amongst ourselves, that it was not possible for all the people of the 
world to eat up all those provisions. 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 62674: A Portuguese Sancho Panza in the Far East

  
  
  
      
  
i or CHINESE VIEW of THE EARTH ih the mid-17th century is offered phi 
‘page from the Ko Chih Tshao, a rare treatise on astronomy and geography, 3] 
hi by Hsiung-Ming-Yu, which includes a diagram explaining the sphericity of our 
planet. Some 16 centuries earlier, a great Chinese astronomer of the Han 0) a
 
LE 
- 
a 
3 
4 
wh 
Era, Chang Heng, described the heavens as “like a hen’s egg and as round as a 
crossbow bullet ; the earth is like the yoke of the egg, and lies alone in the 
centre”. Hsiung Ming-Yu also used the phrase “as round as a crossbow bullet” 
to describe the earth, but graduated his sphere into 360 degrees instead of the 
365 1/4 degrees used by the Han astronomers. The sphere showsships of Chinese 
rig, pagodas i at the antipodes, a large Byropean building like a sathedral.p a 
i
 
: 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 62674: A Portuguese Sancho Panza in the Far East

merchant “adven- 
turers dressed in Euro- 
pean costumes of late 
16th century disembark 
on the coast of Japan 
B52 a Portuguese trad- 
LAR A TER EET 
    
wi 7 \ ey Lf ; ¥ #2 
~ Below, Portuguese mer- 
Big ride on an ele- 
a Japanese: screen paint 
ing. The complete work 
He ~ shows a ship lying in the 
harbour of Goa, the Por- 
* tuguese trading settle- 
~ ment etablished on the 
2 west coast of India, before ; 
  oh 
Co 
  
   i sail for Japan. 
  
  
  

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 62680: Does life end at sixty?

DOES LIFE END 
AT SIXTY ? 
by Alfred Métraux 
Ao the many problems facing our modern 
civilization, the fate of the aged is certainly 
one of those foremost in the public mind, judging by the 
number of articles on this subject carried by magazines 
and newspapers. Over the past century, in fact, the 
average life span in industrialized countries has increased 
by leaps and bounds until it has now reached 73 years. 
This growing percentage of old people in our population 
is a new phenomenon demanding new solutions. After all, 
how can we reconcile the very understandable impatience 
of new generations with the enforced retirement of men 
and women who still have many years of life ahead of 
them and who still feel energetic enough to remain active 
far beyond the time limits imposed on them by society. 
How can we find occupations for these people whose 
physiological age does not correspond to their real age? 
Here I do not intend, like so many others before me, to 
seek answers to the problems, but rather to describe 
briefly some of the attitudes observed in primitive socie- 
ties towards elderly persons who can no longer share the 
normal activities of their group. 
A stubbornly persistent legend still maintains that 
many “savage” societies put people with failing strength 
to tests in which failure is tantamount to a sentence of 
death. It is said, for example, that in the South Seas, old 
men of some tribes are forced to climb coconut trees which 
are then shaken. Those unable to hang on would thus 
Inevitably be eliminated. These particular tales are quite 
untrue. 
I: is true, however, that among certain peoples 
living under very hard conditions—as in the 
past among the Eskimos or the Inhabitants of Tierra del 
Fuego—those no longer able to join in the struggle for life 
were condemned to death. In such cases it was usually 
the individual himself who felt that he had become a 
burden. When he realized, through the veiled remarks of 
his relatives and friends, that his presence had begun to 
20 weigh upon them, he asked to be put to death. With that 
extreme discretion so characteristic of the Eskimoes, the 
men who decided to die merely stepped off their sledges 
  
WHO photo by Pierre Pittet 
without saying a ‘word and stretched out in the snow to 
await their end. Or else a member of the family was 
asked to put an end to their life. The American anthro- 
pologist, C. Weyer, once met an Eskimo who told him 
frankly how he had killed his own father in these cir- 
cumstances. His father had even pointed out the exact 
spot where the son was to plunge his knife blade. 
Often, too, the aged were imprisoned in an igloo where 
they died of cold. Even though these executions were not 
condemned by the Eskimoes, they nevertheless gave rise 
to signs of remorse. This feeling of guilt is expressed in 
Eskimo myths that often tell of the miraculous rescue of 
an old person and the punishment of those who had left 
him to die. 
It would be unjust to consider these -peoples, whose 
slender resources forced them fo get rid of their old people,

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 62680: Does life end at sixty?

    
gr g 
A PATRIARCHAL SOCIETY. For the Dogons, a tribe which settled on the banks of the Niger 
River some 800 years ago, the word of the elders is law. As in other societies whose traditional 
ways of life still hold sway, they revere the head of the family whose authority is unquestioned. 
One must not forget, that the as cruel or barbarous. 
question here ‘was a matter of life and death for the entire 
group. In most cases, the nomads ‘who applied this harsh 
law did so upon the very request of those who could no 
longer keep.up ‘with the group and who knew that they 
were harming it by slowing its progress. Usually, nomads 
would abandon an invalid only after vainly trying to carry 
him and not without leaving him a food supply in the 
hope of finding him still alive when they returned. 
In a comparative study devoted to The Role of Age in 
Primitive Societies, Dr. Lee Simmons reached the con- 
clusion that most societies that live by hunting and food 
gathering do not neglect thelr aged who receive their fair 
shares of game or fruit. 
It is true that “primitives” at this economic level are 
more willing to share their wealth than peoples living 
from agriculture or grazing. Here, solidarity is the rule 
and no exceptions are made for those no longer capable 
of participating in the group’s activities. 
When a Crow Indian hunter on the Great Plains of the 
United States killed a large number of buffalo, he would 
cry out: “I shall take neither my arrows nor my skins.” 
Then the meat of the carcasses belonged to the elderly 
people who were the “poor” of the tribe. In the same 
manner, Creek hunters always set aside a share for the 
old people who also knew that no hut in their clan would 
be closed to them. 
In the past, the Samoans found it difficult to understand 
what it meant for a white man to be poor. To them, it 
was inconceivable that a person burdened by age could go 
hungry and without shelter. In the rural communities 
of the Inca Empire, farmers organized working parties to 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

22 


### 62680: Does life end at sixty?

DOES LIFE END AT SIXTY (Cont'd) 
Living archives 
of the tribes 
cultivate land whose produce was reserved for widows, 
orphans and old people. Even today, among the descen- 
dants of these same Indians, village solidarity to the 
needy is an invariable rule. 
It might often be wondered if the lot of the aged in 
archaic civilizations is not preferable to what they 
experience In our own soclety. First of all, they do not 
feel quite so useless. Even when their declining strength 
prevents them from doing thelr share of the work required 
for their community's subsistence, it is easy for them to 
find a new role in the group in occupations which, by 
common consent, are reserved for them. They become 
counselors or helpers. While they may no longer take 
the Initiative, they at least co-operate in the work of 
others and these new activities, far from being considered 
in any way inferior, reward them with the respect and 
esteem of their community. 
The situation of men considered as tribal elders among 
the Cayopos whom I visited a few years ago could not be 
described by any stretch of imagination as pitiful. Part 
of the “men’s house” 'was set aside for them and there 
they manufactured arrows or wove baskets. They kept a 
watchful eye on the village and intervened each time a 
quarrel broke out. In addition, they lectured the younger 
generations and their speeches, which often went on for 
hours, enabled them to evoke epic incidents in their past 
lives as hunters or warriors. 
In a great many tribes, the most useful artisanal activi- 
ties are the prerogative of the veteran craftsmen. Their 
skill, acquired through long experience, assures them 
ample customers among the younger men, eager to acquire 
tools or weapons. 
C ows also turn to the aged when they 
need someone to supervise a difficult opera- 
tion, such as the building of a house or a boat. Medicine, 
too, is a field in which old people excel. They are reputed 
to know the right herbs to treat any sickness and, above 
all, the appropriate magic formulae which are no less 
indispensable. One has only to recall the extent to 
which magic enters Into the life of these peoples, to realize 
the importance of the elder’s knowledge for a tribe or a 
village. Hunters, fishermen and even farmers must all 
turn to them if they want to be sure of good luck and of 
protection against evil influences. 
Furthermore, who better than the elders, knows the 
tribal rites and the details of ceremonies? They have 
witnessed them all their lives and make sure that they 
are now carried out in accordance with tradition. The 
importance attached by “primitives” to ritualistic details 
is well known, and the custodians of these traditions are 
the men and women of age and experience. 
These people are also the tribe’s living archives. It is 
their duty to transmit their group’s historical myths and 
legends to its young generations. They can also be con- 
sulted not merely on a point of knowledge but to settle 
questions of tribal law. 
Among the Akambas, an African tribe, anyone in doubt 
as to how custom required him to act in any situation 
consulted an elder whom he paid. During disputes the 
elders were expected to produce legal precedents for 
settling these quarrels. 
This knowledge and wisdom not only bestows prestige 
and status on many elders, but is also a source of wealth. 
For the magic formulae that they chant or the advice they 
give, they are paid on the basis of agreed rates. 
In the case of the Akambas, for example, anyone 
wishing to seek an elder’s advice does not go to him 
empty-handed. He brings with him an ox or, at least, a 
 
The National Film THE PRESTIGE OF AGE. Persistent legends 
Board of Canada that aged people in some societies are treated 
harshly, even to the point of being put to 
death when weakness and infirmity make them 
a burden on their community, are discounted 
by studies of anthropologists. They have 
concluded that most old people are helped 
by village or tribal solidarity and in fact are 
held in respect and esteem. As custodians of 
goat in payment. The chants, charms and prayers that 
the Navaho Indians stored in their memories was literally 
a goldmine of knowledge which was a rich source of profit. 
Old men shared their knowledge only upon payment of 
large sums and it has been sald that the sum total of 
medical formulae, sacred names, secrets and songs were 
worth more than a herd of three thousand animals— 
sheep, cattle and horses. Any man could thus accumulate, 
during his life, the scientific, religious or historical 
elements of this oral literature and in his old age use it 
for the benefit of others and for his own profit. 
The prestige and influence of the aged are so great in 
these societies that it ‘would be no exaggeration to describe 
them as gerontocracies. The classical example of this 
ascendancy of age is offered by the aboriginals of Austra- 
la. The elders among the bushmen wield almost tyranni- 
cal authority over almost every aspect of tribal life. Often, 
they form secret societies whose mysteries are divulged 
to young men seeking initiation only at the price of 
absolute obedience. Initiation rites so widespread in 
primitive societies are usually conducted by elders who 
have made them an instrument of domination. 
This gives them control over young men who are made 
to pay dearly for the religious privileges bestowed upon 
them. In Australia, the elders terrorized the women and 
youths by using ritual instruments that made noises like 
the roaring of bulls. 
According to the British anthropologists, B. Spencer and 
S. J. Guillen, the main purpose of certain ceremonies was 
to engrave into the minds of youth their obligation to 
obey the laws of the tribe and to convince them of the 
superiority of the old men who alone knew the ritual of 
these ceremonies. 
Knud Rasmussen, the Danish explorer, and a perceptive

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 62680: Does life end at sixty?

  
tribal lore, ranging from remedies for sickness 
to tribal rites and details of ceremonies, the 
elders wield great influence. They are much in 
demand for tasks like house and boat-build- 
ing which call for skill and long experience. 
With age women too enjoy an enhanced status 
and are allowed many privileges normally 
reserved for men. Above, eskimo igloo builder 
carves out his icy bricks in Canada’s northern 
territories. Right, an aged African woman. 
interpreter of the life of the Eskimo people, recorded the 
following remarks made by the Eskimoes about their 
medicine men: “We do not understand hidden things, 
but we have faith in those who say that they know them. 
We believe in our angakuts, in our magicians... for we 
wish to llve a long time and we do not want to expose 
ourselves to the dangers of hunger and poverty. If we 
did not follow their advice, we would perish.” 
North American ethnography brings us countless 
examples of respect for the aged. A man, even a young 
man, ‘would be called an “elder” as a sign of respect. In 
point of fact, this respect was often based on fear. The 
elders, after all, were close to those ancestors whom they 
would soon join. If they were slighted in any way, they 
might well complain to these ancestors who would then 
withdraw their protective powers leaving the descendants 
exposed to all kinds of dangers. 
This, too, was the way the Dahomeians reasoned when 
they explained the consideration they showed for old 
people. To them, a long life is evidence of divine favour 
and proof that a person has been able to gain the good- 
will both of the gods and the spirits. Among the Palungs 
in Burma, prestige increases with age—so much so that 
women even try to pass themselves off as older than 
ey are. 
Not the least of the advantages enjoyed by the aged is 
their freedom from numerous taboos. It is widely believed 
that those who have reached a ripe old age are immunized 
against dangers which taboos are supposed to ward off. 
Furthermore, when death draws near, a man has less need 
to guard against the perils that threaten youth. 
When women reach a certain age, their status tends to . 
rise to that of men. They are allowed to smoke, to drink 
and to use strong language. In New Guinea, they are even 
permitted to enter the meeting house of the men. The 
  
Unesco, Gerda Bohm 
myths and legends that make up oral literature also 
favour the aged who are readily represented as sages and 
as the benefactors of the tribe. The authority of which 
they dispose in daily life is reflected in the supernatural 
powers attributed to them in the fabulous adventures of 
which they are the heroes. 
Family ties have always been the safest guarantee of 
well-being for the aged. Many societies give elders the 
privilege of marrying young women who will take care of 
them. Often it is the first wife who feels the burden of 
her years and she urges her husband to take a young wife 
who will make her work easier. In Australia, the elders 
had acquired a monopoly of young women—so much so 
that young men had trouble finding wives and had to 
settle for partners who were much colder than themselves. 
Within a family, particularly affectionate relations 
nearly always exist between grandparents and grandchil- 
dren. For the youngsters the old people appear in a 
protective role. Their relations are closer than those 
between the children and their parents. Grandparents 
are protectors, friends and also playmates. They often 
talk to each other as if they belonged to the same genera- 
tion and they do not hesitate to jest and to play jokes on 
each other. And this is why the elders prefer to confide 
their secrets to their grandchildren rather than to their 
sons or daughters. 
When we look once more at our own society after this 
brief glimpse of the way of life of the aged in primitive 
societies, we see more clearly what our technological pro- 
gress has cost us. We certainly live longer than “savages,” 
but we have paid a high price for this privilege. 
To be respected, to feel one’s self a useful and active 
member of society, to enjoy the friendship of one’s grand- 
children... are not these advantages worth far more than 
the comfort offered by our communal homes for the aged 
or our “towns for old people?” 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 62681: Holiday cure for bored teen-agers

“ 
S
a
 
A
P
 ny 
or 
ON 
¥ 3 4 
&: 
J 
* Fron ‘Europe, the nal Voluntary. Work. 
BUT AT TY has spread to Asia, Africa, and 
hy pL America to give young people in many new- 
ly developing countries a chance to do something 
practical about their local community problems. 
: volunteer at work n the Republic of ‘Tog  
T HE youth of today is bored. This 
is a foregone conclusion of the 
Study of the Objectives and Content of 
Out-of-School Education that UNESCO 
is undertaking in 1963-1264. Young 
people in the industrialized countries 
are faced with increasing amounts of 
ready money and free time and often 
find themselves at a loss to put these 
to creative use. Growing minds and 
muscles seem to lack stimulation in the 
atmosphere of material ease prevalent 
in Europe and North America, and 
untapped energies of young people 
from all social backgrounds express 
themselves increasingly in acts of 
hooliganism and gratuitous violence. 
In the developing countries, young 
people—frequently those who have 
attained a relatively high level of edu- 
cation—are pouring out of the country- 
side into the cities in search of paying 
jobs and the stimulation of urban life. 
Many find neither employment nor ex- 
citement and more often than not 
spend months, if not years, perfecting 
the art of wasting time. 
Meanwhile, in all countries, newly 
independent and technically advanced 
alike, there is no lack of social prob- 
lems which youthful energies could 
help solve. In even the wealthiest of 
societies the material and, above all, 
the psychological needs of certain 
groups—old people, slum dwellers, the 
mentally ill, immigrant labourers, racial 
minorities, juvenile delinquents, etc.— 
go largely unanswered. The needs of 
the newly developing countries are 
even greater: roads and railways, 
schools and community centres, 
teachers and technicians—the list of 
necessities in a modern society. 
Here then is the paradoxical situa- 
tion today. On one hand, young people 
the world over are at loose ends, 
bored, marking time before they gain 
the rights and accept the responsibi- 
lities of adulthood. On the other hand, 
some of the world’s most crying needs 
are unheeded. One answer to this 
paradox-—though by no means a pana- 
cea for all today's ills—is to yoke rest- 
less youthful energy to these pressing 
needs, to give young people the oppor- 
tunity for exciting and creative service. 
This is the function of the international 
voluntary workcamp movement,

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 62681: Holiday cure for bored teen-agers

E
—
 
pe 
© 
as
 
A
 
   
  
XJ
 
    
re "A Caer aL. a 
Oo
 
fa
a 
l
f
 
v
i
i
 
V
y
 
4 
oe
 
fa
 
S
o
 
: 
u
a
 
R
R
 
A 
i
n
g
 
Sl
it
 
S
A
S
 
IT 
ad 
A
Y
 4 
¢ og
 
hr
 
W
L
R
 
A"
 
“ 
L 
- 
y 
™ 
A
V
 
Fe
 
A
N
 
4 
T
A
R
R
 
RT 
oN
 
n
e
 
ol 
  
   
           
Cheerful workcampers prepare for the day’s activity on a housing construction project in Waldkappel, 
German Federal Republic. This exceptionally large voluntary summer workcamp project was attended 
by some 2,500 volunteers who put in a total of over 240,000 working hours on the building sites. 
| HE first “modern” workcamp was held near 
Verdun, France, in 1920 when young people 
from France, Germany and other nations helped rebuild 
war-ravaged farms. The movement has grown, especially 
since the second world war, until now each year some two 
million volunteers from all continents and most countries 
gather for from three to six weeks in camps of five to 200 
(the average is 25) to make a personal contribution to 
the welfare of their less fortunate neighbours. 
During the day there are long hours of hard physical 
work: slums are painted in the U.S.A. France and Great 
Britain, schools built in Bolivia, Ghana and the Ukraine, 
roads laid in Yugoslavia, India and Togo, flood and earth- 
quake damage repaired in Morocco, Chile and the Ger- 
man Federal Republic... 
In the evening, guitars, recorders and mouth-organs are 
brought out to accompany folk-singing and dancing. Or 
else, lively, sometimes heated (and always earnest) 
discussions spring up. In some camps, those devoted 
specifically to Improving Orient-Occident understanding 
for instance, lectures and discussions are carefully pre- 
pared in advance, but volunteers everywhere join in with 
youthful verve—usually tempered by the experience of 
trying to do something concrete about the problems they 
are discussing. 
Whether many nations or different regions of one coun- 
try are represented in a given camp or not there is 
never a dearth of topics: the réle of the developing 
countries in the United Nations, abstract art. Eastern 
religions, “are ‘workcampers do-gooders with a guilt 
complex?”, racism, ete. 
On weekends there are excursions to points of local 
Interest, hikes and a chance for the weary to catch up 
on sleep. ’ 
A good example of the kind of project undertaken is 
the camp that was held a few summers ago at Blitzingen, 
a small picturesque village perched high in the Swiss Alps. 
Every summer for decades, perhaps centuries, the people 
of Blitzingen have carried their cows’ milk down miles of 
twisting road once or twice a day from their summer 
pastures perched 1,200 feet above the village. 
As mechanization became widespread in Swiss dairies, 
Blitzingers could no longer compete: the young people of 
the village began to move away and Blitzingen seemed 
doomed to wither and die. Then 20 young workecampers 
representing several nations and races came to help. For 
about a month they worked side by side with the villagers 
who had remained and laid a plastic pipe down the moun- 
talnside. Now the milk comes down from the summer 
pasture in six minutes (instead of three hours) and Blit- 
zingen, encouraged, is beginning to revive. 
As well as short-term service there also exist oppor- 
tunities for experienced volunteers to do long-term 
(6 months to two years) workcamping, primarily in Asia, 
Africa and Latin America. Long-term volunteers are 
putting their knowledge and experience to work trans- 
forming the slums of New Delhi, preparing a student-run 
literacy campaign in Bolivia, helping refugees in Morocco 
and Austria. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 62681: Holiday cure for bored teen-agers

CURE FOR BOREDOM (Cont'd) 
Vacation time, gay but useful 
In one typical long-term project, Nicole Leymann, a 
young French social worker, and Max Hildesheim, a Bel- 
gian architect, spent a year in Togo, helping to strength- 
en the activities of the Togolese workcamp organiza- 
tion “Les Volontalres au Travail.” Nicole had the special 
task of interesting Togolese women in literacy, home- 
making and other educational activities of the workcamp 
group, while Max worked together with local development 
officers to encourage young village men to build schools, 
dig wells, surface roads and accomplish other projects. 
The main aim of the work done by Nicole and Max, 
was to make young Togolese aware of their own 
constructive potential and to teach them the techniques 
which will enable them to put their potential to 
work. Now back in Europe, Nicole and Max agree 
that they learned as much as they taught. Their 
year of service was not a one-way flow of information 
from the “developed” to the “developing” countries but 
rather a truly human exchange. 
At present, long and short-term workcamp projects 
are run by some 250 organizations located in more than 
50 countries throughout the world; there are small, large, 
regional, national, international, Buddhist, Catholic, 
Jewish, Muslim, Protestant, non-religious, governmental, 
non-governmental, political and apolitical organizations 
involved. 
The most active of these (80 at the time of writing) 
are grouped in the Co-ordination Committee for Inter- 
national Voluntary Workcamps, a supra-national, non- 
governmental organization located in Paris, to which 
Unesco has granted Consultative Status. The work 
of the Committee (whose Secretariat is staffed by long- 
term volunteers) includes publicity and co-ordination 
of workcamp activities as well as several Major Projects. 
(For news of the latest project, see page 34.) 
Hard physical effort of the kind furnished by these 
volunteers in England is combined with lectures, 
discussions and other educational activities in work- 
camp projects now run by over 250 organizations in 
more than 50 countries for over 2,000,000 volunteers, 
Unesco 
  
One of these, provides young people from Eastern 
Europe and Western Europe with an opportunity to 
labour, play and live together in voluntary work camps, 
to get acquainted with one another as individuals in an 
atmosphere of common effort. To date, they have worked 
together in camps in France, the German Democratic 
Republic, Poland, Sweden, the U.S.S.R. and Yugoslavia. 
Another Major Project of the Co-ordination Committee 
is the organization of regional training courses for 
prospective workcamp leaders in the developing countries. 
In many of these countries workcamp movements 
already exist; but expansion of their activities demands 
leaders and there are simply not enough experienced 
qualified leaders to go around. Without solid leadership, 
the energy and purpose of these new movements would 
be wasted. 
HE Co-ordination Committee tries to remedy 
this situation by organizing, in collaboration 
with local workcamp groups, regional leader training pro- 
jects. So far, four projects have been organized in South 
East Asia (three in India and one in Pakistan), three in 
Africa (Ghana, Togo and the U.AR.) and one in Latin 
America (Paraguay). In each project between 30 and 
50 trainees, sponsored by local 'workamp and other youth 
organizations, divide their time between theoretical 
sessions (talks and discussions led by workcamp and 
community development specialists) and practical phy- 
sical labour (building schools, digging wells, etc.). 
As a result of this combination, future leaders come 
- to feel the exicitement of workcamping and, at the same 
time, learn how to put their newly acquired techniques 
into practice. Through these regional training projects, 
which are generously supported by individuals and 
groups who contribute through the UNEsco Gift Coupon 
System, voluntary workcamping has been strengthened 
in countries where it existed and spread to new areas. 
At the First Latin American Training Project, for 
example, 29 young people from eight countries came 
together in the village of Primavera, Alta Paraguay, in 
early 1961 for a month's intensive instruction by several 
experts from the Americas and Europe. As a practical 
project, they added a wing to a rural hospital. 
Typical of the trainees was Jaime Reyes Mérida, Gen- 
eral Secretary of the Bolivian University Confederation. 
Soon after his return to La Paz from Paraguay, Jaime 
and other student leaders began making careful plans 
for a literacy campaign, in which student volunteers 
would serve as teachers of reading and writing and 
builders of schools and literacy centres. With the help 
of UNEsco, interested workcamp organizations in Europe 
and international student groups, this campaign was put 
into action. 
This activity and growing interest in voluntary service 
projects is now being ‘“boosted” by the second Latin 
American Training Project which takes place in Sucre, 
Bolivia, from March 15 to April 13. This project combines 
the hard practical work of building a university literacy 
training centre with a period of intensive study of the 
techniques of organizing workcamps. Some 30 volun- 
teers from 9 countries in Latin America now working and 
studying together will return after the training project 
to use their new-found knowledge in their own countries. 
It would, of course, be unrealistic to expect all young 
people everywhere to be interested in giving their free 
time to physically strenuous voluntary service activities. 
Yet, each year, more and more discover that work- 
camping is a means of doing something practical about 
the world’s problems, of bridging the political, social, 
racial and other chasms that divide men, in short, of 
building peace. This is certainly one answer to the 
boredom of today’s youth. 
 
ARTHUR GILLETTE, of the United States, is General Secretary of the 
Co-ordination Committee for International Voluntary Workcamps, 
in Paris. A specialist in the organization of volunteer training pro- 
grammes in developing countries, he is at present in Bolivia helping 
to organize the Second Latin American Training Project,

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 62681: Holiday cure for bored teen-agers

DRUMBEATS CALL 
TOGO 
VOLUNTEERS 
TO WORK 
  
   
    
    
In the newly-developing nations of Africa, 
the International Voluntary Workcamp Move- 
ment has done much to guide and encourage 
work on community development projects. 
In the Republic of Togo, for example, a young 
French social worker spent a year assisting 
the local workcamp organization, Les Volon- 
taires au travail, her special task being to Inte- 
rest Togolese women in literacy, home-making 
and other educational activities. A Belgian 
architect worked with local development 
officers to encourage young village men to 
buiid schools, dig wells and surface roads. Left, 
volunteer builders working to the sound of 
drumbeats are constructing a pre-natal clinic 
in the Togo Republic. Below, another Togo 
volunteer group thatches a newly-built home. 
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 62683: The Hidden face of the cinema, pt. 4: Censorship, a double-edged weapon

28 
  
In a series of articles based on a world survey of the cinema, (See 
The Unesco Courier, Dec. 1962 and Jan. and Feb. 1963) Paul Léglise 
dealt with some of the lesser-known aspects of what might be termed 
the “private life” of the cinema industry, from production to distribu- 
tion and presentation. 
led by institutions and laws. 
Ane is a collective work subect to precise 
economic imperatives and made to satisfy 
cultural needs. Because of these characteristics it 
demands the creation in every country of an institution 
to co-ordinate, promote, control, guide and arbitrate the 
affairs of the national cinema industry. 
The actual forms taken- by such institutions can vary 
greatly. In one country the nationalization of industries 
puts authority into the hands of the State. In another, 
professional organizations join forces to create an organ- 
ization which handles the general problems of the cinema 
industry. Under other arrangements some affairs remain 
in the hands of the State while others are dealt with by 
the film-makers themselves. 
Already in the early days of the cinema, film makers 
formed associations not only to look after their pro- 
fessional interests, but also to co-ordinate and syste- 
matize techniques and working methods. Soon they were 
joined by other groups whose prime interest was in the 
cultural problems of the cinema. 
Today all these organizations have an important func- 
tion in every country, representing the interests of the 
cinema industry in its relations with the public authori- 
ties. Sometimes a professional organization takes over the 
affairs of the industry in its own country and becomes 
responsible for negotiations with those of other countries. 
The United States is a typical example of this “self 
government in business.” 
Other groups concerned with the cultural problems of 
the cinema in turn affiliate themselves with international 
bodies having similar aims, such as the International 
Federation of Film Societies, the International Scientific 
Film Association, the International Centre of Films for 
Children, the International Committee for Film Education 
and Culture, the International Experimental and Art Film 
Theatres Confederation, the International Council for 
But films have also a collective life, control- 
Here, M. Léglise discusses censorship 
problems and the growing importance of films for young people. 
Doll actors fight a duel 
for love of a lady in a 
puppet film version of 
Shakespeare’s “A Mid- 
summer Night's Dream”, 
produced by the Czech 
puppeteer Jiri Trnka. 
Filmexport, Prague 
Educational Films, the International Art Film Federation, 
the International Catholic Film Office, the International 
Amateur Film Union, the International Animated Film 
Association and so on. 
Among the laws that affect the cinema industry cer- 
tainly the most controversial are those relating to cen- 
sorship. A subject which constantly preoccupies film 
makers, censorship is the cinema problem that comes 
up for discussion most often of all. It is one that can be 
argued about endlessly. Sometimes it is simply referred 
to as “control,” either to distinguish it from official 
censorship in which direct power is held and exercised 
by a government, or simply for euphemistic reasons which, 
in any case, deceive no one. 
Every country provides for the maintenance of law, 
order and public decency in the general body of its laws 
and it thus seems somewhat pointless to introduce special 
legislation applying only to films. Justification for censor- 
ship, however, has been based on the immense influence 
which films have on the public and this has led to abusive 
or haphazard application to films of laws relating to public 
order and morality. 
The cinema industry needs protection against the con- 
fused and incoherent use of such laws on a local level, 
and a national censorship of films thus offers a safeguard 
against such excesses. 
It thus comes as no surprise to find the cinema industry 
itself demanding that a system of censorship be set up or 
even deciding to establish one under its own responsibility. 
The purpose here is to prevent the blocking of commercial 
distribution through contradictory censorship decisions 
that may easily vary between different areas of the same 
country and even between one city and another. A central 
censorship authority is, in fact, an economic necessity. 
“The kind of censorship does not matter,” wrote a French 
film-maker in 1919, “as long as it is a centralized one.”

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 62683: The Hidden face of the cinema, pt. 4: Censorship, a double-edged weapon

  
   
This need for a centralized control is amply illustrated 
by the case of the United States. Although the Tariff Act 
forbids the importation of any film that incites people to 
subversion or acts against the government of the United 
States and proscribes the entry of anything immoral or 
obscene, there is no federal censorship. 
Some local authorities, however, possess wide dis- 
cretionary powers. Five States—Kansas, Maryland, New 
York, Pennsylvania and Virginia—have established censor- 
ship systems, and in several others censorship even 
operates on the municipal level. 
Faced by such a lack of legislative uniformity, it is 
hardly surprising that the Motion Picture Producers and 
Distributors of America decided to set up a Production 
Code intended for general application and seeking to 
establish some measure of uniformity in an otherwise 
confused mass of criteria. The Code, in fact, represents 
the unifying force in the organization of the American 
film industry. Its creation only serves fo emphasise ifs 
necessity, for economic reasons alone, to the film industry. 
All the American producers and the importers of pro- 
ductions from abroad can submit their films to the Pro- 
duction Code Administration (PCA) for approval 
Scenarios of U.S. films submitted for PCA approval are 
examined carefully and in controversial cases PCA mem- 
bers may decide to watch the shooting of certain scenes. 
In any case, PCA approval is given only to completed 
films. Where films have not been submitted for approval, 
there is nothing to prevent their being shown in 
specialized cinemas, but the normal channels of distribu- 
tion for the commercial circuits are to all intents barred 
to them. Though the PCA mark of approval has no actual 
legal value it is a significant fact that films bearing it are 
exempted from municipal censorship in many cities. This 
alone would seem to justify its existence. 
Similar kinds of systems are found in some other 
countries: The British Board of Film Censors (United 
Kingdom), the Freiwillige Selbskontrolle der Filmwirt- 
schaft (German Federal Republic) and the Administra- 
tion Commission of Motion Picture Code of Ethics (Japan), 
to name but three. 
In Great Britain the British Board of Film Censors 
delivers three types of certificates to approved films: “U,” 
meaning suitable for general release; “A,” more suitable 
for adult than juvenile audiences, and “X,” for adult 
audiences only. 
In the German Federal Republic there is close collabo- 
ration between the authorities and the FSK (the organ- 
ization named above). There is actually no censorship in 
the Republic although a 1957 law requires authorization 
for the screening of films to audiences of young people in 
three age categories: less than 12, 16 and 18 years of age. 
All the States of the Republic have agreed to abide by the 
decisions of the self-created voluntary censorship service 
of the country’s cinema industry. 
All these self-censorship institutions operate on the basis 
of a production code which defines the kinds of scenes 
regarded as improper: certain aspects of crime and bru- 
tality, vulgarity in dialogue, indecent or obscene passages 
and things likely to give offence to national sentiments or 
religious beliefs. 
In the United Kingdom there is no written code. The 
British Board of Film Censors prefers to judge each film 
on its individual merits and to take all aspects of the 
work into account. 
In cases where Institutions of this kind do not exist or 
where film censorship authority is not vested exclusively 
in the municipal authorities—as it Is in the case of Bolivia 
and Ecuador, for example—what other systems do we find 
in operation: full freedom or rigorous control? The 
answer: widely varying degrees of censorship extending 
between two extremes. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 62683: The Hidden face of the cinema, pt. 4: Censorship, a double-edged weapon

hal 
. 15 it \ 
LBL 
: i i hang” Yu ESA 
: § PR rte ay. 1 : J ah . pr p x 
A 1) -4 -. - A MR 4 heat HE + 
o A - ee he yu FoR oN NT y ! y 
\ 
] i J 
x 
. 
A Unesco- 
Hungarian 
co-production 
on the history 
of numbers 
In prehistoric times, the extent of the 
© cave man’s conception of numbers was 
“one”, “two” and “many”. One day he 
in to realize that “two is always 
matter what it describes... 
  
          
By the position of the numerical symbols 
CPSVANRTETY: IRS T-0 - £1 J LTTE T ER TA LT 
\eir number system. The same symbo 
y a use of repetition, can be employed 
» signify 1 or 60 or 60 x 60, and so on. is missing. At last they find it: the zero. 
  
From India, A 
CINEMA (Cont'd) 
This man was Al Khowarizmi. One of 
his works entitled “Al-jebr wal muga- 
alah” has given us the word “algebra”. 
he term “Logarithm” is said to be 
stortion of this Arab author’s name. 
by symbols. Now he has started 
keep a record of his hunting bag b 
‘means of notches he cuts in his club. 
discovery: the representation of ideas 
to 
( 
7 \ 
\ 
AV
A]
 
LV
] 
  
  
iumerological symbols. 
numbers running from 
our present numbers) 
  
  
  
              
      
ventually reached Spain. Soon it 
Freedom but not licence 
The first of these extremes is in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia, where not only film production but also any com- 
merce in films is strictly prohibited. Only diplomatic 
missions and a few foreign organizations are allowed to 
screen films ‘and these performances must be strictly 
private. 
The other extreme is the Republic of Argentina. Article 
22 of an Argentine law passed in 1957 declares that anyone 
interfering with the freedom of expression of the cinema 
in any way whatsoever, applying censorship or preventing 
the free movement and screening of films is liable to a 
prison sentence of from one to six months. 
Does this prohibition of censorship by law mean that 
no control whatever exists in Argentina? No! For 
freedom does not mean licence to do anything one 
pleases. 
An Argentine decree of 1961 has somewhat reduced the 
scope of the earlier law. The new text specifies a number 
of things whose presentation on the screen can give rise 
to legal action: offences against decency, things offensive 
to religious beliefs or to other races or foreign countries; 
vindications of crime, dishonesty, immorality or violence. 
Despite these far-reaching modifications, Article 22 of the 
original Argentine law is still in force. Control of films is 
now therefore guaranteed and carried out under the 
powers of judicial authority. 
One aspect of the censorship problem—the admission of 
children to certain film shows-—still preoccupies many 
authorities and even the Argentine Republic has decided 
Wise men of India meet to decide on 
They agree on 
ut something. 
LE 
ns Moving ‘across North Africa, ‘algebra 
be 
". came an intrinsic part of ‘mathematics 
a that were taught in Spain’s universities 
~ whose fame spread throughout Europe. 

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 62683: The Hidden face of the cinema, pt. 4: Censorship, a double-edged weapon

he slips and falls flat in a muddy pool 
: cience “from the Orient.” 
  
CICELY [TDS LAUT 
oes to wipe his muddy hands on a roc 
‘His misfortune is really a blessing i 
CIS-TTE for it gives him the means 
~ make a new and important discovery 
These drawings are reproduced 
from a Hungarofilm-Unesco co- 
production entitled “1, 2, 3..” in 
which animated cartoon techniques 
give charm and humour to thé 
history of mathematics (in capsule 
form) and show the contributions 
of Orient and Occident to its 
evolution. This colour film was 
made by a team of Hungarian ani- 
mators, Gyula Macskassy and Gyorgy 
Varnai. Films by Gyula Macskassy 
received the best cartoon awards 
at the Karlovy Vary Festival in 
1960and the 1961 Cannes Festival. 
Unesco photos 
  
              
any fundamental ide 
1 x {ere Pythagorus 
w famous theorem ; 
  
            
e Greeks showed FLUENT analysing . He 
he Fig 
Gazing at his finger marks on the rock Co 
he counts: “One hand—five fingers; 
two hands—ten fingers”. Man’s ten fing- 2h 
ers thus became the basis for the foun- 
~ dation of the decimal system of toda) 
Roman numerals were. ‘hardly designed 
for simple and rapid calculations a 
e Romans were obliged to make u 
of the abacus, a simple calculating ma; c 
ine, consisting off ‘beads sliding ¢ on wir: 
   
  
  
0 be initiated in this new branch «¢ 
Al Khowa 
izmi’s “Algebra” was widely translate 
y medieval scholars and won ‘renown. 
re across Europe w 
not to leave its solution to an application of general laws, 
even when these have been specially amended. The 1957 
law in Argentina was modified in this connexion later the 
same year. The new text stipulates that the National 
Institute of Cinematography must issue a prior certificate 
of approval to Argentine and foreign productions, and 
empowers it to classify films as being unsuitable for young 
people under the age of 18. ‘Local authorities have the 
right to prohibit the admission of minors to the perfor- 
mances of such films. 
The moral protection of youth is, in fact, another reason 
offered for the maintenance of ‘censorship. Conjointly 
with the threat of repressive action by local authorities, 
this new principle, today written into the laws of most 
countries, often raises a barrier to another long-estab- 
lished principle: freedom of expression. 
Belgium has found a way out of this dilemma with a 
solution that is both original and ingenious. It has no 
general censorship to block the free movement of films, 
but admission to cinemas is forbidden to young people 
under the age of 16. A control commission has been set 
The science of numbers s A universal legacy, math 
science in itself and "the tool of all othe 
It is also a vast ‘and interna- i 
onal language in which scientists & 
all lands can speak and be understood, 
up with a mandate that Is clear and precise: it gives 
approval for certain fllms to be shown to children and 
thus attenuates the stringency of general censorship. 
Another system long in use Is a governmental author- 
ization given on the advice and judgment of a special 
commission composed of educationalists, psychologists, 
doctors, magistrates and other competent authorities. 
The universal and controversial problem of censorship 
is one with which countries with socialist economies have 
also to come to grips. In Poland, for example, a decree 
of 1945 (modified in 1952 and 1953) created a central office 
for the control of the press, publications and entertain- 
ments. Its purpose is to prevent the diffusion of any 
written, auditory or visual matter considered to be 
against the interests of the State or infringing law or 
morality. A Ministry of Education committee views each 
film and decides at what age children may see it. 
As the production and the distribution of films in a 
Socialist country are both nationalized activities, it is a 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGF 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 62683: The Hidden face of the cinema, pt. 4: Censorship, a double-edged weapon

32 
CINEMA (Cont'd ) 
A growing industry: films for the young 
normal and general rule for a control to be effected 
through the choice of subject matter for films or of films 
themselves in cases where they are imported. 
It is all too easy to criticise and poke fun at film cen- 
sorship. But its roots are deeply and tenaciously 
engrained and it would be idle to hope for their eli- 
mination in the near future. Far better to admit, even 
unwillingly, that there is still some justification for 
censorship. 
The acceptance of this fact in no way prevents us 
from denouncing and exposing the abuses of censorship 
or its hypocritical use, so as to prevent its extension 
beyond admissible bounds. Nor is this attitude likely to 
prejudice In any way a progressive advance to the day 
when everyone will regard films in the same way as all 
other major forms of expression, subject solely to the 
general laws of a country and answerable, if need should 
arise, to a court of justice. 
In bridging the gap that still separates us from such 
a happy state of affairs, an important role will fall to 
the educational and cultural aspects of the cinema. This 
movement has, in fact, already begun and most govern- 
ments have shown that they are ready to take positive 
action by using the cinema for educational and cultural 
goals. : 
There exists, no doubt, a certain long-standing mistrust 
on the part of some authorities and a disparity between 
needs and resources, but it is certain that national 
authorities everywhere are giving increasing attention to 
the possibilities of educational films. In many cases a 
special service attached to the ministry of education 
takes charge of film production and distribution and 
supplies equipment. Two examples are the Cinemato- 
graphic Service of the Belgian Ministry of Education 
and the National Pedagogical Institute in France. Not 
all such ‘institutions are governmental in origin. 
Frequently an autonomous institution produces films and 
other audio-visual materials for educational use and 
trains special staff in their uses . 
In this fleld valuable international co-ordination is ef- 
fected by the International Council for Educational Films 
founded in 1952 and now grouping 23 countries which 
encourages exchanges, and acts as a catalyzing agency 
by stimulating co-productions between different countries. 
Other specialized organizations encourage action on a 
regional basis. One of these is the Latin American Ins- 
titute for Educational Films, set up by the Mexican 
Government in collaboration with UNeEsco. It arranges 
reciprocal exchanges, the training of staff and the pro- 
duction and distribution of films in Latin America. 
Apart from its role in the educational film field, govern- 
ment action often extends into the production and dis- 
tribution of cultural and scientific films, especially short 
length ones. Sometimes a special body is set up to act 
as co-ordinator for the film activities of all its country’s 
ministeries and to negotiate with private film companies 
on behalf of the State. Examples of this kind include 
France's National Cinematographic Centre, Britain's 
Central Office of Information and the Information Film 
Section in the Republic of South Africa. 
l: France the funds allocated by the State for 
the production and distribution of short-length 
cultural films—an activity co-ordinated by the National 
Cinematographic Centre—annually amount to 10 million 
frances. In the United Kingdom, the Central Office of 
Information is each year responsible for the production 
of some 50 films destined for both commercial and non- 
commercial channels, a further 100 for overseas TV 
transmission and also short films for TV and newsreel use. 
Another increasing trend today is the setting up of 
official agencies responsible for film production on behalf 
of the State. These include the National Film Board of 
Canada, the Dansk Kulturfilm and Ministeruerhes Film- 
ydvag in Denmark, the Aengencia Nacional in Brazil 
Spain’s No-Do, Morocco’s Cinematographic Centre and 
National Film Units in Australia, India, New Zealand 
and Malaya. 
These organizations do not necessarily hold the exclu- 
sive monopoly of film orders for the state. They are 
generally concerned with news-film production and, 
depending on which country they are in, have a more or 
less indirect share in the production of other kinds of 
films, either using their own technical staffs or calling 
on private film companies to do the work. 
India’s Films Division, for instance, produces a news- 
film and several documentaries each week. The Canadian 
National Film Board each year distributes its productions 
(1960-1961 figures) in over 70 countries. 
Similar organizations equipped to prepare and produce 
educational, scientific and cultural films exist in the 
countries with socialist economies. In the Soviet Union, 
popular science films are produced in studios at Moscow, 
Leningrad, Sverdlovsk, Kiev, Tbilissi, Minsk and Tash- 
kent. In Czechoslovakia, documentary films are produced 
in Prague, popular science and educational films in Brno 
and Prague, and children’s films in Gottwaldow. 
Annual production of short films, documentaries and 
popular science films in the Soviet Union is about 750. 
In 1959, 377 similar films were produced in Czechoslo- 
vakia, whose Gottwaldow studios produce between 80 and 
100 films for children each year. 
This global production of cultural films finds some 
outlet through normal cinema channels, but it is chiefly 
distributed through specialized “non-commercial” cir- 
cuits. 
EFORE leaving the subject of cultural films 
mention should be made of developments in 
the production of films for young people. In an earlier 
reference to censorship, we emphasized how a growing 
concern for the moral protection of youth was being 
written into the laws of many countries to an extent 
where it threatened to nullify the long-standing principle 
of freedom of expression. 
However, negative action with regard to films is today 
being offset by positive measures which encourage the 
development of films especially designed for juvenile 
audiences. These include subsidies, special reduced prices, 
bonuses, the waiving of taxes and the creation of 
specialized production studios and distribution channels. 
Under the impulse of the International Centre of Films 
for Children in Brussels, measures are now being worked 
out to encourage international co-productions and film 
exchanges. Though. this is a long-term project some of 
its positive results can already be seen. 
The International Centre of Films for Children was 
created under the sponsorship of Unesco and its members 
include international organizations and national groups 
which are working to develop the movement for chil- 
dren’s films in their respective countries. Priority Is 
given to international film exchanges, but the Centre is 
also working to bring about a greater freedom of circula- 
tion for films intended for juvenile spectators. 
Mention is made of these activities in this context to 
show how some groups and organizations are demonstrat- 
ing convineingly that outdated and negative forms of 
censorship ean be counteracted, and are recognizing the 
positive role that the cinema can fill for teen-agers. 
Delegates to a conference on the development of infor- 
mation media in Latin America, held in Santiago de 
Chile in 1961, noted that in the fleld of films for youth 
there existed “a regrettable apathy, often resulting from 
a shortage of funds but chiefly due to an absence of 
organizations working to highlight the need for this kind 
of film and to encourage its production.” 
If these facts are evident in Latin America, they are 
also reflected in the situation existing in most other parts 
of the world. Thus we must look to the International 
Centre in Brussels for a lead In stimulating the creation 
in all parts of the world of national centres whose alm is 
to work for this worthwhile cause.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

LOST HYMNS OF GEORGIA 
Sir, 
I have read the letters by Alberto 
Hemsi and Bathja Bayer (Octo- 
ber 1962 issue) dealing with my article 
on the “Lost Hymns of Georgia”, 
(May issue). 
The composer, Mr. Hemsi, while 
welcoming -the solving of the mystery 
of ancient Georgian music, would like 
me to explain ‘“‘the problems of the 
rhythm and duration of sound with 
the same precision that the details of 
the pitch and subsequent pattern of 
tones have been outlined.” 
Obviously, it was impossible for me, 
within the scope of a brief article, to 
treat in detail all the aspects of the 
decipherment of the old Georgian mu- 
sical notation. In a somewhat enlarg- 
ed Georgian version of the article 
these detailed aspects have been dis- 
cussed. 
Replying to the two questions rais- 
ed by Mr. Hemsi: 
1. The rhythm of old Georgian 
chants corresponds exactly to the me- 
trorhythmical structure of the ver- 
sified texts of the hymns. 
2. The problem of duration of 
sound. Ancient Georgian religious 
singing, as ancient Christian music 
in general, is the so-called cantus pla- 
nus (“plain chant”, or to use the old 
Georgian term ‘“‘corresponsive” sing- 
ing). 
Religious vocal music was aimed 
at conveying the texts of the hymns 
to the listeners without obscuring the 
meaning, and so the syllabes of the 
text of the hymns were for the most 
part of even duration (musical “chro- 
nos protos”’—a half note in slow time, 
a quarter note in quick time.) 
Augmentation and diminution of 
duration were indicated by signs (repe- 
tition of notes, signs of jubilation.) 
Instructions as to the manner of 
performance, tempo and dynamic col- 
ouring of separate chants and groups 
of hymns are given in Ancient Geor- 
gian synaxaries, indicating the calen- 
dar regulations as to their perfor- 
mance. 
My synthesizing work on “The De- 
ciphering of Ancient and Mediaeval 
Georgian Musical Notation (with spe- 
cimens of deciphered texts)” in Geor- 
gian, Russian and English, is schedul- 
ed to come off the press in 1963-64. 
Those interested will find in it a cir- 
cumstantial account of Ancient Geor- 
gian music, as well as the detailed nar- 
ration of all the aspects of its decipher- 
ment. 
* 
I now pass to the questions raised 
by Mr. Bayer, who, while agreeing 
with the fundamental ‘thesis of my 
deciphering, considers it necessary to 
touch upon a few details which do 
not, as he himself observes, affect the 
main points ‘of. the problem. He be- 
lieves that the names of some musi- 
cal instruments, a photograph of which 
appears with my article, are not given 
quite correctly. ‘“Mostly the transla- 
tor and not the author, seems to have 
been at fault” adds Mr. Bayer. In 
Letters to the Editor 
this he is right. A comparison with 
the Georgian original of my article 
(published Aug. 23 and 24 in the Geor- 
gian press) will show at once that not 
one of the terms in question figures 
in the Georgian original. 
Though for the most part 
Mr. Bayer's remarks are correct some 
of them are not. The thirteenth- 
century Georgian miniature under 
discussion (Page 24 of THE UNEsco 
COURIER) represents an orchestra of 
four instruments. Mr, Bayer is 
inclined to think that the third instru- 
ment of this orchestra “is more 
probably a trumpet of sorts.” This is 
not so. The two Georgian terms for 
it are “stviri” and “nai”. These terms 
(especially the latter), as well as 
references as to the composition of 
such orchestras preserved in Georgian 
sources, show that the instrument in 
question is a variety of flute. Thus 
the name in the text in THE UNEsco 
COURIER is correct. 
Mr. Bayer also points out that the 
practice of writing down polyphonic 
chants in Western music dates from 
the Sth contury, and not from the 
13th. As is well known, only the 
first relatively crude attempts at sim- 
ple polyphony (or rather diaphony) 
date from the 9th century. And even 
afterwards in the following centuries 
when polyphony was undergoing fur- 
ther development in the West, the 
chief melody, cantus firmus, was 
usually written down while the accom- 
panying voices ‘were ‘written down 
only sporadically in exceptional cases 
(they were sung according to worked 
out norms). The practice of writing 
down the accompanying voices along 
with the cantus firmus became general 
comparatively late, from the 13th cen- 
tury. 
With this I conclude my brief notes, 
especially since Mr. Bayer’s remarks 
refer only to the details, and accord- 
ing to his own summing up “the great 
value of Dr. Ingorokva’s communica- 
tion of course remains unaffected in 
principle.” 
In conclusion allow me to express 
my sincere gratitude to THE UNEscO 
Courier and to the authors of the 
letters, for the interest they have 
shown in the cultural heritage of my 
native land Georgia, a country of an- 
cient culture. 
Pavle Ingorokva 
Tbilisi, Georgia, U.S.S.R. 
DEVELOPMENT IN ISRAEL 
 
Sir, 
You have published admirable arti- 
cles on ethnological and artistic sub- 
jects and interesting studies which have 
brought readers into touch with Asian 
and African peoples. But there is 
also a small nation, Israel, which, in 
the face of many difficulties, has cul- 
tivated and developed its lands. I am 
not ‘well acquainted with this country, 
but I know that in place of rocks and 
stones, there is now wheat, where 
there were once tracks there are now 
spacious highways and where tumble- 
down huts once stood, modern build- 
ings have risen. In the place of mules, . 
primitive presses, shepherd boys and 
darkness, there are now automobiles, 
factories, doctors and light. This 
little country is not well known. Why 
not devote some pages in your maga- 
zine to this courageous, hardworking 
and intelligent people? 
: Paul Jaume 
Coursan, France 
WHAT TEACHERS 
SHQULD READ 
Sir, 
In reply to Dr. Sten Rodhe (Too 
Heavy for -Teacher, October 1962), I 
too am a “busy” teacher of primary 
children, but I find time to read the 
articles in THE UNEsco COURIER be- 
cause I find them stimulating and inte- 
resting; also the illustrations are excel- 
lent; some of these I can make use of 
in my class work, I don’t think that 
teachers should only read “what can 
be used directly in their teaching”, 
surely some time can be found to go 
beyond that. 
 
 
Judith Myrtle 
Kelowna, B.C. Canada 
TEMPLE AT JOCJACARTA 
Sir, 
The text of the cover photo of the 
December issue of THE UNeEsco Cou- 
RIER comments on details of a bas 
relief of a gallery of the Temple of 
Shiva, near Djakarta, Indonesia. 
Actually this Temple of Shiva is the 
Loro Jonggrang-temple of the Pram- 
banan-complex near Jocjakarta (Cen- 
tral-Java). Djakarta is the capital of 
Indonesia whereas Jocjacarta is the 
centre of the old Javanese culture. 
The Prambanan-complex is situated 
to the southeast of the famous Bud- 
dhist Borobudur-temple. Since 1961 
the epic of the Ramayana is enacted 
in the Prambanan-compounds with 
each full moon. Thousands of foreign 
tourists have watched these Ramaya- 
na-ballet-performances with the Loro- 
Jonggrang as the background of the 
play. 
Liem Tiong Gie 
Singaradja (Bali) 
MORE PLACE TO SCIENCE 
Sir, 
Would it be possible to increase the 
scientific features, both in number and 
.in contents? I am fully aware of the 
fact that THE UNEsco COURIER is read 
by all sorts of persons, and that there- 
fore it cannot become a science peri- 
odical, apart from the fact that there 
are already many other periodicals of 
that sort. Still, I believe that more 
emphasis on new discoveries and new 
horizons opened by contemporary 
science would be of interest. This, 
however, should absolutely never go 
to detriment of the extremely good 
artistic features which appear. The 
ones on archaeology, in particular, are 
of the highest level. 
Andrea Larsen 
Rome, Italy 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
NEWS AGENCIES FOR AFRICA: 
Upper Volta is shortly to have its 
own national news agency, for whose staff 
a training seminar was recently organized 
by a UNEsco specialist at Ouagadougou, the 
capital. Other newly-independent French- 
speaking African States which have set up 
their own news agencies (some with help 
from Unesco experts) include Cameroun, 
Dahomey, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Mada- 
gascar, Mali and Senegal.. 
A NY CLIMATE YOU WISH. A 
£A600,000 installation for plant 
research, now operating in Canberra, is 
capable of producing almost every known 
type of climatic condition. Many hundreds 
of plant growth experiments can be car- 
ried out simultaneously in this phytotron 
which is an important Australian contri- 
bution to world efforts aimed at increas- 
ing food production. 
NESCO CLUBS HELP IRAN’S 
BLIND: Unesco Gift Coupons total- 
ling $4,000 which can be used to buy 
books and educational materials were 
recently presented to the Nur-Ayin school 
for the blind at Isfahan in Iran. The 
gift is part of a sum collected through a 
campaign organized by the French National 
Commission for UNesco and the French 
Federation of UNEsco Clubs to help blind 
children in many parts of the world. 
ALE THE WORLD'S MUSIC: All 
musical works, in printed or manu- 
script form, written before 1800 are to be 
listed in a 50-volume inventory now being 
prepared by libraries in 20 countries. Five 
volumes are already published or are being 
printed. The International Musicological 
Society and the International Association 
of Music Libraries are working on this 
project with aid from UNEsco and from 
American foundations. 
Q WEDISH TECHNICAL AID: Three 
new Swedish schools for vocational 
training in East Pakistan, Liberia and 
Lebanon are to start operating this year, 
reports the Swedish Agency for Interna- 
tional Assistance (NIB) in a survey of its 
1963 activities. One of them, an institute 
in Siblin, Lebanon, for training instruc- 
tors, foremen and technicians, is Sweden’s 
contribution to the work of UNRWA, the 
United Nations organization helping Arab 
refugees. 
OMEWORK FOR TEACHERS: Bri- 
tish teachers make use of TV pro- 
grammes in school but usually only have 
time to follow those dealing with their 
own field. To give teachers a complete 
view of the possibilities of educational TV, 
British networks put out special pro- 
grammes for teachers during the Christmas 
holidays. Teachers in schools not yet 
equipped with TV were able to make 
their own estimates of the value of such 
services. 
      - 
 
  
  
  
AFRICAN TEXTBOOK CENTRE: A 
centre for the production of school 
textbooks has been set up at Yaoundé in 
Cameroun with UNEsco assistance. It is 
to produce reading primers, textbooks for 
citizenship education, geography and his- 
tory, reading texts for adults, literacy 
booklets, leaflets and posters. It will serve 
the Cameroun and also four neighbouring 
countries: the Central African Republic, 
Congo (Brazzaville), Gabon and Chad. 
ARSAW’S POLYGLOT SCHOOLS: 
Since the start of the present school 
year foreign language teaching in two 
secondary schools has been applied to other 
subjects in the school curriculum and spe- 
cial daily conversation classes have been 
started. This is the first step towards the 
creation of four schools in Warsaw where 
teaching will be conducted in French and 
German and, later, in English and Russian. 
TUCLEAR MEDICAL CENTRE: Five 
hundred research workers are to staff 
the new Institute of Nuclear Medi- 
cine, set up by the Soviet Academy of 
Medical Sciences to develop all aspects 
of the application of isotopes’ and radio- 
active methods in the treatment and pre- 
vention of disease. 
ALK ABOUT STORMS. Building 
research engineers from eight coun- 
tries will attend the first international 
conference on the effects of wind on build- 
ings and other structures, to be held at 
the British National Physical Laboratory 
at Teddington, near London, in June. 
Subjects to be discussed include the effect 
of sudden gusts of wind on various kinds 
of structures and also wind tunnel techni- 
ques developed for their investigation. 
AS UNDER THE CHANNEL: The 
possibility of carrying supplies of 
natural gas from recently discovered fields 
in the Netherlands by undersea pipe to 
Great Britain is now being studied. Ano- 
ther possible future use of pipelines dealt 
with in a paper on this subject presented 
to the Royal Society of Arts, in London, 
was for the movement of pulverised coal 
by pipeline. 
  
(J) PPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE: A 
special bulletin listing opportunities 
open for skilled long term volunteers 
who wish to work in the world’s developing 
countries is now being published by the 
Co-ordination Committee for International 
Voluntary Workcamps, 6, rue Franklin, 
Paris 16°. Produced in co-operation with 
the Mass Communication Department of 
Unesco, this three-weekly bulletin (available 
to volunteer organizations) is the most 
recent major project of the workcamp 
movement, which has also. recently 
published a survey of the real needs for 
volunteer workers in 20 countries. 
Jems & SOCIAL SCIENCE: An 
international study of the social reality 
of our time as seen in the images presented 
by films has been published by Unesco (¥). 
Its autbor, Luc de Heusch, professor at the 
Free University of Brussels, has analyzed 
documentary films from many countries 
from the viewpoint of their use for 
sociological research and training, the term 
sociology being taken to include social 
psychology and cultural anthropology. 
 
(*) “The Cinema and Social Science”, by Luc 
de Heusch (Reports and Papers in the Social 
Sciences), Unesco, Paris. Price : $1.00; 5/ - ; 
r 
Flashes ... 
BM UNICEF—the United Nations Chil- 
dren's Fund—allocated $38.7 million to 
helping children and mothers in develop- 
ing countries last year—its largest contri- 
bution since 1950. For every $1.00 from 
UNICEF, receiving countries committed 
more than $2.50. 
mW Soviet geologists report—following last 
year's cruise of the research vessel “Vityaz” 
—that in a vast volcanic plateau on the Paci- 
fic Ocean bed there are iron and manganese 
deposits far richer than any revealed on 
the world's continents. 
RB International training facilities for jour- 
nalists and broadcasters will be provided 
by the Thomson Foundation, a newly- 
created £5,000,000 trust. It will provide 
a residential training centre for young 
.journalists in England and a training centre 
in Scotland for men who will run new 
TV services in developing countries. 
WM The world's lowest death rate is in the 
Canal Zone of Panama which, according 
to ‘a World Health Organization survey 
covering 1950-1960, had only 3.6 deaths 
per 1,000 population. Lowest mortality 
rates in Europe were in the Faroe Islands 
7.1, Iceland, 7.2 and the Netherlands, 7.6 
deaths per 1,000 inhabitants. 
UNESCO PHILATELIC SERVICE 
The second 1963 U.N. commemorative stamp, issued 
HO WNACIONES UMIDAS 
W
H
O
I
L
Y
N
 
Q
I
I
I
N
D
 
 
N
A
T
I
O
N
S
 
U
N
I
E
S
 
CE BEAMBEHNBIE HALKY 
last month, salutes the World Freedom from Hunger 
Campaign launched by the U.N. Food and Agriculture 
Organization. (During World-Freedom-from Hunger 
Week—the last week in March—over 140 countries 
issued special commemorative stamps). The U.N. 
stamp is issued in 5 cent and 11 cent denominations. 
As agent in France of the U.N. Postal Administration, 
Unesco's, Philatelic Service stocks all 
stamps and first-day covers currently on sale, and 
those issued by Unesco member states to comme- 
the U.N. 
morate important events in the history of Unesco 
and the U.N. For prices and further details write to The Unesco Philatelic Service, 
Place de Fontenoy, Paris (7¢). 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
E
N
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Volume XIV No. 4 1962 
  
Economics 
of education 
Published quarterly $2 10/-(stg.) 6 NF 
International Social Science Jour- 
nal. The most comprehensive inter- 
national journal of its kind because 
of its interdisciplinary approach: 
sociology, political science, law, 
demography, anthropology, etc. In 
each number it brings a series of 
original studies on a subject selected 
on account of its international impact 
or its bearing on current research, 
accompanied with news on research 
institutes, international meetings. 
(Quarterly). 
Annual subscription: 32/6; $6.50. 
UNESCO PERIODICALS 
Impact deals with the social aspects 
of science and technology, with 
subjects concerning relations bet- 
ween science and governments and 
problems of scientific organization. 
It is a quarterly for all thoughtful 
persons in all walks of life who are 
interested in scientific progress and 
the advancement of society. Annual 
subscription: 9/6; $1.75.      
     
       
   
     
by 7 : 
NE ete hk 
— 2 te 1) 4 
o RE So 
x 
IMPACT 
4 of science on society 
Vol. XII (1962, No. 4 
w IN THIS ISSUE 
i SOME PROBLEMS OF INTEREST 
FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
international 
journal 
of adult 
and youth 
education 
  
International Journal of Adult 
and Youth Education. A quar- 
terly technical journal intended mainly 
for specialists in fundamental and 
adult education, which contains ar- 
ticles describing important activi- 
ties in this field and information 
concerning programmes and general 
lines of policy. 
Annual subscription: 7/6 ; $1.50. 
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request) Payment is 
made in the naticnal currency; rates quoted are 
for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO COU- 
RIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul, — AUSTRALIA. 
Melbourne University Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, 
Melbourne, C, 1, Victoria. (A. 15/-). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C°., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 60.-). — BELGIUM. Editions * Labor *, 
342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3, NV Standaard-Boek- 
handel, Belgiglei 151. Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (100 FB) and art slides only; Louis de Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. CCP 3380.00. — 
BURMA. Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoon. {K. 5.50). — CANADA, Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont. ($ 3.00). — CEYLON. The Associated 
Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd.,, Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Colombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
— CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CUBA. 
Libreria Econémica, Pte Zayas 505-7, Apartado 113, 
Havana. (2.25 pesos). — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. Artia 
Ltd., 30 Ve Smeckich, Prague 2. — DENMARK, Ejnar 
Munksgaard, A/S Tidsskriftafdelingen, Prags Boulevard 47 
Copenhagen S (D.kr. 12). — ETHIOPIA. International 
Press Agency, PO. Box 120. Addis Ababa. — FINLAND. 
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
(Fmk. 540). — FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, Place 
de Fontenoy, Paris-7*. C.C.P. 12598-48. (7 F.). 
— GERMANY. RA. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosens- 
heimer strasse 4145, Munich. For the Unesco Kurier 
(German ed. only) Bahren-felder-Chaussee 160, 
Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650(DM 8). — GHANA 
Methodist Book Depot Ltd. Atlantis House, Commercial 
St.,, POB 100, Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See 
United Kingdom, — GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 
18, rue du Stade, Athens. — HONG-KONG. Swindon 
Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. 
Kultura, P.O. Box 149. Budapest, 62. — INDIA. Orient 
Longmans Ltd. Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay 1: 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13: Gun- 
foundry Road, Hyderabad, 1; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New 
Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: Oxford Book & Stationery Ceo., 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16, Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Indian National Commission for Co-operation with 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, New Delhi 3. (Rs. 7). — 
INDONESIA. P. N. Fadjar Bhakti, Dijalan 
Nusantara 22, Djakarta. — IRAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. — JRELAND. The National Press, 
2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (10/-). — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 35, Allenby 
Road and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv(1 £ 5.50). 
— JAMAICA. Sangster’'s Book Room, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston. Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
(10/-). — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., § Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
{Yen 670). — JORDAN. Joseph L. Bahous & Co., 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Amman. — 
KENYA. E.S.A. Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi, — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission lor Unesco, 
P.O, Box Central 64, Seoul. — LIBERIA, Cole 
and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia, — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg. — MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE, Federal Publications Ltd., Times House, 
River Valley Rd., Singapore (M. $500) — MALTA. 
Sapienza’s Library 26 Kingsway, Valetta. (10/-). — 
MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd.,, 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port-Louis. - MONACO, British Library, 30 Bld 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF.). = NETHERLANDS, 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 6). — NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. G. C. T. 
Van Dorp & Co. {Ned Ant.} N.V., Willemstad, Curacao 
— NEW ZEALAND Government Printing Office 
Wellington, and Government Bookshops, Auckland, 
Wellington, Christchurch, Dunedin (10/-). — NIGERIA, ’ 
C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 174, Lagos. (10/-). — NOR. 
WAY. AS. Bokhjornet, Lille Grense. 7, Oslo 
For the Unesco Courier only: A.S. Narvesens Litteratur 
Tjeneste, Stortingsgt. 4, Oslo, Postboks 115 (kr 13.20 
-_ PAKISTAN. The Woest-Pak Publishing Cor 
Ltd., Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374, 56-N 
Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahore. — PANAMA. 
Cultural Panamena, Avenida 7a, No. TI-49, Apartado 
de Correos 2018, Panama, D.F, (Balboas 3-). — PHI. 
LIPPINES, The Modern Book Co., 508 Rizal Avenue 
Manila. — POLAND. " RUCH " ul. Wiloza Nr. 46, 
Warsaw 10 (ZI. 50), — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrada 
Lda, Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — 
RHODESJA & NYASALAND, The Book Centre, First 
Street, Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia. — SUDAN. Al 
Bashir Bookshop, P.O, Box 1118, Khartoum.— SWEDEN, 
A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, 
Stockholm. — For The Unesco Courier: Svenska Unes- 
coradet, Vasagatan 15-17, Stockholm, C (Kr. 7.50); 
SWITZERLAND, Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasse 
Zurich. Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1-236. ** Courier * only: Georges Losmaz, 1, rue des 
Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 1-4811, (Fr. S. 8). 
— TANGANYIKA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 
9030, Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. Suksapan 
Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. (35 
ticals)) — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 14S, Kampala. — UNJON OF 
SOUTH AFRICA. Van Schaik’s Bookstore, Libri 
Building, Church Street, Pretoria. For the Unesco Cou- 
rier (single copies) only: Central News Agency, P.O. 
Box 1033, Johannesburg. (10/-). — UNITED ARAB 
REPUBLIC (EGYPT). La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. 
Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. 
Stationery Office, P.O, Box 569, London, S.E.l, (10/-), — 
UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 
801 Third Avenue, New York, 22, N.Y. (§ 5.00.) 
and {except periodicals): Columbia University Press, 
2960 Broadway, New York, 27 .N.Y. — U.S.S.R. Mez- 
hdunarodnaja Kniga, Moscow. G-200.— YUGOSLAVIA, 
Yugoslovenska Knjiga, Terazije 27/11, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062672engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
   
SUMMER 
OLIDAY 
WITH A 
PURPOSE 
  
  
  
 
  
  