# [071148](071148engo.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](071148engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
Rs —— T i ary re = 
DE Ey TE ie SA la x ial 6a —T a le = Le J i 
h 
- 
4 
conts (U.S FRANCE). 
YOLUME Y¥~— N° 10, ~ OCTOBER 1992 
120 conts (US), | shilling (U-X-). ur do Pee { LS aM — oi ll EE
  
  
  
  
  
  
i "WORK - 
The international 
nical Aisi of 
Di 
"ANUS g

## [Page 2](071148engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

Page 2. 
  
OCTOBER 1952 
  
Lael be a I NER Beg SRST 
EDITORIAL OFFICES : 
UNESCO, 19. Ave. Kléber, PARIS-16 
* . 
Editor-ln- Chief : S. M. KOFFLER 
English edition : R. S. FENTON 
Freach edition : A. LEVENTIS EDITORS 
{ Spanish edition : ;. DE BENITO 
* 
imp. GEORGES LANG, 11, rue Curial, Paris. 
MC. 52 1 64 A, 
Yearly subscription: $2; 10s 6d; 500 
French francs. Sales agents are list- 
ed below. Where none is listed, 
write to Unesco, Paris. 
Argentina : Editorial Sudamericana, 
S.A., Alsina 500, Buenos Aires. 
Associated States of Cambodia. Laos 
and Viet-Nam : K. Chantarith, C.C.R., 
38, rue Van Vollenhoven, Phnom-Penh. 
Australia : HAA. Goddard Ltd, 25a 
George Street, Sydney. 
Austria : Wilhelm Frick Verlag, 27 Gra- 
ben, Vienna 1. 
Barbados: S.P.C.X. Bookshop (Regional 
Office Caribbean Area), Broad Street, 
Bridgetown. 
Belgium : Librairie Encyclopédique, 7, 
rue du Luxembourg, Brussels IV. 
Bolivia : Libreria Selecciones, Av. 16 de 
Julio 216, Casilla 872, La Paz. 
Brazil : Livraria Agir Editora, Rua 
Mexico 98-B, Caixa postal 3291, Rio 
de Janeiro. 
Canada : English speaking : University 
of Toronto Press, Toronto. Frenc 
speaking Centre de publications 
internationales, 4234, rue de la Roche, 
Montréal 34. 
Ceylon : Lake House Bookshop. The 
Associated Newspapers of Ceylon, 
1td, Colombo I. 
Chile : Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 
924, Santiago de Chile. 
Colombia : Emilio Royo Martin, Carrera 
9a, 1791, Bogota. 
Costa Rica : Trejos Hermanos, Apartado 
1313, San José. 
Cuba : Unesco, Centro Regional en el 
Hemisferio Occidental, Calle 5, 
Ne 306, Vedado, Havana. 
Czechoslovakia : Orbis, Narodni 37, 
Prague I, 
Cyprus : Tachydromos, P.O.B. 473, 
Nicosia, 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard Ltd., 6 
Norregade, Copenhagen, K. 
Ecuador : Casa de la Cultura Ecuato- 
riana, av, 6 de diciembre, Casilla 67, 
Quito. 
Egypt : La Renaissance d'Egypte, 8, 
Adly Pasha st., Cairo. 
Finland : Akateeminen 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
Formosa : The World Book Company 
Ltd., 93, Chung King South Rd., Sec- 
tion 1, Taipeh. 
France : Librairie Universitaire, 26, rue 
Soufflot, Paris (5°). 
Germany : Unesco Vertrieb fiir Deutsch- 
land, R. Oldenbourg Miinchen. 
Greece : Elefthéroudakis, Librairie In- 
ternaticnale, Athens. 
Haiti : Librairie “A la Caraveile”, 36, 
rue Roux, Port-au-Prince. 
Hungary : Kultura, P.O.B. 149, Buda- 
pest 52. 
India, Orient Longmans Ltd, Bombay, 
Calcutta, Madras : Oxiord Book 
Stationery Co., Scindia House, New 
Delhi. Rajkamal Publications Ltd, 
Himalaya House, Bombay 7. 
Indonesia : G.C.T. van Dorp & Co. 
NV., Djalan Nusantara, 22, Djakarta. 
Iraq : McKenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Israel : Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 
35, Allenby Road, Tel Aviv. 
Italy : G.C. Sansoni, via Gino Ca- 
poni 26, casella postale 552, Flo- 
rence. 
Japan : Maruzen Co, Inc., 6 Tori-Ni- 
chome, Nihonbashi, Tokyo. 
Lebanon : Librairie Universelle, Avenue 
des Francais, Beirut. 
Luxembourg : Librairie Paul Bruck, 
50, Grand-Rue. 
Malayan Federation and Singapore : 
Peter Chong and Co., P.O. Box 135, 
Kirjakauppa, 
Singapore, 
Mexico : Libreria Universitaria, Justo 
Sierra 16, México D.F. 
Netherlands : N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, 
Lange Voorhout 9, The Hague. 
New Zealand : South's Book Depot, 
8 Willis Street, Wellington. 
Nigeria : C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 
174, Lagos. 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 
7. Oslo. 
Pakistan : Ferozsons Ltd. 
Lahore, Peshawar. 
Panama : Agencia International de Pu- 
blicaciones, Apartado 2052, Panama. 
Peru : Libreria Internacional del Peru, 
S.A., Giron de la Union, Lima. 
Philippines : Philippine Education Co., 
Inc., 1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila. 
Portugal : Publicacdes Europa-America, 
Ltda, 4 Rua da Barroca, Lisbon. 
Puerto Rico : Pan American Book Co., 
San Juan, 12. 
Spain : Aguilar S.A. de Ediciones, Juan 
Bravo 38, Madrid. 
Surinam : Radhakishun & Co, Ltd, 
Watermolenstraat, 36, Paramaribo. 
Sweden : AB. C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hov- 
bokhandel. Frecdsgatan 2, Stock- 
holm 16. 
Switzerland : French-Speaking : Librai- 
rie de l'Université, 22-24, rue de Ro- 
mont, Fribourg. German-Speaking : 
Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zirich. 
Syria : Librairie Universelle, Damascus. 
Tangier : Centre International, 54, rue 
du Statut. 
Thailand : Suksapan Panit, Arkam 9, 
Raj-Damnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
Turkey : Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul 
Union of Burma : Burma Educational 
Bookshop, 551-3 Merchant Street, P.O. 
Box 222, Rangoon. 
Union of South Africa : Van Schaik’s 
Bookstore, Ltd., P.O. Box 724, 
Pretoria. 
United Kingdom : H.M. Stationery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.L 
U.S.A. : Columbia University Press, 
2960 Broadway, New York. ’ 
Uruguay : Centro de Cooperacion Cien- 
tifica pura la America Latina, Unesco, 
Bulever Artigas 1320, Montevideo. 
Yugoslavia : Jugoslovenska Knjiga, 
Marsc.a Tita 23/11 Belgrade. 
Except when otherwise stated, arti- 
oles appearing In this issue may be 
reproduced without prior permission, 
Karachi, 
provided acknowledgement is given 
<0 the Unesco COURIER. 
  
UNESCO. 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWS ROOM 
% Switzerland: Scientists from ten 
countries met in Geneva last month to 
discuss the question of Science and Mo- 
dern Man. Their talks were part of 
the 1952 “Rencontres Internationales”, 
a yearly event at which prominent men 
of science and letters from various 
countries meet to discuss questions of 
international interest. Main speakers 
this year were Pierre Auger (The me- 
thods and limits of scientific know- 
ledge), Erwin Schrodinger. (Our 
attitude to matter), Emile Guyénot 
(Heredity and Freedom), Gaston Bache- 
lard (The scientific vocation and the 
human soul), George de Santillana 
(Myths and Science) and R.P. Dubarle 
(Science, mirror of the destiny of man). 
International: A group of 20 Italian 
uilding trade workers visited Sweden 
this summer to study Swedish building 
methods, town planning and production 
of building materials. The visit was 
arranged under Unesco’s programme of 
group travel tours for workers in Eu- 
rope. About 800 workers have already 
benefitted from this scheme by which 
trade unions, co-operatives and work- 
ers’ educational] associations arrange 
the tours and Unesco provides the in- 
ternational travel cost. 
y Turkey: An educational film centre 
in Turkey has been set up with Unesco 
assistance. Two Austrian specialists 
are helping with the production of edu- 
cational films, and Unesco has granted 
short-term fellowships to Turkish film 
workers for study in Austria. 
Unesco: The World Braille Council 
has just been constituted. This is one 
of the results of three years of work by 
Unesco to bring about uniformity in the 
various Braille scripts used by the blinds 
throughout the world. Heading the new 
Council will be Sir Clutha Mackenzie, 
international authority on Braille. The 
nine-man international Council will 
advise on the application and the main- 
tenance of the united Braille system. 
+% Belgium: The first International 
Biennial of Poetry took place last month 
at Knokke-le-Zoute, under the auspices 
of Unesco and the International PEN 
Club. All member states of Unesco were 
invited by the Belgian Minister of Pu- 
blic Education to participate in this 
world meeting of poets. 
% France: An international seminar 
on workers’ education took place this 
Summer at the Chéateau de la Bréviére 
in the Compiégne Forest of France. 
The seminar was organized by Unesco 
within the framework of its newly set 
up International Centre of Worker's 
Education. About forty-five delegates 
from twenty-five Member States took 
part in the seminar, which lasted until 
August 23. 
+% Jamaica: A seminar on adult educa- 
tion opened last month near Kingston. 
I1 was organized by the University Col- 
lege of the West Indies, with the assist- 
ance of Unesco. The central theme of 
the Seminar was "The role of Adult 
Education in the Caribbean“. All Ca- 
ribbean countries were invited. The 
FOR THE NEW 
GENERATION 
AND THE OLD 
visit at the request of 
on this occasion, Mr. J. Donald Kingsley, 
to over-estimate the needs for an effective programme o 
must be provided with adequate educat 
 
staff of the seminar included members 
of the University of Puerto-Rico and 
several Unesco experts. 
x Turkey: Teaching about the United 
ations and its Specialized Agencies is 
now a regular part of the programmes 
of secondary schools in Turkey. This 
was revealed by the Turkish govern- 
ment in a report received in Paris by 
Unesco. The schools also are teaching 
students about the Universal Declara- 
tion of Human Rights, which has been 
translated into Turkish and been cir- 
culated widely. The government re- 
rted in addition, that it had offered 
oreign students and professors mode- 
rate priced lodgings at student centres 
in Ankara and Istanbul during the sum- 
mer vacations. 
35 STATES SIGN UNESCO 
COPYRIGHT PAGT 
Thirty-five nations signed the 
Unesco Universal Copyright Con- 
vention last month in Geneva. This 
Convention calls for the elimina- 
tion of all formalities of registra- 
tion and legal deposit, and their 
replacement by the simple imprint 
on each copy of the works of the 
letter “C” within a circle, accom- 
panied by the name of the author 
and the date of the first publica- 
tion. Another of its features is 
that each country gives to foreign 
works the same protection as to 
works of its own nationals, this 
protection lasting for at ‘least the 
lifetime of the author and 25 years 
after his death. Translation rights 
are also covered: for a minimum 
of seven years, authors will have 
the exclusive right to publish and 
authorize translations of their 
works. The Convention will enter 
into force three months after its 
ratification by 12 States, four of 
whom are not members of the 
Berne Convention.     
A Unesco fact-finding mission is now in Kor 
Netherlands: Ninety students from 
abroad now studying in the Netherlands 
have just made a special study tour to 
learn about the United Nations and its 
Agencies. The tour was sponsored by 
the Foreign Student Service of the 
W.U.S.—the World University Service. 
The students—most of them were In- 
donesians—started in Paris and paid 
several visits to Unesco House to study 
Unesco’s activities at first hand. They 
then visited Geneva where they toured 
the Palais des Nations, attended sessions 
of UN Commissions and learned of the 
work of the International Labour Orga- 
nization and the World Health Organi- 
zation. 
% International : World release is 
expected shortly of The Open Window, 
a novel documentary film in colours 
which has been produced through the 
co-operation of five European govern- 
ments. The film, which was given its 
premiére at this year’s Edinburgh Fes- 
tival, shows Western Europe's landscape 
as seen through the eyes of such masters 
as Constable, Turner, Rubens, Rem- 
brandt, Breughel and Watteau. The 
governments of Belgium, France, Luxem- 
bourg, the Netherlands, and the United 
Kingdom helped finance the project 
under their cultural affairs agreement, 
and famous treasures were freely made 
available to cameramen in the picture 
galleries of Amsterdam, Brussels, Ghent, 
London, Paris and The Hague. A top- 
flight international team, headed by 
Henri Storck, spent a year producing 
the film. 
s United nations: More than two thou- 
sand, five hundred fellowships and other 
opportunities for international training 
are being offered this year by the United 
Nations and the Specialized Agencies. A 
UN survey discloses that possibilities for 
advanced study in other countries are 
at an all-time high. The awards enable 
specialists in the various economic, social 
and scientific fields to obtain training 
abroad in Techniques needed in their own 
countries. 
x U.S.A.: Books which were burned or 
anned in Germany and Austria will 
be replaced through the CIO’s Unesco 
Gift Stamp Programme. The Ameri- 
can union has produced a special leaf- 
let announcing the programme and 
appealing for support from union mem- 
bers. Workers are being urged to 
launch information programmes on the 
United Nations and Unesco in connec- 
tion with local campaigns for the sale 
of stamps. 
% Unesco: The Egyptian educator, social 
scientist and diplomat, Dr. Abbas Am- 
mar, has been named director of the 
second of Unesco’s international fun- 
damental education centres. The new 
centre will open later this year at Sirs- 
el-Layan, some forty miles from Cairo. 
Its purpose will be similar to Unesco’s 
first centre at Patzcuaro, Mexico, where 
a hundred students from fifteen Latin 
American countries are now being train- 
ed as leaders in fundamental educa- 
tion. The Egyptian centre will serve 
students from the rest of the Arab world 
as well as from Egypt itself. These 
two centres are the first in what ulti- 
mately will be a world-wide network 
being established by Unesco for har- 
nessing education to the task of rais- 
ing world living standards. 
% International : The economic and 
social obstacles to the independence of 
the creative artist in modern society, 
and his relations with the public, the 
State and international bodies, were 
discussed by delegates from 40 countries 
at the International Conference of 
Artists in Venice last month. The con- - 
ference, which was convened by Unesco 
in co-operation with the Biennale, was 
divided into five sections—visual arts, 
music, literature, theatre and cinema. 
It was under the patronage of some cf 
the world’s most prominent figures in 
arts and letters, including Paul Claudel, 
Benedetto Croce, Karl Jaspers, Lin Yu- 
Tang, Thomas Mann, Henri Matisse, 
Gabriela Mistral, Sarvepalli Radakrish- 
nan, Igor Stravinsky, Hector Villa Lobes 
and Frank Lloyd Wright. 
ea to survey educational needs and to draw up a long-ierm 
programme for educational reconstruction. The mission lefc Paris at the end of August on a six-month 
the United Nations Korean Reconstruction Administration. In a statement issued 
Agent General of U.N.K.R.A., pointed out that “it is difficult 
f education at every level. The Korean people 
ion and training in primary and secondary schools, colleges and 
technical schools and in appropriate fields of vocational training. Nothing that we or anyone else 
can do towards the reconstruction of the country is more important than this.” 
U.N. photo.)

## [Page 3](071148engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

+OURIER 


### 71136: The United Nations and national loyalties

THE UNITED NATIONS 
OCTOBER 1952. Page 3 
AND 
ATIONAL LOYALTIES 
by Jaime Torres Bodet 
ER —— HE United Nations has been in existence since 1945. No 
3 longer is it just a vague pacifist hope or a sentimental, 
intellectual aspiration; il is the embodiment of a world 
order which must be consolidated and perfected and 
. which must be defended. But a big question mark 
- remains. Are all the governments in a position to 
\ teach the citizens within their own countries the things 
i they have proclaimed to the world outside over their 
ps ~~ solemn signatures following the horrible havoc of 
oo © the last war? Are they, in other words, prepared to 
teach that all States enjoy “equal sovereignty” but that in the exercise 
of their sovereignty all the nations that joined together to form the 
United Nations admitted certain obligations—obligations which every 
single one of their citizens has the right to know in full, and the right to 
know from school age onwards ? : 
Unesco'’s activities on behalf of education for living in a world 
community are in no sense subversive. What we are trying to do is to 
train citizens who will be faithful in their duty to their own country and 
who for that very reason will also be loyal to the international obliga- 
tions which their country has assumed. The activities of Unesco are 
founded on texts that have been officially approved and are publicly 
regarded as the guarantee of peace and essential to the progress of 
the whole world. 
It has never been the purpose of Unesco to turn citizens from their 
national loyalties. Each one of us belongs to a country, and has 
towards that country an essential duty of loyalty which we cannot and 
should not evade. But each of our countries, in turn, is engaged in 
accomplishing a series of acts, in taking a series of measures, without 
which the peace, security and progress of all would constantly be 
threatened. Now, these duties are so closely linked together that it 
is difficult to draw a line of demarcation between them that would hold 
good for everybody, and in every particular case. 
Few sentiments are so spontaneous and lasting as love of the 
country where we are born. It is perfectly legitimate that we should 
long to see it great. But great by what means? By violence? By injus- 
~ tice? By aggression? It is very obvious that, in extreme cases, the 
patriot who does not care a straw for international obligations delibera- 
tely accepted by his country is a queer kind of patriot. 
Unesco did not make history, but it cannot ignore history. There 
are millions of people who yearn to live in a free and peaceful world 
commuuity, but who are discouraged by the difficulties and dangers 
which beset them. Let none of us underestimate the magnitude of the 
obstacles in the way of adjusting national policy and national interest 
to the new system of international co-operation. 
Faced with the discouragement that such difficulties might produce, 
we adults need to be reminded, our children need to be informed, 1n 
what circumstances and for what purposes the peoples of the world 
established the international organization of the United Nations. Yes, 
we adults need to be reminded again and again. 
Twice in our lifetime the tidal wave of war has swept across the 
‘world. Twice we set our hands to the task of rebuilding the shattered 
community of nations and making it secure. We have seen private 
hopes and plans of individuals wrecked in the castastrophe of society. 
Economic systems have been wrecked, the normal development of 
manufacture and commerce has been violently distorted, currencies 
have been debased, savings made worthless, rich lands made desolate, 
great cities reduced to rubble and to ash. 
Twice in our generation young men throughout the world have 
been torn from their homes and families to lose their lives or ‘waste 
their years in fields of battle while their wives and children lived 
or died under a rain of bombs. Each day brought news of death to 
countless homes. Twice this tide of destruction has swept through 
the ‘world—through the whole world—and given us in common only 
suffering and tears. 
Unesco bears no responsibility for the political evolution of the 
past, but must nevertheless insist that this evolution should be known. 
Unesco lives in a ‘world where, whether we like it or not, we are all 
dependent upon one another. Governments are only too sadly and 
precisely aware that they are not free to take decisions in accordance 
only with their own immediate and limited interests, unless they wish 
to expose themselves to all kinds of sanctions, or else to expose other 
countries to all kinds of troubles. Unesco’ considers that the people 
whose destiny ‘lies in the hands of these governments should know 
~. this, too. 
So long as the obligations which hold the United Nations system 
together remain valid, it would be contrary to the spirit of democracy 
to keep populations in ignorance. To do so would mean in practice 
that education was being used, not as a means of access to a better 
and fuller life, but as a preparation for aggression, or to confirm the 
resignation of weakness in the face of aggression. 
To teach young people about the obligations which arise out of 
the necessity of living in an international community, does not imply 
that we should hoodwink them with the promise of an immutable 
world order that can be established as if by magic. International 
laws, like national laws, always run the risk of being broken by the 
most powerful and the most cynical. But although this danger exists 
In every country, education has nevertheless continued to include 
courses in civics. The more fragile the protection which the law offers 
us, the more necessary it is to train people to help ensure that protec- 
tion. To say that comprehensive teaching about the machinery, activities 
and problems of the United Nations would incite young people to 
forget the respect they owe their own country, amounts to saying that 
the country in ‘which that teaching took place either did not belong to 
the United Nations system or else belonged to it only in appearance. 
I do not believe in virtues which lessen a man. He who, out of 
so-called love of his country, despises his native town, loves neither 
his town nor his country; and whoever, out of alleged devotion to 
some international order, repudiates his loyalty to his own country, 
does not really love his own country nor the international order he 
claims to admire. 
In a system of interdependent nations, internationalism can consist 
neither in the predominance of one State nor in the development of 
a superficial cosmopolitanism. Education for national democracy 
accepts as a corollary, and often as a premise, a clear idea of what the 
individual owes to the nation and ‘what the nation owes to the world: 
whence the expression “international understanding’ which ‘was used 
—.in the programme of Unesco in its early days. But understanding 
others is not everything. It has been said that “to understand every- 
thing is to forgive everything”. But international solidarity depends 
less upon forgiveness than upon justice—not a vindictive justice, but 
social justice applied to all sections of the population alike. 
It is therefore right that the notion of collective security, as the 
United Nations has proclaimed it, that is to say, peace founded on 
respect for law, should be universally known and valued, for once the 
moment for decision arrives, everyone ‘will be called upon to pay the 
price. What sense is there in having a principle for which millions 
of men may lay down their lives and which teachers do not mention 
in their classes, or else, at the most, reserve for the higher stages of 
university education, that is to say, for a minority, a procedure quite 
out of proportion to the unanimity with which the entire population 
is called upon when the hour of sacrifice strikes. 
Nor is it sufficient to adhere simply to the principle of collective, 
security, for the light which this throws on events shows only one 
aspect of international solidarity and that the most severe, the most 
urgent today, perhaps, but not the most exalted. For many, collective 
security unless it is accompanied by the hope of economic and social 
improvement, is no better than the maintenance of an unsatisfactory 
order of society. Now, what helps to give collective security its noblest 
human significance is the progress which it enables all the peoples of 
the world to make. The founders of the United Nations solemnly 
recognized this ‘when they laid it down in the San Francisco Charter 
that : 
“With a view to the creation of conditions of stability and well- 
being which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations 
among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights 
and self-determination of peoples, the United Nations shall promote. 
(a). higher standards of living, full employment, and conditions of 
economic and social progress and development; 
(b) solutions of international economic, social, health, and related 
problems: and international cultural and educational co-oper- 
ation : and ; 
(¢) universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and 
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, 
sex, language or religion.” 
Such is the function which, within the United Nations, devolves 
principally upon the Economic and Social Council; such is the role 
assigned to the Specialized Agencies; such is the -goal which the 
Technical Assistance Programme, with inadequate resources, is trying 
to attain. If we really want these organizations and enterprises to 
succeed, it is not reasonable to keep schoolchildren in ignorance of the 
~ reasons which led to these efforts being made and of the objectives 
which, in the opinion of Governments, justify them; for schoolchildren 
will become essential collaborators in this work, the builders of the 
community of the future. 
“If Governments cannot recommend that the children in their 
schools should be taught what their representatives publicly declare at 
the rostrum of the United Nations, whom are we to believe? The diplo- 
mat who makes speeches, or the teacher who keeps silence? History 
© is no doubt full of these tragic discrepancies between the man who 
commands and the man who teaches. And that is one reason why 
history is bathed in tears and blood. 
Unesco invites you to think over these matters. Qur activities in 
this field are faced with two dangers: one is propaganda, and the other 
verbalism—by which I mean paying too much attention to the letter 
and not enough to the spirit. 
We do not want teaching about the United Nations to be a mere 
repetition of political slogans more or less happily conceived. We 
want the pupil to use his judgment before he expresses an opinion, to 
form his own personal views and not just to absorb placidly and 
automatically the ideas of other people. Nor 
have we ever wanted to bore young people with 
a purely verbal education for citizenship. No 
(continued on 
next page)

## [Page 4](071148engo.pdf#page=4) 2

### 71137: Technical assistance, a United Nations experiment in pooling world skill and knowledge

### 71136: The United Nations and national loyalties

Page 4. OCTOBER 1952 
ACTS, NOT TEXTS, TEACH 
HUMAN SOLIDARITY 
(Continued from previous page.) 
doubt it is important to have a tex- 
tual knowledge of the documents 
which govern international rela- 
tions in the world today; but soli- 
darity is learnt from acts and not 
from texts. 
It is neither wise nor desirable to 
“play ” at Collective Security and 
Human Rights. School is more 
than an introduction to life: it is 
a part of life, even an essential part. 
It offers numerous opportunities 
for putting into practice the funda- 
mental principles of all the docu- 
ments 1 have been speaking about. 
Unless teachers make an effort to 
use these opportunities, it ‘will not 
be of much use to give long textual 
explanations of all the Articles in 
question. Schoolchildren will al- 
ways be intelligent enough to 
understand that education which 
cannot be translated into actions 
and attitudes cannot be applied to 
real life. And so most of them, 
while paying lip-service to equal- 
ity, will take care not to extend 
the hand to their obscure fellow- 
creatures belonging to another race, 
another religion, another latitude, 
and wearing quite different clothes. 
I think it is necessary that chil- 
dren should know about the Uni- 
versal Declaration of Human 
Rights. But it is still more neces- 
sary that through the way they are 
brought up they should learn to 
respect the rights of others. We 
want children to have such infor- 
mation as they need to be good 
citizens in the twentieth century. 
We are much more deeply 
concerned that their education 
should develop those predisposi- 
tions, those attitudes to their fellow 
human beings, that will enable 
them to enter fully and co- 
operatively into the life of our com- 
munity of peoples on this planet. 
There are many ways in which 
this may be done. When I am 
asked how I view the relationship 
between education and peace, I say 
that although there is some teach- 
ing that may promote peace 
directly, the essential contribution 
of education to peace is indirect. 
Inculcation of a doctrine that we 
must live at peace with one an- 
other, learning by heart the Decla- 
ration of Human Rights, and so 
forth, is infinitely less important 
than growing up so that we do in 
fact co-operate freely and equally 
with other men of goodwill. 
A lively sense of the world 
I N some countries where this is 
appropriate to the educational 
tradition, direct courses may be 
introduced into the curriculum so 
that children are taught formally 
about the United Nations, about 
the Declaration of Human Rights, 
and about their own country’s role 
in the community of nations. I, 
of course, welcome that. But it is 
not the only way. Such instruc- 
tion runs the danger of being too 
isolated, too compartmentalized, 
~ too divorced from the main stream 
of study. And precisely because 
it appears to be so direct it may 
have to be so hedged about with 
precautions — dealing as it does 
with questions that often arouse 
. bitter  controversy—that it be- 
comes almost denatured. The 
introduction of direct courses in 
international affairs by no means 
excludes the promotion of acti- 
vities, in school and outside, which 
will give a youngster a lively sense 
of the world in which he lives and 
encourage the right attitudes to be 
formed. 
To the two dangers I have just 
mentioned, propaganda and ver- 
balism, which it is imperative to 
avoid, must be added yet another 
undeniable difficulty : education 
which aims at teaching people to 
live as citizens of a world commun- 
ity must be, in every country, a 
national education. No one can 
impose it on anyone else. It must 
above all be adapted to the condi- 
tions of the environment it aims 
at improving, and must proceed 
directly from that environment. 1 
do not hesitate to say that 
nowadays it is national needs 
which can best open our eyes to 
‘he need for an international order. 
Respect for each culture 
Tue goal is the same for us all, 
but the means we apply to 
reach it are not and should not 
be identical. We must respect the 
originality of each separate culture, 
and appreciate the differences 
which distinguish one country 
from another; we must try to win 
consent but never to force sub- 
mission. This proviso is all the 
more important in that the Uni- 
versal Declaration of Human 
Rights, for instance, is, as 1 have 
often said, a programme of action, 
and one extremely difficult to 
carry out. What State in the 
world can boast that it applies 
without distinction, and in all 
circumstances, all the principles 
proclaimed on December 10, 1948 
by the Assembly of the United 
Nations? : 
If we don’t want to discourage 
young people from the outset, we 
must explain to them that the 
application of each one of these 
principles represents the laborious, 
slow, patient triumph of good over 
evil, humanity over cruelty, co- 
operation over selfishness. Unless 
teaching about Human Rights is 
illustrated, as it should be, from 
the data of history, geography, 
literature, and the fine arts, then 
the traditional training in “civies” 
will achieve nothing. 
Perhaps I should say a little 
more on that point. I will use the 
terminology to which I have 
become accustomed as an old hand 
at conferences. One might like to 
think of Human Rights in terms 
of the agenda of a meeting, and 
the minutes of the previous 
meeting. The Declaration of 
Human Rights states part of the 
agenda for the human race. It 
declares tasks before us, the work 
to be done. The task is to win our 
young people to accept as their 
own this common human agenda. 
But perhaps you will say : “The 
trouble with these young people 
is that they never read the minutes 
of the last meeting”. The minutes 
of this meeting are nothing less 
than the recorded history of 
mankind. In those minutes you 
will see what good intentions have 
been expressed, what aspirations 
avowed, what steps have been 
taken, what victories achieved, 
and alas, what failures recorded. 
It is a long story, this quest for 
human freedom. Our children 
should know it. It is their story. 
Let them read the minutes of the 
last meeting. And let them then, 
with that knowledge and under- 
standing, enter as responsible 
citizens into the human assembly. 
Let them undertake their part in 
the never-ending endeavour to 
build a community of free men 
and women who one and all enjoy 
the rights proper to human dignity 
in a world of peace. 
* 
This article is a summary of the 
address made by the Director-Gene- 
ral of Unesco at Woudshouten, Near 
Utrecht, in the Netherlands, when he 
opened a seminar to study and deve- 
lop methods of education for living 
in a world community. The seminar, 
which was sponsored by Unesco, 
lasted four weeks, and was attended 
by more than 80 educators from all 
parts of the world. 
 
UNESCC: 
  
Fisheries development in Indonesia. 
"Land reclamation in Israél. 
 
ASSISTANC 
whereby skills and knowledge which 
exist in any country may be made 
available to any other country in 
E are accustomed to read from 
time to time in our news- 
papers of some wonderful 
new drug or treatment which is 
alleged to be able to cure one or 
other of the diseases to which man 
is subject. Whatever the headlines 
may shout about such a treatment, 
we usually find when we read fur- 
ther that the doctor or chemist 
responsible for discovering and 
developing it is very cautious in the 
claims that he makes for it. The 
true expert is normally very shy of 
speaking of results and achieve- 
ments, and prefers rather to speak 
of probabilities and experiments. 
Our world, our civilization, like 
the human body, is also subject to 
all kinds of ills. The symptoms are 
plain to see; poverty, hunger ignor- 
ance, ill-health, injustice, inequal- 
ity, strife. The diagnoses that have 
been made of the cause or causes 
are various, and the methods of 
treatment and cure remain uncer- 
tain; but all over the world experi- 
ments are going on and studies are 
being made which it is hoped may 
lead the human race forward to 
better times. 
One of the general signs of the 
world’s ill condition is the great 
unbalance between the standards of 
living in different parts of the earth. 
This unbalance is no new thing, but 
it is more than ever apparent and 
dangerous now that the improve- 
ment of communications has 
brought people so much closer 
together. The fundamental aim of 
some of the biggest experiments is 
to try to remove this unbalance, to 
raise the levels of living in the less 
developed parts of the world to those 
which apply in the more developed 
parts. 
One of the methods which may 
lead to the attainment of this pur- 
pose is through programmes of what 
is called “technical assistance”. 
Basically, these are programmes 
need of them. This exchange of 
skills is carried out by the sending 
of experts and the offering of train- 
ing and study facilities. Like the 
name of some new drug, this phrase 
“technical assistance” is becoming 
familiar in the world. 
It is good that this should be so, 
provided that two things are under- 
stood: first, that technical assistance 
is not new, and second, that it is 
not a proved panacea for the world’s 
troubles. Since the beginnings of 
man’s history, contacts between 
peoples have led to the exchange of 
skill and knowledge to mutual 
advantage. Explorers and pioneers, 
merchants and missionaries, have 
all been the means, even if often the 
unconscious and indirect means, of 
furthering what we now call tech- 
nical assistance. The only new 
development is the attempt to pro- 
vide this assistance under systema- 
tically planned programmes. 
There are several of these pro- 
grammes in action today. Some of 
them operate under arrangements 
whereby one advanced country alone 
provides the needed assistance, as 
under the U.S. Point IV programme, 
or the development programmes 
through which certain European 
nations are trying to help forward 
the dependent countries for which 
they are responsible. Other pro- 
grammes are organized by groups of 
nations acting together, as under 
the Colombo Plan. But the tech- 
nical assistance programme which 
has the widest participation is the 
newest, that of the United Nations. 
The United Nations Expanded 
Programme of Technical Assistance, 
as it is formally called, is like all 
the others in what it is trying to 
do. Its original quality and true 
importance lie mainly in the fact 
that it is an experiment in orga-

## [Page 5](071148engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

OCTOBER 1952. Page 5 JURIER 
  
Fundamental education at Patzcuaro, Mexico. Small industries development in Burma. Building new roads in Greece. 
Training of skilled labour in Pakistan. Fighting disease in Sarawak. Science teaching in Liberia. 
  
    


### 71137: Technical assistance, a United Nations experiment in pooling world skill and knowledge

A United Nations experiment in 
pooling world skill and knowledge 
nizing technical assistance on a 
really broad, international basis. If 
this experiment shows results, it will 
help to prove not just that technical 
assistance is a good way of treating 
the world’s ills, but also that it is 
really possible for the nations to 
work together constructively for the 
common good. 
The practice of technical assist- 
ance is not unlike that of medicine. 
A good physician does not treat 
diseases, he treats people. He cannot 
expect to cure the body of his 
patient if he ignores the mind. But 
while concerning himself with the 
whole man, he may want more 
expert advice on a specific problem, 
and so he calls in a specialist. Simi- 
larly, an attempt is made under the 
United Nations Technical Assistance 
Programme to diagnose the needs 
of a country as a whole, and, follow- 
proves major projects, and allocates 
funds to the member organizations. 
But it is the specialized agencies 
themselves which study the needs of 
Member States in detail and act on 
the requests of governments by fur- 
nishing foreign specialists and by 
arranging for training and study 
facilities in other countries. 
The Technical Assistance Pro- 
gramme is financed by the contri- 
butions of Member States, furnished 
in proportion to their resources and 
voted at an annual Technical Assist- 
ance Conference. At the first con- 
ference in June 1950, slightly over 
$20,000,000 was pledged by 50 na- 
tions for the programme from 
July 1, 1950 to December 31, 1951. 
A similar sum was voted for 1952 at 
the second conference last Novem- 
er. 
According to a recent report of 
by Michael HOWSON 
ing up this diagnosis, to provide the 
appropriate specialized assistance. 
Since the Programme came into 
operation in July, 1950, an organiza- 
tion has grown up to meet its 
requirements. Directly responsible to 
the U.N. Economic and Social Coun- 
cil for the programme is the Tech- 
nical Assistance Board. The Board 
consists of the heads—or their 
representatives—of the U.N. Tech- 
nical Assistance Administration and 
of a number of the Specialized 
Agencies. In addition, the Inter- 
national Bank, the International 
Monetary Fund, and other Agencies 
such as UNICEF, although not 
members of the Board, assist in 
projects undertaken under the Pro- 
gramme. 
~The Technical Assistance Board 
is the central organ which reviews 
programmes, arranges for joint 
action between organizations, ap- 
the Technical Assistance Board, “by 
the end of 1951, some 717 technical 
assistance experts in a wide variety 
of fields of knowledge have been 
sent out under the expanded pro- 
gramme to some 75 under-developed 
countries and territories. Some 
845 fellows drawn from some 69 
countries and territories had been 
placed in technical training institu- 
tions or had otherwise been provid- 
ed with training, study or observa- 
tion facilities, in countries other 
than their own. By the end of March 
1952, an additional 227 experts had 
been recruited and 232 additional 
fellowships had been awarded.” 
Since it is in relation to the pro-. 
blems of the world as a whole that 
the programme is conceived, its 
scope is naturally very wide. Detail- 
ed descriptions of a few of the pro- 
jects that are being undertaken are 
published elsewhere in this issue. 
The doctor can do hardly any- 
thing without the co-operation and 
goodwill of the patient. In the same 
way, the foreign experts sent out 
under the Technical Assistance Pro- 
gramme can do hardly anything 
without the co-operation and good- 
will of the people among whom they 
work. No assistance is given unless 
a request for it is first received from 
the government concerned. By 
making a request, a government not 
only expresses a wish to have expert 
advice and assistance in some field 
which is considered to be important 
to the future of its people, but also 
implies that it is already engaged in 
development in this field or is will- 
ing and able to undertake such 
development. If for example, a 
government asks for expert assist- 
ance in improving its railways, this 
implies that resources, financial, 
material and human, are available 
for railway development. If a go- 
vernment asks for a fellowship for 
one of its citizens to study welfare 
services in a foreign country, this 
implies there will be a job for that 
person in a field of social welfare 
when he or she returns home. In 
fact, nearly all governments have 
their own plans for economic deve- 
lopment, and projects of technical 
assistance are usually designed to 
fit into such plans. 
By far the greatest effort for de- 
.velopment has to be made by the 
people of the requesting country 
which, in addition to making its 
contribution towards the funds of 
the Technical Assistance Pro- 
gramme, is usually devoting to its 
own internal development, resources 
for larger than those furnished from 
outside. 
Official co-operation is thus assur- 
ed for technical assistance projects. 
But this alone is not enough. Fun- 
damentally, technical assistance im- 
plies co-operation between people. 
Much must depend on the spirit 
in which the advice and instruction 
are given and received at the work- 
ing level. However expert a foreign 
specialist may be in his own subject, 
his function is not to present to the 
people of the country where he is 
working, a ready-made plan which 
they have merely to put into effect. ° 
Though, in technical matters, the 
foreign adviser may know all the 
answers, his first important task in 
any country is to ask many ques- 
tions. He and his local counterparts 
must alike tackle their joint pro- 
blems in a spirit ofg willingness to 
learn. 
The . Technical Assistance Pro- 
gramme has now been in operation 
for more than two years; but except 
in the cases of a few projects which 
have limited and short-term pur- 
poses, it is too soon to attempt to 
assess the over-all results. The 
whole Programme is essentially a 
long-term experiment, or rather a 
series of experiments. Although the 
problems which are being faced 
urgently need solution, nevertheless 
neither those who have some active 
part in the Programme, nor others, 
(including the general public of the 
world), who have the responsibility 
for supporting it, must look for 
immediate superficial results. The 
experiments have barely started. 
The nations who have started 
these experiments must see that 
they are carried through to conclu- 
sions still far ahead. Financially, 
the Programme is a small one, 
though it is the expressed view of 
the ECOSOC that it should expand. 
In its special international quality, 
however, it is of immense import- 
ance. Some of the experiments will 
fail; some will only partially suc- 
ceed; others will bring visible and 
sensible benefits. The results will 
all depend on the extent to which the 
efforts of those concerned meet the 
needs of the peoples of the world 
whom they are designed to help.

## [Page 6](071148engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

Page 6. OCTOBER 1952 


### 71138: Afghanistan chooses to prosper

AFGHANISTAN 
CHOOSES TO 
PROSPER 
HE modern world encounters a 
world of 2,000 years ago on the 
Lataband Pass which leads to 
Kabul, the capital city of Afghani- 
stan, a country now undergoing 
great changes. The road climbs up 
the sides of the mountains, with 
precipitous drops, hazardous bends 
and a surface which is little better 
than a dirt track. The tribes move 
in families—men, women and 
children with all their goods and 
chattels, their tents, their rugs, their 
pots and pans and jars; tethered 
poultry balanced on the backs of 
asses; and children strapped to the 
humps of camels. 
Into this ancient world the 20th 
century has charged with clamorous 
horns. Lorries driven by frontier 
tribesmen, who have become the 
freight carriers, dispute the right 
of way with the camel trains and the 
burdened asses. 
Beyond this pass and the grey, 
barren deserts and mountains lies 
Kabul, where at night the two 
mountains which divide the city are 
picked out in a festoon of electric 
lights, proclaiming to the pastoral 
peoples around that the Technical 
Age has come to Afghanistan. 
But only just. For this is a 
country the natural resources of 
which are virtually undeveloped. 
Here more than 90 per cent of the 
population is agricultural and of 
that, most are pastoral nomads. 
The methods of agriculture are pri- 
mitive, and there are few skilled 
industrial workers except those in 
two recent cotton factories. 
The few roads which exist tear to 
pieces the modern vehicles which 
use them. There are no railways, 
and traffic between north and south 
is practically impossible because of 
the great barrier of the Hindu Kush. 
Coal, which is accessible by simple 
mining, is scarcely worked, and the 
mountainsides are continually strip- 
ped of any vegetation usable as fuel. 
Thus, Afghanistan, which even 
superficial surveys have shown to be 
potentially wealthy, is unques- 
tionably an under-developed coun- 
try, and to remedy this state of 
affairs the Royal Afghan Govern- 
ment requested the United Nations 
for help even before the Expanded 
Programme was begun. 
The original United Nations Mis- 
sion sent to the country agreed with 
the Government on a programme of 
technical assistance, whose main 
emphasis was placed on projects by 
which changes within the compet- 
ence of the people themselves could 
produce benefits, pending the more 
ambitious development programmes 
requiring large-scale foreign help. 
For example, the agriculture of 
Afghanistan could be revolutionized 
by modern methods. In a country 
which has a low rainfall, this would 
involve big irrigation schemes and 
the discovery and development of 
underground water supplies; that 
will come. But a minor revolution 
could be produced immediately by 
the introduction, not of advanced 
farming technology, but of the 
simplest improved devices—like the 
hoe or the scythe. 
One of the first things which FAO 
did under its expanded technical 
assistance programme in Afghani- 
stan was to introduce a demonstra- 
tion team for hand-tools. Afghani- 
stan is mainly mountainous, the 
land is steep and the holdings 
small, so that mechanized farming, 
even if it were not too costly for the 
farmers, could have only limited 
value. The only tool which the 
Afghans had for mowing was a pri- 
mitive sickle with the blade set at 
right angles to the handle, which 
has to be used while the farmer is 
sitting on the ground and grasping 
the corn or grass in his left hand. 
A Swiss FAO farm implement 
expert, accompanied by two assist- 
ants experienced in the scything of 
high pastures, gave a series of de- 
monstrations in harvest areas of 
scythes, hoes, forks and hay rakes, 
previously unknown in Afghanistan. 
A jeep and the tools were provided 
aha » 
UNESCC 
“If you choose to die”, an old Afghan saying went, "go to Kundus.” Today, 
.with the region cleared of malaria and agriculture and industries developing, 
the saying is justifiably changed to “if you choose to prosper, go to Kundus”. 
will be trained for a year in Switzer- 
land in the use of hand-tools on 
mountain farms. By extending this 
work during 1952, it is estimated that 
the productivity per man can be 
increased by as much as five times. 
Because of its widespread pos- 
sibilities, this programme, which 
appeals to the local farmer and 
employs the local blacksmith, can 
 
(U.N. photos by Eric Schwab.) 
Afghanistan is a remarkable example of how a country is using expert help from 
abroad to further its development. In one season WHO technicians dusted 
entire population of Kabul with DDT and prevented annual typhus epidemic. 
by the Austrian Government as a 
contribution to FAO’s work. 
The team was able to prove to the 
Afghan peasants that a man could 
mow many times as fast with the 
scythe as with the local sickle. 
About 500 scythes have already been 
distributed, some of them to the 
students of the school of agriculture, 
who, after being trained in their 
use, have taken them to their own 
villages in remote parts of the 
country. A fellowship has been 
awarded to an Afghan student who 
  
Impressive results have been achieved in tight against dreaded rinderpest cattie 
disease. Last year, 1,000,000 cattle were protected by official inoculation and 
isolation schemes that were widely supported by the cattlemen themselves. 
be of far greater service to Afghan 
agriculture than any immediate 
attempt to introduce modern ma- 
chinery. Even if it were thought 
advisable to introduce tractors and 
the like, it would mean not only con- 
verting the peasant farmer to un- 
familiar machines and training me- 
chanics, but also meeting the costly 
use of petrol, which has still to be 
imported at prohibitive expense. 
Another example of how simple 
changes can produce immeasurable 
benefit is the case of Karakul. Ka- 
rakul, the fur of the lamb, is Af- 
ghanistan’s most important source 
of foreign exchange, and gives em- 
ployment to over 1,000,000 people. 
Before 1934 the sheep population 
was in a flourishing condition. In 
that year, when the karakul mono- 
poly was started, only 1,100,000 pelts 
were exported from the country. 
In 1945 this had risen to 3,200,000, 
but in the following year it had 
dropped to 1,700,000. This drop was 
brought about by bad weather, poor 
food and sheep disease. 
If, therefore, the technical assist- 
ance which FAO is rendering under 
its karakul improvement programme 
~ succeeds, it will be providing an 
increase in reserve which could be 
put to improving the agricultural 
conditions of Afghanistan, and also 
to helping build up its industrializa- 
tion, 
The story of Kkarakul, moreover, 
provides an interesting example of 
how inter-active technical assistance 
can be, and how even a malaria 
control scheme affects a country’s 
dollar-earning capacity. 
There is an old Afghan saying, 
“If you choose to die, go to Kundus.” 
Kundus is the centre of a large and 
fertile area between the Hindu Kush 
and the Oxus River. Eight hundred 
years ago Genghis Khan destroyed 
the canal civilization which had cul- 
tivated this area. When the irriga- 
tion system collapsed, the malaria 
mosquitoes took possession. Since 
that time repeated efforts to recover 
this area failed because the people 
were either killed off by malaria or 
ed. 
In 1950, a WHO team set up its 
headquarters at Kundus, and within 
two years had effectively cleared the 
region of malaria. This enabled the 
expansion of a large cotton growing 
belt and the recruitment of workers 
for a cotton mill. While FAO is 
helping to improve the yield and 
quality of the cotton produced, the 
new industry is producing the cotton 
seed cake which can supply the 
winter feed of the karakul and help 
reduce the death rate. This, with 
the other help which the interna- 
tional experts are able to give on 
sheep diseases and the like, will help 
to reduce the death-rate of sheep, 
which is as high as 40 per cent in a 
season. 
With malaria effectively control- 
led, the Northern Provinces can now 
be opened up, not only for agricul- 
tural purposes, but for industrial 
development. In this area lies a 
potential oilfield. One of the first 
requests agreed between the Govern- 
ment and the United Nations was 
for an oil geologist. This year, plans 
for the exploitation of the oil re- 
sources of this region are going 
forward. The old saying has now 
been modified: “If you choose to 
prosper, go to Kundus.” 
The malaria control scheme had 
other secondary effects. In the off- 
season for malaria, the WHO team 
moved into the cities of Kabul and 
Kandahar, dusted the entire popu- 
lation with DDT, stopped the tribes- 
men as they came into the town and 
dusted them too, and thus prevent- 
ed a typhus epidemic which had 
recurred annually in Afghanistan. 
The success of malaria-control and 
typhus-control made a great impres- 
sion on the people of Afghanistan, 
and led to embarrassing demands 
for immediate spraying of the whole 
country. 
Though agriculture is the central 
problem, the services which are 
being made available under the 
technical assistance programme for 
Afghanistan include experts in eco- 
nomic planning, public administra- 
tion, statistics and industrial en- 
gineering; oil drilling, telephone and 
telegraph, underground water, cot- 
tage industries, productivity and 
labour legislation, and cotton cul- 
ture; civil aviation, oil technology, 
health education in all its fields, 
epidemiology, social medicine, ge- 
neral and technical education and 
teacher training. 
This expanding programme is 
closely correlated with the U. 8S. 
bilateral programme, which, among 
other things, includes help in 
opening up the country’s mineral 
resources. 
Afghanistan is a remarkable 
example of how a country is avail- 
ing itself of expert help from all 
corners of the world. The public 
health engineer is from Haiti, the 
woman expert on children’s diseases 
from Finland, the doctor in charge 
of the malaria control is an Indian, 
and the mission has included Bri- 
tish, American, Dutch, Scandinavian, 
French, Belgian and Austrian parti- 
cipants. : :

## [Page 7](071148engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

'OURIER 


### 71139: New highways in the skies of Iran

NEW HIGHWAYS 
THE SKIES OF IRA 
N airman entering Iran for the first time, 
across the dangerous “hump” of the 
Zagros Mountains, will be surprised by 
the strange landscape around Teheran, 
the capital. He will see the ground pitted 
with curious holes, running in straight lines 
which criss-cross each other. 
The pits are the vertical shafts of the 
horizontal wells, or ganals, a Persian water 
system which is supposed to date back 5,000 
years. The horizontal wells are mined along 
the underground water courses back to their 
sources in the mountains. Some of them 
are 30 miles long and the quanat miners keep 
their bearings underground by means of 
a primitive lodestone compass which, the 
Persians claim, preceded the marine compass 
by .centuries and was therefore the ancestor of 
the navigational aids which made air travel 
possible. So, in a way, the services which 
ICAO is providing for Iran is a return for the 
“technical assistance” which the Persians 
rendered to aviation in remote history. 
Iran today stands in need of all the assistance 
which ICAO can give it because it has a 
communications problem which is one of the 
biggest obstacles to its development. This 
country is a vast territory, as big as France, 
Italy, Norway and Spain combined, but with 
about a tenth of the population of this 
European area. It is mainly a high plateau, 
surrounded by battlements of mountain ranges. 
About 70 per cent of the country’s area consists 
of mountains, forests and salt desert. In the 
whole country there are only 17,000 miles of 
roads and 2,000 miles of railways. In the 
north, the mountain passes and railway tracks 
may be blocked for weeks by heavy falls of 
snow. Isfahan, the former capital of the 
country and one of its three biggest industrial 
centres, is not served by a railway at all, and 
its connection with the capital is by a 
road across the desert. Governmentally and 
economically the various parts of the country 
are isolated by poor communications. Ultimate 
development will depend on ground traffic 
arteries, but an urgent problem is how to 
establish communications within the country 
by air and how to maintain and extend the air 
services to neighbouring countries. In this 
connection, the country is subject to con- 
siderable climatic variation, so that air safety 
is a priority problem. 
In response to a request from the Govern- 
ment of Iran, ICAO agreed to send an expert 
to assist Iranian airways in improving their 
organization and service. Simultaneously, a 
team of experts would be provided to help 
the Department of Civil Aviation to train its 
personnel in the operation of ground facilities 
and services. The team began to operate in 
April 1954. Classes in radio techniques have 
been supplemented by regular on-the-job 
training and by expert advice on setting up, 
operating and maintaining radio equipment. 
Air traffic control classes were organized, and 
advanced instruction in actual operation of 
control towers has been given to the existing 
stafl. 
One of the important functions of the 
ICAO mission was to produce meteorological 
observers and forecasters and to train and post 
observers in various parts of the 628,000 square 
miles of country which has not so far had a 
OCTOBER 1952. 
proper weather service. The weather-reporting 
stations are beginning to form an effective 
network and to provide the forecasters with 
the weather data indispensable to safe flying. 
Page 7 
In conjunction with this practical training 
the mission has been able to advance its 
advisory functions through a General Commis- 
sion which the Government has set up, whose 
chairman is the head of the mission. This 
operates through six sub-commissions con- 
cerned with aircraft search and rescue work ; 
communications and radio navigational aids; 
meteorology, climatology and statistics; opera- 
tions; training, licensing and aero clubs; and 
air worthiness. 
The mission, which included four experts 
from the Netherlands, two from Norway and 
one from the United Kingdom, and one stateless 
expert, has been able to help in other directions, 
and especially in the fields of organization and 
operation. Apart from this ICAO has been 
able to provide three fellowships by which 
Iranians can gain experience abroad in aero- 
nautical engineering and electronics. 
Since the ICAO mission began its work in 
April 1951 the economic situation of the 
country has deteriorated, thus making it 
difficult for the Department of Civil Aviation 
and Iranian Airways to take full advantage of 
the mission’s advice and work. In spite of 
this handicap, the work of the mission has 
continued with results which encourage the 
hope that when economic conditions improve 
the Government will be better able to provide 
the necessary support for civil aviation. At 
least it will have trained personnel. 
Iran has only 17,000 miles of roads and 2,000 miles of railways. Ultimate development will depend on both ground traffic arteries and air communication networks. 
With technical assistance, Iran is beginning to form a chain of weather-reporting stations (similar to one shown below) which are indispensable for safe flying. 
   
   

## [Page 8](071148engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 71140: Rice, the bread of Asia

  
  
Ten countries have joined together at F.A.O. Rice Research Institute in India in a compreh« 
for improving the yields of rice. For millions of Asians, their experiments are a matter of; 
_—— FI. Po PRRPU . ~ - IRSVUOIY d 
w hy 3 - ~ .   
Women pounding rice is a familiar sight in Sarawak. 
=, f 4 
\ i i J a 
ARRAN AY | Sa saudi BR AP NP 
HE EAC a 
Thai girl gathers basic food of half the world’s people. 
  
  
In the Terai area of India at the foothills of the Himalayas, U.N. agencies are working to spur food production. From new fields, Terai now wrests its harvests of rice. Photos st

## [Page 9](071148engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

sive scheme 
fie and death. 
Beneath microscope, rice pollen is examined at Institute, 
Fo " a JPR % 
   
o
m
 
  
  
ow harvest being loaded on cart and carried on peasants’ heads for sacking and weighing at mill, 


### 71140: Rice, the bread of Asia

   RC 
THE BREAD OF ASIA 
OR half the world’s population, the experiments at the Rice Re- 
search Institute at Cuttack, in Orissa, India, have a concern which 
is more than academic. For many, it is a matter of life and death. 
Seventy per cent of the Asian peoples depend on rice as their staple 
diet, and while the population has increased by over ten per cent in the 
past twelve years, the production of rice is still below pre-1940. The 
region, as a whole, instead of being an exporter of food has become a 
net importer of food, depending on bread-grain from North America 
and even rice from Egypt and Brazil. Countries like India are poised 
on the verge of rice-famine. 
Rice-production depends on methods which are difficult to change 
and, even though the peasants may recognize the value of new ideas in 
cultivation, it takes time for them to learn new skills and modify tra- 
dition. On the other hand, better seeds, if they are available, can de- 
monstrate their value and carry conviction in a single season. If, there- . 
fore, the plant-breeders can produce varieties of rice which can give 
higher yields from existing acreages, they can bring about an increased 
food-production which improvements in the rice-husbandry will further 
enhance. 
At the Cuttack Rice Research Station, with the Indian Government 
as host and FAO as the sponsor, ten countries — India, Pakistan, Burma, 
Ceylon, Indonesia, Indo-China, Thailand, Malaya, the Philippines and 
Japan — are combining in a comprehensive scheme for improving the 
yields of rice. 
Just what that means can only be gathered by comparison between 
the yields of differents countries. Japan, for example, gets 2,352 lbs. 
of rice per acre, while the Indian yield averages less than a third of that. 
India has the largest acreage in the world under rice, but she has rela- 
tively the lowest production. Its 350 million people live continually on 
the edge of famine because of rice shortages. 
If, then, India could increase her rice yield per acre, if not to the 
prize-crops of Japan but only to that of China, which is double, she 
could have 25 million tons more rice per year from its present acreage. 
The reason for the vast difference between the yields of Japan and 
those, not only of India but of the whole of South East Asia, is the fact 
that the varieties of rice are different, One is ‘japonica’ and the other 
is ‘indica’. 
The following figures show the comparatives average yields in lbs. 
of rice per acre of the two types: 
Japonica. Indica. 
Japan .........cciiiieienn 2352 Java ..........ciiiiinenn 1,034 
Egypt «..cvviiiiiiiiii, 1,890 Thailand ..... Ase hohebalaRabteRets 888 
Korea...........covvnnnns . 1593 Burma ................... 816 
China........covvvnvinnnnn 1,549 India .................... 772 
USA, iii 1,390 Indo-China .............. 716 
Philippines .............. 703 
Apart from the rice-strain, there may be other factors at work, such 
as methods of cultivation, but the disparity between the countries with 
high yields and those with lower yields is apparent enough to suggest 
that japonica has definite advantages. 
It is not just a simple matter of substituting one variety for the other. 
Japonica is the rice of high latitudes and indica is the rice of tropical 
and equatorial Asia. There can be no direct transfer; the process can 
only be by hybridizing the two varieties and that in terms of the locai 
adaptations of indica in the various countries. Nor is hybridization a 
simple process, because japonica in the long daylight of higher latitudes 
flowers within 100 days and indica in regions of shorter daylight takes 
four to six months. 
To achieve cross-fertilization, both have to flower at the same time 
and at Cuttack, the process is speeded up by exposing the plants to 
artificial light. Experts do the pollinization by hand, and the breeding 
rice is protected by paper bags. This has to be done with individual 
plants of each of the different strains from the varied natural conditions 
of the participating countries. From the first 60,000 plants pollinated, 
12,500 seeds were collected—again by hand. : 
All kinds of variables complicate the task of finding an effective 
hybrid. For example, a cross-breed may produce a magnificent head 
but the head will be too heavy for the straw, while straw may be sturdy 
at the expense of the head. Others may incline to the japonica parent, 
with its preference for a cooler climate and long daylight. Others may 
develop quite usefully under Indian conditions and be unsuited for 
Javanese cultivation. 
There can, therefore, be no standardization but only a systematic 
process of adaptation and acclimatization. This takes time, but the 
rewards are high. If, for example, a suitable hybrid could be produced 
for India it is (theoretically) possible to double the rice yield from the 
existing acreages, which, quantitatively, at least, would transform the 
precarious food situation of India. 
. The .Central Rice Research Station which houses the project is an 
All-India centre in the State of Orissa. The International Rice Com- 
mission wanted to promote this hybridization work for the benefit of 
the whole region. The Government of India has made available the 
necessary land and other facilities. The extension of the work is in 
the plant-breeding stations of the countries concerned. 
FAO’s function under Expanded Technical Assistance has been to 
provide modest finances for the labour costs of technical personnel, who 
are under the direction of the director of the station (who has the status 
of consultant without remuneration) and to arrange for the operation 
of a centre there for the training of fellows from member countries of 
the International Rice Commission. 
The Government of India is providing the director of the centre and 
FAO the associate director and certain other instructors, as well as any 
essential equipment. The Colombo Plan is providing buildings which 
will be of permanent value to the centre as well as housing those con- 
cerned with the immediate programme and the work of the international 
training scheme, : 
This is an example of how the enterprise of one government in the 
creation of such a centre, the recognition of a common interest through 
the International Rice Commission, plus the discreet use of Technical 
Assistance funds, can bring together a whole group of countries on a 
regional basis. The results, on an optimistic assessment, may transform 
the rice situation in South-East Asia and the Pacific and benefit 
hundreds of millions. Short of that fulfilment, it still has an immediate 
value in focussing the attention of many nations on a common problem 
and demonstrating the value of co-operative investigation.

## [Page 10](071148engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 71141: Three islands in a sea of sand

Page 10. OCTOBER 1652 
Rl - - L v 
le. A 
- - . 
po ML . » - 
. . » - 
> - - 
, . 3 4 . y 
» -, oo 1 » » 
R - 
." » - .- » 
. te ' ) . 
NE 
» - * . 
~0 ov a ™ oa i -* . . » 
ate est 7 & - 
. - -" . 
> Me 
. ’ 
» - . 
3 . - N - 
- y - - °F ty He. : Noel ; > To 
- - » ; » » 
: + 
- - * 4 = -~ od 
’ hg ” » 
» » 
; oo, a “a 3 
PP. - Tn, 
- 
. a s 4 
Fexzan), are islands in vast seas of sand. Racially 
and geographically, the Libyan population of one 
and a quarter million people is divided into several groups 
ond have never before constituted an independent political 
unit; they have been united only as part of the larger 
empire of foreign conquerors. Over a fourth of the popula- 
tion consists of wandering desert tribes. Only one in ten 
of the people is literate. 
T" three provinces of Libya (Tripolitania, Cyrenaica, 
It is doubtful whether Libya can be called an underdeve- 
loped territory. Historically, it is an over-developed territory, 
in the sense that large tracts of the country are a dust- 
bowl created by greedy development. These are the areas 
which supported a considerable colonial population and were 
the granaries of Greece and Rome from 500 B.C. to 500 A.D. 
Through the neglect to maintain the wells, cisterns and 
trees on which this agricultural prosperity had been based 
ond after the collapse of an effective administrative orga- 
“nization, the depradations of the nomadic tribes which 
replaced the system of cultivation by indiscriminate grazing 
and deforestation, this area was largely reduced to desert. 
Today Libya is a deficit area to a degree matched by few 
other countries. Although governmental services are on a very 
modest level, the deficit of the ordinary administrative budget 
exceeds 30 per cent. There are deficits in the budgets of 
all three provinces and most of the municipalities. There is 
a deficit in the balance of trade of all three provinces, with 
a consequent deficit of about 40 per cent in the balance of 
payments. This, in the recent past and present, has been 
met not by receipts from foreign investments, but by grants- 
in-aid and military spending by foreign powers. The wheat- 
growing project at Barce operotes at a deficit; so does the 
tobacco-growing scheme. 
The agriculture of the Fezzan incurs a deficit; so does the 
power plant at Tripoli, and its harbour, and its gas works, 
ond the railways. The Italian colonization scheme, heavily 
subsidized by the Italian taxpayers during the ltalian occupa- 
tion, still operates at a deficit. Thus the Libyan economy 
cannot maintain even the present low standard of living, which 
averages in income per capita not much more than $30 a year. 
Arresting 1,000 years of decay 
for assisting the independent state it created by on 
act of the General Assembly to achieve higher standards 
of living and social welfare as a member of the family of 
nations. This carries with it the recognition that there are 
no undisclosed natural resources waiting to be developed, and 
that Libya is not only a country with no highly developed 
industry — it is a country with no firm basis for industrial 
development. It has no water power, no coal, no petroleum 
and no commercially-exploitable mineral ores, so far as is 
known. 
Tw United Nations has eccepted its clear responsibility 
Development must necessarily be inclined toward the 
establishment of light industry to process agricultural mate- 
rials. The pressing problem, therefore, is one of arresting 
the decay which has been going on for over 1,000 years, of 
regenerating its agriculture and reconstituting its forests and 
vegetation. The Libyan potential lies in the recovery of its 
“desert and developing the skills and resources of its people. 
“a
 
- 
- » 
» 
» 
- » 
- 
= 
» » 
- - 
- 
» 
’ » 
. - 
. - rg 
- 
» » » » 
> - » 
» 
. - oo 
- ” » 
- 
- » 
l - - 
» 
» , - 
» I - . 
» 
» 
> ,. 
a. 
-e 
fg » 
. - / - 
» LL . 
» 
> 
» 
» » 
- » 
» 
» - > 
> 
- 
United Nations and specialized agency experts assisted 
the UJ. N. Commissioner in Libya, the Libyan Provisional 
Government and the Administering Powers (United Kingdom 
and France) to lay the foundation for the new state. Experts 
of the United Nations, FAO and the International Monetary 
Fund advised the Commissioner and the main interested 
Powers on the establishment of a Libyan currency and on two 
Libyon economic and social development financing agencies, 
one to attract grant-in-aid funds from friendly governments, 
the second to attract governmental loan capital. These 
agencies have been established by Libyan law. They con 
consider only proposals from the Government for the financing 
of projects approved by the Government. 
Experts of the United Nations have also assisted the 
Commissioner in preparing the Libyan budget for 1952, the 
establishment of a civil service, a provident fund law and 
other fundamental public administration acts. The result was 
that, on independence day, Libya had in operation, or pro- 
jected for the immediate future, a governmental organization 
in the administrative, economic and financial spheres, a plan 
for the basic operation of the new Government prepared in 
full co-operation with representatives of the inhabitants of the 
country which would assure the continuing operation of the 
governmental machinery. 
This plan had already provided for a progressive transfer 
of nearly all powers to the Provisional Libyan Government so 
thot the transfer to the government on the day of independ- 
ence was only for matters relating to foreign affairs and 
defence. 
The U. N. Resident Technical Assistance Representative 
(who is also personal representative of the Secretary-General) 
has an important role in the Libyon picture. In addition to 
the normal functions of such an official, he is available to the 
Government for consultation regarding economic, financial and 
social development matters. He is a member of the Libyan 
economic planning committee, sits on the board of manage- 
ment of the Libyan Development Agency, and serves us 
technical assistance adviser of the Libyan Government in the 
Libyan Finance Agency. Thus the Resident Representative 
has an important role in assisting Libya ot all stages of its 
economic ond social development programme. 
The problems of the new Government and Administration 
which came into existence last December are immense, despite 
all of the above-mentined planning which gave Libya what 
was probably the most planned and orderly transition to 
independence in modern times through a combination of nor- 
mal United Nations and technical assistance effort. The 
take-over of the machinery of Government is a major 
undertaking in a country which has so seriously lacked edu- 
cational facilities for so long. 
Great strides in the education of the indigenous population 
were made by the administering powers. Now there are 
50,000 pupils in schools, although only about 1,100 are in 
secondary schools. Education in the Fezzan was even more 
difficult, because there were no indigenous teachers; it is dif- 
ficult to recruit foreign teachers to serve in this bore and 
isolated region. | “ Ss 
A very small number of leaders and government officials 
received an adequate training abroad before the last war. A 
few who were refugees during the colonial period have return- 
ed. There is, however, an overall shortage of people even 
with the elements of education. Yet somehow the adminis- 
UNESCO 
4 - Py . 
- A. PA 
. Ar wid 
: 3 - 
-t g - - 
- 
-» 
- . ., 
. wv 
- 
. 5 fat 
: 2 . 
. - ho 
» » ’ 2 » 
- - he a . - 
» -—— - - 
> > » - 
-~ th ” ny _-. - 
» - » . - 
» - - 
: -" - .." a hate X | 
- le . y 
- - - » 
- » - - » 
» - » 
» - » - - 
- > 4 - - . » 
8 - 
* - 
p - » , ' 
- -- * 
- » 
» Tre - a 
Ji » « - 
. » - 
J 
>" - 
- . . -".e 
e 
’ - » 
. Le. 
.) - - - Te ol 
- . | 
* Sa ry PE - 
tration has to recruit, not only higher civil servants, but clerks 
and typists and postmen capable of reading an address. It has 
to find the staffs for new organizations and institutions 
without which the first steps in devlopment are impossible. It 
has to contemplate somehow, sometime, establishing a univer- 
sity. 
To fulfil its aspirations as a nation, therefore, Libya needs 
all the assistance it can get in practically every aspect 
of civil development. On behalf of the Technical Assistance 
Board, during 1951 a general economic appraisal and subse- 
quently recommendations for an economic and social deve- 
lopment programme for Libya were produced for consideration 
by the Government when it took over responsability for the 
affairs of the country. 
Skill—‘the major untapped resource’ 
VEN before the transfer of authority, however, the U.N. 
agreed with the British and French Governments, then 
responsible for administering Libya, on assistance by 
experts. On the initiative of the U. N. Commissioner in 
Libya, the Economic and Social Council and the General 
Assembly agreed that Libya could continue to receive tech- 
nical assistance after its independance had been achieved, 
and even before it became a member of the United Nations 
or the Specialized Agencies. 
The economic and social development scheme for Libya 
contains no proposals for new industries, new transport 
facilities, new public utilities or big investment projects of 
any kind. It is a plon recognizing the realities of the exist- 
ing situation ond the limit of the rate at which the country 
could absorb large-scale assistance. 
The plan proposes projects and programmes for the im- 
provement or expansion of existing activities or restoration of 
physical plants destroyed by war. Recognizing that Libya's 
“one major untapped resource” is the latent skill of its 
people, it lays heavy emphasis on educational and technical 
training. Improvement in agricultural and animal husbandry 
techniques and practices was a basic recommendation. Tech- 
nical Assistance to Libya during the past year has embraced 
education, agriculture, engineering and technical works, 
public health and social development, public administration 
and finance, statistical services. 
Typical of the urgent measures token, Unesco began in 
Tripoli in 1950 a Clerical and Technical Training Centre, 
following requests from the United Kindom and France, as 
administering powers. The Centre is now running under a 
technical assistance agreement signed by the new Government 
of Libya and Unesco and ILO. The school is under the direc- 
tion of an expert from the U. K. with 13 other teachers and 
instructors provided by Unesco. This represents the creation 
in less than two years of a combined school of trades and 
business administration. At present there are 25 students at 
the Centre, the equipment of which has been provided by 
Libya, Unesco and the U. S. Point IY programme. 
Courses for technical students are designed to train fitters, 
turners, blacksmiths, welders, carpenters, foundry workers and 
motor mechanics. The course of study is two years, but it is 
hoped to reduce this to one year although the delay in pro- 
vision of equipment will require a third year for present 
students in the technical programme. Unesco is also helping 
a centre where elementary school teachers will be trained and 
where Libyan textbooks will be developed. Co

## [Page 11](071148engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

COURIER 
Technical * briefing ” 
OCTOBER 1952. Page II 


### 71142: Short-term aid for a long-term policy: technical "briefing" brings Yugoslavia up to date

brings Yugoslavia up-to-date 
SHORT-TERM AID FOR A LONG- TERM POLICY 
EQUESTS for technical assistance can range 
from those which are so comprehensive that 
they involve the entire economy of a coun- 
try, to those, which only involve calling in a 
specialist in making piston rings. The first 
case may require the training of local experts 
capable of transforming their country. The second 
usually means that the local technicians and 
engineers already exist and all they need is a 
“briefing” to bring them up to date on the latest 
developments in production techniques. 
On the whole, Yugoslavia is in the second cate- 
gory. It is relatively more developed than most 
economically under-developed countries, and al- 
ready has a substantial core of expert technicians. 
During the war, however, most of them lost touch 
with their colleagues and with technical develop- 
ments in other countries. 
Technical assistance to Yugoslavia therefore fol- 
lows a somewhat different pattern from that esta- 
blished in lesser developed countries. Instead of 
sending teams on one-year or even two-year mis- 
sions, the Technical Assistance Administration of 
the U.N. has begun an experiment whereby highly 
qualified experts are being sent to Yugoslavia on 
assignments lasting only a few weeks. 
For a eountry like Yugoslavia, which has been 
carrying on a nationwide development plan of 
industrialization since 1947, the short-term assign- 
ment offers a number of distinct advantages. It 
means that for a given sum of technical assistance 
funds, many experts, in widely different fields can 
be provided; international specialists whose ser- 
vices are needed in many countries will often 
accept a brief job but not one where they are “tied 
up” for long periods; and on the short assignment, 
detailed advice can be given on difficulties which 
may be blocking bigger developments that local 
technicians can then cope with unaided. 
Yugoslavia’s Five-Year Plan of development has 
touched almost every phase of the country’s eco- 
nomic life. The aim of the plan is to turn Yugo- 
slavia into a modern industrialized nation with 
an up-to-date agriculture. Its primary tasks, in 
the past years, have been to raise the level of 
industry and create new ones, expand electric 
power production and speed the exploitation and 
    
      
   
  
    
  
TEYYY 
HE 
mm " 
HIN ! 
i ii it 
Ri rr 
hh / To : 
A “ra al ela i TF 3 15 Se 
development of the coun- 
try’s rich mineral resour- 
ces. 
In the first three years, 
the plan called mainly for 
laying the foundations for 
Yugoslavia’s industrializa- 
tion—that is, erecting the 
buildings, developing the 
grids, raising the dams, 
and digging the tunnels 
for power plants and fac- 
tories. The programme 
was delayed because vital 
heavy machinery, such as 
turbines, blast furnaces, 
generators and similar 
equipment, which had 
already been paid for, 
were not delivered to Yu- 
goslavia by certain for- 
eign countries. 
The Yugoslavs have 
tried to meet this diffi- 
culty by husbanding their resources, ingenuity 
and improvization; by making a good portion of 
the machinery themselves; and by buying it 
either in exchange for their own exports or with 
- credits received from certain western countries. 
The progress of the plan and the increase of 
production in all fields, agricultural as well as 
industrial, has been remarkable. 
In the past four years, for example, new smelt- 
ing ovens have been built in Croatia, a factory 
for the manufacture of water turbines has been 
completed in Slovenia, the cement factory in Split 
(cement is one of Yugoslavia’s most important 
export products) has been rebuilt and enlarged, 
and new electric power plants have sprung up all 
over the country. 
For these and many other industries, Yugoslavia 
has availed itself, and is continuing to do so, of 
the short-term “priefing services” of the U. N. 
Thus, the services of two cement experts from 
Switzerland and France were provided for periods 
of a month and three weeks to advise on various 
problems affecting the cement industry. A US. 
{Yugofoto ) 
nara a 
   
    
 
 
  
wv 
A OO 
  
 
< {Yugofoto.) 
expert in the construction of locomotive industry 
and bridges advised for one month on such highly 
technical matters as locomotive dimensions, the 
production of curved sheets for boilers, forging in 
casting moulds, welding, and the machine finishing 
of locomotive frames. 
In response to requests for help in mining and 
electrification, short-term assignments have been 
provided on the use of new drilling methods in 
large mines, the mechanization of ore-loading and 
transportation, and the roasting of mercury ore. 
Technicians have been provided to advise in the 
re-organization of the Turbine Industry Research 
Institute at Ljubljana which is seeking to improve 
research and development of hydraulic turbines, 
pumps, ventilators and screw propellors; in the 
mass production of electric motors and transform- 
ers; and in the construction of large units of 
electrical machinery. 
All of these appointments have been for a 
month or less. In certain cases, however, the 
technicians have been sent in for longer periods. 
Thus a Dutch sanitary and heating engineer 
stayed in Yugoslavia for three months, and an 
expert on weather forecasting for four months. 
The longest appointment so far — 12 months — 
has been for the services of an expert on rural 
electrification, one of the major targets of Yugo- 
slavia’s industrialization programme. 
Alongside these “weeks-and-months” experts 
who are being provided by the United Nations, 
another new method of technical assistance is 
being tried in Yugoslavia for the first time by the 
International Labour Office. 
It has often been found that experts come up 
against a host of practical problems in giving the 
full benefit of their experience and training to 
the country they are sent to. Perhaps the most 
difficult problem -— especially if it relates to in- 
dustrial training — arises out of the inability of 
the expert to reach the actual worker in the fac- 
tory or workshop. 
For this reason, the ILO has undertaken to help 
workers from Yugoslav factories to get practical 
on-the-job training in industrial establishments 
abroad. In addition to sending 44 fqremen- 
instructors to Yugoslavia, ILO is arranging to 
place as many as 377 workers in factories abroad 
for periods ranging from 6 to 12 months. Of these, 
263 are already skilled workers who will receive 
advance practical training abroad; 114 are compa- 
ratively young workers having completed their 
apprenticeship who will acquire further skills. The 
trades in which they will receive training range 
from electronics to foundry practice, from paper 
manufacture to ship construction, from aeronau- 
tics to railway engineering, and from precision 
instrument making to lorry construction. The 
first Yugoslav workers to be trained under this 
scheme began work this summer. 
Unesco, too, is providing technical aid to Yugo- 
slavia. At the request of the government, a Unesco 
exploratory mission was sent to the country in 
November 1951 and agreed with the Government 
that the most urgent need was for a national, 
scientific and technical documentation centre to 
service scientific and technical research workers 
and students with up-to-date information. 
A Unesco three-man mission has now arrived 
in Belgrade. The Centre, which is now being 
set up, will co-ordinate all the scientific and tech- 
nical documentation produced by Yugoslav insti- 
tutions, will put micro-films within the reach of 
research workers, and will enable Yugoslavs to 
benefit from technical abstracts and bibliogra- 
phies produced in other countries. 
This is only part of the whole story of technical 
assistance in Yugoslavia. Other U.N. agencies such 
as FAO, WHO, UNICEF and the Monetary Fund 
are all participating to help Yugoslavia in the tre- 
mendous effort which is transforming the life and 
countryside of this nation.

## [Page 12](071148engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

Page 12. OCTOBER 1952 
between Bolivia and the United Nations 
programme of technical assistance has a 
_ special significance. Apart from the direct 
economic benefits it should bring to Bolivia, 
this association also constitutes a test of the 
ability of technical assistance to help reinforce 
administrative and planning services which the 
governement considers essential for the success 
of its economic development scheme. 
Realizing the need for a firm administrative 
basis on which to develop more rapidly the 
considerable natural resources which can help 
the Bolivian people to achieve a higher 
standard of living, the goverment requested the 
United Nations for comprehensive assistance 
both in establishing this structure and in 
improving the country’s internal economy. 
Located not far below the equator, the diver- 
sity of Bolivia's climate and vegetation 
makes it possible to cultivate almost every 
variety of plant or animal product. There are 
few material human needs which could not be 
satisfied from its rich soils, its rich minerals 
and its rich water sources. Yet the conditions 
of life for the majority of the Bolivian people, 
heirs of the Inca and the Spanish civilizations 
and inhabiting a country rich, in modern terms, 
beyond the dreams of the Conquistadores, are 
difficult in the extreme. : 
Illiteracy, disease and infant mortality rates 
give cause for concern. The maintenance of 
roads and railways has become a serious pro- 
blem. Agriculture needs developing so that 
foodstuffs and plant materials can be produced. 
in Bolivia instead of being imported as they 
are today. Wide surveys of oil and hydro- 
electric power resources must be made so that 
these can be properly developed. 
For centuries silver from the mountain of 
Potosi was one of the most important exports 
of the Americas, but as the self-evident source 
of wealth, the spectacular deposits of tin have 
now replaced silver. It is also known that 
Bolivia possesses reserves oi zinc, lead, anti- 
mony, tungsten, copper, iron, oil and natural 
gas. Gas and oil, with the enormous possibi- 
lities of hydro-electric power, could provide all 
the energy needed to promote Bolivian industry 
for generations ahead. 
T" type of association being worked out 
  
  
(Photo Copyright Herbert Kirchhoff.) * 


### 71143: Bolivia lays foundations for economic betterment

BOLIVIA LAYS FOUNDATIONS 
FOR ECONOMIC BETTERMENT 
But the tremendous task of developing these 
natural resources and realizing improvements 
in health, education and food supplies calls for 
more extensive administrative machinery than 
that at present disposed of by Bolivia. This 
was recognized by the Bolivians themselves 
when they invited the United Nations to share 
in a experiment which Mr. Trygve Lie has 
described “as an innovation which would be 
watched throughout the world by governments 
in other countries with similar conditions. 
A comprehensive 17 member Technical Assis- 
tance Mission organized by the United Nations 
under its regular programme in co-operation 
with ILO, FAO and Unesco visited Bolivia in 
1950 and surveyed the country’s needs and 
resources. The report of this mission contained 
a number of specific proposals for economic and 
social development in Bolivia, but as a founda- 
tion for these projects, it made a suggestion 
which the Bolivian Government endorsed, that 
the United Nations should assist Bolivia in 
obtaining the services of a number of experienc- 
ed administrative officials, drawn from a variety 
of countries, whom the Government would 
appoint to key positions as integral members of 
the Bolivian Civil Service. 
In agreement with the Government, and with 
the help of FAO and ILO, the United Nations is 
recruiting ten officials for a period of three to 
five years and is providing Bolivia with an 
annual § 200,000 toward their employment. 
These international recruited officials are not 
UN officials but are being employed by the 
Government and are directly responsible to it. 
Eight of them are being assigned to the Central 
Bank, the Ministries of Agriculture, Public 
Works, Finance, Labour and of Mines, Petrol- 
eum and Economy. Two are concerned with 
public administration and social security. The 
UN is also supplying Bolivia with the services 
of 13 technical experts for periods of 6 or 12 
months. 
Here is an example of a country which is pre- 
pared to plan its economic development, in all 
its phases, with the help of international advice. 
The success of this experiment will depend on 
the ability of the country to train its own na- 
tional experts to carry on without outside 
help, and to do so as soon as possible.   
UNESCO 


### 71144: The Awakening valley

THE AWAKENING 
VALLEY 
HE profile of El Salvador is rugged and so is life 
for its people. 
Smallest of the Central American republics 
(160 miles long and 60 miles wide), it has one of 
the highest population densities in the Western 
Hemisphere. Both its birth-rate and death-rates are 
high. The average expectation of life is only 26 years. 
While 40 per cent of its inhabitants are under 15 years 
of age, only 4 per cent are over 60. 
* The average income of the majority of the families 
is less than $250 a year—Iless than 60 cents a day. 
Illiteracy in El Salvador is extremely high. By 
law, education is universal and compulsory, but every- 
where there is poor enrolment and poor attendance. 
Children are family wage-earners and there is an 
acute shortage of schools and teachers, which the 
government is trying to remedy. Last year, the Mi- 
nistry of Education’s budget was dquble. that of 1950. 
This mountainous country, straddled by 11 major 
volcanoes, is primarily agricultural. About 80 per cent 
of the arable land is cultivated, but methods are pri- 
mitive. For example, El Salvador is third among the 
world’s coffee exporting countries—about 136 million 
pounds a year—but 25 per cent of the coffee trees 
produce 75 per cent of the crop. Destruction of forests 
has been responsible for a serious water-shortage in 
the country, although the average rainfall is 75 inches 
a year. : 
The mineral wealth of El Salvador is mainly in gold 
and silver, which rank second only to agriculture in 
value. Industry, which suffers from lack of electric 
power, is restricted largely to the processing of agri- 
cultural products. Transportation is limited by the 
highways (less than 1,600 miles improved roads) an 
by only 375 miles of railway track. . 
Thus, El Salvador is, with all these problems, an 
under-developed country whose government is anxious 
rapidly to advance the country’s standards and pro- 
duction. It turned to the U.N. for aid, even before the 
official Expanded Programme began. In 1947, ILO 
sent a mission for consultations on a proposed social 
insurance scheme. In 1948, the International Bank 
sent a mission to study the possibilities of the Lempa 
River Hydro-Electric Scheme and authorized a loan 
of $12,545,000. UNICEF since 1948 has covered sup- 
plementary feeding for children, maternal and child 
health and a BCG vaccination programme. 
In 1950, FAO and the Economic Commission for 
Latin America made El Salvador the first of the Cen- 
tral American countries to be studied in the survey on 
agricultural credit. Extensive bilateral help has been 
made available by the USA. Since July 1951, the 
United Nations and its specialized agencies have had 
a comprehensive mission in El Salvador. 
A United Nations experiment of world-wide import- 
ance as well as of local benefit is the Cuscatlan 
Valley Demonstration Project. After El Salvador 
offered to provide the site and facilities for a health 
demonstration project, an agreement was signed in 
March 1951 by WHO on behalf of itself, FAO, ILO, 
the United Nations, Unesco and ICAO. WHO 
contributed $150,000 to cover the cost of technical 
personnel, equipment and supplies, and assigned 
25 specialists to the project. 
The Demonstration Area is located in the central 
part of the country, immediately north of San Sal- 
vador. It was selected because it was fairly typical, 
not only of the country, but of many other areas in 
Latin America. 
It embraces mountains, valleys and fertile plains, 
waste ‘lands and rivers. It contains a number of 
fairly large towns and many villages and hamlets. 
large plantations and small individually owned farms. 
There are no substantial factories, but there are active 
cottage industries and small workshops, particularly 
hand-weaving. The schools in the area are in- 
adequate both in number and in accommodation. 
Only one of the five municipalities in the area had a 
resident doctor and there was only one nutrition 
centre. 
In September 1951 a combined operation by the 
Government, WHO and UNICEF tackled malarial 
conditions there. In three months the Insect Control 
Programme had been applied to the entire area and 
to neighbouring localities. Some 17,500 houses, affect 
ing 105,000 people, were DDT sprayed. Training 
courses were conducted for graduate nurses, sanitary 
inspectors and auxiliary nursing personnel. 
By the end of 1951, the government had spent 
$46,000 on the preparations for this experiment of 
international import, which is to provide a practical 
example of what can be done in providing environ- 
mental sanitation, maternal and child health nutrition, 
control of malaria, tuberculosis, venereal and other 
communicable diseases, dental hygiene, laboratory ser- 
vices, health education and public health training. 
But health problems cannot be separated from 
hunger, ignorance and debased conditions of life. 
Other participating agencies are also taking their part 
in this area-experiment. Many physical problems of 
agricultural production require attention, such as 
drainage, irrigation, conservation and proper utiliza- 
tion of the soil. FAO is making a detailed economic 
and scientific analysis of the demonstration area to 
determine the approach to certain land use problems 
and thus assist in its agricultural development. 
Unesco has assigned two experts to the team, one 
in general fundamental education and one in literacy 
techniques. They are making plans to conduct. 
fundamental education in the valley and to train rural 
health workers in fundamental education techniques 
for their work in the villages, first in the valley and 
later on throughout the country. 
It is not the function of technical assistance to 
create a Valley of Privilege in an under-privileged 
country. The objects of Cuscatlan are to enable the 
government to extend the experience gained to the 
whole country, and, beyond that, to set an example 
for other countries in like circumstances. Cuscatlan 
is, therefore, an international laboratory for the study 
of social, economic and technical problems. The initial 
benefits which will accrue to the 100,000 people co- 
operating in these experiments, may be multiplied a 
thousandfold if the experience gained here is made 
avallable and adopted in similar areas throughout the 
world. oo oo

## [Page 13](071148engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

JOURIER OCTOBER 1952. Page [3 


### 71145: The Lilliputian harbours of Poona

THE LILLIPUTIAN HARBOURS OF POONA 
by Daniel BEHRMAN 
Southern India. 
 wT 
This jumble ‘of pipes, planks and water (above) is actually a detailed model reproduction of the port of Cochin in 
Lilliputian models of dams, rivers and port lay-outs (photos below) enable experts to study irrigation 
projects and to work out answers to problems affecting India’s ports, her main life-lines to the outside world. 
T land-locked Poona, 120 miles from Bombay 
A and the sea, engineers are working out answers 
to problems confronting India’s ports, her main 
lifelines to the outside world. There, 2,000 feet high 
and dry in the Western Ghats mountains, sandbars 
choke up the Hooghly Estuary, nightmare of cap- 
tains taking ships into Calcutta, and cyclones blow 
into Madras Harbour, tossing ships at their moorings. 
But this is all happening in miniature. For 30 
years, Poona has been the site of a vast outdoor labo- 
ratory where engineers have been able to scale down 
waterpower and irrigation problems to model size. 
In 1947, the Central Water and Power Research 
Station there was given the added assignment of inves- 
tigating port problems in its 120-acre laboratory, one 
of the largest in the world (elsewhere, weather condi- 
tions force engineers to conduct their tests under roofs, 
but rain is a rarity at Poona). 
There are now 40 engineers and 300 construction 
workers at the Poona station, in addition to two men 
sent in by Unesco, Alfred Frants Mogensen, a 
Danish navigation research engineer, and Dr R. V. 
Baud, a Swiss engineer whose specialty is testing 
structures and materials for safety. 
The station’s activities are a symbol of India’s 
scientific revolution and also illustrate how technical 
assistance by a United Nations agency can be dove- 
tailed into a well-planned national economy. 
Model tests of harbour problems are easily the 
most spectacular aspect of the station’s work. By 
reducing these harbours to small scale, huge sums 
which otherwise would have been spent on full-sized 
experiments can be saved. Poona’s engineers are call- 
ed in regularly to seek solutions to the many pro- 
blems of India’s ports and harbours. 
A typical case is that of Mangalore, a city of 
125,000 on the west coast of India, 500 miles south 
of Bombay, and a heavy exporter of coffee, cashew 
nuts, pepper and roef tiles. We learned about Man- 
galore’s dilemma from V.S. Kudva, one its leading 
business men, who had been delegated to visit Poona 
and inspect a model of his city’s port under con- 
struction there. 
The main stumbling block is the port’s lack of a deep 
channel through the shallow water stretching three miles 
off-shore from the city and which forces ocean-going 
ships to be unloaded by shallow-draft dhows. During 
the four-month monsoon season, not even the dhows 
can get over the shallows and Mangalore must do its 
exporting and importing by rail, and this of course is 
an expensive substitute. 
Dredging a deep channel into Mangalore will cost 
an estimated 4,000,000 rupees, an investment which 
the city can amortize in four years if the channel can 
be economically maintained. It is this “if” which is 
now being studied in a 32,000 square-foot model at 
Poona and, working closely with D.V. Joglekar, 
  
  
    
director of the station, Mr. Mogensen visited Manga- 
lore to help gather data for the Lilliputian port. 
Dr. Baud and Dr. Gurdas Ram of the station’s 
physics section are working on photo-elastic testing, a 
process in which structural models made of plastic are 
placed under stress and polarized light is passed through 
them. The light projects patterns on a screen which 
reveal to the tramed engineer the weak points of a 
design. 
Dr. Gurdas Ram is a physicist who gave up excel- 
lent job in an industrial research laboratory because 
he is convinced that the station’s studies in irrigation and 
harbour problems deserve top prionty in India. He 
also believes technical assistance has a major role to 
play in his country. 
“What we lack is practical experience”, he explain- 
ed. “We have the theoretical knowledge, but we 
have not had enough opportunity to put it to use. 
“In testing structures, for example, we are merely 
beginning and we're at about the same point as were 
Europe or the United States a few decades ago. But 
we cannot wait for these decades to go by in India. 
Our people have freedom and they expect great things 
of it now. When you are dealing with water power 
and, especially irrigation to produce more food, time 
1s precious. 
“In India, we cannot afford to wait.” 

## [Page 14](071148engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

Page 14. OCTOBER 1952 
' a Sie - 


### 71146: A Case of give and take

A case 
of give 
and take 
NE of the most interest- 
O ing technical training 
projects of the Inter- 
national Labour Organiza- 
tion is at present being 
carried out in Brazil. The 
undertaking is an example 
of the ‘‘ give and take’ of 
technical assistance. 
Brazil avails itself of the 
technical aid provided by the 
United Nations as areceiver- 
nation, but at the same time 
it has also pledged $460,000 
as a contributor-nation al- 
though it has been agreed 
that this sum could be devot- 
ed to international projects 
within the country. 
Last year, the ILO entered 
into discussions with the 
Government of Brazil and 
with the Brazilian agency in 
Sao Paulo, known as the 
National Service of Indus- 
trial Apprenticeship (SE- 
NAI) and from this emerged 
an arrangement by which 
ILO has undertaken to ad- 
minister a training scheme 
for all Latin America, mak- 
ing use of the wide training 
facilities and scholarships 
for industrial instructors 
which the SENAI offers. 
The Brazilians have made 
available 100 fellowships by 
which, under the Technical 
Assistance programme, 
technicians from all the 
Latin American countries 
can become the guests of 
Brazil. These include five 
three-year scholarships in 
spinning and weaving at the 
Federal Technical School of 
Chemical and Technical In- 
dustry; 10 fellowships last- 
ing nine months each at the 
SENAI schools, including 
training periods in .indus- 
trial concerns, for the bene- 
fit of industrial teachers, 
foremen and technicians ; 95 
fellowships lasting nine 
months each in SENAI 
schools for the training of 
industrial instructors in me- 
chanics, electricity and tex- 
tiles. 
Since the scheme is es- 
sentially a partnership, the 
ILO, at the request of the 
Brazilian Government, has 
provided technical assist- 
ance to strengthen SENAI 
and to enable it to extend its 
services. ILO has provided 
15 school instructors and 
granted 13 fellowships for 
foreign study by technicians 
and teachers from SENAI. 
It has also provided com- 
plete correspondence cour- 
ses in such subjects as 
carpentry, boilermaking, 
welding, motor engineering 
and machine-designing. 
The response of the 
countries of Latin America 
to this type of technical aid 
has been encouraging. For 
instance, ILO has been able 
to place, under the SENAI 
scheme, 20 of the Ecua- 
dorian workers and foremen 
from various trades for 
whom it has accepted train- 
ing responsibility. 
This contribution-in-kind, 
however, has not been con- 
fined to SENAI and ILO. 
The Brazilian Government 
has offered a long list of 
services which concern 
practically all the agencies 
participating in the Expand- 
ed Technical Assistance 
programme. These include 
a laboratory for obtaining 
agricultural data, an inter- 
national seminar on pro- 
blems of public adminis- 
tration, scholarships for 
special courses in public 
administration, vocational 
training fellowships, and va- 
rious medical facilities. Most 
of these offers have proved 
most valuable and represent 
the cost equivalent of the 
$460,000 which Brazil has 
pledged as her contribution 
to the programme. 
UNESCO 
 
These children are happy but not because the schoolday has ended. They are racing as fast as their legs can carry 
them to reach the eight acres of land where their class raises its own livestock, and grows part of its food. At their 
rural school in Cha-Choeng-Sao, they are beginning to learn in terms of soil and seeds how “knowledge " is not just 
a matter of textbooks, but of hygiene, of agriculture and of other practical things that play a role in their daily lives. . 


### 71147: A Nation transforms its education

A NATION TRANSFORMS 
ITS EDUCATION 

## [Page 15](071148engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 71147: A Nation transforms its education

COURIER 
  
EA al coe ON _ 
the priests. Although it has been secularized, 
the lay teaching is usually done in classes 
around the temples. It is appropriate therefore that 
the educational pilot project in Thailand should have 
been set up in the grounds of a Buddhist monastery. 
At Cha-Choeng-Sao international experts, brought in 
under the Expanded Programme of Technical Assist- 
ance, mingle with the yellow-robed priests and work to 
the tinkling of the temple bells, leaf bells which swing 
in the breeze. But what they are doing is something 
new to this traditional setting; they have been invited 
by the Government of Thailand to help with the 
reform of the entire educational system of the country. 
Cha-Choeng-Sao is 60 miles from Bangkok, and 
in the district there is a population of 240,000 adults 
and 42,000 children. It 1s a provincial capital which 
was chosen as a result of a Unesco consultative mission 
sent out, as a part of the normal programme of acti- 
vities in 1949, to advise the Government on its educa- 
tional development programme.  Cha-Choeng-Sao 
commended itself to international experts because, 
while it was accessible by road, rail and river, it was a 
community typical of most of the life of Thailand— 
rice-growing, fruit farming and small industry. 
It is a jungle area and nearby there is coastal fishing 
It was considered that a pattern of education evolved 
under these conditions and taking account of the cir- 
cumstances of the area would apply almost anywhere 
in Siam. In addition, it is one of the poorest pro- 
vinces with one of the lowest ratings of literacy in the 
country, so that what is being done there can have 
direct benefit for the people as well as having experi- 
mental value for the other 70 provinces. 
The Thai teaching was a function of 
A fundamental education expert from New Zealand 
surveyed the possibilities of Cha-Choeng-Sao in No- 
vember 1950 and, in conjunction with Thai educators, 
produced the rlans on which the centre is now based. 
There was no living accommodation available, but 
some of the existing classrooms were converted into 
living quarters, and an old monastery building became 
a kitchen. The rest of the school was redesigned for 
the manifold purposes of the project. 
One of the first needs was to convince the people 
of the value of what was going on amongst them, and 
so, in March and April 1951, fairs were organized, 
where model farmhouses, kindergarten playgrounds 
  
  
OCTOBER 1952. Page 15 
r —— 
  
 
WRT EERIE Te TER UE Tan LL I Re Sa 
Thailand needs skilled workers, carpenters, mechanics, machinists and technicians for her economic development. At the country’s request, United Nations 
Technical Assistance is helping to meet these needs. Picture shows students at microscopes and micro-dissectors studying laboratory techniques. 
and classroom apparatus and arts and crafts materials 
were on display. Health and child welfare centres 
were set up, and the people were informed of the edu- 
cational plans, which cover every aspect of the coun- 
try’s education — adult, vocational, secondary, pri- 
mary health, physical, music, arts and crafts and social 
education, as well as teacher training. 
With the co-operation of the Thai educational 
authorities and with a staff provided by the Govern- 
ment, the international team consists of a New Zealand 
expert in fundamental education, a primary school 
specialist from Denmark, a specialist in language 
teaching and a vocational training expert from the 
United Kingdom, and an expert from the United States 
who 1s known as “the man with the five dollar labo- 
ratory”, because he can improvise scientific equipment 
from local scrap. Specialists from FAO, WHO and 
ILLO are joining the project, so that classroom teaching 
can be extended into the practical life of the people. 
As an academic exercise the international assignment 
is a challenging, if difficult one, because the whole 
nature as well as the structure of education has to be 
transformed. Learning in the past has been almost 
entirely by rote, formal and verbal, a case of memo- 
rizing and regurgitating. The idea that the child, or, 
for that matter, the grown-up should learn by doing 
was something so novel as to be revolutionary. An- 
other handicap of Siamese education has been the lack 
of proper teachers’ training colleges. They exist, but 
have been used rather as an extension of the secondary 
school education than as institutions for teaching 
methods or encouraging teachers to have any originality 
or enterprise. 
Instead of the children chanting their lessons from 
age-old fables and acquiring a literacy which lapsed, 
the new methods being tried out at Cha-Choeng-Sao 
employ illustrated textbooks designed in the Thai's 
own visual idiom by their own artists; sand tables on 
which the children construct their own villages and 
their own countryside; and paints and brushes, till now 
unknown to the children, but with which they are 
allowed to find their own expression. Thai instruc- 
tors, adapting the ideas brought in from the outside, 
are teaching science with a vividness far removed from 
the formalism in which science had no part. Children 
and adults are beginning to learn, in terms of soap and 
water, soil and seeds in their own fields, and the 
forgotten crafts of their own locality, how “knowledge” 
is not just a matter of textbooks, but of hygiene, of 
agriculture and of other practical things in their own 
daily lives. This emphasis on “wanting to know” 
leads to “wanting to communicate” and so to a literacy 
which will persist. 
Apart from the Thai educators who are the active 
and creative colleagues of the International team, 
teachers come from all over Thailand for courses from 
which they take back new ideas which will enliven 
their existing curricula and, in the process, produce 
local reforms while the wider reforms are evolving. 
They take back classroom techniques, but they also 
acquire the principle of “dirty hands”, which means 
that they are no longer people aloof from the practical 
needs of their community. To teach the people, they 
work with them and thus provide what is one of the 
objects of Cha-Choeng-Sao social leadership. 
This is only a pilot project. It is the beginning of 
a 10-year programme; in the first five years they will 
develop by experiment and by experience the techniques 
which will be extended to the other provinces of the 
country; but in that time Thailand itself will be 
evolving a system of education which will be able to 
absorb and apply the methods of Cha-Choeng-Sao. 
That will involve the reform of the teachers’ colleges, 
the production of more and better teachers, the crea- 
tion of new schools and adult education centres. 
There will be the reform of the primary schools and 
the extension of the secondary schools. Compulsory 
education is already the law of Thailand from seven 
to 14, but a student can leave at the fourth grade, 
and the law has been difficult to enforce because of 
the lack of school facilities and trained teachers. 
It is an ambitious programme and a heavy commit- 
ment for the government. 1 he United Nations agen- 
cies, through this project under the technical assistance 
programme, are providing the example and the stimu- 
lation. In conjunction with the funds available from 
United Nations sources a scheme was worked out by 
the Government whereby United States bilateral funds 
and personnel were made available. 
As a matter of principle, money and materials are 
less important at Cha-Choeng-Sao than training of the 
Thais for leadership, so that the project can be handed 
over and repeated elsewhere through trained Thai 
personnel. (U.N. photos by Eric Schwab.)

## [Page 16](071148engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

  
HELPING MAN TO HELP HIMSELF -— 
ON A WORLD-WIDE SCALE 
nder a blazing sun, these Ecuadorans are working hard to repair irri- 
gation canals which an earthquake has put out of action. They are 
being shown how best to do this by experts of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization, while other foreign specialists give advice on the protection 
and storage of grain in the devastated area. This is only one case among 
hundreds of that international cooperation which the United Nations Pro- 
gramme of Technical Assistance so strikingly exemplifies. The programme 
puts technical knowledge within the reach of all nations that have asked for 
it, so that they can improve the living conditions of their people—especially 
in the under-developed areas. Not that Technical Assistance is anything 
new: right from the beginnings of history, contacts between peoples have 
led to profitable results. But the value and originality of the United Nations 
Programme lies in the fact that, for the first time, this assistance is being 
organized on a rational, systematic, world-wide basis that takes into account 
all social and economic factors. For more than two years, the Specialized 
Agencies of U.N. have devoted themselves to this immense task which has 
so many aspects. Butin whatever country these U.N. specialists are working, 
the successful outcome ultimately depends on the amount of effort which 
the government and people put into it. For United Nations Technical Assist- 
ance is above all a plan which helps man to help himself. (See Page 5.)