# [073649](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073649engo.pdf) 16

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073649engo.pdf#page=1) 4

### IGNORE

  
  
OURIER 
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL. SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANISATION 
 
Volume I.—No. 1 19 Avenue KLEBER - PARIS 16e FEBRUARY 1948 
  
    
       
 
    
   
5
 
. 
A
l
 
Be 
a
 
R
i
e
)
 1)
 
n 
» x 
1)
. 
N 
= 
i 
F
i
 
8
0
 
E
E
E
 
E
E
 
E
e
 
V
e
e
 
m
e
 
e
e
s
 
| 
L
C
 
Re 
! | 
A
E
E
 
F
R
E
E
R
 
S
l
e
 
r
E
 
S
E
 
R
R
E
S
E
R
E
I
E
N
 
W
E
L
 
bE
 
S
E
 
S
E
S
E
 
N
E
E
 
E
E
R
E
 
ir
 
V
E
 
F
E
 
S
r
e
e
 
EM
ME
 
B
N
E
 
N
E
 
   
Cr
oa
t 
e
t
 
 
 


### 73652: Dr. Huxley pays tribute to Mexico

br H y Pa yS Tribute) 
To Mexico . 
‘At the close of the Second Ge- 
neral Conference of Unesco I feel 
I must express my very deep satis- 
faction and also my regret: sabis- 
faction at the results achieved, due 
in large measure to the congenial 
atmosphere surrounding the Confe- 
rence, and regret at leaving this 
unique country—with its wonderful 
"climate. and scenery, and remar- 
kable, above all, for the character 
of the young racé which inhahits 
it—a melting ‘pot in which two old 
and vigorous cultures have been 
fused. 
"We have found an inspiration 
and an example to follow in the 
spectacle of a country which, in 
the midst of a troubled world, has 
preserved its serenity and’ has done 
more than any other in launching 
a vast campaign against illiteracy, 
aimed at developing strong and 
healthy minds in men who fo- 
morrow will be the defenders of 
peace. 
The Conference held in Mexico 
City has demonstrated’ clearly the 
benefits to be derived from the idea 
that Unesco should come into direct 
contact with all different cultures. 
In the past month we have seen 
.that what might be considered 
visionary is reality. We have seen 
living together in your beautiful 
country, united by the same ideal, 
men and women of different races, 
cultures, languages, ideologies and 
religions, all working together 
towards a common geal. And this, 
it must be fully recognised, hag 
been made possible largely by the 
unbounded generosity of the Mexi- 
can Government and people. 
For the moment I am not 
speaking of all the material faci- 
lities provided for us, including the 
splendid building put at our dis- 
posal for the Conference head- 
quarters, but of the arduous preli- 
minary work carried out by His 
Excellency the President, Licenciada_ 
Miguel Aleman, thanks to which 
nearly all Latin America has been 
represented in this Assembly; and 
of the example I spoke of a mo- 
ment ago of those people who are 
doing so much to carry education 
and culture to the most inaccessible 
parts of their country. This has 
been a powerful stimulus to those 
of us who seek to spread them to 
the remotest corners of the earth. 
It has been an honour for me 
and for all of us to have as the 
President of the Conference Licen- 
ciado Don Manuel Gual Vidal, the] 
Minister of Public Education of 
the Mexican Government, who has 
spared no effort -to ensure the suc- 
cess of the meeting. 
We shall never forget the ge- 
nerous hospitality of the Govern- 
ment or our warm welcome from 
the whole peoble. 
Neither can I omit to mention 
the valuable co-operation given us 
by the Mexican press. I think I am 
not mistaken in saying- that the 
whole press of the country was 
interested in our work, as well as 
a large group of foreign correspon- 
dents, representing the principal 
newspapers of the world. The work 
done by the coxxespondents of the. 
Mexican papers has been a help 
for which Unesco can never be 
sufficiently grateful, 
We have laid here the founda- 
tions of a new spirit of universal 
co-operation, which constitutes a 
guarantee of peace; and in clasping 
the hand of the intellectuals of 
Mexico we have shared with them 
the grave responsibility for watch- 
ing over the world we hope to build 
for future generations. 
And so, as we take our leave we 
cannot say goodbye, for we carry 
away with us the conviction that 
Mexico lives side by side with the 
rest of the world and that the 
Englishman, the Chinese, the La- 
banese, the Pole, the Australian, 
simply because they are men Of 
goodwill, are giving reality to the 
ideals pursued by Mexico, which 
are the ideals of all rightminded 
‘peoples of the world. 
on Bote 
 La 
The Teachers’ Normal School, 
was the seat of Unesco’s 1947 
General Conference. The school 
is ‘one of the largest and most 
‘modern buildings in Mexico. 
To Our Readers : 
With this \issue we begin . 
the publication of Unesco 
. Courier, a periodical design- 
~ed to inform the public of 
the activities of the Special- 
ised "Agency of the United 
Nations for Education, 
Science and Culture. 
The Unesco Monitor will 
henceforth be reserved for 
- the . publication of official 
texts, resolutions and pro- 
ceedings of the Organisation. 
This first issue of Unesco 
Courier is devoted entirely 
to the work of the recent 
General Conference of Un- 
esco,. held in Mexico City 
between November 6 and 
December 3, 1947, and the 
’ 
OF VISITORS TO 
Conference. “ 
‘Delegates from forty member 
states and official observers -from 
scores of interhational groups ate 
tended the Conference at which 
Unesco’s activities during 1947 were" 
appraised and a world programme 
-lof action was formulated for 1948. 
The meetings were held at the 
“Escuela Nacional de Maestros” on 
the outskirts of Mexico City, an 
ultra-modern, highly functional 
structure which was completed on 
the eve of the opening session. 
Nearly three thousand Mexican 
workmen and "artisans laboured 
throughout the. night of November 
5-6 to prepare the school for use as 
the site of an international .con- 
ference. 


### 73651: M. Maritain calls for unity

M. MARITAIN | 
CALLS FOR UNITY 
+ The text of the Unesco Appeal 
* | (printed in the adjoining column) 
was placed before the General 
Conference by the President of 
the French Delegation, M. Jacques 
Maritain. It is based upon the 
principles expounded at. the begin- 
ning of the Conference. by the   famous French philosopher, who 
declared: 
“We meet at a particularly grave 
moment in the world’s history. In face 
of international tension and growing 
antagonism, the danger of which it would 
be vain to inderestimate, vast sections of 
public opinion risk abandoning themselves 
to. the idea of the inevitability of war”, 
“What makes Unesco’s task seem’ at 
first paradoxical is that it presupposes® 
unity of thought ameng men whose 
conceptions. are different and even op- 
posed Iowever deep we go there is ne 
longer any common basis for speculative 
thought, In thesé conditions is unity of 
thought conceivable?” : 
This vnity is possible, answered n 
Maritain, because Unesco’s ends are prac- 
tical ones: *Agreement may still result 
spontaneously, - not from a common spe- 
culative philosophy buf from a common 
practical philosophy, This is enough te   Programe "adopted for 
launch a greai enterprise”, 


### 73655: Highlights of projects and budget for 2nd year

Highlights 
and Budget 
Thé Second Session of Unesco’s 
General Conference was the first 
to permit a review of progress 
made by the Organisation. It was 
the first opportunity for Unesco 
to weigh its development with the 
measure of actual experience. . 
It was also the first Unesco 
Conference to be held away from 
the headquarters in Paris, which 
fact gave rise to many complex 
and delicate. ‘problems. At the 
same time, the Conference—dedi- 
cated to strengthening the forces 
of peace—convened during inter- 
national conditions which were, 
to say the least, very troubled. 
Any fears or unhappy anticipa- 
tions” were dispelled, however, by 
the great goodwill, the willing- 
ness for hard work and the 
earnest and continuous desire to 
co-operate which were manifest 
during the meeting. 
The 1948 budget was among the 
first items on the Conference   
<b 
agenda, ror this year, a ceiling 
of eight million dollars was plac- 
ed initially on the overall Unesco 
of Pro jects 
for 2"! Year 
budget This innovation enabled 
the working parties and the Pro- 
gramme and Budget Commission 
to draft their projects within the 
budgetary limits designated. The 
final budget, as ultimately adopt 
ed by the plenary session of the 
Conference, was fixed at $7,682, 
6317. 
The 1948 Unesco programme, 
subject of detailed study and dis- 
cussion at the Conference, was 
divided into six .main chapters. 
These, with the sums for each are 
as follows: 
Reconstruction ............ $614,141 
Communication ,........,.. $1,714,722 
Education ......... creeeenne $854,551 
Cultural Interchange ... $530,237 
Social and Human Re- i. 
lations ..........c.cevee... . $327,236 
Natural Sciences ......... $918,926 
These allocations total $4,959,- 
813 for 1948, leaving something 
over two million dollars for ad- 
ministrative purposes, for the next 
Session of the General Conference, 
(Continued on Page 6.) 
Conference Sets Programme 
for 1948 
[UNESCO MONTH” ATTRACTS THOUSANDS 
  
MEXICAN CAPITAL 
URING a month marked by phys:cal strife and bitter verbal ex- 
changes throughout .much of the world. Mexico City was host to 
one of the most. important efiorts for peace and international under- 
standing sinee the war: the Second Session of the Unesco General 
The school wis built to ‘house 
nearly 12,000 students, and included 
libraries, museums, gymnasium and 
industrial training workshops. It - 
was, to all observers, symbolic of - 
Mexico's great effort to modernise 
and strengthen its educational 
system, 
The. opening session of the Con- 
ference was held in the resplendent 
“Palacio de Bellas Artes” in the 
heart of Mexico City. More than 
2,500 delegates, observers, members 
of the Unesco Secretariat and vi- 
-sitors heard President Miguel Ale- 
man of Mexico welcome the Con- 
ference, and sound a solemn note 
of ‘warning which was the keynote 
the month-long meetings. 
“We are met,” he declared, “at 
a crucial moment for humanity.” 
President Aleman urged ths assem- 
bled delegates to strive for the 
creation of a “mind for peace” as 
an’ antidote to the tensions which 
are a stumbling block to interna- 
tional cooperation. -“ I consider 
the work of Unesco in the field 
of Education, Science and Culture 
to be on the way to developing and 
strengthening the moral “spirit of 
the. world, on which the love of 
peace must rest.” 
(Continued on Page 7.) 


### 73654: UNESCO appeal; war not inevitable

Unesco Appeal 
-War. not Inevitable 
A solemn appeal was address- 
ed by the Unesco Conference to 
“all those. concerned with the 
dignity of man and the future 
of civilisation” to combat, the 
forces which “threaten a just 
and lasting peace”. 
Voted by acclamation and en- 
dorsed by delegates from forty | 
nations, the resolution reads: 
The representatives of Educa- 
tion, Science and Culture, meet- 
ing together at Mexico City at 
the Unesco General Conference: 
AWARE of the responsibilities 
imposed upon them by the 
Constitution of the Organisa- 
tion to further universal respect 
for justice, for ‘the rule of law, 
for human rights, and the 
fudamental freedoms of the 
peoples of the world, without 
distinction of race, sex, language 
or religion; 
CONCERNED at the dangers 
to peace resulting from currents 
of thought conducive to the 
idea that another war is inevi- 
table: 
TROUBLED by the indiffer- 
ence, resignation and even calm 
acceptance which such currents 
of thought meet in certain sec- 
tions of public opinion; 
address a solemn appeal to all 
who are concerned for the dign- 
ity of Man and the future of 
civilisation, particularly 'educa- 
tionalists; . scientists, artists, 
“writers and journalists through- 
out the world; 
adjure them to denounce the} 
pernicious idea that war is 
inevitable; 
to act as the mouthpiece of 
the conscience of the nations, 
refusing collective suicide; 
to combat, by every means in 
their power, surrcnder to fear 
and every form of thought or 
action which may threaten a   just and lasting peace.   

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073649engo.pdf#page=2) 3

### IGNORE

- 
y UNESCO COURIER ~ 
 


### 73657: Natural sciences: practical steps for international cooperation among scientists

NATURAL SCIENCES 
PRACTICAL STEPS FOR INTERNATIONAL 
~ CO-OPERATION AMONG SCIENTISTS 
The importance of international co-operation in the natural 
scientes, pure and applied, both as an essential element in an inte- 
grated world civilisation, and as an immediate factor for peace, was 
given great emphasis by Unesco’ s General Conference, The suc- 
cesses already achieved in the natural sciences during 1947 serve as a 
firm foundation for continued andj 
expanded. activities in 1948. 
The Field Science 
Co-operation Offices System 
A system of Field Science Co- 
. operation Offices was put into 
‘neering colleges. 
operation in 1947. The aim of these 
offices is to link together in. every 
possible way the scientists and 
technologists of the countries less 
advanced in modern science and 
technology, with their colleagues in 
the more highly developed coun- 
tries to facilitate international co- 
operation in science. During 1948 
the highest priority has been plac- 
ed on the maintenance of offices 
now functioning in the Middle 
East, Far East and Latin America 
and on the establishement of a new 
office in South Asia. 
By —— 
Dr. Joseph Needham 
The office in Latin America will 
be closely co-ordinated with the 
project of the International Insti- 
tute of the Hylean Amazon. A panel 
of Latin America experts is to 
be convened to advise on the best 
ways in which the development of 
science in Latim America can be 
assisted in the future. 
The Middle East office has been 
most successful and has rendered 
useful services to Scientists in this 
area including Alexandria. Cairo. 
Teheran and Baghdad. 
The Far East Office, which at 
present serves China and the Phi- 
lippines, is taking over UNRRA’s 
engineering education programme 
in China which _involves super- 
vision of the distribution of 
2,000,000 U.S. dollars worth of 
engineering equipment to Engi- 
  
    
The South Asia office will serve 
Burma, Siam, Indonesia as well as 
India and, it is expected, will 
receive the same enthusiastic sup- 
port accorded to the other offices 
—_ 
. sions. the 
already established. 
Aid to International 
Scientific Organisations 
This~is the second of the two 
main pillars of the programme, If 
the first pillar, the Field Science 
Co-operation Offices. are the Mis- 
ternational scientific 
and technological organisations are 
the Church. Since scientific know- 
ledge is inherently international 
and the accumulation of new know- 
ledge is tremendously’ aided by 
international co-operation, scientists 
are particularly well fitted to de- 
* monstrate how people of all coun- 
tries can work together on con- 
crete problems. To extend and 
maintain the.effectiveness of inter- 
national non-governmental scien- 
tific organisations alreadv in exis- 
tence. grants-in-2id and other 
similar forms of assistance will be 
given during 1948 
Attention will be especially direct- 
ed toward encouraging the creation 
of suitable organisations of scien- 
tists in the applied fields of en- 
gineering, agriculture and medicine 
where they do not alreadv exist, 
since in pure science there is the 
International Council of Scientific 
Unions which, together with the 
Unions it federates. has proven of 
great effectiveness. As in the pure 
sciences, the ‘engineering sciences 
are the sole responsibility of Unesco 
among the Specialised Agencies of 
the "United Nations. 
In the fields of agricultural and 
medical sciences Unesco will con- 
tinue to work in close co-operation 
on problems of common interest 
with the Pood and Agriculture 
‘Organisation (FAO) and the World 
Health Organisation Interim Com- 
mission (WHOIC). In particular, 
the World Health Organisation 
Interim Commission has been ask- 
ed for full co-operation with Unes- 
co's efforts to establish a Perma- 
nent Co-ordinating Bureau of 
Medical Sciences Organisations. 
A sum of $240,000 has been allo- 
cated for assistance in the form of 
grants-in-aid to scientific organisa- 
tions to cover transportation of 
outstanding scientists to interna- 
tional conferences, the publication 
of invaluable reports and journals, 
and to assist in the operation of 
 
established international labora- 
tories and the maintehance of 
stockrooms of special materials and 
biological specimens, 
Popularisation of Science   During 1948, in. co-operation 
with appropriate international 
organisations, -a report on the 
popularising work of 
national organisations will be pre- 
pared and circulated to Member 
States in order to encourage the 
establishment of organisations for 
this purpose in countries not pos- 
sessing them. Steps will also be 
taken to stimulate th: preparation 
and exchange, by various agencies, 
of material that wil coniribute to 
the popularisation of science. 
In the popularisation of the 
social and international implica- 
tions of science, the primary prob- 
lem is the correct evaluation of 
implications, usually in the face of 
very complex situations. The 
achievemerit of the objectives of 
the United Nations and of its 
specialised agencies depends to a 
considerable extent on a knowledge 
of the international significance of 
a mass of scientific and tech- 
nological developments—not only of 
recent key discoveries and inven- 
tions, but also of those that have 
accumulated over the last several 
decades. 
In 1948 Unesco wiil promote basic 
research on the social relations of 
science through its fellowship pro- | 
gramme and other available means. 
It will request all Member States, 
National Commissions and Co 
operating Bodies to initiate 
throughout each. country group 
discussions and debates on the 
social and international implica- 
tions of a scientific subject to be 
proposed by Unesco. The results 
of these discussions will be analys- 
ed and given the widest distribu- 
tion possible. : 
During the year steps will be con- 
tinued toward the ultimate prepara- 
tion (by suitable scholars) of books 
which will provide, for the gen- 
er.l and specialist reader, a wider 
understanding of the scientific and 
cultural aspects of the history of 
mankind, of the mutual inter- 
dependence of peoples and cultures 
and of their contributions to the 
common heritage. 
Emergency Aid 
To-day, thousands of scientific 
workers in devastated countries are 
still out of action for lack of the 
simplest chemicals and apparatus. 
As far as Unesco’s own funds 
and funds from outside sources 
permit, every assistance will be 
given to bring about scientific re- 
construction and rehabilitation. 
The. World Liaison Centre 
For Science 
Preparations were initiated in 
1947 and will be continued in 1948 
for setting up anc operating a 
Scientific Apparatus Information 
Bureau for assisting experimen- 
talists in devastated countries, 
those in regions served by the Field 
Science Co-operation Offices and, 
in special cases, in countries with 
a high degree of active scientific 
research, This Bureau will also 
make contributions, in co-operation 
with other “international bodies, 
toward the standardisation and 
rationalisation of experimental and 
teaching apparatus. , 
Unesco has accepted the nvita- 
tion of the Economic and Social 
Council of the United Nations to 
participate in the preparations for, 
and deliberations of, the Scientific 
Conference on the Conservation 
and Utilisation of Resources 
scheduled to be held in 1949 
Related to this forthcoming con- 
ference will be Unesco’s preparation 
during 1948 for convening in 1949 
an International Conference on the 
Protection of Nature. 
. In 1948 Unesco plans to convene a 
conference in Paris to consider the 
establishment and maintenance of 
high altitude research stations for 
the study of the effects of high 
altitudes on life and of physical 
rs 
~ 
existing 


### 73659: National Commissions to play big role, UNESCO Conference agrees

National Commissions 
to Play Big Role 
UNESCO CONFERENCE AGREES   
  
What Is the Hylean 
Amazon? 
More than 7 million square 
kilometres comprise the Hylean 
Amazon, in a region of greai 
forests . (the world Hylean—' 
from the Greek, Hyle—signifies 
forest, wood) of virtually un- 
tapped natural resources, 
During 1948 it is expected that 
all necessary steps for bringing 
the Institute into being will be 
accomplished. Unesco will pre- 
pare a draft convention for 
submission to the Member Sta- 
tes which will partake in the 
permanent operation of the 
Institute, and to international 
organisations interested in its 
field of work. While final forma- 
tion of the Institute is being 
completed. Unesco is prepared to 
devote $55,000 toward the car- 
rying out @¢f broad surveys -of 
the Hylean Amazon in anthro- 
pology, soil science and biology; 
co-ordinate the activities of the 
Latin . America ¥ield Station 
with the project, and prepare 
the basis of co-operative effort 
with other institutions interested 
in this and similar areas of the 
globe. 
A Conference for the esta- 
blishment of the Institute will be 
held in Peru and Brazil in the 
spring, In 1947 the Brazilian 
Government, in collaboration 
with Unesco, called a conference 
on the Hylean Amazon project 
at Belem do Para which was at- 
tented by representatives from 
ten countries. These countries 
were Brazil, Bolivia, Columbia, 
Ecuador, British, French and 
Duteh Guiana, Peru, Venezuela 
and the United States, In addi- 
tion there were delegates from 
the Inter-American Institute of 
Tropical Agriculture, the Pan- 
American Sanitary Bureau, the 
Pan-American Union, the Inter- 
national Labour Office, the Food 
and Agricultural Organisation 
and the World Health Organi- 
sation Interim Commission.     —~ 
At its Second Session, the General Conference concentrated its 
attention in the field of External Relations on the following six 
questions of primary importance : 
 
I. — Development of National 
Commissions and National 
Co-operating Bodies 
Special efforts will be made in 
1948 to encourage the establishment   of National Commissions or Co- 
operating Bodies in countries where 
they do hot yet exist, and to stimu- 
late their development in countries 
contribute to the democratic re- 
orientation of their educational and 
cultural life, 
“III. ~— Regional Centres 
"The possibility of setting up 
Unesco Regional Centres was the 
subject of long discussions during 
the Mexico Conference. 
The Latin American, Indian, 
where they were established in 1947. Chinese and Middle East dele- 
The Conference was unanimous 
in emphasising that National Com- 
missions were of vital importance 
to the success of Unesco. 
In addition to the role of consul- 
tative and liaison bodies assigned 
to them by Unesco’s Constitution, 
the National Cemmissions should 
become working organs and play 
an active part in the execution of 
gations showed keen interest in this 
project. The Cuban delegation 
generously offered to place at 
Unesco’s disposal the offices re- 
quired for the establishment of a 
Regional Centre in Havana, and, 
in addition, a sum of $10,000. 
Because of the complex adminis- 
trative, and financial . problems. 
involved in the creation of Regional 
Centres, and because of the doubts 
Unesco’s programme. It is only in oo 45 the timeliness of this step 
tis. Tay tat Unesco's alms CaN oypressed by certain delegations, 
e achieved. - which considered it premature, the 
In order to ensure this develop- General Conference made no final 
ment, Unesco will give assistance, decision; it instructed the Executive 
at their request, to Member States Board to make a further study of 
who are setting up National Com- the question, after consulting the 
missions. Programmes of work United Nations and other Specia- 
suited to the possibilities and tra- lised Agencies on their intentions 
ditions of each Member State will in the matter. ) 
be drawn up for individual National — : : 
Commissions. Close contact will be Iv. Co-operation with 
maintained both between the head- Non-Member States 
quarters of the Organisation and In order to ensure the widest possi- 
. the National Commissions and bet- ple participation in Unesco’s surveys, 
ween the Commissions themselves. conferences and other activities, re- 
With a view to strengthening these presentatives of non-Member States 
contacts, news about the Commis- may be invited to co-operate when- 
sion’s activities will be published ever their participation appears de- 
regularly. © sirable and possible. : 
A conference for exchange of As in -thé past, states which 
information between the represen- belong to the ‘United Nations, but 
tatives of the different National not to Unesco, will be invited to 
Commissions and of Unesco will be send observers to the sessions of the 
held at the time of the next Ses- 
sion of the General Conference. 
II. — Relations with Germany 
and Japan 
The Genéral Conference instruc- 
ted the Director-General to study, 
in consultation with the Allied. 
Occupation Authorities, the possi- 
bility of extending the benefits of 
" Unesco’s programme, on an expe- 
rimental basis, to Germany and 
Japan, in so far as it is likely to 
  phenomena observable only at high 
altitudes, : 


### 73658: Dr. Walker elected Chairman of Executive Board

Dr. Walker Elected Chairman 
of Executive Board: 
The Executive Board of Unesco, 
which held its fourth and fifth 
sessions at Mexico City in Novem- 
ber and December, is a novel 
experiment in international under- 
standing, including as it does eigh- 
teen members, each drawn from a 
different country, representing dif- 
ferent cultural regions. 
These members are appointed, 
however, not as governmental repre- 
sentatives but as individuals, who 
are elected by the General Con- 
ference for their competence in 
the fields of education, science and. 
culture. The. terms of office are 
three years, and members are im- 
mediately re-eligible for election; 
six vacancies are created annually. 
The “fourth session which met 
just before the opening of the 
General Conference in Mexico 
reviewed the final arrangements 
for the organisation of the Confer- 
ence, and studied the possible sites 
for the next General Session, which 
is scheduled to be held it Beirut, 
Lebanon. In addition, certain other 
administrative questions were con- 
sidered. : 
The fifth session of rhe Board 
followed the election by the Gen- 
eral Conference of three new mem- 
bers : Dr. Stanislaw Arnold of 
Poland and Dr. Benjamm Carrion | 
of Ecuador, replacing respectively 
Dr. Marian Falski of Poland and 
Professor H.R." Kruyt of the Nether- 
lands, whose terms of office had 
expired, and Dr. George Stoddard, 
who was elected to complete the 
term of the Honorable Archibald 
MacLeish, who had resigned. Four 
members were re-elected: Dr. Chen 
Yuan (China), His Excellency Dr.} 
Martinez Baez (Mexico), Sir John 
Maud (United Kingdom), and Dr. 
E.R. Walker (Australia). 
The officers of the Executive 
Board for the coming year will be: 
Dr. ER. Walker (Australia) chair- 
man; Sir Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan 
(India) and Professor Alf Sommer- 
felt (Norway) vice-chairmen. In 
addition, the members of the five 
permanent committees were nam- 
ed. The programme of meetings for 
1948 was tentatively scheduled for 
the months of February, May and 
September, ; 
~ 
Dr. E. BR. Walker (left), succeeds. 
M. V. Doré (centre), as Chairman 
of Unesco’s Executive Board. Right: 
Dr, Walter H, C. Laves, Deputy 
Director-General of Unesco. 
" Executive Board 
Members 
Dr. Edward R. Walker 
lia)-—chairman. 
Sir Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan (In- 
dia)—vice-chairman, 
Professor Alf Sommerfelt (Norway) 
—vice-chairman, 
Dr. Stanilaw Arnold (Poland), 
M. Pierre Auger (France). 
Professor Paulo Carneiro (Brazil). 
Dr. Benjamin Carrion (Ecuador). 
Professor Chen Yuan (China). 
H. BE. Victor Doré (Canada). 
M. Resat Nuri Guntekin (Turkey). 
H. E. Dr. Manuel Martinez Baez 
(Mexico). 
Sir John Maud (United Kingdom). 
Dr. Jan Opocensky (Czechoslovakia) 
H E, Dr. C. Parra Pérez (Vene- 
zuela). 
Professor Alex Photiades (Greece). 
H. E. Shafik Ghorbal Bey (Egypt). 
Dr. George D. Stoddard (U.S.A). 
M. Louis Verniers (Belgium). 
(Austra~ 
  
General Conference. 
At present, there are 57 Member 
States in the United Nations. 
Forty countries are members of 
Unesco. 
V. — Relations with 
the United Nations and its 
Specialised Agencies 
The Conference nanimously 
stressed the importance of close 
friendly co-operation between Unes- 
co and the United Nations in ac- 
cordance with the agreement bet- 
ween the two organisations. 
All steps will be taken to secure 
elose co-ordination with the United 
Nations in matters of financial and 
budgetary administration as well 
as in the varied field of program- 
ming. 
The Conference expressed its sa- 
tisfaction with the agreements 
regently concluded between Unesco 
and the International Labour Orga~ 
nisation and between Unesco and 
the Food and Agriculture Organi- 
sation. It instructed the Director- 
"|General to develop effeciive co- 
ordination with the other Specia- 
lised Agencies, whose interests and 
activities are related to Unesco’s 
purposes. In particular, the Prepa- 
ratory Commission of the Interna- 
| ‘| tional Refugee Organisation will be - 
contacted with a view to including 
Displaced Persons in Uneseo’s ap- 
Peals for assistance to war-devas- 
tated countries. 
VI. — Relations with other 
Organisations 
‘The Conference decided to pro- 
pose to the International Bureau 
of Education that the agreement 
providing for technical co-operation 
with this organisation in the field 
of education should be renewed. 
The agreements concluded with 
the International Council of Scien- 
tific Unions and the International 
Studies Conference will also remain 
in force. \ 
A new policy was adopted gov- 
erning relations between Unesco 
and International Non-Governmen- 
tal Organisations dealing with ques- 
tions falling within Uneseo’s field 
of interest. Consultative arrange- 
ments will be made with certain 
of these organisations to ensure 
their participation in Unesco’s acti- 
vities, where appropriate, and their 
representation by observers at the 
sessions of the General Conference. 
It is planned to set up, under 
Unesco’s auspices, Consultative 
Committees, grouping together In- 
ternational Non-Governmental Or 
ganisations working in the same 
field (such as students and women’s   
organisations),

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073649engo.pdf#page=3) 4

### IGNORE

/ UNESCO COURIER 
’ 3 


### 73662: Free flow of ideas debated

« Free Flow 
of Ideas” | 
Debated 
Delegates Express Views at 
Working Party Meetings 
on Mass Communications 
“Lively debate marked the discus- 
sions on the “Free Flow of Informa- 
tion” during the meetings of the 
Working Party on Mass Communi- 
cations at the Unesco General Con- 
ference recently held in Mexico 
City. The discussions were centered 
around varying points of view 
characteristic of the state of the 
world today. 
Dr. Adolf Hoffmeister of Cze- 
choslovakia criticised the principles 
of classical liberalism. He asserted 
that unrestricted competition in the 
field of mass communications was 
a danger to existing cultures 
especially for those cultures with 
relatively meagre financial and 
technical resources. 
Dr. Hoffmeister further de- 
nounced the evils of irresponsible]. 
information, subservient to com- 
mercial interests, particularly in the 
United States, which he described 
as eager for sensational and vulgar 
reports to the detriment of truth, 
culture and peace. 
Mr. Antoni Slonimski of Poland 
expressed a similar point of view 
and sharply attacked certain sec- 
tions of the press, radio and cinema 
in the United States. 
Speaking for the British delega- 
‘tion, Mr. J. B, Priestley stated that 
this question was not of primary 
importance to Unesco’'s 1948 pro- 
gramme, since it was one of infinite 
controversy, beyond the powers of 
Unesco to solve effectively. The 
obstacles to the free flow of infor- 
mation, he declared, stem directly 
from political and economic factors 
in the contemporary world situation 
over which an organisation such as 
Unesco has no control. Unesco 
should aim rather at stimulating 
the production and dissemination 
“of information on questions of edu- 
cation, science and culture, 
In the face of this criticism, Mr. 
Lloyd Free explained the position 
of the American delegation. Leav- 
ing to others the task of adjudging 
the merits and the deficiencies or 
the errors of American information 
organs, Mr. Free categorically 
denied allegations that the United 
States were, consciously or un- 
consciously, embarked on a plan of 
“cultural imperialism” for either 
political or economic purposes. The 
free flow of information, the Amer- 
ican delegate declared, is not a 
one-way affair, but rather a system 
of reciprocal interchange on a basis 
of equality wherever possible, The 
‘United States, he added, was not 
unaware of the technical drawbacks 
-of the different countries of the 
world, and for this reason had 
volunteered to play an important 
pari in Unesco’s plan for aiding 
poorly equipped nations to rebuild 
or develop their technical facilities, 
While admitting the need for a 
deeper sense of responsibility tow- 
ards the public by journalists and 
newsmen, and suggesting that this 
might be achieved through improv- 
ed professional training, Mr. Free 
pointed out that freedom itself, 
nevertheless, was the crux of the 
whole problem. Without freedom, 
he said, neither information nor 
culture could exist. Freedom, he 
added, was one of the principle 
aims of Unesco, as defined in iis 
Constitution, and this major obliga- 
tion could not be evaded. 
Mr. Free, undoubtedly, is not 
unaware of the present difficulties 
of the task. The ideal, at least, must 
be constantly kept in the minds of 
men, even if this means employing 
limited measures and achieving 
limited progress. 
Several delegations attempted to 
show that a middle path was pos- 
sible and that the two opposing 
points of view could and should 
be considered expressions of com- 
plementary rather than wholly 
incompatible lines of action. This 
middle-of-the-road view was taken 
by France (M., Joxe), Australia 
(Mr. Dunbabin), Mexico (Sr. San- 
bago de la Vega) and Canada (Mr. 
Dilwaring). 
In the final analysis this com- 
promise opinion prevailed and is 
reflected in the balanced pro- 
gramme for Mass Communications 
as finally adopted by the General 
Conference, N 
Left to right: Mr. A, Slonimski of 
three members of the Working Party on Mass C 
helped formulate Unesco’s challenging programme for 1948 in the field of radio, films and the press. 
/ 


### 73663: Production unit planned: mass media to be used for peace

  
Production Unit Planned 
MASS MEDIA TO BE USED    
JAR REACHING measures to mo 
bilise the resources of press, 
radio and film for peace will be 
FOR PEACE 
     
get across to the world the ideas 
undertaken by Unesco in 1948. An Unesco stands for and thus encou- 
impressive list of activities was rage a greater sense of culfural 
planned during the) month-long solidarity among peoples. The head- 
Conference at Mexico City by dele- quarters of the International Ideas 
gates from forty Member States, 
During -1947, Unesco carried out 
a Survey of Technical Needs in 
12 countries of Europe and the Far 
East. The survey, which was pub- 
lished in September, 1947, in both 
French and English, gave the first 
detailed picture of its kind of losses 
and deficiencies in equipment, man- 
power and raw materials in the 
press, film and radio industries. In 
view of the success of this first 
study, Unesco will extend its in- 
duiries in 1948 to Central and South 
Ameriea, to India, Burma, Malaya, 
Thailand, Indonesia and the new 
Member States in Europe (Italy, 
Austria, Hungary and Switzerland), 
Furthermore, Unesco will launch 
a world-wide appeal during the 
coming year; for contributions to a 
special fund designed to help war- 
devastated countries rebuild their 
media of mass communication so 
sorely hit during the last war. 
In order to promote the use of 
mass media towards understanding 
and co-operation among nations 
and - disseminate more extensively 
the cultural wealth of the world, 
the .United . Nations Educational, 
tion will give high priority to the 
study of positive measures for the 
reduction of obstacles to the free 
flow of information. The obstacles 
that Unesco will attempt to break 
down include excessive postal and 
telegraph charges, high tariff walls, 
consorship, quotas, currency and In addition to the joint projects exchanges 
postal restrictions, to educational, envisaged for the development of materials in processing of editorial 
scientific and cultural material 
In this, Unesco will work closely 
with the UN Commission on Human 
Rights, the Sub-Commission of In- 
formation and of the Press, the 
Universal Postal Union, the Inter- 
national Telecommunications Union 
and other agencies engaged in 
similar work. 
International Ideas Bureau 
~ 
Although it is important, and 
indeed necessary, that meetings of 
science, education and cultural spe- 
cialists be organised, Unesco can 
become a truly world movement 
only when the ordinary people 
take an active interest and share 
in its work. In this light, the crea- 
tion of a special Production Unit 
working with top-flight radio pro- 
ducers, film producers and news- 
papermen, assumes special signi: 
ficance. Known as the International 
Ideas Bureau, the production unit 
will promote special programmes, 
documentary and feature films.   
Bureau will be located in Paris, but 
sections of the unit will probably 
be based in other countries in order 
to facilitate productivity. 
. 
  BY 
  
John Grierson 
    
Four key themes of world signi- 
ficance within the field of Unesco’s 
interest will be mapped out during 
1948. Each theme will then be 
tackled by top-notch writers and 
newsmen, aided by world-famous 
authors, specially engaged for the 
occasion, who will produce a series 
of highly readable articles, stories 
and “reportages” for publication in 
newspapers, magazines and periodi- 
cals throughout the world. 
Simultaneously, a squad of script 
writers and radio producers, sup- 
ported by nationally famous artists, 
playwrights and producers, will 
make available to the radio public, 
feature programmes and dramatisa- 
tions built around the same themes, 
These programmes will be broadcast 
long and short wave bands. 
At the same time the film experts 
at Unesco will endeavour to get the 
same themes covered by newsreels 
and: treated either in documentary 
or feature films. 
Mas§ Media Major Themes, Unesco 
will also undertake, during the com- 
ing year, separate production pro- 
grammes in the field of radio and 
films. 
In the field of radio, for example, 
a World University of the Air is 
scheduled for 1948. It will work in 
close co-operation with existing 
radio networks ‘in Member States, 
not in competition with them. The 
plan is to get the products of the 
worlds best brains and best talents 
across to all peoples so that cultural 
knowledge and progress will not be 
contained within political frontiers. 
In this way Frenchmen can get to 
know what the Brazilians are doing 
in literature, music and drama, the 
Poles can get to know about the 
literature of India, the Italians 
about Canadian and U.S. science 
and education, rather than only 
about their political differences. 
Unesco will collaborate in the 
operation of a United Nations 
\ 
establishment of its own. Until that 
decision is made, however, emphasis 
will be placed on co-operation with 
existing radio stations and efforts 
to increase their programmes in the 
cause of peace and understanding 
between nations. In this connection 
Mass Media radio specialists will 
prepare a restricted number of 
high-quality transcribed program- 
mes to be circulated for use on 
national hook-ups. Surveys of con- 
cepts, techniques and results obtain- 
ed in the use of radio irr school 
broadcasting by Member States will 
also be carried out. This data will 
ultimately be published so as to 
encourage a more extensive use of 
radio as an educational instrument. 
In the development of its film 
programme Unesco will promote the 
production of a series of documen- 
tary film dealing with the achieve- 
ments of a selected number of in- 
dividual nations as well as subjects 
concerning whole groups of nations, 
These documentaries, of an educa- 
tional. scienfific and cultural na- 
ture, will be produced by the co- 
operative action of Unesco Member 
States for national and interna- 
tional distribution. . 
Staff specialists of the cinem 
will also study the problem of the 
inexpensive production of film pro- 
jectors in the hope that this will 
ultimately encourage the cheap 
manufacture of all types of equip- 
ment used for mass communica- 
tions. 
[CN 
Scientific and Cultural Organisa- in various languages over medium, yp... .ion01 Press Institute 
‘To strengthen fies and contact 
among journalists throughout the 
world, Unesco will help the crea- 
tion of an International Ins- 
titute of Press and Information. 
The Institute will’ facilitate 
of techniques and 
ideas and standards, It is hoped 
that the feeling of unity among 
the world’s pressmen will be 
strengthened and that mass com- 
munication techniques will be im- 
proved throughout the world 
through clearing-house activities, 
study grants and scholarships. 
The Second General Conference 
in Mexico stressed the importance 
of such scholarships as a means 
for training film, radio and press 
personnel in devastated and de- 
ficiency countries. (Details of 
Unesco’s programme for scholar- 
ships will be found elsewhere on 
this page.) . 
Of Unesco’s overall budget for 
1948 totalling just under 7,700,000 
dollars, some 900,000 dollars will be 
devoted to the field of mass com- 
munications. Unesco believes that 
this is a small price to pay — a bill 
shared proportionately by its forty 
member states — to help outweigh 
the tensions, the prejudices and 
antipathies, and to help build in 
World Radio Network if the UN their place a stronger sense of 
decides on its establishment, If world community among all peo- 
news stories, articles and books to not, Unesco js 0 examine the ples, 


### 73665: Surveys in mass media broadened: press, radio, film needs of new Member States to be studied

Surveys in 
Mass Media 
Broadened 
Press, Radio. Film Needs 
Of New Member States 
To Be Studied 
During 1947, Unesco carried out - 
a survey in’ twelve war-devastated 
countries on technical needs in 
press, radio and films. Ten surveys 
were made in Europe and included 
Belgium, Denmark, France, Greece, 
Luxembourg, Norway, the Nether- 
lands, Poland, Czechoslovakia and 
Yugoslavia. Two surveys were also 
carried oui in the Far Eastern 
countries of China and the Philip- 
pines. The information thus ob- 
tained will permit an estimate of 
the amount of assistance that 
should be given to these countries. 
The Conference charged Unesco 
with promoting the re-building 
of the means of mass media in 
the twelve countries indicated above, 
In addition, the Second General 
Conference voted tha: this survey 
should be continued and extended 
during 1948, not only to the war- . 
devastated nations buf to those 
countries which lack the necessary 
technical facilities essential for 
press, radio and film work. 
Although 3 complete list of the 
countries to be surveyed in 1948 has 
not, as yet been definitely establish- 
ed, it is possible to state that 
Unesco will carry out surveys, sub- 
ject to the approval of the govern- 
ments concerned, in the following 
regions: 
(I).—-Those war-devastated coun- 
tries not yet studied; Albania, Aus- 
tria, Bulgaria, Finland, Hungary, 
Italy and Roumania, 
(II).—Member States of Unesco 
in Central and Southern America: 
Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Cuba, 
Ecuador, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, 
Peru, Dominican Republic, Uruguay 
and Venezuela. 
(IIT) .—Several eountries in the 
Far East: India, Thailand, Burma, 
Malaya and Indonesia. : 


### 73666: 48 scholarships to be awarded war-hit nations

48 Scholarships 
to be Awarded 
War-Hit Nations 
ESOLUTIONS of the General 
Conference on the Internatio- 
nal Exchange of Persons Stressed 
the role of Unesco as a clearing 
house of information and analysis 
on all international educational in- 
terchange—governmental or private 
—and instructed the Secretariat to 
initiate enquiries with Member . 
States on the international move- 
ment of persons .for educational 
purposes. 
- The Conference urged that studies 
be made, in collaboration with 
appropriate organisations, of the 
barriers which impede the inter- 
change of persons among na- 
tions, such as lack of transport 
facilities, difficulties of currency 
exchange or restrictive laws, or re- 
gulations of Member States. A 
study of the role of international - 
cultural conventions in promoting 
the exchange of persons was also 
urged. } 
The Conference authorised the 
grant of sufficient funds for ten 
fellowships or equivalent expendi- 
ture in travel grants “to be award- 
ed in exceptional cases where 
Unesco’s purposes are clearly in- 
volved and where no other funds 
are available.” These direct grants 
are in addition to 48 fellowships 
authorised by the Exeeutive Board 
on the eve of the Mexico City 
Conference, to cover six grants to 
each of the following war-devastated 
States: China, Czechoslovakia, Den. 
mark, Greece, the Netherlands, Nor- 
way, the Philippines and Poland. 
Subjects to be covered by these 
fellowships are Science and Social 
Development, Cinema and Radio 
Education, Educational Problems of 
War-affected Children, Librarian- 
ship, Educational Administration 
and Art and Music Education. They 
will be for a period of six months 
In addition, Unesco will continue 
to administer fellowships in colla- 
boration with accredited donor 
agencies and will offer its services 
as requested in the planning and 
promotion of internationzl fellow- 
ship and study programmes. 
Priority is to be given to the 
needs of war-devastated Member 
States and to the promotion of 
opportunities for mature persons: 
professors, artists, government of- 
ficers, experts, leaders in adult 
education and industrial and agri- 
cultural workers, ’  

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073649engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

y
o
o
 


### 73667: Fundamental education

Fundamental 
Education 
By 
~ 
John Bowers 
NE small boy, quarrelling with 
another in the streets of Mexico 
City, was overheard by a Brazilian 
delegate to the Second General 
Conference of Unesco flinging a 
parting gibe at his opponent: “What 
you need is Fundamental Educa- 
tion!” “Educacion Basica” had be- 
come a catch phrase in the Latin- 
American countries. 
In the Conference Hall too, 1t 
soon became clear that Fundamen- 
tal Education had caught the ima- 
gination of the delegates as a pro- 
ject whereby Member States would 
receive practical help from Unesco 
in g- practical and urgent task— 
the task of establishing “a mini- 
mum fundamental education for 
all their citizens.” 
It is with this task in view that 
Unesco will seek in 1948 to link up 
the scattered and often isolated 
fundamental education enterprises 
in the territories of its member sta- 
tes into a concerted world .move- 
ment, 
The. General Conference ‘gave the 
project a. clear field of operation, 
endorsing a definition of the aims 
and purposes of Fundamental Edu- 
_cation wherein it was laid down 
that the project should be “spe- 
cially and immediately concerned 
with the less advanced regions of 
the world and with th2 under-pri- 
vileged groups in industrialised 
countries, where the education pro- 
vided falls below the essential mi- 
nimum” . . 
There had been a tendency, when 
the term “Fundamental Education” 
was first coined, fo regard it as no 
more and no less than a campaign 
against illiteracy, but it soon be- 
came clear that the skills of read- 
ing and writing were only of value 
as a means to a wider end. This, 
wider aim of. Fundamental Educa- 
tion has now been defined—"to help 
men and women to live fuller and 
happier lives in adjustment with 
their changing environment, to 
develop the best elements of their 
own. culture, and to achieve the 
economic and social progress which 
will enable them to take their place 
in the modern world.” “Fundamen- 
tal Education .should thus. be de- 
signed to provide a first step to 
further education.” 
Literacy not only Aim-~ 
While, therefore, universal lite- 
racy will be a desirable ideal, the, 
“teaching of reading and writing is 
not the only purpose of Funda- 
mental Education. ‘ 
The work of the Mexican Cul- 
, tural Missions provided a striking 
case in point. The whole life of 
one remote little Indian village, 
which was visited by delegates from 
the General Conference, was béing 
transformed by a team of six “Fun- - 
- damental « Educators.” They were 
teaching the peasants to pipe their 
water supply, to combat disease, to 
‘grow better fruit and crops, to build 
weather-proof houses and make de- 
cent furniture, to bake better bread 
and to weave and sew. but had 
not so far taught them to read and 
write. However, the foundations of 
a village ‘school had been laid. So 
it is with fundamental education. 
Literacy teaching and the extension 
and improvement of primary 
schooling will take their place in a 
wider programme of community 
education: for better living. 
Fundamental Education will “be 
concentrated first on the most 
pressing . problems of each parti- 
cular community.” More often than 
not, these will be—disease and 
poverty. Over vast regions of the 
globe human communities, which 
have scarcely risen above the civi- 
lisation of the Iron-Age, are living 
at ~a bare subsistence level—un- 
derhoused, underfed, and underclo- 
thed, their vitality sapped by 
disease, Their agriculture—if such 
it can be called—consists of shifting 
might well alleviate, by a ‘surplus. 
production the world food shortage. 
Instead, their fertility is being 
dissipated by improvident agricul 
ture, leading to -erosion and soil 
sterility, while their populations 
demand heavy importations of 
foodstuffs and not infrequently 
emergency famine relief. If it can 
help the people of these regions to 
rid themselves of endemic disease, 
to improve their agriculture and to 
develop a ‘balanced economy—in 
short, to live fuller and more pro- 
ductive lives—then Fundamental 
Education will make a real and 
urgently needed contribution to 
world recovery. ! 
With this end in view, Unesco’s 
Fundamental Education policy will 
be closely coordinated with the 
work of the World Health Organi- 
sation and the Food and Agricul- 
ture Organisation of the United 
Nations. It is hoped that at least 
one practical joint undertaking 
between W.H.O,, F.A.O. and Unesco 
Service, and will be ready to res- 
pond to requests for expert advice, 
by correspondence, by analysing and 
commenting upon documents and 
educational materials, by encou- 
raging an informed and active in- 
terest in Fundamental Education 
and by visiting Funfiamenta! Edu- 
cation projects in their own and 
other countries, as well as attending 
national and international confe- 
rence. as Unesco’s consultants and 
advisers. Two meetings of the Panel 
of ‘Experts will be held in 1948, one 
in Paris early in summer and ano- 
ther later in the year, probably i 
a South American country. : 
It will be one of Unesco’s most 
important jobs to keep workers in 
one part of the world in touch 
with the latest developments in 
other areas, and to supply them 
with the most advanced technical 
advise and information. The Secre- 
tariat will therefore act as a 
“clearing house” through. which an 
increasing flow of information—a 
two-way flow—will cross-fertilise 
the many enterprises in Fundamen- 
tal Education in all Unesco’s Mem- 
ber States. 
A periodical Fundamental Educa- 
tion Bulletin will be published by 
Unesco and given wide circulation 
in Unesco’s working languages, with 
free rights of translation and dis- 
tribution. Longer and more techni- 
cal documents on every aspect of 
Fundamental Education will be cir- 
culated in mimeographed form. The 
part which the Panel of Experts 
will play has already been men- 
tioned; there will also be a close 
tie-up between the Technical Infor- 
mation service and Unesco’s so- 
called “Associated” and “Pilot” Pro- 
jects. 
All over the world interesting and 
important enterprises ‘are contri- 
A Unesco Travelling Consultant 
will maintain personal contact with 
as many as possible of the Asso- 
ciated Projects, and visits of Liai- 
son Officers or other persons from 
the Projects to Unesco’s Headquar- 
ters or to Regional Study Conferen- 
ces will be encouraged. The assis- 
tance of Unesco’s Bureau for the 
Exchange of Persons will also be 
enlisted, to promote international 
exchanges of personnel between 
Associated Projects’ in different 
parts of the world. This new con- 
ception of Associated Projects was 
warmly welcomed by the Second 
General Conference, 
Pilot Projects 
Four “Pilot Projects” in Funda- 
mental Education will be developed 
in 1948, as concentrated and con- 
trolleq field experiments to be car- 
ried out at the invitation of Natio- 
nal Governments with the guidance 
of a resident expert consultant from 
Unesco. Basic sociological and eco- 
logical surveys will be made as a 
foundation for a community educa- 
tion plan and a measure of its sub- 
sequent success, and the latest tech- 
niques of Fundamental Education, 
including the uses of mass media 
and visual and oral aids, will be 
tried out in the field. 
Unesco will place at the disposal 
of the Projects the personal advice. 
of experts as well as educational 
textbooks, films and film-strips. 
The results of these -experimental 
projects will be made available in 
detail through Unesco’s Technical 
Information Service, ’ 
Preparations have already been 
made for three of these Pilot Pro- 
jects in 1948, in China, British East 
Africa and Haiti, ‘ 
An American, with long expe- 
  
PROGRAMM   © FOR 1948 
=< 
  
will be realised in a Fundamental 
Education “Pilot Project”, 
In dealing with underprivileged 
groups in industrialised aréas and 
with the problems of trust terri- 
tories Unesco will also co-operaie 
respectively with the ILO and the 
trusteeship Department of UN. 
The Fundamental Education pro- 
ject will operate in 1948 as cne of 
seven priority undertakings 'in 
Unesco’s Education Programme. 
Among the staff of men and women 
are included Americans, Austra- 
lians, British, Chinese, Danish, 
French and Haitians and it is 
hoped that a Mexican and an Arab 
will soon be added. . 
In 1948 Unesco will take the ful- 
lest possible advantage of the. ser- 
vices of a Panel.of Experts, A list 
of more than 400 persons with spe- 
cial experience in Fundamental 
Education has already been com- 
piled and invitations will shortly be 
sent to a selected number to be- 
come members of the Fundamental 
Education Panel. 
This Panel will provide a world- 
wide body of experts, who will be 
kept in touch with the latest de- 
velopments in Fundamental Educa- 
tion through Unesco’s Information 
  
  
-buting to the Fundamental Educa- 
tion ‘movement. : 
‘They -include territory-wide un- 
- dertakings like the “Chinese Mass 
Education Movement or -the Mexi- 
can Cultural Missions, tribal de- . 
velopment schemes, such as are 
growing up in Africa, village im- 
provement projects in India, lite- 
_racy campaigns now being carried 
out .in Brazil and the South. Ame- 
rican ‘ccuntries, Teachers’ Training 
Schools, Medical or Agricultural 
L.C. Extension schemes, or major 
economic - development under- 
takings, such as the British Over- 
seas Food Corporation’s Ground- 
nuts Scheme in Tanganyika. 
Associated Projects 
It is Unesco’s aim to bring the 
‘most significant of these scattered 
enterprises into a World Funda- 
mental Education Movement, by 
linking them up as Associated Pro- 
jects to Unesco’s network, wherever 
such a link is desired. 
Each Associated Project will ap- 
point its own liaison officer to. send 
to Unesco general and technical re- 
ports and tc receive in return indi- 
vidual advice, -and general docu- 
ments and material through the 
Technical Information Service, 
 
rience in China, has been appeinted 
as Consultant to develop the Pilot 
Project in the vicinity of Nanking, 
‘in conjunction with the Chinese. 
Mass Education Movement. 
In Nyasaland, after great rivalry 
between several tribal districts, the 
area for Unesco’s Pilot Project has 
been selected, a special grant voted . 
and the local staff appointed. A 
basic survey is now being carried 
out and a Danish Agricultural eco- 
nomist, with experience in the Folk 
High Schools, will go to Nyasaland 
as TUnesco’s expert consultant in 
February. The education and wel- 
fare side of thé Tanganyika 
Groundnuts Scheme already men- 
tioned will be treated as a compa- 
rative experiment with the tribal 
development scheme in Nyasaland. 
The Pilot Project for Haiti, 
although the first planned, has been 
delayed owing to the inability of 
the Haiti Government to bear the 
full financial burden and efforts 
are being made to launch the Pro- 
ject as a joint enterprise between 
the Haiti Government, the Specia- 
lised Agencies of U.N. (Unesco, 
"W.H.O,, and F.A.0.) and other out- 
side organisations, under a Unesco 
director. 
The plan includes a rural training 
fi
 
’ 
5 
+ 
If 
¢ 
  
E
o
 
c
o
 
A
 
  
an be ( Two international exhibitions organised by Unesco -—one dealing with Libraries and Museums and 
cultivation with the hand-hoe or the other with Fundamental Education and Reconstruction in Education—were shown for the first time 
the wooden plough. These untold during the General Conference in Mexico City. The Fundamental Education exhibition, which is pictured 
acres of potentially productive land here, stresses the great problems which must be faced in providing at least Fundamental Education for all, 
centre for young Haitians, com- 
prising a small clinic, a demons- 
tration farm, a community centre, 
library and museum and a teachers’ 
training school. This will form an 
active nucléus from which Funda- 
mental Education will spread out- 
wards to bring literacy and a 
higher standard of living to the 
remote Valley of Marbial and, by 
degrees, to the rest of the Republic 
of Haiti. . 
The site for a New Pilot Project 
approved by the General Confe- 
rence for 1948 has yet to be decided, 
but an invitation has been received 
from the Government of Peru to 
centre it upon the Cuzco area. 
One Unesco Regional Study Con- 
ference is planned for the autumn 
of 1948 and will probably be held 
in one of the Middle East capitals. 
Here, representatives with special 
experience in Fundamental Educa- 
tion in the various countries of this 
region will come together for a 
month to analyse and discuss with 
members of Unesco's staff and 
Panel the particular problems of 
this area, plans and projects for 
their solution and new .methods, 
techniques and materials developed 
for local use. 
Conclusion 
A well integrated programme for 
Fundamental Education “has thus 
been drawn up by the Second Ge- 
neral Conference, A portmanteau 
resolution adopted by the delegates. 
requires the Panel of Experts to 
examine; and make recommenda- 
tions on, a number of subsidiary 
questions relevant to Fundamental - 
Education. ) 
Among these are: the definitions: 
of literacy as a basis for valid in- 
ternational statistics, the special 
application of Fundamental Educa- 
tion to under-privileged groups in 
industrial communities, tensions 
and barriers hetween colours; races 
and creeds, the status of women ; 
"and inequality of the sexes in'Fun- 
damental Education areas, language : 
problems in Fundamental Educa- 
tion as well. as: the place of arts 
and crafts. and- the use. of .popular, 
libraries and museums in the deve- 
lopment of the movement. In. the 
last five of .these, the co-operation 
of the Unesco Sections dealing with 
Social - Sciences, Languages, Arts, 
Libraries and Museums will be 
sought. : 
A special resolution of .the Ge- 
neral Conference is devoted to 
research into the use of the media 
of mass communications in Funda- 
mental Education. . 
It is clear that these new media 
can play a great part as visual and 
oral aids to teaching, as a vehicle 
of propaganda on Fundamental 
Education and as an- educational 
medium to bridge the gap ‘between 
the early stages of Fundomental 
Education and the successful com- 
pletion -of adult literary teaching. 
- 


### 73668: Brazil's campaign for literacy

Brazil's Campaign 
for Literacy 
A campaign in Brazil aimed at 
teaching illiterates of ‘all ages 
to read and write has resulted in 
the establishment since the be- 
Jginning of 1947 of nearly 14,000 
schools. This ‘was announced by 
‘| the Brazilian Director-General*- of - 
Education, Dr. Lourengo Filho, 
delegate to Unesco’s Second Gen- 
eral Conference, at a press con- 
ference in Mexico City on 'Nov- 
ember 25, who declared that it was 
largely due to Mexico’s example 
that Brazil embarked on its cam- 
paign of Fundamental Education. 
More than 30 million cruzeiros 
(about $1,250,000 U.S.) for this 
special instruction have been set 
aside from a national fund of over 
120 million cruzeiros (about $5,000, 
000 U.S.) created by the Brazilian 
Government for primary education." 
“We are receiving enormous vo- 
luntary support from all sections 
of the nation,” Dr. Lourenco said, 
pointing out that the success of 
the drive was only partly due to 
government initiative. Figures given 
by him showed that, of the schools 
established 3,000 were founded by 
industrial and commercial firms . 
and other organisations, while 
10,540 were set up by the Federal 
Government in collaboration with 
State authorities. The campaign 
will also be extended through com- 
munal centres and cultural mis- 
sions, and it is expected that the 
number of students will exceed one   million in 1948.

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073649engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 73669: Education: three seminars slated for the coming year

EDUCATION : 
Three Seminars Slated 
for the Coming Year | | 
Aware of the importance of con- 
tributions educators and teachers 
can make to international under- 
standiny as the condition of peace, 
delegates from forty nations, as- 
sembled in Mexico City at the 
General Conference of Unes- 
co, assigned top priority for 1948 to 
a carefully integrated educational 
programme, 
Seven major proposals, all of 
which will have equal priority, 
have been approved for 1948. At- 
the outset, the Conference recom- 
mended that Unesco’s activities in 
Fundamental Education should be 
combined with its other educa- 
tional work so as to strengthen and 
co-ordinate all educational activities 
with the other. aspects of Unesco’s 
programme, (A special article on 
this vital aspect of Unesco's educa 
tional programme will be found 
on the cpposite page.) 
Three international study Se- 
minars will be sponsored by Unesco. 
the work, already begun, of collating 
and dissemirating information 
likely to help achieve this end. 
Problems arising ;n the educi-| 
tion of war-handicapped children 
will be studied in collaboration 
with national and international or- 
ganisations concerned. From repu:ts 
and information received from ex- 
perts in different countries, plans 
will be drawn up to overcome these 
problems in the light of past ex- 
perience 
Several Educational Missions, in- 
cluding representatives from teach- 
ers’ organisations and school ex- 
perts, may be sent to Member States 
upon recuest for pumpos:s of con- 
sultation and advice on the re-or- 
ganisation of educational systems, 
particularly in war-devastated areas. 
Charter for Youth 
Unesco will continue to co-operate 
- with other United Nations organisa- 
Of these three Seminars in 1948, 
one will be sponsored jointly by 
Unesco and the-United Nations, on 
the general topic of teaching about 
the United Nations and its Agen- 
cies, particularly in the elementary 
and secondary schools of Member 
States. Teacher and child .educa- 
tion will’ be discussed at other in- 
ternational Seminars, in different 
areas of the world. The special 
educational problems of Latin 
American Member States may be 
considered at a fourth Seminar ap- 
proved by the General Conference. 
In planning these Sessions, Unes- 
¢0 has the benefit of experience 
gained at the eminently successful 
Seminar held in 1947 at Sevres, 
Particularly concerned that chil- 
* dren in all parts of the wor.d shall 
tions in a number of projects group- 
ed under the general heading of 
education: Greater educational op- 
portunities for women; theerole of 
the arts and of science in general 
education; extended technical edu- 
cation and vocational guidance; 
and the special problems of lan- 
guage teaching, particularly the 
teaching of auxiliary languages in 
connection with Unesco’s “pilot 
projects” in Fundamental Educa- 
tion. All these projects will be 
studied as part of the extensive 
work programme for 1948. 
Implicit in the whole pro- 
gramme is the principle of equa- 
lity for students and teachers alike. 
The possibility.of an International 
Charter for Youth will be studied. 
This Charter will call for equality 
  
By Dr. Kuo Yu-Shou 
  
1 
pe able vividly to understand the 
nature and the objectives of the 
United Nations, Unesco delegates to 
the Conference voted to co-operate 
with the United Nations during the 
coming year in providing materials 
. teachers could use. And in order 
to stimulate the interest of youth 
in the work of Unesco, two com- 
pétitions are to be organised in 
Member States, with the help of 
National Commissions. 
A conference of leaders in ‘Adult 
Education is to be held by Unesco 
in the first six months of 1948. In 
sponsoring this conference, Unesco 
will capitalise on results obtained 
through contacts during the last 
year with leaders of the former 
World Association for Adult Educa- 
tion and of the projected In:erna- 
tional Federation of Workers’ Edu- 
.. cation Associations, and with adult 
etucation experts in many parts of 
_ the world. The 1948 conference 
is being designed to canvass the 
opportunities of increasing inter- 
national understanding through 
adult educational agencies, for the 
promotion of peace and securi-y. 
- Association of Universities 
The responsibilities of Univer- 
sities in international matters is a 
question that has aroused so 
much interest recently that dele- 
gates to the General Conference 
instructed the Unesco Secretariat 
to- bring university leaders to- 
gether, to look into the possibility 
of closer co-operation between 
Unesco and the universities and of 
developing more extensive interna- 
tional courses in the universities 
themselves. The possible formation 
of a World Association of Univer- 
sities is envisaged for the coming 
year, to study and report on equi- 
valence of degrees and to promote 
education in international relations 
among universities 
Delegates to the Cuoaference also 
indicated their desire to see an 
improvement in textbooks and other 
teaching materials and instructed 
the Unesco Secretariat to continue 
’ . 
of educational opportunity and in- 
cludes the principle that no youth 
should be deprived, by reason of 
financial handicap, of instruction 
suited to his capacities. 
Teachers at the Conference spoke 
optimistically of drawing up an In- 
ternational Teachers’ Charter, with- 
out discrimination of race, colour, 
sex or religion, and applying it to 
all levels of the teaching profes- 
sion. 
~ In committee and plenary meet- 
ings alike, there was hardly a dele- 
gate who did not, at one time or 
another, stress the part teachers 
all over the world play in achiev- 
ing the purposes for which Unesco 
stands. 
Teacher-delegates spoke of the 
enormous reservoirs of goodwill 
that were waiting to be tapped, and 
of the results that could be achiev- 
ed by correlatin, efforts now being 
made by teachers to help the cause 
of peace and understanding. In vot. 
ing to continue an enquiry into the 
status of the teaching profession 
in Member States, the Conference 
agreed unanimously to encourage 
teachers’ organisations to colla- 
borate in drawing up a Charter 
designed to raise the professional 
and financial status of teachers 
throughout the world. 
  
  
i b gh 
  
Sera Sa rEg & ress Eo 
TI. 
One panel of the Reconstruction in 
Education exhibition calling attention 
war-devastated 
countries to rebuild their facilities, 
to the help needed by 


### 73671: UNESCO to promote reconstruction fund

    
Unesco to Promote 
Reconstruction Fund - 
By Dr. Bernard Drzewieski . 
An extended programme, design- 
ed to assist and stimulate educa- 
tional, scientific and cultural re- 
construction was agreed upon by . 
delegates to Unesco’s Second Gen- 
eral Conference for implementation 
throughout Member States during 
1948. Committees who considered 
the draft programme recommended 
that Member States form National 
Committees of non-governmental 
organisations for the purpose of 
coordinating the task of rebuilding 
the means_of learning and culture 
in war-devastated countries. 
Unesco will eontinne to make 
available information on the needs 
of these countries and will provide 
material suitable for use in national 
campaigns, special emphasis being 
placed on radio broadcasts, docu- 
mentary films and illustratéd pam- 
phlets. ~ 
Delegates urged ‘that Member 
States be approached to arrange 
for the duty-free entry of contribut- 
ed educational material-and it was 
also recommended that more ade- 
quate information be given by reci- 
pient countries regarding the dis- 
posal of money and materials con- 
tributed. : 
T.ILC.E.R. Grows 
The secretariat for .T.IL.C.ER. 
(Temporary International Council 
for Educational Reconstruction) 
will continue to be furnished by 
Unesco. Created in May 1947, 
T.I C.E.R. now has a representation 
of twenty international voluntary 
agencies working for relief in the 
stricken countries. In 1948, as In 
the year of. its formation, T.I1.C.ER: 
will work with Unesco in order to 
aid in the coordination of volun- 
tary efforts, while fully recognising 
the autonomy of co-operating 
groups. Member States are being 
asked to maintain close liaison 
with “this body so as to ensure the 
40 
Australia Denmark 
Austria Dominican Rep. 
Belgium Ecuador 
Brazil Egypt 
Bolivia El Savador 
Canada France - 
China Greece 
Colombia " Haiti 
Cuba Hungary 
Czechoslovakia India 
  
MEMBER STATES OF UNESCO 
Italy Poland 
Lebanon Saudi Arabia 
Liberia Switzerland 
Luxembourg Syria 
Mexico Turkey - 
Netherlands U. of Sth Africa 
New Zealand United Kingdom 
Norway U.S. of America 
Peru Uruguay 
Philippines Venezuela 
States which have signed but not yet ratified- the constitu- 
tion are: 
Argentina Honduras Nicaragua 
Chile Iran Panama 
Guatemala Iraq Yugoslavia -   
maximum achievement in this 
world-wide campaign for recons- 
truetion. 
The General Conference at 
Mexico decided that Unesco would 
immediately take on certain short- 
term eniergency commitiments, de- 
signed to afford early relief to the 
nations whose educational, scien- 
tific and cultural institutions have 
suffered badly from the effects 
of total war. Among the projecis 
envisaged in this connection is the 
immediate purchase, as far as funds 
will allow, of books, educational 
material and scientific equipmens. 
Unesco’s eighteen-man Executive 
Board will take on the added res- 
ponsibility of advising in the alloca- 
tion of such supplies and material 
among devastated countries. Other 
assistance will take the form of 
suggestions to teachers, library and 
museum authorities, - sponsors of 
youth camps and others in an ef- 
fort to solve some of the educa- 
tional and cultural problems aris- 
ing from the war. 
“The Book of Needs” 
A report based on surveys made 
by Unesco field workers, and state- 
ments from governmental and in- 
ter-governmental sources was pre- 
sented ®o the Conference. This 
report, which is now on sale under 
the title of “The Book of Needs, 
covers fifteen European and Asiatic 
countries and indicates the type ~f 
assistance and the areas meriting 
the highest priority. After examn-- 
ing this Report, the Delegates 
again urged the need for immediate 
action on behalf of educational re- 
. construction. The cost of this pub- 
lication was borne by Unesco as 
part of the publicity to attract con- 
tributions of money and material 
as well as to enable the provision 
of professionnal training for the 
countries whose educational and 
cultural machinery has been ne- 
glected during the past eight years. 
Unesco will explore the possibi- 
lity of launching an appeal for 
funds to assist these countries in 
building up their media of mass 
communications. In addition, the 
counsel of international financial 
experts will be sought to advise on 
the feasibility of creating an “in- 
ternational loan” whereby countries 
may obtain foreign currency needed 
for cultural reconstruction. 
The basis of the scheme is that 
countries requiring assistance from 
the hard currency areas in the task 
of rebuilding their shattered educa-. 
tional and cultural institutions will 
provide facilities in their own 
“soft” currency for professional 
and cultural visitors from the 
hard currency areas. This exchange 
will further international under- 
standing between the countries co- 
- operating in the scheme." 
The - study of the multiple pron 
lems arising in the task of educal- 
ting the post-war child will be de- 
veloped during 1948 and a suitable 
plan of action to combat these dif- 
ficulties will be drawn up in col 
laboration with the various na 
tional and international organisa 
tions concerned. Experts in -variou. 
countries will be contacted for.in 
formation and suggestions ‘amd 4 
survey made of the most significant 
experiments already carried “out 
These background reports. and sta- 
tistics will be analysed and usec 
as the basis for further action. 
As in 1947, Unesco will aid .youi! 
camps and conferences which seek 
to develop international .under- 
standing by serving the .commoun- 
interests of their members ano 
providing a more fruitful commmnn-. 
ity life. 
The "publication of the Libraries 
Bulletin, which has world-wide cir- 
culation to libraries, museums, uni- 
versities and other cultural inst 
tutions, and which is equally avail- 
able to private organisations and 
the general public, will also con- 
tinue as part of the publicity given. 
to this sphere’ of the Recorstruc- 
tion and Rehabilitation programme 
Books for Devastated Areas 
~~ 
National Book Exchange and Dis - 
tribution Centres will be establishec 
and maintained by Unesco, as par: 
of the drive to overcome inadequat- 
distribution of cultural, educationa: 
and scientific literature between 
countries, Unesco will also assis 
these centres in negotiating for the 
reduction or elimination of impor: 
duties and the reduction of trans 
port costs for book: and other edu- 
cational material. Member States 
are asked to take the lead in the 
reduction of such tariffs and hau: 
lage charges and to co-operate n 
the setting up of their own Centres 
with all possible speed. 
The General Conference recom 
mended that while careful selec: 
tion should be made of all book: 
and periodicals passing through 
such centres, censorship in any 
form would be undesirable. 
Reconstruction and rehabilitation 
of the educational, scientific ana 
cultural institutions of the war- 
devastated countries is a gigantic 
taclz. Unesco’s carefully gauged and 
well integrated programme was 
acclaimed by delegates bf forty na- 
tions who attended the Conference 
as a pratical measure towards forg- 
ing the bonds of peace and under- 
standing between the nations of the 
world.

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073649engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 73672: Book coupon scheme to be studied in 1948

6 UNESCO COURIER 
Book Coupon Scheme 
to Be Studied in 1948 
By Edward ]. Carter, 
AS Unesco’s work develops, it 
becomes increasingly evident 
that no programme can work in 
isolation from the others. This is 
particularly true of the work and 
plans of the Libraries program- 
me, Libraries are essentially ser- 
vices to education, science and 
culture and are among the impor- 
tant channels of communication 
through which the mind of man is 
stimulated and refreshed. In terms 
of Unesco’s own Charter, libraries 
can be an immense force for the 
“development of international un- 
derstanding and world peace.” 
Public Library Development 
The conference gave special em- 
phasis to the responsibilities of 
Unesco in the development of pu- 
.blic libraries, to enable all peoples 
fo have an”equal chance to develop 
‘their educational, scientific and 
cultural life. One of Unesco’s tasks 
is to bring workers from diverse 
countries together for discussion 
and study of each others’ ideas, 
techniques and problems, 
The Unesco Bureau for the 
Exchange of Persons will help the 
Library programme by awarding 
a number of fellowships to public 
librarians from “reconstruction 
area” countries to enable them to 
study in other countries where the 
finest examples of public library 
work can be seen. 
Reconstruction 
Almost every part of Unesco’s 
work, and certainly every part of 
the Libraries programme has 
reference to post-war reconstruc- 
tion. The problem of reconstruction 
ig everlastingly present, and no 
good library is ever free from the 
need to construct and reconstruct 
its programmes and collections. 
For Unesco, libraries reconstruction 
is mainly a problem of creating or 
re-creating new and better com- 
munications between libraries inter- 
nationally and between libraries 
and all existing sources of publica- 
tions. The reconstruction work 
which was started in 1947 will be 
continued and developped during 
-the present year. 
As its main libraries reconstruc- 
tion agency Unesco has established 
an “International Clearing House 
for Publications,” an intelligence 
centre where an extensive filing 
system records the publications 
which particular libraries want and 
the duplicates they have for 
disposal by gift, sale or exchange. 
Already, more than 6,000 libraries 
are co-operating and many hun- 
dreds of exchanges have been 
effected through the clearing house 
and advice has also been given on 
the disposal of book gifts. The 
clearing house works in close 
liaison with the American Book 
Center in Washington, and under- 
took the disposal of the books from 
the Inter-Allied Book Centre in 
Tondon. A Unesco Bulletin for 
libraries is published monthly as 
8 means of channeling Clearing 
House information round the world 
and enabling libraries to establish 
their own contacts. The Bulletin, 
enthusiastically received during 
1947, will continue to be published 
during 1948. ' 
Inter-library exchange is an old 
established means of maintaining 
stocks, and there is a growing need 
for national exchange and distribu- 
tion centres for publications. The 
General Conference has recom- 
mended that all Member States 
establish such centres and has 
instructed the Secretariat to press 
for the abolition or reduction of 
import duties, and the reduction of 
transport costs and excessive book 
prices, all of which militate against 
the free flow of publications, 
Owing to the disturbed econotnic 
state of the world at the present 
time, it is practically impossible for 
countries with “soft currencies” to 
purchase books from © “hard cur- 
Tency” countries. 
Although Unesco cannot reform 
the economic system of the world, 
& realistic proposal has been made 
for a system of purchase by “book 
coupons’ which will enable some 
of the outstanding difficulties to be 
circumvented. Briefly, the es- 
sence of the scheme is that Unesco 
or some other agency shall issue 
internationally valid coupons to 
enable “soft currency” countries to 
buy books in their own currency 
from the “hard currency” areas. As 
Le 
mei, 
the next step towards the achieve- 
ment of the scheme it is proposed 
to convene a small committee of 
experts who understand the com- 
plexities of book distribution and 
international finance, to answer 
outstanding problems, and it is 
hoped that the scheme will be 
operating before the end of the 
year. 
Bibliography and 
Documentation 
Bibliographical and documenta- 
tion work, though perhaps little 
understood outside the realm of 
the specialists who have to use 
these services, is, in fact, at the 
base of all library activity. The 
public librarian cannot decide what 
books to buy, or the scientist select 
the most important material that 
has been published on his subject, 
without an intricate chain of 
bibliographical services. This in- 
cludes short and simple book lists 
for the popular reader, elaborate 
specialised bibliographies for work- 
ers in higher studies and huge 
national bibliographical enterprises, 
such as national union catalogues 
and complete national bibliogra- 
phies. 
At the simpler and more popular 
end of Unesco’s bibliographical 
work, every nation is being urged 
to issue regular short lists of its 
best current publications, paying 
special attention to those which 
contribute to Unesco’s aim to 
promote international understand- 
ine and world peace. The General 
Conference has also urged all 
Member States to publish complete 
national bibliographies and to 
establish national union catalogues, 
which show in one centre the hold- 
ings of all the principal libraries 
in the country. These tasks involve 
the building up of effective con- 
tacts with librarians, documental- 
ifs and archivists throughout the 
world, largely through the Infer- 
national Federation of Documenta- 
tion, the International Federation of 
Library Associations and a project- 
ed International Council of Pro- 
fessional Archivists. 
A world-wide survey of biblio- 
graphical services as a means of 
detecting overlaps and gaps and 
deficiencies will be undertaken 
jointly with the Library of Con- 
gress in Washington during 1948. 
This project will probably be con- 
centrated on a detailed study of 
the bibliographical and documenta-- 
tion needs in one field of Unesco 
activity—such as Fundamental Edu- 
cation. 
Science Abstracting 
Another big single project under 
the bibliographical head will be 
worked out in co-operation with the 
Natural Sciences section of Unesco. 
—A large-scale attack on problems 
of natural science abstracting. 
Without carefully prepared abs- 
tracts, or summaries of current 
literature, it is impossible to keep 
pace with scientific work thtough- 
out the world. A series of expert 
committees and meetings will be 
held during the year, leading, it 
may be hoped, towards the exten- 
sion and improvement, not only 
of abstracting services as the cen- 
tral subject of discussion, but of all 
the related services of indexing and 
publications distribution. 
One final section of the libraries 
programme is being worked out 
in close co-operation with the Mass 
Communications staff; this is to 
explore ways of encouraging the 
inexpensive production of books and 
periodicals, In recent years publish- 
ers 1n many countries have con- 
tributed to education, science and 
culture with great imagination by 
developing the production and 
distribution of good inexpensive 
books. In an effort to stimulate 
this enterprise, Unesco will suggest 
new books which should be written 
and published in cheap editions, 
and will help the negotiation of 
agreements so that existing good 
books can be re-published cheaply, 
translated into many languages. 
This is a big programme. It is a 
start only of an enterprise which 
extends indefinitely; but the start. 
is bold and will be successful if it 
receives the enthusiastic support of 
the mass of the people of the world, 
who almost all, are directly or 
indirectly dependent on the printed 
word for their spiritual and mate- 
rial welfare. 
 
Third Session of the .General Con- 
ference of Vinesco will be held in 
Beirut, at the invitation of the 
Lebanese Government. Photograph 
shows Menseigneur Jean Maroun, 
of the Lebanese delegation, and Mr. 
Joseph Aboukater, Lebanese Minis- 
ter to Mexico leaving a Session. 
UnescoProgramme 
To Stress Exchange 
Between Museums 
During 1948 the principal task of 
the Museums programme will be to 
promote the exchange of informa- 
tion on museums, and of museum 
personnel throughout the world. 
Emphasis is thus laid on exchanges 
because it is by that means that 
the immeuse amount of damage 
done to museums everywhere by 
the war can most speedily be made 
good. 
In many war-devastated coun- 
tries, museum systems were entire- 
ly destroyed, and it is a primary 
duty -of Unesco to help in their 
reconstruction. To resume the flow 
of ideas, interrupted in all coun- 
tries by the war, is vital if mu- 
seums are to play their part in 
developping education, science and 
culture. . 
The possibility of establishing in- 
ternational foundations, supported 
by member governments, as a 
means of encouraging co-opera- 
tion betwéen museums will be 
studied by Unesco; international 
conferences, like the one to be held 
by the International Council of 
Museums next June, will be aided, 
and plans for international exhibi- 
tions will be stimulated and en- 
couraged. 
The work of the Museums Pro- 
gramme is not limited to periodical 
conference meetings or exhibitions; 
i must, above all, furnish a per- 
manent service which wili arrange 
for- persons connected with mu- 
seums to visit museums in foreign 
countries, and to meet foreign 
museum experts so that they may 
exchange ideas and experiences. 
This permanent service will be able 
to supply, on request, guidance and 
information based on the most up- 
to-date museum practice wherever 
it many be found. 
In conclusion, it may be said 
that although a great deal has 
already been done to develop the 
use of museums in the cause of 
education, science and culture, yet 
the greater part of the task is still 
before us, involving much new and 
exciting experimental work, but al- 
so entailing much routine survey- 
ing of present conditions through- 
out the world, 
z 


### 73655: Highlights of projects and budget for 2nd year

Highlights of Unesco 
Projects for New Year 
(Continued from Page 1) 
the work of the Executive Board, 
Public Information, Personnel, and 
other activities not directly con- 
cerned with executing projects 
within the programme. 
Reconstruction 
Unesco hopes to put into opera- 
tion in 1948 a novel international 
scheme for Cultural Rehabilita- 
tion, based on a new method of 
securing funds on an international 
scale. ‘If this scheme is deemed 
feasible, Unesco will urgé a system 
whereby “soft currency” countries 
in the field of education. A broad 
programme has been outlined for 
1948 of education to improve inter- 
national understanding. 
_ Three Seminars on education, 
similar to those at Sevres, France, 
last year, will be held in different 
parts of the world during 1948. In 
co-operation with the Uniteq Na- 
tions and its other Specialised 
Agencies, Unesco will undertake 
an educational campaign of teach- 
ing about the UN, its aims and 
activities, 
Cultural Interchange 
may obtain “hard currency” and 1n the field of Arts and Letters, 
pay for it by meeting the living ynesco will continue to. support by 
expenses of visiting teachers, stu- technical advice the creation of 
  
dents and technicians from these 
countries. 
Unesco will also encourage the 
establishment of a National Ex- 
change Centre in war-devastated 
and book surplus countries to 
facilitate the international exchan- 
ge and dissemination of books, 
and will seek to eliminate or re- 
{duce import duties on literature 
dealing with science, education and 
culture. 
Communication 
an International Theatre Institute, 
independent of Unesco. Unesco 
will also undertake preliminary en- 
quiries for the establishment of 
an International Music Institute. 
The Director-General has been 
instructed to draw up a list of high- 
quality colour reproductions design- 
ed to illustrate the most important 
phases and movements in art. This 
catalogue will be published and dis- 
tributed throughout member states 
to promote the interchange of cul- 
" tures. In 1946, the United Nations 
Unesco’s Communication Pro- 
gramme, which includes Exchange 
of Persons, Mass Communication, 
Libraries and Copyright has been 
assigned a high priority for 1948. 
A resolution proposed by the 
United States delegates was 
adopted by the Conference to .en- 
courage the free flow of informa- 
tion by seeking to reduce the 
barriers existent in the world to- 
day. A second resolution, sponsored 
by the United Kingdom delegation, 
was also approved, calling for the 
creation of an Int'l. Ideas Bureau. 
In the field of broadcasting, the 
General Conference agreed that 
Unesco will co-operate in the pro- 
posed United Nations world radio 
network; if it is established. If 
this network is not set up, hovewer, 
Unesco will study the creation of 
a network of its own. - 
The Mexican delegation favoured 
the creation of a World University 
of the Air which would broacast 
the best lectures from leading 
world universities over all natio- 
nal networks. : 
During 1948 Unesco will place special 
emphasis on a Book Coupon Scheme. 
Here, too, Unesco has outlined a plan to 
agsist the “soft currency” countries. It, 
is unfortunately true, that since the last 
war, most “soft currency” nations have 
been almost unable to buy books and 
periodicals of other nations. ’ 
Unesco’s Book Coupon Scheme is an 
effort to eliminate this currency exchange 
problem py substituting special coupens 
redeemable in local monies. 
Education 
EDUCATION occupies an im- 
portant place in Unesco’s 1948 
programme, At the Mexico City 
Conference delegates agreed that 
it is the duty of all member 
states to guarantee a basic mini- 
mum of education to all their 
citizens that is free and universal 
compulsory primary schooling. To 
aid Member States in such cam- 
paighs, the Conference authori- 
sed the use of a world board of 
Fundamental Education experts. In 
addition Unesco will aid and 
advise a limited number of “pilot 
projects”. 
Fundamental Education, however, 
   Thousands of visitors to the General Conference saw the exhibitions at 
the Escuela Nermal de Maestros and through them learned how Unesco 
assists in the development of Library, Museum and Educational systems, 
Two Mexican visitors, pictured here, study one of the panels of the   Museums’ exhibit arranged as part of the ““Unesco Month” programme, 
requested Unesco to prepare a plan 
for the translation of the classics. 
Unesco expects to complete and 
present such a plan to the Eco- 
nomic and Social Council by June 
1, 1948. - 
A number of eminent philoso- 
hers attended the Mexico Con- 
ference. As a result of their delibe- 
rations the Conference agreed upon 
a series of round-table discussions 
dealing with certain philosophical. 
concepts to be held in conjunction 
with the Amsterdam International 
Congress of Philosophy. In order to 
link the efforts of philosophers and 
humanists with the work of Unesco, 
the organisation will encourage the 
establishment of an International 
Council of Associations in the field 
of Philosophy and the Humanities, 
Unesco’s Museum specialists will 
prepare a plan for the international 
exchange of contemporary works of 
art through organised exchanges of 
exhibitions and collections accom- 
panied by appropriate catalogues. 
Social and Human ’ 
Relations 
Searching enquiries into the ten- 
sions affecting international under- 
standing will be cartied out by 
Unesco in 1948 in collaboration 
with leading social scientists every- 
where. The purpose of such enqui- 
ries is to prepare first of all, a 
comprehensive analysis of the for- 
ces which influence understanding 
and respect among peoples of dif- 
ferent culture patterns. Secondly, 
the project envisages a programme 
of action to overcome and eliminate - 
tensions negatively affecting mu- 
tual understanding. 
Natural Sciences 
Unesco specialists in the NATU- 
RAL SCIENCES were very active 
during 1947. The three Field 
Science Co-operation Offices al- 
ready in existence in the Middle 
East, the Far East and Latin 
America will be maintained and an 
additional office in South Asia wiil 
be established in 1948 as under- 
takings of the highest priority 
within the Natural Sciences pro- 
gramme, 
This year will also see the 
establishment of the International 
Institute of the Hylean Amazon. 
The Brazilian Government and the 
countries bordering on the vast 
paigns, the Conference authoris- 
Amazon Basin are taking special 
interest in the Institute, which will 
study ecological, ethnological and 
agricultural questions as well as 
educational and linguistic problems, 
affecting the Amazon region, 
It became evident during the 
Mexico Conference that, amidst 
the troubled problems before the 
world today, Unesco offers one of 
the few meeting places where hoth 
men and nations may find agree- 
ment on vital international ques- 
tions. 
This feeling was manifest at 
Mexico City where an almost una- 
nimous effort was made by na- 
tional delegations to avoid con- 
troversial political issues. Delegates 
agreed that Unesco—in the space 
only of its first year of life—had 
gained ground towards becoming 
a truly universal organ,

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073649engo.pdf#page=7) 5

### IGNORE

- 
7 
  
y 


### 73674: Translations of classics to be promoted by UNESCO

TRANSLATION OF CLASSICS 
TO BE PROMOTED BY UNESCC 
By Prof. Jean-] acques Mayoux 
it is true that “it is in the minds of men that the defences of 
peace must be constructed,” in what way can philosophy and the 
vast studies dealing with the cultural past of mankind contribute to 
such a peace? 
Let us, in this respect, examine the Philosophy and Humanities 
programme of Unesco, by dividing 
ical and the theoretical. 
“ UNESCO MONTH ” 
ATTRACTS 
THOUSANDS 
{Continued from page 1.) 
Early in the Conference, Dr. 
Julian Huxley, Director-General, 
pointed out the difficulties under 
. which Unesco would have to work 
- 
Ye
ar
 
and the obstacles against which it 
would have to struggle. He de- 
clared: 
“Unesco cannot operate with full 
effectiveness in the presence of 
fascism, imperialism, intolerance, 
witch-hunting, oppressive exploita- 
tion, corruption, authoritarian sup- 
pression of freedom or exaggerated 
nationalism . . .” 
From november 10 to November 
28, in sub-commissions and work- 
ing parties—as many as six con- 
vening simultaneously in morning, 
afternoon and even night séssions 
—the 1948 programme took form. 
At the same time, problems of ad- 
ministration, of budget, external 
relations and procedure were stud- 
ied and resolved. 
Nineteen plenary sessions were 
held up to December 3, the last five 
of which were almost continuous. 
Delegates from all member. states 
heard and approved the programme 
for 1948 in its final form, 
Letters and telegrams of support 
were received from people all over 
the world in all walks of life. 
Lectures, musical and artistic 
presentations and receptions high- 
lighted the colourful Unesco Month 
Programme, held concurrently with 
the Conference. A series of seven 
lectures was delivered on Mexican 
education, science, plastic art, 
music, biology and literature at the 
“Palacio de Bellas Artes”. 
_ During the. Conference, 
Unesco exhibits (each divided int 
two sections) were on display in 
the school — one exhibit on public 
libraries and museums, the other 
on Fundamental Education and 
on educational reconstruction—and 
were viewed by thousands of vi- 
sitors. 
Other- important meetings we 
'held in conjunction with the Con-| 
ference which itself served—in the 
view of both delegates and observ- 
ers—as a successful experiment in 
international co-operation. A -lang- 
mark for the organisation’s work, 
concluding Unesco’s first year of 
ife, 
two 


### 73681: World copyright law planned

WORLD COPYRIGHT 
LAW PLANNED 
When Unesco’s Director-General 
Dr Julian Huxley said: “Copyright 
matters are a primary responsibility 
of Unesco because of its interest 
in the free flow of information 
throughout the world and the pro- 
tection of the literary, scientific 
and artistic ‘works upon which 
cultural interchange depends,” he 
was stating with greater precision 
what Unesco had already affirmed 
during the initial stages of the 
Preparatory. Commission in London. | 
The various groups of laws pro- 
tecting copyright had hitherto 
been ‘considered merely from the 
relatively unfavourable aspect of 
the obstacles which their entirely 
anarchical condition was constantly 
raising against world cultural inter- 
change. 
In the future, this will no longer 
be the case. The programme un- 
dertaken in pursuance of a 
decision by the Mexico City Con- 
ference -will make a study of 
copyright problem: with the object 
of harmonising the various national 
laws on the subject and will prepare 
the draft of a Universal Copyright 
Convention. 
The first task of this programme 
for 1948 is to make a critical survey 
of comparative law, having regard 
to all the laws at present existing 
and the methods by which these 
Jaws are given practical effect. Due 
regard will be paid to all the 
interests involved, e.g., free flow of 
information, the rights of authors 
and publishers or workers in gen- 
eral as well as the public. 
This considerable survey is being 
undertaken under the direction of 
the French expert, M. Francois 
Hepp, Doctor of Law and organiser. 
of the Provisional Committee of 
Copyright Experts, which met at 
Unesco House in Paris during 
Beptember, 1947, 
it into two categories. the empir- 
On the practical side, it is a 
fact that intellectual life and the 
minds of men are both condition- 
ed by habit and surroundings. Be- 
cause of the every nature of their 
academic work and the universal 
character of their interests, philo- 
sophers, * humanists and social 
science specialists depend on inter- 
national exchanges. These, until 
now, have been almost entirely 
lacking. The fact is that philo- 
sophers and humanists are not 
organised on an international 
scale, or at east not effectively. 
In an endeavour to remedy .this, 
Unesco has proposed the re-group- 
ing of the existing organisations 
in order to establish an Interna- 
tional Council of Philosophy and 
Humanistic Studies similar to the 
International Council of Scientific 
Unions. This International Council 
it is hoped, will stimulate the 
movement of ideas and the dissemi- 
nation of knowledge between na- 
tions. 
Among the many duties which 
the Association will uhdertake on 
an international scale are the pre- 
paration of bibliographies: various 
systems of card indexing; analy- 
tical summaries and abstract sur- 
veys; clearing house services for the 
exchange of articles between philo- 
bulletins and year books containing 
scientific information. 
Translation- of Great Books 
In this same field of Cultural In- 
terchange, the Economic and So- 
cial Council of the United Nafions 
has charged Unesco with a difficult 
and important undertaking, that of 
preparing, submitting and ultimate. 
ly putting into execution a plan 
for the general translation of the 
classics, including great contem- 
porary books not only of literature 
but of philosophy and of social and 
natural science as well. . 
This project will have the follow- 
ing two objectives : ; 
a) Unknown or insufficiently 
known classics are to be translated 
into _a number of major languages 
in order to enrich the culural 
heritage of the world and to give 
particular encouragement to all na- 
tions whose cultural” importance 
may have seemed insignificant. 
b) "A limited number of Great 
Books, selected for their universal 
-alue and their representative and 
auman qualities, are to be translat- 
ed into as many languages as pos- 
sible. 
Regional Centres 
and Culture Understanding 
Realising that it is essential 
for Unesco’s purposes to under- 
stand and appreciate all cul- 
tural differences, the Organisa- 
tion, during 1948, is to consider the 
possibility of setting up regional 
centres of cultural co-operation, A 
start in this direction will be made 
this year when a survey will be 
carried out in the Middle East. 
On the theoretical side, Unesco, 
and in particulz the Philosophy 
and Humanities programme will en- 
courage a critical study of human 
values on an international scale. It 
must avoid the danger of civilisa- 
tion destroying itself through ap- 
parent conflicts of ideology, which 
in reality, may be no more than a 
confusion of words. 
In 1948, Unesco will undertake 
two groups of surveys : 
1) an enquiry into the influence 
on current ideological controversies 
concerning the fundamental con- 
of the fundamental concepts of 
democracy, justice and liberty, 
2) an enquiry into the ideas held 
by a country, or b- a group within 
a country, of its own culture and 
the relations of that culture with 
others, individually or as a whole. 
Here the object is*to ascertain the 
gaps in existing relations and to 
work out measures to integrate 
ex. culture in tke whole of world 
civilisation. 
These undertakings, and in fact 
the work of Unesco as a whole, will 
succeed enly in proportion to the   active participation stimulated, par- 
ticularly amongst youth, 
UNESCO COURIER 
 
 
His Excellency the President of Mexico, Lic. Miguel Aleman (left) 
and Lic. Manuel Gual Vidal, Mexican Minister of Education and 
President of the Second Session of Unesco’s General Conference. 
sophical reviews and. eventually.| 


### 73676: Moral guide of world says Mexican President in tribute to UNESCO

“ Moral Guide 
of World” 
Says Mexican President 
In Tribute to Unesco 
At the inaugural meeting on the 
6th November, 1947 of the Second 
Session of Unesco’s General Con- 
ference in Mexico City, His Excel- 
lency Miguel Aleman, President of 
the United Mexican States welcom- 
ed delegates .and observers to his 
country, . 
Describing Unesco as “the moral 
guide of the peopies of {he world” 
President Aleman stressed the im- 
portance of the work already ac- 
complished by Unesco and stated 
the Organisation’s principal task as 
“the creation of a, mind for peace 
that shall be like a second nature 
in all men”. 
President Aleman stated that 
through science, education and cul- 
ture Unesco’s purpose could be 
achieved and the peoples of the 
earth live together in mutual un- 
derstanding and harmony. 
“Right education”, he said, “is 
~ 
HE major project in the Social 


### 73675: Social scientists study international tensions

Social Scientists Study 
international Tensions 
their time and energy. But. the post- 
Sciences programme for 1948 is war situation poses new interna- 
that on Tensions affecting Interna- 
tional Understanding. The Unesco 
Conference indicated three main 
lines along which efforts should be 
directed. 
The first step - towards interna- 
tional understanding, it decided, is 
to make it possible for nations to 
understand one another better. It 
into the distinctive character of 
the, various national cultures, ideals, 
and legal systems, with the aim of 
stimulating the sympathy and res- 
By 
Dr. Arvid Brodersen 
pect of nations for each other's 
ideals and aspirations and the ap- 
preciation of national problems.” 
As a counterpart to this it also 
instructed the Director-General to 
promote “Enquiries into - the 
conceptions which the people of one 
nation entertain of their own and 
of other nations.” 
These two groups of enquiries 
aim at discovering, as it were, the 
present state of international un- 
derstanding in the world, The 
problem is how this understanding 
can be made better. To this end 
the 1948 programme provides for 
“Enquiries into modern techniques 
which have been developed in edu- 
cation, political science, philosophy 
and psychology for changing men- 
tal attitudes and for revealing the 
processes and forces involved when 
human minds are in conflict.” 
This general -‘udy is to be sup- 
plemented by a specific piece of 
work bearing directly upon this 
central question: “An enquiry into 
the influences throughout life which 
    
predispose towards internationai 
understanding on the one hand and 
aggressive nationalism on the 
other.” 
Finally, it is recognised that two 
particular factors are of special 
importance in regard to tensions 
affecting international understand- 
ing; technological change and po- 
pulation movements, A Source 
Book is to be prepared showing 
what studies are under way on 
these subjects in the Member 
States. > 
Two further points laid down by 
the Conference for the conduct of 
the “Tensions” -project are of 
special interest. To the utmost 
extent possible the services of uni- 
versities, research centres, National 
Commissions, international organi- 
sations, are to be enlisted in carry- 
ing out this project. At the same 
time, the Director-General of 
Unesco is instructed to “study 
methods whereby the findings of 
the investigations may be popular- 
ised.” 
tional problems too. The peoples of 
the world will have to think and 
live and work together in a com- 
munity of international co-opera- 
tion if they are to be spared a new 
and final catastrophe. Therefore 
Unesco will try to call tothe atten- 
tion of social scientists everywhere 
the importance of dealing with the 
accordingly provided for “Enquiries Problems of international collabora. 
tion which can be investigated in 
various fields of study. 
In the present world, the peoples 
have laid a basis for working and 
living together, in the great inter- 
national organisations and institu- 
tions of the United Nations. But 
they are far from complete and 
perfect yet; they are living organ- 
isms which need proper care, 
nourishment. and guidance to gain 
the strength and skills-required of 
them in the world of to-day. It is 
vitally important for scientific 
specialists in all social fields to 
study and observe the day-to-day 
problems of this great community 
of the peoples. Here and there, 
valuable work is already being done. 
Unesco will seek to encourage such 
work and in some cases to initiate 
special studies itself. 
International Standards 
in Political Science 
National divergences in. research 
techniques and concepts, in ap- 
proach and emphasis, are an im- 
portant problem at thic stage, when 
the social sciences everywhere mus: 
pe developed and brought together 
into an international force fit .to0 
deal with the great issues of our 
times. The problem can be describ- 
ed as one of creating a unity m 
diversity, an internationally in- 
tegrated social science with stan- 
dardiSed working tools, terms, con- 
cepts and methods: at the same 
time leaving full freedom for the 
expression of the national genius 
in social research. 
In 1948, Unesco will initiate a 
comparative study of political 
science as presented in representa- 
tive samples of recent research 
materials from various countries 
(scientific publications and high- 
level textbooks). A main reason 
for choosing political science as 
the first subject of study is the 
fundamental importance of that 
discipline for the understanding of 
international problems. The project 
is therefore ancillary to the en- 
quiries on: international collabora- 
tion’and on tensions. The term “po- 
litical science” as used here may 
be described broadly as the sys- 
tematic study of politics and poli- 
tical behaviour, particularly “the 
exercise of and struggle for poli- 
tical power in central or local gov- 
ernement. Some typical fields of 
study are, for instance: parties 
party systems and other political 
International Collaboration JEAi.) IoppaTsiay bodies (par- 
: : liaments, etc): political public 
As a Problem in Social opinion; leadership and political 
Science personnel; political doctrines and 
Social scientists everywhere are ideologies; government and puhlic 
largely preoccupied with national administration. The findings of 
problems these days. Reconstruction this enquiry are to be presented in   and social development after the a publication as a Report To The 
war naturally have a first claim on General Conference, 
basic for the continuous develop- 
ment of culture and for the healthy 
progress of science. We have always 
felt the need of giving education 
the highest moral function. This 
need was expressed by Simén Bo’ 
livar—the most authorised spo- 
kesman of our peoples—when he 
outlined before the Congress of 
Angostura, the constitutional as- 
sembly of the nations he had lib- 
erated, his ideas as to how free 
peoples should organise themselves”. 
“Simén Bolivar said ‘Popular edu- 
cation should be the primary in- 
terest and concern of the Congress; 
morality and enlightenment are the 
foundation poles of a Republic; 
morality and enlightenment are our 
prime needs’ ”. > ’ 
“Unesco corresponds in the in- 
ternational field and for the entire 
world, to what Bolivar desired for 
the peoples he made independeni”, 
stated President Aleman. “There 
fore, in these lands of Bolivar’s 
America, the purposes of Unesco 
find the most favorable environs 
ment, are most .warmlv welcome, 
have the greatest assurance of 
being understood and awaken 
glowing enthusiasm”. 


### 73677: Dr. Gual Vidal stresses education role in building peace

Dr. Gual Vidal 
Stresses Education Role 
In Building Peace 
In his inaugural address as Prese 
ident of the Second Session of the 
General Conference, H. E. Licen- 
ciado Manuel Gual Vidal, Mexican 
Minister of Public Education, set 
the general tone of the Conference 
when he "emphasised the role 
Unesco - can play in building & 
lasting and secure peace, through 
the active support of the peoples 
and nations of .the world. 
The Minister of Education de- 
clared: “We fully recognise the 
world-wide significance of the ex- 
ceptional honour conferred on our 
country, on Hispano-America and 
on the New World in general by 
this Conference, staged in the tem- 
ple erected by Mexico to carry on 
that mest honourable of human - 
vocations: that of the Teacher, 
whose noble work is ‘the best means 
of training men morally fitted to 
live together in peace, harmony and 
brotherhood”, : 
“The Mexican nation has been 
stirred to the heart py Unesco’s 
work”, he said. “It has mobilised 
its teachers, its men of science and 
of letters; it has brought its best 
resources into play. Mexico has 
learnt from the historical signi- 
ficance of the aims and functions 
of the Organisation that, we, the 
Members States, have the moral 
duty of formulating, through the 
proper constitutional channels, in- 
ternational educational agreements, 
and of setting up schools at all 
levels to carry. Unesco’s educational 
principles to the heart of the 
teaching systems of the world. . 
“When these efforts have borne 
practical results”, concluded Dr 
Vidal, “they will serve as a model, 
a basis for an international educae   tional plan which will be a constant 
source of peace among peoples”;

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073649engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO - COURIER 
 


### 73678: Arts and letters programme for 1948

Arts and Letters 
Programme 
for 19438 
Jack branch of Arts and Letters has before it pro- 
jects which constitute valuable contributions to 
‘the Arts. The programme is a direct attempt to 
stimulate the arts and to further the major Unesco 
aim of promoting inderstanding between peoples. It 
entails much work; it demands co-operation, energy 
and judgement. 
It has long been apparent that the exchange of 
eiticles between library- periodicals has never reached 
a sufficient, proportion or voluthe to achieve impor- 
tant results in the exchange of cultures. For one 
and particularly since 1939, 
periodicals have lacked exact information regarding 
the literary scene in other countries. Ed:tors have not 
reason or another, 
" known where fo seek articles or. 
~ 
writer's. The need was felt’ for some system of assis- 
~ tance "by which a literary review’ In some- -mid-west 
town of the United States, ‘for example, or a strug- 
gling review in a devastated country could enjoy" the 
possibility of publishing articles 
-tributors In the same way the great reviews of the 
European capitals have desired to print the works of 
- writers in other countries. 
It is the aim of the International Literary Pool 
to effect this exchange, and to help literary periodic- 
als in their attempts to keep their 
of international literary and cultural life. 
1947 the Secretariat conducted preliminary enquiries 
as to how this project might be accomplished, and 
how a Pool, a turntable of this nature, might best 
serve its purpose. 
That such a Pool was necessary soon became 
apparent. Requests for information and for articles 
were received from sources in many different parts 
of the world. To take a typical example, the Pool 
was able to place the French review “la Nef” in 
contact with the “Revista de America,” 
published in’ Bogota. 
But it must be -emphasised that ‘Unesco has no 
desire to create a monopoly and no wish to act as 
a- substitute for a literary agency. 
above all as one of liaison, as providing a means 
for establishing contact at a time when communica- 
tions are excessively difficult. 
‘A well advanced project is the International 
Theatre Institute. The setting up 
was agreed to at a meeting of experts held through 
the direct agency of Unesco in July, 1947. It is to 
hold its first Congress this year, when it-is hoped 
that the draft charter will be ratified. 
During the Congress and the early stages of the 
Institute. The Secretariat will be provided by Unesco. 
It is designed to promote international exchange in 
the world of the theatre, to facilitate the movement 
of- theatrical troupes, scripts, ideas 
theatrical information. 
"how to contact 
by foreign con- 
readers informed 
During 
which is 
It sees its work 
present time. If 
of this Institute 
seemed essential 
and all kinds of 
of art. 
  
 
 
If much has already been accomplished in litera- 
ture and the. theatre, only the spade work has been 
undertaken in the Visual Arts. In a sense so uch 
could be attempted that thé major problem facing 
Unesco has been to limit the choice of prajects to| 
those which could be effectively carried out at the 
was felt by the Conference that 
the most fruitful opportunity for action lay in the 
field of reproductions. . 
During the last few years much technical progress 
has been made in art reproduction methods and it 
to encourage the raising of stan- 
dards and the improvement of distribution facilities 
as a means of assisting art education and stimulating 
cultural exchange. Any work of this nature inevitably 
would be considerable, and the Conference according- 
ly felt that attention should be devoted in the first 
place to: important and specific periods and phases 
+ 
x, 
FINE ART REPRODUCTIONS TO BE- "ENCOURAGED 
Though some alterations and 1947 felt that Customs barriers they are tasks specifically set by the 
additions may prove necessary, the 
categories marked for attention 
during 1948 indicate the breadth of 
the project. They concern Pre- 
historic art, Persian art, art of the 
Italian Renaissance and the devel- 
opment of European painting be- 
tween 1870 and 1914 The aim of 
the Arts and Letters Programme 
is to compile a detailed catalogue 
of those paintings which have been 
reproduced in colour, together with 
recommendations for additional re- 
- productions. This catalogue will be 
discussed with experts in colour 
reproduction, art education and the 
history of art, who are to meet in 
Paris this summer at the same time 
as the Conference of the Inter- 
national Council of Museums. To 
complement these lists, to bring preliminary investigations will be 
them alive as it were, an exhibi- 
tion will be held consisting of the 
form an impediment to the ex- 
change of culture. It is thus one 
of the tasks of Unesco to begin 
enquiries into those Customs duties 
and other restrictions imposed -by 
Member States on the importation 
of works of art, and to study the 
possibilities of negotiating an agree- 
ment to reduce or eliminate thent, 
Reproduction is one of the prin- 
cipal themes of the Programme 
this year. Music specialists in the 
same way as Visual Arts specialists 
will commence the preparation of a 
catalogue of world music. As yet, 
final details for this catalogue 
have not been fully worked out, but 
il will be approached along the 
same lines as those adopted for the 
Visual Arts. Ap the same time, 
made into 
establishing 
the advisability of 
an International 
best colour prints available to illus- Music Institute; a report will be 
trate the technigues of colour 
printing and their role in art 
appreciation and education. 
A Conference of experts held in 
submitted to the Third Session of 
the General Conference in 1948. 
Though these projects are na- 
turally of paramount importance— 
Argentina: 
Australia: H., A. Goddard Ltd, 
Cuba: 
Czechoslovakia: 
Denmark: Einar Munksgaard, 6 
france: Editions A. Pedone, 
129 Oxford St,, 
  
SUBSCRIPTION RATES 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly in English, French 
and Spanish by the Public Information Office of Unesco. 
6-month subscription: 2s.’d, or $0.50 or Fr.jrs.60. 
Please write to the Unesco agent indicated below for your country, 
or directly to Unesco House, 19 Av. Kléber, Paris 16e, France. 
Editorial Sudamericana S.A. Alsina 500. Buenos-Alres. 
255a, George St., 
Canada: The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. 
La Casa Eelga. R: de Smedt O'Reilly, Habana. 
Librairie F. Topie, 11 Narodnti, 
13 Rue Soufflot. Paris, Se. 
Great Eritain: H M. Stationery Office, Th: Chief of Publications, 
London W.1. 
Greece Eleftheroudakis, Librairie internationale, Athens. 
tolland: N, V. Martinus Nijhoff's Boekhandel en Uitgevers Maats, 
9 Lange Vaorhout The Hague 
India: Oxford Book and Slationerv Co., Scindia House, New Delht 
Iraq: Mackenzie and Mackenzie. Booksell.rs, The Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Sweden: Ab. C. E Fritzes. Fredsgatan 2. Stockholm. 
Switzerland: Libraire Payot. Lausanne. . 
Syria and Lebanon; Librairie universelle, Av. Fouad Ier, Beirut. 
Svdaey. 
West, Toronto, 
Prague. 
Norregade. Copenhagen. 
  
1¢ 
Conference—the Arts and Letters 
Programme will also "include its 
continuous activities. These consist 
of research and documentation, con- 
cerning all phases of the Arts and 
art education, which must be built 
up over -a number of years. They 
will'not only enable Unesco to meet 
enquiries from member states and 
the general public, but equip the 
Organisation to undertake such 
tasks of a long or short term 
nature as the General Conference 
may set for it. 
Attention of World 
Fixed on Unesco 
“All men of goodwill who have 
the heavy task of seeking, insfruc- 
ting and informing, have their 
attention focussed on our work. 
Entire peoples passionately follow 
our discussions, We must not de- 
ceive this great hope of a world 
profoundly desirous of peace, the   problems of which can be resolved 
only by passing from a purely 
material approach to an internatio- 
nal and human approach. Let us 
unite in our efforts to give people 
reasons to believe in a future more 
closely conforming to their aspira- 
tions and conforming also to the 
ideal of our Charter.” 
(Extract from address of M. Jacques 
MARITAIN, chief of thé French Dele- 
gation delivered at inaugural meeting 
of Second Session of the General 
Conference at the Palacio de Bellas 
Artes. Mexico City on November 6, 1947.) 
New York Office of Unesco 
The New York office of Unesco 
has recently been moved to the 
United Nations Building in Man- 
hattan. 
___The official address is: Unesco, 
United Nations Building (Room 401) 
405 East 42nd Street New York 
City, N. Y. 
Telephone: MUrray Hill 3-1100, 
Extension 40. 
IMPRIMERIE 
DU NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE 
21, Rue de Berri - Paris 8e 
  
Above: Dranecd. flag of the Mexican Republic, 
surmounted by the country’s national emblem, 
forms a dramatic backdrop to the speaker’s 
rostrum in the main conference hall of the 
Escuela Nacional de Maestros where the 
General Conference of Unesco held its 
Second Session. Upper left : 
of the principal conference hall, pictured 
during a plenary session. Left: the President of 
Mexico welcomes delegates to the Second 
Session of the Geaeral Conference of Unesco 
at the inaugural ceremony in the Palacio 
de Bellas Artes, Mexico City. - 
Another view 
  
PRESS REVIEW 
The Second Session of Unesco’s 
General Conference received world- 
wide coverage in the press: from 
New Zealand to Norway, from 
Belgium to Brazil, editorialists 
have shown themselves sensitive to 
the fact that the world is interest- 
ed in the work of this Specialised 
Agency of the United Nations. 
We re-print below extracts from 
a very small selection of the clip- 
pings Unesco has received, taken 
from newspapers printed in widely 
separated cultural areas of the 
globe : 
“LE FIGARO” (France) of 30 De- 
cember : 
“Unesco’s session at Mexico City 
represents a turning point in its 
existence. The delegates showed 
clearly their determination fo pass 
from the mecessary phase of plans, 
enquiries and programmes to that 
of realisation and action. 
The repercussions of the meeting 
in Mexico City were so great in 
all the Latin American countries 
that it became apparent that a 
meeting in the Near East would be 
useful to spread in the Arab world 
the ideas of solidarity and mutual 
understanding which are the essen- 
tial condition of peace.” 
..M. Paul Rivet. 
“EL, UNIVERSAL” 
November. 
(Mexico) 10 
In an editorial entitled “Lan- 
guages in Unesco”, this paper 
writes : 
“It would be an anomaly if the 
language of Cervantes were exclud- 
ed, not only in Mexico, but in the 
many distant countries where it is 
spoken, and only those of Shakes- 
peare and Moliére retained in the 
work of this important organisa- 
tion. Since the countries speaking 
our language total nearly half of 
the Member States of the United 
Nation Educational Scientific and 
Cultural Organisation, the right of 
Spanish to be classed along with 
English and French as a widely 
spoken language is beyond dispute. 
And this right, it must be emphasis-. 
ed, is mot confined to the present 
meeting. It is valid for alt future 
meetings of Unesco, and the dele- 
gales of the nations who recognise 
this right must never cease lo 
claim it.” . 
“ MANCHESTER GUARDIAN ” 
(England) 12 December. . 
An editorial entitled “Mexico 
City” reads in part as follows: 
“Most of the good work or Unesco 
is unspectacular and done in re- 
mote parts of the world. There is 
no better publicity than a big 
conference. 
“It woyld be far better if Unesco’s 
friends thought less for a while 
about war and peace dnd took as 
their task to press on in the praci- 
ical service of education and   
science as ends in themselves. On 
the scientific side there :s already 
a sound tradition of international 
co-operation... For its own intrinsic™ 
merit it deserves generous finan~ 
cial support, and the General: 
Conference had the good sense to 
provide it. 
“CORRIERE DI MILANO” (Italy) 
21 December. 
Guido De Ruggiero writes. 
“The work of the Second Gen- 
eral Conference of Unesco has 
come to an end. During this month 
much was discussed and in the 
midst of a number of rather Ulo- 
pian and abstract plans which were 
formulated and approved, several 
concrete proposals have come to 
light which will constitule a use- 
ful working programme’ for the 
year 1948. Among these which will 
interest Italians particularly are 
those which will seek to stimulate 
the international exchange of per- 
sons, books and scientific material. 
New study grants will be allocated 
and concrete facilities introduced 
for the exchange of professors and 
students on ‘the basis of a “clear- 
ing” system which will obviate the 
necessity of currency exchange. A 
plan has also been formulated for 
the exchange of books. with the’ 
* creation of “book coupons” to be 
guaranteed by Unesco, “thus assur- 
ing an int'l. circulation of books. 
“CIN” 
ber. 
Dr. R. Vanicek in an article 
(Czechoslovakia) 5 Decem- 
. “Neglected Unesco” writes: 
“Since politics have undoubtedly 
a greater impact on the organisa- 
tion of the world than science and 
culture, the last session of the’ 
General Assembly of United Na- 
tions and the Conference of For- 
eign Ministers in London had 
much more publicity than the 
work of Unesco, and its General 
Conference. This should not be the 
case since a peace organisation 
such as UN with all its political 
and economic activities cannot do 
without an educational institution 
like Unesco. 
“By co-operation with ‘prominent 
scientists all over the world a stage 
of world development could be 
achieved where politics would be 
subordinated to knowledge and not 
vice versa as we have experienced 
it so far to the great harm of all 
mankind, 
“CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MONI- 
TOR” (USA) 6 December). 
“So Unesco has packed its bags... 
figuratively with as many good 
things as old Saint Nicholas him- 
self might have taken aboard for 
a peace-hungry world nearing the 
Christmas festival. The good- 
effects of these gifts may not be 
felt until the new year is well un~ 
der way, but the packages can be 
opened now for viewing