# [101488](101488engo.pdf) 4

## [Page 1](101488engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

| 1205-9511 
wna iii  

## [Page 2](101488engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

We invite readers to send us 
photographs to be considered 
for publication in this feature. 
Your photo should show a 
painting, a sculpture, piece of 
architecture or any other 
subject which seems to be an 
example of cross-fertilization 
between cultures. 
Alternatively, you could send 
us pictures of two works from 
different cultural backgrounds 
in which you see some striking 
connection or resemblance. 
Please add a short caption to 
all photographs. 
. Ein Le I 
Achilles’ 
I ( [1:1 | 
© 1994, Smoke darkened 
A [EITC EVE EET] 
1s by Martine Cazin 
This group of ceramic 
~ sculptures evoking the 
death of Achilles, the 
legendary warrior EN 
leading character in 
Homer's lliad, belongs 
to a series entitled 
Armures d’argile (clay 
: armour). During a 
recent visit to Japan, 
the French painter and 
potter Martine Cazin 
ECR EEE CHER GT 
sculptural possibilities 
[PET ELECT LITT 
and has since explored 
the theme in sculptures 
inhabited by “our 
ambitions and fears”. 
“Empty armour,” she 
RL CE | TE {71 CER TY 
vanity of weapons.” 

## [Page 3](101488engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

CONTENTS 
NOVEMBER 1995 
46 
Interview with 
Yehudi Menuhin 
35 
Greenwatch 
Fish farming: 
a 4,000year-old growth 
industry 
by France Bequette 
39 
Global view 
40 
UNESCO IN ACTION 
Heritage 
The Iguacu Falls, 
cascading wonder of the 
subtropical forest 
by Edouard Bailby 
44 
LISTENING 
The birth of the blues 
by Isabelle Leymarie 
50 
1995, UNITED NATIONS YEAR 
FOR TOLERANCE 
The watchful eye of 
democracy 
by Richard Hoggart 
a new beginning 
_6- 
A new beginning by Federico Mayor 
-8- 
Our common home by Edgar Morin 
_11- 
The road to 1945 by Chikh Bekri 
14 - 
UNESCO’s programme for peace by Ahmed Saleh Sayyad 
-17- 
Demilitarizing military service by Anne Baer 
-19- 
i | - { \ Yr | ' V4 1 i yy | oD _ 
HONOURED BY UNESCO 
Nelson Mandela by Tahar Ben Jelloun 
Frederik Willem de Klerk by Anthony Johnson 
The Hague Academy of International Law 
Shimon Peres by Charles Enderlin 
Yitzhak Rabin by Luc Beyer de Ryke 
Yasser Arafat by Lotfi EI-Kholy 
Jimmy Carter by Flora Lewis 
Juan Carlos I by Ramon Luis Acuiia 
THE UNESCO ( OURIER 
48 th year 
Published monthly in 30 languages and in Braille

## [Page 4](101488engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNESCO 
OURIER 
Published monthly in 30 languages and in Braille by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization. 
31, rue Francois Bonvin, 75732 Paris CEDEX 15, France. 
Fax: (331) 45.66.92.70 
Internet: unesco.courer@unesco.org 
Director: Bahgat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin 
French edition: Alain Lévéque 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Features: Jasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey (Tel. 45.68.46.90) 
Documentation: José Banaag (Tel. 45.68. 46.85) 
. Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel, 45.68.46.87) 
Secretariat: Annie Brachet (Tel. 45.68.47.15), 
Administrative Assistant: Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and 
Korean: Mouna Chatta (Tel. 45.68.47.14) 
Artwork Consultant: Enc Froge 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Irina Utkina (Moscow) 
German: Dominique Anderes (Berne) 
Arabic: El-Said Mahmoud El-Sheniti (Cairo) 
Italian: (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: Akbar Zargar (Teheran) 
Dutch: Claude Montrieux (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Moacyr A. Fioravante (Rio de Janeiro) 
Urdu: Javaid Iqbal Syed (Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras | Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay: Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Kang Woo-hyon (Seoul) 
Swahili: Leonard J. Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene: Aleksandra Kornhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala: Neville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish: Katri Himma (Helsinki) 
Basque: Juxto Egana (Donostia) 
Thai: Sudhasinee Vajrabul (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Do Phuong (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Nazer Mohammad Angar (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
Ukrainian: Volodymyr Vasiliuk (Kiev) 
Galician: Xabier Senin Femandez (Santiago ce Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION. Fax: 42.73.24.29 
Subscriptions: Marie-Thérése Hardy (Tel. 45.68.45.65), 
Jocelyne Despouy, Jacqueline Louise-Julie, Manichan 
Ngonekeo, Michel Ravassard, Mohamed Salah El Din 
(Tel. 45.68.49.19) 
Customer service: Ginette Motreff (Tel. 45.68.45.64) 
Accounts: (Tel. 45.68.45.65) 
Shipping: Daniel Meister (Tel. 45.68.47.50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. Tel.: 45.68.45.65 
1 year: 211 French francs. 2 years: 396 FF. 
Students: 1 year: 132 French francs 
Binder for one year's issues: 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
1 year: 132 French francs. 2 years: 211 FF. 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of UNESco or by Visa, Eurocard or Mastercard 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted pro 
wding the credit line reads “Repninted from the Unesco Couner”, plus date 
of issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles 
reprinted must bear author's name. Non-copy night ¢ ph hot 054 wilt be 5 Supplied 
on request. Unsalicited manuscripts cannot 300 
nied by an international reply coupon covenng po    ned 
Wy repre esent the 
   
  
    
express the upirins.of ne authors and do not 
opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of the X Coun r. Photo 
capt ans and headline *S are written by the Ua staff The e bound: 
anes on maps publis al endorsement 
or acceptance by Unesc sco Couner is pro- 
duced in microform (mic rofilm and/c che 1) Unssco, 7 Place de 
Fontenoy, 75700 Pa ans; 2) Univers ny " crofiims (Xerox), Ann Arbor, 
Michigan 481001 SAL (3)N C.R. Microcard Edition, Indian Head lnc. 111 
West 40th Street, New York, u. S.A; (4) Bell and Howell Co., Old Mansfield 
Road, Wooster, Ohio 44591, USA 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) 
DEPOT LEGAL: C1 - NOVEMBRE 1995 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - DIFFUSE PAR LESN.MPP 
Photocomposition, photogravure: Le Courrier ge I'Unesco. 
Impression: MAURY IMPRIMEUR, 
Z.l. Route d'Etampes. 45331 Malsherbes 
ISSN 0041-5278 N* 11-1995-0P1-95-542 A 
This issue comprises 52 pages and a 4. page insert between 
pages 2-3 and 50-51. 
4 
PREAMBLE TO 
UNESCO’S CONSTITUTION 
The Governments of the States parties to this Con- 
stitution on behalf of their peoples declare, 
that since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in 
the minds of men that the defences of peace must 
be constructed; 
that ignorance of each other’s ways and lives has 
been a common cause, throughout the history 
of mankind, of that suspicion and mistrust 
between the peoples of the world through which 
their differences have all too often broken into 
war; 
that the great and terrible war which has now ended 
was a war made possible by the denial of the 
democratic principles of the dignity, equality 
and mutual respect of men, and by the propaga- 
tion, in their place, through ignorance and prej- 
udice, of the doctrine of the inequality of men 
and races; that the wide diffusion of culture, and 
the education of humanity for justice and lib- 
erty and peace are indispensable to the dignity 
of man and constitute a sacred duty which all 
the nations must fulfil in a spirit of mutual 
assistance and concern; 
that a peace based exclusively upon the political and 
economic arrangements of governments would 
not be a peace which could secure the unani- 
mous, lasting and sincere support of the peoples 
of the world, and that the peace must therefore 
be founded, if it is not to fail, upon the intellec- 
tual and moral solidarity of mankind. 
For these reasons, the States parties to this Consti- 
tution, believing in full and equal opportuni- 
ties for education for all, in the unrestricted pur- 
suit of objective truth, and in the free exchange 
of ideas and knowledge, are agreed and deter- 
mined to develop and to increase the means of 
communication between their peoples and to 
employ these means for the purposes of mutual 
understanding and a truer and more perfect 
knowledge of each others lives. 
In consequence whereof they do hereby create the 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization for the purpose of 
advancing, through the educational and scien- 
tific and cultural relations of the peoples of the 
world, the objectives of international peace and 
of the common welfare of mankind for which 
the United Nations Organization was estab- 
lished and which its Charter proclaims. 
Adopted in London on 16 November 1945 and amended by the 
General Conference at later sessions.

## [Page 5](101488engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

onth by month 
On 16 November 1945, UNESCO's Constitution was signed by forty-one states. It came into 
force a year later, on 4 November 1946, after being officially ratified by the first twenty 
signatories. 
The mission of the new organization was, in a word, to construct the defences of peace 
so as to make war redundant. As well as being a matter for international agreements, peace 
was to be instilled into people's hearts and minds, into their private and public ambitions 
and their daily lives. 
This idea had been formulated by Kant in the eighteenth century, but until the immediate 
aftermath of the Second World War its expression was compromised by the almost total 
supremacy of national self-interest. It was not until 1945, when the world contemplated the 
monstrous consequences to which this had led, that the victorious democracies proclaimed 
the principle of an intellectual and moral solidarity that included all humanity. 
In this respect UNESCO's Constitution broke new ground. It stressed “that a peace 
based exclusively upon the political and economic arrangements of governments would not 
be a peace which could secure the unanimous, lasting and sincere support of the peoples of 
the world.” A more ambitious kind of peace was called for. States should seek to “develop 
and to increase the means of communication between their peoples for the purposes of 
mutual understanding”. 
But another half century was to elapse before any real progress was made on this peace 
agenda. 1t took time—the years between 1945 and 1989—for the East-West confrontation 
between communism and capitalism to come to an end, and for the colonized peoples to 
attain political sovereignty and full membership of the international community. 
The world scene has been transformed. The inegalitarian integration of economies and 
capital movements in a single market and the aggressive unification of technological stan- 
dards and media networks have led to the development of paradoxical and explosive situa- 
tions: growing cultural standardization at the same time as the exacerbation of tribal, 
ethnic and confessional reflexes; the rise of democratic ideals as well as the recrudescence of 
despotism. 
In this general climate of instability in which countries large and small are tempted by 
introspection and isolationism, the struggle for peace is a far less straightforward process 
than it was. New dangers have appeared, but so too have new hopes. 
The prospect of a global nuclear conflagration has receded. But while the threat of war 
has become less intensive it has become more extensive, in the form of internal conflicts 
within regions, countries, cities and even neighbourhoods. The great powers are less and less 
inclined to take action outside their own turf, but while this may encourage adventurism by 
petty local tyrants it may also foster self-expression on the part of peoples which are now 
freed from tutelage, as well as experiments in democracy and the invention of many new 
approaches to peace. 
In such an open-ended context, the initiative of inspired and courageous leaders may 
bring an end injust situations that have existed for centuries. The imagination and civic 
spirit of private citizens now count for much more than they did. Many things that once 
seemed inevitable, including war, have ceased to be so. 
The world outlook has radically changed, bringing new fears and new promises. It is 
time for a new departure on the road to peace. 
BAHGAT ELNADI AND ADEL RIFAAT 
5 » 
-

## [Page 6](101488engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 101489: A New beginning

Anew beginning 
  
FEDERICO MAYOR 
is Director-General of Unesco. 
6 
by Federico Mayor 
For many years world events moved slowly 
because the two super-powers took all the 
decistons, and it seemed that the rest of the 
world had been side-tracked away from deci- 
sion-making. Now, suddenly, we realize that 
we are facing new threats for which we are 
unprepared—overpopulation, poverty, intol- 
erance, the knowledge gap and the inability of 
different ethnic groups and cultures to live 
together. 
The Secretary-General of the United 
Nations recently offered some ideas for con- 
sideration in his Agenda for Peace. The 
Agenda for Peace has two main facets: peace- 
keeping and peace-building. 
PEACE-KEEPING AND 
PEACE-BUILDING 
Peace-keeping is at the very core of the UN 
mandate. It is implemented by the Security 
Council. Peace-building, on the other hand, 
is a more complex and long-term preventive 
activity to which all UN institutions and spe- 
cialized agencies must contribute. We are 
sometimes successful at peace-keeping, but 
as yet we arc unprepared for peace-building. 
We are used to relying on force, and our 
budgets make provisions for the armed forces 
and their weaponry. Our war machines exist 
because we think that the hawkish inclinations 
of others can only be discouraged by our own 
capacity for destruction. 
Some of today’s peace-keeping operations 
require an investment of 1.5 billion dollars. 
Meanwhile, it is impossible to raise even 30 
million dollars for peace-building operations 
because the latter do not yet fit into our order 
of priorities and therefore do not form part of 
our budgets. 
This is not a new situation. To take one 
example, we are willing to provide 526 million 
dollars in food aid to fight the effects of 
drought in Africa, but all this money remains 
in the North because that is where the indus- 
tries that provide the food arc located and so 
are the aircraft and ships that transfer it. But 
when we ask for a million dollars for endoge- 
nous capacity-building, to provide stricken 
countries with intensive learning pro- 
grammes so that they can be better prepared 
for future droughts, we get a flat refusal. 
Why? Because we are not ready to provide 
that kind of peace-building operation. 
Peace-building means taking preventive 
action. Not only must we be prepared to act 
when a conflict has broken out; we must also 
be able to detect warning signals early enough 
to nip conflicts in the bud. Just as we have 
smoke detectors in buildings, so we should 
have an early-warning system that would 
enable us to act in time, before conflagrations 
occur. 
The problem is that preventive activities 
attract neither recognition nor thanks. If a 
conflict does not break out, nobody is going 
to congratulate you for having prevented it. 
The same thing happens in medicine. If you 
prevent an epidemic or stop a disease from 
spreading, parents are not going to come 
along and thank you for protecting their chil- 
dren, for the simple reason that there has 
been no outbreak of disease. If a surgeon 
removes a tumour, the operation 1s 
applauded as an achievement of modern

## [Page 7](101488engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 101489: A New beginning

medicine. But if you manage to avoid surgery, 
no one will congratulate you. Decorations go 
~ to generals who win minor battles, not to 
those who avoid major wars. Preventive 
action produces intangible results; and we 
have not yet learned to invest in intangibles. 
We are only used to tangible results that 
can be splashed across newspapers or televi- 
sion screens. If nothing happens—and this is 
exactly what we want—no one will accept 
that we are in any way responsible. We must 
be prepared to use the media to inform 
public opinion about how important it is to 
take preventive- measures to stop problems 
from degenerating into conflict. In other 
  
words to establish peace in hearts and minds. 
In culture. 
EVERYBODY'S BUSINESS 
With the growing power of civil society, the 
situation has rarely been more propitious. 
Every action, even the most trivial, counts. 
Creating a culture of peace is now every- 
body’s business. Peace can no longer be 
regarded as an agreement between the pow- 
erful, as a state of grace that sometimes 
descends on a lucky country. It is a social 
condition to which every citizen can con- 
tribute at every moment, 
It would of course be ridiculous to deny 
that this condition depends largely on deci- 
sions that only politicians can take. But the 
opportunities for individual and collective 
action on behalf of peace are certainly greater 
than is usually thought. The cause of peace 
must be defended in everyday life—at home, 
at school, in the workplace, in parliaments 
and cafés. Independent actions can interact 
and strengthen onc another. In this way we 
shall gradually move from a culture condi- 
tioned by centuries of war to a culture 
existing in the name of peace. 
The supreme expression of a society’s cul- 
ture is the behaviour of its members in their 
everyday lives. The framework of justice, 
dignity, equality and solidarity which is what I 
mean by the term “culture of peace” will be 
built, day in day out, by way of such behav- 
iour, at last free from all interference and con- 
straint. | 
Constructing 
the defences of 
peace is not an 
exercise in damage 
limitation but a 
preventive effort 
to which every 
citizen can 
contribute 
Lex, The dream of an angel, 
by B-year-old Gao Yan (China).

## [Page 8](101488engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 101490: Our common home

Our common home 
by Edgar Morin 
We should abandon the Promethean dream of 
dominating the universe and aspire instead to live 
"together on earth 
The preamble to UNESCO’s Constitution makes 
the correct diagnosis that, “since wars begin in 
the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that 
the defences of peace must be constructed”. 
Today, although the illusions and enthusi- 
asms of 1945 are gone, we are again confronted, 
in an acute form, with the same fundamental 
problems that led to the establishment of 
UNESCO, the problems of peace and war, the 
problems of material, technological and eco- 
nomic underdevelopment facing the countries 
of the South and the East and the problem of 
psychological, moral and intellectual underde- 
velopment, which is universal. 
As we look back over our millennium, the 
three questions raised by Kant two centuries ago 
come again to mind: “What can I know? What 
must I do? What can I hope for?” 
A WORLD IN DISARRAY 
The planet is in turmoil: the crisis of progress 
affects all of mankind, everywhere creating dis- 
array, causing old bonds to break and communi- 
ties to turn in upon themselves; the fires of war 
are again being stoked; and the world is losing 
hold of the global outlook and the sense of the 
common good. Faith in science, technology and 
industry is everywhere running up against the 
problems that science, technology and industry 
are themselves causing. Science is not only a 
source of enlightenment, it is itself blind as to 
where the scientific adventure is leading, an 
adventure that is slipping beyond its control and 
beyond the reach of its conscience. Like the bib- 
lical tree of life, science is a tree of knowledge 
whose fruit contains both good and evil. 
The vast apparatus we call science and tech- 
nology produces not only knowledge and 
insight but also ignorance and blindness. 
Progress in the various branches of science has 
produced advantages arising from the division 
of labour but also the drawbacks of over-spe- 
cialization, compartmentalization and the frag- 
mentation of knowledge. 
With so many dramatically interrelated 
problems, the world would seem to be not just 
in crisis but on its last legs, in that violent condi- 
tion where the forces of death grapple with 
those of life. Despite all our common interests, 
we are still one another’s enemies, and the 
unleashing of racial, religious and ideological 
antagonisms continues to generate wars, mas- 
sacres, torture, and humiliation. Humanity 
cannot overcome man’s inhumanity to man. 
What we do not know yet is whether this 1s 
merely the death rattle of an old world, 
heralding a new birth, or whether these are 
really the world’s death throes. 
We had already lost sight of the principles 
that anchored us in the past; now we have lost 
sight of the certainties that guided our steps into 
the future. There is no law of history that auto- 
matically guarantees progress. 
We are simultaneously experiencing the crisis 
of the past, the crisis of the future, and the crisis 
of transition. Contained within these crises are 
the crisis of development and the crisis of our era 
of planet-wide consciousness, comprising such 
increasingly grave problems as the urbanization 
of the world, economic and demographic dis- 
order, lack of progress or reverses in the devel- 
opment of democracy, and the uncontrolled 
onward march of science and technology. 
Inherent in all this is the danger that civilization 
will become homogenized and cultural diversity 
will be destroyed, a risk inseparable from the 
equal and opposite danger that the nations will 
split up into small, conflicting communities, ren- 
dering a shared human civilization impossible. 
Our planet is indeed, in keeping with the 
etymology of the word, a “wandering star”. We 
are embarked upon a great adventure into the 
unknown. 
LIVING TOGETHER 
ON EARTH 
The earth itself has lost its old familiar universe: 
the sun has shrunk to the size of a Lilliputian star 
among billions of others in an expanding uni-

## [Page 9](101488engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

Lo, by 11-year-old Nadia Ei 
Saqed (Egypt). 


### 101490: Our common home

verse; the earth is lost in the cosmos, its surface 
a small, tepid patch of living mould in a glacial 
expanse where stars and black holes devour one 
another with incredible violence. As far as we 
know at present, this small planet is the only 
place where life and consciousness exist. It is 
the common home of all human beings. We 
need to acknowledge our consubstantial link 
with it, relinquish the Promethean dream of 
becoming masters of the universe and aspire 
instead to living together on earth. 
Instead of seeing “the universal” and our 
various “homelands” as opposites, we should 
link our homelands—family, region, nation— 
into a concentric pattern and integrate them 
into the concrete reality of our earthly home- 
land. We must stop contrasting a radiant future 
with a past of servitude and superstition. All 
cultures have their own virtues, their own store 
of experience and their own wisdom, as well as 
their shortcomings and areas of ignorance. It is 
in its past that a community finds the energy to 
confront its present and prepare for its future. 
Since all humans are children of life and of the 
carth, “rootless cosmopolitanism”, which is 
something abstract, must be discarded in favour 
of “carthling cosmopolitanism”, citizenship of 
our extraordinary little planet. The re-establish- 
ment of ethnic or national roots is justifiable as 
long as it goes hand-in-hand with a decper re- 
rooting in our human identity as citizens of earth. 
The distinguishing feature of mankind is 
unitas multiplex, unity in diversity, the genetic, 
cerebral, intellectual and affective unity of our 
species, whose numberless potentialities find 
expression through the diversity of cultures. 
Diversity is the jewel in the crown of human 
unity and, conversely, unity is the jewel in the 
crown of human diversity. 
Just as living, ongoing communication 
needs to be established between past, present 
and future, so living, ongoing communication 
needs to be established between distinctive cul- 
tural, ethnic and nattonal characteristics on the 
one hand, and, on the other, the concrete reality 
of one world, the homeland of all humanity. 
CIVILIZING THE EARTH 
And so we must civilize the earth. This means not 
only creating a confederation of humanity, while 
respecting existing cultures and homelands, but 
also promoting democracy and solidarity. 
Democracy presupposes and also fosters 
 

## [Page 10](101488engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

diversity of social interests and groups and diver- 
sity of ideas. In other words it must not only 
cause the will of the majority to prevail but it 
must also acknowledge the right of minorities 
and protest movements to exist and express 
themselves, and allow heretical and deviationist 
ideas to be expressed. It requires consensus 
about respect for democratic institutions and 
rules, but also needs conflicts of ideas and opin- 
ions to make it lively and fruitful. Conflicts can, 
however, only fulfil that function if they comply 
with the democratic rules of conduct, which 
keep antagonisms in check by substituting the 
combat of ideas for physical combat and which 
decide the provisional victor among the contes- 
tants by means of debates and elections. 
As to solidarity, a society cannot increase in 
complexity without an accompanying increase 
in solidarity, since more complexity means 
more freedoms, more opportunities for initia- 
tive and more possibilities of disorder, which 
can be both fruitful and destructive. Carried to 
extremes, disorder ceases to be fruitful and 
becomes mainly destructive; carried to 
extremes, complexity deteriorates into disinte- 
gration, the breakdown of a whele into its con- 
stituent parts. The cohesion of the whole can, of 
course, be maintained by reverting to coercion, 
but to the detriment of complexity; an integra- 
tive solution conducive to complexity can only 
be achieved by developing true solidarity, a sol- 
idarity that is not imposed upon people but that 
they feel within themselves and experience as 
fraternity. What 1s valid for any homeland, is 
now valid for the whole human community. 
This brings us to the problem of reforming 
our thinking and of rethinking education. 
Awareness of all these issues can only be 
achieved when our thinking is capable of recon- 
necting concepts that have become discon- 
nected and areas of knowledge that have been 
compartmentalized. The new areas of knowl- 
edge whereby we discover the place in the 
cosmos of the earth as humanity’s homeland are 
meaningless as long as they remain separated 
from one another. The earth is not the sum of 
the planet, the biosphere and humanity. It is a 
complex physical, biological and anthropolog- 
ical totality wherein life springs forth from the 
history of the planet and humanity springs forth 
from the history of life on earth. 
Piecemeal ways of thinking that split what is 
global into fragments naturally ignore the 
anthropological complex and the planet-wide 
context. But waving the global flag is not 
enough; the component parts of the global 
whole must be joined together in a complex, 
organized system of linkages, and the global 
whole itself must be put in context. The reform 
of thinking that is required is one which will 
generate attitudes that take account of the con- 
text and of complexity. 
10 
A MULTIDIMENSIONAL 
WAY OF THINKING 
As regards the context, we need to think in 
planct-wide terms when considering politics, 
economics, population questions, ccology, the 
preservation of biological and cultural diversities. 
It is not enough, however, to set all objects and 
events within a planet-wide “framework”. What 
is needed is always to seek out the relationship of 
inseparability, interaction and feedback between 
any phenomenon and its context, and between 
any context and the planet-wide context. 
As to complexity, there is a need for a way of 
thinking that brings together again that which has 
been put asunder and compartmentalized, that 
respects diversity whilst recognizing individu- 
ality, and that tries to discern interdependences. 
In other words, we need a multidimensional way 
of thinking, an organizing approach that takes 
account of the two-way relationship between the 
whole and its constituent parts, an approach that, 
instead of studying an object in isolation, exam- 
ines it in and through its self-organizing relation- 
ship with its cultural, social, economic, political 
and natural environment, a way of thinking that 
acknowledges its own incompleteness and 
knows how to deal with uncertainty, particularly 
where action is involved, since action can only 
take place where there is uncertainty. 
In the course of history we have often seen 
the possible become impossible, but we have also 
scen hopeless dreams come true and improbable 
events occur. 
We now know that the potential of the 
human brain is still very largely under-exploited. 
Since the possibilities of social development are 
related to the brain’s potential, no-one can say for 
certain that our societies’ capacities for improve- 
ment and change are exhausted and that we have 
reached the end of history. 
The anthropological and sociological possi- 
bility of progress re-establishes the principle of 
hope for the future, but without “scientific” 
certainty and without “historical” promises. It 
1s an unsure possibility, greatly reliant upon 
raised awareness, willpower, courage and luck; 


### 101490: Our common home

the raising of awareness is therefore an urgent 
task. 
We are engaged, on a world-wide scale, in 
life’s cssential undertaking, that of resisting 
death. Civilizing the earth and promoting soli- 
darity, converting the human race to humanity, 
such 1s the basic, all-embracing aim of any pro- 
ject that aspires not only to progress for 
mankind but to its very survival. An awareness 
of our common mortality should lead us 
towards solidarity and reciprocal commisera- 
tion onc with another, by all and for all. || 
EDGAR MORIN 
is a French sociologist who is emeritus director of research 
with the French National Centre for Scientific Research 
(CNRS). His most recent work published in English is Towards 
a Study of Humankind. Vol 1: The Nature of nature (1992).  A wonder tree, 
by 7-year-old 
Ulrike Terpetschnig 
{Austria).

## [Page 11](101488engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 101491: The Road to 1945

  
The road to 1945 
by Chikh Bekri 
The long-cherished idea of creating peace in the minds of 
men took form in the watershed year of 1945 
UNESCO did not spring forth fully armed, like 
Athene from the head of Zeus, out of the 
smoking ruins of London one foggy day in 
November 1945. As British Prime Minister 
Clement Attlee said at the opening session of 
the London conference for the establishment 
of UNESCO, the idea of an intellectual organiza- 
tion to promote co-operation among the 
nations and serve the cause of mutual under- 
standing between the peoples had been around 
since the French Revolution or even earlier. 
The relationship between culture and peace 
has not always been obvious, however. It was 
only with the gradual establishment of democ- 
racy in the nineteenth century and the assump- 
tion of responsibility for public education by 
the state that the new concepts of the right to 
knowledge, equality of opportunity and educa- 
tion for all emerged. 
THE PIONEERS 
In the late nineteenth century the Dutch educa- 
tionist Herman Molkenboer wrote, with 
touching naivety, that “School is therefore the 
power to which the future belongs and teachers 
are the factors whose joint action should bring 
the fruits of the moral order in the universe to 
maturity”, and the German educator Kurnig 
drew up a plan for peace through education. 
These forerunners often found themselves 
swimming against the tide, without resources 
or supporters. At the beginning of the twen- 
tieth century they were drawn largely from 
associations of intellectuals and feminists. They 
learned to frequent the corridors of power and 
to lobby politicians. After the First World War, 
the Belgians Henri Lafontaine and Paul Otlet, 
who had founded the Union of International 
Organisations in 1910, tried without success to 
persuade the politicians to create an interna- 
tional organization of intellectual workers. 
Fannie Fern Andrews, who established the 
American School Peace League in 1908, later 
worked on a project for an “International Edu- 
cation Bureau”. 
But these pioneers of culture for the sake of 
peace could not make themselves heard. Prepa- 
ration for war was part of the training of the cit- 
izen, i.e. of culture, which, like education, 
remained the exclusive preserve of the state. 
The victors of the war made the vanquished 
pay dearly for their defeat, while the latter 
dreamed only of revenge, and thus the rise of 
nationalism was exacerbated by the confidence 
that comes from victory and the resentments 
that rise from defeat. The maxim “Let him who 
desires peace prepare for war” was quoted as a 
self-evident truth, 
At that time, few countries paid any attention 
to intellectual co-operation, which was not 
regarded as an important, or even a useful, factor 
in International relations. Some governments 
even regarded this form of international co- 
operation as suspect. The Covenant of the 
League of Nations is silent on the subject of cul- 
ture. Peace remained the preserve of politicians, 
diplomats and, in the last resort, the military. 
PEACE IN THE MINDS 
OF MEN 
The Second World War was to change this situ- 
ation and to win acceptance for the idea, set 
forth in UNESCO's constitution, that “since wars 
begin in the minds of men, 1t 1s in the minds of 
men that the defences of peace must be con- 
structed”, that “a peace based exclusively upon 
the political and economic arrangements of 
governments would not be a peace which could 
secure the unanimous, lasting and sincere sup- 
port of the peoples of the world”, and that “the 
L111 
se

## [Page 12](101488engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

peace must therefore be founded, if it is not to 
fail, upon the intellectual and moral solidarity of 
mankind.” 
Most of the speeches made at UNEscO’s 
founding conference took up this theme. The 
general atmosphere in London was neither one 
of rejoicing in victory over the forces of evil 
nor even one of rehef at awakening from a 
nightmare but rather reflective and subdued. 
As Jaime Torres Bodet, who headed the Mex- 
ican delegation and was later to become 
UNESCO's second Director-General, put it, “the 
gratification of triumph would be madness if we 
were to neglect the immediate need of finding 
some guarantee against the recurrence of such 
perils”. The fear of a war that would annihilate 
human life on earth was in everyone’s mind, 
and Archibald MacLeish, the leader of the 
United States delegation gave direct expression 
to it when he told the delegates: “We must 
choose to live together or we must choose, 
quite literally, not to live.” 
CULTURE FOR PEACE 
Tribute was also unanimously paid to the 
courage shown and the sacrifices made by intel- 
lectuals and to their decisive contribution to the 
triumph of democracy. In her opening address, 
British Minister of Education Ellen Wilkinson, 
who was President of the Conference, referred 
to the part intellectuals had played in these 
words: “In every land which the totalitarians 
overran, it was the intellectual who was picked 
out first to face the firing squad—teacher, 
priest, professor. The men who meant to rule 
the world knew that first they must kill those 
who tried to keep thought free”. 
The founding fathers also knew that culture 
in itself was not enough to guarantee peace. The 
totalitarian ideologies had been thought out by 
philosophers before being put into practice by 
politicians, and the deadliest weapons—whose 
devastating effects conference delegates could 
see for themselves. in London—had been 
devised and developed by scientists before 
being used by the military. 
Knowledge cannot do without morality. 
War, even more than a matter of armies, is a 
matter of ideologies. As Léon Blum, Associate 
President of the Conference, said, the war “has 
shown us how education, culture (in the strict 
sense) and science itself may be distorted 
against the common interests of humanity. . . . 
Expansion and perfecting [them] are therefore 
not enough. These institutions must be steered 
1 the direction of that ‘ideology’ of democracy 
and progress which 1s the psychological condi- 
tion and psychological basis of international sol- 
idarity and peace.” 
12 
FROM UTOPIA TO 
THE CULTURE OF PEACE 
The British scientist Julian Huxley, who in 1946 
became UNESCO’s first Director-General, was 
asked to draft a document on the new organiza- 
tion, to which he gave the title UNESCO, its pur- 
pose and its philosophy. The goal that Huxley set 
for UNESCO was not only that of preserving the 
peace, which is obviously the ultimate aim of 
the whole United Nations system, but of con- 
tributing thereby to the fulfilment of humanity, 
of those unique beings who have still to explore 
and exploit all their possibilities but who are hin- 
dered in so doing by the obstacles they have 
themselves raised, in the form of beliefs, ideolo- 
gies, cultures and so forth, which Huxley 
regarded as the root cause of the divergences 
between them, of conflicts and of wars. 
Arguing from the viewpoint of an agnostic 
biologist, Huxley was convinced that it was not 
by integrating all cultures and all beliefs, with 
their differences and contradictions, that 
UNESCO could help to usher in peace as 
humanity’s natural state, since it would be lacking 
that which he considered essential, a coherent 
overall philosophy in conformity with its ideal. 
No philosophical, religious, social, political or 
economic system in the world could of itself sat- 
isfy the ultimate purposes of the new organiza- 
tion. The dream of this scientist, whose view of 


### 101491: The Road to 1945

humanity was both optimistic and utopian, was 
to lay the foundations of an organization that 
would “help the peoples of the world to mutual 
understanding and to a realisation of the 
common humanity and common tasks which 
they share, as opposed to the nationalisms which 
too often tend to isolate and separate them.” 
But Huxley’s ideas were rejected. Most of 
the delegates to the London conference wanted 
UNESCO to preserve the diversity of identities 
and cultures. As the French jurist René Cassin, 
the guiding spirit behind UNEscO’s Constitu- 
tion, was to say, summing up the founders’ 
viewpoint, the new organization should not 
“affirm any uniform philosophy, which would 
strike a blow at the diversity of thinking, not 
only of nations but even of individuals”. 
NO SCIENCE WITHOUT 
CONSCIENCE 
What sets UNESCO apart within the United 
Nations system is not only its intellectual nature 
but above all its moral basis. For the founding 
fathers in London, it was above all an ethical 
organization operating in a technical field: the 
conscience of the world, as Jaime Torres Bodet 
liked to call it. Its main task along the hard road to 
peace 1s to contribute to the qualitative improve-

## [Page 13](101488engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

D ream, 
by 7-year-old Xiao Han 
Qiu (China). 


### 101491: The Road to 1945

ment of humanity through education, science 
and culture, to put the relations between individ- 
uals and peoples on a moral footing, and to help 
to establish greater justice, fraternity, under- 
standing and solidarity among them. 
Paulo de Berrédo Carneiro, another emi- 
nent figure in UNESCO’s history, insisted that 
“We cannot regulate the human forces con- 
ducive to peace save by establishing above 
purely political authority a spiritual force 
common to ali peoples”. 
NO PEACE WITHOUT 
DEVELOPMENT 
UNESCO's founders specified in its Constitution 
the paths it should follow in order to reach out 
towards the peoples, not over the heads of the 
states but through those in government. These 
paths arc followed by educators, scientists, 
writers and artists, working under the aegis of 
UNESCO National Commissions and their com- 
mittees, within non-governmental organizations, 
among the general population, young and old, 
within UNESCO Clubs and Associated Schools, in 
short, in the whole of civil soctety and among its 
elites—a vast field of operations in which to sow 
the fragile seed of peace in the minds of men. 
But culture alone is not enough, for the 
hungry have no ears to hear, and nothing is more 
terrible than culture when it makes educated 
people aware of their unjust situation as those 
whom fate has forgotten. The founding fathers 
knew and said these things. Torres Bodet ended 
his remarks with the following words: “The 
world is waiting for something more than the 
delimitation of frontiers and zones of influence, 
something more than a system of agreements for 
the exploitation and marketing of its products, 
something more, in short, than an interim system 
of security. It is looking for the establishment of a 
new kind of relationship between nations and 
between men. Hence the urgency of assigning a 
common denominator to its development. And 
that common denominator can be supplied only 
by the moral solidarity of mankind acting through 
knowledge and on the basis of education. | 
CHIKH BEKRI, 
of Algeria, was an Assistant Director-General of UNESCO 
from 1976 to 1987. He is the author of L'Unesco: ‘une 
entreprise erronée'? (Publisud, Paris, 1921). 

## [Page 14](101488engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 101492: UNESCO's programme for peace

UNESCO’s programme for peace 
by Ahmed Saleh Sayyad 
of con 
14 
A strate yi to influence attitudes and act on the root causes 
Peace-keeping is a function of the United 
Nations Organization. Peace-building, an 
activity concerning the human conscience and 
the moral and intellectual foundations of human 
behaviour, 1s a task which is incumbent on 
UNESCO. The level on which UNESCO exercises 
these responsibilities is that of culture as it is 
expressed in everyday life. Culture must be 
inspired and informed by the ideal of peace. 
The American poet Archibald MacLeish, 
who played a leading part in the drafting of 
UNEsco’s Constitution, described what the idea 
of peace meant to him—and to UNESCO's 
founders—in the following words. “Peace... . is 
a process and a condition,” he wrote, “not a 
static objective periodically achieved and lost. It 
1s a condition of mutual confidence, harmony 
of purpose, and co-ordination of activities in 
which free men and women can live a satisfac- 
tory life . .. in which war is affirmatively pre- 
vented by the dynamic and purposeful creation 
of a human and social order between the people 
of the world, in which the incentives to war are 
neutralized by the human and spiritual advances 
created and achieved.” 
Alfredo Cristiani, the President of El Sal- 
vador, believes that the culture of peace is 
simply the “culture of life”, while UNESCO’ 
Director-General, Federico Mayor, regards it as 
“a way of living one’s everyday life”. 
A NEW PERSPECTIVE 
In the Medium-Term Strategy (1996-2001) 
being submitted to UNESCO's General Confer- 
ence the culture of peace is defined as “all the 
values, attitudes and forms of behaviour, ways 
of life and of acting that reflect, and are inspired 
by, respect for life and for human beings and 
their dignity and rights, the rejection of violence 
and commitment to the principles of freedom, 
justice, solidarity, tolerance and understanding 
among peoples and between groups and indi- 
viduals.” 
These are tasks that must be performed by 
all categories of civil society. But it is quite nat- 
ural that teachers and intellectuals (poets, 
writers and creative artists) should play a leading 
role in developing the ideas and values under- 
lying this process. They can also use their 
knowledge and creative powers to inform the 
rest of society and infuse these values into the 
lives of their contemporaries. 
Peace, like war, makes its own demands. It 
implies a new way of looking at traditional 
modes of thought which still abound in warlike 
references—epic tales that extoll the courage of 
warriors, monuments commemorating battles, 
school books that teach children the illustrious 
exploits of soldiers, history books describing 
world wars, civil wars and holy wars. 
A LONG-TERM 
JOB 
Peace also calls for a large-scale programme to 
eradicate the poverty, inequality and discrimi- 
nation that give rise to the violence which fuels 
the conflicts of today. Many peoples and soci- 
eties are familiar with a state of political and 
social instability that could lead to terrible racial, 
ethnic or religious confrontations. The gap is 
widening between the haves and the have-nots. 
Human rights and fundamental freedoms are 
too often scorned. These trends have led

## [Page 15](101488engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 101492: UNESCO's programme for peace

UNESCO to take the initiative by contributing to 
national and international projects that promote 
the search for common ground and bases for 
compromise. These projects involve steps that 
UNESCO can take to isolate conflicts before they 
degenerate into violence, and in cases where 
they have already done so, to help contain them 
and to cope with their consequences. 
This means creating an environment of jus- 
tice and social harmony, building confidence 
between states and peoples, reflecting on the 
remote or immediate causes of conflicts and 
seeking solutions that short-circuit temptation 
to violence, by means of cultural activities, edu- 
cation, communication and legislation. 
IN THE FIELD 
“A culture of peace cannot be imposed from 
outside. It must be a process that grows out of 
the people themselves and develops differently 
in each country depending on its history, cul- 
tures and traditions.” This statement from 
UNESCO’s Action programme to promote a cul- 
ture of peace, launched in 1993, reveals the 
dynamics of a concept which is beginning to 
take practical shape. 
UNESCO’s first steps in this field took place 
in El Salvador, where the “First International 
Forum on the Culture of Peace” was held in 
San Salvador in February 1994. The previous 
year a “Forum for Education and Culture of 
Peace” organized in the same country had led 
to a nation-wide programme the goal of which 
  
was to contribute to the “country’s economic, 
social and cultural renewal”. 
In Mozambique a “Peace consolidation pro- 
gramme” has been organized with the authori- 
ties, non-governmental organizations and local 
community associations. It covers a wide range 
of activities including adult literacy work, the 
social reintegration of demobilized soldiers, the 
promotion of folk culture, radio programmes 
and cultural exchanges between young people. 
In Burundi a “National Symposium on the 
Culture of Peace” gave an opportunity for a 
broad spectrum of socio-professional groups, 
political organizations and associations to reflect 
on “problems connected with the interdepen- 
dence of democracy, human rights, peace and 
development in the Burundi cultural context”. 
Other experiences in the Congo and 
Somalia have enabled UNESCO to develop var- 
1ous steps by which bellicose attitudes can grad- 
ually give way to a spirit of compromise and 
reconciliation. 
A RECONCILIATION 
PLAN IN 
THE CONGO 
A forum on the theme “Intercommunity dia- 
logue for peace, democracy and sustainable 
development” was held in Brazzaville in 
December 1994. It was organized jointly by the 
government of the Republic of the Congo and 
UNESCO. Discussions focused on the questions 
of how to integrate the mechanisms for 
Te earth weeps, 
by 14-year-old Rita Yamashita 
{lapan) 
15

## [Page 16](101488engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 101492: UNESCO's programme for peace

UNESCO'S CULTURE 
OF PEACE 
PROGRAMME 
In response to the challenge of peace-building 
contained in the UN Secretary-General's Agenda for 
Peace, Unesco's Culture of Peace Programme is 
playing a dynamic role in three priority areas: conflict 
prevention, emergency assistance, and 
strengthening the process of post-conflict 
reconciliation. 
For further information, please contact: 
Director, Culture of Peace Programme, Unesco, 7 Place 
de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France. Tel.: (33-1) 
456808 77; Fax: (33-1) 47 8368 67.     
conflict-settlement that exist in traditional soci- 
eties into the new democratic process, the role 
of democratic institutions in peace-building 
between ethnic groups and the ways in which 
political parties can support social integration. 
The action plan “for promoting a culture of 
peace” that was devised after the Forum sug- 
gests a series of measures that could be adopted 
either to prevent conflicts or to encourage rec- 
onciliation. The plan is based on the mobiliza- 
tion of intellectuals, artists, educators and jour- 
nalists. Among the measures it proposes are 
providing support for research programmes on 
pre-conflict situations and on the traditions of 
dialogue and past experience in solving con- 
flicts; monitoring the ways in which different 
communities respect cultural, social and polit- 
ical rights; and upgrading road, rural radio and 
telephone systems to improve communica- 
tions between rural and urban areas. 
Steps are also to be taken to improve the 
status of women, who have often acted as con- 
ciliators in traditional African societies, and to 
educate young people by developing and dis- 
tributing teaching aids and aiding schools and 
universities. 
There are also plans to encourage disarma- 
ment and the disbanding of private militias, and 
to speed up the reintegration of young militia 
recruits into civilian life and the integration of 
— 
16 
unemployed young people and disaster victims 
Into society. 
RECONCILIATION IN 
SOMALIA 
A Symposium on the Culture of Peace in 
Somalia, organized on UNESCO’s initiative, was 
held from 17 to 20 April 1995 in Sana’a (Yemen). 
It was attended by about seventy Somali intel- 
lectuals and professional people (some living in 
Somalia, others belonging to the Somali dias- 
pora), representatives of the Organisation of 
African Unity, the Arab League, a number of 
UN bodies, international organizations and 
donor countries. There were three main items 
on the agenda: rebuilding Somali society, reha- 
bilitating the state and reintegrating the country 
into the international community. 
The Symposium was part of a broader 
framework of activities deployed in Somalia by 
UNESCO, which in the last two years has orga- 
nized 55 teacher training workshops (in many 
parts of Somalia and in refugee camps in neigh- 
bouring countries), printed 850,000 school 
books and handbooks for teachers, and distrib- 
uted emergency teaching materials. 
However, the war has caused incalculable 
damage. Hundreds of thousands of people 
were killed; families were destroyed; people 
displaced and children orphaned. All the tradi- 
tional values of African civilization have been 
overthrown. The only schooling for young 
people was training in handling weapons. The 
elders who had settled conflicts in the past were 
no longer listened to. Many people sought pro- 
tection in a clan. Despite the efforts of many vil- 
lages, violent tribalism replaced the traditional 
mechanisms of peaceful dialogue between 
ethnic groups. 
The participants in the Sana’a Symposium 
emphasized the need to combine tradition with 
modernity in order to build a new way of living 
together. Political pluralism, power sharing and 
a developing democratic system should find a 
source of ideas in certain kinds of traditional vil- 
lage democracy that still exist today. 
As in the Congo and in any other country 
seeking the path of reconciliation, steps must be 
taken towards disarmament, administrative 
restructuring and educational reform. In short, 
Somalis must learn again how to live in peace. H 
STUER FL ——. 
AHMED SALEH SAYYAD 
is the permanent delegate to Unesco of the Republic of 
Yemen and president of Unesco’s General Conference. 

## [Page 17](101488engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 101493: Demilitarizing military service

Demilitarizing military service 
by Anne Baer 
Community service as a humanitarian alternative to 
military conscription 
Te good life on earth, 
by 11-year-old Prajird 
Sangthong (Thailand). 
In many countries the army is an organized and 
efficient structure and can play an important 
role in development. Both in the North and the 
South, young people who are called up to do 
military service have often done civilian jobs. 
They have built roads in Ethiopia and Yemen 
and bridges in Guatemala. In the United States 
they have joined in the war on drug abuse and 
taken part in inner city resettlement pro- 
grammes. In Venczuela, Colombia and some 
other Latin American countries, they have 
taken part in literacy schemes. They have 
worked on environmental projects in the 
  
Himalayas and reforestation projects in the 
Algerian Sahara. 
In most developed countries where com- 
pulsory military service still exists it is 
becoming increasingly unpopular. Each year 
more and more young people register as con- 
scientious objectors. These countries are 
reducing troop numbers, partly because the 
Cold War is over and partly because their 
public finances are in a critical situation. They 
are also reducing the length of military service. 
The notion of security has changed. It has 
assumed new dimensions. The main threats to 
security now come from within, in the shape of 
unemployment, poverty, environmental degra- 
dation and social exclusion. People are starting 
to hope for a form of security that would be 
guaranteed by sustainable human development 
and rooted in tolerance and solidarity and not in 
a balance of terror. 
Exclusively military service could and 
should now be replaced by a form of civilian 
service which is not based on national defence 
but extends to social life, to the environment 
and the development of disadvantaged coun- 
tries. Although the principle of compulsory 
military service would be maintained, its con- 
ception and practice would be rethought. The 
proposed range of activities would be so wide 
that it would stimulate young people's interest 
in national service and community life. Com- 
munity service could be acceptable to the hun- 
dreds of thousands of young people who object 
to carrying weapons and refuse to perform mil- 
itary duties. 
There are many solid social and economic 
arguments in favour of community service. 
The time spent by a conscript in the army costs 
money. This is why lack of financial resources is 
leading some armies to discharge more and 
more young people of military age and in some 
cases to abolish conscription outright. A con- 
script who does community service costs less 
than one who serves in the armed forces. 
JREp——— 
= 1 hg ” | ~ 
FL

## [Page 18](101488engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
War machines used 
for peace 
In the last few months Unesco has been helping young 
people and athletes in poor countries to benefit from 
contributions in kind and from services offered by the 
armed forces of the industrialized nations. 
Tens of thousands of balls, shoes, shorts and 
shirts given to Unesco hy sportswear manufacturers 
like Nike and Adidas have been delivered free of charge 
by the French Navy and Air Force to Madagascar and 
Guinea, where they were handed over to children 
taking part in school-based and extracurricular “Sport 
for all” programmes. Unesco and the International Mil- 
itary Sports Council are co-operating to extend the 
scope and range of operations of this type. 
Meanwhile, the Swiss Army, via UNesco’s Special 
Fund for Youth, has made a gift of 31 jeeps and 
minibuses (worth $160,000) that had been taken out 
of active service. These vehicles have been adapted for 
use in socio-educative projects in Madagascar, Uzbek- 
istan and Romania. 
Re-utilizing military equipment for peaceful ends 
is one highly practical contribution to a culture of 
peace. 
Division of Youth and Sports Activities 
Unesco   
U ntitled, 
by 16-year-old 
Destin Rolex (Haiti) 
Another advantage of community service is 
that it offers young people useful openings that 
may guide them towards a career. Before 
embarking on an expensive course of studies 
that would perhaps lead nowhere, a conscript 
who opts for community service can acquire 
experience and skills that may be useful in a job. 


### 101493: Demilitarizing military service

Community service, whether at home or 
abroad, is useful in itself and may lead to some- 
thing. 
The conventional type of military service, in 
which all conscripts are supposed to be on an 
equal footing, itself provides an exceptional 
opportunity for young people of different back- 
grounds to mect. Community service is an even 
stronger encouragement to become a full 
member of society, as well as being a catalyst for 
democratic mixing. The young conscript who 
opts for community service will come into con- 
tact with elderly people, delinquents, drug 
addicts and problem children. He will learn to 
cope with new situations, and will make plenty 
of useful contacts. Independent of environ- 
mental or development considerations, the 
demilitarization of compulsory national service 
may be a first tentative step towards a solution of 
such contemporary social and human problems 
as the crisis of solidarity, racism, exclusion, urban 
malaise, youth unemployment and drug abuse. 
Conscripts who choose to perform com- 
munity service in a developing country of the 
South must be thoroughly prepared before- 
hand. But this form of service is worthwhile 
because young people may become closely 
attached to the host environment and become a 
major asset to another kind of co-operation, 
involving more modest resources but bolder 
objectives, with local populations. 
The provision of new forms of national ser- 
vice is certainly not risk-free. The availability of 
“free” human resources may lead to abuses. In 
various parts of the world large-scale public 
works projects supposedly of national interest 
have sometimes been carried out by dra- 
gooning people in an arbitrary fashion. Other 
risks may appear on a smaller scale. A conscript 
attached to the civil service, a business firm or 
an association may be required to do jobs that 
are useful to an elected local politician and not to 
the community at large. Nor should young 
conscripts be asked to do work that prevents 
young people in the host country from doing 
the same type of job. In other words, there 
must be rigorous controls. || 
ANNE BAER, 
of Israel, is a Unesco consultant who is currently preparing 
a doctorate in development economics.

## [Page 19](101488engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

EEE KS pi k 2 aay 
s . 
py > LS ny 
™ Any 
“5 
. a 
vi lads & £28, 8 1 “4 y avail 
REE i. ¥ Ea 5 & Sy LL _— 
2s &i } ) % 
a 
a 
ox 4 = | oe 
A Ai J 3 § i a 
yo \ & A SS SY Ha nt ) | 


### 101494: Peacemakers honoured by UNESCO

  
HONOURED BY UNESCO 
0
1991 
NELSON MANDELA AND FREDERIK WILLEM DE KLERK 
1992 
THE HAGUE ACADEMY OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 
1993 
YITZHAK RABIN, SHIMON PERES AND YASSER ARAFAT 
19914 
JIMMY CARTER AND JUAN CARLOS | 
hE 
The collapse of the two-bloc world system Nelson Mandela, a giant of our time 
by Tahar Ben Jelloun 
brought to an end a long period of immobility. 
Frederik Willem de Klerk, a conservative 
However uneasy and unpredictable the revolutionary 
oo oo by Anthony Johnson 
current situation may be, it is more open to 
Shimon Peres, passion and patience 
individual human effort, especially on the part of by Charles Enderlin 
remarkable personalities who, through their Yitzhak Rabin, a hawk with the wings of a 
dove 
commitment to peace, have given new by Luc Beyer de Ryke 
momentum to situations that seemed 
Yasser Arafat, the father of Palestine 
to be at a standstill. On the following pages are by Lotfi EI-Kholy 
thumbnail sketches of some of these Jimmy Carter, the pilgrim-president 
by Flora Lewis 
peacemakers who have been awarded Pe 
\ 1 Juan Carlos I, the democratic king 
Unesco's Félix Houphouét-Boigny Peace Prize. _— by Ramon Luis Acuna 
  
            
os ees 
- 19 ” 
. .

## [Page 20](101488engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 101498: Nelson Mandela: a giant of our time

NELSON MANDELA 
a giant of our time 
  
: 
fF 
  
  
 
A 
4 
Nc . Sw 
In 1994, the year in 
which he was 
elected President of 
the Republic of 
South Africa, 
Nelson Mandela 
visited Robben 
Island where he had 
been imprisoned for 
many years. 
= 
TAHAR BEN JELLOUN 
is a Moroccan-born 
novelist and poet 
who writes in French, 
Several of his works 
have been published 
in English 
translation, including 
The Sacred Night 
(1989), which won 
the 1987 Goncourt 
Prize, Silent Day in 
Tangier (1891) and 
The Sand Child 
(1987). 
I requires great humility to write about someonc 
who has spent his whole life on a long march in the 
name of dignity. First, there is the dignity of his 
people, which was fated to live under the laws of 
apartheid, one of the most barbaric systems this cen- 
tury has known. Then there is the dignity of the man 
himself, whose whole being is informed by passion and 
by the daily fight for freedom. Everything about him is 
redolent of the land, love of the land and love of jus- 
tice. He is a tree as old as the sea; he is a forest as 
dense and as demanding as the urge for eternity. The 
blood that runs in his veins is neither black nor white 
but red, reminding us that there is no such thing as 
race, that it was invented by racists. 
THE DILEMMA OF THE ARMED STRUGGLE 
Nelson Mandela has left his stamp on the twentieth cen- 
tury. More than that, he has given it a meaning. Iluman 
but not all too human, and obsessive in his respect for 
law and justice, he has succeeded in being a unique indi- 
vidual at the same time as the symbol of a people who 
recognized themselves in him before they had even 
chosen him through the democratie ehannel of the 
ballot box. In Africa and beyond, in the memory of those 
who suffer, those whose voices still carry the echo of a 
wound that has never healed, the voices of those tossed 
into the mass grave of ordinary massacres or suffocated 
in a jute sack thrown from an express train, Mandela 
exemplifies a determination that nothing could crush, a 
passion that nothing could discourage. 
Prison, humiliation, petty harassment and attempts 
to undermine his morale did not succeed in shaking his 
conviction that freedom could not be achieved without 
a struggle. And he had a particular kind of freedom iu . 
mind, not one that is deceptively packaged to look 
attractive, yet is actually full of illusions. In his eyes, 
freedom is a non-negotiable value inseparable from dig- 
nity and pregnant with responsibility. 
That unshakeable conviction prompted Mandela, at a 
meeting in June 1961, alter the half-failuve of the stay-al- 
home strike, to address the question of armed struggle. 
Me felt like a man attacked by a wild beast in a forest, 
and used an old Afeican expression: “The attacks of the 
wild beast cannot be averted only by bare hands”, 
At that time he realized that a policy aimed at cre- 
ating a non-racial state by non-violent means had failed, 
that his comrades were beginuing to lose confidence, 
and that they were {lirting alarmingly with the idea of 
terrorism. Mandela, who has heen compared to Gandhi, 
yielded to the reality principle; hie preferred to forego 
the non-violence which he would have preferred, but 
which had proved inadequate in the eontext of a state 
founded on total racial segregation and great brutality. 
Yet he did net wish an extension of violence. Ile 
knew that “with civil war racial peace would be more 
difficult than ever to achieve. . . . How much longer 
would it take to eradicate the scars of inter-raeial war, 
which could not be fought without a great loss of life 
on both sides?” 
WESTMINSTER IN SOUTH AFRICA 
At the time when he accepted the need for armed resis- 
tance, Mandela was already thinking about later devel- 
opments—the need for reconciliation and the possible 
shape of South African democracy. Ile opted unequivo- 
cally for a Western parliamentary system: “I regard the 
British Parliament as the most democratic institution in 
the world,” he said, “and the independence and impar- 
tiality of its judiciary never fail to arouse my admira- 
tion.” Ile disagreed unbendingly with those who thought 
“that system could not be adapted to Africa, who pre- 
ferred a one-party, lotalitarian regime on the grounds 
that it was what Africans needed, and who rejected the 
universality of such values as freedom and the rule of 
law in order better to impose forms of apartheid that 
suited them. Soon after he had heen rcleased from jail, 
Mandela reportedly said to a journalist: “Yes, I want 
Westminster here in my country!”

## [Page 21](101488engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 101498: Nelson Mandela: a giant of our time

hy Tahar Ben Jelloun 
Mandela has never allowed the demands of the col- 
lective struggle to take precedence over the need to 
respect the rights of the individual. Individuals are sin- 
gular entitics, whether they live in London, Paris, Cairo 
or Soweto. They need freedom in order to exist. It may 
be a commonplace to say so, but that simple fact is not 
to everyone’s taste. In the past, people took to the 
streets because they were hungry. Today, they demon- 
strate and risk their lives for principles. The notion of 
the individual is a value that is beginning to take shape 
in many countries where clans or tribes have so far had it 
their own way, and where people’s rights are trampled on 
and violated in the name of the community. The emer- 
gence of the individual heralds the beginning of self-ful- 
filment for the peoples of those countries: they will 
increasingly endow themselves with sound political 
structures and reject those providential “fathers of the 
nation” who are very soon intoxicated and corrupted by 
absolute power—and have an unfortunate tendency to 
regard the coffers of state as their personal property. 
Mandela realized very early on that the best way to 
neutralize the political parasites who are so quick to rob 
peoples of the fruits of their struggle was to make the 
system universally democratic. What holds for whites 
naturally also holds for blacks. It is a simple equation, 
yet it took decades of fighting and tens of thousands of 
deaths for that notion of equality between human beings 
to carry conviction with the South African leadership. 
That Mandela never doubted that it would, even at he 
height of a relentless struggle, even in the loneliness of 
his prison cell, is the most miraculous thing of all. The 
South African people were doubly fortunate in having 
Mandela to guide them during that struggle and Fred- 
erik de Klerk to play for the very high stakes of recon- 
ciliation within an equal society. 
A MAN FOR ALL SEASONS 
The fact that mammoth tasks remain to be carried out 
does not in any way diminish the magnitude of the two 
men’s achievement. The decisive step came with the abo- 
lition of apartheid and the arrival in power of a former 
prisoner who was capable of showing his jailers the road 
to freedom. By way of conclusion to his autobiography, 
Mandela writes: “It was during those long and lonely years 
that my hunger for the freedom of my own people 
became a hunger for the freedom of all people, white and 
A jubilant Nelson 
Mandela on 2 May 
1994 after the 
announcement of 
the victory of the 
African National 
Congress (ANC) in 
South Africa's first 
all-party democratic 
elections. 
black. . .. A man who takes away another man’s freedom 
is a prisoner of hatred, he is locked behind the bars of 
prejudice and narrow-mindedness. . . . The oppressed and 
the oppressor alike are robbed of their humanity.” What 
a prodigious reversal of the situation, where a man who 
emerges from the long night of imprisonment decides 
that those who held him prisoner should also be freed. 
Mandela is an awe-inspiring historic figure. He has 
become so strongly identified with his people that any- 
thing he experiences personally, whether it be victory, 
honours or happiness, is immediately passed on to his 
people as though they were its natural recipients—to 
those faces which have escaped attempts to enslave 
them, to those hands which have thrown off the 
shackles of unhappiness, to those anonymous bodies 
that run through the streets of shanty towns in search of 
work and self-respect. Mandela is a very unusual 
statesman in the extent to which he is a man of his 
people; he has both emerged from his people and sym- 
bolizes them. That is why he is one of the giants of the 
twentieth century. He would probably reject the 
description, but it is no exaggeration. RB 

## [Page 22](101488engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 101499: Frederik Willem de Klerk: a conservative revolutionary

FREDERIK WILLEM DE KLERK 
a conservative revolutionary 
hy Anthony Johnson 
rederik Willem de Klerk must be one of the few 
leaders in the world of politics to have voluntarily 
set in motion events resulting in the inevitable sur- 
render of his personal power and the demise of his gov- 
ernment. Just a few short months after he became 
leader of the then ruling National Party (NP) in South 
Africa in 1979, he embarked on a bold gamble which 
ushered in an era of rapid transformation which saw 
the nation reinventing itself after more than three 
decades of apartheid rule. 
The decision of the former State President in early 
1990 to unban political parties representing the 
majority of unenfranchised South Africans, release 
Nelson Mandela and hundreds of other political pris- 
oners and follow the route of peaceful negotiation, vir- 
tually ensured that he would become South Africa’s 
last white president. 
By playing a pivotal role in breaking the mould of 
race-based politics, De Klerk paved the way for South 
Africa’s peaceful revolution at the very time when 
many observers believed the country was headed for a 
period of unparalleled strife and inter-racial conflict. 
The fifty-eight-year-old politician—now deputy 
executive president in South Africa’s government of 
national unity—is still confronted with the fears and 
grumbles of NP supporters grown used to the security 
and patronage that comes from having forty-five years 
of virtually untrammelled power. 
Despite his demotion as a result of the sweeping 
election victory won by the African National Congress 
(ANC) in the country’s first democratic elections, in 
April 1994, De Klerk maintains that his job satisfac- 
tion is as high as ever. Ile emphasizes that he does not 
lie awake at night worrying about whether he has 
chosen the correct course. 
To this day, however, many political observers and 
even colleagues find it hard to explain how a man with 
the political background and track record of F.W. de 
Klerk was capable of the momentous changes which 
transformed the very fabric of South African society. 
LIKE FATHER, LIKE SON? 
De Klerk comes from a family environment in which the 
conservatism of traditional white South African poli- 
tics is deeply ingrained. His great-grandfather was a 
Pa a 
ol 22 
Vice-President 
Frederik de Klerk and 
newly-elected 
President Nelson 
Mandela on 10 May 
1994. 
| 
ANTHONY JOHNSON, 
a South African 
journalist and 
university teacher, is 
the political 
correspondent of 
the Cape Times 
newspaper in Cape 
Town. 
 
Senator, his grandfather stood twice for the white par- 
liament unsuccessfully, and his aunt was married to NP 
Prime Minister J. G. Strydom. In 1948, the year when 
the NI swept to power in whites-only elections on an 
apartheid ticket, F. W. de Klerk’s father, Jan de Klerk, 
became secretary of the NP in the Transvaal province 
and later rose to the positions of cabinet minister and 
President of the Senate. 
After receiving his early political training in the 
youth section of the NP, De Klerk became a Member of 
Parliament in 1972 and was appointed to the first of 
his many cabinet portfolios in 1978. Significantly, he 
became leader of the NP in the politically conservative 
Transvaal province in 1982—the year when a split in 
the ruling party resulted in the formation of the far 
right-wing Conservative Party. 
During his eleven years in the cabinet before 
becoming NP leader, De Klerk demonstrated that he 
was a highly effective politician but showed few signs 
of being a greal reformer-in-the-making. When polit- 
ical scientists and analysts categorized cabinet minis- 
ters during the 1980s into those who were hardline or 
enlightened in their thinking on racial matters, De 
Klerk was rarely placed in the latter grouping. 
In Parliament De Klerk assumed the mantle of the 
champion of “own affairs”—a euphemism for 
apartheid—and he betrayed very few liberal tenden-

## [Page 23](101488engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 101499: Frederik Willem de Klerk: a conservative revolutionary

cies in his handling of the many portfolios with which 
he was entrusted. But his colleagues recall that De 
Klerk was a wily political operator who refused to 
become too closely identified with the ideological 
camps that emerged during the frequent debates over 
the future of the country. This no doubt gave him 
greater room to manoeuvre when he took over the lead- 
ership of the NP at the end of the past decade from an 
ailing P.W. Botha. 
A BURST OF REFORM 
The courage and speed with which De Klerk as new NP 
leader and State President went about transforming the 
apartheid state left many observers wondering whether 
he had undergone some sort of religious, Damascus- 
Road-type of experience. De Klerk has always denied 
that the burst of reform that he ushered in—culmi- 
nating in his opening address to Parliament on 2 Feb- 
ruary 1990 in which he summarily ended the thirty-ycar 
ban on political movements representing the unenfran- 
chised black majority—was the result of a sudden reve- 
lation. He has endeavoured instead to spread the credit 
for the changes, insisting that the new NT> was really 
born in 1986 when a special federal congress of the 
party approved, in broad principle, the concept of polit- 
ical power-sharing between whites and non-whites. 
ITowever, De Klerk confidants and party insiders say 
the NP leader realized when given the responsibility 
of office that the white minority and its surrogates 
could wage an eighty-year war in a bid to stave off 
black majority rule but would eventually lose. 
A series of other momentous events on the interna- 
tional scene—the demise of the Soviet Union, the end of 
the Cold War, and also the withdrawal of Cuban troops 
from Angola—no doubt created a climate in which 
reform in South Africa was seen by the NP hierarchy as 
less threatening. Whatever the complex dynamics which 
spurred De Klerk and other political leaders in South 
Africa to opt for peaceful negotiations instead of naked 
confrontation, the international community was anxious 
to assist the process and acknowledge those leaders who 
had the courage to choose the peaceful options. 
WHAT PRICE PEACE? 
De Klerk lists the receipt of the Nobel Peace Prize 
(jointly with Nelson Mandela) as one of the important 
milestones of his political career. Nevertheless, he is 
adamant that the fateful day in 1989 when he became 
the leader of the NP was the proudest moment in his 
public life. Ile notes that none of the dramatic changes 
which followed in the ruling party would have taken 
place when they did had he not been entrusted with 
the leadership of the NP. Ile certainly could not have 
had a better foil than the hard-nosed and authoritarian 
P. W. Botha, who ran the party with an iron hand. 
During his steady rise in the NP, De Klerk was even 
regarded as something of a fence-sitter. On the other 
hand, his undoubted intellectual ability—as well as his 
logical and relatively unemotional approach to prob- 
lems—was highly regarded in party circles. Colleagues 
are fond of recounting how after hours of often divisive 
and heated discussion De Klerk would be invited to 
summarize the feelings of the meeting in a few crisp 
sentences or a resolution. This he was almost invariably 
able to do, leaving colleagues wondering what they had 
been arguing about for so long. 
These skills in finding compromise solutions and 
maintaining a clear head during the heat of debate stood 
De Klerk in good stead during the years of multi-party 
constitutional negotiations and bilateral talks with the 
ANC that preceded the April 1994 elections. At a time 
when a number of his colleagues were suffering burn-out 
under the intense pressure of rapid change and his sup- 
porters were voicing grave reservations about the course 
of the talks, De Klerk remained unflappable and main- 
tained his faith in the negotiation process. 
A number of the four million voters who backed De 
Klerk and his party in the April 1994 elections are uncom- 
fortable with the comparatively low profile he has 
adopted since becoming one of the two executive deputy 
presidents in South Africa’s government of national unity 
(the other being Thabo Mbeki). They would also like him 
to be more strident in his criticism of the ANC, which 
many have been brought up to regard as “the enemy”. 
Because of the hectic schedules of President Man- 
dela and Thabo Mbeki, De Klerk is often required to 
chair cabinet committee meetings and is also the chair- 
person of the hugely influential cabinet security com- 
mittee. Ile dismisses criticism that he is a spent political 
force or has lost interest in politics since surrendering 
office to Nelson Mandela. Ile insists that he has as great 
arole to play in forging the new South Africa as ever, and 
remains upbeat about the course the country is fol- 
lowing. He told Parliament recently that despite a 
number of problems confronting South Africa, the 
country remained well placed to develop its “rainbow 
nation” into a successful co-operative society. | 
Frederik de Klerk, 
then President of 
the Republic of 
South Africa, during 
a visit to Paris in 
1990. 

## [Page 24](101488engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

2 


### 101500: The Hague Academy of International Law

THE HAGUE 
ACADEMY OF 
INTERNATIONAL 
LAW 
0 ne of the world’s most prestigious centres for the 
study and teaching of public and private interna- 
tional law, The Hague Academy of Intenational Law is 
distinguished by a spirit of freedom and respect for 
others which is very close to that of the great interna- 
tional organizations and especially to the United 
Nations and its judicial organ, the International Court 
of Justice. 
Founded in 1913 in Paris, it began its work in 1923 
in The Hague, at the Peace Palace, which is also the 
seat of the International Court of Justice. Its aim is to 
spread and deepen knowledge of international law in 
order to promote peace and goodwill between peoples 
and to help to ensure that disputes between states are 
solved through negotiation and not through violence. 
Lectures are given at the Peace Palace by well- 
known lawyers from all regions of the world and cover 
the theory and practice of international law as well as 
international legislation and jurisprudence. 
The Collected Courses of the Academy, amounting 
to over 230 volumes, form a unique collection which 
enjoys very high prestige. In co-operation with the 
United Nations University (UNU), the Academy has 
organized workshops on major themes of concern to 
governments all over the world. 
The Academy’s external programme enables it to 
extend its promotional activities in international law in 
support of peace and human rights to Africa, Latin 
America and Asia. 
The working languages of the Academy are French 
and English. [| 
PI A et 
Shimon Peres, 
Prime Minister 
of Israel's 
government of 
national unity 
in 1984, 
 
| February 1981, a few months before the general 
election, Shimon Peres, then head of the Israeli 
Labour Party, was optimistic. At last all the polls put 
hint in the lead. Secretly, with a few advisors, he began 
preparing his programme. Ilis first hundred days as 
prime minister would transform Israel and the Middle 
East. He left for London where a secret mceting had 
been arranged with Jordan’s King ITussein. 
The two men already knew each other. They had 
met several times since the end of the October War’. 
But the chances of a real breakthrough now seemed 
much more likely. 
After the London meeting, Shimon Peres left for 
Casablanca via Paris where the French authorities had 
arranged a secret meeting with King Ilassan II of 
Morocco. The Israeli Labour leader told Ilassan 11 that 
if elected he would propose placing Jerusalem’s holy 
mosques under the joint responsibility of Saudi Arabia 
and Morocco. When he returncd to Isracl, Peres 
believed that at last things were going to change. 
But the election campaign proved to be one of the 
hardest ever fought in Israel. The right threw waves of 
turbulent supporters into the midst of election rallies 
{for Peres, who more than once had to beat a retreat 
under a hail of tomatoes. Ile lost the elections. Demor- 
alized, he went through a dark period that was made

## [Page 25](101488engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

SHIMON PERES 
hy Charles Enderlin 
worse by the war in Lebanon’. He emerged from his 
depression only in 1984 on the eve of a new general 
election. 
A STATE OF GRACE 
When the campaign opened, opinion polls gave the 
Labour Party a twenty-four-seat lead. But once again 
Peres’s enemies were unrelenting in their attacks, and 
each day the polls showed that Labour’s lead was slip- 
ping away. The final result was a draw between the 
coalition of rightist parties—the Likud—and Labour. 
They decided to share power. Peres would be Prime 
Minister for just over two years, and Yitzhak Shamir 
would be his Minister of Foreign Affairs. Then they 
would swap places until the next elections. 
At long last, Peres became prime minister. 
Although his hands were tied by his deal with Likud, 
he could still prove his worth. Within a few weeks he 
had launched an economic programme that drastically 
reduced inflation. His Minister of Defence, Yitzhak 
Rabin, directed the Israeli retreat from Lebanon that 
had begun in July 1983. The army redeployed in a 
security zone ten kilometres deep along the Israeli 
border in Lebanese territory. Things quietened down. 
This was a period of grace for Peres with Israeli public 
opinion. 
He next tried to get peace negotiations going again. 
Ile made secret contact with the Palestine Liberation 
Organization (PLO). A senior Israeli official was sent to 
Tunis to sound out Yasser Arafat’s intentions, but the 
PLO was not ready and so Peres turned to his old idea 
of a compromise with Jordan. To King Hussein he pro- 
posed setting up a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delega- 
tion that would negotiate within the framework of an 
international conference. But neither the king of 
Jordan nor the king of Morocco could commit them- 
selves to negotiations with Israel with only a few 
months remaining before Yitzliak Shamir took over the 
Israeli leadership. Another opportunity was lost. 
Applauded for lis management and féted by the 
Israeli public and many foreign friends, Peres left the 
premiership to become Minister of Foreign Affairs. 
Furthering the peace process remained his main objec- 
tive, but he had to pursue it by more devious means. 
On 11 April 1987 he had another secret meeting in 
London with Hussein of Jordan. The two men reached a 
three-part agreement on the calling of an international 
conference on the Middle East, the creation of bilateral 
regional commissions, and the procedure for talks. The 
London accord was submitted to the Reagan adminis- 
tration, which sent it to the Israeli and Jordanian gov- 
ernments as if it were an American initiative. But Likud 
rejected the proposals out of hand. 
TIME TO THINK 
A few months later, in December 1987, the Intifada’— 
the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories— 
began. Shamir was in favour of letting the storm blow 
over, hut Peres was convinced that only peace negotia- 
tions would bring a return to calm. He began preparing 
for the next elections, due to be held in 1988. Labour 
presented a plan for a partial retreat from Lebanon. 
Likud accused Peres of wanting a sell-out, 
Events were not on the Labour Party’s side. Forty- 
eight hours before the election, a Jewish family died in 
an attack in Jericho. There was a backlash. Shamir’s 
party won forty seats; while Labour captured only 
thirty-nine. Once again a coalition government was 
formed, but this time on Likud’s conditions. Shamir 
would not share the premiership. Peres tricd to bring 
down the government with a no-confidence motion in 
parliament but in the ensuing crisis proved unable to 


### 101501: Shimon Peres: passion and patience

passion and patience 
Shimon Peres with 
Yasser Arafat in 
Brussels in 
November 1994, 
I 
CHARLES ENDERLIN 
is a French journalist 
who reports from 
Jerusalem for the 
French television 
channel France 2. He 
is the author of 
Shamir (Olivier Orban 
publishers, Paris, 
1991}.

## [Page 26](101488engo.pdf#page=26) 2

### 101501: Shimon Peres: passion and patience

### 101502: Yitzhak Rabin: a hawk with the wings of a dove

form a new government. On 11 June a right-wing gov- 
ernment was presented to the Knesset’, and the Labour 
Party went back into opposition. 
They remained in opposition for another two 
years—time enough to think, and time enough for the 
situation in the Middle East to change, after the Gulf 
War, and the Madrid Peace Conference which opened 
in October 1991. In the meantime Shimon Peres was 
challenged by his long-time rival Yitzhak Rabin, who 
supported his bid for the Labour Party leadership 
with the argument that three failures at the polls were 
more than enough. The party activists opted for Rabin, 
and Peres became the party’s second in command. 
In 1992 Labour based its election campaign almost 
uniquely on Rabin’s personality, emphasizing that he 
had been the victorious general in the Six Day War® and 
the Defence Minister who had contained the Intifada. 
For the first time in fourteen years Likud went into 
opposition. Peres again became Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, and most important of all relaunched peace 
negotiations. 
On 16 November he went on an official visit to 
Egypt. He asked his hosts to let the PLO know that he 
was ready for a new dialogue. Even Prime Minister 
Rabin did not know of this. On 1 December the 
Knesset repealed a law that forbade all contact with 
the PLO. Three days later Yair Ilirschfeld, a left-wing 
Israeli university professor, met a PLO official, Abu 
Ala’, in London. The two men decided to begin secret 
discussions in Oslo, Norway. The meeting began on 20 
January 1993. Peres was informed a few days later. He 
in turn informed Rabin, who decided to let the discus- 
sions go ahead, although at first he did not think they 
had much chance of success. 
THE BREAKTHROUGH 
The big moment came on 19 August, and Peres 
savoured it to the full. Late at night without the pres- 
ence of reporters and recorded on film only by Norwe- 
gian security guards with a home-video camera, he was 
present at the first signing of the Oslo Agreements, by 
Uri Savir and Abu Ala’. Shimon Peres’s obstinacy had 
brought about a fundamental change in the Middle 
East. Less than a month later the breakthrough was 
officialized in Washington, this time with the cameras 
turned on Yasser Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin. | 
1. On 6 October 1973 Israeli positions were attacked by Egyptian 
forces in the Suez Canal sector and by Syrian forces in the Golan 
Ileights.—Ed. 
2. The Israeli invasion of Lebanon on 6 June 1982, known as 
Operation “Pcace in Galilee”. —Ed. 
3. Arabic for “uprising”.—Ed. 
4. Israel’s parliament.—Ed. 
5. From 5 to 10 June 1967, Israel occupied Sinai, the Gaza Strip, 
the West Bank of the Jordan, the eastern seetor of Jerusalem and 
part of the Syrian Golan Ileights.—Ed. 
“ : 
PE . 
Pr Sa 
Yitzhak Rabin 
in 1985,  
lose friends of Yitzhak Rabin say mischievously: 
“When he was a teenager Yitzhak was ginger- 
haired. There’s a slang word in Ilebrew to describe the 
temperament of people with ginger hair: gingi, which 
means inflammable. Gingi people flare up like tinder.” 
When still only a young man, Rabin was quite pre- 
pared to clash with Ben Gurion. Ile cut his teeth in the 
Palmach, the commando troops secretly formed during 
the British mandate. Once Israel had gained indepen- 
dence, Ben Gurion disbanded the Palmach and Rabin 
became a “regular” soldier. But he kept in touch with 
his former comrades—more so than Ben Gurion would 
have liked. As a result, Israel’s patriarch felt a mixture 
of resentment and esteem. Ile found himself dealing 
with a sabra' who stood up to him and used familiar 
forms of language when addressing him. It was enough to 
irritate Ben Gurion, but no more than that. 
It may seem surprising that someone like Rabin, 
whose responsibility when he was Defence Minister was 
to put down the intifada, should subsequently be the 
man who made peace with the Palestine Liberation 
Organization (PLO)—particularly since the intifada 
eventually ran out of steam. But Rabin realized that 
running out of steam is not the same thing as disap- 
pearing entirely. When he recognized the PLO, Rabin 
was not renouncing his belief in Zionism. On the con- 
trary, the man who, after Ben Gurion and Begin?, can 
lay claim to the title of king of Israel, is determined to 
hang on to what he has achieved. If the war continues, 
 

## [Page 27](101488engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 101502: Yitzhak Rabin: a hawk with the wings of a dove

YITZHAK RABIN 
a hawk with the wings of a dove 
by Luc Beyer de Ryke 
it will prove an ever-increasing drain on resources. More 
seriously, if it is hard to keep law and order in the 
streets of the Occupied Territories, it is impossible to 
prevent children from being born: the Palestinian 
birth-rate will eventually threaten Zionism. 
During the First World War, the French socialist 
Marcel Sembat proclaimed: “Make war or make a king.” 
The French did both: in Georges Clemenceau, known as 
“the Tiger”, they found a republican king who waged 
war and won it. Rabin is just as tough as “the Tiger”. 
But making war does not preclude hard thinking. Rabin 
may be quick-tempered, but he also has a methodical 
and well-ordered mind, Indeed, he is sometimes criti- 
cized for being almost too rational. If you go to war and 
lasting victory eludes you, it is as if you had lost the war. 
The important thing for Rabin is to be able to guarantee 
Israel’s security and, as a result, the survival of Zionism. 
The journey from the icy waters of Oslo Fjord to the 
White 1Iouse was a psychological ordeal for him. But it 
was necessary and he made it. 
HARD BARGAINING 
Rabin is familiar with Washington. He spent years 
there as ambassador and knows the workings of Amer- 
ican politics inside out. He has had to deal with people 
like Presidents Nixon, Ford and Carter and Secretary 
of State Henry A. Kissinger. His main interlocutor was 
probably Kissinger. Relations between the two men 
were marked by a combination of mutual under- 
standing, disagreement, friendship and complicity as 
each fought to defend the interests—at once conver- 
gent and divergent—ol his country. One of the reasons 
why Rabin’s politieal rival, Yitzhak Shamir, lost the 
1992 elections was probably that he and the White 
louse were no longer on the same wavelength. Begin 
had gradually loosened the traditional ties between 
Israel and the United States, Shamir sonred relations 
even further. In the end, while Israel expected much of 
Rabin, so did the United States. 
But did the Israelis realize, when they elected 
Rabin, that the hawk would sprout the wings of a dove? 
It remains to be seen just how far Rabin is now pre- 
pared to go. The peace accords are being implemented 
with only lukewarm determination. The letter and the 
spirit of the law are two different things. The tram- 
mels of occupation have been eased in Gaza and 
Jericho, but they remain firmly in place in the rest of 
the Territories. To be sure, the Palestinians are now in 
charge of education, health and tourism in those areas, 
and that is already something. But, as an Israeli jour- 
nalist has pointed out: “In the Territories, you open 
your newspaper and read reassuring headlines; then 
you open your window and see an Israeli patrol driving 
past.” As for Palestinian prisoners, many are being 
released, but even more remain behind bars. 
It is hard to decide what degree of generosity 
should be shown when it forms an integral part of polit- 
ical bargaining. Itis a difficult game to play, and there 
are many players, There are Palestinians, Jordanians 
and Syrians, not to mention Israeli public opinion, 
which probably approves Rabin’s policies, though 
nowadays only halfheartedly. 
For the time being, Rabin wants to stick to the 
Accord, whether it ends up being called the Oslo, 
Washington or Cairo Accord. The agreement implies, in 
his eyes, a refusal to accept a Palestinian “state”. But 
Rabin-watchers think he may shift his ground if the 
peace process works. If this turns out to be the case, a 
Palestinian “state” would no longer have the explosive 
repercussions which the Israelis [ear today. 
Fresh elections are due a year from now, and for the 
first time the Prime Minister will be elected by universal 
suffrage. It is thought that Rabin intends to stand. Were 
he to win, Israel would get a taste of a republican 
monarchy of the kind experienced by the French under 
Charles de Gaulle and Francois Mitterrand. 
If Yahweh and the electorate smile on him, that 
election will mark the official conseeration of Yitzhak 
Rabin as king of Israel and, perhaps, a new stage in the 
long road towards peace. | 
1. The name given by Israelis to those born in the region of the 
modern state of Israel. —Fd, 
2. Menachem Begin, Prime Minister of Israel from 1977 to 1983. 
Joint winner, with President Anwar El Sadat of Egypt, of the 1978 
Nobel Peace Prize.—Ed. 
In September 1893 
demonstrators in Tel 
Aviv-Jaffa show their 
support for the 
policy of seeking 
agreement with the 
PLC. 
| 
LUC BEYER DE RYKE, 
of Belgium, is a 
journalist with his 
country's French- 
language radio and 
television service 
(RTBF). He is the 
author of several 
books on political 
subjects, including 
two about Africa, 
and an 
autobiography. 

## [Page 28](101488engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 101503: Yasser Arafat: the father of Palestine

YASSER ARAFAT 
    
3 
l 
hy Loth El-Kholy 
oe his is the most difficult situation that we’ve 
ever had to face,” Yasser Arafat told me one 
day in 1982. We were in his little hotel room over- 
looking the sea, a few kilometres outside Tunis, where 
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) had 
recently gone into exile after the war in Lebanon. “And 
yet,” he went on, “there is a glimmer of hope because 
we now know that we must choose between existing or 
not existing.” 
Suddenly he broke into a smile and said, “Have you 
heard the latest one about Abu Ammar'?” Sometimes 
he talks about himself in the third person. “They say 
that one day he made the pilgrimage to Mecca. When 
it came to his turn to stone the devil by throwing the 
customary seven rocks at him, Abu Ammar only threw 
six. When somebody asked him why he hadn’t thrown 
the seventh rock, Abu Ammar answered, ‘Do you think 
I’m crazy enough to cut off all my links with the 
devil?” And he burst out laughing. 
I said I was surprised to see him laugh at a joke 
that made him look like a common opportunist. Still 
laughing, he answered, “It’s a long time since I was 
upset by accusations of opportunism. Because of the 
secrecy that surrounds them, some of our decisions can 
only be understood by a small number of leaders. But 
that’s not the most important thing. What counts is 
whether or not a leader can face up to his conscience 
  
J Ee 
he fai 
    
her of 
every night before he goes to sleep—when he has the 
opportunity te sleep!” 
I think that this is one of the keys to Yasser 
Arafat’s personality. The revolutionary rushes impetu- 
ously to the edge of the precipice and then at the last 
minute stops himself from tumbling into adventurism 
and, political animal that he is, gets ready to take one 
or two steps backwards, open up an escape route and 
then return to the logic of revolution by another route, 
or else open up a new avenue for political action to har- 
vest the fruit of revolutionary action. 
FROM REVOLUTIONARY... 
In the early days of his combat he believed in the total 
liberation of Palestine, from the Mediterranean to the 
Jordan, by foree of arms. Ile talked in terms of perma- 
nent revolution, and his watchword was that Palestine 
could only be recovered at gunpoint. With experience, 
more direct contact with reality and growing awareness of 
the real power struggles between Arabs, between Arabs 
and Israelis, and between Arabs and the rest of the world, 
the political animal began to mature, merge with the rev- 
olutionary activist, keep an eye on him and calculate 
what the revolution eould accomplish in material terms. 
His goal shifted from the liberation of the whole of Pales- 
tine to establishing a Palestinian state on the West Bank 
and in Gaza, with East Jerusalem as its capital. 
  
Yasser Arafat 
(centre) at Unesco 
Headquarters in 
Paris during the 
ceremony at which 
he received the 
Houphouét-Boigny 
Peace Prize. Beside 
him is Federico 
Mayor. At left and 
right, the two other 
prize-winners, 
Shimon Peres and 
Yitzhak Rabin. 
5

## [Page 29](101488engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 101503: Yasser Arafat: the father of Palestine

  
He stopped defending the hijacking of aircraft and 
terrorist operations against Israeli civilians, and 
focused armed operations exclusively on Israeli mili- 
tary targets. Later, he refused to let the Intifada use 
weapons, insisting on the use of civil disobedience, 
strikes and stone-throwing against the Israeli security 
forces. After being admitted to the United Nations, he 
made it increasingly clear that he was determined to 
recognize Israel within its pre-June 1967 borders in 
exchange for recognition of the Palestinian people and 
the PLO, 
Ile also refined the strategy of harassment and 
political cat and mouse with the Arab regimes without 
ever going so far as to break with them. le has often 
said that “Breaking off ties with an Aral country is a 
luxury that belcaguered Palestine can ill afford, no 
matter what insults or personal grief are involved.” 
Ile has survived ten or more assassination attempts 
and has always found out for himself who was behind 
them. Ile has always stopped short of throwing the sev- 
enth rock at the devil, be he Arab, Israeli or Palestinian. 
Ile is constantly meditating on the lessons of his 
experience and records all his thoughts and conversa- 
tions in small notebooks that are never far away. No 
matter who he is talking to, he never hesitates to pull 
out a notebook and jot down anything lie thinks is 
important. By now he must possess more than four 
thousand of these notebooks, numbered in chronolog- 
ical order. 
The late Abu Iyad® often told me about Arafat as 
he was in the late 1940s when they were both members 
On1July1994 
Yasser Arafat 
returned to Gaza 
after a long exile. 
I 
LOTFI EL-KHOLY 
is an Egyptian 
author and political 
essayist. Since 
1988 he has been 
Secretary-General of 
the Afro-Asian 
Writers’ Association. 
of the Palestinian Students’ Union; of which Arafat 
was the president. “Ile was full of vitality. We mem- 
bers of the executive board would meet and divide up 
our activities for the week. Two days later, we would 
be called in to see that Yasser Arafat had done all our 
jobs by himself. He would ask us to discuss what he 
had done and give our approval. We would accuse him 
of trespassing on our territory. But he would say, 
‘Why? What harm have I done? Go on. I'm ready to be 
judged.” We would ask him why he had acted on his 
own. ‘The opportunity presented itself,’ he would say, 
‘and I didn’t want to let it slip by. I assumed my 
responsibilities as president.’ 
Something of this activism survived in Abu Ammar 
when he became chairman of the PLO. “It’s true that 
Abu Ammar sticks to the collectively decided policy 
line,” Abu Iyad told me. “But just as he did when he 
was president of the Palestinian Students’ Union, 
whenever he can he takes the initiative to put the col- 
lective policy line into action. He can never wait. Ile 
moves faster than other people.” 
...10 POLITICIAN 
As a result, he has often been accused of exercising 
personal power. This charge has even been made 
against him before the Palestinian leadership, and 
frank, sometimes stormy, exchanges have taken place, 
with Arafat by turns silent and combative, But these 
meetings have always ended with almost unanimous 
renewal of confidence in him. The man who has given 
everything to the revolution—his life, his time and his 
personal wealth—has become the symbol of the Pales- 
tinian cause. 
One day in 1993, at a time when he was the target of 
considerable criticism, it was reported that he had been 
killed in a plane crash. At once Palestinians everywhere 
began to mourn, and when it transpired that Abu Ammar 
had survived the crash unharmed, the mourning sponta- 
neously changed into a tidal wave of joy. 
Abu Ammar is not the only name given him by his 
companions and the children of his people. They also 
call him the “father”, the “master” and the “khtiare” 
(wise old man). After the landmark agreement between 
Israelis and Palestinians had been reached, Professor 
Edward Said, who had been one of Arafat’s closest 
friends, made a violent attack on him in the press. 
When he read Said’s article, Arafat immediately dic- 
tated a telegram which read: “My dear Edward, I have 
read your article. I want to tell you that I'll he 
returning to Palestine in February 1994. Come and join 
us and help build it on the ground. Your brother, 
Yasser Arafat.” n 
1. Abu Ammar is Yasser Arafat's nom de guerre. —Ed. 
2. Abu Iyad, a leading PLO member, was killed in 1991. —Ed. 
o wagner

## [Page 30](101488engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 101504: Jimmy Carter: the pilgrim-president

JIMMY 
CARTE
R 
e pilgr 
hy Flora Lewis 
hen Jimmy Carter left the White [louse in 1981 
after one term as president of the United 
States, he was not popular with Americans. Since then, 
more and more of his compatriots have come to say, 
“Carter is the best ex-President we’ve ever had.” Ile 
had chosen neither to retire in sour resentment at the 
electorate’s ingratitude nor in fading but leisurely emi- 
nence, but to dedicate himself with undiminished 
energy to the causes that grip him. They cover a broad 
spectrum, and usually he pursues them quietly. But 
now and then there are spectacular, news-making 
bursts. 
His trips to North Korea, to Haiti and to Bosnia in 
rapid succession in 1994 were so startling that cartoon- 
ists were inspired to draw a desolate, hopeless war 
scene or even a furiously quarreling husband and wife 
over a caption that said some version of “Send for 
Jimmy Carter.” A miracle worker? A meddler? A right- 
eous, naive moralizer? Ie was accused of all, and he 
didn’t seem to care. 
In those three mediations, he brought spectacular 
results in one case—Ilaiti—where he persuaded the 
governing military junta to depart peacefully, permit- 
ting the elected president, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to 
return under protection of an American invasion force 
without a shot being fired. In North Korea, he also 
defused an imminent threat of war, on terms accept- 
able to the U.S. government but criticized by its 
domestic opponents as giving insufficient guarantees 
that Pyongyang was abandoning its ambition to build 
nuclear weapons, the issue of the crisis. In Bosnia, he 
achieved no more than a tenuous four-month cease-fire, 
less than fully observed but still bringing more respite 
Managua 
(Nicaragua), 1990. 
Jimmy Carter heads 
an international 
chserver mission 
during the 
presidential election.   
im-presidenti 
than dozens of previous cease-fires and providing 
breathing space for more negotiations which may or 
may not get anywhere. This is a mixed score, hut in all 
cases lives, perhaps a great many lives, were saved. 
Problems were left, of course, but he had achieved the 
purpose of giving peace a chance. 
Mr. Carter has been embarking on such missions for 
quite a while, and he brings to them not only his 
stature and prestige but an accumulation of tech- 
niques and attitudes developed by hard, and some- 
times negative, experience. Ile explained some of them 
in an interview in the New York Times magazine with 
Jim Wooten, an American journalist who had written 
his biography. 
For one thing, he isn’t afraid of failure. This was 
critical in Pale, where he made clear to the Bosnian 
Serb leader Radovan Karadzic that he would just walk 
away empty-handed if minimum terms weren’t 
accepted. Ile had no personal stake in the appearance 
of success. Further, he was aware that Karadzic had 
already lied to him, as so often to others. That 
encounter had begun when a delegation of American 
Serbs called on him in his home town of Plains, 
Georgia, with an invitation from Karadzic to take part 
in peace efforts. “I knew he wanted to use me,” Carter 
told Wooten, “so I told them I'd consider it only if the 
Serbs would agree to a cease-fire.” 
DOING THE RIGHT THING 
Word came back that Karadzic would go much fur- 
ther. Ile would end the war, free all UN hostages, 
reopen Sarajevo airport, allow free movement for 
_peace-keepers, release all Muslim prisoners under nine- 
teen, respect human rights, and accept a cease-fire in 
Sarajevo before Carter’s arrival. None of that hap- 
pened by the time he got to Bosnia, shortly before 
Christmas, as many had warned Carter to expect. Ile 
wasn’t optimistic, but he went to Karadzic’s head- 
quarters at Pale with his proposals nonetheless. 
There, he took care to observe another of his nego- 
tiating precepts. No recriminations, suspension of 
judgment, allowing enough time for interlocutors “to 
understand that there’s nothing on the table except a 
mutual effort to reach some sort of agreement. Of 
course, there has to be a table. People in conflict have 
to be willing to talk about ending it, or at least

## [Page 31](101488engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 101504: Jimmy Carter: the pilgrim-president

  
EE 
FLORA LEWIS, 
a noted American 
journalist 
specializing in 
foreign affairs, is the 
author of several 
books, including 
Europe: Road to 
Unity{1992). 
Jimmy Carter acted 
as an observer 
during the 
presidential election 
in Haiti {1990}. 
ehangingit, and there has to be someone willing to talk 
to them, however odious they are—and that’s where 1 
come in.” 
Carter is a deeply religious man, a “born again 
Christian”, which means an adult rededication to the 
ideals and principles of his faith. It has brought a rec- 
titude and austerity to his own behaviour and a confi- 
dence that he knows precisely what is right that can 
seem chilling at a distance. But he can also muster a 
tolerance and indulgenee for others, whatever despi- 
cable things they've done, that give him an apparent 
belief that no one is beyond redemption, everyone 
should be given the chance to be humane and resolve 
conflict. 
ITis words of kindness and sympathy for the Haitian 
leaders who had such a murderous record shocked 
many. But he thought it worthwhile and wasn’t 
ashamed to tell what he called “a little white lie” 
about President Clinton’s acceptance of the Haitian 
pscudo-President’s signature on their departure agree- 
ment if that’s what it took to get them out of the way 
without war. Ile isn’t interested in retribution, hut in 
solutions. Ile’s after getting something done, and he is 
remarkably resistant te personal attack. Nothing said 
about him seems to irritate him more than the sugges- 
tion that his motivation is personal enchancement, that 
his goal is the Nobel Peace Prize. 
“I do what I do because I think it’s the right thing 
to do,” he told Wooten. “Most of the time, believe it or 
not, I enjoy myself. Sometimes I even have fun doing 
my duty. Imagine that,” he said with a chuckle. 
All recent American presidents have set up libraries 
and sometimes foundations, but unlike the others 
which are essentially devoted to history, the Carter 
Center at Emory University and the adjoining Carter 
Library, in Atlanta, are action-oriented. They run lots 
of conferences, the modern version of monastie convivi- 
ality, but also a surprising variety of programmes that 
deal with regional problems, health seourges, agricul- 
tural innovation, human rights and, of course, conflict 
resolution. 
Carter has established a Council of Freely Elected 
ITeads of Government, which sends teams to monitor 
clections in Latin America and has on occasion made the 
difference between rigged and reasonably honest votes 
that actually brought a democratic transfer of power. 
Nicaragua and Guyana are examples. Ile has Deen per- 
sonally involved in peace negotiations in Liberia, between 
Ethiopia and the Eritrean rebels, and in Sudan. Some- 
times there is a long preparation, many trips establishing 
personal contacts, before he gets results. Sometimes 
there are no results. Ie shows no discouragement, as he 
shows no triumphalism when he succeeds. 
FORCE OF CONVICTION 
There are aspcets to his personality that were abrasive 
and hurt him with the American public when he was in 
office. Ile ran against Washington, as an outsider, one of 
the folks, and it got him elected. To prove he hadn’t 
become pompous and self-inflated, he was pho- 
tographed carrying bis own suitcase on official trips, 
even revealing anguished exhaustion while jogging. 
Many Americans weren't comfortable with that much 
show of being “just like us”; they weren't sure they 
wanted that un-presidential looking a president. lis 
toothy smile was taut, and he spoke earnestly of 
national “malaise,” put in sharp contrast by his sue- 
cessor Ronald Reagan, who always assured Americans 
they were “Number One” in the world and looked 
relaxed and cheerful whatever happened. It may be a 
flaw of human nature, but it shouldn’t be surprising 
that people found Dr. Feel-good more appealing than 
Dr. Do-right. 
Liven Carter’s name somehow set him apart, instead 
of giving him the aura of friendly familiarity he seemed 
to suppose. lis proper name is James Earl Carter, Jr., 
and when he heeame president many thought it 
unseemly to call him by the nickname Jimmy. But he 
had grown up and governed Georgia as Jimmy, and he 
insisted that he hadn’t changed and neither should the 
name he went by. 
To look at, he is a medium sort of man, neither 
large nor small, overwhelming nor reclusive, impressive 
31

## [Page 32](101488engo.pdf#page=32) 2

### 101504: Jimmy Carter: the pilgrim-president

### 101505: Juan Carlos I: the democratic king

nor indistinguishable, not the type that immediately 
draws the eye of strangers. His force lies not in person- 
ality but in conviction. He eschews florid rhetoric and 
sets himself clear and narrowly defined objectives, 
wiping out the plague of guinea worm in Africa, getting 
a cease-fire in Bosnia. Ie wants to change the world, 
but accepts that it can best be done in specific, modest 
steps, and his persistence in pressing them is relentless. 
No doubt historians will give his presidency Detter 
marks than did his contemporaries. His contributions 
to Ameriea’s relations with the world were lasting: the 
Panama Canal treaty, the Camp David peace treaty 
between Egypt and Israel, the nuclear arms reduction 
treaty with the U.S.S.R., establishment of diplomatic 
relations with China, and perhaps most important of 
all and undoubtedly of great personal satisfaction to 
him, the establishment of human rights as a funetional, 
significant part of the international agenda. The 
Helsinki accords, which made the way a government 
treats its own citizens a legitimate international con- 
cern and not an exelusive sovereign matter, were signed 
by his predecessor, Gerald Ford. But it was Jimmy 
Carter who gave substance to the paper promises. 
AN ITINERANT PRIVATE CITIZEN 
Somehow, it has turned out that the 39th president of 
the United States has won more affection and admira- 
tion as an itinerant private citizen, sticking his nose into 
other people’s quarrels, than he did as the head of a 
super-power. At a time when U.S. involvement in the 
world seems to be shrinking and others worry more 
about the country’s indifference than what they used 
to consider a will to dominate, Jimmy Carter’s almost 
ubiquitous efforts have a special value. Ile admits he 
shares the common human pleasure at being appreci- 
ated, but he isn’t much moved by criticism or reward 
because he has his own sense of fulfilment in doing. 
When interviewer Wooten insisted that he must 
really want the Nobel peace prize, saying, “But you 
wouldn’t reject it, would you? F mean, you'd like to be 
chosen, right?” Carter replied, “Of course, but I'm 
telling you that isn’t what this is all about. Docsn’t even 
come close. My goodness, what if it were? What if the 
Nobel were the be-all and end-all of my existence? And 
what if it never happened? . . . Well, what sort of dried- 
up, shriveled-up, disappointed old prune of a man 
would I be then?” 
That he isn’t. He is still running to see to the things 
he sees a need to do. And then he goes home, to his 
modest house in Plains, Georgia, a modest country 
town, and walks the land that gives his sense of place 
and permanence. It is a 2,000-aere spread, some of it in 
the family for 150 years, and on parts of it he farms 
the lowly peanut. Nothing grandiose, but his earth, his 
feeling of having a purpose and serving it to his utmost 
capacity. un 
FE 0 ve 
‘32 
Juan Carlos 1 in 
Madrid in 1988.  
nan Carlos I of Spain is a king for our times. Not 
for him ermine robes, erown, seeptre, or throne— 
although he was well and truly on the throne when he 
brought about the collapse of an attempted military 
coup in February 1981. On that oceasion he revealed 
lis moral stature to his fellow citizens and showed the 
world his demoeratie convictions. 
“The Crown cannot tolerate the slightest act or 
behaviour that seeks to disrupt by force the democ- 
ratic process enshrined in the constitution that has 
been approved by the Spanish people by refer- 
endum.” With these words the King ended his short 
and solemn television address on the night of 23-24 
February 1981, when the government, the parliament 
and a group of journalists were heing held inside the 
Cortés by a clique of officers nostalgic for the old 
regime. 
Juan Carlos’s action served to inject an anti-putsch 
vaccine into the fragile, yonthfnl body of Spanish 
democracy. Ever since, no Spaniard has ever had to 
ask what the king is there for. 
His opposition to the putsch, which marked a [inal 
break with the previous regime, endorsed the legitimacy 
of a monarch who from that moment could rightfully be 
called the “democratic King of Spain”. His democratic 
purpose had, of course, already Deen clearly shown 
during the difficult transition period, but here snddenly 
 

## [Page 33](101488engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 101505: Juan Carlos I: the democratic king

JUAN CARLOS | 
the democratic king 
hy Ramon Luis Acuiia 
it was expressed in a founding act that confirmed the 
shift from dictatorship to democracy. 
After inheriting from General Franco [ull powers 
over the army, the Council of Ministers, the Cortés and 
the legislative system, the King thus rendered to the 
people a sovereignty that was a political hot potato 
since it was based on a military victory won in the 
Spanish Civil War of 1936 to 1939. Ile returned Spain, 
aeeording to a widely used phrase, “to the hands of the 
Spanish people” and, with the agreement of all democ- 
ratic forces, applied the Constitution approved in 
1978. This Constitution is in many respects one of the 
most advanced in Europe, partieularly concerning 
regional political freedoms and the defence of the 
rights of cultural minorities. 
Juan Carlos’s aetions met the expectations of 
Spanish civil society which had entered the post- 
Franco era long before Franeo’s death and wished to 
get into step with the civil societies of the other devel- 
oped countries of Europe. At first, some politicians 
wrongly saw Juan Carlos as the successor of the pre- 
vious regime, even going so far as to nickname him 
“Juan Carlos the Short”. They could not have heen 
more mistaken. Juan Carlos soon came to embody the 
Spanish people’s aspirations for ehange—one of the 
profoundest collective feelings expressed in Europe in 
the second half of the twentieth century. 
The King always insists that “the protagonist of the 
transition was the people” and that he has done 
nothing more than his duty in assuming the responsi- 
bility that history and the demands of the moment 
imposed on him. 
Ile was iu fact the catalyst of a decisive politieal 
change that astonished other democratic societies and 
gave hope to those still subject to dictatorship. The 
transfer of power in Spain was a model, a source of 
imspiration for guiding democratic changes not only in a 
number of Latin American countries but also, and 
despite a very different political situatiou, in the 
Eastern bloc countries, including Russia. 
Juan Carlos started out from a simple, solid prin- 
ciple: he wished to be “the King of all the Spaniards” 
that he was proclaimed to be in the posters waved by 
his supporters on coronation day, 22 November 1975. 
During the 
attempted putsch 
of 23 February 
1981, 200 Civil 
Guards invaded the 
Spanish Parliament. 
     
  
     
     
     
3 
. A # A 
Se alle, 
Ile would not only be the king of those who had won 
the Civil War; he would also be the King of those who 
had lost it. Ife would not only be the king of the Castil- 
ians and the Aragonese; he would also be the king of 
the Basques, the Catalans, the Galicians and the other 
inhabitants of Spanish territory. His attitude coineided 
with the widespread opinion in the political parties in 
favour of national reconciliation, the feeling that the 
Civil War was a thing of the past: Spaniards realized 
that while change was inevitable, a brutal break with 
the immediate past could lead to serious confronta- 
tions. In consequence most of them chose the middle 
way of reason, and their king, like them, preferred to 
build the future rather than dwell on the past. 
HISTORIC RECONCILIATIONS 
And so he obeyed a second principle: that the rank of 
monarch is not conferred by divine right or exclusively 
by inheritanee. It must be earned by doing the job well. 
A monarchy only makes sense if it shows itself to be 
useful to the nation. If it does net, it may become 
redundant or even harmful, as happens when it falls 
into discredit. Because of this approach, a two-thou- 
sand year-old institution provided what the king called 
“a propulsive stimulus” to the modernization of Spain. 
The king’s third goal was harder to implement. He 
wished to effect without violence or trauma the transi- 
tion from a dictatorial government to a constitutional 
monarchy. The former regime was anachronistic and 
lifeless, held together until the end by nothing more 
than its autocratic figurehead. The ship had to be 
settled. On his own and caught in a cross-fire between 
\ » "Nr 
X a 
      
   
  
4 g = 5 
E : 
= a : 
rad ng 
aa   
 

## [Page 34](101488engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  
RAMON LUIS 
ACUNA, 
of Spain, is 
assistant general 
manager of the 
Spanish news 
agency EFE and 
special advisor for 
communications to 
UNESCO. His most 
recent published 
work is Las Tribus de 
Europa (1994, “The 
tribes of Europe”). 
yr vn = gm 
‘34 7 
on 
King Juan Carlos 
(centre) out walking. 
the hostility of the hardline Franco supporters and the 
initial mistrust of the democrats, Juan Carlos used the 
wide powers he had received with skill and determina- 
tion. “Everyone was against me,” he said later. But he 
succeeded in influencing the course of events. The 
authoritarian structure was methodically dismantled 
without bloodshed, and democracy built on its ruins. 
The facts speak for themselves. This is the “democ- 
ratic king's” 
His powers are defined by the constitution. As 
arbiter and guarantor of the institutions, the king is 
contribution to the history of Spain. 
the head of the armed forces and his country’s highest- 
ranking representative abroad. Iowever, he appoints 
the head of government in strict conformity with elec- 
tion results and can only dissolve parliament if 
requested to do so by the head of the executive. His 
authority is primarily of a moral nature. 
Juan Carlos has a high reputation in Spain. More 
than 80 per cent of Spaniards questioned in polls over 
the years have given a favourable opinion of him. He 
has become the most popular king in Europe. This is 
largely due to his warm personality and joviality. Ile 
has a straightforward manner which immediately puts 
people at their ease. Ile likes laughter and jokes. Once 
when I was interviewing him, some small change 
slipped out of my pocket and onto the armchair where 
F'was sitting. When I was leaving, a member of his staff 
caught me up on the staircase, handed me the coins, 
and said, “ITis Majesty has asked me to tell you that for 
the moment he makes no charge for interviews.” 
But this relaxed manner should not be misinter- 
preted. Juan Carlos is thoughtful and well-informed, 
an avid reader of books, reports and newspapers. In pri- 
vate he is extremely spontaneous; in public and in the 
performance of his duties he detests improvisation. 
Ile loves family life and spends as much time as he 
can with his children. He takes advice from his wife, 
Queen Sophia, whose “inestimable support and under- 
standing” he readily acknowledges. A sports enthu- 
siast, he runs every day, rides off on his motorbike 
whenever he can, sails in summer and skis in winter. For 
a fifty-eight-year-old, his physical activity is intense. 
When I last visited Cartagena in Colombia, the 
guide who showed me around that beautiful colonial 
5? town kept saying, “and here, when the king came. . . . 
After a while I asked him which king he was referring 
to. “Our king, of course! Who else?” he answered 
without hesitation. Just as he has managed to trans- 
form the Spanish into “Juancarlistas”, if not outright 
royalists, Juan Carlos has succeeded in being sponta- 
neously dubbed “the king” by Latin Americans. 
Reconciliation within Spain has also led to historic 
reconciliations with the world outside. Regarded in 
Latin America as a symbol of the new democratic 
Spain, Juan Carlos has to a large degree contributed to 
reestablishing links with Spanish-speaking nations on 
the other side of the Atlantic. In 1991 he was the 
prime mover for an annual Latin-American summit and 
himself attends these meetings of heads of state 
designed to reinforce the community of Spanish- and 
Portugese-speaking countries. In Madrid in 1992, com- 
memorating the 500th anniversary of the discovery of 
America, Juan Carlos spoke in full awareness of criti- 
cism of Spanish and Portuguese colonization when he 
declared, “We must assume our part in the history of 
peoples with dignity and responsibility in order to 
make a better future.” He often points out that Spain 
promulgated the “Law of the Indies”, the social 
aspects of which were extremely progressive and that 
the first universities in the Americas were founded in 
Lima and Santo Domingo in the sixteenth century at a 
time when many European cities had none. 
A MODERNIZING MONARCHY 
Also in 1992, 500 years after the expulsion of the Jews 


### 101505: Juan Carlos I: the democratic king

from Spain, Juan Carlos paid tribute in the Madrid syn- 
agogue to the “Spanish Jews who had to leave Spain 
because the state saw religious uniformity as the basis 
of its unity”. Ile went on to express the wish that 
“never again should hatred or intolerance provoke grief 
or exile”. 
The 500th anniversary of the fall of the last Muslim 
bastion in Spain, the Kingdom of Granada, also 
occurred in 1992. On that occasion Juan Carlos paid 
tribute to Arab Andalusia, Al-Andalus, as a place 
where “several peoples formed the habit of sharing 
over the centuries and where each of them maintained 
their respective identities without losing respect for 
difference”. This history shared between the Jews and 
Arabs for centuries “left a cultural heritage in Spain of 
supreme importance,” said the king, “and contributed 
to the definition of Spanish national identity.” These 
thoughts also harmonize with current Spanish thinking: 
that is trying to recover the culturally rich roots the 
country is so proud of. 
During one of my interviews with King Juan Carlos I 
asked him what was left for him to do in Spain since, if 
one looked at his list of achievements, his task seemed 
to be complete. “You must be joking,” he said with his 
usual eandour. “There is much to be done. Nothing less 
than the modernization and renovation of Spain. And in 
this field too, I'd like the crown to be a spur.” ||

## [Page 35](101488engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 101506: Fish farming: a 4,000-year-old growth industry

GREENWAT 
FISH FARMING: 
A 4,000-YEAR-OLD 
GROWTH INDUSTRY 
Right, skimming 
floating weeds 
from fish ponds 
in Bangladesh, 
  
FRANCE 
BEQUETTE 
is a Franco- 
American 
Journalist 
specializing in 
environmental 
questions, 
  
by France Bequette 
our thousand years ago the 
F Egyptians were already 
successfully farming Tilapia 
or “Nile carp” (Oreochromis 
niloticus). It is still a highly 
regarded species: about 500,000 
tonnes of it are produced world- 
wide today. Carp-raising has been 
apart of Chinese and Vietnamese 
traditions for centuries. 
Aquaculture, which was 
rediscovered in the 1960s as a 
weapon in the fight against 
hunger, is the raising of fish, mol- 
luscs, crustaceans and plants 
either in salt or fresh water. By 
1990 fish were providing about 
15 per cent of the protein con- 
sumed worldwide. The United 
Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) estimates 
that by the turn of the century 
fish produced by aquaculture 
will comprise up to 20 per cent 
of the world supply of fish and 
will be the major source of pro- 
tein in developing nations. 
While the world harvest from 
capture fisheries has barely 
increased since 1988 (rising 0.5 
per cent between 1990 and 
1991), aquaculture production 
has grown steadily since 1984 
(doubling between 1984 and 
1992) with an annual growth rate 
of 9 per cent. Global fish produc- 
tion reached 98.1 million tonnes 
in 1992, 13.9 million tonnes (9.4 
million tonnes of fish and 4.5 mil- 
lion tonnes of molluscs and crus- 
taceans) of which came from 
aquaculture. 
To maintain the current level 
of world fish consumption, i.e. an 
average of 13 kg per head per 
year, until the year 2010, 91 mil- 
lion tonnes of edible fish will have 
to be produced to feed the 
earth’s projected population of 7 
billion. In other words the pre- 
sent level of aquaculture produc- 
tion will have to be doubled. This 
is an attainable goal. Yet contrary 
to what might be thought, fish- 
farming is not easy, especially if 
the need to protect the environ- 
ment is taken into account. 
CAPTIVE CATFISH 
The advantages of expanding 
aquaculture are obvious. At the 
same time, the different systems 
used, ranging from small-scale 
fish farming to high-yield indus- 
trial plants, pose numerous prob- 
lems. A 1989 report produced by 
the Organization of Economic Co- 
operation and Development 
(OECD) asked a number of 
important questions. Is there a 
risk that fish farming will modify 
natural populations and reduce 
biological diversity? Is it wise to 
introduce exotic species? Might 
not fish farming cause the spread 
of disease? What effects might 
waste deposited in lakes, rivers 
and coastal zones have in the long 
term? What happens to chemical 
products such as antibiotics that 
are used in aquaculture? Are fish 
farming zones wisely chosen? Is it 
possible to predict the impact of 
aquaculture on the environment 
by using computer-generated 
models? 
Let us look at the example of 
Viet Nam, where fish are farmed 
in ponds (64 per cent), rice pad- 
dies (21 per cent) and floating 
cages in rivers (15 per cent) and 
the exploitation of water 
resources makes a major contribu- 
tion to the economy. The continent 
of which Viet Nam forms part is, 
moreover, the runaway champion 
in aquaculture. Asia supplies 84 
per cent of world production, fol- 
lowed by Europe (8.5 per cent), 
North America (3.7 per cent), 
South America (2.3 per cent), the 
former Soviet Union (0.9 per cent) 
and Africa (0.5 per cent). 
A single species of catfish 
(Pangasius bocourti, ca ba sa in 
Vietnamese) constitutes almost 
three-quarters of floating-pen

## [Page 36](101488engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 101506: Fish farming: a 4,000-year-old growth industry

production in Viet Nam, where 
most fish farming is concentrated 
in the Mekong Delta region. Until 
recently supplying the farms with 
young fish meant taking ten to fif- 
teen million young fish from their 
natural hatcheries in the Tonle 
Sap (“great lake”) of Cambodia 
during the rainy season (July to 
November). The disadvantages of 
this system are obvious. A natural 
habitat is depopulated and the 
source of supply depends on the 
political relations between two 
countries. Last May scientists 
from the Continental, Mediter- 
ranean and Tropical Aquaculture 
Group (GAMET) in Montpellier 
(France) succeeded in getting the 
catfish to reproduce in captivity. 
This is a momentous development 
for Vietnamese fish-farming, 
especially since the price of 
young fish fluctuates widely. 
The fish are raised in pens 
that float under houses. They are 
fed with a paste made of rice- 
bran and fresh fish, and are also 
given human and animal refuse. 
Aquaculture is a profitable way 
of using wastes. 
CULTURE AND AQUACULTURE 
Surprisingly, in both Viet Nam 
and China, where this technique 
began, ponds used as latrines or 
fertilized with manure prove to 
be excellent for fish-farming. 
Jérome Lazard, head of the 
“Aquaculture and Fish Pro- 
gramme” in the department of 
farming and veterinary medicine 
at France’s Centre for Interna- 
tional Co-operation in Agronomic 
~ cv - a 
¢ 36 
pr. 
Research for Development 
(CIRAD) says that there is no risk 
of fish transmitting disease- 
bearing germs to people if the 
fish are left to swim freely in 
clean water for a few days in 
order to cleanse themselves hoth 
inside and out. Lazard regrets 
that this process is not practised 
widely enough. Although con- 
sumers say they do not want to 
eat thesc “dirty fish”, the 
130,000 tonnes (minimum) pro- 
duced in this fashion find buyers 
nevertheless. 
“Wherever ponds can be cre- 
ated,” says Jérome Lazard, “they 
constitute wonderful fish produe- 
tion facilities, since they blend 
perfectly into agricultural produec- 
tion systems by helping to improve 
water quality and by using various 
by-products and wastes.” The 
ideal thing is to dig ponds just 
downsteam from stahles, pigsties 
Hauling up a 
wicker fish-pen in 
a floating village 
on Tonlé Sap, a 
lake in 
northwestern 
Cambodia. 
 
  
FURTHER READING: 
« The State of World Fisheries and 
Aquaculture, FAQ, Rome, 1995 
« Aquatic Biotechnology and Food 
Safety, OECD, Paris, 1994 
« (Ceres, FAQ review, no. 131, 
September 1991 
« Aquaculture continentale. 
Initiatives rurales, the French Ministry 
of Agriculture and Forests, no. 9, 
1990 
« Aquaculture—Developing a New 
Industry, OECD, Paris, 1989     
and chicken coops or even to raise 
these structures onto piles, which 
solves the problem of effluents. 
The droppings are nutritious to 
the plankton that the fish feed on. 
Fish canneries provide 
another propitious environment, 
for fish are very fond of fish! It 
takes one kilo of fish in the form 
of meal or oil to produce a kilo of 
edible fish. The fish-meal is made 
from less appetizing species and 
is also used to feed pigs and fowl 
and for making surimi, a kind of 
fish paste. But since it takes at 
least five kilos of fish to make a 
kilo of fish meal, supplies of this 
food source may eventually 
dwindle and thus encourage over- 
fishing. 
In order to be viable, the use 
of ponds for fish farming must be 
culturally acceptable. Writing in 
the FAO review, Ceres, Peggy 
Polk pointed out that in Africa, 
“when experts suggested that 
farmers raise fish in the small 
ponds used to water cattle and 
supply household water needs, 
many local people rejected the 
A tank of young 
fish on a fish farm 
in Andalusia 
(Spain).

## [Page 37](101488engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 101506: Fish farming: a 4,000-year-old growth industry

idea, insisting the fish would 
muddy the water and make it 
unsuitable {or drinking”. In India 
it is standard practice to add fer- 
tilizer to water tanks being used 
for aquaculture—except in 
Madhya Pradesh State where 
people refuse to allow the fertil- 
ization of water tanks because 
they use the same water for 
cooking and bathing. 
The farmed species also must 
be acceptable to prospective con- 
sumers. In some parts of 
Colombia, for example, people 
traditionally do not eat dorado. 
HOOKED ON PROFIT 
Profit is probably the most dan- 
gerous bait for the fish-farmer 
who is indifferent to the equilib- 
rium of ecosystems. In the 1980s 
there was a boom in demand for 
the Penaeus monodon shrimp in 
the Gulf of Thailand. It was easy 
to make a fortune. All it took was 
the cash to buy a piece of man- 
grove swamp or to build a grow- 
out pond in the estuary of a river, 
People said there was more 
money in shrimp farming than in 
illicit drugs! Between 1983 and 
1988 aquaculture in Asia grew at 
the rate of 40 per cent a year, 
Then, in 1989, 80 per cent of the 
farms located near Bangkok, 
where most of the activity was 
concentrated, went bankrupt. 
There were several reasons for 
this, including a drop in demand 
on the world market, reduced 
profit margins and polluted water 
due to poor effluent management. 
(Dumping too much organic 
matter reduces its oxygen con- 
tent, and untreated urban efflu- 
ents carry diseases and promote 
the proliferation of algae that are 
toxic to fish and humans alike). A 
similar collapse had taken place 
for similar reasons in Taiwan two 
years before. Epidemics had 
been caused by over-stocking the 
ponds and there had been “mis- 
management of the pond 
ecosystem”, indiscriminate use of 
antibiotics and chemicals and the 
use of polluted water. The 
results have been disastrous. 
Vast areas of mangroves have 
been destroyed in Indonesia, the 
Philippines and Thailand. 
| 
A NEW KIND OF LIVESTOCK 
In Europe, especially in Norway, 
future candidates for aquacul- 
ture are cod, halibut, turbot, 
catfish, lobster and scallops 
raised in pens, tanks and, for 
certain species like cod and 
salmon, by sea-ranching, 
Fish farmers use techniques 
comparable to those that have 
been used for years in animal hus- 
bandry. The salmonids are being 
used as guinea-pigs for aquatic 
biotechnology, which was the 
subject of an OECD report in 
1994." The {ish are not only oper- 
ated on and vaccinated but also 
fertilized, sterilized, made to 
grow and even change sex. Scien- 
tists are trying to develop salmon 
capable of living in the cold polar 
waters by implanting the genes 
that code for the anti-freeze pro- 
tein into its genome. They have 
also injected the growth hormone 
gene from the rat into trout, carp 
and salmon. In other words, trans- 
genic fish now exist. What will 
happen if they escape from their 
pens and mingle with their kind 
in nature? Fortunately the 
greater the genetic difference 
between organisms, the less 
capable they are of fertilizing 
each other. 
Another way of obtaining 
monosex or male fish (which grow 
twice as fast as females) is by 
administering  “masculinizing” 
steroids. “This technique, which 
is forbidden in Europe, is widely 
used in Asia (Taiwan and the 
Philippines) and in Israel,” notes 
Jérome Lazard with some con- 
cern. “It releases some thirty by-- 
products into the water, and we 
don’t really know its ecological 
consequences.” Nonetheless, 
researcli is continuing to make 
great strides and some concrete 
results have already been 
obtained. A natural hormone that 
is as effective as the artificial 
hormone but much easier for fish 
to absorD is now available. Tt is 
possible by using heat treatment 
to change the sex of young fish 
without harming the environ- 
ment, These are some of the 
avenues that tomorrow’s fish 
farmers will be exploring. | 
1. Aquatic Biotechnology and Food 
Safety, OECD, Paris, 1994   
  
LEADING THE VINE MOTH 
ASTRAY 
After 20 years of research and experimenta- 
tion, the French National Institute of Agro- 
nomic Research (INRA} has developed an 
original way of protecting southem Euro- 
pean vineyards from the European vine 
moth (Polychrosis botrana). The new method 
consists of disrupting olfactory communi- 
cation between male and female moths, the 
latter of which emit a chemical substance 
(known as a pherome) to attract males at 
mating time. By diffusing a synthetic 
pherome in the vineyard it is possible to pre- 
vent the males from detecting the signals 
emitted by the females, so that fertilization 
does not take place. Only one application is 
required, instead of the four or five applica- 
tions of chemical insecticide that are usually 
needed in campaigns against the vine moth. 
The treatment can be applied in any weather 
conditions, leaves no residue and only 
affects the moth. It costs slightly more 
than the chemical method but is more envi- 
renment-friendly. | 
 
THE IRON OF MOUNT NIMEA 
Although mining activities were not dis- 
cussed at the Rio Earth Summit in 1992, 
awareness of their impact on the environ 
ment seems to be growing. It has been 
known for years that the Nimba Mountains 
in Guinea contain a deposit of about 350 mil- 
lion tonnes of high-grade iron ore (65 per 
cent pureiron) which a consortium of mining 
companies is eager to develop. But the 
range, whose highest point is 1,742-metre- 
high Mount Nimba, is also covered by a rain 
forest that harbours a number of unique 
species. A nature reserve since 1944, it was 
accepted as a biosphere reserve by Unesco 

## [Page 38](101488engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

Ww 0 
in 1980 and registered on the World Heritage 
List in 1881. Environmentalists wonder 
whether the world's need for iron ore is so 
great that mining Mount Nimba should take 
precedence over ecological considerations. 
China, the former Soviet Union and Brazil 
alone supply 450 million tonnes of iron ore 
annually; while Nimba would only produce 8 
million, i.e. 1 per cent of world production. 
Unesco has recently agreed to modify the 
World Heritage site to exclude the proposed 
mine, but it is to be feared that the influx of 
people caused by mining would be harmful 
to the natural environment. [| 
ALL THEIR EGGS 
IN ONE BASKET 
The New Zealand section of the World Wide 
Fund for Nature (WWF) has discovered 
that, contrary to a widely held belief, the 
survival of a species is not threatened if 
the gene pool becomes too small. It cites 
the example of the Chatham Island Black 
Robin, only 5 of which remained in the early 
1980s and whose numbers have now risen 
to 150, all descendants of the same 
breeding pair. They live on two tiny islands 
in the Chatham chain, located to the east 
~ of New Zealand. [| 
A MARINE PARK 
FOR MAFIA ISLAND 
[n April this year Tanzania passed legislation 
to establish Mafia Island Marine Park, 120 
kilometres south of Dar es-Salaam. Mafia 
belongs to the Rufiji Delta ecosystem, is 
surrounded by a chain of islets and 
abounds in coral reefs and seagrass beds. 
The environment has been damaged by 
dynamite and seine-net fishing, and shell 
and coral collection for building-stone and 
lime production. The park has been estab- 
lished after a World Wide Fund for Nature 
workshop in 1991 and a national campaign. 
Most of the park will be a “regulated-use 
zone” where sustainable resource use and 
development will be promoted. [| 
 
SPIIINX BITES MOTORWAY 
The Egyptian government has agreed to a 
Unesco proposal that the planned new 
eightlane motorway that was to cross the 
protected site of the plateau of pyramids 
to the south of Cairo should be rerouted. 
The Giza Plateau is on the World Heritage 
List, and the pyramids and the Sphinx, 
already suffering from erosion due to cli- 
mate, traffic and air pollution, would have 
been exposed to an added threat caused 
by car exhaust and vibrations. [| 
PHOSPIIATES, 
HOW DO 
YOU PLEAD? 
The water companies that manage France's 
drinking-water resources have called for a 
ban on the polyphosphates found in deter 
gents, which, they believe, are largely 
responsible for water eutrophication (lack 
of oxygen, green or brown colouring and the 
spread of microscopic algae). Although 
large-scale water purification plants can 
dephosphatize urban waste water, much 
waste water outside urban areas is 
returned to nature without any processing. 
A convention signed in 1991 between the 
ministry of the environment and the deter 
gent manufacturers seeks to limit the 
phosphate level in detergents to 20 per 
cent. France, however, is one of the major 
consumers of detergents as well as the 
foremost phosphate producer in Europe. 
Phosphates have been banned in Switzer 
land, Canada and Norway [| 
  
 
INITIATIVES 0 
= 
AMERICA’S NEW BREED 
OF RANCHER 
In the last century when Wendy and Warner Glenn’s 
great grand-parents settled in the far southwest corner 
of Arizona near the New Mexico and Mexican borders, 
nobody thought about the environment. By 1960 when 
the couple took over the family ranch, things had 
become much more complicated. Environmentalists 
were criticizing ranchers and complaining about the 
degradation of pastureland. Moreover, about half of 
the region’s half-million hectares of near-desert 
belonged to the state. The few people living there felt 
victimized by administrative harassment. Burning the 
prairie, for example, had been outlawed for nearly 
eighty years although it had been practised for thou- 
sands of years in order to ensure the renewal and the 
quality of grazing land by preventing the growth of 
woody species like mesquite (Prosopis juliflora). 
The ranchers soon realized that if they wanted to 
get anything done they would have to join forces. In 
1993 thirty-five cattle ranchers founded a non-profit 
organization called the Malpai Borderlands Group. 
“Our goal,” they write in their manifesto, “is to restore 
and maintain the natural processes that create and 
protect a healthy, unfragmented landscape to support 
a diverse, flourishing community of human, plant and 
animal life in our Borderlands Region.” Prairie fires 
are no longer systematically opposed, and the first ones 
have already taken place, resulting in the growth of 
grass and wildflowers. 
The Malpai Group also has a programme for the 
protection of endangered species. The first beneficiary 
has been the Chiricahuan Leopard Frog. During a long 
drought last year, one member of the group and his 
family hauled 4,000 litres of water each week to a 
stock pond to keep some of these frogs alive. The 
Malpai Group then began raising funds to sink wells 
and install pumps to keep the frogs supplied with 
water. Group members also keep their cattle con- 
stantly on the move in order to prevent over-grazing, 
They can also benefit from a “Grass Bank”, a system 
whereby some ranchers make grazing land available to 
others who don’t have enough. This helps to prevent 
over-grazing and division of the land, and gives the 
grass time to grow back. 
The Malpai Group also works with a botanist from 
Tucson, Ray Turner, who has been studying the 
region’s plant-life for forty years and is able to assess 
modifications by means of photographs taken a cen- 
tury ago. And if some ranchers are tempted to sell 
their land because the life is too hard, the Malpai 
Group vets new buyers to ensure that they protect the 
environment by preventing wildcat development of the 
beautiful wild valleys by profit-hungry developers, 
sub-division of the land, massive incursions of tourists 
and cars, industrialization and pollution. [| 
Malpai Borderlands Group, 6226 Geronimo Trail Road, 
P. 0. Drawer 3536, Douglas, AZ 85608 United States. 
Tel.: (1-602) 558-2470; Fax: (1-602) 558-2314.

## [Page 39](101488engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

a
t
 
glo 
CHILDREN FOR PEACE 
Between May and October 1995, Unesco's Cul- 
ture of Peace Programme and Associated 
Schools Project jeintly organized 7 festivals for 
children in Costa Rica, the Cook Islands, Greece, 
Grenada, Jordan, Thailand and Zimbabwe. In each 
country children aged from 11 to 13 and their 
teachers met to discuss the best ways to pro- 
mote a culture of peace in their immediate envi- 
ronment. The results will provide the basis for a 
multimedia teaching kit for international use in 
primary and secondary schools. The “Seven 
Appeals” written by the children and the material 
they made to depict the festivals’ most signifi- 
cant moments will be exhibited at Unesco’s Paris 
Headquarters from 25 October to 16 November 
during the 28th session of the Organization's 
General Conference. The title of the exhibition will 
be “Around the Planet, Children in Quest of a 
Peaceful World". 
WORLD SUMMIT FOR EDUCATION 
THROUGH ART 
The International Society for Education through 
Art (INSEA) is a Unesco-affiliated non-govern- 
mental organization which has championed the 
role of art in education since 1951. It will be 
holding its 29th World Conference, under the 
auspices of Unesco, from 8 to 14 July 1996 at the 
Lille Conference Centre (France). The general theme 
of the conference will be “Art, Science and Envi- 
ronment in the 3rd Millennium: Divorce and Rec 
onciliation”. Hundreds of teachers, research stu- 
dents, artists, philosophers and art historians 
are expected to attend some 350 lectures, dis- 
cussions, round-tables and workshops, at which 
they will assess the current state of art educa 
tion and chart guidelines for the future. 
For further information contact 
Bureau Organisateur du 29e Congrés mondial, INSEA, 
Université de Lille III, Maison de la Recherche, BP 149, 
59653 Villeneuve d'Ascg, France. Tel.: (33) 20 33-65 08; 
Fax: (33) 20 33-64 60; E-mail: insea@univ-Lille3.Fr 
CARACAS, THEATRE CAPITAL OF THE 
WORLD, 1995 
Under the auspices of Unesco’s World Decade 
for Cultural Development the International The- 
atre Institute (ITI) held its 26th World Congress 
in Caracas (Venezuela) from 24 to 30 June 1995, 
Leading playwrights including Nobel Laureate 
Wole Soyinka (Nigeria), Emilio Carballido (Mexico), 
Enrique Buenaventura (Colombia) and Isaac 
Chocron (Venezuela) took part in a symposium 
on the theme of the Congress, “The Fall of 
Utepias and the New Millennium”. Hundreds of 
actors and actresses from the 93 ITI member 
countries took part in numerous artistic events, 
including the first session in Latin America of the 
Albert Botbol University of the Theatre of 
Nations. 
For further information contact 
International Theatre Institute, Unesco, 1, rue Miollis, 
75732 Paris Cedex 15 (France). Tel.: (33-1) 45 68-26 50; 
Fax: (33-1) 45 66-50 40. Cable: INTHEAT, 
PEACE EXHIBITION 
TRAVELS THE WORLD 
To celebrate the end of the Second World War 
and the fiftieth anniversary cf the United 
Nations and to commemorate the bombing of 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, a French association, 
“Le Mouvement de la paix”, has organized a 
multi-disciplinary exhibition in Montlugon 
(France) entitled “1995: For a culture of peace”. 
More than 250 works by artists from some 20 
countries were shown. They were divided into 
three sections: “Banners of peace” (painting 
and poetry), “Images of peace” (photography 
and poetry) and “1945-1995 Hiroshima, an 
image for peace” (posters). A travelling exhibition 
of copies made from the original exhibits will tour 
the world until the end of 1996. It has already 
visited Locarno (Switzerland) and Hiroshima 
(Japan). 
For further information contact 
“Le Mouvement de la paix”, 139, boulevard Victor Hugo, 
93400 Saint-Ouen, France. 
Tel.: (33-1) 40 12-21 21; Fax: (33-1) 40 11-57 87. 
CONTEMPORARY ART 
AT THE PALAIS DES NATIONS 
An international open-air exhibition of contempo- 
rary art entitled “Dialogues of Peace” was held at 
the Palais des Nations in Geneva (Switzerland) 
from 2 July to 26 October 1995. The exhibition, 
organized by France's Association Frangaise 
d’Action Artistique (AFAA) on the cccasion of 
the 50th anniversary of the United Nations, fea- 
tured paintings, sculptures, installations, pho- 
tographs and videos specially produced for the 
occasion by more than fifty up-and-coming or 
internationally known artists from five conti- 
nents. A catalogue of the exhibition has been 
published by AFAA with a preface by the Secre- 
tary-General of the UN, Mr. Boutros Boutros- 
Ghali. 
For further information contact 
AFAA, Rue du Mdle 38 bis, CH-120, Geneva, Switzerland. 
SWISS FILM PRIZE 
MARKS UNESCO AND UN 
ANNIVERSARIES 
At the Locarno International Film Festival 
(Switzerland) in August 1995 the Swiss National 
Commission for Unesco awarded a prize to mark 
the 50th anniversary of Unesco and the UN to 
Chen Yu-Hsun, a 33-year-old director from Taipeh, 
for his film Redai Yu (Tropical Fish). The prize-win- 
ning film shows with a blend of humour and fan- 
tasy how tolerance and respect for human dig- 
nity are possible even in difficult circumstances. 
Chen Yu-Hsun also received Unesco’s Fellini 
Medal commemorating the cinema's one-hun- 
dredth anniversary. 
SPOTLIGHT ON ETHICS: 
A NEW UNESCO PUBLICATION 
The first issue of Spotlight on Ethics, the 
newsletter of Unesco's international Bioethics 
Committee (IBC), was published earlier this year. 
The purpose of the new publication, as defined 
by Unesco Director-General Federico Mayor, is to 
be “a place for debate and exchange, ... opento 
all committees on ethics and similar bodies all 
over the world that are busy developing pro- 
grammes of research, education and informa 
tion”. By publishing background articles as well 
as practical information about international 
meetings, publications and institutions con 
cerned with bioethics, the bilingual (English/ 
French) newsletter will contribute to efforts by 
IBC to define ethical guidelines to accompany 
advances in genetics. 
For further information contact 
Spotlight on Ethics, the Bioethics Unit, 
Unesco, 1, rue Miollis, 75732 Paris Cedex 15, France. 
Tel.: (33-1) 45 68-38 03; Fax: (33-1) 4567-39 15. 
39

## [Page 40](101488engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 101507: The Iguaçu falls: cascading wonder of the subtropical forest

. The Iguacu falls 
  
    
   
    
cascading wonder 
of the subtropical 
forest 
| by Edouard Bailby 
UNESCO IN ACTION 
HERITAGE 

## [Page 41](101488engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 101507: The Iguaçu falls: cascading wonder of the subtropical forest

On the border between 
Argentina and Brazil, the 
Iguacu Falls are one of 
the natural wonders of 
the world and the main 
attraction of the Iguacu 
National Park (Iguazu in 
Spanish) which is 
registered on UNESCO's 
World Heritage List, 
The 275 cataracts formed by 
the waters of the lguagu River, 
on the border between Brazil and 
Argentina, create a permanent cloud 
of spray above the surrounding area. 
The breathtakingly spectacular 
falls occur above the point where the 
1,320-kilometre-long Iguagu, which 
rises in southern Brazil, joins the 
Parana, the country’s second-largest 
river after the Amazon. Twenty-eight 
kilometres before the eonflucnce, the 
I.2-kilometre-wide Iguagu suddenly 
plunges into an 80-metre-deep 
eanyon. Its raging waters form an 
immense succession of brilliant white 
cataracts, forming a horse-shoe 
shaped front of 2.7 kilometres. It is 
an awesome sight: the mighty roar of 
the river as it erashes down to the 
bottom of the canyon at an average 
rate of 1,700 cubic metres of water 
per second, with peaks of nearly four 
times that quantity, can be heard for 
several kilometres around. 
Long before the arrival of the 
Spanish, then the Portugnese, in the 
sixteenth century, the area belonged 
to the Guarani people. Iguagu means 
“oreat waters” in Guarani. The story 
socs that a tribe forming part of a 
powerful people known as the 
Caiguangue worshipped Tupi, the 
Supreme God, and his son M’Boi, the 
Serpent God. On learning that Taroba, 
a young warrior from a neighbouring 
tribe, had fallen in love with the 
Indian Naipt and {led with her in a 
pirogue, M’Boi flew into a rage. Sum- 
moning up all his strength, he parted 
the earth and created the gorges of 
the Iguagu. The pirogue was swept 
over the waterfall and vanished into 
the raging waters. Taroba turned into 
a palm tree and Naipi became a rock 
at the foot of the falls. M’Boi buried 
himself upright up to his neck in one 
of the caves in the canyon so that he 
could keep an eye on the two lovers 
and censure they would never be able 
to embrace each other. 
A NAIR-RAISING TRIP 
UPSTREAM 
The river waters flow relentlessly and 
at terrific speed through the green 
jungle. The surrounding trees harbour 
 
toucans, parrots (in particular the 
glaucus macaw, which is an cndan- 
gered species) and budgerigars. 
Singing birds of every possible hue flit 
branch. Other 
denizens of the forest include monkeys 
and silently fluttering blue butterflies 
from branch to 
of impressive proportions. There are 
few large cats, which shun the pres- 
ence of man, But the paths trodden by 
visitors are sometimes crossed by deer, 
wild pigs and other tropical mammals. 
lguagu National Park, which was 
included on UNESCO's World Heritage 
List on 28 November 1986, consists 
of two sections, one in Brazil, covering 
an area of 1,750 square kilometres, 
and the other in Argentina, on the 
left bank of the river, covering an area 
of 550 square kilometres. The two 
sections were connected a few years 
ago, when a bridge was built across

## [Page 42](101488engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 101507: The Iguaçu falls: cascading wonder of the subtropical forest

RE {0% 
  
Falls. No visitor should fail to visit 
both sections, which are very dif- 
ferent in appearance. While the most 
impressive spot is the Garganta do 
Diabo (Devil’s Gorge) in Brazil, it is 
only from the Argentinian side that it 
is possible to get a panoramic view. 
The canyon can be admired in all its 
splendour from various forest paths 
and from a 117-metre-long footbridge 
over the waters. Last year, 970,000 
tourists paid the $2 entrance fee to 
National Park 
(Iguaza in Spanish). 
Visitors can take a dirt road down 
through the forest on the Brazilian 
side to a small landing stage on the 
get into Iguacu 
Iguacu River. There, a specially 
designed inflatable dinghy waits to 
take them on an extraordinary forty- 
minute trip. It can accommodate 
batches of ten seated passengers at a 
|
EDOUARD BAILBY 
is a French journalist who has been a correspondent 
with the weekly L’Express and a press officerin 
Unesco's Office of Public Information. He is the author 
of guides to Cuba (4th edition, 1993) and Hungary 
{1991) published by Arthaud, Paris. 
42 
boat takes off at spcetacular speed. 
Firmly fastened to his scat, the pilot 
is forced to drive upstream at a speed 
of 80-100 kmh in order to overcome 
the force of the enrrent and to wend 
his way between whirlpools and 
rocks. As it is swept along by its own 
momentum, the dinghy sometimes 
rears almost vertically out of the 
water, before falling hack and contin- 
uing on its difficult way upriver, even- 
tually gliding gently along the 
Macuco falls, whose countless 
droplets form a translucent haze. 
TIL DANGERS OF TOURISM 
Can tourism harm this spectacular 
site? Until now, it has not done so, 
since both Brazil and Argentina have 
taken the necessary steps to protect 
wildlife. But the fragile balance of 
the forest could be jeopardized if 
either country were to take a wrong 
decision. Controversy has already 
been caused by the helicopters 
which carry tourists on trips above 
the falls every day. 
The fact is that the Brazilians and 
Argentinians are chiefly interested in 
l a (3 
y % | 
x 
‘ 
X 
- Pr 
é 
Liki, Loot LS ISILES CL SUE Se c JS (LS i LE : 3 Taelen Sadat A 
the Iguagu downstream from the time equipped with lifebelts. The protecting the Park from poaching 
and the illegal felling of palm trees. 
At might, groups of men creep 
seeretly into the forest to hunt game 
and fish for salmon in the lguacu. 
Others trade in palm hearts, which 
they gather in Brazil and sell in 
Argentina, where they fetch a higher 
price. Contraband has declined 
thanks to the presence of the forest 
rangers, but there are only about fifty 
of them, which is not enough to 
guard an area of 2,300 square kilo- 
metres. It is all the easier for 
poachers to trespass on the Park 
because it is not surrounded by a 
buffer zone. When it was created in 
1939, José Ramos, 
director of the Brazilian Park, the 
notion that nature reserves needed to . 
says Carlos 
be protected did not yet exist. 
The Brazilian journalist and envi- 
ronmentalist Jackson Lima, with the 
support of his Argentine colleagnes, 
has denounced various plans hatched 
by private companies with an eye to 
profit. One multinational would like 
to illuminate the falls at night. The 
cost of the installation would be $1.4

## [Page 43](101488engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 101507: The Iguaçu falls: cascading wonder of the subtropical forest

million. “What do they want to do? 
Frazzle birds with the heat of their 
lamps?” asks Lima. “We get a (nll 
moon every month—it’s much more 
beautiful! Another company has 
plans for a seventy-metre-high tower 
with a revolving restantrant at the top, 
from which diners would be able to 
admire the falls. A third firm has 
come up with the idea of building a 
miniature Disncyland-type railway 
that would run around the cataracts. 
In the last twenty years, 85 per 
cent of the rainforest cover on the 
banks of the Parana River lias been 
destroyed to make way for fields of 
wheat and soya. Straddling the Iguacu 
as it does, the National Park las 
ended up becoming a veritable island 
that has preserved most of its {lora and 
fauna. But Ramos is particularly eon- 
cerned by a new development project. 
To reduce the road distance between 
two small Brazilian towns, Capancma 
and Medianecira, by 140 kilometres, 
there have been moves to drive an 
asphalted road straight through the 
middle of the Park from the southeast 
to the northwest. “I shall continue to 
oppose that plan as hard as 1 can. 
Iguagn is sacrosanct,” he says. Unfor- 
tunately, he simply does not have the 
human and financial resources he 
needs to keep the site in good shape. 
A BOLD VENTURE 
The need to improve the lguagn 
National Park’s protection system is 
all the more urgent because the Park 
is located at the meeting point of 
three countries, Argentina, Brazil and 
Paraguay. The population of the 
Brazilian town of Foz do Iguacu, 
which is only thirty kilometres {from 
the falls, lias risen from 30,000 at 
the beginning of the 1960s (when 
work started on the world’s most 
powerful hydro-electric power sta- 
tion at Naipu, twenty kilometres to 
the north on the Parana River) to over 
200,000 today. Foz do lguagn is now 
Brazil’s third biggest tourist attrac- 
tion, after Rio de Janeiro and Sio 
Paulo, and boasts 160 hotels of every 
class. Yet two-thirds of their rooms 
are taken not by tourists who have 
come to admire the falls, but by 
sacoleiros, people who drive across 
the Bridge of Friendship, a few kilo- 
metres away, to go shopping in the 
thousands of duty-free shops in the 
border town of Ciudad del Este in 
Paraguay. On some days, especially 
Wednesday and Saturday, cars wait 
four hours to cross the Parang River. 
In 1994, 4.1 million people crossed 
the bridge. 
It is very tempting for loz do 
Iguacu in Brazil and Puerto Tguazi 
in Argentina to take advantage of this 
more or less clandestine trade, while 
at the same time preserving the nat- 
ural environment of the National 
Park. It will be a tricky enterprise 
that will require continual co-opera- 
tion between the authorities of the 
two countries. Last June, 270 travel 
agents from all over the world met for 
four days in Foz do Iguacu to look at 
ways of attracting more tourists to 
the region, which lies at the heart of 
Mercosur, the common market of four 
South American countries (Argentina, 
Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay) cre- 
ated in January 1995. The question 
is: what, in addition to the falls, can 
tourists be offered to induce them to 
stay more than forty-eight hours on 
tlie banks of the Ignacn River? 
This is an issue that is likely to 
debate between provoke heated 
defenders of the environment and 
champions of growth. “We shall need 
UNESCO’ help,” says Ramos. | 

## [Page 44](101488engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 101508: The Birth of the blues

by Isabelle Leymarie 
After emerging from the field songs of 
the cotton plantations in the Deep 
South at the end of the 19th century, 
the hues hecame a fount of inspiration 
for jazz and later rock 'n’ roll. Here 
Isabelle Leymarie reviews La route du 
blues (“The Blues Road"), a new hook 
that journeys along the Mississippi to 
the source of this Afro-American 
musical form that has fans all over the 
world, 
he origin of the blues, one of the 
most original and powerful 
musical forms to develop in the 
New World, can be traced back to field 
hollers, the modulated cries made by 
slaves as they laboured in the cotton 
fields of the Deep South. When LeRoi 
Jones wrote a book on black Americans, 
later to become a classic of Afro-Amer- 
ican literature, he gave it the evocative 
tittle The Blues People. 
The blues and its urban reincarna- 
tion, boogie-woogie, are the ancestors of 
rock 'n’ roll. Elvis Presley, Vince Taylor, 
the Rolling Stones and Eric Clapton 
contd never have existed without the 
blues. Jazz is constantly going back to 
its roots in the fertile soil of the blues 
a4 
  
and gospel music, which has always had 
close links with the blues. The cele- 
brated blues scale, which is so typical 
of Afro-American music and gives it its 
specific “mashed note” tone, provided 
the uprooted slaves with a means of 
reproducing untempered African scales 
on instruments dilferent from those 
they had known. The first blues singers 
were “loners”— unattached men living 
in rural arcas who accompanied them- 
selves on the guitar. Later the blues 
became urbanized when it was taken 
up by vaudeville artistes and recording 
companies, With the massive migration 
of blacks to the northern states, the 
blues became more stylized and eventu- 
ally came to be played by bands and 
orchestras. 
Standard blues contains twelve bars 
with a typical modulation on the fifth 
bar. But rather than a particular strue- 
tural or harmonic pattern, the blues is 
above all a “sound”, a way of life, an 
emotion. Musicians say that you lave to 
have lived the blues before you can play 
 
it, you have to have suffered, toiled 
away, wandered from place to place, 
been inlove and paid your dues. 
From New Orleans to Chicago 
La route du blues (“The Blues Road”) 
traces the wanderings of the bluesmen 
along the Mississippi from New Orleans, 
Baton Rouge and the Louisiana coun- 
tryside to Chicago, the end of the road 
for the huge wave of migrants and still 
capital of the blues today. This lively, 
well-designed and beautifully illns- 
trated book reveals the multifaceted | 
world of the blues and its dilferent 
regional styles. It takes us along the 
majestic Mississippi and explores its 
curious hidden by-ways, as the musi- 
cians themselves once did. After the 
haunting bayous and the monotonous 
plain stretehing from Lake Pontchar- 
train to Baton Rouge, we enter the

## [Page 45](101488engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 101508: The Birth of the blues

  
 
Ee SRD 
di 
 
Q4 
- hd » 
a ELT 
yea 
WY ily 
A a. pe 
LI. Ura | y 
| Pus 
  
    
state of Mississippi with its impressive 
delta swollen by the waters of the 
Yazoo River. We move on through 
Natchez, Greenville, Greenwood and 
other towns and villages where some of 
the famous blues performers lived. We 
visit Indianola, Itta Bena, Tutwiler, 
Clarksdale, and Memphis, with its ever- 
present memories of Elvis Presley, 
Martin Luther King Jr., Beale Street’s 
famous blues clubs, and “Stax”, the 
ereat soul musie record label, and then 
on to Saint Louis, Detroit and Chicago. 
We discover the nrban and rural 
landseapes, and taste the atmosphere of 
bars, saloons and gambling dens, often 
run-down hut still “jumping”, brightly 
coloured churches, heat-oppressed resi- 
dential neighourhoods built along the 
roadside or amidst luxuriant vegetation. 
Vivid descriptions of places are inter- 
spersed with portraits and interviews 
with musicians, record producers and 
other figures associated with the history 
of the blnes—people like the prize- 
fighter and pianist Champion Jacek 
A scene in the French 
quarter of New Orleans, 
Louisiana {U.S.A.). 
Dupree, Fats Domino, Professor Long- 
lair, Slim Harpo, the legendary Lead- 
belly, who was discovered in the Angola, 
Louisiana, penitentiary by the musicolo- 
gist John Ifammond and was one of the 
first jazz musicians to use the twelve- 
string guitar, Lightnin’ ITopkins, “Blind” 
Lemon Jefferson, Willic Dixon, Charley 
Patton, Robert Johnson, B. B. King, 
Sonny Boy Williamson, Elvis Presley, Al 
Green, Muddy Waters. We meet a cast 
of characters who are by turns ecstatic, 
disillusioned, thoughtful, jovial, kindly, 
  
LA ROUTE 
DU BLUES 
(“THE BLUES ROAD") 
by David Ausseil and 
Charles-Henry Contamine 
with photos by Denis Chapoullié 
Preface by Ahmet Ertegun 
Ediciones de Arte J. P. Barthélémy 
Besancon (France) 1995 
383 pages 
ISBN 2-909 413-179 ||       
jubilant, ironic and stylish, but all fig- 
ures of great humanity. And, of course, 
there is the music, everywhere defying 
adversity and discrimination, erupting in 
Chieago’s vacant lots or in the middle of 
its crowded streets. 
Touring the world 
The book also gives a detailed history of 
the first blues reeordings, such as Mamie 
Smith’s Crazy Blues on the “Okelh” 
label, which was marketed only to 
blacks and sold 75,000 copies in a 
month, the hits of Bessie Smith, the 
“Queen of the Blues”, and the emer- 
gence of the minstrel shows. Some pages 
tell the story of the aleohol, women and 
gambling that fuelled the droll, tor- 
mented imagination of the bluesmen. 
Others show trains with nicknames like 
“The Southern” or “The Dog” whieh 
carried migrants and hobos to faraway 
places and oecupy a key place in blues 
lyrics. Other parts of the book are 
devoted to sueh important themes as 
colton, the Mississippi, voodoo (known as 
mojo in the Deep Sonth), migration, reli- 
gion and its place in everyday life, and 
Chess Records, one of the first impor- 
tant urban blues recording labels. 
The saga of the blues did not end on 
the shores of Lake Michigan. Its lan- 
guage has become international. In his 
preface Ahmet Ertegun describes the 
feelings that gripped him in Bodrum, 
Turkey, when he heard an unknown gui- 
tarist launch into an impassioned version 
of a Muddy Waters blues standard. The 
hook’s authors report that “back from a 
European tour with ITowlin® Wolf during 
the Blues Revival, the cver-inspired 
Hubert Sumlin had been fascinated by 
the hero-worship with which they had 
heen received by British guitarists, 
‘When we got there, 1 eouldn’t believe 
it. They knew more about us than we 
know onrselves, or almost!’”. nu 
ISABELLE LEYMARIE 
is a Franco-American musicologist.

## [Page 46](101488engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 101509: Yehudi Menuhin talks to Martine Leca

  
talks to Martine Leca. 
A former child prodigy, one of the 
great violinists of the century, 
Yehudi Menuhin has also 
conducted, directed several music 
festivals and founded a music 
school in England. A man of peace, 
he played for the Red Cross during 
the Second World War and 
continues to be a staunch defender 
of human rights. From 1969 to 1975 
he was president of UNESCO's 
International Music Council and is 
presently a Unesco Goodwill 
Ambassador. He recently created 
the “Muse” project which seeks to 
provide European children with 
education for peace through music. 
MARTINE LECA 
is a French writer and journalist. 
46 
i]
 
i 
a
e
 
b) 
i 
hy 
ll
 ol 
S
e
a
s
 
hi
ll
 
B
L
 
T
e
l
 
n
C
 
er
t 
I] 
ls 
o
w
 
a 
Ml You gave your first concert at the 
age of seven. How did you come to 
terms with the gift that has taken you 
so far? 
— I accepted it naturally. Later on, 
daily practice of yoga—in which the 
body is like a root shooting simultane- 
ously skyward and into the earth— 
along with my fundamentally robust 
nature, has kept me from going astray. 
I was also certain that my music 
helped to make the world a better 
place. That was my first and most 
abiding wish. My ambition was not to 
become a virtuoso, a music-making 
machine, but an intermediary who 
could reveal the joy that exists in all 
of us and he receptive to others. My 
soul has never heen imprisoned by 
the straitjacket of technique. On the 
contrary, it is my Slav soul, with its 
age-old wealth of instinct, that has 
made me play naturally. 
BM You have been called “the Mozart of 
the violin”. Has being a virtuoso 
imposed constraints on you? 
— My father set himself the task of 
helping me and looking after my 
carcer. lle had nothing in common 
with Mozart's father, who was over- 
bearing and vain and presented his 
genius of a son to the courts of France 
and other European countries. My 
court was—and still is—the public, 
the people who come to uplift their 
minds and souls so that they can 
forget their everyday troubles. No, 
learning to play the violin was never 
an imposition for me. 
The route from the head to the 
heart must always be direct. When, at 
the age of seven, 1 held my first violin, 
this route was already mapped out 
within me. I owe this rigour, these stan- 
dards that governed my childhood, to 
my upbringing and to my nature. Later 
I diseovered a more carefree attitude 
to life, 
Enescu'—taught me to play unsystem- 
because my teacher— 
. atically, intuitively. I became known as 
a young virtuoso. I went from concert 
to concert, pursued by the desire to 
float like a balloon and discover the 
marvellous lightness of being. 
However, the lightness I was

## [Page 47](101488engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 101509: Yehudi Menuhin talks to Martine Leca

looking for was concealed by a sensa- 
tion of heaviness. It took me twenty 
years to feel the weight of one finger 
and to understand the relationship of 
music—which comes {rom the soul— 
to the muscles. I then realized that 
technique must take a spiritual 
course which involves the body. The 
body is a noble thing: it should be 
given life through dance, singing and 
music, and not be crucified. Some 
civilizations have understood this, 
others not. 
Art develops the intellectual, 
physical, imaginative and sensory 
spheres, and henee all human poten- 
tial. We use only part of our capabili- 
tics because education does not go to 
the source. As a source of equilib- 
rium and tolerance, music should be 
brought into the schools as a form of 
sclf-fulfilment, a new philosophy, 
“especially in primary schools, with the 
participation of monitors, musicians, 
specialists and composers. Musical 
education, which has hitherto heen 
regarded as an optional subject, can 
change people’s social behaviour. 
BB Why in primary schools rather than 
at other levels? 
— Music encourages revelation, a 
sense of union with others and with 
our environment, It enables us to 
interpret our relationship with the 
earth’s rhythms and express emotions 
like joy and pain. In remedying the 
evils of a society blighted by con- 
sumerisnt and the excesses of materi- 
alism, children are in a way our 
teachers and redeemers. Because 
they are so genuine, they react imme- 
diately to encouragement and atten- 
tion. Schools nowadays often bring 
together children from different 
ethnic backgrounds. An exchange of 
memories, cultures and sensibilities is 
encouraged by this diversity because 
children, by nature, do not succumb 
to the temptation of rejecting others 
on ethnic grounds. 
They succumb to it when they are 
adults, depending on how narrow- 
minded they become or on the cre- 
dence they give to false information— 
for xenophobia is a falsehood and is 
based on myths. The adult in us kills 
the child. Now the child must teach 
Sharing is the best | 
guarantee of peace. We 
must encourage 
everything—such as 
music and the arts—that 
encourages sharing and 
exclude everything that 
destroys or harms the 
growth of harmony 
between people. 
the adult. Musicians, composers and 
well-intentioned teachers must iden- 
tify with children, respect them, and 
not deceive them by giving false 
answers, by evasiveness or silence. A 
driver must know that the road is his 
guide and that he must adapt his driv- 
ing to the road, not to his idea of it. 
There ean be no mistaking a straight 
stretch for a bend in the road. 
HM You say that you have retained a 
childlike naivety and freshness. What is 
your recipe for this? 
— Quite simply, I have never let 
mysclf give in to negative ideas, the 
lugubriousness and hand-wringing 
which poison our soeiety. I prefer 
happiness. And so, I have no diffi- 
culty in projecting myself into the 
feelings of hundreds of millions of 
children, into their games and into 
their suffering. Since these children 
are the continuity of humanity, they 
should be given a hearing, They are a 
living source that will help us to 
recreate ourselves. In a sense, this 
infanticidal adult world of ours 
deserves the punishment it inflicts on 
itself, like the scorpion that dies from 
its own sting. In periods of so-called 
peace—a word that to my mind no 
longer corresponds to reality—the 
world spends its energy preparing for 
future wars. 
BM Do you think that music is capable 
of changing human relations, of 
turning people towards peace? 
— Sharing is the best guarantee of 
47

## [Page 48](101488engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### 101509: Yehudi Menuhin talks to Martine Leca

peaee. We must enconrage every- 
thing—such as music and the arts— 
that encourages sharing and exclude 
everything that destroys or harms the 
growth of harmony between people. 
During the Second World War, I 
often played for the troops: it was my 
form of resistance. The faces of these 
men who had stared death in the face 
and who would perhaps die the next 
day, shone with a kind of ecstasy, the 
ecstasy that is within our reach, if 
only we want to grasp it and pass it 
on. Music is the antidote to crimi- 
nality. Musicians will never be erimi- 
nals, nor will those who practise the 
martial arts, because they purge 
themselves of all their negative 
impulses. The energy that {lows into 
them amplifies and enriches their 
relationship with the world and with 
other people. 
Our times don’t teach the higher, 
transcendent things. But music and 
singing can do so. Singing brings 
people together; it harmonizes body 
and mind. It unites people with others 
We all have considerable 
reserves of energy which 
remain untapped or are 
repressed or even 
spoiled, in particular 
because of the very 
Western obsession with 
material things. Our worst 
actions are dictated to us 
by a desire for security 
and by fear. 
aud creates a symbiosis. Everybody has 
to adapt to the rhythin and the notes. 
This produces a collective effect on 
the emotions and the intellect. Music 
and singing have nothing to do with 
consumerism; they are part of life. 
HM Are you set apart from the world by 
the ecstasy and sublimation you expeti- 
ence when you play? 
— Any work of art, or any interpreta- 
tion of a work of art, is bound to be 
executed outside real life and time. 
Twentieth-century theatre seeks to 
render the world’s tragedy expres- 
sionistically, to show us real blood 
being shed and people’s real-life 
occupations. Even if it wishes to be 
close to the real world, art cannot 
coincide with it. Ilence the need for 
sublimation. 
Emotions must be distilled. Mozart 
could make people hear and see ter- 
rible events which, through the filter 
of art, they could listen to in their 
drawing-rooms and be profoundly 
moved. If art gets involved in repro- 
ducing reality on stage, it becomes a 
kind of television news broadcast. Art 
has better things to do. It performs a 
redeeming function. The artist’s role 
is to guide human beings, who are too 
wrapped up in material things, 
towards ecstasy. In other words, to 
take social beings out of themselves 
and unite them to the work of art, 
which expresses the intense experi- 
ence of the artist. This is the nature of 
the link with the public: a shared 
ecstasy created in a spirit of abnega- 
tion. You want to enwrap the audi- 
ence in the the beauty and calm of the 
detachment that takes hold of you. It 
is the joy of feeling a natural sense of 
ecstasy at a time when artificial formns 
of ecstasy are so fashionable. 
I have always liked to experience 
this sublime feeling and spread it 
round me. It is a paradoxical state 
which is at the same time very real 
and yet detached from the present. 
The Russians experience this state in 
their everyday lives—it is how they 
transcend themselves. They have a 
gift for drama. Their daily lives have 
always been so steeped in sadness 
and horror that they cscape from it 
into the world of art, which Lifts them 
out of distress and gives them life. 
When they sing, dance and play they 
draw on the drama of their daily lives 
which they transmute with incredible 
intensity and force. 
| travelled with Russians during 
the war. Singing and reeiting poems 
was their form of resistance. It was the 
expression of a spontancous culture 
which had nothing to do with school; 
it was born of pain but also of 
indomitable hope. The survivors of 
the concentration camps have set us 
the same example: considering their 
physical and mental exhaustion, it is 
impossible to explain how some of 
them went on living. These people 
‘struggled and survived. My parents, 
who were Russian Jews, personified 
this blend of deep melancholy and 
i 
dogged hope. 
HM Is this mystery, which seems such 
an important part of your make-up, reli- 
gious in origin? 
— No. I feel its presence above all in 
the space we call reality, but which is 
to some extent beyond us. We do not 
know what existed before we were 
born or what will come to pass after 
we die. So we look for ways of cre- 
ating ecstasy that are capable of liber- 
ating the mind from the body. But the 
body is not an impediment to the sonl. 
On the contrary, everything hinges on 
mastering its rhythms and its breath. 
I have achieved my relationship 
with the world withont religion,

## [Page 49](101488engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 101509: Yehudi Menuhin talks to Martine Leca

Yehudi Menuhin and the young 
violinist Sarah Chang at an award- 
giving ceremony at the Palais des 
Congres in Paris in 1993. 
through a sort of cosmic complicity 
with the world that weaves its web 
around me and in me and whicli 1 
weave like everyone else. Religions 
bonds between those who 
but 1 
excesses of adoration to which they 
create 
practise them, dread the 
give rise. lluman beings in search of 
an existential support have the keys 
of their freedom within them. Individ- 
uals are the threads of this cosmic 
web, whieh is of divine essence. This 
attitude seems to me to be truer, 
closer to the human scheme of things 
than any form of religions worship. 
We all have considerable reserves 
of energy which remain untapped or 
are repressed or even spoiled, in par- 
ticular hecanse of the very Western 
obsession with material things. Our 
worst aetions are dictated to us by a 
desire for security and by fear. Ide- 
ally, we should root out these evils, 
which are within us. If we cannot 
manage to do so, we might at least 
adopt a conciliatory attitude, which 
would not neeessarily mean giving up 
our resistance and determination. It is 
a question of striking a balance. 
There’s no point in trying to smash a 
brick wall by knocking your head 
against it. Thought and mental energy 
can do the job. 
So, as I grow older, 1 get pleasnre 
from f[celing light, freed from the 
burden ol having to take sides. The 
only thing that interests me is a harmo- 
nious centre that is flexible and strong, 
stronger than the snm of the parts. 
This very simple arithmetic ought to 
suit societies whose centre is yielding 
under the pressure of extremes. 
HB You are a fervent adept of yoga. 
What part does it play in your attitude 
to the world? 
— Yoga is a source of balance 
between carth, heaven and the self, a 
souree of fusion not only with human 
beings hut with animals, plants and 
the cosmos as a whole. It enables me 
to play by introducing the heartbeat 
of life and to understand intuitively 
The adult in us kills 
the child. 
Now the child must 
teach the adult. 
what a composer is trying to say. For 
instance, Bach’ “Chaconne”, which 1 
regard as the finest piece ever written 
for solo violin, admits neither gratu- 
ilous ornamentation nor aggressive- 
ness. [tis a work that demands nerves 
of steel. lluman beings are like 
Bach’s “Chaconne”. They have to be 
capable of settling their own differ- 
ences, balancing their opposites and 
negotiating their transformations, all 
the deaths and rebirths which are 
constantly changing them. 
HB Do you have a political philosophy? 
— Politics captivates crowds which 
are taken in by the illusion of speech. 
1 believe that all politicians should 
have a job outside politics. Politicians 
who were also cobblers, cooks or gar- 
deners, who had direct experience of 
their country at every level, would 
be head and shoulders above today’s 
politicians. They would be really 
useful to their fellow citizens. Hu 
1 Georges Eneseu, Romanian composer and 
violinist (1881-1955). —1id. 
49

## [Page 50](101488engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### 101510: The Watchful eye of democracy

  
The watchful eye of democracy 
The task of encouraging tolerance may seem complex 
at any time, but we live today in a particularly sombre 
era. Our capacity to destroy each other, if we let intolerance 
take its course, has never been greater—I{rom massive state- 
organized destruetion to do-it-yourself horrors engineered by 
small fanatieal groups. 
Rabid intolerance is widespread and growing. Religious 
intolerance stalks several large nations. Those who exhibit 
ethnic intolerance have so far lost any sense of shame as to 
flaunt an appalling phrase such as “ethnic cleansing”. Nazism 
and other intolerant creeds are increasing, even in the most 
“developed” parts of the world. The situation could hardly 
be worse, hut it worsens yearly. 
When a real disagreement surfaces between individuals 
and peoples, there is sometimes a tendeney to say: “It’s only a 
failure in communication” as though to go further and [ur- 
ther so as to communicate more and more would ineluctably 
lead to the sunny uplands of mutual respect. Not necessarily 
so. As one [ormer British Prime Minister answered when a 
member of his Cabinet who was being dismissed said there 
seemed to be a failure in communication: “There is no 
failure. I understand you very well. You are not up to the 
job”. We will get nowhere without such frank speaking. 
Many of us are congenital joiners—of clubs, societies, 
neighbourhoods, nations. We like to feel we belong. That 
sense of belonging is umbilically linked to its opposite: the 
assumption that other people do not belong, are outsiders 
and arc to be kept in that condition. Those of us in nalions 
which arc comfortable and little threatened can keep such 
nasty attitudes more or less at bay—though if someone out- 
side the pale asked to marry our daughter it might well flare 
into life. 
These are hard and unpalatable thoughts. What hope is 
there? The first hope is in the spread of democratic institu- 
tions. They are not a panacea, only the least bad social system 
so far devised. For the idea of democracy is fonnded pre- 
cisely on the assumption of tolerance, rather than on any type 
by Richard Hoggart 
of authoritarianism, lay or religious: because those take away 
the subjeet’s freedom, and that loss is the essence of state 
intolerance. 
However, democracies only work well when they do better 
in some important issues than the majority of their citizens 
would wish or would vote for in a referendum. Thus, in 1995, 
75 per cent of the population of Britain are in favour of a 
return to eapital punishment. Probably a majority have cle- 
ments of racism in their attitudes. But parliament has passed 
anti-capital punishment and anti-racist laws. 
That parliament should have to force its citizens to be 
more virtuous than their natural instincts even in a demoe- 
racy is a pity but unavoidable. One may look forward to a 
time when eilizens do not bave to he “screwed into virtue” by 
their elected representatives. Meanwhile we have to be 
thankful for these instances where parliament does better 
than the majority of us would collectively do. 
So we are quite well on in the debate before we come to 
what most well-meaning people put first: the power of edu- 
cation as a force towards tolerance. It is a critical force; 
but not easy; not a matter of warm injunctions. In an carly 
poem the English poet Wl. Auden wrote: “We must love 
one another or die”. That was a call to a sort of calculated 
tolerance. Later he altered it, because lie thought it was 
plioney, sentimental, lace-saving, lo: “We must love one 
another and die”. 
We must in teaching (and in its best adjunct, broadcasting, 
if it is properly used, and not made the agent either of com- 
merce or of state propaganda) be challenging and firm. We 
can arrange school exchanges, pen friends and all the rest, 
but we must not expect too much from them even though we 
prepare most carefully and unsentimentally. 
Above all, we must educate our pupils and students in the 
art of critical literacy in a democracy. This means, among 
much else, training them both to understand and value their 
particular enltuve but also to stand outside it and be able 
and willing to judge it. = 
  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Cover (from left to right and top to bottom): Antoine Gyori © Sygma, Paris; lan Berry © Magnum, Paris. Benami Neumann © Magnum, Paris; S. Nackstrand © 
Gamma, Paris; Photo news © Gamma, Paris. Carlos Angel © Gamma, Paris; T. Graham © Sygma, Paris. Page 6: UNesco/Ines Forbes. Pages 7, 10-11, 13, 15, 
1617, 18: © International Museum of Children’s Art, Oslo. Page 9: §.0.S. Children’s Villages-International Museum of Children’s Art, Oslo. Page 20: © 
Gamma, Paris. Page 21: lan Berry © Magnum, Paris. Page 22: © Juda Ngwenya/Reuter/Max PPP, Paris. Page 23: Antoine Gyori © Sygma, Paris. Page 24: 
Benami Neumann © Gamma, Paris. Page 25: Photo News © Gamma, Paris. Page 26: S. Nackstrand © Gamma, Paris. Page 27: S. Nackstrand © AFP, Paris. Page 
28: ).F. Campos © Vu, Paris. Page 29: M. Deghati © AFP, Paris. Page 30: Halesian-Liaison © Gamma, Paris. Page 31: Carlos Ange! © Gamma, Paris. Page 32: T. 
Graham © Sygma, Paris. Page 33: © AFP photo/Europapress, Paris. Page 34: Omega © Sygma, Paris. Page 35: Marc Beziat © Cosmos, Paris. Page 36 (above): 
© Yves Gellie/Icone, Paris. Page 36 (below): Pierre Boulat © Cosmos, Paris. Page 37 (above): Voegele © INRA, Paris. Page 37 (below): M. Renaudeau © Hoa Qui, 
Paris. Page 38 (above): H. Silvester © Rapho, Paris. Page 38 (below): © Esther/Ask Images, Paris. Pages 40, 41: Frangois Gohier © Explorer, Paris. Page 42: © 
E. Bailby, Paris. Page 43: 0. Franken © Explorer, Paris. Pages 44-45: Gérard Sioen © Rapho, Paris. Pages 46, 49: James Andanson © Sygma, Paris.   
50

## [Page 51](101488engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
     
    
   
Aton NB 
JEUNESSE 
3 BELL NE 
Ce Salon, 
camedonne une 
faim de loup! 
  
  
  
  
4 Seine Saint-Denis 
% 1 Conseil Général | 
       
  
| gopher.unesco.org 
or 
http://www.unesco.org 
Currently on-line are: an index of the contents of the last 22 issues of the Unesco Courier, UNESCC 
ress releases, addresses, fax, telex and electronic mail numbers of Unesco's regional office 
National Commissions and Unesco Clubs, the directory of UNesco databases and informatio 
services, colour images of the Japanese Garden and other architectural sites at UNEscc 
eadquarters, as well as works of art such as Henry Moore's reclining sculpture. 
directly with suggestions and comments, type: 
INesco.courier@unesco.org

## [Page 52](101488engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

years 
de 
  
20 November 1946. The first General Conference opens at the Sorbonne In Parls. Unesco/Eciar mondial 
(FACE TREY BFS 
    
      
  
SN Ne c A = 
1951. The arid zone research programe, Unesco/G. Bohm 
world literature feature in 
the Unesco Collection of 
Representative Works 
Unesco Archives 
1956. Radio Forum pilot project for literacy and development in India. I — 1950. The ir Aesco Una etucalion programme on behalf of Palestinian ge 7 children. 
Unesco). Bhownagary Unesco/D. Roger 
THE NESCO COURIER 
h Dptenunt 10 he November 1995 ssue 
0l0 separately

## [Page 53](101488engo.pdf#page=53) 0

### IGNORE

- 
$NA Ie 
Susi vg IRE a   
    
   
         
   
ri | = 
Une SCo 
  
i~ 
     
   
      
), - 0+ 
)'} a h a. 
»> 
N 
| Campaign for the Safeguard of the 
 
    
hb | 
1960. The Intemational 
  
  
   
= oS 
   
> ' 
1965. The SITE satellite brings television to many Indian villages. (sco Aimasy

## [Page 54](101488engo.pdf#page=54) 0

### IGNORE

5 Se, WF 
a Lin ALN Fn 
1963. A women's education project In Africa, Unesco/M. Cailard v 
¥ “iso 5   
 

## [Page 55](101488engo.pdf#page=55) 0

### IGNORE

TN hel. SEER 
£2 Te gi 
1976. Arid land research in the Mount Kulal blosphere reserve (Kenya). 
© Yann Arthus-Bertrand/Earth from Above/UNESCO  
: Grande Co mate 
worON Archipel i) 
des Comores : C 3 Ambre   
    
- NM : 
L Mohad |, Arqouan 
i Saat 200 
    
4 AR : : 
1971. The Man and the Biosphere (MAB) programme. Wind power as a renewable energy source, 
C. Bacheller © EDF Photo Library, Levallois-Perrat 
   
  
      [S— 
m, 
ay fem: 1 SE 
re TEW FEMA. 
   
    
 
    
  
- HO I < 
ELUM HARE a= 
TE ataba 22 VIL 
    
    
   
  
|] 
ope | 
. Te hy 
     
 
   
Saver la MONE Te) = — 
. yapatd Mgrs etm ee 
Mikoa ya Kanda Yor | Saas 
| wars 
® 
be wake Wyn 
 
   
    
      
  
Moulton Ke Wahes 
1976. The Geological World Atlas. © COMW, Unesco 1972. Studying African oral traditions and promoting African languages. Unesco/M. Claude

## [Page 56](101488engo.pdf#page=56) 0

### IGNORE

  
Aes 3420 
: 2130 
Vd N\ ; EN 
- a ” bY 
” \ 
3 ry . Cape Ahi {5 
1520 | 
WA A 
2000, l - 1325 
5. 
Ph / 028 : 
, } 2200 31th J 
Ge “\ 
Mocs as \ 
12 
Word Heritage; Weidan- Emam, Isfahan (Ian. 1973. A world study of marine pollution Is launched under the of th trgovermentl Oceanogr ah. Crmisson (10 
Koch © Rapho, OHI/COI/SHC © Minister of 
      1976. World Hertage: the Galapagos Islands (Ecuador). 
R. oe Seynes © Rapho, Paris   
  
   
    
  a 
Ron 
1978. World Heritage: the rock-hewn churches of Lainela beta (Ethiopia). CA de W eroerg Heritage 2001/"La Caixa" Foundation. Heritage 2001 is a 
Unesco-sponsored project executed by the “La Calxa™ Foundation and GAMMA Presse Images with the participation of Kodak. 
  
ECE EAN oe “di Ek oo Ny Ti FMA r ) i 
Blalowiezs nional park Uicphere reserve (Paland)e 5. Code OElurtn. | World Heritage: RBC athlon Ml oni yt sho ney bes

## [Page 57](101488engo.pdf#page=57) 0

### IGNORE

          
acs SETTER wa. 
It ne o £ i] Ris C > < 
4 
by} 
           
  
World Heritage: Merida (Spain). 
© D. Mora. Heritage 2001/°La Caixa” Foundation 
      World Heritage: the Medina of Fez (Morocco). World Heritage: . Palmyra (Syrian Arab Republic). 
© E. Bower, Hentage 2001/"L.a Caixa” Foundation © W. Denker. Hevitage 2001/ La Caixa” Foundation 
  
. i 
World Heritage: the Old City of Havana (Cuba). 
© R. Gailarde. Hentage 2001/ La Cana” Foundation 
World Heritage: Humayun's Tomb in Delhi (India). World Heritage: Hawall Volcanoes National Park (U.S.A.). 
OY. Lyma. Hentage 2001/"La Caixa” Foundation M. Friegel © Rapho, Pans 

## [Page 58](101488engo.pdf#page=58) 0

### IGNORE

      
  
    
   
  
World Heritage: at the foot of 
Dogon people of Mall. © 
World Heritage: the Sanctuary of Bom Jesus do Congonhas (Brazil). 
© C. Freire. Hentage 2001/ La Caixa” Foundation 
  
World Heritage: the temple of Borobudur (Indonesia). 
UUsesco/Vorontzof    
  
 
      
1988. AFRALPHA word software for 
African languages. Uso, 
The General 
of Africa (vols 1 
and 2). 
  
Charlevoix blosphere reserve, Quebec (Canada). 
Girard © Explorer, Pans 
       dh pe ’ 
ar = ily ME 
  
  19851987. Communication courses for women 
In developing countries. Ussco Banga Racio

## [Page 59](101488engo.pdf#page=59) 0

### IGNORE

( E 
  
             
    
  ‘ WS VIE LEAR 
1990. Research on the “Silk Routes, Routes of Dialogue”. Unesco 
Civilizations 
of Central 
Asla 
(Vol 2).   
Dar yous talk bo them about 87 Are vou sure it's With your hel hools can play an unpawrtant 
| wmough? rode. If you'd | Io kw aw you A parenl 
| They ned to be arming about health in an be more involved ’ 
school Healthy hitestyles can be lewrmed. Ar cormculom 
(vey beang taught? ALDS toro   
   
     
  
Now, more than ever, your children onoed ary earning, imps 
an understanding of what it takes 10 be healthy 1-800-ATDS-TTY 
AMERICA 
RESFONDS 
TO AIDS 
1993. The World Foundation for Aids Research and Prevention. 
4 gy Unesco 
  
World Heritage: A ue altarpiece In the historic city of Sucre 
(Bolivia). G. Sicen © Rapho, Paris 
Chey 4 =. os 
  
World Heritage: Angkor (Cambodia). 
C. Sappa © Rapho, Paris 
World Heritage: The Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg (Russia). 
© W. Denker. Hentage 2001/°La Caixa” Foundation 
OE 
A * 
AA 
  
     
§ pf a - ANS 
Bookmark biosphere reserve (Australia). hus 1992. Aid for the Sarajevo daily newspaper Oslobodenje (Bosnia). 
© R. Thwaites 0 AFP/G. Bouys 

## [Page 60](101488engo.pdf#page=60) 0

### IGNORE

IN THE NEXT ISSUE: 
CAVE DWELLERS 
AND THEIR WORLD 
NEW WITH 
INTERVIEW WITH JEAN DANIEL 
HERITAGE: THE CITY OF LUXEMBURG 
ENVIRONMENT: PROTECTING WILD PLANTS 
§ T° UNESCO RUE 
a, (Us, reasons for 
offering your i 
friends a gift 
~ Subscription: 
The Unesco Courier is the only intemational magazine published in 30 
languages and read by hundreds of thousands of people in 120 countries 
Jin 
mar ACATRALIL CRT NS AA SAAT ENE Te Bh REATARD SR RARE FC A A 
Each month, CIT MEL 
CELTS OTE] I. ; 
| THO EY ES ELT of the - 
It associates ts readers with Unesco's mission of furthering “universal ~~ 
problems of today and : Dosim 
| tomorrow © freedoms. thot ditto of ace, Se, ngage or ion... 
! 
aan Mais   = > WE