# [073178](073178engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](073178engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

J 
| | -& IL] 
iB ul 
       
     
O111y (5 5 
© MAY 1987-9 French francs 
i El N i 
‘The spice of life 
BE 
  
5. g ia — iE a= 
Food and culture 
  3 Or LB

## [Page 2](073178engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
A time to live... 
  
FF 
  
  
Water and life 
Mali is the largest of the French-speaking States of West Africa. Through 
this land-locked country, half of which is desert, flow two major rivers, 
the upper Sénégal and the Niger, whose middle course brings water and 
life to parts of the drought-stricken Sahel. The population (some 7.5 
million in 1984) is essentially rural. Farming, using irrigation water from 
the two rivers, is the country’s main source of wealth, although livestock- 
raising and fishing, with outlets in both the domestic and the export 
market, also play an important role in the economy. Fishing on the Niger, 
in particular, gives rise to a significant export trade in dried and smoked 
fish. Above, traditional net fishing on the Niger. 
54 Mali 
Ph
ot
o 
Se
ba
st
ia
o 
Sa
lg
ad
o 
©
 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
 

## [Page 3](073178engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
0, 
IL Editorial 
“Tell me what you eat and I will tell you what you 
are.” The maxim penned a century and a half ago by 
the French lawyer Anthelme Brillat-Savarin in his 
celebrated work on gastronomy, The Physiology of 
Taste has not gone unheard by modern anthropolo- 
gists. The foods people select from the range avail- 
able to them in their environment, the ways in which 
they prepare those foods for consumption, the sig- 
nificance they attach to the act of eating and the 
code of manners which govern it can shed remark- 
able light on many other aspects of the societies in 
which they live. Food and drink are so profoundly 
important for humanity that they are often linked 
with matters that have nothing to do with nutrition. 
To take but one example described in this issue, for 
some groups of Mexican farmers, maize is not only a 
staple of their diet but an object of veneration, the 
very heart of their culture, myths and religious 
practices. If food satisfies an essential human need, 
it is also an essential ingredient of cultural identity. 
This issue of the Unesco Courier examines some 
of the connections between the cating habits of 
peoples in different parts of the world and other 
aspects of their behaviour. These connections, as 
our contributors point out, are many and varied. 
Eating together is a way of initiating and maintain- 
ing human relations. Meals convey social messages. 
Through eating together as a family cultural valucs 
are transmitted from generation to generation. 
Symbolic meanings are attached to food and drink 
by the major world religions, and eating is associ- 
ated with initiation and burial rites and other ccre- 
monies. Food is used as a form of currency. The 
consumption of rare and expensive foods is a mark 
of status. 
This issue is thus intended as an introduction to 
the “anthropology of eating” rather than an ex- 
amination of the problem of world hunger. If the 
question of food aid to the victims of natural catas- 
trophes and other disasters is evoked, it is in terms 
of the impact of such aid on the nutrition habits of 
those who receive it. 
Finally, the importance of food and eating is 
reflected in proverbs, folk wisdom and metaphor in 
many languages. We hope that the following pages 
will whet our readers’ appetite for knowledge about 
mankind’s “consuming passions”, provide them 
with some food for thought, and leave them hungry 
for more. 
Cover: Summer, fantastic head composed of flowers, fruit, 
vegetables and other crops, by the Italian painter Giuseppe 
Arcimboldo (¢.1527-1593). Photo © Réunion des Musées Natio- 
naux, Paris. Louvre Museum 
Editor-in-chief: Edouard Glissant   
 
May 1987 
40th year 
The anthropology of eating 
  
4 Food, culture and society by Igor de Garine 
The spice of life 
  
8 A grain revolution 
The impact of imported rice on millet-based African 
civilizations by Thianar Ndoye and Malick M'Baye 
10 Of maize and meat 
Culinary traditions and cultural identity in Mexico and 
Argentina by Perla Petrich 
13 Beneficial beans? 
14 Reflections on the potato by Nick M. Joaquin 
17 The ones that get away 
A coastal community that turns its back on fish by John Durnin 
Eating together 
 
18 (Table) manners makyth man 
The emergence of homo sapiens as a convivial animal 
by Naomichi Ishige 
22 The meal is the message 
The language of Brazilian cuisine by Roberto DaMatta 
24 China’s health food tradition 
by Li Ruifen 
Too much and too little 
  
28 Paradise lost 
Bulimia, anorexia and drug addiction by Piero Camporesi 
32 Food aid and food habits by Jeremy Shoham and 
Bruno Stainier 
  
2 A time to live... 
MALI: Water and life 
Advertising in the Courier 
We wish to inform readers that as of June 1987 the Courier 
will be introducing advertising pages into its English, 
French and Spanish editions. 
Advertising matter will be entirely separate from the 
editorial content and will be restricted to fields in which 
Unesco takes an active interest, such as educational publi- 
cations, communications technologies, and the work of 
international organizations. 
Advertising revenue will be used primarily to assist the 
non-Headquarters editions of the magazine. 
We hope that readers will understand the nature and 
purpose of this project, which is a new departure for the 
Courier but is already the practice in certain other publica- 
tions of the United Nations system.     . 
] he ( ourl er English Italian 
F . 1] 
A window open on the world rench Hindi 
Spanish Tamil 
Published monthly in 33 languages Russian Hebrew 
by Unesco . 
The United Nations Educational, German Persian 
Scientific and Cultural Organization Arabic Dutch 
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. Japanese Portuguese 
Turkish Macedonian Finnish A selection in Braille is 
Urdu Serbo-Croat Swedish published quarterly in English, 
Catalan Slovene Basque French, Spanish and Korean 
Malaysian Chinese Thai 
Korean Bulgarian Vietnamese 
Swahili Greek ISSN 0041-5278 
Croato-Serb Sinhala N°5-1987-CPD-87-1-445 A  

## [Page 4](073178engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 73102: Food, culture and society

  
Food, 
culture 
and society 
cannot survive. Human beings, however, appear to differ 
slightly from other animals in the solutions they have de- 
vised for this problem. Thanks to our physiological omnivorousness 
and our nature as social animals with a culture, a sense of symbolism 
and the ability to create a favourable micro-environment for our- 
selves, we can live equally well in the polar regions and in the 
equatorial rain forests. We may wonder, however, whether our 
efforts to adapt to the symbolic standards dictated by our culture are 
always in keeping with our optimum biological adaptation, either in 
the short term as individuals or in the long term as members of the 
human species. 
Food is one field in which biology and culture are to some extent 
out of step. Human beings are equipped with internal regulatory 
food-consumption mechanisms whose purpose is to maintain certain 
balanced states in the organism; but these mechanisms are often 
faulty. 
In industrialized societies evidence of this phenomenon can be 
seen in the pathological consequences of an overabundant food 
supply. Although their lifestyle is tending to reduce their energy 
output, people eagerly consume animal proteins, fatty and sugary 
food, stimulants and intoxicants whose nutritional value is, to say 
the least, questionable. 
Is this a recent development, specific to urban societies which are 
located in a man-made environment, alienated from natural 
rhythms, and have not had time to adapt to new types of stress? This 
is by no means certain. Where food is concerned we must beware of 
ecological providentialism and of the belief that in traditional 
societies people naturally consume the diet that is physiologically 
best for them. 
As the American anthropologist Margaret Mead once pointed 
out, human societies make a selection from the potential range of 
foodstuffs which are provided by their environment and brought 
within their reach by the technical resources at their disposal. The 
survival of a human group obviously depends on a diet which 
satisfies its members’ nutritional needs. However, the level of 
satisfaction of those needs, the definition of which is a matter of 
controversy, varies from one society to another both qualitatively 
and quantitatively. 
~ It often happens that some available foodstuffs are either neg- 
lected or used to meet other needs. The example most often given is 
that of the Hindu populations of India, whose respect for animal life 
leads them, for religious and philosophical reasons, to practise more 
or less strict forms of vegetarianism. Pastoral peoples, who might be 
thought to eat large quantities of milk and meat, usually consume 
Um they satisfy their needs for food, living creatures 
  
 
these foodstuffs sparingly. Cattle are used primarily to provide 
other forms of satisfaction, as a bride-price, for example. 
Many African population groups live in climatic zones where 
cereal farming is possible, but they choose instead to grow tubers, 
especially cassava, which is less nutritious. People eat according to 
patterns prescribed by the societies to which they belong. Their 
culture determines the range of what is edible and imposes the 
dietary taboos which, when necessary, serve to distinguish their 
society from others. 
The discrepancy between what is recommended by the culture 
and what is nutritionally indispensable is most strikingly apparent in 
the nourishment given to children after weaning. They are nearly 
always given what is thought to be the best possible nourishment, 
and are lucky if this provides them with the ration of protein they 
need to guarantee their growth and resistance to infection. In most 
cases, children are looked upon as small adults, and they receive a 
ration appropriate to their size but not to their specific needs for 
protein. 
Populations afflicted with malnutrition for reasons which may 
include dysfunctional cultural choices, also undoubtedly pay a price 
in terms of death-rates (especially child mortality), physical de- 
velopment and longevity. The influence of malnutrition is, 
however, often difficult to disentangle from that of the major 
endemic diseases. In traditional societies there is a marked differ- 
ence between known potential food resources and those which are 
actually used. Subsistence is usually based on a small number of 
foodstuffs of plant origin which, even in most hunting and fishing 
communities, provide nearly all the calories in the diet. The diet of 
traditional societies is extremely monotonous; perhaps familiarity is 
a source of comfort. Variations are the result of seasonal fluctua- 
tions of resources. 
What reasons underlie the choice of what have been called

## [Page 5](073178engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 73102: Food, culture and society

  
“supercultural” foods? Both practical (and possibly nutritional) and 
symbolic considerations, notably the quest for prestige or for identi- 
fication with an envied model, should be taken into account. These 
foods are often treated as divine gifts. The acts of cultivation and 
their accompanying rituals give form and pattern to the com- 
munity’s yearly round. 
Eating habits, likes and dislikes are formed by the sense-impress- 
ions conveyed by the flavour, smell and texture of certain foods and 
the dishes of which they form part. These preparations provide the 
basis for human gastronomy and for the food of the gods, since 
offerings and sacrifices are a special means of communicating with 
the transcendent. Not only vegetable foods are used in this context. 
Meat comes into the diet through celebration: its consumption 
nearly always has a festive or ritual aspect. Blood is seen as an 
essential ingredient in Vedic sacrifices, in the Christian mass, and in 
the cutting of a chicken’s throat as an offering to the ancestors in 
African ceremonies. 
The esteem in which certain foods and dishes are held by different 
human groups is no indication of their real nutritional value, which 
is, as it were, a bonus. What is usually sought is a food which rapidly 
produces a feeling of repletion. One example, the thick porridge 
made from unsifted flour by the Massa people of Cameroon, 
contains a large quantity of indigestible carbohydrate which is filling 
but interferes with the assimilation of the other nutrients in the food 
ration. 
Man is not a frugal animal. Some specialists believe that human 
beings are among the mammals with the greatest propensity to store 
fats. In most traditional societies, the quest for a full stomach, 
participation in a banquet to which both the living and the dead are 
invited and its digestion in common with other people, are among 
the main lubricants of social relations and provide a means of 
communication. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ig
or
 
de
 
Ga
ri
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s 
by Igor de Garine 
“What have been called ‘supercultural’ foods are often treated as 
divine gifts. The acts of cultivation and thelr accompanying rituals 
give form and pattern to the community’s yearly round.” Left, a 
Chadian farmer holds a cluster of sorghum. 
In the first hours of life a child comes into contact with the flavours 
and textures typical of the foods eaten by the group to which it 
belongs. Although taste remains something distinctive and indi- 
vidual, it is imprinted from birth with the stamp of a culture. A 
child’s emotional response to the foods that its culture considers to 
be good is part of the process whereby it is integrated into society. 
Without a doubt, the relative plasticity of early eating habits is a 
factor that must be taken into account when considering the future 
of our species. If the survival of a group depends on it, or for other 
reasons, it is possible to profoundly modify the eating habits of the 
members of that group, provided that a start is made at birth. 
Although the connection between food and physical health may 
not be clearly perceived, all societies to some extent attribute 
magical medicinal properties to food. The general principle is that 
the body and the mind should be given the foods that are most 
appropriate, both materially and symbolically. The tendency in the 
West is to follow the Galenic theory of medicine, whereby ingested 
foods are converted into humours on whose balanced relationship 
the health of the individual depends. In India and China, the 
systems of correspondence are extremely complex, and in the choice 
of food account is taken both of the fundamental elements of the 
Universe and of contingent matters such as place, season, time and 
the distinctive characteristics of each person (see article page 24). 
“Tell me what you eat and I will tell you what you are,” wrote 
Anthelme Brillat-Savarin (1755-1826) in his celebrated work on 
gastronomy La physiologie du godt, (English translation, The Phy- 
siology of Taste, 1925). Food consumption expresses the status of 
individuals according to a whole range of criteria (age, sex, social 
and economic status) within a society in a particular spatial and 
temporal context, which is itself in contact with other self-contained 
societies. It provides a counterpoint to most other overt social 
characteristics and may, as the French anthropologist Claude Lévi- 
Strauss has suggested, unconsciously reveal the underlying structure 
of societies. 
Eating is a form of expression whereby a person in a sense acts out

## [Page 6](073178engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 73102: Food, culture and society

his or her position in a particular society. For this reason, the quest 
for prestige and distinction is a constant feature of the dynamic of 
food selection. This dynamic operates between individuals, between 
groups within a society, and between traditional societies today 
faced with the overwhelming influence of urban industrial civiliza- 
tion. Monetary income has doubtless become the main variable that 
influences food consumption, but the dynamic of choice has by no 
means been brought under control. Any understanding of the 
process calls for considerable knowledge of local problems and the 
complexities of their historical background. 
One example will suffice. In northern Cameroon, the Massa, the 
Toubouri and the Fulbe live side by side in approximately the same 
ecological setting. They can grow the same crops, but until recently 
some Massa were willing to forgo the benefits of dry-season trans- 
planted sorghum, although they knew about it. They based their 
rejection of this crop on a religious argument (the curse of Mother 
Earth on upstart innovators) probably wishing to defend their 
cultural authenticity by distinguishing themselves from the other 
two peoples. Today, traditional beliefs and antagonisms have faded 
and the Massa are more inclined to see themselves as members of 
the Cameroonian nation. They have adopted dry-season trans- 
planted sorghum and are tending to abandon their own varieties of 
red sorghum for strains which produce white flour, and for rice, 
which was the food of both the wealthiest peoples in the towns and of 
the Fulbe, who were historically dominant in the region. 
This example shows that the influence of industrial civilization is 
not all-powerful and that local cultures (which are separate) also 
provide role models for neighbouring populations. This factor is 
seldom turned to account for development purposes. 
Even if a standardization of everyday eating habits is taking place, 
linked to the trend towards a single world food economy, local food 
consumption patterns continue to flourish and traditional foodstuffs 
continue to be produced. Developing countries can probably free 
themselves to some extent from the need to import foodstuffs if they 
are willing to make an effort to promote indigenous products on a 
par with the efforts made to promote imported commodities. 
One of the many reasons for fostering a degree of attachment to 
local foods is that self-sufficiency in food production is still an ideal 
situation for rural societies where money is too scarce a commodity 
to be wasted on food. The other reasons are symbolic. Individuals 
are emotionally attached to their childhood eating habits which are 
usually imbued with their traditional culture. The perpetuation of 
the traditional style of nourishment in daily life or in the calendar of 
festivities is a pledge of authenticity and social cohesion and a 
defence against outside aggression. This phenomenon is also found 
among emigrants. It has been pointed out that consumers fall into 
two categories: those who see a Golden Age in the past and uphold 
traditional cuisine, and those who envisage a Golden Age in the 
future and put their trust in scientifically approved nutrients. This 
dichotomy can also be observed in developing countries. 
   
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
St
av
en
ha
ge
n 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
Me
xi
co
 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Na
ti
on
al
 
Ar
ch
ae
ol
og
ic
al
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
,
 
Fe
rr
ar
a,
 
It
al
y 
  
RI
AN
 
 
Preparation of taro gruel, a ceremonial 
dish consumed during festivities and 
rituals in the Melanesian archipelago of 
Vanuatu. 
\ ‘ 
L nN
 
A)
 
IY 
J 
L
L
)
 
1
A
 
or
 
>»
 
 
  
Right, lamas of the Tamang people of 
Nepal partake of a ritual meal. 
Far left, ancient Greek cantharus or drink- 
ing vessel in the form of a satyr’s head 
decorated with a sacrificial scene (5th cen- 
tury BC). 
Left, fragment of a ceramic urn in the form 
of the young god of maize is from the 
pre-Columbian city of Monte Alban in Mex- 
ico. (Zapotec civilization, c. 500-750).

## [Page 7](073178engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 73102: Food, culture and society

  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ig
or
 
de
 
Ga
ri
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s 
   
Admittedly, the advent of urban industrial civilization has made a 
big difference to the relationship between people and what they eat, 
This relationship is now independent of time and space. In some 
societies, those who can afford to do so can eat or drink anything, 
any time, anywhere and in any quantity. Food choices have become 
more individualized. Less repressed than they were by material 
constraints and the search for food, personal tastes are being more 
strongly expressed. 
Anxiety about food has taken a new form. Seasonal hunger and 
the search for a full stomach have given way to a permanent and 
legitimate quest for pleasure in eating as a means of easing tensions 
whose origins specialists in the psychopathology of eating interpret 
as expressions of a nostalgic desire to return to the womb. 
Food production has become monetarized, and food is now, as it 
were, secular. This does not mean that food has lost its symbolic 
value or its social significance. Although there is something anarchic 
in our habits of nibbling, it is still the person who runs the household, 
or, nowadays, the restaurant-owner or canteen manager who 
chooses what food is consumed at meals. 
This choice is determined by many criteria whose range, thanks to 
advances in communication, has steadily widened. Urban industrial 
civilization encompasses many subcultures. Every social group has 
its own range of foods which helps to express its values and lifestyle. 
In accordance with a wide variety of criteria, each group makes a 
choice from the countless resources available to it, and this reduces 
the likelihood of a uniform worldwide food model, the establish- 
ment of which sometimes seems to be imminent. [| 
IGOR DE GARINE, French ethnologist and specialist in the study of food 
and nutrition in relation to culture and ecology, is currently director of 
research at the National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS), Paris, 
where he heads a research team on “differential food anthropology”. A 
former head of the food habits section of FAQ's Nutrition Division, he is the 
author of around a hundred scientific articles and studies in French and 
English, and of eleven ethnographic documentary films. 
* 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ig
or
 
de
 
Ga
ri
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 8](073178engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 73103: A Grain revolution; the impact of imported rice on millet-based African civilizations

    
by Thianar Ndoye and Malick M’Baye 
grain revolution 
The impact of imported rice 
on millet-based African civilizations 
desertification have wrought pro- 
found changes which have upset the 
balance of the agrarian food-production 
system. 
For centuries, millet and sorghum were 
the food staples that enabled the farmers 
of the Sahel to achieve self-sufficiency in 
an exchange economy. These farmers 
domesticated and improved Pennisetum 
spicatum, or bulrush millet, also known 
as “pearl millet”. Owing to its short 
growth cycle, this crop draws the fullest 
benefit from the short rainy season. 
In the southern Sahel, millet is culti- 
vated as a supplement to sorghum, or 
“great millet”, which originated in the 
Sudanese regions of tropical Africa. The 
area under sorghum cultivation has ex- 
panded considerably in the tropical re- 
gions of other continents, and even in 
warmer temperate countries. This cereal 
is nowadays the staple food of more than 
300 million people, most of whom live in 
Africa, India and Central America. 
Millet and sorghum have always been a 
powerful link between the African far- 
mer and his environment. Froma cultu- 
ral point of view, millet plays a central 
role in the organization of community life 
and in the interpenetrating systems of 
kinship and values. Learning to grind 
I: rural Africa today, drought and 
 
millet with the traditional pestle and mor- 
tar and to process it into an edible food- 
stuff was part of every girl's introduction 
to the art of cooking. 
The grain is dehusked by moistening 
and pounding with a pestle and mortar. 
After drying it is milled, by means of a 
second and then a third pounding, each of 
which is followed by winnowing. Then 
comes the fermentation stage, achieved 
by humidification, kneading, mixing and 
even germination. The end product is 
cooked in water and eaten with milk or a 
sauce, types of nourishment which are 
more liquid than solid. 
Steaming became popular with the ad- 
vent of recipes for couscous from the 
Maghreb peoples, who invented the tech- 
nique and utensils and transmitted them 
to other cultures. The Senegalese cook 
has improved the recipe by meticulously 
working the flour by hand into a finer, 
firmer texture. The resulting semolina is 
then steamed, sealed with laalo (dried 
baobab leaves, ground into powder) and 
given a smoother consistency before 
being soaked. 
Recorded in every African’s memory 
are the working songs of women pound- 
ing millet, sung to the rhythm of the 
thudding pestle as it crushes the grains 
into flour. This millet or sorghum flour, 
Ph
ot
o 
M'
Ba
ye
 
- 
Un
es
co
 
made into porridge, is an excellent res- 
torative for those who do hard manual 
work, for women who have recently 
given birth, and for convalescents. 
Millet cakes are the first symbolic solid 
food given when a child is weaned. And 
couscous, thanks to traditional proces- 
sing techniques, will keep for several 
months. It is the food on which nomad 
peoples survived during their long jour- 
neys. Millet, a sacred cereal, is also 
valued for its use in sacrifices connected 
with the Islamic or animist traditions of 
West African countries. In Africa dried 
millet stalks are used as building mate- 
rials and as cattle fodder. Red sorghum is 
used to make beer. 
Sorghum and millet also have ex- 
change value in the rural African world 
and are bartered for other foodstuffs. 
The millet granary is a sign of wealth and 
abundance, and has a mythical signifi- 
cance. It is a symbol of fertility and a link 
between man and the earth. Thus it is 
appropriate to speak of a “granary cul- 
ture”, of the sacred characteristics of mil- 
let and, by extension, of all cereals. 
Sorghum and millet may be traditional 
cereals, but they are nevertheless full of 
promise for the future, owing to their 
capacity to resist drought. Today, in Cen- 
tral America and in the United States, 
where high yields of sorghum are 
obtained thanks to fertilizers and irriga- 
tion, it is used essentially for cattle feed. 
In many countries facing food shortages, 
millet and sorghum hold out a hope of 
self-sufficiency. 
However, rice has ousted millet and 
sorghum from their economic and 
mythical primacy, thereby increasing the 
food crop deficit of many Sahel countries 
and placing them in a vulnerable food 
supply situation. 
The changeover from millet to rice 
took place in a particular historical con- 
text. The Portuguese introduced ground- 
nuts to Senegal in the fifteenth century, 
and groundnut production was soon in- 
corporated into the cultural system and 
Senegalese village women grind millet In 
large wooden mortars before sifting the 
flour from the bran.

## [Page 9](073178engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 73103: A Grain revolution; the impact of imported rice on millet-based African civilizations

A young Chadian woman prepares a thick 
millet porridge, one of the staple foods of 
the African savannah. 
developed within a colonial market eco- 
nomy at the expense of the traditional 
crops which had enabled the farmers to 
be self-sufficient. To make good the food 
deficit caused by the cultivation of 
groundnuts, the colonial authorities 
imported cheap broken rice from Indo- 
china. 
New eating habits thus began to 
appear. Rice was adopted by Senegalese 
urban society and soon became fashion- 
able throughout the country as the cereal 
to be eaten on festive occasions. It even- 
tually pushed into the background an 
essential social and economic feature of 
African granary civilizations. Urban soci- 
ety began to impose alternative ways of 
life and styles of thought on the rural 
population and, in particular, to revolu- 
tionize habits of food consumption 
through the overwhelming acceptance of 
rice served with fish or meat. 
Unlike millet, the preparation of which 
is a lengthy and laborious task, rice is 
ready for cooking: this is surely the main 
reason for its success. “Rice and fish” 
cooked in oil is a typically Senegalese 
recipe and may even be considered the 
national dish of Senegal. Today it has 
spread to all the countries of West Africa. 
Rice and oil, essential to the preparation 
of this dish, are increasingly important to 
the economy. A complex network of 
transactions has been established: the 
farmer sells his groundnuts, purchases 
rice with the proceeds, and buys back the 
oil from the groundnuts that he has sold. 
The terms of trade in these transactions 
have deteriorated for the farmer. Rice 
imports are increasing (approximately 
300,000 tonnes a year), and oil produc- 
tion is no longer keeping pace, owing to 
the poor harvests of recent years blighted 
by drought. 
But, contrary to all expectations, re- 
cent studies show that rural consumers 
still favour a number of the traditional 
millet recipes, a preference which high- 
lights the importance of food symbolism 
to Black Africans and the crucial role 
played by traditional forms of nourish- 
ment in cultural identity. nu 
THIANAR NDOYE, of Senegal, was assistant 
director of ORANA, a Dakar-based institute for 
food and nutrition research in Africa, from 1952 
to 1965. A co-founder of his country's food and 
applied nutrition service, he played a leading role 
in the WHO programme for nutrition education in 
Senegal (1972-1982). He has carried out mis- 
sions as a consultant with Unesco, FAO and 
WHO, and has published articles in a number of 
journals. 
MALICK M’BAYE, of Senegal, is currently work- 
ing with Unesco’s Division for the Study and 
Planning of Development. The author of a num- 
ber of scientific studies on development, gene- 
tics and sexuality, he has carried out research 
with the French National Centre for Scientific 
Research (CNRS) and has taught at the Uni- 
versity of Toulouse. 
   
   
o
v
 
  
      
     
       
   
    
 
a 
Ag 
Wh = 
> . b> | on §.f [ bY. So
~~ i Fk f Bi 
Ta [= fl 4 : s 
on “i J 2 i 
Fe, ww i i er 
v i s 
J : 5 Er B 
  
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ig
or
 
de
 
Ga
ri
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 10](073178engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 73104: Of maize and meat; culinary traditions and cultural identity in Mexico and Argentina

10 
Of maize and meat 
Culinary traditions and cultural identity 
in Mexico and Argentina 
by Perla Petrich 
a \ 
7 - \ Ppp 
| | 4 i {C=
 TIN LR UL 
» i : 
; 
ye 
i, 
“MN 
Y 
~ Q; 
Fa— 
  
  
  
  
SA re 
. 1) \ ee . . “" . x Iara : 0. FX ST Re le Sn Ain = 
EE ANY COA CARIES wR HARE TR OT i, vi. 
LTHOUGH the food that groups 
A of people choose to eat is un- 
doubtedly dictated by their phy- 
siological needs, their environment and 
the technical and economic facilities 
available to them, these factors form part 
of a wider context—the social and histor- 
ical background and the outlook on the 
world which are specific to each society. 
In other words, exclusively ideological 
motives play an important role in the 
choice of the staple foodstuffs and food 
processing techniques that make it possi- 
ble to create a culinary tradition that is 
primarily recognized as a sign of cultural . 
identification. 
The ideology that each society creates 
in relation to food and eating is reflected 
in the choice of foodstuffs, the techniques 
employed in preparing them, and the 
rules laid down for their consumption. 
What is the relationship between the 
physical need to eat and the ideology 
which justifies or determines what is 
eaten? In an attempt to answer that ques- 
tion, we shall take two examples from 
Latin America: maize (Indian corn) in 
Mexico and meat in Argentina. 
* Even if soybeans or rice were cheaper 
to grow or produced higher yields, Mex- 
ican farmers would never dream of grow- 
ing these crops instead of maize, which 
accounts for 80 per cent of their diet. For 
them maize is a cultural landmark of 
  
. 
fundamental importance as well as a 
source of nutrition. According to Maya 
mythology, man was created by the gods 
from maize dough. Other materials such 
as clay and wood had proved useless. 
Only people made from maize survived 
to venerate the plant from which they had 
originated and which provided them with 
their daily sustenance. 
Every ear of maize, every morsel of 
tortilla (maize cake), every sip of atole— 
the traditional beverage made from 
maize flour—provide incontrovertible 
proof that feeding is not merely a chemi- 
. .cal and biological process but a form of 
direct communication with the deities. 
Through that communion, which is re- 
newed every day, people bear witness to 
their faith in the gods, whose presence 
guarantees that life will go on. 
Since the gods chose maize to create 
and feed mankind, how could man ever 
doubt its perfection, cease to revere it, or 
fail to believe in its origins and its divine 
reproductive powers? Maize has had di- 
vine status for centuries. Even today, 
Mexican Indians are reluctant to sell their 
maize because that would be tantamount 
to trading in their own flesh. Maize is 
grown exclusively for personal con- 
sumption. 
Maize is the Mexican farmer’s only 
criterion of taste, to the exclusion of all 
others. No other foodstuff can replace 
Sh RRNA Wh AY
ARB ARIA D 
ad] 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Je
su
s 
Ga
rc
ia
-R
ui
z 
the fortilla which the women prepare with 
maize dough and then brown on the com- 
al, a baked earthenware hotplate. In this 
context, quantity is not important; even if 
people gorge themselves on meat or fish 
they will still feel unsatisfied if they do not 
eat tortillas. On the other hand, a few 
tortillas accompanied by a pinch of salt or 
chili pepper will be sufficient to stave off 
hunger. 
The tortilla has formed the Mexicans’ 
taste for food. It is made from maize 
which is boiled and then kneaded into a 
soft, smooth dough. Compared with such 
a food, which calls for little chewing, 
meat is unpleasant, regardless of its qual- 
ity. Roast meat is regarded as hard and 
dry, and it often happens that when hun- 
ters roast the animals they kill, the 
women later boil the roast meat in the 
kitchen. 
In this indigenous culture there is a 
general feeling that maize is the only 
nourishing food. All other foods may be 
eaten for pleasure but they are not consi- 
dered to have any nutritional value, be- 
cause, it is assumed, they will be quickly 
expelled as waste. A man achieves social 
recognition when he begins to farm the 
land, and a woman when she begins to 
cook. Only when they have shown that 
they can grow and cook maize can they 
start a family. Only then do men become 
eligible for positions of responsibility

## [Page 11](073178engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 73104: Of maize and meat; culinary traditions and cultural identity in Mexico and Argentina

within the community. The influence of 
maize thus permeates every aspect of hu- 
man life, since it provides physical suste- 
nance, integrates men and women into 
the system of agricultural production, 
justifies their existence and reaffirms 
their beliefs. 
Paradoxically and tragically, this con- 
ception of maize is not confirmed by the 
biological facts. Maize cannot cater for 
the individual’s energy requirements un- 
less it is supplemented by a substantial 
protein and calorie intake. With few ex- 
ceptions, the Indian’s diet is limited to a 
maximum of 45 grams of protein a day 
compared with the 70 grams that are con- 
sidered essential, and to 1,300 calories 
instead of the 2,600 calories needed by 
people engaged in regular physical 
labour. 
The Pampa, the vast humid plain in 
central Argentina, has always provided 
the country with its food. It was there that 
the Indians hunted game and that Span- 
ish and Creole settlers grew wheat and 
then began to rear cattle on a large scale. 
From the seventeenth century 
onwards, beef formed the staple diet and 
roasting was the most common culinary 
~ technique. To the Argentines, roasting 
Ph
ot
os
 
©
 
Je
su
s 
Ga
rc
ia
-R
ui
z 
evokes lavishness and plenty, in contrast 
to boiling, which is symptomatic of scarci- 
ty and frugality. Boiled meat not only 
preserves its juices but increases in 
volume. Roast meat, on the other hand, 
shrinks as it dries out. 
Opposite page, detail from the “Codex Fe- 
jervary-Mayer” a 14th-century Meso- 
American pictographic manuscript. The 
water-goddess can be seen pouring water 
on maize with a hand that emerges from 
her head. Maize is depicted as a sturdy 
young man firmly rooted in the soil. 
Lassoing (1820), a watercolour by the 
English artist Emeric Essex Vidal (1791- 
1861). : 
 
  
    
  
 
The maize harvest as depicted in the 
“Codex Florentino”, a manuscript contain- 
ing information from indigenous sources 
which was used by the Spanish monk and 
ethnologist Bernardino de Sahagun (1500- 
1590) in his study of Aztec civilization, 
Historia general de las cosas de Nueva 
Espana (General History of the Things of 
New Spain). 
A comparison of roasting in Argentine 
cookery with boiling as practised in Mex- 
ico shows how food preparation patterns 
reflect not only different ecosystems but 
contrasting forms of social and cultural 
organization. In Mexico, from the six- 
teenth century onwards, the areas on 
which farmers were able to grow food 
were reduced as a result of colonial set- 
tlement. This land shortage was com- 
pounded by low crop yields caused by 
constant soil erosion. In Argentina, on 
the other hand, food production called 
for little effort until the mid-nineteenth 
century. The gauchos who lived on the 
plains considered themselves the 
monarchs of all they surveyed. If they felt 
hungry, they killed an animal, cut off a 
piece of flesh—sometimes only the 
tongue—and left the rest for the dogs or 
birds of prey. Today things have 
changed; unless they own livestock, peo- 
ple have to buy their meat. Even so, meat 
is still reasonably priced and continues to 
be the staple of everyday diet. 
The hospitable ethos of the Pampa and 
its seemingly boundless vistas influenced 
ways of cooking. Food was prepared in 
the open air—meat was spit-roasted in 
the courtyard of the home or in the 
fields—for the entire extended family 
and friends who would turn up to eat 
without a formal invitation. Another sig- 
nificant feature of this type of cooking is 
"

## [Page 12](073178engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 73104: Of maize and meat; culinary traditions and cultural identity in Mexico and Argentina

12 
its masculine character. As hunters and 
livestock raisers, men not only procured 
the food and did the slaughtering and 
skinning; they also did the cooking. The 
meat was either impaled on a spit, one 
end of which was driven into the ground 
so as to maintain it at an angle over the 
flames, or else placed, with the entrails, 
on a grill, to avoid direct contact with the 
hot cinders. 
It was the usual practice—and still is in 
rural areas—for everybody to take his 
knife and cut off the slice he fancied, and 
then eat it without any seasoning. The 
only drink that went with the roast 
meat—the asado—was mate, an infusion 
prepared in a small gourd and drunk 
through a metal tube, or bombilla. 
Women took no part in the preparation 
of the asado and only emerged when the 
meat was cooked. Their culinary duties 
lay elsewhere—in boiling, frying or bak- 
ing the food for the daily meal when the 
family circle was confined to the intimacy 
of parents and children, and when the 
food was both prepared and consumed 
inside the home. Women prepared the 
puchero, a stew consisting of beef, Span- 
ish-type chorizo sausage, black pudding, 
bone marrow, bacon, pumpkin, yams 
and potatoes, and the carbonada, a dish 
made with charqui, salt meat dried in the 
sun. 
The Argentine culinary horizon 
broadened with the arrival of Italian, 
Spanish, Syrian, Lebanese and Jewish 
immigrants at the end of the nineteenth 
century and the beginning of the twen- 
tieth. However, the choice of food was 
not greatly modified; roast beef remained 
the staple diet and all other types of meat 
or cereal were secondary. Roasting con- 
tinued to be the favourite cooking 
method. 
For the Argentines, roast meat sym- 
bolizes the direct assimilation of the ani- 
ma’s vitality and of nature. People must 
eat plenty of meat to conserve their 
strength. All other foods are regarded as 
secondary, inessential. This approach to 
food has led to excessive meat consump- 
tion, to the detriment of dairy products 
and other foodstuffs. Argentina’s vast 
herds of cattle have been used almost 
entirely for meat production. Even 
today, the consumption of milk and dairy 
products is negligible. 
Both in Mexico and in Argentina, the 
appetite can only be satisfied by the sta- 
ple food, the tortilla in one case, roast 
meat in the other. This does not exclude 
the consumption of other foodstuffs or 
the use of other cooking techniques, 
especially in the urban areas where they 
were introduced by immigrants in the 
early years of the century. Pizza and pas- 
ta, for example, have become part of the 
everyday diet, and although roast meat is 
still the most highly prized dish, it is no 
longer a regular feature. In urban areas, 
it has been replaced by steak, which ful- 
fils for those who eat it the conditions 
Ph
ot
o 
Re
né
 
B
u
m
 
© 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
 
A herd of young cattle on an Argentine ranch

## [Page 13](073178engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 73104: Of maize and meat; culinary traditions and cultural identity in Mexico and Argentina

described by the French critic and 
essayist Roland Barthes: succulence and 
simplicity. 
The long-standing preference for beef 
is reflected not only in the high rate of 
beef consumption but also in the rejec- 
tion of other types of meat. The offshore 
shelf of Argentina abounds in an extraor- 
dinary variety of fish, but the lean, white 
flesh of fish is no substitute for beef, let 
alone a complement to it. Fish is only 
eaten occasionally and has an exclusively 
symbolic significance; as a result of Span- 
ish influence, salt cod is eaten on Fridays 
in Lent and during Holy Week. 
These occasions apart, fish almost nev- 
er appears on the family table. The 
reasons are clearly neither biological nor 
economic (domestically caught fish is no 
more expensive than beef), nor are they 
imposed by the natural environment. 
The same symbolic significance can be 
seen in the “imported” Christmas menu, 
which is a carbon copy of that prepared 
by the family forebears in the Iberian 
Peninsula and includes the pinenut cakes, 
almonds and nougat which were designed 
to make good the calorie deficit caused by 
the European winter but are quite unsuit- 
able—as well as being indigestible—in a 
sultry South American summer, even 
though the family continues to decorate 
its Christmas tree with cotton-wool snow. 
In short, roast beef has undoubtedly 
come to be a practical sign of “Argentine- 
ness” and boiled maize of “Mexican- 
ness”, in that they are both nourishing 
foodstuffs, the natural environment lends 
itself to their production, and the tech- 
niques are readily available for turning 
them into food. Fundamentally, 
however, these dishes embody the sym- 
bolic values which the two peoples have 
vested in them and which add to the 
pleasure of eating them. Referring to 
these intellectual models for interpreting 
and giving meaning to reality, the people 
of one region of Latin America look upon 
themselves as “maize people” who have 
been created and nourished by the tender 
grain which they venerate, while the peo- 
ple of another region see themselves as 
consumers of meat whose consistency 
evokes the boundless, rich and untamed 
land which, like the meat itself, can only 
be conquered by biting at it vigorously. HM 
  
PERLA PETRICH, of Argentina, is professor-of 
Latin American literature at the University of 
Paris Vill and a member of the French National 
Centre for Scientific Research's Laboratory of 
Languages and Civilizations with an Oral Tradi- 
tion (LACITQ). She is the author of several works 
on food and nutrition, including La seméntica del 
maiz entre los mochd (“The Semantics of Maize 
among the Mochos”"). 
“Pythagoras and Music”. Woodcut from a 
late 15th-century illustrated book by a Ger- 


### 73116: Beneficial beans?

Beneficial beans? 
among the most nourishing vegetables 
eaten by man, has also since very 
ancient times produced a luxuriant crop of 
beliefs, cultural practices, rituals and taboos. 
A bean taboo imposed on those rendering 
sacrifice is mentioned in the oldest Indian 
ritualistic text, the Yajurveda. In ancient 
Greece, the use of beans is mentioned at 
banquets and festivals, and a bean-god, 
Cyamites, was worshipped. In the Roman 
world beans played a role in magic rites, and 
the priest of Jupiter was forbidden to touch a 
bean or mention its name. 
These and many other examples of the 
cultural and religious importance of beans 
have been recorded by the American anthro- 
pologist A.C. Andrews, who has written that 
“the ancients felt towards beans a mingled 
respect and dread, a complex of emotions 
generally applied to an object believed to be 
charged with some supernatural force, con- 
tact with which might be either beneficial or 
harmful”. 
The Greek philosopher Pythagoras (c.580- 
500 BC) forbade his followers to eat beans 
“on the ground that beans were occupied by 
the souls of the dead and thereby took on the 
qualities of human flesh”. Through this pre- 
sence, according to the Pythagorean theory, 
beans became dynamic receptacles of gen- 
erative power. 
Two American specialists, Solomon H. Katz 
and Joan Schall of the University of Pennsyl- 
vania, have made a study of the consumption 
patterns of fava beans in the Mediterranean 
region and have suggested that the “rich 
growth of cultural beliefs and taboos sur- 
rounding the fava bean may be a product, in 
part, of the fact that many individuals who 
consume the beans become very sick". This 
sickness, known as favism, is “an acute 
haemolytic anaemia resulting in fever, jaun- 
dice and possibly death”. Those who are sus- 
T- bean, certain kinds of which are 
man musicologist, Michael Keinspeck. 
 
ceptible to favism are those who suffer from a 
hereditary metabolic defect in a red blood cell 
enzyme, known as glucose-6-phosphate de- 
hydrogenase deficiency (G6PD-). A particu- 
larly severe variant of this condition (GdB-) 
has been found to occur at frequencies of 10 
to 30 per cent in certain populations in the 
Mediterranean region. 
“Why”, ask Katz and Schall, “are fava 
beans consumed in areas with high G6PD- 
frequencies since so many people would face 
a serious health risk? If the consumption of 
fava beans is so disadvantageous, they 
should be used less and/or be replaced by 
other nutritionally equivalent legumes ... In- 
stead, fava cultivation and consumption have 
been widespread in the Mediterranean region 
since Neolithic times, suggesting that fava 
consumption confers some adaptive advan- 
tage through its nutritional qualities, [and/or] 
possible psycho-pharmacological effects ..." 
In fact, it seems that the distribution of fava 
bean cultivation and consumption corres- 
ponds closely with that of the enzyme de- 
ficiency described above and with the inci- 
dence of malaria in the Mediterranean region. 
Since fava beans contain a number of sub- 
stances which are similar to those used. in 
antimalarial drugs, could it not be possible that 
their consumption may confer some protec- 
tion against malaria? 
For Katz and Schall, “The consumption of 
fava beans may indeed confer an antimalarial 
effect on G6PD normal individuals, similar to 
antimalarial drugs. In some individuals ..., 
fava consumption could prevent malaria, 
while in others ... it could precipitate serious 
disease and death. The continued use of fava 
beans as an important staple crop in these 
populations with high GdB- frequencies is 
more understandable if positive health effects 
are enjoyed by many, even though there are 
clearly deleterious consequences for some 
GdB- individuals.” ® 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Gi
ra
ud
on
, 
Pa
ri
s 
13

## [Page 14](073178engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 73105: Reflections on the potato

Reflections on the potato 
CCORDING to the German wri- 
A ter Giinter Grass, the introduc- 
tion of the potato was a more 
important event in the history of the Ger- 
man people than all the martial victories 
of King Frederick the Great. Indeed, 
Grass considers the potato a crucial fac- 
tor in the development of Europe. It was 
the potato, he believes, that made possi- 
ble the industrialization of Europe and 
the rise of the proletariat. 
We can see what he means. The potato 
is a highly nourishing food that is also 
very cheap because it can be grown so 
quickly and easily. The coming of this 
“fast food” liberated the masses of 
Europe from age-old hunger. It de- 
veloped a sturdier working class. It re- 
leased more and more people from farm 
work and made them available for factory 
labour. 
The factories in turn led to the develop- 
ment of a strong labouring class that 
democratized Europe, and to a science 
and technology that made Western cul- 
ture supreme in the modern world. 
It can be argued therefore that the 
by Nick M. Joaquin 
identity of the modern European as a 
highly civilized, cultured and progressive 
individual can be traced back, partly at 
least, to the coming of the potato. 
But now let us bring in a counter- 
argument. Let us imagine, say, a Euro- 
pean who is rabidly anti-potato because 
the potato is not indigenous to Europe. 
As this chauvinist argues, the potato 
should never have been allowed to 
change Europe because it, the potato, is 
so foreign and exotic. By eating the pota- 
to, the European lost something of his 
original nature, with the result that Euro- 
pean culture today is a deviation from a 
pristine original. The true European is 
the European before the introduction of 
the potato. 
But how can that uncorrupted original 
be restored? 
Our imaginary European chauvinist 
demands the abolition of the potato. 
At once, of course, we see the flaw in 
his proposal. Abolishing the potato will 
not restore European man to his pre- 
potato condition. Why not? Because 
from the potato have come such develop- 
  
ments as industrialization, democratiza- 
tion, modernization, and so forth. And 
these developments have so radically 
altered European man that he would still 
remain what he has become even if he 
stopped eating potatoes altogether. 
In other words, potatoes are the cul- 
ture and history that cannot be cancelled 
in a desire to recover a former innocence. 
You may smile at my potato story, 
which seems to make the potato like the 
forbidden fruit in the Garden of Eden. 
But I think that some such story would 
illustrate the problem of nationalism to- 
day in my country, the Philippines—and 
not only in my country but also in most of 
Asia, and Third World countries in 
general. When Adam and Eve ate of the 
apple, they lost innocence, they lost para- 
dise. And I would say that among the 
peoples of the Orient, certainly among us 
Filipinos, there is a feeling that, by tasting 
of Western science and technology, we 
lost innocence, we lost a primordial 
paradise, 
Our feelings towards Western culture 
are therefore ambivalent. We are fascin- 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ma
s,
 
Ba
rc
el
on
a.
 
Sa
n 
Fe
rn
an
do
 
Ac
ad
em
y,
 
M
a
d
r
i
d

## [Page 15](073178engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 73105: Reflections on the potato

A family meal on Luzon isiand, the Philip- 
pines 
ated by it and we are also repelled. We 
fear and resist it even as we hanker for it. 
And though we crave to progress in the 
Western manner, we wonder at the same 
time if we should not rather go back— 
back to the culture we had before we 
were “corrupted” by the West. 
Not long ago I had dinner with a Filipi- 
no family whom I admire for their 
nationalism, although they rather tend to 
make a display of it. At this dinner, the 
display consisted of a round grey stone 
about the size of a baseball. This stone— 
it was actually a piece of rock salt—was 
passed around instead of salt because, 
said my host, that was how the ancient 
Filipinos salted their food. You pressed 
the stone on your rice and fish, you 
rubbed it against your meat, you soaked 
it in your broth, to obtain the desired 
saltiness. 
I'm afraid they all looked down on me 
when I said I’d rather have ordinary table 
salt. That piece of rock salt reminded me 
of the stones we used in the old days, 
when bathing, to scrub our bodies with. 
And 1 was putting no such stone into 
anything I was going to eat! Still, I was 
charmed by the sentiment behind the dis- 
play, the nationalist nostalgia. What 
bothered me were the implications be- 
hind the sentiment. 
In effect, my hosts were saying: “See 
how truly Filipino we are. Instead of us- 
ing a saltcellar, which is foreign, we use a 
salt stone, which is native.” The implica- 
tion therefore is that the more we return 
to what is native and the more we abolish 
what is foreign, the more truly Filipino 
we become. 
This may be true—but what I couldn’t 
help noticing then was the inconsistency. 
Why pick on the poor saltcellar? On the 
table were fork and spoon, which are not 
native; and beef and cabbage, which are 
also not originally Filipino, and I knew 
that the food had been prepared using the 
sauté method, which is foreign, and 
cooked in a saucepan or kettle, both also 
foreign. To retain these, while abolishing 
the saltcellar, is tantamount to saying that 
the saltcellar is a bigger hindrance to 
becoming truly Filipino than cabbages 
and kettles. 
Of course I know what question was 
supposedly being answered at that dinner 
table with the abolition of the saltcellar: 
the question of identity. 
Identity, I would say, is like the river in 
philosophy. You remember the saying: 
“You can never step into the same river 
Needy children eating potatoes. Detail 
from “St. Diego of Alcala and the Poor” by 
the Spanish painter Bartolomé Esteban 
Murillo (1618-1682). 
Ph
ot
o 
Bo
ut
in
 
©
 
A.
A.
A.
, 
Pa
ri
s 
twice.” The river has changed even as you 
step into it. Nevertheless, the Sumida 
River remains the Sumida River, though 
from one moment to the next it is no 
longer the same river. 
This is the dynamic view of identity. 
I'm afraid that we in the Orient—or 
anyway we Filipinos—have a different 
idea of identity, different because we re- 
gard identity as static: something given 
once and for all, something to which 
things happen but is itself never a hap- 
pening, never becoming. We ourselves 
are, or were, a fixed original identity to 
which certain things—alien cultures, 
alien histories—have been added, layer 
upon layer. Therefore, if such cultures 
and histories are addition, identity is sub- 
traction. All we have to do is to remove 
all those superimposed layers and we 
shall end up with the true basic Filipino 
identity. 
That is the static view of identity. 
But culture is not simple addition. Cul- 
ture is not a stew to which you can add 
anything and it will still remain a stew. 
Instead, culture is like those laboratory 
experiments in physics where the mo- 
ment you add a new ingredient the orig- 
inal mixture becomes completely 
transformed into something different. 
When history added the saltcellar, the 
fork and spoon, beef and cabbage to our 
culture, the identity of the Filipino was so 
completely transformed that there can be 
no going back to a pristine original even if 
we abolished the saltcellar, the fork and 
spoon, and so on. Culture and history are 
the flowing waters that make it impossi- 
ble to step into the same river of identity 
twice. [| 
 
NICK M. JOAQUIN is a Philippine novelist, jour- 
nalist and playwright. Among his published 
works are The Woman who had Two Navels 
(novel), Tropical Gothic (short stories} and a 
volume of poetry, EI Camino Real and Other 
Rimes. 
A cereal chronology 
 
BC 
10000 
8000 
7500 
6500 
6000 
Jordan: einkorn and emmer wheat 
and two-rowed barley 
France: wild grasses 
Japan: buckwheat, barley and 
various wild cereals 
Romania: various grasses 
Crete: emmer wheat 
Mexico: maize 
Central Europe and Western 
Hungary: large-seeded grasses 
Mauritania: wild millet 
Balkans: wild millet, einkorn and 
emmer wheat 
Japan: millet 
Southern Europe: einkorn wheat 
Spain: four varieties of wheat and 
two of barley 
Northern China: millet then sorghum 
Denmark: varieties of small cereal 
Egypt: wheat 
Siberia: millet 
Southern China: rice 
India: millet, rice 
Babylonia: barley, millet, sesame, 
emmer wheat 
Africa: millet (from east to west) 
Ethiopia: “great millet”, barley and 
wheat 
Central Europe: rye 
Mauritania: cultivated millet 
Persia: wheat 
Italy/Greece: soft wheat then hard 
wheat 
Northern China: soft spring wheat 
(from west to east) 
Japan: rice 
Sudan: barley, sorghum 
Europe: rye (from east to west) and 
cultivated oats 
Sahel-Chad: sorghum 
Italy: rice 
America: wheat 
Europe: maize 
France: rice 
Australia: wheat 
Source: Histoire naturelle et morale de la nourriture by 
Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat, Bordas, Paris, 1987. 
15

## [Page 16](073178engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

16 
  
Cereals and especially wheat have long been a staple of the human 
diet. The diet of the Latin peoples, for instance, was for centuries 
based on the consumption of different forms of bread. An impor- 
tant crop since Antiquity, grain also had mythical associations in 
many civilizations. (1) “Harvest crown” (1987) woven in traditional 
style with winter wheat by the French artist Martyn Lévéque. (2) 
Wood and stucco model of a granary from an ancient Egyptian 
tomb (c. 2000 BC). (3) Kneading dough. Earthenware statuette 
from Cyprus (2000-1600 BC). (4) Greek earthenware statuette 
(525-500 BC) depicting bakers shaping oven-ready loaves. 
  
  
Photo [© Réunion des Musées Natonaux, Paris. Louvre Museum 
AIR CALS Ta SEG Se da, AEN 2 Lg NEE TEV OUT,  THC Aes 
TA
P 
2
 
BE 
S
p
 
\ 
E
o
 
a are 
ol
 
y
o
 
% 
LL
 1
S
 
A
h
 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Pe
li
za
su
s 
Mu
se
um
, 
Hi
ld
es
he
im
, 
Fe
d.
 
Re
p.
 
of
 
G
e
r
m
a
n
y
 
   
So w= RN rs BR SO 
y wy Lr) ida 
. 
Photo © Réunion des Musées Nationaux, Pars. Louvre Museum 
 Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ch
ri
st
op
he
 
E
n
s
m
i
n
g
e
r
-
E
d
i
t
i
o
n
s
 
Al
ph
on
se
 
Ma
ré
, 
Ch
ar
tr
es
, 
F
r
a
n
c
e

## [Page 17](073178engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

The ones 
that get 
away 
of some Papua-New Guinean 
villagers was thought to be so low 
as to be incompatible with adequate pro- 
tein equilibrium. Moreover, as an appa- 
rent paradox, these people were usually 
well-built and muscular. The amount of 
physical work they performed and their 
levels of fitness were also high: indeed 
their results in fitness tests put them well 
above well-fed European populations. 
A satisfactory explanation was difficult 
to formulate until relatively recently, 
when it became clear that protein de- 
ficiency was much less common through- 
‘out the world than had been supposed 
and that the requirement of the human 
body for protein is relatively modest. The 
low protein intake of these New Gui- 
neans was therefore unusual but not phy- 
siologically harmful. 
However, if people are allowed access 
to even a relatively restricted choice of 
foodstuffs, they almost invariably seem 
to make a choice which provides an in- 
take of protein which is equivalent to 
between 10 to 14 per cent of the total 
energy content of their diet, whatever the 
particular foods that comprise that diet. 
The New Guinean population whom 
we studied was therefore a very unusual 
group since, although its members lived 
on the coast and had easy access to the sea 
and to fishing, they had an extraordi- 
F OR many years, the protein intake 
Two Melanesian cooking utensils from the 
Sepik River valley in north-east New 
Guinea: below, anthropomorphic earthen- 
ware bowl; below right, ladle made from a 
coconut shell. 
  
 
The eating habits of these Papua-New 
Guinean villagers are a biological puzzle. 
Although they have plenty of opportunl- 
ties to fish and hunt, they persist in follow- 
ing a very low-protein diet. Their physical 
condition Is superior to that of some “well- 
fed” peoples. 
narily low protein intake. They lived in a 
large village of about 1,200 people, on the 
edge of moderately open jungle. The 
mainstay of their diet, grown in gardens 
cleared from the secondary forest, was 
taro (a root vegetable) and bananas, both 
of which were grown in several varieties. 
They also ate some nuts and fruit, and 
consumed occasional small amounts of 
animal protein from flying foxes (which 
they shot with bows and arrows) and 
opossum. Taro, bananas and nuts contri- 
buted about 75 per cent of the total ener- 
gy intake, and animal protein accounted 
for less than 20 per cent of the total 
protein in the diet. 
The extraordinary feature of the vil- 
lagers’ diet was that although they lived 
near the coast, possessed canoes which 
they used frequently for leisure activities 
when they went to the beach, and had no 
apparent taboos against eating fish, they 
caught and ate an astonishingly small 
quantity of fish. The amount of sea-food 
in their diet was negligible although fish 
was relatively plentiful in the sea, was the 
object of leisure-time hunting, and in- 
deed was eaten when it was caught. 
Ph
ot
os
 
Er
ik
a 
Ve
sp
er
 
© 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
fii
r 
Vo
lk
er
ku
nd
e,
 
Be
rl
in
 
(W
es
t)
 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
J.
V.
G.
A.
 
Du
rn
in
 


### 73106: The Ones that get away; a coastal community that turns its back on fish

by John Durnin 
A coastal community 
that turns its back on fish 
The behaviour pattern of these New 
Guinean coastal people is at variance 
with the accepted norm. It would appear 
that although their protein intake was 
low, it was adequate in biological terms 
and they had no “intrinsic”, fun- 
damental, biological urge to supplement 
it by increasing their protein intake from 
animal sources. 
This particular study, on a group of 
people living in very simple circumstan- 
ces, seems to have revealed a biological 
conundrum, in that the presence of 
reasonably plentiful animal protein in a 
situation where other sources of protein 
were of inferior type and limited quan- 
tity, did not seem to have provided any 
stimulus to increase the total intake of 
protein to a “usual” level. 
An adequate amount of protein in the 
diet is regarded as important for renew- 
ing body tissues, for the constant manu- 
facture of enzymes and hormones, and 
for replacing body losses in general. 
From a psycho-social point of view it is 
widely assumed that people prefer to eat 
a diet containing around 10 to 14 per cent 
of total energy in the form of protein. The 
basis of many theories of what constitutes 
a desirable diet depends upon this idea. If 
it is not universally valid—as would seem 
to be the case from our studies in New 
Guinea—the implications are quite wide- 
ranging. [| 
JOHN DURNIN, British nutritionist, is professor 
of physiology at the University of Glasgow. He 
has carried out research on energy requirements 
in a number of countries and has published over 
a hundred scientific articles and texts on topics 
such as energy metabolism. 
  17

## [Page 18](073178engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 73107: (Table) manners makyth man; the emergence of homo sapiens as a convivial animal

18  
The emergence 
of homo sapiens 
as a convivial animal 
. by Naomichi Ishige 
VEN the most delicious food lacks 
KE savour if it is eaten in solitude. To 
enjoy our meals we need a com- 
panion to sit at our table and share our 
food with us. Of course, this does not 
mean that the pleasures of the table 
should be shared with just anyone. It is 
better to eat alone than with a stranger. 
But we all know people with whom we 
are on close terms—members of our 
family, friends or colleagues, a group 
which varies from country to country and 
from person to person—the people we 
feel at ease with when we are at table. We 
all belong to a social group through which 
we relate to other people. One such 
group consists of those who eat together, 
and might be called the kydéshoku shudan 
or “conviviality group”. 
Eating together strengthens the group 
and gives it a certain cohesion. A meal is 
also 2a means of communication whereby 
people assert their identity within the 
group. 
Those who share a meal also share 
sensations. That is why, in many 
societies, ritual celebrations are often 
accompanied by feasting, which provides 
an opportunity to create new bonds be- 
tween people and to strengthen those 
bonds that already exist. 
In the animal world, eating is a solitary 
activity. A meal is neither a means of 
communication nor an occasion to get 
together. Mammals give milk to their 
young, and birds bring their chicks food 
as long as they stay in the nest. But that 
can hardly be called conviviality. It is a 
temporary relationship, for when the 
young have reached maturity they will 
Ea ee eT _ Ee Sk ¥i 
feed alone. Carnivores which hunt in 
packs sometimes gather around a good 
catch and eat it together. But here too 
there is no conviviality, despite 
appearances. 
On the other hand, studies have shown 
that chimpanzees may beg their food 
from other members of the troop, who 
sometimes let them have part of a meal 
composed mainly of plants but some- 
-_ 
Eating together 
   
times of prey. If a chimpanzee catches a 
large animal or gets hold of some fine 
fruit, he is quite prepared to share his 
precious trophy with any member of the 
troop who pesters him for it. It is often 
the female who presses the male to feed 
her on his return from the hunt. The 
behaviour of chimpanzees is in some 
ways reminiscent of the division of labour 
between man and woman in the early

## [Page 19](073178engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 73107: (Table) manners makyth man; the emergence of homo sapiens as a convivial animal

(Table) manners makyth man 
  
  
  
    
   
  
    
days of mankind, when the man went 
hunting and the woman gathered the 
fruits of the earth. 
There is no reason, however, to think 
that the sharing of food among chimpan- 
zees means that they have a preference 
for certain members of their troop, espe- 
cially since they behave as individuals 
when actually eating. 
We can therefore conclude that con- 
viviality is an attribute peculiar to man, 
and has been so since the emergence of 
the human race. 
Man has been defined as an animal 
with the power of speech and the ability 
to use tools, but it could also be said that 
man is a convivial animal in the sense that 
he likes to eat in company. And the basic 
unit in which every human being likes to 
share his meal is the family. 
Te LANL ap 
0 , Le 
Ph
ot
o 
Re
né
 
Bu
rr
i 
©
 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
“The basic unit in which every human 
being likes to share his meal is the family.” 
  

## [Page 20](073178engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 73107: (Table) manners makyth man; the emergence of homo sapiens as a convivial animal

20 
According to the French anthropolog- 
ist Claude Lévi-Strauss, marriage is the 
exchange of women between groups, and 
women were the first currency in the 
history of mankind. Food, however, was 
another form of currency. We do not 
know whether the family started with the 
formation of a couple or whether the 
sharing of food between man and woman 
came before the couple—this is the old 
problem of which came first, the chicken 
or the egg. 
As soon as man stood upright he began 
to hunt and learned to handle tools. Meat 
began to assume an important place in 
people’s diet. In all hunting communities 
today, the males do the hunting. Since 
the dawn of mankind this activity must 
have been left to the men because of their 
greater physical strength. 
The basic unit of society, the family, 
was probably established when a man 
began to share an animal he had caught 
with one particular woman and her chil- 
dren. The family came into being when a 
stable sexual relationship was begun be- 
tween the man and the woman, who were 
linked by the sharing of food, and when 
someone had to be chosen to bring up the 
children born of their union. 
The man left the dwelling-place to go 
hunting and led his life in a wider orbit, 
where he had what might be described as 
a social life. The woman stayed in or near 
the home. Her life was directed more 
towards the family—gathering fruit and 
nuts, looking after the children and the 
household. So their ways of life became 
differentiated, and the work was divided 
into male and female tasks. In almost all 
societies the woman is expected to pre- 
pare the family’s meals. But a man—a 
professional chef—is often entrusted 
with the preparation of meals eaten on 
social occasions. 
It is clear that man does not regard 
eating as a solitary but as a profoundly 
social activity. A meal is something to be 
shared, not to be consumed in solitude. 
This means that rules of conduct must be 
established. Table manners are the codi- 
fication of these rules. 
All societies have their own rules of 
behaviour while eating, even those 
societies which do not use tables or any 
kind of cutlery—whether chopsticks, 
knives, forks or spoons—where, for ex- 
ample, people eat with their fingers. Such 
rules reflect the complex nature of each 
culture; they are the outward sign of the 
power either of the head of the family or 
of religion. When a number of people eat 
together, the main cause of disagreement 
is the question of how the food is to be 
shared. Obviously, if there are no rules 
the strongest will prevail. This may be the 
origin of table manners, the observance 
of which had to be enforced by a familial 
or religious authority as a means of keep- 
ing order. In any society, the appropria- 
tion of food which has been offered to 
someone else, especially if that person is 
about to eat it, is considered to be ex- 
tremely impolite. However, these rules 
may be set aside when close relatives or 
friends (parents and their children, or 
couples) exchange food that has been 
partly eaten. 
Sex and food are the two principal 
bonds that hold the family together. Sex- 
ual relations are reserved for husband 
and wife, and are regarded as incestuous 
if they occur outside the couple. But all 
the members of a family are entitled to 
Ph
ot
o 
Ri
ch
ar
d 
Ka
lv
ar
 
© 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
“In many societies, ritual celebrations are 
often accompanied by feasting, which pro- 
vides an opportunity to create new bonds 
between people and to strengthen those 
bonds that already exist.” Left, a wedding 
ceremony in the Japanese Shinto tradi- 
tion. The couple make their marriage vows 
by exchanging a bowl of saki three times. 
  
“The usefuiness of home cooking is chal- 
lenged by ready-to-eat or pre-cooked food 
products, or the increasingly popular 
practice of eating out in fast food or self- 
service restaurants.” Below, automatic 
vending machines dispense an instant 
family snack. 
  
Ba 
— 
—— 
_— 
—— 
_— 
— 
—— 
— 
— 
R —— 
—_— 

## [Page 21](073178engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

share the food on the table, and sharing it 
is designed to bring them closer together. 
That is why in many cultures the family is 
symbolized by the hearth and the oven 
which are used in the preparation of food. 
This symbol, however, is tending to 
lose its meaning in highly industrialized 
societies. The usefulness of home cook- 
ing is challenged by ready-to-eat or pre- 
cooked food products, or the increasingly 
popular practice of eating out in fast food 
or self-service restaurants. 
Thus, in technologically advanced 
societies, giant food and catering indus- 
tries constitute a challenge to the family 
home. Meals have become more indi- 
vidualized. In days gone by, when the 
home was both the unit of production and 
of consumption in a self-sufficient eco- 
nomy, the individual could not decide 
unilaterally when and what to eat. Now, 
it matters less if some members of the 
family are not present at meal-times. 
They eat whenever and whatever they 
wish. Does this mean that the very mean- 
ing of the family, based as it is upon the 
sharing of food, is disappearing, and that 
the human race will soon be eating as 
individuals again, much as animals do? 
The family has made a material and 
economic contribution to the success of 
industrialized societies, but it is doubtful 
whether society can take its place in pro- 
viding the emotional relationships which 
family members—husband and wife, pa- 
rents and children—establish between 
themselves. 
The members of a modern family 
spend over half their time outside the 
home, at work or at school, and for them 
the family table is the main meeting: 
place, the opportunity to confirm mem- 
  
  


### 73107: (Table) manners makyth man; the emergence of homo sapiens as a convivial animal

  
M
O
E
N
 
OF
 
 
{ £   
  
bership of the group. If people were to 
stop eating together the family would 
cease to exist. 
The origins of the family can thus be 
traced back to the sharing of meals. Mod- 
ern civilization has not yet found another 
basic living unit, compatible with human 
psychology, to take its place. The present 
family system should thus be preserved, 
even if it appears outdated, through the 
institution of the common meal. For 
although eating has become more of an 
individual activity than it was in the past, 
it seems unlikely that the kitchen or the 
family table will cease to be part of our 
homes in the near future. [| 
NAOMICHI ISHIGE, Japanese cultural anthro- 
pologist, teaches at Japan's National Museum of 
Ethnology. He is the author of many published 
works including “An Investigation into Food and 
Life” and “The Ethnology of Gluttony”. 
      
Ph
ot
o 
Ri
ch
ar
d 
Ka
lv
ar
 
©
 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
21

## [Page 22](073178engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

22 
Ph
ot
o 
Ph
el
ps
 
©
 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 


### 73108: The Meal is the message; the language of Brazilian cuisine

   
The meal is the message 
The language of Brazilian cuisine 
VERYONE has to eat to live, but 
E each society defines in its own way 
the significance of the act of 
eating, and stipulates what should be con- 
sumed regularly and what must never be 
eaten for fear of turning into an animal or 
a monster. 
Strict rules define the relationship be- 
tween the food consumed and the condi- 
tion of the person who consumes it. All 
Brazilians know that they should fast be- 
fore taking communion, in order to main- 
tain the assumed state of purity compati- 
ble with the host which they receive into 
their bodies. They behave very dif- 
ferently, however, when they entertain 
their relations or friends at home for Sun- 
day lunch. On these occasions they care- 
fully choose the food that will help them 
to define the social situation they wish to 
create. 
If I am invited to eat a fejoada, a 
cozido, or a peixada, I expect to take part 
in an informal ritual of meal-sharing in 
which there will be a connection between 
what is eaten, the way in which it is eaten, 
and the people with whom it is eaten. 
These dishes consist of a variety of ingre- 
dients (either meat or fish combined with 
vegetables and flour) from which the 
guests help themselves and make their 
own mixture of the various items offered 
on the table, Brazilian-style, establishing 
a parallel between the act of eating and 
the ideal of “mixing” socially those who 
eat together. 
Brazilians have strict rules for match- 
Above, a food-vendor in a street of Salva- 
dor, capital of Bahia State (Brazil). Among 
her wares are crab, pé de moleque (a kind 
of nougat made from brown sugar, far 
right) and fried bananas coated with flour. 
ing a meal to those who eat it. I should 
never think of inviting home the Gov- 
ernor of my State for a feijoada. A more 
classic menu would be appropriate on 
such an occasion and might include such 
dishes as roast chicken with salad, or 
meat cooked in a more cosmopolitan 
style. However, there is nothing wrong in 
having a cup of coffee or a snack with 
strangers, but in this case you eat stand- 
ing up in a downtown snack-bar or bal- 
cdo. This is a mode of eating in which the 
utilitarian concept of “eating to live” 
takes precedence over the moral or sym- 
bolic aspects of a meal. During a slap-up 
meal with your friends, on the other 
hand, Socrates’ adage is forgotten and 
instead of eating to live you live to eat. 
In Brazilian cooking and hospitality a 
great effort is made to combine the 
“universal” aspects of food (such as its 
nutritive and energy value, its capacity to 
sustain the organism and its protein con- 
tent) with its symbolic characteristics, 
since “man does not live by bread alone” 
and the act of eating has great social 
significance. All this is connected with 
“totem commensality”, as the French 
anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss de- 
scribed a system in which people and 
their mood, the surroundings, the food 
by Roberto DaMatta 
and even the way of preparing the meal, 
must all be in harmony. 
This no doubt explains why in Brazil a 
sharp distinction is made between the 
concept of “food” and the concept of a 
“meal”. In the language of Brazilian 
cuisine, these terms express a fun- 
damental semantic opposition between 
the universal and the particular. Brazi- 
lians know that all edible substances are 
“foods” but that not every food is neces- 
sarily a “meal”. In transforming food into 
a meal the preparation is of critical im- 
portance, but a degree of ceremony is 
also required. When preparing a careful- 
ly organized and well-thought-out meal, 
no Brazilian will be satisfied with simply 
buying top-quality produce and then obe- 
diently following a cook-book recipe. He 
will take great pains to prepare the ingre- 
dients and season them properly. Since 
the quality of the meal, served copiously 
and with care, expresses consideration 
for the guests, it would be inconceivable 
for a Brazilian to serve pre-cooked con- 
venience foods, as is now the practice in 
Anglo-Saxon countries. 
The meal is also a means of expressing 
and asserting a national, regional or local 
identity, or even the identity of a family 
or an individual, depending on the con- 
text. Essentially, the act of eating crystal- 
lizes emotional states and social identi- 
ties. Outside my country I can use a re- 
gional dish to express my national iden- 
tity, but within Brazil I identify many 
regions and even families through the

## [Page 23](073178engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 73108: The Meal is the message; the language of Brazilian cuisine

way in which they prepare and serve cer- 
tain foods. In a genuine system of “totem 
meals” social identities can be expressed. 
Every Brazilian knows that the people of 
the Northeast are as fond of flour as mice 
are of cheese; that tutii con linguica (a 
dish based on sausage and beans) is typic- 
al of Minas Gerais State; and that chur- 
rasco is the favourite dish of the gauchos 
of the South. 
And so, when speaking of Brazilian 
cooking both the modes of eating and the 
groups of people who are invited to share 
certain kinds of food must be taken into 
account. There is no doubt that in some 
contexts meals acquire a personality of 
their own, which explains the enormous 
importance of meals as offerings in Brazi- 
lian traditional cults. Thus there are 
foods associated with the sacred (or the 
profane), with sickness (or health), with 
virility or femininity, with childhood or 
with maturity. 
Sitting down at table is supposed to put 
an end to disputes. Brazilians believe that 
some dishes and some situations (the 
Carnival, for instance) are, like some 
women, irresistible, so that the very pre- 
sence of certain dishes should be enough 
to create a degree of conviviality and 
bring harmony to those who are assem- 
bled around the table. 
But the symbolism of meals also pro- 
vides an opportunity to examine a highly 
complex question which is usually over- 
looked in “anthropologies of eating”— 
the search for a rational explanation for 
the culinary peculiarities that are found in 
every society. Every society has dishes it 
would almost be ready to die for. It is not 
fortuitous that North American society 
has an individualistic culinary model 
according to which everyone tucks into a 
Ritual offerings for a macumba ceremony 
in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil). 
Ph
ot
o 
Br
un
g 
Ba
rb
ey
 
©
 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
solitary meal from a tray in front of a 
newspaper or television set. There must 
be some connection between the fast 
food and junk food industries, self-ser- 
vice restaurants, and the values of self- 
reliance and independence which under- 
pin society in countries such as the United 
States. 
But what is happening in countries like 
Brazil where traditional cuisine exists 
alongside modern, more individualized 
patterns of food consumption? There is 
no doubt that in these countries, the mod- 
ern practice of eating an individual food 
product such as a hamburger, either 
alone or with strangers, coexists with tra- 
ditional eating habits which reassert 
themselves at banquets held in that 
atmosphere of friendliness and convivial- 
ity to which people are still strongly 
attached. 
The Brazilian example reveals that 
these two practices are not mutually 
exclusive. On the contrary they can re- 
inforce each other; dual eating habits 
seem to exist in societies of this kind. One 
practice is an expression of “modernity”, 
while the other can provide a focus for 
personal relationships. In Brazil there is, 
indeed, an impersonal, individualized, 
public cuisine, in contrast to traditional 
home cooking which keeps people in 
touch with the basic social relationships 
that give form and meaning to life. 
On the whole, however, the concept of 
the meal as an act of sociability is insepa-. 
rable from family, friends and colleagues, 
in other words from all close relation- 
ships. In this connection it is worth men- 
tioning that all Brazilian national dishes 
such as feijoada, peixada, cozido, vatapd 
(a dish based on manioc flour or rice with 
fish or meat) and carari (typical of Bahia 
State), specifically combine solids with 
liquids, meat with fish, and dried veg- 
etables with green vegetables. 
  
In Brazilian cooking the utmost im- 
portance is attached to combining ingre- 
dients which in other countries are served 
separately. Brazilians pay close attention 
to the arrangement of the table and care- 
fully blend black beans with assorted 
meats, cabbage, oranges, forrezno 
(pieces of bacon) and white manioc flour, 
all of which are eaten in a rather curious 
manner, taking a little here and a little 
there and mixing everything up in the 
centre of one’s plate. 
Echoing the layout of the table, where 
the main dish is surrounded by accom- 
panying dishes in a perfectly-defined 
hierarchy, the centre of each plate is re- 
served for the principal item of food, as 
though gradations were emphasized at all 
levels. The ideal of Brazilian cooking is to 
assemble appropriate dishes and guests 
on an important occasion in a harmo- 
nious ceremony which is the main symbol 
of sociability in Brazil. 
Does this arrangement of the table 
(where there is always a leading figure 
and supporting actors), table manners 
(the main dish is served first, then the 
others) and even the method of eating, 
have a direct correlation with what I 
would call “intermediate meals”, an 
embodiment of the ties which for centur- 
ies have enabled so hierarchical a society 
to absorb and harmonize values from 
other cultures? It is similar to the effect 
achieved by humbly and subtly blending 
in the same dish black beans and white 
manioc flour to form an intermediate 
mass that is as delightful as a mulatto 
skin. | 
ROBERTO DAMATTA, of Brazil, is professor of 
social anthropology at Brazil's National Museum, 
Rio de Janeiro. He has also taught and studied at 
universities in the United States, the United King- 
dom and France. Among his published works are 
A Divided World and Carnavais, Malandros e 
Herdis (“Carnivals, Bandits and Heroes”). 
23

## [Page 24](073178engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
©)
 
M
u
s
é
e
 
Ce
rn
us
ch
i,
 
Pa
ri
s 


### 73109: China's health food tradition

24 
 
China’s health 
  
ANY people appreciate the 
M subtle and delicious flavours of 
Chinese food and drink, but 
few are aware of the important role they 
play in preventing illness, curing disease 
and preserving health. 
Over thousands of years the Chinese 
people have learned that many foods 
have a medicinal value. During the 
period of the Longshan culture 4,000 
years ago, our ancestors learned how to 
make wine for drinking, for use as a 
condiment, as a medicine for invigorating 
the blood, nourishing the gi (vital ener- 
gy), warming the stomach, and keeping 
out the cold. The lower part of the orig- 
inal Chinese character signifying doctor 
and healing ( BX ) contains the character 
forwine ( ff = jj ), illustrating the point 
that “food and medicine originate from 
the same source; a food is also a 
medicine”. 
Professional food doctors already ex- 
isted in China during the Zhou Dynasty 
(c. 11th century-221 BC), and The Canon 
of Medicine, the first work of Chinese 
traditional medicine written in the Spring 
and Autumn Period (770-476 BC) stated 
that food as well as medicine should be 
used in the treatment of disease. Bain 
Que, an eminent doctor who lived during 
the Warring States Period (475-221 BC), 
used food treatment before prescribing 
medicines. The Peaceful Holy Benevolent 
Prescriptions, a work written during the 
Sung Dynasty (960-1279) gave recipes for 
the treatment of twenty-eight diseases 
with instructions for the preparation of 
appropriate foods. Porridges made with 
different nutrients were prescribed for 
different illnesses: black bean porridge 
for oedema; almond porridge for coughs; 
fish porridge for dysentery. 
Over forty years’ experience as a clinic- 
al dietician have taught me how success- 
ful food treatment can be. As a mother I 
feel special concern for women during 
childbirth, and pay great attention to the 
restoration of their health after delivery. 
I once looked after a fragile young 
woman who weighed less than 50 kg be- 
fore she became pregnant. She was wor- 
ried that she would not be able to with- 
stand the strain of childbirth. I drew up 
Left, preparation of fish as depicted by a 
sculptor of the Han Dynasty (3rd century 
BC). Right, making pasta by hand in mod- 
ern China. 
 

## [Page 25](073178engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 73109: China's health food tradition

food tradition 
by Li Ruifen 
  
   Ph
ot
o 
Ev
e 
Ar
no
ld
 
©
 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
special menus for her in accordance with 
Chinese traditional practice—stewed hen 
without soya sauce, eggs in glutinous rice 
wine, millet porridge with brown sugar 
and sesame, and other re (hot by nature) 
foods. Within a few months she had re- 
covered, even though she breast-fed her 
baby. In fact, she became much healthier 
than before. 
According to traditional Chinese 
medical theory, the physical constitution 
of a woman after childbirth is xu (weak), 
han (cold by nature), and her internal 
organs do not function normally. Such 
patients should take either wen (warm by 
nature) or re foods to obtain vital energy 
and to restore the balance within the 
body. On the other hand, pork, duck, 
mung beans and other kan foods are not 
suitable for women after childbirth. 
I have also advised hundreds of 
mothers on a suitable diet for their 
babies. One pale-looking premature 
baby was so weak that it lacked even the 
energy to suck. It is generally believed 
that only in rare cases can such weak 
babies survive. This particular baby was 
placed under my care. First of all, I fed it 
the thick liquid skimmed from rice por- 
ridge to provide it with the calories it 
needed. (Doctors practising Chinese tra- 
ditional medicine assert that rice is sweet 
and neutral by nature, and is easily 
absorbed in the spleen and kidney. Li 
Shizhen, a famous doctor of the Ming 
Dynasty (1368-1644) said, “Skinny and 
dark babies fed on the thick liquid from 
rice porridge become plump and white 
after a hundred days”.) 
Then I gradually added milk powder, 
egg yolks, fish paste and bean soup to the 
baby’s diet to provide amino acids, and 
liquids from vegetables and fruit as a 
source of vitamins and minerals. The 
baby was fed very small amounts at first, 
and then gradually increasing quantities, 
and from eating a single kind of food 
progressed to eating many different 
kinds. In less than a hundred days, the 
baby was heavier than other babies of the 
same age. When it was six months old, I 
cut down on its starch intake to control its 
weight and added more vegetables and 
fruit to the diet. By the time the child was 
one year old, it was healthy and lively. In 
China, some mothers are always afraid 
that their babies may be hungry and so 
they overfeed them with protein-rich 
foods. The results are unsatisfactory as 
overfeeding harms the digestive system. 
Old people often come to me for advice 
on how to eat to prolong life, and I always 
quote them a rule laid down by the re- 
nowned Doctor Sun Simiao of the Tang 
Dynasty (618-907) which recommends 
“many small meals”. This is good advice 
for older people whose physical faculties 
are gradually failing. They should take 
light meals with little sugar, little salt, and 
not much fat. I also advise them to eat 
two or three snacks between their three 
regular daily meals. At each meal, they 
25

## [Page 26](073178engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 73109: China's health food tradition

Ph
ot
o 
Re
né
 
Bu
rr
i 
©
 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
should stop eating before their stomachs 
are full, and should include at least twen- 
ty and if possible between thirty and forty 
different kinds of food in their daily diet 
in order to obtain the many kinds of 
nutrients they need. 
Madame Zhang is an elderly writer 
whose way of life I highly approve of. 
Every day she eats some millet, dried 
shredded corn, beans, peanuts or other 
grain. A green leafy vegetable dish forms 
part of every meal. One of her favourite 
foods is bean curd. She does all she can to 
maintain a balance between han and re 
foods in her diet and a balance between 
motion and rest in her daily activities. She 
rises early and goes to bed early, and 
often takes an outdoor stroll as well as 
walking 7,000 paces around her rooms 
each day. She also massages herself daily 
and _does some household chores. 
Although she is in her eighties, Madame 
Zhang is physically fit and mentally lucid 
and is able to keep up with her writing. 
I told her that the rate of metabolism is 
slower for old people and that she should 
add more protein to her diet. Instead of 
dining on “four-legged animals” (cow, 
pig, lamb, etc.), it was better to eat “two- 
legged fowls” (chicken, duck or other 
birds), “single-leg edible fungi” 
(mushrooms) or “legless fish”. Poultry 
and fish have a high protein content, are 
low in fats and their short fibres are easy 
on the digestive system. Fungi are a rich 
source of plant protein. 
Once I made a special “eight-treasures 
duck” for Madame Zhang. This is a high- 
ly nourishing festive dish with a low fat 
content. I used protein-rich plants for the 
stuffing—xianggu mushrooms (which re- 
plenish vital energy, regulate blood cir- 
L 
  
culation and reduce phlegm), lotus seeds 
(which are credited with sedative prop- 
erties, strengthen the function of the 
heart and reduce blood pressure), sesame 
(which nourishes and builds up the body 
and moistens the intestines), Chinese 
dates (which reinforce the spleen, nor- 
malize the functions of the stomach, 
nourish vital energy and replenish body 
fluids), chestnuts (which nourish the 
spleen, invigorate the functions of the 
stomach, reinforce the kidney and invigo- 
rate blood circulation), gingko seeds 
(which warm the lungs, nourish vital 
energy, check asthma and act as a detox- 
icant), peanuts (which enliven the spleen, 
normalize the function of the stomach, 
moisten the lungs, stop coughing), bam- 
boo shoots (which clear up internal heat, 
reduce phlegm, regulate the stomach, 
moisten the intestines) and glutinous 
rice. Thus the combination of these foods 
with duck (nourishing to the yin! and an 
eliminator of dampness) makes an excel- 
lent dish for the aged. 
I usually follow our traditional method 
of selecting appropriate foods which will 
gradually restore the physical strength of 
my patients, especially those who are cri- 
tically ill. The patient must first acquire 
enough calories to maintain life, to im- 
prove resistance against disease and 
strengthen the immune defence system in 
order to increase the opportunities for 
recovery. 
Some years ago I treated a woman who 
had undergone an operation for stomach 
cancer. It was found that the cancer had 
spread to all the lymph nodes. The doc- 
tors predicted that the patient had only 
three months to live. At the time the 
patient was undergoing chemotherapy 
  
which seriously impaired her health. She 
was constantly vomiting as a reaction to 
the chemotherapy and lost between 2 and 
3 kg after each course of treatment. 
I decided not to make her eat in the 
morning when she had her chemotherapy 
treatment which caused her to vomit. But 
after 4 o’clock in the afternoon when the 
climax of the toxic effect of chemother- 
apy had passed, she was put on a special 
diet which included her favourite foods. 
For a patient in her condition, every 
mouthful counted and so she was con- 
stantly fed until night. The next morning, 
when chemotherapy continued, she was 
given a slice of ginger to suck to prevent 
vomiting and to warm the spleen and the 
stomach. With such care, though the pa- 
tient underwent eight courses of che- 
motherapy treatment in over a year, she 
gained more than 10 kg in weight. She 
lived five years longer than predicted. 
Chinese traditional medicine insists 
that diet should vary according to the 
individual. The human body needs a cer- 
tain amount of all kinds of food, but the 
amount taken must be based on such 
factors as age, physical constitution, diet- 
ary habit and climate. Over-eating or 
starvation must be avoided to protect the 
spleen and the stomach. By proper use of 
food to build up the body, it will be 
possible to give priority to the prevention 
of disease. 
According to Chinese traditional medi- 
cine, the physical constitution of the hu- 
Regional traditions of Chinese cooking re- 
flect climate, customs and natural pro- 
duce. In Shanghai, below, and elsewhere 
in eastern China, people are fond of hot, 
spicy dishes while the people of western 
China tend to prefer tart flavours. 
BebtLLLLT ITI ]TE 
  
Ph
ot
o 
Bo
ut
in
 
©
 
A.
A 
A.
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 27](073178engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 73109: China's health food tradition

  
Three specialities of traditional Chinese cuisine: above, shrimps, 
strips of meat and vegetables are simmered in soup kept boiling in 
a pot heated by burning charcoal; top right, “turnips in chicken 
soup” accompanied by bamboo shoots and ham; right, “Hudie 
Su”, butterfly-shaped pastries. 
man body is classified as yin, yang,’ xu, 
han. Food materials are han, re, bu (re- 
plenishing) or xie (reducing) in nature, 
and taste sweet, sour, bitter, salty or hot. 
Selection of foods must be made accord- 
ing to the season and the climate and the 
corresponding relation between them. 
Doctors of Chinese traditional medicine 
classify the four seasons as spring-warm, 
summer-hot, autumn-dry, winter-cold 
and believe that the physical condition of 
a person undergoes corresponding 
changes in the different seasons. Unless 
appropriate changes are made in their 
diet, people are likely to fall ill. 
Since there is a release of vital energy 
and the gi (vital energy) and blood tend 
to rise to the surface in spring, people 
should eat more vegetables and less fats 
at this time of year. Hot, pungent foods 
must be avoided. In summer, there is 
usually a loss of appetite and a slackening 
in the function of the digestive system. 
Thus it is desirable to take tart foods and 
other innately cold foods to facilitate the 
removal of toxic heat within the body. 
With the arrival of autumn and cool 
weather, people regain their appetite. In 
NN 
this season a reasonable amount of hot 
and pungent foods serves to expel inter- 
nal residual summer heat. When winter 
comes, the rate of metabolism rises and 
thus more hot and pungent rich foods 
may be included in the diet. 
The styles of Chinese cooking have 
been developed according to the geog- 
raphical location, customs and habits, 
and the material resources of the diffe- 
rent parts of our country. The people of 
the Sichuan Basin, for example, are fond 
of peppery foods. This can be related to 
the fact that they live in an area which is 
damp all the year round. Hot peppery 
foods help to remove dampness within 
the body and thus restore its inner balan- 
ce. In our country, the southerners are 
fond of sweet foods while the northerners 
prefer salty fare; easterners favour hot 
foods and westerners like tart flavours. 
The reasons for this variation in the local 
flavours may be found in differences of 
climate, geographical characteristics and 
material resources. 
Chinese food treatment is based on the 
hypothesis that “if there is genuine ener- 
gy within the body, diseases will not be 
    
      . v - 
nae ye A 
well f # ed 
Photos Dai Jiming © Xinhua News Agency, Beijing 
is Pe SA 
        
   
vis 
ear ~ on acy o£ > 
able to attack”. Prevention is of primary 
importance. Treatment after a person 
falls ill comes next. Food treatment is too 
complicated a subject to be expounded in 
a short article, and I shall leave the last 
word to a distinguished thirteenth-cen- 
tury doctor, Chen Zhi, who wrote that 
“regardless of hundreds and thousands of 
kinds of edible foods found on land and in 
the sea, their five colours,’ five tastes and 
their natures of han re, bu xie are inherent 
in the yin yang and the five elements*”. W 
1. Yin—the female or negative principle. 
2. Yang—the male or positive principle. 
3. Five colours—blue, red, yellow, white, black. 
4, Five elements—wood, fire, earth, metal and water 
with their characteristic properties—an ancient philo- 
sophical concept to explain the composition and phe- 
nomenon of the physical universe. Later used in tradi- 
tional medicine to expound the unity of the human body 
and the natural world and the physiological and patholo- 
gical relationship between the internal organs, 
 
LI RUIFEN, Chinese dietician, is deputy manag- 
ing director of the Beijing Gastronomy and Nutri- 
tion Research Association and deputy director of 
the Beijing Nutrition Association. 
  27

## [Page 28](073178engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28 
of 
= 
c 
2 
> 
E 
3 
0 
© 
J 8 
sS0 
w @ 
= 
[54 
w 
‘= 
o 
Rk] 
= 
[7] 
= 
3 
x 
© 
o 
° 
L 
a 


### 73110: Paradise lost: bulimia, anorexia and drug addiction

Paradise lost 
NTIL modern times, melancholy 
\ | was always regarded by Western 
medicine as the worst enemy of a 
“well-ordered”, harmonious life, in 
which the humours were perfectly bal- 
anced, especially in the blood, which was 
held to be the very “food of life”. It was 
possible to govern the body and maintain 
its balance by keeping a rein on desires, 
by a wise and prudent administration of 
the “treasure of life” on which the quality 
and length of human existence depend. 
The key to life was thought to lie in the 
phenomenology of nutrition, in the 
mysterious “faculties” and “virtues” of 
food. Natural scientists of the old school 
saw clearly that the body was responsible 
for its actions to none but itself—neither 
to moral standards nor to religious laws. 
The ancient Delphic precept “Know 
thyself” was extended to cover know- 
ledge of the physical as well as the inner 
life. Governance of the passions was 
united to control over the body’s hidden 
drives and rhythms and over the world of 
desires and needs. Self-knowledge meant 
taking good care of oneself. 
In this conception of the well-bal- 
anced, consciously ordered life, the only 
limitation on the enjoyment of pleasures 
was that prudent, carefully controlled ba- 
lance of the biological and physiological 
functions which was the basis of physical 
wisdom. 
At the centre of this system of vigilant 
self-regard was moderation in eating, or 
dietetics, which became the absolute 
arbiter of the fate of the body and the 
harmony of the mind. The delicate ba- 
lance of the four humours, on which the 
marvellous edifice of the human body 
reposed, could be upset not only by foods 
which were unsuited to the individual 
“temperament” or by ignorance of the 
“nature of foods”, but also by incorrect 
proportions and by an unreasonable ex- 
cess or insufficiency of certain foods. 
If that balance was upset, the hell of the 
disorder and corruption of the humours 
opened up before the feet (and in the 
blood) of the immoderate man who was 
hungry or the exhausted man who had no 
appetite. The moderate, balanced 
nourishment of the body, which gov- 
erned the balance of the mind, was upset 
by such extravagant forms of alimentary 
deviationism. The destabilization of the 
healthy diet caused irreparable harm to 
the governance of the soul and psyche. It 
is no accident that our forebears thought 
that the paradise of delights was identical 
with unspoiled, incorruptible Eden 
Bulimia, anorexia 
\ \, al 
Walking Man (c. 1950), oil on paper by the 
Swiss painter and sculptor Alberto 
Giacometti (1901-1966).

## [Page 29](073178engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 73110: Paradise lost: bulimia, anorexia and drug addiction

P
h
o
t
o
 © 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
of
 
Mo
de
rn
 
Ar
t,
 
Ne
w 
Yo
rk
. 
Ja
me
s 
Lo
rd
 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
Ne
w 
Yo
rk
 
  
“Palaeolithic Venus” unearthed at Dolin{ 
Vestonice (Czechoslovakia) Is made of a 
mixture of clay and powdered bone (11.4 
cm). 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Mo
ra
vs
ke
 
Mu
se
um
, 
Br
no
 
{
T
N
 
T
d
 
¥ = 
where the perfect moderation of the 
humours—before Adam’s fall brought 
the scourge of imbalance and immodera- 
tion into the world—warded off both 
sickness and evil. Paradoxically, 
however, dreams of Eden or the dread of 
falling into the infernal abyss provoked a 
short circuit in the form of food neuroses 
and upset the delicate system of the phy- 
siological order. 
Even today, the dietary pattern and the 
fragile mechanism of self-control can be 
disturbed either by alienating fears or by 
excessive, inordinate desires. When this 
happens, compensatory or renunciatory 
attitudes towards food are bound to be 
produced. 
The appetite for sweet, sugary things 
that appeal to the senses, and the plea- 
sure of gormandizing, are greatly stimu- 
lated by the unconscious desire to recre- 
ate artificially the Eden-like happiness of 
our dreams, and to recapture in some way 
the delights of the honey, manna and 
milk enjoyed by our remote ancestors. 
The uncontrolled bulimia of high-calorie 
diets is caused by the tormenting dream 
of re-creation. It is due to a desire to 
retrieve, through the consumption of res- 
torative, invigorating nutrients, a place in 
paradise lost, to take refuge in the uncon- 
y | Too much | 
and too little 
Detail from “The Fight between Carnival 
and Lent”, by the Flemish painter Pieter 
Bruegel the Elder (c. 1525-1569). 
by Piero Camporesi 
taminated, contented womb of Mother 
Earth, to counteract the squandering of 
life during the daily round, and to ex- 
orcize the grim uncertainties of the future 
by means of food. 
For centuries, the vain hope of being 
able to prevent entropy and the dissipa- 
tion of heat and energy has kept alive the 
myth of the tonic, the fortifying cordial, 
the miraculous elixir of youth which will 
restore the life-force and bring back lost 
happiness. 
Anorexia, on the other hand, express- 
es a premature, much-feared descent into 
an underworld of darkness and bitter- 
ness, hunger and thirst. It marks the de- 
feat of the libido by the death instincts 
and a surrender to the decay of the flesh. 
It is a symptom of an irresistible desire to 
taste the perverse pleasures of the death 
throes by deliberately and gradually anti- 
cipating the moment of decomposition. 
In the allegory of the drama, the battle 
between fat, jovial, cheerful, sanguine 
Carnival and dismal, melancholy, emaci- 
ated Lent, symbolized the conflict be- 
tween the two great principles that gov- 
ern life (Dante’s two “great powers”) and 
preside over the destiny of the world, the 
two temptations, and the call of the nega- 
tive and the positive: the rift between 
29

## [Page 30](073178engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 73110: Paradise lost: bulimia, anorexia and drug addiction

30 
night and day, the stages of life which 
alternate between the two opposite poles 
of intensification and diminution of the 
vital forces. 
The dream of longevity, of returning to 
the age of the patriarchs, the various 
formulae and secrets for delaying the 
onset of old age and lengthening the life- 
span, as well as the opposite temptation 
to shorten life, to reject it by freeing 
oneself from the primordial life instinct, 
and to lighten the weight of the flesh once 
and for all—both these impulses are ex- 
pressed in a pathological appetite or the 
lack of it, and quantified accordingly. 
Both originate in the logic of lack and 
absence, in yearning for lost happiness. 
For some, happiness was to be recovered 
at all costs; while for others, it was 
irretrievable. 
Scepticism about life, failure to achieve 
fulfilment, a frustrating awareness of the 
wretched limitations of the human con- 
dition, confined in both space and time— 
such are the motives behind the desper- 
ate search for alternative solutions. They 
lead people to build dream factories for 
themselves, producing artificial paradises 
to push back the narrow confines of 
>" 
J Pg Fs 
OE Te 
Lr 
“The Ham Lunch” (detail) by the French 
painter Nicolas Lancret (1690-1743). 
biological necessity and put back the 
clock of life, of history and of inevitable 
social change. 
In all ages and all cultures, man has felt 
the need to recreate a time which is non- 
temporal or timeless, outside history, and 
to regain an Eden-like condition in a 
different place, to invent a different 
abode by going back to the prehistory of 
the ego, to divide man’s earthly lifetime 
into an infinite number of ages and to 
reconstruct it according to a new geomet- 
ry. This need has led to along and drama- 
tic search for “mediators of oblivion”, 
ranging from food and drink that produce 
euphoria, to tonics and cordials that bring 
elation and conviviality, philtres and 
other magic potions, and insidious hallu- 
cinogenic substances. 
Ritual drugs (fungi, herbs, leaves) 
have been used in some religious prac- 
tices to help people expand their con- 
sciousness, explore the realms of the un- 
seen world by embarking on imaginary 
journeys, and make contact with the 
celestial spirits that preside over the cos- 
mic order. (The fumes of the tobacco 
used by Amerindian cultures and of the 
incense used in the Christian liturgy are 
like frail olfactory threads intended to 
make communication easier and help 
people to understand messages from the 
unknowable.) These drugs have long 
been a potent means of magical and reli- 
gious communication. Institutionalized 
by the liturgy and ordered by the sacred 
calendar, the hallucinogens used in 
worship were deeply rooted in the collec- 
tive culture of the social group which used 
them and kept them under control. 
Society today is largely desacralized; 
and now that the regulated use of drugs for 
a specific purpose has been abandoned 
their consumption has become a danger- 
ous experiment undertaken by individuals, 
a desperate attempt at personal escape, an 
act of negation that marks the disintegra- 
tion of the tribe and a lawless attempt to 
escape from the body of society envisaged 
as a grey, oppressive prison, without light, 
colour or fragrance. Hu 
PIERO CAMPORESI, Italian cultural historian 
and essayist, is professor of Italian literature at 
the University of Bologna and visiting professor 
at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences 
Sociales in Paris. He has published a number of 
works on the anthropology of literature and the 
history of popular cultures, which have been 
translated into several languages. 
Ph
ot
o 
©)
 
Gi
ra
ud
on
, 
Pa
ri
s.
 
Mu
sé
e 
Co
nd
é,
 
Ch
an
ti
ll
y

## [Page 31](073178engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

  
Detail from “The Meal in the Monastery”, a 
fresco by the italian painter Luca Sig- 
norelli (c. 1445-1523). The fresco, which 
depicts the life of St. Benedict, is in the 
abbey of Monte Oliveto, near Siena. 
Food shortages and food aid 
have caused great hardship in sub-Saharan Africa in the last decade, are usually 
accompanied by severe food shortages. The effects of these climatic hazards last longer 
than those of any other natural catastrophes and include crop failures, risk of epidemics, and 
Eo cee climatic conditions, such as the widespread and persistent droughts that 
large-scale migration from rural areas to better-fed towns and cities. 
Other factors which have an impact on food production and consumption include the current 
world economic recession and the imbalances stemming from it—higher rates of unemployment, 
falling national income, increase in external debt—which in many developing countries are 
leading to deteriorating living conditions and malnutrition. In some regions the situation has been 
made much worse by civil disorders or war. 
At the end of 1985, the Global Information and Early Warning System of the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) reported that 11 countries were experienc- 
ing abnormal food shortages—6 in Africa, 4 in Asia and 1 in Central America. The situation had 
improved considerably since 1984, when the total was 34 countries (25 in Africa, 6 in Asia, 2 in 
Central America and 1 in South America), mainly because of better weather conditions and 
increased food production in sub-Saharan Africa. 
At the end of 1985 FAO estimated that shipments of food aid in cereals had amounted to some 
12.5 million tons in 1984-1985, 2.7 million tons more than the previous year. This significant 
increase mainly reflected larger shipments to Africa. The estimate of commitments of food aid in 
cereals for 1985-1986 was much lower, since increased rainfall had had a positive effect on 
Africa's food aid needs. 
Source: The State of Food and Agriculture 1985, FAO Report. 
 Ph
ot
o 
© 
Sc
al
a,
 
Fl
or
en
ce
 
31

## [Page 32](073178engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 73111: Food aid and food habits

32 
Food aid and food habits 
by Jeremy Shoham and Bruno Stainier 
      a « X SRE Ss 
PO eT PR . 
“pis ’ " 
: Pw, Jy A 
wl Ee: TES AEC A Ae NN 
— - I 8 
  
»
 
- 
5
 
Ph
ot
o 
To
rt
ol
i/
FA
O,
 
R
o
m
e
 
A cloud of locusts almost blots out the African sky. 
and other disasters can dramati- 
cally dislocate families from their 
normal environment. Households may 
then be forced to rely on donations of 
food to survive, and as a result changes in 
food consumption habits may occur. A 
number of questions have been raised 
about food aid of this kind. Is it likely to 
alter food habits? If it does, will such 
changes be to the benefit or detriment of 
individuals? How will such changes sub- 
sequently affect local and national econo- 
mies? Might they establish a dependence 
on imports if local agriculture proves un- 
able to adapt to altered tastes? 
Questions about the potential effects 
of emergency food aid programmes are 
particularly pertinent at this time, in view 
of the possibility of increasingly frequent 
food emergencies in many parts of 
drought-prone and war-affected Africa. 
The beneficiaries of emergency food aid 
are likely to become increasingly depen- 
dent on the food ration they receive, and 
in some cases may have to endure the 
situation for several years. Most major 
donors make every effort to supply foods 
traditionally used by intended benefi- 
ciaries, but this may not always be possi- 
ble if such foods are not available among 
the surplus food commodities stored in 
donor countries. Local purchases may 
also be problematic in food emergency 
I) ni oir floods, locust plagues situations as food scarcity causes 
inflation. 
It is convenient to distinguish between 
emergency programmes which bring food 
aid to indigenous populations, and refu- 
gee feeding programmes (although refu- 
gee aid is also usually described in the 
early stages as emergency aid). The dis- 
tinction may be important in its implica- 
tions for food habits, since emergency 
programmes are generally of shorter 
duration than refugee feeding pro- 
grammes and receive more traditionally 
consumed foods, as donors have a greater 
chance of finding suitable short-term 
stocks. 
Also, emergency food aid recipients 
will not necessarily receive a full subsist- 
ence ration and may well continue to 
consume some local foods, while refu- 
gees are likely to be totally dependent on 
the ration for some time. While these 
factors may make food habit changes less 
likely among emergency programme re- 
cipients than among refugees, the fact 
that such populations may be consider- 
ably larger than refugee populations sug- 
gests that if food habit changes did occur, 
their effects on local agriculture would be 
far more significant and diffusion to other 
population groups more probable. 
The World Food Programme (WEP) 
supplies the bulk of refugee food aid. 
Generally, at least three commodities are 
provided: cereal (400 grams), either 
maize, rice or wheat; oil or another fat 
(30 grams); and a protein source such as 
pulses or dry skimmed milk. In some 
programmes WFP also provides fish, 
meat or cheese. The total ration usually 
supplies upwards of 1,800 kilocalories” a 
head. However, in emergency rations the 
WFP may not be the only major donor, so 
that such rations are limited both in terms 
of the number of commodities and quan- 
tities. The main commodity is a staple 
food, cereal, associated if possible and if 
necessary with fat. The average ration 
provides about 1,400 kilocalories, and 40 
grams of protein are recommended. 
Many factors influence food habits, 
and people never eat simply to satisfy 
their physiological needs for various nut- 
rients. They eat to achieve satiety and 
they eat foods with certain textures which 
they like. Colours also play an important 
role, as do cultural, social, economic and 
demographic factors. Some of these fac- 
tors may dictate that certain foods are 
prohibited, and in some situations a 
radical change in food habits, externally 
imposed, may amount to a symbolic 
breaking with society. Hence, in the 1944 
The prefix kilo is commonly omitted from the term 
kilocalorie, and the “calories” counted by dieters are in 
fact kilocalories.

## [Page 33](073178engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 73111: Food aid and food habits

Bengal famine, many rice-eating Benga- 
lis preferred to starve rather than eat 
wheat flour provided by an aid pro- 
gramme. 
The provision of food aid could affect 
food habits in many ways. It may, for 
. example, cause a reduction in the price of 
locally produced substitutes and a subse- 
quent fall in agricultural production in 
response to the low price. Increased 
quantities of food aid would then be re- 
quested to fill the resulting agricultural 
deficit and the increased availability of 
the food aid commodity would gradually 
encourage altered food habits. In many 
cases the change in food habits would 
probably require little encouragement. 
For example, the availability of wheat 
and rice food aid allows rural as well as 
urban consumers access to staples which 
are considered by many to be better 
foods. However, in spite of many studies, 
particularly in India, there is no firm evi- 
dence that long-term food aid is a disin- 
centive to local agriculture. 
In contrast there have been no studies 
on the effect of bulk emergency food aid 
on agricultural production and food. 
habits. Recent evidence from emergency 
programmes in sub-Saharan Africa sug- 
gests that this may be an important omis- 
sion. In Sudan, for example, dramatic 
price deflation of the staple grains millet 
and sorghum in 1985 and 1986 closely 
mirrored patterns of food aid flow. Prices 
were actually lower than in 1982, in spite 
of an annual inflation rate of 30 per cent. 
Wages were also affected and labour 
costs on two irrigation schemes tripled 
over 1984 levels. Food aid appeared to be 
acting as a work disincentive, with the 
resulting labour scarcity causing wage in- 
flation. Many large farms around 
Gedaref were reportedly left unhar- 
vested in 1986 because of the squeezing of 
agricultural profit margins. It seems 
probable that as a result of this a signifi- 
cant proportion of Sudanese farmers sub- 
sequently cut back production of the nor- 
mal staple and changed their cropping 
patterns to reduce future risks. Clearly, 
this has implications for food habits. 
Food aid may of course have a more 
direct impact on food habits. Recipients 
may react quickly to factors such as taste, 
ease of preparation and the status 
attached to certain donated foodstuffs. 
Some reports on mother/child health, 
food-for-work and school feeding pro- 
grammes have revealed the rapid accept- 
ance of new food items. In Sri Lanka a 
previously untried weaning mixture in- 
troduced through mother/child health 
clinics caught on so quickly that it stimu- 
lated local production of vegetables con- 
tained in the mixture to the point of self- 
sufficiency within two years. There are 
also examples of foodstuffs which have 
proved unacceptable. For example, the 
unfamiliarity, texture and odour of fish 
protein concentrate have caused it to be 
withdrawn from a number of program- 
Ph
ot
o 
L. 
G
u
b
b
/
U
N
I
C
E
F
 
mes. Other reports describe situations in 
which new foods are tolerated rather than 
wholeheartedly accepted or rejected, as 
with sorghum-grits in Bangladesh. 
Overall, it seems probable that a num- 
ber of factors militate against enduring or 
widespread changes in food habits from 
food aid provided by this type of project, 
most of which are small-scale with limited 
national coverage. In India, for example, 
only 1.5 per cent of pre-school children 
are reached by the mother/child health 
programme. Most beneficiaries are only 
attached to such projects for short or 
A refugee family in an African camp. It is 
increasingly felt that measures to develop 
sound nutrition habits should be an indis- 
pensable part of food aid and other relief 
programmes. 
33

## [Page 34](073178engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 73111: Food aid and food habits

34 
intermittent periods. World Food Prog- 
ramme mother/child health programmes 
only encourage attendance for one to two 
years, while food-for-work projects 
attempt to offer employment at a time 
when there ts seasonal slack in labour 
demand. Most projects also provide only 
a proportion of food subsistence needs, 
so that participants consume traditional 
foods concurrently. 
It might be expected that refugee feed- 
ing programmes would be more likely to 
encourage changes in food habits, since 
many of these programmes are long-term 
and involve total dependence on food 
aid. In Asia and Latin America, 
however, refugee food aid items have 
been the same as, or very similar to, 
normally consumed foods. This contrasts 
with Africa where, for example, the main 
refugee food aid staple items have been 
wheat and maize, which have therefore 
substituted for the more traditional sor- 
ghum, millet and teff used by the Somali 
and Ethiopian peoples. While these don- 
ated staples have generally been accepted 
in the camps, largely because of their 
convenience and ease of preparation, itis 
not clear whether long-term use of these 
staples and other unfamiliar food items 
will lead to an eventual change in food 
habits, should these refugees return 
home. 
Some refugee settlements have been 
allowed to cultivate areas of land, and 
have therefore managed to grow a prop- 
ortion of their former staple. Other 
camps have allowed refugees individual 
or community gardens where traditional 
spices, vegetables and other items are 
grown. But even if refugees learn to grow 
and process new staples and other foods 
in the settlements, it may prove difficult 
for them to do so on their return. Furth- 
ermore, as surveys have shown, agricul- 
turalists, who comprise the bulk of refu- 
gee populations, are notoriously con- 
servative with regard to certain food 
habits. This is borne out to some extent 
by the number of food aid items which 
end up in local markets as refugees ex- 
change them for preferred traditional 
foodstuffs. 
On the other hand, many refugee 
populations tend towards a younger than 
normal age distribution (as vulnerable 
older segments of the population may 
have died in the period of hardship lead- 
ing up to the refugee exodus, or may have 
been abandoned), and may therefore 
adapt more readily to changed food cir- 
cumstances. Indeed, in many camps, chil- 
dren under five will have known no other 
source of nutrition than refugee food aid. 
At present it is impossible to say with 
certainty whether food aid, and in particu- 
lar emergency and refugee aid, affects 
long-term food habits. What is certain, 
however, is that some changes in food 
habits, such as greater use of appropriate 
weaning foods, may be very desirable 
while others such as those that may create 
dependence on expensive imports, are 
tions expand and as emergency pro- 
grammes recur with greater frequency in 
those countries increasingly vulnerable to 
food crises, the need to link food aid 
distribution with educational and produc- 
tive activities must be recognized, in 
order that relief operations of a certain 
duration may be used as an opportunity 
to protect and develop sound nutrition 
habits. | 
 
JEREMY SHOHAM is a nutritionist and a consui- 
tant on food aid matters with FAQ. 
BRUNO STAINIER is head of the Nutrition Prog- 
rammes Service of FAQ, based in Rome. 
Social Structures and Food Deficiency, a 
book based on the proceedings of an interna- 
tional seminar organized by Unesco in 1985, 
will be published later this year in English and 
Spanish editions. (English edition published 
by the Unesco Regional Office, Bangkok.) 
 
yA PI id 
Food for all 
T- world now has the means to attack 
childhood malnutrition and disease on 
a massive scale. The lives of over 4 
million children have already been saved in 
the last five years by countries which have 
mobilized their resources in order to put 
today's low-cost solutions into effect. But in- 
fections and undernourishment still Kill 
280,000 children every week. 
Through its major programme IV, “The For- 
mulation and Application of Education Poli- 
cies”, Unesco is contributing to the fight 
against this situation by implementing, within 
its sphere of competence, a series of activities 
in the field of nutrition, notably through co- 
operation with other agencies of the United 
Nations system and non-governmental orga- 
nizations concerned with nutrition and health 
education. 
Many individuals are also engaged in the 
struggle against the tragic consequences of 
famine and undernourishment. One of them is 
the Greek poet and politician Yannis Cout- 
socheras who, wishing to remedy a situation 
which he considers to be unworthy of human- 
ity and also a major obstacle to world peace, 
has for some years been advocating the prop- 
osition that free access to staple foodstuffs 
should be recognized and practised as a basic 
human right. 
Since 1975, when, as a member of the 
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of 
Europe, he proposed that “the basic food 
products necessary to humanity should not be 
subject to market forces and should be de- 
clared freely available to all”, he has cham- 
pioned this ideal through speeches in the 
Council of Europe, at Unesco and elsewhere, 
and also through his writings (including his 
trilogy White Hand, Black Hand). An interna- 
tional meeting is scheduled to take place later 
this year to discuss ways of implementing his 
proposal. [| 
  
Noemi a ee 
The Courier iri 
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Office: 
Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. 
Subscription rates 
1 year: 90 French francs. 
Binder for a year’s issues: 62 FF 
The Unesco Courier is published monthly. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted 
may be reprinted providing the credit line reads 
“Reprinted from the Unesco Courier”, plus date of 
issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the 
editor. Signed articles reprinted must bear author’s 
name. Non-copyright photos will be supplied on 
request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be 
returned unless accompanied by an international 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles 
express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of Unesco or 
* those of the editors of the Unesco Courier, Photo 
captions and headlines are written by the Unesco 
Courier staff. The boundaries on maps published in 
the magazine do not imply official endorsement or 
acceptance by Unesco or the United Nations. The 
Unesco Courier is produced in microform 
(microfilm and/or microfiche) by: (1) Unesco, 7   
Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris; (2) University 
Microfilms (Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, 
U.S.A.; (3) N.C.R. Microcard Edition, Indian 
Head, Inc., 111 West 40th Street, New York, 
U.S. A.; (4) Bell and Howell Co., Old Mansfield 
Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
Editorial staff (Paris) 
Assistant Editor-in-chief: Olga Rodel 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
Editors: 
English: Roy Malkin 
Caroline Lawrence 
French: Alain Lévéque 
Neda el Khazen 
Spanish: Francisco Fernandez-Santos 
Russian: Nikolai Kuznetsov 
Arabic: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoudi 
Braille: 
Research: Violette Ringelstein 
INustrations: Ariane Bailey 
Layout and Design: Georges Servat, George Ducret 
Promotion: Fernando Ainsa 
Sales and subscriptions: Henry Knobil 
Special projects: Peggy Julien 
All correspondence should be addressed to 
the Editor-in-chief in Paris 
Non-Headquarters editions 
German: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Japanese: Seiichiro Kojima (Tokyo) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Ram Babu Sharma (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew: Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian: H. Sadough Vanini (Teheran) 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra Ilgazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Paik Syeung-Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwah (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene: 
Bozidar Perkovie (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: 8.J. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Lina Svenzén (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larrafiaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Dao Tung (Hanoi)   
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) - Dépétlégal : C1 - Mai 1987 
PHOTOCOMPOSITION : Ateliers de I'Unesco - PHOTOGRAVURE-IMPRESSION : MAURY-IMPRIMEUR S.A, Z.I. route d'Etampes, 45330 MALESHERBES.

## [Page 35](073178engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Ne, 
[11H 
  
        
“For people who care about 
the rest of the world ... 
¢ A monthly magazine, each 
issue usually devoted to asingle 
theme 
¢ Stimulating and informative 
coverage from a wide range of 
viewpoints 
¢ A window open on the world 
¢ A meeting-place for different 
outlooks and cultures 
® A valuable source of ideas and 
information on current issues 
such as development, new 
technologies, human rights and 
the rights of peoples, and the 
cultural heritage 
e A powerful instrument in the 
service of international solidarity 
and understanding 
The only magazine in the world 
a id Lid 
Rio 
The Courier BIL: 
 
The Courier 
Forthcoming issues include: 
The world of medicine 
The baroque 
Underwater archaeology 
Japan 
Join or ask 
your friends to 
join our international 
family of more 
than 3 million readers 
around the world. 
Annual subscription 
12 issues: 90 French francs 
published in 33 languages, with 4 (free) language editions in Braille. 
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco periodicals 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National Distributor in your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors in countries not listed, along with subscription rates 
AUSTRALIA. Hunter Publications, 58a Gipps St., Collingwood, Victoria 3066; 
Publications: Educational Supplies Pty, Ltd., P.O, Box 33, Brookvale 2100, 
NSW; Periodicals: Dominie Pty. Subscriptions Dept., P.O, Box 33, Brookvale 
2100, NSW. Sub-agent: United Nations Association of Australia, Viclonan 
Division, 328 Flinders Street, Melbourne 3000. AUSTRIA. Buchhandlung 
Gerold and Co., Graben 31, A-1011, Vienna. BAHRAIN. United Schools 
International, Arab Regional Office, P.O, Box 726, Bahran. BARBADOS, 
University of the West Indies Bookshop, Cave Hill Campus, P.O. Box 64, 
Bridgetown. BELGIUM. “Unesce Couner” Dulch edition only! Internationale 
Drukkeri en Uitgeverij Keesing, Keesinglaan 2-20, 2100 Deurne-Antwerpen. 
CCP 000-0012775-68, French edition and general Unesco publications agent: 
Jean de Lannoy, 202 Ave. du Roi, 1060 Brussels, CCP 000-0070823-13. 
BRAZIL Publicagoes Tecricas Internacionais Lida, Processing Dept. R 
Peixoto Gomide 209, 01409, Sao Paulo SP. CANADA. Renouf Publishing Co. 
Lid., 1294 Algoma Road, Ottawa, Ontario K1B 3W8. STORES: 61 Sparks 
Street, Ottawa, 211 Yonge St., Toronto. SALES OFFICE: 7575 Trans Canada 
Hwy. Ste. 305, St. Laurent, Quebec H4T 1V6. CHINA. China National Publica- 
tions Import and Export Corporation, P.O. Box 88, Beijing. 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA, S.N,T.L., Spalena 51-113 02, Prague 1; Ve Smeckach 
30, P.O.B. 790-111-27 Prague 1 (Permanent display); Zahranicni literatura, 11 
Soukenicka, Prague 1. For Slovakia only: Alfa Verlag -Publishers, Hurbanovo 
nam. 6,893 31 Bratslava-CSSR. DENMARK. Munksgaard Export-OG, Tids- 
sknftservice, 35 Norre Sogade, DK-1970 Kobenhavn K. EGYPT (ARAB 
REPUBLIC OF), National Centre for Unesco Publications, No. 1 Talaat Harb 
St, Cairo. FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, P. O. Box 128, SF-00100 
Helsinki. Suomalainen Kinakauppa Oy, P.O. Box 2, 01641 Vantas 64. Rauti- 
karja Oy, Subscription Department, P.O. Box 1, 01641 Vantas 64. FRANCE. 
Libraine de I'Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris, CCP 12598-48. 
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Buchhaus Leipzig, Postfach 140, 710 
Leipzig, or from Irternationalen Buchhandiungen m the G.D.R. FED. REP. OF 
GERMANY. For the Unesco Courier; Mr. H. Baum, Deutscher Unesco-Kurier 
Vertrieb, Basaltstrasse 57, D5300 Bonn 3. GHANA. Fides Entreprises, P.O. 
Box 14128, Accra. GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. GREEGE John 
Mihalopoulos & Son SA, International Booksellers, P.Q. Box 10073, 541 10 
Thessaloniki. G C Eleftheroudakis SA, International Bookstora, 4 Nikis Street, 
Athens T 126. Kostarakis Brothers, International Booksellers, 2 Hippocratous 
Street, Athens. HONG KONG. Swindon Book Co., 13-15, Lock Rd., Kowloon, 
in local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
Hong Kong Govt Inlormation Services, Publication Centre, Baskerville 
House, 22 Ice 5t. HUNGARY. Kultura-Bushimport-ABT, P.O.B. 149-H-1388, 
Budapest 62. ICELAND. Snaebjorn Jonsson and Co., H.F. Hafnarstraeti 9, 
Reykjavik. INDIA, Orient Longman Lid., Kamani Marg, Ballard Estate, Bom- 
bay 400038; 17 Chitaranjan Ave., Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, 
Madras 2; 5-9-41/1 Bashir Bagh, Hyderabad 500001 {AP); 80/1 Mahatma 
Gandhi Rd., Bangalore 560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda, Hyderabad-500001. 
Sub-depots: Oxford Book and Stationery Co., 17 Park St., Calcutta 70016; 
Scindia House. New Delhi. INDONESIA. Indira P.T.. JI Dr. Sam Ratulangie 37, 
Jakarta Pusat. IRAN. Iranian National Commission for Unesco, 1188 Englab 
Ave., Rostam Give Building, Zip Code 13158, P.O. Box 11365-4498, Teheran. 
IRELAND, The Educational Company of Ireland Lid., Ballymount Rd., Walkin- 
stown, Dublin 12. ISRAEL. Literary Transactions, inc., c/o Steimatzky Lid., 
P.O. Box 628, Tel Aviv 6t006A.B.C. Bookstore Lid., P.O. Box 1283, 71 
Allenby Rd., Tel Aviv 61000. ITALY. Licosa (Libreria Commissionaria Sanso- 
ni, $.p.A.), Via Lamarmora 45, Casella Postale 552, 50121 Florence. JAPAN. 
Eastern Book Service Inc, 37-3 Hongo 3-chome Bunkye-ku, Tokyo 113. 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, 
Seoul. KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., Lid, POB 2942, Kuwait; for the 
Unesco Courier: Farafalla Press Agency, P.O. Box SAFA 4541, Kuwait. 
LUXEMBOURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grande-Rue, Luxembourg. 
MALAYSIA. University of Malaya Co-operative Bookshop, Kuala Lumpur 
22.11. MALTA. Sapienzas, 26 Republic St, Valletta. MAURITIUS. Nalanda 
Company Ltd., 30 Bourbon St., Port-Louis. MEXICO. Libreria El Correo de la 
Unesco, Actipan 66, Colonia de! Valle, Mexico 12, DF. MONACO. British 
Library, 30 Bd. des Moulins, Monte Carlo. NEPAL. Sajha Prakashan Pol- 
chowk, Kathmandu. NETHERLANDS. Faxon Europe, P.O. Box 197, 1000 AD 
Amsterdam. NEW ZEALAND. Government Publishing, P.O. Box 14277- 
Kilbirnie, Wellington; 130 Oxford Terrace, P.Q. Box 1721, Christchurch; Alma 
St., P.O. Box 857, Hamilton; Princes St., P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin. NIGERIA, 
The University Bookshop of ite; The University Bookshop of Ibadan, P.O: 286. 
NOAWAY. Johan Grundt Tanum, P.0.B. 1177 Sertrum - Osle 1; Narvesen 
A/S, Litteraturt Jenesten, P.O.B. 6125 Etterstad, N 0602 Oslo 6; Universitets 
Bokhandelen, Universitetssentret, Postboks 307 Binder, Oslo 3. 
PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quard-i-azam, P.O. Box No. 
729, Lahore 3; Unesco Publications Centre, Regional Oftice for Book De- 
velopment in Asia and the Pacific, 39 Delhi Housing Society, P.O. Box 8950, 
Karachi 29. POLAND. Orpan-import, Palac Kultury | Nauki, Warsaw, Ars 
Polona-Ruch, Krakowskie Przedmiescie No.7. 00-068 Warsaw. PORTUGAL. 
Dias & Andrade Lida. Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. SAUDI 
ARABIA. Dar al Watan, Olaya Main Street, Ibrahim Bin Sulaym Building, 
Riyadh. SINGAPORE, Federal Publications (S) Pte Ltd. Times Jurong, 2 
Jurong Port Rd., Singapore 2261. SOUTH AFRICA. American & Overseas 
Publications (Pty) Ltd., Subscription Service, P.O. Box 42476, Johannesburg. 
Universitas Books (Pty) Lid., P.O. Box 775, Pretoria 0001. Van Schaik’'s 
Bookstore {Pty) Lid., Libr Building, 268 Church Street, Pretoria 0001. Central 
News Agency Lid.. Group Overseas Periodical Div. P.O. Box 613, Cape Town 
8000. SRI LANKA. Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chittampalam Gardiner 
Mawata, P.0.B. 244, Colombo 2. SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 
1118, Khartoun, SURINAME. Suriname National Commission for Unesco, 
P.Q. Box 2943, Paramaribo. SWEDEN. For the Unesco Courier: Svenska FN 
Forbundet, Skolgrand 2, Box 150 50 $-104, 65 Stockholm; Wennergren- 
Williams AB, Nordenflychtsvagen 70, S-104, 25 Stockholm; Esselte Tidskrift- 
scentralen, Gamla Brogatan 26, Box 62-101, 20 Stockholm. SWITZERLAND. 
Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zlrich; Librairie Payot, Rue Grenus 8, 1211, 
Geneva 11, C.C.P. 12-236; Librairnes Payot alse in Lausanne, Basle, Berna, 
Vevey, Montreux, Neuchatel and Zurich. SYRIA. Aleppo University Books 
Establishment, University of Aleppo, Aleppo. TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.Q.B. 8030, Dar-es-Salaam. THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Ltd., 
40-42 Charoen Krung Road, Siyaeg Phaya Sr, P.O. Box 402, Bangkok: 
Suksapan Pant, Mansion 9, Rajdamnemn Ave., Bangkok. TRINIDAD AND 
TOBAGO. National Commission for Unesco, 18 Alexandra St, St. Clair, 
Trinidad W 1. TURKEY. Haset Kitapevi A.S., Istiklal Caddesi, No 469, Posta 
Kutusu 219, Beyoglu, Istanbul. UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, 
Agency Section Publications CTR, Periodicals Section-Room 008, Nine Elms 
Lane, London SW8 5DR, and H.M.S.0. Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, 
Belfast, Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol; for scientific maps only: McCarta 
Ltd., 122 King's Cross Rd., London WC1X SDS. UNITED STATES. Bernan- 
UNIPUB, Periodicals Department, 4611-F Assembly Drive, Lanham, MD 
20706 4391. USSR. v/O Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga, UI. Dimitrova 39, Moskva 
113095. YUGOSLAVIA, Mladost, Ica 30/11, Zagreb; Cankarjeva Zalozba, 
Zopitaneva 2, Lubljana; Nolit, Terazije 27/11, Belgrade. ZAMBIA. National 
Educational Distribution Co. of Zambia Ltd., P.O. Box 2664, Lusaka. 
ZIMBABWE. Texibook Sales (PVT) Ltd., 1 Norwich Union Centre, Harare. 

## [Page 36](073178engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
The false banana tree 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
An
na
 
Fe
rr
ol
us
si
, 
R
o
m
e
 
The ensete (Ensete ventricosum), or “false banana tree” grows abundantly in 
Ethiopia's Sidamo region. Paste made from a pulp extracted from the tree and 
then fermented is shaped into small cakes which are cooked on metal or 
earthenware hotplates and eaten with butter or vegetables. Although this tradi- 
tional food is eaten at almost every meal (each person consumes an average of 
500 grams per day), studies carried out by Italy's National Institute of Nutrition 
(Rome) have shown that its nutritive value is very.low. Ensete consists largely of 
carbohydrates and is almost totally lacking in proteins and fats. Photo shows a 
villager preparing ensete paste according to the time-honoured method. 
E
N
T
E
.