# [083206](083206engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](083206engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

m@ | he Courier 
MAY 1589 - 9 French francs 
  
MODERN MANUSCRIPTS 
a tragile heritage 
Catalonia: a thousand years of art and culture

## [Page 2](083206engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 3](083206engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

May 1989 
4 
The written word... 
. by Léopold Sédar Senghor 
Th
is
 
is
su
e 
co
mp
ri
se
s 
36
 
pa
ge
s 
an
d 
a 
4-
pa
ge
 
ad
ve
rt
is
in
g 
in
se
rt
 
be
tw
ee
n 
pa
ge
s 
2-
3 
an
d 
34
-3
5.
 
5 
...a fragile heritage 
by Juan Carlos Langlois 
6 
Libraries to the rescue 
by Georges Cartier 
9 
Microwaves that save manuscripts 
by Denis Sergent 
10 
France's Bibliothéque Nationale 
A library in action 
by Florence Callu 
12 
From the world’s archives 
14 
The quest for authenticity 
by Giuseppe Tavani 
18 
The Archives Collection, 
a laboratory for the future 
by Amos Segala 
21 
Literary detection 
and Latin American writing 
by Fernando Ainsa 
24 
The birth of a language 
by Rubén Bareiro Saguier 
26 
A thousand years of Catalan history 
by Francesc Vallverdd 
29 
Romanesque treasures of Catalonia 
by Eduard Carbonell i Esteller 
32 
Gaudi and Dali, the art of excess 
by Daniel Giralt-Miracle 
ISSN 0041-5278 
No. 5-1989-OP1-89-1-468-A 
—_— 
The Courier 
A window open on the world 
Published monthly in 35 languages English 
French Spanish Russian German 
Arabic Japanese Italian Hindi 
Tamil Hebrew Persian Dutch 
Portuguese Turkish Urdu Catalan 
Malaysian Korean Swahili Croato- 
Serb Macedonian Serbo-Croat 
Slovene Chinese Bulgarian Greek 
Sinhala Finnish Swedish Basque 
Thai Vietnamese Pashto Hausa 
  
42nd year 
ed
it
or
ia
l 
If the architects of the Pyramids of Giza had bequeathed 
to us the sketches, rough drafts and plans which they 
made as their ideas were gradually transformed into 
stone, they would perbaps have provided us with keys for 
understanding the innermost workings of Egyptian 
society five thousand years ago. 
But these precious records have disappeared, like the 
early drafts of many writers and composers, and the 
preliminary sketches of many painters and sculptors, 
effacing all trace of the doubts, besitations, and tensions 
which can help us to feel the pulse of life at a given time 
and place. 
Even when such traces have survived, they have 
often been inaccessible, neglected, or misinterpreted. 
Today, however, they are increasingly prized as precious 
evidence by scholars who are following in the creative 
footsteps of modern writers and retracing the 
development of works of literature from the author’s 
initial idea to the completion of the published text and 
its reception by critics. This return to the original 
sources coupled with a determination to preserve the 
fragile heritage of modern manuscripts bas given rise to 
a new branch of study called manuscriptology. 
The purpose of manuscriptology, which might be 
described as textual archaeology, is to establish fully 
authentic texts of works of literature and to respect the 
intentions of their authors and the cultural memory of 
the group to which they belong. The publication of 
rigorously documented critical editions is the 
culmination of this process. One recent initiative in this 
field is an international co-publication project, described 
in this issue by Amos Segala, which bas led to the 
creation of the “Archives Collection”, a series of critical 
editions of literary works by 20th-century Latin 
American, Caribbean and eventually African writers. 
It is sometimes said that such research is an 
encroachment on authors’ privacy and that the act of 
creation should be inviolable. However, this issue of the 
Unesco Courier is not so much a contribution to the 
lively debate that has arisen around this question as an 
attempt to show how modern scholarship and technology 
are using original manuscripts to throw light on the 
complex gestation of works of modern literature. 
Cover: La muse et le poéte (1909), by the French painter Henri “Le 
Douanier” Rousseau (1844-1910), depicts the poet Guillaume Apollinaire 
with his “muse”, Marie Laurencin. 
  
Part of a human column or castell (castle), folk tradition 
« of Mediterranean origin which persists at festivals and ceremonial 
occasions in Catalonia today.

## [Page 4](083206engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 83186: The Written word...

  
THE WRITTEN WORD... 
BY LEOPOLD SEDAR SENGHOKR 
HE fire which destroyed the 
Library of Alexandria is often 
cited as one of the natural catas- 
trophes which have afflicted humanity. 
Many other fires have impoverished for 
all time the memory of mankind. They 
are mentioned less often, but we who 
have suffered their effects at first hand 
know that these irreparable losses have 
been instrumental in permanently distort- 
ing the contribution of our peoples to 
universal civilization. : 
Today our identity and our heritage 
are faced with the threat of a form of des- 
truction which may be less spectacular 
but is quite as pernicious and is taking 
place more insidiously. So insidiously, in 
fact, that the international cultural com- 
munity does not yet seem fully aware of 
it and ready to take action. This form of 
destruction, which is jeopardizing the 
safeguard of the written heritage of the 
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, today 
not only concerns the developing coun- 
tries; it has become a serious and urgent 
global problem. The fragility of the 
material on which manuscripts are writ- 
ten, the inadequacy of the resources allo- 
cated to national libraries, legal loopholes 
and the lack of facilities for training 
specialists, are all misfortunes which are 
shared, albeit unequally, by all countries 
and institutions. oo 
It is to the credit of 2 non- 
governmental organization entitled ““As- 
sociation Archives de la Littérature 
Latino-Américaine, des Caraibes et Afri- 
caine du XX¢ Siecle” (ALLCA, the La- 
tin American, Caribbean and African 
20th-century Literary Archives Associa- 
tion), of which I was president for ten 
years, that it has tried to make Unesco 
member states aware of the need for con- 
certed action in this field, on a par with 
the measures they have already taken to 
save other aspects of the cultural heritage 
of humanity such as monuments, mov- 
ing images and oral traditions. Initially 
such measures should be taken by in- 
dividual countries, but they cannot be 
limited to the national level. 
To preserve the testimony of creative 
thinkers and to render their manuscripts 
accessible to international research is an act 
of profound civic importance whereby we 
affirm our identity and maintain the life 
and continuity of our cultural heritage. The 
  
 
  
   
 
cultural heritage is not a dusty monument, 
a souvenir of the past restricted to a scho- 
larly élite, but the focus of a form of 
“ancestor-worship” which vitalizes and 
enriches later generations. u 
LEOPOLD SEDAR SENGHOR, Senegalese 
statesman and writer, was president of the Repub- 
lic of Senegal from 1960 to 1981. The author of 
many poems, essays and other literary works, he 
has been 2 member of the Académie Frangaise since 
1983. As former president of the **Association Ar- 
chives de la Littérature Latino-Américaine, des 
Caraibes et Africaine du XX- Siecle” (ALLCA), he 
has a special interest in the safeguard and study of 
contemporary manuscripts.

## [Page 5](083206engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 83187: A Fragile heritage

...A FRAGILE HERITAGE 
  
  
  
      
  
A 
bod Jif IP 
—— - : 
} 7 - 
= —" nn LT i Had LT 
iE - 
Lh hed 
53 = - or 
- 
> 
      
  
Above, the old wing of the Ambrosian 
Library in Milan (Italy). It was destroyed by 
bombing in 1943, together with 50,000 books. 
BY JUAN CARLOS LANGLOIS 
NPARALLELED “producers” 
and ‘“‘consumers” of manu- 
scripts, the nineteenth and twen- 
tieth centuries witnessed an explosion in 
writing and literary creation. 
The mass of notebooks, jottings, 
sketches and musical scores that their cre- 
ators have bequeathed to us are a heritage 
of extraordinary diversity. They testify 
to an age of intense intellectual activity 
and creative expression which shaped the 
modern outlook and will leave a mark on 
the people of the twenty-first century and 
beyond. 
Systematic study of original manu- 
scripts has enriched our understanding of 
contemporary literature. It enables 
specialists to trace the creative process 
by making a kind of X-ray of an author’s 
activity. 
Unfortunately there is a risk that 
most of these documents may have less 
chance of survival than older manu- 
scripts. They are endangered on many 
counts. To take one example, since the 
middle of the last century wood pulp has 
been the main material used in the 
manufacture of paper. The end product 
yellows, becomes brittle and deteriorates, 
and the life of contemporary manuscripts 
is today reckoned at between thirty and 
fifty years. The use of carbon paper and 
photosensitive material makes preserva- 
tion even more difficult. 
Some inks contain acid products 
which attack paper; others are too solu- 
ble and are diluted by humidity. New 
types of pens and pencils are inimical to 
certain preservation techniques. 
The effects of air pollution in the big 
cities where museums, libraries and 
archives are concentrated, compound the 
traditional threats caused by inappropri- 
ate lighting, damp and adverse tempera- 
ture conditions. With the growth of Literary 
and historical research, manuscripts are 
more widely consulted. This poses an 
additional preservation problem. 
Several international meetings have 
been held to examine this problem, 
notably a symposium on the safeguard of 
the written heritage of the twentieth 
century organized at Unesco’s request by 
a non-governmental organization, 
ALLCA, which was held in Paris in Sep- 
tember 1987 and attended by specialists 
from twenty-one countries. These meet- 
ings have concluded that this priceless 
heritage is threatened all over the world 
and have recommended that urgent meas- 
ures be taken. 
It has emerged from these meetings 
that the systematic drawing up of inven- 
tories is one preliminary step to action 
at national or international level. Such in- 
ventories would make it possible to iden- 
tify and locate manuscripts whose 
safeguard should be given high priority. 
An assessment should be made of their 
state of preservation and of the measures 
most needed to protect them. At the same 
time, the specialized facilities available 
should be listed. 
Such initiatives should bring home to 
the international community that its ac- 
tive co-operation in this field is needed 
before the end of the century. Various 
forms of action could be envisaged, such 
as the launching of safeguard campaigns, 
the exchange of information, the 
strengthening of infrastructures at nation- 
al and international level, the standardi- 
zation of cataloguing methods, the use of 
micro-reproduction techniques and the 
establishment of an international system 
of exchange of reproductions thus 
produced. 
No specific international resolution 
has so far been adopted for the preserva- 
tion of contemporary manuscripts, and 
experts have concluded that suitable in- 
struments for their protection must be 
drawn up as soon as possible. 
Thus the preservation of contemporary 
manuscripts can become an important field 
of international cultural co-operation. It 
would be paradoxical if our generation 
cannot protect a precious heritage which is 
common to all cultures and is the basis of 
the historical memory. n 
 
JUAN CARLOS LANGLOIS, Argentine artist, 
was for several years director of Unesco’s Interna- 
tional Fund for the Promotion of Culture. He is 
currently serving on the editorial committee of the 
Archives Collection.

## [Page 6](083206engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

ANUSCRIPTS are unique and 
fragile things, which are sul far 
from being protected as part of 
the national heritage, despite the fact that 
they are the focus of widespread interest. 
Although their importance may be ac- 
knowledged, the resources allocated to 
safeguard them are in many cases slender. 
And yet collections of manuscripts are 
surely just as much a part of any nation- 
al heritage as the monuments which states 
pay large sums of money to preserve, as 
the works of art amassed by museums, 
and the areas of outstanding natural beau- 
ty which are protected by their status as 
national parks. 
  
Seeing the creative impulse 
at work 
The literary, scientific, social or po- ge | 
litical history of a people can only be 
written objectively if it is based on the 
original sources, and those sources are 
manuscripts or archival documents. In- 
deed, one meaning of the word “source” 
is precisely that of “original document”. 
Manuscripts are the lifeblood of history. 
In them it is possible to trace the develop- 
ment of writers and their work, the lives 
of statesmen, the manifold activities of 


### 83188: Libraries to the rescue

peoples. Their value is impossible to cal- 
culate, and even if it is perceived as rela- 
tively slight in the world context, within 
each culture and each country it is 
absolute. 
National libraries have long under- 
stood the importance of this heritage, es- 
pecially since manuscripts constitute 
natural additions to their holdings and 
form part of their mission to acquire, 
preserve and provide access to printed 
works. Although not all national libraries 
possess 2 manuscripts department as such, 
most wish to acquire private archives and 
to safeguard them as far as their means 
permit. 
Such collections enable those engaged 
in literary research to consult in one place 
the documentation on a writer, ranging 
from drafts and manuscripts to printed 
editions of his or her work, as well as 
reviews in newspapers and magazines, ra- 
6 ___ 
LIBRARIES TO 
    
   
      
     
  
i 
risa es I oA Ny TONER REY Vigra 
EET ove RA UH Hin od Jy 
net KA34 yma Wx Ka UR PIAS 49K 
ARIA Kp zp re ina wm by 
ie Mies n Dag BI 0k 3S J 
fd Dao WE TITAN LE 0) Torey 
a ? VCASH An Lg RK 
Po ot EP AN frm Sarwan woh may 
ieee, Kian esta Yvon Aras] x NC 
om od Jem "wie wer yy KU Spymx hy 
: fo 1 2% 
 
way ao 
£2 HE AUTRE dx white TRO 1 Naa xy 
Ya Cru OY ay TAU SE Tae n KY 
Hin Prom TUES Wa rh grin mu Aus 
rs ie. mye. Rt 2 dn WI APY FGA Tok spa A 
boo Po SE i) 1s. PR Sogn 
LER | 3 wn 
» ~ 
5 
Y 
| 
“
 = 
—
 
» 
- 
*A
 
—
 
; 
JA age f, : 
= 
Below, manuscript conservation room at the 
National Library of Quebec 
 
- Pow Eat fa) Eman fines 
wo sd wd ry a) MyK - 
3 ka Fa TRIN SE alr DVB AAS RN, 
we hyn im wap HSN By os Ide 
 
adm as hy Yan KO) Kar ann Tr hs 
ray von Won 1 wt 4s ye Sees sms ane svt 
PN) pi wn A TOs §= NRINTY rir maw Ns 49 Wa 
THK vy ona. THAT DSA 05 pay x Sans Lach we) 
YN x AVIS DSA rasa TO Nay LW y yor 
PAK Try XP i plea lo - Ea FP "LE aha xb ga 
SI FBUKAIRY PVA TVET HY SUN ANA KTM 0 a 
Kh ava a oy a Eo A WIS IXY MNY iy vd 
v | Tr up Ae vn bags ens 
® humm wx fa wie de grid ARPS PRIVR HA VIR yy 
) rio pis mi SY dd wn JURY ARTY pr LAX 
FANS) WRI a) A apa) KY Axe Ruy i ax) 
IA yx you Tob mgs TINY Aonn, #51 Ket Way 
ERIN IA HY IVE TAILS TRA ryan or ATES 130, war 
ARDEA G8 ANI 0 To Nord, Kray TASS win 
TLS IIA YOKE AME Poi wm Yah 
Ty LTT TRIK VIX, rem x BION To 8, wor 
APA TOM SN INONY ines daria say Ages v 
Yona maw} dims A srbgnushy! rs wy be 
“IVD | RY Yak omy 31 vamos AUN ae 
w 3A THK ps wk AK x yoyo wry 
HB KX HX TORY A RY AX A Wim {wy 
ty 
wr UYImt yong KYHTUN 4175 TUR WO) A oh 
y roy 
TIAN sw hon aly osx VR TOU AL HWA USK 
TARYN KY ry Ww h TT  ITUAL IN Ny, by tran 
hod tl ™F {3 SORA AY 3D? \ f 
aL 4 {quis 
ede 
This late 2nd-century manuscript of the Book 
of Isaiah (detail above) is one of the famous 
Dead Sea Scrolls. With several other 
remarkable biblical manuscripts, it was 
dio and television interviews, records, let- 
ters, notes of all kinds—in order to follow 
the evolution of 2 work or its creator, and 
to see the creative impulse at work. These 
primary sources are particularly in- 
dispensable because only they are entire- 
ly reliable, since secondary sources are 
too often marred by errors which are 
then repeated and multiplied from one 
edition to the next. The French political 
philosopher Montesquieu wrote in his 
Lettres persanes (Persian Letters, 1722) : “1 
have a little room full of very precious 
and very dear manuscripts; although I 
ruin my eyesight reading them, I much 
prefer to use these rather than printed 
works, which are less reliable...”. Final- 
ly, the existence of complete collections 
of manuscripts makes possible the prepa- 
ration of critical editions and the discov- 
ery of unpublished material. 
 

## [Page 7](083206engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

THE RESCUE 
  
If # 
b 
\ 
( wl 
DAL of ANY KA FUDD 
spe K ty iphone FS SA NV a 
we Sed wal al and PAT WUE RT 
sti 1A by 3 aA San weak Te Au Tym 
ara a ep Ay wy , Tr me wd a ais var vy SR eon pane Savy Yr PREA WN wor baa 
[NOY Aw A WRB BATE ys Wry TE rs wage 133 sod w 1 wry rm wow oy 
wn arb: Tr PRN Sy , FEMI II 32 V3 —- by yom ies mm 
Be L 
Aan rvs Vm Eyre baci: audi Boplhise’ A I SO TAK DRY re 
yor Sam stan "A Wyasy y ‘ars 3 p ] 
PRR IE OF AC Mg Cy ye 
WR ry THO AS yy fs _ 
  
wry branes monte ova may dryoed wb wg yon rhs EE reac dhe Hil 
AYN pA Haran vv asrpvy by q boichd LLL OY) MgB A MY HAITI RR CO Ww 
nen rea 1 hve Sony THY TIAA art Areal 408 JUIN TUE STN YEN IV IAR TIN Wan TE 
: “ww! ys pe SW ger AC TTR UY ea BAK AO KY WH 
TUE TOR YE A Straw errs shaw Som vr aw 
[Any aud pedi rwbtygors: A (ae nv Arce 
Fd aiid a mri gh nnd san SAT ALSS TIME PW TO pu parc) she, aml 
FRY MATEO KH As ay Tn 7 oh) wiv a gv eo mw 
FAM esd wn a ww PE Su WATE AION HIPS I By EPIC IAM PA AN TT 
| BAY ARYOAIW PO .. VEAAYy AAW THAD ») vo By A) set RY: 
AVIA AI TY, yy AAD $00 3 HOR RBA YO Ths KOT OY A ATTA NAT Yo _— 
ri Y 5 Hs SAI ARDY SOU TEN TITY (A UATE Dre Aa 7 MY PHY SA UY 
“AN Rr I anwn prem Bowsz wry, VO JIVE TAA AA TYAS TOV RAT HD pod vows miyva VE 
TW AIRC PTR wy pene Wha WA HN PAE TURE WI as TOW PAX Te 
wash “34 inl THI AY Rr Wien wt a yy ot os enn UR 
SVR TD 
Hy GAN ATI rw ys ww proamher, LAI WK AKIN Ir ZI J A TT DRY | 
AYR II AH aT JNA ITI meson er enn vas oh he 
Po I — yam Yn WARY ANS AU we 
Yo wp ey sh Riv Kh PU YR wun 
MALS ARN Hy any ba 
YAR Hae TON a WA IK ATS AIM XY Towvnl Pa 
wane, 
xyes maby ALN AUT AIX om. tp thr rd - my 
J—— a “ww rigs Mrawe (Hey 
a a AFR PT avy my 
discovered near the Dead Sea in 1947 at 
Qumran, on the site of a monastery destroyed 
by the Romans at the dawn of the 
Christian era. 
  
The role of national libraries 
The importance of public archives 
has long been widely taken for granted. 
If we accept that private archives are 
equally deserving of preservation, then a 
fundamental question arises: who should 
be responsible for preserving them? So 
far, few countries have come up with a 
very satisfactory solution to this problem, 
as indicated by the number of manuscript 
collections that are still dispersed. Regret- 
tably, conflicts even arise between nation- 
al archives and national libraries, 
university libraries and public libraries, 
and the private libraries of foundations 
and associations. 
BY GEORGES CARTIER 
Faced with such confusion, a second 


### 83188: Libraries to the rescue

question springs to mind: what role can 
and should be played by national 
libraries? From the legislation which 
created them and from the nature of their 
mission, it is clear that these institutions 
enjoy a stability and permanence that, 
theoretically, guarantee the sound 
management of the heritage of printed 
works entrusted to them. However, na- 
tional libraries, like other institutions, are 
at the mercy of the fluctuations of the 
economy. But conservation remains their 
primary purpose and is generally en- 
shrined in the legal provisions of their 
mandate. This is why budget cuts or staff 
reductions have less impact on conserva- 
tion policies than on other library 
activities. 
The task of conservation necessarily 
leads national libraries to hire highly 
qualified staff and acquire highly special- 
ized equipment to ensure that their col- 
lections will withstand the ravages of 
time. Their activities include rigorous 
control of atmospheric conditions, the 
deacidification of books and documents 
and of their containers, the reproduction 
in facsimile or on microfilm or 
microfiche of those which are at most 
risk of deteriorating, and the elimination 
of external threats. 
Below, machines for consulting microfilm in the reading room of Brazil's National Library in Rio 
de Janeiro 

## [Page 8](083206engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

As well as taking these costly and es- 
sential measures, national libraries must 
acquire manuscripts to complement their 
collections of printed works. It is small 
wonder, therefore, that they have always 
taken a keen interest in the development 
of manuscript collections, even setting up 
special departments for the purpose. This 
trend was, and still is, part of the logical 
evolution of their responsibilities, a path 
from which they cannot stray without 
detrimental consequences both at the na- 
tional level and worldwide. 
“This does not necessarily mean cen- 
tralization at all costs. Modern technolo- 
gy provides long distance and virtually 
instantaneous access to the reproduction 
of a document and to information relat- 
ing to it. Data banks that can be consult- 
ed at any time have become part of daily 
life, as has the transmission of images or 
texts. This new technology should allow 
national libraries to accept an even greater 
measure of responsibility for 
manuscripts, since their primary aim is 
to encourage consultation and even co- 
ordination among depositories of private 
archives. They should act as advisers to 
other libraries and provide technical and 
financial support where necessary, so that 
the national collection of manuscripts, 
even if dispersed around a country, may 
be preserved in the best possible condi- 
tions, and be well catalogued and univer- 
sally accessible. 
Through their direct or indirect con- 
nections with the government, to which 
they are largely accountable, national 


### 83188: Libraries to the rescue

libraries should also try to make the 
authorities aware of the value of the writ- 
ten heritage, and induce them to adopt 
appropriate legislation and regulations. 
Much still remains to be done in this 
direction, if only in the form of tax con- 
cessions granted by several countries to 
donors, legatees or even sellers of 
manuscripts. 
  
A universal heritage 
Bodies such as the International Fed- 
eration of Library Associations and Insti- 
tutions (IFLA) cannot, for their part, 
abdicate responsibility for national collec- 
tions of manuscripts, which are all too 
often threatened. Like areas of outstand- 
g§ 
ing natural beauty, these collections 
represent riches that all humanity has a 
duty to preserve; together, they consti- 
tute a world heritage on whose behalf 
Unesco and its member states should 
adopt the measures that are urgently 
needed. 
Manuscripts should be recognized 
forthwith as part of our universal 
heritage, and countries should sign a 
declaration undertaking to provide the 
legislative, financial, human and techni- 
cal support necessary for their preserva- 
tion. Each national library should 
establish its priorities and defend them in 
its relations with governments and inter- 
national organizations. LJ 
 
GEORGES CARTIER, of Canada, is director- 
general of the National Library of Quebec and a 
former director of arts and letters in the Ministry 
of Cultural Affairs. He is the author of a number 
of essays and a novel entitled Notre-Dame du col- 
portage (1987). 
Poster created for Unesco’s International Fund for the Promotion of Culture as part of the 
campaign to revive the ancient Library of Alexandria 
  

## [Page 9](083206engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 83190: Microwaves that save manuscripts

MICROWAVES THAT SAVE 
MANUSCRIPTS 
BY DENIS SERGENT 
EACIDIFICATION of manu- 
scripts, books and archival docu- 
ments is necessary today for two 
main reasons: the inferior quality of cer- 
tain types of modern cellulose-based 
papers (dating from the second half of the 
nineteenth century); and atmospheric 
pollution. Paper was formerly manufac- 
tured from textile fibres (linen, hemp or 
cotton) obtained from rags. Since 1850, 
cellulose fibres from broadleaf and 
coniferous trees have been used. The 
wood pulp is produced either by chemi- 
cal or mechanical methods. Chemical 
pulp is of good quality, but paper made 
from mechanical pulp acidifies, especial- 
ly when treated with sizing agents such 
as alum. This type of paper, used for 
newspapers or paperbacks, turns yellow, 
hardens, becomes brittle and finally 
disintegrates, a process that 1s aggravated 
by atmospheric pollution. 
A method of deacidifying paper, dis- 
covered by an American and tested in 
Canada, has been adapted and improved 
at the French research centre for the 
preservation of illustrated documents in 
Paris, resulting in the design of the first 
assembly-line deacidifying plant in 
Europe. In 1988 a prototype was installed 
in the French Bibliotheque Nationale’s 
preservation centre at Sablé-sur-Sarthe. 
The main advantages of this appara- 
tus are that whole books can be treated 
and it is no longer necessary to take a 
book apart and soak the pages one by one 
in the treatment solution. Several books 
or documents can be treated at a time (as 
many as 250 a day). 
The bound books are vacuum dried 
and heated, and the acid is then eliminat- 
ed by soaking them in a basic alcohol 
solution. Subjected to a pressure of 4 bars, 
this solution penetrates all the pages. 
In any attempt to preserve paper 1n- 
volving deacidification in an aqueous 
medium or strengthening by thermal 
sizing, or to restore flood-damaged paper, 
problems arise when it comes to the 
drying process. The paper is either dried 
in the open air on racks, or by means of 
traditional heating devices which are not 
really suitable (hot air blowers, heated 
plates or rollers, or infrared radiation). 
But these methods toughen the cellulose 
fibres and thus partially cancel out the 
effect of the previous treatment. 
Traditional heating devices work by 
conduction, convection or radiation. 
Water 1s evaporated by purely thermal 
effects which act indiscriminately on the 
water and on the paper. For rapid dry- 
ing (a few minutes), the wet paper has to 
be heated quite fiercely, and the thermal 
energy may alter the mechanical proper- 
ties of the paper or even burn it. 
The electrical energy of microwaves, 
on the other hand, acts selectively on the 
molecules of “free” water that have not 
seeped into the paper. It is thus possible 
to eliminate the water without unduly 
raising the average temperature of the 
paper and without extracting its constitu- 
tional water (sometimes known as residu- 
al moisture). There is then no danger of 
destroying a document through drier 
malfunction or operator error. 
By using microwaves it is possible to 
dry both old and modern paper while 
preserving its chemical and physical qual- 
ities, and in particular its mechanical 
resistance to stretching and tearing. The 
drying is homogeneous, so that no “hot 
spots” are created, and it takes place at 
a low temperature (30° C to 43° C). The 
drier can be adapted to the dimensions of 
the material to be treated. During treat- 
ment, paper flow can be regulated (from 
a few sheets to 10-20 sheets per minute), 
and the belt on which the paper is spread 
can be run with a backwards and for- 
  
    
‘ 3 
A= \ & ™ pare 
I £0 > p— 
REA ay aq 
Dias a = MN 
i/ 148 IMITATION 
\"' Parlez-nous vous-méme, el nous vous 
‘*" vons; mais que le Seigneur ne nous parls 
peur que nous ne mowrions, ( Exod, 2 
n'est pas la, Seigneur, ce n'est po 
ve; mais plutdt, je vous en conjure 
de désir, comme le prophéte Samu 
eigneur, parce que votre servitew 
1, 5,9. 
Paper made from some kinds of wood pulp is 
at risk from acidification, which causes it to 
turn yellow, become brittle and eventually 
disintegrate. 
wards motion or continuously in one 
direction. 
The prototype microwave drier has 
now moved into an industrial and com- 
mercial phase. Two were in operation by 
1987, one in the Bibliotheque Nationale’s 
preservation centre at Sablé-sur-Sarthe 
and the other in the laboratory for 
research on historic monuments at 
Champs-sur-Marne. In 1988, a third dri- 
er was installed in the restoration work- 
shop of the University of Tiibingen 
(Baden-Wiirtemberg, Federal Republic of 
Germany). [| 
 
DENIS SERGENT, of France, is a scientific jour- 
nalist in the Press Office of the National Centre for 
Scientific Research (CNRS), Paris. 
Paper deacidifying plant at the French Bibliotheque Nationale’s manuscript preservation centre at 
Sablé-sur-Sarthe. 
»      
    
 
1) Lk 
/ {| 
n 
  
 

## [Page 10](083206engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 83191: France's Bibliothèque nationale: a library in action

FRANCE’S BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE 
A LIBRARY IN ACTION 
ROM the time when Charles V, 
Fo of France from 1364-1380, as- 
sembled a thousand manuscripts in 
his library at the Louvre, French monarchs 
dreamed of building up an encyclopaedic 
library as witness to the culture of their 
times. Collectors of books and patrons of 
the arts have shared this concern and 
amassed treasures which, whether or not 
they ended up in the royal library, are part 
of the heritage of France. 
The descendant of the first royal 
library, the Bibliothéque Nationale in Paris 
has a prestigious collection of manuscripts 
which it is dedicated to enrich and preserve. 
  
Outstanding collections of 
modern manuscripts 
Through an active acquisitions policy, 
the Bibliothéque Nationale seeks to com- 
plete its existing holdings when the occa- 
sion arises, and to build up new collections 
through donations, purchases and gifts 
received in lieu of payments to the state. 
Gifts or bequests made by writers or 
their families, or by collectors, are a very 
important source of manuscript acquisi- 
tions. Exceptional bodies of work by 
nineteenth- and twentieth-century writers 
have been added to the collection in this 
way, including manuscripts by Victor 
Hugo, Flaubert, Zola, Apollinaire, Barres, 
Anna de Noailles, Romain Rolland, Roger 
Martin du Gard, Jules Romains and Miguel 
Angel Asturias. 
10 
  
— 
wepr log pala) ¢. 
————————— —— 
/ ify, 
| J ) ada ~ A ate - bh. . . a NA YW 
} Roane. ole sink In ia ’ J oo { | | 
1» Ou 2. 2 4 - hell nn Ba a fs Gp Lng 
\e} k(uti®g wyt Ud fn Cad 4 4 ine Ngan 
wb lh | ak A | aa nitty Naoto 
| a Monge’ Goud of wal de i lin 4. w fodased ven 
tof: tt ¢ ages ihe    
  
les Xf ZL GL 7 J 
- ” 5m PT Kat 2 i 
BY FLORENCE CALLU 
    
      
   
a 
  
- m4 
  
Page from Marcel Proust’s notebook with drafts of Sodome et Gomorrbe (1922), part of his novel A 
la recherche du temps perdu (Remembrance of Things Past). Proust rewrote passages on slips of 
paper and pasted them over earlier drafts. The layers of paper have been separated and stored in 
muslin envelopes at the Bibliothéque Nationale’s restoration workshop, so that the changing text 
can be studied from the first draft to the ultimate version. 
The main difficulty as far as purchases 
are concerned is that forward planning is 
rarely possible. In most cases documents 
suddenly appear on the market at an auc- 
tion. If the pre-sale estimated price of a 
manuscript is high, beyond the library’s or- 
dinary budget, there is little time to obtain 
extra funds. The Bibliothéque Nationale 
was very fortunate in 1988, when special 
funding from the Ministry of Culture and 
Communication made possible the acqui- 
sition of the precious manuscript of Mon 
coeur mis a nu by Baudelaire, Apollinaire’s 
poems Alcools, and a collection of poetry 
by Verlaine. 
The Bibliothéque Nationale has the 
right to pre-empt a document offered at 
public auction at the price paid for it by 
the highest bidder (without itself taking 
part in the bidding). Moreover, before a 
manuscript can be taken out of the coun- 
try an export licence must be applied for 
and submitted to the library for agreement. 
If the library is interested, it can order the 
work to be held by the customs and buy 
it at its declared price. A microfilm copy

## [Page 11](083206engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 83191: France's Bibliothèque nationale: a library in action

of the manuscript must be made in any 
case before it leaves the country. 
Among the great collections of con- 
temporary manuscripts bought since the 
1960s are the papers of Proust, Valéry, 
Claudel, Bernanos, Colette and Sartre. 
In 1968 a law concerning donations to 
the state in lieu of death duties provided 
an additional safeguard to the French liter- 
ary heritage. Under this law, the heirs to 
objets d’art may, after having them valued, 
take them before a legal commission which 
makes a ruling. Valuable additions to the 
Proust and Martin du Gard collections 
were acquired under this procedure. 
In the strict sense, conservation of col- 
lections consists in keeping them in good 
condition in surroundings where complete 
security and freedom from pollution are 
guaranteed. 
  
New techniques for 
conservation and safeguard 
Two basic problems arise in relation 
to the manuscripts themselves—their bind- 
ings and the surface on which they are 
written or printed. Damaged bindings are 
repaired by the Central Restoration Work- 
shop at the Bibliothéque Nationale. The 
most valuable are placed in ventilated can- 
vas boxes, thus avoiding contact with the 
shelves. Parchments, which are very resis- 
tant to wear, pose few problems, nor does 
paper manufactured before the mid 
nineteenth century. But paper made after 
that date is at risk from a process of acidifi- 
cation and requires the use of recently de- 
veloped techniques to halt the damage (see 
page 9). 
These preservation techniques are 
backed up by protective legislation passed 
by the French government in 1977. Provid- 
ing access to information is one of the vo- 
cations of the Bibliotheque Nationale, but 
a policy of accessibility to original 
manuscripts, which would be seriously 
damaged by too frequent handling, has to 
be reconciled with conservation policy. A 
special photographic workshop was opened 
in 1983 in the Department of Manuscripts, 
in which certain documents can be record- 
ed systematically on microfilm. These are 
chosen on the basis of exceptional quality, 
and the amount of use to which they are 
subject. Microfilms, in monochrome for 
text and in colour for illuminated 
manuscripts, are gradually replacing the 
originals for consultation purposes, an 
readers are available in the microfilm 
room opened in 1985. 
The Bibliothéque Nationale is the cus- 
 
todian of a valuable and fragile heritage, 
brought together by the kings of France, 
enriched with Church property confiscat- 
ed during the Revolution and by gifts and 
purchases of quality made in the nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries. Vigilant manage- 
ment is necessary in order to carry on a 
tradition which has remained unbroken for 
over five centuries. [] 
  
FLORENCE CALLU, of France, is director of the 
Department of Manuscripts at the Bibliothéque Na- 
tionale, Paris. She has published many articles and 
essays on the preservation of manuscripts. 
A calligram by Guillaume Apollinaire 
(1880-1918) that has recently been donated to 
the Bibliothéque Nationale. Portrait of 
Apollinaire, above, was painted by the French 
artist Jean Metzinger in 1914. 
Me focus Lipo eh fein cubs van waa Jo feet, 
toes! a 16 nt sh doc & prt prs fe 1 abit 
dh pank aia oe ons ie 1 As jp «2 coral 
Ar 
tu (en by! . 
"w p jn raptiti get 
i i" vidos feuds, TVS 
de. Nay 
C Jide 
: Ard, Peres Ga we bof pay dé 
Loa Thou jowanbe Bean detrws Phas Altrime se sod bu clorimm burtle avonds 4 
ot wu plusktuh pox woud Jats sal 2en (3 | an 
Au foe {od od fhaydy, / taknn thaanr [2 Crvn 
alee ole of wudh ed AAp 
te gi wud Teta 18 pike cane ay Shest ty LA “Crnect foariod “fo 
fe grail forsfon Yip A ad 
Voted tre anid outpoin coe J Lge hs. 
in dant Bot | of lea o¥ Jo ust 
Fash amma | surah andor tao lll oi {errs 
Vopd die /. dustin 
me evil wx PI q tht ¥ viene iy rpronlif 
trust ots fomih- pra Beil 
v ogi pny gest oo J bu Ars. - plu pig 
ol 8 
" BRIS shams J An ae Rg go ne 
Ue alle [fink frm Moa Intnl A Atha 
  
  

## [Page 12](083206engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 83192: From the world's archives

FROM THE WORLD’S ARCHIVES 
  
The Vatican Library 
named because of the practice where- 
by the archives of sixteenth-century 
European sovereigns were usually described 
as "'secret’’) are by virtue of their universal 
nature, a documentary source of exception- 
al interest not only for religious and political 
history but also for the social and cultural de- 
velopment of many nations. In 1880 they 
were opened to the public, without distinc- 
tion of nationality or religious persuasion, by 
Pope Leo XIII, and since then they have been 
used by scholars from all over the world. Each 
day some eighty researchers study in the Ar- 
chives, while some 120 more use the Vati- 
can Library. 
The documents in the Vatican Archives 
originate from the bishops, priests, monks 
and laymen and women of local churches, 
and from the nunciatures of the Holy See. 
They contain ecclesiastical, historical, social, 
cultural, economic and political information. 
Also in the Vatican Archives are the records 
T= Secret Archives of the Vatican (so 
In February 1988, a fire in the Leningrad 
Library of the Soviet Academy of Sciences 
destroyed an estimated 400,000 volumes, and 
a further 3.6 million books and documents 
were damaged by fire and water. Unesco has 
helped the library to collect microfilm 
versions of many of the works that were 
destroyed and has advised on drying and 
restoration. Above, the cataloguing 
department and (inset) the periodicals reserve 
after the fire. 
12 __ 
~ 
&. 
Qe fedfvrumas f= wrt 
J of wget Soe for Beorff Reis oh Je pone BS ns Fal 7 FS 
’ Tress afr iF ris 1 mememane- By. queda oF Joend® wwe © smnerfc sms wi of] an ol 
pronfial eur pebabar Sheen ppm walnba pane Lrg ey Thome [iba wn eng ~ pale 
w
R
 
” Female 7 rarnfpen i comp Rear Sag pas + afi fr Rl 
Oe pons Nas bomefhemerfoid fs So bemendy fore y aa hed pond ga orf marisa mont way Ke 
En aa ron] fuffiremns (fale eflgm ng ox narh. ov paroreris a a TR C— mrorf 
PL sande Fhe soll T germ manus (Renofrgrene Sheva _gucres 1 rill; Fam fae” Framer frome poser 
a I wr Se Touma Foc Sm To pe nme wffrefe rarer TH pofebin a wr 
fae’ \ put} A 1 Fn 2 pe Fonlai wes. supe when E —— Tw + Jaen © i ot ci 
nS on ee oki gee a lan ep Ph pletion fren idee puget 3 Som oF a 
pi pore aan EL 
ir
 
of the major departments of the Roman curia 
which are responsible for relations with the 
churches of the six continents. 
Josef Metzler 
Prefect of the Secret Archives of the Vatican 
  
f aie a 
("3 vd A bemgne on fle, "pie he SR Bonn of wT Joes Spm a 
8 frm ali fromasf wef i FR planes gr Sispaf ow o Yes. ha Se ay -&3 ain 
ffir n Be nd p ephes a aged 
  
   
  
  
a
e
 
o
e
 
Boi lh Boge 
Letter bearing the seal 
of Bela IV, King of Hungary. It was sent in 
1246 to Pope Innocent IV. 
  
The Soviet Union, 
a scattered heritage 
twentieth-century literary manuscripts 
are preserved in the great libraries and 
research institutes of the USSR Academy of 
Sciences such as the Institute of Literature 
(Pushkin House) in Leningrad and the Insti- 
tute of World Literature in Moscow. The Cen- 
tral State Archives of Literature and Art 
specialize in preservation work. 
But facilities for the preservation and use 
of twentieth-century literary manuscripts 
leave much to be desired. Holdings cannot 
be efficiently consulted because they are not 
computerized. And in most cases the basic 
conditions for preservation do not exist. 
Attempts to constitute the literary ar- 
chives of Soviet authors are confronted with 
many obstacles. The manuscripts of great 
writers who were victims of Stalinist oppres- 
sion were either destroyed or have been lost 
without trace. As a result of emigration, es- 
pecially during the Civil War, the Soviet Un- 
ion lost many of its leading creative artists and 
their manuscripts are today scattered all over 
the world, notably in the United States. 
A comprehensive history of twentieth: 
century Russian literature is being prepared 
under the auspices of the Gorki Institute of 
Ru holdings of nineteenth- and

## [Page 13](083206engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 83192: From the world's archives

  
The safeguard of manuscripts 
in Africa 
tised for several centuries in Ethiopia, in 
the Maghreb, in Muslim Black Africa 
and in southeastern Madagascar. But only 
relatively recently, during the period of Eu- 
ropean colonization, did written records be- 
gin to be kept throughout the continent. 
Today manuscript archives are found in all 
African countries. Some Ethiopian gospel- 
books and other illuminated manuscripts 
written in Amharic and Geez (right) and cer- 
tain Arabic manuscripts from the Maghreb, 
date as far back as the fourteenth century, 
but most of the remainder are contemporary 
or recent. 
In spite of a growing awareness of the 
incalculable value of these manuscripts, few 
effective measures have been taken to 
safeguard and preserve them. The situation 
is in many ways disturbing because complete 
and systematic inventories have not been es- 
tablished at the national level, because of the 
slender resources of institutions in which 
manuscripts and documentary sources are 
kept, and because of lack of personnel 
specializing in the analysis, treatment and 
preservation of manuscripts. 
T= art of the manuscript has been prac- 
World Literature. It will record the full diver- 
sity of Russian literature written in this cen- 
tury both in the USSR and elsewhere. Where 
the manuscripts of works written outside the 
USSR are concerned, the gaps are very seri- 
ous. If this project is to be brought to a suc- 
cessful conclusion, scholars engaged on it 
must at least be able to consult copies of 
manuscripts by these writers who produced 
their work outside the Soviet Union and use 
them as a basis for research and future criti- 
cal editions. 
The ideal solution would be to provide 
for the exchange of copies of manuscripts be- 
tween different institutions and different 
countries. A comprehensive agreement on 
this point is needed to provide for mutual as- 
sistance in the collection, preservation, study 
and possible publication of literary 
manuscripts. Such an agreement should con- 
cern the manuscripts of all authors in all 
countries. The Central State Archives of Liter- 
ature and Art, the repository of the most im- 
portant collection in the Soviet Union, is ready 
to work towards this goal. 
Natalia Volkova and Irina Nikiforova 
“a Danae Lo TH Annw 
a le Er TL 
a RVR A BRON SSA - 
A ga, = LE ey 
PE ater LL SO LE 
El all a |
taints A Ld hal 
  a . ad 
et BA EEL A wry RS 
A aa a ipa. 
AE ad WN Py 
LW m———— Lali al 
PAREET me BE Bw 
Et AL Bl hai) SY 
TRA MA~SAN BY A rm 
-h 
NE 18thcentury prayer     
African manuscripts are housed in a var- 
iety of institutions ranging from libraries, 
research centres, archives services and pub- 
lishing houses, to Ethiopian churches and 
monasteries, and mosques and Koranic 
schools in the Maghreb, Mauritania and 
Senegal. Many documents are in private 
hands. Writers and their families usually keep 
the manuscripts of their published works. Not 
only should the institutions where 
manuscripts are preserved be provided with 
adequate facilities; other holders of these cul- 
tural treasures should be identified. 
book written in Geez, 
a liturgical script of 
: the Ethiopian Coptic 
Church from which 
Amharic was derived. 
Efforts should also be made to train 
specialized staff. Schools of library science, 
some of which have been functioning for 
several years, should be upgraded and provid- 
ed with improved equipment. In too many 
cases, courses on the restoration and preser- 
vation of documents provided by library 
schools are excessively theoretical and the 
practical aspects are neglected. 
Ousmane Sane 
Director of the School of Librarians, Archivists 
and Documentalists, Cheikh Anta Diop 
University, Dakar (Senegal) 
  
India: a new conservation policy 
n contemporary India literary manuscripts 
are usually destroyed after publication, and 
authors rarely keep their manuscripts and 
other material related to their work. (One 
notable exception was the Bengali poet 
Rabindranath Tagore, whose manuscripts are 
preserved at Visva-Bharati University.) 
Recently, however, India’s National Academy 
   
of Letters (Sahitya Akademi) has adopted an 
acquisitions and conservation policy for 
contemporary literary documents, and the 
state has granted financial assistance to 
libraries for the preservation of rare 
manuscripts in their keeping. Below, reading 
room of the National Library at Calcutta, 
which has important manuscript collections. 
  
ba a ro 
"Yh

## [Page 14](083206engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 83193: The Quest for authenticity

THE QUEST FOR AUTHENTICITY 
URING the past few years, there 
has been a heightening of interest 
in the question of textual authen- 
ticity, a question to which little attention 
had been paid previously except by phi- 
lologists, who studied only classical, 
medieval and Renaissance texts. Such 
scholars believed that contemporary texts 
lacked the value and distinction which an- 
cient documents possess because they be- 
long to a recognized literary tradition. 
  
The writer betrayed 
Most readers were indifferent to the 
question of authenticity, and cared little 
whether the novel, poem or essay they 
were reading corresponded exactly to 
what the author had written and intend- 
ed to publish. And almost invariably the 
published text not only did not represent 
the author's intention, but altered and oc- 
casionally even betrayed it. In the past, 
it was easy to blame a scatterbrained cop- 
yist or compositor, or the interference of 
a censor. It was up to the philologist to 
restore the text to its original form, or at 
least produce a version as close as possi- 
ble to the presumed intention of the 
author, This task consisted in detecting 
and eliminating the interferences, addi- 
tions and alterations to which these texts 
had been subjected for centuries due to 
faulty transmission and inaccurate trans- 
lations and interpretations. 
In the case of nineteenth- and 
twentieth-century literature, scholarly in- 
difference and threats to freedom of 
speech and opinion have introduced more 
distortions into original texts than those 
inflicted on medieval works. Ideological 
intolerance, overt or concealed censor- 
ship by writers and editors, the disappear- 
ance or wanton destruction of 
manuscripts and rough drafts— 
occasionally even their acquisition by 
booklovers who jealously hoard them— 
piracy or the publication of works 
without the author’s control, have often 
altered the conditions in which these 
works were conceived, written, transmit- 
ted and published. 
Readers and scholars have now 
changed thetr attitude. Some have under- 
stood the importance of the integrity of 
literary works and increasingly demand 
accurate editions endorsed by informed 
14 
 
Scene of a performance of The Barber of Seville (1816), by Gioacchino Rossini (1792-1868), 
at the Festival of Aix-en-Provence, France. 
criticism. Others—from the outset or af- 
ter a life dedicated to the laborious recon- 
stitution of texts ravaged by time—have 
discovered the satisfaction of working on 
texts for which, in most cases, the process 
of elaboration from the first draft to the 
final version can be reconstituted. 
The establishment of real or pre- 
sumed authenticity is of fundamental im- 
portance. A civilization like ours, based 
essentially on books, that is on the writ- 
ten word, requires a text to reflect, 
without excessive distortion or deforma- 
tion, all the conventions of the social con- 
tract, the ideologies, the cultural 
traditions, the very structure of society. 
Law books and holy scriptures, classical 
and contemporary literature, historical 
documents and music scores, must all be 
error-free if clear and precise norms are 
to be set and the legacy of which we are 
the beneficiaries and the guardians is to 
be preserved intact. 
  
The text transformed between 
Ist draft and final proofs 
There is a big difference between con- 
temporary literary texts and those of the 
past. In the case of the latter, manuscripts 
and printed versions rarely correspond to 
what the author wished to say, because 
they were copied or printed without his 
control, often long after they had been 
written. In the case of the former, one or 
several versions usually exist, all original, 
corresponding to different stages in the

## [Page 15](083206engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

BY GIUSEPPE TAVANI 
  
composition of the text. 
This difference reveals one charac- 
teristic of a work of literature which has 
been hitherto ignored or neglected. 
Manuscripts which show how many 
transformations it undergoes while it is 
being created indicate that a work of liter- 
ature 1s never one-dimensional and is 
something more than the current edition 
or even the fair copy that the writer 
delivers to the printer. On the contrary, 
every work of literature has several 
dimensions. It takes shape slowly, some- 


### 83193: The Quest for authenticity

times very slowly, as a result of a series 
of transformations and variations which 
form what might be called the “pre- 
text” —all the textual material and docu- 
ments, from the first draft to the proofs 
corrected by the author, and subsequent 
editions where further changes occurred. 
    
   
     
    
  
For want of a horse ... 
The pre-text consists of everything 
that goes into the creation of a work of 
literature, everything that reflects the 
writer’s imagination and vision. This 
complex and ever-changing pattern of ele- 
ments abandoned and retrieved, of frag- 
EE ER A 
ha
J S— | —— wr 
vi 
wl — BL; Con) a 
INN |} TA 5 \ » = Te 
np J a 4 - — ~~ 
- seam "ww - 1 
a a FE 
— AN _— Vg H _-— ha 
A *.) 4 A) a 
ol gt Lo A i ps = 
{ - ND i” pr as a a 
—— o = re 2 # wt 5 3 pe 
I Ea Eo 
» \ . [- a IF 4 Ea = —_ 
ant or “ 4 
— pm a nF 
’ | A 
: " -  — = + T ry ¥ 5 =H = i 
- | -l fs 
— ry f : - SFE Cd i — a] yey ol 38 Pads 1 . Bias oa 
I a a i mn a 
. i’ ta ! “ hes bp X= (SN 
- a - = p" i. ; a 
u 
\ 
ments of writing covered with later 
additions or abridged to the point of ob- 
scurity, of dissected and reassembled state- 
ments, of passages which themselves do 
not change but whose meaning changes 
as they are moved around, is a source of 
valuable information. It is possible to find 
in the pre-text not only clarification of 
the published work, but also the mechan- 
isms of its creation. A reading of the 
rough drafts allows us to verify, for ex- 
ample, the extent to which the author’s 
modifications of a work can be useful for 
its interpretation, and how well they har- 
monize with or modify its context and 
in which sense. 
-_ en - ~ 
» = :  ™ - 
> vy | - ot 
eaka -. 
- T ET a cay A) § = > ee J) ! 
Sheet from the 
manuscript of the 
opera La Bohéme 
(1896), by the Italian 
composer Giacomo 
Puccini (1858-1924), 
above. 
  
  
| Er . FS " 
The first stanza of Alfred de Musset’s 
poem Venise, which originally read Dans 
Venise la rouge / pas un cheval qui bouge 
/ pas un pécheur dans l'eau / pas un falot = 
(“In Venice the red / nary a horse was 
moving / nor a fisherman in the water 
/ nor a lantern”) was modified by the 
poet who, perhaps realizing that horses 
are not to be seen in Venice, replaced 
“horse” by “boat” (nary a boat was mov- 
ing). In so doing, as a modern critic has 
pointed out, ‘‘he substituted an incoher- 
ent image for a coherent one which 
opened the poem with a synthesis deve- 
loped in the following stanzas”, and this 
substitution “eliminates the contrast of 
15

## [Page 16](083206engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 83193: The Quest for authenticity

    
 . 
Right, page 8 of the 
manuscript of Piu che 
l'amore (“Only Love”) 
by the Italian novelist 
Gabriele d’Annunzio 
(1863-1938). Above, 
D’Annunzio (at right 
tp YEE lk. juno : 
a HA lyr ie 
  
drafts, notes and successive revisions must 
be used not only to clarify the meaning 
of the text and interpret it as correctly as 
possible, but also to give the reader an op- 
——— 
In fx % worth ? 
* f . 
beh Aline © ha, 
in photo) with the Y 1 kpanic Hn Jie aAyohe, 
French writer and Yo Hl | a TA Tay 
politician Maurice me vove <& U N } 
. A hg e * cent pled . 
Barres, during the ( Nhado An rh 
First World War. a— 
¢ 4 Yi. - 
Sendq Lea \ A A mi 10 fn A i it 
\ la MQ 
Cle upon ‘ vy ly h fell che bbmenr— 
ert, ww {e/A iu 11] [od ory YY all assall 4 
z Lda wmlree le al Comb Wene 
the earth (horse) and water (fisherman), 
weakens the spatial notations and des- 
troys the totalizing function of the first 
stanza’. 
  
A service to the reader 
Of course, if all variants are signifi- 
cant, they do not all necessarily modify 
only a short segment of text, as in the case 
of de Musset’s boat. The alterations may 
involve entire sentences, even paragraphs 
or chapters. Sometimes, the minor vari- 
ants, in addition to the modifications that 
each one independently introduces in the 
text, may be so numerous that they re- 
quire, no less than the major variants, sus- 
tained and constant attention. A modern 
edition of a literary work cannot ignore 
this textual mobility. Manuscripts, rough 
16 __ 
portunity to grasp its dynamism. In the 
case of censored or self-censored texts, a 
return to the pre-text usually makes it 
possible to establish the authentic word- 
ing through the identification and elimi- 
nation of superfluous additions and the 
re-establishment of fragments of text 
banished by the censor’s blue pencil. 
  
The new science 
of manuscriptology 
The first problem raised by rough 
drafts is that of decipherment. A glance 
at the manuscript of Gustave Flaubert’s 
story Un Coeur Simple is enough to show 
that decipherment is not always easy. A 
second problem, in this case of a strati- 
graphic nature, 1s that of retracing the his- 
tory of the text by taking the complex 
body of original material and making a 
chronological classification of the 
author’s alterations to the text through 
the analysis of paper, ink, pens and hand- 
writing. The methods and techniques of 
this procedure have given rise to a new 
discipline: manuscriptology. 
These operations are often so com- 
plex that they are beyond the capacities 
of a single person, and most critical edi- 
tions of contemporary literary 
manuscripts are the work of teams which 
almost invariably use computers to help 
them perform a task which nevertheless 
takes several years. Cases of this kind in- 
clude the Corpus Flaubertianum on which 
Giovanni Bonaccorso and his collabora- 
tors are currently working; the drafts of 
Marcel Proust’s A la recherche du temps 
perdu (Remembrance of Things Past) which 
a team of scholars at the Institute of 
Modern Texts and Manuscripts at the 
French National Centre for Scientific 
Research has been studying for several 
years; James Joyce's Ulysses; Franz Kaf- 
ka’s Schriften, Tagebiicher, Briefe (““Writ- 
ings, Diaries and Letters’) in addition to 
the contemporary Latin-American works 
which are being studied by over a 
hundred teams of specialists—one for 
each of the planned critical editions be- 
ing prepared under the scientific direction 
of an international committee (see arti- 
cle page 18). 
  
The tribulations of Ulysses 
It required seven years of work to 
produce the critical edition of Ulysses and 
correct the 5,000 errors of the current edi- 
tion, which reproduces the very corrupt 
text of the eighth edition (1960). The mis- 
fortune which has pursued this text since 
the first edition of 1922 is not unusual in 
the history of printing. Joyce’s complaint 
in a letter to Harriet Shaw Weaver—*I 
am extremely irritated by all those 
printer’s errors ... Are these to be per- 
petuated in future editions? I hope 
not.”’—is of a kind frequently found in 
writers’ correspondence, even with seem- 
ingly less justification, such as matters of 
punctuation, which is more often subject 
to the house style of printers, rather than 
the author’s wishes. Thus, Jean-Jacques 
Rousseau wrote on 17 June 1758 to Marc--

## [Page 17](083206engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 83193: The Quest for authenticity

Michel Rey, with regard to his Lettre a 
d'Alembert sur les spectacles: ‘‘there are 
however suspension points added after 
certain words on pages 27 and 48. I un- 
derstand why they have been put there, 
especially the last ones, but I don’t like 
them, and would ask you not to do so 
again, unless found in the copy. I also find 
too many commas. Different divisions 
within the same sentence should not be 
marked by the same punctuation. It com- 
pletely obstructs the meaning’. 
These examples reveal how persis- 
tent authors can be in their quest for the 
ideal printing which entirely respects 
their stylistic requirement. This ideal to- 
day’s critical editions aspire to achieve. 
They also illustrate the value of writers’ 
private correspondence for re-establishing 
the authentic textual order wished by 
them. 
  
Authentic scores 
of great operas 
It is obvious that the problem of re- 
establishing the authenticity of a text is 
not limited to literature, but concerns all 
creative works, including music scores. 
For the past thirty years, original scores 
(or at least transcriptions controlled 
directly by the author) have been reco- 
vered and critical editions prepared by 
research teams working directly on the 
manuscript sources and first editions, in 
order to locate alterations and additions 
introduced by the transcribers and the 
performers, to eliminate them and to 
bring the text back to its original form. 
This tremendous undertaking has begun 
to bear fruit. Critical editions of // Bar- 
biere di Siviglia, Cenerentola, La Gazza 
ladra, L'Italiana in Algeri, Tancredi, Il Sig- 
nor Bruschino, and Il Turco in Italia have 
recently been published by the Fondazi- 
one Rossini at Pesaro, and editions of 
Verdi’s Rigoletto, Ernani and Requiem 
Mass have been published by the Institu- 
to di Studi Verdiani at Parma, the Ricor- 
di publishing house and the University 
of Chicago. A critical edition of Pucci- 
ni’s La Bobeme and of Bellini’s Norma are 
In preparation. 
Texts restored by musicologists are 
usually favourably received by the pub- 
lic and critics. The critical edition of The 
Barber of Seville was performed 192 times 
in 1984 and 178 times in 1985, while the 
traditional score was only used for 44 and 
57 representations respectively, Prefer- 
  
    
  
wm pretending to hide - 
) AT YOu F © 
no yonder they hide 1 with 2 cabbage eal the wom 
   
  
¢ “Ma wr Bl \ - 
oF A a. ” Avanta ed a 
Hy afin the Press [2 1M Bingrplacer 4] | 
PUP Fepresent beauty placed up there like those statues in the Museo 5s So PAL ¢ of 1 t with ber hand sre_jLey.so-bertlTlul of cold Je AP pure compared with what 3 sus-leekr #9 %ih his two bags fu y 1 hi\ other thing Ranging down out of him or wicking up a 
an Is beauty of cope 
that admitted when he said | could pose for a picture naked 
fellowh\ in Holles street when be Jost the ob in Helps ent T was selling the fons a ! 4 
  
ol — 
[J pasad rlside the mens ois ass Yh 
Boncoant sheet latin. jpurt By Swe flr 13 
[ han Ta pns p yA ket 74 At 2H shad Ake 
| 10 ReF Crradins of He ol nt | of Tthoese oH pluses pes ho -— 
ge gi and Reap 2 for ten Left, page proof with 
yp o lp author’s corrections 
- 
jo-2otie rich from Ulysses, by the 
  
     
    
 
  
clothes und wromming ia the coffee GN 1 be like that bath of the *** nw | Irish novelist James symph Yuh my hair down My shes younger or Im a little like 3 fhe. 
: i ‘ etle bikg foie 3 - . dirty bisch in that Spapiett phot be has the nymphs used they go ibout like L Joyce (1882 1941) 
that | asked b Patt doagmting Cameron highlander behiod the meat marke satis *, d Above, symbolic or that othe wretch with the red bead behind the tree) when | was passis AL ws* i f ) in Py 
prergading He was pissiog standing out for me to see Te th his babyclothe “ a representation of 
hod " 5 the Queens own they were a nice lot its well the Surreys Joyce, drawn in 7 meheved them] tried to d " ' 1 > . . ” ited s et’! ed , daw a per olin before | 1ore it up like 2 sunge PWC Indian ink for the V OF someting | wonder theyre not alnaed going about of getting a kick or o » he my LI y Re tang of something there and that word met something with hoses in hare frontispiece of a book, peer i and be came out with some J breakers shout the incarmation he never by the Romanian 
Gan expla 2 thing simply the wily a body can understand then he goes and . - i buns the bottom ont of the pan all for his fidney this one not s0 much Ld Po sculptor Constantin theres the mark of his teeth still wi ried 10 bite the nipple [ ’ i 
” s 6 wiere he mied 0 bite he ple | had 0 rl an 1 (1929). ~ scream out arent they fearful trying to hurt fou | had a grear breast of milk tap “PAE Br cus ( ) 
| with Milly enough for two what was the reson of that be said 1 could have oF ys 
0 FX a pound = week a a wet nue all swelled our the moming thar delicate > w 
A looking student that stopped ic od 28 with the Chwony Penrose nearly 
caught me wash ng through the window only for | smapped up the towel 10 Puss place 
my face that was his studenting hurt nee they used 40 weaning her tll he got Mga Aero 
doctor Brady to give me the Belladonna prescription | bad ro get him to suck 
them they were 30 hard be said it was sweeter and thicker than cows then he 
wanted to milk me into the tea well hes beyond everythiag | declare somebody 
ought to put him in the badger if 1 only could remember the one half of 
the things aad write a book out of it the works of Master Poldy yes and ins 50 
much smoother the shin much an hour he was at them Im sure by the doi} 
all the pleasure those men get out of 3 woman 1 can feel his mouth O.4 
I must stresch myself | wished bho wesHe18 or somebody 10 let myself go with 
  
an¢ Come ag  
ence is given to the authentic score even 
if fairly correct traditional editions are 
available. 
  
The question of access 
In order to decipher rough drafts and 
prepare critical editions, researchers must 
clearly have easy access to manuscripts. 
It is vital that documentation on writers 
(and composers) should be assembled in 
special departments of public libraries, 
where it can be consulted by manuscrip- 
tologists and philologists. The situation 
in this respect is far better today than it 
was thirty years ago. Collections of 
modern manuscripts began to appear at 
the beginning of the nineteenth century, 
but their proliferation has only taken 
hat | feel afl fire inside me or if | could dream t when he 
7 ru Thay 
place in recent decades, coinciding with 
the growing interest in authentic texts. 
Foundations have been created to bring 
together the manuscripts of writers or 
composers. University institutions and 
research centres are also taking action, 
and most national libraries have created 
departments of modern manuscripts, 
which are now treated with the care that 
was formerly reserved for ancient 
manuscripts. a 
1. Henri Coulet, Le bateau de Musset et 'ancre de Segalen, 
in Avant-texte, texte, aprés-texte, Paris-Budapest, 1982, 
2. Rousseau’s polemical treatise on the question of the 
morality of theatrical performances, in reply to an article 
by the French philosopher Jean d'Alembert in the 
Encyclopédie. Editor 
GIUSEPPE TAVANI, of Italy, is a professor in the 
faculty of philosophy and letters at the University 
of Rome. The author of several studies on textual 
criticism and of critical editions of medieval texts, 
he is a member of the international scientific com- 
mittee of the Archives Collection. 
17

## [Page 18](083206engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 83194: The Archives collection, a laboratory for the future

THE ARCHIVES COLLECTION, 
BY AMOS SEGALA 
ment of a critical edition led to a com- 
plete reassessment of the work. 
We made sure that we had learned all 
we could from this initial experiment be- 
fore recommending its extension to the 
works of other Latin American writers, 
and eventually to the literatures of other 
parts of the developing world. 
At the World Conference on Cultur- 
al Policies organized by Unesco and held 
in Mexico City in 1982, Léopold Sédar 
 
    Be Preparios » 
be e) rosario: 
los Principes Above, the 
Guatemalan writer 
Miguel Angel Asturias lglenin y neas thas necesiondes... OF 4.0 Lenudt “vdy wi dante 
in 1956. His 
manuscripts, which he 
donated to France’s 
Bibliothéque 
Nationale, were the 
nucleus of the 
“Archives Collection 
(see article). The final 
page of the 
manuscript of his 
novel El sefior | 
presidente, right, 
shows that the work 
was written between 
1925 and 1932, and 
not around 1945 as 
critics once believed. 
Purg tories 
  
IFTEEN years ago, the Guatemalan 
writer and poet Miguel Angel 
Asturias (1899-1974), winner of the 
1967 Nobel Prize for Literature, donat- 
ed his manuscripts and archives to the 
Bibliothéque Nationale in Paris, so that 
they could be preserved there and used 
in the preparation of an international edi- 
tion of his work using modern methods 
of textual analysis and criticism. 
The results have been highly instruc- 
tive. In the first place, despite the ex- 
pressed wish of the author, many of his 
manuscripts were not made available to 
the Bibliothéque Nationale, and other 
documents essential to the understanding 
of his work were dispersed and perhaps 
lost for ever. Secondly, where documen- 
tation was available, as in the case of the 
novels El sefior presidente (The President, 
1963) and Hombres de maiz (Men of Maize, 
1975), methods of textual analysis have 
evolved so radically that the establish- 
18 
El ectuaiante liegd si slmel ue was calle ala Lia 7 «1 skids 
16 puerta de *u casm,cortads por las ¥osecitan de an servi 
responder i. letanis,oyd lu vor d¢ eu s.ire¢ ue lleva- 
~Por los agonizuntes ye SAnalet,.. 
Criotisnose.s POF AC ,L€ HOLDEN Pesbieliicn J€ JUStiClivmg 
Por los enemigos de la (é catéilcn,.. por .. COLA Je v lu Canta 
Ayrie elcicon 
— —————— 
LOTgUe tule Lo SUS Lnilre 
  
wre ySoviemure de 1940 
¥y 8 de Diciembre do 1932    
Senghor called on Unesco member states 
to take international action for the preser- 
vation, evaluation and study of twentieth- 
century manuscripts. At the time, Mr. 
Senghor was president of ALLCA, the 
Latin American, Caribbean and African 
20th-century Literary Archives Associa- 
tion, which had grown out of the Friends 
of Miguel Angel Asturias. 
In 1983 and 1984 international meet- 
ings were held in several countries to dis- 
cuss these issues. The gatherings were 
organized by the National Centre for 
Scientific Research and the Bibliothéque 
Nationale in France; by the Consiglio 
Nazionale delle Ricerce (CNR) in Italy; 
and by the Instituto de Cultura e Lingua 
Portuguesa (ICALP) in Portugal. 
Specialists in philology, linguistics, histo- 
ry, Latin American literature and com- 
parative literature took part in 
interdisciplinary workshops, and a “Mul- 
tilateral Agreement on Archival Research 
and Co-Publications” was drafted and 
then signed in September 1984 at Buenos 
Aires (Argentina) by four European 
countries—France, Italy, Portugal and 
Spain—and four Latin American 
countries—Argentina, Brazil, Colombia 
and Mexico. 
  
An international agreement 
The aims of this “Archives Agree- 
ment” are to promote: 
* philological and linguistic analysis 
of texts on the basis of manuscript or 
published versions approved by the 
author, and the transcription and study 
of variants, i.e. the establishment of a 
reliable, authentic text and the history of 
its creation; 
* the compilation of dossiers on each 
author, his or her writings, and the 
problems they raise; 
e textua] and contextual analyses by 
critics from the same country or region 
as the author or from elsewhere; 
® the systematic examination of texts 
from an international and interdiscipli- 
nary viewpoint; this approach is not in- 
trinsically new but it is innovatory in the 
case of the Archives Agreement because 
of its scope and long-term nature. 
As a result of the Archives Agree- 
ment, a number of literary works began 
to be published in a series known as the 
Archives Collection (Coleccion “Archi- 
vos”) in severa] cities of Latin America. 
Each year ten or so titles are scheduled 
for publication in the Collection. All the 
countries of the region and four languages 
(Spanish, Portuguese, French, English) 
are represented. The project is thus con- 
tributing to the recognition by interna- 
tional scholarship of each country’s 
classic authors, to a reassessment of the 
literary history of Latin America in the 
twentieth century, and to the establish- 
ment of a distribution network for 
Latin American literature which will 
be as wide-ranging as the intellectual, 
technical and financial efforts that have 
gone 1nto It. 
The scientific direction of the Collec- 
tion is in the hands of an international 
committee of twenty-seven specialists in 
the relevant literary disciplines. ALLCA 
also has a publishing committee consist-

## [Page 19](083206engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 83194: The Archives collection, a laboratory for the future

A LABORATORY FOR THE FUTURE 
  
E
n
 
—
 
N
L
D
 
DEMETRIO AGUILERA MALTA 
DELMIRA AGUSTIN 
CIRO ALEGRIA 
JACQUES STEPHEN ALEXIS 
| ENRIQUE AMORIM 
MARIO DE ANDRADE 
I OSWALD DE ANDRADE 
| RAFAEL AREVALO MARTINEZ 
| ALCIDES ARGUEDAS 
| JOSE MARIA ARGUEDAS 
ROBERTO ARLT 
| MIGUEL ANGEL ASTURIAS 
| JOSE ASUNCION SILVA 
| AURELIO ARTURO 
MARIANO AZUELA 
| EMILIO BALLAGAS 
| MANUEL BANDEIRA 
| PORFIRIO BARBA JACOB 
EDUARDO CARRANZA 
TOMAS CARRASQUILLA 
JORGE CARRERA ANDRADE 
GABRIEL CASACCIA 
ROSARIO CASTELLANOS 
HAROLDO CONTI 
JULIO CORTAZAR 
JOSE DE LA CUADRA 
RUBEN DARIO 
ROQUE DALTON 
MACEDONIO FERNANDEZ 
  
BALDOMERO FDEZ. MORENO 
ROMULO GALLEGOS 
JOSE GOROSTIZA 
LEON DE GREIF} 
JOAD GUIMARAES ROSA 
RICARDO GUIRALDES 
AUGUSTO GUZMAN 
MARTIN LUIS GUZMAN 
PEDRO HENRIQUEZ URENA 
FELISBLERTO HERNANDEZ 
JULIO HERRERA Y REISSIG 
FUGENIO MARIA DE HOSTOS 
VICENTE HUIDOBRO 
JORGE ICAZA 
JOSE LEZAMA LIMA 
CLARICE LISPECTOR 
LUIS CARLOS LOPEZ 
RAMON LOPEZ VELARDE 
LEOPOLDO LUGONES 
JOAQUIM MACHADO DE ASSIS 
ROGER MAIS 
LEOPOLDO MARECHAL 
JOSE CARLOS MARIATEGUI 
JOSE MARTI 
EZEQUIEL MARTINEZ ESTRADA 
CLAUDE MC KAY 
RICARDO MIRO 
GABRIELA MISTRAL 
EDGAR MITTELHOLZER 
&N 
  
ing of internationally known specialists 
and the people directly concerned with 
producing the Collection. 
  
 
  
| 
ii \ 
ll i | 
| RAFAEL KE MUROZ 
| PABLO NERUDA 
VICTORIA OCAMPO 
| FERNANDO ORTIZ 
PABLO PALACIO 
| LUIS PALES MATOS 
| RICARDO PALMA 
| TERESA DE LA PARRA 
| CARLOS PELLICER 
| MARIANO PICON SALAS 
| JEAN PRICE MARS 
HORACIO QUIROGA 
GRACILIANO RAMOS 
JOSE LINS DO REGO 
ALFONSO REYES 
| JOSE REVUELTAS 
JEAN RHYS 
JOSE FUSTASIO RIVERA 
JOSE ENRIQUE RODO 
| JACQUES ROUMAIN 
JUAN RULFO 
SALARRUE 
BALDOMERO SANIN CANO 
| DOMINGO F. SARMIENTO 
GUILLERMO VALENCIA 
CESAR VALLE)O 
JOSE VASCONCELOS 
| GONZALO ZALDUMBIDE 
| AGUSTIN YANEZ 
COLECCION ARCHIVOS 
Tee -ae LE 
Ediciones Criticas 
  
—
 
TIGA 
120 titles from 22 countries 
Backing for the Collection is provid- 
ed on an equal footing by the eight sig- 
natories to the Archives Agreement. The 
European countries grant financial sub- 
ventions and the Latin American coun- 
tries provide contributions in kind. From 
the outset Unesco and especially its In- 
ternational Fund for the Promotion of 
Culture has provided the project with 
financial and other support. 
In France, the National Centre for 
Scientific Research and the University of 
Paris X have set up a research group to 
co-ordinate the scholarly work being car- 
ried out in the other signatory countries, 
improve the methodology of the project 
Left, poster advertising the Coleccién Archivos 
(“Archives Collection”), a series of editions of 
20th-century works of literature from Latin 
America and the Caribbean prepared and 
published as a result of an international 
agreement signed in 1984 at Buenos Aires 
(Argentina). Scheduled for publication are 120 
critical editions of works in Spanish, 
Portuguese, French or English. With Unesco 
support, each title published in one of these 
languages will be translated into the other 
three, as well as into Italian and German. 
5 NN a 1 be ie rd , & 
» - 1 
a oa. 
Jose Asuncion Silva 
OBR\ 
COMPLET 
Hoowe HE Osaka 
hain Cin wi Nendo

## [Page 20](083206engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

_—— 
Sy 
i Et] 
  
A. Emennds sels FL SP 
  
and add new titles to the Collection, tak- 


### 83194: The Archives collection, a laboratory for the future

ing into account the results obtained so 
far. 
With the publication of 120 titles by 
authors from twenty-two countries in the 
pipeline, the Archives Collection 
represents the cultural and linguistic 
wealth and diversity of an entire region. 
Its scale and timespan are unprecedented 
for a programme of cultural and scientif- 
ic co-operation of this kind. 
The Latin American countries which 
were or are unused to working together 
in this field, and lacked the opportunity 
for mutual understanding despite their 
common history, have thus embarked on 
a long-term sharing of literary experiences 
which will bring them closer together. 
Another interesting aspect of the Ar- 
chives Agreement is the participation in 
it of four European countries which are 
profoundly and irreversibly linked to La- 
tin America. The Agreement thus breaks 
new ground both in Latin America and 
in the Latin countries of Europe, herald- 
ing new forms of international scientific 
co-operation and cultural solidarity. 
What are the underlying reasons for 
this Agreement which mobilizes 500 
specialists from a wide range of dis- 
ciplines, eight governments, many insti- 
tutions and considerable resources? The 
answer is that Latin American literature, 
currently one of the world’s richest, is an 
extreme example of the isolation and 
neglect that in some cases afflict the liter- 
ature of developing countries. The Ar- 
chives Collection is not only an 
instructive experience in itself, but a test 
case from which other regions can learn. 
— 20 
A recent survey carried out in Latin America 
under the auspices of Unesco’s International 
Fund for the Promotion of Culture concluded 
that there was a need for legal instruments 
whereby states would preserve contemporary 
literary manuscripts as part of their national 
heritage and, in a region where many library 
personnel are trained in preservation 
techniques, for improved technical facilities jn 
this field. The survey also suggested that 
manuscripts should be made more easily 
accessible to scholars. As a response to the 
study, Venezuela has passed legislation on the 
protection and preservation of manuscripts. 
Left, contents page from Cantares mexicanos, 
a manuscript preserved in the National 
Library of Mexico. 
 
As Mr. Senghor has said, Africa sees 
this project as a “promise for the future, 
a laboratory where the new civilization 
of the third millennium is taking shape, 
a universal civilization based on a dia- 
logue between cultures”. | 
 
AMOS SEGALA, of Italy, is secretary-general of 
the Latin American, Caribbean and African 20th- 
century Literary Archives Association (ALLCA) and 
director of the Archives Collection. A researcher 
at the French National Centre for Scientific 
Research, and the author of several studies on an- 
cient Mexican texts he co-ordinated the publication 
of critical editions of the works of the Guatemalan 
writer Miguel Angel Asturias. 
  
  
  
Titles published 
* MIGUEL ANGEL ASTURIAS e MARIANO AZUELA ¢ ENRIQUE AMORIM 
Paris 1924-1933 Los de abajo La carreta 
Periodismo y creacion literaria (Jorge Ruffinelli (Fernando Ainsa) 
(Amos Segala) 
. e MARIO DE ANDRADE o ALCIDES ARGUEDAS 
¢ RICARDO GUIRALDES Macunaima Raza de Bronce 
Don Segundo Sombra (Telé Porto Ancona Lopez) (Antonio D. Lorente Medina) 
(Paul Verdevoye) 
* JORGE ICAZA * JOSE GOROSTIZA 
* JOSE LEZAMA LIMA El Chulla Romero y Flores Poesia y Poética 
Paradiso (Renaud Richard/Ricardo Descalzi) (Edelmira Ramirez Levva) 
(Cintio Vitier) 
* TERESA DE LA PARRA ¢ CLARICE LISPECTOR 
* CESAR VALLEJO Las Memonias de Mamé Blanca A Paixéo Segundo G.H. 
Obra poética (Velia Bosch) (Benedito Nunes) 
(Américo Ferran) 
Publishing programme for 1989-1990 
e JULIO CORTAZAR ¢ JOSE ASUNCION SILVA * JOSE VASCONCELOS 
Rayuela Obra completa Ulises Criollo 
(Saat Yurkievich - Julio Ortega) (Juan Gustavo Cobo Borda - (Claude Fell) 
Héctor Orjuela) 
* GABRIEL CASACCIA ¢ BALDOMERO FERNANDEZ 
La Babosa e TOMAS CARRASQUILLA MORENO 
(Francisco Feito) Los cuentos Poesia 
(Uriel Ospina) (Mario Benedetti) 
» EZEQUIEL MARTINEZ 
ESTRADA * JOSE EUSTASIO RIVERA * JOSE MARIA ARGUEDAS 
Radiografia de la Pampa La Voragine El zorro de armba y el zorro 
(Leo Pollmann) (Herndn Lozano) de abajo 
(Eve Mane Fell) * OSWALD DE ANDRADE Le 
Uorge Schwartz) (Diego Araujo) Tradiciones peruanas 
(Julio Ortega) 
* JOAO GUIMARAES ROSA e ROMULO GALLEGOS 
Grande Sertéo, Vereda Canaima « JOAQUIM MACHADO 
(Walnice Nogueira Galvio) (Charles Minguet) DE ASSIS 
Papéis avulsos 
« HORACIO QUIROGA * JOSE REVUELTAS on Guilherme Merquior) 
Los Cuentos Los dias terrenales 
(Rubén Bareiro Saguier) (Evodio Escalante) e RAFAEL AREVALO 
MARTINEZ 
¢ VICENTE HUIDOBRO ¢ JUAN RULFO El hombre que parecia un 
Poesia completa Obra completa caballo 
(Saul Yurkievich) (Carlos Montemayor) (Dante Liano)

## [Page 21](083206engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 83197: Literary detection and Latin American writing

LITERARY DETECTION 
AND LATIN AMERICAN WRITING 
Revolution, the writer Mariano Azuela 
published a serial in an obscure 
newspaper in El Paso, across the US 
frontier in Texas. At the time he was 
writing for the paper, El Paso del Norte, 
his stories reflected developments in the 
Revolution. Some months later he col- 
lected the episodes of the serial and turned 
them into a novel, which by 1925 was 
recognized as a classic of twentieth- 
century Latin American literature under 
the title Los de abajo (The Underdogs). 
I= 1915, at the height of the Mexican 
  
The fate of The Underdogs 
The novel went through several edi- 
tions, and by 1983 had sold more than a 
million copies, but the text had been 
repeatedly changed. Azuela had amend- 
ed and expanded the short original novel 
in each of the successive editions pub- 
lished during his lifetime. Only after his 
death in 1952 at the age of seventy-nine, 
when he was already a famous writer, was 
the “definitive” edition of the novel pre- 
pared. It was finally published in 1958. 
BY FERNANDO AINSA 
Azuela had begun by changing the 
verbs in the 1920 edition from the present 
to the past tense, altering adjectives, and 
correcting punctuation, spelling and syn- 
tax. After Los de abajo became the estab- 
lished “novel of the Mexican revolution”, 
Azuela decided to rewrite it extensively. 
In the 1938 edition he introduced a new 
character, Valderrama, who brought a 
humorous touch to the austere original 
version. He modified his Manichean 
representation of the revolutionary gener- 
al, Pancho Villa, and made important 
ideological changes in the behaviour of 
other characters, such as the cynical Luis 
Cervantes. The novel which he had writ- 
ten in the sound and the fury of the Revo- 
lution became a more detached reflection 
on Mexican history. Times had changed. 
The revolution had become “institution- 
alized” and Mariano Azuela had become 
an established author. 
Meanwhile, the newspaper in which 
Azuela’s original text had been published 
had disappeared without trace. Surpris- 
ingly, the paper was not registered, even 
in the United States, and not a single copy 
had been kept. Thus for over sixty years 
only the second and third editions of Los 
de abajo were known, while a semi- 
mythical legend grew up around the lost 
first version. Then, thanks to the per- 
severance of an American researcher, 
Stanley R. Robe, an incomplete set of El 
Paso del Norte was found in a private 
collection in 1979. 
Only then did most of the original 
text of Los de abajo become available, 
allowing the comparison and collation of 
different editions and the publication of 
a critical edition indicating important 
changes in the text. Apart from the aca- 
demic interest of such an enterprise, crit- 
ics now had a great opportunity to make 
a genealogical study of the text and a com- 
parison of the different versions from a 
linguistic and semiotic point of view. 
Literary critics and Azuela specialists 
jumped at the chance. 
The fate of the text of Los de abajo 
closely resembles that of other works of 
Latin American literature, where all trace 
of manuscripts, drafts, or simple annota- 
tions indicating the author’s creative 
process has been lost. But it is also an 
example of the confusion that can arise 
when successive editions pick up mis- 
prints or spelling mistakes from a care- 
Cover illustration from the critical edition of the Uruguayan writer Enrique Amorim’s novel La carreta (“The Wagon”), recently published in the 
Archives Collection. Analysis of the author’s archives revealed over 1,500 differences between the first and sixth editions of the novel. 
Nad ll 3 A= 
j J p 
I yi 
 

## [Page 22](083206engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 83197: Literary detection and Latin American writing

lessly produced first edition, afterwards 
reproduced without anyone checking the 
original—something which is not always 
feasible. 
  
A revaluation of César Vallejo 
One of the most striking examples of 
this process is the work of the Peruvian 
poet, César Vallejo, which has had a 
chequered fate even though Vallejo is one 
of the major figures of Latin American 
literature. The two collections of poems 
published during his lifetime, Los heral- 
dos negros (1918; “The Black Heralds”) 
and Trilce (1922), were quickly forgotten. 
Reprints and anthologies published after 
his premature death in 1938 were full of 
inaccuracies. His publishers’ use of arbi- 
trary chronologies and indiscriminately- 
chosen titles, such as Poemas humanos 
(1939; “Human Poems”), has led to his 
work coming out in a distorted and frag- 
mentary form. 
Moreover, as often happens to 
writers whose estates give rise to bitter 
dispute among their heirs, the excessive 
zea] of Vallejo’s widow resulted in most 
of the poet’s output remaining unpub- 
lished for thirty years. Only in 1968, 
when Vallejo’s fame was established 
beyond doubt, did his widow agree to the 
publication of this body of work. Once 
again an arbitrary chronology and title 
were used—Poemas en prosa (‘Prose 
Poems”). As if this were not enough, 
other typescripts and manuscript origi- 
nals in her possession disappeared mys- 
teriously after her death in 1984. But the 
saga of Vallejo’s work did not end there. 
Some years ago, the first edition of the 
poems inspired by the Spanish Civil War, 
Espatia, aparta de mi este caliz (“‘Spain, 
take away this cup from me”), which was 
thought to have been lost at the time of 
the Republican defeat in 1939, was 
discovered hidden in the monastery of 
Montserrat in Catalonia. 
The task of retracing the develop- 
ment of Vallejo’s work from such incom- 
plete and unreliable elements was a great 
challenge. The absence of drafts, notes, 
manuscripts or first versions made it im- 
possible to undertake a complete genea- 
logical study of the kind which is possible 
when writers bequeath their papers to a 
national library. But a philological and 
genealogical study of the “internal” fea- 
tures of Vallejo’s work could be made 
which goes beyond mere conjecture. 
Proceeding from recurring themes and 
the evolution in style, an international 
team led by the critic Américo Ferrari has 
—_ 22 
 
TERRES TES 
The Cuban writer José Lezama Lima 
(1912-1976). A critical edition of his novel 
Paradiso has been published in the Archives 
Collection. 
succeeded in “deconstructing” existing 
anthologies and “constructing” an ap- 
proximate chronology which throws 
light on unpublished parts of the poet’s 
work and relates them to the whole, thus 
necessitating a reassessment of the defini- 
tive texts. 
  
‘Paradise’ regained 
A similar case is that of the Cuban 
writer José Lezama Lima. The first edi- 
tion of his voluminous novel Paradiso 
(“Paradise”) was full of typographical er- 
rors which for many years were taken to 
be deliberate mistakes made by the 
author, since he had checked the proofs. 
Seventy per cent of the errors which he 
had inadvertently overlooked were at- 
tributed to his style, to indiscriminate use 
of quotations and references and to the 
full stops and commas which he scattered 
in time with “the rhythm of his asthmatic 
breathing”, as he ironically remarked, 
and not according to the prevailing rules 
of grammar. 
An attempt was made several years 
later to correct the innumerable errors in 
the 1966 Cuban edition in a second, Mex- 
ican, edition supervised by the writer Ju- 
lio Cortazar. But a new problem arose. 
Not having the original manuscript from 
which to check the text, the publishers 
introduced new errors, changed Lezama 
Lima’s idiosyncratic style to the extent of 
altering the meaning of some passages, 
and corrected the author’s spelling of per- 
sonal and place names. Lezama Lima him- 
self lost interest. Letters addressed to him 
by his publisher remained unanswered 
and he claimed that checking the proofs 
of the text against the manuscript would 
“tire” him. 
Over twenty years went by before 
the published texts could be compared 
with the manuscripts deposited in the 
José Marti National Library in Havana. 
This painstaking task, carried out by 
Lezama Lima’s old friend, the poet Cin- 
tio Vitier, made it possible to establish the 
definitive text of Paradiso. There were 
many surprises, and thanks to the result- 
ing critical edition, many judgements of 
the novel are being revised. 
The examples of Azuela, Vallejo and 
Lezama Lima show how important it is 
to apply an adequate methodology when 
studying the “itinerary” of literary texts 
in regions like Latin America and the 
Caribbean, where insufficient importance 
has hitherto been attached to the preser- 
vation, evaluation and study of manu- 
scripts and to the variations which can 
exist between different editions of the 
same work. Literary manuscripts have 
not received the same attention as 
historical documents, and there are few 
countries whose national libraries have 
a department specializing in the pre- 
servation and study of their writers’ 
“archives”. 
  
29 years from Ist edition 
to ‘definitive text’ 
An interesting example is provided 
by the Literary Archives of Uruguay’s 
National Library, thanks to which it was 
possible to prepare a critical edition of 
Enrique Amorim’s La carreta (“The Wag- 
on”). The problem here was quite differ- 
ent from that posed by César Vallejo’s 
work, in that Amorim’s widow, Esther 
Haedo, had donated all her husband’s per- 
sonal papers, which included a lot of 
material relating to his work. There were 
enough manuscripts, drafts, plans, typed 
copies corrected by hand, and published 
texts (different editions of the novel) and 
a large dossier on matters relating to La 
carreta, such as correspondence and crit- 
ics’ reactions. The task was to classify and 
interpret all this material, 
Its analysis brought other facts to 
light. Amorim’s novel, published in 1932, 
was an amalgam of four short stories 
which appeared between 1923 and 1927. 
The first of them, Las Quintanderas, con- 
tained the “genetic seed” or nucleus of 
the novel, so that all the statements by 
the author, letters and controversies aris- 
ing from its publication, would be of fun- 
damental importance for a genealogical 
textual criticism.

## [Page 23](083206engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 83197: Literary detection and Latin American writing

Despite the novel's success, and the 
fact that the first two editions were sold 
out immediately, Amorim was not satis- 
fied with the structure of La carreta, feel- 
ing that it was too dependent on the 
original short stories. A couple of years 
later, he changed the order of the chap- 
ters, made stylistic changes in order to 
achieve greater unity, and published a 
third, revised edition. 
Although he was still dissatisfied with 
La carreta, Amorim dashed off other nov- 
els and stories which he published at this 
time. Obsessed by the “imperfect”, “un- 
finished’ character of this first novel, he 
made further changes in the text of ev- 
ery edition. In 1942 he even added a new 
chapter, which had been published as a 
short story entitled Carreta solitaria a 
year earlier. It was not until the sixth 
edition of 1952 that the “definitive” text 
of the novel was established. Like Bou- 
vard et Pécuchet, the structure of which 
greatly preoccupied Gustave Flaubert, 
Amorim’s novel, put together from ° 
“remnants” and worked upon during a 
large part of his life, became its author’s 
favourite. 
This creative process lasting twenty- 
nine years has left over 1,500 differences 
between the first and last editions of La 
carreta. Their inventory is of interest be- 
cause the “deconstruction” of the novel, 
from the definitive 1952 edition back to 
the short story of 1923, has made it pos- 
sible to study the development of the 
work. 
The paradox of La carreta is that the 
critical edition of a work that is imper- 
fect but laboriously prepared is more in- 
teresting than that of one which is 
theoretically perfect but was written “‘at 
one go”. Amorim could have agreed with 
the German thinker Walter Benjamin, 
who said that “for a great writer, a 
finished work is of less importance than 
a fragment on which he has been work- 
ing all his life”. 
  
Cortazar’s logbook 
In the development of genealogical 
textual criticism in Latin America, in 
which an initiative like the Archives 
Collection* plays an important role, the 
The children’s game of hopscotch (Spanish 
Rayuela) inspired the structure of Argentine 
writer Julio Cortazar’s eponymous novel as 
well as providing its title. Sketches of the 
game, two of which are reproduced here, are 
scattered throughout El cuaderno de biticora 
de Rayuela, the notebook he kept while 
writing the novel. 
Argentine author Julio Cortazar has in- 
voluntarily provided excellent material 
for researchers. When he began writing 
his novel Rayuela (1963; Hopscotch) on 7 
November 1958, he decided to keep a sort 
of diary of the creative process which he 
significantly called El cuaderno de biticora 
de Rayuela, or “the log book of Rayue- 
la”, to which he committed at random 
outlines of scenes, lists of characters, suc- 
cessive plans for the arrangement of the 
work, diagrams and sketches, all of which 
represented the development of the nov- 
el he was to publish five years later. 
The career of this log book did not 
end with the publication of Rayuela in 
1963. Exactly twenty years later, in 1983, 
El cuaderno de bitacora de Rayuela was 
published in Buenos Aires and in turn be- 
came an object of genealogical study. 
Whether they deal with incomplete 
or carefully preserved manuscripts, scat- 
tered literary archives or those deposited 
in public or private collections, studies of 
this kind are attracting more and more 
interest in regions like Latin America and 
the Caribbean, whose “voices of identi- 
ty” are raised in the cause of safeguard- 
ing our heritage, of which the written 
word is one of the essential pillars. ™ 
* The five examples cited in this article are taken 
from the first genealogical studies of texts and the 
creative process in Latin American countries, made 
possible by the creation of the Archives Collection 
(see article page 18). 
 
FERNANDO AINSA, Uruguayan writer, is a 
Unesco staff member. He is the author of many es- 
says and novels including Los buscadores de la uto- 
pa (“The Quest for Utopia”) and Mdentidad cultural 
de Iberoamérica en su narrativa (“The Cultural lden- 
tity of Spanish-speaking America in its Fiction”). 
He was director of the critical edition of Enrique 
Amorim’s novel La carreta which has appeared in 
the Archives Collection. 
1D 
      
AWA Wisin 
wf uke 
nat eh (nba ) 
Yuoricle (Glac) Crruia    
      
  
 
  
  
  

## [Page 24](083206engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 83198: The Birth of a language

THE BIRTH OF A LANGUAGE 
The many occupations an Aztec boy could choose are shown in this page from the “Codex 
Mendoza”, a 16th-century record of Aztec life. At top centre, a father describes them to his son. 
ATIN American writers have de- 
veloped a complex about the lan- 
guage in which they write because 
they have always felt that it was not their 
own. Many writers of metropolitan 
Spain, especially purists, have encouraged 
this feeling by assuming proprietary 
rights over the Spanish language and 
relegating Latin American literature to 
the status of a mere offshoot of Spanish 
literature. This attitude was summed up 
24 __ 
by the Spanish essayist and novelist 
Azorin (1874-1967), who frankly declared 
at the beginning of the century that “we 
are the souls of the language”. 
Philologists and linguists have tried 
to explain this phenomenon which simul- 
taneously united and separated writers on 
each side of the Atlantic. There is a lin- 
guistic ‘“‘system’” which for obvious 
historical and political reasons is called 
Castilian or Spanish. This system has 
variants within Spain and, with much 
greater justification, in Latin America. 
The substrata of Amerindian languages, 
the influence, in regions such as the 
Caribbean, of African languages and of 
contributions by immigrants, as well as 
the language of creative writers, have 
profoundly marked the phonetic modu- 
lations, word-structures, syntax and 
vocabulary of Latin American Spanish. - 
They have strongly influenced and 
impregnated this language which has been 
used for centuries, but they have not 
destroyed the unity of the system. It is 
the same Spanish language, variegated and 
enriched—why not?>—by contributions 
which reflect the cultural and historical 
context of Latin America. 
This situation is the result of a long, 
hard struggle, often waged in obscurity, 
to achieve and assert a cultural identity. 
The struggle finally bore fruit in the 
twentieth century. The theory of the 
Spanish linguistic system and its variants 
is the expression of a linguistic situation 
that clearly appeared at a specific moment 
in the history of Latin American 
literature—the moment when Latin 
American writers lost their inferiority 
complex vis-a-vis their Iberian colleagues 
and dared to assume their language. This 
turning point marked the emergence of 
a literature, initially poetic but later 
predominantly narrative, which asserted 
the continent’s cultural identity through 
works of exceptional quality which 
testified to an original presence on the 
contemporary literary scene. 
Language is not the only determin- 
ing factor in the flowering of Latn 
American literature in recent decades. But 
in my opinion it is a decisive factor, if not 
the principal one, because the full as- 
sumption of one’s own language shapes 
the balance of expression and the prac- 
tice, without complexes or culpability, of 
letters. 
The Archives Collection (see article 
page 18) is revealing this decisive stage in 
the evolution of twentieth-century Latin 
American literature, through its mission 
to represent the entire continent, and 
through its methodology which en- 
courages the study of the original text and 
its variants. “Readings” by specialists 
representing a variety of trends in con- 
temporary literary criticism highlight 
different aspects of each work. A mul- 
udisciplinary approach is used in the

## [Page 25](083206engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 83198: The Birth of a language

BY RUBEN BAREIRO SAGUIER 
preparation of critical editions in which 
the study of details is combined with an 
analysis of the wider significance of the 
work in question. 
Since the Archives Collection com- 
prises works produced since the begin- 
ning of the century, it enables the reader 
to follow the development of Latin 
American writing from its last stage of in- 
security to its affirmation as a literature 
which has discovered its mode of expres- 
sion. Since all Latin American countries 
are represented, the reader has a com- 
plete, comparative view of the variants 
which exist within the linguistic system 
outlined above. The Collection also illus- 
trates a basic fact about the linguistic sit- 
uation in Latin America. What, by 
reference to a narrow, repressive critical 
tradition, was once regarded as a form of 
inadequacy, a blameworthy fault, a vice 
that contaminated the “purity” of the 
Castilian tongue, is actually a source of 
enrichment to a changing language. Few 
languages, in fact, are nourished from so 
many sources as Spanish. This fact is now 
accepted by the writers and even by the 
academics of Spain, and is helping the’ 
members of both communities to under- 
stand each other more fully and to feel 
that they belong to the same cultural 
community. 
The Archives Collection is contribut- 
ing to the search for, or rather to the 
affirmation of, the Latin American iden- 
tity. One area unexplored in this search, 
although it concerns the roots of Latin 
ol SHAVE : 
A (GVALPA- C DOERR 
Ta 
ou ) f st Fe qu 
fo a — - 
{ \ 
   
 
  
  
American identity, is that of the Amer- 
indian literatures. At the first plenary 
session of ALLCA, the Latin American, 
Caribbean and African 20th-century 
Literary Archives Association, a proposal 
was approved for the publication of texts 
from this deep-rooted, predominantly 
oral form of expression before it disap- 
22 - 
lad 1 van (E nin Las 
ADM eed AW 
a L -— 
CMake do halla wwe haven ada. duds 
-— 
de wad 
Yvv MJAR Que ol Oo abu of 
¢ 
HMA pT 5 vy a. LLL oY > 
Qi & frre 
fo hae 0 dandad + 
Ann alee de 4 
wi Lae 
  
fu HD OMLAV AM a7 | Uw iv, Oy Aas » p. n Uh rar od Wadn- : 
AN vil tm fol ns Un dura > 
wy Qo us. all, bons onsrusshin. 
gully Wade Gada fa f pry 
de tot Srni/Te 
Tv , > oo 
Tis da Jwdna yall y va Thre ov PPI Po 
, ol bdr 
as Yd fora, 
* fle De irndard Juve 2 Dama bride pur i 
anion wn fadasmas, whwrlas, bar wad Winn 
nl) , Vert sarod the Sain 0 pul C wy 
plchehataran eons ds Valid od doe habeas a aQuuiads vinta 
A tdelnos de Sha ne Noavma hie a hs 
waa wndoda. wglus ab ta wad und ads iM Td H A, 
Wada, nd Lada Ord (AR 
Cid 
das tae be ua dik Hou. 
du rire ie" share Takia fe tenis 
ie anal RA as Ud fra Sly. hi 
von Coma Var, 4. tcsskisdien. Su daw 
5 th sh luc dime 7 Td 
da oF 
Hr Loi ori Af 
FR rir rai Lankan 
REA 
\ wk a 
pears. Implementation of this proposal 
will make it possible to preserve or res- 
cue texts which are notable not only for 
their beauty but because they contain 
essential clues to the understanding of the 
founding cultures of Latin America. 
These texts are as inexhaustible as the soil 
in which they have been buried, but they 
are also as fleeting as the murmur of a 
voice, a trace of the collective memory 
Two Inca women kneel before the Spanish 
conquistadors Francisco Pizarro and Diego de 
Almagro. This is one of many illustrations 
from a two-part work entitled Nueva cronica 
(1600) and Buen gobierno (1615) by the 
Peruvian historian Felipe Guamin Poma de 
Ayala (1534-1615). 
Atha wn gun pair 
Un RL andad Beaaneid Lode han Ia Jr oarede Ay, 
{Ronchade, fw Mibantal y 
unk ih. ful {amide 
Sonasnimiimiiandt 
wltader 
Ya det bdigomats al dems 
a adn lupe a 
Wo lbhiwrla, 2 fo. 
os MARA BD hewn. 
[A wha, L oly oh dwn de da, rn oe a gras 
ogustat a Oonen nd 400 
Left, page 9 of the 
manuscript of 
Memorias de Mama 
Blanca (1929), a novel 
by the Venezuelan 
writer Teresa de la 
Parra (1895-1936), 
above. The 
manuscript is 
preserved in the 
National Library of 
Venezuela, Caracas. 
w frat fan. cms 
tontha 
asi 
: & vid 
of a people. Their publication will bring 
a magnificent cultural enterprise to a 
fitting conclusion. [| 
  
RUBEN BAREIRO SAGUIER is a Paraguayan 
writer and a specialist in the Guarani culture and 
language. He is a researcher at the French National 
Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS) and 2 mem- 
ber of the international scientific committee of the 
Archives Collection. Among his publications are lin- 
guistic studies and collections of poetry and short 
stories. 
— 25

## [Page 26](083206engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

Fountain in the Plaza 
Real, Barcelona 
   
    
  
. a] 
= EEL ed Le 
Be Akal i 
  
  


### 83202: A Thousand years of Catalan history

A THOUSAND YEARS 
OF CATALAN HISTORY 
BY FRANCESC VALLVERDU 
EN centuries ago, the Count of Barcelona severed the 
ties of feudal loyalty that bound him to his liege lord, 
the King of France. From then on, a territorial, social 
and political entity centred on the ancestral house of Barcelo- 
na grew in strength and, from the thirteenth century onwards, 
was known as Catalonia. 
As a marchland and the outpost of Carolingian Europe in 
Muslim Spain during the High Middle Ages, and the driving 
force behind Catalan and Aragonese expansion between the 
twelfth and fifteenth centuries, Catalonia has a historical con- 
26 
tinuity of which even many Spaniards are unaware. Hence, the 
commemoration of its “birth” a thousand years ago is more 
than a strictly political event. 
Catalonia is a small territory of some 32,000 square 
kilometres which is situated in the north-eastern corner of the 
Iberian peninsula and forms part of the kingdom of Spain. 
However, historical Catalonia included part of southern France, 
and even today some people think of Catalonia as encompass- 
ing the Catalan-speaking regions of Valencia, the Balearic Is- 
lands, Andorra, and the French Département of Pyrénées

## [Page 27](083206engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 83202: A Thousand years of Catalan history

Orientales. But let us leave polemics aside. The region referred 
to in this article is the autonomous community of the “Gener- 
alitat de Catalunya”, whose capital is Barcelona. 
In geographical terms, present-day Catalonia is a triangular- 
shaped region bounded in the north by the mountain chain 
of the Pyrenees, in the east and south by the Mediterranean, 
and in the west by the provinces of Aragon and Valencia, which 
are irrigated by the River Ebro. There is a wide variety of cli- 
mate and relief. In the north are the Pyrenees, whose limestone 
spurs extend southwards. The transversal north-eastern cor- 
dillera and the Mediterranean coastal ranges make a contrast 
with the Ebro basin and the coastal plains. Although the cli- 
mate is predominantly Mediterranean, the high mountain areas 
are Alpine in character. 
From barely two million in 1900, Catalonia’s population 
has risen to six million today. The increase is primarily due 
to immigration, which has compensated for the low birth rate 
of the Catalan population. 
Catalonia is one of Europe’s most economically dynamic 
regions. It occupies a pre-eminent position in the Spanish econ- 
omy, along with Madrid and the Basque region. The industrial 
sector is particularly strong and is concentrated on textiles, 
paper and the graphic arts, chemicals and metallurgy, and 
tourism. 
  
A dynasty that ruled for 5 centuries 
Some 3,000 years ago the region was settled by Iberian tribes 
with which the Phoenicians and Greeks established trade rela- 
tions, and in the third century BC it became part of the Ro- 
man province of Hispania. As elsewhere in Spain, Roman 
civilization left an indelible mark on the language, culture and 
law of Catalonia, which even inherited its agricultural and fish- 
ing techniques from Rome. 
Mending fishing nets, Barcelona harbour 
pT EI 
a m ISERRERSE fioreipesopiy 
Ep Tis it ei: 
  
        
  
    
 
| 
rian 
After the fall of the Roman Empire, Hispania was invaded 
by Germanic tribes and later by the Moors. In the eighth cen- 
tury AD, Charlemagne set up a number of vassal earldoms in 
the eastern Pyrenean region of France as marchlands facing Mus- 
lim Spain. When the Count of Barcelona became independent 
of the French kings in the tenth century, he established a dy- 
nasty that would govern Catalonia for the next five centuries. 
In the twelfth century, the Count of Barcelona became, through 
marriage, the king of Aragon. From then onwards, the Catalan- 
Aragonese confederation, also known as the Crown of Aragon, 
expanded into the eastern part of the Iberian peninsula. It con- 
quered Valencia, the Balearic Islands and later Sardinia, Naples 
and Sicily, and eventually reached Greece and North Africa. 
This was a splendid period of Catalan culture. Among its artis- 
tic and intellectual highlights were its Romanesque (see page 
29} and later Gothic, art and architecture and in literature the 
work of the thirteenth-century philosopher and mystic Ramon 
Llull and the fifteenth-century poet Ausias March. 
  
Crisis and loss of independence 
In the fifteenth century, Catalan society experienced a 
demographic crisis owing to the great plague, and an econom- 
ic and political crisis when the dynasty of the House of Barce- 
lona came to an end. The Crown of Aragon passed to rulers 
of Castilian origin. During the reign of the Catholic monarchs 
Ferdinand and Isabella at the end of the fifteenth century, the 
kingdoms of Aragon and Castile were united, although each 
maintained its political autonomy. This de facto confederacy 
lasted until the eighteenth century when Philip V, victor of 
the War of the Spanish Succession and the first Bourbon king 
of Spain, conquered the former territories of the Crown of Ara- 
gon and annexed them to the Court of Castile. 
  
   
 

## [Page 28](083206engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

The philosopher, 
mystic and poet 
Ramon Llull (c. 
1233-1316), one of the 
founders of Catalan 
literature. Often 
referred to as the 
“Visionary Doctor”, 
Llull devoted his life 
to meditation and 
missionary work. This 
18thcentury portrait, 
an engraving by the 
Italian artist 
Domenico Rossetti, is 
based on an earlier 
painting by Jan-Frans 
van Douven.   
In 1714, Catalonia lost its political independence and self- 
governing institutions, and the Catalan language was banned 
from education and public administration. At the same time, 
the region began to recover from the economic decline into 
which it had fallen between the fifteenth and the seventeenth 
centuries. The contrast between economic expansion, based on 
advances in agriculture and industry, and a lack of political 
decision-making powers was the fundamental reason for the 
Catalonia’s instability during the nineteenth century and one 
of the decisive causes of the political crisis in Spain. 
  
The recovery of autonomy 
Although, with the proclamation of the Catalan Republic 
in 1931, it seemed that the crisis in the Spanish state could be 
resolved by democratic means, while respecting the autonomy 
of Catalonia, that illusion was soon dashed by the terrible Civil 
War which lasted from 1936 to 1939. After General Franco’s 
victory, Spain was subjected to a fascist-inspired dictatorship 
which, for Catalonia and the Basque region, entailed the loss 
of their national liberties and their governing institutions. 
The situation began to change again with the restoration 
of democracy in 1975. Two years later Catalonia recovered its 
traditional self-governing institution, the Generalitat, and since 
1979 it has enjoyed self-governing status as an autonomous com- 
munity within the Kingdom of Spain. 
Over a period of ten centuries, then, Catalonia has deve- 
loped into a viable national community and a strong-willed peo- 
ple which has asserted itself through the vicissitudes of its 
history. 
  


### 83202: A Thousand years of Catalan history

A cultural boon 
Today Catalonia can celebrate the thousandth anniversary 
of its political independence with serenity and optimism. 
Although only twelve years have passed since 1977, it is worth 
recalling that Catalonia has not enjoyed such a long period of 
political autonomy and democracy for three centuries. The 
Catalan language has recovered its status as an official language 
_ 28 __ 
alongside Castilian Spanish, it is taught in all educational es- 
tablishments and it is increasingly heard on radio and televi- 
sion. There is a boom in Catalan literature not only within the 
region, where over 4,500 books a year in Catalan are published, 
but elsewhere, owing to the translation into Spanish, English, 
French and other languages of the works of our great medieval 
and classical writers such as Ramon Llull, Bernat Metge, Au- 
sias March, Joariot Martorell, as well as those of contemporary 
authors like Josep Carner, Salvador Espriu, ]J.V. Foix, Merce 
Rodoreda and Joan Perucho. - 
Catalan art, which in this century has produced such world- 
famous figures as the architect Gaudi, the musician Pau (Pab- 
lo) Casals, and the painters Joan Miré, Salvador Dal{ and An- 
toni Tapies, has brought extraordinary stature to our culture, 
which will surely be appreciated by the visitors who will at- 
tend the Olympic Games in Barcelona in 1992. 
Certainly there are problems which cast a shadow over 
some aspects of this positive report, but perhaps their very ex- 
istence is a sign of the vitality of Catalonia and its ability to 
take up the challenges of the next thousand years. u 
FRANCESC VALLVERDU, Catalan writer and educator, is the founder of 
the Catalan Sociolinguistic Group and editor-in-chief of the review Treballs de 
Sociolingdiistica Catalana. 
Car manufacturing plant, Barcelona 
K fa {il 1 . Ite 
Ri i | iat: 
= 
— 
    
      
   
" 
Pi NX) fo . A 
a : 3 
Hy | a 12110] vi 
3 = | 4 I : } a 
vA | Soil | ls . 4° c 
| 2 =, 
4 | 
 

## [Page 29](083206engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 83203: Romanesque treasures of Catalonia

ROMANESQUE TREASURES 
OF CATALONIA 
  
RTISTIC styles tend to be strongly associated with the 
countries where they originated (as in the case of Renais- 
sance art in Italy or the Gothic style of northern France) 
or with the countries where their most important works were 
produced (such as Baroque painting in Spain). 
But styles are also associated with certain countries for other 
reasons. Thus the Romanesque style is associated with Catalo- 
nia although, judged in terms of the numbers of high quality 
works found there, Gothic would seem to be a more represen- 
tative Catalan style. Furthermore, many works of architecture, 
sculpture and painting from the Romanesque period in Caralo- 
nia are largely inspired by foreign models from southern France 
and, especially, from northern Italy. 
Catalonia’s association with Romanesque art stems from 
the fact that the country’s historical origins and the affirma- 
BY EDUARD CARBONELL I ESTELLER 
An outstanding 
example of Catalan 
Romanesque 
architecture, the 11th- 
century monastery of 
Sant Pere de Rodes is 
located in a 
mountainous setting 
near Gerona. 
tion of its nationhood date from the tenth and eleventh centu- 
ries. There are two factors in the art of this period which, I 
believe, explain this sense of beginning and affirmation. These 
are an early form of Romanesque based on the indigenous forms 
of a previous tradition, and an internationalist ambition. 
  
The pre-Romanesque tradition 
Apart from the main trends in Romanesque architecture 
represented by the Lombard style of northern Iraly, remarka- 
ble buildings were being constructed in Catalonia in the early 
decades of the eleventh century which continued an earlier style, 
— 29

## [Page 30](083206engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

A major monument such as the monastery church of Sant Pere 
de Rodes at Gerona, consecrated in 1022, represents a continu- 
ation of the great international architecture of the previous cen- 
tury, the most typical example of which is the church of Sant 
Miquel at Cuxa, on the northern slope of the Pyrenees, which 
was associated with the Benedictine abbey of Cluny in Burgun- 
dy, France. 
Sant Pere de Rodes church is notable for the presence of 
classical architectural features, such as the superposed order of 
the columns and the monumental quality of the construction. 
This continuation of pre-Romanesque art is also represented 
by two outstanding early eleventh-century illuminated bibles 
from the monasteries at Rodes and Ripoll, which are preserved, 
respectively, in the Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris, and the Vati- 
can Library, Rome. 
Meanwhile, the architectural trend from Lombardy reached 


### 83203: Romanesque treasures of Catalonia

Catalonia and became widely influential. The Lombard type 
of construction dominates the architectural landscape of the ear- 
ly Romanesque period in Catalonia with such remarkable build- 
ings as the church of Sant Pere de Casserres, the monastery of 
Santa Maria at Ripoll, and the building which is to my mind 
the paradigm of this style, the collegiate church of Sant Viceng 
at Cardona (Barcelona). 
  
Inspiration from Italy and France 
The international character of Romanesque art is another 
feature which associates it with Catalonia, whose outward- 
looking spirit during the Romanesque period was an expres- 
sion of political and religious assertiveness. This is reflected in 
the importance of religious centres such as Ripoll and Cuxa 
     
- = : 
v | 5 ) L\ / J A 
od \ ’, J 8 
Eble, 4 " & 
as | 
    
~~ 
      
    
  
   
Left, Romanesque frescos in the apse of the church of Sant Climent de 
Tahull, Lérida. The central figure of Christ Pantocrator (All Powerful) 
rests His feet on the world. On either side of His head are inscribed 
the first and last letters of the Greek alphabet, alpha and omega, 
symbolizing the beginning and end of Creation. These paintings, 
executed in 1123, rank among the finest examples of Catalan 
Romanesque art. 
and the cathedrals of Vich, Gerona and Barcelona. These were 
cultural centres of European importance frequented by people 
like Pietro Orseolo (991-1008), Duke of Venice, and the monk 
Gerbert of Aurillac (c. 945-1003), who became Pope Sylvester II. 
Catalan Romanesque sculpture and the best Catalan 
Romanesque painting also reveal foreign influences. The chief 
examples reflect Italian and French styles but sometimes there 
is also a short-lived Islamic influence. 
The splendid series of paintings in the church of Sant Quirze 
de Pedret, and the wall paintings from the churches of Santa 
Marta and Sant Climent de Tahull, were undoubtedly the work 
of artists who followed the great Italian school of mural paint- 
ing. In sculpture, the influence of the workshops of Roussil- 
lon, southern France, and later of those of Languedoc, especially 
the great centre of Toulouse, is manifest in the capitals of 
columns at Vich cathedral and in the imposing portal of Santa 
Maria monastery at Ripoll. 
International influences are also evident towards the end 
of the twelfth century, in the cloister of Tarragona cathedral 
which is possibly the work of artists from the last Toulouse 
workshops. Like the Daurade in Toulouse or Master Antela- 
mi’s work in Parma, northern Italy, the Tarragona sculpture 
represents the swan song of Romanesque art, which was to give 
way to Early Gothic from northern France.

## [Page 31](083206engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

  
        
  
Catalan Romanesque art produced many works of outstand- 
ing beauty. Apart from those already mentioned, typical ex- 
amples include the cathedral of Seu d’Urgell at Lérida, 
completed in 1175 by Raimundus Lambardus according to 
Italian models, the collegiate church of Sant Joan de les Abadess- 
es at Gerona, consecrated in 1150, and the magnificent cloisters, 
rich in sculpture, in Gerona cathedral, the church of Sant Pere 
de Galligant, also at Gerona, and the Benedictine abbey of Sant 
Cugat del Vallés near Barcelona. 
This late style can also be observed in painting, especially 
panel painting, but in this case with a Byzantine influence from 
southern Italy which reached the studios of Roussillon painters. 
  
Church iconography and the decorative arts 
After such early works as those of Sant Joan de Boi, which 
~ recall the Carolingian style, a high point was reached around 
1100 with the paintings at Sant Quirze de Pedret and, a little 
later, with the Tahull ensemble which dates from 1123 and is 
executed in a more geometrical style. The link with stylistic 
trends from the other side of the Pyrenees is evident in such 
works as the apse paintings from Santa Maria de Mur (now in 
the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, USA) and in the paintings 
preserved in the church of Santa Maria de Barbera. 
Sculpted figure of Christ in Majesty adorns the tympanum of 
a mid-12th-century doorway in the monastery church of Santa Maria 
at Ripoll, Catalonia.  
Catalan panel painting of the late twelfth and early thir- 
teenth century is in some respects comparable only to that of 
Italy in the rich decoration it provided for liturgical furniture, 
altar frontals, canopies and apse beams. 
Also outstanding are the great carved wooden figures such 
as that of Christ in Majesty, rendered with great intensity, lean- 
ing on the cross, attired in noble garments; the Mother of God 
on the sedes sapientiae; and sculptured groups including those 
representing the Descent from the Cross. 
The most important centres for the production of illumi- 
nated manuscripts were at Vich and Ripoll and, later, in the 
cathedral of Tortosa, at Tarragona, and in Barcelona cathedral. 


### 83203: Romanesque treasures of Catalonia

A high degree of excellence was also achieved in crafts, es- 
pecially textiles (in such works as the eleventh-century tapes- 
try of the Creation in Gerona cathedral), and the 
Limoges-inspired art of enamel-making, most of whose products 
are preserved in the two richest museums of Catalan 
Romanesque art, the Museum of Catalan Art in Barcelona and 
the Episcopal Museum at Vich. [| 
EDUARD CARBONELL I ESTELLER, professor of art history at the Au- 
tonomous University of Barcelona, has published many studies on medieval 
and Romanesque art, and notably on Catalan art of the high Middle Ages. He 
is currently serving as director-general of the cultural heritage of the autono- 
mous region of Catalonia. 
The late 12th-century cloister of Tarragona cathedral may have 
been built by stone-masons from Toulouse in southern France.

## [Page 32](083206engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

  
HE architecture of Antoni Gaudi (1852-1926) and the 
painting of Salvador Dali (1904-1989) have a distinctive 
aesthetic power which raises many questions for those 
who seek to understand the innermost meaning of their work. 


### 83205: Gaudí and Dalí, the art of excess

Both artists have been described as geniuses, as creators 
afflicted by madness, men whose minds were caught in the 
hallucinations created by certain forms arising from the 
subconscious. Admired and contested by their contemporaries, 
they mocked the cultural tenets of their time and succeeded, 
with bravado and originality, in creating an extraordinary world 
of novel ideas which are now internationally acknowledged as 
high points in the annals of art. 
Both Gaudi and Dali were natives of Catalonia, a region 
which prides itself on dividing its people into two categories: 
those who are balanced, serious-minded and well-behaved; and 
those who are consumed by a kind of rage, who are impulsive, 
quick-tempered and wilful. 
In their own region, Gaudi and Dali are generally thought 
of as belonging to the impulsive category, most probably 
because, at some point in time, with the clearsightedness born 
32 ___ 
GAUDI AND DALI, 
“ SR 
Far left, in 1953 
Salvador Dali 
examines a sheet of 
paper being made by 
hand for an edition of 
the Book of 
Revelation to which 
he contributed an 
illustration. Left, 
Capricorn, lithograph 
by Dali from a series 
on the signs of the 
zodiac. Right, 
Osificacién matinal del 
cipres, a painting 
executed by Dali in 
1934. 
  
of good judgement, they opted for the freedom of the spirit 
and the creative imagination. 
It is not surprising that Catalonia’s main cultural attractions 
and international tourist draws should be the architecture of 
Gaudi in Barcelona and the Dali Theatre-Museum in Figueras. 
Each artist in his own way epitomizes the essential charac- 
ter of the region, and interprets its landscape, the forces of na- 
ture at work there and its traditional mythology. 
  
Gaudi and the architecture of the fantastic 
Antoni Gaudi was born into a family of craftsmen, from 
whom he learned the secrets of the traditional trades and familia- 
rized himself with the techniques they used. He studied architec- 
ture in Barcelona, where he was awarded his diploma in 1878, 
at a time when, in the wake of a cultural and political revival, 
“modernismo’’ was starting to emerge in Spain as a movement 
in architecture and the decorative arts contemporary with Art 
Nouveau which spread throughout Europe in the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. 
Although he was rejected by the public opinion of his time, 
he enjoyed the support of a prosperous and enterprising mid- 
dle class, which sought its identity in the extravagant buildings 
he designed. 
The secret of Gaudl’s art is that he succeeded in grasping 
the patterns present in nature and the organic world and was 
capable of selecting from their infinite variety of shapes those 
that could be transposed into architecture. He pursued this 
course with great imagination: tree-trunks, branches, bones, 
ribs, fishing nets and flowers all became ideas for designs which 
he used in churches, parks, schools and other buildings. 
All his work was based on logic and reasoning and was 
thought out down to the smallest detail. Underlying the 
exuberant fantasy of the shapes he used, there was always a 
rational calculation and a far-reaching study of the loads and 
forces involved and of the function of all the structural elements

## [Page 33](083206engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 83205: Gaudí and Dalí, the art of excess

THE ART OF EXCESS BY DANIEL GIRALT-MIRACLE 
which he brought into, play. He applied this method of work- 
ing as much to the large columns supporting a facade as to the 
tiniest ornamental details reproduced in ceramic tiles, glass, 
wood or wrought iron. Essentially, he was seeking to achieve 
a work of total art, in which the parts and the whole were in 
harmony and conferred on the architecture a new and differ- 
ent personality, full of aesthetic meaning, 
  
Dali on a tightrope between the real 
and the imaginary 
Salvador Dali is a very similar case to Gaudi. He drew his 
inspiration from the wild and secluded Costa Brava, with its 
steep and rocky shoreline, and from the enigmatic landscapes 
of the Ampurdan region constantly buffeted by the Tramon- 
tane, the northerly. wind coming off the mountains. 
After studying art in Madrid, where he was a contemporary 
of Luis Buiiuel, Garcia Lorca, Rafael Alberti and other figures 
of the Spanish avant-garde of the 1930s, he exhibited his work 
in Barcelona, where his paintings and eccentricities made him 
a celebrity. In 1928 he moved to Paris, where the Surrealist 
group of artists and writers were so taken aback by his work 
that the French poet André Breton declared that Dali embod-   
Below, fountain in the Giiell Park, Barcelona, designed by the Catalan sculptor and architect Antoni Gaudi (1852:1926). 
 

## [Page 34](083206engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

ied the Surrealist spirit: ‘the poetic and visionary images of his 
paintings possess an extraordinary intensity and explosive 
force.”’* 
He invented an imaginary world. An authentic landscape 
of the mind came to the surface through his depictions of “soft” 
watches, boundless perspectives stretching into infinity, elon- 
gated staffs, human limbs exaggerated out of all proportion, 
giraffes bursting into flames, gold coins and other forms that 
made him a fitting exemplar of the “paranoiac critical” theory 
embraced so enthusiastically by Freud and the painters and 
poets of the time, whereby images were brought up from the 
subconscious mind. 
Dali often claimed that his entire work was a projection 
of his inner world, the representation of his subconscious, and 
the obsessions and fantasies of an artist who turned his hand 
with equal energy to painting, sculpture, literature, drama, stage 
design, jewellery, film-making, the design of artefacts and public 
“happenings”. 
The Dali Theatre-Museum in Figueras, which was found- 
ed in- 1974, epitomizes the world of fantasy, theatrical effect 
and over-brimming imagination inhabited by Salvador Dali, a 
figure who was a source of interest to poets and artists, film- 
makers and scientists, philosophers and politicians, children and 
adults alike. 
Curiously enough, Gaudi and Dali are two typically Cata- 
lan figures, each of whose names, in both origin and meaning, 
define the form taken by their lives: “gaudi” (gaudir) means 
to “enjoy” delving into interestiag questions, while “dali” (delir) 
signifies “being impelled by an overwhelming urge”. 
Such is the intense and passionate force of these artists who, 


### 83205: Gaudí and Dalí, the art of excess

drawing inspiration from their native soil and driven forward 
by their genius, became universal figures speaking through art, 
the most universal of all languages. u 
* André Breton, Entretiens 1913-1952, Gallimard, Paris, 1952 
DANIEL GIRALT-MIRACLE, Catalan art critic and writer, is a former lec- 
turer at the University of Barcelona and the Autonomous University of Barce- 
lona. He is currently vice-president of the International Association of Art Critics 
and Director of the Museum of Contemporary Art, Barcelona. 
Views of the Giiell 
Park, Barcelona 
34 
 
     
      
   
  
ro fr 
>a Ao ~~ . at 
p Se “ - - 
- FEN : v2 £, FT : . ‘ 2; 
SX Yo . ~~ . Sp 3 TN = 
dy A Pk a 1 : 3 ? gt al vy 
dn no NES LE 
PEs ad WE RE . 5 ' oe % , eel 1 WF
Aer ul ds NEES 
& Ro a rls . LS a - 
LE SR SE Tr 1 v 
2-1 : : . FETA ‘ 
Ws 1 4 vac ’ [ y “ W : 
p Ve _ : oo 3 Fy X: 
« TW oe] + y , 2H 
RU : \' I 
no ES oh | Mi | TRL 
raed vou ata ; po” oi CR Co 
yo y 3 
4 4 ¥ . 
os og " Ra” mae RS 6 » 
J 4 2 Yel, pi " 8 rf : a) 
BS Fe ¥ le & : ¥ > 
x : aa - oh y { 
i | va ay : tH v * I ¢ 
. i ‘ 5 . "wc - 
\ 
Pry a J on Be 4 ; 4 
» RS “ww Ww _- rk 2 
Poo ¢ > Y- yo. . 
I WN om a 
or A f° JUN Mics 
J 
MLL 2 JE . 
in 25 4 Lin 
FA LT 
. 
. » | L 
ht. q dT J 
WG IR id 
[EAT a 
gy, 
hw ~ 
Fe 5 " . 
A _ a ' 
\
 
\
 
) 
f 
NF
 
SA
N 
TA
Y 
El 
\ 
\
 A 
3/ 
19
8 
w
r
 
pe
 
th
e 
ul 
: ) 
y 
P
o

## [Page 35](083206engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National Distributor in your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors In countries not listed, along with subscription rates 
in local currency, wiil be supplied on request.) 
ALBANIA. ‘Ndermarna e perpjes se libnt’, Tirana. ARGENTINA, Librena el 
Correo de la Unesco - EDILYR, SRL, Tucuman 1685, 1050 Buenos Ares 
AUSTRALIA. Books only:: Educational Supplies Pty. Ltd. P.O. Bex 33, 
Brookvale 2100, NSW: Periodicals: Domine Pty. Subscriptions Dept, P.O, 
Box 33. Brookvale 2100, NSW. Sub-agents' United Nations Association of 
Australia, Victonan Dwision, 328 Flinders Street, Melbourne 3000.Hunter 
Publications, 58a Gipps St. Collingwood. Viciona 3066. AUSTRIA. Gerold 
and Co., Graben 31, A-1011, Vienna. BAHRAIN, United Schools Interna- 
tional, Arab Regional Office, P.Q. Box 726, Bahrain; The Arabian Agencies 
and Distnbuting Co.. Al Mutanabi St, PO Box 156, Manama, BANGLADESH 
Karnm International, GPO Box No: 2141, 647) Manipur Para, Tejgaon, 
Farmgate, Dhaka BARBADOS. University of the West Indies Bookshop, 
Cave Hilt Campus. P.Q. Box 64, Bridgetown. BELGIUM. Jean de Lannoy. 202 
Ave. du Roi, 1060 Brussels. BOTSWANA. Botswana Book Centre, PO Box 91 
Gaborone. BRAZIL. Fundagao Getllio Vargas, Servige del Publicagoes. 
cama postal 9.042-ZC-05 Praia de Botafogo 188, Rio de Janeiro (RJ) 2000; 
Books only. Imagem Latinoamencana, Av. Paulista 750, | andar, caixa postal 
30455, Sao Paulo CEP 01051. BULGARIA. Hemus, Kantora Literatura, 
boulevard Rousky 6, Sofia. BURMA. Trade Corporation no. (9). 550-552 
Merchant Street, Rangoon. CANADA. Renouf Pubhshing Co. Lid. 1294 
Algoma Road, Ottawa, Ontano K1B 3W8 (Stores: 61 Sparks Street, Ottawa, 
211 Yonge St., Toronto. Sales office: 7575 Trans Canada Hwy Ste. 305, St. 
Laurent, Quebec HAT 1V6. CAMEROQN. Cameroon Book Centre, PQ Box 
123, Limbe, Comruission Natonale, BP 1600, Yaounde. CHILE, Edhional 
Universitaria S.A., Departamento de Importaciones, M. Luisa Santander 
0447, casila 10220, Santiago; Editorial ‘Andrés Bello’, Av; R. Lyon 946, 
Casillo 4256, Santiago de Chile; Dipubic, Antonio Varas 671, 29 piso, casilla 
14364, Correo 21, Santiago CHINA, China National Publications Import and 
Export Corporation, P.O. Box 88, Bening COLOMBIA, Instituto Colombiano 
de Cultura (Colcultura), Carrera 3A, n® 187 24, Bogota; Books only” Librerta 
Buchholz Galena, Calle 59, No; 13-13, Bogota CYPRUS, "MAM', Archbishop 
Makarios 3rd Avene, PO Box 1722, Nicosia, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, SNT.L., 
Spalena 51-113 2, Prague 1; For, Slovakia only’ Alfa Verlag -Publishers, 
Hurbanovo nam. 6.893 31 Bratislava: PNS-UED, Jindrisska $4, praha 1: 
Slovart, Gottwaldovo Nam 6. 80532 Bratislavia. DEM. REP. OF YEMEN, 14th 
October Corporation, PO Box 4227, Aden, DENMARK. Munksgaard Export- 
OG. Tidsskrftservice. 35 Norre Sogade. DK-1970 Kobenhavn K. 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC Libreria Blasco, Avernda Bolivar, No; 402, esq 
Hermanos Deligne. Santo Domingo. EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). Un- 
esco Publications Centre, No. 1 Talaal Harb St., Cairo. ETHIOPIA. Ethiopian 
National Agency for Unesco, PO Box 2996. Addis Ababa. FINLAND. 
Akateeminen Kinjakauppa, P. O. Box 128. SF-00100 Helsinki. Suomalainen 
Kinakauppa Qy. Kowvuvaarankuja 2 01640 Vantaa 64. FRANCE. Librairie de 
I'Unesco. 7 Place de Fonlenoy. 75700 Pans Periodicals only; Unesco CPD / 
V-1, rue Miollis, 75015 Pans GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Buchex- 
port. Postfach 140, Leninsirasse 16, 7010, Leipzig FED. REP. OF GER- 
MANY, For the Unesco Courier: Mr. H. Baum, Deutscher Unesco-Kurier 
Vertnieb, Basaltstrasse 57, DS300 Bonn 3: UNO-Verlag, Simrockstrasse 23, 
D-5300 Bonn 1: S. Karger GmbH, Verlag Angerhotfstrasse 9, Postfach 2 
D-8034 Germenng / Munchen For scientific maps only: Geo Cenler, Postfach 
800830, 7000 Stuttgart 80. GHANA. Books only: Presbyterian Bookshop 
Depot Lid., PO Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Lid , PO 7869, Accra, 
The University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; The University Bookshop of Cape 
Coast; The University Bookshop ol Legon, PQ Box 1, Legon. Periodicals only: 
Fides Entreprises, P.O. Box 14129, Accra. GREAT BRITAIN. See United 
Kingdom. GREECE. Eleftheroudakis SA, International Bookstore, 4 Nikis 
Street, Athens, John Mihalopoulos & Son SA, International Booksellers. P.O. 
Box 10073, 541 10 Thessaloniki. Greek National Commission for unesco. 3 
Akadimias Street, Athens. HONG KONG. Swindon Book Co, 13-15 Lock 
Road, Kowloon: Federal Publications (HK) Ltd., Tokwawan, Kowloon; Hong 
Kong Gavernmenl Information Services. Publication Section, Hong Kong: 
Periodicals only: Beaconsfield House 6th floor, Queen's Road Central, Victor- 
ia, HUNGARY, Kultura-Bushimport-ABT, P.O.B. 149-H-1389, Budapesl 62 
ICELAND. Snaebjorn Jonsson and Co.. HF. Hatnarstraeti 9. Reykjavik. 
INDIA, Onent Longman Lid , Kamar Marg, Ballard Estate, Bombay 400038: 
17 Chitaranjan Ave., Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
5-9-41/1 Bashir Bagh. Hyderabad 500001 (AP); 80/1 Mahatma Gandhi Rd , 
Bangalore 560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda, Hyderabad-500001. Sub-agents. 
Oxford Book and Stationery Co , 17 Park St., Calcutta 70016; Scindia House, 
New Dethi 11 0001. INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers and Booksellers, 29, 
J1. Oto Iskandardinata 111, Jakarta; Indira P.T., JI Dr. Sam Ratulangie 37, 
Jakarta Pusat. IRAN. iranian National Commission for Unesco, 1188 Englab 
Ave, Rostam Give Building, P.O. Box 11365-4498, Teheran 13158 
IRELAND. Penodicals only: The Educational Company of Ireland Ltd , PO Box 
43A, Walkinstown, Dublin 12, Books only: TDC Publishers, 11 North Frederick 
Street, Dublin 7. ISRAEL, Literary Transactions, Inc., ¢/o Steimatzky Lid, 
P.O. Box 628, Tel Aviv; A B.C Bookstore Ltd , P.O. Box 1283, 71 Allenby Rd, 
Tel Aviv 61000. ITALY. Licosa (Librena Commissionana Sanson, Sp A}, Via 
Lamarmora 45, Caselta Postale 552, 50121 Florence; vta Bartolini 29, 20155 
Milan: FAQ Bookshop. via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome. JAMAICA. 
University of the West Indies Bookshop, Mona, Kingston 7. JAPAN. Eastern 
Book Service Inc., 37-3 Hongo 3-chome Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113. JORDAN 
Jordan Distribution Agency, PO Box 375, Amman. Periodicals only: Jordan 
Book Centre Co. Lid., PO Box 301, Al Jubeiha, Amman. KENYA. East Alncan 
Publishing House. PO 30571, Nairobi; Afnca Book Services Ltd, Quran 
House, Mangano Street, PO Box 45245, Nairobi KOREA, Korean National 
Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. KUWAIT. The Kuwait 
  
Photo credits 
Bookshop Co., Ltd. POB 2942, Kuwall; Periodicals only: Farafalla Press 
Agency. P.O. Box SAFA 4541, Kuwait. LEBANON. Librairie Antoine A. Naufal 
el Freres, BP 656, Bewrul. LESOTHO Mazenod Book Centre, PO Mazenod. 
Maseru. LIBERIA National Bookstore, Mechhn and Carey Streets, PO Box 
590. Monrovia. Cole and Yancy Bookshops Lid., PO Box 286, Monrovia » 
LUXEMBOURG. Books only: Libraine Paul Bruck. 22, Grande-Rue, Luxem- 
bourg; Periodical: Messageries Paul Kraus, BP 1022. Luxembourg MALAWI! 
Malawi Book Service. Head Office, PO Box 30044, Chichiri, Blantyre 3 
MALAYSIA. Unwersity of Malaya Co-operative Bookshop, Kuala Lumpur 
22-11. MALTA, Sapienzas. 26 Republic St, Vallea. MAURITANIA GRA.L).- 
COMA. 1 rue du Souk X. Avenue kennedy. Nouakchott. MAURITIUS. 
Nalanda Company Ltd., 30 Bourbon St.. Port-Lows. MEXICO. Librena E) 
Correo de la Unesco. Actipan 66, Colonia del Valle. Apartado postal 61 164, 
06600 Mexico DF. MONACO. Bntish Library, 30 Bd. des Moulins, Monte 
Carlo. MORROCCO. Libraine ‘Aux belles images’, 282 ave. Mohammed-V., 
Rabat; Libraine des écoles, 12 ave, Hassan-ll. Casaglanca, Société chenlien- 
ne de disinbution el de presse, SOCHEPRESS, angle rues de Dinant et St. 
Saens, BP 13683, Casablanca 05. MOZAMBIQUE. Institulo National do Livro 
e do Disco (INLD), avenida 24 de Julho, 1921+ / d 1° andar, Maputo NEPAL. 
Saha Prakashan Polchowk, Kathmandu. NETHERLANDS. Books oniy: 
Keesing, Boeken B V., Hogehilweg 13, Postbus 1118, 1000 BC Amsterdam. 
Periodicals: Faxon Europe, P.O. Box 197, 1000 AD Amsterdam. 
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. Van Dorp-Eddine N.V., PO Box 200. Willem- 
stad, Curagao, NA. NEW ZEALAND. Government Publishing, P.O. Box 
14277-Kilbinie, Wellington, NIGERIA. The University Bookshap of Ife; The 
University Bookshop of Ibadan, P O. 226; The University Bookshop of Nsukka, 
The University Bookshop of Lagos: The Ahmadu Bello University Bookshop of 
Zana. NORWAY. Johan Grundl Tanum, P.0.B. 1177 Sentrum - Oslo 1; 
Universitets Bokhandelen, Universitetssentret, Postboks 307 Bindern, Oslo 
3, Periodicals ony Narvesen A/S, Litteraturt Jenesten, P.O B. 6125 Etterstad, 
N 0602 Oslo 6. PAKISTAN, Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-i-azam. 
P.Q. Box No. 729, Lahore 3; Unesco Publications Centre, Regional Office for 
Book Development in Asia and the Pacific. 39 Delt Housing Society, P.O. Box 
8950, Karachi 29. PANAMA. Distnbuidora Cultura Internacional. Apartado 
7571, Zona 5, Panama. PHILIPPINES. National Book Store Inc., 701 Rizal 
Avenue, Manila. POLAND. Orpan-import. Palac Kultury | Nauk, Warsaw: Ars 
Polona-Ruch, Krakowskie Przedmiescie No.7. 00-068 Warsaw. PORTUGAL. 
Dias & Andrade Lida. Livrana Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. ROMANIA. 
ARTEXIM Export-Import, Piata Scienten, no. f, PO Box 33-16, 70005 
Bucharest. SAUDI ARABIA. Dar al Watan, Olaya Man Street, Ibrahim Bin 
Sulaym Building, Riyadh. SEYCHELLES. New Service Lid. Kingsgate 
House, PO Box 131. Mahé: National Bookshop. PO Box 48, Mahé, SIERRA 
LEONE. Fourah Bay College, Njala University and Sierra leone Diocesan 
Bookshops, Freetown. SINGAPORE. Righteous Enterprises, P.O. Box 562, 
Kallang Basin Post Office. Singapore 9133. SOCIALIST PEOPLE'S LIBYAN 
ARAB JAMAHIRIYA. General Establishment for Publishing. Distribution and 
Advertising, Soul Al Mahmoud: 5t., PO Box 959, Tripoli. SOMALIA. Modern 
Book Shop and General, PO Box 04d, Mogadiscio. SPAIN, Mundi-Prensa 
Libros SA, apartade 1223, Castelld 37, Madnd 1: Ediciones Liber, aparado 
17, Magdalena 8, Ondarroa (Vizcaya); Donare, Ronda de Quterro, 20, 
aparlado de correcs 341, La Coruna; books oniy: Libreria Castells, Ronda 
Universidad 13 y 15, Barcelona 7; Libreria de la Generalitat de Catalunya, 
Palan Moja, Rambla de los Estudios 118, 08 002 Barcelona. SRI LANKA, 
Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244, 
Colombo 2. SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum, 
SURINAME. Suriname National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box 2943, 
Paramanbo. SWEDEN. A/ B C E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Regenng- 
sgalan 12, Box 16356, 5-103 27 Stockholm 16; For the Unesco Couner: 
Svenska FN Forbundet, Skolgrand 2, Box 150 50 $-104, 65 Stockholm; For 
penodicais only. Wennergren-Wiliams AB, Nordenflychtsvagen 70, 5-104, 25 
Stockholm; Esselte Tidskrifiscentraten, Gamia Brogalan 26, Box 62 -101, 20 
Stockholm SWITZERLAND. Europa Verlag. 5 Ramistrasse, Zunch: Libraines 
Payot in Geneva Lausanne, Basle. Berne, Vevey. Montreux, Neuchatel and 
Zunch. SYRIA, Aleppo University Books Establishment, University of Aleppo, 
Aleppo." TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030, Dar-es- 
Salaam. THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Ltd., 40-42 Charoen Krung Road, 
Siyaeg Phaya Sri, P.O. Box 402, Bangkok, Suksapan Panil, Mansion 9, 
Rajdamnern Ave., Bangkok; Suksit Siam Company. 1715 Rama IV Road, 
Bangkok; ROEAP, PO Box 1425, Bangkok 10500. TRINIDAD AND TOBA- 
GO. National Commission for Unesco, 18 Alexandra St., St. Clair, Port-ol- 
Spain. TURKEY. Haset Kitapewvi A.S., Istiklal Caddesi, No 469, Posta Kulusu 
219, Beyoglu, Istanbul. UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, PO Box 7145, Kampa- 
1a. UNITED ARAB EMIRATES. Maktabat al Maktaba, PO Box 15408, Al Ain, 
Abu Dhabi. UNITED KINGDOM. H M. Stationery Office, PO Box 276, London, 
SWB 50T; H.M S.0. Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham. Bristol; Third World Publications, 151 Stratford Road, Birming- 
ham B11 1RD; for scientific maps only McCarta Lid., 122 King's Cross Rd. 
London WC1X 90S. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. Bernan-UNIPUB, 
Periodicals Department, 4611-F Assembly Cnve, Lanham, MD 20706 4391. 
URUGUAY. Ediciones Trecho, S.A., Maldonado 1092, Montevideo. USSR. 
V/Q Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga, Ul. Dimitrova 39, Moskva 113095. 
YUGOSLAVIA. Miadost, llica 30/11, Zagreb; Cankaneva Zalozba, Zopnar- 
jeva 2, Lubljana; Noli, Terazye 13/ VIII, 11000 Belgrade; periodicals only: 
Jugosolvena Kniga, PO Box 36, YU 11001 Belgrade. ZAMBIA. National 
Educational Distribution Co. of Zambia Lid... P.O. Box 2664, Lusaka. 
ZIMBABWE. Textbook Sales (PVT) Lid., 1 Norwich Union Centre, Harare. 
Front cover : © Giraudon, Paris/Kunstmuseum, Basle. Back cover, pages 19, 21 : ALLCA XX, Paris. Page 2 : ].M. Charles © Rapho, Paris. 
age 4 : Doisneau © Rapho, Paris. Pages 4-5 : © Weidenfeld Publishers Ltd., London. Page 6: © National Library, Quebec. Pages 6-7 : 
1 
P; 
David Harris © Israel Museum, The Shrine of the Book, Jerusalem/D. Samuel & Jeane H. Gottesman Center for Bib cal Manuscripts. Page 
7 : © National Library, Rio de Janeiro. Page 8 : International Fund for the Promotion of Culture/Unesco. Page 9 : (above) © CNRS/CRCDG, 
Paris; (below} © Ministry of Culture, CCBN, Sablé-sur-Sarthe, France. Page 10 (left), 11 (above), 29 : © Roger Violet, Paris. Page 11 (below), 
18 (right) : © Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. Page 12 (above) © Secret Archives of the Vatican; (below) I. Belinski ® Fotokhronika TASS. 
Page 13 : (above) : Luc Joubert © Unesco Courier; (below) © Carlos Freire, Paris. Pages 14-15 : © Bernand Press Agency, Paris. Page 15; 
(above) © Harlingue Viollet, Paris; (below) © Nitsch Collection, Lausanne. Page 16 : (left) Coursat © Rapho, Paris; (right} © National Library, 
Rome. Page 17 : {right) RMN © National Museum of Modern Ar, Georges Pompidou Centre, Paris/ADAGP, 1989; (left) © Harry Ransom 
Humanities Research Center, University of Texas at Austen/Joyce Estate/Society of Authors. Page 18 (left) : Unesco/Dominique Roger. 
Page 20 : © National Library, Mexico. Page 22 : Jesse Fernandez © Seuil, Paris. Page 23 : © Carmen Balcells, Barcelona. Page 24 : © Bodleian 
Library, Oxford. Page 25 : (above right & centre) © National Library, Caracas; (below} © Collection Viollet, Paris. Pages 26, 27, 28 (below), 
33 (below), 34 (above & below) : © Munoz de Pablos, Paris. Page 28 (above) : © Giraudon, Prints Department, Bibliothéque Nationale, 
Paris. Page 30 (below) : © Giraudon, Paris. Pages 30-31 : © L.L. Viollet, Paris. Page 31 : Dieuzaide/Zodiaque © Rapho, Paris. Page 32: 
(left) © Almasy, Paris; (right} © Edimedia, Paris, SPADEM 1989. Page 33 (above} : Martin © Anephot, Paris, SPADEM 1989. 
The Courier I 
A window open on the world 
Published monthly in 35 languages by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization 
A selection in braille is published quarterly 
in English, French, Spanish and Korean 
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Office: 
Unesco, 7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700, Paris. 
Editorial staff (Paris) 
Director: Bahgat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaat 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin, Caroline Lawrence 
French edition: Alain Lévéque, Neda El Khazen 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, 
Aracelli Ortiz de Urbina 
Arabic edition: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoudi 
Braille edition: 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Research: Violette Ringelstein 
Liaisons with non-Headquarters editions: 
Solange Belin 
Sales and subscriptions: Henry Knobil 
Non-Headquarters editions: 
Russian: Georgi Zelenin (Moscow) 
German: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Japanese: Seiichiro Kojima (Tokyo) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Sri Ram (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew: Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian: H. Sadough Vanini (Teheran) 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra Ilgazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Abdul Manaf Saad (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Paik Syeung-Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwah Dar-es-Salaam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene: 
Bozidar Perkovic (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: SJ. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Manni Késsler (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larrafiaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Fangok) 
Vietnamese: Dao Tung (Hanoi 
Pashto: Nasir Seham (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
Subscription rates 
1 year: 90 French francs. 
Binder for a year's issues: 62 FF 
tndividual articles and photographs not copyrighted 
may be reprinted providing the credit line reads 
“Reprinted from the Unesco Courier’, gs date of issue, 
and three voucher copies are sent to the editor. 
Signed articles reprinted must bear author’s name. 
Non-copyright A will be supplied on request. 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless 
accompanied by an international reply coupon 
covering postage. Signed articles express the opinions 
of the authors and do not necessarily represent the 
opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of the 
Unesco Courier. Photo captions and headlines are 
written by the Unesco Courier staff. The boundaries 
on maps published in the magazine do not imply 
official endorsement or acceptance by Unesco or the 
United Nations. The Unesco Courier is produced in 
microform (microfilm and/or microfiche by: 
(1) Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris; 
(2) University Microfilms (Xerox), Ann Arbor, 
Michigan 48100, US.A.; (3) N.C.R. Microcard 
Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 West 40th Street, 
New-York, US.A.; (4) Bell and Howell Co., Old 
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, US.A. 
All should be addressed 
to the Editor-in-chief in Paris 
Imprimé en France (Printed in France) - 
Dépon légal: C1 - MAI 1989. 
Photogravure-impression: Maury-Imprimeur S.A., 
Z.1. route d'Etampes, 45330 Malesherbes. 
 

## [Page 36](083206engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE