# [105695](105695engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](105695engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  (Een 
I i : 
   
       cues

## [Page 2](105695engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

ENCOUNTERED 
We invite readers to send us photographs to be considered for publication in this feature. Your photo should show a painting, a sculpture, piece 
of architecture or any other subject which seems to be an example of cross-fertilization between cultures. 
Alternatively, you could send us pictures of two works from different cultural backgrounds in which you see some striking connection or 
resemblance. Please add a short caption to all photographs. 
     
RUINS OF THE EAST 1995, photos by Luc Maréchaux 
In a series of photos taken in Lebanon and Syria, Luc Maréchaux compares the time-worn 
ruins of majestic Palmyra (left) with the devastation wrought in Beirut by fifteen years 
of civil war. “We can forgive slow destruction by time,” he notes, “but what should we 
think of destruction by human action?” 
© Luc Maréchaux, Montreuil

## [Page 3](105695engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ch
ri
st
op
he
 
Ch
ic
le
t,
 
Pa
ns
 
P 
Wy
so
ch
i/
S 
F
r
a
n
c
e
s
 © 
He
mi
sp
he
re
s,
 
Pa
ns
 
THE UNESCO ((OURIER 
   
= INTERVIEW E 
Teo writers from former Yugoslavia, 
Predrag Matvejevic and Vidosav Stevanovié 
talk about their anomalous status ‘between 
asylum and exile.” (p. 4). 
Amiens cathedral (France), 
a classic example of Gothic art (p. 40). 
 
contents 
MARCH 1997 
PLURAL CITIES 
 
Month by month byBahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 9 
TANGIER: myths and memories......................................... 10 
by Tahar Ben Jelloun 
NEW YORK BIUES .......ooo oo) 14 
by Jerome Charyn 
BOMBAY: oneandmany......................... 19 
by Lajpat Rai Jagga 
MARSEILLES: portof calland recall ................................. 23 
by Emile Temime 
LA PAZ: atale of two cities... 28 
by Luz Pacheco 
VANCOUVER, or the spirit of place. ..................................... 32 
by Hadani Ditmars 
The spirit of diversity ..............cooooe ooo 36 
by Anissa Barrak 
FAC file... ooo 37 
Consultant: Anissa Barrak 
Commentary Federico Mayor 38 
HERITAGE | 40 
Notre-Dame d’Amiens, a Bible in stone by Cécile Romane 
GREENWATCH Large dams by France Bequette ..................cccoieiiiin... 44 
REFLECTIONS The world is a sanctuary by Henryk Skolimowski............... 48 
LISTENING Rediscovering Lili Boulanger bylsabelle Leymarie ................. 49 
AUTHORS eee, 50 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR... eee eee, 50 
Cover: Didier Dorval © Explorer, Paris, S Fautre © Ask Images, Paris, Bruno Barbey © Magnum, Paris, 
Luc Girard © Explorer, Paris; Georg Gerster © Rapho, Pans; Alain Evrard © Globe Press /Hoaqui, Paris 
THE UNESCO Gouriern MARCH 1997

## [Page 4](105695engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 105694: Between asylum and exile

© 
Ch
ns
to
ph
e 
Ch
ic
le
t,
 
Pa
ns
 
interview 
 
THE UNESCO Couriekm MARCH 1997 
Interviewed by Jasmina Sopova, two leading writers from former Yugoslavia, a Bosnian Croat and a Serb, 
testify in the light of their experience of the war that tore their country apart. Looking beyond eastern Europe, 
they draw some general conclusions from what they have learned, about the role of the writer and the 
psychology of nationalist conflicts. 
Predrag Matvejevic 
Predrag Matvejevi¢ was born in Mostar (Bosnia and Herzegovina). His father was a Russian from 
Odessa, his mother a Bosnian Croatian. He taught at the University of Zagreb before settling in Rome 
where he teaches Slavonic literature at the University of Sapienza. A staunch champion of human rights 
who defended many persecuted east European intellectuals under the communist system, he now spends 
much of his time trying to heal the wounds of the fratricidal war that tore his countryapart. The works 
of this brilliant essayist have been translated into ten or so languages. His The Mediterranean—a Cul- 
tural Landscape will be published later this year by the California University Press. 
WM “Between asylum and exile” is the 
formula you use to define your situation as 
anintellectual “who came in from the East”. 
Predrag Matvejevic: I am not really an exile. 
No one exiled me [rom Croatia and the 
former Yngoslavia. Ileft Croatia because 
I realized that I could express myself 
more openly and freely elsewhere. But 
when I had left, I saw that this was a 
trap. This is what I meant when I talked 
about being between “asylum and exile”. 
Asylum ncutralizes your message and 
exile distances it [rom its goal. 
But intellectuals from the East are 
not the only people in this situation. So 
too are intellectuals in the Western world. 
The relatively comfortable position they 
enjoy in their own countries is a kind of 
“born” asylum. At the same time they 
are exiles because they cannot take part 
in decision-making and have no say in 
social projects. They are exiles in their 
own homeland. 
WM “Between treason and outrage” is 
another phrase you often use. 
P. M.: Yes. Every word I utter against the 
atmosphere I live in, or against the 
national group to which I belong, is 
regarded as treasonable. Any criticism I 
make of others is regarded as a calnmny 
and an outrage. This position “between 
treason and outrage” exists in many cul- 
tures and destroys critical thought. You 
arc caught in a vice which prevents you 
{rom expressing yonrsell {recly. 
BM The main reason for your voluntary exile 
is to enjoy freedom of expression. Do those 
who stayed behind have to keep their 
mouths shut? 
P. M.: 1 would say that they stand 
“letween silenee and obedience”. Silence 
about mistakes that are made—here too 
I'm not only talking about former 
Yugoslavia—silence because you're 
afraid to talk, because the media are 
controlled, ete. Obedience, because by 
obeying the authorities you keep your 
privileges. 
BM So are silence and obedience both forms 
of self-betrayal? 
P. M.: Not necessarily. Silence can mean a 
lot of things. There are eloquent silences. 
The silenee of Boris Pasternak and Anna 
Aklimatova under Stalinism meant “We 
reject Zhdanovist social realism, we 
reject tervor in the arts and letters.” But 
there is also a silence which is a sign of 
conformity, of acceptance of an existing 
state of affairs. I think this is the position 
of the nationalist intelligentsia. Its silence 
about what happened in Vukovar and 
Sarajevo means: “Let’s keep quiet. We 
are not guilty.” 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6

## [Page 5](105695engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

@ 
Ch
as
to
ph
e 
Ch
ic
le
t,
 
Pa
ri
s  


### 105694: Between asylum and exile

Between asylum and exile 
Vidosav Stevanovic 
Vidosav Stevanovi¢, a leading contemporary Serb writer, lived for thirty years in Belgrade, before going 
into exile in 1991. Since 1995 he has been living quietly in a house outside the town of Kragujevac, 
where he was born. Although his voice is not heard in his own country, he is well known internationally. 
His works have been published in some twenty languages. 
MW In 1995, after your period of self- 
imposed exile, you returned to your home 
country. But you still travel a lot. . .. 
Vidosav Stevanovic: I travel from time to 
time. Foften go to Paris. Soon 1 shall be 
visiting Prague and the United States, 
on the occasion of a film which is being 
wade based on The Island of the 
Balkans, the second book of my trilogy 
The Snow and the Dogs. The dircetor is 
a Croatian in exile. We are on the same 
wavelengthin our attitudes to our respec- 
tive countries. The Czech Republic is 
the only country that has heen willing to 
give a nationality to this film. And so a 
Croatian and a Serb are making a Czech 
filnt for the European market, probably 
in English. . . . 
HW Isn't there a risk that this collaboration 
will cause you problems? Predrag Matvejevi¢ 
describes a situation “between treason and 
outrage”. 
V.S.: [agree with this idea. It is true to 
onr experience. The only way of avoid- 
ing the traps that are set [or you is to 
write what you feel and what you think, 
whatever the cost, now or in the [uture, 
when it may well he even higher. Atleast 
you will have acted according to your 
conseience; you won't have been sullied 
by the evil that rages in the Balkans. 
BM Is keeping silent a form of self- 
preservation from this evil? Some writers 
have chosen silence in the current situation. 
V. S.: Most of my country’s writers today 
live in silence. An eloquent silence, some 
people say. I don’t agree with them. 
There are moments in history when peo- 
ple should come out of their corner and 
fight for specific values, in this ease the 
values of humanism (however old-fash- 
ioned that may seem), the values of a ¢iv- 
ilization that does not know how to defend 
itsell. I'm talking about European civi- 
lization. We must fight for these ideals, 
just as we must fight against those intel- 
leetuals who have engineered war pro- 
grammes and war propaganda, and 
fomented hatred. Let’s not he too indal- 
gent towards those who keep quiet. Can 
we accepl that a country’s literature 
should he reduced to a handful of people 
who speak out in the midst of a general 
silence? 
When a war ends, people are affected 
by colleetive amnesia. “There was no war, 
we didn’t take part in it; there were no 
erimes, it’s got nothing to do with us.” 
They remember nothing. Those of us who 
speak out helong to the awkward squad, 
because we remember what has hap- 
pened. “Undesirable” though we may 
he, we shall continue to bear witness. 
A people cannot get over its funda- 
mental problems without making an in- 
depth analysis of itself, just as some 
patients cannot he cured without being 
psychoanalysed. Nationalism is a siek- 
ness. A people must settle accounts with 
itsell, [ace up to its phantasms and its 
myths that are the source of everything 
that has happened. Until it has come to 
terms with its own eonseience—not other 
people’s—the lull will he short-lived. The 
phantasms will sink to the bottom and 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 7 
THE UNESCO Courier m MARCH 1997

## [Page 6](105695engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 105694: Between asylum and exile

interview 
Predrag Matvejevic 
Irelused to adopt that position. That 
is one of the reasons why I left. 
B This attitude is comparable to one that 
appears in your recent books—"between 
refusal and praise”. 
P. M.: Yes. Some people don’t only obey, 
) they sing the praises of the authorities. 
Others don’t take refuge in silence but 
openly express their hostility to the 
authorities. The gap between these two 
positions is growing wider. Very few peo- 
ple stay in their country and express their 
revolt. 
HB Your latest book, The “Ex” World, 
Confessions, contains some hard thinking 
about the war in former Yugoslavia. You 
write: “In this war there are neither victors 
nor vanquished. Everywhere there are 
victims. ...” 
P. M.: And I go on to add: “There is no 
just partition of Bosnia; the only act of 
justice would be not to partition it.” The 
first victim is Bosnia itself. [ have always 
been on the side of the victims. At the 
time of the aggression against Croatia 
and against Vukovar, I was on the side 
of the Croatian victims. But when Croa- 
tian soldiers destroyed the bridge at 
Mostar which had snrvived all kinds of 
barbaric acts since it was built in 1560, 
and then the part of Mostar where the 
Muslim majority lived, my sympathy 
again went to the victims. 
BM You also write: “Losing is part of our 
destiny. But itis rare to lose a country. It 
has happened to me.” Is mourning an 
appropriate word to use here? 
P. M.: I think that former Yugostavia’s pol- 
icy of non-alignment in a deeply divided 
world had merits that deserved a better 
fate. Even if this people wanted to split 
np, I would have preferred them to do so 
He unesco (COURIER @ MARCH 1997 
without war. Perhaps 1 am alone in this, 
but Hike Yngoslavia as a whole. Wherever 
I go in Yugoslavia 1 feel at home. At the 
same time I don’t think 1 usurp the iden- 
tity of its different constituent peoples 
in any way. You might call this, wrongly, 
“nnitarist Yugoslavism” or talk of 
“Yugonostalgia”, hut it’s nostalgia for the 
peace and well-being of all these peoples. 
I am without prejudice. 1 just feel very 
suspicious of those who are guilty, evenifl 
they are guilty to different degrees. 
BM What do you think of the emergence of 
national cultures from Yugoslav culture? 
P. M.: We all fight for the right to a 
national culture. That is an undeniable 
right. Bot some arcas of a national eul- 
ture often turn into nationalist ideology, 
as happened under fascism. The fascist 
regimes included cultured people who 
helped to shape their ideologies. We saw 
this in Ltaly, Germany and Spain. We also 
saw it in Stalinist Russia. Itis necessary 
to be more critical and vigilant where 
national culture is concerned. This is a 
danger we're not always aware of. 
BM Inyourrecent books you sound the 
alarm against another danger: considering 
each characteristic of a people as an 
intrinsic value. 
P. M.: Yes, this mistake is often made. 
Particnlarity is not necessarily a value, 
Cannibalism is a particularity. Does that 
make ita valoe? If yon don’t make a dis- 
tinction between these two notions, then 
you can slip {from particularity to par- 
ticularisin, 
BR Your book The Mediterranean—a Cultural 
Landscape, first published before the war, 
was a reflection on the Mediterranean which 
was not confined to current events. In The 
“Ex” World, Confessions, however, which 
appeared in 1996, you return to the same 
theme but treat it quite differently. Is this 
change of perspective a result of the war? 
P. M.: Yes, the war sharpened some of my 
attitudes. The earlier book ignored cur- 
rent events and said nothing about the 
hard realities of the Mediterranean today, 
whereas the chapter devoted to this in 
my latest book is an indictment in which 
I emphasize the complete difference 
between the Mediterrancan and the usual 
image of it. This “land of myths” has suf- 
fered from the mythologies it has given 
risc to. Decisions about its fate are taken 
elsewhere. 
BM What does it mean to be an “ex”? 
P. M.: You are not born an “ex”; it is some- 
thing you become. From one day to the 
next you discover that you are an ex- 
Yugoslav or you deelare that yon are an ex- 
communist. For some this is a happy expe- 
rience, for others a traumatic one. It is a 
situation that is regrettable to varying 
degrees (one does not miss the ex-Soviet 
Union in the same way as one misses ex- 
Bosnia and [lerzegovina). In individual 
experience, the word “ex” does not have 
the same meaning. At the end of the last 
century, Nietzsche said that he wanted to 
be “untopical”,i.c. “ex” in relation to the 
present, bnt he had the futnre in mind. 
The untopicality of ecrtain “exes” today 
looks towards a past that is over. 
732 BM There seem to be a lot of “exes” in 
Europe as the century draws to a close. 
What has happened to the myth of 
progress? 
P. M.: The idea of progress and other 
utopian ideas were seriously compromised 
by Stalinism and by what happened in the 
former Soviet Union. Theidea of emanci- 
pation has been pushed into the shadows, 
whereas it should be held before us as a 
guideline, without reference to any kind 
of ideology. The absence of this idea, at 
the end of the century, is tantamount to an 
absence of humanism. It is here, outside 
ideological paradigms, that 1 am trying 
to find my way. HN

## [Page 7](105695engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 105694: Between asylum and exile

Between asylum a 
Vidosav Stevanovic 
{float back to the surface wlien the next 
shock occurs; then we shall see a modern 
version of last century’s war in the 
Balkans. 
BM This recurring war is the leitmotiv of 
your book recently published in French as 
Prélude a la guerre (Prelude to War). In the 
first edition, published in Serbian ten years 
ago under the title Testament, you wrote: 
“Today or tomorrow we shall lose freedom. 
All that my ancestors have accumulated will 
be taken away from us. Everything will be 
destroyed, devastated, looted; people will 
be torn to pieces, women raped, churches 
desecrated. Nothing will be left ....” Those 
were prophetic words. 
V. S.: Crities have drawn attention to the 
“prophetic” element in this hook, but you 
don’t have to be a genius to foresee war! 
Wars nsually break out for the same rea- 
sons, happen in the same way and are [ol- 
lowed by the same amnesia. It’s not hard 
to be a prophet when you prophesy evil. 
I don’t want to he either a prophet or 
a people’s guide. That is not the writers 
job. At most he can be the voice of con- 
science, the voice of art, the voice of an 
individual. 
When 1 wrote that book, I was trying 
to get down to the roots of the history 
of Serbia and its people and trace how 
inyths had originated and been trans- 
formed into evil, into collapse. “Look 
where your myths are leading you”, I 
wanted to tell people. Take them for 
what they are: stories and nothing more. 
Don’t tet them turn into monstrosities. | 
tried to warn them. I failed. 
BM Inthe same book, you also write: “Evil 
is not in the world but in man; he alone 
invented it and he alone uses it.” 
V. S.: Evil is just as much part of Imman 
nature as good. Before launching out into 
a erusade against other peoples evil, one 
shionld eampaign within oneself. Though 
evil is Inherent in human nature, it 1s not 
a dominant component of our world. The 
proof is that the world continues to exist, 
wliereas the ultimate ain of all evil is to 
destroy it. 
BM Can the writer exorcise this evil, this 
destructive instinct? 
V.S.: The writer says: dou’t let yourself be 
carried away by myths of death. Ie 
writes a poem about death which is a 
poem about life, about the beauty of liv- 
ing. The writer writes an endless poem 
about an ephemeral world. 
BM Is “Prelude to War” not also a quest for 
this endless poem? “Is there some story 
that will be never-ending. .. always ready 
to admit me into it and to rescue me from 
time, in which it would be impossible to 
know which sentence, page or chapter will 
come next?” you write, calling to mind 
Jorge Luis Borges’s Book of Sand. 
V.S.:1 am not a Borgesian, but perhaps 
you are right. All the same, don’t forget 
that the hero of my novel asks this ques- 
tion but does not give an answer. Doesn’t 
a writer write the same story in many 
books, in an attempt to save himself from 
time, from the ephemeral? 
BM Yourimaginary world seems close to 
. that of Julio Cortazar. 
V. 5. Throughont my writing life I have 
used a literary form that I called, before 
Gabriel Gareia Marquez, “fantastic real- 
ism”. It consists of lifting from reality 
images that can be transformed into fan- 
tasy and the surreal. Perhaps this 
explains why you see a parallel between 
my work and that of Latin American 
authors. } am a great admirer of Latin 
American literature. In the last thirty 
years, it has brought something really 
new to what we call world literature. 
BM Do you believe in the existence of a 
world literature? 
V.S.: Yes, inthe sense of a literature that 
cmbodies receptiveness between cul- 
tures. On the other hand, Tam very scep- 
tical about the idea of “national litera- 
ture”, which is based ultimately on a 
certain isolation. If you add to that the 
various kinds of political climate that 
prevail in our part of the world, for exam- 
A] 
d exile 
hd a » pu 
ple—political exclusivity, largely inca- 
pable leaders, intellectuals ready to lord 
it on their own dunghill—you get some- 
thing that is simply not viable: a closed 
culture. 
BM The political fragmentation of 
Yugoslavia has led to the disintegration of 
its culture, What are the consequences of 
this? 
V. S.: 1 feel no nostalgia for what was 
ralled Yugoslavia. If it broke up it’s 
hecause disintegration was inevitable. 
But I deeply regret that we have lost 
what was called the Yugoslav enltural 
areca. None of the now-proelaimed 
“national” literatures from that arca 
would be what it is without years of con- 
stant interpenetration with the others. 1 
have learned a lot froin Croatian, Slovene 
and Macedonian writers who belonged, 
in my opinion, to one and the same cul- 
ture. That culture drew great profit from 
its very diversity. Itis very important to 
have the opportunity to choose. H you 
lock yoursell up in your little enclosure, 
you cease to have any choice. I think that 
before establishing relations between the 
new Balkan states, something that will 
not depend on writers, it is vitally impor- 
tant that artists should continue to col- 
laborate, to learn from each other and 
even   why not?—to quarrel if their quar- 
rels are creative, 
The main ideological thesis of all 
nationalism in the Balkans is that a com- 
mon life is impossible. That is what led to 
war, to the creation of nation-states, to 
cthnie cleansing, to crime. But each war 
sliows those people that their thesis is 
crazy and withont foundation. Each war 
shows that in the Balkans, an area which 
las, often wrongly, attracted many nega- 
tive connotations, a common lifeis not only 
possible but absolutely indispensable. 
This is why I think that culture or enl- 
tures should he the precursors of reuni- 
fication, not in some state or other, hut 
intellectually. There are enough links 
between us to give vise to a single culture 
and enough differences for that culture to 
be strong. And that is the best thing the 
Balkans can offer to the world. [| 
He unesco COURIER Bm MARCH 1997

## [Page 8](105695engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

THUNESCO 
OURIER 
50th YEAR 
Published monthly in 29 languages and in Braille by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
31, rue Frangois Bonvin, 75732 Pans CEDEX 15, France 
Fax: (33) (0) 145 68 57 45 
e-mail. unesco courier@unesco org 
internet: http://www.unesco org 
Director: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Giilhan Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin 
French edition: Alain Lévéque 
Spanish edition: Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Features: Jasmina Sopova 
Art Umit/Production Georges Servat 
Illustrations Ariane Bailey (Tel. (33) {0) 1.45.68.46,90) 
Documentation (Tel. (33) (0) 1 45 68. 46.85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press. 
Solange Belin {Tel (33)(0) 1 45 68 46 87) 
Film duplication: Daniel Meister 
Secretanat” Annie Brachet 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1.45.68 47.15), 
Administrative Assistant. Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and 
Korean (Tel (33)(0) 1.45 68.47.14) 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian Inna Utkina (Moscow) 
German Dominique Anderes (Berne) 
Arabic’ Fawzi Abde! Zaher (Carre) 
Italian: Gianluca Formichi (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi) 
Tamil: M, Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian. Akbar Zargar (Teheran) 
Dutch Bart Christiaens (Antwerp) 
Portuguese Alzira Alves de Abreu (Rio de Janeiro) 
Urdu Mirza Muhammad Mushir (Islamabad) 
Catalan Joan Carreras 1 Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay: Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur) 
Swahili: Leonard J. Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene. Aleksandra Kornhauser {Ljubljana) 
Chinese: Feng Mingxian (Being) 
Bulgarian. Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala Newville Priyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish Rutta Saarinen (Helsinki) 
Basque: Juxto Egana {Donostia) 
That: Duangtip Surintatip (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Do Phuong (Hano) 
Pashto. Nazer Mohammad Angar (Kabul) 
Hausa Aliyu Muhammad Bunza (Sokoto) 
Ukrainian® Volodymyr Vasiliuk {Kiev) 
Galician Xatier Senin Fernandez (Santiago de Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION. 
Fax. (33)(0)1 45.68.57.45 
Subscriptions Marie-Thérése Hardy 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1 45 68 45 65), Jacqueline Louise-Julie, 
Manichan Ngonekeo, Mohamed Salah Ei Din 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1 45 68 49 19) 
Customer service: Michel Ravassard, 
(Tel. (33)(0) 1 45 6B 45 91) 
Accounts: (Tel. {33) (0) 1.45 68 45 65) 
Shipping’ Daniel Meister {Tel, (33) {0) 1.45 68 47.50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. 
Tel.: (33) (0) 1.45.,68.45.65 
1year 211 French francs 2 years: 396 FF. 
Students. 1 year 132 French francs 
Binder for one year's issues 72 FF 
Developing countries 
1 year 132 French francs 2 years 211 FF, 
Payment can te made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco or by Visa, Eurocard or Mastercard 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted 
providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from the Unesco Couner™, plus 
date of 1ssue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor Signed 
articles reprinted must bear author s name Non-copynght photos will 
be supplied on request, Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. 
Signed articles express the opinions of the authors and do not nec 
essarily represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of 
the Unesco Courier Photo captions and headlines are wntlen by the 
Unesco Couner staff The boundaries on maps published In the maga 
une do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by Usesco or the 
United Nations The Unesco Courier 1s produced In microform (micro- 
film and/or microfiche) by {1) Unesco, 7 Place de Fortenoy, 75700 
Pans, (2) University Microfilms (Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100 
USA, (3INCR Microcard Edition, Indian Head Inc, 111 West 40th 
Street, New York, U 5 A; {4) Bell and Howell Co , Old Mansfield Road, 
Wooster, Ohio 44691, U S A 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed In France) 
DEPOT LEGAL, C1-MARS 1997 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - DIFFUSE PAR LES 
NMPP 
Photocomposition, photogravure, 
Le Courrier de "Unesco 
impression: MAURY IMPRIMEUR, 
Z |. Route d’Etampes, 45331 Malesherbes 
ISSN 0041 5278 N° 3-1997-0Pi-97-557 A 
This 1Issue comprises 52 pages and a 4-page insert 
between pages 2 3 and 50-51. 
q 
THE UNESCO Courier WB MARCH 1997 
crossroads cities 
  
Thomas Hopker © Magnum, Pans

## [Page 9](105695engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 
New York, Tangier, Bombay and the other cities profiled in this 
issue, have been dubbed “crossroads cities”, a term which calls 
for some explanation. They are cities where life is particularly 
rich and variegated because their history has been punctuated 
bythe arrival of successive waves of immigrants who settled in 
  
    
x them side by side—in some cases packed closely together. 
BE Joy i”; bol 1 Prosperity wove the different strands of this urban popula- 
ii #8 == STS LH - 11 ey . . . i mH Ye 4 tion together and crisis unravelled them, but as hopes gradually 
mingled and memories intertwined, a sense of belonging devel- 
oped, albeit one that fluctuated between solidarity and con- 
flict. The pulse of these cities beats more intensely and more 
unpredictably than that of many others, but each one has 
acquired the knack of handling its spasms of violence and even 
of drawing vitality from them. 
At first sight, these unusual socio-cultural excrescences 
seem to tell us nothing about the countries in which they are 
located. A closer look shows that this is not so. They have been 
grafted onto their nation’s tissue and the graft has taken. They 
have grown and prospered within the nation because through a 
mysterious alchemy they have responded to some of its unspo- 
ken aspirations and unavowed desires. 
What is more, these cities have often been pacemakers of 
their country’s modernization, sometimes in the teeth of strong 
opposition. It is due to them—although the debt is not always 
acknowledged—that their country is geared to major trading 
flows and to the non-stop movement of people, ideas, capital and 
merchandise, In a word that it keeps pace with the changing 
world. 
They contribute to their country something far more than 
resources and knowledge. Theyinstilinto it the creative energy 
generated bythe combustion of a very broad spectrum of think- 
ing and imagination, by myriad sources of inspiration and by 
the revitalization of beliefs and powers of invention. And this 
energy seeps through hidden channels into the surrounding   country, bearing much-needed antidotes to uniformity and con- 
formism, 
By virtue of the contradictions they harbour and the con- 
flicts they foment, crossroads cities are laboratories of the 
future for their respective countries as they face the challenges 
of globalization. [| 
THE Unesco ((OURIER B MARCH 1997

## [Page 10](105695engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 184079: Tangier: myths and memories

    
     
  
Et
ie
nn
e 
Ge
or
ge
 
® 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
THE uNEsco (COURIER 8 mARCH 1997 
  
angier—a gateway to Africa, and a 
window on Europe—still draws sus- 
tenance from its myths and legends, 
even though the city has expanded, 
looks different and no longer recognizes its 
children. This is the fate of places marked by 
transience, the crossroads of history and 
rumour. A point of departure (of escape) and 
arrival, a port for easy dreams and uncertain 
journeys, Tangier no longer knows what to do 
with its reputation. The deeds and misdeeds 
ascribed to it are legion; so too are the clichés 
and fiendish images it has given rise to, and 
the fractured prose and obscure poetry it has 
inspired. Ithas been painted in every possible 
colour, and evoked in salons and galleries so 
often that it has become a ghost dressed in 
shabby silk, a crumpled postcard not fit to 
be sent to a friend waiting in the faraway cold. 
A year after the death of Marco Polo, Ibn 
Batuta, who was known as “the prince of trav- 
cllers”, left Tangier on 14 June 1325 (he was 
born there in 1304) on the journeys that 
would take him several times round the then 
YY OY NY 
EFF RY ! 
vIrvvi LCD 
Mh 
ia ™ 
    
© Roger-Violiet, Pans 
known world. He did not often feel homesick 
for the city, but he was haunted by its image. 
Its perfumes and smells followed him every- 
where, conjuring up the memory of a peaceful 
community where nothing untoward ever 
occurred. He wrote that Morocco, “the land 
where I wore the amulets of childhood and 
where the dust first touched my skin”, was 
the best of all countries. In the travel note- 
books (Rihla) which he dictated, there were 
few references to Tangier, which had not yet 
become a crossroads. It was above all a port 
from which people set out to explore the 
world or seck adventure. 
(1 The painters eye 
In 1832, Eugene Delacroix stayed in Tangier 
before going on to Mcknes, Fez and other 
places. He was welcomed everywhere and did 
not conceal his surprise or his sense of won- 
der. “I have now arrived in Tangier,” he noted. 
“I have just made a tour of the city and I am 
full of astonishment at all I have seen. I would 
need twenty arms, and days forty-eight hours

## [Page 11](105695engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

Lex, Avenue d'Espagne 
in the 1930s. 
J ewish Wedding in Morocco 
(1839), oil on canvas by 
Eugéne Delacroix. 
_m- 
  
i 
i gn Flog d 
Akai. gi Ee 
a I al ay 
long, to give an account of itall.... At the 
moment, I am like 2a man tn a dream who sees 
things which he fears will escape his grasp. ...” 
Through the good offices of Abraham 
Benchimol, an interpreter at the French Con- 
sulate, he was able to obtain an introduction 
to Jewish society in Tangier which gave him the 
opportunity to paint his celebrated Jewish 
Wedding. In aletter to his friend Pierret dated 
25 January 1832, he wrote: “The Jewish 
women arc admirable. I am afraid that it would 
be difficult to do anything but paint them: 
they are pearls of Eden”. 
Later on, another French painter, Henri 
Matisse, came to Tangier, where he stayed at the 
Hotel Villa de France. At first, torrential rain- 
fall kept him confined to his room. Since he 
had come for the sun and the light, he almost 
gave in to disappointment and thought of 
returning to France. Fortunately, he decided to 
stay until the weather turned fine. That year, 
1912, marked a new direction and dimension 
in his work. The light of Tangier was a revela- 
tion to him. 


### 184079: Tangier: myths and memories

Other painters have spent time in Tangier. 
Today the Chilean Claudio Bravo lives and 
works there. He seldom emerges from his 
beautiful house at the foot of the “Vicille 
 
Montagne” and he paints the people and 
objects of Tangier in a hyper-realistic manner 
which cannot be reduced to orientalism or 
exoticism. Claudio Bravo paints the meeting of 
two civilizations. He turns this place into a 
crossroads where different ways of seeing and 
being, different visions of the world and sen- 
sibilities, and a mix of different temperaments 
all confront each other. In fact, his attraction 
and respect for Moroccan popular culture have 
made it virtually the main subject of his work. 
"An international city 
For some forty years, until 1957, Tangier had 
the status of an international city. What did 
that mean for its inhabitants? Although it had 
arcpresentative of the royal authority, the city 
was administered by several different countries. 
However, the most widely spoken language, 
apart from Arabic, was Spanish, and the most 
widely used currency was the peseta. Other cur- 
rencies could be exchanged in booths on the 
rue Siaghine, between the jewellers and the 
bazaar stall-holders. There were as many schools 
as there were countries represented in the city. 
Young Moroccans had the choice between the 
Spanish Institute and the Italian school, the 
a nd eae bi ny! 
rarive lw ob A Beier ty ol eg 
HE Unesco (COURIER B MARCH 1997 
© 
Gi
ra
ud
on
, 
Pa
ns
/L
ou
vr
e 
Mu
se
um
, 
Pa
ns

## [Page 12](105695engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 184079: Tangier: myths and memories

Ch
ri
st
ia
n 
Sa
pp
a 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
| 4 
a
 
American school and the French lycée. At this 
time cosmopolitanism was a lifestyle, multi- 
lingualism was not encumbered by the problem 
of identity, and the Muslims of Tangier lived in 
the same neighbourhoods as the Christians and 
the Jews. The Calle Sevilla was known as the 
Spaniards’ street, but Muslims lived in the same 
buildings side-by-side with the Spaniards and 
there was no feeling of mistrust between the 
two. It was a time when Moroccans wondered 
how nearby Spain, a fairly poor country, could 
be capable of colonizing them. They did not ask 
this question about the French, who did not 
mix with the others and often behaved in an 
overbearing manner. 
This period when the city had an interna- 
tional status witnessed the arrival of more 
traffickers, gangsters, forgers and insolvent 
or ruined businessmen than artists. Yet the 
1950s were prolific years for the group of Beat 
Generation poets who discovered Tangier and 
turned it into a centre for writing, pick-ups 
and a total change of scene. Allen Ginsberg, 
William Burroughs, Jack Kerouac, Lawrence 
Ferlingherti, Paul Bowles and Tennessee 
Williams all came together to smoke hash, 
party and improvise poetry performances. 
Jean Genet did not mix with this set, even 
though he knew most of the poets. He did not 
like Tangier, which he compared to the French 
Riviera And yet he wrote in The Thief’s Jour- 
nal: “This city (Tangier) represented Betrayal 
for me so well and so magnificently that I felt 
I had no option but to come ashore here”. 
How did a gathering place of travellers, 
traders, diplomats, gangsters and exiles come 
to symbolize what Jean Genet called 
“Betrayal”? It is probably because this port 
opening on the West, washed by two seas, the 
Atlantic and the Mediterranean, this myth 
which still preserves some Roman remains, 
this route to other places, 1s a stage where life 
and death are played out, where old actors 
take refuge in retirement, where writers fixed 
rhe unesco (COURIER M MARCH 1997 
G eneral view of Tangier. 
A café in the Socco 
district. 
Mae scene 
in the casbah, the high 
part of town, 
in the past compose nostalgic laments for a 
Tangier which no longer exists. 
W Fading romance 
This memory of a city with its special status 
still finds a refuge among people of another 
age, outlasting the dampness of the tired walls, 
the gusts of the East wind and the cternal 
spirit of hope which one day will save Tang- 
ier from decay. It is in this sense that the city 
1s romantic, destined to appear in works of 
fiction or fantasies stalked by mystery. 
Over the past thirty years, until a major 
clean-up campaign was launched carly in 1996, a 
parallel clandestine economy linked to “mint” 
(kif) trafficking was concentrated in Tangier. 
Traffickers, smugglers and even government 
officials were arrested and tried. At the same 
time, a relentless struggle began against the smug- 
glers of human beings: people trying to emi- 
grate. Tangier had become the last stage for those 
who hoped to cross the straits of Gibraltar and 
find work in Spain or clsewhere. People came 
i 
\ 
  
Je
an
 
Va
le
nt
in
 
@ 
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ns
 
Ch
ri
st
ia
n 
Sa
pp
a 
© 
Ra
ph
o 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 13](105695engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

Pi
er
re
 
Cl
iv
ie
r 
De
sc
ha
mp
s 
@ 
Vu
, 
Pa
ns
 
A scene in the medina, 
the old town. 
from all over, from southern Morocco and even 
from certain African countries, to embark at 
night on boats belonging to unscrupulous 
fishermen. 
The city has grown. So-called “popular and 
spontancous” new districts have mushroomed 
on the outskirts. Beni Makada, which was a 
huge shantytown, has become an almost new 
The port 
seen from the medina. 
  


### 184079: Tangier: myths and memories

  
    
    
and respectable quarter, where the buildings arc 
now all solidly built. Casabarata is no longer 
a shantytown, cither. Tangier is no longer con- 
fined to the old city, the Casbah, Marshan and 
the cattle market—the residential arca along 
the road to the “Grande Montagne”. Tangier 
is spreading in length and breadth. The city’s 
old families arc isolated and in a minority. Per- 
haps that is why they are not managing to 
make their voices heard and to fight for the 
future of their city. 
Tangier is starting to lose its identity as a 
crossroads, a place of trade and cross-fertil- 
ization, and is coming to resemble any other 
modern Moroccan city. Fortunately, thereare 
artists, most of them foreign, who still have 
a passion for the city. Some of them live there 
permanently, others come several times a year. 
Neither they nor the people of the city can 
understand or explain the attraction for this 
port which can often seem shabby or com- 
monplace. Someone encapsulated this feeling 
in the phrase: “I can’t explain why I love this 
city, but IT know why I don’tloveit!” Appar- 
ently, love wins over everything else and peo- 
ple keep coming in spite of the wind and the 
decay, the annoyances of everyday life and the 
spectacle of a city adrift. | 
tHe unesco ((OURILR B MARCH 1907 
Di
di
er
 
Do
rv
al
 
© 
Ex
pl
or
er
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 14](105695engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

© 
5 
B
a
s
s
o
u
l
s
/
S
y
g
m
a
 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
Ha
rl
in
gu
e-
Vi
ol
le
t,
 
Pa
ns
 


### 105710: New York blues

 
new york 
BY JEROME CHARYN 
A. ocean liner arriving in 
New York harbour circa 1925. 
THE UNESCO Courier W MARCH 1997   
ew York is a city that breathes 
fairness and barks against 
inequality. It’s this that has 
made it the marvel of the twen- 
tieth century, not its skyscrapers or its bil- 
lionaires. New York’s skyscrapers have lost 
their lyrical line, and no billionaire has ever 
really made a dent in the city’s chaotic heart. 
New York is the only city on the planet where 
the lower depths fought against the rich, estab- 
lished order and won. 
These lower depths arrived in the form of 
the Irish, who tossed the Protestant majority 
out of city government and became the boss of 
Manhattan right after the Civil War, around 
1865. The Irish were never bankers or brokers, 
and they rarely built mansions on Fifth Avenue 
or anywhere else, but they were firemen and 
cops and schoolteachers, mechanics, gangsters, 
and politicians, who practised their own rude 
blues 
Lhe or eal} «Le 
LLU 
  
democracy, stealing from the city and also edu- 
cating and feeding the poor. And when the first 
immigrants from Eastern Europe arrived in 
the 1870s, the Irish enlisted them in their own 
anarchic political machine. The greenhorns voted 
for Irish mayors and aldermen before they 
could even spell their own names. 
Wave after wave of immigrants soon fol- 
lowed the same example—TItalians, Ukraini- 
ans, Greeks, Polish, Russian, and Romanian: 
Jews, Magyars, Albanians, Slovaks, Serbs, who 
helped create their own turbulent tribal orches- 
tra until the National Origins Act of 1924 cut 
off the flow of “mongrels” from Eastern 
Europe. But not even the anti-immigrant hys- 
teria of the United States Congress could really 
change the complexion of the vitality of immi- 
grant New York. The “mongrels” had learnt 
i LAL 
+ : 1 
L
l
e
l
d
i
m
E
a
u
N
m
a
d
d
 
“
P
g
 
         
        
  
co o
oh
 
e
m
s
.
 a
e 
=
 
co]

## [Page 15](105695engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

- 
       
   
     
   
       
  
   
  
     
     
  
  
  
     
        
   
 
 
 
 
    
     
  
   
rl FO | ary EO 
: a " " i" ~ “ han nui i yh - Gn = 1 Cha ee 
He ap ” tienen 
il. i on i + — — SHORE 
- T= as sw MH 4 mr un CL BEE Bae od i . 2 WE ZA ion 
Il i 2 BRN C0 nn an Rm a an cia Teun 
mm i ~ AAR ERE FT 
TIE "a nn ww TE Ml A oe 1. ey its wm 
"ME fs. tO a 
HER ui in We g- TE i Thermage mo " vo 
He rou I x mmo Jat LE LT 5 
pL. | i Lom i " LEAL i i 
pitt» IT " HHALR i Wil lll 
"i : yr nan : : tn fom ii i] Bake ff im ai AH i 
a J HR = ” 1 S| LH HE in ELE p—A—. 
' pun il if Hl == mm * w For fine 14 41 PARRY : " | Tn . . LETT dedi 
FR “th ls uy  : COR Hf HI gfe y if i iit oy FP n - h 3 .y 111 : fi iy : 
ik "gy | 81 Bram 2 0 ad a. * " roan WHE Wh HHH " BR fe ULE HEH rrr Ril REET] Hike A o 
2 § oa ey | is e t LEE 1 LET | . . . “ IE 
bs % R Li Jeti _——— H HTL ial it ’ 
wo Fi Wi (LFTT a= aon LAE FL TARAS | 25 a NT Au ! i, ! 3 5 1  g— J shld ITB Y ; 
| - . : Hey yo: A m . 1811 '. 5 
wr - x edd " MEE a LL TIE ERT IITRT 
‘ we 2 wd 1 Bd Sk fl hd] 1 — | ! Yr ar ry | 
- ase a “rAfRfuaf iri \ : Sagat "MNT LARLED 4 ak | 
I Chetan LF 1 Tg THIN EI} LLL SS 
r ) . LE SN I I}! ! LT 131s -t 'E : TI . .- In 59 30040 AAA I ra Sinn errrrn "y 
~2 ; a | La ! A HT SERRA RE LATE OE LJ 11 
Fw Do ell Cai ik ¥ hn 1 1r3INYS NE NTREWER HIE 
Ee rE PE TA TEE TER THI TTI TTR RRR 
LCL BEL LL witd BAR i HHH LLE SAE ETN TERT ir. nih ihn dir ap [aA LEY 1 Monaain es. LEWES nan 4 “uilh .. Hill add’ - Lina rasa a a i in f88 sail SHE HIRT. of wa TTT Ti 
cows wo IEEEN : : HA whl bd, SER " JE SLI CNET BRL ra of Saal 111 Ni ney Ty  —- BIRTINPFEF TFET 723 “ ' ¢ 
NH RAR ALLLE TRA 
E) AKTIARP te wi 3 i _— ra - 
os SRN ) 
    
 
   
 at 
S 
Fa
ut
re
 
© 
As
k 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ns
. 
The southern tip of 
Manhattan. 


### 105710: New York blues

English, could interpret all the complex signs 
and signals of the metropolis, could gather 
capital for their own enterprises, could buy 
their own seats on the New York Stock 
Exchange. Even more important, they helped 
school their own and other people’s children 
without rancour or a sense of exclusion. 
New York in the 1930s, in the midst of 
the Great Depression, was still the most 
democratic place on earth. It encouraged the 
very idea of rebellion, the sacredness of indi- 
vidual rights, the belief that any government 
which did not serve these rights should and 
could be driven out of office. Even Holly- 
wood understood this ethos and capitalized 
on it. In film after ilm—The Bowery (1934), 
Dead End (1937), Angels with Dirty Faces 
(1938), City for Conquest (1940)—New York- 
ers are depicted as an unruly lot, women, chil- 
dren, and old men who provide their own 
liberty and law. This ethos even reached as far 
as Rick’s Cafe (Casablanca, 1943), where Rick 
Blaine (Humphrey Bogart) warns a German 
major (Conrad Veidt) that if the Nazis ever got 
near Rick’s old neighbourhood of Hell’s 
Kitchen, they had better run for their lives. 
But there are no Rick Blaines today. Is the 
City becoming a kind of behemoth as it 
approaches anew century? Its public schools are 
dying. It cannot seem to educate its young, 
teach them the most basic skills, or convince 
them that the city is there for them. New 
York’s crisis of faith has become the crisis of 
every large American city. The poor have lost 
their place. They cannot negotiate for them- 
selves in this labyrinth. Since 1965, three million 
THE UNESCO Courier MARCH 1997 
>

## [Page 16](105695engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

> 
Th
om
as
 
Ho
pk
er
 
@ 
Ma
gn
um
, 
Pa
rs
 
immigrants have arrived in New York, most 
of them non-white: Jamaicans, Dominicans, 
Mexicans, Koreans, Pakistanis, Indians, Chi- 
nese, who have formed their own tribes and 
entered into the fabric of New York, but it’s 


### 105710: New York blues

not the same democratic family. Blacks and 
whites are further apart than they ever were, in 
spite of “integration.” Young black males have 
become an endangered species in New York. 
They cannot survive the system’s shabby pub- 
lic housing and shitty public schools. 
No onc, not even the most passionate New 
Yorker, seems capable of dealing with that 
heartless dividing line between whites and 
blacks. Poor blacks (and Latinos) have fallen 
 
THE UNLSCO Counir § MARCH 1997 
Ch
an
ta
l 
Re
gn
au
lt
 
® 
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ns
 
  
Too, immigrants take the oath of allegiance during a 
naturalization ceremony in New York City. 
Acore a meeting of “Guardian Angels”, volunteers who 
patrol the New York subway. 
L eft, street scene in New York City's Chinatown. 
outside America’s vocabulary. They are, as nov- 
elist Ralph Ellison described over forty years 
ago, invisible women and men. Itdoesn’t really 
matter that some blacks have escaped the 
ghetto to have fabulous carcers as rap singers, 
generals, actors and actresses, comedians, box- 
ers, basketball and baseball players. The others 
have been left woefully behind. And the 
despair, paranoia, and depression get worse 
and worse. The overwhelming majority of all 
prisoners in New York State come from the 
poorest black and Latino neighbourhoods in 
New York City. These neighbourhoods, like 
Harlem and Brownsville and the South Bronx, 
arc the ghastliest sort of ghettos, where crime

## [Page 17](105695engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 105710: New York blues

begets crime, where the walls of cvery block are 
  
   
    
   
   
 
filled with painted clegies to fallen black and 
Latino warriors. This is the fastest-growing 
art coming out of the ghettos. And the young 
artists who are painting these testimonials are 
sought out everywhere. It’s ironic and sad that 
their only real capital is death. 
The South Bronx has become the worst of 
the little laboratories of crime. The police are 
quite proud that they have been able to use 
the same federal statutes that trapped Mafia 
chieftains like John Gotti to go after the black 
and Latino gangs of the South Bronx and toss 
them nto jail. The exploits of these crusading 
cops were written up in The New Yorker's 
 
© 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Lé
na
rs
, 
Pa
ni
s 
Above, New York's Indian community celebrates Indian 
Independence day (15 August) on Fifth Avenue. 
Rig, a city playground. 
B elow, a Chinatown grocery store. 
Ch
an
ta
l 
Re
gn
au
lt
 © 
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ns
 
“Talk of the Town” column, which praised 
Walter Arsenault, chief of the Homicide Inves- 
tigation Unit, “a small team of detectives and 
prosccutors which specializes in large gang 
busts and has not lost a single case in its ten- 
year history.” Arsenault, whose uniform is a 
pair of blue jeans and a white oxford shirt, is 
like a wizard who can rattle off the nicknames 
of every defendant in a particular case— 
“Chicken, Foodhead, Pacqualito, Popcorn, 
Dominican David.” But is the South Bronx or 
Brownsville in better shape without “Pop- 
corn” and “Dominican David”? I doubt it. 
1 A | rs 3 : 
CARL 1 Ww BE 
f/ ¥ - ‘A J 
Th IR § Jd p 
Fi 57 = nig 
As soon as one gang is pulled off the street, 
Ge
ra
rd
 
Bo
ut
in
 
© 
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ni
s 
another gang forms. It’s all part of the same » 
He unesco (COURIER 8 MARCH 1997

## [Page 18](105695engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

> 
Jo
e 
Vi
es
t 
© 
As
k 
Im
ag
es
. 
Pa
ni
s 
implacable beast, that Hydra’s head of depra- 
vation that keeps fattening itself on other peo- 
ple. The police can only solve problems in a 
community by being part of that commu- 
nity, by living in it, by sharing its despair, 
bathing in its stink. But the cops never live in 
the communities they patrol and rarely havea 
stake in them. They are often part of the cor- 
ruption that helps destroy a community, in 
spite of Walter Arsenault’s heroics. 
The South Bronx always had its gangs, even 
sixty years ago, when the gangs were mostly 
white, and the cops who dealt with them often 
came out of the very same gangs. Then and 
now, the poor had to have their colours, their 
territories, their little flags, declaring that they 
were outlaws in a world that was largely indif- 
ferent to them and their designs. To some 
degree, it was an educative process, a means 
whereby a gang could talk to itself and other 
gangs, find a common language. I’m not dis- 
missing the plunder and mayhem of any gang, 
past or present. But most often, the gangs fed 
off their own entrails and still do. Their com- 
mon language still unites them; it’s the only 
schooling many of them will ever have—ecither 
the old Fordham Baldies or today’s La Com- 
pania, Wild Cowboys, and Jheri Curls. 
The police had better learn to understand 
the dynamics of the gangs and their will to 
w 
THe uNEsco (COURIER B MARCH 1997 
8 
1 i 


### 105710: New York blues

survive, or they themselves and the city of 
New York will not survive the gangs, which 
are already taking over and “educating” the 
jailhouses they are in. 
New York itself has become an enormous 
jailhouse, where the rich have their isolated 
“free” zones, and the poor are tucked away in 
ghettos that are growing largerevery day. Cap- 
tured gangs will not make the problems disap- 
pear, only the deepest compassion and a com- 
mitment to overcome white and black paranoia 
can possibly change things. New York is like 
any other nation involved in internecine war- 
fare, and that warfare has to be stopped. It will 
not come with crime statistics which claim that 
homicide is going up or down. Statistics always 
lie. They’re the baldest, cruelest propaganda. 
Crime will go down when New Yorkers feel 
themselves to be a family again. It might start 
to happen right now, as young artists, white 
and black, invade bombed-out areas in search of 
cheaper rent. But will they involve themselves 
with the poor? Or will they recreate “fashion- 
able” neighbourhoods that will only drive up 
the rent and oblige the poor to plunge into yet 
another ghetto? No one really knows. 
But I’m always the optimist. Like any 
Depression baby (I was born in 1937), I still 
believe in fairness. And no magical policeman 
in blue jeans will ever take that away. =u 
 
Rig, film stars parade 
through crowded Bombay 
streets in a fund-raising 
campaign for hurricane 
victims. 
Sunbathing during 
lunch break in the business 
district.

## [Page 19](105695engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

Bruno Barbey © Magnum, Pans 
BOM 
  
    
BY LAJPAT RAI JAGGA 
ombay, the gateway to India, is a city 
of contrasts. On the one hand, the 
dazzling interiors of its five star 
deluxe hotels; on the other the 
poverty and squalor of its slums. The capital 
of Indian finance and films, it is a city of hope 
and despair, evoking desire and promising a 
future, however illusory, to all who come to 


### 105713: Bombay: a one and many

its shores. The rags to riches stories that 
abound in Bombay films recreate the myths of 
its dream world. 
W The European connection 
Legend has it that Bombay, or “Mumbai”, 
derives its name from Mumbadevi, the goddess 
worshipped by the Kolis, the earliest inhabi- 
tants of the archipelago on which the city is 
situated. It is probable, however, that the city 
me and many 
v 
derived its modern name from the Portuguese, 
to whom it was ceded in 1534 by the Sultan of 
Gujarat, and who called it “Bom Bahia”, the 
beautiful bay. In 1661, it was given as a marriage 
gift to Charles II, the king of England, by his 
queen, Catherine of Portugal. Its territories 
then consisted of seven islands, interspersed by 
swampy, low-lying areas, eighteen kilometres 
long and seven wide, with Malabar Hill rising 
to sixty metres above the sea, and the island of 
Colaba as a narrow jutting headland. A nine- 
teenth-century traveller wrote that, “Bom- 
bay harbour presents one of the most splen- 
did landscapes imaginable”, with “its gemlike 
islands reflected in the broad blue waters” of 
the Arabian Sea. 
Evidence of human activity in the archipel- 
ago goes back a long way. The early Buddhist » 
i0 
tHE Unesco {COURIER B MARCH 1997 © +

## [Page 20](105695engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 105713: Bombay: a one and many

» grottoes of Kanheri date from the second cen- 
tury A.D. Hindu grottoes and the sixth-eighth- 
century caves of Elephanta testify to a rich cul- 
tural heritage. However, the region owes its 
carly economic development to the coming of 
the Parsis, who arrived there from Iran in the 
eighth century. 
Starting in the seventeenth century, Euro- 
pean settlement on the west coast of India— 
the French in Cochin and Mahe, the Por- 
tuguese in Goa, Dicu and Daman, and the 
English in Bombay, Baroda and Surat—trans- 
formed the landscape, architecture, economy 
and life-style of the inhabitants. The English 
presence was the main catalyst of cultural and 
economic transition in the Bombay region. 
Rich merchant communities that had been 
settled for centuries in the hinterland moved 
to the ports, and Bombay became the focus of 
this movement of indigenous culture and 
wealth. The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 
greatly enhanced Bombay’s status as a port on 
the Arabian Sea, and its rail links with the hin- 
terland made it the hub of all India. 
Since the 1860s the Bombay economy has 
been based on cotton—its export and the man- 
ufacture of cloth. With the outbreak of the 
American Civil War in 1861, and the conse- 
iit) or 
a SR 
a Tati ow 
Br
un
o 
Ba
rb
ey
 
© 
Ma
gn
um
, 
Pa
rs
 
THE UNESCO Courier 8 MARCH 1997 
Victoria Station. “Mogul” 
features complement the 
Victorian neo-Gothic style. 
3 
pw, 7 
df 
 
quent “cotton famine”, Bombay suddenly 
emerged with a virtual monopoly of the world 
cotton trade. Its merchants acquired wealth, 
land and prosperity surpassing that possessed 
by the colonial masters. Here in Bombay, 
amongst its culturally diverse merchant com- 
munities and its modern cosmopolitan intel- 
ligentsia, was born the idea of freedom. 
W A blend of architectural styles 
While the growth of indigenous business and 
finance made Bombay a hub of trade, the avant 
garde movement in nationalist ideas, films and . 
architecture made it the cultural capital of 
India. In the course of the nineteenth century 
Bombay evolved a typically Indian style in 
architecture, and later in films and in the devel- 
opment of a composite culture that no other 
city of the British Empire could boast of. In 
architecture the Raj tried to impose its heavy 
Gothic style, as can be seen in the gigantic 
facades of the Victoria terminus and the city 
hall. The merchant communities, mainly the 
Parsis, tried to blend modern European and 
traditional forms. The American historian of 
urbanism Norma Evenson has pointed out 
that a striking feature of nineteenth-century 
» 
" 
| > 
n SE) a 
suid cof) 
Bigot 1

## [Page 21](105695engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 105713: Bombay: a one and many

For over a century, Bombay has attracted 
people from all over India, from all walks of 
life to come to live and share the gentle sooth- 
ing winds of the Arabian Sea and the melodies 
of the Hindi film song. Bombay today has a 
population of nearly twelve million inhabi- 
tants, butit has always been a city of crowds, 
a mix of many communities, cultures and lan- 
guages. Land was always scarce, and as early as 
the 1890s the Back Bay reclamation was started; 
it still continues today. Reclamation and the 
intermixture of socio-cultural groups may 
sum up a century of Bombay’s social history. 
“A pole of attraction 
Each social group has brought to the city its 
richness and diversity, creating an environ- 
ment of tolerance and sharing. A person may 
come from anywhere in India or the world, 
here he or she is a Bombaywala, and speaks a 
mixture of many languages. Whether people 
sleep on the pavement, live in the slums or 
reside in a Bungalow (big house) in Bandra, 
they all share the city, its dreamy films, its 
walks such as the Marine Drive, and its 
beaches—the Chaupati and Juhu. Over the 
years, however, differences of community, 
religion and social class have begun to plague 
Bombay, as much as they have other cities of 
northern India. 
Nearly 70 per cent of the people of Bom- 
bay are Hindus of diverse castes, sects and 
beliefs. In recent years, however, the Maharathi- 
speaking 45 per cent have begun to dominate »   © 
Ca
rl
os
 
Fr
ei
re
, 
Pa
ns
 
Avo, the Hindu market 
near Victoria Station. 
private building in Bombay was “its decorative 
carving, a quality that linked it with the tra- 
ditional Gujarati architecture”, while its five- 
or six-storied buildings reproduced “the char- 
acter and charm of older centres of popula- 
tion” such as Amritsar, Lahore or old Delhi. 
The creativity of this style is illustrated by 
“airy balconies enriched with graceful carvings 
and painted in all colours of the rainbow”. 
The fagade style of older houses, with tradi- 
tional woodwork, has been “compared to that 
of the Ionian Grecks”.* This blending of archi- 
tectural styles in nincteenth-century Bombay 
was a part of the modern movement and the 
city has continued to be an open window to 
the outside world. 
Right, a Bombay street 
scene. 
  Be
rt
ra
nd
 
Ga
rd
e!
 
© 
Hé
mi
sp
hé
re
s,
 
Pa
ri
s 
THE UNESCO Courier B MARCH 1997

## [Page 22](105695engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

> 
la
ud
e 
Sa
uv
ag
eo
t,
 
Pa
ns
 
Cl 
© i 
the city’s political life. Nevertheless, the 
Gujarati, Sindhi, Punjabi or Marwari Hindu 
merchant communities play an important role 
in the city’s economy. Nearly 15 per cent of the 
population is Muslim. The Bohras and Kho- 
jas are the more important business groups, 
and their leader, Prince Aga Khan, is an inter- 
national figure. The Parsis, once Bombay's 
most important community, are now in 
decline, but still have a national presence in 
the Tatas, India’s most powerful industrial- 
financial group. There are large numbers of 
Christians, mainly Catholics, and there is also 
a small Jewish community. Although the Jains 
and Sikhs intermarry with the Hindus, they 
have a separate cultural identity and exercise 
considerable influence. Bombay’s population 
also includes oil-rich Arab sheikhs, Buddhists, 
Armenians, Chinese and Europeans, who have 
made the city their home and contribute to its 
cultural texture, 
Bombay is not only a city of the rich or the 
middle classes. It has attracted millions of 
aspiring young people from all over the sub- 
continent. They speak different languages, 
Konkani, Tamil, Kanard, Behari, Punjabi and 
the beautiful tribal dialects. They all come to 
Bombay in search of a livelihood, to live close 
to the sea, and be a part of the dance, drama and 
colour of its film world. 
W Necessary contradictions? 
Each socio-cultural group has brought to the 
city its place of worship, lifestyle, social cus- 
toms and habits, and has left historical monu- 
ments as a testimony of a composite culture. 
The Hindus—Marathi and Gujarati mer- 
chants—gather at the ancient temple of 
Walkeshwar (god of sand) on Malabar Hill, or 
the temple of Mahalakshmi (goddess of 
wealth), near which there is a mosque built in 
 1 
Nd 3 
Zz & 
SU THE UNESCO Gouriera MARCH 1997 


### 105713: Bombay: a one and many

the memory of Haji Ali, a Muslim saint. In 
Worli is a Buddhist temple and the basilica of 
Mount Mary, one of Bombay’s twenty 
Catholic churches. On the Back Bay, near the 
Dhabi Hat, is the principal temple of the Jains. 
In another part of Malabar Hill are the 
Dakhmas, “towers of Silence”, the place of dis- 
posal of the dead of the Parsis. Bombay also 
has many Gurudwaras, Sikh places of worship. 
Each community celebrates its religious fes- 
tivals: the Hindu Diwali, the festival of light 
and Ganesh Chaturthi; the Muslim Muharram; 
the Catholics’ annual festival of Mount May. 
For over a century these communities have lived 
a shared life of mutual respect for each other’s 
religion and belief, but cracks have begun to 
appear in this tightly woven social fabric. 
The partition of India in 1947 left 
wounds——riots, internecine killings of Hindus 
and Muslims which the passage of time has not 
healed. Communal tensions elsewhere in India, 
as in the case of the demolition of the Babri 
Mosque in Ayodhya in December 1992, have 
sparked off sectarian religious emotions and 
riots. But morealarming is the growth of a sec- 
tarian organization, the Shiv Sena, which has 
used political rhetoric—Bombay only for the 
Maharashtrians—to win votes. A narrow 
regionalism, coupled with sectarian religious 
sentiments, could destroy the healthy mix of 
cultures that Bombay has come to represent 
for the rest of India. Bombay, a recent Hindi 
film directed by Mani Ratnam, shows the 
predicament of this city of cultural intermix- 
ture. It depicts the love story of a Muslim boy 
and a Hindu girl, a saga of the reconciliation 
of cultures of which Bombay is a living sym- 
bol. | 
* Norma Evenson, Indian Metropolis, A View Towards 
the West, Yale University Press, 1989. 
VY] odern buildings in 
Bombay’s waterfront 
business district. 
* E
R
 
  
e
m
 
. 
~ 
1 
R
V
R
 
5%
 
P
a
d
 
o
_
o
 
 
A. improvised ball game 
in the Panier district during 
a day off school.

## [Page 23](105695engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

MARSEILLES 
3 ww TT } 
a 
Y 
: po | , - 
'i ] 
- 
   
NEL 


### 105714: Marseilles: port of call and recall

port of call and recall 
tis the destiny of Marseilles to be a cross- 
roads, a place of transit and a refuge. Mer- 
chants, travellers, migrants and merchan- 
dise meet in this city whose hinterland 
spreads out along rivers and roads, this mythic 
place that opens its arms to the Mediterranean 
world. Once a colonial port, it has lived pri- 
marily from the passage of people and goods 
whose diversity has shaped its long and event- 
ful history. 
In the nineteenth century, a revival of com- 
mercial and industrial activity attracted busi- 
nessmen from northern Europe to Marseilles, 
  
  
in accordance with a process that already existed 
before the French Revolution, when the city 
cnjoyed privileges that made it a meeting point 
between traders—particularly Germanic 
traders—and ships that brought silk and spices 
from the East or were engaged in the lucrative 
West Indian traffic. This economic revival also 
attracted Piedmontese, migrants from the 
French Alps, and Ligurian sailors who found 
temporary work in Marseilles and in due 
course settled down there. 
Later, after 1870, the Mediterranean was 
the theatre of the great westward migration » 
SUE 8S) 
' 1 . 
| 2 
i tal ll g 
: " : 
   
   
  
     
    
BY EMILE TEMIME 
mr 
THE UNEscO (COURIER B MARCH 1997 © 
Sé
ba
st
ie
n 
Bo
ff
re
do
 
® 
Vu
, 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 24](105695engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ro
ge
rV
io
ll
el
, 
Pa
ns
 
> 
  
  
  
  
  
     
of Italians, Greeks, Armenians and Levantines 


### 105714: Marseilles: port of call and recall

towards the American Eldorado. For many 
of these migrants, Marseilles was merely a 
stopover, albeita lengthy one in some cases. Its 
population remained predominantly Euro- 
pean, but it was a cosmopolitan city, and after 
the completion of the Suez Canal it became 
more receptive than ever to all kinds of outside 
trends and influences. 
The following decades saw the arrival of 
newcomers who gradually gave shape to the 
Marscilles mosaic as we know it today. The 
great influx of Armenians in the 1920s was 
triggered by the violence and revolutions that 
shook eastern Europe and the Middle East. 
The usc of “colonial” labour, starting early in 
the twentieth century, brought to the Old 
Port workers from the Far East, the shores 
of the Indian Ocean (Somalis and Malagasy), 
black Africa and, above all, from North Africa. 
Marseilles industrialists were the first in France 
to use Algerian workers. This flow of North 
African workers was slowed neither by colo- 
nial wars nor by decolonization, after which 
large numbers of “repatriated” French made 
their way to Marseilles. 
As a result of colonialism Algerians, 
Tunisians and Moroccans came to constitute 
the majority of “foreigners”. In the 1970s 
Comorians joined the Senegalese and Malians 
who had long been settled in the city. There 
have been sporadic inflows of Vietnamese, 
Laotians and Cambodians. The decline in occan 
shipping and passenger traffic since 1960 does 
not seem to have had any immediate impact on 
the city’s multi-faceted identity. 
: 
THE UNESCO Counter BH MARCH 1997 
But an idyllic portrait of Marseilles would 
be inappropriate. Terms like diversity, toler- 
ance, and acceptance of others should be han- 
dled with care. There is a longstanding mis- 
trust of newcomers. Divisions have always 
existed, and sometimes minority groups have 
been treated as outsiders. 
Wl Living together 
Two centuries ago, many Catalonian fisher- 
men left Marseilles as a result of legal pro- 
ceedings. Anti-Italian demonstrations at the 
cnd of the nineteenth century provoked a tem- 
porary exodus of Italians. More recently, vio- 
lence in 1973 against Algerians spread fear and 
caused some departures. But all these episodes 
were short-lived and did not jeopardize an 
accepted and on-going cohabitation. 
Coexistence is not always synonymous 
with community. Crossroads are not neces- 
sarily places where people really meet. One rea- 
son for this, in the case of Marseilles, is that 
many people do not stay long in what is above 
all a place of transit. All that many newcom- 
ers have known of Marseilles is life in fur- 
nished accommodation or transit camps, their 
presence hardly noticed by the city’s perma- 
nent population. [ am thinking of the colonial 
workers housed for years in the Lyautey and 
Viet Nam camps of south Marseilles, of Jews 
from North Africa and the survivors of the 
concentration camps and ghettos of central 
Europe after the Second World War, many of 
whom lived in the “Grand Arénas”.  
The Old Port in the late 
nineteenth century. 
M arket scene in 
the Old Port, today a pleasure 
boat marina.

## [Page 25](105695engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 105714: Marseilles: port of call and recall

he Buteven people who settle permanently in 
“-~ ~ oI the city do notalways become part of the com- 
‘a ‘a . “ay munity. Barriers remain. Ethnicity persists not 
-v ; -~ only because of rejection but because of the 
bonds created by a common origin and a com- 
mon language and because of a basic need for 
security and communication. The people of 
Marseilles long dubbed “Belle-de-Mai” and 
“Saint-Henri” in the northern part of town, 
and “Menpenti” and “La Capelette” in the east, 
as “Italian neighbourhoods”. Later, Armeni- 
ans settled on the edge of the city at “Beau- 
mont” and “Saint-Antoine”. They did not con- 
stitute the entire population of these areas, but 
there were quite a few of them, and their sense 
of solidarity was strong enough to identify 
them with the neighbourhoods they lived in. 
Such identification may last longer than the 
demographic situation really warrants. 
Divisions sometimes even persist when the 
reasons for them have disappeared. In the inter- 
war years, for instance, Italians and Corsicans 
lived side by side in the “Panier” neighbour- 
hood, in the old town overlooking the sca. 
They understood cach other; their cultural » 
FA 
  Lu
g 
Gi
ra
rd
 
© 
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ri
s 
a Paco Beach. 
  La
ur
en
t 
Gi
ra
ud
ou
 
© 
He
rm
sp
he
re
s,
 
Pa
ns
 
me unesco (COURIER 8 MARCH 1997

## [Page 26](105695engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

> 
Ri
ch
ar
d 
Ka
lv
ar
 
® 
Ma
gn
um
, 
Pa
rs
 
backgrounds were fairly similar; and they lived 
in more less the same conditions. Many of 
them did the same kind of work. Yet a closer 
look reveals that for twenty years there were 
Corsican streets and Neapolitan streets, Cor- 
sican cafés and Italian cafés. 
The many places of worship, often in the 
same neighbourhood, demonstrate a de facto 
tolerance and mutual acceptance that arc actively 
encouraged by the authorities. Their number is 
synonymous with coexistence but not neces- 
sarily with dialogue. The longstanding diversity 
of Christian churches is now matched by that 
of Jewish and Muslim places of worship, with 
their distinctive congregations and rites. 
So itis notin the city’s nature to erase cul- 
tural differences, and the steady turnover of its 
population probably helps to maintain and 
even strengthen traditions that might even- 
tually have disappeared with the appearance 
of new allegiances. 
W Multiple allegiances 
These allegiances, which transcend national 
and religious boundaries, are largely based on 
the jobs people do. This is true for all levels of 
society. 
Trade is the mainstay of the city’s wealth 
and has from very early times encouraged peo- 
ple of different origins and beliefs to com- 
bine their efforts and work together. The very 
small French Protestant middle-class com- 
munity has played a role quite dispropor- 
tionate to its size. Some surprising alliances 
have been made. In the nineteenth century, for 
example, the Altaras, a devout Jewish family, 
combined with a militant Catholic family, the 
Caunes, to found an arms company. 
Atabout the same time, Greek merchants 
THE UNESCO Courierm MARCH 1997 
Bottom, Spanish immigrants 
on the Canebiére, the famous 
Marseilles boulevard that leads 
into the city from the 0!d Port. 
B elow, an American sailor 
joins in a carnival organized by 
Mi
ch
el
 
Se
tb
ou
n 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Marseillais of West Indian 
origin, 
SS 
—__ 


### 105714: Marseilles: port of call and recall

 
achieved notable status among the leading cit- 
izens of Marseilles, although at the outset 
they did not take French nationality. Tech- 
nicians and engineers from Britain, Germany 
and Switzerland also provided their expertise 
and made a contribution to the city’s mod- 
ernization. 
More recently, fortunes of another kind 
have been built on new networks and busi- 
nesses arising from North African initiatives. 
In Belsunce, the business district of central 
Marseilles, the fabric of commerce has been 
woven, unravelled and woven again by Arme- 
nians, and Jews and Muslims from North 
Africa. Competition is no obstacle to a 
sense of community transcending national 
and religious boundaries, although it may 
give rise to mistrust and occasional misun- 
derstandings. 
 
For the most part immigrants have pro- 
vided the pool of unskilled labour needed to 
run the port and the factories. This poorly 
paid and exploited workforce included men 
and women from all over the world. At first 
Italians provided the bulk of the port work- 
ers, then Algerians, their ranks swelled until 
the 1960s by Spanish, Greeks and Armenians, 
in short all those who were forced to do- 
unpleasant jobs in order to survive. Here, com- 
petition led to confrontation, but in the long 
run awareness of common interests brought 
these workers closer together and helped them 
overcome longstanding grievances. The real 
gaps are social, not national. 
In the twentieth century, the middle classes 
have concentrated in the southern districts, 
continuing a process that began much earlier.

## [Page 27](105695engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

The north-south polarity grew more marked 
in the 1960s and 1970s when working-class 
housing was built, mainly in the northern 
neighbourhoods, for a population that was 
growing in a context of full employment, a sit- 
uation that has changed since then. 
W Social integration 
This cleavage naturally exists in daily life, start- 
ing at school. The school still docs the “inte- 
grationist” job described by the long-standing 
residents of working-class neighbourhoods 
who look back to the time when children of 
all backgrounds rubbed shoulders in the class- 
  
A. anti-racist demonstration 
in a Marseilles street, 
A Marseilles worker gives a 
colleague a friendly hand. 
  Ri
ch
ar
d 
Ka
lv
ar
 © 
Ma
gn
um
, 
Pa
ns
 
114 
SAiCccey 
Piss? 
room, speaking a common, sometimes 
invented language, a variant of French full 
of foreign sounds and local jargon. But it is 
true that social discrimination is growing 
more marked and that schools are sometimes 
closed because there are not enough pupils. 
Working-class housing abandoned by its 
more affluent residents is demolished. 
But thereare other places where the dif- 
ferent segments of the population come 
together. They meet at places of recreation, 
first and foremost at the soccer stadium, 
where many of them probably identify most 
strongly with the city. Gathering places less 
well-known to non-residents of Marseilles 
are the recently rehabilitated “beaches” along 
the fringes of the southern neighbourhoods 
and cultural centres (such as the “Maison de 
IEtranger”) where different cultures can 
express themselves. The “Fiesta des docks”, 
held in abandoned warehouses on the water- 
front, is another recent success in this field. 
It attracted thousands of mostly young peo- 
ple from the city’s new frontiers. 
These new frontiers stretch to the Etang 
de Berre and Aix-en-Provence. However, the 


### 105714: Marseilles: port of call and recall

odds are that the city will only truly solve its 
problems of unemployment, economic effi- 
ciency and harmonious coexistence by play- 
ing its traditional role as a bridge between 
Europe and the Mediterranean. The big dan- 
ger would be for Marseilles to turn inwards 
to its hinterland and break the bond between 
the two shores of the Mediterrancan. HW 
21 HE unesco (COURIER m MARCH 1997 
Mi
ch
el
 
Se
tb
ou
n 
@ 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 28](105695engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 105715: La Paz, a tale of two cities

la paz 
a tal € 
of two cities 
BY LUZ PACHECO 
Co 
  
ucstraSciiorade La Paz (Our Lady 
of Peace) was founded by the 
Spaniards on 20 October 1548 in 
the valley of the torrential river 
Chuqueyapu. Located in the arca where the high 
plateaux of the Andes (the Altiplano) give way 
to the slopes leading down to the Amazonian 
side of the cordillera, it became an important 
station on the route connecting the Potosi sil- 
 
ver mines to Cuzco and the Pacific coast. 
At first La Paz consisted of two settle- 
ments, one for the “Indians” on the right bank 
of the Chuqueyapu, near what is today Plaza 
Alonzo de Mendoza; the other for the 
Spaniards and their descendants, on the left 
bank around Plaza Murillo. Although the 
indigenous-mestizo and Spanish-creole pop- 
ulations lived in close proximity, in practice 
they were divided by all kinds of physical and 
symbolic barriers. The torrents and ravines 
that scar the hill-slopes around the historic 
town scparated the different neighbourhoods, 
and after an uprising of the Aymara Indians of 
the Altiplano in 1780 a wall was even built to 
protect the white population. 
W Asocial Babel 
La Paz is the only city in Spanish-speaking 
America that still has two names. In addition 
to its official name it is known to the Aymara 
Indians of the Altiplano as Chuquigo or 
Chukiwayu Marka. In spite of the changes 
wrought by the centuries, the shifting of the 
neighbourhoods occupied by the different 
populations, and ethnic intermixture, La Paz 
still consists to a large extent of an Indian city 
and a white city. 
THE UNESCO Gounitr HE MARCH 1997 
Ge
or
g 
Ge
rs
te
r 
@ 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ni
s 
L. Paz from the air. 
 
This polarity is etched into its majestic 
site, dominated by Mount Illimani, whose 
peak towers over 6,400 metres high. The 
world’s highest capital, and the different social 
strata that live in it, extends in tiers between the 
altitudes of 4,200 and 3,200 metres. On the 
heights, slopes and edges of the Altiplano live 
Aymara Indians who have migrated from the 
countryside. The middle classes live in the 
heart of the city, at around 3,600 metres, near 
the administrative and commercial centre (La 
Paz became the seat of the Bolivian govern-

## [Page 29](105695engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
A passer-by is dwarfed 
by a wall painting in El Alto, 
the Indian district. 
ment in 1900). Below 3,500 metres are resi- 
dential districts where an affluent and largely 
white population lives in expensive houses 
surrounded by gardens whose upkeep is 
favoured by a more temperate climate. 
The 1,000 metres between the “top” and 
“bottom” layers, between the Indian settle- 
ments of El Alto and the elegant districts of 
Calacoto, la Florida and Achumani, contain a 
welter of climatic, ethnic, economic and social 
contrasts. 
W Interdependence 
The whites were long haunted by the fear that 
they would be encircled by the indigenous 
people, as they were by Tupaq Katari in 1781. 
However, the conquest (or reconquest) of the 
city by the Indians has taken other, more 
peaceful and irreversible forms. Between the 
sixteenth century and the beginning of the 
twenticth, whites and mestizos made constant 
inroads on the territory of the indigenous 
population. Deprived of their land and no 
longer able to farm or raise animals, the Indi- 
ans began to specialize in crafts and trade and 
came to constitute a partly urbanized group 
known as cholos, “town Indians” or mesti- 
20s (sec box page 31). 
After the revolution of 1952, agrarian 
reform, universal suffrage, education for all 
and other measures were introduced, trans- 
forming Bolivia's social and economic struc- 
tures and encouraging a far-reaching process 
of national integration. An internal market 
grew, the rural world turned increasingly 
towards towns and cities like La Paz, 
 
Cochabamba and Santa Cruz, and new poles of 
development emerged in the eastern lowlands. 
Attracted by better-paid jobs with higher 
status to leave their small plots of infertile land, 
Indian immigrants and Aymara peasants set- 


### 105715: La Paz, a tale of two cities

tled in the hills around La Paz and on the 
plateau, where the gigantic settlement of El 
Alto grew up. The city’s population, 321,000 in 
1950, had almost quadrupled by 1992, with 
nearly one third living in El Alto, where infra- 
structure and services are often dismally lacking. 
Today, the two cities are closely interde- 
pendent. The “white” and mestizo city cannot 
exist without the labour of immigrants who 
work in the lower echelons of the urban econ- 
omy (in the clothing, transport and con- 
struction industries, in small businesses, and 
as domestic servants) but have rarely cut them- 
sclves off from their home villages. 
The birth of the “Indian” 
When the Spaniards arrived in this part of the 
Andes it was inhabited by a number of 
Aymara groups such as the Pacajes, the Lupacas 
and the Collas. These traditional ethnic and 
territorial units were dismantled by the colo- 
nizers and the generic term “Indian” was used 
to designate all indigenous people. This view 
of the Indians as a uniform mass still prevails 
today, even though cach region and rural com- 
munity has a specific identity that can be rec- 
ognized by its styles of clothing and music, 
and by the spoken dialect. The term “Indian” 
is rejected by most of the indigenous peoples, 
who regard it as an insult and associate it with 
exploitation and discrimination, but at the 
LI
 
4 
TR
A 
4 
W
a
 
x
y
 
gH
 
Sa 
he 
“nn 
re 
= 
~~ 
ft
 
THE UNESCO Courier # MARCH 1997 
> 
Br
un
o 
Pe
rr
ou
ss
e 
© 
Yu
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 30](105695engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Lé
na
rs
, 
Pa
ns
 
> 
 
same time it is accepted by Indian rights move- 
ments which in the last twenty years or so 
have been trying to end discrimination against 
all the Indians. 
Whatever the rights and wrongs of this 
debate, it is indisputable that the immigrants 
brought cultural models that have given La 
Paz its special flavour. La Paz differs from 
other Latin American capitals, which are sur- 
rounded by poverty belts, in that its needy 
districts display many features of the rural 
communities from which their inhabitants 
have come. For economic and cultural reasons, 
newcomers first build adobe (sun-dried brick) 
houses with corrugated iron roofs like those 
in the villages they have left behind, consist- 
ing of a kitchen and a huge common living 
room for all the family. Later they add new 
rooms built of industrially manufactured 
bricks which are often left ungarnished by 
plaster or whitewash, partly because of the 
HE unesco (COURIER B MARCH 1997 
D.ncers shaking rattles 
celebrate the Christian feast 
of the Assumption. 
A street scene 
in the city centre. 


### 105715: La Paz, a tale of two cities

cost but also because new migrants regard these 
bricks as a status symbol. 
External signs and codes—physical appear- 
ance, clothing, food and language—are 
imposed, maintained and even sought-after. 
They reveal the extreme ethnic diversity of 
these Indian groups, and also highlight the 
contrast between them and the economic and 
political elites who favour a “Western” lifestyle. 
La Paz has always been shaped by a two- 
track process of integration and discrimination. 
Although the existence of racism is denied it 
can be seen in the day-to-day relations between . 
people from differentsocial strata. Immigrants 
of peasant origin do the dirtiest jobs, earn the 
lowest wages, are excluded from the social secu- 
rity system and have only limited access to 
schooling and health care. 
WM Festive union 
The different classes of society mingle during 
the fiestas that punctuate the year. In the pre- 
dominantly indigenous neighbourhoods, as in 
the villages, patron saints are the object of 
colourful celebrations organized and financed 
by volunteers who want to show their devo- 
tion and also acquire prestige corresponding to 
the money they spend on food and drink for 
the participants, dancers’ costumes, bands, 
and so on. 
In recent decades, several events of Andean 
and rural origin have spread to other sections 
 Se
an
 
Sp
ra
gu
e 
® 
Pa
no
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on

## [Page 31](105695engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

HALF-WAY HOUSE 
In La Paz the term cholo describes people who are socially and 
ethnicallyin a halfway house. For those who regard themselves 
as “whites”, a cholo is the son of an Indian who no longer dresses 
in a traditional way like his father and has received a more 
highly rated education. For others, a cholo is the mestizo son of 
a marriage between a white and an Indian, or else the son of a 
cholo. To be considered as such, two conditions must be met. A 
cholo must have migrated to the city and have a job whose sta- 
tus is sufficiently high for him no longer to be defined as an 
"Indian". For example, a mason or a plumber who has migrated 
from the countryside will be treated as an Indian, but an incomer 
wha has a job with higher status (e.g. as a driver or butcher}, will 
be regarded as a cholo. 
In white people's minds, the intermediate status occu- 
pied by the cholos in La Paz society seems bound up with a set 
of qualities and defects (rebelliousness, submission, neurosis). 
  @© 
Gé
ra
rd
 
Si
oe
n/
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
Foi sellers in an Indian 
market. 
of the population. The alasitas fiesta dedicated A passport from cholo status to that of a “sefior” is possession 
to Ekeko, an ancient divinity of plenty, is 
now celebrated throughout the city each year 
of a certain amount of wealth and an education—preferably 
gained abroad. For many “whites”, however, those who have 
“made it” in this way, i.e. become “senores”, remain half-cho- 
los. “He acts like a cholo,” is an insulting way of saying that a 
person has no manners and reprehensible habits. 
on 24 January. On that day, at midday, every- 
body in the city stampedes to buy miniature 
models of houses, cars, banknotes and other 
good luck charms. 
The fiesta of Sefior del Gran Poder, which 
takes place in June, was once celebrated only by 
the people who live in the parish of that name. 
In the last twenty-odd years it has been an occa- 
sion when dozens of costumed groups dance to 
In La Paz, there are no very marked differences in men’s 
dress, which is mainly determined by economic factors, but 
women’s dress s quite a different matter. In everyday language, 
a distinction is made between "a dressed-up woman *, who 
wears Western-style clothes, and a chola who wears the pollera 
(a capacious dress with a pleat in the middle). 
Cholas who control the sale of food in the markets are a 
feared and respected group. They react with firmness and pride 
when the term cholais applied to them pejoratively by those who 
de not belong to their social and cultural world, NLP 
rhythms from mestizo, indigenous and chola 
cultures as they parade through the city’s main 
avenues. Recently, people from classes which 
would once have looked down on such events 
as vulgar and “Indian” have joined in. 
Another common practice is to organize a 
ch’alla good-luck ceremony at house-warm- 
Events of this kind show how practices 
and beliefs that not so long ago were generally 
inaccessible or despised are spreading and that 
Se
an
 
Sp
ra
gu
e 
© 
Pa
no
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
ing parties, political meetings and all kinds of 
other occasions. During the ceremony Andean 
divinities (Pacha Mama or achachilas, the 


### 105715: La Paz, a tale of two cities

sacred mountains) are invoked and presented 
with offerings bought in the “Street of 
Witches”. Sometimes indigenous shamans are 
called on to use their expertise as negotiators 
with the Aymara divinities. 
the different classes and cultures of La Paz are 
intermingling. It is still too early to say 
whether these borrowings merely indicate that 
the “haves” are taking over the cultural forms 
of a tamed and neutralized class of “have- 
nots”, or whether they mark the start of a 
process that will eventually lead to genuine 
recognition of these cultures. | 
 
M 
Be
rt
in
et
ti
 
@ 
R
a
p
h
o
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Lex a house in the Calacoto 
residential district. 
Fa left, a shanty town on the 
heights of La Paz. 
THE uNEsco (COURIER @ MARCH 1997

## [Page 32](105695engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

T 
Mi
ll
s 
@ 
Va
nc
ou
ve
r 
Art
 G
al
le
ry
, 
Va
nc
ou
ve
r 


### 105718: Vancouver or the spirit of place

VANCOUVER 
‘the spirit of place 
BY HADANI DITMARS 
A mask by Bob Dempsey 
inspired by Native American 
tradition. It depicts a human 
face with a raven and a frog. 
 
THE UNESCO (ouniern MARCH 1997 
ancouver, pretty little Pacific town 
of my youth. Cedar trees and blue 
water. Snow-capped mountains and 
Indian legends. I returned to you 
after years away and found a city transformed. 
Whole neighbourhoods had changed lan- 
guages—f{rom English to Chinese, Punjabi 
and Spanish. Street signs spoke Cantonese and 
all the taxi drivers were refugees. Vancouver 
had made that grand voyage from small town 
to big city, and even more dramatically, it had 
leapt into the realm of displacement. It had 
become a town full of people who were from 
somewhere clse. 
Canada is known for its multiculturalism, 
but Vancouver, which is separated from the 
rest of the country by the Rocky Mountains 
and spiritually connected to Asia by the Pacific 
Ocean, 1s unique even within the Canadian 
experience. 
  
 
Only onc hundred years old, Vancouver 
was built on the bones of ancient native cul- 
tures by mainly British Europeans and inden- 
tured Chinese and Japanese labour. 
Native Indian children were routinely taken 
from their parents and put into “residential 
schools” where their culture, language and tra- 
ditions were replaced by white English, Chris- 
tian values. 
Since the introduction of Canadian Prime 
Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau’s policy of mul- 
A bentwood box with a mask 
inside by Ken Mowatt, a 
contemporary Canadian 
artist. 
T, 
Mi
ll
s 
@ 
Va
nc
ou
ve
r 
Ar
t 
Ga
ll
er
y,
 
Va
nc
ou
ve
r

## [Page 33](105695engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 105718: Vancouver or the spirit of place

a place where anything is possible, a place where 
the new cultures arriving here can easily take 
root. 
Vancouver is not 2 “melting pot” like the 
American multicultural model, where inte- 
gration usually means assimilation. Itis a place 
where cultures can continue to flourish and 
grow, often keeping their language and tradi- 
tions, transplanting them into new soil. The 
end results a kind of cross pollination where 
cultures rub against cach other in new and cre- 
ative ways. 
Evidence of this is found in Vancouver's 
many ethnically distinct neighbourhoods, 
districts that have their own colour and 
flavour, but manage to transcend “ghettoiza- 
tion” through cross-cultural connection. 
There 1s Vancouver’s “Chinatown”, for 
instance—one of the largest in North Amer- 
ica—where the street signs are bilingual (Chi- 
nese/English). Although most residents are ori- 
ental, thereis agrowing link with the non-Asian 
community, just as Chinese speaking Vancou- 
verites are making inroads into traditionally » 
  
   
Al
ai
n 
Ev
ra
rd
 
© 
Gl
ob
e 
P
r
e
s
s
/
H
o
a
g
u
r
,
 
Pa
ns
 
Tee inner port of Vancouver, 
Canada's third largest city. 
ticulturalism, Canadians have been encouraged 
to forget the past and embrace each others’ dif- 
ferences. But the road to harmonious cultural 
pluralism has not been easy. Japanese Canadian 
groups have sought and in many places gained 
acknowledgement for their unjust internment 
during the Second World War as enemy aliens, 
but compensation for the full extent of their 
emotional and financial suffering has not been 
forthcoming. 
Native groups have been engaged in a series 
of on-going and controversial land claims, and 
English-Canadians have had to adjust to the 
cultural changes brought by the influx of 
Hong Kong immigrants. 
But Vancouver's unique position in the 
Canadian cultural context, its dramatic geog- 
raphy and indeed its very newness, create a 
special atmosphere, where cultural métissage is 
not only possible but inevitable. Forinacity 
less than a century old, tradition is something 
that must be created rather than referred to. 
W The beauty of emptiness 
As a student, I always complained that Van- 
couver lacked culture and dreamed of escape to 
Paris or Rome—older cities with richer tra- 
ditions. Now, coming back to the city of my 
birth after years in many “older” places, I real- 
ize that the very newness of Vancouver is its 
richness. Its emptiness is its beauty. Without 
the cultural baggage—both good and bad— A totem pote 
of more established cities, Vancouver becomes In Stanley Park. 
   Al
ai
n 
Ev
ra
rd
 
© 
Gl
ob
e 
Pr
es
s/
Ho
aq
u 
Pa
ri
s 
THE UNESCO Courier HB MARCH 1997

## [Page 34](105695engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 105718: Vancouver or the spirit of place

> 
© 
As
za
, 
V
a
n
c
o
u
v
e
r
 
Anglo-Canadian enclaves (especially in the busi- 
ness sector). A small but significant Anglo- 
Canadian community of artists, inspired by 
the sounds and colours of the lively market- 
place, chooses to live and work there. In addi- 
tion, in a city whose culinary palate is becom- 
ing more and more Asian (most Vancouverites 
feel comfortable using chopsticks, and have dim 
sum and sushiin their nutritional vernacular), an 
increasing number of non-Chinese Vancou- 
verites go to Chinatown to shop for food. 
And as alternative medicine currently 
enjoys great popularity in Vancouver, many 
non- Asians go to Chinatown to consult Chi- 
nese herbal doctors or acupuncturists. Some 
non-Chinese Vancouverites are even adopting 
Chinese geomancy—or feng shui—the ancient 
Taoist art of designing houses and interiors 
so that energy and harmony emanate and “bad 
spirits” are not “trapped” in “blocked” or 
poorly designed spaces, and come to China- 
town to consult with feng shui masters. 
Others come to Chinatown to sit and con- 
template in the Sun-Yat-Sen classical Chinese 
      
wt 
J 
3 4 THE UNESCO Courirm MARCH 1997 
  
M usicians of different ethnic 
origins form the Vancouver- 
based “Asza” group. 
 
gardens, where blue herons perch near bamboo 
plants and pools of goldfish. (The only other 
public garden in Vancouver that matches this 
one in serenity is perhaps the Nitobe memo- 
rial Japanese Garden, which stays true to the 
Shinto spirit thousands of miles from Kyoto, 
while springing effortlessly out of West Coast 
forest that is eerily Japanese). 
W The gateway to Asia 
While Vancouver 1s becoming known as the 
“gateway to Asia” and 25 per cent of our pop- 
ulation are Chinese speaking, this is only part 
of the cross-cultural picture. 
The Commercial Drive area, on the East 
side of the city, is another example of an inte- 
grated ethnic neighbourhood. Originally a 
very Italian area, Commercial Drive has now 
become the great boulevard of multicultural 
café society. Bohemian Anglo-Canadians, new 
Portuguese and South American immigrants 
as well as the original Italian community, all sit 
together at the numerous terrazzo cafes, sip- 
ping caffe latte. Commercial Drive has become 
the place for displaced Mediterraneans of all 
nationalities, as local clubs feature nights of 
Spanish flamenco music and Portuguese fado 
attended enthusiastically by both southern 
Europeans and WASPs with gypsy hearts. 
A stroll through the areaaround 49th and 
Main Street, popularly known as Indiatown, 
is a fantastic voyage in itself. It’s like finding a 
Delhi market magically transported to the 
West Coast. I remember shopping there one 
day in the midst of a small blizzard, with two 
feet of snow piled up on the sidewalks. The 
full fury of a Canadian winter could not stop 
the sari merchants from selling silk, or keep the 
sweetshop owner from his brisk trade in 
coconut delectables. The streets were full of 
women in colourful scarves and pantaloons 
wearing snowboots, and young, turbanned 
men dressed in the latest urban chic—leather 
jackets and mobile phones—off to the CD 
shop to buy the latest bhangra (Indian pop 
music) tunes. After a few blocks, the faces 
became paler, the music duller, the aromas less 
intense, and I looked back at Indiatown like a 
small urban jewel, glittering in the distance. 
Similarly transporting 1s a walk down West 
Broadway in the “Greek area”. Within a five- 
block radius, thereare scores of Greek restau- 
rants, cafes and night-clubs. A special base- 
ment taverna known simply as “The Greek 
Club” offers after hours bouzouki music, 
great oxzo and wild folk dancing, as well as 
heart-felt ballads of lost love belted out by a 
beautiful, dark-eyed singer. It’s enough to 
make you homesick for Athens, until, bleary- 
eyed from the late night and the Greek ciga-

## [Page 35](105695engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 105718: Vancouver or the spirit of place

| 
  
 
  
rx \ » 
HEU Ld 
  
Y } 
i 
Tos, an Italian restaurant on 
Water Street. 
Aso, left to right: Fruit and 
vegetable stalls in Vancouver's 
Chinatown. A street near the 
waterfront. Street scene in the 
city centre. 
bw - 
PARR: 
“, 
Gra i) i 
« = 
°< 
o 
a 
Q 
$ 
a 
a < 
[2] 
T 
2 
x 
oO 
rette smoke, you emerge from below only to 
find some unmistakable sign of North Amer- 
ica—a McDonalds restaurant or a Seven-Eleven 
chain-store. 
And while Vancouver’s colonial history is 
not unblemished, different cultures do co- 
exist here in relative peace and harmony. Indeed, 
more and more immigrants are attracted to 
Vancouver precisely because it 1s, relatively 
speaking, a sanctuary. 
Not long ago, a group of gypsies arrived 
here from central Europe, flecing the recent 
increase in violence and persecution from skin- 
heads and neo-nazis. They were helped by a 
group of local gypsies and other supporters to 
find housing and winter clothes. Some of the 
gypsies who were musicians were able to find 
work ata café where a multicultural group (an 
Indian guitarist, a Rom gypsy dancer from 
England, and a French Basque singer) perform 
flamenco music every week. To them, Van- 
couver is paradise. It is a place where they can 
have achanceto live normal, healthy lives, rel- 
atively free from racism. 
During the violent shelling in South 
Lebanon in the spring of 1996, a local group 
of humanitarian Jews and Arabs joined forces 
Be
rt
ra
nd
 
Ga
rd
el
 
© 
Hé
mi
sp
hé
re
s,
 
Pa
ns
 
 
to raise funds for refugee relief—a simple, 
compassionate gesture that might not have 
been possible in another cultural and geo- 
graphical context. 
Spiritually, too, Vancouver offers a wealth 
of cross-cultural experience. It is a city where 
you can find Christians who go on native 
“visionquests”, Jews who have become whirling 
dervishes, and Scandinavian Lutherans who 
have transformed into Tibetan Buddhists. 
I know of an Iranian Sufi teacher who leads 
weekly discussions of Persian esoteric poetry 
from his East Vancouver apartment. He reads 
and analyses excerpts from Saadi, Hafez and 
Rumi for a group of faithful students from all 
corners of the globe. Among them are Jews, 
Muslims and Christians, Asians and Anglo- 
Canadians—all Vancouverites. The sense of 
  
Al
an
 
Ev
ra
rd
 
© 
Gl
ob
e 
Pr
es
s/
Ho
aq
ui
, 
Pa
ns
 
displacement somehow complements the Sufi 
message that we are all spiritual exiles in the 
material world, as well as the idea that unity is 
achieved through transcending opposites. 
I also know a Cree healer who runs weekly 
native “healing circles” where people from all 
kinds of backgrounds participate. When I first 
attended one such “circle”, where participants 
sing, chant and drum native prayers while 
passing an eagle feather around, I found a truly 
international group. Among them were a Pol- 
ish secretary, an African teacher, a Swiss natu- 
ralist and a French artist. The Cree Shaman 
told us that we were all connected by a com- 
mon experience of the spirit of the land. 
It was a spiritual homecoming for me to 
realize that, although my ancestors came from 
many different lands—from Lebanon, from 
Denmark, France, England and Ireland—they 
and I were bonded by, as D. H. Lawrence put 
it, the spirit of place. 
Vancouver’s green forests, blue waters and 
majestic mountains are a common heritage for 
us all to share. As the American Indians say, no 
one “owns” the land because it “belongs” to 
everyone. As long as everyone in turn belongs 
alittle to the land. || 
tHE Unesco COURIER B MARCH 1997 
Al
ai
n 
Ev
ra
rd
 
© 
Gl
ob
e 
Pr
es
s 
/H
oa
qu
, 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 36](105695engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

Lo
ui
s 
Go
ld
ma
n 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s  
  


### 105719: The Spirit of diversity

THE SPIRIT OF DIVERSITY 
€ rossroads cities” took shape 
down the ages as a result of 
population movements and 
  
voluntary or enforced migra- 
tions that brought together a wide spectrum 
of cultures and ethnic groups. Located in the 
heart of economically strategic regions, these 
composite cities have drawn sustenance from 
multifarious contributions made by those 
who have settled in them. Their societies pos- 
sess a creative dynamism which is the main- 
spring of their constantly renewed diversity. 
But successful handling of the difficulties 
inherent in these plural societics—with their 
multitude of ethnic groups, languages and 
religions—mecans facing up to the problems 
of adversity, exclusion, ghettoization and rejec- 
tion. Crossroads cities harbour striking con- 
trasts and fierce conflicts sometimes erupt 
within them. 
Religious, national and ethnic minorities, 
of varying numbers and degrees of influence, 
provide the pluralistic flavour of crossroads 
cities. The place they occupy in the city is often 
reflected in its spatial organization. To live in 
onc of the ghetto areas into which minorities 
are shunted is generally a sign of discrimina- 
THE UNESCO Couriern MARCH 1997 
BY ANISSA 
BARRAK 
hl es™N;NM kL 
Tos, a street festival 
on Ninth Avenue in Manhattan 
(New York}. The stalls offer 
ethnic gastronomic 
specialities. 
tion, of legal inequality or social and economic 
marginalization. When minorities are more 
evenly spread throughout a city itis often the 
sign of a more tolerant and egalitarian regime. 
Cities and towns that have managed to 
develop and prosper in a spirit of cultural and 
human diversity have done so by officially 
protecting minorities. This kind of protec- 
tion is the guarantee of peaceful cohabitation, 
even if cohabitation is not always synony- 
mous with fair and equal treatment, still less 
with cordial relations between the different 
communities. In one city ethnic and cultural 
intermixture succeeds because itis an accepted 
practice; in another, communities are sepa- 
rated; elsewhere, fidelity to specific traditions 
goes hand in hand with allegiance to a nation. 
Some regard ethnic and cultural interinin- 
gling as a source of cultural impoverishment 
through a fusion that leads to uniformity and 
levelling down; others see it is a source of 
mutual enrichment, the fruit of mutual 
exchange. But this dilemma reveals the paradox 
that is at the heart of all crossroads cities: is the 
pursuit of cultural intermixture as an ideal in 
plural cities anathema to their very pluralism? 
|

## [Page 37](105695engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

FACT FILE 
  
RAMPANT 
URBANIZATION 
The world’s population is becoming more and 
more urban. In 1950 cnly 30% of humanity 
lived in towns and cities, and 45% in 1995. By 
the year 2000, every second human being is 
expected to live in an urban area. Most of this 
growth will take place in small and medium- 
sized towns and cities. The world's mega-cities 
of more than 10 million inhabitants currently 
hold only 4% of the world's people. [| 
Source: United Nations, 1996 
UNESCO 
AND CITIES 
Unesco has established an action-oriented pro- 
ject entitled “Cities: management of social and 
environmental transformations” for the six- 
year period 1996-2001. The first four years will 
be spent designing and implementing a small 
number of pilot activities. During the final two 
years (2000-2001), a comparative evaluation 
of these experiments will be carried out, and 
proposals will be designed to improve policies 
for cities, mainly in respect of support for local 
communities. 
This project, which will be carried out as 
part of Unesco's MOST (Management of Social 
Transformations) and MAB (Man and the Bios- 
phere) Programmes, will be implemented in 
partnership with local authorities, non-gov- 
ernmental organizations and local voluntary 
associations. Co-operation with international 
organizations and scientific communities is 
actively sought. [| 
MOST AND THE 
SOCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY OF 
CITIES 
Successful city management policies must be 
conducive to “social sustainability”—this 1s the 
central premise of a MOST project entitled 
“towards socially sustamable cities: building 
a knowledge base for urban management”. 
By policy-relevant research, the MOST pro- 
gramme seeks to foster an environment ¢on- 
ducive to the participation of culturally and 
socially diverse groups while at the same time 
promoting social integration through improve- 
ments in the quality of life of all segments of the 
population. 
Its international research projects cover a 
broad spectrum, including industrialization and 
decentralization in medium-sized towns in 
India, the socio-economic problems of mege- 
cities, and cities, environment and social rela- 
tions between men and women. [| 
UNESCO, MOST Secretariat 
1, rue Miollis, 75732 Paris CEDEX 15 France 
Tel: (33) (0)1 4568 3799 
Fax: (33) (0)14568 5724 
Internet home page: www.unesco.org/most 
For the theme “Cities as places for social 
transformation”: 
e-mail: g.so linis@unesco.org 
METROPOLIS 
“Metropolis” is an international research pro- 
ject that seeks to stimulate multidisciplinary 
research on the effects of international migra- 
tion on urban centres. 
The project has two overriding objectives: 
* to provide policy makers at all levels of gov- 
ernment, as well as community and business 
leaders, with solid information on which to 
anchor their policies; 
« to develop an inventory of “best interna- 
tional practices”, i.e. the most effective 
approaches adopted in all countries that have 
significant numbers of foreign-born persons in 
their large urban centres. 
Metropolis is a loose partnership involv- 
ing governments, research institutes and inter- 
national agencies. Its members include 
Canada, the United States, Argentina, New 
Zealand, Israel, Italy, the United Kingdom, 
France, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, 
Norway, Denmark, Switzerland, Austria, the 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD), UNesco and the European 
Union. 
The project features a series of major 
annual international conferences hosted by 
“partner countries”. The first was organized 
in 1996 by Italy. The next will be held in Copen- 
hagen (Denmark) from 25 to 28 September 
1997. [| 
For further information, contact: 
Department of Citizenship and Immigration 
Canada-Metropolis Project. 
Tel: (1) (613) 957 59 70; 
Fax: (1) (613) 957 59 68. 
REGIONAL TRENDS IN URBANIZATION 1970-2025 
* Percent of Population Residing in Urban Areas % 
100 
90 
80 5 
70 i y 
m 1 | i 
50 | ¥ 3 
| | 
} 3 | 
30 | 2 
= AR 10 
ofl THR °H 
Africa Asia Europe Latin North Africa Asia 
America America 
1970 MW 19095 MW 2025 19701975 
Source" United Nations Population Division, 1995 
Average Annual Urban Growth Rates 
| | Il i 
} A J 1 IEE "TH. nm 
Europe Latin North 
America America 
I 19952000 WB 20202025 
THE UNESCO Courierm MARCH 1997

## [Page 38](105695engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 105720: Science and society

a 
5 
Gd
 
Ja
cq
ue
s,
 
Mo
nt
ré
s 
convener Federico Mayor 
 
He unesco (OURIERm MARCH 1997 
ol 
  
Scientists, politicians and 
scientific research 
The Second World War marked a turning point in the rela- 
tions between science and government. It was then, for 
example, that the first science adviser to the White Ilouse 
was recruited. This kind of assignment was something quite 
new to those who had hitherto earned their living mainly by 
researeh or the teaching of science. 
While scientific research and government were becom- 
ing indispensable to each other, traditional policy-making 
procedures were becoming obsolete. 
A dangerous shift 
Science has come to impinge more and more on society, to 
some extent vindicating faith in the scientific enterprise, 
but giving rise to doubts about human capacity for the wise 
management of its applications. Increasingly science has 
had to respond to many different and not always convergent 
interests in society and enter into a relationship with many 
different groups, including industry, government depart- 
nents, the academic community and tax-payers. The tradi- 
tional boundary between scientific practiee and science 
policy has become blurred. The issues, though still scien- 
tific in nature, are also economic, political, social and cul- 
tural. It is increasingly apparent that the traditional model 
of science-and-technology decision-making, in which experts 
in their various fields offer advice in confidence to decision-

## [Page 39](105695engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 105720: Science and society

makers whose interests and reflexes are often more political 
than scientific, will no longer serve. 
Where a ministry or an equivalent body lays down pol- 
icy guidelines for scientific research, it is often not suffi- 
ciently separate from day-to-day politics to maintain the 
long-term perspective required in this sphere. Fnrther- 
more, responsibility for science and technology policy is 
often sectorally divided, which is not conducive to the 
development of an integrated policy or the promotion of 
rescarch in frontier areas cutting across traditional fields. 
There is also an unfortunate tendency for the interests of 
science to be sacrificed to expediency—[or example, to 
short-term economie considerations or the government’s 
need to achieve immediate results in order to stay in power. 
Decisions and disagreements 
Matters are not helped by the fact that science invariably 
speaks with many voices. Despite their commitment to objee- 
tivity, technical advisers rarely agree once they stray out- 
side the realm of hard science. “When issues related to sci- 
ence and technology having strong political content . . . 
come to the fore,” Frederick Seitz, a past president of the 
American National Academy of Sciences, has said, “it is 
always relatively easy to find individuals with good pro- 
fessional qualifications to argue, even veliemently, in sup- 
port of either side.” This accords undue power to decision- 
makers who then make choices based on their interests 
and/or biases, using so-called scientific evidenee in sup- 
port of what is in effect a foregone conelusion. 
The lack of agreement among scientists reflects the com- 
plexity of the issues, which invariably involve a complex 
combination of fields and require a holistie approach for 
their solution. Scientists by themsclves cannot be expected 
to provide a complete answer to such questions. It is impor- 
tant that the spectrum of expert advice should be extended 
to ensure inputs from all relevant fields. 
A fresh approach 
What is required is to move away from what has been termed 
“d hi .- % 1 . 1 t 1 hi decisionist action”—wherehy government decrees policy 
based almost exclusively on expertise provided by the sci- 
entific and technological community—to an approach 
whereby the government takes into consideration the views 
of the different protagonists with their diverse values and 
standpoints. An effort should also he made to raise the gen- 
eral level of scientific and technological culture to opti- 
mize societal participation and support. 
But this would require some fundamental changes of 
attitude on the part of scientists and politicians alike. Sci- 
entists would have to develop a greater sensitivity to the 
social and political impact of the advice they proller. Politi- 
cians, for their part, would have to cede some of their deei- 
sion-making power to the experts, while learning to aceept 
the inevitable quota of uncertainty and instability in the 
advice received. 
The role of expert advice must, therefore, be redefined 
in such a way as to emphasize the importance of scientifi- 
cally based deeision-making while exeluding any idealized 
vision of enlightenment through scientific rationality. The 
goal should be to arrive, through the marshalling and con- 
frontation of advice in all relevant fields, at the choices best 
adapted to each situation. The diagnosis on which policy is 
based should be as complete as possible, but it must also be 
made in time. If we wait too long, “the patient may die”, or irre- 
versible damage may be caused. Irreversibility is a key eri- 
terion. Postponement could lead to a point of no return. 
Thought also nceds to he given to the increasing 
unwieldiness of scientifie and technological institutions 
with their multitude of decision-making centres. They should 
be trimmed down to manageable proportions so that respon- 
sibilities can be more readily pinpointed and the risks of 
duplication lessened. That being said, the hubris of over- 
planning must be avoided. Scientific creativity cannot be 
regulated. Policy decisions in certain areas of fundamental 
research must remain with the scientists concerned—such 
autonomy being the very condition of those qualitative 
advances in understanding that are ultimately as crucial to 
the applied as they are to the basie sciences. In the words 
of Bernardo Houssay, “there are no applied sciences if 
there is no science to apply”. | 
HE unesco ((OURIERE MARCH 1997

## [Page 40](105695engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

P 
Wy
so
ck
l/
S 
F
r
a
n
c
e
s
 
@ 
He
mi
sp
he
re
s 
Pa
ns
 


### 105722: Notre-Dame d'Amiens: Bible in stone

HERITAGE 
NOTRE-DAME D’ MIENS 
oy by Cécile Romane 
(eNiNy vi a i -
 
ia 
id 
a 
FRANCE 
  
Pp swnzenamo 
The cathedral of Amiens in France is a masterpiece 
LE of Gothic architecture celebrated for the stone 
carvings on its Western portals. It was placed on 
the World Heritage List in 1981. 
a
d
a
 
Ri 
Notre-Dame d’ Amiens, the 
largest cathedral in France 
and a masterpiece of the Rayon- 
nant style of Gothic architecture, 
is twice the size of Notre-Dame 
in Paris. Yet it does not give any 
impression of being overpowering 
or disproportionately huge. On 
the contrary, harmony, clegance 
and rhythm are the words 
brought to mind by the thrust of 
the pillars, the daring of the high 
windows and the proportions of 
the rib vaults. Inside, the visitor is 
struck by the airiness, and looking 
upwards is charmed by the alter- 
nating vivid pinks and greens 
which cover the expanses of the 
vaults. Even though other French 
cathedrals clicit widespread 
admiration (Chartres or Rheims, 
for example), many people regard 
Notre-Dame ’Amiens as the 
Gothic cathedral par exeellence. 
A PASSION FOR BUILDING 
The first Gothic churelr of Amiens, 
consecrated in 1152, burned down 
in 1218. Another elurch had to 
be built. Like most of their con- 
temporaries, the people of Amiens 
wanted to improve on what had 
In foreground, a already been done and they had 
sculpture by an the resonrcees to do so. Thanks to 
anonymous 16th- 
century artist depicts 
Salome holding the 
its weavers, its spinners and its 
dyers, who used plants to produce  head of John the the highly popular Amiens “blue”, 
Baptist. the city was prosperous. The chap- 
tHE unesco (COURIER BM MARCH 1997

## [Page 41](105695engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 105722: Notre-Dame d'Amiens: Bible in stone

ter was also growing rich from the 
flux of pilgrims. Bishop Evrard 
de Fouilloy lost no time in asking 
the architect Robert de Luzarches 
to build a cathedral in the Gothie 
style, which had begun to he used 
in the previous eentury and was 
then flourishing—eonstruction 
work was already underway on the 
cathedrals of Chartres, Bourges 
and Paris. 
The passion for building in the 
~3 IR — TTY 
SSTNICD URnt 
SRL SIN A 
a 
EIR his | 
+ 
re . yor 
ah 
Middle Ages—which some people 
at the time described as morbus 
aedificandi (the building siek- 
ness)—covered I'rance with mon- 
uments of which half, some 1,300 
buildings, still exist today. Amiens 
cathedral (1220-1280) was huiht 
during this productive period 
when an aspiration towards splen- 
dour and novelty fostered techni- 
cal prowess. 
In due course, two other archi- 
The west fagade of 
Amiens Cathedral 
(13th century). The 
two towers were 
completed in the 14th 
and 15th centuries. 
The cathedral was 
extensively restored 
in the 19th century by 
the French architect 
Viollet-le-Duc, 
Detail of the carved 
wooden choir stalls 
(early 16th century). 
© 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Lé
na
rs
 
Pa
ns
 
 
   
&% 
The Face of Saint John the Baptist, 
a relic from the cathedral treasury. 
teets, Thomas de Cormont and his 
son Renaud, succeeded Robert de 
Luzarches. The suecess of the 
cathedral was due as mueh to 
Robert’s plans and methods as to 
the innovations introduced by his 
two successors. Amiens was the 
first cathedral to be built to small- 
scale plans and also the first where 
the stone-cutting work was ratio- 
nahized. Shelters were built in the 
quarry so that work could continue 
during bad weather, and the pre- 
fabricated elements the masons 
produced were then stored, ready 
for use when the weather improved. 
Work on a churelt usually 
starts with the choir, the centre of 
worship. However, since the area 
where the choir was to he located 
was ocenpied, work at Amiens 
started with the nave and the high 
windows were placed on a blind 
triforium, the normal practice at 
that time. However, after the 
death of Robert «te Luzarches in 
about 1223, when the choir and 
the apse were being added, the 
THe unesco (COURIER @ MARCH 1997 
© 
Am
ie
ns
 
Ca
th
ed
ra
l 
Tr
ea
su
ry
 
> 
© 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Lé
na
rs
, 
Pa
ns

## [Page 42](105695engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 105722: Notre-Dame d'Amiens: Bible in stone

nm» 
—   
» techniques for building an open- 
work triforium were known. This 
is why, at Amiens, light {lows in 
abundantly at the back, confer- 
ring on the cathedral a grace 
which is felt by everyone who vis- 
its it, Christian and non-Christian 
alike. 
From the twelfth century 
onwards, the Gothic conception 
of architecture attached more 
importance to emptiness than full- 
ness, and soared skywards in 
scarch of beauty. This concern for 
clarity and for unity of space dic- 
tated certain features which con- 
tribute to the originality of 
Amiens. 
LIVES OF THE SAINTS 
On the West facade, the vast Beau 
Dicu porch is flanked by the 
smaller porclies of the Mother of 
God and St. Firmin. The profu- 
sion of sculptures rceounting 
saercd history has earned the 
cathedral the description of “a 
Bible in stone” The fifty-five main 
statues are placed in a hierarchical 
order with, in the centre, the 
twelve Apostles surrounding Christ 
giving his blessing, while the tym- 
panum shows details of the Last 
Judgement. The right porch dis- 
plays the history of the Virgin 
Mary, and the left the lives of St. 
Firmin, who came from Pamplona 
in the third century to preach in 
Amiens, and of other local saints. 
In the past, the porches were 
used as shelters as well as 
entrances and justice was dis- 
pensed there. Bencath eaeh 
statue, at head height, are two 
lines of quatrefoils, a typical 
French Gothic motif. The vices 
and virtues are represented at the 
feet of the Apostles. They are 
read vertically—with courage 
standing higher than fear—and 
symmetrically. Each virtue refers 
to its symmetrical counterpart on 
the other side of the porch—so 
that love faces chastity. Charity is 
represented by the gift of a cloak 
to a naked heggar. This allegory 
reminds us that it was at Amiens 
that St. Martin divided his cloak 
in two with a stroke of his sword 
and gave half of it to a poor man. 
\ 
y 
HE Unesco (COURIER B MARCH 1997 
~ 
 
One of the great west 
portals, decorated 
with 13th-century 
sculptures including 
the “Beau Dieu” and 
the Last Judgement 
(detail). 
A masterpiece 
from the cathedral’s 
treasury: 
the casket of 
St. Firmin, the first 
bishop of Amiens 
(13th century). 
St. Firmin’s portal shows the work 
of the different seasons of the 
year and the signs of the Zodiac. 
Very high up, above the Galery 
of the Kings, which is found in all 
Gothic cathedrals in France, shines 
arose window whose fine stone and 
glass tracery extends over a circle 
with a diameter of almost 13 
metres. This colossal cirele is as big 
as a circus ring with room for twelve 
galloping horses. On cither side rise 
two towers of different heights, one 
completed at the end of the fonr- 
teenth century, the other in the {if- 
teenth, When it was built, the inte- 
rior of Amiens eathedral was the 
highest in the world, the central 
© 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Lé
na
rs
, 
Pa
ns
 
vault rising to more than 42 metres, 
the equivalent of fifteen storeys. 
But the cathedral’s architec- 
ture is not its only interesting fea- 
ture. The 110 oak choir stalls, 
carved with breathtaking virtuosity, 
constitute the finest masterpiece 
in wood to be found in France. 
They were executed over a period 
of fourteen years (1508-1522) by 
three local artists. On the seats, the 
arm rests and the pendentives, 
thousands of small figures, all dif- 
ferent and dressed in the style of 
the early sixteenth century, mime 
biblical and secular scenes. 
Round the choir and the 
transept, four series of polychrome 
stone high-reliefs show dozens of 
figures, as lifelike as portraits, act- 
ing out the Bible stories and the 
life of St. Firmin in fifteenth- and 
sixteenth-century costume. 
In addition to a polychrome 
wooden Madonna and Child dating 
from the fifteenth century, the 
cathedral Treasury contains the sil- 
ver casket of St. Firmin, amarvel of 
thirteenth-eentury art from the 
Meuse region, and the Face of St. 
John the Baptist, brought back 
from Constantinople aronnd 1206. 
This impressive relie, protected by 
alarge hollowed-out rock crystal, is 
presented on a gold plate with an 
enamelled cover adorned with a 
striking face of St. John. 
NON-STOP RESTORATION 
Restoration work is always going 
on in Notre-Dame d’Amiens. In 
1880, John Ruskin, the English 
art lover and critic, expressed the 
view that the French could not 
leave their cathedrals alone for 
ten minutes! 
  
METZ IV TN ETF 
“ 

## [Page 43](105695engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 105722: Notre-Dame d'Amiens: Bible in stone

The nineteenth century saw a 
succession of restoration projects, 
the most extensive of whieh lasted 
from 1849 te 1874 and was 
directed by Viollet-le-Duc. The 
current operation is similar in seale, 
but the eomparison stops there. 
No architect nowadays would go 
so far as to create, as he did, a 
gallery on the facade or add his 
own portrait—even eoneealed-— 
behind an altar, Curvent practices 
respect everything, even the alter- 
ations made by Viollet-le-Duc. The 
statues of the Kings of France dee- 
orating the facade are smiling, 
whercas those dating [rom the 
time of Viollet-le-Duc are more 
austere and will remain that way. 
UxEsco placed Amiens Cathe- 
dral on the World Heritage List 
in 1981. France is financing the 
restovation work. The most sig- 
nificant effort is enrrently foeus- 
ing on the West facade, the aim 
being to ensure that it will enter 
the third millennium without 
scaffolding. The rose window, 
which was dismantled at the end 
of 1996, will be back in place in 
the spring of 1997. The sculp- 
tures are being eleaned hy laser 
(the first time this has been done 
in France) and this has revealed 
minute traces of the early paint- 
work under the dirt, and has given 
some idea of the original vivid 
hes of red, green, white and gold. 
The galleries and pinnacles are 
being cleaned up by a micro rub- 
bing technique (with a 29 micron- 
calibre abrasive!). In order to pro- 
tect certain stones from being 
blackened hy the sulphur in the 
urban atmosphere, some of them 
have been coated with a mineral- 
izing agent and others with water 
repellents. Those that are too 
badly damaged are replaced hy 
good-quality new stones of similar 
colour. None of Amiens’ master- 
picees, produced with such mar- 
vellous skill, have heen lost. Unfor- 
tunately, however talented the 
restorers and however neh fund- 
ing is provided, pollution works 
very quickly. Tt is discouraging to 
note that the cathedral became 
dirtier in the last decade than dur- 
ing the previous half-eentury. HB 
The cathedral measures 133 metres 
in length and 42.30 metres from floor to 
vault. Right, the nave. ©P
 
Wy
so
ck
i/
S 
Fr
an
ce
s 
© 
He
mi
sp
he
re
s,
 
Pa
ns
 
    
  
  
        
  
  
  
-
-
 
“i
 
“
X
S
.
 
—
—
—
 
      
      
  
—
—
 
  
      
  
  
  
     
          
e—
 
om
 
—
 
y 
 
—
_
—
—
 
~ 
C
—
O
 
-         
v 
p
l
—
—
  
THE Unesco (COURIER B MARCH 1997 
      
 

## [Page 44](105695engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

ee
 
The Tucurui 
hydroelectric dam 
on the Tocantins 
River in Para state 
' 
i 
a 
44 ol 
(Brazil).  
GREENWATCH 
“When the garden is full of 
fruit, it’s time to bottle some 
for the winter,” says Jacques Lecornu, 
managing director of the International 
Commission on Large Dams (ICOLD). 
“In the same way, dams retain water 
reserves for use in the dry season.” 
Floods claim some 100,000 vic- 
tims per year, and according to 
ICOLD’s 1995 Position Paper on 
Dams and Environment, flood con- 
trol “has always been a particularly 
significant motive for dam construc- 
tion.” Dams also “mitigate droughts, 
adjust natural runoff with its sea- 
sonal variations and climatic irre gu- 
THE UNESCO Courier W MARCH 1997 


### 105723: Large dams

Large Dams 
by France Bequette 
! 
| 
» 
| 
  
larities to meet the pattern of 
demand for irrigated agriculture, 
power generation, domestic and 
industrial supply and navigation. 
They provide recreation, attract 
tourism, promote aquaculture and 
fisheries, and can enhance environ- 
mental conditions.” Swiss engineer 
Nicholas Schnitter, author of A Iis- 
tory of Dams (1994), adds that they 
also protect estuaries against the 
ravages of flood tides. 
This positive view is increasingly 
being questioned, however, by envi- 
ronmentalists and scientists who 
advauce strong arguments in support 
G 
Bi
zz
an
 
@ 
Pa
no
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
of their case. Concern was expressed 
as early as 1973 at an ICOLD con- 
eress in Madrid in the following 
terms: “The real problem to be 
solved is the question whether dams 
are uscful or detrimental, whether 
they improve our environment as a 
whole and man’s well-being or 
whether they spoil it, and appreci- 
ating in each case whether they 
shonld be built and according to 
what characteristies”. 
Past and present 
The first dam for which there 1s reli- 
able evidence was built in Jordan 
5,000 years ago to supply the city of 
Jawa with drinking water. Around 
1800 B. C., during the reign of the 
Pharaoh Amenembhet III, the Egyp- 
tians constructed a reservoir with 
the amazing storage capacity of 275 
million m3 in Al Fayyum Valley, 
some 90 km southwest of Cairo. 
Known as Lake Moeris (today Lake 
Qarun), it was used for 3,600 years. 
According to Jacques Lecornn, 
more than half of ICOLD’s nearly 
40,000 registered large dams 
(higher than 15 metres) have been 
built in the last 35 years. 
Dams can be divided into two 
broad categories according to their 
use: those designed to regulate river 
flow in the interests of navigability, 
and those which confine and check 
the flow of water for a variety of other 
needs. Each type has a specific 
design. Most water storage dams 
(83%) are embankment (earth fill) 
dams, a less costly technique than 
masonry. The materials used may he 
rock (Egypt’s Aswan Iligh Dam), earth 
(the Nurek dam in Tajikistan) or a 
mixture. There are various types of 
concrete or masonry dams: gravity- 
dams consisting of a massive triangu- 
lar wall (the Grande-Dixence dam, 
Switzerland), arch dams built in a 
convex arch facing the reservoir (Zim- 
babwe’s Kariba dam), and buttress 
dams (e.g. the Alcantara II dam in

## [Page 45](105695engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 105723: Large dams

  
Spain). More than 52% of the world’s 
dams are located in China, 16% in 
the United States, and 6% in Japan. 
Costly savings 
Reservoir-dams are mainly used for 
irrigation and drinking-water sup- 
Ply. Although waterfalls have heen 
used for centuries to generate 
energy, hydroeleetrie production has 
increased over the past thirty years 
and now meets about 20% of world 
electricity demand (but only 7% of 
global energy demand). By econo- 
mizing on coal and oil, hydroelectric- 
ity limits the air pollution caused by 
fossil fuel combustion. Ilydroelectric 
power could be developed to great 
advantage if only it were not so often 
associated with dams that have dire 
consequences on the environment, 
especially in dry ecosystems. 
The effects that dams can have 
on the environment are described in 
Freshwater Resources, a booklet 
produced hy UNESCO and the United 
Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP). They inelude changes in 
the ecosystem, loss of agrieultural 
land, the spread of water-related 
diseases (especially bilharzia and 
malaria), regulation of river flow, 
change in water quality and sedi- 
ment regime, flood risks, changed 
conditions for fisheries, agriculture, 
transport and other economic activ- 
ities, population displacements, loss 
of recreational areas and increases 
in the area’s seismic potential 
because of the reservoir’s weight. 
There may also be effects on climate 
as well as the disappearance of somne- 
times rare plant- and wildlife that 
originally lived in the [looded areas. 
These social and environmental 
impacts assumed considerable pro- 
portions in the 1970s, when it 
became impossible to ignore the fate 
of the populations that were 
Above, the dam 
at Marib, the 
former capital of 
the Saba kingdom 
(Yemen). One of the 
world's oldest, it 
was operational 
from the 5th 
century B. C. to the 
6th century A. D. 
Above right, an 
irrigation dam 
near Jogjakarta in 
Java (Indonesia). 
The Glen Canyon 
dam in Utah 
(United States) 
with Lake Powell 
behind. 
© 
Ch
ri
st
ia
n 
Li
on
el
 
Du
po
nt
, 
Va
ll
au
ns
 
affected by dam construetion and 
in some cases summarily displaeed 
withont compensation. 
According to the World Bank, 
the construetion of 50 dams has 
uprooted about 830,000 people, 
only lialf of whom were resettled in 
a satisfactory manner. The Kiambere 
hydroelectric project in Kenya, for 
example, has supplied 30% of 
Kenya's energy needs since 1990, 
resulting in fuel oil savings of $25 
million. When dam construction 
began it was estimated that 1,778 
people would be affected, but even- 
tually 7,500 people were displaced 
or dispossessed, receiving financial 
compensation which many spent on 
marriages or debt repayment, but 
which was too small for them to buy 
land equivalent to their original hold- 
ings. Resettlement reduced them to 
poverty. Lubuge hydroelectric plant 
in China supplies 21% of the energy 
demand of Yunnan province, yet the 
 
JC
 
Ma
rt
in
 
@ 
As
k 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ns
 
2,320 people displaced were satis- 
factorily resettled under a plan that 
offered them a choice between eon- 
tinuing to farm on new land irrigated 
under the project or being retrained 
for new jobs. The projeet brought 
resettled families aceess to drink- 
ing water, electricity and communi- 
cation facilities. 
Side effects 
The World Bank has adopted guide- 
lines for integrating social and envi- 
ronmental eoncerns into analysis of 
dam construction projects and avoid- 
ing or mitigating adverse conse- 
quences. ICOLD is producing publi- 
cations and organizing symposia to 
highlight lessons learned from the 
past and to present technology for the 
future. But we are still paying the 
price today for structures built in the 
past by engineers who did not fore- 
see all the consequences of their work. 
Monique Mainguet, Professor of 
Geography at the University of 
Rheims (France), recently published 
a book, Lhomme et la sécheresse 
(Man and Drought, 1995), in which 
slie assesses the impact of the Sélin- 
gué dam, built in 1981 on one of the 
major tributaries of the Niger, 
upstream of Bamako (Mali). The dam 
deprived farmers of natural seasonal 
flooding that irrigated 100,000 
hectares of land and made it possible 
to grow rice, and the fishing indus- 
try collapsed three years later. She 
reports that two other dams in west 
Africa, the Diama dam on the Sene- 
gal River and the Manauntali dam on 
the Bafing River (a tributary of the 
Senegal), are not living up to expec- 
tations. Diama is not preventing sea 
water from moving 200 km upriver 
in the dry season. The Manantali “is 
responsihle for the destruction of 
10,000 hectares of woodland; it is 
accelerating erosion and sanding up of 
THE UNESCO {COURIER B MARCH $997 4 0 
© 
Ch
ri
st
ia
n 
Li
on
el
-D
up
on
t,
 
Va
ll
au
ns
 
>

## [Page 46](105695engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 105723: Large dams

A 
Ar
ma
ud
 
© 
Ap
pa
re
nc
e,
 
Pa
ri
s 
4 
F 
the valley and holding back fertile 
silt from the delta”. 
The Aswan Iligh Dam in Egypt 
is fulfilling its initial purpose (regu- 
lation of flooding and the produc- 
tion of hiydroelectricity), but it too 
has drawbacks. hs 500-kilometre- 
long artificial lake receives some 100 
million tonnes of fertile silt that used 
to be carried and deposited by the 
Nile during its annual flood. “This 
silt was once used to manufacture 
bricks and natural fertilizers that 
now have to be replaced by costly 
artificial materials and chemical fer- 
tilizers.” Without the proteetive 
[ayer that the silt forms on sandy 
soil, the land is eroded by the wind. 
What's more, the reservoir loses 
more than 10 billion m3 of water 
annnally to evaporation, and a lot of 
water percolates down into the sub- 
soil, resulting in increased ground- 
water salination in a richly evaporite 
soil. But the dam has enabled Egypt 
to cope with the large-scale 
droughts that have struck the Sahel 
inrecent decades. 
Big but not beautiful 
In 1918 Sun Yat-sen, lather of the 
Chinese Republic, had the idea of 
building the Three Gorges dam on 
the Yangtze jiang River in Ilubei 
province in central China. Over 75 
years later, the first stone of what 
will eventually be the world’s largest 
dam was laid in 1994. Although it 
promises to supply 10% of the coun- 
try’s electricity and regulate river 
levels for nearly 300 kilometres, the 
dam is a controversial project. For 
thousands of years poets and 
painters have sung the rare beauty of 
its chosen site. Its 175-metre-high 
concrete wall will create a lake 
between 500 and 650 kilometres 
long that will drown a magnificent 
landscape, completely or partially 
an 
THE UNESCO Gouricrm MARCH (997 
The Ataturk dam 
on the Euphrates 
(Turkey) 
initia 
submerging a dozen towns. About 
1.5 million people will have to he 
resettled. There are also risks of 
massive pollution and silting up dune 
to the reduction in water flow—sed- 
iment and effluent carried by the 
Blue River will accumulate iu the 
lake. According to some estimates, 
the total cost of the project eould 
well reach $32 billion. UNESCO and 
UNEP have asked whether Three 
Gorges dam should be built. 
The estimated cost of the Bakun 
dam project in Sarawak (Malaysia) 
is in the region of $6 billion. Located 
in the mountains on the island of Bor- 
neo, it will submerge some 70 to 
80,000 hectares of tropical forest 
and uproot around 10,000 people. 
Preliminary work has alveady begun, 
despite vigorous protests from local 
environmental organizations. But 
Malaysia is a member of the Inter- 
national Commission on Large Dams, 
and is sticking to the terms of the 
Commission’s Position Paper, which 
states that “Attention to the social 
and environmental aspects of dams 
and reservoirs must he a dominating 
concern pervading all our aetivitics in 
the same way as the concern for 
safety. We aim to balance the need 
for the development of water 
resources with the eonservation of 
tives 
the environment in a way which will 
not compromise future generations,” 
Despite their controversial 
aspects and increasing reservations 
in scientific and financial circles, 
large-scale projects are still popular, 
Since 1986 the World Bank has 
approved 39 dam projeets and lent 
$7.4 billion (3% of total World Bank 
lending in the past ten years) to build 
them. Wouldnt it be better to ehan- 
nel the enormous investments they 
require into more numerous smaller 
projects that would he more accept- 
able to local people and the environ- 
nent? According to Jaeques Lecornu 
between 1,200 and 1,400 such dams 
are hegun every year. | 
»* 
FURTHER READING: 
v The Impact of Large Water Projects on the 
Environment, proceedings of an international 
symposium held at Unesco in 1986, 
Unesco-UNEP, 1990 
v Freshwater resources, 
UNEP-Unesco, 1995. 
v L'homme et [a sécheresse, 
Monique Mainguet, Paris, 1995 
v ICOLD Position Paper on Dams 
and the Environment, 1995, 
(ICOLD, 151, Bd. Haussmann, 75008 Paris, France. 
Tel: (33) (0)14042 68 24; 
Fax: (33) (0)140426071 
v LEgypte et le haut-barrage d’Assouan, 
M. Bakre, J. Bethemont, Presses de |'Université 
de Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France, 1980 
CREM, a leader in urbistics 
The town of Martigny in Switzerland (15,000 inhabitants) is just the right size to serve as a real- 
life laboratory for the Centre for Energy and Municipal Research (CREM). CREM’s guiding prin- 
ciple is urbistics, or computerized town management. 
CREM seeks to reconcile concern for the environment with development in an urban context. 
This means bringing together town planners, engineers, builders and transportation, water, 
energy and telecommunications utilities, which do not always see eye to eye. In partnership with 
the Lausanne Federal Polytechnic, CREM’s small pluridisciplinary and highly motivated team 
collects data on everything to do with towns and how they work. This information is used as a 
basis for developing, testing and making available tools aud methods for planning, managing and 
maintaining municipal infrastructures. The goal is to limit investment, reduce efflient, mini- 
mize environmental damage and make good use of resources by implementing a range of com- 
puterized measures. 
Using this approach, CREM has launched a programme to clean up the heating systems of 
public buildings. It has also shown that the centralized supply of liquefied petroleum gas 
(LPG) to towns cut off from existing natural gas networks reduces energy costs and environmental 
impacts. In 1995 it completed development of its SyCREM® (version 4.0) personal computer 
software for monitoring energy resource use. The software is being used hy several companies 
in the Martigny region. 
CREM also organizes courses and seminars on which it publishes reports and a newsletter, 
Vecteur. [| 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 
CREM, Rue des Morasses 5, case postale 256, 1920 Martigny, Valais, Switzerland. 
Tel: (41) 027 721 25 40; Fax: (41) 027 722 99 77; E-mail: crem@pingnet.ch

## [Page 47](105695engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Lé
na
rs
 
Pa
ri
s 
SUMMIT MEETING 
Colombia’s Sierra Nevada de Santa 
Marta mountain chain, which rises to a 
height of 5,775 metres, contains the 
world’s highest coastal peak. [tis also a 
Unesco Biosphere Reserve coveringover 
17,000 km? and including the sources 
of 36 rivers that supply 1.5 million peo- 
ple with water. By the early 1980s mar- 
ijuana cultivation lad destroyed 
100,000 hectares of fovest and endan- 
gered a whole range of ecosystems, 
indigenous farming and water supplies 
for the plains below. In 1986 the Foun- 
dation for the Protection of the Sierra 
Nevada de Santa Marta got down to 
work on the problem and a conservation 
strategy began to be implemented in 
1992. The creation of an association of 
Sierra Nevada towns lias been one mile- 
stone in the development of co-opera- 
tion. Its existenec is a remarkable 
achievement in view of the spectrnm of 
groups that had to be brought 
together—guerrilla fighters, the army, 
drug produeers, big landowners, small 
farmers, government officials and local 
people—and convinced that they share 
a common interest in safeguarding the 
  
environment. 
TURKEY HOSTS WORLD 
FORESTRY CONGRESS 
Forests cover about a quarter of 
Turkey’sland area (some 20.2 million 
hectares). 98% of them are state- 
owned and managed. There are 30 
national parks, and several nature 
parks and wildlife reserves have been 
created since 1958. Moreover 9,000 
of Europe’s 11,000 plant species are 
found in Turkey, a botanist’s paradise. 
All these are good reasons why Turkey 
will be hosting the 11th World 
Forestry Congress in the town of 
Antalya from 13 to 22 October 1997. 
The event will be sponsored by the 
Ministry of Forests and the Food ani 
 
Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAQ). | 
WATER IN THE 
MEDITERRANEAN REGION 
“Water in the Mediterranean region, sit- 
uations, perspectives and strategies for 
sustainable water resources manage- 
ment” is the theme of a useful bilingual 
(English-French) document published 
by the Regional Activity Centre of the 
Blue Plan, an arm of the United Nations 
Environment Programme’s Mediter- 
ranean Action Plan. The document was 
prepared on the oceasion of the Euro- 
Mediterrancan Conference on local 
water management held in Marseilles 
(France) in November 1996. Address- 
ing the Conference, Michel Batisse, 
President of the Blue Plan, called for 
“improvement in management capaei- 
ties on the economic, social and envi- 
ronmental [ronts, strengthening of the 
relevant legal and financial institutions, 
greater participation by users, espe- 
cially [avmers, and move intensive train- 
ing in water-related fields.” || 
For farther information, contaer: Blue 
Ilan Regional Activity Centre (BIY/RAC), 
Place Sophie-Lallitle, Sophia Antipolis, 
06560 Valbonue, France. Tel: (33) (0) 1 
93653959; Fax: (33) (0193 65 35 28; 
E-mail: planblen@iway.fr 
Ne
il
 
Co
op
er
 
© 
Pa
no
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
MONEY GROWS ON TREES 
Farmers in the centre of Cote d’Ivoire have high hopes 
that gum arabic trees may prove to be a profitable crop. The 
eum arabie or gum acacia is a small tree (from 4 to 6 metres) 
that produces a resin that ean fetch from $2,000 to $4,000 
per ton. It is used as an ingredient in chemical prodnets, 
medicines and some kinds of tyre. The Inter-Alrican Agency 
for Development and the Environment, a non-governmental 
organization ereated by young people in Katiola province, 
has already planted 60 hectares of the trees. Basy to grow 
and already well entrenched in Mali, Niger, Nigeria and 
Sudan, the gum acacia should help to improve the living 
standards of Ivorian farmers. 
TRADITION VERSUS EROSION 
In mountainous and semi-arid Kthiepia some 1.5 billion 
tons of soil are degraded each year by erosion. In an attempt 
to solve the problem, scientists have turned to traditional 
farming techniques used by the Konso people who live near 
Lake Turkana (Lake Rudolf) in the south of the country. 
The Konso manage to farm steep arid slopes by terracing 
and alternating crops, digging small basins where they 
deposit plant waste, controlling cattle grazing and prac- 
tising agroforestry. They even manufacture straw and 
sorghum pipes to drain water run-off which would other- 
wise carry away the thin fertile layer of topsoil. 
DEADLY HOOKS 
Since high-seas drift nets have—theoretically—been banned 
because of their destructiveness to marine life, another 
deadly effective fishing method has appeared: fishing lines 
np to 130 kilometres long that can carry as many as 3,000 
hooks. Thousands ol boats are equipped with them. The 
longlines are more selective than the drift nets and present 
less of a danger to marine mammals, hut they are so effec- 
tive that some species which take a hook easily, like sword- 
fish, are endangered. In view of the small size of the sword- 
fish now found in American markets, some biologists claim 
that we are “eating the babies”. Among other innocent vie- 
tims of long lines are albatross, which take the bait and 
then drown after being hooked. 
- 
  
HE Unesco (COURIER BM MARCH 1997 
® 
So
ns
io
/P
an
da
, 
Bi
os
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 48](105695engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

~~
 
  REFLECTIONS 


### 105725: The World is a sanctuary

THE WORLD IS A SANCTUARY 
BY HENRYK SKOLIMOWSKI 
The time has come to abandon the metaphor which 
has for so long dominated our perception of the 
world and to reject the damaging assumption that 
the world is a elock-like mechanism within which we 
are little cogs and wheels. It has led ns to reduee 
everything, including human life, to the status of 
components of this great machine. The consequenecs 
have been disastrous. Only when we {ind a new 
metaphor and invent a new coneeption of the world 
shall we be able to stand np to the senseless, destruc- 
tive forces that have swept over our lives. 
Aceording to one tenet of ccological thonght 
the world is a sanetuary and we should treat it as 
such. This assnmption is the basis of a completely 
different outlook on the universe and onr place 
within it. If we live in a sanctuary, then we must 
treat it with reverence and care. We must be the 
earth’s custodians and shepherds. The idea of stew- 
ardship naturally follows from the assumption that 
the world is a sanctuary. 
These are the basic components of what I eall 
the ecological metanoia: simultaneonsly changing 
our mctaphor of the world, our attitude to it, and 
our thinking about it. This can and is being done. 
Of course it is a large and difficult project, and 
this is why it is progressing slowly, haltingly, some- 
times grudgingly. For psychological and historical 
reasons, we are reluctant to change, but deep down, 
we know that we must do so. Thisis not the end of 
the story, however. Other important changes must 
occur before we arrive at a sane, sustainable and [ul- 
filling world. 
This quest for meaning leads us on to the ques- 
tion of the purpose of human life and to those ulti- 
mate concerns upon which our humanity is based. 
One characteristic of our times is the atrophy of 
meaning. Both religious people and seeularists are 
aware that there is a desperate search for meaning 
inmodern society. We do not {ind a meaning in con- 
sumption, entertainment and ordinary jobs. We 
look for a larger purpose and we do not find it. For 
this larger purpose requires a transeendent dimen- 
sion to our life. 
This is where eschatology comes in. Eschatology 
is the sphere of human thinking whieh is concerned 
with the ultimate ends of human life and thus with 
the meaning of hmmnan life, and with the question 
of what gives meaning to meaning. Eschatology has 
traditionally been the discipline which envisages 
transcendent goals as the purpose of our life. These 
goals are often, but not always, religious. Tran- 
scendent goals and purposes must not he mistaken 
for a religious agenda or religious beliefs. 
Why do we need a new eschatology? Why do 
we need a new transcendent pnrpose to give mean- 
ing to human life? The answer is that secular escha- 
tology, promising fulfilment here on earth in mnate- 
rialist and secular terns alone has failed dismally. 
Instead of bringing happiness and fulfilment, it has 
robbed us of the deeper dimensions of human life. 
Some seeular humanists are aware of this and have 
attempted to devise a new scheme, whereby a new 
transeendent purpose is grafted on to secularism. 
They postulate a task of eontinual self-improve- 
ment in the porsuit of perfectibility and freedom. 
But these are only words. If perfectibility and sclf- 
improvement are to mean anything, they must be 
rooted in a deeper sense of transcendence which 
goes beyond secnlarism. 
It is thos time to abandon our linear modes of 
thinking and an exploitative attitnde toward nature 
in favonr of an ecological perspective and a new 
form of spirituality. 
Let us very briefly state some of the main con- 
tentions of the new ecological world-view, whieh 
are also components of the new eschatology. The 
universe is on a meaningful journey of self-realiza- 
tion. We are a part of this journey. The universe is 
not a haphazard heap of matter and we meaning- 
lessly drifting particles in it. The new Astrophysies, 
the New Physies and the Anthropic Principle all 
converge to inform ns that we live in an intelligent 
universe, seH-actnalizing itself. There is a won- 
derful coherenee in this process of continuous sclf- 
transcendenee. Nowadays this is well supported 
by science. I am not saying it is “proved” by sci- 
ence, for scienee cannot prove such things. A lead- 
ing contemporary physicist, Freeman Dyson, has 
said: “Looking at all the ‘coincidences’ which have 
occurred in the evolution of the cosmos, we eannot 
escape the conclusion that the eosmos behaves as 
if it had known that we were coming”. A leading 
American physieist, John Archibald Wheeler, inain- 
tains that when we look at the universe, it is the uni- 
verse itself which is looking at itsell, throngh our 
eyes and minds. For we live in a euriously partiei- 
patory universe, and we are profoundly woven in 
this stupendous participatory process. 
We are the eyes through which the universe 
looks at itself. We are the minds through which 
the universe contemplates itself. We have anincur- 
able urge to transcend because the will of the uni- 
verse—to coutinnally self-transeend itsel—is built 
into us. We are cosmic beings. We share with the 
entire universe the dimension of transcendence and 
the urge to sell-realization. This has heen the basis 
of all enduring forms of spirituality. 
A wonderful journey lies ahead of us as we seek 
to actunalize the cosmie meaning which resides in us, 
to help the universe and all its ereatures in the 
journey of sell-actualization and in the process of 
healing the earth and making it blossom again, Hl 
THE UNESCO Courier m MARCH 1997

## [Page 49](105695engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### IGNORE

LISTENING 
REDISCOVERING 
A brilliantly 
precocious French 
composer who dazzled 
the world of European 
music at the beginning 
of the 20th century. 
‘The works of Lili Boulanger,” 
the composer and conductor Igor 
Markeviteh has written, “impress 
me with their solitude. They are indilferent 
to fashion and seem oblivious of what is writ- 
ten about them. I think that this is why 
they endure, and it may even explain the 
strange delay before their true worth was 
recognized.” 
This long “delay” is seemingly not yet 
over. Yet Lili Bonlanger, who died at the 
age of twenty-four, left ns music that is both 
expressive and Inminous, moving and 
enchanting. She revealed her genins and ful- 
filled her voeation with an nrgency that was 
sharpened by the imminence of death. 
“Lili” (Juliette Marie Olga) Bonlanger 
was born in Paris on 21 August 1893 of a 
Russian mother and a French father. The 
family had a musical tradition going back 
several generations, Lili’s mother was an opera 
singer and her father, a composer (especially 
of comie opera) and teacher of voice at the 
Paris Conservatory, had won the Grand Prix 
de Rome for composition for his cantata 
Achille. ler sister Nadia—six years her 
senior—was one of the twentieth century's 
mast influential teachers of composition, and 
tramed many singers, instrumentalists and 
composers, including Aaron Copland, Virgil 
Thomson, Astor Piazzolla, Quincy Jones and 
the trumpeter Donald Byrd. 
Lili showed her exceptional musical gifts 
at a very early age. When she was six she 
sang songs by Fauré, who accompanied her 
on the piano. Despite indifferent health, 
she learned to play the organ and began 
composing at twelve when she wrote Valse 
en mi majeur (Waltzin E Major) and La let- 
tre de mort (The Letter of Death) in 1905. 
She was attracted to sacred music, and 


### 105728: Rediscovering Lili Boulanger

LILI BOULANGER 
BY ISABELLE LEYMARIE 
  
 
impressed her family and friends by her 
contemplative nature, maturity and spiri- 
tuality. “It is a finished monument,” wrote 
French composer Henri Barraud of her 
work, “firmly established in its fullness, its 
sobre style and a classieism which owes noth- 
ing to schooling and everything to natural 
balance, a blend of knowledge and ability. 
There is no trace of weakness in her think- 
ing or inexperience in her composition, no 
youthful squandering of resources or vital- 
ity, no blaze of ill-contained passion—if pas- 
sion there be, it has lost all carnality and 
beeome a radiant beam of light.” 
Nadia, who was herself an organist and 
had been a pupil of Fauré, tanght Lili har- 
mony and counterpoint. Lili also received 
advice from Roger Ducasse, a family friend 
and another of Fauré’s pupils. She studied 
the piano with Raoul Pugno, a cultivated 
neighbour of the Bounlangers’ at Ilanneu- 
court-Gargenville in the greater Paris region 
where she composed prolifically. Under the 
guidance of Georges Canssade, a teacher 
of fugue and counterpoint at the Paris Con- 
servatory and a celebrated havmonist, she 
soon became adept at composition. In 1911 
and 1912 she composed choral music and 
cantatas, including Hymne au soleil (“Ilymn 
to the Sun”). 
She entered the Conservatory the fol- 
lowing year and studied with Paul Vidal, 
an old friend of Debussy and Liszt, and Mau- 
rice Emmanuel, an enthusiast for modal 
musie. She practised for the Prix de Rome 
with the cantata Pour les funérailles d'un 
soldat (“For the Burial of a Soldier”) with 
words from a play by Allred de Musset. She 
was particularly fond of Debussy, especially 
Pelléas et Mélisande and Prélude a Uapreés- 
midi d’un faune, which influenced several 
  
of her works. But she was ahead of her time, 
and gradually moved away from impres- 
sionism and found her own voice. In 1913, at 
the age of nineteen, she became the first 
woman to win the Grand Prix de Rome, 
awarded for her cantata Faust et IIéléne. 
ler works now began to be published, and 
Faust et Hélene was performed by the cel- 
ehrated Concerts Colonne in November of 
the same year. 
In 1914, despite declining health, she 
made a trip to [taly that was a revelation to 
her, composed in Rome, then returned to 
Nice in the South of France where she 
began her cycle for voice, Clairiéres dans le 
ciel (“Clearings in the Sky”) based on a poem 
by Francis Jammes, instrumental pieces and 
the Psalms. During the First World War, 
Lili and Nadia founded a Franco-American 
support committee to send letters and food 
parcels to the fighting men. Despite rest, 
and an operation in 1917, Lili’s health con- 
tinued to decline; she faced adversity with 
exemplary conrage and serenity. In the Jast 
two years of her life she completed the three 
Psaumes (“Psalms”) and Vieille priére boud- 
dhique (“Old Buddhist Prayer”) for voice 
and orchestra, Un matin de printemps (“A 
Spring Morning”), for violin (or flute) and 
piano, and her masterpiece, Pie Jesu (for 
voice, organ, string (uartet and harps), 
which she was too weak to write herself and 
dictated to Nadia from her bed. She died in 
Mézy near Paris on I5 March 1918. 
Lili always remained an example for 
Nadia, who praised her sister’s “moral and 
spiritual superiority” and “purity”. 
Througheut her life Nadia steadfastly kept 
her sister’s memory alive by propagating 
her work and infusing into her students the 
sacred five that had burned in Lili, [| 
THE unesco (COURIER @ MARCH 1997 
© 
Ha
rl
in
gu
e 
Vi
ol
ie
t,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 50](105695engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

AUTHORS 
TAHAR BEN JELLOUN is a Moroccan-born 
novelist and poet who writes in French. Several 
of his works have been published in English 
translation, including The Sacred Night (1989), 
which won the Goncourt Prize in 1987, Silent 
Day in Tangiers (1991) and The Sand Child 
(1987). His latest novel, La nuit de I'erreur, has 
Just been pubhshed by Editions du Seul, Paris. 
JEROME CHARYN, of the United States, 
teaches film history at the American University 
of Paris. He has written many novels and several 
works of non-fiction, including New York, 
chronique d'une ville sauvage (Gallimard, Paris, 
1993). His most recent published work in 
English is Ef Bronx (Warner Books, 1997). His 
novel The Dark Lady from Belorusse will be 
published in the U.S. later this year by St. 
Martin’s Press. 
LAJPAT RAI JAGGA, of India, is a professor of 
History at Jawaharlal Nehru University in New 
Delhi (India). 
EMILE TEMIME is a French historian who has 
spent many years studying international 
migratory movements. He has co-authored 
several works on Spain and published a 4- 
volume study on Marseilles, Migrance, Histoire 
des migrations & Marseiile (Edisud, Aix-en- 
Provence, 1989-91) and Marseille transit. Les 
passagers de Belsunce (Autrement, Paris, 1995). 
LUZ PACHECO, of Bolivia, is a social 
anthropologist spectalizing in the rural world of 
the Andes. 
HADANI DITMARS, of Canada, 1s a Journalist 
specializing in intercultural relations. 
ANISSA BARRAK, a Tunisian Journalist, Is 
cultural attaché with her country’s delegation to 
Unesco. She 1s managing editor of the magazine 
Confluences Méditerranée and author of Villes 
exemplaires, Villes déchirées (L'Harmattan, Paris, 
1994). 
CECILE ROMANE is a Franco-British writer 
whose published work includes a novel, La 
Népalaise, (Orban/Plon, Paris, 1987) and a 
story, Les téméraires (Flammarion, Pans, 1993). 
FRANCE BEQUETTE is a Franco-American 
Journalist specializing in environmental 
questions. 
HENRYK SKOLIMOWSKI, of Poland, 1s 
professor of ecological philosophy at the 
Technical University of Lodz. He is the author of 
many books and articles. 
ISABELLE LEYMARIE, a Franco-American 
musicologist, has recently published Du tango 
au reggae, Musiques noes d'Amérique latine et 
des Caraibes (From Tango to Reggae, Black Music 
of Latin American and the Caribbean, Flammarion, 
Pans, 1996) and Musiques caraibes (“Caribbean 
Music”, Actes Sud, Arles, 1996). 
THE UNESCO Courier n MARCH 1997 
 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
A TARNISHED 
HERO 
Tn your December 1996 issue (“Ephemeral Art™) 
you published a very interesting article hy 
Taroslav Isaievych on Bohdan Khmelnytsky, a 
historical figure who is little known in many 
countries despite the very important role he 
played in the history of the Ukraine. 
But nothing was said about one aspeet of his 
career. In the history of the Jewish people 
Khmelnytsky is known as the archetypal orga- 
nizer of pogroms, a wholesale murderer of Jews. 
The English historian Paul Johnson's well doe- 
umented and objective A History of the Jews 
(1987) which the author of your article unfor- 
tunately scems not to have read, shows that his 
exploits were surpassed only by the person who 
has been dubbed the “Khmelnytsky of the 20th 
century”. The Nazis clearly possessed infinitely 
greater resources to carry out their murderous 
plans. 
Objectivity in analysing notable historical 
figures is also a way of teaching tolerance and 
mutual respect. 
Congratulations on your magazine’s exeel- 
lent quality, 
G. Finkelstein 
Jerusalem (Israel) 
When the Ukrainian peasants and Cossacks 
rehelled against the Poles and set up an inde- 
pendent Ukraine, Bohdan Khmelnytsky’s troops 
perpetrated acts of unspeakable savagery and 
cruelty on the Jews. 
Most of the massacres were committed 
between May and November 1618. The Jewish 
communities on the cast bank of the Dnepr were 
exterminated in the carly days of the revolt. 
During the summer, persecutions extended to 
the river's west hank. By mid-June no Jews were 
leftin the villages and towns of Volhynia (these 
details are taken from the Encyclopedia 
Judaica, vol. 5, Jerusalem, pp. 480-181). 
Itis impossible to say precisely how many 
died in these pogroms, which went on into 1619. 
Jewish chronicles record that there were 
100,000 deaths and that 300 communities were 
exterminated. 
Emmanuel Moses 
Paris (France) 
OUR COMMON 
ANCESTOR 
Is the mind-set that causes us to practise intol- 
erance and prejudice the fault of educational 
systems in use around the world? 
We know that we are descended from a com- 
mon ancestor, [lomo erectus, who evolved into 
Homo sapiens, and began to migrate from Africa 
to all parts of the world. We are all descended 
from the same African ancestor. 
Should the schools and universities of the 
world cach day instil this knowledge into the 
minds of the worll’s students? 1 they did, per- 
haps they would dispel the mind-set that leans 
toward intolerance and prejudice. 
Martin J. O'Malley, Jr. 
Passaic, New Jersey (U.S.A) 
PROGRESS AND EQUITY 
“The poor countries must he helped to acquire 
new technologies and cquipnient, to train their 
people and enter existing networks, in short to 
modernize along with the others,” writes Fed- 
erico Mayor in his Commentary column on page 
39 of your December 1996 issue. 
To my mind, this is quite a challenge. Dey el- 
opment aid from the wealthy countries has dwin- 
dled in the past few years. 
The day when we manage to “ally progress 
with fairness” men and women will be living in 
the best of worlds. 
Abdou Tini Kano 
Tibiri (Niger) 
CITIZENS OF THE WORLD 
In his interview on peace education in your Jans 
uary 1997 issue, Professor Johan Galtung dis- 
cusses a number of interesting ideas to which 1 
subscribe. 
But to my mind he fails to grasp the fact 
that conflict is sterile whereas peace is fertile. 
There is a risk that his peace studies will not 
get “to grips with... violence” (even though he 
realizes that communication and education are 
essential tools for doing this), because what must 
be done is shoulder the noble task of developing 
a system to promote peaceful collaboration. 
The days when we were Chinese, French, 
Indians or Chileans are over. Now we are all eit- 
izens of the world with responsibility for the 
planct. 
Claudia Merazzi 
Bienne (Switzerland) 
CARTOON ISSUE: 
AN ORDER OF MERIT 
lam used to the fine illustrations that you usu- 
ally publish and thought that the aesthetic 
quality of the cartoons in your July-August 1996 
double issue (Unesco Through the Looking- 
Glass) was uneven. 
This is my order of preference: 
1) Egypt 
2) Military dictatorship 
3) World Heritage (pp. 46-55) 
4) UNEsCo in the year 3000 
5) A Lone Fortune adventure 
I would have thought more highly of the 
“Nomads” story il the characters had not heen 
depicted with like dog-like faces. The Tuareg, 
Masai and other nomadic peoples deserve some- 
thing better than caricature. 
Guy Barrére 
Tamanrasset (Algeria) 
Thank you for for your appreciation of our car- 
toon issue. Jano, the author of “Nomads”, 
always draws the characters of his comic strips, 
whatever their theme, witli the features of ani- 
mals, — Editor 
AUTHOR! 
Why have you stopped giving biographical 
details, even just a line or two, about your con- 
tribntors? It would be interesting at least to 
know their profession and nationality. 
Yolande Briffa 
Houilles (France) 
Brief biographical notes ou contributors are now 
published at the end of each issue. See this page. 
— Editor

## [Page 51](105695engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
http: //www.unesco.org 
Currently on-line are: an index of the contents of the last 22 
issues of the Unesco Courier, UNesco press releases, addresses, 
fax, telex and electronic mail numbers of Unesco’s regional 
offices, National Commissions and Unesco Clubs, the directory of 
Unesco databases and information services, colour images of the 
Japanese Garden and other architectural sites at Unesco 
Headquarters, as well as works of art such as Henry Moore's   
| reclining sculpture. 
  
directly with suggestions and comments, type: 
  
  
. unesco.courierQunesco.org

## [Page 52](105695engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

    
  
INTERPRETING 
THE HUMAN BODY 
Vv 
INTERVIEW WITH: 
MARIO LUZI 
HERITAGE: 
TE WAHIPOUNAMU 
(SOUTH WEST NEW ZEALAND) 
   
  
     
    
   
: - 
~ GARDENS THROUGH 
  