# [078449](078449engo.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](078449engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO 
  Courier 
  
March 1967 (20th year) U.K.: 1/6-stg. - Canada: 30 cents - France: 1 F 

## [Page 2](078449engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

§ 1 
TREASURES 
~~ WORLD ART 
i = in A 
+" a i _. 
WN = TF 
Speaking Hands 
This year marks the fiftieth 
ELDUTAETEE TOV) i 4 ToGo 0 0 I 
Auguste Rodin (1840-1917). 
The French sculptor’s repu- 
LCL I EES CET [IV TANT WG TT 
the last half-century, although 
COLE REE CG CRG ERTL IETS 
EE 110 AVANT TERRY Tg RV] TT1  B 
now generally recognised was 
hotly contested. Such is the 
VEEL ET CI TET 
put that the public at large is 
EY ITH FAVE OT Se -Te E11, -T-0 
[LT £8 The work of this 
“unknown Rodin” includes 
such small sculptures as these 
RAT IAT 1 ETT ER TTT TTC I OE 
gether in gentle supplication 
(CETAVET BE Oo TNT i 7: 7] 
cms). For Rodin, hands were 
more expressive than faces. 
He entitled this sculpture 
“The Cathedral” so as to 
LTD ERO ERT CER RG CRT 4 
with spiritual elevation, the 
supreme symbol of which was 
exemplified in his view by 
the Gothic arch. 
Photo ? SPADEM, Paris 
LU LTELTN CCT I S 
g 
' 
= 
or Bl 
¥ {7 : “SN 
{i10 

## [Page 3](078449engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

The 
mCourier 
MARCH 1967 - 20TH YEAR 
 
    
PUBLISHED IN 
NINE EDITIONS 
  
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 
Japanese 
Italian 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢. 
Annual subscription rates: 15/-stg.; $3.00 
(Canada); 10 French francs or equivalent; 
2years: 27/-stg.: 18 F. Single copies 1/6-stg.: 
30 cents; 1F. 
* 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except 
in August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese and ltalian. In the United Kingdom it is distributed 
by H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, Londen, S.E.L 
Individual! articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Read- 
ers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
* 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Lucio Attinelli 
Managing Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition: Arturo Despouey (Paris) 
Russian Edition: Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition: Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Research: Olga Rodel 
Layout & Design: Robert Jacquemin 
Allcorrespondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief 
Page 
  
14 
20 
23 
24 
27 
30 
32 
33   
Ne
 
3 
- 
19
67
 
M
C
 
67
-1
-2
22
 
A 
APARTHEID IN SOUTH AFRICA 
A COUNTRY DIVIDED 
A Unesco report on apartheid 
THE EFFECTS OF APARTHEID ON CULTURE : 
THE PRICE OF SEGREGATION 
By Alan Paton 
THE FORBIDDEN DIALOGUE 
By Lewis Nkosi 
THE SEEDS OF WRATH 
By Dennis Brutus 
THE DYING MINDS 
By Ronald Segal 
THE FETTERED SPIRIT 
By Breyten Breytenbach 
SOUTH AFRICA’'S WASTED MANPOWER 
An inquiry by the International Labour Organization 
FROM UNESCO'S REPORT ON APARTHEID 
APARTHEID AND THE CHURCH 
TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
Hands (Auguste Rodin) 
Photo © Holmes - Lebel - Ernest Cole 
/) » 
po Lied Ee Cover photo y y Giacts Ob 
4 v 
nie : lg Ta Xe 
na) Fy Y : f 
Rs 5% { wl Xa RE 
: br : : he a 
or 4 o TE ’ - A a _— . ; 
;- = hones Tp Sn oy SS Rg A o- Caan), | fad P 7A Me be 
    
  
“Education shall be directed to the full development of the human personality...” 
Article 26 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights. 
“We should not give the natives an academic education... We should so 
conduct our schools that the native who attends those schools will know 
that to a great extent he must be the labourer in the country.” 
Mr. IN. Le Roux, present Minister of Agri- 
culture of the Republic of South Africa, 
House of Assembly (April 2, 1945).

## [Page 4](078449engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 59663: Apartheid in South Africa

APARTHEID 
IN SOUTH AFRICA 
The General Assembly of the United 
Nations has proclaimed March 21 
“International Day for the Elimination 
of Racial Discrimination”. In the 
same resolution proclaiming this In- 
ternational Day, which coincides 
with the anniversary of the Sharpe- 
ville massacre in South Africa, the 
Assembly again called on States 
practicing racial discrimination or 
“apartheid to comply with the United 
Nations Declaration on the Elimina- 
tion of All Forms of Racial Discrimi- 
nation and with the Universal Dec- 
laration of Human Rights. 
At the beginning of this year, on 
January 18, an important Unesco re- 
port on the effects of apartheid on 
education, science, culture and in- 
formation in South Africa was made 
public by the United Nations in New 
York. This report will be published 
in its final form in English and French 
in some months time. 
The present issue includes passages 
from this document together with a 
series of statements on the effects of 
apartheid on South Africa's cultural 
life. These articles have been spe- 
cially written for the Unesco Cou- 
rier by the distinguished South Afri- 
can writers Alan Paton, Lewis Nkosi, 
Dennis Brutus, Ronald Segal and 
Breyten Breytenbach. 
     
   
  
RHODESIA 
SOUTH WEST 
AFRICA   
 
    
   
   
In sett Soe "EVD, | SWAZILAND 
 WEGrange grit a" 
ms A Li LESOTHO (ex-Basutoland) 
J.Lo 
«\ 1 
Transkei 
Port Elizabeth (Im ‘Bantu reserves’ 
(approximate) 
SOUTH AFRICA 
Cape of 
Good Hope 
 

## [Page 5](078449engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 59663: Apartheid in South Africa

A report prepared by the 
United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization (Unesco) on 
the effects of apartheid on education, 
science, culture and information in 
South Africa concludes that the policy 
of apartheid is not only an inadmissible 
answer to racial and group conflict 
but is itself the major source of racial 
and group conflict there. 
The report, to be published later this 
year by Unesco in its final form, was 
prepared for the U.N. General Assemb- 
ly's Special Committee on the Policies 
of Apartheid of the Government of 
South Africa. 
In its report, Unesco terms the situa- 
tion in South Africa “alarming” and 
outlines in detail how discrimination in 
the areas studied contributes to main- 
taining an ideology which it says is 
“unacceptable to the world of today.” 
The 259-page report was prepared 
by the Unesco Secretariat with the 
help of various consultants and is 
based essentially on official govern- 
ment publications and reports from 
scientific and research institutions 
within and outside South Africa. 
D ISCRIMINATORY practices 
at all levels of education, which keep 
Africans at the most menial level of 
society are outlined in the report. It 
cites legislation and regulations which 
require Africans to finance their own 
educational institutions to a very large 
extent through special taxation on them, 
which limit the range of subjects offer- 
ed to them in school and which isolate 
South African children of different eth- 
nic groups from each other. The report 
also states that the overcrowding and 
an insufficient number of teachers— 
for the most part poorly trained—add 
to a pattern which serves to prevent 
Africans, and to lesser extent colour- 
eds and people of Asian extraction, 
from playing a full role in society. 
While there has been an increase 
in the number of Africans going to 
school, the report states this has been 
achieved without a corresponding rise 
in expenditure. In fact, the percentage 
of net national income spent on African 
schools is decreasing, the report adds. 
The increase in school atten- 
dance, the report says, has been 
achieved through the introduction of 
double sessions in the first two years 
of schooling, the policy of appointing 
women teachers who are paid a lower 
salary and the conversion of money 
earmarked for school meals for expan- 
sion of education. 
The sum allocated for school meals 
has decreased from $1,758,960 in 1954 
to $98,000 in 1966. Several surveys 
among African school children, con- 
ducted around 1960, revealed that 
60-70 per cent were recognizably suf- 
fering from malnutrition, 50 per cent 
needed nursing and medical attention 
and almost 10 per cent required hospi- 
‘The term “white” Jig t used for 
people of European stock. The 
term “African” replaces the word 
“Bantu” which is at present used 
‘by the South African Govern- 
ment to designate people of 
African stock, except in direct 
‘quotations where, if the word 
“Bantu” was originally used, [13 
is retained. The term “Asian” is 
‘used for people of Chinese or 
Indian descent, and “coloured” 
for those of mixed European and 
African or Asian background. 
The use in this issue of these 
terms white, “African,” “Asian” 
and “coloured”, has been un-’ 
EVCICELICMLECETE SG TW ETS 
of “apartheid” itself. However, 
the Unesco Secretariat rejects 
the concepts of race and of 
ethnic group relation 
terms imply. 
talization for diseases directly or in- 
directly attributable to malnutrition. 
While there is no doubt that primary 
level education, financed by the Afri- 
cans themselves, has expanded, the 
position has remained almost stationary 
at secondary and university levels, 
according to the report. “That Africans 
are being trained to ‘take over’ in the 
Reserves cannot be supported either 
by the numbers who graduate. . . nor 
by the degree of administrative respon- 
sibility. That they are not being train- 
ed to play their part in a total South 
African society is explicitely stated by 
the South African Government itself.” 
The education section of the report 
concludes: “The effects of apartheid 
on education go far beyond the racial 
discrimination that the facts and figures 
of this report demonstrate. The most 
deplorable effect is on the South Afri- 
can child whatever his colour. ..who 
in all cases is educated within the res- 
trictions of an ideology unacceptable 
to the world of today.” 
I HE report investigates the 
effects of apartheid on the employ- 
ment of non-white scientific and tech- 
nical personnel; on scientific organi- 
zation; on social field research and on 
international scientific and technical co- 
operation. Among facts brought out 
in the survey are the following: 
— There is little training available to 
non-whites in engineering or in agri- 
culture where the need for non-white 
specialists is probably greatest in the 
so-called “Bantu Homelands.” 
— The total number of non-white 
doctors in 1960 was estimated at 
around 130. The number of doctors per 
head of population in that year was one 
in eighteen hundred in South Africa 
compared with one in eleven hundred 
in the United Kingdom and one in 
seven hundred and fifty in the United 
States. Many scientific societies have 
resisted government pressure to change 
their constitutions so as to prohibit 
membership to non-whites. 
— The difficulty which trained non- 
whites experience in obtaining employ- 
ment. “This lack of suitable employ- 
ment opportunities undoubtedly dam- 
pens the enthusiasm of many a 
potential non-white scientist and may 
lead to mediocre performance and lack 
of interest in scientific training,” the 
report states. 
Besides taking up the influence of 
apartheid on intellectuals, both “white” 
and “non-white,” the report also consi- 
ders culture in the broader context and 
gives details of the difficulties encoun- 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](078449engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

APARTHEID (Continued) 
tered by non-white South Africans fac- 
ed with the official Government policy 
of the separation of cultures. 
The report cites the Bantu Laws 
Amendment Act of 1964 which served 
to create a migratory labour force of 
Africans temporarily resident in urban 
centres but without any permanent 
rights. This Act, the report states, has 
had important effects on the African 
family. One of these has been the 
disproportionate increase in African 
male population in the suburbs of 
cities. Another has been the break-up 
of entire families’ because of govern- 
ment refusal to permit husbands and 
wives to live together. 
That apartheid is compatible with 
Christianity has been denied by many 
denominations, according to the report, 
although a 1950 conference of the 
Dutch Reformed Churches, which 
attempted to define that church's policy 
towards the African, endorsed the solu- 
tion of “Bantu Homelands™ and recom- 
mended the replacing of the African 
in the European industrial system. 
In the area of literature, the report 
points out that major works by African 
South African writers, writing in 
English, have been banned as “inde- 
cent, objectionable, or obscene,” and 
that well-known African writers, if not 
under house arrest, now live outside 
South Africa. 
Sou AFRICA has had a 
long tradition of library services. The 
report states, however, that under the 
policy of maintaining separate libraries, 
the major libraries remain closed to 
non-white South Africans. In Pieter- 
maritzburg, the European library has 
almost ten times the number of volumes 
as the branch for non-Europeans. 
Sports have also been affected by 
apartheid. The separation of the 
“races” in the field of sport covers 
five different but related issues, the 
report states. These include mixed 
teams, inter-racial team competitions, 
the participation of non-white players 
in games played on fields of all-white 
districts and the composition of foreign 
teams visiting South Africa and mixed 
audiences. 
Through the Group Areas Act of 
1950, which was later extended to 
cinemas, non-whites may not be allow- 
ed to attend cinemas, theatre or opera 
in a “white” district without a special 
permit, and {whites” are not permitted 
to attend cinemas and other entertain- 
ments in non-white areas. 
While freedom of the press is part 
of the Constitution of the Republic of 
South Africa, the Government may 
prohibit any publication which it deems 
serves “communism” under the Sup- 
pression of Communism Act of 1950. 
According to the Unesco report, this 
Act endangers freedom of information. 
Under its clauses, the Minister of Jus- 
tice has the power to prohibit an 
individual from attending a particular 
meeting or playing any part in certain 
‘organizations and may prohibit any per- 
son from living in a given area for 
a period of time, as well as assign- 
ing him to a determined residence. 
The Annual Survey of South African 
Law of 1963 states that there were 
7,500 banned publications. 
The report concludes that in educa- 
tion, science, culture and information, 
apartheid violates both in principle and 
in practice the United Nations Charter, 
the Constitution of Unesco, the Uni- 
versal Declaration of Human Rights, 
as well as the standards which have 
been set by the international commu- 
nity in conventions, recommendations 
and declarations which have been 
adopted within the United Nations sys- 
tem. Moreover, “separate develop- 
ment” as practised within the Republic 
of South Africa, does not mean equality 
between various ethnic groups in any 
of the spheres with which Unesco is 
concerned. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
la
n 
Be
rr
y 
- 
M
a
g
n
u
m
 


### 59663: Apartheid in South Africa

MYTHS OF SOUTH AFRICA 
Two myths are widely believed in South Africa: that the Dutch landed 
in empty territory and that the early history of white settlement was 
marked by the massacre of innocent whites by Africans. Early travellers 
had very different tales to tell: “On Sunday November 26, 1497 the fleet 
reached the inlet... a number of Hottentots appeared... They were 
very friendly”; or they “came with all friendliness to trade with us... 
The killing of our people is undoubtedly caused by revenge being taken 
by the [Africans] when their cattle is seized...” 
In “Prejudice in the Classroom” (Johannesburg, 1966), Eleanor Hawar- 
den points out that “if African peoples are presented to school children 
solely as engaging in unprovoked attacks on white farmers—and this is 
the picture which most South African textbooks and teachers present in 
both primary and secondary schools—then though the facts of individual 
attack may be correct, the total impact on the students and the picture 
they form of past events, is untrue. It omits the attacks by Europeans, 
the provocation suffered by the Africans, the loss of their lands, the 
courage and chivalry with which the Ama-Xhosa fought in defending 
their country from invasion.” 
Similarly, land tenure and its relationship to frontier clashes was one 
of the key aspects of early South African history. Yet F.E. Auerbach 
(“The Power of Prejudice in South African Education,” Cape Town/ 
Amsterdam, 1965) found that in the Transvaal no junior book explains 
it and only one senior book deals with it. 
From the Unesco Report on Apartheid 
  

## [Page 7](078449engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 59663: Apartheid in South Africa

    
   
  
VR Fs Mr? LB (0 i BLE = LE : 
- y \ ’ >: ro WR ’ \ h ". : " i . LY To Ry 20 NEY : J5 d Te L » ua wr » ] “J LR fa. Se 3 + Ey aT : TE NT ¥ Woh phe il ? ATH at ah 18 N < En N WRN aN -— uN § ¥ | TRG » x STL \ og" LAN ON 3." \ . 4 ‘Ry » _ 5 § : eC. * : 
" . ‘ TX " - i % \ : 3 uv * 3 3 4 LHRUAG : he AW A RX EL 2 » . on 
- * 
» > . oi % “5 » - 
3 . = 1 3 . h ’ a ¥ _ AY : “a ES / ; AAT pe : : Bir, 3 hh gL 3 0 ’ - RU 
xt < { : \ Ti 2 13 A 
Jo : : § Be - L 2 Sy i = ¥ we "wa CS (} 1 SF 3 3 ) 
= rest Cl b | Sa SN 1 ar = ® . “ yt > . . 4] 174 in 
JA FICS A Fs 4 AL» ge ORCL oF © Ns. ARINC : "4 . ara) Ny 
B \ 153 £7 RA WN ¥ % 
L SF 
ae 
On March 21 1960, the crowd scatters as firing starts in Sharpeville 
(South Africa). A few moments after this CLC TEL VEER ELECT 
about one hundred Africans were killed and more than two hundred 
     
TN : 3 
ax BAN fy 
ne : ‘General Assembly proclaimed March 21 as “International D wounded. The police had opened fire to disperse demonstrators the Elimination of Racial Discrimination”. 
  
RY EASE aE 3 | 
A COUNTRY DIVIDED 
The following excerpts 
are drawn from 
the Unesco report 
on the effects 
of the policy 
of apartheid on 
education, science, 
culture and 
information. 
Sour Africa, a society in 
which Africans, Asians and Europeans 
co-exist in the same territory has been 
the result of a long history going back 
to the first European settlement in the 
Cape of Good Hope in 1652. It is a 
history not only of prolonged contact 
(some of it friendly) between these 
groups of people, but also a history 
of conflict over land and cattle at 
first, then over industrial opportunities 
when towns grew up. 
There were also conflicts between 
the Boers, decendants of the first 
Dutch settlers, and the English-speak- 
ing South African—conflicts which 
terminated in the Boer War and the 
defeat of the Dutch-speaking Afrika- 
ners by the English colonizers. 
About the mid-twentieth century, 
then, the ingredients of the present 
alarming South African situation were 
all pcesent: the rivalry between the 
Afrikaner and the English-speaking 
South Africans which split the white 
population into two main groups, the 
suspicion and fear which most of the 
white group felt for the Africans who 
were numerically stronger, against 
whom they had fought a series of wars 
and whom they had traditionally treat- 
ed as a source of cheap labour. 
There was also the coloured group 
formed from a mixture of white, Hotten- 
tot and Malay elements and an Asian 
group brought to South Africa in the 
19th century as labour for the new 
sugar plantations in Natal. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](078449engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 59663: Apartheid in South Africa

i 
A COUNTRY DIVIDED (Continued) 
The myth of ‘separate development’ 
At the end of the second world war 
there was another factor on the South 
African scene. White supremacy, 
threatened occasionally over the 
300 years of white settlement, was 
challenged by the emergence of inde- 
pendent states in Africa and Asia. 
On the political front the struggle for 
independence was a struggle for one- 
man one-vote, and had direct conse- 
quences for South African whites, who, 
in framing the Constitution of 1910, 
had resisted any effective participation 
of non-whites in the political process. 
There was another challenge; in all 
countries arose a new demand for the 
implementation of “Human Rights”, a 
demand encouraged by the United Na- 
tions Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights of 1948. In South Africa this 
meant a demand for equality of oppor- 
tunity on the social and economic 
front and was thus a direct threat to 
white privileges. 
The Nationalist Party came to power 
in 1948 on an appeal which rested al- 
most entirely on its promise to safe- 
guard and, if necessary, strengthen 
“white supremacy.” In its public state- 
ments the Government identified this 
political, economic and social policy 
with the ideology of “apartheid” which 
was described in the 1947 Election 
Manifesto of the National Party as 
follows: “In general terms our policy 
envisages segregating the most impor- 
tant ethnic groups and sub-groups in 
their own areas where every group will 
be enabled to develop into a self-suffi- 
cient unit. We endorse the general 
principle of territorial segregation of 
the Bantu and the Whites... the Bantu 
in the urban areas should be regarded 
as migratory citizens not entitled to 
political or social rights equal to those 
of the Whites. The process of detri- 
balisation should be arrested...” 
Fron the beginning there 
were two co-existing concepts of apart- 
heid. One was that the races should 
be completely segregated into self- 
sufficient territories. The other was 
that apartheid was not to mean com- 
plete territorial segregation but a more 
rigid enforcement of “non-white” social, 
economic and political inferiority. From 
1948 to 1965, the South African 
Government moved in both directions. 
On December 4, 1963, the Prime mini- 
ster, Dr. H.F. Verwoerd, stated 
that “...we shall be able to prove that 
it is only by creating separate nations 
that discrimination will in fact disappear 
in the long run.” 
It is certdin that some idealistic 
“white” South Africans hoped that the 
incipient conflict in the South African 
situation would be resolved by apart- 
heid. Further, many hoped that while 
the political and economic aspirations 
of the “African” majority—and the 
“coloured” and “Asian” minorities— 
would be met by “separate develop- 
ment” the privileges of a “white” South 
Africa would be guaranteed. 
The creation of Bantustans—“Black 
Homelands"—from the scattered reser- 
ves and the establishment of the Trans- 
kei as an example of a semi-autono- 
mous state, are steps in this “separate 
development.” 
T is not necessary here to 
go into the Government's case for 
independent Bantustans—or the case 
against it. It is sufficient to note the 
report of the United Nations’ Special 
Committee on Apartheid in South Afri- 
ca, September 13, 1963: “These moves 
are engineered by a Government in 
which the African people concerned 
have no voice and are aimed at the 
separation of the races and the denial 
of rights to the African population in 
six-sevenths of the territory of the 
Republic of South Africa in return for 
promises of self-government for the 
Africans in scattered reserves which 
account for one-seventh of the terri- 
tory. These reserves contain less than 
two-fifths of the African population of 
the Republic, while many of the Afri- 
cans in the rest of the country are 
largely detribalised and have little 
attachment to the reserves... The 
creation of Bantustans may, therefore, 
be regarded as designed to reinforce 
white supremacy in the Republic by 
strengthening the position of tribal 
chiefs, dividing the African people 
through the offer of opportunities for 
a limited number of Africans and 
deceiving public opinion.” 
One important step in any attempted 
separation of the races was the enforc- 
ed removal of people of differing races 
who had lived closely together. 
The Population Registration Act of 
1950 with its later amendments provid- 
ed for the classification of the South 
African population into three main 
groups: white, coloured and African— 
the Asians constituting a sub-group in 
the coloured group. This classification 
was fundamental to the whole Govern- 
ment policy of “separateness” for 
each “race”. 
Control of the freedom of movement 
of Africans has been achieved through 
the “Pass Laws.” A system of Pass 
Laws was in effect before the Natio- 
nalist Party came to power; however, 
these laws varied from province to 
province. Some classes of “Africans” 
were exempted from carrying them, 
and in the Cape, while they existed 
in theory, they were in practice no 
longer required. 
The Natives (Abolition of Passes 
and Co-ordination of Documents) Act, 
1952, repealed previous laws. Hence- 
forth all Africans were required to 
possess a “reference book” which 
contains detailed information about the 
holder, including a space for efflux 
and influx contro! endorsements. Fail- 
ure to produce the “reference book” 
on demand is a criminal offence. 
Between July 1, 1963, and June 30, 
1964, 162,182 Africans had been pro- 
secuted for failing to register or to 
produce these documents. 
The Natives (Urban Areas) Consoli- 
dation Act of 1945 and its amend- 
ments together with the Bantu Laws 
‘Amendment Act, No 42, provided for 
the compulsory residence in locations, 
native villages or hostels of Africans 
within an urban area. It regulated 
the entry of Africans into the areas 
and the place of their settlement. The 
presence of an African in a prescribed 
area for more than 72 hours is subject 
to severe restrictions. To take up 
work he must get permission from a 
labour bureau, and to visit the area 
permission must be sought from a 
labour officer. 
S OME Africans are exempt- 
ed from these restrictions; for example, 
those continuously resident in the area 
since birth (who must provide proof 
that they are entitled to be there.) But 
even Africans who qualify to remain 
in a prescribed area may be deemed 
“idle” or “undesirable” and then be 
ordered out of the area, forfeiting 
their residential rights, Moreover, 
there seems to be some confusion as 
to what the exemptions are and to 
whom they apply. 
The Group Areas Act has ceen fol- 
lowed by a list of Group Area Decla- 
rations—setting aside areas for the 
exclusive occupation of one or other 
population group. This Act has been 
implemented in spite of repeated reso- 
lutions by the General Assembly. 
The proclamations issued in October 
1963 involved in Durban alone the 
eviction of nearly 10,000 families, the 
great majority of them Indians. In

## [Page 9](078449engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 59663: Apartheid in South Africa

The Extension of 
University Education Act 
1959 proposed to replace 
attendance of non-whites 
at the universities 
which until then were open 
to all races by 
institutions for the 
different groups : 
Africans, Asians and. 
coloureds, each with its 
own university, the 
Africans being further 
divided according to 
tribal origins, The 
Unesco report finds that 
“neither enrolments, 
nor degrees awarded, 
justify the statement that 
establishment of Ethnic 
Group Colleges has 
provided increased 
university facilities for 
non-whites." While 144 
Africans obtained degrees 
in 1956 and 182 in 1961, 
there were only 105 
in 1962. 
Outside Durban University 
(right), white and 
African students protest 
against racial 
discrimination. This 
demonstration took place 
ten years ago; today 
it would be an extremely 
risky undertaking. The 
new laws are so 
stringent that all 
participants could be 
arrested and detained 
without charge for 
nearly six months. Ph
ot
o 
© 
la
n 
Be
rr
y 
—
 
Ca
me
ra
 
Pr
es
s 
—
 
Ho
lm
es
-L
eb
el
 
1964 the declarations were designed 
to resettle virtually all of the 38,000 In- 
dians on the Rand. 
  
  
Ejection orders are not confined to 
situations in which there may be a 
degree—however small—of mixed 
residential districts; the orders were 
framed to force non-whites out of the 
town centres and to resettle them on 
the outskirts. Thus, the joint minis- 
terial statement of February 1966 
declared District Six—one of the oldest 
sections of Cape Town—which had 
been populated by coloured residents 
for over 300 years, as a “white” area. 
A coloured population of over 20,000 
was to be forced to move, 
-
 
In spite of the ideology of apartheid, 
in spite of the uprooting of thousands 
of families, the complete separation of 
peoples into tribal and ethnic groupings 
in South Africa has proved impossible. 
The closely integrated economic struc- 
ture, the location of all the major 
industries, all the mineral wealth, all 
the important harbour facilities and all 
the best arable land in that part of 
South Africa which is outside the 
reserves in white ownership has meant 
that Africans—as well as "coloureds” 
and “Asians”"—remain dependent on 
the town and farming complex of 
“white” South Africa for a livelihood. 
Even the Government's attempt to en- 
 
courage African-owned small-scale 
industries in the Transkei has come up 
against the relative poverty of the area, 
the comparative lack of natural resour- 
ces and the lack of accumulated 
capital. 
For good or ill, “white” and “non- 
white” South Africa remain economi- 
cally interdependent. If the non-whites 
need the job opportunities at present 
available in "white South Africa, so 
white South Africa could not maintain 
its present industrial and agricultural 
production—nor the present high 
standard of living without non-white 
labour. In fact, whatever the stated 
policy of the Government, there has 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 10](078449engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 59663: Apartheid in South Africa

10 
"In 1962, “in terms of Government policy, 
In 1961 an Indian, Dr Dorasamy Chetty, 
a graduate of the University of the 
Witwatersrand (South Africa) and the 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, with many years of experience 
on malaria eradication programmes in 
the Far East with the World Health 
Organization, was unable to obtain a 
post in South Africa where he could 
practice and teach preventive medicine. 
a highly qualified African doctor was 
refused an appointment to the Liv- 
ingstone Hospital for non-whites in Port 
Elizabeth because in his post he would 
have had several whites working under 
him” (A Survey of Race Relations, 
Johannesburg, 1963). 
From the Unesco Report 
on Apartheid 
These Indian women (photo right), 
officially classified in the so-called 
“Asian” racial group, were forced, 
with their families, to leave the city 
and shift to the districts specifically 
allotted to their group. Photo far right: 
Johannesburg (1,100,000 inhabitants) 
is the largest city in South Africa 
and the most important industrial 
and commercial centre. 
Photo © Holmes-Lebel 
A COUNTRY DIVIDED (Continued) 
been an increasing number of Africans 
admitted to urban areas. 
Between 1962 and 1964 the Afri- 
can population of Johannesburg in- 
creased from 609,100 to 706,389; the 
number of African men employed in 
Durban increased from 74,500 in 1946 
to 136,000 in 1965. In the Western 
Cape, the number of Africans em- 
ployed by local authorities, the Pro- 
vincial Administration, Public Service 
Departments, agriculture and industry 
increased from 1963 to 1964 by 7.5 9% 
(from almost 77,000 to a little under 
83,000) and increasing numbers were 
being recruited for employment through 
the labour bureaux in the Transkei. 
The main push of apartheid has 
therefore been in the direction of more 
rigid racial discrimination, with growing 
inequalities in opportunities. 
As could be expected, the policy of 
apartheid has given rise to opposition. 
There have been protests, demonstra- 
tions and riots from the non-whites, 
while among whites opposition to the 
Number of Africans admitted to and endorsed out of the main urban areas 
during 1964 and the first three months of 1965 
    
First 3 months 1965 ....   
Admitted Endorsed out 
Men Women Men Women 
1084... sade sn rma vs 156,352 18,747 84,258 13,983 
44.409 5,133 19,159 3,855   
Government's policy has ranged from 
criticism to more political involvement. 
A minority can hardly succeed in 
preserving its absolute supremacy in 
all spheres without the use of force. 
It is therefore not surprising that the 
implementation of the policy of apart- 
heid has been accompanied by an 
abuse of police power, a disregard for 
the integrity of the individual and cen- 
sorship of the press. 
The real or imagined fear of coun- 
ter-violence, has led those in power 
to a multiplication of procedures 
aimed at strengthening the system of 
apartheid by destroying opposition. 
Again and again during the post- 
war period, attention has been called to 
the situation in South Africa with regard 
to civil rights. One need only briefly 
draw attention to the 90-day detention 
clause in the General Law Amendment 
Act, 1963, which when it was with- 
drawn was in fact replaced by the Cri-

## [Page 11](078449engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 59663: Apartheid in South Africa

minal Proceedure Amendment Act. 
Under this Act the Attcrney General 
may issue a warrant for arrest and de- 
tention for a maximum of six months 
(180 days) of a person who is likely 
to give evidence for the State in any 
criminal proceedings with respect to 
certain offences, as long as that deten- 
tion is deemed to be in the interest of 
such a person or of the administration 
of justice. 
The International Commission of 
lJurists observed: "This must be one of 
the most extraordinary powers that 
have ever been granted outside a 
period of emergency. It authorizes the 
detention of an innocent person against 
whom no allegations are made and no 
suspicion even exists; it authorizes 
detention in the absolute discretion of 
the Attorney General. It denies the 
detainee access to a lawyer without 
special permission; and it precludes 
the courts from examining the validity 
of the detention even within the al- 
ready very wide powers of the Act. 
“It further authorizes the subjection 
bf the detained witness to solitary con- 
finement for a period of six months 
and, with the object, inter alia of 
excluding, ‘tampering with or intimida- 
tion" of any person, places him in a 
situation where he is in the almost 
uncontrolled power of the police who 
also have an interest in the evidence 
he may give.” 
There are, too, the peculiar techni- 
ques of banishing, or listing persons, 
and of banning. 
Banishment is an action which can 
be taken against Africans. The Native 
Administration Act empowers the State 
President, whenever he deems it expe- 
dient in the public interest, without 
notice to order any tribe, portion of 
tribe or individual African to move to 
any stated place. Banishment has 
been used, i.a, to remove from the 
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris 
reserves persons who have been active 
opponents of chiefs or of certain 
Government measures. 
In addition, emergency regulations 
for the Transkei provide that any per- 
son suspected of committing an 
offence under the regulations of any 
law, or of intending to do so, or of 
possessing information about an 
offence may be arrested without war- 
rant and held in custody until the 
police or prison authorities are satis- 
fied that they have fully and truth- 
fully answered all relevant questions 
put to them. The offences include: 
holding a meeting of more than ten 
Africans unless with special permission 
(church services and funerals are 
exempted), making any statement or 
performing any action likely to have 
the effect of interfering with the autho- 
rity of the State, one of its officials, or 
a chief or headman, or boycotting an 
official meeting. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
11

## [Page 12](078449engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 59663: Apartheid in South Africa

12 
A COUNTRY DIVIDED (Continued) 
Salary of Africans: one-seventh that of whites 
The person held in custody under 
these regulations may not consult a 
legal adviser without the consent of 
the Minister of Bantu Administration 
and Development. 
Between January and April 1966, a 
total of sixty-two Transkeians were 
detained by the South African autho- 
rities. 
Under the Suppression of Commu- 
nism Act, 1950, amended in 1962, a 
person might be listed as member or 
active supporter of the Communist 
Party of South Africa (banned in 1950) 
or of any other organizations deemed 
unlawful (as the African National Con- 
gress, the Pan-African Congress and 
the = African Resistance Movement.) 
In 1962 a list of 437 names of persons, 
129 whites and 308 non-whites, was 
published in the Gazette. At a later 
date some were removed from the list; 
others were added. The publication 
of the names is merely for public 
information, having no direct legal 
consequences. 
However, the Minister of Justice is 
empowered to take certain actions 
against a listed person. It should be 
mentioned that the same actions might 
be directed against certain other cate- 
gories, too, as persons convicted of 
actions deemed to have furthered the 
aims of Communism, Banning orders 
of the most varying character might be 
served. Thus, a person might be pro- 
hibited from becoming or being a mem- 
ber of specified organizations or orga- 
nizations of a specified nature. 
Further, a person may be prohibited 
from attending gatherings of any kind, 
including social gatherings. 
hibiting persons from attending gather- 
ings are rather frequent. With certain 
exceptions it is an offence to record, 
publish, or disseminate any speech, 
utterance or writing made anywhere at 
any time by a person under such ban. 
In addition a banning order may imply 
that the person concerned is prohibited 
from absenting himself from any stated 
place or area, may be confined to a 
town or a suburb, may be confined to 
house arrest for a certain number of 
hours, and on public holidays. It is 
sometimes required that the person 
shall remain at home for 24 hours each 
day. 
The publication of particulars in the 
Gazette contains the date of delivery 
of notice and the date on which notice 
expires. The period varies, often it 
is one or two years, and sometimes 
five years. 
At the beginning of 1964, 257 per- 
sons were subject to restrictions under 
the Suppression of Communism Act. 
Bans pro-- 
The United Nations Special Com- 
mittee on the policy of Apartheid in 
the Republic of South Africa gave the 
number of persons “banned” as 
approximately 600 in 1966. 
While Unesco is not directly con- 
cerned with the economic and political 
aspects of apartheid in the Republic 
of South Africa, the policy of apart- 
heid has consequences for education, 
science, culture and the dissemination 
of information—consequences which 
follow logically from the philosophical 
concept of man as conceived of by the 
ideology of “apartheid”, from the eco- 
nomic inequalities which the policy 
creates and reinforces, and from the 
political situation which severely 
curtails freedom for all South Africans, 
and in particular for the non-white 
South Africans who form the majority 
of the country's population. 
N conformity with the ideal 
of “separateness,” Africans, Asians, 
coloured and whites are educated as 
independent groups within the popula- 
tion, the “separateness” emphasized by 
the administrative structure of educa- 
tion, by methods of finance, by diffe- 
rences in syllabuses, and by different 
levels of achievement deliberately 
imposed to fit in with different expecta- 
tions in employment. Ultimately educa- 
tion is geared for the effective prepara- 
tion of the Africans for their future 
occupations as unskilled labourers. 
Higher training is intended only for the 
small number of persons who can be 
employed in skilled work in African 
“homelands” or African “development 
schemes.” 
The result of racial discrimination 
in education and in the pattern of em- 
ployment is seen clearly in the field 
of science. South Africa is facing a 
chronic shortage of top-level man- 
power in science and technology as 
well as in management. The shortage 
cannot be remedied by relying on the 
white population alone. Moreover, the 
general repressive atmosphere is ini- 
mical to the development of a spirit 
of free enquiry and has led to the loss 
to South Africa of some scientists of 
great eminence, particularly in the 
field of the social sciences. The poli- 
tical atmosphere has also affected 
recruitment of staff, particularly from 
universities in the United Kingdom. 
“Separate development” in the field 
of culture has reduced to a minimum 
all contacts between whites and non- 
whites that are not purely of an eco- 
nomic nature. As in all other fields, 
“separate development” is in fact 
synonymous with “inequality of 
access”, but moreover, cultural apart- 
ness, as opposed to cultural interac- 
tion for which Unesco stands, has 
limited the creative possibilities of all 
South Africans. 
 
 
Africans |Coloured| Asians | Whites 
Distribution of South African 
population according to racial 
GroURS ea hs 12,162,000 1,742,000 533,000 3,395,000 
Income per capita 1960 ...... 87 Rands 109 Rands 147 Rands 952 Rands 
Average salaries in mining, 1963 152 458 » 458 =» 2,562 » 
Average salaries in manufactur- 
ing, 1983. .../. cn a 422 660 » 660 » 2,058 » 
Public Service, 1963 ......... 346 603 » 884 » 1,694 » 
Maximum old age pension rates 
{per -annum). ol LL CU 44.40 City: City: 360 » 
168 » 168 » 
Non-City Non-City 
138 » 138 =» 
Infant mortality rates. Number 
of infants under 1 year of age no figures 
per 1,000 live births 1963 . given 126.9 44.7 29.0 
Percentage increase or de- 
crease of T.B. rates in 1963 
over 1962—children under 
Bo YOATS . oisisns oii Telnaes plus 20.3 plus 7.5 minus 16.8 minus 7.0         
(1) 1 South African Rand = $ 1.40

## [Page 13](078449engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 59663: Apartheid in South Africa

That policy cannot be separated from 
principle is illustrated by the fact that, 
whilst the South African Government 
in its statements continues to uphold 
the right to freedom of information, the 
need to enforce the policy of apartheid 
has affected the relevant legislation 
and its application, the actions taken 
denying in fact the principle of free- 
dom of information. 
Apartheid is not only not an admis- 
sible answer to racial and group con- 
flict but is itself the major source of 
this conflict. This is most serious in 
relationships between whites and non- 
whites, but the very heightening of 
group awareness, which is part of the 
aims of the apartheid system, should 
per se intensify hostilities between 
Afrikaner and English-speaking South 
Africa, and, by the separation of Afri- 
cans into self-contained tribal units, 
create a tribal nationalism leading to 
increased inter-tribal rivalry. 
The image of man—to whatever 
ethnic group he belongs or is made a 
part of—which results from the policy 
of apartheid in South Africa, is an 
image which is clearly the opposite of 
the one to which the community of 
nations is ethically and legally dedi- 
cated. 
1] HE ill effects of apartheid 
are not confined to the situation within 
South Africa; “the practice of apart- 
heid and all other forms of racial dis- 
crimination constitute a threat to inter- 
national peace and security and are a 
crime against humanity,” as stated in 
the Resolution on “Unesco’s tasks in 
the light of the resolutions adopted by 
the General Assembly of the United 
Nations at its 20th session on ques- 
tions relating to the liquidation of colo- 
nialism and racialism,” which was 
adopted by the General Conference at 
its 14th session (Nov. 1966). 
The Secretary-General of the United 
Nations emphasized in an address on 
February 3, 1964: “There is the clear 
prospect that racial conflict, if we can- 
not curb and finally eliminate it, will 
grow into a destructive monster com- 
pared to which the religious or ideolo- 
gical conflicts of the past and present 
will seem like small family quarrels... 
This, for the sake of all our children, 
whatever their race and colour, must 
not be permitted to happen.” 
The group of experts, established by 
the Security Council Resolution of 
December 4, 1963, warned that “a race 
conflict starting in South Africa must 
affect race relations elsewhere in the 
world, and also, in its international 
repercussions, create a world danger 
of first magnitude.” 
 Ph
ot
o 
© 
Er
ne
st
 
Co
le
 
- 
C
a
m
e
r
a
 
Pr
es
s 
- 
Ho
lm
es
-L
eb
el
 
THE INVISIBLE WALL. That the informal and personal contacts between people and pri- 
vate entertaining are important in the ordinary daily living together of any people no-one 
will deny. The extent to which they can take place in South Africa is limited by the regu- 
lations governing eating together outside of the home, staying overnight in named areas 
or in getting permission to visit “locations”. It would be impossible for a racially mixed 
group of South Africans to have tea or coffee together in any public place in the Republic. 
Besides this, the whole atmosphere of mistrust between people, the basic suppositions 
of the superiority and inferiority of racial groups, the difficult politica! problems, the 
suspicion that Government-paid informers exist make meaningful human relationships not 
only across colour groups, but within groups themselves, difficult to maintain. As long 
as the present situation continues, one thing is certain—South African culture (for whites 
and non-whites) will become increasingly less creative. 
From the Unesco Report on Apartheid 
13

## [Page 14](078449engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

Since 1964, the presence of an African 
in a “white” district for more than 
72 hours has been severely restricted. 
Wives and children of Africans working 
in these districts may not live with 
their husbands or fathers unless they 
have resided continuously in the same 
district previously. Visits between hus- 
bands and wives residing in separate 
districts are limited to a maximum of 
72 hours unless otherwise authorised. 
From the Unesco Report on Apartheid 
THE EFFECTS OF APARTHEID 
ON CULTURE 
 


### 59665: The Price of segregation

The price 
of 
segregation 
by Alan Paton 
  
ALAN PATON was born in 1903 in 
the province of Natal, South Africa. His 
famous novel “Cry, the Beloved Country” 
(1948), which was translated into 18 
languages and published in 22 countries, 
earned him world-wide renown. An opera, 
“Lost in the Stars”, and a film were based 
on this book which gives a moving 
account of the conflicts and crises 
arising from racial segregation in South 
Africa. Paton's second novel, "Too Late 
the Phalarope™ deals with the attitudes of 
the Afrikaners. All his books, some 
fifteen novels and studies, have been 
published outside South Africa, in England 
or the United States. They include “South 
Africa and her People” (1957), “The 
Christian Approach to Racial Problems 
in the Modern World" (1959), "Hope for 
South Africa” (1958), "Tales from a Troubl- 
ed Land” (1961) and “South African 
Tragedy; the Life and Times of lan 
Hofmeyr” (1965). Alan Paton was among 
those who formed the Liberal Association 
of South Africa which became the 
Liberal Party of which he is President. 
The Liberal Party rejects the racial 
theories used to justify white supremacy 
and aims at equal rights for all South 
Africans regardless of their ethnic groups. 
Photo © Jonathan Cape Ltd., London 
   
» 
Photo © lan Berry - Magn 
  
 
um 
IT. policy of apartheid, or 
Separate Development as it is now 
more grandly called, has as one of its 
main aims the preservation of the 
cultures of each of the racial groups 
in South Africa, the safeguarding of 
each culture from contamination by the 
others, and presumably the develop- 
ment of each of these cultures "along 
its own lines". Apartheid has no 
vision whatsoever of a South African 
culture, enriched by contributions from 
its Afrikaners, its Africans, its Coloured 
people (that is, those of mixed blood, 
Malay, Hottentot, and European strains

## [Page 15](078449engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 59665: The Price of segregation

amongst others), its white English- 
speaking people, its Hindus and 
Muslims and Jews. These streams 
must not flow into a river, they must 
not even flow into the sea, they must 
flow parallel to one another for ever 
and ever. 
Nor does apartheid envisage a 
group of distinct racial cultures con- 
tinuvally enriching themselves and 
others by fruitful exchanges. In fact 
the purpose of legislation is to prevent 
this from happening. It is now against 
the law for a mixed (1) audience of 
whites and non-whites, even with 
a
]
 
i 
O/
T 
aa
ty
 
T
R
A
C
K
 
CA
 
a
 
M
o
v
 
on 
“ "I 
vo 
— 3 
ev 
Se 
4 
P
W
 1 
® 
di
 
x 
-
 
5
 
\ 
g 
; 
w
r
 
: 
v'
 
L
Y
 
a)
 
Wi
 
segregated seating, to attend the 
ballet, the concert, the opera, the 
theatre, without a special permit from 
the governmental authorities. 
Hardly a day passes without news 
that a permit for this or that event has 
been refused. The most recent 
example of this is the refusal to allow 
Africans to attend the quinquennial 
(1) The adjective “mixed” in this article, 
when used of teams, audiences, and other 
groups, means that white and non-white 
people are associated as co-players, co- 
performers, co-spectators, elc. 
showing of the Oberammergau Passion 
Play in the city of Durban. The 
Government is prepared however to 
let the all-white cast present a 
separate performance for Africans, but 
it would almost certainly not be 
prepared to allow the producer of the 
play to use a non-white actor for the 
part of Simon of Cyrene. Nor can a 
coloured opera group use a white 
singer without permit. 
It would be tiresome to retail the 
thousand-and-one permutations and 
combinations for which permits would 
be required. The whole thing is an 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
13

## [Page 16](078449engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 59665: The Price of segregation

THE PRICE OF SEGREGATION (Continued) 
'Like walking blindfold through a minefield’ 
immense fatuity, irrational and derisible, 
with an element of cruelty that is 
inevitably present when one race group 
assumes the task of preserving the 
cultures of others. 
The same fatuity characterises the 
Government attitude towards sport. 
Spectators in segregated seating may, 
if a permit is granted, witness cricket, 
soccer, rugby, football, tennis, and 
other games, but no mixed team can 
visit the country. Nor can any mixed 
team be formed in the country, except 
presumably to play on some private 
ground, nor can a team of one race 
play against a team of another race 
without a permit. 
The reader must note, however, that 
this would not apply if the two mono- 
racial teams were both white; it is the 
element of colour that is the important 
consideration. It will therefore be 
seen that apartheid or separate 
development is not solely concerned 
with the preservation of cultural 
differences; it is equally concerned 
with the preservation of racial 
differences, and above all, of course, 
  
. Dre EX 
- “acl At EN - > - SLA A a 
X*, SO NY bd I A — Di 
Ee A RL - » " (TM Se UR at SON 
with the preservation of white racial 
purity, such as it is after a period of 
three centuries. 
Again hardly a day passes without 
news that sports apartheid is being 
more and more rigidly enforced. 
The South African golfer Mr. Papwa 
Sewgolum is of Indian descent, but he 
can no longer play in any open golf 
tournament. He can therefore no 
longer win prizes, and must rely on 
charity to enable him to golf abroad, 
for example, in Holland, of whose 
Open Tournament he has been the 
winner on two occasions. 
The Government has already 
announced that if Mr. Basil D'Oliviera, 
a South African coloured man living 
in England, is selected to play for 
England in cricket in 1968, the team 
will not be allowed to enter South 
Africa. . 
As | write this, it has just been 
announced that Mr. Ronnie van der 
Walt, a leading South African boxer 
who has been fighting in “white” 
boxing for 12 years, has now been 
classified as a coloured man. When 
ee ———— 
PE, ih oT | 
et TANASE DET Ae ~ NSN WN os SE i 
AA 18 3 LA ~~ 2D bn SA Sy - tet | 
 = 
   
  
TAS 
  
interviewed by newspaper men, he 
broke down and wept. His tears will 
bring no relief; the Government will 
go ahead with its task of creating a 
happy and harmonious community out 
of the unhappinesses of individual men 
and women. 
The people who suffer most from 
these restrictions are those Africans, 
Indians, and Coloured people who are 
eager to enjoy and to learn more 
about Western music, ballet, theatre, 
and opera. Such people are incident- 
ally characterized by their quiet 
behaviour. They do not go to concerts 
and plays to demonstrate, they go to 
hear and enjoy and learn. Their 
numbers are in general not great, so 
that they are unable to organize such 
occasions for themselves. In any 
event it appears to me impossible for 
any non-Westerner, except the most 
exceptional, to make much progress in 
the understanding of Western culture 
unless he is in touch with those who 
are part of it. 
In 1948 apartheid, though it certainly 
existed, had not yet been translated 
This sign at the entrance 
to St. George's Anglican 
Cathedral, Cape Town, 
was erected in 1957 
when the South African 
Parliament, in session a 
few streets away, passed 
the Native Laws 
Amendment Act one 
clause of which forbids 
people of different races 
to worship together. 
This sign has since been 
replaced by a much 
larger one, stating 
the same message in 
English, Afrikaans and 
Hauser. For an article 
on apartheid and 
the church, see page 33. 
  
CO ny 
0
RR 2 
NEW

## [Page 17](078449engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 59665: The Price of segregation

into the formidable body of law the 
making of which has occupied 
so much of the time and energy of 
successive Parliaments. Cultural con- 
tacts between and among South 
Africans of different races were 
steadily increasing. It would almost 
appear that South Africans were 
growing in cultural awareness of one 
another. 
This tide has now been halted and 
is in fact receding. Yet one hears the 
preposterous suggestion that the 
children in rigidly segregated schools 
should be taught to appreciate and 
understand the children of other races. 
They are in fact to be taught to love 
others, while being strictly forbidden 
to play or eat or have any meaningful 
relationship with them. 
Apartheid has a crippling effect on 
the art of writing. | give it as my 
considered opinion that any play or 
work of fiction which dealt with any 
racial topic or any act of injustice in 
a way uncongenial to the government, 
would today. have little chance of 
passing the governmental organ known 
as the Publications Control Board, 
whose powers are very far-reaching. 
| add that such a work need not be 
brought before the Board, but that 
few publishers or producers would risk 
a ban after publication or production. 
It could of course be said that the 
banning of publications has nothing to 
do with apartheid, but in fact the 
banning of publications is directed as 
much against books dealing with racial 
topics and injustices as it is against 
the flood of pornographic trash which 
would pour into the bookstalls. 
The real purpose of publications 
control is shown by the attitude 
of censors towards “Selma”, that 
distasteful tale of the freedom fighters 
in the Deep South. Any novel dealing 
with love or sex affairs between black 
and white (unless it does so with 
considerable restraint, as in my own 
novel “Too Late the Phalarope™) would 
never be allowed to enter South Africa. 
But “Selma” was allowed to enter 
because it showed freedom fighters 
as unsavoury characters; who would 
want integration if these are the people 
who fight for it? 
One must not think that apartheid 
and authoritarian control of thought 
and education are separate entities. 
They are one and the same thing. 
Without authoritarian control there 
could be no apartheid. Both of 
them powerfully influence the culture. 
Some years ago African education 
was largely in the hands of missionary 
bodies, who gave what one could 
generally describe as a liberal 
education. Today, with the exception 
of the Transkei, it is firmly in the hands 
of the Bantu Education Department. 
Greatly against the desires of the 
parents, primary education is given in 
the vernacular, whereas parents want 
it to be in English. They believe, and 
university teachers confirm, that their 
children are retarded by one or two 
years by this vernacular teaching. 
What is more, they want their sons and 
daughters to be at home in the 
Western, or shall we call it the modern, 
world. They (though not often 
publicly) deride the idea that their 
culture must be preserved by others 
and say that they will preserve what 
they choose to. 
I... are already signs 
that the Government would like to 
exercise a tighter control over the 
education of white children also, which 
at the moment is controlled by the 
provincial administrations. Although 
white unity is thought to be necessary 
in the face of threats from within 
and without, Afrikaans-speaking and 
English-speaking children are educated 
in separate schools. They may later 
co-operate in commerce, industry, and 
other spheres, but during their 
impressionable years they must be 
kept apart. The government has also 
given signs that it is preparing to 
exercise greater control over university 
affairs. 
Finally, apartheid has had a 
calamitous effect on that part of culture 
which has to do with moral ideas. 
Here | shall confine myself to the moral 
ideas of the white population. 
Apartheid, because it has been 
elevated to the status of the supreme 
value, has wrought devastation 
amongst the other values. The rule of 
law is one of the outstanding 
casualties; people are banned, 
banished, and detained in solitary 
confinement for periods up to 180 days 
without any recourse to the courts of 
. language, 
Greatly against the desires of 
the parents, primary education 
is given in the vernacular, 
whereas parents want it in 
English. As the Unesco Report 
on Apartheid in South Africa 
states, this serves “to reinforce 
the linguistic, social and 
cultural isolation of the African 
population within the country 
as well as from the world at 
large.” Left, a school in the 
Capetown area. 
Photo © Francos - Holmes - Lebel 
law. White South Africa, with 
laudable exceptions, accepts this 
procedure on the grounds that such 
people “must have been up to 
something” 
Certainly the proposition that the 
end justifies the means is not now 
much debated. Such things as the 
rule of law, university autonomy, 
parental rights to choose the language 
in which children are educated, the 
freedom of the churches, have all 
suffered erosion. The value of any 
thought, any activity, is officially judged 
by one criterion and one alone—does 
it further or does it impede the cause 
of apartheid. 
The Press, especially the English 
is under continuous fire. 
Although as yet no direct steps have 
been taken to curb it, the editing of 
a paper is, in the words of one of our 
leading editors, “like walking blind- 
fold through a minefield”. 
Therefore although one of the main 
aims of apartheid is to develop the 
cultures separately, its effect is to 
ossify them separately, and to make 
them resistant to the entrance of new 
ideas. Whether the State will be in 
the long run successful in maintaining 
its hold on culture, or whether culture 
has some inherent and independent 
life of its own, remains to be seen. 
One takes hope from the knowledge 
that there are South Africans of all 
races who reject apartheid as a 
gigantic self-deception, who reject 
what is called the “traditional way of 
life”, who speak and write openly, and 
boldly present their ideas for the 
consideration and criticism of younger 
generations, though it may be 
dangerous for them to do so. 
Nor should one overlook the fact 
that despite the laws and the 
conventions, and despite the attempt 
to preserve the separate racial 
cultures, a great deal of cultural 
assimilation has already taken place, 
and though attempts are made to 
reverse the process (as in making the 
vernacular the medium of school 
instruction), there are grounds for 
believing that they will not be 
successful. The forces that make for 
apartheid and those that make for 
assimilation will continue to fight each 
other, in a struggle that is as old as 
South Africa itself. 
11

## [Page 18](078449engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 59665: The Price of segregation

  
' - - b . ' 4 # 
— N ‘“n ¥ ~ a - Ca ' § uh 
i. : 
COLOUR MAKES THE JOB 
During the past five years there are records of only three non-white 
engineering graduates from South African universities. 
   
   
The Government may prohibit the replacement of employees of one 
race by those of another race, may reserve certain types of jobs to 
persons of a specific race. The Government in introducing this legisla- 
tion indicated that it was intended to protect the “white” labour force 
against the infiltration of non-whites into skilled labour. The Trade 
Unions have become one of the strongest supporters of a job reser- 
vation policy, and its corollary “white supremacy”, in the social and 
economic spheres. 
   
   
From the Unesco Report on Apartheid 
  
 
 
   
  
      
      
y interfering with their freedom 
~ of movement and residence, says ELE 
~ International Labour Organisation reports 
Sou African law tends to compel 
BLE CER CRE LCI UC CEE attrac ive 
jobs. Above, an African worker B= 
~ arnves at a diamond mine. South Africa 
i the Second Bi Rn 
<r 
Only the whites: “ate eligible = 
for highly skilled work or 
executive positions. Left, a 
interview in the personnel ole - 
tures; of a diamond’ mine. = 
Each ovetiing. (right), the “miners gah = 
hand in at a window the diamonds 
extracted during the day. Miners 
are stringently controlled to prevent wo Vy 
stones from being smuggled out: i: 
When their employment comes to ¥ 
an end, the miners are carefully  oarchedd 
This man (far right) has been searched 
ELL ERE TIT Cl TID C1 517-1. = 
Additionally, non-white workers are 3 ws 
obliged to live within the actual area 
of the mine throughout their employme! n 
; PAotos, Li an: Ber Ty - Migaip :. i 
. oH ve 

## [Page 19](078449engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 59665: The Price of segregation

  
h
y
 
—
 
—
—
—
—
 

## [Page 20](078449engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 59666: The Forbidden dialogue

20 
THE EFFECTS OF APARTHEID ON CULTURE 
The forbidden dialogue 
by Lewis Nkosi 
 
I HE profoundest, most com- 
pelling impulses of South African 
society have always been, and still 
are, toward amalgamation. This is 
perhaps the fact least frequently noted 
about South Africa even by those most 
opposed to the doctrine of apartheid; 
but it is a fact which | think ought to 
be set down straightaway not only 
because it is true and evidence can be 
adduced to support it, but because a 
great deal of the legislative programme 
of the Nationalist Party Government 
since 1949 cannot be properly under- 
stood without taking this fact into 
account. 
It has also become fashionable in 
writing about South Africa to empha- 
size the incompatibility of black and 
white interests; yet left to their own 
devices the races have always tended 
to move closer, albeit unconsciously, 
toward some form of integration. 
Surely the most glaring proof of this 
fact lies in the economic sphere; but 
less obvious is a similar impulse at 
work in the social sphere, which, 
however denied and deeply buried, 
continues to reaffirm itself and to agi- 
tate toward complete expression. 
The very strong attempts to separate 
the races by legislation, by force if 
necessary, shows how strong this 
impulse is. And how natural. The 
State therefore feels compelled to uti- 
lise all its energies toward erecting 
barriers against the secret, often deni- 
ed but natural tendency toward inte- 
gration; and it is my view that such an 
occupation by the State is not only of 
doubtful value but that it is positively 
harmful to the cultural life of the 
country. 
That the blacks suffer untold hard- 
ships as a price for the maintenance 
of the policy of apartheid is a fact 
that cannot be denied even by the 
proponents of apartheid. How often 
has one been told that a certain amount 
of hardship and injustice is inevitable 
during the transitional period leading 
to that perfect state of race separation 
in which all races will enjoy true well- 
being and in which they will experience 
deep spiritual and material satisfac- 
tion? 
What is not always noted is that, 
though economically exploitative as 
a ruling class, the whites are also 
subject to certain very real deprivations 
as a result of their determination to 
live by a policy which would seem 
to all reasonable men not only unrealis- 
tic but insane. 
To say the very least, South African 
whites are the most culturally deprived 
community in Africa. Emotionally they 
are just as stunted. White South Afri- 
cans cannot express certain emotions 
which come naturally to most healthy 
people simply because the State has 
decided that the expression of such 
emotions is subversive of the very 
foundations of White Supremacy. 
As a result they not only grow up 
denying their innermost dreams, they 
also learn to do without some of the 
best works of modern world culture 
(in literature, music, painting and intel- 
lectual discourse) either because such 
works are considered subversive or 
resuscitative of dreams that would be 
better left covered, or because traffic 
in culture with the outside world is 
rendered almost impossible by the 
maintenance of the policy of apartheid. 
It must be remembered that a great 
number of people active in the cultural 
area are either non-white or white 
people strongly opposed to a doctrine 
of apartheid. Thus the white commu- 
nity in South Africa is becoming almost 
as isolated in its privileged position as 
are the blacks without privileges; for 
not only must the blacks not see Harry 
Belafonte with a white girl in his arms 
in “Island in the Sun” but the whites 
must not see Tony Curtis chained to 
Sidney Poitier in the film, “The Defiant 
Ones.” 
Indeed, a great number of mod- 
ern works of the best kind in the 
post-war cinema are kept out of the 
Republic of South Africa. The banning 
of books and plays thought to be con- 
troversial is too well-known to need 
reiteration. Under these circumstances 
it would be surprising if the growth of 
an indigenous South African culture 
was not hampered and it would be 
surprising indeed if the fostering of 
standards on a par with the rest of the 
world was not rendered almost impos- 
sible. 
However, let us take a closer look 
at the effects of apartheid on the grow- 
ing indigenous culture in the country 
itself. | think | can write more effecti- 
vely about an area in which 1 myself 
am interested. That area happens to 
be literature. 
|. seems to me that both 
black and white writers are severely 
impoverished by the limitations as well 
as the schism existing in South African 
national life, by a certain lack of shared 
assumptions or sense of common na- 
tionhood, fostered by the persistent 
and ruthless application of the policy 
of apartheid. 
For a black writer too much of his 
emotional response is absorbed into 
formulating his attitude toward apart- 
heid or finding his place in the revo- 
lutionary struggle; no matter where he 
goes later on and no matter how bored 
he is with politics he cannot be free 
of the tragic burden of South Africa 
until that country has freed its 
14,000,000 non-whites. 
Yet there are times when a writer 
must suspect that his revolt against 
the system is too easy, even glib, pre- 
determined rather than arrived at out 
of a singular personal anguish; and

## [Page 21](078449engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 59666: The Forbidden dialogue

  
this revolt, so far as literature is con- 
cerned, must result in the formulation 
of characters who are not only glib 
and standardized but whose only claim 
upon our imagination is that they are 
caught in the apartheid mill. If we 
confess ourselves bored with them we 
then experience some guilt because 
we cannot be sure that we are not 
becoming unduly callous. 
At the same time it seems to me 
that the blacks in South Africa, no 
matter how deprived economically or 
politically, have a graver, far more res- 
ponsible attitude toward life. Where 
white South Africans must manufacture 
dreams and fantasies in order to main- 
tain some equilibrium between what 
they really are and what they think 
they are, the blacks have to learn quite 
early to strip themselves of every illu- 
sion. 
With the hindsight of modern psy- 
chology we all know what happens 
to people who cannot face up to the 
reality of their lives, who must live by 
evasions and fantasies; a greater 
burden is placed on writers or any 
other kind of artists who belong to 
such a community. Before they go on 
to create anything of value they must 
make an extraordinary effort to unlearn 
everything they have been taught. 
To put it more simply, in South 
Africa, they must, for instance unlearn 
what they are taught in schools: that 
the whites, from their forefathers to 
the present generation, are all heroes, 
that the whites have the monopoly op 
moral wisdom and intellectual enter- 
prise; the pain and the anguish which 
attends the creative efforts of Afri- 
kaans writers at the moment is not a 
matter for cynical amusement. It is an 
agony of creative artists who must 
break through a ‘sealed cocoon in 
order to see the world in its various- 
ness or even to say something remo- 
tely relevant to their country. 
Black writers do not have to make 
LEWIS NKOSI, South African author and 
journalist, was born in 1936 in Durban 
where he was educated and later became 
an editorial writer on the Zulu-English 
newspaper ‘“llanga Lase Natal (Natal 
Sun). He then joined the editorial staff of 
“Drum” and of “Golden City Post" in 
Johannesburg. In 1960 he was exiled by 
the South African Government. In 1966 
his collection of essays “Home and Exile" 
shared second prize with Ralph Ellison's 
“Shadow and Act" at the Dakar World 
Festival of the Negro Arts. He now lives 
in London where he is literary editor of 
“The New African". 
   
any comparable moral choice; they do 
not have to choose to oppose a system 
which is patently contrary to all ob- 
servable reality; their colour makes the 
choice for them; what they have to 
do is learn to survive the system. 
What they are prevented from doing 
by a combination of circumstances is 
exploring in depth that experience 
which goes deeper than the present 
apartheid setup, for there are times 
when an affirmation of certain tradi- 
tional African values proves exasperat- 
ingly difficult for black writers since 
most of them are reacting to an ideo- 
logy which asserts again and again 
that black and white people are irre- 
concilably different; that the African 
mind cannot grasp certain nuances of 
European thought; and, concluding 
from the foregoing, that apartheid is 
justifiable, indeed, the only realistic 
policy to follow. 
The result has been that black intel- 
lectuals in South Africa have had to 
bend over backwards to prove that they 
cannot only master the modes of Euro- 
pean thought but that they can beat 
the South African whites at their own 
game. 
In the process they have neglected 
to.examine those modes of thought or 
cultural expression which are indige- 
nous and have sustained masses of 
their fellow Africans undergoing the 
process of urbanization. Consequently, 
urban African music seems to me to 
have provided the only example of 
what South Africa can offer culturally 
if she were left to develop in a natural 
direction. 
Music, because it is non-literal, is 
not subject to the same limitations as 
literature; it is hardly banned; also it 
is less self-conscious in the modes it 
adopts to express the agony of the 
South African situation. The result has 
been that popular urban African music 
has provided a glaring paradigm of 
what is happening to the underground 
life of the nation. 
The music is predominantly African, 
which is as it should be, considering 
the dominant numbers of Africans in 
the country; but it is also eclectic; it 
provides a moving illustration of cultu- 
ral diffusion in that part of the continent 
which offers us the best laboratory for 
the marriage of African and European 
techniques and for the coming together 
of European and African modes of 
expression. Indeed, the phrase “popu- 
lar music” is meaningless if used in the 
European sense of a music which offers 
us fantasies about life, for South Afri- 
can urban music is nearer to the 
blues. 
W.. black literature from 
the Republic offers us glimpses into 
an appalling situation of rare brutality 
and anguish, the music not only shows 
us this but goes further to affirm what 
we should have known all along that 
the oppressed in South Africa also 
display an amazing form of resilience, 
emotional certitude and optimism. On 
the other hand, apartheid deprives 
white South Africans of any real parti- 
cipation in such robust forms of 
cultural expression. 
In a short article of this nature one 
cannot enlarge too much on this theme 
but there is just one more disturbing 
aspect to the present cultural situation 
in South Africa which must be touched 
upon; and that is the fear of the written 
word as well as the brutality practised 
against it. 
It seems to me impossible to dis- 
cuss culture without discussing lan- 
guage; and language in the Repub- 
tlc of South Africa seems to be work- 
ing under the severest of strains. 
There are totalitarian regimes in the 
world, of course, in which language is 
subverted, debased, and made to serve 
the interests of the regime by first 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 22](078449engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 59666: The Forbidden dialogue

22 
THE FORBIDDEN DIALOGUE (Cont) 
being raped and then being asked 
to declare love for that which it loathes. 
George Orwell's essay on this subject 
and more recently George Steiner's 
writings on German literature are 
instructive. 
White South Africans are prevented 
from “naming” those emotions which 
they may experience but which are not 
sanctioned by the State, or they are 
asked to give the opposite names to 
what they truly feel. This is clearly 
playing havoc with language, some- 
thing which is the very essence of 
culture. 
Consider, for example, what the 
South Africans mean by immorality. In 
South Africa a love affair between 
black and white is regarded as unna- 
tural; therefore a law has been put on 
the Statute Book called “The Immo- 
rality Act” which has nothing to do 
with immoral acts as we understand 
them: it simply means black and white 
couples who feel love for one another, 
even if they wish to marry. 
TI. legislation by which 
African students were deprived of 
university education in the so-called 
“white universities" is called “The 
Extension of University Education Act”; 
the act by which the movement of the 
Africans in urban areas was more 
rigidly controlled was called “Abolition 
of Passes and Co-ordination of Docu- 
ments Act. © 
| have to explain here that the Afri- 
cans are compelled to carry identity 
documents called “passes” by which 
their movements are controlled; there 
have been more riots about “passes” 
in South Africa than about any other 
issue. 
Therefore naming legislation which 
was to secure a far more rigid control 
of black people “Abolition of Passes” 
takes on a more sinister implication as 
soon as one remarks on that phrase 
“Co-ordination of documents” for in- 
deed one begins to wonder what is 
being “co-ordinated” if the law requir- 
ing Africans to carry “passes” is being 
abolished. 
This kind of abuse of language is 
only indicative of a certain malaise 
which is paralysing South African cul- 
ture. It is also indicative of a malaise 
which compels the young, more expe- 
rimental Afrikaans writers to search 
for a more poetic, transcendentalist, 
symbolic language in order to comment 
even remotely on the South African 
situation. Otherwise it is doubtful 
whether their writing, controlled as it 
is by the Afrikaans publishers, would 
ever see the light of day. In this res- 
pect both the literary pieces and the 
paintings of a young Afrikaans writer 
like Breyten Breytenbach become of 
the utmost significance (see p. 27). 
 
  
Apartheid and the ‘All Blacks’ 
A white team cannot compete against a non-white team, nor can a white sprinter run in 
the same race as a non-white sprinter. The Government's policy of apartheid applies not 
only to South African teams inside or outside South Africa but also to foreign teams 
visiting South Africa. The New Zealand “All Blacks” rugby team was due to visit South 
Africa in 1967. New Zealand proposed to include in its team two Maoris. But the Prime 
Minister of South Africa made a public statement: “Just as we: respect other people's 
customs so we expect that when other countries visit us they will respect ours and that 
they adapt themselves to our customs.” The “All Blacks” decided not to tour South 
Africa in 1967. 
From the Unesco Report on Apartheid  

## [Page 23](078449engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

DENNIS BRUTUS is a South African writer 
banned from South Africa and now living in 
England. An outstanding sportsman (cricket, 
rugby, tennis, table tennis) he was founder 
and secretary of the South African Sport 
Association and President of the South 
African Non Racial Olympic Committee 
which, among other International demonstra- 
tions of opposition to apartheid, obtained the 
exclusion of South Africa from the 1964 
Tokyo Olympic Games. His struggfe against 
the apartheid policy led to his arrest on a 
number of occasions. A secondary languages 
teacher for 14 years, he was forbidden to 
teach in 1961. In 1962, publication of his 
literary work was prohibited. In 1964-65 he 
did 28 months hard labour after having been 
wounded by the police during his arrest. His 
— R. 
Fo 
a 
I 
5    
rai so 8 
Sports stadiums in predominantly white 
areas may in general be used by whites 
only. Exceptionally, permission may be 
granted to non-whites to attend major 
events provided separate seating is made 
available. As far as minor events are 
concerned, coloureds and Asians may be 
admitted to grounds so situated that white 
residents are not disturbed. Above: an 
enthusiastic supporter at a rugby match, 
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Jo
hn
 
Bu
lm
er
 
- 
C
a
m
e
r
a
 
Pr
es
s 
- 
Ho
lm
es
 
Le
be
l 
volume of poems, “Sirens, 
all-Africa competition in 
Knuckles and 
Boots”, won the Mbari prize for poetry in an 
1962. He 
  
Ph
ot
e 
© 
Su
nd
ay
 
Ti
me
s 
is 43. 


### 59667: The Seeds of wrath

THE EFFECTS OF APARTHEID ON CULTURE 
The seeds of wrath 
I. world knows a great 
deal about apartheid. It knows it as a 
repressive political system which 
denies political representation to 
14,000,000 South Africans because 
they are not white; it knows it as a 
divisive social system which keeps 
people apart, dividing them ruthlessly 
on rigid colour lines and punishing 
those who try to cross these lines. 
But the effects of apartheid in terms 
of social behaviour and on cultural 
development are less well known. 
To understand the effects of apart- 
heid it is necessary to think of the 
daily lives of the people and the ways 
in which their lives are regulated by 
apartheid—both in law and in social 
conventions. 
It means standing for hours in a 
bus-queue, because there are too few 
buses specially set aside for black 
by Dennis Brutus 
people; it means having to pass thea- 
tres and swimming pools with no 
thought of ever entering them, because 
they are set aside for white people; 
and because the restrictions extend to 
the thoughts people think, and because 
the laws apply to both black and 
white, it means that all people in South 
Africa are denied the right to read 
certain books because the government 
believes them to be subversive of its 
apartheid society. 
Apartheid means that outstanding 
sportsmen like the cricketer Basil 
D'Oliviera, the footballer Steve Ma- 
kone, the weightlifter Precious Mac- 
kenzie could never represent their own 
country because they were not white; 
that singers and actors like Miriam 
Makeba and Lionel Ngakane would be 
restricted because of their colour to 
appearing in certain places and before 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
23

## [Page 24](078449engo.pdf#page=24) 2

### 59668: The Dying minds

### 59667: The Seeds of wrath

24 
THE SEEDS OF WRATH (Continued) 
certain audiences—a coloured cast 
could perform Verdi's “La Traviata” 
but no non-whites could attend a per- 
formance before the State President. 
The list of restrictions is endless— 
these are only a few small examples. 
But what they add up to is an isolation 
of the people—a division which breeds 
bitterness and hostility. At sports 
events, if white and black spectators 
are present, they support opposing 
sides and the result is friction—so 
much so that in many grounds only 
white spectators are allowed. 
Small things show the effects of 
apartheid: When | tried to take my high 
school pupils to the theatre because 
“King Lear” which was their prescribed 
work was playing, they were turned 
back: when, as part of my studies, | 
tried myself to see an Afrikaans play, 
the ticket sold to me in error was taken 
from me and | was refused entry: often 
| have seen small children being 
chased away from the swings in the 
park playgrounds—their only offence 
was that they were black. And in the 
few churches which white and black 
can still attend together, the blacks 
kneel at the back, go to Communion 
after the whites. 
It is illegal for white and black to 
play chess together—South Africa 
continues to be a member of the World 
Chess Federation in spite of this chess 
apartheid. And whites who tried to 
play football in a team with black 
members were prosecuted in the 
courts. 
Of course white and black live in 
different areas and it is not difficult 
to pick out the houses for blacks— 
poor tin shacks, or at best, monoto- 
nous cubes of cement built by the 
council housing schemes. 
And in a society where these ugly 
barriers exist, it is better to pretend 
that they are not there. The result is 
that the writers and poets of white 
South Africa are incapable of pro- 
ducing any work which truthfully 
reflects their society; and so deep has 
this kind of blindness entered that no 
work of any real worth has been pro- 
duced in South Africa for many years. 
Perhaps one might expect the writers 
among the blacks, in a situation full of 
tension and bitterness and pain, to 
produce works which live. But for 
them apartheid presents another prob- 
lem; to be frank is to be banned. 
And so talented writers like Alex la 
Guma were silenced by banning or- 
ders, or others, like Alfred Hutchinson 
and Bloke Modisane fled the country 
to evade arrest. Some have faced 
greater tragedy; for Nat Nakasa the 
pledge he was required to sign—to 
leave his country and never return 
proved too much; he committed suicide 
in New York. 
Even white writers—André Brink, for 
instance—who have dared to criticise, 
or appear to criticise, the apartheid 
society have suffered. Their works 
have been banned, or they have been 
savagely attacked by the official 
spokesmen of apartheid. 
The failure of writers to write, or of 
people to understand each other—all 
these are indications of the deeper 
evil; the failure of communication. But 
what is little understood by the outside 
world is that this is a failure legislated 
for. It is a failure which has been 
deliberately designed. 
It is the intention of those who have 
constructed the apartheid society, and 
who intend that it should endure indefi- 
nitely, that those who make up the 
society should be prevented from com- 
municating with each other. Black and 
white must be cut off from each other, 
must be unable to communicate, It is 
on this division that apartheid rests. 
This is the true meaning of apartheid. 
And it is this that inflicts the true terri- 
ble wound on South African society. 
B.. the real damage is in 
daily human relations. | have seen 
white children standing in one of the 
mixed buses rather than sit beside any- 
one who was not white and this seems 
to me so complete a rejection of an- 
other human person that it goes much 
further than the division and separation 
enjoined by law. From this kind of 
rejection comes a complete lack of any 
feeling of common humanity; the suff- 
ering of a human being ceases to be 
real because he has ceased to be a 
real human being. 
In an atmosphere like this, it is easy 
for children at play to imagine them- 
selves shooting a few blacks, It is 
equally easy for blacks to think of 
massacring whites in revenge for the 
many injustices they suffer. 
This is the situation which has been 
created in South Africa today. The 
tensions are real, the threat of a vio- 
lent eruption constant. And this must 
not be thought of simply as something 
which the politicians say, or which is 
the product of political factors or argu- 
ments. lt is a simple truth that human 
relations between people have deterio- 
rated so far, and have been so barri- 
caded against by apartheid laws, that 
dialogue, understanding, friendship— 
all these are impossible. 
This is the effect of apartheid in 
terms of the society—this is its all per- 
vasive extent: it breeds, if it breeds 
anything, hostility: often the result is 
simply the bitter sterility which will 
engender violence. 
oo fy 
Th 
ye 
for 
i 
“fe 
= 
OF APARTHEID 
"ON CULTURE 
; by Ronald Segal a 
   
P
h
o
t
o
 
©
 
J
o
n
a
t
h
a
n
 
C
a
p
e
 
Lt
d.
, 
L
o
n
d
o
n
 
RONALD SEGAL, author and journalist, was 
born in South Africa in 1932. After graduat- 
ing from the University of Cape Town, he 
took a further degree at Cambridge, having 
previously played a leading part in South 
Arican student organizations. After a short 
stay in the United States where he had a 
fellowship at the University of Virgina, he 
returned to South Africa and established the 
quarterly “Africa South” which quickly became 
an international front against racism. Nine 
days after the Sharpeville shootings, Segal 
fled South Africa to escape arrest. He 
settled in England where he published “Africa 
South in Exile" until 1961 when he became 
editor of Penguin Books’ African library. In 
1963, he published his autobiography “Into 
Exile". The following year he convened in 
London the International Conference on 
Economic Sanctions against South Africa. 
His most recent book is “The Race War" 
(Jonathan Cape, London, 45/-).

## [Page 25](078449engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 59668: The Dying minds

T is piteous and appalling, 
the ecstasy in which all but a very 
few whites in South Africa pursue 
their own degradation. There are 
those among the victims of apartheid, 
white and non-white, who consum- 
mate themselves in their refusal to 
submit, discovering in resistance a 
courage and a loyalty and a love that 
seem the final meaning of humanity. 
But inevitably apartheid degrades 
many of its victims. There are those 
who give way under torture by the 
political police, betraying their collea- 
gues and so, desperately, themselves; 
there are those who take service with 
their own subjugation, as informers 
and police, or—like the docile chiefs— 
as administrative instruments, seeking 
sanctuary in a little power and a pre- 
tended indifference to contempt; and 
there are those, the still silent majority, 
who do not resist, and whose degra- 
dation is their own shame, the vio- 
lence that they do, passively, to them- 
selves. Yet these, the acquiescent, 
the betrayers, even the collaboration- 
ists, are the afflicted; and their 
awareness of affliction secures them 
from that other, deeper degradation, 
the atrophy of the mind. 
For there are those who afflict and 
do not care, or deliberately cease to 
know any longer enough to care. In 
white South Africa the repugnant 
quickly becomes the ordinary; and the 
ordinary, the ignored. A new law yet 
further savaging the lives of the non- 
whites, in the cause of security or 
separate racial development, stirs a 
short rustle of consideration and then 
settles into the unnoticed natural way 
of life. 
X- emaciation of white 
thought is everywhere evident. The 
organs of fundamental opposition have 
been suppressed or survive only under- 
ground. The English-language news- 
papers, once the source of a vociferous 
if superficial questioning, are now 
overwhelmingly subservient to the 
demands of white supremacy. 
Where the persecution of a few bold 
journalists and the steady encroach- 
ments of censorship have not suc- 
ceeded, the prosperity of racial re- 
pression has promoted an eager sur- 
render. Indeed, like the official parlia- 
mentary opposition, the bulk of the 
English-language press has taken to 
attacking the government, when at all, 
for being too liberal and endangering 
white rule by bothering about separate 
development for non-whites. Criticism 
is safe only if it is directed at clearer, 
closer, still more certain domination. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
pti SATTOE | 
 Photo © lan Berry - 
An old Afrikaner couple on May 31, 1961 when a republic was proclaimed and the 25 
Union of South Africa, which had left the Commonwealth two months earlier, became 
the Republic of South Africa. Such were the country’s reactions to the many criticisms 
levelled by other Commonwealth states at its apartheid policy. 
Magnum   

## [Page 26](078449engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 59668: The Dying minds

26 
THE DYING MINDS (Continued) 
The South African Broadcasting 
Corporation engages in ever more 
extravagant propaganda, with pro- 
grammes on the Communist Menace 
at home and ‘abroad so contemptuous 
of reality that only minds wasted over 
the years can receive them without a 
sense of outrage. There is no tele- 
vision. The government long ago 
decided that television would require 
too many imported programmes for 
the security of white South African 
assumptions, and white South Afri- 
cans have accepted, with a proper 
sense of proportion, the sacrifice 
required by the survival of their civi- 
lization. 
The cinema is heavily censored, and 
films which reflect a racial impartiality 
are either banned altogether or so cut 
as to become incoherent—a drawback 
of apparently small consequence, since 
queues still form to see them. 
l= English-language univer- 
sities, especially the long unsegregated 
ones at Johannesburg and Cape Town, 
were once centres of intellectual rest- 
lessness and resistance. But the non- 
whites are being removed from the 
“open” universities to their own racial 
—and, for the Africans, separate tri- 
bal—institutions; the staff has been 
cowed by particular government inter- 
vention, like the expulsion of those 
named as Communists from teaching, 
and by the general intimidation of 
dissent; and the diminishing numbers 
of disquieted students, the more out- 
spoken of their leaders selected for 
salutory persecution, satisfy themselves 
with the formality of increasingly 
meaningless protests or withdraw 
completely from public communication 
to find their way through underground 
passages of rebellion. 
From the bookshops and the libra- 
ries, private as well as public, dis- 
appears an ever lengthening list of 
banned books, pamphlets and news- 
papers, published abroad or once upon 
a time legally in South Africa itself. 
Yet this is not sufficient to stop up the 
leaks of intellectual enquiry. 
The government bans the more 
feared of its opponents not only from 
all gatherings, but from the publication 
of any statement anywhere in the 
country. How much further can fear 
of the single mind, of the individual 
struggle against the atrophy of 
thought, be taken? 
The truth is that fear is far more 
profound within the white community 
than the non-white. The non-whites 
fear the whites; the whites fear not 
only the non-whites, but themselves. 
The Immorality Act has made sexual 
relations between white and non-white 
punishable by long imprisonment and, 
among whites, social horror. Yet the 
number of contraventions steadily 
mounts, with an embarrassing parade 
of such responsible whites as Dutch 
Reformed Church clergymen and 
  
. Photo @ Emil Schuitess - Rapho 
 
A permanent curfew prohibits Africans from entering “white” urban 
districts between 11 p.m. and 5 a.m. unless they have the necessary 
passes. 
police brought before the courts. 
There is fear at the consequences for 
even the pretence of white race purity 
in such flouting of the law, and deeper 
fear still at the consequences which 
might attend scrapping the law alto- 
gether. 
And who is white? After more than 
300 years of miscegenation, few fami- 
lies beyond first generation immigrants 
can feel confident of a completely 
colourless pedigree. The Population 
Registration ‘Act provides all South 
Africans with compulsory racial classi- 
fication and suitable identity cards so 
that, as the Minister of the Interior 
declared in 1958, “To many a certainty 
has been given that they never had 
before.” 
But fear is not removed by such offi- 
cial adjudication; if anything it is for- 
tified. For now there are formal enqui- 
ries, with race tribunals, and whispers 
or unco-operative genes can soon 
enough cancel, beyond concealment, 
one classification for another. 
Fear breeds, indeed, around the very 
source of protection against fear. 
Whites who indulge only their imagin- 
ation by supposing themselves of 
Above, a Johannesburg street. 
interest to the political police, whose 
views are no less orthodox than the 
conventions of parliamentary opposi- 
tion can comfortably contain, refuse to 
discuss politics on the telephone or 
admit any criticism of the government 
in private letters. The frenzy with 
which many whites pursue luxury and 
leisure—their obsession with sport is 
internationally remarked—cries out 
their fear of the risks in any interest 
demanding more of the mind. 
The refusal to think at all offers 
itself as the one escape route from 
fear. For, surely, to think is to reco- 
gnize the implications of racial repress- 
ion, and to reject its capacity to sur- 
vive in a sane world. And so white 
South Africans perpetuate their privi- 
leges by surrendering their minds, and 
in the name of civilization sacrifice 
civilization's essence. 
What is left is fear and the appetite 
for domination, feeding insatiably upon 
each other. It is the gangrene of huma- 
nity, and its amputation is imperative 
if the sickness is not everywhere to 
spread. History belongs to the victims, 
for their human purpose is in their very 
suffering sustained.

## [Page 27](078449engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

P
h
o
t
o
 
© 
Jo
bs
t 
G
r
a
p
o
u
r
 


### 59672: The Fettered spirit

THE EFFECTS OF APARTHEID ON CULTURE 
The fettered spirit 
“l want to express by means 
of the plague the suffocation 
from which we all suffered, 
and the atmosphere of men- 
ace and exile in which we 
all lived." (Albert Camus.) 
I HERE are certain concepts 
and principles which, in the Republic 
of South Africa, must be stated and 
restated until one is blue in the face. 
This is necessary because of the con- 
stant modification, erosion and exploi- 
tation these concepts undergo in the 
country at the present time. To the 
extent that leaders and members of 
the white community justify their laws 
and actions and aspirations in terms of 
the universally accepted meanings of 
these concepts and principles, the 
pretence must be shown up. One must 
apply this constant debunking to nearly 
every form of organized human acti- 
vity: education, legality and the laws, 
politics, the racial concept, the right to 
work, trade unions, private and public 
 
BREYTEN BREYTENBACH 1s an Afrikaner 
writer, poet and painter. He was born in 
1939 in South Africa and studied art at the 
University of Cape Town. In 1960 he left 
South Africa and travelled around the world. 
He now lives and works in Paris as a 
painter. Exhibitions of his works have been 
held in several European countries and in the 
United States. A writer in Afrikaans, he is 
the author of several collections of poems 
and essays and a volume of short prose 
pieces entitled *Katastrofes". 
business, travel, marriage and the free 
association of individuals, etc. And, of 
course, culture. And here, we touch 
not only upon the organized manifes- 
tation of culture, but also the right and 
freedom of the individual to create, 
to entertain or be entertained, to think, 
to express himself to laugh or to cry. 
Culture, to me, is the uttering of a 
nation's dreams, hopes, fears, fantasies 
and desires. It is national insofar as 
the individual or group of individuals 
formulating and expressing these, be- 
long to a nation sharing a common 
heritage, living in the same country, 
exploring a mutual present and mould- 
ing a brighter future. Culture is the 
way in which the members of a nation 
find themselves and their countrymen. 
It should never be a privilege—the free 
expression of culture through the visual 
and performing arts and literature, and 
politically free access to cultural mani- 
festations should be a right never even 
questioned. This is patently not the 
case in South Africa. 
Tribal white man has imposed a way 
of life on the nation which has reduced 
culture to folklore, or rather, has den- 
ied the progression from folklore to 
culture. Apartheid, which puts the 
accent on—and favours—that which 
distinguishes one group from another, 
inevitably means the glorification of 
the banal and the local as opposed to 
the original and the universal (or even 
merely national): handicrafts and post- 
cards as opposed to sculpture and 
painting, the beating of the tom-toms as 
opposed to the discovery and enjoy- 
ment of richer musical forms, inferior 
journalism as opposed to creative 
writing. 
Freedom is inseparable. There can 
be no rich cultural life when man can 
hardly aspire to the possibility of 
attaining political and economic free- 
dom. 
In which way does apartheid then 
destroy culture? lt seems senseless to 
point to recent laws which, for example, 
prohibit racially mixed audiences or 
create a board of censorship so ob- 
viously politically motivated. Com- 
plaining about these is what | would 
by Breyten Breytenbach 
term “giving battle”, a token (or real) 
resistance to what is considered ex- 
cessive—whereas the whole ideology 
underlying apartheid must be abolish- 
ed before we can think in terms of 
culture, and therefore in terms of 
human dignity. Advocating the libe- 
ralization of a situation is another way 
of condoning the status quo. It is 
like treating the patient for bilharzia 
without purifying the water. 
It is the basic ideology of the white 
people in power (and those they re- 
present) as embodied in all the apart- 
heid laws, which denies culture and 
human dignity—to all the people of 
South Africa, including themselves. 
And this ideology is one of Chris- 
tian-Nationalism or Calvinist-Tribalism 
by which one tribe is trying to perpe- 
tuate itself (according to the image it 
has of itself) by monopolizing all power 
and dictating to the other tribes their 
supposed lines and forms of cultural, 
political and economic development. 
This development must always exist in 
relation to the white man's central per- 
petuation of exclusive power. This tribe 
dictates to its own members in that 
it refuses any opposition to or ques- 
tioning of its ideology of supremacy 
which may undermine the monolithic 
power structure. 
| stifles the cultu- 
ral contributions of the black, brown 
and yellow man—but in its denial of 
morality, humanism and dignity, it is 
probably well on its way towards kil- 
ling the contribution of the white man. 
Other contributors will be able to 
show in greater detail how the apart- 
heid laws prevent the growth of cul- 
ture, or affect the existing culture. 
My intention is more general—to try 
and define this death for myself. 
Apartheid is the big effort to curb the 
forming of a South African nation— 
politically, economically, culturally and 
therefore also racially—which should 
be one of the most normal things on 
earth given our interdependence and 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 28](078449engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 59672: The Fettered spirit

THE FETTERED SPIRIT (Continued) 
A cultural and national death wish? 
mutually hybrid origins. And culture and 
cultural exponents would have been 
the links. Now it has become futile 
to hope that one ethnic group may fer- 
tilize another, and the brittle contact 
established previously among writers, 
artists and musicians of the different 
groups is being dismantled progres- 
sively. It seems to be part of a 
general movement of contraction and 
falling apart—a cultural and national 
death wish. 
At this stage of the contraction and 
the spasm we have influential cultural 
leaders of the Afrikaans community 
asking the Government to stop the 
flow of immigrants from non-Germanic 
countries (as they fear the extinction 
of Afrikaans culture) while launching 
a campaign to replace English by Afri- 
kaans among the “Bantu.” 
We are going to have a new law-—to 
be tabled during the present Parliamen- 
tary session—which is to seek the 
  
prohibition of one race “interfering” 
in the political affairs of another: the 
Prohibition of Improper Interference 
Bill. For political affairs read anything 
from social gatherings to plays or jam 
sessions or writers’ discussions. 
One would hardly have thought it 
necessary to pass new restrictive 
laws. It is estimated that 1,800 people 
were punished without trial for their 
political beliefs in recent years. At 
the moment, there are about 70 people 
under house arrest, 600 more are ban- 
ned or restricted, another 40 are liv- 
ing in banishment in remote areas 
and over 2,000 people are in prison 
as 90 and 180-day detainees. 
Every Government Gazette adds to 
the list of people whose creative 
works are no longer allowed in South 
Africa. The Classic, a literary quar- 
terly had this to say in a recent issue: 
“Classic regrets... present rules that 
writers of the calibre of Ezekiel 
  
Mphahlele, Lewis Nkosi, Can Themba, 
Todd Matshakiza, Bloke Modisane, 
can no longer be read in the maga- 
zine or country.” There are many 
more. 
It is not surprising. In the atmo- 
sphere engendered by these laws one 
can see how simple human acts or 
the description thereof can be given 
quite fantastic values, interpretations 
and implications. For a black man to 
kiss a white woman is revolutionary. 
If this act were to be described (enthu- 
siastically!) by a writer in a book or 
on stage, or even shown by a painter, 
the life of the work would be endan- 
gered. And in this environment unfor- 
tunately a “literary” or “artistic” 
importance would be ascribed to this 
work far beyond the import of the sim- 
ple description. The daring young man 
on the flying words. 
And to the extent that culture must 
also be the expression of social ideas 
The policy of the 
Government of South 
Africa is to reinforce 
tribal traditions so 
as to promote tribal 
nationalism as opposed 
to country-wide 
    nationalism. 
Photo © Paul Almasy, 
Paris

## [Page 29](078449engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 59672: The Fettered spirit

Trade unions set up by 
non-white workers 
are not legally 
recognized in South 
Africa. Non-whites are 
forbidden to strike 
in any circumstances 
and heavy penalties 
are imposed for failure 
to observe this law. 
In certain cases, 
according to an 
International Labour 
Organization report, 
strikes may be treated 
as “sabotage” which 
is punishable by 
hanging. Right, a 
Witwatersrand gold 
mine in the Transvaal. Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Pa
ul
 
A
l
m
a
s
y
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
and values, the writer, the artist and 
the musician must use it as such, and 
use it to fight for political freedom, 
for dignity and for justice. Man only 
lives in other men, he only expresses 
his dreams in human terms, his only 
real fear is of other men. It should 
be up to the individual to decide how 
much “message” or propaganda his 
work can carry, and in which form. 
Already the final decay has set in 
in South Africa's cultural world. If 
the coloured people of Cape Town 
can no longer attend concerts in the 
now all-white City Hall, then music 
must eventually suffer. If our painters 
W 
are relegated to painting esoteric 
pastoral scenes and “Bantu” motifs, 
then our paintings will be just decor- 
ations on the wall. If plays with a 
mixed cast can no longer be staged, 
then the spirit of the theatre must 
become atrophied. The non-white 
writer may, if he is lucky, leave the 
country for a bitter exile. If the white 
writer, to be able to continue writing, 
must compromise his humanism (his 
love)—for apartheid is practised also 
in his name—then the illness has 
touched and discoloured the very 
blood of his being, and his writing 
will be an aberration of European 
culture. Perhaps the fact that no Afri- 
kaans writer has been banned yet, is 
a measure of this. 
“And that is where the catch lies. 
Most white South Africans have sim- 
ply never opened their eyes to the 
reality of there being other humans 
beside the whites in this country. 
They do not “do unto others,” but 
unto an unidentified mass of Natives.” 
— Nat Nakasa. 
As long as we have apartheid—and 
the mutual fear, distrust and hate this 
inspires—it will be impossible for 
South Africa, or any of its ethnic 
groups, to develop a living culture, 
\ 
; REE - 
SEARO, SNA y 
\ ne Sa Q »’ 
En Ne % o% 3 4 - h . \ ~ 
C Jal Nes ed NA VN Sa a RA, IN Ana | 
3 oN ~ - ak ‘Be \ RN W FONE NH ORR 2 UES fat 
5 EN aS BOTH TUT RNA aN SH ANS RN MEET iy So IR BS w AN AA Tm ARE SN NERY i a | NF ro a aOR nl ;! ’ RE ol 
a . po Yo ; ou LY ~~ Toe wy. « ar . 20% . . Ll ’. 7 SM % > 5 . In “ a WX, ' A Xd . W wa Jae 6 N M ¥ -" 
v - A : , ) 8 ) - ARN AL ! > Lun 3% SORE SAN hs rh NI “Nn pn — 
ea J MA Are 4 eh . CRN US = ay i Act ENA NN A TR Sa er ly 
29

## [Page 30](078449engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 59675: South Africa's wasted manpower

30 
SOUTH AFRICA’S 
  
Sou Africa is outstand- 
ingly rich in minerals. It has for gener- 
ations been the world's chief producer 
of gold, output of which continues to 
rise. It is the second largest producer 
of diamonds, chrome and asbestos, 
has the world's largest known reserves 
of uranium, and vast reserves of iron 
and coal. It is also a large producer of 
copper, limestone and manganese. 
Agriculture, which with 30 per cent. of 
the economically active population at 
the time of the 1960 census employed 
more labour than any other sector, 
produces many and varied products 
both for internal consumption and 
export. 
Manufacturing has experienced par- 
ticularly rapid growth in the past 
20 years, and now constitutes the 
largest sector of the economy in terms 
of output, accounting for a quarter of 
the national product. South Africa— 
which employs a higher proportion of 
its African population in the modern 
sector than any other African country— 
has the most developed and diversified 
economy in the entire continent. 
These developments have materially 
affected the composition and utilization 
of South Africa's labour force, setting 
off trends which are a growing chal- 
lenge to the purported objectives and 
basic policies of apartheid. Thus, 
instead of the separate development of 
at least Africans and Europeans in their 
own territories, economic development 
is drawing an ever greater number of 
the former into the white areas, creat- 
ing a symbiotic relationship in which 
the African worker is becoming in- 
creasingly dependent on wage-earning 
  
(1) Second Special Report of the Director- 
General on the application of the Declaration 
concerning the Policy of “Apartheid” of the 
Republic of South Africa, International Labour 
Office, Geneva, 1966. Price : 50 cents ; 3s. 6d. 
WASTED MANPOWER 
  
Every year since 1965 the International Labour Organization has carried 
out a survey of developments in connexion with the apartheid policy 
as it affects labour. The following text is condensed from the 1966 
survey (1). Examining the economic consequences of racial discrimination 
in South Africa, the report notes that apartheid artificially obstructs 
the flow of potential skilled manpower which South Africa needs to a 
growing extent and that the Government seeks to keep this movement 
under control, even at the expense of greater prosperity. 
in the white economy and at the same 
time ever more indispensable to it. 
The increasing demands for skilled 
manpower and the insufficient supply 
of white labour to meet them are 
also opening up to the non-white popu- 
lations rungs in the industrial ladder 
to which conventional as well as statu- 
tory colour bars previously denied them 
access, thus giving them a growing 
stake in the white economy. 
The strained manpower position has 
likewise served to emphasize the eco- 
nomic wastefulness of the migratory 
labour system and the colour bar, 
which reduce the volume of produc- 
tively employed African labour, perpe- 
tuate instability and low productivity 
and bar the way to utilization of vast 
potential sources of skill. 
I. inflationary pressures 
in the South African economy have 
increased the urgency of making more 
rational use of the country's man- 
power resources. Unless opportunities 
for training of Africans are substan- 
tially increased and African education 
adapted accordingly, the depressive 
effect of apartheid on the quality of the 
labour force will become an ever grea- 
ter drag on South Africa's industrial 
progress. 
African manpower in the white eco- 
nomy is treated as an imported commo- 
dity, as undifferentiated labour units 
deprived of ordinary human rights: the 
rights to free choice of employment, 
to security of residence and employ- 
ment, to the development of inherent 
capacities, to a say in how the eco- 
nomy of which it forms an essential 
component should be run. 
That is why the South African Gov- 
ernment maintains its adherence to 
the migratory labour system, influx 
control, the colour bar and the denial 
of trade union rights to Africans. 
Whatever the new openings and mat- 
erial improvements which South Afri- 
ca's spectacular development are 
bringing within the reach of its non- 
white population, the status reserved 
for African workers in an economy 
wedded to the principle of white domi- 
nation is thus scarcely distinguishable 
from one of servile labour, The con- 
tradictions inherent in such a situation 
are pregnant with danger to the 
country's social peace. 
The measure of bitterness engen- 
dered by apartheid is to be found in 
the repressive apparatus which has 
had to be built up concurrently with the 
progressive development of apartheid 
laws and practice in the social and 
economic spheres, Without attempting 
any exhaustive enumeration, it should 
be remembered that the repressive 
measures adopted include hangings, 
detention without trial, house arrest, 
and bannings of persons, organizations 
and publications. To maintain apart- 
heid, South Africa is living in a per- 
manent state of emergency. 
Parallel with these internal difficul- 
ties, on the international level South 
Africa finds itself in a position of 
isolation in a world hostile to the 
course upon which it is set. The Inter- 
national Labour Organization is not the 
only organization from which it has 
withdrawn under the pressure of inter- 
national opinion. South Africa left the 
United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization (Unesco) in 
1955, and in 1964 it withdrew from the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations. It has been 
expelled from the United Nations Eco- 
nomic Commission for Africa and has 
resigned from the Commission for 
Technical Co-operation -in Africa. Its 
participation in the Scientific Council 
of Africa has likewise ceased. 
In the United Nations, South Afri-

## [Page 31](078449engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 59675: South Africa's wasted manpower

In 1964, the apartheid 
rules were provisionally 
made more flexible 
so as to allocate 
African miners to 
certain supervisory 
tasks. In 1965, the 
Government terminated 
this experiment 
“in view of the 
detrimental implications 
involved”. Yet the 
International Labour 
Organization's report 
stresses that South 
Africa continues to 
suffer from a serious 
shortage of skilled 
labour. The 
Government's economic 
development plan 
forecasts that in 1969 
there will be a shortage 
of 47,000 white 
workers, but at the 
same time there will 
be 240,000 non-white 
unemployed. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Em
il
e 
Sc
hu
lt
es
s 
- 
Ra
ph
o 
4   
ca's racial policies and consequential 
repressive measures have been under 
investigation by a special committee, 
and the whole pressure of world opin- 
ion has been brought to bear on the 
South African Government to aban- 
don a policy held to constitute a threat 
to international peace and security. 
Because of its tremendous wealth 
and developed institutions, South 
Africa could play a major part in pro- 
moting the progress of the African 
continent, through investments, trade 
= 1 ha 
hv Rian 
IN SFY 
and technical assistance. An extended 
market for South African goods would 
not only greatly strengthen the coun- 
try’s industry, but also bring immea- 
surable benefits to the entire Southern 
African region. 
The educational system, now biased 
in favour of the white population, could 
help to spread literacy. The country 
could offer advanced technical know- 
ledge and participate in fighting dis- 
ease. However, the possibilities for all 
such developments must remain strictly 
limited so long as South Africa's pre- 
sent racial policies are pursued. 
No country can easily bring itself to 
reconstruct the very bases of its body 
politic, particularly in relation to an 
issue so charged with passion as 
apartheid. 
The choice lies between a stunted, 
frustrated, bitter and isolated society 
and a community built on purposeful, 
constructive co-operation both within 
the national borders and within the 
wider family of nations. 
   
31

## [Page 32](078449engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

32 
From the Unesco Report on Apartheid 
 
Apartheid and African rights 
 
During the reading of the 1964 Bantu Laws Amendment Act, 
a Nationalist Party member of the House of Assembly, Mr. Grey- 
ling, stated that “there is no such thing as ‘the rights of a Bantu’ 
in the White area. The only rights he has are those which he 
acquires by performing certain duties. Those duties which he 
performs give him the right of sojourn here. The officials in 
the labour bureaux, in considering whether they are going to 
allow a Bantu to remain here, will have to give priority to the 
consideration of whether that Bantu has carried out his duties 
as a worker, and not whether he has a supposed right which 
has been invented for him by members of the United Party.” 
Apartheid and international news 
 
One of the South African Government's main aims is to see 
that international information is slanted so as to conform with 
its general policy and particularly its apartheid policy. Everything 
possible is done to prevent the introduction into the country of 
overseas information deemed “undesirable” from this angle. 
Apartheid and films 
 
Films for Africans are subject to strict censorship. Most 
countries have some sort of film censorship but in South Africa 
it is used as an instrument to further “separate development.” 
The Censorship Board may prohibit the showing of films before 
a particular race or class. On many occasions it has decided 
that, while a film may be shown in a non-white cinema, children 
between 4 and 16 together with Africans may not be admitted. 
There is a tendency to ban any film which does not present 
non-whites as inferior to whites. 
Apartheid and creative writing 
 
Commenting on the situation of creative writers in South 
Africa, the exiled African author Ezekiel Mphahlele pointed out 
that, “Our energies go into this conflict to such an extent that 
we don’t have much left for creative work. One might ask, 
‘Why could this not be a spur towards creative writing?’ | think 
it is paralysing... We are in two ghettoes, two different streams, 
and you can't get really dynamic art in this kind of society. You 
won't get a great white novel, | think, and yeu won’t get a great 
black novel until we become integrated. As soon as the white 
man has learned to realize that he is an African and no longer 
a European, he will then begin to write an African novel or an 
African poem.” : 
Apartheid and sport 
 
In 1963, the South African Olympic and National Games Asso- 
ciation (SAONGA) was reminded by the Minister of the Interior 
that participation in international sports competitions by mixed 
teams representing South Africa as a whole could in no circums- 
tances be approved. South Africa was unable to take part in the 
1964 Tokyo Olympic Games. 
The International Table Tennis Federation refused to recognize 
the all-white South African Table Tennis Association as the 
negotiating body for South Africa. 
South Africa was asked to leave the International Football Asso- 
ciation. 
In sport, as in drama, as in entertainment, South Africa—black 
and white—is becoming increasingly isolated from the rest of 
the world. 
Apartheid and libraries 
In Durban there are 11 municipal library depots and one 
reference library for whites, one library for coloureds and one 
branch library for Africans. In the Orange Free State there is 
a free “whites only” library service and no similar service for   
Africans, The demand for books, moreover, is governed by the 
African’s social and economic situation: he often grows up in 
a home where there are no books, he has little money to spend 
on them and he has had few opportunities to acquire a taste for 
reading. Regarding school libraries, the poverty of the book 
stock in non-white public libraries makes it impossible to supple- 
ment the inadequate book supply of the non-white school libraries. 
In 1959, of the films provided for library users, 2,319 films were 
screened for Europeans and 180 for non-Europeans. 
Apartheid and social science 
Social science field work in South Africa is greatly hampered 
by the apartheid policy. Permission to carry out research in a 
“Bantu Reserve” is essential and may be withdrawn at any time 
without any reason being given. . . Field workers have the 
impression that they are under continuous police surveillance and 
are permanently apprehensive that they may lose their permits 
to work in specific areas or, in the case of foreigners, their permits 
to remain in South Africa. Even more serious is the suspicion and 
hostility displayed by the people being studied. Even where 
there is no open hostility there may- well be a reluctance to 
talk since any white investigator is regarded as likely to be a 
local official or a member of the special branch. 
Apartheid and education 
 
In 1965, the salaries paid to African teachers were less than 
half those earned by white teachers—41-9 per cent for men and 
37.9 per cent for women. In 1965, the gap widened when white 
teachers salaries were raised. It is impossible to claim that sepa- 
rate development in education promotes good race relations. The 
inequalities inherent in the educational system would in themselves 
be damaging to racial harmony but one of the aims of the educa- 
tional system set in policy statements by both the Government and 
influential groups in the white sectors of society is group natio- 
nalism. 
Apartheid and the universities 
The extension to higher education of the principle of separate 
development has had serious repercussions on the universities. 
In 1961 it was reported that 25 staff members from Cape Town 
had left, that Natal had lost 35 and that eight professorships, nine 
senior lectureships and nine lectureships were vacant at the 
University of the Witwatersrand. Some of the scientists who 
have left had played a major part in the intellectual life of the 
country. And losses have continued on a considerable scale. 
Apartheid and beaches 
 
Racial zoning has been extended to beaches and, in December 
1965, the Minister for Planning announced that the beaches of the 
municipal areas should be allocated to different population groups. 
Certain beaches, traditionally used by non-whites, but situated 
opposite areas reserved for white residential districts, were 
henceforward to be used by whites only. 
Apartheid and the theatre 
 
In conjunction with the anti-apartheid movement, playwrights in 
Great Britain, U.S.A. France and Ireland have instructed their 
agents “to insert a clause in all future contracts automatically 
refusing performing rights in any theatre where discrimination is 
made among audiences on grounds of colour,” The protest by 
foreign writers arose from their personal abhorrence of the evil 
of racism, but their action was based on the Berne Convention 
which gives artists and authors the legal right to authorize the 
publication and performance of their works. In 1965, South 
Africa passed a new Copyright Act, including a clause designed 
to prevent authors from prohibiting the performance of their 
works in South Africa on ideological grounds. . .

## [Page 33](078449engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

S verry two per cent of 
all South Africans and 94 per cent of 
all white South Africans are Christians. 
The doctrinal approach of the Dutch 
Reformed Churches in South Africa 
to race relations was that the Dutch 
Reformed Church “could not associate 
itself unreservedly with the general 
cry for equality and unity in the world 
today... It is mostly a surrogate unity 
and brotherhood, that men seek to 
realize without Christ in a world 
disrupted by sin ...” The unity of 
man already exists in Christ, and is 
a supernatural organic unity... One 
of the factors causing the imperfect 
realization of the existing unity in 
Christ is racial contrasts and racial 
tensions, in South Africa as in the 
rest of the world. 
In April 1950 a conference of Dutch 
Reformed Churches was held at Bloem- 
fontein to define the church's policy 
towards the African. Apartheid was de- 
fined as a way which seeks to lead each 
section of the people in the clearest 
and quickest way to its own destination 
under the gracious providence of God. 
The only way in which the permanent 
subordination of one group to another 
could be avoided was by total 
separation; the nature reserves were 
to be converted into true “Bantu 
Homelands” with full opportunity for 
development and self-government and 
the replacing of the African in the 
European industrial system, 
After the riots at Sharpeville and 
Langa in March 1960, nine leading 
ministers of the Nederduitse Gerefor- 
meerde Kerk issued a statement, 
which, after protesting the “continuous 
besmirching of our country, people 
and church by untrue and slanted 
information,” and declaring that the 
condemnations of South Africa "do 
not always spring from Christian 
responsibility but show signs of... 
the hysterical efforts of the West to 
overbid the East for the favour of 
the non-whites of Africa for the sake 
of the ideological slogan of self-deter- 
mination,” went on to say: 
“The Nederduitse Gereformeerde 
Kerk has made it clear... that it can 
approve of independent, distinctive 
development, provided that it is carried 
out in a just and honourable way, 
without impairing or offending human 


### 59678: Apartheid and the church

APARTHEID 
AND THE CHURCH 
dignity. The Church has also accepted 
that this policy, especially in its initial 
stages, would necessarily cause a 
certain amount of disruption and 
personal hardship, for example, in 
connexion with the clearing of slums. 
The whole pass system must be seen 
in this light.” 
The nine ministers issuing this 
statement then approved of the prin- 
ciples of the policy of apartheid, but 
also called for an improvement of 
the wage structure for Africans, that 
non-whites be treated by whites in a 
more dignified manner so as not to 
reap a harvest of hate and that “re- 
sponsible and law-abiding” non-whites 
should not be “misled by the false 
promises of agitators who are not 
concerned about the utmost good of 
the non-whites...” 
In December 1960, as a result of an 
initiative on the part of the Anglican 
Archbishop of Cape Town—who had 
publicly repudiated compulsory. segre- 
gation—the World Council of Churches 
sent a six-man delegation to consult 
with representatives of its eight 
member churches (1) at the Cottesloe 
residence of the University of the 
Witwatersrand. Five of the churches 
sent inter-racial delegations. 
I... report, known as the 
Cottesloe Consultation Report, stated 
that while being united in rejecting al! 
unjust discrimination, widely divergent 
views were held on the basic issues of 
apartheid. Nevertheless it was possi- 
ble to make certain affirmations con- 
cerning human needs and justice as 
they affected the races of South Africa: 
No one who believed in Jesus Christ 
should be excluded from any Church 
on the grounds of colour or race; 
adequate facilities should be provided 
for non-white .people to worship in 
urban areas as well as in segregated 
townships, there should be more 
(1) Church of the Province of S.A., the 
Nederduitse Gereformeerde Kerk of the 
Transvaal, the Methodist, the Presbyterian, 
the Congregational Union, the Bantu Pres- 
byterian, the Nederduitse Gereformeerde 
Kerk of the Cape, the Nederduitse Her- 
vormde Kerk of Africa. 
effective consultation between the 
Government and the leaders accepted 
by the non-white people, there were 
no scriptural grounds for the prohi- 
bition of mixed marriages, although 
certain legal, social and cultural factors 
might make such marriages inadvi- 
sable, 
It was pointed out that migrant 
labour had a disintegrating effect on 
African family life, that the vast 
majority of non-white people received 
wages which were below the generally 
accepted minimum standard for healthy 
living, that the job reservation system 
should give way to a more equitable 
method of employment, that the right 
to own land where one was domiciled 
and the right to participate in the 
government of the country was part 
of the dignity of all adult men. 
YR the Neder- 
duitse Gereformeerde Kerk of the 
Transvaal and the Cape issued another 
statement which said that a policy of 
differentiation could be defended from 
the Christian point of view and 
provided the only realistic solution to 
the problems of race relations. The 
Nederduitse Hervormde Kerk of Africa 
the next day issued a press statement, 
in which they dissociated themselves 
from the resolutions passed and re- 
affirmed their faith in racial separation 
in the belief that the ideals of Chris- 
tianity would best be served in that 
way. 
Opposition to the Cottesloe report 
continued to grow. During March 1961, 
the Nederduitse Hervormde Kerk 
Synod met and decided by 487 votes 
to 13 to withdraw from membership 
of the World Council of Churches. 
The Transvaal Synod of the Neder- 
duitse Gereformeerde Kerk meeting 
in April 1961 also decided to withdraw 
from membership of the World Council 
of Churches, since the Cottesloe reso- 
lutions were at variance with the 
policy of the Church and were 
embarrassing to the Government. In 
October the Cape Nederduitse Gere- 
formeerde Kerk Synod decided by a 
large majority to reject the Cottesloe 
report as “undermining the policy of 
separate development”; the Synod 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
33

## [Page 34](078449engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 59678: Apartheid and the church

34 
APARTHEID AND THE CHURCH (Continued) 
also decided to leave the World 
Council of Churches. 
Individual members of the Dutch 
Reformed Churches continued to 
question South African racial attitudes. 
In November 1960, 11 leading theo- 
logians of the Nederduitse Gerefor- 
meerde Kerk, the Nederduitse Her- 
vormde Kerk and the Gereformeerde 
Kerk published a book—"Vertraagde 
Aksie“—calling for a new outlook on 
South African racial attitudes. 
This resulted in the heresy trial of 
Professor Geyser, one of the authors 
of the book, before the Synodical 
Commission of the Hervormde Kerk in 
December 1961; he was found guilty 
on one of three charges of heresy. 
He decided to contest the findings in 
the court of law, but an agreement 
was reached out of court (in 1963) and 
he was reinstated as a minister of 
the Church. 
In August 1963, the Christian Institute 
of Southern Africa was established; it 
was inter-racial and inter-denomi- 
national. The Director of the Institute 
was the Rev. C.F. Beyers Naudé, who 
had been elected Moderator of the 
Southern Transvaal Synod of the 
Nederduitse Kerk, had defended the 
Cottesloe resolutions and was editor 
of an inter-church monthly magazine 
Pro Veritate. 
The Christian Institute came under 
attack from certain Dutch Reformed 
quarters. Prof. Verhoef of Stellen- 
bosch for example, felt that members 
of the Christian Institute had made an 
error in judgement: the Institute gave 
the impression that it understood the 
problems and the aspirations of the 
Africans better than the “Boorekerk.” 
That apartheid is compatible with 
Christianity has been denied by many 
denominations in South Africa. The 
Methodist Conference in 1947 and 
1948 stated clearly that every human 
being is entitled to fundamental human 
rights. In 1952 the Conference 
rejected the policy of apartheid as 
being impracticable, contrary to the 
interests of all sections of the South 
African community and inconsistent 
with the highest Christian principles. 
This was reaffirmed in 1957, in 1958, 
in 1959 and in 1960. 
l. 1960, the Conference 
outlined a programme of Education in 
Race Relations which included inter- 
racial study groups, pulpit exchanges 
and visits between church organiza- 
tions. Moreover the possibility was to 
be explored of setting up a pilot city 
circuit scheme of a racially inclusive 
Church. 
In 1961 the Conference resolved to 
proceed with the removal of racial 
demarcation from its official records 
and legislation. In 1963 the Confe- 
rence elected an African, the Rev. Seth 
Mokitimi as its president. 
The 1950 Provincial Synod of the 
Church of the Province of South Africa 
—a self-governing church within the 
worldwide Anglican communion {the 
supreme legislature body within the 
Church} made the following statement 
on race relations: 
“The Conference is convinced that 
discrimination between men on 
grounds of race alone is inconsistent 
with the principles of Christ's Reli- 
gion... (we) believe that the effect 
of much recent legislation is likely 
to be the rigid division of the popu- 
lation into social classes with unequal 
rights, privileges and opportunities, 
and the relegation of the non-Euro- 
peans to a position of permanent 
inferiority, and for this reason 
condemns this legislation as incon- 
sistent with the respect for human 
personality that should be characte- 
ristic of a Christian society..." 
Severs Anglican clergymen 
have made individual statements 
against the policy of the South African 
government. Trevor Huddleston has 
protested particularly over the demoli- 
tion of Sophia Town; the Rev. Ambrose 
Reeves has been outspoken in his 
opposition to the government's policy 
and was deported in September 1960; 
the Rev. Michael Scott was imprisoned 
for taking part in a non-violent 
campaign against segregation, left 
South Africa to take the case of South 
West Africa to the U.N. and has not 
been readmitted to South Africa. 
In addition, in 1963 several Anglican 
Bishops in South Africa made state- 
ments condemning the apartheid 
policies of the government. In 1963 
the Minister of Foreign Affairs was 
reported as having said at a Nationalist 
Party meeting that the time had come 
to tell the bishops that it was not in 
the interests of their Church to inter- 
vene in South Africa's political issues. 
The Synod of Bishops meeting in 
November 1963 issued this statement: 
“In these circumstances, it seems 
necessary to the Bishops of the 
Church of the Province of South 
Africa, now meeting in Synod in 
Bloemfontein, to reaffirm their 
unanimity in proclaiming their con- 
viction that the Church must openly 
and fearlessly condemn all that it 
believes to be evil and false in the 
social, political or economic life of 
any nation and, whenever the claims 
of obedience to the State and God 
are in conflict, it is to God that our 
obedience must be given.” 
in 1952, 1957, 1960 and 1962, the 
Catholic Bishops of Southern Africa 
issued joint pastoral letters on the 
situation in South Africa. In 1957 the 
pastoral letter entitled “Statement on 
Apartheid" condemned apartheid and 
went on to say: “there must be a 
gradual change... but change must 
come, for otherwise our country faces 
a disastrous future... This involves 
the elaboration of a sensible and just 
policy enabling any person, irrespec- 
tive of race, to qualify, for the enjoy- 
ment of full civil rights...” 
The pastoral letter of 1962 was 
headed “We Dare Not Remain Silent” 
and said in part: “As Christian people 
we dare not remain silent and passive 
in the face of the injustices inflicted 
on members of the unprivileged racial 
groups...” In July 1966 the Bishops 
again denounced apartheid and all 
forms of discrimination which it 
engenders. 
Since apartheid, two great theolo- 
gical debates are being fought out in 
South Africa. 
The first, illustrated by the position 
taken by the Bishops of the Church 
of the Province of South Africa, is an 
old one—the obedience which a 
Christian subject should give to a 
State which promulgates what he 
holds to be intolerably evil laws and 
the right of his leaders to criticize 
these laws. 
The second theological debate is 
primarily a debate of this century, and 
in its acute form was initiated precisely 
by the system of apartheid in a country 
whose leaders were prominent Chris- 
tians. It was the meaning to be given 
to racial equality and whether or not 
the doctrine of the brotherhood of all 
Christians pre-supposed a multiracial 
Church. 
W ithin South Africa the lines 
drawn were principally between the 
Dutch Reformed Church, on the one 
hand, and the English speaking Church, 
on the other. But even within these 
groupings the argument continued. 
Geyser and Naudé and others within 
the Dutch Reformed Church took 
theological positions not unlike those 
of the Bishops of the English-speaking 
Church—and that in spite of the strong 
sanctions which could be imposed on 
them to conform to the main trend 
of thinking of the members of their 
congregations and of their Synods. 
Within the English-speaking Churches, 
too, there were some missionary 
leaders who advocated separatism 
for Africans. 
This debate was not confined to 
South Africa, it was part of the 
worldwide ecumenical debate of the 
1950s and 1960s, although certainly 
by 1965 the idea of a multi-racial 
church was accepted by most churches 
outside South Africa, and racial 
equality took on the meaning of 
multi-racialism, as opposed to racial 
separatism in the statements of 
major Christian religions. The Dutch 
Reformed Churches in South Africa 
are being increasingly isolated, not 
only by the withdrawal of some of their 
groups from the World Council of 
Churches, but by their theological 
assumptions on the question of race. 
This text is part of a chapter from 
the Unesco Report on Apartheid. Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
—
 
D.
L.
 
1°
F 
tr
im
es
tr
e.
 
—
 
C.
 
n°
 
1.

## [Page 35](078449engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

     
    
UNESCO ART BOOKS 
ETRUSCAN TOULOUSE- 
SCULPTURES LAUTREC pocket edition 
  
Se
   
Price per 
volume : 
6/-stq. 
$0.95 
i 
4 
In each volume, 
30 colour reproductions 
Series published in seven languages 
(English, French, Spanish, German, 
Italian, Danish, Dutch). 
e
B
 
a TICE if, Tr 1 
FONTANA UNESCO ART BOOKS 
TH
 
  
    FONTANA UNESCO ART BOOKS 
    
  
       
EGYPTIAN 
SCULPTURES 
HENRY 
MOORE 
MOTHER AND CHILD 
    
JUST PUBLISHED 
Obtainable 
through 
local a (A (PRS 
booksellers FONTANA UNESCO ART BOOKS 
  
  
MODIGLIANI 
   
    
5.
 
3
,
 
a 
e
w
 
A
N
 
  
      FONTANA UNESCO ART BOOKS 
    
    
a Aa £ 
pe : cr 
FONTANA UNESCO ART BOOKS      
    FONTANA UNESCO ART BO 
oo BASS 
ig 3 
0KS 
FONTANA-UNESCO ART BOOKS: Collins Pub- 
lishers, London. 
MENTOR-UNESCO ART BOOKS: 
American Library, New York. 
The New 
WHERE TO RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzal, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Longmans of Austraba Pty Ltd., Railway Crescent, 
Croydon, Victoria; sub-agent United Nations Associa- 
tion of Australia, Victorian Division, 4th Floor, Askew 
House, 364 Lonsdale St., Melbourne C. I. (Victoria); 
for the Unesco Courier only : Dominie Pty Ltd, 463 Pitt- 
water Road, Brookvale {N.S.W.) ($A 2.25). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C°., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 70.-). — BELGIUM, All publications: Editions 
“Labor”, 342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-We- 
tenschappelifke Uitgeverij Belgiélei 147, Antwerp. L For 
The Unesco Courier (140 FB) and art slides (488 FB) only : 
Louis De Lannoay, 112, rue du Trbne, Brussels 5. CCP 
3380.00. — CANADA. Queen's Printer, Ottawa, Ont. 
($3.00). — CEYLON. Lake House Bookshop, Sir Chittam- 
palan Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B, 244, Colombo, 2 {Rs. 7). 
~ CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd.,, 29 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CYPRUS, 
“MAM”, Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 
1722, Nicosia. — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L, 
Spalena 51, Prague 1 {permanent display); Zahranicni 
literatura Bilkova 4, Prague 1. — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, Ltd., Prags Boulevard 47, Copenhagen S. (D. 
Kr. 17). — ETHIOPIA. International Press Agency. P.O. 
Box 120, Addis Ababa (10/-). — FINLAND, Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (Fmk. 9.40). — 
FRANCE, Librairie de ['Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 
Paris-7°. C.C.P. 12598-48, (10 F). — GERMANY. All 
publications: R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145, Munich, 8. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed only) 
Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bzhrenfeld, C.C.P. 
276650 (DM 10). — GHANA Methodist Book Depot 
Ltd., Atlantis House, Commercial Street, POB 100, Cape 
Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — 
GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, 
Athens; Librairie Eleftheroudakis Nikkis 4, Athens. — 
HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, 
Kowloon, — HUNGARY. Académiai Konyvesbole, 
Vici u. 22, Budapest V; A.K.V, Konyvtirosok Bolcja, 
Népkoztirsasig utja 16, Budapest VI, — ICELAND. 
Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
(120 Kr.) — INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd.,, Nicol 
Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson 
House, 1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New Delhi. 
1; Sub-Depots : Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 
Park Street, Calcutta 16 and Scindia Hause, New Delhi: 
Indian National Commission for Cooperation with 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, New Delhi 3. (Rs. 
10.50). — INDONESIA. P.T.N. “Permata-Nusantara" 
c/o Department of Commerce 22, Djalan Nusantara 
Djakarta — IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, Al-Rashid 
Street, Baghdad; University Bookstore, University 
of Baghdad, P.O. Box 12, Baghdad — IRELAND. The 
Nacwional Press, 2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. 
4, (15/5). — ISRAEL, Emanuel Brown, formerly Blum- 
stein's Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48 Nahlat 
Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (1£8). — JAMAICA. Sang- 
ster’s Book Room, 91 Harbour Street, Kingston. {15/-). 
JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome, Nihon- 
bashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo (1,200 yen). 
~~ JORDAN. Joseph |. Bahous & Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, 
Salt Road. P.C.B. 66, Amman. — KENYA. ES.A. 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi (10/-). — KOREA. 
Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Cen- 
tral 64, Seoul. KUWAIT The Kuwait Bookshop Co., 
Led., P. O. Box 2942, Kuwait — LIBERIA. Cole and 
Yancy Bookshops Lid., P.O. Box 286. Monrovia {10/-). 
— LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand- 
Rue, Luxemburg (F.L. 140). — MALAYSIA. Federal 
Publications Ltd., Times House, River Valley Road, 
Singapore, 9; Pudu Building (3rd floor), 110, Jalan 
Pudu, Kuala Lumpur (M. $.7.50). — MALTA, Sapienza’s 
Library, 26 Kingsway, Valletta, {15/-). — MAURITIUS. 
Nalanda Company Ltd.,, 30, Bourbon Street, Port- 
Louis {(15/-). — MONACO. British Library, 30, Bld. 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo, {F. 10). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Yoorhaut, 9, The Hague. 
(fi. 8.50), — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G. C. 
T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Cura- 
¢zo. NLA. (NA fl 4,50). — NEW ZEALAND, Govern- 
ment Printing Office, 20, Molesworth Street (Private 
Bag), Wellington; Government Bookshops: Auckland 
{P.O. Box 5344), Christchurch (P.O. Box 1721), Dune- 
din {P.O. Box 1104) (15/-). — NIGERIA. C.M.S, Book- 
shops, P.O. Box 174, Lagos (10/-). — NORWAY, 
All publications: A.S. Bokhjornet, Lille Grensen 7, 
Oslo. For Unesco Courier only: A.S. Norvesens Litte- 
raturjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6, (17. 50kr.). — PA- 
KISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., Unesco 
Publications House, P.O. Box 374 G.P.O.,, Lahore; 
Showrooms : Urdu Bazar, Lahore, and $7-58 Murree 
Highway, G/6-1, Islamabad. — PHILIPPINES, The Mo- 
dern Book Co., 508 Rizal Avenue, P.O, Box 632, Manila. 
— POLAND, “RUCH", ul. Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10 
zl. 60.). — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lda, Livraria 
Portugal, Rua do'Carmo 70, Lisbon. — PUERTO RICO, 
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor Roosevelt 115- 
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. — SOUTHERN RHODESIA. 
Textbook Sale (PVT) Ltd., 67, Union Avenue, Salisbury, — 
SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P. O. Box 1118, 
Kharcoum. — SWEDEN. All publications : A/B C.E. 
Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Scock- 
holm 16. — For the Unesco Courier: The United, 
Nations Association of Sweden, Vasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 12); SWITZERLAND, All publications : 
Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich, Payot, rue Grenus 6, 
1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 1-236. “Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1-4811. (Fr. 5. 10). — TANZANIA, Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 2775, Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Panic Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue. Bangkok. 
(35 ucals). — TURKEY. Librairte Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA, Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O. Bax 145, Kampala{10/-).—SOUTH AFRICA. 
All publications : Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pry) Led., 
Libri Building. Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretaria. 
For the Unesco Courier (single copies} only : Central 
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. (R1.-50). 
— UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie 
Kasr El Nil, 38, rue Kasr EI Nil, Cairo. Sub/agent : 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — 
UNITED KINGDOM, H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. 
Box 569, Landon, S.El, and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester. 
Birmingham and Bristol, (15/-). — UNITED STATES. 
Unesco Publications Center, 317 East 34th St, New York, 
N.Y. 10016 ($ 5.00). — U.5.5.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska 
Knjiga Terazije, 27, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](078449engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

 