# [062404](062404engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](062404engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

A WINDOW OPEN ON THE WORLD 
The ~~ 
mC OUricr 
JANUARY 1963 (16TH YEAR) - PRICE 1/-STG. (U.K.) - 30 CENTS (U.S.) - 0.70 F (FRANCE) 
 
  
  
¢ ’ 

## [Page 2](062404engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

~ TIMELESS AF F THE GAULS. This Janus-like head adorr 
1 lng a terra-cotta vase discovered in northern France in the 
18th century is a remarkable example of ancient Gallic wart... 
Excavations have brought to light many magnificent works of 
sculpture, ceramics, jewels and coins which reveal the great 
originality and richness of the ancient civilization of Gaul. 

## [Page 3](062404engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

Ad WinbDbw DPrIw Di THI WOALS 
"mCourier 
Contents 
No. 1 
PUBLISHED IN 
EIGHT EDITIONS 
    
  
JANUARY 1963 
16TH YEAR 
M.C, 62.1.176 A) 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Russian Edition : Veniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
Page 
English 4 A MUSEUM OF THE ALPHABET 
‘French The story of writing as a key to mankind's progress 
Spanish By David Diringer 
Russian 10 THE LIBRARY OF THE FUTURE 
German How automation and electronics will change the world of books 
. By J. H. Shera 
Arabic 
USA. 14 AFRICAN EXODUS 
The dramatic problem of 150,000 refugees 
Japanese By Stanley J. C. Wright 
20 A SPUTNIK’S EYE VIEW OF THE EARTH 
Space-vehicles take the measure of our planet 
By L. Samsonenko : 
24 GLOBES FOR SPACEMEN... AND SCHOOLS 
26 UNESCO ART POCKET BOOKS 
A new venture in art publishing 
Rh 27 UNESCO IN RETROSPECT AND PERSPECTIVE 
COVER PHOTO By Jane Albert Hesse 
This young African is one of 
many thousands of people 28 THE HIDDEN FACE OF THE CINEMA 
who have fled from their 
homes in Rwanda. Most of Pt. Il. The vast machinery of film distribution 
these refugees have found 
sanctuary In the Kivu Province By Paul Léglise 
of the Republic of the Congo 
or in Uganda, Tanganyika 
Exodus has Created a giannis 33 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
probiem of rehabilitation and 
resettlement which the United 
Nations High Commissioner 34 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
for Refugees and other inter- 
national relief groups are 
trying to soive. (See p. 14), 
UNHCR photo 
Published thly b THE UNESCO COURIER it published monthly, exceptin July and August whan 
The "United Nations y Educational, Scientific and Cultural itis bi-monthly (11 issues a year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German 
Arabic and Japanese. In the United Kingdom it is distributed by H.M. 
Stationery Office, P. O. Box 569, London, S. E. 1. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UMESCO COURIER", plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are rent to the editor, Signed articles ra- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage, Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO cor those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
The Uneaco Courier is indexed monthly in The Readers’ Guide to 
Periodical Literature published by H, W. Wilson Co., New York. 
Annual subscription rates: U.S. 8 3.00; 10/-stg.; 7.00 
French Francs or equivalent. Single copies |/.stg. 30 
cents (U.S.) ; 0.70 French Francs. 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°. 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief.

## [Page 4](062404engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 78195: A Museum of the alphabet

by David Diringer 
     
  
      
  
     
 
  
= $s TTI 
 
rere yh Teves 
TT PAT FH RT Sede 
  
  
     
  ol 
ly 
+9 
y 
 wi) attest TTT TIT8 1 
\ iit i     
  
      JIL 
14: 
I 
  
  
£1 CHT 
i 
aLFEAR F EH 
Wz is so much a part and parcel of our 
lives today that it is difficult to imagine a 
world in which writing is unknown. Yet for by far the 
greater part of his immense past man was without 
writing. Nor is it easy to realize in these days of popular 
education, that for a great part of the time since its 
invention, writing has been the prerogative of a few. 
This was still the case in the not-too-distant past when 
mankind had already reached a fairly high level of cul- 
ture. In some famous civilizations writing was cultivated 
almost exclusively by the priestly classes. So great was 
the magical power it exercised over the unlearned, that 
this precious possession was regarded as something 
beyond man's unalded powers of creation. 
Ancient peoples held writing in such awe that its inven- 
tion was frequently attributed to leading divinities. The 
anclent Egyptians assigned it to Thoth or Isis; the Baby- 
lonians to Nebo, sun of Marduk, who was also the god 
of man’s destiny: the ancient Chinese to the dragon-faced 
Ts’ang Chien; the ancient Greeks to Hermes and others 
of the Olympians; the Romans to Mercury. 
The Teuton god Odin or Wotan was credited with the 
invention of the Runes; the Celtic god Ogmlos with the 
invention of the Oghams. The Aztecs attributed thelr 
writing to Quetzalcoatl; the ancient Indians to Brahma. 
Even amongst the Jews there was a tradition that con- 
sidered Moses the inventor of the Hebrew script. 
The position in more recent times is generally known. 
Even in the more advanced countries, up to almost yester- 
day people could not read or write. The assaults of the 
“awakening masses” on the ramparts of “privilege” have 
been a frequent theme in radical or democratic teaching. 
In an elementary sense writing—and here need one be 
reminded that the power to write includes the power to 
read—in effect, access to education was a focal point of 
privilege. 
Briefly, as a key to knowledge and learning, writing was 
also a key to social and, in effect, to political power. 
Here we are not concerned, even if space allowed, to look 
at the vast complex of social, economic and political prob- 
Man has used all kinds of methods 
and devices for transmission of 
thought, images, symbols or arbi- 
trary signs. One symbolic device 
was the “wampum’ of the North 
American Iroquois Indians (left). It 
was a sort of broad belt formed by 
strings of shells or beads arrang- 
ed in patterns according to the 
story to be recorded. The most 
convenient and adaptable system of 
writing used by man is the alpha- 
bet. Right, an example of one 
early alphabetic script, Aramaic. 
This Canaanite-Aramaic inscription 
is one of the few that have come 
down to us from between the 9th 
and 7th centuries B.C. Aramaic 
had little importance when a chain 
of Aramaan states stretched from 
Mesopotamia to western Syria in 
the Bth century B.C. The decline 
of these states, however, marked 
the beginning of Aramaan cultural 
and economic supremacy in Western 
Asia. Aramaic then became the 
“lingua franca” of the Near East. 
For more than a thousand years 
it was the vernacular of the Jews, 
and thus of Jesus Christ and the 
Apostles. It was probably the origin- 
al language of the Christian Gospels, 
lems ,to which, over some hundreds of years, this posi- 
tion has given rise. The events and movements involved 
in the endeavour to solve them, are the stuff of modern 
history; nor least important is the shattering French 
Revolution with its reverberating cry “Liberty, Equality, 
Fraternity.” 
Much nearer to our immediate concern Is the place of 
writing in the general picture. For it is the development 
of writing which forms the subject of the Alphabet 
Museum in Cambridge, England. As will have been 
gathered, the field is vast. The endeavour has been to 
cover all ages and all lands. In fact, the story is broadly 
traced in the co-ordinated assembly of material covering 
this wide field. The story, however, is more than the story 
of writing. It Is a story which, it is thought, gives some 
insight into the history of man's social and spiritual deve- 
lopment; for writing, especially under the dominion of 
    
    
    

## [Page 5](062404engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 78195: A Museum of the alphabet

   
   
  
        
   NY IM IP3 
\ 
(EET ah allel Vp radia (2) 
2 irs Erne 
rac _~ ar 
i Ry eh, 3a a Sadan FE BL op day N ad 
CREE 
er th li 
the Alphabet, Is probably the greatest instrument which 
has helped Man in his upward struggle from a more or 
less tribal state. 
In this broad picture, the Alphabet has a special place. 
It is often a matter of great surprise to learn that the 
alphabetic system is distinguishable from writing in gene- 
ral. Indeed, for long the two were regarded as one and 
the same. The truth is that the Alphabet was invented 
long after the dawn of writing—roughly about the eight- 
eenth century B.C. 
In this article we can but draw attention to one or two 
aspects of the Importance of the alphabetic system in the 
general history of writing. Its great virtue—due to its 
intrinsic phonetic principle—is its value in simplifying 
writing, reducing the number of symbols or letters to 
small compass—usually between 25 and 45 letters. So 
  
ole El TA 
0 Tom ies 
  
Yor Vv a 7) 
7 a ROX     L. “ 
  
Photos ftom “The Alphatet” by David Diringer, 
published by Hutchinson, London 
by lightening in no small degree the task of teaching and 
learning—In itself an immeasurable gain—it opened more 
and more widely the doors of education. 
Today, popular education, with all that it means for 
the working of a true democracy, is a tribute to the alpha- 
betic system. Not least of the merits of the system is its 
easy adaptability; so that it has, in fact, been adopted 
for almost every important language of the world. Even 
the Chinese have now officially adopted it. 
Thus, we get some inkling of the part played by the 
Alphabet over an enormous field. Great thinkers such as 
Kant, Mirabeau, Carlyle, reflecting on human progress. 
have referred to the invention of writing as the real 
beginning of civillzation. They were writing in an age 
when the fruits of the alphabetic system were already 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
  
    
In the history of writing there 
have been various scripts called 
Ideographic which are a develop- 
ed form of picture writing, 
Some have disappeared but 
among those that are still known 
is the script used by the Na-khi, 
 
   
a people who lived an indepen- 
dent existence within the fron- 
tiers of China until the 18th 
century. No one knows when 
and hcw the script originated, 
but it is believed to have been 
created by tombas or medicine 
men. Left, the first page of an 
illustrated Na-khl manuscript.

## [Page 6](062404engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 78195: A Museum of the alphabet

THE ALPHABET (Cont'd) 
  
  
  
  
  
    
 
Writings on the wall 
widely apparent. In our own day, an American scholar, 
H. Breasted, has been even more definite; in his opinion, 
writing was of greater importance in uplifting the human 
race thah any other intellectual achievement. 
Ton writing—and in this context we include 
such secondary forms as printing—has entered 
into the whole fabric of our civilization. Almost without 
our realizing it, it has become an indispensable part of 
our whole system. Not only in education, but in scientific 
and technological development, in the great and varied 
field of government, in all the vast and complicated 
mechanism for maintaining and promoting the well-being 
of large populations, writing—if only in the modest role 
of recording—plays an all-penetrating, if a strangely 
unobtrusive part. Nor should we forget that, in this role, 
it provides a basis on which knowledge is built up, giving 
it permanence and passing it on, with an assurance of 
accuracy, from one generation to the next. 
Yet, astonishing though it may seem, the history of 
writing is the true Cinderella with learned men and lay- 
man alike. It has escaped formal study in most univer- 
sities and secondary schools; great international founda- 
tions, which assist so worthily in so many directions, are 
not concerned with it; no important museum has thought 
it necessary to offer a comprehensive exhibition of the 
story of writing. Yet, almost every scholarly discipline 
touches upon writing at some point, often in matters of 
considerable importance, 
It forms the basis for two significant branches of 
research: epigraphy (dealing with the decipherment and 
interpretation of anclent inscriptions) and paleceography 
(dealing with the decipherment and interpretation of 
texts written on soft materials, such as parchment, papy- 
rus. paper. linen, wax). The study of epigraphy has revo- 
lutionized knowledge of the ancient world and has led to 
the rediscovery and reconstruction of entire civilizations; 
the study of palaeography has been of the greatest prac- 
tical importance for ancient and medieval history, for the 
study of philology, for textual criticism, and so on. More- 
over, Egyptology. Assyriology. anthropology and ethnology, 
Sinology. Indology, and many other branches of learning 
6 ire based on particular sections of the history of writing. 
Here we have something of the most far-reaching 
‘SQUARE’ ALPHABET. Pali is the language in which 
the sacred literature otf Buddhism is written. Originally 
oral, it began to be put into written form in the 5th 
century B.C. The script employed for writing these 
books is not easily readable. The letters were painted 
with a broad brush and were correspondingly thick. 
Above, Pali script from the sacred book ‘‘Kammuwa” 
importance and yet, somehow, the most elusive. Like sun- 
light and the air we breathe, it is so “common,” so 
“ordinary,” and so well “understood” a thing that often 
it is not understood at all. The Alphabet Museum and 
Seminar aim$§ to offer, or rather to help in offering, a 
corrective. 
The Museum was formally opened by Sir James Pitman, 
M.A., MP, on June 8, 1959; it assembles the results of 
many years’ research by the present writer. The structure 
itself is a modest one, built in the rear of his private resi- 
dence in Cambridge. Yet, in my humble judgment, it 
provides an archive more comprehensive than any so far 
attempted in this field. Indeed, as a “documentary” on 
the development of script, it is, I think, unique in the 
world. 
The large collection includes original inscriptions on 
stone and clay, casts of inscriptions, original manuscripts, 
photographs of many more, charts and maps, and lantern 
slides. The items are drawn from the world over, from 
North-East Siberia to Central Africa and Peru, from the 
Pacific Islands through Indonesia, India and Central Asia, 
through Europe to North America; and the age ranges 
from prehistoric times to the present day. 
i TS main interest for the West-European 
student will doubtless be the wealth of 
material on the development of the Greek and Roman 
and related alphabets; for the East-European student, 
the abundant material on the development of the Cyrillic 
alphabets and their adaptation to dozens of other alpha- 
bets including Finnish, Turkish and Iranian. 
For the Far-Eastern student, there is material on the 
development of the Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Mongolian 
and other scripts. The Indian and Indonesian student 
will find much on the development of the numerous 
branches of the Indian and Further-Indian scripts. 
The Islamic student will find explanations of the origin 
and development of the numerous Arabic scripts, the 
Jewish and Old Testament student, on the development 
of the Early Hebrew and Square Hebrew scripts, and the 
Central African student, on the interesting memory-aid 
devices and the adaptation of the Latin alphabet to lan- 
guages far removed in character. 
CONT'D ON PAGE 8

## [Page 7](062404engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 78195: A Museum of the alphabet

fa Lr] i Ti Ton : 
ogha 
SI : ig re aT tr I op 
s applied to an ancient form of cryptic speech and 
yA us i eh g 
[4 £5 C) pt 
~ alphabet peculiar to the Celtic population of the British Isles, mainly in south- 
~ ern Ireland and southern Wales, but also on the Isle of Man and in Scotland. 
~ Unknown in origin, the alphabet was very simple, consisting of 20 letters repre- 
~ sented by groups of one to five straight or ip strokes or thick dots Hough 
gl QE SRL PLE EY : r alongside a line. Above, a Pictish ogham found near Aberdeen, Scotland. On 
2 SE left are shown the Roman alphabet equivalents of the ogham letters The text, 
~ which is read from bottom to top, has not o2en translated. Pictish CLUE ERT 
often accompanied by pictorial symbols—animals, birds, fishes, geometrical 
#8 desig s—that may represent a pictorial heraldry, such as the one shown here. ay Fw aly by < : ER Sa 4 i i £: d . bx Fr Ri Hy A FF A Lie, LITER AT LP J EE 

## [Page 8](062404engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 78195: A Museum of the alphabet

  
   
   
      
         
       
=
 
N
a
e
 
Y
e
 
Ya
 
a
S
 
          
proverbs of the Ewes of West Africa. From 
left to right: (1) Two adversaries with bows Eo 
‘and arrows—"two enemies cannot hold the 
~ field. (2) Man between the world (repre- 
sented as a nut) and a tree, meaning “the |} 
world is a baobab’—‘ the world cannot be 
bent round, encompassed, changed, trans- 
formed.” (3) The Ewe symbol for “I”: Man 
ou | imself or holding | hand breast. 
hE RRR SE ET Ao 
SIBERIAN GIRL'S LOVE LAMENT 
diagram (left) is a Siberian girl's love lament written in ideographic script (symbols rep- 
resenting ideas) of the Yukaghirs of north-eastern Siberia. “Il am alone my home,” the 
text reads, “You have left and gone far away (to Russia). You love a Russian girl; you 
have married her, but yours is an unhappy marriage notwithstanding your children, 
| shall remain sad and will always love you, though there is another man who loves me.” 
The umbrella-shaped symbols (numbered 1-6) indicate persons. Pointed lines on the top 
of 1 and 2, indicate “pig-tails,” i.e. women; 2, wears a skirt wider on the top than No. 1: 
she is a Russian. No. 1 is in a house, shown by lines A-B; the other girl lives far away 
(i.e. in Russia), as indicated by the “house” C-D, of which only the roof can be seen. 
The man indicated by No. 3 is the husband of No. 2 (they live under the same roof), 
but they are not happily married (as indicated by the cross lines Z-Z), though they 
have children (5 and 6). Our heroine (No. 1) loves passionately (lines W-Y) the 
man No. 3, this love being broken (line V cutting lines W and Y) by the wife of her 
4 beloved ; our girl will continue to love him (line U), although she herself is loved (line 5) 
by another Yukaghir man, No. 4. Her great sadness is indicated by the cross-lines TT-TT. 
  
    
  
      
      
    
    
Shown in 
strange 
Be M5100 dV 3 fT: Tol blet found 
at Marsiliana d’Albenga, Tuscany Italy, isi 
inscribed with the 26 letters of the early 
Etruscan alphabet. It belongs probably to the 
end of the 8th or beginning of the 7th century 
~ B.C. and is the oldest Western ABC extant. 
TE a TL i a te Me aT a op gh : b 
; J ii 
SIA v oo - 
 
"THE ALPHABET (Cont'd) 
Family tree with 350 branches 
It Is of no small help to see these numerous scripts in 
their appropriate places in the general picture of the 
development of writing. There is in fact here assembled, 
and scientifically arranged, what has been displayed, with 
perhaps greater picturesqueness, in large university halls 
and public galleries. 
On entering the Museum, a visitor first sees a striking 
wall-chart, painted in colour—the “Alphabet Tree.” It is 
a many-branched tree, dealing with some 350 alphabets 
and showing their relationships in the light of up-to-date 
research. Some scripts far removed geographically, are 
seen in surprisingly close relationship. Green leaves repre- 
sent the many scripts In use today; brown leaves, the 
alphabets in effect dead. 
Where particular scripts—because of their use for 
ritual or religious purposes only—are removed from the 
normal competition for survival (although assured of 
“iife” at least as long as those who revere them endure), 
they are represented by leaves partly green and partly 
brown; in this way are shown the Samaritan and Coptic 
scripts. Likewise represented are the Welsh, Irish, Manx 
and other scripts only partly used. . 
An interesting point sometimes, causing great surprise, 
is clearly evident from the Chart: all alphabets, however 
widely separated geographically, even alphabets long 
abandoned, are probably descended from a common 
ancestor, the North-Semitic. 
In this setting there is an endeavour to show how 
writing sprang out of the deep soil of human enterprise 
and mutual understanding: and how from the needs of 
social intercourse and mystical spiritual expression, the 
demands of superstition and magic, and of the higher 
religions, not to speak of those of trade and the economic 
pressures, there resulted a growth of primitive means of 
communication in various parts of the world. 
Where the soil was favourable to the seeds of higher 
attainment, there developed more advanced systems of 
writing—these are symbolized by smaller trees on either 
side of the main tree; they are the non-alphabetic 
systems (scientifically known as “analytic,” but generally 
though wrongly called “ideographic’”) of the ancient 
Egyptians, the Mesopotamian peoples, the Hittites, the 
ancient Cretans, the Chinese, the Mayas, the Aztecs, and 
SO on. ; 
a
h
d
 
af
 
Pe 
R
E
N
E
E
 
AE
 
BE 
a
d
 
el
! 
e
y
 
LL
 
Sa 
Fh
an
d

## [Page 9](062404engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 78195: A Museum of the alphabet

EE TE oo I os Tn ee Ee Er Ey 
KIEIK[¥IAIAAIAIAAIAINAIA ALA 
13191513 BIRIBIE] | IBIBIBRIBIB 
ANN A TY ES IC CC 
ZAI dIAIAALI]d] [QIDIDIDIDID]! 
EVE YENENENFAVAIAENKCIE ALAA EE 
RAT EERE If PTE] 
AA Eh FTE 0 EL 
BET WE I 0 1 TE OT 
REI ZZ =H =I R= = = l= DE = Hi 
PI RP ROOOSO | | | 
PEAS WWE RE BEERENNI IRE RE ARERR 
0 A NOIR a RE 
INZINMBIENTAT SI SR IE IP HH dl 4k. 9 
TITCIETAI LIVIA] (LILIA LIL] 
4 5 [2 TTT IMIM MIVA  MIMIAUMIM 
T1219 TY AMMININ I NIMIMIMINININD IN INT 
Mic RE I 1 TO I 
101210100 IC 10 010! 10/00) UYIQ | 
Zr rr ANF AT IPI pi 
ERAT TT AM Er RE 
  
RL Ry rE 
Kemsley Picture Service, London £2 
OLDEST LATIN TEXT. Professor David Diringer, ’ 
= author of our article, holds in his arms the oldest 
~ preserved Latin text: cast of the cippus (or 
small column) from the Roman Forum, dating 
from the late THR, or, the early 6th century B.C. 
A Le are) Sai CIS IPIYIY PVF IPIQI LQIQIOQIQ Q | 
WWWIWIE TLE [ETS TS TRIS [S15 18] 
WWW TET TET OT TET ? RIN IR IRI 
EXXIAX TIT I TTT] 
TTT IVY IVAIVIVIVIVISTYIUI 
3 1 EA EB NE SR 0 
3 EA SP NO OB 
TS VE CO RRR DD 
rrr rrr er Ir Iyibiyiyd 
ol E72 I TE SOR IO SD ne 4 AAA 
a on the right iain how ED as 
~ tal characters developed from their North 
“ Semitic forms in the late Second Millennium 
The syllabic scripts also claim attention, particularly 
those of the Japanese and the ancient Cypriotes. In the 
region of the tree-roots are Indicated the probable or 
possible factors which gave rise to the particular scripts, 
or otherwise influenced their development; here, too, are 
references to the various theories on the origin of the 
Alphabet. 
Wall panels show the development of the main writing- 
systems and of the individual alphabets. The panels are 
supplemented by a great variety of material, including 
specimens from manuscripts, photographs of Inscriptions, 
alphabet-tables, maps and so forth. 
In this vast fleld, one is all too conscious that much 
remains to be done and development in fact proceeds as 
opportunity offers. This applies, in varying degrees to 
almost all the 22 individual sections which, of course, 
cover the whole history of writing. Parts of these sections 
come within the sphere of “Writing and Art,” and the 
department dealing with this, as well as one or two other 
departments, are being carefully studied with a view to 
development 
The realization of so large a project of development pre- 
sents formidable difficulties; but the effort seems worth- 
while. In no other field of culture is the spiritual unity 
of Man so clearly manifest. In the early endeavour— 
where speech could not serve—to form a method of com- 
  
i [C2 Fe hd 5 I ES 
Se 0
0
munication between individuals, In the effort through the 
ages to perfect such a method, an effort in which so many 
peoples have taken part, irrespective of age or ciime, rac2, 
creed or form of speech, we see at work something more 
than a great co-operative principle. There Is something 
which forms a basis for mutual respect between peoples. 
The Alphabet Museum, it Is hoped, helps to make clear 
this underlying unity. 
The “Seminar,” an adjunct of the Museum, Is the 
meeting-place for discussion of problems concerning the 
history of writing, and is open to members of the Univer- 
sity and, indeed, to scholars everywhere. Facilities for 
study and research, including a specialist library, are 
being made available. 
  
PROFESSOR DAvID DIRINGER, curator of “The Alphabet 
Museum” in Cambridge, England, is a lecturer in the 
Department of Oriental Studies at the University of 
Cambridge. He is the author of The Alphabet—a key to 
the history of mankind. First published in 1948 by 
Hulchinson’s Scientific and Technical Publications, this 
work is now being revised by the author in the light of 
the most recent scientific discoveries and will shortly 
appear in a new edition.

## [Page 10](062404engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 62412: The Library of the future

YYhat will the library of tomorrow look like? A peek at what 
it may be one day was allowed visitors at the “Library 21” 
i i hibition at the Seattle World's Fair last year. The chief 
I. How many books are published In the keynote was electronics and automation’ revolutionizing 
methods of storing, retrieving and communicating know- 
world each year ? ledge to future library users. Visitors saw how specially 
. “programmed” computers (right) can already provide 
m What are the chief vernacular lan- 
guages spoken in Africa ? | OLE a Ine 
The machine replies... 
m | am 15 years old. Which books on 
space science should | read ? : uptohe-minuee Information on differen countries, supply 
printed excerpts from the writings of the world's great 
novelists, thinkers and scientists, and offer specially “tail- 
ored” bibliographies on subjects ranging from the arts to 
#2 Who said : a The foundation of every space science according to the individual's age, education 
." and degree of interest. The transparent spheres, below, tell 
1 i i the story of communication with three-dimensional models 
state IS the education of Its youth ! depicting cave painting, the development of writing, 
papermaking, printing, the telescope, and other wonders 
from among some of the newer media in the field of education. 
  
© Pan American 
  
  
  

## [Page 11](062404engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

Ns 
ol A 
Lak “7 ae es Ba * 
RL Ps | 
¥ 
J, Tin SR GN Sd ial ws RR atl 
SRE a. 
EE RA RE TR TTR 
    
Western teserve Univ, Cleveland, Olu, U.S A. 


### 62412: The Library of the future

THE LIBRARY OF THE FUTURE 
by J. H. Shera 
M AN, in his long struggle up from savagery, has 
undergone many experiences and evolved 
many ideas which would be important to our own quest 
for a better life if we could but retrieve them from the 
past. But, because we do not yet possess efficient means 
of access to the store of recorded human knowledge, we 
have rediscovered that which was already known-—re- 
invented the wheel, many times. 
Worse, we have probably re-invented “square wheels,” 
without knowing, or even suspecting, that they had long 
ago been rejected. A degree of prodigality in research 
may be unavoidable, and if properly controlled perhaps 
even desirable. But, contrary to popular lore, ignorance is 
not characteristic of a state of bliss and what we do not 
know can hurt us. 
As early as 1937, Frederick P. Keppel, then president 
of the Carnegle Corporation of New York, sought an ima- 
ginary solution to the problem of improving man’s 
recourse to the records of the human adventure by pro- 
jecting himself into the library world of 1958, of which 
his imaginary librarian said: 
“I blush to think how many years we watched the 
so-called business machines juggle with pay rolls and 
bank books before it occurred to us that they might be 
adapted to dealing with library cards with equal dex- 
terity. Indexing has become an entirely new art. The 
modern index is no longer bound up in the volume, but 
remains on cards, and the modern version of the old 
Hollerith machines will sort out and photograph 
anything that the dial tells it. . . we librarians must 
keep up with all these applications of sclence, and 
I admit it takes a fair share of our time to do so.” 
The almost uncanny accuracy of Keppel's prophetic 
vision will have been quite apparent to visitors to the 
“Library 21” exhibit at last year's World's Fair in Seattle, 
Washington, U.S.A. There, on the shores of Puget Sound, 
a computer, manned by professional librarians and tech- 
nical assistants provided inquirers with short annotated 
bibliographies on selected subjects tallored to the 
education, age, and language capability of the indivi- 
dual patron. The computer was also stored with selected 
texts from the “Great Books of the Western World.” to 
provide the visitor with quotations on appropriate subjects 
from the great classical authors. 
In reality the Seattle exhibition was far less dramatic 
than the real developments that have actually taken 
place during the quarter of a century that has followed 
Keppel's prophetic words. Moreover, the importance of 
these Innovations is not to be interpreted solely in terms 
of the machine, for automation 1s only the outward mani- 
festation of the Intellectual revolution that is taking place 
in librarianship today. 
The most Important phrase In Keppel's statement does 
not relate to the gadgets that he hypothesized, but to the 
assertion that “Indexing has become an entirely new 
art.” The bases of that art, Keppel might have added, 
are the semantic relationships among ideas, concepts, 
and words, and only incidentally the innovations in elec- 
tronic circuitry. 
One should not minimize the importance of the 
machine, for the machine has made a fundamental con- 
tribution in redirecting and refocussing the thinking of 
librarians concerning the intellectual processes which the 
management and efficient utilization of recorded know- 
ledge involves. But the machine is still an instrument 
and nowhere Is its instrumentality more apparent than 
in its role as a library catalyst. 
Traditionally, lbrary procedures and methods have 
derived from ad hoc assumptions concerning the nature 
of books and the ways in which they are used. Such 
library classifications as those of Dewey, the Library of 
Congress, and the Brussels Institute are based upon the 
Implicit assumption that books resemble blological speci- 
mens which can be arranged In a hierarchical order of 
genus and specles according to a major characteristic of 
their intellectual content. Similarly, the subject entries 
In the card catalogue are terms which are assumed to be 
not only meaningful descriptors of the content of books 11 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 12](062404engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 
THE LIBRARY OF THE FUTURE (Cont'd) 


### 62412: The Library of the future

Electronics invades 
the world of books 
but also the terms which the library user would assoclate 
with the subject of his search. 
But because the standard library classifications and the 
subject catalogues have worked reasonably well, In some 
instances surprisingly well, librarians did not much con- 
cern themselves with research Into the underlying theory 
of Information storage and retrieval until the decade of 
the 1950's brought an unexpected proliferation In recorded 
knowledge that far surpassed the capabllities of con- 
ventional library and bibliographic Instruments. 
Simultaneously with these new demands upon the 
library came the rise, In other areas of Intellectual endea- 
vour, of automation, and librarians turned in hasty 
desperation to the machine as a potential source of sal- 
vation. Two early twentieth-century inventions, the Hol- 
lerith punched card and the micro-photograph or micro-~ 
film, seemed to hold the greatest promise, and much expe- 
rimentation was begun in adapting these, in a variety of 
ways, to the storage and retrieval of recorded Informa- 
tion. 
Subsequently magnetic tape was added to the arsenal 
of the automated library. But despite the engineering 
skill lavished upon other devices, results fell far short of 
expectations because these mechanisms were not logi- 
cally derived from an understanding of the intellectual 
process that takes place when the library patron searches 
a library file. 
This charge of failure does not imply condemnation. 
Ili-considered as some of these experiments were they 
represented a necessary stage in the development of 
man's progress in Improving lbrary procedures. Every 
social innovation must shake Itself free from a morass 
of misconceptions, false starts, and exaggerated hopes. 
Moreover, automation has already proved- itself, perhaps 
in more ways than most people realize, as an effective 
means for facllitating certain types of bibliographic and 
Indexing operations. 
The preparation of concordances, which formerly was 
regarded as the work of a lifetime, can, through the use 
of punched-card or magnetic tape equipment, now be 
accomplished in months. A number of libraries are using 
similar equipment for the reproduction of catalogues and 
speclalized bibliographies thus greatly extending the use- 
fulness of thelr respective collections. 
] HE punched paper tape typewriter, such as the 
Flexowriter, with a print-out speed of more 
than six hundred pages an hour, offers possibilities for 
improving library and bibliographic operations that are 
only beginning to be fully realized. The Key Word In 
Context (KWIC) system now being used successfully by 
Chemical Abstracts Service for the superficial indexing of 
chemical literature employs high-speed computers to 
facilitate its operations. 
The indexing and abstracting methods devised at 
Western Reserve Unlversity have been fully automated 
and are in daily use in an information retrieval service 
offered by the American Society for Metals. And, on a 
much less sophisticated level, libraries had, even before 
the outbreak of the Second World War, begun to employ 
limited automation In thelr acquisition and other busi- 
ness routines, as well as for the circulation records of 
thelr books. 
Today, these limited uses of electronic and mechanical 
devices no longer seem strange or out-of-place in the 
library, and the time Is doubtless not far distant when 
much more intricate mechanisms for the performance of 
much more complex library and bibliographic operations 
will be accepted by librarians and general public alike as 
standard library equipment. We should remind ourselves 
that not so very many decades have passed since the first 
library schools, before the typewriter became prevalent, 
regularly offered courses in a form of penmanship known 
as “the library hand.” 
"In a world transformed by automation what, then, will 
be the form of the library of the future? Obviously the 
applications of automation to librarianship are so new 
BOOKS ARE STILL 
BASIC. The “Library 
of the Future’ (general 
view right) designed 
by the American Li- 
brary Association, by 
no means neglected 
books. Books and 
other printed materials 
will continue to re- 
main basic to all edu- 
cation in the next cen- 
tury. The library was 
a prototype of six or 
seven core libraries 
which will serve vast 
areas of America in the 
next 100 years. These 
libraries will be linked 
together so that every 
important document, 
book and pamphlet 
will be available to 
every library user no 
matter where he lives. 
 
and imperfectly understood that prognostication is dan- 
gerous. One can certainly say conservatively, however, 
that these new electronic mechanisms that simulate man’s 
mental processes should give us new insights Into the 
operations of the human mind and hence a better under- 
standing of .the ways in which the human belng seeks 
out, acquires, and utllizes knowledge. 
One also seems on solid ground in saying that machines 
are not likely to replace librarians any more than com- 
puters replaced mathematicians. On the contrary, these 
new devices will not only provide the librarian with 
means for improving the services he can render, but also 
will increase his understanding and appreciation of his 
role in soclety. 
Finally, one can say with some confidence that the book 
is very far from becoming obsolete. To be sure, techni- 
ques for Its miniaturization will doubtless become even 
more prevalent than they are today, and for purposes of 
storage the book In its traditional form does display cer- 
tain marked disadvantages. But for use the book is so 
admirably adapted to the ends it serves that man has not 
been able to improve upon it since the parchment codex 
evolved from the papyrus scroll. The book is here to stay, 
and library architecture is not likely soon to deviate from 
a form making possible efficient shelving of books. 
To those who are punch-drunk from the impact of 
scientific innovation, the library of the future is apt to be 
envisaged as a phantasmagoria of flashing lights, spinning 
tapes. and rattling teletypes. To be sure, rapid progress 
in facsimile transmission, mechanized character recog- 
nition, data processing, and trans-world communication 
will doubtless leave their mark upon the library, and one 
may properly expect to find in the library of the future 
a variety of electronic and other devices that today would 
have appeared to many as being out of place. 
But the most striking characteristic of the library of 
the future will be not so much its physical form, as the 
intellectual activity that will take place within its walls, 
and this may be traced back at least as far as the great 
library established by the Ptolemies in Alexandria at the 
mouth of the Nile. 
 

## [Page 13](062404engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 62412: The Library of the future

  
The library of the future, then, should be a true infor- 
mation centre—a collection of graphic records of every 
variety, assembled and used to the ultimate limits of its 
resources by a community of scholars educated both in one 
of the traditional academic disciplines and In the new 
sclence of librarianship and proficient In the scholarship 
of their new profession. 
This is a new concept of librarianship only in fits 
insistence upon the librarian as scholar and its emphasis 
upon the new tools which modern science will provide for 
improving the efficiency of his work. But before these 
tools can be designed and fabricated, and before the2 
intellectual and functional dimensions of the library of 
the future can be identified and described, much important 
research Into the physical and psychological nature of the 
library process must be completed. 
Research in libraries has, from the beginning, been one 
of the major reasons for the creation of the institution, 
but research In librarianship is of such recent origin that 
its importance is not yet fully comprehended even among 
librarians. Librarianship as the proper subject of orga- 
nized research must have brought to bear upon it the 
work of many disciplines in the physical, biological, and 
social sciences if it is to be rescued from suffocation by 
its very riches. 
But however much the profile of the library may 
change under the impact of this research, the library as 
a service agency will remain, though the concept of that 
service may well undergo dramatic alteration in the tran- 
sition from a passive organization to one that reaches out 
to the patron without walting for his initiative. 
In this the new media of communication can play a 
very important role, not only In bringing to the patron 
the required information in a variety of new forms, but 
also in expediting inter-library co-ordination by forging 
ever more strongly the bonds of co-operation that will 
eventually make available the total intellectual resources 
of a nation at any one point of need. 
Architecturally, the library of tomorrow must be funec- 
tional rather than monumental—a form in which change 
can be made quickly and economically in anticipation of 
Seattle World's Fair 
rapid obsolescence. We do not bulld for the future by 
architecturally crystallizing or ossifylng the present; 
change is the only constant. When the responsibilities of 
the librarian were regarded as primarily custodial, and 
preservation was generally accepted as his first concern, 
the library as mausoleum was architectually appropriate. 
With the twentieth century came a new and more 
dynamic concept of library service. The library as a gothic 
cathedral expired with James Gamble Rogers’ great ana- 
chronlstic outcry at Yale. The new functionallsm dic- 
tates modular construction—an empty shell with a mini- 
mum of bearing walls and fixed partitions. In fact, the 
library of the future may not be a single bullding. but a 
complex of interrelated structures which provide not 
only for the acquisition, utilization, and dissemination of 
traditional library materials, but also are true “Informa- 
tion banks,” dedicated to the fullest possible use of 
recorded human knowledge In whatever form. Already 
Johns Hopkins University is planning a new library 
bullding that will include a computing center for mecha- 
nized literature searching. 
There is no limit to the potentialities of the library of 
tomorrow except the boundaries of the human imagina- 
tion and our willingness to work. No longer is the library 
a soclal embellishment for the perpetuation of local or 
personal prestige. It Is essential to the survival of 
soclety for the simple and obvious reason that our culture 
has become so complex and interdependent within and 
among its constituent parts that it cannot survive without 
constant intellectual nourishment. 
Knowledge, then, is the life-blood of our civilization, and 
the library of the future may well be regarded as the 
Instrument by which its continuing circulation of kXnow- 
ledge is maintained. What goes on, then, in the library 
of the future may or may not be outwardly spectacular, 
but it will probably influence substantially the course of 
the human adventure. 
Dr. Jesse H. S8HERA is Dean of the School of Library 
Science at Western Reserve University, Cleveland, U.S.A. 
13

## [Page 14](062404engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 62414: African exodus: the dramatic problem of 150,000 refugees

“as, THE DRAMATIC PROBLEM 
LL OF 150,000 REFUGEES   
  
   
    
    
  
By 
Stanley 
J. C. Wright 
PEOPLE WHO WAIT. 
Like many thousands of 
their fellow people from 
Rwanda, this mother and 
her son (left) have found 
sanctuary, but the sadness 
in their eyes tells of a home 
lost perhaps forever and 
doubts about the future. 
Right, other refugees 
climb into a truck sent 
by the League of Red Cross 
Societies which will take 
them to one of the four 
resettlement centres in the 
Kivu Province of the Con- 
go. So far over 21,000 
refugees have been taken 
care of in these centres. 
UNHCR photos

## [Page 15](062404engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

uring recent years, the 
Office of the United Na- 
tions High Commissioner 
for Refugees (UNHCR) and 
the League of Red Cross, Red 
Crescent, Red Lion and Sun 
Societies have been carrying 
out a number of joint opera- 
tions. From 1957 onwards 
they gave relief and main 
tenance to the Algerian re- 
fugees in Morocco and Tuni- 
sia, an operation which ended 
with a repatriation move- 
ment to which both organiza- 
tions lent active assistance. 
Elsewhere in Africa, in Togo, 
UNHCR and the League 
joined in giving relief to a 
small group of exiles needing 
reestablishment. In the Congo 
(Leopoldville) an operation 
was undertakeh in 1961 to 
help over 100,000 refugees 
from Angola who could be 
settled locally. At present, 
UNHCR and the League are 
trying to solve the problem 


### 62414: African exodus: the dramatic problem of 150,000 refugees

  
AFRICAN EXODUS 
 
to this action, UNHCR has 
been taking an interest in the 
Rwanda refugee situation in 
Uganda, Tanganyika and Bu- 
rundi. (On July |, 1962, the 
Trusteeship territory, Ruan- 
da-Urundi, administered by 
the Belgian Government until 
June 30, 1962, became inde- 
pendent as two sovereign 
states—Rwanda and Burundi). 
In all these undertakings, the 
two organizations plan and 
work together at all levels. 
accepts the responsibility for 
storing and distributing relief 
and, in some cases, the co- 
ordination of activities in the 
field. UNHCR for its part 
maintains liaison with govern. 
ments, seeks funds for pro- 
jects from governmental and 
private sources, and delegates 
“Chargés de Mission” who 
work in close co-operation 
with League operational per- 
sonnel in the areas concerned. 
Both organizations are of a 
of the refugees from Rwanda 
in the Kivu Province. Parallel 
A band of perhaps a hundred people have 
gathered in the shadows of a cluster of banana 
trees. They are sitting quietly on the ground by a 
primitive sandy track, waiting. Among the tall men and 
women are several almost too ill to move, their bodies 
emaciated by starvation and disease. Many babies and 
children are frighteningly thin with swollen bellies. They 
are refugees from Rwanda, who have come to the Kivu 
Province of the Congo. 
But soon the ordeal of these “waiting people” is over. 
Three-ton trucks painted with the emblems of UNHCR and 
the League of Red Cross Societies pick them up and, 
after a five to ten hours’ journey over primitive tracks, 
bring them to one of the four resettlement centres in the 
Kivu. There they find medical aid and food. Later they 
will be given the means to start a new life. 
The exodus of Rwanda refugees began when political 
unrest led to violence between the two major tribes—the 
Batutsi and the Bahutu. The Batutsi, a tall, handsome 
people, came to Rwanda some six hundred years ago, 
probably from far away Ethiopia. Although forming even 
today not more than sixteen per cent of the population, 
these shepherd warriors subjected the local tribes of the 
Bahutu and set up a feudal society both in Rwanda and 
Burundi under separate kings called Mwami. During this 
century, under the impact of education and, later, of the 
movement towards independence, the social structure in 
both countries underwent certain changes. 
The League relies on support 
from its national societies and 
non-political and a purely 
humanitarian character. 
In Rwanda, where the segregation of the two peoples 
was maintained over a longer time than in Burund}, the 
Batutsi, as the rullng class, came to be identified with the 
more traditional and conservative form of government. 
When the king was deposed in January 1961 and Rwanda 
became a republic, political clashes led to tribal violence. 
Hundreds of pcople were killed, villages burned and crops 
and cattle destroyed. 
An exodus began which culminated In a tragle flight 
of over a hundred thousand Rwandese. By September 
1962 it was estimated that 150,000 refugees had found 
shelter in the countries bordering on Rwanda: 60,000 in 
the Kivu Province of the Congo, 40,000 in Burundi, 35,000 
in Uganda and 15,000 in Tanganyika. 
Some of these refugees, particularly those in Uganda, 
brought with them thelr animals, the long-horned cattle 
so reminiscent of the oxen on Egyptian bas reliefs. The 
overwhelming majority, however, found themselves 
destitute, without means of livelihood. 
At the time of this exodus, Rwanda and Burundi were 
passing through one of the perlods of famine characteristic 
of the area. The administration had distributed the 
existing reserves to those refugees who had carlier sought 
protection near the Catholic missions Inside both 
countries. This meant that the fleeing populations were 
weakened and open to disease. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
15

## [Page 16](062404engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 62414: African exodus: the dramatic problem of 150,000 refugees

16 
AFRICAN EXODUS (Cont'd) 
  
L - , - 
Ronny ir ( ar n ! : 4] 
ea re =. 20 Fats, * y Ray oT Fs TA 4 
bY 3 FY a EY mae . 
UNHCR photos 
‘We are ready to learn and work’ 
The Kivu also was passing through a difficult phase as 
a result of the administrative dislocation in the Congo. 
Access to the large Ruzizi Valley, for instance, was barred 
by rebel soldiers, thousands of refugees found themselves 
in unhealthy marshland cut off from every form of help. 
The Batutsi used to live in the mountains; they were not 
used to the heat, nor the unhealthy conditions in the 
lowlands. They were therefore particularly vulnerable to 
malaria. No statistics exist regarding the death rate but 
starvation, intestinal diseases caused by polluted water, 
malaria and scables took a very heavy toll. 
When in March 1962 a joint fact-finding commission 
(UNHCR, the League of Red Cross Societies, UNICEF and 
UNOC) succeeded in reaching this area they reported 
“the general health situation (among the refugees in 
Kivu) to be bad and very bad, with the exception of areas 
south (the Ruzizi Valley) where the situation must be 
considered catastrophic.” 
Indeed, in one of the villages visited by the fact-finding 
mission a family of eight was completely wiped out in the 
course of a fortnight. Sald Dr. Voigtberger of WHO in a 
report to Geneva, “the refugees have become a reservoir 
of infectious diseases that threatens the entire region.” 
The situation, although extremely precarious, was not so 
tragic everywhere. The refugees who had gone further 
inland and reached the Masisi territory had found 
temporary work and help from the settlers who had 
migrated in earlier years under plans to alleviate the over- 
population problem in Rwanda. These settlers, though 
Bahutu, received the Batutsi in their midst and allowed 
them to work on their land. Those who had stayed in 
Goma, Bukavu and Uvira, the three main Kivu towns near 
the border, received occasional assistance. Others in rural 
areas found work on local farms and plantations, but even 
among them there was occasional famine. 
When the UNHCR “Chargé de Mission” in the Congo 
visited the Kivu in December 1961, there was not only 
an urgent need for relief but also for action which would 
give the refugees a possibility to move away from the 
unhealthy areas and to resume life in more normal 
conditions. : : 
At the request of UNHCR, sixteen tons of food and 
three thousand pounds of medical supplies were flown in 
by UNOC planes from Leopoldville. Forty-five tons of food 
were shipped by river to Stanleyville and carried by UNOC 
trucks along the one-thousand kilometre tracks to Goma 
(the distance from Geneva to Rome). 
The Oxford Committee for Famine Relief in the United 
Kingdom made £10,000 available to the Norwegian Pro- 
testant Mission in Bukavu so that food supplies could be 
bought locally, and later sent another £10,000 to the 
FLIGHT for over 
100,000 refugees from 
Rwanda began in Novem- 
ber 1961. Some, parti- 
cularly those who reached 
Uganda, managed to bring 
with them their animals 
(left) long-horned cattle 
reminiscent of the oxen 
on Egyptian bas-reliefs. 
But the immense majority 
found themselves desti- 
tute, without any means of 
livelihood. Right, at the 
Kalonge reception camp in 
the Kivu Province, re- 
fugees queue up for manioc, 
beans and palm oil 
Swedish Protestant Mission in the 
same town. The Swedish Mission in 
Rwanda sent four tons of food to 
Goma when the supplies of the 
Catholic Mission there ran out. 
Eighty tons of milk from the United 
States’ surplus food were carried by 
UNOC trucks from Usumbura in 
Burundi to the Kivu Province. 
In the meantime, the League of 
Red Cross Societies had agreed to a 
joint action with UNHCR. A plan 
was drafted to create resettlement 
areas In the mountainous areas of 
the Kivu and, with the full approval 
of the Prime Minster of the Province, 
Mr. Miruho. It was put into opera- 
tion almost overnight. 
Under the Belgian Administration, 
several attempts had been made to 
establish Rwanda farmers in the 
highlands. An organization, the MIP (Mission d’Installa- 
tion des Populations), had been created which for several 
years had been entirely in the hands of Congolese officials. 
On its own initiative it had begun to help refugee families 
by assisting with their establishment in Northern Kivu, 
but their efforts had been hampered by lack of food. 
On the strength of this experience, it was decided to 
create four resettlement centres—in Iuhula, with the help 
of the White Fathers; in Bibwe ‘with the MIP; in Kalonge 
with the Norwegian Misson, and in Lemera with the 
Swedish Mission. These centres were all situated in thinly 
populated areas where the implantation of refugees is 
unlikely to cause any social, economic or political distur- 
bances in the future and where the land offers excellent 
prospects for agriculture. 
It is actually wrong to speak of “centres.” Bibwe, for 
Instance, which has already received more than 5,000 
people, is now composed of six villages and more will be 
created as the number of refugees increases. Each family 
has received four hectares of land and there is enough 
virgin forest around to carve out a four-hundred hectare 
tea plantation which is one of the projects of the 
programme. 
Practically every day one or more lorries bought with 
UNHCR funds by the League of Red Cross Socleties picks 
up groups of refugees in Goma or from the border areas. 
Every day also refugee families arrive on foot, some having 
walked over a hundred miles. 
Upon arrival they are registered and given temporary 
shelter in communal accommodation until they can build 
their own huts (which takes about two weeks). They 

## [Page 17](062404engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 62414: African exodus: the dramatic problem of 150,000 refugees

” 
- 
ww ARH Ls 
PRR Ey war “J aL Tw y 
SNS IR TR  
recelve an average of three kilos of food per person per 
week (manlioc, beans and palm oil). Each family is allotted 
a machete, a hoe and some seeds for immediate planting. 
A beginning has been made with community develop- 
ment plans: the creation of a tea plantation, the establish- 
ment of a saw mill, the setting up of a community store 
where the refugees will eventually be able to buy essentials 
(seeds, tools, fertilizers, etc.), and the organization of the 
sale of handicrafts which will help to maintain the 130 
widows and their children who have come to Bibwe. 
There is a heartening spirit of pioneering among 
the refugees. Several students who studied in Europe 
or who were in technical schools in the Congo when 
events in Rwanda prevented their return, have come to 
Bibwe to settle provisionaliy. It is they who have bulit 
the huts for the widows, the two schools and a mission 
house. Several are acting as unpald teachers to the 
350 children of school age. 
Right now activities are concentrated on planting 
manloc, sorgo, maize, potatoes, sweet potatoes and beans 
—the staple diet of the population. By early 1963, the 
refugees, if all goes well, ought to be completely self- 
supporting. In two years’ time, thanks to the community 
plans, the standard of life in the new villages will rise 
above subsistence level and allow for further development. 
Many of the refugees are, in fact, looking ahead with 
quiet hope to better times. They want to build houses of 
stone, give their children a chance to learn better methods 
of agriculture, raise the standard of health. “There is 
no reason why ‘we should not do as well as the planters 
around here,” says Brother Alphonse, a Catholic monk, 
himself a refugee. “It may take time, but our people are 
ready to learn and work.” 
The part taken by the Congolese and the refugees 
themselves is Indeed onc of the Important aspects of the 
resettlement of the refugees in the Kivu Province. They 
are actively associated with the drafting of plans, work 
out all the administrative detalis, and are fully responsible 
for the execution of the projects. To them, the presence 
of UNHCR, Red Cross League and UNOC officers Is a 
guarantee of continucd support and friendly help. 
So far, the contribution of the international community 
to the Kivu operation has been comparatively modest, 
even 1f without it the operation could not have been 
undertaken with any chance of success. UNHCR has 
already contributed $70,000, UNOC, $50,000, UNICEF 
$24,000, the Oxford Committee for Famine Rclief $56,000, 
the League of Red Cross Socleties $25,000, to which must 
be added United States’ surplus food, and private dona- 
tions. At least $65,000 more will be required to complete 
the operation. The League has two officers In the areas, a 
Swiss and a Dane. 
So far, over 21,000 refugees have been resettled in the 
four centres. Their number may rise in the next few 
months to 40,000, possibly even more. Within less than a 
year they will have travelled the road {rom starvation to 
plenty, a short road Indeed, thanks to their own energies, 
the understanding and active assistance of the local chiefs, 
and support given by the international community. 
STANLEY J. C. WRIGHT is Chief of the Information Section, Office 
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Geneva. 
17

## [Page 18](062404engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 62414: African exodus: the dramatic problem of 150,000 refugees

Leaving fear and famine behind them, refu- 
gees from northern Rwanda set off on the 
road to a new life. One group (left) climbs 
aboard a Red Cross truck which will take 
it to the Bibwe reception camp in the 
Kivu Province of the Congo. Below, a small 
girl, wearing a makeshift dress cut from a 
food sack, patiently waits her turn. A few 
hours later, greeted by shouts and waves 
of welcome (below left) the group arrives 
at the camp of the Reinstallation Mission. 
The refugees are determined to buiid them- 
selves a new life and become self-support- 
ing. Atthe weekly food distribution (below, 
centre) the men select the best beans for 
planting. As the framework of a new home 
takes shape (below right) hopes rise and 
smiles broaden. After work is over there 
is time to enjoy traditional festivals and 
dances (right). The land is good. New 
crops will soon raise their heads. Life once 
again begins to take on a real meaning. 
  
 Bas + 
¥ 
  
 
        
  
IN 
BIRABUS IONE KUL TUL I, 
CHEF TI ER ABA - 
rR 
  
 

## [Page 19](062404engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 62414: African exodus: the dramatic problem of 150,000 refugees

## [Page 20](062404engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

hls IR 
“Man pierces the 
BE EUR] LUT I Of 
~ plores the spheres”. 
Today, this prophetic 
 16th-century woodcut 
(right) by an unknown 
~ engraver has become 
fact. With the help of 
artificial satellites 
launched into orbit 
around the earth man 
‘has “taken the mea- 
~ sure” of his planet. 
Other, more far-rang- 
ing “cosmic laborator- 
ies” have begun “the 
exploration of the 
spheres”. Diagram on 
left shows (schema- 
tically) the changing 
path of a man-made 
satellite observed at 
the perigee (nearest 
point) and at the apo- 
~ gee (point farthest 
~ away from our planet). he   
We asked what shape the Earth Is we usually 
say without thinking that it is a sphere. But 
how many of us could give proof that this Is really so? 
Probably only the spacemen who have flown round the 
Earth at a height of several hundred kilometres have a 
real visual perception of the sphericity of our planet. 
The circular border of the Earth’s shadow as it moves 
across the moon's disc during an eclipse, and the gradual 
rise of a moving ship as it approaches the observer, gave 
the ancient Greeks, with their keen, penetrating minds, 
the ldea that the Earth on which they lived was like a 
ball. All those proofs of the roundness of the Earth that 
a teacher recounts nowadays to ten-year-old schoolchil- 
dren were recorded by Aristotle about 2,500 years ago. 
Eratosthenes, curator of the famous Alexandrian libra- 
ry, poet, philosopher and astronomer, who lived about the 
same time as Aristotle, based his calculations on the 
dimensions of the Earth on the assumption that it Is a 
JE pe spherical body. His method was simple but bore all the 
so OF THE CIRCUMFERENCE hallmarks of genius. 
SRW He had observed at Syene (Southern Egypt) that the 
ER A sun at midsummer noon was directly overhead so that it 
shone on the water of the deepest well. When the sun 
was observed at the same moment from Alexandria, where 
Eratosthenes lived, its angle from the vertical corres- 
ponded to one-fiftieth of the circumference of a circle. 
Lines drawn from Syene and Alexandria to the centre 
of the Earth would enclose the same angle; therefore, 
reasoned Eratosthenes, the distance from Syene to Alexan- 
dria must be one-fiftleth of the Earth’s circumference. 
This gave him a figure of approximately 24,700 miles as 
the Earth’s circumference (the best modern measurement 
is 24,860 miles)—and Eratosthenes lived twenty-five cen- 
turies ago! 
Is the Earth a true sphere In shape? Before we can 
answer this question we must declde exactly what we 
r A ’ mean by shape. There are plains, plateaux, deep hollows 


### 62418: A Sputnik's eye view of the earth

Sy Eran Shows, he Shsorved that Wills the Fan br and high mountains on the Earth’s surface. But it is the 
i Inons ar rai Slabs A 4 WE u oi a relatively uniform surface of the ocean, covering as it 
8p mer noon) their angle from the does three-quarters of our planet, that represents more 
exactly the real shape of the Earth. It is not very diffi- 
cult to transfer this concept to dry land; in fact it is done 
when we speak of heights being so many feet above sea 
  
4 YE Ey rag ln TA et ~ Un 
 ERATOSTHENES’ WELLS. Twenty-five centuries ago, 
~ Eratosthenes, poet, philosopher and astronomer, in- 
~ geniously calculated the earth's dimensions. As dia- 
~ vertical at Alexandria corresponded to 1/50 of the 
~ circumference of a circle. His calculation of the dis- 
~ tance between the two towns as 1/50th of the earth's 
~ circumference gave him a total distance of about 24,700 level. 
files (best modern imeasurement Is, 24,860 miles). Sir Isaac Newton, who lived over three hundred years 
ago, knew that the Earth could not be a true sphere.

## [Page 21](062404engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 62418: A Sputnik's eye view of the earth

g
p
   
=
 
« 
- 
-
 >.
 
[C
ER
 
  
  R
=
 
   
  
|i % 
  
    
= ‘ 3 
Ps 7 Minny ® 
=A 1mm\} 
2k Zl IY 
    
  
    
From ' Le Soleil” published by Arthaud, for the Federation des Cooperatives Migros, Zurich, 1961 
This was the proof he offered: let us imagine two wells 
sunk from the surface of the Earth to its centre, one at a 
Pole and the other on the Equator. If the Earth did not 
rotate the water would be at the same level (reckoned 
from the centre of the Earth) in both wells. 
Because the Earth does rotate, the water in the equa- 
torial well would rise, under the influence of centrifugal 
force, until the pressure of the additional column of 
water compensated weight lost by centrifugal action. 
The same thing must actually happen to the water in 
the seas and also to the body of the planet itself, since 
there are no absolutely rigid bodies in nature; this means 
that the Earth must be slightly flattened at the poles and 
bulge a little at the Equator, its shape resembling that of 
a tangerine or a pumpkin. 
The measurements made by eighteenth century French 
scholars proved the accuracy of Newton’s theory: working 
at the Equator and beyond the Arctic Circle they found 
that the meridian is 40,009 kilometres in length and the 
Equator 40,075 kilometres; the polar and equatorial radii 
differ by 21 kilometres. Newton computed the amount of 
flattening of the Earth (the ratio of the difference bet- 
ween the equatorial and the polar radii to the equatorial 
radius) to be 1/230. Huyghens, a Dutch scholar living at 
about the same time, made the same calculation and 
arrived at the figure of 1/530. 
One may well imagine the consternation of the learned 
world when this big difference was made known. It was 
soon discovered, however, that the two scholars had based 
their calculations on different assumptions. Newton had 
assumed that the Earth's density is uniform throughout 
and does not change with depth, whereas Iluyghens had 
assumed that the Earth's gravitational pull Indicates that 
Its mass is concentrated mainly in the centre, l.e., that 
density rapidly increases with depth. 
Later measurements showed that the actual difference 
in the length of the radii is about 1 unit in 300 so that 
Newton was closer to the truth than Huyghens: the den- 
sity of the Earth docs increase with depth but not as 
greatly as Huyghens assumed. From this Jt-follows that 
accurate measurements of the Earth's dimensions can 
help us understand something of what ls inside it, thou- 
sands of kilometres below the surface. 
It has now been demonstrated that the simplest and 
most accurate measurements of the shape of Earth may 
be made by observations of artificial earth satellites. 
Man-made satellites circle the Earth in elliptical orbits, 
so that the distance from the Earth to the satellite is 
constantly changing, If the Earth were a true sphere the 
satellite would pass through the same points at its apo- 
gee and perigee in each orbit (relative of course to the 
fixed stars). 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 22](062404engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 62418: A Sputnik's eye view of the earth

22 
SPUTNIK'S VIEW (Cont'd) 
Space-vehicles help to measure our planet 
To put it another way, if, say, the perigee of the vehicle 
were visible from the Earth in line with a certain fixed 
star, the direction would be the same for each orbit. If, 
however, the Earth is an oblate spheroid and not a true 
sphere, this would not be strictly true. 
Actually the perigee of a vehicle orbiting round the 
Earth changes with each orbit and gradually moves 
round the Earth; the amount of the shift for each orbit 
depends firstly on the flattening at the poles, the greater 
the flattening the greater the shift, and secondly on the 
angle between the plane of the vehicle's orbit and the 
plane of the terrestrial Equator (the smaller the angle the 
  
Unesco 
ISAAC NEWTON'S WELLS. In the 18th century, 
Sir Isaac Newton declared that the earth could not be a 
true sphere. To support his theory he imagined two 
wells sunk from the North Pole and the Equator to 
the centre of the Earth. If the Earth did not rotate, he 
said, the water would be the same level in both wells. 
But because of the earth's rotation, water in the equa- 
torial well would rise under the influence of centrifugal 
force. The same must happen to the water in the seas and 
the body of the planet. Thus the Earth must be slightly 
flattened at the poles and bulge a little at the Equator. 
greater the shift). The movement of the vehicle's perigee 
(or apogee) around the Earth, therefore, enables mathe- 
maticians to determine the exact shape of the Earth. 
When the vehicle is in flight the position of its perigee 
among the stars is noted; on each successive orbit the 
position is again noted and the difference in position, 
between successive orbits gives us the angle of displace- 
ment of the perigee. Knowing this displacement, the ave- 
rage distance of the vehicle from the Earth’s centre, the 
time taken for one orbit and the declination of the orbi- 
tal plane from the Earth's equatorial plane, an astrono- 
mer can calculate the oblateness of the Earth by the use 
of ready-made formulae. 
In practice, of course, the position and dimenslons of 
the orbit are much more difficult to calculate because 
they are affected by the resistance of the terrestrial 
atmosphere In a complicated manner that is not yet fully 
understood. The usual method is to strike an average for 
a large number of orbits. 
It is important to observe the sputnik’s perigee and the 
displacement of it from as many points on Earth as possi- 
ble; this requires the co-operation of many countries and 
all continents. 
In the twentles of this century the American scholar, 
John Hayford, spent some years analyzing geodesic data 
that had been accumulated over dozens of years and 
found the difference in the polar and equatorial radii to 
be 1 unit in 297. In 1940 a large group of Soviet geodesists 
headed by F. Krasovsky completed their many years of 
work on the same problem and arrived at the figure of 
1 in 298.3. A few months’ observation of Soviet Sputnik II 
and American Vanguard I produced the figure of 1 in 
298.2, and the data was analyzed within a few weeks. 
Observations of artificial earth satellites are made by 
over one hundred stations in the Soviet Union; positions 
of the vehicles in space are recorded by means of visual 
observation and by photographs taken with specially de- 
signed precision cameras. These observations have pro- 
vided further information on the peculiarities of the 
Earth’s shape. 
W:-: now know that the Earth is not a simple 
oblate spheroid. It is made like the flgure 
known in geometry as a triaxial ellipsoid, that can be 
obtained by squeezing the sides of an oblate ellipsoid. 
The Earth's Equator is not a true circle, it is slightly 
flattened on two sides and has its greatest diameter 
approximately on the meridian of Prague. True enough, 
the difference is very slight—not more than 200 metres. 
By careful observation of the displacement of the peri- 
.gee of a “Sputnik’s” orbit, scientists have discovered that 
the northern hemisphere is “higher” than the southern, 
the distance from the centre of the Earth to the North 
Pole being between 30 and 60 metres greater than from 
the centre to the South Pole. 
This is only the beginning of the space age. Artificial 
satellites have been used for less than five years, but the 
observations have produced some outstanding discoveries. 
The study of the Earth with the aid of small satellites 
has a tremendous future. If we know exactly how a 
“Sputnik” Is moving and measure its position simultan- 
eously from two points on the ground, we can measure 
the distance between those points accurately. 
By locating observation posts in different continents and 
repeating the measurements over a number of years we 
can decide whether the continents are moving—are the 
positions of Eurasia, America, Africa and Australia fixed, 
" relative to the Earth’s centre, or do they drift about? 
Changes in the character of an artificial satellite’s orbit 
described above (the motion of the perigee) are caused 
by the greater concentration of mass in the vicinity of 
the Equator and the slight flattening; this excess of mass 
(in relation to the main mass of the Earth) helps to pull 
the satellite out of a “regular elllptical orbit”. 
It follows that the path of a satellite will change with 
every change in the Earth’s gravitational pull so that the 
motion of a satellite over a mountainous area must be 
different from its motion over seas, because the mountains 
are composed of material that Is denser than water and 
effect a greater pull on the satellite. 
The satellite, furthermore, will “feel” big deposits of 
some extra heavy or extra light substances buried deep 
below the Earth's surface because of the difference in gra- 
vitational pull and will change its course accordingly. 
Thus we see what great prospects for the study of the 
Earth’s interior are opened up by the observation of even 
tiny man-made moons in flight.

## [Page 23](062404engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 62418: A Sputnik's eye view of the earth

SPUTNIK TRAIL INTO SPACE. Sc 
rocket carrying the world’s first arti- 
ficial satellite on October 4, 1957, 
~ soars aloft, its path marked by a lu- 
~minous trail in the night sky. Since 
the first “Sputnik” went into orbit, 
the flight of space vehicles has been 
plotted by technicians and scientists 
on tracking boards resembling huge 
cobwebs (right). Observations of and 
from these vehicles have given man 
~ new information on the peculiarities 
of the earth's shape and shed new 
light on the composition of its interior. 
23

## [Page 24](062404engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

All photos © Three Lions, New York 
  
’ 
- 
& 
GRAPEFRUIT-SIZED GLOBE in centre of photo 
above is part of a dual plastic model of the earth and the 
heavens. A transparent globe of the earth is placed inside a 
larger sphere on which the sun, the planets and the stars 
are indicated. A globe of the earth similar to inner 
one shown here, has been used in U.S. space capsules, 
FLAT EARTH. Like a flash-back to an old historical 
belief, the earth is flat on this plastic sheet (left) but it 
will be heated, then inflated with air to achieve the 
rounded contours of our planet (above). These large 
globes for schools are painstakingly made by hand. 
a 

## [Page 25](062404engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

GLOBES FOR SPACEMEN... AND SCHOOLS 
As he hurtles round the earth in his space capsule, a U.S. astronaut has gauged his 
approximate position at a glance—by looking into a box. Inside the box is a grape- 
fruit-sized plastic globe which the spaceman sees through a window marked with a 
black dot. The globe automatically turns on its axis like the earth. The position of the 
black dot indicates the position of the space vehicle in relation to the earth. This is 
one space-age use found for the plastic worlds created by an American from Philadel- 
phia, Robert Farquhar. In addition to his space globes, Farquhar and a team of five 
men also produce plastic model worlds for schools and government agencies. These 
globes are larger than those built for space capsules. Farquhar also produces a novel 
type of transparent globe within a globe showing the earth and the stars (left). 
        NORTH MEETS 
SOUTH as the globe- 
maker fits together 
the two sections of 
a three-foot globe.

## [Page 26](062404engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

26 


### 62420: UNESCO art pocket books: a new venture in art publishing

A new venture 
in art publishing 
UNESCO ART 
POCKET BOOKS 
new international and multilingual publishing 
A venture by Unesco has made its mark in 
the field of art book production. Collabo- 
rating with publishers in eight countries Unesco has 
launched a series of art books in pocket form. 
The striking fact about this new collection, in which 
four volumes have already appeared, is that it pre- 
sents colour reproductions of great works of art of 
a high quality normally only found in expensive art 
books, in a pocket-sized format at well within the 
normal level of pocket book prices which are usually 
around 5/- or less than $1.00. This has been made 
possible by the scale of the enterprise and the 
co-operative arrangements between Unesco and 
publishers in Britain, the United States, France, the 
German Federal Republic, Italy, Mexico, the Nether- 
lands and Spain. 
 
ACH Unesco Art Pocket Book contains 28 
plates of colour reproductions, additional illus- 
trations in black and white and an introductory 
text by an international scholar in which the histor- 
ical background and an analysis of the works it 
covers are presented in a simple, straightforward 
way for the man in the street. 
In “Egyptian Wall Paintings from Tombs and 
Temples”, Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt, Cura- 
tor of the Department of Egyptian Antiquities at the 
Louvre in Paris, discusses the delicate frescoes 
painted some 3,000 years ago in the tombs and 
temples of the Nile Valley. “Persian Miniatures 
from Ancient Manuscripts” is introduced by Basil 
Gray and presents some of the great art treasures 
of the world in the form of miniatures now preserved 
in the Gulistan Palace of Teheran. 
HE third book, “Spanish Frescoes of the Roma- 
T nesque Period", introduced by Juan Ainaud, 
opens the door to a brilliant and little-known 
period of European art. Lastly, “Russian Icons from 
the 12th to the 15th Century”, with its colour plates 
and an introduction by Victor Lazareff, presents a 
vivid overall picture of the different schools of 
Russian icon paintings. : 
More titles are to be added to the series which 
has so far appeared in English, Spanish, French, 
Italian, German and Dutch language editions. By 
this multilingual approach and the fact that these 
books will be on sale in every kind of bookshop 
and bookstall, in railway stations and large stores, 
Unesco's aim—to bring fine quality colour reproduc- 
tions of world art masterpieces within reach of a 
wide public—wili have been achieved. - 
The success of Unesco’s earlier initiative in art 
publishing—its handsome World Art Series albums— 
promises to be repeated by its new Art Pocket 
Books. (See page 35 for further details.) 


### 62421: UNESCO in retrospect and perspective

A Frenchman writes on 
UNESCO 
IN RETROSPECT 
AND PERSPECTIVE 
by Jane Albert Hesse 
| T may seem surprising that Unesco is stiil an 
unknown organization to certain people. Is 
it not an international organization which has been in 
existence for 16 years, the co-operative enterprise of 113 
countries ‘which has been reported and commented on by 
the ‘world press ? Its headquarters are in the centre of 
one of the world's great capitals in a striklngly-designed 
building of concrete and glass—a new sightseeing at- 
traction for the visitor to Paris, but primarily the labor- 
atory of a new 20th- century humanism. 
Educators, scientists, artists and specialists of all kinds 
follow UNEsco’s work either by participating directly or 
through reading the books, periodicais and the studies 
which it publishes. But other people, the vast majority, 
in fact, only hear of Unesco through the necessarily brief 
and fragmentary reports that appear in the press. Some, 
in fact, think of Unesco either as an institute for study 
and research or a body with humanitarian aims on the 
lines of the International Red Cross. 
Though comprehensive studies on UNEsco have appeared 
in some countries, in France. UNesco’s adopted home, no 
exhaustive work on how it came into being and what it 
has since achieved had ever been published until recently. 
This gap has now been filled. 
A remarkable book published by the famous French pub- 
lishing house, Gallimard, * recounts the UNEsco story 
telling of its aims and problems, its failures and succes- 
ses. The book has set out to dissipate widespread igno- 
rance and misunderstanding regarding UNESco, yet even 
the reader 'well-aquainted with Unesco will find revealing 
facts and information in its pages. Bearing the simple 
-itle, “Unesco”, the book was written by a Frenchman, 
Jean Thomas, ‘Who knows Unesco well. He served UNESCO 
from 1947 to 1960, first as head of its Cultural Activities 
Department and later as Deputy Director-General. He 
shows how the name “Unesco”—United Nations Educa- 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization—embodies 
both the historical reasons for the creation of this U. N. 
Specialized Agency after the Second World War, and why, 
face to face with the urgent needs of a swiftly-changing 
world, it has had to choose between one road and another 
at various periods of its life. 
U NESco was born in London in November 1945, 
when representatives of 45 countries met to 
found a new organization dedicated to education, science 
and culture. The atmosphere of this period was 
influenced by the many still-unhealed wounds and the 
resolve of nations to “erase from men's minds the seeds 
of fanaticism and hatred.” There was thus a need, as 
Miss Ellen Wilkinson, Britain’s Minister of Education, said 
at the time, for an association of states which would 
make education one of its main fields of action, but not 
its sole objective. 
UnEsco’s forerunner, the International Institute of 
Intellectual Co-operation, established in 1926 by the 
League of Nations had been conceived on very different 
lines—as an “association of minds”, to recall the words of 
Paul Valéry. In the case of Unesco, the greatest emphasis 
was on education and the Agency was founded, to quote 
its own Constitution, “for the purpose of advancing, 
through the educational and scientific and cultural

## [Page 27](062404engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 62421: UNESCO in retrospect and perspective

rey — w— 
Wi 
| 
  
RE 
rR mi 
  
TI. 
 
relations of the peoples of the world, the objectives of 
International peace and of the common welfare of 
man J 
The rapidly changing situation of the postwar world 
and the emergence of so many former colonles and trust 
territories as Independent nations soon made it clear 
which were priority tasks. Even before political develop- 
ments sparked these changes, the economically-developed 
countries had stated clearly and unequivocally the degree 
of responsibility they felt towards their less fortunate 
neighbours. 
H-- can UNEsco carry out its work. asked Sir 
Julian Huxley, in his first report as Director- 
General to the Unesco General Conference, in a world 
where more than half the people are illiterate and lack 
the skills and knowledge necessary to build for themselves 
a healthy life and prosperous conditions of agriculture and 
also fo make the most effective use of sclentific dis- 
coverles? 
The need was clear: give top priority to providing educ- 
ation where there had been none, never forget the human- 
istic ideal of universality and always show a genuine 
understanding and respect for cultural values whatever 
their origin. 
. At Unesco’s preparatory conference in London in 1948, 
representatives of 44 states were present. The next year, 
a total of 23 had ratified the Constitution and took their 
seats as member states at the General Conference. The 
numbers grew: 37 by the end of 1947, 55 In 1950, and 
today, 113. } 
Equality In status for the member states of Unesco did 
not, however, remove a flagrant inequality of fact: the 
number of newly-developlng countrles in UNEsco grew 
unceasingly and the dlviding line between these and the 
more favoured was clearly economic. 
It was to meet this grave situation that the Expanded 
Programme of Technical Assistance was concelved, 
adopted In principle in 1948 and applied, In UNEsco’s case, 
as from 1950. In applying this aid, Unesco always kept 
in mind the aims affirmed in its Constitution. “Unesco 
was the only International organization,” writes Jean 
Thomas, “to take to heart the truth that people have not 
only material needs, but spiritual ones too, which are no 
less important.” 
This faith in the primacy of education and the resolve 
to see it universally acknowledged stand out clearly 
throughout the book. They are its real animating force 
and spirit. The author has not given to his account the 
chronological form that might have weighed down his 
narrative. Nevertheless the whole story of Unesco—how 
it faced up to Increasingly complex tasks, how it main- 
tained course and purpose despite difficulties and crises 
and how, finally, it came to maturity—stands out clearly 
in his account. 
No one could say that UnEsco’s task has been simple. 
It has encountered many difficult and dangerous situa- 
tions in its lifetime and one of its major problems has 
been the question of its moral autonomy. “How can the 
unanimity which for so long has been missing from the 
United Nations be achieved in Unesco?” asks Jean Tho- 
Henry Moore 
mas. Yet while in no way underestimating the difficul- 
tles, he considers that Unesco Is proving its worth, and 
explains why. However, to judge its eifectiveness, he 
adds, “each one of UNEesco’'s projects must be examined 
separately and cach time on the basis of different cri- 
cria.” 
How then has UNEesco coped with two major tasks: the 
fight against llliteracy and the reclamation of the world's 
arid lands? 
It 1s not Unesco's role to take over education for chil- 
dren or for adults In any country. This Is the responsibi- 
lity of governments. Through a system of co-operation 
between governments, educators and appropriate orga- 
nizations, Unesco has offered advice on educational tech- 
niques that might be used, has suggested the lnes for 
development programmes and has passed on the results 
of experiments that have been tried successfully elsewhere. 
ry has glven direct ald to countries when they have asked 
or it. 
For the arld zone problems, “through co-operation 
between speclalists, UNesco has encouraged and co-or- 
dinated scientific activities related to these problems and 
has helped member states within the action of the Tech- 
nical Assistance Programme.” 
Thus any evaluation of UNEsco’s effectiveness must take 
Into account Unesco’s alms, the methods it uses and the 
means it Is given to work with. None of thls is lkely 
to be Immediately obvious to the man in the street. It 
Is here that the Jean Thomas’ book reveals itself as an 
indispensable guide to those concerned with publie infor- 
mation. It analyzes clearly and precisely UNEesco’s rela- 
tions with its member states and with the United Natlons 
and explains how UNEsco co-ordinates the delicate balance 
between Its activities. 
N 0 matter how slight his previous knowledge of 
Unesco, the reader is left with the Impression 
of having shared In an unfolding adventure of high 
endeavour, For, says the author, Unesco’s Constitution 
has given it a task high in the scale of moral values: “the 
maintenance of peace and security among the nations". 
But the roads of peace are rarely triumphal highways, 
modest, rather, and always difficult of access. 
Here, in its “public relations”, Its relations with the 
peoples of 113 countries Unesco is accomplishing its mis- 
sion. Thousands of peace treaties have been swept 
away by the winds of history. UNesco today strives to 
build the defences of peace in the minds of men. 
And this is by no means the least Important of the 
lessons offered by this book which the author concludes 
on a resolutely optimistic note, still further underlined by 
the frankness with which he has described the temporary 
setbacks and permanent problems facing Unesco. “When 
one takes stock.” he says, “of all the multitude of different 
activities and Intellectual disciplines involved In UnEesco’s 
work, the resulting array of strength is so great as to 
banish any fears as to the resources open to it. What it 
must learn to do is to draw and marshal‘around it all 
these forces of goodwill.” 
* Unesco by Jean Thomas, published by Gallimard, Paris, 1962. 
Price 13.50 Fr. frs. 
21

## [Page 28](062404engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

. istics of the film-goers. 
28 


### 62422: The Hidden face of the cinema, pt. 2: film distribution

THE HIDDEN FACE 
OF THE CINEMA = 
PT. 2 FILM DISTRIBUTION 
pelllh of fF Do | bs ne, ail: ~RA 
In its Decemb 
hy XE: te The $i Ra 
i: Sh rf el ft hp rl an 
er issue, THE UNESCO COURIER 
Ata Ae 
egan the publicati 
series of articles on the lesser-known aspects of the cinema industry 
based on a world-wide survey by Paul Léglise. In his second article, the 
EU ROE ER UC INC LR GERTES SEU LIT TI QE ETL TL ER GEL which 
~ films of all kinds are distributed to the world’s 170,000 (TT CITA EUR LET EE 
i 48 he nhikiBani oF Sueisl iod wsusmng ist items 
Aon has been completed. Soon it will be 
presented to the public in cinemas around the 
world. Its makers hope that it will turn out to be a 
major box-office success, drawing record audiences to the 
cinema. As the American producer, Walter Wanger, once 
wrote in The New York Times: “The film must appeal 
just as much to an eight-year-old child as to a man of 
eighty; it must entertain people of every race and every 
country, irrespective of their religions, and political or 
social systems.” 
This is the salient principle of the universal audience 
and what American film-makers mean when they speak 
of “universal appeal.” But the cinema-going public is not 
a homogeneous group of people. Innumerable influences 
exert pressure upon the cinema audience. E£ex, age, in- 
come, social position, level of education, character, likes 
and dislikes, working hours, seasons, periods of prosperity 
and economic crisis—all help 'to mould the audience, as 
does publicity in all its forms. And, moving alongside 
the entertainment film, the specialized production now 
holds an increasingly important place in the cinema world. 
By way of example let us simply take one of these 
factors—age. Surveys and polls conducted in different 
countries all indicate that, from childhood on, film-going 
increases with age to reach its maximum among teen- 
agers (between 15 and 20). From then on attendance 
declines. Thus the film public and the public in general 
are not one and the same and because of this, film dis- 
tribution has to be geared to meet the special character- 
Its first problem is publicity: 
what is the most effective way to publicize a newly- 
completed film? 
The greatest impact on the man-in-the-street is made by 
the “spectacular” aspect of publicity—the use of huge 
poster hoardings and eye-catching boxed items in the 
press. Through other columns in newspapers and perio- 
dicals he also tastes some of the atmosphere and feverish 
excitement of international film festivals—the gala 
openings, carnival-like processions and cocktail parties. 
All this is dismissed by some people as trivial and frivo- 
lous. And yet this kind of artificial effervescence is vital 
to the cinema. This was so in the past and is still the 
case today. As to the future, there is a need for the 
development of more mature tastes in the. spectator— 
and the means to satisfy them. Tomorrow's fllm-goer 
will be more responsive to the qualities of what he or 
she sees on the screen, and the cult of the film will be 
FANS AND FLASHLIGHTS. Flashbulbs pop 
while fans and the curious crowd around some of 
the stars in the galaxy attending the Cannes 
Film Festival in France. Behind the glitter and 
excitement of such occasions—the gala openings 
carnival-like processions, receptions and cocktail 
parties—is another world : the serious, down- 
to-earth business world of the film industry. 
replaced by a love of the cinema. Already film criticism 
is making a positive contribution in this direction. 
But the general public has, on the whole, little inkling of 
the things that go on behind this glittering facade: the 
negotiation of contracts, the planning of future produc- 
tions and the sale of current films on the world market. 
The number of contracts signed during a fortnight-long 
festival is a fair measure of the concentration of “stars” 
and big names in the cinema at any of these “fairs” of 
the film world. 
While business may occupy pride of place at the great 
film festivals, cultural values are not forgotten. Meetings, 
discussions and round-tables are not exclusively concerned 
with professional matters, but deal with such subjects as 
artistic expression, intellectual trends, the art of editing: 
or décor. iq 
Festivals at Cannes, Venice, Berlin, Moscow, Tokyo. Mar 
del Plata, St. Sebastian and Locarno are primarily devoted 
to feature-length entertainment films. There is never 
any question of other aspects of the cinema being given 
the place of honour nor can they always even squeeze 
their way in to a folding seat or a stool in the aisle. This 
explains the mushroom growth of film festivals that we 
have seen recently in many parts of the world. 
Some (Oberhausen, Tours) are solely devoted to short 
films or, more generally to cultural and documentary films 
(Cork, Mannheim, Manila). But above all nowadays the 
movement is towards subject specialization (mountains 
and exploration at Trento; sports films at Cortina d’Am- 
pezzo; industrial films at Harrogate, Rouen and Antwerp; 
cartoons at Annecy; music and dance films at Valencia; 
touristic and folklore films at Brussels). 
An important co-ordination problem concerning film 
distribution is how to keep the organizers of film screen- 
mgs properly informed about the material that Is 
currently in circulation. The difficulty is not so great in

## [Page 29](062404engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 62422: The Hidden face of the cinema, pt. 2: film distribution

the case of feature-length and even short entertainment 
films shown in cinemas thanks to the excellent compre- 
hensive catalogues distributed each year by the national 
trades organizations. But for cultural, educational, scien- 
tific, technical or industrial films the situation is far more 
complicated. How is ene to find the way through a forest 
of catalogues that overlap, but do not necessarily present 
a complete picture, and amid card indexes of the most 
varied types and sizes. 
One way of getting around this problem was suggested 
by a round-table gathering organized by Unesco in Venice 
in July 1959. This meeting recommended that national 
information centres should be set up to supply facts about 
all films produced in thelr respective countries. A similar 
suggestion came from the conference organized in London 
in February 1961 by the Council of Europe, on the distribu- 
tion of cultural films. 
Subsequently, at UNEesco’s request, the International 
Cinema and Television Council appointed a specialist to 
make a thorough study of the problem. In a remarkable 
and comprehensive report, this specialist has outlined all 
the facts on the basis of which a rational and effective 
plan of action could be co-ordinated and applied. 
As recommended by the Venice round-table and the 
London conference, the national cataloguing centres would 
assemble and list all films and television programmes for 
eventual publication in a General Film Catalogue, similar 
to existing national bibliographies. To meet the delicate 
problem of bringing cataloguing standards into line, 
Unesco has published, International Rules for the Cata- 
loguing of Educational, Scientific and Cultural Films and 
Filmstrips. 
In the early days of the cinema a film might be produc- 
ed in hundreds of copies which were sold by the yard and 
shown by travelling showmen until completely worn out. 
© Curopress, Part, 
The film trade was first alerted to the need for a reform 
In this sphere by a former French lawyar, Edmond 
Benoit-Levy, in a key article that appeared in the review 
Ciné-Gazette which he founded in 1905. Writing under 
the pen-name of Francis Malr, he asked, “What is a film? 
Is it ordinary merchandise which the purchaser can use 
as he thinks fit? No, a film is a literary and artistic 
property. In order to show It royaltles must be paid. 
Future discussions wlll be concerned with the fixlng of 
such royalties.” 
The first to adopt this formula was the French newsreel 
ploneer, Charles Path¢é, who in 1907 set up five regional 
companies in France and gave them a 20-year monopoly 
to exploit his productions. 
The results of this reform in distribution methods were 
revealed quite clearly when the second International 
congress met in Parls under the presidency of Georges 
Méllés in February 1909. This was attended by film 
company representatives from the United States, Great 
Britain, Denmark, Italy and France. Faced by a looming 
crisis In the cinema business and wishing to fix uniform 
prices for films as well as to prevent the over-long use of 
prints, the congress decided to introduce the first regula- 
tions governing the sale or release of films. Producers 
agreed that in future they would supply films only to those 
who had signed an agreement and who were prepared 
to certify In writing that they would return the films, 
carriage pald, to the producers within four months. 
This was the beginning, however embryonic, of film 
distribution as we know it nowadays. Today a product 
of the film-maker’s art is protected as an original work 
under the Berne and Geneva Conventions on Copyright. 
and only its authors have the right to authorize its re- 
production and screening. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
29

## [Page 30](062404engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

CINEMA (Cont'd) 
A trade in 
‘intangible property’ 
Who.are, in fact, the authors of a film? For many years 
this controversial question provoked lively discussions at 
international congresses. The 39th Congress of the World 
Literary and Artistic Association, held in Budapest in 1930, 
appeared to reconcile the conflicting views on the problem 
when it defined the term “author” as covering the writer 
of the original work, the composer of the original score and 
the film’s director, with the producer retaining exclusive 
ownership of the cinematographic rights in the work for a 
period of seven years. 
For some years afterwards, however, producers, pressed 
home the view that the producer was the chief, if not 
the sole, author and that he alone had the right to 
authorize the reproduction and showing of a film. 
  
N owapays the film is generally considered 
as a collective ‘work and while each fllm may 
be judged as an individual case, the prevalling view is 
that the co-authors of a cinematographic work are the 
HY RH 
Ph, - Ind : ht x LI ie Mle SN a 
‘Magic by Merlin is a 
creative collaborators (director, scenarlo writer, music ra a ab avaY: Hopi 
composer and producer). pt ois par ye ah d ) car” 
These co-authors grant most of the rights which they of the film, “School Sau- 
have inherited in the work to one of their number, the ~ cery” an awardwinning 
producer, but retain a moral right which covers the inclu- production by the Wal- 
ston of thelr names in the film credits and in advertising ~~ ton County Secondary 
and enables them to refuse to accept any changes that, in ~ School Film Unit in 
thelr view, detract from the integrity of their work. For ~ England. Each year the EW 
the distribution of the work, the producer may in turn ~ best school film unit pro- per. AW 
grant the rights which are his by contract to other per- ~ ductions compete in Lt Ee ~cil AY 
sons. Thus the distribution machinery is set in motion. a nationwide contest a gm 


### 62422: The Hidden face of the cinema, pt. 2: film distribution

It seems reasonable to suppose that not only the financ- RE ed; by pSrear peel 
ing arrangements of a film, but even more so its distribu- A es onal BEANE | 
tion would call for a full knowledge and clear understand- Ol Eat her yy. n a 
.ing of its authors’ rights, any contracts involved as well as Ve ET
any disagreements and ensuing legal decisions. It is oA Sr TOR Sl 17" ‘ 
surprising, therefore, that only a few countries such as Lice or Bini Ba a HU ae > 
France, Italy and Federal Germany, require these basic NS er bin is pressed 
facts to be listed in a central registry. rahe service by a youth- 
(TLV TT EL I (GF -019)) 
Though film distribution may be looked upon in principle, ~ “on location” at a sea- 
as a trade in what jurists call “intangible property” side resort. Film pro- 
(having no material existence In itself, but attaching as a ~ duction gives youngsters 
right or profit to some actual thing) it does involve many a deeper and more se- 
aspects of a more material nature. rious interest in the 
After signing a contract with the producer—and as we cinema ; and 5 develops 
have already seen, this often takes place when the question Inv Below; a 15- 
arises of financing a planned film—the distributor, acting a st at work 
for the producer, launches a publicity campaign aimed at Ste animating desk 
exhibitors. Screenings for members of the film trade are : : 
arranged and distribution company. salesmen make the 
rounds of cinema managers’ offices to offer films that are 
available. 
Blind-booking—doing business in films that are still in 
the planning stage—is practised less often nowadays. Yet 
the risks involved in rentals of this kind are still accepted 
by some first-run cinemas which thereby put up a percen- 
tage of the money needed to finance the production. 
Large companies whose Interests cover simultaneously 
production, distribution and exhibiting are also obliged to 
adopt this system In thelr cinema circuits so as to ensure 
the distribution of their own films. And for similar rea- 
sons, so are the cinema organizations In countries with 
soclalist economies. 
Another method—frequent and deep-rooted—Iis block- 
booking which consists of not selling the exhibiting rights 
to a given film but to a series. Exhibitors buy a locomotive 
(a film sure of box-office success) and a string of trucks 
(films whose profitability is far less certain) on the basis of 
“all or nothing at all.” This Is the reason for the uneven 
and incongruous series of programmes that some cinemas 
30 —other than those which specialize in a certain type or 
         
    
   
  
 E yay 
or aT i 4 , 3 2 edi Ne 
School 
i 
   
  
3 h L a ; ee Spa  > 
a Ser aly ote 2 Xe ghia fon: he 
CONT'D ON PAGE 32 : 
Film Unit 
Cid Pas ap 4 

## [Page 31](062404engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 62422: The Hidden face of the cinema, pt. 2: film distribution

l
i
 
~ 
e
l
 
. 
a
.
 
s
i
r
 
Ng
 
E
E
S
.
 
w
e
t
s
 
=
f
 
‘The right angle for the | 
~ close-up. Schoolboy | 
‘cameraman prepares 
to “shoot” the girl 
“star” of the film 
 “Crosswise”” (right). 
Below, a camera team 
photographs the end 
titles for “School Sau- 
"a short” fim. 
3 A Pel pS y oy er ly 
== his year for the first time 
ed school-age and teen-age film 
~ producers are to have their own inter- 
BUENCLEUR CE OVER TN K-10 OG TET 
~ Competition” organized by the Inter- 
national Centre of Films for Children 
~ (241, rue Royale, Brussels) is to be 
‘held at the Venice Lido and will 
~ award prizes for the best films made 
by young people. It will be world- 
~ wide in scope and open to two age 
~ groups: those under 16 and those | 
between 16 and 18 years of age. | 
~ Films may be in colour or black and 
~ white, 8-mm. or 16-mm., but they 
‘must be silent and must not run 
BLES UEUR ERIM CE Cha EL 
LTE of TT 2 CT TU CT TTT I TE 
ECR CR UCL CRU ECE UH EE LEU 
mythology) reflects the place now 
given to films in the classroom and 
in education jenerally. Film produc- 
CLR AUC UTHER GEIGER ER LV 
a regular feature in the curriculum 
~ of many British schools. Photos on 
~ these pages show some of these 
“junior British film-makers at work. re FS an 
: Semi CO, 
by NCE oy LT tw i Lg L - = kh 
i a Lp i ar =. 7% 

## [Page 32](062404engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 62422: The Hidden face of the cinema, pt. 2: film distribution

CINEMA (Cont'd) 
Boom in art and experimental films 
. class of film—offer thelr customers; programmes that 
always surprise cinema-goers who would like to see 
something corresponding to thelr tastes rather than 
simply “go to the cinema.” 
How many prints of a film will be needed by the distribu- 
tor? The answer can vary—considerably. It all depends 
on the success of the film, the cinemas involved and 
whether the film is to have a. mass release or a gradual 
distribution. Coples reduced to a 16-mm. format instead 
of the standard trade format of 35-mm. will be needed for, 
use on rural circuits and in the non-commercial field. 
In the case of foreign language films, sub-titles must be 
added or, through the more complex operation of post- 
synchronization, actors voices dubbed in the national or 
local language. 
Then the next phase in distribution begins. Films have 
to be despatched and on thelr return the condition of 
copies checked carefully. This alone calls for an ade- 
quately-developed technical department, according to the 
size of the firm and the number of rental contracts. 
Equally indispensable is an extensive book-keeping 
department. The distributor, in fact, is the real cashier of 
the cinema and as such he often becomes a kind of 
production banker. He draws up the invoices, sees that 
these are settled and pays over to the producers the sums 
that are due to them. Supervision of receipts, especially 
where a system of percentage rentals is involved, is often 
a far from stralghtforward operation. 
It is here that corporative or State bodies can often be 
of great help since taxation and financial authorities have 
a direct interest in the control of cinema business. In 
France, for instance, all tickets sold at cinema box-offices 
are supplied by the National Cinematographic Centre. 
After each programme is screened, the Centre receives a 
declaration of receipts, showing the first and last numbers 
of tickets sold during the performances. 
In the socialist countries distribution and production are 
associated in nationalized firms which come directly under 
the ministries concerned with films: Film Polski (Govern- 
ment Film Monopoly in Poland), Ceskoslovensky Film 
(Czechoslovak Films), Sovrofilm (Rumania) and so on. 
De _ problems like those already 
described create new difficulties in developing 
countries where the technical resources to cope with 
them are not always available. Shortage of raw film and 
- a polyglot language situation complicate matters still 
32 
further. 
These are the kind of problems that inspired the Bang- 
kok Conference on the development of information media 
in South East Asia (January 1960) to suggest the creation 
of a regional co-operation hureau. Though this body 
would not itself actually distribute films, it would assist co- 
ordination between national film departments and would 
produce local-language versions of films. 
Under what kind of legal conditions is film distribution 
operated? Without going too deeply into the judicial 
complications of contracts we find two maln categories. 
In the first of these the distributor obtains the exclu- 
sive right to handle a specific film within a specified area 
and for a fixed period at an agreed price or, alternatively, 
against a share of the receipts from rental. He may also 
grant these rights to another distributor. 
The second type of contract determines the general 
conditions in which films are exhibited. It gives the 
exhibitor the right to screen a copy of a film in a specific 
cinema for an agreed number of sessions, on pre-arranged 
dates and on payment of a lump sum or a fixed percentage 
of receipts. He may not, however, pass on this right. 
This type of contract usually includes clauses granting 
benefits to certain cinemas: sole rights (only the benefi- 
clary has the right to show the film within a specified 
‘region and for a set period); priority (the right to screen 
a film before other exhibitors); first or second showing 
rights: protection periods (th2 length of time prior to or 
following the screening of a film during which no compet- 
Ing exhibitors within a named area may also exhibit it). 
Programme patterns vary from one country to another. 
By far the most common practice is to open with a 
newsreel and one or more short films and then present 
the main feature film. But this seems to be increasingly 
replaced by the “double feature” —two major films in the 
same programme. This trend is to be regretted for it 
leads to the suppression of short films and a corresponding 
growth of the so-called “B films.” 
There are of course, other kinds of cinema programmes. 
In the “news theatre,” for example, newsreels and short 
films provide about an hour’s entertainment, and some 
other cinemas provide a complete programme of shorts. 
Today art and experimental cinemas grouped within the 
International Federation of Art and Experimental Cinemas 
 
United Nations 
A vast number of educational films are produced 
nowadays, but their distribution is handicapped by 
lack of standardization in cataloguing and "indexing 
systems. Unesco has now made a study of the various 
systems with a view to co-ordinating and assembling 
information about educational films which would be 
of special benefit to countries in which this kind of 
film production is small or non-existent. Above, 
an image of rural life in Ceylon being filmed by a 
cameraman from a U.N. travelling motion picture 
unit for a film entitled “A Field in Asia”, showing 
developments in U.N.-aided projects throughout Asia. 
are experiencing a remarkable boom throughout the world 
by distributing top-quality programmes of the kind that 
are often hard to exploit commercially. The development 
of special programmes for young people should also be 
taken into account. 
Generally speaking, cinemas receive newsreels on a 
subscription basis. Payment is calculated on fixed sum or 
a percentage, depending on how up-to-date the newsreel 
is by the time it is shown. In South America, for example, 
the rental cost is frequently a multiple of the price of the. 
best seats in the house (five times the cost of a ticket 
for the most expensive seat in Brazil; ten times the price 
in Paraguay). In some countries, including Argentina, 
Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, German Federal Republic, Hun- 
gary, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Peru, Poland and Spain, 
the showing of newsreels is compulsory. 
(To be continued.)

## [Page 33](062404engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

ROADS TO FAMINE 
 
Sir, 
I read Mr. Zottola’s article “Famine, 
the Greatest Scourge of History” (July- 
August 1962) with much interest. It 
also made me wonder why historians 
have so seldom stated the combination 
of factors which leads to famine. If 
these were better known perhaps many 
famines could have been avoided or 
the damage caused considerably re- 
duced. The Bengal Famine of 1942 
was triggered by fear, followed by 
hoarding of food grains in damp and 
unhygienic stores where it was des- 
troyed by fungi and store pests. If 
there had been air-tight bins and mod- 
ern silos in India on a sufficient scale 
there would have been no famine. 
How many of the European famines 
have been brought about by mould 
fungi and micro-organisms? 
You mentioned that Sir Jack Drum- 
mond said, “We had no idea how to 
revive these dying victims of hunger.” 
Between May and November 1942 | 
had the task of going into Burma 
to help our refugees. I fed the first 
meal to more than 22,000 starving, 
exhausted and often disease-ridden 
refugees. During the first few days 
I killed off 9 people with rum or bran- 
dy and another 9 with too much food. 
This meant in terms of figures that I 
lost 18 refugees out of about five 
thousand. During the next four and 
a half months when conditions were 
much worse, I lost one woman out of 
seventeen thousand people. 
Twenty years later, reading the 
numerous books about over-popula- 
tion, agriculture and hunger, I am 
wondering if everyone has forgotten 
the advice that Joseph gave to Pha- 
raoh about building storehouses and 
silos. Air-tight bins and silos do not 
seem to be mentioned in the reports 
of the United Nations. Why? 
A.R. Tainsh 
~ Stockholm, Sweden 
HOW BIG IS BUENOS AIRES? 
Sir, 
In your July-August issue under 
the heading “Big Cities Getting Still 
Bigger” you published a handsome 
photograph of the port and city of 
Buenos Aires. Under it you say that 
Buenos Aires and its suburbs “have 
6 1/2 million inhabitants—almost 
the total population of the country in 
1914.” This information is wrong 
unless you consider that the suburbs 
of Buenos Aires sprcad over a dis- 
tance of 300 miles and more from 
the city itself. 
According to a study made by Al- 
berto Cataldi, of the Latin-American 
Demographic Centre in Santiago, the 
population of the Argentine capital, 
comprising greater Buenos Aires and 
its immediate suburbs, was 3,795,813 
on September 30, 1960, the date of 
the last census. The rest of the pro- 
vince of Buenos Aires, including such 
Letters to the Editor 
important «cities as La Plata, Mar 
del Plata and Bahia Blanca, had by 
then 2,938,735 inhabitants. 
Consequently, the population of 
6,734,548 (sum of the figures quoted 
above) corresponds to the province 
of Buenos Aires, including the fede- 
ral capital. 
Alejandro Echegoyen 
Santiago, Chile 
WORLD'S WORST EVIL... 
Sir, 
I was very moved by the articles 
you published on the world fight 
against hunger (July-August). With 
the mechanized methods that exist in 
the world hunger should have long 
ago been banished. Unhappily this 
redoubtable curse will always be with 
us as long as there is no just and 
equitable sharing out of all kinds of 
consumer goods. In France alone 
scores of thousands of under-nour- 
ished people try to exist on salaries 
or “pensions that shame a self-pro- 
claimed progressive country. In my 
view the worst evil in the world is 
money and as long as it remains 
paramount, the ravages of hunger 
will continue. The so-called advanc- 
ed countries speak of helping under- 
developed ones. They should first put 
their own houses in order, above all 
morally. 
 
André Tosolini 
Clermont-Ferrand, France 
«. AND MOST SERIOUS MALADY 
Sir, 
Although I have read many issucs 
of your journal the most serious 
disease of modern times has not been 
tackled.  Mistrust between the na- 
tions of the world can do more harm 
than any other disease known to the 
peoples of the world. Tue Usts- 
co CourIErR is read throughout the 
nations of the world, thus what bigger 
audience can there be? 
I appreciate that yours is not ea 
political paper, but would it not be 
possible to utilize a whole issue on 
cach of the countries in Unesco... 
on the ways of life of the people, 
food and agriculture problems, medi- 
cal services, working conditions, plans 
for the future etc. etc. If only the 
ordinary man in the street could be 
made to understand that the ordinary 
man in the other countries wants the 
same things from life as he does, 
then perhaps there may be a chance 
of peace in this world. 
HH. H. King 
London, England 
YOUTH ON THE MOVE 
Sir, 
I am particularly interested in tra- 
vel, living with people of other na- 
tions which I think is so important. 
We recently travelled to Turkey, 
through Yugoslavia, Greece and 
Crete by any means of transport avail- 
able—ox-carts, donkeys, on foot, in 
passing rvehicles —und relying on the 
hospitality of the people for food, 
ete. Everyone was so helpful nd 
hind the whole journey has left a 
deep impression on us. ‘The poverty 
and yet the simplicity in which these 
people took it for granted to she 
with us the little they had overwhelmed 
us. Since then I have taken to 
the road many times, travelling in 
the same way, meeting people and 
exchanging ideas, ‘This has brought 
about a tremendous desire to travel 
even further in the Middle and Far 
East but this time 1 would like to 
work with some hind of organization 
—1 do not care how small my part 
may be in it. I wonder how it is 
possible to go about finding such a 
job and wonder if you can help me. 
Barbara Bastian 
London, England 
Enttor’s Noi: Young persons of 
cither sex interested in working abroad 
can contact the Co-ordination Coni- 
vite for International Voluntary 
Work Camps, 6, rue Franklin, Paris 
16°, France, An article on the Volun- 
tary Work Camps will he published 
shortly, 
BRAVE NEW UNIFORM WORLD 
Sir, 
Your aim, as far as 1 can sce, is 
to make us, as cividized literate peo- 
ple, aware of the plight of people 
(underdeveloped people seems to be 
implied) in underdeveloped countries 
and to help them materially and in- 
tellectnally to attam a high standard 
of living similar to our own. Alw 
there is the luxurious preservation of 
wilde and rare beasties and the con- 
templative observation of all manner 
of crawling things and coloured stones 
which I do admit could contribute 
quite a lot, in its own sophisticated 
way, to the furtherance of scientific 
knowledge; but in what direction? 
The most basic, real, attainable aims 
of the organization are the cultura- 
ble and educatable peoples of the 
world. The eventual success of all 
these high endeavours will be a brave 
new uniform world, devoid of form 
and so devoid of culture, religion and 
superstition and everything that 
man as a proper cultured unit feels 
in his soul. 
The progress of communication in 
the present century has been a curse 
to every existing culture in the world. 
To sponsor a thought-flux be- 
tween civilizations is a prolific sophis- 
tication begetting only sophistications, 
all of which are barren. Certainly, 
onc day the world will be uniform 
but do not let the dominant culture 
select those parts of the subsidiary 
cultures that it fancies. Let there be 
mature conflict, let there be evolu- 
tion and no willing synthesis... 
Michael Ferron 
Londonderry, Northern Ireland 
33

## [Page 34](062404engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
  
RENE MAHEU of France has 
« been elected Director-General 
of UNESCO by the 12th Session of 
the UNESCO General Conference 
meeting in Paris. With 89 out of 99 
delegations voting for his nomination, 
Mr. Maheu was elected on November 
14 with a larger majority than any . 
previous UNESCO Director-General. 
Previously he had been Acting Direc- 
tor-General since the resignation of 
Mr. Vittorino Veronese in 1961. 
Born In France in 1905, Mr. Maheu 
graduated from the Ecole Normale 
Supérieure and taught philosophy at 
the University of Cologne, the French 
institute of London and the Franco- 
Moslem College at Fez, between 1931 
and 1942. He joined UNESCO in 
September 1946 as head of the Divi- 
sion of Free Flow Information. In 1949 
Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet, then Director- 
General of UNESCO, appointed him 
as Director of his Office. He was 
appointed Assistant Director-General’ 
by Dr. Luther Evans in July 1954, and, 
with the same rank, UNESCO Repre- ° 
sentative to the United Nations in New 
York in November 1955. Mr. Maheu 
returned to UNESCO headquarters in 
December 1958 and in November 1959 
was appointed Deputy Director-Gene- 
ral by Dr, Vittorino Veronese. An- 
nouncing Mr. Maheu’s election for a 
JS ARTHQUAKE-PROOT HOMES: A 
UNESCO specialist sent to Iran follow- 
ing the disastrous earthquake on Septem- 
ber 1, 1962, in which 12,000 people lost 
their lives, has suggested how mud-walled 
village homes there could be simply and 
inexpensively reinforced against future seis- 
mic shocks. He proposes the use of steel 
straps which in two hours can be fitted by 
four men on poles at each corner of the 
house and tightened by turnbuckles. 
MN ONACO’S ‘SCOLATEX’ CONTEST: 
Following the success of its inter- 
school and international educational phila- 
telic exhibition, “Scolatex I’, in 1959, the 
Monaco National Commission for UNESCO 
is this year organizing a philatelic contest- 
exhibition, *“Scolatex II”, which will be 
open to all young people under the age of 
18. Individual or group competitors will 
be asked to illustrate, by means of stamps, a 
theme or idea of their choice. For full in- 
formation write to the Commissaire Géné- 
ral de Scolatex II, Commission Nationale 
Monégasque pour I'Unesco, B.P., 9, Mon- 
aco. 
IRST-AID FROM THE SKY: Austra- 
lia, which initiated the Flying Doctor 
service to cover vast “outback™ areas is 
now launching another airborne medical 
 
  
Unesco = Dominique Roger 
term of office of six years, the Pre- 
sident of the General Conference, 
Professor Paulo de Berredo Carneiro 
of Brazil praised the choice of 
Mr. Maheu who, he said, was “a direct 
product of the UNESCO Secretariat 
and, therefore, an international man.” 
service—First-Aid Parachuters., The St. 
John's Ambulance Brigade is forming its 
first parachute division whose members are 
already amateur parachutists. 
LECTRONIC ‘JELLYFISH: An elec- 
tronic apparatus designed by biophy- 
sics scientists at Moscow University, is based 
on the jelly-fish’s aural system which picks 
up the infrasounds of an oncoming storm. 
The apparatus is able not only to forecast 
storms 15 hours in advance, but also to pre- 
dict their force and the path they will take. 
V IN THE KINDERGARTEN: Chil- 
dren at over 100 infant schools in 
Venezuela now watch a daily television pro- 
gramme put out by the Ministry of Edu- 
cation over Radio Caracas, that includes 
plays, films and stories. Venezuelan spe- 
cialists are agreed that this audio-visual 
teaching helps to develop creative abilities 
and powers of observation, aids the study of 
the 3 R's and expands vocabularies. 
OMPUTER VS. LITERARY RIDDLE: 
Using an electronic computer, “two 
Harvard University mathematicians recent- 
ly identified the authorship of 12 essays 
believed to have been written by the Amer- 
ican statesman, Alexander Hamilton, and 
" by James Madison (4th president of the 
the Congo. 
United States) which were published anon- 
ymously in 1787 and 1788. The mathe- 
maticians fed information on the frequency 
of key words in the essays and in the known 
writing of the two men, and from the 
results identified Alexander Hamilton as 
the author of 11 of the essays. 
EW WAY TO LEARN FRENCH: In 
a Leeds (England) school a French 
woman teacher took a junior school class 
for all subjects, speaking nothing but French. 
After two weeks the children were able to 
understand all that was said to them and 
after nine weeks spoke French fluently, had 
a large vocabulary and were obviously able 
to think in French as well. Similar experi- 
ments in three London schools have met 
with equal success. 
WARD TO UNESCO RECORD COL- 
LECTION: A Unesco record collec- 
tion, “Musical Anthology of the Orient” 
(See THE Unesco COURIER June 1962) 
has received one of the awards given in 
1962 by the Académie du Disque Francais. 
The first five records in the Unesco collec- 
tion present traditional and folk music of 
Laos, Cambodia, Afghanistan and Iran, 
WEDES SERVING U.N. CAUSE: At 
least 12,000 Swedes have so far been 
engaged in the United Nations supervision 
and control services in various parts of the 
world. Over 11,000 Swedish soldiers have 
been stationed in the Gaza district and in 
Others have served in Korea 
and the Lebanon. 
AN IN SPACE SYMPOSIUM: One 
hundred and fifty scientists from 19 
countries met recently in Unesco House, 
Paris, for an international symposium on 
environmental problems of man in space. 
The meeting highlighted the growing colla- 
boration brought about by the new prob- 
lems in space science between biologists, 
_on the one hand, and physicists and engi- 
neers on the other. 
  
Flashes... 
MW Six more countries have recently joined. 
Unesco, bringing its total of member states 
to 113. The countries, in their order 
of joining, are: the Mongolian People’s 
Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, Jamaica, 
Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi. 
BW A special Soviet non-magnetic ship, the 
“Zarya” is now on a 32,000 mile voyage 
around the world to continue magnetic 
mapping of the oceans that was begun 
during the International Geophysical Year. 
‘ll Over 630,000 fruit and timber trees were 
planted in Ceylon during the first six 
months of last year's tree planting cam- 
paign. More than half these came from 
nurseries created by schoolchildren and 
rural societies. 
Wm The Unesco Coupon Scheme under which 
countries are able to buy badly-needed 
books, scientific and educational equipment 
in “hard currency” areas, paying for them in 
their own national currency, has had a turn- 
over of over $48 nillion since it wus 
launched in 1948. 
BW An Asian Regional Institute for school 
building research sponsored by Unesco has 
been opened in Bandung, Indonesia. Other 
similar special centres for Asia include New 
Delhi (educational planners and administra- 
tors); Bangkok (Regional Office for Educa- 
tion) and Manila (teacher training). 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
LA
NG
, 
PA
RI
S.

## [Page 35](062404engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Each volume contains many 
fine quality full-colour repro- 
- ductions and other illustra- 
tions in black and white. 
UNESCO ART POCKET BOOKS are published in 
six languages (English, French, Spanish, Italian, 
German and Dutch) and in eight different editions. 
They are published in London by Collins. 
Price per volume : 
5/- 
3.50 French francs; 
$ 0.95 (U.S. edition) 
   
  
    
   
 
  
        
  
  
First four titles : 
UNESCO 
ART POCKET BOOKS 
EGYPTIAN WALL PAINTINGS FROM TOMBS AND TEMPLES 
PERSIAN MINIATURES FROM ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS 
SPANISH FRESCOES FROM THE ROMANESQUE PERIOD 
RUSSIAN ICONS FROM THE 12TH TO THE 15TH CENTURY 
obtainable through local booksellers 
 
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; rates quoted are 
for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO COU- 
RIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul, — AUSTRALIA. 
Melbourne University Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, 
Melbourne, C. l., Victoria, (A. 15/-). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Framme & C*,, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 60.-). — BELGIUM. Editions ** Labor “, 
342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-Boek- 
handel, Belgiélei 151. Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (100 FB) and art slides only: Louis de Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. CCP 3380.00. — 
BURMA, Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoan, (K. 5.50). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Oteawa, Ont. ($ 3.00). — CEYLON. The Associated 
Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd., Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Colombo, 2. (Rs. 9}. 
— CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formesa), — CUBA. 
Libreria Econémica, Pte Zayas S0S-7, Apartado 113, 
Havana. (2.25 pesos). — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. Artia 
Ltd., 30 Ve Smeckich, Prague 2. — DENMARK, Ejnar 
Munksgaard, A/S Tidsskriftafdelingen, 6 Norregade, 
Kébenhavn K. (D.kr. 12). — ETHIOPIA. International 
Press Agency. P.O. Box 120, Addis Ababa. — FINLAND. 
Akateeminen Kirjakauppay 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
(Fmk. 540). — FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, Place 
de Fontenoy, Paris-7°. C.C.P. 12598.48. (7 F.). 
— GERMANY. R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosen- 
sheimer strasse 145, Munich. For the Unesco Kurier 
(German ed. only) Bahren-felder-Chaussee 160, 
Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650 (DM 8). — GHANA 
Methodist Book Depot Ltd. Atlantis House, Commercial 
St., POB 100, Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See 
United Kingdom, — GREECE, Librairie H. Kauffmann, 
28, rue du Stade, Athens. — HONG-KONG. Swindon 
Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. 
Kultura, P.O. Box 149. Budapest, 62. — INDIA, Orient 
Longmans Ltd, Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; Gun- 
foundry Road, Hyderabad, 1: 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New 
Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16, Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Indian National Commission for Co-operation with 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, New Delhi 3. (Rs. 7), — 
INDONESIA, P. N. Fadjar Bhakti, Djalan 
Nusantara 22, Djakarta. — |IRAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. — IRELAND. The National Press, 
2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (190/-). — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein's Pookstores Ltd., 35, Allenby 
Road and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (1 £ 5.50). 
— JAMAICA. Sangster's Book Room, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston. Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
(10/-}). — JAPAN, Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
{Yen 670). — JORDAN. Joseph L. Bahous & Co. 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.OB. 66, Amman. — 
KENYA. E.S.A. Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Secul. — LIBERIA. Cole 
and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 186, Monrovia. — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck. 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg. — MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE. Federal Publications Ltd.,, Times House, 
River Valley Rd., Singapore — MALTA. Sapienza’s Library 
26 Kingsway, Valetta. (10/-). — MAURITIUS. Nalanda 
Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis. 
— MONACO. British Library, 30 Bld des Moulins, 
Monte-Carlo. (7 NF). — NETHERLANDS. N. V. 
Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9. The Hague. 
(fl. 6). — NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. G. C. T. 
Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V,, Willemstad, Curacao. 
— NEW ZEALAND Government Printing OHi.e 
Wellington, and Government Bookshops, Autkl.nd, 
Wellington, Christchurch Dunedin (10-). — NIGERIA. 
C.M.S, Bookshop, P.O. Box 174, Lagos. (10/-). — NOR- 
WAY, A.S. Bokhjornet, Lille Gremie. 7, Oslo 
For the Unesco Courier only: AS, Narvesens Littaratur 
Tieneste, Stortingige, 4, Oslo, Postboks 115 (kr 13.20 
—_ PAKISTAN. The West-Pak Publuhing Cor 
Ltd., Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374, S6-N 
Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahore. — PANAMA, 
Cultural Panamena, Avenida 73, No. TI-49, Apartado 
de Correos 2018, Panama, D.F. (Balboas 3-}. — PHI. 
LIPPINES. The Modern Book Co., 508 Rizal Avenue 
Manila, — POLAND.  RUCH * ul. Wiloza 
Nr. 46, Warnaw 10 (ZI. 50). — PORTUGAL. 
Dias & Andrada Lda, Livraria Portugal, Rua 
do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — RHODESIA & NYASA- 
LAND. The Book Centre, First Street, Salisbury, 
Southern Rhodesia. — SWEDEN. A/B C.E. Fritzes 
Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredigatan 2, Stockholm, — 
For The Unesco Courier: Svenska Unescoridet, 
Yasagatan 15-17, Stockholm, CC (Kr. 7.50); 
SWITZERLAND, Europa Verlag, 5 Rimiitrasuse 
Zurich. Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1-236. ** Courier * only: Georges Losmaz, 1, rue des 
Yieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 1.4811, (Fr. S. 8). 
— TANGANYIKA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 
9030, Dar-er-Sataam., — THAILAND. Suksapan 
Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. (35 
ticals}, — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 lsuklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 14%, Kampala, — UNION OF 
SOUTH AFRICA, Van Schaik's Bookstore, Libri 
Building, Church Street, Pretoria, For the Unesco Cou- 
rier only: Central News Agency, P.O. Box 10133, johan- 
nesburg. (10/-). — UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC 
(EGYPT). La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh, Adly-Pasha, 
Caro. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Sutionery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, $.E.I. (10/-). — UNITED 
STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 801 Third 
Avenue, New York, 22, N.Y. (§ 5.00.) and {except 
periodicals}: Columbia University Press, 2960 Broad- 
way, New York, 27, N.Y. — U.$.5.R. Mezhdunaraodnaja 
Kniga, Moscow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA, |ugoslo- 
venska Knjiga, Terazije 27/11, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](062404engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

    
  Sh 
  
a
 
Ty
 
E
E
R
 
O
E
R
 
C
o
v
 
E
E
 
a
 
L
a
a
t
,
 
  
  
   
\ 7 i" Ra i. ! t ~ oe os : "x all . Es Cas res 
> 
©
 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
, : 
. & 
phe L 4 : = iL 
  
as - I EN, 
UNESCO ART POCKET OOKS gorod School (late 14th century). This work, now in the Russian Museum. Leningrad, is one of many reproductions in full colour pre- 
sented in “Russian Icons from the 12th to the 15th Century’, one of Unesco's new Art Pocket Books. (See P. 26 and back cover). 
 