# [074946](074946engo.pdf) 9

## [Page 1](074946engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

VOLUME 1 = N°. 12 
  
THE WILL TO PEACE 
IFTY years ago our fathers 
F stood at the threshold of the 
Twentieth Century. That was 
a time of progress and of belief in 
progress, and the eyes of all men 
looked forward to the future. But 
events were soon to dash their 
hopes. Twice, since then, war has 
plunged the world into bloodshed 
and horror. And our generation 
asks today : « What grounds have 
we for belief in a better future ? » 
It would be easy — but quite 
unjust — to blame the men of the 
Twentieth Century for errors whielt 
are, after all, but the result of 
carlier centuries of self-interest, of 
creed and of misunderstanding. 
Why were the men of 1900 so cer- 
tain that they were moving into an 
era of peace and well-being? 
What had the Nineteenth Century 
done but extol! the glories of nation- 
alism? There were enlightened 
exceptions, but in the main it is 
fair to say that the man of 1900, 
so certain of the glorious prospects 
of the days to come, saw world 
history from a purely national 
angle.” His ancestors had, no doubt, 
fought for liberty, for equality, for 
fraternity—but it was for liberty 
and for fraternity in a world still 
divided by the barriers of frontiers 
and of customs. There were a few 
peoples who ruled and made his- 
tory, but in most of the others, 
history was imposed. Was it reason- 
able, in such a world, to expect 
any peace other than one of mere 
resignation? 
The wars of the Twentieth Cen- 
tury have, indeed, made things no 
better. But through suffering men 
have at least—and at last—learned 
the unity of human destiny. We 
have learned, by tragic experience, 
to believe what the philosophers 
had vainly attempted to teach us: 
that no man can save himself alone; 
that no class, no state, no race, no 
nation, can save itself alone. As 
Dostoievsky wrote: “We stand re- 
sponsible for all things, before all 
men.” The bullet which strikes 
down any man, even though he be 
our “enemy”, strikes us too. When 
he is lost, a part of ourselves is lost 
likewise. And the family he leaves 
behind him has lasting e¢laims upon 
us. 
* 
HE Twentieth Century has 
T already witnessed two great 
catastrophes. But, in the 
midst of disaster, it has also been 
responsible for two inspired crea- 
tions, unprecedented 1n history: 
  
HUMAN RIGHTS DAY. (Page 4) 
* 
THE FIRST PEACE PPE : AN 
AMERICAN INDIAN FOLK TALE. 
(Page 5.) 
* 
FILMS BRING ART TO THE PEO- 
PLE. SCIENCE AND THE CINEMA, 
(Pages 6 and 7.) 
* 
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR WOMEN. (Page 9.)     
In this issue 
© PRICE : 10 Cents (U. $.), 6 Pence (U. K.), or 20 Francs (FRANCE). 
 
The League of Nations and the 
United Nations. Whatever the 
immediate results of these two 
enterprises, one fact remains: this 
century, like no other before it, has 
sought a world solution for the 
problems of mankind. At last the 
nations of the world have under- 
stood that security for one requires 
security for all, and that political 
security is meaningless if it is not 
founded upon the four fundamental 
human rights, to which the great 
Agencies of the United Nations 
correspond: the right to life, to 
health, to work and, Unesco's own 
reason for being, the right to edu- 
cation and culture. 
NS gr 
The conquest of these rights will 
demand many long years. We 
cannot even hope that this century 
will see the full achievement of 
such a programme. Nevertheless, 
only through such a programme 
can world peace become peace for 
mankind, peace for all men, 
everywhere. 
If we are to deserve and to 
achieve this we must, above all, 
vigilantly maintain our will to 
peace. We know now that the most 
generous resolutions and the most 
admirable intentions are of litlle 
value if we are not ready to tran- 
slate them into action. We have 
  
 
o
e
 
    
  
A 
—
—
—
y
 
l go 
‘A HEAD FO 
ABETTER WORLI 
  
R 
Publication No. 
Ist JANUARY 1950 
   
IN GEE pe 
proclaimed Rights of Man; now, 
through our efforts, the union of 
the peoples must become more than 
a legal phrase. If we do not work 
for peace that is possible today, we 
shall never create peace that will 
last for ever. This torn world of 
ours needs a faith; faith in the 
brotherhood of human kind. 
In wishing all the peoples of the 
world a New Year of concord and 
harmony, Unesco reaffirms its 
belief in the power of the values 
of the mind for the cause of liberty, 
of justice and of peace. 
(New Year Message From The 
Director-General of Unesco.) 
 
  
  
hie 
U
T
 
SO
R 
L
E
 
a
E

## [Page 2](074946engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 
a = a hs Te 
   
world-wide task which 
mon linguistic bond. 
One of these regions is the Spanish speaking part of America 
where ethnological, political, social and economic causes give an 
imporiance and urgency to educational and cultural problems 
in the 18 countries it comprises. 
The first major step in arousing the interest of the peoples in 
these 18 countries in Unesco and its work was the holding of 
the Organization’s Second General Conference in Mexico, in 1947. 
The following article shows how interest in Unesco’s aims and 
achievements has been developed since the Mexico City Confe- 
rence, and particularly during a six week period (September 15 
to October 31) last year. 
Xx Xx 
n 15 October representatives from 
45 universities were present at 
the opening of the first Latin 
American Congress of Universities in 
Guatemala, to which Unesco had sent 
Dr. José de Benito and Dr. Pedro 
Bosch-Gimpera as observers. A spe- 
cial message from the Director-General 
of Unesco was read in the Great Hall 
of the University of San Carlos, broad- 
cast throughout Central America and 
reprinted by the Latin American press. 
Unesco had already established 
contacts and had been working for the 
founding of a World Association of 
Universities, and in their speeches, 
Dr. Carlos Martinez Duran, Rector of 
the University of San Carlos, and Dr. 
Raul Osegueda, Guatemalan Ministry 
of Education, made numerous referen- 
ces to Unesco's work in this field. Yet 
so far there had been no hint of the 
possibility of the Congress passing 
resolutions or agreements establishing 
regular and permanent co-operation 
between Latin American universities as 
a whole and Unesco. : 
New World University Links 
wo points in particular relating to 
the union of Latin American Uni- 
versities are of outstanding inte- 
rest for Unesco and for the future of 
the World Association of Universities 
now in course of formation. Paragraph 
(a) of Article I of the Union’s objects 
reads : “to improve, consolidate and 
encourage mutual relations between 
Latin American Universities and rela- 
tions between those universities and 
other cultural institutions and bodies 
such as Unesco and the Inter-Ameri- 
can Cultural Council of the Organiza- 
tion of American States”. Another 
object is: “the establishment within 
the Executive of the Union of Latin 
American Universities of a special sec- 
tion for the purpose of promoting the 
closest co-operation with international 
bodies of a similar kind, preferably 
with Unesco”. 
The application of these provisions is 
already becoming a fact. Many Latin 
American universities have ratified the 
agreements reached at the First Con- 
gress and have joined the Union. The 


### 74948: UNESCO in Latin America

| UNESCO | 
IN LATIN 
AMERICA 
S a specialized agency of the United Nations, Unesco has a 
leads it into widely different 
geographizal areas, some of which, however, have a com- 
ct 
    
Union’s Secretary-General is in contact 
with Unesco’s Secretariat in Paris and 
with the Preparatory Commission of 
the World Congress of Universities to 
be held at Nice in 1950. The Congress 
is being organized by Unesco as a 
sequel to the Utrecht Congress of 1948 
and all the indications are that, uniike 
the Utrecht meeting, which was not 
attended by delegations from Latin 
American universities, the majority of 
those universities will be represented 
on this occasion. 
n the same six week period last Au- 
tumn the Information Department 
of the United Nations organized 
three Latin American regional confe- 
  
     
   
       
y' 
’ 
3 
eq. ob \ 
   
7 = a IE 
er i =r i id i be Ar WS 
rences of non-governmental organiza- 
tions concerned with information in 
Panama, Santiago de Chile and Mon- 
tevideo. 
The first of these conferences which 
between them covered all the countries 
of Latin America, took place at Pana- 
ma between 23 and 26 September and 
was attended by 37 organizations from 
5 countries, the United Nations being 
cation, science and custure, 
subscrihers, 
French Francs. 
SUBSCRIBE NOW! 
get them to subscribe too. 
Australia 
Canada : 
Toronto. 
Great Britain : H.M. Statione 
Service) : P.O. Box 569, 
Hungary : 
India : 
Hague 
Switzerland : Librairie Payot, Lausanne. 
2960 Broadway, New York 27, N.Y. 
Agraciada 1875, Montevideo.   
Courier 
——— UNESCO ——— 
The UNESCO COURIER is an international periodical devoted to the work 
of UNESCO and to activities and developments throughout the world in edu- 
Until now some of our readers have been receiving free copies of our 
periodical. In order to permit us to supply the many thousands of new readers 
in almost every country in the world we are undertaking a special drive for 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) costs only $1.00 US. or 5/- or 200 
Tell your friends about the UNESCO COURIER and 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, or directly to UNESCO 
House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris, 16¢, France, 
Argentina : Editorial Sudamericana S. A. Alsina S0C Buenos-Aires. 
: H. A. Goddard Ltd., 255a, George St., Sydney. 
Belgium : Librairie encyclopédique, 7, rue du Luxembourg, Bruxelles IV. 
Brazil : Livrario Agir Editora, Rua Mexico 98-B, Caixa postal 3291, Rio-de-Janeiro. 
Mr Victor P. Seary, Manager, The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen Street West, 
Chile : Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 924, Santiago de Chile. 
Colombia : Mr Emilic Roya Martin, Carrera 9a, 1791 Ca 
Cuba : La Casa Belga, Sr. D. René de Smedt, O‘Reilly, Havana. SELLE 
Czechoslovakia : Orbis, Stalinova, 46, Praha XII. To 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard, 6, Norregade, Copenhagen. 
France ; Unesco Sales Service, 19, av. Kléber, Paris (16¢). Tél. Kléber 52.00. 
Office : London : York House, Kingsway (Retail Counter 
ondon S.E.I. (Post orders). - Manchester 2 : 339-4! King 
Street. - Edinburgh 2 : 13a Castle Street. - Cardiff : 1 St Andrew's Crescent. - 
Bristol I : Tower Lane. - Belfast : 80 Chichester Street. } 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie Internationale, Athens. = TEs 
“lbusz” Akademia-u. 10, Budapest V. EE RE 
Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House, New Delhi. CLE TEL 
Italy : Messagerie ltaliane, Via Lomazzo, 52, Milano. So LT 
Lebanon and Syria : Librairie Universelle, Avenue des Francais, Beirut. ° or 
Mexico : Libreria Universitaria, Justo Sierra 16, México DF. 
Netherlands : N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, Afd. Fondsadministratie, Lange Voorhout 9, The 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 7, Oslo. 
Peru : Libreria Internacional del Pera, S.A. Girdn de la Unién, Lima. 
Portugal : Uniao Portuguesa de Imprensa, 198 Rue de S. Bento, 3° Esq. Lisbon. 
Sweden : C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
United States of America : International Documents Service, Columbia University Press, 
Uruguay : Centro de Cooperacién Cientifica para la América Latina, Unesco. Avenida 
Bogotd. 
  
  
from the Orient. a 
shown in the above photo of the Cathedral ruins. 
_———— 
nn 
One of the three Central American countries which have recently . 
taken steps to join Unesco is Costa Rica. This photo, taken in the 
Presidential Residence at San Jose de Costa Rica shows (from leit 
to right) Dr. Gonzalo Facio (Minister of Justice), Professor Jose de 
Benito (Unesco’s Representative). Don Jose Figueres (President of 
the Government), M. Daniel Oduber (Secretary of State) and 
M. Alberto Canas (Director of the National Bank). 
Panama, which recently decided to join Unesco. has had a distinctive and picturesque history. During 
the early Spanish regime its capital was the storehouse of gold and silver from South America and treasures 
In 1671, however. the city was destroyed by pirates. although traces still remain to-day as is 
old site. 
represented by M. Asdrubal Salsamon- 
di, and Unesco by Dr. José de Benito. 
Delegates learned a great deal about 
the organization and functions of 
Unesco, and passed four resolutions 
assigning it important tasks. 
The Second Conference, held in San- 
tiago de Chile from 15 to 18 October, 
was attended by representatives from 
137- organizations, including 103 dele- 
gates and 202 observers, and the Third 
Conference, held at Montevideo 
between 27 an 30 October was attended 
by more than a hundred delegations 
from non-governmental associations in 
Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil. Both 
these conferences adopted resolutions 
which should assist the progress of 
Unesco’s work in Latin America. 
  
    
   we 
ntil recently Panama, Costa Rica 
and Guatemala had not ratified 
Unesce’s Constitution. Now, wi- 
thin a period of 22 days, all three of 
these Central American countries have 
approved and promulgated the neces- 
sary laws to enable their instruments 
of ratification to be deposited at the 
British Foreign Office. 
On 20 September the Guatemalan 
Parliamentary Committee for Educa- 
tion and Home Affairs approved a 
report commending the Bill for the 
ratification of the Unesco Constitu- 
tion. The passage of this bill into law 
was delayed until November as a result 
of the catastrophe suffered by Guate- 
mala following torrential rains which 
caused hundreds of deaths and serious 
damage. When normal life was res- 
tored, the Parliament was once again 
able to turn its attention to the bill 
and give it the three readings required 
by law; following which it was pro- 
mulgated by the President of the Repu- 
blic and published in the official 
gazette, 
~ Making History in Panama . 
n Panama, almost before the work 
I of the first Latin American Re- 
gional Conference on Non-Govern- 
mental Organizations was over, the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs drafted a 
bill for Panama’s ratification of the 
Unesco Constitution. On Monday, 
3 October, the first day of the new 
parliamentary session, the bill was 
tabled. By the following day, a favou- 
rable report on it had been submitted 
by the Foreign Affairs Committee and 
a number of articles added respecting 
the formation of the Panamanian 
National Commission for co-operation 
with Unesco. 
The amended text was passed at its 
first reading the same day, and after 
two more readings it had become law 
in a total ef three days. The speed 
with which the Bill became 
unprecedented in Panamanian parlia- 
mentary history. 
In Costa Rica the first move on the 
question of the country’s joining Unesco 
came from Dr. Gonzalo Facio, Minis- 
ter of Justice and former Minister of 
Foreign Affairs. His suggestion was 
welcomed by the President of the pro- 
Unesco’s Latin American Science Co-operation Office, 
under the direction of Professor Establier. 
premises are shown above, has been asked to prepare plans for a 
science museum to be opened in Montevideo. 
Directory of Scientific Institutions and Scientists of Latin America 
have also been_issued by the office. 
law is, 
The city was rebuilt in 1673 five miles to the West of the 
visional Government, Don José Figue- 
res, and as this government was vested 
with extraordinary powers, the ratifi- 
cation of Unesco’s Constitution was 
promulgated by decree. On October 11, 
the Minister of Justice informed the 
press that the Cabinet had approved 
Costa Rica’s accession to, Unesco. 
High Altitude Studies in Peru 
ince the holding of the second Gen- 
S eral Conference in Mexico at the 
end of 1947, Unesco’s work has 
gained in scope, weight and effective- 
ness among the Latin American peo- 
ples. The Marbial Valley pilot project, 
in Haiti, a report on which appeared 
in Vol. II, No. 5 of the Courier last 
 
formerly 
situated in Rio de Janeiro, has now been re-opened in Montevideo, 
The Office, part of whose 
Three volumes of the 
June, is just one aspect of this work. 
A seminar on education and illite- 
racy was held at Caracas in 1948 and 
its work continued at a further semi- 
nar in August and S3ptember of this 
year at Quitandinha (Rio de Janeiro. 
Chile has-lately been the seat of a 
Congress on Marine Biology, while in 
Lima a symposium on High Altitude 
Biology is now in progress. In Mexi- 
co, the Government is launching a 
major experiment in fundamental edu- 
cation in the State of Mayarii, and 
Unesco’s 1950 programme provides for 
the opening of a Unesco Regional Cen- 
tre in Havana to co-ordinate the Orga- 
nization’s work in the countries of the 
Western Hemisphere. In Colombia 
another fundamental education experi- 
ment has already begun to yield 
results. 
Hundreds of newspapers are already 
regularly receiving articles, news and 
stories on advances in science, art and 
culture supplied by Unesco. The Orga- 
nization is using the four short-wave 
bands of the United Nations broadcast- 
ing station at Lake Success for educa- 
tional and cultural programmes, which 
are re-transmitted by numerous Latin 
American stations. 
Lastly, the work of the Regional 
Field Science Co-operation Office, 
which is now at work in Montevideo, 
deserves special mention. One of the 
best examples of the kind of practical 
work this Science Co-operation Office 
has been doing is the help it was able 
to give the Philippines whose maize 
fields had been ravaged by locusts. 
ed, and after carrying out in- 
vestigations it forwarded supplies 
of a variety of maize immune to lo- 
custs which is utilized in Mexico. 
From these supplies it has been pos- 
sible to grow seedlings for planting so 
that much of the maize sown in the 
Philippines next year will be safe, 
from this pest. 
An indication of the speed at which 
Unesco’s work is being done among the 
peoples of Latin America is that the 
programme laid down for this Centre 
by the meeting of Scientific Experts 
on Latin America, and estimated to 
require two years, has been completed 
in less than seven months. 
T he Montevideo office was consult-

## [Page 3](074946engo.pdf#page=3) 3

### 74949: Avicenna, Bach, Balzac, Confucius: tributes to four great men planned for 1950 UNESCO Conference

### 74217: L'UNESCO définit les bases de sa coopération avec les Organisations régionales

AVICENNA. BACH, 
BALZAC. CONFUCIUS 
Page 3 — UNESCO COURIER 
MEN PLANNED FOR 1950 UNESCO CONFERENCE 
HE first decision taken at 
last month's meeting of the 
Unesco Executive Board was 
fo elect Sir John Maud, Permanent 
Secretary of the British Minis- 
try of Education, as its chairman 
for 1949-50, in succession to 
Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan of 
India. Professor Louis Verniers 
(Belgium) and Professor Alex 
Photiades (Greece) were elected as 
first and second vice-chairmen. 
The preparation of Unesco’s next 
General Conference which is to be 
held at Florence, Italy, was also 
discussed by the Board, which fixed 
the opening date for May 22. The 
Florence Conference will be a full- 
scale one, in contrast to the 
“business” conference held in Paris 
last September, which discussed 
only minor changes in the 
progamme, 
After considering whether a 
general debate similar to the one 
organized in connection with the 
Paris Conference should be held at 
Florence, the Board decided that it 
would be more suitable to replace 
this by a very full discussion of 
the Director-General's report, thus 
allowing delegations to go fully into 
the aims and policies of the 
organization. : 
Anniversaries 
To Be Celebrated 
HE Board, however, expressed 
the hope that, in connection 
with the Conference, the Ita- 
lian National Commission for 
Unesco would be able to organize 
lectures and other activities to 
illustrate various aspects of Italian 
culture, as well as to commemorate 
the works of several of the world’s 
great men whose anniversaries fall 
in 1950. 
Following a suggestion by Pro- 
fessor Chen Yuan, of China, that 
these should include Confucius, the 
2,500th . anniversary of whose 
birth is being celebrated in 1950, 
M. Torres Bodet declared that 
Unesco was already preparing to 
honour this anniversary as well as 
those of Avicenna, Bach and Balzac. 
It would be ready to co-operate 
with the Italian National Commis- 
sion and to provide material that 
had already been collected for these 
anniversaries. 
At Florence, the chief task of the 
delegates will be to consider the 
“streamlined” programme which 
was called for by the Paris Confer- 
ence. The examination of this 
programme was begun by ‘the 
Executive Board last month. 
After discussing a text suggested 
by the Director-General, the Execu- 
tive Board requested its programme 
committee to prepare, with the 
help of a small working party, a 
programme in three parts : a basic 
programme, a list of the working 
methods the organization will 
employ to put its programme into 
effect and finally, work plans for 
1951. This draft will be examined 
by the Board at its meeting next 
month, along ‘with the Director- 
General's budget proposals for 
1951, before being submitted to 
Member States and finally to the 
Florence Conference. 
new step in the development of 
A Unesco's relations with the 
world's regional organizations 
was also taken by the Board, which 
authorized M. Jaime Torres Bodet, 
the Director-General, to co-operate, 
with the Council of Europe. 
This decision means that Unesco 
will now be able to provide the 
Council of Europe with information 
and technical documentation on 
questions with which Unesco has 
been concerned in its own work. 
The possibility of eoncluding an 
agreement with the Council in 
order that Unesco may also carry 
out certain work on ifs behalf will 
also be examined by M. Torres 
Bode. 
Unesco’s move to begin co-operat- 
ing with the Council of Europe 
was made at the request of the 
Council's Secretary-General, follow- 
ing the decision of the European 
Committee of Ministers to establish 
contact with existing cultural 
bodies whose object is to promote 
and foster cultural co-operation 
between different eountries. 
The Council, which was formed 
last year, does not possess mach- 
inery to deal with cultural problems, 
nor does it propose to create, under 
  
    
BS 
4 —— 
The proposal made by the OAS 
is in accordance with a resolution 
passed by American teachers who 
attended the Rio de Janeiro 
Seminar on Illiteracy in the Ame- 
ricas, last August, that Unesco 
and the OAS should set up a centre 
of this type. It also illustrates 
the OAS desire to co-operate in 
spreading Unesco’s ideals and to 
help to carry out the Organization's 
work in America. 
Thanking the Lebanese Govern-    | § nl 
| nf 
- ; 
 
Unesco’s Executive Board, some of whose members are shown above. at their meeting in 
Paris last month, has a membership of eighteen. Those s3rving on the Board are elected by 
Unesco’s General Conference for their personal distinction in the fields of Unesco’s interests 
and having regard “to the diversity of cultures and « balanced geographical distribution”. 
Its members act on behalf of the Conference as a whole between the latter's sessions and 
not as delegates of their respective countries. 
its own authority, new technical 
bodies for the study of these 
problems. But another important 
reason which Unesco and the 
Council of Europe have for working 
together is that the great majority 
of the Council's members also 
belong to Unesco. 
Unesco is planning co-operation 
with another regional organization, 
the Organization of American 
States (OAS) and the lines along 
which this is to be developed were 
discussed by Unesco’'s Fourth Ge- 
neral Conference in Paris, last 
September, 
At that time, the Conference 
authorized the Director-General to 
negotiate an agreement with the 
OAS for collaboration: in the 
Western Hemisphere on education- 
al, scientific and cultural problems 
in which the aims of the two 
organizations are closely related. 
Mexican Fundamental 
Eduecatien Centre 
NOTHER important decision 
taken by the Board, in 
accordance with a General 
Conference resolution, was for the 
setting up in Mexico of a regional 
fundamental education {raining 
centre for teachers and workers 
and for the production of materials. 
This will be undertaken in co- 
operation with the Mexican 
Government and the Organization 
of American States. The OAS has 
offered a contribution of $100.000 
for the operation of the Centre in 
1950, while the Mexican Governi.ent 
will provide facilities for its 
housing and upkeep. 
The OAS has also offered the 
assistance of its specialized insti- 
tutes and services which deal with 
education, health, agriculture, the 
conservation of natural resources, 
labour, co-operatives and housing. 
These services will provide the 
Centre with valuable technical 
data, advice from experts and infor- 
mation on experiments they have 
already carried out in America. 
ment for an invitation to establish 
an adult education training and 
production centre in Beirut, the 
Board agreed that should it be 
possible to set up a second centre, 
similar to the one planned for 
Mexico, this would be done in the 
Lebanon, 


### 74218: Great Unescan becomes head of Executive Board

| “GREAT UNESCAN"” 
BECOMES HEAD OF 
- EXECUTIVE BOARD 
IR John Maud, Permanent Secretary of the 
British Ministry of Education, who was re 
cently elected as Chatrman of the Unesco 
Executive Board for 1948-50, has been a member 
of the Board since the formation of Unesco in 
~
 
15948, 
It war Sir John, speaking 
U.S. National Conference on 
Unesco, in Cleveland, who coined 
the word “Unescan”, meaning a 
persen who undertakes his réspons’- 
bilities as a citizen of the world 
and takes part in Unesco's activity. 
Since then, this word has become 
more and more widely used. 
M. Torres Bodet, Director-Cene- 
ral of Unesco, recently recalled the 
term when, paying a tribute to the 
work done for Unesco by the newly 
¢lected Executive Board Chairman, 
he referred to S'r John as “this 
great Unescan”. 
Born in 1908, Sir John was edu 
cated at Eton and later at Oxford, 
from where he went to Harvard 
College (USA) as Henry P. Davi 
son Scholar. From 1932 to 1939 he 
was a Fellow and Dean, University 
College, Oxford, and University 
Lecturer in Politics (1938.1939). He 
was also invited by the Johannes. 
burg City Council to write the 
municipal history of the city. 
A
 
A
 
R
T
 
P
C
 
P
T
 
TE
 
S
E
T
 
T
E
 
r i 
at last year's 
As a tribute to the work done 
for Unesco by Dr. CE. Beeby, 
who, until last October was As- 
sistant Director-General in charge 
of education, the Executive Board 
conferred on him the title of Hono- 
rary Counsellor. Dr. Beeby who 
has now returned to his post as 
Director of Education for New 
Zealand, is the third person to be 
so honoured. Unesco’s other Hono- 
rary Counsellors being Dr. Julian 
Huxley, the organization's first 
Director-General and Dr. Joseph 
Needham, former head of the 
Department of Natural Sciences. 
The Board made a preliminary 
study of general problems con- 
cerning relations between Unesco 
and non-governmental organiza- 
tions, aimed at achieving more 
efficient co-operation. 
Amounts Due From 
Member States 
T ed, providing for co-opera- 
tion with and assistance for 
two international organizations — 
the International Council for Philo- 
sophy and Humanistic Studies and 
the Couneil for the Co-ordination of 
International Congresses of Medical 
Sciences — which were recently set 
up with the help of Unesco. 
Proposals - for contracts with 
fourteen international organiza- 
tions, providing assistance totalling 
$72.520 were approved, as well as 
the detailed distribution of grants- 
in-aid amounting to $231,079 for 
the International Council of 
Museums, the International Theatre 
Institute, the International Council 
of Scientific Unions and the Inter- 
national Studies Conference. 
At the Paris General Conference, 
delegates were disturbed by the fact 
that budget contributions of some 
Member States for preceding years 
were still outstanding. 
The Executive Board has 
therefore authorized the Director 
General to start publishing a 
statement, on the lines of the one 
published by the United Nations, 
showing what sums still remain 
due from Member States. 
  
Food where be became Deputy Sec. 
retary and later Second Secretary 
transferring in 1944 to the Ministry 
of Reconstruction, where he was 
Second Secretary. Before joining 
the Staff of the Ministry of Educa- 
tion he occupied for a time the po- 
sition of Secretary at the Office of 
the Lord President of the Council. 
Throughout his association with 
Unesco’s Executive Board, Sir John 
has distinguished himself by his 
energy and s'neerity. Unesco's 
appreciation of his contribution 
towards the success of the Board's 
work was expressed by M. Torres 
Bodet, when he addressed the 
U.K National Commission for 
Unesco, last April. 
“You are always ready, Sir John~, 
said the Director-General, “at the 
right moment 
TRIBUTES TO FOUR GREAT 
Wo agreements were approv- 
with the word of 
wisdom, the word that brings the 
discussion back to the right chan. 
nel, and that saves time for us all 
50 that we can carry on our work 
prefitadbly and faithfully.” 
q

## [Page 4](074946engo.pdf#page=4) 3

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 4 
  
 
    
  
    
he Universal Declaration of Hu- 
man Rights was adopted by the 
United Nations General Assembly 
on December 10, 1948. A few hours 
after this historic decision, Unesco’s 
Third General Conference, meeting in 
Beirut, Lebaron, passed a resolution 
instructing the Director-General to 
“stimulate the dissemination of infor- 
mation about this Declaration... to en- 
courage its incorporation... in teach- 
ing about the United Nations in 
schools...* 
Since then, Unesco has used every 
available means to make all men 
know and understand the principles 
enshrined in the Declaration. 
In addition, M. Jaime Torres Bodet, 
Unesco’s Director-General, in a widely 
circulated letter, proposed setting 
aside December 10 each year for the 
celebration of “Human Rights Day”. 
For Many — The 
First Time 
ince adopting this suggestion, au- 
thorities in countries throughout 
the world have been planning the 
most appropriate and effective ways of 
observing the first anniversary of the 
Declaration’s adoption. 
As these plans were put into effect 
on December 10, millions of people 
listening to radios or attending public 
meetings were told, many of them for 
the first time, of the nature of their 
rights as men and women as well as 
their corresponding duties, 
Lack of space prevents the ‘“Cou- 
rier" publishing individual accounts of 
events in countries where Human 
Rights Day was celebrated, but these 
reports coming from all parts of the 
world had one thing in common; they 
all confirmed the importance of De- 
cember 10 1949 as a milestone on the 
foad to making Human Rights come 
ive. 
In tiny village schools and the large 
modern ones of big cities teachers read 
and explained the Declaration’s 30 
articles and emphasized its importance 
as a landmark in the fight for free- 
dom. 
Spreading Human 
~ Rights Message 
he leading citizens of many coun- 
tries spoke on human rights 
through the radio and at public 
meetings. Leaflets, pamphlets and 
books, bearing the full text of the 
Declaration were widely distributed. 
Special ceremonies, including dra- 
matizations of the Rights, and concerts 
in which artists and musicians from 
different countries took part, were 
organized by Unesco National Com- 
missions and non-governmental organi- 
zations in many parts of the world. 
Full support in the efforts to make 
December 10 a truly international 


### 74221: The First "Human Rights" anniversary

THE FIRST 
“HUMAN RIGHTS” 
ANNIVERSARY 
  
    
festival was given by Foreign and 
Education Ministries, by officially 
designating it as Human Rights Day 
and by arranging for it to be celebra- 
ted in universities and schools, and 
by distributing documentary material. 
Special articles on the subject were 
published in the daily press, some 
newspapers reproducing the text of 
the Declaration. Films which helped 
to publicize Human Rights, included 
a short documentary prepared by 
Unesco for its Human Rights Exhibi- 
tion in Paris, and since copied for 
screening in public cinemas. 
Human Rights Day 1949 marked the 
end of a year's efforts in the struggle 
to convert the principles of the Decla- 
ration into facts everywhere in the 
world. It was also the prelude to 
nsw and increased endeavours for, as 
M. Torres Bodet, Director-General of 
Unesco, declared in his anniversary 
message: “It is not enough to set 
aside a day in commemoration of the 
principles that we are now celebrat- 
ing.” 


### 74950: December 10: a day to remember every day

sscssenin § DAY TO 
REMEMBER EVERY DAY 
A “PLAN OF CAMPAIGN" IN MANKIND'S 
STRUGGLE AGAINST OPPRESSION 
n the first anniversary of the adoption by the United Nations 
General Assembly of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, M. Jaime 
Torres Bodet, Director-General of UNESCO, issued a call to action for 
the bridging of the gap that exists between the promise of the Declaration and 
its fulfilment. 
In his message, whose text we publish below, M. Torres Bodet warned that 
the Declaration would seem a far off goal “as long as men anywhere still have to 
endure hunger and want, injustice and ignorance”. : 
N 10 December 1948, the General 
() ssempiy of the United Nations 
proclaimed the Universal Declari- 
tion of Human Rights. The observance 
of this important anniversary would be 
‘void of meaning if we, who are cele- 
brating it, failed to realize the challenge 
that it brings: what have we done, what 
are we doing, and what can we do in 
the future to help ensure that the lofty 
principles of that Declaration are car- 
ried into effect? 
No man today, in these troubled times, 
can take refuge in the thought that, for 
countless centuries, the human race has 
existed without exercising the universal 
precepts as contained in the Declara- 
tion. The infamy of our violent past 
can account, perhaps, for our distrust 
of the future; it does not, however, jus- 
tify present inaction. 
The Declaration of 10 December is 
not only a milestone in history : it is 
also a plan of campaign. Every para- 
graph is a call to action; every line a 
condemnation of indolence; every sen- 
tence reproves some aspect—individual 
or national—of our past; every word 
forces us to re-examine our presenl 
state. Can any of- us say: “Nol 
Guilty?" 
No country is guiltless of the oppres- 
sion that still weighs upon mankind. 
How many States can boast, even 
within their own frontiers, a real and 
complete code of freedoms? And, even 
it they could, would they, by that fact 
alone, have fulfilled their duty towards 
the rest of the world? 
Written in the Peoples’ Blood 
RUTH recognizes no frontiers. The 
‘A destiny of man is a universal re- 
sponsibility shared by everyone. So 
long as any right of any man is violated, 
the United Nations’ Declaration will 
hold us guilty of cowardice, negligence, 
laziness and inhumanity. The document 
signed in Paris a year ago will seem a 
very far off goal so long as men 
anywhere still have to endure hunger 
and want, injustice and ignorance. 
The Declaration of 10 December 
moves us—it moves us because it was 
writlen in the blood of millions of men 
of Education. 
course of a speech he said 
CT éé HE new education, so strongly 
marked since its inception by 
the impress of your thought 
can properly be described as revolu- 
tionary — and I think the main reason 
why it is so, may well be that many o; 
its pioneers were doctors like yourself. 
It was the study of the abnormal child 
and appreciation of the impossibility 
of applying to the backward or men- 
tally deficient, the methods of elemen- 
tary education then in vogue that 
brought you to devise — originally for 
their Denefit — a new technique and a 
new equipment. Nevertheless your 
most important innovation was a new 
approach. Your ideas, like all great 
ideas, were simple; but what you 
advocated for the teaching of Dback- 
ward children proved so fruitful of 
results that its suitability for all young 
children was at once apparent — the 
doctor became a great leader in edu- 
cation, and the whole of education 
reaped the benefit. 
“Your primary idea, comprehending 
in itself all the remainder, was that 
action precedes thought “and that 
thought is the child of action. Its 
direct consequence was emphasis on 
notor adjustment and the co-ordination   


### 74222: The Doctor who opened a new door to education

| THE DOCTOR WHO OPENED 
|A NEW DOOR TO EDUCATION 
ARLY last month, Maria Montessori, the distinguished Italian woman educa- 
E tionist, made a short visit to Paris for consultations with Unesco’s Department 
The first woman in Italy to graduate in medicine. Maria Montes- 
sori developed the ‘*‘free discipline” method of educating children which has since 
had a world-wide effect on teaching practices. 
in the work she began nearly 50 years ago. 
During her stay in Paris, Maria Montessori was honoured by the French Govern- 
ment which made her an Officer of the Order of the Legion of Honour. 
On December 7, during a reception in her honour at Unesco House, M. Torres 
Bodet, Unesco’s Director-General, paid tribute to her life's work, when in the 
Today. aged 79. she is still engaged 
of movement and perception; and 
equipment of your devising taught the 
child to do things involving the first 
beginnings of geometry and perhaps 
even of logic. But there were other 
consequences : the whole legacy of 
outmoded methods of formal, merely 
verbal, teaching was exploded; the way 
was opened to an active method of 
education; and it was shown that the 
pupil — whatever his age — is not 
just a brain to be stuffed, but a many- 
sided being, needing full play for all 
his faculties.” 
“... And there is yet a further tribule 
of thanks and admiration to be paid to 
one who brought so clear and keen a 
vision to the problem of peace; for it 
was you who reminded us all that care 
lavished on the child would all be 
wasted unless it made him a respon- 
sible citizen, strong to meet the chal- 
lenge of our age. Here your concerns 
and ours are one : our task is to help 
the teachers of all nations to train 
those future citizens of the world 
without whom all our undertakings 
must rest sterile. Madame Montessort. 
Unesco accounts itself honoured bY 
your presence.”   
and women who died that we might be 
able, one day, to proclaim these prin- 
ciples. And what is wriiten in the 
peoples’ blood can never be erased. 
Documents such as the Universal De- 
claration of Human Rights are incen- 
tives not to complacency but to heroism. 
There is little value in writing them; 
the important thing is to live them. 
They are not just dreams or hopes. 
They are calls to action, showing us the 
tremendous gap that exists between the 
promise and the fulfilment. It is we 
who must close that gap, bringing all 
our talent and strength to the task. To 
sustain this ideal, built up at such heavy 
cost, demands of us tenacily and cou- 
rage. 
A Great Symbol : Man’s Dignity 
T rat is why Unesco is trying to 
make known the Declaration of 
10 December evevwhere, both to 
the adult and the child in school. Our 
conduct will never be imbued with its 
principles if these are taught mechanic- 
ally. These principles can only be 
learnt through practice. Every right 
has its corresponding duty : for ins- 
tance, the right to education implies 
our duty to give others the edu- 
cation they need; the right to work 
implies that we must work to earn that 
right; the right to freedom of thought 
implies that we must both think freely 
and tolerate others’ freedom of thought; 
the right to equality before the law 
implies the need to respect the laws 
that ensure that equality; and, finally, 
that fundamental right, rooted in the 
hidden depths of our being—the right 
to life-—bids us respect in all ecir- 
cumstances the right of others to live. 
. To spread throughout the world a 
knowledge of the Declaration of 10 De- 
cember is to launch a worldwide 
campaign for decent living condi- 
tions for all, to be brought about by 
governments in solemn and practical 
recognition of their duties in regard to 
the social development of mankind. 
Unesco’s great mission is to help States 
to fulfil those duties in the fields of 
education, of science and of culture. 
And what more inspiring role could we 
ascribe to culture, education and science 
than to make all men the guardians, and 
therefore the faithful executors, of the 
Universal Declaration? 
n a day like this, millions of 
O children bow before a great sym- 
“bol : the dignity of man—of the 
man that each child, between hope and 
fear, is preparing to become. Let us 
try to ensure that the world they will 
inlrerit is happier than the one into 
which we, ourselves, were born. The 
nations are tired of fighting [fruitless 
wars; but they are no less fired of 
hearing barren precepts. The peoples 
want words that are borne out by deeds. 
Every one of the rights of man was 
fought for : and we must fight to keep 
and extend them. It is not enough to 
set aside a day in commemoration of 
the principles that we are now celebrat- 
ing. Celebrating them means prepar- 
ing to carry them out. And carrying 
them out means practising them every 
day, every hour, in every action of ours 
throughout our lives. Thus shall we 
be men living in independence, courage 
and faith in the condition of man. 

## [Page 5](074946engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  
Last year, UNESCO'S Radio Unit 
asked broadcasting organizations in - 
different parts of the world to send 
in stories from their own countries 
suitable for children aged from six 
to ten; and having as their basic 
theme the idea that the best way 
to settle a dispute is by sitting down 
and talking things over. 
From the first stories it received, 
the Radio Unit has selected | 2 which 
are being translated into English, 
French and Spanish, and adapted for 
broadcasting. This first series of 
“Children’s Stories for Peace” will 
shortly be sent out to radio orga- 
nizations for use in children’s 
programmes. 
The tale below, which comzs from 
America, is included in the first 
series of “Stories for Peace”.     
The Mighty 
One was sO wor- 
ried he could 
not sleep. Night 
after night 
he lay awake 
with his sad 
thoughts. But 
think as he 
might, he did 
not know what 
to do. 
The merry twinkle of the stars, even 
the smiling face of the full moon, 
could not make him forget his sorrow, 
so full of noise were his ears, a ter- 
rible noise that came from the earth. 
Everybody there was fighting every- 
body else, and the noise they all made 
filled the space. Just what was the 
trouble that caused the noise that 
filled the space and kept the Mighty 
One awake was not clear even to the 
Mighty One himself. 
For no reason at all, or so it seemed, 
Dog chased Cat up a tree and vowed 
he'd never let Cat come down. After 
awhile, Cat became hungry and ie 
miauled as loud as he could. Dog was 
unmoved. Perhaps because a dog 
with a full stomach does not knew 
how hungry a cat with an empty sto- 
mach is. 
But iwhy did Bear send a rock roll- 
ing down the mountainside ? Thun- 
dering into the valley, it crushed Baby 
Deer on its way. 
The Bird People were just as bad. 
Eagle took the twigs Pigeon had 
gathered for his nest. Pigeon cried. 
It was the same with the Tree Peo- 
ple. Willow sent a root across the 
whole width of the stream, sprouted 
from it countless branches, weaving a 
Light net which caught all the Fish 
0 
EARTHWORMS LOST 
THE RACE 
ven the peaceful earthworms came 
out of their tunnels to challenge 
the beetles to a race — which 
they lost. 
It seemed that everyone hated every- 
one else. The Bird People, the Fish 
Folk, Trees, Hills, Grasses, all the 
animals, even those living under the 
  
" = ort gL 
    H
E
N
E
E
E
R
E
R
E
E
S
!
 
          
  
  
§ 
pe 
fi. , a BW oT 
1 dank 
Breet. of the™ 
 
Page 5 — UNESCO COURIER 
: Ma : 
we v ¥ 


### 74951: The Making of the first peace pipe: a tale from American Indian folk lore

(A Tale from American Indian Folk Lore) 
ground, all around the world everybody 
was fighting, including the men. 
It was the men who made the most 
noise of all, quarreling, fighting and 
killing each other so skilfully, that 
only a few of them were left alive. 
No wonder the Mighty One could not 
sleep. He had made the world and all 
the peoples in it. Now they were 
destroying each other. 
« What shall I do? » he asked 
himself over and over again, without 
 
finding any answer, until he thought 
of calling the winds. They came all 
at once and together in one big gust, 
the North Wind, the South Wind, the 
East Wind and the West Wind, bring- 
ing along their Half-Brothers and all 
the Breezes. 
« What shall I do to make the 
peoples of the earth stop fighting ? » 
asked the Mighty One. “I gave them 
food to eat and water to drink, the 
sun to keep them warm and the moon 
to cheer them by night. I made many 
of each kind so that none would feel 
lonely. But instead of loving each 
other, they quarrel and fight. I must 
find some way of stopping them.” 
gh OT TT 
  
     
  
  
 
The Wind Persons listened in si- 
lence. Softly they consulted each 
other. : 
“We have an idea”, they said finally, 
whispering it into the ears of the 
Mighty One. 
GATHERING AT 
RED STONE MOUNTAIN 
HE Mighty One smiled, thanked 
the Winds and immédiately sent a 
message to all the peoples of the 
earth to gather around the Mountain 
of the Red Stone. He also told each 
person to bring a gift, something of 
his very own, that no one else could 
give. 
From all over the world they came 
and crowded on to the mountain, 
quarreling, fighting as fiercely as ever 
They made so much noise, they never 
even noticed the Mighty One was 
there. 
“Get out of my way!” 
“Why did we all have to come 
here?” angrily they shouted, pushing 
each other. 
The Mighty One answered them. 
“I asked you all to come here to 
make you happy.” 
All heard him and they were quiet. 
“I gave you friends to 
love. I gave you food and 72+4 
water and clothes and 
everything you wanted. 
But you fight and quarrel. 
Iam sad. I amsosad I 
cannot sleep. And be- 
cause I cannot sleep I am 
very, very tired.” 
Everyone was so still 
you could hear the drops 
of water drip off Raintree 
and sink into the soft sand below. 
Quietly, one after another, each person 
brought his gift and laid it at the feet 
of the Mighty One. 
Beaver brought a whisker. Dog gave 
a claw. Eagle dropped on the pile his 
beautifullest feather. Willow a bundle 
of branches. Mink gave his white- 
tipped summer tail. 


### 74224: World task seen through eyes of youth

WORLD TASK SEEN THROUGH EYES 
| TOGETHER WEBUILD 
A NEW WORLD 
  
While the pile was growing and 
growing the .winds blew about excit- 
edly because they knew what was 
going to happen. 
« Now », said the Mighty One, when 
all ‘had given what they had: to- give, 
« I shall make you a gift. Of all the 
gifts you brought I shall make a pipe» 
~ So saying, he picked up from the 
ground a smooth red stone, took “ne of 
Willow's branches and fixed one to the 
other with some Bee's wax. To this 
he fastened Eagle's feather. Rabbit's 
fur, and all the other things, neatly 
tying them with strips of Buffalo's 
hide until all the gifts were gone. He 
painted the pipe with the bright 
colours of the rainbow. When it was 
dry, he took tobacco out of his tobacco 
pouch, filled the pipe and lit it. The 
‘Winds provided the draft. 
“Now, each one in turn will take 
cne pul ” he said, and he showed the 
people how to smoke, by taking the 
first puff himself. 
One after another, each person took 
one puff, passing the pipe to the next 
person, until all had tasted the sweet 
taste of friendship. 
And then, one after another, each 
person joined in the chorus, until all 
were singing the song of the Peace. 
Pipe: “Nin-do-kidj-an-nin-do-kidj an- 
nin-do kidj-an.” 
CLI Hiss EHS fii Ses 
Nn do-Nd) on mn 
ELE Err ESfeE=—ire=t 
do-4idj om. min. 
  
When finally the pipe came back to 
the Mighty One, he said: “This is 
your Pipe of Peace. Each one of you 
gave something to make it - something 
of himself. Remember, whenever a 
person quarrels with another person, 
let them not fight, but come together, 
smoke the Peace Pipe and quietly talk 
things over.” 
  
OF YOUTH 
TOGETHER 
  
awarded la the form of a gran! to enable winners slither to Gravel abroad. sttend eo : 
scquire further education or lo purchase books or other 
been used on the Lront page is the work of & 
. Victoria. Australia. Ahoy (from left to right) are posters submi 
Provine i 
a léyear-old fo { a

## [Page 6](074946engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 74952: Films bring art to the people

UNESCO COURIER — Page 6 
FILMS BRINC 
TO THE PEC 
In the following article, Peter Urlik 
describes some of the art films that are 
today helping “the many as well as 
the few” to develop a sense of aesthetic 
appreciation. 
* kx 
0ST of the world’s finest art 
treasures are still enjoyed 
by too few people. The 
reason is not that people 
generally are insensitive to beauty, 
but that works of art are often diffi- 
cult of access. This holds true even 
for countries exceptionally endowed 
with art treasures, like Italy. or 
France. 
For centuries, many of the finest 
works of art—enduring testimonies of 
man’s skill and aspiration towards 
beauty—have thus remained reserved 
for the few. Architectural monu- 
ments, sculptures and paintings can- 
not be moved easily, nor is it desirable 
that they should be removed from ori- 
ginal and natural settings. Often 
such art treasures are the private pro- 
perty of nobility or clergy, or are 
placed in museums in a few big cities. 
In any case, only a comparatively lim- 
ited number of people will be able to 
admire them. 
With the increasing educational fac- 
ilities of modern civilization, man’s 
W
h
e
 
R
a
W
 
a renaissance of art-appreciation. 
More and more people of all ages, 
social classes, countries and races 
want to see and appreciate art trea- 
sures of the past and present. This 
is a growing cultural need calling for 
the employment of new techniques. 
HERE are, of course, museums in 
many parts of the world with re- 
presentative art collections of the 
most brilliant periods. There have 
been travelling exhibitions and experi- 
ments with shows of specially pro- 
duced and selected high-qualivy repro- 
ductions. But all this is limited in 
scope, and certainly far from com- 
mensurate with the needs of a poten- 
tially unlimited public—countless men 
and women cof all countries. 
Radio has done much to bring music 
to the people. Now another of the 
media of mass communications, the 
cinema, is beginning to do the same 
for the pictorial arts. How effective 
the cinema can be in bringing the arts 
to the people was impressively illus- 
 
In the Belgian film. “Rubens”, Henry Storck and Paul Haesaerts. have used many new 
devices to draw out the very essence of the artist's work and to highlight his intentions. 
Following the close-up (above) of Rubens‘eye, from his famous seli-portrait at Windsor 
Castle, the producers have shown four portraits of Rubens, as he saw himself at various 
periods in his li 
Portrait of Rubens (circa 1623) from the 
collection of the Uifizi Gallery, Florence. 
It was between 1611 and 1625 that Rubens 
painted the greatest number of pictures. 
including many official works. His more 
personal period came in later years. 
life.     
awareness of the place of art in his 
life has been re-awakened. It would 
probably not be amiss to speak of 
  
  
$ 
  
  
  
   
An example of how the camera helps to “rediscover” a work of art. Fra Angelice’s “La Leggenda 
dei Santi Cosma e Damiano’, showing the technical indications of Luciano Emmer, leader of the 
interpretative school of art film production in Italy. Emmer uses the camera to select, isclate and 
. magnify the details of a painting and with ingenious cutting and appropriate musical background, 
: gives life and mobility to the whole. 
  
trated during the recent Tenth In- 
ternational Film Festival in Venice, 
when about 20 outstanding document- 
ary films on art subjects were shown. 
Whether produced in colour or in black 
and white; whether lasting one hour 
or only a few minutes, the best among 
them make it possible for the layman 
to appreciate and wholeheartedly enjoy 
the masterpieces in painting, sculp- 
ture or music. 
These films came from France, In- 
dia and Italy, They were certainly 
not the first art documentaries; 
yet some of them marked a new 
technique of making paintings, sculp- 
tures, architectural monuments and 
music come to life for the specta- 
tor with a particular intensity. To 
take one example: an Italian film on 
the great Florentine master, Sandro 
Botticelli, by Luigi Cristiani. A new 
colour-technique contributed to its 
pictorial excellence, but its most strik- 
ing feature was the intelligent scenic 
interpretation of the poetry, mysti- 
cism and mastery of Botticelli’s art. 
No visit to a museum could bring 
the spectator so near the very essence 
of artistic creation, nor convey so di- 
rect a visual understanding as these 
film sequences which show such works 
of world renown as the “Birth of Ve- 
nus”, “Primavera”, “Magnificat”, 
“Adoration” and the “Madonna of St. 
Barnabas”. Similarly successful film 
ventures are “Michelangelo’s Last 
by J. P. URLIK 
Judgment” and “Lorenzo the Magni- 
ficent”, produced with great care and 
discrimination by an Italian film stu- 
dio specializing in the production of- 
films on art. 
Films are also showing to increas-: 
ingly large audiences such resplendent 
examples of architecture as, for 
instance, “Santa Maria della Salute”, 
a film about the baroque basilica 
built by Baldassare Longhera in 1630 
to express the gratitude of the: 
people of Venice for their escape from. 
annihilation by pestilence. : 
Thanks to this film, the majestic 
cupola of this church, which rises as: 
a landmark of singular beauty at the 
entrance of the Grand Canal in 
Venice, will be seen by many 
thousands of people, who might 
otherwise never have even dreamt of 
buildings so perfect and glorious. 
Italy’s lead in art documentaries is. 
understandable , for Italy is a country 
of unequalled art treasures and tra- 
ditions, but other countries are not 
 
lacking in films of quality and interest. 
A Frenchman, J. K. Raymond, has 
made a delightful short film on 
“Islamic Art”. An Indian, G. M. 
Bhavnani, produced the remarkable 
film “Saga in Stone”, shown for the 
first time in Europe at the recent 
Venice Film Festival. This picture 
will acquaint the public of the world 
with fascinating examples of Indian 
architecture of the classical 15th and 
16th Centuries, with temples and 
intricate facades that seem to be alive 
with sculptured gods and godesses of 
Indian mythology. 
HESE are but a few examples of a 
new kind of art documentary: 
which can contribute greatly to- 
wards a more general enjoyment and 
understanding of works of art, no 
matter where they originate, or what 
language the spectators speak. Two 
recent art films even succeeded in 
making language entirely superfluous. 
One of them might almost seem & 
“tour de force”, for while the specta- 
tor’s ear is filled with the music of 
Bach’s St. Matthew’s Passion, his eyes 
participate in the visions of some of 
the greatest painters of all times, whe

## [Page 7](074946engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

PLE 
depicted the scenes musically told in 
the great oratorio. 
Another composer, Mendelssohn, 
speaks wordlessly to people every- 
where, and he does so in a new and 
exciting manner in the film “Romance 
without Words”. Harmonies of 
sound and sight are blended with 
startling effect as three piano works 
by Mendelssohn are played while the 
architectural scenery of Venice un- 
folds before the eye, with the same 
palaces, canals, and gondolas, with the 
same play of light and shade on 
- sculptured ornaments, which inspired 
the composer to write his music dur- 
ing his stay in Venice in 1830. “Ro- 
mance without Words” lasts only 
12 minutes, and yet the impact of its 
visual and musical harmonies is such 
as to make the spectator momentarily 
lose his sense of time. 
These are indeed striking examples 
of the way in which the cinema is 
opening up new possibilities of aes- 
~ thetic appreciation, for the many as 
well as for the few. ’ 
  
  
Page 7 — UNESCO COURIER 
  
  
Sl ha ——— A —— i —~—— 
~ . — -> og hy 
A cinematic treatment of Rubens’ “L’Apothéose d’Henri IV”. In the film on Rubens, white outlines are drawn round sections of the painting tc focus 
attention on detail and composition or to suggest analogies, and even actual movements within the frame of the picture. 


### 74954: Science and the cinema: each helps the other

SCIENCE AND THE CINEMA 
- — EACH HELPS THE OTHER 
FORE the advent of (he 
brothers Lumiére and of Tho- 
mas Edison; before, indeed, 
the invention of the cinematograph, 
scientists had already devised several 
ingenious instruments able to register 
and analyse movements which escape 
the naked eye. 
In 1874, Pierre Janssen, the astro- 
nomer, was able to photograph the 
successive phases of Venus. In about 
1880, Marey invented a “photo-gun” in 
which the trigger moved plates into 
position rapidly enough to make it 
possible to photograph a bird in flight, 
whilst Eadweard Muybridge was able 
to record the movements of a galloping 
horse by means of a series of photo- 
graphs taken in quick succession. 
Indeed, the cinema was invented pri- 
marily for scientific’ purposes rather 
than for those of art and enter- 
tainment. 
As a scientific instrument, the cine- 
ma has two aspects which are comple- 
mentary to each other. On the one 
hand, scientific research brought tech- 
   


### 74952: Films bring art to the people

    Art films bring out the wealth of detail in works of art as, for example, in the above 
close-up of the eyes in another Van Gogh self-portrait. i 
camera pinpoints attention on a limited area and brings out every perfection — or flaw. 
Two years ago, Gaston Diehl, a young 
French art critic, working with Robert 
Hessens and Alain Resnais, made a film 
about Van Gogh, using such works as the 
self-portrait of Van Gogh (above, left) to 
interpret the artist's message. 
The supersensitive eye of the   
by Francis BOLEN 
nical improvements both to the camera 
and the film, whilst, on the other, 
films became a valuable means of 
research into the different branches 
of pure and applied science. 
Curiosity of man 
in the street 
N October 1947, an International 
Scientific Film Association (ISFA) 
was set up through the joint ef- 
forts of the Institut de Cinématogra- 
phie Scientifique, created in Paris in 
1930 by Jean Painlevé, and the 
Scientific Film Association of Scientific 
Workers. 
The third annual Congress of the 
I.S.F.A. was held last year in Brussels 
on the invitation of the Belgian Insti- 
tute of Scientific Film Production. 
Delegates and observers from more 
than 20 countries and from Unesco 
attended this meeting and also parti- 
cipated in a Festival of Scientific Films 
which was held in Brussels during 
the same period. 
‘Entries at’ the Festival came from 
Australia, Belgium, China, Czechoslo- 
vakia, France, Germany, Holland, 
India, Italy, Poland, the Soviet Union, 
South Africa, the United States and 
Uruguay. 
On the opening day of the Festival, 
the great ship-like hall of the Brussels 
Palace of Fine Arts was filled to capa- 
city. The opening ceremony was 
attended by Queen Elizabeth of Bel- 
gium and many prominent personali- 
ties of the scientific and film worlds, 
but the bulk of the audience number- 
ing some 2,000 was made up of ordi- 
nary men and women who had come 
to the Festival out of interest and 
sometimes out of sheer curiosity. 
Limitless fields 
of knowledge 
  
| B less than a week, more than 150 
“shorts” were shown which can be 
broadly classified as follows: 
popular scientific films, films on scien- 
tific research, educational films, films 
dealing with medicine and surgery and 
those depicting industrial processes. 
The complexity of subjects already 
dealt with and the limitless fields of 
knowledge which remain to be explor- 
ed by the camera are almost over- 
whelming. 
But the task is not only one of 
producing scientific films : it is essen- 
tial that these should have the largest 
possible circulation. It should, there- 
fore, be borne in mind that there are 
many international barriers to be 
overcome before their circulation can 
become truly international. 
It will be remembered that at its 
third General Conference at Beirut 
Unesco adopted an international agree- 
ment relating to the circulation and 
the spreading of educational, scienti- 
fic and cultural aids by audio-visual 
means. The agreement has now been 
submitted to the member states for * 
acceptance. It will come into effect as 
soon as ten countries have accepted it. 
In the meantime, I.S.F.A. at its third 
annual congress, has drawn up the 
draft of a bilateral agreement relating 
to the exchange of films produced by 
government departments. The char- 
acter and scope of this scheme are 
limited but it is a first step and one 
which may well lead to a more general 
type of agreement. 
Co-operation for which 
the world is richer 
| § order that films may circulate, it 
is necessary to create a demand. 
This is one of the reasons why the 
Brussels Congress decided to adopt an 
international card-index system. In 
future, all scientific films will be listed 
and analysed in their countries of ori- 
gin for reference, information and 
eventual use in other countries. Not 
only will this system promote the 
exchange of films but it will prevent 
work from being done twice. 
The Third Annual Congress of the 
I.S.F.A. has established three perma- 
nent committees. These bodies will 
concern themselves with films in the 
respective fields of industrial techni- 
ques, medicine and surgery and pure 
science. 
Among the schemes which are being 
actively promoted are the production 
of scientific films on an international 
basis, the creation of an international 
film library, and the publication of a 
magazine and of a year-book. 
The activities of the L.S.F.A. in the 
service of the cinema and of science 
are good news indeed. Each helps the 
other and the world is richer for it.

## [Page 8](074946engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 8 


### 74957: A "Prescription" for children's science books

TURK YPRESERI 
FOR CHILDREN'S SCIENCE 
a 
LY RAE By | ba SI SR, RIC 
hen Unesco asked Mrs. Amabel 
Williams-Ellis, a leading British 
writer, to prepare a report on 
“The Popularization of Science 
Through Books for Children”, it also re- 
quested that she make her approach some- 
what different from that employed in other 
reports of the “Popularization of Science” 
series, 
Mrs. Williams-Ellis, an experienced writer 
in this field, was asked to put'down as far 
as she could what experience had taught 
her were the considerations and techniques 
that an intending author should bear in 
mind. : 
This seemed to Unesco a useful approach 
because books of the kind under review 
are needed for children speaking many 
languages and having many backgrounds. 
Furthermore, education authorities—na- 
tional and local—will want to discuss the 
basis of such books before commissioning 
them, and it is hoped that these authorities, 
after reading this report, will have a clearer 
view about whom to approach and what 
standards to adopt before “approving” a 
book. 
Finally, the value of such an analysis to 
the intending author, to whom she directly 
addresses it, and toc the commercial pu- 
blishers, who are wondering if they shall 
use their capital on the production of such 
books, is equally clear. 
Maurice Goldsmith, of Unesco’'s Natural 
Sciences Department, has written for the 
“Courier” a short review of the report by 
Mrs. Williams-Ellis, which we publish 
below. 
  
ow are we to teach science to 
the child? This is a difficult 
question to which there is 
no simple, universal answer. We can 
define “science” as “the natural 
sciences”, but the definition of 
“child” is not as simple. One of 
the most common and fatal mis- 
takes the adult can make is -to 
assume that among the young of 
any community there is such. a 
being as “The Child.” : 
In fact, “a child from five io 
seven is unlike what the same child 
will be about nine; the nine and 
ten-year-old - is again unlike what 
it will be between 12 and 15. 
Moreover, at each stage the child 
will find a book intended for a’ 
different age group much less 
acceptable than an adult”. : 
These are the words of an expe- 
rienced writer of books on science 
for children. She is the British 
author, Mrs. Amabel Williams- 
Ellis, who has written more than 
20 books, including the very widely- 
read “How You Are Made”. 
Now, in a Report, “The Populari- 
 
line. 
own three children, 
finally her small grandchildren. 
“How You Are Made”. 
  
“with 


### 74228: Amabel Williams-Ellis

AMABEL WILLIANS-ELLIS 
MABEL WILLIAMSs-ELLIs, whose report 
A “The Popularization of Science 
Through Books For Children” is 
reviewed on this page, says she took up 
writing for children to provide books 
which her own children seemed to need 
and which were not to be found. She con- 
tinued this work, as she found it to be 
more stimulating and a better discipline 
to a writer than any other literary side- 
Mrs. Amabel Williams-Ellis, who was 
for some time literary editor of the Lon- 
don Weekly, the “Spectator”, says she has had “an almost continuous 
éducation from children”. The first of these was a young brother 
(John Strachey, the present British Minister of Food), then her 
then a group 
evacuated children who filled her house for most of the war, and 
Books for children have therefore figured largely among the total 
of over 20 which she has written, one of the most widely read heing 
Her other children’s books include "How You 
Began”, “The Beagle in South America”, “Men Who Found Out”, 
“What Shall I Be”, “A History of English Life”, and with the help 
of her husband and children “In and Out. of Doors ”. : 
At present she is working on a number of boeks which include 
“Human Nature Study”, “The Art of Being a Woman” and, for 
Unesco, a “Food and People” Geography. 
Mrs. Williams-Ellis, whose recreations are walking, sailing and 
travelling, has been round the world and has visited America, Aus- 
tralia and New Zealand as well as most European countries. 
  
C
T
R
L
 
P
S
R
 
T
N
 
12
 
—
 
" 
' 
: 
1 
i
 
<
n
m
e
 
PO
N—
,   
  
© way 0 gel & “close-up” of modern scientific 
~~ bow it works Is by joining © science club. 
¢ estrial Magaetism. a! the Carnegie Institule of Wash- 
ington. they are given « demonstration of the magnetic pull of 
the Depariment’s 60 inch Cyclotron. 
* 
the microscope. 
For most schoolbe 
zation of Science Through Books 
for Children,” specially written for 
Unesco's Division of Science and 
Its Popularization, Mrs. Williams- 
Ellis has produced something that 
may be described as “a prescrip- 
tion” for books of this kind. She has 
put down what experience has 
taught her are the considerations 
and fechniques that an intending 
author has to bear in mind. 
Although her experience is based 
upon writing books for children 
a western background, she 
believes that an author intending to 
write for children, say in Asia or 
the Carribean, will be able to make 
his own corrections. “The general- 
ization that ‘Children of a given 
age are alike all over the world’ is 
probably less of an exaggeration 
than any generalization that seeks 
to cover the tastes and capacities of 
an individual child through its 
different stages of development,” 
she declares. o : 
  
of from len to seventeen 
  
children are interested in ksowing “what makes the wheels 
These young people above have found that the bes! 
the most lmacinating Hem in the lab” i» 
en M. Jaime Torres Bodet. Unesco's Director: 
General attended the meeting of the U.K. National Commission 
for Unesco, in London. last year, he was laken by Mr Ceorge 
© Tomlinson (British Minister of Education) to meet some school. 
children visiting @ Unesco Exhibition. This peep into the micre- 
f scope co-lncided with the rival of the Director-General (on 
right) at the exhibition. 
Li eS AENE 7 a de ee len TO TRENT AIM Te TCE 
of prediction, in a 
  
    
  
wipmen! and learn 
siting the Depart. 
In this Reporl, slie discusses the 
techniques of “mediating the 
changing world of science {o the 
changing child (by means of 
books)”. 
The main job of the science 
writer for children is “to estab- 
lish in the child methods of 
thought . about the phenomenal 
world which have abundantly 
proved their success in action and 
by means of which mankind has al 
last achieved, in an unprecedented 
Jegree. either control, or the power 
number of 
fields If it is too much to hope to 
establish such thinking habits, the 
child can at least be made aware of 
them”. 
Scientific method — observalion, 
experimenl, and the construction 
and testing of hypotheses — must 
be made clear; and the techniques 
of science must be guided by a 
habit of mind which demands 
much more rigorous proof than is 
common in the everyday world. 
The emphasis must be on 
keeping to the concrete and the 
particular, on avoiding dogmatic 
abstraction. The author “must 
bear in mind that he has to correct, 
for his particular field, an existing 
bias towards dogma and rule of 
thumb, and even magic, which has 
its roots deep in the history of 
human culture”. 
Choeck=full 
af wisdom 
T HERE is no space here {o give 
examples of the common-sense 
matter - of - factness which 
makes this Report one of the besl 
written. It is chock-full of wisdom. 
Mrs. Williams-Ellis, after inves- 
tigating “What Are We Trying To 
Teach?”, goes on to consider: 
“Whom Are We Trying To Teach?” 
“What Branches of Science Should 
Be Taught?” “What Approaches 
Can We Use?”, and ends with a 
word of advice to the publisher. 
Above all, she warns, “all these 
rules and lips and ‘analysis of 
consumer needs’ are no good unless 
the author 71) has sympathy with 
children; (2; either knows his 
subject. or can, like a good lawyer, 
‘get up a brief’ efficiently; (3) knows 
how lo write. . Where there is a 
  
PTION’ | 
Howadays : oolboy : 
ibition ia the United States. Thomas 
leveland. Ohio. demonstrates the modem 
ing, agreeable and delightful. 
» 
BOOKS 
-
 
_
—
r
 
L
I
 
E
L
E
 
““sthentists” build thelr 
Li 
e
e
e
 
og 
R
E
 
ES
 
E
A
R
S
 
A
S
 
collaboration over such a book, as 
there oflen is and should be, the 
present writer ventures to suggest 
that i{ is the author — the artist 
in presentation — who should be 
the senior partner. : 
« Leaps across ages, 
conquers space » 
66 INALLY, we must never forgel 
F that now and then an author, 
who is an artist when he is 
on his day, can break all the rules 
and even produce that apparently 
impossible thing, the publisher's 
ideal -— an all-round. book on 
science for voung readers. This 
has been done, at least once, by 
Hin in his ‘Men and Mountains’, 
which is liked by children of any 
age between eight and fifteen, a 
hook which Maxim Gorky in his 
introduction rightly called ‘a prose 
poenv. 
“Here the details are fused by 
the author's imagination into one 
compelling whole. Ilin leaps across 
ages, he conquers space, and the 
reader's imaginalion gallops after. 
In the exhilarating rush, the reader 
from a different land finds himself 
applying and adapting what is — in 
Iin's text’— local to the Steppe, 
the tundra or the Caspian, to his 
own landscape. 
“But even Ilin only once achieved 
this deggee of creative energy. 
Thus we cannot rely on inspiration 
or despise any little tips on ‘how 
to write’ that we happen to find 
useful. 
“In this field the imaginative 
writer has the consolation of 
feeling that even a lesser degree of 
success can vet be useful, enlighten- 
The 
world's ehildren badly need some 
new books and we authors are 
guilty of a grave dereliction of 
duty, if laziness or self-satisfaction 
ever lead us to write for them less 
well than we might. We must not 
give stones to the children who ask 
us for bread.” 
“The campaign on “Food and 
People” was, indeed, Unesco’s most 
rewarded eHort of the year in Bri- 
tain, and the discussions emphasize 
the value of the Organization's 
contribution towards the educational 
campaign which must accompany the 
application of science to agriculture 
and problems of human nutrition.” 
Nature (London), December 3, 1949.     

## [Page 9](074946engo.pdf#page=9) 3

### 74958: A Child's education begins twenty years before he is born: women's access to education

### 74230: La Déclaration des droits de la femme à l'éducation et à la culture prend le sens d'un appel

One of the Fundamental Problems of Our Age : 
WOMEN'S ACCESS TO EDUCATION 
“A CHILD'S EDUCATION BEGINS 
TWENTY YEARS BEFORE HE IS BORN 
Y proclaiming that “everyone has the 
B right to education”, and qualifying 
it with the words, “without distinc- 
tion of sex”, the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights draws attention to one of 
the fundamental problems of our age: 
equality of educational opportunities for 
women, 
The problem Is one of redressing an 
injustice, an age-old Injustice which, 
though less flagrant than in the past, still 
constitutes a glaring denial of the rights of 
the majority of women in the world. 
Unesco, which Is working jointly with 
the United Nations to make the theoretical 
equality of women’s right to education a 
practical fact, last month called a meeting 
of an all-woman committee of experts to 
examine the obstacles which prevent the 
realization of this right and to suggest how 
they can be overcome. 
The following article which outlines 
some aspects of the problem as it exists 
to-day and suggests how Unesco might 
attack them, is based on reports prepared 
by Mile. Jeanne Chaton, a Unesco Consult= 
ant on Women's Education and Secretary 
General of the Women's Expert Committee. 
LrHovcH the right of women to 
A education is proclaimed in the 
Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, and although it was confirmed 
by most of the countries which replied 
to the questionnaire sent out by the 
Commission on the Status of VWomen 
(UN Economic and Social Council), the 
position in many countries is still unsat- 
1sfactory. - 
Even in the countries where the most 
favourable conditions existed, only an 
insignificant percentage of women had 
completed the various stages of educa- 
tion and won distinction for their 
scientific research. The famous naines, 
so often quoted, are exceptions that 
divert attention from a basic inequality. 
Five tasks for Unesco 
x those countries where local condi- 
* tions or social and religious traditions 
have slowed down the evolution of 
women, there is marked evidence of a 
lack of education among women and an 
absence of their influence. In other 
cases, where education has suddenly 
been made available to women, 3s in 
Turkey for example, the result has 
been an outstanding cultural progress 
for the whole population. 
In its programme for 1949, Unesco, 
while making every effort to make 
known the Universal Declaration of 
ITuman Rights, has been carrying out an 
i i ri hh     
   
nN the forefront of man's strug- 
gle against the elements is fight, 
inquiry into the educational opportuni- 
ties open to women. Could anything 
be more logical? By the very nature 
of the mission entrusted to it at its 
foundation. Unesco, as the cultural 
agency of the United Nations, was 
i 8... 
Ts 
Page 9 — UNESCO COURIER 
  
  
  
“ THE DECLARATION 
OF WOMEN’S RIGHT 
TO EDUCATION AND 
CULTURE BECOMES 
A RALLYING CRY ” 
vg cannot over-emphasize the tru- 
| ly fundamental importance of 
women’s education. The man 
who said that a child's educa- 
tion begins twenty years before he 
is born, with the education of his 
mother, was not being funny. Al 
the present day, this problem is be- 
coming extremely serious both for 
adults and for children. It is one of 
the [fundamental problems of our 
age. We need only reflect that more 
than half the population of the 
world is female and that the child's 
constant association with his mother 
in his early years gives women a 
decisive part in the upbringing of 
the entire human race. 
« Now when, if it is to survive, 
humanity must make use of all ils 
heritage, without overlooking the 
smallest item, now when mankind 
must have a reason for wishing to 
survive and know why life is worth 
the living, no particle of spiritual 
[force should be neglected. The 
Declaration of Woman's Right to 
‘Education and Culture becomes a 
rallying cry. It is more than a state- 
ment of the theoretical equality bet- 
ween the seres, in which a process 
of intellectual development has cul- 
minated: it makes a demand upon 
us, calling us to take part, as-res- 
ponsgible citizens, in the campaign 
to secure educational opportunities 
for women, an advance that pre- - 
conditions every hwman effort tu 
establish a just and lasling 
peace”. 
Jaime TORRES BODET, 
Director General of Unesco. 
(in an address to the inaugural 
meeting of the Conference on Obs- 
tacles to Equality of Educational 
Opportunities for 
month), 
Women, last   
all nations 
Unesco's 
in this unceasing Among 
Third General 
amar re EET 
A 
Ae Tn Fr te Ri YER NE 
the possible ways of 
obtaining water recommended by 
this Union were the study of 
 
Mlle Jeanne Chaton. secretary-general of the Comittee of Experts on Obstacles to the Equality 
of Educational Opportunities for Women. addressing delegates to the meeting in Unesco 
House. From left to right: Mme Shafik (Arab Musulman League and Egyptian Feminist Union}: 
Miss W.-G. Gowan, C.B.E 
Secretary of 
(International Council of Women) ; Mrs. Lakshmi N. Menon. 
the UN Commission on the Status of Women: Mlle Chaton; Dr. P. Volkov 
{New Education Fellowship) : Dr. Eder (International Council of Women). 
bound to consider how it could help fo 
bring about the realization of educa- 
tional equality for the sexes. 
HAT means should Unesco use to 
achieve this purpose? It should 
maintain a close collaboration 
with the UN Commission on the Stalus 
of Women, especially when the Com- 
mission's work and recommendations 
bear on educational problems. It must 
also follow closely the policy of Mem- 
ber States with regard to general 
education, schools and universities. 
It should see that special attention is 
given fo the problem of equal 
opportunities in the consideration of 
educational facilities for women, and 
should diagnose the reasons for paxt 
and present discrimination, in order to 
find effective and practical remedies. 
Finally, it should, by employing every 
possible information medium, try to 
win public support throughout the 
world for equal educational opport- 
unities for both sexes. 
Among other matters to be considered 
are the fotal lack of proportion between 
the numbers of educated men anu 
women in certain areas of Africa or in 
countries bordering on the Indian 
Ocean and the seeking out of the 
various religious or economic causes 
which vary from country to country. 
This will be a task for ethnographical 
and sociological experts co-operating 
ith specialists on fundamental educa- 
ion. 
At present, it appears that therc are 
very few cases where there is a higher 
TSE a TA a 
EWE. oe . 3 
posed the formation of an Inter- 
national federation of interested 
organizations “o sift arld zone 
proportion of educated women than 
men, two examples being Basutoland 
and Bechuanaland. 
While Unesco’s Department of Edu- 
cation will naturally be required to play 
a leading part in this fask, it will also 
be up to the Department of Mass 
Communication to use every means to 
spread lhe idea of the right to educa- 
tion, wherever it is still disputed or 
ignored, bearing in mind differing local 
conditions. ’ 
Diagnosing causes 
of diserimination 
HE Division of Exchange of Persons 
must also see that women benefit 
from the increasing number of 
international exchanges brought about 
by its work ; it must also encourage 
private and governinental assistance for 
the cultural emancipation of women. 
The work of the Social Sciences 
Department must include consideration 
»f the underlying reasons for educational 
discrimination still existing between the 
sexes : the conflicting interests of men 
and women and the conflicts between 
family and professional obligations 
inherent in women’s special role in 
society. 
Independently of the United Nations, 
Unesco should assemble information on 
the subject, keeping it constantly up-to- 
date, and should “make known its 
recommendations through the National 
Commissions and international non- 
governmental organizations. 
v4 Soh Ge gl 
wer LURE ve, 


### 74959: Using science and technology to transform nature's wastelands

~ Using science and technology 
0 transform nature's wastelands 
   
blems of arid and semi-arid 
areas. 
In view of the urgent need for 
the battle of the barren lands. 
About 20 million square miles 
(nearly a quarter of the total 
land surface of the globe) consti- 
tute what are known as the Arid 
Zones. It is estimated that 66 per 
cent of the earth's land surface 
does not receive adequate and 
reliable rainfall, while 31 per cent 
may be classed as arid or semli- 
arid, not including tundra and 
cold desert. 
Mankind’s battle is on two 
fronts. Firstly, means must be 
found to stem the invasion of 
the desert upon neighbouring 
arable lands under cultivation. 
Secondly, ways must be devised 
by scientists and technicians for 
improving life in the arid and 
semi-arid lands, and turning them 
into valuable new food-producing 
belts in regions where the world 
is most hungry. In the train of 
new-found food resources may 
come new industrial and cultural 
strength, much of it built upon 
or around land which was once 
the site of former great civili- 
pations. 
with the aim of consolidating 
the equipment and knowledge of 
Conference at Beirut in 1948, 
approved the study of a proposal 
for setting up an International 
Arid Zone Ins.itute, 
Both before and since the Bei- 
rut Conference, various scientists 
and international scientific orga- 
nizations have submitted « plans 
of campaign » to Unesco includ- 
ing short and long-term schemes, 
by which water may be utilized 
more effectively to irrigate the 
wastelands and render them pro- 
ductive, to halt the encroachment 
of the desert, and stamp out 
diseases and pests. 
Harnessing the Sun, 
Winds and Tides 
HE use of solar energy as a 
fuel source in pumping 
water, and the harnessing 
of power from winds, tides, oil 
and atomic energy, were among 
basic projects recommended to 
Unesco for long-term research in 
a report on the Arid Zones sub- 
mitted by the International 
Union of Geodesy and Geophysics. 
means for obtaining subterranean 
water from depths greater than 
those af present exploitable; pos- 
sible use of salt water through 
de-salting or distilling; artificial 
rain production; and the use of 
fog and dew as sources of mois- 
ture. For sanitation and health, 
the association recommended the 
study of climatic and geophysical 
factors affecting disease, pests 
and other nuisances; and of dust, 
heat and other limitations to 
habitation. 
For short-term consideration, 
the International Union advocat- 
ed the planning of a network of 
observing stations to collec’ geo- 
physical data linked with the 
solution of Arid Zones problems, 
and the creation of means for 
exchanging information and 
experience reports between spe- 
cialists of nations affected. 
Most of “he reports submitted 
to Unesco called for extensive 
preliminary surveys before creat- 
ing an institute. An informal 
Arid Zones Study Group, called 
by Unesco at Lake Success, pro- 
problems. 
Council to Study 
Arid Zone Problems 
HE information given in five 
main reports from different 
international organizations 
was considered by a committee of 
experts from five continents who 
met in Unesco House last month. 
Taking into accoun’ the ‘work 
already being done by national 
services in different countries 
either on a scientific level or 
through direct action, the experts 
felt that in the fields of basic 
and applied scientific research, 
fur her international co-operation 
is needed to strengthen existing 
services. In addition, they con- 
sidered that creation of new 
services must be stimulated, espe- 
cially in under-developed coun- 
tries. } 
The Committee therefore re- 
commended to Unesco that an 
international council be set up 
to study the scientific, technical 
and resource development pro- 
dealing expeditiously with the 
problems of these areas, the com- 
mittee decided that the best way 
was not the immediate setting 
up of a comprehensive Institute of 
the Arid Zone, but that the pro- 
posed international council should 
study this proposal and make 
recommendations to Unesco. 
Among the tasks assigned to 
the proposed Council during its 
first year would be the collection 
and distribution of information, 
particularly regarding problems, 
programmes, methods and re- 
search results relating to hydro- 
logy and the exchange of person- 
nel for research and training in 
this field. 
The Council's main objectives 
would include the preparation of 
a directory of scientists, engineers 
and institutions engaged in re- 
search and development, the call- 
ing of periodic international 
meetings and of symposia, if 
possible close to arid areas, the 
study of possible basic and 
© applied research programmes and 
the setting up of new research 
centres.

## [Page 10](074946engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 74960: What is race?

UNESCO COURIER — Page 10 
  
    
  
P
L
E
 e
e 
M
Y
 
L
S
e
t
 
  
—— 
reocial pre end enlogoniama 
which Unesce is study 
ol an educeotienal a gitaed ot 
 
     
  
  
racial prejudices. Unesco last called a meeting of » and select 
and historical texts as as moral end socialiee et which con be - 
used in this Bght, a i 
The members of this committee who oiea discussed the iff of these texts 
and the resecich jor new included Prolessor Humayus Kabir India. whe. 
in the lollewing article discusses some of the ouctiitigiEEicRNIIS examined by 
the committee, 
* * & 
HE broadest and perhaps least unacoept 
a a group of Individuals with certaln con 
ney 1" den 
yung of: chatacters 
in the concept which precludes its a onl 00 ORNS AlMnals Dut usually it 
1s restricted to man Once, however, we DASDNEEEEEEEEED oro 0 Si LD agteement 
belween different iheorists of face dias ' * 
The majority of anthropo regard These COMES ARRMOT er 4 Rs cerialn 
persistent physical features A ETO ahares POM petaration Seration » 
The more stable such a cha er * STORAAEUES BRINE BR An inde gor race 
classificalion 
Anlnropologiets MrO O SLE hase 1 not, wid 
reroas of physical d Some 
or euitural groups of even Ne of of Raed women described 
8 people Or a Tolk Ta aplication 10 tHe ors of Kuage, People or rell<s 
awn seeins,. however, altogether At 
We have Instances of people speak i langusge, but aint mov 
Other way, Similarly, religion a Sat d to diverse gro on 
differsni parts of the world Wha! TT a8 a people, fo a 
invariably composite and © Zp of kof strands ‘which oa mee - 
disiinctly @ifferentintcd, hs \ = 
ZOOLOGICALLY MANKIND Is onl? 
HAYSICAL anthrepolorts ts slsoditifer a8 to which, shim iad ive In ‘he 
determination of race Stale, plonsntation rot proportion 
between the varions limbs, He texture Sli quantity of halr, "A all - tried 
AREY or In combination for dividing malling nto distinguiah 
t has Deen argued and gpehethlly conceded that 12 
are carried from generation 10 gemaration A 
Bumber forty-eight, the Jhon of ~ach pafent bong oil iy regarded 
impervious 10 changes, don Baye Dowever Deel raised chrommosoroes 
sre entirely stable. They are conpotite and SORNSL of Pes with nb In a sehae are 
the ultimate aclors of Deredity 
Somme say that the genes themselves are suliect Lo Manges aL ¢ party 
to geographical factors and partly to interbreeding BNEA Logether genes 
differant types of chromosomis, Even U We reject "he heoly of chemical 
changes In the genes the infinity possible permutations and combile!lons of the 
chromosomes and (he genes provoke doubts about the stabilisy of & mcial ype 
© The Mct of difference, whether physical 1 te. owlural or ethnic, would 
not Oy Feel! Dave maitered If It Were not made tatls of valuation. All (hearies 
of moe ultimaldly tend to de apologies for or condemunation of Sertaln Iypes 
ph 
MOsOmes 
enya oes ene Seen Bon de, WSCA rer or 
   
“10 the al EDeCies 
“, - 
. ’ o We 
Apion 
ote is Bo 
ally 
Sete Ra only 10 RPL tors Tin 
Ay PEERS 20.000 OT aguiste religious great tri at pt 
Tigwest lodividaaks wi tin ARE 
| 4 
  
a 
: 
      
     
     
rp. hn. . A - r 
differences axtrmniis BAe eyes denied the MEMEY of the LUMAR Dec lof 
Others have rded the vialble physica! differentiate BS ORS SMDETTicial and 
unstable AciiETEN In betwerlh Se have all gradal theo ris 
RURIDRe fa certain TOE the point of view of Mdloglh sl men belong 
Unlike erosses OL even nearby specins Wilhin 
genus, th@Belween various races of mankind are never sterls 
Beside ihe various maces of man SWEAR Ofis another in She physic! chaps 
pa {pe A Western Buropean and A CORisSse may be sharply @ifferentiated, hut Q 
Mle Of Border areas shOW many CONEERER characteristics. This ia due Par ly 
MICHIE Dioodl and partly M0 THE fact that the physical raps FhAERGe- 
dually Siend Iolo eDe another 
t also remember SHEL WMRlon, conquest and trade have TOSSA 
mixture 8 weeny. Buraan Selig Belo: nging to different types The factors of 
stiractiof bd repuliion DetiEn Bil erent physical types have also operated tO 
make any RSting group of IRENA in any area of the world hem endani» 
of _yarious Tpen. acd strains Mh n Nidely scattered sources 
HE altéinpt to Ate m to piifileal charmcteratics ana Bees ihe 
cause of both misund false os. Zoclogically VIBE human 
species ls one and all e, OF mived origin Georta~ 
aces have mores 
rent racial charadigriaiies Dave eli 
sy. Ig would 1hSrefore Be BEIGE Sei 
has til ow contfributed Mitie or 0 
Poy dates with that end’): 
HR diferengh Bay en: the highest ond IBS. 
hcinl ethodl MEEuistic, cultural of DRUOER 
BOR Eton er than Whe differences Delween mates 
fa Pe. pV pent of eertalfh human grofps THY 
i OPporiuniiy, Ana the | : tities 
One 
ihe same 
pi
d 
- 
  
     
    
 
    
   
   
   
  
condet aff ANY "le on ‘he ErounS 
wo tL cuiture of the Wadd. Ne Re 
view, Sondemt any mar on this eco 
We have also ‘eo TERRE Bar 
      
   
BIOUD B85 at times Just 88 Lobe 
SF Sillerent groups 
THE comparative retards 
BE AF much due to jack 
BRIER Arise out of poverty | 
    
    
     
  
. 30a CT. daciors as any WLHnMe    Beaides. even if De BR: 1a SRAINCIeristics aa w th wer 
PRENEA) Traits, we not ¥ a of Boe: or pit FY 
Cr a establish any ity on 0 then ed 
    
   
DIFFIDENCE IN JUDGING he. 
up. Human beings cE DE vidi races hin xe of BERNE 
TS a ph al traits RISES “a bul not abeolute y SEED 
so habits grow JET BN SEER hysical and geog SPREE 
The ca Abd SEEN Bnscition t me extent modi Re 
ES ik 
Even W be, ja th spe Ble . u 
as ember ] 
     
     
  
more to the civitlmation i 
of the world ul : human history is only 
About 4.50 old and shear acm of many cilia tions which Baye heel 
ost. This make us SHEEN JOllging (he acliyements of any patticulsr 
mes or type 
1 
THE AEs of the sciPREEE DhEEryer should therefore be that thsre are 
a shoes among human HeiRE HAL Sal be regarded as contributing to he varie'y 
AEC comnpiexity of the humal Speci DUE cannot be the balla of any Judgment 
nh 


### 74961: UNESCO aiming for quantity and quality in classics translations

UNESCO AIMING FOR QUANTITY AND QUALITY 
IN CLASSICS TRANSLATIONS 
  
ANY translations give a distorted 
view of the works they wish to 
make known and, as a result, of 
the peoples of which these works are 
an expression. 
No translation, it is admitted, can be 
absolutely identical with the original, 
but it can provide a satisfactory equi- 
valent. 
And, at a time when man has never 
had greater need to extend his horizen 
and develop his understanding of 
others, the importance of clarity in 
spreading the messages of the human 
mind has never been greater. 
*x x 
T is for this reason that Unesco, 
in agreement with the United 
Nations, is working both to add to 
the translations of the world's great 
books in every language and at the 
same time to gradually bring them up 
to the highest possible standard. 
To assist in this work, Unesco re- 
cently called a meeting in Paris of an 
international committee of experts to 
discuss plans for carrying out, under 
Unesco’s sponsorship, the translations 
of the world’s most important literary, 
scientific and philosophic books. 
Among the works which can be des- 
cribed as classics, some are still too 
little known and these Unesco proposes 
to have translated into a few of the 
chief world languages to bring them 
before the cultivated public. 
Others, on the contrary, are world- 
famous as the common heritage of 
mankind and these Unesco will try to 
have translated into as many lan- 
guages as possible. 
The Committee of experts, who were 
holding their second 1949 meeting, 
      
 
submitted a number of recommenda- 
tions to Unesco including one for the 
establishment of an International 
Bureau of Translations and another 
for the publication by Unesco of a 
quarterly Bulletin of Translations. 
(In its last issue, the « Courier » 
announced that Unesco had re-started 
the publication of the Index Transla- 
tionum “ handbook ”, and a report on 
the Committee's proposal for a 
“Translators Charter” is published 
elsewhere on this page). 
The Committee, which grouped ex- 
perts from 14 countries under the 
chairmanship of M. Julian Cain, Di- 
rector of the Bibliotheque Nationale 
in Paris, also approved two important 
projects on which Unesco has already 
started work. 
The first of these is for the transla- 
tion of the great books of the West 
into Arabic and of the great Arab 
classics into Western lapguages. This 
work is being carried out by an Inter- 
national Commission set up in Beirut 
by the Lebanese Government and 
Unesco, and which it is hoped will be 
joined by other Arab States. Progress 
has already been made with the 
translation into English French and 
Spanish of Algazel's poem “Ayuha’l 
Walas, and of “Don Quixote” into 
Arabic. 
The second project is the collection 
of Latin American works in French 
and English translations, made in 
collaboration with Unesco’'s Member 
States in this continent. 
A plan has also been prepared for 
the translation of great books into and 
from Italian and in the near future 
Unesco hopes to extend its translation 
plan to India. 
 
A CHARTER FOR 
TRANSLATORS 
TRESSING the cultural importance 
S of good lranslations, Unesco 
pointed out in a report to the 
Economic and Social Council of the 
United Nations that one cause for the 
prevalence of mediocre translations 
is thal in many causes translators 
are poorly paid and insufficiently 
protected. 
At the recent meeting in Unesco 
House of experts on the translation 
of great books these queslions were 
discussed on the basis of opinions 
held by leading contemporary writers 
such as André Gide, Valery Larbaud 
and Santayana. These and many 
other writers consider that a trans- 
lation is “an original work of art’ 
and that the primary qualification 
for a translator is that he should 
himself be a writer. 
The Committee therefore consider- 
ing that a proper status would be 
all the more readily conferred on 
translators as their professional train- 
ing gave belter guarantees, suggest- 
ed that in connection with language 
training, special university training 
for translators was desirable and 
. could be studied by Member States 
of Unesco. 
Unesco, they suggested, should 
prepare a Draft Charter for Transla- 
tors whose principal aim should be 
to define a minimum of economic, 
legal and moral guarantees to which 
the translators should be entitled in 
all countries.     
“HAVE YOU READ BARUCH? ” 
A Fontaine, it is said, was so impressed 
by the apocryphal books of Baruch that 
for some time after reading them he 
asked everyone he met : « Have you 
read Baruch ? » and was surprised when 
hardly anyone answered « Yes ». 
To-day, if one asked of many people, 
« Have you read ‘The Dream of the Red 
Room’ or ‘Fortunate and Jacinta’ by Gal- 
dos’? » or again « Have you read Charles 
Doughtys’'s ‘Travels in Arabia Deserta’ 
the answer would probably be « No! » 
For, although « The Dream of the Red 
Room » is one of the great works of Classical 
Chinese literature, scholars, other than those 
capable of understanding the Chinese text, 
have only been able to read an inadequate 
translation, so abridged that only about one 
sixth of the work can be appreciated. 
« Fortunata y Jacinta » was written by the 
19th century Spanish writer, Benito Perez 
Galdos, who has been described as the 
greatest Spanish novelist since Cervantes. 
Some of Galdos works have been translated 
into several languages, but this, his most 
important book, has been ignored by trans- 
lators. 
Doughty's « Travels in Arabia Deserta », 
one of the most unusual books on travel 
and exploration, was also a long work and 
was published at a very high price by its 
author, who was not interested in fame. For 
years it remained almost unknown to the 
public until a second edition was published 
in 1921 with a preface by Colonel T.E. Law- 
rence. 
« Lawrence of Arabia » said he had con- 
stantly used the book as a guide while in 
Arabia because of its accurate descriptions 
of the country and its interpretation of the 
Redouin character. 
it would be possible to quote many other 
examples similar to these three to emphasize 
the importance of the recommendation made 
by the United Nations that Unesco should 
arrange for a collection of great works of 
world-wide interest in as many languages 
as possible.

## [Page 11](074946engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

. * 
ts 
ol 
v 
  
The buildings of Royaumont Abbey are a ‘cavalcade’ of French architec- 
tural history irom the 13th to the 18th centuries. Above, is shown the 
building which houses former monks’ cells, now equipped with central 
heating and used by students attending the study groups. 


### 74236: An Answer for the future

"We are working for a united 
world because we believe in Man” 
AN ANSWER FOR THE FUTURE 
NE of the features of Human 
Rights Day ceremonies in 
Switzerland on December 
10 was a public meeting of the 
Swiss National Commission for 
Unesco, in the City Hall at Berne, 
This meeting, which served to 
link the values proclaimed in the 
Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights and the ideals set for 
Unesco in its Constitution, also 
enabled M. Torres Bodet, making 
his first official visit to the Fe- 
deral Government, as Director- 
General of Unesco, to meet the 
members of the National Com- 
mission. 
Addressing the Commission, 
M. Torres Bodel outlined Unes- 
co’s activities and prospects, to 
show, as he put it, “that the 
Organization i8 past the stige of 
study and preliminary enquiry 
and 18 now an effective instru- 
ment of international co-ope- 
ration.” 
“But,” he said, “we must not 
expect Unesco suddenly to pro- 
duce a ready-made solution [or 
the problems of a divided world”. 
Signpost to 
A New Era 
wr Organisalions do not 
expect to fird the phi- 
losopher’s sione. But 
they know that by bringing 
together men of goodwill, by 
giving them an opportunity of 
getting to know each other 
and working together, they are 
helping to overcome the divi- 
sfons and prejudices which 
mark our international life 
to-day. 
“On 29 November 1949” he 
continued, we learned that an 
American scientist near Chi- 
cago had succeeded in trans- 
muting certain mercury isoto- 
pes into gold. This was, in 
truth, no more than one strik- 
ing indication, among many 
others, that we are wn a new 
era. But the discovery sug- 
gests too that the alchemists 
dream of extracting gold from 
sulphur and mercury was 
perhaps not quite as mad as 
modern science, in ils early 
days, was tempted to suppose. 
It has remained for modern 
nuclear physics, endowed with 
the equipment that earlier cen- 
turies lacked, to disperse the 
clouds of abstract polemical 
violence and confirm that in- 
tuition. 
Social Alchemists and 
A Golden Age 
CCY ike the earlier initiates 
rir? the mystery of the 
oneness of matter, those 
who to-duy preach the gospel 
of one world pass in some 
quarters for alchemists, so- 
cial alchemists obsessed with 
the dream of a golden age. If 
the transmutation performed 
by Professor Arthur Jeffrey 
Dempster could confirm one of 
the oldest and most disputed 
theories, then willingly would 
we admit the accusation, 
“The truth is that ce ure 
working for a united world 
because we believe in Man, in 
his tworth and in his oneness, 
whatever his race, his country 
and his class, and because we 
know that to-day, in the United 
Nations and their Specialized 
Agencies, we hate the technical 
equipment which. can counter 
the disintegration threatening 
us and work for the building 
of « peaceful world wherein 
each may find fulfilment. 
“Humanity is one, but its 
oneness is still seeking its poli- 
tical expression. The future 
will show the trials through 
which men must pass to find It 
But we can give our own 
answer at once”. 
ER GEL AE 
“AS GAME AS 
NED KELLY" 
n Australia this expression is 
I one of the most flattering 
terms when applied to 
anyone with courage. It could be 
used to describe a young artist 
from “ down-under” whose one- 
man show is now on erhibit al 
Unesco House. In depicting inci- 
dents [rom the life of the 
Australian Robin Hood, Ned Kelly, 
the artist, Sidney Nolan has had 
the courage to present in Paris a 
show which follows none of the 
French schools of painting. 
Using a bold primitive style, 
very suitable as a medium for 
his subject, and bright glowing 
colours evocalive of the clear 
Australian light, Nolaw’s work has 
an erotic vigorous quality. 
Thirty-four years of age, 
Sidney Nolan was born in Vic- 
toria, and spends much of his 
time in remote parts of the 
continent. He is particularly 
interested in the early days of 
his country’s history, and the 
27 paintings centre around the 
now almost legendary figure of 
Ned Kelly. 
Kelly roamed the Australian 
“ push "seventy years ago, ler- 
rorising the police. But the 
inhabitants tool a romantic 
interest in his daring exploits, 
and when he was finally cap- 
tured and sentenced lo death, 
thousands of Australians peti- 
tioned, unsuccessfully, for his 
reprieve. -... . - ee 
Page 11 — UNESCO COURIER 


### 74962: Old and new worlds meet at Royaumont

OLD AND NEW WORLDS 
MEET AT ROYAUMONT 
n the late middle ages, the 
monks of Royaumont Ab- 
bey, like other members of 
the Cistercian order were 
helping to play a part in the 
development of European civi- 
lization, not only by religious 
teachings, but through the 
study and practice of agri- 
culture. 
The Cistercian monks were 
the great farmers of those 
days and many improvements 
in farming operations were 
introduced and propagated by 
them. 
To-day, at Royaumont Ab- 
bey, some 20 miles from Paris, 
different kinds of studies are 
taking place, studies whose 
aim is the development of a 
world civilization through 
international understanding. 
For the last two years, this 
beautiful French abbey, built 
in 1227 by St. Louis and his 
mother, Blanche of Castille, 
has been the home of an 
International Cultural Centre, 
to which students, writers and 
artists of all nationalities have 
been coming to attend courses 
of studies and lectures or 
“decades” on the cultural 
achievements of different 
countries. 
Royaumont has thus been 
carrying on the tradition of 
another great Cistercian Ab- 
bey, that of Pontigny, in Bur- 
gundy, where in 1903, a simi- 
lar plan cf intellectual co- 
operation was inaugurated by 
the French writer and hu- 
manist, Paul Desjardins. 
And, in the same way that 
famous writers, poets and phi- 
losophers such as Jacques Ri- 
~ viere, André Gide, Paul Valery 
and Salvador de Madariaga, 
used to meet at Pontigny, to- 
day, writers and students from 
all parts of the world find 
their way to Royaumont, 
whose Abbey, one writer said, 
“rises like a miracle among 
the trees of the Ile de 
France". 
Royaumont Abbey, like 
many others, suffered damage 
during the French Revolution, 
when its church was destroyed, 
but today it still represents a 
“cavalcade” of French archi- 
tectural history from the 13th 
to the 18th centuries, and its 
Gothic beauty, its dim, cool 
cloisters and green lawns form 
an ideal setting for its present 
role. 
Cells for Modern 
“ Monks ” 
nd, it is well equipped for 
its new task. Students 
live in what were for- 
merly monks’ cells. But these 
have lost their monastic aus- 
terity. Adequately furnished 
and equipped with ceniral 
heafing they combine the ne- 
cessary atmosphere for study 
and contemplation—peace and 
quiet—with the modern requi- 
rements for comfort. 
The Centre has a library of 
20,000 books and a group or 
people, “Friends of Royau- 
mont Abbey” have helped to 
establish a system of resident 
scholarships under which 
students are fed, accommodat- 
ed, and can attend lectures at 
a minimum cost. 
People come to Royaumont 
to discuss and learn about a 
wide variety of subjects. Last 
September, for example, 48 
youth work camp volunteers, 
representing 14 different na- 
ticnalities, returning from 
summer camps in different 
parts of Europe, interrupted 
their homeward journey to 
attend the first Unesco spon- 
sored post-camp conference. 
Once installed at the Abbey. 
they got down to the business 
for which the conference had 
been called: The exchange of 
first-hand experiences and 
views aimed at making the 
work camp movement a more 
effective instrument for pro- 
moting international good- 
will. 
More recently, a ‘decade” 
on Latin America, aimed at 
promoting intellectual rela- 
tions between the Old and New 
‘Worlds, was organized. 
Picture Of A Continent 
peakers, lecturing on the 
life, art, literature and 
music of Latin American 
countries conjured up a pic- 
ture of a Continent of whose 
existence the original occu- 
pants of Royaumont were com- 
pletely ignorant. 
In addition to sending an 
observer, Dr. Jose de Benito, 
Unesco also asked Dr. Alfred 
Metraux, a well-known anthro- 
pologist who has carried out 
undamental education work 
for the Organization in diffe- 
rent parts of the world, to 
tor-General of Unesco, of the 
desire for international under- 
standing with which the de- 
cade had been planned. 
“As a Mexican”, said 
M. Torres Bodet, “I am pro- 
foundly glad of your interest 
in the intellectual and artistic’ 
life of Latin America. Beyond 
the informed circles you Tre- 
present so eminently, and in 
spite of the efforts previously 
made by the International 
Institute of Intellectual Co- 
operation and continued to- 
day by publishers, film makers 
and the managers of theatres, 
concert halls and art galleries, 
too few Europeans yet know 
our poets and musicians, no- 
velists and painters. 
“Most Europeans are still in 
very much the same position, 
as far as we are concerned, as 
Christopher Columbus’ con- 
temporaries were with regard 
to the civilization of the 
Aztecs, Mayas or Incas, or as 
the followers of Plato in their 
mythical dreams of Atlantis. 
The situation is changing ra- 
pidly, I know, and I can only 
thank the organizers of this 
Decade and congratulate them 
upon having taken such a step 
and made it so great a success. 
hen we consider the 
future of Latin 
America, we have not 
only to assess the extent of its 
resources and emphasize the 
66 
  
Modernization to meet needs of its present role as an international centre 
for cultural studies has not affected the beauty of the Abbey, as is shown 
in the above photo of the former refectory. : 
give an outline of Unesco 
activities in Latin America. 
The organizers of the decade 
called on a number of eminent 
writers and scholars and 
experts on Latin America, in- 
cluding M. André Siegfried, Dr. 
Paul Rivet, Director of the 
Musée de THomme, Paris; 
M. Ronze, Director of the 
Franco-Latin-American Insti- 
tute of Cultural Relations, 
M. Jacques Soustelle, Professor 
Lehman, M. and Mme. d’Har- 
court, M. Stresser Pea, M. 
Braudel, M. Germain Bazin 
and Professor Castro Leal. 
The young people of Latin 
America and Europe were re- 
presented among the lecturers 
by MM. Francisco, Viacava, 
Heiremans and the Mexican 
poet, Octavio Paz. 
Jaime Torres Bodet. 
who presided at the 
® (losing session, express- 
ed his appreciation, as Direc- 
peoples in the world. 
tion. 
ment was exile 
country,   has regained its sovereignty. 
- LUXEMBOURG : 
A “VOICE” OF UNESCO 
DDRESSING the newly formed Luxembourg National Commis- 
A sion for Unesco. at its inaugural last month, M. Jaime Torres 
Bodet, Director-General of Unesco, stated that the 300.000 
inhabitants of the Grand Duchy were among the best informed 
The results of a Unesco survey into press, radio and film needs 
of war devastated countries, he said, had shown Luxembourg to 
have the highest number of newspapers per 1.000 head of popula- 
«So far as broadcasting is concerned”. said M. Torres Bodet, 
“your voice can be heard throughout Europe, thanks to the power- 
ful Radio-Luxembourg transmitter ; from that station. you are publi- 
cizing Unesco’s programme and aims, and disseminating news 
about our Organization and. in particular, about the international 
work camps, in your “International Programme for Young People’. 
Luxembourg, whose people call it “Gutland” (the good land) 
gave its support to the plan for Unesco’s creation while its govern- 
iled in London, and later attended the Preparatory 
Conference, finally joining Unesco in 1947. 
Judged by its afea, the Grand Duchy is considered a small 
but in difficult situations, it has always 
capable of taking on a stature which has no relation to its physical 
During its history it has been occupied at different times by 
Spanish, Austrians, French and Dutch. In 1867 the great powers 
guaranteed its neutrality, but this did not prevent Luxembourg 
being invaded and occupied in 1914 and again in 1940. 
however, with no other power than an international guarantee, it 
! 
shown itself 
Each time,   
speed with which they can be 
exploited. We have to 
discover what the men of 
those countries can give the 
men of the whole world. What 
contribution to the progress of 
all can be made by the human 
clay shaped in those mighty 
countries now that they, in 
their turn, have joined the tre- 
mendous and somewhat disor- 
derly concert of common ef- 
ort? 
“At the present time, the 
peoples of all those countries 
are conscious of a profound 
unity and community of inte. 
rests, not only in the sense of 
the past they share but in the 
awareness of a common future. 
They are united, too, by the 
same heritage of culture and, 
above all, by the linguistic 
associations which bind them 
to the Latin world. Despite 
political divisions and frontier 
disputes, which, incidentally, 
have not given rise to irreme- 
diable antagonisms, Latin 
America is the most united of 
the continents. : 
Humane Ideal of Latin 
America 
or Latin America, Man 
is the most important 
thing in the world. In 
order to raise him to a higher 
level, those of our predecessors 
whose conscience was most 
alert did not hesitate to Sirake 
the very foundations of so- 
ciety, in the conviction that, 
by freeing the individual. they 
were serving a more lofty so- 
cial ideal. 
“Latin America is convinced 
that the ideal of the free man 
is the only fitting ideal for the 
world to pursue. With and 
through Unesco, Latin Ame- 
rica is calling upon all the 
peoples of the world to unite 
and strive together to make 
Human Rights and, in -Jarti- 
cular, the right to education 
and culture, a practical and 
real achievement of the 
Twentieth Century.” 
66

## [Page 12](074946engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 12 


### 74963: José Clemente Orozco: mankind was his hero

   J - - NO EB or 
JOSE CLEMENTE 
OROZCO 
= MANKIND WAS 
HIS HERO 
* ¥ 
man, leader of the United Kingdom delegation, paid a tribute to the Mexican artist 
A T the close of UNESCO'S Fourth General Conference in October, Mr David Hard- 
José Clemente Orozco, whose death occured a few weeks previously. 
“This Conference ” said Mr Hardman “cannot be insensitive to the loss to the culture 
of the world that the death of Orozco has caused. Born in 1886 for more than a gene- 
ration he covered the walls of the palaces, churches and public buildings of Mexico with . 
his tremendous frescos, one of which, indeed, as many here will remembei, adorned the 
walls of the Escuela Normal, where our Conference was held in 1947. 
“Through his frescos he sought to express his understanding and the yearning of the 
common people of the world for ail we, here, are searching to foster---for education in 
understanding.” 
After M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director-General of UNESCO, and Dr Antonio Castro 
Leal, leader of the Mexican delegation, had replied to Mr Hardman, the Conference adopt- 
ed the British delegate’s suggestion that a message of condolence and regret be sent to 
the Government of Mexico. 
As a further tribute to this great Mexican artist, the “Courier” is presenting on this 
page, an appreciation of Orozco written by Jean Cassou, the distinguish~d French Hispanist 
and Art Critic, .ogether with reproductions of two of the artist’s works. 
HE history of European art 
during the second half of the 
19th century is a succession 
of rebellions and adventures. It is 
a story of heroic stature, and the 
great artists who have played their 
part in the making of it have an 
aura of tragedy about them. Each 
of these men carried his individual- 
ism to a point of extremity. The 
artist of the time occupied an 
unfortunate social position, outside 
society, and against society. 
Gauguin and Van Gogh are 
examples of the artist cast out 
from society. 
But, however much we may 
admire them, these are not 
“examples lo be followed indefinite- 
‘ly. The unfortunate position of 
the artist is not inherent in the 
nature of things. He may come to 
wish for a movement of co-opera- 
tion between himself and society. 
Today this co-operation works by 
way of compromise and expediency, 
such as snobbishness, fashion and 
the speculation of dealers and art 
collectors. 
A broader, better coordinated and 
more firmly established co-opera- 
tion can be conceived, through 
which society as a whole, rather 
than a privileged minority, would 
  
benefit from the artist's effort. 
This society of the future would 
entrust the monuments of its cul- 
ture and tradition to the artist's 
hand. The artist would be called 
upon to construct the great public 
buildings dedicated to the civic, 
cultural and social activity of the 
people. 
This would be the ideal form of 
reconciliation between the artist 
and society. Modern art, which 
formerly was individualistic and 
ostracized, will have reached its 
perfect expression when it becomes 
monumental. Art which limited 
itself to small canvases will find 
new forms of expression in mural 
decorations and frescoes, as it did 
during the great periods of history, 
in the centuries of great civili- 
zation. 
And then this succession of 
marvellous inventions and prodi- 
gious innovations which we have 
witnessed will find its glory, its 
justification and its reward. 
ART AND SOCIETY 
HARMONIOUSLY BLENDED 
N important social development, 
bringing about a new regime, 
will soon temd toward that mo- 
It was in depicting the past and present history of his country that Orczco portrayed the his- 
tory of man’s suffering, struggles and fullilment. This painting illustrates one of the events in 
Mexican revolutionary history when the “Zapatistas”, followers of General Emiliano Zapata. 
revolted in support ol agrarian reforms. at the beginning of this century. (Oil on canvas, 
1931 - Museum of Modern Art Collection, New York.) 
numental self-expression. 
-
—
 
yA  
an his “Martyrdom of St. Stephen”, Orozco jolts the spectator into an arena of wild emotions. 
his bold, stark designs. often adapted irom the abstract violence of pre-Columbian art, 
reinforcing the: action. By choosing brutal themes and developing them to deliver the 
sharpest impact, painters of social reality like Orozco, create new beauty in tragedy. 
A new 
regime, will be ambitious to match 
ils great predecessors in history 
which have left their mark upon 
their century and have given it its 
style. : 
But such an ambition is not 
always very readily satisfied. The 
example of the Mexican Revolution 
is a noteworthy exception. This 
revolution has had its artists from 
the very beginning, and they have 
known how to respond to the oppor- 
tunity which was opened to them 
to create a great social art. They 
used the monumental: form to 
express the revolution, the spirit 
of the people who had made it, their 
past and present history, emotions 
which they shared, and their des- 
tiny. The contemporary Mexican 
frescoes are one of {he great achie- 
vements of world civilization. In 
them, art and society find them- 
selves harmoniously blended. A ——— 
By 
Jean CASSOU 
TIER. ed 
Foremost in this renaissance is 
Diego Rivera, who, as a young man, 
travelled in Europe and lived in 
Paris, where he mingled with the 
first Cubists of the French school. 
‘He has thus participated in the 
experiments and innovations of our 
modern art — that insurgent and 
1 
i 
gl SLE 
ostracized art — and his vast mural’ 
epic is its climax and synthesis. 
With him, modern art reaches mo- 
numenta! proportions. 
His fellow countryman, José Cle- 
mente Orozco, who has recently 
died, came to know Europe later in 
life. But he intuitively understood 
and assimilated the efforts, the dis- 
coveries and the daring trends of 
modern European art, particularly 
of French painting, and they have 
served him as a point of departure 
for his great compositions. 
José Clemente Orozco was born 
in 1883. He studied in Mexico and 
witnessed his country's revolution. 
He painted his first frescoes in 
1922. The problems which he faced, 
which are the problems of mural 
art, i.e. of social art, are the assi- 
milation of style and expression. It 
was necessary to transpose the sty- 
lised, simplified, synthetic, geome- 
trical, abstract vocabulary of 
modern art into an expressive lan- 
guage and epic themes which could 
be understood by the masses. 
n IGNIFICANT among his work is 
S his gigantic figure of Irome- 
theus (1930), which must have been 
a fascinating subject for Orozco. He 
must have felt the necessity to 
project this powerful religious 
. image — the image of human reli- 
gion — of truly michelangelesque 
character, for himself as well as 
for his people. 
Two vears later. upon his return 
from Europe, hé undertook the 
frescoes in the Dartmouth College 
Library, and following that, his 
famous work at- Guadalajara and 
Jiquilpan. Each new work added 
to the scope and power of his art. 
His last work, the vaults and walls 
of the church of the Hospital of 
Jesus (1942-1944), reaches new 
heights of movement and grandeur. 
CHRIST DESTROYING 
HIS CROSS 
HE revivalist dream which ani- 
T mated Europe and particularly 
France in the 19th century, and 
which tried to express itself in 
decorative painting, achieved real- 
ity in the frescoes of Jos¢ Clemente 
Orozco. The history of man, por- 
lrayed in this history of the Ame- 
rican man, appears in all its dialec- 
tical grandeur in those powerful 
‘works. A continent and its myster- 
ies transform their energy in the 
drama of revolution. Prometheus 
plays his heroic parl against the 
gods, man suffers, struggles and 
fultils himself; it can be likened to 
a symbol which belongs to Orozeo’s 
early work: Christ destroying his 
CTOSS. 
The work of Orozco, this extra- 
ordinary epic narrative of truly 
hemispheric dimensions, reveals 
the Mexican soul. Its forms, its 
combinations of forms, its plastic 
sections, display a certain quality 
of hardness, rigour and strength 
which are profoundly characteristic 
and correspond to deep organic 
necessities. But this message is of 
universal interest and concerns us 
all. The Mexican man becomes the 
cosmic man. 
“Through the language of meta- 
phors, signs and symbols”, writes 
his fellow countryman, Justino Fer- 
nandez, “Orozco tells us that the 
lluman reality is movement, con- 
stant renovation, disintegration and 
integration, death and resurrection.” 
When an artist, inspired by his 
~ country’s past and present history 
and inspired by the genius of his 
country, achieves a work of such 
philosophical scope and such broad 
significance, he raises himself and 
his country to universal stature. 
With Orozco, Mexican art, if it 
remains rooted in its native soil, 
reaches out beyond the frontiers and 
becomes a message to humanity. 
Courier 
wenenmrmnn NESEY oo oo wee 
EDITORIAL OFFICES 
UNESCO MOUSE 
19, Ave. Kidber, PARIS. 14 
  
Dwrector : DOUGLAS MH. SCHNEIDER 
Editor : §. M. KOFFLER 
Acting Editor : | CHANDERL! 
Assistant Editor: R. 5. FENTON 
All reproductions authorized 
— 
mprunerie GEORGES LANG 
11, rue Curial, Parns 
UNESCO Publication 536     