# [104412](104412engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](104412engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

ENVIRONMENT: 
THE PHILIPPINES’ 
LAST FRONTIER 
—
 mw
 
m
 
=
 
m
=
 
o
5
 
S3
2 
>
 m
 
o = is
 
m
 ~N
  

## [Page 2](104412engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
We invite readers to send us 
 
photographs to be considered 
for publication in this feature. 
Your photo should show a 
painting, a sculpture, piece of 
architecture or any other 
subject which seems to be an 
example of cross-fertilization 
between cultures. 
Alternatively, you could send 
us pictures of two works from 
different cultural backgrounds 
in which you see some striking 
connection or resemblance. 
Please add a short caption to 
all photographs. 
1by a a fl soda, Hike a laser b a 
Signs bth forma (square, eight painted star, se e) 
and informal (arabesques) evoking contact between 
cultures and “a moment of questing and truth. . 
> 
  
 

## [Page 3](104412engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

Mi
ch
el
 
Cl
au
de
 
/ 
Un
es
co
 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Lé
na
rs
 
THE UNESCO ((OURIER 
  
        
INTERVIEW 
  
Swiss microbiologist Wemer Arber 
(Nobel Laureate, 1978) reflects 
on biodiversity and the place of science 
in society. 
 
The medina of Fez (Morocco). 
The historic district of a great metropolis is 
being carefully restored (p. 36). 
contents 
OCTOBER 1996 
EXILES 
  
  
Unesco in action If 
Month by month by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 8 
A land of no return by Abdelmalek Sayad 10 
The coolies’ odyssey by Khaleel Torabully 13 
A journey of self-discovery by Bujor Nedelcovici 17 
Travellers from a far country by Ismail Kadaré 20 
The roots of the banyan tree by René Depestre 22 
The brain drain by Carmen Garcia Guadilla 24 
Refugees: the rising tide by Rony Brauman 25 
Restricted entry 29 
Fact file 33 
Federico Mayor Commentary K 
HERITAGE 36 
The medina of Fez—crafting a future for the past 
by Geneviéve Darles and Nicolas Lagrange 
GREENWATCH 40 
Palawan, the Philippines’ last frontier by France Bequette 
UNESCO IN ACTION 
Who are we? by Géraldine Schimmel 44 
REFLECTIONS 
Culture first by Claude Fabrizio 47 
LISTENING 
Isabelle Leymarie talks to Juan Carlos Caceres 48 
As it was... The Unesco Courier August 1957 50 
Couver: Blue crowd (1995), a computer-generated design by Diana Ong. 
© SuperStock, Paris 
'S 
4 
THE unesco Quien Ne mOCTOBER 1996 
© 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 4](104412engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 104367: Biodiversity is a guarantee of evolution: interview with Werner Arber

interview 
THE UNESCO Gurr BOCTOBER 1996 
Werner Arber 
  
Swiss microbiologist Werner Arber 
shared the 1978 Nobel Prize for 
Physiology or Medicine with Daniel 
Nathans and Hamilton Smith for their 
‘discovery of enzymes that protect 
bacteria against v ral infec ions. 
Known as the restriction and 
modification system, it has proved to 
be extremely useful in molecular 
biology and genetic engineering. In 
this interview with Serafin Garcia 
Ibanez, Werner Arber talks about the 
relations between science and 
society, especially questions arising 
from advances in genetics. 
  
BH What is biodiversity? 
Werner Arber: There are an estimated 10 mil- 
lion animal speeies in the world. Biodiversity 
is widely regarded as referring to diversity of 
species. But there is also great genetic 
diversity within each species. And ecosys- 
tems that are home to a large number of dif- 
ferent species also contain an equally large 
variety from one place to another. All this is 
biodiversity. 
HM Not all of these species have been 
identified, have they? 
W. A.: Far from it. A lot of them are unknown 
to us. About four million of them have heen 
© 
Mi
ch
el
 
Cl
au
de
 
/U
NE
SC
O

## [Page 5](104412engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 104367: Biodiversity is a guarantee of evolution: interview with Werner Arber

listed, if that; everything depends on geo- 
graphical location, habitat and type of organ- 
ism. A lot of miero-organisms, for example, 
which are my speciality, have not been 
described becanse they can’t be cultivated 
in the laboratory. The only ones we know 
well are those that can be studied in vitro. 
HB So, many species are bom and disappear 
without our knowing about them? 
W. A.: Biodiversity is the result of a long 
process of biological evolution that continu- 
ally produces new genetic forms. So it is 
clear that in the past living beings have dis- 
appeared, and that more will be born in 
futnre the like of which this planet has 
never seen. A new species is the fruit of 
numerons mutations that oceur in sncees- 
sive and distinct stages. Biodiversity as we 
know it today is not static; it reflects the 
world as it is at a given moment, and its 
composition changes constantly. 
| What is a mutation? 
W. A: It is a change in the sequence of a 
DNA molecule. A sequence is the linear 
repetition of the four hase elements (which 
are designated by the letters A, C, G and T) 
in this molecule, which contains genetic 
information. A mutation occurs when one 
letter replaces another, either by cancelling 
or by inserting one of these letters at certain 
places in the sequence. With the help of 
specific enzymes, entire segments of this tiny 
piece of DNA can be rearranged. 
HB How can we protect species we don’t even 
know exist? 
W. A.: The best way to protect them is to 
keep their living conditions—whatever they 
may be—stable. But that’s easier said than 
done. [Tow is it possible to keep living con- 
ditions absolutely stable? A host of changes, 
not counting those caused hy people, can 
modify the temperature, the humidity rate 
or any other parameter of the environment, 
so that living conditions on the planet are 
never entirely stable. 
HB When we attack viruses—which we 
automatically assume to be harmful—can we 
be sure that they are not vital for other 
ecosystems and even for the preservation of 
biodiversity as a whole? 
W. A.: People imagine on the basis of their 
own experience that micro-organisms are 
their enemies because some micro-organisms 
canse diseases. It has to be accepted, how- 
ever, that the great majority of these miero- 
organisms are very useful, not only to peo- 
ple but to nature in general. They can, for 
example, break down certain toxins very 
quickly. 
HB Are we not, therefore, playing with fire by 
trying to change and improve certain forms of 
life through biotechnologies? 
W. A.: Risks are always involved in this kind 
of application, but there are ways of control- 
ling them. We must accept responsibility for 
establishing long-term strategies, in several 
stages, so that these risks can be assessed 
through experimentation. 
BM Can science today create life from 
inorganic matter? 
W. A.: No. Several theories currently seek to 
explain how certain biorganic molecules are 
prodnced by physico-chemical reactions, 
but this is still a far cry from being able to 
ercate a being endowed with the functions 
necessary lor what is called life, namely 
metabolism, reproduction, assimilation and 
so forth. But not all scientists agree on this 
subjeet. Some think that in the near future 
science will have advanced to the point 
where we shall know more abont the mech- 
anisms of life and perhaps even be able to 
partly construct a living entity in the labo- 
ratory. Others, including myself, think that 
life is more complicated, and none of this is 
feasible in the near future. I am always fas- 
cinated by the elegance of certain molecu- 
lar mechanisms, and I feel we should think 
onrselves very fortunate to he able to 
understand nature and watch it at work. 
HB The progress of research in human and 
plant genetics opens up all kinds of 
Some of the fears associated with the 
applications of genetics arise from the fact that 
some scientists overestimate their powers. 
THE UNESCO L_LOURIER BOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 6](104412engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

interview 
© 
Mi
ch
el
 
C
l
a
u
d
e
 
/
U
N
E
S
c
o
 
    
of | 
Werne 
  
r Arber 
  
  
speculation. What do you think of people’s 
hopes and fears in this respect? 
W. A: We should be sceptical about the 
claims of certain scientists. In the 1950s and 
1960s we heard promises that it would soon 
be possible to cure cancer. It’s the same story 
today with the Aids virus. It was thought 
that once the virus was identified, it would 
only be a matter of time before the disease 
could be treated. But it’s not as simple as 
that. And as [ar as the fears are concerned, 
as I’ve said, it is a matter of responsibility, for 
we can assess by means of experimentation 
the risks involved in a given application. 
There is no general rule; we have to proceed 
on a case-by-case basis, It is also trne that 
some fears associated with the applications of 
sencetics arise from the fact that some scien- 
tists overestimate their powers and claim that 
anything is possible, whereas in reality things 
are much more complicated. 
HM Do research and researchers need a 
normative framework? 
W. A.: I think it’s important to define stan- 
dards that should be respected, and also 
that these standards should be revised from 
time to time. Some applications may prove 
useful and even necessary. Others may be 
dangerous. All the factors should be taken 
into account. 
WM Biodiversity is no respecter of frontiers. Is 
international agreement needed to preserve 
it? 
W. A.: I think that a certain biodiversity is 
necessary for evolution. If too many hiologi- 
cal functions were to disappear in a short 
period of time, it would take a long time— 
thousands of years—Dbefore some of them 
reappeared. Knowing that species disappear 
partly because of physical and chemical 
changes in their environment (in tempera- 
ture or humidity rates, for example) and 
that the activities of our civilization have an 


### 104367: Biodiversity is a guarantee of evolution: interview with Werner Arber

Biodiversity is necessary for evolution. If too many 
biological functions were to disappear within a 
THE UNESCO Gu RIER 
short time, it would take thousands of years 
WOCTOBER 1996 
before some of them reappeared. 
impact on these changes at the planetary 
level, awareness of the problems must be 
world-wide. If one state makes a decision 
without consulting the others, it doesn’t 
help anyone. We must aet together, we must 
co-operate. We cannot bring the economic 
machine to a standstill, but we must, for 
example, devote the smallest possible area 
of land to food production. Above all—and 
this is the major problem—we mmst rednce 
air and water pollution. 
WM Do you think there is a limit to the 
numbers of people the planet can feed? 
W. A.: There are two possible answers to this 
question, but first of all you have to define 
a humanly acceptable quality of life. What 
criteria shonld he adopted? Those of the 
industrialized countries or those of coun- 
tries with a traditional economy? In the lat- 
ter case, the fignres may vary, but in the 
former—and it is clear that most human 
beings would prefer this way of life—there 
arc already too many of us for the planct’s 
Trecsonrees. 
HM Our world seems increasingly dependent on 
technological and scientific data. Should 
scientists play a more important role in states’ 
political and decision-making machinery? 
W. A.: Research is a full-time job that leaves 
hardly any time for anything else. As far as 
I’m concerned, I think it’s a good thing that 
politics are the concern of another category 
of the population than researchers, but 
contacts hetween the two categories could 
be a lot more fruitful than they are at pre- 
sent. Some aspects of scientific research also 
have iniplieations that go further than mere 
techmological applications, forming part of 
the broader field of philosophy and its use in 
helping us to understand our world. To take 
one example, molecular genetics teaches us 
that certain genes involved in mutations are 
involved on a random rather than a consis- 
tent basis. Nevertheless, these genes are 
necessary not only for the short lifespan of 
the individual but also for the evolution of 
the population as a whole, so that it can 
adapt to other environmental conditions that 
may possibly develop. This is the kind of 
information that it would be instructive to 
integrate into our picture of the world. WH

## [Page 7](104412engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO IN ACTION... 
DANISH DONATION 
Denmark has agreed to provide Unesco with $21 million over 
the next four years, i.e. an average of $5.25 million a year. The 
funds will be allocated to activities that are in line with Den- 
mark's development policies in the fields of education, the en- 
vironment, human rights and communication. [| 
SCIENCE AND CULTURAL 
HERITAGE 
An impressive battery of new technologies for examining and 
preserving the world's cultural heritage were reviewed at a re- 
cent symposium held at Unesco’s Paris Headquarters. The 
techniques included ground-penetrating radar, three-dimen- 
sional computer-generated models {virtual reality), electro- 
magnetism, thermography, remote sensing and the rein- 
forcement of ancient stone with injections of electrically 
charged crystals. | 
PEACE AWARD FOR UNHCR 
The 1995 Félix Houphouét-Boigny Peace Prize was presented 
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR) and its High Commissioner, Ms Sadako 
Ogata, at a ceremony held at Headquarters on 5 June 19986. 
nH 
FASHION WITHOUT FRONTIERS 
To mark the 50th anniversary of the United Nations, Unesco 
and the Japanese group Felissimo launched “Design 21°, a 
 
  
WORLD REPORT LISTS PRESS 
FREEDOM VIOLATIONS 
The 7th Annual Report on Press Freedom worldwide*, published by the French non- 
governmental organization Reporters Sans Frontiéres (478 pages, 90 francs) records 
violations of the right to inform and be informed in 149 countries. 51 journalists were 
killed in 1995 (three-quarters of them in Africa, especially Algeria) and nearly 400 im- 
prisoned for doing their job or expressing opinions counter to those held by their coun- 
tries’ rulers. The report notes two new forms of repression: the subordination of jus- 
tice to political interests and the implementation of legislative reforms that limit free- 
dom of the press in several countries of eastern Europe, sub-Saharan Africa, North 
Africa and the Middle East. In Western nations such as France, Germany and Austria, 
violence hy extreme right-wing groups and extremist nationalist movements is im- 
posing a heavy hurden on the work of the press. [| 
* Rapport annuel sur Ia liberté de la presse dans le monde. 
For further information contact: Reporters Sans Frontiéres, 
5, rue Geoffroy-Marie, 75009 Paris, France. Tel: (33-1) 44 83 84 84; 
Fax: (33-1) 45 23 11 51; e-mail: rsf@calvanet. Calvacom.fr   
UNESCO IN ACTION... 
project to establish intercultural links through fashion de- 
sign and to encourage co-operation between young design- 
ers and textile manufacturers. In March 1996, 50 designers 
from 28 countries, winners of a qualifying competition, pre- 
sented their creations at a fashion show held in Paris as part 
of the project. They are being exhibited in Tokyo in October 
and November 1996, and in Kobe in December. 
For further information contact: Unesco, Division of the Arts 
and Cultural Life, 1, rue Miollis, 75732 Paris Cedex 15, 
France. Tel: (33-1) 4568 43 26; Fax: (33-1) 42730401. Wm 
THE 1996 IMC/UNESCO 
MUSIC PRIZE 
The 1996 International Music Council /UNesco Prize has been 
awarded to Hungarian composer Gyorgy Legeti and Argentine 
singer Mercedes Sosa. The prize, created in 1975, has also 
been awarded honoris causa to the Paul Sacher Foundation 
of Basel, which was created in Basel in 1873 to collect man- 
uscripts and other documentation related to the most im- 
portant composers of our time. | 
GLOBAL SECURITY 
Over 100 specialists from 30 countries attended a sympo- 
sium held at Unesco Headquarters from 12 to 14 June on 
the theme “From partial insecurity to global security”. Offi- 
cers, diplomats and academics from 30 countries attended 
4 round tables: From Crisis Management to Conflict Preven 
tion, Social and Cultural Roots of Insecurity, Conditions for 
Development Security, and Defence and Security Policies for 
Peace. The participants concluded their discussions with a 
proposal to create an international association of defence 
and strategic studies institutes to foster dialogue on ways 
to prevent conflicts and build and maintain peace. [| 
RIGOBERTA MENCHU TUM, 
UNESCO GOODWILL AMBASSADOR 
On 21 June Rigoberta Mencha Tum (Nobel Laureate for 
Peace, 1992) was named a Unesco Goodwill Ambassador 
for a Culture of Peace by the Director-General of UNESCO, 
Mr. Federico Mayor. During a ceremony held at Headquarters, 
Rigoberta Mench( Tum called on all nations to provide fi- 
nancial support for the rapid transformations experienced 
by indigenous societies. [| 
he unesco (Durr BOCTOBER 1996 
UNESCO IN ACTION...

## [Page 8](104412engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

TH&AUNESCO 
OURIER 
49th YEAR 
Published monthly in 30 languages and in Braille by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization. 
31, rue Francois Bonvin, 75732 Paris CEDEX 15, 
France. 
Fax: (33-1) 45.66.92.70 
Internet: unesco.courier@unesco.org 
DIRECTOR 
Bahgat Elnadi 
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 
Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin 
French edition: Alain Lévéque 
Spanish edition: Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Features: Jasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey (Tel. 45.68.46.90) 
Documentation: José Banaag (Tel. 45.68. 46.85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel. 45.68.46.87) 
Secretariat: Annie Brachet (Tel. 45.68.47.15), 
Administrative Assistant: Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and 
Korean: (Tel. 45.68.47.14) 
Artwork Consultant: Eric Frogé 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Irina Utkina (Moscow) 
German: Dominique Anderes (Berne) 
Arabic: Fawzi Abdel Zaher (Cairo) 
Italian: Anna Chiara Bottoni (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: Akbar Zargar (Teheran) 
Dutch: Claude Montrieux (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Alzira Alves de Abreu (Rio de Janeiro) 
Urdu: Mirza Muhammad Mushir (Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay: Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Kang Woo-hyon (Seoul) 
Swahili; Leonard J. Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene: Aleksandra Kornhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala: Neville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish: Katri Himma (Helsinki) 
Basque: Juxto Egana (Donostia) 
Thai: Duangtip Surintatip (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Do Phuong (Hanoi) 
. Pashto: Nazer Mohammad Angar (Kabul) 
Hausa: Aliyu Muhammad Bunza (Sokoto) 
Ukrainian: Volodymyr Vasiliuk (Kiev) 
Galician: Xabier Senin Femandez (Santiago de Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION, 
Fax: 42.73.24.29 
Subscriptions: Marie-Thérése Hardy (Tel. 
45.68.45.65), Jacqueline Louise-Julie, Manichan 
Ngonekeo, Michel Ravassard, Mohamed Salah EI Din 
(Tel. 45.68.49.19) 
Customer service: (Tel. 45.68.45.64) 
Accounts: (Tel. 45.68.45.65) 
Shipping: Daniel Meister (Tel. 45.68.47.50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. 
Tel.: 45.68.45.65 
1 year: 211 French francs. 2 years: 326 FF. 
Students: 1 year: 132 French francs 
Binder for one year's issues: 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
1 year: 132 Frenc francs. 2 years: 211 FF. 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco or by Visa, Eurocard or Mastercard 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted 
providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from the Unesco Courier”, 
plus date of issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor. 
Signed articles repnnted must bear author's name. Non-copyright 
photos will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts can 
nol be returned unless accompanied by an international reply coupon 
cavenng postage. Signed articles express the opinions of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent the opinions of Unesco 
or those of the editors of the Unesco Courier. Photo captions and 
headlines are written by the Unesco Courier staff. Tne boundaries on 
maps published in the magazine do nat imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by Unesco or the United Nations. The Unesco Counter 
1s produced in microform (microfilm and/or microfiche) by: (1) Unesco, 
7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris: (2) University Microfims (Xerox), 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100 U.S.A.; (3) N.C.R. Microcard Edition, 
Indian Head Inc., 111 West 401th Street, New York, U.5.A.; (4) Bell 
and Howell Co. Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) 
DEPOT LEGAL: C1 - OCTOBRE 1996 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - DIFFUSE PAR LES 
N.M.P.P. 
Photocomposition, photogravure: 
Le Courrier de I'Unesco., 
Impression: MAURY IMPRIMELUR, 
Z.1. Route d'Etampes, 45331 Malsherbes 
ISSN 0041-5278 N° 10-1996-0P1-96-552 A 
This 1ssue comprises 52 pages and a 4-page insert 
between pages 2-3 and 50-51. 
me unesco (Qurier WOCTOBIR 1996 
  


### 104370: The Darkness and light of exile

  
The darkness and light 
Is the state of exile, which was for so long the 
exception, now becoming the rule? 
To be expelled from a community in the far- 
off times when communities regulated every 
detail of their members’ lives was tantamount to 
receiving a death sentence. Not only did exiles 
face the future alone, bereft of the protection of 
the group, they also forfeited all contact with their 
ancestors and with their gods, as well as the possi- 
bility of setting up hearth and home. An individ- 
ual banished from a community was a lost soul. 
For communities themselves, exile was a col- 
lective disaster when, after being defeated in an 
unequal struggle, their survivors were reduced to 
slavery. The victors severed the ties of continuity 
that bound the defeated peoples to their past, 
keeping them alive for callous exploitation as’ 
beasts of burden with no identity as human beings. 
[tis true that there were more tolerable forms 
of exile. Exceptional people—princes, doctors, 
engineers or artists—who were constrained to 
leave their homeland, usually for political rea- 
sons, might sometimes live comfortable lives and 
even enjoy privileges and positions of influence 
in prosperous states. But they never ceased to be 
foreigners. An essential part of them remained 
anchored in a homeland that became mytholo- 
gized by time, nostalgia and regret. 
With the colonial conquests of the fifteenth 
and sixteenth centurics, the notion of exile 
changed. The great voyages of discovery, 
advances in navigational instruments and tech- 
niques, and the growth of a permanent network 
of exchange across the oceans paved the way for 
a global market. In the course of time, large num- 
bers of people emigrated in scarch of regions 
more politically clement or more economically 
promising. For these migrants uprooting was not 
 

## [Page 9](104412engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
 
of exile 
a punishment or a calamity. It might be an adven- 
ture, at one with the spirit of change that was the 
hallmark of the new cra. They were embarking 
on another life, but one whose hazardous nature 
they freely accepted. They saw the country of 
their birth as a distant, stable landmark in a shift- 
ing world, a haven of certainty amidst the vicissi- 
tudes of life. 
Until the second half of this century, however, 
exiles everywhere belonged to a very small minor- 
ity. Demographic stability was the rule; population 
movements were the exception. Today things have 
changed. The international market, which for- 
merly encompassed national markets whilst 
respecting their frontiers, is now in the process of 
abolishing those frontiers. The major economic, 
financial, technological and information flows 
criss-cross the planet. 
A demarcation line now runs through all 
countries, dividing those who participate in the 
age of globalization from those who cannot adjust 
to it and seck imaginary escape-routes from it by 
withdrawing into hermetic nationalist, denomi- 
national or tribal worlds of their own. Not that all 
those affected by the high tide of economic glob- 
alization arc privileged. Far from it. A minority 


### 104370: The Darkness and light of exile

holding the levers of economic power and the 
cultural values that open the doors to success arc 
obtaining unprecedented power, freedom and 
outlets for expression. Meanwhile, hundreds of 
millions of men and women are gradually being 
driven from the rural areas, regions and countries 
where they were born—as a result of economic 
impoverishment, political terror or war—and 
involuntarily thrust into nearby or distant centres 
of growth. 
Their tragedy is that, although they have no 
future in their own land, they have little chance of 
by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 
prospering elsewhere. If the winners of global- 
ization feel at home wherever they are, the losers 
feel excluded both from a homeland where they 
would have preferred to stay or to which they 
dream of returning one day, and from the coun- 
trics to which they have emigrated, where they 
are generally looked down upon and do not “fit 
in”. For the happy few, exile is freely chosen and 
creative; for the vast majority it is enforced and 
alienating, 
This gap is even more intolerable because 
while it is widening the world looks on through 
the universal eye of television. It is a potential 
time-bomb. The frustrations it causes and the ten- 
sions and violence it provokes are bound to get 
worse if nothing is done to counterbalance the 
chaotic, inegalitarian tendencies of the market. 
For the time being, however, the privileged 
inhabitants of the planct arc more inclined to 
defend their vested interests than to share the 
fruits of their prosperity. They cordon off their 
territory with illusory barricades and in so doing 
respond to the outsiders knocking on their door 
with some of the most retrograde arguments of 
the fundamentalist canon. 
They forget that their own power is indisso- 
ciable from the globalizing process that manufac- 
tures these outsiders. Above all, they forget that 
the revolutionary ideas of liberty, equality, law, 
justice and solidarity have played just as powerful 
arole in the drive to world unification as market 
forces. It is these ideas which sustain human cre- 
ativity, advances in science and productivity, and 
the security of intellectual and material exchange. 
They have long been the prerogative of a small 
group of nations. They can no longer remain so. 
In today’s open world, if their benefits do not go 
to all, they will be lost for everyone. |   
the unesco (Ourier H OCTOBER 1996

## [Page 10](104412engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 104371: A Land of no return

A LAND OF NO RETURN 
xile 1s a time when people experi- 
ence, often painfully, an almost 
carnal attachment to the territory 
(country, native soil, homeland) 
and group (family, relatives, com- 
munity, nation) they come from. That area, 
which has fashioned each and every one of us, 
and which we have ourselves fashioned for 
our own purposes, is also an area of nostalgia, 
of homesickness. Homesickness is a word 
which contains both the cause and the cure. 
Nostalgia, feeding as it does on the illusion that 
the cure (going home) will cure the sickness 
by removing its cause (exile), triggers off an 
emotionally charged process of memorization, 
reminiscence and imagination. It has the effect 
of sanctifying the places on which it focuses 
and thus puts time and place on the same 
plane, suggesting that the abolition of one will 
result in the abolition of the other. 
But exile does not always take the same 
form. Sometimes it is long, and sometimes 
not so long; sometimes it is permanent, and 
sometimes temporary. In some cases there is 
no choice (as when a person is banished, 
deported or forced to flee); in others, exile is 
intentional—at least apparently so. Sometimes 
the outcome depends solely on the person 
concerned; sometimes it hinges on the good- 
will of a third party. Nor does nostalgia always 
take the same form. A political exile’s nostalgia 
is different from an immigrant’s, an éniigré 
worker’ different from a colonizer’s. It varies 
depending on the relationship exiles have 
with their native country and with their 
adopted country. 
That dual relationship varies with time, 
« % 
THE UNESCO Courier . BOCTOBER 1996 
which itself influences the perception exiles 
have of where they belong. Awareness of 
links and differences such as place and 
milicu, past and present, and the “here” and 
the “elsewhere” modulates nostalgic anxiety 
and melancholy. 
Here, there and nowhere 
In the last analysis, nostalgia expresses the 
essence of exile: an impossible quest to be 
here and there at the same time and all the 
time. It is fuelled by the duality of two 
simultaneous lives experienced on two dif- 
Te Isle of the Dead (1880) 
by the Swiss artist 
Arnold Bécklin.

## [Page 11](104412engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

LA Eh pai SR 
: oP 
BL conti TT 
i ot ps ‘ 
ferent planes, those of reality and desire— 
the reality of an active life, lived in the pre- 
sent, pregnant with materiality, immediacy 
and everydayness, and the desire that is 
inherent in a secret and wholly internal life 
consisting of memories and imaginings of 
something which is no more, but which may 
yet come into being again, a life superim- 
posed on one’s actual life. 
Even if the “elsewhere” of nostalgia is 
constantly being modified and embellished 
by exile, it nonetheless remains something 
which has already been experienced. It is 
familiar and In this “native”. respect, 
© Kunstmuseum, Basel 
ABDELMALEK SAYAD 
is an Algerian sociologist. 
BY ABDELMALEK SAYAD 
Sl at 
Odysseus may be regarded as the prototype 
of the exile wandering in search of his or her 
country, and The Odyssey as the account of 
that exile and the homecoming, in other 
words the cure for nostalgia. It seems as if 
his return to Ithaca totally compensates for 
his departure ten years carlier. But that kind 
of homecoming and the ending of nostalgia 
that it implies are not as easy or as automatic 
as one might think. 
A bittersweet 
homecoming 
Odysseus does not sail the seas because he 
likes sailing, or because he responds to the call 
of the deep or the attractions of wide open 
skies. Homers hero, unlike Dante’s, who 


### 104371: A Land of no return

passes through the Columns of Hercules to 
venture out on to the ocean in search of new 
horizons, could be any émigré who simply 
yearns to return home after suffering the 
ordeal of absence—a notion later expressed 
more prosaically by another well-known 
exile, Victor Hugo: “One cannot live without 
bread; but one cannot live without a homeland 
either.” There is a difference though: through- 
out his wanderings, Odysseus constantly pre- 
pares the way for his homecoming and 
embarks on a series of ordeals, each of which, 
as it is overcome, brings him a little closer to 
his final goal. What is more, he is determined 
to return home as master in his own house, so 
he can restore things to their former state, as 
though his ten years’ absence did not matter. 
Odysseus’s homecoming causes none of 
the disappointment which almost always» 
£ 
He unesco (COURIER © + mOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 12](104412engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 104371: A Land of no return

© 
Pa
tr
ic
k 
La
ge
s,
 
Pa
ri
s 
A: nomads on the 
shores of the Red Sea. 
» replaces nostalgia when the long-awaited 
remedy proves incapable of curing the sick- 
ness. When people return home they are 
never the same as they were when they 
started out; they never return to the place 
they think they have left. The homecoming, 
for exiles, 1s a return to themselves, to the 
time preceding their departure. Itis at once a 
retrospective and a time of retrospection. A 
return is possible in space but not in time. It 
gives rise to all sorts of hopes, but it is a 
source of disappointment and frustration. 
Disappointment, which is something 
Homers Odysseus does not experience, 
dogs his modern successors, such as the 
central character of Nikos Kazantzakis’s The 
Odyssey, a Modern Sequel, a book which 
begins where Homer's epic leaves off. As 
soon as Odysseus has comfortably settled in 
his palace, he is racked by anxiety. He begins 
to get bored and dreams of setting off again. 
He thinks back to the fabulous lands he 
glimpsed and spurned. Departure and 
return continually echo cach other. There is 
the pleasure of having come home. But 
there is above all the pleasure of constant 
homecoming, which requires one to be 
always going away. If nostalgia is not to turn 
into disappointment, homecoming has to be 
kept in abeyance. || 
 
THE UNESCO Courier BOCTOBER 1990

## [Page 13](104412engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

Por Louis, capital of 
Mauritius, in 1870 
C.
 
Pa
va
rd
 
© 
Ho
a 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns
 
A Tamil “signature” on the 
front of Mauritian business 
premises built in 1895. 


### 104372: The Coolies' odyssey

  
THE COOLIES’ 
BY KHALEEL TORABULLY 
arge numbers of men and women 
left India during the nineteenth 
century to work as coolies in 
countries where the practice of 
slavery had recently been officially 
abolished. Out of their exile grew a pattern 
of life and poetics which might be called 
“coolitude”. 
It is impossible to understand the essence 
of “coolitude” without charting the coolies’ 
voyage across the seas. That decisive experi- 
ence, that coolic odyssey, left an indelible 
stamp on the imaginary landscape of coolitude. 
As the time to sail drew near, a first taboo 
needed to be broken. Hindus who cross the 
ocean, which is peopled with hooghlis (mon- 
sters), cut themselves off from the sacred 
waters of the River Ganges. They are 
doomed to wander eternally and lose any 
chance of reincarnation. It seems that the 
British placed huge cauldrons of water from 
the Ganges on board ship so that emigrants 
could perform their ritual ablutions. The 
subterfuge apparently induced the most 
reluctant voyagers to entrust their souls to 
the world beyond the seas. 
It was the first time most coolies had 
ever seen the sca, the first time they found 
themselves on the verge of the unknown, 
wrenched away from their traditional view 
YSSEY 
of the world. An age-old social taboo was 
also broken when Indians of every caste 
were packed into the steerage, which was 
open to the skies. They were equal before 
life and death on the ocean even though the 
voyage would only last ten days—or so they 
had been promised. Ten days soon go by. 
And yet as the ship cast off its moorings they 
all knew deep down that to leave your native 
land is a form of death. 
An angry silence 
There is a parallel between the coolies’ 
predicament and that agonizing moment 
when slave ships weighed anchor off the 
African coast, with their cargo of chained 
slaves in their holds. That instant was marked 
by what the West Indian writer Edouard 
Glissant has called “the scream from the 
hold”, a primal utterance from deep in the 
slaves’ flesh, which would erupt beyond time 
and space, demanding an explanation from 
History and reconstructing their History. 
Slaves often spent the crossing stretched 
out in chains. Coolies enjoyed relative free- 
dom of movement: they could see the 
coastline disappearing into the distance and 
watch the stars, phosphorescent trails, an 
approaching cyclone—in other words they 
C.
 
Pa
va
rd
 
© 
Ho
a 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns
 
witnessed a slow evaporation of their earlier p 
he unesco (OURIER MOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 14](104412engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
AN INHUMAN 
SYSTEM 
The abolition of slavery in the British colonies in 
1834 and in the French colonies in 1849 led to a 
labour shortage on the colonial plantaticns. To 
compensate for this, Western traders tock foreign 
contract workers. India’s economic difficulties at 
the time encouraged a massive outflow of mainly 
unskilled emigrants. 
Coclies {the word comes from the Hindi Kuli, 
an aboriginal tribal name, or from Tamil kuli, 
“wages”) voluntarily signed contracts whose terms 
were very harsh, but they were often duped or 
press-ganged into signing. While awaiting shipment 
they were cooped up in insalubrious depots, then 
packed on to boats in inhuman conditions. Many 
of them did not survive the journey. 
The exodus resulted in sometimes large Indian 
communities becoming established in certain 
colonies. These included Mauritius, Reunion Island 
and Madagascar in the southern Indian Ccean, the 
Fiji islands in the Pacific, Malaysia, Burma and 
Ceylon in southeast and southern Asia, Kenya, 
Tanganyika, Uganda, Zanzibar and Natal in Africa, 
Trinidad and Jamaica in the West Indies, and British 
Guiana and Surinam in South America. 
Indian workers thus played a key role in the 
expansion of colonial economies. But in many 
countries, particularly in Africa, they were denied 
basic civil rights and suffered from racial discrimina- 
tion, which Gandhi denounced many times during 
his years in South Africa, putting into practice his 
principle of satyagraha, or non-violent action, for 
the first time there in 1906. 0   
me unesco (Durer BOCTOBER 1996 
A young coolie woman who 
arrived in Mauritius in 1874. 
A
R
 


### 104372: The Coolies' odyssey

 
> being. The coolie’s carefully pondered, vol- 
untary voyage was already a form of inter- 
mixing, physical contact with a different 
poetics, a different world-view. Coolies 
“knew” where they were going. They 
would think about their separation, devise a 
strategy for survival and settling down, and 
work out their place in the new existential 
structure that would take them in. 
The Bhagavad Gita 
written from memory 
The children of “coolitude” shared with the 
children of “creolity” the “scream from the 
hold”, the moment of silence that replaces 
the scream at being wrenched away and 
then, as in the early days of the slave trade, 
develops into amnesia, whether intentional 
or not. In any history, the unsaid is often 
blotted out or pushed into the background, 
as though the best way of censoring a painful 
past were to surround it with dense silence. 
This is where the coolie non-text, or pre- 
text, comes in: it 1s, In a sense, a statement 
that is repressed ahead of exile. 
Slaves experienced that moment knowing 
C. 
Pa
va
rd
 
© 
Ho
a 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 15](104412engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 104372: The Coolies' odyssey

| dentity cards of Indian 
coolies hired to work on the 
plantations of Mauritius. 
  
full well that they would have no chance of 
advancement in a society that had just reduced 
them to the state of objects. They clung to 
their beliefs and their languages. They also 
thought of suicide. Coolies, on the other hand, 
experienced their uprooting in real time, with- 
out bearings between heaven and earth. They 
came up against a culture of sailors and 2 lan- 
guage they did not speak well (except for a few 
educated Brahmins). Their voyage had begun 
with a piece of trickery: the crossing actually 
took almost a month. They had plenty of time 
to think about their fate and to understand that 
the deceit had already begun with their con- 
tracts. It was there, in a legal framework, that 
they would concentrate their efforts to 
become emancipated. 
Coolies had a culture of the written word, 
  
     SPT  
   
   
  
SIPs Es J) 9/2 yg | 
wv 
v 
   
pol 
$40) 
| rad 
  
JESIFS™ 
= 
and they set off on their voyage with books: 
the Quran, the Bhagavad Gita and the 
Ramayana. These sacred texts were part and 
parcel of their journey. The Coolie Museum in 
Moka, Mauritius, possesses a copy of the 
Bhagavad Gita which coolies wrote out from 
memory so as to bring a token of their original 
culture to the country where they had been 
contracted to work. This is indisputable evi- 
dence that a struggle against deculturation took 
place. Coolies clung to their founding texts. 
The “strategies of deviation” described by 
the West Indian writers Jean Bernabé, Patrick 
Chamoiseau and Raphaél Confiant! were 
more in evidence among African slaves, who 
were imbued with a civilization based on oral 
expression. This partly explains the greater lin- 
guistic inventiveness shown by the descen-» 
   SZ A. - PP 
V 
  
 
LP pre 
 
Caf L 
gates 2 
a ; 
    
  
    
Say   
  
Vt ordi - 
        
v 
i £ 
q 
y re 
pI JS SoS Ss So 
i pal 73 Hoy cos n fag Her ~~ 
f 
 
  
    Lo ES     KHALEEL TORABULLY 
is a Mauritian poet.   C.
 
Pa
va
rd
 
© 
Ho
a 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns
 
  
i THe unesco (Ourier WOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 16](104412engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
THE CONCEPT OF ‘COOLITUDE’ 
The first pages of the history of “coolitude” were written as soon as India 
was left behind in the spray of the Indian Ocean. The concept of “coolitude” 
is based on two pillars. Firstly, the reconstitution of a memory, which veers 
between an imagination drawn back to the atavistic homeland—Indianness as 
a set of inalienable values bequeathed by india since the beginning of time— 
and the constellation of signs spawned by the uneasy interaction of the 
exiled Indian's values with the cultures of the host country. Secondly, the 
contribution of a poetics based on the Indian element and shaped by the 
fact that the coolie was chronologically the last arrival to contribute to the 
making of diversified societies. OKT   
Cootics took with them the 
classic texts of their culture. 
Below, the feast of Shiva at 
Grand-Bassin in the south- 
central region of Mauritius. 
  
THE unesco (OURIER HE OCTOBER 1996 


### 104372: The Coolies' odyssey

» dants of slaves, whereas coolies were happy 
for most of the time to transfer or extend their 
texts into a universe other than their own, 
Creoles felt they had to invent a cosmogony 
and a poetics. Coolies effected a transfer of 
their own universe to their host country: they 
rewrote and transposed their semiological ref- 
crents to their new country. Thus, anchored 
to their founding texts, coolies promised 
themselves that if they reached the Promised 
Land alive they would repay their fare and 
own land in their turn. 
A symbolic wound 
The Indian worker's pragmatic view of things 
had a decisive bearing on literary creation and 
on writing, which coolies abandoned in favour 
of the Maati, or the carth-mother, a guarantee 
of their continuity and a veritable “matrix 
text”. Their work in exile then took on a cos- 
mogonic value. And it is here that one can 
sense that strong and sensual impregnation of 
language, that poetics of the diverse in which 
creolity and “coolitude” come together. 
As soon as the coolies disembarked, their 
traumatic voyage at an end, their captain tore 
out, usually in great haste, the pages of the 
register bearing the names of the new 
arrivals. The pages were held in place by 
indented metal clips, hence the term “inden- 
tured labourers”, from the root dens (tooth), 
which was often applied to coolies. 
These striated pages were symbolic of 
the wound inflicted on Indian patronymics, 
which were violated by being Latinized, 
forms which are still used for islanders of 
non-European origin. This is the most signif- 
icant metaphor of “coolitude”—for it sets 
the seal on the wound to identity and lan- 
guage—and 1s the visual mark of the coolie’s 
place in the language. Coolies always felt out 
of place and were afraid of making mistakes 
in their master’s language, and even in creole, 
the language of the emancipated. 
Coolie authors often wrote in their 
ancestral languages, such as Hindi, Tamil and 
Urdu. But they allowed a large number of 
outside influences to enter their language. 
The mosaic thus created 1s a trace writ large 
of the exile shared by the children of “cooli- 
tude” and creolity. | 
1. Authors of Eloge de la créolité, Gallimard publishers, 
Paris, 1993. 
C.
 
Va
is
se
 
© 
Ho
a 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 17](104412engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 104381: A Journey of self-discovery

A JOURNEY OF SELF-DISCOVERY 
BY BUJOR NEDELCOVICI 
  
T: Ideal City (15th century), 
a painting attributed to 
Luciano Laurana and 
Francesco di Giorgio Martini. 
It is now in the Ducal Palace, 
Urbino (Italy). 
BUJOR NEDELCOVICI 
is a Romanian novelist, 
essayist and scriptwriter. 
  
E
S
 
-
 
-
 
7 
m
w
e
m
—
 
a
=
"
 
-
 
4 
—
 
i 
“
-
 
N
a
e
»
 
r
—
 
® 
G.
 
Da
gl
i 
Or
ti
, 
Pa
ri
s 
  
n initiatory. rite above all else, 
but also a journey into the 
labyrinth and a descent into 
hell, exile is a source of inspira- 
tion and a revealer of personal- 
ity. For people who live in exile—whether 
voluntarily or involuntarily—their old life 
ends, a new one begins. Whether their exile 
is internal, external, political, economic or 
cultural, it produces a fundamental spiritual 
and moral change in them. 
Exile has always existed. From the forced 
march of the Hebrews described in the Bible 
to Dante’s banishment, it has been a regular 
feature of Western history and imagination. 
But never have exile and exodus been more 
systematic and widespread than in the twen- 
tieth century. 
In the 1930s, many intellectuals were 
forced to flee Nazi Germany and the occu- 
pied countries in order to escape the jack- 
boot. Sigmund Freud, Karl Popper and Elias 
Canetti left Vienna for London. Bertolt 
Brecht and Thomas Mann took refuge in the 
United States. Stefan Zweig went to Brazil, 
where he committed suicide. But being an 
[<4 expatriate (from the Latin expatriare, “to 
leave one’s native country”) is not easy, and 
all exiles are foreigners obsessed with retain- 
ing their human dignity. 
But it was the Soviet Union which, more 
even than Nazi Germany, became the twen- 
tieth century’s biggest generator of exile. 
Vast numbers of people left that land of ban- 
1ishment in search of freedom of conscience, 
thought and expression. The indifference 
and cynicism of the contemporary world 
were finally swept away by the publication 
of Alexander Solzhenitsyn’s The Gulag 
Archipelago. The banished Solzhenitsyn is 
onc of this century’s great men of con- 
science. Recent events in the former 
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda (to mention only 
two examples) have shown that history 
repeats itself, but above all that human 
beings continue to exile each other, succes- 
sively taking on the roles of banisher and 
banished, torturer and victim. 
Voluntary exiles, whether they be intel- 
lectuals, thinkers or writers, adjust to their 
condition. They adopt new countries and 
sometimes cven new languages. People like 
René Descartes in Holland, Voltaire, who 
took refuge first in England, then near 
Geneva, Joseph Conrad, who adopted 
English culture and the English language, 
Lawrence Durrell in the Middle East and 
many other well-known and less well- 
known figures alternate between isolation 
and adoption according to a sophisticated » 
THE UNESCO Gurier BOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 18](104412engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 104381: A Journey of self-discovery

» and sometimes elusive process whereby the 
distinction between voluntary and involun- 
tary exile 1s sometimes blurred, even to the 
point of vanishing altogether. The odyssey of 
people like Pablo Picasso, Marc Chagall, 
Wassily Kandinsky, Albert Camus, Samuel 
Beckett and Mircea Eliade has marked the 
scientific, literary and artistic history of the 
twentieth century. 
A testing time 
“One inhabits not a country but a language,” 
the Romanian essayist Emil Cioran said of 
writers, who form a case apart. Is not the 
writer always somewhere else? That con- 
ception of the homeland could explain why 
so few writers—Conrad, lonesco, Cioran 
himself—have written in a language other 
than their own. 
Experience has taught me that the most 
gruclling and frustrating form of exile is prob- 
ably the exile that exists at home—the exile 
that precedes the physical act of departure. 
After I had inherited, under the iron rule of 
communism, the mark of dishonour branded 
on my father, a political prisoner, I was not 
allowed to occupy any social rank other than 
  
VICTOR HUGO 
(1802-1885), 
French writer. 
    
that of a manual worker on building sites. The 
need to understand, to explain and also to 
imagine made me take refuge in writing, 
where I won back my freedom of thought 
and expression. In the end, censorship forced 
me into physical exile, far from my family, my 
friends and my home. I am an expatriate in 
the literal sense of the term: I am neither 
Romanian, nor French, nor even an exile. I 
am a writer, and my only homeland is writing. 
If exile 1s an initiation test, it is also a test of 
the truth. It entails shedding one’s illusions 
and the world of wishful thinking and pre- 
tence, and arriving at a kind of lucidity. It 
means learning how to winnow out the wheat 
from the chaff by discarding bogus tolerance, 
which produces a semblance of inner peace, 
in favour of real tolerance, which requires 
one to immerse oneself in the universal. 
In the end we have all experienced exile at 
one time or another in our lives. The main 
thing is to understand it and to try to bring out 
its metaphysical dimension by surpassing our- 
selves. Involuntary exile has become, in my 
case, voluntary exile in search of things past 
and spiritual resurrection. To accept is already 
to effect a return—at least to oneself. | 
paren wiiel., ALEXANDER 
Lag SOLZHENITSYN 
JORGE LUIS BORGES “(born 1918), 
(1899-1986), ussian writer. 
Argentine writer. 
Sophie Bass 
meunesco (Ourier © WOCTOBER 1996 
Vio Starnskas © Sygma, Pans 
wis © Sygma, Pans 
   
WOLE SOYINKA 
(born 1934), 
Nigerian writer. 
FM Ca n © Gamma, Pans

## [Page 19](104412engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 104381: A Journey of self-discovery

T
T
 
THE UNESCO unin MOCTOBER [996 
  
© 
Pa
tn
ck
 
La
ge
s.
, 
Pa
ns

## [Page 20](104412engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 104398: Travellers from a far country

TRAVELLERS FROM A FAR COUNTRY 
a Minoan bronze statuette 
me unesco (Ouritk 
Tie thapsode, 
(2600-1200 B.C.) 
WOCTOBER 1996 
    
he question that writers living in a 
foreign country are most often 
asked is: “Now that you live away 
from your home country, do you 
write in the same way as you did 
before?” In other words: “Did you bring 
your source of inspiration with you, or do 
you need a new one?” 
Ingenuous questions arc often the hard- 
est ones to answer. As if infected by their 
naivety, writers answer them naively. 
The best answer would be another ques- 
tion: “In our little universe on earth, can you 
really be far removed from your country?” 
My answer is: “No.” 
For a true writer, the world is immedi- 
ately perceptible in its entirety, like the view 
that opens up when you stand at a window. 
This 1s so not only because of television, as 
might be expected, but for a more profound 
reason: the full extent of the world is always 
present in the consciousness of writers, 
whether they like it or not. If it were other- 
wise, their artistic vision would be mutilated, 
severed, and perhaps inoperative. It would 
be like using a language without the syntax 
that is vital if words are to relate properly to 
the expression of ideas. 
In various layers of our consciousness 
are the Egyptian pyramids, the icecap of the 
North Pole, the winds of Siberia, the scorch- 
ing heat of the desert, New York skyscrap- 
ers and Tibetan monasteries. It requires no 
effort of the imagination to conjure up these 
images, or others such as the crucifixion of 
Jesus or Genghis Khan’s caravanserai. They 
are as familiar and natural to us as the local 
post office or the shop around the corner. 
It could be argued that the human brain 
spontancously encompasses the full extent 
of the world and the course of events which 
have fashioned it over thousands of years. 
From earliest childhood, people get used to 
this scheme of things as if to exorcise their 
fears and avoid distress. They often add 
other boundless spaces, such as the flames 
of hell. 
Distance and exile are not just a familiar 
condition for the writer. To a large extent 
they are part of the creative mechanism 
itself. 
They are part of the screen of mist with- 
out which it is impossible to draw the divid- 
ing line between the appearance of reality 
and its artistic reflection, the necessary dis- 
tance between the creator and life. 
Absence has always been part of the cre- 
ative process. 
Before writing cxisted, before even the 
concept of “the writer” existed, there were 
rhapsodists—travellers who came from afar 
bringing stories about unknown peoples in 
distant lands. They were also the first authors. 
Distance stimulated their imagination and 
encouraged them to modify landscapes and 
to invent human beings different from those 
who had existed, or even from those who 
had never existed—in other words, to create 
characters. 
In the end, distance meant that they were 
not subject to control and thus ensured the 
freedom of the creator for the first time. 
It could almost be argued that it was in 
the nature of creators to create distance in 
one way or another. 
A combination of political and ideological 
factors and writers’ quarrels and conflicts 
with society probably influences their choice 
of exile. But there is also a mysterious quest

## [Page 21](104412engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

ISMAIL KADARE 
is an Albanian writer. 
» 
BY ISMAIL KADARE 
  
which is closely connected with the creative 
proccss. 
Yet there is not the slightest contradic- 
tion between exile and a writer’s cultural 
identity. 
On the contrary, exile can strengthen cul- 
tural identity, and at the very moment when 
the latter seems to be languishing it becomes 
even more real thanks to the universal 
dimension it derives from cxile. 
In general, writers or creators of cultural 


### 104398: Travellers from a far country

values who move to a foreign country are 
like the travellers of ancient times, bringing 
from afar the more colourful and surprising 
aspects of their own country. As for the for- 
eign country that takes them in, the immo- 
bile country that takes in migrants, it is at 
least as interested in their fantasies as in their 
view of everyday life, if not more so. Thus, 
the mechanism works reciprocally: on 
cither side there is a quest for distance. And 
on either side that quest is satisfied. 
Looked at from this angle, it could be 
argued that writers seek exile when some- 
thing goes awry in their inner creative 
processes. Other motives then become less 
important. Homer, who in all likelihood did 
not settle permanently anywhere, left no 
explanation of his movements. 
Wandering seemed a natural way of life to 
bards and rhapsodists. 
The reason why a second great writer, 
Aeschylus, emigrated remains obscure, or at 
least seems rather poorly justified in purely 
political terms. An inability to come to terms 
with Greece, or indeed with his times, or 
perhaps a row with the jury of a drama con- 
test, may have strongly motivated him, but 
that alone cannot explain why this genius 
was forced to leave Athens at the age of 
sixty-seven. 
‘Dante Alighieri had the bright idea of 
opposing the political wrangling between 
S.
 
Ba
ss
ou
ls
 
© 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
two hostile clans in his city—with the result 
that he went into a long exile (in a neighbour- 
ing city). While in exile he wrote one of the 
most powerful works of world literature, 
the Divine Comedy. Perhaps this was the 
real reason why he went into exile. 
Political turmoil, especially in the twenti- 
cth century, has prompted thousands of 
writers and artists to leave their countries 
and scatter to the four corners of the globe. 
But even in the fever of politics there is 
always somcthing that remains immobile 
and in abeyance, “like stars during carth- 
quakes” (as onc poet put it). And that is the 
fever of creation. 
This fever partly explains the reasons for 
exile. It decides the fate of exiled creative 
artists. It keeps them alive or it destroys 
them for ever. During the communist 
period, and above all during the transitional 
phase before it was swept away, thousands 
of writers and artists left the East Europcan 
countries, some with clearly-defined objec- 
tives, others driven by a collective psy- 
chosis, a yearning for a more interesting life. 
Although the dust of that storm has now set- 
tled and it is easier to see things more clearly, 
we are still in no position to identify the real 
reasons for a migration on that scale. In any 
case we shall need a little more time before 
we can appreciate the artistic treasures it 
made possible. 
In the nincteenth century, when the 
Balkan states were in the iron grip of the 
Ottoman Empire, their ideologues, leading 
thinkers, poets and philosophers left the 
Balkans and settled in Western Europe. 
From there, they called on their compatriots 
to join them in exile. At that time, exile was 
an understandable consequence of repres- 
sion. But as the years went by it became 
clear to readers of the works they wrote in 
exile that exile was neccessary to those writ- 
crs primarily so that the importance of the 
countries they had left behind could grow 
within them. 
In such a situation, exile becomes sustain- 
ing and redemptive. When your country 
becomes impossible to contemplate, you are 
forced to look away. It is said that the Greek 
philosopher Democritus blinded himself for 
that reason. 
Somchow there always comes a day 
when, each in our own way, we replicate that 
age-old and definitive act. [| 
the unesco (Durer W OCTOBER 1996

## [Page 22](104412engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 104400: The Roots of the banyan tree

THE ROOTS OF THE BANYAN TREE 
RENE DEPESTRE 
is a Haitian-born poet and novelist. 
me unesco (oumier © ®OCTOBER 1996 
  
- 
a } * 
  
S.
 
Ba
ss
ou
ls
 
© 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
oes the idea of exile that our civ- 
ilizations share with Antiquity, 
the Middle Ages, the Renais- 
sance, and the baroque, classical 
and romantic eras, make any 
sense in the age of the Internet? 
In the past, exiles were people who were 
wrenched from their native soil and cut off 
from their childhood and mother tongue, 
and experienced the heartache of mourning 
and nostalgia in a foreign land. Exile was 
regarded by the political authorities as a pub- 
lic punishment and civic death. It was a tool 
of the penal code which forced individuals 
to leave their homeland (or their adopted 
home) and forbade them to sect foot there 
again. Their appetite for life and their 
integrity as citizens soured into an endless 
season of bitterness and distress as their 
uprooting became an incurable disease. 
Excluded by historical forces from the land 
of their birth, scarred and humiliated by the 
loss of their roots, exiles were non-persons 
whose lives were totally absorbed in the 
desperate quest for paradise lost. 
Today we have a broader perception of the 
world. The alchemy of exchange and the pro- 
liferation of contacts between civilizations are 
BY RENE DEPESTRE 
accelerating as never before. The witchcraft of 
fundamentalist dogmas, the flotsam and jet- 
sam of sects, mental impoverishment—the 
various forms of barbarity that now flourish 
are doomed to fail because of the cross-fertil- 
ization of values and approaches which is 
everywhere gaining ground in the relations 
between the planet’s people, fields of knowl- 
edge and commercial activities. 
Such a decisive change, such an enlarge- 
ment of the scale of our experiences, invite 
us to take a fresh look at the concept of exile, 
together with most of the other traditional 
cultural landmarks that we regard as perma- 
nent fixtures. The process of globalization is 
bound to phase out the belief that only stay- 
at-homes have an identity. As people and 
goods move around at dizzying speed and 
ideas spread like wildfire from one civiliza- 
tion to another, the situation of the exile 
ceases to be cut-and-dried. 
Irons in the fire 
As for my own story, half a century after 
leaving Haiti in 1946, a lifetime’s wandering 
has led me to find an original answer to the 
drama that exile can bring to a writer’ life. Far 
from Jacmel, my native plot of West Indian 
soil, I have learned to stay firmly outside 
those closed pockets of ethnicity, those 
tensely inward-looking and backward-look- 
ing groups, that exiles of all kinds (and émi- 
grés in general) tend to form in their host 
societies. I have always been wary of the 
effects of group psychology and the nostalgic 
prickliness that hold back migrants’ natural 
efforts to fit into the values of their adopted 
homes. Thanks to my insistence on keeping 
two irons in the fire, the sun of home (which 
I have lost), and the sun of abroad (which I 
have gained), I have managed spontancously 
to be French in Paris, Brazilian in Sio Paulo, 
Czech in Prague, Italian in Milan and Cuban 
in Havana. These different roots, added to 
my Haitian heritage, have produced the 
selves, vibrant with all the world’s poetry, that 
have prepared me to experience with joy and

## [Page 23](104412engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

wisdom the age of multiple identity and cul- 
tural ubiquity that is knocking on our door. 
When I arrived in Cuba in March 1959, 1 
had twelve years of exile in my baggage—in 
Paris, Prague, Milan and three Latin American 
capitals, Santiago de Chile, Buenos Aires and 
Sdo Paulo. Covered with scars, my head 
bursting with the contradictions of the Cold 
War, I loathed more than anything the dogma- 
tism, the thought police, the wooden language 
and thought, the betrayals, double-think and 
compartmentalized morality which were the 
redoubtable components of Stalinism and its 
terrifying “socialist” realpolitik. 
In the early days of my integration into the 
Cuban revolution, I felt strongly that Fidelism, 
irrigated by Che Guevarism, was capable, in 
spite of its youthful vagaries, of putting an end 
to the scandals of racism and the other social 
defects inherited from colonization. I lived 
each day under the illusion that the land of José 
Marti, Alejo Carpentier, Ernesto Lecuona, 
Nicolds Guillén, Wifredo Lam and Fernando 
Ortis would never bring me up against a new 
exile. In my heart of hearts, for years on end, in 
the midst of the vicissitudes of the new regime, 
I thought, and was told again and again by those 
around me, that Cuba was my home and that I 
was just another Cuban. . . . My Cuban years 
were to end in yet another departure. 
Adopted homelands 
What could I do with so much exile under 
my belt, in an elsewhere from Haiti which 
A banyan tree (Ficus 
benghalensis) with 
spectacular aerial roots. 
occupied in my imagination so many differ- 
ent adopted homelands? Could the absence 
of my mother tongue, Haitian creole, from 
my work as a writer and poet, be the sign of 
a linguistic exile, the root-metaphor of my 
nomadism as a lifelong exile? By exalting my 
Haitian identity through the French lan- 
guage and the historic values of the French- 
speaking community, was I not betraying 
Jacmel, creolity, negritude, the surrealism of 
the Haitians, the evenings of a childhood 
illuminated by a bewitched reality, by 
voodoo legends and spells? 
These questions about my identity have 
been answered by the life I have lived for 
the last ten years as a nomad who has taken 
root, as a French citizen in a little town in 


### 104400: The Roots of the banyan tree

provincial France. I know from experience 
that identity with a single root is an ethno- 
nationalist dogma which is poles apart from 
the robust health required by the imagina- 
tion of a writer who is constantly replen- 
ished by drawing on the complementary 
resources of his original Haitian home and 
the intensely experienced home-life he has 
made among the French. 
Once when I was in Mauritius I discov- 
cred the banyan, the sacred tree of southeast 
Asia whose roots sustain a single trunk from 
whose branches aerial roots emanate, 
descend into the soil and rise to the surface 
as new trunks. My banyan-identity situates 
my life and experience as a poet at the oppo- 
site pole to exile. | 
Te unesco (Qurier 
 
© WOCTOBER 1996 
S.
 
Co
rd
ie
r 
® 
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 24](104412engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 104401: The Brain drain

‘THE BRAIN DRAIN 
BY CARMEN GARCIA GUADILLA 
return” programmes were sct up in order to 
make the best use of trained personnel occu- 
pying strategic positions in the developed 
countries. This gave rise to the United Nations 
Development Programme’ Transfer of 
Knowledge through Expatriate Nationals 
(TOKTEN), which encourages technicians 
and scientists to work in their own countries 
for short periods. 
Globalization 
and competition 
But the brain drain from these countries 
may well increase in response to the new 
laws of the international market in knowl- 
edge. The rich countries are far better placed 
than the developing countries to attract 
and/or to keep brainpower. 
Recent studies forecast that the most 
developed countries (North America, Japan 
n the second half of the twentieth cen- and Europe) are going to need more and 
tury, many countries of the South began more highly qualified professionals—around 
to send students to the industrialized twice as many as their educational systems 
countries for further education. They will be able to produce, or so it is thought. As 
urgently nceded supplies of highly  aresult there is an urgent need for developing 
trained personnel to implement a concept of countries which send students abroad to give 
development based on modernization. preference to fields where they need compe- 
But many of thesc students decided to tent people to give muscle to their own insti- 
stay on in the developed countries when tutions, instead of encouraging the training of 
they had finished their training. At the same people who may not come back because 
time, many professionals who did return there are no professional outlets for them. 
home but no longer felt at ease there also It is essential to train people who will be 
decided to go back to the countries where able to train others in their turn, to train 
they had studied. This migration was teachers of engineering rather than engineers 
encouraged by developed countries which and trainers of doctors rather than doctors. 
offered attractive conditions to keep the ser- Here, priority must be given to doctoral and 
vices of those they had trained—people post-doctoral studies. But if all this is to lead 
whose training had often been paid for by to anything, the countrics of the South must 
 © 
Cé
ci
le
 G
ou
y,
 
Pa
ri
s 
their home country. not be content with institutional structures 
cre that simply take back professionals sent 
A difficult return abroad, they must introduce flexible adminis- 
In the 1960s, some Latin American countries trative procedures to encourage them to 
tried to solve this problem by setting up spe- return. If they do not do this, the brain drain 
cial “return” programmes to encourage their is bound to continue. 
professionals to come back home. These pro- The failure of students and trainees to 
grammes received support from international ~ return home from abroad is a complex sub- 
bodies such as the International Organization ject. In many cases, it is independent of the 
for Migration, which in 1974 cnabled over Wishes of those who do not return and of 
1,600 qualified scientists and technicians to those in charge of the institutions concerned 
return to Latin America. Another example in their home countries. It is often the result 
was Argentina’s scheme for the repatriation of of burcaucratic inertia and the incapacity of 
political refugees, which was supported by the the country’s economy to respond to the 
UN High Commissioner for Refugees aspirations of those who have acquired high 
(UNHCR). qualifications in the developed countries by 
a In the 1980s and 1990s, “temporary offering them suitable opportunities. n 
CARMEN GARCIA GUADILLA 
is a Venezuelan educator. 
meunesco (QURIER © mOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 25](104412engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 104402: Refugees: the rising tide

  
REFUGEES: THE RISING TIDE 
BY RONY BRAUMAN 
nl 
Aor, Somali refugees 
arrive in Mombasa (Kenya), 
1992. 
here are over sixteen million 
refugees in the world today. The 
reality behind this stark figure is 
the multitude of human tragedies 
being played out in encampments, 
sometimes surrounded with barbed wire, - 
where freedom is the price paid for survival 
and security is maintained not by the rule of 
law but by enclosure. To be a refugee is to ex- 
change one injustice for another, one form of 
suffering for another. 
But unless we are prepared to accept the 
refugee’s condition as a permanent onc, as is 
somctimes unfortunately the case, it is 
important to understand the origins of these 
mass movements and the course they take. 
Since 1990, for cxample, some 10 million 
cxiles have managed to return home and 
pick up the threads of a way of life they had 
been forced to abandon. Another important 
fact is that half the total number of refugees, 
some 8.5 million people, originate from only 
four countries: Palestine, Afghanistan, 
Rwanda, and Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
This does not mean that the refugee 
problem is confined to the Third World and 
that the refugees plight has never been 
known in the countries which are today 
industrialized. The Huguenots, the French 
P.
 
Mo
un
tz
is
/U
NH
CR
 
Protestants who fled from France after the» 
me unesco (Quritr WOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 26](104412engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 104402: Refugees: the rising tide

» revocation of the Edict of Nantes, the law 
which gave them a measure of religious lib- 
erty, in 1685 were the first group of refugees 
to be defined as such. To avoid dragonnades, 
the quartering of Louis XIV’s soldiers in 
their households, forcible conversion, and 
exclusion from professional activities, 
300,000 Protestants fled the kingdom and 
sought refuge in neighbouring Protestant 
countries. They were the first exiles for 
whom specific responsibility was acknowl- 
edged, in this instance a duty of religious 
solidarity. 
Horror and 
humanitarianism 
But the age of refugees that has outstripped 
all others has been the twentieth century, 
which seems to have been divided between 
humane sensitivity and political terror. 
Constant growth of concern for human 
rights—both in the minds of men and 
women and in international conventions and 
regulations—has been accompanied by the 
appearance of new forms of oppression, 
social control and destruction. Modern 
tyrants are probably no worse than those of 
the past, but the technical means at their dis- 
posal have enabled them to envisage pro- 
grammes of social surgery that their prede- 
cessors could never have imagined. Horror 
   
  
£0 THE UNESCO Courier “ BOCTOBER 1996 
Rey An : = 7 4B . : 0 a allie PRETEEN TSA ON IE Seale TT SE 
RR, Ra [35 SE A EL 
A - 1 FR 
  
   
-
 
-
_
»
 
v
e
 
B
E
 
     
 
—
     
o>
 
>
 
a
 
DD
 
r
T
»
 
o
>
 
Re
za
 
© 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ni
s 
Ruandese mothers looking 
for their children. In 1995 
UNICEF and the International 
Red Cross posted thousands 
of children’s photographs in 
the refugee camps of Goma 
(Zaire) in the hope of reuniting 
parents separated from their 
children during the exodus 
from Rwanda the previous 
year. 
magnified by technology is a leitmotiv of the 
twentieth century, but it has been accompa- 
nied by a concomitant determination to 
react by taking humanitarian action. A year 
after it was foundcd in 1920, the League of 
Nations established the High Commission 
for Refugees under the leadership of 
Norway’s Fridtjof Nansen, whose first task 
was to organize the repatriation of 1.5 million 
refugees and prisoners of war scattered all 
over Europe by the turmoil of the First 
World War. 
In the Second World War, civilians were 
   
   
Le, refugees voluntarily 
leaving Mexico to return home 
to Guatemala. 
The United Nations Relief and 
Works Agency for Palestine 
Refugees in the Near East 
(UNRWA), established in 1949, 
runs 98 health units and 30 
dental and special clinics. One 
third of the 2.39 million 
   
  
   
rt aA S refugees registered with 
£5 an wa RT hed be 2 UNRWA live in crowded refugee 
oat Y, Fa 3) A tt & camps. Right, a medical visit 
Ey X24 Fs fhe Li : ey 3 in Beqa'a camp.

## [Page 27](104412engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

in the eye of the storm. At the end of the 
conflict there were a recorded 21 million 
refugees scattered across Europe. In 1951, 
the Office of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 
began its activities (sce box). According to 
the 1951 Geneva Convention relating to the 
Status of Refugees, which was drawn up in 
parallel with the creation of UNHCR, 
refugee status is accorded to any person 
~ who, “owing to well-founded fear of being 
persecuted for reasons of race, religion, 
- nationality or political opinion, is outside the 
country of his nationality and is unable, or 
“owing to such fear, 1s unwilling to avail him- 
self of the protection of that country... .”. 
One necessary (but not sufficient) condition 
of refugee status is the crossing of an interna- 
tional border. This differentiates refugees 
from people forced out of their usual place 
of residence, who are considered as “dis- 
placed persons” and are without legal status. 
Changing status 
This definition was hammered out by 
Europeans in the political context of the 
1950s. Since then its practical application has 
broadened over the years in response to 
changing conditions. It was a straightforward 
matter when a Soviet or Hungarian dissident 
sought protection in 2 democratic country in 
the 1960s or 1970s. It was just as straightfor- 
ward when it was a question of saving 
 


### 104402: Refugees: the rising tide

  
THE OFFICE OF THE UNITED NATIONS 
HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES 
(UNHCR) 
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was 
established in 1951 with responsibilities for “providing international protection . . . 
and . . . seeking permanent solutions for the problems of refugees”. Its work is 
humanitarian and entirely non-political. Initially, its mandate was limited to people out 
side their country of origin, but over the years it has increasingly been called on to pro- 
tect or assist returnees in their home countries and particular groups of displaced 
people who have not crossed an international border but are in a refugee-like situation 
inside their country of origin. 
The 1951 UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, which is the key to 
UNHCR's protection activities, is a legally binding treaty. It contains a genera! definition of 
the term “refugee” that no longer ties it to specific national groups, clearly establishes the 
principle of non-refoulement, whereby no person may be returned against his or her will to 
a territory where he or she may be exposed to persecution, and sets standards for the 
treatment of refugees, including their legal status, employment and welfare. 
UNHCR endeavours: 
* to encourage governments to ratify international and regional conventions concern- 
ing refugees, returnees and displaced people; 
« to ensure that refugees are treated in accordance with recognized international 
standards and receive an appropriate legal status and the same economic and social 
rights as nationals of the country in which they have been given asylum; 
« to promote the granting of asylum to refugees, i.e. to ensure that they are admitted 
to safety and protected against forcible return to a country where they have reason to 
fear persecution or other serious harm; 
« to ensure that applications for asylum are examined fairly and that asylum-seekers 
are protected, while their requests are being examined, against forcible return to a 
country where their freedom or lives would be endangered; 
* to help refugees to cease being refugees either through voluntary repatriation to 
their countries of origin, or through the eventual acquisition of the natienality of their 
country of residence; 
« to help reintegrate refugees returning to their home country and to monitor 
amnesties, guarantees or assurances on the basis of which they have returned home; 
« to promote the physical security of refugees, asylum-seekers and returnees. 
UNHCR's material assistance activities include emergency relief, assisting efforts 
to promote voluntary repatriation or resettlement within new national communities, 
social welfare, education and legal aid. ||   
Iranians or Argentines from the claws of 
their gaolers in the 1970s. Serious complica- 
tions began to appear in the second half of 
the 1970s when major upheavals occurred in 
several parts of the Third World. Changes of 
regime in Southeast Asia and in southern and 
castern Africa, the invasion of Afghanistan 
and the rise of violence in Central America 
transformed the problem, although percep- 
tions of it and the international instruments 
designed to provide a response did not really 
change accordingly. The end of the Cold 
War saw the easing of a number of conflicts, 
enabling millions of exiles to return home. 
But other regions erupted into violence. 
These political transformations have had   Mu
ni
r 
Na
sr
/U
NR
WA
 
profound consequences on the status of » 
The unesco (OuriEr WOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 28](104412engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

  
- 


### 104402: Refugees: the rising tide

» refugees. The problem was once solved by 
the integration of refugees in their host 
countries; today’s solution is to provide aid 
in camps established along the borders of 
warring nations for people who hope even- 
tually to return home. The last few years 
have shown that return can be possible and 
that exile is not inevitable. 
Ethnic cleansing 
A Third World phenomenon in the 1980s, 
refugee camps have since then reappeared in 
Europe for the first time for forty years. In 
conflicts of ethnic and political “cleansing” 
refugees are no longer a consequence of vio- 
lence but its very purpose. Here, displace- 
ment is no longer a grim by-product of 
human passions but a strategic goal of total 
wars waged by armies, not against other 
armies, but against civilians. 
Whatever the cause of the exodus may 
be, the international community’s duty—its 
fundamental commitment—must be to pro- 
tect these peoples, first of all by applying the 
principle of non-refoulement (see box page 
27). People do not choose to uproot them- 
selves from their land voluntarily, for rea- 
sons of opportunism. They flee to escape 
oppression, and the international commu- 
nity has a collective duty to shelter and help 
those deprived by force of circumstances of 
the means to ensure their own survival. The 
defence of freedom and pluralism can only 
be based on recognition and defence of the 
right of asylum. In these uncertain times, the 
struggle is certainly a hard one, but it is more 
important than ever to wage it. n 
” 4 
ey 
THE UNESCO (Gurier WE OCTOBER 1996 
  
 
  
UNHCR: 
FACTS AND FIGURES 
UNHCR Public Information Section 
Case postale 2500, CH-1211 Geneva 2 Dépét 
Switzerland 
Tel; (41 22) 732 8502 
Fax; (4122) 7327315 
e-mail: hopi@@@unhcr.ch 
® UNHCR programmes are financed by voluntary 
contributions from governments and governmental 
and non-governmental organizations. UNHCR's 
budget has increased from some $550 million in 
1990 to $1.3 billion in 1995. It also receives a sub- 
sidy from the regular budget of United Nations for 
administrative costs. 
® In 1996 UNHCR employed 5,500 staff mem- 
bers working in 123 countries. 
® In August 1996, 131 States were Parties to 
the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of 
Refugees and/or its 1967 protocol. 
® Between 1981 and 1991, the number of 
refugees more than doubled, rising from 8 to 17 mil- 
lion persons. 26 million refugees and persons of 
concern to UNHCR were recorded in 1996. 
® In 1994, UNHCR confronted the largest and 
fastest exodus in its history when more than 2 mil- 
lion Rwandans fled to neighbouring countries 
between April and August. 
® The conflict In the former Yugoslavia has given 
rise to more than 3.7 million refugees, displaced 
people and others of concern to UNHCR since 
1991. During this period, UNHCR spent more than 
$1 billion in this region alone. | 
—  
M.
 
Ka
ba
ya
sh
i/
UN
H    
A persons displaced within 
their own national borders, 
these Chechen civilians fleeing 
the combat zone are of 
concern to UNHCR. 
Bow left, voluntary 
Cambodian returnees head for 
a reception centre set up by 
UNHCR. 
RONY BRAUMAN 
is a French medical doctor. 
M.
 
L
a
r
s
e
n
/
U
N
H
C
R

## [Page 29](104412engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 104403: Restricted entry

RESTRICTED 
ENTRY 
    
Te 
w
i
n
g
 
\ - 
. 
The following article has 
been freely adapted from 
a longer study prepared 
by Pedro Vianna. 
he protection of persons exposed 
to persecution has always been a 
matter of concern to human soci- 
cties. The history of early Mediter- 
ranean civilizations offers several 
examples of writings on this subject. 
At the end of the second millennium of 
the pre-Christian cra, an Egypto-Hittite 
treaty set forth the conditions of safety and 
impunity that were to be enjoyed by per- 
sons accused of political offences who were 
extradited to Egypt. The Old Testament is 
full of references to forced exile and the pro- 
© 
Ph
ot
o-
Ca
li
g.
 
Fr
ei
bu
rg
 
/U
NH
CR
 
tection of those fleeing persecution. Ancient 
Greek literature includes many texts on pro- 
tection as a sacred duty and on places of asy- 
lum (from asulos = inviolable). But the first 
literary work to deal directly with the issue is 
Aeschylus’s tragedy The Suppliants, in 
which Aeschylus establishes a link between 
the sacred, politics and social issues. 
According to legend, an important event in 
the carly history of Rome, where there scems 
to have been less emphasis on the sacred 
aspect of asylum, was the creation of a refuge 
at a place dedicated to the god Asylaeus. In his» 
ah MES ve 
A camp for east European 
refugees in the Federal 
Republic of Germany (1953). 
L
a
 
e
a
l
 
d
s
 
Ri
 
pe
d 
vu
 
W
i
k
 
w
h
 
B
a
n
 
a 
| 
TH
) 
TX
 
TT
 
Tre unesco (Ourier BOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 30](104412engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 104403: Restricted entry

» History of Rome Livy shows how the 
founders of cities used the principle of asylum 
as an instrument of demographic policy. 
In medieval Europe, asylum was essen- 
tially religious. Christian emperors like 
Theodosius, Valentinian and Justinian, as 
well as various religious councils, strove to 
codify the right of asylum, giving it varying 
degrees of generosity depending on the 
period and the type of offence committed. 
During this time, places of asylum included 
the university, churches, bishop’s resi- 
dences, convents, monasteries and, more 
generally, any site of a religious nature, 
including wayside crosses. 
A sovereign act 
The way states were structured in the mod- 
ern era resulted in a secularization of the 
right of asylum, which became the sover- 
eign’s prerogative and therefore a mainly 
political act, even if its sacred and moral 
foundations persisted, and tied the hands of 
the state authorities. 
From the end of the Middle Ages on, the 
practice of asylum was common in Italy. 
Citizens of one republic who had incurred 
their ruler’s wrath would take refuge in the 
territory of another. Over a period of several 
centuries after the expulsion of the Jews 
from Spain in 1492 (they found asylum in the  
land of Islam), several attempts were made 
by the emerging nation-states to codify the 
right of asylum, notably in the Villers- 
Cotteréts edict of 1539, several other British, 
French and German legal and philosophical 
texts, and the French Constitution of 1793. 
However, these attempts were never of a 
universal nature, since the texts concerned    did no more than deal with specific cases, 
e.g. the Potsdam Edict of October 1685 on 
the admission of French Huguenots, or else    
       
  
    % adalah 
state gencral principles, as did Article 120 of 
the 1793 French Constitution (which was ! 
 
- 2    never promulgated). 
0)
 
The decision to grant or revoke asylum is 1 : regalian in character. It is the sovereign act of 
~ ry a state which decides to grant the citizen of 
N Se"
The unesco (OurIER © WOCTOBER 1996 
another state who is already in its territory or  “ Ho
wa
rd
 
J. 
Da
vi
s 
© 
Pa
no
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
wishes to cross the border into it the right to

## [Page 31](104412engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 104403: Restricted entry

  
L
o
 
-~ " 
. . N 
- - 
- » 
" “lr. _ © 
- : - Nn end bg - 
hy - . 3 > 
&$ >. ual 5 ts 
od - | JEN 
- - — x . Rs 
‘ ~~ \ . - at PT 
, -— - ') - = - . - p “" " “= x LO NN ~ ‘e 
. 
- WE, - Fans - LAC Mew 
- . x “ ~ SN » 
re - ~3 » - a » 
J LEE INL - - 5 
~ . r . > 5 
- hi — ~ gh 
PO » oy hy 5 ~ . 
- 2 Ys » * - \ 
“ : OE AA A EU al + 
. >. “ - 
Te of L ea > 
» - ‘s - LN - ~~ 
Y - » : 
-—— - en = ’ » 
reside in that territory. This is territorial asy- 
lum. The notion of diplomatic asylum, 
which fell into abeyance in Europe in the late 
nineteenth century, became enshrined in 
law in Latin America in 1889 with the signing 
of the Treaty of Montevideo. It is a practice 
which has since then been reaffirmed in 
numerous conventions and is still followed 
today. 
Refugee status 
In 1921, the explorer Fridtjof Nansen was 
High 
Refugees. There followed a series of interna- 
appointed Commissioner for 
tional agreements applicable to specific cate- 
gories of refugees. But it was not until 1938 
that the Intergovernmental Committee for 
Refugees, set up that year, first outlined a 
more general definition of the refugee 
. ww. 
_- 
“ | know for myself that exiles 
live on hope,” (Aeschylus, 
Agamemnon, 458 B.C.). 
O.oosite page, asylum 
seekers receive advice in the 
offices of a refugee aid 
organization at Heathrow 
Airport (United Kingdom). 
© 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s 
extending to “all persons . . . who, as a result 
of events in Europe, have had to leave or 
may have to leave their countries of resi- 
dence because of the danger to their lives or 
liberties on account of their race, religion or 
political beliefs”. 
After the Second World War, European 
states had to contend with the problem of 
several million refugees and displaced per- 
sons. But the complexity of the way in which 
the various categories of refugee were listed 
in the constitution of the International 
Refugee Organization (IRO) set up in 1946 
reflected differences of appreciation between 
the eastern bloc states and those of the West. 
It was not until the 1951 United Nations 
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 
(the Geneva Convention) that the issue was 
clarified. 
The crucial importance of this Convention 
lies in the fact that it sets forth a universal defi- 
nition of refugees that has nothing to do with 
the origin of the person concerned and can be 
applied irrespective of time and place. This 
definition (see article page 27) is now binding 
on States Parties to the Convention and its 
1967 Protocol. 
From theory to practice 
The 1951 Geneva Convention also defines 
the circumstances under which refugee sta- 
tus no longer applies, contains clauses which 
exclude a refugee from its field of application, 
and determines the guarantees and protection 
that states must grant refugees they admit. 
However, the Convention does not oblige 
states to grant refugees the right of residence, 
Le. territorial asylum, and leaves each country 
free to organize its own procedures for rec- 
ognizing refugee status. Since Article 14 of the 
1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 
which states that “Everyone has the right to 
seek and to enjoy tn other countries asylum 
from persecution”, is not binding in law, it 
may be safely asserted, whatever the Geneva 
Convention may say, that from a legal stand- 
point the right of asylum in fact remains the 
right of a state to grant asylum. 
In practice, states tend systematically to 
grant asylum to those they recognize as enjoy- 
ing refugee status. Moreover, both the 
Convention on the Application of the» 
HE unesco (QURIER WOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 32](104412engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 104403: Restricted entry

  
I. the late 17th century many 
French Protestants, or . . . 
Huguenots, found refugein > Schengen Agreement, in its section relating to 
Prussia from persecution in asylum, and the Dublin Convention,?2 define 
their own country. Above, The 
welcome of the Huguenots to 
the court of the Elector enter the territory of a state with a view to 
Frederick William. Wood 
engraving {circa 1890). 
the asylum seeker as a person who tries to 
seeking recognition of his or her refugee status. 
We may “sum up the essential differences 
between the status of a person who has 
obtained asylum and refugee status [as 
defined by the Geneva Convention] by say- 
ing that the former... provides no guarantee 
as to procedure or continuity of residence, 
since it is subject [only] to the wishes of the 
host state, whereas the latter... provides a 
persecuted person with guarantees of protec- 
tion, procedure and continuity of residence, 
as well as the minimum rights laid down in the 
Geneva Convention3”. 
How is it, then, that despite the existence 
of a universally applicable convention and a 
gradual convergence of opinion as to what 
constitutes asylum or refugee status, the main 
non-governmental organizations dealing with 
refugees increasingly accuse the developed 
nations of reducing to a trickle the number of 
cases where asylum is granted? 
Increasing restrictions 
In practice, recent developments have 
resulted in the subordination of recognition 
of refugee status to the granting of asylum, 
rather than the other way round. What has 
happened is that the developed states have 
taken draconian steps to ensure that as few 
asylum seekers as possible actually enter 
their territory. This makes it extremely diffi- 
THE UNESCO Gurier BOCTOBER 1996 
® 
AK
G 
ph
ot
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
cult for such people to gain access to the 
procedures which determine whether or 
not they qualify for refugee status. 
So as to be in a position to withhold refugee 
status from the very large numbers of asylum 
seekers from such countries as Algeria, Bosnia, 
Somalia, Chechenya, Romania and Turkey, 
European states have tended to read into the 
text of the Convention what it does not con- 
tain. They claim, for example, that persecution 
which is not carried out by state bodies does 
not come within the Geneva Convention’ 
field of application. This means that victims of 
persecution occurring in the course of a civil 
war or widespread disturbances would not 
benefit from the Convention. But in fact the 
text of the Geneva Convention sets no condi- 
tions as to the perpetrator of persecution, and 
in its Handbook on Procedures and Criteria 
for Determining Refugee Status the Office of 
the United Nations High Commissioner stip- 
ulates that persecution “may also emanate 
from sections of the population that do not 
respect the standards established by the laws 
of the country concerned,” and cites religious 
intolerance as a case in point. 
By way of contrast, the 1969 Convention 
of the Organization of African Unity cover- 
ing matters specific to refugee problems in 
Africa and the 1984 Cartagena Declaration 
on Refugees in Central America, Mexico 
and Panama are in accordance with the letter 
and spirit of the Geneva Convention and 
even spell out the definition in full. 
It is well known that arbitrary practices 
gain ground surreptitiously and attack the 
weakest before taking hold of society as a 
whole. Countries which make themselves out 
to be champions of human rights should pause 
to think for a moment about the example they 
arc setting when they slam the door on the 
persecuted, whereas the countries of the 
South, including the very poorest, have no 
option but to take in the vast majority of the 
millions of refugees listed by UNHCR. NH 
1. The Schengen Agreement (1985) on free circulation of 
goods and persons within the European Economic 
Community, now the European Union. Editor 
2. The Dublin Convention (1990) supplements the 
Schengen Agreement for matters concerning asylum 
seckers and refugees. Editor 
3. “Les réfugiés dans le monde”, an article by Pedro 
Vianna, Luc Legoux and Frédéric Tiberghien published in 
Probléemes politiques et sociaux n° 699, La Documentation 
francaise, Paris, 1993.

## [Page 33](104412engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 104404: The World's major refugee situations

FACT FILE 
The world’s major refugee situations 
UNHCR is providing protection and assistance to 26.1 million 
people around the world, of whom 13.2 million are refugees. 
War in former Yugoslavia 
Some 3.7 million people who have been dis- 
placed or affected by the war are receiving 
humanitarian assistance from the United 
Nations, 2.4 million of them in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina alone. 
Asylum in Europe 
Since the carly 1980s, around five million 
applications for refugee status have been 
submitted in Western Europe. UNHCR 
tries to ensure that any measurcs taken to 
control this phenomenon are consistent 
with the principles of refugee protection. 
The Palestinian question 
Around 3.2 million people are registered 
with UNRWA, the agency responsible for 
Palestinian refugees. Their future remains 
one of the most complex issues which must 
be addressed in the Middle East peace 
process. 
West African refugees 
The conflicts in Liberia and Sierra Leone 
have forced almost a million people into 
exile in Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire. Large 
numbers arc also displaced within their 
own countrics beyond the reach of interna- 
tional assistance. 
Guatemalan repatriation 
Some 20,000 Guatemalans have returned to 
their homeland over the past 10 years. 9,500 
of the 45,000 who remained in Mexico were 
30 r— pg 
Pa S 
ii HiT 
il 
—
—
—
 
—
 
a « ll) : 
3 
- Ore v8 by 19 8 
The number of refugees and other persons of concern to UNHCR, 1975-1996 
Of the 26.1 million persons assisted by UNIICR in 1996, 13.2 miltion are refugees in the strict sense—people who 
have crassed an international horder and been granted asylum in another state. “Other people of concern 10 the 
UNHCR” are internally displaced people (these who have fled for similar reasons to refugees but have not crossed 
into another country), returnees, war-affected populations and other groups benefiting from UNTICR protection 
and assistance activities. Totals do not include Palestinian refugees assisted by the UN Relief and Works Agency for 
Palestine Refugees (UNRWA) in the Near East. 
[] Other persons of concern to UNHCR 
g06 "9NT8S 26 RY 88 i 20°98 97 93 
repatriated in 1995 with assistance from 
UNHCR. 
Haitian asylum seekers 
UNHCR is assisting with procedures 
designed to determine the status of asylum 
scckers from Haiti and to monitor the situa- 
tion of those who return. 
Reintegration in Mozambique 
More than 1.6 million refugees returned to 
Mozambique from six neighbouring states 
between late 1992 and early 1995. They must 
now begin to support themselves and to 
reintegrate within their own communities. 
Conflicts in the Caucasus 
Recent years have witnessed a succession 
of population displacements within and 
between Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and 
the Russian Federation, involving around 
2.5 million people. Many of this number arc 
unable or unwilling to return to their for- 
mer place of residence. 
Reconstruction in Afghanistan 
Half of the Afghan refugees have repatriated 
since 1992, leaving nearly three million in the 
Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan. 
Additional reconstruction efforts are needed 
within Afghanistan to enable their return. 
Displaced Sri Lankans 
More than 54,000 Sri Lankan refugees have 
returned from India since 1992, leaving 
Source: UNTICR 1996. 
  
nearly 90,000 in their country of asylum. 
UNHCR provides assistance to the 
returnees and to other people who are 
threatened or displaced by the war. 
Repatriation to Myanmar 
By mid-1995, only 50,000 of the 250,000 
people who fled from Myanmar in 1991 and 
1992 remained in Bangladesh. The home- 
ward movement, organized by UNHCR 
will continue until the end of the year. 
Vietnamese boat people 
Although the departure of boat people has 
effectively come to a halt, just over 40,000 
Vietnamese asylum seckers remain in 
camps throughout Southeast Asia. Nearly 
80,000 have gone back to their own coun- 
try, where their situation is monitored by 
UNHCR. 
The Horn of Africa: exile and repatriation 
UNHCR continues to assist around 1.3 
million people from thc Horn of Africa and 
the Sudan, traditionally onc of the most 
important refugee-producing regions. The 
repatriation to Eritrea from Sudan is under 
way, more than 30 years after the first 
refugees left that country. 
The Rwanda/Burundi emergency 
More than a million Rwandcse poured into 
Zaire between April and July 1994, one of 
the largest and fastest refugee movements 
ever seen. UNHCR is now providing pro- 
tection and assistance to some 2.2 million 
displaced people in Burundi, Rwanda, 
Tanzania, Uganda and Zaire. || 
Source: UNHCR, Geneva 
Statistics date from August 1996. 
  
3 
: 
IH 
aa 20 9% 92 93 04 
Refugees resettled by UNHCR in third countries, 1979-1995 
The procedure of third country resettlement involves transferring refugees from their country of asylum to an- 
other state which has agreed to admit them and to grant them long-term residence rights and the opportunity to 
become naturalized eitizens, Over the past decade, the international community has reached a broad consensus 
that third country resettfement is the least preferred solution to a refugee problem, “the solution of last resort”, 
Source: UNHCR 199% 
THE UNESCO Gurer BOCTOBER 1996 
© 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 34](104412engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 104405: The Struggle for peace

Ga
 
Ja
cq
ue
s,
 
M 
Ja
rs
 
me unesco (Durer 
 
’ 
B OCTOBER 1996 
L. 
connencary Federico Mayor 
a 
UNESCO has been in existence for fifty years, and for fifty 
years it has been erecting its vast programme for the promo- 
tion of peace through education, science and culture. But 
the work of constructing peace is unending; it has to go on in 
all places and at all times. 
The world has changed considerably in this last half cen- 
tury, and especially in recent years, with the fall of the 
Berlin Wall, the end of the East-West standoff, the rise of 
conflicts of a new type within nations, the increasingly strong 
urge towards the assertion of selfhood, the growing scale of 
population movements, the swing towards democracy, the 
communications explosion, and so forth. The world we live in 
is changing and reshaping itself along lines which are as yet 
hard to decipher. 
In this world that is struggling to be born, two certainties 
stand out. The first is that the vicious circle of poverty, igno- 
rance, exclusion and violence has become an established fact 
and is spreading wider and wider. It is poverty that drives 
people from the South to seek a better life in the North and 
that drives rural populations to the towns; it is against a 
background of ignorance that fear, extremism and intoler- 
ance thrive; and it is exclusion that brings in its train despair 
and violence. Sccondly, the disparity in the distribution of 
the planet’s wealth has become intolerably great, with 
nations living at widely differing levels of development and 
the gulf between rich and poor within nations growing 
deeper. These glaring inequalitics are a threat to peace 
throughout the world. 
It is for this reason that UNESCO set up a specific pro- 
gramme on the culture of peace in 1994. 
The concept “culture of peace” is not casy to define. The 
definition is being worked out one step at a time, forged in the 
heat of the work being done and the thought being given to 
the (uestion hy all who are serving the cause in the fiekd. The 
first characteristic to have been identified concerns the rela- 
tionship between peace, development and democracy, a rela- 
tionship that is growing steadily closer and whose synergic 
effect is growing steadily stronger. Peace, development and 
democracy constitute a three-cornered system of interactions 
that has constantly to be created and recreated. The end of

## [Page 35](104412engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

an armed conflict, the moment when the warring parties 
express a willingness to come to an agreement, is often the 
right time for consolidating peace and trying to get it to take 
root in people’s minds, in institutions and in patterns of hehav- 
iour. This explains why UNESCO has a special role to play in 
regions where this kind of post-conllict situation obtains. 
In the general context of new approaches to security, 
UNESCO is for the first time entering into a dialogue with the 
military authorities of various countries. I believe that the 
armed forces, which occupy a central place within the 
nation, rank among UNESCO’s natural partners, and as such 
have a decisive contribution to make to the task of building 
a culture of peace. UNESCO is accordingly involving defence 
colleges, centres of strategic studies and military academies 
in its activities. This dialogue is proving fruitful for all par- 
ties concerned. It is, furthermore, essential at a time when, 
against a background of increasing democratization, all the 
constituent parts of society are required to play their part 
Doth in the construction of peace and in devising and imple- 
menting development strategies that demand not only reduc- 
tions in military budgets but a redefinition of the role of the 
armed forces. 
UNESCO seeks to create a closer relationship with civil soci- 
ety and to organize all its component parts into working for 
peace and is particularly coneerned to establish a more {ruitful 
dialogue with parliamentarians. I firmly believe that UNESCO’ 
exchanges with these key figures of democracy, both at the 
international level, through the Interparliamentary Union, and 
at the national level, give its work a solid basis and a pragmatic 
dimension with which it can no longer afford to dispense. 
The national-level programmes for a culture of peace 
pursue the [ollowing objectives: non-violent conflict manage- 
ment, the establishment of democratic procedures and 
respect for basie individual rights; and participation by all in 
the process of peace and development. The following are a 
few examples. 
Unesco peace-building activities 
Burundi. One of UNESCO's first responses to the crisis follow- 
ing the events of October 1993 was to organize a symposium in 
Burundi on the enlture of peaee and te set up a UNESCO 
Centre for the Culture of Peace, which in 1995, in co-opera- 
tion with national institutions, nen-governmental organizations 
and other agencies of the United Nations system, ran a series 
of seminars on training and edueation for peace, human rights 
and democracy for the benefit of journalists, primary and sec- 
ondary school teachers, activity organizers, educators, provin- 
cial governors, local government officers, leaders of women’s 
associations and deputies of the national parliament. 
Mozambique. UNEsco organized training and awareness-rais- 
ing activities for parliamentarians in 1993, e.g., enabling 
twelve members of parliament to go on a study tour in South 
Africa and Malawi and exchange views with parliamentarians 
in those countries. These measures have helped to create a 
climate of confidence. 
Rwanda. A nation-wide forum on the culture of peace held 
in Kigali in January 1996 with the participation of people 
representing the country’s various social strata and political 
movements, gave an opportunity for discussing key questions 
relating to the re-establishment of peace following the geno- 
cide. The forum’s recommendations formed the basis of pro- 
jects that have been incorporated into UNESCO’s current 
action plan for Rwanda. 
Somalia. UNESCO convened a symposium of Somali intellee- 
tuals in Sana’a (Yemen) in April 1995 to map out ways of 
promoting the culture of peace in Somalia. A follow-up 
meeting was held in Paris in October 1995 to set up a group 
with responsibility for drawing up projects to he carried out 
with the support of UNrsco, the European Union and the 
United Nations Development Programme. 
El Salvador. In October 1995, the Salvadorian Legislative 
Assembly held a seminar to consider the contribution it 
could make to the consolidation of peace and the further- 
ance of national development. Eighty regular members of 
the Assembly and more than twenty substitute members 
worked together on a doenment addressed, among others, to 
the Head of State, the President of the Supreme Court, gov- 
ernment institutions, the diplomatic corps and the press. 
The seminar adopted a proposal for co-operation with 
UNESCO to encourage dialogue between different currents of 
opinion and make it casier for democratic rules and systems 
to funetion. 
Congo. A national forum was held in December 1994, hring- 
ing together all the country’s political forces with represen- 
tatives of civil society. This was a fundamental step forward 
in the peace process. It enabled an ongoing dialogue between 
al the conflicting parties to be set up and resulted in the 
adoption of a peace charter. 
All UNESCO's activities, all the projeets it earries ont, 
directly or indirectly, the studies it commissions, the meet- 
ings it convenes and the exchanges it organizes in the fields 
of education, science, the soclal sciences, culture or commu- 
nication, serve a single purpose: peace. Whether it is work- 
ing through its Associated Schools to familiarize children 
with ethnic, social and cultural diversity, enabling scientists 
from different parts of the world to exchange their findings, 
facilitating knowledge transfers by establishing professor- 
ships or granting fellowships, or whether it is identifying 
ways of managing social change by bringing representatives 
of different viewpoints lace to face, encouraging the estah- 
lishment of independent media or bringing young artists 
from many different backgrounds together, UNESCO has one 
overrriding concern, in {ull accordance with its ethical mis- 
sion, and that is to allow the inhabitants of Planet Earth to 
get to know one another better, so that they may have a 
truer appreciation one of another and may therefove live 
together in greater harmony. || 
THe unesco (Ourier BOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 36](104412engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

The 
GENEVIEVE DARLES AND 
NICOLAS LAGRANGE 
are French journalists. 
me unesco (Durr   
HERITAGE 
by 
Genevieve 
Darles and 
Nicolas 
Lagrange 
MOCTOBELR 1996 
  Br
un
o 
Ba
rb
ey
 
© 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 


### 104406: The Medina of Fez: crafting a future for the past

edina of Fez—crafting 
a future for the past 
The old city of Fez 
(Morocco) is one of 
the most beautiful 
quarters of its kind 
in the world. It was 
placed on UNESCO's 
World Heritage List 
in 1980, and a few 
years later Morocco 
and UNESCO 
embarked on a far- 
reaching safeguard 
operation which is 
now starting to 
bear fruit. 
Viewed from the high part of 
the city, the medina of Fez 
unfolds as a dense, undulating 
expanse of little white houses 
from which a number of more 
imposing bnildings emerge. To 
visit the medina is to venture into 
a labyrinth of alleys bustling 
with activity, a realm of pedestri- 
ans, donkeys, commerce and 
craftsmanship, whose ground- 
plan has not changed for cen- 
turies. The stroller on the look- 
out for historical remains will 
find many examples of fine archi- 
tecture—madrasahs, mosques, 
fountains—amid the mass of 
dwellings. The hand of the past 
still makes an imprint on the 
daily life of the community. 
Founded in 808 A.D. (192 of 
the Ilegira) by Idris II, Fez grew

## [Page 37](104412engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 104406: The Medina of Fez: crafting a future for the past

q din 
1 
' ' lit HI LW \ 
  
Above, the inner 
courtyard of the 
Qarawiyin 
mosque. 
Opposite page, a 
souk (market) in 
Fez today. 
up at the crossroads of ecommuni- 
cation joining the Mediterranean 
to black Africa and the eastern 
Maghreb to the Atlantic. In the 
ninth century the Andalnsians 
expelled from Cordoba by the 
Ummayads settled on the right 
bank of wadi Fez, and migrants 
from Kairouan in Tunisia made 
their homes on the left bank. 
Fez-el-Bali came into being as a 
result of the union of the two 
communities in 1069. 
Qarawiyin 
world’s oldest, was founded in 
university, the 
Fez in 859 by a woman, Fatima el 
Fihri al Kairouani. Celebrated 
(Quranic 
developed around it at the time 
madrasahs schools) 
of the Marinids, the Berber 
dynasty which established its 
rule over Morocco during the thir- 
teenth-fifteenth centuries. The 
city’s intellectual, artistic and 
religious influence soon reached 
beyond North Africa. Students 
came from all over the country, 
but also from the Orient, Africa 
and Spain to work under illustri- 
ous leachers. Among those who 
studied in Fez were the historian 
Ibn Khaldun, the mathematician 
Ibn Al-Yasamin, the physician 
Ibn Rushd (Averroés), and many 
linguists. 
An ambitious scheme 
A centre of Islam, the city was 
flourishing eeonomiecally by the 
end of the thirteenth century. 
The Marinids made it their capi- 
tal and ordered Fez-el-Jedid, the 
white eity, to be built to the west 
of Fez-el-Bali, the historic city. 
Bruno Barbey © Magnum, Pans 
In the following centuries, the 
new city continued to expand and 
welcomed an influx of new inhahi- 
tants, mainly of rural origin. 
Under the French protec- 
torate (1912-1956), the medina 
was neglected and priority was 
given to developing a modern eity. 
In 1980 it was the home of over 
60 per cent of the city’s popula- 
tion and their cconomic activities. 
But road access was inadequate, 
and the district was slowly going 
downhill. With its 143 mosques, 
seven madrasahs and 61 monu- 
mental fountains, Fez was a 
threatened masterpieee. 
Then Untsco placed Fez on 
the World Ileritage List. After 
five years’ study, Morocco and 
UNEsco finalized plans for com- 
plete rehabilitation of the old 
mie unesco (Gurier BOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 38](104412engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 104406: The Medina of Fez: crafting a future for the past

ir unesco {our 
The Najjarin Fountain 
{17th century), near the Moulay 
Idris mosque. 
city, including its monuments, 
amenities 
(roads, drainage, lighting, etc.) 
and economie life. The project 
really took off in 1989. After a 
general feasibility study, the 
Moroccan state set up Ader-Feés, 
dwellings, urban 
a body responsible for carrying 
out and co-ordinating the rescue 
programmes, Around fifty monu- 
ments—the oldest and most sig- 
nificant from a historical or 
architectural ~~ viewpoint—are 
involved. The estimated total 
cost of rehabilitation is around 
$600 first 
restoration work is being done 
million and the 
step by step, as donor commit- 
ments are received. 
Ader-Fés is using the best 
local craftsmen, the méiilem, 
keepers of the city’s traditional 
skills, to reconstitute the original 
architecture of the buildings 
using time-honoured techniques. 
It is also setting up a training 
institute in traditional building 
crafts and a rehabilitation and 
restoration laboratory. On the 
ground the work is proceeding 
slowly, however. The streets of 
the medina are so narrow that all 
the materials have to be brought 
in by donkeys. The general need 
for protracted and metieulous 
work is well illustrated by the 
ease of Mesbahiya madrasah, of 
which only a few terraces and 
ceilings and a handful of decora- 
tive elements have survived. The 
of the madrasah 
have now been stabilized and the 
foundations 
next step is to reconstitute the 
architectural details in all their 
refinement. 
A pragmatic approach 
The cultural context also plays 
an important role in the success 
of this 
“ Pp 
gigantic enterprise. 
eople here do not venerate art 
for art’s sake”, says Abdellatif el 
ltajjami, director-general of 
Ader-Fés. “They attach more 
importance to a hammam than to 
WOCTOBER 1996 
Soh 2.07 . 
ni lr ors 
 
a monument. H restoration is to 
be accepted, a new social funec- 
tion must be found for the monu- 
This 
behind the renovation of the 
Najjarin funduk (which housed a 
livestock market in the eigh- 
ments.” approach lies 
teenth ¢entury) and the nearby 
carpenters’ souk which has heen 
transformed into a woodwork 
museum and will house a library 
for specialists and a restoration 
laboratory. 
Restoration of the Observatory 
Tower of the great Qarawiyin 
1348 and 
destroyed by fire a few decades 
mosque, built in 
ago, is being carried out in the 
same spirit. When the work is fin- 
ished it will house an astrolabe 
museum. Bou Inaniya madrasah, 
which was built in 1356 by the 
Marinid Sultan Abou nan, is also 
being renovated. A building of 
outstanding decorative refine- 
ment, Bou Inaniya is a place of liv- 
ing memory (it is still a Friday 
mosque). It contains the world’s 
oldest hydraulie elock. 
One of the most recent safe- 
guard operations has focused on 
Dar Adyel palace, built in seven- 
teenth-eighteenth century style. 
This sumptuous dwelling is far 
more spacious than other con- 
temporary buildings of its kind 
and has original architectural 
features. It belonged to the 
Governor of Fez in the seven- 
teenth century and later became 
the property of leading eitizens 
of Fez. When its structure has 
been consolidated, its decorative 
elements of carved or incised 
plasterwork, its woodwork and 
small eoloured tiles known as zel- 
© 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Le
na
rs
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 39](104412engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 104406: The Medina of Fez: crafting a future for the past

lij will have to be reconstituted. 
When restoration is complete, 
Dar Adyel palace will, as in the 
past, be the home of a conserva- 
tory of Andalusian music. 
“In all, a dozen historical mon- 
uments are currently being reha- 
bilitated, but equally critical 
work is also being done on hous- 
ing, mains, and roads. The sue- 
cess of repairs to the drainage 
system will Targely hinge on the 
transfer of the most polluting 
activities—tanneries, oilworks, 
factories—to Ain 
NokDbi, a new craftsmen’s district 
copperware 
outside the medina which is 
equipped to handle their wastes. 
rchabilitation work 
began, the medina had an over- 
Before 
population problem caused by 
  
demographic growth and an influx 
of population [rom the country- 
side. Deserted by the better-off, 
the old eity was caught in a down- 
ward spiral of poverty. There 
were growing deficiencies in the 
public services. This situation has 
now been halted. 
Emergency have 
been taken on over 200 buildings 
that were on the verge of col- 
lapse. Ader-Fés also intends to 
renovate a number of dwellings 
of historic value (there are over 
10,000 of these in the medina 
out of a total 13,385 buildings) 
with help from the municipality 
and the people concerned. It has 
measures 
carried out a massive computer- 
ized survey in which the address, 
type, architeetnral eunltural 
 
  
  
        
Carved plasterwork, 
right, is an important 
feature of traditional 
architecture in Fez. 
Far right, Mesbaniya 
madrasah during 
restoration.  
 
  
© 
Ni
co
la
s 
La
gr
an
ge
, 
Pa
ns
 
© 
Ph
il
ip
pe
 
Ug
he
tt
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
SRgNE Aha 
value, number of households and 
pliysical condition of each build- 
ing is recorded. 
The thorny problem of roads 
and streets remains to be solved. 
There was some support for a 
plan for a road through the med- 
ina, but the proposal had a hos- 
tile reeeption 
Today the idea is to make two or 
internationally. 
thiree inroads, each a few hun- 
dred metres long, so that the old 
city will become more accessible 
to emergency services and its 
business premises will be less iso- 
lated. Although rehabilitation 
operations are still far from com- 
plete, the medina has already 
recovered some of its unique 
radiance and eliarm. Nn 
A craftsman coats a brick wall with 
plaster before covering it with 
zellijs, small chequerboard tiles. 
The Institute for training in 
traditional building crafts, set up 
     
     
   
       
     
  
   
in 1992, 
&) | - + 
J: [] +] 
| a 
RF a 
Be TR J 
Ny 
© 
Ph
il
ip
pe
 
Ug
he
tt
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
    
   
cn AA ; 
DARARSALINLN. ERR eg 
TAAAA Ay 
a 5 ree. 
— 
\ 
a — 1 ae ===} ee = ES 
Ir E> 
“4 r/o 
  
@ £ 
3 
a. 
© 
biel 
c 
«© 5 
I) 
© 
= 
« 
8 
3 
2 
= 
[©] 
THe unesco ((QURER WOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 40](104412engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 104407: Palawan, the Philippines' last frontier

Ursula Island, 
one of the 1,768 
islands in Palawan 
Province, is a bird 
sanctuary and a 
wildlife reserve. 
Author France 
Bequette and 
environmentalist 
friends collected 
120 kilos of 
wastes from its 
beaches in a single 
THE UNESCO Gounitr 
day.    
Greenwatch 
= 
¥ 
In Puerto Princesa, capital of the 
Philippine province of Palawan, 
the town hall 
panoramic view over llonda Bay, 
new offers a 
the turquoise blue sea and a string 
of islands bordered by white sandy 
shores. The presence of a rusting 
and heavily loaded logging truck 
right in front of the building strikes 
a jarring note. It has been parked 
there deliberately. The massive 
logs, cut illegally, were seized with 
the truck and put on show to 
remind the inhabitants of Palawan 
island that logging in virgin forest is 
now strictly forbidden. 
Palawan, the largest of 1,768 
islands that make up the province of 
the same name, is dubbed the “last 
BOCTOBER 1996   
frontier” because of its location on 
tlic southwestern the 
Philippine archipelago, not far from 
edge of 
Borneo. Covering approximately 
14,000 km? and stretching eight to 
40 kilometres across, the island con- 
sists of a 425-kilometre-long moun- 
tain range (highest peak 2,085 
metres above sea level) and plains 
covering about 118,350 hectares. 
From the air, the island looks 
very green, seentingly covered by 
lush vegetation. But appearances 
can be deceptive. The fate of 
Palawan’s forest is a snapshot of 
what lias been happening in the 
Philippines since logging in virgin 
1991. 
According to the current Under 
State the 
Environment, Palawan lost 19,000 
forest was banned in 
Secretary of for 
hectares of forest every year 
hetween 1977 and 1988. At this 
rate, the island might have been 
stripped of more than 50 per cent 
of tts 780,000-hectare forest cover 
within 20 years. 
The fight to save the forest 
Despite the important economic 
interests hound up with the logging 
trade, ecologists launched a can- 
paign in 1988 and soon mobilized 
public opinion in favour of defend- 
ing the forest. \ leading environ- 
mental group, the Ilaribon [“King 
® 
F
r
a
n
c
e
 
B
e
q
u
e
t
t
e
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
by France Bequette 
of the Birds”] Foundation (named 
for the Monkey-eating Eagle, an 
endangered Philippine species), 
drafted a petition calling for a total 
logging ban. 1t collected one million 
signatures and was presented to 
former President Corazon Aquino. 
Three years later, logging was 
banned by law. A battle had been 
won, but not the war. In the late 
1980s, illegal timber exports were 
estimated to total about $800 mil- 
lion annnally, approximately four 
times the officially recorded earn- 
ings [rom forest-product exports. 
egal logging is still going on 
today. Near the truck placed sym- 
of Puerto 
Princesa town hall, the police pile 
bolically in front 
up confiscated loads of timber. 
The ecologically minded Palawan 
Sun newspaper reported that iu 
the space of two months earlier 
this year, authorities on the west 
coast scized timber with a retail 
value of 381,196 pesos (815,250). 
Deforestation can have far- 
reaching and devastating conse- 
quences, as Palawan’s governor 
Salvador P. Socrates stressed when 
he visited two towns ravaged by 
flash floods in September 1995. 
“Our problem is that there are no 
more trees to stop the water [rom 
coming down the mountain,” he 
said. Besides provoking floods, 
the 
layer of earth covering the moun- 
deforestation removes fine 
tainside. Swept away by water, the 
silt cascades from denuded lands 
into the island’s fishing grounds 
and settles on coral reels, which in 
turnare suffocated. 
Dynamite and cyanide 
A danger of another kind is threat- 
life, 
renowned for its beauty and great 
ening Palawan’s marine

## [Page 41](104412engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 104407: Palawan, the Philippines' last frontier

  
The little fishing 
port of Santa 
Lourdes, on Honda 
Bay, has recently 
been a victim of 
mercury 
contamination 
from a nearby 
mine. 
FRANCE BEQUETTE 
is a Franco-American 
journalist specializing 
in environmental 
questions. 
variety of algae, fish, molluses and 
shellfish. A number of fishermen in 
the area are using dynamite and 
cyanide, two illegal and destrue- 
tive practices. Dynamite kills fish 
bunt also damages coral reefs. 
Cyanide paralyzes fish so that 
they can be caught alive and then 
sent by plane in water-tanks, three 
tons at a time, in order to supply 
aquariums or restaurants in the 
Far Fast, where thie consumption 
of certain fish such as lapulapu is 
believed to bring prosperity and 
longevity. 
In Hong Kong, random tests for 
cyanide carried out on live fish sold 
in restaurants lave shown levels 
below the permissible amount set 
by the World Iealth Organization 
for drinking water. But whether 
eating fish eaught using cyanide is 
100% safe still remains to be 
proved. In 1987 the Ilong Kong 
government banned cyanide fishing 
in its territorial waters, but the 
problem lias not gone away. 
In Palawan the law in this field 
is also difficult to enforce, despite 
heavy sentences for offenders. In 
Mareh 1996, six dynamite fisher- 
men, locally known as bum- 
bongeros, were arrested in Cuyo 
with 80 kilograms ef fish and sen- 
tenced to 20 years in prison. The 
same month, 21 eyanide users 
were given ten-year sentences. 
The Tubbataha Reefs national 
marine park has not been spared. 
Located 180 kilometres southeast 
of Palawan in the middle of the 
Sulu sea, it stretches over 33,200 
heetares. It was created in 1988 © 
Fr
an
ce
 
Be
qu
et
le
, 
Pa
ns
 
and proclaimed a World Heritage 
Site in 1993. Every year, visiting 
divers from all over the world 
observe the damage eaused by 
destruetive fishing practices around 
the two atolls lying at the heart of 
the marine park, which is excep- 
tional on acconnt of its abundant 
and highly diverse corals (300 types) 
and 400 species of fish. A research 
and marine ranger station has been 
set up to chase poachers and 
illegal fishermen. A patrol team of 
eleven is stationed in Tubbataha 
for two months at a time. Their 
living conditions are tough and 
funding is tight, despite backing 
from several organizations, 
including the Department of Envi- 
ronment and Natural Resources, 
the Palawan Council for Sustain- 
able Development (ICSD) and Con- 
servation International. 
Protective measures 
Created in 1992, the CSD estab- 
lished an Environmentally Critical 
Areas Network in order to regu- 
late and control the use and man- 
agement of the province’s natural 
 
resources. A mine exploited near 
ITonda Bay, for example, caused 
mercury poisoning in fish and 
shellfish. Several inhabitants of 
the small port of Santa Lourdes 
were also affected. The mine was 
closed and a long-term plan was 
adepted to provide health care for 
the villagers and to find alternative 
means of subsistence to fishing. 
In an effort to encourage preser- 
vation, the network is also seeking 
to make forest dwellers the owners 
of their environment. The PCSD is 
studying the possibilities of deliver- 
ing ancestral ownership eertifieates 
to three indigenous peoples, the 
Batah, the Tagbanuas and the 
Palawan, All Live in upland areas 
and practise slash and burn agrieul- 
ture. They also hunt, extract resin 
from almaeiga (which yields a type 
of copal), exploit rattan and harvest 
wild honey. In 1995, a scheme to 
protect Palawan’s tropical forest 
was finally drawn up. Among the 
sites included in the plan are the St. 
Paul Subterranean River National 
Park (known for its magnificent 
underground river) and its adjacent » 
Mangroves on 
Snake Island, in 
Honda Bay. 
THE UNESCO Courier BOCTOBER 1996 
© 
Fr
an
ce
 
Be
qu
et
te
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 42](104412engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 104407: Palawan, the Philippines' last frontier

» communities, as well as those 
around the Irawan watershed near 
Puerto Princesa. 
In these last two vicintties, the 
Pista y Ang Kageban, or I'estival 
of the Forests, has Decn cele- 
brated for the last six years on 23 
June. At this year’s event, 30,000 
people led by Edward llagedorn, 
Puerto  Princesa’s outspoken 
mayor and environmental activist, 
arrived at dawn to plant 100,000 
trec seedlings of different vari- 
eties, thus bringing to 700,000 
the total number of trees planted 
in the capital and its surrounding 
area. Founded in 1970, Puerto 
Palawan, it has heen a UNESCO 
Biosphere Reserve since 1990, as 
the maps handed ont by the 
tourist office point out. This dis- 
tinction is, however, news to most 
of the island’s inhabitants. 
What is certain is that Palawan 
has narrowly avoided an ecological 
catastrophe. The last [rontier 
faces many threats but it is spared 
from violence, mushrooming con- 
crete eonstructions and pollution. 
It can only be hoped that the 
developing tourist industry will not 
harm the local culture, the luxuri- 
ant vegetation, the rivers and crys- 
tal-clear caseades, the endless 
Princesa well and truly lives up to Leaches and an underwater world 
its claim of being a “clean and that is among the most beautiful 
green” city. As for the island of in the world. | 
rr 
 gr— 
. p— 
. p— 
Papering the desert green 
Carlos Yruretagoyena is a trained oceanographer, and on the face of it there 
was nothing except his scientific background and his love of nature to suggest 
that one day he would set up an environmentally-focused research department 
in one of Mexico's largest domestic-use paper factories, the San Francisco 
paper works in Mexicali. When he asked if he could do some work on the fac- 
tory’s wastes. his boss raised no objection and Carlos went ahead. 
Paper factories produce liquid (65%) and solid (35%) wastes. Once dry, 
the wastes consist of 5% water, 63% cellulose fibres and 32% mineral ash. 
Their pH (a measure of the acid or alkaline content of soil) varies between 7 
and 8.7, the toxic residues they contain do not exceed permitted norms, and 
they contain no pathogenic agents liable to pollute the environment. Because 
of these factors, Carlos thought they could be used for soil enrichment. 
He ran a number of experiments to demonstrate that the wastes encourage 
seed germination and the growth of seedlings, that they can improve the 
mechanics of soils and lighten heavy earth. and that their moisture-retaining 
capacity leads to considerable water savings. 
The wastes are dried and then crushed into granules no larger than three 
centimetres in diameter (too compact a texture would suffocate plants). Next, 
the granules are mixed with various kinds of organic and geological matter (in 
a proportion not exceeding 50% of the total weight) based on dried cattle 
manure, clay, burnt wood debris and fodder plants. The blend is left to com- 
post for 30 days then spread in cardboard trays and seeded. The technique is 
simple and has many advantages: the mix is lightweight. easy to handle and 
rich in raw materials. 
Another experiment proved that subsoil composed of untreated residues 
from paper-making retained water better than a control plot of ordinary earth, 
its retentive capacity doubling between depths of 8 to 30 centimetres. 
The crops that have already been planted are clearly in good health. 
Flowers, vegetables and fruit trees are growing fast and well. If the value of 
these experiments is recognized. Carlos has plans to reforest the desert at low 
cost. He is convinced that his technique can be useful to everyone involved in 
the fight against desert encroachment. \ 
a7 
me unesco (Durer BOCTOBER 1996 
world... 
THUMBNAIL GUIDE 
TO THE WORLD'S 
WETLANDS 
Comprehensive information on the 
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands 
of International Importance, 
which celebrates its 25th anniver- 
sary this year, can be found in an 
excellent short guide, “The 
Ramsar Convention Manual”. The 
Manual, compiled and edited by 
T.J. Davis and published by the 
Convention Bureau, is aimed at a 
wide readership and is available in 
the Convention’s 3 official work- 
ing languages, English, French 
and Spanish. Although they are 
remarkable repositories of biolog- 
ical diversity and cultural her- 
itage, wetlands are among the 
environments most threatened by 
drainage, drought, pollution and 
over-exploitation of resources. 
The Manual is available (price £21.50) 
from IUCN Publications Services 
Unit, 219¢ Huutington Road, 
Cambridge CB3 ODL, United 
Kingdom. Tel: 44 1223 277 894; 
Fax: 4412232771753; 
email: inen-psu@weme.org.uk) 
Ramsar Burean, rane Maaverney 28, 
CI1 1196, Switzerland. 
Tel: 41 22 999 01 70. 
Fax: 41 22 999 01 69. Telex: 41 96 24. 
E-mail: ramsar@hyj.iuen.ch. 
AN UNWELCOME 
VISITOR 
Chromoluena odorata, a creep- 
ing grass from Central America 
that was introduced into Nigeria 
around 1936 as soil cover, is now 
causing large-scale agricultural 
losses in Cote  ’Ivoire. In 
favourable agro-climatic condi- 
tions, the grass ean spread from 
20 to 50 kilometres per year, sti- 
{ling all the plants on its way. It is 
already responsible for a 30% 
drop in coeoa, eoffce and palm 
oil production. It robs heveas of 
the water they need and slows 
down their latex production by 
one to two years. But harmful 
though it is to biodiversity, the 
plant does have some advantages. 
It is a good fertilizer and is also 
used to treat the eyes, stomach

## [Page 43](104412engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

world 
  
pains and wounds. Given the high 
cost of herbicides, the best way 
to fight the damaging grass is to 
raise insects that consume it, 
then let in the 
invaded zones. 
them loose 
RABBITS ON THE RUN 
In 1975, hunters released a male 
and female rabbit inte the Balagne 
maquis in Corsica. Twenty years 
later, local farmers are facing a 
veritable takeover. The rapidly 
proliferating rabbits are gnawing 
at roots and bark, destroying pas- 
tures, cereal crops, fodder, young 
olive plants, shrubs and trees. The 
future of sheep farming is also 
threatened. So far none of the 
options considered for getting rid 
of the intruders—hunting, traps, 
poison, fire—has worked. Now, 
the representative of the Freneh 
National Institute of Agronomic 
Research (INRA) in Corsica has 
been asked to come up with a plan 
of action that respects the fragile 
balance of the island’s ecosystem. 
NO VISA FOR THE 
WHITE RHINO 
Three of the 14 white rhinoceros 
living in Garamba National Park 
in northern Zaire, a site regis- 
Unesco’s World 
lleritage List, were shot by 
tered on 
poachers at the beginning of the 
year. In 1984, there were 1,300 
the 
species’ extinction, the World 
(IUCN) 
asked Zaire’s head of state for 
white rhinos. Fearing 
Conservation Union 
world... 
B.
 
Re
bo
ul
ea
u 
© 
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ri
s 
permission to transfer the last 
survivers to the United States, 
but he refused and called 
instead for more logistical sup- 
port to protect the rhinos on 
their home ground. The Park, 
created in 1938 and located on 
the border with Sudan, is the 
of this 
species, Its 
last natural refuge 
extremely rare 
ruards are not even armed. 
MINING SETBACK 
Deposits of titanium, a strong, 
lightweight metal used in the 
defence and aviation industries 
have been discovered ou the east- 
ern shores of Lake St. Lucia in 
wo Lid... 
South RwaZnlu-Natal 
region. The area, which is covered 
Africa’s 
by old-growth forests, is a wetland 
by the 
Convention. A mining company 
protected Ramsar 
applied to the government for 
“urgent permission” to strip mine 
the area’s titanium-rich dunes but 
a campaign by the World Wide 
Fund for Nature (WWF) and the 
St. Network 
blocked the project. An environ- 
Lucia  Allianee 
mental impact assessment con- 
cluded that strip mining would 
have catastrophic consequences 
for the region’s abundant wildlife. 
What’s more, the South Afriean 
government is seeking to have St. 
Lncia registered on UNESCO’ 
World Heritage List. 
 
PICTURE-BOOK 
LANDSCAPES 
The Swiss Fund for Landscape 
Protection, created in 1991 and 
endowed with 50 million Swiss 
francs, snpports innovative pro- 
jects in the field of landseape 
protection and management. In 
1995, it received 200 applica- 
tions, 91 of which have been 
They 
scheme in the canton of Valais to 
processed. include a 
restore Disses, small mountain 
streams diverted into channels to 
irrigate meadows, and measures 
safeguard orchards and 
reconstitute 
courses and protect marshlands 
to 
hedges, water- 
in the Jura canton. Another pro- 
ject focuses on restoring tavail- 
lon (wood-tile) roofs in the 
Fribourg and Vaud cantons. 
  
P.
 
Er
an
ia
n 
© 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ri
s 
wor lids... 
UNDER 
THE VOLCANO 
The French island of La Réunion, 
in the Indian Ocean, may one day 
draw some of its fresh water sup- 
plies from beneath an active vol- 
Piton 
Geophysicists from the French 
cano, de la Fournaise. 
Scientific Research Institute for 
Development Co-operation (ORS- 
TOM) have been probing the vol- 
cano’s southern flank using the 
audio-magnetotelluric method, 
whieh analyses natural electric 
and magnetic signals and can mea- 
sure the conductivity of soils up to 
a depth of one kilometre. The 
ORSTOM prospectors discovered 
a 250-metre-thick layer of fresh 
water 200 metres down, above a 
layer of salt water. These tech- 
niques using light casy-to-handle 
equipment are well sutted to diffi- 
cult prospecting conditions on vol- 
canic slopes. 
MINIATURE 
ARCTIC SURVIVOR 
The lemming, a small rodent 
weighing barely 80 grams, is 
found from Greenland to Alaska 
and from Scandinavia to northern 
Canada. It feeds on grass and tiny 
willows that grow in the tundra. 
In some years, up to one ton of 
these small mammals can be 
found per square kilometre. 
When food is short, their num- 
ber, and hence that of their 
predators, drops sharply. This 
rise and fall in their population 
follows three to four year cycles. 
 
HE unesco Courier 
S.
 
Co
rd
ie
r 
© 
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ns
 
WOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 44](104412engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 104408: Who are we?

UNESCO IN ACTION... UNESCO IN ACTION... UNESCO IN ACTION... 
The second Unesco philosophy forum 
Who are we? 
by Géraldine Schimmel 
Earlier this year, Unesco’s Paris Headquarters was the 
  
scene of a four-day intellectual marathon during 
which philosophers, sociologists, biologists, 
historians, jurists, writers, political scientists 
and artists from all over the world met on the 
occasion of UNesco’s Second Philosophy 
Forum and endeavoured to answer the 
question “Who are we?”, Here Géraldine 
Schimmel presents a round-up of some of 
the salient issues raised at the Forum 
(27-30 March 1996), which was organized by 
Ayyam Sureau of Unesco’s Philosophy Division 
and a panel of six thinkers. 
To those who might think this theme some- 
what out-of-date | would point out immedi- 
ately that the question is not “Who am 1?” or 
“What are we?" but “Who are we?” It is a trick 
question. Although it does not directly raise 
the issue of identity or human nature, it con- 
stantly implies it. It impinges on the notion of 
collective identity and therefore of otherness: 
who am | to the other, who is the other to me, 
and, together, who are we? What is it that 
links us all together to the point where it is 
possible to talk of human community and, 
linked in this way, what future are we heading 
for? 
This multifaceted question is not specific 
to any particular discipline, but every disci- 
pline can contribute part of an answer. ltis a 
moral and social question, but has political 
overtones. A human community wonders 
me unesco (ourier 1 BOCTOBER 1996 
what constitutes its identity. What is meant 
by “we”? 
A community of communities 
In the view of Richard Rorty (United States), 
a member of the Forum's Advisory Board, the 
expression “we” is meaningless unless it is 
part of a realistic and just project that offers 
everyone a future, But this future, because it 
is increasingly unlikely, weakens our collective 
identity. It is pointless to believe in a moral 
community if the world is divided by an 
unbridgeable gap into two camps, the poor 
and the rich. What meaning can the notion of 
a moral community have when almost 1.5 bil- 
lion human beings live in a state of total desti- 
tution without their plight arousing any real 
world solidarity? Is that solidarity even possi- 
ble? In Rorty's view, regarding others as mem 
bers of the same moral community presup- 
poses not only that one is prepared to help 
them, but that one has the means to do so. 
Here, the word “we” is consigned to the 
chilly universe of economic realities. Is this 
pessimism totally justified? 
Richard Posner (United States) sug- 
gested that a political community is defined 
chiefly by feelings of altruism, which tempers 
competitiveness between its members and 
turns it into virtuous emulation. There can be 
no human community without social justice 
and equal rights. Human beings have shown 
that they are capable of making the transition 
from “I” to “we”. Many societies are now 
more egalitarian and more just than they used 
to be. It is surely reasonable to believe that in 
time the “we” will progress. 
Irrespective of economic considerations,

## [Page 45](104412engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 104408: Who are we?

Daniel C. Dennett (United States) argued that 
there is room for a rational exchange between 
human beings that can pave the way to 
progress towards a global moral community. 
Angéle Kremer-Marietti (France) accepted that 
the idea of a global democracy, a “community 
of communities”, is Utopian, but believed that 
itis a goal we should aim for. In a world where 
interdependence is continually becoming 
stronger, and where exchanges—trade, commu- 
nications, migration flows and epidemics—are 
taking on a global dimension, it would be unreal- 
istic to suppose that rich countries can isolate 
themselves from poor countries. Although 
twentieth-century examples of totalitarianism 
may cast doubt on the feasibility of an egalitar- 
ian society, we can at least aim for faimess. 
For, as Vitaly Chelichev (Russia) pointed 
out, quoting the American philosopher John 
Rawls, justice is not about egalitarianism, but 
equity. The rich can get richer as long as that 
leads to some extent to the poorest getting 
richer. Equity would in that case seem to be 
above all a rational quest for a less and less 
unjust society. If this is accepted, the politi- 
cal “we” can exist in societies which are to 
some degree inegalitarian. But there are cer- 
tain definable tolerance thresholds beyond 
which economic inequality may jeopardize 
political stability. 
Perhaps the moral community we are try- 
ing to define is neither a community of trust, 
as Rorty suggests, nor a defiant “we”, to 
paraphrase Annette Baier (New Zealand), but 
simply a community of common interests. 
The human species has discovered that it is 
UNESCO IN ACTION... UNESCO IN ACTION... 
 
UNESCO IN ACTION... 
  
French geneticist Albert Jacquard (left) and French philosopher Lucien Séve (right). 
held together by a new bond, a bond emanat- 
ing from its own fragility. The earth's equilib- 
rium is under threat and the shadow of 
Malthusianism still looms, as Nicole Morgan 
(Canada) observed. The image of our small 
planet being in danger has created a new form 
of solidarity between its inhabitants: the sur- 
vival of us all is at stake. This responsibility 
brings a fresh intensity to the notion “we”. 
Federating differences 
To use the word “we” is first and foremost to 
accept other people's right to exist. In the 
words of Albert Jacquard (France), only the 
collective gives humankind its dignity. “I” is 
above all the link | build up with others. It is 
my membership of a community which has 
the power to make the “I” emerge. This argu- 
ment was echoed by Yirmiahu Yovel (Israel), for 
  
American philosopher Richard Rorty (left) 
and Cameroonian philosopher Gaston-Paul Effa (right). 
Ca
th
er
in
e 
Ch
ev
al
li
er
 
/
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
whom we are transient creatures who try to 
transcend our existence by tearing ourselves 
away from meaninglessness, finite beings 
who desperately strive to overcome our fini- 
tude. Identity provides us with a metaphysi- 
cal anchor. Yovel contrasted static identities 
(national, racial, religious), which constrict and 
imprison the individual, with dynamic identi- 
ties, which enable human beings to belong to 
several groups at the same time. But in any 
case, the “I” exists only thanks to the “we”. 
The role of the Other is thus crucial to the 
definition of the Self, especially in cases 
where the Other is someone who does not 
belong to my group. This difference can gener- 
ate positive competitiveness and become a 
source of energy and creativity; but it cannot 
be fertile unless there are ethical standards 
and political institutions that guarantee 
mutual recognition and preclude all forms of 
intolerance. The idea of federation, in the 
sense of a veritable association of nations, 
was regarded as a possible solution both by 
Yovel and by Alain Finkielkraut (France), who 
cited Kant's project for universal peace, which 
holds that international relations will only 
emerge from the state of nature through 
development of the idea of federation. 
To say “we” is to recognize the Other in 
his or her dignity as a human being. This 
recognition seems to be reflected par excel 
lence in the universalist discourse of human 
GERALDINE SCHIMMEL 
{France}. 
" 
THE Unesco (QuriEr *D WOCTOBER 1996 
Ca
th
er
in
e 
Ch
ev
al
li
er
 
/U
NE
SC
O

## [Page 46](104412engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 104408: Who are we?

  
Russian epistemologist Vitaly Chelishchev. 
rights. It has been seen by some as an instru- 
ment of the West's desire for cultural domina- 
tion, particularly during the colonial period. 
But it cannot be considered solely as an ideo- 
logical vehicle remote-controlled by the super- 
powers with the aim of erasing the specific 
characteristics of different human communi- 
ties. Universalism can be adapted to diversity 
of cultures and, as Pilar Echeverria de Ocariz 
(Venezuela) argued, it is a guarantee of secu- 
rity for the peoples who support it. 
One might ask why universalism should be 
regarded as incompatible with cultural identi- 
ties. One reason is the fear that a form of glob- 
alization and a certain cultural hegemony may 
iron out differences using the power of the 
communications media. Zaki Laidi (France) 
stressed that globalization is not an idea, but a 
process with no symbolic force which may 
prompt nations to protect their endangered 
identity. The universal, on the other hand, does 
not neglect differences; it simply forbids a 
withdrawal into one’s own identity. It is possi- 
ble to be integrated into the world community 
without losing a cultural identity, particularly 
since that identity, according to Egon Gal 
(Slovakia), does not exist in itself, but is con 
stantly being reshaped by our acts. 
History and identity 
Attention was now turned to another compo- 
nent of the meaning of the term “we”: we are 
solely because we were. To forget that we are 
the product of a past and a common history 
is tantamount to weakening the foundations 
of our collective identity. Jacques Le Goff 
(France) insisted on the fact that we consist 
of many strata. We have constructed our 
THE UNESCO Courier BOCTOBER 1996 
Ca
th
en
ne
 
Ch
ev
al
li
er
 
/
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
  
selves around events which have become 
identity myths, and to forget them is to 
deprive our identity of its foundations—thus 
eroding the foundations of a common future. 
But we must distinguish between what 
forms a constituent part of our identity and 
what does not. Abdulkarim Sorush (Iran), for 
example, seemed to think that one of the main 
shortcomings of European Enlightenment phi- 
losophy was that it tried to deny the religious 
dimension—a dimension which formed an inte- 
gral part of the Western world’s identity. 
Because it has tried to eliminate all religious fea- 
tures from its collective organization and sub- 
jected it to purely secular constraints, the West 
may have robbed itself of part of its identity 
and, what is more, lost the ability to under 
stand nations with a religious structure, espe- 
cially the Islamic world. 
How can a collective identity withstand 
the changes of history? If one is, for exam- 
ple, “a former dissident from a former 
Eastern-bloc country”, as Pedrag Matvejevich 
(former Yugoslavia and Croatia) described him- 
self, how should one see the future and pre- 
pare oneself for it? Matvejevich noted that 
ideologies based on identity are running out 
of steam. Who ought we to be if we are no 
longer what we were? Since the immediate 
past does not help to construct an identity, 
should we, as Matthias Middel (Germany) sug- 
gested, delve into the past and see if a demo- 
cratic ideal from the nineteenth century can 
help us to tackle the problems of the future? 
Hence the central question: when do we 
become aware that the collective “we” exists? 
Gianni Vattimo (Italy) answered by quoting 
Walter Benjamin: “The essence of a thing 
appears in all its truth when it is threatened 
with extinction.” In the same way, awareness 
of identity seems to be shaped by danger and 
conflict. Perhaps we resign ourselves to cul- 
tural minimalism through fear of this violent 
conflict. This conflict, necessary though it is to 
enable the identity to disintegrate and reconsti- 
tute itself, needs nevertheless to be chan- 
nelled and organized. Vattimo took as his exam- 
ple the European Community's process of 
constructing an identity, which is taking place 
within the framework of a non-violent conflict. 
This process is akin to the universalist ideal 
which aims not to make all nations identical, 
but to allow them to display their differences 
on the basis of a universal legal standard. 
However, another difficulty has emerged 
as the twentieth century comes to a close. As 
Marcel Gauchet (France) explained, “being 
together” becomes increasingly difficult as 
the mystery of “being oneself” melts away. On 
the one hand the individual, who has become 
the subject of scientific knowledge, seems 
easier to understand. The cognitive sciences 
have taught us much about the workings of 
the mind. On the other hand, there is a crisis 
of sociological intelligibility, a crisis of soci- 
eties’ capacity to act on themselves, espe- 
cially since the expectations of socialism came 
to an end. It has become painfully obvious 
that despite our mass of knowledge our soci- 
eties remain impenetrable to us. 
So we shall go an asking the question 
“Who are we?” for some time to come. One 
only hopes that nations will be capable of over- 
coming thelr differences and of reaching a mini- 
mum degree of agreement about what they 
share, || 
 
 
Dorothy Blake of Jamaica (adviser to the Assistant Director-General of WHO, Geneva), 
Ca
th
er
in
e 
C
h
e
v
a
l
l
i
e
r
/
U
N
E
S
C
O

## [Page 47](104412engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 104409: Culture first

Reflections: Culture first 
A follow-up article to last month's issue 
(“Culture and Development: A life worth living”) reports on UNesco’s 
thinking about the cultural dimension of development 
Development policies based entirely on eco- 
nomic considerations and intended to help the 
_ countries of the South to “catch up” with the 
industrialized nations encountered many set- 
backs in the 1960s and 1970s. One result of 
this was the emergence in the 1980s of a new 
concept, the cultural dimension of development. 
This idea, whose importance was recognized 
by the World Conference on cultural policies held 
in Mexico City in 1982, is based on the observa 
tion that some features of pre-industrial soci- 
eties are inconsistent with the societal model of 
industrialized countries and on the belief that 
these features should be taken into account in 
development planning. 
Although the concept was widely acknowl- 
edged in 1982, it only really began to influence the 
working methods of co-operation agencies in the 
early 1990s, when these bodies began to take 
account of certain cultural characteristics and to 
associate local populations more closely with the 
preparation and execution of field projects. 
During this time, the United Nations system 
was engaged in an appraisal of the qualitative 
aspects of development which led to the emer- 
gence of the concepts of sustainable develop 
ment, human development (for which the United 
Nations Development Programme became the 
permanent standard bearer) and, more recently, 
social development. 
Meanwhile Unesco, as part of its activities 
within the framework of the World Decade for 
Cultural Development which it had launched 
jointly with the United Nations, began to study 
in depth the methods whereby cultural consider- 
ations could be integrated into development. 
Two major steps 
Two important steps must be taken. Firstly, it 
must be recognized that the interaction between 
culture and development is the interface of two 
cultural models, one corresponding to tradi 
tional, pre-industrial cultures, and the other 
(which is often presented as not belonging to 
 
any kind of society in particular) corresponding 
to the dominant industrial culture. 
Secondly, it must be accepted that central- 
izing, technocratic methods of promoting devel- 
opment must be replaced by more flexible 
approaches tailored to situations in which 
countries, populations and communities pro- 
pose to act on their own account, according to 
their own needs, possibly with the help of out 
side institutions. 
The importance of two Unesco flagship pro- 
jects may be seen in the light of these two 
obstacles—the work of the World Commission 
on Culture and Development (as reported in the 
September 1996 issue of the Unesco Courier) 
and a methodological project on “The Cultural 
Dimension of Development”. 
After carrying out a series of case studies, 
in 1992 Unesco began drawing up an inventory 
of ways and means of integrating cultural fac- 
tors into development, exploring the full implica- 
tions of the cultural factors and impacts of 
development and outlining a new approach to 
the problem based on analysing development 
from the cultural point of view. Planning meth- 
ods are now being reassessed on the basis of 
© 
Th
ie
rr
y 
Ma
ng
er
, 
Pa
ns
 
by Claude Fabrizio, UNEsco consultant 
this new approach, and the resulting proposals 
will be published at the end of the year as A 
Cultural Approach to Development, Proposals for 
a Planning Manual. 
An entirely new perspective 
The new approach involves a complete change of 
perspective. The planning process now starts 
on the ground and moves up to the financial and 
other decision-making centres. Projects are justi- 
fied essentially in situations (previously called 
“contexts”) in which problems raised by local 
people call for outside intervention. The partici- 
pation process is thus turned upside down. 
Local populations have now become the chief 
players, and the people from outside have to 
establish new partnerships with them. 
There is no longer any room for models of 
change designed in a vacuum. The variety of cul- 
tures and situations must be matched by a cor- 
responding variety of approaches to develop- 
ment with a human face. Excessively rigorous 
timetables clash with the variety of rhythms that 
are found in different societies. They are only of 
interest to intellectually rigid institutions which 
alfocate their resources according to results 
which may not necessarily correspond to the 
underlying effects of innovation on different 
human groups. 
If these institutions were to set up guide- 
lines associated with conditions that countries 
requesting institutional support must meet, 
planning could be much more easily adapted to 
the unique cultural dynamics of each society. 
Projects would then respond to needs 
expressed at grass roots level, to the mobiliza- 
tion of local people, and to an intemal rationale 
of continuity and change. 
These proposals correspond to questions 
which are increasingly being asked, in various 
forms, in all the institutions of the United 
Nations. | | 
1 See The Cultural Dimension of Development, Towards a 
Practical Approach. Unesco Publishing, Paris, 1995, 
THE unesco (DURIR BOCTOBER 199

## [Page 48](104412engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

LISTENING 
  
Isabelle Leymarie 
talks to 


### 104410: Isabelle Leymarie talks to Juan Carlos Cáceres

Juan Carlos 
Caceres 
Instrumentalist, singer and painter, Juan Carlos 
Caceres is a one-man history of the Argentine tango, 
vividly evoking its pathos and sensuality in paintings, 
pastels and his latest recording, Sudacas. Here he 
describes some unusual and little-known facets of this 
enduringly popular musical form, the memorable 
characters who have contributed to it, and the many 
musical influences that have fashioned it since the 
19th century. 
MW Isabelle Leymarie: What is 
the tango and where did you get 
your passion for it? 
Juan Carlos Cdceres: The tango is 
one of Latin America’s richest 
kinds of music. Even the older 
pieces are sometimes surpris- 
ingly modern and harmonically 
adventurous, not to mention 
work by more recent com- 
posers like Astor Piazzolla. 
I come from Buenos Aires, 
which is the home of the tango 
and has an extraordinary jazz 
school and excellent musi- 
cians. As a child I spent a lot 
of time listening to the radio. 
At that time there was a pro- 
gramme on the tango of the 
1920s, but they also played 
recordings from the last cen- 
tury—what they call today 
the tango of the Old Guard. I 
can still remember the pro- 
gramme’s opening announce- 
ISABELLE LEYMARIE 
is a Franco-American musicologist. 
THE UNESCO Courier } 8 |OCTOBER 1996 
ment, which said: “Tango of 
the Old Guard, from the can- 
dombe to the habanera, from 
the habanera to the fandango, 
from the fandango to the 
milonga, from the milonga to 
They also broad- 
cast a famous tango called El 
the tango.” 
Porteniitol. Old-style tango was 
played with anything the 
musicians could lay their 
hands on. It was a two-speed 
tango, often played by neigh- 
bourhood brass bands, or 
municipal or military brass 
bands performing in band- 
stands in town squares. One of 
the first 
recordings was made in 1907. 
important tango 
The music was recorded in 
Paris by the brass band of the 
Republican Guard! 1 also 
liked listening to Anibal 
Troilo, who in the 1940s was a 
famous player of the hando- 
nion, a kind of portable har- 
monium or accordion that is 
popular in Latin America. 
The first tango age 
I A NA 
stretched from the 1880s to 
1920, a time when bandonions 
were few and far between. The 
bandonion first turned up in 
the Rio de la Plata region 
around 1870 during the war 
with Paraguay, when a mulatto 
named Santa Cruz played 
polkas and mazurkas on it. 
During this first period all 
tango musieians were black or 
mulatto, and the tango was 
street music, outsiders’ music. 
The whites listened to classical 
music. Later the tango blended 
with other types of dance for 
couples, and its instrumenta- 
tion developed. Barrel organs, 
which could easily be taken 
outside, were ideal for produc- 
ing bitter-sweet sounds. Brass 
bands, with their big horns and 
flutes, played the tango in its 
most polished form at that 
time. Trios and gnartets made 
up of such instruments as 
flutes, clarinets, violins and 
harps and guitars played it in 
brothels. Fancy brothels had 
ii M _— YT 
BN | BY \ 
ro XS 
      
    
© 
Ta
de
us
z 
Pa
cs
ul
a 
pianos, and pianists also played s I 
ragtime. 
M I L.:Itis often forgotten 
that the tango resulted from a 
meeting between many different 
cultures. 
J. CC: That's right. As early as 
1880 it is possible to see links 
with Brazilian musie in the 
milonga, which was sung hy 
the gauchos of the Buenos 
Aires suburbs and whose bass 
line shows Cuban influences. 
Sonie notes in the tango are 
also close to those of jazz. 
People always talk about an 
input from the United States, 
but I think it’s much more 
important to emphasize the 
close ties between the eoun- 
tries of the southern half of 
South America and the rest of 
Latin and the 
Caribbean. Argentina has never 
|] 
Ameriea 
been the isolated nation it’s 
sometimes thonght to have 
been. The long couplets of the 
milonga were sung hy

## [Page 49](104412engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 104410: Isabelle Leymarie talks to Juan Carlos Cáceres

ven the angels 
dance thetango 
payadores, itinerant singers 
who accompanied themselves 
on the guitar. The milonga 
blended with the tango and 
became the tango-milonga. In 
the 1920s, which are consid- 
ered to be a golden age of the 
tango, the violinist Julio De 
Caro codified this music and 
defined its colour. Sextets then 
started to appear, generally 
consisting of two bandonions, 
two violins, a piano and a bass. 
NH I L.:Theimportant 
contribution from the candombe 
is also often forgotten when 
talking about the roots of the 
tango. 
J.C.C.: There are traces of the 
candombe in Sudacas, the 
record I made recently. You 
can still hear the influence of 
this old religious music of the 
blacks of Rio de la lata in the 
strong heat and syncopation of 
the tango and the milonga. 
Until the 1950s, the tango was 
deeply rooted in popular cul- 
and the that 
played in the open air played it 
ture, hands 
with an incredible swing— 
without amplifiers. The best 
musicians have always played 
with a swing, but the tradition 
of improvization has gone. 
There was also a particularly 
erotic version of the tango 
called the tango con corte, 
which came from one of the 
figures of the candombe. It 
was daneed by the ordinary 
people, but it was banned. For 
a while even lunfardo, Buenos 
Aires slang, was forbidden. 
Then the Argentine middle 
classes introdneed the tango to 
Europe before the First World 
War, and it even became fash- 
ionable in Russia. The Pope 
issued a bull forbidding the 
- tango for being too sensual, and 
Argentine dancers were sent to 
the Vatican to dance for him in 
an attempt to persuade him to 
go back on his decision. In the 
1930s the tango lost its bite. A 
vogue for sung tango came in, 
with Carlos Garde! as its repre- 
sentative figure. Then came a 
tango revival in the 1940s. 
Influenced by North American 
music, it went from a binary 
measure to one in four-time. 
The old repertoire was played 
again, and Anibal Troilo kept 
the phrasing of the milonga. 
HM I. L.: How have you managed 
to pursue a double career as a 
painter and a musician? 
A painting by Juan Carlos Caceres. 
J.C.C: I started painting very 
the 
Buenos Aires Art School), also 
young (I studied at 
playing the piano and the 
trombone. 1 was especially 
fond of the tango and jazz, 
particularly cool jazz; I liked 
its romantic side. By the way, 
after the Second World War, 
several French musicians set- 
tled in Argentina and spread 
the 
Reinhardt. This gave rise to a 
influence of Django 
unique guitar school in 
Argentina. In the 1920s sev- 
eral tango musicians also 
spent some time in the United 
States. When they returned, 
they incorporated new jazz 
chords into their works. After 
the 1966 coup d’état, I went 
to Spain, and then settled in 
® 
Ju
an
 
Ca
rl
os
 
Ca
ce
re
s 
in 1977 1 
formed a tango group called 
France where 
Gotan (the word tango in 
reverse). I was the pianist and 
arranger. We had an alto vio- 
lin, a viola, a bandonion, a 
bass and an electric guitar. 
We played a lot of original 
pieces. Then I went through a 
patch where I couldn’t find 
any musicians I could get 
along with, and so I spent 
more time painting. I pro- 
duced a fresco of Latin 
America history and I also 
took some ideas from the 
French Revolution. In 1989 1 
went back to music, which 
had come to be a kind of 
therapy. 1 formed a new 
group called Tangofon with 
two saxes, a piano, a bass, a 
bandonion and drums, and I 
started singing professionally. 
HM I L.: Your painting also 
expresses the magic of the world 
of the tango. 
J.CC: The tango is still my 
main source of inspiration. 
I’ve painted Carlos Gardel, 
the Astor 
Piazzolla when he was playing 
handonionist 
with Anibal Troilo, whose 
arranger he was, couples 
dancing, pimps, dives, broth- 
els and even a canvas showing 
the tango dancers who went 
to dance for the Pope. In the 
[ower portion you can see 
angels daneing the tango in 
Paradise. || 
  
1 “The little guy from Boenos 
Aires.”Ed. 
DISCOGRAPHY: 
Sudacas 
CD Celluloid/Mélodie 66969-2 
49 tHe unesco (Courier MOCTOBER 1996

## [Page 50](104412engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### 104411: A Tiny bubble in the silence of the infinite

  
    
by Rabindranath Tagore 
Indian writer and poet (1861-1941) Nobel Laureate for Literature (1913) 
n apology is due from me for my intrusion into the 
world of pictures, thus offering a perfect instance of 
the saying that fools rush in where angels fear 10 tread. I, as 
an arlist, cannot claim any merit for my courage; for it is the 
unconscious courage of the unsophisticated, like that of one 
who walks in dream on a perilous path, who is saved only 
because he is blind to the risk. 
The only training which I had from my yonng days was 
training in rhythm, rhythm in thought, rhythm in sound. I 
came to know that rhythm gives reality to that which is 
desultory, which is insignificant in itself. And therefore, 
when the scratches in my manuseript cried, like sinners, for 
salvation, and assailed my eyes with the ugliness of their 
irrelevance, I often took more time in rescuing them into a 
merciful finality of rhythm than in carrying on what was my 
obvious task. 
In the process of this salvage work I came to discover one 
fact, that in the universe of forms there is a perpetual activ- 
ity of natural selection in lines, and only the fittest survives 
which has in itself the fitness of cadence, and I felt that to 
fit the heterogeneous into the balance of fulfilment is cre- 
ation itself. 
My pictures are my versification in lines. If by chance they 
are entitled to claim recognition it must be primarily for some 
rhythmic significance of form which is ultimate, and not for 
any interpretation of an idea, or representation of a fact. 
he world of sound is a tiny bubble in the silence of the 
~ infinite. The Universe has its language of gesture, it talks 
_in the voice of pictures and dance. Every object in this world 
proclaims in the dumb signal of lines and colours the fact that 
itis not a mere logical abstraction or a mere thing for use, but 
is unique in itself, it carries the miracle of its existence. 
There are countless things which we know but do not rec- 
ognize in their own dignity of truth, independent of the fact 
that they are injurious or beneficial. It is enough that a 
flower exists as a flower, but my cigarette has no other claim 
upon me for recognition than as being subservient to my 
smoking habit. 
But there are other things which in the dynamie quality of 
™ Nn 
He unesco COURIER © OCTOBER 1996 
w
o
w
e
d
 
  
¢ / al aV ala ) A C1lence 
. fe we - Sw "EN wed 
al ¢ 
|} » | 
a8 EB - wu 
bil a SE 
rhythm or character make us insistently acknowledge the fact 
that they are. In the book of creation they are the sentences 
that are underlined with coloured pencil and we cannot pass 
them by. They seem to cry to us “See, here I am,” and our 
mind bows its head and never questions, “Why are you?” 
In a picture the artist creates the language of undoubted 
reality, and we are satisfied that we see. 1t may not be the 
representation of a beautiful woman but that of a humble 
animal, or of something that has no external credential of 
truth in nature but only its own inner artistic significance. 
eople often ask me about the meaning of my pictures. 
I remain silent even as my pictures are. It is for them 
to express and not to explain. They have nothing ulterior 
behind their own appearance for thought to explore and 
words to describe and if that appearanee carried its ultimate 
worth then they remain. Otherwise they are rejected and for- 
gotten even though they may have some scientific truth or 
ethical justification. 
It is related in the drama of Shakuntala, how one busy 
morning there stood humbly before the maiden of the forest- 
hermitage a youthful stranger who did not give his name. 
Her soul acknowledged him at once without question. She 
did not know him but only saw him and for her he was the 
artist God’s masterpiece to which must be offered the full 
value of love. 
Days passed by. There came to her gate another guest, a 
venerable sage who was formidable. And, sure of his claim to 
a dutiful welcome, proudly he announced, “I am here!” But 
she did not hear his voice, for it did not carry with it an 
inherent meaning, it needed a commentary of household 
virtue, pious words which could assign a sacred value to a 
cuest. Not the value of irresponsible art, but of moral 
responsibility. Love is kindred to art, it is inexplicable. Duty 
can be measured by the degree of its benefit, utility by the 
profit and power it may bring, but art by nothing but itself. 
There are other factors of life which are visitors that come 
and go. Art is the guest that comes and remains. The others 
| may be important, but art is inevitable. 
=

## [Page 51](104412engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

— Ge raw * 
| The Swordfish 
by Hugo Claus 
A short novel translated from the 
Tolerance Flemish (Belgium) by Ruth Levitt 
Based on an original idea by Dominique 1996, 104 pp. 
Roger ISBN: 92-3-103277-1 / 116 FF 
and Claudine and André Parinaud 
1995, 191 pp., photographs 
ISBN: 92-3-103235-6 / 240 FF 
UNESCO Collection of Representative 
Works 
* During the course of an idyllic 
* Are peace, democracy and freedom summer's day in the country, a 
possible without tolerance? senscless crime 1s committed. In 
Throughout the history of art,   its wake, fantasies and passions, 
masters of painting have never ceased desire and grief unite the destinies 
to denounce the crime of violence of the villagers. Most affected is   
  
unleashed by intolerance. In this young Martin: his fertile 
   
book, thirty masterpieces depicting imagination leads him to identify 
human tragedy are placed alongside a is ® turn in turn with a swordfish, 
photographs showing gestures of : Clint Eastwood and above all, 
respect, tolerance and solidarity Jesus Christ. Widely regarded as 
throughout the world. These values are the most distinguished 
expressed in a selection of texts written i LS8 contemporary writer from the 
by such inspiring figures as Mahatma ® Low Countries and a candidate 
Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Octavio for the Nobel Prize, Hugo Claus 
Paz, Desmond Tutu and Vaclav Havel. ¢ ¥ is best known for The Sorrow of 
The humanist ideal they express are a Belgium. His work has been 
compelling incentive to fight against all translated into more than nine 
« Day aber day, discover forms of injustice in our daily lives. _ languages. 
and admire some of the 
world’s most breathtaking ORDER FORM 
natural and cultural sites : 
with the UNESCO World Yes, Viwish to orden 
Heritage Desk Diary, Tide Ref. Price Copies Total 
redesigned to celebrate its UNESCO World Heritage 
tenth anniversary. An Desk Diary 1997 92-3-003305-7 110 FF 
attractive work organizer, Tolerance 92-3-103235-6 240 FF 
this diary aims to foster The Swordfish 92-3-103277-1 116 FF 
public awareness of how Plus postage: 30 FF 
much still has to be done to TOTAL: 
preserve our monuments : 
and natural sites for future Name; 
generations. By acquiring Address: 
this desk diary, you are also City and postcode: 
contributing to the World Country: 
Heritage Fund, created to J I enclose a cheque made out to UNESCO, established in French francs and issued by a bank in 
assist in the restoration of France, or a cheque for the equivalent amount in US dollars issued by a bank in the United States. 
endangered sites around the Eurocheques are not accepted. 
world. J | wish to pay by: J Eurocard J VISA J MasterCard 
176 pp. photographs Card No.: Expiry Date: 
ISBN: 92-3-003305-7 / 110 FF 
Format: 18 x 26cm Please mail or fax your order form to: UNESCO Publishing, Promotion and Sales Division, 
1, rue Miollis, 75732 Paris Cedex 15, France. 
Fax: (+ 33) 01 45 68 57 41, Internet: http://www.unesco.org/publishing 
PU
B 
CO
U 
10
/9
6

## [Page 52](104412engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

  
   
=]
 
    
    
MARKETPLACE 
© HERITAGE: 
BAROQUE CHURCHES 
"OF THE PHILIPPINES 
    
k 
tile Nd R 
i 
' THEME OF THE NEXT ISSUE: | | | 
1 od 
THE 
, 
HERVE TELEMAQUE : 
 