# [068948](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
ba H Cau. i BER 
a 
7 
  
- : . - 
“cinema of the 
i, £’ fb 
The birth  

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
” ad a“ ae ak 22h Ami ; si epysi TO oe’ Fe 
CR ad “ - gr L 
PE Ti CW ia 
“ 
-_a a anid a he 
. Jp ¥ nT L_- 
. - oo A oe . a 
Feerte gram GA a Eda § ] Lone SR " NN er i " 1 od a 
) + —~ NH p/- Froey ov TI ald a ot FI - 
. , A Le y 
Tdi Ln Se .   
BOATING BY MOON- 
LIGHT. Chinese art is 
noted for the remarkable 
effects achieved with a 
minimum of brush strokes. 
Here, the great master Ma 
Yuan (1190-1229) has shorn 
his painting of all but the 
essentials. The mountain is 
depicted only by its summit. 
The rest is shrouded in mist 
and mystery, creating an 
atmosphereof romantic rev- 
‘erie and yet great simplici- 
ty. This work is now inthe: 
British Museum. (Seep. 22.)

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
  am Cour cr. 
’ 
Number I - 1955 
8th YEAR 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
3 EDITORIAL 
5 THE CINEMA AND ITS ORIGINS 
By Jacques Guerif 
17 NEWSREEL CAMERAMEN OF YESTERDAY 
12 THE CINEMA TODAY—A WORLD PICTURE 
© By James Douglas 
20 DREAMING WITH EYES WIDE OPEN 
: By W.D. Wall 
MAGIC SHADOWS—A PHOTO STORY 
6  Plateau's Magic Discs . 
8  Zoetropes and the Optical Theatre 
10 A Century of Clicks 
11 A $25,000 Bet on 2 Horse 
13 Marey’s Camera Gun 
I5 Edison—Motion Pictures’ Public Debut 
16 Lumiére—The Screen’s Premiere 
I8 They Turned a Page—Mélids, Griffith 
OTHER ARTICLES AND FEATURES 
 
22 THEY PAINTED WITH KNIFE AND BRUSH 
Chinese Art 2,000 Years Ago 
By Chou Ling 
26 TWENTIETH CENTURY GULLIVERS 
By Alain Gille 
28 MICROSCOPE QUIZ 
33 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
34 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
* 
Published monthly by 
The Department of Mass Communication of the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, 19, Avenue Kleber, Paris 16, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Associate Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton 
French Edition: Alexandre Leventis 
Spanish Edition: Jorge Carrera Andrade 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
Circulation Manager 
Jean Groffier 
U.S.A. : Henry Evans 
* 
Individual articles not copyrighted may be reprinted from THE COURIER but 
must be accompanied by the following credit line: “Reprinted from UNESCO 
COURIER”. Signed articles reprinted must carry the author's name, 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompanied by an inter~ 
national reply coupon covering postage. 
Signed articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of THE COURIER, 
Annual subscription rates of THE COURIER : 6/-; $ 1.50 or 300 French firs. 
MC. 54.1 88. A 
  
  
Unesco Courier. — Nr 1, — 1955 
FORGOTTEN SHADOWS 
Oc i 
With this photo 2 man sneezed his way into 
cinema history, In 1893 Fred Ott, a former 
comedian working as a laboratory mechanic 
for Thomas Edison, was filmed in the world’s 
first studio, in New Jersey, doing his sneezing 
act. Because of this Ott has been called the 
world's first motion picture actor, but his 
right to the title has been sharply disputed. 
  
few years ago the National Library of Peru, in the 
heart of Lima, created a traffic jam which ‘was repeated 
every day for more than two weeks. Outside the library 
the street was crowded with adults and children. As they 
filed past the entrance, the visitors were counted by a photo- 
electric cell flicking monotonously at a rate which went as 
high as five thousand a day. The attraction was a travelling 
exihibition, intended to explain very simply the newest 
developments in science, to take science out of the bewil- 
dering maze of the laboratory and bring it to the public. 
That exhibit which dealt with physics and astronomy was 
~ seen throughout Latin America and is still travelling. It was 
followed by three other science exhibitions which have 
already been seen in 26 countries by about 1,500,000 people. 
But in the files of Unesco there is something even more 
important than the itinerary of the travelling exhibitions, 
more important than the names and number of the countries 
visited. It is the evidence of the incalculable enrichment 
these exhibitions and others on education and the arts have 
brought to the lives of countless persons in small towns 
as well as large cities on every continent. 
One day, for example, a Unesco exhibition on modern art 
arrived at a place called Tizi-Ouzou, a small, rarely visited 
town in the rugged hills of Algeria. It was on a tour 
organized for overseas areas by the French National Com- 
mission for Unesco. From miles around villagers flocked 
into Tizi-Ouzou to take a look. Some.came, scratched their 
heads and with a shrug went away. Many others, like the 
schoolmaster from the distant mountains of Kabylia, looked 
for a long time and then sat down and wrote Unesco their 
impressions. 
“I was passing through Tizi-Ouzou,” the schoolmaster said, 
“and was privileged to be able to see the Unesco travelling 
exhibition on modern art... Until now I had no chance to 
see modern paintings at first hand and your exhibit revealed 
to me a form of art I knew nothing about and the very 
existence of which I barely suspected.” 
There are numerous examples of ‘whole communities 
joining together to buy a duplicate set of a Unesco exhibition 
in order to be sure that it would always be on display or 
in circulation in the country. After one exhibition had been 
shown at the Perth Art Gallery in Australia, a public 
subscription ‘was started to which students, teachers, artists 
and other citizens contributed one hundred pounds ‘for the 
purchase of a duplicate set. And the curator of the Perth 
gallery wrote : “The exhibition proved a great stimulus to 
the art-loving public and created considerable interest 
among those to whose notice it brought the work of some 
contemporary artists for: the first time.” 
- At present, travelling art exhibits on the Old Masters, 
Modern Art, Leonardo da Vinci and old Japanese woodcuts 
are touring the world. Other Unesco exhibitions have includ- 
ed a broad range of subjects such as the emancipation of 
women, freedom of information, music and the cinema, 
children’s books, education and peace, school architecture, 
man’s fight against the desert and the jungle, the history 
of human rights, and the protection of nature. 
This issue of the Courier has been inspired by three 
recent Unesco exhibitions. Two Thousand Years of Chinese 
Art, Man Measures the Universe, and Horizons of the 
Cinema. Only limited aspects of these, of course, could be 
dealt with in these pages. “Horizons of the Cinema” was 
first erected at the International Film Festival at Venice in 
1953, and is now a permanent exhibit at the Paris Institut 
des Hautes Etudes Cinématographiques. A smaller version 
(on the origins of the cinema) is touring or has completed 
tours of cities and towns in 12 countries. It has been 
shown at educational conferences in Egypt, Spain and 
Canada. In Canada it has also served as the basis for an 
important television programme. 
It is now sixty years since the motion picture was invent- 
ed. The following pages are a salute on the part of Unesco 
to the artists and technicians who have contributed to it 
as a means of human expression.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

  THE BIRTH 
AND END... 
..OF AN ERA 
  
  
Unless otherwise indicated, all photos in 
this issue on the origins of the cinema 
are published with the kind co-operation 
of the Cinémathéque Francaise, Paris.       
  
  
These two pictures mark the beginning 
and the end of a great era—33 years in 
the history of the cinema. Above, a 
scene from the first film ever seen by a 
. public audience, “La Sortie de I'Usine” 
(Leaving the Factory) projected by the 
Lumigre Brothers in Paris in 1895." 
Left, the end of the silent film days is 
sounded in 1927 by Al Johson in the 
first talking picture, “The Jazz Singer”. . 
      

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 68942: Forgotten shadows: the cinema and its origins

  
   
      
F it weren't for the fact that a strip of film is quicker than 
the eye — the retina, to be exact — the cinema would 
not even exist. 
Hollywood and Elstree and the two-gun cowboy hero and 
the most stupendous epic ever made and the Saturday nights 
of hundreds of millions around the world all depend on the 
. retina’s ability to hold an image for a scant tenth of a 
- second after it has vanished. 
During that tenth of a second, you actually see what isn’t 
there any more. If the vanishing images flash in front 
of your eye quickly enough, they merge together in a stream 
of movement. And the retina is unable to tell the dif- 
ference between a movement broken down into a series 
of still pictures and the actual movement itself. 
Ever since antiquity, men have known about this retina 
time lag. In the 17th Century, the magic lantern made its 
bow along with a host of gadgets intended to create 
an illusion of movement. But they seemed destined to 
remain as parlour toys. Even the invention of photography 
did not change matters at first because the pioneers of the 
camera, after all, were trying to break down or stop 
movement, not to create it. - 
Then, a long step forward was made when, in 1877, 
an English photographer in California, Eadweard Muybridge, 
. rigged a set of cameras side by side next to a race track 
.and was able to take a series of 24 pictures breaking down 
the movements of a galloping horse. Then a French 
scientist, Etienne Marey, built a camera capable of taking 
Jacques GUERIF, former foreign desk editor of the French daily 
‘* Le Monde ", is now a member of the press staff of Unesco. 
    
Unesco Courier, — Nr 1. —= 1955 
P
R
E
V
A
 
a
 
F
L
.
 
at
 
E
R
 
several photos a second to help him study birds in flight. 
Photography had now proved capable of recording move- 
ments which the human eye could not catch. At the same 
time experimenfers were able to show that the eye could 
be fooled by pictures flashing before it at a speed of from 
six to forty images a second. Now the problem was to 
take that many pictures in so short a time. As long as 
photographers were limited to glass plates, it seemed in- 
soluble. Then along came the invention of celluloid roll 
film, in 1889. Things happened quickly after that. 
Although. there is still much dispute over which of the 
many film inventors first succeeded in showing his pictures 
on a screen, both Thomas Edison and the Lumiére Brothers 
(Louis and Auguste) share the glory of having made the 
“cinematograph” a reality. (The world itself was coined 
by the Franchman Leon Bouly in 1893 when he patented 
a moving picture machine under this name. Other in- 
ventors achieved success with astounding simultaneity: 
C. Francis Jenkins and Thomas Armat in the United States, 
Robert Paul and William Friese-Green in England, Le Prince 
in France.) 
Edison began his basic work on moving photographs in 
1887. . Two years later, on October 6, 1889, he gave the 
first demonstration of the Edison Kinetoscope. His moving 
picture films, though they lasted less than a minute, ushered 
in the era of cinema production. Their eyes glued to the 
viewers of the peepshow Kinetoscope (photo page 15) 
spectators were able to glimpse a favourite vaudeville artist 
or penetrate the secrets of an opium den or even relive 
+, the execution of Mary, Queen of Scots. 
(Continued on next page)

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 68942: Forgotten shadows: the cinema and its origins

FORGOTTEN SHADOWS (Continued) 
For several years the Kinetoscope was a popular novelty 
but it did not project an image on'a screen. In 1895 Louis 
Lumiére and his brother Auguste, sons of a French manu- 
facturer of photographic supplies, patented the *“cinema- 
tographe” machine for taking and projecting motion 
pictures. On December 28 of the same year, the first time 
in history, a true audience—120 persons jammed into the 
Grand Café on Paris’ Boulevard des Capucines—was able 
to watch a moving film pictured on a screen. The film in 
question was only a small documentary’ shot by Lumiére 
showing factory workers going out to lunch. The same 
programme presented the home life of his family—complete 
down to the goldfish bowl—and a train entering a station. 
The critics hailed them as *a slice of real life”. 
Destiny decided that the Grand Café audience of 1895 
included a certain Georges Méliés, a music-hall magician 
who had been baffling audiences for over eight years with 
his sleight-of-hand. He saw immediately that this was 
more than a new scientific marvel ; to him it was a new 
kind of magic, and he determined to make films himself. 
One day he accidentally discovered double exposure cinema- 
tography and realized at once that he could use it to create 
any visual illusion on the screen..and that films could be 
turned into a new entertainment medium and a new art. 
In October 1896, two years after Edison had completed 
the first film studio, the Black Maria, Méliés began 
construction of his own studio in the suburbs of Paris. Even 
a producer of 1955 would recognize it with its stages, flood- 
lights and a movable cabin for shooting. There Méliés was 
able to invent many of the tricks of the trade which film- 
makers still use today—dissolves, shooting against a black 
background to bring out relief, and the use of one actor to 
play two or even more roles. Like Edison and others before 
him, he also dabbled in talkies, trying to find a way of 
synchronizing a phonograph with his silent films. 
Méliés alone shot some 450 films between 1896 and 1914. 
The film industry had come into the world and it proved a 
lusty infant. In 1902, a theatre built specifically for film 
shows opened in Los Angeles, California, and it was followed 
by thousands in the United States and Europe. Even in 
those early days, films were already printed by the hundreds 
and distributed throughout the world. 
And the public loved it... 
improvements. 
something new and different. The Herculean task of. the 
inventor had only begun. The public was fed first sound, 
then colour and now relief and cinemascope—and the public 
is still waiting for something new again. 
but it .constantly clamoured for 
od . 
i: 
3d 
To 
  
THE MYSTERY 
MACHINE was the 
name given to magic 
lantern by pedlar show- 
men of [8th century. 
It was usually simply a 
wooden box with an 
opening through which 
people were able to 
see images projected 
on a transparent screens 
by a lantern. Mounted 
on wheels, the box . 
was a source of amuse- 
ment and wonder at 
town and village fairs.     
Audiences flocked to the films which offered 
6 
  
   
In this eternal chase after new techniques, hundreds fell 
ruined by the wayside but thousands of others continued on 
to wealth and fame. The spectators watched and revelled 
in the struggle which had only one rule : sooner or later, 
the new had to win over the old. 
~The film industry had to adapt itself to the struggle by 
constantly experimenting and making use of the new dis- 
coveries. The result is that the history of this art is a long 
tale of adventure where unexpected victories are followed 
by startling defeats and where the only certainty is change. 
It was round about 1914 that technical improvements and 
art really met on the screen. Charlie Chaplin began making: 
his early films, astonishing in their wealth of sentiment and 
generosity and always true to the mark in their social satire. 
But the momentous year for motion pictures was 1915 
for it witnessed the production of a film—D.W. Criffith’s 
“Birth of a Nation”—which marked the founding of the 
modern film. Despite its racial intolerance, it was and still 
remains a masterpiece of cinematographic art. It is con- 
sidered one of the three most famous of all films—the other 
two being Carl Meyer's “The Cabinet of Dr Caligari” (Ger-

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 68942: Forgotten shadows: the cinema and its origins

  
many, 1919) 
1925). 
By the 1920's, films had become a staple necessity like 
bread or newspapers and rapidly became standardized into 
types. There were the grandiose spectacle films, melo- 
‘dramas, comedies, westerns, crime and racketeering pictures. 
But the same period also saw the rise of new pioneers in 
different countries who sought to turn the art of the cinema 
into new channels of aesthetics and expression : René Clair, 
in France (“Entracte”), Louis Bunuel of Spain (“Un Chien 
Andalou”), V. I, Pudovkin in Russia (“Mother”), and Carl 
Dreyer in Denmark (“The Passion of Joan of Arc”). 
and Sergei Eisenstein’s “Potemkin” (Russia, 
Dreyer’s film, produced in 1928, marks one of the last 
authentic products of the silent era. The silent film had 
“brought an image of life to the screen; the talkies gave this 
image a voice. Its coming swept like a broad broom, revo- 
lutionizing the whole film industry. Even Charlie Chaplin, 
whose pantomime for long stood as a passionate challenge 
to the spoken word, admitted defeat in 1936 with his film 
appropriately entitled “Modern Times.” 
The new era of the talking picture broke on the world on 
the evening of October 6, 1927 with Warner Brothers “The 
Jazz Singer” starring Al Jolson. A year before, though, a 
silent film—“Don Juan”--had been produced with a syn- 
Unesco Courier. — Nr 1. — 1955 
Pre-Movie Toys 
In 65 B.C. the Roman poet Lucretius 
discovered what is called persistance of 
vision—the ability of the retina to hold 
an image for a fraction of a second after 
it has vanished. Scientists in iater times 
proved its existence experimentally, but 
it was not until the eariy 1820's in England, 
that it began to be closely studied, par- 
ticularly in relation to the possibility of 
making pictures ** move '' Dr Peter Mark 
Roget now remembered as the author of 
the ** Thesaurus of English Words and 
Phrases '' was one of the first pioneers in 
this fieid. His paper ** Persistence of vi- 
sion with regard to movement " publi- 
shed in 1824 laid a foundation for ali 
further work. 
S
I
E
 E
S 
L
R
N
 
1S 
. 
J 
i) 
i 
| 
The foilowing year Dr. W.H. Fitton and 
Dr. John Alrdas Paris invented a paper 
toy calied the. Thaumatrope which made 
use of the idea of persistence of vision. 
This consisted of a circular card with 
strings fastened to two opposite sides 
(upper photos). On one side was drawn 
a picture of a bird on a perch and on the 
other a cage. Whirling the card about 
gave the impression that the bird was 
inside the cage. 
In 1833, a Belglan, Dr. Joseph Piateau, 
invented the Phenakitoscope (photo, 
lower left). It consisted of a disk of card- 
board pierced at Its circumference by 
small holes, with painted figures on Its 
inside surface. When the disk was turn- 
ed in front of a mirror, a glance 
through one of the holes revealed the 
filusion of the figures in motion. 
Other variations of such devices were 
developed but ali remained litlle more 
than interesting toys, and no reai progress 
towards the cinema was made until 
photography was in common use. 
One of the oldest optical spectacies 
-— Shadow Theatres — came from China 
and was known in Europe during the 
Middle Ages. It gained a new lease of 
life towards the end of the 19th century. 
Operators of the shadow theatres then 
worked only with their hands and a few 
simple accessories. For the projection 
of the shadows they used the magic 
lantern. The most noted of them at 
this time was the conjuror, Trewey. 
(Photo, lower right.} 
chronized musical score, and Fox had launched the Movie- 
tone Newsreel in May 1927 using a sound track. It was not 
until 1941, however, that talking films reached a landmark 
comparable, to Griffith's work in the silent medium. It came 
with Orson Welles’ “Citizen Kane”, 
As it developed, the sound film became not only a richer 
medium of entertainment but the voice of many causes. 
With more or less happy results it assumed a role as 
pamphlet, sermon, textbook and political propaganda voice. 
The camera, when it took sides, could be middleclass or 
proletarian, socialist or anarchist, exalting or satirical. 
Pacificism (“Maedchen in Uniform”); criticism of standard- 
ized mechanization (“A nous la Liberté”, “Modern Times”); 
the sufferings of the disinherited (“Grapes of Wrath”, 
“Beggar’s Opera”, “Bicycle Thieves”); maladjusted rebels 
(“Pepe le Moko”); national or revolutionary epics (“Peter 
the Great”, “The Peasants”) : such were the themes which 
inspired directors and brought many stars to fame. 
In little over 50 years the film has carved out a unique 
place for itself as a work of art and a medium of entertain- 
ment, produced not by a lone creator but by a collective 
group who number in the hundreds and thousands. Of all 
the art forms it is undoubtedly the one that reaches the 
largest audience in history.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

ANSCHUTZ'S ELECTRICAL TACHYSCOPE (1889). 
 
 
a
y
 
t
=
 
. 
  
a
 
af
te
 
  
g
s
i
 
5 
ta
t 
WILLIAM HORNER'S ZOETROPE (1834). 
 
 
“ 
: —_
 . 4 
p 
To
 
! 
1 
“
i
 
a
T
 
I 
T
e
 
T
E
 
“ h
i
 
A 
  
nia
 
A
Y
 
 
 
-
 
Sp
 
T
E
L
L
S
 
FORGOTTEN SHADOWS (cont'd)

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

  
Unesco Couricr. — N* 1. — 1955 
QOL iE 
     
Emile Reynaud : 
the Walt Disney 
"of 1892 
In the first years of this century, prize-winning 
schoolchildren were often rewarded with a toy 
which once delighted grown-ups too: the Zoe- 
trope. It was a device which looked like a 
* saucepan mounted on a short pedestal with 
regularly spaced slots cut in the sides. Inside 
was a paper band with images which broke 
down the various stages of an object or person 
in motion. When the “saucepan” was spun 
round by hand a peep through the slots created 
the illusion of movement. The Zoetrope was 
thought up in 1834 by a mathematician from 
Bristol, England, William Horner, and it was a 
great -improvement on Plateau’s magic disks. 
{Photo from the film “Naissance du Cinéma.) 
Plateau’s device also inspired a German inventor, 
Ottomar Anschiitz, in 1889, to build his Elec. ‘ 
trical Tachyscope, which was one of the great 
attractions of the Chicago World's Fair in 1893. 
The Tachyscope was an iron wheel worked by 
hand which used the flash of an electric tube to 
immobilize in appearance a moving image. The 
discovery of the value of the flash, which is one 
of the fundamental bases of the modern motion 
picture projector, was originally made by Sir 
Charles Wheatstone of England. 
About the same time, a Frenchman, Emile Rey- H 
naud, became the first moving picture showman 
of modern times with his “Théitre Optique” in 
Paris. (Photo taken from the film “Naissance 
du Cinema”) This was the first popular motion 
picture theatre—but hand-drawn instead of 
photographed pictures were used. The draw- 
"ings were on celluloid bands whose performances 
lasted up to 15 minutes. Between 1892 and 
1900, some 500,000 spectators saw Reynaud’s 
shows (12,800 of them) in the Musée Grevin. 
One of the reels was used twice daily for sixty- 
two months. Reynaud was an impresario who 
stood between the shadow plays and panto: 
mimes of the ancients and the modern cinema. 
     
  
  
Pi'a 
- = M 
-     
   
REYNAUD'S OPTICAL THEATRE (1892). MODERN RECONSTITUTION, LEFT; OLD DRAWING, ABOVE.

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

FORGOTTEN SHADOWS (Cont'd) 
A century 
of clicks 
  
. t 
A FAR CRY from the reporter-photographers of 1874 (shown 
above) whose “portable” equipment included a tent, folding table, 
chemicals and a massive camera, is the modern amateur photo- 
grapher armed with a pocket-sized apparatus featuring fast lenses, 
multiple dials and a host of trick attachments. Photography, once 
described as the most typical art of the 20th century, has grown 
from the achievements of many men in many countries. Its real 
beginnings were in France in the early 1800's when Joseph Nicéphore 
Niepce produced on glass an image formed by a camera obscura. 
Modern photography, however, began with the “daguerreotype”, 
produced by Louis Daguerre, a French artist working with Niepce. 
ft was so successful that a French cartoon soon complained that 
half of mankind had become “daguerreocrazed” while the rest was 
“daguerreomazed”. Everything on sight was caught—from Victor . 
Hugo's hand to the sedate family group. But until well on into the 
9th century equipment was cumbersome and methods were 
complicated. To take his famous American civil war pictures in 
the 1860's, photographer Matthew Brady required a lumbering 
vehicle, nicknamed by soldiers the “What is it waggon”.- (Photo 
taken from the film *“Naissance du Cinéma”.) 
HAT TRICK CAMERA was one of the novelties that delighted the 
growing legion of amateur photographers in 1885. Drawings of 
that time suggest the seriousness with which these keen picture 
snappers went to work. Despite the handicaps of the early days, 
a group of distinguished and devoted amateurs persisted at their 
hobby. Among them was the Oxford mathematician Charles 
Dodgson (who, as Lewis Carroll, wrote “Alice in Wonderland”), 
novelists Charles Kingsley and Samuel Butler, and U.S. Justice, Oliver 
Wendell Holmes, who called the camera “a mirror with a memory”. 
  
  
        
  
     
  
  
    
  
      
| uw | THEE 
  
  
  
  
  
  
       
 
 
 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

* Unesco Courier. — Nr 1. — 1955 
A $2 5.000 bet 
on a horse   
  
    A $25,000 bet ona horse at a racetrack was 
responsible for a major event-in the history of           the cinema's beginnings. It led to the first 
successful attempt at breaking down. motion 
by direct photography. Leland Stanford, rich, 
one-time governor of California, made the bet 
in 1872 during a dispute as to whether or not 
all the legs of a horse running at a full gallop are 
off the ground simultaneously, Horsemen were 
  
  
  
  
never entirely satisfied with the way artists had 
MUYBRIDGE painted or drawn horses in motion with their 
four legs spread out in a large arch and actually . touching the ground. 
He called in an English photographer, Eadweard Muybridge to get pho- 
          tographic proof to settle the dispute. Muybridge began work with a 
single camera at first but his results were not entirely conclusive. 
 
About 1870 Etienne Marey the great French cinema pioneer had 
determined how a horse runs with a recording device attached to its 
foot. Drawings made showed that a galloping horse supported itself 
on one hoof, then on’ three, then on two, then on one. But he. had     
  
      no photographic proof of his findings. 
When these drawings reached California some years later, Stanford 
could hardly believe them. In 1877 Muybridge and an engineer, John D,                Isaacs, set up a battery of 24 cameras beside a specially re-built racetrack   on Stanford’s ranch. From the lens shutters a wire thread was stret- 
ched across the track. As the horse raced by, it broke the thread, 
tripping the shutter of each camera in turn. Muybridge thus obtained 
_ the first series of photographs showing a horse in full gallop (photos 
top centre). 
" Marey was delighted to hear of the results of Muybridge’s work and 
was the first to synthesize motion from the photographs by mounting 
them so that the action could be reconstructed. Marey, one of the 
first great physiologists, gave a strong. impetus to the photographing 
and projection of motion pictures through his desire to learn more 
about movement, the movement of life—animals, birds and men. Muy- 
bridge had photographed his subject on a 
white background so that one exposure des- 
troyed the sensitivity of the plate. Using a jet black 
background Marey found that the only impression 
made at each exposure was the impression of the 
model, the rest remaining black. This enabled 
him to take several photographs on the same 
plate without any difficulty — His famous “Man 
in White” (photo bottom left) was taken this 
way. Photograph below shows a man’s walk as 
it was analysed by Marey, in 1882, - 
  
   
at*t%00,.,,. etree RELL LLLP TIN 
“eae S, gant’ ((Y im INR Wii 
ALR 
AN NC 
- Ror TR MN en 
~ 
a Ei a ve R 
ol Aa . —-— RR 
PE Cy TOT Sl ut he 
A Ti Na -— . 3 a E363 Re A 

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 68943: The Film today: a world picture

from the U.S.A. The impact on the 
. feature films. 
SN
 
N
R
 
cr 
L
A
R
 
F
h
e
 
O
E
E
 
P
I
R
I
 
M
E
E
T
 
a
t
 
S
B
 
p
t
 
H
S
 
A 
T
e
 
   
    
AGED ‘with ever-increasing competition from the tele- 
vision screen, films have not yet sullered the 
decline ‘which many people forecast a few years 
ago. By the use of new techniques, such as cine- 
mascope and by a greater concentration on the pro- 
duction of realistic documentary features—two .good 
examples are “The Wages of Fear” and “On the Water- 
front—the world film industry has managed success- 
fully to attract the same millions who have frequented 
the cinema in the past. : : 
However, in the field of feature film 
   
by James Douglas 
lic of Germany are the main producing countries but 
interesting developments have also taken place in Norway, 
Spain, the U.S.S.R., Greece and Turkey. 
The Soviet Union has adopted the. somewhat revolu- 
tionary step of bringing the entire Soviet .feature film - 
production output to the television screen. All films made 
in the U.S.S.R. are automatically shown on T.V. With 
a total of some 700,000 television receivers this may not 
have a great effect at the moment, but with the rapid 
growth of television the policy may 
have some important long-term cou- 
 
production and distribution there 7 
have been some significant changes. 
Taking a world view if is abundantly 
clear that the U.S.A. still continues to 
dominate the motion picture field. 
There are few countries today which 
do not draw the bulk of the feature U.S.A. 
films shown on their screens from Japan 
Hollywood. Generally speaking, it “India 
would be true to say that most film Hong Kong 
importing countries’ in the ‘world Italy 
oblain between 50 and 60 % of all =A 
feature films shown in their cinemas 
minds of millions of people produced   
THE « BIG EIGHT” OF 
FEATURE FILM 
PRODUCTION IN 1953 
Germany Federal Republic 101 
* Including co-productions 
sequences. : 
In Greece and Turkey there has 
been a considerable upsurge in- {film 
production, and the Greek quota has 
more than doubled in the past two 
years. Turkish studios.put out some 
100 features in 1954. In both coun- 360 
302 tries the popularity of the locally- 
259 produced film has tended to diminish 
200 the box office returns on {foreign 
50 features : Turkish and Greek cine- 
mas usually play to capacity audi- 
ences when domestic films are being 
shown. Norway, a country which 
until 1953 had made only a very 
small number of films, turned out 12 
1*   by what Hollywood thinks of history, 
art and everyday life remains au 
enormously important fact today. 
Despite the U.S. predominance there has been, never- 
theless, a noticeable trend towards what might be term- 
ed a decentralization of the film production industry. In 
the last few years Asia has come very much to the fore, 
and in 1953 Japan produced no less than 302 fealure films 
—only some G0 less than the U.S.A. itself, thus jumping 
ahead of lndia which until 1952 was the world’s second 
- largest producer. 
The Indian film industry, which is one of the largest 
in the world, turned out 259 features in the same year. 
"Both Japanese and Indian features are now being shown 
in European cinemas. One can visit a cinema in Greece, 
for example, and see a Japanese film spoken in Japanese 
and carrying Greek sub-titles—an unheard of thing a few 
years ago. In the Far East the demand for films in Chi-~ 
‘nese has remained high, and to cater for this demand the 
 Ilong-Kong film industry has, almost overnight, become 
one of the world’s largest. 
In one three-month period in 1953 the seven film pro- 
duction companies in Hong-Kong made no less than 50 
The year’s total came to just over 200. 
1t cannot be said that Europe has lagged behind in the 
production effort, and if the U.S. films shot in European 
countries are taken into account (many have been made 
in the past three years) Europe is found to be providing 
a large proportion of the total world film production. 
"Italy, France, the United Kingdom and the Federal Repub- 
JAMES DOUGLAS has spent the past 20 years of his life In Infor- 
mation and news services, as editor, writer and journalist. He has 
worked with the BBC, the British Foreign Office and the United 
Nations. Certaln facts and figures in this article will appear later 
this year in a revised edition of Unesco’s study “World Commu- 
nications-Press, Radio, Film, Televislon” which Is now belng 
prepared. .     
new feature films in 1954. The Nor- 
: wegian Government is lending a cer- 
tain amount of assistance to the local film producers and 
this also applies in Spain ‘where 44 features were produced 
in 1953. Most of these were exported for exhibition in 
Latin America. 
Apart from films designed for entertainment, newsreels 
are now being increasingly produced in Europe. Coun- 
tries such as Hungary, Finland, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, 
Switzerland - and Yugoslavia all produce their own 
newsreels and the erstwhile monopoly of the U.S., French 
and British newsreels has declined. 
In Latin America there has been little change in film- 
making. Argentina and Mexico still remain the only two. 
countries turning out large numbers of feature films, 
although Brazil has been producing a number of docu- 
mentaries and shorts. Argentina produced 39 features in 
1953 and Mexico 99 in 1952. Both countries export most 
of their output to the other republics in Central and South 
America. One Mexican production, screened during 
1954, drew larger audiences than any foreign film shown 
in Mexican cinemas—a surprising fact when one consi- 
ders the easy availability of U.S. films, : 
If we turn from film production to film exhibition it 
can be a matter of little argument that cinemas generally 
Lave improved, particularly so as regards seating, con- 
struction and visibility. This is pronouncedly the case in 
Latin America. Guayaquil may not be a town well- 
known to the average person-—it is in fact Ecuador’s chief 
port and industrial centre—but it is of some interest to 
note that a new cinema has just been opened there with 
every modern facility and seats for 2,500 people. In 
Venezuela 11 new cinemas were opened in 1954, and 
owing to the big increase in popularity of European films 
IR : - (Continued on page 14)

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 68943: The Film today: a world picture

TAS a Ce) BF rel a 
| FORGOTTEN SIIADOWS (c 
} ay 
   
     
ont’d)     
   
   
 
   
     
  
¢ FATHER ° OF THE 
MOVIE CAMERA : 
Re 
EB iB i i Be 
This picture of one 
“man lunging with a 
sword, made in 1890, 
‘marks a tremendous 
step forward in the 
~cinema’s history. I 
“shows how, for the 
first time, a series 
of images could be 
taken from the sam 
point because the 
‘camera (Marey’ 
chrono - photograph 
“had a shutter in the 
form of a windowed 
disk asingle | 
7 go , 5 : ¥ 
RR a i ui i 
Unesco Courier. — Nr 1, — 1955 
  
   
Inspired by a photographic revolver (heavier than 
a small cannon) invented by the Norwegian as- 
tronomer Jules Janssen in 1874, Marey devised 
his photographic rifle (far left), the world’s first 
portable motion picture camera. Pressure on 
the trigger exposed a series of sensitive plates 
in the breech of the rifle and made them rotate, 
In this way Marey photographed gulls in motion 
(above). Marey also built a zoetrope of his own 
(left) in which he replaced the pictures usually 
used in this apparatus by models of a gull in 
successive stages of flight. When rotated it gave 
a perfect illusion of a flight of gulls following each 
other round and round in a closed circle, 
) 
1 
' 
+ 
\ 
4 
i 
‘ 
A deadics axe De $ wh il 
C
N
E
L
 
| 
gi 
| 

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 68943: The Film today: a world picture

The film today (continueq 
a Venezuclan cinema: combine will be purchasing 80 
European feature films for exhibition in local cinemas. 
In North America the United States has the immense 
total of 17,000 permanent cinemas, 4,000 ol these are 
“drive-ins” where your seat is your motor car. No fewer 
than ten million people can be seated at one time in all 
U.S. cinemas—a staggering figure. llowever, despite 
these large totals some shrinkage has taken place, and 
due primarily to increasing competition from TV, some 
6,000 cinemas have closed down since 1940. 
On the olhier side of the 49th parallel 10 million more 
Canadians are going to the cinema than was the case four 
years ago. Whether this trend will continue in Canada, 
where television has spread across the country from east 
to west, it is difficult to say. Although Canada imports. 
large numbers of U.S. features it also provides the best 
overseas market for British films. 
In Asia the increase in the number of cinemas has 
also been remarkable. Japan has 3,750, India 2,000 and 
countries such as Indonesia, Burma and the Philippines 
have also shown marked increases. Perhaps, however, 
the growth in cinema attendaiice has been most noti- 
ceable in the smaller territories where only a few years 
ago permanent cinemas were a rarity. The Fiji Islands. 
~ with 30 cinemas and Guam with 16 are cases in point. 
In common “with the growth in the number of cinemas 
in the smaller countries and territories goes the tremen- 
dous increase in the number of films imported. Trinidad 
and Puerto Rico, to take two examples, both import some 
2,000 feature films annually : an amazingly high figure 
in relation to the population figures. Another case in 
point is Singapore where tlie cinema altendance rate is 
one of the world’s highest. Singapore imports upwards 
of 700 {films annually. 
Australia and New Zealand have also seen increases in 
cinemas and attendances. By reason of the large influx 
of European migrants info the two countries the demand 
for the exhibition of European films has enlarged, with 
the result that, in a limited manner, there is a new and 
active competition to U.S. dominance. 
The pallern of film attendance in European countries 
has remained relatively stable with the exception of the 
U.S.5.R. where latest reports speak of some 31,000 cine- 
mas of all types, with an annual altendance at an, 
astronomical 2,000 million. A certain decline in atfen- 
dance has been noted in Scandinavia, the Low Countries 
and the UK. In the latter country it is perhaps signi- 
ficant that the number of private cinema owners has 
steadily diminished with the result that the great majority 
ol all U.Iz cinemas are controlled by the large cinema 
circuits. Two large groups between them control over 
one thousand cinemas, : 
The question of group cinema control and the conse- 
quent lack of independent choice in the exhibition of films 
leads to another important aspect of the film industry : 
the realm of the documentary and educational film. 
The true documentary film was first conceived in Bri- 
tain in the early thirties by a’ brilliant group of people 
working under Sir Stephen Tallents and Jolin Grierson. 
Since thal time documentaries have spread throughout 
“the world and today few film-producing countries do not’ 
make a quola of these films. With spread in production 
there has also been a vast increase in exhibition. Britain 
could, with justice, still be regarded as the main docu- 
mentary producer but the U.S.A; Denmark, Canada, 
I'rance, the U.S.S.R., Poland and Czeclioslovakia also turn 
out large numbers. An interesting case is that of Canada 
where the documentaries produced by the Canadian Na- 
tional Film Board are dubbed in five different languages 
and exported throughout the world. - 
By means of the mobile. film units, educational and 
documentary films reach their audiences in the depths of 
the jungle and the middle of the desert. In the Belgian 
Congo, Mozambique, the Cameroons and the Sahara the 
mobile cinemas find their way into the smallest villages 
(Continued on page 33) 
14 
 
  
AY 
Thin 
   wn = a i wel 
EARLY PANORAMIC SCREENS. The two strange-looking con- 
traptions shown here are early attempts at large screen projection. 
The Cyclorama (above) by a Chicagoan named Chase was tried out 
unsuccessfully in 1894 with a 150-foot circular screen. Mechanism 
was on circular platform. The Cineorama (below) a multiple camera 
device developed by a Frenchman Grimoin-Sanson two years later had 
three performances before it was stopped as a fire hazard at the 1900 
Paris Exhibition. Visitors were invited for an imaginary balloon flight 
and a real balloon was attached to the platform where several hundred 
spectators were grouped in centre of 300-foot circular screen. The 
ed) ¢ : 
na | teil _, | 
  
  
hy 
 

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

  
      
Unesco Courier. — Nr 1. — 1955 
Le TE TE TTT Be ——— 
ATT AR pyr CIE “1 ATE aR 
MLE Ase 0 te Da Thr C0 Ta Se TIN 
FORGOTTEN SHADOWS (cont'd) 
  
WORLD'S FIRST FILM STUDIO, known as “Black Maria” because it was painted black inside and out, was 
built by Thomas Edison in | 894. It had revolving base on which it was turned towards sunlight. In this studio 
Edison made hundreds of brief films for his Kinetoscope, the first successful moving picture machine marketed 
(below). Picture strip shows professional strong man Eugene Sandow displaying muscles for the camera. 
E
N
 
' 
. 
[
]
)
 
. 
- 
  
Edison came to the motion picture 
through his Talking ‘Phonograph, He 
was looking for a device that would 
combine the voices of the phonograph 
with the sight and movement of a picture. 
Late in [887 Edison started work on 
what was to become his Kinetograph 
camera and Kinetoscope peepshow film 
device. The world premiere took place 
on April 4, 1894 at a Kinetoscope 
Parlor opened on Broadway in New 
 
York City. The Kinetoscopes were a great success. § [20 was taken 
in the first night. The original show of films was a kind of “double 
feature” in that the spectator was charged 25 cents to see the second 
line of five Kinetoscopes. The films included *Fred Ott's Sneeze” (see 
front cover). This was one of the most significant days in cinema 
history for it brought the motion picture to the public for the first 
» 
The peepshow sensation 
on Broadway 
  
  
time and from Edison's Kinetoscope and- his Kinetograph modern 
motion picture devices evolved. Edison was aided in his experiments 
by William Laurie Dickson. At first the “Wizard of West Orange” 
used coated glass plates and later celluloid for taking pictures.’ Then 
in Eastman’s flexible film roll he found an ideal material, Edison was 
the first to perforate the two sides of each picture or frame to keep them 
passing evenly through the cameraand his perforated film is still used today. 
Edison's first camera was a power-driven machine as heavy as a piano. 
With it he turned out short films, fifty feet of which provided a 
| 3-second show. The Kinetoscope immediately became a world sensa- 
tion. But [dison at first only developed and exploited his device as a 
peep-show machine. Not until April 1896 did he project his first 
film on a screen publicly. The projector used was developed by a 
Virginian, Thomas Armat, and manufactured by the Edison Company 
which called it the Vitascope. Other inventors patented different projec- 
tion machines and for many years a bitter patent war raged betwean 
Edison and the rival companies which had by developed by this time, 
ET. _=W — 
aa. i al A 
a aS ne _ » 
  
\ 
y 
1 X 
) 
T
E
E
 
ER
 
m
e
 
E
w
 
S
e
n
 
i
S

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

  
   
   
   
   
FORGOTTEN SHADOWS (Contd) 
  
The screen’s 
world premiere : 
receipts 33 frances 
“At the time when Edison's Kinetoscope began 
to arouse public curiosity,” wrote Auguste 
Lumigre in his memoirs, “my brother and | 
thought how interesting it would be if we could 
project “moving scenes on a screen.” The 
Lumiére brothers, owners of a photographic 
materials factory in Lyons, began experimenting 
with the idea. In February 1895, they obtained 
a patent on their camera-projector device, the 
“Cinematographe Lumiére.” - Ten months later, 
on December 28, they gave their first public 
projection (admission one franc) in the basement 
of the Grand Café in Paris. Only a few dozen 
curious people paid to watch the films on the 
first day and the receipts amounted to only 
33 francs. But word of the spectacle soon 
spread through Paris and within a few weeks 
the Lumiére films were playing to a standing- 
room-only audience averaging 2,000 admissions 
a day. “The show left us dumbfounded, struck 
with amazement,” one early spectator wrote. 
“At the end of the performance though there 
was wild enthusiasm.” Thus at last the motion 
picture screen was revealed to a large public. 
The hesitant steps of the past were now to 
become a firm stride as the motion picture 
developed In many lands into a great industry. 
Photos show Louis and Auguste Lumiére, one of 
the Grand Café posters, shots from two of 
the early films that they made — “A Train 
Arrives at Ciotat Station” and “Baby's Meal.”

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

  
      
) HE motion picture industry start- 
T ed on its world career as an 
entertainment medium with the 
presentation of topical events—or 
what we would today call the newsreel. 
The chief aim of the earliest produ- 
cers—like Edison, Lumiere, Pathé and 
Gaumont — was in fact to give their 
audiences films taken from life, from 
everyday events 
railway stations and wherever there 
was movement or activity. 
Thus Lumiere’s first films, showing 
the arrival of a train and workmen 
leaving the factory, were in a sense 
newsreel subjects. The first real 
newsreel was made by the Lumiere 
brothers even before they gave their 
first public showing in Paris. The 
Cinematographe was to be shown at 
the Congress of the National Union of 
French Photographic Societies in 
June of 1895. There the Lumieres 
created a veritable 
they filmed the delegates arriving for 
.the opening meeting on June 10, de- 
veloped the film and showed it on a 
screen before the conference ended on 
June 12, 
. From this point ‘on it was only a 
short step to the regular filming of 
topical events, 
were not slow to take it. On January 
5, 1896, the Lumiere brothers engaged 
an Algerian photographer, Felix Mes- 
guich, who was to become the world’s 
first film reporter. For years he trav- 
_elled all over Europe and the rest of. 
the world. Other producers followed : 
the .Pathé brothers and Léon Gaumont 
in France, Oskar Messter in Germany, 
Edison and later his rivals the Bio- 
in the street, in. 
sensation when 
and. film producers" 
Unesco Courier. — Nr 1, «— 1955 


### 68944: The Newsreel cameraman of yesterday

The Newsreel 
Cameraman 
of Yesterday 
graph and Vitagraph companies in the 
. United States. 
By 1897 Biograph and Lumiere had 
both filmed the Jubilee of Queen 
Victoria ; Tilden and Rector in the 
U.S.A. the Corbett-Fitzsimmons boxing 
match; Pathé the Czar’s arrival in - 
Paris; and Gaumont the arrival of 
the French President. Edwin S. Por- 
ter, the pioneer of the story film and 
motion picture editing, was equally 
busy at this period with newsreel 
shorts (President McKinley's Inaugura- 
ton, McKinley’s Funeral Procession, 
ete). : 
Georges Méliés, the genius who de- 
veloped the film as entertainment, was 
also interested in current happenings 
but only in order to “reconstruct” 
+ such notable events as the coronation 
Early film . of Edward VII in 1902. 
makers were often compelled to re- 
enact news events since the camera in 
those days was mnot- admitted every- 
where as it is today. 
Thus when the Spanish-American 
war broke out in 1898, cameramen 
tried to get to the front in Cuba but 
were turned back by the military au- - 
thorities. Edison, Biograph and others - 
reconstructed the battle scenes them- 
selves. The most sensational re- 
enactment, however, was the accom- 
plishment of Edward H. Amet after the. 
Spanish fleet was destroyed. ‘Working 
from photographs, he built a plaster 
copy of Santiago Bay in the garden of . 
his villa. Here (not in his bathtub as 
is generally supposed) he, placed small, 
~ but exact functioning replicas of the 
Spanish and American armadas and 
filmed the battle in all its detail. The 
completed film had such tremendous 
success that the Madrid Government 
even bought a copy for its military 
archives. This same Amet 
created a sensation by staging on 
waste ground in Brooklyn realistic 
battle scenes from the Boer War 
which broke out almost immediately 
after the Spanish-American war. 
An important event for the future 
of motion picture photography came 
with the introduction of artificial 
lighting. Newsreel producers were 
responsible for it. On November 3, 
1899, the Jeffries-Sharkey boxing 
match was held at .the Coney Island 
Club in Brooklyn. The Biograph 
company obtained the exclusive film 
rights for this event and installed a 
battery of 400 arc lamps in the hall. 
(They gave off such heat that at the 
again 
end of each of the 35 rounds the 
boxers had to seek cover under a pa- 
rasol!) Rival Vitagraph technicians 
though were hidden in the audience 
and as the fight began they cranked 
their film by the light ‘of the lamps, 
protecting themselves with “shock 
troops”. Both films were . great 
successes financially but the Biograph . 
attained a record for the longest film 
made in -the 19th century (5,575 feet). 
In the early days of the cinema, the 
news was not presented as it is today 
—in- journal form. Until about 1907, 
cinema programmes were made up of 
comic, dramatic or news shorts. At 
first their maximum length was 65 
feet but gradually increased. (A five- 
minute film needs a minimum of 4,800 
images.) The exhibition of fllms was 
mostly in the hands of travelling 
showmen; films were not rented as 
they are now but sold to exhibitors 
who screened the. prints until they 
were worn out. 
The birth "of the .first newsreel 
journals coincided with two revolu- 
tionary changes in the industry. One 
was the change-over from {travelling 
shows to permanent halls where, 
since the audience remained largely 
the same, the programme had to be 
renewed frequently. The other change-- 
over was from outright sale to film- 
renting. This occurred sometime 
around 1905 in the United States, and 
"around 1907 in France. Also in 1907 
Charles Pathé created his Journal. He 
was followed in 1908 by Léon Gau- 
mont and the Société Eclair. In 1909 
the Pathé brothers went to London 
and pioneered newsreels there with 
Pathé Gazette. : 
The modern newsreel was born, It 
remained as a branch of fllm produc- 
tion and kept growing steadily, first 
with the advent of “talkies” and now 
with television. 
  
  
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

  
GAG KING of early comedy producers in the U.S, was 
Mack Sennett who sometimes appeared in his own films. In 
“Murphy's LO.U.” he here plays the ‘part’ of a waiter. 
n the first two decades of the twentieth _ 
century many new cinema pioneers took 
over the development of the film from 
those who had discovered how to make 
moving pictures, and began a great era of 
search and endeavour. 
In France the work of George Méliés 
permanently enriched the technique and 
scope of filmmaking by introducing it to 
fancy and to fantasy and by forcing it to 
tell a story. Méliés was the first to create 
visual illusions on the screen, and in [900 
he made the first series of fairy tale subjects 
which embodied a rich succession of trans- 
formations, tricks, fantasies and illusions. 
His most famous picture “A Trip to the 
Moon” was made in 1902 and his last “big” 
  
film “The Conquest of the Pole” in 1912. 
During this period, a flexible form of narra- 
tive film was shaping in America, in whose 
development one man, David Wark Griffith, 
stands out above all others. In [215 his civil 
war epic “The Birth of a Nation” established 
him as the foremost U.S, producer. Still 
more important, the film induced millions of 
people to take the cinema seriously. Another 
American producer, Mack Sennett, became 
the master of film comedy. His use of gags, 
slapstick and unexpected situations revealed 
rich sources of humour, 
Thus, after its primitive, hesitant begin- 
nings, the cinema industry quickly expanded 
and its enormous entertainment possibilities - 
and popular appeal were firmly established. 
  
INTOLERANCE 
a |916 superpro- 
duction by David   
"settings and crowd 
been models. for 
 
Wark Griffith. Its: 
scenes have since" 
all» “super” films. 
i —— 
CINEMA * TRICKS "WERE FIRST DEVISED AND 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

Unesco Courier. — Nr 1, —= 1955 
     
FORGOTTEN SHADOWS # 
—— 
I ONS te 
pry AN 
NNR 
       
  
   
   
2, Sh 
— 
~~. 
   
   
    
| 72 
— y= . = . ¥ - 
USED ON A LARGE SCALE BY GEORGES MELIES OF FRANCE IN SUCH FILMS AS “JOURNEY INTO THE IMPOSSIBLE” (ABOVE) MADE IN 1901. 
" CABIRIA, an am- 
  
bitious film made - % 
- by the Italian pro- 
ducer Pastrone, 
included the first 
~ panoramic __shots 
- taken with camera 
on -wheels (1913)  
APOCALYPTIC 
HORSE and astral 
carriage — dream- 
like devices used 
by George Méliés, 
an early exponent 
of theatrical fanta- 
sy in film-making. 
19

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

  
as potentially the most universal and powerful means 
of mass influence. It has only recently been replaced 
as the bogey of the moralists and educators by the 
latest form of popular entertainment—television. 
Much the same note of angry alarm was struck by hostile 
critics of the drama in 17th-century England and else- 
F ROM its earliest beginnings, the cinema has been feared 
where, and in the 19th century by those who disapproved . 
of illustrations in newspapers. Jeremy Collier slated the 
dramatists of the Restoration in his “Short view of the 
Profaneness and Immorality of the ‘English Stage” and 
Wordsworth wrote an indignant sonnet on “the vile abuse 
of pictured page” saying that “discourse once deem’d man’s 
noblest attribute” would die under its influence. 
In spite of the indictments of the moralists, the general 
public continues to regard the cinema primarily as a dis- 
traction just as it has accepted the theatre and the illus- 
trated newspaper. 
The surprising thing is that relatively very little : is known 
in any objective or scientific way about the influence which 
the cinema exerts or the daily lives of people. Yet this is a . 
fascinating field of st1dy which leads right to many of the 
most important psychol gical and social problems of modern 
man and his society. Much has indeed been written and 
said on the economic, social and cultural influences which 
appear to operate in the production of a particular film or 
which govern the choice and hendling of themes by sections . 
_ of the industry. 
Many have speculated on .the way the cinema makes 
people more or less contented with their lot, acts as an 
excitant to crime, influences the pnrchase of clothes, motor- 
cars or refrigerators. Apart from the work of a handful of 
social scientists in Europe and North America, such pro- 
nouncements are relatively partisan, concerned with attack- 
ing or defending the cinema industry. Few have recognized 
the cinema as probably neither good nor bad in itself, but as 
at once a shaping force and a symptom of the age and 
culture which have given birth to it. 
For want of objective studies we cannot even answer such 
a simple question as “Is this a good film for children?” 
In spite of great technical improvements, the progress of 
the cinema as an aesthetic, educative and recreational 
medium is at the mercy of trial and error. This may be 
excellent when it is the product of genius; and when cir- 
cumstances—as for example in the 17th-century drama, in 
England or France—permit the inspiration of the drama- 
tist to dominate his medium and to know his audience. In 
modern film production, however, circumstances are entirely 
different. A film is a collective phenomenon resulting from 
Dr. W.D. Wall, psychologist and educator, has devoted many 
years to research in Great Britain on the reactions to films of 
children and adults. He Is the author of * The Adolescent Child ™ 
and numerous studies and articles on this question. }     
20 


### 68945: Dreaming with eyes wide open

DREAMING 
with eyes 
wide open 
by W. D. Wall 
an only partly controlled inter-play between producer, 
author, cast and a multitude of technicians. 
Moreover, the lack of continuity in the actual production, 
the - isolation of the film-making community from daily 
contact with its audience—an isolation which is as much 
economic as geographical—is likely to emphazise the ele- 
" ments of collective fantasy and remoteness from daily 
reality, without permitting an individual genius to dominate 
and refine them into a work of art. 
Another circumstance of fundamental importance, psy- 
chologically and socially, is that of all forms of expression, 
the film is the one most capable of producing illusion and 
the least dependent upon an active, imaginative effort in 
the spectator. The fancies which for long have charmed or 
~ terrified the imagination of mankind—ghosts, fairies, flying 
spirits, giants, 
witches, the ma-- 
terialization and 
the dematerial- 
ization of “solid” 
human beings, 
magical transfor- 
mations of the 
physical environ- 
ment—can be 
- reproduced with 
~ an actuality far 
outstripping the 
limitations of the 
stage ‘or of life 
itself. Films make 
the most dream- 
like events seem 
real and can up- 
set all the phy- 
sical laws or laws 
of consistency of 
character which 
“actually operate 
in the real and - 
~ everyday world. 
Most of us unconsciously or subconsciously are haunted 
by. “magical” wishes, fears and anxieties which rise to the 
surface usually only in moments of fatigue or in dreams. 
Much of the appeal of art is to these at best barely conscious 
aspects of our emotional lives. At least some of the pleasures . 
of literature and of the theatre are those which arise from 
the stimulation of fantasy and day-dreams. But the printed 
page, the illustration, even the actors on a stage, are 
sufficiently remote from actuality for us nearly always to be 
aware of the gulf. 
 
The darkened cinema, and the moving shadows cunningly 
contrived may produce a situation akin to that between 
sleeping and awaking. Thus the instinctive elements upon

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 68945: Dreaming with eyes wide open

which our emotional life is deeply based—such as fear, erotic 
desire, self-assertion, aggressiveness and the like—may be - 
directly stimulated without our realizing that what we are 
seeing on the screen fis not really true. 
It is perhaps in this peculiar combination of the circum- 
stances of film production and of an almost direct appeal . 
to mental activity below the level of consciousness, that 
we have the central problem of the cinema and of its social 
influence. - It. is one of the most difficult to investigate 
directly, though attempts have been made by a series of 
indirect approaches. 
We know, for example, that cinema audiences in England 
—and probably elsewhere in Europe—are not a represen- 
tative cross section of the population: they are in fact a 
psychologically more vulnerable group. Adolescents of both 
sexes and young men and women attend more frequently 
than married couples; the peak of attendance is between 
the ages of 16 and 19. It has therefore been argued that 
the plots chosen and treated by producers are directed to 
the needs and wishes of an audience which is not fully 
mature. 
It has, however, also been pointed out that the composition 
of the audience might be changed if films stressed different 
aspects of life. This might well be so, though it is not quite 
as simple as it 
seems since other 
_ factors play a part 
in cinema attendan- 
ce. We know that 
attendance at the 
cinema tends to 
rise when people’ 
are emotionally dis- 
turbed, as they 
were during the 
war ; maladjusted 
and unhappy - indi- 
viduals go more 
frequently than the 
average; and, among 
English adolescents 
at least, attendance 
among the less in- 
telligent students is 
higher than among 
older and more able 
groups. 
More striking still 
" perhaps is the fact 
that among children . 
and adolescents over the age of ten roughly three- quarters 
go to the cinema at least once a week, and about a quarter, 
as much as twice to four or even six times weekly. Figures 
for adult attendance are more difficult to obtain but it 
seems probable that, of city and town dwellers, about half 
go habitually once a’ week ; ; and relatively few do not go 
at all. 
Such a level of attendance must mean that sooner or later 
every film generally released in a country will be seen by 
the majority of the young adult population. Such conti- 
nuous exposure. to a large number of films often without 
any discrimination being exercised is worth examining. 
- Between 1945 and 1949, I personally carried out a series 
of investigations on the psychological effects of the cinema 
on children. In the course of one study, I had to see and 
analyze some 30 films in a 14-day period. My attention was 
thus concentrated upon the plots and incidents of each film. 
In spite of this, at the end of the period I could recall little 
. except isolated images and occasional incidents. I couldn’t 
remember the titles or even the stories. It may be that, for 
the frequent filmgoer, the immediate distraction is all, and 
nothing remains. The film passes like a dream. 
That this is not wholly true is shown by a curious pheno- 
menon first pointed out by an investigation made with 
educational films in the thirties. It was noticed that when 
children wrote essays about what they had seen, their 
* descriptions were episodic and tied to particular striking 
images; there was more detail and less generalization or 
logical continuity. The same kind of result occurred in writ- 
Unesco Courier. — Nt 1. — 1955 
ings by adolescents in 1947 on “My favourite film.” Certain 
vivid incidents, appealing to such emotions as fear, self- 
assertion, sex, sympathy for others, stood out. whilst the 
plot may have been forgotten or misunderstood. 
Yet in many subtle ways these general themes may rein- 
force or counteract the attitudes of the spectators. In the 
writings of adolescents and even in those of adults there 
is a strong tendency to identify oneself with the hero or 
heroine or with one of the characters portrayed. Sometimes 
the identification is with the star rather than with the part 
played, or with the attributes—like physical beauty, wealth, 
ability to ride a horse, travel—or with the sex role played 
vis-a-vis another star. Such identification, especially among 
the immature, may well lead to an acceptance of certain 
implied moral values of a particular pattern of behaviour 
and of attitudes towards others and to life in general. 
* Analyzing the various plots and the values which films 
portray may therefore give us an important clue to the way 
the cinema industry may be shaping our communities. 
Several such analysis were undertaken from the mid- 
nineteen-thirties until the immediate post-war years. In 
genera] the result is what might be expected. Films on city 
life predominate and deal with people in a slightly higher 
social or financial bracket than the one most audiences 
belong to. Over half 
the leading charac- 
ters are cast in roles 
that are. egoistic 
and, in some cases, 
morally doubtful if 
not frankly hostile 
or contemptuous of 
society. The love 
themes which pre- 
dominate accentuate 
physical attraction 
at the expense of 
mutual understand- 
ing and friendship. 
Very few films, 
proportionately, deal 
in any deep or pe- 
netrating way with 
the great social, 
moral or interna- 
tional problems of 
our time or tend 
to provoke serious 
thought : and rare 
indeed are those 
which do not finally preach some rather banal philosophy 
of contentment with things as they are. 
One is however moved to ask whether the cinema is any 
different, in this respect from the stage or from the general 
run of printed matter in this or any other age. All tend 
to reflect popular thinking and popular values; they also 
tend to hold a slightly distorting mirror up to nature and 
to emphasize some aspects at the expense of others. In the 
case of the cinema, at least, the pertinent criticism is not 
that it depraves and corrupts but that it does not edify. 
Does the audience, however, merely accept passively the 
values and attitudes that are presented on the screen ? As 
far as adolescents are concerned—and they are the most 
impressionable group—the answer is that they do not. 
In a study of a dozen films of the usual types, I found that 
boys and girls between thirteen and sixteen exercized con- 
siderable discrimination. Films like Odd Man Out, The Root 
of all Evil, The Green Years and Razor's Edge were con- 
sidered by some two-thirds of nearly a thousand boys and 
girls to be true to life—a judgment with which in a gene- 
ral sense, one must concur. 
Other films like Monsieur Beaucaire, Time of their lives, 
Kid from Brooklyn, were enjoyed but not taken seriously 
or considered true to life. Uncertainties arise over films 
like The Magic Bow—a romanticized and not very accurate 
biography of Paganini. It seems to be true to say that when 
adolescents and young adults are presented with situations 
and circumstances which they can compare with their own 
experience they do draw a distinction between the fantasy 
(Continued on page 32.) 
. 
21 
~

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 68946: They painted with knife and brush; Chinese artists 2,000 years ago

CHINESE ARTISTS 
2,000 YEARS AGO 
They pated with 
knife and brush 
  
by Chou Ling 
unusual form of art. They engraved paintings 
directly on stone. From this ancient art another 
evolved, called stone “rubbings” which achieved 
exquisite, highly delicate results on paper and silk. Since 
little of this art is known outside of China, Unesco has 
prepared a travelling exhibition containing high-fidelity 
reproductions of 20 of these stone paintings and rubbings 
as well as 40 other masterpieces in colour of ancient 
Chinese painting. Making the reproductions was such 
exacting and delicate work that it took a Parisian publisher 
(Editions Euros) eight years to complete the job. Works 
originally painted on silk were reproduced on silk. The 
originals were collected from museums the world over 
including the Chinese Government Museum, Tokyo Mu- 
seum, the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, the British Museum, 
the Musée Guimet in Paris and the National Museum 
Tx thousand years ago the Chinese developed an 
in Stockholm. Twenty identical sets of Unesco’s exhi- 
bition, entitled “Two Thousand Years of Chinese Painting”, 
are now beginning a world tour of Unesco member coun- 
tries. They will be displayed in art galleries, museums 
and centres for youth and workers groups in rural and 
“urban areas. The UNESCO COURIER has asked Dr. 
Chou Ling, art historian, critic and lecturer, who has 
devoted the past |5 years to the colour reproduction of 
Chinese paintings, to describe his country’s stone gravings 
and a few other aspects of ancient Chinese art. 
  
EAGLE. CARVED STONE PAINTING OF THE HAN 
aNy are the paths that lead to 
M beauty. The Greeks, in the 
time of Pericles, chose that of 
sculpture and. found their 
ideal artistic expression in the art of 
stone-carving. The Hindus, with 
{heir lofty sense of religion, preferred 
lhe spiritual path and achieved their 
closest approach to beauty through 
mysticism. The Chinese, who tended 
towards abstract thought, liave from 
their earliest times been charmed by 
pictorial art. 
This choice is no accident. Paint- 
ing, which is to some extent abstract, 
has an extraordinary power of sug- 
gestion and description. Form and 
movement can be expressed in a few 
firm, lively strokes. To depict the 
three-dimensional world on a flat 
surface is no matter of accident 
either—it is merely one of those 
human possibilities which the Chi- 
nese regard as a kind of discovery, 
and the secret of which they long 
kept to themselves. 
A) 
TIGER AND LEOPARD. CARVED STONE RUBBINGS DATING FROM HAN PERIOD, DISCOVERED AT THE BEGINNING. OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY. 
22

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 68946: They painted with knife and brush; Chinese artists 2,000 years ago

Unesco Courier. — Nr 1. — 1955 
  
  
PERIOD (206 B.C.-220 A.D.). — PROCESSION OF CHARIOTS. A RUBBING NOW IN SZECHWAN PROVINCIAL MUSEUM. 
The distant origins of Chinese 
painting are known to us chiefly. 
from written descriptions, for the 
works themselves have perished. 
The engraved bones, the prehistoric 
pottery, and the decoration of" the 
bronze objects of the Chou period 
{400 B.C.) already reveal the existence 
of considerable pictorial skill among 
the Chinese; but in painting, the 
most striking evidence is provided by 
an important group of engraved 
stones belonging to the Han period 
(206 B.C. — 220 A.D.). : 
These are tombstones or funerary 
monuments, and the process is a 
kind of engraved painting. They are 
not bas-reliefs, as might be supposed; 
they are real’ paintings, in which the 
feeling for composition and the pic- 
torial sense are fully evident. Only 
instead of using a brush, the Chinese 
of that period preferred to engrave 
their compositions directly on the 
stone with a knife. 
(Continued on page 25) 
    
HORSEMAN BETWEEN TWO TOWERS. FUNERARY RELIEF, HAN PERIOD, DISCOVERED 1920. 
’

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 68946: They painted with knife and brush; Chinese artists 2,000 years ago

FESERETEI LAKESHORE IN WIN. 
5 x TER. Painting on silk by 
an unknown master typical 
: : of the Sung dynasty (12th- 
13th century) which pro- 
duced one of the greatest 
landscape schools the world 
has ever known. Artists 
sought only essentials in 
landscapes, discarding all 
trivial and accidental effects. 
This masterpiece, measuring 
41, feet by 3 1} feet, is 
now in the British Museum, 
EE TTT ER ST TR WR OT ed 5 AL ELT Cae WE ho =. A : I yews Wy A Ae wr ATR SC Ws JRE i 
  
  
De
re
rw
f 
     
     
     
    
   
 
. ql. : 
1 THE POET LI T’Al-PO. 
A masterpiece of purity 
by Liang K'ai, one of the 
greatest artists of the Ch’an 
school (a group of painters 
who rebelled against the 
academic school of their 
time). Liang K'ai worked 
around 1200, and launched 
the fashion for monochrome 
(wash-tints). Depicting the 
poet, he makes no effort 
at a set background but 
concentrates on conjuring 
up an inner atmosphere. 
«1 
fo X 
As 
Ls £ "* 
k. r , 
; E. : 
a. ; hy i 
; : 
: 4 
4 
i | 
3 
4 LE 
by 8} 
4 I : 1 
Te. oo) 
; 5 
elk 
: ae 
5 ZL 
3 he. 
oF ET 
4 Pun ¥ ne A 
x a Ay So ci 
—e . Mg) .” FL 4 FLY eR I . 
a ER Bi PAM Sa Si a AE 
an SRE Ey 
Ys ~ als id a Se > i = 
3 afr TB WTAE 3   Th el < 
Ck no ER ses ls a 
 
24

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

# 
Sy 
E
e
 
—
—
 
-
-
 
- 
fi 
- 
- 
LL 
—
—
—
—
 
© 
LL 
—
—
—
—
 
i 
—
—
—
 
 
a
t
>
 
La
 
: 
A 
p
e
 
. 
" 
S
E
 
4 
—
—
 
is
 } 
- 
pa
ns
 
N
S
O
 
i
 
B
y
 
. 
 
—
 
ar
a 
t
e
 
. 
J
E
R
 
: 
i 
 
.
 
i
y
 
: 
% 
. 
" 
a 
x 
a 
A 
, 
. 
: 
; 
"a 
0d 
—
 
C
r
 
A 
—
 
- 
- 
0 
E
y
 
~ 
  
“
b
e
n
t
 
£5
 
- 
¥ 
y
t
 
0) 
- 
a
 
S
A
 
2
,
 
y 
N
e
a
 
: 
. 
CP
) 
£
m
»
 
A
N
 
S
I
T
 
Ju
) 
J
h
a
,
 
: 
rd
 
M
n
 
e
a
 
Ay
 
A
Y
.
 
| 
S
i
 
; 
R
T
E
 
AS
 
 
—
 
l
e
 
—
—
—
 
Unesco Courier. — Nt 1. — 1955 


### 68946: They painted with knife and brush; Chinese artists 2,000 years ago

THEY PAINTED WITH 
KNIFE AND BRUSH 
{Continued} 
Later on, a method of “pressing” was invented in 
China, making it possible to take a kind of rubbing of 
these sculptural compositions and transfer them direct 
onto paper. As a result, these engraved paintings 
reached a wide public as the centuries went by and had 
an undoubted influence on painling ilself. 
These engraved stones were particularly numerous 
in three large districts — the provinces of Chang-Tong. 
Honan and Szechwan. They deal with a wide variety 
of subjects, including scenes of domestic life, hunting, 
palace life, battle, and entertainments (both popular and 
ritual). Throughout the dilferent regions and epochs, 
they preserve a most remarkable similarity of style; 
they are free and direct in expression, full of move- 
ment, and often convey a feeling of great liveliness. 
The earliest actual paintings which have come down 
to us date from the fourth century A.D. Reaching the 
Tang period (618-907), we find in the towns along the 
"Western frontier, on the borders of Central - Asia, a 
precious store of.f{rescoes which are still preserved in 
cerfain Buddhist caves. These frescoes convey valuable 
information to art historians, for they reveal Lhe 
influence of Indian and Persian painting. This was the 
period immediately following the introduction of Bud- 
dhism into China, when certain monks made long 
journeys from China to India or from India to Central 
China, fostering, in their comings and goings, a wide 
interchange of arlistic knowledge between China and 
the other countries of Asia. : 
. Afler these transitional years, the Sung period (960- 
1276), during which China established its aesthetic 
criteria, began to work out its own laws of beauty. This 
period produced many admirable piclorial works in 
Chinese ink touched up with gouache—misty land- 
scapes, restrained and rapidly executed porlraits, and 
delicate, elegant, thought-provoking drawings. It was 
at this juncture that Chinese painting took the final 
form which il retained for nearly a thousand years, 
until modern times. It is notable for its lyricism, 
naturalistic style and quality of line. It also reveals 
a unique concepl of painting, volume being rendered 
solely by means of very {irm outline, with no shadows 
. to destroy the- ethereal effect of the painted surface. 
These characteristics of the great Sung period have 
persisted; despite the various changes of style which 
occurred during the Yuan period which succeeded it 
(1276-1368)—when China, under Mongol! domination, 
" developed a keen interest in hunling scenes and the 
beauty of horses—and the subsequent Ming period 
(1308-1644), which saw a deliberate return to the stricily 
. Chinese manner and an attempt to recover the earlier 
highly stylized and calligraphic form of beauty. 
Not until fairly recently did Chinese art begin to be 
known in other countries. From the eighteenth century 
onwards, missionaries began to spread a knowledge of 
it in Europe and America, and there was a vogue for 
minor works of art—engraved stones or embroideries, 
decorated with fantastic beasts or flowers. Only at 
the beginning of the present century did further 
research lead to the discovery that Chinese art had more 
subtle and more powerful aspects; and today we 
realize that, through all the stimulaling variations of 
‘its two-thousand-year history, it has preserved a unity 
of style and an aesthetic aim which is peculiar to the 
Chinese people. 
RAIN. One of the simple but delightful little engraved 
. paintings found on the tombstones of ancient Chinese 
notables, often depicting earthly life or a future one. 
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

  
    
YARDSTICKS 
FOR OUR UNI- 
VERSE. Man mea- 
sures the universe 
of the infinitely 
small and infinitely 
large with an ama- 
zing variety of ins- 
truments. Diagram 
shows several of 
these, and mea- 
surements obtai- 
ned in metres. Dot- 
ted lines indicate 
still unexplored 
universe, 
ne natives of Lilliput in 
Swift's Gulliver's Travels 
stood knee high to a grass- 
hopper, measuring no more than six 
inches in height, while the giant 
Brobdingnagians were 60 feet tall. 
Since then, modern Gullivers have 
been exploring and measuring Lilli- 
putian worlds a million million times 
  
smaller and giant ‘worlds many. 
billions of times larger. 
These figures stagger the imagi- 
nation. What, we may ‘ask, can 
man actually measure that is so 
uicredibly tiny, or so immense ? 
ALAIN GILLE Is the Unesco specialist who 
planned and prepared the travelling science 
exhibition described in this article as well as 
others organized by Unesco, now touring 
member states throughout the world. 
26 
At the smallest end of the scale of 
measurement, exploring within the 
atom, man has measured. the dia- 
meter of elementary particles such as 
the proton. In the world of the 
infinitely: great he has measured the 
distance to the remotest galaxy of 
stars known today. 
Nowadays, we know that many 
animals have some knowledge of size 
and distance. When a hermit crab, 
for example, outgrows its shell 
“hideout” and looks around for 
a larger home, if prospects a new 
shell by exploring it all over ‘with its 
claws and feelers. Only when it is 
satisfied swith the dimensions does it 
“try on” the new shell for size. 
But this is a confused sort of 


### 68947: 20 century Gullivers

20th century 
Gullivers 
knowledge. While. there are many .- 
kinds of animals capable of counting, 
there is not one which has the idea 
of measuring or of systematically 
placing the living creatures and 
things around it in their proper 
relationship to one another. 
It was when our ancestors learned 
to measure things around them that . 
they ‘were better able to cope with 
life. And they learned to measure 
things as we do today by comparing’ 
them with other lengths which they 
took as standards or units. . The first 
such units ‘were derived from things 
with which man ‘was most. familiar: 
the foot, the inch (from the thumb tip. 
to the first joint), the cubit (derived 
(Continued on page 28)

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 68947: 20 century Gullivers

Unesco Courier. — Nr 1. — 1955 
  
  
  
    
     
    
   
   
   
WORLD EXPLORERS. — Curva- 
ture of earth (photo, top) is 
photographed for first time from 
FEET . rocket shot 70 miles into air. 
Important. localities : (1) Mexico 
1,320,000 City; (2) Gulf of California; 
(12) Albuquerque ; (15) Rio 
Grande. Drawing shows how 
man has explored the world 
above and below the earth's 
surface, and distances reached. 
Also three methods of measur- 
ing distances : radar waves 
reflected from plane, under- 
water ultra-sonic “echoes”, and 
triangulation (calculating dis- 
tance from | known side and 
2 angles of a triangle). 
Multi-stage Rocket .... 
Sounding Balloon. ..... ® 
BalloON vv v ins seve y 
Mount Everest ........ : 
132,000. 
  
    
   
   
 
a 
Free 
ot 
z 
i 
1 
1 
] 
i 
t 
1 
! 
ie 
Divet, wearing suit .. 
i 
i 
1 
1 
1] 
1] 
i 
1 
3 $ 7 ; ; Ce 5% 
Diver . Ta Ei H   
p
e
 
 
h
n
 
——
- 
o
e
 
2 
; 
h
e
 
o
s
 
e
e
 
t
e
 
ht
 
pe
 
t 
Bathyscaph | 
  
ee
 
a
—
 
A
 
yo 
$0
4 
i
 
e
e
 
0 
une Ber —
—
_
—
z
 
27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 68947: 20 century Gullivers

Gullivers 
(Continued) 
from the Latin cubilas, elbow, it was 
the distance from a man’s elbow to 
the tip of his middle finger), and 
others. The Egyptians used the 
outstretched arms as a unit, and the 
Greeks the length of a stadium (about 
607 feet). | 
"With his senses alone, man could 
explore only a tiny fraction of the 
universe. Bul, using his intellect, he 
has designed and built “tools and 
instruments ‘which have taken hmm 
far beyond the world directly acces- 
sible to his senses. Wilh their help 
he has carriéd his investigalions inlo 
the realm both of the infinitely 
small “and of the infinitely large. 
During his search for new know- 
ledge he has discovered unsuspected 
marvels that have enriched his ideas 
of the world, and in this process he 
has developed new means wilh 
which to transform his existence. 
Exploring tiny specks 
~~riL the 17th century, when the 
magnifying glass and the mi- 
croscope were invented, man 
had practically no other instrument 
for studying the infinilely small. 
The lower limit of his universe was 
the power of his own eye, ie. its 
capacity lo distinguish two dots about 
one-tenth of a millimetre (three. 
thousandth’s of an inch) apart, and 
placed " about ten inches from the 
eye. 
With this human-limilation it was 
as if the entire world had been pass- 
ed through a sieve having a mesh of 
one-tenth of a millimetre. Then, 
suddenly, the new optical instruments 
enabled man to peer into a mysterious 
realm — the “microscopic world” — 
and led him to the discovery of cells 
and microbes, and thus to the proof 
that-life also existed on this new and 
“tinier scale. With improvements in 
the new research tools scientists 
using the optical microscope even- 
tually were able to distinguish two 
points 0.000 mm apart — the meshes 
of the sieve had come a thousand 
- times closer together. 
About two decades ago came ano- 
ther great advance — the invention 
of the electron microscope. With 
this powerful instrument it was pos- 
sible to distinguish two points a mil- 
lionth of a millimetre apart. Thus 
the meshes of the sieve had closed in 
a further hundred times, and science 
made a fine haul, bringing in viruses 
—the simplest form of life we know 
—and large organic molecules. 
Then the discovery that X-ray dif- 
fract (break up) on crystals brought 
atoms into the microscopic instru- 
ment “net”. Atoms were found to 
be arranged in regular geometrical 
patterns inside molecules, some ten 
millionths of a millimelre apart. On 
this level of the microscopic world 
no form of life was found. 
28 
Among the giants 
The achievement of measuring dis- 
tances befween atoms in molecules 
and crystals encouraged scientists to 
accept the next challenge—how to 
measure the distances between the 
particles which make up the atoms 
themselves. Science and technology, 
showing themselves equal to this 
challenge, produced new instru- 
ments. One of these was the Wil- 
son Cloud chamber (a device which 
makes it possible fo see and photo- 
graph the path of eleclrically charged 
particles). Another was the Geiger- 
Muller counter which detects and 
counts elemenlary particles emitted 
"by radio-active substances. 
Now the meshes of the sieve had 
become a million times more closely- 
. knit than before, catching elementary 
particles—elegirons, protons and 
aneutrons—and giving man power- 
ful aid in his efforts to learn all the 
basic secrets of matter. : 
Primitive man had a limited sense 
of great dislances. Ilis life was 
taken up with the search for food. 
For him major distances were those 
which took him to the limits of his 
hunting-ground.  Ilis life was a 
two-dimensional one. Sowetimes 
he must have looked up at the night 
sky to admire the stars, and wonder- 
ed how far away they were. But 
to know how distant an object is one 
has to be able to reach it ; and primi- 
tive man’s only means of reaching 
skywards was to climb trees. He 
therefore concluded that all heavenly 
bodies ‘were the same distance away. 
from him. 
This view prevailed until the Gth 
century B.C. Then the Ancient 
Greeks made {wo important measure- 
ments—the circumference of the 
Earth and the distance from the Earth 
to the Moon. Their other measure- 
ments, however, were little more than 
imaginative inventions. It was Co- 
pernicus in the 16th century who first 
worked out the exact order of distri- 
bution and distances of the main pla- 
nets. 
Reaching for the stars 
1E invention of the telescope, in 
‘the 17th century, gave man a 
powerful instrument to reach 
beyond the limits of this visual 
capacity. Until then, astronomers 
had only studied the planetary 
system, But with the 18th century, 
scientists began to take an active 
interest in the stars, and devised 
techniques and instruments for 
measuring their dimensions and dis- 
lances—the method of trigono- 
metric parallaxes, the spectrophoto- 
metric method and others. In 1838, 
just over a hundred years ago, the 
first stellar distance was measured 
— that of Star 61 from Cygnus (11 
(Continued on page 31.) 
  
  
  
    
Station, Cheshire, 
England. 
  
  
Photo Jodrell Bank 
Experimental . 
    
oo
 a
a
 
  
      
pe}

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 68947: 20 century Gullivers

irr TEAL wn Rl 
i 8 ‘the flat gop. of Mount Palomar 
in southern California stands the world’s 
largest telescope with a mirror over 16 
feet in diameter (above). It can penetrate 
interstellar space 500 million to a thousand 
million light years away. Science is now 
developing another and more extensive 
“ window ” into outer space by capturing 
radio waves transmitted by the stars with 
a new instrument, the radio telescope, 
which uses large radar aerials shaped like 
concave mirrors. It is unhampered by 
climatic conditions, operating day or night, 
and has revealed previously unsuspected 
radio stars which may well be as common 
in the universe ‘as visible stars. Britain 
is completing a giant 250 foot radio tele- 
cope, to be the world’s largest (model is 
shown on left). Rem arkable photo on right 
Unesco Courier. ~— NT 1. — 1955 
Y IR a ho 
y 
bon ty 
5 

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 68947: 20 century Gullivers

4 -y 
: 
rs 
a  

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 68947: 20 century Gullivers

    
Unesco Courier. — Nr 1, — 1955 
Strange patterns from 
the microscopic world 
  
{Continued from page 28.) 
light-years) Distances were at that 
time measured in thousands of mil- 
liards of kilometres 
Since then, instruments have been 
steadily improved. Attention was 
turned from individual stars to gal- 
axies. 
century, the distances -measured 
were no further than a hundred light- 
years or so ; but the largest telescope 
in the ‘world today (on Mount Palo- - 
mar in the United States) with its 
5-metre mirror, enables scientists to 
observe galaxies nearly a thousand 
million. light- 
years away. 
At the beginning of the 20th 
cessible to his senses — to an infi- 
nitely * small and infinitely large 
universe of ever receeding limits. 
Our present knowledge in this fleld 
1s shown in a Unesco travelling scien- 
tific exhibition “Man Medsures the 
Universe ”, ‘which is now touring the 
countries of Western Europe:.. 
The exhibition explains nine ma- 
jor scales of magnitude and employs 
a large collection of scientific instru- 
ments to demonstrate methods of 
measurement used in each case, 
They cover. the entire range of size 
“beginning “with lengths that are near 
the human scale 
and measured in 
  
Measurement of 
length and dis- 
tances is only 
one part of Lhe 
progress made in 
the field of mea- 
surement in ge- 
neral, covering 
the smallest and 
largest masses, 
time, energy, tem- 
perature and ma- 
ny other magni- 
tudes. In all cases 
man has design- 
ed and produced 
many instruments 
which have en- 
abled him to reach 
out — beyond the     
What are they? 
The seven photomicrographs 
on these pages present some 
of the inhabitants and objects 
found in the microscopic world 
and are shown here as they 
appear through powerful elec- 
tron microscopes. They inclu- 
de: water plants, aluminium, - 
blood pigment, paraffin, cellu- 
lose and varnish. Can you tell 
which is which? They are iden- 
tified on next page. 
yards, feet and 
inches, then 
downward to the 
smallest known 
dimensions of the 
particles inside 
the atom. 
Reaching out- 
ward, the .exhibi- 
‘tion shows the 
methods of mea- 
suring geogra- 
phical distances, 
the solar syslem, 
distances bolween 
the stars and the 
distances of the 
remote galaxies 
measured in par- 
secs (19 billion   world directly ac-   miles). 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 68945: Dreaming with eyes wide open

Dreaming with open eyes 
{Continued from page 21) 
world of the screen and the realities of their own lives. . 
But when the realism of the screen bears upon something 
beyond their experience, they either reject it entirely as 
fantastic or untrue—as is occasionally the case with pictures 
of rather luxurious American life—or their judgment is 
uncertain. 
We may also ask how far films arouse discontent and 
longings which in the nature of things cannot usually be 
satisfied. It is often alleged that, for adolescents at least, 
the highly coloured world of the film makes life seem 
wanting in excitement and makes them long for more 
money. My personal findings show that rather less than 
one-third of the group I studied felt that their own lives 
were dull by comparison and only about one in twenty 
Certain films," acknowledged a longing for more money. 
however, are an exception. The Outlaw (Jane Russell) a 
western with a strongly erotic and sensual theme, made 
half the boys .and three-quarters of the girls who saw it 
find their own lives dull ; and in other ways it appeared to 
-have a very powerful effect on their emotional life. 
The principal effects, however, at least of the twelve films 
I studied, all of which were at the time extremely popular, 
seem to be laughter and a relatively enduring happiness and 
satisfaction ; and the consensus of opinion of the adolescent 
audience was that the forces of good win in the end. 
Another way of estimating the possible influence of the 
cinema is to study its impact on people’s behaviour. Do 
films influence the ways people talk and dress, the kind of 
amusements they seek, the way women do their hair or use 
cosmetics? Direct and indirect influences here are exceed- 
ingly difficult to disentangle. 
Such scanty evidence as we have suggests that for 
adolescents and particularly for girls, the cinema provides 
a school of manners, deportment and style, which they 
knowingly try to imitate. Nearly half a representative 
group of boys admit that ways of talking, of amusing them- 
selves, hair style and techniques of approach to the opposite 
sex, are the things they imitate most. 
girls than boys admit to being deeply influenced by the 
cinema. Between two-thirds and four-fifths of the group 
of adolescent girls studied in the course of personal investi- 
gations admitted to being influenced by the screen in making 
up their faces, doing their hair and dressing themselves. 
According to nearly six out of every ten of those questioned, 
ways of talking and of dancing are imitated too. As with 
MICROSCOPIC BODIES 
KEY TO 
PHOTOS 
ON PAGES 
30 AND 31    
1. Aluminium (highly polished), magnified 23,000 times 
2. Paraffin cristal, (during growth) magnified 34,000 times 
3. Sea plant (diatom), enlarged 13,600 times } 
4. Cellulose (synthetic fibre), magnified 12,000 times 
5. Blood pigment (snail) enlarged 90,000 times 
6. Sea plant (diatom) magnified 270 times 
7. Varnish surface enlarged 21,000 times 
Photo credits, | and 7, University of Paris; 2, Glasgow University ; 3 and 5, Max Planck 
Institute; 4, M. Besse; 6 and back cover, J. B. Le Poole,     
RE 
32 
On the whole more . 
Spectator. 
 
the boys, one-third of girls admit that their “ways of making 
love’ are also modelled on what they see on the screen. 
As youth grows out of adolescence into man and woman- 
“hood, however, the cinema's influence is balanced by other 
things ; reasonably happy and satisfied adults recognize 
the gulf there is between the realities of their own lives 
and the world of the screen: Nevertheless, some aspect of 
a film'can affect an individual spectator more deeply even 
than he may realize himself and the continual presentation 
of slightly displaced values may have a cumulative effect. 
Within certain limits, we tend to find in any film the 
things we look for, be it consciously or otherwise; and at 
least some of the pleasure a film gives us comes from the 
fact that it mirrors and excites our wishes and desires. If 
this is so, then the cinema’s influence upon us and upon 
our lives will be limited to intensifying and shaping what is 
already there, at least in a latent form. The spectator is 
not in fact passive ; far from it. The fact, however, that 
the film relies primarily upon the large projected image ; 
that it takes place in a darkened auditorium; and that 
rapid visual stimulation coupled with relaxed physical 
comfort closely resembles the conditions which induce 
hypnosis, probably means that its emotional appeal is more 
primitive, direct and effective than that of any other 
medium. Few films arouse conscious effort from the 
Hence even when a film or an incident in a film 
is not understood, a subconscious meaning may well be 
conveyed. One may even reject a film’s message and yet 
accept at least some of its meanings subconsciously. 
It is in some of these senses that films may be held 
responsible for juvenile delinquency or even adult crime. 
Probably no one who is well-balanced emotionally has ever. 
been driven to crime by a film. On the other hand, persons 
with delinquent tendencies springing from deep, emotional 
and social maladjustments find immediate motives and the 
means to crime in particular sequences of a film. Less 
dramatically and probably more commonly, films may tend 
* to reinforce maladjusted tendencies in those who are already 
unbalanced. 
Enough has been said to indicate some at least of the 
problems raised in the mind of a psychologist by the cinema 
and the fact of almost universal attendance by children, 
adolescents and adults alike. Mr, Everyman takes his flicks 
as a harmless entertainment. They probably are for the 
most part. Nevertheless, as well as giving entertainment, 
they may be deeply shaping the society we live in; on the 
other hand, they may merely be a reflexion of the way it is 
developing. The cinema industry could be a greater force 
for good or for ill if more were. known about the psychology 
of the spectator and of the particular mechanism of his 
response to the films he sees. 
Here then is a vast field of research on which only the 
merest and most superficial start has been made. The most 
important questions are still untouched, and have been for 
the past fifty years or so since the first public cinema halls 
were opened.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 68943: The Film today: a world picture

Unesco Courier, — Nt 1. — 1955 
  
  
Letters to the Editor... 
Sir, 
In my double capacity as Inspector- 
General of Penal Institutions of Argen- 
tina and Professor of Penology at the 
National Penitentiary Training School, 
I have read from cover to cover your 
Human Rights issue of the UnEsco 
Courier devoted to the prevention 
of crime and the treatment of delin- 
quents... 
Apostles of Prisoners Rights, Spain is 
represented by Manuel Montesinos who 
you say lived in the 19th century but 
you give no exact dates. Don Manuel 
de Montesinos v Molina was bern in 
the city of San Roque near Gibraltar in 
1792 and died on 3 July, 1862. A bio- 
graphy of his life by José Rico de 
Estasen (“Colonel Montesinos - A Spa- 
niard of European Prestige”) was pu- 
blished in Madrid in 1948. 
J. Carlos Garcia Basalo. 
Inspector-General- 
of Penal Institutions 
Argentina. : 
Sir, 
Although my sympathies are firmly 
with Unesco, I have not renewed my 
subscription to the Unesco COURIER 
because most of its articles seem too 
impersonal and too “restained” to 
arouse any deep interest—despite the 
great competence of the authors. 
“I am ‘not the only one to voice this 
criticism—a - friendly one, however— 
regarding the TUNEsco CouURIER and 
other UNESco publications. Perhaps 
this shortcoming is unavoidable in a 
publication aimed at a wide public 
whose opinions are manifold—and often 
contradictory. 
: Pierre Burney. 
French Institute, : 
Athens, Greece, 
Sir, . 
You and your 
Unesco Courrier devoted to crime and 
© justice. Of all of the recent publica- 
tions in the popular press on this to- 
pic, I-have found yours to be the most 
informative and boldest in conception. 
The article by Carlo Levi is particularly 
to be stressed for its magnificent state- 
ment of the necessity to distinguish 
betweent the manifest improvements in 
.penology and the basic and continuing 
disposition of society. : 
The Marquis de Sade was, I think, 
the first to understand this distinction, 
and I flatter myself that in my book 
“Stone Walls and Men”, Odyssey Press, 
1946, this point was central to my 
thesis. 
As .one familiar in this field, I was 
In your notes on the Seven - 
staff are certainly to. 
be congratulated on the issue of the 
rather disappointed in the articles by 
Dr. JR. Rees and Sir Cyril Burt. It 
Seems to me that neither of these 
gentlemen properly understands the re- 
lationship between the phenomenon of 
delinquency and the current stage of 
civilization. Did they do so, they would 
not be able to write so glibly of “cau- 
sative” superficialities : it is only in 
relation to the world scene that the 
tendency toward violence among youth 
everywhere can be apprehended. Ne- 
vertheless, my congratulations for an 
exceedingly well-done job. ' 
. Dr. Robert Lindner. 
Baltimore 2, 
Maryland. 
Sir, 
It was extremely gratifying to read 
the excellent article “Biting The Hand 
That Feeds Us” in the Unesco Cou- 
RIER (N°¢ 4-5, 1954), stressing the need 
for wise use and protection of our na- 
tural resources, on the principle that 
we must live in harmony with nature, 
rather than combat her. Many believe 
that human survival on this planet is 
predicated on that philosophy. 
We were pleased also to read the fine 
tribute paid to the International Union 
for the .Protection of Nature. Unesco 
may well be proud of the IupN for it 
was founded under the aegis of Unesco, 
and is one of the most practical and 
productive of international organiza- 
tions. The National Parks Association 
is proud of its membership in the 
Union. 
One of the captions stimulates a com- 
ment. There is a common impression 
that the solution to water__problems 
is basically to impound water, either 
on the mainstreams or on the tribu- 
taries. 
States has taught us that such dams 
may do serious harm to paramount va- 
lues, unless they are carefully planned 
to co-ordinate with related programmes 
of upland soil control, wise agricultural 
practices, sound forestry, and watershed: 
and wildlife protection. Too much of 
our water development programme has 
been based on engineering considera- 
tions alone, with no attempt to study 
the Beology of the drainage basin as a 
whole. - ) 
Fred M. Packard. 
. Executive Secretary, 
National Parks Association, 
Washington, D.C., U.S.A, 
Sir, 
In the article on “The Translating 
Machine” published in 1954, Dr, Leon 
Dostert is described as “one of the 
experts particularly responsible for set- 
ting up the ‘simultaneous translation 
That experience in the United" 
system now: currently used by interna- 
tional organizations.” 
I think it might interest your readers 
to know that the simultaneous transla- 
. tion system to which you refer has been 
used since 1924 by the International 
Labour Organization, whose permanent 
secretariat is the International Labour 
office in Geneva, at the plenary sessions 
of its annual conferences. 
The initiative for using, this system 
belongs to Mr. E.A. Filene, of Boston, 
U.S.A. whose financial aid enabled the 
first experiments to be made during the 
International Labour conferences in 
Geneva in 1924/25. By 1928 regular use 
of the system was being made at all ses- 
sions of the Conference held in 
Geneva. 
When the League of Nations head- 
quarters was built in Geneva in 1936 it 
was equipped, at the request of the 
I.L.O.,, with a simultaneous translation 
system which is still used for the annual 
sessions of the International Labour 
Conference and the World Health 
Assembly, 
These facts in no way diminish the 
credit due to Dr. Dostert in connection 
with the wider adoption of the system 
which has become a basic condition for 
the . smooth working of international 
conferences in view of the increased 
number of -languages now employed. 
’ Henri Reymond. 
International 
Labour Office, 
Geneva, 
Sir, 
What makes your magazine really 
interesting to follow is that it deals 
with essentially human questions at an 
international level. I find it full of 
interest and consider the cost of sub- 
scription a reasonable one.. Nothing 
but benefit can come from reading an 
international publication so unswerving- 
ly concerned with man and his rights. 
I shall do my best to introduce the 
Unesco Courier to others. 
Max Vialis. 
" Ecole de Maubec, 
Vaucluse, France. 
Sir, 
The Unesco COURIER is an unequalled 
pocket battleship of international cul- 
tural activity and goodwill. It stimu- 
lates readers to seek more understand- 
ing of other people, and our almost cli- 
nical impatience towards anything that 
is strange to our way of life becomes 
amended in exact ratio to our increased 
knowledge. Every home is poorer that 
is without it. : : 
’ Oscar Edwards. 
, Sydney, Australia. :       
The film today (Continued from page 14) 
and bring the film {o millions every year. What is true 
for Africa is also true for Asia and the Americas. China, 
for example, has 1,200 teams touring the villages in the 
interior of the country and giving educational film shows 
before audiences which may vary from a hundred or so 
to a thousand. Afghanistan has just purchased three of 
‘these mobile cinemas which carry out similar tasks in the 
remote mountain villages. . = 
In the last few years the educational film has become 
an accepted part of the school curriculum in most coun- 
tries.” In thousands of schools in Europe, Asia and the 
Americas the film is an.integral part of the weekly work 
in’ the classroom. Let us take one example which is in 
its way typical of hundreds of others. The Latin Ame- 
rican’ Republic of Peru has, since 1947, distributed. 150. . 
16 mm sound projectors to Peruvian primary and secon- 
dary schools throughout the country. In 1953 the number 
of schools performances given amounted to 618 and the 
number of pupils who attended to 128,000. There can be 
little doubt that the eflect of a new educational medium 
on these 128,000 Peruvian scholars has been considerable. 
From entertainment to education the world of fhe film’ 
has many facets. As the industry continues to progress 
it must at the same time submit to change. These chan- 
ges are seen today in the shift in production emphasis 
from the U.S.A. io Asia and Europe ; the evolution of new 
techniques in the U.S.A. itself and the practically unli- 
mited ‘spread of entertainment and educdtional films 
throughout every part of the globe. The final challenge 
of television may still lie in the future, but in the mean- 
time entertainment for the majority of the world's popu- 
_ lation means in simple terms “a visit to the flicks”. 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

From the Unesco Newsroom... 
 
came Assistant 
Unesco in January 1955. 
organization's entire 
  
UNESCO EXECUTIVE - APPOINTED 
Dr. Malcolm Adiseshiah, of India, be- 
Director-General 
His appoint- 
ment followed that of M. René Maheu, 
of France to a similar post in July 1954, 
Dr. Adiseshiah - previously directed 
Unesco's world-wide technical assistance 
operations, He will now co-ordinate the 
programme, 
will act as special technical aid adviser 
to the Director-General, and as repre- 
sentative to other U.N. Agencies. 
Born in Madras in 1910, Dr. Adises- 
hiah studied at Madras University, the 
London School of Economics and King's 
College” Cambridge. From 1939 to 1946, he taught economies at 
Madras University, and prior to joining Unesco in 1950, he served as 
Associate Secretary-General of the World University Service. 
of 
but       
   
» 
RT re 
Se ba 
re 
  
No LANDLUBBERS, 
WANTED : Landlubbers at the 
University of London would do 
well to take shelter on the lee 
side. For the University is 
floating out to sea in the fo’c’sle 
and bunk cabins of over 1,600 
tankers and merchant ships 
now sailing: the seven oceans. 
As a result of an arrangement 
concluded by the British 
Seafarers Education Service 
merchant seamen are now 
enrolling by the boatload as 
active - students at London 
University and are taking their 
examinations while afloat. A 
quarter of a million textbooks 
were shipped to merchant vessel 
students during 1853, the Sea- 
farers Education Service reports, 
and a record cargo of written 
homework is being returned to 
port. 
+ THE LADIES ARE WIN- 
NING: The word teacher is 
rapidly becoming a feminine 
noun in Turkey as the result 
of a powerful nation-wide 
campaign to increase wo- 
men's opportunities for em- 
ployment. A report from 
Turkey announces that wo- 
men now outnumber the 
men for the first time in city 
primary schools and are now 
rapidly catching up in rural 
areas as well. 
8S cen EXPLORERS : 
Preparations are now under 
way all over the world for one 
of the most gigantic inter- 
national projects ever attempted 
for exploring the mysteries of 
our planet. Thirty six countries 
have already agreed to join 
forces though scientists from all 
nations are expected to 
.participate. The co-operative 
venture, scheduled to take place 
from July 1957 to December 
_ 1958, will be known as the Inter- 
national Geophysical Year and 
will cost an estimated 
$ 100,000,000, Studies and ex- 
periments are fo be conducted 
on the earth's magnetism, 
cosmic rays, the circulation of 
the atmosphere, the aurora, 
solar activity and the movement 
of glaciers. Spécial observation 
34 
‘staticns will be set up in select- 
ed regions; rockets to explore 
the upper atmosphere will be 
shot from . aircraft or other 
points. Installations will be such 
that scientists expect to be 
prepared for any unexpected 
phenomenon such as a sudden 
violent eruption in thé sun. 
+* MUSIC WHILE YOU 
READ: Book lovers in In- 
diw’s Delhi Public Library 
are now enjoying soft mu-. 
sic piped through to them in 
the reading rooms. The li- 
brary, created three years 
ago as a Unesco-India pilot- 
project, has found the music 
an aid to concentration in- 
stead of a distraction. The ex- 
periment is proving ertreme- 
ly popular with young and 
old readers alike. Unesco 
reports that an average of 
2,200 people now use the li- 
brary which has 20,000 re- 
gistered borrowers and 60,000 
books in Hindi, Urdu and 
English. Social activities of 
an educational nature have 
attracted over 190,000 people 
in the past three years. 
IP corres OF MELAN- 
ESIA: In its issue on “Last 
Frontiers of Civilization”, (Ne. 
8/9, 1954) the UNESCO 
COURIER published on page 28 
two photographs (a Wogeo man 
and two women of Guadal- 
canal) to illustrate an article 
on the peoples of Melanesia by. 
Dr. Margaret Mead. Credit 
should have been given to Mr. H. 
Ian Hogbin of the University of 
Sydney’s Department of Anthro- 
pology who took these photos 
and mention made that they are 
copyright by Asia Press Inc, 
publishers of Mr. Hogbin's book, 
“Peoples of the Southwest 
Pacific”. 
+ THIRTY MILLION 
TEXTBOOKS: All children 
in war-shattered Korea may 
not be too happy about it but 
textbooks are back at their 
newly rebuilt schools through 
the combined efforts of the 
United Nations Korean Re- 
(UN construction Agency 
KRA)Y and UNESCO. The 
most modern printing plant 
in the country—the National 
Textbook Printing Plant— 
has now been completed. 
The plant is capable of pro- 
ducing 30,000,000 textbooks a 
year. The two UN organiza- 
tions contributed $238,000 for 
machinery and other equip- 
ment. 
SciENcE LIAISON: 
Story of the work of Unesco's 
science co-operation offices 
spread across the world. Tells 
how equipment and research 
materials ranging from seed 
samples and rare chemicals to 
animal skeletons have been sup- 
plied to scientists and institu- 
tions by Unesco's network - of 
centres in Montevideo, Cairo, 
Istanbul, Delhi and Jakarta. 
(Illustrated) 
+ YOUTH AND FUNDA- 
MENTAL EDUCATION : 
A guidebook that tells how 
young people can join in the 
present world-wide battle to 
raise Standards of living 
through better health, farm- 
ing and education. Offers 
concrete, practical examples 
of how and where youlh vo- 
lunteers can do effec’ive work - 
that is often literally a mat- 
ter of life and death. (Illu- 
- rated, $ 1.75; 9/6; or 450 Fr. 
7.) } 
Aras MICROFILM 
CENTRE : A science informa- 
tion centre and library, equipped 
with the most up-to-date micro- 
film recording instruments in 
use today, is- being set’ up by 
Unesco in Egypt. It will serve 
working scientists throughout 
the Arab region in the Middle 
East. An American expert in 
microfilm photography, Cosby 
Brinkley, is now in Egypt 
organizing the new centre. 
Similar Unesco institutions now 
exist in India, Yugoslavia and 
Mexico. — 
« TREASURE HUNT: 
Scientists have begun one of 
the greatest hunting expe- 
ditions in Pakistan's history 
to uncover hidden mineral 
resources which are known 
to exist in large quantities 
in ‘the country. The ezx- 
pedition plans lo 
thousands of square miles 
of Pakistan territory and is 
utilizing new scientific tech- 
niques including magnetic 
_ prospecting methods, espe- 
cially effective in locating 
iron ore and other min- 
erals. A Unesco expert, 
Dr. Karl Weinert of Austria, 
was sent to Pakistan to train 
a team of scientists in these 
new techniques. 
PD eveLopmenT OF PUB- 
LIC LIBRARIES IN AFRICA: 
Publishes papers and conclu- 
sions of a Unesco seminar on 
this subject held in Ibadan, Ni- 
geria during 1953. An impor- 
tant study for all those interes- 
ted in library developments in 
under-developed countries. (Il- 
lustrated. § 1.75; 9/6; 400 fr. fr.). 
UNESCO PUBLICATIONS 
  
films listed 
included. 
cinema. :   
Films on Art: Panorama 1353 
Contains a 53-page catalogue of films on art which 
. gives technical data on 729 films from 31 countries. 
in previous editions of Films on Art are 
The Entertainment Film for Juvenile Audiences 
Among the most urgent problems of the cinema is the 
production of entertainment films for juveniles, 
surveys the position in countries where the production of 
such films is particularly developed and includes a list of 
special films available for children. 
Bibliography on Filmology 
as Related to the Social Sciences 
A bibliography intended for research workers and students 
of the problems of filmoloay as related to the social 
sciences, particularly psychology, sociology, psychiatry, phy- 
siology, anthropology and philosophy. In compiling the biblio- 
graphy, the author used as his criterion of selection the 
scientific intention or implication of the studies or simply 
the interest they have .for the scientific history of the 
The 
$.65 4/- 200 fr, 
“by Henri Storck 
This book 
$1.25 7/6 375 fr. 
3.40 2/- 100 fr.   
explore 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
II
, 
ru
e 
Cu
ri
al
, 
P
A
R
I
S
-
 
19
°,
 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

“...A Window open on the World” 
The 
COMIN G 
Unesco Courier 
IN NEXT MONTI’S ISSUE 
The Awakening 
Continent 
A report on Latin America 
and ney forces chaning old vas 
* Anew policy for the Indians 
of the Andes 
x Birth of a Costa Rican Valley 
* The Mayan Indians modernize 
x (olombia’s amazing radio 
TO SUBSCRIBE 
 
In the United Kingdom send your 
remiltanee to ILM. Stationery Ofli~ 
“ce P.O. Box 569, London S.E. I. 
In other countries write to National 
Distributors listed below. 
Ii your country is not listed write 
direet]ly to Unesco Sales 
19, avenue Kléber, 
Division 
Paris, IY ranee. 
priest 
Previous issues you 
 
may have missed 
N° 12 - 1954 The Promise of Atomic 
Power and the Beneficent Atom, 
Ne Il - 1954 
World Art 
Rare Masterpieces of 
— A special issue with 6 pages of full colour plates. 
Ne 10 - [954 - Prisoners Are People 
a — The Right to Human Treatment. 
Unesco's National Distributors from whom 
the English edition of THE COURIER can be" 
obtained are listed below, Other Unesco 
Distributors are listed in the French and 
Spanish editions of THE COURIER, 
* 
Australia : Oxford University Press, 346, 
Little Collins Street, Melbourne. 
Austria : Wilhelm Frick Verlag, 27, Gra- 
ben, Vienna I. 
Burma Burma Educational Bookshop, 
551-3 Merchant Street, P.O. Box 222, 
Rangoon. : 
Canada : University of Toronto Press, 
Tarente, 
Ceylon : Lake House Bookshop, The Asso- 
ciated Newspapers of Ceylon, Ltd., P.O. 
. Box 244, Colombo I. Rs, 5. 
Cyprus : M, E, Constantinides, P.O.B. 473, 
Nicosia. 
Denmark : Ejnar Munksgaard Ltd., 6 Nor- 
regade, Copenhagen, K. 
Egypt : La Renaissance d’ Egypte, 9, Adly 
Pasha Street, Cairo. - 
Ethiopia : International Press Agency, 
P.C.B. 120,.Addis-Ababa. 
NATIONAL 
Finland : Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Kes- 
kuskatu, Helsinki. 
Formosa : The World Book Company Ltd., 
99, Chung King South Rd, Section |, 
Taipeh. 
France : Sales Division, Unesco, 19, Avenue 
Kléber, Paris- | &¢, 
Germany : Unesco Vertrieb fiir Deutsch- 
land, R. Oldenbourg, Miinchen, 
Greece : Librairie H. Kauffman, 28, Rue 
du Stade, Athens. 
Hong Kong : Swindon Book Co., 25 Nathan 
Road, Kowloon. 
India : Orient Longmans Ltd., Bombay, Cal- 
cutta, Madras : sub-depots : Oxford Book 
& Stationery Co., Scindia House, New 
Delhi: Rajkamal Publications Ltd., Hima- 
laya House, Bombay 7. Rs. 4. 
Indonesia : G.C.T. van Dorp & Do. NY. 
Dijalan Nusantara, 22, Djakarta.’ 
Iran : Iranian National Commission for 
- Unesco, Avenue du Musée, Teheran. 
DISTRIBUTORS 
Iraq : McKenzies Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Israel : Blumstein's, Bookstores Ltd., 35, 
Allenby Road, P.O. Box 5154. Tel-Aviv. 
Jamaica : Sangster's Book Room, 99, Har- 
bour Street, Kingston; Knox Educational 
Services, Spaldings. 
Japan : Maruzen Co, Inc., 6 Tori-Nichome, 
Nihaonbashi, Tokyo. 
Jordan : ].l. Bahous and Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, 
Salt Road,” Amman, 
Korea : Korean National] Commission for 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, Seoul. 
Liberia : |], Momolu Kamara, Gurley and 
Front Streets, Monrovia, 
Malayan Federation and Singapore : 
Peter Chong and Co., P.O. Box 135, 
Singapore, 
Malta : Sapienza's Library, 28, Kingsway, 
Valletta. 
Netherlands : N VY. Martinus Nijhoff, 
Lange Voorhout 9. The Hague. 
New Zealand: Unesco Publications Centre. 
100, Hackthorne Rd., Christchurch. 
Nigeria : C,M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 174, 
Lagos. 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass, 7, 
Oslo. 
Pakistan : Ferozsons Ltd., Karachi, Lahore, 
Peshawar. Rs. 3 
Philippines : Philippine Education Co., 
Inc., 11 04 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila. 3.00 
Surinam : Radhakishun and Company Ltd., 
(Book Dept.}, YWatermolenstraat 36, Para= 
maribo. 
Sweden : A.B.C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hov- 
bokhande’, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm 16. 
Thailand : Suksapan Panit, Arkarn 9, 
Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 20 ticals. 
Union of South Africa : Van Schaik’s Book- 
store, Ltd., P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
United Kingdom : H.M. Stationery Office, 
P.O. Box 569, London S.E.IL 
U.S.A. : Unesco Publications Service, 475 
Sth Ave., New York 17, N.Y,

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068948engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

   
   
        
      
4g 4 od 3} AL fr + x oo » bl, 7 - V4 pe 3 ~» 
oy, al Ly i we LG ep 
4 >» x 4 gh LAE A Fd SA 
$ Fr . 4 (& AY yop Ea «te ¥ 
4 - y, | ATE by ¥ wd tA # Rd / pa | : Oo el INE Bl al SIE PT EGETRS . oo. > vr a Aw 4 % 7, B SORTER © PAI STAT od AA SAA GRAY, 
Pol, "! 340 TWESL . 1 * pid % te 
h YA 3 ig vy, IR Hs oh 2 RL ES rat lL ; > ‘ . 
A Te i NA 
  
LF i 
Bhs ’ ’ “Ppt g : A 
%: “f.4' PREHISTORIC MONSTER? No, simply a minute | Lop TA, Soe FUP Via 
a Ei bacteria cell wall magnified 100,000 times under io ¥ pies Ty WP M 3 
ne, J ¥' a powerful electron microscope. How man can RINT ¥ ALT LE "1 
td 4, ,, measure the universe of the infinitely small and Fle ht 5 Hla TY Vie 
EA fi g large is told in “20th Century Gullivers ”, page 26. Rodi: t A gh REE 
> : “4g ~TEW R AWTS MT RD br he £0 000 gk Aad AVE 
3 1 OR ATR a IRR RT ha oT Rd 4 0 Iori Ba 
LAN SEL INTE TARA ESR Int STR LA 
bo % hy ATPL 44 EG Tr os 3% pi nis re ud ¢ 4s by ea fy 
Fs La ¥ ro NLS F Lg “Pally [ay IN.’ eB EE ELAN NER, be LL 5nd SS Vy So a IE a 2 re 
’ X 1 
0 é Ff ¢ 
BL Ty F! 
3 ey al 
EL 3.5 
f ’ 
{ (ig 
EY wt LAY hs IN ie 1 Tilt of 1 a 
TIRE BN Sr ths ST RT TAR SAAR nd 
AES 5S Win yk gad rl vii Ay In HIS 
ye A od, yey yar 1 - ME oe - pe ¥ A 8% : 
hip x 2 NI YL 
£50 tert iy AE V7 2b os 
2% Rat) 
  
: ¥ - ¥ k33 Jon Rh 
9.1 wud BON 
  
      
  
      
      L* re ¢! 
ds 5 
ba 3 A 
hl y 9a » 
ARS TS 
2 
AAA IG
RR 
ERA u | 
a sel 1%   2% J» 