# [062906](062906engo.pdf) 8

## [Page 1](062906engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
etd . 
WW rt 
5 Lig ro Ye 
: is 
HE IE vg ral , liso oy 
SETI 0 WO 
he \ - . y on I=, » > 
BR NS a fos 
  
WORLD HEALTH DAY

## [Page 2](062906engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

hel v 
UPSIDE-DOWN WORLD 
These two children are probably having the time of their lives but 
many grown-ups would probably look askance at such behaviour. For an 
article on a famous woman who certainly did not, see article page 16. 

## [Page 3](062906engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

"WCourier 
PUBLISHED IN 
NINE EDITIONS 
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 
Japanese 
[talian 
  
COVER PHOTO 
 
Eskimo children in particular 
have benefited from the health 
services set up in recent years 
in the Far North of Canada 
{see page 12}. In other Arctic 
territories —Alaska, Greenland, 
Scandinavia and Siberia — 
health services are also being 
expanded, and research into 
health problems in these areas 
is being co-ordinated by 
the World Health Organization. 
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
Page 
11 
12 
14 
16 
21 
24 
26 
32 
33 
34 
APRIL 1964 
17TH YEAR 
TUBERCULOSIS: STILL 3 MILLION DEATHS A YEAR 
World Health Day 1964 
THE BATTLE OF TUNISIA 
A nation declares war on tuberculosis 
A MOMENTOUS LOOK INTO THE MICROSCOPE 
Robert Koch's discovery of the tuberculosis bacillus 
BIRTH OF A NEW VACCINE 
The success story of BCG 
RESURRECTION OF THE ESKIMOES 
Health patrols and flying doctors in the Far North 
SUPER-BACILLI: A NEW CHALLENGE TO MEDICINE 
The T. B. bacillus counterattacks 
VISION OF MANKIND TRANSFORMED 
Maria Montessori and education for peace 
By Maria Remiddi 
THE SILENT MUSIC OF THE EARTH 
By May Hall Thompson 
PANTHEON OF GREEK GODS 
THE DAY THE RIVER SPOKE 
A short story from India 
By Kamala Nair 
STORIES IN STAMPS 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
; French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
‘Russian Edition : Victor Goliachkov 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-lchi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
Hy P= 4 We OL Y wn . - . 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin July and August when 
itisbi-monthly (|| issues a year) :n English, French, Spanish, Russian, German. 
Arabic, Japanese, and 1talian, In the United Kingdom itis distributed hy HM. 
Stationery Office, P. O. Box $69, London, S. E. |. 
individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER, 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Readers” Guide to 
Periodical Literature published by H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
Annual subscription rates : 10/-stg.; $3.00 (Canada) ;7.00 
French Francs or equivalent. Single copies [/-stg. 30 
cents ; 0.70 F. 
(M.C. 64.1, 190 A) 
N+ 4, 1964 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief, 
PRERIE NF 1

## [Page 4](062906engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

. 


### 61489: Tuberculosis: still 3 million deaths a year

TUBERCULOSIS 
still 3 mi lion |= El 
deaths a year 
Wm 
“At least 15 million people suffer from infectious 
‘tuberculosis today. The disease still claims more 
than three million lives each year... in nearly all 
“economically-developed countries, the number of 
sufferers has not declined as nearly as rapidly as 
the number of deaths, and tuberculosis remains a 
grave problem. In the world as a whole, between 
two and three million new cases occur each year...” 
These warning words by Dr. M.G. Candau, Director- 
General of the World Health Organization, explain 
why the theme chosen for World Health Day 1964 
| {April 7) is “No Truce for Tuberculosis”. On the 
~ following pages The Unesco Courier retraces 
‘the long history of tuberculosis and the efforts 
‘to find curative and preventative medicines. Also 
described are the powerful new drugs and infection 
control methods which can be used to defeat {1} TT 
~ culosis and eliminate it as a public health problem. 
Because, as Dr. Candau has also pointed out, “for 
the first time in man’s history we now possess 
effective weapons with which to fight tuberculosis.” 
EL 
  
  
Five years ago Tunisian doctors met in the 
Public Health Office, one of the government 
ministries in the Kasbah at Tunis (right) to plan 
a war on tuberculosis. As a prologue to this 
national campaign, a pilot experiment into 
. the use of drugs for preventative treatment 
was carried out jointly by the Tunisian Govern- 
ment and WHO. The test zone was the Djebel -_ ft 0 
Lahmar (below) a community of 25,000 ATH Se ea TS pl 
people whose homes are one-storey mud . - - 
dwellings grouped on the outskirts of Tunis. Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris 
 

## [Page 5](062906engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  
    
 
    
 
  
  
r 
  
 
= 
oA n o A ‘ - 
’ - + f fartrd : 
hd - - 
3 » 
    
   
— 
wa 
— 
" . 
N ' ’ : 
  
    
pe | 
‘ ' : Tia 
  
- - ~~. 
a EE nn EN ll a 


### 61490: The Battle of Tunisia

THE BATTLE OF TUNISIA 
EB Tunis, one morning in January 1959 an all- 
out war was declared on tuberculosis. It all 
started when the authorities of the small town of Ksar 
Ellal, near Sousse, found that the number of sick was 
Increasing daily among the 10,000 inhabitants of the com- 
mune, most of whom were weavers, 
An SOS went out by letter and telegram to the Govern- 
ment Public Health Office. A health team was sent 
to investigate. 
‘When the X-ray vans arrived in Ksar Ellal they were 
besieged. In record time 5,000 people were examined. 
The results were alarming: a tuberculosis prevalence of 
8%, or more than ten times present-day figures in Europe. 
In some of the weavers’ families at Ksar Ellal, tubercu~ 
losls had existed for generations. Not through heredity, 
of course, bul simply because it was inevitable In such 
overcrowded living conditions and dusty working en- 
vironment that sick parents should pass the disease on 
to healthy children in their daily contacts. And if tuber- 
culosis prevalence was 8% at Ksar Ellal, what, the Health 
Office wondered, would it be elsewhere? 
With the aid of technical advisers from WHO, it was 
decided to launch a nation-wide campaign against tuber- 
culosis. The Government offered completely free treat- 
ment to all tuberculosis sufferers, and earmarked a special 
budget of 95,000 dinars (£80,000) for the campaign. The 
Governorate of Sousse (460,000 people) was chosen as the 
starting place because it had the next largest population 
to Tunis itself, 
Wherever they went, the teams worked according to 
three basic principles: case-finding, supervised treatment, 
and protection through BCG vaccination. Lorries laden 
with X-ray equipment set out along the dusty roads, 
while the organizers scoured the countryside in small cars. 
The teams were warmly welcomed everywhere. In the 
Governorate of Sousse alone, almost 95% of the popula- 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](062906engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 61490: The Battle of Tunisia

Sh BY Hr  -h re 
BP Fong {CANIN 
Tunisia’s health authorities began their anti-tuberculosis campaign in the province of Sousse 
—the most heavily populated area after Tunis itself. The campaign will move south to cover 
areas around Kairoun and Gafsa, near where this photo was taken during the annual “sheep 
festival “ in April. Here, villagers watch local rider performing a traditional mounted “fantasia”. 
TUBERCULOSIS (Cont'd) 
Passport to health 
tion turned out. There was no need for posters. But to 
ensure full coverage, it was declded to carry out a census 
by family. This took up precious time, but only when it 
was completed could the real work begin. Once the 
administrative controls had been carried out, the pace 
quickened. 
Here, as throughout this hard-fought campaign, vaceci- 
nators and casefinders worked side by side. Radiological 
examinations for everyone over five years of age. Next, 
please! A tuberculin test was administered to all the 
under-twenties. Next, please! Those who had been 
given the test came back three days later—BCG vaccina- 
tion for the negative reactors. For all suspects there were 
medical examinations followed by INH (isoniazid) 
treatment for the mild cases, and hospital for the more 
serious ones. When everyone had been examined in the 
village or district, the diagnostic teams packed up and 
went off to start the same work elsewhere, returning 
three months later to check up on the sick. 
The work went on without a break; the teams relayed 
each other from sunrise to sunset. All sorts of problems 
arose. Some were relatively simple—like the transport of 
equipment . and its maintenance. Hermetically sealed 
thermos containers of wood, cork, and zinc were rigged 
up on the spot to protect tuberculin and BCG which 
quickly deteriorate under the blazing sun. Trained 
technicians were needed to maintain and repair the 11 X- 
ray microphotography machines and the generators. 
A radiological engineer sent by WHO to co-ordinate this 
work has already trained 13 Tunisian operators. Others 
now being trained will shortly form the nucleus of a 
central technical service being set up by the Tunisian 
Government. 
To carry ouf their ambitious programme, the Tunisian 
teams have had to adapt themselves to the most unexpected 
situations. In Moknine and Kalas Kebira—towns deeply 
attached to religious traditions—radiophotography had to 
be carried out at night, sometimes until two in the morn- 
ing, because women were not permitted out of doors 
before sunset. During Ramadan, worried heads of 
families were afraid that the tuberculin-test injection 
might break the fast, and the religious authorities had to 
be brought in to convince them that it is permissible. 
Elsewhere, the census ran up against other unforeseen 
difficulties. At Gabes, with its 400,000 palm trees, the 
oasis encircles the town in a vast pincer-movement. There 
it was found that four sheikdoms overlapped. After end- 
less working sessions the exact boundaries were defined, 
thus permitting a census of the inhabitants, which was 
carried out street by street in the town, and hut by hut in 
the oasis. The absence of surnames did not make matters 
any easier when making sure that everyone, without 
exception, was called for examination, but that no one 
was called twice. 
But problems of case-finding were nothing compared to 
those of treatment. One difficulty has been the distances 
to be covered. The assistants sanitaires (“health assis- 
tants”) travel by car from sheikdom to shelkdom, 
distributing INH tablets, checking the progress of treat- 
ment, encouraging those who seem to be faltering.

## [Page 7](062906engo.pdf#page=7) 2

### 61490: The Battle of Tunisia

### 61491: March 24, 1882: a momentous look into the microscope

Health workers measure mothers and 
children (right) and take identity 
photos (below) for records and the 
eventual issue of a family health card. 
The operation was carried out jointly 
by the Tunisian Health Ministry and 
UNICEF. Since 1959, BCG vacci- 
nation against tuberculosis has been 
compulsory for all Tunisians under 20, 
and children are not allowed in school 
unless they have been vaccinated. 
  
  
Photos © Paul Almasy. Paris 
At regular intervals the population is asked to gather at 
control centres. The crowd thronging round the doors is 
sometimes too large to handle easily. At first there may 
be about 400 people waiting, but soon these may increase 
to 600, 700, or even 1,000. Then the health team has to 
organize and process them as best it can. 
To conquer tuberculosis In Tunisia also means to build 
new houses. Parents, children, uncles, aunts, and grand- 
parents are frequently crowded into a living-space of 15 
square metres. Even then the palm-covered huts of the 
farm labourers at the Gabes oasis are certainly preferable 
to the caves of Old Matmatta, 15 km to the south. Here 
the steppe country is broken up into fantastic canyons; 
the soll grows progressively stonler and the water scarcer. 
But the people who are living in holes in the mountain 
will soon be evacuated. They 'will be resettled—some 
15,000 or 20,000 of them—In the town of New Matmatta, 
which has been specially built for them near a dam in the 
plain, 10 km away. New Matmatta has something even 
better than new houses—a fountain with running water all 
day long. Here water is vital. When you turn your back 
on Gabes, the desert is quite near, just at the end of the 
road, its presence indicated by the spectacular sunsets. 
The campaign organizers are constantly haunted by 
this problem: how can someone ‘who earns a bare lving 
be ‘expected to go to hospital when it means leaving his 
family in even more tragic poverty? If he Is a farm 
labourer he may earn 6 dinars a month, plus 2 kilos of 
semolina—6 dinars a month when a loaf costs 50 millimes, 
 
a kilo of fish 400 millimes, and meat is 600 or 700 milllmes 
a kilo (about one-tenth of his monthly Income). 
An effort is belng made to solve this problem. 8peclal 
committees have been formed to co-ordinate the work and 
share out the resources. All the needy are alded, all 
patients with active tuberculosis who earn less than 180 
dinars (£150) a year receive a monthly ration of flour, 
corn, malze, millet, powdered milk, beans, and cheese—a 
total of 16 kilos per patient per month, plus 8 kllos for 
each dependent child. 
Thus, between July and September 1963, 336 tons of food 
were distributed to tuberculosis patients and their chil- 
dren. Today these food supplies serve as an incentive for 
the patients, for if it Is found that they are not following 
the prescribed treatment regularly, the extra rations are 
cut off. 
Short-term hospitalization can have a dual effect. The 
patient is encouraged in healthy habits and he gains in 
self-respect. He undergoes a sort of transformation. He 
will also have become accustomed to taking his INH 
tablets at a set time. For these patients the hospital is 
a kind of school. The normal period of hospitalization 
is two months, but with difficult cases lt Is extended, the 
date of discharge being postponed as long as possible. 
Tunisia is the only North African country without a 
sanatorium. As for the hospitals, the Tunisians have 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](062906engo.pdf#page=8) 2

### 61490: The Battle of Tunisia

### 61491: March 24, 1882: a momentous look into the microscope

TUBERCULOSIS (Cont'd) 
Door-to-door 
medical check-up 
made an enormous effort, providing 1,500 new beds at 
1,000 dinars a bed over the last 15 years. As a result, the 
country's hospitals now have some 2,300 beds reserved for 
these patients. 
The first Tunisian medical faculty has just opened its 
doors. It 1s anticipated that It will be able to admit 70 
students a year, most of them on State scholarships. That 
there is an urgent need for trained personnel 1s confirmed 
by the results of the anti-tuberculosis campaign in the 
Sousse Governorate. 
At the time of the census, there was a population of 
460,395. Of these, 419,661 were examined, and 341,630 X- 
rayed. The number of cases detected was 22,812, Includ- 
ing 10,700 active cases (thls means a tuberculosis preva- 
lence of 2.6 per cent.). Of these cases 8,800 have now 
been “stabilized” or cured. But how many new cases 
have occurred since? How many will occur in future and 
need treatment? 
A pllot experiment directed by a joint WHO Tunisian 
Government commission preceded the antituberculosis 
campaign. Its object was to study the use of drugs to 
protect currently healthy persons from tuberculosis. The 
test zone was the Djebel Lahmar, a community on the 
outskirts of Tunis. Here some 25,000 people live In one- 
storey mud dwellings, usually with five or six rooms group- 
ed round a courtyard, and one family to each room. The 
windows are small, ventilation is poor, and sanitary 
facilities are rudimentary. 
| HE inhabitants are nevertheless concerned 
about their health, and responded willingly 
when the Sheik asked all of them, except the under-twos 
and those already vaccinated with BCG, to take part In 
this study of the prophylactic value of INH. 
The procedure was the same as in the antituberculosis 
campaign. A house-to-house census ‘was carried out. As 
there was no civil registration, serial numbers were paint- 
ed on the walls. Then the population (24,505 persons, 
according to the census) was divided Into two groups. 
Those In the first group were given INH tablets, while 
those In the second group served as controls. (Naturally 
actual tuberculosis sufferers in both groups were given 
curative treatment.) 
The people were required to take the INH tablets 
regularly for one year. All were supervised at regular 
intervals by health assistants. However, in a surprise 
check-up, It was found that four-fifths of those examined 
had not taken their medicine on that particular day. 
To Improve the supervision of non-hospitalized patients, 
the medical assistants are now carrying out more of 
these surprise check-ups, visiting a number of houses each 
day. It may thus be possible to prevent patients from 
stopping the treatment because they cannot be bothered 
to make the effort. Both Tunisian experts and WHO 
advisers consider that .the main hope lies in continuity 
of action. After the campaign in Sousse, it will be the 
turn of Kairouan, and Gabes. But a campaign is a 
transitory thing and some provision must be made for 
the years to come. 
There is another way—the protection of the young. 
This has Government support: a law passed in 1959 made 
BCG vaccination compulsory for everyone under 20 with 
a negative tuberculin test, and its application in progress- 
ing with the development of the campaign. Mothers now 
know that they cannot send their children to school unless 
their Family Health Card shows that they have been 
vaccinated. Soon, throughout Tunisia, this little docu- 
ment will be a veritable “passport to health.” 
   

## [Page 9](062906engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

La oF  —— ~ TN nr  } . 
ES eit lt SL ALLE p oh >" 
= - rr 
—— 
> » 
- “ — " - . ” or - “a Ee Ne 
, 2 5 _—— SG Ra Lenmar ars 
oh CTIA EC LT ee TR hei 
  
    
   
      
  
  
W
a
s
 
L
a
s
s
o
 
3 
XA
 
*,
 
C
t
 
S
E
A
R
 
e
e
 
R
A
R
 
| 
or Y 
~ 
. 2 
. wy apes - “I re. SEO r 
a - , + 
  
  
Left, a London slum, as the well- 
known artist, Gustav Doré, de- 
picted it in 1874. Tuberculosis 
raged everywhere in 19th-cen- 
tury Europe. Towns became 
overcrowded and slums prolife- 
rated as people poured into the 
first industrial cities. At the 
beginning of the 19th century 
one death in four was due to 
tuberculosis. Tuberculosis was not 
a new disease; it had been well 
known in the ancient world, but 
probably reached its worst period 
in Europe during the 18th century. 


### 61491: March 24, 1882: a momentous look into the microscope

March 24, 1882 
A MOMENTOUS LOOK 
INTO THE MICROSCOPE 
 eencusoss was known and studled by the physicians of 
the ancient world. Four thousand years ago the famous 
Code of Hammurabbi, King of Babylonia, mentions “the wasting 
disease.” An Egyptian papyrus written in 1,600 B.C. gives the first 
description of chest diseases. Excavations In one area of Egypt have 
unearthed so many bodies with tuberculous leslons that some special- 
ists believe it was the site of a large sanatorium. 
The disease, In fact, goes back much further still, as we may judge 
by the skeleton of a young man found in a neolithic burial ground 
near Heldelberg: its fourth and fifth dorsal vertebrae were fused 
together showing that tuberculosis of the spine was already afflicting 
prehistoric man some 6,000 years ago. 
Tuberculosis was described clinically by Hippocrates, “the father 
of medicine” (about 460-370 B.C.), who called it “phthisis” (from a 
Greek verb meaning “to dry up”), and it was known either by this 
name or as “consumption,” until the 19th century. 
Remedies for the disease were described by Galen (about 130-200 
AD.), another famous name in ancient medicine. Avicenna (930- 
1034), “prince of physicians” and author of “The Canon of Medi- 
cine,” considered that the disease evolved in three stages, and 
another doctor, Ferrari of Pavia, wrote a “Treatise on Phthisls.” 
The painter Botticelli lost hls favourite model, Simonetta Catarina 
Vespucci, a beautiful Florentine, carried off by phthisis at the age of 
16. He made a tender portrayal of her hollow cheeks, frail neck and 
sloping shoulders. 
The typical Romantic of the 19th century was emaciated. had 
flushed cheeks, and died spitting blood at the age of 30. This was 
the period when George Sand and the consumptive Chopin fled from 
Majorca, and a Barcelona hotel-keeper demanded compensation for 
the musiclan’s bed after the police had ordered it to be burnt. The 
disease inspired Byron, who declared that he would like to be carried 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 10](062906engo.pdf#page=10) 2

### 61493: Birth of a new vaccine: bacillus Calmette Guérin

### 61491: March 24, 1882: a momentous look into the microscope

10 
TUBERCULOSIS (Cont'd) 
Two allies: 
poverty and war 
off by a consumption so that all the ladles would say how interesting 
he looked while dying. 
Edgar Allan Poe was haunted by the memory of his wife, Virginia, 
who died of consumption at the age of 24. Dumas wrote in his 
memoirs that “everyone was consumptive—and especially the poets— 
it was good form to spit blood from sheer emotion.” Marie Bashkirt- 
seff, the famous nineteenth century painter, noted: “... I never stop 
cougliing, but miraculously it does not make me ugly—on the 
contrary, it gives me a languid air that is most becoming.” 
Tuberculosis—as the disease was beginning to be called—raged 
everywhere In 19th century Europe. Towns became overcrowded and 
slums proliferated as people poured Into the first industrial cities. 
Children of 13 did the work of adults. Towards the middle of the 
century, the death-rate from the disease was as high as 500 per 
100,000 in some places. Tuberculosis had become a social disease. 
It was to remain one as long as there was no improvement in econo- 
mic and social conditions, declining only when the social benefits of 
industrialization and technical progress ultimately began to be felt. 
In times of war, however, tuberculosis found allies in stress, mal- 
nutrition, and poor housing conditions and at once renewed its 
attacks, 
A 270 unsuccessful attempts, a German scientist called 
Robert Koch succeeded In identifying the agent of tuber- 
culosis: a slender rod between three-and four-thousandths of a milll- 
metre in length. 
When he discovered the bacillus that bears his name, Robert Koch 
was 39 years old. 
Koch began to be interested In bacteria when a country doctor in 
Silesia, but did not remaln in the provinces for long once his brilliant 
researches on the anthrax bacillus had brought him to the notice of 
his contemporaries, the scientists Cohn and Cohnheim. 
“Koch will again astonish us with his discoveries,” one of them 
predicted. And both his sponsors used their influence to secure him 
a post with the Imperial Health Office in Berlin. Koch brought with 
him the microscope his wife had given him for his 28th birthday. 
Day after day he sought the best medium for the culture of 
microbes, and perfected the techniques for studying them. He showed 
the same persistence In his attempts to isolate the bacillus of tuber- 
culosis, which was then the most widespread disease in the western 
world. 
He spent most of his time shut up In his laboratory at the Charity 
Hospital, Berlin. The door was closed to everybody except his co- 
workers and his wife. His only other companions were the. guinea- 
pigs, rabbits, and mice needed for his experiments. 
He finally succeeded in isolating the bacillus, a micro-organism 
that was not only hard to cultivate, but hard to see. It was particu- 
larly difficult to stain, since the colouring matter had to be left to 
act for a period of 12-24 hours. He therefore borrowed a technique 
from the dyers, that of using alkall with the dye. Added to methy- 
lene blue, the alkali acted as a mordant enabling the dye to penetrate 
the bacillus. 
At last the great day came. On March 24 1882, in a crowded room 
at the headquarters of the Berlin Phthisiological Society, the young 
man with the pointed beard addressed some 80 fellow-sclentists. 
Robert Koch explained his discovery in a matter-of-fact way, as if 
he were presenting some routine paper. He told them all about the 
culture technique, the bacillus, and the characteristics of the lesions. 
Microscopes stood waiting on the desk in front of him. One by one 
the audience came up, peered Into them, and saw the slender rods 
for themselves. There was a dead sllence. Not a single voice was 
raised In opposition to Koch's findings. From that moment everyone 
knew that the origin and propagation of tuberculosis were no longer 
a mystery. It was not a hereditary, but a communicable, disease. 
Soon after the First 
World War, two French 
scientists, Albert Cal- 
mette and Camille Gué- 
rin, gave the world the 
first effective weapon 
against tuberculosis : 
BCG vaccine (Bacillus 
Calmette-Guérin). To- 
day, hundreds of mil- 
lions of doses of BCG 
have been administered 
throughout the world. 
Right, Camille Guérin 
at the Institut Pasteur, 
Paris in 1960, a year 
before his death. Photo 
in the background is of 
Calmette (1863-1933). 
WHO, René Caloz 
  
r
r
 
\ 
4 
SI
AR
 
rr
 
e
e
 
: 
- 
  

## [Page 11](062906engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 61493: Birth of a new vaccine: bacillus Calmette Guérin

   
a
 
 
.
.
.
—
 
wo French scientists, Albert Calmette and 
Camille Guérin, gave the world the first 
effective weapon against tuberculosis. 
Léon-Charles-Albert Calmette, was a former naval 
doctor who took up research on bacteriology, first becoming 
Director of the Pasteur Institute at Lille, then Sub- 
Director of the main Pasteur Institute at Paris. With his 
closest collaborator, the veterinarian Camille Guérin, he 
had published a “Contribution to the study of the 
vaccination of bovids against tuberculosis” shortly before 
the First World War. 
In it the two scientists described how they had cultivat- 
ed the tubercle bacillus on potato boiled in glycerinated 
beef bile, using a virulent strain of bovine origin. After 
about three weeks the bacillus was found to have lost 
some of its virulence. But it was not until years later, 
after the operation had been repeated more than 200 
times, that Calmette and Guerin succeeded in evolving 
a new kind of bacillus, harmless, yet capable of conferring 
a state of immunity when administered by vaccination. 
Animals inoculated with this bile-cultivated vaccine 
proved resistant. to tuberculous infection. 
Shortly after the end of the Second World War, Cal- 
mette felt that the time had come to test the effects of 
this vaccine in man. 
On July 1 1921, in a Parisian apartment, a baby received 
three 6-mlilligram doses of Bacillus Calmette-Guérin 
(BCG), administered orally. Since both the child's 
mother and the grandmother who was bringing him up 
were suffering from tuberculosis, there was a good chance 
  
that he would become Infected. Yel six months later he 
was developing normally and healthily. 
Then the vaccine was tried out on a larger scale: 664 
babies in the créche run Dr Weill Hallé, paedlatrician at 
the Paris Hospital of Charity, were vaccinated without 
any ill effects. 
Henceforth Calmette was considered as the leading 
authority on tuberculosis. He published a paper In the 
Journal de Académie de Médecine, entitled “Trial of a 
vaccine against tuberculosis Infection” {in which he 
summed up 20 years’ work in a few pages. The vaccine 
began to be widely used. The Pasteur Institute was 
authorized to send ampoules of BCG abroad, and vaccina- 
tlon were carried out in Barcelona, Montevideo and Rio 
de Janeiro; in Argentina, Cuba, and Poland; in Dakar, 
Salgon and Sao Paulo; and in the Balkans. 
Nevertheless, there were some dissenting voices. At the 
Trudeau Sanatorium, Saranac, N. Y., Dr Petroff asserted 
that the vaccine had retained pathogenic qualities. In 
Switzerland, some authorities pronounced it dangerous. 
In Vienna, Dr Kraus, Director of the Institute of Sero- 
therapy, forbade the use of BCG in Austria. Even In 
France, Calmette was attacked. 
Nevertheless he went on organizing demonstrations and 
controlled experiments, and succeeded in turning the tide 
of opposition. He submitted his case to an International 
jury of experts, convened by the League of Nations, which 
concluded that BCG was indeed effective. 
CONT'D ON PAGE 13

## [Page 12](062906engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 
ahr 


### 62905: Resurrection of the Eskimoes

RESURRECTION OF THE ESKIMOES 
WHEN the Eskimoes lived alone in the Far North they 
hardly knew what illness was. But from their first 
contact with civilization they harvested tuberculosis, then 
syphilis and later poliomyelitis. Sixty years ago, the Eskimoes 
were a disappearing race. Today, the trend has been re- 
versed. The Eskimoes seen in these photos, who live in 
the Far North of Canada, have increased from 7,000 to over 
12,000 in the past 15 years. One reason is the health net- 
work—dispensaries, airborne doctors and air ambulances, 
and preventative services, including tuberculosis case-finding 
—now woven over great reaches of the Eskimo country. 
on 
Je- 
 
National Film Board of Canada 
ONLY ONE CHILD IN TWO used to survive the first 
year of life. Now, thanks to better health practices 
and emergency aid, four children out of five survive. 
CHILDREN OF THE ESKIMOES (above 
and below) were the first to benefit 
from new health services in the Cana- 
dian Far North. To maintain these 
services for a widely scattered popu- 
lation of about 12,000 Eskimoes costs 
an average of $2,000 per head annually. 

## [Page 13](062906engo.pdf#page=13) 2

### 61493: Birth of a new vaccine: bacillus Calmette Guérin

### 62905: Resurrection of the Eskimoes

FLYING AMBULANCE lands near a lonely 
dwelling in Canada’s north to pick up an 
emergency case requiring surgical treat- 
ment. Emergency calls arising from 
accidents and illnesses are answered 
all the year round and in all weathers. 
  
TUBERCULOSIS (Cont'd) 
Victory over calumny 
and suspicion 
Suddenly there was a traglc development. Out of 252 
children in Liibeck, Germany, who had been vaccinated 
with BCG between December 1929 and April 1930, 71 dled 
and 27 fell ill, five of them dangerously so, the cause being 
a serious tuberculosis infection. 
Protests flowed into the Pasteur Institute from all sides. 
An Inquiry was held, and revealed that Calmette’s work 
was not at fault. The Institute issued a statement: 
“Elther the BCG culture was accidentally infected by a 
virulent tuberculosis germ from other cultures in the lab- 
oratory at Liibeck, or else, through carelessness, flasks 
or tubes containing virulent tubercle bacilll were unfor- 
tunately placed in the same drying-cupboard as the BCG 
cultures and substituted for them in the preparation of 
the first vaccine emulsions in January 1930. 
“ The Idea that BCG could suddenly have become 
virulent after being administered to the children is unten- 
able. There Is therefore no doubt that the children in 
Liibeck received a virulent tuberculosis culture Instead of, 
or mixed with, BCG.” 
A lawsuit was started. Then German bacterlologists 
revealed that the conditions in which the BCG strain 
had been kept in the laboratory were unsatisfactory. 
A serious mistake had been made. In a culture that had 
been used in the preparation of the vaccine, BCG was 
found mixed with virulent bacilll from a straln forwarded 
to Liibeck by a laboratory in Kiel. It was proved that 
the tragedy had been caused by a blunder at the Libeck 
laboratory. The doctor responsible was sentenced to two 
years’ imprisonment, and Calmette and his Institute were 
exonerated. 
A million small children in all parts of the world 
had already been vaccinated with BCG. But, 
as if to exemplify the old saying “If you filng cnough mud, 
some of it is bound to stick,” BCG was to be viewed wlth 
suspicion for a long time to come. 
Today its value is no longer in questlon. Full recogni- 
tion finally came in 1948, when 300 delegates from all 
parts of the world took part in the Flrst International 
BCG Congress. BCG vacclnation is now compulsory in 
several countries, Including France and the U.S.S.R. The 
vaccine Is manufactured by more than 50 laboratories In 
different parts of the world, from strains supplied by the 
Pasteur Institute. 
By June 1924, Calmette and Guérin had vaccinated 217 
children. Today several hundred milllon doses of BCG 
have been administered, 150 million of them In campaigns 
undertaken by WHO and UNICEF in more than 60 
countries. 
Further indisputable proof of the value of BCG was 
obtained in a recent intensive trial of the vaccine among 
35,000 young people lving in highly industrialized 
communities in Great Britaln. There were 80 per cent 
less cases in those who had received BCG than in those 
who had not, and this reduction has by now been main- 
tained for more than eight years after vaccination. It 
has often been argued that the unfavourable sociological 
and economic conditions and the high exposure to infec- 
tion found in developing countries would lower the value 
of BCG. A controlled study in India, supported by WHO, 
has however recently revealed the same degree of protec- 
tion as that found in the British trial. 
Being economical and easy to apply, BCG vaccination 
could—if used systematically and continuously over the 
next few decades—bring about the elimination of tuber- 
culosis as a public health problem in any developing 
country. 
13

## [Page 14](062906engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

14 
TUBERCULOSIS (Cont'd) 


### 63196: Super-bacilli'; a new challenge to medicine

"SUPER-BACILLF 
A NEW CHALLENGE TO MEDICINE 
0: difficulty in large-scale campalgns against 
tubercuiosls using modern drugs in the 
appearance of tubercle bacilli that are “resistant” to their 
action. But, as the International Union against Tuber- 
culosls declared recently: “We hear a great deal about 
the resistance of the bacillus. But not enough is sald 
about another form of resistance: that coming from igno- 
rance, apathy, and lack of interest—in a phrase: the 
resistance of Man.” Immunization, diagnosis and treat- 
ment offered on a community-wide scale are nothing but 
empty gestures if the public is not ‘willing to make full 
use of these services. There is need for active and 
continuing co-operation of both the individual and the 
community. 
Doctor and patient have often different points of view. 
The doctor wants to “follow up” his patient, while the 
patient tries to keep away from his doctor. Both in the 
sanatorium and at home, the patient is far from being 
always co-operative. Despite the serious nature of his 
illness, there all too often comes a time when he revolts 
against the tiresome routine of taking his daily quota of 
drugs. 
Even sanatorium patients have been known to throw 
their pills out of the window. They want to believe that 
there is no need for further treatment, to think that they 
are already cured; the truth is that the course of the 
disease is merely interrupted. They have only one idea 
in mind: to leave the sanatorium and get home as soon 
as possible, regaln their freedom and resume their normal 
activities. 
When this human weakness is a real problem even 
under strict hospital routine, then it is not surprising that 
the discipline of the home-patient, who has to take the 
drugs dally on his own initiative, easily breaks down. 
H ue resistance to the discipline of taking 
potent drugs regularly for a long period means 
that the tubercle bacillus Is subjected to only a half- 
hearted attack and this gives it the time {to mobilize a 
drug-resistant population. Once this has happened there 
is no reprieve: the bacillus that has been “immunized” 
through the patient’s negligence produces other bacilli 
just as impervious to the effect of the drugs to which 
it is resistant. 
Doctors have the greatest difficulty in dealing with 
these “super-bacilli,” which respond only to a few costly 
drugs that may be dangerous and must therefore be 
administered under close hospital supervision. To provide 
such special treatment on a large scale would place an 
intolerable burden on the strained economies of most 
of the developing countries. 
The consequences of defaulting from treatment are 
extremely serious: not only does the patient get ‘worse, 
but he may succeed in spreading drug-resistant bacilli to 
healthy individuals who, in turn, become untreatable by 
the normal methods. 
Perhaps the only way of dealing with the “resistant” 
patient is, after all, to supervise him and make sure that 
he takes the medicine at his home or at the health centre. 
If drug treatment could be given intermittently, say once 
a week, instead of daily, medication could be supervised 
even in developing countries. The Madras Chemotherapy 
Centre has been investigating this possibility: twice- 
weekly ambulatory treatment with isoniazid and strepto- 
mycin gave the same spectacular results as daily 
administration of isoniazid and PAS: more than 90 per 
cent. of advanced cases cured. Stimulated by these 
unexpected and encouraging findings, the Centre has 
begun to study the feasibility of a once-weekly regimen. 
Applicability on a mass scale, economy, convenience, 
and reduced toxicity: these are the truly impressive array 
of advantages offered by the latest possibilities in the 
treatment of a disease that has plagued mankind since 
the beginning of history. 
Tuberculosis is an international health problem and 
must be solved on a world-wide basis. Although varying 
enormously from the large underprivileged areas of the 
world to the highly industrialized countries, the tubercu- 
losis situation is of serious concern to all. 
E those few countries which are gradually 
eliminating the problem within their own 
frontiers cannot hope to be safe as long as tuberculosis 
is rampant elsewhere. The increasing rapidity and 
volume of international transport, the migration of 
workers across national boundaries tend to intensify the 
risk of infection. Another cause for worry is that as 
tuberculosis becomes less frequent in a country the 
natural resistance of the population may be expected 
gradually to diminish, and this at a time when the anti- 
tuberculosis services are likely to relax their vigilance. 
Tuberculosis must be conquered everywhere. 
Since it came into being in 1948 the World Health 
Organization (WHO) has assisted national governments 
in bringing tuberculosis under control by providing expert 
advice and teams of specialized personnel. 
Under its guidance, mass vaccination with BCG, the 
first weapon against tuberculosis, has been extended to 
most parts of the world. However, the very first large- 
scale vaccination campaigns were launched by the “Inter- 
national Tuberculosis Campaign” which was set up after 
world War II by the Scandinavian countries to aid 
nations which had been most seriously ravaged by the 
disease. 
More recently, when effective antituberculosis drugs 
became avallable, the rational use of this powerful weapon 
in the many countries ‘where hospital facilities are limited 
or non-existent was investigated through special projects. 
It is clear that none of the weapons against tuberculosis 
can be used in exactly the same ‘way in every country. 
Conditions and resources differ and different strategies 
have therefore to be developed. To meet this need 
WHO has co-operated in pilot projects for tuberculosis 
control in numerous countries. 
I: all of these activities the United Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) has been a partner 
of WHO. With the joint assistance of WHO and UNICEF 
more than 150 million people have been vaccinated in 
campaigns in 61 countries, tuberculosis control training 
centres have been set up in many parts of the world and 
more recently pilot projects in tuberculosis control for 
about a third of the world’s population have been started. 
Another important partner in the world-wide fight 
against tuberculosis is the International Union against 
Tuberculosis (IUT). A frequent obstacle to the efforts 
made by governments to control tuberculosis is a lack 
of sustained co-operation by individuals and by commu- 
nities. It is here that the IUT and its constituent 
voluntary tuberculosis associations can play a decisive 
part: what governments cannot do national, regional and 
local associations often can. The Mutual Assistance 
Programme of the IUT has been designed specifically to 
supplement the governments’ efforts by mobilizing and 
maintaining nation-wide support.

## [Page 15](062906engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 63196: Super-bacilli'; a new challenge to medicine

  
WH 0. Spooner 
MASKED & GOWNED 
AGAINST INFECTION 
Stringent precautions against infection are taken in this tuberculosis section of a research 
laboratory. Staff work in gowns and masks and all items of equipment are coloured 
red to avoid possible confusion with material from other research sections. Research 
leading to discovery of drugs with direct action against the tuberculosis bacillus—strep- 
tomycin, p-aminosalicylic acid and isoniazid—has sharply reduced mortality rates. 
15

## [Page 16](062906engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

Maria Montessori 
  


### 61494: Maria Montessori: a vision of mankind transformed

    
A VISION OF MANKIND 
TRANSFORMED 
by Maria Remiddi 
I: 1947, two years after the end of the Second 
World War, great interest was awakened in 
Rome by the announcement that Maria Montessori was 
to give a talk there on “Education and Peace.” For 
although Maria Montessori had studied in Rome (she held 
degrees in medicine, biology, philosophy and education) 
and her first research into the psychological development 
of small children had been carried out there, she had 
pursued the rest of her career in foreign countries, open- 
ing schools In England, the United States of America, 
Spain, Denmark, India and the Netherlands. At last she 
was coming back to Rome, a dignified old lady dressed in 
black, with a halo of white hair. She had a very quiet 
voice and spoke so simply that no one could fail to follow 
her arguments. 
She sald there was no need to unite the world, for it 
was united already. In order to develop a peaceable 
disposition in young children, we must give them their 
place in this new united, unified world where everyone 
works for the benefit of his neighbour. For in the world 
of today nothing comes to us direct from nature in the 
old, simple way; men must work to bring it to us. 
She pointed out that this applied not only to houses, 
tables, chairs, books, but that even a fruit, ‘which seems 
the most direct and genuine of nature's gifts, comes to us 
only because men have tended the tree it grew upon, 
plucked it and brought it to market. 
She went on to say that nothing was easier than to 
make little children aware of the human kindness which 
is constantly being expressed in work, for every child 
meets with such kindness in everyday life. Unconscious 
kindness, perhaps, but kindness all the same. It helps 
people a great deal if they realize they have this kindness 
within them. 
Maria Montessori never wrote out her lectures or lessons, 
Maria Montessori 
her entire life to education. 
She worked tirelessly to 
develop teaching methods 
and materials that have 
since been incorporated 
into many current educa- 
tional systems. Left, 
towards the end of her 
life, the distinguished Ita- 
lian educator greets an 
Indian teacher at 2 Mon- 
tessori Congress. Right, 
freedom of expression, as 
displayed here by a young 
classroom artist from 
Czechoslovakia, is one 
of the main principles 
of the Montessori method. 
 © Publifoto, Rome

## [Page 17](062906engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 61494: Maria Montessori: a vision of mankind transformed

and spoke ‘without notes. When I went to ask her if 
I might have a copy of what she had sald, she looked 
surprised and told me she had not got one. So I hurried 
home and wrote down everything I could remember. She 
read my notes afterwards and agreed that they were her 
words. 
Even so, they gave only a pale reflection of her ideas. 
She had begun to take an interest in young children in 
the early years of this century, when she was working at 
the psychiatric clinic of the University of Rome and had 
been instructed to study the behaviour of a group of 
feeble-minded children. 
S- had already received a thorough scientific 
training for this type of research from Giu- 
seppe Sergi, the anthropologist, who had founded the first 
Institute of Experimental Psychology at the University of 
Rome; and she was also familiar with the work of Pro- 
fessor Cesare Lombroso, the celebrated authority on 
criminal psychology. On completing her studies she 
turned to research, gradually deepening her insight into 
the physical and psychical substratum underlying abnor- 
mality and her understanding of the educational methods 
by which behaviour could be improved. 
To acquaint herself with what was being done elsewhere 
in the field of remedial education, she went abroad, 
spending some time in England and then in France. In 
the latter country the investigations carried out by Itard 
and Séguin interested her particularly, J.E. Marie Gaspard 
Itard (1774-1838) was a physician who had devoted him- 
self to the education of deaf children. 
© Jan Lukas, Prague 
After her return to Rome, Maria Montessor!l continued 
her study of mentally defective children, Improved her 
methods of training, and invented the teaching materials 
that bear her name—a set of objects (Interlocking puzzles, 
cubes, cylinders, laces, coloured Implements, figures, 
letters) designed to stimulate dormant sensory perception. 
Finally she opened a school to train teachers for the diffi- 
cult task of preparing feeble-minded children to play 
thelr part In normal life. 
Meanwhile, however, she had become increasingly 
absorbed by another question. “If,” she asked herself, 
“after all thls scientific research and study of educational 
methods, we can now improve the lot of the mentally defl- 
clent child, what results should we obtaln if we gave 
equally close attention to normal children, on whom the 
future of the human race depends?” She decided that the 
methods of sclentific research must now be applied to the 
psychology of normal children, and that in order to obtain 
relable data the children must be In surroundings where 
they could behave spontaneously and naturally. 
An opportunity to put this plan into practice occurred 
when the city of Rome began to bulld large blocks of 
low-rent flats in slum districts, each provided with a Casa 
dei bambini (a kind of créche), and Marla Montessori was 
asked to organize and manage these. This was in 1906. 
In these nursery schools the children ‘were given the Mon- 
tessori teaching materials to stimulate thelr sense of 
touch, hearing and observation; and most Important of 
all, they had teachers who, though always on the watch, 
left them free to behave just as they wished. 
And to the amazement of these teachers—and of Mon- 
tessori herself—this led to the gradual emergence of a 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
17

## [Page 18](062906engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 61494: Maria Montessori: a vision of mankind transformed

18 
MARIA MONTESSORI (Cont'd) 
A search for 
peace and 
a better world 
new type of child, who could concentrate on one occupa-~ 
tion for a long time, who was thoughtful, pursuing its 
psychological development and building up its own per- 
sonality in this quiet and peacefully experimental atmo- 
sphere; who was placid and naturally polite—a completely 
unaggressive child. 
‘Was it her discovery of the unaggressive child that led 
Montessori to the conclusion that man ‘was really intended 
for work and peace, not for battle and destruction? Or 
was It her ‘wish to gulde mankind along the paths of peace 
that prompted her search for the methods and surround- 
ings which would produce peaceful men? We shall never 
know; but from this time on she devoted herself mainly 
to the search for “the better man” who is to be found in 
every child that comes into the world. 
She noted at this period that “The child’s unsatisfied 
demands leave their mark on the grown man in the form 
of a conflict, a perpetual struggle that awaits man at birth 
and continues throughout his development—the conflict 
between the adult and the child, between the strong and 
the weak, and one might even add, between the blind and 
the sighted. The adult gets the better of the child, with 
the result that the grown man always carries the scars of 
these battles: something has been destroyed in him, and 
the price of his victory has been a painful adjustment.” 
And it grieved her deeply to realize that during the process 
“the finest psychic qualities of the individual are lost for- 
ever.” 
W:= Maria Montessori gave her first public 
lecture on the theme of education for peace— 
in 1932, at Nice, at a Congress of the International Bureau 
of Education—she was almost dismayed by her realization 
of the novelty of this idea. Rather than make a frontal 
attack on the subject, she therefore chose an imaginative, 
persuasive approach. 
She went back through history some twenty centuries 
and spoke at some length on the mysteriously recurring 
plague which took, over the years, a toll of millions and 
millions of lives. This had continued until men of learn- 
ing, scrutinizing the invisible universe, discovered the 
microbe that was responsible for the scourge, and halted 
its reproductive process by drawing up certain vital rules 
of hygiene and Inducing society to adopt them. As a 
result, modern man is physically healthier than his 
ancestors. 
Having thus built up a proper basis for comparisons, 
Maria Montessori carried her argument further: “War is 
like plague,” she said, “and it leaves us bewildered. But 
just as a new physical constitution was needed to defeat 
plague, so we need a new spiritual constitution to help 
us put an end to war, 
“A child is required to be obedient, both at home and 
at school; as this demand for obedience is not based on 
any inner conviction, and makes no appeal to reason or 
justice, it merely produces men who are submissive to 
blind forces. The form of punishment, so frequent in 
schools, ‘which consists in holding up the offender to 
public obloquy—putting him, as it were, in the pillory— 
gives children a senseless, irrational fear of public opinion, 
even when that opinion is manifestly unjust and mistaken. 
CONT'D ON PAGE 20 
GEOGRAPHY 1S FUN for 
the younger children in this 
schoo! in Pueblos, Colorado, 
U.S.A., when it can be learn- 
ed while playing games 
on a giant map painted on 
the school playground. Les- 
son-games on this 35-foot- 
wide map of the U.S.A. are a 
feature of the programme. 
Unesco - Sholomovitch 
 
  

## [Page 19](062906engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 61494: Maria Montessori: a vision of mankind transformed

  
 
  
      
   
       
    
  
     
     
a — am 
Tol A x 
a = - 
a i 4 
cme: WE 
———— > 
-— -—- 
—- \ — C 
— \ — 
1 — 
._ \ Ril 
. n' N —— — 
0 N= mmm ||| . 
Bes he 
Ly 
4 av 
. oe : ; 4 h . 
SE on BR agin 2 Ee AY TN VT , PI oh Pl ig Ta a 3 : ¥ he a a |x om 2 AE 3 ge, ’ : : } L2% rae . - Re ——— ra — IATL 8 TIVIL Lry TanaTi “Hrs we ers erie JASE pay Ls he he ; 
Of ASIA es 4 HEAR : ~~ OLS Lt ~N he ¥ fat ' ~ ee Le 
~ . ~ : ’ px . 
rs - Ts Tops ane oH Fk ’ 
; : - 
J Ed, Sane dd A © A lo Er SETS 
—— HMw The a wl wll FA MLS - “ 
Rs. oo Unda Us pl 
- > wl gw AX - 
TG La i To Pa A Wy — —— 
. N —~ A NY -. NW FS ——— . 
", Kr pee SY #4 : . . ath 4 
BF WP FA hn 1 
 
Tt ie 
ANd f= ae PRS 
or . pr 
    
NURSERY SCHOOL 
HOUSEKEEPERS 
Children in this Paris 
nursery school learn 
how to wash the baby, 
a 6-lb. doll that “eats” 
and sleeps. The 300 
three - to - six - year - olds 
in this school receive 
housekeeping and child- 
care lessons as part of 
training for adult life. 
One of the principles on 
which Maria Montes- 
sori based her system of 
teaching was that chil- 
dren should be shown 
how to do such practical 
things as sweeping, 
cleaning and washing. 
YOUNG SCULP- 
TORS, pondering over 
their figures of men and 
animals, belong to the 
children’s art school in 
Komsomolsk on the Ri- 
ver Amur, a city founded 
32 years ago and now 
one of the most impor- 
tant industrial centres 
of the Soviet Far East.   
— 
   
    
M
i
r
a
n
 
3 ps
 
 
Unesco - Giselle Freund

## [Page 20](062906engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 61494: Maria Montessori: a vision of mankind transformed

MARIA MONTESSORI! (Cont'd) 
In the steps of Jean-Jacques Rousseau 
“Adjustment to these circumstances, and to many 
others of a similar nature, which help to create a per- 
manent Inferlority complex, breeds and encourages a 
spirit of devotion, almost of idolatry, directed towards the 
‘leaders’, the authorities who, for such repressed per- 
sonalities, are a reincarnation of parents and teachers— 
the figures the child was taught to regard as perfect and 
infallible. In thls way, discipline becomes almost a form 
of slavery.” 
But, declared Maria Montessori, there was another way 
in which schools could be regarded as the breeding-ground 
of war, inasmuch as instead of developing the child's 
sociability, they discouraged it. Five years later she 
stressed this point again: “Education in its present form 
encourages the child’s sense of isolation and his pursuit 
of his own interests,” she sald. “Children are taught not to 
help one another, not to prompt those who do not know 
something, to think of nothing but their own advancement, 
to aim solely at winning prizes in competition with their 
companions. And these pathetic egotists, mentally wearied 
as experimental psychology reveals them to be, then go 
out into the world, where they live side by side like grains 
of sand in the desert—every one cut off from his neigh- 
bour, and all sterile. If a gale arises, this human dust, 
with no spiritual essence to give it life, will be swept away 
in a death-dealing whirlwind.” 
The death-dealing whirlwind ‘was just appearing on the 
horizon; for this was in 1937. 
At the VIth International Montessori Congress, at 
Copenhagen, the founder declared that the words 
“Educate for Peace” should henceforth ring out like a 
command. As she spoke there was a new note of distress 
in her voice. At the opening meeting she praised Den- 
mark, “great and generous in offering hospitality to world 
  wd 
pl A 
Sod _g Sw 
x w’ ; wr aro * - ~< CN Kn 
i ——r RL - pa vr an EB EN 
peace,” and expressed her satisfaction that Belgium, 
Catalonia, Chile, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, France, Greece, 
Halitl, Latvia, Mexico, Rumania, the U.S.S.R.. the Swiss 
Canton of Ticino and the United States had responded 
to her invitation by sending official representatives to the 
Congress. She spoke of education for peace, of peaceful 
children, of peace as the true destiny of mankind, 
throughout that week in August, from the first meeting of 
the Congress to the last. 
The Second World War confirmed her belief that her 
methods should be applied as widely as possible. As soon 
as it was over she began again to address teachers in her 
assured 'way, putting her ideas to them clearly and con- 
vincingly. 
And so she worked on, tirelessly, to the age of 81. 
It might well be asked: “What was so original about 
Maria Montessori’s ideas?” She undoubtedly follows in 
the great tradition of Rousseau, who declared that the 
child is basically good, but is spoilt by society. But 
whereas In Rousseau this belief sprang from poetical 
intuition, in her it ‘was the outcome of a precise, scientific 
study of the hundreds of young children she had the 
opportunity to observe. 
It is true that while she was engaged in research and 
experiment other investigators In different parts of the 
world were working on the same lines and reaching simi- 
lar conclusions. But she alone was gulded by this ardent 
vision of mankind transformed; and she alone pointed out 
that nothing but an educational system which, instead of 
crushing the child, fostered his psychical energies, could 
produce men with the moral qualities required to control 
the tremendous scientific advances they themselves had 
brought about. 
Unesco-Tamagawa Gakuen, Tokyo 
AS A TEAM. Smil- 
ing group of young- 
sters from a Tokyo 
school set off for a 
day of outdoor acti- 
vities of the kind 
advocated by Maria 
Montessori as a po- 
sitive means of de- 
veloping’ the child's 
sociability. "Edu- 
cation”, she said, 
"too often encou- 
rages the child's 
sense of isolation 
and also his pursuit 
of his own interests.”

## [Page 21](062906engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 61519: The Silent music of the earth

HE classical definition of sound relates the phenome- 
Lalo a I=D Co [VETAVICY AVAR Col da To €=T oT La FT-IR s EET TT Jl 4 a 1-1o s FE I 
‘nism such as the ear. As such, sound is the sensation received 
th rough the organs of hearing from vibrations transmitted by EL 
vibrating area in contact with the air. 
But in physics sound is generally taken to relate to alternations 
in air pressure (or that of water or of other fluids) over a wide 
BT: 1aTe Bo) Bd T-RT o=Tor dg VT0 a TO I A TVET 4 VT IT IRVVE AVIS) TT Tod oI [OAV {0-0 
‘quency that we do not ordinarily think of them as sound at all but 
“only as cyclic pressure waves of air of such long wave lengths 
RUE GTA ET lo T-Wo [23 Toa £10 WoT 1 AVA SVT To FR AV) instruments operating: 
somewhat in ‘the manner of a barometer. |  21

## [Page 22](062906engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

22 


### 61519: The Silent music of the earth

  
MUSIC OF THE EARTH (Cont'd) 
Sixteen octaves below man's perception 
Such knowledge is not new, and “ultra-sound,” or sound 
frequencies five or six octaves above the human 
sound perception threshold, has been made use of in 
industry, as is well kngwn. By producing the right 
number of vibrations to accomplish a particular job, 
sound, or rather ultra-sound, can be used in various 
industrial processes. Supersonic waves can sterilize food, 
pasteurize milk, emulsify paint, clean castings, and so on. 
But the use of sound that 1s not sound has recently 
brought to light another possibility—that of exploring the 
earth’s Interior structure. From the new methods now 
used precise and detailed information can be obtained on 
the detalls of the earth’s Inner density and elasticity, on 
the length of major earthquake faults, and the degree of 
the “ringing” of the earth. So while most of our attention 
recently has been turned to Outer Space, sclentists have 
actually been learning more about the earth’s interior (1). 
Scientists, especially geophysists, have discussed and 
studied the vibrations of the earth for more than three- 
quarters of a century, but until recently little was known 
about these phenomena. Nevertheless science was able to 
evolve some theories and to define the related problems. 
Scientists believed there were free oscillations of the earth, 
unrelated to normal earthquake waves about which much 
had already been learned. 
By studies of the passage of earthquake waves through 
the earth, some knowledge of the density and elasticity of 
the earth’s crust, mantle, and core had been gained. But 
scientists believed the earth had vibrations of its own. 
They believed the earth played music that might be 
“heard” if only the means of detecting it could be devised. 
And if it could be heard, they wondered what would be 
the pitch, or the musical term for frequency, of the result- 
ine oscillations? 
THE EARTH'S 
BRITTLE CRUST 
Movements of the earth's 
crust under the ocean are 
shown in this plate from 
the Unesco colour film- 
strip, “The Sea”. From the 
waters emerge atolls and 
the islands formed by vol- 
canic activity. Beneath lie 
huge undersea mountain 
ranges and between them 
is a vast rift in the earth's 
crust. It was the opening 
up of a “fault” of this 
kind that caused the des- 
tructive earthquake in 
Chile in 1960. Scientists 
were able to map the fault 
action from recordings of 
terrestial ~~ vibrations—the 
strange music of the earth 
hidden from man's ear. 
VIBRATING 
PATTERNS 
Intricate circular wave 
systems flow out through 
water Into which two 
probes have been set 
vibrating on the same fre- 
quency. As the effect of 
the vibrations diminishes 
the patterns become less 
is produced by 
Unesco-Mercier fundamental free oscilla- 
tions of the earth, 
Some scientists began working on new instruments, 
electronic digital computers called extensometers and 
gravimeters. The extensometer records oscillations in the 
horizontal direction and the gravimeter in the vertical. 
The extensometer, an extremely sensitive seismograph 
capable of recording very slow oscillations, was designed 
by Dr. Hugo Benioff, seismology professor at the Cali- 
fornia Institute of Technology Seismological Laboratory. 
Selsmographs pick up normal earthquake waves that go 
around the earth but disappear quickly. The new 
computers were sensitive enough to detect a squeeze or 
stretch of one-sixteenth of an inch in the earth between 
Pasadena, California and New York. 
One of Benloff’s extensometers was located near 
Isabella Dam in California’s Kern County and two of 
them at Nana, Peru. It was already known that certain 
shock waves, when passing through molten matter, act 
differently from when moving through solids. But among 
the things scientists also want to learn about the earth's 
interior is how much of it is molten and how much of 
it is solid: how deep the roots of mountains go into the 
TWO MINUTES TO NOON 
The worst natural disaster in recorded history 
occurred on September 1, 1923 when a great 
earthquake, followed by fires and landslides, 
devastated Tokyo, nearby Yokohama and the 
surrounding countryside. A dramatic new 
account of this great seismic catastrophe is 
presented in “Two Minutes to Noon”, by 
Noel F. Busch, published by Simon and Schuster, 
630 Fifth Avenue, New York 20, U.S.A. ($ 4,95)     
complex. The same effect

## [Page 23](062906engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 61519: The Silent music of the earth

earth; and how the course and severity of earthquakes 
can be accurately predicted. 
If earth’s music could be recorded and studied, more 
and more answers to these problems could be obtained. 
And then in 1960 the tremendous Chilean earthquake 
struck, and its massive jolt served as the striking hammer 
on the bell of the earth and set the earth ringing loudly 
enough for its vibrations to be picked up on the instru- 
ments. Sound that is not sound was “heard” at last! And 
through it more was learned about our ringing earth. 
It was learned that the earth has two fundamental 
frequencies of vibration, one with a period of 53.1 minutes 
and the other with a period of 54.7 minutes. This double 
pitch is due to the fact that the earth is spinning on its 
axis. If it were not spinning it would have only one 
fundamental pitch whose frequency would be somewhere 
between the two. 
The earth’s overtones, or the secondary tones produced 
by the independent vibrations of a part of the vibrating 
body itself, go to frequencies as high as one vibration 
every 3.7 minutes. The torsional vibrations, or the twist- 
Ing and turning vibrations caused by internal stress, are 
42.3 minutes in length. The overtones die down a little 
faster than the fundamental vibrations. After about one 
hundred oscillations, the overtones were down to one- 
third of their original strength. The fundamental oscilla- 
tions lasted even longer in the earth’s core than near the 
surface because the core is a better bell. 
Yes, there is a music of the earth that can never be 
uslis 
heard by the normal ear unless a recording of It is arti- 
ficlally speeded up and played back, for the frequency of 
the vibrations is little less than one per hour. Sound 
that man can hear travels about 344 metres (1130 feet) 
a second In air under normal conditions. The lowest 
audible tone man hears naturally is four octaves below 
Middle C, while the Globe's music is about 20 octaves 
below. But the music Is there—sound that is not sound, as 
we normally speak of it, yet now known and heard by 
certain scientists. 
This discovery led to further progress. Analysis of the 
oscillations enabled the scientists to map the fault action 
that resulted in the Chilean earthquake, a fault of about 
600 miles beginning near the town of Concepcion and 
extending southward, mostly under the sea. 
More facts about the elasticity and the density of the 
earth through the crust, mantle and core were also learned 
and no doubt the future will bring us still greater 
knowledge. At present it takes great earthquakes, such 
as the Chilean one, to set the earth ringing loudly enough 
for its vibrations, to be detected. Smaller earth tremors 
may produce similar effects but so far scientists have not 
been able to “hear” them. Who knows, however, what 
the future will tell us about the inside of our planet? 
Perhaps it will prove almost as interesting as Outer 
Space. 
(1) See “Probing the Interior of the Earth,” The Uncsco 
Courier, Oct. 1963. 
23

## [Page 24](062906engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

24 
  
Above, head and neck of bridled horse decorates 
both sides of this black-figured Attic vase (560- 
550 B.C.). Below, another vase painting showing 
Theseus killing the Minotaur, the famed mythological 
monster of the Cretan Labyrinth (about 540 B.C.). 
  


### 61520: Pantheon of Greek gods and heroes

  
PANTHEON OF GREEK 
GODS AND HEROES 
The scenes from Greek mythology shown here 
were painted over 2,500 years ago on Attic 
black-figured vases now in the collection of 
the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. 
Photographs and descriptions of 56 of these 
vases and vase fragments recently appeared in 
a special fascicule (1) prepared by Dietrich 
von Bothmer. It was published under the 
auspices of the International Council for Philo- 
sophy and Humanistic Studies with financial 
help from the Metropolitan Museum and from 
Unesco. The fascicule has now been added 
to the Corpus Vasorum Antiquorum, a vast 
“catalogue” of the world’s antique vases which 
the International Academic Union has been 
assembling since 1922. Many countries have 
contributed to the Corpus whose 118 fascicules 
now constitute a planned and detailed record 
of some of man’s finest antique art treasures. 
(1) = Attic Black-figured Amphorae”, published by Har- 
vard University Press, 79, Garden Street, Cambridge, 
Mass. U.S.A., from whom this and other U.S. fascicules 
may be ordered. rn 
in the ** Corpus Vasorum Antiquorum 
Do not order from Unesco. 
  
    
  
 
Four men and a youth competing in a foot race. They 
appear on a prize amphor, one of the Panathenaic vases 
linked with the festival of Athens, held to celebrate the 
union of Attica under Theseus (about 520 B.C.). 
  
      
All photos © 1963, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 
New York.

## [Page 25](062906engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 61520: Pantheon of Greek gods and heroes

  
  
  
A scene believed to depict the apo- 
theosis of Herakles. The woman in 
the chariot, holding the reins and the 
goad, is probably Athena, goddess of 
wisdom. On far side of horses are 
Apollo and Hermes (about 530 B.C.). 
Dionysos, in the centre, turns his head 
towards a flute-playing satyr. To 
the right of Dionysos stands Hermes 
holding wine pitcher (5630-520 B.C.). 
—
 
6 b 
—d <¢ ar. 
| 
Y
Y
 
O
N
A
N
,
 
  “
9
9
 
=
 
  Dionysos, god of wine, of fertility 
and of the theatre, shown between 
two dancing satyrs. In his left hand 
the god holds a drinking horn. Vase 
painting dating from about 520 B.C. 
s
P
0
0
0
0
0
g
0
0
r
0
8
4
8
9
,
 
—
—
 
E
A
A
 
A
N
 E
I
T
Y
Y
A
R
 
A
L
N
:
 

## [Page 26](062906engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 61521: The Day the river spoke; a short story

26 
  
  

## [Page 27](062906engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 61521: The Day the river spoke; a short story

THE DAY 
THE RIVER SPOKE 
This is a story about Janu, the little girl from India who 
lived in a village way down in the southwest, in a place 
called Kerala between the mountains and the sea. It is a 
green land where the hibiscus and the frangipani bloom, 
and coconut palms grow tall and beautiful. In the fields A Short Story 
men and women work together before the monsoons and bv K ala Nair 
after, in the seasons of harvest and sowing. If the big y amala au 
rains fail there is not enough rice to go round, and many 
homes go hungry. But the children are bright-eyed and 
eager, wanting to know what lies over their mountains 
and their sea — in their own land which is India, and the 
other lands beyond. 
ANU wriggled through the gap in the bamboo fence and walked down the path between the 
paddy fields. The paddy lay green and soft as far as the eye could see—to the east where 
blue grey hills were tall against the morning sky, to the west till it met the railway track, 
and before her, southwards, right up to where the green river slipped and slid through shale 
and boulder to the sea. 
She could not see the sea, of course. But Chandu, the fisherman, had long stories to tell of 
the river's journey to the sea and how skilfully he had to row his boat at the river's mouth. 
It was wonderful to listen to the stories Chandu had to tell and to see the fish he brought, 
rowing up river from the sea—the clams and mussels and the silvery sardines that all her 
village loved, and the dogfish that was cured and salted and hung from the kitchen rafter 
in a plaited basket made of palm leaves. 
All along the river by the edge of the fields were the coconut palms, their leaves feathery 
in the sunlight, and when the big, round moon rose above the hills, the leaves were wet with 
moonlight and they rustled. Sometimes when the breeze swept through the bamboo clumps 
by the river one could hear a delicate “rat-tat-tat"—the reed song that the bamboos liked to 
sing. 
Janu walked a little slowly now, sniffing the salt air which blew landwards from the sea. Some- 
times, she stopped to pick up the small flat stones which she saved for skimming on the still 
water of the tank in Meena's house. The red silk cotton tree was a glory of colour and the 
gnarled, twisted branches of the frangipani were laden with blossom. She plucked two, fold- 
ing the petals back so that they looked like earrings. Their scent was lovely and warm and 
she put some in her hair as well. 
She noticed a tiny yellow spider in the golden heart of a flower, and shrank from it at first, 
then she shook the flower, and the spider spun a long thread and fell to the ground. A tiny, 
golden spider. “l hardly saw it at first,”, thought Janu, “it was so yellow, just like the flower.” 
She had seen brown spiders and large black ones which always scared her, but never one 
Study of a girl by this colour. 
era She had reached the river bank now and sat on her favourite rock, her hands cupping her 
Indian boy. This chin. She had long, bright eyes which her mother had darkened with lamp-black and anti- 
awarded first Drive mony and her hair was bunched up in a knot. 
(13-14 age group) in the international A green lizard slid from under the rock and disappeared into the bamboo. A copper-smith 
children’s art sounded its “Honk honk, honky tonk” in the distance. The river went past, its murmur soft in 
contest held by the stillness, and Janu said to herself—she loved talking to herself—"1've never seen a yellow 27 
Shankar's Weekly, . . . " 
New Delhi, in 1954. one before. Why do yellow spiders hide in yellow flowers? | must ask Ettan. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 28](062906engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 61521: The Day the river spoke; a short story

28 
The day the river spoke (Gm) 
  
DRAWINGS BY 
A.B. SCHWARZ 
These illustrations 
are taken from “A 
Journey Through 
Toyland,” by Ka- 
mala S. Dongerkery; 
Popular Book Depot, 
Bombay, 1954. 
Ettan went to school where the teacher had taught him to read and write, and he used to sit 
in their verandah loudly reading his lessons over and over again. All the boys in their village 
went to school, she noticed. But not all the girls. 
Meena went, of course, but that was different. Meena had no brothers or sisters and her 
father was the village headman. Why, her mother even wore gold “zari” on her blouse when 
she went to the big town in the railway train, and she had a fine black umbrella, and Meena had 
one too, a small black one with a red tassel. 
Most of the others in their village used palm-leaf umbrellas which they wore on their heads 
like a hat with a wide brim. It was so much easier to work in the fields in rainy weather when 
one wore a palm-leaf umbrella, because it left both one's hands free, but a black umbrella was 
so much nicer to have. 
“Mother, why can't | go to school like Ettan and Meena?” Janu had asked. Janu called her 
brother “Ettan” because Ettan means “Elder brother,” but his real name was Gopi. And Mother 
had replied: "You are too small, baby. Maybe later.” But when she was five, Little Ramu was 
born and Mother said: “Maybe next year. Janu girl, mind your little brother while | go to the 
fields now." 
1. Little Ramu was two, and then three and Mother said: “Hush your crying 
now. Ettan goes to school because he is a boyand boys must learn early. You be just my little 
girl and help me to clean the rice and fetch the wood. And you keep Little Ramu out of mischief.” 
“But Meena is a girl and she goes to school I” 
“Meena’s father has a lot of money,” said Father who had come in from the fields. “Sending 
girls to school, indeed! Learning to cook is what they need. And sweeping and pounding rice 
and helping in the harvest.” 
And Big Uncle who lay on his straw mat in the corner sat up and said: “What's that? What's 
that? Getting lazy, is she? A bamboo switch is what she needs,” and then he choked because 
his wad of betel leaf nearly went down the wrong way and Mother rushed to pat his back to 
stop the coughing and Janu nearly wept because no-one was listening to her. 
“But | can do all that when | come back from school. | promise. Please, Father!” 
“And who's to mind Little Ramu, I'd like to know? And your mother in her condition!” 
lanu looked at her mother and sighed. She locked very much as she did just before Little 
Ramu was born. 
“Would you like to go down to Chandu and buy some sardines for the pot?” asked Mother 
kindly, changing the subject, and Janu tock the coin Mother gave her and went down the fields 
to Chandu. 
B. Chandu only laughed when she said she wanted to go to school like Ettan. 
“And what would you be doing in a school?” asked Chandu. “Bawling your lessons all together. 
Waste of time, | call it. Now if you said: “Let me learn to make a net, let me learn to catch fish," 
there'd be some sense. Schools!” Chandu spat with unerring aim into the water. He wrapped the 
sardines in a piece of paper and said: “There, now. You run along home and learn to make 
some man a good wife one day. And tell your Mother sardines are coming scarce now. Next 
time it'll be dogfishl” 
Ettan was twelve and growing bigger and Ramu was five and going to school and she was 
nearly ten and minding Little Appu who was the smallest. She came sometimes to the river 
when Mother wasn't looking, slipping through the gap in the fence. Down by the river every- 
thing was quiet and peaceful and she was happy. Mostly. But today wasn't one of those days. 
A big bright tear splashed down her nose. And another. And another. A kingfisher swept 
down, its wings an arrow of blue in the sunlight. And the green lizard slithered down to the 
river's edge to bask in the sun, “Dear, dearl” said a sleepy, murmuring voice, “what's the 
matter?” 
Janu started, because she was sure she had been quite alone. It couldn't have been the lizard. 
And the kingfisher was up in the bamboos eating the fish it had caught. It couldn't be the par- 
rots, because parrots shrieked and this was such a sleepy voice. She looked around her. There 
wasn't a soul in sight. She was rather scared and wanted to run away.

## [Page 29](062906engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 61521: The Day the river spoke; a short story

  
  
“You shouldn't cry, you know,” the voice went on. “And you really shouldn't be scared, 
when you have been coming here to see me every day—well, almost every day.” 
She started uncertainly. It was such a murmurous sleepy voice, like the river. It couldn't be 
the riverl 
“Well, tell me all about it,” said the River, for it was the River. “I've got to hurry to reach 
the sea, you know." 
“They won't let me go to school,” said Janu. “They don't want girls. They only"~—she stop- 
ped a sob—"only want boys. And I'm so old now, they'll never let me go. And | want to go. 
| want to learn to read like Ettan and Meena. | want to know why spiders are yellow in yellow 
flowers, why the bamboos rustle, why the moon always comes from behind the hills, never tho 
other way, why the baby fish in the field water become frogs, why. . .” 
“Stop!” said the River. “You make me breathless. So many ‘why’'s'l | can tell you where 
the moon goes,” he said conspiratorially. “She goes down towards the sea. I've seen her: she 
always takes the same way—over the mountains and down to the sea, like mel® 
“Even Little Ramu goes to school,” said Janu bitterly. “Pity the school isn't by the sea,” 
said the River. “Then | could take you along, you know. But | suppose | couldn't really. You'd 
get your feet wet. And that would never dol No, there's only one thing you can do, I'm afraid!” 
“I can do something?” asked Janu. “Well, it's up to you,” said the River. “Seems to me little 
girls can do as much as little boys—they swim as well as little boys. You just slip along one 
morning and sit there in the school and listen to what's going on, and maybe the teacher will let 
you stay.” 
“| couldn't,” gasped Janu. "| couldn't! They'd scare me. They'd chase me out.” The River 
laughed. “You? Scared?” he said, “when you're not afraid of the green lizard, or of the snake 
in the bamboo clump,” (Janu started) “or the big trains rattling past that bridge. Trains are 
noisy. | prefer ships,” said the River. 
ANU forgot to be scared of the snake she'd never known was in the bamboo 
clump. “What are ships?” she asked. “Big boats,” said the River, “so big that they can take 
hundreds of people, and they sail along the sea with lights that shine all night.” 
Janu held her breath. “Will they come here?” she asked. “I'm afraid not,” said the River. 
“Too large, you know. Chandu’'s catamaran is good enough for me. Chandu can take you to 
see a ship, some day.” 
“They'd never let mel” wailed Janu. “Oh, why am | a girl?” “Try going to school first,” said 
the River. “Remember—it’'s up to you!” 
He sounded sleepier than ever and Janu could hardly hear him now. She rubbed her eyes and 
sat up. It must have been a dream. But when she scrambled down the boulder, carefully 
skirting the bamboo clump before she got to the path through the fields, she thought she heard 
the river chuckle. A slow, sleepy chuckle. 
She'd done it at last, but it hadn't been easy. First of all she'd had to wait till Father went 
to the fields and Mother began the cooking. Then she combed her hair and put on the red 
ribbon Meena's mother had once given her. Big Uncle had finished his early meal of cold rice 
and salted mangoes and was asleep. Little Appu was sucking a contented thumb and Ettan 
and Ramu had already left for school. 
Ramu was using the slate Ettan used when he first went to schoo! and which, when no-one 
was looking, Janu used to borrow just to draw pictures. Very quietly she would draw Chandu’s 
boat and the bamboo clump and the school. On the slate you could draw things and rub them 
out and draw again. 
She put Little Appu down on the mat and went towards the fence. Little Appu let out a 
howl. She went back hastily and picked him up. Little Appu gurgled happily and pushed a 
chubby fist into her face. She said under her breath: "| suppose I'll have to take you now. Only 
if you start crying when we get there, I'll—I'l] throw you into the trees and the parrots will come 
and take you away.” 
She reached the school panting and out of breath and stood by the door listening while the 
teacher read out the lesson. It was a story about a prince called Asoka who became a great 
king. Little Appu had fallen asleep on her shoulder. She crept nearer and nearer till she 
was in the back row squatting with the others on the earthen floor. Little Appu made no noise 
and she listened. 
The teacher was asking questions. Everyone was busy turning over the pages and holding 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
29

## [Page 30](062906engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

30 


### 61521: The Day the river spoke; a short story

The day 
  
     
SOV YVUVIOTD" 
   
the river spoke (Cont'd) 
up a hand to answer and when the questions were finished, the teacher said: “Now, | have a 
surprise for you. Next week we shall take the train and go down to Kozhikode and there 
we can see the big bazaars and the tile factory and | shall show you the sea and the lighthouse.” 
There were delighted shouts from the class. “Please, Sir, what is a lighthouse?" asked Kutty, 
the weaver's son. 
“It is a big building shaped like a pencil—a huge pencil—with a bright light at the top that 
shines very far, so that the ships at sea can sail safely.” 
“Is a ship like a catamaran, Sir?" asked Nanu whose mother lived all by herself at the edge 
of the clearing by the forest. He walked two miles to school and back every day. 
“Now who can answer Nanu's question?” said the teacher and Janu forgot Little Appu and 
her fear and her shyness and said clearly: “It is much, much bigger than a catamaran, big 
enough for hundreds of people to live inside and..." She stopped. 
All eyes were on her and Little Appu who had been jerked out of sleep when she got up to 
answer, let out a wail. Janu panicked. “Where did you spring from, little girl?" asked the 
teacher. “And what is your name? You're new in my class. And haven't | told you, all of you, 
not to bring your little brothers and sisters here? Whose little boy is he? Who brought him here? 
Hey? Answer mel” 
The teacher's spectacles nearly fell off and the class was a forest of shiny black heads all 
nodding, all whispering. Janu's lower lip trembled. <J-Janu, Sir. He... He's my little brother. 
| didn't mean to make him cry. | didn't mean..." 
“She's Gopi's sister—Gopi is in the next class, "said one of the boys. 
"It's Janu,” said another. 
“She's Uncle Gopalan's little girl,” said a third. 
And the teacher said: “Come here, Janu. All right, all right, pick him up and bring him along, 
too. Come here to my desk. Now, all the others can go.” 
S. went in fear and trembling and Little Appu sobbed with fright at the strange 
faces round him. The boys trooped out into the sunshine, leaving her along with this stranger. 
She held Little Appu close for comfort. She no longer wanted to go to school. School without 
the children inside was terrifying. 
“So you're Gopi's little sister? Nice lad, Gopi,” said the teacher, peering at her over his spec- 
tacles. “| suppose he doesn’t know you're here. 
“| suppose your mother thinks you're lost. And your little brother, too. Now tell me, why 
didn't you come to school before?” He held out a pencil to Little Appu who looked shyly at him 
and finally grasped it in his chubby fingers. 
By the time the teacher had heard from Janu herself all about how she couldn't go to school 
it was past midday, and when she went home her mother was so worried that she scolded Janu 
from sheer relief, and her father said he'd take a stick to her back one of these days, roaming 
about when there was work to do, and much more, in the way her father always spoke when he 
came home tired. } 
But her secret was her own, like the bright shiny copper coin she polished with tamarind juice 
and put away carefully under her mat each night. Of course, when Gopi came back from 
school, everyone would know about her escapade. But no-one knew what the teacher had told 
her—her bright shiny promise which she held tight to her heart like her copper coin which glint- 
ed in the sunlight. “If you really, really want to come to my school, Janu,” the teacher had said, 
“we'll talk your father into it. Don't you worry. We'll find a way.” 
Meena had laughed at her story. Meena always laughed a lot and when she did, the dimples 
came and went. Meena said it was all over the village, the way Janu had just walked into 
school, and Meena's father thought it a pity that some boys didn't have so much spirit and 
Meena's mother said: “Wait till she grows up, she'll shake up this place, I've no doubt.” Then 
Meena had said: “Let's swim a bit, shall we? Race you to the tank.” And she had pulled Janu 
into the water and they raced each other swimming to the other side and back. 
“School is fun,” Meena said, shaking her damp curls. “You'll like it. | hope your father will 
let you come. My father says that if you really study hard, you can go on and on and on, 
maybe even to High School.” 
“And after High School?” asked Janu, though she didn't know what High School was. But 
Meena didn't know the answer to that. Not yet.

## [Page 31](062906engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 61521: The Day the river spoke; a short story

  
Janu saw the teacher walking up the steps to their gate the next evening when she was 
lighting the lamp. She lit the lamp and brought it to the front verandah and set it down on 
the step, a tiny winking light to bless their home. Big Uncle had a sprig of tulsl leaf behind his 
ear, and was chanting his prayers and Ettan and Ramu joined in, little Ramu stumbling over 
the big words. She was too excited to pray. To chant them with Big Uncle, that Is. But, she 
did say a prayer all by herself. Not loud, but a small prayer which she hoped God would hear. 
She could see her father scratching his cheek the way he did when he was worrled and 
the teacher was nodding and saying something she couldnt make out. Then he offered her 
father some betel leaf and tobacco to chew and they chewed it in a friendly way by the bam- 
boo fence. 
And Mother said: “Little Janu, | shall miss you when you go to school. They do say nowa- 
days that girls should learn like boys—when | was your age | wanted to go to school, but your 
grandmother said ‘No’, but now, | am glad the teacher came to talk to Father.” 
H. came yesterday too when you were at Meena's house. He thinks you can 
study just like Gopi, and | want Gopi to grow up and pass his examinations and work In a big 
building as they say Meena's uncle does, far away in a place called Delhi—so far It takes three 
days to reach there by train. 
“But what will you do, Janu girl, if you go to school now? You'll learn to write your name 
and maybe to sew with that big machine, like Meena's mother, but we won't have any money 
to buy a machine, so it's no use thinking of that. Well. . .if you've set your heart on it, | 
suppose there's no stopping you.” 
And she sang to Little Appu: 
O little koel, little black bird, 
Don’t you know the season's changed? 
Comes the wind and comes the rain 
Won't you build your nest again? 
And Janu said: “Mother!” and went and threw her arms round her mother's neck and hugged 
her tight. “When | grow up,” she said, “I'll be a teacher and I'll go from house to house in our 
village and ask all the little girls to come to my school. And I'll teach them all I'm going to 
learn. You'll see!” 
And she went down the path between the fields the next morning before school began, with 
a hop, skip and jump and sat on her favourite rock, the red ribbon in her hair and a yellow 
flower. 
1 did itl” she told the river. “| was scared, but | dit itl And they're letting me 
go. I'm going to learn to write my name and do sums and find out why our little fishes in the 
ricefields turn into frogs and see the lighthouse. One day I'll see a ship,” she nodded to the river. 
And the river slipped and slid between shale and boulder and held its green course among 
the bamboos, and the coconut palms. Janu took the frangipani blossom from her hair. “Take 
this to the sea for me, dear River,” she said, “and hurry, hurry, or you'll never reach there.” She 
turned back to look as she went past and there was the white and yellow blossom floating down 
the current. She was sure it was a dream the day the river spoke, but here she was actually going 
to school with a red ribbon in her hair and that wasn't a dream. 
She ran between the tall green fields. And way behind her she thought she heard the river's 
sleepy chuckle: “Come again, little girl, and I'll tell you all about the ships that sail the sea,” 
he seemed to be saying, but of course, it could have been just the breeze sighing through the 
ricefields in the morning. 
 
KAMALA NAIR is a member of the Indian Ministry of Education, New Delhi. Iller story is set 
in Kerala which has the highest percentage in India of literacy amongst women, and where 
almost all girls of the age group 6-11 are now in school. “The theme, however,” she writes, 
“is of topical interest in view of the very real need of stepping up the enrolment of girls in 
schools in South and South-East Asia.” 
31

## [Page 32](062906engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

  
S
3
I
N
O
I
 
  
 
     
  
U
N
I
T
E
D
 
N
A
T
I
O
N
S
 Va 
> 
Ex 
, 
1 = 
- 
§ 
S
V
A
I
N
D
N
 
  
ag F La L] [] - 
as The Unesco philatelic service 
POSTAGE 4 A y Laks x . ; w i 2 = ahs 
. 1 SY. : Vi oa) 4 Jee ar. J : ull Mi oP aly fd il RT . 4 
~ As agent in France of the U.N. Postal Administration, Unesco’s 
Philatelic Service stocks all U.N. stamps and TE Ae EVA L158 
“currently on sale as well as stamps issued by Unesco member 
states to commemorate important events in the history of 
‘Unesco and the U.N. Some recent issues are shown ‘here. 
Above, from left, a newly-designed U.N. 50 cent stamp which 
has now replaced the 50 cent issue in use since 1951, a U.N. 
~ stamp honouring the United Nations Conference of Trade 
and Development which opened in Geneva on March 23, and 
~ a stamp commemorating the 10th anniversary of the Korean 
National Commission for Unesco. On left are stamps from 
Nepal (with the slogan “Education for All", recalling Unesco’s 
efforts to promote literacy and extend education) and from 
the Mongolian People’s Republic (marking its entry into 
the United Nations). For prices and further details write to 
The Unesco Philatelic Service, Place de Fontenoy, LEENA) A 
EY a ES i 1 EST ERNCE e ei (E NR 
     
   
  
 
(r
d 
[o
s E x
 
(v
e)
 ESKOSLQYENSKO KOSLOVENSKO 
fo, Jai 
i - 
AZ
E hd 
~ 
«1 
oL 
[8 
- 
— 
[=] 
pv4 BOLUS 
‘Some years ago an enterprising teacher in Monaco decid- 
ed to organize a philatelic contest among his pupils. His 
idea has now grown into a large scale TR CIOENGLET 
‘stamp competition and exhibition which, as Scolatex Il, 
recently attracted 2,000 entries from 18 countries. 
Be ENTLY I VAR CIR VE EES ENT RET oT LIES LS C1 
Monaco and the Monaco Philatelic Union, the contest 
ECELCR CIRCLE GENCE TEND ERE NC) gE oR 1 CRS ETT Ea 
LE RUHR I CRUE AINE RL CIO ENE LEUNG GETS ETT TT
NCU CIR VCSEL RE TRG TET TENET IT RY [ey ETA selection 
“of the exhibits was shown at Unesco’'s H.Q. in 
Paris, where prizes, including Unesco Art Albums and 
subscriptions to The Unesco Courier, were awarded by 
Unesco. Winners of the inter-school section awards 
‘were: (1) Ecole Scheepflin, Strasbourg, France (History of | 
Postal Services in Alsace-Lorraine); (2) Ecole Catholique 
de Garcons, Wissembourg, France (Hunger in the World) ; 
(3) Young Philatelists’ Club, Kochitse, Czechoslovakia 
(The History of Dress). Winners of individual prizes 
“were: (1) Claude Bosse, Monaco (Hydro-electric power) ;
(2) Zbynek Pop, Breznice, Czechoslovakia (A Child Grows, 
[I ESERE a1 I =F: 1 15) IFO) WN <- J WF: To EO EToTeT F: FO = VE ET 2) 
~ Hungary (The Concentration Camps). Right, four stamps 
from the prizewinning exhibit, The History of Dress. 
i aT ay £0 retin 7 Hy SL Se i 1 CRE pas 
= Es 
  
 
25
0 
LE
T 
IN
ZE
NY
RS
KY
CH
 
Ba
 
CO
 
SK
OL
VP
R 
  
[&) 
D> |” 
172] 
of 
> 
z 
ld 
~less 
z 
=9 
© Re 
— 
[= 
un ba       
  
  
         1749 - 1838     
be 

## [Page 33](062906engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

Letters to the Editor 
A CLASSROOM HELPER 
Sir, 
We live in a time of “universalism” 
and nothing concerning mankind 
should be alien to any of us. Through 
your magazine UNEsco helps to 
achieve the great task of making 
nations approach each other on the 
basis of a broader mutual knowledge. 
In the French lessons which I give 
at the University and the Polytechnic 
School of Guayaquil, I make good 
use of the French edition of THE 
UNEsco Courier, both for translations 
and exercises. By using it in this 
way I find that the interest created 
in the subjects you present is sustained 
and increased for my students. 
Luis Felipe Torres 
Guayaquil, Ecuador 
WHEN FLIGHT WAS SILENT 
Sir, 
In his article on the history of 
balloons (Sept. 1963) David Gunston 
relates how the French used a tethered 
gas-bag for observation purposes at 
Maubeuge. This captive balloon was 
actually used at Fleurus in the Belgian 
province of Hainaut during the famous 
battle in which the army of the French 
Republic defeated the Austrians, on 
June 26, 1794. This was the first time 
a balloon was used for military tecon- 
naissance. 
I was surprised that the article did 
not mention Auguste Piccard, the 
Swiss scientist and professor at the 
University of Brussels, who in 1931 
became the first person to reach the 
stratosphere (16,000 metres) using a 
balloon carrying a sealed nacelle. 
Eliane Jacquemyns 
Brussels, Belgium 
VULCANOLOGISTS OF RABAUL 
Sir, 
In your excellent issue about the 
interior of the Earth (Oct. 1963) vul- 
canological observatories are discussed 
but no mention is made of the well- 
equipped observatories in the Melane- 
sian region of the Pacific: facilities 
for. the prediction of volcanic eruptions 
exist at Rabaul, in New Guinea; 
Honiara in the Solomons; and Vila in 
the New Hebrides. 
In particular, at Rabaul, the Aus- 
tralian Government has maintained a 
Vulcanological ~~ Observatory since 
1937 to watch over the 30 dormant 
and active volcanoes in the Territory 
of Papua and New Guinea. The 
Observatory is under the auspices of 
the Administration of Papua and 
New Guinea and is partly staffed 
from the Bureau of Mineral Resources, 
Canberra, Australia. 
The Rabaul Vulcanological Obser- 
vatory is equipped with a most up-to- 
date telemetered seismic network to 
safeguard the large population living 
in and around the Rabaul Caldera. 
In addition, a comprehensive report- 
ing network utilizing government 
patrol posts, missions, private plan- 
tations and air companies ensures an 
adequate warning of any premonitory 
volcanic phenomena. These reports 
are immediately checked by competent 
vulcanologists from Rabaul. Three 
more seismic outstations nearing 
completion at outlying volcanoes, to 
be manned by Papuan and New Gui- 
nean Vulcanological Assistants, will 
increase the protection offered by the 
present organization. 
C. D. Branch 
VYulcanologist 
Rabaul, New Guinca 
BELGIUM'S CONGO RECORD 
Sir, 
In your November 1963 issue you 
publish a long article on the Congo 
(Leopoldville). I can understand that 
Unesco wishes to tell readers what it 
is doing in the world, but I would 
have hoped for a more accurate ac- 
count and for a little justice to be 
rendered to the former colonizers. 
Though it may be true that in 1960 
the Congo had produced few university 
students, it was also a fact that of all 
countries in Tropical Africa, it was 
the one with the lowest illiteracy 
rate. 
You also speak of Lwiro. From 
the captions with the photographs 
anyone unfamiliar with the subject 
would certainly believe that this scien- 
tific centre had been created by 
UNEsco, when, in fact, it was a Belgian 
foundation and always welcomed 
foreign research workers who wished 
to study there. 
I have been sorry to see that in the 
organizations connected with the Uni- 
ted Nations, Belgian achievements in 
the Congo are easily forgotten whereas 
there is no lack of criticism of a kind 
that is not necessarly valid. 
Dr. R. Mouchet 
Brussels, Belgium 
HIDDEN HUMUS RICHES 
 
Sir, 
In the forests and jungles covering 
great stretches of the earth, a con- 
tinuous process of life and death goes 
on, especially in the tropical and sub- 
tropical zones. Rotting bark and 
leaves, transformed into humus, even- 
tually feed new plants and trees that 
replace the dead ones. Humus can 
also be obtained by draining lakes 
and swamps whose bottoms are full 
of decomposed plants and other 
vegetal organisms. Could not the 
humus from both sources be used as 
a fertilizer in those parts of the world 
whose dry, sterile soil needs it so 
badly? This might literally mean sal- 
vation for millions facing hunger. Is 
my idea too utopian? Let us have some 
expert opinions on this point. 
Augustin Rubio Delclos 
Barcelona, Spain 
OPEN THE WINDOW WIDER 
 
Sir, 
Your motto is “A Window Open on 
the World." Unfortunately that win- 
dow is not a very big one! Ours is 
a changing world and in my opinion 
Tue Ux~resco Courier does not keep 
pace with the changes. 
In place of former colonies, new, 
independent states are taking shape 
with their own, original, even though 
young, cultures. A glance at the map 
of Africa is sufficient; in the last five 
years the continent has become un- 
recognisable. 
What is life like in these new states, 
how are the people building their 
economy despite all their difficulties, 
how do they work, how do they spend 
their leisure time? Every one of these 
peoples has its own customs, each has 
its own dances and songs. 1 should 
like to sce all these interesting things 
through your “window.” 
It is true you have published some 
malerial on these subjects, but very 
little, and your authors have more to 
say about the past of the peoples of 
Africa and Asia than about the pre- 
sent, 
The theme is certainly a broad one. 
Tell us how the people of countries 
like Mali or Ghana, Western Samoa 
or Yemen or Gambia are living today. 
Interesting changes are taking place 
in the U.A.R. and Algeria. In short, 
open your window wide, so that 
through it we shall see that part of 
the world to which spring is only 
just coming. 
The ycar 1963 was marked by a 
very encouraging cvent—the conclu- 
sion of the Moscow Test Ban Treaty. 
The world is growing warmer, but the 
warmth is only faintly reflected in 
the columns of your journal. 
I should like to read how the people 
of different countries arc fighting for 
peace, I should like to know some- 
thing about our contemporaries who 
grudge no effort in the struggle for 
this great cause. 
Anatoly Chetverikoy 
Gorky, US.S.R. 
PORTRAITS OF GREAT 
ARTISTS 
 
Sir, 
I realize that you cannot always 
satisfy the requests of all readers. 1 
would like to hope, however, that you 
will one day publish an issue similar 
to the one on Velasquez (December 
1960) which encouraged me to sub- 
scribe to your magazine. Could you 
not devote an issue to another great 
artist? 
René G. Ryckebusch 
Dallas, Texas, U.S.A. 
Ed note: We are studying the possi- 
bility of introducing colour and thus 
hope to present great works of art in 
colour more often. 
33

## [Page 34](062906engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
From the Unesco News 
ESTS FOR TEXTBOOKS: Five Eu- 
ropean countries are taking part in a 
UNESCO experiment to compare geography 
books published in different countries and 
assess their contribution to international 
understanding. Books from Denmark, 
France, the Federal Republic of Germany, 
Poland and Spain are to be evaluated for 
accuracy, adequacy, objectivity and balanc- 
ed presentation by experts from Argentina, 
Brazil, Chile and Mexico. Geography 
books from these Latin American countries 
will also be reviewed on a similar basis 
by European specialists. 
EW UNESCO ART SLIDES: Mosaics 
from Israel, illuminated manuscripts, 
from Ethiopia and Byzantine mosaics from 
Greece are illustrated in three new series 
of art slides issued by Unesco. The UNEsco 
Collection brings mvithin reach of a ‘wide 
public masterpieces that are not adequately 
known. Each series consists of about 30 
mounted slides (5X5 cms) with an explan- 
atory booklet and captions in English. 
French and Spanish. 
ONGEST LABORATORY: Across 
the Central Asian deserts, the Kazakh 
steppes, the Altai mountain chain and the 
Siberian tsiga stretches a chain of seis- 
mological stations of the Soviet Institute 
of Earth Physics, ranged in a line over 
2,300 miles long. In the past three years 
it has made studies into what is happening 
inside the earth to a depth of 600 miles 
and more. It has also made a special 
study of tidal movements in the earth's 
crust—oscillations which can amount to 
over one foot per day. 
WW IENNA COURSE FOR GEOLOGISTS: 
An International Post-Graduate Train- 
ing Centre, sponsored by UNESCO and 
organized by the Geological Survey of 
Austria, will hold its first course in Vienna 
for eight months, from September 21, 
1964. Application forms to attend this 
course are obtainable from Geological 
Survey of Austria, Wien III, Rasumof- 
skygasse 23, Austria, and should be 
returned before April 15. 
M ILKY WAY TELESCOPE : Sweden's 
largest radio telescope is now being 
built near Gothenburg on the country’s 
west coast. Intended for research in the 
Milky Way and for tracing space signals, 
the telescope is equipped with a reflector 
whose diameter is over 100 feet. 
 WINDLING REDWOODS : The 
World Wildlife Fund reports that the 
Giant Redwoods of California are still 
being felled for lumber in their hundreds. 
In one area six miles of redwoods will 
soon fall unless conservationists can acquire 
the property. It is hoped that one grove, 
the Pepperwood Grove, may be bought 
as a memorial to Dag Hammarskjold, late 
Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
THIOPIA’S NATIONAL MUSEUM: 
A museum is to be built in Addis 
Ababa to house the cultural and artistic 
heritage of Ethiopia. It will have three 
main departments: archzology, painting 
  
  
  
and an 
cinema 
and folk arts, and sculpture, 
auditorium for 
performances. 
theatrical and 
¢ | BRARY/USA’ : A unique com- 
puter-equipped reference library, 
“Library/U.S.A.”, is one of the outstanding 
features of the New York Worlds Fair. 
It makes use of a combination of books, 
electronic equipment and professional 
personnel not only to provide information 
to Fair visitors, but also to demonstrate 
the dynamic nature and significance of the 
modern library. 
ONUMENTS ON THE MAP: Swit- 
zerland has arranged for the publica- 
tion by its Topographical Institute of a 
map on which there are shown the sites 
of its artistic and historical monuments, as 
well as those of Liechtenstein, its neigh- 
bour. Switzerland was the 49th country 
to ratify the International Convention for 
the Protection of Historical Monuments in 
the Event of Armed Conflict, sponsored 
by UNEsco. 
JI ABUKI SHOWS FOR EUROPE: 
Kabuki, the centuries-old traditional 
drama of Japan is to be presented to Eu- 
ropean audiences later this year according 
to the Japanese Foreign Office. It is 
hoped that a troupe composed of 60 to 70 
leading actors will perform in Berlin, 
Rome, Paris and London. 
AR ON ILLITERACY: Senior 
officials from some 40 African 
countries met in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, at 
a UNEsco regional conference last month, 
to explore ways of stepping up the fight 
against illiteracy throughout Africa. Their 
conclusions were later submitted to a meet- 
ing, also held in Abidjan, of African Mi- 
nisters of Education. 
"ALLING DOCTOR X: An Australian 
doctor has developed an emergency 
radio call service gadget called “Telmar”. 
Connected to the horn of a motor-car it 
can be used to contact the doctor while 
he is on his rounds or, as it weighs only 
two and a half pounds, it can be worn 
in a case over the doctor’s shoulder. Tests 
have shown that Telmar can receive signals 
from 50 miles away. 
J) ocrors FOR THE CONGO. Fifty- 
nine Congolese (Leopoldville) medical 
assistants who were accepted in French 
medical schools in 1960 have now 
gratuated and have returned to their 
country as full-fledged doctors. Their train- 
ing ‘was made possible by fellowships 
from the World Health Organization, 
financed from U.N. allocations to the Fund 
for the Congo. 
RITING ABOUT THE U.N.: A 
prize competition for the best 
magazine articles on the economic and 
social activities of the United Nations 
published in 1964 is being organized by 
the International Federation of the Period- 
ical Press, which is offering awards of 
$500, $250, $100. Articles entered should 
be sent to the IFPP, 45, rue de Lisbonne, 
Paris-8°% France, before January, 1965. 
CIENCE BOOKS FROM SWEDEN: 
A gift of 50,000 volumes of scientific 
literature, worth about $80,000, is being 
made by Sweden to a dozen developing 
countries in Asia, Africa and South Ame- 
rica. The scheme is sponsored and 
financed by NIB, the Swedish Agency for 
International Assistance. 
V EYES FOR GEOLOGISTS: In 
the U.S.A., geologists are using a set 
of two TV cameras to scan holes in the 
earth’s crust drilled to depths of up to 
5,000 feet. The set, designed by the 
Lawrence Radiation Laboratory of the 
University of California, has one camera 
which looks down the hole while the other 
views the sidewalls, enabling geologists to 
determine rock formations and mineral 
deposits. 
RUGUAY’S SCIENCE FAIR: About 
750 boys and girls from secondary 
schools in Uruguay entered models and 
projects in the country’s first National 
Science Fair held in Montevideo and timed 
to coincide withan “Atoms at Work” 
exhibit organized in the capital. Entries 
covered all aspects of the natural sciences 
from astronomy to zoology, and included 
projects relating to space science, industry, 
cattle-raising and agriculture. 
ARIBOU IN DANGER: Only 15 years 
ago men were taking as many as a 
million caribou a year in the Canadian 
arctic, to feed themselves and their dog 
teams. By 1955 the total number of 
caribou was estimated to have been reduced 
to a mere 278,000 as the numbers killed 
by far exceeded the number of calves 
born to the herds. Many Canadian con- 
servationists regard the ultimate survival 
of the caribou as still in doubt, according 
to an article in “Canadian Audubon”. 
Flashes... 
  
Wm Three million students in 7,500 ele- 
mentary or secondary schools and many 
thousands in colleges in the United States 
are receiving part of their education through 
television, according to the Institute for 
Communications Research of Stanford Uni- 
versity. 
W More than eight million square kilo- 
metres of Africa is a danger zone for 
sleeping sickness reports WHO. This area 
is infested with 23 species and 13 subspecies 
of tsetse fly, the insect that transmits the 
diseases to animal and man. 
W More than one quarter of Mexico's 
budget—about 400 million dollars— will 
be devoted to education in 1964, when it 
is planned to build 12,500 literacy centres 
and to increase primary school enrolment 
by 260,000. 
Wl The floor of the Pacific Ocean is a vast 
dumping ground for chemicals and miner- 
als, including nickel, copper, cobalt, phos- 
phates and manganese produced by rivers, 
submarine volcanoes, disintegrating rocks 
etc., reports a University of California 
scientist, who estimates that there are 
1,500,000 million tons of metal nodules 
waiting to be “mined”. 
BW The Government of West Pakistan plans 
to open 5,500 new primary schools by the 
end of the present school year. At least 
one thousand of these schools are destined 
for isolated areas. Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.

## [Page 35](062906engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Volume [I : Paintings Prior to 1860 
— Lists nearly 900 recommended colour reproduc- 
tions and 
In the Federal Republic of Germany, Switzerland 
and Austria, a special Unesco-Oldenbourg Verlag 
edition (with German text) is also available. 
includes many examples from Asia, 
Africa, Australia and Central Europe. 
Price: 30/- (stg); $6.00; 21 F. 323 pages. 
    
fatilogo de 
reproducciones en color 
of paintings 
1860 to 1963 
UNESCO CATALOGUES OF 
COLOUR REPRODUCTIONS 
OF PAINTINGS 
Two volumes presenting an up-to-date listing of 
colour reproductions of world-famous paintings com- 
piled from the Unesco collection of reproductions selec- 
ted by internationally-known experts on the basis of 
fidelity of reproduction, the significance of the artist 
and the importance of the original painting. 
Each painting in these beautifully presented volumes 
is reproduced in black and white together with full 
details of the original, name of publisher and price of 
colour reproduction. 
  
an _n os Volume II 
i en SO oe Pa ction A 
~~ esaapa SSS Paintings 
Ly Sl on CtAIORHIE, 
from 1860 
to 1963 
— A new and completely 
up-to-date edition of 519 
pages. 
— Contains descriptions 
and illustrations of 1440 
reproductions available in 
full colour prints including 
28 artists represented for 
the first timo. 
Price: 
30/- (stg); $6.00; 21°F. 
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Tradco Agencies, 109 Swanston Street, G., P. O. 
Box 2324 V, Melbourne C. I. (Victoria) ; United 
Nations Association of Australia, Victorian Division, 
Bth Floor, McEwan House, 343 Little Collins $t., 
Melbourne C. I. (Victoria). (A. 15/-). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C®., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 60.-}, — BELGIUM. Editions * Labor ", 
342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-Boek- 
handel, Belgielei 151. Antwerp, For The Unesco 
Courier (100 FB} and arc slides only: Louis De Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. CCP 3380.00, — 
BURMA. Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoon. (K. 5.50). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont. ($3 3.00). — CEYLON. Lake House 
Bookshop, 100 Parsons Road, P.Q, Box 244, Colombo, 
2. (Rs. 9). — CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd.., 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (For- 
mosa). — CUBA .Cubartimpex, Apartado 6540, La Ha- 
vana, — (2.25 pesos). — CYPRUS. Cyprus Natuonal 
Youth Counc, P.O. Box 539, Nicosia, — CZE- 
CHOSLOVAKIA. Artialtd., 30 Ve Smeckich, Prague 
2. — DENMARK. Ejnar Munksgaard, Prags Boulevard 
47 Copenhagen S (D.kr. 12). — ETHIOPIA. Interna- 
tional Press Agency. P.O. Box 120, Addis Ababa. — 
FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, 
Helsinki. (Fmk. 540). — FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, 
Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7*, C.C.P. 12598-48. (7 F.}. — 
GERMANY. R, Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145, Munich. 8, For the Unesco Kurier (German ed 
only} Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, 
C.C.P. 276650 (DM 8). — GHANA Methodist Book 
Depot Ltd, Aclantis House, Commercial St., POB 100, 
Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United King- 
dom. — GREECE. Librairie H. Kaufimann, 18, rue du 
Stade, Athens. — HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 64, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Kultura, P. O. 
Box 149. Budapest, 62. — ICELAND, Snaebjorn |onsson 
& Co. H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik — INDIA. Orient 
Longmans Led. Nico! Road,, Bellard Estate, Bombay 1; 
17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; Gunfoundry Road, 
Hyderabad, 1; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson House, 
1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O.Box 386, New Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: 
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 Park Street, Calcutta 
16, Scindia House, New Delhi. Indian National Commission 
Co-operation with Unesco. Ministry of Education, for 
New Delhi 3. (Rs. 7). — INDONESIA. P. N. Fadjar Bhakti 
Djalan, Nusantara 22, Djakarta. — IRAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. — IRELAND. The National Press, 
2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (10/3). — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein's Bookstores 35, Allenby Road 
and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (1£ 5.50). 
— JAMAICA. Sangster’'s Bock Room, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston, Knox Educauonal Services, Spaldings. 
(10/-). — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, P.C. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
(Yen 670). — JORDAN. Joseph L. Bahous & Co., 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Amman. — 
KENYA. E.S.A. Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi, — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — LIBERIA. Cole 
and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia, — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg. — MALAYSIA Federal Publications Led, 
Times House, River Valley Rd., Singapore (M. 3 500) — 
MALTA. Sapienza’s Library 26 Kingsway, Valletta, (10/-}. 
— MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port-louis. — MONACO. Briush Library, 30 Bld 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF.). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Marunus Nyheff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 6). — NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES, G.C.T. Van 
Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Curacao. NLA, 
— NEW ZEALAND Government Printing Office 20, 
Molesworth Street (Private Bag) Wellington, C. 1 Govern- 
ment Bookshops,: Auckland (P.O. Box 5344), Christ 
church (P.O. Box 1721), Dunedin (P.O. Box 1104 (10/-}. 
NIGERIA. C.M.5. Bookshops, P.O. Box 174, Lagos 
(1C/-). — NORWAY. AS. Bokhjornet, Lille Grense, 
7 Oslo For the Unesco Courier only: AS. Narvesens 
Licceratur Tjeneste, Stortingsge, 2 Oslo, Postboks 115 
(kr 13.20) —~ PAKISTAN. The Wast-Pak Publishing Co. 
Led. Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374 56-N 
Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lshore. — PANAMA, 
Cultural Panamefa, Avenida 7a, No. Ti-49, Apartado de 
Correos 2018, Panama (D.F, Balboas 3-), — PHILLIPI. 
NES. The Modern Book Co. 508 Rizal Avenue 
Manila. — POLAND. "RUCH' ul. Wiloza Nr, 46x 
Warsaw 10 (ZI. 50). — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade 
Lda, Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — 
PUERTO RICO. Spanish English Publications, Eleanor 
Roosevelt 115, Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. —~ RHODESIA 
& NYASALAND. The Book Centre, Gordon Avenue, Sa- 
lisbury, Southern Rhodesia. — SUDAN. Al Bashir Book- 
shop, P, O.Box 1118. Khartoum. — SWEDEN A/B C.E. 
Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm 16. 
— For The Unesco Courier: Svenska Unescoridet, Vasaga- 
tan 15.17, Stockholm, C (Kr. 10); SWITZERLAND. 
Europa Verlag. 5 R¥mistrasse Zurich. Payot, 40, rue du 
Marché, Geneva C.C.P. 1-236. *' Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P, 
1-4811. (Fe. S. 8B). — TANGANYIKA. Dar-e1-Salaam 
Bookshop, P O.B. 9030, Dar-es-Salaam, — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue. Bangkok, 
(35 ucals), — TURKEY, Librairie Hachette, 469 hhuiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala, — UNION OF 
SOUTH AFRICA. Van Schaik's Bookstore, Libri Building, 
Church Street, P.O. Box 724 Pretoria. For the Unesco 
Courier (single copies) only : Central News Agency. P.O. 
Box 1033, Johannesburg. (10/-). — UNITED ARAB 
REPUBLIC (EGYPT). La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. 
Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. 
Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.4, (10/-). — 
UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 
317 East 34th St, New York, N.Y. 10016 ($5.00.}) 
and (except periodicals): Columbia University Press, 
2960 Broadway, New York, 27, N.Y. — U.S.S.R. Mez- 
hdunarodnaja Kniga, Moscow. G-200,— YUGOSLAVIA 
Yugoslovenska Knjiga, Terazije 27, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](062906engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

    
CERAMIC ART th centur | 
| lo : : Now Yor Gr,RL IV 
ROM ANCIENT GREECE 1! A i i 