# [067949](067949engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](067949engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

vi Ar 
‘YN SNC | 
C or RR 
  
 
Rh ah 
| OCTOBE 
1957 
(10th year) 
Price: 9d. 

## [Page 2](067949engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### 70462: Declaration of the Rights of the Child

Declaration 
of the Rights of the Child 
By the presen! Declaration of the Rights of the Child, commonly known as the 
Declaration of Geneva, men and women of all nations, recognising that Mankind 
owes to the Child the best that il has to give, declare and accept it as their duty to 
meel this obligalion in all respects: 
I. THE CHILD must be protected beyond and above all considerations of race, nationality 
or creed. 
II. THE CHILD must be cared for with due respect for the family as an entity. 
III. THE CHILD must be given the means requisite for its normal development, materially, 
mortally, and spiritually. 
IV. THE CHILD that is hungry must be fed; the child that is sick must be nursed; the child 
that is physically or mentally handicapped must be helped; the maladjusted child must 
be re-educated; the orphan and the waif must be sheltered and succoured, 
V. THE CHILD must be the first to receive relief in times of distress. 
VI. THE CHILD must enjoy the full benefits provided by social welfare and social security 
schemes; the child must receive a training which will enable it, at the right time, to 
earn a livelihood, and must be protected against every form of exploitation. 
VIL. THE CHILD must be brought up in the consciousness that its talents must be devoted | 
to the service of its fellowmen. 
      

## [Page 3](067949engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
“mCouricr, 
OCTOBER 1957 
10TH YEAR 
  
No. 10 
CONTENTS 
2 GENEVA DECLARATION OF CHILDREN'S RIGHTS 
3 THE RIGHT TO BE CHILDREN 
4 THE CHILD'S FIRST RIGHT: HEALTH 
By S.M.Keeny 
8 AMBASSADOR TO 40 MILLION CHILDREN 
By Danny Kaye 
11 OPERATION UNICEF 
Battle on three fronts in 100 countries 
12 GREETINGS CARDS MAKE MILLIONS HAPPY 
14 PIONEERING WITH PEOPLE 
How U.S. children help UNICEF 
By Norman Acton 
17 UNESCO DEDICATES MAJOR PROJECT TO 
CHILDREN 
2] HIGH INTELLIGENCE—ASSET OR LIABILITY? 
By W.D. Wali 
24 THE RIGHTS OF 900 MILLION CHILDREN 
By Paul Almasy 
(1) THE CONFLICT OVER CHILD LABOUR 
(2) CHILDREN JUDGED BY THE LAWS OF MEN 
(3) LOVE AND A REAL HOME 
33 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
34 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
* 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, 19 Avenue Kleber, Paris 16, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Alexandre Leventis 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Carrera Andrade 
Russian Edition : Veniamin Matchavariani 
Educational, Sclentific and Cultural 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
* 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly (12 issues a year) in English, 
French, Spanish and Russian. A small Japanese version is published in Tokyo 
and a Danish version in Copenhagen. The United States of America edition 
is distributed by the UNESCQ Publications Center. U.S.A. 801 Third Avenue, 
New York 22, N.Y., Pennsylvania 6-085], Second-class mail privileges author- - 
ized at New York, N.Y, (M.C. 57.1.117 A) 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
credit is given to THE UNESCO COURIER and two voucher copies are sent 
to the editor. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompanied 
by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express 
the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent the opinions of 
UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
Annual subscription rates: $2.50; 8/- stg. ; 400 French francs or equi- 
valent. 
AFTER NOVEMBER |, 1957 : $3.00; 10/vstg., 500 frs.   
QESCg 
Q 
ancurt®   
COVER PHOTO 
 
About one half of the 40 million school- 
age children in Latin America are depriv- 
ed of primary education because there 
are too few schools, teachers and equip- 
ment. To heip speed up the march 
from this half-way mark to the full goal 
of free and compulsory education for 
all children on this Continent, Unesco 
has launched a ten-year major project to 
extend primary education and teacher 
training in Latin America. (See page 18) 
  
ITHIN a period of six weeks each year the world 
\W/ commemorates two United Nations anniversaries: 
United Nations Day on October 24 and Human 
Rights Day on December 10. This year Tue UNEscO 
Courier wishes to mark both occasions by devoting this 
special issue to the theme of Human Rights Day 1957— 
The Rights of Children. 
Our era has been an appalling one for children. Millions 
upon millions awoke to life amidst ruin and death, and 
the memory of those frightful days has left a deep-set 
mark. If today, most children can look out on a world 
less violent, the welfare of children has not ceased to be 
one of the major preoccupations of the world community. 
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights which was 
passed by the General Assembly of the United Nations 
nine years ago is valid for young and old alike. Several 
of its thirty-three articles deal specifically with children 
and seek to ensure their physical and moral protection, 
their education and full development. The Declaration is 
not a treaty binding governments under international law 
but it sets forth a standard of principles to which we must 
all aspire if we are to live in freedom and in peace. 
Over the past ten years much of the work of the U.N. 
itself and of its special agencies such as the U.N. Child- 
ren’'s Fund, the World Health Organization, the Food and 
Agriculture Organization or Unesco has been devoted to 
implementing the various rights listed in the Universal 
Declaration, whether such work was in the form of a prick 
of a needle to prevent tuberculosis, advice on nutrition to 
build strong bodies, the provision of schools to nourish 
young minds, or the supply of powdered milk to save chil- 
dren from starvation. 
Recognizing that the child needs special protection 
because of his physical and mental immaturity, the U.N. 
Commission on Human Rights has been considering a 
“Declaration of the Rights of the Child” drafted several 
years ago by the United Nations Social Commission (for 
text of draft Declaration see page 29). The project was 
debated In Geneva last April and the results of these dis- 
cussions have been transmitted to the member states of 
the U.N. for comment. Detailed discussion of the Declara- 
tion is scheduled to begin in Paris next year. One can 
thus hope that a new international instrument in defence 
of the rights of children will soon be formulated within 
the framework of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights whose tenth anniversary falls next year. 
The Declaration of Children’s Rights reproduced on 
page 2 is the Charter of the International Union for 
Child Welfare, an international non-governmental 
organization having consultative status with Unesco. 
The declaration was proclaimed in 1923 and was 
endorsed by the League of Nations.     

## [Page 4](067949engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 67937: The First right of the child: health

  
A
S
P
E
N
 
E
l
 
4 
) 
3 
4 
ig 
H
L
 
ia
r 
i 
Le 
C
E
R
 
A
e
 
SO
IC
 
by S.M. Keeny : 
Regional Director for Unicef, Asia 
LL over the world people today are talking about the 
rights of the child. The rights of the child mean 
many different things to many people ; his right to 
be protected on considerations of . race, nationality or 
creed ; his right to receive education and training in order 
to earn a living ; and (a general belief we hold in the Uni- 
ted Nations)—the right to live in a peaceful world. 
Now we in UNICEF concern ourselves primarily with what 
is perhaps the first right of the child—health. Without 
health he has nothing, 
Sometimes it’s easier to understand if we don’t think of 
children in the millions, but one at a time. Meet, for 
example, Mrs. Srinchan and baby Ta, aged nine months, 
from the heart of Asia. Their costumes may not be those 
of your home town, but Mrs. Srinchan thinks as much 
of her baby as does any mother anywhere. If you were 
to ask her, in the stilted language we in the United 
Nations too often use, “What are the opportunities for 
improving child health in Asia?” -she would probably 
giggle nervously and think you were even crazier than 
foreigners usually are. If you were to ask her what the 
question really means: “Can we do something to help 
little Ta grow up a healthy youngster?” she would think 
you crazier still ; for the answer is “of course” 
Why “of course”? Because baby Ta is pretty lucky to 
be alive even at nine months; 
world one baby in five dies in the first year (in some 
places, it is one in two) and another one in five before 
they grow up. In New Zealand, by way of contrast, the 
death rate in the first year is one in forty, and in any 
one of a dozen other countries less than one in thirty. 
Why do they die? Come with me into a typical village 
in Java—not one of the worst. Put on your old shoes, 
4 
for in his part of the 
 
MOST NUTRITIOUS ‘MEAL’ OF THE DAY FOR MILLIONS OF CHILDREN AROUND 
for it rains a lot here and the “street” is full of puddles 
of dirty water in which ducks swim and children play. 
The families get their drinking water, at best, from an 
open jar of rain water; or from shallow wells or pools 
into which the surface ‘water runs; or from the canal, 
where people swim and wash their clothes and dishes, 
and which they use as common toilets. 
‘As we ‘wander about in the evening we keep slapping 
‘for no village in these parts is complete without mos- 
"quitoes. 
Everywhere about us families are eating together, sitting 
on the ground. Usually the plates are green leaves. If 
there are real plates and cups, they will be washed after- 
ward in cold water—probably from the canal. 
Inside the one-roomed huts the whole family sleeps 
together, whether all are well, or whether one or more of 
‘the family has open tuberculosis. 
If the baby is sick, mamma holds him a little tighter 
and hopes that love will make up for everything else that 
is missing. All too often she feels that baby is hotter 
than usual. But that does not mean the doctor comes, 
for in this country there is only one doctor to 75,000 people. 
No, the few doctors are for city people, and for the rich 
even there. So baby gets hotter for two or three days, 
and then—all too often—is hot no more. 
We are looking at just one village with perhaps 500 chil- 
dren in it. It is pretty much like the others in which live 
three-quarters of the 1,200 million people in Asia— more 
than a half of all those in the world. The numbers are 
enormous ; but the problem is essentially the problem of 
that one village. And we should be thinking less about 
whether we can help protect the rights of babies like Ta, 
but where we should help first.

## [Page 5](067949engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 67937: The First right of the child: health

  
Of course, we can take the position that high death 
rates are part of Nature's Way. We may think that, 
unless many of these children die, there won't be rice 
enough to go around, so that it is better they should die 
young—before they eat too much rice. The answers to 
this hoary question, which generally assumes a static 
amount of food in the world, are many. The conquest 
of malaria opens new land for cultivation; well people 
can work better than sick ones ; new seeds, irrigation, and 
better methods of cultivation can multiply crops; even 
the birth rate can be lowered, as Japan has shown by 
reducing its annual rate from thirty to twenty per thou- 
sand In the last seven years. But the people who talk 
about “Nature's Way” usually stop thinking when they 
have used the phrase. Besides, they seldom use it when 
they are talking about their own children. 
Into this eastern world, where half the world’s children 
live, has come UNICEF, as a symbol of the concern that 
nations feel for all the world’s children. Fortunately, 
UNICEF need not do the whole job ; local governments are 
already doing a great deal with their limited money; and, 
of course, the missionaries and many voluntary agencies 
have been in Asia a century before us. There need be no 
rivalry, however; there is plenty of work for all. In UNICEF 
we have decided that we should not be paralyzed by the 
all-too-common attitude toward the East that the need. 
is so great that it is no use trying to do anything about it. 
Rather, we have taken the decision that we should select 
for attack a few diseases that are the greatest enemies of 
childhood and, among these, the ones where we can save 
the most children from death or years of suffering for the 
least money. This decided, we simply begin. 
After we have got started, we push ahead wherever we 
The Unesco Courier. — October 1957 
UNICEF photos 
THE WORLD IS THE CUP OF MILK SUPPLIED THROUGH UNICEF FEEDING PROGRAMMES WHICH HAVE BEEN SERYING CHILDREN FOR PAST ELEVEN YEARS, 
get results; for, no matter how great the need, we can 
give help only where the people co-operate and where 
the government can organize the work that is to be done 
with the aid of expert help from outside and from impor- 
ted supplies. We must work this way : for our policy is 
to spend money on essential supplies and not on imported 
personnel for administration. Thus, in Indonesia, where 
we have programmes approved costing nearly $7,000,000, 
we have just three imported administrative staff. 
The repulsive disease called Yaws is almost unknown 
outside the tropics. But in Asia its dreadful ulcers, often 
two inches across and half an inch deep, make life 
miserable for at least twelve million people, half of them 
infants and children, not to speak of the several million 
people whom it has crippled. From time immemorial 
yaws was just one more thing to be endured. But in the 
last few years it has been discovered that one shot of 
penicillin, costing on the average about five U.S. cents, Is 
an almost certain cure. 
With the assistance of the World Health Organization, 
UNICEF has financed three projects in Indonesia, Thailand 
and the Philippines, which within the last six years have 
cured nearly seven million cases. That is not all of the 
twelve million, but the job is more than half done, and the 
rest of it will be done within the next five years. 
In this, as in all other medical projects, UNICEF provides 
the money for the imported supplies and equipment, but 
the World Health Organization gives the 
technical direction to the project. Wao 
provides only a few highly skilled person- Cont'd 
nel; foreign technical people supervise the on 
cure of the whole twelve million cases. next page 
All local expenses are paid by the

## [Page 6](067949engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 67937: The First right of the child: health

governments, which supply 
hundreds of personnel and 
which are responsible for 
the projects from - the 
beginning. This policy has 
been established both to fix 
the responsibility with the 
governments concerned and 
to ensure that they ‘will be 
better prepared to carry on    
Yaws is only one of many 
dangers that baby Ta must face. Most of our money 
therefore, goes into a multipurpose project that tries to 
help baby get a good start in life, beginning with the care 
of his mother when she is still expectant and continuing 
until he is well on his way to healthy childhood. This work 
is at the heart of all our planning, but to get all the results 
we want is complicated indeed; for in most countries 
babies are not generally delivered by child specialists—or 
even by general practitioners. All except a few in a thou- 
sand come into the world with only the aid of the old-style 
midwife, who goes about her work cheerfully chewing 
betel nut, with which she not only consoles herself at her 
work, but also uses as a chief ingredient for a poultice on 
the baby’s tummy to heal the umbilical cord. 
If these slightly outmoded practices are to be changed, 
nurses must be trained who are willing to admit that 
Lister had something, and that there is nothing like 
boiling water to put the quietus on germs that thrive in 
hot climates as nowhere else in the world. Not just a 
few midwives and nurses are needed, but thousands and 
thousands of them, and so UNICEF is helping the schools 
of nursing and midwifery to turn out more and hetter 
graduates. The chances for improvement are excellent: 
even in Afghanistan it is becoming fashionable among the 
better families for women to go in for nursing—a job 
that would have been scorned ten years ago. The group 
will still be much too small, and there will be considerable 
“wastage” from marriage, as our technicians so anti- 
socially put it; but it is a step. And the group, though 
small, will make a good beginning. 
Although mosquitoes bite adults just as greedily as they 
do infants, malaria is a far greater killer of infants than 
of grownups. In India, Pakistan, Burma, Thailand, In- 
donesia, it is the number one killer of infants. But the 
answer is simple: ppt. And so wHO and UNICEF, with 
much assistance from United States bilateral aid, are 
helping governments in Asia to apply the methods that 
have been so spectacularly successful in Italy, Greece, and 
elsewhere. 
Tuberculosis is an exam- 
ple of a job in which many 
different agencies can work 
together. rao wants to get 
rid of malaria in order to 
increase agricultural prod- 
uction; wHO as a public 
health measure; UNICEF 
especially for the protection 
of children. 
Here is a disease poles 
apart from yaws. It is not 
easy to discover and diffi- 
cult to deal with after it has 
been found. We are told 
that the best way to help 
children is to prevent the 
disease with Bcc vaccin- 
ation. Nearly one hundred   
after U.N. aid has stopped. - 
World battle against tuberculosis: 
56 million children vaccinated 
and sixty million children have already been tested and 
more than 56 million who needed it have already been 
vaccinated. Mass Bce campaigns are more difficult to 
organize in Asia than in Europe; but the children now 
vaccinated in Asia every month are about three-fourths 
of all those reported for the whole world. Vaccination 
against tuberculosis in underdeveloped countries is becom- 
ing as much a routine as it is against smallpox. 
But what ‘about the millions of open cases now living 
with their families and infecting millions of others? 
These must be found. Mass X-rays and follow-up of 
suspected cases are all a beginning, but they are useless 
if nothing more is done. There are.very few hospitals in 
the area for all purposes and still fewer for the care of 
tuberculosis. But Chemotherapy now promises a simple 
system of home treatment and care that even Asia can 
afford. But, to make it effective, thousands of home vi- 
sitors must be trained. 
The children in Asia are among the most poorly fed in 
the world. One of the basic shortages is that of protein, 
in which powdered skim milk is especially rich. Moreover, 
there is nothing to the legend that Asian children won't 
drink milk because they are not used to it. They guzzle 
it out of coconut shells in Thailand as readily as out of 
enamel mugs in Spain. 
Surplus milk from the United States is being moved 
constantly to Asia. This is 
no long-term cure for 
  
  
undernourished children, 
but it will serve to span the 
gap until nations can devel- 
op 'with unicer aid their 
own indigenous sources of 
protein, - such as soya bean 
“milk” in Indonesia. 
Some reader is sure to 
ask : “But can we afford to 
keep up these expenditures.” 
Let’s not get too self-right- 
eous on this point. In all 
Asia, UNICEF spends only 
about $5 million a year—or 
two cents a child per year. 
That bill is divided among 
about eighty countries and 
territories. The half paid 
by the United States is 
about one third the cost of a single bomber, or of five miles 
of a modern super-highway, and about-the same amount 
per year as American girls spend on home permanent 
waves every week. 
  
   
I've indicated five opportunities that we at UNICEF are 
~ taking to improve the rights of the child to health. There 
are, of course, many more. And we are constantly seeking 
more partnerships with governments, voluntary and semi- 
voluntary community organizations, and the international 
agencies set up to provide technical and material assis- 
tance. : 
It is a beginning. We at UNICEF can see week by week 
the changes accomplished by unremitting attacks on the 
miseries that have beset children for centuries. We can 
see the children gaining strength and acquiring new per- 
spectives and more skill and more knowledge with which 
to confront their share of tomorrow’s problems. We be- 
lieve by the time baby Ta is himself a father, his sons will 
not only have gone far in winning the well-established 
right to health, but can look forward to enjoying more 
of the other Human Rights in the brighter days that lie 
ahead.

## [Page 7](067949engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 67937: The First right of the child: health

The Unesco Courier. — October 1957 
‘HALF THE WORLD'S CHILDREN 
A human view of the 
struggle to get food and 
medical programmes started 
among millions of village a half the world's 
 
  
children in Asia is told in 
a recent publication, “Half 
the . World's Children,” 
which describes the work 
the United Nations Child- 
ren’s Fund (UNICEF) is doing 
to help them, 
~ Written by S.M. Keeny, 
UNICEF's Asian Director, it 
is largely a personal record 
dawn from his notes and 
experiences over a period of 
seven years of service in 
that part of the world. 
o
r
 
J 
~ 
NX 
~ 
J 
P| 
y 
  
Mr. Keeny never loses 
sight of the fact that you cannot bring health and 
happiness to millions of children by signing a paper or 
waving a wand. It has to be done child by child—and 
that is the way UNICEF works. The human factor rather 
than the cold statistic is always stressed as the author 
describes the growth from a period in 1950 of no relief 
from suffering, to the establishment today of some 125 
active projects. 
_ Sometimes the villagers tell their own story: “Govern-, 
ment aid often scratches us where we don't itch,” is a 
typical example of how these courageous people meet their 
plight with laughter and fortitude. 
Thanks to recent medical discoveries, such as ppT and 
the antibiotics, Mr. Keeny points out, it is possible to 
show that the diseases which can be wiped out to prepare 
the way for better standards of health and living need not 
    
 
  
UNICEF photos 
STRUGGLE FOR SURVIVAL. In Asia one baby in five (in some be limited to smallpox, plague, yellow fever and typhus. 
places one In two) dies in Its first year. In 1957 more than 45 million To this list can now be added malaria, yaws, trachoma 
children and pregnant and nursing mothers will benefit from Unicef- and, with reservations, tuberculosis and leprosy, This aided disease control and feeding programmes in over 100 countries _ fact alone leads the author to say that UNICEF “has a good and territories. Yet some 600 million children still live and die in _ story In terms of what the. sensible investor wants every- 
want. Three-months old Indonesian baby (below) has gone blind in a where, in business or in international projects: results.” 
few days through contracting an eye disease called xerophtalmia. Published by Association Press, New York. Price: $3.50. 
* 
‘RIDE WITH THE SUN’ 
Crippled orphans in Haiti, 
deaf mutes in Indonesia and 
homeless boys from . the 
slums of Lima, Peru, are Ride with the Sun 
among the children - who ) ROM COUNTRIES (OF 
have been helped by the of Toit UNITY NATIONS 
United Nations Women's | ash 
Guild in New York through 
sales of the Guild's 
Book, “Ride with the Sun,” 
an anthology of folk tales 
from member countries of 
the United Nations, The 
book whose stories are 
arranged to “ride with the 
sun” from East to West 
around the world was first 
published in New York by 
Whittlesey House, McGraw- 
Hill Book Co., Inc. (Price $3.50) in 1955 and in the first 
year, royalties amounting to over $2,300 were donated 
to children’s charities. In April this year it was publish- 
ed in England .by Messrs Edmund Ward Ltd., 144-200 
-Bishopgate, London E.C.2. (Price 15/-) and now a 
French version has been published by Editions G.P., 80, 
rue St-Lazare, Paris (Price 1,000 frs). The book will 
also appear in German and Indonesian, and other edi- 
tions are planned. “Ride with the Sun” is one of many 
projects through which the United Nations Women’s 
Guild has helped children from Greece to Finland and 
from Liberia to the Philippines. 
 
FOLKTALES AND STORIF 
               

## [Page 8](067949engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 67942: An Ambassador-at-large to forty million children

AN AMBASSADOR-AT- LARGE 
TO FORTY MILLION CHILDREN 
  
  
   
  
  
UNICEF 
‘ASSIGNMENT CHILDREN’, took comedian Danny Kaye to the Far East in [954 to film the work of 
the United Nations Children's Fund in Burma, Hong Kong, India, Korea, Japan and Thailand. His film, 
translated into |8 languages, was seen by more than 90,000,000 people. Here, on the steps of a Buddhist 
temple near Bangkok, Danny Kaye endears himself to Thai schoolchildren by joining in a game of handball, 
by Danny Kaye 
HAVE some sober advice to offer in case an ambassa- 
dorship ever comes your way, and if you think it 
couldn’t happen to you, you'd better think again. It 
happened to me—and I was born in Brooklyn. 
In the past three.years I've travelled 100,000 miles across 
Europe and Asia and into Africa as a special ambassador 
for uNIcEF, an organization that this year will give milk 
and medical aid to some 40,000,000 under-privileged chil- 
dren throughout the world, I carry a United Nations 
document so big you have to fold it six times to get it'into 
your pocket. It’s very effective with customs guards from 
Algiers to Bombay: but all its fancy language means, I've 
found out, is simply, “Let this bum t'ru 
And that’s not all I've learned. An ambassador may be 
called upon to speak any language from Tagalog to Thai. 
But don’t let this scare you; languages are a snap. I 
wasn't in France more than a week, for example, when 1 
was able to say to the benefit audience in Paris, “Je ne pas 
trense electrol ensi tren toi”. Pretty, en? Imagine my 
dismay when the audience laughed. It ‘was all straighten- 
ed out ‘when a friend explained that what I had said was, 
“I can’t help the train although the rattlesnake is 
limping.” 
Not knowing languages, you can, of course, use an inter- 
preter. But you must know how to use him. I advise 
breaking your sentences into even fragments. In Spain 
last summer I used an interpreter because my Spanish is 
not as good as my French. Greeting the audience, I said: 
“1... 
The Interpreter translated: “Yo...” I said: *“.. am..” 
The interpreter said: *“... soy...” I said: *“.. very...” The 
interpreter said: “.. muy..” I countered: “..glad to be 
able to meet with you ladies and gentlemen to talk about 
the great work being done by the United Nations Chil- 
dren’s Fund.” 
Such thoughtfulness toward an interpreter is bound to 
be repaid many times by his undying gratitude. We can 
dismiss the reaction of my Interpreter on that day as 
- atypical. 
The next rule I learned as an ambassador is also very 
important: Always observe protocol. 
The best way I can define protocol is to illustrate. In 
Vienna, I called on Austrian President Theodor Kérner at 
the Imperial Castle. That day I had paid my respects to 
the mayor, the minister of social welfare and the minister 
of finance. My feet were killing me. When Herr Korner 
came info the hall to greet me, he stood and talked. When 
my feet could no longer take it, I asked him, “Wouldn't 
you like to sit down?” 
He was flabbergasted. “But I'm supposed to ask you 
that”, he said. 
“So ask me,” I replied, grinning, This is what is known 
as protocol. 
Perhaps the most important ambassadorial rule of all 
is this: Neglect no one. In Bonn last year, UNIcer officials 
gave me a banquet. One by one those at the head table 
rose and proposed a toast to the guest of honour, me. 
Each time, when the toast ended, we all stood and drank. 
We were two thirds of the way through the brass when 
I jumped up, raised my glass and shouted: “To the 
gentlemen who serve UNIceEr! The waiters!” And so 
everyone stood and drank a toast to the waiters. 
By now I hope you realize I'm jesting. I know no more 
"about protocol than what common sense tells me. You: 
couldn’t get a top hat on my head because a golf cap is 
usually there already. As for foreign 
languages, I don’t know them—not even : 
French. Continued | 
Nevertheless, I'm an ambassador, even on 
though the form of diplomacy I practice page 10 
is limited fo the little world of laughter. 
Jrem—— rm——

## [Page 9](067949engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 67942: An Ambassador-at-large to forty million children

The Unesco Courier. — October 1957 
  
  
 
  
        
B¥ MAN WITH A MISSION 
Since 1954 Danny Kaye has travelled 100,000 miles across Europe and Asia and 
into Africa as a special ambassador for UNICEF. ‘He has seen and talked to the sick, 
handicapped and undernourished children being helped by UNICEF, and with his 
clowning, miming and dancing has administered his own particular brand of medicine— 
laughter. Here he is seen in Nigeria where he visited a leper settlement. 
UNICEF photos 
  
  
  
       

## [Page 10](067949engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 67942: An Ambassador-at-large to forty million children

AMBASSADOR-AT-LARGE (Goreme 
I've played to 6,000 Israelis jammed into an amphitheatre 
beside the Sea of Galilee, and to a mere half dozen Greek - 
kids seated in a poilo bath in an: Athens rehabilitation 
centre. I've clowned before 20,000 Turks at a children’s- 
day parade in Ankara, and before half a hundred kids 
with yaws in Thailand, I'm not swaggering about all 
this, for the truth is that my association with UNICEF 
was an accident. I was about to leave for the Orient on 
a tour three years ago ‘when Maurice Pate, UNICEF's 
executive director, asked me if I'd look in on some of 
his organization’s outposts. I did—and I haven't stopped 
looking since. : 
I've seen a little Siamese boy whose skin was almost 
overcome by infectious yaws cleaned up in’ three weeks ° 
with one shot of penicillin; I've seen Korean kids drinking. 
milk who'd never seen milk before. I've seen some unplea- 
sant things, too, like Moroccan children disregarding the’ 
clusters of flies on their faces, not because they were lazy, 
but because to brush them off would do no good. The {flies 
would only come back. I've played ball with little Italian 
boys balanced on one leg or catching with stumps of arms. 
But wherever I went—and I travelled through 24 coun-’ 
tries—I found vunicer staffs giving the kids the same 
devotion, the same quality of help—colour and country 
of origin no matter. That’s what really got me. 
So I did a little work to help these 
kids—my. kind of work, I tried to 
make them laugh. I played to crowds 
that had never heard of America, had 
never seen a movie, couldn't tell the 
difference between Danny Kaye and 
Santa Claus, and ‘what's more, 
couldn't understand what Kaye was 
saying. 
So what ? Kids will laugh at any 
man willing to act like an idiot. To 
those kids, I was the funny man with 
the red hair. 
I'd walk funny, and make faces. 
I'd get mixed up in dances, I'd mimic 
every kid I could. If he covered his 
mouth, I'd cover mine; if he waved 
me away, I'd wave back. And I'd 
listen hard to get the rhythm and 
sound of his language, because among 
other things I learned in my UNICEF 
travels that people flip if you utter 
so much. as a single phrase of their 
tongue. In a Roman polio ward, I 
watched a nurse leading a group of 
little boys in abdominal exercises. At 
her count of “one”, the youngsters, 
lying on their backs, would arch their 
bodies. At her count of “two”, they 
would recover. “Uno... due”, she went, 
“uno... due.” : 
I asked if I could count too. She 
sald I could. I counted: *“Uno.. 
cinque.” Just that delighted those 
little boys. . 
I have no desire to create the 
impression that I think all kids .are |! 
good, or even that I like all kids. 
There are good kids and bad, and I like some and not 
others. Some kids don’t like me. But good or bad, Greek 
or Siamese, their reactions are always the same. And so 
are reactions to them—especially ‘when they're sick. 
Adults want to make them well. I haven't met one yet 
who didn’t, and ‘I've been looking for three years and 
100,000 miles. 
I went to Zagora, Morocco, in the summer of 1956. It’s a 
tiny, town of 667 people ‘who live in an ancient fortress 
on the desert. Zagora in the summer is frightening- 
ly hot, dusty and insect-ridden—a climate favourable to 
conjunctivitis, an eye inflammation that usually paves the 
way for a contagious disease called trachoma. Trachoma 
strikes mainly at children. Often it blinds them. In some 
southern areas of French Morocco, it blinds them all. 
Three years ago, after a government study of preventive 
treatments, 17 teams of health workers spent five months 
in heat that reached 115 degrees treating the entire popu- 
lation of one foothill area. Twice a day for half a year, 
10 
 
© Kamerabild, Stockholm 1957 
IN SERIOUS MOOD during his European 
trip for UNICEF, Danny Kaye tells a group of 
young doctors at the Stockholm Medical 
Institute about the varied world-wide activities 
of the United Nations Children’s Fund. 
they treated the eyes of 114,000 people ‘with antibiotic’ 
ointment. That summer, there was no conjuctivitis there.. 
I can’t forget Luc. Duliére, one of the doctors in- this 
. campaign. A young mam, he came from France to devote 
his life to the trachoma programme. I can’t forget him 
because every three or four weeks he gets conjunctivitis 
himself. He cures himself and he keeps on working. 
- Because of devotion like this, Morocco's war against tra- 
choma is on the edge of success. 
But UNicer personnel—and local officials "and World 
‘Health Organization experts with ‘whom they co-operate 
—cannot easily step into a community and go to work 
immediately. Often they must first overcome ancient 
fears. UNICEF workers four years ago set up a maternity 
- and child health centre in a small Syrian village. They 
were ready for business, but they had none. Their 
methods were foreign. They ‘were suspect. 
One evening a nurse midwife, trained by UNICEF, was 
"roused from her bed by an insistent knocking at her door. 
Several Arab men. stood outside. “Come quickly,” one of 
them urged. A cow ‘was calving, and in trouble, If UNICEF 
knew all about delivering bables, here, said the men, was 
a chance to prove it. The midwife rushed off with them 
to the scene of the difficulty. There was little she could 
"do. But she did that little. In time the calf arrived. The 
next day, there were women and children at the clinic. 
I found perhaps the most striking story of the fight 
: against superstition in Nigeria. The 
man who leads this fight is a fifty- 
year-old Irish doctor who could very 
.well double for Barry Fitzgerald, 
hanging eyeglasses and - all. His 
name is Charles McConnaughy Ross. 
Ross went to Nigeria 28 years ago to 
fight leprosy. 
If he lives long enough, Dr. Ross 
may. ‘well see the end of leprosy. A 
relatively new group of drugs— 
sulfone—has revolutionized treatment 
of the disease. Until a few years 
ago to be a leper meant social 
and economic ostracism. Today 
lepers have begun to walk among 
their people. The new drugs reduce 
the symptoms and in many cases 
hasten recovery. As a result lepers 
who had stayed in hiding for fear of 
being ostracized—and had un- 
wittingly endangered their families 
—are now coming out of hiding for 
treatment. 
All this means much more than 
just what appears on the surface. 
The world’s less fortunate people are 
beginning to understand that the 
more fortunate want to help them. 
To the Nigerian or Moroccan this is 
overwhelming knowledge, For per- 
haps the first time, he can see a life 
.of work instead of beggary. The 
people I have met are proud people ; 
they’d rather work than beg. Now 
that they are being helped, they are 
beginning to help themselves. They 
are taking independent measures to 
protect their health. 
One of my firmest beliefs is that there is no common 
formula for happiness. Each human being finds happiness 
in his own way and time, To a Nigerian leper the idea 
of mingling with nonlepers is happiness. I remember a 
welcome I recelved at a leper settlement in northern 
Nigeria. The lepers formed a large, thick circle, and when 
drummers set upon their drums, some children began to 
dance. I felt like dancing too—so I got up and started 
dancing with them. . Suddenly out from the crowd came a 
young lady—a leper—to dance with me. We faced off, 
shuffled feet, swirled and circled as though 'we had 
rehearsed the dance for weeks. I had a great time, and so 
did my partner. So did the audience— laughing at us. 
To be laughed at, you know, is the nature of comedy. At 
one point I wanted to be a doctor, because the idea of 
making people happy appealed to me. I never became a 
doctor—hut I think I've made people happy by making 
them laugh. And I think when you make someone laugh, 
you're giving him medicine.

## [Page 11](067949engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 67943: Operation UNICEF: a battle on three fronts in a hundred countries

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2c
 
| 
2 
| 
2 
| 
2 
| 
et
 |
 2
c 
| 
ee 
| 
oe 
| 
2 
| 
3c 
| 
2 
| 
2 
| 
i}
 
  
  
  
> 
| 
> 
| 
> 
| 
 
  
  
  
  
    D
C
 
| 
ng
 
| 
2 
| 
2
       
AFRICA 
ALGERIA 
BASUTOLAND 
BECHUANALAND 
CAMEROONS 
FR. EQUAT. AFRICA 
FR. WEST AFRICA 
GAMBIA 
GHANA 
9 KENYA 
10 LIBERIA 
11 MOROCCO 
12 NIGERIA 
13 NORTHERN RHODESIA 
14 NYASALAND 
15 SIERRA LEONE 
16 SOUTHERN RHODESIA 
17 ST. HELENA 
18 TANGANYIKA 
19 TOGOLAND 
20 TUNISIA 
21 UGANDA 
0
0
 
~
~
 
O
N
 
W
n
 
P
W
N
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
DC
 
| 
2k
 
| 
pk
 
| 
2k
 
| 
ot
 
| 
2 
| 
pC
 
  
  
  
>
 | 
  
  
DC
 
| 
eg
 
| 
ek
 
| 
2c
 
| 
2
 
  
P
C
 
| 
2€
 
| 
2€
 
| 
oC
 
| 
2 
| 
Dx
 
  
  
  
  
2g
 
| 
2 
| 
x 
| 
2 
| 
  
      P
|
 
2g
 
| 
ot
 
| 
2x
 
|   >
|
 
> 
| 
> 
| 
et
 
| 
2
   
22 ZANZIBAR 
ASIA 
23 AFGHANISTAN 
24 BURMA 
25 CAMBODIA 
26 CEYLON 
21 CHINA (TAIWAN) 
28 Fl 
29 GILBERT & ELLICE IS. 
30 HONG KONG 
31 INDIA 
32 INDONESIA 
33 JAPAN 
34 KOREA 
35 MALAYA 
36 NEW HEBRIDES 
37 NORTH BORNEO 
38 PAKISTAN 
39 PHILIPPINES 
40 SARAWAK 
41 SINGAPORE 
  
  
  
  
         
  
><
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
PC
 
| 
aC
 
| 
2g
 
| 
2 
| 
2g
 
| 
2
 
  
  
P
|
 
et
 
| 
2k
 
| 
ok
 
| 
2 
| 
2 
| 
2€
 
| 
2 
  
  
  
> 
| 
   D
C
 
| 
pC
 
| 
p<
 
|       
  
  
42 SOLOMON ISLANDS 
43 THAILAND 
44 VIETNAM 
45 WEST NEW GUINEA 
46 WESTERN SAMOA 
EASTERN 
MEDITERRANEAN 
47 ADEN 
48 BR. SOMALILAND 
49 EGYPT 
50 ETHIOPIA 
51 IRAN 
52 IRAQ 
53 ISRAEL 
54 JORDAN" 
55 LEBANON 
56 LIBYA 
57 SOMALILAND 
58 SUDAN 
53 SYRIA 
60 TURKEY 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Disease Control 
215518 EUROPE 
X 61 AUSTRIA’ 
X | 62 FINLAND 
X 63 GREECE 
64 HUNGARY’ 
X |X| 65 ITALY 
X 66 PORTUGAL 
X|X|X| 67 SPAIN 
X|X|X]| 68 YUGOSLAVIA 
THE AMERICAS 
X | 69 ANTIGUA 
X|X 70 BARBADOS 
X|{X{X| 71 BOLIVIA 
X |X| 72 BRAZIL 
X| 73 BR. GUIANA 
X X | 74 BR. HONDURAS 
X | 75 BR. VIRGIN IS. 
X|X |X| 76 CHILE 
X|X|X|77 COLOMBIA 
X X | 78 DOMINICA 
XIX 79 DOMINICAN REP. 
X|X|X| 8 ECUADOR         
The Unesco Courier. — October 1957 
4 Mother and Child Wellare 
  
  
  
  
|
 
2x
 
| 
| 
x 
  
  
  
  
  
>
|
 
| 
>
|
 
  
  
  
  
  
DC
 
| 
oC
 
| 
2 
| 
pg
 
| 
  
  
  
  
DC
 
| 
| 
2k
 
| 
2 
| 
ok
 
| 
2k
 
| 
2k
 
| 
  
D
C
 
| 
Dg
 
| 
De
k 
| 
De
t 
| 
ee
t 
| 
De
k 
| 
DC
 
| 
De
g 
| 
De
g 
| 
Dc
 
          
[f] Nulrition 
EL SALVADOR 
FRENCH GUIANA 
GRENADA 
GUATEMALA 
HAITI 
HONDURAS 
JAMAICA 
MEXICO i 
MONTSERRAT 
NICARAGUA 
PANAMA 
PARAGUAY 
PERU 
ST. KITTS 
ST. LUCIA 
ST. VINCENT 
SURINAM 
TRINIDAD & TOBAGO 
URUGUAY 
YENEZUELA 
“Emergency Aid

## [Page 12](067949engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

GREETING CARDS THAT BRING HAPPINESS TO MILLIONS 
HiLDREN of all ages and all lands often speak in their 
drawings the sensations and enthusiasm they can 
express in no other way. It was the drawing of 
little seven-year old Jitka Samkova, a serious, blond 
Czechoslovakian girl, expressing joy for life-giving food 
and medicine supplied through the United Nations Child- 
ren’s Fund (unicer), that was the start of the UNICEF 
Greeting Card Fund.. 
Jitka lived in a small town in Bohemia which, while it 
had not been bombed during the war, had seen drought, 
famine and the devastation of invading armies. Many of 
the children had never tasted milk; some had tuberculosis, 
and other little bodies were crippled and wasted for lack 
of proper medical care. As part of a programme to help 
war-torn countries care for their own needy children, 
unicer sent food, medicine and public health equipment 
into the little town. The undernourished children were 
fed, the sick and crippled were treated and prenatal care 
was given to expectant mothers that their children might 
have an opportunity to live. All the children were tested 
for tuberculosis infection and those found free were 
vaccinated with preventive vaccine. Jitka was one of the 
fortunate ones given tuberculosis protection although it 
was too late for many of her little friends. 
In an after-school art class, the children discussed 
with their teacher ideas for drawings that would express 
their gratitude to unicer. Then they went to work. Draw- 
ing on glass because there was no paper, Jitka drew a 
picture of sun shining down on a group of gaily clad 
children dancing around a maypole. Her colourful 
drawing was one of nine in her school that was sent to 
Prague for entry in a contest. And, hers was the one 
chosen to be used as a poster at all unicer feeding centres 
. 
~ 
ok 
¥n pa 
* a Bion 
“Sewing”, by Vietnamese artist, Mai-Thu. 
12 
throughout Czechoslovakia. In 1949, it became the first 
unIceF holiday greeting card and was sold around the 
world for the benefit of the Fund which inspired it. 
Today, millions of UNICEF greeting cards are sold not only 
to convey holiday greetings but to help feed other needy 
children the world over. : 
All profits from the sale of unNIcEF greeting cards are- 
used to aid sick and malnourished children throughout 
the world. During 1956, approximately 37 million children 
and mothers benefitted from vunicer-alded feeding pro- 
grammes, anti-tuberculosis and anti-malaria campaigns, 
yaws control, trachoma and related eye disease treatment’ 
and leprosy programmes. Many more were aided at 
maternal and child welfare clinics equipped by UNICEF. 
In 1957, unNiceF is aiding 45 million children in more than 
. 95 countries and territories. 
Through the years since 1949, the cards have been 
designed by internationally famous artists for the benefit 
of the Fund. The uniIcer gallery of fine artists, who have 
donated their work, includes Danish-born Dagmar 
Starcke; French impressionist Raoul Dufy; world- 
renowned Henri Matisse; the British team of Lewitt-Him; 
Swiss-born Roger Duvoisin and French illustrator Edy 
Legrand. In 1956, Joseph Low contributed a series of five 
designs portraying “Festive Times in Many Lands.” 
Indian-born Jamini Roy, who rarely permits his works to 
be shown outside his studio, designed two cards that were 
representative of Indian folk-painting. United States 
artist, Saul Steinberg, designed the official United Nations 
card which was titled “Bridge of Peace.” 
This year, UNICEF is privileged to present cards designed 
and contributed to the Fund by four more famous artists : 
Ludwig Bemelmans, Mai-Thu, Gladys Rockmore Davis and 
Hans Erni. 
* 
PLEASANTEST WAY TO SHOP 
FOR GREETING CARDS 
Fill in and mall coupon below. All cards $1.25, 7/6 stg., 350 frs. per box of 10. 
Cheque or money order. No C.0.D.'s. Allow 15 days' shipping time. 
Greeting cards carry “Season's Greetings” In the five officlal U.N. lan- 
guages. Note cards (same design) are blank Inside. In U.S. only for an 
additional 40¢c a box, your name Is Imprinted on Greeting cards... on the Note 
cards “Merry Christmas and/or Happy New Year” with name. Minimum Imprint. 
order, 10 boxes of any assortment, 
EUROPE: Unicef, 24, rue Borghese, Neuilly-sur-Seine, France ; Unicef, 14- 
15, Stratford Place, London, Great Britain ; Deutsches Komitee fir 
Unicef, Bremen, Germany ; Unicef, Blegdamsve], 118, Copenhagen, Den- 
mark; U.N. Information Centre, Palais des Nations, Geneva, Switzerland ; 
Netherlands Unicef Committee, Stadhouderslaan, 148, The Hague. 
ASIA: Thailand, Unicef Regional Office, P.O. Box 415, Bangkok; India, 
Unicef Area Office, Patlala House, Hardinge Avenue, New Delhi 2. 
U.S.A.; UNESCO Publications Center, 801 Third Ave., New York 22, N.Y. 
NOTES GREETINGS 
( ) Boxes Bemelmans, two each of 5designs. ....... ..... Creare 
() Boxes Ernl “Brothers” ...ieiineieciiies taseeer sesssrisanss 
() Boxes Ernl “Community” ...vvvivirnnese sennees co ntersaaen 
( ) Boxes Mal-Thu, flve each of two designs. ....... reessriranas 
() Boxes Gladys R.DaviS......ovveeennninee sinnn s sasisianasss 
() With name Imprinted on Greeting cards 
as you wish it to appear... vciensieinanes ereiss sranans anss 
Name: 
() With name and “Merry Christmas - 
Happy New Year” on Note cards......v  cevener  sesesnsnnnse     

## [Page 13](067949engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
“Brothers”, symbolizing the unity of man, 
by Hans Erni. 
; pt = dl T y 
4 a wr. nn Fi 
, Ape +2P Nan rd ad, 
IR Ee i LF ATER 
Phe | 
y » 
“Community of Man", also symbolizing the 
unity of man, by Hans Ernl. (Switzerland) 
  
p— 4 R 
~~ 
~, Cao e 
~ << 4 — Cm Vd 
The Unesco Courier. — October 1957 
ANTAL wr " SrA UE lr 
) / A wr | RL iy C " {/ 
i Y N \ 2. 7 A ol “' : 1 FC \ Cf 
We) RY 3 as O 10% 
YEG Wy Bgl C5 NUH Ja 
EST NE 
Ew 4m ¢ 757) h) 
- 7 "A ' re 
AER +) guy CIA 
7 76 NlalanR 
iad. Al 
7 Slave) 
2 [4      
‘Sleigh Bells”, North Europe, by Ludwig 
Bemelmans. 
_ ww oo “uf y P] 
1 & \ by & J 
PA (RRC 1NE RL bE \ FONT Pr 
’ Ja SA Tr ’] 
5 g 
N
R
 
+ —
 o
r
 
    
P
E
T
A
R
,
 Th
 
T
E
T
 
“Carol Singers”, North America, by Ludwig 
Bemelmans. 
  
X 3 XR te . \ » 
— >. ‘3 : 1 
Ak - A ow : A i 
“Shepherd Boy with Flute”, the Mediterranean, 
. by Ludwig Bemelmans. 
“Drums and Pipes”, Asia, by Ludwig 
. Bemelmans. 
Mother and Child", by Gladys Rockmore Davis. 
{United States) 
13

## [Page 14](067949engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 67946: Pioneering with people: how U.S. children are helping UNICEF

PIONEERING WITH PEOPLE 
How U.S. Children Are Helping Unicef 
  a 
’ . 
W 
Fe IN % 
20a ok be Bet 
UNICEF 
‘HI NEIGHBOUR’ programme of U.S. Committee for Unicef puts history and geography 
in a new perspective for youngsters in schools, summer camps and youth organizations across 
the U.S.A. while teaching them about Unicef's work. Each year the Committee prepares 
a kit with the stories, games, songs, dances, crafts, recipes and sketches of Unicef’s programmes 
in five countries. Here, musical message of goodwill goes from New York to Belgian Congo. 
IONEERING has taken many forms 
P throughout human history, and there 
has been a fascinating story associat- 
ed with each effort of men and women to 
accept the challenges of the new and un- 
charted. One such story is unfolding in 
our time. It hasn't yet been written—in 
part, because those who know much about 
it are too busy living the story; in part, 
because the ending is not yet known. - 
I refer to the efforts of millions of people 
in many parts of the world to participate in 
mankind's greatest effort to organize ra- 
tionally the international relationships 
among our countries; I refer to the unoffi- 
cial, voluntary, non-governmental actions of 
citizens, organized and otherwise, to estab- 
lish meaningful links with the United Na- 
tions and its family of associated organiza- 
tions. The United Nations Charter says, 
“We the peoples of the United Nations... 
have resolved to combine our efforts” to 
accomplish the aims of the u.N. Many of 
“We the peoples” are not content to rely 
on the indirect implementation of that 
resolution provided by the fact that their 
government is a member of the United Na- 
tions and various of the Specialized Agen- 
cies. They believe that the spirit and aims 
of these organizations will be effective in 
the progress of mankind only if and when 
there is understanding and support in the 
hearts and minds of the people. 
There is nothing new in that philosophy, 
but there are many new and uncharted 
roads to be travelled in the process of 
translating the philosophy into useful action. 
Evolving relationships between non-govern- 
14 
by Norman Acton 
mental and governmental institutions which 
will strengthen the character of each, 
planning activities ‘which will be at once 
meaningful to the individual citizen and 
helpful to the international governmental 
body, seeking a balance between the local 
and national objectives of groups of citizens 
and the international aims of the United 
Nations family: these, to cite a few of the 
most apparent problems, exemplify the lar- 
gely unexplored wilderness through which 
new paths must be cut if “We the people” 
are to satisfy our responsibility for accom- - 
plishing the objectives of the United Na- 
tions and its associated organizations. 
All the world’s work 
participation has been accepted by 
the governing bodies of most 
members of the u.N. family and they have, 
as a matter of principle, recognized the role 
of non-governmental interests. Some, such 
as the International Labour Organization, 
have been exploring this area for much 
longer than the U.N. has been alive. 
UNICEF, the United Nations Children's 
Fund, has worked closely ‘with inter- 
national and national voluntary groups 
since its inception. I think all would 
agree, however, that much exploration re- 
mains to be done in perfecting patterns of 
H “eri the importance of citizen 
" relationships and types of function. 
Those of us associated with the United 
States Committee for UNICEF enjoy the 
exhilaration gained from our part in this 
pioneering process, and we are honoured to 
tell our story as one thread in the fabric of 
the larger problem discussed above. We 
know it is only one of the many stories 
which might be told to demonstrate how 
citizens and their organizations can partici- 
pate usefully in the work of the u.N. 
The United States Committee for UNICEF 
is a private, non-profit corporation. It is 
governed by a group of leaders in the civic, 
educational, religious, health and welfare 
life of our country who serve as Members 
of the Corporation, and by a Board of 
Directors whom the Members elect. The 
Committee employs a small staff at head- 
quarters, but no paid workers in the field. 
The Committee was first organized in 
1947 and was reconstituted in its present 
form in 1953. Throughout its existence, it 
has been devoted to three objectives: 1) To 
tell the people of the United States about 
the United Nations Children’s Fund; 2) To 
serve as the channel through which the peo- 
ple might support and participate in the 
work of uNICEF; and 3) To provide com- 
munication between citizens and the U.S. 
government concerning the participation of 
the latter in the work of UNICEF. 
The activities of the Committee may be 
best understood in the light of two princi- 
ples which guide its policies and decisions. 
While there is nothing earth-shaking about 
either of them, it will be seen that they 
have great significance in shaping the direc- 
tion of an organization’s programme.

## [Page 15](067949engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 67946: Pioneering with people: how U.S. children are helping UNICEF

Our first principle is that passive partici- 
pation does not meet the hunger people 
have to become a part of the u.N. family 
and its work. In our case, this means that 
people not only want to know what UNICEF 
is doing to help the world’s children, but 
they also want to do something about it. 
Carried one step further, it means that peo- 
ple who are given an opportunity to do 
something about it earn the right to identify 
themselves with the Children’s Fund and, 
having done so, become the devoted consti- 
tuents envisioned in the Charter’s preamble, 
Our second principle may be a result of 
a particular situation in the United States 
but it nevertheless has a broader validity. 
It is that the best support we can gain for 
UNICEF comes when the people see such 
support as a logical and consistent expres- 
sion of their basic ideals.” This means that 
we do not seek to build a new and separate 
organizational structure. Our goal is 
rather to assist the many existing civic, reli- 
gious, educational, service and other orga- 
nizations who wish to include uNICEF-relat- 
ed activity in their work. The citizen 
therefore comes to-understand the Child- 
ren’s Fund not as a new and unrelated 
activity, but as what it really is—an exten- 
sion of the objectives which he has long 
endorsed through his church, parent-teacher 
organization, service club, professional asso- 
_ ciation or other group affiliation. 
‘1 brought Dad along’ 
HE validity of these principles has, in 
T our judgment, been established by the 
success which our efforts to carry 
out the objectives of the Committee have 
enjoyed. To cite a few examples: 
On a hot mid-summer day Wayne trudg- 
ed into the offices of the U.S. Committee 
for unicer. “I trick-or-treated for UNICEF 
last Halloween,” he said. “What did you do 
with my money?” Amazing ten-year old 
poise with a definite business-like air and 
obvious determination to obtain answers. 
He listened intently as he was told of the 
milk and vitamins, vaccines and protective 
medicines. “Good,” he said, “Give me 
some brochures to take home to Illinois. 
My friends and I will do it again this 
Halloween.” After more discussion of the 
plight of “all the world’s children” we- 
. walked to the outer office with Wayne to 
say goodbye. His father was patiently 
waiting for him and we thanked him for 
bringing Wayne to see us. Wayne's reply 
was quicker than his father’s: “Dad didn’t 
bring me, I brought him. I had business 
with UNICEF!” 
Indeed young Wayne did have business 
with UNICEF, as do several million other 
young Americans, and their interest is not 
confined to Halloween but extends through- 
out the year. Of those who come to 
New York there is a steady stream visiting 
the offices of the U.S. Committee. Others 
communicate their interest by letter—some 
laboriously pencilled with heart-tugging 
messages: “I wanted to help cause once I 
was a little poor too” or “I have money for 
the poor children. I love them. I love 
you too.” 
The programme was started by one Sun- 
day School class back in 1950. Those 
children wanted to share their typical 
American holiday—Halloween—with less 
fortunate children all over 
the world. The idea spread Cont'd 
and" each year more and 
more children take part, on; 
The U.S. Committee pre- | next page 
pares a kit of planning 
 
 
The Unesco Courier, — October 1957 
PENNIES AND DIMES being collected (above) by these gaily-garbed U.S. children at traditional 
Halloween Festival will buy penicillin, vaccine and milk for sick and malnourished children all 
over the world. ‘Learning by doing’ about life in other lands, U.S. campers (below) make Belgian 
Congo masks, a project inspired by “Hi Neighbour” programme of U.S. Committee for Unicef. 
UNICEF photos 
 

## [Page 16](067949engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 67946: Pioneering with people: how U.S. children are helping UNICEF

Spooks, Witches & Goblins—With Collecting Tins 
suggestions, posters and stickers for the 
half-pint milk cartons, which symbolize 
the purpose of the programme. Local or- 
ganizations—civic, religious or fraternal— 
sponsor Trick or Treat in each of the more 
than 7,500 communities that participate. 
In many cases interest is so widespread 
that a UNICEF committee is formed with 
representation of all the major organiza- 
tions in the community. 
A UNICEF Halloween is traditional with 
children costumed as spooks, witches and 
goblins; it retains all the fun of ringing 
daorbells, parties, apple-bobbing and the 
collecting of treats. The “treats” are the 
difference. These are “treats” for others— 
pennies, nickels and dimes which, through 
UNICEF, become life-saving penicillin, pro- 
tective vaccine and health-giving milk and 
vitamins for ill or malnourished children. 
These children have become Good Ghosts 
of UNICEF and they share because they care. 
They know that UNICEF, representing the 
co-operative effort and support of more 
than 85 countries and territories, cares for 
all children—for them too if ever there’ 
should be need. 
Swahili ‘Hi’ in Guatemala 
calling “Jambo” —the Swahili greeting 
comparable to “hi”~or learning how 
to make “Palm Oil Chop” (Nigerian stew) 
in cooking class. A young school teacher 
helped gather authentic material on 
Guatemalan children’s fun activities for 
this programme of the U.S. Committee for 
uniciF and then introduced “Hi Neighbour” 
to her own pupils. And in Lagos, Nigeria, 
a programme director for Nigerian Broad- 
casting is putting on a series of radio shows 
from the music on the “Hi Neighbour” 
record and the activities from the Kit. 
I MAGINE little girls in Guatemala City 
  
Concurrently across the United States, 
youngsters—little and big—in schools, in 
surnmer camps, in many organizations— 
are using this same material. One town 
had a Games of Many Nations Spring 
Festival in which every youth club had a 
share. History, geography and UNICEF- 
aided projects take on new importance 
when a youngster knows—through fun— 
the daily activities of his contemporaries in 
these countries. : 
This U.S. Committee programme is 
three years old. [Each year a kit is prepar- 
ed with the stories, games, songs, dances, 
crafts, recipes, Fun-Facts-to-Know, and 
sketches of UNICEF programmes in each of 
five countries. There is also a record of 
the music from the five 1957 countries— 
Guatemala, Iraq, Nigeria, Philippines and 
Yugoslavia. From the gathering of the 
material to its dissemination, “Hi Neigh- 
bour” depends on the co-operation, interest 
and time of many adults around the world. 
The material itself must be authentic and it 
must give as broad a picture as possible of 
the varied cultures that make up each 
country. Its value to children lies in the 
hands of adult leaders, adults who believe 
that fun and beauty are clues to understand- 
ing individuals and groups of people—and 
that, through understanding, today’s child- 
ren will be better prepared to meet the 
challenges that their world does and will 
present. 
And so, the purpose of the U.S. Commit- 
tee’s “Hi Neighbour” programme is three- 
fold: to strengthen better understanding 
between people; to stimulate the interest of 
United States youth in the people of other 
countries; and to broaden understanding of 
UNICEF's aims and achievements around the 
world. Other national committees for 
UNICEF in different parts of the world and 
other organizations working for the United 
UNICEF 
Nations and its specialized agencies have 
found this project a valuable tool. With 
their help, the U.S. Committee seeks to 
broaden this happy bridge to friendship 
and understanding. In 1958, the program- 
me will be devoted to Indonesia, Italy, 
Lebanon, Paraguay and Uganda. 
Unicef Greeting Cards sold by local 
UNICEF committees last year represented 
almost 20 per cent of the total sold in the 
U.S.A. 
Then there is the UNICEF counter in the 
General Assembly Building of the United 
Nations. Here again, volunteer support 
plays a tremendously important role, 
Twelve months a year this counter is 
manned by volunteers and their efforts re- 
sult in more than 15 per cent of U.S. na- 
tional sales. 
The U.S. Committee, as is implicit in 
what has been said, assists other organiza- 
tions and individuals sharing its interest in 
UNICEF and in international co-operation. 
Speakers, films, literature, national publi- 
city and programme assistance are among 
. the added facilities offered. The results 
are seen both in more adequately informed 
participation in such projects as those men- 
tioned above, and in the development of an 
organized constituency which gives expres- 
sion to the enthusiasm with which many 
citizens view United States support of the 
Children’s Fund. 
Millions want to help 
liaison encouraged by the Committee 
are such activities as joint pianning 
with the National Citizens Committee for 
the World Health Organization in connexion 
with the World Health Assembly which will 
be held in the United States in 1958. The 
Committee also works closely with the 
National Social Welfare Assembly and 
recent discussions have explored the 
possibility of establishing a group within 
the Assembly's Committee on International 
Social Welfare to assist the U.S. Committee 
for unNIcEF in defining the welfare aspects 
of the policy recommendations it makes to 
the United States representative on the 
UNICEF Executive Board and to the U.S. 
government agencies which participate in 
the formulation of this country’s positions. 
A MONG the more specific patterns of 
The U.S. Committee for UNICEF is one 
of a number of national committees work- 
ing to support the Children’s Fund in vari- 
ous countries. On the international level, 
the Non-Governmental Organizations Com- 
mittee on UNICEF serves as a co-ordinating 
body for more than 50 international volun- 
tary organizations in consultative relation- 
ship with the uniCEF Board. In their work 
with the Children’s Fund, these internation- 
al and national organizations, together with 
' their constituent organizations and indivi- 
duals, provide a dramatic expression of the 
desire of the world’s people to associate 
themselves with UNICEF and its work. No 
one claims that final answers have been 
found to the questions of what techniques 
and relationships will best carry this asso- 
ciation into a successful future. But, with 
determination, vision and co-operation, it is 
certain that such efforts will do much to 
apply the vdst reservoir of human goodwill 
to support of the important undertakings of 
the United Nations family to meet the needs FESTIVAL OF NATIONS grows out of “Hi Neighbour” programme in a camp in New York 
State. Here, young people learn to share fun and folkways of children in Unicef-aided countries. 
16 
of mankind.

## [Page 17](067949engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier. — October 1957 
  
    
 
  SB SA at: 
UNESCO-Eric Schwab 
GYMNASTICS IN A MODERN PRIMARY SCHOOL, TREMBLEY PARK, GENEVA, SWITZERLAND, 


### 67947: UNESCO dedicates major project to children

UNESCO DEDICATES MAJOR 
PROJECT TO CHILDREN 
: For every ten children in the ‘world, five have no 
schools and four complete only a few years of elemen- 
tary schooling, according to UnEesco’s 1955 “World Sur- 
vey of Education”. The world’s most formidable task 
in education and the goal of both national and inter- 
natioral efforts is therefore free schooling for all chil- 
dren so as to give real significance to the right to 
education proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights. In education Unesco has three main 
goals : the improvement of education through the 
exchange of information, the extension of education 
and the promotion of education for international 
understanding. These three aims are reflected in the 
Unesco activities on behalf of children which are 
reviewed briefly on the following pages. One of the 
most significant and ambitious of Unesco’s efforts to 
aid the development of education is its ten-year 
Major Project to extend primary education in Latin 
America. An account of the work planned for the 
first two years of this project is given on next page. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE    

## [Page 18](067949engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 67947: UNESCO dedicates major project to children

UNESCO & CHILDREN (Continued) 
   
  
  
    
has compulsory education laws. 
Between principle and practice, 
however, there is often a wide gap. In 
this Continent, as in many other parts 
of the world, numerous obstacles have 
so far prevented the full application of 
the laws on education. 
E VERY country in Latin America 
In two Latin American countries the 
proportion of school-age children who 
receive primary education is 80%, in 
some others the percentage varies 
between 60 and 80, and in 12 countries 
it is less than 40 % (in six of them, less 
than 30%). It has been estimated that 
out of a total of 40 million Latin 
American children aged between five 
and 14 years, between 14 and 17 million 
do not go to school. Even if there 
were enough schools, 400,000 more 
teachers would be needed. 
The shortage of teachers is therefore 
just as serious a problem as that of 
school buildings. With three exceptions, 
all Latin American countries are forced 
to make use of teachers who have had 
no professional training (about 36% of 
primary school staffs). The provision 
of teacher training schools is thus high 
on the list of urgent needs. 
Latin America’s population (170 
million today) is increasing rapidly 
(between 1% and 2.7% according to 
country) so that the number of children 
of school age will have been swollen by 
several million in ten year’s time. To 
meet this problem the countries of this 
Continent are planning a long-term, 
large-scale development of education. 
About 18 months ago a regional 
conference on free and compulsory 
education in Latin America meeting in 
Lima, Peru, under the auspices of 
Unesco and the Organization of Ameri- 
can States, noted “the intense desire of 
" the people in both urban and rural areas 
to improve their living conditions, and 
to provide better education for their 
children.” The Conference hailed the 
idea of a 10-year “Major Project” on 
the extension of primary schooling in 
Latin America—one of three Major Pro- 
jects (a new feature in UNEsco’s pro- 
gramme, designed to concentrate its 
efforts on important problems) which 
UNESCO was preparing to submit to its 
General Conference meeting in New 
Delhi in November 1956. 
Two year programme 
for teaching teachers 
approved the Major Projects and 
in March 1957, Unesco’s Ex- 
ecutive Board fixed the budget of the 
Latir American project at $600,000 for 
the first two years. Under the approv- 
ed plan Unesco will concentrate during 
the next two years on the improvement 
of educational statistics, the training of 
teachers and of teachers of normal 
(teacher training) schools, the organi- 
zation of a system of “associated 
universities” and the setting up of a 
fellowship programme. Large-scale aid 
is planned for four rural normal schools 
and two universities. 
T HE UNEsco General Conference 
During the next two years it is 
proposed to award 80 fellowships for 
educationists to carry out further studies 
in the United States and in Europe; to 
provide further training for inspectors of 
primary schools and teachers of normal 
schools and to enable school administra- 
tors to work at the inter-American rural 
education centre at Rubio and to study 
the operation of rural school systems. 
Outside their own national program- 
mes, several countries have come 
forward with offers of aid. Colombia 
has suggested a regional educational 
planning seminar be held at Bogota. 
Bolivia has offered its teachers’ training 
school at Warisata as an “associated 
normal school.” . As an “associated 
university,” Brazil has offered that of 
Sao Paulo with its institute of educa- 
tional research. Similarly, Colombia 
has put the Pedagogical University of 
Tunja at UNesco’s disposal; Chile, the 
University of Santiago and its educa- 
tional research institutes ; and Mexico, 
the Higher Normal School, the National 
Institute of Education and its national 
educational museum, and the Latin 
American Institute of Educational Films. 
Colombia has offered 16 fellowships 
towards the Major Project; Chile, 20; 
France, 18; Mexico, four (conditional on 
the acceptance of its offer for associated 
universities); and the Office of Ibero- 
American Education, 15. Other fellow- 
ships will be forthcoming from Spain and 
probably the United States. The 
UNEsco.-- National Commission for 
Czechoslovakia has invited several Latin 
American educationists to study its 
country’s teacher-training methods. Fi- 
nally, the Organization of American 
States will co-operate with UNEscoO in 
carrying out a vital project whose 
problems, whether social, educational, 
demographic or economic, are deeply 
human ones. 
THE LUCKY ONES. Smiling schoolgirls near Puebla, Mexico, are more fortunate than many children in Latin America. In some countries 
less than 309 have schools to go to. Unesco's Latin American Project aims to aid national plans for making primary education available toall. 
UNATIONS 
 
18 
  
   

## [Page 19](067949engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 67947: UNESCO dedicates major project to children

  
  
  Ka 
UNESCO 
WITH EYES BANDAGED a young 
student learns touch typing at the 
Clerical and Technical Training Centre 
started in Libya by Unesco in 1950, 
to aid the newly independent country 
in producing the trained clerical and 
technical staff it needed to man the 
machinery of government. Its first 
trainees—sons of taxi drivers, day 
labourers, small shopkeepers and 
farmers—all found government jobs 
waiting for them on graduating.         
Unesco educational missions have 
surveyed resources in many Member 
States and have suggested how these 
might best be used to lay the founda- 
tions of modern school systems. 
Afghanistan, Burma, Korea, Libya, 
the Philippines and Thailand are but 
a few of the countries that have been 
helped in this way. In answer to 
requests from 22 countries and 
territories Unesco has sent teams of 
experts in the development of ele- 
mentary education to each of them. 
It has convened regional conferences 
for teachers and school administrators 
to exchange experiences and discuss 
common problems. It has published 
studies on compulsory education in 
many countries, on the extension of 
schooling, the employment of child 
labour, on teacher training, on the 
language of instruction and. the 
teaching of reading and writing. 
is 
During 1955-56 Unesco undertook 
one of its largest technical assistance 
projects in any Member State when it 
provided fellowships for 83 primary 
and secondary school teachers and 
education officials from all over Yugo- 
slavia to study educational arrange- 
ments in 11 European countries and 
the United States as a preliminary to 
reforming Yugoslavia’s entire edu- 
cational system. The fellowship hold- 
ers—mostly senior teachers and 
educational officials—carried out 
group or individual surveys whose 
results are already proving to be use- 
ful in the planning stages of Yugo- 
slavia’s educational reform. 
* 
Each year Unesco and the Interna- 
tional Bureau of Education sponsor 
an international conference to discuss 
major educational problems. Exam- 
ples : the financing of public educa- 
tion (1955) ; the problems of the 
teacher shortage and the ways in 
which teaching can be made more 
attractive as a profession (1954). For 
these meetings countries prepare re- 
ports on progress made over the past 
year, thus providing a world-wide 
picture of educational developments 
and needs. 
* 
Unesco seminars and publications, 
particularly those concerned with 
the teaching of history and geogra- 
phy, have encouraged educators and 
publishers in many countries to ana- 
lyse their textbooks and then ask 
other countries to comment on ways 
in which they feel they may have 
been misrepresented in them. 
UnEesco’s efforts to improve textbooks 
and teaching materials for interna- 
tional understanding are based on its 
belief that the only people who can 
improve textbooks are those in the 
country ‘which uses them. On its 
invitation 23 Western countries took 
a look at their textbooks to see what 
they say about Asia—and how they 
say it. Eastern countries are to 
study their textbooks to see what 
kind of a picture these present of the 
West. 
The Unesco Courier, — October 1957 
Children are among the most pitiful 
victims of war, About 30 million 
homes were destroyed in the Second 
World War and the number of chil- 
dren with no roof to shelter them 
reached staggering figures: 1,300,000 
in France, 8,000,000 in Germany, 
6,500,000 in Russia, 2,000,000 in 
Yugoslavia. By the end of the war 
many communities to house orphans 
had sprung up in all war-torn coun- 
tries. Unesco alerted public opinion 
to the problems of these communities 
and strengthened the ties between 
them by setting up an International 
Federation of Children’s Communities. 
* 
Unesco carried out enquiries into 
the problems of juvenile vagrancy 
and published studies dealing with 
its psychological causes. Fact-find- 
ing missions revealed the immensity 
of this problein in Europe. In one 
occupation zone of Germany alone 
there were more than 40,000 young 
vagrants, homeless and without iden- 
tity cards, living by black marketing, 
theft and prostitution. In 1949 
UNEsco sponsored an international 
conference of experts and directors 
of children's communities to deal 
especially with these problems. 
* 
War - devastated countries with 
burned-out schools, battered univer- 
sities and ruined libraries were a 
challenge which UNEsco accepted. It 
helped in the job of educational re- 
construction, of make-do and salva- 
ging. It launched appeals, 
collected and distributed Cont'd 
donations. From Canada on 
came books for the Far 
East and from the United © oo 
DESERT SCHOOLS. Since [949, 
Unesco and Unrwa (U.N. Relief and 
Works Agency) have opened over 
300 schools for about 100,000 of 
the Arab refugee children from Pal- 
estine, Unesco has given aid in 
teacher training, technical and handi- 
crafts training and fundamental edu- 
cation. This operation began as an 
emergency measure... but for these 
refugee children the emergency has 
not yet ended. Here five-year-old 
girl pupil, Karim Beshir, picks out 
different letters of the Arabic alpha- 
bet for the teacher at one of the 
Unrwa-Unesco schools in the Jordan. 
UNRWA           

## [Page 20](067949engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 67947: UNESCO dedicates major project to children

UNESCO & CHILDREN (Continued) 
States tons of school equipment for 
Europe. In one year alone over 
$1,000,000 worth of books went to help 
many countries. 
* 
Through Unesco children were able 
to join in the job of post-war recons- 
truction, those in the more fortunate 
countries helping the ones who had 
suffered most. Aid came from hum- 
ble sources: the pockets of school- 
children who used their savings to 
buy Unesco “Gift Coupons.” Through 
such anonymous generosity thousands 
of dollars collected in 18 “donor” 
countries enabled needy schools in 46 
states or territories to buy books or 
apparatus. Help of this kind has 
since continued to flow across fron- 
tiers. Since 1951 more than 300 ins- 
titutions in 50 countries—mainly in 
Asia, Africa, and Latin America— 
have received equipment and other 
aid to the value of $750,000 through 
the Unesco Gift Coupon Programme. 
* 
Greece was another challenge to 
Unesco. Nine years of continuous 
warfare had orphaned 380,000 chil- 
dren and destroyed or badly damaged 
7,625 out of 10,000 schools. UNESCO 
undertook educational reconstruction 
and launched appeals. The refuges 
children needed schools, teachers and 
equipment. In 1947, scientific equip- 
ment and educational supplies worth 
$300,000 were sent to Greece. Schools 
were rebuilt and equipped with UnNgs- 
co’s ald and with the funds it receiv- 
ed from many countries. 
* 
Restoration of educational facilities 
has ranked high in the Korean re- 
construction programme in which 
Unesco has taken part under the di- 
rection of Unkra (U.N. Korean Re- 
construction Agency). Unesco sought 
“first aid” for 100 of the neediest 
Korean primary schools through its 
Gift Coupon Scheme. Together, 
Unesco and UNkRrA set up a national 
printing plant which now issues more 
than 30 million textbooks a year. 
* 
Unesco has worked closely with the 
World Health Organization and many 
non-governmental organizations in 
studying the relationship between 
pre-school and early childhood edu- 
cation and the mental health of chil- 
dren. In 1955, Unesco and the Gov- 
ernment of Thailand opened an 
International Institute for Child 
Study in Bangkok. This is now the 
centre of a network of research in 
child development which is gradually 
being extended to other Asian coun- 
tries and to the Arab states. The 
important role of the police in the 
protection of mental health of chil- 
dren was highlighted in 1954 at a 
Unesco conference grouping police 
officials from 17 countries. 
20 
UNEsco has helped to set up “pilot” 
libraries such as the Delhi Public 
Library and Colombia’s Model Library 
at Medellin, stressing at all times the 
need to provide better children’s 
library services. It has recently pub- 
lished a book, “Public Library Servi- 
ces for Children”, written from an 
international viewpoint and particu- 
larly adapted for countries where 
libraries are in an early stage of de- 
velopment. 
* 
Meeting in the Unesco Institute for 
Education in Hamburg, Germany, last 
March, educationists, research work- 
ers and psychologists from 12 coun- 
tries, studied reports from all over the 
world on the working and effects of 
national systems of examinations. 
They discussed the causes of failure 
in school and what might be done to 
improve examination systems which, 
reports showed, are being criticised 
in more and more countries, even to 
the extent of wishing to abolish them. 
* 
Unesco Travelling Science Exhibi- 
tions have helped to develop the 
interest of young people in science 
and technology. The first exhibition 
(Recent Discoveries in Physics and 
Astronomy) toured 13 Latin American 
countries between 1950 and 1952. 
Since then four more on subjects such 
as “Energy and its Transformations” 
and “Man Measures the Universe,” 
have toured Europe, the Far East or 
Latin America. About three million 
people have visited the Unesco Tra- 
velling Exhibitions. 
* 
Unesco has supported the efforts of 
many governments to improve science 
teaching in schools. It has published 
eight volumes dealing with science 
instruction methods in different types 
of schools, and it has published inven- 
tories of apparatus and materials to 
help countries now in the midst of 
educational development to solve 
laboratory equipment problems. It 
has issued sets of 156 drawings from 
which schools in tropical countries 
can build low-cost science teaching 
laboratories and in “The TUNEsco 
Source Book for Science Teaching”, 
it has combined the collective expe- 
rience of the experts it has sent into 
regions where the need for the pro- 
duction and use of simple equipment 
is greatest. UNEsco co-operates with 
the science club movement around 
the world, recognizing that today’s 
children are tomorrow’s science 
teachers, scientists and community 
leaders. 
* 
The aim of the International Union 
for the Protection of Nature, founded 
in 1948 under Unesco sponsorship, is 
to spark an international effort to 
assess and safeguard the sources of 
our food, energy and material wealth. 
It works to educate people, and espe- 
cially children, in all lands to under- 
stand the value of Nature and to 
appreciate its beauty, and it has 
stimulated the creation of nature 
clubs in many countries. 
  
  
TV AND CINEMA INFLUENCE on young audiences is a special problem that has 
been studied by Unesco. Through surveys, studies and meetings it has highlighted 
such aspects as the production of entertainment films for juvenile audiences, the place 
of TV in education, films and juvenile delinquency. 
International Centre of Films for Children which was established in Brussels in March 
1957 to distribute information on the production of films for children, to study the 
needs of child audiences and to publicize films approved for them in various countries. 
UNESCO-P. Le Fauconnier 
It sponsored the creation of the       

## [Page 21](067949engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 67948: High intelligence: asset or liability?

The Unesco Courier. — October 1957 
by W.D. Wall 
Director, National Foundation for Educational Research 
in England & Wales 
makes of the ability inherent in its citizens. This is 
particularly true when we think of the most able 
five or ten per cent of its population from which 
leadership in science, the arts, industry, professional and 
administrative life will be drawn. The researches of men 
like Havelock Ellis, Terman and Burt have taught us 
that the social output of highly talented individuals is not 
A NY community is likely to stand or fall by the use it 
in direct but in geometric proportion to their higher 
ability and at the top end of the scale apparently small 
increases in power may make enormous qualitative and 
" quantitative differences in the contribution made to the 
life of a community. 
High intelligence is a complex aspect of the human 
mind. Partly it is innate, dependent upon the play of 
genes in our inheritance; but, as 'we are coming more and 
more clearly to see, cultural factors, experiences in early 
childhood, the kind, length and effectiveness of school and 
higher education, inhibit or facilitate growth in this as in 
other respects. 
What is more, the nature of this broad educational 
experience structures the mind in a qualitative way. A 
technological society tends to produce technologists as 
much by informal contacts with applied science in its 
everyday manifestations as it does through its direct 
scientific and technical training. Indeed we may say that 
the genius of an age or culture is both a reflection of its 
social climate and in many ways determines what can be 
achieved in its schools, and the forms in which its ablest 
men will express themselves. 
This leads us to another point which, though much may 
be made of itin pronouncements about education, is rarely 
fully realised in practice. Education, training, instruction 
is never solely nor even principally a matter of shaping 
and informing the intelligence. Human learning is as 
much an emotional and social, as it is an intellectual, 
process. Children, adolescents and adults learn in 
function of their prior emotional growth and of the 
immediate situation. : 
‘Blue-stockings’ & ‘egg-heads’ 
UT it is more than this. As they learn at home, in the 
B streets or flelds, or in school, children are developing 
their intelligence in the context of attitudes to 
themselves and others, of the satisfaction or frustration of 
their basic psychological needs, in short within a 
personality. This personality and their ideas of themselves 
are formed by contacts with other children, their parents 
and relatives, other adults, and their teachers. Children 
rarely learn precisely or only what adults set out to 
teach; usually they learn much more, often quite the 
opposite of what is intended. 
This applies to all children, but the highly intelligent 
ones present certain additional problems. It is not 
unusual for brilliant boys and girls to be in advance of 
their contemporaries at, say, the age of ten by as much 
as four or five years of intellectual maturity. This 
discrepancy increases with every year of growth. At the 
same time, physically, socially and even emotionally they 
may be only a little, if any, in advance of the average. 
Thus the question arises of whether such children should 
be kept with their chronological contemporaries whose 
interests and abilities they have left behind or whether 
they should be taught with older children who are more 
mature physically and socially. In either case, the super- 
normal child may easily feel somewhat of the ugly 
duckling and find it difficult to adjust. 
Another problem arises from the ambivalent attitude 
of society towards high intellectual ability, an attitude 
mixed of envy and fear on the one hand and of honour 
and favour on the other. Just because they are more 
rapid and penetrating in their thinking than others and 
because they solve educational problems better, bright 
children like intellectual adults, are often mistrusted. 
School-fellows equal matters up by such terms as “swot” . 
and “blue-stocking” and adults apply the derisory epithets 
of “high-brow” or “egg-head”. On the other hand the 
prizes in school and many of the prizes and honours of 
life go to sheer intelligence. It almost looks sometimes as 
though we wish to teach our ablest children that ability 
is a strictly personal asset, to be exploited as a means of 
triumphing at the expense of others, while at the same 
time we suggest that it should be hidden because it makes 
them different from the rest. 
Trahison des clercs starts in schools 
maladjusted adult who does not fully exploit his 
ability or whose intelligence, allied to egocentricity 
and neurosis, brings him to a position where his influence 
is exerted negatively. It is this which is the real 
trahison des clercs and it begins in our schools. 
What then is the solution? In most countries of Europe 
at all events and in many elsewhere, children at the 
threshold of adolescence are segregated in some way more 
or less according to academic ability. A small group of 
the supposedly most able go on to a form of education 
(Lycée, Gymnasium, Grammar School) which prepares 
them for entry to the University or the professions. The 
rest either continue in their elementary school or attend 
technical, commercial or modern courses. 
The result is that all our most able children tend to 
receive the same kind of education—a verbal academic 
one. Moreover when, as in many countries, selection is 
made by examinations of attainment and depends at least 
in part also upon parents’ ability to pay fees and to 
support a child in school well beyond the compulsory age, 
this education tends to have a marked social bias. The 
able child from a working class family is less likely either 
to enter or to succeed than a less able one from a middle 
class or professional family, 
Even where, as in England and in the Scandinavian 
countries, selection is made on the basis of objective tests 
and secondary education is free, it has been shown that 
T HE results we so often see in the highly intelligent 
* this social bias is by no means absent. Equality of 
educational opportunity is only. partly a matter of 
adequate educational provision and fairness in the 
allocation of places in different types of course. The able 
child’s own family and the immediate community within 
which he lives have themselves from his earliest days 
conditioned his ability—sometimes in the 
wrong directions so that he may be unable Cont'd 
to show his true prowess. 
Even when a child from a poor family 
wins his way, the discrepancy between the 
values and motives of his home and 
on 
next page 
21

## [Page 22](067949engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 67948: High intelligence: asset or liability?

  
   
HIGH INTELLIGENCE 
(Continued) 
community and those embodied in the school and held 
by most of his contemporaries may be too great. He 
may then either leave prematurely or conform against the 
grain only to find later that he belongs neither to the 
group from which he comes nor to that towards which his 
education has thrust him. Writ large this is the problem 
of able members of a developing but still primitive 
community educated abroad; but it is also a daily problem 
in societies where academic education is historicaliy based 
on a particular social tradition. 
Such segregation presents other dangers. The first is 
that, however we may recruit them, abler pupils in the 
academic school who go thence to the University and into 
professional life are cut off from three-quarters or more 
of their fellows at a time when social, political and 
humanitarian attitudes are likely to be formed. An élite 
is educated out of touch with the bulk of humanity. What 
is more, because of the prestige of academic courses, able 
children are implicitly taught tq believe themselves 
superior to the rest and to despise much of the work 
of the world to which they could make a peculiar 
contribution. This may be particularly true in a country 
in course of development which produces a surplus of the 
academically trained who are unwilling to soil their hands 
in the essential tasks. Such attitudes are intensified by 
curricula which are often remarkable for valuing studies 
in proportion to their uselessness rather than for truly 
training the minds and personalities of the ablest for 
the responsibility and self-sacrifice imposed by their 
superior gifts. 
Because of this, many educationists have held that all 
children should be educated together in the same schools 
and classes, at least until the end of compulsory schooling. 
The common school is held to be “more democratic”. This 
attractive idea needs close examination however lest we 
confound equality of human value and human rights with 
equality in ability and identie in social contribution— 
22 
ELEPHANTS INVITED 
TO THE CLASSROOM 
vastly different things. All men should certainly be born 
free and equal; but it is quite certain that such equality 
is a political and ethical concept not a psychological one. 
Children differ ineluctably in their needs and abilities and 
therefore in the kind and pace of education appropriate 
to the full flowering of their personalities. Nothing could 
be more profoundly undemocratic than educating all 
children in the same way and at the same level. 
This fortunately has never seriously been tried. Many 
school systems have, however, attempted to keep a 
considerable range of ability in the same class and an 
even wider one in the same school, and then to 
differentiate curricula through optional courses and 
through individual and group assignments, to meet 
differing needs. Some of the comprehensive schools in 
England and the Junior and Senior High Schools of the 
United States do this. The advantage is that, at least 
until mid-adolescence, children of all levels of ability mix 
in their daily lives. Many activities, social, artistic, 
sporting, can be carried on together irrespective of 
differences in sheer capacity to learn. Pupils can find out 
that intellect is only one dimension of personality and 
that there are other forms of excellence and other 
instruments of service. - 
The practical danger, and one which is making many 
educators, particularly in the United States, uneasy, is 
that the abler children may be insufficiently stimulated. 
They may tend to hide their light under the bushel of 
conformity to the mean. We know too that able children 
and adolescents gain from each other and from the 
stimulus of emulation much that would not arise 
spontaneously. 
What then is the solution? There are probably many 
solutions to the problem but their implementation depends 
upon factors not all fully understood and some outside the 
control of educationists. An educational system is the 
product of a society and it is only by thoroughly under- 
standing that society that one can begin to change 
education, and through education to improve society. 
Hence lightning solutions and universal prescriptions are 
impossible. 
Perhaps the most valuable human attitude is a sense of 
disinterested personal and social responsibility. Such an

## [Page 23](067949engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 67948: High intelligence: asset or liability?

There really were two elephants between the blackboard and 
the class. And even the Thai children who are used to seeing 
elephants were a little apprehensive as the animals swished 
their tails and broke off nearby tree branches with their trunks. 
Soon the elephants began to show the class of six-year-olds 
what they could do: how they help their drivers to mount, 
how they obey steering instructions, how they give themselves 
a cool, refreshing shower with a bucket of water. Soon the 
boys and girls were going off themselves, six at a time, for a 
ride on the elephants. All this took place at a demonstration 
school in Thailand, which is part of the rural teacher training 
centre set up in 1954 by the Thai Government and Unesco at 
Ubol. Here Unesco experts are working with Thai educationists 
to develop new methods of teaching suited to rural areas, and 
to breach old conventional teaching habits. A dozen head- 
masters in a group of schools near Ubol have said: “Let us take 
a fresh look at our village and base our new work on what we 
find here”. When other teachers in Thai villages decide to 
do the same, a great problem will have been solved, 
Photos UNESCC-Gillett. 
attitude, coupled with harmonious personal development, 
puts high ability at the service of humanity without too 
much thought of personal gain or prestige. It has marked 
the truly great men of all times and nations. It has by 
no means always marked the bulk of leaders in art, science 
and politics in all countries. Genuine humility and under- 
standing of others are equally important if leadership is 
to be acceptable within a democratic framework. 
Government by consent does not necessarily imply 
government by mediocrity. It should imply that those 
who have deep insight use their minds to help others see; 
neither impose a solution nor withdraw aid in disgust. 
Such attitudes and such personal balance do not come 
to the able child or to the rest of us suddenly or by chance. 
They have to be produced by education, and are unlikely 
to be produced otherwise. They must be implicit and 
explicit at least in school and preferably in the home too. 
Differences hetween children and adults in all the 
dimensions of personality and particularly in sheer 
intelligence will however always exist—and it is stimulat- 
ing that this should be so. Hence a rich and highly 
stimulating educational environment, within which pupils 
can choose the nurture of which they have need, is 
essential for all children and for the able most of all. 
This must mean that traditional curricula and methods, 
many of them based upon outmoded concepts of social 
and pedagogic aims, should be closely scrutinised and that 
while certainly the strenuousness of academic demands for 
the able should be maintained, the fields of study might 
be greatly broadened, particularly during adolescence. 
The teacher of the highly able child thien becomes the 
guide, philosopher and friend rather than the instructor 
he so often is at present; and the standards he maintains 
are those of scholarship shown in all, and not merely the 
traditional academic, fields. More even than with most 
children and adolescents, with the able he stresses the 
ideas of responsibility and service and provides real 
opportunities of every kind for strenuous endeavour for 
the benefit of others. Thus the educational catch-word 
of “learning by doing” may acquire a real meaning. The 
able will only be trained for disinterested social leadership 
and responsibility by exercising it throughout the period 
of their growth and education. 
The Unesco Courier. — October 1957 
  
  
  
BESIDE A SWISS LAKE 
This year some 30 twelve and thirteen-year-olds of Neu- 
chatel (Switzerland) Girls High School have been spending 
a few hours each week in Greece. Of course it is an 
imaginary trip, but it is one which has brought the country, 
its art and people alive for these youngsters who live 
beside a Swiss lake as no textbooks could possibly have 
done. They know all about the geography of Greece, its 
frontiers, mountains, towns and islands and what a day's 
work means for the peasant in the olive groves or the 
fisherman casting his nets in the Aegean. They have studied 
Homer and Sophocles and they have given performances 
of Greek songs and dances. What is happening in 
Neuchatel is also happening in more than [00 schools 
in 33 countries which participate in a special Unesco 
programme of education for international understanding. 
Not only different countries are studied; a school 
in Ecuador may study Human Rights and another in 
India, the work of the United Nations. The problem 
which this Unesco programme is helping to solve is the 
adaptation of education as a whole to the needs and 
to the interests of children living in a new kind of world. 
Photos UNESCO-Will Gloor 
GREECE COMES ALIVE 
23

## [Page 24](067949engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

THE RIGHTS OF 
900 MILLION 
CHILDREN 
by Paul Almasy 
0 
The conflict over child labour 
HE emancipation of women is generally considered 
T to be one of the greatest conquests of the 20th 
century. No less important has been the eman- 
cipation of the child by legal measures and the codification 
of his rights. 
Until the beginning of our century, children in most 
countries were deprived of any right whatever. Their 
parents or tutors were their undisputed masters. Their 
physical and moral well-being depended entirely on the 
goodwill of adults for whom they were little more than 
bleces of property, the law merely protecting the life of 
the child. 
If children were nevertheless treated with kindness in 
the overwhelming majority of families of all classes, and 
if parents did their utmost to ensure a happy life to their 
offspring, no merit for this was due, in most cases, either 
to the state or to society as a whole but simply to the 
happy consequences of natural instinct and maternal and 
paternal love. 
It was only toward the middle of the 19th century that 
legislators began to take a serious interest in the juridical 
status of the child. Public opinion was suddenly aroused 
by news that millions of young people, many no more 
than infants, were then living under the most revolting 
conditions, that in many countries children were working 
as virtual slaves, that boys and girls were employed as 
labourers under conditions which defied every sense of 
human dignity. . It was urgent that the law-makers step 
in and put an end to such abuses. 
With the onset of the Industrial Revolution, countless 
working families rejoiced at the possibility of increasing 
their slim incomes by sending their children out to the 
factories to work. It was mostly in the textiles and food 
industries that children between the ages of 10 and 14 
(boys and girls) found it easiest to get jobs, for certain 
jobs In such factories required neither physical force nor 
the intelligence of an adult person. Reports dating from 
1825-1840 relate that thousands of children between the 
ages of seven and fen were employed in factories, forced 
to work 14 to 16 hours a day, and received a maximum of 
15 to 20 per cent of the salary of an adult for the work. 
In England, for example, the children of needy families 
suffered particularly, since the employment of children 
was, up to a certain point a necessity of the national 
economy. The Industrial Revolution had swept across the 
country and factories, mines, etc.,, were faced with a 
sudden need for increased manpower but foo many hands 
could not be spared from farming lest the entire food 
situation of the country be threatened. Children were 
the victims of the manpower shortage. Thousands of 
children, no more than six or seven years of age, were 
sent into the collieries. Hitched to coal waggons by 
groups of ten, they took the place of horses in galleries 
too low and too narrow for beasts of burden. 
The situation was no different on the European 
continent. Of all European authorities, it was the 
24 
SC THa 
CCE 
a 
- -> 
. 
AT THE END OF THE [9TH CENTURY IT WAS COMMON IN MANY COUNTRIES TC 
Cantonal Council of Zurich which was the first to react 
against the abusive use of children as labourers. By 1815 
the working conditions of minors ‘were severely re- 
glemented in the entire territory of the Swiss Cantons. 
Ten years later, England too recognized the necessity of 
intervening in favour of children working in industry. 
In 1825 a law was passed making it illegal for children to 
be employed more than 69 hours a week. In 1867, the law 
was completed by an ordinance making a medical 
examination mandatory for juvenile labour. 
These two examples were followed'in 1839 by Prussia, 
in 1841 by France, and by several of the States of 
the U.S.A, such as Massachusetts, in 1842. In France, 
legislation for the protection of children progressed in a 
regular pattern. In 1841 employers were forbidden to 
employ children of 12 to 16 for more than 12 hours per 
day. In 1892, working hours were further reduced to 
10 hours, and for children of 16 to 18, to 11 hours a day. 
In 1900, maximum working hours for children up to the 
age of 18 (both boys and girls) was fixed at 10 hours, in 
1919 to 48 hours a ‘week, and in 1936 to 40 hours a week. 
In many instances, however, the good intentions of the 

## [Page 25](067949engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

legislators went unheeded since no organized control 
existed to enforce the laws. Thus both parents and 
employers continued, by tacit agreement, to exploit 
juvenile labour. It was only by the beginning of the 20th 
century that most countries took the stringent measures 
necessary to ensure the protection of children and that 
their lot really improved. 
Today, in almost all countries of the world the working 
conditions of young people are strictly regulated by law. 
Since its inception in 1919, the International Labour 
Organization has had as one of its primary objectives 
the protection of children and young persons. The 
international standards for protecting young workers 
established by the ro are embodied in Conventions and 
Recommendations adopted by the International Labour 
Conference at its annual meetings attended not only by 
government delegates but also by representatives of 
management and labour, all voting on a basis of equality. 
Owing to this “tripartism”, which is a special 
characteristic of the structure of the 1Lo, the Conventions 
and Recommendations adopted by the International 
Labour Conference are instruments of great practicgles   
The Unesco Courier. — October 1957 
FIND SMALL CHILDREN IN THE MINES FOR EXAMPLE WORKING AT THE HARDEST TASKS, HARNESSED TO COAL WAGGONS LIKE BEASTS OF BURDEN 
authoritative value. Taken together they form what has 
been called the International Labour Code. 
The main provisions of the International Code 
concerning young workers may be summarized under the 
following headings: 
1. The minimum age of admission to employment: 
Young persons under 14, and according to later (revised) 
Conventions, under 15 years, must not be admitted to 
employment in the various branches of economic activity. 
Higher ages should be prescribed for work which is 
dangerous to the life, health or morals of the young. For 
admission to work underground in coal-mines a minimum 
age of 16 years should be prescribed and recommendations 
are laid down to protect young workers under 18 years 
against lead poisoning and employment as trimmers and 
stokers at sea. 
2. The prohibition of night work: Young persons under 
18 years of age must not be admitted to 
work at night in industrial and non- 
industrial occupations, except under specific 
safeguards in certain well-defined cases. 
Cont'd on 
next page 
25

## [Page 26](067949engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

CHILD LABOUR (Continued) 
3. Medical examination for fitness for employment: 
Young persons under 18 must not be admitted to employ- 
ment in industry, in non-industrial occupations and at 
sea unless they have been found fit for the work on which 
they are to be employed, by a thorough medical 
cxamination. Their continued employment is made 
subject to periodic re-examination. In occupations in- 
volving high health risks, the medical examination and 
re-examinations are prescribed until at least the age 
of 21 years. Rehabilitation measures are required for 
those who are found unfit. 
4. Preparation for employment and placement in 
suitable work: Various Recommendations lay down 
guiding principles as regards measures to combat un- 
employment among young workers, the organization of 
apprenticeship and of vocational training and guidance 
services, 
The standards laid down are of course not meant to 
remain a deadletter but to be applied by the Member 
States. In the case of a Convention, the State which 
decides to ratify it is bound to apply its provisions by 
national law and practice and report every year to the Lo 
on how this obligation has been fulfilled. These reports 
are thoroughly examined and if necessary the States are 
invited to bring their law into full harmony with the 
ratified Convention. Recommendations are less binding. 
They cannot be ratified, but States nevertheless are called 
upon to report on the extent to which they were able to 
apply their provisions by national law and practice. 
There is no doubt that the Conventions and Re- 
commendations concerning young workers have had a 
considerable impact on the development of social policy 
for young workers in a great many of the 77 States at 
present members of 1Lo although it is hardly possible to 
assess the extent of this impact. 
As of June 1, 1957, eleven countries had ratified the 1ro 
Convention fixing the minimum 
age of employment in industry at 
15; eight countries had ratified a 
second Convention fixing the 
same minimum age for young 
people in non-industrial occupa- 
tions. In a number of countries 
of Europe the minimum age in 
industry and agriculture stands 
at 14, but a certain laxity is 
permitted as regards its applica- 
tion to farms. The law, in several 
States, permits the employment 
legislators have put into effect a particularly interesting 
measure: compulsory savings for young workers of 14 
to 18. The employer must deposit a part of the youth's 
salary in a savings bank; the youth cannot withdraw the 
savings until he reaches the age of 18. : 
According to the International Labour Review (March 
1954) published by the 1Lo the efforts and experiences of 
the countries of Europe and North America have spurred 
an important legislative movement for young workers in 
the Latin American Republics, some of which are 
comparable in result with those achieved in Europe and 
North America. Nevertheless, according to the Review, 
it is estimated that more than 12 million children and 
adolescents less than 18 years of age are employed in 
various branches of economic activity. 
In most countries night work is prohibited for children 
under 18 years in accordance with the International 
Labour Code, but many are the countries that nevertheless 
legally lower the age limit for enterprises where the 
nature of the work is such that production continues day 
and night. In such cases minors between 16 and 18 years 
cah often he employed. Similar exceptions exist for 
industries in tropical countries where work is generally 
considered less difficult at night than during the daytime. 
Working hours of children are nevertheless limited so that 
the child has a minimum of 12 consecutive hours of rest. 
“Tt is undeniable”, the 1Lo indicates, “that there is not a 
single country in the world, even among the industrially 
highly developed ones, which has as yet applied all the 
provisions of the International Labour Code concerning 
young workers.” 
In any event it may be safely stated that the internation- 
al standards for young workers have been’ extensively 
implemented in the industrially developed countries. 
There the premature employment of children has been 
largely replaced by compulsory education, the age of 
admission to employment raised 
to 14, 15 and 16 years, the con- 
ditions of employment of young 
workers strictly regulated and 
the necessary measures for the 
administration and enforcement . 
of the law taken. The problems 
of working youth have thus 
been largely resolved in the 
“industrialized countries even 
though there is still work to do 
as regards the strict enforcement 
of the law, especially in smaller 
undertakings and also as regards   of children in agriculture below ll 
the age of 14 provided that the 
child’s school work is not interfer- 
ed with. : 
One principle: which seems to have triumphed in most 
parts of the world is that the minimum age for 
young workers should correspond with the end of 
compulsory education (1). Thus the majority of industrializ- 
ed countries have fixed the age limit at 14. In the United 
-States, federal legislation forbids the employment of young 
people under 16 (though certain States have legally lower 
standards). Australia, South Africa, and New Zealand 
are considering raising the minimum working age to 16, 
while in Europe, curiously enough, the only country to 
have thus far adopted the U.S. federal example, is Albania. 
In some countries it is considered that a child of 12 can 
be a useful and productive member of society, and the 
legislation of these countries does not prohibit the 
employment of boys or girls of 12 in either industry or 
agriculture. Amongst these countries, varying widely in 
economic and social structure, are Costa Rica, Egypt, 
Haiti, Honduras, Iran, Mexico, Pakistan, Portugal and 
Turkey. In Egypt, a special provision concerning the 
textile industry permits the employment of children of 
9 years, and in the Lebanon where the minimum age is 
- fixed at 13 generally, certain special provisions permit the 
employment of children of 8 years. 
In Latin America, the situation is rather complex. 
Argentina was the first country to regulate the employ- 
ment of children with a national law passed in 1907, 
although one year before, Nicaragua had already passed a 
mining code fixing the minimum working age in coal-mines 
at 17. In Argentina, the employment of minors under 14 
was forbidden and for young people of 14 to 18 years 
working hours were limited to six hours a day. For 
children over 14 who continued their studies the maximum 
working hours were set at four per day. Argentine 
26 
the protection of children and 
young persons in rural areas and 
in various forms of non-industrial employment, including, 
for instance, domestic service. 
But it is in the economically less-developed countries 
‘where the problems of working children and young persons 
call most urgently for attention and remedial action. In 
these countries, where poverty is ‘widespread, and compul- 
sory education facilities are inadequate or lacking, many 
small children are found working under detrimental 
conditions for their health and physical development in 
order to earn their own living or to contribute to the 
family income, 
In these regions, the standards of the International 
Labour Code for the protection of young workers can, as 
a rule, only be applied by stages and governments need 
the help and practical advice the 1Lo is able to give. (The 
mo offers practical help and advice to countries who ask 
for it under the agency’s technical assistance programme 
and under the Expanded Programme of Technical 
Assistance of the U.N. and the Specialized Agencies.) 
The protection of young workers cannot be dealt with in 
a vacuum. Measures for the health, education and 
general social welfare of children are essential for their 
future well-being as workers and citizens. Where, for 
instance, no compulsory primary education facilities exist, 
it is difficult to prevent young children taking up work 
and they will lack a proper basis for their later vocational” 
training. This inter-relation is recognized in the *1Lo 
Youth Charter”, a comprehensive programme for child 
and youth protection adopted by the International Labour 
Conference in 1945. Whenever appropriate, therefore, the 
1Lo deals with .youth questions in collaboration with U.N,, 
uNEsco and the other Specialized Agencies. 
(1) A report on “ Child Labour in Relation to Compulsory Edu- 
cation” has been published by Unesco. Price: $1.50; 8/6; 400 fr.

## [Page 27](067949engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier, — October 1957 


### 67951: Children judged by the laws of men

e CHILDREN JUDGED BY 
THE LAWS OF MEN 
we 
ociery has always faced the problem of juvenile 
S "delinquency. Even in the dimmest eras of the past, 
an effort. was made to understand the child who 
unconsciously committed a crime. Only near the end of 
the last century, however, was this common-sense 
approach written into law with the creation of special 
statutes for minors in penal codes. Action by legislators 
was as necessary for juvenile delinquency as it had been 
for the protection of child labour, for common sense had 
often disappeared in the past. There was many a trial 
of children in which the judge was guiltier than the 
unfortunate defendant. 
In the Law of the Twelve Tables—the first law of the 
Romans, dating back to 306 B.C.—there were already 
special provisions concerning thefts committed by 
children whose responsibility for such crimes was 
recognized as limited. Under the reign of Hadrian, 
Pomponius declared that neither an insane person nor a 
child could suffer capital punishment for a crime. It 
was during this same period (2nd century A.D.) that 
Roman jurists made an attempt at establishing different 
degrees of responsibility according to the age of the 
defendant. They set up three categories: ‘1. “Infans;” 2. 
“Admodum impubes;” and 3. “Proximus pubertatl.” They 
defined the “infans” as someone who was still not able 
eighteen irresponsible. 
to distinguish between right and wrong and therefore 
completely irresponsible for his actions. Certain punish- 
ments were laid down for the “amodum impubes” category 
but infinitely less severe than those meted out to adults 
for the same crimes. The sanctions permitted for the 
“proximus pubertati” were much sterner. 
Peoples much less civilized than the Romans also 
admitted the principle of the irresponsibility of the child 
in their legal procedure. The Saxons and the Salic 
Franks considered the child to be irresponsible up to the 
age of twelve. The Swabians and the Bretons were more 
tolerant—they granted children immunity until the age 
of fourteen. The Burgundians and the Vislgoths inflicted 
no severe punishments upon children under fifteen. The 
Lombards even went so far as to declare all persons under 
Practically speaking, one might 
well wonder how these rules could have been enforced 
since no official birth records existed before the 19th 
cenfury and the exact age of a person was never really 
known. One must presume that the judges 
decided on the basis of the defendant's Cont'd 
physical appearance. 
Beginning in the middle of the Middle 
Ages and continuing to the end of the 18th 
century, common sense lost ground steadily 
on 
next page 
27

## [Page 28](067949engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 67951: Children judged by the laws of men

BY THE LAWS OF MEN (Continued) 
U.N. TEN-POINT CHARTER FOR YOUTH 
and judges displayed unbelievable intolerance toward 
juvenile offenders. In the Holy Roman Empire, children 
were often executed on the same grounds as adults. 
During the 17th century, the Paris Parliament pronounced 
2 certain number of verdicts which show a total absence 
of logic. Thus on August 17, 1617, a young man of 
seventeen wilfully killed one of his friends by hurling a 
stone at his head, The verdict: punishment by his father. 
A few years later, the same court—but probably made up 
of different judges—tried a youngster of thirteen who, 
obeying his father’s commands, had put poison into a 
neighbour’s beef stew. The verdict: the child was to be 
hung by the arms for two hours and whipped. A century 
later, in 1765, a boy of sixteen was condemned under a 
royal decree to three years in the galleys for vagrancy. 
The Court of the City of London made the following 
proclamation at the beginning of the 12th century: “A 
thief may escape immediate execution only if he is under 
twelve years of age and if the value of the stolen object 
is less than 12 pence.” 
Outside Europe, peoples of the most varied civilizations 
recognized the irresponsibility of children before the law. 
In India, one law dating back to the 15th century deser- 
ves to be quoted as a humanitarian example (and even, 
perhaps, as a pedagogical one) ; “If a child under the age 
of five commits a forbidden deed, no matter how serious, 
not only must he not be placed on trial but his parents 
themselves should not inflict any punishment upon him. 
Human beings of so tender an age can be educated only 
by kindness and love.” 
Modern legislation reflects the tremendous variety of 
educational methods now in use. To some authorities, an 
offence committed by a minor should not be judged as 
a crime but as the symptom of a dangerous state of mind. 
To others, the personality of the child accused of a crime 
is more important than the nature of the act he commit- 
ded. As far as the problems of delinquent youth are 
concerned, modern jurisprudence is dominated. by psy- 
chological, medical, social and educational factors. This 
explains why laws and procedures differ so greatly from 
one country to another. 
In most countries the upper age limit for juvenile offen- 
ders varies from 16 to 19 years (16 in Belgium, Burma, 
Ceylon, some regions of India and Pakistan, the Phi- 
lippines and Israel; 17 in Great Britain, Greece, Poland 
and Egypt; 19 in many other countries). Norway and 
Sweden have set up a special category known as “young 
adults.” In Norway, this includes persons between 18 and 
23 years; in Sweden, between 21 and 25. For this special 
category legislators recognize attenuating circumstances, 
justified by age considerations, and have set up a deten- 
tion system different from that for adults. 
\ 2 
N the United States there is no nation-wide upper age 
limit for a juvenile offender. The age varies in each 
State ranging from 16 years in Oklahoma to 21 in 
Arkansas. The upper age limit is also different for boys 
and girls. In Wyoming, for example, a boy is legally an 
adult at the age of 19 while a girl benefits from the pri- 
vileges granted minors until she is 21. 
Many countries today recognize different degrees of 
responsibility for children depending upon their age. A 
distinction is often made between children, adolescents 
and young adults. Children in the first category are 
considered to be exempt from criminal responsibility and, 
as a rule, cannot be punished by the courts. Nevertheless, 
in certain cases where the court ascertains that the child 
acted “with discernment”, he can-be punished. 
The minimum age at which a child can be held respon- 
sible for his acts and brought before a special court varies 
widely from country to country. It is fixed at seven in 
the United States, at eight in Great Britain, nine in 
Israel, twelve in Greece, thirteen in France and Poland, 
fourteen in the Federal Republic of Germany, Austria, 
Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Italy, Norway, Switzerland and 
Yugoslavia ; fifteen in Denmark and Sweden; and sixteen 
in Finland. No minimum age is specified .in the Penal 
28 
Code of the Netherlands; for small children only protec- 
tive measures can be ordered by the authorities. 
While children are today punished less severely than 
adults, in most jurisdictions, the delinquency statute 
includes a wide variety of acts or courses of conduct that 
are not punishable if committed by an adult. Thus in 
the United States, children and often. adolescents are 
considered delinquent if they smoke cigarettes or use 
tobacco in any form, or are beyond the control of their 
parents or their guardians, or are “incorrigible”, if they 
associate with immoral persons, drink intoxicating liquor, 
beg, use vile, obscene or vulgar language in public, or act 
in a way which is dangerous or injurious to themselves 
. or others. In Jordan, any young person under 15 who 
lives in a house with a prostitute (not his mother) or in 
a house that is used for prostitution, is considered. a 
vagrant minor. In several Middle Eastern countries, a 
  
  
 
. THE OLD WAY to deal with the juvenile offender was to send him 
to an institution in which harsh punitive methods and strict discipline 
were the accepted forms of “corrective” treatment. Today most 
approved” schools, reformatories, and “model” training schools take 
child under 18 can be brought to court if he is of bad 
conduct and refractory to the control of his father, guar- 
dian ‘and, under certain circumstances, his mother. 
Egyptian law forbids children to collect cigarette ends. 
Punishments laid down by the law and penal methods 
vary greatly from one country to another. In Europe, the 
first complete legislative reform in this field was made in 
Belgium in 1912. Previously, there were only -unco- 
ordinated laws and ordinances. The same held true for 
other countries. As early as 1908, Orlando, the Italian 
Minister of Justice at the time, urged judges to treat 
minors with understanding, but a complete body of 
legislation concerning juvenile delinquents was adopted 
in Italy only in 1930. 
Above all, the most urgent need was for special chil- 
dren’s courts with judges who were more than mere 
magistrates—that is, where they were both jurists and 
educators. In 1877 in the United States, the State of New 
York set up not only separate court hearings for minors

## [Page 29](067949engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 67951: Children judged by the laws of men

but ordered the segregation of children from adults in 
institutions, courts and vehicles for transporting prison- 
ers. These steps were far in advance of any taken by 
European countries. In May 1911, a children’s court held 
its first session in Portugal. In Switzerland, the Canton 
of St. Gall created a “Jugendgericht” (children’s court) 
in 1912 and the Canton of Geneva followed suit in 1913 
with a “Chambre Pénale de I’'Enfance.” The first German 
“Jugendgericht” dates back to 1914. In Asia, Japan 
created the first two courts for children in July, 1923. 
It is interesting to note that in the United States, 
where the first children’s courts were introduced, crimes 
of murder are tried in half of the States by ordinary cri- 
minal courts, irrespective of the age of the defendant. 
In the -States of Indiana and Rhode Island, juveniles 
accused of murder are tried in children’s courts; on the 
other hand, traffic offences committed by minors are tried 
in ordinary courts.’ 
From the educational point of view, the philosophy of" 
justice and the procedure followed in dealing with juve- 
  
  
     
© Paul Almasy 1957 
a very different view of their reforming role. In the past half century it 
has been increasingly recognized that the problem of delinquency 
Is part of a much .wider one of mental and emotional ill-health. 
Causes and background of anti-social behaviour are now closely studied. 
nile delinquency are basic problems, on which depends 
the extent to which the mentality of a delinquent child 
can be changed. Intelligent treatment can, in most cases, 
transform a juvenile delinquent into a good citizen. But 
there are times when the child is lost to society on release 
from an institution. 
The view has become very common today that the 
nature of the child’s delinquent behaviour is unimportant 
except as a symptom of his underlying emotional prob- 
lems and that jurisdiction should be predicated upon 
“the child’s need for help.” Among educationists and 
child-welfare authorities, it is now the generally accepted 
view that the official and authoritarian agencies should 
be used only rarely ; that the function of the court is to 
protect and “save the child” rather than to correct or 
recondition him. 
A wide range of measures is at the disposal of judges 
in different countries in dealing with children’s cases: 
reprimands which can be either punitive or educational, 
The Unesco Courier. — October 1957 
school-prisons, probation, supervision, reform schools and 
observation homes. 
Corporal punishment was once accepted by a large 
number of countries, Today, a judge can still order it in 
Burma, Ceylon, India (with the exception of the Bombay 
region), Iran, Iraq and Thailand. It is also accepted in 
Pakistan but only for boys (this is also true in Burma, 
India and Ceylon). 
In Asia, with the exception of Japan, children can be 
placed in prisons for adults, for lack of special institu- 
tions. In most countries of Asia and the Far East the 
arrest procedures of children are usually carried out by 
the ordinary police, on a similar basis as in the case of 
adults. In Burma, the Philippines and Bombay, however, 
special officers other than members of the police exist 
to carry out these functions. 
In the countries of the Middle East, parents or guar- 
dians can be held responsible for acts committed by chil- 
dren and ordered to pay a fine which, in Turkey, can be 
as high as 200 pounds, in Egypt 50 piastres, and in 
Iraq, Lebanon and Syria, 50 pounds. In Jordan, the fine 
Is unlimited but it can be levied only if the child’s act is 
attributable to parental negligence. 
“Prevention is better than cure”, the old proverb 
reminds us. Thus, along with enlightened measures 
which they have introduced to check juvenile delin- 
quency, society and its lawmakers have undertaken the 
task of child welfare. In many countries specialist orga- 
nizations have been set up to safeguard the physical and 
mental health of children and to assist their parents in 
educating them. 
* 
RAWING inspiration from the “Universal Declaration 
D of Human Rights” of 1948, the United Nations Social 
Affairs Commission drew up in May, 1950, a draft for 
a “Declaration of Children’s Rights” which wili be sub- 
mitted to the U.N. General Assembly for adoption and 
eventual application in all of the U.N.'s Member States. 
This Declaration consists of ten points: 
1. THE cap shall" be given the means necessary to 
enable him to develop physically, mentally, morally, spiri- 
tually and socially in a healthy and normal manner and 
in conditions of freedom and dignity, 
2. THE cHILD shall be entitled from his birth to a name 
and a nationality. . 
3. THE cHiLp shall enjoy the benefits of social security. 
He shall be entitled even from before birth to grow and 
develop in health. He shall have the right to adequate 
nutrition, housing, recreation and free medical services. 
4. THE cHILD shall be given opportunity to grow up in 
economic security, in the care of his own parents when- 
ever possible, and in a family atmosphere of affection 
and understanding favourable to the full and harmonious 
development of his personality. 
5. THE cHILD shall be given an education which will 
bestow upon him general culture and enable him to de- 
velop his abilities and individual judgment and to become 
a useful member of soclety. Such education shall be free. 
6. THE cHILD shall in all circumstances be amongst the 
first to receive protection and relief. 
7. THE cHILD shall be protected against all forms of 
neglect, cruelty and exploitation. He shall in no case be 
. caused to engage in any occupation or employment which 
would prejudice his health or education or interfere with 
his development. 
8. Tue cHILD shall be protected against any practice 
which may foster racial or national discrimination or 
hatred. He shall be brought up in the consciousness that 
he will achieve his fullest development and derive greatest 
satisfaction through devoting his energy and talents to 
the service of his fellow men, in a spirit of universal 
brotherhood and peace. 
9. THE cHILD who is physically, mentally or socially han- 
dicapped shall be given the special treatment, education 
and care required by his particular condition. 
10. THE cHiLp shall enjoy all the rights set forth above, 
irrespective of any consideration of race, colour, sex, lan- 
guage, caste, religion, political or other opinion, national 
or social origin, property, birth, legitimacy or other status. 
29

## [Page 30](067949engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 67953: Love (and more love) and a real home

  
<A MY 
a . 145 3 
v puri,    
HE U.N. Declaration of the Rights of the Child pro- 
T claims that a child should be given the opportunity 
to grow up “in the care of his own parents whenever 
possible, and in a family atmosphere of affection and 
understanding...” It would be a serious encroachment 
on this right, which is based on the most deep-rooted of 
human feelings, if the State considered “child care” as 
meaning direct interference in the child's upbringing in 
the home, except in special cases where parents or guardi- 
ans are unable to provide the physical and moral securi-, 
ty essential for the child. As a general rule, State-care 
is of an indirect nature, aimed at enabling parents to 
raise their children under the best possible conditions. 
In many countries philanthropic organizations opened 
creches and day-nurseries for children of needy families 
and established institutes for the crippled and handi- 
capped. These efforts greatly assisted many families but 
they could not replace action by the State for the good 
of the country as a whole. 
Today, in most countries irrespective of political systems, 
family allowances have become one of the basic measures 
adopted by the State to help children, though the meth- 
ods used vary widely. In certain countries the State 
pays a family allowance to all persons with dependent 
children, regardless of social or financial status. This 
applies to Great Britain, Norway, Sweden, Australia and 
Canada. Brazil and the Union of South Africa restrict 
the allowances to families in low-income brackets. In 
France, Belgium and Czechoslovakia they are only avail- 
able to persons who pay social insurance. 
France, Belgium, Czechoslovakia and. Chile have pro- 
gressive rates for family allowances, the State paying 
more for the second child than for the first, more for the 
third than for the second, and so on. In general, allow- 
ances are exempt from taxation. Two exceptions are 
Great Britain and Norway whose governments consider 
them taxable since all families receive them, irrespective 
of means. A special factor, related to the relative costs 
of living in town and rural areas,.is applied in France 
where a family with: three children living in a town, for 
example, receives more than a similar sized family whose 
home is in the country. In Switzerland, only the families 
of civil servants and farm workers receive allowances. 
Many other variations exist. France, Sweden, Greece, 
Czechoslovakia, Chile and Uruguay all pay allowances for 
a single child: other countries provide them only for fami- 
lies with several children. An extreme example is 
Brazil where the allowance (abono familiar) is paid only 
to families with not less than eight children. In the 
U.S.S.R. a minimum of four children is required to qualify. 
However, unmarried mothers are entitled to a special 
30 
allowance from the time of birth of each child until it 
is 12. They may also draw an allowance for large families 
if they have more than four children. If an unmarried 
.mother marries, she retains the right to this special allow- 
ance. The US.SR. and Great Britain fix the age limit 
for children’s allowances at 15. In several Latin American 
countries (Argentina, Brazil and Chile) the age limit is 18. 
Most countries have recently made great efforts to help 
children in the fleld of public health. The Popular Demo- 
cracies, for example, provide free medical aid for all 
children. In the U.S.S.R. factories and collective farms 
have creches in proportion to the number of families. 
Five per cent of housing areas must be given over to 
children’s playgrounds and kindergartens. 
Great Britain, the Scandinavian countries and the Popu- 
lar Democracies offer free maternity facilities and 
treatment. In Finland and Sweden the State grants two 
weeks’ paid holidays to mothers with more than four chil- 
dren. Finland, Great Britain, Sweden, the Netherlands 
and Mexico provide free classroom materials for children. 
In France this is done by the municipal authorities. School 
meals are provided for children in Denmark, Sweden, 
Great Britain, the Netherlands, France, Czechoslovakia 
and the United States, to name only a few countries. 
Passport to patrician’s rank 
ANY countries (among them Belgium, France, Den- 
mark, the U.S.A, Norway, Sweden, Australia and 
the U.S.S.R.) make housing allowances, and some, 
including Brazil, France, Sweden and Czechoslovakia, 
grant loans for buying furniture; Norway has a system 
of bonuses for this purpose. 
The Netherlands is one of the countries where private 
philanthropic groups working for the care of children are 
most numerous. Special attention is given to crippled and 
weakly children. Tiny Netherlands today boasts some 150 
special schools for physically or mentally handicapped 
children, with a total of 18,000 pupils. In Great Britain 
the State offers free accident insurance to all children 
under the age of 15. 
Today throughout the world there are hundreds of 
thousands of childless couples who eagerly desire to have 
children. There are also hundreds of thousands of chil- 
dren of all ages, orphaned or abandoned, who are deprived 
of a home life and the affection of parents. Society has 
therefore instituted the procedure known as adoption, an 
institution dating back to antiquity in some countries, 
though in the past it did not apply to children. Thus in 
certain civilizations an individual (of either sex), or a

## [Page 31](067949engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 67953: Love (and more love) and a real home

touple could show friendship or admiration for an adult 
person by asking him or her .to join their family and be 
considered exactly like a son or daughter. Naturally only 
unmarried persons couid be adopted. Sometimes the 
adoption was made for social or material reasons or for 
dynastic ones. In his new family the adopted person 
assumed the role and the rights of a direct descendant. 
He could thus ensure the transmission of the family name 
in the absence of a natural heir. 
In ancient times and among primitive peoples adoption 
followed a ritual. When the adoptive parent was a 
‘woman, she (or in the case of a couple, the wife) made a 
‘pretence of being in labour and of giving birth in a pub- 
licly-held ceremony. She clasped the person to be 
adopted to her bosom after which she pushed him away 
and let him fall to the ground. 
Adoption was commonplace among the Hebrews, the 
Egyptians, the Greeks and especially the Romans. Prob- 
ably the most famous example in Roman history is that 
of Octavianus. He was adopted by Julius Caesar and later 
became the Emperor Augustus Caesar. In Roman law 
the act of adoption enabled a citizen of Latium to become 
a citizen of Rome, a plebeian to rise to patrician’s rank. 
In France the adoption of children became legal only 
in 1923 by an Act which made it possible to adopt orphan- 
ed or deserted minors. There had previously been some 
exceptions, as in the case of the adoption by the nation 
of children orphaned in the 1914-18 war. Switzerland 
was one of the first European countries to pass adoption 
legislation at the beginning of the century. Before the 
Federal Civil Code of 1907, adoption existed in only eight 
cantons. Legal adoption was introduced in England only 
in 1926; in Northern Ireland in 1929; and in Scotland in 
1930. Denmark’s first Adoption Act was passed in 1923. 
The principles applied in the matter of adoption reflect 
the varying philosophical, religious, moral and social ideas 
of different peoples. The law-makers of France, Italy, 
Bulgaria and Venezuela forbid a man to adopt his illegi- 
timate child in order to legitimize it, but those of Greece, 
England and Belgium encourage the adoption of illegiti- 
  
    
  
   
The Unesco Courier. — October 1957 
mate children by their fathers. In Spain, Cuba and Uru- 
guay members of the clergy are not allowed to adopt 
anyone. In Colombia, Panama and in the Canadian Pro- 
vince of Quebec a couple can adopt a child of either sex, 
but a single man can only adopt a boy, and, similarly, a 
single woman can only adopt a girl. In contrast to the 
customs of other times, many countries today forbid the 
adoption of adults. 
I'll take a ‘problem’ child 
N most countries the law lays down strict conditions 
I about the age of the child and of its adoptive parent. 
In Brazil and in Greece the adopter must be at least 
50 years of age; in the U.S.S.R. anyone ‘who has reached 
his majority, in this case 18 years of age, can adopt a 
child. In other countries the minimum age for adoptive 
parents varies between 25 and 45 (Norway, Sweden, Great 
Britain 25; Belgium 35; France and Switzerland 40). In 
Great Britain the adopted “child” must be over three 
months old, but not over 21 years. In Bolivia a child 
under the age of 14 cannot be adopted, unless the adoptee 
has saved the adopter’s life. 
In the United States adoption has always been widely 
practised. Nowadays about 80,000 children are adopted 
each year. On birth certificates no mention is made of 
adoption and only the names of the adoptive parents are 
given. This is also the practice in Germany. 
Couples in the United States who are seeking to adopt 
a child are often interested in “problem” children. From 
humanitarian motives these couples undertake to bring up 
a child who is handicapped in some way, either mentally 
or physically, or who presents a difficult psychological 
problem. Thus they provide for him the 
kind of life of which he would otherwise Cont'd 
be deprived. The laws of the United States 
allow the annual entry into the country, on 
outside the normal immigration quota, of next page 
4,000 children under the age of ten who 
    
  
A BETTER START is assured for children in 
most countries today because of improvements 
made in public health services in the past few years. 
Guatemala, for example, now has excellent ser- 
vices providing treatment and vocational training 
for those who are physically disabled. Photos show 
Miss Saara Kontio, a physiotherapist from Finland, 
demonstrating corrective exercises to a student 
at the Children’s Rehabilitation Centre in Guate- 
maja City. Miss Kontio was sent by the U.N. 
Technical Assistance Administration to the Centre 
in Guatemala at the request of the Government. 
  
UNATIONS photos 
31

## [Page 32](067949engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 67953: Love (and more love) and a real home

LOVE & A REAL HOME (Continued) 
  
RWW nh is : 0  
  
  
UNESCO 
LIFE BEGINS AGAIN for Rachamin Hamdani, as he slowly recovers from polio in a hospital near Tel Aviv. He contracted the disease on his first 
birthday and suffered paralysis of his body and limbs. Until he was two and a half years old Rachamin was unable to sit or even lift his head. A year 
later with the help of a World Health Organization physiotherapist in the Tel Aviv hospital he was making good progress and could feed himself. 
have been adopted by citizens of the United States. 
A minimum difference of age between the child and its 
adoptive parent is a frequent requirement. If the adoptee 
is a minor this difference must be ten years in the State 
of California. In France it must be 30 years. Belgium 
and Spain require a difference of 15 years, and Switzer- 
land, Greece and Hungary, 18 years. In New Zealand 
there must be a difference of 18 years if the child and. - 
adoptive parent are of the same sex and of 40 years if | 
they are of different sexes. 
In France, Bolivia, Argentina, Denmark, Greece, Peru, 
Belgium and Switzerland, among other countries, people 
who already have a child of their own, are not allowed to 
adopt another one. In Greece it is possible to adopt 
several children at the same time, but not successively. 
Israel applies individually the laws of adoption of the 
country from which the child originated. Switzerland, the 
State of New York, Argentina, Denmark and Yugoslavia . 
allow an adoption to be revoked by mutual consent, but 
such cases are rare. Seven countries have no laws what- 
ever on the question of adoption. 
If the child is over a certain age, all legal systems 
maintain that, independently of consent by his legal re- 
presentative, the child himself must be heard with regard 
to adoption. This age ranges from ten years in Argentina, 
the U.S.8.R., Yugoslavia, Quebec and Michigan, to 12 years 
in California, 13 years in Poland, 14 years in Bolivia, 
Denmark, New York State and Peru, and 16 years 
in France and Greece. In Japan the adopter himself must 
obtain the consent of his own parents. In the Republic 
of Ireland only orphans and illegitimate children between 
the ages of six months and seven years can be adopted. 
Both parties must be of the same religion. 
Adoption is an ancient tradition among the Eskimos. 
In certain communities of Greenland, 25% of the couples 
have adopted children—even those who have children of 
their own. If the eldest child is an adopted one he takes 
priority in matters of inheritance over all younger chil-" 
dren in the family even if these are direct descendants. 
In Venezuela the State reserves the right to nullify an 
adoption at any time if it considers this to be in the 
child’s interest. Cuban law specifies that adoptive parents 
32 
) can under no circumstances be the heirs of a child they 
adopt. In Peru, Colombia and Panama it is forbidden to 
adopt a minor if he or she owns more than a certain 
amount of money. 
The laws of most countries show a tendency to offer 
more and more protection to an adopted child in matters 
of inheritance. Legislators have always been mindful of 
this question and extremely explicit laws were passed to 
settle the formalities of inheritance in times when no 
care of any other sort was extended to children by the 
State. In very ancient times parents could decide them- 
selves whether their children should inherit their posses- 
sions. It was the Roman emperor Justinian who, in 543 
A.D. promulgated the first law instituting the portio 
legitima, or compulsory share which parents had to leave 
to their direct descendants. In the Middle Ages, the Ger- 
manic countries adopted the system of the Pjflichtieil (the 
reserved portion), but for centuries, inheritance was a 
"question that was settled in many countries according to 
common law. Parents could dispose of their riches as 
they pleased, although the handing down of titles of no- 
bility and of privileges was decided by royal decree. 
The care extended to children by the State today em- 
braces this question. The principle of portio legitima is 
widely accepted. Where differences do exist they simply 
concern the proportions and the relationship between 
legitimate and illegitimate children, The U.S.S.R. and 
the other Popular Democracies allow inheritances, and a 
Soviet law of 1928 fixes the obligatory share of children in 
their parents’ possessions at 75% providing the total value 
does not exceed 10,000 rubles. In France an only child is 
entitled to at least 50% of his parents’ wealth. If there 
-are two children each must receive one-third, three chil- 
dren at least one-quarter each, four children a fifth each 
and so on, : 
While the care of the State in the social and juridical 
fields is indispensable for the sound development of future 
generations, paternal and maternal affection remains the 
prerequisite of happiness for all children. Only a child 
who is reared in a home where a harmonious atmosphere 
prevails can hope to develop a proper moral and emotion- 
al equilibrium,

## [Page 33](067949engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

IE] 
The Unesco Courier. — October 1957 
Letters to the Editor 
Sir, 
May 1 draw your attention to a 
point in the statistics you published 
(February, 1957) concerning the 
world’s most translated authors, 
which I feel needs correcting. Your 
attribution of German nationality to 
the poet Rainer Maria Rilke is open 
to criticism by both German and 
Austrian readers. 
R.M. Rilke, who was born in 1875 
in Prague, when that city was in the 
Austro-Hungarian: Empire, was the 
descendant of an old Carinthian 
family—thus Austrian. He was 
educated in an Austrian military 
school and he began his university 
studies in Vienna, continuing them in 
Munich and Berlin. Although, in 
1902, he entered the Worpsweder 
artistic circle, his literary activities 
and his friendships were based on the 
Prague circle of Austrian literature 
whose members included writers like 
Werfel, Kafka, Meyrink and Brod. 
Rilke,-who led an extremely unstable 
life, was not only for many years the 
secretary of Rodin; he travelled outside 
France in Italy and Russia and one 
might attribute a nationality for him 
from these countries. But if we wish 
to consider Rilke’s national origin, 
we can only describe him as Austrian 
because he belonged to the German 
speaking population of the Austrian 
Empire. Above all he belonged 
literarily to this same ensemble—that 
is the essential point. - . 
~The example of Beethoven can 
throw light on this question. The 
long years of creative work of this 
composer: in ~Austria—his artistic 
homeland—do not justify anyone 
calling him Austrian: No more could 
one describe Rilke as a German. 
Both these men were, in the best 
sense of the word, Europeans. But 
there is still some way to go before 
their kind of Europe will exist. In the 
meantime Austrians would like to 
claim Rilke, even if his works have in- 
fluenced the entire German language 
field. 
Hugo Pepper 
Vienna, Austria 
Sir, 
In your May number you gave very 
generous space to my article “Forty 
Jumps through the Universe”, but you 
were forced, through lack of space, 
to cut its conclusion. I shall there-- 
fore be glad, if you will enable me to 
give expression to it in this way. 
"I stated then that “it is a matter of: 
life and death for the whole of man- 
kind, that we learn to live together, 
and that our children be educated in 
a spirit of tolerance and mutual res- 
pect, regardless of differences of birth 
and upbringing, of nationality or race, 
of creed or conviction.” 
What I had wanted to add was that 
there is a real need for an *“In- 
ternational Children’s Community”, 
where such education can best be 
given, and where men and women of 
all races, faiths, nationalities and 
convictions can send their children to 
be educated in that spirit. 
As educators and teachers in it men 
and women must be chosen, who 
themselves live above the separating 
boundaries, and who are willing to 
devote themselves disinterestedly to 
the great task. 
Sections of such a world-wide chil- 
dren’s community could then be 
formed in all countries. Through the 
intermediary of UNEsco the boys and 
girls who would be educated in these 
"institutions should then be enabled to 
finish their higher education in Uni- 
versities all over the world. From 
them should one day come the best 
prepared personalities who can carry 
on the manifold activities of the 
United Nations. A Foundation, the 
“Werplaats International Children’s 
Community”, was formed, which aims 
at creating such an institution. = As 
Secretary of this Foundation 1 shall 
be glad to get into touch with readers 
of THE UNesco Courier who might 
help to make the plan materialize. 
Kees Boeke 
Abcoude, Netherlands 
Sir, 
In the city of Jaroslave where I 
live, 1 was fortunate to obtain the 
January number of your wonderful 
‘magazine THE UNEsco COURIER. The 
contents of the magazine and the 
quality of the reproductions are 
delightful. I am passionately fond of 
art, particularly of the fine arts 
(besides that I am a teacher of English 
and have published my first little 
book of lyric poetry). 
I beg you to help me with your 
advice. I want to buy some (more 
attractive to me) numbers of your 
magazine, which were published in 
1956. How is it possible to become 
acquainted with their contents? What 
must I do to get these numbers? The 
New York Graphic Society publishes 
the series of Albums on World Art. 
1 dream of some of them, particularly 
of the Indian Album. 
Y. Golovanova 
Jaroslave, U.S.S.R. 
Ed. Note: For past contents of 
THE UNEsSco COURIER see 2-year 
Analytical Index 1955-56, published 
with April 1957 issue. The Albums 
in Unesco’s World Art Series are as 
yet not available in the Soviet Union. 
Publication of Russian-language ver- 
sions is under consideration. 
WHERE TO SUBSCRIBE 
Unesco’s national distributors from 
whom the English, French, Spanish. 
and Russian editions of the UNESCO 
COURIER can be obtained are listed 
below. 
AFGHANISTAN. — Panuzai, Press Dep- 
artment, Royal Afghan Ministry of Educ- 
ation, Kabul, 
AUSTRALIA. — Melbourne University 
Press, 303 Flinders Street, Melbourne, 
C.!, Victoria. | 
AUSTRIA. — Verlag Georg Fromme 
& C-., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V. 
EELGIUM. — Louis de Lannoy, Editeur 
Libraire, |S rue du Tilleul, Genval (Bra- 
bant). BO Belgian francs. 
CANADA. — University of Toronto Press, 
Baldwin House, 33 St. Georges Street, 
Toronto 3S. 
Periodica lne.,, 5090 Avenue Papineau, 
Montreal 34. 
CEYLON. — The Associated Newspapers 
of Ceylon Led, Lake House, P.O. Box 
244, 100 Parsons Road Colombo !. 
CHINA. — World Book Co. Ltd., 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa). 
CUBA. — Libreria Economica, Calle 
©’ Reilly 505, Havana, 
DENMARK. — Ejnar Munksgaard Led., 
6 Nérregade, Copenhagen K, 
FINLAND. — Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
FRANCE. — Unesco Sales Section, 
19 Avenue Kléber, Paris, 16%. C.C.P. 
12598-48, Unesco Bookshop, Paris, 
GERMANY. — R. Oldenbourg X.G., 
Unesco-Vertrieb {fiir Deutschland, Rosen- 
heimerstrasse 145, Munich 8. 
GREECE. — Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28 
rue du Stade, Athens. 
HONG-KONG, — Swindon Book Ca., 25, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. 
INDIA. — Orient Longmans Private Ltd. 
Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay |; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; Gunfoundry Road, Hyde- 
rabad, 1; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P. O. 
Box 386, New Delhi, t; Sub-Depots : 
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., Scindia 
House, New Delhi; Rajkamal Publicat- 
ions Ltd,, Himalaya House, Hornby Road, 
Bombay I. 
INDONESIA. — G.C.T. Van Dorp & Co., 
Djalan Nusantara 22, Posttrommel 85, 
DJakarza. 
IRAN. — Iranian National Commission for 
Unesco, Avenue du Musée, Teheran. 
IRAQ. — Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad 
ISRAEL. — Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 
P,O.B. 4154, Tel-Aviv. 
ITALY. — Libreria Commissionaria San- 
soni, Via Gino Capponi 26, Casella Pos- 
tale 552, Florence. . 
JAMAICA. — Sangster's Book Room, 99 
Harbour Street, Kingston, : 
Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
JAPAN. — Maruzen Co. Lid, 6 Tori- 
Nichome, HNihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 
Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
KOREA, — Korean National Commission 
for Unesco, Ministry of Education, Seoul. 
MALAYAN FEDERATION AND SIN- 
GAPORE. — Peter Chong & Co., Post 
Office Box |385, Singapore. 
MALTA. — Sapienza’s Library, 26 Kings- 
way, Valetta. 
NETHERLANDS. — N.V. Martinus Nij- 
hoff, Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague. 
NEW ZEALAND. — Unesco Publications 
Centre, 100 Hackthorne Road, Christ- 
church, 
NIGERIA. — C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 
174, Lagos. 
NORWAY. — AS, Bokhjorner, Stortings- 
plass 7, Oslo. 
PAKISTAN, — Ferozsons : 60 The Mall, 
Lahore ; Bunder Road, Karachi and 
35 The Mall, Peshawar, 
PHILIPPINES. — Philippine Education Co. 
Inc., 1104 Castillejos, Quiapa, P.O. Box 
620, Manila. 
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND. — The 
National Press, 16 South Frederick St., 
Dublin. 
SWEDEN. — A/B C.E. Fritzes, Kung, 
- Hovbokhandel, Fredsgaten 2, Stockholm 
16. 
SWITZERLAND. — Europa Verlag, § 
Rimistrasse, Zurich. 
Payot, 40 rue du Marché, Geneva. 
5.20 Swiss francs. 
TANGIER. — Paul Fekete, 2 rue Cook, 
Tangier, 
THAILAND. — Suksapan Panit, Mansion 
9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
UNION OF BURMA. — S'P.CK. (Burma) 
$549, Merchant Street, P.O. Box 222, 
Rangoon. 
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA, — Van 
Schail’s Bookstore, Libri Building, Church 
Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
UNITED KINGDOM. — H.M, Stationery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.1. 
UNITED STATES. — Unesco Publications 
Center, 801 Third Avenue, New York, 
22, N.Y, 
U. 8. S. R. — Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow, G-200. 
YUGOSLAVIA. — Jugoslovenska Knjiga 
Terazije 27/11, Belgrade. 
33

## [Page 34](067949engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

From the Unesco Newsroom... 
S UPPORT FOR UNESCO PACTS: 
The United Kingdom, one of the world’s 
three leading book-producing countries, 
recently joined the Universal Copyright 
Convention sponsored by unesco. Twenty- 
seven countries have now joined the Con- 
vention whose purpose is to fill gaps in 
international copyright legislation under 
which certain countries are bound by one 
Convention, others by a different one, and 
still others by no agreement at all. Recent- 
ly too, the Federal Republic of Germany 
became the 25th country to apply the 
Unesco-sponsored international agreement 
which exempts books, newspapers, maga- 
zines and works of art from import duties. 
The agreement also covers educational 
films, newsreels, recordings and science 
equipment, if sent to approved institutions 
in participating countries. 
HM ‘ASIA MONTH’ IN THE U.S.A: An 
Asian month will be held in the United 
States during November this year when 
"cultural institutions of all kinds will 
work to promote better understanding 
of Asian countries amongst the general 
public. The programme will coincide 
with the Sixth National Conference of 
the United States National Comission 
for UNESCO being held in San Francisco, 
which has for its theme “Mutual Ap- 
preciation: Asia and the West”. 
Training FOR JOURNALISTS: 
An International Institute for Advanced 
Studies in Journalism will open at the Uni- 
versity of Strasbourg on October 15. Esta- 
blished with support from uNesco and aid 
from the French Government, this Centre 
will serve countries in Europe, North Afri- 
ca and the Middle East, bringing together 
professional and academic experience and 
newsroom and classroom skills for journa- 
listic training. It is the first of a series of 
regional centres envisaged in UNESCO's pro- 
gramme for improved training facilities for 
information personnel. Among the “stu- 
dents” of the first course will be holders 
of Unesco fellowships from ten countries, 
including teachers of journalism, experien- 
ced journalists .interested in teaching, or 
graduates who intend to take up a career 
of teaching in this field. 
BH WOMEN’S RIGHTS IN HAITI: 
Haiti has signed the United Nations 
" Convention on the Political Rights of 
Women, under which women are enti- 
tled to vote, hold public office and 
exercise other public functions on equal 
terms with men. The Convention, 
adopted by the U.N. General Assembly 
in December 1952, has so far been 
signed by 40 other countries. Of these, 
27 have ratified or acceded to the Con- 
vention. 
Cir CYCLOTRON IN ACTION: 
The synchro-cyclotron built by the Euro- 
pean Organization for Nuclear Research 
(CERN) at Meyring, near Geneva—the 
third biggest of its kind in the world— 
is now operating at full strength. After 
. just over two years of intensive work tests 
were carried out with the machine run- 
ning at its peak output of 600 million elec- 
tron volts. The second CERN high 
energy accelerator, a 25,000 million elec- 
tron volt proton synchrotron, is still under 
construction and is expected to be comple- 
ted by late 1960. Both machines are de- 
signed to further the study of the funda-. 
mental nature of matter. Twelve European 
countries are sharing the financial cost of 
the undertaking. The results are made 
available to scientists all over the world, 
HB NEWS FOR PHILATELISTS: Two 
new stamps in the United Nations se- 
ries are to be issued on October 24-— 
U.N. Day. Printed in 3-cent and 8-cent 
denominations, the stamps which ho- 
nour the Security Council, show the 
U.N. emblem shedding light on the 
globe. They were designed by Rashid-ud 
Din, a Pakistani member of the U.N. 
Secretariat. Meanwhile, the U.N: Pos- 
tal Administration has also announced 
that four of the regular issue stamps, 
originally printed in 1951, have been 
re-printed. The stamps are the regular 
20 and 25-cent denominations, as well 
as the 12 and 25-cent airmail stamps. 
KF LYING UP—ACCIDENTS DOWN: 
Over 10,000,000 more passengers used the 
world’s regular airlines in 1956 than in the 
previous year—an increase of over 16 per 
cent. The safety record was “the best 
result yet achieved for scheduled air services 
as a whole”. These facts are revealed 
in the annual report of the International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), a 
Specialized Agency of the United 
Nations, which also notes that the lar- 
gest increases occurred on the Far East and 
North Atlantic routes. In the latter case, 
passenger traffic rose by 20 per cent. 
HB EDUCATION IN A GLOBAL 
SOCIETY: “The elementary schools 
that will make the greatest contribution 
to life in the next generation will be 
those that are related to the world 
community, yet firmly anchored in their 
home communities.” This opening 
quotation expresses the theme of 
“Introducing Children to the World”, 
a book by Dr. Leonard S. Kenworthy, 
Associate Professor of Education at 
Brooklyn College, New York. Dr. Ken- 
worthy, who was formerly in charge of 
the Education for International Under- 
standing Section of Unesco, believes 
that the most urgent task of the school 
today is that of educating children to an 
awareness of their - country's inter- 
dependence with the rest of the world, 
and he has outlined methods and 
materials for teaching children these 
realities, The book is published by 
Harper and Brothers, 49 East 33rd 
Street, New York 16, N.Y., Price $ 3.75. 
enclosed 
  
SUBSCRIPTION 
Subscribe to THE UNESCO COURIER today - $ 2.50; 8 /-stg.; 
400 francs per year (l2 issues) 
Fill in this subscription blank and mail it with your cheque or money order 
to our local agent in your country listed on page 25 
Please enter my subscription for THE UNESCO COURIER 
O One year $2.50; 8 /-stg.; 400 French francs Tb Cheque /Money Order 
O Two years $4.50;16 [-stg. ; 800 French francs O Please bill me 
neesnssesperseannencsssssunetitaliorsenseatoelaltIsATIsNIsIssssLItITRSETIVRNTSTS 
meNGccesessrtIsFans terest atcsganyrteaTocToreanecetiinsenovenanaaaliibiiiatY 
sssssvnssesanuveanErErerYY   
FORTHCOMING 
PRICE INCREASE 
The Unesco Courier announces with 
regret that in view of ever-increasing 
production costs it will no longer be able 
to avoid a slight increase in price. On 
and after November |, 1957, the an- 
nual subscription rate will be increased 
to: 
$3.00 10/-stg. 500 frs 
and the price per copy will go up to 
30 cents |/-stg. 50 frs 
All subscriptions received before 
November |, 1957 and accompanied 
by payment will be accepted at the old 
rates, including renewals for subscrip- 
tions whose expiration falls in the 
12 months following November |, 
1957. Renewals for unexpired sub- 
scriptions can be ‘accepted only for a 
. maximum period of one year.     Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
34 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
,

## [Page 35](067949engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Your Gift Coupons 
bring health into the school 
  
PREVENTION AS 
WELL AS CURE IS 
THE OBJECT OF 
UNICEF SCHOOL 
HEALTH PROGRAMMES   
    
  
  
  
School garden in Danli, Honduras 
...GARDENING HELPS SCHOOLCHILDREN 
TO GROW THEIR OWN FOOD 
For $100 UNICEF CAN BUY GARDENING TOOLS AND SEEDS 
or £36 FOR A SCHOOL OF 100 PUPILS 
- IF YOU WANT TO HELP 
FOR FURTHER*INFORMATION WRITE TO: 
“Unicef Headquarters, UN, New York; Unesco, 19, Avenue Kléber, Paris; 
Unicef,. Neuilly-sur-Seine (Seine); Unesco, UN, New York.     
 
  
  
  
  
School Feeding in the Philippines 
.. A GLASS OF MILK A DAY 
KEEPS THE DOCTOR AWAY 
For $50 UNICEF CAN GIVE 150 CHILDREN 
or £18 A YEAR'S SUPPLY OF MILK. 
  
      
~... CLASSROOM AND SCHOOLTEACHER 
BASIS OF MASS HEALTH CAMPAIGNS 
For $500 UNICEF CAN PROVIDE ENOUGH 
or £180 PENICILLIN TO CURE 5,000 CHIL- 
DREN OF YAWS.

## [Page 36](067949engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
      
   
=
 
3 
ay
 
. 
ro 
\ 
SE
; 
A
S
E
 
- 
’ 
-
 
R
e
t
e
)
 
oo
. 
N
g
 
a¥
 
i, . 
: DR. DANNY KAYE: : : ay 
; A LARGE DOSE 
: OF LAUGHTER 
| 
bu Last year Danny Kaye 
ie] completed his third mis- 
3 sion for the United Na- 
tions Children's Fund / 
4 (UNICEF) after travelling 
to eleven European, Mid- 
: dle East and African coun- 
A tries to make a new film 
on the work of UNICEF. 
4 In Italy he visited a han- 
By dicapped children's home. 
hs In Morocco he pushed 
» into the Atlas mountains 
= to see the UNICEF-aided 
campaign against infec- 
hy tious éye diseases. He 
led a Children’s Day par- 
: ade in Turkey and visited 
pt a leper colony in Nigeria. 3 
a Everywhere children for- 
[E get their troubles in the 
= laughter provoked by his 
i fun and clowning. For, as 
il he says himself, ‘“when 
he you make someone laugh, 
= you're giving him medi- 
cine." (See page 8) 
UNICEF photos 