# [078384](078384engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](078384engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

    
  
 Pr o> SSeS Som FETTER -~ = - 
 
  
   393722 C Cel 
2A0ARELDROVIRNICE UO LN WRT Seeds Juve m 20 ) ph 
ASAE BLEOE OG G® y 
H065950000000600080CEERRs BE TR aT U0 GL Is seri mn gh 
VSB BINDGEECE dd 44 
art YX Serr eee ” 
Nn Re 2d prea bhi) 
PARTRA hl i ppb 242 Jobodbe ss 
ANDRO Ade ~~ 
ORANT2Peses P Y BOTT amet gy 
vas Toe pe - - 
i TE —— 
   
    
   
 
      
 
   
      
       
    
i.

## [Page 2](078384engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

TREASURES 
WORLD ART 
TUNISIA 
  . RTO = . --i - 
pba BEET Verlet SREEESS 8 | wo vt Ete 
Photo Unesco - Roger Lesage 
Diana the Huntress 
Presented to Unesco by the Tunisian Government on June 29, 1972, this mosaic once formed 
the floor of the dining-room of a 2nd century A.D. Roman house in ancient Thysdrus—now 
El Djem in Tunisia. Uncovered during excavations carried out in 1961, it measures about 8 ft. 
by 5 ft. 6 ins. It is a typical example of Afro-Roman decorative art at a time when the mosaic 
technique was at its height. Diana, goddess of nature, water, trees and hunting, is portrayed 
framed in a rustic arbour built on rocks from which a spring gushes forth: around her are 
depicted lions, gazelles, stags, donkeys and wild bulls. Above, detail of this mosaic. 
C2001 V2

## [Page 3](078384engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

"mCourier 
OCTOBER 1972 
25TH YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 12 LANGUAGES 
 
English Japanese 
French Italian 
Spanish Hindi 
Russian Tamil 
German Hebrew 
Arabic Persian 
Published monthly hy UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢ 
. Annual subscription rates £ 1.30 stg.; $5.00 
(North America); 17 French francs or 
equivalent; 2 years: £ 2,30 stg.; 30 F. Single 
copies: 13 p stg.; 50 cents: 1.70 F. 
* 
The UNESCO CQURIER is published monthly, except in 
August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese, italian, Hindi, Tamil, Hebrew and Persian, For list 
of distributors see inside back cover. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER," plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international reply 
coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCQ COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in the 
Readers’ Gulde to Perlodical Literature, published by 
H. W. Wilson Co.,, New York, and In Current Con- 
tents - Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A. 
* 
Editorial Office 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7® - France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Olga Rodel 
Managing Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition : Francisco Ferndndez-Santos (Paris) 
Russian Edition : Georgi Stetsenko (Paris) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim EI Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Kazuo Akao (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition : Kartar Singh Duggal (Delhi) 
Tamil Edition : N.D. Sundaravadivelu (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition : Alexander Peli (Jerusalem) 
Persian Edition : Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Assistant Editors 
English Edition : Howard Brabyn 
French Edition : Philippe Quannés 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Illustrations : Anne-Marie Maillard 
Research: Zoé Allix 
Layout and Design : Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed" 
the Editor-in-Chief 
1972 
| ii \ International 
Book Year 
Page 
4| SRI AUROBINDO 
IN THE PATH OF A GREAT SAGE 
By K.R. Srinivasa lyengar 
6 LANDMARKS IN A LIFE 
OF DEDICATION 
Photo report 
8| THE IDEAL OF HUMAN UNITY 
By Sri Aurobindo 
11 | AUROVILLE: CITY OPEN TO THE WORLD 
Photo report 
Ne
 
8 
- 
19
72
 
M
C
 
72
-2
-2
81
 
A 
14| THE VIBRANT INTENSITY 
OF TRADITIONAL AFRICAN MUSIC 
By Francis Bebey 
20 | KIRGHIZIA 
THE ‘LAND BEHIND THE CLOUDS’ 
By Chinghis Aitmatov 
26 TAXILA: ANCIENT UNIVERSITY CENTRE 
OF THE ORIENT 
A symbol of Pakistan's rich cultural heritage 
By Syed Ashfaq Naqvi 
31 | UNESCO 
PUBLISHER TO THE WHOLE WORLD 
By Betty Werther 
33| UNESCO NEWSROOM : 
34| LETTERS TO THE EDITOR   
  
2| TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
: Diana the Huntress (Tunisia) 
[od 
| AUROVILLE: CITY 
: OF GLOBAL UNITY 
This is the model of a 45 by 30 metre 
spheroid structure covered with 
golden discs that will dominate 
the international city of Auroville 
now being built near Pondicherry, 
in south-east India. 
The “Matrimandir”, as it is called, 
symbolizes the ideal of beauty and 
harmony and will be a place for 
meditation. Auroville is named after 
Sri Aurobindo, the Indian poet and 
philosopher, whose work and ideals 
inspired the founding of the city. 
Photo © Dominique Darr, Paris 
    
 

## [Page 4](078384engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 52652: Sri Aurobindo: in the path of a great sage

by 
K.R. Srinivasa Iyengar 
  
K.R. SRINIVASA IYENGAR, Indian educator, 
author and critic, has made a special study 
of the life and philosophical works of Sri 
Aurobindo, to whom he devoted his latest 
book, “Sri Aurobindo: a Biography and a 
History”, published recently in two volumes 
at Pondicherry, India. He was formerly head 
of the English Department at Andhra Univer- 
sity (S.E. India) and its Vice-Chancellor be- 
fore his election in 1969 as Vice-President 
of the National Academy of Letters in New 
Delhl. He has published blographies of Ra- 
bindranath Tagore, Frangois Mauriac, Shakes- 
peare and other writers. 
W.. it just a quirk of fate 
that Sri Aurobindo, the Indian philo- 
sopher, poet and patriot whose cen- 
tenary we celebrate this year, was 
born 75 years to the day before India 
achieved independence? 
Aurobindo himself regarded the fact 
that his 75th birthday coincided with 
the proclamation of an independent 
India on August 15, 1947, (our “tryst 
with destiny” as prime minister Jawa- 
harlal Nehru called it) "not as a fortui- 
tous accident but as a sanction and 
seal of the Divine Power that guides 
my steps”. 
Third son of a surgeon, Aurobindo 
received an English education at Lor- 
etto Convent School, Darjeeling, India, 
and St. Paul's School, London, before 
reading classics at Cambridge. Return- 
ing to India in 1893, he accepted ser- 
vice in the Baroda State in western 
India, rising to become Vice-Principal 
and professor at Baroda College and 
later Principal of the new National Col- 
lege in Calcutta. 
But with the Indian sub-continent, 
which he saw not just as a geogra- 
phical area but as Bharati the Mother, 
under foreign domination, Aurobindo 
set little store on the easy security 
afforded by his teaching career and 
embarked on a two-pronged program- 
me of revolutionary action. 
At first he was content to exercise 
from behind the scenes a long-dis- 
tance control over a secret, nation- 
wide, revolutionary organization that 
would be ready when the time came 
for armed uprising. Then, in 1906, he 
openly entered the arena of nationalist 
politics, and as de facto editor of the 
Calcutta daily newspaper “Bande 
Mataram™ he preached the nationalist 
cause with missionary fervour. 
Already Sri Aurobindo’s “Bhavani 
Mandir”, which in the eyes of the alien 
bureaucracy was an incendiary pamph- 
let, was in secret circulation among 
young revolutionaries. Now his open 
espousal of extremist nationalism 
made him the most dangerous man

## [Page 5](078384engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

Unesco’s General Conference begins its session on October 17 
this year. At its last session in 1970 it invited all Unesco member 
states and non-governmental organizations to participate in 
this year’s centenary of the birth of Sri Aurobindo, the great 
Indian spiritual leader and philosopher. An exhibition on Sri 
Aurobindo’s life and work will be held at Unesco headquarters 
in Paris from October 16 to 26. Special ceremonies have taken 
place and will take place at Pondicherry, south of Madras on 
the east coast of India and on the nearby site of Auroville, 
the international city named after Aurobindo. In this issue 
published in the international spirit of Unesco’s General Confer- 
ence we present articles on the life and teaching of Sri Auro- 
bindo; the traditional music of Africa; a Kirghiz writer speaking 
about his country, Kirghizia: the glorious heritage of Taxila 
in Pakistan; and finally International Book Year and Unesco 
as a publishing house. 
Ph
ot
o 
He
nr
l 
Ca
rt
ie
r-
Br
es
so
n 
© 
Sr
l 
Au
ro
bi
nd
o 
As
hr
am
, 
Po
nd
ic
he
rr
y,
 
In
di
a 


### 52652: Sri Aurobindo: in the path of a great sage

IN THE PATH OF A GREAT SAGE 
SRI AUROBINDO 
Sri Aurobindo in his 78th year, 
. a few months before his death in 1950.   
of India's spirituality into Europe and 
America, and, finally, “a step in evo- 
return to France with the outbreak of 
the First World War, Aurobindo kept 
in India. Following the killing of the 
Pringle-Kennedy ladies at Muzzafer- 
pore by two revolutionary hotheads, 
Sri Aurobindo was arrested and placed 
in solitary confinement in the Alipur 
jail on charges of conspiracy. 
After a prolonged trial he was 
acquitted and released in May 1909. 
But during his time in prison Sri Auro- 
bindo underwent a mystic experience. 
which decided him to turn his back 
on politics and retire to the French 
settlement at Pondicherry in southern 
India for the undisturbed pursuit of 
Yoga and spirituality. 
In his “Cave of Tapasya” at Pondi- 
cherry, he set about working out the 
meaning of the spiritual insights he 
had received while in jail. In collabora- 
tion with a French woman, Madame 
Mira Richard, who was to become 
known as "The Mother”, he launched 
the monthly philosophical journal 
“Arya” and founded the famous Ash- 
ram, or settlement, 
Although Madame Richard had to 
lution which would raise man to a 
higher and larger consciousness”. The 
last was the most important and was 
the theme of “The Life Divine”, "The 
Human Cycle” and “The Ideal of 
Human Unity". 
Sri Aurobindo’s diagnosis of the 
present human predicament is that, 
while man's mastery over the outside 
world has been growing at an acceler- 
ated pace, his inner development 
seems to have halted long ago. Our 
environment is changing fast, but the 
inner climate has remained the same. 
So far only the first three stages of 
evolution have emerged, the develop- 
ment from “matter” to “life” and from 
“life” to “mind®; but the time has 
come for the step forward to the: 
“supermind” and the “divinisation” of 
man and the universe. 
Sri Aurobindo died on December 5, 
1950, but his work has been continu- 
ed by “The Mother”, It was in further- 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
the journal going until 1921, publishing 
in it in serial form a number of philo- 
sophical treatises such as “The Life 
Divine”, “The Human Cycle”, “The 
Ideal of Human Unity”, "The Synthesis 
of Yoga”, “The Secret of the Veda”, 
“Essays on the Gita”, “Foundations 
of Indian Culture” and “The Future 
Poetry”. 
Sri Aurobindo's achievement as a 
lyricist, dramatist and epic poet must 
rank him among the great creative 
writers of our time, Yet it is not 
merely ‘as a writer and poet, but as a 
thinker and prophet that Sri Auro- 
bindo has made his unique impact 
upon our age. 
In his Independence Day message 
of August 15, 1947, Sri Aurobindo 
referred to five world movements 
with which he had involved himself 
and whose fulfilment he hoped for—a 
free and united India, a resurgent Asia, 
an emerging world union, the overflow

## [Page 6](078384engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 52652: Sri Aurobindo: in the path of a great sage

  
   
   
     
A GREAT SAGE (Continued) 
ance of his vision of the future that 
“Auroville”, the international “City of 
Dawn" was inaugurated in February 
1968. 
Though nearly twenty-two years 
have passed since the death of Sri 
Aurobindo, his influence is still keenly 
felt, particularly so in this his cen- 
tenary year. He was cast in the hallow- 
ed mould of India’s great sages and 
Rishis, and it was his destiny to par- 
ticipate in great world movements and 
help hasten their fulfilment. He saw 
India bound and willed her free; he 
saw that man was a creature of infinity 
in his aspirations, but a maimed thing 
in reality because of the limitations of 
egoistic desire, inbuilt incapacity and 
the certainty of death. 
The Ashram at Pondicherry and 
Auroville represent the dynamic phase 
of Sri Aurobindo’s spiritual philosophy. 
They are but mini-worlds, spiritual pilot 
projects in which several hundred men, 
women and children drawn from most 
of the nationalities of the world are 
laying the foundations of the “Deva 
Sangha” (the Community of Gods) that 
Sri Aurobindo envisaged. 
The Ashram and Auroville are still 
but the beginning of beginnings; no 
more than hints and guesses, sketches 
and opening bars of music. They are, 
if you will, like promissory notes; but 
the seal and the signature are Sri 
Aurobindo’s. 
Landmarks 
in a life 
of dedication 
El Aurobindo as a schoolboy in 
Manchester, in 1883. Son of an Indian 
surgeon, he was born in Calcutta and was 
1 educated in England from the age of seven. 
Ph
ot
os
 
()
 
Sr
i 
A
u
r
o
b
i
n
d
o
 
A
s
h
r
a
m
 
Po
nd
ic
he
rr
y 
H Aurobindo (seated centre, second from left) with other Indian nationalist 
leaders at Poona, near Bombay (1906-1907). After completing his studies 
at Cambridge, Aurobindo returned to India in 1893 to become a Professor 
at Baroda College in western India. In 1906 he became openly involved with 
the nationalist movement in which his activities led to a term of imprisonment. 
After his release in 1909, he turned his back on politics and retired to 
Pondicherry where he founded his “Ashram”, or spiritual community. 
El Sri Aurobindo in 1919, preparing an article 
for “Arya” the monthly philosophical journal he 
founded with Madame Mira Richard, 
the Frenchwoman disciple who later became 
known as “The Mother” of the Ashram. 
    
M 
Photo © Dominique Darr, Parls

## [Page 7](078384engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 52652: Sri Aurobindo: in the path of a great sage

  
  
[3 Part of the crowd 
attending a “darshan” or 
balcony ceremony at the 
Sri Aurobindo Ashram. 
Four times a year, in 
February, April, August 
and November, 
“The Mother" appears on 
the balcony of her 
apartment to greet the 
disciples and visitors 
gathered below in silent 
respect. 
HE Disciples meditate at 
the tomb of Sri Aurobindo. 
1 Sri Aurobindo at Pondicherry in 1919, 
the period at which he produced many of his 
great philosophical writings. 
  
I A photograph of “The Mother" taken in Pondicherry 
last year, Mira Richard was born in Paris in 1878 
and first met Sri Aurobindo in 1914. In 1926, Sri 
Aurobindo entrusted the administration of the communal 
life of the Ashram and the spiritual guidance 
of his disciples to her. 
7) 

## [Page 8](078384engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

Photos © Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 
Pondicherry 
LATINA 
A. “CT 
  
LCE a - 
- ~~ -— 
~ PY 
  
  
THE ASHRAM 
AT PONDICHERRY 
The ideals and precepts of Sri 
Aurobindo have found expression 
in the life and activities of the 
spiritual community he created at 
Pondicherry, 170 km south of 
Madras. From a handful of dis- 
ciples and followers who lived as 
members of Sri Aurobindo’s house- 
hold, the community, or Ashram, 
has grown into a settlement of 
1,800 persons—seekers after a 
life based on spiritual realization. 
Community services staffed by its 
members now range from weaving 
and spinning (photo left) to farm- 
ing, building, handicrafts and metal 
work. Handmade paper (bottom 
left) feeds the community's print- 
ing press which publishes in 
13 languages. Cultural activities 
include painting, sculpture, and 
music played on traditional Indian 
stringed instruments (photo right). 
Founded in 1952, the Ashram’s 
“Sri Aurobindo International Cen- 
tre of Education” today provides 
education ranging from kindergar- 
ten to post-graduate studies based 
on an experimental “Free Pro- 
gress” method outlined by Sri 
Aurobindo. 


### 52657: The Ideal of human unity

THE IDEAL 
OF HUMAN 
UNITY 
Poet, critic, scholar and humanist, Sri Aurobindo was a new type of 
thinker whom the London “Times Literary Supplement” has described 
as “one who combines in his vision the alacrity of the West with the 
illumination of the East.” 1n 1914, after four years of spiritual contem- 
plation, he launched a monthly philosophical journal, “Arya” in which 
he expressed his vision of man and history, his destiny, and the 
progress of human society towards unity and harmony. These treat- 
ises, since published as books, were followed by other major works 
from the pen of Sri Aurobindo, including the epic *Savitri’’, a spirit- 
ual poem of 23,000 lines, and Mind of Light”. The following quo- 
tations are from “The Ideal of Human Unity”, which first appeared 
in “Arya” in serial form between 1915 and 1918. This treatise and 
two other works—“The Human Cycle” and “War and Self Determi- 
nation”"—were recently published under the general title, “Social 
and Political Thought”, as volume 15 in the Sri Aurobindo Birth 
Centenary Library by the Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondicherry.  

## [Page 9](078384engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 52657: The Ideal of human unity

by Sri Aurobindo 
Today the ideal of human unity is more or less making 
_ its way to the front of our consciousness. The ideal... must 
certainly be attempted, and is likely to figure largely 
among the determining forces of the future; for the intel- 
lectual and material circumstances of the age have prepar- 
ed and almost impose it... 
The State and the individual 
We must note one fact in connexion with the claim of 
the State to suppress the individual in its own interest: 
that it is quite immaterial to the principle what form the 
State may assume. The tyranny of the absolute king 
over all and the tyranny of the majority over the indivi- 
dual... are forms of one and the same tendency. Each 
when it declares itself to be the State with its absolute 
“L’Etat, c'est moi,” is speaking a profound truth even while 
it bases that truth upon a falsehood. The truth is that 
each really is the self-expression of the State in its cha- 
racteristic attempt to subordinate to itself the free will, 
the free action, the power, dignity and self-assertion of the 
individuals constituting it. The falsehood lies in the under- 
lying idea that the State is something greater than the indi- 
viduals constituting it and can with impunity for itself and 
to the highest hope of humanity arrogate this oppressive 
supremacy. 
National conscience and individual liberty 
A national culture, a national religion, a national educa- 
tion may still be useful things provided they do not inter- 
fere with the growth of human solidarity on the one side 
and individual freedom of thought and conscience and 
development on the other. 
Human aggregation and living organisms 
The administrative, political, economic organization of 
mankind in aggregates of smaller or greater size is a 
work which belongs at its basis to the same order of 
phenomena as the creation of vital organisms in physical 
Nature. It uses, that is to say, primarily external and phy- 
sical methods governed by the principles of physical life- 
energy intent on the creation of living forms. 
Liberty and justice 
Liberty is insufficient, justice also is necessary and 
becomes a pressing demand; the cry for equality arises. 
Certainly, absolute equality is non-existent in this world; 
but the word was aimed against the unjust and unneces- 
sary inequalities of the old social order. Under a just 
social order, there must be an equal opportunity, an equal 
training for all to develop their faculties and to use them. 
The plague of national egoism 
War can only be abolished if national armies “are abol- 
ished and even then with difficulty, by the development 
of some other machinery which humanity does not yet 
know how to form or, even if formed, will not for some 
time be able or willing perfectly to utilize. And there is no 
chance of national armies being abolished ; for each nation 
distrusts all the others too much, has too many ambitions 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

## [Page 10](078384engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 52657: The Ideal of human unity

10 
THE IDEAL OF HUMAN UNITY (Continued) 
and hungers, needs to remain armed, if for nothing else, 
to guard its markets and keep down its dominions, colonies, 
subject peoples. 
Progress and liberty 
... All unnecessary restriction of the few common liber- 
ties man has been able to organize for himself becomes a 
step backward whatever immediate gain it may bring; and 
every organization of oppression or repression beyond 
what the imperfect conditions of human nature and society 
render inevitable, becomes, no matter where or by whom it 
is practised, a blow to the progress of the whole race. 
Diversity and unity 
...Freedom is as necessary to life as law and regime: 
diversity is as necessary as unity to our true completeness. 
Existence is only one in its essence and totality; in its 
play it is necessarily multiform. Absolute uniformity would 
mean the cessation of life, while on the other hand, the 
vigour of the pulse of life may be measured by the 
richness of the diversities which it creates. At the same 
time, while diversity is essential for power and fruitfulness 
of life, unity is necessary for its order, arrangement and 
stability. 
The inner liberty 
Nature does not manufacture, does not impose a pattern 
or a rule from outside; she impels life to grow from within 
and to assert its own natural law and development modi- 
fied only by its commerce with its environment. All liberty, 
individual, national, religious, social, ethical, takes its 
ground upon this fundamental principle of our existence. 
Democracy 
Democracy is by no means a sure preservative of liberty; 
on the contrary, we see today the democratic system of 
government march steadily towards such an organized 
annihilation of individual liberty as could not have been 
dreamed of in the old aristocratic and monarchicai systems. 
It may be that from the more violent and brutal forms of 
despotic oppression which were associated with those sys- 
tems, democracy has indeed delivered those nations which 
have been fortunate enough to achieve liberal forms of 
government, and that is no doubt a great gain. It revives 
now only in periods of revolution and of excitement, often 
in the forms of mob tyranny or a savage revolutionnary or 
reactionary repression. But there is a deprivation of liberty 
which is more respectable in appearance, more subtle and 
systematized, more mild in its method because it has a 
greater force at its back, but for that very reason more 
effective and pervading. 
Language and tongues 
A common language makes for unity and therefore it 
might be said that the unity of the human race demands 
unity of language; the advantages of diversity must be 
foregone for this greater good, however serious the tem- 
porary sacrifice. But... language is the sign of the cul- 
tural life of a people, the index of its soul in thought and 
mind that stands behind and enriches its soul in action. 
Therefore, it is here that the phenomena and utilities of 
diversity may be most readily seized more than in mere 
outward things... Diversity of language is worth keeping 
because diversity of cultures and differentiation of soul- 
groups are worth keeping and because without that diver- 
sity life cannot have full play; for, in its absence there is a 
danger, almost an inevitability of decline and stagnation. 
The inner and the outer 
In laying stress on culture, on the things of the mind 
and the spirit, there need be no intention of undervaluing 
the outward material side .of life: it is not at all my purpose 
to belittle that to which Nature always attaches so insistent 
an importance. On the contrary, the inner and the outer 
depend upon each other... The peace, well-being and 
settled order of the human world is a thing eminently to 
be desired as a basis for a great world-culture in which all 
humanity must be united; but neither of these unities, the 
outward or inward, ought to be devoid of an element even 
‘more important than peace, order and well-being—freedom 
and vigour of life, which can only be assured by variation 
and by the freedom of the group and of the individual. 
The ultimate aim: the spirit 
A spiritual religion of humanity is the hope of the future. 
By this is not meant what-is ordinarily called a universal 
religion, a system, a thing of creed and intellectual belief 
and dogma and outward rite. Mankind has tried unity by 
that means; it has failed and deserved to fail, because there 
can be no universal religious system, one in mental creed 
and vital form. The inner spirit is indeed one, but more 
than any other the spiritual life insists on freedom and 
variation in its self-expression and means of development. 
A religion of humanity means the growing realization that 
there is a secret Spirit, a divine Reality, in which we are 
all one, that humanity is its highest present vehicle on 
earth, that the human race and the human being are the 
means by which it will progressively reveal itself here. It 
implies a growing attempt to live out this knowledge and 
bring about a kingdom of this divine Spirit upon earth. By 
its growth within us oneness with our fellow-men will 
become the leading principle of all our life, not merely a 
principle of co-operation, but a deeper brotherhood, a real 
and an inner sense of unity and equality and a common 
life. 
* 
The idea of a world-empire imposed by sheer force is in 
direct opposition, as we have seen, to the new conditions 
which the progressive nature of things has introduced into 
the modern world. 
* 
Behind the apparent changes of the most radical revolu- 
tions we see this unavoidable principle of continuity sur- 
viving in the heart of the new order. 
* 
In the old phrase his (Man's) business is to learn to live 
according to Nature. 
* 
Man tries to determine the laws of his mind and life and 
body, the law and rule of the facts and forces about him. 
* 
The present arrangement of the world has been worked 
out by economic forces, by political diplomacies, treaties 
and purchases and by military violence without regard to 
any moral principle or any general rule of the good of 
mankind. 
* 
The free individual is the conscious progressive: it is 
only when he is able to impart his own creative and mobile 
consciousness to the mass that a progressive society 
becomes possible. ! 
  
Texts © Sri Aurobindo Ashram Trust 1970, taken from “Social 
and Political Thought” by Srl Aurobindo. °

## [Page 11](078384engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

Av
 


### 52658: Auroville, city open to the world

AUROVILLE 
city 
ope 
to the world 
Photo © Dominique Darr, Paris 
This model of Auroville, the cultural township being set up by the Sri Aurobindo 
Society a few miles north of Pondicherry in India, shows the city of global unity 
spread out like a giant nebula with the golden sphere or “Matrimandir” as its focal 
point (see page 12). With its four zones—residential, industrial, cultural and internat- 
ional—Auroville will eventually cover an area of 15 square miles with a population 
not exceeding 50,000. In the cultural zone academies of arts and sciences will 
welcome artists and scientists from all parts of the world. In the international zone 
pavilions of all nations will serve as embassies of the culture, art and handicrafts 
of each country. The city’s nebular-shaped layout allows for the integration of the 
different zones. The foundation stone of Auroville was laid on February 28, 1968, 
and the city is expected to take 20 years to complete. Unesco has invited its member 
states and non-governmental organizations to participate in the development of 
Auroville as an international cultural township “designed to bring together the. 
values of different cultures and civilizations in a harmonious environment”, and has 
been lending its support to the project as a whole. 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
11

## [Page 12](078384engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 52658: Auroville, city open to the world

AUROVILLE (Continued) 
  
SPHERE OF UNITY. An overall view of the giant “Matriman- 
dir” sphere at Auroville, showing the huge structure as it will look 
after completion in a complex of 12 gardens symbolically recalling 
the open petals of a lotus flower (see also cover photo caption 
page 3). Its golden discs will move gently in the wind and will 
cover the concrete walls overlaid with plastic. Pathways from the 
gardens pass between walls 30ft. high that will slope down to 
form a 12-sectioned crater enshrining the golden ball. Cross-section 
of the structure (below), designed by the French architect, Roger 
  
     » % a 
LF f 
= 
} oT ul 
- REAL I I TLE 
Ya 
—
 
Anger, shows stairways leading to 2 lower room from which ramps 
give access to a 12-sided hall of meditation in this structure of 
spiritual unity. At its centre a luminious ball will diffuse light 
into both rooms from the top of the structure, which is pierced ver- 
tically down its axis. Opposite, inhabitants of Auroville gather at 
the site as it looks at present. The reflections of the sun add an 
awe-inspiring note to the scene. The foundations of the Matri- 
mandir and the surrounding gardens are being excavated by hand 
without the help of mechanical earth-moving equipment. 
 

## [Page 13](078384engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 52658: Auroville, city open to the world

FREE PROGRESS. One of the first buildings to be completed at 
Auroville was a new type of school — new in its architectural approach 
and in the educational methods used. Below, an international study 
group on the role of the arts is seen in -the open air patio of the 
new structure. Studies are available for persons of various ages 
using a technique evolved by Aurobindo himself called “Free Pro- 
gress”. The method seeks to teach students to gain a better know- 
ledge of their own nature and instil a spirit of “belonging to humanity”. 
Right, one of the first children born in the new city of Auroville. 
Photos © Dominique Darr, Parla 
    
Fy 
sa
 

## [Page 14](078384engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

Wooden reliquary in the form of a flute 
player, from south Cameroon. The 
interpenetration of music and sculpture is 
a marked feature of African culture. 
Musical instruments are often ornamented 
with delicate carvings (see also page 16) 
and instrumentalists are a favourite 
subject for sculptors. 
  
Photo © Musée de I'Homme. Paris 


### 52659: The Vibrant intensity of traditional African music

THE VIBRANT 
OF TRADITIONAL 
B... African music is not 
meant just for the ear but for all 
the senses and faculties of the body. 
It reflects Africa's vision of the world 
on earth and the world beyond, a 
world of change and movement, a 
world in permanent search of better- 
ment and perfection. 
It is a music that demands total 
attention, total absorption and recepti- 
vity to the supra-natural, It opens the 
door to a strange world of the unreal 
and the invisible, of spirits of every 
kind, and marks a belief in the passage 
of Man from this life to another, 
beyond. 
If to many Westerners African music 
is little more than a jumble of incohe- 
rence, to the African its rhythms have 
a coherence and depth which vary 
according to the important events of 
life such as birth, illness, recovery, 
death. 
African music has a cyclical quality, 
for it symbolizes the actual life-cycle 
of Man. And because it is cyclical, one 
must never forget that it is made up of 
“micro-cycles” or particles of sound 
which are released into the air in the 
extremely short musical phrases end- 
lessly hummed or strummed by the 
musician, repeated over and over again 
to the bewilderment and even the 
despair of the European who finally 
growls: it's boring and monotonous. 
In reality, this apparent monotony is 
part of a complex cycle made up of 
elements which are vibrantly alive in 
the flesh, blood, brain and heart of 
the black man. The musical phrase 
perceived by the ear is in fact only 
  
FRANCIS BEBEY, musician, novelist and 
poet of Cameroon, is responsible for the 
music programme in Unesco. He has written 
a book of Initiation into the traditional music 
of Black Africa, the English edition of which, 
“African Music”, is soon to be published 
by Hill and Wang, New York. Composer 
and guitarist, he has given recitals of his 
compositions In many countries and has 
published three L.P. records of his works, 
the latest being "Guitare d'une autre Rime" 
(Pathé Marconi, C 062.15184, Paris, 1972). In 
1968, he was awarded the Grand Prix Litté- 
raire de I' Afrique Noire for his novel, "Le Fils 
d’'Agatha Moudio® (“Agatha Moudio's Son”, 
Heinemann, London, 1971). For ten years he 
was associated with Unesco’'s programme for 
the development of broadcasting in Africa, 
and Is the author of a book on the subject. 
by Francis Bebey 
one part of an ensemble of perfectly 
co-ordinated sounds which nourish the 
entire body like the circulation of the 
blood. 
Continuing the comparison, we 
might imagine that from a hole made 
at a certain spot in the human body— 
the mouth in the case of song—a 
trickle of blood would emerge in a 
continuous stream, flow in a circle 
outside, and then return through the 
same hole to join up again with the 
circulation inside the body. 
To the African the notion of cycles is 
not restricted to the world of sound. 
Sculpture and representational art pro- 
vide cyclic motifs whose meanings 
have not always been properly un- 
derstood. The snake biting its own 
tail, for example, has been interpreted 
as portraying the clumsiness of the 
most loathsome of reptiles. In fact, 
the closed circle thus formed by the 
snake represents either the will to 
exclude anything extraneous from 
a closely circumscribed world, or the 
determination to live for ever—the 
circle being the symbol of continuity, 
even within extemely restricted limits 
—in a world where everything con- 
stantly begins anew. 
The “monotony” of black African 
music thus takes on a compelling 
significance for the educated person, 
not only because it can be explained 
in philosophical terms but also be- 
cause, even when considered tech- 
nically, it is seen to be the product of 
detailed, conscious elaboration. 
Some contemporary composers, 
particularly in the field of light music, 
are in fact Increasingly drawing ins- 
piration from the so-called monotony 
of Black African music in composing 
works whose originality immediately 
strikes the listener. 
American jazz has already made ex- 
tensive use of this characteristic of 
African music. Its famous riffs (1), 
have not only contributed to the popu- 
larity of jazz but have also helped 
to imprint the jazz repertoire on the 
memories of countless listeners. 
It should be noted that western clas- 
(1) In Jazz a riff Is a musical figure or 
phrase, usually faily short, played re- 
peatedly by one or several Instruments.

## [Page 15](078384engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 52659: The Vibrant intensity of traditional African music

INTENSITY 
AFRICAN MUSIC 
Photo © Emil Schulthess, Zurich 
sical music, which appears to be deci- 
dedly chary of such monotony, does 
everything possible to get round it, 
for example by resorting to subter- 
fuges like the fugue. Basically, the 
art of the fugue consists in repeating 
a usually short phrase at different 
points in the scale, the various super- 
imposed repetitions conveying the illu- 
sion of renewal. 
Yet when we listen to the music of 
Johann Sebastian Bach, we are in the 
presence of a phenomenon compar- 
able to that produced by certain forms 
of Black African music, the only differ- 
ence being that with the latter we 
do not have a single phrase which is 
Transported by the music, this drummer from the Republic of Zaire 
(ex-Congo-Kinshasa) seems lost in another world. The drum in all its many 
forms still remains one of the chief musical instruments of Black Africa. 
repeated at higher intervals, but an 
infinite variety of rhythms on a given 
phrase, which recurs again and again. 
Frequently the purpose of African 
music is action, with the dance not an 
end in itself but a kind of transition, a 
springboard to help the body fulfil the 
mission assigned it. The action is 
purely mechanical, since the aim may 
be to draw out suffering from a sick 
body by the force of music, accom- 
panied by rubbing and massage; or to 
plough and sow the land to music, 
or harvest the grain or bind up the 
dead fittingly for burial. 
The action may also be on a much 
higher plane, when spirits are invoked 
and entrusted with the soul of the 
dead man; when a patient is cured 
without being touched or given any 
medicine except the magical power of 
the dance; or when there is singing 
and dancing to turn ill-fortune from a 
village at the birth of twins. 
Throughout the duration of this 
music and its spell, thought plays 
no part; it stands aside from the 
performers’ movements as if tempor- 
arily imprisoned. Facial expression 
also reflects this inner state: the 
mechanical, though not automatic ges- 
tures are performed unsmilingly. A few 
minutes later, dancing may pass into 
ecstasy. 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
15

## [Page 16](078384engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 52659: The Vibrant intensity of traditional African music

AFRICAN MUSIC (Continued) 
Here one sees the strength of the 
music which, eliminating for a time all 
power of thought, dictates directly to 
the body the movements to be per- 
formed to heal the sick or bring rain 
to the crops. Without this extraordi- 
nary power and driving force, many 
of the rites of African life would be 
impossible. 
The instruments with which man tries 
to “touch” music—an intangible art 
—are highly prized: lutes, harps and 
other stringed instruments plucked by 
hand, demonstrate his desire to finger 
sound. This explains why stringed 
instruments are used for supernatural 
ends such as divination, healing and 
worship of the gods. 
Among the Lemba in the Transvaal, 
the Instrument representing the crea- 
tion of the world and the continuation 
of the human race Is the "sanza”, 
known also as “deza”, a small portable 
harpsichord with thin metal plates 
plucked by the fingers. Each sound 
plucked forth represents the birth of 
a child somewhere in the world. 
In the same way, among the Fali in 
northern Cameroon, two drums beaten 
with the bare hands at the moment 
of death symbolize the everiastingness 
of man, who is for ever born anew, 
even if our eyes see his body pass 
away. One of the drums symbolizes 
  
  
     
Ph
ot
o 
© 
M
u
s
é
e
 
de
 
I
'
H
o
m
m
e
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ho
a-
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ri
s  
Left, an Ivory Coast harp 
often used to invoke the 
spirits In times of sickness, 
danger and misfortune. 
the male principle, the other the fe- 
male. The concert of their sounds 
gives life to a new being, destined to 
replace the one who has just died. 
But the real significance of this 
symbol is the magical power of sound 
drawn forth by the hand of man. 
This symbol, incidentally, "is found in 
many African’ communities, ranging 
from those of the savanna, such as the 
Fali, to forest-dwellers such as the 
Fang of southern Cameroon or nor- 
thern Dahomey. The instrument used" 
by the Fang to accompany epic tales 
and legends is the “mvet”, a kind of 
portable harp or zither with strings 
plucked by both hands. The Fang cali 
the performer “the zither-handler”. 
The instrument is used to create an 
atmosphere of legend to accompany 
the story-telling. 
The story repertoire draws on ex- 
ploits from ancestral history, or the 
lively inventions of mythology, which 
continually receive new life from 
music. From these sounds touched 
by man’s hands is born a driving force 
which gives legends their strength and 
a special status and prestige in the 
life of the community. Sounds which 
are well-known, yet ever new to the 
listener, announce the departure of the 
Above, portable xylophone 
from the Republic of Chad 
with sound boxes made 
of calabashes of different 
shapes. 
band of warriors led by Ovang-Obam- 
O-Ndong for the kingdom of Engong, 
where they hope to conquer immorta- 
lity for all mankind. 
Immediately the audience claps its 
hands, is carried away and takes part 
in the adventures of the long march 
and endiess wars, which always end 
in failure: immortality will never be 
accorded to man, despite the warriors’ 
desperate struggle to conquer it. But 
the music keeps hope alive and hints 
that, from one evening to the next, 
other episodes will follow, giving the 
narration its character of a legend of 
unending hope, the very image of the 
search for eternal life. 
African music is not easy to un- 
derstand on account of its formal pat- 
terns, the nature of its sounds and 
pitch and also its content. This is why 
it will only yield up its secrets and 
really influence the universal art of 
sound, gradually... but profoundly. It 
is music born of a meeting of indivi- 
duals whose collective aim is to inte- 
grate it with the life of their community, 
so that against the general background 
of life it plays a co-ordinating and regu- 
lating role, using rhythm as its tool. 
While the *“griot”, the wandering 
minstrel, an age-old figure of the Afri-

## [Page 17](078384engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 52659: The Vibrant intensity of traditional African music

can scene, declaims the praises of the 
great at the top of his volce, recalls 
the victories of the tribe and recounts 
many other past exploits, rhythm beats 
out the time for both present and 
future. For while song fixes action in 
the past, rhythm, through the alchemy 
of movement, thrusts man towards the 
future, 
The journey to the next world, which 
many believe to be so long-drawn 
out, is thus given a stylized pattern by 
Africans, with a simplicity some per- 
sons consider childish, Death does 
not exist. Life and death are separated 
by a wall which is invisible to the liv- 
ing, though the Telem, the predeces- 
sors of the Dogon on the cliffs of 
Bandiagara, in Mali, choose to repre- 
sent it through the medium of a sta- 
tuette. 
To cross the wall it Is not in fact 
necessary to see it. It is enough to 
know that the wall is very thick, and 
that to traverse it the dead man, 
as soon as he expires, must take the 
form of a'needle or a snake with a 
body slim enough to slip through, thus 
passing from this life to the next. 
Hence the thread-like statuettes dis- 
covered in this region of Mali, where 
the worship of the dead and funeral 
rites figure largely in the life of the 
community. Music, choreography and 
sculpture, with a variety of masks, play 
an active part, all eager to maintain 
and represent the idea of man's conti- 
nuity, one which we find also in other 
African communities, often very remote 
from Bandiagara. 
Music is a vital spiritual need and 
also a physical one, since It accom- 
panies all the labours and other acti- 
vities of life. Thus we begin to see 
some possible purposes for music 
which are not often envisaged, so 
accustomed are we to thinking only 
of its artistic aspects. 
African music, comprising songs and 
dances to celebrate different occa- 
sions in life, also contains an Impres- 
sive range of pieces devoted entirely 
to work: songs or instrumental music 
to encourage the worker. This reper- 
toire covers almost 50 per cent of 
African ancestral music as a whole, 
Giant rattles from the- Ivory 
Coast made from calabashes 
protected and embellished 
with wickerwork. 
so it is worth considering more closely 
what contribution this music can make 
to Africa today, in the context of 
development. 
African music in the service of 
development is an idea to bring a smile 
to the lips of a true music-lover, for 
whom the world of sound, ethereal and 
intangible, is not concerned with the 
problems of existence and everyday 
life. Today, however, as in the past, 
the rural economy of many African 
regions Is still given much of its impe- 
tus by the stimulus of music. In the 
forests of Africa women work on the 
land in groups singing as they work, 
Men sing as they fell trees, even in 
modern logging camps. 
In the savanna, work In the fields is 
often carried out to the encouraging 
accompaniment of the songs by one or 
more “griots”. In certain African 
societies, the griot is the expert in the 
lore of his ethnic group. He learns its 
history, customs, laws, ways of think- 
ing, sometimes its magic, always its 
music. He is the repository of the 
culture of his people, and though his 
knowledge Is sometimes sketchy, he 
is the reference source for an ancient 
"oe 
-» 
» 
{ 
rr) 
saying, the name of an ancestor, or 
past exploits of the tribe. 
Created by man, African ancestral 
music lives, as does its creator, with 
an eye to the future. It 1s “traditional” 
only is the sense that there is no 
better expression to distinguish it 
from other kinds of music. Unlike a 
tradition, which is petrified, and per- 
haps more appropriate to museums, 
it marches on steadfastly towards the 
future, destined to revolutionize that 
future by a revival ‘of sincerity, by 
means of laws which man has not yet 
understood and a rhythm whose force 
has not yet been sufficiently appre- 
ciated to be properly made use of. 
Its subject is man. It recreates life 
around legends old as time, as alive 
as the huge trunk of the palaver tree 
set in its dominating place on the 
savanna and imperturbably fulfilling 
its centuries-old role. 
It is like a spring which gradually be- 
comes heady with rhythm and grows 
and swells out of all proportions, to 
become as mighty as the boiling Con- 
go. It demands to be known, studied 
and respected for what it is, not for 
what one would like it to be. ‘W 
Photo Vincent © Afrique Photo, Paris 

## [Page 18](078384engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 52659: The Vibrant intensity of traditional African music

AFRICAN 
HUNTING HORN 
Left, made from the horns 
of many animals, 
instruments such as this 
are used throughout 
Africa both to summon 
the hunters and to imitate 
the cries of the quarry 
during the hunt 
  
BELL FESTOONsp 
Right, a troupe 
of dancers from Guinea, 
their legs festooned 
with bells and their arms 
adorned, with tufts of 
animal hair, at the 
Pan African Festival    
  : : [A i) =n . . { of culture staged in 1969 
So Bl, Te at the Annasser stadium, 
Vis vl . Fo , 'S. .e = - Algiers. 
Photo Fouguer © Afrique Photo, Paris 
Photo © Musée de I'Homme, Paris    
=
.
 
™ 
Pa
ri
s 
A 
  
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Ho
a-
Qu
i,
 
GOD OF 
THE RAINBOW 
Above, bas relief from 
the royal buildings 
of Abomey, ancient capital 
of Dahomey, representing 
the God of the Rainbow. 
The symbol of the snake 
biting its own tail has 
often been misunderstood, 
says Francis Bebey; 
the closed circle 
represents the 
determination to live 
forever, the circle being 
the symbol of continuity. 
The theme of the circle 
is repeated in the 
movements of this 
acrobatic dancer from 
the Ivory Coast, 
photos left. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
C.
 
Ra
lm
on
d-
Di
ty
vo
n 
- 
Vi
va
, 
Pa
ri
s 

## [Page 19](078384engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 52659: The Vibrant intensity of traditional African music

 

## [Page 20](078384engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

20 
         
by Chinghis Aitmatov 
  
CHINGHIS AITMATOV Js a famous author 
from Kirghizia, a Soviet republic In Cen- 
tral Asia. His works are extremely popular 
throughout the U.S.S.R. and have been 
translated into some 60 languages. Win- 
ner of two Soviet awards for literature— 
the Lenin Prize (1963) and State Prize 
(1968)—he has written extensively about his 
own country, which he also represents as 
a Deputy in the Supreme Soviet of the 
U.S.S.R., the Soviet Parliament in Moscow. 
Among his books published in English are 
“Tales of the Mountains and Steppes”, the 
novel for which he was awarded the Lenin 
Prize (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1969) 
and “Farewell Gulsary® (Hodder and Stough- 
ton, London, 1970). 
EB 
LP
 
»
 
g 
PR
 
I
R
s
 
1 
a
 
7 
g
n
 
ar
 
ol y bE 
™ - 
4 hp \ 
¥ MY 
CT e > 
ab. : 
- . 
: - - 
- . AN A 
IN L - » 
N SET oa U 
- y ) » 
: . A 5 
~~ a Ror WN 
S 
>
 
\ 
i
n
t
 
F
R
Y
E
R
 
s 
% 
| fi
g 
’ 
  
P  
“r a y LE! ; Ny 
# A EAA v 
LS) E VINE § URW 
F. the peoples of my 
country the fiftieth anniversary of the 
formation of the U.S.S.R. is a great 
landmark. ‘What we now call a new 
historical community—the Soviet peo- 
ple—is made up of over a hundred 
nations, peoples and ethnic groups. 
Some of them were at the feudal 
stage of development when the Soviet 
Union was formed in 1922, others still 
lived under very primitive conditions. 
In the recent past the numerous peo- 
. ples inhabiting this vast country were 
worlds apart as regards civilization, 
culture and social experience as well 
as in their customs and traditions, their 
different religions and the different 
languages they spoke, so different, in 
fact, that they could not understand 
each other. 
Every people of my country, big or 
        
    
      
   
   
HALF A 
MILLION 
VERSES 
BY HEART 
Stone figure, right 
(detail left) Is one of 
hundreds scattered 
throughout the valleys of 
Kirghizia, one of the Soviet 
republics of Central Asia. 
The statues, mostly 
human sized, are thought 
to have been sculptured 
about the 6th century A.D. 
by ancient tribes that 
inhabited the area. 
Far right, a present day 
Kirghiz, aged 70, who 
remarkably resembles the 
6th century figure. He Is 
Sayakbal Karalayev, 
the famous storyteller 
who knows by heart more 
than half a million lines 
from Kirghizia’s greatest 
epic poem, “Manas” 
which has been handed 
down orally for 
generations. He is here 
shown examining historical 
documents at the 
History Institute of the 
Kirghiz Academy 
of Sciences. 
Ph
ot
os
 
©
 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 


### 52661: Kirghizia, the 'land behind the clouds'

KIRGHIZIA 
small, passed in its development 
through different stages of history, life 
and culture. It took a long time before 
they became what they are today. 
Every one of our nations has its own 
cultural traditions, its spiritual experi- 
ences, which include not only the 
general human values in the treasure- 
house of mankind, but also specific 
features which are the imprint made 
by the life that people led during 
different periods. 
There is probably no single people 
whose fate was an easy and happy one, 
whose history is not a chronicle of 
suffering and woe. This applies fully 
to the history of the Turk peoples (the 
Kazakhs, Uzbeks, Kirghiz, Uigurs and 
Turkmen, among others), one of the 
most ancient in the world, who in the 
Sth-8th centuries had reached a high

## [Page 21](078384engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 52661: Kirghizia, the 'land behind the clouds'

the land 
behind the clouds’ 
level in the organization of social life 
and cultural development. 
The runic writing of the Turk peoples 
is one of the most ancient written lan- 
guages on the territory of the Soviet 
Union. | have in mind the Orkhon 
characters, notably the texts of the 
Kul Tegina, composed in 717 by Tegin, 
the first Turk historian and writer, and 
other monuments of early Turk written 
culture. 
Yet, a bitter fate was in store for 
the descendants of these peoples. 
Generation after generation had to 
fight to preserve its national indepen- 
dence. This continued right up to the 
20th century. The great revolution that 
swept one-sixth of the planet resolved 
that age-old problem and gave these 
ancient peoples a new lease on life. 
A hundred years ago, Kirghizia, my 
homeland, spreading over the moun- 
tainous part of Central Asia, the Ala 
Tau, was unknown to the world. Travel- 
lers who had been there told of it as 
of a geographic discovery. Now 
things have changed. 
This change is reflected also in the 
new symbol of Kirghizia—a girl with a 
red scarf on her head reading a book, 
pictured against the background of the 
snow-topped Ala Tau. 
Kirghizia has become part of the 
developing civilized world. In our age 
technological achievement has become 
commonplace. A people's intellectual 
culture, the problems it is resolving and 
intends to resolve have become the 
true criterion of its development. 
The long road from the improvised 
akyn to the modern philosophical poem, 
from patriarchal sagas to the modern. 
novel, from ornaments to modern paint- 
ing, from folk plays to the theatre and 
the cinema, from the komuz to sympho- 
nic music has been travelled by the 
Kirghiz people during the years of the 
making and consolidation of the Soviet 
nion. 
Political equality has enabled not 
only the Kirghiz people but also all 
the nationalities of the Soviet Union to 
raise their economy and production to 
the modern level, and has brought 
about the rapid social and national 
renaissance of formerly backward 
peopies, 
Multinational 
—from the Roman Empire and the 
states set up by Alexander of Macedon 
and Genghiz Khan, to the Russian 
Empire — were unstable formations 
because of various social and econo- 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
states of the past. 
21

## [Page 22](078384engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 52661: Kirghizia, the 'land behind the clouds'

22 
KIRGHIZIA (Continued) 
mic reasons. The domination of one 
people over others, the way of think- 
ing imposed by one people over 
other peoples, led to suppression of 
national aspirations, to the extinction 
of national languages, which deprived 
these nationalities of the right to inde- 
pendent existence by robbing them of 
their national and ethnic charac- 
teristics. 
A people's immortality lies in its 
language. The language of every 
people is a general human value. 
Every language is a creation of human 
genius. We should not hold any lan- 
guage in disdain, no matter to what 
people it belongs, no matter what 
development it has attained. Given 
favourable conditions every language 
can attain perfection by internal dev- 
elopment and also by borrowing, 
directly or indirectly. 
The mother tongue is like a mother 
to whom one owes a debt of grati- 
tude, just as one owes such a debt 
to one's people, by whom one has been 
given life and the greatest gift of all 
—Ilanguage. At the same time it is 
impossible to develop a national cul- 
ture without drawing actively on the 
achievements of other cultures. 
I. formation of the 
U.S.S.R. was a decisive factor for 
progress. The Russian language be- 
came the language for communication 
between all peoples inhabiting a vast 
multinational country, but at the same 
time conditions were created for the 
development of national languages, 
within the limits of their geographic 
and administrative areas: 90 to 99 per 
cent of the nationalities in the various 
national Republics and autonomous 
regions today consider the vernacular 
as their mother tongue and use it 
extensively. 
A written language using the Russian 
alphabet was created for peoples who 
had no written language, and their 
national epics appeared in print. Many 
peoples thus acquired a national lit- 
erature of their own. The artistic level 
and creative possibilities of these lan- 
guages can be seen from the fact that 
the works of Cervantes, Shakespeare, 
Tolstoy, Balzac, Hemingway and many 
other great writers have appeared in 
them. The Russian language played 
the role of an intermediary, of a bridge 
linking the cultures of peoples, who 
previously had not even known of 
each other's existence. 
The rise of Soviet culture is the re- 
sult of the flourishing of many national 
cultures. In a letter to the world- 
famous historian Arnold Toynbee, 
N. Konrad, a leading Soviet historian, 
wrote: “Our revolution has set us the 
task of creating not only a new social 
system, but also a corresponding cul- 
tural system. There must be one so- 
cial system for our entire community, 
and it must, at the same time, take 
into account that every people in our 
Union has had and continues to have 
CONTINUED PAGE 24 
h
e
t
 
Ph
ot
o 
Yu
rl
 
Tr
an
kv
il
li
ts
ky
 
© 
AP
N 
- 
"S
ov
ie
t 
Un
lo
n®
 
ma
ga
zi
ne
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
Ph
ot
o 
E. 
Vi
lc
hi
ts
ky
 
© 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
CER ESE a 
  

## [Page 23](078384engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 52661: Kirghizia, the 'land behind the clouds'

  
 — 
   
TELEVISION ATOP 
THE CELESTIAL 
MOUNTAINS 
At the junction of two gigantic mountain 
ranges, the Tien-shan (Celestial Mountains) 
and the Pamirs, Kirghizla, bordered 
by China and the three Soviet Republics 
of Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan, 
is a country of striking contrasts. 
Shepherds tend their vast flocks 
on horseback (above left} and tamed eagles 
are used for hunting in the centuries-old 
way (right). Yet high on 
a mountain peak (above right) 
a TV and radio relay station keeps 
the .three million people of Kirghizia 
in touch with the latest news and events. 
At a remote grazing ground, 4,000 metres 
up (left) a medical service helicopter 
lands to pick up a sick shepherd, 
H
s
 
bh
 
<
8
 
e
l
 
Ph
ot
o 
A,
 
Po
ly
ak
ov
 
© 
AP
N 
- 
"V
ok
ru
g 
Sv
et
a®
 
ma
ga
zi
ne
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
    
=
a
 
©
 
A
P
N
 
. 
"S
ov
ie
t 
Un
io
n"
 
m
a
g
a
z
i
n
e
,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
h
a
 
3 
Ph
ot
o 
Yu
ri
 
Tr
an
kv
il
li
ts
k

## [Page 24](078384engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 52661: Kirghizia, the 'land behind the clouds'

W
G
 
S
a
 
  
u 
KIRGHIZIA (Continued) 
3 
S . 
§ 
= 
& 
< 
© 
3 
5 
S 
2 
o 
& 
Mosaic of cultures and nationalities 
its own cultural tradition, that many of 
these peoples have a great and long 
cultural history of their own... Every 
people must have its own culture, and 
at the same time the national cuiture 
of every people must form part of the 
common culture of Soviet society.” 
One of our tasks is to strengthen 
and develop the national cultures, and 
the national economies, for our society 
is a dynamically expanding community. 
This task has become even more ur- 
gent today in the age of the scientific 
and technological revolution, one of 
the possible consequences of which 
may be standardization and the loss 
of individuality. The wisest course 
for a State in these conditions is to 
preserve, improve and enrich national 
languages and national cultures. “The 
world is great”, as they say in the 
East “because it has not discarded a 
single grain of sand.” 
| think Konrad’'s words contain the 
answer to the dilemma facing some of 
the small peoples In our time: whether 
to preserve their national traditions at 
the expense of social progress or to 
sacrifice them for its sake. No nation 
can be preserved if it is bottled up. To 
do so in our time would be an ana- 
chronism, 
A nation is subject to change, as 
is everything in the world. Every 
nation has lost something during its 
historical development and gained 
other things instead. Only what is 
best and most progressive in every 
nation is worth preserving and devel- 
oping. 
The spiritual make-up of the Soviet 
people is marked by features common 
to all the country’s nationalities, while 
national characteristics exist and de- 
velop in forms expressive of universal 
human qualities. The emergence of 
Soviet man, to whom the diversity of 
national traits has given an originality 
and wealth of ideas, seems to me to 
be one of the most important historical 
achievements of the past half century. 
W. have travelled a vast his- 
torical distance in our cognition of 
reality, and have created a single mui- 
tilingual and multinational Soviet 
artistic culture, one that has absorbed 
all the great achievements of peoples 
big and small. It was no easy task, 
since many nationalities had to pass 
from spoken folklore, from patriarchal 
epics and sagas to books dealing with 
the psychological problems of life in 
entirely new historical conditions. 
Our culture does not reject the 
achievements of preceding cultures. 
On the contrary, it accepts and wel- 
comes these multiple facets of human 
existence—the beauty of national 
creation, the original characteristics, 
traditions and ways of life engendered 
by particular historical, geographical 
and cultural conditions. 
The national originality of works of 
art presupposes the expression of dis- 
  
    
  
tinctive qualities, specific aesthetic 
forms and a particular view of the 
world in images that are traditional to 
a given culture. But time marches on 
and the frontiers of national life ex- 
pand, absorbing the best cultural val- 
ues and traditions of many peoples. 
National forms change. They inter- 
act and mutually enrich themselves, 
free themselves of what is outdated 
and has outlived its usefulness in new 
social conditions. But whenever we 
speak of the national we are apt to 
think only of the past and not to notice 
what exists next to us, in the present, 
what has been born of our environ- 
ment. Yet, artistic thought always re- 
flected the spiritual state of contempo- 
rary society. 
That is why national originality is 
not only the aggregate of the national 
features reaching back across the 
ages. It would be wrong to understand 
the national in the patriarchal sense of 
the word. The national includes not 
only what has been preserved and 
time-tested, not only the experi- 
ence of the past, but also all the in- 
novations made by our reality. 
The best of our national works of 
literature and art generally express 
common human ideals and problems as 
seen from the viewpoint of Soviet man, 
from the views he holds on the social 
struggle, on past and present history, 
on the individual and society. 
National originality is thus seen to 
be closely attuned to the internation-

## [Page 25](078384engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 52661: Kirghizia, the 'land behind the clouds'

og ne - 
Photo V. Runov © APN, Moscow 
alist outlook and to current social 
concepts, and thus succeeds in high- 
lighting common, human internation- 
alist ideas in a vivid national form. 
The harmonious combination of the 
international and the national marks the 
level of maturity at which thought 
becomes planetary, the desire to un- 
derstand others and be understood by 
them, the desire for solidarity in the 
evaluation of social and aesthetic 
categories—ijustice, virtue and beauty. 
S.. thinking, when every 
person gives to others as much 
consideration as he gives to himself, 
when he realizes that his neighbour is 
no less sensitive and vulnerable than 
he is himself, leads to the acquisition 
of the most human of human traits— 
compassion—towards which Homo sa- 
piens advanced through pain and tor- 
ture, ‘endless suffering and sacrifice, 
through wars and revolutions. There 
is only one kind of humanism for all 
people, and its distinctive feature is 
that it cannot be abstract. Humanism 
is always social. 
In our difficult world, fraught with 
the danger of atomic war, humanism 
is the only ray of hope for the human 
race. And we firmly believe that in 
our society we are advancing towards 
it in the proper and most dynamic 
way—>by combining national with inter- 
national interests. | 
 
TRS 
Ph
ot
o 
Yu
rl
 
B
a
a
r
v
a
n
s
k
y
 
© 
A
P
N
 
- 
"S
ov
ie
t 
Un
io
n"
 
ma
ga
zi
ne
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
COMPUTERS AND BOOKMOBILES 
IN THE STEPPES OF CENTRAL ASIA 
In factories such as the one below, Kirghizia today produces 
sophisticated electrical equipment, physics instruments and 
electronic computers. Today six persons out of ten complete 
secondary or higher schooling compared with a national illiteracy 
rate of 98 per cent in 1917. Left, a mobile bookshop in a 
remote mountain settlement in this country rightly called the 
“Land Behind the Clouds”. Far left, a child spells “Mama” 
in Kirghizian: A-pa, written A-na in Cyrillic letters. 
E——— 
a 
it) il ali FE 
  
  
  
  

## [Page 26](078384engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

2 
In the hills 
of Pakistan 
 
by Syed Ashfaq Naqvi 
T. earliest traces of human 
settlement in Pakistan date from the 
Stone Age. Later, the region became 
the cradle of many an ancient civiliz- 
ation as shown by the discovery of 
such now well-known sites as Mohenjo 
Daro, Harappa, Kot Doji, Mainamati, 
Mahasthangarh and Paharpur. 
Taxila, in the Punjab, 20 miles west 
of Rawalpindi, is also one of the 
ancient sites which symbolize the rich 
cultural heritage of Pakistan. 
it lies in the peaceful valley of the 
River Haro, a land of bracing air and 
sparkling sunshine at the foot of the 
snow-capped Murree Hills in the north 
of Pakistan. Here, set against the 
cool, green landscape, trees and 
bushes stand out in their brilliant attire 
—the “kutchnar” with its gay bonnet 
of purple and white blossoms and the 
“saimul,” a forest giant aglow with 
blood-red blooms. 
Yet the sweet-smelling orchards and 
stretches of green turf seem to attain 
their ultimate beauty in the splendid 
gardens laid out around the remains, 
more than 2,000 years old, of a great 
city which attracted the attention of 
Alexander the Great of Macedon, and 
which later saw the rise of Asoka, 
the greatest of the Buddhist kings. 
For centuries, Taxila served as a 
sanctuary for exhausted travellers 
coming from central and western Asia 
in search of knowledge or trade. To- 
day, it is a place of pilgrimage for 
thousands of tourists who come to 
 
SYED ASHFAQ NAQVI, head of the National 
Museum of Pakistan, in Karachi, is an inter- 
nationally-known archaeologist and museolo- 
gist who has excavated at many Pakistani sites ~ 
such as Mohenjo-Daro, Harappa and Taxila. 
A noted specialist in the conservation of 
monuments he has undertaken special missions 
for Unesco at Mohenjo Daro, Venice and 
elsewhere. He is the author of many studies 
on archaeology, modern museum techniques 
and ancient art, including “The Muslim Art” 
(1966); “Gandhara Art" (1967) and “1,400 Years 
of Quranic Calligraphy” (in publication). 


### 52663: Taxila: ancient university centre of the Orient

TAXILA: ANCIENT 
CENTRE OF THE 
admire this land of wonder and 
enchantment. 
Taxila flourished for more than 
1,000 years from the 6th century B.C. 
onwards, and during this period saw 
the rise and fall of at least seven 
ruling dynasties. Most of our know- 
ledge about this metropolis is based 
on the results of the archaeological 
excavations conducted at its three 
city-sites dating from different periods, 
and over a dozen Buddhist stupas and 
monasteries during the past 60 years. 
This information, supplemented by the 
records of Greek and Chinese writers, 
helps us to Imagine what a varied 
scene Taxila must have presented in 
far off times. 
In its early days, Taxila was a great 
centre of learning and was well known 
for its university where the arts and 
sciences of the day were taught. It 
attracted students from different and 
distant parts of the sub-continent and 
elsewhere. Numerous references in 
the Jatakas (the narratives of former 
incarnations of Buddha) testify to this 
fact, though Taxila owed its reputation 
as a seat of learning above all to its 
teachers who were the recognized 
authorities on their subjects. It thus 
exercised a kind of intellectual suzer- 
ainty over a wide world of letters. 
But, let us not confuse it with the 
western concept of a university—a 
much later development. In this early 
period, a university consisted of 
organized groups of independent 
teachers. The same appears to have 
been true of Oxford and Cambridge in 
their early days. 
In the east, this practice continued 
for a much longer period, and places 
like Nadwa, Poona and others became 
renowned as important centres of 
learning due to the spontaneous 
grouping of well-known scholars who 
had dedicated their lives to the cause 
of education. 
European travellers of the 17th cent- 
ury also noted a similar state of affairs 
at Benares., Frangois Bernier, a 
French doctor who spent 12 years in 
India at that time, writes: “Benares 
was a kind of university, but it had no 
colleges or regular classes and 
resembled rather the schools of the 
ancients, the masters being dispersed 
in different parts of the town in private 
houses.” 
It was on this pattern that the famous 
University of Taxila also flourished 
more than 2,000 years ago, though the 
innumerable monastic establishments 
where the “world-renowned” teachers 
lived and imparted knowledge could, 
of course, be taken as the component 
parts of a great and sprawling univer- 
sity which covered an area of more 
than 26 square miles in the valley of 
the Haro. 
Early Buddhist literature refers to 
the students as going to Taxila to 
“complete” their education and not to 
begin it. They were invariably sent at 
the age of sixteen, that is, when they 
"came of age." This shows that 
Taxila was a seat of higher learning, 
not of elementary education, 
The minimum age for admission, 
curiously enough, was thus the same 
as that prescribed by modern univer- 
sities. Perhaps this age for entry was 
fixed to ensure that students coming 
from far off places were mature enough 
to face the rigours of a long and 
difficult journey. 
U. oro, apart 
from these few historical facts, not 
much is known about Taxila before its 
conquest by Alexander the Great 
in 326 B.C. Lavish accounts by 
Alexander's companions and con- 
temporaries inspired the descriptions 
of later writers of Antiquity. The Greek 
historian Flavius Arrian calls it “a large 
and wealthy city, and the most 
populous between the Indus and the 
Hydaspes rivers.” According to the 
Greek geographer Strabo, it was 
“a large city crowded with inhabitants 
and with very fertile soil." Pliny 
describes it as "a famous city, 
situated on a low but level plain, 
in a district called Amanda.” 
Soon after Alexander's departure 
from the scene, Taxila was incorporat- 
ed into the Mauryan Empire, and it was 
during the days of Asoka that Taxila 
rose to a pre-eminent position among 
the cities of the north-west. A number 
of monasteries and stupas were built 
in and around Taxila, and their remains 
bear testimony to the days when 
Buddhism was the prevailing faith. 
With the break-up of the Mauryan 
Empire, Taxila appears to have lost its 
importance, and its history becomes 
chequered. 
CONTINUED PAGE 28

## [Page 27](078384engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 52663: Taxila: ancient university centre of the Orient

O ) E N Perched atop a-300 foot Hill, the monuments of Jaulian, outside Taxila (Pakistan), 
have dominated the surrounding countryside since the 2nd century A.D. The buildings, 
consisting of a Buddhist monastery with cells for the monks and a main stupa, 
were ravaged by fire in the 5th century. The statues surrounding 
the commemorative shrine seen in photo show the high degree of skill and artistry 
attained by the sculptors of the period. The graceful folds of the drapery enhance 
the contours of the bodies and the faces of the figures in meditation 
are suffused with an expression of inner peace and serenity. 
Proto © Paul Almasy, Paris 
 

## [Page 28](078384engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

  
    
28 
TAXILA (Continued) 
 
A tale of three cities 
The Greeks from Bactria returned 
for a short time followed by the invad- 
ing hordes of Scythians. The Parthian 
King Gondophares, who is said to 
"have played host to Saint Thomas the 
Apostle, ruled over the city during the 
1st century A.D. The Kushans, under 
Kanishka, ruled in the 2nd century A.D. 
and then in the 5th century A.D. came 
the White Huns, carrying fire and 
sword. They overthrew the ruling 
dynasty and destroyed the city, leav- 
ing the monasteries and stupas in 
ruins and desolation. 
The Chinese traveller, Hsuang Tsang, 
who visited Taxila in the 7th century 
A.D., relates that most of the monu- 
ments had been shattered and Taxila 
itself turned into a dependency of 
Kashmir, He wrote: 
"The Pilgrim returned to Utakahantu 
(Udaka Khanda) city, went south 
across the Indus, here three on four li 
broad and flowing south-west pure and 
clear, to the Takshasila country. This 
was above 2,000 li in circuit, its capital 
being above ten li in circuit. The 
chiefs were in a state of open feud, 
the royal family being extinguished; 
the country had formerly been subject 
to Kapias but now it was a dependency 
of Kashmir. It had a fertile soil and 
bore good crops, with flowing streams 
and luxuriant vegetation; the climate 
was congenial; and the people, who 
were hard-working, were adherents of 
Buddhism. Although the Monasteries 
were numerous, many of them were 
desolate, and the Brethren, who were 
very few, were all Mahayanists.” 
During the course of excavations in 
this green valley of the River Haro, 
three distinct city-sites and a number 
of monasteries and stupas have been 
discovered by archaeologists. The 
first city site, known as “Bhir Mound,” 
flourished before the arrival of the 
Greeks. It is situated on a small 
plateau past the Tamra Nala, a 
seasonal stream. 
The layout of the city is very hap- 
hazard, the streets narrow and the 
plans of the houses irregular. In the 
earlier periods, the houses appear to 


### 52663: Taxila: ancient university centre of the Orient

The 
tlouble-headed 
eagle of Taxila 
have been built of rubble and stone 
supported by timber which has now 
disappeared. In the later stages of 
the city, however, kanjur has been 
used freely in the construction. 
The second city of Taxila which was 
founded by the Bactrian Greeks in the 
2nd century B.C., and the remains of 
which are now found on the western 
spurs of the Hathial Ridge, is known 
as Sirkap. It was enclosed by a 
stone-built city wall about three and 
a half miles long. 
It is very well planned, the houses 
being grouped into square blocks with 
straight wide streets cutting each other 
at right angles. In planning this city, 
Greek principles of defence appear to 
have been kept in mind, by including a 
considerable area of hilly ground 
within its perimeter. 
The third city site, which dates back 
to the early Kushan times, is laid out 
in the traditional Central Asian style 
of that age. It is situated to the north- 
east of Sirkap and forms a rough

## [Page 29](078384engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 52663: Taxila: ancient university centre of the Orient

The invasions that marked the beginning of the 2nd century B.C. 
left Taxila destroyed and beyond restoration. The Bactrian Greeks, 
who settled at Taxila at this time, transferred the city centre to a 
new site at Sirkap to the north-east. Protected by a wall some 
6 yards wide, the new city enclosed many temples of which one 
of the finest is that of the double-headed eagle (below and detail 
left). Similar to those found in early Babylonian and Hittite 
sculptures, the double-headed eagle may have been introduced at 
Taxila by the Scythians. Despite the Greek presence Buddhism 
continued to flourish, as this head of Buddha (right) with its 
expression of calm peace and its gentle benevolent smile testifies. 
  
   
parallelogram, about three miles in 
length. The material used in the 
construction was again stone, 
Along with these three city-sites, a 
number of Buddist monasteries and 
stupas are scattered over this wide 
area. The devotees appear to have 
taken special care in selecting the spot 
for their places of worship and devot- 
ion. These are beautifully situated on 
hill tops overlooking the valley or in 
secluded places. 
One of the most important structures 
here is the Dharmarajika Stupa, built 
by the Buddists to enshrine relics of 
the Buddha or of one of the Buddhist 
saints. The construction of a stupa 
was regarded as a work of great merit 
which brought the builder a step near- 
er to salvation. 
The Dharmarajika Stupa is circular 
with a raised terrace reached by a 
flight of four steps. It is faced with 
limestone blocks and appears to have 
been originally coated with lime-plaster 
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris 
and paint. The terrace served as a 
processional path for the monks. 
Around this great stupa are many 
smaller ones. It was here, in 1917, 
that a casket was found which contain- 
ed the relics of Buddha. This was 
presented by the then Viceroy of India 
to the Buddhists of Ceylon and has 
since been enshrined in the Temple of 
the Tooth at Kandy. 
The other important stupa com- 
memorates the pious memory of Kunala, 
the son of Asoka the Great, and 
Asoka's Viceroy to Taxila, Kunala's 
stepmother, Tishyarakshita, had fallen 
in love with him, but having failed to 
entice the handsome young prince, she 
managed to forge a royal decree 
ordering Kunala to be blinded. When 
the order reached Taxila, the king's 
ministers were loath to execute this 
cruel punishment, but Kunala brave- 
ly submitted to what he believed were 
his father's orders. When Asoka, who 
had never issued such a decree, learn- 
ed what had been done, he becane 
enraged and finding the culprit was 
his own wife, he put her to death. 
This stupa marks the site where 
Kunala’s eyes were put out. It stands 
on a rectangular base of 63 feet from 
east to west by 105 feet from north to 
south and commands a striking view 
of the valley. Of its imposing super- 
structure not much remains, and we 
have to visualize most of its past 
grandeur from the parts of the beauti- 
ful Corinthian pilasters with an elab- 
orate moulding surmounted by a 
denti] cornice and coping which still 
remain. The delicate concave curvature 
of its *plinth, is another remarkable 
feature of this monument. 
The stupa and monastery of Mohra 
Moradu are situated at a picturesque 
site about a mile to the south east of 
Sirsukh. At the time of excavation, 
nothing but a portion of the ruined 
dome was visible. But as the earth 
was removed, there emerged one of 
the most spectacular ensembles of 
Buddhist architecture. 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
    
29

## [Page 30](078384engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 52663: Taxila: ancient university centre of the Orient

TAXILA (Continued) 
 
Cultural meeting place of East and West 
enshrine, cannot convey a true idea of 
the variety and extent of the cultural 
remains of Taxila. Much more has to 
be seen’ and examined if one is to 
visualize the life of the people in those 
colour which once embellished them. far distant days. The large quantities 
Pippala, Jaulian, Bhamala and Giri are of jewellery, coins, statues and 
other interesting stupas and monas- domestic utensils which have been 
teries in this vicinity which preserve discovered at Taxila and which are 
relics of Buddhist art. now preserved in the site museum 
Here, most of the stucco reliefs and 
images are well-preserved and reveal 
a high standard of art. The figures 
are particularly endowed with life and 
movement and there are traces of 
Excavations near Taxila brought 
to light the shrine and monastery 
of Mohra Moradu, a spectacular 
ensemble of Buddhist art 
and architecture. Among 
the reliefs and images was 
this statue of the Bodhisattva 
Maitreya set on a pedestal. 
A Bodhisattva is a “future 
Buddha” or “one on the way 
to Enlightenment”. . can do much to help us to form a 
arts of East and West are harmonious- existed there. 
ly blended. OQutstanding examples are 
the seated and standing statues of 
Bodhisattvas and of the Buddha, in 
which particular attention has been 
paid to the lines of the face, the 
contours of the body, and the free- 
flowing and natural drapery. The 
artist has tried to make the body 
visible through its folds. Here, the 
principle of naturalness has been 
accepted and the human form perfect- 
ed in every detail. 
A brief description of some of the 
features of these sites and the art they 
The jewellery which is made of gold 
and silver inlaid with stones, comprises 
pendants, necklaces, girdles, amulets, 
bangles, brooches and hairpins. It is 
distinctively Greek or Graeco-Roman 
in design and the technical processes 
of moulds and dies employed are the 
same as those found throughout the 
Graeco-Roman world. The granulated 
and filigree work is the most attractive 
feature of the Taxila jewellery. 
The coins discovered here are many 
and varied and throw light on almost 
Excavations at Sirkap, site of the second ancient 
city of Taxila, have revealed its well-planned 
chessboard pattern of square buildings and straight 
wide streets laid out within a perimeter wall three 
miles long. The most important building unearthed, 
the royal palace (350ft. by 400 ft), has audience 
halls and grey sandstone columns. This poster 
at the entrance to Sirkap recalls the dynasties that 
ruled the city during four centuries. 
    
  
   
  
x. 
1          
Photo @ Taxlla Museum 
all the phases of Taxila's history. The 
majority were minted by the local 
autonomous kings of the city, the 
Sakas, the Parthians and the Kushans, 
and a smaller number of coins of the 
Greek kings have also been uncovered. 
The earliest coins found are the silver 
bars with a wheel-like symbol belong- 
ing to the fourth century B.C. 
The pottery which has been unearth- 
ed at the different sites of Taxila is 
essentially utilitarian in character. 
It ranges from capacious storage jars 
for oil and wine to cooking pots, 
bowls, saucers, pans and spouted and 
perforated vessels. 
As in the case of other arts, pottery 
was marked by foreign influences. 
The early wares are rather simple in 
shape and decoration, but with the 
arrival of Greeks and Parthians, new 
forms appear to have been introduced, 
including beautiful amphoras, handled 
jugs and flared beakers. In the 
treatment of the surface and the decor- 
ation of the pottery also, a change is 
visible with the introduction of an 
attractive lustrous varnish and emboss- 
ed designs. 
Among the terracotta and clay 
objects, a large variety of sacred and 
mundane figurines, toys of different 
shapes and personal ornaments have 
been found. These objects are mostly 
kiln-baked and show a remarkable 
freedom and freshness of modelling 
work in clay. During excavations, a 
large number of bone, ivory, shell, 
glass, copper and bronze objects have 
also been found in the shape of per- 
sonal ornaments and articles of house- 
hold use. 
Of special interest are the seals and 
sealings found here which display the 
most exquisite artistry. These were 
intended for practical use rather than 
as ornaments. On them are beautifully

## [Page 31](078384engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
engraved subjects of a religious or 
quasi-religious order, most often in 
typically Hellenistic style. 
Sir John Marshall, the British 
archaeologist, has rightly observed 
that, “as with architecture so with the 
plastic and other arts, they, one and 
all, derived their inspiration from the 
Hellenistic School, and in the very 
slowness of their decline, bear testi- 
mony to the remarkable persistency of 
its teachings.” 
Yet, in spite of these foreign influ- 
ences, the jewellery, seals and the 
statues from Taxila show that the 
city's crafsmen were no mere 
imitators, but gave rich expression to 
their own originality and genius. |]   
  
A slick paperback with the 
frightening title Planet in Peril? went on 
sale during May in bookshops around the 
world. 
Written by Raymond F. Dasmann, senior 
ecologist for the International Union for 
the Conservation of Nature and Natural 
Resources (IUCN), Planet in Peril? was 
commissioned and prepared by Unesco. 
It is published and distributed jointly by 
Penguin Books of London, World Publish- 
ing of New York and Unesco, through 
its network of agents. 
The striking jacket of the American 
edition, black with a moon-shot photo of 
the earth looking as green and decaying 
as overdone Roquefort cheese, would 
stand out on a bookstore display any- 
where, and “Planet”is expected to enjoy 
widespread commercial success. 
This is not the first Unesco book 
destined for the broad general public, 
but it is the most recent example of an 
increasing trend in this direction. 
Up until now, the great majority of 
Unesco books and periodicals were intend- 
ed for specialists. The recently published 
Origin of Homo Sapiens, for instance, 
one of four volumes in the “Ecology and 
Conservation® series, deals with what is 
perhaps the most intriguing ecological 
question of all: that of the origin of man 
and the interrelations between it and 
environmental changes. But it was written 
by experts basically for experts who are 
already informed and convinced of the 
urgency of the problem. Unesco now feels 
‘that this readership Is not broad enough, 
especially in an area so vital as pollution. 
Of the eleven periodicals published by 
Unesco, only the Unesco Courier is for 
general circulation and has over two million 
readers in its twelve language versions. 
Most of the others are intended for spe- 
cialists (Museum, The Unesco Bulletin for 
Libraries, etc.) but some like Impact of 
 
BETTY WERTHER, of the U.S.A., was formerly 
a staff member of the United Nations and 
is now a free-lance writer and Journalist. 


### 52664: UNESCO, publisher to the whole world

  
UNESCO 
publisher 
to the 
    
whole world 
by Betty Werther 
Science on Society, International Social 
Sciences Journal or Prospects (a quarterly 
review of education} also appeal to the 
educated general public. 
The fact of aiming more and more 
at this category of readers does not 
mean, however, that Unesco intends to 
go into competition with the big commer- 
cial publishing houses. 
“It would be impossible,” says Peter 
Thorp, director of distribution for Unesco's 
Documents and Publications Bureau. “Our 
role is to reflect the Unesco programme, 
to spread ideas, while the dominant need 
of a private publisher is to make money. 
Therefore, we will always be non-commer- 
cial.” 
Still, Unesco's publishing operation has 
most of the characteristics of a major 
publishing house. Sales of Unesco books 
and periodicals, which may be ordered 
through any bookseller or direct from a 
national distributor in member countries, 
come to over $2,000,000 per year.” In 
this year’s compact, copiously annotated 
catalogue, 500 titles are available in 
English, French and often in Spanish 
versions. The greatest proportion of these 
is concerned with education, although an 
increasing number fall into science and 
culture categories. 
This tendency directly reflects the chang- 
ing priorities of the Unesco programme. 
In the early days, the late 1940s and 1950s, 
when a large part of the organization's 
activities was devoted to cultural exchange, 
Unesco put itself on the publishing map 
with a series of 23 luxury art albums, 
many of which are now out of print, 
presenting little-known art treasures. 
Published in six languages, under the 
imprint of the New York Graphic Society, 
these revealed artistic treasures such as 
those of Cyprus, Poland, Czechoslovakia 
and Australia. Much of the same material 
was subsequently re-printed in cheap 
pocketbook editions. With the same 
objectives in mind, Unesco later under- 
took what continues to be one of its 
most useful artistic aids—the Catalogue 
of Reproductions of Paintings which en- 
ables countries with little or no access 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
31

## [Page 32](078384engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 52664: UNESCO, publisher to the whole world

J 
UNESCO, PUBLISHER TO THE WORLD (Continued) 
to original art to procure the best possible 
representation. 
With few exceptions, Unesco now leaves 
the publication of art books as such lar- 
gely in the hands of commercial publishers. 
Unesco goes beyond simple presentation 
of our artistic heritage to consider a 
more penetrating analysis of the role and 
functions of art in society in works such 
as The Arts and Man, or the 6-volume 
Man through His Art published for the 
World Confederation of Organizations of 
the Teaching Profession with the co-opera- 
tion of Unesco. 
Unesco books fall roughly into three 
categories: reference, publications for 
speciallsts, and those destined for the 
general public. Particularly in this last 
category, about 1 book in 10 is published 
as a co-imprint or a joint-publication with 
outside publishers. 
One might easily say that the chief 
difference between Unesco and other 
publishing houses is in the area of refer- 
ence books where the organization can 
carry out projects which no private 
publisher could possibly undertake. The 
Unesco Statistical Yearbook is an obvious 
case in point. 
The World Survey of Education is also 
a veritable monument of its kind. In fact, 
its five volumes total a combined weight 
of some 45 kilos (100 pounds). It costs 
Unesco more to produce than its $40 
($50 in cloth cover) selling price, and for 
a private publisher, even if he could obtain 
all the information Included, which is unli- 
kely, the cost would be prohibitive. 
A recent example of a book which only 
Unesco, by its unique position, could 
concelve and publish is Learning to be, 
a report of the International Commission 
on the Development of Education presided 
by Mr. Edgar Faure, a former French 
Minister of Education. This book is a 
blueprint for the progress that education 
must achieve if it is to fulfil its new role 
in the world today. It is a book for 
everyone interested in the upbringing of 
children and young people everywhere. 
(See the November 1972 issue of the 
“Unesco Courier” on this subject) 
Other books emphasize the growing 
importance of education as a life-long 
process, a subject which also goes beyond 
the limited circle of experts and techni- 
cians. 
W... the World Survey of 
Education is to educators, another sizeable 
volume (819 pages plus tables) is to social 
scientists. Entitled Main Trends of Re- 
search in the Social and Human Sciences 
this intensive study by scholars of world 
renown started appearing in 1970. It not 
only constitutes a report on the main 
trends of research, but, in the words of 
Claude Lévi-Strauss, the distinguished 
soclal anthropologist, “aims at identifying 
the paths on which the science of 
tomorrow may embark”, With the stu- 
dent's purse in mind, separate chapters 
of this major volume have been or are being 
translated for publication In low-cost 
pocket-book editions in many languages. 
Another typical example of something 
which probably only Unesco could do 
is the Index Translationum, an annual 
international bibliography of translations. 
Begun in 1950 with 8,750 items, it is now 
in its 23rd volume and contains data on 
41,322 titles in 73 countries (see p. 35). 
The Index can answer questions such as: 
What country leads in the number of 
translations? Who are the world's most 
translated authors? In how many langua- 
ges does the Bible appear? 
“Only Unesco can request and obtain 
this kind of Information”, says Mr. Thorp. 
“Any private publisher would come up 
against a barrier. We have the necessary 
lines of communication. Thus it seems 
evident that if Unesco decided to drop 
publication, the Index would probably 
simply disappear.” 
U.... also has its best- 
seller list of books which, now fully amortiz- 
ed, are making a comfortable profit which 
can be fed back into the organization's 
publications’ fund. 
Topping the list by a run-away margin 
is the Unesco Source Book for Science 
Teaching which is heading towards one 
million copies sold. The history of this 
popular manual goes back to the post-war 
period when Unesco sponsored a small 
volume entitled Suggestions for Science 
Teachers in Devastated Countries. While 
proving useful in these areas, the book 
has also been a considerable success in 
all regions of the world where previously 
there had been little or no low cost 
equipment for practical science teaching. 
The revised edition thus became the 
first edition of the now well known Source 
Book , for Science Teaching which has 
been translated into 30 languages and 
reprinted 23 times. Consisting of ideas 
contributed by teachers all over the world, 
it makes use of common and widely 
available resources and materials for the 
construction of simple scientific equipment 
and for the devising of simple scientific 
activities. 
Another widely used book is Study 
Abroad. Updated periodically like a 
Michelin Guide, it now provides infor- 
mation on international scholarships and 
courses for 126 countries and territories. 
Here again because of the use of Unesco 
resources, Study Abroad and its sister 
volume Vacation Study Abroad can be 
priced at a reasonable level with students 
and low-budget libraries in mind. 
One of the most rapidly expanding areas 
of Unesco activity over recent years has 
been the production of scientific maps. 
Individual countries draw up their own 
geological and other maps and atlases, 
each, using its own set of rules, So 
Unesco’'s World Geological Atlas is a 
pioneering venture, the first concerted 
attempt to map the world using a stan- 
dardized International “language” which 
can be “read” anywhere, 
Celebrating a quarter century of activity, 
a thick cumulative catalogue entitled 
25 years of Unesco Publishing is now 
being completed. It will contain refer- 
ences to some 5,000 to 6,000 titles 
ranging from those for which Unesco was 
sole publisher to others in which the 
organization participated jointly or, again, 
played a more remote role such as simply 
sponsoring a certain work or providing a 
small grant. 
Occupying an important part of the 
catalogue will be books published under 
the “Unesco Programme for Literary Trans- 
lations“. These books, most of which are 
translations into English or French, derive 
from 60 different literatures, corresponding 
to some 40 Asian and 20 European lan- 
guages, not to mention the non-Slavic 
literatures of the Soviet Union and many 
African literatures. 
Through this programme, the Greek 
poet George Seferls was brought to the 
attention of English-speaking readers in 
1960 three years before he received the 
Nobel Prize for Literature. The same 
prize was awarded to the late Japanese 
novelist Yasunari Kawabata whose Snow 
Country (Yukiguni) was one of the first 
translations published in 1956 in the 
Unesco series of contemporary works. 
The current widespread interest in Japa- 
nese literature in the world today is due 
in no small measure to Unesco's efforts 
in making both classic and modern works 
available in the western world. 
These books are all published by private 
firms. 
“You might say that, here, Unesco 
comes in to prime the pump” says 
Mr. Thorp. “We want to see a certain 
work published, so we assume part of the 
financial risk involved. We may take care 
of the translation or even share print costs. 
In any case, were it not for Unesco, the 
great majority of these books probably 
would have remained virtually unknown.” 
Unesco can also, and, indeed, feels 
compelled to undertake certain other pro- 
jects private firms would hesitate to tackle 
alone. Into this category falls a series of 
booklets on the “Race Question in Modern 
Science” (later published in a collective 
volume under the title of Race and Science) 
and Apartheid (a Study of its Effects on 
Education, Science, Culture and Informa- 
tion). Widely distributed by the co-pub- 
lishers and Unesco, both titles have 
become very successful publications. 
To quote another example, it was not 
easy to find a commercial publisher for the 
joint publication of Birthright of Man, an 
anthology of over 1,000 texts asserting 
man's birthright over the ages. Marking 
the 20th anniversary of the Universal Decla- 
ration of Human Rights, it nonetheless 
sold 15,000 copies in English and French. 
Since then, three other language versions 
have been published or are in course of 
preparation and there are more to come. 
F... if one were asked 
to select a single work as constituting 
Unesco's most significant contribution over 
a quarter-century of publishing, a reason- 
able choice, and one best exemplifying 
the Unesco spirit, might be the History of 
Mankind: Cultural and Scientific Develop- 
ment which Is the first genuinely interna- 
tional account of the scientific and cultural 
history of the world. 
Already issued by major publishers (or 
in course of production) in nine countries 
and in eight different languages, with a 
print order of 100,000 sets, History of 
Mankind was written by experts of world- 
wide reputation who sufficiently contained 
their differences to produce an agreed 
version of a world view of human destiny. 
Negotiations are now being conducted by 
Unesco publishing services for low-priced 
paperback editions of this work, necessa- 
rily expensive in its six-volume, illustrated 
original edition. 
Encouraged by the success of the 
History of Mankind, Unesco is now pre- 
paring the publication, on the same pattern, 
of the first General History of Africa in 
eight volumes. The first volume will 
probably be issued in 1974 in hard-cover, 
and later paperback versions will appear 
in different language versions. | 
This text is a revised and edited version 
of a text which first appeared In “Unesco 
Features” (No 625 - July 1972} — Unesco’s 
fortnightly bulletin for press, radio and 
television,

## [Page 33](078384engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

  
be
 
BOOKSHELF UNESGORNEWSROOM   
RECENT UNESCO BOOKS 
MW In the Minds of Men. An account 
of Unesco and its work during the 
past 25 years by 15 international 
authorities, 1972, 109 pp. (£1.20. $4) 
BW Apartheid. Its effects on edu- 
cation, science, culture and informa- 
tion. 2nd edition, updated and 
expanded, 1972, 256 pp (£1.20, $4) 
BM Catalogue of Reproductions of 
Paintings Prior to 1860, 1972 501 pp 
(£2.85, $9.50) 
BM Broadcasting for adult education 
A guideboock to world-wide experi- 
ence, by Ignacy Waniewicz, 1972, 
132 pp (£1.35, $4.50) 
B A Guide to Satellite Communi- 
cation (Reports and Papers on Mass 
Communication, No. 66) 1972. 35 pp 
(30p. $1) 
* 
OTHER BOOKS 
BM Editor, Author and Publisher, 
edited by Wm. | Howard, Univer: 
sity of Toronto Press, 1969, 121 pp 
($6) 
HB The Chariot of the Sun and other 
sites and symbols of the Bronze 
  
   
Sammy Davis Jr. 
stars in Unesco gala 
for the blind 
Sammy Davis Jr, the internationally famous American singer and entertainer, 
is to give a benefit performance on behalf of the Unesco “Books for the Blind” 
programme. As this issue went to press, the gala was scheduled to take place 
on September 25, at the Olympia Theatre in Paris. The show, jointly sponsored 
by Unesco and the U.S. National Commission for Unesco, is part of a large scale 
fund-raising effort launched for International Book Year. 
Sammy Davis Jr., actor, singer, dancer, author, comedian and film producer, 
was recently appointed a member of the Unesco Commission in the United States. 
His appointment to this body reflects the great contribution to performing arts 
he has made over the past decades. In a letter to Unesco's Director-General, 
René Maheu, he wrote: “The occasion this affords me to contribute my services 
to Unesco is one of the more rewarding aspects of my appointment.” Speaking 
of “Books for the Blind", he said: “I can think of no more worthwhile endeavour 
than the contribution my forthcoming benefit performance will make to this most 
worthy of Unesco projects.” Sammy Davis Ir., whose injuries In a motor accident 
caused the loss of his left eye, is widely known for his efforts to aid the under- 
privileged and ease racial tensions, 
“Books for the Blind" is part of the Unesco Gift Coupon Programme, a 
combined educational and fund-raising undertaking, and is carried out in co-opera- 
tion with the World Council for the Welfare of the Blind. The proceeds from 
the Sammy Davis Show will be used to provide Braille books and other educa- 
tional materials for blind people, especially blind children in the developing 
  
  
   
Age, by Peter Gelling and Hilda 
Ellis Davidson. JM. Dent and Sons, 
London, 1972, 200 pp (75p) 
MW The Temple of Dendur. A visit to 
Ancient Egypt, by Emery Kelen. The 
Bobs-Merril Co., Inc., Indianapolis 
and New York, 1972, 111 pp ($4.95) 
MB The Local Cultures of South 
and East China, by Wolfram Eber- 
hard. Translated from the German 
by Alide Eberhard. E. J. Brill, Lei- 
den, 1968, 
HB Museums: In Search of a Usable 
Future, by Alma S. Wittlin, 
Foreword by S. Dillon Ripley. The 
M.L.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass, 
U.S.A., and London, 1970 (£7) 
x 
THE ENVIRONMENT 
WB Environment and Society In Tran- 
sition (Annals of the New York Aca- 
demy of Sciences, Vol. 184), edited 
by Peter Albertson and Margery 
Barnett, New York Academy of 
Sciences, 1971, 699 pp 
MW Clean Water: Affluence, In- 
fluence, Effluents, a design for 
water quality management, edited by 
Albert E. Millar, Jr, ASEE-NASA 
Langley Research Center, Old Dom- 
| inion University Research Foun- 
dation, Norfolk, Virginia, U.S.A, 
3 1971, 228 PP 
BW Los Angeles, The Architecture of 
Four Ecologies, by Reyner Banham, 
| Harper and Row, Publishers, Inc.     New York, 1971 ($6.95) 
countries. 
persons.   The total blind population of the world is estimated at 16 million   
Indian Council 
of Peace Research 
An Indian Council of Peace Research has 
recently been formed in New Delhi under 
the chairmanship of Dr Prem Kirpal, chair- 
man of Unesco's Executive Board, to 
promote peace research in India and the 
developing countries. Its initial programme 
includes research for promoting the cause 
of non-violent social order and studies on 
peace and conflict in the context of social 
growth and cultural development. Dr Kirpal 
is founder and president of another new 
Indian organization, the Institute of Cultural 
Relations and Development Studies, in 
New Delhi. 
Spotlight on African culture 
Two recent International meetings have 
studied ways of giving wider diffusion to 
African culture. The aim of the 2nd Ros- 
trum of African Music, organized In Venice 
by the International Music Council, was to 
encourage radio stations to make tradi- 
tional African music better known. In 
Dakar, Senegal, cultural directors of Afri- 
can radio and television services examined 
with specialists from centres recording oral 
traditions of Africa how better use can 
be made of Africa's cultural resources. 
International Fair Play Trophy 
Swiss long-jump champion Meta Antenen 
was recently awarded the international 
Pierre de Coubertin Fair Play Trophy, at 
Unesco’s Paris headquarters, for an act 
of sportsmanship during the 1971 European 
championships at Helsinki. Rival long- 
jumper Ingrid Mickler-Becker had to take 
part in the 100 metres relay while the 
long-jump heats were In progress. Miss 
Antenen insisted that she be allowed more 
than the regulation time to recover and 
Miss Mickler-Becker went on to take the 
European title. Certificates were also 
awarded to British cyclist John Clewarth, 
footballers Paul Courtin of France and 
Steve Kember of Great Britain and to 
French tennis-player Jean-Loup Rouyer. 
Soil map of the world 
A soil map of South America, recently 
issued, by Unesco and the U.N. Food and 
Agriculture Organization, marks the first 
step in the publication of a ten-volume 
Soil Map of the World. Prepared with 
the aid of 13 South American governments, 
the new map could be a major instrument 
for agricultural planning in that continent. 
With legend in English, French, Spanish 
and Russian, the map is available from 
Unesco, In Paris, or Unesco Sales Agents 
(see p. 35) price $24 (map with 200 pp. 
Eng. or Spanish text), separately. $12 each, 
School for disarmament 
The fourth summer course of the Interna- 
tional School on Disarmament and Re- 
search on Conflicts was held recently at 
the Carlo Ederle College, in Padua, Italy. 
Subjects under discussion included the 
relationship between strategy theories and 
the arms race, the limitation of strategic 
arms, the political problems of disarma- 
ment and international law, and the theory 
of conflicts. The school was founded In 
1966 by Carlo Schaerf, professor of Phy- 
sics at the Faculty of Biological Sciences 
of Rome University and Edoardo Amaldi, 
professor of Physics at the University’s 
Institute of Physics. 
33

## [Page 34](078384engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
Letters to the Editor 
UNDERWATER ARCHAEOLOGY 
IN ITALY 
Sir, 
On pages 4 and 12 of the May 1972 
issue of the “Unesco Courier”, devoted 
to underwater archaeology, mention is 
made of the exploration of sites on the 
Isle of Capri, at Spargi, Albenga and 
Lake Neml, but no indication is given 
that this work was carried out by teams 
of Italian archaeologists. 
The underwater exploration of the 
Blue Grotto, on the isle of Capri, was 
carried out in 1964 by Professor Alfon- 
so de Franciscis, Director of Antiquities 
of Naples, with the assistance of naval 
divers. The exploration and scientific 
recovery of Roman ships at Albenga 
and Spargi was done by the Experi- 
mental Centre for Submarine Archaeo- 
logy, established in 1957 by the Italian 
Ministry of Education. The Centre had 
at its disposal a vessel loaned by the 
Italian Navy; it now has its own vessel, 
the “Cycnus”, which was also used 
in 1970 for exploratory work in Spain. 
The formidable task of lowering the 
level of Lake Nemi, near Rome, by 
27 metres, in order to raise the two 
“floating palaces” of the Roman emp- 
eror, was undertaken in 1928 by engi- 
neers, technicians and archaeologists 
of the Italian Government. 
The exploration of the Marzamemi 
site, off the coast of Sicilv was carried 
out by German (G. Kapitédn) and Ameri- 
can volunteers, supervised by Professor 
Barnabo Brea, Director of Antiquities 
of Eastern Sicily. 
Many other underwater archaeologi- 
cal explorations, besides those mention- 
ed in this issue of the “Unesco 
Courier”, have, of course, been under- 
taken by Italian experts, as, for example, 
the work at Giannutri, near the island 
of Elba, in 1963, which led to great 
progress in the techniques of mapping, 
raising and recovery of wrecks. The 
work at Albenga is being continued by 
regular expeditions each year. 
Prof. Nino Lamboglia 
Director, International Institute 
for Ligurian Studies and of the 
Experimental Centre for Submarine 
Archaeology, Bordighera, Italy 
ORGANIC FARMING 
Sir, 
| don’t know whether a ban on agri- 
cultural chemicals will lead to famine, 
but | am quite sure that their continued 
use will. 
Has Dr. Norman Borlaug (author of 
“In Defence of DDT", “Unesco Cou- 
rier", February 1972) not heard about 
the results obtained by organic farming. 
An experimental farm at Haughley in 
England has harvested 60 to 70 quintals 
of wheat and barley per hectare, using 
only vegetable compost on the land. 
| know one farmer who has had 
55 quintals per hectare, after using 
these organic methods for only three 
years, 
In a recent laboratory experiment, 
rats fed on wheat produced on land 
fertilized by compost were found to be 
much healthier than others fed on wheat 
grown with chemical fertilizers. 
| admit that DDT has given us a 
 
respite in the fight against malaria, but 
if we continue to use an arsenal of 
chemicals instead of using a basic 
approach—by building up resistance 
with food obtained from a balanced 
soil—the malaria problem will never be 
eradicated. 
Organic farming is the right answer 
for the developing countries. Put com- 
post on the Savannah instead of burn- 
ing it; draw nitrogen from the air instead 
of buying it in sacks—here is the 
secret of productivity. 
Jean Metrallet 
Annecy, France 
PACKAGED POLLUTION 
 
Sir, 
After reading your stimulating issue 
on pollution (July 1971), | would like 
to point out one crucial factor in the 
despoiling of nature: the proliferation 
of modern packaging. Don't you think 
it would be well worthwhile to launch 
a campaign against the excessive use 
of packaging? 
To deploy vast technical .resources 
and to spend huge sums of money to 
produce packaging materials that are 
often used for only twenty-four hours 
is a gross waste. It is an abuse of 
nature to cut down forests to produce 
paper which then has to be re-absorbed 
by nature in the form of rubbish. To 
destroy forests, pollute rivers and the 
atmosphere, expend money and resour- 
ces merely so that we can have a packet 
of spaghetti wrapped up in a piece of 
paper or plastic is quite unwarrantedl 
R. Hugues Blanc 
Neuilly-sur-Seine, France 
RENDER UNTO CAESAR 
Sir, 
May | call your attention to a his- 
torical slip in the article entitled “Book, 
Dear Friend”, ("Unesco Courier”, July 
1972), 
The article states: “It is said that 
Alexander presented Cleopatra with 
200,000 manuscripts from the library of 
Pergamum”. It was, of course, Antony 
who did so, not Alexander. 
Abdel Moneim El-Sawi 
Managing Editor 
Arabic Edition, Unesco Courier 
Cairo, Egypt 
*SO0S MANKIND’ 
Sir, 
“Save Angkor, save South-East Asia, 
save mankind™ should have been the 
theme, if not of the main article, then 
at least of one of those published In 
the “Unesco Courier” issue, "SOS 
Angkor” (December 1971). 
I support unconditionally all who seek 
to preserve the great monuments and 
priceless cultural treasures that human 
genius has created, all who stand up 
for the defence of such values. Rome, 
Venice, Egypt, Greece indeed must be 
preserved, but so also must paintings, 
sculptures and architectural treasures 
wherever and whatever they may be, if 
we are to “‘preserve our cultural links 
with the past”, as your author Hiroshl 
Daifuku puts it, and maintain historical 
“identification and continuity”. Yet one 
monument to be saved has escaped the 
 
attention of the authors writing in this 
issue—the foremost monument of all: 
mankind. 
The effort now deployed in the battle 
against the destroyers of temples and 
other wonders of human creativity must 
be increased to the nth degree and 
thrown Into the battle against crime, 
war and genocide in whatever form and 
place it occurs. 
Francisco Ventura Arredondo 
Havana, Cuba 
UTOPIAN OR REALISTIC? 
Sir, 
| was sorry to see Mr. Y. Chabrier’s 
somewhat cynical letter (ending “Please 
spare us from the inept ‘if onlys’ of 
utopian dreamers”) concerning Philip 
Noel-Baker, which appeared in your 
January 1972 issue. 
Apart from the fact that Mr, Noel- 
Baker has worked indefatigably for 
peace for many years (for which he 
was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize 
for 1959) it is imperative that the idiot 
world should be reminded of its incred- 
ible fatuities and lost opportunities 
from time to time. Without these 
reminders people (such as your corres- 
pondent) tend to become lost in pessi- 
mism and may even be convinced that 
the way the world Is run Is quite 
reasonably sane, 
If it is utoplan to point to the stupi- 
dities of “statesmen” and the world 
that might have been, we might as well 
wind up the United Nations and pray 
for an early end. 
W.l. Barnes 
Orpington, England 
SPARE A PENCIL 
Sir, 
During a very interesting visit to five 
East African countries earlier this year, 
| was particularly impressed with the 
children and young people | came 
across and their keenness to learn. 
One thing they valued and appreciated 
more than anything else.was pencils. 
Paper books were provided in the 
schools but the children had to buy 
their own pencils, Would it be possible 
for Unesco to organize collections of 
pencils (there must be quantities of 
part-used pencils in offices and schools 
and homes all over the world that are 
just thrown away), and have them sent 
to schools for the children in countries 
where pencils would be appreclated? 
Gabrielle Black 
Derby, England 
HOMAGE TO LOUIS PASTEUR 
Sir, 
As a reader who has enjoyed the 
“Unesco Courier” for over 12 years, 
may | suggest that you recall the hfe 
of Louis Pasteur, whose 150th birthday 
anniversary falls on December 22, 1972, 
The outstanding moral and scientific 
qualities of this great scientist as well 
as the direct and indirect results of his 
work that benefit all mankind deserve 
to be acknowledged by a magazine 
such as the “Unesco Courier”. 
F. Dauter 
Paris, France     Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
— 
Dé
p8
t 
lé
ga
] 
C 
1 
— 
S
e
p
t
e
m
b
r
e
 
72
 
— 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
 
(P
ri
nt
ed
 
in
 
Fr
an
ce
)

## [Page 35](078384engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

A
 
T
T
 
Just published 
  
répertoire 
international 
des traductions 
Unesco’s 
international 
bibliography 
of translations 
25 
Index 
ranslationum 
books. 
 
lation. 
      unesco 
paris 1972 
952 pages 
Multilingual with bilingual (Eng-French) introduction 
Paper £14 $42 168 F 
Cloth £15.35 $46 184 F 
annual guide 
to world translations 
m Index Translationum presents a detailed picture of 
world translations, recording those published in a single 
year, and including new editions of previously published 
m Compiled with the help of librarians in many countries, 
it enables readers to follow, year by year, the flow of 
translations from one country to another and to trace 
the works of individual authors as they appear in trans- 
m The latest edition gives data on 41,322 titles published 
in 1970 in 73 countries. 
Where to renew your subscription 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
— AUSTRALIA. Publications : Educational Supplies 
Pty. Ltd, P.O. Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NS: 
Periodicals: Dominie Pty. Limited, Box 33, Post 
Office, Brookvale 2100, NSW. Sub-agent. United 
Nations Association of Australia, Victorian Division, 
Sth floor, 134/136 Flinders St, Mel- 
bourne (Victoria), 3000. ($ Aus 3.60) — AUS. 
TRIA. Verlag Georg Fromme & C=, Arbeitgasse 1-7, 
1051, Vienna (AS 110). — BELGIUM, lean De Lannoy, 
112, rue du Tréne, Brussels 5. CCP 3380.00. (220F 
belges) — BU RMA. Trade Corporation N* (9), 550-552 
Merchant Stret, Rangoon. — CANADA. Information 
Canada, Ottawa, (Ont.)($ 5,00). CEYLON. Lake House 
Bookshop, Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244 
Colombo 2. (Rs 25). — CYPRUS. ,,MAM”, Archbishop 
Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 1722, Nicosia. — 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L., Spalena 51, Prague 1 
(permanent display); Zahranicni literatura, 11 Soukenicka 
Prague 1. For Slovakia only : Nakladatelstvo Alfa, Hurba- 
novo nam. 6 Bratislava, -~- DENMARK. Ejnar Munksgaard 
Ltd,, 6, Norregade, 1165, Copenhagen K. (Dan. Kr. 27.00) 
— EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). National Centre for 
Unesco Publications, N* 1 Talaat Harb Street, Tahrir Squa- 
re, Cairo: Librairie Kasr El Nil, 38, ru : Kasr El Nil, Cairo. 
IL.E. 35) ETHIOPIA, National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box 2996, Add,s Ababa,.— FINLAND, Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Kes kuskatu, Helsinki (Fmk. 13.90). — 
FRANCE. Librairte de I'Unesco, 7-9, place de Fontenoy, 
75-Paris-7°. C.C.P. 12598-48 (17 F). — GERMANY. All 
publications : Verlag Dokumentation, Postfach 148, 
Jaiserstrasse 13, 8023 Minchen-Pullach, For the Unesco 
Kurier (German ed only) Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, 
Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650 (DM 16). — 
GHANA. Presbyterian Bookshop Depot Ltd, P.O. 
Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Led, P.O. Box 
7869, Accra; The University Bookshop of Ghana, 
Acera: The University Bookshop of Cape Coast, The 
University Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon, — 
GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom, ~ GREECE. 
Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, Achens; Librairie 
Eleftheroudakis, Nikis 4, Athens, —~ HONG-KONG. 
Swindon Book Co., 13-15, Lock Read, Kowloon. — 
HUNGARY. Akadémiai Kéonyvesbole, Vici u. 22, 
Budapest V; A K.V. Kényvtirosok Boltja, Népkdztirsasig 
utja 16, Budapest VI. — ICELAND. Snaebjérn Jonsson 
& Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. — INDIA. 
Orient Longman Ltd., Nicol Road, Ballard Estate, Bom- 
bay 1; 17 Chitearanjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna 
Solai, Mount Road, Madras 2; 3/5 Asaf Ali Road, New 
Delhi 1; Sub. Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery Co. 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16 and Scindia House, New 
Delhi; Publications Section, Ministry of Education 
snd Youth Services, 72 Theatre Communication 
Building, Connaught Place New Delhi 1, (Rs. 18,75). 
— INDONESIA. Indira P.T., Djl. Dr. Sam Ratulangie 
37, Djakarta. — IRAN. Iranian National Commission 
for Unesco, Avenue Iranchahr Chomali No 300, 
B.P. 1533, Teheran. — IRAQ. McKenzie’'s Bookshop, 
Al-Rashid Street, Baghdad; University Bookstore, Uni- 
versity of Baghdad, P.O. Box 75, Baghdad. — IRELAND, 
The National Press, 2, Vvellington Road, Ballsbridge, 
Dublin 4, -— ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly 
Blumstein’s Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48, Nachlat 
Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv: 9, Shlomzion Hamalka Street 
Jerusalem. (24 LL) ~ JAMAICA. Sangster’s Book Stores 
Led.,, P.O, Box 3.2, 101 Water Lane, Kingston, — 
JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd, P.O. Box 5050, Tokyo 
International 100-31(Y 1,440).—KENYA.The E.5.A.Ltd., 
P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. -—- KOREA, Korean National 
Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — 
KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., Ltd, P.O. Box 
2942, Kuwait. — LIBERIA. Cole and Yancy Bookshops 
Led, P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. — LIBYA. Agency for 
Development of Publication & Distribution, P.O. Box 34- 
35, Tripoli. = LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 
22, Grand-Rue, Luxembourg. -—- MALAYSIA. 
Federal Publications Sdn Bhd., Balai Berita, 31, Jalan 
Riong, Kuala Lumpur. — MALTA. 5apienza’s Library, 
26 Kingsway, Valletta, — MAURITIUS. Nalanda Com- 
pany Led., 30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis (Rs. 17,45). — 
MONACO, British Library, 30, Bld des Moulins, Monte- 
Carlo. ~~ NETHERLANDS. N. V, Martinus Nijhoff, 
Lange Voorhout, 9, the Hague. {fl. 14). — NETHER« 
LANDS ANTILLES. G. C. T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned 
Ant.). N. V., Willemsetad, Curacac. NLA. (NA fl. 7.80). 
— NEW ZEALAND. Government Printing Office, 
Government Bookshops at : Rutland Street, P.O. Box 
5344, Auckland; 130, Oxford Terrace, P.O. Box 1721, 
Christchurch; Alma Street, P.O. Box 857, Hamilton; 
Princes Street, P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin; Mulgrave 
Street, Private Bag, Wellington ($3 3.00). — NIGERIA 
The University Bookshop of Ife, The University Bookshop 
of Ibadan, P.O. Box 286: The University Bookshop of 
Nsuka, The University Bookshop of Lagos, The Ahmadu 
Bello University Bookshop of Zaria. — NORWAY, All 
publications : Johan Grundt Tanum (Booksellers) Karl 
Johans gate 41/43, Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only: A.S. 
Narvesens Litteraturjenesce, Box 6125, Oslo 6(K.23,00).— 
PAKISTAN. The VWest-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., Unesco 
Publications House, P.O, Box 374 G.P.O., Lahore; 
Showrooms : Urdu Bazaar, Lahore, and 57-58 Murree, 
Highway,-G/6-1, Islamabad. Pakistan Publications Book- 
shop, Sarwar Road, Rawalpindi; Paribagh, Dacca. = 
PHILIPPINES. The Modern Book Co., 926 Rizal Ave- . 
nue, P.O. Box 632, Manila D-404. — POLAND. All 
publications : ORWN PAN Palac Kultury i Nauki, 
Warsaw. For the Unesco Courier only : RUCH, ul. 
V¥ronia, 23, Warsaw 10, — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade 
Leda, Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon (Esc. 105). 
— SINGAPORE. Federal Publications Sdn Bhd,, Times 
House, River Valley Road, Singapore 9, — SOUTHERN 
RHODESIA, Textbook Sales (PVT) Led, 67 Union 
Avenue, Salisbury. —- SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, 
P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publications: 
A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, 
Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16, For the Unesco 
Courier Svenska FN-Férbundee, Vasagatan 15, IV 
10123, Stockholm 1 Postgiro 18 46 92 (Kr. 18), — 
SWITZERLAND. All publications : Europa Verlag, 
S Rimistrasse, Zurich. Librairie Payot, rue Grenus 6, 
1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 12-236 (Fr. S. 16.-). — TAN. 
ZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 3030 Dar-es- 
Salaam, — THAILAND, Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, 
Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. (71.00 baht). — TURKEY. 
Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Caddesi, Beyogly, Istanbul, 
— UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala. 
— SOUTH AFRICA. All publications: Van Schaik's 
Bookstore (Pty). Ltd, Libri Building, Church Street, P.O. 
Box 724, Pretoria. For the Unesco Courier (single copies) 
only: Central News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. 
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O, 
Box 569, London, S.El, and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham, Bristol (£1,30).—=UNITED STATES. Unesco 
Publications Center, P.O. Box 433, New York, N.Y. 
10016 ($ 5). = U.S.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow, G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugosiovenska 
Knjiga, Terazije, 27, Belgrade; Drzavna Zaluzba Slo- 
venije Meseni Trg. 26, Ljubljana. 
E
E
 
,
 
R
r
 
-
_
 
  
C
r
 
 
 

## [Page 36](078384engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

A HUNGARIAN ARTIST 
LOOKS AT INTERNATIONAL BOOK YEAR   
    
= = = 
Pi / | 7 NNN 
V 22, S25 TN 
-l 
LS 
HH BRT 
ily Sv 
Wij: 
EUROPE 
  
 
ll 
WoT WF 
[RH] 
re PET = £ RT 
  
\ 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
   
  
  
AUSTRALIA       ARAB COUNTRIES 